per copy· $1.oo


CANADIAN
l TERATURE
N°·3



Winter, I960



Articles  By:

HUGH MACLENNA N, JAMES REANEY, WILFRED WATSON·, DESMOND PACEY, DAVID M . HAYNE, W. B. HOLLIDAY.

Reviews. By:

PETER QUENNELL,  JEAN -GUY PILON, WARREN TALLMAN, MARGARET ORMSBY, R. E. WATTERS, GILLES MARCOTTE
AND  OTHERS.


Special Supplement:

A CHECK LIST OF
CANADIAN LITERATURE,  I959·



A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW









A TIME
OF PROJECTS


A FAVOURITE  WORD among  Mexicans is proyectismo; it means  the  rage  for  making  plans without  considering  the  probability of achievement. To the  outside observer in recent years  the  Canadian literary world  might  at  times  have seemed  to be suffering  from  proyec­ tismo, so many  plans for  magazines  and other  publications have been in the  air.  In  fact,  a surprising number  of these plans  have taken concrete  form.  Canadian Literature, here publishing  its third  number, can regard  itself as well out of the project  stage, and it is only one of a considerable group  of literary magazines which have started  in Canada during  a com­ paratively short  period  and  which still flourish. Fiddlehead  in the Mari­ times,  Delta  and  Liberte  in Montreal, Tamarack in Toronto, Prism in Vancouver-even such an incomplete list shows that  the literary maga­  zines  are  not  merely  becoming  numerous,  but  also that  they  healthily represent  every  region  of the country.
Perhaps the most encouraging fact about  these new magazines  is that
they do not seem to be achieving  mutual  strangulation; on the contrary, those whose circumstances we know appear to be receiving more support than  the  pioneer  Canadian little  magazines  of the  1940's. Whether the people  who  support the  magazines  of today  are  getting  more  for  their devotion  in  terms  of  good  writing  than  the  people  who  supported the early  issues of Northern Review and Contemporary Verse is another matter, and  perhaps not yet to be judged;  the important fact  at present is that  those who do write  well in Canada can  be more sure than in the past  of having  places  to publish,  people  to read  them,  and  even a  pay­ ment  which  at  least  makes token recognition  that  writers  should receive material as well as moral  encouragement.


3

EDITORIAL



OuTSIDE THE FIELD of periodicals other  projects  suggest a liveliness in the general  air of Canadian literature and  literary scholar­ ship.  One  of  them  is the  new  Readers Club  of  Canada  which started operations towards  the end of last year. This is the first book club devoted  to the dissemination of work by Canadian writers, and its early selections
range  interestingly from  relatively  light  biography to works like  E. J.
Pratt's Collected Poems and  W. T. Eccles' Frontenac.

A SECOND PROJECT of rather different  literary interest  is under  way  at  the  University  of Toronto, where  preparations are  well­ advanced for  the  Dictionary  of Canadian Biography, which  will  differ from  its  predecessors,  the  Dictionary of National  Biography in  Britain  and  the  Dictionary of American Biography, in adopting the much more practical method  of considering  its subjects  by periods instead  of alpha­ betically.  As a result of a continuing  endowment, it will become possible to found  a  permanent centre  of biographical information, where  the editors  of  the  Dictionary  intend  that   the  material gathered in  the  en­ quiries  they direct  may be filed for the use of individual scholars. In other  words,  we shall  have  not  merely  a  biographical dictionary which  will doubtless increase  our knowledge of  Canadian literary figures and stimu­  late  the  art  of biography,  but also a new Canadian research  institution of great  value to writers of all kinds.

FINALLY, as a project  of particular interest  to readers of Canadian  Literature  we would  like  to  draw  attention to  the  Literary History  of Canada which is being prepared under  the general  editorship of  Carl  F. Klinck,  with  an  editorial  committee that  includes  Northrop Frye,  Roy  Daniells  and  Desmond  Pacey.  The  combined efforts  of the editors  and  twenty  other  writers  will produce, we are  told,  "a  compre­ hensive  reference  book (about  6oo pages in length) on our literary his­ tory,  which  is due  to appear in  Ig6I  or  Ig62". The collection  of essays by many  hands  has rarely been completely  successful in presenting either  literary or  general   history;  there  is  the  temptation  to  produce an  an­ thology  rather than  a cohesive narrative. Yet variety of viewpoint  has its merits, and we can certainly expect that  the Literary History will produce new  facts  and  fresh  interpretations which  will stimulate interest  in this field of scholarship.

4



A	FOREST	OF
SYMBOLS:

An Introduction  to
Saint-Denys Garneau


David M.  Hayne




A NEW ERA   in French-Canadian poetry  began when  Saint-Denys Garneau published  a volume  of twenty-eight poems early in 1937. The  significance of the appearance of Regards et  jeux dans
l'espace  was  not  immediately apparent; indeed,  the  reputation of this young man,  whom  Etienne  Gilson has called  French Canada's greatest poet, dates,  for all except  a handful of his friends, from  the past decade. His Poesies completes (not quite complete,  of course)  appeared in I 949; his ]ournal  (substantially less complete) was published in I 954· Six years later  it  has  become  impossible  to speak  of twentieth-century  French­ Canadian poetry  without mentioning his name.
But Canadian life and literature, as Quebec's first premier  noted nearly
a century  ago, find their  image in the great  double spiral staircase of the Chateau de Chambord, which two persons can mount simultaneously without  ever meeting. It is not surprising  that Saint-Denys Garneau, ex­ cept  for a few pages of translated selections and  one or two brief  critical notices,'  is almost  unknown  in English-speaking Canada.
•   Translations by Jean Beaupre and  Gael  Turnbull in The Canadian Forum  xxxvi (Feb.  1957)' p.  255;  by John Glassco in  Fiddlehead   XXXVI   (Spring 1958)' pp.  3-5, in  The Tamarack Review VIII   (Summer 1958), pp. 17-35,  and  in The Waterloo  Re­ view  II   2  (Winter 1960), pp.  50-52;  by  F.  R.  Scott  in  The  Tamarack  Review  IV (Summer 1957), pp.  55-59,  and  in  his  Events and  Signals, Toronto:  The  Ryerson  Press, 1954, p. 22.
Professor   W.  E.  Collin  discussed  the  Journal  in  "Letters in Canada 1954"  in  the
University of Toronto Quarterly XXIV, 3 (April  1955), pp. 32 I -324.


5

A  FOREST OF SYMBOLS



Born in Montreal on June  13, 1912, Hector  de Saint-Denys Garneau was  on  the  paternal side  a  great-grandson of  the  historian,  Franc;ois­ Xavier   Garneau and  a  grandson  of  the  poet  Alfred  Garneau; on  his mother's side he claimed  descent  from Jean Juchereau, a contemporary of Champlain and  ancestor  of one of  French Canada's "first  families". The  young Hector  seems to have  been  baptized  "de  Saint-Denys" after  an illustrious  forbear, Nicolas Juchereau de Saint-Denys, to whom Louis XIV granted letters of  nobility for his gallantry in the defense of Quebec in 1690.
Saint-Denys Garneau spent his childhood at the ancestral manor-house
at Sainte-Catherine de Fossambault, about  twenty-five miles north  of Quebec. When  he was eleven, he was returned to Montreal to take his secondary  schooling  at  a Jesuit  classical college. Already  his talents  for poetry  and  sketching  were apparent, and  during some of these years he attended classes at  the  Ecole des Beaux-Arts de Montreal. His literary debut   occurred   at  the  age  of  thirteen, when  he  submitted a  thirteen­ stanza  poem in a children's literary  competition organized by a Montreal department store.  His  entry,  accompanied  by  a  fearsome  sketch,  was entitied  "Dinosaurus", and it began :

Il etait  gigantesque
Et son nom  je vous dis
Etait  presque
Aussi grand  que  lui

Except  for  the  lack of punctuation, which  remained a characteristic of all his later  poetry,  this early effort is evidence  of precocity  and  little else. In  1928, however, a Hugolian mood poem  with Baudelairian over­ tones, "L'automne", won for him first prize in a poetry  contest conducted by the  Canadian Authors'  Association.  Other poems  of this  adolescent  period  show  the  impact  upon  him  of his reading of various nineteenth­ century French  poets as well as of his compatriot, Emile  Nelligan,  but the emancipation of his verse form, which he may owe to Peguy, had not yet taken  place.
His classical course was interrupted in 1934 on his doctor's  orders be­
cause  of a rheumatic heart  condition.  Devoting himself  to painting and writing,  he  now  had  the  leisure to attend concerts,  public  lectures  and art   exhibitions. That  same  year  he  joined  Robert Charbonneau and

6

A  FOREST OF SYMBOLS



others  to found  a literary magazine,  La Releve, which was patronized by Jacques Maritain and  which  lasted,  under a rejuvenated title,  for four­ teen  years.  During the  first  three  of those  years,  Garneau  contributed essays, book reviews,  art  criticism  and  poems to  La  Releve; except  for the  poetry,, these contributions have  not been collected  in volume  form.
The  greater part  of Saint-Denys Garneau's writing  was  done  before he was thirty,  in the five years from 1934 to 1939. In addition to his work for  La Releve,  he was writing  poetry  and  making  meticulous  prepara­ tions   for  the   publication of Regards et  jeux  dans  l'espace; about sixty poems  not  included in  that  volume or composed subsequently are contained in  the  collected edition of  1949· He  was also  keeping  the famous  journal which caused such a sensation in French-Canadian liter­  ary circles when  it was published  by his friends Robert Elie and Jean  Le Moyne  in  1954.  The  published   journal  extends from  January 1935 to January 1939, although we are  led to believe that  it may have been car­  ried on for another year or two.
By the  end  of the  thirties  the still youthful  Saint-Denys Garneau was living  in  quiet  retirement. In  the  summer of 1937  he had  set off for Europe, but  had  returned unexpectedly after  spending  only three  weeks abroad, largely  in Paris.  Already  the spiritual  questionings which  were to become  an  obsession with  him were making it difficult for him to live and  move  in  ordinary society;  withdrawing more  and  more,  he wrote poetry,  painted a little,  and confided his anguish  to his diary.  By the end of 1938  even  the  writing  of poetry  had  stopped.  Declining health  and increasing periods of depression caused him to retire  to the family manor­ house where  he lived as a recluse, cared  for by his parents. On October
24, 1943, overcome  by restlessness, he left the house to paddle his canoe to an  island  in the  river,  where  he sometimes camped out.  He seems to have felt unwell and  to have called at a nearby house in the hope of find­ ing a telephone. The  next  day his body was discovered  beside a creek in an adjoining field.
In  December, 1944, in  an  attempt to save  him  from  oblivion,  his friends of La Nouvelle Releve brought  out a special issue of the magazine in his honour.  It  included three  short  critical  studies, a few unpublished poems, and  tributes  from  his cousin Anne Hebert  and from  Raissa Mari­ tain,  who did not hesitate to rank him beside French authors like Alain­  Fournier and  Paul  Eluard. A similar special issue was devoted to him by

7

A FOREST   OF SYMBOLS



the Montreal newspaper  Notre Temps in May,  I947·
The  real  vogue  of Saint-Denys Garneau began,  however,  in  I949, launched by Professor  M. B. Ellis in her  book-length  study  of the  I937 edition.  Later that  year,  the  collected  edition  of  Garneau's poems  ap­ peared, and since that  time two more books2   and a steady stream  of arti­ cles have been devoted to him.
Admittedly, much  of the  interest  shown  in Saint-Denys Garneau has
been  psychological  or  religious, occasionally  almost  hagiological, rather than  literary. The  revelations of the  journal, illuminating as they do the soul-searching of many of the poems, give an  unprecedented insight  into the spiritual itinerary of a young Canadian intellectual of a particularly sensitive  and  introspective type,  who,  while  groping for self-realization, feels  himself  gradually  overwhelmed by  his  irremediable solitude.   In April  I 93 I, while still in his teens, he had written to a friend:
Solitude! Solitude! nous sommes des isoles, des aveugles,  des muets  qui  mourons avec le secret  de notre terrible  nuit.3
In  those years solitude had not yet become an obsession for the student confident  in the invigorating realization  of his intellectual power.  By the spring  of I934, he was expressing in Le Releve  his ambitions for a great spiritual revolution  under the aegis of Art:
Dans  Ia grande revolution  qui s'ebauche, et qui  devra  etre  le retour de !'human­ ire  au   spirituel,  il  s'impose  que  !'art, cette   couronne de  l'homme,  !'expression supreme de  son  arne  et  de sa volonte,  retrouve son sens perdu et soit !'expression splendide de cet elan vers en haut. (Lacroix, p. 37).
That Art  failed  him, or that  he failed  Art,  is only too clear  from pas­ sages like the  following one in the  ]ournal  after  the  publication  of Re­  gards et jeux dans l'espace:
C'est  ainsi que  mon livre ne peut  exister  puisque je n'existe pas. II ne peut  sans mentir avoir  de grandeur ou d'originalire. (p.  I24).


2   M. B. ELLIS, De Saint-Denys Garneau;  art et realisme. Montreal. Eds Chantecler, I949·
FRERE LEVIS  FORTIER,  Le message poetique de S aint-Denys  Garneau, Ottawa. Eds  de
l'Universite, I954· (Bibliography, pp. 225-230).
ROMAIN  LEGARE, o.F.M., Vaventure  poetique  et  spirituelle  de Saint-Denys  Garneau.
Montreal. Fides,  I 957.

3  BENOIT  LACROIX, Saint-Denys-Garneau; choix  de textes  .... Montreal:  Fides, I956, p. 2r.

8

A  FOREST OF SYMBOLS



A  few  months  later  he  has  abandoned all  hope  of  self-realization through art:  "C'est cela qui ne va pas:  faire rna vie avec man  art,  man esprit" (p. 202). Meantime his sense of solitude has been growing.  In the early pages of the  journal he had reported  a spiritual crisis involving both a sense of abandonment and exhaustion and a moral  revelation:

J'ai connu la semaine derniere [i.e., at the end of January, 1935]  une experience interieure de  delaissement, d'humiliation,  de  solitude   .  . .  J'ai, la  semaine  der­ niere,  ete  mis en face  du  dilemme du  bien et  du mal, et d'une fac;on si nette dans la vue  des deux  termes,  qu'il m'etait impossible de choisir  le mal.  ( pp. 51-52).

By 1937 the obsessive character of his sense of solitude  is evident: "Je suis  traque. Je  me  sens  traque comme  un criminel. Depuis  longtemps. Mais cela devient  vraiment insupportable" (p. II 9). He tries desperately to strengthen his spiritual intention, to seek the  path  to  God,  but  feels himself  "rompu, brise,  pulverise" (p.I 35).  He  clings  to  his diary  as a means of stabilizing  himself, and records with satisfaction his brief moods of serenity,  of communication with Jesus Christ.  On days when he does not detect  the presence  of God in any way, he is plunged  into despair.  In a more  tranquil period  in October, I937 he imagines  himself  approach­ ing a state  of spiritual "engagement", and he aspires  to make  the gift of himself. "11 me faut  m'engager et jusqu'aux os. A vrai dire, il ne me reste plus que les os" (p. 183). But a new disillusionment  follows, and in Janu­ ary  I938 he feels submerged by the weight of despair, hoping for nothing,  aware  of nothing. He  scrutinizes  his poems and  rejects  the  majority of them  as insignificant   and  insincere.  Despite  the  fleeting  comfort  of the presence  of the  Communion of Saints,  he now sees himself  as a lifeless hulk,  amputated  and  meaningless,  like a tree  with  its branches lopped off. "Maintenant, c'est  l'idee  de l'epine  dorsale avec cette  impression  en plus  d'une  hache  qui   (sans  douleur)  en  detache les cotes, !'impression d'etre ebranche" (p.  237). And so the  published   journal  trails  off into silence;  its last  fragmentary lines are  references  to death and  suicide in Baudelaire and Bemanos.
Despite  the undoubted fascination of his spiritual adventure, it is prob­ ably for his poetic  theories  and  achievements that  Saint-Denys Garneau will retain  a  place  in the  history of French-Canadian letters. In  poetic theory  he belongs to the long tradition of Symbolism  in the widest sense, a tradition that  links Baudelaire and Mallarme, Claudel and Valery.

9

A  FOREST OF SYMBOLS



Under  the influence of Maritain's Art et scolastique, Saint-Denys Gar­ neau  at  first spoke of art  in Thomistic terms,  although confessing in the journal  (p. 250)  his limited comprehension of Thomism. "L'art est har­  monie", he wrote  in 1934;  "il est verite  ordonnee parfaitement  ...." "Mais la  verite  en art", he hastened  to add,  "n'est pas  dans les chases tant  que dans  la fac;on de les envisager, le sens qu'on  leur donne".4  Thus  he rejected both Romantic emotionalism  and Parnassian realism in favour  of the "Ideal" of the Symbolists:

Celui  qui  est sensible  aux  chatoiements de  la couleur, a !'agitation tumultueuse de  la  passion,  ne  peut  pas etre  place sur  le meme  plan  que  celui  qui  recherche la purete degagee  de  la forme  et  l'·eternelle serenite de  l'idee.  L'un parle  davantage aux  sens, I'autre davantage a I'esprit.  (ibid.).

The  artist  takes  possession of the  world  in its mysterious  reality.  "Ce que  je cherche, c'est  une sorte  de  possession du  monde  par  !'esprit au moyen de I'art" (Lacroix,  p. 8g). Art  is thus an  inverted form  of  meta­ physics:
Le  metaphysician atteint le particulier, l'intimite unique des  choses  a force  de general, d'universel. L'artiste atteint a  l'universel a force  de  particulier, d'unicite
... Ainsi  compris, l'art  est un  mode  d'assomption du  monde. (Journal, p. 153).

The  business of the artist  is to detect  the  beauty  of reality  under  the appearances that,  in the eyes of other  men,  pass for  reality.  "11 a  voca­
tion  de  reconnaitre la  beaute  a travers  la  creation"  (Lacroix, p. go). What  the  artist  then presents as his work of art  must  be "transparent a
la beaute" (Journal, p. 158),  since it reveals "la  transparence de la forme
a l'etre" (p.I 75). The  two levels of "transparency" are  explained in an
essay on Alphonse de Chateaubriant:
... Transparence  d'abord [ du  style]  aux  choses  dans   un  effort  a y mouler
I'expression, a en restituer la vie dans I'exactitude de sa forme.
Puis,  a mesure d'un  approfondissement, transparence des choses  a ce que  nous pourrions  appeler  l'arriere-fond mysterieux de  leur  vie  dans  une  correspondance
a l'humain.
Et   jusqu'a  ne  plus  faire  des choses  que  des  signes  non  plus  seulement  trans­ parents a leur  vie  profonde  et  a l'harmonie metaph)lsique qu'elles figurent, mais des symboles, des representants d'idees, de faits spirituels, de lois.5

4    "L'art  spiritualiste", La  Releve  1 ( 1934),  p.  40.  (Quoted in  Lacroix, p.  36).

5  La  Releve u  ( 1936), p. 253 (Quoted in Legare, p. 141).

10

A  FOREST OF SYMBOLS



The same theory of transparency could be illustrated from Saint-Denys Garneau's criticism  of music and  painting. Mozart  and  Debussy delight him by the "simplicite transparente des themes"  (]ournal, p. 57) ; Beetho­ ven,  on  the  other   hand,  is too  emotional,  Handel diffuse.  In  painting he  admires the  clear  vision of Matisse,  and  in Renoir  "!'intention et le spectacle  sont  des l'abord sur le meme  plan  transparent ..."  (p. 95). But Picasso's abstractions or "la feroce caricature de Rouault" leave him bewildered (Lacroix, p. 53).
In  Saint-Denys Garneau's view, transparency implies  Symbolism. His
jottings  in the   journal  and  elsewhere  often  provide  unconscious echoes of passages  from  Symbolist  theorists.6  For  Mallarme, "tout, au monde, existe pour  aboutir a un livre"; for Saint-Denys Garneau, "...  tout est poeme;  il s'agit  qu'il  y ait  un poete"  (Lacroix,  p. 89).  Speaking  of the underlying unity of all existence as expressed by the artist, Charles Morice had  written  in I889, "Ce  retour  ala simplicite,  c'est tout l'art"; in I935, Saint-Denys Garneau was urging "un  grand  retour  general  a la simpli­ cite"  (Lacroix, p. 39).  Saint-Pol-Roux had  related  Beauty to God:  "La  beaute  etant  la forme  de Dieu, il appert que la chercher induit a chercher Dieu,  que  la montrer, c'est  le montrer"; Saint-Denys Garneau  confesses in his  journal  "Et  quand je saisis la Beaute,  je ne puis le voir oppose a Dieu,  au salut" (p.I 69). It is unlikely that  there  is any direct  imitation in these passages; they are  merely indications of  Saint-Denys Garneau's general  sympathy with  Symbolist point of view.
In  his own poems, Saint-Denys Garneau had a habit of using a certain symbol  in a few poems  while he was absorbed  by a certain  problem - the  parallel passages  can  usually  be  traced  in  the   journal- and  then abandoning it,  although  retaining almost unconsciously some of the images  into  which  the  original  symbol had  ramified  in  his  mind.  His symbols thus tend to group  themselves about the themes which concerned him  at  various  times:   poetic  creation, solitude,  authenticity and  death.
The  first of these, poetic creation, will serve to illustrate both the rami­
fication  process,  and  the  parallel  preoccupations of the  poems  and  the
journal. This  theme  is dominant in the period preceding the publication



6   GUY  MICHAUD,   La   doctrine  symboliste   (documents).  Paris:  Nizet,   1947.  The quotations from  Mallarme, Morice  and  Saint-Pol-Roux are  found  on pp.  16, 17 and
42 respectively.


I I

A  FOREST OF SYMBOLS



of Regards et  jeux dans l'espace early in 1937, at which  time his  journal is filled with  discussions of aesthetic  problems. As the  title of the collec­ tion suggests, poetic  creation  is seen as a combination of the artist's in­ sight   ( "le  regard")  and  his representation of the  reality  he  perceives. ( "les  jeux du  poete"). It  is by his "regard" that  the  poet seeks to take possession of reality  and  to make contact  with  humanity.

Quelle grande chose qu'un regard  pur,  non pas cette  recherche chez  les passants de  ce qui  en  eux  correspond a  notre  bassesse, mais  l'avidite de l'ame des autres, de  la  vie  des autres, de l'etre  salvable  et  joyeux  dans  les autres! Le  regard  trans­ parent qui est comme  une bonne  parole. Le regard qui  ne s'arrete pas au sens char­ nel des formes, mais qui penetre jusqu'aux elements de salut.
Comme ce  regard  en  effet  transforme le  monde, en  fait  un  monde de  joie  et
d'esperance, presque deja  ressuscite!  (Journal, p. 82)

The  process is not one of interpreting or of judging,  but of perceiving; the  poet  withdraws into his own mind,  into  a tiny room in his skull "ou l'on  se retire  de  tout,  de soi-meme,  pour  s'asseoir  et pour  regarder. La, on  n'a  plus  affaire  avec  rien:  on est etranger. On  regarde seulement" (Journal, p. 106).  But the "regard" is not directed only at the world out­ side. It is a double-edged sword.

Regard, la lame  a double  sens. La  distance ou il penetre au dehors,  il faut  qu'il la  perce  au  dedans, sans quoi  voila  qu'il  bascule  et  nous  a sa suite, entra.lne  a  un ecoulement perfide, funeste.
Pour  supporter la peroee  retroactive du  regard, il faut que  le pays interieur ait la  profondeur, et  la  solidite,  l'authenticite, la  force  et  la sante   ...
(Journal, p. 228)

It was in the inward  direction  that  Saint-Denys Garneau felt his own "regard" to be "bourbeux et devaste'' despite  his longing  for a "regard pur et libre" ( p. 142 ) .
In  the poems, the "regard pur et libre" is frequently symbolized by the
insight of a child:
Toutle monde  peut voir une piastre  de papier vert
Mais qui peut  voir au travers
si ce n'est  un enfant
Qui  peu comme  lui voir au travers et toute liberte
(Poesies  completes, p. 38).

As early  as  1932, Saint-Denys  Garneau had  written to a friend,  "Je crois que si dans  l'enfance on est plus eloigne des verites, on est plus pres

12

A  FOREST OF SYMBOLS



toutcfois  de la verite."7   The  eyes of a child are  "grands pour  tout  pren­

dre" (Poesies completes, p. 38).  The  child sees without difficulty, notices everything, "mais  son regard  est rarement dehors;  il retourne aussitot  a
la forge prochaine derriere de son imagination, ou il est absorbe" (]our­
nal, p. 220).
When  the child  looks outward, he takes possession of the world about him,
11 ne regarde que pour vous embrasser
Autrement il ne sait pas quoi faire
avec ses y,eux

Ou les poser  .  .  .  .
 
(Poesies completes, p. 47)


The  poet  tries similarly  to seize upon the essence of reality,  the beauty of the world:
Et mon regard  part  en chasse effrenement
De cette spendeur qui s'en va
De la clarte  qui s'echappe
Par  les fissures du temps
(Poesies completes, p. 86)

But as the  poet  moves farther and  farther from  the simplicity  and in­ ner tranquillity of a child, his "regard" is obscured; the world is too much with him, and

La ville coupe  le regard  au debut
Coupe a l'epaule le regard  manchot
 


(Poesies completes, p. 39)

Even external nature ceases to satisfy his glance: "nos regards  sont fatigues  d'etre fauches j par  les memes  arbres" ( p.  176),  and  he  con­ fesses despondently that  he has failed in his attempt to take possession of reality:
Mes regards ne sont pas alles commes des glaneuses
Par  le monde alentour
Faire des gerbes lourdes  de choses
Ils ne rapportent rien pour  peupler  mes yeux deserts
Et c'est  comme  exactement s'ils etaient
demeures en dedans
Et que laporte flit restee fermee.



1   La Nouvelle Releve m ( 1944), p. 517.
 (Poesies completes, p. 150)

A  FOREST OF SYMBOLS



The  second stage of the poetic process is the representation of reality, the  creation or construction by which  the  poet  attempts to present  the reality he has perceived:
De  la, les jeux du  poete,  les jeux feconds  du  poete  qui  se met  a raconter comme c'est  beau,  et  qui  s'y  prend   de  mille  manieres, ne  pouvant arriver a dire  assez comme  c'est beau.  (journal, pp. 251-2)

The  poet's  medium  is language,  but his words are  not units of mean­
ing in the simple sense :

Ses paroles qui ne sont pas du temps
Mais qui  representent le temps  dans  l'eternel, Des manieres de representants
Ailleurs de ce qui  passe ici, Des manieres de symboles
Des manieres d'evidences de l'eternite qui  passe ici.
(Poesies completes, p.  122)

By an  extension  of the  symbol of the  poet-child, poetic  creations  be­ come games: ''l'art, lui, est une manifestation, un libre exercice,  un  jeu" (Journal, p. 230).  The  "play" theme is developed at length  in the poem "Le  jeu",

Ne me derangez pas je suis profondement occupe

Un enfant est en train  de batir  un village
C'est  une ville, un comte
Et qui sait
Tantot  l'univers.
Il  joue  ..... .
(Poesies completes, p. 35)

The  poet-child plays with  his toy-box, "pleine de mots pour  faire  de merveilleux enlacements" (p. 36),

11 vous arrange les mots comme si c',etaient  de simples chansons
Et dans ses  eux
A voir que sous les mots il deplace toutes choses  .  . .  (p. 37)

In  an  essay entitled  "Monologue fantaisiste sur le mot",  published  in

,
 Saint-Denys Garneau had  stressed  "Ia  terrible exigence  des


8  La  Releve  111 (1937), pp.  71-73. The  quotations in  the  remainder of this  para­
graph are all from  this short essay. (Reproduced in Lacroix, pp. 63-66).

A  FOREST OF  SYMBOLS



mots qui  ont  soif clc substance". Words  are not mere  instruments of  ex­ pression;  "le  mot  contient  toute  une culture,  toute  une refl.exion". One must strive to enter the word, to possess it, to draw  upon its substance and to  add  to  its  substance   in  return. Culture consists in  the  possession of words in this intimate sense:
Le  poete   reconnait le  mot  comme  sien.  II  est  libre  du  mot  pour  en  jouer.  II joue de  tout  par  le mot.  Le  mot  est !'instrument dont  il joue  pour  rendre sensible le jeu qu'il  fait de toute  choses.
As Brother  Levis Fortier  has shown9,  Saint-Denys  Garneau's treatment of poetic creation obviously owes a good deal to Valery.  But the symbols of the poet-child and his games probably  go back much further, to Baude­ laire,  who is referred to more  than  a dozen times in the  ]ournal. Robert  Elie confirms  that,  after  his spiritual crisis in 1935, Saint-Denys Garneau "ne lira plus ni Musset ni Loti, mais il decouvrira Baudelaire, qui l'accom­ pagnera  jusqu'au bout  de son aventure."10   As in Les Fleurs du mal, the opening  poems of Regards  et  jeux dans l'espace examine  the poet's func­  tion;  in fact,  the  image  of the poet-child  occurs in the  second  poem of Baudelaire's  volume  ("Benediction")  precisely  as it  does in  Garneau's book. It is conceivable, however, that  the "toy-and-game" symbolism has its  source  in an  essay Baudelaire published  in  Le  M onde  Litteraire in
1853 and  later  included in L'art romantique under  the title "Morale du joujou". In  it  Baudelaire  maintains that  "les  enfants   temoignent par leurs  jeux de leur grande faculte  d'abstraction et de leur haute  puissance
imaginative ... Le  joujou  est la premiere  initiation de !'enfant a l'art
.  . .  " When  a child  wants  to see what  makes  his toy work, "Je ne me
sens pas le courage  de blamer  cette manie  enfantine: c'est  une premiere tendance metaphysique ..."" Most  of the  elements  of Saint-Denys Garneau's poem  "Le  jeu" are  to be found in these pages.
To  continue the exploration of this single theme  of poetic  creation in Saint-Denys Garneau would  lead  us into  intriguing byways such  as the symbolism of the poet's right and left eyes:
Et pourtant dans son oeil gauche quand le droit  rit
Une  gravite de I'autre monde s'attache ala feuille  d'un arbre
(Poesies  completes, p. 37)

9   Le message  poetique  de Saint-Denys-Garneau, pp. 190-201.
10  Revue Dominicaine LVI  ( 1950), p. 99·
11  L'art  romantique. Paris: Skira, 1945, pp. 143, 144, 148.

15

A  FOREST OF SYMBOLS



-or of the children's dance:
Mes enfants vous dansez mal
Il faut dire qu'il  est difficile de danser ici
Dans ce manque d'air
lei sans espace qui est toute  la danse   . . .  (p. 39)
-or of the invisible flowers:
Et surtout n'allez  pas mettre un pied dans  la chambre
On  ne sait  jamais ce qui peut etre dans  ce coin
·  Et si vous n'allez pas ecraser la plus chere des fleurs invisibles  (p. 36)
But  like a child  chasing  a butterfly,  we should  find ourselves wander­ ing deeper  into  this "foret  de symboles" than  we intended. In true  Mal­  larmean fashion,  Saint-Denys  Garneau tempts  his readers  to try a "serie  de  dechiffrements" which  will unlock  the  mysteries  of these  half-trans­ parent, half-hermetic poems, and  thereby  lures them  back into the laby­ rinth  of his  journal and of his spiritual adventure.





16



FREDERICK PHILIP  GROVE: AN IMPRESSION




W.  B. Holliday


0NE DAY  IN   THE  FALL   of 1939  l was wandering
among  the  book stacks in Eaton's  Toronto store.  A novel, Two Genera­
tions, by Frederick Philip  Grove, caught  my eye. Grove's  picture was on the  dust  cover  with  a  brief account  of his life. I noted  that  he owned a farm  near Simcoe. The  photograph was of a thoughtful man in his forties wearing a  high,  old-fashioned collar.  He  was  looking  away  from  the photographer with a detached expression. In his eyes a certain kindliness and modesty seemed to mingle with a suggestion of tragedy. He appeared to be somehow  vulnerable, approachable. I decided  to write  to him and ask for work on his farm. I had  literary  ambitions.
He  replied  to my letter  four  days  later. He  acknowledged that  he
owned  a  farm,  but  a  tenant  worked  it. "Still", he  wrote,  "if  you were here,  I  might, in the  long  run, be able  to do  something for  you. We have,  for  a year  or  so, had  a young  man  in the  house  to act  as a sort of janitor  in return  for his board; and we have not yet filled the position for  this  winter.  We  conduct   a  private  school here   ..." He  named  a meeting-place in Brantford which he would be visiting a few days hence.
His tone was cordial  but  I had misgivings and  I allowed  the day of the
suggested  meeting   to  pass.  The  following  week-end   I  took  the  bus to Simcoe  and  walked  the mile from  the town to Grove's  house. He was in his garden  kneeling  among  the vegetables. He looked up from  his weed­ ing. I identified myself. "Oh, yes", he said without surprise. "I thought you'd  changed your mind". He  pointed  out that  he would  be unable  to pay me. I expressed  indifference to money. He said nothing.
I studied  him closely. His head was massive and well-shaped; I noticed particularly the impressive distance  from  the top of his head  to his ears.

FREDERICK PHILIP  GROVE



His  sandy,  cropped hair  gave him a youthful appearance and  I  judged him to be in his fifties. (I learned  later  that  he was sixty-seven.)  The day was raw and a drop of moisture clung to the tip of his long nose. His eyes were  pale  and  framed  by heavy  pouches.  He  was polite  and  receptive, but there  was something in his manner  which made  me wonder  if he was indifferent to my presence.
I  watched his  thick  fingers expertly  grasp  the  weeds  and  pull  them from  the black soil. But it was disillusioning  to see the man  whose picture I  had  observed  on the  jacket  of a  novel crouching thus  upon  the  earth and  performing such a lowly task. I began  to question  him about  books and authors. He offered his views pleasantly but with authority, even with finality.  When  he expressed esteem for D. H. Lawrence I was reassured.
Presently  we went to the house for tea. Mrs. Grove, a business-like per­
son,  questioned me  discreetly  about  my intentions. She  seemed  faintly incredulous that  I was prepared to leave a job in Toronto in order  to live with  them.  Grove, smoking a cigarette in a holder,  sat with  his long legs crossed,  occasionally  interjecting a  remark.
When  the  time  came  for  me to catch  the  bus, Grove  rose and  shook
my  hand,  looking  down at  me in a friendly  way. "I'd like to come",  I said. Both appeared to welcome my words yet plainly  they wished the decision  to  be  made  solely by me.  I  returned to Toronto, resigned  my office position  and  within three  weeks I was living with  the Groves.
Life  in the  household  ran  a simple,  Spartan course. There were four of us, including Leonard  the son. We rose early  and  by seven-thirty  we were  at  breakfast. Everyone ate oatmeal porridge, soaked overnight. By eight  o'clock  Grove  had sharpened his pencils in a school room and  was on his way upstairs  to his study. He was typing the final draft of In Search of  Myself and  the  rattle  of his typewriter was heard  until  noon.  After lunch  he  returned to his study  to read  or  he worked  in the  garden; on two afternoons a week he taught  French  to the dozen or so pupils attend­ ing the school.  (Teaching the students  bored  him). After supper he and I  walked  together or he spent  some  time  with  Leonard; frequently he went  to his study and played solitaire while solving the problems  his writ­  ing  posed  him; he  rarely  made  social calls  though  occasionally  friends visited  the  house;  he never went  to a motion picture. By ten o'clock  the house was quiet.
Grove  was essentially a  European. He  was, one  critic  has stated, the

J8

FREDERICK PHILIP  GROVE



Canadian Thomas Hardy. To  him  life  was complex, full  of tortuous depths,  hidden motives,  inevitable suffering;  a struggle  against  a blind, impersonal fate.  One  must  have patience,  endurance; these brought  re­ signation  and  with  resignation might  come  wisdom.  His  opposition  to Magna Charta- it  replaced the tyranny  of the  king with  the tyranny  of the  masses-together with his admiration for  Goethe,  the enemy of the  French  Revolution, baffled me at first; his views seemed  perverse, at war with the bland assumptions, the facile optimism of the North  Ameri­  can.  I  concluded that   he  must  have  reflected  with  wonder  during  his years in Canada upon  the strange twist of fortune  which had  placed him as a youth in an  environment so alien to all that  was congenial  to him.
InI 94 Ihe wrote to me:  "You will probably see through the papers ... that  I have been elected  a fellow of the Royal Society, the highest honour which  can  come  to a  Canadian man  of letters; so be sure  to put  the
'FRSC' behind  my name  henceforth. It's as good as a title they tell me." Obviously,  under  the  banter, he was deeply  touched  by the distinction. Nevertheless,  apart from  a few discerning  critics  and  a small  but grow­ ing audience, popular acclaim  never  came  to him.  He  told me that  the works of George  Meredith met with indifference  until the author's death; afterwards Meredith's heirs reaped  the rewards  of  posthumous fame.  In cheerfully  dismissing the public he ascribed  its inattention to distaste  for his forthright message. "I am hard  at work", he wrote  to me in Decem­  ber,  I940, "on another of those novels which I shall never publish; I haw· half a dozen such on my shelves. If I published  them  the people of Can­  ada  would  have  me  stoned  or call them pornography. You see, publica­  tion  means  nothing. What  matters is solely that  the  work  be done,  the book be written, the beauty created. The rest of my work counts for little. But  I  once  published the  least  "objectionable" of those  novels  which comprise  my real work  (Settlers of the  Marsh) and  the  libraries  barred  me;  and my friends  cut me in the street. So why should  I even try to pub­  lish. Quite apart from the fact  that  I can't.  But that  is no reason for not writing  those books, to me".  He declared  his independence of the reader  again  in a  letter  of  November,   I941.  "Work  on a long book makes the rest of life seem irrelevant. What  difference does it make whether, from day  to day,  you  are  dissatisfied  with  what  you are  doing, whether, per­  haps,  you are almost  starving; even whether  your book progresses satis­ factorily; so long as it either  is alive or is coming to life; gestation  is not

FREDERICK PHILIP  GROVE



a  fast  process;  it  demands  time,  and  you can't hurry  it.  But when  the book is born, it is a miracle  to you, like every birth".
Grove's  words  betrayed  a  certain   gnawing contrariness of  which  I was to see other  examples.  On the one hand  he is pleased  with  the few honours  that   have  come  his way-honours,  though, which  only  the appearance of his books could  bring him; on the other  hand  publication means  "nothing''. He was contemptuous of politicians, inferring that,  in the main,  they act out of self interest; yet he showed me, with some satis­ faction,  a letter  he had received from  Mackenzie King  thanking him for the  copy of Two  Generations Grove had  sent him.  To my doubts that  I was sufficiently independent of public opinion  to write as my heart  willed he encouraged me:  "As far  as that  normality of which you speak,  natu­ rally we are anything but 'normal people'; and  we hold those that  are a bit in horror; at least I do; my wife certainly to a less extent." He affected to despise cities;  they were monuments to a soulless materialism. Yet as an  affluent  youth  astir  with  dreams  of  great  accomplishments he  had moved  with  ease in the great  cities of  Europe. I suspected  that  his pro­ fessed dislike was based on the knowledge  that  when among  the inhabi­ tants  of those places he was unknown,  anonymous like themselves; their indifference to him was the measure of his failure as a writer.  And he was ready  to overturn my pride as a Torontonian in the  Canadian National Exhibition by dismissing it  briefly in 1941:  "The exhibition was a dis­ aappointment to everyone of us. We went  home  about  3 p.m."
From  a perspective of twenty  years I believe Grove  was disappointed
that  his pen had failed to earn him a decent livelihood. He was a patrician by nature as well as by birth  and  wealth  would have allowed  him to live in style. During my stay he was earning a  modest  sum  as a reader  for Macmillan's. His  own  works were  paying  him  little; he  told  me  with amusement that  once  he  received  a  royalty  cheque amounting to sixty cents.
Yet Grove would have spurned  the suggestion  that  he debase his talent
for money although, on one occasion, when his wife needed a refrigerator, he wrote  a pot  boiler to get it. But this deliberate act  must  have  been a rare  perversion  of his muse for deep within  him  burned a constant  flame that  was his integrity. He knew what  he had  to say and  he knew the only way in which  he could in all honesty say it. As an  impressionable youth I found  this almost  stubborn probity  an  impressive and  exhilarating in-

20

FREDERICK PHILIP  GROVE



flucncc. Doubtless  never very far from Grove's thoughts were his models, the great  writers  of the  past, and  I believe that  their  example  was sup­ ported   ultimately by a  strong  belief  in his own  worth  as a  novelist  of importance.
I have  listened  with  Grove  to  the  Ninth  Symphony,  observing  how
Beethoven's  hammer blows seemed  to parallel  his own searching views on the human condition. And watching  his studying a folio of the frescoes in the Sistine  Chapel, I have marked  his love for the eternally  beautiful. But it was  Grove's  opinions  as a writer  that  I wished to know. And  he gave his views willingly. War and Peace was the greatest  novel ever writ­ ten;  Anna Karenina was next in importance. When I surmised that Gals­ worthy  had  little  sympathy for Irene  Forsyte, he said:  "You must have read  the  book  with  little  understanding; he pleads  her  cause  on every page." He denied that  Dickens was merely a caricaturist; he was a "great psychologist",   a  novelist  with  few peers;  "he  is  underrated just  now". Grove  appeared to have  little  interest  in  American writers,  though  he admired Thoreau deeply  possibly  because of Thoreau's rejection of the  superfluous in life. Several  times during  my stay he  repeated with thoughtful amusement  Thoreau's dictum  that  it is wise to avoid  the be­ ginnings  of evil. He said:  "A  novel is essentially the  road  pursued  from an idea to an act that bears it out."  He told me that  once, during  a short illness, he  had  read  the  complete  works of Shakespeare. He  referred to Stefan  George, Andre  Gide and Rainer Maria  Rilke admiringly. He told me that  one day, in his youth, he had  brashly called  upon Swinburne.
But I doubted, as I listened  to him day after  day, that  he felt for the mass of human kind  that  high  regard  which  he had  for his intellectual peers.  He  was  kind  and  magnanimous in his daily  relationships but  he was inclined  to scoff at the pretensions of little men and at the weaknesses of those in public  life. I think that,  to him, mankind on the whole made a poor showing; indeed,  the life of many men was scarcely  justifiable.  In his novel The  Master  of the Mill, a copy of which  he gave me, his pre­ occupation with  the  forces  that  impel  mankind rather  than  a  feeling for  the  individual is apparent; his characters are  at  the  mercy  of the novel's preconceived design;  they lack an inner life of their own; they are shadowy  pawns.  Thus  the  book is curiously lacking in warmth. I readily identified  the  author as the  man  whose personality  I was beginning  to know.


21

FREDERICK PHILIP  GROVE



When  the war  began Grove followed events closely. He listened regu­ larly  to the  dry, factual  reporting of Elmer  Davis. Subsequently when  I left the household  and had  joined the service he commended my action: "Were I  younger,  I  should  no longer hesitate. We  live in a  world  of insanity.  I  recommend to  you Out  of the  Night  to allay  any  lingering  scruples.  I  have  no sympathy  with  the  author; but  essentially  what  he says is the truth."
From  this  time  my life took a new  direction. But  I often  thought of Grove; from a distance  of two thousand  miles the recollection  of my stay with  him  became  increasingly  precious.  In  1943  he  sent  a  short  note which  proved  to be his last letter  to me. As usual it was typewritten and signed F. P. G. He was still writing "but  it is next to impossible to publish my  sort  of  thing". And  he  added   gloomily:   "Life runs  its  humdrum course;  and  only Leonard has so much  before  him  that  he still looks for great  things."  His words were  dispiriting, but  I was heartened to know that in spite of the distractions of a world conflict as well as the realization that  he could  not  expect  the  acclaim  which  he  may  secretly  have con­ tinued  to  expect,  he  was  still  at his  desk.  One  day,  while  on  leave,  I journeyed  to Simcoe.  Grove had  suffered  from  one of the strokes which ultimately killed him. His right side had been paralysed and he had made  an  incomplete recovery.  He  spoke with  difficulty.  He  had  received  an honorary doctorate from the University of Manitoba, but he seemed more amused  than  grateful; perhaps the  recognition had  come  too late.  His manner was remote,  passive. Mrs.  Grove told me that  he wanted to die. I  understood, for  he could  no longer write:,  his  usefulness, he doubtless believed,  was at  an  end.  When  I  left  Grove  that day  I  knew  I should never see him again.
No one who knew Grove could fail to be conscious of his profound integrity. It  is this attribute to which  I  return again  and  again  when  I think of him. To the end he retained  an admiration for that  which is ex­ cellent; and  excellence as a writer  was ever his goal. As an interpreter of his adopted country,  he never veered from his resolve to portray her with all the honesty of which he was capable. His death was marked  with deep regret  by a few; but one day Canadians will become aware  that  no man  understood so well  the  forces shaping their  character as  the  gentle European novelist who dwelt so long unnoticed in their  midst.



22



THE	THIRD	EYE

JAY MACPHERSON'S
The Boatman


James Reaney





E    of Canadian poetry is like some lonely farm­ house at the centre  of a remarkably large and bleak farm.  One enters  the farmhouse to find the inhabitants all busy at making wonderfully strange  carvings  apparently unrelated to the prairie  fields and  Yonge streets that  lie outside.  I say "apparently" unrelated because the more we stay with these carvers  the more we realise that  the carvings are related, related  in a very freeing  way to the whole farm  of  ten fields and  two wastelands.
On  our  way home  we saw a heron  fishing in the  bog; Mr.  Le Pan  is carving that  heron  into a hollow Silenus figure filled with tiny shapes of gods and  goddesses.  The  old farmer himself,  Mr.  Pratt, has  just  com­ pleted  a dragon, one of many,  a dragon  that  represents the muskeg  we had  such difficulty with on the road here. There is also Miss Macpherson who  has  just completed a model  of the farmhouse itself-it's a whale. This  carving   (her  volume  The  Boatman)  has  made a  great  difference  in the world of Canadian poetry. Let us proceed to explain  the greatness  of this difference.
First, what one  must  remark about Miss  Macpherson's whale or "Leviathan" is that  it is so very skillfully carved,  and so are all the other beasts  inside it, for  her  Leviathan turns  out to be a Noah's Ark as well. It  can  also be said  that  she is the first Canadian poet to carve  angels at all well. No one before had  ever told Canadian poets that  the Angel was or could be a very suitable and good topic for poetry.
Miss Macpherson's angels, of course, have a lot to do with the fact that she does some very natural but very hard  things connected with the Bible. The  Bible is still a vexatiously  ill-known  work in Canada despite  all the

23

THE  THIRD EYE



nineteenth-century piety and  the packed  churches of the  twentieth cen­ tury.  I mean  that  it is ill-known  as a key to art  and  as a source for new art.   Miss  Macpherson knows  her  Bible, knows  that   the  natural world about  us is not natural, knows how her Bible shows you how to deal with this  unnaturalness; so nothing  seemed  more  amiable  probably  than  to have lots of angels, for they are the structure of the Bible and  they prove to  be a  subject  that  immediately creates  a  tension  in which  any  object or animal or being-Egg, Abominable Snowman and  Mary of Egypt - begins to have an outline  that  glows. In The Boatman there  is the "face­ less angel" of the Storm,  the angel who knows what  "sways when  Noah nods",  the  "inward angel"-of  a poem called  that- who has a "dia­ mond  self". There are  the angels  who  look on as Leviathan frolics and there  are the seraph  forms within the "caverned woman" which are later named   "flowers,  fountains,  milk,  blood".  In  this  equation we see  that  what  the  poet  means  by an  angel  is anything or anybody  or any  being seen in its Eternal aspect,  that  is, at its most glorious  and  most real,  its most  expanded. Actually,  in  leafing  backwards through The  Boatman  and  tracking down  the  angels,  I've  forgotten to mention  the  very im­ portant angel in the last poem:
The  world was first a private park Until the angel, after  dark, Scattered afar to wests and  easts The  lovers and  the friendly beasts.
This  angel  represents  the giant  and  supernatural force  all Creation lost at the Fall. This force, like a cork in a bottle, stands between  us and Para­ dise in the sense that  we must attain to it again  before  we can return to Paradise. This  significant  angel  and  his companions are  a  great part  of the reason why The Boatman is such an exciting book. Of course, Genesis, St. John, Milton,  Blake and  Rilke can't  be wrong-the concept  of the angel  is one of the most stunning things  man  ever stumbled across. To have  landed  and  handled  this concept  is a real achievement.

NoT ONLY is this poet  able  to arrive  at a skill with  a very important symbol; she knows also how to deal  with  a great  variety of topics in a carefully modulated variety of ways. The  variety of methods
or  ways or tones is so cleverly arranged that  by the  time the reader  has

THE  THIRD EYE



finishcu  the volume he has boxed the compass of the reality  which poetry imitates. This should be  an  ability an  enthusiast for  poetry would naturally expect from  the author of any volume of lyrics. Even the mean­ est musical composer can manage  a suite in which the prelude is different  from  the  gigue  which  in  turn  is different  from  the sarabande.  But the average poet  cannot  manage this, nor does he very  often  even want  to, or  know  that  it  is possible.  Even  in really  academic circles  where  one might  naturally expect to meet ultra-theoretical sympathies, the idea that  a poet  might  arrange his lyrics in suites or build up a collection  of lyrics around a  consistent  and  observable  variety  in  poetic  effects  is usually poohpoohed as being rather mechanical or even rather immoral. If Miss Macpherson smashes  the  spell  that  still holds many  a  poetry  consumer both inside and outside literary circles in Canada-that the stuff is writ­  ten more or less as if an undistinguishing frenzy had overtaken one -she will have accomplished one miracle  at least. This  problem is very much connected with  the conspiracy of brute silence about  criticism  in Canada which  Mr.  Mandel mentioned in the  first issue of  this  quarterly.  Miss Macpherson shows  what  interesting results can  be achieved when  one dares  to break  this silence,  dares  to accept  almost casually  the fact  that literature can  be talked  about  and  described.
Canadian poetry  has  always  been  plagued  by the  book of  unrelated
lyrics. I often  feel  that,  aside  from  the  fact  that  for  a long while there were no Canadian critics who could help with this problem, the influence of the  average collection  from  England  should  bear  some of the  blame. Despite  the fact  that  Yeats,  Eliot, Thomas and Sitwell  have tried some­ thing  different,  the  usual  English  poet  generally  dishes  out  a  selection of his latest  "real" walks. Canadian poets are unfortunately rather trap­ ped when it comes to writing  English poetry about  walks, since in some parts  of Canada it is impossible  to take a walk either because  the traffic would  kill you or  the  particular province  was designed to be interesting only  to  birds.  Miss  Macpherson's  angels  help  tremendously, since it  is possible  to  talk  about  an  angel  no  matter  where  you live.  One  of the proudest  conclusions  the  author of The  Boatman might  draw  about  her own  volume  is that  very few of  the experiences  described are  "real" or "natural"  experiences. The  situations,  the  beings,  the  speakers  are  all gloriously  artificial like  the  themes  of Bach,  which  no "real" bird,  no "real" train  whistle could imitate or has ever imitated. If the tyranny  of

25

THE  THIRD EYE



the "natural" or unorganised  results in the ragbag approach to a volume of lyrics, then  the monarchy  of the  better  than  "natural", the monarchy of the  organised, has resulted  in the  beautifully articulated structure of this book, and  it is a monarchy that  shows the way to future ones. I can remember feeling  so envious with regard  to one of my own earliest poetic enthusiasms-Edith Sitwell;  I envied  her  the  idea  of a  suite  such  as Fa<;ade represents. I envied  because I felt  that  to imitate it would  be to plagiarize. But  The  Boatman quite  persuasively  shows  that  originality consists not in avoiding what  has been done before but in doing what  has been done over again. So far as the organization of a book of lyrics is con­ cerned  William  Blake showed the way forever.  To transplant that organ­ ization  into  our  poetry which so sadly needs it is not the least interesting of The  BoatmanJs accomplishments.
In  a  poem  entitled  "The Anagogic Man" we are  presented with  a
figure  as interesting as the  angel,  the  figure  of a  sleeping  Noah  whose head  contains  all creation. "Consider that  your senses keep/ A death  far deeper  than  his sleep".  This  is Blake's  Albion,  Emerson's Giant  in his great  early essay "Nature", Joyce's sleeping  Finn, and  it represents as do these  analogues the  slumbering imagination of all  life, a slumbering imagination  that   slowly through  art   and  science  rearranges  the  sun, moon, stars and figures of the gods until they are once more under  human control.  This  Noah  is the artist,  a man  who has brought and  still brings all  of society  safely  through  the  flood and  tempest  of a  fallen  world's whirlwind of atoms and death-wishes. But Art must  be allowed  to decide for itself when the time for universal apocalypse has arrived. If we waken him or it beforehand it is akin to building  the Tower  of Babel, to attempt­ ing a leap into Paradise when we are by no means  ready for it. The  whole collection  of poems requires  the reader  to transfer himself from the sleep our senses keep  to Noah's sleep, and from  Noah's  sleep eventually to the first morning in Paradise.  Miss Macpherson's book is a dream that  starts  off in the world  of the senses and  slowly lifts us higher and  higher  until in the final half  dozen pages we are  as high  as we can be.
Other Canadian poets, as a matter of fact,  have  handled this figure, and  he  is a figure that a  poet  has  to  handle in  one shape  or  another sooner or  later, since  the  very  process of  being interested in  meta­ phor  evidently   must  lead  to an  interest  in  giant  and  mythical  figures. Once  you start  saying that  "my  love is like a  red,  red  rose", you  might

THE  THIRD EYE



as well start  saying that  she is like a great  many other  beautiful things as well, and  then  of course  if she really is a goddess she is like everything, because  a  goddess  isn't  a goddess unless she can  control  both  beautiful and  ugly things, even things indifferent. So she is everything and contains all  the  things  she  is like. If anything is like  anything (meta ph or)   it eventually  is everything (myth) and is an anagogic  figure similar  to Miss Macpherson's.
Douglas Le Pan has a poem about this figure called "Image of Silenus". The  motto  is from  Plato: "He  is like one of the images of Silenus. They are made  to open in the middle, and inside them are figures of the gods", but the basic image  of the poem is from Canadian nature -a heron who is equated with  this image  of Silenus. Le Pan's  Silenus or Noah contains the "shrunken figures of desire". Miniatures rather, toys in a toyshop win­ dow" -Dionysus, Christopher, Francis,  Apollo,  foam-born  Aphrodite. The   speaker   turns  and  looks down  from  a  railway  viaduct  at  the  so­ called  real  world,  "real and  suffering city".  "They are  rows  of jostling
seeds, I Planted too close, unlikely to come to maturity. I Some will shoot
up  (germs are brave things and hard  to kill). I But most will be crushed." This is the world we live in. But in the inner city, the world we think, feel and imagine  in, the figures of the gods-". .  .  The  puppets have looked
out I Like sick children with their faces pressed to the window I (Guarded by guiling  glass I By an  invisible barrier) ". Le Pan's  glass is Miss Mac­ pherson's  golden  bubble  head  of glass which  in turn  is the container of
Noah's  anagogic  dream  life. But in Le Pan's  poem  it is not time yet for the  complete  union  of the  figure of the gods-or completely expressed desire-and frustrated, wretched, longing  humanity. "Now  the  blinds drop,  the  shop  shuts,  the  mask  grins  again", and  as  the  Silenus  figure closes away his hidden  myths to become one more mocking figure imitat­ ing our own ugly imprisonment the heron flies away.
The  Boatman climbs from Le Pan's  seedbed  to his figures of the gods.
Both poets here remind  one of Northrop Frye's concept  of the verbal uni­ verse  which  hovers  over  the  seedbed  of the so-called  real  and  natural world picking out this or that  event for admission into its world of literary  forms. Both  Noah  and  Silenus  are  humanizations of Frye's concept  and the  idea  is, I suppose,  that  eventually  all  will  be  verbal  universe.  The  concept  is obviously a very valuable  one to poets and should be a far more fruitful one to discuss than  the  usual chestnut  of  "obscurity", especially

THE  THIRD EYE



since  one  can  see it  as lying  behind these two  fine  poems, Le  Pan's "Silenus" and  Miss  Macpherson's "Anagogic Man",  which  achieve  so much intensity and communication.
The  epiphany of the mysterious heron,  the vision of the all-containing
head,  show as in a lightning flash a sight of what  the whole world would be like if it were completely metaphored, completely humanly controlled. One  day  the  sleeper  will awaken,  the  film  will  be  all  developed, the images of desire  will break  through  their  imprisoning glass. Now I have lined up another poem by another  poet with  Miss Macpherson's "Anago­ gic Man" in order  to show that  the sleeping  mythical Noah figure con­ nects up very easily with what  most people  might  consider the more real and  more  Canadian world of viaducts,  herons  and cameras. I have also wanted  to show  one of the things The  Boatman continually does;  after  reading  it, other  poems and poets take on a new design and sharpness.  I remember about   the  time  that The Boatman  came  out  there  was  an account  in the papers of a doctor who said that  it was much more sensible to hang  abstractish Braques  and  Picassos in  children's hospitals  rather than  representational works since  the  eye  can make  an  endless variety  of faces and scenes out of a good abstract painting, only one or two things out of the  representational painting. So here  Miss Macpherson's "Ana­ gogic Man" is an abstract or mythical design which, as we have seen, lies behind  another poet's  representa tionaI particulars-a heron,  a slum district  under  a viaduct-and it also could lie behind  a great  many more particular and  varied experiences. Mr.  Le Pan  has attached his concrete particular to the abstract design of Plato's  god-bearing Silenus, but  Miss Macpherson has taken  just this design itself, carried it about  as far  as it can  be carried, so far as precisely probing  its clarity  is concerned, and so produced a  poem  to which,  as faces and  scenes flock into  the  abstract painting,  other   poems  and  a  great  many  experiences can  be attached.
In  the  poem  actually  called  "The Boatman" we have  the  Anagogic Man  in comic,  Gilbert  and  Sullivan  terms.  Comic  mirroring or parody is one of Miss Macpherson's most striking organizational devices; themes usually considered rather august, and often treated elsewhere  by the poet with  dignity,  are  quite  suddenly  unbuttoned and  playfully  kicked about. One  has  only  to contrast  the  chuckling  rhythm of "You  might  suppose it easy" from  "The Boatman" with the meditative atmosphere of "Noah walks with head  bent down" from "The Anagogic Man" to see how skill-

THE  THIRD  EYE



fully  the poet  can  transpose  a  theme  from  one mode into  another. The reader is asked  in this comic anagogic  "Boatman" to turn  himself inside out in order  to get his beasts outside him. Presumably one can't  be a Noah whose head  is filled with  all the images of the world  until one has been thoroughly turned upside  down  and  cleansed  of the  world-parts inside your head  in the wrong way; you have  to be turned  inside out since that is the only way  to get ready; for  rebirth-to be the very opposite  of all the so-called  real and  natural world expects of you. The  range  exhibited by the distance  between  this comic rollicking poem and the serious "Ana­ gogic Man" is remarkable. Serious poets often attempt to be the opposite of serious, and  Ogden  Nash  no doubt  furtively  attempts elegy, but here we have  a poet  who makes  both elegiac and comic equally rich.
One  other  key poem  I  should  like  to glance  at  before  attempting a description of the  book as a whole is the  last poem,  "The Fisherman". Fishing  is a  much  praised  Canadian activity,  although few Canadians, even  the  much  befisheried National Film  Board, ever quite  catch  as important a  fish  as  this  one.  What  the  Anagogic  Man,  The  Boatman ("That's to get his beasts outside him,  j For they've  got to come aboard him") and  the Sleeping  Shepherd (another version of anagogic  Noah) have  been  doing  is fishing, that  is, humanizing the myriad  forms of the world  which  old  Adam  let slip away.  Miss Macpherson's Fisherman is, as Northrop Frye  pointed  out,  a  successful Fisher-King. He  is also the Emily  Carr of Wilfrid  Watson's  poem who has been coughed  up on the shores of Eternity by a green Leviathan. Emily  Carr got  to Eternity through humanizing or  catching Leviathan in  her  paintings; here  the Fisherman catches Leviathan  with all  the  humanizing devices  that human imagination provides.



0NE  CLUE to the mystery of Miss Macpherson's hold on one's  imagination is the  feeling she constantly  gives of things  inside other  things.  This  idea  of things within  things can  be expanded into the most satisfying  explanation of existence  I think  I know of. We live in a
Leviathan which  God  occasionally  plays with and  is always attempting to catch. Once  we played  with  it and  tried  to catch  it but  it caught  us

29

THE  THffiD EYE



instead. This  myth  is the  essential  design  of Miss  Macpherson's  book, and  the key poems I have glanced at as well as her ability to organize everything grow naturally out of this myth-the myth  of things  within things.
In  the very first poem the  reader  can  spot  the larger  fable in the line
"A  mouse  ran  away  in my wainscot".  There the speaker  feels only the beginning  of an  insideness-outsideness  which  slowly spirals  upward into the magnificently final statement of the very last poem  where inside and outside  disappear for ever.  What  Miss Macpherson eventually  seems to be saying, for example  in her Ark poems, is that  the God who plays with the monster  of our universe has also got this Leviathan or universe within him. Man  inside  the Leviathan will one day become  the God who plays rather than  gets entrapped and  finally  the  God  with  Leviathan inside him-Milton's "all in all".
There is another early poem called "The Third Eye". The  Third Eye that  made  a  "Cosmos  of miscellany" is the  guiding force  that  can  still help  us back  to the lost world of the second  section  where  "the  lost girl
gone under  sea I Tends  her undying  grove".  The  reader  must  read these
poems  with  a third  eye. This  is like Eliot asking  us to read The Waste­
land  with  Tiresias' eyes; Tiresias,  the hermaphrodite, represents  subject and  object   joined  in  the  same  enlightening way  as the  third  eye  here represents a  possible freedom  from  the  divided  world  of left eye, right eye; man,  woman,  left hand,  right hand  and  so on. The Third Eye loses its power in the first pages of the book, but grows again  throughout and reappears in the  reader's brow at the end where  cosmos is indeed  made out of miscellany.
In  the  third  section of the  book, "Plowman in Darkness", the feeling which  emerges is one probably  bubbling  to the  reader's lips at that  very moment. This  feeling might  be expressed  as that  "it's damn  cosy in this Leviathan and  I'm  not  going  to stir  an  inch":

Well, the blessed upshot  was, Mamma worked  her way across From  Egypt  to the Holy Land,
And here  repents, among  the sand  .

When  the  reader  realizes that  this particular Mary  worked  her passage to the  Holy Land  by prostitution he has no doubt  realized  the intention

THE THIRD EYE



of this section,  which  seems to be the showing of how useful evil can be. It  can  get you to the  Holy  Land.  It's  amusing and  it provides  a muddy filthy nest for humanity, which is some sort of protection from  complete nothingness   until  the  sleeping  shepherd  of the  next  section  can  dream up  something better. The  epilogue  to this section,  "Plowman in Dark­ ness", presents  us with the sister birds Procne and Philomela, the swallow and  the  nightingale. The nightingale broods  upon  a lost  garden  world, but the swallow:
. . . snug in walls of clay Performs as she is able: Chatters, gabbles,  all the day:, Raises  both Cain  and  Babel.

These  two birds  are  displaced versions of angels and  in Miss  Macpher­ son's iconography are to be carefully placed beside the dove and the raven later  mentioned in connection with Noah's Ark. "Plowman in Darkness" is a very exhilarating part  of the book to read since it performs the diffi­ cult  feat  I have already glanced  at of taking  myths and  symbols usually canonized  in deep  sanctity and  playing  them  in a  different key:. I think most  poets  in Canada could  babble  a few lines  about  the  phoenix  as a very sacred  bird  indeed,  but  few are sufficiently trained in literary  sym­ bolism to see, as Miss Macpherson does, that the phoenix could be funny, even  squalid  as well  as solemn. The  hermaphroditic Phoenix  who is a companion bird   to  the  chattering  Philomela   is certainly a  disturbing creature, but  needed  to be invented. And  that's the  whole  point  of this suite filled with holy harlots and second rate Thomas the Rymers-holi­ ness has to fall, has to be laughed  at or else it can never be holy again, or rather remain holy.
The  fourth   suite,  "The Sleepers",  represents  an  advance spiritually
forward in that  the various sleepers, sleeping shepherds for the most part, are  dreaming their  way out of the  prison of Nature. This  Nature is the Nurse  of the  last poem  who "spins a sensual shining  web".  In  the world of the Sleepers female  figures, partly  of the nightingale variety,  partly: of the babbling swallow type, attend the sleeping male figures. In the "Gar­ den of the  Sexes" we see that  the natural feminine  and fallen world im­ prisons Man's waking  life until he is bound to a Tree; but at night  Man  escapes from  his prison  in dreams  and  it is Nature that  finds herself im­ prisoned   there.  Babbling and  singing and  crooning  beneath all  these

31

THE  THIRD EYE



poems,  of course,  we have  the  story of  the  Bible like a ground  bass to which classical allusions are connected  with great  ease. For example, the poem  "Helen in  Egypt" reminds  one  of  Israel  in  Egypt  and  Christ  in Egypt.  The  "Faithful Shepherd" has both  Ezekiel and  Endymion  behind it.  In  the "Old Enchanter" we get a clue  as to what  Miss Macpherson means somewhat later on by an island and also what sleep means. Merlin was not  "betrayed by love or doting": his enchanted sleep  is a skillful retreat to a place  where he and  the civilization in his bosom can survive the Fall and prepare a new world:

Long ago, Shaken  by dragons, swamped with sea-waves, fell The island fortress, drowned like any shell.

But the  dreamer "hears  no tales of overthrow"; he wills that  the island which is civilization  does not drown  but only falls asleep. The  exciting crossover between  Abraham's bosom and Merlin's bosom should be noted as well as the modulation on the Helen  in Egypt  theme.  Perhaps this be­ gins to indicate what  reading  this book is like. One  poem  reminds  the reader  of another poem in a slightly different  key; read one poem eventu­ ally and  you are  reading  all the poems at  the same  time. Simultaneity is the result of Miss Macpherson's method  if I am right  in seeing the whole book as a set of variations  on that  very first intimation of the insideness­ outsideness  theme-the mouse that  runs away  in the wainscot.
By the  time  we have come  to the "Natural Mother" (a  nightingale)
at  the end of this fourth  suite, and  just before  the "Nurse" (a swallow), we have come as far in the Biblical ground  bass as Christ's birth. Actually it  seems  but  yesterday  that  Cain  and  Abel  fought, Helen  waited  and Endymion  slept. The pressing together  here of widely separated historical figures  reminds the  reader  of Spenser's  Fairyland in  which  Adam  and Eve meet  St.  George,  and  Arthur exists at  the  same  time  as Elizabeth. Both  the  world  of the Sleepers  and  the Elizabethan Fairyland are dedi­ cated   to  the  dream world  where  time  and  space  are  more  beautifully arranged  than   they  are  in  the  waking  world.  The  speaker  of  the  very first poem "Ordinary People in the Last Days"  has lived to see the third  eye disappear, to see the world of two eyes, the world of one eye ("Plow­ man in Darkness") and  then in this suite, like the moon above a fog, the slow return of the third  eye. So Man,  once a complete Man  with Eve in-

32

THE  THIRD EYE



side him, has seen himself split into two. He has been content  to copulate with  the other  half  (the  hideous hemaphroditic Phoenix) ; now the first Man  returns.
In  the fifth suite  entitled "The Boatman", the point of the Ark poems
is that  when Man found himself sinking in the fallen world he had enough sense  to  build  an  imitation of  that  world which met  it  and  himself halfway.  One  day  he'll  regain  his island  or Eden,  but  a floating  island will do for now. The  poems  here  have sharper, more  urgent  tones than those  of the  "Sleepers", as if  all  the  conjunctions and  parallelisms throughout the whole volume were tightening up. The Ark is a Leviathan within  Leviathan and  it prophesies to Noah that  one day he will swallow his own  Ark,  that  is, make  mental  and  controllable what  was physical before  and  not  so easily controlled. I suppose  primitive religions  are  as good a meaning for the Ark as any. They did ferry humanity across some frightening abysses, but now we have reached  the point where instead  of crawling through a  Bushman's whale-shaped hut  to rebirth we can  do all that  in our heads:
Shall swim circled  by you And cradled on your tide Who  was not even, not ever Taken from  your side.
The  last  line  reminds us that  Eve, the  half-man, was a sort of Ark  too who one day will be a spiritual controllable reality, not a constantly turn­ ing and  elusive  female  Nature. "You  dreamed it",  says the  Ark  as like an  eggshell  it  is cast  away  and  Man  walks on  to his island  again.  The  island or Eden  is a new world and  the flood that  obscured it was after  all only the  Man's tears.  The  "Inward Angel", we note, has an inward eye which  is the  Third Eye;  this eye should  reappear now  that  the escaped diamond self has been recaptured.



IF THE  READER has  really  tried  to turn  himself  inside out,  that  is, discipline  and  organize  his life around a focus of Eternity, then  the  riddles  of the last suite of The  Boatman  are easy. Each  riddle is the  top  of a  spiral  staircase  leading  down  through the  book. In  all the riddles the  effect is very much  like that  of the dancing sequence of those


33

THE  THIRD EYE



naked  ladies  on  the  Acidalian  Mount  in Spenser's Legend  of Courtesy. There is an air of release in Spenser-the Mountain of Contemplation is also at  last  the  mountain of love and  jo)-1,  nakedness  and  beauty.  So here,  after   learning   how  from  the  other   poems  in The  Boatman,  the reader  can  look at anything in the world  and find joy in it, from a lung­ fish to an abominable Snowman.  This is the world Yeats is talking about  where body is not "bruised to pleasure soul", where  root, bole and blossom are  one. For example  the lungfish was once a fish -"a swimmer  in the fallen  world"-but now is "no Friday  faring". It contains  both fish and a higher  state in the same being. "The Mermaid" is both nightingale and
swallow,  both  romantic and  ironic.  The   Whale   is Leviathan and  also God's Creature. The last section in effect says to the reader  that Creation, Fall  and  Redemption are  part  of a dance  whose final figure is the scene in which the Fisherman, in the very last poem, having  corrected the Fall is himself corrected for all time. But perhaps in Eternity we would never dream  of  playing  with  lungfish  and  mermaids completely scrubbed  of their  fallen  characteristics, which  would  be their  firm graspable outline. Even  when  one finally achieves  the  freedom  of being outside  one keeps very wisely a delight  in the  perils of insideness.
Perhaps the best way to conclude  what  should  be said in praise of The
Boatman is that  it shows you how to get from  "here to there". If "here" is this world  and  "there" the world of Eternity, then  this book of poems shows the  reader  all the necessary steps of the  way. These  are steps that I am sure an increasingly  great  number  of readers  and  writers in Canada are going to find very exciting to take.








34




THE	STORY	OF A	NOVEL
 





Hugh  MacLennan


This  account of his problems as a writer  and  of the genesis of his most recent  novel, The  Watch that
Ends the Night, is a version­
somewhat revised-of  a talk  which
Hugh MacLennan originally, gave on the CBC   Anthology  programme.
IHAVE NEVER BE>'ORE spoken intimately in public about
my work.  Previously  I have  been too shy or too proud.  I have  accepted
the common  professional  attitude that  a man's work should talk for itself. I have said little or nothing when I have heard, or read, statements about Canadian literature which  seemed to me to be sheer  nonsense. Only oc­ casionally  have  I protested, and  never in my own case, against  the habit  of some of our reviewers of selling our best work short.  Only once have I written that  the most famous reviewers of New York regard our best work as belonging  to the  literature of the  modem  world,  while  many  of our reviewers at home still assume that Canadian writers are like ball players competing in a bush league.
But no writer  ever should argue  with the critics, least of all the writer who  is talking  to  you now.  Lately  Canadian reviewers  have  been  very kind  to me.  I know  they  want  to see us do well. I know also that  their Canadian pride  makes  it hard  for them  to overpraise  for fear  that  they will seem to be provincial, but  I do wish, sometimes,  that  they all knew what  the  reviewer  of a  famous  American paper  said  last  fall  of Colin McDougall's magnificent novel, Execution: "This is the final proof," he said, "that the most important writing  in the western  hemisphere is now coming out of Canada."
If this statement is true-if it is even half true-it is because Canadian writers  are  hungry  writers.  They  are  writers  who have  had  to work ex­ ceedingly  hard  in order  to live. They  are  writers  who write,  not  just for money, but because  the excitement of discovering Canada compels  them to write.
35

THE  STORY OF A  NOVEL



Writing is a fascinating, arduous  and solitary  profession. The  technical skills necessary  to produce  even a commonplace novel are  quite  as com­ plicated as those necessary for a brain  operation. It took me two unpub­ lished novels and eight years of continuous disappointment before I even began  to learn  how difficult it is to write an original  novel. The  only way I learned  how to write  was by endlessly re-writing. When I tell aspiring  young men how much  I rewrite-!do it in order  to make my characters and scenes live for myself-they often turn  pale. Let me give some figures on that.
My  first  published  novel, which  was called  Barometer  Rising, was a
relatively  simple  tale located  in my home  town of Halifax. When  I had finished about  two hundred pages I threw  them away and started all over again  because  now the story-line  seemed clearer. When  I had finished a hundred and  fifty  pages  of this  draft   I  threw  them  away  and  started again.   Barometer  Rising  in  its  finished  form  contains   about   Ioo,ooo words. In order  to arrive at that  finished product I wrote about  7oo,ooo.
My next  novel, Two Solitudes, was published at  I35,ooo  words. In the
writing   of  it  my  wastebasket   received  approximately a  million  and  a quarter. My third novel, The Precipice, was published  at the same length as Two  Solitudes. To the best of my recollection  my wastebasket received a million and a half words before the script was mailed. The fourth  novel, Each Man's  Son, was the shortest of them  all:  it was just under  Ioo,ooo words. It  was a transitional piece-a kind of bridge  between  The Preci­ pice and  my last-and so far as I recall, my wastebasket  received no more than  a million words on that  particular job.
The  fifth  novel, The  Watch  that Ends the Night, I shall talk about  in
some detail  later  on. At the  moment,  let me say that  I lived  with it for more  than   six years,  and,  in  order  to  produce the  I 4o,ooo  words  the finished  script  contains,  I probably  wrote more  than  three  million.
I submit  that  a  practical man  will recognize  this as a preposterously
wasteful  manner in which to earn  one's living. What  is more,  he will be still  further shocked  if he  knows the  conditions which  have  developed within  the book trade  during  the time I have been working  like this.
In the spring of I 95I, when my fourth  novel was published, the bottom fell out of the conventional novel market in North  America. The  reasons for this collapse  are  now apparent. For years, the chief difficulties in the trade  had  been  concerned  with  the  price  of books and  the  problem  of

THE  STORY OF A  NOVEL



distributing them  to a population scattered between Halifax and Victoria in Canada, and  Provincetown and San Diego in the  United  States. The small  communities where  most of the population lives could not support regular  book stores.  In the whole of Canada there  were less than twenty­ five.  The   business  of  keeping  a  bookstore  in  a  small  community was notoriously  unprofitable. Not  only could  the  merchant  not  risk buying the great  variety  of books on which a healthy  trade depends; rising costs of stock and  labour  were almost pricing first-run cloth  editions out of the market except in the large cities.
The  economic  impasse,  so far  as  the  consumer  was  concerned, was
solved by the  triumphant success of two relatively  new selling agencies: book clubs on the  one  hand,  and  paper-back reprints on the other.  The book clubs worked  like mail  order  houses, selling masses of cloth covers all over the continent through the mails at cheap  prices. The  paper-back reprints-utilising drug  stores,  railway  stations,  airports, hotel  lobbies and  even street  corners -developed  more  than  two hundred thousand outlets  for selling books at cheap  prices. This was the greatest  revolution in publishing since the  invention  of the steam  press. In  I 95 I, more  than
260 million  paper-back reprints were sold in the United  States  alone.
All this looks wonderful for the  writer-and it is wonderful  if what he wants  above all else is a large  reading  public. But economically  it has been little short of disastrous  to most of us who depend  on writing in order to live. A sale of 5o,ooo  books in cloth  through  the stores will generally gross the author about  $25,000. But a sale of 5o,ooo paper-backs once grossed  me only $250 -in other  words, not enough  to pay two months' rent. Terms are better  now than  they used to be, but they are still unsatisfactory.
Still  another economic  shock followed  in  the  wave  of the  book club and  paper-back revolution. This new competition cut the sales of regular first-run  editions  to a fraction of what they had been a decade  previously. Popular books in  the  United  States  in  I946 often  sold a million copies in  the  stores.  Since   I95I, a  top  best-seller  seldom  has  gone  over  the
I oo,ooo  mark,  and  many  a  book which  reached  the lower  rungs of the
Times  best seller lists grossed the author less than  $I2,ooo.
Looking at this situation in I95I, when I should have been established in my career,  I recognized  that,  far from being established, I had become another young  man  with  my way to make.  In short,  I knew it was im-

37

THE  STORY OF A  NOVEL



possible  to  try  to  live by writing  novels alone,  as I  had  been doing  for nearly  ten  years.  I accordingly  took a  part-time job at  McGill,  which turned  out  to be one of the happiest  decisions I ever made.  I also began writing  regular monthly  essays for The  M ontrealer magazine, and  did a lot of free-lance articles for MacLean's, Saturday Night and the Ameri­ can  magazine Holiday.  It  was while  carrying this  extra  load,  which  I enjoyed  carrying, that  I wrote The  Watch that Ends the Night.


BuT ENOUGH  bout
writer  in  his senses writes solely to make  money.  If money  is what  he
wants  most,  he needs his head  examined if he  becomes a writer. There are  hundreds of easier ways to make  money  than  with  your pen or your typewriter. Writers who stay with the profession  do so because they can't help  themselves. They enjoy writing so much-or rather, they are so miserable  if they aren't writing-that they will gamble  their  lives again and again no matter how unfavourable the economic  aspects of the trade maybe.
Far  more  serious  to me  in  1951  was  my sudden  realisation that  the
traditional novel was failing  in its function. I submit  that  our basic atti­ tudes to society have changed, inwardly, out of recognition since the war. I  submit  further that  the  conventions  of the  traditional  novelists have failed  to meet  and  translate this changed attitude into art.
The   traditional  English  novel  dealing   with   what   might   be  called
human destiny  has  been  the  unconscious  slave  of Shakespeare for  the past century  and a half. Shakespeare's tragedies were based on the assumption that  human  destiny is to be found  in the interplay of human characters. So, to an  extent,  it is. But Shakespeare wrote  for  the stage, and  the stage  requires  that  actions be made  visible. Though the essential action  in Hamlet  is invisible, within  the minds  of the characters, Shake­ speare  nonetheless  translates it at the end into violent action. The second greatest  play in our literature ends in melodramatic absurdity.
Somewhere around   1950  it  seems  to  have  occurred to  millions  of readers  that  this kind of external  action-this drama played  as a means of revealing  the  tragic  nature of man-was apt  to be both  inaccurate and  inadequate. Within   a  civilised society,  only  goons,  primitives  and

THE  STORY OF A  NOVEL



psychotics  tend  to settle  their  conflicts as Shakespeare's people  settle theirs.  Modern psychology  reinforced  the  feelings  of intelligent readers that   most  modern novels  had  become  peripheral. If they  were  tragic they  usually  dealt  with  outcasts,  with  men excessively violent, with  men excessively  primitive, with  men  excessively criminal.
Around  this time, it seemed to me, as it seemed to the educated public,
that  the basic human conflict was within  the individual. But how to find an  artistic  form  for  this concept?  That was the  question.  Certainly the novelists failed  who wrote  clinically;  they absolutely  failed  to purge  the soul of pity  and  terror, which  is art's  supreme  function. When  I  began The Watch that  Ends the Night  I was at least clear on that score. I would not write a clinical  book. But somehow I was going to write a book which would  not  depend on character-in-action, but on spirit-in-action. The conflict  here,  the  essential  one, was between  the  human spirit  of  Every­ man  and  Everyman's human condition.
In  order  to find  an  accurate fictional  form  for  this concept  of life, I wrote millions of words and postponed the publication of The Watch that Ends  the  Night  for  some  eight  years. Or  rather, I spent  more  than  six years learning how to shape a new bottle for a new kind of wine.
It was an  intense,  illuminating and  at  times a wonderful experience. I wrote  on and on, I tore up again and again,  and  all the while, in order to earn  a living,  I kept  on turning  out essays and  teaching at McGill.  I refined my style and discovered new techniques I had previously known nothing about.  And  finally in the greatest  single burst  of writing  energy I ever had,  I began  all over again  and  wrote  the  whole finished version in a space of five months.
Now  this novel  has  been in the hands  of the  public  for a year  and  it
is mine  no longer.  Looking back  on  it, I sometimes have the  feeling that  it was written by another man. The  public has been kind to it. It has had  a moderate success in the United  States,  and  in Canada a consider­ able success in terms  of the Canadian market. It will be, or is being, pub­  lished  in  England, Sweden  and  Spain,  and  probably it will appear in a few more  translations before its course is run.  Now, like  most writers,  I am waiting  for the emptied well to fill again, and after  a while I suppose it will. Meanwhile I again  feel like a young man  with his way to make,  for  every novel is a new experience  and  every experience must  be lived through until it is done.


39































HERE   ARE  SOME   MEN WHO  AS POETS ARE  ANIMALS.
Just 'as some men, when  they couple, Couple in bestial fashion,
So some poets, when  they write poetry,
Give themselves over to the inner beast. To do so, in a pure sense,
Is a very difficult feat.
But this beast poetry;, when someone manages  to shape it, Is a very powerful thing


II.
It is of course very difficult of comprehension. It is an affair of images, without thought.
It .is the  blood  crying
It is the blood crying  down  the corridors of the arteries
The  blood crying  as it turns corners  in the veins
The  blood eying in a passionate mindlessness. It is always an alien thing



Wilfred  Watson

A	MANIFESTO 	FOR BEJIST	POETR,Y

"The expression of the soul of
the dumb ox would have a penetrating
beauty of its own, if it were
uttered with genius -with
bovine genius  ...."
WYNDHAM   LE,WIS









III.
Don't mistake  the failures of the sects of poets
We see in these debased  ages
For  beast-poetry;.  Beast-poetry is not puffed  up. It exalts  no one. Machinery multiplies
And  books, and  the dehorsification of dairies
And haulage systems provides a new houyhnhmn
To  whinny  at every: street  corner. But this isn't  beast  poetry

Beast-poetry isn't  the sort of blue-stocking knitting That Archibald MacLeish or Marianne Moore Their disciples  their  imitators and  cousins germane Wage  into  books.

Beast-poetry has nothing to do with blue guitars. I expect  women, those who love
Below the mind, who live always In their  hearts breasts  and  bowels Are best at  this sort of poetry.
But-beast-poetry, it would  make Gertrude Stein shudder

A  MANIFESTO  FOR BEAST - POETRY



Beast-poetry never  thinks in blue.
It never  puts  on a blue-thinking stocking. It never  thinks


IV.
Iall poetry,  everything
Is either in the infinitude or in the limitation. The he-all  of beast-poetry lies in the limitation. A man  playing dog, this is what  I mean-
Is not a man  excluding
Himself  from every level of life except  the animal's. Neither is a man  playing dog
Supplying flame to every thorn  branch twig or leaf
Of  the burning bush which is mankind.
It is very difficult  to be a man, Since  the idea of a man
Is, biologically  speaking, one of  pre-eminence­ Excellence is the first testicle of a man.
A man  to be a man  must be more than  a man  playing  dog. A man  to be a man  must be more than  a man.
But to write  beast-poetry a man  must be no more than  a beast


v.
The house is a very large one.
Let us also admit that  it is an exceedingly  noble one, Noble, yes, but cracks  in the wall, something gone, An uncanny stink of ghost behind  the door,
The smell of human tallow haunts the woodwork, the birth  and  death smells,
The breast. smell and  the smell of suckling  children, The smell of love-making and  of cooking fat,
The aroma of laundry-business, the fungus-smell of old clothes, Footleather,  bookbindings, newspapers.
We despair of the plumbing, the hand-basins
Invite the auctioneer's hammer, their stain  is
Macbeth's, everlastingly water-proof, marked  for perdition, We make  the sign of the cross in the dust
Of  the mantel-piece marble. We stretch
Out a finger  of dust
We shut  up the library  & reception  rooms & the great  hall & private chapel &
promenades.
We let the ground go to the statues, the gardens to pot

42

A  MANIFESTO FOR BEAST - POETRY



We cat sandwiches in the kitchen. In  this way, less expense  of spirit.
But we don't become -in this way-rats.
It is very difficult  to become  a rat.
It is difficult enough to be a mouse.
It is, in an opposite and  northwest way, still more difficult to become  a man


VI.
But beast-poetry is a rare  and  powerful  thing. We prefer  something in  between.
In  a sense we pay upsidedown homage  to Pascal.
We deny, let us say, 'the  glory of' with 'the  misery of'.

Let's  pretend
My god, my god, how bizarre, how very bizarre, What a sense of humour -
Let's  pretend we are  mice, squeak, squeak. But  this is pretence. It is not beast-poetry


VII.
The profound the deep
Poetry  of the beast doesn't theorize.
It doesn't think  at all.
It doesn't think, it is-
It really is. It has no tripe,  no stomach for the cerebral
Hypocrisies of Archibald MacLeish et al.
It isn't  like the visceral  poetry  of D. H. Lawrence
All bladder bladder bladder
Full  of pigheaded opinion.
It has no conceptions whatever of, on, or about  anything. It doesn't take its Hiroshimas from  the papers.
A plain  matter-of-fact  non-mythical anti-mystical Belsen
Is the  ordinary keel of its being.
It knows no short-cuts to experience


VIII.
Shallow critics  denounce this sort of poetry
They  say it is mad
Let us all take  hands  and go skipping it tripping it back to Wordsworth
Plain  living sanity  and  the simpler  humanities
But 0 Dorothy Dorothy


43

A  MANIFESTO FOR BEAST-  POETRY



0 Tintern  Abbey
Shallower critics  praise it for being mad. The very best critics
Raising their  eyes to the white goddess
Observe that  it is
lncomprehending with the deep  unreason
Of  the deep incomprehensible beast, That is, if it is beast-poetry,
Not a fake





The very essence
 IX.

Of  being  a beast, is to be the remnant of a living soul That has in obedience to a complex of appetites Reduced itself to being a machine.
The ant-eater is a machine for eating  ants.
The lion is a machine for eating  antelopes.
The ant  is a machine for eating  dead  cats, etcetera etcetera. Nevertheless, there  is something ascetic about  a beast.
There is even something ascetic about a rabbit-
To  become  a machine an animal  has to give up all but a very nominal sex-life. A beast can't afford  to dally with contraceptives.
There is something profoundly tragic  about a beast. The machinery with which it is invested  is ancestral. This bestial  machinery lends a dignity
Which only an ages-old  machinery can  bestow, every motion  a pathos.
Hence, one of the skins of beast-poetry
Is, it is a satire
On  human depravity


X.
Don't imagine that  a course
In  the archetypes of Dr. Jung will provide
Any pass-key to the deep bestialitYr of the beast. Quite the  contrary.
Dr. Jung takes a mop  and bucket of water
And  plenty  of good old-fashioned eighteenth-century yellow floor soap
The  sunlight soap of the enlightenment
To  every cluttered up cupboard of the human soul, He's  tried  to clean  up every bestial corner,
To  mop  up every untidy  stain of nature.

44

A  MANIFESTO FOR BEAST - POETRY



llcast-poctry
Skulks off to some Canada of the unconscious  the Herr  Doktor misses. The  holy simplicity of psychology
Never comes anywhere near  beast-poetry


XI.
The  great masters of beast-poetr}: are, as follows, Simply  none.  Beast-poetry is still unwritten. There is lacking  the great  renunciation.
This age ought to have  written great  beast-poetry
For we are the first great  age of the machine
But we still pervert the machine to human uses
Instead of, with  pure  animality, surrendering the human being  to the machine. The  machine subsists as a tool, merely.
Affirmation, affirmation & pride,  have crept  in

Mr. T. S. Eliot  with his wonderful beast's nose for images
Might have  done  it. When he said
That, had he meant something else, he'd  have said something else
He came  very close to beast-poetry.
But he wasn't beast enough to write beast-poetry. He is not even a minor  beast-poet.

No, Mr. Eliot  is not the  John the Baptist  of beast-poetry. He  thinks  too much, until  his images think  too. Eventually
The strict  critic  of beast-poetry
Catches Mr.  Eliot  out-his beast-images
Are screens for  thought.
He  lacked  the deep  humility of the beast


XII.
Whether a man  dances
Or  whether a man  makes  music
Or  whether he gestures  or paints  a picture or carves sculptures
(Or  simply  is)
Words  keep recurring. It isn't
Sufficient  merely  to dance, this won't  do for a man. He must  dance a madrigal.
He must caper to the words of a ballad. Or  if he makes  water-

45

A  MANIFESTO  FOR BEAST - POETRY



But all this verbal  antic,  the desperate endeavour to speak
Is quite  foreign  to beast-poetry.
Let  us understand this, that  beast-poetry uses words in a totall}: new way, It uses words as experiences. It excludes speech.
Beast-poetry is profoundly uneloquent. Words  are  used so as to be, not to speak

There is something appallingly mute
About  beast-poetry:. It is as silent, as uncommunicative
As a mountain. You do not listen
To, or read, or perform exegesis upon
Or  write scholarly articles  against, the poetry of the beast. It brutally scorns  the  academic handmaidens.
You descend  mindlessly and  alone into its caverns. Beast-poetry is the most dumbing
Of  all human acts


XIII.
I wouldn't openly pretend that  we in Canada
Have  in our public forests, game-preserves or animal-parks
Bred any great  beast-poet. But in my, secret  heart
I pretend to myself alone that  the great  beast-poet Will cleave from  our substance. We have pioneered The  animal-natures, the brutal uneloquences,
The  massive contempt for the civilizing influences; And machines to fit the necessary: degradations.
We have  the CBC.
It is excusable in a Canadian to believe that  the great beast-poetry
Slouches  towards Toronto to be born


XIV.
Therefore I call out aloud  to the future
I summon the age about to be
Not  to debase itself in any petty way to the sub-human, But to cut itself off boldly; from all its ancestors;
To descend  impudently down  to the shameless depths
Of beast-poetry. I am weary
Of this shabby-parrot, this figurative lingerie, And of the free & easy verse opinions.
I await  the terrible new beast-poetry



A	COLONIAL
ROMANTIC

MAJOR JOHN RICHARDSON, SOLDIER AND NOVELIST


Desmond  Pacey

PART I I: RETURN TO  AMERICA

T.JOHN   RICHARDSON who  returned to  Canada in February,  I838,  was  a  vastly different  being from  the ambitious young ensign who had  set sail for Europe in r8I5. He was now almost forty-two
years old, a major, a holder  of a decoration from  the Spanish  queen,  an acquaintance of almost  all the literary  men of London,  and  a successful novelist. Although his successes had  been  by no means unmixed  with failures,  he  had  some  reason  for  pride  in his achievements, and  a sub­ stantial basis for the  expectation that  he would be received in his native  country  with respect if not with deference.
Once  again,  then,  he set forth  with high hopes. He had secured a com­
mission from  the London Times to act as their  Canadian correspondent at a salary  of  £300 a year, and he had furnished  himself with a letter of introduction to Sir  Francis  Bond Head  from  the  Secretary of Colonies, Lord  Glenelg.I  His dream was to secure an influential public  position in his native  country. Like all his dreams,  it was destined  to frustration­ frustration which  was  in  large  part  brought  about  by  his own  tactless pugnacity.
The  first  disappointment came  in  New  York,  where  he found  Bond
Head  en route  for England. The  returning governor, obviously in a state of nervous agitation, said curtly  that  he could do nothing about  the letter


I Eight Years in Canada  (Montreal, 1848). p. 6.

47

A  COLONIAL ROMANTIC



from  Lord  Glenelg  recommending Richardson for  an  official  appoint­ ment,  and  handed it back with  the suggestion  that  Richardson try it on Sir  George  Arthur. Thus  Richardson received  the  first of many  rebuffs from  Canadian governors,  a succession of whom, for the next  ten years, he was to bombard with  requests for official  posts and  pensions.
Proceeding by coach and  steamer  to Canada, Richardson paid a brief visit to his native  Queenston, went on to Toronto, Montreal, and eventu­ ally to Quebec where he met the newly arrived  Lord  Durham. The  meet­ ing was a fateful  one for  Richardson. The  two men, similarly  haughty and  impetuous, were  mutually attracted,  and  Richardson, who  had hitherto held  the  most reactionary views about  the  Canadian situation, was  temporarily converted   to  the  more  progressive  ideas  of  Durham. Richardson's first  two despatches to the  Times  had  been correctly  con­ servative,  but now he began sending despatches which favoured Durham and  Durham's proposals. Naively, he expressed  the hope  that  the editor  of the Thunderer would accept his information as the work of an honest reporter: "I know your object is to obtain facts, and that  if in the attempt to elucidate these I should occasionally clash with your own views on the subject,  I shall  at  least  have  the  credit  of sincerity  and  impartiality."2
The  editor  gave ample  warning  of his disapproval by appending a note to  the  dispatch, stating:  "The writer  of  these  letters  is an  occasional correspondent: it will be seen that  he is a sort of partisan of Lord Dur­ ham." No more of Richardson's dispatches  were printed, and his appoint­ ment  as correspondent was cancelled.  When he informed Durham of this, the  latter wrote  to Richardson on OctoberI 8,   838 as follows:
It is indeed  most  disgusting  to see such  proof  of malignity in  those  who  ought to value  truth and  fair  dealing  as the  best means  of informing the  public,  of which they profess to be the best possible instructors.
Your   course  has  been  that   of  a  man   of  honour and   integrity, and   you  can hardly regret  the dissolution  of a connexion which  it appears could  only have  been preserved by  the  sacrifice  on  your  part  of  truth and   justice-by  the  suppressio veri, if not the assertio falsi.3
Such  praise was a salve to Richardson's injured dignity,  but he needed more  tangible  help.  Now  that  he had  lost his position  with  the Times, he was desperately in need of an alternative source of income. He hoped,

• The  Times, "Lord Durham's Administration", Tuesday, Sept. 18, 1838, p. 5·
3   This  letter  appears as Appendix 8 of Eight Years in Canada.

A  COLONIAL ROMANTIC



of course,  that  Lord  Durham would  find a means  of rewarding his ser­ vices, and  Durham did  indeed,  through his secretary Charles  Buller, promise  to do what  he could.  But  Durham's sudden  resignation, illness, and  early death put an end to these hopes, and Richardson had to begin anew,  at  the age of forty-two, the task of building a career. For the next seven years, as letters  in the Public Archives of Canada testify, he made  repeated overtures and  petitions  to successive governors, begging that  his services  to  Canada as  writer  and  soldier be  recompensed by an  official appointment or a pension.
The  most elaborate of these petitions was addressed to Lord Sydenham
on July 20, I 84I. Never one to affect a modesty he did not feel, Richard­ son began  by asserting  that: "Your  Excellency's  Petitioner  is  generally  known and  acknowledged as the only Author  this country  has produced, or who  has attempted to infuse into  it a spirit  of  literature."4   He  went on  to detail  his literary activities,  his military services, and  the services rendered by members  of his family, and  ended  by requesting  that  he be granted a pension from  the Civil List. On this long and  beautifully writ­ ten petition, we can still read Sydenham's hastily scribbled  note: "Reply. There are  no funds  for such a purpose." Such was to be the melancholy  fate of all Richardson's petitions until I845·
Meanwhile, Richardson sought  to make a living in his native  country
by the exercise of his pen. In the fall of I 838, after  his dismissal from the Times, he remained in Montreal to see his Personal Memoirs of the war in Spain  through the  press. He  is also said to have  written a pamphlet, the only surviving  copy of which  is housed in the library  of McGill Uni­ versity, entitled Sketch of the late Battle of the Wind Mill  near Prescott.  An unsigned pencilled  note on the title page of this pamphlet states, "This was  written by  Major Richardson who edited  the  few  numbers of the Prescott, Ont.  Sentinel  which  were  printed." He  also,  in characteristic fashion, became  involved in a quarrel with some officers of the Grenadier Guards, issued at least five challenges  to duels, and  was "posted" by the Guards  for alleged  cowardice when he refused to accept a challenge be­ cause  the  messenger  was not, in his opinion, a  gentleman.5

4   Public  Archives  Mgg. G 20, Vol. 4, No. 415.

5  For  an  account of this affair see the column  "All  Our Yesterdays" by A. E. Col­ lard,  Montreal Gazette,  November 12, 1955· For  Richardson's version,  see  his  The  Guards in Canada; or The  Point of Honor  (Montreal, 1848).


49

A  COLONIAL ROMANTIC



Perhaps because  Montreal was too uncomfortable for  him  as a result of such feuds,  Richardson went  to Amherstburg early in 1839, hoping  to settle in the town where so much  of his boyhood had  been spent.  Unable to find a house in Amherstburg, he rented  one in nearby  Sandwich, and there  he completed  his third  novel, The  Canadian  Brothers, a lively and patriotic tale of the War of 1812. He returned to Montreal early in 1840 to see this book through  the press, and after  a few weeks there set out for Sandwich driving  a new sleigh and  a  team  of spirited black  horses.  In typical fashion, he had neglected  to consider  that  the sleighing season was almost over, and when he reached  the town of Brockville he was stranded by lack of snow. While making  arrangements there for a carriage, he saw a large house and extensive grounds which took his fancy, and impulsively bought   this  "Rock  Cottage" at  twice  its market value.  Presumably  to meet  this  payment,  he sold  his commission  in the  British  Army  during the early summer.
At first Richardson found Brockville a dull and dispiriting place; more­
over his pugnacious  temperament soon got him into trouble  with the local inhabitants. He became involved in a quarrel with a certain Colonel Wil­ liams at a private card party,  and when Williams alluded to Richardson's alleged  cowardice in the  affair  of honour  in Montreal,  Richardson dis­ played  placards throughout the  town accusing  Williams of slander; an­  other  duel  was narrowly  averted.6  He also objected bitterly  to the habit  of the male  youths of the town of bathing in the nude near  his house. In a  long  tirade  in  the August  19, 1842  issue of his paper, The  New Era, Richardson lashed such offenders:
"There is an  unblushing depravity, a shameless  immorality, among a certain class of  beings  in  Brockville,  such  as  we  never   knew  to  be  equalled in  any  town  in Europe .... We  shall  make  it  a  point  to  take  down  the  names  of all  persons found bathing within  view of our  premises,  after  sunrise,  whether in or out  of the limits,  and  this  list we shall  submit  to the  magistrates at  the  next  Session".

This  attack was contained in the final issue of The  New  Era; the first issue had  appeared in June,  1841. He wrote  and  printed the paper him­ self, using a press he had specially imported from  New York for the pur­  pose.  He  commented on Canadian and  foreign  news,  ran  as serials  his


6  See  the  pamphlet M ajar Richardson's  Reply  to Colonel  Williams'  Gasconarde
( 1840), a copy of which is in the Queen's University Library.

50

A  COLONIAL ROMANTIC



Recollections of the  West   Indies,  jack  Brag in Spain, and  The War  of
1812, and sought to promote the sales of his other books by quoting lauda­ tory reviews of them  and  soliciting subscriptions.  It was, then,  a kind of personal  house organ  of its editor  and  publisher-and  very  unlike the lofty  journal  he had  advertised in his grandiloquent  Prospectus:

A  journal essentially  Literary, and  of a moderate, or  juste milieu  tone  of politics, having   for  its  object   the  ultimate good  and  prosperity of  the  Country, without undue or  slavish  bias  towards any  party,  is a desideratum which  cannot be more seasonably;  hailed  than   at  a  moment when  these  stupendous  Provinces, emerging from   the  comparative night   in  which  they  have  hitherto been  enshrouded, are about   to  take  their  initiative among  Nations. Hence  the  project of The  New  Era or Canadian Chronicle, which  the educated of all classes of society,  and  especially the  more  intellectual portion of the  communit}l,  as well as the  advocates of a con­ sistent  and  good government are now called upon to support.

Since  the support  was not forthcoming in sufficient force, Richardson dropped the paper  in August  1842 to devote himself to another grandiose project-completing his history of the War  of 1812, of which  the part printed in The New  Era was only the first of three  projected sections, in order  that  it might  be used as a textbook in Canadian schools. He printed the first part  in book form  from the New  Era plates,  and then applied  to the  government for  a  grant   to enable  him  to complete the  remainder. The  Assembly voted him  £250 for this purpose, but the sale of the First Series  was  so disappointing that  Richardson did  not  have  the  heart  to proceed  with  the work. He argued,  rather  unconvincingly, that  the grant had  been  a  reward  for  previous labour rather than an  aid  to future publication.
Again  Richardson turned to newspaper  publishing,  and  early in 1843 founded  in Kingston The Canadian Loyalist or Spirit  of 1812.7  The New Era  had  been  relatively non-partisan in its political   reporting and  it had  failed; this  new  paper was  pro-Tory, and  violent  in  its  denun­ ciations  of  the  Lafontaine-Baldwin ministry  and  of Francis Hincks; no doubt  Richardson hoped  in this way to gain readers and  to assure himself of preferment when  and if the Tories succeeded  to office. This, of course,


7   According to  British  Authors of the  Nineteenth Century, edited  by Kunitz and Haycraft (New  York,  1936)   p. 521,  this  paper  is also recorded as the  Native  Cana­ dian.  I have  been  so far  unable to trace  any surviving copies of it under either  name.

51

A  COLONIAL  ROMANTIC



was the outcome,  in the summer  of I 844, and  Richardson almost imme­
diately  suspended  the  paper,  confidently  expecting patronage.
Richardson had to wait almost a year for preferment-but it did finally come, on May  20, I845, when he was appointed Superintendent of Police on the  Weiland Canal.  At last he had  the  public  position  for  which  he had  been  vainly  petitioning for seven years. It  was not  a very lucrative post-the pay was only ten shillings a day-nor a very influential one, but  Richardson resolved to make  the  most of it. Unfortunately his own belligerence ruined  yet  another   opportunity. Within two  weeks  of  his appointment he dismissed "several insubordinate and useless characters".8
Within a month  he requested  the Chief Engineer on the project  to cancel a holiday granted the workmen for July 4, and when asked to give reasons for  his request  haughtily replied: "I certainly am  not aware  that  I am compelled  to give any reason to any person  employed  on this Canal, the superintendence of which is confided  to my judgment and  discretion." A fortnight later  he was inquiring  from  the  Governor-General what  rights he, Richardson, had to punish those constables who disobeyed his orders; and a week later  he reported  to the Governor that  a neighbouring magis­ trate had  sworn  out a warrant for the Superintendent's arrest, and  that  Richardson had  actually  been arrested by one of his own ex-constables! In the  light  of such revelations  of troublesomeness, it can  have afforded  the  Governor little  comfort  to  be assured  of  Richardson's  efficiency in drilling  his men to a high pitch of military precision. "In the meantime", Richardson reported on  November  8,  1845, "I have  my men  regularly  drilled  to the use of the Broad sword, and  taught such cavalry  movements as may be most useful on the limited ground on which  they would in all probability be required  to act."
As a man  with  more  commonsense  would  have  expected, Lord  Met­ calfe  was more  impressed  by Richardson's feuding than  by his drilling.  On January I 7, 1846, the following letter  was despatched to Richardson by Mr. D. Daly, the Provincial Secretary:



8  This,   and   the  following  quotations relating to  Richardson's  employment  as Superintendent of Police, is taken  from  the  pamphlet Correspondence (submitted to Parliament)  Between Major  Richardson, Late  Superintendent of Police on the  Wet­ land   Canal   and   the   Honorable   Domineck  Daly,  Provincial   Secretary (Montreal,
1846).

52

A  COLONIAL ROMANTIC



I haw   the  honor, by command of  the  Administration of  the Government, to ac­ quaint you  that  His  Excellency, in Council, has  had  under consideration the sub­ ject  of  the  Police  Force   on  the  Weiland Canal, and   the  question whether  such Force  may  not  with  propriet)l be discontinued, and  that  His  Excellency: has  been pleased  to  direct   that  your  services  and  those  of the  Force  under  your command be dispensed  with from  and  after  the 31st of the present  month.

Richardson did  not  take  his dismissal  without  protest; he  complained bitterly  that  the notice  was too short, and that  his Force was still needed. All  his  protests were,  of  course, in  vain.  No  doubt intelligence had reached the  Governor to the  effect that  were  the  pugnacious major  to remain  in command, violence was likely to erupt. In fact  it did erupt  in spite  of his dismissal; at  midnight on January 31, Richardson wrote  to the  Provincial Secretary from  his home in Allanburgh :

I have  to acquaint you, for  the information of His  Excellency the  Administrator of  the  Province, but  with  sentiments of  unmitigated disgust,  that   this  night  has been  characterized  .... by a scene of outrage and  confusion, and  intended  per­ sonal  insult  to myself-still the servant  of the Government-which  can have no parallel even  among uncivilized nations.
These atrocities I shall  later  detail  to  you:  sufficient  be it  for  the  present, to observe  that  more  than  thirty shots were fired opposite my house, which  is situated on the Canal, accompanied by fierce shouts  and  y;ells, and  that  not  only: Canaliers but  discarded Policemen, of my own,  were  of the  number of the  scoundrels.

Throughout these exchanges  of letters, Richardson never revealed  the slightest sense of doubt  in the complete  correctness  of all his actions. His pride perhaps reached its  apex on  March 12, when  he wrote from Montreal to the  Provincial Secretary in part  as follows:

As I am  by no means  prepared to forego my; claim  to an honorary:  rank  which  has been  acknowledged by Her   Majesty  herself,  and  by; the  Commander in  Chief  of the British  Army:, in several  written communications from  His Grace, at the caprice of any of Her  Majesty's Colonial Subjects,  however  exalted their  local  distinction, I enclose  and   with  the  seal  unbroken, the  letter  you  have  done  me  the  honor to send to me, with  a view to its being properly  addressed.

And yet, six days after  sending such an insulting reply to the Provincial Secretary, Richardson had  the  effrontery  to dispatch a  long  memorial to Earl  Cathcart, Lord  Metcalfe's successor in the Governorship, detail­ ing all his woes and laying further claims:


53

A COLONIAL ROMANTIC



That y:our memorialist however seeks not  as a mere  favor,  but claims  from  the Government as a due  .  . .  that  he be placed  in some situation of trust  and emolu­ not  inferior to  that   which  he  has  recently  filled,  or  receive  a  gratuity  from  the Government whose summary  proceedings  have  seriously   affected  his  private pecuniary interests.

The  governor's reply to  this  memorial, dated March 20,  is curt,  re­
strained, but very apt:

In  reply  I am  to state  that  His  Excellency  considers that   it  would  be  useless to direct   that   the  unfitness  of the  manner, in  which  you have  expressed  yourself  to­ wards  the  members of His Excellency's  Government, should  be pointed out  to y:ou, since  your  own  sense of propriety has not  prevented you from  expressing y,ourself in the way you have  done.

Thus,  in  rioting  and  ignominious  wrangling, ended  Richardson's single tenure of public office in Canada.
By  this  time,  1846,  Richardson was fifty  years  old,  a  widower   (his second wife, Maria Caroline,  having died during the first weeks of his Superintendency of Police) , and  a lonely and  embittered man.  He  had tried  and failed  twice as a newspaper  publisher; he had  had a brief taste of public office and had found it bitter; he had sold his army commission to meet his debts; he had tried to sell his books to his countrymen and had found  only  a handful of buyers; and  he  had  alienated the  appointed governor  from  whom,  rather   than  from  the  elected  assembly,  he  had always sought favours. He remained  in Canada until 1849, writing and publishing   Eight  Years in Canada  and  The  Guards  in Canada  in  the interval, but  more  and  more  he  found  himself  casting  envious  glances over the  border  which  as a boy he had  defended against  the Yankee in­ vaders. Several  times during  his second stay in Canada he had visited the United  States,  and had found that his books were better  known and more highly esteemed  there than at home. Like many another Canadian writer  after  him, Richardson decided that  fame and fortune could be won much more  readily  abroad.
Once  more  then,  but  for  the last  time,  Richardson set out  on a new adventure with  high  hopes. In  New York  City,  it must  have  seemed  to him at first that  his long-deferred dreams  were to come true. In the space of three  years he  was able  to publish  four  new  novels -Hardscrabble, Waunangee, The  Monk  Knight  of  St.  john, and  Westbrook-and  to

54

A   COLONIAL ROMANTIC



issue new  editions  of W acoustaJ  EcarteJ  and  The  Canadian  Brothers (under the  new  title  of Matilda Montgomery). He  was something of a celebrity  in  the  great  American metropolis,  as he had  formerly  been in London,  a  man  whose name  could add  lustre  to a newspaper. Thus  we find this passage in the biography of "Frank Forester" (H. W. Herbert), a  prominent Anglo-American journalist  of the mid-century:

When   The  Sachem was  commenced  by  the  same  parties   who  had  essayed  the establishment  of  The  Era,  an  editorial  position  was  reserved   from   motives   of friendship for  Herbert, although the  paper  had  been designed  to serve as a species of  Native   America organ.  Nevertheless, its  projectors contemplated  the  employ­ ment  of  the  best available talent  in the  production of an  unrivalled literary paper, regardless  of national prejudices .... As literary  associates  to Herbert were con­ joined  Major Richardson, author of W acousta,  a  popular Indian romance;  Wil­ liam  North, author of The Slave  of the  Lamp, and a poet of no mean  order  ....9


.But it was not  long  before  Richardson's pugnacity got him into further trouble. Shortly after the  passage just  quoted comes  this  revealing sentence: "After the contribution of several excellent  articles  and  a few historical  sketches,  Herbert retired  from  the paper, in consequence of a misunderstanding with  Major  Richardson and  Mr. North, upon some political  questions  connected with the rule of England in Canada."
Indeed, although much  remains to be discovered about  this final phase
in Richardson's career, it seems certain that  it was no less troubled than the  earlier  phases  had  been. The  new books were all mere  potboilers - The Monk  Knight of Saint   john in particular is the 1850 equivalent of the most lurid  and erotically perverse of today's pocketbooks-and they were  published by the  notorious  firm of Dewitt  and  Davenport in fifty­ cent  paperback editions  which  brought   their  author meagre  financial return.
He died, supposedly of erysipelas complicated by malnutrition, on May
12, 1852, at his lodgings at 113 West 29th Street,  New York City. Legend has it that  he sold his Newfoundland dog, Hector,  a few days previously in order  to buy food. His obituary notice, as it appeared on May 14 in the New York  journal  of Commerce) is more matter-of-fact:


9   The Life  and  Writings of Frank  Forester  (H. W. Herbert), edited  by David  W. Judd, London, n.d.


55

A COLONIAL ROMANTIC



Died-On the  I 2th inst. Major John  Richardson, late  of H. B. M. Gordon High­ landers aged  53  (55)   years. His friends  are  invited to attend his funeral, without further invitation, from  the  Church of the  Holy  Communion, comer 6th  Ave:n,ue and  20th  Street, this day at two o'clock, p/m.

Haughty and  belligerent  to the last, Richardson declared near the end of his life that  he had no desire to be ranked  among Canada's future  men of genius or to share  any posthumous  honour  reserved  for them. A man of genius, in a literary sense, he certainly  was not;  but he was, according to his lights, a man of honour. He was a Hotspur who forever sought, and found,  trouble; a romantic whose dreams  always outran reality and who was capable of infinite self-pity and infinitesimal self-judgment; a colonial whose insecurity and  sense of inferiority  led him  to distrust  and  despise his fellow-colonials; a man who did in many ways serve his native country but  whose consciousness of those services robbed  them  of much  of their lustre.  His chief  lack  was a sense of humour, a sense of proportion; his chief virtue  was that  he was never, in any circumstances, merely dull.






FOR  REASONS  of space,  the  articles  by; Pierre Berton  on the  literature of  the  Klondike and  by Hugo McPherson on  the  novels  of Robertson Davies  which  were  announced for  publication in  this  issue  of Canadian Literature have  been  delayed,  but  they will certainly appear in the fourth (Spring,I g6o)  issue.
Among  other articles  to appear in that and  later issues will
be essays  on  the  poetic  vision  of Wilfred   Watson, by  john W. Bilsland, on  epic  strains in  contemporary Canadian poetry by  Paul  West,  and  on theatrical taste in  the  Canadian West  by  Michael R.  Booth,  as  well  as studies of Canadian  anthologies by Robert Weaver, of  the  immigrant in literature by Ruth McKenzie, of the CBC  Critically Speaking programme by  Tony !Emery  and  of  the  plays  of  Gratien  Gelinas by  Marguerite Primeau, together with  a bi-lingual feature on  the  poet  and the translator by Anne Hebert, F. R. Scott  and  Jeanne Lapointe and  further reflections on  Canadian Literature by !Ethel Wilson.  Among  other features planned for  early  publication are  studies  of the  teaching of literature in Canadian schools,  of children's literature in Canada, and  of certain aspects  of publishing in  this  country.



review articles



A VICTORIAN IDEALIST

Peter Quennel!



WILLIAM  ROBBINS.  The Ethical Idealism of Matthew Arnold. University of Toronto
Press.  $3.75.


WHEN   BISHOP  COLENSO of Natal, an  earnest  churchman  who  had run  into  difficulties while  attempting  to elucidate  the   New   Testament for   the benefit  of inquisitive Zulu  converts, pub­ lished  in   1862  his   momentous  work, The Pentateuch and  the  Book  of Joshua Critically Examined, he  was  accused   by at  least  one  eminent cleric  of "labouring to destroy  and  blot out  the  faith  of Jesus Christ from   the   hearts of  the   people"; and  Bishop Lee of Manchester announced that he could  find  "no  language befitting a gentleman and  a Christian" to describe his fellow  dignitary's conduct. More  un­ expected and  much  more interesting were the  protests   voiced  by  Matthew  Arnold, a  poet  whose  own  religious  beliefs  were admittedly unorthodox, but  who  on  this occasion   felt  it  his  duty   to  rally  to  the orthodox side, since Colenso's methods of textual  criticism, which   tended  to  per­  suade the   ordinary  reader  that  "the Pentateuch is  not  to  be  read  as  an  au­  thentic narrative",  failed   to   remind  us
that the  sacred book  was  also  "a  narra­
tive  full  of  divine  instruction in  morals and   religion". Colenso   had  come  to  de­ molish.   What could he  offer in   place of   the   venerable structure  he  was  en-
 deavouring  to  sweep   away?   Like  Eras­ mus,  Arnold   was  firmly  convinced  that  no system of beliefs should  be "heedlessly  wrecked" until something new and  better  could   be  raised  upon   the  same  founda­ tions.  For   Arnold   was  a  middle-of-the­ road   man;   and   Professor   Robbins' un­ usually illuminating volume is largely devoted  to  an   exhaustive  discussion   of how  and  why  he  held  that path. It  ex­ plains  Arnold's view  of  the  function  he performed,  and   illustrates  some   of  the stresses and  conflicts  that  determined his attitude as  a  Victorian   prophet and  thinker.
True, the  word  "thinker" is possibly a little   misleading  if  applied  to  a  writer of Arnold's  temperament. By academic philosophers, including F. H.  Bradley,  he has frequently been  written off as an intellectual light-weight, whose misuse of scientific and  philosophical terms should debar   him  from   serious   consideration. Even  a literary critic,  Herbert W. Paul, damns his philosophical essay,s with faint praise.   "Of   Matthew  Arnold as  a   phi­ losopher",  this  critic  asserts,  "it  may  be said  that,  though clear  he  was  not  deep,  and  that,  though gentlf\, he was not dull." Profundity, of  course,  is  a  quality  diffi-

57

REVIEW  ARTICLES



cult  to measure; and  metaphysicians are apt to  differ on  what constitutes  the accurate use of language. But  there  is no doubt,  according  to  Professor   Robbins, that  Arnold   pursued a  consistent  line  of thought, and  that  he  had  a clear  notion throughout his later  life of the nature of the  service  he  had   set  out  to  render­ which   was  to  mediate  between   reaction and   revolution, and   to  help  preserve  all that   was  best  in  the  old  by  giving  it  a new  support,  freeing  religion   from   the chain  of dogmatic  theology and  re-cloth­ ing  it  in  the  attributes of  feeling   and imagination.  He   hoped that  such in­ fluence  as  he  had  acquired might  be of some   value,   during  the  troubled  times that   he  saw  ahead,  "as  a  healing   and reconciling  influence". And   elsewhere,  predicting  that  "a  great change must come,   a  great   plunge   must   be  taken", he  wrote  that  he considered it advisable, instead of  dilating-as both  the  religious and  the  anti-religious worlds were  apt  to do-"on  the  plunge's utterness,  tre­ mendousness  and  awfulness, to  show  mankind  that   it  need  not   be  in  terror  and  despair, that  everything  essential  to




sa
 its  progress  stands  firm  and  unchanged". He  envisaged himself  as a literary  peace­ maker; but  his courageous efforts  proved  strangely  ineffective;  and   he  succeeded, observes   Professor   Robbins,  not  only, in avoiding  extremes but,  on  either side  of the  controversy, in  "antagonising the  ex­ tremists".  His  defence of  religion en­ raged  the  agnostics, while  "the orthodox Christians  were  naturally suspicious  of a man  who  set out  to  rescue  religion  from
'the  extravagances  theologians have taught people  to  utter'."




ARNOLD, in fact,  as a religious controversialist, was  a  man   who  wished to have  his cake and  eat it-still attracted towards the  idea  of faith, which  he had learned at  his  tremendous father's  knee, yet held  back bthe strain  of imaginative scepticism   he  had   developed  during  his early   manhood. He   has   been   treated, remarked F. W. H.  Myers,  "as  a flippant and  illusory, Christian" rather  than­ which  would  have been more appropriate
-"as a specially  devout and  conservative agnostic".  But,   if  Arnold    remained an agnostic   at   heart,  he  was  always  pecu­ liarly   susceptible  to  the   beliefs   he  had discarded; and,  in addition to reconciling the  old  and  new worlds,  he sought above all  else  to  reconcile   his  own  tendencies, to  arrive   at   a  spiritual   modus   vivendi that  would  ensure him  the inward peace  he  needed. Here  I  think   that   Professor Robbins  might   have   extended  his  re­ searches  into Arnold's life and  work,  and investigated  the origins  of the odd  dicho­  tomy  that seems to have split  his personal character in two. A deeply serious-minded person,  he  retained throughout his exist­ ence  some   touches   of  disarming  pagan

REVIEW  ARTICLES



frivolity; his juvenile  dandyism was never complelcly abandoned;  nor   was   the romantic lover  of  the  mysterious  "Mar­ guerite"  entirely  submerged  in  the   de­ voted husband and  parent,  and the  hard-pressed inspector of  elementary schools.  "Empedocles",  which  Professor Robbins praises,  strikes me as a decidedly  dull   poem;  but   "The  Scholar Gipsy",  with  its  haunting,  elusive  melancholy, is one   of  the   masterpieces  of  nineteenth­ century  literature; and   Arnold's  evoca­ tion  of  the seventeenth-century pilgrim-
Still   nursing the  unconquerable hope, Still  clutching the  inviolable shade ...
bears some  resemblance to a self-portrait. "Dover Beach", too, tells us more about Arnold than any: of his  moral and philosophical discussions.
Professor  Robbins, on  the  other  hand, is  little  concerned with the   study  of




DEUX POLES
 Arnold's character,  and  is  content  to describe   and   analyse   the   gradual   pro­ gress  of  his  hero's   thought,  in   relation both  to the  problems of his own age and  to  the  kindred  problems   of  the  present  day.  This   he  does  lightly   and  skilfully, without  ever   employing   pompous  ver­ biage.  His  prose  style  is  easy and  fluent; and,  although he never indulges in facile  witticisms  or  attempts  to  thrust home  an unworthy gibe,  his  pages  are  not  devoid  of   humour,  sparkling  just  beneath  the surface  of  his  text.  Altogether, this  is at once  a  useful  and -from  the  ordinary reader's point  of view -an unexpectedly enjoyable book. Let  us hope  that  he pub­ lishes  a  second volume,  covering the  poems  as well as the controversial essays, and  by broadening  the  scope  of  his sur­  vey  g1ves us  a  balanced portrait  of  the whole  man.







Jean-Guy  Pilon


ALAIN  GRANDBOIS,  ed.  Jacques Brault. PAUL   MORIN,   ed.   Jean-Paul Plante. ROBERT CHOQUETTE,  ed.  Andre Melan<;on.  Editions Fides;  Collection  Les Classiques Canadiens, $r.oo  each.


RoBERT CHOQUETTE, Paul Morin, Alain  Grandbois . .  . Trois  noms qu'il  est rare  de lire ala suite  lorsque l'on parle   de  poesie  canadienne. C'est  en  les ecrivant l'un  apres  !'autre que  je m'aper­ ctois soudain  qu'ils  dessinent  comme   les etapes  majeures de  l'histoire  poetique du Canada franctais,  histoire que  les gens de rna  generation  s'emploient  sans  cesse  a corriger et dont ils n'ont pas encore  reussi a dilapider totalement l'encombrant heri­ tage.   Car   il  arrive  parfois qu'on  herite
 d'un passif, et en litterature il n'est  pas possible de  refuser  l'honneur d'etre  lega­ taire  universe!.  Les depouilles spirituelles de  nos devanciers nous  sont  offertes  sans remission.
Je me suis deja  explique Ia-dessus mais j'y reviens parce que cela n'est jamais definitivement compris. 11 y:  a eu  ici  des premiers  essais, des balbutiements, des tentatives qui valent ce que valent  des devoirs d'ecoliers. Le  premier signe avant-coureur  d'une  veritable poesie


59

REVIEW  ARTICLES



canadienne, c'est  Jean-Aubert  Loranger qui  le  lanc;:a, oh!  bien  timidement,  vers
1923·  J'aime a relire   un  de  ses  poemes
qui  se  termine ainsi  et  que   je  ne  desa­
vouerais pas :

J'enregistrerai sur  le  fleuve
La  decision d'un tel  sillage
Qu'il faudra bien,  le golfe atteint,
Que Ia parallele des  rives
S'ouvre comme deux grands bras
Pour  me donner enfin  Ia mer.

Nous  n'avons pu  mesurer   que  15  ans plus  tard   ce  que  laissaient   entrevoir  les poemes  de  Loranger. Alain  Grandbois et St-Denyl> Garneau allaient les premiers doter la  litterature canadienne d'une poesie veritable et surtout libher le poete. St-Denys Garneau  disparut  bien  vite  et c'est  Alain   Grandbois qui  avec  Les  lles de la Nuit  et Rivages de l'Homme, ouvrit une ecluse  et  fit naitre cet extraordinaire renouveau poetique que la litterature canadienne  connait  depuis   7  ou  8 ans. On  ne  dira  jamais  assez !'importance de la  publication  des  lles   de  la  Nuit.  Ce n'est  qu'apres ce livre  majeur de Grand­ bois  qu'on  decouvrit  St-Denys  Garneau, le seul  livre  publie  du  vivant  de ce der­  nier,   Regards et   Jeux   dans  L'Espace, l'ayant  ete  a  un  tres  petit nombre  d'ex­ emplaires  et   n'ayant   pas  rec;:u   l'accueil  qu'il  eut merite.
Alain  Grandbois est, pour plusieurs d'entre nous, le premier  poete canadien. Dans  le temps  et dans l'espace.  C'est pourquoi je me rejouis  en voyant  le petit livre  publie  sur  son  oeuvre  dans  la  Col­ lection  Les Classiques  Canadiens. Jacques Brault,  dans   son   introduction,  esquisse les  themes  majeurs et  les lignes  de  force de  !'oeuvre d'Alain  Grandbois  d'une fac;:on tres objective   mais  en   laissant quand meme   deviner  !'admiration  qu'il  voue  au  poete.  11  insiste  sur  les qualites

6o
 fondamentales  de   cette   oeuvre,   qu'elle soit   de  prose ou  de  poesie: "ecriture racee,   quete  passionnee des  valeurs   qui haussent le  destin  au  niveau  de  la  voca­ tion". Brault degage  !'orientation  essen­ tielle  de   la   poesie  de  Grandbois  ou  les memes  themes  sont souvent repris comme  pour  attaquer le mystere  d'un autre cote, le  maitriser davantage.  L'amour, le  cos­ mos,  la  mort  reviennent  a  chaque page comme   les  donn·ees   essentielles  d'une haute demarche spirituelle.
Jacques Brault refute certaines des ob­ jections  que  l'on  entend parfois  a  propos  de   la   poesie   de   Grandbois et   que   des auteurs de  manuels scolaires  ont  tenu   a repeter, manifestant   bien   par   la  leur etroitesse d'esprit et leur  manque de  cul­ ture   poetique.   Ces   considerations  nous paraissent  inutiles   au  premier  abord: elles  se  justifient  cependant si l'on  tient  compte  du   fait   que   les  livres  de   cette  collection  sont  destines  principalement aux etudiants de  nos  maisons  d'enseigne­ ment  secondaire pour  qui ils peuvent de­ venir  d'excellents instruments de  travail.
Le choix des textes que completent d'abondantes notes bio-bibliographiques est dans I'ensemble excellent. La premiere partie est  reservee  aux  oeuvres  de  prose
et  on  y  lira   de  larges   extraits de  Ne a
Quebec, Les  Voyages de M area Polo, et
du  recueil   de  nouvelles   Avant   le Chaos, qui  sont  au  nombre des  plus  belles pages de   prose  ecrites   par   un  ecrivain   cana­ dien.   La   partie  reservee aux   poemes groupe les  plus  celebres  poemes  des  lles  de la  Nuit  et  de  Rivages de !'Homme. 11 est regrettable que  Jacques Brault  ait  ete dans  l'impossibilite  de  citer certains poemes  de !'Etoile  Pourpre, le derniere­ cueil  de Grandbois, paru  aux Editions de l'Hexagone en  1957.
D'Alain  Grandbois  a  Paul   Morin,  le

REVIEW  ARTICLES



saut   est  presque  perilleux. Nous  reman­ tons   en   anit: rc,   nous   ne  sonnncs   plus elements d'un  monde en   marche  mais spectateurs larmoyants  d'un  coucher  de soleil  ou  d'un clair  de  lune.  Je  ne  peux quand meme m'empecher d'avoir un cer­ tain  respect pour !'oeuvre de Paul  Morin. Une  oeuvre  a  peine  esquissee  qui  laissait entrevoir   des   possibilites   mais   que   les circonstances  ont   empeche  le  poete   de mener  a bon terme. Paul Morin aura cependant ete  une  etape dans !'elabora­ tion  lente  d'une poesie canadienne. L'in­ troduction de Jean-Paul Plante est faible  et  ne  fait  que  suggerer  un   portrait  de Paul  Morin remontant sans doute  a 1925. Nous  aurions aime  autre chose.  L'intro­ duction  a   l'oeuvre  de   Paul   Morin   est encore  a ecrire.
Les  poemes   ont  ete   groupes sous  des titres  choisis, nous  previent Jean-Paul Plante, par  Paul  Morin  lui-meme. Ils sont
inutiles   et   creent a l'interieur  de  cette
oeuvre  des divisions  arbitraires. Mais lisez
plutot: Alma   Parens,  Sonnets, Elements Latins, Gouaches venitiennes, L'illusion orientale, Simplicites, Enchantements, Pietes.  Ce  n'est  pas  serieux.  Au  surplus, les  titres   ne  correspondent  en  rien   aux
 poemes.   Pourquoi  pas   aussi   Portee   de chats ou Cages a laj1ins?
Les  poemes  de  Paul   Morin   sous  leur fatras litteraire laissent  parfois  passer des eclairs,  comme   l'image d'une  porte  ou­ verte  sur  un  univers  poetique qui  aurait
pu  devenir  necessaire. D'un  poeme   a
l'autre, l'on   demeure  a   l'exrerieur  des
choses, dans  le paraitre, et, il faut  bien l'avouer, tout  cela  date  un  peu  ...
J'ai  voulu  reserver  pour  la fin ce plaisir
de   rare  qualite que   j'eprouve  en   com­ mentant les oeuvres  de  M.  Robert  Cho­  quette. Nous  avons  affaire  ici  a  un  cas etrange:    celui   d'un   mauvais  poete   qui a  persiste   jusqu'a  ces  derniers  temps   a ecrire  des  vers,  alors  que   le  vrai   poete ecrit  ou transcrit de la poesie. C'est  toute  la difference. M. Choquette, au  moment ou  il a  publie  ses  premiers poemes,  vers
1925, avait  un  certain talent. N'allez  pas croire  qu'il  avait  lu Apollinaire ou Cend­ rars.  Mais on ne pouvait lui nier  une cer­ taine   jeunesse,  une  certaine  fougue,  un desir de la vie qui  reussissait a transpercer tout   l'appareil de  faux   romantisme  at­  tarde.   Pendant 20 ans,  de  1933  a  1954, M.   Choquette  n'a   rien   publie  et   ce silence,  n'en  doutons  pas,  a  profite   a  la collectivite: pue  coincidence sans  doute, durant  cette  periode   la  veritable  poesie canadienne est nee et a pris l'essor qu'elle connait aujourd'hui.
En 1954:  catastrophe. M. Choquette publie Suite  Marine, un   monstrueux somnifere en sept  mille  vers. II aurait du se  taire.   Nous   aurions  dit   de  lui   qu'il avait ecrit dans sa  jeunesse quelques poemes acceptables.
Le  drame chez   M.  Choquette,  c'est qu'il  ecrit  en  1954  avec  une  sentimenta­ lite  de  1925 et quand on  sait l'etat de la litterature ici  a  cette  epoque, on  entre­ voit  immediatement  les  resultats. Ce

6r

REVIEW  ARTICLES



mauvais poete  n'a  pas  evolue  depuis  go ans.  Sa  sensibilite  est  d'une epoque finie et ne nous interesse  plus.
Le    surrealisme?  Eluard?  Char?
St. John Perse?  Michaux? Rien  n'a mar­ que  M.  Choquette. I1 est  reste  a  l'heure de  1925.
Comment a-t-il  pu ecrire  Suite Marine
sans  s'endormir? Voila  Ia seule  question
 importante  qu'un  cntlque  devrait se poser  au  sujet  de  M. Choquette .
0







RICHLER  AND THE FAITHLESS CITY
 





Warren Tallman


MORDECAI  RICHLER.   The    Apprenticeship of Duddy  Kravitz. Andre  Deutsch. $3-75·


IN  SIGNIFICANT fiction the protagonists are likely to wander beyond established social  forms  to  new  areas  of the  imagination from  which  better  forms of  truth can  be  glimpsed.  Such  wander­ ings are necessary because there is so little  truth in   the  established  forms,  so  little  regard  for   human  need  and   desire.   In his   new   novel,   The   Apprenticeship   of Duddy  Kravitz, Mordecai Richler guides Duddy toward freedom by subjecting the conventions  which   overrule these  forms  to   a   thorough  drubbing.  Duddy  is  no Columbus  of   the   imagination,  and   no one   would   call   the   lake   property   he covets and  finally  possesses the   New America. But  these  limitations not ith­ standing,  Richler  has  here  created  one of  the  truer travellers  through the  chaos of  our  North  American  world.
Richler begins Duddy's  journey  by turning Brian  Moore's  The  Feast   of
 Lupercal  upside  down.  In  Moore's novel we  watch  the  Irish   schoolmaster,  Diar­ muid    Devine,  struggling   unsuccessfully  toward some  measure of  truth and  free­  dom  through the  inner  knots  and  outer whips  of outrageously  restrictive conven­ tions.   Richler's   novel   begins   with   just such  another  somewhat older   and   even more   crippling ly  caught  schoolmaster, John  MacPherson. But Richler looks past MacPherson to the  young  barracuda who slashes  away   at   his  feeble   attempts  to keep  afloat-Duddy. MacPherson   goes under  (his  thin  blood staining  the waters)   and  the  novel  cuts  out  after  the barracuda. The pace  is fast,  the  writing is from  the  wrong  side of the  tracks,  and so is  the  protagonist. Duddy begins  as  a most   unpromising candidate  for  any­ body's type of truth. But in what amounts to a summation of their  clash,  MacPher­ son  tells  Duddy,  "You'll  go  far  Kravitz.

REVffiW  ARTICLES



You're goin;  to  go  very  far." And  the comic fix is in.
There  are  funny  scenes. But   the
comedy   consists  mostly  in  a  reversal  of the  usual  tragic  dilemma in  which  a  pro­ tagonist  wears  his   hopes  and   chances  away  against the  high  shores  of  this  un­  obliging   world.   In  this   novel   the   pro­ tagonist  proposes   and   the  world   serves up  suitable victims.   When  Duddy   bites he comes  away  with  meat dripping blood called   money  spelled  success.  The more  outrageous  his  demands, the  more  oblig­ ingly   are   they   met.   Now   every   right­  minded  reader  will  realize   that   Richler is  manoeuvring Duddy into   a  trap. For even   comic success has   human  conse­ quences,  and   as  Duddy's  dream   begins to  build   he  comes   to  value   the  figures who   help  him  build   it-notably   his financial, sexual  and  emotional Girl  Fri­  day,   Yvette,  and   his  Boy   Friday, the wackily  devoted  epileptic, Virgil.   When  Duddy's  rush  toward success  forces  Vir­  gil  into   a  crippling  accident,  alienating Yvette,  he   realizes   that   he  needs   their  help  and  regard. At  once  the  fast-swim­ ming  barracuda loses   force   and   turns  over,  soft   human  underbelly  up.   Guilt  forces him to rent  a truck  which  he drives obsessively, "doing Virgil's job", to quar­ rel  with  all  of  his associates,  and  finally to  hire  out   driving a  cab-his  father's trade. Ruined, but  at  last  aware  of what  it  means   to  be  human, Duddy  becomes bearable. Such   would  appear  to  be  the lesson  he  masters,   the  saving  knowledge he  acquires in  the  course  of  his appren­ ticeship.
But  fortunately  it isn't.  The money
meat   is  dangled  once  again, curing   the sick  barracuda. In  a  brief  but  superbly represented episode, Duddy wakens  to his dream, gobbles  down   Virgil's money  in
 the  final  and  most  atrocious of his many swindles,  and   the  lake  property he  had so intensely coveted  becomes  his entire, gouged  from   the   world's  body.   Nor   is this the full extent of the reversal. When Duddy  was seven, his grandfather illumi­ nated  his life by saying,  "a man  without land  is a  nobody.  Remember  that  Dud­ del."  And  the  difference between Duddy and  everyone  else in  the  novel  is that  he wakens  to  this  vision.  What is more,  he believes.  What is  most  important of  all, he has faith. Like the fool  who  eventually turns   up  as  the  type  of  wisdom,  or  the outcast   who   practices   those   virtues   in whose name   he   has   been  banished, Duddy  emerges  as  the  secret  hero  of the world  he  has played  at  with  seeming  fast and  loose. For  no  one  else in  that  world has  any dreams, faith  or a truth: not MacPherson  (who  vowed  never  to strap a boy then   fell  to  strapping boy,s) ;  not uncle Benjy (who wore a false cloak of impotence in order  to shield  his wife's neurosis and so drove  her into a deeper neurosis) ; not  Virgil   (the   type  of  devo­ tion  who  was  devoted  most  deeply  to his own  illness); not  Yvette  (who  sacrificed herself  to  Virgil's   illness) ; not  even  his Zeyda  (who  sent  Duddy on a  journey  he would  not  take  himself).
None  of  these  best  people  in  Duddy's life have  any,thing  to save  themselves ex­ cept   those  conventions  which   they   put  on   to  hide   from   shame  whenever   cold winds blow their  human nakedness home.  The   ominous   hero  who  dominates  their dream   of  human life  is  Dingleman, the Boy  Wonder,  a  hopeless  cripple  and   a thoroughly  vicious  man.  Duddy is never ashamed   of   his  own   humanity-even when  it is  threadbare-and that  makes  all   the  difference.  His   seeming   wrong­  doings trace  to an  inability amounting to

REVIEW  ARTICLES



an   unwiilingness  to  realize  or  recognize the  crippled condition in  which  he  and all of the others live. At the last, when he orders   Dingleman off  his  land   ("Faster you  bastard. Run  Dingleman. Let's  see you run  on those  sticks.")   he is ostensibly: shooing  away   his  most  dangerous  rival for  ownership of the  land.  Actually  he is possessing his dream. He has done with cripples.
However, this  back  street  prophet of a world  in  which  people  are  not  crippled by  the  guilt   and   shame   which   pervade our  lives because  they  pervade  our  social forms  is  only  an  apprentice.  And  Rich­ ler   does   no   special  pleading.  Duddy's vision   is  represented  in  the   vernacular and   the  vernacular is  consistent   with  a place  where  "the boy,s  grew up dirty  and  sad,  spiky: also  like  grass  beside  the  rail­  road   tracks". Part  of  Richler's achieve­ ment   has   been   to  turn   the  vernacular into  a poetry, making Duddy  memorable, without departing from  the dirt,  the sad­  ness and the spikes. He  is memorable be­ cause   he  is  so  consistently   himself.  But he  is far  from  liberation. It  is one  thing to  break   through  the   limitations of  the conventional world;  it is quite  another to discover   alternatives. The   lake  property toward which  his imagination struggles  is almost   completely  unparticularized.  No
 promised   land   is  truly   repossessed   until the  gods   come   back,   and   these   are   as absent   from   the  limbo  of  Duddy's  lake world  as  they  are  from  the sick limbo  of the  world  he  has  passed  through. He  is intact. But  he  wants  to  laugh,  he  wants to  fight,  he  wants  to  cry:. When   the  self is born,  the  struggle is only  just  begun.
Art  is vision,  a  way  of seeing,  and  in The Apprenticeship of Duddy Kravitz Mordecai Richler has  put  on  comic  eyes partly to reveal  and  partly  to soften  what he  sees.  The most  melancholy clowning permits  him   to  break   through   conven­ tional   attitudes  toward  Montreal, and  this  break  through  permits  him  to repre­ sent  the  city  as  actually  (if  unwillingly) faithless,  truthless, dreamless-that  is ty;pically  North  American. But  art   can­ not  stop  with  such   an  actuality if  only because human  beings   cannot.  To   say so is to reach  the corner Richler has writ­ ten  himself  into.  If he  is to  advance be­ yond   those  boundaries to  which  he  has guided  his  protagonist he  will  need   to discover  a way; of seeing which  will make  the  lake  of  life into  which  Duddy wants  to dive  a mirror and  a source  for  deeper desires   than   his   present   hero  even dreams. This of   course   is  much   easier for  a  reader to  say  than  it  is for  even  a gifted   novelist  to do.



HISTORIANS' VIEW POINTS
 





Margaret Ormsby


DONALD  CREIGHTON.    The Story    of Canada. Macmillan. $3.50.
EDGAR MCINNIS.   Canada:  a Political   and   Social   History.  Revised  and   enlarged.
Clarke, Irwin. $9·75·


THESE TWO histories  of  Can­ ada   illustrate the  old  saw  that  the his­ torian is  the  product of  his  own  times. Edgar Mcinnis first published Canada: a Political  and  Social  History  in  1947, the heydey  of  Mackenzie King   Liberalism. Most  of his research, and  probably most of his writing, must  have been  done  dur­ ing  the  war,  at  a  time  when  Canadians, worried    about    "the   conflicting  stresses and  strains, both  internal and  external" which   challenged  the   unity   of  Canada, were  inclined to  identify the  nation  with the  state.  As  historian, Mcinnis took  on some colour from  his background. He dis­ covered   "the  essential    drama"  of   the Canadian achievement "in  the slow and tenacious advance from   one  step  to  an­ other   along   the  road  to  nationhood,  the patient  evolution of   successive  compro­ mises  in   politics  and  government, the determined  conquest of  the  physical  ob­ stacles   to   national  economic develop­ ment". The words  might   well have  been Mackenzie King's very  own.
Twelve years  later, when  Canada had
just  entered  its  "first   Elizabethan  Age" and   Diefenbaker  Progressive-Conserva­ tism  had  created  a  "politically reunited" nation, Donald Creighton, seeing signs of a   "robust   Canadianism",  set   down   on paper an   epic   which   he   recounted  in terms   of    "the  east-west    axis,   the   all­ Canadian, anti-Continental  and pro-
 British  elements of  national  design". In the post-war years Canadian nationalism had   become   something  positive,   some­ thing  separate and  individual, and in  the writing  of Canadian history the emphasis  no longer  needed  to be on frustration and  compromise.
In  planning and   writing   their   books, each historian had in mind  a different segment  of  the  reading public.  Mcinnis was  writing a  textbook for   university students. So he produced a sober  and  re­ strained  analytic  narrative.  Creighton, through  his  biographical   study   of  Sir John  A. Macdonald, had already reached a   wide   "popular"  audience; but   there  was always  the  chance that  some  of  this audience  might   have   been   lost   to   the script-writer, the  man  who could  employ sound, dramatic action  and  colourful re­ construction  to  make   history   palatable. With  a sense of mission,, and  the  convic­ tion  that   the  written  word  outlives   the spoken,   Professor   Creighton   undertook to  win  back  readers  for  the  professional  historian. Boldly, he compressed into  276 pages  a  history   of  Canada that   has  all the  vividness  of  pictorial  reconstruction
-and  much  more  besides.
As the  writer  of  a  textbook,  Mcinnis felt  compelled to be encydopaedic. Creighton, on  the  other hand, could afford   to   be   the   artist,  employing the technique of  simplifying the  outline and

REVIEW  ARTICLES



rejecting  the  extraneous detail  in  order that   attention  might  be  focussed   on  a great  central theme.  Writing for students, Mcinnis eschewed  private opinion and personal bias.  Writing for  the general public,   and   bound   only  by  the  code  of the academic historian, Creighton could permit   his  readers  to  share  his  enthus­ iasms.  As a  result,  his  book  has  a glow­ ing,  pulsating quality  previously  lacking  in  general histories  of  Canada.
Generally speaking,  Mcinnis's book belongs to the tradition of "history as science" and  Creighton's to "history as literature". In the matter of scientific exactitude, however,   The  Story  of Can­ ada yields nothing to Canada: a Political and  Social History. (For one  thing, Creighton  alway,s seems  to  be  closer  to, or at least more familiar with, manuscript sources.)   What it  does  do,  is to  go  be­ yond   the   process   of  sifting,  evaluating and  corroborating, the  limit  which  satis­ fies so many   "scientific"  historians. Like the  great   scientist,  Creighton allows  his own intuitive imagination full play,. He is not  satisfied  merely  to  describe "events", "developments" and  "trends"; seeking explanations, he  probes personality, character  and   setting. He   is  never  ob­ viously  schematic; y,et he  has  a  central theme,  and  minor  strands are not allowed to  obscure  the  pattern he is  weaving.
The story of Canada, as Creighton tells it,  is  the  story: of  adventurers in  a  new land,  who  are  attracted first  by  the  en­ chantment  and   compulsion  of   the   St. Lawrence, "the  River   of  Canada",  and  then   by  the  enchantment  and  compul­ sion  of  the  north-west. Led  inland, they extend  their  reach  until   their "con­ tinental  inheritance"  is   within  their grasp.   Interpreted  in   this  fashion,   in terms  of an  innate urge  to create  and  to

66
 preserve   a  separate, independent   exist­ ence,  Canadian  history   acquires  vitality and  pace.
These  attributes  are   lacking   in   Mc­ Innis's book.  For  his  theme is the search  for a middle ground on which "numerous and  conflicting stresses,  internal and  ex­ ternal" may  be  reconciled. With   such  a theme, he is forced  to make  official policy his  main  concern. Although, of  course, the  political figures  are   present, his  his­ tory tends  to  be  dehumanized.
Creighton  clothes   his  figures  and   lets them walk on the stage. At the time of Confederation he tells us, Sir John A. Macdonald was  in  the  prime  of life and the  height  of  his powers.  "There was  no sign of portliness in his tall, slight,  jaunty figure.  The defiant panache of his  dark, curly  hair  had  subsided only a little; and the  ugly  charm of  his  face,  with  its  big nose  and   generally sardonic  smile,  was as attractive as ever." When  Mackenzie King,  by securing the incorporation of Newfoundland in   I949 succeeded in carrying to  completion the  grand design of I 864,   he   was  still   "an   ordinary   yet curiously unusual  man,  courteous  but friendless, unobtrusive but  dominating, with odd  dark  complexities beneath his correctly commonplace exterior,  [who] had made himself appear  a  political necessity  without ever acquiring much respect  or inspiring any great  affection". Equally effectively,  lesser   figures are brought  to  life.  Who   is  likely  to  forget Lord  Durham after  reading that:

His   luggage  took   two   days   to  land. The buffet at  his  lavish   receptions and   supper parties  was   resplendent with  family plate and  racing trophies. His  Byronic moods, his imperious  yet   gracious manner,  the   care­ lessly   baroque  magnificence of  his  style  of life   soon   became almost  legendary  in   the  Canadas. He  had  once  confided to  Creevey

REVIEW  ARTICLES



that he  could 'jog  along' on  forty   thousand pounds a  year.   He  was  known   privatPiy as
'King Jog'; but   his  political  sobriquet  was
'Radical Jack'.

There are wonderful vignettes in Creighton's story.  Champlain   confers with  the  Montagnais, "the dark  natives, with  their  feathered scalp-locks, their breech-clouts, their  rough  leggings  of hide,   and    their    shapeless  garments  of skins  and   furs   [sitting]  in  solemn  con­ clave". The Battle of the  Plains  of  Abra­  ham  reaches  its climax:  "Montcalm was mortally wounded while  he  tried  in  vain to  rally  his  men.  There  was  no  rallying them.  They   broke,  turned  and  fled. And Montcalm's  black  horse  walked  his dying master  slowly  back  into  the  city  through the St. Louis gates." The Canadian Paci­ fic   Railway, the symbol of  unity,,  is completed at  the  very  moment when  in­ surrection  in   the   west  is  brought   to  a dramatic conclusion:

On  November 7th   [188s], far  out  in the mountains, at a  spot   which Stephen  deter­ mined  must  be  called   Craigellachie in memory  of   his   clan's   meeting-place  and  battle  slogan, the   bearded  Donald  Smith drove home the  last spike  in  the  railway's transcontinental  line; and nine   days  later, on  November  16th, while   the  autumnal sun rose late over  plains which were  white  with  hoar frost,  the  sprung trap  in   the  Regina prison   gave   and  Riel   dropped  to   his  ex­ tinction.

The Story  of Canada offers more  than personality and   action. The fur  trade  is seen as "the glory  and  folly of the St. Lawrence";  Canada  as  following   until
1874  a "dependent career as a favoured
producer of staple products for  more mature metropolitan  economies"; and the   west   as   creating  "new   contradic­ tions,  new  and   exciting  tensions.  But  it had  done  far  more  than  that. It had  also promoted a  new  and  dominant sense of
 national unity." There  is  less  emphasis on  a  topic  still   beloved   when   Mcinnis was writing  his book. The "advance to nationhood" is  not   the  steady   progress that  it once was; instead  we are  reminded that  Laurier had  "a  rather parochial and suspicious   Canadianism" and   that   with the   signing of  the   Atlantic Charter, "Canada, who  for  a  year  had   been  the second   big  power   engaged   in  the  con­ flict,  became   the  submissive  satellite  of the  Big Three."
It is these  new  insights  that   make  the book  so  fascinating  and   so  compelling. The  specialist,   as  well   as  the   layman, finds  his  attention  caught  and   held   by new perspectives, perspectives which emerge  when  familiar events  are  set in  a wider   context.  For   too   long   Canadian history   has   been   written  by  men   who have   been   too   close   to   the   Canadian scene; trained in the scientific method, encumbered by masses  of  published  ma­ terial,   they  have   done   little   more  than describe  "the outside" of  an  event.  Mc­  Innis, sad  to relate,  belongs to this group. His  book is comprehensive, detailed and  "accurate";  but   the  scaffolding  dates  from  an  earlier age  of  historical writing and  the  whole structure is flat, and  even rather flaccid.



LEACOCK IN LIMBO
 


R. E. Watters



RALPH  L.  CURRY. Stephen Leacock,   Humorist   and   Humanist. Doubleday  &   Co.
$4-95·


IMAGINE,  if  you  can,   a  bio­ grapher  of  Mark  Twain  who  sees   no personal  or  literary   significance  in   the fact  that  his subject  was American rather than   English,  grew   up  on  the  banks  of the Mississippi rather than the Clyde, and published  his   first   writings   in   frontier newspapers rather than in Punch. Such  a biographer  would  be Ralph L.  Curl)'i, if we  judge   him   by  his  book  on  Stephen Leacock, a book  that  misses its aim  com­ pletely   because   Mr.  Curry  never   dis­ covered   where  his  target was located.
This  book  grew  out  of  a doctoral  dis­
sertation  at   the   University  of   Pennsyl­ vania,  at   which  time it  bore  the  title "Stephen Leacock, American Humorist". Subsequently, somebody decided  that  kid­ napping is better   not  advertised, but  no one  thought of  restoring the victim  to his own family  as "Canadian Humorist". In­ stead  of  releasing  him  to such a narrower freedom, how much  better  to de-national­ ize the  man  and  thereby  suggest  a signi­ ficant   universality!  Evel)'ione knows  that  a  Canadian author,  unlike  his British  or American betters, can become "universal" only  by  surrendering his local  habitation and  its  name.  But  although the  kidnap­ ping  is no longer  advertised, Leacock  was not  actually released   to  either   the  lesser or  the  larger  liberty,  for  in  this  book  he still  remains in  American custody:

Stephen Leacock represented in a way  the paradox  which   is   Canada.  Born   in   Eng­ land,  he   moved  to   Canada  and   wrote

68
 American humor. But  this  was  the  simplest of  the  inconsistencies that   his  life  and  per­ sonality presented.

If Canada is a "paradox" for  the  reason here  suggested, is  the  United States  also one  for  the  same  reason?  As for  Leacock himself,  the only "paradox" or "inconsist­ ency"  about his  humour is  the  fact  that  sometimes Englishmen  kidnap   him  with the  excuse  that  his first six y,ears (out  of
75!)   were  spent   in  England, and  some­ times  Americans  (like  Mr. Curry)  do  so on  the  assumption that  they possess sole title  to  the  adjective  "American".
"By   his   own   admission  in   his   criti­ cism",  claims   Mr.  Curry,  "Leacock  was an  American humorist,  by, heritage" (p. 349). Leacock's "American" heritage, however,  was   not   the   sadly   shrunken national one  which  is all  his  biographer can  envisage.   As  Leacock  himself  often  took  pains  to assert,  he was a continental American. Here is a passage from  Humor and  Humanity:

A  great many of  us in  North America (the United States and   Canada,  which last   the word   America  seems  to  omit), will   admit that  the   whole  of  our  literature ... has not    equalled  in   volume  or   value   that  of the  older  English-speaking world   ... But many  of   us   think  that  humour is  an  ex­ ception to  this,  and   that here  the  American product  ... is   equal  to   anything
[My italics]

No  meaning  for   the   adjective  "Ameri­ can" other  than  the  narrowly   national one  ever  occurs  to  Mr.  Curry.  Although

REVIEW  ARTICLES



he discusses various  United States humor­ ists  such   as  Artemus  Ward   and  Mark  Twain  as  part   of  Leacock's  "American heritage",  he   omits   altogether  any   ex­ amination of   Leacock's Can<J.dian  pre­  decessors from  Haliburton down,  includ­ ing   the  contributors  to  Grip, in  which Leacock's first  writings  appeared.
Though  our   border is  undefended, it is  surely   not   indistinguishable;  the  un­ happy  results of an  inadequate awareness  of our  differences vary  from  the slight  to the momentous. Here are some examples: a paraphrase of  Leacock's "snake fences"  to  "snaky   rail  fences"  ( p. 25) ;  the  ap­  parent  belief  that   Canada has  only  one railway   (p.  272), that  a "large tract" for an   Ontario  farm   is  Ioo   acres   (pp.   22,
23), and  that   the  term  "the war  year  of
I g I 7"   somehow  distinguishes  this   year from    I g I 6   or   I g I 5;  the   unsurprised acceptance of "second base"  as a term  in cricket   (p.  48); the  assertion   that  Lea­ cock could  not expect  a suggested knight­ hood  in I 933 "because such appointments
. . . were  controlled by the  Liberal Prime
Minister"  ( p.  2 I 8)  -a  belief  that  pre­ sumably   explains  why   no   investigation was  made into  Prime  Minister Bennett's failure   to   nominate  such a  "staunch Conservative" as  Leacock rather  than  Roberts. More  important is  Mr.  Curry's apparent  ignorance of  what   went  on  in our election  campaign of I g I I, since only ignorance  can   explain  his  viewing   the Mariposa  election in  Sunshine  Sketches as "gentle fun" (p. 97). And finally there is for  Mr.  Curry an  "inconsistency" in  a Leacock   who  strongly   preferred  private enterprise  to  socialism   but   who  simul­ taneously  felt   that   the  former  was  un­  likely to  serve  the  needs  of  social  justice and   that   therefore  government  "would have   to  extend its  protection"  (p.  348,
 et  al.). Deeper knowledge  of  Canadians might  have  suggested  to  Mr.  Curry that here Leacock was much like most other Canadians who steadfastly refuse  to elect a C.C.F.  government but  enthusiastically support any "private enterprise" party which  will steal the most attractive planks of the "socialist" platform.
The fact  that  he  had  to cross the 49th parallel   in   his  attempt  to   portray  the heart   and   mind   of  a  great   Canadian made  so little  impression on  Mr.  Curry that   he  misunderstands  Leacock's   rela­ tionship  to Canada and  Canada's to Lea­  cock.  For   instance, in   describing  Lea­  cock's  reception in England in  I 92 I,  Mr.  Curry  declares  that the English  "were  not like  Canadians  dealing  with   their   own prophet" (p.  ISI). Yet only, a few pages earlier   we   had  been   told   that   for   his literary efforts  Leacock  had  already  been awarded   honorary   degrees  at   both Queen's  and   Toronto, and   still  earlier that   the  whole  3,ooo  copies  of  the  first edition  of  Literary  Lapses  were  sold out in  Montreal in  only two  months.
Leacock's   devotion  to  Canada  eludes
or  bafHes Mr.  Curry completely. He  re­ ports   Leacock's  refusal   "to   charge   for speeches  in  Canada, though he  accepted payment  for    addresses   made   in   the  States," but  he explains  this perversity  as "a   kind  of  chauvanistic   [sic]  stubborn­ ness"  ( p.  I49). Later, reporting that  Bis­ hop's  University conferred  a  Doctor  of Civil Law  degree  on Leacock, Mr.  Curry proceeds  (my italics)  :
Perhaps  it  was  in  answer  to  this   favor  that he   published  the   articles  he  did   in  1934; at any rate  they  were, except two  on Ameri­ can   humor, Canadian  writing   about  Do­  minion  subjects.  "Revision  of  Democracy" was  about  a  dominion's  status  in  a  demo­ cratic  empire. "The  Stirring  Pageant of Canadian History" was  a  mildly chauvanis­ tic   [sic]   reminder   of  the   struggle for   the

6g

REVIEW  ARTICLES



settlement  of  Canada, and   the   other  two were concerned with the contemporary economic and   social structure of his country
... (p.  228).

Obviously, that   a  Canadian should  con­ cern    himself    with    the   mildly   stirring pageant of Canada's past  and  present  is, for  Mr.  Curry,  so  extraordinary an  aber­  ration that  any  explanation at  all is bet­ ter   than   letting   the   reader   consider   it sheer lunacy.
Mr. Curry faithfully reports the amount of Leacock's serious  writing, the great  bulk of which concerned things Canadian; yet the plain  inference to be drawn is missed completely.  When  a man in his serious moments is devotedly Cana­ dian,  surely  the  possibility  exists  that  his humour might  also reflect his  homeland? Such   a   possibility   never   arises  in   this book,  though a good  deal  of attention is given  to the supposed  characteristics and themes  of Leacock's  humour. To  demon­ strate  how   wrong   Mr.   Curry    can   be would  take  more space  than  I  can  com­ mand  here.  Instead, I shall  quote  a few sentences  which,  if  Mr.  Curry  had  read them,  might   have  started   him  thinking
 more  sharply than   he  does  any,where  in his  book.  The   sentences were  written  by
J. B. Priestley  in  the  introduction to his
admirable selections  for The  Bodley Head
Leacock  ( 1957)  -and  they  deserve  our national thanks:

Canada   should  not    only    be   proud   of Stephen   Leacock   but    also    be    specially grateful  to   him.   The best   of  his  humour does   something  very    difficult  to   do-it expresses an  essential Canadian quality ... The  Canadian is  often a  baffled  man  be­ cause    he   feels   different  from    his   British  kindred  and    his   American   neighbours, sharply refuses  to  be  lumped  with  either of them, yet  cannot make plain this  difference. But   Leacock  was   doing  it   in   his   humour
. .  . .  And   when   he   is  very   good   indeed
. .  .  he  achieves an  outlook, manner, style, that  typically British or American humorists
find  it  impossible to  achieve. These belong to   the   man    but   they   also   belong  to   the nation.

Rescued    at   last,   though  posthumously, from  kidnappers on  both  sides of the  At­ lantic,  Leacock  should   be spared  further foolishness  about where  he  belongs.
No, Mr.  Curry; you've  missed by many a mile. We still need a study of Stephen Leacock, Canadian humorist, heir  to the continent and  host  to  the  world.













UNE ROMANCIERE DE VINGT ANS

MARIE-CLAIRE  BLAIS.  La   belle   bete. lnstitut litteraire du  Quebec.

MARIE-CLAIRE   BLAIS  a  vingt   ans,  et  La belle  bete   n'est   pas  son   premier,  mais son  cinquieme ou  sixieme   roman'.  Une telle  prodigalite d\ criture
fondre, dans  un   pays   ou   les  ecrivains generalement  ne    s'expriment qu'au compte-gouttes. Non  mains  etonnante est la  surete   d'expression,  la   fidelite   a   un reve  interieur etrangement cruel  et  ten­ dre,  qui  font  de  La  belle  bete  l'une  des oeuvres   les  plus   saisissantes   parues   ces dernieres annees  au  Canada  fran  ais,  peut-etre  meme  au   Canada.  Ce   livre offre   beaucoup  plus   que  !'interet  pas­ sager   d'une  precocite. II  accomplit son dessein  avec  la  rigueur de la maturite, et demande a  etre  reu
de  plein  droit.
A  vrai  dire,  il  faut  faire  violence  a  la notion  communement admise  du  roman pour  l'appliquer a  La  belle bete. Le quotidien, l'univers des  apparences, echappent presque entierement a  Marie­ Claire   Blais,  et   quand  elle  s'y   aven­  ture,   c'est  d'une  demarche  mal  assuree. L'essentiel de son roman  se passe au  dela


• !--es   utres  ':1-e     s nt  pas   encore  publies. Mane-Clatre Blars  a  egalement ecrit de  nom­ breux  poemes,  dont  une   serie   a   recemment paru  dans le  cinquieme volume  des  Ecrits   du Canada  franfais (Montreal).
 de l'ordinaire mesure,  dans  un  monde  de demi-reve  ou  les ctres  obcissent  sans  tar­ der a des raisons secretes  qui les dominent et  les depassent. Patrice, la  "belle  bete", ne  s'appartient pas.  II  est,  a  la  fois  par  sa  perfection   physique et   par   son  in­  conscience   ( il  est   idiot   de   naissance),
!'image d'une  Beaute   aveugle  qui  est  la passion devorante de tous les personnages du  roman.  II  lui  suffit  de  se contempler, et  d'etre  contemple:  par   sa  mere,  qui voit  en  lui  la  confirmation de  sa  propre beaute,  mais  aussi  par  sa  soeur  Isabelle­ Marie  qui,  !aide,  eleve  contre  lui  la  re­ vendication d'une douloureuse humanite. Precisement  parce   qu'elle   est   !aide,   et qu'elle   souffre,   Isabelle-Marie  est  ici  la seule  a  ne   pas  subir   l'inhumaine fas­ cination de la Beaute. Elle croira, l'espace  d'un ete,  pouvoir  rejoindre les autres  au sein  de  la  parfaite  illusion,  en  se disant  belle pour un  jeune aveugle, mais celui-ci la  rejettera  sitot  la  guerison venue.  Isa­ belle-Marie n'echappe  pas  a  son  destin d'humanite,  et   elle  se  retrouve  face   a Patrice, dans  un  combat qui  est celui  de la conscience  contre l'inconscience, de la vie imparfaite contre un  reve sterile.  Elle doit  detruire la  beaute  de  Patrice,  briser ce masque  atrocement parfait qui  n'offre aucune prise  a  l'amour et  a  la  pensee. Une  premiere fois, alors  que  Patrice etait confie  a sa  garde, elle l'a  prive  de  pain; plus tard,  elle lui  plongera le visage dans l'eau   bouillante. Ce   ne  sont   pas  la  des actes de pure  cruaute, de simple  sadisme, et il faut  observer que,  de tous les person­ nages  du   roman,   Isabelle-Marie  est   la seule a eprouver de la  pitie  pour  Patrice, a le considerer dans  sa qualite d'homme. En  le defigurant, en  lui faisant connaitre par  la le denument  et la  souffrance, elle lui ouvre  les voies de  la conscience. L'art de Marie-Claire Blais n'est  nulle part  plus

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



subtil  et  plus  sur  que  dans  la description de  la  sourde   evolution qui  fera  acceder
la "belle bete"  a une  aurore d'humanite.
Mais, dans le monde fascine que cree la romanciere, il  n'y  a pas  place pour l'humain. A la  fin Isabelle-Marie et  Pat­ rice  se suicident, la  premiere apres avoir ete  jusqu'au bout  de  sa  revolte  et  brule  la ferme de sa mere,  le second apres avoir soupc_;onne qu'il   avait   une   arne.   Parce qu'ils   savaient, parce  qu'ils  s'etaient re­ trouves   eux-memes,  ils  devaient mourir; la  mort   seule   pouvait  briser le  cercle enchanre.
Ce serait  trap  demander qu'une oeuvre
aussi exigeante, aussi  profondement troublante, flit sans defauts.  Marie-Claire Blais decrit maladroitement les comporte­ ments  exterieurs,  et  ses   personnages adultes - la  mere  et  son  nouvel  epoux,
Lanz-sont  reduits souvent   a des  roles
de  fantoches.   Meme  dans  l'ordre des
images et des symboles, ou elle se meut d'ordinaire avec  une  si prodigieuse  agil­
ite, il lui arrive de supp1eer a une experi­
ence   defaillante  par   des  souvenirs  lit­ teraires. Mais  la logique  interne, les arti­ culations essentielles,  et aussi l'ecriture du roman  manifestent  dans  !'ensemble  une etonnante solidite.  La  belle  bete  n'est  du reste   pas  une   oeuvre  isolee  dans  la  lit­ terature  canadienne-franc_;aise contem­ poraine. Elle se situe dans un climat  de primitivire, de commencement du monde, ou   s'amorce egalement-mais  pour
s'ouvrir a une  esperance de  vie-le beau
roman d'Anne Hebert, Les Chambres de bois. Ainsi  le  roman reprend  les  interro­ gations principales de  notre  poesie, et  va
chercher a la  naissance   meme  du  geste
les  signes  d'une  existence   qui  se  gagne
dans  la difficulre  et  l'angoisse.
GILLES  MARCOTTE
 A BATTLE RE-TOLD

c.  P.   STACEY.  Quebec, 1759: The Siege   and the  Battle. Macmillan. $s.oo.

FRONTENAC and  now Wolfe in his last months  have   sat   for   a  long   hard   look from  two diligent historians and  have emerged from  this scrutiny with altered reputations. It  seems   that   documentary sources connected with most historical happenings--especially Canadian  ones­ have   to  be  brought out  every  fifty, years or   so   and   re-examined, and   a   search  made for  new ones. The  result is entirely salutary,  judging from   these  two  recent  examples,  though  it  is  disconcerting  to all   who   have   been   taken  in, by  one  or another of  the  misconceptions triumph­ antly   exposed  by  the  specialists.   If this keeps   on,   our   histories,   both   academic and   popular,  will  have   to  be  rewritten. Can. Hist.  is  becoming a  bottomless well of  possible  books, which should  make writers  happy; the   reading  public,   per­  haps,  just a little  weary.
This is not  to take  away from  the pain­ staking, fair,  and  lucid  manner in  which Colonel Stacey  has  set  about   his  task  of re-examining  the   evidence   surrounding the Battle  of the  Plains of  Abraham. Two  of his main  points--that Wolfe,  far  from  being   a  great   strategist,  was  amazingly indecisive and   ineffectual  except  in action, and  that luck  had most  to do with his ultimate success-are clear, it seems to me,  from  a  reading of  the  documents in Doughty;'s  still-invaluable Siege   of  Que­ bec    ( 1901).  (The  writings   of  Doughty and others come in for some cutting com­ ments from  Colonel Stacey.  I feel  that  a word  or  two  in  a  note  at  the  end  would have   been  sufficient, in  a  book  of  such

BOOKS  IN   REVIEW



authority,  to  draw   attention to  his  pre­ decessor's  errors.)  However,  countless historians have  appeared to  be  blind  to these  detractions-because  it  didn't suit their  purpose to  notice   them,  perhaps­ and  Colonel Stacey  elucidates  both  facts once  and  for  all.  He  presents in  addition other convincing evidence to correct some oft-repeated  though minor   fallacies.  He  finds   that   Mackellar's  plan   of  Quebec made in  I  756-7  was  erroneous; Wolfe's relations with  his subordinates were poor;  the   French-speaking  Scot,   when   chal­ lenged   before   landing  at   the   Anse  au Foulon, did  not  identif)l  himself  as being of  the  Regiment  de  la  Reine; it  is  not likely that  Wolfe  broke  the  silence by  re­ citing   Gray's   Elegy  at  this  time; he  was not   the  first   to   jump   out   at  the  Anse; Vaudreuil's interference with  the disposi­ ion  of French troops  on  the  eve of battle  cannot  be  proved  convincingly,;   Mont­ calm,   a  competent   though  not   a  great commander, was  strikingly unperceptive when  it came  to foretelling British inten­ tions,  etc.,  etc.  In  spite  of the  hesitations and  inefficiency  in  all  that   led  up  to the climax, the  final  British  achievement  is not   underrated,  however,   and   Colonel  Stacey  gives  credit where  credit   is due: "The  army   did   its   part with   dexterity and   boldness  that   matched  the   navy's. This  night's work  fully, supports the  re­ putation of  the  enterprise as a classic of combined operations. It  was  a   profes­ sional  triumph."
It is hardly  surprising that  such a  dra­
matic event   has  been  over-romanticized through the  y,ears; that   the  final  victory of the sickly Wolfe  should  have  obscured the   nature of  his  actions leading   up  to it; that  detail after  detail  of  misinforma­ tion  has  been  perpetuated  by, those  who have   not   had   the   prolonged  access  to
 documents that  Colonel  Stacey had. His exhaustive  investigations  and   his  grace­ ful  presentation of  his findings  can  only be  welcomed.   To   me  it  is  this  second accomplishment that   is most  impressive. You  rarely, find  analyses,  arguments, re­ buttals,  descriptions,  quotations, minute examinations of the old claims,  presenta­ tions   of  the   new,  set  forth   in   such   a smooth and   readable  style.  Colonel Stacey's   purpose-to re-examine evi­ dence,  to  put  the  record  straight-pre­ cluded  the  dramatic,  imaginative treat­ ment  that   has  placed   Parkman's telling  of  the  story,  errors   and  all,  so  firmly  in our  affections.   But  his  book  is  a  model of  the  scholarly  investigation that  every­ where  bears  a  good  writer's touch.   It  is a  fine  achievement and   a  valuable one. It should  stand  virtually  unchallenged­ for  at  least  another fifty  years.
WILLIAM  TOYE


POLITICAL PROPHET

KENNETH   MCNAUGHT.  A  Prophet  in   Politics; A   Biography   of   ].  S.  Woodsworth.  Uni­ versity of Toronto Press. $5.95.

THERE  wAS  nothing  ftamboy nt
J.  S.  Woodsworth,  except   perhaps  the little  beard   (inappropriately aristocratic)
which  he alway,s wore. But  in its broader outlines   his  life  was  of  such   an  extra­ ordinary   (one   is  tempted   to   say   un­ Canadian)   quality,, that  in   another country we would  expect  it  to be a fruit­ ful   source   for   legend,  fiction,   the   film and  T.V.  Indeed, one Canadian novelist, F.   P.   Grove,   in   his   bizarre    study   of capitalism and  automation, The  Master of  the  Mill,  has  given  us  "Mr.  Birkin-


73

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



shaw", whose name  suggests G. B. S., but whose career and character reflect a popular image  of  Woodsworth:  the  un­ compromising idealist  held  impotent  by his ignorance of political necessities while more  worldly   men  ruled.  Kenneth  Mc­ Naught's new  biograph}\  does not  exploit  the  drama of  Woodsworth's life nor  does it cater  to the popular image  of the man,  despite  the  somewhat misleading  title.  It focusses   instead   on   the   political    signi­ ficance   of   W oodsworth  and   becomes essentially (as Woodsworth himself would no  doubt have  wished)   a  scathing  criti­ que   of  fifty; years  of   Conservative  and  Liberal rule  in  Canada.
A Prophet  in Politics dispels the  image of   an   ineffectual  and  impracticable Woodsworth  more  successfully  than   any of  the  previous  biographies or studies  of the  C.C..F.  Party. It describes  intimately his  costly  decision   to  leave   the  church in  order  to preach the Social  Gospel  and gradualist socialism,  a decision  based  on years of wide first-hand experience of the real   conditions  of   Canadian  life   that surely   could   not   be  surpassed   in  range by any man  in Parliament. Professor Mc­ Naught   marshals  the   substance   of   his book- Woodsworth's  parliamentary career   and   its  large   and  small  crises  of some   two   decades-clearly  and    often dramatically. The member for  Winnipeg
( r 922-42)   was   always   a  strong   moral
force,  but  rarely  a  direct  political   power in  Parliament, and  his influence  is  there­ fore   open   to   different   interpretations. Did  Woodsworth and  his supporters goad the  pusillanimous and  reluctant horse  of social  progress,  or  did  Mackenzie  King  and   the   Liberals   willingly   ride   ahead  with  the  reins in  sure  and  steady  hands? Professor McNaught is highly  persuasive. Tho Woodsworth he shows us was indeed

74
 an  idealist and  a  prophet, indeed  an  un­ compromising non-conformist all  his  life, but  also a man  whose idealism was  based on practical, humane wisdom, and  whose non-conformity  was  that   creative  stand  taken   by  one  who  is  truly  ahead  of  his time.   Non-conformity  involved   thirty  years  of  pacifism   in  the  most   war-torn century  in  history,  and  political  suicide  in  I939  when  the  C.C.F.  would  not  fol­ low  his  lead  in  opposing Canada's  entry  into  World  War  II. History  is full  of sur­  prises.  This  apparent  aberration, lament­ ably  unworldly and  unpatriotic, now re­ emerges  not  only: as a keystone in Woods­ worth's thinking, but  as a Christian deci­ sion  that   challenges  attention  anew.
Though  the    biography  is   carefully
documented, the  author is throughout an enthusiastic, energetic  advocate.  This makes  for  an  intense and  lively book, but also accounts for its limitation. How  little one  gets   to   know   Woodsworth   person­ ally!  Did  he really  expend  his life so fully in  his  political role?  The  preacher who abandoned a religious  for  a  political sect was,   it   appears,   obsessed  by  biblical  archetypes of  lonely leadership: John  the Baptist, the  Christ   figure,  solitary  in  the wilderness,  or  freely  sacrificing   Himself. How   far   is  such  a  myth  the  key  to  his astonishing  moral  courage and   determi­ nation? A Prophet  in Politics displays  the statesman  impressively, but  as a  portrait of a  man's  life  it  is frustrating, and  not merely  to   vulgar   curiosity.   Because Woodsworth  was  so  remarkable a  man, so  close  to  a  kind  of  greatness when  we see him  in  the  gallery; of Canadian  poli­ ticians,   the  desire   to  understand  him  is not  easily satisfied,  even  by Professor Mc­  Naught's admirable  study. The  next  bio­
graphy  of  J. S.  Woodsworth  can   now
afford  to give  us less political  history  and

BOOKS  IN  REVIEW



more  of what, in  defining  biography, the Oxford  Dictionary  calls  the  "life-course of a living  being."
F. R. WATT




THE CONTEMPLATIVE MAN'S
RECREATION

RODERICK  HAIG-BROWN.   Fisherman's Summer.
Collins. $4.50.

EARLY  IN   1951  Mr.   Haig-Brown  com­ pleted   Fisherman's Spring, the  first  of  a planned series of four  volumes that  were to  range  over  the  activities  and  medita­ tions  of  a   particular-and an  extra­ ordinary-fisherman-philosopher during the  four  seasons  of the  y,ear. Fisherman's Summer is the  third volume  in  the series. Fisherman's  Winter  went    through  the presses  in  1954;  the  autumnal volume  is still to come,  a fact  for  which  all anglers may be thankful, for the feast  is good and its conclusion will be met with  reluctance.
It is inevitable by the  very  nature and purpose  of  the   book   that   many  of  the essays of which  it is composed will appeal in  the  main  only  to  the  true  disciples  of the   venerable  and   saintly   Walton,  who not   merely   wrote   on   fish  and   how   to catch    them,    but   quietly   and   sincerely stated his  faith   in  fishing  as  an  art  that would  worthily provide for  the  "contem­ plative  man's recreation". Haig-Brown is, as all  who  have  met  him  know,  a super­  latively  fine  fisherman,  who  can  not  only cast  a  long  line,  but  who  can  drop  a dry fly in  the  circle  of  a  rising  fish with  un­  common  accuracy   and   rare   gentleness. He  knows  the  art  of  fishing,  and  he  has
 studied  with  painstaking care  the  habits of   fish-their   feed,   their    migrations, their  reactions  to their  physical surround­ ings,  their  birth,   their  mating,  and  their  death. On   these  matters  he  writes  with that  authority which  comes from  a know­ ledge acquired by, w ars
vation,   wide   reading,  and   rich   experi­ ence.  But  he  also  has  deep  and  lasting  impressions   of  many   of  the   rivers   that  he   has   fished -the   Black   Birch,    the Coppermine, the  Parsnip, the  Nimpkish, the historic  Beaverkill, and, above  all, the Campbell, on  the  lovely  banks  of  which  he   has  lived  for   many  y:ears. He   likes these    rivers -and    many   others -for their  fish, for  the  excitement that  comes from  the hard  and  sudden strike  and  the subsequent  battle; but  he  loves  them  for their  beauty,  and  for  the  joy and  peace  they   have   given   him-either    at   the moment  of  seeing  or  later   when  recol­ lected  in tranquillity,.
These  particular essays on  fishing-for rainbow,   cutthroat,  steelhead,  grayling, and  salmon-are the reminiscences of a fisherman   written  for   fishermen.  But there   are  essays  in  the  volume   that   are wider   in  interest. They   range   from  ac­ counts   of  what   the  early, explorers  saw of  fish  and  fishing  in  British  Columbia to   a   thoroughly  delightful   satire   on modern fish  derbies.  Among  them  are  a number of deeply: provocative and  serious essays  on   certain   developments  in   our ever-changing  civilization  that   threaten the recreational areas  of our  land  and  the valuable commercial resources  of streams and  oceans: more specifically, the indis­ criminate and,  in  the  eyes of  the  writer, the   unscientific   use  of  insecticides over wide  areas  of  forest,  causing tragic  des­ truction of fish and  game  alike; and  the  short-sighted  development  of   hydro-

75

BOOKS  IN  REVIEW



electric  power,  with  a subsequent loss in the great  runs  of commercial fish that depend upon  streams and  ocean  for  their existence.  These  are  essays that  should  be read   by  all   who   are   interested  in   the shape   of  things  still  to come.  For  Haig­ Brown  is not  only  fisherman and  writer; he is a  dedicated conservationist, bold in his stand   and   unabashed by  the  opposi­ tion   he   meets   from   industrialists  and politicians alike.
It   has   been  frequently said  of   Haig­ Brown   (especially   by  American  critics.) that  he is a modern Walton or a twentieth century Gilbert   White.   These  comments have   been   meant  as  compliments,  but they   are   not   accurate   nor   do  they  do justice   to  Haig-Brown  as   riter
man.  Walton, learned and religious, wrote  with  an  even,  quietly  poetic  tran­ quillit}l  that   has  only  slight  tonal  varia­ tions.  Even   the   landing of  a  good  fish seems   to  have   engendered   little  excite­  ment  in  the old master's being. As for  the Vicar  of Selborne, though he was a most skilled   observer   of   nature  and   a  fine writer, he too was placid-something of
a  recluse   who  participated  little  in  the affairs  of his world.  In his writings, Haig­ Brown  can  be as poetic as Walton  and  as detailed in  his observations as  White  and  as  learned as  both  of  them;  but  he  can also  write  with  anger   when  his  feelings are  moved,  and  he can  bring  to the  long run   of  a  fish  through a  pool  or  to  the flight  of a kingfisher  along a river's  edge a  feeling  of  intense  excitement found  in neither  of   his   great   predecessors.    But above   all,  he  shows  in  his  writings   the unflagging  interest of  a man  devoted   to the  improvement of  the society  in  which he  lives,  an  interest  rarely  seen  in  The Complete  Angler  and  The   Natural  His­ tory   of Selborne.
 Fisherman's Summer  bears  witness  to all  these  things.  It is a good  book for  the man   or  the  woman who  loves fishing  as one  of  the  minor  arts; it  is a  book  that should  be read,  in  parts  at least, by every citizen  who is concerned with  the preser­ vation  of irreplaceable natural  wealth.
S. E.  READ



WORLDS WITHOUT  MEN

Our  Living Tradition (Second  and Third Series), ed.  R.   L.  MCDOUGALL. University  of Toronto Press. $6.so.

The    Face  of  Canada    (by   various  contribu­
tors). Clarke,  Irwin. $4.95.

OF THESE two  books  Our  Living  Tradi­ tion  is  the  more  seriously  intended. It is a  dozen pieces written  for   a  lecture series sponsored b): Carleton University's Institute of  Canadian Affairs.  The  list of contributors  is  impressive  and   the  sub­ jects  they  have  chosen,  to highlight some of  our   living   traditions,  are   potentially of  the  highest  order. The authors are  all experts in their  fields and  they have  some ver}:  good  and   interesting  things   to  say about Canada and  Canadian Politics and literature. If these  things  could   be  com­ municated  by  mathematical  formula or telepathy it  would  be  fine,  but language must   be  used  and   the  results   are  some unhappy   distortions   that  are   not   the faults   of  either   poor  scholarship or  shal­  low  thinking.
In   the   opening  lecture  of  the   third series,   (the   second   and   third   series  are printed in this volume)  Baker Failey points  out  that  Canadian painting so far "shows  us the face  of the world  without a

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



man   in  it,   almost   as  if  it   were   unin­ habited". Tf   the  two  hooks  under  review here   were   the   sum   total   of   Canadian writing  left on some atomic beach  for the perusal  of a future outer-galactic anthro­ pologist,  he  would  have  to conclude that  the  same statement also described Cana­ dian  letters.   Perhaps this  absence  would pass  unnoticed if  it  weren't for  the  fact that three  authors in the  two volumes  (A.
J. M. Smith, C.  L. Bennet  and  Roderick
Haig-Brown) are  writers  who   are   not bound  up   either  with  themselves or movements or  events.  Perhaps this  is not bad.  Perhaps we will be  the  first country to produce a literature where  only mam­ moths   representing  the  colossus  of  geo­ graphy on  the  one  hand, and  the  com­ plaining  and  / or   boasting   "I" on   the other,  battle with  superlatives  and  dead­ level logic to conclusions reached by men writing  about men  a hundred generations ago.
It is sad,  then,   not  to  say  unnerving, to  read  Our  Living  Tradition, a book of twelve  essays about twelve  different men by twelve carefully selected Canadian thinkers and   find   only  A.  J. M.  Smith capable of  seeing  a  man's work  as  pro­ ceeding  from    a   human  being    (he   is assessing Duncan Campbell Scott)  whose world  is carried with  him  as a  joy  and  a curse  and  a  revelation -to  quote  Eliot via  Smith,  "as   a  fascination  and   a  re­ pulsion".
Fairley, in his headlong attack on  non­ objective painting,  mentions  his  subject  Varley    (a   man   of  considerable   parts)
only  once or  twice; Dr.  Birney  uses E. J.
Pratt and  his critics  as a pad  from  which to  launch a  long  cry  about the  injustice of   being   a   prophet  honoured  only   in one's  own  country; Reaney unearths  Isa­ bella  Valency  Crawford and  immediately
 relegates   her   without  grace   or  form   to mere   exegesis  and   a  general  judgment that  she is "a second-rate grannie" who discovered  one good way of writing about living in Canada; Louis  Joseph  Papineau has to run hard after  Jean Bruchesi's Ambassadorial prose to keep from  fading altogether from   the  page; and   only  the Devil   himself  would   be  able   to  suggest what   George   Brown   would  say  to  Pro­ fessor  Careless   if  he  read  his  essay.  Mr.  Brown  was  used  to  being  damned with more  than  faint   praise.
God  give us some  writers,  and  let  our living traditions fall  where  they may. But let me add, and  fervently, that  I think Carleton's Institute of Canadian  Studies and   that   Institute's  continuing series  of lectures   are   good   things.   The  printed record  of what  is written for  that  forum, forcing  some of our  leading lecturers into naked  print, will perhaps produce some writers   without God's   help.
The   Face  of Canada should   be taken more lightly, even though the  same failure  is evident in it as in Our  Living Tradition. It  is  a  book  put   out  for  the tourist   and  for  some  new,  and   probably old, Canadians who want  to know more about  the geographical behemoth that  is Canada. It is a series  of fifty-page essays by five writers about the five large regions in  the  country. The Atlantic and  Pacific provinces   are   served   best.   Both   C.   L. Bennet  and  Roderick  Haig-Brown write as   men    at  ease  with  their  adopted homes  and  with  the  language. Bennet  is especially  good   about the  Atlantic  Pro­ vinces,   as  he   talks   truthfully   and   un­ sentimentally  to   the   reader   about    the landscape and   the   relevant  history,  and  the   people   he  loves  and   admires. The Carleton  lecture  series   could   use  him. Mr.  Haig-Brown  finds  B.C.  a  beautiful

77

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



place-if  it  weren't for  the  people  who want  to soot  it  up  and  tear  it  down.  He has  a  love  of  it  and  a  fear  for  it,  and his genuine concern as a  resident  and  as a  man  makes  a  good  frame  of reference for  the  reader  unfamiliar with  the  pro­ vince.   Gerard  Filion's  writing   about  Quebec has,  along  with  caution  and  re­ serve,  the  air of having  been stiffly trans­  lated.  It is perhaps not  too  harsh  to say that   the  result  is dull.  The  Prairies,  too, are   flat,   and   this   despite   Miss  Camp­ bell's trying  to divert  us with more super­ latives  than there  are  oil rigs in  Alberta.  The   forty-mile   horizons,    her   absolute  dog-delight at  the  thought of  a  Regina tree   and    the   assurance  that    all   those Winnipegonians living in Victoria talk about nothing but home, only serve to obscure  the real Prairies. But, of all the regions,  Ontario perhaps comes  off the worst.  Gregory Clark, the  journalist, circles  aimlessly  around the  outbacks  for a  few  pages  and   then  homes  rapidly  on his  very  own  Toronto. His  essay on  that city  is a  masterpiece.
The illustrations, some  three  dozen  of
them  isolated  in  the  center  of  the  book, are  too familiar, too often seen on calen­ dars.  The  book  needs  an editor.
ROBERT HARLOW

MASQUERADES
IN FICTION

PHILLIS   BRETT  YOUNG. Psyche.   Longmans
Green.  $4.50.
THOMAS   B.   COSTAIN.  The   Darkness  and  the
Dawn. Doubleday. $4.50.

IT IS  CLEARLY Mrs.  Young's  intention in Psyche  to  create a  narrative sy;mbolic of man's search  for his own identity. Psy he, a  child   born   to  wealth,  beauty,   intelli-
 gence  and  love,  is kidn pped
of  two  and  then  left  for  dead  at  the side of  a  road,   but  two  tramps find  her  and leave   her   on   the   doorstep  of  a  shack, where  she  is discovered and  taken  in  by a  miner and   his  wife.  Because  they  can­ not  pronounce the  name embroidered on her   night  dress,  the}i   call   her   simply "kid". If her  childhood  is anonymous, if she  is taught to swear, to avoid  washing,  to play poker,  the miner and  his wife are,  nevertheless, kind.  But  Psyche  recognizes these   people   as   neither  her  source   nor her  destiny.  Forced to  leave  when  she  is seventeen,  she   begins   her  actual search  for   her  own   identit}i.  An  artist   teaches  her  to pronounce her  own name,  to wash, to  speak  correctly, but,  when  she  realizes that  he  is  interested  in  her  imag,e  and not   in   her   person,   she   moves   on.  Be­ friended  by  prostitutes,  she  is   tolerant but  rejects  their  way  of  life. And  even  a brain  surgeon, practicing  psychoanalysis, does  not   give  Psyche  an  image  of  her­  self that  she  can  accept.
The  tension of   the   plot  would   be greater  if  Mrs.  Young did  not  make   it clear   from   the   beginning  that   heredity dominates  environment.  The  experiences Psyche  is  subject  to  are  simply   tests  to prove   her   inability  to  be  influenced  by environment. But,  if  the  idea   threatens the  plot,  the  plot  destroys   the  idea.  For neither Psyche's   heredity nor  her  search is real.  Her  parents, who  enter  the  novel periodically  in   italics,   are   as  shallowly idealized as a couple in an  advertisement for  silverware.  Against   their   perfection, which   is  Psyche's   identity and  goal,  the other characters in  the  book  are   judged and  found wanting. It is to Mrs. Young's credit  that   she  occasionally creates  be­ lievable  and  interesting characters, parti­ cularly in  the  miner's wife, but  too often

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the author's imagination produces hoboes and  prostitutes who have  never lived anywhere but in  books of  this  kind. Psyche  is a fairy  tale,  a story  of wish ful­ filment, masquerading as a novel  of  psy­ chological reality.
The Darkness  and  the  Dawn  is an  in­
tended masquerade. Set in the period  just prior  to the sack of Rome, the characters in authentic dress play Huns and  Romans across   an   accurate  landscape. But   they are  not  twentieth century figures  in  dis­ guise.  If it seems significant that  a small nation  finds  itself  trapped  between  two great   powers   of  barbarism   and   decad­ ence,  it  is only  because  Mr.  Costain has chosen   the  convention   of  being   timely. He  does  not  stoop   to  political   allegory. Nor  is any  moral  implied when  the hero discovers  that  he  needn't choose  between  the  Huns   and  the  Romans but  can   be converted to Christianity and  the  service of his own  little  country instead. As Mr.  Costain  say,<;, in  his  bold  Victorian voice, "This is  not  the  story  of  Nicolan's con­ version." As a matter of fact,  Mr. Costain uses motivation as a mystery  story  writer uses  his  most  obvious   clue.  He   keeps  it well out  of the  way: of the  plot.  The  plot is  the  purpose of  The Darkness  and  the Dawn. One  episode  of tension  arbitarily, and   sometimes  historically,   follows   an­ other, each   climaxed  by  torture,  execu­ tion,   or  mass   murder,  but   always   the final  escape  of the  hero.  And the  heroine,  pursued by the  Hun leader, rides  a black stallion   over   the   country:llide   to   suffer capture, marriage, but  not  the loss of her virginity,  for  the Hun leader  drops  dead  on  her  marriage  bed.  Unnerved but  un­  harmed, she  rides  off  with  the  hero  and  "they  lived  in  accord for  the  most  part  and   with  as  much  happiness as  is  pos­ sible   between    two   reasonable  people".
 Everywhere, as in  this conclusion, Mr. Costain shows  the same  moderation. For people  who are fond  of reading historical novels and  haven't read  too many, of this kind   already, The   Darkness and   the Dawn   offers  professional entertainment.
JANE RULE



PUBLISHERS' PRIZE-DAY

ARTHUR  G.    STOREY.  Prairie   Harvest. Ryerson.
$4.00.
c. T. RITCHIE. Black  Angels. Abelard-Schuman.
$3-5°·

ORDINARILY, books   of   the   calibre    of Prairie   Harvest   would   not  merit   a   re­ view.  When  one  learns,  however,  that it received  the  Ryerson   Fiction  Award  for I 959 one is persuaded to examine it with
some  care  in  an  effort  to discover quali­
ties which  would  entitle it to such special favour. At  the  end  of  such  an  examina­ tion, one can  only  be astonished that  this novel  even  attained  publication.
The book deals  with  the  fortunes of a
family   on  the  Saskatchewan  prairies. It would  appear that   it  is  based  on  actual incidents. The fact   that   the  events   take place in and  around the town of Haultain where   Mr.   Storey   was   born   reinforces this  view. Maybe the  old-timers of  Haul­ tain,  will  obtain enjoyment in  trying   to identify  the   prototypes  of   the   various  characters, but  most  readers  will become  weary   at   the   steady:  flow  of   anecdotes which  are  recorded with  a lack of varia­ tion   that   is  absolutely  deadening. Inci­ dents  that   might have  been  exciting, or revealin,g, or  meaningful, receive  exactly  the  same amount of space  and  emphasis

79

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



as   trivial   incidents  that   seem   to   have been dragged in  "because they really happened".
The  strongest   note  which  does appear
is a dislike  that  is close to hatred for  any Canadians  whose   roots  are   not   in   the British   Isles.  Not   only  in   the  dialogue and  through the mouths  of his characters, but   also  in  the  body  of  the  novel,  Mr. Storey   continually  refers   to  immigrants of Germanic origin  as "bohunks".
The  bohunks surrounding the  farm were ignorant  people  of   the   land   and   she  saw them   creeping over   its  face   like  locusts.

And,· referring to the "land scavengers" who  occupied deserted homesteads after the  depression and  dust  storms  had  ren­ dered  them  worthless, Mr.  Storey has this to  say:

A bath, shave, and  change of clothes would have  made many of  the males  of the tribe resemble men.  The women, however, seemed to  be  closely  related to  the  apes.

In  a  book  with   no  positive   outlook,   a book  without  tenderness or  compassion, this  vein  of hatred is disturbing.
However, even  this comment might  be considered  to  give  the  novel  an  import­ ance  it  does  not  have.  The  only  surpris­ ing  thing  about  it is that such  untalented writing would   receive  an  award   of  one thousand dollars  as  the  best  piece  of fic­ tion  submitted  to  this  publisher during the  year  1959· It  would  be far  better  to make  no  award  at  all.  In  g ving
to  this  effort  the  publishers  do disservice to  Canadian  literature.
Mr.   Ritchie's  book,  Black   Angels,  is slick  and, as  the  publisher's blurb  has it, moves   at   "breathtaking speed". It  is  a historical  novel  that   opens  shortly   after the Monmouth Rebellion in England and then  moves to the New World. It contains chases,  fights,  torturing Indians -every-

8o
 thing.   Unfortunately  at   the   end   of  its
250  odd  pages  the  reader   couldn't care less about all  these  frantic goings-on  be­ cause  none  of the characters come  to life except  in  the  most superficial way.
DOUGLAS FORRESTER



GIANTS  OR POETS?

PETER    MILLER.    Sonata for   Frog    and   Man.
Contact Press.  $2.00.

R.  CYNEWULF  ROBBINS.  Out   of Solitude. Lin­
den  Press,  London. 7/6.

DOROTHY  ROBERTS.  In Star  and Stalk. Emblem
Books. soc.

The Varsity Chapbook. Ed.  JOHN R. COLOMBO.
Ryerson Press.  $r.oo.

The  McGill Chapbook. Ed.   LESLIE  L.  KAYE.
Ryerson Press.  $ r.oo.

THE  FIVE  VOLUMES   of  poetry   under  re­ view  represent in  all  the  work  of  thirty­ two Canadian poets.  The  least one could reasonably expect from  examining them is  variety.   But,  in  fact,  the  general im­ pression  is one  of  sameness: sameness  in style,  in   theme,  in   execution; sameness in  the  failure to  explore  in  depth and  to engage  the  emotions. We  become  aware, when  inept  technique and  immature sen­ timent do not interfere, that  the poets are responding  feelingly  to  their   perceptions of  the   world   and   its  ways,  but  seldom do  we  feel  caught  up  in  specific  exper­ iences  which  enable us to share the poets'  responses.  The  majority of   these  poems are  lustreless; they  do  not  crush,  caress, pound,  twist,   inflame,  enrapture;  they simply  expound  undramatically.
The outstanding exception is Peter Miller's second   volume  of  verse,  Sonata for Frog  and  Man. Here  indeed   we find individuality  of  style,  versatility in  tech-

BOOKS IN   REVIEW



nique,   exc1tmg  use  of  imagery   and  dic­ tion,  and   insighl.   The   collection,  how­ ever,   is  uneven,  and   would   have  been more   impressive  had    the   editors   been more  critically selective. The earlier  of the eight  titled  sections  into which  the  poems are  needlessly  divided  contain individual poems which  are interesting: "Juke Box", "Past President", and  "Sketch for a Can­ vas, Later", vivid  with  colour  and  danc­ ing with  vowels. The sixth  section,  "Edi­ torial  Comment", is the  most  rewarding. It   provides  a  variety  of  moods:  anger, satiric  humour, poignancy, irony,  pathos, serious  self-appraisal. With  the  exception of  "Men  of  the   Age",   which   is  rather trite and self-conscious, the poems in this group all  provide delights of one kind  or another: a memorable image from "Transvestite", for  instance:

But   ... you,  quick to  the  call  of Kay! Who  first sucked breath as Tom;
you, eyes inward, spectacle shorn, drive blue  augurs deep:
seeing  what maggots there, that nibble your  indeterminate core?

or  the  effective   movement in  tone  and diction in  "Fate and  the  Fissionists":

His  mind of peace
gentles helpless hands to war. Knowledge his aim,  and betterment, he struggles, salmon of  the  ether,
still  counter to the  stream of sunlight
and must  spawn in  blast-heat a poison of ignorance and  nullity.

Peter  Miller's Sonata  for Frog and  Man is the  work  of  a  poet  whose  imaginative grasp  and  ability  to  use words  meaning­ fully   and   powerfully   provide   a   sound foundation for  development.
The little  volume, Out of Solitude, by
R.  C);Ilewulf  Robbins, does  little  to  sup­ port   the   contention  on   the   dust  cover that  "Here is a new, strong  voice", whose mastery of words  "enables him  to indulge
 at  will  in  intricate forms  or  bold,  plain rhyme to give full range to his intensely religious purpose." In  fact,  the  treatment of time-worn themes  lacks  both  original­ ity  and  vitality;, and,  although  form  and  style  are   varied,  the   verse   generally  is undistinguished :

Watch the  wind  a deep  breath take To  puff  and  blow  across  the  lake; He  kicks a wave  up here  and there And  tumbles a boat  without a care.

Fleeting   moments  of   pleasing   lyricism, and  of  light  wit  (as  in  "The Drip" and "Election") fail to save the volume from mediocrity.
Dorothy  Roberts'  In   Star   and   Stalk contains eleven   poems  dealing with  the beauty    and   paradoxes  of   nature,  with childhood, and  with  "our deep  desire  to last".  Her  conclusions sometimes destroy moods  and  meanings as  in  "Two  Chil­ dren" and  "Bus  into  Night", and  occa­  sionally   her  expression  deteriorates  into  banality, when,  for example, she explains  the   central  symbol  of   her   poem   "The Apple"; "That was autumn objectified." "The  Setting", a  reminiscence about  the stolid  old  age  of  her  rigid  and   religious grandparents-"the advancing/ Of  age in its uniform on the towers  of loss" -is the  best she offers.
The  Varsity Chapbook fails  to  fulfill the  hope  of  its  editor  that   it  "will  shat­ ter,  once  and  for  all, the  illusion  that, of Canadian  universities,   only   McGill   is






81

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



producing its quota of top-flight  poets." James Reaney's "The Man Hunter", which  opens the volume, is characteristic­ ally, individual in style and theme.  Gerry Vise   reveals   strong   lyrical  sense  in   his four  poems, and  the simplicity  of his pre­ sentation gives  them  charm and  charac­ ter. Priestly,  a  most  promising  writer,  ex­ hibits   both   technical  adroitness  and   an imaginative grasp  of the core of his material. But  much  of the other  material in this chapbook is immature, poorly exe­ cuted and  sometimes  sentimental.
The  McGill Chapbook is a  more  im­
pressive  collection. It  reflects  a  maturity lacking   in  The  Varsity Chapbook, and, on  the  whole, greater competence. Again the   editor's  hopes   are   somewhat   over­ exuberant when  he suggests  that  "it may be that  one of those represented here  has the  matter that  makes  a giant".  Though we find  no "giants", we do find  much  of merit.  Four   poems  by  D.  G.  Jones   are lyrical    and    sensitively   perceptive,  and there  is  power  and  depth  in  Sylvia  Ber­ nard's  tightly  woven  "Ballad  to  Breug­  hel".   Daryl   Hines'  "Trompe l'cril"   is finely  structured, impressive, controlled, intellectual, but  lacking  in emotional im­ pact.  His  "Allegory  of  Sleep  II",  how­ ever,  touches   us  keenly  and   is  the  best piece  in  the  book.  Phyllis  Webb's ener­  getic  poems convey a sense of despair  and agony,  but  leave  the  reader  lost  for  the centre, the  experience.  She  depends too exclusively  upon  diction   for  her  effects, and   consequently  she  elicits   no  clearly defined   emotional  response.
It  would   be  a  salutary  experience, I think,   for  Canadian  poets  to  think   less in terms  of being "top-flight poets" and "giants"  and   more   m  terms   of  simply writing poetry  well.
JAN DEBRUYN
 CHRISTMAS IN CANADA

MARY  BARBER  and   FLORA  MCPHERSON.   Christ­
mas  in  Canada. J. M. Dent. $4.00.

IF THERE ARE   disadvantages in reviewing what  is frankly, according to  the  adver­ tising,  "a  Christmas gift  anthology", for the   post-Christmas  issue  of  Canadian Literature, there  are  also compensations. Once  the  notes  of  the last  "Noel" have died  away,  the  reviewer   can  attempt to evaluate   Christmas  in   Canada    on   its merits  as an  anthology of Canadian writ­  ing  rather than   dismissing  it  as  }let an­ other attempt to cash  in  on  the  spirit  of a   Freeburgian "Green   Christmas"  or appearing to  sit in  judgment on  the  fes­ tive  season  itself.
So  considered,  Christmas  in  Canada can  hold  up  its  head  in  the  compan}{ of most   collections  of  Canadiana,  though that  is  not,  perhaps, saying  a great  deal. To  the  question which  must  be asked  of all such  anthologies, "Does  this book give us  recognizably  and   distinctively  Cana­ dian  material of competent literary: quali­ ty?",   the   answer   of   this   reviewer  is  a qualified "Yes". The  greater part   of  its content  achieves  a   reasonably  high standard of  literary  competence as  well as   interest,  a   standard  shattered  only occasionally    by  sudden  and   unpleasant sinkings   from  the  height. If the  height represented by the Christmas scenes from Ernest  Buckler's  The Mountain and  the Valley   is  seldom   equalled,  the   depths touched  by the  slickness  of John  Fisher's reporting  on  "Christmas Customs" and the flatness of Dan  McCowan's wildlife survey  in  "A  Cricket Singing" are  simi­ larly  rare,  though Edith  Tyrell's  "Edna Eldorado", which   does  little  more  than

BOOKS  IN REVIEW



transfer Bret  Harte's "The Luck  of  Roar­ ing  Camp" to  the  Canadian  Northland, stays  well  below  sea  level.
Though  the  editors  have   been  guilty
of  one  or  two  lamentable lapses,  for  the most  part   their  good  taste  and  common sense   have   enabled  them   to  avoid   the pitfalls attendant  upon   the  compilation of  an   anthology of  Canadian  sentiment on the theme  of Christmas. For one thing, they   have   not   attempted  to   present   a balanced  and   equitably  representative picture of  the  Canadian scene  but  have selected, wherever   possible,   first-hand accounts of  interesting, unusual, or  typi­ cal   aspects  of  Christmas  in  Canada. Though the  decision  has  placed  a  heavy emphasis on  the  past,  the  primitive, and  the   polar,   it   has   been   justified   by  the results.   The   sincerity  and   simplicity  of the  extracts from   The   Jesuit   Relations, the   reports from  isolated  trading  posts, and  the  journals  of  early  explorers, give them   a   vigor   and   vividness   too  often lacking   in  the  selections   from   more   re­ cent   and  more  sophisticated  writing. :rt is  the  contemporary  items, however, which  give  the  anthology its  variet)l  of theme    and  tone,  ranging   from    Dr. Nadine   Hradsky's  moving    account  of "Our  First Canadian Christmas" to Eric Nicol's  tongue-in-cheek  snarling  at Christmas trees in  "Yule Logging". That poetry receives so scanty  a representation is,  no  doubt,  a  reflection  upon   the  re­ sources   of   Canadian   literature   rather than    of  the   editors.  Brebeuf's  "Huron Carol" is, of course,  included  along  with a   few   French  Canadian   carols -not, mercifull)l, in   translation.  Otherwise Frederick B.   Watt's  "Boarder's  Christ­ mas,    1944"   and   Robert  Finch's  "The Crib" are  the  only  poems,  and   of  these only  the latter inclines one  to desire  that
 more  rather than  less verse had  been selected.
Though  the  critical reader may  wish
that  the editors  had  been  more  consistent in applying their  criteria of choice and perhaps that   they, had  sauced  sentiment more  liberally  with  satire,  he  will find  a good deal  of pleasant as well as informa­ tive   reading   in   Christmas in   Canada. Even  as after-Christmas fare  it  is by  no means  to be equated with cold  turkey  on Twelfth Night.
MARION  B.   SMITH



FROM THE MARITIMES

Atlantic  Anthology,  ed.   WILL   R.   BIRD.    Mc­ Clelland & Stewart, $6.oo.

THE    MOST  remarkable  thing  about Atlantic  Anthology  is  that   its  editors (though  Will   R.  Bird  is  the  editor-in­ chief,  and  is the only, name  on  the cover, the  discerning and  very  capable  hand  of Alec  Lucas,  the  associate  editor, can  be seen  everywhere)   have  not  attempted to label  their  collection anything but  what  it  is:   a  collection  of  prose   and   poetry written, and  not  alway.s in  praise,  of  the Atlantic   provinces.  So  often   Canadian editors   preach    the   rather  inane  theme  that   all  Canadian  writing is steeped   in universal  appeal, that   it  is  part   of  the great   growth  of  "world literature". The regional   quality  of  Canadian  writing   is often  put into  the background, and  rather than  claiming  it for  what  it is-Canadian
-reference is made instead that  "this  is
good minor  writing". But  the editors  here have  not  attempted  to  do  this.  Rather, they  have  given  something to  praise  as

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



far  as regional writing  is concerned, and have  shown   (as  is  stated   in  their  fore­ word)   that  their  hope is that  "the reader  will  sense  how  different it  [the  Atlantic region]  is  from  the rest   of   Canada". They  have  fulfilled  this aim.
This  selection   of   poetry,   non-fiction and  fiction  about the  four  Atlantic  pro­ vinces  gives  a  fine  interpretation  of  life there.   Very   often   the   rest   of   Canada forgets   that   the  Maritimes do  exist,  and when   thinking of  their  writers  cynically praises  the  work  of Carman and Roberts and  does  not  think  of or  remember any­ one  else. Admittedly:,. people in the  Mari­ times often  think  of  no one  else, but  this anthology presents  diversified  subjects  by many  authors.  There is "The Settling of Port   Royal"  by  Samuel   de  Champlain, "The Heroine of Acadia" by James  Han­ nay:,   and   Alfred   G.   Bailey's   "Creative Moments  in   the  Culture  of  the  Mari­ time  Provinces". How  easy it would have been  for  the  editors  to fill  the  book with works  by the  many  poets who  have  their roots  in  the  Atlantic  provinces!  Instead, their  selection  has  been  fine and  limited, and   they  have  presented such  things  as Charles G.  D.  Roberts' "Tantramar  Re­ visited", the beautiful "The Blue Heron" by  T.  G.  Roberts, and   perhaps the  best Canadian  poem,   "Low   Tide on  Grand Pre", by  Bliss Carman.
This anthology has  been  selected  well, and gives varied  moods, themes, and approaches which  seem  to  grasp  the  in­ tangibles  that   are   the  gist  of  the  Mari­ time   provinces.  For   one  who  wants   to learn  about this  part of  Canada  in  writ­  ing   that   is  both   vivid  and   dramatic  in style and  mood, Atlantic Anthology is the answer-and  proof  that  these writers  are more  than  just 'daisy-pickers'.
DONALD  STEPHENS
 WAVERING RESPONSES
Challenge  and   Response, ed.  CHALMERS  &
IRVINE. Ryerson. $3.50.

THE  "cHALLENGE"  of  the Toynbeean title  of  this  symposium is, we learn  from the sub-title, the challenge of "modern ideas", and  the  "Response" is  that  of "religion", as exemplified, presumably, in the  authors, seven Canadian University teachers:  one   President, one  archaeolo­ gis,
and  one  philosopher.
The publishers inform  us, of this varied group, that  "their multi-valent [sic]  per­ spectives  are  unified  by an  ultimate  reli­ gion    which    underlies   the   book    as   a whole". The religion  concerned is, clear­  ly, Christianity, though why  it should  be thus  darkly  referred  to  as  "an  ultimate religion", I  cannot see.
In any  event, title,  sub-title and  blurb are  all misleading. Some  of the articles­
for  instance R.  J. Williams' and   Millar
Maclure's-are  in   no  sense   responses,
secular or  religious,  to  any  specific  chal­ lenge  in  modern thought. John A. Irvine proposes   a  rational and  liberal-minded, but   not  at  all  religious,  response   to  the challenge of  international lawlessness. To the  challenge  of  Marx-Leninism,   Presi­ dent Kirkconnell offers  a vehement anti­ Communism plus  a  Protestant  leaven  in the  schools  brought into fig)1ting  trim  by sharpening its  wits on  people  like  Arch­ bishop Carrington with whom  "pericopae in  Mark, marked  in  the  margins of  the Codex Vaticanus  as  a  dodekad of  hep­  tads,  become  lectionary  units  in   the  liturgy: of a primitive church, whose syno­ gogic  type  of  public  interpretation made it  a Beth  Midrash for  the  new Scriptures

BOOKS  IN  REVIEW



as well".  I quote  from  a  final  paragraph of   extraordinary  erudition  and   irrele­ vance.
Nevertheless, taken   individually,  some of the contributions have  real interest  and merit. Northrop Frye's,  for  instance, is a masterly  combination of incisive criticism and   creative insight. Frye  has  the  capa­ city:  simultaneously  to  clarify   and   to deepen one's  own  appreciations  and  re­ sponses.  Dr.  Thomson on  Existentialism makes   a  fair   and   lucid   statement  of  a genuine challenge in modern thought and of his Christian-theological response. Mil­ lar  Maclure sweeps  confidently through all   the   ranges   of   contemporary  fiction with the  speed  and  adroitness of an Olympics figure-skater.
In spite of the fact that many of the contributors  do   not  seem   to  operate in these  articles  from  a  primarily Christian basis,  I came   to  suspect, after   reading the  penultimate essay  "Eschatology and its  Cultural  Relevance"  (by  one  of  the
 editors,    Professor    Chalmers)   that    the book is really intended to givo aid to the wavering    and  comfort  to   the   single­ minded   Christian. If  you  are  open   to persuasion   about  the  cultural  relevance of the  doctrine of the  resurrection of the body,  Professor  Chalmers may: persuade you. But I  imagine that  even  in this con­ servative  culture there   are  more  than   a few  who  have  decided   that   they  cannot forever  keep  an  open  mind  about every,. thing.
The  book  does  not  in fact  do what  its title,  and  the  publisher's blurb,  propose. To   the  assumption,  which   underlies at least half  the  book,  that  dogmatic Chris­ tianity   can   be   "taken  for   granted", I prefer   the   kind   of  humility  implied   in Northrop Frye's  essay and  made explicit  in his final sentence:  "Scripture is poetic  and   not  doctrinal,  ... Jesus   taught in parables   and   not  in  syllogisms  .  . .  and our  spiritual  vision is in  a  riddle."
WATSON THOMSON

























ss







LET'S PAN
A MAGAZINE


Anthony Friedson




THE  RECENT  review  of Prism in Canadian Literature raises some ques­ tions about  the functions of the reviewing  critic  and  the  little  magazine. Mr. Emery  seems  to  misunderstand both.
The   reviewing  critic   has  certain   re­ sponsibilities: to the authors he is writing  about; to  the  readers who  will,  presum­  ably, pay some attention to what he say,s; and   to  himself   and   the   literary   values behind  his  criticism.  Unfortunately, Mr.  Emery;'s  critical  method is such  that  for both  writer  and  reader-and hence  for himself-he  has written one more short,  slick and  useless  review.
His   analysis,   in   this  review   at   least, seems  to  depend on  two  principal  tech­ niques: the  comparison and  the  pigeon­ hole.  The first  device  he  employs  most generally in  glossing   off   the  fiction.  Of Kreisel's "Travelling  Nude" we are  told, with   blase   mdulgence,  that   it  "unfolds with   a   humorous,   Middle-European irony  reminiscent of  Svevo  ...."  The comparison becomes  more derogatory for Margaret Laurence, whose subject  mat­ ter  and   style  "invite a  comparison with Joyce  Cary  which  she is not  yet ready  to

86
 withstand". The  pigeonholing is  especi­ ally  applied  to  the  poets: "Mr.  Souster is flippantly;  amusing in an undergraduate way;   Mr.    Sowton  is  probably  a   born prose-writer,  and   Mr.   Bluestone  is  ob­ viously  an  academic ...."  and  so  on. Mr.  Emery's bouquets are  as annoy ngly absolute as  his   brickbats:  "...  Mr. Nowlan, especially   in  the  poem   'Begin­  ning',  gives  promise  of   writing  good poetry   sometime, and  is  clearl}l a  name  to watch." That's all;  and  now we know. No  prolix   and   vulgar  evidence. Simply  the statement ex  cathedra.
These remarks constitute the  only  par­ ticular consideration given  to the authors at  which   they  are  leveled.  Waiving the  question  of  the  appropriateness  of  Mr.  Emery's  remarks-and he seems skillful enough   at   this   sort   of   literary  name­ calling-one is likely; to  find  that,  lack­ ing   any   substantiation or   development, they  are  inane. One may say that  Shake­ speare   is  an   upstart  crow,  and   Prior   a poor   man's  Pope;  Dickens   a  journalist; James    an   over-bred  eunuch;  and,  for that   matter,   Mr.   Emery    a   west-coast  John   Wain.  Everyone is  placeable and

NOTES AND OPINIONS



remm1scent  of everyone else-some  ad­ mittedly more  than   others.  But  what do these  generalizations say  about  the  writ­  ing, and  of what  use could  they be to the writer--or to readers? Such surface  com­ ments   promulate   the  senseless  gap   be­ tween  writers  and  critics,  and  cause  the childish   outbursts  by   writers  such   as Faulkner  against critics  in  general.
It might  be argued that, in  so short  a review,   there   is  no   room   for   anything more   than   the   Johnsonian   pronounce­ ment;  that,  as   long   as   reviewers   are assigned   the   task   of   assessing  the  con­  tents    of   a   magazine   in   six   hundred words,   they;  will  be  compelled  to  write  pointless   reviews. This  excuse   would serve  Mr. Emery  better had  he not spent approximately: half  the  review  in  a witty minuet around the  prospectus and  design of   the   magazine.  Few   would   disagree with   his  assessment   of  these  extemalia. But   they   are   surely   self-condemnatory, easily  corrected, and   more   deserving  of hasty   treatment than  the  contents. Mr. Emery   gives   the  prospectus  and   design four  times  the  wordage he  gives  the  fic­ tion  and  well  over  twice  the  wordage  he gives the  poetry.
But   writers  these   days   should   know
that  they  are  living  in  a  pitiless  universe
-an element of  which  is the  cursory  re­ view.  They  should   also  know  that  good writing is  as  viable  as  bad  reviewing   is ephemeral. Given  the chance of publica­ tion,   the   writer  of   merit,  or   potential merit, should   be  able  to  hold   his  own. But  Mr.   Emery  does  not  seem  to  want  the  writer to  have his  chance. His  con­
clusion,  skillfully  protected by "wonder"    I
I
I
I
I
I
I
 ------------------------------------
I
I I
I I I
I
I
I
I
I
I
News

The  brilliance  of scholarship and creative  writing  in Britain  today is illustrated  by this sampling   from
our current  list.


For  twenty-six centuries, says Robert Graves, Homer's  Iliad   has  been  mur­ dered   by   successive   generations  of schoolmasters.
To   resuscitate  Homer  as   a   living author and  remove the  classroom curse from  a fascinating human story,  Graves provides his own  translation from  the original Greek text  in
THE  ANGER  OF ACHILLES
$7.00


What is  a  novel? What are  the problems which  face   a  novelist when he sits down to write a work  of fiction?
Drawing on  the  experience of  Eng­ lish,  French and  Russian  novelists with quotation and  commentary so that one  may   discover   what  they   have   to  say about  the   novel   as   a   literary  form, Miriam  Allott, lecturer  in   English at Liverpool  University  has   produced a major work  of criticism in
NOVELISTS ON THE NOVEL
$7.00



BRITISH  BOOK  SERVICE (Canada)   LIMITED
I 068 BROADVIEW AVENUE
TORONTO  6, ONTARIO

L-------------------------------------

NOTES AND OPINIONS



This  statement, especially  when  applied to  the  present   situation in  Canada,  in­ volves  a  false  conception of  the  literary  process and  of the role of the little maga­ zine  in  that  process.
The  literary process is dynamic. Many writers   of   talent   are   searching  for   the confident form  and  sty;le for  that  talent; others  have   achieved   such  a  form   and style  but  have  reached a  point  at  which their    confidence  has   degenerated  into staleness.   They   need   to  experiment.  As Marianne Moore  pointed  out  recently,  a traditional and   exciting   function of  the little  magazine has been  to publish  young writers,  and   writers   who   are   groping. Sometimes-although rarely-the experi­ menting  writer   or   the  developing  one turns   out  to  be  a  frowning babe  of real genius.   Most   little   magazines   are  more
 interested in  developing writers  and  en­ couraging new  trends   than  in  maintain­ ing  the  uniform standards of  a commer­ cial  publication. For   this   reason   their contents are  likely  to   be   uneven    in quality. And  for  this  reason  they; usually  spring  up  prolifically in  a  period  of stir­  ring  literary  achievement.
There is another reason  why  vigorous
literary activity   has  usually  carried with it  a  number of  little  magazines  publish­ ing   a  great   deal   of  mediocre   material along  with  some  good  writing.  Any  two editors    of   excellent  taste   can   disagree  strongly  about the merits  of a given  piece of writing.  (Everyone has  his own  list of important works which  have been  turned down  by   a  succession  of   publishing houses  and  editors  before being  printed.) An   editor's  literary   prejudice  is   often















Jl?nIll
 Oxford

Biographer of Macdonald, friend of Laurier, cre­ ator  of the Department of External  Affairs, and supervisor  of numerous Roy:al  Visits,  Sir Joseph  Pope was at  the centre of  affairs in Ottawa from I88r  to  I925· He  had completed his memoirs to
c
result  is a  book  which  we  must  read  for  a full


Bl   Dl
 bl®
 
HI   fJ    1
 

understanding  of  Canadian  history  and   which will  reward  the  reader by introducing him  to  a

l 	J	remarkable man   and   most  lovable   personality.
Servant
THE  MEMOIRS  OF  SIR  JOSEPH  POPE
$4-50.


88

NOTES AND OPINIONS



complicated by personal, political  and provincial cousi<.lerations. However  repre­ hensible  these prejudices may  be, they are inevitable in a dappled universe. For  this reason  it is essential  that  there be several periodicals, so  that   a  number  of  editors  of divergent tastes  can  assure publication to  any  talented writer   in  any  locale.
The above  arguments would  be greatly
weakened  if   there   were,   in   Canada, a superfluity of little rags publishing worth­ less  writers.   But   how   extensive  is  Mr.  Emery's "current  crop"?  At  least  as  re­ cently   as  last   June,  it  was  possible  for Tamarack  Review  to   advertise  itself, with  only  a slight distortion of the  truth, as "Canada's only national literary maga­  zine".   At   a   generous  count,  there   are only  some  half  a  dozen  little  magazines  in   Canada   which   publish    any   fiction, poetry  or  drama. There is only one  such
 magazine-Prism- west   of  Toronto. How   few   periodicals  does   Mr.   Emery want  in  Western Canada?  Only  none  is fewer  than   one.  At  this  point, one  can see Mr.  Emery  flick the  ash off his dress­ ing gown and,  like Jehovah firing Sodom and  Gomorrah, reluctantly affirm  that  if there  are  no  good  writers,   there  should be no magazine. Unfortunately,  we have no  reason  to  believe  that  Mr. Emery  has Jehovah's omniscience.
All this is not  a plea  for indiscriminate
literary   publication. There is,  of course, always   a   danger  that    little   magazines shall  become   repositories for  poor  writ­ ing. It is up  to writers  such as Mr. Emery  to help  assure  that  this does not happen. But  he will  not  do  it  with  a  few  Olym­  pian   generalizations and  some  stale  and  inapplicable cummings.



The Foundling and The Werwolf A Literary-Historical Study of Guillaume de Palerne BY  CHARLES  W. DUNN

he                             I200, occupies an  honourable place  in Old  French literature. In this  work,  Professor Dunn offers  a detailed investigation of its  contents, background, and possible sources, studied  against  the   wider   background  of  the   twelfth century. Old French and   Middle  English scholars, together  with   folklorists and medieval historians, will  find  this  a  useful,  well-documented, independant  work.  No. 8 in  the  University of Toronto Department of English Studies and  Texts. I68 pages, 6 x 9 inches, $4-95·


The Ethical Idealism of Matthew Arnold
BY  WILLIAM  ROBBINS
Cifir all  those  who  are  interested in the  interplay of ideas between science, religion and  humanism, this  is an  important book.  "...  typical of the  best sort   of   American   critical   writing." THE   OBSERVER;  " ••• intelligent  and scholarly book." NEW  STATESMAN;  "An  important examination of the  intel­ lectual  milieu  in   which Matthew  Arnold   ... moved." OTTAWA   JOURNAL.
xii  + 263 pages, 5% X  g, $3.75.

UNIVERSITY OF  TORONTO  PRESS
TORONTO  5, ONTARIO

8g



WHO
IS PROVINCIAL?

We   print  below   two   American  comme_nts on Dwight Macdonald's peep  at Canadian reviews  in   Canadian  Literature  No.  1.

*  *  *
Speaking  of   landscapes, I  find
myself   carping  at   Mr.  Dwight   Mac­ donald's "glance" at some  Canadian magazines. In  view  of  his  own  avowed ignorance of  Canada, I do  not  see that  his criticism of, e.g., "arcane" discussions of  some  fine  points  of Canadian history is valid.  What may seem "arcane" to him is  of   liveliest   interest  to   thousands  of other   better  informed readers.  As for his objection  to   the   word   "Canadian"  in connection   with   the    University  of






























go
 Toronto   Quarterly  or    Queen's,  what about the   New  Yorker? Isn't  that   even more  localised  as  a name? Joking apart, his remarks struck me  as smarty,  and painfully provincial, and, as  an  Ameri­ can,   I am   registering  my   disagreement and   protest.
MARINE LELAND,
Northampton,  Massachusetts.

*  *  *
I hope  y;ou pay no attention to Dwight Macdonald and  go ahead being  as Cana­ dian   as  you  wish.  Macdonald,  after   all, writes  for  a somewhat  provincially-titled and provincially-directed magazine called The  New  Yorker.
RUSSEL  B. NYE, DIRECTOR,
Division of Languages and  Literature, Michigan State University.


CJINJIDIJIN	LITERJITURE -1959
















A CHECKLIST  EDITED BY INGLIS  F. BELL

91



ENGLISH-CANADIAN

compiled by Inglis  F. Bell







anthologies

BARBER,  MARY and  FLORA MCPHERSON, eds.   Christmas in  Canada. Toronto, Dent. BIRD, WILL R., ed.  Atlantic Anthology. Toronto, McClelland & Stewart.
WILSON, MILTON, ed.  Recent  Canadian Verse; selected  and edited with general intro­
duction. Kingston, Ont., Jackson Press.


fiction

BEATTIE, JEANN. Behold the Hour. Toronto, Ryerson. BODSWORTH, FRED. The Strange  One. New York, Dodd, Mead. BRUCE, CHARLES. The Township of Time. Toronto, Macmillan. BUELL, JOHN. The Pyx. Toronto, Ambassador.
CALLAGHAN, MORLEY. Morley  Callaghan's Stories. Toronto, Macmillan.
CHRISTIE, ROBERT. The Trembling Land. Toronto, Doubleday. CLARK, GREGORY. The Best of Gregory Clark. Toronto, Ryerson. CORNISH, JOHN.  Olga. Toronto, Macmillan.
DENNY, A. DE couRcY. Swings  and  Roundabouts; a Collection  of  Stories. New York,
Greenwich Book Publishers.
HAILEY, ARTHUR. The Final Diagnosis. Toronto, Doubleday.
HAMBLETON, RONALD. EveryMan Is an Island. Toronto, Nelson, Foster & Scott. HILLIARD, JAN. Dove Cottage. Toronto, Nelson, Foster & Scott.
mwiN, GRACE LILLIAN.  In  Little  Place. Toronto, Ryerson.
KmiAK, ILLIA. Sons of the Soil. Toronto, Ryerson.
Klanak  Islands:  Eight  Short  Stories. Vancouver, Klanak Press.
MCCOURT, EDWARD. Walk  Through the Valley. Toronto, McClelland & Stewart. MACLENNAN, HUGH. The Watch That Ends the  Night. Toronto, Macmillan. MCNAMEE, JAMES. Florencia Bay. Toronto, McClelland & Stewart.
REYNOLDS, HELEN DICKSON. He Will  Return. Toronto, Ryerson.
RICHLER, MORDECAL. The Apprenticeship of Duddy Kravitz. London, Andre Deutsch. RITCHIE, CICERO THEODORE.  Black Angels. New York, Abelard-Schuman.
ROY, KATHERINE. The Gentle  Fraud. Toronto, McClelland & Stewart.

92



SANDERSON, DOUGLAS. Cry Wolfram. London, Seeker & Warburg.
SHIPLEY,  NAN. The Scarlet  Lily. Toronto, Ryerson. SLUMAN,  NORMA. Blackfoot  Crossing. Toronto, Ryerson. STOREY, ARTHUR G.  Prairie Harvest. Toronto, R}\erson.
WATSON, SHEILA.  The Double Hook. Toronto, McClelland & Stewart.
YOUNG, PATRICIA. Half Past Yesterday. London, Ward, Lock.
YOUNG, PHYLLIS  BRETT. Psyche. Toronto, Longmans, Green.



poetry

BARNARD,  SYLVIA.   The  Timeless Forest.  Montreal, Contact  Press.  (McGill  Poetry
Series, 4).
BATES,  RONALD.  The Wandering World. Toronto, Macmillan.
BAYER, MARY ELIZABETH.  Faces of Love.  Toronto, Rj erson.  (Ryerson   Poetry  Chap- Book I8I).
CARPENTER, EDMUND, ed. Anerca. Toronto, Dent.
COGSWELL,  FRED. Descent  From  Eden. Toronto, Ryerson.
-.The Stunted Strong. Fredericton, University of New Brunswick.
COLLIE, MICHAEL. Poems. Toronto, Ryerson.  (RJ erson Poetry Chap-Book I82). COLOMBO, JOHN ROBERT, ed. Ten Poems. Toronto, Privately Printed.
DOWNEs, G.  v. Lost Diver. Fredericton, University of New Brunswick.
GUSTAFSON,  RALPH,  ed.  The   Penguin   Book  of Canadian  Verse. Toronto,  W.  H.
Smith  Wholesale  (Penguin).
HARDEN,  VERNA LOVEDAY. In Her Mind  Carrying. Toronto, Ryerson.  (Ryerson  Poetry
Chap-Book I83)
JOHNSTON, GEORGE. The Cruising  Auk.  Toronto, Oxford University Press.
KAYE. LESLIE L., ed. The McGill Chap-Book. Toronto, Ryerson.
LAYTON, IRVING. A Red  Carpet  for the Sun. Toronto, McClelland & Stewart.
LOCHHEAD,  DOUGLAS. The Heart  is Fire. Toronto, Ryerson.   (R}\erson Poetry  Chap- Book I84).
MILLER, PETER. Sonata  for Frog and Man. Toronto, Contact Press.
PURDY, ALFRED.  The Crafte  So  Longe  to  Lerne.  Toronto, R}\erson. (Ryerson   Poetry
Chap-Book I86).
-.Emu, Remember! Fredericton, University of New Brunswick.
RASHLEY,  R.  E.  Moon Lake  and  Other Poems.  Toronto, Ryerson.   (Ryerson   Poetry
Chap-Book I 87) .
ROBBINS, R. CYNEWULF.  Out  of Solitude. London, Linden Press.
ROBERTS, DOROTHY. In Star and Stalk. Toronto, Emblem  Books.
. THOMSON,  THERESA E.  and  DON  w.  River  and  Realm. Toronto, Ryerson.  (Ryerson
Poetry Chap-Book I85).
WALTON, GEORGE. The Wayward Queen. Toronto, Contact Press.
WYLE, FLORENCE. Poems. Toronto, Ryerson.  (Ryerson  Poetry Chap-Book I88).

93


essays

BERTON, PIERRE. Just Add Water  and Stir. Toronto, McClelland & Stewart.
HAIG-BROWN, RODERICK. Fisherman's Summer. Toronto, Collins. MASSEY, VINCENT. Speaking of Canada. Toronto, Macmillan. scOTT, JACK. From Our  Town. Toronto, McClelland & Stewart.


humour

NICOL, ERIC. In Darkest  Domestica. Toronto, Ryerson.


biography

BEAVERBROOK, LORD. Friends. London, Heinemann.
CAMPBELL, ROBERT E. I Would Do It Again. Toronto, Ryerson.
CARELEss, J· M.s. Brown  of the Globe. Vol.   1, The  Voices of Upper Canada, I8I8- I859· Toronto, Macmillan.
COLLIER, ERIC.  Three Against the Wilderness. Toronto, Smithers  & Bonellie.
CROWE, JOHN  CONGDON. In the Days of the Windjammers. Toronto, Ryerson. ECCLES, w. J. Frontenac: the  Courtier Governor. Toronto, McClelland & Stewart. GODSELL, JEAN w. I Was  No Lady. Toronto, Ry,erson.
GOLDBLOOM, ALTON.  Small  Patients. Toronto, Longmans, Green.
GREEN, HENRY  GORDON. The Silver  Dart,· the Authentic Story of Hon.  J. A. McCurdy, Canada's First Pilot. Fredericton, Brunswick  Press.
LEVINE, 1.   E.  The   Discoverer  of Insulin:  Dr.  Frederick  G.  Banting. Toronto, Copp
Clark.
MCDOUGALL, ROBERT L.  Our  Living  Tradition. Toronto, University of Toronto  Press.
MCNAUGHT, KENNETH.   A  Prophet   in  Politics:   A  Biography   of  f. S.  W oodsworth.
Toronto, University of Toronto Press.
MOODIE, susANNA. Life  in the  Clearings.  Edited  and  with an  Introduction by Robert
L. McDougall. Toronto, Macmillan.
MOWAT, FARLEY MCGILL. The Dog Who Wouldn't Be. New York, Pyrainid Books.
NEWMAN, PETER c. Flame  of Power. Toronto, Longmans Green.
NOBLE, m1s.  The Doctor Who Dared, William Osler. Toronto, Copp  Clark.
PHILIPS, BLUEBELL. Something Always Turned Up. Toronto, Ryerson.
ROHER, MARTIN. Days of Living: The Journal  of Martin Roher. Toronto, Ryerson.
SANDERSON, CHARLES R.,  ed.  The  Arthur Papers, Volume Ill. Toronto,  University of Toronto Press.
STEWART,  MARGARET and  DORIS FRENCH.  Ask No Quarter. Toronto, Longmans Green.




94



juveniles

BEATTIE, EARL. The Day Slippery Ran  Away. Toronto, McClelland & Stewart. BOYLE, JOYCE. Bobby's Neighbors. Toronto, Welch.
CHAPLAN, LUCILLE. Elephant for Rent. Toronto, Little, Brown. CRAIG, JOHN. The Long  Return. Toronto, McClelland & Stewart.
DAEM, MRS. MARY. Lucky Lure  at Arrow  Point.  London, Abelard-Schuman.
DICKIE,  DONALDA. My  First History  of Canada. Toronto, Dent. EDWARDS, WINIFRED. The Money Tree. Toronto, Foulsham.
FALKNER, FREDERICK. The   Aqualung Twins and the Iron  Crab. Toronto, Dent. FERGUSON, ROBERT D. The Man  from St. Malo. Toronto, Macmillan.
FRASER, FRANCES. The Bear Who Stole the Chinook.Toronto, Macmillan. GREENE, MARION. Canal  Boy. Toronto, Macmillan.
GUTTORMssoN, RAGNHILDUR. Ian of Red  River. Toronto, Ryerson.
HARRINGTON,  LYN. The Real  Book  About  Canada. Garden  City, N.Y.,  Garden City
Books.
HAYS, WILMA PITCHFORD. Drummer Boy  for Montcalm. Toronto, Macmillan. HOLLIDAY, JOE. Dale of the Mounted; Atomic  Plot. Toronto, Thomas Allen. INGALDSON, VIOLET PAULA. Cold  Adventure. Toronto, Copp Clark.
MCKIM, AUDREY. Andy  and the Gopher. Toronto, Little, Brown. MCNEILL, JAMES. The Sunken City. Toronto, Oxford University Press.
SHAW, MARGARET MASON.  Canadian Portraits:   Geologists  and  Prospectors. Toronto
Clarke, Irwin.
SWAYZE,  FRED. The Fighting  LeMoynes. Toronto, Ryerson.
-. Frontenac  and the  Iroquois. Toronto, Macmillan.



bibliography

Canada: A Reading Guide for  Children and Young People, 1951-1958 Supplement.
Ontario Library  Review, 43:  40-46,  Feb.
Canadian Catalogue  of Books Published  in Canada, About  Canada, as Well  as Those Written by Canadians, with  Imprint I 92 I- I949  (consolidated English language reprint edition) with Cumulated  Author Index. Toronto, Toronto Public Libraries.
Canadian Index  to  Periodicals  and   Documentary  Films.  Vol.   11,  1958.   Ottawa,
Canadian Library Association and  National Library of Canada.
FRYE, NORTHROP,  ed.  Letters in   Canada:   1958.   University  of Toronto  Quarterly
28:344-492, July.
HURTIG, M. Books  in  Canada. Humanities Association  of Canada  Bulletin, No.  27:8,
18, April.
OWENS, NOEL. F.  W.  Howay and R. L. Reid Collection of  Canadiana at the  Uni­
versity  of  British Columbia. British Columbia Library  Quarterly, 23:9-13, Oct.


95



WATTERS,  REGINALD EYRE.  A  Check   List  of Canadian  Literature  and  Background
Materials, 162B-I950. Toronto, University of Toronto Press.


publishing, foundations, censorship

ANON. Government Defines Obscenity. Quill and Quire, 25: 14-26, Aug.-Sept.
-. Problems  of  the  French Canadian  Publisher. (Report of  speech  by  M.  Pierre
Tissey1re). Quill  and Quire, 25:48-50, Aug.-Sept.
-. A Thoroughly Dangerous Law. Quill  and Quire, 25: I 2-13, Aug.-Sept. DAVIDSoN, J. A. Crazy World  of Book Publishing. Saturday Night, 74:70, Oct. 24. EDINBORO UGH, A. Pornography and  Public  Taste. Saturday Night, 74:7-9, 42, Aug.  1. FULFORD, ROBERT. Obscenity. Canadian Forum, 39:74-75, July.
HERBERT,  w.  B.  Canada  Foundation. Canadian Art,   I 6:29, 65-66,   (French  sum­
mary  74)  Winter.
MCCLELLAND,  J. G. Book  Buying:    the  Unpatriotic Mr.  Davidson. Saturday Night,
74:68, Nov. 7·
OTTAWAY, o. A. Printing Industry in Canada. Canadian Labour  4:23-24, 47, March. PHILLIPS,   ALAN. Are  We  Getting Our   Money's Worth from  the  Canada Council?
Maclean's, 72:26, 72-75, Dec. 5·
THOMSON, DONALD WALTER. The Foundation and the Man, by Walter Dawson  pseud.
Toronto,  Privately   Printed.  (History   of  The   Canadian  Writers'  Foundation founded by Dr. Pelham  Edgar) .
TOYE, w.  Children's Book Publishing in Canada. Canadian Library  Association  Bul­
letin,  I6: I I-J4,  July.
wooDcocK,    GEORGE.   Areopagitica  Re-Written.   Canadian  Literature,  No.   2:3-9, Autumn.
ZADo, H. Who Is On the Side of the Law?  Saturday Night, 74:44, Aug. 29.


literary history  and criticism

GENERAL

BILSLAND,   J.   w.   George   Woodcock,   Man   of  Letters.  British   Columbia  Library
Quarterly, 23:23-28, July.
BOURINOT, ARTHURs., ed. Some  Letters  of Duncan  Campbell Scott, Archibald  Lamp­
man and Others. Ottawa, ArthurS. Bourinot.
CREIGHTON, HELEN. Folklore  of Lunenberg County, Nova  Scotia. Ottawa, Queen's
Printer.
DEACON, WILLIAM  ARTHUR.  The  Reviewer. Canadian Author and  Bookman. 35:4-7, Fall.
FINCH, M. Getting to Know  Our  French-Canadian Authors. Ontario Library  Review,
43: I 54- I 55, May.

g6


FULFORD,  ROBERT. The  Yearning for  Professionalism. Tamarack Review, I3:8o-85, Autumn.
HAIG-BROWN,   RODERICK  L. H.  The   Writer in  Isolation. Canadian  Literature,  No.
I:5-I2, Sununer.
KLINCK,  CARL F. The  Canadian Chiefs and  "Tiger" Dunlop. Waterloo Review, 2:46-
5I,  Sununer.
-. A Gentlewoman of Upper Canada. Canadian Literature No.  I: 75-77, Summer. LEFOLII, K. Poet Who Outfought Duplessis. Maclean's 72: I6-I 7, 70+, April  I r. MCDONALD, J. A. Emily Carr: Painter as Writer. British Columbia Library  Quarterly,
22: I7-23, April.
MOORE, J. M. Nathan Cohen.  Canadian Commentator, 3:8-9, March.
PENFIELD,   WILDER.  The   Liberal   Arts  in  Canada.  Dalhousie   Review, 38:497-507, Winter.
ROPER, GORDON. Turning New Leaves  (I). Canadian Forum, 39: I34-136, Sept. SAPIR, EDWARD. Indian Legends  from  Vancouver Island. Journal  of American  Folk­
lore, 72: Io6-I I4, April-June.
scoTT, DUNCAN CAMPBELL. Copy of Letter by Duncan Campbell Scott  to Ralph Gus­
tafson. Fiddlehead, No. 4I: I2-I4, Sununer.
scoTT, LLOYD M. The  English  Gentlefolk in the Backwoods of Canada. Dalhousie  Re- view, 39:56-69, Spring.
TULLOCH,  CATHERINE. Pioneer  Reading. Saskatchewan History, I2:97-99, Autumn.
WEAVER, R. L. Literature: Some Promise. Saturday Night, 74:34, Aug. 29.
WILSON,  ETHEL. A  Cat   Among   the  Falcons.  Canadian Literature, No.  2: IO-I9, Autumn.


FICTION

BISSELL,  CLAUDE T. Letters  in Canada I958:  Fiction.  University of Toronto Quarter- ly, 28:365-372, July. 	.
BODSWORTH, c. F. Backwoods Genius  with the Magic  Pen. Maclean's 72: 22+, June  6. COLLIN, w. E. Andre  Langevin and  the Problem  of Suffering. Tamarack Review, No.
10:77-92, Winter.
CURRY,  RALPH   L. Stephen Leacock:    Humorist  and  Humanist. Garden City,  N.Y., Doubleday.
-. Unknown Years  of Stephen Leacock.  Maclean's, 72 :20-2I, 45-47, July 4; 26-27,
34, July  I8.
DAVIES, ROBERTSON.  MacLennan's Rising  Sun.  Saturday Night, 74:29-3I, March 28. MCPHERSON,  HUGO. The Garden and  the  Cage.  Canadian Literature, No.  r :46-57,
Summer.
MAGEE,   WILLIAM    H.  Local   Colour   in   Canadian  Fiction.    University  of  Toronto
Quarterly, 28: I76-I89, Jan.
PACEY, DESMOND. A Colonial Romantic, Major John  Richardson, Soldier  and  Novel­
ist. Canadian Literature, No. 2:20-3 I, Autumn.

97


REYNOLDS,  HELEN DICKSON.  My  First   Book-and  Others. Canadian Author   and
Bookman, 35: I 3, Fall.
STEINBERG, M. w. John  Cornish, Satirist  in a Provincial Landscape. British  Columbia
Library  Quarterly, 23: 22-2q, Oct.
-. A  Twenteth Century Pentateuch, A. M.  Klein's The Second   Scroll.  Canadian
Literature, No. 2:37-46, Autumn.
THEALL, D. F. A Canadian Novella.  (Sheila  Watson's The Double  Hook). Canadian
Forum, 39: 78-8o, July;.
VALLERAND, JEAN.  Hugh MacLennan ou  la tendresse  dans  la litterature canadienne,
Le Devoir, samedi  28 novembre, p. I I.
WATT, FRANK  w.  Western  My;th, the  World  of Ralph Connor. Canadian Literature,
No. I :26-36,  Summer.
WEAVER, ROBERT. Stories  by Callaghan. Canadian Literature, No. 2:67-70. Autumn.


POETRY

COGSWELL,  FRED. Moses  Hardy Nickerson: a Study.  Dalhousie  Review, 38:472-485, Winter.
DE  BRUYN,   JAN. Anne  Marriott, Poet  of  Joy.  British  Columbia Library  Quarterly,
22:23-29, Jan.
DUDEK, LOUIS. Transition in Canadian Poetry. Culture, 20: 282-295, septembre.
FRYE, H.  N. Letters   in  Canada  1958:    Poetry.   University  of  Toronto  Quarterly,
28:345-365, July.
HORWOOD,  HAROLD. E. J. Pratt and  William  Blake:  An  Analysis. Dalhousie  Review,
39: I97-207,  Summer.
MARCOTTE, GILLES.  Le  poete  Irving Lay;ton, vu  d'ici.  Le  Devoir, samedi   I 7 octobre,
p .I I.
RASHLEY, RICHARD ERNEST.  Poetry in Canada. Queen's Quarterly, 66: I 53, Spring
SMITH, A.  J.  M. Duncan  Campbell Scott,  a  Reconsideration. Canadian Literature,
No. I:13-25, Summer.
sowToN,  IAN. The  Lyric  Craft of  Miriam Waddington. Dalhousie  Review, 39, 23J7-
242, Summer.
WATT, FRANK  w. Edwin  John  Pratt. University of Toronto Quarterly, 29:77-84, Oct. WILSON,  MILTON. The Poetry  of  Margaret Avison. Canadian Literature, No. 2:47-
58, Autumn.
-. ed. Recent  Canadian Verse. Queen's Quarterly, 66: 268-3 I I, Summer.


DRAMA AND  THEATRE

CLOSINGCHILD, THOMAS  D. Between  Festivals: A Letter from  Vancouver. Tamarack
Review, No. I0:64-72, Winter.
COHEN,  NATHAN. Theatre Today: English  Canada. Tamarack Review, No.  I3: 24-
37, Autumn.

g8


EDINBORO UGH, ARNOLD. Stratford's Seventh Season: Shakespeare Fights  for  Recogni­
tion. Saturday Night, 74:7-9, July  18.
GARDNER, D. Canada's Theatre:  Climbing in  Second  Gear.  Saturday Night, 74:12-
13,40, May g.
GELINAS, GRATIEN. Credo  of the Comedie-Canadienne. Queen's Quarterly, 66:18-25, Spring.
GUTHRIE,  w.  T. My  Part   in  the  Stratford  Adventure; Excerpt from   A  Life  in  the
Theatre. Maclean's, 72:13-15, 84-86+, Nov. 21.
HAMELIN, JEAN. Theatre Today: French Canada. Tamarack Review, No. 13:38-47, Autumn.
MCKAY, A. G. Western  Ontario Drama. Waterloo Review, 2: 13-16, Summer.
MICHENER,   WENDY.   Towards  a   Popular  Theatre.  Tamarack  Review,  13:63-79, Autumn.
MOORE, MAVOR. Theatre: Some Backsliding. Saturday Night, 74:.32-33, Aug. 29.
OWEN, IVON. Theatrical Reviews:  Stratford. Tamarack Review, 13: IOI-103, Autumn. ROBERTSON,  GEORGE. Drama on  the  Air. Canadian Literature, No.2 :59-65,  Autunm. SABBATH,  LAWRENCE. Comedie Canadienne's  First  Year.  Saturday Night, 74:19-21,
Sept.  29.
-.French Theater in Quebec. Canadian Commentator, 3:10-12, Oct.
-.Theatre du  Nouveau Monde's Ninth  Season.  Saturday Night, 74:20-22, Dec.  5· STRATFORD, PHILIP. The  Shakespearean Festival: a  Pre-Season  Inventory. Canadian
Forum, 39:81, July.
-. Stratford After Six Years. Queen's Quarterly, 66:2-17, Spring.
-.Stratford 1959· Canadian Forum, 39:105-107, Aug.
STRATFORD SHAKESPEAREAN   FESTIVAL OF CANADA FOUNDATION.  The Stratford  Shake­
spearean  Festival of Canada, 1953-1959. Stratford.
TOVELL,  VINCENT  and  GEORGE  MCCOWAN.   A  Conversation. Tamarack  Review, No.
13:5-23, Autumn.


periodicals

NEW  TITLES

Canadian Literature:  a Quarterly of Criticism   and  Review. No.  1 ; Summer,  Van­
couver,  University of British Columbia.
lntervales:  a  Literary  Magazine Published   by the  Arts  Society  of the  University of
New Brunswick, xst, Fredericton, N.B.
Liberte  59· No. 1; Jan.-Feb., Box 97, Postal Station H, Montreal, P.Q.
Prism:   a Magazine of Contemporary Writing. Vol.  1, No. x; Sept.,  Vancouver, B.C.

HISTORY AND  CRITICISM

ANON. Canadian Literary Review. Canadian Forum, 39:125, Sept.


99



CALLWOOD, JUNE. Maclean's. Canadian Forum, 39: I99-200, Dec. DEBRUYN, JAN. Birth of a Little  Magazine. Canadian Forum, 39: I I6, Aug. FULFORD, ROBERT. Saturday Night. Canadian Forum, 39:52-53, June.
MACDONALD, DWIGHT.   Landscape Through  a  Peephole.   Canadian  Literature, No.
I :93-97,  Summer.
MCDOUGALL, R. L. University  Quarterlies. Canadian Forum, 38:253-255, Feb. WADDINGTON, M. Canadian Art Magazine. Canadian Forum, 39: I03-I05, Aug. wooDcocK,   GEORGE.  The Tentative  Confessions of  a  Prospective Editor.  British
Columbia Library  Quarterly, 23: I 7-2 I, July.


LANGUAGE

ALLEN,  HAROLD B. Canadian-American Speech  Differences Along the Middle Border.
Journal  of the Canadian Linguistic  Association 5: I 7-24, Spring.
AVIS,  WALTER  s. The  Importance of Pronunciation in a Canadian Dictionary. Jour­
nal des Traducteurs, 3-4 4- I : 2 I -24.
BAKER,  RONALD  J.  Linguistics  and  Literature in  Canada.  Canadian Literature, No.
I :97- I oo, Summer.
DRYSDALE, P. D. A First Approach to Newfoundland Phonemics. Journal  of Canadian
Linguistic  Association, 5:25-34, Spring.
LEHN, WALTER.  Vowel  Contrasts in  a Saskatchewan English  Dialect. Journal  of the
Canadian Linguistic  Association, 5:90-98, Fall.
WILSON,  HARRY REX. The  Dialect  of Lunenburg County, Nova  Scotia; a Study of the English  of the County, with  Reference to its Sources, Preservation  of Relics and Vestiges  of Bilingualism. Ann Arbor, University Microfilms.








100



CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE

compiled by A. E. Ford





fiction

ACADEMIE CANADIENNE-·FRANCAISE.  C ahiers:  contes et nouvelles, octobre. ANNE-MARIE. L'Au be de la joie. Montreal, Le Cercle du Livre de France. BLAis, MARIE-CLAIRE. La belle bete. Quebec, L'Institut litteraire du Quebec.
CHICOINE, RENE. Carrefour  des hasards. Montreal, Le Cercle du Livre de France.
DESROSIERS, LEO-PAUL.  Vous  qui  passez. Montreal, Fides.  (Tome deux  des Angoisses et tourments.)
GAGNON, MAURICE. Les Chasseurs  d'ombres. Montreal, Le Cercle  du  Livre de France.
GELINAS,  PIERRE.  Les  vivants, les morts  et les autres.  Montreal, Le Cercle  du  Livre de France.
GIRoux, ANDRE. Malgre  tout, le  joie! Quebec, L'Institut litteraire du Quebec.
HERTEL,  FRANCOIS  (RODOLPHE  DUBE).  jeremie  et  Barabbas;   memoires  imaginaires.
Paris, Editions  de la Diaspora fran  aise.
-. 0 Canada, mon  pays, mes amours.  Paris, Editions  de la Diaspora frall(_;aise.
ROQUEBRUNE,  ROBERT DE.  Testament demon  enfance. Montreal, Fides.
SAVARD, FELIX-ANTOINE. Le Barachois. Montreal, Fides.
-.Martinet le pauvre. Montreal, Fides.
SIMARD, JEAN.  Les Sentiers  de la nuit. Montreal, Le Cercle du Livre de France.


poesie

BELLEAU, ANDRE. Suite  urbaine. Liberte 59, 6:402-10, nov.-dec.
BLAis,  MARIE-CLAIRE. Poemes. Ecrits du Canada   fran ais,
BOISVERT, LAURENT.  Credo  d'un  athee. Montreal, Editions  Nocturne.
CHOQUETTE,  ROBERT. Textes choisis. ed. Andre  Melan on,
DROUIN, MICHELE.  La Duegne  accroupie. Montreal, Editions Quartz.
GIBEAULT, GASTON. Au cours des  jours. Montreal, Beauchemin.
HEBERT, ANNE. Les Chambres de bois. Duverna)'l, P.Q.,  France-Canada.
LALONDE, MICHELE.  Geoles. Montreal, Editions d'Orphee.
MARTINO, JEAN-PAUL.  Objets  de la nuit. Montreal, Editions Quartz.
MONETTE, ARCADE-MARIE, o.p. Suite de vingt-cinq poemes. Culture, 20:437-57, dec.
PLANTE,  GERARD. Essais poetiques. Montreal, Beauchemin.


IOI


biographie
I
BEGIN, ABBE EMILE. Franfois de Laval. Quebec, Presses  Universitaires Laval.
LE FRANc, MARIE. Enfance  marine. Montreal, Fides.
LEGARE, ROMAIN,  o.f.m. Un   obsede  de  la  Saintete:  le  pere  Jules  Marie  Guilbault, franciscain (I 898-1958). Montreal, Editions Franciscaines.
PffiRRE, MICHEL. Une  epopee  de l'air et Romeo Vachon. Montreal, Beauchemin. TREMBLAY, GILBERTE. Bernier, capitaine   a I7 ans. Montreal, Editions Lemeac. THEORET,  ABBE PffiRRE EUCHER.  Monsieur Lussier  (1835-I9II): un  homme, un  pre-
tre. Ile  Pierrot Nord, P.Q., L'auteur.
TRUDEL,  PAUL-EUGENE,  o.f.m.  Monseigneur Ange-Marie Hiral,  o.f.m.:  fondateur  et gardien  a Quebec. t. 3, Montreal, Editions franciscaines.
soEuR,  E. MITCHELL, s.g.m. Elle a beaucoup aime. Montreal, Fides.



pour les jeunes

ACHARD,  ANNIE. La   Pille   de  la  Prairie. Montreal,  Editions E.  Achard, Librairie generale canadienne.
ACHARD, EUGENE.  Aux  temps heroiques  du  Canada. Montreal, Editions E.  Achard,
Librairie generale canadienne.
-. Ceux   qui   firent  Montreal. Montreal,  Editions E.  Achard, Librairie  generale canadienne.
BERTHIER, PAUL. La Vierge  au lutrin. Montreal, Fides.
BROCHET, HENRI. Le Passeur du torrent. Montreal, Fides. CHANCEREL, LEON. Le Pelerin de Compostelle. Montreal, Fides.
CLEMENCE, PAUL. Les  petits  nains  de  la montagne. St.  Maurice, P.Q., Editions St.-
Augustin.
FERLAND, REAL. Carrousel. Montreal, Editions Nocturne. GREGOIRE-COUPAL, M.-A. Un  filleul en chocolat. Montreal, Fides. HOULE, DENISE. Confidences de Lucie. Montreal, Fides.
KLINCK, GEORGE  ALFRED.  La  randonnee de  l'Oiseau-Mouche (A la  recherche  de la mine  secrete). Montreal, Editions E.  Achard, Librairie generale canadienne.
-. Le retour  de l'Oiseau-Mouche. Montreal,  Editions E.  Achard, Librairie generale canadienne.
LAURENCE-BERARD, LOUISE. Petits bouts de vie. Montreal, Fides.
LEDUC, ALEC. Alfred  et l'Zle des cinq. Montreal, Fides.
-. Alfred  le decouvreur. Montreal, Fides.
-.Journal debord d'Alfred. Montreal, Fides.
-. Lili, soeur d'Alfred. Montreal, Fides.
LEGAULT, ROLAND. Le Seigneur  de Chateauneuf. Montreal, Fides.
MAROT,  suzANNE.  Lectures   pour les  jeunes:  sous  forme d'histoires. Montreal, Beau­
chemin.


102


PALLASCIO-MORIN, ERNEST. Sentiers  fieuris: livres ouverts.  Montreal, Beauchemin. THERoux, GISELE. Les exploits  de Ti-Puce. Montn al,
-. Ti-Puce chez les scouts. Montreal, Fides.
-. Ti-Puce dans sa famille. Montreal, Fides.



bibliographie,  censure et edition

ANON. La loi Fulton  sur l'obscenite. Relations, 224:198, aout.
ANON.  ( un discours  prononce par  M. Pierre  Tisseyre.)  Problems  of French-Canadian
Publishers. Quill  and Quire, 25: 48-5o. aout-sept.
BEAUDRY-GOURD, ANNE.   Les  Societes  litteraires au  Canada fran<;ais. Vie   Frant;aise,
13: 159·76.
DASSONVILLE,  M. Repertoire des  theses  presentees   a Ia faculte des  lettres  de  l'Uni­
versite Laval,  r 946- r 956. Culture, 20: r 95-222,  juin.
DUPUY,  PIERRE;  BAZIN,  HERVE;  DIDELOT, FRANCIS;  et  GARNEAU, RENE.  Rencontre au sujet  de  la  diffusion  du  livre  canadien en  France. Le  Devoir, samedi   I 5 aout, p. I I.
FRYE, NORTHROP.  Letters in  Canada. University of Toronto  Quarterly, 28:345-492, juillet.
tAMARCHE,   A.  Essais  critiques de  l'Academie  canadienne-fran<;aise. Revue   domini­
caine, 65:56-8,  jan-fev.
PILON,  J. G.  Situation de !'edition au  Canada fran<;ais. Revue  de l'Universite Laval,
13:503·7, fev.
Theses  de maitrise  et de  doctorat soutenues  .a l'Universite d'Ottawa en  1958. Revue
de l'Universite d'Ottawa, 29: 163-6,  juillet-sept.



histoire et critique litteraires
OEUVRES ET  ARTICLES DE  NATURE GENERALE ANJOU, M. J· D'. Reclame n'est  pas critique. Relations, 224:212-3, avril.
BERNIER, GERMAINE. Le  jeune ·ecrivain dans  la cite et la societe. Le Devoir, samedi  28
novembre,  p. 20.
BERTRAND, REAL.  Monseigneur Paul-Eugene Roy. £'Instruction  publique, 4:235-7. BLAIN, MAURICE. Academie  et litterature vivimte. Le Devoir, samedi  7 novembre, p. 12. BONENFANT,  J .-c.  Plaidoyr
dienne-anglaise. Le Devoir, samedi  28 novembre,  p. 25.
coLLIN, w.  E. La  litterature  canadienne-fran<;aise vue  par  un  lecteur  de !'Ontario.
Le Devoir, samedi  28 novembre, p. 15.
DAGENAIS,  GERARD. Refiexions sur nos  fat;ons d'ecrire  et  de  parler. t.I.  Montreal, Le
Cercle  du Livre de France.


103


DAVELUY,  M. c.  Raphael  Bellemare    (182I-1go6). Revue   d'histoire   de  !'Amerique franfaise, 12:535-73, mars.
DESROSIERS, LEO-PAUL. Un Conformisme de conformisme. Nation  nouvelle: revue du
Canada   franfais, 1 : 35-8,  (?) .
-. Perspectives  litteraires. Lectures, 5: 1 2g-? (?).
DUBE, MARCEL. Puisque  c'est  notre  patrie  .... Le Devoir, samedi  28 novembre, p. 1 1. DUDEK, LOUIS. Peut-on concevoir  une  litterature qui serait  commune a nos deux  cul-
tures?  Le Devoir, samedi  28 novembre, p. 1 7·
FALARDEAU, J .-c. Nos deux litteratures-miroirs: description d'un  etat  social ou plongee en profondeur dans  l'univers interieur. Le  Devoir, samedi  28 novembre, p. 25.
FINCH, M. Getting to know  our  French-Canadian authors. Ontario Library  Review,
43: I 54-5, mai.
GALARNEAU, c. Edmond de Nevers, essayiste. Revue  de l'Universite Laval, 13 :57g-g5, mars;  13:704-21, avril; 13:830-50, mai.
GRANDPRE, PIERRE  DE. L'homme et  l'hiver au  Canada. Le  Devoir, samedi  11 juillet,
p. II.
HENAULT, GILLES. Homages a nos ecrivains.  Le  Devoir,  samedi  28 novembre, p. 22.
-.Propos sur notre  litterature. Le Devoir,samedi 23 mai, p. 13.
LELAND,  MARINE. Joseph-Franc;ois Perrault.  Revue  de l'Universite Laval, 13:417-28,

jan; 13:52g-34, fev;  13: 63o-g, mars;  13: 688-g8, avril; 13:804-20, mai. MACLENNAN,  HUGH. La  litterature canadienne-fran aise 	a
Dickens at a Balzac. Le Devoir, samedi  28 novembre, p. g.
MARCOTTE, GILLES.  La  Litterature,  sera-t-elle le  trait   d'union de  nos  cultures?  Le
Devoir, samedi  28 novembre, p. g.
MINISTERE  DE LA CITOYENNETE   ET DE L'IMMIGRATION.  L'Jmmigrant dans  la litterature canadienne. Le Devoir, samedi  18 juillet, p. 11.
MULLINS, STANLEY.  De  la  production  litreraire  du  Canada  anglais, retenons   30 romans sur quelque 2,500. Le Devoir,samedi 28 novembre, p. 11.
NADEAU, GABRIEL. Louis Dantin. Lectures, 6: 68-g, nov.
ROBERT, GUY. Chances de  la  jeune  litterature. Revue  dominicaine, 65: 22g-3g, nov.
-.Petit bilan  de notre litterature 1g58. Revue  dominicaine, 65:81-go, mars.
ROY, MICHEL.  Le  dialogue  des cultures et  le  probleme de !'information. Le  Devoir,
samedi  28 novembre, p. 11.
SAINT-GERMAIN, CLEMENT. Claude-Henri Grignon. Lectures, 6: 100-2, dec.
SAVARD,  F.-A. Engagement:  ... la  raison  d'etre de  tout  ce  que   j'ai  ecrit  dans  le passe. Lectures, 6:124-6, dec.
THERIAULT,  YVES. Le  mythe  de  la  double  culture canadienne. Le  Devoir, samedi  28
novembre, p. I 7·
-. L'Outil philosophique de l'ecrivain canadien. Revue  dominicaine, 65:176-8, avril. TOUGAS,  GERARD. Bilan  d'une litterature naissante. Canadian Literature, I =37-45. ete. VIATTE, A. Deux  bilans litteraires. Revue de l'Universite Laval, I3 :6og-q, mars.




104


FICTION

CHARLAND, T.-M.,  ed. ].-B.-A. Ferland. Mont11eal, Fides.
coLLIN, w.  E. Andre   Langevin and   the  problem   of  suffering. Tamarack  Review,
10: 77-92, hiver.
DESROSIERs, LEO-PAUL. Marie  Le Franc. Lectures, 5: 243-6, sept.
DUHAMEL, G. Roman et  theatre. University of Toronto Quarterly, 28:453-73, juillet. GRANDPRE, PIERRE DE. Hertel, exile volontaire, parle  et reparle du Canada. Le Devoir,
samedi  21 mars, p. g.
LAMONTAGNE, L., ed. Arthur  Buies. Montreal, Fides.
LEBEL,  MAURICE. Adjutor Rivard  ( 1868-1945)  :  l'homme et  I'oeuvre. L'lnstruction publique, 3:441-5.
-. Mgr.  Felix-Antoine Savard (ne 18g6). L'lnstruction publique, 3:636-44.
-. Mgr.  Paul Bruchesi  ( 1855-1939). L'Instruction publique, 3:912-g. LEGARE, ROMAIN, o.f.m. Ringuet. Lectures, 6:4-6, sept.
MCPHERSON, HUGO. The Garden and  the Cage: Gabrielle Roy. Canadian Literature,
1:46-57, ete.
MARCOTTE, GILLES.  Marie-Claire Blais,  romanciere et  poete.  Le  Devoir, samedi  31 octobre, p.  1 1.
TUCHMAIER,  H.  s. L'evolution du   roman   canadien. Revue   de  l'Universite Laval,
14:131-43, oct;  14:235-47, nov.



POESIE

BESSETTE, G. L'evolution des images en poesie canadienne-franc;aise. Culture, 20:3-14, mars.
BLAIN, MAURICE. Anne  Hebert ou  le risque  de  vivre.  Liberte  59, 5:322-30, sept.-oct.
BRAULT, J.,ed. Alain Grandbois. Montreal, Fides.
CLOUTIER, CECILE. Propos sur la poesie. Revue  dominicaine, 65: 163-6, mars. coNSTANTINEAu,  GILLES. Gaston  Miron: 'Je  suis plus  un agitateur qu'un poete'. Le
Devoir, samedi  22 aout,  p. 12.
-. Maurice  Beaulieu, Guy  Lafond, Sabine  Sicaud.   Le  Devoir, samedi  14 fevrier, p. 13.
DASSONVILLE, MICHEL, ed. Frechette. Montl'eal, Fides.
GRANDPRE, PIERRE  DE. Fernand Ouellette, Michel  Van  Schendel: un  accent  neuf  en poesie canadienne. Le Devoir, samedi  7 fevrier,  p. 12.
-.Des poetes:  Michel  Aubier,  Jacques Godbout, Alain  Marceau. Le Devoir, samedi
31 janvier,  p. 11.
LACROIX, BENOIT. o.p. Deux  textes de Michele  Lalonde. Revue  dominicaine,65:243-6, mai.
-. Maurice Beaulieu: poete. Revue  dominicaine, 65:58-g, jan-fev.
LEBEL,  MAURICE. Frere  Marie-Victorin  ( 1885-1944). L'Instruction  publique, 3:526-
31.


-.Robert Choquette (ne  I905). L'lnstruction publique, 3: 7I5-22.
LEPAGE, JACQUES.  Une  poesie canadienne. Le Devoir, samedi  Ier aout,  p.  I I.
MARCOTTE, GILLES.  Une  poesie d'exil.  Canadian Literature, 2:32-6, automne.
..:.         Marie-Claire Blais:  romanciere et poete. Le Devoir, samedi  3 I  octobre,  p. I I. MELANCON, ANDRE, ed. Robert  Choquette. Montreal, Fides.
MEUNIER, JEAN.  Rina Lasnier  et le tribut a !'experience de !'amour toujours nouveau.
Revue  dominicaine, 65: 2 I 7-28, nov.
MONETTE,    ARCADE,  o.p.  Reflexions:  A   l'ombre   de  ['Orford. Revue  dominicaine,
65: I56-8, oct.
PANNETON. G.,  ed. Marius  Dian. Montreal, Bellarmin. PLANTE, JEAN-PAUL, ed. Paul Morin. Montreal, Fides. POULIOT, LEON, ed. Charlevoix. Montreal, Fides.
ROBERT, GUY.  La  jeune  poesie canadienne-franc;aise (IV). Revue dominicaine, 65:36-
45, juillet-aout.
-. La   jeune   poesie   canadienne-fran<_;aise  a  Saint-Sauveur.  Revue    dominicaine,
65:284-9, dec.
SYLVESTRE, J. G.  La poesie. University of Toronto Quarterly, 28:444-53, juillet.
VIATTE, A.   Du  theatre et  de  la poesie. Revue   de l'Universite Laval, I3:397-40I, jan.
WYCZYNSKI,  PAUL.  Charles Gill, intime.  Revue  de l'Universite d'Ottawa, 29:447-72,
oct-dec.
-.Emile Nelligan.  Lectures, 6:37-9, oct.


DRAME ET  THEATRE

AUTEUIL, G. H. D'. De l'essai au chef-d'oeuvre. Relations, 2 I 7: I0-2, jan.
-. Le theatre n'est pas en greve. Relations, 2 I 9:73-4, mars.
DUHAMEL, G.   Roman et  theatre. University of Toronto Quarterly, 28-453-73, juillet.
GELINAS, GRATIEN.  Credo of the Comedie-Canadienne. Queen's Quarterly, 66: I8-25,
printemps.
HAMELIN,    JEAN.   Theatre  today:  French Canada.  Tamarack Review,  I3:38-47,
automne.
P.s.-R. L'Eglise et le theatre. Revue  dominicaine, 65: I I 5-6, sept.
SABBATH,  L.    Comedie-Canadienne's  First  Year. Saturday Night,   74: I 9-2 I,  le  29
septembre.
-.French Theater in Quebec. Canadian Commentator, 3: I0-2, oct.
-. Theatre  du   Nouveau   Monde's  Ninth   Season.  Saturday Night, 74:20-2, le  5
decembre.
TOUPIN,   PAUL.  Pour  etre  valable,   le  theatre canadien doit  etre  poetique. ed.  Jean
Hamelin, Le Devoir, samedi  4 avril, p.  I I.
VANASSE, JEAN-PAUL.   Marcel Dube  ou les chemins  sans issues. Liberti 59,  6:356-69,
nov-dec.
VIATTE, A.  Du  theatre et  de la poesie.  Revue  de l'Universite Laval, I3:397-40I, jan.


106



LIVRES POUR LES  JEUNES

AN JOU, M. J. o'. La critique des livres pour enfants. Relations, 223: 184, juillet.
-. Une critique reguliere  des livres pour enfants. Relations, 225:244-5, sept.
-.De quoi  tenter  les meilleurs.  Relations, 221 : 129, mai.
-. Ecrire  pour les jeunes, ambition d'adulte. Relations, 219:72-3, mars.
-.Guider les jeunes dans leurs lectures. Relations, 227:294-5, nov.
-. Litterature de jeunesse. Relations, 218:40, fev.
-. Reussir  un livre pour  la jeunesse. Relations, 222: 156, juin.
-. Trois ecrivains pour  la jeunesse. Relations, 2 I 7- I 5, jan. CLEMENT,  BEATRICE. Lit-on  chez nous? Relations, 227: 290- I, nov.


publications  periodiques

ANON. Situations. Culture, 20:189-91, juin.
B.v. Nation  nouvelle: revue  du Canada  fran ais.
CHATRAND, G.-A. Liberte  59· Culture, 20:188-9, juin.
HENAULT,  GILLES. Le Premier cahier  du  Quebec  Libre.  Le  Devoir, samedi  5 septem- bre, p. 7·
LAMARCHE, A., o.p. Le Devoir litteraire. Revue  dominicaine, 65:54-6, jan-fev.
LEDIT, J. H. La revue Marie. Relations, 219: 71, mars.
MIGNAULT, T. La revue Nation  nouvelle. Relations, 221:131-2, mai.
PILON, JEAN-GUY. Des excuses qui  n'en  sont  pas. Revue  de l'Universite Laval, 14:37-
43, dec.
ROBERT,  GUY.  Situations:  nouvelle   revue  mensuelle. Revue   dominicaine, 65:182-3, avril.
WEINBERG,  KURT. Une   nouvelle   revue:    Liberte   59·  Canadian Literature, 2:91-3, automne.


la langue

ACADEMIE CANADIENNE-·FRANCAISE.  Bulletin  de linguistique. no. 2 I -30, jan-dec. ALLEMAGNE,  ANDRE o'.  Notre  langue: ou en  est-elle?  ou va-t-elle? Le  Quebec  libre,
I : 24-38, aout.
ANJOU, M. J. o'.  Anonnement, bredouillement, charabia. Relations, 224:209, avril.
-.Conscience linguistique. Relations, 218:41, fev.
-. Consonnes doublees.  Relations, 228:326, dec.
-. Difficultes duson 'o'. Relations, 227:293, nov.
-.Divide et impera. Relations, 220:97, avril.
-. Lang,age de normaliennes. Relations, 217: 14, jan.
-. Nasales et nasillement. Relations, 223: 181, juillet.
-. Pour  qu'on enseigne a 'parler' franc;ais, Relations, 226:266, oct.


107


-. Purete  des vo elles. 	I:I 25, mai.
-.Resolutions d'urgence. Relations, 225:237, sept.
-. Un  obstacle majeur: la vulgarite. Relations, 222:I 58, juin.
BEAUDIN, DOMINIQUE.  La langue fran<_;aise est unilangue. L'Action nationale, 48: 206-
I I,fev.
DAGENAis, GERARD.   Refiexions sur  nos  fafons  d'ecrire  et  de  parler. t.I.  Montreal, Le
Cercle du Livre de France.
DAVIAULT, PIERRE.  Notre  langue   fran<;aise, cette  malmenee. Nation   nouvelle:  revue du Canada   franfais, I:39-42,  ( ?) .
GENDRON, J.-D.  Desonorisation des  voyelles en  franco-canadien. Revue  de  l'Associa­
tion canadienne de linguisitique, 5:gg-I08, automne.
GRANDPRE,  PIERRE  DE.  Notre   compatriote Fernande Saint-Martin:   theoricienne du langage  litteraire au XXe  siecle. Le Devoir, samedi I 7 janvier.
LALIBERTE, JOSEPH,   c.ss.r.  L'anglais  des  Canadiens-fran<;ais. L'Action   nationale,
48:236-4o, fev.
LAPORTE,  PIERRE.   Le  fran<_;ais  progresse:  faisons   progresser   le  fran<_;ais.  L'Action nationale, 48:325-8, avril.
ROY, ARCHELAS.   Au  chevet  de  la  langue: bilinguisme  ou  fusion  de  deux  pauvretes
linguistiques. L'Action nationale, 48:24r -g, fev.
-. Vocabulaire et climat  mental. L' Action  nationale, 48:436-40, (?).







THESES

compiled by Carl F. Klinck




BALLSTADT, CARL PAUL ARTHUR.  The Quest   for Canadian Identity in Pre-Confedera­
tion  English-Canadian Literary  Criticism. M.A., Western  Ontario.
LEON-VICTOR,  i.e., frere.  Arthur de  Bussiere, sa vie  et  son oeuvre.  Ph.D.,  Universite d'Ottawa.
RIPLEY, JOHN.  A  Biographical  and Critical  Study of Morley Callaghan. M.A.,  Uni­
versity of New Brunswick.
SINCLAIR,  MRS.  NORA R.  Social  Criticism   in  the  Canadian Novel, rg::w-1945· M.A., University of Alberta.
WILSON,  L.  R.  A  Biographical   and  Critical  Study of Francis  Sherman. M.A.,  Uni­
versity of New Brunswick.

108
