$7 .50 per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE





Winter,1983

FJCTJONJIL P)ITTERNS
Articles
 N°·99


BY  JAN C.  HORNER, LAURENCE STEVEN, THOMAS YORK, MICHAEL GREENSTEIN, ROBERT MAJOR
Poems

BY  DOUG  FETHERLING,  ROBERT GIBBS, CHRISTOPHER  WISEMAN,  RICHARD STEVENSON, GREG  SIMISON, JOY !\.OGAWA,  ELSPETH   BRADBURY, EVA  TIHANYI, RAYMOND SOUSTER, TOM   WAYMAN, WM . B. ROBERTSON
Books in Review

BY  LORRAINE WEIR , SUSAN STONE-BLACK B U RN,  RENATE USMIANI, M. A. PETERMAN, JANET  GILTROW, RAMSAY COOK, MURIEL WHITAKER , GEORGE WOODCOCK, S. E. READ,  PATRICIA  MONK , SIMON R UDDELL, ANTHONY JOHN  HARDING, 1<.  P. STICH, TERRY GOLDIE, BARBARA  GODARD, LESLIE MONKMAN, JOAN  E.  PAVELICH, ROBERT WALLACE, HELEN  HOY, DAVID I NGHAM, DAVID LYLE JEFFREY, ELEANOR JOHNSTON, WENDY KElT NER, PETER KLOVAN, JENNIFER  LEVINE, DOROTHY LIVESAY, CAMILLE R.  LABOSSIERE, BRENTON MACLAINE, LAURENT MAILHOT, GRAZIA MERLER, ANN MESSENGER, ANN   MUNTON, SH IRLEY NEUMAN, JANET  M.  PATERSON,  UMA PARAMESWARAN, BRUCE PIRIE, KENNETH  S HERMAN, R.  H. RAMSEY, LAURIE RICOU, LINDA  ROGERS, IAN  SOWTON, DONALD  STEPHE NS,  MARGARET STOBIE, GERA LD THOMAS, PA U L  TIESSEN,  SUSAN WASSERMAN, JERRY  WASSERMAN, ANTHONY APPENZELL,  MICHAEL F. DIXON, P . COLLET, ANDREW GURR, KEATH FRASER,
CAROL E  GERSON

Opinions and  Notes

BY  PATRICK  B. o'NEILL

A QUARTERLY OF
CRITICISM AND REVIEW





J








NEARING 1984





SINCE  I948,  we have been living with the idea of I984 -living with Newspeak and Big Brother and  the promise of Eternal  Bureaucracies.  We have joked about the  possibility of them  Happening Here,  and  always truly  identified  them  with what  is Already  Happening There,  and  never  entirely  agreed  on  what  "here" and "there" mean. And we have secretly equated  the onset of the terrible bureau­ cracies with the actual  year:  if we survive  I 984, we tell ourselves, and still don't feel threatened-if  Big Brother  isn't  watching   us and  we still  have  access to history books and  newspapers -then  we're  home free,  untouched  by events, as in a child's game.
But Orwell  was writing about  I948, of course, and  what  could follow on from postwar  constructions  of order.  It was no  game  he  ritualized,  but  the  ruthless machinations of  politics, religion,  industry,  all  wearing  the  disguise of  benevo­ lence. Why  wear  such  a disguise? Because people-those  ordinary  individuals who  make  up  the  democratic  mass-would like to  believe the  best  of others, and  at the same time would like to be left to lead their separate  lives as comfort­  ably  as  possible, would  like not  to be disturbed  by ideas,  would  like to believe that  Authorities  are looking after their best interests. But if such "authorities" are looking  after  their  own  best interests  first -if  a  ruthless  amorality  guides  the governors and  a moral apathy  invades the governed -the "benevolence" is false and  government   guarantees  of  freedom  are  subverted.  Paradoxically it  is not chaos that  results, but order,  false order.  In  Gringo,  his recent  South  American  travel  journal,  the Canadian journalist Dennis Gruending writes of his own poli­ tical  education  in  Chile:  eager  to uncover  tales of rebellion  and  resistance,  he instead  found   people  complacent   about  dictatorship-complacent  because  it supplied  the  appearance of  order,  and  because  the  threat   of  uncertainty was apparently more frightening  to them  than the  restriction  of their  freedoms:  for them, the form the order took, and the reasons that  allowed a restrictive order to take  power  in  the  first place, were  of less moment  than  the  illusion of security they  currently  enjoyed.  And  how  is this illusion  projected?  Through systems of

2

EDITORIAL

privilege and  punishment, both covert and observable, and  through  language.  As Orwell  knew, a rhetoric  of benevolence, repeated often enough,  will be accepted, because  the  terms of the  rhetoric  will become stock phrases in peoples' vocabu­ lary:  the  words will be used, and  words in use carry the cachet  of  authority, as though  they  had  real  meaning.   (What  words have the  politics of  the  last forty years  custom-framed? "imperialist," "liberated," "law-and-order,"  "flexibility,"  "restraint." "Game plan"  has  come  to  mean  military  strategy,  as  though  war were child's play and  would leave us untouched.)
What  lessons are  there  to  learn  from  such  matters-"Here"-in  Canada, where  we  profess our  belief in  "peace,  order,  and  good  government"? One  is cautionary:  to  remember  that  this  trio  is a unit,  that  "order" without  "good government" may not  be admirable, that "bad  government" can emerge here as well as elsewhere and  impose an order that serves itself and its friends more than it  protects  peace  and  the  people. A different  lesson is Machiavellian: to learn that  there is power in rhetoric, and that  repetitive advertising  can sell people and beliefs as well as it can  market  products.  A third  is advisory:  how to persist in maintaining freedoms -by learning  to resist the rhetoric  as well as to battle  the apathy. Freedoms  are  not  lost  because  others  take  us over;  freedoms  are  lost when  we passively give them  up. And we give them up the moment  we lose our facility  with  language,   our  desire  to  know  more,  our  willingness to  question, challenge,  doubt.  We give them  up  when we lose our  language  and  our  history to the news-makers,  the news-shapers, the publicists, and  the priests of fad.  And we resist through  language:   by valuing literacy and  asserting the importance of education. It is because literacy  is such a force in society that  usurpers of power try always to control  the young;  by limiting people's desire or ability to challenge what  they have  been told, they diminish  the threat  to their  own  hold on power. Their  power depends  upon others'  passivity, and in order to defuse any articulate opposition  to  their  own  rhetoric,  they  make scapegoats of anyone  who  can use words effectively-writers, teachers-by attempting to ridicule the importance
of the arts and  to imply that  artists and intellectuals are merely children  at play.
Language, we must  remember, is an  inheritance  and  a freedom-it  should give life to our society, not restrict it.  (Our  official bilingualism should open opportunities for us in the world at large, not be received as a Protestant punish­ ment.)   In this context  it is interesting  to read two fine recent works on the range of  the  English  language   alone:    Robert   Claiborne's   Our   Marvelous   Native Tongue (Times  Books)  and  Richard  Bailey and Manfred Gorlach's English as a World  Language  (Univ. of Michigan  Press).  Bailey and Gorlach  have  brought together  fourteen  parallel  essays on the cultural  and formal variations  that  char­ acterize  English  in  Great  Britain,  the  Commonwealth, and  the  United  States;  they  analyze  sound  systems, vocabulary  differences, structural and  grammatical features  of the language  in the separate  societies that  use English, and  they com-

3

EDITORIAL

ment  on  the  history  and  social  implications of  English  usage  as well. Claiborne writes  a  more  personal  book,  about   his own  love  affair with  the  language and American society,  and   through both  of  these  with  the  cultural  inheritance  he derives  from  England. Bailey and  Gorlach emphasize multiplicity and  variation and  the  richness  that  variation creates; Claiborne emphasizes tradition and  the richness  of a linear  descent.  The  contributions to English  as a World  Language make  clear  how  phonetic and  structural variations record  peoples'  separate  his­ tories-the  diversity  of  their   experience and   attitudes-and show  how  lan­  guage  is therefore a sensitive  medium for  communicating the  subtleties  of  cul­ tural values.  Claiborne is at  his most  fascinating in tracing the  root  meanings of words,  the  hidden metaphors and  attitudinal assumptions that  often  rest  within  the  current structures of the  words  we use. But  no subject  could illustrate more  clearly  the  difference in authorial expectation that  marks the two books than  the subject of language in  Canada. Claiborne, the  enthusiast  for  a single  tradition, writes  that  the

English  spoken  by  most  Canadians differs  little  from  General   American,  apart from  one fairly widespread  trait: the diphthong in words like "out" and "about" shifts  toward  IooI, yielding something  like Scots  "oot" and  "aboot".... Other­
wise ... Canada is too close to the United  States ... to be more than  an extension
of its  large  neighbor,  linguistically speaking-always, of course, excepting Que­ bec, most of whose inhabitants continue  to speak their  own rather  archaic dialect of French.

Claiborne, that  is, speaks  of  dialect, of variation from  a  presumed norm  that is held  in the  command of  a  central authority. Bailey,  who  writes  the  excellent chapter on Canada in the other  book, speaks of a cultural difference in language:

From  the earliest  times, the English language  in Canada has taken a distinctively Canadian form,  a combination  of mutually  intelligible  but  differing  regional  and social  dialects.... Today,  regional  differences  still  exist in  the  English  of  Cana­ dians,  but  they  have  become more  alike  in  their  speech  and,  at  the  same  time, more  and  more  distinct  from  the  other  Englishes  of  Great   Britain  and  North America....

What  is distinctly  Canadian  about  Canadian English  is not  its unique  linguistic features  (of which  there are a handful) but its combination of tendencies  that  are uniquely  distributed.

No  one  else, that  is, talks like  us,  pace Mr.  Claiborne. That may  not  be a suffi­ cient  buttress against national disintegration, but  it should remind us that we can be  comfortable with  our  speech  because  our  speech  still  gives us the freedom to be who we are.
Interestingly, it  is Claiborne who  reminds us directly that   the  freedoms that speech   gives  us  are   repeatedly  under   pressure;  he  offers  government  secrecy, "para-government"  rhetoric, and   irresponsible censorship  as the  three   current

4

EDITORIAL


threats, and   he  does  not  idly  promise  that   language and  freedom will survive them.  A  knowledge of  history  is the  defence  he seems  by implication to cham­ pion; one  could  wish  him  as informed on his facts  as Bailey is, and  as apprecia­ tive of cultural differences. But  there  remains  a political  urgency  about the threat he feels, the  need  he wants satisfied.  Imposed systems of order  can disenfranchise us,  more  easily  than   we  like  to  think,  and  in   1g84, before,  or  after.  But  if we value  our  independence enough, we  will continue to  value  our  differences. We will  reject  systems  that rule  by fear,  and  retain  control over  the  words  we  use. By  keeping   our  language alive,  we  can  retain  some  controls  over  opportunity, over  the  history  we  have  inherited and  made,  and  over  the  memories  that  are our  own  to  possess. We  can  perhaps in  the  process  even  give ourselves  a  little room  in  which to  think, in  which  to  create  and,  as we  used  to  do  as children, also to piay.

W.N.












PROLOGUE

Doug Fetherling


When the heart skips a beat
the lights begin to falter in a show of solidarity

This is not the apocalypse, it is not even morning
but only a reminder of what's obvious and basic:

We have forgotten  nature so nature, perhaps, has abandoned  us

If this is the forest then we must be the animals

5

IRISH & BIBLICAL MYTH IN JACK HODGINS' liTHE INVENTION OF THE WORLD"


Jan C. Horner

ONFIRST  READING  Jack Hodgh>s' The Invention of the
World  one is not sure whether  Hodgins is saying that  myth  is a swindle or that
myth is a fiction which is nonetheless true. I am convinced  that  The  Invention of the World  must  be read  mythically because the  development of Becker as char­ acter-narrator shows that  some revelation  has taken  place and  that,  in fact,  the pilgrimage  to  Ireland   is  a  sacred   journey.1   Furthermore, events  in  the  story resound  with  mythic  paradigms,  both  Irish and  Biblical:  Keneally's conception,  the  central  pilgrimage  of  Maggie,  Wade,  and  Becker, Keneally's expulsion,  the riotous wedding  among others. Finally, Keneally  and  Horseman are truly mythic characters.  Horseman, as revealed  by the  events  of the  story, is literally  super­ natural. Keneally  is mythic by virtue of the  profound  dimension  he has assumed in the  unconscious of the other  characters  in the  novel. Both characters  are up­ held in their  mythic  roles by Hodgins' conflation of Irish and  Biblical myth and epic in his creation of them.2
In  order  to answer the initial  question-"is myth  a swindle?"-it  is neces­ sary to come to terms  both with "The Eden  Swindle," the source of the mythic and  heroic  materials  concerning  Keneally,  and  with  its  author  Strabo  Becker. The story read on its own terms is as much an account  of Keneally's Lucifer-like fall as it is of the swindle of Carrigdhoun. Taking into  consideration  the author of "The Eden Swindle,"  Strabo  Becker, this section of the book can be viewed as a history into which unconscious reality has been incorporated.
One could look upon the fantastic  story of Keneally's  birth as simply a swindle perpetrated by Keneally on  Carrigdhoun, and  one could  view the content  of his mother's  visions and  dreams as his inventions. But this view ignores the testimony of Grania   O'Flynn, who  witnesses the  coupling  of Keneally's  mother  with  the bull  god,  and   whose  visionary  peasant   imagination  may   have  intuited   his mother's  original  dream.  The  reader  is asked  to  accept  Julius'  vision into  the past;   why  not  Grania   O'Flynn's?  When  she  denounces   Keneally   before  her death,  she  does not  denounce  his fantastic  birth,  but  his intention to take  Car­ rigdhoun  to Canada.

6

MYTH IN HODGINS


Keneally is born  with  god-like  potential, born  perhaps to be  a saviour  of his people.  Indeed, Yeats'  heroine, Cathleen ni  Houliha:n,  who  recruited the  Irish youth  to insurrection, is the spirit  who is chosen  to announce his birth. One  half of his personality has enough love of a fight, it is later  revealed, to want  to whip the  English  out  of  Ireland. His  epic  battle  in Carrigdhoun is, significantly, with an English  bailiff.
But it is as though once  Keneally is expelled  from Carrigdhoun he ceases to be supernatural and   becomes   merely   manipulative.  Like  Lucifer,  when   Keneally makes  and  destroys  the  god  machine, he  reduces  himself  as  well.  He  convinces no  one  in  Ireland to  follow  him  except  a  cripple  in  Kilgorlan. This  conscious assault  on  Kilgorlan's faith  is far  less devastating than  the  unconscious effect  of the   mist  on  Carrigdhoun. It  is  not  through any  demonstration  of  Keneally's power  that   the  villagers  are  persuaded to  follow  him;  nor  can  their  conversion be  attributed to  the  villagers  being  "complacent rubes," as  Robert Lecker  has stated. Rather,  Keneally's conscious  capitalization on  their  unconscious  vulner­ ability  causes the  villagers  to follow him. At this point Grania O'Flynn recognizes the  reduction of  Keneally's stature:  "But  she knew,  after  looking  once into  the eyes of the  returned Keneally, that  in  the years of his absence  the  trickster  child in  him  had   been  nurtured into  meanness,   the  unnatural  strength  of  him  had developed into  a danger, the immense  knowledge  of him  had twisted  itself into  a cynicism.  The  fiery glow  in  his eyes was  more  the  light  of a fanaticism than  of the  god-qualities in his bull-father she'd  seen in her shed  all those years before."' At the  end  of his life Keneally is reduced  to the bestial, like Lycaon. His Celtic surname  Keneally or   "0  cmnrAOtAlD" means  both  "wolf   head" and  "learned man"4    and   it is  the  wolf  rather than  the sage  into  which  he  chooses to metamorphose.5   When  it is too late  Keneally  tries to recover  the  dimension he has lost by corkscrewing himself into  the earth; he attempts to redeem  his mythic
beginning-his birth,  as it were, from  the earth. When  Lily questions him  about this,  Keneally speaks  of Irish  " 'giant  circular stone  forts,  high  up on a hump of land, where  the  people  long  ago  used  to live, or hide  from  invaders. Inside  the stone  walls  and   down   under   the  ground   there  were  tunnels, to  escape,  in  case they  were surrounded by the  enemy.' " What  Keneally is alluding to is the sidhe or  Land   Under Hill  in  the  depths of mountains where  the  Irish  gods  were sup­ posed  to  have  retired   upon   the  coming  to  Ireland of  men.6   The  sidhe  has  re­ mained  sacred  even  while Keneally is corrupted.
Another explanation for  the fantastic-historic paradox of "The Eden  Swindle"
is  that   Strabo Becker,  its  amanuensis, recognizes  the  powerful effect  Keneally has   had   on  the   personal  and   collective   unconscious   of  the   islanders  and   he attempts to  reconcile  this  psychic  phenomena with  historical  fact.  The  islanders most  notably  affected  by him  are  Madmother, Lily, Maggie, Doreen  Ryan  in her fear  and   desire  for  privacy,   the  paranoid Henry  Burke  and  the  alleged  son  of

7

MYTH IN HODGINS

Enrico  Manani, whose childhood fear evokes such a great ambition  to escape the colony that  he becomes a "world  famous singer."  Thus  Becker accepts rumour, hyperbole,  and  mythic  stature  for  Keneally  in his "history" because  it  reflects Keneally's far-reaching influence. Keneally accuses his friend  Edward  Guthrie  of long  distance  killing, but  Keneally's  baleful influence  extends  over time  as well as  space.  In  fact,  Donal  Keneally  represents  unmeaning,  chaos,  illusion  and obscurity,  and  he  holds such  archetypal  importance, even among  Becker's con­ temporaries,  that  his myth  must finally be confronted  and  released  to oblivion:  "'Myth ... like all the past, real or imaginary,  must  be acknowledged ... espe­ cially when  it's  not believed. When  you begin to disbelieve in  Keneally you can begin to believe in yourself.' "
Robert   Lecker,   however,  suggests  that   Becker  is  taken   in  by  Keneally: "Hodgins implies  that  Becker is mistaken  in  the  value  he  places upon  himself and  his search for legend. His attempt  to reshape Keneally's  world by organizing fragmented memories, documents, and details makes him envision himself as a creator.  But  he becomes a  reflection of his deceptive  subject: the  myth  he  un­ covers in  Keneally  is not one of truth  but one of magic  and  treachery." Lecker misses the  point;  for  what  is crucial  is not  whether  the myth  is one of  truth  or deception,  but that  Keneally is a manifestation of myth.
Lecker  also  argues  that:  "Becker's  problem ... is that  he  takes  the  warped
data   he  uncovers  far  too seriously-seriously enough  to see Keneally,  who  is really  a  brutal,  selfish tyrant,  as the legendary  redeemer  of his people."  This  is never the case. The  reader is not allowed into  Becker's thoughts,  nor even hears much  of  his dialogue  until  the  "Wolves  of  Lycaon" and  "Pilgrimage." Before that  we are  introduced   to him  by the narrator who reveals his pretensions  and hints at his limitations-Becker's caretaker  rather  than  creator  role. "The Eden Swindle"  is, moreover, a collective tale and  one which is one step removed from Becker, for the narrator says: "Becker tells you this:." The  reader is not allowed to  know  how or  why Becker would  tell him  "this" and  is given no clues as to how his personality has affected the telling. But the Becker who recognizes that Keneally  is evil, and  that  Keneally's myth must be confronted, does not perceive the Irishman  as a "legendary  redeemer."



BECKER's PERCEPTION  is refined  in the  course of the  book. In  the introductory section Becker wants to control, order,  and  possess Keneally's story,  but  in  "Second  Growth" he admits:    "His  story  has  returned   to the  air where I found it, it will never belong to me, for all my gathering and  hoarding." The  introduction and  "Scrapbook" are  co-extensive, for in the introduction we are  told  that  Becker already  has a  hoard  of scrapbooks,  tapes,  and  other  docu­ ments,  while  the  tale of Keneally  only has "a  certain  agreed-upon  beginning."

8

MYTH IN  HODGINS

"The Eden  Swindle" and  "Second  Growth" also can  be paired  together -both having  similar  opening  statements  by Becker and  both  admitting that  Becker is not  the  creator  and  that  the story exists independent of him. As Lecker himself points out,  the  "agreed-upon beginning" of the introduction is changed in "The Eden   Swindle,"  from   "Donal  Keneally's  mother  started   it  all"  to  "It  was Keneally's   mother   who  started   the  whole  deception."  This   change   reflects Becker's  realization   that   it  is  not  his mission to  uncover  the  exact  details  of Keneally's  extraordinary life,  but  to  perceive  what  myth  he  represents  and  to come to terms with it. Becker acknowledges that Keneally's  story is a deception, but one which offers mythic truth.
Becker, whose mythical  counterpart is Charon,  leads us from the conscious to the unconscious  reality of Keneally. This connection  is drawn  by Becker himself in  his notes about  the  Irish  hawker  (for  the ferry to the garden  island  of  Gar­ nish)  who is anxious to go to the next world. Becker, then, acts as a psychopomp for the reader  as much as Horseman  does for Maggie and Wade.
The  marriage that  Becker  records in  "Second  Growth" reflects the  psychic healing  that  has  taken  place  in the  community  after  the  pilgrimage.  The  mar­ riage  is  a  communal  event  and  in  its  disorder  akin  to  primitive  rites  which invoked  chaos in order  to regenerate  the world. In  primitive  cultures this crea­ tion  or invention  of the  cosmos recurred  each  year, the new year  arriving  with the harvest.7   The  new  year in Irish  pagan  culture  coincided  with  the festival of Samhain  on the first of November  where the dead were able to rise and mix with the living. Ella  Young,  an  Irish folklorist, attests to the visionary significance of Samhain:  "Samhain is,  I think,  the  greatest  of  the  Old  Celtic  Festivals,  this Feast  of Nuts-the  Nuts of Knowledge-and of apples-the Golden  Apples
of  the  Tree  of  Life-since  in  it,  symbolically, the  Shaper  of the  World,  the Smith  of the  Stars,  of  Hades,  and  of the  Nether  Hell grants  to those who can drink  of his cup,  immortal  life and  power to know the true from  the seeming."8
The  reader  is not told the date of Maggie's  wedding, but the first Saturday in November  is close enough  for one to suspect that  it is also intended  to be Sam­ hain,  the  first  day  of  November.  The  presence of the  dead  (Keneally  and  his three  wives) ;  the  combat   between  two opposing  groups   (the  loggers  and  the townspeople)  ; and  the presence of the erotic element in the food orgy and  in the passionate  embrace   of  Wade  and   Maggie   (which  dispels  the  fight  and  from which  they emerge  "the  new  man  and  the new woman") are  all  characteristic traits of primitive  new year festivals.
Unlike  Keneally,  Maggie  is known to the entire community  and  her marriage
unites the  community in a desire for celebration  and  then in a desire for  peace. The  list of presents  offered  the  couple  ranges from  plausible items  to odd  con­ crete  objects  to  utter   abstractions. These  abstractions   are  unconscious  hopes, wishes, and  fears  which  have  been allowed  to  rise like the  dead  on  this  heiro-


9

MYTH IN   HODGINS

phanous occasion.  This  abstract category  will not  help  Maggie and  Wade set up housekeeping, but  it  will present  a vision of  the  future of equal parts  good  and evil. It is with  these  gifts of vision that  "the fine and  important couple" will be able  to  maintain an  ecological  balance in the  larger  world  which  they  have  un­ covered.



l:Is MYTHIC   READING  OF  The  Invention of the  World   is supported by the  book's  allusion  to Irish  paradigms of myth,  epic,  and  legend  in Keneally  and  Horseman. For if one examines The  Mythological Cycle,  Keneally appears to be modelled  after  Balor, a King  of the  Fomorians, the elder of the two races of gcds  venerated by the  ancient  Irish.  The Fomori incarnate the  forces of death, night,  storm, and  ignorance (Arbois de Jubainville, p. 79). They  were the enemies of the Tuatha de Danann, the good gods of light,  knowledge, and  dawn. The  Fomor  were  also known  as the  gods of the  men  of Domna (or  Domnand), the  men  of Damna being  the traditional foes of the  Ulster  heroes,  Cuchulain and Conchobar.  Donal   is  written  "DOr'lnA1.1."   in  Irish and is  derived from the Celtic   dumno-valos  "world  mighty"  or  dubno-valos, "mighty  in  the   deep." 9 "D01"1nAn ," the   word  which  is  the   name of  the people who   worship   the Fomor,   means   "a  little   world"  or   "microcosm,"'"  suggesting  both   the   Fir­ Domnan's human limitations and  their  limited  vision:   the  Fir-Domnan have "all  manner of  vices and  defects" (Arbois de  Jubainville, p.  72). Thus, in  his  very naming, Keneally has the  potential both  for dominion and  petty dominance.
Balor's  lineage   confirms  Keneally's identification  with  him.  In  Celtic  legend the  moon  is a horned creature, a  bull-headed god  named Buair-ainech and  like Keneally, Balor,  the  god  of Night  is born  from  this  bull-headed god  (Arbois de Jubainville, p.   1 14). Balor  has  an  evil  eye  which   when  opened   strikes  like  a thunderbolt  ( Arbois  de  Jubainville, p.  115)  and  he  is sometimes referred  to  as god  of  the  Thunderbolt. Similarly,   Keneally's dogs,  both   called  Thunderbird, are symbolic  of his power  and  instrumental to the  fear  he arouses.  At his greatest performance Keneally appears to call up a thunderstorm which  reduces  even  the most sceptical witnesses to doglike servility.
Balor  is destroyed  when  Lugh  his grandson puts  out  his evil eye. Keneally is broken  when  Thunderbird is killed by Paddy  O'Mahony, who  Lily says could  be Keneally's son.  Furthermore, in  popular Irish  folklore,  the  father of Lugh,  who begins Balor's  downfall, is named  MacKineely (son of Kineely)  just as in a sense O'Mahoney is Keneally's son.
Keneally's treatment of the Colony  people as if they  were slaves evokes another
Fomor,   Bress,  of  whom  Arbois  de  Jubainville writes:  "He  exacted   oppressive tributes from  the  people  and  gave  nothing in  return." The   Fomor  were  known as a  race  of  tyrants who  exacted  tributes of corn  and   milk  and  the  sacrifice  of

10

MYTH IN   HODGINS

two  thirds  of  the  children   born  in  the  year  (Arbois  de  Jubainville, p.  57). Keneally,  before  the  dedication   of  The  House  of  Revelations,  proclaims  that there  will be no sacrifices of children  "because  they were civilized men and saw no evidence  at  all of any  god  to  worship."  Ironically,  many  of the  children  of the  Colony are sacrificial  victims to Keneally's omnipotence,  most notably Mad­ mother Thomas, who is molested by him.
In  physical appearance the Fomor were monstrous:  either dwarfs, giants, men with goats' heads or deformed  beings (Arbois de Jubainville, pp. 52-54). In the Book of  Invasions,  among  the  deformed  Fomor,  are  those  with  only one hand and  one  foot.  Thus   one  recognizes  Jems  the  Cripple,  Jerry   Quirke,   Grania O'Flynn, and  even the grotesque  Keneally with his "sack of turnips." Moreover the huge trees which surround the Colony are dark giants.
Keneally  is, then,  a  manifestation   of  the  archetype  of  death,  darkness,  and
evil. He is associated  with  mist, which symbolizes a sinister unknowable  quality. Becker  comments   that   the  islanders  "don't  have  any  idea  what   to  do  with Keneally. As long as he was out there, unreckoned  with, unlabelled,  he was a fascination  and  a threat. You couldn't  be sure how much  reality  to grant  him. Evil is always like that."
Keneally  upsets  the  paradise  of fearlessness in  Carrigdhoun even  before  the coming  of the  mist. He  plays great  deceptions  on the  people and  disturbs  their sense of time.  Indeed,  Keneally's  great  knowledge is mistlike:  "Donal Keneally absorbed  knowledge  as it came down the mountain  in the Inist and  clung to him like the moisture  of his hair." Keneally's sense of "fifty different  ways you could come at a word like 'truth' and  arrive at a separate  meaning  every time" speaks of the  plurality  rather  than  the  unity of his vision. It  is shortly  after  Keneally's departure from  Carrigdhoun  that  the  terrible  mist  does  descend,11   as  though with his expulsion paradise  ceases to exist.
Fear  invades  Carrigdhoun and  the villagers are no longer  able  to distinguish the  real  world  from  the  imagined,  truth  from  unmeaning. Here,  the  Biblical myth  of the  fall and  Paradise Lost echo in the Irish mist. One  interpretation of the  Biblical fall understands the Tree of Life and the Tree  of Knowledge  as the same tree. The serpent offers Adam and Eve a hitherto untasted experience "of fragmented unity,  of  things  unreferred  to the  center  and  valued  for their  own sake  as  if  they  were  self-sufficing entities."12   When  they  partake  of  the  fruit, Adam  and  Eve  are  allowed  to  know  a  partial  truth  in scientific exactness and detail,  the  trees  are  separated, and  Adam  and  Eve lose the  ability  to know the whole or  perceive the  unity.  While the Samhain  wedding  restores the two trees (of Apples and  of Nuts)  to visionary wholeness, the people of Carrigdhoun with the  expulsion  of Keneally  and  the descent of the mist are synonymous  with the Fir-Domnan who  worshipped  the  Fomor  and  exchanged  macrocosm  for  micro­ cosm, the Tree of Life for the Tree of Knowledge.


II

MYTH IN  HODGINS

The  explicit  reason for  Keneally's  expulsion  and  the  concomitant descent  of the  mist  is his fight  with  the  English  bailiff.  Here  epic  allusions to  both  Irish legend  and  Paradise Lost signal  a mythic  fall.  For "Donal" may  also allude  to "Donnataurus," the  name  of  the  dun-coloured,  prize  bull  in  the  T din  B6
Cuailnge  of the Heroic, Ulster or Red Branch  Cycle (Lecker,  pp. 95-96) .18  Near the end  of this saga  the dun  bull fights and  wins an  epic battle  with  the white bull of the opposing side. In  a direct  parallel  Keneally's  battle  with the English­ man  marks  the  countryside  with "The Bailiff's Retreat," just as Ireland's place names according  to the Cuailnge  were changed  by the bulls' fight.14 This fight is later  re-enacted   when  Keneally  confronts  the  Island  town's  mayor.  The  Island fight  begins  with  the  Irishman  "springing   up  surprised  from  the  mayor's  bed

5
 Their  final battle  also has a devastating effect on the

landscape,  and  Keneally again  whips his opponent  yet is forced  to leave.
In  the Cuailnge  after winning  his fight the dun  bull rampages  across Ireland. Significantly, when the bull reaches the sea his heart bursts and he dies, just as Keneally  suffers the  ritual  death  of expulsion.  In  Keneally's  temporary victory, then,  one  can  see the  dun  hull's  last  hurrah and  Lucifer's  initial  brave  stand against  God.  This  is not  to say that  the  English  bailiff  is God,  but  that  he is what Keneally  mistook for dominion;  he is tyranny  rather  than  divinity.  In other words the white bull is the bailiff's more apt alter-ego.
Keneally's  character  also  corresponds  to Partholon, the  chief of the first race
in the  Mythological  Cycle to settle in Ireland. Distinguished  by their  folly,  Par­ tholon  and  his people  preceded  the  divine  Tuatha de  Danann.  Partholon de­ livered  his people from their  enemy by successfully leading  them  to victory over the Fomor  ( Arbois de Jubainville,  p.I 8). Keneally  appears to deliver his people from  the  enemy:   literally  from  their  English  oppressors,  and  figuratively  from their  mistlike fear.  After Partholon's death,  his colony is wiped  out by a plague which  is understood  as an  act  of divine  vengeance: "When  Partholon left  his country  to come into  Ireland, it was not  of his own accord;  he had  been con­ demned  to exile for having killed his father  and  his mother -a double  parracide  for  which  banishment  was  not  deemed  a  sufficient  punishment"  ( Arbois  de Jubainville,  p.  20). Similarly,  Keneally's  mother  dies  giving  birth  to  him,  his foster  father   Quirke  dies of shock  when  Keneally  returns  to Carrigdhoun and Keneally  outright   murders  Grania   O'Flynn,  his  foster  mother.   (Lucifer's at­ tempted  parracide is also evoked here. )   Both  Partholon and  Keneally  are false saviours for their  people; their  journey to "promised land" is compromised  from the outset.
Keneally  also is like Partholon  in the modem  legends, in having  an unfaithful wife. Partholon catches  his wife in  an  adulterous situation with  a  young  man ( Arbois de Jubainville, p. I 8) .16 When  confronted, the  wife blames  Partholon, suggesting that  he is a less than  adequate or  desirable  husband.  In  great  anger

I2

MYTH IN  HODGINS

Partholon kills his wife's dog-"the first act of jealousy in Ireland." Keneally's jealousy is much  more  ferocious, for  the implication  in  the  text is that  he kills Nell and  her lover. Because of his illegitimacy as leader Keneally reacts especially violently  to criticism.  Since  in  the end  his self-deceiving notions of his god-like origins and  his god-given  rights are closely tied to his sexual potency and  prow­ ess, he is especially vulnerable  to attack  in this area.  Hence  his despicable treat­  ment  of Hattie Scully for  her  and  her  mother's  "treachery";  hence  the alleged murders  of  his  wife and  Christopher   Wall. Significantly  too, when  Paddy  0'­ Mahony  challenges Keneally's  droit  de seigneur,. Keneally's power base begins to crumble.  The  death  of Keneally's  child by Mary O'Mahony at Easter acts as a reminder of his loss of power.




IN CONTRAST  TO   KENEALLY,  Horseman   is a  truly  recogniz­ able supernatural character. His counterparts in Irish  myth  are  the Tuatha de Danann. In  pagan  belief the  Tuatha De descended  from  heaven  and evidence in  the  Irish  annals  reveals  that  these Irish  gods travelled  in  air ships.17  Hence Horseman's association  with  a  car  "paler  than  sky, a silver-blue  sedan,"  space ships and  reflections.  The  name  "Horseman" may allude  to a  number  of Irish myths in which  the hero,  on returning  from the Land  of the Dead  or the Land Under  Wave,  "cannot alight  from his horse without  exposing himself to certain misfortune ... their  chariot  and  horses, which the mode of  warfare  of the primi­ tive  Celts  associated  so  inseparably  with  them-have  something  superhuman about  them,  and  are  in  many  respects exempt  from  the  general  laws to which the  rest  of  nature   is subject" (Arbois  de  Jubainville,  p.  207). "Horseman" is also  undoubtedly an  allusion  to  Yeats'  epitaph  and  "Under Ben Bulben,"  his last poem. Yeats' use of horsemen  was based upon the peasant  belief, researched by  Lady  Gregory  and   himself,  that  supernatural  horsemen  rode  between  the mountains.18
Horsemen  cannot  be understood  simply as Wade Powers' double because he is seen  by Anna  Sterner   and  Maggie,  and  Anna  also notices  his resemblance  to Wade.  Horseman's  teasing  statement   that  he  is, in  a  manner   of speaking,  a "man  of God,"  and  his feat of being able to release himself from the locked fort, attest  to his super-nature. One  also senses about  him that  he moves beyond the limits of life. To  Maggie  he is Yeats' cold horseman,  bringing  her anxiety about mortality: " 'This  damn   wind ... it makes me cold right  to the  bone-I half expect  to see your  friend  Horseman  sneaking around  behind  the stones, he had the same  kind  of effect on  me.' " Once  men drove them  out  of visible Ireland, the  Tuatha de  Danann and  Fomor  became  the Sidhe,  which  means  "wind.mo In  Yeats' mind  the  horsemen  were also associated with  powers of final destruc-

MYTH IN  HODGINS

tion;  the  horsemen  of  Revelations  are  also  alluded   to  in  Hodgins'   book.  In Wade's  dream,  Horseman  in his space ship tries to suck him in  just as Keneally seems to suck Lily into his obsessive digging. Wade  and  Keneally are both mov­ ing towards  a recovery of the true self:  both  fear  death  and  apocalyptic empti­ ness.
Keneally  betrays  curious similarities to Horseman. Keneally's  high boots were polished "till  you'd  see the sky in them.... " After  Keneally's  failure  to convert Kilgorlin  a:nd other  villages and  his encounter with  the  sexually  intimidating Meg Delaney, he steals a horse. It is with this horse his luck changes:  he miracu­ lously finds Nell MacGuire  and  returns  triumphantly to Carrigdhoun. When  he plays "Superman" at  the  Colony his horse,  usually  a  black  stallion, symbolizes his sense of his own god-like sexuality. Keneally  in "Wolves of  Lycaon" is like a black  hole sucking  in Lily  (and  removing  her soul)  and  in  "Wade" Horseman  in a dream  warning  acts like a vacuum  trying  to suck in  Wade.  These  parallels suggest Keneally's  non-identity  or rather  his parasitic identity.  This  relationship between  Keneally  and  Horseman   has  its  paradigm  in that  of  the  Tuatha de Danann  and  the  Fomor:   "The Fomoiri  are  normally   pictured  as  unpleasant  spirits dwelling overseas to the north of  Ireland. There is a vagueness, however, in  Irish  tradition concerning  them  which  is in  marked  contrast  with  the  clear characterization and  wealth  of  detail  about  individuals which  has been handed  down  concerning  the  Tuatha  de Donann.  Indeed  the  vagueness is such  that  it has permitted  so great  an expert  as T.  F. O'Rahilly to suggest that  between  the Fomoiri and  the Tuatha De 'there are at bottom  no real distinctions.' "20
Unlike  Keneally,  who affects the lives of others randomly  and  gratuitously, Horseman  causes psychic disturbances at crucial  moments.  In  Maggie's  case, she is stewing over the  appearance of Danny  Holland  at  their son's wedding.  It be­ comes apparent that  she fears Holland's "shadowy  presence"  because he reflects a  side of  herself she would  like to bury-her  bush  or  Zulu self. While she is fretting  over  Holland, Anna  Sterner  appears at  the  window  to  tell  her  about Horseman. Through the same  window  Wade  appears to Lily Hayworth  as her former  husband  Donal  Keneally. Lily fears Keneally  for much  the same reasons that   Maggie  fears  her  first  "husband" -for  the  influence  he  had  over  her. When  juxtaposed  with the disturbing  trio of Horseman, Wade,  and Keneally, the threat  of Holland  is diminished and  Maggie's fear of him dissolves.
Horseman  appears  to Wade shortly after  he denies ever having loved Maggie, his anima  figure. Wade is a milder version of Keneally,  or at least someone who has  caught   a  residual  dose  of  Keneally's  emptiness.  Wade's   fort  is  a  small counterfeit  world  like Keneally's  Colony. Wade  is the  black sheep of his family, just as Keneally  was of his village. Both men  have a weakness for women. Wade reflects, suggesting  his resemblance to Keneally: "Without even making  a show of it they [women] led you around  like a bull with a ring in your nose.... "

MYTH IN  HODGINS

Horseman  disturbs  Wade's  sense of reality before he is sucked into the void as Keneally  is. Wade's  anxiety  about  reality  is reflected  even  in  his first feelings about  Horseman's sedan: "Wade felt like someone who had  just come through a museum  where  he'd  admired  everything  there  was, and  then  realized that  he hadn't the  slightest  idea  what  any  of it  meant." In  this state  of mind  Wade becomes  hostile  to  Virginia  Kerr's  art  because it does not  conform  to what  he can  see  with  his  eyes. Wade,  like Keneally,  has  become  a  materialist  and,  as Virginia  Kerr  tells  him,  has  lost the  ability  to  perceive truth.  He  destroys the vision of her art and  sends her away as surely as one suspects Keneally killed his first wife and  her lover for the way they challenged his world.
Horseman  enlightens  Wade  in two ways. He tells him  that  he has buried  his
true  self, perhaps  symbolically  in  his fort.  Wade  is once  more  tied  to Keneally who in  the  end  is obsessed with  the ancient  circular  forts  and  what  is beneath them.  He also tells Wade,  by means of the story of the woman  grieving over her dead  children  in  the  one  remaining  room of her house, that  he too has chosen to accept  a small space  for the whole world. It  is this smallness of vision which has  made  Wade  resist the  loggers' life as well as the  life of  his parents-his mother ends up in a booth selling tickets.
Horseman  invades  Maggie  and  Wade's  consciousness on two significant  occa­ sions on  the  pilgrimage.  At  Carrigdhoun in  the ruins of a stone  house  Maggie persuades  Wade  how  little is needed  to domesticate  and  swindle  people from  a larger   vision  of  the  world,  suggesting  how  easily  people  are  fooled:   " 'The stones,'  she  said,  'these  walls. Can  you imagine  these  being  all  that  separated inside from  outside?  All that  made  home separate  from  world?'" Just  after  this remark   Maggie  chooses for  the  first time  to  confront  Wade  with  Horseman's revelations.
Horseman   is also  present  at  the stones above  Kilkeal,  the  high  point  of the Maggie-Wade-Becker pilgrimage.  He  breaks in on  Maggie's  thoughts  following her anxiety about  finding her position on the map. Horseman  has appeared to counteract  the influence  of maps before this event. Maggie was studying her maps and  planning  road  blocks for Danny  when she first heard of Horseman. Fighting over the road  with  Holland  she realized she has been drawn  into  a petty battle while Lily might  have been dying and also realized the non-reality  of any fear of Holland.
Keneally  and  his small  sense of dominion  are from  the  beginning  associated
with  maps.  When   Keneally  makes  his own  pilgrimage  to  the  stones after  his expulsion  from  Carrigdhoun "in  the  course of the long night  he heard  the soft voice of his mother  laying out for him the direction  of his life like a complicated map of roads."  In  Maggie's  dreams, which arise from the enslaved and  befouled world  as  represented   on  her  maps,  Keneally  appears.   While  Maggie  in  her dream  tries to open  up  the locked-up  world of her maps, a Keneally-like figure

MYTH IN  HODGINS

harasses and scares her:  "And  always, always from behind  a mileage number  on a boundary  line an  upright  man-like shadow  would appear and  pursue  her run­ ning  down  the  broken  lines  and  twisting  roads,  down  blue-vein  streams  and narrow  inlets, his laugh  a thunderous roar  that  made  the  paper  ripple  beneath her feet."  Indeed,  Keneally allies himself with surveyors and  land-developers in his vision of the Island being setded and  developed  by what would be prison-like colonies much like his own.
Wade  also  shows a  reluctance  to  trust  his  instinct  and  relinquish  signs. He wishes to place Horseman  on a map  as a test of Horseman's reality. Driving  in Ireland  Wade  is hesitant  to trust  any roads not on the  map.  Yet it is Wade,  in his instinctive  movement  to cover her map,  who releases Maggie from  her obses­ sion. Her  recognition  of the  childlike quality  of Wade's foot  makes her  map  a small  and  invented   reality  by  comparison.  Maggie  sees Wade  as her  destiny rather  than  the complex and  duplicitous  map  that  was presented  to Keneally  by his mother  at  the  stones.  Her  recognition  is also  an  acknowledgement of  her truly  feminine  role  as the  mother -a  role which  for  much  of her life she has tried  to avoid.  At crucial  moments  the mother  in  her  emerges:  with  the young girl at the commune  after  the murder; in her concern for Lily in the heat of her batde with Holland; and her sheltering of misfits, including Madmother Thomas.
With  Maggie's  recognition  of  her  self-evasion, she  moves  to confront  Wade finally with  his. Becker tells them that  they should  not simply feel shame or self­ loathing  for  their  evasion,  rather,  they  should  rejoice  in  what  they  have  un­ covered:  the living roots below the frozen ground. In  fact  Maggie's response to the car of vandals,  a machine  with arms, is a kind of rejoicing: " 'Look at them go down, look how high we've come, look at how high we've come.' " The  mon­ strous  car  alludes  to the  Fomor,  and  thus  to the  forces  which  Keneally  repre­ sented.  The  fact  that  the pilgrims have confronted  Keneally  and  the duplicitous forces he represented  in themselves and  ritually cast them  down the mountain or rather  consigned them to oblivion, is emphasized here.
The  movement  of the  book is then, from  night  to day,  from  dark  to light  as the  dark,  unknowable  Keneally  gives way  to  the  known  and  radiant  Maggie. "Second  Growth" also alludes  to  the second  growth  of  Celtic  Irish  mythology where  the  dark  Fomor  fathered  by Buarainech,  a dark  god associated  with  the moon, gives way to the Tuatha de Danann : the gods of light who are the sons of the  Goddess  Danu    (Arbois   de  Jubainville,   p.   73). Thus,   in  moving  from Keneally  to Maggie,  from  masculine  to feminine,  the  novel echoes the levels of cosmogony in  Irish  myth. Similarly,  there  is a general  healing  movement  in the book.  Becker's  investigations  arc  a  means  of  healing  the  psychological  wound inflicted  by Keneally  to Becker's father.  Maggie  is the  central  healer and  Mad­ mother  the central  victim. It is Madmother whom  Maggie  instinctively seeks out

MYTH  IN HODGINS


on  her  pilgrimage to  the  bush  and  whom Maggie brings back  to  the  Revelations
House, Madmother's true home.
Hodgins' characters in The  Invention- Maggie, Holland, and Madmother to name a  few -appear  at  first  to  be from   the  small  world of  an  AI Capp comic strip. In  The  Invention of the World  Hodgins attempts to set  up  and  break these cartoon  cliches reminiscent of  pastoral Dogpatch and  to  invent or  uncover the larger world hidden  beneath  them.21   Jack  Hodgins' use  of  Irish myth   and   of Biblical and  classical myth,  too,  are  intended to  alter and   enlarge the  reader's vision   and  thus   to  incorporate the   primitive, mythic, and   unconscious into it. Hodgins in  The  Invention of the World  uses myth   to metamorphose snails  into sparrows.

NOTES

1 Hence  this  paper  disagrees with  Susan   Beckmann, "Canadian  Burlesque: Jack Hodgins' The  Invention of  the   World,"  Essays  on  Canadian Writing,  No.  20 (I 980-8 I), pp.  106-25;  and  with  Robert Lecker,  "Haunted by a Glut  of Ghosts: Jack   Hodgins' The  Invention of the  World," Essays on  Canadian Writing,  No.
20 ( I98o-8I), pp. 86-105.
2    Although the  book  makes  many  classical  allusions,  space  does  not  allow  a discus­
sion of them  here.
3   This and  subsequent references are  taken  from  Jack  Hodgins, The  Invention of the  World   (Toronto: Macmillan, I977).
4    Patrick Woulfe,   Irish  Names and  Surnames (Dublin:  M.  H.  Gill  & Son,  I923), p. 465.
5   There is some  evidence of a  belief in lycanthropy among the  pagan  Irish.  George Brandon Saul,  Traditional Irish  Literature and  its  Backgrounds: A  Brief  Intro­ duction (Lewisburg, Pa.: Bucknell  Univ.  Press, I970), p. 35·
6   H.  D'Arbois de  Jubainville, The Irish  Mythological Cycle  and  Celtic  Mythology, trans.  Richard Irvine Best  (Dublin/London, I9o3;  rpt.  New York: Lemma  Pub­ lishing,  I 970), p.  I 50. All further references  to this work  appear in the text.
7   Mircea Eliade, The  Myth of the  Eternal  Return or, Cosmos  and  History, trans. Willard R.  Trask   (Princeton, N.J.:  Princeton Univ.  Press,  I954), p. 51.
8   Ella  Young,   Flowering   Dusk:   Things  Remembered Accurately and  Inaccurately
(New  York: Longmans, Green, I945), pp.  78-79.
9    Patrick Woulfe, Irish  Names and Surnames, p. I8o.
10  ""'OOMnAn ,"An Irish-English Dictionary ( I927).
11  The illusion  or  the  truth of fiction  created by the eleventh-century Irish  annalists, depending on  one's  point  of  view, in  recording early  Irish  history  is described  by the  villagers  of Carrigdhoun: "But  in  the  early  Irish  history,  what  one solid and irrefutable fact  appears upon  which  we can  put  foot  or  hand   and  say, 'This  at all  events,  is certain, this  that   I  hold  is not  mist;  this  that   I stand  on  is neither water   or  mire'? Running down   the  long  list  of  Milesian kings,  chiefs,  brehons, and  bards,  where  first  shall  we  pause,  arrested by some  substantial form  in  this procession  of  empty  ghosts -how  distinguish the  man  from  the  shadow,  where over  all  is diffused   the  same  concealing mist,  and  the  eyes of  the  living  and  the dead  look  with  the  same  pale  glare?" The  Heroic  Period,  vo!.  I  of  History  of Ireland   (London, I878; rpt.  New York:   Lemma Publishing, I97o), p. 20.

MYTH IN HODGINS

12  Marco Pallis,  "Is   There a  Problem of  Evil?" in  The   Sword  of Gnosis:  Meta­ physics, Cosmology,  Tradition,  Symbolism, ed.   Jacob  Needleman     (Baltimore, Md.:  Penguin, I974),  p. 237·
13  Lecker   is quite  wrong  when  he  says:  "In the  Cuailnge,  the  Donn's rage  defeats all, and  he triumphs in the  end." For  the  dun  bull  dies at  the end  of the  saga.
14   Douglas Hyde,  A Literary History of Ireland:  From Earliest Times  to the Present
Day, ed. Brian  O'Cuin (London: Ernest Benn,  I 967) , p. 340.
15  In  a  short   auxiliary saga  to  the  Tain  it  is  revealed that   the  bulls  were  "really rebirths of  two  men  who  hated  each  other during life,  and  now  fought it  out  in the form  of the  bulls." Hyde,  A Literary History of Ireland, pp. 339-40.
16  The tale  of  Nell  and  Christopher Wall's  first  meeting as  related by his  brother, bears  a resemblance to the Tain  B6 Froich which  is "famous for its description of the  beauty  of Froech as he swam  in  the  pool"  where  he is watched and  admired by Findabair, the  heroine.  Eleanor Knott and  Gerard Murphy, Early Irish Liter­ ature   (London:  Routledge & Kegan Paul,   I 966),  p.  I 30. A  translation  of  this passage appears on pp.  I 30-3 I.
17    Ella Young,  Flowering Dusk, p. 33·
18  John Unterecker, A Reader's Guide  to William Butler Yeats  (New  York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, I959),  p. 277.
19    Sister  M.  Bernetta Quinn, "Yeats and  Ireland," English Journal, 54 ( I965), 449·
20    Eleanor Knott and  Gerard Murphy, Early Irish Literature, p. 108.
21 It is obvious  from  the importance Hodgins places  on  the "Dog Patch" comic  strip as  an  influence on  him  that  he  found  deep,  even  mythic meaning in  its stories. Jack  Hodgins, "Beginnings," Today  Magazine  (28 Feb.  I98I), p. 3·




SPRING W]ILKS
 


Robert Gibbs




I wake to robins and  redwings that
stake  their  ground   The Nashwaak claims a kingsize bed over the whole  interval
The farmer's dump's afloat and  his manure pile's wider  than  his farm 	I walk

to the river to see in the grey 	red marks  laugh  out  loud 	two mailboxes  and  a coca-cola sign Joe's Diner  where  I count  seven bunched over  dim-lit  breakfasts

A mother waves and  two kids in pajamas half  wave    and  keep their  hands
half open  till their  van  blunders off

18

POEM

The river's  still    and  brimming   It moves on faster  than  I see except  by the  red

drum it rolls    snatched from some raft  or  jetty  upstream 	Benches
along  the bank  ankledeep yesterday  are kneedeep today 	and  rent-a-cars
behind the  hotel  half  drown 	Someone's

been  out  half  the  night 	sandbagging the  river's  back  premises 		I love
this mist    that  mixes daylight into itself red  mist and  grey    yellow mist greening land  into  water     water  into  trees    trees

into sky	This undistinguishing mist holds  candlelight in willow  tips 	It blurs 	mystifies 	unfreezes 	I love too these lights 		that  people set their borders  by	crocuses white  and  purple

that spurt out  of ripe old leaves
I turn and  walk  back    wary of hungry schoolbuses     that  shoulder out
to set their  yellow rules against this day's  unruliness


II

By the cindertrack where  runners run  I put my ear  to the  ground   not as keen as when I put  it to the rail to hear  the train
far-off  coming  I want  now to hear

the earth break  or breathe  I look for horses to come  beating out  of the mist
and  listen  too 	deep as I can 	for your
breathing   and  the songs of the long dead

stretching out  their  sleep    I sniff what's threaded round  the  taproots of dandelions   My seismographic heart	that falters  when  you falter

skips a beat 	It wants  to know  the flaws
in your sleep 	the whimpers of baby groundhogs or of lovers    who  turn  and  whisper  to dry
sheets    where  bodyheat should  be

POEM
 

NEEDS
 





Christopher Wiseman



Beacon  Hill  Park,  early March, after  rain,
And  I'm  straight from  the white  death-house of the prairies.

I'm  not much  interested in the lakes and  trees, The peacocks  parading like bad  motel  paintings,

The world's  tallest and  dullest  totem-pole,
Or  even the mild green giving  of grass under my shoes.

Today it's  the crocuses  that  I am stopped by, The astounding fields of them,  white  and  blue,

Reaching upward, opening to the weather, A fury in them  as if they would  be taller,

As if they would  defy whatever it is
Decrees  they must  not grow  too much, turn giants,

As if they were desperate to go all the  way,
If they were allowed,  up into cloud  and  beyond.

I go on, down  to the beach,  smelling secrets
Of my childhood in the salt of a freshening wind,

Down  to the sandhoppers and  shining driftwood, Sea-bleached, eaten  hollow, heaped at random

Like a bone-house for enormous frozen  beasts. I balance  on a huge white  spine  of log,

Looking past  the birds into  the horizon,
My mind  dizzy, white  and  blue with  distance,

And  I raise my frozen  hands. I would  be taller. I feel the fury in me. Today I would

Go all the way, no holding back.  I reach
And, look, already the clouds are  higher, lifting.





20


JACK HODGINS'  "THE INVENTION OF THE WORLD"
& ROBERT BROWNING'S
"ABT VOGLER"

Laurence Steven


IN ms  REV>EW-ARTICLE OF  The Invention of the Wo'ld J. R.
(Tim)  Struthers comments briefly  on  the  relationship between   "Abt  Vogler"
and  the novel:

By  allusion,  the  piano  player  [in  the  climactic  wedding  scene]  hammering  on middle  'C'  until  he has everyone's  attention  returns  us to "The C Major  of this life" in Robert  Browning's  poem "Abt  Vogler". Hodgins'  quotation of a two-line passage from  "Abt  Vogler"  in  the  conclusion  to The  Invention of the  World   is very appropriate, since Browning and his musician also knew that revelation is achieved in the moment  of artistic invention.1

Though Struthers' comment is perceptive, it falls far  short  of the  actual  signifi­ cance   that   Browning's poem  carries  for  Hodgins.  The  two  line  borrowing that  Struthers neglects  to quote in the  body of his paper-"What  was good shall  be good,   with,   for  evil,  so  much   good  more:  On   the  earth  the  broken  arcs;   in heaven, a  perfect   round"-reflects  a  central   element   of  Hodgins' vision.  For Hodgins, as  for  Browning, our   world  is  not  the  world.  In an  interview with Geoff  Hancock, editor of  the  Canadian  Fiction  Magazine, Hodgins defined  his view  of  reality  as "The Reality that  exists  beyond  this  imitation reality  that  we are  too often  contented with.  The  created  rather than  the  invented world." 2
The  duality at  the  heart of this vision -creation  versus invention, broken  arcs versus  perfect   round -is  embodied in  the  novel  in  Hodgins' use  of  the  dual creation myth  from  Genesis.  Significantly, the introduction of this myth  coincides with   the  novel's  single   mention of  Robert Browning's name. Strabo Becker  is pacing  around old  Lily  Hayworth's  bedroom, trying  to convince her  to consign her life memories to tape:

He'd  fingered  her  books, her  Robert  Browning,  he'd  picked  up  the  little  black leather   Bible. "A  Bible,  Lily?"  he  said. "You've  been  reading  this?"  No, she'd never  read  it, not  through, she said.... A strange  story, he said, if you'd  read it. It has two beginnings.  The  first, a single chapter,  would  have  us all made in the image  of God,  perfect  spiritual  creatures.  Then  someone else came along, started


21

HODGINS & BROWNING

it all over  again,  and  had  us all made  out  of clay. The  rest of the story shows a lot of people  trying to get back to that  first beginning,  back before the  mist and the  clay. You  get  all the way up  to nearly  the  end  of the  book before you meet the man who knows how to manage it.3

Lily wonders if this feat  is accomplished by magic,  because  she knows that  magic is what  people  are  looking  for  to help  them  overcome, in  her  words,  "the limits that  are  put  on  us by this sack of bones we call ourselves." Becker  tells her  there was no magic  involved, and  then  continues:

magic  is what  seems to defy  the  laws, or  suspend  them.  There's nothing  magic about  something  that  was there  all along,  though  hidden,  like the  underground roots of frozen grass.

The  relation of the constant to the  transitory -the root  to the frozen  grass - is elaborated in  the  two  major  movements of Browning's poem.  The first move­ ment,  Abt  Vogler's ecstatic  moment  of musical extemporization, is analogous to Hodgins' first  creation. Where   Becker  says  we  were  all  once  perfect   spiritual creatures, Vogler, in  the transcendent moment, when  past  and  future, earth  and heaven, life  and  death are  one, says the  following: "What never  had  been,  was
now;  what  was, as it shall be anon: I And  what  is, -shall I say, matched both?
for  I was made perfect  too"  (ll. 39-40). This moment of perfection is, however, fleeting-our  earth is only a broken  arc.  Consequently doubt creeps in:

Well, it is gone at last, the palace of music I reared;
Gone! and the good tears start, the praises that  come too slow; For one is assured at first, one scarce can say that  he feared, That he even gave it a thought, the gone thing was to go.
Never  to be again!                                                        (ll.57-6I)

The  second   major  movement of  the  poem  deals  with  Vogler's response  to  this loss of truth. In  the  lines of central  importance he says he "must be saved  because
I cling  with  my  mind  I To  the same,  same  self, same  love, same  God: ay, what
was, shall  be"  ( ll. 6g-64). William  Whitla comments usefully here:

Perfection  is gone. It cannot  constantly  be experienced  ... but  must  be replaced, argues  Vogler, with the definite act of mind,  the willing choice which  holds on to the  memory  of perfection  once experienced.  The  choice  is also made  to hold on to the  self that  was the  medium  of the  experience.... The  artist  also chooses to cherish  the love that  brought  it to be ... and  the love of God who is himself that love.4

Falling away  from  perfection means  assuming, inevitably, a  false,  or  at  least imperfect self.  For  sustenance Vogler  must  cling  to  the  point  at  which  he  was made   perfect. But  as  Whitla says,  this  takes  a  "definite act  of  mind," an  act which  most  of  us,  for  whatever reasons,  do  not  make.  Old   Lily  Hayworth in Hodgins' novel intuitively recognizes this:

22

HODGINS & BROWNING

Maybe  that's   what  life  is,  forgetting  what's  natural, or  maybe  that's  what  life isn't.  Maybe our  natural life goes on without  us while we slap on layer after  layer of what we think is life but is only pretense.

Rather  than  responding to  our   true   natures as  perfect   spiritual  creatures  by striving to  manifest that  nature, we believe  only in our  all-too-apparent  limita­ tions.  Though these  are  real  they  belong  only  to  the  realm  of the  broken  arcs. The  other  reality, however, of the  perfect  round, is always  part  of  us -like the  underground  root-, dwelling in  us as  a spiritual sense,  or  conscience,  or,  as Strabo Becker tenns it in his notebook, an instinct:

Maybe  all  our  lives  that   instinct   is in  us, trying  to  translate   the   fake  material world  we  seem  to  experience back  into  pre-Eden  truth, but  we learn  early not  to listen. Instead  we accept  the  swindle, eat it whole.

Hodgins' vision  of  man's dual  existence-the perfect spiritual being  hidden within   the   flawed,  materially-tied  surface   personality-gets a most  effective dramatization in  the   relationship of  Wade   Powers  and   his  double   Horseman. Horseman is the   true, the  real,  Wade   Powers.  He  is  Wade Powers  as  Wade would  appear in the  first creation-a perfect  spiritual creature. He inhabits the perfect   round of  heaven as  opposed  to  the  broken  arcs  of  earth. When  Wade questions him  about his occupation Horseman responds:

"A  man  of God  is a busy man,"  he said. "I'm on  the  road  a lot, it's not very often I get the time to lie around  like this."
"What?"
He  sat  up,  shaking  his head.  "Oh,  I don't  mean  preacher,  not  a minister. It was a silly thing  to say, I suppose, but you see that's  the way I think of  myself, of us all."




f2oR TO  HIS MEETING with  Horseman, Wade has carefully suppressed the spiritual component in his life. He is one  of those  who are tied,  in Horseman's words,  "To earth. To  things.  To  themselves,  to  their  own  bodies." He  has  cultivated a  hedonistic lifestyle, finally  attaining what  he  believes is an ideal  existence: "the thing he'd  waited  for all his life had  happened. He  had  the Fort.  He  had  those  tourists so eager  to part  with  their  money.  He  had  Virginia. Things were  perfect." But  this  perfection, such  as it is, comes at  the  expense  of the   tourists   Wade dupes   and   then   holds  in  contempt. As  he  says  to  Virginia Kerr:
the sight of tourists  disgusted  him. A bunch of fools was what  they were, he told her,  to  part  with  their  money so easily. They  came  into  the  place looking  as if there  was a real  treat  in store for  them, and  went out  again  looking as if  some­ thing had  just been added  to their lives. They thought  they were stepping back in

23

HODGINS & BROWNING

time, living their  own ancestors' lives for a moment,  and  didn't even suspect what idiots they were.... It probably wouldn't  even bother  them  to be told what  they'd paid for was only a rough counterfeit of the real thing.

Whether the  fort  is real  or  not,  the  tourists  find  it a  meaningful experience. The  important point  is the  motive  behind  the  offering, whether it is offered  with love or contempt. This  is brought out fully in the exchange following  Horseman's discovery  that  the fort  is counterfeit:

"Nevertheless," the man  said,  his head  tilted  in  thought. "If  you've offered it to them  with love, if you're giving them  this because it's the closest you can come to the real thing,  and if the real thing is something  you want  them  to  have, then you're  not  really cheating  them at all. They  spend  their  lives being satisfied with reasonable   facsimiles.  This  is  no  different.  The   important  thing  of  course  is motive. Any gift, offered with love, has some value."
"It's a business," Wade said. "It's my business."
"Then it's offered with contempt."

Even  if only  a  reasonable facsimile  of the  real  thing, the  gift  offered  with  love has  value   because   love  is  the  precondition of  reality,   of  the  created  world  as against   the  invented one,  the  first  creation  as  against  the  second,   the  perfect round  as against the  broken  arcs.  Just  as Abt  Vogler  had  to  cling  to his "same self,"  the  perfect  being  he had  been in the  ecstatic moment, so he has to cling to the  "same love"  which  was  the  condition which  allowed   that   moment its  exis­ tence.  As Jacques Maritain says:

To  produce  in  beauty  the  artist  must  be in love with  beauty. Such  undeviating love is a supra-artistic rule -a precondition, not sufficient as to the ways of  mak­ ing, yet necessary as to the vital  animation  of art -which is presupposed  by all rules of art.5

For  Wade to offer  his fort  in a spirit  of love  would  mean he was clinging to his "same   self" -his   perfect   spiritual nature -as  it  is  embodied  in  Horseman. This,  however,  is not  what  he does.  His  contempt constitutes a denial  of reality and  a  perpetration of a  fraudulent, invented world.  Horseman regrets  the  lack of  contact between   them  in  a  passage  employing variations on  the  imagery of circle and  arc from  Browning's poem:

The  man  sat  down  on  the  little  bench  where  the  curved  outside  wall  and  the straight  inside wall met. "We're further  apart than  I imagined." He looked as if he truly  regretted  it "I thought  yesterday for  a moment  or  two when  we talked that  it wouldn't  be hard  to find at least one point  at  which we touched.  Tangent line and circle. But evidently I was wrong.

The appearance of  Horseman in  the  story  at  all,  however, indicates that   a core of loving  reality,  hitherto deeply  buried, is beginning to emerge  from  within Wade. Hodgins includes a significant juxtaposition in  the  following  statement:

24

HODGINS & BROWNING

"And  the next day,  which  was the day the stranger  arrived  on the  beach, [Vir­ ginia]   wanted   to  know  if  Wade  had  ever  been  in  love  with  Maggie  Kyle." Horseman's arrival  corresponds  to the reawakening  of Wade's  dormant  love for Maggie,  a love whose seeds had been sown in the childhood  pact they had  made to always count on each other. Maggie is the one person Wade is willing to really give of himself for:

If she'd call him, if she'd telephoned from Hed and  told him something terrible was going to happen to her, he would be on the road in minutes, heading back to the mountains. He didn't  feel sorry for her, he grew more and more fascinated....

The  gift  is  genuine,  offered  with  love.  It  is this  loving  nature   Wade  has  to acknowledge,  rather  than  stifle by, symbolically, locking it up in his bastion cell. As Horseman  says in  their  final confrontation: "Don't you think,  Powers, that it's time you took responsibility for what you really are?" Wade  has to dare-as Abt  Vogler  has  "dared  and  done"   (I.  95)  -has to  dare  to  let  his spiritual instinct guide him.
The  first direct  quoting  from  Browning's  poem occurs in the section entitled "The Wolves  of  Lycaon," in  which  old  Lily  Hayworth, at  the  prompting   of Becker  with  his tape-recorder, plunges into  memories of her  time  as third  and last  wife of  Donal  Keneally -founder  and  self-styled lord  of The  Revelations Colony of Truth. She is a witness to his self-destruction,  when, as a broken and frightened   old  man,  he  obsessively tunnels  his way into  the  earth  beneath  the floorboards  of their  home and  dies in the ensuing cave-in. The  first of two iden­ tical quotations from "Abt  Vogler" comes as Lily and  Keneally sit in the kitchen during  one of his occasional  respites from  tunnelling. She  ponders  the situation as follows:  "Who was there left to do anything for anybody? There  was only this dark,  and  the two of them  eyeing each other dully. On  earth the  broken arcs, in heaven the perfect rounds."
The  line of poetry is printed  in italic type, possibly indicating  that  Lily recites it  at  the  subconscious  level;  certainly  indicating  that  she is, in  some sense, in touch  with  a spiritual  dimension  that  Keneally has consistently denied  and gone to great  lengths to discredit  in the eyes of those whom he would have follow him unquestioningly. Lily is certainly  no dogged  follower. When  Keneally  explains the circular  structure of the colony buildings by saying, "In  some cultures ... the circle  represents   enlightenment.  And   perfection"  she  responds:    "Well   what happened   to  your  perfection  when  you got  past the  shacks?  All the  fields are squares, all the fences are straight  lines."
Lily's  sarcasm  reveals  the  inevitable  limitations  of  any  material   perfection. Like  Wade  Powers  and  his ideal  material  existence, Keneally  has attempted  to establish  paradise  on earth,  and set himself up as God.  The  tools he uses are all, finally, superficial:   charisma,  magic,  humiliation,  brute  force;  the  one element

HODGINS & BROWNING

that  could  begin  to effect a change -love-is absent. Lily, however, for all her coarse  exterior, does  have  a loving  nature, and  it is this  that gives the  lie to her bleak  question, already   quoted:  "Who was  there  left  to  do  anything for  any­ body?" Lily   herself   is  doing  something  for  somebody, she  is  remaining  with Keneally to  the  end,  protecting him  from  those  who  would  take  advantage of his weakness. The love is apparent in the following:

My  first concern  was for  him. Let  those  others  wallow  in  their  dirt,  they were used to it, they'd  forgotten  anything  else, time and  Keneally's  brain-washing had convinced  them  of their limitations  and  I wasn't  going to  change  that  overnight. No, my first concern  was him. Villain, god, demon,  magician,  con-man,  call him what  you want  he was my husband  and  I could see what  was happening to him, besides being  human  after  all and  getting  old  he was catching whatever  disease he had  set loose on the others, it was coming  back on him now and  he probably didn't even  recognize it. I saw it sitting  in  there  in his eyes the same way I had seen it sitting  in the eyes of the others,  and  my only thought at first was to keep them from finding out or even suspecting.

Though this love motivates Lily to genuinely offer  herself  to Keneally, she also has  the  intuitive awareness that  nothing materially can  be done  to save him. His sickness  is of  the  soul;  the  determination not  to  acknowledge anything  beyond himself can only lead  to self-immolation:

Should  a doctor,  or a psychiatrist, be permitted to put  patches  and Band-Aids on a life  that  had  been plummeting  like this from  near  the  beginning?  It was only natural that  he should screw himself into the ground,  after  the fall.

The material, humanly limited  element in  Lily  balks  at  this  conclusion but  her spiritual sense finally  overcomes the  objections as the  line  from  "Abt Vogler" is quoted again:

But  natural was never  taken  as an  excuse and  wouldn't be for  her. There  was nothing  natural in  the way she only sat at  that  table  listening. Wives did  not do that,  even  when  they knew it was the  only sensible thing.  Yet  there  were some things  that  mustn't be tampered  with,  you  only  had  to  shift  the  angle  of  your vision. On earth the broken arcs, in heaven the  perfect rounds.

From   the  perspective of  the  perfect  round-the  reality  of  the  first  creation, informed by love-Keneally's life has been  a denial of its very foundation; from this  view  he  has no  reality,  in effect  he  doesn't exist.  As Abt  Vogler  says, "The evil is null,  is sought, is silence implying sound" (1. 70). Conseqently, for  Lily to attempt to  heal  Keneally  physically  is pointless; the  most  she  can  do is stand  by him  as an  example of the  loving sound  his evil silence  implies.  The constancy of love, its  reality,  finally encompasses evil. This  is the significance of the  Browning line: "What was good shall  be good,  with,  for evil, so much  good  more" (1. 7 I ) . And  this is also the significance  of the gesture  Lily makes  from  beyond  the grave. Through her  will she has  Maggie  Kyle  carry  Keneally's ashes  back  to his birth-

HODGINS & BROWNING


place:  the  circle  of  stones  on  the  Irish  mountain. Symbolically Lily's  love  has moved  Keneally from  hell to heaven, from  the broken  arcs  to the  perfect  round; it has redeemed him.
For  Maggie Becker,  and  finally  for  Wade Powers  as  well, the  journey  to the Irish  mountain is more  than  just a favour  for Lily Hayworth. Each  of them  is on a  spiritual pilgrimage, searching for  the  created   as  opposed   to  the  invented world.  As they  stand among the ancient stones a:nd Maggie gets the view she has been  craving throughout the  novel we realize,  through allusions  to both  the Bible and   "Abt  Vogler," that   they   have  momentarily re-entered  the  first  creation; have transcended the broken arcs:

if there  was magic  here  it  wasn't  in the stones, it was in the command  they had of  the  earth,  which  fell away  below them  and  ringed  them  round  as far  as she could see. Dominion  was the word that  nagged to be said. Dominion over the sun, even, whose fire had  already  sunk beneath  the hills but  whose rays like horizontal bands  of  light  streaked   out  of  cloud  to  cross  the  valley  and  find  themselves absorbed  in stone. Absorbed  and  then  thrown  out again, against  themselves.

"Dominion," of  course,  is what  God  gave  man  in chapter one  of Genesis-the first creation :

And God said, "Let  us make man in our image, after  our  likeness:  and  let them have dominion  over  the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle,  and  over  all  the  earth,  and  over every creeping  thing  that  creepeth  upon the earth."    (Gen.  I:26)

This  is no  worldly  power  that  one  man  can  hold  over  another, as with  Keneally and  his slaves,  or  Wade and  his tourists; it is the  power  that  comes from  recog­ nizing  the  entire created world  as spiritually alive  and  from  seeing  yourself  as part  of it. The creation "rings them  round" as far  as  they  can  see;  briefly  the impediments to vision are overcome.
To  underline just to  what  extent  this  mountaintop episode  inhabits "the  per­ fect  round" Hodgins deftly  includes a scene  which  embodies within  it  a  drama­ tization of Abt Vogler's "broken arc":

Somewhere  behind  them,  on the  wind,  there  was a new sound.  Turning,  they saw far, far  back across the lumpy plateau,  the small black speck of a car coming towards  them.... it  rounded  the final curve,  came  up  the final slope, going fifty or  sixty  miles an  hour,  came  yelling and  screaming,  waving  bottles  and  papers, spouting   steam   from   the  grill,  belching  blue  coiling  clouds  of  smoke  behind, slowing suddenly,  screeching,  at the every edge of the drop. A bottle, arching  high in the air  and  then  down, smashed exploding against  the tallest stone at the same moment  the car  went  over suddenly, dropped  over the edge, and  turning,  roared shooting down the first steep broken section of the road.
"My  God,  look,"  Maggie  said. "Look  at  them  go down,  look how high  we've come, look how high we've come."

HODGINS & BROWNING

The   smoke-belching car  and  its  disrespectful occupants,  symbols  of  the  worst aspects  of our  invented world,  are  on  a downward path  similar to the  invented patterns that   society  has  provided   and   can't see  the  reality   in  front   of  them. Hodgins has skilfully  brought us from  the  outside  to  the  inside  of his vision. As we read  this scene  we share  Maggie's perspective; we stand in reality, look out  at invention, and see how phoney  it is.




bE FINAL SECTioN  of the  novel, entitled "Second Growth," is a mythic rendering of Maggie and  Wade's wedding celebration. In  its extended exaggeration this  expisode  is analogous to  Abt  Vogler's ecstatic   moment as  he extemporizes on  his orchestrion. For  Vogler,  extemporization is the  only  artistic endeavour in  which  "the finger  of  God" (1. 49)   can   be  experienced directly because  inspiration and  expression  are  simultaneous, there   is  no  subjection  to artistic  laws. Hodgins' use of exaggeration is a symbolic attempt to approach the state of extemporization by transcending the restricting limits of traditional literary realism.  And   this  use  is  not  purely  symbolic,   either.  As  Hodgins says,  in  an interview with Alan  Twigg,

Sometimes  I  just fly by the seat of my pants. That is, I want  to turn  the  page to find out  what  happens  next. I don't  always know. I'm  never happy  if my writing seems simply beautiful or practical.6

In  terms  of the  Browning imagery  predominant in  the  novel,  traditional realism, in its adherence to the limits imposed  by material reality, manifests a broken  arc, while the  extended exaggeration, by breaking the  rules, moves toward the  perfect round.
The   wedding is an  appropriate occasion  for  this  move  toward transcendence because  it  is a celebration of love, and  love, as I said  earlier, is the  precondition of reality.  The creative, ordering power  of love-its ability  to show  us what  we really  are-is  seen  clearly  in  the  way  it stops  the  battle which  erupts  between loggers and  townspeople at the reception :

it  was Maggie  and  Wade  who stopped  the  battle  in the  end,  before anyone  got seriously hurt,  by expressing  their  feelings for each  other  so vehemently  in word and  deed  under  the flower-bedecked  arch  that  a  pale  warm  eerie glow radiated from  them  all over the crowd and stopped  them  dead  in their  tracks, full of awe, to contemplate the nature  of their own actions. People fell, where they'd stood, in heaps on the floor. Both horrified and  amazed at  their own  behaviour,  they either escaped into sleep or hid their faces in shame.
Just  as Lily  Hayworth knew  there  was finally  nothing materially  that  she  could do for Keneally's disease, so Maggie  and  Wade don't attempt to physically  break up  the  battle-this  would  only  add  fuel  to  the  fire.  It  is their  love,  remaining

HODGINS & BROWNING

calm  and  consistent in the  midst of the chaos around  it, that  encompasses, and so quells, the uproar.
When  calm  is  restored  Wade  gives his speech  and  unconsciously  points  the moral  by quoting the two Browning lines I opened with:  "What was good shall be good,  with, for evil, so much  good more:  On  the earth  the  broken  arcs;  in heaven,  a  perfect  round." He  then  suggests it is time  to open  the gifts, and  as Cora  Manson  tears the paper  from parcel after parcel at an increasingly frenzied pace the episode moves to its transcendent cresendo. Beginning with conventional enough  wedding  gifts-pillows,  sheets and  appliances-the list is soon exag­ gerated  beyond  any semblance  of realism, finally leaving  the  concrete  material realm in order  to confer on the couple the entire range of human  experience and emotion: "Hope. The  bomb.  Crime. Ecology. Faith.  Charity.  Life. Truth. Grief. Despair." The  list concludes,  in total  appropriateness to the  vision discussed in this paper,  with love.
In the final stanza of the Browning poem, Abt Vogler leaves off meditating  on the  implications   of  his ecstatic  moment  and  resumes earthly  life:   "Well,  it is earth   with  me;  silence  resumes  her  reign:   j I  will be  patient  and  proud,  and soberly acquiesce"  (ll. 8g-go). He feels for "the  common  chord  again" (1. 91), assuming  his resting  place in  "The C  Major  of this life"  (1.  g6). In  doing  so, however, his perspective  is not completely that of other men:  he stands "on  alien ground" (1. 93). As William  Whitla  comments: "Just  so is earth  alien  to the man who has his citizenship in the heaven which he has glimpsed.m
Similarly,   as  the  wedding   guests  are  "Reeling   from  the  shock  of  such  an incredible   display  of  wedding  gifts,"  Hodgins  brings  them  back  to  earth: "It was the  piano  player  who saw the stranger  first, and  hammered  on middle  'C' until  he had  everyone's  attention." The  stranger  turns  out  to be Horseman, the symbolic  projection   of  Wade's  perfect  spiritual  nature.   It  is he  who leads  the bride  and  groom  back  to their  home at the House of Revelations. Symbolically, Horseman's appearance at  this  time  indicates  that  the  reality  glimpsed  by the couple on the  mountaintop will remain  with them in their earthly  life as a guid­ ing  love. Significantly,  as they  leave  the  marriage  celebration  Hodgins  calls his couple "the  new man and  new woman."
For  both  Browning  and  Hodgins  the  work of the  truly  creative  artist  is an
attempt to present  the  perfect  round  within  the broken arcs. Browning's  "whole poet" is able to behold "with  an understanding keenness the universe, nature  and man,  in their  actual  state  of perfection  in imperfection."8  Similarly, in the Han­ cock interview,  Hodgins says

What  you and  I  call  the  ocean is to me only a metaphor.  All those trees, for instance, are  metaphors;  the reality lies beyond them. The  act of writing to me is an attempt  to shine a light on that ocean and those trees so bright that we can see right through them to the reality that is constant.9

HODGINS & BROWNING

For  both writers, then, art, as  displayed in  "Abt Vogler" and The  Invention of the World, becomes a means of revelation.

NOTES

1 "Fantasy in a Mythless  Age," Essays in Canadian Writing, 9, pp.  I45-46.
2    "An   Interview  with   Jack   Hodgins,"  Canadian   Fiction  Magazine,  No.  32-33 (I 979-80),  p.  47. This  quotation from  Hodgins provides the  necessary  corrective to  Robert Lecker's gloss  (in  "Haunted by a Glut of Ghosts: Jack  Hodgins' The Invention of the  World,"   Essays in  Canadian  Writing, 20, pp.  86-105)    of  the two  Browning lines that  Wade Powers quotes: "The metaphor is quite apparent: contentment and  meaning must  be found  in  'the broken  arcs'  of this  world,  and in  'The C Major of this life,'  as Abt Vogler  says." Though this gloss may support Lecker's contention that  Hodgins is an  "uninventor" of narrative worlds,  it is not borne   out  by  either   the  novel  or  the  poem.  Neither  Browning nor  Hodgins  is concerned with  finding  "contentment," and,  as for  "meaning,'' both  offer  numer­ ous  indications, implicit and  explicit,  that  our  limited existence gains significance only to the degree  in which  it answers  the  pull from  beyond.
3   This and   all  subsequent references are  to  Jack   Hodgins, The   Invention of the
World  (Toronto:  Macmillan, 1977; rpt., Signet, I978).
4    William Whitla, The  Central  Truth  (Toronto:  Univ. of Toronto Press,  1963), p. 86.
5   Jacques Maritain, Creative  Intuition in  Art  and  Poetry;  quoted in  Whitla, p.
69 n.
6    "Western  Horizon,''  For  Openers   (Madeira  Park,   B.C.:  Harbour  Publishing,
r98I), p. I9I.
7   Whitla, p. 88.
8   Robert Browning, "An  Essay  on  Percy  Bysshe Shelley,'' in  Walter E.  Houghton and   G.  Robert  Stange, eds.,  Victorian Poetry  and  Poetics  (Boston: Houghton Mifflin,  r 968) , p. 339·
9  "An  Interview with Jack  Hodgins,'' p. 47·







SEVEN SPECIALIZED BOOKSHOPS UNDER ONE ROOF AT THE NEW UBC BOOKSTORE




6200 UNIVERSITY BLVD.

BOOKSTORE
 • ARTS  &  HUMANITIES

• LANGUAGE &  LITERATURE

• SOCIAL & BEHAVIOURAL SCIENCES
• PROFESSIONAL

• HEALTH SCIENCES

• GENERAL

&
 VSY
 1W9


DUSK, DURING H]IRM]ITT]IN

Richard Stevenson


You want to say it is like a fog in winter, the road is a deep, dark river
that  has nothing to do with Jordan, the sluggish currents of the blood.

Your  presence  is like an oil slick, some white,  frothy patch of phosphate-laden detergent that  thickens  the surface, fouls bird wings.

That there  is no interface between  earth and sky where  angels  might  breed, leave their  spawn  to hatch from  oxygen-fed reeds.

The trees thrust their roots in the air, seem cauterized, teased away from the dead, grey flesh of the sky,
hang their  own seed pods

like so many  thieves. Cars grope  through centuries of
bad  timing and  come upon others
suddenly, as a man  comes upon his reflection in a dark  room.

-Potiskum-Maiduguri highway, Nigeria, 1981

LONGBEJICH
 



greg
 


..
szmzson



for hours
approaching the coast
we sense a creeping metamorphosis but it's only on the ferry
deep-breathing the salty night
the sea stench
washing  cities from our systems that  it becomes tangible;
the skin tingling
as webs reassert themselves between fingers and  toes the tug of organs
resuming  an ancient alignment our brains elated
as they dust off paleozoic skills

a constant seethe
gradually calming  with  the dawn
as we slide into welcoming breakers leaving behind
one abandoned car
and  two bewildering ruts across the startled sand






ROJID BUILDING  BY PICK JIXE

JoyKogawa


driving down  the
highway  from  Revelstoke - the highway  built  by
forced  labour -all my people  having no
choice  etcetera etcetera

32

POEM

and  I mention this in passing  to my friend who  tells me when  he came  to Canada from England he wanted to
go to Vancouver too but
the  quota for  professors was full so he was
forced  to go to Toronto






PINK GERJINIUM
 


JoyKogawa


late  october farm  auction - the  farmer's widow
stands by the  fence watching the crowd

at  her  feet
a black  tipped brown  fur fat  caterpillar  moves hump lunge  hump lunge

on  the  auction block
the  hammer throated auctioneer disembowels the farm

"who'll gimme a five a
five for  this  box of antique lace yessir an'  a six we'll throw in
this beautiful pink  geranium"

the  widow
lifts  her  hand  quickly grasping air
as the  pink  geranium
slips and  falls

and  the caterpillar is suddenly tight  and  round
a green  wound  oozing
from  its side

33

TWO POEMS

Elspeth Bradbury


Pothole  is not preferable	the word's  lacuna This is solemn 	sometimes  I am solemn-ish With  one or two    the ones I notice  with
My present  lapses    lapses of my present
How  the surface  tilts and  pits
Walking to the bridge  together

Walking back the footing  fails to catch	I miss
Am cold apart and  fish-eyed
Settles something hard and  ancient of the throat A stiffness to the thigh 	a something of relentless Not  at all our way of walking 	when  it walks
I elsewhere light and bending	will you warm  as always

Notice  none of this! 	I promise
These  are little leavings and  a far cry from  the last


* 	* 	*

WORDS to clasp the sometimes  silver? Clods! I curse the drivel
Curse  the creepy-crawly devil I am evidently How shall music of me? 	How shall  leaping? I am beautiful with sorrow
How shall seeing?

Songs I've  heard  that  sucked a woman out  of me
More lovely than  the riding  moon
She lives on air
Poor soul
Too  light and  large
To  come back home to me

If clods may climb me to her    let me Alleluia drivel
And Amen for ever hands  and  knees





34


THE POST-MORTEM POINT OF VIEW IN MALCOLM LOWRY'S "UNDER THE VOLCANO"



Thomas York




MACHADO DE  ASe<s,  the  nineteenth-century  B,azilian
novelist,  begins  his Epitaph  of a Small  Winner  with  the  words: "The Death of
the  Author: I hesitated some  time,  not  knowing whether to open  these  memoirs at  the  beginning or  the  end .... I am  a deceased  writer  not  in the  sense of one who  has  written and  is now  deceased, but  in the sense of one  who  has died  and is now  writing.... "1 The  mechanics of his ghostly  narrative, he goes on to say, would  require a  book in itself to relate.  But,  unfortunately, Machado himself  has not  mastered them: he proceeds to write  a straightforward novel-length memoir, only  referring  from   time  to  time  to  "the great  and  useful  idea" that   was  the cause   of  his  death -"a  great   cure,   an   anti-melancholy  plaster,   designed   to relieve  the  despondency of mankind."2
In  the same  year  (I 879)  that  Machado was writing  his Epitaph, Sir Sandford
Fleming, engineer in  chief  of  surveys  for  the  Canadian Pacific  Railways,  con­ ceived   the   idea   of  standardized  time-zones. It   was  immediately  adopted   by North American railroads and  then  by rail systems around the world. Sir Sand­ ford  Fleming had  inadvertently posed one solution  to the  problem of breakdown of  auctorial authority, which  authors as diverse  as Proust  and  Gide,  Broch  and Mann, Joyce  and   Woolf,   would  employ  in  their  works  to  achieve  an  effect  of simultaneity-the representation,  by  contrasting public  with   private time,  of single  moments in temporal succession  which  nevertheless gives the impression  of instantaneity. Machado had  proposed  a different solution. But  whereas Sir Sand­ ford  Fleming's concept of synchronized time  was immediately adopted by public  transit systems  (the  CPR in  I879), and  assimilated   before  the  tum of the  cen­ tury  by philosophers (e.g.,  Bergson)  and  artists  (e.g.,  Proust), Machado's post­ mortem  narrator  remained  a  disembodied  idea.   It  was  not   until   1927  that  Heidegger elaborated  the  time-consciousness  required   by  such   a  concept;  not untilI 947  was  it  assimilated into  fiction  by Malcolm  Lowry  in Under  the Vol­ cano, and  by Samuel Becket in Molloy in 1951.

35

LOWRY



1E TENDENCY AWAY  from  an  omniscient author, and  the introduction of relativity  and  uncertainty into  the  twentieth-century novel stimu­ lated  a generation of writers  to experiment with a host of conventions-auctorial personae, unreliable narrators,  central  intelligences,  reportorial sprechers-all with  a  view  to  compensating for  the  lack  of  narrative  authority which  accom­ panied  the  loss of auctorial omniscience. The omniscience of the author was, and still  is,  the   primary  assumption of  the  reader. With   this  compact  broken, the sense  of  reliability  was  threatened,  although  reader and   author both  stood  to gain,   by  dint  of  hard  work  on  both  sides,  a  greater sense  of  authenticity. The  reader was  forced   to look  to  the "varying focus,  fractured  surface, over-deter­ minations, displacements"3  of  the  modern novel  for  a  worthwhile vantage; and,  faced   with  the  amorphous  material which   cried  out  for  order   and  shape, the author was forced  to smuggle his distinctive presence into  the  narrative somehow. He  could  either fracture the  narrative surface and  torture the syntax  beyond  any hope   of   coherence, as  William   Burroughs and   eventually  Joyce   would  do,  or move  one  of  the  characters, or  the  narrative voice,  ahead in  time  beyond  the time  scheme   of  the   novel -into  what   Beckett   would   call  "the  mythological present."4   Those  novelists whose craft  would  develop  in the  direction of the post­ mortem viewpoint elected the latter alternative.
"But it  is only since  I  have  ceased  to live that I think  of these  things  and  the other  things.  It is in the  tranquillity of decomposition that  I remember the  long confused  emotion which  was my life, and  that I  judge  it,  as it is said  that  God will  judge  me, and  with  no less impertinence" ( Tril., 25), writes Samuel Beckett in  the  opening pages  of  Molloy,  the  first  of  his  trilogy  of  novels  composed  be­ tween  September I 947  a:nd June I 950  in  "the siege  in  the  room" at  6  rue des Favorites, Paris. 5    The  post-mortem voice  employed by  Beckett,   which  becomes by the  end  of the  trilogy  no  longer  a voice  but  a word,  and  then  not even  that  ("no voice left,  nothing but  the  core of murmurs, distant cries ... silence" [Tril.,
4I 3-I 4]), gives the  effect  of omniscience, yet without standing above  or  outside the  novel: "I speak  in the  present  tense, it is so easy to speak  in the present tense, when  speaking of the  past.  It is the  mythological present, don't  mind  it" (Tril.,
26).  The mythological present  of the  post-mortem narrator is an  existential past tense,  but  fully  capable of being  embedded within  the  unfolding of the  dramatic "now" of  the  novel.  As such  it  represents a  point   of  view  at  once  capable of dramatization  (in  a  character, or  narrative  voice), phenomenologically reliable even  though  epistemologically uncertain  (it  is as much  as the  author, or anyone, can  know), and  existentially  credible   (the narrator has  not survived the experi­ ence  related  -it is that   critical, it  was  that   traumatic, to  him6 -but  he  has somehow contrived to relate  it).  The mechanics of his contrivance are  no more

g6

LOWRY


in  evidence  in  Beckett's novels  than   they  were  in  Machado's memoir, but  "the great   and  useful  idea" of  a  post-mortem narrator-one  "powerless to  act,  or perhaps strong enough at  last  to  act  no  more" (Tril., 161)  -is dramatically realized   in  a  credible point   of  view  which  gives the  effect,  though it  lacks  the pretense, of omniscience.



IT wouLD  NOT  BE   FAIR to say  that   Lowry  stumbled on  this device  as a fully  developed "design-governing posture.m Neither could  it be said that  he approached the  writing of Under the Volcano with  the intention of using a post-mortem narrator. Rather, as a comparison of the I 940  manuscript version
with  the  1947  published text  shows, Lowry  progressively  fragmented and  refined the  narrative voice employed in Under the Volcano in order  to meet the demands of  his  own  evolving   creation; he  "discovered" for  himself  and   adapted to  his own  needs  the  post-mortem point  of view. This  adaptation was an  organic, and not  a  technical,  process.  Even   after   his  novel  had  been  accepted and   was  in process  of being  published, Lowry  was unclear about  who,  precisely,  was telling the  story and  about how  pervasive the  post-mortem point  of view had  become  in Under the  Volcano. Was  it  integral only  to  Chapter I?  Was  it  a  frame  device informing the  first  and  last  chapters? Or  did  it pervade the  whole  novel?  In  his letter   to  Jonathan  Cape he  defends  in  detail  Laruelle's expository function in Chapter I, then  says  "if we  like,  we  can  look  at  the  rest  of  the  book  through Laruelle's eyes, as if it  were  his creation."8  This  condition-contrary-to-fact clause is  a  concession   to  the  publisher's reader. Were  Under the  Volcano to  be  read thus,  it could  be interpreted much  as Conrad's Heart  of Darkness  is interpreted: with  the  narrator  Marlow jLaruelle as raisonneur surviving the  journey  he  nar­ rates,   while   penetrating the   darkness   of  a  doomed   protagonist   Kurtz/Firmin who does not survive.  But  Laruelle's voice does not frame Under the Volcano for the  reader, nor  interpret the  Consul  to the  reader. Lowry's Laruelle is more  akin to Conrad's "the Russian in motley" than  to Marlow, and  his ghostlike  presence in  Chapters I, VI, and  VII, not  to mention his "ghost" in  Chapter XII, estab­  lish him  as one of the  Consul's Doppelgangers, though not the  primary one.  Not­  withstanding the  important expository  function  performed  by Laruelle in Chap­ ter  I, his primary function is to establish,  with Mexico  as its objective correlative, an  infernal topos  viewed  from  a  post-mortem  vantage. In  this  purpose  he fully succeeds,  but  as a  character he emerges curiously  wraithlike and  crepuscular, as merely  one  of the  "aspects of the same  man,  or of the  human spirit  ... [as] two of them,  Hugh and  the  Consul, more obviously  are"  (Letters, 6o). Lowry's  con­ cession  to  the  publisher's reader  proves  untenable for  a  number of  reasons,  but chiefly  because  the  post-mortem  narrative voice which  he employs  is incommen-

37

LOWRY

surable with  distinct   and  discrete  characterization. Its  characteristics are  more like those  of  film noir than  the  drama of character: with  vague  and  fluctuating outlines,  mistaken identities, uncertain encounters, and  missed appointments pre­ dominating.  While   Lowry   was  writing   and   refining  over   a  decade  his  own masterpiece, there  was a novel  with  which  he was familiar that  embodied  all of these  traits.  It is to  the  obscure  British  novel   julian  Grant  Loses His Way  that  the   critic   must   turn for  the  book  that   most  directly  influenced Lowry's  first chapter.9
"It is the  history  of a  man  who  commits emotional suicide," Virginia Woolf said  in  her  anonymous review  of  this  1933  novel  by  Claude Houghton.10  The author's eleventh novel,  julian  Grant  Loses His Way  exemplifies  from  its open­ ing  sentence the  varying  focus,  fractured surface, over-determinations,  and  dis­ placements that   critic  Frank Kermode contends constitute "a  perpetual invita­ tion  to all  inquirers after  latent sense."11  And  latent sense there is in  abundance in  Julian  Grant  Loses His Way, for  the  novel  is a  tour  de  force of  Machado's great  idea,  except that  Julian Grant does  not  realize  he is dead  until  late  in the novel, where  latent sense becomes explicit  in the following exchange:

'You don't  really mean to say that you haven't guessed yet?'
'Guessed?'
'Yes-guessed!' the  artist  repeated,   with  tremendous emphasis.  'How  much
more  evidence   do  you  want?  God!  It's   unbelievable!   Surely  there's  only  one explanation of all  that's  happened  to you. Anyone overhearing our  conversations
would have guessed long ago.'
'I don't  know what you're-'
'You're  dead. I'm dead. Now, do you understand?'
'Dead?' 	(JG, 345)

The  novel  is divided  into  three  sections-"Adventure in  Picadilly," "Retro­ spect  in a  Cafe," and  "Adventure Beyond  Picadilly." The first  and  final  parts are  composed   in  the  post-mortem mode,  and  frame the  long  middle part which  is conventionally written-so  conventionally that  Graham Greene  complained of  "a  yawning gap  between  the  intelligence of  the  method and  the  convention­ ality  of the story ... the framework might  have  been  an  afterthought designed  to lend  significance to an otherwise  conventional story."12   Only  the  framing device of Houghton's novel is of enduring interest, and  it alone proved  useful to Lowry.  In  an  unpublished letter  to  his editor   Albert  Erskine, Lowry  acknowledges his debt  to  Claude Houghton in  the  following  terms: "There are  many  influences
here  [in  Chapter XII of  UTV]  ... Ouspensky ... Spengler ... Claude  Hough­
ton  plays some  part  here . . . See  julian Grant  Loses His Way, yet another novel about   hell,  where   the  author's method is  just  to  throw in  Swedenborg by  the bushelful   and  leave  it at  that.m3   But  it  was  in  his long  and  important opening chapter that Lowry  borrowed most  heavily  from  Houghton, though the  debt  has

LOWRY


gone  unacknowledged. In  order  to appreciate how  Lowry  used  Houghton's  first chapter as virtually a  blueprint for  his own, some sense of the general  texture of Julian  Grant  Loses His Way  may  prove  helpful,  before  specific  borrowings are cited.
The  opening sentence of Julian Grant Loses His Way  reads: "He stopped and
turned sharply, as  if  someone   had  called  him,  then  looked  round   in  order   to discover  his  whereabouts." Within two  pages  all the  ideas  that inform  the  book have   been  established,  and   until  the  long  and   conventional "Retrospect  in  a Cafe" section  commences eighteen  pages later,  the "quality of confusion  and unreality"14   is sustained  while  the  reader   experiences with  the  protagonist the pressure  of a vague  but  impending appointment, surprise encounters with figures from  the  past,  and  the  sense of temporal and  spatial  dislocation. All these motifs
-predominant  among them  the sense of "the past more actual than  the present"
(!G, 3)  -are held  suspended in  a  murk  of broken  prose.  Houghton does  not resort   to  tortured  syntax   or  stream of  consciousness  techniques; all  his  effects flow  from  a  faithful and  restrained rendering of the  post-mortem point  of view as  applied  to  a  character who  does  not  know  he  is dead. Things familiar are rendered strange, and  familiar things  perceived  strangely assume  a symbolic sig­ nificance   which  is grasped as  if  for  the  first  time.  The   protagonist's  name,  for example: "Julian Valentine Grant. It was odd  that  he had  used his second  name a  moment ago,  for  it  did  not  belong  to  him  now-it  belonged  to  his  youth, from  which  he seemed  to be separated by several  lives.... Valentine! it was the name of a Christian martyr in the reign of the Emperor Claudius. What link had  Julian Grant with a  fanatic of  the   third  century?"  (!G, s-6). With this passage  one  might  compare  Laruelle's  "obscure desire  on  his  last  night  to  bid farewell  to  the  ruin  of  Maximilian's Palace," his recollection of overhearing the lovers'   blamecasting and   passionate  weeping,   and  then   his  mental superimpo­ sition  of the  ghostly  Emperor and Carlotta upon  the image  of the equally  ghostly Consul  and  YvonneY It is not  only  that  formally  the  techniques used  here  are identical, for  a similar mythical  method  is very differently employed by Yeats  in his verse drama Deirdre;  it is the way in which  Lowry and  Houghton incorporate this  mythical dimension into  their  already uncertain and  dislocated dimension that  is noteworthy and  deserving of acknowledgement, as is the  device  by which  Lowry  positions Laruelle in the cinema  for what, in the I 940 manuscript version, would  be a massive  retrospective similar  to the "Retrospect in a Cafe" witnessed  by Julian Grant.
The way  Lowry  handles this transition to a conventional narrative in theI 940 manuscript version  of Under  the Volcano, and  the  way Houghton does the same thing  in  his I 933  Julian  Grant  Loses His Way, is strikingly similar. The  urgent sense  of  a  message   to  be  delivered   is Laruelle's counterpart  to  Julian  Grant's urgent need  to  keep  an  appointment. Laruelle does not  know  what  the  message

39

LOWRY

is, and  he  never  delivers  it; Julian Grant does  not  know  where  or  with  whom his appointment is, and  he ends  up  not  keeping  it. Essential to these leitmotifs is the  sense  of  destination.  Both  Laruelle and   Julian Grant, while  not  knowing what  their  destinations are,  nevertheless  arrive at  their  predestined stations. They arrive  in spite  of, or  perhaps because  of, the  circuitous routes  they  take: "At  this rate  he  [Laruelle] could  go  on  travelling in  an  eccentric orbit  round his house forever" (UTV,  29), Lowry  says  almost   apologetically in  the  published text; while Grant zig-zags  by starts  and  fits in an  effort,. first to keep  his appointment, then  to  avoid  an  encounter. Their arrivals at  their   respective destinations, the cantina and  the cafe, are the result of a journey.18
The   journey  is a standard narrative device  in  naturalistic fiction: like Zola in Germinal  and  Frank Norris  in  The  Octopus, both  Lowry  and  Houghton  com­ mence  with  a section  in  which  their  outsider   character covers  much  of  the geo­ graphical and  social  range  of the  novel to follow.  More  than  naturalistic exposi­ tion  is involved  here,  however.  Lowry  in  his  letter   to  Jonathan  Cape says  of Laruelle's walk: "A  second  reading will show  you  what  thematic problems we are  also solving  on  the  way-not  to say  what  hams, that  have  to be there,  are being  hung  in  the  window" (Letters, 68).  It becomes clear  to the  reader before  he is very  far  into  the  landscape that  both  Laruelle  and Julian Grant are  intro clueing  him  to  an  infernal topos.  The  sites  (Maximilian's  Palace, the  beach  at Cornwall) are  Dantesque stations  on the way to Dis  (the  cantina, the cafe). The  sense of time  is uncertain and  shifting,  the  scene  changes illogical  and  strangely obsessive.  In   julian  Grant  Loses His  Way   the  scene  shifts  are  managed  by  a character's exertion of will. So long as Julian holds  a scene  in mind,  it manifests itself;  but  as soon  as he forgets it, the scene disappears.17  This  device is used once by Lowry  where  Laruelle, overcome in his dream-trance by passionate desire  for Priscilla/8   wants  to  embrace her;  but as soon  as  he  moves  to embrace her,  his desire  passes and  she disappears.  In  Houghton's more  mechanistic version of hell the  characters  gradually  lose  motivation to  maintain  remembered scenes;  their  passion  and   power   of  mind  dissipates   until   finally  they  accept  their  fate -a bleak  Gleichschaltung.  Dilthey  (I 833- I 9 I I ) , who  posited  the  concept of  Vor­  verstiindnis  (pre-understanding)  so essential  to  the  post-mortem point  of view, also held  that the  real  gets experienced in  impulse and   will, and  that  reality  is resistance, or,  more  precisely, the  act  of resisting.  This theory  of reality  provides an  adequate basis for  Houghton's depiction of hell.  Lowry, while he flirted  with this  metaphysic  (which  he  attributed  to  Sweden borg), finally   rejected  it  in favour  of a more  complicated and  integrated one.
In  his I 940  version,  Lowry  uses the  trance, or  dream motif-probably  bor­ rowed  from  Shelley's  Alastor. By his final  version  he has dropped this device  for managing scene-shifts  and  relies entirely  on mood  (the Day  of the Dead, Quauh­ nahuac)  and  time-structure (the  Ferris  wheel,  the  film  reel). All  these  devices,

LOWRY


techniques, motifs  have  to  do  with  place  as a  projection of  an  interior state  of mind-in  a  single  word,  allegory.  Regarding the  state  of  mind   itself  and  the mood  being  projected, julian Grant  Loses His Way  is obsessive, Under  the Vol­ cano  oppressive. Both  Laruelle and  Julian Grant   experience ridicule:  Laruelle in  Maximilian's Palace,19  Julian Grant in the  cafe. Both  are  outside, yet seeking to  penetrate, the  phenomena which  pass before them.  Both  function as flesh and  blood  characters to  introduce the  reader to ghosts  and  phantoms.  But,  in fact,  the reverse is the case:  it is the phantoms who are the more real.
"Everything that   is  actually Real   becomes  a  mere  phantom when  one  con­ siders  it as a 'Thing in itself'-when it does not get Experienced," wrote Count Yorck  to Dilthey  in I 8g4.20  The  difficulty  that  Lowry  faced  in successive honings  of  his  first  chapter  was  that   of  defining   the  horizon,  or  context, of  his  whole novel.  His chosen  agent  for  this task  was Laruelle: a minor  character, an  aspect of  his major character, an  imperfect ego, and  little  better  than  a  phantom him­  self. But  Laruelle was  present  in  Quauhnahuac in  November  I939i  the  Consul and   Yvonne   were  dead, and   Hugh had  vanished   and  perhaps was  dead  also. Lowry's dilemma  involved   infusing   Laruelle  with  enough   life  so  that   he,  and through him  the  reader, could  evoke  and  experience  the  absent  characters, who were  more  vivid.  They were  not  palpable, but  they  were present, having  died  or disappeared before  mass  death overtook  the  world,  when  tragedy was still  pos­ sible.  In  this  post-mortem world  Jacques Laruelle  lives on  "like  a  wanderer on another planet" ( UTV, I 5), a  "six  foot  three  or four" husk  of  his former self, the  Consul   ( UTV, 2 I 3).  Laruelle also  "had  acquired a  certain   identity with Hugh. Like  Hugh he  was  going  to  Vera  Cruz; and  like  Hugh too,  he  did  not know  if his ship  would  ever  reach  port" ( UTV, I 5). Andrew Lytle,  writing on Under  the  Volcano, says:   "The stream of consciousness  when  used  by this im­ perfect  Ego, masquerading as a  point  of view, makes  the  action  more  imperfect by the intensity this  use of consciousness  gives to the  action.  There must  be some hone,  some   point   of  objective  reference, some  measure   for  this  interior flow; usually  this  is the  secular  world. But it need  not  be just this.  Without objectivity the  consciousness  reveals  itself as too private."21 Lowry,  having  tried  and  rejected Dilthey's resistance theory and  possibly  Shelley's  dream device,  solved  the  diffi­ culty  inherent in his first chapter by making  the objective referent Death. Death, or the  deadweight of the  past,  is oppressively  present  throughout Laruelle's over­ hearing of  ghosts  at  Maximilian's Palace, his finding  and  reading the  Consul's lost  letter   while  in  the  cantina, and  finaly  in  his act  of  burning the  letter  as a bell tolls "dolente ... dolore !m2
Heidegger has  defined   Death as  "the possibility  of  the  impossibility of  every
way  of  comporting oneself  towards anything, of  every  way  of  existing ... the possibility  of the  measureless impossibility of existence." 23  It is this sense of Death that   confronts Laruelle as  it  does Julian Grant and  that  serves  to  define  them.

LOWRY

Predominant in  both  opening chapters is a sense of "the past  more  actual than the  present" (]G, 3), or,  as  Lowry  simply   puts  it,  "the weight  of  the  past" (Letters, 66). The  oppressive landscape with its claustra!familiarity, the haunted figure  in  transit  across it  (Julian Grant is always  walking "swiftly" or  "slowly," but  the  reader perceives  him  in  paranoid flight; Laruelle "climbs" or  "orbits," but  the  reader  senses his guilty  avoidance of something or someone) are reminis­ cent  of  Samuel  Beckett's   Molloy  crawling  crutchless across  a  dead  landscape toward his  mother. Lowry's  Laruelle, who,  to some  degree,  is a  ghostly travesty  of  the  Consul   ( UTV, 2 I 3-14), is as dead  in  spirit  as Julian  Grant is in body. He  does not  grow  in conception or change his function  between the I 940  manu­ script  version  and  the I 947  published text. The objective referent which  sets him off undergoes refinement of technique and  increases its dramatic impact, but  he remains a  light   ficelle. Perhaps that  is why  so many  potential readers of Under  the Volcano  have  not  persevered  past  the  first  chapter: the  prospect of looking  at  the  rest  of  the  book  through Laruelle's  eyes has  proved  too  much  for  them.




CHAPTER I  IN  THE  PUBLISHED TEXT of Under  the Volcano is a chapter set apart from  the  rest of the  novel -in time structure, in dramatic techniques, and  in  the  ways in  which  it affects  the  reader. The foregoing  com­ parison  between  opening chapters of theI 940  version  of Lowry's novel  and  the I933   novel  it  was  modelled  on  indicates that  the  post-mortem  point  of  view, while  implicit in Under  the Volcano, is explicit  in  julian Grant  Loses His Way; indeed, the  latter novel's  "interest," as Graham Greene says, is "that  of a  tech­  nical  trick."24  Such  blatant exploitation of the  post-mortem narrative voice is not evident  in Under  the Volcano:   even  in the  early  version  it is mitigated through Lowry's   use  of  the  dream   motif,  and   by  the  final  version  it  has  been  further refined   and   disguised  in  the  pervasively  oppressive tone  and  allegorical topos. Lowry  has  used  the  weight  of the  past  and  "the slow  melancholy tragic rhythm of  Mexico   itself-its  sadness"   (Letters, 58)   to  define   the   wraith  Larucllc, through whom  the  reader  gets his first view of the Consul   (curiously like Julian Valentine Grant)  as a doomed  lover  and  one  "who suffers  dreadfully from  the mania of  persecution" (Letters, 70).  This  depiction of  the  Consul  as  paranoid was  intentional and  part  of Lowry's  post-mortem apparatus. Remarking on  the reader's sense throughout the book that the  Consul  (suspected by Sr. Bustamente and  others  of  being  a spy)  is  being followed, and  the  Consul's apparent oblivi­ ousness,  Lowry  says:  "For lack  of an object  therefore it was the  writer's reason­ able  hope  that this  first  sense of the  Consul's being  followed  might  settle  on  the reader and  haunt him instead" (Letters, 70).

LOWRY


Here,  then, is the  second  way of looking  at  the  entire novel  as a post-mortem narrative. The  first  was  Lowry's concession  to the  publisher's reader, to "look  at the  rest of  the  book  through Laruelle's eyes, as if it  were  his creation" (Letters,
7 I ) . In  that  case,  Chapters II-XII, which  depict  the  last  day  of an  individual's
life,  constitute a  lengthy remembrance:  "it  seemed  one  was  still  permitted to remember the  days  when  an  individual life held some  value  and  was not  a mere misprint  in  a  communique"  ( UTV, I I ) , Laruelle muses  as  he  contrasts  the tragedy  of the  Consul's death a year earlier  with  a world  at  war in I939·  In  this way of viewing  the  novel,  the  remembrancer would  be Laruelle; the life remem­ bered  would  be  the  Consul's. In  the second  way, however, it is the Consul  who acts  out  his  own  life  in  a  mythological present.  Integral to  this  second  way  of regarding the  entire novel  as a  post-mortem narrative is the  reader's conviction that   Geoffrey   Finnin is  already dead   and, possibly,  in  hell  when  Chapter II commences-to  be  precise  at  7 a.m.  on  November 2, I938.  The  remainder of the  book-comprising the  events of the next  twelve hours,  to 7  p.m. on Novem­ ber  2,  I938-can  only  be  read   in  the  post-mortem mode  if   we  locate  time present  in  a  past  event,  such  as  the  Consul's "sin" of  incinerating the  German officers  in  the  Samaritan's furnace during World  War  One,25   or  the  traumatic event   of  Yvonne's separation  from   the  Consul   in  December of  I937·  If the Consul   can  be said   to  have  "died" at  either  of  these  critical   points,.  then  the narrative of his life since is post-mortem. To  the extent  that  he is, or feels himself to be, in hell,  his own  existence  is spurious and  his relations with  the other  char­ acters  more  apparent than  real.  In  this reading, the Consul is never  authentically present   throughout the  novel: he  is  enslaved  to alcohol, entrapped in  the  past, and   emotionally  and   morally   dead.  These  are  the  logical  consequences of  the view  Andrew Lytle  takes  when  he says:  "Lowry renders hell in the  mind  of one man,   the  Consul  ... whose  aloneness  is the  result  of  and  the  punishment for  a mortal crime; it  is Satan's  condition when  he  was cast  forth  from  the  mind  of God,  that  is from  love, to the isolation  of his own  thoughts, which is hell."26 And,  again, "he   is  already  dead   when   the  representative of  law  and   order, now  a murderer and  outlaw, shoots  him  down  with  malice.  His death repeats  in parody his  own  act  with  the  German  prisoners."27   But such  a  reading is forced, if not patently  false.  Whether  or  not  the  Consul  committed a "sin" years ago,  he is on November  2,   I938, only  imperfectly and  self-indulgently in  a  hell  of  his own making. He still  has,  and  can  exercise, freedom of choice -as evidenced by his choice  of   paths at  the  close  of  Chapter X.  The   allurements of  Yvonne   (her  dream of  Canada, and   the  Consul's response  to it), and  the  actions  of  Hugh (his  bringing the  Consul  and  Yvonne  together when  he leaps  in the  arena with the  bull),  point   up  the   hastiness  of  Lytle's  interpretation -an  interpretation the  Consul   himself   would   like  to  hold,   but   cannot. He   has  not  yet  suffered enough, he is still subject to temptation, and  he still  possesses free  will. He  may

43

LOWRY

be said,  metaphorically, to  be "already dead" when  he is killed  in Chapter XII, and  he  may  experience horrific  glimpses  of  hell  (both in  Laruelle's house,  and in  the  toilet  of  the  Salon  Ofelia), but  he  is  not  there   yet.  Not  until   he  and Yvonne  are actually dead is all hope gone.
Under the  Volcano, then,  due  to its trochal design,  may  be said to comprise a post-mortem narrative  throughout  only  on  second   reading, or  if it  is  read,  as Lowry  conceded it  might  be, through Laruelle's eyes. Such  a reading, however, does not  correspond to the  literal  sense of the  text; the  novel  to follow  after  the Ferris  wheel  tums, though a retrospective of sorts, does not  read  like one. Lowry was  able  with   justification   to say in  1946  of  the  post-mortem device,  which  he lifted  from   julian  Grant   Loses  His  Way and   planted in  the  first version  of  his own  novel  then  subsequently refined,  that  "these influences are  assimilated here so far  as this  author is concemed,ma but  it  is with  reference only  to  Chapter I that  this claim  can  be made.  The  first chapter influences the  rest of the  book by establishing a lugubrious, reflexive mood in the so-called  present  (actually mytho­ logical   present)  tense,  which   plunges  the   reader into   the   past,  whose  present  becomes  the  book.  Aside  from  the  flashbacks, especially  Hugh's in  Chapter VI,  and  Yvonne's in  IX, the  events  depicted in  Chapters II-XII  occur  in  present  time.  The  Consul's plunge  into  the  barranca in XII, and Yvonne's apotheoses in XI,   are   the  simultaneous climaxes  of  what   presents  itself  to  the  reader as  a strangely convoluted, but  nevertheless  linear,  novel.  The  post-mortem point  of view,  which  Lowry   borrowed from  Houghton and  used  in  his melancholy first chapter as a  prop  for  his character Laruelle, was not a subtle  enough  device  to sustain   his main  character, the  Consul,  through  a  narrative nearly  ten  times  as long.  For  that   tour  de  force he  would  resort  to other, less terminal, devices,  in­ cluding   a  complicated scheme   of  temporal  manipulations more  related   to  Sir Sandford Fleming's time-zones  than  to Machado's "great cure."29

NOTES

1 Joaquim Maria Machado De  Assis, Epitaph  of a Small Winner, trans.  William L.
Grossman (New  York: Noonday, 1952), p. 19.
2   Epitaph, p. 2 1.
3   Frank Kermode, The   Genesis  of Secrecy:  On   the  Interpretation  of Narrative
(Cambridge, Mass., & London: Harvard Univ. Press, 1971), p. 15.
4    Three   Novels  by Samuel  Beckett:  Molloy,  Malone  Dies, The  Unnamable, trans. Patrick  Bowles  and  Samuel   Beckett   (New   York:  Grove, 1955), p.  26.  Further references will be cited Tril.
5  Samuel   Beckett,  as  quoted in  Deirdre Bair,  Samuel  Beckett   (New  York  &  Lon­
don: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1978), p. 346.
6   Beckett,   before   he  embraced  the  post-mortem point   of  view  in  his  post-World War  Two  fiction,  employed   the  Jungian idea  of  a  narrator who  was  not  yet, or not  properly, born.  See  Murphy ( 1938;  rpt.  New  York: Grove, 1977), p. 78. In

44

LOWRY

Molloy  he  uses  the   two  ideas   interchangeably,  only  the  post-mortem  view  m
Malone Dies and  The Unnamable, and  neither in Watt.
7   The phrase is Van  Gogh's. Lowry's  application of it  to  his own  technique is dis­ cussed   by  Malcolm Bradbury, "Malcolm  Lowry  as  Modernist," in  Possibilities (London: Oxford, I973), p. I82.
8  This  remarkable thirty-one page  letter, begun  by Lowry  on  January 2, I946,  and mailed   on  January I5  to  Cape, was  in  response  to  the  reader's report which  he had  received  from  Cape the  previous  November. Lowry's  letter  in its entirety and an  abridgement of  the  letter   from   Cape   may  be found in  Selected   Letters  of Malcolm Lowry, ed.  Harvey Breit  and  Margerie Bonner  Lowry   (Philadelphia & New York: Lippincott, I965), pp. 57-88,424. Hereinafter cited  as Letters.
9    Claude Houghton [Oldfield],   Julian  Grant   Loses  His  Way  (Garden City,  New York:  Doubleday, Doran,  I933). Hereinafter cited  as  ]G. This obscure   British novel  has   received   passing   reference in  the  literature on  Lowry  at  least  three times:    in  Tony  Kilgallin's  Lowry   (Erin, Ont.:  Press  Porcepic, I973),  p.  I73, where   the   statement is  made   that   "Geoffrey echoes  the   belief  of  the  hero  in Claude Houghton's novel"; in Andrew  Pottinger's I978  dissertation, "The  Revis­ ing  of Under the  Volcano," as a marginal note  in  the  appendix; and  in  Sherrill E.  Grace's  I974  dissertation, "The Voyage  that  Never  Ends," p.  45,  where  the novel  is characterized as "an  extremely heavy-handed portrayal of a dead  man  in Hell   who  relives  his  past," and  is  cited  as  one  of  "several minor  works  which influenced his [Lowry's] masterpiece."
10   Times Literary   Supplement (20  April  I933), p. 274· Cf.  Houghton, p. 326.
11  The Genesis of Secrecy, p. I5.
12    Spectator ( 2 I April  I 933), p. 250.
13  Lowry   (22  June  I946), as  cited  in  Sherrill E.  Grace,   The Voyage That  Never Ends:   Malcolm  Lowry's Fiction   (Vancouver:  Univ.  of  British  Columbia  Press, I982), p.  I29,  n. 5·
14   Graham Greene, Spectator ( 2 I  April  I 933), p. 250.
15    Malcolm Lowry,  Under the  Volcano  ( I947;  rpt.  Harmondsworth & New  York:
Penguin  Modern  Classics,  I 963),  pp.  I 8-2 r.  Further references will  be  cited
UTV.
16   The cantina abutting on  the  cinema, where  Laruelle reads  the Consul's letter  and dreams, or  thinks,  his  retrospective, is as far  as his  journey  carries  him  in  either
the  I940  manuscript or  the  published version  of the  novel.  In  the  published  ver­ sion,  although Laruelle has  a good  view of the interior of the  cinema, he decides  he  doesn't want   to  see  the  film;  whereas  in  the  manuscript version  he  actually watches the  film  Las  Manos de  Orlac,  falls asleep  and  dreams his  retrospective, and  wakes  up  in  the  theatre. How  he got  into  the  theatre is not  accounted for.
17    See,  for  example, Houghton, pp.  303-04,  where  Julian in  conversation with  the artist  says:  " 'I can't stand   the  knowledge that  you can  see my  thoughts-that you can  read  my memories like a book. It's  damnable! I can't see your  thoughts, or  penetrate to  your  memories.' " The artist,  a veteran of hell,  replies: " 'That's only  because  you're such  a damned egotist.  You will-when you get sick of your­ self. And  one  does get  very sick of oneself  in  this dream-world, where  everything is only a  projection of oneself .... My God! that  confounded river's  gone!  Quick! Concentrate! or  the  damned lot  will  go!  That's better. I  say,  you  really  have  a first-class  imagination.' "
18  In  the  I940  version  Priscilla  is the Consul's wife, Yvonne  is his daughter.

45

LOWRY

19  Following Laruelle's attempt  to take  Priscilla  in  his arms  in  the  I 940 manuscript version,  the  ruined palace  collapses  around him  "and he had  the  notion  that the walls were shaking with laughter at him."
20    Briefwechsel zwischen Wilhelm Dilthey und  dem Grafen  Paul Yorck  von Warten­
burg 1877-1897 (Halle-an-der-Saale, I923), p. 61.
21  The   Hero  with  the  Private  Parts: Essays (Baton   Rouge:  Louisiana State   Univ.
Press,  I966)' pp. s8-59·
22    The burning of the  letter  at  the  close of Chapter I is "poetically balanced by the flight   of  vultures  'like  burnt  papers floating from   a  fire')    at   the  end   of  III, (Letters, 70).  In  the  I940 version  Chapter I  ends  with  an  evocation of vultures.
23   Martin Heidegger, Being and Time, trans.  John Macquarrie and  Edward Robin­
son  (New  York: Harper and  Row,  I962), p. 307.
24    Spectator  (2I  April  I933),  p. 250.
25    The  internal evidence against this  episode   having actually occurred is massive.
Both  Hugh ( UTV, I88)  and  Laruelle ( UTV, 38)  discount the  Consul's version of  his  "sin." Further doubt is cast  by  the  chronological fact  that,  if  the  Consul
was  fifteen   years  old  in   I9I I  ( UTV, 22),  the   likelihood  of  his  having  com­ manded a  submarine-chaser in  World   War  One   would   be  remote,  though not, apparently, impossible.  In   the  last  months of  the  war   public  school  boys were getting "battlefield" promotions and  being  forced  to  take  over  units  whose  com­
manders had  been  killed.
26    The  Hero with the Private Parts, p. 54·
27    Lytle,  P· s8.
28    Lowry   (22 June I946),  as cited  in Grace, "The Voyage  that  Never  Ends: Time and  Space  in  the  Fiction  of Malcolm Lowry," Diss. McGill, I974, p. 22.
29    See  "Manipulated Time" and  "Ecstatic Time" in my "Under the Volcano: The
Novel  as Psychodrama," Diss. Tulane University of New  Orleans,  I982.








BLIND M)IN

Eva Tihanyi


Since the eclipse,  the earth speaks to him in braille
and  his hands  listen, his life syncopated
by the beat of a cane
tapping out  anger,  jazz, lust, the rhythm of his breathing

POEM

Light,
both  particle and  wave falling and  flowing
of his eyelids
is for him a sound, a white  melody
scored  on  the  dark  sheets

He  has  a penchant for  roses, is the only man  I know
who  hears  them  sing





EJIRLIEST HISTORY
 


Raymond Souster


I was born  on Oakmount Road in the west end  of sleepy Toronto January 15, 1921.
The doctor who attended my birth
(my mother's first)  was Joe Gilchrist, already slowly dying of diabetes,
who in the  next  year or so would  become  the first
human guinea-pig for Banting and  Best.

It was early  morning with a grey dawn  coming up when  Dr.  Gilchrist lifted  me up by the legs
and  slapped me smartly  on the ass. That hurt my feelings and  I cried  out (and  have  been  crying  out  ever since),
then  was wiped  of my slime and  given  to my mother.
The room  was cold, there  were too many  pairs of eyes looking  down  at me, and  when  I was raised  to a nipple it was nice while  it lasted  but  that  wasn't  long enough.

There seemed  at  that  moment only one sensible  thing  to do.
I closed my eyes, imagined the snug comfortable place
I'd  been  rudely  ejected  from,  then  climbed  back in to lie curled up in warmth and  peace.

I don't think  I've  even  really come out  again.

47

MONIQUE BOSCO  "EN ABYME"


Michael Greenstein





Q-STRUCTURALIST CRITICISM has  eagedy seized  upon Gide's concept of "mise  en  abyme," a  phrase  he  borrowed from  heraldry where the  inner   design  of  a  shield  repeats   the  overall   pattern. Modem critics  have extended this synecdochic relationship to include the  image  of two mirrors facing one  another thus  creating  infinite  reflection, repetition, or  vertigo  such  as might be  experienced  on  the  edge  of  an  abyss.  This  sense  of  vertigo   appears as  an important characteristic of Quebec fiction  in generai,I and  more  specifically,  the "mise   en  abyme" effect  seems  central to  the  novels  of  Monique Bosco.2     The present  study  seeks  to explore  some  varieties of "abyme" that inform   Monique Bosco's writing, as her characters lose themselves in  bewildering labyrinths of obsessive  repetition from  which  they  emerge  only  to  find  themselves reeling  on the  brink  of an  abyss. Repetitive thoughts, actions, and  language that  preoccupy her  protagonists and  narrators reveal  dilemmas paradigmatic of modem fiction.
U n  Amour   maladroit   (I g6 I),  winner of  the   American  first-novel   award,
begins with
Je suis devant lemur
Le longmur
Lemur des lamentations
Le mur des ancetres qui,
La face couverte de cendres, Venaient pour  s'y lamenter Se lamenter
La seule chose gratuite
Supreme consolation permise.

In  these lines Bosco announces her obsession with  lamentation:  repetitive tears in front  of  repetitive walls that  connect   her  to  her  ancestors. In  her  claustra! uni­ verse  "walls" play  a  central role,  occasionally  pierced   by  windows   or  mirrors that,   instead   of  offering   relief  or  escape,   merely  intensify   the  sense  of  endless repetition and  incarceration.3  Immediately following the  poem  about Jerusalem's Wailing  Wall   or  psychological   ghetto walls,  the  narrator  "reflects" upon   her existence: "Image fuyante, miroir  infidele.  Miroir, dis-moi  qui  je suis:  ni la plus belle   ni  la   plus  laide."4    Through  her  looking-glass  the   narrator  perceives   a doubling confirmation of her internalized identity, a vision confounded by domes­ tic  labyrinths:   "Longs corridors sans  fin  ou   j'erre,   interminablement,  qui   ne

BOSCO

donnent  que  sur  des chambres desertes, desesperement  vides. A l'interieur, tout n'est que noirceur. Dans chaque  piece, un miroir dont  je n'aperc:;ois que l'envers." By the end  of the novel she has resolved the question  posed at the outset of how to grasp  her life as she returns  to her mirror:  "Dans  la glace, j'accepte que man reflet me paraisse enfin familier  et inevitable. Je n'espere plus de transformations miraculeuses pour man visage." Where earlier she had sought "le miracle d'une metamorphose," she  now  resigns herself to confronting  a  reality  unchanged  by flattering  mirrors.
Like her self-reflexive mirrors,  the windows in Un  Amour  maladroit  offer no
outward   escape,  for  they  serve  only to  isolate Bosco's young  protagonist  from society. She  addresses  the  shop  window separating  a little  girl from  toys:  "Un meme  mur,  invisible comme  une  paroi de verre, se dressait toujours  entre la vie et  moi."  This  self-proclaimed   masochist  finds no outlet  at  her  window  which reminds  her  only of the  happiness  of others:  "Chacun se hate  vers le but qu'il s'est choisi; quanta moi, je m'efforce de ne penser a rien, penchee a cette fenetre qui  ni  debouche   que  sur  Ia  joie des autres."  While  others  rush  forward,  she remains  alone,  static,  petrified  at  her window:  "J'aime cette insidieuse maladie qui  me transforme lentement, inexorablement, en une statue  de sel." Not unlike Anne  Hebert's heroines,  Monique  Bosco's protagonists  find themselves stationed at  windows  peering  into  vacant  external  worlds, or  surrounded by  walls that enclose an equally internalized emptiness.
Confined  within  huis clos, the narrator eventually succumbs to dizziness caused either  by the contraction of walls on her psyche or by a labyrinthine branching
of endless corridors  perplexing  her divided ego. Her  reaction  to her  psychiatrist places  her  on  the  brink  of an  abyss:  "Un   jour qu'il  avait  reussi a me pousser
plus loin de coutume,  j'eus la sensation d'etre  perdue dans le corridor sombre et desert  d'une  mine  abandonnee. Un  pas plus avant  et  j'etais certaine  de tomber dans le noir absolu  d'un  precipice sans fond."  Though  ashamed  of her excessive egocentricity,  she  cannot   renounce  her  martyrdom, and  her  quest  for identity meets with failure  because the walls of her own ego block her entry into the lives of others.  "Je vais,  je viens,  je tourne  en  rand,  sans fievre et sans caprice,  de fac:;on ineluctable.... Je ne puis meme pas prendre  place parmi les pleureuses du mur  des lamentations." The  misery of her awkward  love knows no company,  for Bosco's obsession with walls merely accentuates the whirligig's compulsive abyme, shelter, and invisibility:  "De cet echafaudage  est ne le long mur qui bientot m'encerclera etroitement, refusant  l'entree  de ce domaine  a quiconque. Derriere son  enceinte.... La  sera  man  arche,  a  l'abri  des regards,  au  je serai  invisible pour l'oeil meme de Dieu."
While  she  fails  to  establish  contact  with  mankind  at  large,  she is no  more
successful in more  particular relationships involving women,  her family, and  her
Jewish  religion. Just  as she is surrounded  by walls, so is she enclosed by a femi-


49

BOSCO

nine family of mother, sister, aunt,  and grandmother, for she was born fatherless "en  un  gynecee."  Where  her  younger sister Elizabeth   (whom  she considers her double)  has a name, she remains "la  Petite," an anonymous  narrator whose patronym,  the sole inheritance from her father,  embarrasses  her at school. Her grandmother  recalls the  family's  flight  from  Poland   to  Paris,  and  her  mother instructs her in the ways of religion:

Tremble, m'a-t-elle dit, fille digne de moi,
Le cruel dieu des Juifs l'emporte aussi sur toi.

From this simple rhyme she graduates  to Sartre's Reflexions  sur la question  juive later  in  life and  a  masochistic Jewishness:  "Pour m'en  punir,  je reprendrai la route,  la  longue  route  sans  fin du  Juif  errant." But  her  wandering  Jew  turns inward  to repeat  her intramural role: "Je  demeurais  prisonniere  demon infernal ghetto individuel. ... Nulle issue. Nulle sortie vers le monde." Thus,  the externals of  the  plot-hiding  in  Marseilles  during   World   War   II and  emigration   to Montreal  after  the  War-complement  the  wanderings of a central  conscious­ ness paralyzed  en abyme, where family and  religion do not help in  her quest for self-identity and the world at large.


LA FEMME  DE    LOTH  ( 1970)   picks  up  where  U n  Amour maladroit  leaves off with the emphasis once again  on obsessive repetition, enclo­ sure,  and  infinite,  abysmal  doublings.  Structurally the  division  into  240   short
sections  furthers   the  atmosphere   of  enclosure  as  one  section  echoes  another. "Toi" and  "tu" reverberate  throughout   the  novel  as the  first-person  narrator, Helt ne,
within interwoven narrative and chronological sequences encompassing biblical history, family  history, the  immediate  past,  and  the  present  that  fluctuates  be­ tween Montreal and Venice, scene of an earlier  novel Les lnfusoires  (Ig6s). La Femme  de Loth  begins and  ends in circular  fashion  with  HeU ne
suicide :  the  walls and  mirrors  of the  first novel turn  to a window  in this later work  which  seems to  have  been  influenced  by Diane  Giguere's  Le Temps  des jeux ( I g6 I ) . In  Giguere's  novel the young heroine experiences  vertigo from her window  overlooking  an  existential  abyss:   "ouvrit   la  fenetre,  se pencha  sur  le seuil et ferma  les yeux. Son  corps oscilla dans  la lumiere.  Il  y avait  longtemps qu'elle  songeait  a cette issue, mais elle perdait  toujours  courage  au  dernier  mo­
ment.... Prise  de  vertige,  la  nausee  l'envahit et  elle  appuya   ses coudes  a la
croisee." Bosco begins comparably: "Il  y a la fenetre.  Un  bond. Et on echappe
a !'horrible son  d'une  voix. Douce  voix, soudain  transformee  en  voix ennemie.
. . . Dans ce dur  pays de froid, les fenetres ne s'ouvrent pas sur le vide."5  To  the
windows,  transformations,  claustra! emptiness,  and  suicidal  depression  of  the

so

BOSCO

earlier novel  is added the  image  of  "voice" -whether  her  lover's  or  her  own that  echoes  in  obsessive  litany. As a child  she suffers from  vertigo  near  her  win­ dow:  "Je  restais   pres  de  la  fenetre a  relire  interminablement  mes  nouveaux livres. Je  les savais  deja  par  coeur.  Je  n'osais regarder au sol, a cause du vertige." The  window  separates the  internal world  of literature from  external  reality­ a central theme in La Femme  de Loth.
Helene's soliloquy  or interior monologue heightens the  claustra!, reverberatory
effect.  The auditory equivalent of face-to-face mirrors  in  mise en abyme  would be  a continuous echo,  the  voice  and  name  of Pierre  resounding through section after  section.  "Tu te  moquais de mes 'litanies,' de ce besoin  de repeter ton  nom, a  l'infini." Excluded from  the  world  at  large  by her  closed  window  and  by her rejection  at  the   hands of  Pierre,   Helene   repeatedly defines  herself  through a series of negatives that deny  the  possibility of human contact or relationship. She remains an  outsider even  to  her  parents, whom  she  regards as an  ideal  couple. When she  asks  for  a  baby  brother her  parents reply,  "11 y a  des  maladresses qu'on  ne  peut   repeter." Their  refusal   to  repeat   their   error   takes  on  a  more poignant note  as  the  child  recalls  voices that  wonder  why  she  fails  to resemble her  mother and   father: "Et la  meme  voix,  ou  une  autre, differente, ou  mille autres, reparties au  long des annees,  reprenait en echo, en leur  passage: 'Le  beau couple.... C'est  fou  comme   ils se  completent.' " Ironically her  Parisian accent distinguishes her  at  school  in  Montreal, and  later  in life she is complimented for her voice alone,  the rest of her body relegated  to an inferior  status.
Instead of  resembling her  parents, Helene  discovers  that  she  looks  more  like her  grandmother, the  link  to  her  Jewish   background  which  extends from  the Bible  to  the   modern  Holocaust of  the  Jews  trapped  by  Hitler. The   narrator regards herself as a latter-day wife of Lot, for she must learn  to define herself independently of  Pierre, and  with  an  eye to  the  unknown future rather than  a failed  past.
En  laissant  Ia ville  en  flammes  se consumer.  Sans se retourner.... II faut  aller de !'avant. Sans  un  regard  pour  le passe. Pourtant  quand  Yahve  voulut  sauver Loth,  il l'autorisa .a  partir   avec  sa  femme,  ses filles. Et  malgre  Ia presence  de
Loth,  le reconfort  des enfants  nees de sa chair,  elle se retourne,  malgre Ia defense
formelle, Ia vieille femme folie regrettant ce qui a ete.

The  cumulative "re"  prefixes  stamp  Helene's perverse   predicament  indelibly upon  the  archetype to  form  a  palimpsest  or statue  of salt.  This  memory  of her personal past  and  her  archetypal past  causes  a feeling  of nausea  in  Helene  who is constantly torn  between  the  demands of past and  future with  the former some­ what  less painful than  what  awaits her.
J'aimerais comprendre pourquoi  Dieu voulut sauver Loth et sa famille s'ils ne retournaient pas sur  Ia ville en ftammes. Je  comprends  si aisement  Ia femme  de Loth.

BOSCO

Moi  aussi, a la fin de cet 'ete, je me serai  peut-etre transformee  -a force de repandre des larmes sur le passe -en une autre  statue  de sel.

As  Bosco's  narrators survey  their  past,  they  naturally appropriate  the  myth  of Lot's  wife with  its emphasis  on tears  transformed into  a saline  statue; this biblical leitmotif  reappears towards  the end of the novel:

Loth  et sa famille. Les filles sont  jeunes, avec l'avenir  devant  elles. Pour  la vieille femme,  c'est  tout  son passe qui s'engloutit.  Alors elle tourne  la tete, cherchant a
distinguer  ce qui  se passe, ce qui s'est passe. Elle se retourne,  malgre
expresse.  Pauvre  vieille femme. Dans la Bible, tu  n'as  pas de nom. La femme  de Loth,  cela suffit.... Une statue  de sel. La  belle image. L'admirable symbole. Une statue  de larmes petrifiees....
Je me retourne,  moi aussi, sur ce passe devaste.

Re-view,  re-turn, re-peat-these  constitute the  static actions within  Un  Amour maladroit  and   La  Femme  de Loth,  the  retrogressive pull  inhibiting any  future progress;   moreover, these  "re" prefixes  meaning "back" and  "again" focus  on forms  of doubling in the  novels.
Helene's solitary  existence  defines itself in contrast to forms of doubling includ­ ing  the  ideal  couple  that  her  parents represent or  the  other young  couples  who meet  and   marry while  she  remains alone.  For  her  this  pattern  extends back  to the  biblical  archetype: "On accepte seulement les 'couples' comme  dans l'Arche de  Noe." So, like other  masochistic heroines  with  whom  she identifies,  she looks into  her  mirror for  a doubling, narcissistic  illusion:  "Miroir, miroir, dis-moi  que,  pour  lui,  je suis celle qui  compte." When  the flattering mirror fails, she turns  to her  window   only  to  be  reminded once  again  of  her  separation from  any  com­ munion or  community, and  the  impossibility  of substituting "romantic" dreams in  place  of  harsh   realities:   "J'ai passe  des  annees  a  faire  du  lechevitrine aux etalages   du   bonheur  conjugal.  L'Amerique  entiere affichait   ses  richesses  aux fenetres panoramiques de  toutes  les  belles  banlieues peuplees de  couples  amou­ reux.  11 me  convient   de  pleurer  sur  mon  ersatz  de  reve  d'arriere-cour." Faced  with  the  claustra! reality  of four  walls,  a  room  of  her  own,  Helene  gains  some comfort from  literature-from  reading and  writing -where she can  find some doubling  fulfilment  not  offered   by  society.  "J'ai  toujours ete  etonnee de  voir mon  ombre se profiler  sur  un  mur, sur  le sol. J'avais done  une  ombre. Des em­ preintes digitales uniques au monde.... J'essaie de les nommer, de les cerner, sur ce  papier. ... En  cessant  d'exister,  je ferai  mon  premier choix  de  vivante. Exit Helene." Helene projects her shadow on a wall  and  a dramatic role upon  herself thereby  splitting  herself  into  an  acting self and  a recording or observing self.
Caught between  past and  future, Helene recognizes  her dual  personality: "Vieillarde prematuree. Fausse  jeune fille prolongee. Voila  mes deux  faces."  Her destiny  lies en abyme:   "Je serai  double   jusqu'a la  fin.  J'hesite entre  I'amour et la haine.  L'Ancien et le Nouveau Testament. Parjure aux  deux." Even  her mar-

52

BOSCO

riage  to  Claude,  a  homosexual,  thwarts  any  desired fulfilment;  instead  it  pro­ vides her  with  another  doubling  role:  "11 incarnait  un  role. Volontairement, je donnais  rna replique  dans  cette mauvaise piece de boulevard." Her awareness of this re-plication,   (deux-pli-cation), and  role-playing occurs at the very centre of the  novel  in  a series of short  sections,  "cette  farce  que  je repetais"  and  "mon simulacre  de role." "Le  passe est passe. J'ai  tort de m'acharner envers ce double d'autrefois, rna  soeur  d'hier.... On  ne  se refait  pas."  Abundant references to novels  within  the  narrative further  contribute   to  the  mise  en  abyme;  Proust, Kafka,   Dostoievski,   Sartre,   and   Simone  de  Beauvoir   provide   Helene   with examples  "d'y   retrouver   le  reftet  de  mes angoisses." Literature, books, words, transform  life and  reality for her as she depicts her own metamorphosis from girl to woman;  contrasting life and  art, she states her purpose in creating  La Femme de Loth:   "Je  n'ecris  ce roman  que  pour eloigner l'echeance  de la verite." Writ­ ing  alone  saves her from  committing  suicide by the end  of the novel:  "Pauvres pages. Preuve  derisoire qu'en  fin de compte  tout est litterature.... Simulacre  et derision." Through parody she deconstructs her own portrait.




Bosco TRANSFORMS  Pierre,  the  doctor,  in  La  Femme  de Loth  into  the  protagonist  in Charles Levy,  m.d.  (1977), and  continues  her ear­ lier  preoccupations,  only  now  she  portrays  a  bleak  world  through   male  eyes instead  of from  a  feminine  perspective. Dying of cancer,  Dr.  Levy  laments  his past failures in life through first-person narrative  and interior monologue. Gloria Escomel  has noted  "un  effet d'echo"  between Helene  and  Charles: "ce chasse­ croise de personnages  produit  un effet de mise en abyme des deux romans."6  In other  words, the  mise en abyme  found  in individual novels may be carried  over to Bosco's entire  oeuvre  marking  a central  preoccupation  in  her fiction. In  this latest  novel, however, she carries  thematic dedoublement  and  repetition  one step further  by adding  an obsessive, stylistic double entendre.
Like  David  Canaan in  The  Mountain and the Valley, Charles  Levy has an
incestuous  relationship  with  his twin sister, Sarah,  more satisfying than  his mar­ riage. Bosco introduces the doppelganger motif near the beginning: "Ma moitie. Ombre  de  notre  ombre.  Double  cruel  d'Edgar Poe.... la soeur  perdue,  le vrai double,  rna precieuse  jumelle.m  Twin  phonemes echo each other  and stress the­ matic  and  imagistic concerns  at all stages. Like Bosco's other  Jewish protagonists Charles  complains  about  his racial  identity:  "Libre  Levy, sauf  de la vie. 0 les vies non  vecues de  tous  ces gens de rna race.  Levites. Toujours plus vites." He places orthodox  Jews  en abyme, "Ghetto dans  le ghetto," and  regards  his per­ sonal  p< st in similar  terms,  ontogeny  recapitulating  phylogeny:  "Je  ne suis ja­ mais vraiment  sorti du ghetto  d'enfance."

53

BOSCO

Paronomasia pervades  every  aspect  of  his life  as linguistic and  existential ele­ ments   fuse.  The   moribund  physician   of  language  diagnoses his  condition  en abyme:  "ces  mots  creux  qui  proliferent comme mon  cancer. Un mal,  des maux.
J'ai   des  maux a l'infini.  Et  des most  aussi." Sexual   distinctions also  proliferate
through echoing homonyms in clipped  sentences with  absences  of verbs.  "La maleheure. L'heure des males.  Du  mal." "Femme. Fame, faim  en italien. Fame, en  anglais." "Ombre.  Ombre. Hombre! Voie   des  voyages.  Voix.  Vois.  Vois l'age." The   surgeon who  dissects  language to  this  extreme ultimately loses  his way  and   his  voice  in  a  never-ending labyrinth, "L'enorme  grotte.... Tuyaux
d'orgue a l'infini.... Un  vide sans echo." Words tum upon  themselves in imita­
tion  of  the  egos of introverted narrators and  protagonists who stare into  a series of shattered mirrors.
Thus, each  of  Bosco's novels  reveals  her  preoccupation with  various  forms  of doubling, echoing, and  repetition en abyme. Bosco seeks shelter  behind  cloistered walls  pierced   by  windows,  mirrors,  shadows, and  the  echoes  of ancestral  voices haunting her  prose  and  pulling  her back from  the  brink  of a contemporary abyss.
The  same  notes  resound  in her  prose poem  "Jericho" (1971):  "Je n'irai jamais
a Jericho. Je  renonce a !'heritage. J'accepte qu'au bruit de rna voix, nul  echo  ne
reponde.  Que   les  autres   entonnent  leurs   trompettes, faisant  crouler les  murs humains. Je  reste  sagement a l'abri d'un pauvre present. Le  passe  est mort. Et
je recuse,  d'avance, l'absurde futur incoherent." And   as  the  walls  of  an  indi­ vidual  ghetto close in on  Charles or  Helene, so the  four  comers of the earth dis­ seminate and  encompass the  diaspora: "La loi de la dispersion  est  respectee  aux  quatres coins de la terre. On  honore !'heritage du  juif errant" ( S chabbat  70-77).

NOTES

1 Gilles Marcotte, Une  Litterature  qui se fait (Montn al:
2   Gloria  Escomel, "Monique Bosco ou le miroir  brise," La Nouvelle  Barre du  jour,
no. 65 (avril  I978), 90-97.
3    See Eva-Marie Kr1>ller, "La  Lampe dans la fenetre: The  Visualization  of Quebec Fiction,"  Canadian  Literature,  no. 88  (Spring  I98I), pp. 74-82; and  E. Blodgett, "Prisms  and  Arcs:  Structures  in Hebert  and  Munro," in Figures in a Ground, ed. Diane   Bessai and  David  Jackel   (Saskatoon:  Western   Producer   Prairie  Books, I978), pp. 99-I21.
4   This  and  subsequent  references are  from  Monique Bosco, Un  Amour  maladroit
(Paris : Gallimard,I 96I  ) .
5  This  and  subsequent   references  are  from  Monique Bosco, La  Femme  de  Loth
(Montr·eal:  HMH, I970).
6    Escomel, p. 93·
7   This   and  subsequent  references  are  from  Monique   Bosco, Charles  Levy,  m.d.
(Montreal: Les Editions Quinze,  I977).



54


"PROCHAIN EPISODE" ET "MENAUD, MAITRE-DRAVEUR"

Le decalque romanesque

Robert Major




L'oEuvRE COMPLEXE et d&outante d'Hubert Aquin  a  peu d'egales  dans  notre  litterature. Seul Jacques  Ferron,  sans  doute,  peut  rivaliser avec  l'extreme  fascination  qu'exerce  Aquin  sur  une  diversite  de lecteurs  depuis qu'en  1965, avec son premier  roman,  il s'est fait connaitre  d'un  plus vaste public que  celui  de  la  revue  Liberte.  Mais  contrairement  a  ce  qui  se  produit   chez Ferron,  ou le talent  du conteur  et les dins  d'oeils complices enferment  le lecteur dans un reseau de complicite  quasi tribal  ( sinon familial)  -le contrat  initial du conte laissant toute  liberte au  narrateur de montrer  ses ficelles -, le lecteur qui se sent  pris dans  les lacets inextricables  de la  prose d'Aquin est proprement  en­ voute. Sensation  a la fois penible et ludique. Comment  qualifier au juste !'impres­  sion ressentie de s'avancer toujours  plus avant  dans un labyrinthe-seme d'em­  buches,  traverse  de  fausses  pistes, tant  les miroirs  reflechissants  et  deformants  abondent  -, mais dont la disposition intelligente est une fete pour I'esprit? Rare­  ment  victimes  consentantes seront-elles allees avec  autant de  volupte  a  la  ren­ contre du Minotaure.
Et  justement,  la tentation constante et bien comprehensible  des critiques est de s'enfermer  allegrement   dans  cette oeuvre  proteiforme,  car  elle nourrit  bien son homme.  Mais se peut-il  que la predilection qu'affiche  Aquin  pour le recit specu­ laire de meme que sa propre  fascination  avec les differentes  modalites de la mise en abime soient une invitation  a sortir de l'oeuvre, a aller au dela de son systeme de  miroirs  auto-reflechissants, et a considerer  de quoi  cette  oeuvre  meme  est le reflet? De quelle  oeuvre,  plutot,  tel roman  particulier  d'Aquin est  le reflet? Car il ne s'agit  pas ici de sortir  des limites de la litterature et !'evocation de la notion d'"oeuvre-reflet" n'a  dans  ce travail-a ce moment,  du  moins-aucune inci­ dence sociologique.  L'hypothese  de depart  est plutot  la suivante: le principe  de la recurrence  semble systematiquement exploite par Aquin  dans ses romans, mais pas  necessairement   ( comme  c'est  le plus souvent  Ia  fonction  de la recurrence) pour  assurer la coherence  et la lisibilite du texte, au contraire. Ce principe  de la recurrence  va-t-il  au-dela  de l'oeuvre?  Celle-d  est-elle inseree dans  une relation de dedoublement avec une oeuvre anterieure?

55

AQUIN & SAVARD

Si l'on s'en tient a l'examen  du premier roman  d'Hubert Aquin, il semble bien que  l'on  puisse repondre  affirmativement  a ces questions.  La  profonde  parente
entre  le  premier   roman   d'Aquin, Prochain  episode,  et  le  premier   roman   de Felix-Antoine  Savard,   publie  trente  ans  auparavant, M enaud  maitre-draveur, est patente.  Ce  sera  l'objet  de  ce travail  d'expliciter cette  relation  et  d'essayer d'en degager quelque  peu le sens.
Une   hypotheque est  a lever  au  depart. Le  rapport  privilegie  qu'entretient
l'oeuvre  de  Mgr  Savard  avec  le roman  de  Louis-Hemon semble  avoir  occulte cette relation  Savard-Aquin, aussi significative et peut-etre  plus revelatrice.  Or il semble que  Menaud, maitre-draveur, plutot  que  le terme  d'une  relation d'influ­ ences, devrait  etre  perc;u comme le moyen terme d'un  dialogue d'oeuvres unique dans notre litterature. Et ce dialogue a ceci de bien particulier qu'il  offre, malgre
les apparences, tous les indices d'une  rupture a Ia fois epistemologique  et existen­
tielle entre  Ia premiere  (Maria) et Ia deuxieme oeuvre  (Menaud). Monseigneur Savard  peut  bien reprendre  les personnages, les scenes, le decor et meme le texte de Louis Hernon,  ce n'est que pour mieux subvertir  l'oeuvre  de ce dernier: pour l'essentiel, ces deux  univers romanesques  n'ont  rien en commun.  Hubert Aquin, par ailleurs, malgre l'originalite  de ses personnages, de ses scenes, de son decor et de son texte, reprend  le discours de Monseigneur  Savard  et nous offre un double troublant  de Menaud, maitre-draveur.


"M enaud" et "Maria"

La lecture  en serie de ces oeuvres fait  bien ressortir ces divergences et  conver­ gences. Les parentes  entre  Maria  Chapdelaine  et Menaud, maitre-draveur  nous sont  bien  connues:   parente  entre  les personnages  (Samuel-Menaud; Franc;ois Paradis-Joson   et  Alexis;  Maria-Marie; Lorenzo  Surprenant-Le Delie;  Eutrope  Gagnon-Josime), similitude  des scenes  (Ia  cueillette  des bleuets, l'egarement en
foret,  etc.), identite  du  decor   (les  terres  de  colonisation,  adossees  a Ia  vaste
foret). L'utilisation hautement   poetique  que  fait  Savard du  texte  de  Hernon  a egalement  retenu  I'attention: d'abord  tcxtc entendu, puis souvenir  d'audition et
pole  referentiel,  ensuite,  a mesure que  le texte  s'eloigne  dans  le temps  et  perd
toute actualisation trop precise, cri de ralliement  et parole absolue; il devient finalement  hallucination, balbutiements  et prophetic  d'un  dement.  Les multiples reprises de cette  parole anterieure scandent  le roman  de Savard  et lui conferent une tragique  grandeur.
Dans  se jeu de reprises, que  le texte du  premier  roman  change  radicalement de  nature  en  integrant   le second  est tout  a fait  normal.   Non  seulement  parce
qu'il  est utilise differemment  et que  Ia redondance lui assure un relief poetique, mais surtout  parce  qu'il  devient  partie  constituante d'un  univers tout autre.  Car

AQUIN & SAVARD

au-dela  des similitudes  contingentes,  ces deux  univers romanesques  sont irrecon­
ciliablement  opposes. Entre  les deux, s'est produit la faute.
En effet, Maria  Chapdelaine nous presente un univers edenique.  Certes, la vie est  dure   et  les  joumees   longues,  Samuel   Chapdelaine  se  sent  bien  un  peu penaud  d'avoir  abuse  de la  bonte  de sa femme et Maria  sera bien quelque  peu tentee  par l'appel  du luxe et de la vie facile. Mais ce ne sont que des ombres au tableau,  des tentations auxquelles  on resiste:  le paradis est sans fissures. Samuel est  dure   et  les  joumees   longues,  Samuel   Chapdelaine se  sent  bien  un  peu avant  lui, et Maria  fera le choix de la continuite:  elle suivra, sur les traces de sa mere.
Tout  autre  est l'univers  de  Menaud, maitre-draveur.  Son  point  de depart­ son fondement  -est  un sentiment  de culpabilite. Au debut  du  roman,  Menaud  est arrive  ala fin de sa vie; il se sent pecheur et s'avoue coupable d'avoir  fait "le chien  tout  son regne."1  11 s'est  produit  une felure dans l'univers  plein et clos de Maria  Chapdelaine:  Menaud   en  prend  conscience  lorsqu'il  entend  sa fille lire des pages qui  decrivent  le paradis  perdu.  Brutalement,  tout  chavire,  et comme ce fut  le cas lors de la  perte du  premier  paradis, le pecheur  prend  conscience de
1'espace et du temps.
Cette   conscience   est  justement   ce  qui  oppose  antinomiquement  ces  deux univers  romanesques.  L'espace,  implicitement,  est illimite  dans  Maria  Chapde­ laine. Six fois dans  sa vie, lorsqu'il  se sentait  trap  comprime  par  l'avance  de la civilisation,  Samuel   Chapdelaine a  demenage  ses penates.  Toujours a  l'avant­ poste des forces de colonisation  et de peuplement,  il n'a  jamais manque de terres vierges et de terrain  en friche.  Rien  d'ailleurs  dans le  roman  n'indique chez lui la  moindre  conscience  de 1'epuisement  du  territoire.  Le  lecteur  du  roman  sait bien que famille en est rendue  aux limites septentrionales des terres arables, mais Samuel,  quant a lui, ne voit venir la fin de ses peregrinations  que  parce qu'il  est rendu  a  la  fin de sa  course  terrestre,  non  par  manque  d'espace.  De  meme,  le temps  n'a  aucune  prise sur son style  de  vie. Certes,  comme  tout  homme,  il est soumis a la loi commune  et la perte de sa femme signale bien qu'il  est rendu  au terme  de  son existence.  Mais  cette  perception  reste resolument  individuelle,  ne s'accompagne d'aucun  pressentiment  qu'il  est peut-etre  parmi  les derniers  d'une  espece menacee  et que  ses fils ne conna.ltront  jamais une telle liberte,  Maria, sa fille,  perc;oit  confusement   et  dans  un  etat  de  quasi  clairvoyance  que  certains dangers  se  dressent  a l'horizon, mais elle n'a  qu'a  assumer la voie rectiligne qui est tracee devant elle pour que tout rentre dans l'ordre.
Toute autre  est la situation  de Menaud  et toute autre  sa conscience de sa posi­ tion.  Menaud   habite  les dernieres  frontieres:  le territoire  est occupe,  la collecti­ vite est menacee ses derniers  retranchements et illivre un combat d'arriere-garde desespere pour  empecher  d'etre definitivement  confine dans  un enclos. En  mains de  vingt  ans,  de  Maria  a  Menaud, l'espace  a  litteralement  fondu.  Alors  que

57

AQUIN & SAVARD


Samuel  avait  vraisemblablement le droit  d'aller s'installer ou il voulait, Menaud n'aura  bientot meme   plus  le  droit   d'acceder aux   montagnes qui   aboutent  sa terre.  De Ia l'urgence d'agir et la conscience  tragique de la fuite  du  temps  qui  le conduit a la  folie.  Honteux d'avoir laisse filer les heures  et les annees,  se  rappe­ lant  a la fin de sa vie la mission sacree que  lui avait  confiee son pere  ("Garde c;a pour  toi  et  pour  ceux qui  viendront, mon  sappregue !"), conscient qu'il ne laisse en  heritage a  son  fils qu'un  "metier d'esclave" et  les luttes  qu'il  aurait du  lui­ meme  assumer:

Lui  deja  vieux  et  son temps  utile epuise,  son fils prendrait la  releve et lutterait contre  les empietements  de l'etranger.	(p. 43)
Toutes  ses Hkhetes a lui, ses annees sous le joug, c'est  Joson qui  racheterait cela. (p. 8o)

incapable, finalement, de  s'en  remettre a  Joson  apres  la  noyade de  ce dernier, Menaud  est  accule,   alors  qu'il   est  vieux  et  mine   par  le  chagrin, a  une  lutte derisoire,  mimique de combat contre  un  adversaire inaccessible. Le temps  lui fait defaut. Alors que  Maria n'a  qu'a accepter la continuite puisqu'il ne s'est  produit aucune cassure  dans  sa vie feutree, Menaud doit  rebrousser chemin, reprendre sa vie,  poser  des  gestes inedits  et  refaire  sa  journee  dans sa  vingt-troisieme heure. Sosie  de  Samuel Chapdelaine et  son  frere  de  sang,  Menaud se distingue  nean­ moins  radicalement de lui  par  sa conscience  angoissee  et  tragique de l'espace et du temps.


Aquin et l'ombre de Savard

Par  ailleurs,  malgnles disparites d'age, de milieu,  de formation, d'occupation, le heroes  d'Hubert Aquin  est le double  de  Menaud. Les deux  oeuvres debutent par  le meme  constat d'echec et  le meme  sentiment cuisant d'humiliation face  a la  mission  trahie: mission  rec;ue du  pere,  incarnation de  la  fidelite  patriotiq ue, dans  le  premier cas,  mission  rec;ue des freres  d'armes, patriotes en  lutte  revolu­ tionnaire, dans  le second.  Menaud et X  ( c'est  ainsi que  je nommerai dorenavant le "je" de  Prochain  episode,  alternativement narrateur et  espion  et  souvent  les
deux  a la  fois)   se sentent   tous  deux  prisonniers: X  est  veritablement enferme
derriere des  barreaux et  etouffe  dans  son  cloisonnement; Menaud se sent  con­ damne a une  "barbotiere aux  pirons," incapable de faire  l'outarde et de filer au nord   a sa  guise.  Leur   humiliation  vient  en  grande  partie de  cette  restriction
spatiale, image  meme  d'une liberte  amoindrie. C'est  alors  que  les protagonistes envisagent de  transmettre leur  mission  a des alter  ego:  Menaud a son fils "ne  de sa souche," le narrateur a un espion  de sa creation, qui  se chargeront de la lutte
contre   l'ennemi.  Cette   transmission  ne   peut   s'effectuer,  Joson   se  noyant  et l'espion-heros s'empetrant, s'engluant, se noyant en quelque sorte  dans  les phrases

AQUIN & SAVARD

du narrateur. Les protagonistes doivent done eux-memes assumer la lutte, bien maladroitement, et c'est  dans  le deroulement  de celle-ci qu'eclate leur  profonde identite.
Leur  commune  impuissance est evidente. Elle provient d'abord de leur inadap­ tation  a la lutte.Tous deux  partes a la reverie et a !'introspection (ala "jangle­  ric"  dans  le vocabulaire  de Savard), ils sont d'une  incompetence  penible a voir en  tant  que  militants.  Poetes d'abord, maniant  avec un  rare  bonheur  un verbe vigoureux  et enlevant,  d'une  extreme  violence, constamment assode  au feu dans le cas de Menaud  et a un autre  type de feu, celui des armes, dans le cas de X:  ils sont  des discoureurs  intarissables.  Cette  parole  forte  et  drue  est nourrie  par une  conscience historique  aigue qui s'enracine dans un amour  profond du pays: amour  quasi  charnel  au  du  mains fortement  erotise  (il faut  voir quel  plaisir les deux  prennent  a la simple  nomination,  Menaud  de ses montagnes qui  lui sem­ blent  autant de betes familieres  qu'il  caresse du regard,  X des petits villages des Cantons  de l'Est  au  de la  Petite  Nation,  rappels de la femme  aimee). Les deux protagonistes se sentent  en  relation intime, immediate, avec les ancetres heroiques ( decourvreurs et explorateurs au patriotes rebelles, selon le cas)  et ant conscience d'incarner la race. Menaud parle "comme s'il eilt ete a lui seul tout  un peuple et qu'il  eilt vecu  depuis des siecles," X affirme constamment  son identite  collective:
"je  suis  un  peuple  defait.... " Cette  ardeur  patriotique, toutefois,  cet  amour douloureux du sol meme  des peres, ne postule en rien une quelconque efficacite militante,  tout  au  contraire. Le chant  lyrique et la violence essentiellement  ver­ bale sont a la fois un exutoire et une mimique de la lutte. La prolixite s'associe a une  activite  febrile-courses en auto  ou courses en  raquettes-qui satisfait le besoin de bouger mais empeche toute veritable action consequente.
Si les protagonistes,  au  depart  partes  a la reverie, doivent  se resigner ainsi a un simulacre  de lutte,  c'est essentiellement parce que l'adversaire est absent. Car il s'agit  bien  du  meme  adversaire: 1'Anglo-Saxon au  plutot  la  puissance  finan­ ciere  des "etrangers" qui  peut  acheter  des montagnes  entieres  et en chasser les possesseurs non  pas  Iegaux  mais Iegitimes, et qui  ecrase  impitoyablement, avec
ses forces repressives, toute  velleite de resistance au de revolte. Face  a un ennemi
anonyme,  impersonnel,  nulle  part  present  mais tout  puissant  (le capital  n'a-t-il pas taus  les attributs de la divinite?), Menaud  veut lutter  avec ses poings et X, a peine mains derisoire, avec des mitraillettes. Ils ne trouvent  devant  eux que des hommes, freres ennemis  de surcroit:   Le Delie, tra.ltre a sa race et H. de Heutz,
au  patronyme   francophone  (par  opposition  a  Carl  von  Ryndt,  integralement
etranger).2   Ennemis  tellement  fratemels  qu'ils  aiment  la  meme  femme  que  les
patriotes et sont aimes en retour  (Marie  aime a la fois Le Delie et Alexis, fils spiri­ tuel  de  Menaud; la femme  blonde-K?-aime  a la fois X  et H. de  Heutz). Ces freres peuvent etre menaces verbalement-ce dont on ne se prive pas-et les menaces  peuvent   meme  en  venir  aux  coups.  Mais  dans  l'economie  des  deux

59

AQUIN & SAVARD

romans, les coups  ne  peuvent  etre  que  superficiels (lutte  dans  la  clairiere entre

Alexis et Le Delie ou coups de feu erratiques entre X et H.  de Heutz). Quel  sens cela  aurait-il de  tuer  qui  nous  ressemble?   QueUe  utilite   y  a-t-il  a eliminer   un

pion?  Supreme ironie,  les protagonistes qui  ne veulent  ni ne  peuvent eliminer ces ennemis   concrets   mais   ambigus,  s'epuisent  neanmoins  a  les  attendre:   ainsi
Menaud dans  sa  montagne qui  attend Le  Delie  et  qui  perd  la  raison,  et  X qui, dans son attente au chateau, est en proie aux  pires hallucinations.
Ce  n'est  pas  le  moindre point  de  rapprochement entre ces deux  oeuvres  que cette  incapacite partagee de  representer l'ennemi veritable. Une  breve  evocation de l'ingenieur dans  Menaud, un  apen;u fugace du  banquier dans  Prochain  epi­ sode,  puis  immediatement  s'interpose  le  frere-adversaire ambigu. Il s'agit   Ia d'ailleurs d'une  constante de  notre   litterature3 -1'Anglais  est  un   personnage romanesque tabou  -mais  plus remarquable dans  les oeuvres etudiees ici du  fait
qu'elles creent  des  personnages  en instance de  lutte nationale a qui  on  refuse  de
presenter  l'ennemi.  Et   les  deux   protagonistes,  solidement  encaisses   dans   un dilemne dont ils ne  voient  guere  d'issue,  gesticulant  fievreusement mais  inutile­
ment,  en  viennent a perdre  la  raison  ( ou  a etre  soup onne
cas de X).
Cette folie est etroitement liee au  theme  de la noyade dans  les romans. L'image de  la  depression-mentale et  geographique  (les  eaux   du  Lac  Leman) -est centrale dans  Prochain episode  ("je suis attable au  fond  du  Lac  Leman, plonge dans  sa  mouvance liquide  qui  me tient  lieu  de  subconscient, melant rna  depres­
sion  a  la   depression  alanguie  du   Rh&ne  cimbrique ... "), et  les  images   de
plongee  scandent le recit,  jouant  constamment sur  les deux  niveaux. Etre  fou ou soup onne  tel,   c'est   etre   "emprisonne  dans   un   sous-marin  clinique."  Dans Menaud, maitre  draveur, la  noyade  est  non  seulement mort   physique   (Joson) mais  aussi  mort  spirituelle. C'est  ainsi que  perdu dans  la  tempete, Menaud s'en­ fance  dans  un trou  de neige:

11 ramassa  ce qui lui restait de force pour  grimper  le surplomb  de neige au bord de la coupe ... mais 'epuiS'e, vaincu  des pieds a la  tete, il s'affaissa dans  un trou,
tandis  que  tous les demons  de la  tempete  hurlaient au-dessus dans  les renversis. ( ... )  Mais  bientot,  le  rale  ne  deborda   plus  du  trou  de  neige,  tandis  que  les pieds de l'homme  gelaient dans le linceul ou il etait  entre debout.

Debout comme  un  noye. Meme  sous sa forme solide, l'eau  manifeste sa puissance dissolvante et  destructrice. Que  la  noyade-depression soit  le lot  des deux  prota­ gonistes  ne saurait nous etonner: "le salaire  du  gerrier  defait, c'est la depression" (P.E., 17).
Par   ailleurs, le  theme   de  la  noyade   re oit
montagnes.  Elles  representent  pour  les  deux   heros  des  absolus,  des  images  de liberte, des  sources   d'exaltation  et  d'enivrement.  Menaud  remue   ciel  et  terre pour  defendre la  montagne menacee,  alors  que  X  porte  constamment ses regards

6o

AQUIN & SAVARD

vers le  contour dentele des  Alpes.  On  retrouve ainsi  dans  les deux  romans une thematique de  mantee  et de  descente,  ala fois spatiale et psychique, les lieux  bas representant des espaces  clos et depressifs, la montagne, la ferveur et !'exaltation. Assez paradoxalement, toutefois,  l'espace reve sera l'espace de la  ruine.  En  effet, dans  les deux  romans, les protagonistes qui sont  alles porter  la lutte  sur le terrain eleve,  n'y  trouveront que  deconfiture. D'ailleurs, au-dela des  justifications anec­ dotiques, n'est-il  pas  curieux qu'ils  choisissent  un  champ de  bataille  si  loin  de leur  domicile: les Alpes  pour  le  Montrealais X,  une  montagne a  trois  jours  de marche de chez lui pour  Menaud?
Supreme paradoxe, alors  que  tout  est  consomme, que  la  defaite est totale  et les  heros  aneantis, les  deux   oeuvres,   par   une  volte-face   qui   tient   du  tour   de passe-passe,  projettent le lecteur  hors  de  l'oeuvre et  postulent un  futur  redemp­ teur,  ou  du  mains different. Alors  que  rien  dans  l'oeuvre ne le  prepare ni  ne le justifie,  le  dernier chapitre  de  Prochain  episode  multiplie  les  assertions   a  cet effet:

Mais  tout  n'est  pas  dit.  ( ... )  je me  sens fini;  mais  tout  ne  finit  pas en  moi. ( ... )  Mais  tout  se  resoudra  en  beaute.  J'ai  confiance  aveuglement ... ( ... ) Deja,  je pressens les secousses intenables du prochain episode.

La  fin  de  Menaud  est  plus  ambigue. La  phrase  de  Josime  se veut  prophetique, mais  prophetie de quoi?  Sibylline  a souhait, elle ne saurait se reduire facilement. Toutefois, son  caractere sentencieux, la  lenteur et le calme  de  l'enonciation qui contraste avec le desarroi des autres:

Alors, au  milieu  des hommes  qui se passaient la main sur le front  contre  le frole­ ment  de  cette  demence,   lentement   le  vieil ami  de  la  terre,  Josime,  pronom;a:  "C'est  pas  une  folie comme  une autre! Ca  me dit, .a moi, que c'est  un  avertisse­ ment."

la  nature  particuliere du  paysan-locuteur, "bon comme  la  terre  et  sage  autant qu'elle," et  surtout le fait  que  la scene se deroule  au  printemps, en  plein  renou­ veau,  et  immediatement apres  que  le  jeune  couple  eut  decide  de  continuer la lutte,  taus   ces  elements  conferent  a  cette   fin  un  certain   caractere optimiste. Auparavant, ses compatriotes se moquaient de  Menaud et  n'accordaient aucun credit  a ses paroles:

L'affaire  des etrangers  dans  la montagne  ne les enervait  point. C'etait partout la meme r·eponse, fait en montrant les crocs:

-Le  bail ... Ia loi ... Bah! on se fiche de  tout cela comme des vieilles lunes! il n'y a que le bon Dieu .. .

Et  Menaud revenait  .ala nuit  tombante; et dans le chemin  d'ombres  touffues, il pensait  tout  haut,  et maudissait  le sol jaune de n'avoir  pousse que des hommes de rien ... "dubois d'esclave! criait-il, dubois d'esclave!"

61

AQUIN & SAVARD

A la fin de l'oeuvre,  les voisins se regroupent  chez lui, ecoutent  avec emotion ses cris de demence  et reconnaissent leur valeur  prophetique. Impuissant, alors qu'il est sain d'esprit,  Menaud  sera ecoute, fou. Paradoxalement-et la meme struc­ ture  sera  reprise  dans  Prochain  episode-, !'engagement  patriotique  ne  sera dote  d'une  quelconque  effi.cacite (hautement  problematique d'ailleurs,  car sim­ plement  postult e,
de la folie.
A vrai dire, le processus ( echec   foliesucces?)  est plus complexe dans les deux oeuvres. A l'echec, succede la folie. Mais celle-ci ne sera affectee d'un  signe positif qu'apres avoir ete soumise ala double action  du temps et de la narration. Quelques  mois suffisent dans  les deux  cas. Apres  trois mois de detention, X se met  a  raconter  son  histoire, tissu de souvenirs et d'affabulation, longue  confes­ sion lyrique  d'un  echec  dont  il ressort miraculeusement optimiste.  De  meme,  il aura  suffi. des quelques  mois d'hiver  pour que  l'aventure de Menaud soit reprise et  merveilleusement  transformee  par  l'action  du  recit.  Le  Lucan  en  devient  le narrateur:

Son  titre  de  n!volte lui avait  donne  un  prestige mysterieux. On  se rassemblait pour !'entendre  parler du drame  de Menaud.  ( ... )  A !'issue du  recit, chacun retournait  chez soi, et toute la nuit, les paroles de Menaud  rodaient dans le som­ meil du Pied-des-Monts.

L'identite de structure  semble  assez claire:   le salut  individuel  et collectif ne peut  venir,  ne  peut  paraitre  possible, que  mediatise  par  l'action  du  recit.  Mais puisque  dans  les  deux  oeuvres  le  narratif   se  differencie   nettement  et  meme s'oppose au  vecu, !'affectation  d'un  signe positif ala folie et a l'echec a caractere tres  ambigu:  mensonge  poetique,  evasion  verbale,  derobade langagiere ... En­ fin:  une echappatoire. Le procece est ancien et comme tel investi d'une certaine autorite   respectable.  Le  "desastre   de  Roncevaux" n'est   pas  devenu  equipee heroique  autrement. Ce qui  prenait  autrefois  trois siecles se faisant  maintenant en trois mois (acceleration  extraordinaire et progres notable,  signe de notre  plus grande   capacite   d'illusion  ou  de  l'urgence   particuliere de  la  situation   quebe­ coise ... ?)  Mais  cette anciennete  de la combine  ne la  rend  pas mains  proble­ matique   ni  mains  deprimante.  La  morale  est  limpide:   le  succes  patriotique n'appartient  qu'a   l'ordre   du   recit.   Morale   doublement   affirmee.   Dans   les
oeuvres, puisqu'elles confient a la narration interne  le soin de racheter  l'echec, et
par les oeuvres,  puisqu'il  s'agit  de toute  evidence  de  romans  nettement  reussis, mais de  romans  de  patriotes  dont  l'action  effi.cace reste confinee a la litterature.


Romans et vision du monde

Rien  n'indique qu'Hubert Aquin  ait  attache une importance particuliere  au roman  de Mgr  Savard  et, pour  rna part  du  mains,  je ne sache  pas qu'il  s'y soit

AQUIN &  SAVARD

arrete a  un  moment ou  a  un  autre dans  aucun de  ses textes.  Au  contraire, il semble,  a son  issu, a  trente ans  d'intervalle, reprendre l'oeuvre de  son  predeces­ seur,  rajeunissant !'intrigue mais  n'y  modifiant rien  d'essentiel. Cette  reproduc­ tion  quasi  en  decalque de  Menaud, maitre  draveur  par  Prochain  episode  est autre chose  qu'une  quelconque relation de  similitude et  davantage  qu'un rap­ port   du   type   deja   codifie  par   la  critique litteraire  (influence,  imitation, pla­ giat ... ) . Le  parallelisme des oeuvres  est manifeste  au  niveau  des  themes  et de la  structure fondamentale. En   plus  des  elements  degages  dans  cette  etude, il aurait  ete   possible  de   parler  de  certains autres.   De  l'ecriture "poetique"  de chaque oeuvre, par  exemple, le contenu du  terme  "poetique" variant avec  les deux  epoques, mais s'opposant ace  que  le moment offrait  d'ecriture romanesque plus  conventionnelle. Ou  encore  de  la  fonction  compensatrice des oeuvres  pour
les auteurs face  a une  activite extra-litteraire de reconquete (Savard en Abitibi,
Aquin dans  la  clandestinite). Ou  bien du  reseau  proprement narcissique des personnages dans chacun des roman  et de leur  capacite de dedoublement:  ainsi la  chaine Menaud-Joson-Alexis, le premier devant  agir  par  defaut du second,  le troisieme   n'etant  que   la  copie   conforme  des  deux   premiers-relations  avec l'histoire et  le  surnaturel comprises-et  devenant le  narrateur du  drame du premier, cette  chaine sera  reprise  dans  Prochain episode,  mais  l'unicite  protei­ forme sera assuree  alors par le jeu complexe du pronom "je."
Cette   profonde  homologie des  deux  oeuvres  ainsi  etayee   ( et  qu'il serait  sans doute   possible  d'elucider davantage)  pose  un  certain   nombre de  questions inte­ ressantes.  Elles se ramenent toutes  a la  permanence problematique d'un  univers imaginaire au-dela  des  transformations  socio-economiques, au-dela  des  options  politiques, au-dela  des  changements de  mentalites. Que  le  Quebec  des  annees  trente,  rural,  archaique et  ferme   sur  lui-meme et  que   le  Quebec  des  annees  soixante, urbanise,  industrialise, balaye  par  taus  les courants de  pensee,  qu'un pretre  feru   de  classicisme,  corporatiste, admirateur  de  Salazar et  de  Franco et qu'un socialiste   athee, imbu   de  modernite, revolutionnaire mais  surtout anar­ chiste,   puissent   produire  des  oeuvres   vehiculant  au-dela  des  contingences, la meme  vision  du  monde, merite  certainement de  retenir !'attention de quiconque prend la litterature au serieux.
Comment expliquer le  phenomene? L'utilisation d'une  certaine  terminologie ( homologie,  vision  du   monde)  dans  le  precedent paragraphe   pourrait  laisser supposer une  tentative de  resolution du  cote de la perception goldmannienne de l'oeuvre litteraire. Resolution difficile a effectuer, pourtant. Car  nous sommes  en presence,  avec  ces deux  romans, d'oeuvres maitresses  qui  ant  eu de grands reten­ tissements   et  dans   lesquelles   des  groupes importants  de  la  collectivite  se  sont reconnus: la  droite traditionnelle avec  Savard  (son  idealisation du  monde pay­ san,  de la  religion, de la famille, de la fidelite ... ) , la  jeune gauche avec Aquin  (son  idealisation de  la  Revolution, des  luttes  de  decolonisation ... ) . Ces  deux

6g

AQUIN & SAVARD

groupes  qui  se considerent  antinorniques  se partageraient alors la  rnerne vision du  rnonde?  Vision du rnonde dont les elements fondarnentaux sont les suivants: la  conscience  d'un   echec initial,  le sentiment  d'ernprisonnernent, la  volonte  de s'en sortir  par  un geste de delegation,  la necessite d'assurner  soi-rnerne la lutte in extremis   ( une  lutte  essentiellernent disproportionnee, 1'action  du  patriote  etant inefficace car  verbale et incapable  d'atteindre l'ennerni  sur son terrain), la folie (la coupure  d'avec  le reel)  qui  en resulte et finalernent  la transformation de cet echec sur le plan de I'action  en une reussite sur le plan de narration: l'aventure du  patriote,  passant  par le creuset du recit, se voyant  affectee d'un  signe positif, rnerne si elle a  echouee. Qu'est-ce  a dire?  Trois  possibilities d'interpretation se presentent  de prime  abord,  rnais les trois echappent a !'hypothese  de Goldmann selon laquelle la structure  d'une  oeuvre forte et exernplaire est liee a  (porte  a son maximum  de  conscience  possible ... )  la  vision  du  rnonde  du  groupe   dont l'ecrivain fait partie:

(a)   Mgr  Savard   ne  ferait  pas  partie,  contrairernent  aux  evidences,  de I'elite clericale, traditionnelle  et corporatiste,  des annees trente.  Il serait en avance sur son temps, le pere spirituel des effelquistes de 1g6g....

(b)   Hubert Aquin,  rnalgre ses engagements  et ses references  ideologiques,  pro­ longerait  un  discours de la droite  traditionnelle canadienne-fran _;aise  et en ferait done "objectivernent" partie....

(c)   La  notion  de classe n'a  ici aucune  pertinence  car la vision du  rnonde d'un auteur  ne saurait  aucunernent  se reduire  a l'universalite d'une  classe....

Pour   rna  part,   je retiens  de  cet  exarnen  sornrnaire  de  deux  de  nos  chefs­ d'oeuvre,  non  pas  trois possibilites de resolution  rnais trois indications, les  deux premieres   d'ordre  socio-culturelles  et  plutot   troublantes,  la  troisierne  d'ordre critique.  D'abord que la race est, pour  reprendre la  terminologie  de  Sartre,  un puissant  element  psycho-syncretique qui tend  a gammer  ou du mains a rnasquer les  contradictions  et  les luttes  plus  concretes:   le  nationalisrne  quebecois -le patriotisrne  plutot-transcende les polarisations  politiques, echappe  aux discours ponctuels  et les rend  taus cacophoniques.  Ensuite  que le  discours nationaliste  au Quebec,   tel  qu'il   s'incarne   dans  des  oeuvres  rornanesques  exernplaires  de  ce siecle, est intrinsequernent  statique: d'ailleurs, la lecture  la rnoindrernent  assidue de nos journaux  indique  que le phenornene est social avant  d'etre  litteraire -la rnerne situation  a cours, quinze ans apres Prochain episode et quarante ans apres Menaud, maitre-draveur. Finalernent-et  cette  constatation est ala fois heuris­ tique  et aveu  d'irnpuissance  (de  recherches a faire,  pour employer l'euphernisrne courant) -qu'il  faut  rappeler  ce que Sartre disait dans  un contexte  autre  rnais analogue:

AQUIN & SAVARD


La   plupart des  ouvrages  de  !'esprit sont  des  objets   complexes et  difficilement classables  qu'on peut  rarement "situer" par  rapport a une  seule ideologie  declasse
mais  qui  reproduisent plutot, dans  leur  structure profonde, les contradictions et les luttes  des ideologies  contemporaines.4

Un pas  avant dans la  comprehension et  la  "classification" des  ouvrages que­ becois  serait peut-etre fait si la  critique d'ici pratiquait davantage ce qui  Henri Mitterand  appelle le  "comparatisme intra culturel."5  La  confrontation,  le  rap­ prochement des oeuvres, non  pas  d'ecrivains de la meme chapelle ou  de la meme generation, mais d'auteurs eloignes, situes  aux  antipodes meme, permettrait peut­ etre  de  preciser, lentement et  patiemment, les elements vraiement fondamentaux de notre univers imaginaire. De  notre univers tout court.

NOTES

1 Les  ref,erences  suivront ainsi  immediatement apres  les citations, avec !'indication de la page  entre parentheses. Les editions  citees sont:
-Felix-Antoine Savard, Menaud, maztre-draveur (Montreal:  Fides,  Bibliothe­
que  canadienne-fran<;aise, I g66) .
-Hubert  Aquin, Prochain episode  (Montr,eal: Editions du  Renouveau pedago­
gique,  I g6g) .
2    Cf.   Michel  Bernard,  "Prochain  episode   ou  l'autocritique d'une  impuissance,"
Parti  pris, I 4, no. 3-4  ( novembre-decembre I g66), pp. 78-87.
3  Que   l'on   retrouve aussi  dans   notre   histoire.  Jacques Ferron, entre autres,  s'est interroge sur  cette   occulation  systematique de  I'Anglais qui  a  fait  en  sorte  que notre   historien national,  le  chanoine Groulx,  puisse  presenter Dollard des  Or­ meaux  comme heros  collectif. Par  quelle  aberration les Iroquois, qui avaient cesse
d'etre une  menace :reelle des le debut du xvne siecle, en sont-ils  venus a incarner
l'Ennemi? C'est  ainsi  qu'on nous  proposait comme  heros  un brigand qui  n'a  peut­
etre   jamais   existe  et  comme ennemis   des  Amerindiens depossedes,   alors  que  la
lutte ,etait ailleurs.
4    Jean-Paul  Sartre,  Questions  de  methode   (Paris:   Gallimard,  collection  Idees, rg6o), pp.  r6r-62.
5   HenriMitterand,LeDiscoursduroman (Paris: PDF, rg8o),p. I2.








BREJITH: FOR FRED WJIH

Tom Wayman


you  know
these mountains breathe
from  below    from  the valleys:
they breathe in and  Fall
floats down  at  noon in the wooded  hills over  the  Lake
first snow on  ridgelines
descends;



and  Spring
 breathe out

rises from gravel
up  the yellowing  slopes between evergreens 	the wind at first with  the glaciers in it and  then  sun;

breathe out sounds  of the  Lake
flowing  against  docks and the rocky shore    air tosses the willow-tops'
strands and  branches   as seaweed on a choppy  day
birch  leaves, cottonwood
vibrate
in the  breezy light
glints on the moving  water-



surges  uphill
 the  Lake

through the new leaves

you see





66


HORSE KNEES

Wm. B. Robertson


This morning I became  a horse and  round and  round
the  coffee  table
I plodded
two kids on my back yelling  "giddyap"
my knees  screaming:
"shaddap" "buck  them  off" "let  them  walk" "sit down."

My knees are  hockey hurt running pounded
crack  when  I bend
painful  testimonies
to the  damage I've  done my  body
and  me
pushing it too far.

My  body is a desecrated temple:
graffiti  names  ugly on  the  walls
and  tipped over  tombstones marking some memory that only  lingers  now
when  I  walk
but screams when I  play hard
when  I play horse plodding round the coffee  table
two kids yelling  "giddyap."

Be quiet knees
these kids see only hooves.




b::ks  in review


WOMEN & ICONS
JENNIFER   WAELTI-WALTERS, Fairy  Tales  and the  Female  Imagination. Eden  Press, $r8.g5.

"No ONE IN   HER  RIGHT MIND could  pos­ sibly   want  to  be  a fairy   tale  princess," argues  Jennifer   Waelti-Walters   in   her  new   book,   Fairy  Tales  and  the  Female Imagination. Princesses, as  Waelti-Walt­ ers  shows,  have traditionally had   singu­ larly   unlucky  lives,  forced  to  subsist   in exile   from  genuine  experience of  their bodies or  wishes,  held  captive in  a world of mirrors, imprisoned in dreams from which there can  be  no escape. These are the   heroines  offered  to   generations  of young women as  role  models serving to inculcate the  passive life of attendance, domestic and  romantic, upon  men   who are  free  to  move through the  world and make their own  marks upon it. Woman learns silence, man learns language. Woman learns to please,  man to act. Eventually, defined for centuries out  of positions of  power, woman becomes the nothing, the  absence, which   with   tragic irony  defines her  position with  respect to those  figures associated with  being,  pres­ ence, authority:  men in a  patriarchal so­ ciety.  To want to be a  fairy  tale  princess, then, is  to  invite one's  own   annihilation
-spiritual and, in  one  way  or  another, physical as  well.  "Girls have been  taught for  centuries that  they  should commit a smiling, lifelong suicide, deny  their own nature, have no  identity whatsoever," as Waelti-Walters says.  Or, as  Simone de Beauvoir puts it in an epigram quoted on several occasions by Waelti-Walters, "On ne  nait  pas  femme, on la devient."
Little boys,  however, are   born   into a world which teaches them  autonomy, in­ culcating-as these  fairy tales make clear


68
 -"an overt  possessor/object, master/ slave   pattern, the   playing out   of  which will  reinforce the  self-destructive vrcum pattern  of   behaviour  taught  to   girls." Thus   begins  the    vicious  circle  which drives women into alienation, perhaps madness, even   as  they  seek  love  and  ac­ ceptance  while enacting  the  "feminine" roles   of  dependence  enforced  by  partri­ archally-defined    social     "norms."   The woman who  steps  outside this  circle   be­ comes a  witch, a madwoman, a hag, and if she  is lucky,  gives  birth to herself.
:This  argument is,  of  course, not   new in   feminist criticism. W aelti-Walters quotes extensively from Mary Daly's clas­ sic, GynjEcology, and also  draws on such  basic   texts   as   Phyllis Chesler's  Women and  Madness, Robin Lakoff's  Language and  Woman's Place,  Luce  Irigaray's Ce sexe  qui  n'est  pas un  and,  of  course, Si­  mone de  Beauvoir's Le  Deuxieme  Sexe,  among many others. Fairy Tales  and  the Female  Imagination does,  however, make a significant contribution to the  emerging literature   on   the    iconography  of   that hitherto   vacuous  phrase,  "the   female imagination." In furthering the  recovery of that lost continent, Waelti-Walters does an  incomparably better job  than a critic like  Patricia Meyer Spacks whose  The Female    Imagination   (I972)   has    long been  a pioneering study in  the  area, and does so in some  interesting ways.  An obvi­ ous  difference is in area of  concentration: Spacks  is   concerned   with   British  and American fiction of  the last  three centur­ ies,    Waelti-Walters   with   French   and Quebecois fiction of  the  last  quarter  cen­ tury. The tighter focus  and  severe restric­ tion  to discussion of eight works facilitates Waelti-Walters'  purpose  for   her    book seeks  as  much to  convince  readers of  its political  position as  it  does  to  elucidate certain features of the works  which struc­ ture  the   discussion.  Her   book   is  quick, intense, vigorously  written. We  must  pick up  the  argument swiftly  and  accept terms

BOOKS IN REVIEW



whose history feminists will know but oth­ ers may not. For  the latter group, suspen­ sion of disbelief  (willing or not)  may well be necessary  if this book is to be digested.  Like  many  feminist critics  of  the last five years   or   so,   Waelti-Walters   begins   in medias  res in  terms  of the  feminist  argu­ ment; the Spacks stage  of gentle  guidance is long past.
So is Spacks'  innocence of French femi­
nist   interest   in    and    development   of
Jacques Derrida's  and   Jacques Lacan's theories about  the   relationship  between word  and  body,  textuality and  sexuality. Thus  Waelti-Walters presents a  dichot­ omy which  structures her  book and  opens into the transformations now taking  place within  women's literature. In the first part  of  her  book,  she  focuses  on  texts  which exemplify the fairy  tale themes of entrap ment    within   powerlessness  and   which mirror in their  language the  authors' de­  pendence upon phallocentric language. In this group are Hebert's The Sil.ent Rooms, Beauvoir's Les  Belles Images, Blais' Mad Shadows, and  Duras' The Rapture of Lol V. Stein. In  the second  part  of the  book, the  focus  is  on  the  shattering of  these themes  and  modes  of expression  in Hyv­ rard's  The  Prunes   of  Cythera, Wittig's The  Guerilleres, Bersianik's The  Eugue­ lionne, and  Delaunay's "A  bad  reading." Passivity and  violence,  mirrors and  blood, linguistic/stylistic conformity and  the cre­ ation  of new forms: these are some of the basic   elements   in   this   binary    system formed  not only by the two groups of texts but also, as Wa:elti-Walters argues, within  the  historical evolution of women  in  the
last three decades. In  the  violent  ref crea­
tion  of  the  text  in  Wittig and  Bersianik
lies the  possibility  of rejvision within  the
female imagination, the  assumption through satiric  wit of a world in which equality has  become  a  place  from  which to  think   rather  than   an  ever-receding goal.
In return for  the energy  and  conviction
 with  which   these  points   are  made,   one may  perhaps forgive  certain flaws in  the book:  poor editing, occasional  use of  Gal­ lic syntax and  idiom,  the use from time  to time of an oral style which  doesn't always work in print,  and  the selection  of a range  of  texts  about   which   the  author  clearly  has  strong   feelings  but   whose  pedigrees for inclusion  in  this argument are  not  de facto obvious.  Why  these  books  and  not other equally  relevant ones? But these are trifling  objections to  the  work  of one  of the   very  few  critics  expert  in  feminist  theory  and  writing in  English  in Canada today. Beyond what this book has to teach  us about fairy  tales  lies a purpose which  surfaces  repeatedly  in  the  strength of its convictions and  the drive  of its prose:  the instilling of  the courage to see what  has already    been   accomplished-ironically enough, not  an  easy  task  for  those  who have  focused  for  so long on  the  terms  of their  own oppression.
LORRAINE WEIR


JUNGIAN DAVIES

PATRICIA MONK,  The  Smaller  Infinity: The Jungian  Self in  the  Novels of Robertson Davies. Univ.  of Toronto Press, $25.00.

IN The Smaller Infinity Patricia Monk undertakes an important and  challenging task:  a study  of Jungian thought in  Rob­ ertson Davies' fiction. She traces the grad­ ual eclipse of Davies'  early admiration for Freud by a growing enthusiasm far  Jung, and she shows Davies'  affinity for Jungian thought by  comparing Davies'  views  on folklore, myth,  literature, magic,  and  ro­ mance  with  Jung's and  contrasting both with  Freud's. In  Davies,  she  argues,  the creative process  is directed towards an understanding of the  nature of human identity, which  entails  an  exploration of illusion: fantasy, delusion,  insanity,  and, in the Deptford trilogy, faith.
Monk  shows Davies'  interest  in  the  re-


6g

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



lation   between   ego  and   persona   in  his first   book,    Shakespear;e's  Boy   Actors ( r 939) ;  and   in  his  creation  of  Samuel Marchbanks, a  fictional  second  self,  she describes   Davies   as  stripping  away   his persona  and  externalizing his shadow.  In the  Salterton trilogy,   Monk   sees Davies working  to synthesize  parts  into  the whole of human  identity, exploring various du­ alities  and   using  Jungian  archetypes. In Tempest-Tost  (I95I)  he  examines  the duality of the transcendent  (the  world of The  Tempest) and  the mundane, focus­ ing on Hector's encounter with his anima  in  his   delusory   love   for   Griselda.  In Leaven  of Malice   ( 1954)   he  treats   the
duality of  true  and  false  identity on  the
mundane level of personal identity and, in Solly and  Pearl's battles  with  the  anima and  animus in their  parents, on 'the  tran­ scendent level  of  psychic  identity.  In  A Mixture  of Frailties ( 1958)  Davies treats  the  themes  of illusion  and  identity  in re­ lation   to  Monica's growth as  she  relin­ quishes her delusion that mundane reality is  all   and   gains   from   her   music   true knowledge of  transcendent reality.  Mon­  ica's recognition of the difference between herself  in  the  transcendent state  and  her everyday  self can  be understood in  Jung­ ian  terms,  Monk  explains,  as the  duality of  the  self  and   the  ego,  and  she  traces Monica's growth as  the  Jungian  process
of  individuation in which   Monica  con­ fronts   various   of   her   psychic  elements manifested in other characters.
In  Fifth  Business ( 1970)  Davies  treats all  the earlier themes in more  depth and with  greater artistry. Monk  points  out  a change  in  his  concept of illusion,  which now is seen  not  only  as a mask that con­ ceals  reality  but  also as a  metaphor  that
illuminates reality.  Davies  focuses on  the interlace in Dunstan Ramsay  between  the transcendent psychic reality and  the mun­ dane  physical reality, and  Monk discusses this  interface in  teiTils of  four  "psycho­  symbolic  patterns" in  the  novel: the  op-
 positions  of  the  psychic  and  the  physical, of truth and  falsehood, of good  and  evil, and   the  reciprocal relationship of  Boy's life  and   Dunstan's,  each   of  which   she relates  to Jungian thought.
The  Manticore  allows  Monk, like Da­
vies, to outline the  theory  of Jungian analysis as well as the particulars of David Staunton's encounters with  his shadow, anima and  magus  as she discusses David's journey towards self-understanding under Dr.  Von  Haller's guidance. In this  most Jungian of Davies'  novels,  Monk  finds marked ambivalence in Davies'  attitude toward Jung, especially in  the  ending of the  novel  which  leaves  David   undecided about  whether  to  go   on   with   further analysis  or  to undertake the  heroic  jour­ ney to self-understanding on  his  own,  as Liesl advocates (though in fact his analyst  also  suggests  that  he  is now  equipped to go it alone).
Davies   continues  the   exploration   of
good and  evil, truth and  illusion  in World of Wonders  (I 975), but  here  he attempts to  define   human  identity  not   solely  in terms   of  Jungian  individuation, but   in terms  of  the  mythic hero   journey,  sug­ gested in The  Manticore  as an alternative
to Jungian self-exploration, and  in  terms of   Spengler's  Magian  world    view,   in which   the  mundane world  is permeated with  the  wonder of  an  unseen   world  of good  and  evil  spirits.  Though Monk  ac­ knowledges that   there  is a  place for  the mythic hero-journey in  Jungian  thought and  that  Davies modifies  the Spenglerian view in the  direction of J ungianism, she concludes that in World  of  Wonders  Da­  vies places  Jungianism  as a myth  among other   myths,  a  way  of  knowing, not  the knowledge itself,  to be  reshaped by each individual in  his  own  search  for  under­ standing, a:s  Davies  does  himself.  Davies has  not  finally  defined   human  identity, because  it  is  indefinable; he  is exploring "the smaller infinity" that  is man.
Monk    establishes  convincingly   both

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Davies'  debt  to Jung and  his creative in­ dependence from Jung, though she places his conversion to Jung later ( 1958)  than
she  should, apparently  because she  mis­ takenly interprets  a  statement  made  by Davies  in  1956  as an  unfavourable com­
parison of  Jung  to Freud, when  it is ac­
tually  a comparison between   Jung  and
Freud's biographer with reference to their accounts of  the  split  between   Jung  and
Freud. Much of the evidence she offers to
establish   Davies' "natural"  affinity  with Jung is from  Davies' writing in  the  mid­ rgso's, when  he was in fact  well launched on   his   study   of   Jung    (begun   "about
1950,"  Davies  says). General  Confession
(I 956) ,  featuring  Casanova  and   three characters who  are  indisputably his  sha­ dow,  his anima, and  his "wise  old  man," is as patently Jungian as The  Manticore, but    Davies'    plays    are    omitted   from  Monk's study.
Much of Monk's discussion  of Jung is sound,  but  in the central matter of the individuation process, her  tenninology is puzzling,   and   she   misrepresents Jung's theory.  Monk  lists the primary archetypes as the shadow, the anima/animus, the magus (lung's "wise old man"), the sybil, and    the    self.   Davies    uses    the    term "magus,"  but   neither  Davies   nor  Jung uses "sybil" except in connection with  the anima, so why Monk  chose it for the great mother  archetype  is  unclear.  What  is clear   is  that   she   failed   to   notice   that Jung's wise  old  man   and   great   mother are,  like  the  anima and  animus,  equiva­ lent archetypes for individuals of different sexes.  Though Monk   notes  that  Davies  introduces nothing corresponding to  her sybil into  David  Staunton's analysis,  she nevertheless assigns sybil figures  to Ram­ say   and   Eisengrim   and    a   magus    to Monica.
Monk's discussion  of good and  evil and
truth and  illusion  in the  Deptford trilogy illuminates the  three complex novels. She is least successful  with  Leaven  of Malice,
 where her own  focus on illusion and iden­ tity  throws  the  novel  itself  out  of  focus. Even  in her  more  rewarding  exploration of  the  later   novels,  Monk's  focus  on  a particular pattern of  her  own  can  belie the  novel  under  discussion. She  has an appealing  conception  of   the   reciprocal ego-shadow    relationship   between     Boy Staunton and  Dunstan Ramsay which  she discusses sensibly  except  when  she  forces it into a complex  schema born  of a super­
ficial   acquaintance   with    Jung's   ideas
about  the mandala and  her misconception
about    the   individuation  process,   com­ bined  with  Liesl's  description of  the five­ part   "cabal" that   killed   Boy  Staunton. She decides, on the basis of her identifica­ tion of members of the cabal in relation to Boy and  his reciprocal  relationship with Ramsay, that  "for Ramsay, Mary  Demp­ ster  is the woman  he  knew,  and  Leola  is the woman  he did not know; Paul  Demp­ ster   remains   the  man   who   granted  his inmost  wish, and  Boy Staunton becomes the  inevitable  fifth." Mary Dempster is then  cast  as  Ramsay's "sybil," Leola   as his  anima,  and Paul  as  his  magus.  Cer­  tainly  Leola  serves  as  one  of  a  series  of anima  figures  for  Ramsay, though she is far  less important in  this role  than  Mary Dempster.  But   Paul   as  his  magus? To overlook  Padre Blazon  in  this  role  is ob­ viously  an  error which   Monk   falls  into simply  out  of enthusiasm for  the schema she has devised.  Even  her  claim  for  Paul  as the  one who  granted  Ramsay's inmost  wish  rests on  the  fact  that he  introduces Ramsay   to  Liesl;   it  would   make   more  sense to say that  Liesl granted his inmost  wish-but  neither  Liesl  nor  Blazon  fits into  the  reciprocal  relationship pattern, because Boy never met  them,  so the  truth of   the   novel   is   sacrificed    to   Monk's schema.
As Monk rightly  observes  (though she does not  always appear to remember it), Davies does not enslave himself to a rigid demonstration  of  Jungian  ideas   in   his

BOOKS IN REVIEW



novels. She deals most effectively with Davies when  she discusses his exploration of illusion  and  truth without trying  to superimpose her  idea  of Jungian individ­ uation  on  his characters' self-discoveries.

SUSAN STONE-BLACKBURN


THE CLOWNS OF QUEBEC

GERALD SIOOUIN,   Th68.tre en  [utte:  [e  Th/8tre
Euh!  vlb editeur, $rg.gs.

IF THEATRE IN   GENERAL is an  ephemeral genre  hard to  contain within   the  tradi­ tional  perimeters of literary criticism,  the decade of the  197o's presents the historian of Canadian  theatre  with  unprecedented difficulties.  This   is our  decade   of  alter­ native theatre, following  upon  the radical theatre   movement  of   the   U.S.   in   the
196o's. The most  interesting and  original developments of  that   period  occur  in  a militantly anti-literary spirit, emphasizing spontaneity, improvisa;tion  and  collective creation. Brecht  and  Artaud are  the  twin deities  of  the  movement, process,  rather than   product, its  major goal.  A  product is easily described; to pin down  a process in  constant state  of  flux  is considerably more  difficult.  Yet,  this  is exactly  what Gerald Sigouin has attempted with Thea.­ tre  en  lutte:  le Theatre  Euh!  If  his  at­  tempt  is largely  successful,  this  is due  to the fact  that  he has, wisely indeed,  chosen a   documentary  formart:   rather  than    a straight presentation. His volume is essen­ tially  a  source  book. Almost  half  of  the book  ( 138  out  of  297  pages)   is devoted  exclusively  to documentation, and  the dis­ cussion itself is also heavily supplemented  by documentary material.
In the first part  of the book, the author examines the  history  and  ideology  of  the Theatre Euh! This young  company, founded  jointly  by Marc  Dore  and  Cle­ ment   Cazelais,   operated  in   the  city   of


72
 Quebec  between 1970  and  I 978.  It was the most  militantly marxist-leninist of the Jeune Theatre groups  active  at  the  time, its  aggressively  political stance  forcing a split   in   the   Association Quebecoise du Jeune Theatre. Affectionately known sim­ ply   a:s    "les   clowns,"  members  of   the troupe performed in working-class neigh­  bourhoods, on  the  streets,  meeting  halls, cegeps-anywhere  but   in  a  legitimate theatre space. They participated at avant­ garde  theatre festivals  in France with. var­ ied  success,  and   ventured  as  far  a:s  Al­ geria.   But   wherever  or   whatever  their productions, the central theme always re­ mained that  of the  Klassenkampf.
Sigouin follows the evolution of the company at  the  hand of four  major pro­ ductions, devoting one  chapter to each: Quand  le metriarcat  fait des petits  (fam­ ily   and    consumerism);   Cre   Antigone! (social/political revolt);   L'Histoire   du Quebec   (history seen  as  class  struggle), and  Un, deux,  trois, vendu!  ( expropria­ tion  of  lands for  Mirabel airport).  For each of these, detailed scenarios are given, as well as excerpts of dialogue, and  pro­  duction   pictures.  Extensive  quotations from  Theatre  Euh! manifestoes provide firsthand insight  into  the  company's ide­ ology and  operating methods. The weak­  ness of  Sigouin's presentation  lies  in  his tendency  towards   redundancy,  towards stressing   the  obvious,  and  towards over­  statement.
The second   pam  of  the  book  provides much   useful   material:  a  complete  pro­ duction  list  which   includes date,  place, and type  of  audience; a  biography  for each   of  the   eight   key  members  of  the company; interviews with  members of the company as  well  as  with   theatre critic  Gilbert David (a  useful  balance!) ; and  extensive bibliographies.
While   there   is  no  question about the value  of  the  hook  for  research   purposes, one  might well  ask  why  devote  a  book­ length  study  to the  Theatre Euh!, rather

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



than   any  one  of  the  other more  promi­ nent   contemporary  jeune   theatre   com­ panies, such  as  Raymond Cloutier's Grand  Cirque  Ordinaire.  Neither editor  nor   author   provide  a   reason   for   their choice  of  this particular company, whose history  has  been  documented better  than  most  in  the  pages  of  the  revue   feu  al­ ready.  One  can  only  hope  that  Sigouin's book will be the  first in a series of similar volumes of documentation on a period  of effervescence in Canadian theatre, both English  and  French.
RENATE USMIANI


IN RESISTANCE

MARIAN FOWLER,  The  Embroidered Tent:  Five
Gentlewomen in  Early  Canada. Anansi,  n.p.
The   Embroider<ed  Tent   seems  bound   to be a  popular and  well-used  book. Briskly written, evocative in  detail, waggish  and irreverent in its humour, alert  to signs of sexual   repression   below   the   surface   of gentility,  the  book  brings   together  por­ traits   of   five   gentlewomen-Elizabeth Simcoe,  Catharine  Parr  Traill, Susanna Moodie, Anna  Jameson, and  Lady  Hariot ("one hesitates to use [her first  name]") Dufferin-and critical readings of their autobiographical responses  to  the experi­ ence of living  in nineteenth-century Can­ ada. Each chapter concludes usefully with photographs and, where  relevant,  repro­ ductions of  the   particular   woman's art  work.  We  have  no  book  quite like it  on our  literary shelves. If it serves to awaken  contemporary attention  to the  worrlds of these   women   and   the   difficulties  they faced   over   a  century  ago   in   removing from  England to Canada, it will have ac­ complished much. Ce:rtainly, in its several interesting   angles   of  approach  and   its feminist  perspective it  will  draw readers  aplenty.
At  the   same   time   it  is  a   book   that bothers me  in  a  number of  ways.  First,
 there  is the simple  matter of the  number of gentlewomen presented and  the  prin­ ciples  of  selection  exercised   by  Marian Fowler.  Why  five figures  and  why these five?  Why  not  include  Frances  Stewart, a stalwart pioneer  of  Anglo-Irish descent who  settled   in  the  Peterborough  back­ woods nearly  a  decade before  Traill and  wrote  Our  Forest  Home?  Why  nort:  in­ clude  Ann  Langton, settler,  painter, and author of  A Gentlewoman in Upper Can­ ada? Fowler doesn't provide a satisfactory answer,  though by inference we might guess  that   variety   and   her  pursuit   of  a book-length  manuscript were  major  fac­ tors in her selection.
Still,   The   Embroidered   Tent   is  not meant to be a  potpourri like  Pierre  Ber­ ton's  The  Wild  Frontier. Nor  is it a col­ lection of pieces like Mary  Quayle Innis's  The  Clear Spirit. What Fowler tries to do is,  in  fact,  inordinately   ambitious.  She aims  to  dramatize  the  "culture shock"  experienced by these  five  women  as they "stepped  on·to  Canadian  soil  clutching their  shawls  and  embroidery with  tense fingers";  then  she  traces  and  judges  the respective  ways in which  they  respond  to frontier and wilderness. It is Fowler's  con­ tention  that   the  pressures   of  wilderness forced  upon   them   the  need  to  develop "masculine" attributes (to enter  into what she  calls "the  androgynous ideal")  both in practical and  imaginative ways. The experience  thus  gave  them  the  opportu­ nity  to  free  themselves from  the  "role­ conditioning"  of   women   in   England, opening them  up  to new power  and  new freedom    in   Canada's   frontier  society. These    "caged  birds"   become   "soaring eagles"  as  they  exchange  their   "fragile silk"  for  "strong  canvas." Furthermore, not  content with  the  mere  rhetorical ori­  entation of her  thesis, Fowler  also prom­ ises "to  see  these  women  whole"  and  to show  them  to  us  as  "representative Ca­  nadians" who  are  "our fore-mothers."
Role-conditioning is  Fowler's   starting


73

BOOKS IN REVIEW



point  in  each   case.  She  puts  great  em­ phasis  on  the  power  of "conduct  books" in determining a woman's sense of  fam­ ily, social  role,  duty,  and  personal  iden­  tity. Works  like  William  Kendrick's  The  Whole   Duty   of  Woman   (I 753),   Mrs. Sarah  Ellis's  The  Women  of England, Their Social Duties and Domestic Habits, and   Mrs.   Sandford's  Woman  in  Her Social  and   Domestic  Character  (  83I  ) are used as guides  to the ways women  felt and   acted   in   the   nineteenth  century. Lacking  evidence  that   her  five  women actually   read    specific   books,   however,  Fowler often  embroiders her own connec­  tions, slipping deftly  from  supposition to declaration and   violating chronology in ways that  are  bound   to distress attentive readers. At  the  same  time she  plays  fast and  loose with  social realities. To say that "All  five  gentlewomen came   to  Canada from    upper-middle-class   British    back­ grounds" is  to  create a  significant  blur. It elevates  the Strickland girls, Traill and  Moodie, well  above  their  position.  The effect  is  to  evade   a  careful   look  at  the assumptions  of  class  and   wealth   which doubtless affected not only the upbringing and   education of  these  five  women  but also-when  it  came  down  to actual in­ fluence, position, and  pounds-put them  in very different situations vis-a-vis Cana­ dian  society  and  the  wilderness.  We may well wonder, then, whether conduct books played  a more  or a less influential role in the  lives  of  the   newly   (and   as  it  soon turned out  precariously)  rich  Stricklands of Suffolk   as  opposed   to  the  experience of  Hariot Hamilton in  Killyleagh   castle in  Northern Ireland. Similarly   we  need to query  how  pertinent it  is to compare the  brief  wilderness   "rambles" of  Anna Jameson  and   the  formal   sightseeing   of Lady Dufferin with  the actual experiences of  pioneering and  surviving in the  bush day  after   day,  year  after  year,  financial strain   after  financial strain,   baby  after baby. While Fowler  by no means  ignores


74
 these  elements, she  has a convenient way of  building arguments and   comparisons so as to diminish their  due importance.
The  romantic  among Fowler's  gentle­
women, 1ameson  and  Moodie, receive her
most sympathetic treatment. One  suspects
a temperamental affinity, especially  given a  writer who   is  a   relentless   metaphor hunter -any references to birds and ani­ mals in the gentlewomen's books are grist for  Fowler'·s mill-and  a  kind  of  post­ facto matchmaker,  particularly  with   re­ gard   to ·that  life-long  bachelor  Colonel  Talbot.  Fowler's prose  is most  euphoric
in  describing 1ameson as  "reborn" and
"fully  her  primitive self"  during her wil­
derness  rambles. As a "Canadian feminist­ picaroon" Jameson anticipates. Ethel  Wil­ son's  Maggie Vardoe. Similarly, echoing Atwood,   Fowler   rises   to   "the    double  voice"  in  Moodie:  one  side  of  Moodie's experience bound  her  to  female  submis­  sion and  the conventions of the sentimen­ tal   novel;  the   other  freed   her,   Fowler  argues, to  escape   "orderly,  right-angled spaces"   and   move    comfortably  in   "a  world   of  intuition and  mystery," indeed to  wheel  and   soar,  if  only  occasionally, "in  male preserves."
By contrast, Lady  Dufferin and  Cath­ arine Parr Traill are,  according  to Fow­  ler's   thesis,  failures. Lady   Dufferin  ac­ cepted  her   familial and   social   roles  so completely and  uncomplainingly that  she showed  little  if  any  autonomous individ­ uality  in  My  Canadian  Journal  (I8gr). Tra:ill is characterized oddly  a:s a utilitar­ ian,  "a  perfect Gradgrind of facts," who, though  attentive to  the  Canadian  land­ scape  and  its  flora and   fauna, was easily vanquished by the  frontier's "crude  real­ ity" and  her own fear of wilderness. Thus, she  retreated back  into  her  embroidered tent  to  play  out  her  chosen  role as "Mrs. Happy Homemaker." How wrong-headed this seems, how unsympathetic to Tra:ill's formative  background and  particular sit­ uation,  how  insensitive a  reading of  her

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



temperament and  her  approach to writ­ ing! The more  questions I asked the more The  Embroidered Tent  seemed  to  be  a warning against slap-'happy labelling,  en­ thusiastic metaphor-hunting and,  what  is worse,   uneven  research.  Fowler    could have discovered a great  deal  of pertinent information, for  example, by  consulting the  voluminous Traill  Family Papers  in Canada's National  Archives, but  she seems not to have made the effort. It is difficult,  then,  to be confident that  in any of these five cases we are actually seeing these women  "whole." Neither the ap• proach nor  the  philosophy nor  the  style of writing will allow it. For all that is interesting in  this  book-and  there  is a good  deal -there is  a  great   weight   of unsatisfactory generalizing and categoriz­ ing  to be recognized and  resisted.

M. A.  PETERMAN

COMMERCIAL TRAVELLER

ALEXANDER WALKER,  An  Account of a Voyage to the  North  West  Coast  of America  in 1785 and  1786, ed.  Robin Fisher and  J. M.  Bum­
sted. Douglas & Mcintyre, n.p.  With  editor's
introduction,  maps and  illustrations, notes, appendix, bibliography and index.

IN I 785 THE Experiment and .the Captain Cook  sailed  from  Bombay  for  the  north­ west coast of America, arriving at Nootka  in   the   summer  of   I 786.   Inspired  by Cook's  reports of  an  abundant sea  otter  population in  the  area, organizers of the venture hoped   to establish and  monopo­ lize  a  fur   trade  between  the  American coast  and  China.  The voyage  itself,  oc­ curring in  the  years  between Cook's  and Vancouver's,  urges  us  to  a  fresh   (or  re­  covered)  perspective: for  these  travellers  from   Bombay,    our   western    coast   was more  logically   the  frontier of  the  East, rather than  an  outpost of the  West.
Among   the   ships'   crews   were   fifteen
 soldiers  seconded  from   the   East   India Company's  Bombay   Army.   It was   in­ tended  that  this contingent would  estab­  lish a garrison at  Nootka, to get  a  com­  mercial    foothold   in   the   region.  This scheme did  not  work out, and  all but one of the soldiers returned  to India with  the Experiment and   the  Captain Cook. But it  is  a  lucky   thing  for  history   and   for twentieth-century readers that  the contin­ gent did make the trip, for its commander was   Alexander   Walker,  Ensign   in   the Bombay Army, and  author of An Account of a Voyage   to the  North West  Coast  of America in 1785 and 1786, now published for  the  first  time,  and   finally  disclosing the observations and insights of a thought­ ful   traveller  who   found   himself,   as  he says, in  "a  Country little  known" which  afforded "many  objects  of  curiosity."
Walker  was only twenty-one years old when  he set  out  for  America. He  made notes  of  his  experiences in  that  summer of I 786, and  prepared a narrative of his travels at their conclusion. But this manu­ script   was  last.  What  we  have  now  is Walker's attempt-in late  middle age­ to recuperate the sense of the lost manu­ script.   In   his  fifties  and   sixties  he   re­ worked   his  rough   notes  of  the   voyage, and   a  copyist   produced   the   fair   draft
which  historians Robin  Fisher  and  J. M.
Bumsted  have   prepared for  publication.
(This draft was  found   among   6oo  vol­ umes  of  Walker's  writings   and   private papers  in  the  National Library  of  Scot­  land.)
Should  we regret  that  that  earlier man­ uscript  went  missing?  It may  have  been a more  lively or somehow more "authen­ tic"  narrative than the deliberative, dis­ cursive   text  we  have  in  its  stead.   Cer­  tainly,  the  intervening  years  must   have  influenced the shape and  character of this final draft: between  his American adven­ ture and  his retirement, Walker  led a life that was remarkably active,  both officially and  intellectually. As an  officer with  the


75

BOOKS IN REVIEW



East  India Company, he  held  a  number of  exotic  and   even  powerful   posts.  And as a thinker and  reader  and  writer,  he explored    rather   thoroughly  the   details and  abstractions of  custom  and  culture. So, An  Account of a Voyage  is, in some respects, a negotiation between  the young man's  surprised innocence and  the older man's   vast  experience. I  think   this  cir­ cumstance makes it an even more interest­ ing document than  that  early manuscript must  have  been.
The purpose of the enterprise was com­ mercial,  not scientific.  Yet Walker sought instances  of native behaviour as eagerly as the leaders of the venture sought pelts. He wanted   to  know   about   the  societies  he encountered around  Nootka  and,  later  in the  summer, at  Prince   William   Sound. "The Savage," he says, "is  the  prototype of  the  Civilized  Man," and  his  inquiries
and  interpretations lead  him  again   and
again  to name  certain universal  elements of human behaviour at  the  same  time  as he calculates the distinctions between  the "prototype" and  the later  type. While  he tries  to  reckon   European man's   kinship with  the  "Savage," he also tries to meas­ ure the  differences which separate  them.
Particularly, he  looks  for  signs of "higher'' feelings-gratitude, generosity, hospitality, trust,   "decency." He  is  gen­ erally  disappointed. "Suspicion,"  for  in­ stance,  "perhaps forms  a  natural  part  of the  character of  a  Savage.  He  is armed  against all and  he suspects every Person." And he watches in vain for shows of gen­
erosity or  gratitude. Seemingly  forgetting that  he  and  his cohorts themselves  came only to trade, to get as much  as they could for  as  little  as possible,  he  remarks  sadly on the  natives' niggardliness and  greed:
it  was  plain, that they had  little hospitality. They seemed   to  have  no Idea of giving  any thing without receiving an equivalent. I paid a string of  beads  for  a drink of  Water. We bestowed several little presents on  them, which    produced  no   other  effect, than  to make  them  clamorous for more.  In bartering
 with us,  they  showed many  instances of  the most  craving avidity. They expressed neither gratitude nor  thanks for  what they  received.

Almost all the social exchanges between the  visitors from  Bombay  and  the natives were  commercial transactions or  prelimi­ naries   to  such   transactions. So  most  of Walker's data must  be based  on  observa­ tions   of  the   natives as  bargainers -as must   the   natives'  information  of  these Europeans. That  kind  of  social  event   is bound   to discourage sympathetic attach­ ments between participants who are each trying   to   best   the   other.  Nevel'theless, Walker  seems  to  have  made some  sym­ pathetic contact  with   two  of  the  chiefs among the Nootka-Maquinna and Cal­ licum -for  he  provides brief  but  plaus­  ible  portraits of these men and  their  per­  sonalities.  Like  Hearne's portrait  of Matonabbee, these character sketches  ele­ vate  their  subjects  from  the  stereotypical bundles  of   attributes that   all  travellers like  to  assign   to  foreigners. As  Walker  presents  them, Maquinna and  Callicum are memorable and  dignified  individuals.
It would  be too much, however, to say that  Walker admires the  chiefs,  for  what Walker admires most  is European man. For  all  his  broadmindedness, his  respect for  native know-how and   technique, his unusual willingness  to examine his ethno­ centric premises,  there  is no doubt that  he sees Nootka society-and  the  numerous other non-European societies with  which  he compares it -as an earlier and  there­ fore  inferior form  of  human association.
Members of these inferior societies may show  no proper awe  or reverence for  dis­ plays of European civilization. They may show  no curiosity or  even  interest  in  Eu­  ropean habits or  contraptions.  But  this doesn't shake  Walker's feelings of  superi­ ority.  He  can  explain their  indifference: "Man  must  be  far  advanced  in  Civiliza­ tion, and the refinements of life, before  he can   have  any  leisure,   or  inclination  to inquiry."

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



I have   said   that   the   years  of  India service must have influenced the extant narrative of  the  American episode.  This influence  is clear  in Walker's descriptive strategies: he compares the  people  of the west coast  to peoples  in other parts  of the world  that  he has observed  or read  about, and  includes a  lot  of  information about other cultures. But  this  long  interval  be­ tween the original experience and its final description probably influenced the  form of the  text as  much  as its content.  Many  of his references show  that  Walker was a reader  of   travel   narrative,  and   he  ar­  ranges  his data in such  a way as  to obey the  conventions of  that   genre,  particu­ larly as it developed in the last half of the eighteenth century. This  means that   he uses two distinct organizing principles to present his  material: first,  he  tells  what happened each day, under daily headings. Then, in  separate  chapters, he  discur­  sively summarizes information on the arts, appearance, attitudes, and  social relations of the natives,  and  on the landscape, products, and  wildlife  of the  region. Un­ like  the  narrative chapters that  present facts   serially,   as   they   were   discovered, these   discursive   chapters are   organized topically,   and   hierarchically.  A  chapter that   discusses  the  conduct of   trade, for instance, begins  with  a  topical  assertion  connecting a  maxim to  a  general   state­ ment   about  the   Nootka:   "The  desires and  passions  of Men  are nearly  the  same everywhere: These Savages  wished  to se­ cure  all  the advantages of our  commerce to   themselves." In  his   travel    reading, Walker  would  have  found  strong  prece­ dent  for his methods: many notable trav­  ellers  rearranged  their  journal  materials this way, once  they  got home.
This  practice is conventional, but its effect on the text is nevertheless conspicu­ ous. The reader gets no real sense of what  this  place  was  like. The  discursive  chap­ ters  abstract from   the  narrative sections all   the  elements that   would   provide a
 comprehensive setting for  the doings  and contacts described under  daily  headings. Birds and  flowers and  trees,  for instance, appear not as environment or background to events,  but  in  lists  buried  in  the  dis­ cursive chapters. In the narrative sections, days rarely have  weather:  weather comes later,  summarized in the discursive  chap ters under  an appropriate topic sentence. This   lack   of   context  for  events and  persons  is partly  a result  of generic  con­  ventions,  and  partly a  result  of Walker's own  urge  to classify and  generalize, after  thinking all  this  over  for  so many  years. He  was  intellectually  committed  to  his subject and  its implications, and  his com­ mitment made him  a good  traveller, and a careful  travel  writer. To  know  the  ex­ tent  of his own  achievement, he  needed only  to compare himself  with  one  of his companions, Surgeon's Mate John Mac­ kay,  the  member of  the  expedition who stayed  behind  for  a year  to maintain the East  India  Company's  connections with
the  Nootka.
When  Mackay returned from  Nootka, Walker   questioned  him   on   his   experi­ ences. This was no easy task, for Mackay's "natural  Stupidity prevented  any  Infor­ mation flowing from  him spontaneously." Poor Mackay had  had  a rough  time of it. Early  on in his sojourn, he had  permitted the Nootka  to examine his musket-and dismantle it, and  carry off bits of it. Thus disarmed,  Mackay   apparently  was   no longer   esteemed   by  his hosts,  and   'they treated  him with contempt, scarcely  both­  ering to feed him. To make matters worse, he  inadvertently insulted Maquinna:  he stepped  over  Maquinna's sleeping  infant. The Nootka  were horrified, and  they beat Mackay. Their superstitious reaction was mysteriously  justified, for the child  died  a fortnight later.
Luckless  Mackay somehow  weathered all  this  hardship and   obloquy,  and  sur­ vived his experience with  the Nootka. But the  details  of  the  experience itself  would


77

BOOKS IN REVIEW



have vanished into the unspoken  past had Walker  not persisted  in his interrogations of Mackay, and  written  down  the  result. (Mackay had  been instructed to keep a journal, but one of his hosts tore his paper in tiny  pieces and  playfully  scattered the pieces in  the  wind. )
Walker   was  disgusted   with   Mackay,
shocked  that  his "observations had  been so circwnscribed that  he could  give no account of the curious People, with whom he had  lived fourteen months  in habits  of closest   intimacy."  One   can't  help   but think   that   Mackay  probably   wanted  to forget   those  fourteen  months, and   put them   behind   him.  How  unlike   Walker, who hoarded and  tallied  the  swnmer months of 1786 for forty years! Walker despised  Mackay for not making  an intel­ lectual   profit  on  his  unusual  enterprise. And  perhaps he had  a right to do so, for Walker   was  a  distinguished  traveller:  a man of his own time and his own culture, obviously,  but  ready   to find  meaning in experience,  and   ready   to   relish   exotic goings-on   and   the  challenge  they   pre­ sented   to   his   mentality.  Although  An Account  of a  Voyage offers  only  minor  aesthetic excitement, it is nevertheless  an important  and   valuable  document-a part  of  our  literary heritage.
This  volwne contains an editors' intro­ duction which  is very interesting and  well written; maps  and  illustrations; Walker's vocabulary of the  Nootka  language; and more  than  fifty  pages  of  exhaustive and  fascinating notes which must increase  any reader's pleasure  in this text.
JANET GILTROW

A MORAL PRESS

PAUL   RUTHERFORD,   A   Victorian Authority: The Daily Press in Late  Nineteenth Century Canada. Univ. of Toronto Press, $3s.oo; pa.
$12.50.
PAUL RUTHERFORD  describes  the  daily press  in  late  nineteenth-century Canada
 as "a Victorian authority" for  two princi­ pal  reasons.  First,  despite the  emergence of 'the popular press with  its top  radical­ ism, newspapers played  "a central role in legitimizing the pattern of authority." Be­ yond that, or perhaps because  of it, Ruth­ erford believes  tha:t  it was "the emphatic moralism of  the  daily   press  which   best justifies its title of  a Victorian authority." That  moralism,  most  often  based  on  an increasingly  vague  religiosity   (though in Quebec  theology  remained stronger than  mere moralism), was essentially  a monot­ onous  sermon on  the  virtues   of  middle­ class   values:  sobriety, thrift,   self-help,  brotherhood, sanitation, and   a  generally  muscular Christianity.
These conclusions, and  quite a few lesser ones, are supported by a wealth  of sometimes overly  dense  detail  about  vir­ tually   every  facet   of  the  history  of   the daily   newspaper  in   the   years  spanning roughly   the  last  half   of  .the  nineteenth century. Here  we can  learn about owner­ ship,   circulation,  profit   and   loss,  style, form,  advertising, the status  of  the  jour­ nalistic  profession, party  affiliation, ideol­ ogy, and  more.  A  Victorian Authority is both  an indispensible handbook for  those interested in  ·the  history   of  newspapers, and  a  valuable addition to  the  study  of institutions, politics  and  opinion in late Victorian Canada. The research  is  thO!r­ ough,   the   writing  plain   and  clear,   the arguments carefully marshalled.
Each  chapter takes up a cluster  of ques­ tions under a theme; organization, chang­ ing  technology, news  gathering  methods, editorial  writing,  relations   with   parties  and  governments,  constraints  created by economic  imperatives. What  the   period most obviously  illustrates is the growth  of press  independence, by which  is meant independence from   political   parties.  But that, ironically, meant a  growing  depen­ dence  upon  revenues captured in the mar­ ket.   Papers which   had   once  been  con­  cerned with  party  fortunes,  now  became

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



increasingly concerned  with  the  fortunes of their  owners.  Of course,  none  of this is to  be taken  as  meaning 'that  newspapers stopped supporting political parties and governments,  but   merely   that  partisan­ ship  became less shrill  as advertising rev­ enues grew. While Rutherford argues  that  newspapers had  definite interests to  de­ fend,  and   that  those  intersts were  more and  more economic rather than political, he rejects the contention of some sociolo• gists that ,the press was merely  the  propa­ ganda section  of the  capialist system. His detailed research shows this view to be far too  simplistic. To   Rutherford ·the  press was neither the obedient servant of  capi­ talist  masters nor  a  totally  independent "fourth estate." It stood  somewhere be­ tween   the  two,  sometimes closer  to  one than   the  other  depending on  both   per­  sonalities and  profit  margins.
One   particularly  interesting aspect   of the book is the comparison between  the French and  English  language press which runs   through  the   entire  book.  What  is most  striking is the  similarity. While  the French language press  retained  closer affiliations with political parties than  their English  language counterparts, the papers developed in much  the same  fashion, adapted to  the same technological changes, adopted some aspects  of the yel­ low  press,  and  advocated similar  causes. Ideologically  they   shared  most   of   the same  assumptions, though  they  differed  about the  nature of nationalism  in  Can­ ada.
The one  thing  Rutherford tells us little about, beyond  numbers, is readers. So we are  left  wondering how  much   this  Vic­ torian   institution's   authority   was    ac­ cepted, and  how  much  it was questioned. Was  it the  editorials, the sports,  the  gos­ sip, or ·the stock market reports that  most won  readership? Did  people  read  papers  to  have   their  opinions  changed or  con­ firmed?  Rutherford is aware of  the  im­ portance of  these  questions, but   he  has
 no very ready way of solving them. In  the last analysis he appears to be rather scep­ tical  about  claiming much  influence  for newspapers. But  if  that  is so one  is left wondering about the title. Were the news­ papers   really  an  authority, or  were  they merely a means of  purveying the messages of authority,  whether political, religious, economic,  or intellectual?

RAMSAY COOK

NATIVE WOODNOTES WILD

EVALYN GAUTREAU,  Tale  Spinners  in  a Spruce
Tipi. Borealis,  $8.gs.
DANIEL H. PAGE & VICTOR M. P. DAROSA,   Heri­ tage  of the  North   American Indian  People. Borealis,  $12.00.
JILLIAN &  ROBIN RIDINGTON, People  of the Longhouse, How the Iroquoian Tribes  Lived, illus.    Ian    Ba,teson.   Douglas  &   Mcintyre,
$w.gs.
IN RECENT  YEARS books about Canadian Indians have  proliferated to such  an  ex­ tent  that  each   new  arrival  prompts  the question,  "Is  this  book really  necessary?" The  works under review  exemplify  three  ways of treating Indian  history  and  folk­ lore. In  Tale  Spinners  in  a Spruce  Tipi, Evalyn   Gautreau   tells   folktales   of  the Dogrib  Indians, a  tribe  living  chiefly  be­ tween  Great  Bear  Lake  and  Great Slave Lake in the Western Arctic. Any such col­ lection must be measured by the standard of  George  Clutesi's Son  of Raven, Son  of Deer:   Fables   of   the    Tse-Shat   People
( 1 g67) . Clutesi   fulfils  the   dual  motiva­ tions  of  the  native  storyteller-the de­ sire to teach younger members of the tribe "the   many  wonders of  nature; the   im­ portance  of  all  living  things,   no  matter how small and  insignificant," and  the  de­ sire to entertain by presenting individual­ ized  animal  characters  in  an  authentic and   consistent   setting. Furthermore, the Indian artist-author captures the  poetic


79

BOOKS IN REVIEW



feeling  and  elevated  tone that,  according to  the  Reverend  Peter  Kelly,  character­ ized the original stories.
Gautreau's collection  fails almost  every test. There are the usual origin myths and pourquoi  tales,   explaining  the   pelt-like shape of land  near Norman  Wells or the strange sounds  heard  in the Wezisatla mountains. There is a trickster  hero Zha­ monzha, a squirrel who "prevented  total  darkness forever," and  a  bear  who  says "Drat it  all!" and  "Wowee-ee-ee this  is great." Yet in spite of familiar archetypes, the  collection  lacks  a  unifying   attitude and  a  distinctive representation of place. Describing ·the Dogrib Country  as a "land where  a curving shell of sky tucked  itself neatly  under the  horizon" doesn't   really tell  us  much. The  greatest   weakness  is stylistic. Despite her assertion that  she has "tried to  retain the  dignified  tone  of  the original myths," her cliche-ridden prose owes more  to pulp  magazines  than  to  na­ tive  tradition. Scenes  are  delightful,  eyes beady,  mists soft;  trees fight a losing  bat­ tle, activities come  in  flurries,  and  there  are  plenty  of "folks." The  description of Zhamonzha's meeting with  a strange  girl is representative:
Zhamonzha's  breath  caught in   his   throat. He   studied  the   face   with   that  amazingly white  skin   framed  with   hair, ebony   black and  flowing free  in  the  evening breeze.  He could contain himself  no  longer; he  had   to meet  her.  Down he plunged over  the  rugged path and  came   up  beside  her.  The girl  had been    watching  his   descent  and    now   she turned to  him,  her  face  smooth and   white, her  lips  curved in  a  little  red  bow.
Publication  of  Tale   Spinners  was  sup­ ported   by  the  Canada Council  and  the Multiculturalism    Programme,    Govern­ ment  of Canada.
Heritage of the North American Indian People falls into  two distinct  parts  which appear to be the work of different people. The first eight  chapters deal with the his­
tory of  native groups  by region; the  last three  with  aspects  of  life in  Canada  to-


8o
 day.  The  historical sections  are  delight­ fully  eclectic.   There are   maps,  recipes, and  descriptions of such activities as gath­ ering  wild  rice  and   making  pots.  There are  biographies of  Pontiac, Little Turtle, Tecumseh, and   Crazy  Horse,  quotations from  Dan  George  and  Tom Whitecloud, and   Louis  Riel's  moving  address to  the judge  and  jury. Specific dates  attached to various stages of  development usefully  re­ late  Indian history  to our  familiar histori­ cal framework. Kahionhes' rather charm­ ing pen  drawings show  men  and  animals in  the  forest,  a birchbark tipi   beside  a lake, and  various  artifacts such  as drums, pipes,  and   feather  headdresses. A list  of Indian contributions to American life in­ cludes  cigarettes, chewing gum,  popcorn, flapjacks, corn   flakes,  and   "the  concept of a free  people  in  a classless society."
One has  some  reservations about  the high  degree  of idealization. The Iroquois are  depicted as peaceable, good-hearted fellows  whose  energies   were  entirely  de­ voted  to  procuring food.  There  were  no wars  until  the  coming  of  the white  man.  Nor  is there  any  mention of  hunger, dis­ ease, slavery, and  other ills. One also ques­ tions a selectivity  which devotes sixty-five pages  to the  Eastern  woodlands and  four to the Northwest coast, an  area  that  pro­  duced  a culture which  has been described as one  of the richest  and  most  distinctive in the  world.
If this  book  had  ended   with  chapter eight,  it could  have  been recommended as a  useful  resource for  elementary  schools. However, the final sections dealing with government policy and  contemporary conditions are  badly  written and  disturb­ ingly  polemical. The  media  are  blamed  for  misrepresenting Indians  and  for  giv­ ing them  "the added struggle of retaining the average genuinity against a prevailing myth"  (whatever that  means!). Difficul­ ties in  holding jobs are  attributed to  the fact   that  "habituation  to   routine  and daily  hard   work,  including drudgery for

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



over a period  of years, if necessary  to earn a living,  was also not  as clearly  regulated in   the   Indian  system,   particularly  for men." There is  no  honest   discussion   of such  contemporary problems as  alcohol­ ism  and  crime. The author suggests  that  all  native  "dilemmas" would  be solved if Indians  could   be  legally   guaranteed  a livelihood  derived from  raising  game,  fur farming, manufacturing artifacts, produc­ ing maple products, and   taking  over  the tobacco industry.
Both Tale  Spinners and  Heritage  show
the  effects  of  poor  editing. The  correct use of punctuation seems  a  total  mystery at  Borealis  Press and  faulty structures  to­ gether  with  imprecise language often ob­ scure the meaning. This complaint cannot  be made about People  of the  Longhouse, part of Douglas  & Mcintyre's series, How they  lived  in  Canada. Lucid,  unaffected  prose  conveys  factual  information about  traditional Iroquois life under such head­ ings   as   "The   People,"  "Family  Life,"  "Social  and   Political  Structure,"   and "Beliefs  and  Ceremonies." The  authors are   objective   in   admitting  the   harsh realities:

The greatest proof   of  a  warrior's  power was  to  bring back  captives to  his  village, ... Captives  were   often  tortured  in   order  to make their strength part of  the  strength of the  village.

It was  a  surprise  to  learn   that   the  Iro­ quois  were  a  matriarchal  society  where the  birth  of a girl  was  welcome  and  the power  of  women   wa:s sufficient  even  to prevent men  going  to  war.
Ian  Bateson's descriptive pencil  draw­
ings deserve comment. His  Indians are depicted in a heroic  mould, with  much attention to naked, muscle-bound torsoes and  aquiline profiles.  In such full-page pictures as that  of the longhouse interior, the  variety  of postures, gestures, and  ac­ tivities  (sifting  ashes, grinding corn, mak­  ing   pottery)   convey    an   impression  of strength, liveliness, and community spirit.
 A three-dimensional effect is achieved  by sensitive  use of tonal  range  from  dark  to light.  Unlike Tale  Spinners and  Heritage, this book for  younger  readers can  be  un­ reservedly  recommended.
It could  be argued that  we now  have enough    retellings  by  whites   of   native myths and legends. We probably  have enough   accounts  of  native   lifestyles  in times pa:st. We have  a reasonable amount of fiction by whites who treat  natives sym­ pathetically. What we still need  is a sub­ stantial body of writing by native authors who  can  provide a  subjective  view  free from  the sound  of grinding axes.

MURIEL WHITAKER


V ARlOUS HISTORIES

SUSAN MANN TROFIMENKOFF, Stanley  Knowles: The  Man  from  Winnipeg North  Centre. Western  Producer   Prairie   Books,   $1 7·95; The   Dream  of Nation, Macmillan, $22.95.

FoR   SEVERAL YEARS Susan  Mann  Trofi­ menkoff  has  been  attracting attention as one  of  the  more  interesting  younger  Ca­ nadian historians, and  now she shows her considerable  versatility  by  publishing, al­ most  simultaneously,  two  books  of  very different kinds  and  relating to  very  dif­  ferent  currents of  Canadian history.  The Dream  of Nation  is an  elaborately struc­ tured  and well-researched history of Que­ bec,  clearly  planned to establish  its own kind of precedent in Canadian historiog­ raphy.  Her  Stanley  Knowles: The Man from Winnipeg North Centre  is an almost naively  informal biography of one of  the most  influential  figures  in  the  develop­ ment  of Canadian social democracy.
Stanley Knowles  is  biographically  in­ teresting   because Dr.  Trofimenkoff   has sought  an  approach that  might  seem  ap­ propriate for  recording the  life of a  man  who was reared  in  the populist  traditions of the  West and  never-despite his long years   in   Ottawa-completely    weaned


81

BOOKS IN REVIEW



from  them.  It is an informal, personal account, with   no  bibliography and  very few footnotes; it  is based  largely  on con­ versations,  and   here  the  biographer  has certainly enjoyed an immense  advantage, for she has  known  her  subject  almost  all her life. As Susan  Mann, she was a child of two when Stanley Knowles first arrived  to  live  for  the  parliamentary sessions in her  parents' house,  a practice he contin­ ued  for  forty  years.  The  combination of a  historian's skills  with  the  intimacy   of forty  years  of  close  and  affectionate  as­ sociation   is  an  unusual one,  and   it  has resulted   in  a  very   warm   and   sensitive portrait of an admirable man. There is an intelligence  and   at   times   an   irony   in Susan  Mann's account that saved it from excesses of  adulation and  will  doubtless  make  it an  indispensable source  book for the  warts-and-all  biography of  Knowles that   we  must   eventually  expect   if  the area  of  Canadian political  history he rep­ resents is to  be more  critically  examined.
The  Susan   Mann  who   grew   up   in Stanley  Knowles' benevolent shadow  and the  Dr.   Trofimenkoff  who   has  written The  Dream of Nation  seem like two dif­ ferent   even  if  not  separate  personae, so divergent are  their  approaches, and  it  is certainly a triumph  of virtuosity  that  the same  individual  should   have   written  a pair of such dissimilar books. The  Dream of  Nation  is  described as  the  "first  one­ volume    English-language   overview    of Quebec  history,"  but   this  does  seem  a rather  technical  claim   to  novelty,  since Mason  Wade's monumental  work,  The  French Canadians,  though  it took up two massive volumes,   presented a  unified thesis, and,  although it  discussed  Acadi­ ans  and  other French  Canadians as well as the Quebecois, embraced a remarkably thorough  "o'Verview of Quebec history."  It is hard  to imagine that  The  Dream of Nation failed  to benefit  from  Wade's  pio­ neering work, yet, though  The  French Canadians appears in Dr.  Trofimenkoff's
 bibliography,  it  is  not   even  once  men­ tioned  in her  text.  In my view, though it carries the  story  forward  only  to  1967, The   French  Canadians  still  remains the basic  English-language work  on  Quebec history,  and  one  day,  perhaps, it will be updated to resume its position  as the lead­  ing  text  on  the  subject.
The  Dream of Nation does have the advantage of  relative   brevity   (which  is
perhaps  what  is  meant  when   it  is  de­ scribed   as  an  "overview") and  there is no  doubt that  Dr.  Trofimenkoff  has the kind  of generalizing ability  which  makes  for  a  condensed and  yet  convincing ac­ count. Her   narrative  lacks   the  kind   of clustering circumstantial detail  that  gives pleasure   and   conviction  to   a   leisurely  reading  of  history,   but  it  sweeps  boldly along  and brings  the  history   of  Quebec together in a kind  of organic evolutionary unity,  which  is something different from the mythic unity  imposed  by the national­ ist  historians who  have  followed   in  the line of Garneau and especially  of Groulx.
Inevitably, whether as dream or  politi­ cal movement, nationalism tends to dmni­  nate  the book, though Dr. Trofimenkoff is perhaps rightly  inclined  to see  this  phe­  nomenon less as  a  reaction to  the  Con­  quest,  which  it  took French Canadians a long  time  to  get  into  any  clear  perspec­ tive,  but  rather as  the  product of  nine­ teenth-century political developments, modified  by  changing  clerical  interests. But  parallel with  the development of  na­ tionalist sentiment  moved  deep  currents of social  change which  tended to counter the   overt   political  tendencies,  and   Dr. Trofimenkoff   has   a   great   deal   to  say about the importance, even from  the pre­  Conquest period, of the role of women  in Quebec  history,   first   in   providing  the province's earliest  rudimentary social ser­ vices  under the  auspices  of  the  church, and  later in  actively  assisting  the  erosion of conservative attitudes through the fem­ inist  movement. It is clear  that  her  views

BOOKS IN REVIEW



in  some  of  these  areas run  very  close  to those of recent  Quebec hlstorians, notably Fernand Ouellet, who have been less than committed to creating a national mythol­ ogy for  Quebec.
The  Dream of Nation  is, most  of all, a useful  review,  written at  a time  when  we
can  see contemporary separatism with  a
degree  of detachment, of the  events  and tendencies  tha:t   have   made Quebec a province less comme  les autres than  even the  most  malcontent areas  of  the  West, and  as such  it  is good  secondary reading for  anyone   interested in  Quebec  writers and  writing. Strangely enough, since she describes  her  book  as  a  "Social and  In­ tellectual History," Dr.  Trofimenkoff  has little  to say on Quebec literature; for her, intellectual history  seems to end  with  the historians, and  when  she has discussed the genesis  of  political ideas  in  Quebec  she does not go on  to show  the ways in which the growth of a special francophone soci­ ety  has  affected  French writing in  Can­ ada,  nor  does she  recognize the  part  nov­ elists   and    dramatists  have    played    in sustaining a sense of national identity.
The other surprising omission -one so obvious  that  it cannot be undeliberate­ is that  of the  non-French communities in Quebec.  Only  a  passing  reference notes that  not until  1870 did  Montreal cease to be a mainly  English  city;  there  is no ref­ erence   to  the  long  period during which that   city  remained  the  financial and largely  the commercial capital of all Can­ ada,  whlch  certainly affected internal de­ velopments within Quebec;  and  the  an­  glophone writers in  Montreal who  played such  a  hlstoric  role  in  the  growth of  a Canadian  literature in  English   between  the  1920's  and   the  1950's  go  as  unmen­ tioned  as their  francophone counterparts. Virtually  nothing is said  of  the  notable Jewish, Italian, and  other immigrant mi­ norities  in  Quebec, while  the  native  In­ dians  appear only  as enemies.  Indeed, it is one  of  the  oddities of The  Dream  of
 Nation   tha:t, whlle   critically exammmg Quebec  nationalism,  Dr.   Trofimenkoff appears  to   grant  the   grossest   of   the pequiste myths,  that   the  only  culture of Quebec is French.

GEORGE WOODCOCK


FIGHTING MEN

ELINOR KYTE SENIOR, British  Regulars in Mon­ treal:   An   Imperial   Garrison,   1832-1854. MeGill-Queen's Univ., $29.95.
FRANK  J. SHRIVE, The  Diary  of a P.B.O. Bos­
ton  Mills  Press,  $I5·95·
WILLIAM E. CHAJKOWSKY,  Royal Flying Corps: Borden to Texas  to Beamsville.  Boston Mills Press,  n.p.

OF   THESE   THREE   BOOKS  Dr.   Senior's work on the British  Regulars in Montreal from  1832  to 1854  is unquestionably the best. A meticulous scholar  and a solid his­ torian, she  has  produced a  well-written account of the Garrison's stay in a rapidly developing city.  In  its four  general parts  we  are  given  much   factual  information about the Garrison and  the city itself, the  Garrison as  an  aid   to  civil  power,   the cui tural  dimensions of  the  Garrison, and finally its financial aspects. The main  text,  some  2 14 pages,  is followed  by sixty-four pages   devoted   to  appendices,  notes   on sources,  a  lengthy   bibliography,  and    a meticulous index. But  the  subject is nar­ row in scope. Only  a dim light  is shed  on Quebec as  a  whole,   and   we  find   little about   the   troubled  years   of   1837-38.  There is an interesting chapter, however, on  the  violent  days  during and  after the  debate  on   the   Rebellion  Losses  Bill  in
1849. The  Parliament House  (·then in Montreal)  was gutted by fire and claim­ ants  and  their  supporters,  Loyalists  and  Patriots, clashed  in  the  streets.  It was  a hazardous period  and the British Regulars were  called  into action. There is also  an interesting chapter on the Gavazzi  Riot  of
1853. But we are  told little  about Gavazzi

BOOKS IN REVIEW



himself, save that  he was an apostate Ital­ ian   priest    who   revelled    in   preaching against  Popery  from  the pulpits of protes­ tant  churches and  who, following  his one Montreal appearance, disappeared quickly across  the  American  border leaving   be­ hind  'him battered  Protestants and  Cath­ olics, some fatally injured. Again  the Brit­ ish Regulars were involved.  In  brief,  the work  as a  whole  (and  here  I  may  be in error)  has  something of  the  semi-sweet odour of a  reworked Ph.D.  thesis. Com­  petent  and  scholarly, it  will  be of  value to  readers seeking   detailed   information about this  brief  period,  and  it  will be a useful  reference  work  for   university  li­ braries.  Finally,  it is a well-produced book and  has  excellent illustrations of  people, events, and  places.
Frank Shrive  was never a scholar  nor a professional    writer,  but   in   September
1917,  at  the  age  of  nineteen, he  was  al­ ready   a  war  veteran. A  private  in  the Canadian artillery, he had  been wounded  at  the  great   battle of  Vimy  Ridge   and
was  back  in  England recuperating. Like
many  of  his  contemporaries he  had  had enough  of war on land and had a burning desire  to take  to  the  war  that  was in  the air. He had  also begun  to write what  was to become  his diary.  But  his  application for   transfer  to  the  Royal  Flying   Corps was complicated and  long in coming  and it  was  not  until  the  following  April  that he at  last found  himself  in the  Royal  Air Force,   the   name  given  on   the  first  of April  to the  reorganized British  air  arms. The  training period  was slow and, some­ what  to  his  chagrin, he  was  assigned  to the  role  of  an  observer.  Finally,   on   25
August  he was commisioned as a second­ lieutenant, with one wing on his chest, not two.  He  had  become  a  P.B.O.-a poor bloody observer.  Three weeks later  he was on his way to Archangel in northern Rus­ sia,  a part  of  the  abortive Allied  expe­
dition  that  was supposed  to bring support to  the  White  Russians  against the  Bolos,
 the   Bolshies,   the   Bolsheviks.   He   never really  knew  why  he  was  there  nor  what this  particular war   was  all  about.  And he was none the wiser when he left Russia for Scotland some months  later, having received  the Russian Cross of St. Anne for valour.
Of  the  diary   itself  not  much   need  be said.  It is by no means  a meticulous  rec­ ord; rather, as Shrive  himself  says,  "it  is the substance of letters sent  to my mother which  she so thoughtfully saved." Entries are   spasmodic,  and    many   days,   even weeks, are  blank.  The first  section,  some thirty pages  of text,  is slow and  dull; but the   second,    describing  'the   role   of  an R.A.F. observer in  Russia,  some  thirty­ four  pages, is of genuine interest, not only because  it is a  reminder of a strange  and  forgotten  moment in history,  but  also be­ cause  it  gives  the  reader an  insight  into the  conditions under which  he and  his companions lived and  fought. Flying  was often  next  to impossible; planes  were  not well equipped for  winter weather, many of   the   engines   were   water   cooled,   air strips  were  piled  high  with  snow  or  with hills of slush and  mucic  But  he did  man­ age  to mal(e  a large  number of  sorties  in enemy   territory,   dropping   some   small bombs  on  huts  or  villages,  or  working  as an   observer  for   artillery  in   action.  He had,   I  believe,  no  actual  aerial   combat against  the   Bolsheviks,   but  he  and   his pilot   were   frequently   in   danger  from ground fire, and  one of  his pilots,  a Rus­ sian, was shot  through the chest  but man­ aged  to bring  the plane,  and  Shrive,  back to safety.  But even  in  this  section  of  the diary  the tone is factual, even placid.  Yet here is enough  to make  us realize  that  the very  young  Shrive was  a  man   of  great  courage, who lived  through a tough  win­ ter, and survived with a triumphant smile. And  he  always  loved  a  good  party,   es­ pecially  with   the   native   Russians,   who were  cheerful, loved  to  dance, and   had  plenty of vodka.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



So The   Diary  of a  P.B.O.,  though a minor  work,  does make  a small contribu­ tion  to a minute comer of  history. It has been carefully edited by the author's son, Norman  Shrive,  of  the  Department  of English,  McMaster  University, and  has a brief historical introduction by Robert H. Johnston, of  the  Department of History,  of the same institution. It has, also, some eleven  pages  of  pictures, some  of which  are  of  interest.
In the last six months of  rgr8 I was a cadet  in the Royal  Air Force  and  all that I  need  say  about William   Chajkowsky's book on  the  Royal  Flying  Corps in  Can­ ada   is  that   it   is   a   complete   disaster. Chajkowsky spent  his adolescent years in the  1940's  on  the  family  farm  near  the abandoned Beamsville  airport in  the Nia­  gara  Peninsula. Fascinated apparently by childhood memories, he turned years later  to  the  writing of  a  history   of  sorts  but concentrated  his  efforts  on  two  or  three  of the airports used by the R.F.C.JR.A.F. and  on  the  few months that  some  of the Corps  spent  in  Texas during the  winter of    rgr7-19I8.  He   gathered together a mass  of facts  and  statistics about the number of hangars, barracks, glue  shops, kitchens,   and   mess  halls,  and   brings   in some information about the training of cadets.  But clearly  he is not a scholar and equally  clearly  he has no skills as a writer. Hundreds  of   his   paragraphs  have   no more  than  two or  three  lines, with  few or no transitional devices between  them,  and his  pages  are  riddled by  illiteracies and errors.  The  result  is an unbelievable hodgepooge. True, there   are  pictures in abundance, but  many  are  poor  or  repe­ titious.  It is obvious  that  he had  no  help from   a  competent  editor, but  it  is  not obvious   why   publication   grants  should  have   been   received   from   the   Canada Council and  the Ontario Arts  Council.
S.E.READ
 REAL POETS

CECILIA FREY,  The  Least  You  Can  Do Is Sing.
Longspoon, $7.oo.
RHEA  TREGEBOV,  Remembering History. Guer­
nica, $s.oo.
JANE DICK, Conceptions. Guernica, $4.00.
DOUGLAS BARBOUR&: MARNI L. STANLEY   (eds.), Writing Right: Poetry by Canadian Women. Longspoon, $1 o.oo.

THE REAL POET IS BY NATURE a singular­ ity, speaking with  an  unmistakable voice, perhaps a little  muffled at first,  but  even­ tually  clear and true. Among  the  three  of them, Cecelia Frey,  Rhea Tregebov, and  Jane  Dick  provide a  wide  spectrum of contemporary vision.  Each  of  them   has developed   an  unmistakable voice  which comes through clear and  unmuffied  in her particular volume. By contrast, the  voices of the poets in the anthology seem muffled and  hard to distinguish one from  another. The  publisher's blurb   on  the  back  of Cecelia  Frey's The  Least You  Can Do Is Sing  explicitly   limits   her   to  "recording western   landscapes,  western   voices  and western  experience," as though her sensi­ bility  were  a  machine  which  could  only operate under  certain limited  conditions. Certainly, Frey  draws  upon  her  western  environment  in   her   poems    (in   "Bad­ lands," for  example) , and  so  transmutes it  into  poetry   (rather than  transfiguring
it  as the  blurb  suggests-the distinction is subtle but  important) as all poetry transmutes its  subjects. But  in  doing  so, she transcends the  limits  ascribed to  her, and  her poems  speak  universally. She understands the demonic underlay of  hu­ man   experience; in  "Bush  Camp,"  she suggests  the  ever-present  threat of  mad­  ness in the isolation of  the  bush:
If I remember a few basic rules there is no reason why
I should not return exactly as planned....

She  is aware,  too,  of  madness lurking in other aspects of human experience: in the

Bs

BOOKS IN REVIEW



pressure  of the northern winter on an immigrant in  "The Man  from  St  Kit's," and  in  the  pressure  of a  constant  irrita­ tion on almost  anybody  who has to put  up with  it  for  too long,  so that  the constant sound   of  tile  wind   in  "Wind  at  Oyen,  Alta." makes   the   persona   "each   night
dream of madness I the form I will take."
But although ,the demonic exists and can­
not   (and  must  not)   be ignored, the  un­ demonic grows  out  of  the  demonic, as the   persona  in  "Slough   in   November" learns:

we come  upon
the fisherman, his bloated  remains
I cannot look until  you show me
how from  the  soft cavity  of his mouth
sprout   branches, leafing....

One  of her  distinguishing characteristics as  a  poetic   voice  is to  invest  even  the deznonic presence with a non-demonic humour;   the    persona    of   "Song    and Dance" speaks  in  a  truly  human tone  of exasperated patience while  preparing a truly  demonic "exquisite torture" for  the other character, and  leaves the  reader smiling   nervously   and   unable   to  forget the  poem.  This is an  impressive  first  col­ lection.
Rhea Tregebov's collection Remember­ ing  History  should   more  accurately  be called   Condemning   History.  Justifiably, Tregebov is angry-angry with  the male
domination not only of the past itself, but also  of  the  records  of the  past  (history) and   of  the  present    (future history). In "Graffiti,"  she   insists   of   history    that
women  must  "make it written I make  it
read," and   the  final  lines  of  the  poem
condemn the  male  history-makers of  his­
tory  with  cold  finality:

it  is you
who have  been  found
wanting.

But 'they also imply a warning to the mak­ ers of future history: if women allow men to shape and  record  it alone, all of them,


86
 men   and   women, will  be  found  "want­ ing."   Her    anger    is  signalled   by  vivid images   of   blood,   dismemberment,  and  murder. In "Life  in the  Diner," where  Tregebov   comments  on   the   waste   of women's lives, she shows her  protagonist, Jane, as she "wipes blood  onto her  apron
I offers  coffee.  I Her  education got  her
nowhere."  In   "Room,"  the   anger  1s
against  the   constricting  of  women    to purely  domestic roles:
It may  be the  garden is irrigated with  blood,  that  some girl's  blood (wife  or  slave)   sweetens  the  dough.
In  "Icon," 'the young girl considering her identity recognizes  that  "Pieces are man­
ageable. I Something took her  to pieces."
Anger   is  directed  against  women   who
conform to  men's domination in  "There Are  Angels," where  the  persona strangles her  conformist self  in  a parodic version of Jacob's wrestling match with  the angel in Genesis. Such  anger  requires -and re­ ceives  in  her  poezns-a controlled  but vigorous  irony.  In  "Necessity," the  per­  sona  remarks:
As a  physician,  I can  understand the  passion  for  money.
I  myself, after  four
or five hours  in  the operating room,
prefer  an object  that  won't  bleed.
Here, the ironic  tension set up between "passion" and  "object" is finely controlled and  deeply  disturbing. "Women Are  Not for  Burning," a  poem  inspired (perhaps provoked would   be a  better term)  by a
1979 newspaper report of "a  young  bride set  on  fire  by  her  husband's family  be­ cause   they    were   dissatisfied    with   the  dowry"  according  'to  Tregebov's   note, notes   ironically  'that    "The  law,   now,
doesn't sanction I the selling of women; I
their  burning is prohibited," and  in these
lines   there   is  a  disturbing  ambivalence about the  word   "now." This also is an impressive first collection.
Set  beside  the  commanding  presences
of Frey  and  Tregebov, Jane Dick  regret-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



tably  does  not  convince as strongly. Her sensibility  is essentially  introspective, and she  writes  with   some  sensitivity  of  the inner  domain of her  private and  personal relationships. The  poems  on  this  subject constitute by far  the  largest  group  in  the collection, with  only  two or  three  which attempt to  look  at  external reality.  The last  poem  in  the book, "Warriors," is one of  the  few  poems  which  appear to con­ cern   themselves   with   the  world  outside  the   poet's   skin,  but   its  insight   into   its subject-a child  in an overcrowded and badly underequipped orphanage-is lim­ ited.  In the  poems  of  the  inner   world, Dick   is  both   more  at   home   and   more convincing:   the   irony   of   "When  the Bleeding   Stops"   is   well   controlled,  al­ though it might  be described more  accur­  ately as ambiguous than  as ambivalent:

as soon  as we know
which of  us  is  the  patient
one  of  us  will  die ;
it  will  be an  act  of mercy.

But  even  at  her  best, she is uneven. "In­ ception" is a small  and  enigmatic  poem, which   opens  excellently  with   the  image
"need  tumbled  from   her   lips  I like  si­
 sities, since most of the poets have at least one   individual  collection  already   pub­ lished. This  makes  it impossible  to review the  selection  from  any  of  the  poets as a representative sample of her  work,  since the   needs  of  a  teaching  anthology  are  specific and  do  not  always coincide with an anthology assembled  for more  general  purposes.  The  tone  of  the  collection   is strongly   feminist    (.this  is  a   descriptive note,  not a complaint, since  I have  north­ ing  against   anthologies  of  feminist   po• etry) , and   its   tendency  is  to   include
younger   and Ior   less  well   known   poets
(this  makes  for  a  roster  of  names  which
clearly represents the idiosyncrasies of the anthologists, which  is probably  par for the course, but  I have  to say that  it is not  an anthology I  could   see  myself   teaching from). Its title  is misleading, making  the volume  sound   like  a  composition text. The design of the  book is dismal  and  not improved  by including a handful of  illus­ trations. Its usefulness  will, I suspect,  de­ pend   on  how   far   the  teacher  using  it shares  the views of the anthologis.ts  as to which   poets   should   or   should   not   be taught.

lence," but  after  a few lines  the reader stumbles  over the bizarre lines "he opened his body  I like a  seed  / and  planted her with  words." There is considerable prom­
ise in  these  poems,  but  Dick's  talent  has yet  to develop  fully.
As a  result  of being  given  a chance to show ·their work in individual collections, Frey,  Tregebov, and  Dick  all  manage to speak  with  a very clear  and  true  voice to the  reader. But  as  I  have   already  sug­ gested,  cramming sixteen   poets  into  the pages  of  the  anthology,  Writing  Right: Poetry  by  Canadian  Women, does  all of them  a disseiVice by  muffling their  voices and  crowding their talents. I suspect  that  it  has  been  produced as  a  teaching an­  thology of  women's poetry for  use in high schools, community colleges,  and  univer-
 PATRICIA MONK


SKIRMISHES WITH THE PAST

F. G.  PAci,  Black  Madonna. Oberon, n.p.
MARK GORDON, Head   of the  Harbour. Ground-
hog, $1 o.gs.

Black  Madonna is very  much  a  novel  of the  new  world  in  the  twentieth century, one which  speaks  for  the children of  Eu­ ropean  immigrants to Canada, Australia, and  America. It tells of their struggles - not  with  the  new  society,  which  is now their own, but with  the language and  val­ ues  and   traditions   of  .the  old.   In   this peculiar  conflict between  the generations, all  the  advantages of   time   and   moral

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



force  are  on  the  side  of the  elders  while those  of  geography  and   cultural  domi­ nance  lie  in  the  hands   of  the  children; but of course  there  are  no "winners" here except   for  time  and  whoever   is  last  to arrive on ,the scene.
Black   Madonna   is  particularly  the story  of  an  Italian family  in  Sault   Ste. Marie,  but  it is not  exclusively so, nor is it exclusively  "immigrant" in significance. The   dominant  point   of  view  is  that   of Marie,  the   daughter,  which   gives  the novel a refreshingly wide and  thoroughly modem sensibility; for  it  is the   female role  which  has  undergone the  most radi­ cal changes as a result  of the move from the  old  world.  It therefore  produces the greatest  stresses   within   the   individuals concerned.
Predictably Marie, a  bright   girl,  was not  content to  remain in  the  Sault  after completing high  school and  winning  a scholarship  to   a   university.   She   moves south,  gets a degree, a husband, a  job, a child,  and  a divorce -becomes the com­ plete North  American female in short,  the antithesis of anything her parents envision for her.
An apparently necessary part of the process  is  almost   total   alienation  from both   her  parents and   her  brother  who stays  home  to  play  hockey  and  work  at the  factory. Her   family  feels she  thinks she  is too  good  for  them  and   the  town and  everything they  stand  for, either  in Canada or in Italy; and  to a large extent they are  right.  She  knows no Italian, nor wants  to  even  though it  would  mean  at least  a chance at  communicating with them.  To  a  certain degree  then  this ali­ enation   from    her    background    is   an alienation from   a  part   of  herself  which in  the  final  analysis  she  needs  to  under­ stand.
This  is a nagging point  from  early  on in  the  narrative when  Marie returns "home" upon  the  death  of her  father. A wealth  of inte>:nal reminiscence complete


88
 with guilt and  defiance stirs up and  forces the  children to deal  both  w1th their  past and  with  what to do  about their  mother in  a  society  which   has  no  place  for  her and   in   which   she   has   never   sought   a place.  Marie is  less  willing   to  confront these  questions than  her  brother, but she must   ultimately solve 'them.
They would like to send their mother "home" to  Italy, and   there  are  relatives willing  to have  her  back  again, but  she will  have  none  of  that  either. They   are cheated to a certain degree  by her  death shortly  afterwards, but  the intezval  serves its  narrative and   thematic purposes   well in Paci's  hands.
They  are   cheated  because   "in   dying she had  forever shut  the door  on herself." They have  no chance to regroup in this particular skirmish  with  the  past,  yet this experience forces them  to face up to its strange force  in their  lives, which increas­ ingly  becomes  the  force  of  absence. It is something they  know  little of and  would have  liked  to  forget; it is something they would  like to deny as not of them  but also what  they  cannot  be  complete  without coming to terms  with. Now the  chance to do  all ,that seems  to have  itself  become  a part of the  past.
An  interesting implication here  is that
it  makes  no  difference whether you  stay home   or   not.   Marie's  brother  is   mar­ ginally  closer  to  his parents but  not  fun­  damentally so. Considering that he comes so much nearer to fulfilling  their expecta­ tions  for  him  than she did,  his failure to understand  them    (and   their  faihue  to understand him)   is much greater.
Paci's  narrative, while  dwelling in  the past,  avoids   the  sentimental and  infuses the  obvious  with  such  dispassionate good sense and sense of fair play that  Black Madonna has much to say  to  both  gen­ erations, male  or female,  Italian or Cana­ dian. It underscores the fact  that for some time  to  come  we  shall  remain  a  society

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



of immigration and  that  it  is only  fitting our literature should reflect  this.
Novels  like  Head   of  the  Harbour  un­ derscore the  value  of a  good  editor,  not so much  for typographical considerations, but for the weightier task of deciding just how   much    of   a:n   author's  manuscript should  see print. Head  of the  Harbour  is literally too   long  by  half,   and  someone  should  have  been  at  hand, and  had  the dispassionate good sense, to manage Gor­  don's   propensity  for  recording and   then developing  seemingly everything  of  any interest,  and  more.   It might be  an  un­ enviable  task  but  it  would  have  made  a great difference here,  I think.
There is a story here,  and  one probably worth  telling  to  a  considerable number of  readers if only  Gordon had  been  able to  get  at  it,  if  only  the  reader could  be allowed  to read  it without having to wade through the  swamps of  the  author's  un­ certainty.
This   uncertainty extends further  than a  judgment about what  makes  the  novel and  what  doesn't, however. Gordon lacks confidence in  his  very  ability  to describe and  give the feeling  of the simplest  events and   emotions. The  tone   is  set  early  on with  the  following paragraph:

The Air Canada jet circled  the airport outside   Halifax.  The   pilot   was  trying   to guide  it  around  the  fog-shrouded  trees,  to lower it, not on its  fragile belly, but  plumply, on its three  sets of wheels.    (my italics)

Five  hundred pages  of  this  sort  of  over­
statement is tiresome indeed.
This is too much  the story of the young student striving after experience and  then trying  to make  that  experience meaning­ ful,  because  after all,  he  is a  writer,  has decided   to  be  a writer.  What it  really amounts to  is a sort  of  journalism of the maturation  process,  with   the  result  that  there   are  a  lot  of   questions  posed  and  answered in a never-ending internal mon­  ologue.
Essentially   this  is  a  novel   of  under-
 development: underdeveloped themes, characters, scenes, and  stnJcture -ironi­ cally   presented  through   overdeveloped prose.   This   is  Mark   Gordon's  second novel,  after   The   Kanner  Aliyah, but   I suspect ·that the bulk  of it was completed much  earlier, while  he was attaining the skills which  made  The Kanner   Aliyah  a so  much  more   polished production.  He should   have   resisted   the   temptation  to "work  up" a novel out  of such a:s yet raw material.
SIMON  RUDDELL


ON TARGETS

WILLIAM  GOEDE,  Quantrill. Quadrant Editions, n.p.
DON    AKENSON,  The   Lazar  House  Notebooks.
Quadrant Editions,  n.p.

CHRISTMAS  EVE,  a  farm   near  Indepen­ dence,  Missouri.  Out of  the  night  comes a  party of  Redlegs,  led  by a  young  man  from   Ohio  who   calls   himself Charley Hart. They  carry carbines and  ammuni­ tion courtesy  of  a group of well-meaning Boston abolitionists; their  aim,  to relieve another   Missouri   farmer  of  his  slaves, take  them  into  abolitionist Kansas,   and pack  them  off to Canada. Hart makes  a secret  deal with  the farmer, however. Within hours   three  of  his  co-riders are dead  and "Hart," now resuming the name William   Quantrill, has  exchanged a  ca­ reer with  the "Emigrant Aid Society" for the   protection  and   pride  of   the  slave­ owning  Walker  family.
Quantrill's act  turns out  to be a choice of sides in a bloody  and  devastating civil war.  A Confederate army  is reported  to be  in  training down   in  Arkansas,   Fort Sumter is shelled,  and  Quantrill finds himself  treated as a symbol of the South­ ern cause, exhibited to one fascinated and respectful  Missouri   family  after   another as  a  kind  of  "plaster  saint." They  want  him  to explain his defection, to point  out


Sg

BOOKS IN REVIEW



its moral,  but  all  he  can  do  is tell  over and over, with varying degrees of elabora­ tion,  a half-fictitious account of  his deal­  ings  with  the  Redlegs  of  Lawrence and the   repellent,  duplicitous Jim Lane. Creeds,    beliefs,   principles   are   not   in Quantrill's line.  If the  truth exists  any­ where,  it  must  be in a story.
The great  strength of Goede's  novel  is exactly this: it avoids the comforting, conscience-placating explanations. The ready-made pieties  of history  are  demol­ ished  as in scene  after  scene Goede  con­ vinces  us:  this is how  it must have  been. Such  terms  as  "historical  novel"  do  not really fit the book,  because  the  usual  aim of  the  historical  novelist,  to  reveal   the cogs  and  wheels  of  history,  the   hidden motives   and   pressures   that   drove   men and   women   to  act   in  certain  ways,  is absent.  Goede  knows  the temptations and the  danger of  trying  to understand one's subject   better than   he  understood  him­ self. Ra:ther, Goede  shows us the intransi­ gence  of  history.   It does  not  abide our question. All we can  do is to tell stories:  "this   is  how   it  was."  The  motives   we attribute, the  morals  we  append, are  for our  own  purposes   and  always  after   the event.
Quantrill becomes  leader   of  a group of bushwackers or resistance  fighters  that eventually numbers several  hundred. A skilled  strategist, a convincing leader,  he knows  how  to  win  the  war  for  the  Con­ federacy, by infiltration and subversion  of Yankee   territory;  but   though  Jefferson Davis  loads  him  with medals  and  presses him  to accept  a  commission  in  the  Con­  federate army Quantrill is given to under­ stand  that the Confederate President must remain  free from  any  taint  of  direct  in­ volvement with  Quantrill's methods. "We are  not a President of guerrillas!" So Quantrill is free to carry out his raids and reprisal  killings, but  without official sanc­ tion.
Yet  Quantrill is  no  rampaging,  psy-


go
 chotic killer, and  the quality of his leader­ ship  is of  a  kind   that   many  a  commis­  sioned  officer  might envy.  He  does  not welcome  men who want to join the Quan­ trill Company just to get revenge, because  he knows that such motives make for poor discipline and   endanger  the   safe·ty of them  all.  He  sets his  face  against rape,  looting,  and  indiscriminate killing.  Plan­ ning  a daring raid  on Lawrence, Kansas,  in retribution for  the death and  maiming of  fifty women,  all  sweethearts and  rela­ tives  of  Quantrill's men  rounded  up  by the barbarous Yankees,  Quantrill tells his followers  "you  aren't going to run in any­ where  unless you work  it all out ahead of time ... you  got  to  be subtle."  One   fa­  vourite liberal myth  that  the  novel  han­ dles very roughly indeed  is the  belief that  in  order to  be  a good  killer  you  have  to be psychotic.  Much is made of the "dark­ ness"  inside  Quantrill-the large   area  of himself  that  he does  not  question and  reveals only intermittently, in a shy, puz­ zled  way,  to a  few  confidants. But   the most  compelling parts of  the  book  are those  in  which   Quantrill comes  face  to face with  a darkness deeper even than his own:   in   the   Canadian,  George   Todd, whom  he makes  his lieutenant; in Ander­ son,  the scalp-hunter, malicious and  trig­ ger-happy; in  the  thirteen-year-old Jesse James, a  boy  with  the  eyes  of  a  snake; and   in  the  bestial  Lark   Skaggs,  out  to "get  me a woman" in defiance of Quan­ trill's    strict   prohibition   against  rapes. After  an  interview with  Todd, Quantrill is  forced  to  consider how  far  and   deep  their meanness and  darkness runs  among his company, and   whether it is even  the hidden power  that  activates them.
Here  is the book's central theme, its appearances  sometimes heralded  with  a noticeable banging  of  verbal   drums. Goede  does not give us easy answers, how­ ever,  nor  are  there any  elaborate  Con­  radian structures of  theory  or  symbolism erected around the  psychology  of Quan-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



trill  and  his  hendunen-only  a chilling glimpse  into  the  powers  that  are  let loose when  men  start  killing each  other. Quan­ trill  is  no  dedicated  hero,   no  Sou them gentleman, and  he even  dislikes the insti­ tution of  slavery  which  he  is  fighting  to defend.  His   courage,   intelligence,  and  leadership are  unquestionable. Yet  even Quantrill cannot control the meanness he has  helped  to  focus,  and   tried  to  disci­ pline.  He  remains an  outsider, distrustful of official social  ideals  and  still  resenting his  parents'  cold,   doctrinaire  moralism and  the  piety of  the  wealthy, do-gooding Yankee abolitionists  of  Lawrence -the "untouchables." From his point of view, society  is  a  conspiracy of  fine-sounding nonsense,   and   something  he  can   never belong   to.  But   neither  can   he  counte­ nance    the   bestiality    of   Skaggs   or   .the
bloodlust of  Anderson and   1esse 1ames.
The  disturbing question that   this  well­
made book  poses  is whether Quantrill's ad  hoc  code  of honour (what one  of his men   calls  Quantrill's  "high  ideals")  is based   on   anything  more   than  a  com­ mander's self-preserving wish  to keep  his men disciplined, whether "the rules"  rep­ resent  anything more  •than  the self-inter­ est of those  who happen  to be on top for the  time  being.
Don  Akenson's The  Lazar House Note­ books is a satirical farrago, always scurri­ lous, occasionally clever, but failing in the long  nm  because  it  does  not  identify  its targets with  sufficient  clarity.   A team  of researchers from  the "Division of Human Realities" in an unnamed academic insti­ tution  ("·the  Firm")  is investigating the geography  and   history  of  an  obscure i land  in  the Inner  Hebrides. Dr.  S.,  the author  of  a  history  of the  island   (which  he  writes  in  reverse,  beginning with  the index,   then  moving to  the  final  chapter and  so on), is helped and  hindered by an unlikely crew of assistants: a Bahamanian
("the  Immigrant") ,  a  1esuit   (married,
and  obsessed  with  purchasing life  insur-
 ance  policies) , a Polish  Prince,  and  a fe­ male  fundamentalist. His  efforts  are also frustrated by the  philistinism of the  phi­ landering  Chairman,   whose   own   aca­  demic  achievements are  of   course  con­  temptible. In  this  chaotic  circus  of aca­  deme  some  of  the  side-shows  are  enjoy­ able, such  as ·the account of the  way  the Chairman's  mistress   ("the Godmother") catalogued  the   papers  of  William  Mc­  kenzie   King-Lion   ("Canada's   greatest Premier" [sic] ) . The Godmother is suc­ ceeded   in   ·the  unenviable   position   of Chairman's mistress  by Dr. S.'s wife, who writes  articles  for  The  Housewife's  Hu­ man  Enquirer  and  National  Home  Sex­ uality  Helper.  Ultimately,  however, the book  does  not  achieve genuine comedy but  disintegrates  into   a  series  of  rather sour academic  jokes.

ANTHONY JOHN  HARDING


MULTICULTURAL WE STAND

HEDI  BOURAour,  ed.,  The   Canadian  Alterna- tive.  ECW  Press, n.p.

A CONFERENCE MAY  BE  AN  EFFECTIVE way of opening  up new vistas and  of stimulat­ ing intellectual growth among its partici­ pants,  but  its  proceedings do  not  always make  an  effective  book.  A  good  case  in point   is The   Canadian  Alternative, the edition  of eleven  papers  given  at  a con­ ference  on  "Cultural  Pluralism and   the Canadian Unity" held at York University in  1979. The papers are  generally  !>trong on  Kulturpolitik  rhetoric, platitudes, wiSihful tlhinking,  as well  as  good  inten­ tions;  and  they are correspondingly weak in  either  pragmatic insights  or  inspiring theories.  Perhaps this is  to  be  expected of public papers dealing, in a conciliatory academic  atmosphere, with  such  mettle­  some  parenthood issues as multicultural-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ism,  Quebec's threat of  separation, and
Canadian unity.
Of the five participants that  address themselves specifically to improving French-English relations for a united Canada only  two  add  some spark,  which in their  cases, however,  is likely to arouse merely ·anger. Rejecting separatism as un­ christian,  Leo   A.  Brodeur   exults   in  a sort of mediaeval Catholicism as the only way to unify a multicultural society. Thus  protestants,  for  instance, and  social   re­ formers outside the  Roman  Church be­ come  the cause of Quebec separation and  Canadian disunity. Memory  tells one that  so-called   Popish   plots  have   always  col­ oured   popular   history   and   have   some­ times  led  to first-rate literature, yet how can   one  rationally  accept   any  form   of religious totalitarianism in  Canada? Not as  extreme as Brodeur, though  similarly malapropos is  James  N.  Porter's  praise of a half-French/half-English Canadian language. Ironically, Porter  himself  illus­ trates the  necessity  of a thorough  knowl­ edge of a language: he seems to miss the ambiguities in the title of Rene Levesque's La Passion du Quebec.  Based on his par­  tial  reading of  la  passion  as  desire,  he  generalizes about  English  Canadian  in­ sularity and  fears  of  desire  which  he de­ tects  in the   book's  English   title  of  My  Quebec.
Moreover, such  faulty   argumentation is symptomatic of  a  missing clarity   that makes Porter's paper a key example of the obfuscation accompanying policies and discussions  of  multiculturalism. The  pa­ per's   first  few  sentences Inay  suffice  to underline my point:

The aim  of  this  inquiry is  to aid  in  the  for­ mulation of  the  ideas of  multiculturalism in a  way  that  enables one  to  see  the   good   it represents.  Our   interest   is   to   understand how   and   for  whom   multiculturalism could  be   attractive,  and   how   and   for   whom   it could  be  repulsive, so  we  want to  imagine the   kind   of   life   that  devotion to   multi­ culturalism  produces.  Our  aim   is   not   to
 produce a description or definition of  multi­ culturalism, for  we do  not  wish  to treat it as a  thing to  be  possessed  or ignored. Our aim is not  to  give  information  about it ...

Fortunately, two of the collected papers allow me to redress my overall  negative impressions of  the  book as a useful  docu­ ment  for students and  the general  reader  for   whom   it   is  meant  especially   (and  who of course  helped  fund  its publication through a  government  grant).  Stanislav J.  Kirschbaum   presents   an   historically and  theoretically concise view of Canada's growth toward a state made up of a con­ federation  of   culturally diverse  commu­ nities within provincial boundaries, rather than toward the nation-state or bi-nation­ state it was to have  become  in traditional English  and  French  perspectives. Focus­ ing on the individual within  such commu­ nities  Jamshed Mavalwala views multi­ cu}turalism "as a basic ethic  that  says that each  person  is an  individual in her  or his own  right." Avoiding jargon  and  politi­ cal  gestures,  ·stressing  ethics  rather than  ethnicity, the  individual  rather than the group, Mavalwala  makes  multicultural­ ism  a  grass-roots  issue  in  keeping with liberal  education in  the humanities.
Linking multiculturalism to the role of ethnic groups  is the  more  traditional  ap­ proach, though, as the  papers  by George  Korey,  Alex Chumak, Johnny Lombardi, and  Rudolf  K. Kogler exemplify. Yet one should  que&tion  Korey's assumption that  the  non-English  and  non-French minori­ ties form  a collective front of one-third of Canada's   population.  What  about  the perpetuation of Old  Country preferences and  prejudices among and  within ethnic groups? What about the  lack  of, for  in­ stance, social  and   religious  homogeneity within  various minorities  that are  groups  only in a StatsCan sense? What about the time-given  factors  of   acculturation  and  assimilation?  Moreover, one should  ques­ tion   Chumak's  and    Kogler's  concerns about  the   vagueness  of  official   policies

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



and   definitions  regarding  multicultural­ ism. The survival of a  culture surely  de­ pends  on  its  quality  and  on  its aliveness in individuals; its survival cannot rely on government intervention. People,  not gov­ ernments, keep  a culture alive.
This point is well  demonstrated in Kogler's demographic  assessment  of  the Polish  community according to  the  1976
Census  results.  He  implies  that  an  ethnic
community without its inherited language will lose its sense of identity. By extension, multiculturalism without multilingualism is unlikely  to thrive. Yet one  might  ask to what  extent  language and  other cultural phenomena constitute trappings of veiled materialism rather  than   evidence  of  a sort of ethnic biology. In this context, Theresa Kott's paper, though fragmented in its argumentation, is a useful  reminder of  the  conflict   between individual rights and  group  rights  that  is manifesting itself increasingly in ethnic quota systems.
Most of the papers reflect  a welcome uneasiness with terms like ethnic and multicultural, as  if  to  say  that  ethnicity and  multiculturalism tend  to become lab­ els only.  In his paper, Hedi Bouraoui ac­ tually    calls   the    term   multiculturalism "banal and  Inisleading." His implicit  ridi­ cule   of  other  papers  in   the   volume   is amusing, though, as Bouraoui's substitute notion    of    "transculturalism"  is  hardly  more  useful;  nor   is  his  term   "unicity" (by   which   he   does   not   "mean  either
'Anglo-conformity' or 'Franco-confor­ mity,'  but a dialogue between and  among  peoples  which   will  highlight their  com­ mon  experience as  Canadians, as well as the  rich  heritage  their   original cultures have   left   and   will   leave   to   the   New World").  Underneath such   jargon   and hyperbole,   there   is  the   undeniable  fact that  Canada's majorities and   minorities
-the  good  multinationals -have  con­ tributed enough leaven  of change for "the  re-confederation of Canada" that Ian  H. Macdonald wants  to see achieved through
 the strengthened "leadership of the mod­
erates," the  traditional  Canadian way. Judging by the papers' subjects and  the
participants' multicultural backgrounds, affiliations and  professional qualifications, the  book  promises  more  than  it  delivers in its commonplaces on Canadian society. Even  the  title  is misleading. The  reader does not get  the one alternative but  hints of several alternatives for  the country's growth, and  they are  not  particularly Ca­ nadian in kind,  only  in degree. After  all, it is a simple  paradox of the common  day anywhere that  "something  there  is  that  doesn't   love  a  wall"   and  "good   fences make   good   neighbours."  It  is  good   to remember this  beside  the  sartorial praise of any  secular state  as an  over-nation.

K. P. STICH


ALAS, POOR  BEAVER

cHARLES STEELE, ed., Taking Stock: The  Cal­ gary   Conference  on   the   Canadian   Novel. ECW  Press, n.p.

WHEN THE CALGARY CONFERENCE   took place,  it became quite a  cause celebre, primarily  because   of  the  infamous List. For  those  who   had   their   eyes and   ears closed during February 1978, it Inight  be best to begin  by stating what the List was.
In Taking Stock, Malcolm Ross is very careful to  define   what it  was  not:  not
"the   greatest," not  "the best,"  and  cer­ tainly   not   "the  only."   Rather,  it   was meant  to   represent  the   one   hundred "most  important" Canadian novels. Even  this is of course vague. And Ross displays some  very careful footwork  in  maintain­ ing this vagueness. In  the letter  which  he sent  to  the  various  critics  and   teachers who  voted  on  the  list, the  purpose  must  be  ascertained  by  inference rather than directly:

It will  be  the  aim   of  the  Conference to examine   the   diversity,   quality   and   avail­ ability   of   appropriate  texts   of   Canadian


93

BOOKS IN REVIEW



novels   for   use   in   the   classroom  and    for scholarly research. It is also  hoped   tha_t the Conference will  be  able  to  propose a  hst  of significant Canadian  novels  that can   serve as a guide to  those  interested in  the master­ works  of  our  literary tradition.

There is  no  more   explicit   statement  of the criteria to be  used  in voting.
One   need  not  be  a social  scientist  to
recognize  that  t:llere is an inadequate test­ ing mechanism employed  here. The sub­ jects  didn't really  know  what  they  were deciding. And we, as assessors of 'the pub­ lished  data, are  given  little sense of who the subjects were and  how many  of them there  were.  How  would you judge  a  test which  took  an  arbitrary  number of peo· ple,  chosen   in  some  unstated  way,  and asked  them  to put  various  items  into  an order  from  most  to  least,  although most and  least  what  is  not  exactly  explained.
I suppose the List has some redeeming value. Although I had not been at ·the conference   I  was  asked   to  appear  on local radio' to comment. In  the five years since  I have  not  been  asked again  to talk about   literature. We  should   thank  any­ thing  ·that  makes  Canlit hot  news.  Still, Taking  Stock shows that  the List was only a part  of what  was going on, a symptom of a larger  condition.
As W.  J. Keith points  out  towards  the
end  of ·the  book,  the  first  words  of  the
conference, spoken  by Robert Kroetsch, were,  "F.  R.  Leavis." Kroetsch's subject was "Contemporary Standards in the Ca­ nadian Novel," but  wi·thin this there was an  awareness that in ·smne  way  the  con­ ference was engaged on a Leavisite quest: what  is Canada's great  tradition? In the appendix,  Charles   Steele   refers   to   the "attempt to define" a "corpus of novels." The  programme  mentioned four  confer­  ence  objectives  and  concluded: "The fi­ nal  result   will  be   the  identification  of those novels which  have established them­  selves as Canadian  classics."
Do  you  trust  all  this?  My  immediate


94
 reaction is like  that mentioned in Kroetsch's paper: "Let each  reader read everything and  decide -if  he  or she  be­ lieves in  that  kind  of decision." But  then he decides that  "one  of the ways in which  we  build   a  culture  is  by  selecting  and  elaborating a few  texts."
I  think  Kroetsch should  have  stuck  to his  original  guns.   My  argument  is  the simple  one  of cultural relativism. Best in one  time,  in  one  place,  is only  good  in another, mediocre in a third, and  perhaps bad  in a fourth. The example often  used by art  historians is Whistler. Prices fr paintings have  gone  up and  down  llke a yo-yo, according to prevailing tastes.
Barry  Cameron's response  to Kroetsch
begins to address this problem but in a complex terminology and  through a se ­ ies of allusions to critics  that  obscure  h1s message.  One point   which   he  makes  is that  if we could  only agree  on a criterion for  evaluation then  at  least  for  our  time and   our   place   we  could   make  our   list. Although   he   would    not    support  ·the choice   himself,    he   suggests   a   possible yardstick  might be the degree  of national consciousness.
Very good.  But could  we expect any agreement even  on  this  ground? I  pre­ sume   that   national  consciousness  would be  a  major part of  the  evaluation  pro­  cedures  employed  by  Margaret Atwood and  Robin Mathews. But would their lists be  the  same?   Would  not  each   have   a number of  inclusions and  exdusions with which   the  other could   not   agree?  My implied  answer is obviously  yes, because  even  our  nationalisms are  of very  differ­  ent   orders.  And   even   if  they   weren't, could any  of us set  up  our  personal eval­ uative  computers to deflect criteria which are  not  nationalist, such  as  our  opinions on socialism,  feminism, or conuna faults?
Everyone at  the  conference wished  to assert that  the List was not meant to be anything other than a  sta11ting place  for dialogue. A comment in  Hallvard Dahl-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ie's introduction suggests  the larger prob­ lem,  however: "requests for  the  list kept coming   in  from   all  across  Canada and from  overseas   long  after  the  immediate furor  of the  occasion had  died  down." It would   be  nice  to  assume  that   this   just reflected  an international need  for Cana­ dian  conversation-starters, but  I suspect the  purpose was much  more  precise.
Ever    since   Survival   was   published, most  academics have  fulminated against it. This  is not  because  it is a bad  book but because   of  its  effect  on  education.  At­ wood's choice  of writers  to consider in her study  was idiosyncratic but  no more than  most. But many  teachers, who knew noth­ ing  about Canadian  literature but  were asked  to  teach  a  course  in  it,  used  Sur­  vival as their sole source  for text selection  and,  often,  for  interpretation. I  suspect all  university  teachers have   observed   at least some of the pernicious effects of this praotice.
I think  this list will be used in a similar manner. And  the short  list from  the con­ ference, meant to  be  the  ten  best  Cana­ dian  novels, is probably a still greater evil, especially  outside Canada. As a student of Commonwealth literature  I   have   often  been  asked  by teachers in other countries to suggest  texts  for  a  Canadian literature course. Usually .these teachers have known  little   about  the  subject  but   have   been operating out  of  Survival. Now  the Tak­ ing Stock  list might replace it, but I don't think  to much benefit.
One  obvious   problem  for   this  latter group  is the absence of an  indigenous perspective. The average Australian  aca­ demic   knows  more   about Canada  than  we  know  about  Australia but  that  isn't  saying   much. If he  asks,  the  Canadian High   Commission  will  supply  him  with some  material, but  it  probably  won't be much  more  than Survival and  perhaps a bit of Creighton to  brush  up the  history.  To  speak  from   personal  experience, my sense  of  'the  corpus   of  Australian litera-
 ture was changed greatly by living in Australia.  And   I  can   think   of  no  Aus tralian  list   of  the   great   works   which would in any way replace my personal hierarchy. I think  a foreigner would  find the same with Taking Stock.
The  list   also   raises   other   ques:tions about  insiders  and  outsiders in  the  ques­ tion of regionalism. Without knowing the selection  procedures for   the  voters  it  is impossible  to assess whether  the  Atlantic novelists  were  fairly  treated. Can  Upper Canadians and   Westerners  evaluate our literature?
But this is a small  quibble in compari­ son  to  the  treatment of  another region,  Quebec. Various respondents at  the con­  ference  attempted  to  deal  with   our   bi­ cultural problem but with  little success. Ronald Sutherland provides a  very  per­ sonal   impression  of   the   two   heritages which  is quite   compelling, but  it  leaves me   with   only   a   vague   wish   that    we all  could   have   Sutherland's  profoundly French-Scottish  background.   I  suspect  that   my  own  is  much   more  representa­ tive:  no French relatives; the first FrancO>­ phone   I  ever  met  was  my  Grade  Nine French teacher, and  she was  from  Paris. Thus, from my perspective, when Suther­ land  claims  that  Leonard Cohen is much closer  to Jacques Godbout than  to  Fred­ erick   Philip   Grove   I  say  yes,  but   he's much   closer   to   the   American  Hubert Selby than  to either. And  what  does  that  do for  the  Canadian cause?
The  point  must  be that   they may  both be part  of one country but  French and English  Canadian literatures are  of  two cultures. Yves Theriault speaks  of  the Calgary conference as "foreign" and one need  not  be  a  separatist to  observe  that for a Francophone it must  have  been. Someone   like  Sutherland  cannot   over­ come  this foreignness anymore than Bha­  rati  Mukherjee can  make  Canada seem like India.
'!be  list  certainly  brings   this   home.


95

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Titles  of French novels are  listed in  Eng­ lish  translation. There are  only  nineteen French  works  included  but  of   these  six are  by Gabrielle Roy,  the  English  Cana­ dian's favourite French  Canadian. A few more ·difficult figures are included: Aquin appears once,  in  fifty-fomth place,  with Prochain Episode  (untranslatable?), and Godbout's The   Knife   on  the  Table   is Number Ninety-five.  Still, there  are many obvious  exclusions,  such  as  Victor-Levy Beaulieu. Sutherland refers to  him  twice but he was nat even included on the preliminary ballot.
At  the end  of the  conference there ap­ pears to have  been some discussion  of  this inadequacy.  The   result   was  a  call   for more   translations and  for  more  French instruction in  the  schools,  but  such  ex­ pressions   of  concern  don't   get   to   the heart   of  things.  When  will  people  Jearn that  with  the very few exceptions of peo­ ple  like  Sutherland,  we lack  the  knowl­ edge or awareness to pronounce upon  two cultures?  My  comments here  show  .that I am not attracted to any list but I would find  it  much   more   acceptable if  it  had been   left   as  an   English-Canadian   list. Perhaps if enough people  realize  that  an admission   that   we  are   too  ignorant to judge  Quebec literature is nat  part  of a separatist plot,  those involved  in Quebec literature might cease to regard  us as patronizing.
Which  leads   to  the  value   of  Taking Stock.   I  have   just   become   emotional about Canadian literary politics.  I doubt
that    there    is  much  knowledge  to   be gained from the volume but most of the typical  opinions are  there-often,  as in the case of Sutherland, expressed  by their leading supporters. We have covered evaluation and  the  French-English split. There are  other sections  on  regionalism and thematic criticism.
Neither of these stir my soul the way evaluation and  biculturalism do but for others  there  might  be enough  to get them


g6
 heated up. Eli Mandel gives a careful elucidatiton of  what  regionalism might be. Frank Watt continues this  argument and   then  suggests  that   Canadian  litera­ ture  is  becoming more  concerned  about the   regions,   rather   than   "Toronto,  or Montreal, or Ottawa, or ... some equally  non-distinctive  place."  Rudy  Wiebe   re­ plies  that  "either  there   is  only  regional  literature or there  is none at all. ... There is  only   the individual  writer's imagina­ tion...." I   am   inclined  to  support Wiebe's   view  in  that   each   writer   must define  the particular in order  to reach  the universal.  It may   seem   that  Bay  and Bloo·r or  Oxford Circus   are  less regions than  Joe  Batts  Arm,  Newfoundland, but
I  suspect   that this  is  in  the  eye  of  the
beholder.
W. J. Keith upholds  the  banner of the
anti-thematic critic, but he  tends  to wan­
der  into  thematic criticism ·himself, which is nat  surprising. It is difficult  to see how the most phenomenologically hermeneutic semioticist could avoid  themes. The damn little   things   worm   their   way  in  every­ where.  As to Keith's support for  evalua­ tion,  I  think  I have  diatribed  enough  on that.
Still,  the  context of Keith's call for evaluation creates an  interesting subtext: "I first studied English  at  Cambridge and therefore came  under the  influence of evaluative criticism at  what  some  might call an impressionable age." Thus through Keith  a   decidedly  British   approach   is subtly   applied  to   Canadian  literature. This might  be compared with Warren Tallman's comments: "Continental  Fly­ ing  Object kept  pace,  black  hole  in  the middle.  But   this  same   1950-time,  that  Author-ship arrived at  California in  the West,  it  also  arrived  at  Canada in  the North."  Tallman's   Americanization  of Canlit is about as  subtle  as one  of John Wayne's battlecries. Cambridge tea-party meets  Iwo  Jima on  corpse  of  Canadian beaver.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



But to be fair  to Keith, his central con­ cern  seems a very worthy one,  a d ire focus on the individual texts, to overcome a tendency in our  search  for general pat­  terns   in  which   various  thematic forests obscure the   view  of   the   trees.  He  also states  that  we should  look  only  at  "first­  rate" texts  because  that   is  all  we  have  time  for.  He  seems  to  reject  the  value  of the kind of thing done in Survival or The Bush  Garden or  the  various works of his three  respondents, D.  G.  Jones,   Laurie Ricou,   and   John  Moss.  But   the   point should  be  made   that   all  literature, and  this most  definitely includes the  most  in­ ferior,  is part  of a  number of larger cul­ tures,   and   those   cultures  form   various  patterns. Jones  states  that   he  sees  larger  patterns and  if he sees them  he shall study them.
Ricou's comments are  entertaining and sententious but  I  think  they  are  also per­ haps   the  most  important  ones  made at the  conference, in  that   they   provide   a necessary  corrective. The tendency of the conference, perhaps shaped by that  amor­ phous  corpus,  is to be prescriptive: what  is and  what  isn't, what should  be included and  what  shouldn't be.  Ricou   is specifi­ cally attacking Keith's anti-thematic criti­ cism  criticism for  its  tendency to  use its own  bete  noire,   the  Procrustean bed,  to attack  those  whom   Keith views  as  the­ matic and   thus   Procrustean  themselves.  Ricou's reply might  be metaphorically ex­ pressed as "let  a thousand flowers bloom." Which   is  my   final   reaction  as  well. There is little  information  to  be  gained from  Taking  Stock   and  at  least  some  of i:t is  mis-information  (Elspeth  Cameron claims  ahistorically  that   "the  notion   of two  cultures originates with  Hugh  Mac­ Lennan's   phrase   'two   solitudes' ..."). But   there   is  a  good   deal   of   energetic debate, which  can stimulate the reader as much  as it  obviously  stimulated  the  par­  ticipants. Still,  it  is difficult  not  to  con­ clude  that  the  whole  idea  of  the  confer-
 ence was essentially  wrong-headed. We might finish with one more glance at that name  which  opened everything. Is  there any  Canadian critic with  so little  fear  of Marley's ghost  that  he  would  create our own  Leavis, even  a collective one?

TERRY GOLDIE


LETTER TO THE AUTHORS

ANDRE  BROCHU   lit   GILLES   MARCOTTE,  La  Lit­
terature et  le reste.  Quinze, n.p.

DEAR  ANDRE    BROCHU   and   Gilles  Mar­
cotte:
In your recent  book, a collaborative venture, I  was  pleased   to  overhear your conversation about  the  theory  and  phi­ losophies of criticism  which  have  shaped
your earlier  works  of practical criticism:
L'Instance critique  and  Le Roman a l'im­
parfait. Through your  charges  and coun­
terchargI have   learned  much   about
your ambitions for a "national" critical tradition in  Quebec  (a   Parisian suburb in your view, Marcotte, which  has yet to produce a great  critic  with  an original theory). Now it is my turn  to hit  the ball into your court. With  two racquets against my one the rally will be short, but this extended   play  will  enlarge  the  perspec­ tives on  the game.  As you can see, I am both  echoing  the  tone  of  your  book  and  adopting your game  metaphor.
'These allusions  you make-to hockey,
baseball,   football -do more   than   de­ scribe   the   alternations and   oppositions which  govern  this exchange of  letters  be­ tween May 1978 and October 1979. They  constitute a  large  part of  that   "all   the rest"   mentioned   in   your   title.   Indeed, reading that  and  your  opening sally  on the   Stanley    Cup   Playoffs,    Brochu,    I thought I would  be  reading phenomeno­ logical  criticism  which   would  articulate the  process wh reby


97

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



being  as the  world  is rediscovered  in  the perceiver-the   sort   of   open   criticism where  the material circmnstances of one's life  are   recorded  in  what   become   ex­ tended   documentaries of  one's  reading. Process I found, but  not  document. The conversational format of  your letters does maintain an  open  dialogic  form,  as  ad­  vocated   by  Bakhtin to  whom  you  refer frequently, and  your  questioning-espe­ cially your probing, Marcotte, of Brochu's reading of  La N ausee, launched with  an "And  so what?" -becomes an  intersub­ jective  reading, your  coming  together in the work, recorded in conversation. How­ ever, your letters are  not really about "the relation between   writing  and  living,"  as Marthe Robert (to  whom  you also refer frequently) writes,  but about  writing  and philosophy. Nor  are  they as disjointed as her  diary   form,  but  retain  •the shape  of the academic essay.
Another metaphor might more aptly re­ flect   the  aim   of  your   bOQk, a  musical analogy. For  music's  formal properties of repetition-polyphony, theme and varia­ tion,  canon,  fugue -would convey  the interlocking  features of  your  book  more  precisely   than  does   the   game   analogy  which  is  based on  opposition and  aggres­ sion. Moreover, it  would  more  fully mir­  ror   what  was  for   me  the   book's  most compelling feature, namely  the  elegance of its sustained conversation-witty, eru­ dite,  provocative. As you  avow,  Brochu,  the art  of dialogue is a difficult one, little practised today, at  least in the university,  as is corroborated by you, Marcotte, with your  description of  a  university  confer­  ence,  "by  definition  a  tower  of  Babel."  Your   letters,  however, create  this   rare  phenomenon. Perhaps your conversations are  so stylish  (your sports metaphor does encourage  you  to  discuss  hits  and  misses and   to  underline  those   moments  when dialogue  is  refused)  because   you  both write fiction.  Or  it may be the inheritance of the legendary conversations in the bril-


g8
 liant intellectual community of Montreal in the  1940's and  195o's which  your compeer, Jean  Ethier-Blais, has  talked about. While  it  is clear  that  your  letters do  not   get   involved   with   the   material realities of  living,  they  do  reflect  on  the relations  between   reading  and   writing. And  here  they follow a direction charted in  France which  makes  criticism "strong writing" like fiction,  writing which aban­ dons   the   paraphrase and   quotation  of traditional  criticism for  the  less  marked allusions and  common  topoi  of  creative writing in  the  manner  of  Blanchot and Barthes, whose names you mention in an­  other context. Both  of you  seem  to  have such  a project in mind.  For  you, Brochu, dream of writing either a free essay which would   be  the  story  of  your  intellectual formation outlining the impact of ideolo­  gies  on  your development (a processual hermeneutic)  or  of  writing "a total book,"   one   where   a  new  relation  with reality  based  on  Quebecois reasoning would  be conveyed  through writing. For you too, Marcotte, through your link with journalism, personal writing is to be pre­ ferred to  distant and  objective  academic criticism.
IThe  personal note  is  most  obvious  in the rhythm of your letters.  Prolific during summer holidays,   the  letters  come  more slowly  during ·the academic term.  Then, too,   they   become   less  speculative and theoretical, more   practical,  culminating in your extended exchange over  Brochu's semiotic analysis  of  Sartre's La  Nausee, the  most  conventional part of your  book, the  most  rigorous   analysis  and   the  only example of  close  reading.   he introduces more  fragmentation,  jottings, more  doubt, especially  for  you,  Brochu, as the  New Jersey  sun  induces unwanted indolence of thought. The New  England sun  agrees  better with  you, Marcotte, in­ citing   you  to  a declaration of  pluralism and  fondness for  anglo-saxon critical ap­  proaches, notably the  work  of  Auerbach

BOOKS IN  REVffiW



and   Northrop Frye.  Not   the  theoretical Frye,   you   make   clear,  but   "the   well­ tempered critic"  who   writes  The   Bush Garden, criticism intent  on  making  the fine discriminations  between literary works  which  you  feel  are  central to  the critical act,  not   the  construction of  an autonomous system of  words. Your  broad  North American sympathies-expressed, as you say, more easily  in  Maine than  in Montreal-lead you to reject  a narrowly  nationalistic   criticism  to   express   Que­ becois  reasoning. American criticism  ex­ ists,  you  write,   because   there   are  great critics  in   that   country. Frye's   example shows that  critical skills grow  from study­ ing  the great  writers about  whom a criti­  cal  tradition has developed which obliges one  to 'take a position, make that  leap  to originality, and   not  from  close  attention to   one's   own   minor   literature.  Conse­ quently,  you  hesitantly suggest   that   the teaching of  Quebec literature be reserved for  doctoral  studies  after   students have cut their  critical teeth. Your  reflection  on "minus Quebec" is one which  finds many echoes  in  English   Canada where   recent issues of  periodicals such  as "Minus  Ca­ nadian" (Studies in Canadian Literature,
1977)  and "Beyond Nationalism (Mosaic, rg81)   indicate a similar concern for  lit­ erature qua literature with  no attempt to find  a national specificity.  Still, from out­ side Quebec your depression about critical activity  in  the  province seems  somewhat exaggerated. There  are  many cri·tics who offer  interesting readings within an  elab­ orated  theory-critics	such   as   Jean­ Charles Falardeau,  Gerard Bessette,  Su­ zanne Lamy. But then  it may be that their sociological,  psychological,  and   feminist perspectives  are   too  "absolute," too  di­  vorced  from "reality" for your  taste. This  would  mean  your  position diverges  from that   of   "minus  Canadian,"  because   it would  inject  more   rigorous  theory  into  the perception of the  literary ·text, would divorce  it more  from  its context.
 Your  critical  stance, Marcotte, is  dic­ tated   by  more   than   geography,  having deep   personal   roots   in  your  politics­ your federalism -and in your experience as  a  journalist, your  interest   in  literary
''facts." You  find  few  barriers  between
the   language  of   literary  criticism   and that   of  social  science; you  move  easily between  the  personal criticism  of creative writers   and   the  explicative  criticism   of coincidence and  complicity   practised   by journalists.  For  you,  the  question  of  the function of criticism  is not  as anguishing as  it  is for  your  colleague Brochu, who dreams of an  autonomous criticism,  one which   will  be  a  philosophical absolute, yielding  an  "infinity of meaning." Jesuit trained, Brochu, as  you  remind   us,  you hope  to find  in  literature a  replacement for  religion,   criticism   becoming secular scripture, popular  philosophy. Philosophy thinks  lived reality,  literature expresses it. As you  see  it,  literature's  function is  to question the  formulation of  meaning in contemporary t:hought,  the  work  putting knowledge  into  question even  as it is  in­ terrogated by  knowledge. Criticism  then  is mediation between  two  fields,  between art  and  knowledge which  relate  to  two kinds  of  trut:h,  subjective  and  objective. In  this  perspective,  literature has  an  or­  dering function,  giving   meaning  to  the gestures  and  language we use. From  this position, Brochu, you challenge Marcotte to  make  more   precise   the   ideology   of mimesis  underpinning literary sociology. Your   "railing  against  pluralism,"  your hunger  for  the  absolute, Brochu,   which launches these fast balls at Marcotte's bat, are  also issues of  personality and  history. You  and  the   ot:her  young  Turks of  the Parti   Pris  group would  seem  to  be  new "clercs,"  for   your   literary  nationalism would  seem to be as theological as that  of the  Abbe Casgrain, though your  absolute is now  a faceless  one.  And  ironically, it is your  approach to literature as a source of  meaning that   most  resembles  that  of


99

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the  "internationally" famous   Frye.  Un­ like him,  however, you leave  behind  the texts  to harp on  that  infinity,  that  pleni­  tude  of meaning you hope  to reach.  And almost  lost me as a reader  in  the process. Fortunately your articulation of your exis­ tential   malaise  through   the  reading of Sartre  opened the   dialogue  with    the reader  again. There were some other  nug­ gets  you  offered  along   the  way  in  com­ pensation, like your  formulation of Que­ bec literary  history   in   light   of  Jakob­ son's functions-the novel having  moved through descriptive, representational function, to the expressive  function in the sixties and  on to  the  metalinguistic  func­ tion of the present. Still I was left hunting for "the pleasures  of the text" which seem to be adumbrated only in their absence.
As you can see, I was more attracted to your  pluralism, Marcotte. For  one thing,  it  has  permitted  the  emergence  of   my feminist  readings of texts. However, I am equally  concerned with the  text  as a pro­ ducer  of meaning.  While  I am  thankful to you for sharpening the distinctions be­ tween   and   dramatizing  these  different positions,  it  seems  to me  tha;t the  oppo­ sition  between   them  is a  false  one.  Both critical theories  and   textual  analysis  are  necessary, and  as I wrote in another letter  last  week,  theory   needs  to  be  related   to specific texts.
There are  broader implications to this, generational ones.  Your  cry  forr theory, Brochu,  is being  raised  by critics  of your generation in  English  Canada for  whom literature  has   an    epistemological and metaphysical function. Yet  while  there  is an attraction to French critical theory  in which  the word  is the absolute  signifier or which  wishes to decentre this word  from its primacy-still  within  a  philosophical system -there is also a general  resistance to a flight  into  the  empyrean of  abstrac­ tion,  a desire  to  retain   contact  with  the concreteness of all those details and  facts  that delight you, Marcotte.


100
 Your  letters point  out  the  truth of Jacques Ferron's description of Montreal as  the  halfway  point   between   Belgium and  Kentucky. They clearly  indicate the implications of  the  decisions  to be  made between    two   critical  positions,  though your  geographical metaphors obscure  the fact  that  these  are  more  general issues of contemporary critical theory,  not  unique to Quebec. I should  like to  thank  you for having so lucidly  and  wittily disentangled the  issues in  this  critical  problem.
Sincerely,  BARBARA  GODARD

IN CONYERSATION
JEAN  ROYER, Ecrivains   contemporains.  Entre­
tiens 1:  1976-1979. Editions de  l'Hexagone,
$12.50·
THE EPIGRAPH TO Jean Royer's collection of interviews with  thirty contemporary writers indicates the perspective that  is central to the  book's success:
Tout livre a  pour referent general, non  pas un  sujet, mais   un  moment historique ou  se croisent Ia biographie de  son  auteur et  I'etat de  Ia  societe. La  biographie et I'etat social
communiquent en  permanence a travers  Ia
culture et I'information.
(Bernard  Noel, L'Outrage aux  mots)
With  a couple of exceptions such  as Julio Cortazar and Milan Kundera, the writers represented  in   Ecrivains  contemporains are  francophone, and  al.though  writers of Quebec dominate more  than half  the book, ·their  views are  usefully  placed  be­ side comments from  writers responding to particular  cultural   contexts  in   Algeria, France,   Czechoslovakia,   Belgium,    and Argentina.
Since   most   of   the   conversations   re­
corded here were  first published in either Le  Devoir   or  Estuaire, their   focus  and format vary considerably according to the occasion  for   Royer's contact  with   the writer. Thus we  meet  Antonine Maillet just  after her  return from  accepting the Prix Goncourt for Pelagie-la charette encounter several  of the writers from out-



WEST COAST
REVIEW














a quarterly magazine of the arts featuring: reviews, drama, music, essays, drawings, photographs, fiction, poetry

For seventeen years,
the West Coast Review has published original creative works by new Canadian artists.

Today,  we invite you to subscribe.

SUBSCRIPTION  RATES
Patron $500. Sponsor $100. Donor $30.
Regular subscription  (one year), $12. Single copy, $3.50
Foreign subscriptions including USA (one year), $15. Single copy outside Canada, $4.lnstitutions, $16.
Mail subscriptions, correspondence, and manuscripts to: The Editor, West Coast Review
c Io The English Dept. Simon Fraser University
Burnaby, B.C.  Canada   V5A 1S6

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



side  Canada during their  attendance at international   writers'  conferences  orga­ nized in Montreal by Liberte. Each inter­ view  is preceded by  a  brief  formal bio­ bibliographical introduction,  but  only  a few conversations are  recorded  as formal  questions and ·answers.  More  conunonly, Royer  replaces  his  own  conunents and questions with  brief  bridging statements, thereby    permitting  his   subjects'   views their  deserved  prominence. On  those  oc­ casions  when   he   does  present   his  own impressions, Royer  emerges  as enthusiast rather than sycophant despite the fervour  with   which   he  plays  tribute  to  Gaston  Miron as the  guiding spirit  of  Quebecois poetry  during the  past  twenty-five  years and  argues  in  the  book's final  interview that   Claire   Lejeune's  L'Atelier   is  "un
livre  essentiel  a Ia vie de ce siecle."
ust as he relieves  the most sterile con­
ventions  of  the  formal  interview with  his
interspersed conunents, Royer  also avoids the  rigidity   of  either  alphabetical or chronological structure. Instead, the con­ versations are arranged so that each inter­ view  takes  up  issues introduced  in  those preceding  while   also   introducing  new topics  which  may  be  developed   later  in the  book. Given  that  the interviews  were conducted without any such preconceived pattern in  mind, the  recurring topics  are clearly  those of  greatest  interest  and  con­ cern  to Royer. But at no point is a writer's individual achievement overshadowed by the  discussion  of  his  or  her  work  in  the context of  particular aspects  of  contem­ porary  poetics  and  politics.
·Perhaps the best example of Royer's success in  arranging the  interviews emerges in the placing of the conversation with Antonine Maillet beside those with Pierre  Jakez Helias  and  Pierre  Perrault; each of these discussions presents individ­ ual  perspectives on  the  relation  of  oral and   literary   expression  and  on  the  role of the  writer in  bridging  traditional and metropolitan cultures. Maillet  insists that


102
 the  importance of the  Prix  Goncourt lies in  the  respect  that  it  may  confer on  the language and  people  of Acadia:

je suis  plus  petite que  mes  personnages:  ils ont  ete faits par   trois  cent   soixante-quinze
ans  d'histoire. J'ai ete tributaire de  ces  per­ sonnages que  j'ai   rendus au   monde.  Mais  d'autres les ont  faits  avec  moi.

Pierre  Jakez  Helias sees his  role  in  rela­ tion  to  the  people  of  Britanny in similar terms:  "je   suis  un  temoigneur.  C'est-a­ dire   un  temoin   actif." With  the  chron­ icles of Le Cheval  d'orgueil, Helias intro­ duced  an  almost  forgotten  culture to the French public; he  attributes  part  of  the best-seller   status  of    the   book   to   "une sorte de nostalgie  des origines  paysannes," a  phenomenon not  unrelated to  the  suc­ cess of  Maillet's  book ·two years later.  As film-maker and  poet,  Pierre  Perrault re­ sponds  to  and  presents the  people  of Ile­  aux-Coudres  and  Charlevoix as embodi­ ments  of a vital cultural alternative to the metropolitanism  of  contemporary  Que­ bec. While Maillet stresses the importance of Acadian culture as a gift enabling her to communicate her  personal  vision, Per­  rault   stresses   the   public   aspect   of   the writer's role:   "Notre  realite n'avait  pas ete  imaginee.... J'ai  pour   fonction   de dire l'interieur du sentiment collectif  que­  hecois avec  les outils  de  sa vie."
Part  of the impact of these initial inter­ views  may  stem  from   those  with  Helias and  Perrault being  twice  as long as most later   selections.   Yet   the   book   gains   a cumulative interest as the later conversa­ tions  move  to  other  topics  while  main­ taining a focus on  questions  of language, expression  and  the writer's role. Reacting to the idea of a feminist elite, Marie Car­ dinal  insists  on  acknowledgement of  "Ia femme  Ia plus enfoncee dans Ia boue, celle qui  ne sait meme  pas  qu'elle  existe"  and  sees  her  own  role  as  "leur  donner des mots comme  des annes." Having seen her account of her five years as a Parisian prostitute  become   a   best-seller,   Jeanne

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Cordelier's  reflections on  that   book  and its significance in  her  own  life  appropri­ ately  follow  the  Cardinal  interview even as  they  anticipate later  explorations  of sexuality and  psychoanalysis.  Rachid Borudjedra's  insights regarding  the  colo­ nizing power of language in  Algeria  pre­  cede  and   provide a  context for  Jacques Ferron's assertion   that
le bilinguisme n'est  pas fonctionnel. On  peut avoir une  langue qui  n'a pas  d'tkriture  avec un  langue de  civilisation, mais  pas  deux langues aussi  voisines  que  I'anglais et  le fran<;ais,  qui   ont   le  meme   bibliotheque!

As Gaston Miron and  Pierre Vallieres re­ state their  views on  the  political achieve­ ments  and    responsibility  of    the  writer  within   Quebec society  during   the   past quarter-century, their  arguments assume fresh interest by being placed  beside those of two writers in exile, Julio Cortazar and  Milan Kundera.  "L'ecrivain  populaire" serves as an introductory title to the inter­ view with Claude Jasmin but  the conver­ sations  with  Yves  Theriault and  Jacques Poulin reflect  the  same focus  in revealing the  writer  at  work.  In the  latter part  of the book,  the interview with  Victor-Levy Beaulieu introduces several personal med­ itations on  poetry, silence  and  solitude  as he  argues that   the  writer no  longer  has any  social  role  in  contemporary society:
''J'ecris parce qu'il   n'ya  pas  de  solution. S'il y avait des solutions, je ferais autre chose."   Beaulieu's  successors   move   to­ wards   'their   own   conclusions,   and,   as throughout the  book,  their  views  stimu­  late  interest and  questions, both  indepen­ dently  and  in  the  context  of other points of view.
The end-papers of  Ecrivains  contem­ porains announce a  forthcoming second volume   presenting   interviews  of   r 979-
I 982. The attractive format and  careful
editing evident here, supporting Royer's informed skills as an interviewer, should ensure the success of both  collections.
LESLIE MONKMAN
 THE GELINAS REVIEWS

GRATIEN  GELINAS,   Les  Fridolinades, 1941   et
1942, 1943 et 1944.  2  vols.,  Quinze, $14.95
ea.

DuRING THE YEARS  1938-I946, the  high­ light  of  the   French-Canadian  dramatic season  was  Gratien  Gelinas'  annual re­ view  of his  newly  industrialized, urban­ ized, and Americanized society. An enter­ taining   mixture  of   drama,  song,   and dance,  the shows were a tremendous suc­ cess with  audiences and  critics  alike.  Ac­ claimed  by journalists of all ideological persuasions,  they  also  played  to sold-out (I ,400-seat)   houses  for  five  consecutive months  of every  year.  Despite their  suc­ cess, the  shows  were  still  considered  ex­ amples of local,  popular culture, thus not sufficiently universal and literary to merit  having  their  scripts published.
Fortunately Gelinas kept  his work,  de­
ciding  in  I 980 'that  the  time  had  finally come  to  publish   it.  He  is  releasing   the scripts in stages and  in reverse chronologi­ cal order. The middle years of the review, presented  in the second  and  third  volume  of scripts, are  the subjects of  this critique. The last years of 'the review were  printed in the inaugural volume, while the earliest  years should  be appearing soon in the ser­ ies' final volume.
The  scripts  make  worthwhile reading, for even by today's standards they  are entertaining,  moving,  well-written  thea­ tre.  Perhaps their  most surprising quality is their apparent modernity. Although the middle reviews  are  set  against the  back­  drop of World  War  II and  the Canadian war  effort,   their  specific  subjects-the industrial  exploitation and   political   im­ potence  of  French-Canadians, the  frus­ trating  search  for  love  and  happiness in economically disadvantaged  milieux,  and the limited roles open to working-class women -are   those   typically   associated with  "modem" or  post-rg6o's Quebec theatre.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



:In fact,  Gelinas' texts often  bear strik­ ing  resemblance to the  works  of  authors who  defined   .the  characteristics   of  this stage. For example, his realistic plays pre­ sent  a picture of  the  French-Canadian, working-class family  whioh is familiar to all   readers  of   Michel  Tremblay.  The suite of plays "Les  Miserables ou Ia jour­ nee  d'un  perron de  porte" (I 942)'  "Le  Mariage d'Aurore" (I943), and  "Ils  fu­ rent  heureux" ( I944)  occur  in  two  (by now  classic)   locales: the  communal en­ trance-cum-veranda of a multi-family dwelling in Montreal's East End, and  one family's kitchen. The first  is  the  setting for  the  standard scenes of  French-Cana­ dian  tribal  life, while  the second, enclosed and  female space  is reserved  for  the  req­ uisite  intimate disclosures  about  love and marriage.
All the stock characters appear on these
stages. There are the older women, caught in  an  unending cycle of debts,  pregnan­ cies, and  recriminations, who seek  to es­ cape  their  frustrations in quiz and  bingo games.    Then   there   are   the    younger women,  for  whom  the dawn  of a new life never   comes   as  the  fortunes   gained   in working   at   the  munitions  plants  are  as quickly spent on ephemeral pleasures  and fancy  men.  As  for  the  fathers and  hus­ bands,  they  know  themselves  to  be  "ne  pour  un petit pain.'' Even with  their high war-·time   salaries,   they   cannot  provide their  women with  the necessary comforts. Already  they are  taking  to drink  and los­ ing  themselves in  fantasies   about  story­ book  heroes.  Only  the  lighter,  less  unre­ lievedly   tragic   tone  of  Gelinas' realistic  works,  which  were  written after  all  at  a time  when  the  urban condition was still new, differentiates them  from  their  mod­ em counterparts.
Gelinas also writes satirical  works about French-Canadian history and  the contem­ porary  political    scene   which   bring   to mind  the "nouveau theatre" of dramatists like Jean-Claude Germain. The sequences


104
 "La Legende d'un  peuple" ( 1941),  "La V·eritable  Fondation   de    Montreal" ( I942), and  "Le Defile du  Tricentenaire"
( I 942 )   are  as  wild  a mix  of  disparate dramatic genres  and  styles  as any  found on the contemporary stage. While  the first is a loose parody of Louis  F11echette's no­ ble  epic,  the  second  a re-creation  of  his­
tory, and  the  third  a satiric  re-enactment of French-Canadian patriotic parades, all move  nonchalantly from  Brechtian songs to  comic  monologues to  naturalistic  ta­ bleaux    to   Busby   Berkeley   style   dance munbers.
The  general aim of all these works is to provide amusing, alternate interpretations of   important  events  which   reveal   the group and  class interests camouflaged  by the  official  versions.  For  example, in  the second  work a recognizably French-Cana­ dian  character  introduces  himself  as  the French director of a company of French actors, and announces that  they  were  the people  who really  founded Montreal. He then re-enacts the  story of how  they went to  the   king  for   their   passports  "et   de
!'argent americain" and   set  off  to  visit "les Sauvages de cet endroit, afin, primo: de les civiliser, secunda: de les depocher." The  resulting chronicle exposes  the  true mission   of  explorers, American  capital­ ists  and   French  artists   in   Canada. Al­ though Gelinas, who is writing during the years   of   wartime   censorship,  does   not badly    state   why   his   clerical-bourgeois elite  disguised  the real  aims of these  mis­ sions,   he  does   suggest   that   his  leaders  profit  politically from  their  actions.
Gelinas' reviews  share   one  final  simi­ larity  with  the  works  of Quebec's  "nou­ veau  theatre": they  are  composed  so as to encourage audience  participation in a theatrical event   which  seeks  to help   the public  free  itself  from  the  alienating ef­ fects  of reality.  In  Gelinas' shows, Frido­ lin is the character who defines the nature of the activity  to take place in the reviews and  who   teaches   the   audience  its  role.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Most people  remember Fridolin for his endearing personality and  his poignant monologues. A youthful precursor of  Tit­ Coq  and  Bousille,  Fridolin  captured the hearts of  French-Canadians  with  his ac­ counts of  the adventures and  sorrows had by a  young  boy  growing up  in  the  East End. But  Fridolin is not  just a  character in the reviews, he is also their  author and the master  of ceremonies.
Gelinas  called    his   reviews   "Fridoli­
nons," which  is the first person,  plural im­ perative  of  a  special   verb  invented   by Fridolin. "Fridoliner"  means  to  use lan­ guage to  create an  imaginary  world  in which French-Canadians could  recognize, mock  and  come  to terms  with  the  princi­  ples  of  their  existence. At  the  beginning of  each  production, Fridolin explains  the significance of  the  reviews'  title  when  he invites  the public  to join him in creating a world  in which  they can  deal  with  reality as they see fit, instead of simply  suffering it in silent  rage.  The shows'  record  at  the box office confirms  that  his invitation was regularly and  enthusiastically accepted.
Reading Les Fridolinades, the name under which  the  reviews  have  been  pub­ lished,  is a must  for  anyone interested in Canadian  theatre. Examples  of first-rate theatre from  our  past,  they show that the themes   and   forms  of   modern  Quebec theatre  do  indeed  have  historical ante­
cedents.
JOAN E. PAVELICH


ASKING TOO LITTLE

w.  o.   MITCHELL,  Dramatic  W. 0. Mitchell.
Macmillan, $19.95·

THE  FIVE     PLAYS   IN    THIS    ANTHOLOGY span  the six years in which  W. 0. Mitch­ ell's  reputation as  a  writer for  the  stage has  grown  in  Canada to  match  his posi­ tion  as a novelist  and  short story writer  of major importance. In his Introduction to the  volume  'the  author  offers  an  opinion
 that  ironically suggests why his reputation as a  playwright remains one  of size and not  stature, a situation this  book  is  not likely to ameliorate :

the  novelist  asks more  of his reader than the playwright does.  The  playwright invites his audience to  be  involved spectators  and  lis­ teners; a  novelist wants his  readers not  only to watch  and to listen but  to enter envelopes of  consciousness as  well,  giving  the illusion of   inner  dimension  belonging   to   humans alone.

While  disagreeing with  Mitchell's  assess­ ment  of the  central difference between  a novelist's and  playwright's intent, I never­  theless  acknowledge its   applicability  to the   difference  between   his  novels   and  plays. Although all  the  plays  in  this col­ lection  have  moments  of insight  and  in­  tensity, none develops a sustained illusion of inner  dimension for either the charac­ ters or the  worlds  they inhabit. Certainly Mitchell demonstrates here a strong  sense of  "the dramatic"; but  he  is as  yet  un­  able  to shape  this into  plays of unity  and  depth.  Thus, even  as the volume  suggests Mitchell's potential as a playwright, it reveals the  theatrical problems he has yet to solve.
The most obvious  of these is his inabil­ ity  to  create structures that  reveal   and  extend   the  ideological level  of  his work.  His  ear  for  language that  works  so con­  vincingly   in  his  radio  scripts   is  just  as strong  here.  But  quite  probably because  he  recognizes  that theatre demands more  than  authentic-sounding dialogue, he strives for the dramatic moment by utiliz­ ing the physical  languages of the stage  in ways  that   too  often   obfuscate  his  ideas. This  is most  evident in  The  Devil's  In­ strument,  the  first  play  in  the collection, in  which   Jacob  Schunk,  a  16-year-old Hutterite, breaks  away from his commu­ nity  after   being  condemned for  playing  a   mouth-organ.  Divided  into   28  short scenes, the play requires  a complex  audio­ visual  design  that  reads  like a screenplay

BOOKS IN  REVffiW



and  radio script  but  rarely like a work for the  theatre. Scene  five, for  example, is a "montage"   [sic] without dialogue "show­ ing ... the  colony awakening";  it follows a scene in which  Jacob and  his roommate Peter  toss in  their   sleep  as  an  elaborate sound  collage  reveals  their dreams. While both scenes suggest Mitchell's imaginative approach to the stage they ultimately con­ tribute  to  a  fragmented  progression   as theatrically  inappropriate as it  is impos­ sible.  Moreover, by vertiginously  cutting between   a  cafe,   a  horse-drawn   buggy, hillside,    bedroom,   kitchen,    strawstack, wool shed, etc., the scenes diffuse  the ten­ sion  and   drain  the  characterizations of depth.  The  conclusion in  which   Jacob hitches  a  ride  to the  city  is followed  by the   direction  "Jacob   Schunk   may  not know  it, but  this  is  victory. ..."  Unfor­ tunately, the  audience who  may  sense a victory  at this  moment-if  only  because an orchestra (presumably on tape)  begins a  "crashing   and  triumphant   finale" - also may  not  know  why. Form,  in  other  words,  obscures  content.
This book makes clear that Mitchell's difficulty  with  endings is a consistent structural problem. It is most  frustrating when, as in The  Black Bonspiel of Wullie M acCrimmon -probably  his most  pop­ ular  play to date-the playwright works with   a  clever   idea.   Here   Wullie  Mac­ Crimmon, a  harness and  shoemaker in the  foo,thills 'town  of  Wildrose,  strikes  a bargain with  0. Cloutie in which he gam­  bles his soul on  his curling team's  ability to defeat the Devil's  crew in a travesty  of a  bonspiel   that   is  meant  to  suggest  a black  mass and  a reworking of the  Faust  myth.   'J1he  premise   is  exhilarating  but Mitchell's  panoramic style  again   strains  theatrical   possibility   as  he   attempts  in Act   One   to   reveal   simultaneously  the Main Street of town  and  its various  shop interiors and  intermittently utilizes voice­ over   tape   sequences  to  suggest  Willie's reveries.  The play works  better  than  The


106
 Devil's Instrument only because Mitchell roots   the  action in  strong  characteriza­ tions and, in Act Two, restricts  the action  to  one   set   by   focusing  on   the   curling match.  Unfortunately the  theatrical effi­ cacy  of   this  is  at   odds  with   the   play's thematic purposes for it leaves unresolved the  subplots introduced in  Act  One. De­ veloping the  comedy and  tension  of  the bonspiel  Mitchell all but ignores  its moral dimension,  forfeiting  intellectual   depth  for superficial drama. By the  time Wullie curls  his  last  rock,  the  audience  should feel  that  more  than the  game  is at stake.  That W ullie  ends  the  victor  is  obvious; yet, as with  Jacob's victory,  the audience may not know  why.
Back to Beulah, the other play in this collection that suggests  Mitchell's  imagi­ native  approach to staging, also presents  structural problems even  though it is the most  tightly  focused  of  the  three. A taut  drama about three female occupants of a half-way house  for  the mentally diSiturbed who  kidnap  their  psychiatrist,  the  play challenges notions  of  mental illness  and  health by having the psychiatrist, Dr. An­ ders,  collapse  at  the  end  of  the  play.  To  dramatize the doctor's mental breakdown Mitchell introduces a voice-over  tape  and a  series  of  images  projected on  the  back wall of the set in the play's final moments. Pulling  out   all  the   theatrical  stops,  he once again works  the  scene  for  its fullest dramatic potential as the  psychiatrist ca­ reens  into  the  agitated  behaviour  of  ex­ treme   regression. Effective  in  itself,  the scene  is  jarringly  out  of  place  with   the naturalistic drama  of   character  conflict that has  preceded it. Moreover, it is both psychologically    naive   and    improbable. Straining for  effect,   Mitchell ironically weakens his complex study  of illusion  by transforming it into  a simplistic statement about delusion. As the lights fade  to black nobody wins in this play, least of all the audience for  whom   Mitchell's  point-of­ view has been  lost.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Opting for  oversimplification of  char­ acter  and theme is also the major problem  of  the  two  other plays  in  this  volume.  While  The  Kite  presents the  plays'  most fully  realized  character in  the  person  of Daddy  Sherry,  the   oldest   man   in   the world,  it  offers  li:ttle else,  its other char­ acters reduced to  either  types  or  carica­ tures  and  its  plot  left  all but  incidental. Although Daddy's  speech   is indubitably entertaining in  i·ts  anecdotal, feisty  fash­  ion,  it  can't  compensate  for   the   play's thread-bare  circumstance  in   which   the dramatic high-point is the flying of a kite. Any  possibility  for  creating an "inner di­ mension" is ignored here  as Mitchell asks the  audience merely  to  watch   and  listen as  the  garrulous, irreverent old  man  re­ counts his life and  reconsiders his decision to die. The anecdotal quality of  the  play also is typical  of For Those  in Peril on the Sea, Mitchell's most  recent  play  and  the  one  that   concludes the  collection.  Like Back to Beulah, this play depicts a group  of eccentric characters  living  in  a claus­ trophobic  atmosphere -in   this  case,  a boarding-house  that  Mitchell intends   to suggest a ship  lost at sea. Unlike Beulah, however,   For  Those  in  Peril substitutes stereotypes  for   characters  and   fails   to transcend the level of predictable confes­ sion. Although the focus shifts from a pre­ occupation with  one character to a more balanced exploration of the  group,  it of­ fers  little  insight   into  the  inner  conflicts of  communi·ty  that   Mitchell  presumably desires. The "envelopes of  consciousness" that  he locates  in  the novel  definitely  are lacking.  Of all the plays in this collection, this piece asks the least of the  reader (ex­ cept    patience)    and    suggests   that    for Mitchell to  improve as  a  playwright he must  first  believe  that his  audience can  and   will  accept  more   challenging  ma­  terial.
For  the  student or  teacher of drama,
this  volume   also  lacks  information that would  make  the  collection useful,  if  not
 its  for ·the plays  are  incomplete or  non­ existent.  Except for  the  brief notes by the satisfying. Cast  lists and  production cred­ author that   precede  each   play  and   his one-page Introduction, the volume  offers nothing by way of discussion of Mitchell's career or the  context in which  it has  de­ veloped.  Nor  does it provide critical  bib­ liography or  even  a  list  of  the  writer's publications. With   the  exception  of ·the one excellent  photograph of Theatre Cal­ gary's production of For Those in Peril of the  Sea,  the   few  photos  it  includes do little  to reveal  the  physical  nature of the  plays  in  production; most  are  badly   re­ produced closeups  of  unidentified actors. Although Mitchell is not  yet  the  accom­ plished   playwright  he  may  become, he already  deserves   better   treatment  than  this.
ROBERT WALLACE


RUTS & RIDDLES

ELPSETH   CAMERON,  ed.,   Hugh   MacLennan:
1982,  Canadian Studies   Programme,  Uni­
versity College,  Univ. of Toronto, n.p.
E.  D.   BLODGETT,   Configuration: Essays on  the
Canadian  Literatures. ECW  Press, $9·95·

CANADIAN PRACTICAL CRITICISM  has brought forth  both  its Leola  Cruikshanks and  its Liselotte Vitzlipiitzlis, its simple souls and  its sophisticates. Although criti­ cal innocence has predominated, we have  recently  been  attempting to establish  new standards and  to profit  by  developments in contemporary literary theory.  The two works  under   review  here  illustrate both the  earlier  norm  and our  new directions. One   shows  too  little  critical  sophistica­ tion;   the  other, if   that   is  possible,   too much. One  we can read but  need not; the other we should  read  but  cannot.
The papers   of  the   I g82  Hugh  Mac­ Lennan conference in  Toronto  served  a function as  a basis  for  some  satisfying scholarly  interaction among  MacLennan


107

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



specialists.  They  fail,  though, to sustain  a monograph. Only  Eli  Mandel's "Hugh MacLennan and  the  Tradition of  Cana­ dian   Fiction" shows  originality  or  theo­  retical  complexity in proposing MacLen­ nan's  work   (in   the   manner  of  Harold Bloom)  as a misreading of  MacLennan's literary tradition and  a rewriting of Fred­ erick   Philip   Grove.   And   even   this   is cryptic, elusive, and preliminary.
Hugh  MacLennan: 1982 is organized, sometimes inconsistently, into  analysis  of MacLennan's social  vision, critical  read­
ings  of  his  fiction,  and  identification of his place  in  the  Canadian literary  tradi­ tion. In addition, fellow writers Kroetsch, Chaput-Rolland,  Engel,   and   Beresford­ Howe   provide  moving  though  uninfor­ mative  tributes.  Critiques by  other  par­ ticipants follow  the  major  papers: some, like  Brian  McKillop's, simply  reworking the  earlier  argument; others,  like  David  Staines', using the previous  piece as start­ ing  gate  only.  Several  of  the  papers are  in  French; and  the  contributors include a  sociologist  and  an historian as well as professors  of English  and  French.
As Elspeth Cameron herself has pointed  out,   MacLennan  criticism  has sunk deep in the  rut of national-sociologi­ cal  commentary. Yet  this  collection, ed­ ited  by Cameron,  spins  the  enterprise a little  deeper in  these  tracks.  Worse  still, given   the  general  topic  and   particular ideology,    any    thoughtful   MacLennan reader  could  write  most  of  these  papers (for   all   their   occasional    revelations) : criticize  MacLennan's social-political  vis­ ion  from  a  Marxist perspective  (Stanley Ryerson);  point   out  sociological   omis­ sions in  MacLennan's portrait of French Canada  (Jacques Brazeau) ; demonstrate how  MacLennan's  philosophical idealism evades  problems of  class  (Robin  Math­ ews). (Curiously, the understanding that  literature  is  not   mere  documentation, that,    as   Mathews   acknowledges,  "too  often  [MacLennan's] work  has  been  ob-


108
 scured    by ... critical,  political   battles fought with  his  texts  as a  basis,"  has  led not to suitably literary analysis  but  to Brazeau's and Mathews' disingenuous disclaimers that  their  barbed  commentary is descriptive only, not evaluative.)
Even   Bill  Keith's  discussion   of  The
Watch That Ends the Night, while show­
ing  more  of  a  literary sense  than  many of the  papers, is mainly  a flying  of team colours  in  the old  tug-of-war about Mac­ Lennan's  discursiveness. With   a  much­ discussed    author   like   MacLennan,  an inching forward in old tracks  is no longer  adequate. We  must  have  the  impetus of entirely new questions and  literary meth­ ods.
The critical naivete which  weakens Hugh  MacLennan: 1982 and  much  other criticism of Canadian literature is absent in E. D. Blodgett's Configuration: Essays on the Canadian  Literatures, a more sub­ stantial offering. Along  with  an  eclectic  combination of familiar techniques based on Aristotle, classical rhetoric, formalism, and   historical,  generic,  and   archetypal criticism, the author draws  heavily on the methods and  terminology of contempor­ ary  semiotic  and   structural  theory.   His aims   are    commendable.  We   welcome those  who  emerge unscathed from  caves of  modern  literary  theory   bearing with them  Aladdin treasures for  the  world  of practical criticism. Blodgett's fingers glit­ ter  with  new  rings.  He  has,  however, in the  course  of  his  adventures  been  sadly maimed in  his  prose.
The collection of essays includes  read­ ings   of   individual  texts   (MacLennan's Watch), reinterpretations of an  author's oeuvre  (the  comic  pattern of Grove's fic­ tion), comparative  studies  (the  house  in Hebert and  Munro) , overviews   (ethnic prairie literature, Canadian pastoral, and  the West  in anglophone and  francophone fiction), and   theoretical analysis   ( meth­ odologies in Canadian comparative stud­ ies) .  Peppered with   new   insights   and

BOOKS IN REVIEW



close readings, never  predictable or obvi­ ous,  it  establishes Blodgett's  credentials. Here is a critic of admirable breadth and  learning. His  application  of  relevant de­ velopments in related disciplines (history,  philosophy,  even   geography),  his  easy commerce with world  literatures, his flu­ ency   with    works    in   other   languages (Grove's  early   novels-finally explored at  length -and  untranslated  Quebecois works often  overlooked in  English-Cana­ dian  criticism), his  awareness of literary movements  (the   place  of Grove's  Fanny Essler in the German Neuromantik move­ ment)  and   of  generic  distinctions,  and finally  his  range  of  knowledge in  Cana­ dian   literature  enrich individual discus­ sions.
One  cannot help  but  be enlightened or challenged, whether by passing comments
-"the  bifocal  ease  with  which  [Mitch­
ell]  can  look  upon  the  world  dominated by death and  call it good"-or larger arguments - "the   frontier  shared    by Western francophone and  anglophone writers was  marked by  the   unreality of the  former and  the  pseudo-reality of the others." At  least   the  discussion   is  at  a suitably  advanced level. And Blodgett is perspicacious enough to anticipate, though not  always  to  answer  satisfactor­ ily, objections to  his arguments.
Objections  there    are.    The  strained thesis   of   the   MacLennan article, that The  Watch participates in the  poetic uni­ verse    of   Rilke's  "Orpheus.    Eurydike Hermes,"   confirms  my   suspicion  that  "intertexuality" is often an indulgence in the   joys of  source  hunting  without the rigour   of  having  to  demonstrate  influ­ ence.  (Blodgett acknowledges, in  a  post­ script   made  valuable by long  quotations from   his  correspondence with   MacLen­ nan,  that  MacLennan has  not  read  the poem.) The distinction between Hebert's metonymy and  Munro's metaphor is so subtle and  opaque as to be sometimes indecipherable.  Blodgett's  final   conten-
 tion  that  Canadian literature is not  real­ istic,  that   there   is  "a  certain  formality and   abstraction  in   Canadian   writing," demanding  formal  analysis   more   than  other  literatures do,  is a  product of  the critical apparatus he has brought to bear on  the  texts,  for  all  his  protestations to the  contrary.
The  main   difficulty   with   Configura­
tion, though, is stylistic.  At  the  prospect
of a  small  word,  Blodgett breaks  out  in syllables. Unhappy neologisms-"vehic­ uled,"   "thematizes," "epigraphal,"  and "meta-travel"-struggle along  shoulder to  shoulder  with   anaemic  abstractions and   jargon-"textology,"  "ideational," "macrostructure," and   "metatypal  mor­ phologies."  In some cases  ("the semantic code   of  the   novel"  when   "the   novel"  would  do) , the  terms  are  used  more  as buzz  words  signalling  membership in  a scholarly fraternity than as the legitimate tools  they  can  be.  In other cases,  con­  cepts  like  "prolepsis," "anaphora," "syn­ ecdoche," and  "metonymy," while applic­ able,    are   over-used,   becoming   verbal  twitches.
Configuration, in the jargon of the semioticians, must  be decoded. This  is unfortunate because  Blodgett's collection has considerable potential. A good  mind has passed this way. Unfortunately, it has covered  its tracks  quite  thoroughly.

HELEN HOY


CHLORINE  PLEASE

KEN  DECKER, BackyaTd   Gene   Pool.  Quadrant, n.p.

WHAT  DOES ONE SAY about a book whose cover calls it a "soporific"? Which  calls it (not  inaccurately) "a group of sentences which  have  been,  more  or  less in  accor­ dance  with  the  rules  of  behaviour called  ENGLISH    GRAMMAR ... booked   in   for   a quick   tryst,"  under a  picture of  the  au-


109

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



thor-a portrait of the artist  as a young booking  agent,  no doubt. By departing to such  a large  extent from  the conventions of  mainstream fiction -and  even  the emerging conventions of post-modernism
-it also departs from convenient critical contexts in  which  to  discuss it. A  collec­
tion of largely unconnected short  pieces, most  of  which  can  loosely be  called  fic­ tions, with  some of indeterminate form or intent, the  book clearly  goes well  beyond post-modernism,  though  to   what   isn't clear.
Backyard  Gene   Pool  begins   conven­ tionally  enough  (in  the  context  of  post­ modernism, at  any  rate)  :  "Having solic­ ited  eye  contact,  my  primary concern is to  keep   you  reading;  I  don't want   to lose you."  Yet it does  just that.  Explicitly  fearing "the boredom produced by reflex­  ivity  in  any  form," it  promptly falls  vic­
tim   to  it.  Where  Calvino    (in  If  on  a
Winter's   Night   a  Traveller)   can   begin
in  like  fashion   and   charm   and   engage the  reader, Decker disengages,  distances. Earnestly and self-indulgently it belabours its ideas-some  of  which  aren't  bad­ so that   what   kernels  there  are  sink  into the  chaff.  This   narcissism,  this  drawing out  of  a  line  of  thought which  becomes progressively  less interesting, is such  that  the  occasional  flippancy   and   rude   col­ loquialism seem merely  to make  the  tone jarringly   uneven. Where  Traveller  suc­ ceeds  by cloaking its  seriousness  in  play­ fulness  and  wit,  by  appearing to  take  it­ self lightly,  Gene Pool cannot  conceal  the fact   that   it  takes  itself  too  seriously.  It postures cutely,  hoping that  someone  will pat it on the head  and call it avant-garde. Instead, it's often  like trying  to read  por­  ridge.
Nonetheless,   Gene   (as   I'm    sure   it would  like being  called)   has its  redeem­ ing qualities. Having abandoned mimesis, it has not  abandoned  the aim of much  of fiction : to   show   us  something  of   the world   we  live  in.   It  works-when  it


I 10
 works -by   suggestion    and    resonance and   juxtaposition, by images   (often  vio­ lent,  often   unpalatable),  by  connections which   are  imaginative  rather  than   logi­ cal,  to  give  a  reflected, refracted  sense ("image" is too  precise  a  word)  of  our world. The reader must see that  the  book is not saying "this is what  our  world  looks (and  sounds) like,"  but  "the feeling  that  this  gives  is  the  feeling   that   the  world gives"; in place  of "show  and  tell" is evocation. Until the  reader grasps  this, it is like seeing a radar screen  (and  not knowing what  it is)  when  he was expect­ ing  photographs. Realism   is  inadequate, the  book  seems  to  be saying, so all  I can give you are  untethered forays into  verbal worlds  which  will leave impressions which  resonate with   those  our world   produces for  me.
The main  interest of the  book,  then,  is cultural  and   sociological:  mass  culture and  technology intensify  the sordidness of life.  Hence the  revolting images  are  in­ tended to  be  just  that,  and   the  ugliness and    insensitivity  of   the   scientific  and technological language  with  which   the book    is   littered    (from   "Hexagonal Throughput":   "'The  major damage is that  which  was  inflicted   upon  your  cen­ tral   nervous  system  that   you  are  singu­  larly  ill-suited  for   survival   in   this   bio­ sphere,' picking   at the  head   of  a  large boil   under  his   damp,  white    shirt....
'Confronted with  the  false dialectic of a basic altruism being  frustrated by cynical post-structuring of  events,   your  homeo­ static  drives .. .'") is not so much a fault  of the  book  as an  attempt  to  portray the revulsion, the  ugliness and insensitivity of science,   technology, and   mass   culture. Maybe.
There  remains the  suspicion   that   the impressive and   extensive  array   of   allu­ sions and  terminology -literary, techno­ logical,  and  social-scientific-is partly to impress the  reader, to make  him see that  the  author is highly intelligent, informed,

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



and  well-read. Calling a  character "Dr. Herman  Eutix"  may   well   provoke    a smile,  but  having a character, for  no ap­ parent reason, sing, "I bin werking on the hwal-rad"  seems   merely    an   authorial nudge   in  the  ribs:   "Get  it-Old  Eng­ lish.  Get  it?   Get   it?"  And   even   if  the density  and  impenetrability of  the  tech­ nical language (which is the  main  reason the  book  is so  unreadable)  is simply  to indicate to the  reader how dense and impenetrable language has  become,  it  is a clear  case  of overkill; more  disturbing are  the times when  Decker actually seems to like using  that  sort  of language.
A  deeper fault of  the  work,  however, is its "untethered" nature. The first para­ graph asserts  that "it is apparent  that  I have   no  predetermined  strategy,  am  in fact  a text intuitively spilled  from a type­ writer." This  is no  doubt  intended to be disarming and  endearing,  the  way  Cal­  vino  and  Tom  Robbins can  be, and  per­ haps  ironic  as  well,  but  the  fact  remains  that  it accurately characterizes the  book. In  this  collide-oscope there  is a  lack  of focus,  within  the   parts  as  well  as  the whole; the reader often  wonders what  the point   is.   Where  other  writers  of   fic­ tion  can  create bizarre worlds -Kafka, Borges,  or  the  Australian,  Peter   Carey, for   example -they are   self-contained, delimited,  and    complete  worlds,   their laws and workings  apparent or deducible, even if they are initially disorienting. And one  is convinced that,  even   if  it  is  not apparent,  there    is  a   clear   purpose    to them.  Not so, unfortunately, in Backyard Gene  Pool.
I  expect   that, because  of  its  formless­ ness  and   the  apparently scant  regard   it has   for   the   reader,  this   book   will   be quickly  dismissed  by most  who  come  to it; one  reviewer  held  that it did  not  con­ tain   "a shred   of   evidence  to  justify  its publication." But such  a comment is un­ fair  to  the  extent that it  misses  the  at­  tempt  (albeit less than successful) at  an
 imaginative and  linguistic representation of  the  jungle  of  mass  culture and  tech­ nology. Perhaps it does deserve  to be dis­ missed-but not  too quickly.

DAVID INGHAM


LOST VOICE?

RUDY  WIEBE,   My   Lovely Enemy. McClelland
& Stewart, $18.95·

EvEN AFTER  a second  reading and  con­ siderable  reflection,  Rudy   Wiebe's   My  Lovely  Enemy seems, indeed, to be as un­  friendly  as any  book  could  be to  its  au­  thor's hard-earned reputation. That rep­ utation, only recently  celebrated by W. J. Keith and  others, is for a writerly  career marked  by unswerving commitment to a prophetic and  innovative vision, and with it,  the  achievement of  a  distinctive and prophetic voice.  The particular  intona­ tion of Wiebe's  voice  (awkward for some contemporary ears  but  appropriate to its own  character and  dedication)  owes  to the  fact   that   he  has  habitually spoken  words out of the past -old history trans­ lating   to  new  story  on  lips  and   tongue distinctive enough to make  us believe that  there  could  be  meaning for  the  present in  memories  of  the  past.
All  that  seems  to  be  water   under   the bridge.  History  professor  James  Dyck, on­ again,  off-again narrator  of  My  Lovely  Enemy, has   no  such   vital   communion with  the  past,  either his own or  the  past of  the   Indian  culture  he  studies.   One  senses he must  have  had it once for  both,  but   that   history   has   lost  its  power   to charm  or  challenge,  that   ego  and   the present  have  completely won  him  over.  The past  has  become  academic, in  both senses of the  word.
In the opening chapter, we see Dyck, a residual  Christian defending nominal Christianity against the deprecations of a cocktail  party  atheist, who  asks if God's


III

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



omnipotence   is   sufficient   for   him    to change  the  past.  The  reverberations of this   curious  and    unanswered   question lack  any  mature  philosophical resonance in this novel, but  they do echo throughout at the level of innumerable soap-opera cliches  concerning  the  suburban  Cana­ dian  male  in climacteric. Typical of such a  figure,  Dyck  is  presented  as  having  a semi-professional attitude   towards   his work.  Yet  what we see him doing  in  the library  is research of a different order­ instant horseplay with a woman  he hasn't met   before,  who  just  happens to  barge into   his  microfilm  cubicle   and   straddle him.  This is only the  beginning of an unimaginative litany  of horsy  (or doggy) encounters in  the  novel  which,  in an  ap­ parent attempt to outdo soft-porn schlock in  linguistic special   effects,  include  too many   ludicrous  moments.  "A  man   was made  to love a woman  to destruction on all fours,"  says an orgiastic but still philo­ sophical  Dyck after watching his wife  (or is it  his mistress -he can't be sure)   be­ ing  mounted   by  the  man   he  has  been cuckolding:   "this   violent  vicious  giving and   taking  without  reservation and   re­ lentless   and   again   and   again,   through passion   into   spaceless   ecstacy."    In   an­ other choice  moment of his towering pas­ sion  Dyck  confides  to  his  readers: "She  fills   me   round  and   full   as  a  suckable grape." Good grief.
However Wiebe wishes us to read his protagonist (and  I do earnestly  hope he intends an  irony,  though the  evidence is strong   against it),  this  sort  of  verbiage must  be counted as horrific stuff.  Are we to imagine that  Wiebe intends a larger distance between   himself  and  his  meno­ pausal  narrator and  actually to criticize  a moral   and   intellectual  lightweight  run,  as it were,  by his Dyck? It is difficult,  on the  evidence of  the  novel,  to come  to a flattering answer. For if irony or distance is  what   Wiebe   intends,  then   a  hodge­  podge  of  dark  Alberta  metaphysics and


I 12
 dismal  technical failures  prevent us from seeing   the  purpose clearly.  Even   in  the old  joke about Mennonite sexual  postures and  dancing, Wiebe  has somehow  got  the rhythm wrong-does faltering language mirror  a  fumbling  imagination?  Given the  western  as  well  as  academic  ambi­ ence  of  the  book  one  is tempted  to sug­ gest a different jacket  design, perhaps the famous renaissance  illustration of the  di­  lemma of  logical  effeminacy, which   de­  picts  Aristotle being  ridden about (on  all fours)   by the  naked  Phyllis,  her  whip  in hand. For something seems to be nagging Wiebe,  or else his control is deteriorating badly.
Dialogue has never  been Wiebe's great­ est  strength, but  his  is perhaps  nowhere weaker   than   in   this  book.  Gillian,  the young  mistress,  with  "face of  purest  por­  celain, and  her voice," is indistinguishable in  her  voice  from  wife  Liv  or  daughter Becca. While this  may  be intended as an analogue to  Dyck's  inability fully  to dis­ tinguish them  in  his fantasies  (he  seems
to  lust  after them  all), the  reader surely
requires  more   differentiation  to  control the   perspective. The  heavy   theological dialogues  between  Dyck   and   his  wife, Dyck and  his mistress, like the philosophi­ cal discussion  concerning history  between  Dyck  and  his  junior  colleague (the  hus­ band  of  his  mistress), are  tedious,  vacu­  ous and -worst of all-of  no narrative consequence worth  the  space.  The  cita­ tion  of  Teilhard de  Chardin (The  Evo­  lution of Chastity) as an epigraph doesn't much assist in  this respect  either; in  fact, it   makes   things   worse.  At  bottom,  the theorizing about conversion without guilt,  like the  narrator's triumphant  conclusion that  choice  between wife  and  mistress  is unnecessary or  nugatory, is indistinguish­ able  in its quality, as dialogue or  as phi­  losophy, from  Dyck's  commitment to  in­ timate realism  in description of his bath­ room  ritual, laced  as  that  is with  reflec­ tions that  "good  gracious the  Queen does

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



this  too" and learned citations: "but love has pitched his mansion in the  place of excrement."
This book is jammed with literary allu­ sions: narratorial  Dyck   is  afflicted  with total recall. Much of  the  great  literature so invoked, however, is used  so perversely as to make the  citations not  only specious in  the  mouth of  the  narrator, but  also  a kind    of   sacrilege   on   the    page  of   the  author.  Chaucer,   Shakespeare, Milton, Donne, the   Romantics, and  others are  used  in contexts which make the  allusions banal  (the mistress "cannot nor  ever  will be an enduring Griselda") or worse  ("All lovers   live   by   longing  and  endure:   j Summon a vision   and  declare it  pure," following recitation of  "Love is not  love that alters," as Gillian mounts again). If Dyck's  (and  Wiebe's)  distorted  invoca­ tion  of great authors is not  to  be thought of   as   a   kind  of   blasphemy,   there  will surely  be  some  among  his  readers who  will find  blasphemy in the JesusjGod who  appears in  the  stacks of  the University of Alberta Library and at  Dyck's first  hotel room tryst. His  function  is apparently to offer     extensive    socratic   conversations, during   which    he    quotes   Castiglione, Plato, and  Hosea  to  illustrate his  thesis  concerning sexual liberation and the  cor­ poral  theology of  D.  H. Lawrence (or  is it J.  A. T.  Robinson?). Like his  alter­ ego  Dyck,  he  quotes out  of context (e.g.,  St.  Augustine: "If  you   love   God   you can   do   what  you   please"),  pontificates pseudo-philosophically ("to love genitally is a  kind  of  beginning," "to love  is to  be
... love   is  exquisite health,"  etc.) ,  and rationalizes. Though  Dyck   uses  the  op­ portunity to ask his "divine" visitor "How can   a human being live  the   good  life?" it is difficult, even for  this  pedantic spirit, to get  an  answer in edgewise; Dyck inter­ rupts him   obsessively,  preoccupied  with  irritations  concerning   the    authority  of Jesus in  matters excremental and sexual, complaining  that  Scripture  doesn't  talk
 about these  things in  enough realistic de­ tail  to  satisfy  him. Wiebe's collegial  "di­ vinity," devirginized and  foxy,  neverthe­ less aids  and  abets Dyck's insistent aspira­ tions:  "The  truth  of   the spirit is  your  body," he  solemnizes,  then laughs in  the  lingo of  the  locker-room. We  are  not  to wonder that this  special revelation should assist   Dyck   in   his   increasingly  learned lovemaking;   he   is  the   sort   who   enjoys debating a  putative sex  life  for  Jesus and quoting  Donne's  Holy   Sonnet  ("Batter my   Heart   three-personed  God")   while copulating with whomever under a piano.
The book   concludes its  May to  Sep­ tember odyssey  and carnal  allegory  in  a two-part sequence. The  first, predictably perhaps, is in  a  typological hell,  a mine­ shaft outside Edmonton converted into a restaurant where buffalo foetus with cac­ tus  dressing is served at black-out orgies. It  is here  that the all-things-dark-and­ beautiful philosophy of Dyck  and his pro­ tegees   plumbs  its   depths   of   peroration and performance. The  concluding chap­ ter involves a preposterous and effectually gratuitous  resurrection of  his  mother by the  professor, who   calls   her   forth  from the  grave with  the   very   words of  Jesus  to  Lazarus, only  to  hear her  say,  "Well, that is nice." Then, a farmer driving his combine off-course just  happens by with a nice  little typological luncheon which wife, mistress, cuckolded junior colleague, and mother get  to  share with Dyck  and the  mortician (who seems,  after all,  to be Jesus  again, in  another guise). At  this communal repast it  seems   only   fitting, and   to  Dyck  entirely gratifying, that the mortician should anticipate for  them all a blessed  hereafter in  which heaven is actually a  state of  open  marriage.  Un­ surprisingly  also,   in   this   dialogue  as  in earlier appearances, the  mortician-Jesus speaks in  accents  indistinguishable from those   of  Dyck.  The  Professor's shadowy interlocutor,   however,  like   his  counter­ part in  other  texts,  occasionally utters an


II3

BOOKS IN REVIEW



appropriate truth: "All words  are image, speaking is  the  only  way  human  beings can  handle large  reality.  But  the  differ­ ence  between   the  image  and  the  reality  has  to  be  clear...."  One   finds  that   a lack  of such  clarity in  Wiebe's own  nar­ ration  is a  major impediment  to  the  ar­ ticulation of his characteristic voice. Even the   dedication   ("Blessed   are   the   dead  who die in the faith  of  Christ") -at the very  least,  surprising  in  this  context­ seems to underline a  profound confusion. No  matter  how   looked   at,   the   Enemy seems  distinctly  unlovely.
For  all  that,  there  is something here entirely worthwhile. Spliced  into  the fab­ ric of My  Lovely  Enemy, in two sections, is a truly  remarkable story by Wiebe  (pre­ viously published in Canadian Forum, 61 [March 1982]   as  "The Broken  Arm"). The story  of  Maskepetoon is one  of  the best  that  Wiebe  has  written, out  of  the historical  vein  which   he  has  so  success­ fully mined  in the past, and  it is a worthy example of the storyteller's art.  It embod­ ies all  that  Wiebe  does best, and  reminds us of the achievement represented by The  Blue Mountains of  China, The  Tempta­ tions  of  Big  Bear   and   The   Scorched­ Wood   People.  None   of  his   readers,    I hope,   would   condemn  Wiebe   to   mere repetition  of  earlier formulae for success. But  the  plain  truth is that  in My  Lovely Enemy   the   Maskepetoon  sections   stick out  like two lilies on a garbage heap.  The Indian  story  is from  every  point  of view superior writing, more convincing both in dialogue and   as  narrative. By  contrast, the  body  of  the  novel  (into which  Mas­ kepetoon  in   no   way   fits   properly)   is cliche-ridden, hackneyed, and  trite  in  its ultimate statement.
Narratively, and  in terms of dialogue, some  problems of  this  book  are  antici­ pated, I  think,  in  Wiebe's  disappointing Mad Trapper   ( 1980). Wiebe seems most successful  with  a strong voice, one  which  is used  to the powers  of "absolute word"


I 14
 and  which  is secure  enough or  protected enough to afford  a stance  oblique  to the general culture. "Absolute word," it need hardly   be  said,  requires  the  authentica­ tion  of strong character, character which is   achieved  in   Grandmother   Friesen, Maskepetoon, or Big Bear,  but  not in Dr.  Dyck.
Other slippages of voice, especially  nar­
rative "inner"  voice,  seem  to  be  antici­ pated as  early  as  Wiebe's  story  about a psychotic killer, "Did Jesus Ever Laugh?" Printed in  Where   is  the  Voice  Coming From?   ( 1974),  it  also  is  a  first-person narrative,   similarly   disturbing   in   ways which  can  cause  it  to  undermine deeply our  confidence in  the author's controlling perspective.  Elsewhere in  his  pursuit of distinctive voice Wiebe  has, like his some­ time model Tolstoy, reached beyond  him­  self   into a community of authenticated personalities, making  withal   surprisingly credible  use  of  absolute  word   and   ex­ traordinary character. In  this latest  book it  seems  Wiebe   has  made a  deliberate choice  for "personal landscape," a trivial­ ized  world   in  which   "Tolstoi  does  not count. He  is  simply  with   us,  his  lolling happy   face"   merely   that   of  a   hapless suburban lap  dog.  Those   who  have  ad­  mired the Tolstoy in Wiebe will grieve for so  extreme  a  diminishment.

DAVID LYLE JEFFREY

OUTRAGE

GREG HOLLINGSHEAD,  Famous  Players. Coach
House, $7.50.
SAM SPILLER,  Stories  of Men  and  of Rats.  Ex-
position Press,  $10.00.

THE  LOWER  RIGHT  CORNER of  the  cover page   of  Famous  Players appears  to  be dog-eared to expose  half  of John Diefen­ baker's face.  This visual  joke  introduces stories   which   trace  the   ironies   of   the search  for personal meaning through con­ tact   with  "famous  players." Typical  of

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the  protagonists who  chart the  centrality to  their  lives of  brief  conversations with people  such  as Princess  Margaret or Richard Nixon,  the  narrator of  the  first story, "Life with  the Prime Minister," has had   only  occasional contact  with  Tru­ deau,  watching him  talk   to  two  men  in Inuvik, attempting to lend  him  a tie at a Charlottetown  political  rally.  Searching for  significance in Trudeau's  every  word and   gesture, he  is  frustrated  when   the Prime  Minister takes  him  to a  Burt  Rey­ nolds movie: "I assumed that it would  be a special  movie,  a  premiere  or  a  private screening of exotic  pornography." Meet­ ing  Trudeau  on   a  Bahama  beach,   the narrator   expresses   his   disenchantment with   women,  money,    and    power    and demands,  "What  would   you   have   me look  for?"  Trudeau  laughs, "Don't  ask me,"  and  walks  off  into  the  sunset  with his wife.  The next  scene,  the  last  of  the story, records  the narrator's appreciation that  the Prime  Minister visits him in the hospital. Hollingshead has treated the emotional collapse  of  this  unnamed  nar­ rator   through a  short  series  of  vignettes  which  reveal  the subtlety and economy  of a Hemingway story.
Hollingshead can  also  spin   an  outra­ geous  tall  tale.  Glen  Samchuk,  the  pro­ tagonist of  "Red  Muffins,"  travels  from small   town    Saskatchewan   to   London where   he  is picked   up  by  the very  rich Celia. They  happen upon  a country house where  they  join the eccentric, stoned, and  exceptionally  accommodating  celebrants of an engagement party. After  a series of mishaps,  Glen  leaves Celia to Doddy,  who played   with   her  in  the   bathtub at  age five, and  stumbles off with  Red  Muffins, one  of  the  life-size  puppets which   had been  danced from   the  roof  of  the  house by the  bridegroom. The  colonial doesn't belong;  he   continues  his   Grand  Tour alone.  The  psychological realism   of  the conclusion provides an  ironic  twist  to the hallucinatory exhilaration of  the  bizarre
 world  of the  rich,  if not  famous, players outside  Glen's  normal experience.
The endings  of a number of  Hollings­ head's stories which  use the O'Henry con­ vention,   the  ironic  twist  which  surprises  the  reader  into  re-evaluation of the story as a whole, are more  arbitrary. "Cooper," for   example,    ends    with    cannibalism, which  certainly  provides  an  easily  dra­ matic  concluding flourish, but it seems unwarranted by the  events  of  the  story. Such  apparently gratuitous violence,  in a book which  is otherwise a fine first  pub­ lication, provides   a  point   of   distinction from   the  horror which, as  a  vehicle  of social  protest,   pervades  Stories  of  Men and  Rats.
In  "Revolution of the  Poor," H. G. Francq, under  the  pseudonym of Sam Spiller,   tells  the  story  of  Jacques  Ving­ tras,   the  pseudonym  of  Jules  Valles,   a leader  of the  I87I  Paris Commune. This  initial    confusion   of    historical   fact    is echoed   in  the   next   story,   "Diary  of  a Convict," which,   as  Spiller   explains,   is "a  short  adaptation  of  Georges  Darien's account of his  confinement as a military convict.... under pretext of military dis­ cipline,  human beings  cowardly tortured other human beings."  But  the story is not of  Darien  but  of  one  Froissard. Yet  the French cadences, which  suggest  that  the works are  translations and  the  footnoted references to nineteenth-century books, argue  the historical veracity of the stories. What focus does Spiller  intend?
Desperate violence  pervades both stor­ ies, and  resistance  to  evil  is shown  to  be futile. The  I 87 I  Revolution collapses into civil  war  and   the  return  of   oppression. Froissard  succumbs to the  violence  of his officers;  the  agonies   of   forced   marches, the  courts-martial, the  torture of  weak prisoners,   the   hunger  and   thirst   finally drive   him   to   murder.   Froissard   ends many   sections  with   refrains such   as  "I really  don't  understand how we can  take more  of  this  and   keep  standing." (The


II 5

BOOKS IN REVIEW



reader   has  to  agree.)  Having served  his term, Froissard attacks  the system by pub­ lishing  the  story of its atrocities. His story concludes: "In  a  darker  night  still  the oppressed will  have  to raise  their  voices. Paris, 1888." From  the historical  perspec­ tive of one  hundred  years, we know that  justice has not been done. What is Spiller  advocating?
Distorted identity, horror, and  futile protest  underlie  the   final   story,   "The Great Plague  of Bronston," as well. The setting is Bronston, a  thinly  disguised Brandon, in   1989.  Spiller  satirizes  pro­ cessed  food,   joggers,  rock   groups  and,  especially,  the  farce  of education at  uni­ versities  and  the  exploitive capitalist sys­ tem   of  government and   business -all this  as armies  of rats,  the work of Provi­  dence  punishing decadent humanity with extermination, overrun Bronston  with  the plague. When they leave to attack Winni­ peg, Bronston is in flames, its inhabitants all   dead,  except   for   six  social   misfits. Spiller,  a retired Brandon University pro­ fessor,  again   has  used  a  fictional  double
-one of the survivors  is a retired  Bron­
ston  professor,   author of  a  book  on  the
1789  French   Revolution -to   tell   the horrors of a repressive  regime  and  the ultimate  futility  of  its  destruction.  "It was doomsday, ashes to ashes and  dust  to dust." This  conclusion of  the  last  story reflects  Spiller's stance:  part  Old  Testa­ ment   prophet and  part  Swiftian  satirist.  But  he  allows  no  redeeming  humour or justice,  only rage,  disguise, and horror.

ELEANOR JOHNSTON

NO SECOND STAGE
CAROL SHIELDS, A Fairly Conventional Woman.
Macmillan, $r B.gs.
JOAN  BARFOOT, Dancing  in the  Dark. Macmil­
lan, $•7·95·
DuRING THE 197o's, Canadian women writers created  an  exciting   and  mnova-


116
 tive  range  of fictional  "new" women, in­ cluding  feminist  pioneers surviving  the rigours of  wilderness   rebirth, one  deter­ mined   founder of  a  women's  commune, and  a  boldly  unconventional  pig farmer. But  this  major thrust of the  past  decade towards   the    fictional   presentation   of strong, autonomous women  -rebels and  explorers who cross previously  sanctioned boundaries -has  been  deflected   or  dis­ continued  in  the  recent   work  of  Carol  Shields   and   Joan  Barfoot. The  middle­ aged  housewife heroines of their new nov­ els, much  like the main  character of The  Ivory Swing, are caught on the horns  of a dilemma.  As   the    "fairly  conventional woman,"   Brenda  Bowman,  sums   up:  "She  had   come   to   this   awkward  age, forty,  at  an  awkward time  in  history­ too  soon  to  be one  of  the  new  women, whatever that  meant, and  too late  to  be an   old-style   woman." Ultimately what Shields's Bowman  and  Barfoot's fanatical Edna Cormick value  above  all  are  nor­ malcy,  order,  shelter, enclosure,  protec­ tion,  and   safety-the  very  opposite of what  the  rebellious   1970's  heroines craved: independence, self-actualization, novelty,  risk, adventure, possibility. In  re­ directing attention to the discarded image  of  the  "happy  housewife," however, nei­ ther  Shields nor Barfoot digs deep enough to discover new insights.
A  Fairly Conventional Woman  covers the same  five-day  period in the life of the Bowman   family   of   suburban   Chicago as  does   Shields's  earlier   Happenstance
( 1 980) . Previously   Shields   narrated the story of how  ho-hum historian Jack Bow­ man  coped   with  two  pubescent  children and   a   string  of   midlife    crises   in   the neighbourhood while his homemaker wife was  away   at  a  conference in  Philadel­ phia;  the  companion  novel   now   traces  Brenda  Bowman's experiences while  at­ tending  the   National Handicraft  Exhi­ bition  in  the  Franklin Court Arms  Hotel  where  her  quilt, "The  Second Coming,"

BOOKS IN REVIEW



wins honourable mention, her  room-mate screws like a mink,  and  she encounters a refreshingly non-predatory male,  a Cana­ dian  metallurgist, Barry  Ollershaw.
In post-Vietnam America, with  moral distinctions  blurred,   divorce  rampant, and   marital  fidelity   as  quaint as  white bucks  or saddle shoes, Brenda and  Barry re-enact a love story-complete with  a chance meeting in a hotel  elevator, roses, dinner for two by candlelight, and  a night spent   sharing a  bed-but  they  choose not   to  embrace "the  new   sexual   free­ dom." What Barry  offers Brenda  is com­ panionship, support, and  fatherly nurtur­ ance,  seeing  her   through what  she  per­  ceives as her  first  real  disgrace -getting drunk during a protracted interview with an    odious    newspaper    reporter - and  vomiting all  over  her  room,  even  on  her prize    quilt.  Brenda,   in   return,  offers Barry  sympathetic understanding, sanity, and   steadiness,   unlike   his  incapacitated wife  who   has  suffered  a  severe   break­  down.
The clue  to the  dilemma of Brenda Bowman's  midlife  crisis,  which   follows her  mother's sudden death, calls into question  her   love   for   her   husband  of twenty  years,  and  is tied  at  some level to her emerging career as a quilter, seems to be  not  only  her  lack  of  connection with contemporary  women's history,   but  also the fact of her fatherlessness. Born to Elsa Pulaski, a single,  working-class woman  of Polish  origin,  and  raised,  never  knowing who  fathered her,  in  a  small  apartment over a dry cleaner's in Cicero, Illinois, Brenda developed into  a  popular and pleasing  young  woman, graduated from Katharine Gibbs,  worked  for a short  time as a secretary-typist, and  then  married at twenty,  primarily, she  recalls, because  she was "dying for a pink  kitchen." Clearly rejecting the image  of self-sufficiency pro­ vided   by  her  large,   capable,  unconven­ tional  mother, Brenda has  hungered for domesticity and  dependence  and  all  the
 material  trappings of  suburbia and   the feminine mystique.
Shields's   heroine  is  not   without   in­ sight:  "There she  had   been,  diapering babies,  buying   groceries   at  the  A  & P, wallpapering bathrooms,  while other women -who were   these   women?­ fought for  equal   rights,  while  a  terrible war  raged,  while  the country teetered on the   brink   of   revolution." She  chastizes  herself for taking "the coward's way out," but   this  critical  consciousness   does   not lead  to  personal change, and  Brenda re­ fuses  to  get  involved   in  the  handicraft exhibitors' protest against the  hotel  man­ agement for  discrimination  against  their  group, almost   all  women,  in favour of the  International  Metallurgical  Society,  almost   all  men.  Her   prize   quilt,   "The Second  Coming,"  embodies no  Yeatsian apocalypse. In  the end,  Brenda Bowman, priding   herself    on   her    down-to-earth realism,    is   a   superficial,  materialistic, mundane,  and   rather  boring   character. The narrative, filtered   through Brenda's consciousness   and   recording  her   verbal interchanges, fails on artistic grounds, al­ most  wholly  "in  bondage to facts  and  to the present  moment." The problem which  Wordsworth identified some two hundred years  ago-how  to  imitate  truly  a  dull and  garrulous discourser  without repeat­ ing  the  effects  of  dullness   and  garrulity
-irreparably damages A Fairly Conven­
tional  Woman. It all  but  destroys  Joan
Barfoot's Dancing in  the  Dark  as well.
This psychological  novel,  Barfoot's second,  is narrated in  the  first person  by Edna Cormick, aged  43,  incarcerated in a mental institution for  the  "insane" act of murdering her husband with  a kitchen knife. She spends most of a year filling notebook  after  notebook  with  meticulous re-examinations of her  life.
The elder  and  less attractive of two daughters of a stiff, domineering mother, who defied the advice of the women's magazines   of  her   day  and   embarrassed


117

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Edna, and   of  an  ineffectual  hardware­ clerk  father, Edna managed  to break  out  of  the  confines  of  her  small  town  home by going  to  university.  What  she cannot shake   off,  however,   are   her  feelings  of inferiority to her  beautiful younger  sister, Stella,  and  a  pervasive sense of fear  and desolation-the subjects of the  one  and only  poem  she  has  ever  written. Edna feels so deeply  indebted to  the  first man who courts  her -Harry Cormick, whom she eventually marries-that it seems as if she  owed  her  life  to  him.  With  blind devotion, she sets out to be the perfection­ ist  housewife  that   her  mother was  not. Her  disappointment in not  being  able  to conceive children is masked by fanatical attention to the domestic  details of vacuuming, cooking,  decorating, and  lis­ tening  to Harry as he moves from promo­ tion  to  promotion, a  successful  business­ man.  Even  when  times change, the wom­ en's  movement exposes  the cracks  in  the feminine mystique, and Harry himself be­ gins to doubt  whether Edna can  be truly fulfilled   as   a   stay-at-home  wife   after  twenty  years,  she  expresses  no interest at all in another role, failing  to imagine  how a  woman  could  manage an  outside   ca­ reer  while maintaining proper household standards.
One   clue  that  her  life  may  not  be  as satisfying  as she  protests  is Edna's  recur­ ring  fantasy   of  performing on  stage - dancing or singing-and  being the  cen­ tre  of attention. All  the  rest of the  time, however,  Edna makes it abundantly clear that  she prefers  the security  of limits and rules  over  individual  freedom, that   she welcomes  "eventlessness,"  and   that   she cherishes  the  safety  of the  repetitive do­ mestic  routine. She  congratulates herself on  how  "I'd longed  for  the  normal, the ordinary, and  now here  was my life, nor­ mal  and  ordinary.... It was like  having the  pattem of  a  dress  to  sew,  merely  a matter of  taking something already laid


II8
 out  and  cutting and  stitching it properly, following the  lines."
Initially it appears that  Edna's life has been   crowned  with    greater  happiness than  the  beautiful Stella's. Marriage to a local  plumber has  trapped Stella   in  the small-town, working-class ambience that Edna has  fled.  But  when  Stella  divorces her  husband  after   leaming of  his  affair with  her  best friend, she finds a construc­ tive  purpose for  her  anger  and  forges  a new  life  for   herself   in  a  law  office  in Vancouver,  eventually   remarrying  and combining  career   with   motherhood. Leaming  nothing   from    this   example, years  afterward, when  Edna is informed that  her  husband is having  an affair  with  his secretary, she broods  on his "betrayal" for  a  twelve-hour  period, then   butchers him  with  a  kitchen  knife,  and   ends  up totally isolated in a mental hospital. Moreover, Edna's rage  and  murderous hostility  seem totally  contrived; there  is nothing in Barfoot's portrait of this timid, orderly housewife, either before  or  after the murder, to make  this wild, aggressive, criminal  act   the  least  bit  credible. The plea of insanity in the novel -as so often in real life -seems a convenient cop-out.
The first  person   narration, controlled, restrained, devoid  of passion -a fine re­ flection  of the  deadpan, emotionless state  of  the  central character-is  relentlessly realistic. But,  unconscious of  any oppres­ sion whatsoever apart from  the final  rev­ elation  of a cliched  affair, Edna Cormick is an  impoverished and  superficial com­ mentator  on   her   own   condition. The careful polish  of  Barfoot's style serves no apparent end  since  it  fails  to  illuminate the  depths,  as  well  as  the  surfaces,  of  a woman   who embodies the  mythical, self­ less  state  of   the   "happy  housewife" of the  pre-Friedan  era;  paradoxically, the seamless  style  renders totally  obscure  the origins   of  the   suppressed  fury   that  ex­ plodes  in  the  novel's  final  pages. Neither Dancing in  the  Dark  nor  A  Fairly Con-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



ventional Woman offers any challenge to that   powerful, landmark portrait  of  the harrassed middle-aged housewife, The Fire-Dwellers, nor does either explore  the current  realities   or   future  prospects of The Second  Stage.
WENDY KElTNER


TOO MANY POETS

DANIEL   DAVID    MOSES,  Delicate   Bodies.  blew­
ointment, n.p.
AUGUST   KLEINZAHLER,    eds.,  News   and
Weather:  Seven    Canadian   Poets.   Brick,
$6.so.
Squid  Inc  1982. Squid, $4.00.
JOHN   NEWLOVE, The Green  Plain.  Oolichan,
$6.oo.
MAE   HILL BROWN, Tracings. Qolichan, $6.00.

IN HIS AUTOBIOGRAPHY, Yeats  recalls a particularly well-attended meeting of the Rhymer's Club  in London: "I remember saying one night  at The Cheshire Cheese, when  more  poets  than   usual  had  come,
'None of us can  say who  will succeed,  or even who  has or has not  talent. The only thing certain about us is that we are  too many."'  How    would    Yeats    have   re­ sponded to  these  five  recent  collections, representing among  them  eighteen peo­ ple,  all  clamouring to  be  read,   and   all finding  willing   publishers?   Clearly,  if
they  could   articulate a  mood  or  theme that  was inspiring or iluminating, they would  merit   attention and   support, but such  is  not  the  case.  The first  three   of the  above   volumes   contain  mainly  rhe­ torical  echoes   of   genuine   poetry;   the fourth is more  successful; only the fifth  is a real delight.
In  Delicate Bodies, Daniel David Moses filters the  natural world  through a sensibility  more  neurasthenic than  poetic, resulting in  tepid   verses  in  which   it  is usually raining or drizzling. As his speaker stares   moodily   at   the  pervasive grey  of the  landscape, he  yearns   to  merge   with
 it; thus, in "April" the sight  of "city puddles" provokes  the lyric cry,
Oh  I could swell
full  of this  spring water smell if my tongue were  the  muscle to  breach   it....
The image   of  a  tongue   "breaching"  a smell is extremely silly;  rarely  has the romantic longing for  transcendence seemed so forced.
No  one  could   dare   accuse   the  seven poets  included in  News  and  Weather of being silly. These poets -Robert  Bring­ hurst,  Margaret Avison,  Brent  MacKay, A. F. Moritz,  Terry Humby, Guy  Birch­  ard, and Alexander Hutchison-write in what   their  editor  calls  "dead  earnest"; moreover,   they   "would  rather  have   no reader  at all than a smug, lazy one." The first  alternative seems  more  likely.  Mar­ garet  Avison's  poems  are  reprinted from Winter  Sun   and    The  Dumbfounding, and   have  been  anthologized  elsewhere, while  the work  of the other poets,  unlike hers, is pedantic without being  profound. In   "Night  Snack," for   example, Terry Humby  describes  the opening of a refrig­ erator door  with  near-epic pretension:
A slow pull  on  the  door,  a wedge  jumps  free, expanded ghost  of  lemon  pie
drags my kitchen into  yellow  particulars.
But  I am hungry-stray light pales
before  the  refulgence of operating theatres.
Here  is an  educated mind   in  love  with its  own  learning, mistaking a  sterile  ce­ rebralism  for personality, and  left circling endlessly in  the  bell  jar  of its  own  crea­  tions.
Unlike   the  News  and  Weather  poets, the  eight  people  published in  Squid   Inc
1982  at  least  seem  to  be enjoying  them­ selves. Heather Gadsby,  Polly Fleck,  Ma­  ria  Jacobs,  Eric  Layman,  Richard Lush,  Pam Oxendine, Jim Roberts, and  Martin
Singleton,    their    anonymous  editor   ex­
plains,  are  "an  intimate  association of working  poets" whose  "common interest is in getting it right. The art.  Right!" Of


Il9

BOOKS IN REVIEW



the group, Pam  Oxendine and  Jim  Rob­ erts   probably  have   the  most   potential. Oxendine's "Beating" is the most  power­  ful  poem  in  the  volume -an explosive, moving description  of  a  small  child  es­ caping a  whipping:

get  back  to the  house! she screamed beating welts  into  a tightened little ass bitter slash  rebounds
off  face  bones
soon  the  brown belly  slides  up  corrugated bark
ankles scratch
shoved by  toes fanned and  gripping well, she'll never find  you here.

However, as Martin Singleton  says of his own  work,  most  of  the  poems  in  Squid Inc 1982 "are not  so much  poems  as ex­ ercises  in  rhythmic word  control," a  dis­ claimer which   seems  extravagant  praise for something like Richard Lush's "Jose­  pha   Among   The Cabbages":    "How I came  when  she  came  I Against  me. She was every goddam thing  I I dreamed of."  There is no such  yelping  in The  Green Plain, in  which   John  Newlove  attempts to move beyond  his characteristic position  of demoralized inertia, to affirm and  even celebrate "the  land  around us green  and  happy." But  although this  long  poem  of about one hundred lines reveals  the  keen ear  for  rhythm and  cadence that  readers by now expect of a Newlove  volume,  the poem   is,   finally,   rather  nebulous  and  empty. In  his almost  incoherent preface, Newlove explains that the source  of The Green Plain is "a tangible vision of  para­ dise"  he experienced as a child. "It is so
simple," he  remarks, "that I cannot  de­ scribe it to you, or to myself." The vague­  ness of this observation implies Newlove's  problem:  he   cannot  find  an   objective correlative  adequate  to   his   vision.   In­ stead,  he  relies  on  flat, declarative state­ ments  which  reveal only that  the  posses­ sion  of  Truth  does  not  always  result  in compelling  poetry.  Perceptions such   as "There are  no  surprises,  there  is only  /


120
 what   is left" and   "There is  f this  only world" are  not  particularly earth-shatter­ ing.  A "vision  of  paradise" may  be a  joy to the visionary, but how to communicate it?
Mae  Hill  Brown's  Tracings  provides a possible  answer. Brown  shares  Newlove's sense  of  wonder, which   she  expresses  in a series of quiet, intelligent lyrics, such  as "A  Candle Burning One  Holy  Glow," where  she describes "a memory  itself half­
/ remembered":

green grows  the  candle glows  the  light
a flame   tree  set  in  a garden where nightingales sing
no mocking bird  is allowed

Here, indeed, is a vision of paradise, forcefully stated, in  images  which  linger in the  memory. Brown  was born  in 1go8, but  waited   until   1982  to  publish  Trac­ ings,  her   first  poetry   collection.  Unlike  some of her more  prolific  but less-talented colleagues, she  does  not strive to  be "lit­ erary." Her   concern  is  with   the  poem, with   the  image   first  perceived in  isola­ tion    but   then   shared  in   communion. Her,
lescence," which  poignantly evokes the often  bewildering sense of convalescent euphoria that  can  follow a serious  illness:

moving with the  crowd was  new
was  like
saying bon  voyage
to a ship not leaving

Brown's poetry  seeks an audience beyo?d the  English   department, beyond   the  In­ cestuous circle  of the poetry collective. In the   true   sense  of  the  word,  her   poetry  sings -in her  own slpendid phrase, it is
"a psalm  to celebrate f renewal."

PETER KLOVAN

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



METASYNTHESES

LINDA HUTCHEON,  Narcissistic  Narrative: The Metafictional  Paradox. Wilfrid Laurier Univ.  Press, $9.25.

THE LARGER CONTEXT  FOR   Narcissistic Narrative is by  now  a  familiar one:   the claim  that  there  is a kind  of fiction,  more common now  than  fifty years  ago  but  by no means entirely new, that  is resolutely about fiction,  i.e., that  it includes within itself  a commentary on  its own  linguistic or  narrative status, and  that  it  forces on its reader a  new  self-consciousness about the  very  activity of  reading. More,  that it allows him or her powers of creation previously   accorded  only  to  the  writer. Thus, for  example,  Roland  Barthes on the readerly text.  Within this polemic Hutcheon's contribution is  as  a  synthe­ sizer,  indicating  points   of   contact  and divergence  among  a  wide  spectrum  of critics   (among  others:   Jean   Ricardou, Robert  Scholes,   Frank  Kermode, Hans
Robert Jauss, Georges  Poulet, Roman In­
garden,  Wolfgang  Iser,   Wayne    Booth,
Gerard Genette, Umberto Eco,  Northrop Frye) , and  as a  reader of  contemporary French or  Italian  fiction.   Many of  the texts she refers  to are well known  already, and  as  metafictions. It  is no  surprise   to see Barth, Robbe-Grillet, Nabokov  ranged together.   However,   the    discussion    of French and  Italian writing in  the  196o's and    197o's-in   particular  of  the   Tel Quel   group  pre-Ig68   (Jean  Ricardou, Julia  Kristeva, Philippe Sollers   and,   as their  antecedent, Raymond Roussel), and the  Gruppo 63  (Angelo Guglielmi, Gior­ gio Manganelli, Edoardo Sanguinetti, Re­ nato  Barilli,  among others) -provides a lucid  and  informative survey  of  impor­ tant  writers who  remain unfamiliar and largely  untranslated in North America. It also   makes   thoughtful   distinctions   be­ tween   writers, noting  that  though  they share   "a  desire  to  push   the  novel  form
 to  its  linguistic   limits  and,  in  theory  at least, to surpass  it," Italian and  French radicals  work "out of different literary, political, and  social  institutions."  Inter­ estingly,  in  her   last  chapter,  Hutcheon links issues raised by the European writers  with  two Montreal  novels of the  196o's:  Aquin's Trou  de  memoire  and  Cohen's Beautiful Losers. Her  claim  is that  meta­ fiction  is not merely  "self-preening intro­ version."  On   the   contrary,  Aquin   and  Cohen have written narcissistic novels "as incitement to revolutionary activity." The political  claim  is not  entirely convincing, but  it is good  to see French and  English Canadian writers read  together, and  in a wider  context than  is usual  for  CanLit.
As  Hutcheon  herself   makes   explicit, her book has a double aim: to investigate the  modes, forms,  and  techniques of  nar­ rative  narcissism,  and  to  study  "the  im­ plications  of  these   formal   observations both   for   the   theory   of  the   novel  as  a representational genre   and  also  for   the theory of the interpretative and  the  crea­ tive functions of  the  act of  reading." In fact,  this  is  a  book  that  gets  decidedly better   as it  goes  along,  perhaps because  it shifts  from  the  first aim  to  the second.  Taking off  from   Ricardou's  horizontal and   vertical   mapping  of   self-reflexive  writing,  Hutcheon  proposes   a  four-part typology composed of diegetic narcissism  (texts   presenting  themselves  as   narra­ tives) ,   and   linguistic  narcissism    (texts presenting themselves as language). Each of these, in turn, may be either  explicit  or implicit-that is, thematized or  actual­ ized.  Thus,  four   possible   categories  of writing, each  of  which  is discussed  in  a separate chapter. The  closing   chapters are  the  most interesting. In  these Hutch­ eon  explores   the   territory at  the  outer edges of the genre,  suggesting that  we are no longer  dealing with  novels when  texts go beyond  self-consciousness  to  anti-rep­ resentation, when   (often  for  ideological reasons)    they   deny   mimesis   and   even


121

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



diegesis. With writers like Roussel, for instance, we need extra-textual help from the  author  (Comment j'ai ecrit  certains de  mes  livres)   or  from   the   back-cover blurbs  in  order  to  read  at  all.  In  such cases, Hutcheon argues,  we  have  a  kind of writing that  escapes the novelistic. Curiously, then,  in spite of the critical revolution  that   has   taken   place   in  the last  thirty  years,  New  Criticism's  insis­ tence  on fiction  as radically self-sufficient still  seems  to  hold.  However, Hutcheon adjusts the  model  by  making the  reader  no passive consumer of verbal  icons.
Hutcheon begins  her discussion  of  nar­ cissistic narrative with an allegorical read­  ing  of  the  Narcissus myth.  This  is  done against the  grain   of  Ovid's  reading, in which   Narcissus   destroys  himself,  ironi­  cally,  by  his  obsession  with  himself.   In Hutcheon's view,  the  hero  does  not  die, and  the  novel  is not  dead.  She  takes  up the  myth  to  argue  that  narcissism  is the original condition of  the novel as a genre  and   not  a  post-modern aberration. Like Narcissus,   then,    born   of   Ciriope  and  Cephisus  the  river-god who  ravishes  her, the  novel  too  is the  child  of  rape,  "self­ centred   and   self-beloved   from   its  very birth."  Hutcheon locates  this  self-obses­ sion in a long tradition starting with Cer­ vantes, Sterne, and  Diderot, but  never really specifies who  stands  as mother and father to the genres,  and  why its concep­ tion  must  be  understood as a  rape.  Ac­ cording to her  metaphor the  moment of origins  for  the  novel  is one  of  violence andfor deception. Reading  the  myth  se­ lectively,  however,  Hutcheon leaves  this part   of  the  allegory  unexplored and  di­ minishes   its   paradigmatic  force.   Given what   we  know  of  the  complicated  and  multiple   antecedents  of   the   genre    it would  be more  appropriate to describe its origins  as a gang-rape or simply  an orgy. Shamelessly, perhaps,  an  endless  stream of mothers and  fathers continue to step forth  to  claim  their   rights  over  the  bas-


122
 tard  child. With  this  phenomenon,  how­ ever,  Hutcheon is not  concerned.  Simi­ larly,  in  reminding us  that  Narcissus   is full  of  contempt and  mockery for  those who  desire  him  (spuming so many  that  finally  he is cursed  with  their  fate: "may  he himself  love in their  way and  not  pos­ sess the thing he loves"), Hutcheon raises another  unresolved question. Is the novel really  so  unfeeling a  genre? Was  it  ever as  self-important  and   unself-critical  as she suggests? Even  the  "other"  tradition of  formal realism   suffered   from  anxiety  in   its  relation  to  other  genres.   It was hardly so  mocking and  self-righteous as Hutcheon implies.   On   the  contrary,  as Walter Reed   argues   persuasively in  An Exemplary History  of the  Novel  (I g81 ) the  novel,  of  all  the  genres,  is most  sus­ picious  of itself  and  most  desirous to em­ brace   the   widest   possible   field   of  dis­ course.
Hutcheon also uses the  myth  as a historical parable, indicating  three  gen­ eral  stages  in  the  novel's  trajectory.  She refers    to   Don   Quijote   and    Tristram Shandy,  but   also   to   Van   Eyck's   "Be­ trothal of the Arnolfini" to show  that  the self-consciousness of  contemporary  writ­ ing is hardly new. In  these  works there is already a  playful yet  very  serious insis­ tence   on   the   presence  of   the   artist   as maker. From   such  beginnings, then,   the conventions of  formal realism   are  a  de­  viation. In  a   somewhat tangled  argu­ ment    Hutcheon   identifies  the    second stage, the growing hegemony of the novel, with   Narcissus  as   the   object   of  desire  (i.e.,  with   the  beautiful youth   who  an­ swers love  with  mockery  and  contempt). Under the regime  of formal  realism  in the nineteenth century the fate of language is like  that of  Echo,  spumed by  Narcissus but endlessly  desiring him. She "cannot remain silent,  cannot be ignored, and  yet cannot  be  a  creative, autonomous force on  her  own." She  is  like  novelistic  lan­ guage, which   also  "cannot  be  silenced,

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



for  it  exists  independently of  its  artistic function" in its life as ordinary language, and  yet which  depends radically upon  the work  in  which   it  appears "as  one  of  its means  and  one  of its ends." Formal real­ ism  (the  villain  in  Hutcheon's scenario) refuses  to  acknowledge its  medium, lan­  guage.  According to  Hutcheon the  cost of   such   denial   was   enormous:   "like Echo's bones  which  turned to  stone,  all that   appeared  to   remain  were   skeletal structures and  petrified conventional terms   to  be  adopted  uncritically by  the conforming  novelist." Blissfully  unaware of   its   self-engendered   weakness,    "the novel   continued  to   prosper,   seemingly self-important  and   unself-critical,  until [at  last]    it   became  Romantically   in­ trigued  with   its  own   reflection."  Thus, stage   three:  "The  process  of   narration began   to  invade  the   fiction's  content." And  so  we  have  novels  about  novelists, about   novels,  and   about the  reading of novels. Metafiction takes  up the tradition of Sterne and  Cervantes but increases  the reader's freedom and   responsibility. It shifts the focus from  the writer of fictions to  the  reader, and  suggests  that   reading parallels or  even  perhaps equals  writing. In  doing  all this, it lays bare  what  fiction has    always   done    but    has    sometimes  wished  to  repress.  When Narcissus  looks into  the  reflecting pool  and  falls  in  love with  his own  image  his end  is not  death, for Hutcheon, but  metamorphosis: "And now   they   prepared  a  funeral  pile  and brandishing  torches and   a  bier,  but  his body was nowhere to be found; instead  of the  body, they  find  a flower."  Not  death then,  for the  novel,  but  life in a different form.
It is precisely  in  the  contemporary situation of the  genre  that  Hutcheon  sees its greatest hope  for  survival. This  is at least  in  part  because   she   argues   for   a widened sense of the word  mimesis, which she acknowledges as central to the novel­ istic  project. Returning  to  Aristotle she
 notes  that  for  him  diegesis -the  act  of narration-is part  of the content rep­ resented  by the  work  of art,  and  not ex­ ternal   to it. According to  Hutcheon  the nineteenth century excluded the  process and   reduced  representation  to   a   mere  mimesis of product. Modem  metafiction, on  the  other  hand,  continues  the   long and   genuinely   novelistic   tradition  of  a mimesis of  process,  for which  art  and  life are  not  distinct entities   because  fiction­ making  in   language  is  inherently, and necessarily   a  human  activity.   Like   art, life  is  both   product  and   process.   The point  on diegesis  is well taken  and  useful
-if somewhat insistently reiterated throughout: how many  times do we need to be told  that narcissistic  fiction  is more "vital," more  widely  and  deeply  mimetic than   the  ostensible realism  of  Victorian fiction? A certain  strained  defensiveness in   Hutcheon's  argument  leads   me   to wonder why it is so important to redefine the genre's  mimesis  so as to return Barth et  al. to  the  novelistic  fold.  I  would  as­ sume it is so that  we can read metafiction properly-and this  Hutcheon  certainly helps  us to do.  But  it should  also help  us read the aberrant texts -the presumably unself-conscious  writing of  Balzac,  Eliot,  Dickens.  Here  Hutcheon is considerably weaker. There  is little  evidence of  more  than   a  sidelong  glance   at  those  earlier works,  so convenient as  models  and  yet, in  fact,  so much   more  complicated and interesting than   Hutcheon allows.  Fred­ ric   Jameson,  Patricia   Tompkins,   and  Jonathan   Culler,   among   others,    have  warned us  recently  that   the  moment of interpretation  is   over,   that   elucidating texts,  passages, or  references is no longer  the  proper  task of  the critic. It is time  to ask larger questions, describe  wider  fields. This  may  well  be  so. And  yet  surely   a touchstone  for  the  reader of theory,  and a measure  of  the  theoretical critic's skill is  the  precision   and  insight with  which models can  address individual texts. I am


123

BOOKS IN REVIEW



not   satisfied   that   Hutcheon  has   given writers  like Balzac the full measure  of her intelligent attention. Or  perhaps her par­ adigm-useful  as  it  is to  flog  the  past and  claim  the  primacy  of the new -can only   do  so  by  caricaturing  the   earlier  texts. To  be fair,  however,  I  should  note that  in  a closing  chapter  Hutcheon soft­ ens  the  distinctions:   all  narratives, she says  "are to  some  extent  'scriptible' ... produced rather  than   consumed  by  the reader."
I wonder, too, if there  is not  a generic problem here.  Hutcheon has chosen  to explore  metafiction by reference to a very large  number of texts, many of which  are allowed  no more  than a citational space: a few sentences perhaps, at  times  just a phrase.  Obviously  she wants  to show how wide-ranging the  phenomenon is, but  too often  we simply have  to take her word for it.  There is  an   element  of  self-display built  into  this  mode  which  is not  always to the  purpose. Who,  after  all,  will read Narcissistic Narrative?  An  academic  au­ dience,  to be sure.  But it is most  unlikely that   we  are  all  familiar with  the same texts  and   a  shared   ground  needs  to  be established. At  times  there  is too  much  exposition, at others not enough.
A final  quibble. It is irritating to have French and  Italian quotations-whose meaning is essential   to  the  argument­ left   untranslated,  even   in   a   footnote, while Spanish and German texts-whose verbal  qualities  might be  just  as  crucial
-are never  quoted in the original. This is, as  Hutcheon points  out  in  her  occa­ sionally  stilted   way,  "for  reasons  of  au­  thorial  linguistic  competence."   Under­ standable perhaps in a dissertation; rather less so in a book. At times I wish Narcis­ sistic  Narrative   had   freed   itself   more  completely from  its  origins  as  a  thesis. Nevertheless, in its knowledgeable discus­ sion of current  French and  Italian writ­  ings,  and  in  its  account of  the  edges  of a   genre,   the   book   is  thoughtful  and


124
 thought-provoking. We  know  that  Ital­ ians   are    interested   in   our    literature. Hutcheon shows  us, too,  why  we should  be seriously  interested in theirs.

JENNIFER LEVINE

DOWN THE RED LANES

PATRICK   LANE,    Old   Mother.  Oxford    Univ. Press, $6.gs.
ONCE UPON  A  TIME there   were  three brothers: Red,  Pat,  and  John. Their mother was a teacher who loved  reading. She   read    to   them    from   books.   Their father was of  wild  prairie stock, descen­ dent  of hard sadistic  men  and submissive  women. The  boys  grew   up   in   British  Columbia's Okanagan  country,  children of  the  Great  Depression; and  in  the  six­ ties Red  became a legend. He  descended on Vancouver as fiery poet  and  protester against war; but  also in his poetry,  tender and   gentle,  fascinated  by  the  innocence of children. One  week in December  1g64 three poets joined him in giving a poetry reading   in   a   bookstore   on   Granville Street:  Milton Acorn, Judy Copithorne, and  myself.  Red   Lane's poems  for  chil­ dren  warmed our  hearts. But only a short  time   later  Red   Lane  was  dead,  of   an embolism.
I thought of him  as a Peer Gynt  figure
-even more  so when  Patrick Lane  a few years   later  in   Edmonton  read   a   long poem  in  eulogy  of  his  brother. "I feel  I have  to  take  on  his  task,  become  a  poet with   a  social  conscience." He  has  done so, but  with  his own  very individual slant in  form   and   content. The voice  is  not Red   Lane's but  his  own; yet  inexorably drawn from  the same background of male toughness, sensitive  perception, violence and  guilt,  fear  of  death, tender yearning for the fragile unprotected creatures in nature and  in human life. All of these elements  are   to  be  found  in  his  latest work,  Old  Mother.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



The title itself is drawn from  a gouache by John Gould   titled  Woman and  Bird. It depicts  an  old,  cowled  woman sitting. Above  her descends a black  bird  of prey, white  claws extended. She seems to be re­ signed,   awaiting the  inevitable.  And  in the   opening  poem,   "Old   Mother" the poet  identifies the  bird  with  the  woman:
I hold  you  to me  like  a sacrament.
I drink your  endurance.
I keep  the  point of your  talon deep  in  my  heart.
That image  is repeated throughout Part I : a small  boy cowering, hidden,  watch­ ing  adult men  at  a  Side  Show   (shades  of The  Tin Drum!); a young girl  falling  into  a mess of broken eggs, spurting with half-formed bodies; a   woman  axing   a rooster; and  on  to a series of apocalypses, some  violent, some  tender and  grieving. Poems  not  easy  or  pleasant to  read,  but constructed with  clean,   compressed lan­  guage. Whatever one's  sense of revulsion in reading these poems  in Part I they  are compelling because of the care  taken  with intonation,  internal music  and   dramatic intensity.  From  Hell  they  climb  towards Heaven.
Not so, the poems  in Part  II. The mid­ dle  section  of  the  book  is Patrick  Lane's attempt  to  write  a  prairie  documentary
a la  Kroetsch, .a  la  Bowering,  a la  all
those   bright  youngish    Canadians  who
have   scorned  what   Duncan  Scott   had done,  what  Pratt had  done,  what  Birney had   done   but  who  try and  catch   up.  I do  not  believe  that this  is  Lane's forte. But  there  is a third Lane who  appears in Part III-the  real  Red  Lane? For  this section,  "The China Poems," concerns a visit  to Red  China along  with  four  other Canadian writers. By some  magic  or simply  by an  effort  of  will  Patrick Lane has  cleansed   his  thoughts and  his  words of all  the  hate,  violence and  irony  of his previous  poetry.  In   simple   direct   lan­ guage  he  describes  individuals and  their way of life as friends, as humans.
 A grandfather sits  playing with  a child. She laughs as  she  runs   through his  hands. He  could  catch her  but  what for?  She  is young  and  her  laughter is good  in  the  sun.

Any  one  of  us, we  think,  could  write  as simply as this. It is refreshing that  Patrick Lane   can   do   it  at   last,   naturally,   ad­ mitting:

What Iwant  to  take  back  from  China is found  only  in  the  dream of the  red
chamber.
Ashamed, Iwalk  into  the  crowds on  the street
where  young  women, bright as birds,
run  laughing among the  Wu  t'ung  trees.

DOROTHY LIVESAY


AUX ANGES

GINETTE ANFOUSSE,  Le  Savon. Les editions La courte ·echelle, n.p.
GINETTE ANFOUSSE,  L'Hiver, ou  le Bonhomme Sept Heures. Les editions La  courte echelle, n.p.
YVES  THERIAULT,    Popok    [e   petit   Esquimau.
Les •editions  Quebecer, n.p.
CLAUDE JASMIN,  Les  Contes du  Sommet-Bleu.
Les editions Quebecer, n.p.

'"PrcHou,  je  suis  certaine  que   toi,  au moins, tu  me comprends.'" La  petite Jiji a raison,  Ginette Anfousse  semble l'illus­ trer dans Le Savon-ce sont les animaux
( et   non   les  mamans)  qui   s'entendent avec  les enfants  comme les  deux  doigts de  la  main.   Les  animaux  n'ordonnent rien, mais les mamans sont comme  le bon
Dieu.  Maman "voiT  tout,  SAlT  tout,  DE­ VINE  tout," le remarque Jiji.  Ses yeux se fixent  constamment sur  le  ciel;  elle  ne peut  faire  autrement que  d'endosser, en principe, le  reglement  maternel  exigeant qu'une  petite  fille  doit  toujours se  gar­  der  propre.  Pichou, le  bebe-tamanoir si
mignon  de Jiji,  participe silencieusement
a la vie reelle  et  imaginaire de son amie.
Par  consequent, il  sait  qu'en realite  Jiji
ne sera  pas  "TOUJOURS, TOUJOURS  pro­
pre.'' La  creme   glacee   au   chocolat  est


125

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



tellement seduisante et le champ de  ma­ dame   Cote   si  attirant!  Les  mamans ne comprennent-elles  pas  qu'un   enfant  ce n'est   pas  "une  image  dans   un  cadre"? Mais  oui.  Jiji  sait  bien  qu'en entrant sa mere  lui  pardonnera  et  lui  dira: '"Jiji, cours  te  laver!"'  Les  dix-neuf   pages  de l'histoire gaie  illustree  en  couleurs  vives par  Ginette Anfousse  depeignent ce dont  la  petite  Jiji  est  consciente:  il  y  a  de bonnes   raisons   pour   le  savon.   Maman Anfousse est d'accord.
"Cloclo Tremblay l'a  vu,  lui,  le  BON­ HOMME  SEPT  HEURES."   Le  loup-garou, le marchand de  sable, et  ce BONHOMME, ils existent en  verite.  Ala troisieme  page de L'Hiver, on voit Jiji  et Pichou  qui  re­ gardent par  la  fenetre,  fouillant du  re­ gard  la  noirceur  hivernale. lis  cherchent a voir  le  monstre  hideux  qui  cherche les enfants  lorsqu'il n'y  a  pas  de  lune,  pas d'etoiles. L'image du BONHOMME SEPT HEURES   s'approche, tout proche, si proche....  "SEPT   HEURES ET    UNE    MI­ NUTE."    Maintenant  on   peut    dormir. Cette  histoire   anime  une  des  sortes  de crainte  qu'ont  souvent les  enfants-et les adultes. L'art de Ginette Anfousse  est d'une simplicite astucieuse.
"A  chacun ses habitudes," se prononce le narrateur de  Popok le petit Esquimau. Mais  la  le<;on qu'Yves   Theriault  donne aux  gens  du  Sud  souligne,  au  contraire, la presence d'une vie spirituelle depassant les  particularites  culturelles  et   linguis­ tiques.    "Votre  ami    Popok,   mon   ami Popok,  notre ami Popok" -nous sommes tous des notres.  Popok le  petit Esquimau amorce  une   histoire  d'amour  qui   nous menera un   jour  d'un  bout  a !'autre du monde.
Popok   n'a  que  huit  ans,  mais  il  a  de grandes idees. Ce  gaf<;on debrouillard, habitant du village de Povungnituk (situe sur les bords  de  la baie d'Hudson), vou­ drait  le desir ardent de son createur, d'un retour a  un  monde qui n'a  jamais  connu  la chute de l'homme et la  tour  de Babel.
 "Ce  qu'il   voulait surtout, Popok,  c'etait de  pouvoir aimer   tout   le  monde sur  la terre,    qu'ils    soient    blancs ... noirs ... jaunes  ou  rouges,  ou de  n'importe quelle couleur. Et  qu'ils   parlent n'importe qu' elle langue!" Popok  se fera-t-il compren­ dre   a   tous?   Sans   doute.  Different  des adultes, ce gar<;on connait meme  le parler de  toutes  les betes. Et  c'est  ainsi  que  de­ butent les aventures de  Popok: il sauve
la vie a Hua-Hua (le  grand  ptarmigan),
a  Pacopaco  (le  phoque  espiegle),  et  a
Bourlouki (l'ours blanc  trop  bon pour chasser   sa  nourriture). A  l'aide de  ces trois   amis,   Popok   porte  secours   a   une bande de  chasseurs de  son  village  qui  se sont  egares  dans  un  brouillard au  large de la baie.  En  temoignage de leur recon­ naisance, les villageois  accordent a Popok  la  permission de  garder avec  lui  ses trois compagnons; ils s'engagent  meme a !'ai­ der  a les nourrir. Popok, avec  Hua-Hua, Pacopaco, et  Bourlouki,  aura  de   nom­ breuses  aventures qui  nous  seront  "sure­ ment   racontees dans  l'avenir." Les  lec­ teurs   peuvent  s'attendre a  ce  que  The­ riault tienne  sa  promesse.
Une  histoire  d'amour, Popok le petit Esquimau  s'addresse (il  est ironique a le constater) aux  "guerriers" qui  aiment construire des forts en hiver.  La vigeur masculine   est    tou jours    pour    quelque chose  chez  Theriault, un  "constructeur," pour   ainsi   dire,   qui   "fait  des   romans comme on  se fait  des  muscles" (v.  Dic­ tionnaire  pratique  des auteurs  quebecois,
1976). Certes, Popok  est de la famille d'Agakuk et de son heritage a bien des egards.   Mais    Popok    jouira-t-il  d'une grace  accordee peu  frequemment dans ce bas  monde, de  Ia  jeunesse  sans  fin?  Ou un  jour  deviendra-t-il adulte? Nulle  re­ ponse  pour  le moment. En  attendant, on peut  se permettre, en compagnie de !'au­ teur, de  rever  d'un  paradis terrestre. Ou,  d'apres  Theriault,   trouver  ce   paradis? Dans le  Grand  Nord  qui  hante toujours son esprit. C'est  la  que  se situe  son eden

BOOKS IN REVIEW



qui  se repand, par  la  voie  de !'imagina­
tion, dans  tout  l'univers.
Les  oeuvres   du   vigoureux Theriault visent   le  public   jeunesse   a  maintes  re­
prises -neuf   romans "pour  les  jeunes" dans   les  annees   soixante,  par   exemple. Avec la parution des Contes du  Sommet­ Bleu,  Claude Jasmin, lui  aussi  qui  s'est
penche sur  le theme du  "retour a !'inno­
cence"  ( v.  Fran ois                    Livres   et
auteurs  canadiens, I967), s'addresse aux enfants pour  la  premiere fois. Et  le per­ sonnage que  joue Jasmin en tant que nar­  rateur et auteur est  dissemblable du  role que  s'adonne  le  raconteur de  Popok   le petit  Esquimau:  non d'un pere de famille  tres  grand,  tres  sage,  et  tres  fort,   mais
d'un  "mon oncle" doux,   pret   a chaque
instant a participer aux   jeux  et  a la  vie
des  enfants. "Aux enfants, on  peut  tout
dire," Jasmin nous  avise. Aupres  des  en­
fants,  on peut  beaucoup apprendre.
En compagnie de ses deux  neveux, Christian (six  ans)  et  Pierre-Luc (huit), le  narrateur du   premier des  Contes du
Sommet-Bleu, "Le  dragon," arrive  a com­
prendre ce que  ressent  un serpent insolite
pris dans un petit lac et qui souhaiterait s'epanouir dans  lamer. Les autres contes
-d'un   crapaud   geant  qui    demande qu'on  l'emmene a  un   lac,   d'un  grand loup   qui   s'est   echappe d'une  cage   de
cirque, d'un  orignal  qui   choisit   de  re­
gagner  la   montagne,  et   d'une  famille d'ours qui,  a la  fin, monte plus  au  nord,
par    exemple - nous    ramenent   a   ce
theme:  la  liberte. Les  animaux parlent
aux  hommes pour  un  moment-et  puis s'enfuient. Meme l'ours gregaire de  Jas­ min  finit  par  quitter le lieu  des  hommes: la  sensibilite  et  l'enchantement  ne  refu­  sent   d'admettre le  jugement  mur   chez Jasmin. Ces  histoires  merveilleuses  nous
proviennent d'un  maitre raconteur a la
fois doue et modeste. Un  regal  pour  nous
tous.

CAMILLE R. LA BOSSIERE
 TIME-TRAVEL

ELIZABETH  BREWSTER,   junction. Black  Moss,
$6.gs.
ELIZABETH  BREWSTER,   The  Way Home, New
Poems. Oberon, n.p.

CANADIAN FICTION  has  never  before  seen a train  like the one in Junction. It carries Ariana Vail,  the  novel's  widowed,  mid­ dle-aged  heroine,   from   a   mysteriously  metaphysical  junction  back  to her  youth  as Ary Oliver  in  I 948 in a small  Ontario town.  Not having learned how dangerous it is to doze on this  train, Ariana is trans­ ported  once  again  in  the  second  half  of the  novel,  this  time  to  I 9 ro,  and   trans­ formed   into  her  aunt, Ariana Crandall. Brewster's  train  is  a kind  of CN  branch­ line version of  a  time  machine, which,  at the  very least,  gives new  meaning to  the phrase,  "the national dream."
The matter-of-factness with  which  the novel accomplishes this dreamy  trip  from reality is part  of its ingenuity. But beyond ingenious conception  the  novel  will  not go. Wisely perhaps, Brewster  avoids  too much  artifice  with  her  dream-train, and the   novel   foregoes   any   post-modernist
labyrinth  of  reality   a  la  Robbe-Grillet
(even  though one  of Ariana's namesakes
is Ariadne) . Nor  is the  novel  primarily a witty  or  ironical  investigation of  a  dis­ placed    character  like   Nabokov's   Pnin,  who  also  has   trouble  with   trains.  And Junction is  not   (thankfully)  a  novel in which  the past  is re-animated so  that  the dead   may  speak   with  stony  faces about the present. What the novel would  like to be  is  a  study   of  a  richly  sensitive  con­ sciousness struggling to focus  the  blur  of dream,  nightmare,  fantasy, and,   in  this case,  Ovid's  metaphysics, for  the  novel's  epigraph invites  us to see the  work  as an exploration of  the  notions that only change is permanent, that  "nothing dies," and  that  "the spirit  wanders, comes  now here,  now  there,  and  occupies  whatever frame  it pleases...."


127

BOOKS IN  REVffiW



Certainly,  the   heroine  is  more   ether than  flesh, and  the further Ariana travels from  the  present, the closer  she comes  to losing her immediate identity and becom­ ing a character in  the  past. She is aware  of   the   problem:  "I'm   dreaming  her dreams,  she   thought."   Such   dreaming suggests that  Ariana is a Borges character exiled  to rural  Ontario,  but  in fact,  she's a blander version of an Atwood  character surfacing from  a  time warp.
The contradictions of Ariana's predica­ ment   are  numerous, and  Brewster   must contrive explanations for these. As Ariana Crandall, Ary Oliver is in the compromis­ ing  position  of  having  to  "remember" a life  which   she  knows  very  little   about.  Conveniently,  she  is spared  the  agony  of embarrassing errors because Ariana  Cran­ dall  suffered  amnesia; thus   Ary  Oliver does  not  have  to fake  the  finer  points  of quilting.  Brewster   makes   better   use  of other   paradoxes, but   for  the  most  part the  predicaments are  neither threatening nor humorous-but at best curious.  The interior monologue concerning these par­ adoxes  (full  of too many  rhetorical ques­ tions:   "Was this  a  practical   joke?")   is especially  stiff and  colourless:  "If Danny  and  Priscilla  knew  that  they would  quar­ rel and  never  marry, they wouldn't sit so happily eating  their   poached  salmon," muses  Ariana. And  she  adds   with  eco­ logical  seriousness  that   "there  wouldn't be  salmon  from  the  river  for  sale  thirty  years from now...."
Such   monologue is  necessary  because of the heroine's isolation; she has  no one
with  whom  she can  share  the strangeness of  her  experience. Not  that  she  particu­ larly  wants   to,  for  she  tells  us  that   she was "trying to be as inconspicuous as she could...."  But  it  is  difficult   to  remain interested   in   a   character  who   would really rather fade into  the parlour's floral wallpaper. One senses, in fact,  that  Brew­ ster  is more  interested in  the  wallpaper, in the texture of history,  than  in the  psy-
 chology  of her  heroine. The result  is a lot of   late    Victorian  knick-knackery and early  twentieth-century rural  detail: cor­ sets  and   lace,  violet   scents,  and  choke­ cherry  jelly.  Incident and   plot  are   up­  staged  by Canadian  Ensigns, period  post­ age  stamps,  automobiles-and Halley's Comet, which, as a periodically returning astral  body,  at  least  has  symbolic  import and  keeps  the  wandering spirit of which Ovid  speaks  fresh  in our  minds.
The spirit of Brewster's poetry  wanders
just as far  as the  spirit  of her  fiction,  and like  Ariana's life,  it  grows  more  diffuse the further it travels from home-which, in  the  case  of Brewster's poetry,  is where the heart is. Of the three sections which comprise The  Way Home, the first ("The Hoop") , because  it contains the  most in­ timately observed, deeply  felt,  and  intri­ cately  imaged poems,  succeeds  in  a  way the final  two sections  do not.
The opening poem  of  the  volume, "Tired of  Books,"  declares  an  emphatic, if not  entirely convincing, poetics:

Tired of  books
I don't want to write literature
the  stuff  students are examined on
just  notes
a few  memories

She  has succeeded. Occasional images in­ vite  remembering, but  for  the  most  part the verse is leisurely  and  carefully prosaic,  gliding by  both  ear  and  eye in  syntactic chunks, more  paragraph than stanza. The poems  of  memory, and  of  childhood in particular,  are   the   most   evocative.  Of these,  "The Hoop" deserves mention be­ cause  it  so  forcefully repeats  the  issues which   are   prominent  in   Junction  and  which   so  obviously   preoccupy Brewster. Like   Ariana  Vail,   the   speaker  in   this
poem  wants "to  go back in time  I further
and  further"; time  goes  "unreeling and
unreeling"   until    "Alpha   and    Omega meet   I and  time  begins  again   I circular

BOOKS IN REVIEW



as  a  child's hoop." Ovid   again. In  the past,   Brewster   finds   not   only   recycled time   but    also   erotic    girlhood   fantasy ("The Young Girl  Waits  for Love"), and unsettling readjustments of youth  and family life in such poems as "Seeing My Picture as a Young  Girl," "Graduation Evening," "Birthday," and  "Spellbound," while in others the time frame is extended by invoking the archeological past. "Play­ ing  the  Bones"  is a poem  which connects the  immediate family  skeletons  with  the skeletons  of  the  primitive family of man,  and   "Remembering Eden"  concerns an unearthed   Ethiopian    skeleton     ("Eve­ Lucy")  with  whom the speaker identifies by virtue of their common experiences of love  and  fear.  Yet, as  so often   happens in  Brewster's  poetry,  the  image  collapses into  a  heap  of  prose.  About   Eve-Lucy's life, she asks:

Was  life  good  then
or  neither better nor  worse than it  is now?

Such   laxity   becomes  even   more  promi­
nent  in the final  two sections  of the book.
In the Canadian section,  "East and West,"   there   is  a   rambling  associative poem,  "Calgary as a Christmas Tree in February," which  tries to capture the distinctiveness, the  "thisness" of  particu­ lar times and  places, but, like other poems in   the   volume,    its  effect   depends  too much  on  the  resonance of  the  final  line. We   also  find   museum   poems   that   are cluttered with  catalogue:  a battle poem, "At  Batoche";  one  on  New  Brunswick's folk hero, Houdini, "The Hero  as Escape Artist";  and   a  longer   narrative  poem, "Helmcken House, Victoria," which shows that  Brewster's casualness wrenches narrative as well as lyric.
Brewster   looks  for   her   Byzantium in the  Antipodes, though the  South  Pacific is not the colourful mosaic which  she expected; she  decides   in  "Comparisons and  Expectations" that  it is her own "sub-
 Arctic landscape I that  dazzles more." In other   poems  in  this  final  section  of  the volume  ("Cook's Gardens") she attempts to make  the  foreign  familiar by insisting
that  she is "no  alien  I wherever sun and
water  meet" ("The World  is My  Coun­
try"). And in the poem "Cook's Garden,"
the  speaker  is  disoriented  by  the  fauna ("I see a sudden I graceless   jump  of - I a  kangaroo?  wallaby?  -") , but   she
feels at home with the moon because it remains  "neither English  nor Australian."
There are  vivid  images   in  these  poems
(an  Australian sun  is a "gold  wafer dangling I divine, dangerous"),  but
largely, one senses that  the  poet  is reach­ ing  for  subject   matter. The  poems   are littered with  reflective  moments in  hotel rooms,  on  tour  buses,  and   in  museums,  but  the  moments lack  a  sense  of  poetic experience and  capture instead the desire for it.
Travel poems  present special  problems for  the  poetic  imagination. The  experi­ ence may not be so much  felt as observed, and   there   is  always   the   temptation  of empty  description. One response  to these dangers  is itself another danger-prosaic speculation, which characterizes much  of The Way  Home. The themes of coloniza­  tion,  of  nation-building and  "home," of "the   family    of   man"   are    significant enough in themselves,  and  one senses that they spring  from  genuine sources:  skepti­ cism,  fear,   and   a  desire   for   the  soul's permanence. Yet  one  wishes  that   Brew­ ster  would  indeed find  the  way  home  to the poems of the first part of  this volume,  where  experience, though  less exotic,  is more intimate and  imaginatively crafted.

BRENTON MAC LAINE





129

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



LE REVE

MICHEL  TREMBLAY, La Duchesse et le roturier.
Lemeac, $14.95·
JEAN   ETHIER-BLAIS,  Les  Pays  etrangers.  Le- meac, $24·95·

LE TROISIEME  VOLET des  Chroniques du Plateau Mont-Royal -le quatrieme sera Des   nouvelles  d'Edouard,  lettres -ra­ mene  les principaux termes  de la serie et les multiples personnages de la  tribu: la placide et intelligente Grosse Femme, ses fils, son mari  ( tres peu), sa belle-mere, sa belle-soeur, sa niece Therese, adolescente deludie,  qui   vivent   tous  sous  le  meme toit.    Edouard,   quadragenaire  qui   sort beaucoup, fait  le  lien  entre  l'interieur et l'exterieur, la maison  et la ville, la vie et le  spectacle.  La  Duchesse  et  le  roturier,  c'est  lui,  deux personnes   en  une  seule: homme-femme, vendeur de souliers et travesti, snob  et simple.
On  connaissait Edouard par  le  mono­ logue   dramatique  de   La   Duchesse   de Langeais  ( 1970), on  le voit ici surtout de l'exterieur: avec ses chums  du  poulailler du  Palace,  avec  les  vedettes  de  varietes,  dont  la  Poune  et  Juliette Petrie,  dans  sa famille, ecrase  par  !'amour de  sa  mere, libere  par  la  comprehension de  sa  belle­ soeur. Apres bien des peripeties,  il triom­  phe,  deguise   en  duchesse,  lors  d'un re­ cital  de  Tino Rossi.  Sa  propre soeur  ne Ie reconnalt pas. Il decide  alors  de partir pour  Paris,  via New York.
Ce  roman du  spectacle  est  un  roman du reve,  du mythe,  de la vision interieure. Sortant des coulisses du  show-business  et des  bars  specialises,  on  tombe  dans  des rues enneigees, redevenues compagnardes. Nature  et  artifices   se  combattent,  s'ap­ puient.  "Le   reve  etait   devenu   une  se­ conde   nature chez  lui."  Chez  Edouard, qui  imite  les stars afin  de se  trouver lui­
meme;  chez   le  neveu   Marcel,  qui   ira peut-etre a l'asile  pour  avoir  caresse  un
chat   imaginaire  (Duplessis), frequente


130
 les trois Parqes  (Rose,  Violette et Mauve)
et improvise prodigieusement sur le piano a queue d'un grand magasin; chez la Grosse  Femme, qui  lit  des  romans   pour
s'evader et  s'  "aider a vivre!"; chez  son
jeune  fils, futur ecrivain....
Le   livre   lui-meme  est   spectaculaire­ ment-ou     speculairement- presente. Precedes  d'une multiple dedicace et  de mercis,  de  deux   epigraphes  d'Andersen et  de  Balzac, le prologue, les trois  parties  et  trois intercalaires s'ornent  des  "dits" de   Victoire,   la   sage   et   immemoriale grand-mere, figure  folklorique (soeur   de Josaphat-le-Violoneux) et personnage re­ aliste: "Les  signes  du  ciel  viennent  rare­  ment   d'en   haut." Le  roman se  termine, fait   exceptionnel,  sur  une  breve  biblio­ graphie des  ouvrages  consultes,   dont   le Burlesque  au Quebec de Chantal Hebert.
L'immediat  apres-guerre,  entre   Bon­ heur  d'occasion  et  Tit-Coq, est  saisi  par Tremblay  dans   son   atmosphere   et   ses ambigui:tes:  religiosite sans religion,  igno­ rance et  ouverture,  quartiers  villageois, chaleur et  lumieres. On  s'enferme ou  on sort,  on  travaille  ou  on  s'amuse. On  est pauvre, mais on  consomme et on  produit du  reve.  Le  monde traditionnel n'evolue pas, il  bascule.  La  Duchesse  et le roturier
est  a lire  en  meme   temps  que  les  Pays
etrangers de Jean Ethier-Blais: le plateau
Mont-Royal enforce Outremont.
Jean Ethier-Blais est a l'aise  dans  tous
les genres  de la litterature in time: il a un
Dictionnaire de moi-meme ( 1976), tient surement son  Journal,  prepare ses  Me­ moires. Critique, romancier, chroniqueur, il  nous  entretient  toujours  de  ses  etats  d'ame, souvenirs ou  impressions. Il  lit  sa vie comme il  lit  Saint-Simon, Proust  ou Madame du  Deffand. Jean  Ethier-Blais
est  a lui-meme son  propre classique,  son
meilleur personnage.
I1 devait un  jour  ou  l'autre ecrire  Les
Pays   etrangers,   dont    il   emprunte   le titre  a un  proverbe allemand: "Chaque
homme  porte   dans   son  coeur   un   pays

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



etranger. 11 ne devient lui-meme qu'apres l'avoir decouvert et explore." Ethier-Blais n'a   rien   decouvert  ici-il   savait   deja tout -, mais  il  a  explore  en  detail   sa pre-adolescence, ses maitres et amis de college, Borduas et le milieu  aristique, intellectuel, mondain, politique, du Mon­ treal  de  I 947-I 948.  Pays  familiers.
"Les  personnages de ce roman relevent
de !'imagination de l'auteur et  parfois  de la  vie,"  indique une  note  liminaire. J'in­ verserais  les  termes: la  memoire  est  ici plus  precise,  plus  fertile que  !'invention. Elle  en  est  meme  encombrante. 11   y  a plus  de  clefs que  de  portes  ce  roman  in­ terminable. Le  portail, bien  en  evidence,  est le Pere  Bergevin, qui  publia Leur  es­ perance  sous le pseudonyme de Germain Laval,  comme   le  Pere   Rodolphe Dube  avait  ecrit  Leur  inquietude sous  le nom de  Fran<_;ois Hertel. Le  college  de  Mont­ Pele   correspond   parfaitement-meme s'il est rapproche de  Montreal -au Col­ lege  du  Sacre-Coeur de  Sudbury,  alma mater  de Jean-Ethier Blais qui deviendra Jean   Ethier-Blais.  Celui-ci   serait-il    le jeune  et  brillant Pierre-Paul  du  roman? Modestement, "l'auteur  de  ce  livre"  se classe parmi  les "mediocres et  paresseux" anonymes du   centre de  la  classe.  N'en croyons  rien.  11  tire  trop  bien  les ficelles. "Ah!  que    ne    suis-je   Dante!",  pour­  rait-il  s'exclamer, devant  la  cheminee de l'INCO,  comme  le  Pere   Bergevin   a  sa descente du  train.
Jean   Ethier-Blais, qui  a  toujours  reve de  fonder   un   ordre  religieux et  de  le diriger sans en faire  partie, appelle "angelistes" -ce  nom  leur  convient mal
-les jesuites  dont  il fait  sonner le trous­ seau  de  clefs.  11  leur  donne une  origine  italienne  (non   basque   espagnole),  des Ecrits  fondateurs au  lieu  des   Exercises,  etc. Le recteur du college,  historiquement le Pere  Guy Courteau, doit  sans doute  le nom  de Berenger au  prenom de sa soeur, Berengere,   qui    publia   quelque   chose. Leur   oncle   celebre,   Marcel  Dugas,   ap-
 parait dans   Les   Pays  itrangers  comme une  ombre  errant dans  son  exil  parisien et sa mort  montrealaise.
Les  "pays  etrangers," ce  sont  d'abord
l'art et la litterature, puis les amities  a decanter. La vie se deroule, le livre se fait par  evocations et  connotations: des cita­ tions latines,  un  cantique de Jean Racine a la  chapelle, une  entrevue avec  Robert Elie,  conseiller  artistique, un  portrait de Fran<;ois Meurice, "critique d'art, profes­ seur a l'universite, gros  blond  souriant et caoutchouteux" qui doit son nom a Mau­ rice Gagnon et  son  prenom a  Fran ois­ Marc Gagnon,  son  fils.  Les  happy   few pourront se delecter a ce  jeu de masques transparents.
Ethier-Blais n'a  pas la rigueur hautaine de Montherlant. 11  (se)  raconte avec une verve qu'on  pourrait dire  journalistique. Tout est ici echo,  rumeur, anecdote, dis­ cours.  Tantot complice, tantot  ironique, l'auteur fait  revivre une epoque, ou  plu­ tot les idees et les cliches sur  une epoque. Pour   le  peuple,  voir  Michel Tremblay. Ethier-Blais s'est  reserve  l'elite,  toutes  les elites:   les bons  eleves,  le  clerge  instruit, un  chien  aux  "grands yeux  de  philoso­ phe," Borduas et Duplessis  en  personnes, quelques notables  et  fonctionnaires, un couple  ( le seul)   de  bourgeoises  raffinees, Mesdames   Soubliere et  Dupre, mere  et fille-c'est la famille de  Pierre-Paul-, qui aiment  les "visions de neige" d'Ozias Leduc  et ouvrent une galerie de tableaux rue Laurier.
Voila  le  dernier salon  oil  l'on   cause, voila le centre geoculturel des  Pays etrangers.   Tout  se  noue   et   se  denoue au tour  de ces dames: Bergevin  defroque, Borduas   mijote  son   Refus  global,  Phi­ lippe   Aycelin   fait   sa  cour   a   Madame Dupre, Claude Gauvreau et Martha Jack­ son font de la figuration intelligente. Pour  les  vacances  finales,  Pierre-Paul ira  voir mourir  son meilleur ami,  le solide Simon,  dans  une  ferme  nicoletaine qui  est  une veritable   gentilhommiere.  "Inutile   de

BOOKS IN REVIEW


voyager   lorsqu'on  a  l'avantage d'etre  a
l'etranger chez  soi !"

LAURENT MAILHOT


ON HEBERT
ANNE  HEBERT,  Les  Fous  de  Bassan.  Le  Seuil,
$12-95·
ROBERT  HARVEY, Kamouraska d'Anne Hebert: Une   Ecriture  de  la   passion  suiui  de:  Pour un  nouveau Torrent. Hurtubise HMH, n.p.

LES  FOUS DE  BASSAN,  a  complex,   terse, yet ambiguous novel, won its author the prestigious Prix  Femina for  1982. But though Anne  Hebert has  spoken  openly and  honestly  about her  work and  herself as a writer, the  novel  remains  enigmatic, perhaps because of its richness and the multiple readings it  offers.
The title  refers  to  the  familiar name that   the  inhabitants of  Bonaventure  Is­ land  give to a  type  of seagull.  The novel is about birds,   but   also  about   the  con­ nections between   man  and  nature  in  an imaginary place called Griffin Creek. The four  families  of American Loyalists living there  since  1 782 have learned   to exist in better  harmony  with  nature  than   with men.  Incapable of  adapting to American Independence, unwilling to abandon their atavistic  beliefs and  allegiance, they  formed    a   closed   society,   convinced  of their superiority and  proud  of their singu­ larity. But  the  small  colony is slowly  dis­ persed   after   the   sudden   disappearance the night  of August  31, 1936, of two cou­ sins,  almost   sisters,  aged  seventeen  and fifteen.  Their  death  broke  the  link  that  kept   the   colony   united.  The  link   was made  of common  lust, shame,  guilt,  fear, curiosity, cruelty-but  it had  motivated the life of  the village  for the previous  two hundred   years-and the  same  secrets, indolence,  beliefs,  and  complicity   which had  kept  them   united   now  caused   their slow  dispersion. Only   a  handful of  de­ crepit citizens  and  houses is left,  and  the
 novel begins with  the mock celebration of the  bicentenary of the  village's  founding.
Throughout  the   novel,  the   reader   is
hoping to find  out  who  is responsible for the deaths of Nora  and  Olivia, yet almost from  the  beginning it  is obvious  that  the distinction between   guilt  and   innocence is irrelevant. All  the  inhabitants of  Grif­ fin  Creek  are  guilty  and  innocent  of  the same  desire,  the same hypocrisy, the same bad and  good faith. The closeness of their  cohabitation has  forced  them   to  remain  secret   to  each   other,  to  hide   fears  and dreams.  Only    the   violence    of   nature seems adequate, to reflect their  own inner  turmoil; hence  it becomes a rival.
The novel, instead of resting  on  the manichean opposition between  light  and darkness, good  and   evil,  life  and   death (a  pattern many  critics  have  often  found in  Hebert's work), seems  to  me  to  rest more  on  the  notion of simultaneity, and to focus on the imperceptible shifts in the form  and  substance of given  patterns of behaviour as dictated not  by love or  rea­ soning but   by  the  imperative  desire  to affirm  life.  If Stevens   is  responsible for the  murder of  Nora   and   the  rape   and murder  of  Olivia,  it  is  almost   as  if  he were  trying  to match or  surpass  the  vio­ lence  of  the  wind,   the  piercing screams  of  the  birds,  the intolerable constancy of the  waves.  The  competition  is  between himself   and  nature. People,   like  objects and  plants,  have  their  own  centred exis­ tence:  their  nature is to  exist;   they  are neither  good  nor  bad.  The match is be­ tween organisms both  of different species and  different orders:  man   and   nature, man  and  time,  man  and  objects.  To  re­ lieve the  tension  caused  by these fruitless, almost mythical, confrontations, men sub­ jugate women  in  this  novel,  and  women  humiliate men.  Yet  the novel is not about hate  but  about sensual  cravings,  indomi­ table  will,  and  at  times even  conscience.
Just  as the characters are somewhat greater  than   life-size,  so  is  the   novel's

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



form,  for  it  uses  patterns reminiscent of the  New Testament. Five characters give six  different  accounts of  summer  I936. The book of the  Reverend Nicolas  Jones is written in  October I 982;  the letters  of Stevens  to an acquaintance in Florida are written like a journal during the summer of  I 936;   the   book  of  Is-year-old  Nora Atkins   is  written  during  summer  I 936 and  ends  before  her  disappearance; the book of  Perceval and  others is also  writ­ ten  during summer 1936;  a  posthumous chronicle  by  Olivia is  written from   the depths of  the   ocean;  and   a  final  letter  from  Stevens  Brown  to  his  acquaintance in  Florida is  written,  like  the  minister's version   at   the   beginning  of  the   novel, during  the  fall   of   I982.   The  common trait  of all five characters seems to be the incapacity  to  humanize the  dreams, the aspirations,  the  desires,  and   the  hidden furor  of  each heart. The four  central ver­ sions  of  summer  I936   reveal   the  speci­ ficity  of  each   personality  (much  as  the four  Gospels  do), but  also neutralize the notion   of  guilt. The two  other  versions (one  book and  one  epistle  written in  the present)  frame these  four. Jones's   book follows the Pauline tradition, somewhat obscurantist, dogmatic, self-centred, and eminently  unkind  to  women.  But  Ste­ vens's   version    is   decidedly    diabolical. Jones   cynically   invokes   Saint  Paul   and  uses  both   New  and   Old  Testaments to punctuate  his  reminiscences and  to illus­ trate the many facets  of his  tyranny, but Stevens invokes  Rimbaud and  shows both the cynicism  and  the fascination with  risk that often  is attributed to  the  poet.
The most  moving versions  of summer I936 are  Nora's, Perceval's, and  Olivia's. Nora's  version,  the  most  direct, vital, un­ encumbered  of   the   three,  reflects  with fairly    simple    and    repetitive    sentence structures her  joy in  a newly  found  sex­ uality,  her  discovery that she can  choose what   to  accept  and   reject  of   tradition. Nora   is lucid,   in  a  hurry  to  live,  filled
 with  anticipation, hope  and  the  sureness of her attractiveness to men.
Sixteen-year-old  Perceval   Brown   is  a very  shy  man  and   therefore has  a  wild and  unpredictable side  to  his personality (Perceval is  also  the  name   of  the  fiery stallion  in Hebert's The  Torrent, the alter ego  of  Fram;ois,   the   central  character, and   an  agent  of  justice). The   Perceval of this novel is the only character who has passion, will, conscience, but no visible reason.  He is considered the village idiot. He  has compassion  and  seeks tenderness. He   has   the   human  qualities  that    his brother Stevens  does not  possess. He  is, however,  incapable of expressing himself with  words:  only cries surface from  the depths of  his  being  to  signify  either  joy or anguish. His  narration reads  like a list of   nouns,   verbs,   onomatopeic   interjec­ tions.  Instead  of  standard   French  sen­ tence  structure, he  produces a  chain   of wordslinked    by   free   association  of ideas   though  respecting  linear   chronol­ ogy. Perceval's narration is interrupted by that  of  other  witnesses;   theirs  is  gram­ matically and  intellectually more  coher­ ent,   but   the   juxtaposition  of   the  two styles  makes   the  idiot's  version   all  the  more  lyrical.  It is also through Perceval's eyes that  the  events  following the  disap­ pearance of the two girls is seen. Thus the whole  machinery of  justice  is questioned through the lucid vision of the idiot.
The most  touching chronicle, however, is  that  of  Olivia; it  sounds  more  like  a prayer  than  a  narration. She  has  gained eternity by becoming  a sea creature. The ocean  took her dead  body from  the shore of  Griffin  Creek   and  never   returned it. Yet her unappeased desire still haunts the shore  and  the  village:   she  returns with the tide and the wind to recall her joyous youth,   the  mystery  of  the  death of  her mother, her  devotion  to  her  father and her  brothers, her attentiveness to the dic­ tates  of  the  women   who  preceded  her, and  her  attraction to  the  man  who  had

BOOKS IN REVIEW



the  power  to make  havoc of her orderly, calm  universe.  A delicate balance of  nos­ talgia,  humour, innocence, eroticism, and fury   makes   this   character's  version   of summer r 936  the most  elegiac  and  mov­ ing.  As  with  the  other characters' ver­ sions, she stops short  of writing about  the final  violence.
It is tempting to say that  the  novel, because  of  the  particularly skilful  inter­ weaving  of narrative voices, the continu­ ous shift  in perspective, the  juxtaposition of  time  segments,  the  variations in style, and the numerous intertextual references, is a true feast of  technical virtuosity. It is, of course,  all  of  that,  but  the  formal  so­ phistication  is secondary to the emotional tension  it  creates. It is certain   that  the­ matic,  archetypal, formalist, and  linguis­ tic  critics  will find  a banquet. I am  at  a loss  to say,  however, which  method  will account  best  for   the   particular   atmos­ phere  of savage beauty, desolation, move­ ment,    sensual   loneliness    that    emerges  from  the fibres of the novel. The insistent,  piercing,  inconsolable cries  of  the  birds emulate  perhaps the  laments of  craving of  the  inhabitants of  Griffin  Creek,  but they  also  conjure  up  and   exorcise   the enigmatic and  wild  beauty  of  the  land­ scape  along   the  St.  Lawrence  "between Quebec and  the  Atlantic  Ocean." What people   can   inhabit  that   space?   Naive fanatics and  madmen  would venture the risk, like the inhabitants of Griffin Creek.  This  novel  is in  their  honour.

* 	* 	*
Since the early 1970's an increasing number of Quebec academics have prac­ tised  literary analysis  in  the  tradition of formalist  and   post-structural   criticism, concentrating their  research  more  on  the mechanics of  creativity than  on the socio­ logical and philosophical affiliation within  the  general  development of cultural his­ tory.   Quebec  fiction   writers   have   fur­ nished   an  almost   untouched  target   for
 this particular type of synchronic perspec­ tive.  It has,  in  fact,  enlarged,  enriched, and    supported  the   predominant   dia­  chronic and  thematic approach of  many well-established critics of the previous generation.
Robert  Harvey  is  inspired  mostly  by the works of French critics  and  theorists: Genette, Todorov,  Barthes, Sollers.  For the study  of Kamouraska  he concentrates on  the  technique of  distancing used  by Anne  Hebert. The essay on The  Torrent, by contrast, is methodologically less  sys­ tematic;  it   offers,   nevertheless,  a   new reading of  the  short  story,  situating  it  in the  Judea-Christian  tradition of  predes­ tination, suffering, and  redemption. Ac­ cording to  this  interpretation, the  hero,  Fran<;ois, at  the  end  of the  story,  rather than  contemplating suicide,  has acquired a new consciousness of life. We, the  read­ ers,  therefore, are  confronted with  "The Passion" of  Fran<;ois, much  in  the  tradi­ tion   of   the   Passion   of   Christ.  In   the analysis  of  Kamouraska  the  idea  of  pas­ sion  as  suffering is  maintained,  but  the sacrifice,  in  this  instance, is seen  as lead­  ing  to a double transgression:  the  first is the  murder of  Elisabeth's first  husband, the  second  an  extension of  the  first,  but at  the  level  of  the  word,  the  expression, the  particular way  in  which  the  central character  reconstructs her  role.  It is  in this  part of  the  analysis  of  the  narrative technique   that    Robert    Harvey   shows himself   most   clearly    as   a   disciple   of Genette.
He  examines the  diversity  of  the  nar­ rative    voices    (those  of   Elisabeth,   the omniscient narrator,  the  moribund  sec­ ond  husband, and  the chorus) which  are at  odds  with  each  other and  undermine the  reliability of  the characters' percep­ tions  of  the  present  (Elisabeth  waiting for  her  husband to die). He  then  studies  three  realms   of  the  narrative text:  the dream  of  Elisabeth, her  effort   to  recon­ struct the  past,  and   the  ambiguous  role

BOOKS IN REVIEW



of  the  principal narrator, who  is both subject and object. The  narrator,  com­ menting on  the  double role,  is  trying to reach narrative autonomy.
Another  chapter  examines the   fusion between  past   and  present time and  the subsequent "contamination"  of  the   past by  the  present. In fact, the  central thesis that  Harvey  proposes is  that  different techniques of  retrospection and  anticipa­ tion   stem   from one   single  project:   "to exorcise the  past  by the force of the  pres­ ent." The last  chapters  study Elisabeth's imaginary   reconstruction  of   the   crime. Harvey proposes to consider the  novel  as a  "commemorative ritual," with traits of Catholic liturgy, because it functions  ac­ cording to a double transgression:  human (the murder)  and   narrative (the  scram­ bling of  chronology, the  questioning of the    narrator's   reliability).   Recollection (in    this    case   invented)   thus  becomes commemoration   in   "the  vertiginous   si­ lence of profanation" and acquires mythi­ cal   dimension.  Both   studies   stem   from one   central  premise or   intuition:  that Anne Hebert's writing celebrates the  pas­  sion  of  man and has  both the   form and the   tone of  sacred  scripture. The  obser­ vation  is   certainly   pertinent  and    well­  founded.  Yet  what Harvey does  not  suc­  ceed   in   accounting for   is  the   humour, the  vitality  (without  being blasphemous or  bawdy) , the  sensual tension, and the ambivalence of  desire as  destructive and exhilarating forces. The concern to apply rigorously and meticulously specific  ana­ lytical guidelines (to  account for the nar­ rative distancing, by  the  analyzing nar­ rative voices, levels,  and  chronology)  has somewhat  obscured    the    spirit  of   the  original text.
The wish  to respect the  sequences  of narration as  they  appear in  Kamouraska rather than to pursue a central idea  thesis is  perhaps responsible for   the  seeming fragmentation of Harvey's book.  In Chap­ ter    I the   narrative  voices   are   studied
 mostly  in the  events preceding the  dream of Elisabeth, Chapter 2  studies mostly  the dream, and Chapter 4  deals with  Eliza­ beth's  imaginary  reconstruction   of   her  lover's  journey  to   kill   her   husband. It thus   becomes difficult for  the   reader to grasp  the   relation   between   the   conclu­ sions in one chapter and those in the  next, or  to detect one  or  several premises (for­ mal  or  philosophical)  which might have guided   the   entire  research.  In  short  it almost  seems  that the  theoretical  frame­  work  occupies the  place of  honour. The study, nevertheless, is judicious, thorough, and  filled  with sound and astute insights.

GRAZIA MERLER


ENDLESSLY TALKING

ROBERT  WALLACE  and  CYNTHIA   ZIMMERMAN, The   Work:   Conversations with    English­ Canadian Playwrights. Coach  House, n.p.

I HAVE OFTEN  LONGED to meet a medium who  could  conjure up  the  ghost  of Shake­ speare so I could ask him  some questions. Did   the   same  actor  play  Cordelia and the   Fool?   Did   Falstaff   really babble  of green fields?  Why  did  Hamlet hesitate to kill Claudius? And what-nudge, nudge
-was all   that  about  the    second-best bed?
Living playwrights can  be interviewed,
and  Canadian playwrights  are-repeat­ edly.  Sometimes,  incestuously, the   inter­ viewer even   asks  questions about  state­ ments made in  previous interviews. Play­ wrights are  not  the  only  subjects of  such investigations,  of   course. Novelists and poets  and  other kinds of writers also sub­ mit   to  the   ubiquitous tape  recorder, so much so that one  can  expect an academic study of  the  interview  as  genre any  day  now.
The temptation to  ask  the  living  play­ wright what he  feels  about a production of  one  of  his  plays,  how   he  regards the

BOOKS IN REVIEW



state of theatre in Canada, and just  what he  meant to convey about such-and-such a theme or character in a play is a power­ ful  temptation indeed. Why bother strug­ gling   to  produce a  critical  examen of  a play  when you  can  get  the scoop  straight from the   horse's mouth?  Yet   the   inter­ view  as  genre  presupposes  that the  play­  wright   is   willing-and   able-to    an­ swer  one's  questions, and   willing-and able -to  do  so honestly. Such is not  al­ ways  the   case.   Tom Stoppard,  for   in­ stance, is an  interviewer's dream,  because he  gabbles wittily and at length. But  you can't always trust what he says. And  Har­ old   Pinter,  asked    what  his   plays   were about, once snapped, "The weasel  under the   cocktail cabinet" -and   has   to   his chagrin seen   his  put-down quoted, ana­ lyzed,  mulled, and worried over  in  print by critics ever since. The Canadian play­ wrights   interviewed  in   The   Work   are  more co-operative, if less witty. Only oc­ casionally sardonic and almost never  re­ fusing a question, they  do  their  earnest best  to  respond fully  and  thoughtfully to the   questions posed   by  the interviewers. And   yet,  and yet.  Can  we  really   believe George  F.   Walker   when  he   claims  he never  writes   parody?  And   John  Gray, when he  claims he  is not  particularly in­  terested  in  publishing his  work? Should we accept the  meaning an  author says he intended to convey when it conflicts with what we understand?
The  Work  occasionally deals  with  such
intention, such meaning, but  more often the  interviewers' questions elicit explana­ tions  of  the   process of  writing  and  pro­ ducing plays  rather than comment on  the  meaning of  the  final  product. Perhaps it is   natural that  a   book    about  theatre should have such  emphasis, and  indeed theatre  historians   coming  to   this   book will  find   much   of   interest and  of   use. Teachers and students of dramatic litera­ ture will  find  less. One can  dip  into the  interview  with  Rex   Deverell and  learn
 that he  called a play  Boiler Room  Suite partly to  make fun  of  Neil  Simon's Cali­ fornia Suite;  one   picks  up  a few  details about  the   research that  Sharon  Pollock put into Walsh and The Komagata Maru Incident. Such  facts   help  the    literary critic,  but   they   are   thinly  sprinkled  in these discussions  about artistic directors, theatre finances, and plans for  the  future. Ephemera  dominates,  as  it does   in   the  theatre  itself.
Wallace and Zimmerman are  well  in­ formed about theatrical ephemera;  they  have done their homework on  the  play­ wrights  and  on    the   Canadian   theatre scene. They  canvass  the   central   ques­ tions:  regionalism,  nationalism, the   im­  portance of  success  in  New  York; work­ shopping,  second  productions,  collective creations;  naturalism  versus experimen­ talism;   the degree to which plays  are autobiographical, the  degree to which Canadian theatre is healthy. Yet  to  read The  Work  straight through, as a reviewer must, instead of dipping into it, is to grow weary of  questions about  these same  is­ sues  and their predictable answers.  Mer­ cifully, the  interviewers' questions do  not  sink   to  the   level  of  "Do you  write  your  first   draft in  longhand  or  on   the   type­ writer?"  and  only  occasionally  do   they  stoop to  such   an  unanswerable banality as  "Why was  your  play  such  a success?" or  "Why has  your  play  not  had  a second production?" But  neither do  their ques­ tions rise  to  the  challenging or  the  theo­ retical. They  do  not  ask,  What books  do you   read?   What  are   your   politics and why? How important is language in  your  creation  of  a character and how  do  you cultivate   your    sensitivity  to   language? Why   do  you   write  comedy? Is  tragedy possible?   Perhaps  playwrights are   inca­ pable of  theoretical or  conceptual analy­ sis  and  self-analysis-some  claim to  be
-but one  would like   to   know a  little more about their minds.
The  playwrights' minds are   ill-served

BOOKS IN REVIEW



by what I presume is faithful  transcrip­ tion   of   interview  tapes.   The   "yeah's" and   "you-know's," and  "well's" and   "I mean's" make   these  creators  of  speech sound  particularly inept as speakers  them­ selves.  And  appalling ineptitude was  at work  somewhere in  the  process  of  tran­ scribing  and  printing their  speech.  Wal­ lace,  Zimmerman, andjor  Coach  House  Press  have   produced  a  bookful  of   mis­ prints and  howlers:  actresses  "clammer" to  play  a  role,  "I was  only  they're five days,"     "holis    bolis,"    "straightjacket." Surely   an   editor   somewhere  along   the line  could  have caught the  obvious  pho­  netic  errors  and  some  of  the  other   illit­ eracies.   It's   a   disgraceful  printing  job from  cover   to  cover,   including, on  the back   cover,   the   promise  of   "autobio­ graphical" notes.
The biographical notes  are  useful,  the lists of  published and  unpublished  plays (not always accurate) give a sense of the scope of each  playwright's work,  and  the "Selected  Criticism  and    Commentary" on  each  author's works  helps  the  reader find  out  more.  What one  finds  out  most vividly is how little analytical and evalua­ tive criticism of Canadian drama there  is. These lists are selected, indeed spotty,  but they  must  of  necessity  emphasize news­ paper  and  journal reviews of productions and  publications because  there isn't much  more.  The  playwrights  themselves occa­ sionally  write   about  plays   and   theatre, and   they   submit  to  endless   interviews. But   even   Canadian  Drama, where,   by analogy  with  Modern Drama, one would expect  to find serious  academic criticism, produces mainly  reviews,  historical  over­ views, and  still more  interviews. There is an  occasional essay;  there  is a book, per­  haps  two.  But  no  more.   The  scarcity  is understandable:  the   critic  is  as  always caught in  the  dilemma of  whether he  is analyzing theatre or literature; the dram­ atists  are  alive,  and  talking; the  drama is young.   But   however   young   it  may   be,
 Canadian drama is  no  longer   in  its  in­ fancy.  And  it's  time  for  serious  criticism  of Canadian drama to  climb  out  of  the cradle too.
ANN MESSENGER


EQUESTRIANS

RAFAEL BARRETO-RIVERA,  Voices, Noises. Coach
House, $6.gs.
BP   NICHOL,   The  Martyrology, Book  5. Coach
House, n.p.

ONE  HALF OF THE  FOUR HORSEMEN here ride  forth   from   the  Coach House.  The first rider  brandishes his first major poetry collection,   while   the  second   rider  bran­ dishes  the  long-awaited fifth  book  of his life-long  poem.   Images of  creation  and apocalypse abound,  as  journeys  are  un­ dertaken and  documented. Answers  are sought   in   language  and   silence.   These two are master  equestrians.
Co-foundership of the sound poetry en­ semble,   the   Four  Horsemen,  continued friendship,  a  shared   publisher   (Rafael Barreto-Rivera's book was "seen  through the  Press by bp Nichol"), and  coincident publishing   dates-these    specifics   link Barreto-Rivera  and   Nichol   and   justify their  joint  consideration here,  despite  all the  particular  differences between   their two books.
Barreto-Rivera, born in Puerto Rico, immigrated   to   Canada  in    the    early
1g6o's. He has  published poems in maga­ zines  and   chapbooks, done  translations, and  been  a  part  of the  Four  Horsemen's two books and  two records. Voices, Noises reflects  the  diversity of   his  past.  Forms  and subjects  vary; lengths and  patterning differ.  While  some  poems  are  fairly  tra­  ditional, others display  a post-structuralist discontinuity. Barreto-Rivera  reflects  on his  Puerto Rican heritage and  describeF both  the  island  of his memories and  the island  of his more  recent  visits, while  he also considers Canadian  friends   (Nichol

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



and  other   members of  the  Four  Horse­ men among them) , Canadian places, and his own vocation. Many  of the poems are an  attempt by the  poet  to come  to terms with  his world: his return to Puerto Rico ("The  Marriage  of   the   Prostitute  in Puerto  Rican    Folklore"),   the   island's  poverty    and    exploitation    ("San    Juan Bautista"), and   the  ugly  reality  of  war ("Bolivian Warfare"). The Puerto Rican  landscape is often  described   in  fulsome, sexual  terms,  with  sea,  moon,  lotus,  lily images  recurring. Love  is both  the  harsh sale of the  prostitute ("the best  meat  of the  island")   and   the  releasing   joy of  a free   relationship   ("Risking   Rescue") . Birth  is  both   the  individual  experience ( "Landside") ,  and   the  cosmic  nascency ("Memoranda from  the Milky Way").
As a poet, Barreto-Rivera is fundamen­ tally    concerned   with    creativity - the problem   of,  joy of  language. Words   do not come  easily in  the last quarter of the twentieth century  after   the  terrible   de­ ceptions    and   excesses  they   have   been made  to detail or  defend. But  more  than  to  most,  the  inadequacies and   impreci­ sions of  language are  evident  to Barreto­ Rivera,  for  two  tongues  impel  and  con­ found   him.  Spanish, his  birth  language, is familiar but largely  now forsaken.  Eng­  lish, his adopted  language, is still full  of foreign  overtones.  Uncertainty dogs  the
poet  in  his "search I for lasting  speech."
Even   while    claiming   his   deficiencies,
Barreto-Rivera   ironically   demonstrates his power and  versatility:

speaking bad  English mutilated Spanish
because my language, God is not
of  human sound
but  of a growling kind
that growls  even  in  happiness, lacking refinement-
it  breaks
and  binds the  roots  and  bark of  sense
for  lack  of subtle hands.
 Barreto-Rivera's two most important long poems,    "Report  from    Antiface"   and "Base   Infinite," both   explore   creativity and    the   voices   within,  the   beckoning siren-call  of   silence,   and    the   need   to speak   out.   He   describes   the   masks   he wears,   the   journeys   undertaken  to  seek self-understanding, and  the resultant self­ expression. The  discordant  noises  of  his heritage, the growls of "a halfmute speak­  ing,"  must  be transformed, through love, caring, and  renewed  vision,  into  a  voice true   to  his  poetic  ideal,   "a   sub-angelic
mix  I of  [his] loved  languages." "Base
Infinite" describes  "the anxiety  of  influ­
ence," but   nevertheless Baretto-Rivera recommits himself  to "the life of writing" which  is still  ironically "the life  he  neg­ lects":
There every  thought demands
its  contradiction; every  form forces  itself  into
some  new  deformity; every  fact aspires to  be  fiction: every  need becomes a chance
for its fulfillment; every  he
is he  becoming him  along the  axis of his thinking.

With  admirable insight  and  ambition, Barreto-Rivera   concludes  "Base   Infin­
ite": "He is and  he would  be I more  than
he  is."  For  Barreto-Rivera is the  uncer­
tain  newcomer to  the  English  language, but  he is also  the  deft,  poetic  craftsman. His  desire  for  excellence, his "search for lasting  speech," results  in Voices, Noises: the  transliteration of the world's cacoph­ onous  welter  as well  as  the  capturing of
"the very  songs  the  very ifs I of seeing."
Journeying to  understand one's   place and   past  with  a  lengthening poetic  line and form, both Barreto-Rivera and Nichol   seek  a  renewed vision  and  lan­ guage. There is now a significant number of writers in  this country with  a renewed sense of place  (or  remembered, dreamed, or  mythologized place) , a communal re­ gionalism that   provides a  strong  support

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



and  basis for the writing of poetry  ("these friends writers   struggle as i do I make a mend   I join  the  torn  letters of  the  lan­
guage") .  A   large   proportion  of   these writers  is also  using  the long  poem  form, always   important  in  Canada,  but   now used with more experimentation, more openness, and  certainly much  energy,  in an  attempt to  solve structural dilemmas. In  The  Martyrology, Book  5  Nichol  lo­ cates  his  place   very  specifically  and  ex­ plores   in  puns   and   word-play the  par­  ticularities   of   Toronto's   Annex   area.  Myth   and  map   both  structure  his  lines, as  the  grid  of  streets prefaces the  book, and  their  names repeat in  new  combina­ tions   to   create  Annex   myths.   Writing elsewhere about  Dennis  Lee  and   Andy Warhol,  Matt   Cohen   emphasizes  one irony   of   Canadian   regionalism   (used throughout here in an expansive, positive sense, not an  insular  pejorative one)  :

where but  in Canada does  a poet  get  praised for  being  regional if he or she lives outside of Toronto, but damned for  it if he  lives in Toronto?  Why   is  it so  laudably human  to write about  the  gulls   of  Vancouver, or  the snakes   and  gophers of  a  Prairie childhood, but parochial and  power-mongering to write
about Jarvis Street or  Yonge Street?

Nichol  unapologetically takes  the smaller Toronto streets  of his own  particular  mi­ lieux  and  creates an authentic mythology  replete with  the  "tension  between   place and  culture" which  Eli Mandel claims  is so  necessary   a   part   of   regionalism  in Canada   today.   Nichol's   placement   of place  is also the mapping of a conscious­ ness,  cartography as  a  means   of  under­ standing. He  travels   across  Canada and across   the   Atlantic  in   search   of  signs. Robert  Kroetsch  says,  "To   understand the  long  poem  of  our  time  would  be  to understand   our    time."  This,    then,    is Nichol's   endeavour. His  individual time includes his place,  his roots,  his heritage, his  language,  and   like  many   others   he sets off poetically to discover  them,  while
 in so doing discovers  his "retroactively recognized  formal  model  (the  utanikki) ," that  is the  poetic  diary  of  Japanese  tra­ dition.  The   utanikki  accounts  for   the travel  journal  aspects,  heightened  aware­ ness of time,  universalization of  personal events, fictionalization of  happenings, and  (to   use  Earl   Miner's  words)    "the free floating  of  art." This  seems  a  long  way from   the  Canadian  long   poem,   but   in fact  there  seems to be a growing  practice of  the  utanikki in  this  country  (Nichol, Fred  Wah,  and  Roy Kiyooka to  name  a few), but this  is subject for a larger con­ sideration and  is important here  only  as it  pertains to  Nichol's  latest  volume.
The first  two  books of  The  M artyrol­ ogy,  in  mythic   form,   describe  the  lives and  travels  of several "imaginary" saints.  The next  three  books are  more  personal, with    lyric    descriptions   of   the    poet's  friends and  loves  and   his  travels   across the country and  to Britain. All five books present the  search  for  a  renewed poetic  language as a search  for spiritual renewal. Nichol explains,  "Book  V  was structured on the idea of the chain  -chain of thot,  chain   of  images,   chain   of  events -so that  in  the  writing when  a branching of thot occurred i would  try to follow all the chains that  opened up."  This indulgence is  both  the  book's  richness  and   its  con­ fusion.  What the  reader is faced  with  is abundant choice  and  continually new ex­ periences  of the  poem.  There are  twelve sections or chains which  can be read  con­ secutively,    or    the    reader    can    follow Nichol's  complex thought  processes  and  when  signalled   by  what  appears in  the  text  as a footnote  notation, jump  to  the section indicated. Such  directions appear throughout the  book,  and  some  sections are  noted  more  than  once.
The difficulties  and  methods of  struc­ turing the  long  poem  are   here  concern and  subject. Nichol   is  both  playful   and profound, seemingly   in  search of  an  al­ tered  state  of truth in which  words  com-


139

BOOKS IN REVIEW



municate through the  placement and  re­ placement of individual letters,  and sense is discovered in  puns.  "Complexity  dis­ solves  into  simplicity,"  says  Nichol.  But the   jokes   are   not   simplistic,   they   are clever,   humorous,   annoying,  and   ulti­ mately illuminating. (The  earth  becomes
a seer's  ball, "( ou sphere  f  (which  is the global  view  / glow ball crystal  vision  / clear)).")  Nichol's   "mirthology"  recog­
nizes  the  solemnity  in  play,  as he  claims
"i ... find my 'own'  path  f back into lan­
guage  thru  play."  And this route  is neces­ sary because  language needs  reclaiming : "we   name   as  fits  our  purpose /  shape  language to our  own  ends  / all  the  lies, dishonour, death, and  treason  such  a use portends."  Foregrounding his  language, Nichol    employs    syntactical  ambiguity, lingual  transformations, bilingual  word­  play,  vowel shifts, and the realignment/ realinement of  letters. In  fragmentation
-continuity and  hope. In search  of a meaningful semiotic  system, Nichol  tries theatrical and  musical  notations, the atomization of words,  and  the ideal  of an ultimate and  lasting condensation of thought, feeling,  and  form   (chain   10  is one   line   only:  "every (all   at ( toge (for­ ever) ther) once) thing") . Nichol explores  synchronicities  (linguistic,  aural,  visual, historical, mythical)  of the  past  (voyag­  ings,   mappings,   discoverings, creatings, bridgings). For St. And,  that  saint of con­ nections,    seems    still   to   preside    over Book 5.
Like Klein's "nth Adam" Nichol names
his world into a new existence, and his nominalism   becomes    a   political   state­ ment:

living out  the  latter days  of a civilization distrusting systems  for  the  lures  they  are wanting
nonetheless
'a solution' or
some  way  to light the  candle
reveal finally  the  face  of oppressor and oppressed
 dispel the  clouds of  rhetoric beneath which their distress  breeds
Despite apocalyptic fears,  renewing him­ self and  his language, Nichol  reasserts  his basic humanity:
simply   to have  said
i  began them   [these few  books]
carried  them thru  to the  end  or
was outlived by  them 	in  a way  to begin to
be human
The contemplation of language leads  to answers  in life. The contemplation of life leads  to answers  in  language. "A  writing against the  end  of speech": Nichol's  hu­ manity  is  manifest.  Book   6  is   already underway, but   there   is  plenty  to  reflect on  in  Book  5  until  the  next  one is pub­  lished.
ANN MUNTON


MISSION MEMOIRS

WILLIAM HENRY COLLISON, Jn the Wake  of the War  Canoe,  ed.   and   annotated  by  Charles Lillard. Sono  Nis,  $14.95·

IN 1873, WILLIAM COLLISON responded to the call of the  Anglican Church Mission­ ary Society  for volunteers to work among the  Indians of the  West  Coast  of British Columbia.  In    the   Wake   of   the   War Canoe, published in  1915, is his memoir of  more   than   forty  years  of  missionary  work  among the  Tsimshian, Haida, and  Nishga  Indians.
Not  unexpectedly, Collison's narrative sense was more  informed by the Old Tes­ tament  than  by   the   novel:    incidents crowd  one another in his memoir without much   distinction; it  sometimes becomes difficult  to differentiate names  and  anec­  dotes,   one   death-bed  conversion  seems like another. But  despite the  lack of con­ sidered  narrative  structure  (and   again like  the  Old  Testament),  certain figures and  situations do stand forth  vividly from the  welter  of anecdote, particularly those

BOOKS IN REVIEW



connected with  the  Haida. That they do is  the  effect  of  Collison's very  real strengths as a memoirist. Among the first white   men   to  visit  the   Indians of  this area,  he observed  them  before  proselytiz­ ers like himself  swayed  them from  native  custom. His  keen  eye  for  social  customs and  his marked sense  of  adventure pro­ duce  an  account rich  in  detail about  the people  he was  trying  to  convert.
Sono   Nis  has   reprinted  this   memoir with  help  from  Charles Lillard's editing which   removes   many   of  its  difficulties.
Almost  all  the  misprints of  the  original
have  been  corrected  (some  of  those  re­ maining  have   an  amusing  appropriate­ ness:    a   wolf-infested   trail   becomes   a "trial"; and  Collison finds himself  unable  to "altar" a  decision). What Lillard has most carefully done  for  the  memoir is to provide  a  frame  of  reference, through notes,    for   readers   less   familiar   with West Coast  missionary activities than  the "friends" for  whom   Collison   wrote.  He does  so  unobtrusively,  with   a  dry  con­ cision  which  leaves  the  imagination, his­ torical  or  otherwise,  little  hold.  Collison gives  fascinating hints, for example, that  there  was a good  deal  of rivalry  between  himself  and  his Methodist counterpart on the    coast.    Unchristian   and    sectarian though  this collision  may  have  been,  one would  have  liked  Lillard to  have  devel­ oped  its drama in  less modest notes. Lil­ lard  has also modernized Collison's spell­ ing of place  names  and  provided a  glos­ sary  of  equivalents  between the  original and  this  text,  an  invaluable help  to  any­ one   tracing  Collison's movements  on  a map.   But   the   only   map   reproduced  is Bishop  Ridley's  ( 1904), a  map  most  in­ adequate to the demands of this memoir.
Lillard's other major editorial activity has been the excision of "those overtly religious   passages   our   ancestors  so  en­ joyed,  which   today  are  of  little  interest or  historical value." These excisions  pro­ duce  a  readable account,  but  they  leave
 Collison's Christianity a mixture of the statistical,  the  muscular and  the medical. We are frequently told how many are baptized  or married, but  there  is little spiritual reflection in  the  memoir   as ed­ ited.  However, because  Collison's  Chris­  tianity  had  a strongly  practical  side to it, this editing  is less distorting than it might  have  been, given  a different subject. For Collison's dangerous canoe  trips,  his will­ ingness to share  primitive conditions and  a diet  of  dried fish and  eulachon grease, his  endurance on  the  trail   and  his skill with  a  rifle, do  as much   to  win  the  In­ dians   as  does   the   Word.  Similarly,  his account  raises   the   suspicion    that    the medical  skills of  the Collisons  earned the Church more  converts than   his  preach­ ing;   that   his  war   against  the  medicine men  was a medical more  than  a spiritual battle;  that,  in  convincing the  Haida to inter  their  dead  instead of  leaving  them about  the  camps  to  rot,  he  was  moved by sanitation as much  as by belief in Christian burial.
Collison's  memoirs suggest he could occasionally    be   overbearing,   righteous, and momentarily given, faced with a "barbarically" clad  congregation, to  be­ lieve that clothes  made the Christian. But he more consistently shows himself a man of tact  and  energy  and  of quick  and  fair judgment. What finally emerges from  his memoirs  is  evidence of  the  missionaries  as  a  genuine  civilizing  force.  Civilizing  not  because  they  spread  the  Gospel,  but because,  in   their  dedication,  they  were (temporarily at  least)   victorious against  gambling and hootchinoo and  the killings which attended both; because  they ended slavery among the Haida; because  they introduced smallpox vaccine  and opposed shamanism with  sanitation. Whatever the destruction of those who followed him, Collison  left   the  life  of  the  West  Coast Indians improved.

SHIRLEY  NEUMAN

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



DES MOTS & DES MAUX

CLAIRE  DE   LAMIRANDE,   L'Occulteur. Quebec/ Amerique, $12.95·
PIERRE  CHARBONNEAU,  La  Baie  heureuse.  Pi­
erre  Tisseyre,  n.p.
YVON  PARE,  La  Mort  d'Alexandre. VLB  edi­
teur, $I4·95·

QUE CE   SOIT  AU   NIVEAU  des  mots-de leur  pouvoir d'illumination, de metamor­ phose et aussi d'occultation-que le der­  nier roman de Claire de Lamirande cons­ truit  son  sens  n'est  pas etonnant puisque  le  titre  meme   du   roman   est  un   neolo­ gisme  qui  a  pour  effet  d'annoncer, d'un seul geste, l'ecriture d'un recit  non seule­ ment  "moderne," mais eminemment cons­ cient de sa modernite.
Dans    ce   roman  dense,   poetique et
riche,   jouer  avec  les  mots  veut  dire  ac­
ceder   au   langage  de  l'imaginaire  et   a
!'expression d'une  jouissance  verbale. Car
avant meme  de  retracer les lignes  de  la fiction,  le lecteur est frappe par  les com­ posantes  emotive et  ludique qui envelop­ pent  cette  histoire.  Les mots-multiples et   evocateurs-se    conjuguent  sous   le rythme du  desir,  de l'euphorie et de l'an­ goisse. Le  temps  du recit,  qui  est  egale­
ment   soumis   a ce  rythme,   se  derobe   a
toute certitude et a toute  finalite,  renonce
a exprimer ce qui  est,  ce qui  etait  ou  ce
qui sera,  pour  dire  au  conditionnel ce qui
pourrait etre:  "Je  serais  un  enqueteur presse  d'en   finir  avec  cette  enquete." Et comme  pour  confirmer la  joyeuse incerti­ tude disseminee par le langage  et le temps de la narration, ce sont des  fragments de
reve  qui   tiennent  lieu  d'introduction  a
chaque chapitre.
S'agit-il alors encore d'un autre  roman qui   ne   raconte  rien?   D'un  roman   ou, selon  l'esthetique moderne l'aventure de l'ecriture gommerait toute  trace d'une aventure reelle? D'un roman qui ne ferait rien  d'autre que  "se  dire"  et  "se  signi­
fier"?  On  peut  repondre a ces questions,
 sans  complaisance, par  un  oui  et  par  un non.
Commenc;ons  en affirmant la negation. Sans   aucun doute, L'Occulteur  raconte une  "vraie" histoire. Une  histoire,  certes, qui  tient  de l'irreel mais,  neanmoins, une histoire coherente et interessante. En bref, il  s'agit de  la  recherche d'un  enqueteur
qui  apres  vingt  ans  de  quete a travers  le
monde s'installe dans  un village du grand
Nord,   tout   pres  de  la  foret,   afin  de  re­ soudre le mystere  d'un vol de  cinq  mille briques    d'or.  De    nombreuses    amities ( dont celle  en  particulier  avec  un  ebe­ niste  alter  ego), des  fetes  joyeuses  (fetes
-ablutions, fete  de  travail) et  le  desir
soutenu  de   trouver  la  clef  du   mystere tissent  la  trarne   du   recit.  Et  parce   que l'histoire est ponctuee par  la narration de reves,  de  cauchemars et  d'incidents   bi­ zarres,   on   n'est   pas  surpris  lorsque  les fameuses briques  d'or se transforment, ou bien   pour   emprunter  un  motif  cher   au recit,  se  "metamorphosent" en  un  splen­ dide  "condor."  Cette  metamorphose est vraiment bien  reussie  puisque tout  y  de­ meure intact: les motifs  du  vol, de I'or et de la recherche. Tout y compris la struc­ ture  de !'intrigue.
Et  pourtant! Se serait,  nous meme, occulter !'aspect  principal  de  ce  roman
que   de   s'en   tenir   a  !'intrigue. On   est
d'ailleurs bien  averti par  le narrateur de
la  presence d'une certaine complexite: "Sous  les couleurs visibles,  les lignes  ap­ parentes, on  sentait les autres:  les  mul­  tiples  autres sous  la  couche  de  surface." Et  ce sont,  en  effet,  ces "multiples autres lignes" qui conferent au roman une speci­ ficite   proprement  poetique. Les  jeux  de langage,  l'alternance de  deux   voix  nar­ ratives  ( celle  de  l'enqueteur et  celle  de l'ebeniste)  voix  qui  finissent  par  se  con­ fondre, la   repetition  dans   le   texte  des fragments de  reve,  les  references multi­
ples  a l'art, a l'ecriture et  surtout la  ren­
dondance du  signe  "mot" inscrivent  in­
contestablement ce roman  sous l'egide de

BOOKS IN REVIEW



l'ecriture. Tout se passe  comme si la joyeuse  metamorphose decrite dans !'in­ trigue  se situait en  realite au  niveau des mots et de leur  potentiel signifiant. Ainsi,
a  l'image  de   l'enqueteur-occulteur  qui
narre en  partie le  recit,  Claire de  Lami­
rande   joue admirablement le  jeu  double de l'ecriture, jeu ou il y a en meme  temps recherche et occultation du  sens par  le langage.
Dans  La Baie heureuse  de Pierre Char­ bonneau, les  mots   sont   utilises   surtout pour   exprimer une  nostalgie de  la  jeu­
nesse et du  passe. Tout a fait  traditionnel
de  par  son  style  et  sa  structure, ce  livre
en  est  un  qu'on  apporterait a  la  cam­ pagne  et  ete  pour  se  detendre. Il  s'agit,  en  effet,  d'un  roman  peu  complexe dont  le merite principal est de sonder  avec une certaine finesse les  themes de  la memoire et des amours de  jeunesse.  Le personnage principal Jouve,  un  jeune  adolescent en proie  a  de  nombreux reves  et  souvenirs,  attend tout  doucement au  bord  d'un lac l'arrivee d'Anne, jeune fille qui represente pour  lui a la fois le souvenir, "Elle  n'etait plus  qu'une forme grise,  imprecise, pres­ que  irreelle" et  le  desir.   Entre les  mo­ ments   de  reve  et  celui   de  la  rencontre (rencontre qui  advient un  peu  trop  tard dans   le  roman  pour   etre   efficace),  le recit bifurque pour  raconter la vie des dif­ ferents personnages. Or  ce qui transperce admirablement  dans   ces   anecdotes  di­ verses, c'est  non seulement  un amour in­ tense  de  la  nature mais  egalement  une nostalgie  profonde  pour   le   "bon   vieux temps" oil  la  vie etait plus  simple.  Mais si ce roman  est assez seduisant en ce qu'il projette le lecteur dans  l'univers  des sou­ venirs,  il  demeure decevant sur  le  plan de  l'ecriture. Les  cliches  abondent  dans les descriptions de la nature, certains dia­  logues  sont  franchement artificiels  et  la fin  meme  du  roman est  minee  par  la ba­ nalite   du  style.  On   souhaiterait  que   le soleil   soit   moins    "rouge,"   "rose"  ou "mauve," qu'Anne ne soit pas necessaire-
 ment   "transparente  et   pure   ainsi   que l'eau   dont   elle  etait   la  deesse,"  car   les mots ici, donnant dans  la  facilite, trahis­ sent  de  projet original qui  les  sous-tend.
Par contre, dans  le roman d'Yvon Pare La Mort  d'Alexandre, les mots servent a exprimer avec violence  et authenticite  les maux  de !'existence. Faisant echo aux ecrivains  de  Parti-Pris, ce  recit  provoca­ teur,   grin ant
plein dans le registre du reel a cause de l'emploi systematique du  joual  dans  tous les dialogues. Le  roman  est  si fortement marque  par   ce  niveau   de  langue qu'a certains  moments  il   peut   etre   difficile pour  un  lecteur non  Quebecois de  saisir le sens:  "Me picoche  pis picoche,  essaye d'un  bord,   essaye  de  l'aute, prend   une biere  pis un aute  biere,  tu se comment · a fait. Y avait  un Pilote dans gagne.  Un amanchure de gars, fort  comme  un boeuf pis  pas  peureux a  part   d' a!
Y arait vendu  sa mere  pour  une  piaste." Ce langage toutefois n'est  nullement  gra­ tuit.  Au contraire c'est precisement par  le biais des deformations linguistiques, pour  ne pas parler  des nombreux jurons  et des blasphemes   retentissants,  que   le  roman
temoigne d'une  certaine  rage   de   vivre face a la mort.
L'intrigue  est  simple   et  bien   menee. Emile  Parent, le  personnage principal, revient  avec son frere  Gabriel apres  une absence   de   quinze    ans   au   village    de son   enfance  lors   de   la   mort  de   son pere.  Ce  trajet dans  le  temps,  dans  l'es­ pace  et  dans  la  memoire permet la  nar­ ration   de   nombreuses  anecdotes  loufo­  ques.  Et  c'est  ici que  regne  la demesure. Tout, en fait, y passe:  la violence,  la bois­ son,  la  sexualite  ( crue  mais  aussi  effer­ vescente)  ; bref,  tout ce qui  permet a  un bucheron de  faire  face  a la  mort  de  son pere.    C'est    ainsi   la   mesure-meme  de son existence  qui est mise en question par
cette  demesure. Il revient  a Yvon  Pare  le
grand  merite d'avoir exploite avec  verve, humour et compassion une preoccupation


143

BOOKS IN REVIEW



universelle  dans   un   recit   regionaliste: "Que ce  qu'tu veux ... Tout le  monde passe  par  la."               JANET M. PATERSON


IMMIGRANTS

PAVEL  JAVOR,  Far  From  You. Hounslow, n.p.
WACLAW IWANIUK,  Evenings on  Lake  Ontario.
Hounslow, n.p.
CELESTINO DE  IULUS,  Love's Sinning Song  and Other  Poems. Canadian  Centre for  Italian Culture and  Education, $6.75.
GEORGE HINES,  Stephen Gill  and   His  Works: An  Evaluation. Vesta, $8.so.

THE IMMIGRANT EXPERIENCE in Canada today  is somewhat different from  the ex­ perience of those who opened up Canada during  the  nineteenth  century.  Certain elements are  still  common; for  example, the initial disorientation at one's new en­ vironment, compounded  by nostalgia  for familiar sights  and  surroundings left  be­ hind.  But  unlike earlier  immigrants, who had  to confront Canada's harsh  bush and  harsher winters, the new immigrants have the  comforts of  technology and  city  life. In   these   four   volumes,   which   share   a common link in  the  immigrant sensibility of the  authors,  we do  not  have  much  of landscape-painting or farm  life or adven­ ture-trails; though Iwaniuk has Lake On­ tario  as his setting,  the city is always part  of the landscape.
All    four    writers -Javor,  Iwaniuk, Iuliis, and Gill-are themselves immi­ grants,  but   this  common  link  does  not make   them   fall   automatically  into   the same group (we often tend to use this pigeonholing method of placing women­ writers  in  one  coop,  minority-group im­ migrants in  another  and  so on); in  the context of  literary  criteria, Pavel  Javor stands   apart  and  superior  to  the  other three.   He  is  a  mature poet.   Iuliis   and  Gill   are   obviously   novices.  What  each poet  says about poetry  effectively  reveals his quality :
 But  suddenly
quite unexpectedly,
when nobody listens, something very  old sobs  within

And  it's  a poem.	(Javor) I know  that my body
holds  itself in  a kind
of unique state.

while I behave like  an  atom
ready to  explode.	(Iwaniuk)
Ah,  master poet, masturbator,
when  will  you  tire
of pretentious noise?	(Iuliis)

As infant to mother or  moth to flame this  bard dismayed turns to  you
0' fount of  wine. 	(Gill)

Pavel Javor is the  non-de-plume adopted  by  George  Skvor   (Igi6-Ig8I) who  was  an  established writer  in  his  na­ tive   Czechoslovakia  when   he   came   to Canada in  I 950,  following the  commu­ nist   takeover  of   his   country   in   I 948 ("Javor" is the  Czech  word  for  "maple" and  was chosen  as an  expression of com­  mitment to his adoptive land). Far From You   contains  46  poems,   most  of  them  translated  from   the   original   Czech   by Ron  Banerjee; several  were translated by Alfred  French earlier. The 46 poems  are in   three   parts  -"Smoke  from   Ithaca" with   I 2  poems; "There  in  That Land" with  26  poems; and   "The  Land Under the   Cyrillic  Alphabet"  with   12  poems. "Smoke from  Ithaca" contains poignant poems of separation as the persona leaves his   native  land    on   his   Odyssey    and  reaches  Canada. The other two parts  are his   mind-screen   views  of   Ithaca,  long after   the   smoke  signals   have   vanished from  sight.
Many of  the  poems  translated by  Al­
fred   French have  a  rhyme  scheme   and

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



metrical composition similar to the origi­ nal.  Maria Nemcova Banerjee, inheres­ say  on  Javor  at   the   end   of   the   book, mentions these metrical traits of  the poet. Those translated by  Ron  Banerjee have no  rhymes   and   they  sound   stronger  in cadence and  in content.
The Canadian poems,  though only a handful, poignantly go through phases of immigrant experience; from  the  dismay
of "My  God,  where  have  you sent  me?  I
Under the Rockies, on the world's brink,"
through the  lostness  of "Alone and  hun­ gry, through the  streets I  roam  I In this strange city  in  a  stranger's land," to  the
familiarity of "If you are  poor,  with  only shadows I in  your  pockets,   I you  make it on foot  to Mount Royal."
However, it is in  poems of exile, of expatriation rather than of impatriation, that  Pavel  Javor's poetry  has  the  impact
of a sledge hammer: "I repeat, I choking
on  pain,  on  anger  I What Esenin  once wrote: I Finished -no  return"; "Czech
blood  (cursed-forever blood) . Damn you! You,  who  betrayed us!"  he  curses  those who  betrayed his country in  I 938  to  the Nazis, and  again  in  I 948  to  the  commu­ nists.
Waclaw   Iwaniuk,  born   in  Poland   in I g I 5, came  to Canada in I 948.  He  is the author of ten volumes of poetry  and  of translations from  English  to Polish. How­ ever, Evenings on Lake Ontario is his first English  work  and  consists of 44 poems  of uneven  quality. The opening  poem  with its "The country is enormous but its brain  is still  growing" and   his  general picture of Canada reminds one of  Earle Birney's  short  poem written in  I 948 that  compares Canada to an adolescent. There is a nar­ rative  quality in  the  first part that  is well suited  to his informal satirical thrusts:

Tall trees  picketed the  gateway to the  Milky
Way,
only  the  local  birds conversed
fluently in  both  English and  French the  bilinguals of Ottawa.
 The cadence of some  lines  could  be  im­ proved   considerably,  but   the  humorous observations of local  ways  and  compari­ sons to other  settings are always  interest­ ing.
After   a   brief   sojourn  in   Edmonton where  "I broke  out  in  a  sweat  I staring at  the  enormous plains,  I with  the enor­
mous sky," the persona settles  down  in Toronto, and   the  poems  set  there bring the city alive.  The lake is a pervading presence  that  becomes,  by the  end  of the first section,  a part  of the  persona, flood­ ing  inside  him   even   as  sunlight   floods brilliance on  its water.
The second part of 23 poems move into another mode. The persona is more city­ oriented  and   far   too  preoccupied   with being a "poet." His imagery  and message
get tedious.  "I like words.  I I am  at ease
with  them," he says in  one  of  the  many
confessional   poems   about   poetry. That seems   to   be  the   problem - he   is  too much  at ease with  words,  spinning them out   a  little   too  facilely   as  he  expresses trivia.
Iuliis's  Love's  Sinning  Song  says it  all in  the  title  even  more  clearly   than   the other  two self-explanatory titles. The vol­ ume  is  beautifully brought out  with its intriguing cover picture of half of a wom­ an's    face,   and    the   Introduction   says Celestino De  Iuliis  was  born  in  Italy  in
1946  and  came  to Canada in  I953·  The sequence of the various  parts  is intersting in the context  of his immigrant sensibility. Whereas Javor and  Iwaniuk, who  came to Canada as adults, speak  first of their disorientation and   then   with  familiarity of  their  adopted land,  De  Iuliis,  having come  here as a child,  speaks  of love's sin­ ning  song  and  of  sensuality  in  the  first part  and  then,  in  the  second  part, about his  origins.  The father-figure is  the  per­  vading presence  in the latter section. The second  generation search  for  roots -an­ other phase  of the immigrant experience
-is in evidence. Like  Iwaniuk, De Iuliis


145

BOOKS IN REVIEW



also  indulges  himself  too  much  with  his poetic calling, an overindulgence that  jars one   even   when   it   comes  from   one   as forceful and  unequivocally great  as  Wil­ liam  Wordsworth. In  Iwaniuk and  Iuliis  this becomes downright boring.
George   Hines'  Stephen  Gill  and  His
Works  is a  wordy  paneygyric  on  a  very minor   writer,  a  Shadwell who  needs  a
Dryden, not a literary critic. Stephen Gill, an immigrant from  India, has written several  books of poetry,  fiction, and criti­ cism,   none   of   them   particularly   note­ worthy.  The writer-George Hines -is indiscriminate both  in evaluation and  in vocabulary. There  is  endless  paraphrase of poems and  stories; to one familiar with Gill's  work,  the  extravagant praises  lav­ ished  on  his  literary skills  sound   some­ what of a  parody. If Gill  is to be  given any recognition, it would  not be for being a  writer   but  for  being  an  entrepreneur who has set up a publishing house to accommodate South Asian writers  in Canada.
Together,  the  four   volumes   reveal   a recent  phase  in Canadian immigrant lit­ erature   that    is   distinct    from    earlier
phases.  One   does  not  get  a  feel  of  the vastness  of the  country or a sense of  his­ tory.  One  does  not  get  the  feeling  of  a stream  within  a  stream-the  so-called ethnicity that  we see in  Jewish,  Menno­ nite, or  Icelandic writers.  Each speaks as an   individual,  of  himself   as   a   person rather than  as a part of an ethnic group. This   trait   might   have  implications  for sociologists   who   deal   with   the   multi­ ghetto nature of  Canadian society that  is otherwise called the multicultural mosaic.

UMA PARAMESWARAN
 WEBWORKS

ANNE  CAMERON,  Earth Witch. Harbour, $5·95·
MONA  FERTIG,  Releasing the  Spirit. Colophon, n.p.
JERRY RUSH,  Earth Dreams. Coteau, $5.00.
JOHN   NOLD,    Open  Squares.  Coach  House,
$6.5o.

THE   POEMS IN  Earth  Witch, by  Anne Cameron  (also  known   as  Cam   Hubert, author of Dreamspeaker), begin  with  an interesting enough premise: the speaker announces the intention to redefine  her identity by recasting traditional female archetypes. Nourishing, child-bearing Earth Mother is replaced by Earth Witch, whose   magic   and   dangerous  embraces both  devour and  strengthen the  women who  seek her.  This  prepares us, it seems, for  the  exploration of  an  exciting  alter­ native awareness, although  we  might be anoyed   by the  triteness  that  occasionally enervates the  early  poems:

she  held  me her  skin  soft
her  movements gentle
her  eyes  her  voice
her  lips
until I slept
in  her  arms.

Typical is  the  poet's   use  of  three  dots: "I imagined / ... so  much"; "It is  just
... how   she   is ..." -Cameron  wants those  dots  to suggest  meaningfulness  be­ yond  words,  but  this  is cheap  fakery, the mark   of  a  lazy  and  inarticulate  writer. Still,  the  dynamic  figure  of Earth Witch  and   provocative  references  to  Morgana
La  Fey,  Isis, and  Lilith carry  the  reader through those first few  pieces.
What  a   disappointment  to   discover, half-a-dozen  poems  into   the   book,  that

 		Cameron  has   reached  the   end   of  this imaginative  path. The speaker abruptly

ED.  NOTE: Re  Ralph Gustafson's "The  Sav­
ing  Grace"  ( CL 97) :  readers should change "bitterness" affirmation (p. 18)  to "bitterless"; remove comma  from   "the  grace, surely" (p.
20) ; add "pole" to "yard telephone" ( p.  2 1 ) .
 abandons archetypal considerations, turn­
ing    instead   to    what     she    apparently wanted to deal  with  from  the  beginning: a lesbian  relationship. The poetry  at  this

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



point  collapses  into  self-indulgent exhibi­ tionism.   The lazy  triteness  seen  earlier  becomes   the  norm   rather   than the  ex­ ception:
I want to hold  you.
I want to feel  your  lips against my throat ...
I want to press  my face against your  belly
and  circle my  tongue
in your  bellybutton.
And  on  and  on.  This book  embarrasses the reader  by the  chasm  between the pre­ tension  of its  theme and  the  puerility of its art.
Mona Fertig, in  Releasing the  Spirit, sets herself  the  challenge of working  in a heavily   mythopoeic  mode,   thus   risking the cliches of myth-encrusted vision. She meets  the challenge splendidly. Her  book is full of symbolic gardens, fruits,  caves, snakes, seas, and  a Blakean "Devil Angel
called  1 Imagination." What she calls "a
New   Monster  a  New  Spirit" is  in  one
sense not  new  at  all,  but  the  genuine in­ tensity  of  Fertig's blast-furnace  imagina­ tion    transforms  chunks  of    traditional symbolism   into   fiery   new   weapons  of poetry:
Feathers. Angels. A nuclear warhead. Clear­ ing   the  way.  Carving its  own  name  a  new shape  a  scullscape a  continual   wavelength reaching back  into  history and  forward into  the  front lines.
No quaint and  dusty  myth-hunting for Fertig; mythic  awareness becomes adren­ alin  that   charges  her  poetry.  When  she thinks  of hell, she pictures not Dante but New  York  City,  where "the  streets   are live wires" :
in  the  middle
of all  this  hell-fire electricity
B million people live.
Her  symbolism does not ultimately beckon us backward:
the  finger  that says no  turning back
to the  garden points at you.
 Instead, we are exploded into  marvellous and  threatening possibilities  of  the  pres­ ent:

Feed  this  Monster this Beauty  this Art. With your  life. Without which we are  sad  things.

The  poem  "Rain" summarizes the fer­ tility and  vitality  of Fertig's vision. "The garden," she tells us, "is for picking"; the vegetables  are  for  "digging  up.  Uproot­ ing.  Like  your  past." Just  as  rain  brings the  ancient cycle  of life  to  bloom  in  the present,   so   also   poetry    brings    myth­ consciousness,  "as  old  as  time," alive  to nourish   us  today.   It is,  the  poem  con­  cludes, "a practical art."
Earth  Dreams, by Jerry  Rush,  includes half-a-dozen photographs  of  rural   Sas­ katchewan, focused  with crystal precision, so  that   each   tiny   perimeter  encloses   a world of fine detail. Likewise, Rush's best poems are sharply defined portraits of the  small  corners  of  experience. They  are  at their  best  when  Rush   accepts the  disci­ pline of this approach, as in, for example, "Fuel," where  he swiftly etches  the small but  vivid world  of a  prairie family  look­ ing  for  "droppings of  half-wild  horses"  and  "cured pies of  roaming cattle." The dried dung  is used for  fuel,

And  the  earth smell  in  the  kitchen mixed  with  warm brown  loaves
and  steam  from  the  stew  pot
bubbling.

Rush's method draws him  to  the  quirky (a farmer who  installs  a linoleum rug on his   ceiling - "just  wear    out    on   the floor") and  the grotesque (song sparrows
impaling themselves, "throat-hung  I on
barbed wire spikes," and flies that
"mouth" the  wounds of kittens  mangled by an old  tomcat). His  eye seeks the poignant, private detail, not, for example, the obvious flesh of fruit, but

the  lacy seed's pattern, flesh  gently pinched; syrup, on  the  rusted stone at the core.


147

BOOKS IN REVIEW



At other times, Rush tries different, less successful  tactics.  In  a number of pieces, he  amuses   himself   by  imitating  "Cana­ jan"  dialect:

ya wanna solve  gall  stones  heh bijeez 	ya  know  what ya want lotssa  plants an  things

The attempt falls flat because  it has been done  so much  better by others.  A flying/ falling/Icarus motif  runs through the last third   of  the  book, but  references  to "floating" and  "jumping" become clumsy and  predictable. Rush  is not  at  his  best when  he  tries  to  weave large  patterns or become  abstractly reflective; he leaves us wishing for more  of his sharply  focused, limited-angle shots of the "rusted stone  / at  the core."
Weaving large  patterns is exactly  what poet  John Nold  does  best. The  first  hint of something interesting in  the  structure of  Open Squares occurs  with  a footnote that  leads  us  to  "The  Context"-actu­ ally four  "Contexts" -at the end  of the book. Numbers in  the poems direct  us to notes   in   Context   One-explanations, credits, or  unashamed digressions.  Those  notes  refer  to  further notes  in  Context Two,   which   in   turn   lead   to  Contexts Three and  Four.
But   this  is  only   the   beginning.  The reader then  realizes that  the poems them­ selves are  a maze  of  cross-references, and continuous lines  of   thought can  be  dis­ cerned only when  the fragmentary poems are  reorganized, not  into  a "right" order, but   into   several   possible  orders.  Nold's  patterns are  usually  based on foursomes: squares  superimposed on  other   squares.  For  example, there  are  suites  of "colour poems," each suite  having  four numbered poems   scattered  throughout  the   book. Once   all  the  "Yellows" are  brought  to­ gether,  a  "yellow"  theme   appears,  but links between  "Yellow  One," "Red One," and  "Blue  One" are  at least as important as the  links  between the  four  "Yellows."
 The strongest through-lines materialize only  after one  notices  that each  colour poem  is four  pages long;  the first pages of all the colours cohere, as do all the second pages,  and  so on. Squares within squares within squares.
In  short, the  book is a massive Chinese puzzle  or  Rubik's Cube  with  many  solu­ tions,  imitating the  webwork   of   human understanding.  There  are   moments  of great  discovery  and  delight, such as when one   stumbles  upon   Context   One,  note thirteen; there  is no  number thirteen in the  poems and  the note confesses to being "completely out  of  context but  here  it is here  like  the  thirteenth floor  of  a  build­  ing  that  doesn't exist."   There are  also, however, many  moments when it is all too clear  that  the  game  of solving  the  struc­ tural puzzle is more interesting and  mem­ orable than  the poetry  on any given page. "Structure is content," one  poem  tells us, but,   like  much   ingenious  formalist   rt, Open Squares may  leave  us wondenng whether  structure  is   quite  enough  to satisfy  our  appetites.
For  the  four   books  under review,  the
real  issue  is  the  question of  what  chal­ lenges  the  poets  have  set  for  themselves.  Earth Witch fails  because  its author fails to  impose   discipline  on   her  work;  she fails  to choose  a challenge.  The remain­ ing  three  books  achieve  their  uniqueness because   their   authors  choose   challenges of  myth,   image,   and  structure,  respec­  tively.
BRUCE PIRIE


MUCH ADO

PETER VAN  TOORN &: KEN  NORRIS, Cross/cut: Contemporary English Quebec Poetry. Vehi­ cule, $17-95; pa.  $8.95.
AN  ACQUAINTANCE  OF  MINE living  in Montreal recently  told  me that  being English in Quebec now is really a case of coming to terms  with stagnation. This,  he

BOOKS IN REVIEW



claims, is in itself a fascinating endeavour. Well, that may  be. But  judging from  this anthology, it hasn't made for any  particu­ larly distinctive poetic sensibility, nothing like  the  energy  around  the  First   State­ ment   and  Preview   groups. At  least  not yet.
Because  there  is nothing distinctive about  the  seventy   poets  gathered  here, as a group  at  any  rate,  Peter  Van  Toorn,
author of  CrossIcut's seventeen-page  in­
troduction,  is  hard  pressed   to  make   a
case. Rather than  dealing with  the  issue at  hand  -What, if anything, is going on with  English  Quebec poetry? Why this anthology?-Van   Toorn   provides   us with  generalizations on a whole  variety  of topics. He begins with some apple-pie definitions of  poetry:
At once  a philosophical and  historical mode, poetry refines   our   most   public and   private
-and, therefore, our   most  elusive-cur­
rency.  When it succeeds in  providing a sym­ bolic   form    for   significant  states  of   mind, poetry restores a  balance and  radiance not  only  to language, our  spiritual currency, but  to  the  imagination in  charge  of  it,  the  hu­ man   spirit invested with  the  awesome task of employing that  currency  with  dignity.

That sort of inflated prose runs through most  of  the  introduction, except that  it is  often   less  clear   than   in   the   section quoted above.  We  get  vague comments on the relation between art  and  social up­ heaval; a discussion  about how difficult  it is to be recognized as a poet  in  this coun­  try,  using  the  slightly  outdated  examples of   Lampman   and    Klein;  some   stuff about  "imaginative   dereliction"  as   re­ gards    Smart,   Baudelaire,  Van    Gogh; comments on  "an   indigenous Canadian imagination ... found in the  paintings of Tom Thomson ..."; and  to top  it all off, an  observation on  the  interest in  French civilization  by  "writers  diverse   as  Dos­ toyevski,  Goethe, Wordsworth, and  Pien Chih-Lin." One finishes  the  introduction wondering  if   perhaps it   isn't   a  grand  put-on. I really  hope  it is.
 There is  also  a  lack  of  focus  in   the choice  of  poets.   It seems  as  if  anyone writing in  the  English  language in  Que­ bec  was eligible.  And  there  are  inconsis­ tencies. For example, Irving Layton, who has  not lived  in Quebec for eleven  years, is included, while  Seymour  Mayne, who now lives and  teaches  in  Ottawa, was not included  even   though   it   is  widely   ac­ knowledged   that    his   poetic    roots   are firmly implanted in  Montreal.
The fact  that   CrossIcut   is a  pseudo­
anthology ought not detract from  the fact
that  some  very  fine  poems  appear in  it. I'd  like to conclude by mentioning them: David   Solway's   "Lines  Written  in  De­ jection"  and    "Noah";  Endre   Farkas's "Lyric" and  "Scribe"; Stephen   Morris­ sey's   "Waves"   and    "Poem";   Frances Davis's    "Woman";  Artie   Gold's   "Un­ titled"; Robyn  Sarah's "An Inch  of Air"; Michael Harris's  "Owls  Hooing  at   my House";  Raymond   Filip's   "Hank  Wil­ liams Meets  The Music  of the  Spheres"; Ken  Norris's  "Ode to  the  Possibilities." The  anthology also  contains one  of  the  most powerful  elegies ever  written in this country, namely  Gary  Geddes's "Sandra Lee Scheuer."
KENNETH SHERMAN


IN GLOOM, GOLD

TERRY   GRIGGS,  Harrier. Brick   Books,  $2.50.
GEOFFREY URSELL, ed.,  Saskatchewan Gold: 25
Stories  of  the   New   West.  Thunder  Creek,
$3-5°·
RON  SMITH   &   STEPHEN   GUPPY,   eds.,   Rain­ shadow:  Stories   from     Vancouver   Island. Sono  Nis  and  Oolichan,  $g.gs.

THE  SHORT  STORY in recent decades has been an energetic form frequently marked by imaginative and  narrative daring and by wit, in the intellectual and linguistic sense.  What first  strikes  one  about most of the forty-one stories contained in these three   volumes  is  how  conservative they


149

BOOKS IN REVIEW



are.  Many  could  have  been  written  half a century ago, and  going through the collections, one has the sense not just of having read  them   before  but  of  reading them  over  and  over.
Harrier, by  Terry Griggs,  finely  pro­ duced   as  a  kind  of  chapbook, is  one  of the  better   works,  though   perhaps  over­ priced  for a single story eleven pages long. Set  in what  appears to be a small  village possibly on  the  east  coast,  the  story  fol­ lows  the  quest   of  a  young  girl  for  her grandfather, a mysterious  man her grand­ mother  could  not  or  would   not  marry. Much  in   the   story   seems   deliberately vague,  and   the   apt   title   suggests   both hunting (the search, in this case, for spiri­  tual   nourishment)   and   the   annoyance caused by the elusiveness of the prey. The whole process verges on myth-making:  by inventing various   roles for  her  ancestor, the girl invests her own past, her life with meaning.
Both  the  cover  of Saskatchewan Gold and  its  effusive  Introduction blazon  the idea  of  newness -a  new collection of a new vision of the new west; the stories themselves,  however,  give the  impression that  not much  has happened in Saskatch­ ewan  in the  twentieth century. A surpris­ ing  number of  them  focus  on  a  period  prior   to  World   War   II and   look  into nostalgia and  dull  documentary realism at   common   experiences  ranging   from childhood to old  age.
As the characters get older,  the  stories seem  to become  more  substantial. Those that  stand   out  attempt more  than  local colour,  colloquial yarns,  or  a cliched  fas­ cination  with   drinking and   adolescent sex. Bradd  Burningham's "The Girl  with the Baby Arms," for instance, in the form  of a rambling letter from  a graduate stu­ dent   stalled   on  a  Spanish   island  on  his way   to  study   in   France,  displays   both evocative description and  psychologically intriguing human contacts. Edna  Alford's "The Garden of Eloise Loon," though its
 imagery is sometimes unfocused, gives  to the  dilemma of  an  abandoned Indian woman and  her child  a haunting and powerful despair. And  Lewis  Horne's "What Do Ducks  Do  In  the  Winter" re­ calls   on   a   smaller  scale   Joyce's   "The Dead" through its treatment of a middle­ aged  academic addressing a dinner party  that   includes  his  increasingly estranged wife.  The  story  deftly   and   intelligently captures the tension  between  the two and  its eventual  eruption into  violence.
Very few of the stories experiment with form,  though Connie Gault's "at  dusk  I just when  I the Light is filled with  birds"
shows   a  concern  with   the   nature,  the
fictiveness    of   fiction.    Similarly, "The Woman  Who  Talks to  Canada  Geese," by  Byrna   Barclay,  is  a  stylistically  am­ bitious  account of  a  woman  caught  be­ tween  her  fighting husband  and  son  and identifying  with   migrating  geese  which  to her  symbolize  escape. And  in "Reflec­ tions," Bonnie  Burnard  shows  an  elderly  couple facing the imminence of their  own deaths  by   treating  the   basic   situation twice, from each  point  of view. What re­ sults  is a  distorting mirror that   actually enriches   the  characters for   us.  Finally,  Brenda  Riches' "Clara  Smiling," though hardly   more   than   a  short   sketch,   ably catches the  mood  of an  apparently senile woman who  has  just murdered her sister.
On the whole, the fifteen stories in Rainshadow show greater variety  and  a higher level of literary accomplishment than do  those  in  Saskatchewan  Gold. A commemorative volume,  Rainshadow cel­ ebrates  the   twenty-fifth   anniversary  of the  Canada Council. This is a handsome edition,  with   appropriate  silver  colours,  though the  text  is marred  by an  unusual number of typographical errors in a work intended as a tribute. For $roo.oo, a lim­ ited  hardcover edititon is available signed by all fifteen  authors, many  of whom  are well  known,  such  as  W. D.  Valgardson, Leon  Rooke,  Jack   Hodgins, W. P. Kin-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



sella,   Sean   Virgo,   and   Robin   Skelton, and  all  of  whom   have  some  connection with  the Island.
Again,  it  is the  stories  that  go beyond the anecdotal level and  the standard con­ ventions of  form   that   percolate  in   the mind.    Consistently  adventurous,   Leon Rooke   plays   with   narrator,   tone,   and structure in  "Sing   Me  No  Love  Songs, I'll   Say  You   No  Prayers,"  a  humorous account of  relationship  between an  itin­  erant  lumberman and   his  wife  as  they scrounge a  rudimentary  existence  out  of fringe   lumber  companies.  Also   solidly realized  are  Sean  Virgo's "Kapino,"  set in  the  Solomon Islands where   the  ghost of a native  woman mistreated in her mar­ riage  wages  a  vendetta against  any  kind of   romance,  and    Mildred   Tremblay's "Lily   and   the  Salamander"  which   con­ vincingly   depicts a  woman's  progressive los  of  contact with  conventional reality and   her   uncomprehending  family's   re­ actions.
A South  American influence seems  to
be  present  in   "The  Tale  of   the   Rat­ Catcher's Daughter"  in  which  Stephen Guppy, one  of  the  volume's two  editors,  recounts a bizarre and  comic epic descent  by the  son  of  a  Nanaimo coal  baron  in search  of ultimate fulfilment, and in Wil­ fred   Watson's  "Four  Times  Canada  is Four" in which  a reticent academic, plan­  ning  to leave  Edmonton to spend  a sab­ batical   year  in   Paris,   finds   himself   in­ habiting a  strange, dream-like world  of mirror duplications where  reality  parodies itself.
Almost  all  of  the  stories  in  these  col­ lections  are  competently written. If only a handful seem amply  to reward the read­  ing and  to cast  the  rest  into shadow,  this
is  partly   because   one  has  come  to  take
competence for granted and  because, to borrow  Pound's phrase, in  the  blandness of  the  ordinary, "the  gold   gathers the light  against it."
R.  H. RAMSEY
 MARLATT
IN PARENTHESIS

DAPHNE    MARLATT,    Selected 	Writing:   Net
Work. Talonbooks, n.p.
DAPHNE    MARLATT,    What Matters: Writing
1968-70. Coach House, $5.25.

You   DON'T   HOLD   A   Marlatt  poem   in mind,   not  the   whole   poem   anyway,  in the  way  you  might   an  Emily  Dickinson lyric,  or  even  an  AI Purdy ramble. The drifting in  and  out  of  consciousness (which  includes body)   is Marlatt's  prin­ ciple of composition, so that a parenthesis
-"the  sea  is  only   (lonely)  where   the freighters come" -incorporates  the  au­ ral association which  momentarily  passes through the  writing mind. Her  frequent use  of  the  enclosed   parenthesis  implies  moving  into  a  digression, or  an  elabora­ tion,  and   never   returning  to  the   main thought. But  Marlatt is  just  as  likely  to use  parentheses  where   there  is,  on   the face  of  it,  no  digression   at  all,  or  to  be parenthetic with  no typographical signals in  view. "If at  any  point," she explains,  "this  story doesn't break  in  two but  runs, on ... there  is  only  the  unfamiliarity of the  world  to  thank." The reader tries  to follow  the  "paths  leading, leaving ... ," paths  made  by  surprise, by the  compos­  ing mind's  constant discovery  of the  un­ familiar-in  matter, in  language. The result  is certainly  intensely, marvellously poetic,  if attention to  the  richness,  sub­ tlety,  delicacy,  and  complexity of  words is any criterion. But, as Marlatt acknowl­  edged  in an  interview with George  Bow­ ering  in  I974,  the  framework could   be more  accessible:  "I've always  wanted to publish  a  book  of   poems  or  a  book  of writing   of   an   equivalent  density,   em­ bedded  in a series of extracts from a diary or  a  journal  of  letters,   that   would  give them a more  prosaic  matrix."
What  Matters  is the  collage  of  poems and  journal  entries Marlatt  described in

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



I974· The book is in three movements­ California, Vancouver,  Wisconsin-and moves  through the  passages  of  marriage and  giving  birth,  of  searching for  home and   a  poetic  voice.  During  the   period  I968-I970 Marlatt found  that  "the 'drift'
[of  languageJ  could  ground   my  experi­
ence." Writing of that  difficult experience
in I98o, it seems she is now prepared to introduce herself by giving the reader  a "ground" for  her  own  drift  of language. At the centre of the book is the earlier published Rings  (I 97I), that  remarkable recreation  of  the   birth   of  her  son.  But now  it's framed by the matter-of-fact journal entries:  "he  was born Saturday afternoon May  3rd at 7 minutes to 5 on a sunny  day," and  the  diary's  immediate feelings  "I 'gave  him life' as they say, but was  powerless  doing  it."  Similarly, Van­ couver  Poems  (I 972), although  not  re­ printed here,  is given  "a  prosaic  matrix" by the account of its genesis.
There is no doubt that  such grounding makes  the  "spiralling" of Marlatt's poem easier  to  follow.  Which  is not  to suggest that   Marlatt is abandoning a stubbornly won  poetic,  a commitment to phenomen­ ological   composition. On   the  contrary, the  entire field of  "elements occurring in consciousness  at   once"   presumably  in­ cludes   even   conventional  linear   syntax and chronology. And  there  is a fuller  bio­ graphical context here,  consistent with  a poet  who has always insisted on including her   biography /biology    in  her   writing. What  Matters defines, as it questions, Marlatt's ways  with   language and  per­ ceptions. The result  is a rich and exciting  book, combining great  density, with many elements of the introduction.
These two books, in different ways, ful­ fil this desire: both are "introductions" to Marlatt's  work.   Net   Work,  in   Talon­ books'   important   series   of   inexpensive classroom   collections,  is  an   intelligent selection from  all Marlatt's books, includ­ ing  the  poem/journal of  her   return  to
 Penang, published in  The  Capitano  Re­ view,   and    recent   uncollected    poems. What  Matters, which  ranks  with  Steves­ ton in achievement and  significance, is a still  more   valuable  introduction  to  the evolution of  Marlatt's poetic,  and  of her sense of self, in  the  late  I96o's.
Marlatt, more  than  many another poet, poses   a   problem  for   editors,  since,   as Fred Wah's Introduction explains, "'book'  for   her   is  a   very   intentional form." It's difficult  to excerpt Frames of a Story successfully  since  both  the accumu­ lating frames, and  the  story, are lost. So with  Steveston, or  Z6calo, which  in  this selection  has a great  deal  to do with  being a  tourist, and   very  little  to  do  with   the shifting  relationships  between   man   and  woman which  are  so crucial  in the novel. On  the  other hand, of  course, whatever is lost  by  selecting  from  Marlatt, the  drift  of  the  composing -through  sound   pat­  terns,    "semantic  thickness,"  embedded haiku, etymologies, and  out  to the "limits of   syntax" -and the   new  ordering of poems, can be appreciated for themselves. "For Marlatt," Wah  claims,  "the 'word' is a  place   to  focus  the  enegy  of  the  in­ telligence." Using  this theme,  Wah writes an  Introduction, which  is  generally clear  and    succinct,  an   excellent   companion piece to the Bowering interview published in  Open  Letter,  from   which   he  quotes extensively. There is, for example, a sure sense of Marlatt's development, as direct an  explanation of  proprioception as one is likely  to  find,  and  a  helpful basic  bib­ liography.
In  Marlatt the  "what" does matter. In her  poems/prose, it's  things to which  she responds :  everything is  rooted    in   the senses, in fine detail, in place.  And,  then, what  matters,  because   like  every  single word,  it is unique and  uniquely resonant. And,   then, of  course,   there's  an   inter­ rogative and   the  questioning  constantly matters,  the   questioning   of   matter,  of what   matters.   This   book    carries  the

BOOKS IN REVIEW



reader  much  further into  this exploration than I am able to itemize  (e.g., "mater (mother)  [is]  in matter"). In short,  the title of this book is itself a poem, an intro­ duction   to   the    "interplay  of    sensory being-in-a  place    and    thoughts   about" which  forms  Marlatt's work.  The density suggested  by the title is sustained through­ out  and  makes What Matters matter very much.
LAURIE RICOU


PEARLS & SWINE

GWEN   HAUSER,   Gophers and   Swans.  Fiddle­
head, n.p.
LEN  GASPARINI,  The  Climate of  The  Heart.
Vesta, $5-50.
ROSALIND    EVE    CONWAY,    Townswomen   and
Other Poems. Mosaic, n.p.
GERTRUDE KATZ,  Duet. Mosaic, n.p.
GREGORY M.  cooK, Love  En  Route. Fiddlehead, n.p.
ELIZABETH   BREWSTER,   Digging   In.   Oberon, n.p.
DIANNE  JOYCE  &:  EVA   TIHANYI,   Stone Wear I A  Sequence of the  Blood. N.p.

IN  THIS FLASH DOCUMENTARY  world  of ours, where  everything is communicable and  communicated instantly through sneezes  and  the  mass  media, we seem  to have  a  new  ars  poetica. "Let it all  hang out," battle cry of the  sixties,  is  protrud­ ing  in  contemporary  literature.  This  is good  and   bad.  Roses  do  grow  in  dung­ hills.  However, it  often seems  there  is a lot  of  dunghill  and very  few  roses. The  craft of poetry seems to be suffering. This  is  the  overwhelming  impression created by  the  seven   books  of  poems   reviewed here.  A  lot  of  dunghill. A  lot  of  swine. Some  pearls.  I wonder if it  is expecting too  much  to ask for  more.
Gophers and Swans by Gwen  Hauser records the tortured journey from  briefest innocence to  the  crucible experiences of a woman  compulsively resisting  the status
 quo.  "Singing for  her  life,"  Hauser  cele­ brates   the  ugliness  of  compulsive  rebel­ lion.  The only  alternative  to  singing   is madness  in a world she perceives as domi­  nantly  male and  brutal. There is no state  of grace  for  the  lower  case  "i"  of  these poems  who  "fought and   got  away   but never  went  home  again." By holding it up to us without flinching, Hauser makes us share her  pain.
I  probably shouldn't put  Hauser  back
to back with  Len Gasparini, poet and reviewer  of  the  macho school.  However, here he is, hoisted  on his own petard, skewering   Climate  of   the   Heart   in   a rather   smug    poem,    "The  Book    Re­ viewer":

How  can  I venture a further  judgement of them,
except to  repeat what Auden said,
"Some books  are  undeservedly forgotten
none  are  undeservedly remembered."

To  put  a  finer  point  on  it,  I  think  we should  let Gasparini continue in  his own VOICe:

"Forget it" said  the  tattoed one.  I'd rather jerk  off than pay  that much."

Or:

Ten  more  days  and we'll  be  home
Drinkin' beer  and pissin'  foam.

Finally  we have  his advice  to a newborn son:

You  are  a  bright new  arrow For  the  bow  of Sagittarius. Life  be your  target, my son.

Lock  up your  daughters!
Townswomen, by  Rosalind  Eve  Con­ way, is a suite of poems  based on women  characters  in  the   poems  and   stories   of other writers, the  premise  being,  I sup­  pose, that  since  we already have  an emo­  tional  acquaintance with these characters, the facets in this woman's world in micro­ cosm  will  fall  into   place   more  quickly.  The danger in this kind of vicarious  writ­ ing  is  that  deja vu  often   comes  off  as

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



"Second Hand Rose."  Hovering between exposition and psychological truth, these poems  lack  the  incandescence of  real  or fresh fictional  people.  And Other  Poems, last in  the  title,  first  in the  book, do  not flow into  Townswomen. There are  some felicitous  moments, but mostly the poet seems to be "tangled in some spider-web story of her  own  devising."
Gertrude Katz' Duet,  an  ink  blot  trip through the family album  is an eclectic collection which  moves from  the  banal  to the  frankly vulgar   ("To Cum  or  Not  to Cum"), only  occasionally penetrating family   jokes  to  family   pain,  where   the real  history  lies darkly under  the  skin of self-conscious  caricature. In this book, we have   everything  from   Irving  Layton's holy chorus of saints  dancing across the "milky  semen  way"  to "halos spinning hysterical  purity," a very powerful image. Refinement, closer editing, and  ruthless culling  will  move  Katz,  and  others  with her, further from  throw-away journalism and  closer  to art.
Gregory  Cook, in Love En Route, takes the  highway  as  an   extended metaphor
creating an "unending dance" from cover to cover. His highway is "a no man's  land cleaned of dead  animals by crows."  The poems  are  clean  and  gentle  glimpses through an  open  window. Cook  has cre­ ated  a sense of movement through  land­ scape and  family  history  that allows us to transcend pain  and  vulgarity as we lie

... on our  wet  backs  in  the starred  dust shouting our  sudden fear of the earths'
shake
into  the warm  black of our spent  fires.

Always  there  is the  sky above  and  the earth  below. Digging In, by Elizabeth Brewster, describes the poet as juggler attempting to balance stairs and  rabbit holes, the tiny graves for every living moment. It  would   seem  she  sometimes hardly  knows  which  of the  circling  balls are  future or  history.  Out  of  this confu-
 sion  comes  some  uncertainty about  her­ self as artist. The "renewable  glory" she seeks is elusive.  Her  deity  is  flawed.  The shining past  may be dressed in fools' gold. The others, her  predecessors, after  all
left  garbage behind as we do.
In Stone  Wear  and   Sequence  of the Blood,  a   tandem  collection by  Dianne Joyce  and   Eva  Tihanyi, there   is a  con­ scious  effort  to turn all faces  to  the light  and   to  create  a   unity   in   the  patterns of  light   and   shadow, the  irreconcilable halves.  In "Birthright," Joyce  affirms:
You watch  me into  the deeper  waters.
When  I emerge  I will have myself renamed.

Stone  Wear  poems  come  with  the  heart­ beat  rhythms of a chisel in the hands of a gentle  artist. Eva  Tihanyi's poems  follow with  an affirmation that through miracles  blood   can   flow   through   stone.   In   this union, she finally finds

her selves in  perfect  unison
a synthesis  of snow on snow.
This  is more like it.

LINDA ROGERS


(UN)MAKING

ARNOLD ITWARU,   Shattered Songs. Aya  Press,
$6.oo.
PAUL  SAVOIE,  Acrobats. Aya Press, $6.oo.

IN   THE   PUBLISHED  PROCEEDINGS of  an international  symposium on  Vico  (Johns Hopkins  Press,I g6g)   Elizabeth  Sewell gives a bracing account of "Bacon, Vico, Coleridge,  and    Poetic    Method."   She shows how  method, for all three,  includes unmaking for  the  sake  of  new  making. She gives us Coleridge suggesting that  the poet's  task  is to reconstitute chaos  for  us so that making and   remaking can  begin again, and  she quotes  him in typical aphoristic flight  on the matter: "All other men's  worlds  are  his chaos."

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



In   Shattered   Songs  Arnold ltwaru's poems  are  unambiguously  in  the  phase, the  rhythm, of  unmaking. They  unmake up  a  closely  knit  series  of  anti- or  pre­ meditations  enacting  personal   chaos,   a psyche  in  throes  of  extreme  deconstruc­ tion.   (These  anti-meditations come  one to a page so, for lack of titles, I'll  refer  to them  by  page  number.)  Numbed 29, for example,  throws   up  our  old  archetypal friend, the mad  poet,  and  exactly  answers to "All other men's  worlds  are  his chaos." Rereading this volume  I think  of kalei­ doscopes.   During the  first  headlong,  fe­ verish   turns   the   hysterical  confusion  of splintered phrases achieve no patternable song;  they deliberately evoke chaos. Then the  kaleidoscope's  rate  of  turn   seems  to slow  and   glints   of   song  become   darkly
visible-shattered  though they  may  be. We seem  to move  through possessed anti­ renditions  of  incohate  agony   and   rage into  relatively stable  syntactical  vistas of agonized   musing   in  which,   by  Number
38, there  is enough semantic and  rhetori­ cal  space  for  the  persona to  watch him­  self  acting a  part in  a  play  which  is the real   thing which   is  a   play.  And   from there,  fairly  rapidly, to the silence of shat­  tered  songs  that  ends  the  work.  ltwaru's would-be   singer   produces  a   season   in
hell:  a  kind  of  orphic orphan -still  a child   at   nearly   40   (Number  45)  -is finally   torn   to  pieces   by  a  treacherous lexicon.  To  give  pain  a  name should  be to  conjure it  into  livable  versions  of  the self but  his words,  words  that  are  always already  not   his,   are   themselves   pain­ bearers, subjecting him  to continuous dis­ memberment and   rememberment.  One  ruling project, or  fated burden, discern­ ible in all this to to find a habitable locale for   the   psyche -the   book's   subtitle  is "(a  journey  from   somewhere  to  some­ where)."  The  journey   is  excruciatingly dangerous. All  somewheres are  crawling with   agents   and   intimations of   autode­ struction:  a  decomposing  subject  shifts
 elusively  among various personae, keeps vanishing into   undifferentiated,  dopple­ gangerish you's,  her's,  and  they's; primal guilts,  murder, and   incest,  seep  in  then  gush up  (Numbers 8, 15, 23, 28, 32, 37) ; the  pulse-a  major  image   of  signs  of life, of a viable  self -is variously  eaten, severed,  strangled; things  are  wrong way round:
in  rented moments meals  devour us, dust   to  dust,
dream to  dream,
these  rooms  rent us out.   (20)
To  stay  deep   inside   is  tempting  but   it invites  drowning in  the  self's own  detri­ tus;   to  make   a  real   move  outwards  is imperative  but   "out  there,   remember, sons  eat   fathers"   ( 13) .  The   child   of nearly  40 has got  nowhere. Out of being unmade he must  try  to make  something, someone. He must do this with words  that  make  and  unmake; words  that   in  locat­  ing, dislocate  and,  in  patching up  a self, deconstruct it.
If throes  of  unmaking dominate  Shat­
tered  Songs,  Paul   Savoie's   Acrobats  is poised  (sometimes precariously) in the making phase.  There is enough  detach­ ment  and sense of an achieved self to per­  mit a good deal  of reflection, observation, and   narrativity. This  maker,  though, is alert -well  aware of  how  close unmak­ ing  can  always  be.  The opening poem, "Time  of   Arrival"   is   cautionary  tale enough. And  even  a  well-rendered  still life  such   as  "Spoons," or   a  mundane, middle-of-the-night excursion ("The Tap")  to  track   down   the  leaky  faucet, ends  with  a  distinct whiff  of  danger, of boobytrapped ordinariness.
Two  other  features of these collections invite    comparison   and    discrimination. Like Scattered  Songs, Acbobats has strik­ ing wrong-way-round images.  In  the for­  mer,  such  imagery  embodies  radical dis­ sociation  and  discomfiture; in  the  latter, images  of  wrong-way-round  botany, for example, "like  old  barges  growing out  of


155

BOOKS IN REVIEW



fungus," or  of  wrong-way-round  clima­
tology:

The rain  comes,
its  voice  a  raucous engine
pumping fluid  from  the  ground
("Night Vision")

seem  rather to affirm  sudden  recognition of a wary  solidarity with  the  world.  The two collections also have in common  im­ agery   of   the   theatre,  with   associated  images   of   danceldancer.  In   Shattered Songs  Numbers 38 and  39 are late  com­ panion pieces that  (except  for the  quaint "yesteryear" in  39)   register  very  power­  fully a sort of exhausted scepticism  under  the  sign  "merely a  play," "only  a  play."  In  Acrobats   the  emblematic title  is first expounded in  "The Performance":

Soon  the  open curtain
and  the  unbearable weight of light on  my face
the  strong throb of expectant eyes....

And  tropes  of  performing or  being  at  a performance, of watching a performer or being  in  the  gaze of many  eyes, are  used to explore various  situations and semantic permutations. A few  examples: the  sen­ sitive,   unsentimental   "Seamstress";   the "Pianoman," which  reads  like  the  script  for  a  supermod,  punk andlor camp  ad­  vertisement;    and    then    the    titlepoem, where  theatre  as  circus  swings  between
"let  the  acrobats I that  we are" and  "let
the  acrobats I that  we dream  up"  in  an
acrobatics of high  emotional risk.
A  number of  Savioe's  poems  are  for­ mally  rather interesting and  impressive.  His use of repeated phrases, for example, offers  not  only   the  routine  felicities   of repetition;  such   phrases   often    operate rather like the recurring master-lines of a villanelle.   Some  of   the   best   pieces   in Acrobats  are  like  villanelles  out  of  uni­  form. Sprung villanelles,  so  to speak,  as in  "I  Am  Not  a  Lingerer" where   lines from  section   I  and   a  modified   phrase  from   section    II  are   recombined  with
 sharply pleasing  effect  in section  VI. An­ other formal device  is the  postponement of syntactical and  hence semantic gratifi­  cations.  Once  or   twice,   perhaps,  post­ ponement is somewhat too  indefinite but usually  we  are  engaged   to  good  purpose to  produce  a  large,  developing share  of our own meaning. This  device works best, I  think, in "River," where  postponement of  syntactical gratification multiplies dif­ fuse  meanings or  impressions into  a haunting sense  of some  primal diaspora, some   almost   unimaginably  distant   ur­ migration.
It is not  easy  to  tell,  in  contemporary rhythms and   idiom, a  modest   domestic story  that's clearly  wired  up to the ances­
tral   repertory of  romance or  fairy  tale.
The risk  of  blown  fuses  is considerable. Nevertheless "Winnie  Finds   the  Treas­ ure," "The Quiet That  Surrounds Us,"  "Trampolines and  Trapeze Artists," and "The  Child" all  work  well.  Each  is ordi­  nary  in  the sense of not  exotically lolling  about in faery casements forlorn, but each  has  its  own  mix  of  those  family  traits  of dangerous mystery  or  mysterious danger.
I enjoyed  both  these collections. In  the friendly advice department:   noting that Shattered Songs  is about as  confessional as it  can  be  I'd suggest  that, since  there is no  limit   to  matter for  confession,  the time   soon   comes   to  discourse  in  other modes  as well. In  noting that most of the poems  in  Acrobats are  effective,  I'd  sug­ gest  that  at  least  half  of them  would  be all  the  better for  more austerity  of style. I like  my  adjectival  foliage  as  much   as any man  but even some of the best poems in  Acrobats  would not,  I think,  be in  the slightest compromised by pruning. I  sign off  by  congratulating Aya  Press  for  get­ ting its poetry  series away  to a good start.

IAN SOWTON

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



CONVICTION

ANNE  MARRIOTT, The Circular  Coast.  Mosaic, n.p.

TI_I EMBLEM OF  SUCCESS in  a poet  is an ab1hty  to  create poems that are  simulta­ neously simple and  complex,  small   and large, light and dark. These  contrarieties are  encountered readily enough in music painting, and  theatre,  but  perhaps  les obviously in  recent  poetry. They are  cer­  tainly found in  the  poetry of  Anne Mar­ riott, and   more  particularly in  The Cir­ cular  Coast,  a  selection of  old  and   new poems that  is  attracting various  shades of  attention since its  publication in  r g8 1. At  first glance, the  book  is vintage Mar­ riott,   filled   with  poems that  show   the  poet's easy  handling of  words, of sounds,  of  responses to her  inner and outer world all   cultivated  since   she   started  first   t write in  the  thirties, easily  reminding the reader  of   those    qualities  that   brought recognition of her  work when she won the Governor General's Award for  Poetry in
1941.   But   at  a  second and  third  and fourth reading-and the  book  gave  me so  much pleasure that I did  so -it  be­ gins   to  cast   off   its  straightforwardness; never losing   its  clarity, it grows harder nd
mto each other. The language tosses itself back  and forth, creating links  of thought and word; and the  last  poem, "My Soul, there is a  Countrie," knits the  collection together with  the  same joy and pain  that one  feels  when a broken bone begins   to heal. Marriott tells that "I hold  the  whole thing now   / vast  mysterious origins " as she  recognizes that though one doe; not again  go   home,  one    is   "never  out   of home"; she  holds her  world of gull  cries gulf's verge, forgotten ships,  as  a 	'

circle in  my  hands green
luminous
in  the  white dark
bright
 waking night

She  does  not attempt to transform the world, nor  does  she  abandon it; instead she  captures its  changing essence   as  she shapes herself   with   it.  The collection  be­ comes  a portrait of the  poet  as growth.
From the  beginning of  her  career as a
poet,    Marriott   obviously has   been   in­ trigued by  the rhythms of  the  form  and the  sound of  words. For  her, language is almost an  obsession, a  powerful convic­ tion; she  is not, like  so  many of  her  con­ temporaries who  have written poetry over  the   years,   merely   preoccupied  with   it.  Many poets who  have been   writing for almost  fifty    years   as   has    Marriott - Finch, Layton,  Dudek, and others -in­ volved  as they are  in a respect for  rhythm and of  rhyme, let  their words follow  too rapidly  upon each other so  that undue attention  is given to  the  craft of  creating rhythm. Again and again, I feel that some of  our   more mature  poets -those  over sixty,  with  Dorothy Livesay being  an ob­ vious   exception-by   their  use  of   lan­ guage prompt me  to await the inevitabil­ ity  of  their rhythms rather  than  to  be persuaded   by    their   control   and  self­ assurance.
There is no  doubt that Anne Marriott is a professional poet  and   not  a dabbler· the  book  is  a compilation of  her  best,  of work   that  reflects the   times in  which it was  written, of  poems carefully gleaned from what could be many notebooks of started,  yet    unfinished,  poems  -work that she  does   not   want to  put   into the public domain. The  output is  not   that large,  but  what there is reveals an  astrin­ ency
JUSt any  poem into a collection, as  many Canadian  poets seem   to  be  doing. The poems  reveal work, a travail, creating a hardness and a success  similar to the  kind that only  writers like  Phyllis Webb, Mar­ garet  Avison,  Marya    Fiamengo- to name three of  too  few -achieve.


157

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



The book is divided into  three sections, focused  in  subject matter and  mood  per section,  rather than the poems in chrono­ logical  order. Section  I,  "The  Littoral," contains  poems   written  from  I 936  to I979, revealing Marriott's ability  to glow and   blossom  with   rhythms,  to  find   an original  image;  in   "Woodyard  in   the Rain" ( I936), "with a last fierce gesture  rain/ small pocks the oil-green  water  with a  hurled  /  ten  million  wire  nails,"   the image  is  apt  and  true,  for  not  only  does the picture sting,  but  also the sound  cuts, into   the   consciousness.   In   "The  Skin" ( I972), she writes of getting older,  of old skin, which  she tries to remove,  and  does, but  she  says  "I try  to  sew  the  fraying edges  / but  they flake to dust." Similar images abound in this section, amazing by their  freshness,  their  scalpel-like incisive­ ness.  Yet   they   are   more   than   merely clever,  or  new,  or  conscious; rather they serve as links to a mind  that  is tuned  and  timed  to saying  things  exactly.
Section   II, "The Interior," is for  the most part  concerned with places, with discovering their  meaning for  Marriott's individual psyche; in this section she is at her  most  personal, and  reveals  herself  in unassuming ways. She  emerges  as a  per­ son  who  feels  things   deeply,  but  is  also capable of  a  certain kind  of  ironic self­ deprecation and  wit that wins the reader. This  section   contains  "The Wind   Our  Enemy," now  a  classic  poem  about   the prairies   at   the   time   of   the  Depression. The   poem  still  stands  as  a  magnificent tour-de-force with  its images of the shift­  ing land, the  good years and  the  bad, the dust  and   the  wind. The   poem's   success lies not  only  in its portrayal of the wind,  but   also  in   the   juxtaposition  of   those years   when   the   prairies   bloomed   with fields of golden  wheat:

In autumn it  was  an  ocean  of flecked  gold Sweet as a  biscuit, breaking in crisp  waves That never shattered, never  blurred in foam. That was  the  last  good  year ...
 Though the  poem  echoes  a  bleak  plight of desolation, the resounding chord is one of  hope   and   optimism  unrestrained.  It will rain  again, "it  will"! The essence  of the Canadian character may be one of survival -as we are constantly reminded by other, and  lesser,  poets  and  critics­ but  the  root,  the  heart, of  that survival lies in the capacity to discover,  grow  and  build,  captured  best  by  Marriott in  this poem,  and  articulated  best  in  fiction   by Wiseman  in  The   Sacrifice.
The last  section  of  the  book,  "Coun­
tries," is a  suite  of  six  poems.  The  first five poems -numbered but  not  titled­ reflect  that  undercurrent of optimism and  faith  in man  that marks Marriott's work.  For  me,  the  poems  ring  of  a  Canadian consciousness;  they   are   even   patriotic. They celebrate a call on "a  green  country
/ to give me love."  The poet  is a patient in  a  hospital, searching for  renewal,  ex­ ploring ways  to  be well,  to find  a  reason  to  go  on.  The  poet/patient  is  lonely­ as  the  two  always  are-but  from   that  loneliness strength  emerges,  finally  em­ bracing country fpoetjpatient with a com­ memoration  of  life.  There is revelation. And  if  you  want  revelation, read   Mar­ riott's The  Circular  Coast. I  was  happy  to  see  this  book,  to  find  the  wonders in its  pages,  to  be  caught again  and   again  by the  use of language. Marriott's poetry  is  not  automatic;  piquant  imagery en­ livens   both   the   thought and   the   form. Moreover, Marriott's  presence   is  warm and  winning. Read  these poems,  "sad listener," for  in  Marriott we have  a fine poet,  and  I think  that it is about time  we all  told  her so.

DONALD STEPHENS

BOOKS IN REVIEW



LEAH

LEAH  ROSENBERG,  The   Errand   Runner. John
Wiley, n.p.

THIS  AUTOBIOGRAPHY will henceforth be an  obligatory item  in  any  study  of  Mor­ decai   Richler   for   it  is  written   by  his mother. It my
to sociologists studying the transitional process  of  immigrants to  this  country in the early decades of the cent zr·
it is not  remarkable. The wntmg, form­
stance   particularly in  the  early   part   of the  b ok,
coherent, at  times  burdened with  elegant inversion: "Lavish is the panorama of my
memon.es."
Even  as a  reference book, it  will have to be used with  caution, for  it is an oddly uncandid autobiography. As Leah Rosen­ berg says, "To protect the reticent mem­ bers of my family,  I have given  them  all new  names," and   other  kinds  of  infor­  mation  are   not   more  reliable   than   the  names.  Of  the  migration journey,  which included an ocean  voyage from  Hamburg to New York and  a delay of some days at Ellis  Island, she  says, "We left  Warsaw  on  October I 8,  I 9 I 3, and  arrived in To­ ronto   on   October  30"-a   remarkably swift  passage  for the  time.
The book  was  published after  Morde­ cai  Richler  had   written  eight  novels­ the latest,  Joshua  Then And  Now-and what   Leah   Rosenberg   seems  intent  on establishing is the difference between  the culture in which she grew up,  in a family of distinguished  Chassidic rabbis  on both sides, and   that of the  transported ghetto in   which   her  son   grew   up   and   wrote  about. In  Poland, "We were  the  people of the  book ... the  equivalent of aristoc­ racy  in  the  community," her  father "a lion of a man,  a king of Israel  -he was endowed with  all  of God's graces." And in Canada, after  the family  had  moved  to Montreal, Rabbi  Rosenberg's fame  as  a
 scholar grew, and their home became an intellectual centre for  Chassidim, "a  re­ ligious  mystical  movement that  arose  in Europe in  the  eighteenth  century."
Since  the  rabbi  knew  neither  English nor  French, Leah,  the youngest  daughter of  her  mother's seven  children,  became his interpreter, his errand runner, and  on occasion  his assistant. Twelve-year-old Leah,  too young  to  come  under  the  no­ work strictures, carried her  father's small bag of instruments as he went  forth on a Sabbath to  perform a  circumcision.  She was  present when  an  elderly  man .caJ?e at  Passover  time  in distress  about  his sm­ gle  set  of  dentures: Could   he  use  them  for  both meat  and  dairy? The rabbi  con­ sulted  the  law  books with  care  and  said yes, if  he soaked  them  for six hours i_n  salt water  between   dishes.  And   there   IS    the incident of  Leah's sister  undressing her shortly  before  her  marriage to  show  her how  the sex act  is performed. The  rule­ bound,   sheltered  life   was  far   removed from  the steamy,  seamy, grasping, rough­ and-tumble,  knees-to-navel world  of  St. Urbain Street.
The marriage, arranged by her  parents in  I 922  when  Leah  was  seventeen,  was a mismatch. Unhappiness deepened with the   depression    when   the   father-in-law lost his money  and  they were  all reduced to  penury. It was  during this  time  that Leah's younger  son,  Mordecai, was  born in  I93I, and   during this  time  also  that she moved to the cold-water flat on St. Urbain Street. In   I 935  her  father  died and  her  mother had  a stroke  from  which she never recovered. She was taken  to the flat,  where   Leah   nursed   her  for   seven
years.                                   .               .
Prosperity returned  with   the  wartime
boom-there is no mention of the Euro­ pean   agony-and  Leah   got  her   long­  desired  divorce  in  I944· "My  sons,  now thirteen and   eighteen,  proceeded  to  in­ form  me  that   they  had  become  illegiti­ mate." She  supported herself  with  vari-


159

BOOKS IN REVIEW



ous jobs, saved some money,  bought  a boarding house  as  insurance against  old age, and  in the  fifties realized  her  dream of  travelling, visiting  Mordecai in  Lon­ don  and  going on to Russia and  to Israel.  "In a sense, my trips  became  the  culmi­  nation   of  my  life.  I  was  now   my  own person." No longer  an errand  runner.
Leah   Rosenberg is, of  course,  the mother-figure  in   Richler's  books,   pre­ sented  quite  directly in The Street, which generally  tallies  with   her  own  account, thinly   disguised  as  Leah  Goldenberg in Son   Of   A  Smaller   Hero,  and   usually shown  in  unsympathetic contrast  to  the easy-going,  vacillating father-figure. The autobiography's account of the  marriage of  an  ambitious woman   to  an  unambi­ tious man,  the miseries of the depression, the  life-draining burden   of  invalid   par­  ents,  a woman's struggle for financial in­ dependence -all   these   are   twice-told tales.  They  serve  Leah  Rosenberg as an explanation, a  defence, a  vindication, a rationalization  of  the  Richler mother.
In   the   world   outside   Leah's  family there   had    been   revolutionary  changes from  the  end  of the  First  World  War  on, in social  conventions, in  dress, in  habits, in  manners,  in   religious   ties -and   of course  the  upheaval had  affected  Jewish life  too.  In  Son  Of  A  Smaller   Hero,  as Noah    reflects   on   "the   shifting  of   the ghetto  sands,"  he   says,  "There  is  no longer   anything that  one  could   wholly belong to. This  is the time of buts and parentheses."   Leah    faced    this   reality when  she looked  for  jobs and  discovered that she would have to give up Sabbath observances if  she  wanted to  earn  a  liv­ ing.    She    feared    "destruction-assimila­ tion,"   but   she   concluded  that    "while  observance is an integral part  of Judaism, Jewish  life does not  hinge on it. Judaism is a  consecration  of  the  soul  and  spirit, while  observance  is  like  an   outer   gar­ ment." The dreaded  "destruction-assimi­ lation" was to come closer, however. Both


I6o
 of her  sons married outside  the faith. "It
was  like  a  tornado that   burst  upon  me.
. . . Where had   I  failed?" On  reflection, she  realized, "It  had  not  occurred to me that  I was anti-Gentile as some Gentiles were anti-Jewish. I had  been bigoted  and intolerant. When  I understood this, I  be­ gan  to  regard my sons'  wives as  equals." The  rabbi's daughter  had  come  a  long way.
MARGARET STOBIE


TALE TYPES

EDITH   FOWKE,   Folktales   of  French   Canada.
NC  Press,  $7-95·
ANDRE  E.   ELBAZ,  Folktales   of  the  Canadian
Sephardim. Fitzhenry & Whiteside, $14.95·

"FRENCH CANADIANS  have  preserved  by far  the  largest  and  most  interesting  heri­ tage  of folktales in this country, but most of  them   are   unknown  to   Anglo-Cana­ dians." Edith Fowke's introductory state­ ment   in  her  Foreword  certainly reflects both  the collecting and  publishing activ­ ity  which has  characterized the  work  of French-Canadian folklorists  since Marius Barbeau's early  forays into  his native  oral narrative tradition. Barbeau's dynamism led  him   to  serve  for  many   years  as  an associate  editor of the prestigious Journal of  American  Folklore, in  the   pages   of which  appeared, between  I9I6 and  I950, a  number of large  collections of  French­ Canadian folklore,  in the original French. Most,  if  not  all  of  this  material, has  re­ mained  inaccessible  to   all   save   profes­  sional  folklorists.
Fowke's  intention, then,  is to present a small  sampling of French-Canadian folk­ tales,   in   translation,  "for    the   general
reader, old  and   young." Fowke,  one  of the  few Canadian Fellows  of the  Ameri­ can   Folklore Society,   has  drawn  almost  entirely upon  material  published by Bar­ beau  and  his  co-workers in  the  first  half of  the  century. A  second   aim  proposed

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



by Fowke  is that  her  translations "follow the  originals as closely  as possible."  This is certainly a laudable aim, as previous translations of French-Canadian  folktales have  generally  been more concerned with "preserving the  plots  but  not  the  style or the  phrasing of  b."'e  originals."
I will shortly  return to the  question  of oral   style  and   its  presentation  in   pub­ lished  form,  but  first,  a word  on  the  ac­ tual  contents of  the  collection.  Folklore  scholars, following the classification of the Finn  Antti  Aarne set out  in his Verzeich­ nis   der   M archentypen   (I 9 IO)'  subse­ quently  translated, revised  and  enlarged by the American Stith Thompson ( I928,
I 96 I), divide  folktales (broadly speaking, the  fictional   element of  folk  narrative), into four chief categories: Animal Tales, Ordinary Folktales, Jokes  and  Anecdotes, and  Formula Tales.  In Western tradition,
for  which  The Types of the  Folktale (Thompson's  English   title   of  the   Ver­ zeichnis)  was  in  reality  conceived,  Ani­ mal  Tales  are  not  very well  represented; while  medieval literary tradition (Fables,  the  Roman de Renart)  drew  on oral  tra­  dition  in part, tales  in which  animals are the protagonists, rather than  humans, are few and far between. Fowke  provides two examples, one of which,  The Fable  of the Bear  and  the  Fox,  is probably the  best­ known  animal tale  in  Europe and  Euro­ pean-derived tradition.
Ordinary Folktales include what  folk­ lorists   term    Marchen,  and   what   are known   to  the   general  reader   as  Fairy Tales.  This  is not  a  good  term,  as  there  are  seldom  any fairies  in  them; fairies,  in fact,   are   more   in   the   realm   of  legend (broadly speaking, the  non-fictional ele­ ment   of  folk  narartive) .  The tales  are, however,  filled  with   marvels  and   won­ ders:  seven-headed monsters, enchanted princesses,   seven-league  boots,   and   the like. Fowke offers eight  specimens of such tales.  She  also  provides  eight   examples
 of Jokes and Anecdotes, and  five Formula
Tales.
A fifth section  of the collection is made up  not  of folktales in  the  strict  sense of the term,  but of legends,  i.e., stories either told  as truth, or  which  depend originally on  an  element of  traditional belief.  Fif­ teen   legends   are   presented,   several   of them,  by Fowke's own admission, showing  all  the  signs  of  literary reworking. The collection   is  completed  by  notes  on  the Informants  (at  least  those for whom  Bar­ beau  provided notes), Sources  and  Ref­ erences, an Index of Tale Types  (accord­ ing  to  the  Aarne-Thompson  The Types of  the   Folktales),  an   Index   of  Motifs  (according to  Stith  Thompson's Motif­ Index of  Folk-Literature, 6 vols., Bloom­ ington,   I 955-58),  a   bibliography   of French-Canadian  Folktales  and   further bibliographic references.
There is no doubt that  Folktales  of French Canada  will find a ready market amongst the general public. The book's presentation is clear,  the  translations are not overburdened with  too-literal render­ ings.   But   there    are   nonetheless   some points  which  need  to be raised  of a criti­  cal nature.
Firstly,  Fowke's   desire   to  present  ac­ curate translations aimed  at capturing the original style  of  the  French tales  is  all very  well;  but  the  original French  tales themselves   show   every   sign  of  editing. They  do not  sound at  all like the  narra­ tions of  French-Canadian peasants.  They  flow  too well, the  French is by and  large polished.   Now   up   until   quite   recently, this was normal practice amongst folktale scholars, for whom  the plot was the thing; few attempts were  made to capture the spontaneous oral  style  (and  even fewer  to indicate non-verbal aspects  of  tale  per­ formance)   of   folktale  narrators.   The  question here is, then,  why did Fowke not consider   more   modern  versions of  folk­ tales,  collected   by  scholars   who  do  not attempt to  rewrite  their   material, or  to


r6r

BOOKS IN REVIEW



smooth  the  rough  edges of oral  narrative diamonds? They   are  certainly not  lack­ ing.  In  other words,  Fowke  herself  is in­ terested  primarily in the plot  of  the  tales she  translates, a  view  supported  by  her introductions to each of the  five sections of narratives.
Fowke's  references  to   the   Aarne­ Thompson The Types of the Folktale and Thompson's Motif-Index of  Folk-Litera­ ture,    where    she   provides   appropriate  classificatory numbers, will be completely meaningless to  the  general  reader. While  such  references are essential for scholarly works,   they   are   of   little   use  to  people ignorant  of   the   scholarly    foundations upon  which  they  lie. And  nowhere does Fowke attempt to explain  or describe  the theoretical  issues  which  led  to  the  com­ pilation  of   both   The  Types  and    the Motif-Index. They  were conceived  as methodological tools to be used in solving problems of  the  origins  of folktales,  spe­ cifically,  the  so-called  "Indianist" theory, which   argued  that    most   complex  and many  simple  tales  in oral  tradition came  to  Europe from India.  This   theoretical concern  is  now   largely   disregarded  by contemporary scholars, although they  do use  both   classifications  for   purposes   of convenient  reference  and   identification. If, in  a  book   designed  for   the  general  reader, young  and  old,  such  lists  are  to be  provided,  a   word   of  explanation  is essential.
Finally, one may well take issue with Fowke's   inclusion  of  literary  embellish­ ments  of oral  narratives. Part of the  rea­ son is no doubt (this  is especially  true  for legends)   that  narratives based  on  tradi­ tional  beliefs  are  rarely  narrated in nice, well-rounded form.  They  tend  to be frag­ mented,  incomplete (at  least  in  the  eyes of the  compiler), so  that  their  presenta­ tion  to  the  public   necessarily   poses  this problem:  to  be  scholarly   (and   provide not very readable texts), or popular (and provide conflated  versions)?  Fowke  has
 generally opted  for  the  second  solution, while  attempting to maintain a scholarly appearance by the addition of various critical tools.
There is no doubt that  translations are useful  and  important;  perhaps they  may encourage Canadians to want  to read  the originals, and   thereby   learn   one  or  the other of our  two  languages. Folktales  of French  Canada is a welcome  addition to the field if only for the above reason; its scholarly utility  is very  limited, despite  its claims  to the  contrary.
Andre E. Elbaz's  Folktales  of the Cana­ dian  Sephardim, on  the other  hand, suc­ cessfully  combines scholarly  and  popular appeal. It  reflects  the  vigour and  dyna­  mism  of  some  of  the  younger   Canadian scholars  working in  the field  of  folklore. Like Fowke's collection, it is a translation, but   from   the   original  field   collection made  by  Elbaz  in  the  Moroccan Cana­ dian  Sephardim  communities mainly   in Montreal and  Toronto. The original lan­ guages    are   those   of   Moroccan   Jews: Judeo-Arabic, French, and  Judeo-Span­ ish.  The  translations read  easily,  natur­ ally, fluently.
Elbaz's study is far more, however, than a well-translated collection of ethnic nar­ ratives. Sponsored in  I976  by the  Cana­ dian  Centre for  Folk  Culture  Studies of the  National Museum of Man,  Elbaz  set himself   the   task  of  evaluating  the  aes­ thetic worth, the  originality  and  the  im­ portance  of   Canadian   Sephardim  folk literature. To   achieve  this  end,   he  fol­ lowed  the late MacEdward Leach's meth­ odology;  Leach, a  folklore   scholar   and  teacher of considerable repute at the Uni­ versity   of    Pennsylvania,  proposed    four broad   essentials   to  good   folktale study.  They included (I)  collection and  presen­ tation  of   folktales   as   oral    literature; ( 2) study of their  "matrix," or social con­ text;  ( 3)   study  of  the  story-tellers;  and  (4)  study  of the aesthetics of the folktale.
The  term    Sephardim   originally  re-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ferred  to  the  descendants of  Jews  who lived in Spain  and  Portugal before the expulsion of 1492. Today, all Jews  living around the Mediterranean basin consider themselves Sephardim.  Elbaz  provides  a brief historical overview  of the group, identifying religious  and  intellectual  fac­ tors  contributing to  their  sense of  ethnic identity. He  carefully notes  the  relation­ ship  between   oral   and   written  tradition in  Sephardim  society, a  relationship which   tends   to  be  overlooked  in  many western    cultures,   especially   by   literary  scholars.  Elbaz  continues with  commen­ tary  on  external  influences on  the  folk­ tales  of  Canadian  Sephardim, underlin­ ing the  factor of westernization  (leading to  "a  gradual abandonment of  ancient traditions") .
Elbaz discusses the concept of truth and fiction  in his corpus (the  insistance upon the "truth" of apparently fictional narra­ tives,  in  ballad  or  tale,  has  preoccupied some  folklorists   ever  since  Herbert Hal­  pert  drew  the  attention of  scholars  to the question in I 939) ; he briefly analyses  the tale  corpus   before  considering the  issue of aesthetics. This is a fascinating section, far  too  brief,  in  which   Elbaz  summarily evokes  aspects  of   tale   performance ob­ served in the storytelling sessions in which he took part. This  is a relatively new area of concern  to  most  Canadian folklorists, and  one  would  like  to  see a  much  more extensive   treatment  of   the   subject    by Elbaz,   perhaps  under  the   aegis  of  the Folklore Studies  Association of  Canada.
Elbaz discusses the  thematic content of Sephardim tales,  emphasizing the  cult  of the  Saints.  He  examines the  functions of the  tales,  noting the  dual  roles  of  enter­ tainment  and   teaching;  and   concludes with   an   examination  of  the  Sephardic tale  in  Canada,  noting  somewhat pessi­ mistically   that   the  future does  not  bode well for  the survival of Judea-Moroccan  folk  literature. The  brevity  of  the  tales does suggest a weakening of the tradition,
 but  it can  be suspected, as Elbaz  himself suspects,  that   many  themes  will  survive in perhaps novel functions.
Elbaz provides a very comprehensive scholarly  apparatus to  his narrative  ma­ terial.   Unlike   Fowke,  however,   he  does not  assume  that   his  readers  are  familiar with  The Types of the  Folktale  or  the Motif-Index and  explains  the  utility  and  background of these important reference tools. He provides full tables of tale-types and  motifs,  and  precedes  each  tale  with brief but interesting comparative notes, in addition  to  tale  and   motif   numbers.  A brief   and   useful   glossary,   and   an   ex­ tremely  well-organized bibliography  add to  the  value  of the  study.
Folktales  of the  Canadian Sephardim is one of the finest collections of Canadian folktales  to have appeared in a long time; its   essentially   popular  appeal  explains why folklorists will want  more  thoroughly documented publications by Elbaz, whose study is nonetheless exemplary. This is an invaluable contribution to Canadian folk­ lore studies,  to ethnic literature, to popu­ lar  awareness   and,   I daresay, to  multi­ culturalism.  The   folktales   themselves? They   are  highly  entertaining.  Andre  El­ baz  is to be warmly  congratulated.

GERALD THOMAS


VOYAGER'S MASKS

SHERRILL    GRACE,   The  Voyage that    Never Ends: Malcolm Lowry's Fiction. Univ. of British  Columbia Press,  $24.00; pa.  $g.gs.
IN    HER   NEW   BOOK,  The Voyage that Never  Ends:  Malcolm Lowry's Fiction, Sherrill Grace   borrows   Lowry's   idea  of "the  voyage"   to   develop   her   own  ap­ proach   to  all  his  major work.  Using  as starting  point   Lowry's   34-page   unpub­ lished document which describes  his I 95 I plans for his finished and  proposed novels as   a   series,   "The   Voyage   that    Never Ends," and  using other of his statements

BOOKS IN REVIEW



which  began  as early as 1940 to allude  to his oft-changing "Voyage" master-pian, Grace discusses the relation of Lowry's works-Under the  Volcano, the  "mag­ nificent   Popocatapetl among  lesser,  but by no means  uninteresting, peaks,"  along  with virtually all the rest -to each other,  and   the  individual  works  in  their  own right,  in terms of  their  representing Low­ ry's exploration of the expanding human consciousness.
This consciousness  has  its main  repre­ sentation  in   the   character  of   Sigbjorn Wilderness, who  was  to  have  been   the protagonist of the  planned frame for  the entire  "Voyage"  series,   and   who  is  in some  sense  present in  all  the  novels  in between:

Sigbj0rn  Wilderness is  both   the  author  re­ living his  life  in  Under  the  Volcano,  Dark as the  Grave   and   the  other novels,  and  the protagonist  in   the   [framing   device, "The Ordeal of Sigbj0rn  Wilderness,"] where  his life  is  being  written; therefore, he  is  con­  tained  not  only   within  his  own   books  but  also  within  the  imagination of  the  writer of the  "Voyage." This  concept of  fabulation as  a  metaphor, not  only  for  the  activity of the   human  mind,  but   also  for   life   is  the cornerstone of Lowry's "Voyage."

Grace stresses  the  importance of what Lowry called  the rhythm of continuous "withdrawal and  return" in his interpre­ tation of life  as never-ending  voyage.  In this  thematic context, or  the  context   of life ever  demanding of man  his  "striving upwards,"  Under  the   Volcano  ( 1947) presents  man's   negative   condition,  his state  of  "withdrawal," and  is followed  in works such  as October  Ferry to Gabriola by  the  rejuvenation of  "return."  Under the   Volcano  would,   finally,   have   been located  in  the  centre  of  the  "Voyage" series,  preceded by such  works  as  Ultra­ marine   and   Lunar   Caustic, followed   by such   works  as  Dark   as  the   Grave   and  October  Ferry:

Each of the  "Voyage" novels  creates a stage in SigbjBrn Wilderness' journey through life
 -the initiation, repeated ordeals with  fail­ ure   and    retreat,   followed by  success   and  development, that in  turn give  way  to  fresh  defeat.  At  each   stage   the   same  lessons  re­ cur: man must   learn to  change  and  evolve  by courageously  accepting  his  past and   joy­ ously  creating his  future.  With Ultramarine the   voyage   begins. In   Lunar  Caustic  the hero   descends into  a  hell   of  self   that cli­ maxes in  the  apocalyptic vision  of Volcano. In Dark   as  the  Grave, a  new  effort begins  that, with constant setbacks, will be renewed in   October   Ferry    to   Gabriola. Together Lowry's  novels   express  his   myth   which    is "his-story" of  life   repeated  over   and   over again in  "The Voyage That  Never   Ends."

One  of the pleasures of reading Grace's study  comes from  her managing to exam­ ine  Lowry's  work,  virtually from  first  to last,   unpublished  as  well  as   published, without  her  so  much   as  pausing to  ex­ plain    the   incomplete   and   fragmentary state   of  so  much of   that work.  Indeed, though  Grace  notes  at   the  outset   that  Lowry   did   exist   in   the   extremes  of  a private heaven or  hell, and  that  his pro­ ductivity often   suffered   because   of  the extremes he felt,  her  determined affirma­ tion  even  of   Lowry's   unfinished  efforts, and  her acceptance of Lowry's  statements of  his  best  intentions, make  of  Lowry  a man   and    writer  of   surprisingly  good health and  wholeness,  at least in the con­ text  of  a  generation in  which,  as  Grace notes, so  many   writers  were  alcoholics. Her  sustained emphasis on  Lowry's over­ all vision in and  for  his work sweeps into  place  her  approach to  work  after   work, and  serves  as an  antidote to the relatively flamboyant treatments of  Lowry's excesses in   such   well-known   works   as  Douglas  Day's  biography, Malcolm Lowry  (1974)  and  Donald  Brittain's film, Volcano: An Inquiry into  the  Life  and  Death  of Mal­ colm  Lowry  ( 1976). She refuses to enter­ tain  those aspects  of the "Lowry legend" which restrict our  view to his having been only a one-book author and  an  alcoholic.
However,  dealing  as  it  does  with   so much  of  Lowry's promise,  with  so many

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



of his promises,  Grace's interpretation at times   seems   too  earnest,  too  inflexible, too laboured (with  sentences sometimes straining under too many  a "because," "therefore," "this," "thus").  Here and there   I  wish,  actually, for  a  dose  of  the customary Lowry  according to Freud, for Lowry  the alcoholic, or,  as would  be ap­ propriate in  Grace's study,  for  Lowry as jester, as performer, as clown.
Grace does  refer  to  Lowry's   penchant for  delightful  self-parody in  his  fiction, his keen  sense of the  ridiculousness in his
(or  his protagonist's)  roles  as writer, his
extended  use  of  mock-serious  tone  and ironic  jibes in work such as "Through the Panama." Indeed, at   the  outset of  her study  she  emphasizes that   Lowry  was  a man   "with a  wry  sense  of  humour," a "charming, sly, humorous man." Yet  she takes  all  too  literally the  rgsr   "Work in Progress" statement. She  has limited her­ self  too  much  in  choosing not  to  regard  Lowry's  protests  to publishers and editors  (the    1951  "Voyage"  document   was   a major part of Lowry's  "Work in Progress" report  which   he  sent   to  his  New  York agent, Harold Matson) as, at least  partly,  a desperate performance staged  by Lowry to  humour,   dazzle,  seduce,   divert, con­ vince,  and/or  entertain them  with  some­ thing  of   what   he   thought  they   might  want   to  hear   in  New  York:  something concrete and  coherent from  this writer in the Canadian wilderness. (And,  of course, while   buying   time   from   New  York,  or simply   throwing  his  publishers  off  the track  with  his words  of cheer, Lowry  was writing to  himself,  too.)   In  noting that Lowry  claimed that the  entire "Voyage" series, though demanding much  new writ­ ing,  might   take  only  five  years  to  com­ plete   (after Under the  Volcano, a  work which   Grace usually  plays  down  a  little  too  much  in  this  study,  had  taken  ten), Grace seems   all   too   prepared  to   take Lowry   at  his  eager  word,   and  exclaims
 only   that   his   promise    does   sound   in­
credible.
Thus, while Grace rightly  suggests  that the reader  must  respond  with  and  to Lowry's fiction emotionally, she puts aside the  question   of  the  emotional  implica­ tions  and  invitations of  the  1951  docu­  ment.  While  she suggests  that the  "most important feature of  Lowry's concept of self   creation  is   the   idea    of   constant change"  in   his   fiction    ("By    creating masks,  the  individual  consciousness ex­ pands"), she forces  herself  into  a kind of impasse   by   accepting  as   absolute  his "Voyage" concept, or mask.  She  notes of Lowry   that    "for   a   writer  terrified   of
'being  written,' the  danger of  withdraw­ ing  finally  into   his  own  work  was  only too real."  In  a way, Lowry's  bold  parade of promises  for  the "Voyage" series must have  been -for  one  thing -a  defence against  such  danger; but  after  the  inten­ sity of  Under the  Volcano, its  pat  neat­ ness could  hardly  have  pointed him  to an alternative to the  danger of withdrawing finally into  his own  work.  Just as Wilder­ ness sees through his writer's game  at  the end of "Strange Comfort Afforded by the Profession,"   so  Lowry   must   have   been able to see in some way  through his.
But  what   I  would   regard  as  Grace's losing an opportunity to exploit ironically Lowry's  stated  intentions does not invali­ date  her approach to the work,  of  course; her  study  stands,  and   has  value,  quite  apart from  the  question  of   Lowry's   in­ tentions.  To  be sure, for all her literal use of  the  1951  document,  she  herself  does not   seem   to   want  to   commit  herself wholly to it. For one thing, that  she never does give us the whole  document suggests that  she  prefers  to  stand   at  a  little  dis­ tance  from  it.
Indeed,  throughout  her   undertaking, just  as she does  not  become  enslaved by the document, neither does she become enslaved  by any temptation to reductively utilize  those  patterns she  finds  recurring

BOOKS IN REVIEW



in Lowry's  work. Rather, her study analy­ sis  of  the  respective "Voyage"  texts,  as well  as of  the  related   work,  Hear  Us  0
Lord  from Heaven Thy  Dwelling  Place, intriguingly presents Lowry's  work  with a wholeness  and  continuity we are  unac­ customed to seeing. She has enriched her picture of wholeness  by dipping shrewdly  into  the mass and minutiae of manuscript and  marginalia  essential  to a  study  such as  hers.  The  most  important  results  of her explorations, perhaps, are in her  pro­ viding us -directly  and  by  implication
-with a   new   reading  of   Under  the
Volcano.
Grace's interpretation of  Lowry's  ac­ tual  and  proposed achievements is always ennobling, and  her  seeing in his work  an all-pervasive  ethical  thrust   provides    a means of enlarging our reading of Under the  Volcano. By  looking at  even  so dark  a work as Under the Volcano in  terms of the context she  provides,  we see with  her that   Lowry's  vision  and   fiction,   in  one sense so  boldly  post-modernist, are  essen­ tially  "romantic in  their  emphasis upon unending voyage  and  Promethean desire to bring the  word  to the world.... Mal­ colm Lowry is one of the small number of writers who  has  tried  to  express  what  it means  to be fully  human...."
PAUL TIESSEN

AS IT IS

ROGER  BOULET,   The Canadian  Earth:  Land­ scape    Paintings  by   the   Group  of    Seven. Cerebrus/Prentice-Hall, $75.00.

ROGER  BOULET  BEGINS  HIS historical  in­ troduction to the  Group of Seven  by cit­ ing Lawren Harris on the state  of  Cana­ dian    art   at   the   turn   of   the   century. "Artistically, as in  many  other  ways, we were  a  dependent  people  living  in  the gloom  of  a colonial  attitude." That Ca­  nadian art should  have  been  dominated by "European  ways of seeing"  is not sur-


166
 prising. No indigenous artistic convention existed  within the  young country to serve as  a  guide   or  impetus for  growth  and change. Already  outdated European  tra­ ditions  were  the  norm  in  Canadian  art: for  example,  Montreal  in   rgro   (where A. Y. Jackson was designing cigar  labels for a living)  contained more Dutch paint­ ings  than any  other city  in  North Amer­  ica.  So  when   distinctive  new  landscape artists    began    to   appear,   critics    were naturally slow   to   respond. Jackson's sketches,  said  the  Toronto Star  in  I913, belonged to "the Hot  Mush  School." To  the reviewer for Saturday Night  two Igi6 landscapes  by    J.  E.    H.    MacDonald "might just as well have been called  Hun­ garian   Goulash  and   Drunkard's  Stom­ ach."  But  something  powerful was  stir­ ring  out    there   in   Algonquin  Park,   in Georgian Bay,  and  it  was  not  to  be  de­ nied.  "We  are  endeavouring to knock out  of  us all  the  preconceived ideas,"  Fred­ erick  Varley   wrote,  "emptying  ourselves  of  everything except   that  nature  is here in  all  its  greatness, and  we are  here  to gather it  and  understand  it ... not as we think  it  should   be  but  as  it  is._ . ." The Group that   emerged has  defined   for  us to this day  our  vision of  Canadian nature "as   it  is,"  and   that  vision  is  what   this book  is about.
The  Canadian Earth   is a  coffee-table
art  book and  a fine example of the genre. Boulet   has  chosen   to  make   his  twenty­ three   pages  of  text  informative  and  en­ tertaining rather than  critically  discrimi­ nating, and   much  of  the  time  he  wisely lets  the  artists  speak  for  themselves.  We follow  their   pilgrimages  to  progressively  farther  northern  locales  and  watch   their evolution of a  purer,  and in  the  case  of Lawren Harris  almost  abstract, sense  of the    Canadian   landscape.   In    spite   of nearly  bogging  down  in  a  morass  of  de­ tails  about  their   various   camping  trips, Boulet's clear  if at  times  pedestrian prose provides a good introduction for the gen-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



eral  reader at whom  the book seems to be aimed. The same  cannot always  be  said for  the  brief  and  somewhat redundant biographies of each  artist contributed by Paul  Duval, which  in  places  suffer  from obscure  art  criticism rhetoric. What does it mean,  for  example, that  Franklin Car­ michael's "crisply refined,  but  not brittle, rendering of form  requires some attention from  the  viewer"?
The  heart  and    bulk    of   this   book, though, are  its high-quality colour  plates. Each  of the nine  artists,  presented alpha­ betically     (Franklin   Carmichael,   A.   J. Casson,  Lawren S. Harris, A. Y. Jackson, Frank H. Johnston, Arthur  Lismer,  J. E. H.    MacDonald,  Tom   Thomson,  and Frederick H.  Varley),  is  represented by eleven   works,  except for   Johnston  and Varley    (five  apiece).  The  book's  large format and  sizeable reproductions (up  to
24 x 30 em)  allow  the  reader a real sense of just how stunning the best of these paintings must  be in  the  original. Those that stand  out  are  Lismer's dramatically bold  bay  and   lake  scenes,  Harris'  mag­ nificent   Mountain Forms   and   mystical arctic vistas, and  Casson's  pastoral treat­ ments  of southern  Ontario village  life­ the  latter a welcome relief  from  the  un­ remitting  and   overwhelmingly inhuman landscapes  that  comprise so much  of this book   and   the   country  its  artists   made vivid  for  us.

SUSAN & JERRY WASSERMAN


WRONG SIDE OF THE CAMERA

GARY GEDDES  et al.,  Chinada: Memoirs of the
Gang   of Seven. Quadrant Editions, $8.95.

THIS IS A  STRANGE and  somewhat eccen­
tric  book.  A  group of  Canadian  writers
-Gary Geddes, Robert Kroetsch, Adele
Wiseman,  Patrick  Lane,  Alice   Munro,
 Suzanne Paradis, and  Geoffrey  Hancock
-set out on  a trip  to China at  the invi­ tation   of  a  writers'  organization   there. They  were given  much  the  same offhand treatment as one  hears  about from  other  shepherded groups. There were welcomes and  dinners.  The itinerary was cavalierly  arranged  and   reshuffied.  The  travellers seem to have  spent  most of  their  time  in and   around  routine  places  like  Peking,  Shanghai, and  Canton. They   were   put  off  from   going  to  Kueilin  which   they wanted to visit  by  a  tale  of  shortage of hotel   rooms,   though  by   accident  they spent  two  hours there  when  a  plane  was diverted,   and   their   stay   in   Xian   was truncated for similar  reasons. Perhaps the most  moving  occasions  were  when  Chi­ nese writers,  notably  the  veteran novelist Ting Ling, talked  of the persecutions they had  endured under the Cultural Revolu­ tion and  in  this way revealed what a stubborn growth the  urge  to create artis­ tically  may become  in the  human will.
These were  not the circumstances likely to produce good travel  writing, and Geoff Hancock, an  inveterate wanderer, is  ex­ ceptional  in   his  sharp  and   interesting prose  observations of  the  country as  he saw  it.  In   another  genre -a cycle  of more than  a dozen poems-Patrick Lane  shows  the  same  power   of  empathizing with  a strange landscape and  of catching the   resonances  of  another  people's   his­ tory  as he did  in  Peru.  "Silk  Factory" is a good example, since  it catches the  way in   which  the   patterns  of   the   past­ dragon and phoenix in the white brocades woven  in  the  factory -survive  in  mod­ ern  China, and  not  only  in  artifacts but also in the human condition as it is exem­  plified  in  the  lives of the silk weavers:

a weaver-girl laughs at a young man and   he  trips  on
nothing.
When she  moves  he  cannot see where he is going.
Grey  with silk  dust, windows rattle and the  glass  is frosted with snow.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



The bitterness of Ch'en Tao is long  ago
and   the  shuttles are  no longer lumps  of ice.
Still, the  brocade the  weaver-girl makes
is not  for  her,  and the  young  man, though he  labours for  many years,  will  never  buy
the  white silk  she  works  so hard to weave.

Clearly Patrick  Lane  got  a  good  part of  a  new  book  out  of  the  trip,  but  one cannot see such  immediate results  in  the journals and  notes  which  his fellow  trav­ ellers  have  contributed. We have  to wait for the  experience to congeal  into signifi­ cant   writing  later   on,  if  it  ever   does. Apart from  Hancock and  Lane,  none  of these wanderers has been able to perform the  act  of  detachment  from  the  anxious  self that  is the prime need for good travel  writing, and  their nervousness  in a strange world  is shown in the way their comments tend    to   centre   rather   subjectively on themselves and   on  a  relationship  with their  fellow  travellers whose jokey jovial­ ity  is  threaded  through with  dark  veins of   half-suppressed   unsureness.    If  only there  had  been a great  row! If only a love affair  had  burst  scandalously to  the  sur­ face!  It might have  cleared   the  air  and produced  some   better   prose   than   that  which  normally accomplished  practition­ ers like Alice Munro and Robert Kroetsch and  Adele  Wiseman  have given  us here.
Apart from  Hancock, one  always  goes back to the verse, for not only is Patrick Lane's the  best  section  of  the  book,  but the  best  fragments of  some  of  the  other sections   are  poems  embedded  in  undis­ tinguished  prose,  like  Gary  Geddes' ap­  pealing renderings of  Tu  Fu  and  Li  Po and  the garland of small quiet  pieces with which  Suzanne Paradis  ends  her  contri­ bution.
There is, of course,  nothing that  is not
grist  to  the  archival mill,  and  despite  its very   mixed   quality,  Chinada   will   un­ doubtedly  find   its  place  as  one  of   the collectible curiosities of Canadian literary  history.  I suppose  there  is even  an  archi­ val justification for  the 40 pages of rather


I68
 murky  "we  were  there" photographs that fill  the  centre of  the  book,  though  these in fact stress the essential weakness of Chinada, for  the  real  traveller finds  his place  behind   the  camera, not  in  the  pic­ ture. And  so,  in  the  end,  the  title  loses its look of eccentricity, for  most  of  these travellers, failing to lose themselves, have  taken  their  country with  them  and  what  they  have  found is  not  China but  Chi­  nada indeed.
ANTHONY APPENZELL


MAGNETIC FIELDS

RICHARD B. WRIGHT,   The Teacher's Daughter.
Macmillan, $rg.gs.

"... and  with   a  tale,   forsooth, he  cometh unto you, with  a tale  which holdeth children from  play,  and  old  men  from  the  chimney
corner.''
Philip Sidney, The Defence of Poesy  (I 595)

SOME FOUR CENTURIES later,  in the age of Atari,  Sony,  and  Dolby,  Sidney's  haunt­ ing evocation of the  magnetism in a spin­ ning  tale applies more readily, perhaps, to the  hypnotic matrix of  flickering shadows  on  a  screen  than   the  spellbinding net  of words  woven  by a master  storyteller. New media, evidently,  create new  centres of domestic  gravitation as well  as new  mes­ sages.  Yet,  magnetism is a  condition of polar separation; we are  attracted by the mystery  of estrangement: sexual,  natural, or  supernatural.  Surviving custodians of the wordspinner's wheel, such  as Richard Wright, remind us that  no mystery is so timelessly   seductive,  or   elusive,   as   the dark   forest  of  another's mind,  and   that the  linear, causal  structures of language yield   nothing  to  other  media  in   their power  to cut  trails  through this particular forest  where motive   rather than  motion is the  source  of fascination.
In The  Teacher's Daughter, Wright comes  to us with  a tale, an oft-told tale of frustrated courtship, this  time  set among

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the sprawled shopping centres, stereotypic architecture, and  numbing traffic patterns of suburban Toronto. His courtiers share the surface banality of both setting  and subject. Janice Harper, the   titular "daughter," herself  a  schoolteacher,  un­ married, not spectacularly attractive, feel­ ing  the  cold  breath of middle-age  at her back, living  in the  basement of her moth­ er's  neat   bungalow,  moves  casually  into the  magnetic field  of  her  opposite pole, James   Hicks,   a   labourer,   unemployed, spectacularly handsome, several  years her junior,  living  in  squalid  separation from his wife and  son. Such  unlikely  conjunc­ tions usually  afford bystanders the oppor­ tunity   for  vicarious prurience  and  com­ fortable   moralizing,  but    Wright  both exploits   and   transcends  such   curiosity.  With  flawless control of narrative pace, perspective, and  detail, he  locks  readers into   the  consciousness   of  both  protago­ nists,  monitors  their   discordant  idioms, and  thereby   denies  us  the  role  of either voyeur or  juror.  We are  drawn from  play or fireside less as spectators at a diversion  than  as  participants in  a  ritual celebrat­ ing  the mystery  of human motivation.
Individually, Wright's characters them­ selves   glimpse    limited   facets   of    this enigma; in concert their  private glimpses reveal   its  scope.  Janice,  thinking about her  parents' marriage, "wonders how her father ever  put   up  with   this  nice  bird­  brained little  woman for  thirty-six years. But   he  loved   her.  0 yes,  he  did.   She exasperated  him nearly  every  day  of  his life,  and   he  retreated  into   his  study   of history.   But  for   all   that   he  loved   her. Mysterious!"   Equally   "mysterious"  for her  mother  are the  antics of  celebrities, remote  and   awesome,  hyperbolized   to mythical  dimensions,  in  the  sensational gossip  of  The  National Enquirer, while her  father's "retreat" into  history  merely brings  him   into   confrontation  with   the same sources of mystery in cumulative abundance. He  was "endlessly fascinated
 and repelled  by the complexities and con­ tradictions  in   humanity,"  and   on   his deathbed asks for as summative epitaph: "He  Found  Life  a Damn  Strange Trip." Each is a frustrated courtier, and  beneath its mundane  surface, Wright's tale  func­ tions as a type of parable, probing for the source   of   "complexities  and   contradic­ tions" common  to domestic, mythic, and historical  mysteries.
While   Hicks  and   Janice dance  awk­ wardly  through conventional strategies of romantic  courtliness, from   poetry   and  picnics  to  wining,   dining,  and  bedding, their  thoughts move  to a  subtle  counter­ rhythm of attraction and repulsion track­ ing impulses more social than erotic. Each  sees  the  other as  a  kind  of  symbol  en­ dowed  with  the  exotic  strangeness of an alien  class. Hicks  is driven by passionate desperation  to  escape   the   hopeless  vul­ nerability   of   his   condition:   unskilled,  poorly educated, increasingly expendable in   a   technocratic   economy.  He   steals "self-improvement" manuals from  the public    library,    and    Scotch-tapes  their more  impressive  homiles  to  his  refrigera­ tor  door: "In every  person  lies  the  ca­ pacity   to  realize  hisfher  potential." In­  deed,  his mental life pulses  to a confused  homiletic  beat   of   derivative fragments, mismatched  and   unexamined,  echoing the  eclectic  shopping malls,  garish   bars, fast  foods,  and  casual  sex  that   form  his natural habitat and  the staccato of mawk­  ish   country-music  titles   that   punctuate his monologues, throbbing from  the radio  of  his supercharged Trans Am. By turns optimistic and   cynical,   he  strives  to  re­ duce baffling complexity to simple formu­ las,  inevitably prone   to  frustrated anger when  the  world   refuses  to  march to  his reductive drummer. Education means  in­ telligence;   intelligence   means    success; success  means  money; money  means  sur­  vival.  "If you've  got  it,  you're   laughing at  the  rest of  humanity.... The world's  a  jungle.... If you're  on  the  bottom of


169

BOOKS IN REVIEW



the pile, somebody's  going to step on your face  no  matter what  those old  fuckers  in the library  say about things like socialism.
... The guys  who  make  the  big  dollars are  the  guys who  are  mentally alert.... What's mostly  needed   is a  positive  ap­ proach to selling your  talents.  And every­ body  has  a  talent...." Janice  Harper is his   supreme  act   of   simplification;  in courting  her    he   courts,    by   imitative magic,  education,  taste,  dignity.  To  pos­ sess Janice is  to  "realize potential."
Janice, too, is attracted by the potential for escape  from  the oppressive  monotone of her  life offered  in  the  raw masculinity and alien social norms of Hicks, but the rhythm of  her  mind,  dry  witty,  protec­ tively   ironic,   clashes  discordantly  with the  mercurial anguish  of  her  suitor.  Al­ though  she  is   touched   occasionally    by this anguish, and senses the  vulnerability at  its core,  such  moments  are  rare,  fleet­ ing,  and  on  reflection,   threatening. Her  version  of  Hicks'  reductive impulses  is a desire  for  "the uncomplicated life,"  and any challenge to monotony is also a threat to comfort. As much  imprisoned as Hicks by  the  homilies  of  her  class,  she  recoils from   the  very  mystery  that  attracts  her and  wraps  superficial layers of bromide around her  own  vulnerabilities. "We  are worlds apart, damn it.... Outside of bed, its  often   impossible   to  find  anything to talk about. ... What I have  trouble deal­ ing with  is the  plastic  flowers in the vase.
... Everything he  likes  is  tacky....  It's a  question of  taste.  With  a  touchy  man you  don't  argue   too  strenuously about matters  of   taste."  For   the   privileged reader,  "touchy"  and   "tacky" stand   as ludicrous  misconceptions of  Hicks'   baf­ fled  passion,  as does  Hicks'  reduction of Janice's  complex  insecurities to  stereo­ types,  alternately idolizing  her  for  being "superior" and  damning her  for  feeling superior. Each  lacks  the categories either to accommodate the  other's alien  reality or  to recognize  and  articulate their  own.
 Lacking our  privileged access  to motives, they  remain estranged, their  erotic court­ ship   a   parody  of   its   unacknowledged social    counterpart,    turning   corrosive,  accumulating  accidental  and   deliberate cruelties as  it  moves  intricately  toward calamity.
Only  in  the  aftermath of calamity do categories of understanding begin  to emerge, and  their  source  is literature. Janice sees Hicks  as Meursault, Camus' "outsider" in L'Etranger, hypocritically condemned in criminal court for failures as a social courtier. Hicks  is in court, however, because  he  confesses  in  appar­ ent  identification of himself  with  Raskol­  nikov,   the  repentant  murderer  in  Dos­ toyevsky's   Crime  and   Punishment,  the only  book  he  completed  from   a  list  of "self-improvement" aids  requested of Janice in  his perceived role  as "student" to   her   "teacher." It  is  a   measure    of Wright's skill as a storyteller that  both identifications seem  apt:  Janice and Hicks,  like  their   literary  prototypes,  re­ create  and   epitomize  in   this  suburban tale  of frustrated courtship the  bedeviled history  of failed  human community. Jan­ ice's father, the "history teacher," damns American   civilization  for   too   much "know-how" and   too  little  "know-why," recognizing that  history  is a poor  teacher unless we look for motives behind its movements. The mystery  of "why" is the mystery  of motivation, and  Wright's cau­ tionary parable justifies Sidney's doctrine that the  magnetic power  of  fiction  to re­ veal  cause,  not  catalogue  effects,  makes literature a better teacher  than  history.

MICHAEL F. DIXON




AMOURS

JACQUEs   FOLCH-RIBAs,   Une   Aurore   Boreale.
Seuil, $6.70.
ROBERT LALONDE,  Le  Dernier  Ete  des  Indiens.
Seuil,  $9·95·
SOLANGE  LEVESQUE,   L'Amour langue   morte.
HMH, n.p.

TENDRESSE, SENSUALITE,  veUeites  d'ai­ mer,  c'est  sous  ces differents  aspects que se presente l'amour dans  les  trois  romans  quebecois   que   nous  analyserons  brieve­ ment  ici.
Une Aurore Boreale, qui vient d'etre reedite en  format de  poche,  a valu  a son auteur le prix  France-Canada lors de  sa parution en  1974-  Le  heros,   Pierre,   est une  sorte  de  "bon   sauvage"  adolescent, dont   le  pere  etait   Blanc  et  la  mere  mi­ Esquimaude, mi-Indienne. Un  hiver,  les parents de  Pierre se sont  pas  revenue de la  chasse  et  l'enfant a  grandi  seul  dans les bois, loin du  monde civilise qu'il  n'en­  trevoit  que  lorsqu'il va vendre du poisson ou  du  gibier   aux  estivants. Un   jour,  il rencontre une petite fille en larmes; c'est Marie, qui est venue  passer l'ete ala Baie­ des-Epaulards avec  sec  parents adoptifs, des  detraques qui  la  negligent. Les deux enfants joindront leurs solitudes: Pierre apprendra la  nature a  Marie; Marie lui enseignera la  lecture et  l'ecriture,  peut­ etre les seules vraies  richesses que la civili­ sation  atir  a offrir.
Leur  idylle  durera le  temps  d'un  ete, assez  longtemps pour   que   les  lec;ons de Marie portent leurs  fruits. Il semble  que le livre, ou un  narrateur parlant a la pre­ miere  personne se  confond  parfois  avec un   auteur  omniscient, soit   l'oeuvre  de Pierre.  D'ailleurs,  selon   la   citation  de Mallarme, en  exergue au  debut du  ro­ man: "Tout au  monde existe  pour  abou­  tir  a  un  livre."
Une Aurore Boreale est une oeuvre fra.lche,  charmante, ou  le  style  est  par­ faitement adapte au  sujet. A la fois amu­  sants  et  touchants, les dialogues des deux
 BOOKS IN REVIEW


enfants sont  toujours  justes.  L'auteur a su eviter  le  mievrerie, danger auquel sa matiere l'exposait. Dans  des pages pleines de  poesie, Jacques Folch-Ribas a evoque les  paysages  changeants de  la  Baie-des­ Epaulards. Ce Canadien d'adoption-il est ne a Barcelone -semble conna.ltre  a fond  la ftore, et  surtout la faune,  du  bas du  fteuve,  et  les  details   pittoresques que  donne  Pierre  sur  les moeurs  des animaux captivent tout autant le lecteur que  Ma­ rie.  On  comprend  d'ailleurs que   Pierre  ait 'ee
qui  est  d'une  franchise desarmante avec lui, mais rusee comme un renard lorsqu'il s'agit  de berner les "civilises." Si, pour  le lecteur,  les lec;ons de  Marie sont  moins interessantes que celles de  Pierre,  la faute en est a la  matiere et  non  au  professeur: la  nature  renferme des  mysteres  autre­ ment  fascinants que  l'orthographe....
Comme   l'indique  le   titre,   les  evene­ ments  du  roman de  Robert  Lalonde du­  rent  aussi un  ete.  Le  heros  en  est  egale­  ment   un  adolescent  et   la   nature  et  la societe  s'y opposent  comme  elles s'oppo­ saient   dans   Une   Aurore   Boreale.  Mais  nous  sommes  loin  ici  de  la  tendresse   ou baigne le roman de Folch-Ribas. LeDer­ nier  Ete  des  Indiens se situe  a  l'epoque de  "la  grande  noirceur." Michel, que  sa famille  destine  a  la  pretrise sans  lui  de­ mander son avis, se revolte  contre l'hypo­ crisie du clan,  contre une religion qui  lui semble  faite  de  simagrees,  contre  l'escla­  vage  qu'on  veut lui  imposer. Toutefois, au  lieu  de  crier  sa revolte, il fuit.  Il  fuit  le village  fige dans  les traditions pour  se plonger dans  la riviere,  domaine ftuide  de l'Indien  Kanak. Au  monde blanc  de  la non-vie,  il  tente  de  substituer le  monde rouge  de  la  passion  et  de  la  liberte.  Il s'agit  d'ailleurs d'un desir  atavique, car la  grand-mere de  Michel etait   Indienne et  son grand-pere, que  le gavc;on evoque souvent  pour  s'encourager a lutter contre le clan,  lui  a  inculque l'amour de  la  li­ berte.  Mais  ce n'est  pas une  mince entre-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



prise  pour  un  adolescent que  d'affronter
!'opposition de  tout  un village.
Le  roman est  ecrit  a la  premiere  per­ sonne.  Michel y raconte,   d'ailleurs  assez graphiquement, ses amours  avec  Kanak; il dit  sa  joie de  nager  dans  la  riviere,  de se sentir  libre  dans  la  nature.  Mais  une partie importante du  livre consiste en  re­ flexions  sur   les  effets  paralysants  de  la peur,  sur  l'inanite des idees rec;ues, sur le droit   d'etre  soi-meme.  Dans  le  premier roman   de  Lalonde, La  Belle  Epouvante (prix  Robert Cliche   Ig8I ),  le narrateur s'extasie,   pendant cent  cinquante  pages sur les bienfaits d'un amour  qui  le guerit,
peu  a peu,  d'un passe  etouffant. Ce  qui
sauve  ce  roman,  malgre   certaines  repe­
titions  assez agacantes, c'est !'humour de
!'impertinent narrateur. Mais  Le Dernier Ete  des  Indiens adopte un  ton  terrible­ ment  serieux.  II faut  ayouer que les con­ tinuelles   recriminations de  Michel   finis­ sent   par   devenir   ennuyeuses   et  que   le lecteur  a  parfois !'impression de se trou­  ver  devant  un   ouvrage  polemique  qui repete  des idees  ressassees. II est vrai que Michel  manifeste  son  desir  de  se liberer de   fac;on   originale.   Malheureusement,
!'auteur n'est  pas  parvenu a nous  rendre sympathique !'adolescent qui  retient  soi­ gneusement les le<;ons du clan  qu'il renie, puisqu'il est lui-meme un hypocrite fieffe. Quant a Kanak, bel animal  tout instinctif au  debut du  roman, on  accepte  difficile­ ment   qu'il  se  transforme a  la  fin  en  un etre  tendre et sensible.
Pourtant, l'ouvrage n'est  pas depourvu de qualites. Le  grandpere, toujours  eva­ que   avec   tendresse,  est  convaincant  et attachant. Surtout,  Lalonde possede  une parfaite maitrise de la langue.  Le rythme  de  sa  phrase  epouse  celui  des  emotions  ressenties  par son heros.  II excelle a trou­ ver le mot evocateur et lorsque  le narra­ teur   decrit  la   nature ou   la  beaute   de Kanak, il devient poete.
L'Amour langue  morte est le second ouvrage de Solange Levesque.  Le premier


172
 est  un  volume   de  contes,   Les  Cloisons, ou  se revele  deja  un  style  tres  personnel. Et  bien  que  L' Amour langue  morte   soit un  roman, chaque chapitre a son  titre  et constitue un  tout  qui  pourra!t etre  con­ sidere   comme   une   nouvelle.   II  est  vrai que   le  premier  chapitre  nous   presente Gabriel  et  qu'au  dernier, il  est  attendu par  Sylvia; mais entre temps, nous  avons maintes fois perdu Gabriel de vue et c'est Sylvia qui est devenue le personnage cen­ tral  d'un roman ou il  ne se passe presque rien, ou les  personnages n'evoluent guere.  Meme si Sylvia va "cueillir Gabriel" lors­ qu'il  revient a  Montreal, rien  ne  prouve qu'elle l'aimera, car  du  desir  d'aimer a l'amour, la distance est longue.
Ce  que   Solange  Levesque  nous  livre dans  son  ouvrage tout  en  demiteintes  ce sont  des  pensees  fugitives,   des  ebauches de  souvenirs, des  impressions  et  surtout, des  etats  d' me. Nous  entrevoyons  les visages   que   Sylvia   a   aimes   et   qu'elle evoque dans  des moments de nostalgie, traverses parfois  de joies breves ou d'ener­ vements  intempestifs.  Mais  l'univers  de Sylvia   n'est   pas  peupie   uniquement  de visages  reels  ou  evoques;  c'est   aussi  un monde  ou   les  objets   s'imposent.  Rares  sont    les   ecrivains  aussi   conscients  du monde   materiel  que   l'est   Solange  Le­ vesque, comme  le montre deja  le premier paragraphe:
L'homme  avec   un   jean   de   velours   creme, une  chemise en  toile  et qui  remonte !a  rue, c'est  lui.   C'est  Gabriel.  II   porte dans   son sac  une  plume et un   journal, un  cahier de dessins,  un   fruit,  un   livre   aussi,   plusieurs
crayons,   son    porte-monnaie   peut-etre,   a
moins  qu'il n'ait laisse libres  dans une  poche
les quelques dollars.
Sans   doute  le  fait   que   Levesque  est peintre   explique-t-il  cette    predilection pour  l'objet. La  converture du  livre  re­ produit une  huile  de  !'auteur.  Telles  les amies  d'enfance du  roman,  trois femmes vont   s'eloignant  sur   des   routes   irreme­ diablement   paralleles.   Disons   d'ailleurs que  le volume est un plaisir  pour  les yeux.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



La  presentation en  est  soignee, !'impres­ sion  nette,  et chaque chapitre s'ouvre  sur une attrayante illustration. lei aussi, on a eu souci du  detail.
Car   l'art de  Levesque  est  essentielle­ ment  l'art du detail et peut-etre convient­ il mieux  ala nouvelle qu'an roman. Dans  L'Amour  langue  morte, on  voudrait que se  dissipat le brouillard qui  enveloppe la ville  et   les  sentiments;  on   souhaiterait voir  eclater le  soleil  et  la  passion.  Mais ce  n'est  pas  dans  l'eclat que  reside  l'art raffine  et  discret  de Solange Levesque.
D'autre  part,  comme l'ecrit Sylvia  a Genevieve, "le  brouillard porte  toutes  les issues."   Peut-etre,  apres   tout,    l'amour n'est-il  pas  vraiment "langue morte."

P.COLLET


WORDS ALONE

GEORGE  WOODCOCK,   Letter   to   the   Past.   An
Autobiography.   Fitzhenry  and    Whiteside,
$21.95·
BIOGRAPHIES  NEED to be well printed. A handsome book betokens  the stature of its subject. At  the  age  of  70 George  Wood­ cock,  a  master  among  biographers,  has been  accorded  a   remarkably  handsome publication for  the  first  of  his  autobiog­ raphies. It is  only  right  that  it should  be so rewarded, since  Letter  to the  Past is a sibling  to his eleven  major biographies at least  in  their  form  as  what   he  calls  "ac­  counts   of   the  creative  life."  It records  with some precision and  a lot of summary the  salient  influences on  his mind  up  to the  time he  finally  left  England for Can­ ada.
The  creative life  for   Woodcock  is  a
matter exclusively  for words. Illustrations are  a  normal accompaniment to any  bi­ ography, and  in  modern times  the  auto­ biographer who  ignores  his family album  is a rare  bird  indeed. Woodcock's  biogra­  phies  made few  concessions   to  the  pic-
 torial.  His  autobiography makes  none  at all. That principle (it  must  surely  be an overt   and   reasoned    matter  of   choice, since  he acknowledges on  page   I 45  that his memory  is strongly   visual)   even  ex­ tends   to  maintaining  the  anonymity  of his wife, who  is mentioned  once,  protec­ tively, on  page  259, and  thereafter exists only   as   the   mute    half    of   the    "we" who moved  around  England, Wales,  and  France and who jointly decided on escape  to Canada in  I949· Presumably it was the same  reticence  over  visual  images  which  kept  any  picture  of  the  subject  out   of William   New's   A   Political   Art:   Essays and  Images  in Honour of George  Wood­ cock in  I978. All we have  of  Woodcock's face  is a keyhole  drawing on  the  back of Letter  to  the  Past's  dust  jacket.  Perhaps this chosen  reticence is designed as an in­  dication of  the  Janus  role  he  has  played  since   I949,  as  doorkeeper of  exchanges between   Britain   and   Canada.  To   the British who know him chiefly as a biogra­  pher of anarchists he emphasizes the crea­ tive life of words  alone  (words alone  are certain good).  For   the  Canadians  who know his poetry  and  his role in letters he offers  an  autobiography of his formative English   years.   Neither  audience  is   ex­ pected   to  need   the  face   which  accom­ panied  the words.
As a first volume  of creative  autobiog­ raphy,  Letters  to  the  Past  is  noteworthy for other omissions  too. There is no politi­ cal  argument, only  short  accounts of  the events  which  formed the  signposts  along  his  road   to  anarchism.  Nor   is  he  con­ cerned   to offer  detailed  insights  or  even anecdotes about   the  famous   among  his friends. The  finest, most visual,  and  vivid accounts are  of his two childhood homes at  Marlow on  the  Thames and   Market Drayton in  Shropshire. Vague summary impressions  are   all  that   appear  of   the London of  his adult life.  Nothing stayed still  for  long in  the  twenty   years  up  to I949, and the  impression is paradoxically

BOOKS IN REVIEW



of a  greater inwardness and  isolation  in those years than the solitary child ever experienced. The mind's  attic,  as he calls it, when  unpacked shows the creative in­ fluences   (at  least  of  that  memory  which holds  the  door)   to be strongest  when  the subject was youngest, even when the sub­ ject  is such  an  emphatically late  devel­ oper as George Woodcock.
One  formative influence  did bother  this reader   a little.  On  page  107 we are  told of a Welsh ex-serviceman teacher at Bor­ lase  School  in  Marlow during the  First World   War   who  was  provoked   by  the militarist cant   of  a  pupil   to  quote Sas­ soon's  "The General" and  to  denounce the  reality  of  war  as  it  contrasted with the  myth  of it  at  home. A similar  Welsh teacher quoting the  identical  poem  ap­  pears   in   R.   F.  Delderfield's To  Serve Them All  My  Days.  Perhaps Woodcock omitted to mention Delderfield's presence  in   his   very   short   list  of  distinguished Borlase Old  Boys.
This is a  true  autobiography,  though not  a  great  one.  It is cool,  honest,  and openly subjective in its guiding principles. The primacy of  the  creative life  condi­ tions everything. It is only the second-rate artist  who,  as  Woodcock's  master  Wilde  said,  has the  most interesting personality. Woodcock's concern is all with creativity. He  sees  himself  as  improving with   age while  noting the  Dorian Gray  pattern of so  many   brilliant  youths   who  came   to nothing. A poet  at  twenty-eight, a prose writer   at   thirty-three, his  prime   fifteen years   after   that,   the   story   of  his  first thirty-seven  years   is  a   record    of   his growth  into    creativity.  The    complete Janus will  only  be  seen  when   he  writes about the  other side  of  his  doorway.

ANDREW GURR





174
 FOX-TROT

JOSEF   SKVORECKY, The Swell Season. Lester
& Orpen Dennys, $r6.g5.

THE  TUMESCENT  IRONY in  Paul  Wilson's translated title  of Josef Skvorecky's eight­ year-old  novel,  Prima  Sezona, reminds us that   the  author's  young  swell,  spiritual lover  of  twenty-three  girls,  is in  a rut  in more  ways  than   one.  In  Czech,  the  title would  not  appear to echo  the same  swol­ len  urgency  of  teen-age sex, nor  the slang that  accompanies petting and  hickeys.  I can   only   guess.   Translators  should   be creative too.
The  Swell   Season   is  a   loosely   con­ nected novel  of  half  a dozen  stories  nar­ rated  by student and saxophonist, Danny Smiricky, set  in  the  provincial  town  of Kostelec, where  many  more   inhabitants suffer  from   the  mill's  cotton  dust   than  from   the   Nazis  who  occupy   Czechoslo­  akia.
IS   seldom  successful  m  ways he  wants  to
be. He  can't ski, he's  a  poor  swimmer, a worse mountain-climber, and  he puts  his arm   out   at  gym.  Whenever  he  tries  to show off in front of girls, he falls off something:  skis,  diving  boards,   moun­ tains,  gym  horses-inevitably,  it  seems, his  own  high   horse.  Things  are  not  so swell. Pleasures are  certainly fleeting,  and  his passions  interrupted by angry  fathers, insincere girls, and  swells handsomer than  Danny.
His   lustful    glimpses   of   underclothes and  female anatomies are frequent and good. We  have purloined  peeps of crotches, white-skinned bottoms,  backs of knees, dimples, blueberry-stained mouths, cleavages-black brassieres, pink bras­ siers,  black  stockings, black  garters,  zip­ pers.  Lists, especially  the  one starting on page   160, of  the  names  of  Danny's girl friends, have  a  Nabokovian  air  of verisi­ militude; and   the  comparative anatomy is  remindful  of   Nabokov  too:    "Irena's

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



figure   tended  towards the  baroque, but Alena   got   hers   from   reaching  for   re­ bounds."
Moral  poles  in   the   novel   are   Reich and  Church. In "Charleston in  a Cage" a  parish  priest  persuades  Skvorecky's young  skirt-chaser to  help   in  recopying the  entire  marriage  register  to  prevent the  Gestapo from   discovering  the  mar­ riage  of a Catholic and  Jewess. This  fol­ lows,  in  the  same  story,  the  problems  of gaining  the   Regierungskommissar's  ap­  proval    of    a   libretto,   translated   from Czech    into   German  for   his   endorse­ ment.  (Censorship's absurdities echo  Sk­ vorecky's earlier novel,  Miss  Silver's  Past, about Communist censorship of a later decade  in  a  Prague  publishing  house.) Yet in Danny's world  the Reich isn't so confining a "cage" as the  Church. More responsible for his unhappiness than  Nazi racism,  is a Catholic  conscience, because this  strengthens both  the  resolve  of  girls to  resist  him,  and   Danny to  feel,  if  not guilt,   then   certainly frustration-"And
I  suppose   that   is all  the  Lord   God  will ever  allow me, a few hickeys on the necks of  Kostelec   girls  and, if  I'm   very  good and   burn   candles as  though  they  were going  out  of  style, on  girls  from  Linz  as well."
"Sad  Autumn Blues,"  the  last chapter­ story,  is the  other one  in  which  the  Nazi occupation touches Danny's  preoccupa­ tions  of  jazz  and  girls.  Dance music,  no longer  permitted, must  now  be played  in secret.  The interplay  of  zoot-suiters and  jazz,  foxtrots and  ideological  discussion culminates in the most striking line in the book,   spoken   by   the   clarinetist  Lexa, whose life is shocked  into  awareness when he discovers that  "They shot  my dad." In this  final  scene  of  youth, Danny  too  is morally  affected.
His  epiphanies are   not   usually   so  in­ tense.   A  pattern of  ideal,  unattainable girls enhances the  comedy  without obvi­ ously   deepening   Danny's   wisdom.    He
 gains little  insight  by being  rebuffed, and rather enjoys  the  reputation his sexual failures have won him. The picaresque quality is in  the  nature of  this  novel,  for its style consciously resists the reflective, elegaic  tone of the earlier The Bass Saxo­ phone.  That  novella,   though  depicting the narrator's life at almost  the same age, is denser  and  its language richer.  In The Swell   Season   it  is  as  if   Skvorecky   has tried  to remove  the distance of time  and  casually  set us down  in  the  period.
Trying to  catch   the  flavour   of  youth has  led  to  some  curious lapses.  Phrases such  as  "sitting there like  a  bump  on  a log,"  "screwed   up  my  courage," "Then it  hit  me,"  "a pair  of cute  little  knees," "had to pan  out," "took a swig," are sur­ prising.   Presumably,  as  a   professor   of English,  the  author allowed  these cliches to pass as faithful translations of his origi­ nal   Czech.   If   we  are   to   believe   that  Danny's one   good   subject  at   school   is composition, then  the enterprising quality of  his  imagination  should   be  reflected  more  evenly  in  his  narration. "I  looked around and  suddenly I saw a guy stand­ ing  under   a  pine   tree,  urinating." The word  "guy" rests  uneasily  here  alongside the  more sophisticated word  for  peeing. Occasionally, the lapses are embarrassing. "And  she blossomed  right  before my eyes, with  her sweet little  noggin  obviously full of   what   was   going   to   happen  in   the woods  between   ten  and   midnight." I'm not entirely convinced that  this kind of unevenness  is  the  translator's fault, for there  are  times  when  his English  will re­ sist the middle ground for poetic heights: "Through  a   kaleidoscope  of    fabulous dazzlement," narrates Danny, "I saw the  tail  of  the  little   white   gosling,  studded with   four   pearly   stars   like  St.  John of Nepomuk,  swim   up   to  my  face." The gosling  here   is  an   ice-cream  cone;  the stars   a   girl's    fingernails.   Surely   it   is Skvorecky's  abundance of  metaphor and  simile,  rather than  Wilson's imagination


175

BOOKS IN REVIEW



or Danny's effusion,  that  makes  this sen­
tence  so spectacularly bad.
The Swell  Season  deserves the enthusi­ astic   reviews   it   has   received;   it   is  a charming book. Skvorecky's genius  is for scene-making-think   of   that    brilliant scene in the  train  at  the end of "Emoke" in  The  Bass  Saxophone-and  in   this way he continues to evoke an era,  to cast a wistful and  indulgent eye, to relish  the pleasures   of  reinventing his  own  youth yet   again.    If  there's an   air   of   book­ making  about the  work,  buttressed  as it is  by  epigraphs,   quotations,  titles,   and subtitles,   it  might   have  come  from   an unnecessary  attempt to  worry  the  parts  into  a  whole,  when  it's  the  whimsicality of the parts  that  bewitches.

KEATH  FRASER


FIRST THOUGHTS

MARGARET ATWOOD,   Second   Words:   Selected
Critical  Prose.  Anansi, $22.95.

MARGARET  ATWOOD  begins her  Introduc­ tion  to this book with  the disclaimer that  "I don't like  writing the  kinds  of  things that  are  brought  together  in  this volume  nearly   as  much   as  I  like  writing   other  kinds  of  things." The  Introduction con­ cludes,  "I began  as a profoundly apoliti­  cal  writer, but  then  I  began  to do  what  all novelists  and  some poets  do:   I began to  describe   the  world  around  me.  This  book  is  part  of  that   description." In  its chronological  presentation of a  selection  of  Atwood's  non-fictional prose,  Second Words charts  the  emergence of  a  third  face  of  the  writer   who  is probably  Can­  ada's best-known poet  and  novelist,  from a  preliminary deft   sketch  of  the  quick­ witted  book reviewer  of her  student  days, to a full  portrait of the  committed  social critic   of   the   late   seventies   and   early eighties.   The essence  of  Atwood's  con­ cerns -individual and  national identity,


!76
 sexual  and  power  politics,  the  malleabil­ ity and  limitations of  language, the forms and   stereotypes  we  use  to  structure our  perceptions and experience, the appalling myopia of  North  America's commitment to  materialism -has remained more  or less  constant over  the  years.  As she  says (in a  review  of Valgardson's Red  Dust), "It's  a  critical  fallacy   of  our   times ... that a  writer  should   'grow,'   'change,' or
'develop.' ... If you  look  at   what   most writers actually do,  it  resembles  a  theme with   variations  more   than   it  does   the
popular notion   of  growth. Writers'  uni­ verses  may  become   more  elaborate,  but they   do   not   necessarily   become   essen­ tially  different." In  her  own  case,  elab­  oration has  taken   the  form   of  fulfilling  the  implication of  her  1973  remark that  she sees writers "as inescapably connected with   their  society,"  and   recognizing the power  given  to  her  by her  enormous in­ ternational  following. As  her  popularity has expanded beyond the borders of the Canadian world  of letters,  she has sought to exert her voice, to meet the weighty responsibility of the modern fiction  writer whom  she  sees as  having  inherited from the  now  discredited priest  and  politician the  role  of  "guardian of  the  moral   and ethical sense  of  the  community." In  the passionate wisdom   of  recent   pieces  like "An  End  to Audience" and  her  1981 address to the world  meeting of Amnesty International, she asserts that  "The writer bears  witness. Bearing witness  is not  the same as self-expression," and  that  literary art  cannot be separated from  politics  in the  broader sense  of  "who  is entitled  to do what to whom,  with impunity; who profits   by   it;  and   who   therefore  eats what."
This  is only one of the matters covered in  this  book.  At  the  risk  of  repeating a cliche, I must at least mention Atwood's astonishing productivity and  versatility. Whether writing heavily  footnoted  seri­ ous  criticism for  Open Letter   or  Cana-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



dian Literature, appreciatively  reviewing modern (usually  women) writers for ma­ jor American newspapers, or entertaining university    audiences  with   her   cleverly provocative addresses,  Atwood  displays  a chameleon-like ability  to  simultaneously adapt  to her environment and  retain  her distinctive voice. And  while  her  vision of the  world  from  the  perspective of a Ca­  nadian  woman writer gives  rise  to many wry  observations on  the  situation of Ca­ nadians, women, and  writers   (and  the various   permutations  thereof),  she   ex­ tends her range of topics  to include Cana­ dian   humour, Canadian  monsters, Aus­ tralian  Writers'  Week,  and   a   touching personal memoir of  Northrop Frye.
Atwood  appears to have made  this selection  herself.  All  but  two  of the  fifty pieces  have  been  published before,  many in places not rapidly accessible to the Canadian reader (two  reviews from  1976 and  one  from  1978 even  escaped  the  at­
tention of bibliographer Alan  J. Horne).
Partly   because  Atwood's policy  is not  to
review   books  she   dislikes,   the   persona that  emerges  from  this  collection is both generous  and    incisive,   speaking   confi­ dently  and  clear-sightedly in a style which combines it with  eloquence.
As Atwood  is fully  aware, audience is an    important   element  in   her    work: "What  gets   said ... depends  a   lot   on whom   you're saying   it   to."   Hence   she has courteously included both  a good  in­ dex  and  a complete list of  acknowledge­ ments  which   allows  the  reader  to  easily place  each  piece  within  its original con­ text.  The general  Atwood  fan  will  most enjoy  the  later  pieces  directed towards  a wide   audience,   particularly   those   first prepared  as  oral   presentations, such   as "The  Curse   of   Eve,"  "Witches,"  "An End  to Audience," "Canadian-American Relations: Surviving the  Eighties," and "Writing the  Male   Character." The  lit­ erary   historian  will  relish   the  early  re­ views  and  critical essays  from  Acta  Vic-
 toriana and  Alphabet  for the insights  they provide into  their  author's youthful liter­ ary  sensibility,  and   the  selection  of  re­ views which  proclaim her sympathy with writers  as diversified  as Al  Purdy,  Marie­ Claire  Blais, Timothy  Findley,  and  Adri­  enne   Rich.  And  while   Atwood   has  as­ siduously   avoided   analyzing  her    own writing  the way she  has analyzed  that  of Rider Haggard, John  Newlove,  Gwendo­ lyn  MacEwen, and  Jay  Macpherson, the student and  the  teacher of  CanLit  will have difficulty  resisting  the  temptation to apply  her comments on  other  authors to her own  poetry  and  fiction.

CAROLE GERSON


DRUDGES

DEAN TUDOR,  NANCY TUDOR, & BETSY  STRUTH­ ERS,   eds.,  Canadian  Book   Review   Annual
1980. Simon &  Pierre,  $49·95·
ROBERT I.  FITZHENRY, ed.,  The  Fitzhenry & Whiteside  Book  of Quotations. Fitzhenry & Whiteside,  n.p.

IT SEEMS DECIDEDLY inappropriate to  re­ view a book to which one is a contributor, but  that's difficult  to avoid in the  case of CBRA 1980. By my count it includes 195 contributors, all of them potential review­  ers -and   how  many  other  of  us  poor drudges are out  there?
Unfortunately   that    term,    "drudge," seems  all  too  appropriate here.  It's hard
to say why people  agree  to review  books. It is partly  a sense of duty,  I suppose. Someone   must  do  it.  But  it  is also  pre­ sumably  some  manifestation of   the  ego, the  same  as  almost  all  writing.  The re­ viewer  believes  that  he  or  she  has  some­  thing  to  say  and   that   it  can  be  said  in
:1.  review.  Which  takes  the   review   well
bej·ond  a  simple   evaluation.  Some   re­ views become  so interested in  themselves that  they  lose sight  of the  book. But  the best are  able  to  keep  both  reviewer  and

BOOKS IN REVIEW



book in the  foreground and  spin cunning comments.
There is little  sense of that  other level in CBRA. Perhaps the  brevity  of the  re­
views  it  contains, approximately four hundred words each, limits  the reviewers, but  even  then  there  could  be a  bit more spark.   There are   far  too  many   phrases like  "a  good  read" and  prosaic  descrip­ tions of contents. One  of the few  review­ ers who  gets  beyond  this,  Vivienne Hol­  land,  says of one  novel, "This  passionate Canadian  saga,  set  against   the  haunting expanse of  the  prairie landscape, is full of  grand  cliches."  I  would   like  to  see more  of  that  but  all too often  the cliches are  neither grand   nor  ironic:  "Readers are  certain to  be  stirred by  the  lure  of the wild."
Yet  perhaps flair  isn't  really  an  appro­ priate request for  a work such  as this.  It incorporates 550 reviews and attempts to be encyclopedic: "to  locate  and  include all  titles  that  met  CERA's  criteria." The  main   body  of  material   is  "trade  books carrying a Canadian imprint and  a  rg8o copyright date,"  plus  other  works  with "obvious  trade appeal." For  some of  the books this appeal seems less than  obvious.  Also, I  can  think  of at least  a few  works which  are  in  the  mainstream and  fit  the criteria but  are  not included. Still, CBRA was in limbo  for some  time  after  the de­ mise  of  their   publisher, PMA.  Both  the  editors  and  the  new  publisher,  Simon  & Pierre, should  be congratulated that  there  even  is a  rg8o  volume.
But  to what  end? CBRA seems to pro­ vide a service  in its  collection  of  compe­ tent    though  uninspired   reviews,   well­ indexed. But who reads it?  In  my experi­  ence  the  only ones who know  of CERA's existence  are  contributors. I've  asked  li­ brarians if  it's of value  in book purchases but   they   give   the   obvious   answer:  it comes out  too late.
Even  when  they didn't have  publishing troubles  CBRA appeared at  least  a year
 and  a half late.  A number of the works in CBRA 1980, and  not  just ephemera, are already out  of print. Speaking of  ephem­ era,   do  we  really   need   a  review,   three years   after   publication,  of   The   King's Wife's  Cookbook?  (To  let you know  how quickly  popular culture can fade, the title  refers  to  Mrs.  Al  Waxman, whose  hus­ band  used  to be  "King of Kensington.")
Anyway,  CBRA does  a  reasonable  job of  what   it  does,  whoever it  does  it  for, and  I shall  continue to review  for  it,  for whatever reason.  It's  difficult  to be even
that  positive  about The  Fitzhenry & Whiteside Book of Quotations. I can only assume   that   it  is  a  product of  Robert Fitzhenry's habit   of  collecting bon  mots and  a  desire  to  have  F&W's  name  on  a book like this, like Oxford or Penguin.
F&W  adds   little   of  interest  to   the usual  collections of quotations. In  the preface  Fitzhenry  himself   notes   "This book  does  not  have   rich  indices  of  key words  of  first  lines  or  any  of  those  de­ tailed  and  valuable aids.  I leave  these  to the   great   scholarly  collections."  But   it doesn't even   have   a  cross-reference for
subjects  or,   presumably  the   least   one could  expect, titles  of sources.  It's  almost impossible to look up a specific quotation but   even   if  you  find  a  likely  one,  you can't tell  where  it's  from.  Fitzhenry  tells us it's Dickens  or Shakespeare, but what Dickens,  which  Shakespeare?
Even  when  you don't like it, it's impos­
sible  to  leave  a collection of  quotations without a few useful  tidbits.  I'll  take  one by Samuel Butler: "Books  should  be tried by a  judge  and  jury as though they  were crimes." At best, F&W  is a minor felony. If Robert Fitzhenry must  write  he might try  a  more   purposeful form  of  larceny. How  about book  reviews?

TERRY GOLDIE

·m-0






CANADIAN COPYRIGHT DEPOSITS IN THE BRITISH LIBRARY (1895-1924)

THE SYMONS REPORT and  the Canada Council Consultative Group on  Univer­ sity  Research Libraries stated  effectively  in  I975  the  need  to  locate  and  preserve  Canadiana; the   Canada  Council  acted  immediately to  create the  Canada Insti­ tute   for  Historical  Microreproductions.1
No one working in the field of Canadian Studies needs to hear  the arguments for preservation; research in historical Cana­ dian  Studies still  follows  that  classic  re­ ceipt   for  cooking   a  goose  which   begins with    the   fundamental   formula  "First, catch  a   goose."   The   question  still   re­ mains,  where   to  look  for  such   a  goose. Copyright  deposit   collections,  such   as that  in  the  British  Library, are,  in fact,  a logical  place  to institute a search  for Ca­  nadian printed  documents and  books. As early  as  I839,  publishers in  Nova  Scotia  were  required by law to deposit copies of their   printed  materials; the  principle of copyright deposit collections is longstand­ ing.  To  introduce the  nature and  scope of our  project, this  paper will  focus  first on  the  history   of  the   various copyright deposits collected by law  in  Canada, and secondly,  on the  copyright deposit collec­ tion  sent  to  the  British  Library  between  I895  and   I924,  which   is our  particular concern.

Copyright  Legislation in Canada
The history  of  copyright  legislation in
Canada is considerably documented  but
 little  attention has been  accorded the im­ plication of  Canada's  copyright  laws  for sources of Canadiana.2  Initially, it may be helpful   to  survey   the  various  copyright legislation    in   Canada  and   the   earlier  British  North  American  Colonies.  Begin­ ning  in  I 839,  publishers  in  Nova  Scotia  were  required  to  deposit a  copy  of  any work  printed  in  the  province in  each  of the  two  Legislative Libraries as a condi­  tion  of  receiving  copyright.3  Other pro­ vincial  libraries which   received   free  de­ posit  copies   under  copyright legislation  were  the  Province  of  Canada   between
184I  and  I868,4 Prince Edward Island between  I86I  and  I873, 5  and Newfound­ foundland  between    I 888  and  I 9 I 2.6    In
1868,  the federal government re-enacted
the   Copyright  Act   of   the   Province  of Canada as  stop-gap  legislation to  apply in  the  new Dominion;  publishers were required to deposit two  free  copies  with the Minister  of Agriculture who kept one in the Copyright Office and  deposited the other   in  the  Library  of  Parliament,  es­ tablished by the  purchase of  the  legisla­ tive  Library   of  the  Province of  Canada for $2oo,ooo in  I 867.
The first complete copyright legislation in  Canada was  the  Canadian Copyright Act of I875· This act,  which  was substan­ tially   re-enacted  with   some   alterations first in  the  Revised  Statutes  of 1886 and  later   in   the   Revised   Statutes  of  1906, supplied the basis of copyright in Canada between   the   years    I875   and   I924.   It granted copyright for  twenty-eight years from  the  time  of  registration to any  per­  son living in  Canada or other part  of the British   dominions;  and   recognized the copyright for  a similar period  of a citizen in any country having an international copyright treaty  with   the  United  King­ dom.   The   impetus  for   the   legislation came   from   business   interests  and   thus concerns itself  primarily  with  the  com­ mercial  aspects  of  printed and  published works rather than  the right  by authorship


179

OPINIONS & NOTES



to  a  written  work.7   To  register  a  work and  thus  obtain copyright under  the  Ca­ nadian  law,  the  person,  often   the  pub­  lisher   and   not   the   author,  must   have complied   with  the  following  conditions: first,  such   literary,  scientific,  or  artistic  works  must  have  been  printed  and  pub­  lished,  or  reprinted  and  republished, in Canada; or,  in  the  case of works of art, must  have  been  produced or  reproduced in  Canada;  and  secondly,  two  copies  of the  book,  map,  chart, musical  composi­  tion,  photograph, print,   cut,  or  engrav­ ing   must   have   been   deposited  at   the Office of the  Minister of Agriculture; for paintings, drawings, statuary, and  sculp­ ture,  a  written description of  such  work could  have  been  substituted  and  sent  to the Minister. The Act of  I875, as had  the I868  Act, instructed the Minister of Agri­ culture to  deposit  one  copy  of  the  work in  the  Library of  Parliament and  to  re­ tain   the   other   copy   in   the   Copyright Office. In  I895, section  IO of the Act was amended to  require that  three  copies  be sent  to  the  Minister; the  third  copy  was to be  forwarded to  the  British  Museum, now  the  British  Library.
The  deposit    requirement  under    the I875  Act and  its amendment of I895 remained unaltered  until  the  passing  of the  Act  of  I 92 r. The I 92 I   Act  repealed and  superceded all  prior  copyright  legis­ lation   in  Canada and,   with   its  various  amendments,  is  the   basis  of   Canadian copyright law  today.  Sadly, the  I92I   Act (which  was  not  proclaimed  until  I Jan­ uary   I924)   contained  no  provision   re­ quiring deposit   copies  of  books, in  Can­ ada  or  elsewhere. The  Library  of Parlia­ ment,    the   Copyright   Office,   and    the British  Library all lost their  free copies of Canadiana on  31  December  I923.   This situation prevailed until  I93I   when  a bill was  passed,  "not intended to revise gen­ erally  the  Copyright Act,  but  to  amend  that  Act only  in  so far  as is  necessary  to bring  Canadian copyright legislation  into


r8o
 conformity  with   the   provisions   of   the Rome  Convention" of  I928. In  addition to  its  above  stated   purpose, the  amend­ ment  included a  provision  to  restore  de­ posits to the  Library of  Parliament:

The publisher of every  book  published in Canada,  within three months of  the  publi­ cation  thereof, shall   deliver or  cause  to  be delivered, at  his   own   expense,   to  the   Li­  brarian  of   Parliament,  who   shall    give   a written  receipt  therefor,  two  copies   of  the first  edition and   two  copies  of   each   subse­  quent  edition  if   such   subsequent  edition contains  additions  or   alterations  either  m the   letter  press  or   in  the   maps, prints, or other engravings  thereto belonging.

The  rationale for   this   action   was   ex­ plained in a subsidiary note in the amend­ ment:  that  such  copies,  when  deposited, would   form   the   nucleus  of   a  National Library for  Canada.
The dream of a National Library, shat­
tered  by the  Depression and  World  War II, did  not  become  a reality  quickly.  Not until   I952   did  the  National Library   Act pass  through  Parliament. Section   II of that  Act gave  the new library  the respon­ sibility   of   collecting and   systematically preserving  Canadiana   by  requiring  Ca­  nadian publishers to deposit  two copies of each  publication in  the  National Library within  one  week  of  its release  for  public  distribution or  sale.

Copyright Deposit  Collections in Canada
Everything copyrighted in Canada prior   to   I 924   or  published  in   Canada after I 93 I found   its  way  as deposit  ma­ terial   into   official  libraries. This  system would   seem   to   have   guaranteed   ready  access  today   to  all  published  Canadian material;  time   and  circumstance,  how­ ever,  have  served  to  offset  the  intent of the   various   Copyright  Acts.   The  Acts produced   four  sets  of   collections:  the provincial   materials  gathered  prior    to Confederation;  the   Library  of    Parlia­ ment/National  Library  Collection which  was  augmented  by  the  purchase of  the

OPINIONS & NOTES



Province of Canada Library in  1868;  the Copyright Office collection; and, finally, the British  Museum collection.

The  Pre-Confederation Collections
The major defect   in  the  pre-Confed­ eration  provincial  legislation  requiring deposit  was,   primarily,  the   absence   of penalty  for non-compliance with  the law, and,  secondarily, the  calibre  of  the  pro­ vincial  librarians. In  practice, the official librarians for  the  British  North American colonies  served  other functions as well - janitor, sergeant-at-arms, chaplain-and frequently their  appointments lasted  only for  the  duration of the  legislative  assem­ bly.8   Despite these  handicaps, some  ma­ terials  were  received, and  anyone search­ ing   for   materials   published   in   Nova Scotia  between   1839  and  1868,  in  P.E.I. between  1863 and  1873, or in Newfound­ land    between     1887   and    the    present, would   find   the   Legislative  Libraries  of those  provinces a  proper place   to begin. The limited   diligence of  the  official  li­ braries   to  collect   the   materials,  and   of the authors or publishers to request copy­ right,   gainsays   the  completeness of  any of these  collections.9
None of the material received  under deposit by the  Province of Canada, how­ ever,  remains in Toronto or Quebec City. In  1841,  on  the  Union of  the  Provinces  of Upper and  Lower Canada, the  librar­ ies of  the  two  legislatures were  amalga­ mated and  began  receiving legal  deposits of  everything published in the combined province. With  Confederation in 1867, Ontario and   Quebec were  funded  with
$10o,ooo  each  to establish  new legislative
libraries  and    "donated"  their   amalga­ mated library to the  new Dominion as the basis for  the  Library of  Parliament. The Library of Parliament ideally should  have included everything published in the Can­  adas  between   1841  and I 867,  everything copyrighted in Canada between  1868 and
1924, as well as everything published be-
 tween    1931  and   the   formation  of  the
National Library in  1952.
That this collection no longer  exists in its entirety is due  to a series of fires. Dur­ ing  the  riots  in  Montreal  following  the enactment of  the  Rebellion  Losses  Bill, the  Library   of   the  Province of  Canada and  its  collection was  almost  totally  de­ stroyed   by  fire  on   12  April   1849.  Al­ though the collection was substantially re­ built,  fire  again  ravaged  the   library   on
1 February 1854.10 Thus the collection of the   Province  of  Canada,  which   would form  the  basis  of  the  Library of   Parlia­ ment,  contained only  material  deposited for  copyright after  1854.

The Library  of Parliament Collection
As  was  the   Province  of  Canada   Li­ brary,  the Library of Parliament itself was diminished by two  fires. The first  fire  in
1916 began in the Library and  would eventually destroy  the  rest  of the  Parlia­ ment  Buildings.  The Report of  the  Joint  Librarians indicates the  extent  of  dam­ age:

The disastrous fire  which   destroyed the Parliament  Buildings, in  February, did   not leave  the  Library unscathed.
The fire  originated in  the  reading  room,
which   contained a  large and   valuable  col­
lection of books,  as well as the  current  news­
papers.
When these  took  fire,  the  whole  collection
of  books  was  hopelessly doomed  to  destruc­
tion.
During the  night, the  water thrown upon
the   burning  buildings  found  its   way   ulti­ mately  to  the   Library,  and    the  floor   was flooded  to  the  depth of many  inches, during the  two  days  which  followed.
Much damage was  done   by  this  flood  of water; but  owing  to  the  exertions of  some members of  the  Library staff,  who  were  on duty, the  books  on  the  lower   shelves   were, as  far  as  time  allowed, removed and   placed in  higher shelves.ll

A  second  fire  began  in  the  dome  of  the Library of Parliament in  1953 and  water damage again  caused  most of the destruc-

OPINIONS & NOTES



tion  as  it  cascaded  down  upon   the  col­
lections.12
The   collection was   not   totally   de­ stroyed  by these  two fires;  the  Report of the  National Librarian in  1957  observes that   several   "large  transfers   have   been made  by the  Library of  Parliament, and  about  roo,ooo of these volumes have been
unpacked  and   placed   on  shelves."13  By
1967, this transferred material had  been catalogued simply  in a composite file, known  in the National Library as the "In Process Catalogue," and  included 86,223 items;  the   In   Process  Catalogue,  how­ ever, was not integrated into the National Library Catalogue.14  Michel Theriault of the  National  Library, in  charge of  the Canadiana 1967-1900 Project, stated  dur­ ing  the   Learned  Societies'   Meetings  in Halifax in June 1 981  that  the  transferal from  the  Library of  Parliament does  not contain  a  full  set  of  deposit   materials. Similarly,  Maria  Calderisi Bryce,  Music Division,  National Library, noted  in cor­ respondence last summer that  "a great number of  legal  deposit   copies ... have
not been located in our own collection,"15
and  the  National Library should  contain the  first  deposit  copy of every  book  pub­ lished  in Canada between  1868 and 1923 but,  in  fact,  can  not  claim  to  house  this full  collection. Destroyed in  the  Parlia­ mentary fires of  1916  and  1953,  lost  in transit  to  the   National   Library  in   the
195o's,  or simply  stored  and  forgotten in a warehouse at  some  intervening date,  a complete set  of  the  first  deposit   copies of Canadian  material published prior  to
1952 is not accessible in the Library of Parliament nor the  National Library of Canada.

Copyright  Office Collection
The history of the Copyright Office Collection, consisting of  the  second  de­ posit  copies  received  after   r868,  is  more tightly  documented. With   the  assistance  of the  Hon.  Robert Stanfield, then  Mem-
 her  of  Parliament from  Halifax, a mem­ orandum dating from   1937  was  traced: because  of its impending removal to new premises   the  Copyright Office  requested direction on  the  disposition of its  collec­ tion  of  deposit  material,  since  the new offices lacked  the  necessary storage space. Forces  of continentalism outweighing na­ tionalism in  1938,  the  Committee of  the Privy Council determined that  few of the "several  thousands of  volumes  of  books, catalogues, periodicals, pamphlets,  sheet music,   maps," etc.,   had   any  value.   An Order-in-Council,  signed by  Lord Tweedsmuir  and   Prime   Minister   Mac­ kenzie King, ordered that  the material be offered   for  selection to  the  Secretary of State  Library  and    that   the   Copyright Office   dispose   of  what   remained. The Secretary  of   State   Library  observed shortly  thereafter that "One hundred and  fifty-five   books  of   prominent  Canadian statesmen and  the history of Canada were obtained from  the  Copyright Office,  to­ gether with some  sixty volumes  of Cana­ dian fiction." A search of the  Public  Rec­  ords  Office  did  not  reveal  further  corre­ spondence on  this subject; the  remaining
4o,ooo-odd  pieces   were,   we  must   pre­
sume,  destroyed.16
Perhaps confusing Canadian with American and  English copyright law  re­ quirements, some applicants continued to submit deposit copies  after  the legal obli­ gation to do so ceased  in 1924. Items  that  continued to accumulate in the copyright office  after   1 938  were  collected  by  the Department of Indian Affairs in the mid-
196o's  and   distributed to schools  and  li­ braries,  particularly   in   the   Northwest TerritoriesY
This brief description of the collections deposited by copyright in the  Provincial Libraries, the  Library of  Parliament, the National Library, and  the  Copyright Office   demonstrates  a  lack   of  concern prior  to 1952 for  the systematic and com­ plete   assembling of  Canadiana.  It  also

OPINIONS  & NOTES



shows  why   hunting for   the   "goose"  in these  collections is not  always  successful. The Library of  Congress  in  Washington and  the British  Library in London which have   systematically  collected   the   pub­ lished  output of  the   United  States  and  Britain, make  the  researching  of  Ameri­  can    and    British    topics    easier.    Those  "geese" are  not only caught, but  plucked. The elusive Canadian goose continues to hide.

The Formation of the  British  Museum
Collection
We  now  must  consider  the   third  de­ posit   copy   received    by   the   Copyright Office. The disposition of these items  pro­  vides the second  focus  for  this  paper, the British   Library  Collection.   The deposit  copies  for  the  British  Library began  ar­  riving  in  London in  I 895 : "The works transmitted to  the  British  Museum  com­ mence  with  those  registered on  July  23, I 8g5,  viz.  nos.  8035-8040  or   the  latter nos. of  the  list  in  the  Patent  Office  Rec­
ord  vol. 23, no. 7, July 3I,  I895· [Signed] F.B.C."18   Valerie Broomfield's valuable Guide  to  Resources For Canadian  Stud­ ies   in   Britain    reports that    "coverage of  Canadian   publication  is   virtually complete for  the years  I842·I886," in the  British  Library collection.19 The informa­ tion  supporting  this  assertion  had   been supplied to her  by a staff  member of the British  Library, but  the deposit of these Canadian materials to  which  the  Library was  entitled by  the  Imperial  Copyright Act of I842, and that which was actively desired   by  British   Library  staff   at   the time,  had  not,  in fact,  ever  arrived.
The ideas of Antonio Panizzi  dominate
the  British  Library's philosophy of  acqui­ sitions   in  the   nineteenth  century.20    On  I 2  October  I 836,  soon  after being   ap­  pointed  Keeper  of    the   Books,   Panizzi wrote   his  first  report  to  the  trustees   on the  subject of  acquisitions, the  first  prin­ ciple of  which was the following:
 1.  The attention of  the  Keeper of  this  em­ phatically British library  ought  to  be  most particularly directed to  British works,  or to works   relating   to   the   British   Empire,   its religious,   political, literary as  well  as  scien­ tific  history,  its  laws,   institutions,  descrip­ tion,   commerce, arts,   etc.   The  rarer  and  more  expensive a work  of  this  description is, the  more  necessary it  is  to  endeavour by all means to  secure it for  the  library.21

Lack   of  any   specific   response   by  the trustees   regarding this  statement of   ac­ quisition  policy,  Panizzi  regarded as tacit  acceptance of  that   policy.  That  Panizzi continued this  policy  throughout  his ca­ reer   at   the   British   Library   is   demon­ strated in his statement some twelve years later  to a Royal Commission:

The  Museum is  the   library of  the  English nation, and  there ought to be in  that library every  book  that was  printed, either by  Eng­ lishman or  in   English, or  relating  to  Eng­ land.22

This  philosophy of  acquiring  everything in  the  English  language, combined with Panizzi's friendship with  the intelligentsia of London, probably led  to the  inclusion in  the  new act  when  he insisted  that  the British  Museum should  offer equal hospi­ tality  to any  book  without  distinction as to its country of origin, or  its political or religious  basis, Panizzi  was  accepting the tradition  of    nineteenth-century   liberal  thought. Although he numbered many  of London's intelligentsia among his friends,  it is difficult  to document Panizzi's  precise influence  upon   the  Parliamentary  Com­ mittee    considering  copyright  in    I842. The    legislation    it   produced,   however,  demonstrates its  grounding in  the  same liberal   tradition  by  its  measures  to  en­ force   the  collection  and  preservation of all printed material. Thus by the  "Act  to Amend  the  Law  of  Copyright" passed  at Westminster in   I842,  every  publisher in Britain  and  the  British  Colonies was  re­ quired   to  deposit a  copy  of  every  pub­  lished  monograph in the British  Library.23
Enforcement of this  law  in Great Britain

OPINIONS & NOTES



was  difficult   until   Panizzi  launched  in court  158law suits against  publishers who had  failed  to  comply;24   the  enforcement of the law in the Colonies, however, was impracticable as  Panizzi  admitted in earlier  testimony to the British  Museum:

Of   the   works   published  in   the   provinces, I believe we get  a certain number, but  noth­ ing  in  comparison  to  the  number  which   is published; of  the  works  printed  out of Eng­ land,  I  mean Scotland and   Ireland, I be­ lieve  we  get  almost none  at  all; and  of  the works   published  in   the  colonies,   to  which  the  copyright extends,  we  get  none  at al1.2

This   testimony  has  serious  ramifications for  anyone interested in  nineteenth-cen­ tury   Canadian   material   in   the   British Library:

The  law   is   not   stringent  enough....  As things are  at the present we lose the books because they  do  not  come  by copyright, and I  do  not   feel   justified   in   purchasing  them (my  italics) .zs

To  purchase such  books, by right  copy­ right  deposit material, was tantamount to compliance with  the lawbreakers, and  be­ yond  Panizzi's ethical undertaking. By its failure to  purchase, however,  the  British Library grew weak in many areas of later nineteenth-century  Colonial material, In  1886, an  Imperial Act removed  the requirement of  copyright deposit  copies from  all Colonial publishers  including the self-governing Dominions. Since Imperial legislation could   not  guarantee  Colonial deposits   the  British  Library   now  looked to  diplomatic  channels  in   the   various Dominions as a means  of assuring  trans­ mission  of  such   materials.  In   188g  an amended  Canadian  Copyright  Act  had  passed  through Parliament, but  failed  to receive  Royal  Assent. During the consid­  erable  discussion  in England and  Canada that  followed, the  proposed  bill came  to the attention of the  Trustees of the  Brit­ ish Museum. On  their behalf, E. Maude Thompson,  Director  of   the   British   Li­ brary,   wrote   to  the  Marquess of  Ripon
 at  the  Colonial Office  requesting that  he "keep the interests of the British  Museum in  view  in  the  course  of the  negotiations with  the  Canadian Government" and "that, if  the  Canadian Government  ob­ tain  any  realization of copyright  regula­ tions  in  their  favour, they should  under­ take on their  part  to comply  with  the law as  regards  the  deposit of  books  in  the British   Museum."27     The  Marquess  of Ripon  forwarded the  request to the  Earl of  Aberdeen:

I have the  honour to  transmit to  you,  to be laid  before your  Minister, a copy  of a letter from  the  British Museum, respecting the supply to it of copies  of books first  published in  Canada.... The collection in  the  British Museum is,  as  you  are  aware, the  only  na­ tional collection, and   I am  sure  your  Minis­ ters  will  agree with me  that it  is  important that  it  should  be  complete, and  especially in  respect of  works  issued   in  the  most   im­ portant of  Her   Majesty's  Possessions.2s

Although the 188g Act failed  to receive Royal  Assent,  Canada's Parliament did agree  that works published in Canada should be part of the British Museum's collection.  An   1895  amendment  to  the
1875  Canadian  Copyright Act  directed that  three  copies  of each  work  be depos­ ited  with  the  Minister of  Agriculture­ the third copy to be deposited in the Brit­ ish   Museum,   now   the   British   Library. The  rationale  motivating the  Canadian legislators to   require  a  third   copyright deposit copy  for  the  British  Library was, according  to   the   Report  of   the   Privy Council, that  it  "would be  the  means  of introducing  the works  of  Canadian au­  thors  to  the  large  and  influential class of readers who frequent the library." In  ac­ tuality it  was  probably a  political move to  gain  concessions   from   the  Canadian authors  and  the  British  government who had  both opposed  the  proposed 188g Ca­ nadian copyright legislation.
The unpublished "Canadian Copyright
Lists"   of   the   British   Museum  indicate
nearly   100 percent receipt  of the  deposits

OPINIONS  & NOTES



at  the  British  Library between   I895  and I 924.29    A  memorandum  of   27  March I899  stated that, "It is not  proposed   to ask for  'Insurance Plans' (Canadian) , in as much  as their  value  is purely  local - nor  for  English  Novels  published in Eng­ land,  which  are  reprinted in  Canada."30
Despite this disclaimer, these materials continued to be sent by the Canadian Copyright Office,  and, for  the  most part, to be received  by the  British  Library. The "Lists" for  19 I 4  reveal   that   "Copyright exhibit Nos.  28790-288o6  registered  be­ tween  May   I 4  & I 9  have  not  been  re­ ceived -they   were   presumably   lost  in the  wreck  of  the  Empress of  Ireland on May  30."31 In addition,  dozens  of incen­  diary  bombs  fell  on  the  British  Museum on   10 May   I 94 I   and  the  resulting fires in the southwest quadrant caused  the loss of  some  20o,ooo  volumes. The  principal destruction   among  Canadian  copyright deposit  books was in  the  shelves  contain­ ing  law,  stenography,  and   cookery.  De­ spite  its losses, the  British  Library  collec­ tion  of  Canadian copyright  deposit   ma­ terial  remains, we believe, the  most  com­ plete,  of  both   English  and French pub­  lished  materials, for  the  period   between
I 895 and  I 924.

The  British Library Collection  Today
Herein lies the  significance of the col­ lection:  not   that    individual   items   are unique, but   that   the   whole  is,  for   the most   part,   housed   complete  in  one   li­ brary.  Our current research  project 32   has been  undertaken  to  edit  the  "Canadian Copyright   Lists"  of   Canadian  deposit  material to  a  more  useful  form,  and   to add  British  Library  Shelf-marks for  each entry.
The task  has  not  been  made  easier  by
the  change in  philosophy instructing the officers of the  British  Library at  the  tum of  the  century. If Panizzi  and  his  imme­ diate  successors   were   eager   to   receive Colonial  and   Empire  material,  George
 Knottesford Fortesque, who  became Keeper of  the  Books  in  I 889,  was  not. Rather, he  and   his  deputy, A.  W.  Pol­ lard   (who  followed  as Keeper in  I9I9), were dedicated instead to the elimination of gaps  in  the  library's  holdings  of  early English  books and  incanabula, at  the  ex­ pense  of  contemporary material. On  this change   in   philosophy   from   the   nine­ teenth-century  liberalism of  Panizzi  and his  successors,  combined  with   depleted staff and  finances  during the First  World War,   depends the  placing of  some  ma­ terial,  uncatalogued, into  "dumps." Like­  wise, small  pamphlets or individual sheet  poems were placed  in guardbooks (scrap­ books)  which  were  never  indexed for in­ clusion  of each  item  in the  printed cata­ logue.33
-A further problem  for determining the location  of Canadian items  derives  from the  preparation of the  "Canadian  Copy­ right  Lists" from  information supplied by a clerk  at the  copyright office in Ottawa. Catalogue  entries,  however,   were   pre­  pared   by trained library  personnel from  the actual book or document. The British Library catalogue is arranged by author, but  the  copyright lists often  omit  the  au­  thor  of  a  general  text,   contain  spelling  errors  where  names  appear, or  attribute authorship erroneously. Any error  in  the original list  may  take  hours   to  circum­ vent.
In addition, the Canadian material has
been dispersed throughout the various di­ visions  of   the   British   Library   without consistency.   Maps   are  located  primarily in  the  Map  Library, but  some  are  un­  catalogued  in   the   Woolwich "dump." Lyrical   poem  broadsheets should   be  in the Reading Room  Catalogue, but  might  be  in  the  Music   Library. Some   of  the tangential  material, sadly  that   which   is least  likely  to have  survived in Canadian libraries,   may   possibly   have   been   de­  stroyed or lost.


185

OPINIONS & NOTES



Floods     of    worthless   leaflets   and    labels poured in,  and  some,  bearing the  Museum's dated blue  copyright stamp, reached the tables  of  cataloguers, who  gazed  at them  in despair and  (official   conscience forbidding them   to  remove and  destroy   them  secretly) slipped them  under books and  papers where they  could be  quietly  forgotten.34
If all the Canadian material received  had been  shelved   in  one   section   of  one  li­ brary   the  task  of  locating the  material would   have   been   absurdly   simple;   in­ stead,  the  collection has  been  largely  ig­ nored  because  of the difficulty in locating its   pieces.    Because   of   the    structural changes in the administration of the Brit­ ish Museum and  Library, moreover, some items  have  been  traced   to  the  collection  of  the  Museum of  Mankind, which  for­ merly was part  of the British Museum.
Nevertheless, virtually everything copy­
righted  in   Canada  between    r895  and
1924  arrived at  the  British  Library,  and since the library is forbidden by law to dispose  of  any  item,  we may  safely  con­ clude   that   almost   all  copyrighted  items will  be traced   and  located. Our  current plan  is  to  publish   a  series  of  checklists  of these  materials: printed  books, mono­ graphs,   maps,   photographs,  etc.35    The  National  Librarian of  Canada observed in his  annual report for  r 960:

One of  the  chief   purposes and  responsibili­ ties  of  a  national library is  to  collect  syste­ matically  and   preserve the  total output  of the  nation's  publishers.aa

The  British  Library has systematically collected  items from  Commonwealth and colonial  countries whenever possible, and from  Canada in  particular between  r895 and  I 924.  The  editing of  its  accession lists for  Canada should   prove  beneficial to scholars  in all areas  of Canadian stud­ ies. The lists  can,  however,  only  suggest where  a "goose" is hiding. Preparing the goose for  the  oven,  analyzing the  Cana­ dian   copyright   deposits   on   the   British Library, will occupy  readers  of Canadian literature in  the  years  to follow.


r86
 NOTES

1 For  a  history of  the  Canadian  Institute  for
Historical  Microreproduction see  Ernest  B. Ingalls and  Robert  J. Montague,  "Cana­
dian Institute for  Historical Microreproduc­
tions,"  Canadian Library Journal  (June
I 983), pp.  I 34-40.
z  See   R.   A.   Shields, "Imperial  Policy   and the  Canadian Copyright Act  of  I889," Dalhousie Review,  6o   (Winter  I9Bo-8I),
634-58.
3  On  30  March IB39,  the  Nova  Scotia  Legis­ lature  passed    the    first   provincial    act   in Canada requiring the  deposit of  two  copies  of  "any Map, Chart, Book  or  Print"  pub­ lished in   Nova   Scotia "with   the   Clerk   of the   House of  Assembly, to  be  kept   in  the  Libraries  of   the   Legislative   Council  and  House of  Assembly  respectively." This  re­  quirement   was    maintained   in    "Chapter I I9" of  the Revised Statutes of  I85I, IB59, and  IB64.
4  Lower Canada  had  passed an  act  in   IB32 before the  union of Upper and Lower  Can­ ada,  which  legislation  was   entitled    "An Act  for  the  Protection of Copy Rights in  the  Province."  This  Quebec   Act,   unlike  the  later  acts,  did   not   require   the   deposit  of the   publication; it  required only   that  the  printed  title    page   be   deposited  with    the Clerk "of   the  Supreme Court of  Original Jurisdiction of   the   District."
5   This act  received assent  on  29 April I86r.
a   No record has  yet  been  traced in  the  British Library  to  confirm that  material  was   ac­ tually sent   to  London under the  provisions of  this  act. The  register of  materials copy­  righted in Newfoundland  between IBBB and I 9 I 2  is  held   by  Consumer and  Corporate Affairs in  Ottawa.
7    As Sir  Daniel Wilson, President of the  Uni­ versity   of  Toronto,  pointed  out   in   I 892: "It  is  treated as  a  mere   question  between English  and  Canadian  printers   and   pub­ lishers; as  though  the  'Idylls of   the  King'
... were  the  mere  work  of the  type-setters." See    "Canadian    Copyright,"   Proceedings and   Transactions of  the   Royal  Society  of Canada  for the  Year 1892, Section II  (Ot­
tawa, IB93), pp.  3-IB.
s  For   a  history of  the  legislative libraries of Canada see  John Robert Beard, "Canadian Provincial Libraries,"  Canadian Librarian,
22    (May   I966),   422-60,  and  23    (July
I966), 19-41.
9  The variety of   the   holdings  of   the   Nova

OPINIONS & NOTES



Scotia Legislative Library may  be examined in   the   2g2   pages   of  the   Catalogue  of  the Books   in   the   Legislative  Library  of  Nova Scotia (Halifax, 18go).
1° For  individual studies on  Ontario and  Que­
bec  legislative libraries see  A. T.  Wilgress,
"Ontario's Legislative Library," Special  Li­ braries,  18   (May-June  1g27),  and   N.  E. Dionne, "Historique  de  Ia  bibliotheque du
parliament  a Quebec,  17g2-I8g2,"  Royal
Society  of  Canada, Transactions, 2nd   Se­
ries, VIII, 1go2.
11  "Report of  the  Joint  Librarians of   Parlia­ ment," in   the   Annual   Supplement   to  the Catalogue  of   the   Library   of   Parliament (Ottawa, 1g17).
12 For   a  short  history of  the   Library of   Par­ liament and   of  Canadian libraries  see  En­  cyclopedia Canadiana,  6  (Toronto,  1g66),
132·38.
13  Report  of   the   National   Librarian,   1957
(Ottawa, 1g58).
14  See  Dorothy Benson, "Instant Cataloguing,"
Canadian Library, 22  (May 1g66), 41g-21.
15   Information supplied by  M.   Theriot  and M. C. Bryce of the National Library in correspondence.
16  Information supplied by  Barbara  MacDow­ ell,   Administrative   Assistant  to   the   Hon. Robert Stanfield, 1g75.
17   Information supplied by Carol White, Con­
sumer and Corporate Affairs, Ottawa.
18  Memorandum in   the   Canadian  copyright deposit lists  held  by  the  British Library.
1'9    Valerie Broomfield, Guide to  Resources  For Canadian   Studies   in    Britain   (Ottawa, Ig7g).
2'°  For  a history of  Panizzi's policies see  Philip
John Weimerskirch, "Antonio Panizzi's  Ac­
quisitions  Policies   for   the   Library  of   the British Museum," doctoral thesis,  Columbia University, 1g77.
21    "Officer's Reports," 1g  ( 12 October 1837),
5001-02.   Originals   held    by    the    British
Library.
2·2 Report of the  Commissioners appointed to inquire  into   the   constitution  and   govern­ ment of  the   British Museum  with  minutes of evidence ( 1850), para. 4og.
23    Under the   provisions  of  the   copyright act passed   in  17og  during the  reign of  Queen Anne, a copy  of any  book  registered at Sta­ tioner's Hall was  reserved for  the  Museum. Unfortunately, the  act  required  the British  Museum to claim the  books  from Station-
 er's   Hall   and not  all  books  were   available when   collection  was   attempted.  Basically, the  act  was  ineffectual. The 1842  copyright act   required  that  the   publisher deliver a copy  directly to  the  British Museum.
24  See  the  testimony of George Tate in  Copy­ right    Commission:  Minutes   of    Evidence (London, 1878), para. 1701.
25   Report  of  the    Commissioners ... (1850), para. 8gg6.
"6  Report of  the    Commissioners. . .  ( 1850), para. goo4.
27    Parliamentary Papers  I 895, pp.  lxx,  go.
28   Parliamentary Papers  1895, pp. lxx, go-g1.
29    Eight unpublished volumes held  by the Brit- ish  Library.
so Contained   in    the    "Canadian   Copyright
Lists."
31   Memorandum dated  15  October  1g14   in the  "Canadian  Copyright Lists."
32    A  grant  from   SSHRCC  is  enabling   Pro­ fessors John R. T. Ettlinger, Dalhousie Uni­ versity,   and  Patrick O'Neill, Mount  Saint Vincent University in Halifax, to locate and  record the   Canadian material  deposited in the    British   Library   between    18g5    and  Ig24-
33  The earlier philosophy required  that  all material  should  be   treated  equally.   For­ tesque  and  Pollard can  not  be criticized for a  particular slight against  Canada, for  the "dump"  contains  not   only  Canadian,  but  American, English,  and  other colonial ma­  terial.
34   Arundell Esdaile, The  British Museum  Li­ brary:   A  Short  History and   Survey   (Lon­ don,  1g46), 159.
35   Dalhousie Library School Occasional Paper
Series  has  agreed to publish the  lists.
36   Report   of    the   National   Librarian,   1960
(Ottawa, 1961).
PATRICK B. o'NEILL



ON THE VERGE

*****   JAMES   CRIBB,   Treasures of  the   Sea: Marine Life  of the  Pacific  Northwest. Oxford,
$24.g5.  The art book  here  combines with  the scientific illustration.  Cribb,  an  experienced underwater photographer, has  assembled g6 electrifying colour plates of marine plants and animals, with neutral  descriptive notes   for photographers   and    aquarium-watchers. The

OPINIONS & NOTES



creatures are  marvellously named:  blood  star, sea-squirt, slime  star, tubesnout, lumpsucker, nudibranch, warbonnet, and  hydroid. The pho­ tographs  are   visually  splendid-aesthetically pleasing designs  in  and  of themselves, and  also invitations  to  another world.
W.N.
***  JAN  MORRIS, The Spectacle  of Empire. Doubleday,  $39·95·   Subtitled  "Style,  Effect and  the  Pax  Britannica," the  book claims  to be
-and is-about  the  image   that the  Empire projected about style as a feature of power. Photographs  and   drawings are   taken  from   a variety of sources to  show  jubilee  celebrations and   viceroy   parades ;  image-building on   the Zarnbezi and  the  Fraser, in  Trinidad and Darjeeling; naval stations in  Gibraltar  andEs­ quimalt;  posters and  paintings that  evoked  an attitude of  mind; tennis and  hunting, touring and   tea.   Implicit  in   the  photographs  is  the  world   of  authority and  subjection,  the   force  of  arms, economics, and  technology; what  is tangibly manifested are  the   products  of   im­ perial expansion. Yet  what   is  less  explicit is the  sheer belief  in  worth  which  gave  the  gen­  eral   style   to  the  world   of  empire in  the  first place, and which  (for  all  the  problems of  race and  poverty on  which  we  now focus)  nonethe­ less   bequeathed many values  and  benefits to Commonwealth nations, values  which  we ought not  too  easily  to spurn.
W.N.
***   ERIK   BARNOUW,    Documentary: A   His­
tory of the  Non-Fiction Film,  rev.  ed.  Oxford,
$12.75·   First  published  in   1974,   Barnouw's book   now   takes   account of  the   technological changes  of   the   last   decade,  and   reflects   on their  implications for   film.  But   his  emphasis remains  the  same: this   is more  a  book  about film-makers than about film. Itself  a  documen­ tary, it recounts the  politics of  setting film com­
panies into  motion-and includes occasional comment on  the  NFB.  And  it suggests several documentary stances  that  films   adopt:   film­ maker as  poet,  chronicler, prosecutor, guerilla. But  it  categorizes  developments more  than it analyzes accomplishments. It  remains  for  an­ other  book   to  comment on  the  documentary art.
W.N.
**  GILA  RAMRAS-RAUCH,   The   Protagonist  in Transition. Peter Lang, sFr  44.00.     A study of five    characters -from    Dostoevsky, James, Mann, Kafka, and  Lowry-this book attempts to chart a  new  territory for  protagonists:   ter­ ritory neither moral nor  psychological, territory


x88
 without  historical  precedent,  territory   amor­ phous  and    without  consistency,   hence   apart from   the   characters  themselves.  The  charac­ ters,   perforce,  find   meaning,   to   the    degree they   can,   in   themselves  and   in  style.   About Lowry's Consul,  the   author   argues against  a symbolic reading;  the   signs   (volcano, ravine, etc.)  are   to  be  read   as  consular  parallels, not explanations - parallels   that    are     equally dense, equally  without meaning. In  the  "dis­ jointure" is  the character's  (and novel's) mod­ ernism.  Regrettably  the   book  is  riddled  with misprints.
W.N.
**   JULES   VERNE, Family   without   a  Name, trans. by  Edward  Baker. NC  Press,  n.p. 		We are   so  used   to  thinking of  Jules  Verne as  a pioneer science fiction writer  that  we  are  in­ clined to  forget he  was  a  hard-working  man­ of-letters who  wrote about the  past  as  well  as the   future,  and    among  his   historical   novels produced  several about  Canada,   which   are mostly  unknown in  this  country. Deservedly so, if one  can  judge from  Family  without  a Name, a   novel   about the   Lower  Canadian  rebellion of   1 837,   which   has   just  appeared  in  Canada for   the  first   time   in  a  translation by  Richard Baxter. It is a  badly  written mixture of  didac­ ticism  and swashbuckler romance whose history is  arbitrarily inaccurate (the 1837  rebellion  is represented  as  third  in  a  series   of  uprisings, etc.)  and   whose   sympathies  are   suspect. For it   seems   quite evident that  Jules Verne, a conservative French nationalist, regarded  Que­ bec  as  still  "a part of  the  mother  country" to be  considered in  the  same  way  as  Alsace   and  Lorraine, recently annexed by  Germany at the  end   of  the  Franco-Prussian  War, and   that he wrote  Family   without   a  Name   as  irredentist propaganda aimed at  the   people  of  the   two recently  lost   provinces   beside    the    Rhine  as much as at French Canadians. Modern Quebec nationalism would  have   puzzled  and   alarmed him.  Lacking either  literary quality or  histori­ cal  relevance, Family without  a Name  is at best an  antiquarian curiosity. 	o.w.
**  DANIEL FRANCis,  Battle  for the West: Fur­ Traders  and   the   Birth   of   Western  Canada.  Hurtig,  $18.95;  pa.   $9-95·    Students   of  the history of  the  West  who  are  familiar with   the  available material will find  nothing new  in  this  book,  since  it is drawn entirely from  published sources, but  for  a  general reader who  wants a concise,   well-written introduction  to  the   fur  trade it  is  to  be  recommended. It is  accurate where  that is possible  and  judicious where in­ terpretation of  the  known facts is  needed. Es-

OPINIONS & NOTES



pecially, Francis avoids perpetuating  the  less plausible myths   of  the  fur   trade, offers  us  no heroes, and   presents a  more   balanced picture than most  historians of  the  respective roles  of the   Hudson's  Bay  Company  and   the   North­ westers  and  of  their impact on  Indian  society,
G.W.
*  RALPH    MAUD,   A    Guide  to   B.C.    Indian Myth and  Legend. Talonbooks, n.p.     There is a  misleading  contradiction   between  the   title and   the  sub-title  of  this   book.   It is  certainly not,  as the  main  title  suggests, "a guide  to B.C. Indian myth  and  legend." Anyone reading it in the  expectation of finding a  real  survey  of this rich  field of oral  literature will be disappointed. At   most   it   can   be   regarded  as   a   guide    to sources, for  it  is in  fact   no  more   than, as  the sub-title  tells   us,  "A   Short  History of   Myth­ Collecting and   a  Survey of  Published  Texts." What  Maud  actually  does   is  to  identify  the scholars, from   Petitot and  Hill-Tout  onwards, who  gathered the  oral  literature of B.C.  Coast  Indians, give  us  a  little  information on  them, and   tell  us  how  they got  to  work.  He  gives  us the   titles   of   their  published  collections and  discussions  of   myth   and  legend, and   gives  a few  examples  of  what they  collected. But  this is  no  more  than an  indication-and a  useful one -of   the   texts  one   should  consult,  and  anyone who  wishes  to read  in  extenso will  have  to  go  to  the  original books,  to  Hill-Tout and  Boas and  Swanton and the  others.
G.W.
*  MARGARET B. BLACKMAN,  During My  Time: Florence  Edenshaw  Davidson,  A   Haida Woman. Douglas &  Mcintyre, $19-95·     This is a disappointing jigsaw  of a  book.  It is based on  a  series  of  interviews by  the  American  an­ thropologist Margaret  Blackman with  Florence Davidson, daughter of the  classic Haida Indian carver Charles Edenshaw and  grandmother of the contemporary carver Robert Davidson. Un­ fortunately the  meat of  the  book-the conver­ sations   with    Florence    Davidson-occupies only  a  little  over half  an  already slim  volume, and   they  are  far  less  rich   than that admirable other  oral  record  of  a  British Columbian In­ dian  woman, the  classic  Days  of Augusta. Per­  haps   it   is   her    own    laudable   diffidence,  or perhaps  it   is  the   interviewer's  failure  to  ask the   right  questions, that  makes Nani-Mrs. Davidson-appear as  a  remembrancer of  the more   trivial aspects of  Haida life.  This rather fragile core  is surrounded  by  a  tough husk  of rather  pedantic  anthropological   self-justifica­ tion  and  background  information. Perhaps the strongest-and  the  saddest-impression  one
 gets  from  reading such  a book  is  that, in  their efforts   to  codify   the  cultures of  the  Coast  In­ dian   past,  the  anthropologists have  themselves been  subtly   transforming the  Indian memory of it,  and  that in  the  last  resort  they  may  have  been  just as harmful an influence as the  Indian Agents or  the   missionaries  or  the   traders, or anyone else  who  has  brought alien  values  into aboriginal coastal life.
G.W.
*  KATHERINE   BASTIAN,  Joyce   Carol   Oates's Short   Stories Between Tradition  and   Innova­ tion.  Peter    Lang,  sFr   44.00.     Unfortunately the  style  of  this  book  is set  on  its  first  page: "Critical interpretation of  Oates's short stories  has   unfortunately   remained   neglected  in   the  wake   of   her   novels."  Bastian  proposes  that Oates    "reimagines"   and/or    "Americanizes" stories  by  Kafka, Thoreau,  and   Joyce.   What follows  is a series  of fairly mechanical readings of    stories  from    eight   volumes,  generalizing about her  handling of  fantastic, cyclical, and initiation models. The principle is of  interest; both   the  style   and   the   print  job  leave   much still  wanting.
W.N.

JOY PARR, ed.,  Childhood and  Family  in Cana­ dian    History.   McClelland   &    Stewart,    n.p.  Most  of  these  eight  articles  read  more   as  in­  ventories  of   research than   as   the   developed arguments  about ordinary  people   and   private lives  to  which   the  burgeoning subdiscipline of family   history  aspires. Articles that  leaven the  quantitative  approach with   anecdote, such   as Alan  Brookes  on  goin' down  the  road  in  Nova Scotia, or Veronica Strong-Boag on the  Dionne generation, are  most  memorable. Editor Parr's introduction  provides helpful synthesis, but  the book  as  a  whole   needs   more   active attention to comparative contexts to  refine  the  tentative insights,  and    bolder   generalizations  to   give meaning to  the  diligent  demographic  analyses.
L.R.


A welcome  new  paperback series  from  Formac
Publishers -called  "Goodread   Biographies"
-is the brainchild of James Lorimer. Reprints of  various   Canadian life   stories   published  in recent years,  the  series  promises a "good read"
-and delivers its  promise in  the  first  12  vol­ umes.  The range is  wide,  from   Elspeth  Cam­ eron's  scholarly Hugh  MacLennan  to  Takeo Hjo   Nakano's  moving autobiography   Within the  Barbed  Wire Fence, from  accounts  of  hoc­  key greats and  war  aces  to  the  political mem­ oirs  of  Walter  Gordon;  we   look   forward  to more.


189

OPINIONS & NOTES



Among recent  reprints  are   Jack   Hodgins' The  Barclay  Family   Theatre (Macmillan/ Laurentian  Library,  $8.95) ;  Hugh  Garner's Storm   Below  and   Nice  Place to  Visit   (Paper Jacks, $3.95 each);  Michael Ondaatje's  Run­ ning  in  the  Family   (M&S, $9.95);  The  Col­ lected  Poems  of F. R. Scott   (M&S,  $14.95); two volumes of selected poems  in McClelland's Modern Canadian Poets  series,  Milton Acorn's Dig Up  My  Heart  and  Ralph Gustafson's The  Moment  Is  All   ($12.95  each); and   an  1865 novel,  the  first  adult  fiction  with  a  prairie set­  ting,  W. H. G. Kingston's Rob Nixon, The  Old White  Trapper   (Univ. of  Alberta, $6.95, ed.  Dick  Harrison).
Rubicon  is  a  new   journal, from   the  Arts  & Science Undergraduate  Society  at McGill  Uni­ versity,  edited by  Peter  O'Brien, whose  solid,  objective reviews-and    an    interview   with
Jack    Hodgins-grace  the   first   issue.    Other contributors of poetry, fiction,  commentary, in­ clude Erin Mou11e and Kenneth Dyba.   A  sec­ ond  new  venture is True  North/Down  Under  (Box  55,  Lantzville, B.C.), "a  journal  of  Aus­ tralian  and   Canadian  Literature"   edited  by Kevin   Roberts;  among  the  important  writers to   contribute  to    issue   number   1   are   Leon  Rooke,    Les   Murray,   Chris    Wallace-Crabbe, Jack  Hodgins, Tom Shapcott, and  Judith Rod­ riguez. Its   awoved  aim   is  to  increase aware­ ness of the  two literatures in  both  countries­ its  first  issue  is  a  lively  indication that  it  will do exactly  that: we wish  it  well.  Among other journals  to  arrive  here   lately   are   Index   On Censorship, a monthly from  Writers & Scholars International  Ltd.  in   London,  which   probes the  issue  of censorship in  theatre and  publish­ ing  (and its  relevance to political  and  cultural life)   in  all  parts of  the  world   (the  February
1983  issue  reports on  everything from  Ngugi's banned musical in Kenya to a notice  about reporting Canadian sub  judice cases  in  Ameri­ can   magazines). Canadian   Children's  Litera­ ture,  no. 27/28, is a special Grove issue, which  among important  support  material  prints Grove's own  children's  book  "The  Adventure of Leonard Broadus."
Recent reference works  include  Contempor­
ary Literary  Criticism, vol.  24  (Gale, $76.oo), which   excerpts  (over   26  pages)  commentary on  Frye's criticism; the   whole   volume   is  de­ voted  to  major twentieth-century critical  theo­  rists,  so  constitutes a  fragmented but  remark­ ably  useful   guide  to  the  progress of  criticism in  our  time.
New  books  on  science and   its  general  rela­ tion   to  culture  include  In  the   Beginning   by Chris McGowan (Macmillan,  $18.95),  which


xgo
 argues for  the  scientific basis  of  evolution, and disputes "Creation Science" in  a series  of  pro­ vocative essays on such  subjects as  Noah's  Ark,  fossils,  and  continental drift. Harald Fritzsch's Quarks: The  Stuff   of   Matter   (Fitzhenry  & Whiteside, $25.50),  a   translation  from   Ger­ man, addresses a  less-controversial subject, at­ tempting with  humour and   some  literary sen­ sibility (there  are  telling allusions to Joyce  and  Updike)  to introduce interested readers to  the world   of  particle physics.  Part of  the  impulse of  this  book  is  to  argue for  the  importance of future  research in  the  field; but  its importance for  the  general reader lies  in  its  careful effort to  explore the  seemingly infinite series  of  sub­ structures within matter-from which we can draw  implications about  the   assumptions   we have  about  the   nature  of  form. Edward  T. Hall's The   Dance  of Life:  The Other  Dimen­ sion  of  Time   (Doubleday, $21.50)   addresses another  abstract  issue  which   cultures  take   for granted. Less  mathematical,  more  reflective in mode, Hall's book  tries  to account  for  some  of the  different assumptions about  time that mark one    culture  off   from    another,   assumptions which  affect,  Hall   asserts,  the   structures  of power  within a  culture. Like  many a  physicist recently, Hall  reaches towards Zen  in  order to deal  with   the  implications of  the  intangible in a  tangible  universe.


LAST PAGE

The high  profile lately acquired by structuralist criticism  in   search  of   theoretical  paradigms can  blind us to  the  variety of critical enterprise that actually does  exist.  Not  without  its  struc­ turalist  elements,  a   recent  batch  of   critical books  suggests what some  of these  other  direc­ tions  are:   biographical,  stylistic,  bibliographi­ cal,    socio-cultural,    regional-sometimes   in combination. At  one  extreme stands a regional primary    bibliography    like    Bruce     Bennett's Western  Australian Literature (Longman Cheshire, $45.00), a valuable but  introductory guide  to  a  literature  that  "resists unambigu­ ous  definition"; running five items  to  the  page in  large print,  the   book  also  lists  books  only, and  leaves    the   reader  still   without  an   ade­ quate guide to  periodical publication or  com­  mentary. At  another extreme are  the swift  sur­ veys   of   entire writers-J.   S.   D.   Mellick's Portable  Henry   Kingsley   (Univ.  Queensland,
$3o.oo; pa.  $r4.95), or  the  three volumes in the  compact New  Zealand  Writers and   Their Work   series   (Oxford, $6.95 each):  Margaret Dalziel's Janet  Frame,  Peter Simpson's Ronald

OPINIONS  & NOTES



Hugh Morrieson, and  Alan  Roddick's Allen Curnow. The  Oxford series   (Roddick's  Cur­ now  is a particularly helpful enquiry  into that poet's work)  has   its  parallel  in  Canada, but  the   Portable series   has  none.  Mellick's sound selection shows  how  useful such  a compendium can  be:  Canadian  publishers please  note.
In  between are  works  of various kinds,  many lurking on  the  edge  of biography, if not  openly confronting a  writer's life-as  in  Canada, in­ dicating both  a critical shuffle  away  from  texts­  in-isolation and   an  indirect declaration  of  the indeterminacy (read:   "fictionality")   of   peo­ ple's  lives.  The  Letters of  A. R. D. Fairburn, ed.  Lauris Edmond (Oxford, $3 1.95), collects
237  (out of an  Boo or  so extant)  letters by the poet   who  in   New  Zealand  parallels A.  J. M. Smith: the  analyst of  society  and   art,   the  en­
thusiast  for   Donne,  the   serious  wit   and   the rebel-turned-defender-of -civilization.   Edmond asserts   that a  "whole personality" shows  itself here; so  does  much of  New  Zealand cultural change: by  connecting so  variously with  such a  range of  literary  figures, the   letters offer  a partial  glimpse of  a  whole   society,  which   no literary  historian  can   afford  to  ignore. Two books  by Charles Brasch, substantial  poet  and one-time editor of Landfall, add  to this  portrait of  literary history-in-the-making. The  Univer­
sal   Dance,  ed.    J.  L.  Watson  (U.  Otago,
$25.00),  collects a  number of  prose  pieces  on
art, society, and literature, and on  what Brasch
saw as a necessary connection among these endeavours. As  his  memoir of  the  years  1909-
1947-Indirections   (Oxford,  $29.95) -also avers,   art  must    have   "relevance,"  and   rele­ vance for  Brasch is  to  be  found in  its  commit­ ment to form, to civilization, to  the  nobility of which     humankind   is   capable.    He    praised Graves; he despaired of Eliot; he reflected that modern   poetry  was   likely    to   recover   from  Yeats. Yeats  appears in  the autobiography, too, in   one   of   a   set   of   powerfully    (poetically) observed moments  in  his  life,  when   his  grand­ mother  takes   up   theosophy. Throughout   his life   he   struggled   to   balance  such    European attitudes with   his  "gardener's enthusiasm" for art in  New  Zealand. "Living," he  writes, "was  never  ... to  come  to  me  easily." The moments of  memory  carry throughout this  sense  of dou­ ble  affiliation-at Oxford, reading  Mansfield and  Plato; in   the   1920's  and  1930's,  visiting relatives  in   both  Australia  and  Germany;  in the  1940's seeking form  in  poetry and  fighting in   what  seemed  an   "amorphous"  war.   The memoir closes  as he  is about to establish  Land­ fall  and   commit much  of  his  editorial  life  to literature  in   his   native  land;   this   elegantly written  book   is  an   enquiry  into   the  roots   of
 his  endeavour  and   at the   same   time   a  clear demonstration of his  own  literary skill.
At  half  the  length, Helen Nebeker's  biogra­ phy    jean   Rhys:   Woman  in   Passage    (Eden Press,  n.p.)  seems   twice   as  long.  Rightly  ac­ knowledging the  feminist centre to the  works of
the    Dominica-born  writer,   Nebeker  labours with  plot  summary more  than is necessary, and laces   her   text   with   adjective  and   metaphor: "This ... is  the   entangling  seaweed in   which Rhys  leaves  us  floating, bound  as  inextricably as  the  eternal plankton holds  the  helpless  sail­ ors  in  currentless tropical seas." Rhys,  author of  Wide  Sargasso   Sea,  deserves   better-de­ serves,  indeed, the  kind  of  objective sympathy that  Peter  Alexander   shows  for   his   subject in    his   impressive   Roy    Campbell   (Oxford,
$40.75)· Campbell, the  South African  enthusi­ ast   for  poetic forms, "virility,"  and  Catholic mysticism, was  noted most  for  his  satires and  his  charismatic  energy.  Dismissed   for   half   a century because   of  his  fascist  sympathies and  his  irascible behaviour  (most  notably when   he socked  Spender at a poetry reading), Campbell was  befriended later  in   his   life   by  Marshall McLuhan,  and   he  became  "taken"   (we   are  told)  with  the  poetry of  Pratt. If he  still  does not  seem  endearing on  these  pages,  perhaps it is  because  charisma is  hard to  convey  second­ hand; through this  account of his life, nonethe­ less,  we can  move  past  the  more  objectionable sides    of   his   personality   to    appreciate   the sources   of  the   lyric   intensity   that   sometimes manifested   itself    more   positively   in   lasting poetry.
Other critical works  are  more  conventional: descriptive, thematic, majesterial, and  for  ref­ erence only.  Rotraut  Spiegel in  Doris  Lessing  and   Carol Seiler-Franklin  in  Boulder-Pushers (Peter Lang, 33 Fr.  and  42  Fr.)  both  consider the   work   of  Doris   Lessing;   one   follows    the theme of  alienation,  and   the  other  (more in­  terestingly)  reflects on  the  writer's examination of  the  roles of  women. K.  G.  Hamilton's Stud­ ies   in   the   Recent   Australian  Novel   (Univ. Queensland,  $25.00)  is  more interesting still; an   anthology  of  essays   on   Australia's  major prose   writers  of  the   last   forty   years -Boyd, White, Stow,  Keneally, Wilding, Johnston, and others-the  book  reiterates the  need  so  many writers feel  to stamp their own  particular form on  life,  so  to  squeeze meaning  from  it.  What it   also   (and  perhaps  incidentally)   reveals is the  turn  Australian writerdom has  taken, from thematic summary to  formal analysis-but  in quest  of significance nonetheless.
The contrast could not  be  clearer than it  is among several  works  on African and  Caribbean writing. Robert Wren's Achebe's World (Three

OPINIONS  & NOTES



Continents,  n.p.)  explores the  "historical and cultural context" the  Igbo  author  draws upon:
-explores it,  that is,  for  a  Western  reader­ ship. It is  an  extremely valuable,  clear, illus­ trated handbook to Achebe's  world  and  world­ view: an  account of the  allusions  in  his novels,
a  glossary  of  Igbo   and  pidgin words,  notes  on
money   and   naming systems,  and   critical  sug­
gestions  concerning the  significance of  the  tex­ tual  references to religion and  historical events. It  offers  a  cultural outsider a  way  in.  In an­  other way   (a formal structuralist  way), so  is Martin  Bestman's Le   feu  des  Masques  (Nou­ velle   Optique, $1 3·95), a  set  of  analyses  of books by Soyinka, Beti,  and four  others. For  the cultural  insider, works   like  0. R.  Dathorne's Dark  Ancestor (Louisiana State U.P., n.p.) or Emmanuel Ngara's  Stylistic  Criticism and  the African Novel  (Book  Society, $13.75)  may  be ultimately  more  instructive. Ngara's book  is  a set   of   practical  analyses   of  the  kinds   of  lan­  guage   (and  linguistic  assumptions, linguistic conflict)  to   be  found  in   novels   by  Soyinka, Achebe,   Okara,   Ngugi,   and    Armah - the critical  text   seeking  to  establish  the   African "field"   within   which   communication   takes place. Dathorne observes  how  the  African  heri­ tage   in   the   New   World  transcends  both   na­  tionality and   language, persisting  in  transcul­ tural attitudes  towards land,  God,  and  family. Drawing  his  evidence from  Cuba, Brazil,   and  Martinique as  well   as  from  English-speaking black    communities,  he   traces    the   historical changes that  transformed Yoruba and  Angolan gods  into voodoo  deities, various religious cere­  monies  into   the   rituals  of  carnival, and   oral  culture  generally into   the   forms   of  song   and  tale,  the  force  of political declaration, and  the power  of  linguistic innovation within  the  new languages.
A final  work  is called The Story  of the  Stor­
ies (Beaverbooks, $t5.95). By the Jewish South African novelist Dan  Jacobson, it is an  account not  simply   of  the  Old   and   New   Testaments, but   of  the  making of  the  two ;  Jacobson   sees them   not   as  divine etchings but   as  social  fic­ tions: that is, as constructed tales  and histories, by  which an  entire culture  articulates  its  own moral code  and  its  consequent expectations of God.  It is not  just  that the  Jewish and  Chris­ tian  writers pursued moral stories, but  also  that  the   rhythms  of  the   Bible   reflect   the   cyclical historical view  of  the  culture.  In  method  this is  a   novelist's  book,   narratively   argued.   No greater  contrast  with    Frye's    formal  method could  perhaps be  imagined, yet  there   is a  sur­ prising overlap in  their  response  to  the  fact  of recurrence itself-which  invites  further  com­  parison, both  of stance and  of  substance.  Both
 writers take  as  their  subject the  shaping  inter­ relation  between  the   Bible  and   Western  cul­  ture; one  finds  that society  shapes a myth, the other that the  myth  shapes  a society. For  both, the  medium is literature, which  criticism serves.

W.N.
