. -	\
' .,.... .	$1.00 per .copy :


. . 	.
CANADA

-·
 CANADIAN LITERATURE
 TU.
 R..	E-


\::-"

I   '   '•),_)\         '"'\
 N°·13







..
:-
' 	THE .Y.EJI.R 1-N··. FRENCH (JtNJIDJI
 

...,

...
 

Chrro111iclie ·- . .
 •	; ,.'       • 	I  -

.....	.-·
 ·. ;;( ...-  .-,	'•;J

				Attidf	f	' .. 	. .	.
1
:j 	.	_·:··,: .
?	- .	. ··	•

· B;.  AU "m..#:·s.E• .READ;JoA- HiivE;
F_RANK DAVEY; MICHAEL R. BOqT:H<    · -_	:, '\	.:. 	.  '•,
•   •  •	.•·	- 	;<  •     ,_ 	',:	..t.':: .,•	•   ,"' 	•    •  •	I
.· ?: _	··  -   ev e:Vtffl	. ;	·· -· ·- · 	-- ::: 	··
 


• .  . I) .
.· 	.  .  .:. r
 

'l  ;·
,·  :.


. I
-l

·;

·.
 .  BY E. E. BOSTETTER.G   ¥.0-.BOtyEiriN ·wi	. ,·
MAJIG_-1'\,RET LAU;RENQE,'FR;EP CO SLi.,GiJlW GE
AND  IV!'BERS 	.	.·	"*  \ .	.  .  .   . .  ,.	·;·  . ..	.

..
	.. : _   .-·:.. BY :SUG_il	NNA,-
:ij-

.·.	. J.!:J'il'D OTIs
-   ·	::.
.
J 	-

..:. ...	r	.	.



.     .	,	. -  ..' //·-:i:<,;- -- --
 

· .'·
 ..	' .
.	':.•


> _:·.- ·· ... .
... ' -- <:
 


. \   •.
\ •

,, r·</ ··	A .-QUARTERLY- .OF..  -::- · ·::-  · ::··   .· -,.,
:.--- :-	·REViEW	, ,  : .· ..

. .'   .
 "."I .  . , 	0	.	, )• • :.    . 	,.
 ....

.	"· .
 . .
.  ..	i
 


•• •      !
·.  ---: ... :.   :..
.
 . •.  . !
,
. .	. ·...  -...
-      -j





t
l




CELEBRATIONS OF HARVEST




THE WORLD OF CULTURE, like the world of primitive  religion, moves in  the  ritual  cycle of the year. Spring, fall and  winter, seedtime,  harvest and Yule, are the times when publishers and other farmers of the art perform their rites, with as much  apparent faith in the magic of the seasons as any cultivator  of the  zodiac-ridden   East.  To  complete  the  antique  pattern, we observe also the higher rites of annual  reckoning, when the Brahmins in their proper spheres award prizes, prepare  anthologies  and  bibliographies,  and  grandly  judge and  celebrate the harvest of the year.
This  year Canadian  Literature  plays its Brahminical  role in the great ritual by assuming  the responsibility of judgment  for the University of British Columbia's Medal  for  Popular  Biography.  Unfortunately  our  reading  of the  biographies  of
1961 produced  a result which gives a tone of anti-climax  to this announcement;
we decided  to make  no award  at all for the year. Those readers who remember our editorial of two years ago, "On  the Cultivation of Laurels", will not be entirely surprised at this judgment.  We have always contended that awards, when they are given  at  all,  should  be  clear  indications  of exceptional  merit.  As  the  Canada Council  recognized  when it took over the Governor-General's Medals, to give an award  merely for the best book of the year is pointless, since it may be a good deal worse  than  the  fifth-best  book  of  the  preceding year.   Without  a  continuing standard of excellence any  award  loses its meaning. This  at least is the attitude we have taken.  1961  was a year of near-famine  in the publication  of biography, and  we found  no book among  the lean and  withered  crop  that  stirred  our  col­ lective  admiration enough  to  regard  it as exceptional.  We  can  only hope  that
1962's biographers  will have cultivated  their gardens more propitiously.


3

EDITORIAL



MEANWHILE   CELEBRATIONS OF ANOTHER  KIND,  in  the  form of published estimates of the year's achievements, are proliferating  in many directions. The  Canadian  Annual Review, published by the University of Toronto Press  ($I 5.00), has  now  appeared  for  a  second  year  under  the  editorship  of John T. Saywell, so that we can regard it as an established feature of annual publishing. It is an ambitious survey of many fields of Canadian life, from politics to sport,  and  roughly  a fifth of its pages are  devoted  to cultural  activities in a rather  broad  sense, including literature,  music, art,  theatre,  radio  and  television. The  Review  has grown in size since its first year, but  not  uniformly  in quality. In  I g6o, for instance, literature  was admirably  discussed by Milton  Wilson, and there were intelligent comments on the quality of radio and television programmes. In  Ig6I   the discussion of literature,  no longer by Professor Wilson, has declined to  factual  narrative   ruined  by insensitive comment   (the  short  works of Lowry and Salinger, we are told, "form one whole"!) And the accounts of radio and television have  become  almost completely concerned  with  the  politics of  broad­ casting.
It seems, from looking through  the rest of The  Canadian  Annual  Review, that
such  fields as  politics and  the  national  economy  have  been  far  more  compre­ hensively and capably dealt with than the arts and related subjects. This may well be because the editor himself is at home in these fields while-from his extremely spotty choice of commentators -he quite evidently is not at home in  the world of culture.  Perhaps  what  we still need is a good  Year  Book of the Arts run  by people who really know about  them,  with a group  of  commentators chosen not merely for their ability to mug up facts, but also for  their critical perception  and their  power to present lucid and brightly written  accounts  of significant happen­  ings in  their own fields. I suggest it to Canadian  publishers as a suitable  Rite of Spring for I963.

IN FRENCH   CANADA, something  very near  to what  I  am  sug­ gesting is being done in  the field of literature. It is an  annual  critical survey of French-language books edited by Adrien Theria; the first issue, Livres at  Auteurs C anadiens I g6 I, priced at $I, has just appeared, and  I gather  that it  hhad  a wide sale of almost  I o,ooo  copies, which  emphasizes  the  comparatively  greater interest  that  literary  topics arouse in French  as compared  with  English Canada. It is a substantial  work, a hundred  pages of magazine format,  and it includes not only complett   bibliographies,  but  also reviews by  good  critics of every book of literary  significance  published  in  French-Canada  during   the  year.

4



EARLE BIRNEY  AND
THE COMPOUND GHOST





Paul West





No POMP OR  POET's POSE'  ju.t a tall, sell-contained sell­
analyst dominating the lectern and mixing shrewd points with occasional smiling
mutiny,  as if to suggest a terrible soul beneath: not professional or vatic, but  a gently wild man  born in Calgary  in 1904.  That  is how he must have appeared, as lecturer  and  reciter,  during  a multitude  of performances  in  North  America, Japan, Mexico,  India  and  London.  It is typical of him  that  he should speak of "saying"  his poems, display a genial regard  for beer-parlours  and  write, he sup­ poses, to prevent  himself from going mad.
The  poet  in  this poet-professor  has always delightedly fastened  upon  the un­
familiar: not to show off with, not because the Pacific Coast bores him or because he finds the ordinary  too difficult, but  because he has always been something  of an animist. For him the temperate  Canadian pastoral kept leaping into pageantry, bestiary and  something  close to the heraldic.  We could liken him to his favourite Chaucer: voracious for the detail of contemporary  life and  yet, while musing on and exposing foible, lunging  after ghosts, the miraculous or the shimmering time­
less. The  Birney of "Anglosaxon  Street" is an inspector of human  customs:


Then by twobit magic unlock picturehoard, soaking bleakly
 to muse in movie, or lope to alehall,
in beer, skittleless.



Home again to hotbox
in slumbertrough adding
 and humid husbandhood, sleepily to Anglekin.


The  pastiche disguises nothing: this is the flavour of Chaucer  but with more feel


5

1

EARLE BIRNEY



for  the  motion  of life than  Chaucer has;  the  method  is compactly allusive,  as if he wants  to transform everything. And  the key to Birney's  power,  as to the disci­ plines  and  rigours  he  has imposed  on  himself,  is his urge  towards myth. This  is why  his Canadian pastorals  never  quite  succeed. Because  he  is a lover  of  myth,  he tends  naturally to the dislocated  reality  of mountaineering and  the lost reality of the  Indians: for instance,  the  title-poem  of his first book  of poems, David  and Other Poems  ( 1942)  is peculiarly  diffuse yet crammed with exact data. The  data  is placed exactly  nowhere:
One Sunday on Rampart's arete a rainsquall caught  us,
And passed, and we clung by our blueing fingers and bootnails
An endless hour in the sun, not daring to move
Till the ice had steamed from the slate. And David  taught  me.

How time on a knife-edge can  pass with  the guessing of fragments
Remembered  from poets, the naming of strata  beside one ....

One  might  call it the  inevitable Canadian metaphor, this siting  of particulars in the  vast  blank.  And   whatever one  calls it-whatever  it  tells  us specially  of Canada-it  keeps falling  short.  Supposed  to refer  universally because  it is of no region, it misses the suggestive power of such lines as these of Eliot:

Summer surprised us, coming over the Starnbergersee With a shower of rain; we stopped in the colonnade, And went on in the sunlight, into the Hofgarten....

Eliot's  two tent-pegging references-the colonnade and  the Hofgarten-compli­ cate  reality   all  over  again; they  restore  whole  worlds  to  us,  whereas   Birney's descriptive sequence  followed  by  that  not  very  firm  allusion  to  the  poets  merely insulates   us.  We  have  to  set  to  work  in  order   to  get  beyond   the  phantoms of atavism, the primitive pattern.
Having objected to the  delicious  particulars of such  poems  as "David"  I have
also to  confess that  I find  the  philosophical Birney  (strong in  David  and  Other
Poems  and  repeated in more senses than  one in the second  volume, Now  Is Time,
1945)   just  as far  from  enlightening me as I find,  say,  the  Speech  of the  Salish Chief  in Trial  of a City  ( 1952)   a bit fusty, not a little fustian. Much  of the early Birney  is an  express  of vivid  description with  philosophical baggage to follow by the  next  train. There is no  synthesis;  but  in  his  deliberate habit   of  reprinting earlier  poems in the context of new ones there is an effort  meriting great sympathy. It is Birney  trying  to put  a world  together: now  blurring with  general  ideas,  now thrusting detail   (either  urban  or  pastoral) into  the  middle of  philosophising. He

6

EARLE BIRNEY



cannot keep  the  pastoral intact, he  knows,  and  the  presence  in  Now  Is Time, which  is mostly war  poems and  excellent ones at that,  of philosophical poems from David  warns   us  that   he  is  groping after  something:  a  fusion,  an  amalgam, a compound. Again,  in  The  Strait  of  Anian  ( I948)   he  juxtaposed his poetic  past and  his present, and  in Trial  of a City turned  to satirical fantasy and  recaptured the mordant note of some poems in David.
This  progress  is worth   pursuing in  further detail: it  crazy-paved the  way for what  is Birney's  finest  and  most  recent  achievement, Ice Cod  Bell or Stone', the very title  of which  suggests  a miscellany  rammed together; a reconcilable quartet. He  has  approached it  by  finding  various  modes  of expression  variously  unsatis­ factory. First,   the  remote   and  straitened reality  of  "David" in  which  the  con­ versations  seemed  hardly   artificial enough: "but he  cried,  louder,  'No,  Bobbie!  Don't ever  blame  yourself; You  can  last.'  He  said only,  'Perhaps ... For  what? A wheelchair, Bob?'" Then the  war  poems, with an  imagery that knocks  us over before we have time to assume any attitude at all:

The clusters of children, like flies, at the back of messhuts, or groping in gravel for knobs of coal,
their legs standing like dead stems out of their clogs.

And  then  the  satirical semi-dramatic, the  vocal equivalent of myth: the  poet  is seeking again  the movement of conversation, trying to find  an idiom  and  inflexion to  partner the  jumble  he  has  now  acquired of Seal  Brother, Hell,  salmon,  sea­ wolves, the Tide  of the Thimbleberries, cetegrande, popcorn, "Narvik's blanching hulks", the  "rotograved lie",  the slug's "greentipped taut  horns  of  slime", "dying Bering,  lost in fog"  and  lilies growing  their  pungent  bulbs unprompted.

AFTER A  SILENCE  of ten  years he finds  his way  out  in Ice
Cod  Bell or Stone,  through a loose combination of voices. There is the deliberate
patience of the  professional gazer: as in "El  Greco: Espolito":

The  carpenter is intent  on the pressure of his hand on the awl, and the trick of pinpointing  his strength through  the awl to the wood, which is tough.

The   flat  tone  and   meticulous eye seem  to insulate  the  horror from  us without,


' McClelland  and Stewart,  Toronto, $3.50.

7

EARLE BIRNEY



oddly enough, soothing  us one bit. The  point  is well taken  because  we are allowed no guesswork. Because  we are  not  the  intended victims  (not  on  that  wood  any­ way)   Birney  deprives  us of vicarious  pain.  Contrast this  cool  recital  with  such ventriloquism as the following:
Ah but I saw her ascend up in the assendupping  breeze

There  was a cloudfall of Kewpids their glostening buttums twankling

That comes  from  a  poem  called  "Mammorial Stunzas for  Aimee Simple McFarcin"; not  far  from  Eliot's  Aristophanic melodrama, but  closer  than  Eliot ever  is to illustrious vernacular and  rendered with  a Dickensian relish for carica­ ture. Just  listen to this:
Jesus man what did you expect
Queen Liliuokalani spreadeagled  on a tapa mat? Sure they got a farm in Diamond  Head crater  this a big place state cap world tour-
but any guy dont like Waikiki say we got
more catamarans  surfboats fishspearin palmclimbin than all them natives saw in a thousand
years waitin around for us okay maybe the hula aint

The  book  displays  three  principal idioms: cool meditation studded with  vivid detail,  and  pastiche  of raw  vernacular; these  tend  to slide  into  each  other  when the  poet  is empathising hard  or really wanting the contrast of two points of view. The   third  is represented by a few  poems  in  foundering, chaotic typography the point   of  which-presumably  visual  enactment-escapes me  almost   entirely. All three  idioms,  however,  tell us a great  deal  about Birney  the rebel.  He  is repu­ diating the  professorial  sage, the mug tourist  and  (I think) the Birney who shrinks  from  typographical trickery  and  therefore forces  himself  to  attempt it.  There is no  need   to  choose  between  Birney  the  eloquent and   reflective  intelligence and Birney  the mimic; in each role he is anxiously  trying  to relate himself  to the world
-and with  gratifying  success, all  the  more  so  when  he  deepens  a  poem  by transcending while evoking the academic mode:

Lo as I pause in the alien vale of the airport fearing ahead the official ambush
a voice languorous and strange as these winds of Oahu calleth my name and I turn to be quoited in orchids....

8

EARLE BIRNEY



The  mimicry  is the  fact,  more  or less, and  the comment  is the endlessly interpret­
ing mind.  Sometimes they are sandwiched in an impacted conversation:

But  arent  there  towns in Mexico  more av-? Dear madam, Actopan is a town more average than mean.
You may approach  it on a sound macadam....

Always,  however,   whether or  not  the  mimicry  is full-blooded or  tame,  the  con­ versations  -like the  personae, the  academic-sounding exercises,  the  brilliant vig­ nettes  of Japan, Mexico,  Siam,  are  metaphors for  the  essential  loneliness  of any articulate observer.  The  mimicry is the lunge out of oneself, the effort  to transpose  oneself without however  losing the advantages of intelligence.
Ice  Cod  Bell or Stone  is a conspectus  of the  poet's  honesty  while  he strives  to be  more  than   a  tourist  in  a  world  of gaudy  surfaces  and  fraying skins. No-one anywhere is treated more  impersonally than  the tourist,  and  this  book is a record of being  a geographical and  spiritual tourist.  Observe  the  names,  weird  and  un­ friendly, which  populate the  Mexican reservation  in this volume: Najarit, Ajijic, Irapuato, Pachucan, Tepoztlan, Tehauntepec. This  poet  responds acutely  to the out-of-the-way; apart from  the  twelve  poems  about  Mexico,  which  must  almost all of them  rank  among his best, there  are many  novel themes  or points  of  depar­ ture: a  bear  on  the  Delhi  road,  Captain Cook,  El Greco,  a tavern by the Helle­ spont,  Ellesmereland, Kyoto,   a  Bangkok   boy,  two  poems   by  Mao  Tse-Tung, Wake  Island, Honolulu, Yellowstone,  and  (that telling mutilation)  Aimee  Simple McFarcin. By contrast the  few Canadian poems seem less mature:  quiet  demon­ trations of  fidelity  tucked   in  between   bouts  with  seductive  haunts  where  life is more  intense.
Yet  I do  not  think   Birney  yields  to  the  meretricious or  pursues novelty  for
novelty's   sake   (except  typographically).  In   one  poem   called   "Can. Lit."   he explains  that

We French,  we English, never lost our civil war, endure it still, a bloodless civil bore;
no wounded  lying about, no Whitman  wanted. It's only by our lack of ghosts we're haunted.

It is precisely  that  lack  of ghosts  which  emerges  in  the  Canadian poems  in  this collection  and   which  handicapped the  early  Birney  until  he  went  to war.  Even this haunting poem  about a tree seems no more, finally, than  a punctuation mark added to a vast meaningless process:

9

EARLE BIRNEY



Then  the white frosts crept back. I took to slipping out when no one looked
and poured the steaming crescent of my pee
over the shivering body of my tree. That brown offering seemed to satisfy; a warm tan mounted  to her head.

The   tan  is a  substitute for  those ghosts. Significant too is the  poem  which  gives the title:

Explorers say that harebells rise from the cracks of Ellesmereland and cod swim fat beneath the ice that grinds its meagre sands
No man is settled on that coast
The  harebells are alone
Nor is there talk of making man from ice cod bell or stone.

It is all "say" and  "alone"; he evokes a land  of little  purchase. He is supposed  to deal  with  a  country upon  which  the  history  of  man's failures   and   triumphs  is hardly   even  recorded. Phantom hypotheses  make  a  poor  show  alongside those
who
... came chattering  and dust-red from Asia
to these wharfstones, a tipsy Xenophon  in tow.... or that  small Japanese boy with his kite:
tall in the bare sky and huge as Gulliver
a carp is rising golden and fighting thrusting its paper body up from the fist of a small boy on an empty roof higher and higher into the winds of the world.

"It is not  easy  to free",  one  poem  says, "myth from  reality"; we  might  have expected that  from  Birney. It is no surprise  either  that  he appears with  just a few poems  on  a  country whose  main  reality  is the  Great Outdoors, and  then  seeks ballast  in  more  storied  countries. And  yet,  even  allowing  that  he  has  a  distinct point  to make  about being  at home  abroad and  yet never  belonging there,  I feel somewhat uneasy  about  Ice  Cod  Bell or Stone. I feel  prompted to ask:   Has  he done  as ingeniously,  as vividly, as boldly, by Canada as he might  have  done?  All great  northern boredoms  and  ice vacancies  apart, surely  this raw  material from

10

EARLEBffiNEY



the  only  poem  about modern North  America  could  have  yielded something more arresting:

wordswords are oozing and ooshing from the mouths of all
your husbands saying SPACEWAR and FIGGERS DONT and EGG
inter
HEADS   and   WY  and   plashing on  the 		of	national plastic
buses and dribbling on barbecues the slick floors of
autocourts  saying W ALLSTREET saying BIGSTICK and TAXES
and REDS

The  acerb  satires  of Cummings and  Irving  Layton  are  more  carefully calculated than  this.  Birney  is quick  to point  out  that  Mexican  strawberries resemble  "small clotting hearts"; but is there  no Canadian version of that, or of this?

El Capitan Jas6n Castilla y Mordita
shoulders his golden braiding through the shitten air, rolls in a fugue of sporting up the Street
of Games -crossing the already strabismic
eye of the chess-carver tiptapping in his brick cave-and swings at the Lane of Roses....

The English  poet,  D.  J. Enright, has written  of modern Japan in the  same  kind of idiom: raw,  discordant, with  close-ups that  carry  a climate and  generalizations that  go sour  even  while  being  made. But Enright has written, in that same  idiom, about  the  English  Black  Country. Surely  when a poet has so brilliant a technique as Birney  has, it is a pity that  he doesn't  focus on the homely palpable, the squalid next-door.
I can't help  thinking Ice  Cold  Bell or Stone  a bit of a poet's  holiday; I might even  say  an  excursion  into  idyll-not  idyll in the  absolute  sense  but, compara­ tively speaking, idyll in  the  sense that  the  exotic  (as  Byron  proved)  makes  more  impact for  less work.  In  other  words,  Birney  has got  a start  from  the exotic  and redeemed  himself  by  displaying so  magnificent a  technique  that  we  know   he never  needs  the exotic  anyway. The over-familiar will serve him just as well;  and  it  is surely  the  over-familiar that  the  poet  has  to teach  us  to see  as if  we  have never  encountered it before.  Here  is a man  who has gone abroad and  shot  scores of zebras,  impala and  elephant because,  it seems, his guns cannot touch  moose.
All  the  same,  I can  see  why  Birney  does as he does.  Poets  please  themselves anyway. And  those  Mexican ghosts enable  him to inherit myth  while dealing with

I I

EARLE BIRNEY



daily  reality  whereas  Birney the  Canadian realist  inherits only  a few vague  side shows:

0 mammoma we never forguess you and your bag blue sheikel getting
loused, lost from all hallow Hollowood 0

Aimee Aimee Tekel Upharsin

Birney's   Mexico   is  dry,  foetid,   fly blown, lottery  optimistic,

Wholehearted  Aztecs used this isle for carving out the cores of virgins. Cortes, more histrionic, purified it
with a fort and modernized the Indians
in dungeons contrived to flood each time the tide was high.

History  has bled to death  there,  but so it has in Rome, and  there  is much  in Rome that  is not  imperial. It  may  be an advantage to a poet  to have  a theme  with  the grandeur or  pain  of history about  it, but  it should  not  be an  essential.  Otherwise the  poet  will become  a mere  historiographer. In  one of his best poems the  Italian poet  Eugenio Montale makes highly effective  use of a popular song, "Adios Muchachos";  Eliot's throbbing  taxi  is  sinisterly   eloquent  and   so  are   Pound's excerpts from  headlines. If modern Canada has no legend,  then  the opportunities for  imagism are  considerable. Present  the  thing,  for  once,  in  terms  of itself.


IFEEL SUPPORTED in these  thoughts by Birney's  own  practice as a novelist.  I am  thinking  not so much  of Turvey ( 1949), his military  comedy,
but  of the less applauded Down the Long Table  (I 955), which  is primarily con. cerned   with  Leftist  activities  in  Toronto and  Vancouver. It opens  with  a  public hearing where  Professor Saunders, tired  Canadian radical and  specialist  in medi<e val  English  at  a Mormon college in Utah, is denying un-American activities.  But once  a  rebel.  . . . The  novel  plods  back  over  his picaresque career:  as a young lecturer, quitting both  Mormon college  and  pregnant mistress;  pursuing a Ph.D. in Toronto; muddled politics, muddled love, bumming across  Canada on freight trains in  order   to start  a Third International in  Vancouver;  donnishly quizzing the  layabouts of  the  South  Vancouver Workers' Educational  Army; eventually

!2

EARLE BIRNEY



returning to  Utah,  respectability and  a  safe  chair   (now  having  his doctorate) . With   less documentary purpose  and  more  panache this  might  have  been  a  dis­ turbing and  savage  book. Birney separates his chapters with  excerpts  from news­ papers,  and  this  Dos  Passos  technique surely  belongs in  his poetry  too. It  proves he has some feeling for life's miscellaneous  and  kaleidoscopic  quality and therefore too  for  such  techniques as we find in  poets as different as Eliot,  William Carlos Williams  and  Pound. (Obviously Birney has enjoyed  and  learned from  his Joyce; Aimee  Simple  McFarcin comes  to us by that  route.)   Down  the  Long  Table  also reveals  a  flair,  as  I suggested   earlier  apropos of  "Anglosaxon  Street", for  the motion  and  feel of life:  a wilder  Chaucer. And  this flair, combined with  the  by no  means  idealizing or  evasive  eye intently turned on  Mexico  in  Ice  Cod  Bell or Stone, is just what  most Canadian poets lack. Irving Layton  is too self-consciously  tough; Jay  Macpherson and  James  Reaney  are  too  academic in  flavour; Louis Dudek, if anyone other  than Birney, has been close to what  I am  specifying,  and  his magazine Delta  regularly offers samples  of the right  thing,  although these are sometimes  carelessly put  together.
Birney  alone,  I feel,  at  present,  has  the  necessary equipment.  His  sense  of pageantry curbed by a gritty  realism,  he apprehends the squalid  or the dull  with visionary  zest. Take this, for instance, from  Ice Cod  Bell or Stone:

those ladies work at selling hexametric chili,
and all their husbands, where the zocalo is shady, routinely spin in silent willynilly
lariats from cactus muscles; as they braid they hear their normal sons in crimson shorts go shrilly

bouncing an oval basketball about the square-


The  power  of that  is not  in  the  exotica  but  in one phrase, "all  their  husban s",
_which suggests  in  the  echo  of  that  popular-song fragment-"where the  zocalo is shady" an  absolute, almost  preposterous vision of labour. All the  husbands (as in  the  poem  quoted earlier)  are  collected  up  and  frozen  into  a  helix  of  work, rather like those streams of soaring  and  diving souls in William  Blake's  drawings. It is a microcosm: mysterious women  obedient  to occult  routine; their  husbands, all  of  them,   animated by  something heavy -all  the  suet  in  suetude; and   the "normal" sons not  yet conscripted but  devising their  timekiller  just the same. It is a  most  original and  graphic piece of summary poetry: tough  enough  to stand a little experiment I tried  by altering a few words:

EARLE BIRNEY



Those ladies work at selling Pentagonic  jelly,
and all their husbands, where the conifer is shady, routinely spin in silent willynilly
lariats of smoke from new Havanas; as they fume they
hear their normal sons in boxer shorts go shrilly bouncing an oval basketball across the border -
A small  homage to Birney  the  satirist.  But  a  presumption and  defensible  only because  I think  poetry  ought  almost  always  to be contaminated by the great  deal of  our  living  that is ugly, awkward or  vapid. Ice,  cod,  bell and  stone  belie  the book,  are   more   pastoral   than the  symbols Birney manages  best, and   more Canadian-sounding than  the book's contents. They  remind us that  the most characteristically Canadian thing  is the  Canadian landscape; cities, on the  other hand, merge  together. One  would  like to see Birney  at  the  automat or the super­ market; if he  can  tackle  a diaper, as he does  in  the  present  collection, then  the rest  is easy. Our civilization  is unlikely  to restore  itself to a life based  exclusively on ground-roots and  the pasturing of animals.
Let  us hope  that  Birney's  proposed  trips  to the  Caribbean and  Latin  America are  intended  to  give  him  an  objective  view  of  the  home  image,  for  a  graphic synopsis to come,  with  the whole of the world  jumbled  together on the poet's  own planet. Ice Cold  Bell or Stone  marks a tremendous access of vision and  technique, and  proves  that  the  lack of ghosts is, properly speaking, immaterial to a  poet  as
good as this.












;-

;'


'



THE ACTOR'S   EYE

Impressions of
Nineteenth-century Canada




Michael R. Booth


EMOST   OF   ITS  THEATRICAL  HISTORY,   Canada has  been
dependent on  British  and  American actors.  In  fact,  in  the  earlier   part  of  this
history  she would  have  had  no actors  at all were it not for adventurous travelling companies, since the few Canadian actors of merit who appeared in the nineteenth century  sought  their  living  in the  United  States; even if they had  stayed  at home there  would  not  have  been  enough  of them  to keep  a single  theatre open.  The kind   of  actor   who  came   into  Canada  during this  period   was  something of  a pioneer,  for even in the cities acting  could be a hazardous and  difficult occupation. The   records  left  by  several  touring players  constitute an  interesting account of the theatres they acted  in and the towns and villages they passed through; their impressions  collectively  provide  a vivid picture  of contemporary Canadian theatri­ cal conditions as well as an  observant commentary on Canadian life.
At  the  beginning of  the  nineteenth century, Montreal, Quebec, and  Halifax
were  the  only  towns  with  theatres  (or  what  passed  for  them), and  even  here performances were  irregular; several  years  might  pass  between   visits of  profes­ sional  troupes. John Lambert noted  of the  theatres in Quebec and  Montreal that  "the persons  who  perform, or rather attempt to perform  there,  are  as bad  as the worst  of  our  strolling actors; yet  they  have  the  conscience  to  charge   the  same price,  nearly,   as  the  London  theatres."•  Quebec was  better  off  than   Montreal because  of the  presence  of the  garrison  amateurs, but  only two of these "did  not murder the  best scenes  of our  dramatic poets."  Boys performed the  female  parts  ("despicably low") as there  was only one actress, "an old s_uperannuated  demirep, whose  drunken  Belvideras, Desdemonas, and  Isabellas,  have  often  enraptured a Canadian audience."" The arrival  of a company from  Boston under  the direction

THE ACTOR'S EYE



of  Luke  Usher  improved matters, but  Lambert doubted whether the  citizens  of
Quebec were  willing  to spend  enough  money  to support professional  theatricals.
The   English  actor,  John  Bernard, visited  Montreal in  1810, reaching it after a road  trip  which  he described  with horror. He  found  a company "as  deficient  in talent  as in numbers," but  acted  for it with  great  success. "The houses proved  all good,  and  my own  [benefit] was an overflow,  an assurance to me what  Montreal could   do  for  a  manager when  any  proper   inducement was  offered  to  it."3  In Quebec he  had  similar  success, in spite  of having to  perform "in  a  paltry  little room  of  a  very  paltry  public-house, that  neither in  shape  nor  capacity merited the  name  of theatre."4  Bernard  considered opening a theatre in Quebec himself, but  felt that  he would  provide  unfair  competition with  the army  amateurs.
In   the  twenty   years  after   1825,  Montreal  established itself  as  the  theatrical
centre  of Canada, and  was visited during this  period  by such  names  as Edmund Kean,  Madame  Vestris,  Edwin  Forrest,  Charles Kean,  Charles and   Fanny Kemble, Tyrone Power,  Ellen Tree,  Celine Celeste,  Louisa  Drew,  James Wallack, and  William   Macready. Unfortunately, none  of these  performers (with  one  ex­ ception)  left  any  impression   of  acting   in  Canada. The   exception   was  Fanny  Kemble, who  had  acted  in  Quebec and  Montreal in  1833. She  wrote  in  1834 to Charles Mathews, then  in the United  States,  in answer  to his request for infor­  mation  about  Canadian conditions. Her  letter  is worth  quoting at some length.


Vincent  de Camp  had  the theatres  there, and  (truth is truth) of all the horrible strolling  concerns  I  ever  could  imagine,  his company,  and  scenery, and  gettings up, were  the  worst. He  has  not  got  those  theatres  now,  I  believe;  but  they are generally opened only for a short time, and by persons as little capable of bringing forward  decent  dramatic  representations  as he, poor fellow! was.... Our  houses were good; so, I think, yours would be:  but, though  I am sure you would not have to complain  of want of hospitality, either in Montreal  or Quebec,  the unspeakable dirt  and  discomfort  of the  inns, the  misery of the  accommodations,  the  scarcity
of eatables, and  the abundance of eaters (flies, bugs, &c.) together with the wicked dislocating  road  from  St. John's  to La  Prairie,  would,  I  fear, make  up a sum of suffering, for which it would be difficult, in my opinion,  to find an adequate com­ pensation.  In  the summer time the beauty of the scenery going down the St. Law­ rence to Montreal, and of the whole country round Quebec, might in some measure, counterbalance the  above  evils. But  unless Mrs.  Mathew's and  your own  health were tolerably  good at  the  time, the  daily and  hourly  inconveniences  which  you would have to endure, would, in my opinion, render  an expedition  to the Canadas anything  but  desirable. The  heat,  while we were in  Montreal, was intolerable­ the  filth  intolerable-the flies intolerable-the  bugs  intolerable-the  people

16

THE  ACTOR'S EYE



intolerable.  I lifted  up  my hands  in thankfulness  when I set foot again  in "these United  States."  The  only  inn  existing  in  Montreal  was burnt  down  three  years ago, and everything you ask for was burnt down in it.5


By the  middle   of  the  century, theatrical activity  had  been  extended into  the country towns  and  villages,  and  while  acting  in the cities became  more comfort­ able  and  audiences larger,  the  same  inhospitable conditions that  Fanny  Kemble  complained of could  be found  almost  anywhere outside  Montreal6,  Quebec, and  Toronto7,  although audiences were often  enthusiastic and profits often  good.




0NE OF  THE  MOST ENTERTAINING and  observant accounts of a tour  which  encountered these conditions was written  by an amateur, Horton
Rhys,  who  wagered five hundred pounds  with  a friend  in England that  he would make five hundred pounds profit  (aside  from living expenses)  during a year's trip as actor  and  singer  in  any  country other  than  Great  Britain  or Ireland. He  was allowed  to  take  with  him  any  actress  who  had  not  appeared in  London,  Liver­ pool,  or  Manchester  at  the  time  of  the  bet.  Rhys  chose  North  America, and  opened  in Boston  in  May,  1859, acting  under  the name  of Morton  Price.  For his programme he  used  skits  and  entertainments written   by  himself   (including an operetta, All's  Fair in  Love  and  War), songs  and  dances,  and  three  standard farces.  In six months he had  won his bet.
Rhys  began  the  Canadian part  of his tour  at Quebec (which he found  "at  all times  a dull-looking place")  in the  Music  Hall  on St. Louis Street  ("a wretched contrivance"). The   house  grossed  $250,  apparently a  good  sum  for  the  town. Rhys  was  depressed   by  the  trip  from  Quebec to  Montreal. "Wood and  water, water  and  wood,  wretched hovels, squalid  people, dirty children, mangy  pigs, and emaciated cattle   are  all  you'll  see in  the  dreary  length  between   the  Scylla  and Charybdis of  Quebec and   Montreal."8  In  Montreal he  noticed   the  low  social status  of actors  in  Canada, explaining that  they "are  a little  too much  of the fly­ by-night order" to warrant any  respect.  In  Ottawa the  reception was good, but  the  troupe had  to play  in an  uncomfortable converted  chapel. In  Kingston Rhys likewise found no theatre or concert  hall, and  performed in the city hall for three nights.  He  thought Kingston a dreary  town  where  shops  all closed at seven,  and the  eyes  of  their  proprietors at  eight.  The   cats  of Kingston, though,  were  "the

THE  ACTOR'S EYE



most  rampaginous   crew  I  even  had  the  misfortune  to  listen  to".  The  "lower orders" of Kingstonians  ("principally Irish and Scotch") were "very dirty and discontented,  and most prolific". The second visit to the city was more profitable, as it took place in Great Exhibition week. The group acted in The Sons of Temperance Hall on a stage so cramped  that from it one could shake hands with everybody in the reserved seats. Audiences were large, however, and cracked nuts and  ate  apples  "like sensible people." Here  Rhys took $450  in four  nights, but had  to cancel the Saturday  night performance,  as the Exhibition  had ended  that afternoon  and only three people turned  up. One of them, a man who had ridden twelve miles for the occasion, commented disgustedly, "Al-ways said as this Kings­ town  was the d-st hole out west, and now I know it!  Ga way, hoss !"
Whereas in Kingston Rhys was at least able to praise fine buildings, Belleville aroused contempt.  "Of all the melancholy, miserable, misanthropic-looking  places I ever saw, Belleville is the beau ideal." The  theatre  was so new that  it consisted only of lath and plaster, yet cost $50 a night to hire. After two nights at this rent, Rhys moved to a hotel dining room for his third. Following profitable appearances in Cobourg,  Port Hope, and Peterborough  (none of which had a proper theatre), the  company  moved on  to Toronto, "the  handsomest  town  we have  yet seen." Rhys greatly  admired  the streets, shops, gardens,  churches,  public  buildings and hotels. Regrettably,  there was only business enough  for one night, and  Rhys con­ cluded that he "didn't care much about Toronto; there was too much assumption of exclusiveness, without  just grounds  to go on."  Six performances in  Hamilton  at the Mechanics' Hall and the Templars'  Hall were an improvement on Toronto, but Rhys was puzzled by the town.


Hamilton is  curiously  inhabited. There are  more  Englishmen there  without any apparent occupation, and  living  upon  apparently nothing, than  in any other  town in  Canada. They  seem  to  be  an  exiled  lot,  always  looking  out  for  and  expecting something that  never  turns  up ... in short  I never  could  make  head or tail of them.


At St. Catherine's Rhys played in a hotel  on a stage  made  of all the  dining­ room  tables  put  together.  The  sole entrance  to the stage  was from  the  kitchen on a board  perilously balanced on two buckets. The audience  was "the most queer of all queer audiences ... one foot in the grave and the other in bandages." The  dining room was free, but Rhys was so angry at the owner's charge of five dollars a  night  for  gaslighting  that  he left for  London  after  one  performance,  though booked for three.



THE  ACTOR'S EYE



Covering much   the  same  ground as Rhys  were Sam  Cowell,  one  of the  first music-hall stars,  and  his wife. Cowell  began  his Canadian tour  of songs, dances, and  farces  at  St.  Catherine's in  July,   I86o,  sending  reports to his wife, whore­ mained in the  United States  till September and  kept a diary  of their whole  North  American trip.  Cowell  did  well in Hamilton, Toronto, and  Montreal, and  when his wife  joined  him  they  took $95 I for four  nights in  Quebec, receipts  which  led Mrs.  Cowell  to write  thankfully, "Good   Canada! God save  the  Queen!" Three more  nights  in  Montreal on  the swing  back  into Ontario yielded  $480,  but  Mrs. Cowell's  jubilation disappeared at  Ottawa. Her description of their  arrival at the theatre is vivid:

Over  the wooden pavements,  and  no pavements, and deep ruts, and  thick pools of mud,  we picked our  way till we were in the fields. A great  building  towered over us. It was the 'New  Hotel'  which had been opened to accommodate  the Prince of Wales and suite, but was now shut up! Across a dismal road lay the Theatre. 'A rat­ hole below and  a swallow's nest above.'  We knocked in vain for  admittance,  for a long time. At last got into the den. Dismal crackling, brown 'evergreens' decorated the Theatre in the audience  part. The dust clogged one's throat,  and the gas leaked so badly that  half had  to be put out. -Sam dressed  half  in sight of the audience, and Miss German  had a cellar  (full of rats)  assigned to her.9


The  remainder of their  tour  in  Canada conveys a similar  impression  of  hard­ ships  encountered. In  Brockville,  there  was  "such  a  noisy set of  'roughs'  in  the gallery  that  Sam  not  only  had  to  talk  to  them,  but  declined having  the  gallery used at all the next  night  ... in consequence of this resolution, we had only $62 ." The  first night  in Kingston produced $105,  but  the next  night  only half  as much,

for  "being market day,  the  'dirty, stagnant little  town'  as it  is called,  was very busy,  but  the  business  hurt   the  concert,   as few  above  the  rank  of  shopkeepers
live in  Kingston  and  all were wanted in their  stores at night." Belleville depressed the  Cowells  as much  as it  had  Rhys  a year before,  "a  straggling, forlorn  looking little  town," with   the  same   monstrous scenery  of  "forest, forest,  forest,  in  all it  stages  of  decay" all  the  way  from  Kingston. Receipts  were poor  here,  but good  again  in  Toronto and  Hamilton. Mrs.  Cowell explained two  bad  nights  in St. Catherine's by describing it as "only a village, and apparently almost  a deserted one  now." Brantford was  much  better,  $2 I 5 in  two nights,  although "a  yelping dog was in, and  made  a great  outcry,  several times, during the evening which  hurt the  concert." Three performances in  London   produced $339; on  the  last  night "a  most fashionable audience ... there was great  enthusiasm." The  Cowells were

THE  ACTOR'S EYE



persuaded to  play  in  Ingersoll,  much  to  Mrs.  Cowell's  regret,  for  the  take  was low  ( $65 for two nights)  and the conditions frightful.

Violent  storm.  No gas in  Ingersoll, and  streets in  total  darkness.  Seeing nothing, and  drenched  with  rain,  we got  to  the  Hall.  ... The  Hall,  lighted  by oil, was desolate-looking  in the extreme.  No dressing rooms, and  a  platform  so frail  that it trembled  as they each got on it. A temporary  dressing-room was formed  by 'two uprights'  and a line across, on which was pinned  my double sized tartan  shawl as a curtain. -The railway rugs, etc. were called into requisition as window blinds, etc.

After  four  performances in Woodstock   ("no gas ... the  road  rather eccentric") and   Chatham, Mrs.  Cowell  remarked in  her  diary,  "it  will  be quite  a  relief  to get into  a city like Detroit, after  these half savage  villages."


A MORE CHEERFUL  ACCOUNT of another extended theatrical tour-this  one  of  Nova  Scotia  and   New  Brunswick   in  1866-was  published
anonymously in  the   r8go's,   under   the  title  of  Negro   Minstrelry-The  Old Fashioned  Troupes.10    The   author,  "prompted  by  a  wild  love  of  adventure," joined  a  minstrel   troupe  organized  in  Boston.  After  a  succession  of  poor  houses in  Maine, the  company  crossed  into  Nova  Scotia  from  Eastport to  Campobello Island. They  came  without  advance notice  and  were mistaken for  Fenian raiders because  of  the  bright  green  covering  of  their  double  bass, sighted  as their  boat approached the  shore.  The  islanders,  enrolled   in  the  militia  to  a  man,  greeted them   with  guns  and  pitchforks, but  the  misunderstanding was  cleared   up  and the performance successful.
In  Saint   John and  Fredericton  receipts  were  low;   the  company faced  ruin. In  Fredericton bailiffs  seized  the  baggage  and  musical  instruments, which  were released  after  the  intervention of a clever  lawyer.  But  the  manager was detained at  wharfside, and  avoided  his captors only by a desperate dive through the kitchen window   of  the  moving  paddlesteamer, landing "like  a  Brazilian   bat" smack  in a great  pan  of milk and  eggs which  the coloured cook and  his wife were  making into  bread  pudding. The  escape from  the  officers proved  only  a temporary relief. Receipts were  still  low in  Carleton, and  the  company disbanded. However, five of  them,   including the  author -a  violin,  cello,  cornet, and   two  end  men,  all doubling their  parts-resolved  to see what  they  could  do on  their  own  without the  expenses  of  a  large  group. They  advertised by  pasting  cheap wallpaper the

20

THE  ACTOR'S EYE



wrong  side out  on  fences  and  painting in huge letters  of red and  black such cap­ tions as "Go  and  See, This  Night,  the  Most  Wonderful Combination of  the 19th Century".
The first success of the  new  company-after failures  in  Windsor  and  Rants­
port-came  in  Wolfville.  The high  school  gymnasium was offered  free  on  the condition that  they  clean  it  up,  and  the  janitor  was put  on  duty  as ticket seller. After  the evening, the five men found  they had $go profit to divide  between  them, which  they partly  laid  out  on  the hire of two horses and  a wagon  large enough  to transport them  and   their  baggage  wherever  they  wanted to go.  With  the  trans­ action   came   the  driver, Jehu   Stevens,  who  had  apparently  overestimated  the strength of his team  and  wagon. The  next  day they set out, Nell wheezing  "as  if she  had  the  croup," Doctor with  "a  certain  misgiving  of  the  fetlocks,"  and  the "erratic conduct" of the  wheels alarming the passengers, who spent  much  of their
time   pushing. So  travelled  these  strolling   playe.rs in  Nova  Scotia  in  1866,  by means  which  had  been  unchanged for centuries  all over  the world.
Good   audiences turned  out   through  the   Annapolis  Valley,  although in
Lawrencetown

... we found  the inhabitants so suspicious of strangers that  although  the street in front of the hall was packed with people, not one would enter till the mail arrived; on the reception of which, however, and the perusal of an extended notice in the Bridgetown  paper  (written  by one of ourselves)  they dashed  for the door with an impetuosity almost sufficient to upset the ticket-seller.

In  Montangen, a French village on the Bay of Fundy, not only were the posters in  English  useless, but  also the  audience (attracted to the schoolhouse by a poster daubed hastily  with  extraordinary French)  did  not  understand that  they  had  to pay  to see the  show,  and  sat  patiently waiting  for it to  begin  while  the  "bones" man  addressed   them  pleadingly but  ineffectually in  English.  At  last  the school­ master,   the  sole  person  in  the  village  who  could  speak  English,  explained the situation, whereupon the  audience began  a mass stampede to the door  and  were only  persuaded to  stay  by  being  informed (through the  schoolmaster)  that  the company would  perform for  ten  cents  a head,  "after  which  the show  proceeded, apparently enjoyed  by our  strange audience as much  as if they  understood every word."
Success  continued. In  Yarmouth the  minstrels  played  to g,ooo  on  two nights. On  July  4th  their  wagon   was  wrecked  at  Port  Latour, and  the  only  "theatre" was  a  fish  house  without seats,  stage,  lamps,  or  windows.  However, the  whole

21

THE ACTOR'S EYE



male  population  was organized  into  a transport  train  until,  with  planks,  boxes, stools, flags, lamps, etc. "we had improvised quite a respectable opera house,"  and the "fishy redolence" was almost forgotten. To compensate for their pains, the minstrels charged  fifty cents, double price, for performing  on Independence Day, and  took $65.  After  Shelburne,  Jehu  Stevens  declined  to proceed  any  further, and  conveyances had to be procured  from day to day. At Lock's Island  the only hall  was filled with  merchandise,  but  the show  went  on happily in a large sail­ loft, with  Union  Jacks for dressing-room curtains  and  planks on empty  herring boxes for seats. The  first to arrive were three  beautiful  young ladies in  hats, lace, kid gloves, and  pearl-studded  lorgnettes, who insisted on paying a dollar each for "reserved"  seats. Their  appearance  in the sail-loft, calmly seated in the first row of  herring  boxes, astonished  the  company,  particularly   as  throughout the  per­ formance  they  intently  studied  the  actors  through  expensive  opera  glasses, al­ though they were only a few feet from them.
The  minstrels  found  Halifax  too  big  for  their  purposes,  and  so  played  the
mining  settlements  to the  north.  Mount  Uniacke  was "a  most miserable  place, with  none  of  the  comforts and  hardly  any  of  the  necessaries of life",  and  the miners and their families were "a wretched lot". A concert in "a shanty called the School House" was crowded, though unpleasant  for the author, as "a burly miner, with a big pistol in his belt, and sitting close to the low stage, amused himself with ejecting tobacco  juice over my polished boots." At Shubenecadie the troupe acted in  a  government  drill shed;  at  Renfrew  "we  almost  lost our  lives, owing  to an attack  on the  part  of  a ferocious army  of fleas." At Albion  the audience  in the Temperance Hall was composed of "rough  Scotch miners".
Eventually  arriving  at  Cape  Breton Island,  the  group  got a  hostile reception from the telegraph  operators of Plaster Cove, the terminal  of the Atlantic  Cable. These  men,  "the most  discourteous, supercilious  pack  that  we had  yet  en­ countered," were apparently  annoyed by "the  fact of our Yankee origin; surely an anomaly,  seeing that  Yankee capital  and  ingenuity  was the prime cause of their being so employed."  Such was their hostility that they turned  up at a performance in Port  Mulgrave  armed with rotten eggs, but were prevented from a demonstra­  tion by the timely presence of forty Yankee fishermen carrying  marlin-spikes, the crews of two Gloucester schooners who had  been informed  by the actors of their plight.
Following  this incident,  the minstrels profitably  retraced  much  of their  route, and  ended  the  summer's  tour  in Halifax.  In  his final  remarks,  the  anonymous author  commented  on the people he had met, differentiating "the  Blue-nose from

THE  ACTOR'S EYE



the Yankee". He was impressed  by the weight of social distinctions and  the rigidity of class lines in  Nova  Scotia,  and  especially interested in "the scion of aristocracy, who kills time  by lounging aimlessly around the streets and  attending daily service at  the  Episcopal church." This  sort of person's  contempt for anything American, matched by his admiration of anything English,  puzzled  the  writer:
Tell him that  his own land lacks "go-ahead-a-tiveness,"  that Yankee enterprise and Yankee  ingenuity  are  all  that  are  needed  to develop  its  neglected  resources, to make factories  spring  up along its disused water-courses, and  to awake its town to renewed  life and  vigour-and he will shrug  his shoulders  pityingly, as much  as to say, "We  leave you Yankees to the undisturbed  enjoyment of this bustle and confusion;  we are  content   to  jog along  in  the  ruts  which  our  ancestors  marked out for us, satisfied if only we dwell within the shadow of the crown."

To  the  theatrical  traveller in  pre-Confederation Canada  the  professional  en­ vironment  seemed   primitive  and   the   people  often   peculiar.   Nevertheless,  the seemingly   universal  badness   of  the  roads  and   the  makeshift nature  of   theatre buildings,   Temperance Halls,   Mechanics' Halls,  hotel  dining rooms,  and  other  substitutes for  a theatre and  a stage, did not deter  him from  acting anywhere that  audiences (many of them  enthusiastic) were to be had.  Without his comments we would  know  very little about theatrical conditions in Canada at this time, particu­ larly  the  conditions that  were  faced  in innumerable small  towns  and  villages far away from  the main  theatrical centres.



FOOTNOTES

' John  Lambert, Travels  through Lower  Canada   and  the  United States  of North
America  in the Years  rBo6, 1Bo7, and 1BoB (London, 1810),  I, 302.
2   Lambert,  I, 302.
3   John Bernard,  Retrospections of America  (New York, 1887), 355·

4   Ibid., 363. Another  traveller  to Quebec  said of the theatre  there  that  it "receives little encouragement from  the inhabitants; transient  people are its best supporters; it is but a very indifferent  building for scenic representations,  being only the upper apartment of a tavern,  with  so small an entrance  to  the audience  part  of it, that in the event  of fire the most dreadful  consequences must ensue." Jeremy Cockloft, Cursory  Observations Made in  Quebec ... in the  year rBII   (Toronto, 1960),  32.

5   Anne  Mathews,  Memoirs of Charles  Mathews  (London,  1938-39),  IV,  320-21. Needless to say, Charles Mathews did not act in Canada.

6  One  actor  who played in Montreal  in 1858 remembered  that  the summer  seasons there  were popular  with performers.  "There was a change  of bill every night, and

THE  ACTOR'S EYE



so the  work was heavy .... yet the Montreal season was thought to be most desir­ able,  enabling those  who  had  saved  money  during the  winter to hold  on  to  their  savings,  and   those  who  had  not  to  - well,  to  live.  Montreal is a  pleasant city. The  audiences, in  those  days,  were  responsive,   and   the   people  were  friendly."
J. H. Stoddart, Recollections of a Player  (New York, 1902), 115.
7   Even   then,   the  cities  might   not  always  be  comfortable for  players.  Writing of Toronto in  the  186o's,  Rose  Eytinge  recalled  that  "the weather was bitterly  cold, and  the  theatre was like an ice-house.  After  all these years  ... my memory  carries me  back  to  the  horror   of  that   dimly-lighted, freezingly   cold,  long,  narrow den which   was  miscalled   a  dressing-room." The  Memories of  Rose   Eytinge    (New York,  1905), 104.
8  Horton Rhys,  A  Theatrical Trip  for a Wager through Canada and  the  United
States  (London, 1861), 49·
9   M. Willson Disher, ed., The Cowells  in America (London, 1934)., 176.

'








WHAT HAPPENED
TO PAULINE?




Norman  Shrive







As EVERYONE INTERESTED in Canadian litemy history knows,  the  Pauline Johnson centennial was celebrated last year;  indeed, the more obvious  activities  connected with it took place during or close to her  birth-month, March, and  are  therefore well over a year into  the past.  But neither in  1961  nor in  the  time since  has  there  appeared in print-at least,  to my knowledge-any reasonably searching evaluation of the real place in Canadian letters  of this inter­ nationally famous  versifier and  story-teller. Marcus  Van  Steen's introduction to a new  McClelland and  Stewart edition  of  Legends  of  Vancouver  was inclined   to repeat   the  usual  commonplaces, although with  a  refreshing suggestion  of doubt  here  and   there.  Ethel   Wilson's memoir  in  Canadian Literature, delightful as it was, was really a book review of the same new edition.
Recognition of another type  was, of course,  ample.  It included a special  five­
cent  stamp, testimonial dinners, articles  in weekend  supplements and  pilgrimages to  Stanley   Park,  to  Mohawk Chapel and  to Chiefswood, the  old  Johnson home on  the  Grand River. The  International Conference on  lroquoian Studies, which drew  scholars  from  all over  North America to McMaster University, had  as part of its  three-day programme a  public  lecture  on  "The Place  of Pauline Johnson in   Canadiana".  Perhaps the   most  important  expression of  respect   for  Miss Johnson's memory   (judging by  the  dignitaries present)   was a special  dinner in Brantford. As  reported by  the  Expositor, "Chief   Red  Cloud   (Fred  Williams), with  his grandson, Little  White Bear  (Perry Williams), performed a number of traditional dances." Mohawk songs "were sung  by the  Wright Quartet", and "decorating the  tables  were  paper  models  of canoes  and  tepees". Miss  Ontario, of  the  Six  Nations Reserve,  was  there,  perhaps very  appropriately, and  so was

WHAT HAPPENED TO  PAULINE?



Dr.  George  F.  Davidson,  Deputy  Minister  of Citizenship  and  Immigration, to give the main  speech of the evening. Miss Jessie L. Beattie, author  of The  Split in  the  Sky, read her poem, "A  Message from  Pauline" (as her ardent  supporters invariably   refer  to  her),   and,  unaccountably, Mordecai   Richler  wandered   in, retaliating  a week or so later, one senses, for the discomfort  he felt, by writing a squib for Maclean's which, Miss Beattie told me, did not please her at all.
But  the  learned   journals  seemed  blandly  indifferent   to  Miss Johnson.   Yet Pauline  Johnson is material for interesting controversy. If we accept her as Indian (which,  technically  she was not, even when given her Indian  name, "Tekahion­ wake"), how did she and the people who claim her as their own differ from their brothers  and  cousins on the other side of a man-made border? What  necessarily makes her part  of Canadiana rather  than  of Americana  or of  North Americana?  And  then  there  is  perhaps  the  most  searching of  all  questions:   was  Pauline Johnson  really a poetess-Indian, Canadian, North American  or otherwise?
At  the  Brantford  dinner,  Dr.  Davidson,  deploring  the  fact  that  the  recently
published  Oxford  Book  of Canadian  Verse   contained   not  one  word  of  Miss Johnson's writings, took a verbal swipe at academic  critics who believed such an anthology  gave  " a truly  representative  and  completely  adequate picture  of all the  facts  of our  Canadian craft  and  skill in  this important literary  art  without including  a single word from the pen of the  person who, more than  anyone else, must  be  regarded  as the  main  truly  Canadian writer  of our  time."  But  many literary  scholars  would   disagree with   this   assessment of  Pauline Johnson.
A. J. M. Smith,  for example, the editor of that  same Oxford Book  of Canadian
Verse   and  himself a poet of international reputation, suggests that  although  the poetry of Miss Johnson  was much admired  in Canada, "the  romantic  fact of her Indian  birth, played up by critics and  journalists, has been accepted as convincing proof that she spoke with the authentic  voice of the Red  Man". Pauline  Johnson, he continues,  had  a vigorous personality and  an excellent sense of the theatre,  as well as the good fortune to be praised by "a fashionable  London critic", Theodore Watts-Dunton. But,  says Professor  Smith,  the  claim  that  her  work  is genuine "primitive poetry,  or that  it speaks with  the  true  voice of the  North  American Indian will hardly  be made  by responsible criticism.... Her  best known  pieces are decorous imitations of ... [Tennyson  and Swinburne]. They have a graceful and easy-flowing cadence, which presents admirably  vague impressions of pellucid waters  and  shadowy depths,  but they are as empty of content  as any devotee of pure  poetry  could  wish. . . ."  They  are  "minor  Victorian  escape  poems";  and when Miss Johnson  tried to portray the feelings and aspirations  of the aborigines,

WHAT HAPPENED TO   PAULINE?



she  became  "theatrical and  crude". The  rhythm  "is  heavy,  the  imagery  conven­ tional,  and   the  language melodramatic and  forced.  Her  best  work  is  not  to  be found  in her  Indian poetry  at  all but in one or two pretty  and  very artificial  little lyrics."'
Here, certainly, are  two assessments that  if not diametrically opposite  appear to have  little  in common except  sense of conviction. And  perhaps Canadian literary critics,  feeling  that  Smith   had  said  all there  was to be said  on  Pauline Johnson, could   not  be  bothered  to  tell  Dr.  Davidson   to  stick  to  his  portfolio and  leave literary judgments to the qualified. Yet, by interpreting Miss Johnson and  her objectives  in  terms  of the  literary,  social  and  nationalistic climates  in  which  she lived,  we  can  bring  closer  the  professional  and  non-professional viewpoints  and show why neither side can dismiss out of hand  the other.
In  the first place,  the responsible  literary  critics of whom  A. J. M. Smith  speaks, with  their  comparatively wide  knowledge  of the struggle  of Canadian letters  for national and   international  recognition, have  felt  that   much   of  Miss  Johnson's work  falls  into  a  particular,  all-too-characteristic pattern.  Only  three  years after she was born,  the Reverend Edward Hartley Dewart, in his introduction to British North America's first  anthology of verse, intimated the sense of urgency  that  he and  others  were  beginning to feel over  the  need  for  a truly  Canadian literature. "There is probably no country in the world", he remarked, "where the claims of native  literature are  so little  felt,  and  where  every effort  in  poetry  has  been  met with  so much  coldness  and  indifference as in Canada."" It is not important here that   we  note  the  reasons  that  Dr.  Dewart offers for  this  neglect; most  of them are  familiar by  now.  What is significant, however,  is the  self-conscious  attitude reflected  by poet  and  critic  alike at the time, the desire to be Canadian  as distinct from  British or American. The fact of Confederation, of course, served  to increase the  enthusiasm, and  soon  the  newspapers and  periodicals were  publishing a  veri­ table  flood  of verses supposedly Canadian. The  poets concerned are known  now only to the more  devoted student of Canadian letters;  the verse, from the intrinsi­ cally literary  point  of view, is undistinguished. But most of it is notable for one or two  aspects  in  particular. In  its  reflection  of  national  aspiration it  both  exudes sentimental  idealism   and   implies  a  sense  of  colonial  inferiority. In  short,  it  is thoroughly romantic, even  to  deriving  much  of its  imagery and  technique from


' "Our  Poets:  A Sketch of Canadian Poetry in the Nineteenth Century", UTQ, XII (October,  1942), 8g-go.
"  Selections from Canadian Poets  (Montreal: John Lovell, 1864),  p.x.

WHAT HAPPENED TO  PAULINE?



the  English  Romantic poets of half-a-century before.  In  it we see significant illus­ tration of  the  attitudes that  determined  the  way  poetry   was  written  in  later  nineteenth-century Canada. The   example  set  by  the   English  Romantic  poets directed   it  towards  the  depiction   of  native   landscapes and,  sometimes,   native  people,  and   although those  landscapes and   people  were  viewed  as  through an English  filter -for  example,  by referring to  them  by  the  use of English  instead  of  Canadian idiom -the  verse  was  nevertheless  considered "Canadian".  And herein  lies a source  of confusion.  To  be dependent  upon  the  literary  tradition of England, as Smith has emphasized, surely  cannot  be a defect.  If it is, perhaps all American poets except  Whitman are to be dismissed  with  their  Canadian cousins. But in post-Confederation Canada it was more important that  the verse be written by  a  Canadian than  that  it be  poetry; the  comparison was  more  often  between  the  poet  and  an  accepted   English  master  than between poetry  and  non-poetry. This  approach to  criticism  is, of course, still  with  us;  it  reflects,  in fact,  an  atti­ tude   that   is sometimes   expressed  by  a  type  of  Canadian  nationalism still  very much  alive.  Professor  Smith  wrote  in  1946  that "when it is recognized that  the claims  of  nationalism  are  less  important than   those  of  universality and   that   a cosmopolitan culture is more valuable than  an isolated  one, our twentieth-century criticism  will be  prepared to  approach contemporary Canadian poets."3  And  as late  as  1957  he  could  remark, "the  question of  national identity still  seems  to underlie  our  thinking and  haunt our imagination."4






How ALL OF THIS  is relevant to Pauline Johnson should  be reasonably  clear.   During  her  most  impressionable  years  the  literary   influences upon  her  were  similar  to  those  upon  dozens  of  other  versifiers  of the  eighteen­ seventies.  And  despite  her insistence  upon  her father's importance in her learning "the legends,  the  traditions, the culture and  etiquette"5 of the Indian, her literary education was  English.  Walter   McRaye, her  business  manager and  companion,


3  "Nationalism  and   Canadian   Poetry",   Northern   Review,   I   (December-January,
1945-46) l 42.
4    The Book of Canadian Poetry  (3rd ed. Toronto: Gage, 1957)  p. 36.

5  Walter   McRaye,   Pauline   Johnson   and   her  Friends   (Toronto:  Ryerson,  1947), p. 19·

WHAT HAPPENED TO PAULINE?



reports  quite  objectively that  she read  the standard poets and  was especially  fond of  Scott,  Byron,  Tennyson and  Adelaide  Ann  Proctor-the  latter   achieving a somewhat dubious fame   as  the  author of The  Lost Chord.  And  Miss Johnson herself reveals how she fits squarely  into a particular manifestation of Victorian romanticism  when  she  describes  her  parents.   "Their loves  were  identical", she writes:

They  loved  nature, the  trees best of all, the  river and  the  birds. They  loved  the Anglican Church, they loved the British flag, they loved Queen Victoria,  they loved beautiful, dead, Elizabeth  Elliott. They loved music, pictures and china with which George Johnson filled his beautiful  house. They loved books and animals, but, most of all  those  two  loved  the  Indian  people, loved their  legends, their  habits,  their customs, loved the  people themselves. Small wonder that  their children  should  be born with pride of race and heritage, and should face the world with that peculiar courage that only a fighting ancestry can give.6

There is certainly  nothing  reprehensible in  such  an  outpouring of love.  Un­ fortunately, however,  when  many  Canadian poets of the  time,  Pauline  Johnson among them,  attempted to  express  their  various  loves in  verse,  they  did  so in  a rhetorical, overly  sentimental, often  self-indulgent, way.  In  short,  they  reflected  those  aspects  of flabby  Victorian romanticism so familiar in much  of the  fiction,  music,  architecture and  art  of the  period.  In  the  United  States  Mark Twain was scornfully  to denote the  period  as the  "Gilded Age",  illustrating his derision,  for example,  by  the  tragi-comic  story of  the  Grangerfords and   Shepherdsons in Huckleberry  Finn;  Canada, characteristically, had to wait  a few more decades for Stephen Leacock  and  a  similar  satirical  perspicuity.  Yet,  how  can  we appreciate what  these  poets  were  trying  to do unless we are  also aware of the  contemporary tastes  and  norms   that  influenced them?  One  of  Miss  Johnson's many  concerts was given  at  Prince Albert. Here  is the  programme of another evening  of culture sponsored   by  the  PAYMLAC  (the   Prince   Albert  Young   Men's  Literary and  Athletic Club) as it is recorded in the Prince Albert Times  of November 23, 1883:

SONG: -"A Flower  from  my  angel  mother's  grave"  very  prettily  sung  by Miss
Mackenzie.
READING: -By Mr. Fitz-Cochrane,  "Gray's Elegy on [sic] A Country Churchyard". SONG: -By Mrs. Col.  Sproat,  "Jock  o' Hazeldean",  which was so acceptably  de­ livered  as to call  for  an  unanimous  encore, which  produced  that  ever-popular
old song "Comin'  thro'  the Rye", also very nicely sung.


6  Ibid., p. 20.

WHAT HAPPENED TO  PAULINE?



The  next number  was a reading by Mr. J. 0. Davis, but he was prevented  by illness from appearing.
* 	* 	* 	* 	* 	*
Mr. Joseph Hanafin  read the celebrated speech by Sergeant  Buzfuz from Pickwick,
in very good form.
Mrs.  Brown  then  favoured  the  audience  with  the  song "Twickenham Ferry"  in such acceptable  style as to demand  an encore, to which she kindly responded  with "Two  is Company, Three is None", which was also well received.

* 	* 	* 	* 	* 	*
The  programme  was well wound up by a comic song, "Patrick, Mind  the Baby",
by T. 0. Davis, given in his best style, which brought  down the house, and he was obliged to respond  with "When  McGinnis Gets a Job",  which also took the house by storm.

It may  be noted  that  Charles Mair,  a man  who  considered himself  of superior cultural tastes  and   who  within  a  few  months was  to  be  widely  praised  for  his closet drama, Tecumseh, was one of the officers of the  PAYMLAC. I do not wish to  suggest  by  this  example, however,  that   the  level  of  literary taste  throughout Canada was of a consistently  low level. Two  periodicals in  particular, the Cana­ dian  Monthly and  the  Toronto Week, reflected, through the  editorship  of  men such  as Mercer  Adam  and  Goldwin  Smith,  and  the  contributions of  writers  such as W.  D.  LeSueur, Sara  Jeanette Duncan, Charles G. D. Roberts and Archibald Lampman,  a  standard of  excellence  that   the  Canadian  literary  periodical has probably not  attained since. It is significant, however, that  both  magazines had  died  from  lack  of support before  the  end  of  the  century, thereby  supplying evi­ dence  (not  that  it was needed) of the gap  between the literary critic, the poet and  the popular taste.  Pauline  Johnson  herself, determined as she was to write, realized that  she  could  eam no  more  than  a few  cents  when  she  was fortunate enough to  have  work  published; she  therefore  embarked upon  a  career  that  essentially catered to that  taste.  Dressed  in Indian costume  she went from  city to city, town to town,  even  bam   to bam, reciting  her verse  and  reading her  interpretations of the  Indian legends.  And  despite the protests of those who see her as "a  true  poet", we must  describe  these tours as being in the tradition of the music-hall, not of the concert  recital,  nor  even of the peripatetic bard  of old, as has been  rather roman­ tically  suggested.   Walter   McRaye,  writing   in  1946,  notes  that   there  "were no movies, or radio  or Chautaquas" in the 'nineties;

Entertainment was given either by professionals or local talent.  These were usually designated "concerts"  or "shows". The professionals were brought in from Toronto,

WHAT HAPPENED TO PAULINE?



Montreal  or  Hamilton. Singers, violinists, cartoonists, comedians  and  lecturers­ Pauline  Johnson   was  of  such  a  company.  She  read  from  her  own  poems  and appeared in costume,  a  beautiful  buckskin. dress trimmed  with  ermine  skins, and with silver brooches scattered  over the bodice. These were very old and  had  been hammered  from  silver coins by the  native  Indian  silversmiths.  Two  scalps hung suspended  from her waist, a Huron  scalp and one that  had  been given to her by a Blackfoot  Chief.  Around  her  neck was a  beautifully  graded  cinnamon   bear-claw necklace,  and  on  her  wrists   bracelets of  wampum  beads.  Draped   around   her shoulders was . . . [a]  red broadcloth  blanket ... ; in her hair was an eagle feather.  This  costume  was  laid  aside  in  the  second  half  of  the  programme when  she appeared  in conventional  evening dress.7

The   picture is  a  striking   one;  one  feels, indeed,  that   Miss Johnson could  have carried at  least  part  of the  audience by merely standing on stage.  And  for those interested in  symbolic  acts  and  gestures,  the  change  of costume   for  the  second part  of the programme rnay be of significance.



W. SHOULD   NOTE  that   much   of  the  popular interest   in
Miss Johnson today  is still stimulated by the essentially  non-literary aspects of her
career-her  Indian heritage, her  dress,  her  skill as  a  stage  performer and  her personality. Even  the  fact  that  she,  a woman,  would  engage  in such  an  arduous and  unusual venture might  still  raise  a  post-Victorian eyebrow-although,  ad­ mittedly, to  a  very  limited   extent  now.  But she  was  unusual, and  the  fact  that  her poetry  echoed  the  mellifluous cadences  of Tennyson and  Swinburne, the Vic­ torian   sentimentality of  Adelaide Proctor,   and  the  self-conscious  nationalism of her own  Canadian contemporaries, was ignored  by her audiences. They  probably were  not  aware   of  these  borrowed and  assimilated  characteristics; if  they  were they  probably did  not  care  anyway.  They  liked  Pauline Johnson and  what  she said,  and  that  was enough. But,  unfortunately, that  is not enough for the literary  critic.  It  is his business  to  do  more  than  take  his seat  in  the  Orpheus theatre or before  the  hastily  improvised stage  in  a  western  barn   and  merely  listen  to  an Indian princess  talk  about her  father's  people.  In  short, he  knows  too  much  for his own popularity.
To  talk  about her  father's people.  This  statement has,  perhaps, unfair  impli-


1 Ibid., pp. 61-62.

WHAT HAPPENED TO  PAULINE?



cations. Let  us  accept  Pauline  Johnson as she  herself  wished  to  be  accepted - as a  Canadian Indian. And  in her own  time  this  role was the  very one in which her  audiences wished- almost  desperately, one  feels at  times-to see her.  Psy­ chologists  might  even say that  her enthusiastic followers  would  have  projected  this role  upon   her,  whether   she  wished  it  or  not.  For   while  Pauline  Johnson  was growing up, the  popular image of the Indian was undergoing a significant change. He  was no longer  only the tomahawk-wielding, scalp-adorned aborigine of earlier times.  Nor  was  he only  the  noble savage  of  the  eighteen-thirties and  'forties.  He had  become  more  than  noble;  he was also the  down-trodden, dispossessed-and vanishing-victim of  the  ruthless  white  man. And  perhaps most  significant in this era  of urgent nationalism was the fact  that  the  role of the Indian in preserv­ ing Canada herself was apparently being forgotten. Here, for example, are  Mercer Adam's comments in the Toronto Varsity of March 5, 1886:

It is important that  the heroic deeds of the faithful  Indian  allies of Britain, in the struggle  to  plant  and  maintain  the flag of the  Empire  on  this continent, should be treasured,  and a fitting memory preserved of their loyal services and staunch friendship.  Nor should  gratitude  be lacking, particularly in the Canadian nation, which owes so much  to the Indian  tribes for the heritage  it now peacefully enjoys, and  from  which  it  has rudely  dispossessed the  children  of the  woods, and  done much  to make them what they are now -a  poor emasculated,  vanishing race.

These   remarks were  written   almost  exactly  one  year  after   the  outbreak  of  the North-West Rebellion. Yet they reflect  no antipathy towards, for example, Chief Poundmaker and  the  Indians who had  joined  Riel against the Queen's authority. Many  Canadians in Ontario felt, in fact,  that  the  tribes  had  been  goaded  by the half-French Riel;  many  in the  West sympathized with  both  Riel and  the Indian. And  Mercer  Adam was only one commentator among many -including essayists, novelists,  poets-who  were  reflecting  a depiction of the  Indian in rather stereo­ typed  and  often  self-indulgent terms.  Self-indulgent because  one cannot help feel­ ing  at  times  an  almost  patronizing attitude towards the  Indian, at  times even  a reflection of a guilty  conscience.
Pauline Johnson actually  was one of the few  people  who saw through the new popular image  of the Indian and  who said so in writing. Aside from  certain  prose pieces in  Legends  of Vancouver some of the most  perceptive, the most unaffected writing she did  was in private  letters to friends and  in fugitive  newspaper articles, writing that   reflects  an  author of distinction more  than  the  Pauline Johnson of the stage  and  of "The Song  my Paddle Sings". The term  "Indian", she noted,

WHAT HAPPENED TO  PAULINE?



signifies about as  much  as  the  term  "European", but  I cannot recall  ever  having read  a  story  where  the  heroine   was described  as "a  European". The Indian girl we  meet  in  cold  type,  however,   is rarely  distressed  by  having   to  belong  to  any tribe,  or  to  reflect   any  tribal   characteristics. She  is  merely  a  wholesale sort  of admixture of  any  band  existing  between  the  MicMacs of Gaspe  and  the  Kwaw­ Kewlths of British  Columbia, yet strange  to say, that  notwithstanding the numerous tribes,  with  their  aggregate numbers reaching more  than  122,ooo souls in Canada alone,  our  Canadian authors can  cull from  this huge revenue of  character, but one Indian girl,  and  stranger still  that  this  lovely little  heroine  never had  a  prototype in breathing flesh and  blood existence!

This conventional, seemingly invariable and inevitable maiden, Miss  Johnson continues, is known as Winona or Wanda.

She  is  never   dignified   by  being  permitted  to  own  a  surname, although,  extra­ ordinary  to  note,   her  father is  always  a  chief,  and   had  he  ever  existed,  would doubtless  have   been  as  conservative as  his  contemporaries about  the   usual  sig­ nificance  that  his people attach to family name  and lineage.

Above  all,  however, she  is to  be  recognized by  two distinguishing characteristics:
her  suicidal mania and  her  misfortune in love.  She is, Miss  Johnson notes,

always  desperately in  love  with  the  young  white  hero,  who  in  turn  is grateful to her  for  services  rendered the  garrison  in general  and  himself  in  particular during red  days of war  ... Of  course,  this white  hero  never  marries her! Will some critic who  understands human  nature, and   particularly  the  nature of  authors,  please tell  the  reading public  why  marriage with  the  Indian girl  is so despised  in books and  [yet is] so general in real life?

Mercer Adam's Wanda, she  notes,  is much in love with  Edward McLeod, "makes all  the  overtures, conducts herself  disgracefully, assists  him  to  a  reunion with  his fair-skinned love,  Helene; then betakes herself  to a  boat, rows  out  into a lake  in a thunderstorm, chants her  own  death-song and  is drowned". Jessie  M.  Freeland's Winona is also  the  unhappy victim of violent love that is not  returned. She  assists young Hugh  Gordon,  "serves him,  saves  him  in  the  usual 'dumb' animal style of  book  Indians,  manages by  self-abnegation, danger, and   many heart-aches to restore him  to the  arms of Rose  McTavish, who  of course he has loved and longed for   all  through  the   story." But   Winona also  finds  the   "time-honoured  canoe,
paddles out  into the  lake  and  drowns hersel£."8
There is  a temptation to  give  further  exemplification of  this  quite delightful


8  Toronto World, March 22, 1892.


33

WHAT HAPPENED TO  PAULINE?



critical  perspicuity, but  the  point  is clear enough.  Pauline  Johnson,  the  person, knew  the Indian  and  could perceive the artificiality  that  had  become associated with  him. The  irony is, however, that  she in some respects became  part  of that artificiality,  either  deliberately  or unknowingly. That it was the latter  is perhaps indicated  by the lapse in her powers of discrimination  when she applied  them to poetry.  For  example,  in  the  glow of her  enthusiasm  for  Charles  Mair's  verse­ drama  depiction  of the Indian, a depiction  she felt to be far  more realistic than that  of any other  Canadian author,  she reveals the romantic  tendencies of both her own nature  and of the age. "Oh! happy inspiration vouchsafed  to the author  of Tecumseh," she exclaimed,  "he  has invented  a  novelty  in fiction-a white man  who deserves, wins and  reciprocates the  Indian  maiden's love-who says, as she dies on his bosom, while the bullet meant for him stills and tears her heart:

Silent  for ever! Oh,  my girl! my girl!
Those  rich eyes melt;  those lips are sunwarm still­ They  look like life, yet have no semblant voice. Millions of creatures throng and  multitudes
Of  heartless  beings flaunt  upon  the earth;
There's room enough  for them,  but thou,  dull fate­ Thou cold and  partial tender of life's field
That pluck'st  the flower; and  leav'st  the weed to thrive­ Thou had'st  not room for her! Oh  I must  seek
A way out of the rack-I need not live
.... but she is dead  -
And  love is left upon  the earth  to starve, My object's  gone, and  I am but a shell,
A husk, an empty  case, or anything
That may be kicked around the world.9

This  rhetorical,   melodramatic   homage  to  Shakespeare  Pauline  Johnson  found "refreshing", thus indicating,  perhaps,  the standards she set for herself in  verse­ writing.  Mair  became one of her closest friends:  "Oh !", she wrote to him, "you are  half an Indian, I know-the  best half of a man,  anyway-his heart."  She invariably  addressed  him as "My  Dear Tecumseh" and  on one of  her tours she wore  an  exquisitely-made  costume that  Mair  had  sent  her from  Prince  Albert. He frequently  insisted that if ever his play were brought  to the stage only Pauline Johnson  could play his Indian  heroine. She was, he said, a  "true  poet",  one "of a  race  knit  up  in  the  noblest  way with  our  history",  the  "Canadian Sappho"

9   Ibid.


34

WHAT HAPPENED TO  PAULINE?



whose poetry would live "even in this dark age."10
The  "dark   age"  referred  to  was  that period   just  before  and  after  Pauline Johnson's  death.  Perhaps  at  no other  time has the prospect  for Canadian litera­ ture  been bleaker than  what it was then. As Desmond Pacey has aptly suggested, if the last three  decades  of the  nineteenth  century could  be termed  "the  golden age" of Canadian literature, "the  first two decades of the twentieth were without a doubt  the age of brass."" Said  Mair,  referring cynically to the work of Ralph Connor,   "No  one  reads  poetry  except  the  poets themselves;  the  whim  of the flimsy day is the novel."•• Even most of the verse writers were considered in some quarters as  mere  dilettantes  and  not  poets at  all. Mair,  for  example,  regarded Service,  Macinnes and  Drummond as "jinglers,  coarse  rhymesters  or  worse".'3
And  the story of how Pauline  Johnson's  days were made  reasonably  happy ones only through  the generosity  of devoted friends is a well-known one. By the end of the war she, like so many personalities of another era, was virtually forgotten.


Tis NADIR in the history of Canadian letters introduces  one last significant  aspect  of  Pauline   Johnson's   reputation-its  quite   remarkable   re­
ascendency  in  the  nineteen-twenties.  Why this should be can  be partly  and  cer­ tainly interestingly explained  by reference to another  literary  personality-John W. Garvin.
Garvin is surely one of the most fascinating figures in Canadian letters. A stock­
broker by profession, he had evidently decided during the war that  his ability as a businessman  and  his enthusiasm  as a student  of literature  could be combined  to sell Canadians an awareness of their literary achievements. He admitted  to having written  "aboutI 30  poems", but, he said, "I have greater confidence in my philo­ sophical  theories  and  in  my  capacity  as a literary  critic."'4  Beginning  modestly by an  edition  of Isabella  Valancy  Crawford's  poems and  some articles on poets in  the  Public  Health  journal, Garvin  was by the early  ninteen-twenties a well known  anthologist  and  booster  of Canadian  writing.  These  achievements,  how-


10  Public   Archives   of Canada, Denison   Papers,  6oo1,  Charles Mair   to  George  T.
Denison, April  19, 1913.
" Creative Writing in Canada (1st ed. Toronto: Ryerson,  1952), p. 82.
•• Denison  Papers, 4454, December 28, 1901.
'3 Ibid., 4424, October I5,  1901.


35

WHAT HAPPENED TO  PAULINE?



ever,  were  to exact  in the  next  decade  a large  price  from  both  the  man  and  his reputation. Garvin's "pet  hobby", as he called  it, was to bring  him  (and his wife, Katherine Hale)  financial  ruin.  Even  worse,  perhaps, it  was  to identify  him  in the  minds  of  later  rebelling  poets and  critics  as one  of F.  R.  Scott's "expansive puppets" who  "percolate self unction" when  the  "Canadian Authors Meet". For Garvin and  his literary   pretensions  seem  no  more  at  home  than  where  "the air is heavy  with  'Canadian' topics",  where  one  is mixing  with  the  literati and  the maple leaf is praised  "beneath a portrait of the  Prince of Wales".
But none  can  deny that  Garvin  (and others like him)   helped  to generate a new awareness of Canadian literature. Garvin's circle of enthusiastic literati in Toronto indicated the  beginning of a movement such  as Canada had  not beheld since Confederation. Garvin edited  anthologies, undertook  lecture   tours,  even  organ­ ized  newspaper controversies  over  such  topics  as  "Who was  the  real  Father of Canadian  Poetry?" or  "Who are  our  greatest poets?"   Today  we  cannot help flinching before  some  of  his superlatives. In  one  of his letters  he  wrote: "I and other  discriminating critics rate  Charles Mair  and  Isabella  Valancy Crawford as the  greatest  poets  Canada has  produced."rs  In  other  correspondence he  styled Charles G.  D.  Roberts, his son,  Lloyd  Roberts, Albert  Durrant  Watson, Pauline Johnson  and   Robert W.  Norwood   as  also  "great".  After  a  careful reading of Norwood's "Song of a Little Brother", he reported that he "unhesitatingly ranked  him" as great  too. It may not be irrelevant here  to note  that  Norwood, an Angli­  can  minister, had  other  talents  as well. As  Garvin described   him: "He is such a  splendid  fellow,   so  brilliantly   versatile;   read[s]  Browning's 'Calahan'  in  a masterly manner and  sings comic songs incomparably. He  could  make  a fortune on the vaudeville stage".16
The  posturing extravagance of  these  people  in  both  their  verse and  criticism has  had  a rather curious  influence  upon  the  history  of Canadian letters.  For  this whole  literary  movement of the  early  'twenties had  an  anachronistic affinity with that   of  the  post-Confederation period.  As then, the  poets  of the  later  time, sup­ ported by patriotic critics, seemed obliged,  as A. J. M. Smith has noted,  to gather "their singing  robes  about  them  to hymn  the  mysteries  of Life and  the grandeurs of Empire",r 7  to  regard  their  craft  as one of a very high  "high seriousness". But,

r4  Queen's University Library, Mair Papers, Garvin  to Mair, May 23, I9I3.
15  Ibid.,  November  I 7, I9I5.
16  Ibid., December  14, 1915.
17   The  Book of Canadian Poetry, p. 2.

WHAT HAPPENED TO  PAULINE?



as Desmond  Pacey  haB remarked,  with  their  nineteenth-century emphasis  upon nature  and  love, they seemed unaware  that  a new age had come into being, and that  even it waB changing  rapidly.'8 The  revolutionary  trends that  were influenc­ ing  poetry  elsewhere in  the  world  were barely  reflected in  Canada;  here  again this country  had  to wait another  decade. The poet and man of letters of the time, in  fact,  stood  apart  from  the  restless world  around  him;  he  was  fastidious  or affected in his dress, even to celluloid collar, ribboned  pince-nez and stick-pin in his cravat; new  members  of  the  group  were "new  singing  voices" who  would "surely  be heard  afar"; if they were female,  they were  "brilliant daughters" of Toronto  or Montreal; if male, they were "sons of  Apollo". And if they reflected the changing  currents  of the world outside, they did so esoterically. Albert  Dur­  rant  Watson,  for example,  had  a medium  by  whom he aBpired to communicate mystically with  voices of the past, and  he was a keen follower of the adventures in  spiritualism   of  Oliver  Lodge   and  Conan  Doyle.   One  of  his  works, The  Twentieth Plane, Garvin  described aB  "a remarkable book, a product  of psychical research seances". Other  poets were similarly souls apart.
These  remarks  will introduce  one last  paradox  concerning  Pauline  Johnson. She became  one  of those Canadian poets chosen for immortality  by the literary boosters of  the  'twenties,  and  whereaB she herself had  encountered  difficulty in having her verses published during her lifetime, her name and somewhat romantic career  now  assured  space  for  those verses in a large  number  of text-books and anthologies. "The Song my Paddle Sings" and "In  the Shadows" became familiar to pupils of elementary  and  secondary schools throughout Canada, pupils who, significantly  enough,  were  undergoing,  it  will be  recalled,  what  the  jargon  of today  would  call  an  indoctrination programme,  by  which  the  maple  leaf,  the beaver  and  Jack   Canuck   became  almost  holy symbols and  Empire   Day  and Victoria  Day  occasions for  nationalistic  reverence.  In  their  enthusiasms  to  apo­ theosize Canadian writers,  however, the critics did themselves and  their subjects more  harm  than  good, for  when  more sober, less chauvinistic  judgment  viewed many Canadian poets as being somewhat less than great,  the consequent reaction tended  to sweep all our  early  poets aside, along with the whole corpus  of what has  become  known  as  the  Maple  Leaf  school of criticism.  Thus  we  have  the remarks  of  Woodcock,  MacLure   and  Levine, which  were quoted  in  Canadian  Literature last summer,  but are humorously significant enough  to bear repeating: "Victorian versifiers like  Heavysege  and  Sangster  and  Mair  were  dead  before

,s Creative Writing in Canada, p. 84.


37

WHAT HAPPENED TO  PAULINE?



they  reachd
Carman belong  on  captions  in  the  New  Brunswick museum (Carman's  verse is to  poetic  speech  what  Baird's Lemon   Extract used  to  be  to  Demerara Rum)" and  "the dead  wood of the nineteenth century".
But  such  criticism  is  just  as invalid  as  that  of  Garvin and  his friends  of  the
'twenties. Pauline Johnson has suffered  from  both.  The  time  has long since come, surely,  for  what  she  as  an  intelligent   woman would   have  most  wished,  an  un­ prejudiced, dispassionate assessment not  of her verse in isolation,  but  of her verse in reference  to the  conditions  by which  it was written. If we attempt this, I  think we shall see that  she is to be neither  unrestrainedly praised  nor sneeringly scorned. For  she  tells us something about  what  it was like to  be a writer  in the eighteen­ eighties  and  'nineties in  Canada; she tells us something about what  became the fabric of our  literary  history.  She  herself,  certainly, had  none  of the  pretensions to  that  greatness  so romantically ascribed  to her  by over-enthusiastic  critics  and  well-meaning schoolmarms and  schoolmasters. Nor  did  she wish anyone,  one can infer   from   her   private  correspondence, to  make   apologies -or  even   anthro­ pologies-for her.  Perhaps what  she  was, what  she  tried  to  do and  what  effect she  has   had   upon   the  enlightened, contemporary   Canadian  are   reflected   by Ethel  Wilson's  reminiscence in,  ironically,  the same  number of this periodical as were the remarks quoted  above:

Many  years later  I saw her in a crowded street. She was much much older, yet she had a sad beauty. She was ill, walking very slowly and  lost in sombre thought. Memory  rushed  in and, stricken, I watched  her as though  I had done it.



ANYTHING  BUT RELUCTANT

Canada's little magazines





Frank Davey







HISTORICALLY, LITTLE MAGAZINES have 'prung up when­ ever  new,  animated, and  serious  writing cannot find a market. Thus these maga­ zines are  usually  managed and  edited  by writers-writers who are anything but  reluctant to  publish  their  own  works. The  annoyance that  gets such writers  into  the  magazine business  is, of course,  that  in any  period  both  the commercial out­ lets-whether  "literary" mags  or  publishing houses-and  the  glossy-paged scholarly   quarterlies cater  chiefly  to  established  writers.  A  new  group or  school of writers  cannot possibly get  a sufficient  quantity of its work  published to make  its  presence  felt.  Some  of the  semi-professional literary  quarterlies, such  as Can­ ada's Tamarack Review, tend  to become  coterie magazines, depending for almost  fifty  per  cent  of  their   material on  a  particular  fixed  circle  of  writers-again writers  whose  reputations the  magazine knows are safe and  established. Which  is, of course,  a sensible commercial policy, particularly in a country which  has tended to be a graveyard for literary magazines.
Little  magazines, on the other  hand, never  have to depend on "name" writers, their  mimeo  expenses  being  low  enough   to keep  their  losses at  a minimum. But this is only a minor  difference. The  major  one is still that  little mags are  published by engaged  writers,  not by semi-interested onlookers. Whereas the commercial magazine or  glossy-paged   quarterly  usually  reflects  one  man's desire  to  be  an editor, or a group's wish that  their town,  university, or whatever, have  a "literary" mag,   the  little   magazine nearly   always  reflects  genuine writing activity and interest. While  the editors  of the Tamaracks and  the Prisms seldom  have  any new work  of their  own  to exhibit, seldom  are engaged  in creation with any  excitement or  persistence   (but rather go  altruistically or  parasitically to those  that  are), the

39

ANYTHING BUT RELUCTANT



editors of little magazines are usually so absorbed  in and  dedicated  to their own writing  that  they feel they  must  found  a  mag-in  order  that  their  work may receive at least some attention  and criticism. Often, if not always, the little maga­ zine reflects the presence of a group of writers of similar interests who are meeting, arguing,   fighting,  writing,  almost  every  day -a  group   charged  with  literary energy  that  seems to keep continually  overflowing  into and  out of  their  mimeo­ graph  pages.
One  could take  the founding  of Vancouver's Tish  as an example  of the birth
of a little magazine. All of its five editors had been writing for some time; George Bowering had been getting poems published in eastern Canada-though, he says, never  the ones he wished to have published.  With  two visits from the U.S. poet Robert   Duncan   their  bi-monthly  meetings  to  discuss their  own  work  became weekly meetings  of intensive study  of Charles  Olson,  Duncan, Creeley  Pound, and  Williams. In no time literary theories and  poems began filling the air, cover­ ing  the  desks, and  some quick and  dependable  outlet  for quantities  of  material had  to be found.  Even the established magazines  willing to publish some of this work  could  not  be relied on;  they were too slow, and  by the  time  one's poems were  published  one wished to disown  them,  ideas had  changed  so.  Thus  Tish, Vancouver's poetry  newsletter,  was born,  and  the  energy,  the  intensive literary study  and  creation  that  began  it show no sign of  abating.  If  it did,  of course, there would be no reason for Tish  to continue, for, in order to be worthwhile, any little magazine must have this inspiring energy. Evidence of such energy is perhaps the prime criterion for judging its value.
Magazines  with  no energy whatsoever  are,  naturally,  one of the other  minor
but  important causes of the founding  of little magazines.  In  Canada there are a large  number  of  very low-energy  literary  mags  with  no  particular policy;  for example,  Prism's often nondescript collections, Canadian Poetry Magazine's usual dilettante  sprawl, and Fiddlehead's custom of printing so nearly an equal number of bad  poems to good ones that  a writer begins to doubt  the value of publication there.
All of which will tend to make the new little  magazine  editor angry  and  bel­ ligerent. He will be so proud of his strong direction  and sense of development  that he will often make a point of countering  the petrified standards of the professional outlets  with  work initially as shocking as important. He  will counter  the  nebu­ lous-if  even  existent-editorial policies of  the  Fiddle heads  and  Prisms  with an  editorial  line or  bias strict  enough  to exclude  almost  all of the -to  him - mysteriously-established establishment. It can almost be said that, to be true to the

ANYTHING BUT RELUCTANT



energy that  has got  him  writing  and  publishing, the new little  magazine  editor must  be of necessity rebellious -else  have his magazine  redundant.
Again  historically,  such  ventures  have  often  been  successes. Writers  such  as
Hemingway,  W. C.  Williams,  Pound,  and  Aldington,  to name  a few, all began their  careers in little magazines  that  have now either  disappeared  or evolved to unrecognizable  forms. Since the last war little  magazines such  as Canada's Combustion   and   Contact, and   the   U.S.'s Black  Mountain  Review, Origin, Migrant, Measure,  and  Yugen, spawned  most of the writers  now finding  recog­ nition in Grove Press and  New Directions publications and  in professional maga­ zines such as The  Outsider  and  The  Evergreen Review.  At  present in the States Robert  Kelly's Trobar, Cid  Corman's second series of  Origin, and  Le Roi Jones and  Diane Di Prima's  The  Floating Bear are carrying on the fight for the accept­ ance of new writers, the last with undoubtedly the most vigour.






IN CANADA   TOO  we are witnessing a new crop of little maga­ zmes. In  the  last  two  years Moment, Mountain, Evidence,  Cataract, Tish,  and Motion   have  all  appeared. In  Vancouver  alone  three  new  ones are  projected: Recall, a new non-commercial mag of Kenyon  Review  tastes-, Spasm, one prob­
ably  in  the  "beat" tradition, and  Q, "a  quizzical monthly  of satire  and  other
social criticism."  University  magazines, such as Waterloo's  Chiaroscuro, U.B.C.'s Raven, and  Acadia's  Amethyst, continue,  but only as "student" publications­ seldom with any attempt  at absolute excellence.
Of  the new and  ambitious  little magazines Toronto's Evidence  is the only one
to get above the  usual mimeo format.  Alan Bevan, the writer-editor,  says that  it "was born out of the conviction that  there is a good deal of serious writing being done  for  which  there  is no adequate  outlet  in Canada." This  is, of course, the best and  only excuse for the founding of a little magazine,  and so far  Mr. Bevan has  been  able  to  find  interesting  writing.  There have   been   frequent  weak­ nesses, especially in  the  critical  articles, but  Evidence  has still been  superior  to Tamarack's seemingly  endless issues of unexcitement.  Bevan's  magazine  can  be lively-see  No.  g's provocatively  accurate  article in  marijuana-but, in order to counteract  its cold, almost  malicious reception by  the Toronto establishment, should  become  even  more  boisterous and  militant,  and  its editor  should  take  a more  prominent   part  in  its revolutionary  trends.  Evidence  does not seem to be

ANYTHING BUT  RELUCTANT



the  product  of an  active group;  it looks like a one-man  job, and,  unless Bevan himself gets more lively, I foresee a dull future for his magazine.
Montreal's Cataract is certainly militant.  Which  is perhaps  the best thing one can say about  it. Militancy is fine when one has something  to be militant  about; Cataract's  most obvious trouble is that its writer-editors  seem to spend more time thumbing their  noses than  they do writing poetry. Irving  Layton's  "Open Letter to Louis Dudek" in No. 2  shows more concern for Layton's  own waning reputa­ tion  (see his defensive and high-schoolish "To a Lily" here too)  than for Dudek's. But Cataract is the product of a group intensely active and outspoken in writing;  it has a distinct direction. And it has had good poems (ignore Avi Boxer) ; Sydney Aster  has had  several lucky hits, and  K. V. Hertz  and  Henry  Moscovitch  have consistently shown much talent and potentiality. Cataract is certainly not a preten­ tious magazine -it even belabours its non-academic roots, and is definitely worth "bothering" with.
Moment is  a  Toronto  mimeo  poetry  magazine  at  one  time  edited  by  poets Milton  Acorn  and  Al  Purdy,  now  edited  by  Acorn  and  his wife, Gwendolyn MacEwen. Like Cataract it is squarely in  the  little magazine  tradition  of being founded  by cooperating  poets to publish poetry that  might not be accepted by the established markets. The  poetry of Miss MacEwen  is often "poetic" and esoteric, and  at  times beautiful  and  real;  Acorn's is rougher,  probably  less poetic by any­ one's standards. The  outside poetry is diverse, both in quality  and  manner, and, with  the  lack  of  similarity  between  Acorn  and  MacEwen, the  magazine  thus appears  to have little unity of policy. It is probably  held together  more by mar­ riage than  by literary interest. From what I have seen Moment is not dull and not lively, not  consistently  experimental  and  not  quite  reactionary,  not  sufficiently discriminating and  not actually careless. It does have its triumphs,  though-such as the Al Purdy poem in No. 6. A Toronto  magazine.
David  McFadden's Mountain from Hamilton is probably  in one way the most ambitious  and  comprehensive little magazine in Canada. Its purpose seems to be not so much  to announce  something new, as to bring  together  and  re-announce all of the new things that  have happened  recently in Canadian poetry. A sort of poor man's  Evergreen Review, although one cannot  call Padraig  6 Broin's poetry new,  or  John   Robert  Colombo's  lines poetry.  Still  the  first issue of Mountain marked  the first time a Canadian reader could see together in one place most of his country's  important new writers. With  possibly only two exceptions, all of the writers were under twenty-seven years of age.
McFadden announced  in  No.  I that  "Mountain has  very definite  and  rigid

ANYTHING BUT  RELUCTANT



editorial standards, but  they change  from  day  to day,"  and  they must  in such  an eclectic  mag.  The  only  demands McFadden appears  to have  made  of his writers are  youth  and  quality, and   even  these  he  has  very  clearly lifted at  times.  In the  next  issues  perhaps some  direction will  become  apparent, maybe   not  from Hamilton activity  but  from  McFadden's consciousness of the energies  of young Canadian poets as a group. A long hope, but still, even as merely "a lively review of current poetry," Mountain is indispensible.
Tish  and  Motion  are the  two Vancouver mimeo "newsletters". Tish, the  poetry
newsletter, is now  in its twelfth  issue, and  seems to have  crystalized  its determina­ tion  to  re-make poetry  a  natural and  spontaneous human  occupation and  rid  it of the  obscure and  obviously  "poetic" creations  of would  be "artists". Man  not art,  and   the  universality of  human  experience, are  two  of  its  battle-cries, and  battle-cries they  are, for its editors  seem to have  made  a fetish out of belligerency. A  lot  of  their  poetry  seems  weak  and  irrelevant,  yet  some of it  is powerful and  does  show  that   their   attempts at  "natural"  poetry  have  enabled them  to  write  skilled  and  complex poems  with  the  craft  totally submerged and  unobtrusive.
Motion, the  prose  newsletter, seems also to be working  in favour of unpreten­
ious style and  subtlety  of effect.  However, with  only  two issues out  the  question is still whether Motion  has work that  should  be published  despite  the  rejections  of established magazines, or  merely  would  like to think  it has. Either  in Canada or the  U.S.  I know  of  no  magazine with  which  to compare Motion; the  idea  of a monthly   prose  newsletter seems  to  have  been  totally  neglected, possibly  because of the  large  amount of work  necessary  to provide  sufficient  material.
There is one  other   mimeo  little  magazine in  Canada :  another Toronto one, Pa.draig 0 Broin's  rather harmless  Teangadoir, now in its 39th  issue. It claims  to be a magazine of current Canadian poetry, and  is, exactly,  and  is thus  all over the map.  0 Brain  himself  will never  pretend to be experimental, yet side by side with his own  traditional lyrics he will publish  even such uncontrolled ones as those by G.  C.  Miller.  Teangadoir is an  interesting little  magazine, but  not  a  vital  one. There is obviously  no group of fermenting young  poets behind  it; most likely it is a hobby  to 6 Brain,  who  does not seem to have  much  difficulty getting  his poetry published elsewhere.
These  little  magazines really  comprise  most of what  is happening in Canadian poetry.  The so-called  "quality or mass magazines", the  established glossy literary quarterlies, continue to grind  on, but  most of the changes  that  slowly but eventu­ ally occur  in them  are  generated elsewhere  between  the  rollers of  someone's rusty Gestetner. Canada  is fortunate to  have  such  a large  number of  little  magazines

43

ANYTHING BUT  RELUCTANT



that  the commercial  literary outlets are never allowed the  peace to become  per­ manently  stultified. What  is sad is that  most of these mags do not take sufficient advantage  of  their  unique  position -no  one  asks them  to be  responsible, and money  is never  available  enough  to  be  an  objective -to  further  shake  up  the commercial  world  and speed  the evolution  of writing.  As  I  said before,  a little magazine  must  be either  bold or redundant. Cataract, Mountain,  and  Tish are each  in  their  own  way somewhat  brash,  but  Evidence, Moment, Motion,  and especially Teangadoir, could all stand  acquiring some reason for additional  chips on their shoulders. An affable little magazine cannot  help but be worthless.















FLIGHT TO THE PRIMITIVE

Ernest Thompson Seton




S. E. Read





Caleb  viewed him with paternal  pride and said:  "I  knowed ye was the stuff the night  ye went to Garney's grave, an'  I knowed it again  when ye crossed the  Big Swamp.  Yan, ye could  travel  anywhere  that  man  could go,"  and  in  that  sentence  the  boy's happiness  was complete.  He  surely was a Woodcrafter now.





SLOWLY I CLOSED the book, and,  afte• an envious look  at the last illustration -a magnificent sketch of Yan in the full regalia  of an Indian chief-placed it  back  on  its shelf,  along  with  Rolf in the Woods, Lives  of  the Hunted, a  few  Hentys, some  Horatio Algers,  a simplified  Homer, a  Gulliver, a Swiss  Family  Robinson, some  recent   numbers of  St.  Nicholas,  a  collection  of annuals  (chiefly  Boys' Own  and  Chums), the  Books of  Knowledge, a  Bunyan, and  a Bible. As I did  so, I knew  that  I would  never  completely  forget  Yan,  who proudly bore  the name  of Little  Beaver, or Sam, the Great Woodpecker, or Sappy  Guy  Brown,  or  Caleb, the  kindly  old  trapper, or  even  the  aged  Sanger Witch,  Granny de Neuville.
Fifty  years  later -give  or  take  a year  or  two -I  saw  the  book  again  -not my  book,  but  one  fresh  from  the  presses. The  old illustrations were  still  there­ the  footprints, the  flowers,  the  birds,  the designs for tepees and  bows and  arrows,  the glowering lynx,  repulsive  Sappy  Sam,  with and  without war-paint, and  noble Yan, erect  as ever in full regalia  on the last page of the text. Ernest  Seton  Thomp­ son  and  his Two  Little  Savages had  survived  not only  the  bite of time,  but  also the  world's violent  entrance into  an  age  of  atomic  hazards and  ever-expanding horizons.

45

FLIGHT TO  THE PRIMITIVE



Part  of the  reason for  this extraordinary survival  is to  be found  in  the  man himself, part  in the central theme that  repeats itself with modest variations  in all he wrote, and part in the skills he employed. Let me start with the man.
He was born in South Shields on the east coast of England  on the fourteenth  of August,  186o,  and  was duly  named  Ernest  Evan  Seton  Thompson. Largely,  I gather,  because of  the violent antipathy  with  which  he regarded  his father,  he was not  happy  with his name and  early in his career started  signing his sketches and  writings  Ernest  Thompson  Seton, a  name  he legalized in 18gB. For  a brief period,  he  succumbed  to  maternal  pressure and   changed to  Ernest  Seton­ Thompson  -this  time  with  a  hyphen;  he  regarded   this  as a  pseudonym  and after  his mother's  death  reverted  to Ernest  Thompson   Seton,  dying  as such  in Santa  Fe, New  Mexico, on  the  twenty-third  of October,  1946.  His little name game  has  confused  at  least  two  generations  of  readers,  librarians,  and  biblio­ graphers.
In  1866  the family migrated  from South  Shields to Lindsay, Ontario, at that time  a frontier  village not far  from  the eastern  edge of Lake Simcoe.  Here  the father,  a financially broken ship-owner, intended,  with more romantic imagination than  hard-headed realism, to start  life anew  as a "gentleman farmer". It was a mass migration,  for Mrs. Thompson,  a true Victorian,  had been fruitful; she had given birth to fourteen children, ten of whom, all boys, had survived. Ernest Evan was the eighth. He was dominated  by his older brothers and had little in common with  them.  He  despised his father,  whom  he describes as a financial  failure,  an indolent   individual, an  overbearing  husband,   and  a  tyrannical,   brutal   parent. Even toward  his mother his feelings were ambilavent. A deeply religious woman, she was much given to prayers and long Biblical quotations,  to hopes of salvation and  threats of damnation. Her  unthinking  orthodoxy  repelled him. At times, too, she neglected  him, burdened  and  confused as she was by the complexities of her responsibilities. But in  moments of crisis, especially those arising  from  the lad's recurring  illnesses, she lavished tenderness and affection upon him. The  confused, harried,   and  sensitive boy rebelled against  the  accepted  conventions  of religion and  against  his family. For refuge he fled to the world of the outdoors-first in the still wild, open country around  Lindsay;  later  amidst the fields, streams, and the  marshes  that  were yet within  walking  distance  of the growing  town of  To­ ronto;   still  later  in  the  vast,  mysterious  spaces  of  an  opening  Manitoba;  and finally  in  the  great  wastelands  and  mountains   of  the  American   West.  Nature became  his sanctuary.  In  it  he  found  clarity,  order,  and  comfort  rather  than darkness,  confusion,  and  anguish;  and  through  his detailed  observations  of the

FLIGHT TO  THE  PRIMITIVE



world he had chosen he developed his skills as artist and writer.
Of  the  genius of  the  man  and  the complexities of his life little  of value has been  written.  The  available  encyclop<edic articles give some facts  about  his life and  work but  nothing  else. The  few periodical articles I have checked are brief and  superficial,  with  two  notable  exceptions:  Fred Bosworth's "The Backwoods Genius with the Magic Pen"  (Maclean's, 6 June '59)  and  Michel Poirier's "The Animal Story in Canadian Literature: E. Thompson Seton and Charles G. D. Roberts"  (Queen's Quarterly, July '26- April '27). The  first is a short but lively profile of the man, spiced with some astute observations and  unusual information; and  the latter  contains  a perceptive and well written analysis of a limited number of his animal biographies. Two brief American biographical  works have been published,  but  neither  can  be  considered  as a serious study.  As for  Engstrom's Buffalo  vind:  en  biografi  over  Ernest  Thompson Seton  (Stockholm,  1953), it is beyond  my realm  of competence.  In short,  I  am reasonably  convinced  that  the
best source  of information on  Seton is still Seton  himself,  primarily  his erratic
I
and sketchy autobiography, Trail  of an Artist-Naturalist (New  York, 1941), and
The  Arctic   Prairies   (New  York,  1911), an  unevenly  written  but  sporadically interesting  account  o£ a  canoe  trip  down  the  Athabasca  to  the  plains  country near  the Arctic Circle, made  by the author  and a friend in 1907. Of only slightly less value as sources of self-revelation are his other major  works, for rarely could he keep himself out  of the  picture.  Two Little  Savages  is thinly  disguised  auto­ biography; Lives of the Hunted and Wild  Animals  I Have  Known are well larded with personal anecdotes;  and  Rolf in the Woods and The Gospel  of the Red Man reveal his basic religious beliefs and ethical principles.
The  foremost impression  I get from a reading of his works is that  of a deeply
sensitive and  introspective  man,  somewhat egocentric and  opinionated,  who con­ centrated   all  his  powers  on  the  observation  and  minute  study  of  nature  and, especially in  his later  life, on  the spreading  of his "gospel".  With  the  move to Lindsay,  the  boy was brought  into an intimate,  exciting contact  with  primitive, unkempt  nature.
He quickly learned  the simpler lessons of woodcraft and eagerly listened to tales
of great  hunts  and  Indian  warfare  told by men who had  lived out  their lives on the edges of civilization. He read tales of adventure and survival, such as Robinson Crusoe  and  Swiss  Family   Robinson, and later, in  Toronto, the  works of the naturalists,  starting  with  A. M.  Ross's Birds  of Canada   and  eventually  moving into the formidable works of Alexander Wilson, the great Scottish-American ornithologist  of the late eighteenth  and  early nineteenth  centuries,  and  of James

47

FLIGHT TO THE PRIMITIVE



Audubon,   the  most  famous  of all  naturalists  of the  frontier  world.  Under   the influence  of such men, the young boy soon began to keep his daily journals, and began,  too, to sketch much  that  he saw -animal  tracks,  animals,  birds, leaves, flowers.
By his early teens he had begun to retreat  from his family and from his school­
mates, in order  to develop his own peculiar,  off-beat  interests. He  was an  intel­ lectual  eccentric,  an  anti-social,  juvenile  hermit,  an  explorer in  search  of an earthly  paradise.  Eventually  he found  it in  a quiet,  cool, isolated glen  near  the River  Don.  With  a  typical  egocentric  gesture  he  named  his Eden  "Glenyan", for Yan was the name he had given his hermit-self. It was in Glenyan that,  with crude  tools, he fashioned his first crude shanty.  Here  he  methodically studied  the flora  and  fauna   around  him,  and  began  to  develop  his  conviction  that  in  the world of nature  man can find comfort and consolation, an ever-renewing strength,  and  all  the  essential  rules for  ethical  and  moral  behaviour.  Here,  too, he first assumed in full the role of the romanticized  Red Man.
In some ways Seton undoubtedly regarded  himself as a mystic. His "voice" and
his visions directed  him in his activities, his way of life, and his beliefs. Though he eagerly sought for fame -and fortune -he preached  the doctrine of the simple life close to nature, and  in  the spiritual  shrine  that  he erected  he placed  in his holy of  holies an  idealized  symbolical figure -the  American  Indian, the  Red Man.  From his childhood on he was deeply moved by anything even remotely associated with the Indian  way of life. As he matured  he not only came under the influence  of the  writings of Fenimore  Cooper,  but  he also met many  Indians  in his  wanderings   through   Manitoba   and  during   his  long  canoe  trip  down  the Athabasca. Generally  he admired  them,  but  he  was not  blindly  consistent.  He found  many  of  the  Indians  in  the  far  north  indolent,  dirty,  superstitious,  and savage. But these, he would have argued, had been corrupted  by the corrosive influences of a white civilization. Actually his ideal was the Indian  of the past, untainted  by external forces.
This  ideal  is partially  developed in the character of Quonab, "the  last of the
Myanos  Sinawa", the  profoundly  religious, highly  moral,  and  friendly  Indian, who  teaches  Rolf  Kittering,  an  abandoned white  orphan, the  true  way of life; it is deeply  imbedded  in Two   Little  Savages,  when  Yan  and  Sam  are  brought to  maturity   and  wisdom through  studying  and  practising  Indian   manners  and customs;  and  it  reaches full bloom in The  Gospel of the  Red  Man; An  Indian Bible, a work compiled by Seton and  his second wife towards  the end of Seton's life. This  is an  anthology of sorts in which are gathered  "the  inspiring  teachings

FLIGHT TO  THE  PRIMITIVE



of the  Red  man," prayers,  ethical  codes, laws of behaviour.  Its  most revealing section is the  preface,  in which Seton takes a last, lingering look at his own age. In  it he finds little that  is good. The  White man's  way has failed. His culture  is materialistic  and  poisonous; his religion arid, punitive, fruitless. Slowly but all too surely he is destroying  himself. But salvation can yet be found  through  following the  new Gospel. For  this work, Seton expressly hoped,  was to have  a universal religious appeal; it would bring unity and peace into a world fraught  by dissension and  torn  by fears;  it would satisfy Christian  and  Buddhist, Catholic  and  Protes­ tant,   Presbyterian   and   Methodist-all alike. If man  would  only  retrace  the tracks of the  noble  Indian, he could once again find his way back  to nature - and survive.
To  the sceptic  and  the scientist, Seton's  beliefs doubtless appear  naive-the products  of a simple  mind.  But to Seton  himself they were fundamental. They provided  the  main  thrust  that  led to his establishment  of the Woodcraft  Move­ ment  and  to his early support  of the Boy Scouts in America,  and  they  run  as a central strand  in all that  he wrote. His sincerity is obvious; and it is this sincerity that is one of the great factors in his success as a writer.






FROM  HIS  EARLIEST DAYS    in  Lindsay  and  Toronto  Seton studied  the world  of nature  around  him. Animals, birds, flowers, trees, the signs of  changing  weather,  the  medicinal folk  lore  of herbs-all  came  under  his scrutiny.  By curious  games and  devices to sharpen  the memory he increased  his powers of observation. Though he finally submitted to his father's  commands  that he should  be an  artist  rather  than  a naturalist,  he satisfied his own longings by becoming an artist who sketched and painted animals and birds to the almost total exclusion of all else. In  1879 he was gold medalist at the Ontario College of Art in Toronto, and  in  the following year, according  to his own account,  he won a seven-year scholarship  at the Royal Academy School of Painting  in London,  only to abandon it after  twelve months or so to return  to Canada because of ill health. Later,  in the  189o's,  he went  twice to Paris to study and  paint.  At a time when he might have come under the influence of the French Impressionists-Cezanne, Monet,  Renoir,  Van  Gogh-he  preferred  to carry  the  bodies of dead  dogs to his attic  rooms to perfect his knowledge of the anatomy  of the wolf. The  anatomy studied, he then painted-and exhibited-wolves, large and small, and realistic.

49

FLIGHT TO  THE PRIMITIVE



He  prepared   one  massive canvas,  four-and-a-half   feet  by seven, entitled  "The Wolves' Triumph," for entry in a Paris exhibition.  It was rejected. The  subject, said  the critics, was revolting. They  had some reason on their side:  a picture  of a wolf pack finishing off the skeletal remains of a human  body is a gruesome sight even though  the winter setting is done with skill and feeling. The  picture was eventually  exhibited  at  the  Chicago  World's  Fair  of  18gg,  much  against  the wishes of some members of the Toronto  selection committee  who were inclined to believe that  it  might leave an  unfavourable  impression  of the Canadian  way of life.
In  brief, Seton  never became a great  painter.  He  remained  basically a skilful
illustrator  doing  what  he loved  to do-portray  animals  and  birds, sketch  the tracks  to be seen in wilderness sand  and  mud;  illustrate,  with patient  detail,  the best ways to  make  tepees and  bows and  arrows,  or to start  a camp  fire, in  the Indian   way, by rubbing-sticks. And  his specialization  paid  off. Not only did  he do a thousand  drawings of animals and birds for Merriam's Century Dictionary; he also used his skill to illustrate all that he wrote.
But  what  of Seton,  the author?  First he was prolific, especially in  the  period
from the 18go's to the 192o's. He started in a modest way with articles and short stories, but eventually he wrote more than  thirty volumes, ranging from scientific and  semi-scientific  works to  the  vast  bulk  of  his  writing,  which  is specifically directed  towards  the younger reader.  In all his works, however, Seton centres his interest on one focal point-the world of nature.
From  the moment he bought Ross's Birds of Canada (he was then thirteen), he was well on  his way to becoming a self-taught  naturalist. Early in his career  he published  scientific articles on  birds and  animals,  and  in  1909 he produced  his Life-Histories of Northern Animals:  an  Account of the  Mammals of Manitoba. Not  until some nineteen  years later, however, when he was approaching seventy, did  Seton  complete  his  most ambitious  work, his Lives  of Game   Animals. This vast work, originally published in four volumes, immediately  brought  him  recog­ nition  as an outstanding  naturalist.  Professor McTaggart Cowan,  himself  a wild life specialist of international reputation,  tells me that  the Lives  still stands as an invaluable  reference work in its field, in spite of errors and  unscientific observa­ tions and  of its anecdotal  passages and  personal  reminiscences.  For Seton, even in his scientific garb, could never get far away from the technique  of the tale, nor from  the  personal  approach   he  exhibited  with  such  skill in  his more  popular writings.
In some ways Seton was actually in revolt against the scientific method. To him

50

FLIGHT TO THE PRIMITIVE



the type of natural history then current was too general, too vague, to be effective. Scientists, he said,  placed  their  emphasis on  the species. For  him  a  true  under­ standing  of animals  and  birds  came  through  a study of the individual. To  him each  animal  was different,  possessing its own  particular  characteristics,  its own special profile of behaviour.  Moreover the line of demarcation  setting man  apart  from  animal  was a  slight  one.  He  even endowed  his heroes and  heroines  with human  virtues-dignity, sagacity, mother-love, love of liberty, obedience, fidelity
-and encouraged  man  to look closely at the beasts of the fields and  the birds of the air so that he, man, might learn from them ways to a better life.
At times, especially in his early stories, he so humanized  his figures as to strain the  credulity  of  his  more  critical  readers  and   to  antagonize the  scientifically minded.  At  first,  he  even  made  his animals  talk, not  as the  animals  of Aesop talked,  but  as  human   beings  talk  when  caught  in  situations  that  arouse  such emotions as terror,  love, or pity. He translates the single "thump" of a rabbit into "look out" or "freeze"  and  the triple "thump, thump, thump" into "run for dear life." In his later stories, however, he declared  this conversational  technique  to be "archaic", but  he never  ceased to endow  his heroes with  human  characteristics far  beyond  the  accepted  reaches  of instinct.  In  "The  Springfield  Fox",  for  ex­ ample,  his heroine,  Vix,  leads  the  pursuing  hounds  across a railway  trestle  just in time to have  an engine overtake and  destroy them. And Wahb,  the aging and heroic figure in The   Biography of a Grizzly, is given a truly Roman  end  when, worn out and  burdened  by a sense of defeat, he courageously enters  a cave filled with fumes he knows to be lethal.
It was, I believe, because of this same stress on the importance of the individual,
with  its consequent  narrowing  of the  gap  between  animal  and  man,  linked  of course with his ability to tell a good tale, that Seton as a wild life biographer  was from the first successful. He started in a modest way with such tales as "The  Story of a Little Gray Rabbit," which appeared  in that grand old magazine for children, St. Nicholas, in October,  18go, and he was soon in full flight as a writer of animal fiction. With  the great success of Wild  Animals I Have  Known (it was published in I 8g8 and  ran  through  four editions in two months)  his fame was firmly esta­ blished.
It  would  be  a  mistake  to suppose that  Seton's  path  to fame  was completely
smooth.   Naturalists   especially  regarded  his  works  with  scepticism.  Foremost among  them  was the  famous  and  formidable  John  Burroughs,  who  turned  his sharp  pen  against  Seton  in  "Real  and  Sham  Natural  History",  in  the  Atlantic Monthly for  March,   1903.  The  attack  opened  obliquely  and  ended  frontally.

FLIGHT TO  THE PRIMITIVE



Early in the article Burroughs warmly praises Roberts' most recent work, Kindred of the  Wild, a volume in which "one finds much  to admire  and  commend,  and but  little  to take exception  to ... in many  ways the most brilliant  collection of animal  stories that  has appeared." This  was a bitter  dose for Seton to swallow, but  more  bitter  was the one given a page later.  "Mr. Thompson  Seton says in capital  letters that  his stories are true, and it is this emphatic assertion that makes the  judicious grieve. True  as romance,  true  in their artistic  effects, true  in their power to entertain  the young reader, they certainly are;  but true as natural history they are not."
Seton was deeply hurt. He was, if one can  judge by his writings, a self-centred man -opinionated  and sincerely convinced of the validity of his techniques. He was  also sensitive, especially to  this unfavourable  criticism  from  a man  he had long  admired. His autobiography  bears witness to his distress. He devotes a full chapter  to the  Burroughs  affair.  He  refused,  he says, to answer  the attack  pub­ licly,  waiting,  rather,  like a  clever   hunter until  he  could  meet  his  antagonist face to face. The  chance soon came, for the two men were brought together at a dinner  given by the fiery little Andrew  Carnegie,  who not only loved  wealth but also  worshipped  famous  authors.  With  Boswellian glee,  and  with  considerable gloating,  Seton  records his conversation  with  the older  naturalist. Burroughs,  he says, was awkward  and  ill at  ease. He,  on  the  contrary, was self-possessed and quickly  took full control of the situation. It was he who chose the subject of con­ versation-wolves,  his favourite  topic.  With  barrage-like  intensity  he  covered Burroughs  with probing questions about his first-hand knowledge of these animals. Had  he ever seen even one wild one? Under the attack, says Seton, all that "poor old John" could answer was "No", "No", and  "No", until finally, after a further  scattering of shots, he completely "broke down and wept".
If the  incident  is accurately  recorded  the evening  must  have  been far  from a
jolly one, but  I am  moved to doubt  by what  follows in a subsequent  paragraph. Burroughs,  says Seton, quickly made  a  public  apology in  the  Atlantic  for July,
I go4,  by lauding  Seton in these words:  "Mr. Thompson  Seton, as an artist and a  raconteur, ranks  by far  the highest in this field;  he is truly  delightful." But a glance  at  the actual  article bears interesting  fruit.  Entitled  "The  Literary Treat­ ment  of Nature" it really continues Burroughs' early attack,  though perhaps  with slightly  less acidity.  "I  do  not  expect  my natural  history to  back  up  the Ten Commandments," wrote  Burroughs,  "or  to  be  an  illustration  of  the  value  of training-schools  and  kindergartens,  or to afford a commentary  upon the vanity of human   wishes." And,  most significant:  "We  have  a  host of nature  students  in

52

FLIGHT TO  THE  PRIMITIVE



our  own  day,  bent  on  plucking out  the  heart  of every  mystery  in  the  fields and woods. Some are dryly scientific, some are sensational, and a few are altogether admirable. Mr.  Thompson Seton,  as  an  artist  and  raconteur, ranks  by far  the highest  in  this  field,  and  to  those  who  can  separate  the   fact  from  fiction in  his animal   stories, he is truly  delightful." As I have  indicated by the  last italics,  old John's public  apology  was limited, to say the least. I still wonder  a bit if he really did  break  down  and  weep  before  Carnegie and  his assembled  guests.
Yet  this  brief  encounter has its points  of interest.  The soundness of Burroughs' position  is obvious,  but  so, too,  is the  deep  faith  that  Seton  had  in  himself.  The modem naturalist still looks on  the Seton  stories as a strange mixture of fact  and fiction.  But  the  young  reader is not  a  trained naturalist, and  willing  to suspend disbelief,  if  any  exists,  he  reads  the  biographies as written, feels the  full  impact of their  conflicts  and  tragedies, and  obtains much  factual information about the world of wild life.






STANDING QUITE  ASIDE from  all  of Seton's other   works  are two  books  that   demand special  comment -Rolf in  the  Woods and  Two  Little Savages. The   first  is nominally an  historical  novel  for  the  young; the  second  a rich  brew  in  which  are  mixed  nearly  all the ingredients found  in varying degrees elsewhere in his writings.  It is the quintessence of Seton.
I first read  Rolf shortly  after  it appeared in   I g 11. In  the half-century that  had slipped   away  since  then  the  details  of the  yam  had  disappeared beyond  recall, but  the  general impact of  the  book  still  lingered.  When   I  re-read   it  recently  I could  easily see  why.  Set  in  the  era  of the  border  war  of  I8I2-14, the  story  re­ volves around its two  central figures -Rolf  Kittering, a desolate,  insecure white orphan, and  Quonab, a noble  Indian, with whom  Rolf seeks refuge  and through whom  he learns  the  ways of life in the woods, and  the values of a simple and  pri­ mitive   religious  faith.   The  inherent didacticism in  the  work  is  not  repulsively obvious, for both  preaching and  teaching are well blended  with the exciting  events of  the  narrative itself,  including Rolf's  escape  from  the  combined  tyranny of a besotted  uncle  and  a  rigid  New  England society, the struggle  for survival in the deep  woods of the Green  Mountains, and  the dangers of acting  as scout and  guide for American forces along  the Canadian border.
The  actual war,  with  its causes, events, and  attendant horrors, is carefully  kept


53

FLIGHT TO THE PRIMITIVE



in the  background, for Seton  hated  war and  the  military mind.  Only  towards the conclusion of Rolf  does he allow  the excitement of armed combat to creep  in at all;  he prefers-and in this he is consistent-to concentrate on the more  peace­ ful  thrills  of camping, canoeing, hunting, trapping, and  learning the  Red  Man's way of living.  It all makes for good  reading, and  inasmuch as there  is something of  a  plot  with  considerable suspense  it is a good  yarn,  too.  Seton  wrote  nothing else quite  like it.
But  another work also stands  by itself-the classic in the Seton  canon -Two
Little Savages. It contains  the essence of all of the  beliefs that  Seton  held so dear. It is also the  best  and  most evenly  written of his works,  evidencing not  only  his superb knowledge of animal  life, but  also his ability  to tell a good story, to handle dialogue and  to catch  the sounds and  accents  of dialects,  to write clear expositions, to  preach  unobtrusively, a good  sermon,  and  to create  convincing characters. It has  been,  I would  guess, the  most widely  read  of his books, and  it is the  book,  I believe, that  will last the longest.
Basically   the   ingredients  are  autobiographical. In   the  summer of  1875   the
fifteen-year-old Thompson  was  seriously  ill,  and, under   the  doctor's orders,   he was  sent  to  Lindsay  to live with  the  Blackwell  family,  who  had  moved  into  the large  house formerly owned  by Mr.  Thompson when  he was attempting, without success,  to  be  a  "gentleman farmer." William  Blackwell,  the  head  of the  house­ hold,  was  a  practical, hard-working, hard-bargaining  man.  Superficially  he  was tough   and  severe,  but  under  the  surface  he  was  kindly  and  understanding. To  Ernest  he was a better  man  by far  than  his own father. As for Mrs. Blackwell, she was  a  fountain of  motherly  sympathy. Quickly the  lonely,  sickly  boy  became a member of  the  family  group. In  Two  Little  Savages the  Blackwells  become  the Raftens, and   one  of  the  Blackwell  boys  is  transformed  into  the  second  little savage -Sam. As for Ernest  himself, he is given  the name of Yan -his favourite nickname from  his Toronto days.  Even  the  minor characters are drawn from  the folk of the  village  and  its neighbouring farms-dirty, snivelling  Guy;  old Caleb,  wise in  woodcraft and  Indian lore;  and  the  Sanger (Lindsay)  Witch,  the  ageless Granny de  Neuville,  who,  though a  repulsive  crone,  proves  an  unending source of  folklore  and  herbal   knowledge,  which  she  transmits to Yan  in  a  thick  Irish accent. Around  these  characters  the  plot  is formed, and   thin  though it  is, it  is sufficient   to  hold  most  readers  to  the  end.  The   vicious  three-fingered tramp  is duly  caught and  subdued, and  the  evidence   extracted  from   him  is enough to terminate the  bitter  quarrel  between  Raften and  old  Caleb, and  to  restore  that  poor but dignified  ancient  to his rightful  place in the community.

54

FLIGHT TO  THE  PRIMITIVE



The  obvious plot, however, is really a subsidiary affair. The real purpose of the work is to show how Yan,  the insecure, sensitive, unhealthy  boy, achieves status among his fellows. This  he does through  his unremitting  study of nature,  through practical camping,  through  learning and using Indian  woodcraft lore, and through his willingness to venture  into the dark  and  mysterious recesses of the forest and to face danger.
To  Sam  and  Yan  achievement  brought  excitement. It was exciting to make a
tepee-not  any old tepee but  a real Indian  tepee. It was exciting, too, to make a  fire with  rubbing-sticks,  to cook, Indian  fashion, to listen to the strange  night noises, to track  animals  (even  the family cat), to trap,  to hunt,  to kill-not  a coon but a spitting,  vicious lynx. It was exciting for these two little savages to do all these things  for  the  very reason that  in such  things Seton himself found  his own  particular, exciting  way  of life. He  knew of what  he wrote  and  was able to  convey  that   knowledge  with  enthusiasm  to  the  millions  who  were  to  read the work.
Thus  far  I  have said nothing  about  his ability as a writer in the more limited
sense of that  word.  To  avoid some comment  on him as a literary  person would be  a  continuation of  the  silence with  which  he  has  been  generally  treated  by literary  historians  and  critics. But to separate  his skill as a stylist from  the other ingredients  that  he  poured  into  his moulds is not  an  easy task. Perhaps  he did not even regard  hixnself as a literary figure. His writings indicate  little interest in the great  works of literature and he seldom refers to other writers. Yet he did formulate  for  himself  a  simple  theory of  composition from  which  he seldom wavered It is found  in an interesting  passage in Rolf, and,  reduced  to its funda­ mentals, is this:  follow the practice of Wordsworth  and  write of what you know and  of the  times in  which  you live. To  do otherwise is folly. In  following this theory Seton  placed severe limits on himself, but it may be said that it was partly through  his limitations  he achieved success. He knew of what he wrote;  he knew for  whom  he wrote;  and  what  he said was generally stated  with  apparent sim­ plicity, and effective lucidity.
I at one time thought  that  Seton was not really interested in writing as an art.
But  I  am  now  convinced  that  he was a  conscious stylist, quite  willing  to alter and  to prune  in order  to produce  the effects he desired. As a writer of expository passages he was a master;  he could handle dialogue with an easy naturalness  (this is especially evident  in the Two Little  Savages) ; and  in his best descriptive pas­ sages he writes with sensitivity and poetic feeling. Take, for example, this descrip­ tion of a marten,  from Rolf in the Woods:

55

FLIGHT TO THE PRIMITIVE



Into  a thicket of willow it disappeared and out again like an eel going through  the mud,  then  up a tall stub where woodpecker holes were to be seen. Into  the largest so quickly Rolf could scarcely see how it entered,  and out in a few seconds bearing a flying squirrel  whose skull it had  crushed. Dropping the squirrel  it leaped  after it, and  pounced  again  on the quivering  form  with  a fearsome  growl;  then  shook it savagely, tore it apart, cast it aside. Over the ground  it now undulated, its shining yellow breast  like a  target  of gold. Again it  stopped....  Then  the  snaky  neck swung  the  cobra  head in  the breeze and  the  brown one sniffed, and  sniffed, ad­ vanced  a few steps, tried  the  wind and  the ground.  Still farther  and  the concen­ trated  interest showed in its outstretched  neck and quivering  tail.

This,   which  is  not  atypical, illustrates Seton's  competence  as  a  writer. The structural  quality of  the  sentences  is such  as  to  produce  impressions of  rapid motion   and  of  tension.  The  language, basically  simple,  is precise  and  concrete, and  appeals  to the multiple  senses of the reader. And  the well controlled occasional metaphor or simile  adds  a touch  of poetic  magic  to the overall  effects.
But  Seton  nods  much  more  frequently than   Homer. His  punctuation can  be not  only erratic but  erroneous; his grammar is by no  means  always  precise;  and when  sentimentality or  moralizing overpowers his  judgment he  produces bathos of the  worst order. This  will serve to make  the last point. It comes from  the story of  Tito, the  wily  coyote.  She  is quietly  approaching a  prairie-dog, just  before the kill:

She soon cut  the fifty yards down to ten, and  the  ten to five, and still was undis­ covered.  Then,   when  again  the  Prairie-dog  dropped  down  to seek more  fodder, she made  a  quick  dash, and  bore him off kicking and  squealing.  Thus  does the angel of the pruning-knife  lop off those that  are  heedless and  foolishly indifferent  to the advantages of society.
(Lives of the  Hunted, Toronto,  1901.)


It should   be  evident   from  the  quotations above  that   no  valid  claim  can  be made for Seton  as a great  writer; but  it can  be argued that, within  his limitations and  for  his  particular purposes,  he  was  usually  competent, and  at  times  good. But -and  again  it must be said -he cannot be finally  judged  solely as a writer. His  success  came   from  his  extraordinary ability   to  fuse  into  a  unified  and  an artistic  whole  his manifold  gifts-his  wide  and  deep  knowledge as a naturalist, his skill as an artist,  and  his competence as a writer, especially  for the young.
Today the  success  that  he first  achieved  some  seventy  years  ago has  been  re­
affirmed  by  the  myriads  of people  who  have  read,  and  loved,  and  remembered

FLIGHT TO  THE  PRIMITIVE



his works. His brilliant successors, such as Williamson, Gerald  Durrell, and Haig Brown, all of whom write with deep insight of the animal world, have not driven the ancient  Nimrod off the stage, nor have the radical changes that  have occurred in  our  own  civilization;   a  brief  bibliographical  excursion  reveals  that  at  least twelve of his volumes  are  in  print  and  that  a limited number  of his works are being translated  abroad.
Some  day,  perhaps,  old  Seton  Thompson-or  Thompson Seton-will  be
forced  into the limbo where dwell forgotten  authors. But for the moment  he sits securely on his small throne  in the hierarchy of the living. And I believe that  he will continue  to hold  his place so long as the young pitch tents  (even  backyard, drugstore  tents), or gather  around  camp  fires with the gloom of the forests as a backdrop,  or look with inquiring  eyes into the world of nature.


















57




chraaicle



L'ANNEE LITTERAIRE
AU CANADA FRANCAIS


Jean-Guy Pilon




L'ANNEE QUI SE TERMINE a CtC !Cconde en aouvrer de toute" sortes, mais elle a surtout ete significative et representative  de ce qui se passe dans toute Ia vie du Canada  fran ais,
pays.  Certains  sociologues ont  parle  d'examen   de  conscience,  de  prise de  con­
science. II faudrait aussi parler d'ouverture a Ia vie.
D'autres analyseront ce phenomene  complexe, mais en devant  resumer l'annee litteraire,   je ressens le besoin d'en  souligner !'existence. J'eprouve par  ailleurs un certain  embarras,  ne sachant pas exactement  ce qu'il faudrait retenir ou eliminer. Certaines  manifestations, assez modestes en elles-memes, ont une profonde signifi­ cation; et c'est  justement ce qu'il  faudrait  expliquer  longuement.  Les  notes qui suivent sont done forcement superficielles, et, au surplus, constituent  un debut  de jugement  qui paraitra  hatif, mais surtout  extremement subjectif. Depuis que  j'ai entendu   un  grand   journaliste fran ais
subjective,  je ne m'y retrouve plus tres bien, mais je fais comme si.
Annee  faste, done!  Des manifestations  importantes, des livres de qualite  et de toutes tendances, des possibilites innombrables  surtout  qui se dessinent a !'horizon.
En  septembre  Ig6I, Diane  Giguere, speakrine  a Radio-Canada, remportait  le
Prix  du  Cercle du  Livre de France  avec un  roman  discute  Le Temps  des ]eux. Qu'importent les discussions, voici qu'un  tres bon ecrivain-et les adversaires du livre le reconnurent  egalement-etait ne. Elle l'emportait sur uncertain nombre de concurrents,  dont  Jacques Godbout  qui devait  par Ia suite publier son roman
a Paris.
A  Ia fin de septembre,  Ia Cinquieme  Rencontre  des Ecrivains  Canadiens,  se

L'AN NEE LITTERAIRE



tenait  dans  les Laurentides, a Saint-Sauveur, une  petite  municipalite a 50 milles de  Montreal. Autour du  theme  "L'ecrivain dans  notre  societe", les congressistes
-plus  d'une centaine -entendirent  et  discuterent les remarquables  communi­ cations   de   MM.  Jean-Charles  Falardeau,  Fernand  Jolicoeur,  Andre   Belleau, Claude Jasmin,  Maurice Beaulieu  et  Gerard Bessette. Ces  rencontres annuelles ont  pour  but  de  permettre aux  ecrivains  et aux  intellectuels de  discuter  de ques­  tions  qui  les interessent et les touchent, de  prendre mieux conscience  de ce qu'ils  sont  et  de  ce qui  se passe  autour d'eux, de faire  entendre  leur  voix en  tant  que  groupe.
A la fin de la Rencontre, ils adopterent trois resolutions  que  l'on  peut  resumer ainsi:   a)  demander au  gouvernement du  Quebec de declarer la langue  fran  aise comme  seule langue officielle au  Quebec; b)  que  l'autodetermination soit etudiee et  re oive
veritable Ministere de l'Education.
Les  journaux, la  radio  et la television firent  largement echo  a ces resolutions et a la Rencontre en general. La  revue  Liberte  publia  par  la suite le texte de toutes
les conferences.



IL   Y   EUT  par  las suite  une  abondance de  romans nouveaux. Mentionnons plus  specialement Laure  Clouet  d'Adrienne Choquette, trois livres
d'Yves  Theriault, coup  sur  coup; et  le meilleur  roman de  Claude Jasmin:  De­
livrez-nous du  mal.  Que  l'on  se souvienne  de nom  de Claude Jasmin.
Jean  Lemoyne publia  par  la  suite  un  livre  d'essais:   Convergences. C'est  le premier  livre de  Jean Lemoyne, l'un  des grands esprits du  Quebec, qui s'est tou­ jours  refuse  a  la  publication.  Convergences a  reu
Gouverneur general. 11 a  ete  largement  commente, au   Canada et  ailleurs,  et
restera  comme  un  livre  majeur. II a egalement ete un  succes de librairie, ce qui prouve qu'un livre  difficile peut  parfois  rejoindre un large  public.
Un  evenement exceptionnel allait  se produire en novembre. On  sait que  le Gouvernement du  Quebec compte deja  un  Ministere des Affaires  culturelles. Ce Ministere a  cree  un  Conseil  provincial des Arts  dont  la  tache  est de conseiller  le Ministre et d'etablir une  politique d'ensemble tendant a promouvoir la cause des arts,  des lettres  et  des sciences  au  Quebec. Forme  de  vingt-six  personnes venant de  toutes  les disciplines  artistiques, litteraires et scientifiques, ce Conseil s'est reuni pour  la premiere fois en  janvier  et assez frequemment par  la suite.

59

L'ANNEE  LITTERAIRE



Preside  par  M.  Jean-Charles  Falardeau, de  l'Universite Laval  de Quebec,  il sera le plus vigoureux ferment de 1'essor culture! chez nous. Son action est a peine
commencee;  pour  peu qu'on  lui donne des moyens d'action, il apportera aux arts,
a Ia  litterature et  aux  diverses disciplines scientifiques  une  aide  et  un  soutien
comme on n'en pouvait esperer il y a cinq ans.
En  janvier,  Gilles Marcotte,  le directeur  du supplement  litteraire  et artistique de  La  Presse, publiait  a Paris, aux  Editions  Flammarion, un  roman  de grande qualite Le Poids de Dieu. Ce livre, bien ecrit et compose, raconte le drame spirituel
d'un  jeune pretre dans le milieu quebecois, il y a quelques annees.
Et  puis, ce fut  le roman  de Jacques  Godbout, L'Aquarium, publie lui aussi a
Paris, aux  Editions du Seuil. De Jacques  Godbout,   je ne puis parler sans Ia plus grande  amitie.  J'ai   pour  l'homme  beaucoup  d'estime,  d'admiration et  un  coin secret  d'envie.  Car  Jacques  Godbout  reussit  tout  ce qu'il  touche.  Et  Dieu  sait qu'il  en  touche  des choses! II fait  depuis  longtemps  de  Ia peinture,  il a  publie trois ou  quatre   recueils de  poemes  (le  dernier  C'est  Ia chaude  loi des hommes
est a lire sans faute), il a ecrit beaucoup  d'excellents  textes pour  Ia radio,  il est
cineaste  a !'Office  National  du  Film, il a dirige  Ia revue  Liberte, il voyage, il a
represente  le  Canada   aux  dernieres  Biennales Internationales  de  Poesie en Belgique, il intente  entre-temps une action en libelle contre un juge de Ia Cour Superieure,  il poursuit parallelement  trois ou quatre polemiques dans les journaux et les revues, j'en passe et des meilleures. Et void  qu'il  publie son premier roman: un  livre  brillant,  passionnant,  tres bien ecrit,  qui  re<;oit une  excellente  critique partout.
Un  ami  faisait  un  jour  cette  blague:  si le  Canada anglais comptait   un seul
Jacques  Godbout,  il ne serait sfirement pas question  de separatisme.
S'il  est paru  plusieurs essais au  cours de l'annee, il en est un pour  lequel  j'ai beaucoup  d'affection   ( et  j'ajoute  tout  bas:   je prefere  ce livre  a celui de  Jean Lemoyne)   c'est  Repertoire  de Jean  Simard.  Romancier et  professeur a !'Ecole
des Beaux-Arts, Jean  Simard  a reuni dans ce livre des textes tantot  courts, tantot longs, ou 1'auteur se revele tel qu'il est dans la vie quotidienne: un homme bon et
tendre,  attentif,   curieux,  qui  s'interesse  a tout,  observateur   des defauts  et  des
qualites  des autres,  un homme  de gout,  un civilis€. Un  excellent ecrivain  aussi. Son livre n'a  malheureusement  pas re<;u  Ia diffusion  qu'il  meritait.
Les Editions de !'Homme et les Editions du Jour  ont publie au cours de l'annee une grande  quantite de livres:  deux par semaine  environ.  Essais, documents, reportages,  romans,  et parfois  reeditions. Si beaucoup de ces livres n'ont  qu'un interet  passager, il n'en reste pas mains que l'activite  de ces editeurs est une chose

6o

L'AN NEE LITTERAIRE


extremement  precieuse   et  qu'ils   ne  sont pas  etrangers a l'eveil  vigoureux du
Quebec.
J'allais oublier, et  je m'en  serais  repenti  longuement, !'admirable et  touchant roman de Claire  Martin: Quand j'aurai paye ton visage. Un livre tout en nuances et en sous-entendus, plein d'humour; un roman  que  j'aime  beaucoup.


Du  coTE DE   LA   POESIE, l'annee  fut specialement mauvaise. Si l'on  excepte  Poetry  62 qui  comportait une partie  de poemes en franc;ais et qui
a  ete  rec;u avec  froideur  au   Quebec  mais  beaucoup plus  chaleureusement au
Canada anglais (que  se passe-t-il  done?  la  peur  des Americains?), il n'y  a vrai­
ment  rien  a mentionner, si ce n'est  l'Anthologie de la poesie canadienne-franc;aise
que  prepare, pour  les Editions Pierre  Seghers  de  Paris,  le critique franc;ais Alain
Bosquet,  et qui sera publiee  cet automne.
Enfin,  pour  terminer, une  enumeration rapide:  un  imposant Salon  du  Livre, en  mai,  a Montreal; les trois  conferences  de  l'historien Maurice Seguin  sur  la genese  et l'idee  separatiste au  Canada franc;ais, donnees  a la television  de Radio­
Canada en  avril  et  mai; les numeros speciaux  de  Liberte  et de Cite  Libre  sur  le separatisme; et la disparition du Nouveau Iournal.
La  disparition d'un  quotidien est  triste  en  elle-meme.   Le  Nouveau Iournal etait  bien  presente, vivant, audacieux. Mais  cela  ne suffit pas  a pallier  aux  defi­ ciences  de !'administration et  a l'a peu  pres des chroniques et  des informations.
Par  contre  La  Presse, sous la direction de Gerard Pelletier, est devenue  un journal tres bien fait et indispensable.
C'est  un  resume; un  aperc;u;  il faudrait, je le repete,  analyser  longuement tout cela, et beaucoup d'autres gestes, manifestations et ceuvres.
II se passe quelque chose au  Quebec. Quelque chose de grave.  Mais  ne  jouons pas au  prophete; n'allons rien  predire. II vaut  mieux lire les livres qui se publient ici, suivre  le mouvement des idees, le bouillonnement culturel, et ... esperer.











61


review articles




BLAKE, THE PROPHETIC REPROBATE

E. E. Bostetter


PETER  F.   FISHER.  The   Valley   of  Vision:  Blake  as  Prophet   and  Revolutionary,
ed. Northrop Frye. University  of Toronto Press. $6.oo.


BLAKE's anti-rational  myths have proved  to be an almost irresistible challenge to the rational mind.  Ever since Damon's massive commentary in 1924, critics  have  been  convinced, though they may  not  care  to  admit  it,  that  the apparently  disordered  swirl   of  symbols and   action   can   through  patience,  inge­ nuity   and   erudition  be  reduced   to  co­ herent and  logical  pattern, susceptible to rational   explanation.   Each    succeeding critic   is  lured   on   in   all   the   pride   of Manfred  to   believe   that  by   "superior science" he  will  make   the  final   break­  through  that   subdues  the    poems  to reason.   I   am   no  exception;  each   year I  lead  my  graduate seminar  in  Blake  in a  fresh  assault  on  the  prophetic poems. This  time,   by  Urizen! I  say  to  myself, I will  "make sense"  of them.  But  in  the end  I  am  thrown  back  sulking  into  my academic den,  to find  what  solace  I  can in  my  critical tablets  and  books of brass. This   is,  after   all,   poetic   justice:  it  is Blake's  avowed  intent in each  of his later poems  to accomplish the  rout  of the reasoning power.
 On  the other hand, he has more  or less deliberately-with something of the mis­ chievousness   of  his  devils  in  The  Mar­ riage  of Heaven and  Hell-encouraged the  stubborn effort  to  reduce   the  poems to  logical  pattern and  meaning. Indeed, he  lays  a  trap   for  us  when  he  has  Los say in Jerusalem, "I  must  create  a system or   be  enslav'd  by   another  Man's";  we seize  so  eagerly   on   the   word   "system" that  we miss the implications of the  next line,  "I will  not  Reason & Compare: it is  my  business  to  create."  Perhaps most diabolical  are    the    neat    mathematical groupings:   twenty- even
nights,  seven eyes of God, four  zoas, three classes of men, two contraries. And then there   are   the   names of  mythic  persons and  places, always inviting and  yet slyly eluding precise  definition. Finally,  the impressive terminology;  "states",  "nega­ tions",   "contraries",  sugg,est a  carefully thought-out  philosophical  "system". The temptation to  play  Urizen  to Blake's  Los is overwhelming.
Professor  Fisher  was well aware  of the temptation at  the  same  time  that  he sue-

REVIEW ARTICLES



cumbed  to  it,  and   as  a  result   his  book reveals  a curious and stimulating tension.' What  he  is  primarily concerned  with  is to provide  the  necessary  intellectual con­ text  in which  to read  Blake's poems, and  he  makes   relatively   little  effort   to  look closely at  the  poems  themselves.  In  other  words,   he  is   attempting  to  reconstruct the  total  view  of  Blake  the  prophet, the range  of his attitudes toward man,  nature and  society which  are  responsible for and inform   his  mythic  visions. He  has  added  little  except  in  detail   to  what  is already available to the  scholar, but  he has made his  own  independent  investigations and pulled a great  mass of obscure erudition together into a succinct and lucid account.
He begins by presenting Blake as the prophetic "Reprobate",  the  visionary   to whom   the  ultimate reality   has  been  re­ vealed  and   who  has  therefore the  duty, like  the  Hebrew prophets, to  communi­ cate  his  vision  in  an  effort  to  transform or   redeem    mankind.  He   addresses   his prophecies  to  the  great  body  of  people who can  be influenced and changed, who specifically   can   be   led   "to   absorb   and  reconstruct   prophetic  inspiration  into   a new   cultural   form",  and   who   thereby become    the    "Redeemed."   Within  the frame of society,  this  makes  him  a  revo­ lutionary dedicated to  the  elimination of the  "Elect", the  "reasonable" rulers  of a hierarchically  ordered  and   unjust  state, who  in  turn  seek  to  persecute or  drive him out.
Fisher   devotes  the  rest  of  his  book  to

1  Professor Fisher  was  head of  the  department of  English at  the  Royal   Military  College, Kingston, at  the  time  of  his  tragic death in a  sailing  accident  in  September,  1958.   He had  virtually completed the  book,  except for the  last  half  of  the  chapter on  Milton and  a final  chapter on  Jerusalem.
 reconstructing   the    total    vision    which underlies  the specific  prophecies. He pro­ ceeds more or less chronologically, taking up  first  Blake's  concept of  history  as an "Eternal  Circle"  of   destiny   revolving  from  creation and  birth  to  judgment and  death, within  which  revolve  in  the  same pattern  the  circles  of   historical  periods  and  individual  lives. Politically, this circle of destiny becomes an endless  dialectic of revolution  turning  to  reaction, as imagi­  native  vision  hardens into  the  rigid codes of   law   and   reason.    Against   this   large frame   of   reference Fisher   considers   the development of  the  Christian  Church  as a  politico-religious system  in  which  pro­ phetic   vision  was  translated  into  "alle­ goric   revelation"  and   ritualized   in   the moral  code  and  rites  of a  priesthood. He has  a  valuable  discussion  of  what  Dante and  Milton  meant  to  Blake  and  how  he made  use of them. He proceeds to explore  the  rise of  scientific  rationalism and  the mechanistic  view   of    the   universe.    He traces  the line  of  descent  that  Blake sug­ gested    linked    Plato  and    Aristotle    to Bacon,  Newton  and   Locke.  He  looks  at eighteenth-century  empirical  philosophy through Blake's  eyes, concentrating upon Locke  and  Berkeley.  In  one  of  his most interesting chapters  he   investigates the ambivalence  of  Blake's   attitude  toward Methodism, Swedenborg   and   Words­ worth.  He  emphasizes the  difference be­ tween  Blake and  the  Romantics; it obvi­ ously offends  him  to  have  Blake  called  a "Romantic": "With  certain specific  Ro­  mantics  he may be said to have  had  some connection,,  but  to  read  his  works in  the context  of  most  of   the  Romanticisms of the  period  would  distort them  complete­ ly."  Perhaps; it  also  distorts them,  or  at least severely limits  our  understanding, to read   them   completely apart  from   that

REVIEW ARTICLES



context. His  book  would  have  been  the richer   for  a  discussion  of  the  extent   to which Blake was a central  rather than eccentric  figure   in   English  literary   tra­ dition, moulded by and  reflecting  in  his work  the  same  forces  that  produced the Romantics.
In   the   last   half   of  the   book  Fisher
focuses  more   directly  on  the  poetry.  He is concerned with  unfolding the continu­ ous   line   of   development   from   Blake's earliest   political  poems  to  the  last  pro­ phetic  epic,  Jerusalem. He is not so much interested  in  analysing  the  poems  as  in abstracting   the   themes   and    exploring their  significance  against  the  background of  the  world-view  already  presented. He defines   the   mythic   characters  in   terms of   their particular role or functions as dramatizations of dialectical interplay. In similar   fashion  he  defines  and   discusses the  meaning  of  the  terminology   of  the poems.  All of this is valuable both as reference   and    in   making    the    reader aware of  how  closely  linked   the  poems are   as  parts   in  an  organically  evolving vision.  But  by  its  very  neatness  and  co­ herence it  tends  to lull  the  reader  into  a false   confidence   (which    seems   to   be shared in  part   by  the  author)   that  here is the golden  string  that  will lead through the   poems   and   reveal   the  hidden   logic of their  structure -in other words, make  them   explicit    to   what   Blake  calls  the "corporeal eye."
But   the  difficulties   in  the  reading of the  poems  as poems remain  unsolved. Perhaps the  poems  cannot  be understood
 without  the  knowledge  Fisher   has  pro­ vided; but  they  cannot  be  understood by it   alone.   Fisher   has  brought  us  to  the edge  of  the  valley  of  vision;  in  the  best sense  his  book is  preparation for  reading the  poems.  On  the  other   hand   it  points up  the  inadequacies of  the  rational and historical methods for  carrying us through  the   poems.  Fisher   has  gpne   as far  as it is possible to go by rational synthesis; if future criticism  is to  add  to our  perception of the  poems  it must  pro­ ceed   in   a  different way.   Any   further effort   to  reduce  them   to   philosophical "system" threatens  to  do  Blake  the  dis­ service  of  turning what  is  imaginatively magnificent  into   what   is   intellectually absurd.
Professor   Frye   whose   student  Fisher had   been  and  who  has  been  responsible for  preparing the  manuscript for  publi­ cation makes  in  his preface the  final  fit­ ting  comment, "It is clear  that  even  the revised  manuscript was due  to be revised again,  that   the  dry  Aristotelian style was to   be  given   more   warmth   and   colour,  that   the  sentences  were  to  be  tightened up  and   more  examples  given,  and, per­  haps,   that   less  knowledge  of  Blake   on the  reader's part would  be assumed. Even  as   it   stands,   however,    The   Valley   of Vision   is  not   simply   a  contribution  to our   understanding of Blake, but, as an interpretation of one of the great  creative minds of  Western   culture  by  a  critical mind  of singular erudition and  power,  a lasting    contribution   to   human   intelli­ gence."



THE CANADIAN
POETRY UNDERGROUND
 





George Bowering


Than Any  Star   by  Padraig 6 Brain,  Cl6  Chluain Tairbh, Toronto, 143  pp,  cloth
$3.50; D-Day   And   After   by  Frank Davey, Tishbooks, Vancouver, 24  pp,  paper
65¢;  The  Drunken Clock   by  Gwendolyn MacEwen,  Aleph, Toronto,   14  pp,
paper  50¢;  Poems   by  David    A.  Donnell,  Village  Press,   Thornhill,  Ontario,
27 pp,  paper (price unlisted).


THE BUSINESS of small poetry magazines   in  Canada, as  in  the  U.S., is at   present   busier  than   it  has  ever  been before, and  the same can be said for the business   of   publishing   little    books   of poetry.  The latter usually  come  from  the little mags, and there often emerge little publishing  houses  that   turn   out   one  or two   books  and   then   retire as  the  poet­ publishers disperse  around the  country.
Padraig 6 Broin  has  been  the  editor since  r 953 of one  of the  best of the  very little  mags,  Teangadoir, and  his new publication  is  more   ambitious  than   an other  venture this year. Than Any Star is a thick  clothbound book containing  most of  6 Broin's  poems  from  his  twenty-five year  residence in Canada. 6 Broin  is one of  the  most  versatile and   prolific   poets in the  Canadian poetry  underground. He is  presented  fairly   here,   where   we  can see  the  poet  trying   his  talented hand  in various  modes  of expression.
6 Broin  always  gives the  impression  of
a   wise   Toronto  literary  figure,   in   his poetry  and  elsewhere.  His  criticism  in his magazine is  sensible  and   informed, and this   applies  as  well   to  his  poetry.   But readers  who   are   not    "in" -who are neither poets  nor  their  friends-- do  not know   about  him.   This   is  why  it  is  so good  to see this  book appear. It can  only
 be  hoped,   in  view  of  the  alacrity   with which readers ignore poetry and avoid Canadian poetry,  that  it will be followed by a cheaper paperback edition.
The   book  acts  as  a  family  and  social history,  and   6 Broin   seems  to  have   a purpose   that   entails leaving  a  record - something  that  speaks  of an  artist's sense of amvre,  his sense of a  unifying  purpose in  the  life-full  of  work  he  leaves  behind him  as he writes  along.
6 Broin   chronicles  past   history,   his
family,   his   own   growing,   with   a   nice irony,  and  more  important, with  a desire to  tell  the   story,   to  say  what   it  is  all about,    to   keep   his   attention  more   on telling  than  on the  technique of telling. Consequently   the    form    is   clean    and natural in  the  way  Chaucer's is. 6 Broin reminds  one of Chaucer often, and  this largely  because  he has a no-nonsense attitude of telling  the reader  something, rather than  trying  to impart an apprecia­ tion of verbal  wizardry.  A diligent  reader will find the odd  tour  de  force, I suppose,  but  6 Broin's  effort  to  tell  about   things makes   his   journal   unusually  consistent  and  straightforward:

My  Father came  from  County Down: Long,  low,  whitewashed Loughhorne;
Drumlough, outside Rathfriland Town; Newry,  where he  was born-

REVIEW ARTICLES



The shop  in  Water Street yet stands; These fields,  where once  he  played;
The Square, where Green  and  Orange bands
Held  annual parade.

But  it  would   be  difficult  for  the  re­ viewer  to  resist  trying  to note  a  cultural influence  in the militant Irishman's work. Of  course  there  are  thtl Irish  placenames and    strange   words   used   through   the man's speech,  into  which  these  things,  I hope,   have   come  first.  And  who  could help  but say something unscientific  about  the   supposed   cultural  lyricism   of   the leprechaun poet?:

I said  to  the  Moon, "I love  you."  She
Whispered "Oh, my dear!"
And  other things she said  to me
You  shall  never  hear.

She  could not  come  down  to me, I could  not  climb  to her:
I found a warm-lipped girl  could  be
A tender comforter.

The Moon was angered and  she swore
Revenge, and  told  the  tide;
And  that is why  he  hounds the  shore,
Hungering for  my  bride.

D-Day   And    After   is  a   sequence   of poems about  thwarted young love, the minute   observations  of   daily   life   and daily   thought  after   a  bombed-out   love affair-hence "D-Day."
Here the influence of Romantic lyric meets  the influence of theW. C. Williams
-Black Mountain rigour  of natural  ex­ pression,   and   they   produce a   rhythmic listing  of  minutire and  moment. The  reader   learns   to  expect  it  all,  the  banal  detail   among  the   vital   lovelost   truths. Warren Tallman, in  the introduction, an important  piece   of    criticism   in   itself, makes  the  point  that  Frank  Davey's  is a young  talent,  and  that  the  reader  is the first-hand  witness  to  his promise.  This  is true,   but   also,   as   Tallman  hints,   the

66
 poems   do   not   fall   prey   to  the   normal young  poet's  usual  faults.  Seldom  do you see the  tortured and  affected  syntax  that fairly   pleads   for  an  appreciation  of  the poet's  passion.
The poems  are  made  to be read  aloud, and  to  this end  the  variable measure and notation depending on articulation are used   around  the   page,   as   in   the   title poem:

and now  these  dishes who
can  let  me  hurl them toast  crumbs and  tea

What  is  attempted  is  a   re-enactment rather than  an  interpretive description of experience. This can  result  in very subtle and  seemingly  unedited renderings of mental experience, as  in  the  best  of  the pieces,  "Bridge Poem";

At  the  end  here
a  man who  communicates
thru an  orange piece  of cardboard
which I've paid  for and ahead people
people person
I can  never get  thru  to

Davey's only  lack  of  care  seems  to  be in   his   swerve   into   light   verse.  His  re­ enacting  sensibility   is  not   geared   to   a sense   of   the   funny   that   could   survive composition  of  poetry, and   the  humour is weak.
Gwendolyn MacEwen gives eloquent testimony to the  fact that artificial imagery can  still be expressed  with beautifully  chosen   sound   patterns, and this is what  makes  her poetry  worthwhile. Her  very deliberate sound  values, the choosing of  syllables,  result  from  an  im­ pulse    to   make    up   for   discarded   end rhyme.  They are  usually  exactly pleasing.

REVIEW ARTICLES



The  images  are  young  and  feminine and surrealistic. The  poet's   guiding  intellect is always there  in every line, and in the intellective finishing  of epigrams:
crazy   damned  canasta  from    the   hand  of canned Cassandra and  the sermon was of vermin and   Vermouth.
The wife of poet Milton  Acorn, Miss MacEwen has nevertheless escaped  the instinctual proselytizing of  the  middle Toronto group, and  already writes  better poetry    than    does   her    husband.   Ezra Pound    said   poetry    begins   to   atrophy when it gets too far from music. Miss MacEwen's strikes  as competent "scored" music.  Unfortunately it  is often  difficult
 to  make  out  what  she  is singing  about. David  A. Donnell is an  unknown poet
from  Toronto. His book is a beautiful, lovingly  produced job of private printing and    binding.    The  poetry    is   quaintly archaic in expression, given  over  to  des­ cribing  female  genitalia as mythical topo­  graphy.
Enamoured of his own exaggerated expression, Donnell writes ("pens") poetry   that   is  not   response   to  life,  but rather advertisement of the  poetic  soul in travail   and   ecstasy.  There is  too  much stock,  too  much   of  "azure," of  "gold," of "rarest wine." We  have  not,  it  seems, heard   the  last  of  the  Mauberleys.







BIBLICAL SIMPLICITY

William  Hall


F. w. WATT, Steinbeck. Clarke, Irwin. $1.10.


CRITICS OF  STEINBECK's work, whether  well-disposed like  Mr.  Watt or downright  antagonistic   like   Edmund Wilson,   tend   to  do  for  Steinbeck what he   has   always   resisted    doing   himself. They  tend,  that  is-if  only in the prefer­ ence  they  express for  this work or that­ to  classify  the  essential  Steinbeck as this or  that   kind   of   writer.  Mr.   Watt  very consciously   leans  over  backwards, in  his excellent    if    sometimes  sketchy   critical survey,  to avoid  doing  this. Steinbeck, he tells  us,  "might  best  be  called   an  inde­ pendent  eclectic"; but   nevertheless it  is clear  from his discussion  that  he  regards
 Steinbeck's really  significant work  to  be confined to The  Pastures of  Heaven
( 1932), In Dubious Battle  ( I936)  -this with  quite   serious reservations-The Long   Valley  (I938),  The  Grapes of Wrath   (1939)   and   (rather coolly)  Can­ nery  Row   ( 1945). To   see  this  as  the significant  core  of  Steinbeck's  work is to see  him,  if one  must  use  a  tag, as Cali­ fornian  regionalist   concerned  at   times (like  his  contemporaries Dos  Passos and  Farrell)   with  immediate social  issues of the  thirties.
It would   be  difficult,   on  any  serious grounds, to  quarrel with  this  list  as  de-

REVIEW ARTICLES



scriptive  of   Steinbeck's  best   work   (no matter how one might dislike the label attached to  it); but  the  image  of  Stein­ beck  that  results  if one  considers  this list in   the  context   of  the  rest  of   his  work, raises some interesting questions and  leads to some interesting conclusions.
Does  this Steinbeck -especially  when considered as novelist-warrant the same kind  of critical attention as do for exam­ ple Faulkner and Hemingway-to men­  tion  two other novelists who have already  been  treated in this "Writers and  Critics" series?  I  think   the  answer  must  be  that  Steinbeck  as a novelist  does not.
In  Dubious Battle  and  The  Grapes of
Wrath are  the only  two of the five books I  have  listed  that  can  in  any  reasonable sense  be  termed novels at  all.  The  other three   are  all  essentially  groups   of  short stories.  The   Long  Valley  pretends to  be nothing else. The  Pastures of Heaven and Cannery  Row  consist of groups  of stories linked   loosely  together  by  a  particular common  setting,   a  group  of  characters, a  consistency   of  tone  or  point   of  view. Moreover  the   two   novels   proper,   al­ though  they   still   retain   some   of   their  power,   are,   as  Mr.   Watt   rather   reluc­  tantly states,  flawed.  The  nature  of  their  flaws,  if  we  extend   our  view  to  include Steinbeck's  other    novels,   is   significant.  The handling of the strike in  In Dubious Battle  tends  to reduce  the individuals in­ volved   to  specimens  and   results   in   an oversimplification  of  character and   mo­ tive.   The   idealization  of  the   Joads   in The  Grapes  of Wrath, the  presentation of   the   family  as   archetypal  pioneers possessed   by  their   dream,  as  even   the original family  of man,  blurs  their  exist­ ence  as  actual human beings  just  as the need   to  express   the   ideals  of  a   Whit­ manesque democracy in  the  chapters on

6R
 the   Weedpatch  camp  and   the  Hooper ranch   imposes   altogether  too  neat   and simple   a  pattern  on   the  fictional   facts, no  matter  how  firmly   rooted   in  actual fact  the  conditions as described may  be.
Now  these flaws suggest  that  Steinbeck has not so far shown  himself capable of controlling  large   fictional   patterns  with any  great  measure of success. In  the  two examples I've  just given  he oversimplifies; in  East  of Eden  he  lapses  into  incoher­ ence;   in  The   Wayward   Bus  into  a  too rigid   allegory;  in  To   a  God  Unknown and  The  Pearl into  the  confusion  of  his own peculiar semi-mystical symbolism.  In every  case  he  shows  himself   lacking   in the  ability  that  Lawrence for example in Women in  Love so clearly  possesses:  the ability  to  hold  in  balance the  individual conflict   and  the   larger  issues   against




THE VANCOUVER STATIONERS LTD.

Printing Lithography Commercial
Stationery





TRINITY  9-5341

3642 COMMERCIAL  DRIVE, VANCOUVER  I2, B.C.

REVIEW ARTICLES



which  the  individual conflict  takes  place and  with  which  it is intertwined.
If one  then  concentrates attention  on the  three   books  of  short  stories,  despite the occasional  overt comments on society's corruption in Cannery Row, and  the more implicit comments on  it  in  such  a  story as  that   of  the  Lopez  sisters  in  The  Pas­ tures  of Heaven, the main  preoccupation is  not   at   all   with   social   questions  but primarily with  a  personal  obsession  that  is,  I   think,   Steinbeck's  constant  theme.  He  is  constantly  trying  to  describe  and  give meaning to a sense of  disillusion  that  hangs,  as  a  thin  mist  might  hang  at  the edge  of  one  of  his  sharply   etched land­  scapes,  over  his  characters. This  sense of disillusion  may  descend  without warning in  a blinding fog on  any one  of his char­ acters  at any  time, violently,  haphazardly. And  when  it  descends  it  reduces  life for them   to  a  chaotic empty   farce.  It does this  to  Doc  in  Cannery  Row   when   he sees the drowned girl;  to Raymond Banks in  The   Pastures   of  Heaven  when   Bert Munroe   reveals   to  his  naive   mind   the full  horrors of hanging; to Eliza  Allen in the story entitled "The Chrysanthemums" in  The  Long   Valley when   she  sees  her flowers   cast   away   in   the   road   by  the tinker. Mr.  Watt  quotes  Steinbeck's friend,  Edward  Ricketts,  as   describing Cannery Row  as "an  essay in lonelines5." The phrase,   I  think,  might   be  extended to  include most  of  his  work-essays  in loneliness  and  disillusionment-even  the melodramatic fantasy  Cup  of Gold  or the sentimentalized Tortilla  Flat.
The Steinbeck one  is left  with  then  is a writer  whose  major strength lies in  the short  piece,  in  a  hard clear  presentation
 of  a  narrow   area  of  surface reality  and in an intuitive understanding of a very limited   span   of  the   spiritual  spectrum. To  say this is not  to condemn  Steinbeck
-one might  as  aptly  describe  Heming­ way in  the  same  terms-but  is  to make one  wonder  why   the  author  of  some twenty-five  books  should  have  so almost perversely  refused  to  develop within   his very   real   if   limited   talent;   obstinately pursuing  instead   in  a  great   many  of  his books  a  significance   that   appears to  lie outside his range.  At times one is haunted by the  suspicion  that  he  is following  the ignis   fatuus  of  "the  Great American Novel" as did  his contemporary Thomas Wolfe. At others  one  thinks  with Norman Mailer  that  "the world  became too com­ plex and  too ugly for  a man  who  needed situations  of   Biblical   simplicity   for   his art."
Whatever the reasons for Steinbeck's erratic performance over  the  past  thirty­ three   years  there   is  no  doubt   that   the author of The Grapes  of  Wrath  cannot be dismissed as lightly  as can  so many  of his  contemporaries  who  "botched  their books,"  as  Fitzgerald put  it,  "by  the  in­ sincere  compulsion to  write  'significantly' about  America." There is no doubt either  that  in  Mr.  Watt  Steinbeck has  found  a sympathetic   critic.   He   does   sometimes,  in  his effort  to be fair  to Steinbeck, stop short  of  some conclusions  that   it  seems his  discussion  must   bring   him   to.  And this is a fault.  Yet  as it must  compel  Mr. Watt's readers  to read  Steinbeck in order to  see if they  also  would  stop  short,  one might  conclude  that  this  particular fault is not  without  a certain virtue.






6g




POET ALIVE

RAYMOND sousTER.  Place  of Meeting.  Gallery
Editions  II, The  Isaacs  Gallery.

Place  of Meeting neither  adds  to nor detracts from  Raymond Souster's  current place  among Canada's leading   poets.  It adds,  however,  forty-eight further  poems to his substantial achievement, the nature of which  will be discussed  below.
There are certain games -bullfighting is one  of  them,   basketball   another -in which  the  patterns are limited  and  the spectator  can   predict the  recurrence of what   he   has   seen  many  times  before. Given,  however,  the  right  kind of player, the knpwing  spectator watches  the  recur­ ring  patterns of  the  game  with  an  ever­ present delight, for  the charm lies not  in the   patterns  alone   but   in   the   grace,  economy,  and   deftness   with  which   the player   executes  them.   Such  a  game   in words  is  the  Japanese  verse-form   haiku, and,   allowing for   the  lack  of  concision in  the    English   language,  Raymond Souster   is  a   master  in  haiku  or  in  its equivalent.  Consider, for  example "No­ vember, Early":

Dead  leaves, dead  leaves, dead leaves and  brown
over which the black squirrel scampers  with  his perfect  living spring!

or  "The First  Thin Ice";

Tonight
our love-making

ducks
walking  warily
the first thin  ice
of winter.
 
These have  all the qualities of haiku, and of Raymond Souster's poetry  in general: the  simple,  quick running, seemingly effortless   diction;  the   rhythm  of   collo­ quial   speech;  the    homely    illustration drawn from  observation; and  the  sudden  leap  of  the  imagination  which  from   in­ side   himself   the   reader   realizes   to   be startlingly  yet  intuitionally  true.  Souster  himself in "Ed Hall  at the Westover" un­  consciously describes  his own poetry  at its best  when  he writes," ... the  same  age­
less ease I of a  man  in  love with  his art,
not  fighting it, I not  trying  to prove any­
thing  ..."
Over  and  over  in  Place  of Meeting as in his other volumes of verse, Raymond Souster  pulls  out   the  same   stops,  plays the same  tunes.  We know  before we open his  book   what   his  subjects will  be  and how  he will treat  them: a thrust at the hypocrisy  of religion, another at  the stuffiness  of small  town  life in  the  Mari­ times; stronger comments upon the Cana­ dian   literati  and   the   phony   politicians. None    of   these   we   take   over-seriously. Souster is more  attractive in his loves;  he is  not   himself  when   he  hates.  His  loves invariably  include:   the   background  of natural beauty  over  which  Toronto, like a bloated animal, sprawls; youth  and  the joy of young  bodies;  baseball; the  pathe­ tic   endurance  of  the   crippled  in   body
and  I or  mind; and  those  kindred spirits
the  fellow   poets  of  which   he  approves. The  warmth and   humanity of  his  love, his  wistfulness  because   life  is  not   "the big   rock  candy   mountain" that   people wish  it  to  be,  and,  above  all,  his  clean­ cut  grace  of expression  make  us  satisfied with    the   same   fame   in   volume   after  volume. One  accepts  variations upon   a theme when  they are played  by a master's hand.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



In  our  time  of specialization, it is  par­ ticularly  difficult  to make  genuine  poetry of the commonplace and  to convey value through the  mere  presentation in  juxta­  position    of    simple   sensory   images. Souster's  success  in  writing this  kind  of poetry over many  years has proved  that  it is still  possible  for  the  poet  to communi­ cate in completely non-specialized langu­  age to a wide variety  of men  and  women.
No doubt  A.  J. M.  Smith and  Raymond
Souster  have  an  approximately equal rat­ ing  in  the  minds  of Canadian  professors of  English,   for  both   are   poets  of  great  craftsmanship and   dedication,  and  their current  positions   as  Canadian  poets  are comparable.   I    have,   however,    shown poems   by   both   Souster   and   Smith   to labourers and  to  young  people  of varied interests.  All have responded to the work of  Souster;  few  have  responded to  that  of  Smith,  even   after   Smith's aims  and  techniques have been carefully explained. The    words    most    commonly   used   to express   the  cliff erence   between   the  two poets   have   been   "alive"  and    "dead". Although I do not  agree  with  this verdict  with  respect   to  the   poetry   of  Smith,   I agree  with  it  one  hundred  per  cent  in
 so far  as it  relates  to  that   of  Raymond Souster.  There are  many  Canadian  poets as alive as Raymond Souster  in  the flesh, but  when the flesh becomes  word  few are as alive  in  the  kinetic  attraction of their verse  to  those  in  the  Canadian  popula­ tion who need  poetry  the most.
Souster's  poems  seldom  fail.  They  are
the product not so much  of books as of observation, work, imagination, and  the courage  of that  stubborn conviction which  speaks  so well in  the  last  poem  of Place  of  Meeting:

That's the  way
we've  got  to hang on-

like the last  patch of snow clinging to  the  hillside crouching at the  wood  edge with  April  done

dirty-white but  defiant

lonely fighting death
FRED COGSWELL



THE VIRTUES OF URBANITY

ROBERT FINCH.   Acis in   Oxford   and   Other
Poems. University  of  Toronto Press.  $3.00.

RoBERT FINCH  is  an   urbane poet  in  a nation   that   is  too  often   content  merely with   becoming   urban.  He   writes   with poise and  self-consciousness. The Diony­ sic fury  never  leads  him  where his reason  would  not  have  him  go,  and  his  crafts­ manship  is  con trolled and   accurate. Thus, one imagines, Flaubert might  write  if another incarnation made him a Cana­ dian  poet  instead of  a  French  novelist.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



These   qualities,  which  at  once  grace and  limit  his verse,  were already  evident in  Dr.  Finch's first  volume,  Poems, pub­ lished  in  r 946.  The  present  volume,  dis­ tilling  the  work  of the decade  and  a half between   then  and  now,  can  be  taken  as confirming the  bounds  of his possibilities as  a  poet.  His  gifts  are  neither epic  nor dramatic;  he   is   not   a  myth-creator  of the   kind   one   encounters  frequently  of late  in  Canada,  unless one sees a mytho­ logical  touch  in  his  title  sequence,  "Acis in   Oxford",  in   which   he   dwells   with ironic   tenderness  on  the  echoes  a  per­ formance  of   Handel's  version   of    the ancient  legend   arouses  in  the  minds  of hearers and  performers; finally, he is not a   poet   of  the   Canadian   scene,  among  whose  amplitudes his  verse  sounds  with the  silvery remoteness of rococo music.
Yet, such limitations defined and granted, Acis in Oxford is often  true  and sometimes  very good  poetry,  its delibera­ tion  elaborating on  accurate  insight  and  translating, with  a  conciseness impossible to prose, sensitive observations on human existence  and  the  world  of nature. Occa­ sionally,   it  is  true,   Dr.  Finch   falls  into shallow  triteness:

No  mute inglorious Milton even  pined,
His   numbers ravished  hearts  as   well   as critics.
What lacks   when   beauty   is  its  own  <esthe­
tics?
Whose  work    of   skill   falls   short    because
unsigned?

Sometimes also he submits  to the tempta­ tion  of  mere  virtuosity,  of  trying to  ele­ vate  a trivial  observation  by verbal  juggl­ ing.  This happens in  "From a University  Window", where   he  describes  a  man lime-whiting a  playing  field  on  a  snowy morning:
. . A   paler  green  now   snow   begins   to lime  it,
 Powdering the  white gulls and  the  whitened lime-lines
And   the  lime-white siren-suit with   the  man inside it
Pushing the  powdery liming-machine before him.
Yet  Dr.   Finch,  who  is  concerned  al­ most  to  obsession with the  different rhythms of  the  outer   and  inner worlds, can   write   also  with  sensitive  conviction on   the   regrets   and   consolations  of  the human  mind. In  "A  Certain  Age",  for instance, he  talks  of  the  transient things that  we enjoy  "unwary of our  luck", and  thus  he ends his sonnet:
They have  all gone  and  we are  far  away
Where every  season  is a winter's day
That  comes   and    goes   and    always   is   the same

Except that we, more  than its atmosphere, Still   know   and   feel   and   see  and    breathe
and  hear
That   wind,  that  grass,    those    trees,    that
eager stream.
And  in  "The Metaphor" he  expresses  a neo-Metaphysical conceit  with  power and   an  admirable verbal  percussion:
Rain  lashes
And  washes
The muck  and  ruck, Leaving the  rock, There in  the  bare Stone hear it  stir The seed  of groves,
The meed of sheaves.
Listen again, Listen to  rain Whisper and roar The metaphor, For  like  its  boon
He  shall  come  down.
Dr.   Finch  is  an   unfashionable  poet, who  takes  hints  from  the  past  wherever he  finds  them  fitting, but  those  who  dis­ regard him  for  this  reason  will miss  that  combination  of  craftsmanship and   fine sensibility  which-at its  best-makes a good   verse-writer  into  a  poet's-if  not
a  popular -poet.        GEORGE WOODCOCK

BOOKS IN REVIEW



BLUNDERBUSS AGAJNST  BUTTERFLY

FRANCES  BROOKE.  The History of  Emily Montague.  McClelland &  Stewart, New Canadian Library. $r.25.

WHEN SIDNEY SMITH said  that  he never read   a  book  before   reviewing  it   ("this prejudices a man  so"), he probably perpe­ trated   the  canard  that   a  book  reviewer has  no conscience. Conscience, or fear  of righteous indignation,  would  prevent this reviewer   from   discussing   Mrs.  Brooke's The   History   of Emily  Montague in  any popular  medium  for   disseminating  in­ formation.  A  discussion  of the volume  in question,   however,    is   both    right    and proper   in   such   a   journal  as  Canadian Literature.   Canadian  Literature  is  for specialists,   and   so  is  Emily   Montague. How   shocked its  author  would   have been at the thought! She  feared, she said, that  her  work  was  better   liked  by  men than  women.  One  wonders two  hundred years   later   who   were   those   men   who were  pleased   to  read   the  adventures of the  sentimental, sensitive  Emily  and  her silly  goose of  a  friend, Arabella Fermor. (Emily  should  certainly have  been  called "Clarissa".)  We   know   that   nine   years after   Emily   appeared,  Burke   and   Gib­ bon, Reynolds and Sheridan all  pro­ fessed  themselves  to  be  doting  admirers of  another  charming  young  woman,  the still   more    sensitive   Evelina,   and    her creator,  Fanny   Burney. It  is  true   that  Emily   was   not   faced   with   the   endless saga of  misadventures that  befall Evelina,  who  put  up  with  vulgar  relations, perse­ cutions  by the  same  relations, woeful mis­ understandings on  the  part  of  the  noble hero, near  rapes,  missing heirs and death­ bed  repentances; but  Mrs.  Brooke's  is a
 tale of equal  sentimentality, though with­ out   the   melodrama.  Could   it   possibly have  been read,  as its author says it was, by "a  man  of  exquisite  taste", who  was "one  of  the  best  judges  of  Literature I know"?   We   remember   that   once   in   a reckless  moment Dr.  Johnson  confessed that   contrary  to  all  rumours  and   Miss Burney's   own   belief,   he   had   not   read Evelina,  adding   cautiously, "though  I don't  wish this  to be known."
I have  suggested   that   this  is  a  book for specialists, and chiefly for Canadian specialists,  since    the    most    significant aspect  of  The History   is  that   the  scene is Canadian. Here is authentic Canada in its early days, delineated by someone  who was  there  and  who  knew.  All specialists in  the  study  of the  novel,  however,  must be  most  grateful to  McClelland & Stewart  for  making  available  in  agree­ able   format  this   first  American   novel;  and  in  that   "first" lies its  chief  distinc­ tion. Students of literary criticism will be interested in  Mrs.  Brooke's  place  in  the stream   of   eighteenth  century  literature. She  comes  fairly  early  in  that  procession of novel writers  who had  produced a new genre    in    literature.   She    had    known Samuel Richardson, the progenitor of the epistolary   novel,   the   form   she  follows, and    she   knew    Fanny    Burney,    whose Evelina  surely owes much  to The History of Emily  Montague. Historians will find much  interesting material on  early  days in  Quebec; although the  heroine,  in keeping   with   the   age,  definitely   asserts her  lack of interest in politics,  the author finds it difficult to leave the subject out entirely. Sociologists will find sprightly discussions of social  life in  the  busy, gay city of Quebec, with  equally  deft descrip­ tions  of  aboriginal customs   of   Indians, and  a strangely  modern outlook  on these

73

BOOKS IN  REVIEW

















A. J. M. Smith: Collected Poems

One  hundred  poems notably  display Smith's melodic  gift, irony, wit, and  wide variety  of mood  and  technique.

$3.25


KILDARE DOBBS
Running To Paradise

"A  series  of  lies or  reminiscences  set  in various   places   on   the   earth's  surface," with   names   and   incidents   slightly   dis­ guised  to protect the  guilty  and  preserve the privacy  of the innocent.

$3-50


The First Five Years

A selection  from  The  Tamarack  Review, edited  by Robert Weaver, with  an  Intro­ duction by Robert Fulford.

$5-50


OXFORD
 early   Canadians.  All  this  is  set  against a background of Quebec scenery which deserves   Mrs.   Brooke's   epithet  of   the "great sublime".
It is obvious  from  the  novel  that  Mrs. Brooke  was a witty,  observant, intelligent woman, and  Professor  Klinck  in  his excellent introduction  adds  a  number of biographical facts  which  must  make  most readers   wish    that     Mrs.    Brooke    had written  about  her   own   life  in  Quebec, instead of inventing a far  less interesting heroine. She  was  not  a  writer  of  novels. Like  Jane Austen,  her  topic  was love and marriage, and   three   couples  occupy  our attention,  but    the    resemblance   ends there.  Of  plot  she  knew  nothing. In  the last twenty pages, after all the lovers are married off, each  with  an  elegant  suffici­ ency,   and   safely   back   in   England, she feels  that   perhaps a  moral  is  necessary. "A  worthy   purpose" is in  the  air,  since all  the  world  cannot live  in  the  felicity she  has  bestowed   on  her  characters, so she  introduces a  complete  new  set,  and  in  a  letter   half-a-dozen   pages   long  we have  the  history  of a vile seducer, a  too­ confiding Sophia, a  "sweet   infant" left orphaned when  Sophia died  of a  broken heart, and   a  disillusioned  female   friend  who  rescues  the  infant. All this is deeply touching  to  the  author, and   she  makes  one   of  her   happy   bride-grooms write: "The story  you have  told  me has equally  shocked   and  astonished  me:   My   sweet Bell  has  dropped a  pitying  tear  on  poor Sophia's grave."
This   is  a  light   untroubled  little   tale, an  amusing period   piece,  but  it  bears  as much    resemblance  to   life   as  a   flower pressed   within    its   pages   two   hundred years  ago  would   bear  to  the  real  article to-day.

M. L.  MAC KENZIE

74

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



THE RING OF AUTHENTICITY
ARTHUR  HAILEY.  In  High   Places. Doubleday.
$5-75·

LET  ME   MAKE  IT   quite  clear  at  the  out­ set-to   review   a  novel   which   has  re­ ceived  a  ten-thousand dollar  award (the  Doubleday  Canadian   Novel   Award)  is no simple  matter. If you pan  it, you may be suspected of wearing the green  blinkers of  jealousy. If you praise it, perhaps your critical judgment has been blindfolded by another sort of green, namely  dollar  bills. We  must  risk it,  however,  both  ways.
Before   I   read   this  novel,   I  had   the sour  feeling  that   I  was  not  going  to like it,  mainly   (I think)   because  I  had  seen portions of it in M aclean>s,  and  had  read snatches here  and  there  which  seemed  to me  to  be  pretty dreary stuff.  But  this  is not  a  novel  which  should  be read  in bits and   pieces.   Now   that    I   have   read   it straight through, I have  no  hesitation in saying  that  it  is one  of  the  most  absorb­ ing  books I have  encountered in  the past year.   This,    despite    the   fact   that    the characters are  wooden,   the  conversation is  stilted,   the  writing   is  frequently drab  and  at  best  never  rises  above  competent journalism,   and    the   writer    has   some maddening mannerisms, such as the habit  of  listing  the menus  of  every  meal  con­ sumed  by  any  character, or  the  trick  of inserting at  various   points  in  the  narra­ tive   a   reminder  of   what   other   major characters  happen  to   be  doing  at   that  precise  moment-the  "meanwhile, back at   the  ranch"  approach -which  seems to serve  no  useful  purpose. Nevertheless, this   is  an   intensely   interesting  novel. Why?  Simply  because  Arthur  Hailey,  whose strong  point  has  always  been  well-
 structured plot  plus   meticulously   re­ searched  background material, has come up  with  a  prophetic  tale  which  is  both frightening and  utterly  convincing.
The  time  is the  not-too-distant future. James  Howden, Prime  Minister of  Can­ ada,   is  faced   with   the  grim  knowledge  that   nuclear   war  is  becoming  inevitable and  that  when  it  comes  Canada will  be in  the  centre   of  the  heaviest   attacks. In order  to salvage  at  least  something from the  holocaust,   and  to  shift  the  focus  of the   nuclear   attacks   further  north   and  away   from   the   country's  food-growing areas,  Howden  and  others  in  his cabinet feel  it  will  be  essential   for   Canada  to participate  in   an  Act   of  military   and  economic  union  with  the  United States.  Howden  is  well aware that  this  proposal  will meet with  widespread opposition, for although Canadian independence is to be guaranteed in some matters, many  people will  feel  with   considerable   justification that  it is only a question of time until Canada's identity is  lost  altogether and our  national life submerged in that  of the dominant  U.S.A.
At  the  point  when  he  can  least  afford to  have  his  personal prestige  or  that   of his government threatened, Howden is endangered in both  respects. A piece of political skulduggery which he performed many  years  before,  in  his  determination to gain party  leadership, may now be exposed.    Secondly,    the    misfortune  of Henri   Duval, a  stateless  stowaway   who has  been  refused   admittance to  Canada by  the  Department of  Immigration,  be­ comes  a  national  issue  and   his  case  is taken  up by the Opposition in an attempt to   embarrass  the   government.   In   the midst  of  political and  legal  manoeuvres, the  lives and  motives  of  individual men become  hopelessly  entangled. The  situa-

75

BOOKS IN REVIEW



tion makes some men's careers and  breaks others,   almost   arbitrarily-a  throw   of the  dice.  Politicians, lawyers  and  news­ papermen   all   have   their   moments  of honour,  when    inner   conviction    corre­  sponds   with  outer  action,   and   all  have moments  when   conscience   bows  to  ex­ pediency or  principles  prove feebler  than  the  quest  for  power.  Mr.  Hailey's   story is  a   complex  one,  and   it  is  developed  with  great   skill.  The   inner   workings  of government, of  newspapers,   of  the  law, and    even   of   merchant  ships   and   the dockside -these  details  have  the  ring  of authenticity.
This   novel   seems  to  me  to  be  in  a
special category. I  am  not  certain whether it  should  be  called  political science-fiction or Political-Science fiction, but  whichever it  is, it  is worth   reading. Mr.   Hailey   supplies   no  facile   answers, but  he certainly asks some very pertinent questions.
MARGARET LAURENCE


SUSPENSE AND SWEET SUMMER

PHYLLIS   BRETT YOUNG. Anything Could  Hap­
pen!  Longmans Green. $4.50.

KENDAL   YOUNG.   The   Ravine.   Longmans
Green. $3-75·

THREE YEARS  AGO Mrs. Young  published her   first   book,   Psyche,   which   was  fol­ lowed  a year  later  by The  T orontonians, a  novel  which  excited  at least the Jet  Set of  Toronto. It is a novel  concerned with nearly-at-the-top  executives and  their wives  who  live  in  a  wealthy  suburb of The  City   and   have   problems   like  cold busy spouses and  upping those Joneses.
In The Torontonians (I  have  not  read
 Psyche)   Mrs.  Young  shows up as a senti­ mentalist and   romantic with  a  disquiet­ ing  aptitude for  collecting  cliches.  With  Anything Could  Happen! she manages to break  her  own  records.
The book  talks-with many soft chuckles-about Mrs.  Young's thirteenth summer, which  was  passed  at  "the lake" in  the  company of  her  father  (Professor G. S. Brett, Head of Department of Philosophy, University of Toronto), mother,  two   brothers,  eleven   and   nine years  old,  and   a  dog   (not   bitch)    Lucy. There were also the children of Mr. Holloway   ("a   sociologist   with   an   out­ standing reputation on  two  continents") who   joined   the   Bretts   to  prove   to  the local   people   "how  sharper   than   a  ser­ pent's   tooth  it  was  to  know  a  professor's  child."
I  can't see anything particularly sharp about tha.t tooth.  Mrs. Young and her companions occasionally spied  on  old fellows who took a pull at the flask and younger   lovers  who  circled   the  hotel  at night.  Once she borrowed a gun,  without Daddy's  permission, from  Vern  "a  mus­ cular  good-looking young man   with very  bright   blue   eyes,  thick   dark   hair,  and   a  colourful vocabulary  [e.g.  "Jesus  Murphy!"]  ... [who] could  spit  with uncanny accuracy" but  she  only  fired  it once,  at  a  groundhog  which  she  inten­ tionally missed.  She  hid  the  gun  for  the summer in  a  haunted  house  (no  spooks, though) , and  made  a fort  in  the  woods, and   won  a  rowing  boat  race  ("by  more than   a  length!"), and   ran  down  to  the dock  when  the  mailboat came  in  ("cus­ tom  never   staled   the  infinite   variety of this event") and  was "literally scared  out of   [her] wits"  when  she  met  "a  terror­ stricken  cow"  one  dark  night.
Mrs.  Young  does not seem  to have  lost

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the  self-absorption of most  thirteen-year­
olds,  for  none  of  the  other  personalities
-and   there   are   quite   a  few -in her book are anything more  than  instruments to  throw  up  new  lights  on  thirteen-year­ old  Miss  Brett.   Her  father, who  "reads philosophy"  very   early   every   morning, "never said  or  did  anything that  was not colourful," but  Mrs. Young  only  tells  us that   he  says  "Then he  should   be  horse­ whipped"  and   that   Knightsbridge is "a sink of  iniquity".
Doubtless the author has enjoyed  look­ ing  back  on  her  own  sweet  summer, and perhaps a few  (perhaps  many: her  pub­  lisher  boasts  "outstanding" sales  for  her other    books)   will  wander  happily   and foggily   with   her.   But   I   like   snappier summers  myself.
Phyllis  Brett  Young  changes, in  name
 only, when she becomes Kendal Young, author of a suspense story, The  Ravine. Incidentally,  I'm   bewildered  as  to  why she changes.  The book  jacket  blurb  says she's  he  and,  for  fear   the  jacket  is lost, this information is printed again on a preliminary page.
Kendal Young has  one  creditable quality:  he  can   pull   a  Hitchcock  gasp from his reader, at least me, when  the murderer sneaks  up  behind   the  heroine and  strangles  her.  I'm  a  sucker  for  that never - look-behind-you-something-may­ be-gaining-on-you stuff.
The   setting   is  a  small   town   with   a thickly  wooded   ravine   where   two  small girls  have  been  raped, one  of them murdered. Art  teacher Julie  Warner's discovery   of   the   second   victim    drives her  into  a campaign to expose  the  mur-






Two famous  novels available  again

ROBERT GRAVES
Count  Belisarius

A  magnificent historical  novel  with  a  superb  prose  style  fortified   by impeccable scholarship.
$5.oo


ARNOLD  BENNETT
Imperial  Palace
One  of Arnold  Bennett's finest  novels, drawing  liberally  on  his unique gift for characterization.
$5·75

BRITISH BOOK  SERVICE  (CANADA) LIMITED
1068 BROADVIEW AVENUE, TORONTO 6, ONTARIO



77

BOOKS IN REVIEW



derer, which   she  does  with  the  help  of Dr.  Gregory   Markham, "tall  and  rangy" with  "a mouth which,  though  at all times firm,  could  also be gentle."  Miss Warner has  "blue eyes ... between  thick  lashes" and,  "holding a diploma from  the  Beaux Arts  in   Paris   and   with  no  necessity  to earn   her   own   living",   drives   a  station wagon.
As  an   artist    (occupational therapy)
Julie has  befriended Deborah Hurst, first victim  of the  ravine and  subsequently an imbecile.  Dr.  Markham too  is interested in  helping the  child,  which  brings  me  to a  point  about the  denouement.
I  can't  believe that a  child  in Deborah's state  could  be shocked  back  to normal by facing  her rapist  (even if she's coming   out   of  chloroform). But  this  is the  case  in  The   Ravine,  and  Dr.  Mark­ ham  plans  it that  way.
Dr.  Markham falls in love too.

When  Greg got   back  to  the  car,   he  made no  comment, but   his  hand   found hers  and held  it. They stayed  like  that, without speaking,  for    several  minutes.  Then   his mouth was against hers in a kiss brief but possessive.
 More  shaken  than  she   had   guessed   she would   be,  Julie drew   away   from   him   and said   uncertainly, "But  it  can't  happen  like this?"
"It has  happened like  this".
"Greg-"
"Yes?"
"You'll  have    to   give   me    time    to   get used  to it".
"All the  time  in  the  world", he  told  her gently.  "Which  is  not   as  chivalrous  as  it sounds, because I don't believe  it  will  take you  long."
It really does though.
MARY MCALPINE



REBEL
WITH A CAUSE

MARGARET   WADE   LABARGE.   Simon   de   Mont­
fort.  University of  Toronto. $6.oo.

"SIMON  DE   MONTFORT,    though  only   a Frenchman, was  a  Good   Thing, and   is very   notable  as   being   the   only   Good baron   in   history."  This   is  perhaps  the best-known judgment of Simon,  but  there have   been  many   others,   notable  among them   the  scholarly   and  invaluable  work of   Bemont.   This    latest    biography   by Margaret  Labarge owes  a  good  deal   to Bemont,  as   the   author  is  the   first   to admit, but   nevertheless it  is  a  very  dif­ ferent  type   of  book.  Little   new  in   the way  of  biographical  material  on  Simon has  come   to  light   since  Bemont  wrote, and   a  shortage of  personal data  has  re­ mained a  problem for  Dr.  Labarge as it is for  all  biographers of  medieval figure>. At   the   same   time   she   has  not   utilized to   any   great    extent   the   considerable quantity of research which  has been done in recent  years on the baronial movement of   the   mid-thirteenth  century  and   the constitutional  issues  and   precedents  in-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



volved. In her attempt to keep her book comparatively short and  to preserve an appeal to  a  wide  audience, Dr.  Labarge has   not   probed  too  deeply   into  consti­ tutional conflicts.  Instead she  has sought to  set  Simon   against   the  general  back­ ground  of  his  times,  and   has  filled  out the  rather bare  details  of  his life with  in­ teresting sidelights on  thirteenth-century life.
Like her  great  mentor, Sir  Maurice Powicke,   Dr.    Labarge  tends    to   over­ emphasize the  role of Simon  de Montfort in  the   baronial  movement  as  a  whole. She  imputes more  to  ambition  and  per­ sonal   greed   in   his  actions   than  to  the practical idealism  and   rigid    honesty which  have  been  stressed  by  some  recent historians, notably  R.  F.  Trehearne. She also   seems   to   look   with   surprise   and almost   regret    on   the   popular  support  which  Simon  got  in  his lifetime, and  the near   veneration   which    surrounded  his memory.   In   fact  there   is  comparatively little  attention  paid to the whole question  of the attempt of the  barons  to get wider support for  their reforms, and  their  deli­ berate  appeals  to  the  knights   and   later the  burgesses.  Nothing new  is said  about Simon's   status   as  a  constitutional  inno­ vator  or as "Father of  Parliament".
But for the non-specialist there  is much of  interest   in   this   book.  The  footnotes are  sensibly  relegated to the  end  and  are kept  to a minimum, and  there  is a useful introduction on  the sources.  One  chapter is devoted  to a discussion  of life in noble household,  based   on   a   published   book of domestic  accounts of the  De  Montfort family.   This   is  a   fascinating   diversion which  recalls both  in manner and  content some of the  later  chapters of Iris  Origo's Merchant of Prato.
Simon   himself   does   not   emerge   too
 clearly   from   these   pages,   but   that    is partly   the  result   of  the   paucity   of  the material. But one suspects that  it is not entirely    lack   of   material  which   is   to blame  for  the  unsatisfactory  description of  Simon  and  Eleanor's estates.  The  list of   manors    given   in   the   Appendix   is neither   complete nor  substantiated;  nor is  any  attempt  made   to  define  at  what date  the list is valid; certainly it does not include   the  lands  conferred by the  King in   I 259· Furthermore  the   maps   which accompany the discussion of landholdings are extremely  misleading and give the impression    that    Simon    and    his   wife owned  more  than   half  of England. One also regrets  that  diagrams were not found for the battles of Lewes and Evesham; Simon's   military   ability   was  undisputed and  our appreciation of this would  be heightened   by   plans    of   his   two   best known  battles.
Trehearne  once   remarked  of   Simon that   so  much   remains   unknown about him  that   "when  a  man  is  as  great  and as  many-sided as  Simon  de  Montfort, it inevitably means  a different Simon  from every  pen".  In  this case Dr.  Labarge has not  produced a new or a different Simon, but she has nevertheless contributed something  to our  understanding of the period  as a whole.
MICHAEL MALLETT



MUSIC AND MYTH

JAY   MACPHERSON.   Four   Ages   of  Man:  The
Classical  Myths.  Macmillan. $3.50.

THE PUBLISHER SEEMS to have lent Miss Macpherson every encouragement, in her retelling  of the ancient Greek  myths, to produce a  finished  work,  allowing  her  a

79

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



free hand  with illustrations, tidy notes, helpful charts, a pronouncing index, end­ paper   maps,  choosing  an  excellent  type and   good   paper    and   doing   a   perfect  printing  job.   The   result   is  a  dignified little   book,  as  pleasant   to  leaf  through as  to  consult.  For  one  can  treat   it  as  a reference-book   and   keep   it   handy   for that   purpose.  The   likelihood  is that  the reader, instantly satisfied on  the  point  he wishes  to check,  will be drawn  to extend  his satisfaction to other  parts  of the  book and    in   short    time    become    a   ready­ reference  himself,   a  man   as  accurately informed as he is casual  about  it.
The  book    has    another  infectious quality,  making    for   deeper   dye.  What looks at  a glance  like a pretty  garland of verses,  deftly   woven   by  Ariel   (or  Miss Macpherson)   to   beguile  the   English reader confronted rather matter-of-factly with  myths, turns  out  to be the old myths themselves  in  poetic  metamorphosis,  yet literally  recognizable. The myths  go very well with  the  quotations, so well that  the reader  is brought to realize  that  without the   Greek   myths   most   of  our   English poets  would  have  been  short  of  a great deal  of  poetry,  of much  stuff  that  made up   their   lines.   Thus  insinuatingly and gently   Miss  Macpherson  reminds   us, in an  ag,e when  the  fable  is scorned  as  too plottily   deadbeat  and   poetry   no  longer tells   tales,    that    the    story   makes    the poetry; indeed, for  such  poets  as  Shake­ speare,   Spenser,  Milton,  Keats-parti­ cularly   Milton  (from  whom  Miss  Mac­  pherson   has  drawn   the  largest   number of her  quotations)  -the story creates  in a  very  real  sense  its  own  poetry,  so that  one   might    say   that    the   Greek   myths orchestrate much  of  our  English   poetry, and    say   furthermore  that    an   ear   for music  is  an eye for  myth  and  good  poets

8o
 have   both   ear   and   eye.  Thus  genially Miss Macpherson has transformed her reference-book into a guide to English literature, revealing that  the Greek  myths are bone of our poetic bone. A skeletal knowledge  of   what   supports  the   body does not come amiss.
Four  Ages  of Man is simply  classified.
It is a  book  aimed   at  the  child's  under­ standing,   everything  direct   and   some­ times  stark,   tales   about   a  world   where violence    reigns-storms    at   sea,   rivers bursting their   banks,  volcanic  eruptions, strife  between   heat  and  cold,  maddened men  and  women,  the  life of  things  con­ stantly   threatened.  The   early   gods  vio­ lently  possess, eat  their  children, and  are violently   dispossessed;  the  younger   gods and  goddesses  are  most  themselves  when most  opposed,  want  their  own   way, rage  in  defeat, and   are  immortal in  the story   and    so   long   as   the   story   lasts. Stories,  then,  of the  gods, of the  seasons, of human longings  have  all  the  suspense of creation, endurance, unfairness, of the inevitable end,  and  the  strange charm of

BOOKS IN REVIEW



existence   makes  them   worth   the  telling. Miss   Macpherson  tells   the   well-known and  less-known  stories  her  way,  artlessly, and  tells them  well. If at  times she skims off  the  peak  of  a  climax,  as  in  some  of the  Homeric  and   Theban  parts of  her book,  or  makes  a  sad  ending sound  like one  dear   to  the  heart   of  Little  Audrey, no  doubt   she  could  suggest  that  if more climax  or pity is wanted there  is always Homer or Sophocles to supply  it.
R.C.CRAGG



LEGENDS
OF THE COAST

ROBERT  AYRE.  Sketco   the   Raven.  Macmillan.
$g.oo.

THE GREAT RAVEN CYCLE  of legends  were known    and    told   among  many   of   the peoples  of the  Northwest coast,  the Tlin­ git,  the  Haida, the  Tsimshian,  and   the Kwakiutl.  Raven  was  all  things  to  the men  who  spun  his stories; both  defender and  betrayer; the benefactor of mankind, but  also  the  trickster   and   boaster.  It is this  highly  complex, mythical and  magi­  cal being that  Robert Ayre translates into terms   suitable  for   children.  And   very well, too.
He  relies  most  heavily  on  the  presen­ tation   of  Raven as  friend and  guardian of  man   and   emphasizes those  stories  in which  Raven uses his  wits  and  magic  to bring   comfort  and   hope   to  the  Indians living in  a darkened world. He  steals fire from  the  great   Snowy  Owl  so that  men may  be warm; he releases the sun so that  they  may  have  light,  and  brings  game  so that  they  need  not  hunger. Superhuman feats   such   as   these   were   part   of   the
 



MIRROR OF MINDS:

Changing Psychological Beliefs in English Poetry

BY GEOFFREY  BULLOUGH




Some illustrations of the ways in which  at  various  periods English  poetry  has
reflected current views of the
human mind  or soul, from  the microcosmic  conception of man inherited from  the  Middle
Ages to the twentieth century and  the interior depths
below the individual dream.

288  pages 	$5.75





UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO  PRESS





BI

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Raven tales, but  these alone  do not make the  whole,  for Raven  wa5 not only a god, but  also a man.  Ayre's stories are  on  two levels    as   were    the    original    legends. Raven's  destiny   is  not   only   that   of  a magical being  but  also that  of  the  small boy  left   to  drown   by  a  wicked   uncle. That boy, saved  by his wits and  growing to  a man,   tracks  his uncle  relentlessly  to meet   him   at   last   and   fatefully   in   the shape  of the grizzly bear.  Ayre integrates this  high  adventure with  the  magic  ele­ ments  to bring  excitement and dimension to his rendition.
He  further shows  himself  appreciative
of the  rich, sly and  earthy  humour of the originals.    This   humour  he   retains    ( al­ though reducing its earthiness), as in  the story  of  Sketco  and  The   Man  Who  Sits On  The Tide. Children will immediately recognize the  funny and  familiar   gurgle  of  the  bath   water  as  the  giant   leaps  up and  the sea water  escapes down  the great  hole.  It is in  the  use of  humour and  in his  deft,  thumb-nail  characterizations - such   as  the  grumpy Fog  Man   with  his hat   pulled  down  around   his  ears-that Ayre   surpasses   other    re-tellers    of   the Indian   tales.  This   collection   has  much
 more  meaning for the average child  than, say, Cyrus  MacMillan's beautiful, but mannered tales of Glooskap.
The   black  and   white  illustrations are bold,   patterned  on   the  traditional   west coast  art,  and  wholly  satisfying.
JOAN SELBY



UNEASY NEIGHBOURS

ROBIN  W.   WINKS.    Canada   and   the   United States:  The  Civil  War Years. The Johns Hopkins  Press. $6.50.

WITH   SINGULARLY FEW  EXCEPTIONS monographs on Canadian-American rela­ tions   have   been   written   by   Canadian historians or by former Canadian scholars who  have  become professors in American universities. Recently the  tide  has turned, possibly   because   directors  of  American graduate   theses   have   been   looking   for new   areas   that    their    budding  Ph.D.'s might  explore. Whatever the  reason,  the tendency is to be welcomed  and  it is particularly well  illustrated by the volume  under review.
The basis for  this monograph was Pro­ fessor  Winks'   Ph.D. dissertation  entitled Maple   Leaf     and    Eagle;   Canadian­  American relations  during  the  American Civil  War. In  its  preparation the  author visited  the  Public  Archives, both  provin­ cial   and   federal,  in   Canada  and   drew upon    almost   every   conceivable  source, the  most  valuable  being  the  largely  un­  tapped bound  volumes of American Con­  sular   Correspondence.  His   Note  on Sources  is  a  most   enlightening  analysis and  could  be profitably used  as a  model by any  seminar on  bibliography.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



To  a surprising degree  Professor  Winks has cultivated virgin soil, since Canadian historians, with  the  honourable exception of Professor  Landon, have  done  little extensive  research  in  this fieJd. It is to be expected  therefore  that   he  has  cleared away   some   hoary   myth  ,   such   as   the legend   of  the  forty  thousand Canadians who  fought   for  the  North in  the  Civil War,    and    placed    the   history    of   this period    in   proper   perspective.  For   ex­ ample,   it   has  been   customary  to  focus upon  the Trent affair  as the episode that  most  nearly  brought war  between  Britain and  the United States and to pass rapidly  over  the  rest of the  period.  In  reality  the United  States   was   in   no   condition  in I86I    to   take   on   another  opponent,  as Lincoln well knew.  But  after Gettysburg, when  the  North had  the  most  powerful battle-hardened army in the world, the situation was quite  different. The border raids and maritime highjacking episodes instigated  by  the  thousands of   Souther­ ners   in  Canada,  "potentially   as  serious as  was  that   of  the  Trent  affair", might well  have  led  to  war  if  it  had  not  been for  the  good  sense  displayed  in  Washing­ ton   and   the   wise   leadership  given   by Governor-General Monck.
One   of   the   most   revealing  chapters
deals  with  public  opinion in  the  British­ American provinces during the war.  The  author  has   examined   some   eighty-four newspapers and  finds  them almost  evenly divided,  forty-three    being    consistently  anti-Northern, thirty-three consistently anti-Southern  and  the  remainder neutral or shifting from time  to time.  In  assessing the   reasons  for  so  much   anti-Northern sentiment   (the   author   describes   Mac­ donald    as   a   bundle  of   anti-American prejudices)  the  thesis  is  rather  fancifully stated   that  there  was  an  "inchoate sense
 of geopolitics"  which  created a conviction that  " ... a  Southern victory  might  re­ establish  the  North American  balance of power  that  had  been eroded  away during the  two  previous  decades."
Few  will  cavil   with   the  author's  ap­
praisal   of  the  results   of  the  Civil  War, ranging as they  do  from  "a  catalogue of fear"  and  the  loss of reciprocity to varia­ tions  on  the  old  theme  of  annexation to the United  States  and  a greater apprecia­ tion  of  the  necessity  for  a  strong  central government  in   Canada.  But   some  will feel less  comfortable when  the  author in his  closing paragraphs reflects upon  the development of the two separate nations since the Civil  War.  Based  upon  his wide experience  of Canada he  warns  that  this country has  been  "living  beyond  her  in­ tellectual   income" and,  with   deliberate use of sociological  jargon, describes  Can­ ada   as  "an   other-directed  nation".  In words  reminiscent  of  Bruce   Hutchison, Professor  Winks  asserts  that  "Canada  re­ mains   a  nation   in   search   of  a  soul,  a country unknown   to itself."
F. H. SOWARD


SLAVONIC TERRITORY

G.   s.  N.   LUCKYJ     (Ed.).  Canadian  Slavonic
Papers. Vol.  V.  University of Toronto Press.
$4-50.

THE  TEN SPECIALIZED  ESSAYS  gathered under   this general title  deal  with  widely scattered    areas    of   Slavonic   territory, cover   an  equally   wide  area   of  subjects and    range    chronologically   from    Old Church Slavonic  to "policy  decisions  and the  fuel  source  pattern of the  U.S.S.R.". Each  of the contributions is by an expert

BOOKS IN REVIEW



-most of whom  teach  at  Canadian universities-and  presents   detailed   in­ formation  which  should  be  of  consider­  able  value  to specialists.
The  two   studies  which  have   per­ haps   the   widest   interest   are  Robert  H. McNeal's account of  Trotsky's  interpre­ tation  of  Stalin   and   Gordon  Skilling's analysis  of  Lenin's, Trotsky's  and  Stalin's views on  the  permanent revolution. Both authors   are   familiar  with   the   contro­ versial   nature  of  the  material  at   their disposal   and   display   little   of  the   bias which    has    so   often    marred   similar approaches to Bolshevism and  Bolsheviks.
Edmund Heier  joins the growing  ranks of students of  Russian  sectarianism with a note on one of the smaller sects, the Pashkovites, and  L. N. Tolstoy,  who scorned   them  in  his last  novel  Resurrec­ tion,  though  their   humanitarian  ideals were  similar  to his own. Charles Frantz's well-documented   survey   of   Doukhobor ideology   and   political   organization  pro­ vides  a  convenient summary  of the  divi­ sions  within   the  Doukhobor community, which have  prevented the  growth of stability   in  their   ranks  and   the  adjust­ ment    of   some   of   them   to   Canadian society.
The  literary side  of Slavonic  studies  is
represented in this volume by two articles. The first, by M. M. Deane,  deals with Epifanij the Sage, a prominent Russian hagiographer  in   the   fifteenth  century. The  second  contribution consists of three modern Serbo-Croat  poems skilfully translated by R. A. D. Ford, formerly Canadian ambassador to Yugoslavia.  His presence in  this  collection  of essays may be  taken   as  a  sign  that  Slavonic  studies have ceased  to be the preserve of a few academics in  Canada.
IVAN AVAKUMOVIC
 BOOKS, NOT LITERATURE


THE  EDITORS OF MAGAZINES  that  try to nurture  and    abide   by   certain   literary values, no matter how broad  in scope or loosely defined,  are  always  puzzled  by the great number of  books-particularly among    biographies  and   memoirs-that are  published in Canada without any apparent attention to  such  values.  They are  books which  may  inform, which  may entertain, which  may   bore--and all  too often  do--but which  are  united   in  their lack of any  ambition to be taken  seriously as  literature.
What  is  one   to  do   with   them   when the  review  copies  come  piling  in?  Clearly a  book   that   has  no  literary   pretensions cannot be praised or condemned  by standards it  has  never  set out  to meet.  It can,  in  a  journal that   is concerned only with   literature  in   the   stricter  sense,  at best   be   regarded  neutrally,  and   men­ tioned   in   case   it   may   touch   on   some special, extra-literary  interest  of   the  readers.
And  so those  who  are  concerned with military history  may  find  something to interest  them   in  'Worthy':  a  Biography of Major-General F. F. Worthington by Larry   Worthington  (Macmillan, $5.oo); the    diplomatically  minded   may   profit from  A  Canadian Errant  by James P. Manion  (Ryerson, $5.00), which  tells of a quarter of a century in the Canadian Foreign Service; lovers of the  North may respond   to  The Lonely   Land   by Sigurd Olson    (McClelland  &   Stewart,  $5.00) and  Angel  of Hudson Bay  (sic.)   by  Wil­ liam   Ashley   Anderson   (Clarke,   Irwin,
$4.95) , though there  have  lately  been  so

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



many  excellent   books  on  the  Arctic  and the sub-Arctic that  I doubt  if these very ordinary narratives will please the real armchair experts  on Northern travel,  who have always seemed to me a particularly exacting group of  special  readers.
For  those  who  like  "humour", even  if
it is the  usual Canadian tipple  of Leacock and    water,    there    is   Robert   Thomas Allen's   reminiscent  volume,   When  Tor­ onto  was   for    Kids    (McClelland  & Stewart,  $3·95) .   And    the    theatrically minded  will  gain   an   informative,  irre­ pressibly   chatty   inside   view   of  festival dramatics from Joan  Ganong's Backstage at Stratford  (Longmans, $4.95).
G.W.



INTO ENGLISH

THERE HAS RECENTLY been  a small flood of translations by Canadian writers  from various classical and modern authors. The best  of  them,   undoubtedly, is  War­ wick  Chipman's version  of  The  Inferno in   terza   rima    (Oxford,   $2.00),  which forms the first volume  of  the  new Oxford Library of Italian Classics. It is a careful, polished  and sensitive  version  which  both catches  a great deal  of the spirit  of Dante and   is  in  its  own  rights   a  fine  piece  of baroque   verse   writing.  Compared,  for instance,  with  John  Ciardi's "rendering for  the  modern reader" of The  Inferno, published eight  years ago, Mr.  Chipman's
 version is greatly  superior  in scholarship, historical appropriateness and poetic sense. For  once  we are  inclined   to  agree with   a   publishers'  blurb   which   claims that  "it  probably surpasses  all other  pre­ vious  efforts".
As  much   cannot  be  said   for   Laura Wood  Knight's version of The Song  of Roland   (Vantage Press, $3.50).  It is all there,  indeed, and   in  prose  terms  accu­ rately   translated,  line  even reproducing line,  at   the  cost  of  some  extraordinary verbal   contortions, but -like Roland's blast - the  poetry   has  floated  into  the far  air.
Finally,  to  come  to  Canada's own golden boy, there is a slight volume of Selected  Poems by Emile  Nelligan, trans­ lated  by P. F. Widdows (Ryerson, $2.00).
The  translations are  accompanied  by the   original    texts,   on   opposing   pages, which is just as well, since Mr. Widdows writes   a  staid   and   ambling  verse   that gives  one  some   idea   of  what   Nelligan says,  but   very  little   of  how  he  says  it. I  quote  the  first  verse of Nelligan's most famous  poem,  La  romance   du  vin.

Tout se mele  en  un  vif  eclat de  gaite verte.
0 le  beau  soir  de  mai! Tous les  oiseaux en
cha:ur,
Ainsi  que  les  espoirs nagueres a mon  ca:ur, Modulent leur  prelude a rna croisee ouverte.

Here  is Mr.  Widdows' rendering:

The fine May  evening is interfused With  a bright glow  of verdant gaiety. Birds  at  my  window trill  their melody
And  hope  sings  in  my heart, as once  it used.





POSTSCRIPT ON ODYSSEUS


Since   author's  reactions   to   criticism can  often   provide   a  useful  double  light upon   a  work  of literature, we  print  be­ low  a  letter   received   from  Hugh  Mac­ Lennan, whose   works  were  the   subject of the  article,  uA  Nation's  Odyssey", zn Canadian Literature No.  10.
* 	* 	*
Dear  Professor  Woodcock,
I  have  just finished  reading your essay on my novels.... It occurred to me that you, as  a critic,  might  find  it  interesting to   compare  some   of   your   conclusions with  my  own  actual experience with  the novels.
Until I  read   your  essay, it  had  never
consciously occurred to me that  I was following the Odyssey-myth in these books. The choice  of the  name  Penelope in  Barometer   Rising  may have  been  sub­ consciously  prompted, but  the passage  at the  end   where   it  seemed  most  obvious that   I  was  rubbing  the  symbol  in  was not much  more  than  a device, and  rather a corny  one  at  that, used by an  inexperi­ enced   author  to  conclude  his  book.  As for  the  other-s, it  never  once  occurred to me    consciously    that    the    events   were paralleling the  Odyssey,  least  of  all  the smash-up   scene   at    the   end   of   Each Man's Son. I was bothered by the Enoch  Arden aspect  of Martell in the last novel, but  it   never   occurred  to  me  that   once again   this  was  Odysseus  returning.

86
 
This is  all   the  more   curious  because I  once  was  a  classical  scholar   and   have read   the   Odyssey   several   times   in   the original  Greek.
But  perhaps there  is a simpler  explan­ ation    which    explains    why   my   novels (though  in  most  superficial  ways  I  am not   what   would   be  called   a   "typical" Canadian)  seem  to  reach  naturally to  a variety  of Canadians.  This  sort  of  thing  really   happens  in   any   colonial   people.  When   I  was  a  boy  in  school  in  the  first war,  everyone   I  knew,  including myself, seemed   to  be   waiting   for   their   fathers to  return. In  Nova  Scotia  even  now  the men   go  away   to  sea,  and   in  my  early days   they   were   often   away   for  several years.  Thousands disappear in  the  north and   keep   returning.  And   then   there   is the	almost     permanent	story    of	the hundreds of  thousands  who  kept  going to  the  States to make  their  fortunes and kept   returning-even Beaverbrook  and Eaton, and   Sir  James   Dunn from  Eng­ land    fall   into   this   category.   Now   the pattern repeats itself  with  sudden drama in  Quebec. In  the  last  ten  years, for  the first    time,    several    thousand   talented young  French-Canadians have  been  dis­ covering France,  returning,  and   re­ discovering Quebec,  and   this  experience lies behind  the emotional outbreak which at   the   moment  is  called   the  Separatist Movement.
Be that  as it  may,  I did  want  to write you  to  say  how  interesting I found   your analysis. I write much more out of the subconscious  than   I appear to  many   to do,  including  myself.  That  is  probably why in  some  of the  books the  wires  have been  crossed.  But  I think  it may  be damaging to a writer  to worry too much about  wire-crossing. The   thing  is to  get the   stuff   out.   If you  worry   too   much

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



about   that   you  cut  down  your  field  too much-a    good   thing  if   you   have   a precise  Gallic  mind,   perhaps. It may  be a  matter of  temperament, and   probably it  is,  but   I must   confess  that   I  prefer Hamlet with all its wire-crossing to the exquisite   precision   of  Racine. It  would be  wonderful to  be  as  perfect as Sophocles   and   to  retain   all  that   power, but  who  ever  was  after  him?
HUGH  MACLENNAN





KLEIN'S PERCEPTION


Sir,
This letter  is a comment on Warren Tallman's  review   of  a   new   edition  of A.  M.  Klein's The Second   Scroll, Cana­ dian  Literature No.  I I, called  "Creation Beyond  Perception".
Tallman's thesis  is that   the  creation is the  realization of  the  writer's perception of life. His argument is that  A.M. Klein's chosen   theme  (the   predicament  of  the Jew)   exceeds  his perception of life;  that Klein's scene is larger  than  any one man's perspective; and  that  Klein  compensates
-or over-compensates-for this failure
by an  exaggeration of style.
Tallman's terms  arc   not  clear.   When is  a  creation  not   a  perception  of  life? How   does  a  creation carry   a  writer  be­ yond   his  perception?  Is  a  creation   the same  as its  implied theme?  (In  place  of "creation",  I   suggest   "conception"  or "concept"; but  to make  the  problem  less ambiguous, I  would  substitute for  "crea­ tion", "novel".) .
 The   more   practical  question  implied by  Tallman's  review   is:   What  are  the relations of  the  writer, his  style, and  his story?  I  think   that   Klein's style  springs from   many  years  of  insecurity  (as  well as  mastery)    with   language.  His   poetry demonstrates   often    a   mistake    in   his choice  of  the  just  word.  Cause  for  these mistakes  may  be  found   in  Klein's  per­ sonal   life,  his  complex   nationality,   his mixed   allegiances,   and   his  life  in  Can­ ada's    marginal    culture    with    its   two languages.  Also, many  words  may appear mistaken   because  of   Klein's studied Meta-physical view  ("stylistic  magnifica­ tion"-Tallman's  phrase-in  accord  with  perception as  a  coke-bottle, torch­ less Statue  of  Liberty). Much of Klein's genius   has   been   used   to   construct  a language.  More   of  his  genius   has  been used  in  applying that  language to realiz­ ing   his   extraordinary   perceptions.  We note   that    the   climax   of   The  Second Scroll  is the  discovery  of a new  language amalgam.   In    the    novel,    where    style changes  with changes  in geography (as in Valery  Larbaud), the  intense  language­ play  forces  the  question:  is  this  a  novel about  the Jews  or  about  the  language of perception?
Contrary  to  the  "whoppers" Tallman
finds  in  Mitchell's novel,  Klein's  percep­ tions  of  life,  in  whatever  style,  are  con­ sistently  concrete, specific,  personal, and immediate  in   the   treatment  of   the nephew's  life and  his search  for his uncle. Klein's  formal   conception (the  imposi­ tion  of  the  Hebrew Bible  on  a  Modern Instance)   is  made   valid  by  his  brilliant realization.
Is   not   Tallman's  complaint  that    he finds  Klein's   Mannerism  ("ironic  opul­ ence"-Tallman's   phrase)  not   proper  for  a  "great messianic  archetype"?  Why

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



is  it  no  proper?  And,  is  Tallman's  des­
cription accurate ?
SIDNEY FESHBACH
Hartford, Conn.
* 	* 	*
Mr.  Talhnan  replies:
In reply  to  Mr.  Feshbach's letter  may I try to clarify  what  I meant  by "percep­ tion"  and  then  re-state  my  objections to The Second   Scroll.  For  me, a  perceptive man  is a "knowing" man, and this means  that    perception   is   knowledge   as  when Whitman  says   "I   have   intelligence  of earth." Such  perception is  the  basis  for art   because  what   the  artist   "knows" is the  basis  for  what   he  can  realize  in  his work.   But  it  is  a  well-known   fact   that  the   capacity  for   perception  is  variable, intermittent, limited. Every  man  has dull days,  blind  spots,  blank  areas.  It is also well known that  novelists can write  them­  selves  into  areas   that   are   beyond   their  capacity  for  perception.
Klein's The Second  Scroll for example.
Let  me  agree  with  Mr.  Feshbach  when he says that  "much of Klein's genius  has
 been  used  to  construct a  language." Or at  least a style, which  I call  "ironic opul­ ence"   in  order   to  account for  the  deli­ berate  portentousness he  exerts  because he  is  imagining a  portentous event,   the exiles   return   to   the  promised    land.   I don't  think   Klein   succeeds   because    I can't   see    that  he    actually  perceives (knows)  the  portentous. For  me  the sign of  this  failure  is  in   the  style,  which   I find    forced,   arch,    pretentious-in   a word,  painful. Irritating.
However, I do  think  Mr.  Feshbach  is
right  to defend   Klein  on  the  grounds he has  because  I also  believe  that   it  is  the proper  business  of  a  man   of  words   to seek his reality  among  the  words.  And  if a  reader   thinks   that   a  writer  has  failed, and    says   so,   the    possibility    that    the reader's  perceptions are   at  fault   rather than  the  writer's is, to say the  very least, elementary.
WARREN  TALLMAN.




FREEDOM OF CRITICISM?


Sir,
According to  William  H.  Whyte,   Jr., the academic and  literary worlds,  by con­ trast  with  the  world  of corporation  men, often   seem  like  a  jungle.  If  reviews  like that  of Finch's Dover  Beach  Revisited  by John Peter   become   typical  of  Canadian Literature, I shall change over to Business Week.

EFFIE  C. ASTBURY
Montreal




88
