$2 .oo per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE
N°·58
Autumn, 1973



}I  FOREST OF SYMBOLS



Articles

BY  F.  M.  MACRI, MARGARET JOAN  WARD, LAURENT MAILHOT,
MARILYN J. DAVIS, JOSEPH PIVATO, NAIM KATTAN, MICHAEL BEAU SANG


Translations

BY  JOHN  GLASSCO


Review  Articles and Reviews

BY  ROBIN SKELTON,  CHRISTOPHER  XERXES RINGROSE, GERMAINE WARKENTIN,  HERBERT ROSENGARTEN, ANTHONY APPENZELL, ROWLAND Sl\IITH, PATRICIA MORLEY, EUGENE  MCNAMARA, S. E.  READ, MIKE DOYLE, LINDA ROGERS, RONALD SUTHERLAND,  LEN GASPARINI, COLIN ROSS, RUSSELL M.  BROWN



A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW








NEW-OLD CRITICS







THE  PROBLEMS  of the  dissenting critic  are  today  more  com­ plicated than in earlier generations because so many who have followed this direc­ tion  during  the  past  few years have also been academic  teachers  of  literature, institutional   prisoners  who  have  abandoned   the  independence   which   earlier writers at least imagined  they possessed. This was demonstrated  to me with  par­ ticular  emphasis  when  I  read  The   Politics of  Literature\ a  symposium  by  a group  of rebel scholars from American and  Canadian  universities. It is sub-titled "Dissenting  Essays on  the  Teaching   of  English",  but  this  is misleading,  since most of the essays are concerned less with what goes on in the smell of classroom chalk  than  with  the  contemporary  situation  of the  academic  critic, for  none  of the  contributors -to  judge  from  their  lists of  works  and  projects -has  any intent  of perishing for lack of publication.
A man  of the Thirties,  I could not help hearing some familiar  echoes as I read
through  these essays. Expressed  in  tones of  political  naivete  which  one  would never encounter  in a similar  European  collection, the  viewpoints  of the  writers extend  over a  radical  spectrum  that  includes on the left the  near-anarchism of Ellen Cantarow, who admires the Wobblies and wept when she read of the CNT communes  in  Spain,  and  on  the  right  the  antique   Russo-Marxism   of  Bruce Franklin,  a latter-day  Leninoid whose critical  judgment  is so ludicrously  warped by his politics that  he can describe Melville as a "consciously proletarian writer" and  write of "reactionary tracts ... like Animal  Farm ... which  come right  out and  say in  terms  that  everyone  can  understand: Man  is a  pig."  But  Franklin talks with  an  exceptional  proselyte's rage,  which  is perhaps  understandable in view of the fact  that  he was converted  in middle  age from  equally  rabid  New

3

EDITORIAL



Criticism. For  the  most  part  the  attitudes represented in  The  Politics of  Litera­ ture  reflect  a  kind  of  non-partisan  and   non-passionate radical  populism   with strains  of Marcuse and  early  Marx.
Most  of the  writers  indeed  describe  themselves  as Marxist  critics,  but  no essay actually  makes  a direct  attempt to apply  Marxian concepts  to the study  of  litera­ ture. There are only four  quotations from  Marx  and  Engels in the whole volume,  and  the only one of these that  refers to criticism  actually  dismisses it as unimport­ ant,  when  Marx  asserts, in The  German  Ideology, that  "not criticism  but  revolu­  tion  is the  driving force  of  history,  also of  religion,  of philosophy  and  all  other  types  of  theory." There is only  one  reference  to  Georg  Lukacs,  without whose presence  in the shadows one  would  have  thought no volume  of  modem  Marxist criticism  complete, and  then  he appears merely  to make  a very  banal  statement, "everything is politics", while  the  considerable body  of  important  neo-Marxist criticism  that  has  appeared in  France during the  past  decade goes entirely   un­ mentioned. The   Marxist critic  most  often  mentioned  is  Christopher  Caudwell, and  that  I find very significant.
Caudwell, who  was  revived  by  Marxist  scholars  during the  1950s  only  to  be dismissed  as superficial and  romantic, is now  experiencing a  Third  Coming in left-wing  literary  circles, and  seems to be gaining  an  acceptance that  was denied to him  two decades  ago.  No  doubt  in a way  his return  is part  of the  cyclic  cul­ tural  pattern by which,  having  re-enacted  Twenties movements like Dada,  fash­ ion  has  moved  on  a decade, and  young  intellectuals are  vicariously  reliving  the thrills of the Thirties in the same  way as late-night television is reviving  the  films of the same  era.  For  nostalgia  is an  important and  debilitating  element  in  Left­ ism as it has  developed in  the  early  Seventies,  and  one  cannot  accept  contemp­ orary  campus enthusiasms in the same  way as one  had  to  accept  the  passions  of the  Thirties which  Caudwell validated by a grave  beside  the  Ebro  and   Orwell  with  wounds  in the  cause  of socialism  and  freedom  that  hastened his death. The  aura  of the hero and  martyr hangs  over Caudwell, and,  however  much  one might  disagree  with  his critical  viewpoint, there  is no  doubt  of  his dedication to  what  he  saw  as  the  revolutionary  cause.  Undoubtedly some  of  the  essayists  in  this volume,  after  their  forays  with  deans  and  governors,  after  making  in  their  own minds  a  Madrid out  of  Columbia, see themselves  as heirs  of  the  Thirties, but history  does not  repeat  itself, and  the stances  of that  decade  can  no longer  con­ vincingly  be taken. Thus  one  has  the  impression,  reading  through these  campus essays in rebellion, that  their  authors are  really actors,  re-enacting with spirit  in a kind  of  living  theatre the  roles  of  past  revolutionaries-sham  Caudwells and


4

EDITORIAL



Luxembourgs longing vainly for martyrdom. They are not entirely to blame, for society has learnt  to encourage  revolutionary  role-playing as a safeguard  against revolution.
But Caudwell  is significant  in  this context  not merely as a  Marxist  hero  to­ wards whom the attitude of official communists has always  been somewhat  am­ biguous. He also represented  the more simplistic type of Marxist  criticism  (which is largely why the British academic  Marxists of the 1950s rejected  him), and  the fact that  the writers of The  Politics of Literature  should embrace  him so warmly cannot  be divorced  from  the  excessive simplism of their  own  attitudes  towards literature  as well as politics. "High" literature  as it has existed up to the  present is seen consistently as a product  of "ruling  class" culture  (and  this in spite of the crucial  part  played  by the  Russian  novelists of the  nineteenth  century  in  pre­ paring  the  intellectual  ground  for  the  Russian  revolution) ;  "class"  in  fact  be­ comes a naively convenient  explanation  for all the  anomalies  of society and  the crises of culture.  And,  with  the  exception of the  libertarian  socialist Ellen  Can­ tarow,  none of the  writers seems even aware  that  there  are  other  traditions  of dissent, other  criticisms of  the  existing order,  which  are  more  deeply  impreg­ nated with the freedom they all claim to seek than  Marx, that  honestly outspoken authoritarian, ever  was.  Proudhon,  Kropotkin,   Gandhi,  even  Paul  Goodman,  one is surprised to observe, are never mentioned.
Yet The  Politics of Literature cannot  entirely be dismissed as politically naive
and  critically superficial.  Most of the eleven writers are capable  of sharp  critical judgments in their own fields of study. Lillian S. Robinson, for example,  includes in "Who's  Afraid of a Room of One's Own?"  a penetrating  analysis of Virginia Woolf's feminist writings, and  Richard  Ohmann presents a clear and  not  unsym­ pathetic  survey of New Criticism  as a social-literary  phenomenon.  Others  write well on the limitations of modem  English Departments  as settings for acquiring a vital understanding of literature, and on specific social issues of  which they have direct  personal experience, like the  position of women in  academic  life.
There  is also a group  of interesting  and  less directly  polemical  essays on  ex­ periments  in education  and  study  outside the  recognized academic  channels.  I was fascinated  by Florence Howe's "Why Teach  Poetry?",  an  account of an ex­ periment  which she and some women undergraduates carried out in arousing  the appreciation  of poetry among  high school students  on  vocational  tracks, so suc­ cessfully that  potential  motor mechanics revealed shrewd critical insights into the works of poets like Karl  Shapiro. Other  useful essays stress the need for academic definitions of literature  to  be expanded  "so  as to include  local  works, popular

5

EDITORIAL



culture, songs, hymns and oral story-telling", as well as labour  songs and such documents  as the autobiography of Big Bill Haywood. However,  I find it curious that  to these academics  of the Seventies this should seem a new departure;  critics outside  the  academies  were  working  on  such  material  in  the  Thirties,  when Orwell  prepared  his splendid  essays on popular  culture, and  in the Forties when A. L. Lloyd was working on English folk songs and  the present  writer  on  popu­ lar  hymns. Perhaps  the  difference  between then  and  now is that  none  of  us in the past over-estimated  the material  we studied or tried to suggest that  it was in some  mysterious  way  as  good  as  contemporary   works of  high  literature; any such suggestion we would  have felt unfair  to popular  works  whose virtue  lay in their  appropriateness to  particular and  often very limited  social conditions.  But perhaps  we had an advantage in that  we did not have to inflate the importance of  our  fields of  studies  to  meet  the  demands  of   thesis-oriented  research  pro­ grammes.
The  failure  to  recognize  the  extent  of  past  non-academic  work  on  popular culture  is an example  of the  atmosphere  of academic  parochialism  that  impreg­ nates The  Politics of Literature. The  towers from which these essays were written may now be of plastic rather  than  ivory, their ivy leaves may  have  been meta­ morphosed  into  the foliage of Indian  hemp,  but  the writers  remain  imprisoned within  the  university  ambience   to  such  an  extent  that  they  still  regard  it - like their  despised  predecessors of the  1950s-as  the  centre  of literary  culture and  the source of all significant  criticism, from which the revolution in literature  must  have its beginnings.  Not only are all the  contributors  past or  present  uni­ versity teachers,  but most of them  have found  the zenith of their  political activ­ ities in the conclaves of the  Modem  Languages Association, doubtless in accord­ ance with  the old  Marxist  illusion  that  by seizing the institutions  of power and prestige the rebel can transform them, whereas in fact it is the rebel who is trans­ formed,  like a figure in a fairy  tale, when he enters such enchanted  portals.
Literary  developments  in  recent  years are seen by the  essayists of Politics in
Literature  almost wholly in the context of what  has happened  on the  campuses, so that  in their lengthy introductory essay Louis Kampf  and  Paul  Lauter  claim that  "academic repression"  "has  helped to limit  the re-establishment  of a  left­ wing  literary  culture" in  recent  years, a statement  which  one  cannot  imagine any critic or even any academic  scholar making before the Fifties when  the uni­ versities began to draw  writers in large numbers into their  employ and  a power­ ful  campus  movement  of literary  exegesis, the  New Critics, came  near  to dom­ inating  critical thought  in the United  States.

6

EDITORIAL



The shadow of the New Critics hangs heavily over Politics in  Literature, which in one sense is a manifesto  of liberation  from  New Critical  domination of  Eng­ lish Departments in  North  America.  The  editors contrast  the  methods  of  close textual  analysis which that  school favoured  to what  they call "traditional critic­ ism"  which  "tried  to  relate  the  experience  of literature  more  intimately  to  the rest  of  the  readers'  lives";  the  attitude   of  their  contributors   varies  from  the hysterical  denunciations  of the  former  believer,  Bruce  Franklin,   who  describes New Criticism  as "a  conscious counter-attack  on rising proletarian  culture" (he never  tells us where  that  elusive  proletarian  culture  was  in  fact  to  be  found rising),   to  the  saner  comments  of  Richard   Ohmann,  who  defends  the   New Critics  from  the  charge  of reactionary  tendencies,  grants  that  they  represent  a genuine  offshoot of liberal  thought,  but  contends  that  their rejection  of politics cannot  be sustained  in the world as it is.
It is evident  that,  in assuming  the roles which  the  New Critics  rejected,  the authors  of The   Politics  of Liberation  are  linked  with  these  predecessors  in  a line of rebellious filiation;  for  their  view is as limited  to  the  academic  horizon as that  of any New Critic,  which distinguishes them from some of the academic rebels  of  the  late  Sixties.  "In    rg7r," says  Ellen  Cantarow,  "it  is  clear  that dropping  out  is not a viable alternative,  but  that  what  is needed  is the  creation of  an  intelligentsia  a  large  part  of  which  engages  in  active  political  work"; the editors  "propose  that  teachers  of literature  ... should  conceive as central  to their  work  entering  actively into  political struggle."  In  other  words,  so far  as critics are concerned  the political struggle must emanate  from the classroom and be expressed in  the  teaching  and  analysis of literature,  though  the  editors  also grant  that  there  are  "no  simple,  direct, one-to-one  relationships  between  litera­ ture  and  action."  If this means that  in the last resort these campus  radicals  are not  prepared  actually  to subordinate  their  literary  sensibilities to  their  political aims, all to the good, but a reading of their essays does not convince me that  this is the case. Most of them, despite occasional weak denials that  they are advocat­  ing socialist realism, in fact  present  a rather  sentimental  recreation  of the  view taken by Stalinists and  Maoists alike that literature  is significant only as an instru­ ment of the power struggle.
One  cannot  deny  that  there  may be uses for a book of this kind.  It  is good,
for instance, that  critical moulds which have grown rigid should  be broken,  and it  is also good  that  university  teachers  should  at  last  come  to  recognize  what their  critics have long been saying, that "specialization  breeds privilege, privilege generates  more specialization,  both isolate teachers from the concern  of students

7

EDITORIAL



and,  often,  of the  society  generally." Yet it is not  always  easy  to square such  a desire  for  the  doors  and  windows  to  be thrown open  on  to  the  world  with  the actual   ignorance which  all  these  writers  display  of the  living  tradition of  critic­ ism  that   has  flourished outside  the  universities,  largely  unaffected  by  the  great  rift  which  the  New  Critics  created between  the  Thirties and  the  Fifties.
For  even  in  our   age  what   the  editors   call  "traditional  criticism" has  con­ tinued, relating literature to  life,  and  the  study  of  literature has  by  no  means been  monopolized  by  university   teachers.  One  has  only  to  think  of  Orwell, of Edmund Wilson,  V.  S.  Pritchett, Dwight   Macdonald, Herbert Read,  to  realize that   a  strong   current  of  what   Northrop  Frye  has  called   "practical  criticism" still continued, carrying on  the  traditions of Hazlitt and  Ruskin,  of  Arnold   and James,  and  developing a synthetic approach that  gave due  value  to every  aspect of  a  work  of literature. That line  of criticism  has  never  lost sight  of  the  social context  from  which  literature emerges,  it  has  never  denied  that  writing   has  po­ litical  resonances,   but  it  has  regarded works  of  any  art  not  only  as  the  instru­ ments  for  changing men's  minds  and  consequently society,  but  also as the  ftow­ erings  of the  human will  that   transcend while  they  illuminate our  present  con­ dition.  Critics  must  be  politically   conscious,  but  they  must  also  realize  that   to read  a poem  as a political  manifesto is to destroy  it as a  poem.  Literature is not
included in,  but  includes  politics.

GEORGE  WOODCOCK

NOTE

1 The   Politics of Literature: Dissenting  Essays on the Teaching of English,  edited  by
Louis Kampf  and  Paul  Lauter.  Random  House of Canada.  $r 1.95.



















8

ANNE  HEBERT

Story and Poem




F. M. Macri





ANNE HEBERT's  'tory, L'  Tonmt, and   in; 'elation  to the  rest of French-Canadian literature takes on the same  significance as does the
relation  between  an  ancient House  and  its coat  of arms.  It can  be  argued that the  story  is a zenith  point  within  the  tradition to  which  it  belongs.  It  is like  an emblem, an  heraldic legend  typifying  the  house it comes from.
Mlle.  Hebert's position  in  the  literary   history  of  French Canada  speaks  for itself.  She  follows  after   the   poet  Saint-Denys-Garneau  and   comes  before   the writers  of  la  revolution  tranquille.  Any  reading   of  her  work  will  immediately reveal  its hermetic and  personal  qualities.  Anne  Hebert belongs  in  a tradition of privateness established by  Emile  Nelligan  in  the  late  nineteenth  century, taken up  by Saint-Denys Garneau in the  twentieth, and  brought to  its  high  point  by herself. But it is exactly  this kind  of poetry  that  represents  a most significant step in  the  development of  French-Canadian literature. It  represents a  break   with the  past  and   an  exposure   to  contemporary  influences.   In   addition,  a  certain congruency of  images  and  symbols  in  the  work  of  these  three   poets  makes  it accessible, and  renders  it understandable within  the  whole  perspective of literary history.  We are not limited  to interpretations of personal  anguish  and  experience, and of an almost manichean dualism; diligent study  has provided a bounty  of information  concerning  the   literary   influences   on   these  writers,   and   recently attempts have  been  made  to  treat  their  work  in  a  highly  non-subjective way.1
Le  Torrent 2    is  most  accessible  through its  superficial   meaning,  through  its
theme  of conflict.  It  has been stated  above  that  the story is emblematic; as such, it represents   the  duality  that   has  always  characterized  French-Canadian  liter­ ature: the  division  of  being.  The  same  is manifested by the  use and  opposition

9

ANNE HEBERT



of particular  symbols. Water  opposed to dryness invites life; the  closed room or house opposed to the  open  land  or water  invites death.  This  opposition  reflects the archetypal  conflict between  the flesh and  the spirit. The  lesson to be learned here is that  the traditional life of the spirit is really the death  of the flesh, not its mere suppression but its death: a paradox  indicating  the seriousness of the  divi­ sion of being. The  persona will try to escape this division through  a destruction  of the  traditional notion  of life and  an  assertion of life by the  physical senses, to reinstate the natural equilibrium  of existence.
At  once  the  struggle  between  instinct  and   reason  becomes  apparent. The struggle  is  engendered   by  a  clash  of  orthodoxy  and   unorthodoxy   of  values. From  this  observation,  one  can  proceed  to  an  interpretation of opposition  be­ tween  the  official collective order  and  the  unofficial individual  attempts to  ob­ literate  that  order. The  result is dedoublement, the splitting of the  personality by two equally strong  forces.3   The  same  opposition  and  splitting  characterizes  the early  poetry of Anne  Hebert.  Her  late  poetry is an affirmation  of freedom  and new life. The  dramatic action  of the  poetry is conveyed  through  uniform  sym­ bols found also in her fiction. The  images and symbols can be reduced  to a basic concept expressed in the author's total work;  that  is, to the concept  of time and space and  its particular relation  to the poetic persona.
From  her  earliest  poems,4    we observe the  author's  nascent  vision of life and
existence as a  closed space  containing  no  time  but  the  past.  Naturally,  such  a view  leads  from  happy   contemplation   to  disrupting   alienation.   The   past  of childhood   becomes  oppressive,  and  a  closed  existence  becomes  a  permanent present.  There   follows a  progressive,  almost  systematic,  delineation  of  images and  symbols conveying the sterile  condition  of a static existence:  faded  flowers, past  memories, lost  happiness,  sombre  dwellings, closed rooms and  houses,  im­ penetrable  windows and doors, dusty furniture, ashes, mirrors, hydrophobia, claus­ trophobia,  claustrophilia,  and  finally, the  ultimate  irreducible  dark  space  of the coffin and  tomb. The  whole impact  of such imagery will be vividly  presented  in a key poem, "Le  tombeau  des rois".5    Here,  a descent into  the  grave  of a dead past provides the only means of exiting into a present time which will tum  nat­ urally into future. The future  of time is affirmed in the collection called, Mystere de la Parole.
In  Le Torrent, meaning  can  be intensified by a more profound  analysis. The
central conflict in the story does not merely reflect an opposition between the Conscious and the Subconscious, the former represented by Claudine  the mother, the latter  by Fran<;ois the son and  narrator, and  by the action  of the Torrent  of


10

ANNE HEBERT



water  on  him.6    The   Mother   image  in  French-Canadian  literature  embodies more  than  a sumbol  for  the  individual  Conscious. In  Le Torrent  the  Mother represents  a collectivity and  an  established order  of life. Because of the  import­ ance  of this figure in  the  literary  history of  French  Canada and  its  relatively dominant position in the major  portion of our literature  in  French,  the  Mother cannot  perforce be a limited symbol. Indeed,  if she is archetypal  in  Quebec,  all the  ambiguities  of such  a  portent  must be taken into  account.  Claudine,  there­ fore, is not solely Franc;ois' external  world but also a disruptive  part  of his inner world. She is part  of the  Self, conscious and  unconscious.  She  represents  land, duty,  religion, country,  culture,  the  past and  the  present.  If  the  same  mother­ figure symbolizes for  Emile  Nelligan  a  protective  barrier  against  a  threatening real  world,  for Anne  Hebert  she symbolizes a  protective  barrier  that  threatens  self-annihilation.   And  the  poet  is aware  of  this.  Similarly,  the  image  of  the Garden,  a place of refuge, a protective locus amoenus, takes on the same ambiv­ alent  characteristics.  It is a  haven  whose  dangers  are  hidden  under  a soporific guise of goodness. A mother's  arms, a  pleasant  garden  enclosure  are  in  reality stifling  because  they  guard   against  the  contradictions  of  life's  forces,  or  they repress any tentative  action  towards  the full acceptance  of life. The  whole pro­ cess resembles the  contraction  of a  coiled insect when subjected  to a sharp  ex­ terior  stimulus:  "J'etouffe dans  un  jardin/  ... jLaissez-moi  done  dormir!", ex­ claims  the  persona.7      We  observe  in  this  poem  a  skillful  combination  of  two images, the  garden  and  the  room,  which  together  convey  an  extremely  strong feeling of suffocation or living-death. The  garden is in this case the flowery wall­ paper of the bedroom.



l:E NARRATION in Le Torrent divides into  two identifiable parts  with  rising and  falling intensity. The  action  intensified by the  extreme  re­ pression suffered  by Franc;ois, repression by his mother's  will, and  his  own  re­ pression of the pull towards the instinctual life of the Torrent  also  resembles the contraction  of the  insect. This  reaction  climaxes in  Franc;ois'  sudden  deafness, the  result of being struck  by the  mother,  and  in  the sudden  importance of the dominating Torrent: 8

... I had become deaf.
From that day on, a fissure opened in my oppressed life. The  heavy silence of deafness overcame me, and a proneness to dreams, a kind of companionship,  in­
vaded my existence. No voice, no noise from the exterior touched me any more.


II

ANNE HEBERT



No more  the  crash  of  the  nearby  falls, no more  the song of  the  cricket.  I  was certain  of  this.  Yet  I  heard   the  Torrent   existing  within  me,  and  with  it,  our house and  the  whole of our  land.  I did  not possess the world,  but  this one thing had  changed: a  part  of the  world  possesed me. The  land  with  its water,  moun­ tains and deep caves held me in its mighty grip.9

Once  the  narrator is drawn into  the  world  of nature, he experiences a whirlpool of sensations  and  feelings.  Though the  Torrent represents  a  physical  symbol  of repressed  existence,  it also becomes  the image  of the narrator's actual condition: turbulency, loss of direction, loss of  power,  absence  of  will,  full  domination  by external natural forces.  Furthermore, the  narrator's inability   to  control his new condition, constitutes a  falling   action.   He  recognizes  his  condition  but  cannot direct  it  away  from  what  seems  to  be  a  fatal  course.  Like  the  horse,  Perceval, unable  to  be  broken  by  the  mother, Fran<;ois desires escape  from   her  cruel  at­ tempts   to  break  his ego.  Because  of  his deafness,  and  because  of  the  Torrent's hold  over  him,  Fran<;ois begins  truly  to  experience  the  duality of  his  existence and  the  conflict  between  life in nature and  death  by reason; whereas in  the  first half  of the  narrative all  he  knew  was  the  absolute  control  of  his  mother's will, now  he suddenly finds  himself  open  to  himself,  unprotected and  exposed  to  a more  intense  struggle.




IN THE  COLLECTION of poems,  Le Tombeau Des Rois, there is a progression  of images  that perfectly  describes  the  poetic  journey  undertaken by the  persona  and  the  dark   journey  undertaken by Fran<;ois. It proceeds  from water  and  fluid  images  to  more  solid  imagery,  from  these  through the  familiar images  of closed  rooms  and  houses to the  final  tomb  image.  A sampling of titles is enough   to  prove  this: "Eveil au  seuil  d'une fontaine", "Sous  la  pluie", "Les grandes fontaines",  "Les   pecheurs d'eau",  "Les  mains", "Nuit",  "La   voix  de l'oiseau",  "Les   petites   villes",   "La fille  maigre",  "La   chambre fermee", "La chambre de  bois",  "Nos mains  au  jardin", "Vie  de chateau", "Le  tombeau des rois".  Each  step  of  the  way  to  the  end  has  its  appropriate victim.  In  the  first poem  the victim  is a sleepy persona  who is ignorant of the water's dangerous enchantment. Les grandes  fontaines are  found  deep  in  a  forest.  Only  fear  pre­ vents  one  from  going  to  them,  fear  of  what  the  water  may  reflect,  fear  of  its power  to steal  the  body  out  of its  protective  dream-world. A  bird  is  caught by les pecheurs d'eau. The persona  glimpses  an  inverted  image  of a  garden in  the

12

ANNE HEBERT



water,  caught there  as if in a watery  net.  Hands are  the subject  of the  very  next poem.  They   are  washed  in  colour; they  become  a  pitiable   offering   or  gesture under the sun's  rays. Nuit  becomes the  dark  waters  of engulfment. In  this  dark­ ness, the  heart  becomes  a blinking  searchlight sending  out  an  unrecognizable sig­ nal.  But every time the light  hits the eyes, the eyes close like the contracting insect, preferring the safety  of nighttime. A dead  bird's  voice  ("La  voix d'une oiseau") in  an  unknown wood  replaces  the  undecipherable  code.  The   wood  is  a  black
isle, it is captivity: "De  mois  a l'oiseauj ... jNul passage/Nul secours" (p.  25).
Les  petites villes are  those  of the  past, of childhood, containing lifeless parks  and gardens. Barren   of  wind  and   water,   these  enclosures  are  like  museums, their amusements lined  up  in  rows. They  engender a  condition of  living-death. The body  in "La fille maigre" is reduced  to its smallest  living  dimension, a skeleton. The  flaying  of the  Self  not  only  suggests  a  ritualized aggression,  but,  as in  the poem  by Saint-Denys Garneau  ("Cage d'oiseau"),  it  represents the  final  stage of alienation, the  balance between  living-death and  real death.
Then follow  the  closed  and  wooden  rooms  that  imprison  the  body  as well as
the  spirit.  The   rooms  represent   the  historical   past  and   the  reaches   of  sterility. Their wood  is ancient, permeated with  fatal  odours.  These  images  of  imprison­ ment  and  suffocation are  enlarged and  given  a more  explicit  meaning.  Existence  in the  ancestral manor is characterized by its qualities  of  absence  of objects  and people that  would  make  it livable  otherwise. Only  the persona  inhabits this place, a hall of mirrors. The  split  of the  Self is symbolized  by reflection  in  the  polished glass. The Original and  its Double  contemplate each  other,  narcissistically, in the glass waters.  The   Double   retains   his traditional  idiosyncrasies,  he  is Death an­  nouncing death. He  resides  under  the  quicksilver of the  mirror. Being  an  exact copy  of  the  Original, he  sticks  to  his  victim; like  seaweed,  says  the  poet.  To­ gether,  they simulate an  act  of love, a  perversion  of love.
The   result  of  division  by  conflicting  forces  is  alienation  of  the  Self.  In   the
story,  before the  horse's escape and  the mother's death,  Fran<;ois had  only experi­ enced  denial  and  absence; denial  of love,  childhood and  any  physical  life;  ab­  sence  of  other   humans. His  completely  isolated  and  guarded  existence  is sym­ bolized  by  the  confines  of  a  daily  routine   of  chores  and  prayers,   by  maternal decree,  and   by  the  figurative significance   of  the  house.  He  is  thoroughly  dis­ possessed. At  the  seminary  where  he is sent  to learn  self-denial  and  holiness,  he learns  only  loneliness  and  fear.  He  keeps away  from  his fellow students because he  cannot  know  them.  They  are  the  outside,  the  temptations of evil,  of life  be­ yond  the  eternal vigilance  of the self. Thus,  his isolation  is final.

ANNE HEBERT



Alienation,  therefore,  is the  movement  inwards  away from  exterior  existence into  the  very narrow  keep of repression. Extreme  denial of anything  connected with real life produces  a condition  that  must lead to actual  death,  for the grave or coffin is its ultimate  symbol. The  splitting  of the  personality  on  the  surface takes the form of loneliness or solitude. Underneath this isolation, the Self  under­ goes successive change  induced  by the  storm  and  stress of surface  conditions, causing  the  persona  to experience  desperate  need  for contact  of any  kind  with any other human.  Frustration of these needs causes increased division of  the Ego. Finally, the desperation  of such an irreparable state produces complete confusion, total  exposure  to  the  dividing  forces, final  collapse of   rational  existence. The  extent  of this alienation  begins to unwind  in the second  part  of Le Torrent,  at the  narrator's fascination   with  the  horse, Perceval,  ending  with  the  last  para­  graph  of the story. The  attempt  to escape such  existence, which constitutes  the action of the second half, is the first made in the work of Anne Hebert.
The  mother  dead,  he is left  to himself. Gradually,  as he  perceives the static
condition  of his sterile life, he feels the effects of utter solitude and  isolation, and then of alienation.  His life is referred  to as pointless in time and  space, without centre. The feelings of absolute loneliness are intensified by despair. It is too late to recapture  life. The  moment  this is perceived  is a  moment  of revelation,  for the narrator knows then that  he must follow events to their end. His previous subjection  to  the  Torrent had  left  him  without  direction. The  events  he  must follow are  a surge  of activity  that  bring  Fran ois
recognition  of  his utter  desolation.  He  must  endure  a series of irreversible  ex­
periences.  He  becomes  tormented   by desire for  woman,  and  goes out  to  find her.  Each  impulse  to act,  to counter  passivity, is met by a  painful  reminder  of his split existence, something  which in itself prevents positive action.  In  order  to find a  woman,  he must  confront  and  admit  to his solitude. Doing  so, he bears witness to his alienation.
The  girl he brings home, Arnica, in many  ways resembles the horse Perceval:
in spirit, in mystery, and  in appearance, with blue-black hair  like the blue-black skin and  mane  of his stallion. She is the unknown, the purity of physical and  in­ stinctual  life. But Franc;ois can only suffer from his encounter  with  her:

I observe the alien couple during its wedding night. I am the wedding guest.

This splitting  into actor and spectator,  not only forms the premise for the narra­
tion;  it  also  occurred   as  such  at  the  exact  moment  when  Franc;ois is struck

ANNE HEBERT



deaf  by Claudine.  The  splitting  results from  an  ever-present  conflict,  for  the mother  prolongs her  domination   over the  narrator   right  up  to  the  end.  Being dead, she truly becomes the symbol of the devastation  wreaked  by the order  she symbolizes. Such destruction  pushes Franc;ois to the very limits of his existence. The  necessity voiced  by the  Torrent  in  his pounding  temples  invites  him  to  a final and  complete discovery of the unknown.
The  prospect of being found out by the girl, of being destroyed  by her presence and  the  demands  it  makes  upon  him, drive  Franc;ois mad  with  fever  and  de­ lirium.  She  represents  possible destruction  or  invasion,  not  simply  because  she may discover the secret concerning  her mother's  death,  but  because she  has  in­ vaded  all possibilities of concealment  that  Franc;ois previously en joyed;  she has opened  up all the closed spaces of his external  and  internal  life. She  has  pene­ trated  all  the  locked  rooms  of the  house and  stripped   him  of  his  last  private refuge,  robbed  him of submergence  into  the  deepest  part  of  himself. Once  she is gone, there  remains only one thing  to confront:   complete  and  absolute  soli­ tude,  final  and  irrevocable  alienation.  As if  to  confirm  this,  the  narrator an­ nounces:

Who will teach me the way out? I am alone, alone inside of myself.

To escape the pain of his conscious existence, Franc;ois must  push away its  con­
stricting  effects, must attempt  the final "adventure" of life:

I bend over as far as I can. I want to see the whirling abyss from as close as possible. I  want  to  lose myself in  this adventure.  My one  and  only appalling possession.

The  story ends with an attempt  to reclaim life in its fully ambivalent  state.  It is also escape into the unknown,  the last potential means of becoming one with the rush of the Torrent  and  all it represents.
In  the  poem, "Le  tombeau  des rois", a similar  journey  or adventure can  be
observed, a similar  escape into  an  unknown future.  The  descent  into  the  tomb is a Thesian  voyage through  the labyrinth  of the mind, or of the soul and  body. The  reduction  of the closed spaces of  the  persona's existence is contained  in the image of the grave. The  grave  as the dimension of death  is absolute.  It  is both breathless and  fathomless,  like the  gulf or  the  abyss; it  is an  unescapable  en­ closure. This image is used to project the conditions of living-death. The  nature  of actual  death  can only be induced  or imagined,  as Franc;ois imagines  it  to be "mon  aventure,  rna seule et epouvantable richesse". Anne  Hebert's  persona  in-

ANNE HEBERT



duces  the  nature of actual death from  the  particulars of her  experience  through­ out  the  progression  of  poems  in  Les  Songes  en  Equilibre   ( 1942) and  Le  Tom­ beau  des  Rois  (I 953). In  this  title  poem  of the  second  collection,  actual death  becomes  identified  with  dead  kings,  and  the  experience of  it  is  recreated in  the rape  of the  persona, seven  times  by seven  tall  Pharaohs. After  a  symbolic  real death, the  persona  is freed  from  its living-death  and  moves  towards the  dawn  at  the  end  of the  long  tunnel of the  tomb.




l:E JOURNEY THROUGH THE  DARKNESS begins with  the per­ sona  carrying  her  heart  on  a fist, bearing  it like a lamp  to light  the  way. Within  the  tomb  lie the  remains of all that  was human, the  remains  of past  mythologies  and  civilisations,  and  a vestigial  attraction for the  gems and  bones of  a dead  ex­ istence.  The  heart  is a sightless  bird  that  breathes  and  trembles strangely  when­  ever  the  attraction becomes  too  dangerous. In  the  bony  embrace of the  kings, a dry  hand  searches  for  the  heart  to break  it. In  the  end,  the  rites of death having  passed,  the dream finishes, a reawakening occurs:
Livid and  satiated  with the horrible dream
My limbs freed
And the dead  thrust  out of me, assassinated, What  glimmer  of dawn  strays in here? Wherefore  does this bird quiver
And turn  toward  morning
Its blinded eyes ?10

Liberation of  the  Self  depends on  confrontation with  death. To  be  irritated into   life,  one  must   die,  literally   or  symbolically,   in  order   to  be  reanimated. Fran<;ois' end  allows  him  to  experience the  unknown,  and   therefore  his  new adventure could  possibly  be  a  new  beginning.  The   persona  of  the  poem  is  re­ leased  into  the  light  once  more,  and   her  affirmation of  life  unfolds  in  Mystere de  la  Parole  where  every  word,  act  or  gesture  is a fiat.  The   title  poem  vividly asserts that  the word  can  be made flesh. The  word-maker lives by  naming things. The  poetic  consecration of life is thus  a creative  process:

Que  celui qui a rec;u fonction de la parole vous prenne en charge comme un coeur tew§breux de surcroit,  et
n'ait  de cesse que soient justifies les vivants et les morts
en un seul chant  parmi  l'aube et les herbes.U

!6

ANNE HEBERT



All the closed spaces of the Self are opened up by the destruction  of the symbols of isolation and solitude. Poem titles again convey the feeling of transformation: "Naissance  du pain",  "Alchimie du  jour", "Je  suis la terre et l'eau", "Printemps sur  la  ville",  "La   ville  tuee",   "Annonciation",  "Eve",   "Des   dieux   captifs". Symbols and  images previously given a negative and morbid function  now  meta­ morphose  into  positive and  vivid  meanings. Snow,  birds,  water,  landscape   no longer convey a perverse condition  of  alienation; they are shorn of  their  previous uniformity.  Instead  of a blanket of death, snow becomes a natural element  com­ plete  with  all  its ambivalent   characteristics.  It is negative  when  it  tempts  one into  a  prison  of dreams  and  sterile  purity,  positive when  it  is  made  a  natural  compliment  to existence. Birds fly free. Water  flows as blood  flows. Landscape  is divested  of  any  static  qualities.  Time  is freed  and  allowed  to  fill the  im­ mensities of space.
The  idea and image of the Torrent  form the symbolic foundation of Franc;ois'
narration, just as the idea and  image of the tomb from the symbolic foundation of the collection and  its title poem, "Le  Tombeau  des Rois".  In  both  cases, the fundamental component  has a distinctly ambivalent  quality;  it evinces negative and  positive characteristics  at the same time. Ambivalence constitutes  the  neces­ sary element in the drama  of Anne Hebert's  total work. Without  attraction there can  be no repulsion,  and  the  poetic drama  is animated  by such  a  process. The Torrent  is an aggregate  of opposites, destructive  and  creative. The  Tomb  as an aggregate  symbol represents the logical end  of a  progression  marked  by opposi­ tion. All the images and  metaphors  of preceding poems are  resolved by the  final descent underground. The  light of day at  the end of the  descent into  the  tomb provides an  indication  of a non-destructive  resolution. It leads  literally  into  the mysteries of creation.  We can  conclude  that  the  duality  of existence cannot  be resolved, but  that  the  persona can  accept its dialectic and  use it creatively. The Self will then  cease to be split by physical and  metaphysical  forces. What  takes place in Anne Hebert's  last poems is the  exploration  of the  mystery of new  life, and the wonderment  and affirmation  of  anything  and everything.
There  is this final comment  to be made on the implication  of Le Torrent  for French-Canadian literature.  In  Anne  Hebert's  story, the  characters  and  events are  the  parts  of a  collective consciousness:  Claudine  is la  femme  canadienne, an enduring  but  perverted  Maria  Chapdelaine; Franc;ois represents  the  effected offspring of the former, the depersonalized male, empty ownership,  the disjointed Self, the disinherited  heir seeking reintegration  with  his surroundings;  Perceval and  Arnica  are  personifications  of  the  land,  of  natural   life.  Together,  these

ANNE HEBERT



characters and  symbols form the  dramatic opposition that constitutes the  central activity of the  French-Canadian, and  indeed the  Canadian, literary tradition.


NOTES
1 See Gilles Houde's study  in La  Barre du Jour, and  papers  given at  the conference, Poet  and  Critic, November  I969  at  the  University  of  Alberta,  Edmonton.  See note  6.
2    Anne  Hebert, Le Torrent  (Montreal, I963).  The  story was written in  I945· This edition  also contains other  short  stories  by the  author.
3   See Albert  Le  Grand, "Ann Hebert: de l'exil  au  royaume", Etudes  Franfaises, 4,
I   (I 968),  complete article.
4   Les Songes  en  equilbre   (Montreal, I 942).
5    In  Poemes   (Paris,  I 960).  This  collection   contains   two  collections,  Le  Tombeau des Rois  (I 953)  and  M ystere  de la Parole  (I 960).
6   Gilles  Houde, "Les  symboles  et  Ia structure mythique de  Torrent", La  Barre  du
Jour,  no.  I6  and   21.
7    Les Songes  en  equilbre, p. 69.
8   Le Torrent, p. 29.
9    My  translation.
10  Anne  Hebert, "The Tomb of Kings", trans.  by F. R. Scott,  Saint-Denys Garneau: Anne  Hebert, translationsjtraductions (Vancouver, I962),  p. 47·
11  Mystere  de la Parole,  title  poem,  p. 75·













CANADIAN  AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available at

the bookstore
UNIVERSITY  OF BRITISH COLUMBIA VANCOUVER 8, B.C. 	228-4741


18


THE GIFT OF GRACE



Margaret Joan f.1'ard


EMHIS  FIRST  NOVEL, Modey Callaghan appean< a prophet
of gloom. He  writes almost exclusively about  the people on the edge of society:
about  the  non-conformist,  the  negro, the alcoholic, the  prostitute,  the  criminal. Most of them are doomed to destruction. With one or two exceptions, those who survive have little left beyond their will to live.
How  can this hell he creates be reconciled with Callaghan's own statement  in
That   Summer  in  Paris:  "My  problem  was to relate  a Christian  enlightenment to some timeless process of becoming"? His intention  appears  to be the examina­ tion  of Christian  faith  as it impinges on  human  existence in this  world,  not  in the finality of the world hereafter.  The basic message of  Christianity is the good news of redemption  from evil as presented in the person of Jesus Christ.  Implied in  this  theme  are  the  beliefs that  man  has  responsibility  for  his own situation,  however desperate,  that  man must sincerely desire to change his life, and that  he is dependent  on  the  grace  of  God  to  effect  such  change.  Callaghan's concern with the redemptive  process is illustrated by his use of the Biblical themes of the prodigal or lost son, of the lost sheep, and of Lazarus.  All these present  in some way the return to life from death or from a state analogous to death.
If redemption  has human  significance, each man must be able to choose regeneration  and  life or to refuse it. The  concept of free will appears  critical for Callaghan's religious position. His characters  are  the ideal  testing ground  since they represent  the most restricted  and  hopeless elements in society. Many  of his novels  explore  the  possibility  of  free  will  and  individual   responsibility,  both through   an  apparent  acceptance   of  naturalism  in  his  early  novels, and  later through an examination  of communism.
A naturalistic determinism  dominates Strange Fugitive, Callaghan's first novel. Harry  Trotter  is at once a helpless victim of the forces driving him and  a willing accomplice  in  avoiding  a  sense of  responsibility for  his  own  fate.  His  violent death seems inevitable. But he yearns for Vera and the world where relationships were true and  right, where he gained status by being the man  of the household.

THE GIFT OF  GRACE



That   is, he aspires to a  position of responsibility, however limited.  His longing for  Vera  and  his first tentative  move toward  her when he realizes he may face death  are  evidence  of  Callaghan's uneasiness in  the  naturalistic   deterministic position, an uneasiness borne out by his later novels. Michael Aikenhead  in They Shall  Inherit   the  Earth  wrestles  with  his sense  of  guilt  over  Dave  Choate's drowning  by trying  to  blame  the  tragedy  on unsatisfactory  family  relationships and  on his father  as pivotal in them.  Nevertheless in his ultimate  assumption  of responsibility, he denies the validity of total determinism.
Mter  his earliest novels, Callaghan  rejects a deterministic  position, developing his  view  of  a  limited  free  will  against  the  challenge  of  communism.  Charlie Stewart  of Such  Is My  Beloved and  William Johnson of They Shall  Inherit  the Earth  both  try  to explain  prostitution  in purely economic terms. The  only solu­ tion  they  can  offer  is revolution  and  the  ensuing  radical  social change.  They deny  the  value  of  the  individual.  William  Johnson  says of  Anna  Prychoda: "She's  an  illustration  of a larger  issue and  you can't  stop to worry  about  her." Michael's  intervention  in  Huck  Farr's  seduction of Anna  indicates  his sense of responsibility  toward  her  as an  individual,  and  implies his  rejection  of an  im­ personal radical position.
In  A Passion in  Rome, Callaghan  through  Sam Raymond's  words relates the
sense of personal worth to eternity and God:

I'm  telling you, the Christian, about resurrection ... Out  of the ruins of her life. That  look that  comes on  her face. Something in her spirit survives. It's  got to survive. It's the divine spark.

Despite  the  emphasis  Callaghan   places on  external  pressures which  compel certain  sorts of behaviour,  he affirms that the individual can and  does choose his way. Michael  argues  with  Nathanael  Benjamin that  "If the passions overwhelm you  you  can  hardly  be free."  Although  he angrily  rejects  Benjamin's  reply­ "You  might  be  just free enough  to have  just a little influence on  whatever  hap­ pens"-yet  he finds Benjamin's  outlook on life so attractive that  finally Anna's jealousy is aroused.
Callaghan   maintains  a  tension,  however,  between a  man's  sense of  responsi­
bility and  the  social  pressures which  denude  him  of it. Society, he  recognizes, tends  to  destroy  the  sense  of  individual  worth:   through  the  economic  forces leading Ronnie and  Midge to prostitution, through the conflicts destroying the Aikenhead  family,  through  the  refusal of society to support  Kip  Caley's efforts at reform,  through  the prejudices  against non-conformists such as Peggy Sander-


20

THE GIFT OF  GRACE



son  and   against  negroes,  through   the  injustices  of  public  opm10n  destroying Harry   Lane's  reputation, and  finally  through  the  circumstances  forcing  Anna Connel into dissolution.
The  collective pressures toward  evil are somewhat  moderated  through  social conformity   and   justice,  which  create  a  beautiful  pattern   paralleling   that   of natural law. Michael Aikenhead,  on his hunting  trip, understands that  the death of one creature  brings life for another.  Father  Dowling sees the  role of the two prostitutes  as scapegoats so that  society can maintain  the health  of its structure. Society,  like  nature,  subordinates   the  welfare  of the  individual   to  that  of the whole.  In  both,  the  only expectation  can  be  death.  The  social  process proves almost  as deterministic  as naturalism  and  is as destructive  of individual   worth. Jim  McAlpine  describes social rules as being rather  like a hockey game:  "Any­ thing  that  breaks the pattern  is bad. And  Peggy breaks up the pattern."




SINCE NO  PERSON can totally escape from society, each is implicated  in the evil of its injustices. He  participates in guilt just by being what he is. Scotty  comes in  Harry's  delirium  to reproach  him:  "If you weren't  like you  are,  would  I  have  become  what  I  am?"  Sam  Raymond  sums  up:   "The whole  human   race  hasn't   had  any  innocence  for  about  twenty-five  thousand years."  In  this sense, man  is involved in original sin and  is under  moral  judg­ ment.
Despite his freedom of choice, man's  predicament  is so desperate  that  he may find his own powers inadequate to effect a radical change. Without  the impetus of an  outside  force, he may in effect be enslaved by society and  by his own  in­ adequate nature.  All he can expect is the inexorable  justice of nature, where his death  is part  of the  pattern  and  where  his individuality  is  irrelevant. Grace  is therefore  essential  for  his  redemption.   By the  end  of  They  Shall  Inherit  the Earth,  Michael in his weakness cries out for the mercy  that  has already  come to him unrecognized in the person of Anna:

I only know that Anna will have to die, and it won't be unjust. But I don't want justice. Who on this earth  ever really wanted justice? ... My God, have pity on me. I don't want justice, I want mercy. Have pity on me.

Insight  comes, as to  Michael,  in moments of crisis. Harry  Lane  gains  under­
standing  in the nightmare  of temporary  paralysis. Anna Cannel submits  to Sam's


21

THE GIFT OF GRACE



creative   will  only  after  she  has  become  incapacitated by  her  terror  of solitude. Michael  Aikenhead is reaching toward  this concept  when  he tells Anna: "They say  suffering   draws   men  to  God ... Suffer  and  you  have  a  chance   of  finding God."
To  accept  regenerative mercy,  man  must  not  only desire  it,  he must  acknowl­ edge  his own  guilt,  both  as an  individual and  as a member of  society. It is only after   Andrew   and   Michael Aikenhead both  admit   their  involvement in  Dave's  drowning that  a  meaningful relation  is possible, for the process of shifting  blame  divides  them.  Harry Lane   must  finally  admit   that,  despite  his legal  innocence, his personality and  social  position  invited  Scotty both to envy and  to exploit  him,  and  that  therefore he too bore moral guilt for the tragedy.
Recognition of guilt  and  desire for  change  open  the  way for a new quality in relationships. Harry Lane's life and  feelings for others  have  been  distorted by his obsession  for  proving  himself  innocent   before  society.  Yet  in  the  crisis at  the hospital   and   in  the   final  vulnerability of  Mike  Kon,   Harry understands that innocence without compassion can destroy himself and others:

Did  he imagine  he could  appear  in court  and  try to serve two masters;  the one longing  for  a  world  of  new  relationships  with  people,  and  the  other  one ... clinging desperately  to this last remnant,  a comeback triumph  in court in the  jail­ ing of Mike Kon?

By staying  away  from  court,  Harry moves toward  the world  of new relationships where  love  assumes  responsibility for  the  fate  of the  other  person  as Harry  ulti­ mately  does for Mike.
Once  a  person  has  entered into  the  new dimension  of relationship, he experi­
ences a freedom  he has never  known  before. For Michael  Aikenhead, the assump­ tion  of responsibility  so that  he can free his father will also free himself. He  is no longer  oppressed   by  his  involvement in  Dave's  drowning and  by  the  fear  that  revelation  will  destroy   his  relationship with  Anna.   He  can  now  approach the freedom and  richness of Anna's emotional life:

She gave herself to everything  that  touched her, she let herself be, she lost herself in  the  fulness of  the  world,  and  in  losing herself she found  the  world,  and  she possessed her own soul.

The despair   of  daily  life  is  transmuted by  love  into  the  richness  of  the  more abundant life promised  by Christ.
The  central  theme  of Christianity is that  God's  grace  becomes  comprehensible

THE GIFT OF  GRACE



as it  is manifested through  the  divine-human person  of Jesus  Christ. Men  may continue to  encounter God's  grace  mediated by the  Holy  Spirit  through human personality.  Many   of  Callaghan's characters learn   new  responses  through the love and  faith  of others.  Kip  Caley  reforms  under  Father Butler's influence and withstands  the   ultimate  test  of  his reform   through  the   supportive  power   of Julie's love.
Although the Church is traditionally regarded as the channel of grace, regenera­ tive  power  does  not  necessarily  flow through it. In  so far  as the  Church admits worldly  values,  an  expedient necessary for its survival  as a social force, it diverges from  its redemptive vision.  It  is precisely its officials, the  Bishops of Such  Is My  Beloved   and   More   joy  in  Heaven, those  responsible  for  its  temporal welfare,  who  have  least  faith  in  regeneration. The  extreme form  is represented by Peggy Sanderson's father, who  so far  compromised  his  faith  with  social  values  that  he lost  his belief  in  God.  Although some  priests, such  as Father Butler  and  Father Dowling,  are  vehicles  of love, they  are  suspect  by the  Church hierarchy and  by the  orthodox and  devout. Apparently  regenerative power  does not  flow through the structure of the  Church but  rather  through the  individual who,  in his inter­ action  with other  individuals, mediates divine love and grace.
Such love  is at once intensely personal and particular, and redemptive.
Although  the   Bishop  is  compelled   to  reject   Father  Dowling's behaviour and attitude  towards the   prostitutes,  he  cannot   suppress  the  suspicion   that   in  this relationship Father Dowling is approaching divine love:

Father  Dowling  in  the beginning  may have loved them in a general  way and,  of course,  that   was  good.  His  love for  them  became  too  concrete ... From   the general  to  the  particular,  the  conception  expressed  in  the  image ... From  the word to the flesh, from  the general  to the particular, the word made flesh.

And his thoughts echo the Gospel:

In  the beginning was the Word, and  the Word was with God, and  the Word was
God ... And the  Word  was made flesh and  dwelt among us. (John  I: I, 14)

The   passage  from  Such   Is  My Beloved  suggests  that  the  Word  or  message  of redemption embodied in  Christ  might  also find expression  in the  love of a  priest (or  of  a  woman   such  as  Anna   Prychoda). Similarly  it is in  Julie's love,  not through physical  passion but  through her reckless commitment to Kip  as a person of great  intrinsic  worth, that  his life finally assumes meaning. In  the end  Kip  can comfort  her  that  she  has  brought him  life. Significantly, Father Dowling  spends

THE GIFT OF  GRACE



his lucid  moments  in the mental  institution  writing a commentary  on The  Song of Songs, a highly sensuous book and  an epitome of the concrete and  particular, which Church  Fathers  have allegorized to represent Christ's love for the Church.




l:E PERSON  bringing  redemption  is not,  however,  totally identified  with  Christ.  He  remains  rooted  in society and  its corruption. Father Dowling,  as a  priest  of  the  Catholic  church,  that  is in  his social  role,  cannot condone  birth  control,  the only feasible help for the Canzano  family, yet he can spend  himself in trying to bring a new life to two prostitutes who are the product of homes as inadequate as the  Canzanos'. His motives raise doubts.  He  desires glory, it seems, in  winning  even the hopeless to God, and  he needs to convince himself that he really loves God by loving the dregs of society.
Peggy  Sanderson,  another   "saint", bestows her  love on social outcasts,  par­
ticularly  on negroes. Although  there  is always the suggestion that  she is sexually corrupt,  she gives many  people a sense of her innocence and  purity. In fact, Jim McAlpine  sees Peggy as a  kind  of St. Joan,  who "lived and  acted  by her own secret intuitions." It  is never clear whether  her secret intuitions  are the result of special insight or of some abnormal psychopathology arising from her childhood experiences with  negroes and  from  profound  disillusionment with her father.
The  redemptive  person  himself needs the  regeneration  which  comes through an  existential  relationship.  By restoring  Anna  Connel  to  a  fulfilling  life, Sam Raymond  finds new direction  in  the apparent dead-end  of his own. The  same process is suggested  when  Harry  Lane  assumes responsibility for  Mike  Kon,  or Anna  Prychoda  for  Michael  Aikenhead.  Acknowledging that  he is his brother's keeper releases the individual  from his private bondage and  produces the charac­ teristically radical life-vision.
Many  of Callaghan's "saints" invite their own destruction. The  personal charismatic  vision, the  living  by secret  intuitions,  challenges the  accepted  pat­ terns of society. Where  Peggy touches one person, she antagonizes  many. There  is in her  relationships  the contrast  between the church,  her  purity and  wisdom, and  the  leopard,  the  destructive  forces within  her  and  directed  toward  her by society. Father  Dowling can marvel that so wealthy a man as Mr. Robison could be so fine a Christian. Yet he fails to understand  that  his chief  danger  lies with just such Christians  whose concept of their own goodness is  judged by his ideals.
Kip  Caley is destroyed  because he does not conform to the preconceived  pat-

THE GIFT OF  GRACE



tern  for  the  returned   prodigal.   When,  through   his sense  of  responsibility  to Foley and  Kerrmann rather  than  to social mores, he is involved  in the shooting of a policeman, everyone assumes he has betrayed a trust:

It  was  necessary that  he be  hanged in  order  that  their  pride  and  self-respect might  be redeemed, that  they might be cleansed of their  humiliation, and  that the pattern of law and order be finally imposed on him.

The  social  pattern  of  law  and  order  is the  antithesis  of  the  redemption   and cleansing made available  through  the grace of love. Because of the drive to main­ tain  the status quo, Father  Dowling is certified insane, Peggy Sanderson is raped and strangled, St. Joan  is burned at the stake, and Christ is crucified.
Morley Callaghan  rarely  presents a dogmatic  answer to any  problem,  or any explicit affirmation of his religious belief. Indeed the ambiguity of many of his characters  precludes such  a statement.  Yet the  pattern  of regeneration  to which he repeatedly turns is firmly rooted in Christian doctrine: man's fundamental involvement  in  social guilt,  the  importance  of accepting  personal  responsibility for  one's  actions,  the  necessity of  regeneration,  the  crucial  role  played  by  self­ sacrificing love in regeneration, and  the achievement  of a new plane of existence characterized  by more vital human  relationships. Although  there is no credo, the patterns of Callaghan's novels are profoundly Christian.

























25

LE MONOLOGUE QUEBECOIS


Laurent Mailhot




L'homme  ne disait rien. Ce que nous nommons monologues sont des dialogues avec quelque  part ignoree de nous-meme
-GILLES HENAULT

Le  monologue  ideal  serait   silencieux­
YVON DESCHAMPS





LE MONOLOGUE  e;t  Ia forme  Ia plus  ancienne  et  Ia plus nouvelle du  theatre  quebecois   (je  ne dis pas de Ia scene canadienne ou  cana­
dienne-fran<;aise). II se situe  a Ia fois en marge  (au  cabaret,  dans  les boites)  et
au  coeur  de notre  theatre.  Des chansonniers  aux  dramaturges tous les hommes de  Ia  parole  et  du  spectacle  l'ont   plus  ou  moins  utilise. Yvon  Deschamps  et Michel  Tremblay  l'ont   rendu   particulierement  significatif.  Le  monologue  est peut-etre,  aujourd'hui comme  au  temps de Jean  Narrache  et de Fridolin,  notre forme  de theatre  Ia plus vraie,  Ia plus specifique, Ia plus populaire  et  Ia mieux engagee, Ia seule ou puissent se retrouver  ensemble travailleurs  et chomeurs,  m­ tellectuels et bourgeois. Comment  ? Et pourquoi  ?


LE  ROMAN nous avait habitues aux  voix  de Maria  Chapde­
laine,  a Ia  folie de  Merraud, aux   jongleries d'Alexandre  Chenevert,  au  vecrire
de Galarneau. Yves Theriault publiait  des Contes  pour un  homme seul, Adrien
Therio  un Soliloque  en  hommage a une  femme,  Real Benoit voulait  Quelqu'un
pour m'ecouter, etc. Ces personnages sont maintenant  sur Ia scene, sous les feux. lis  n'ont  pas fini de ruminer  et de se bercer  ( d'illusions),  mais I'humour  (rose

LE  MONOLOGUE QUEBECOIS



ou rouge,  noir, corrosif ou grin<;ant) leur est venu en meme  temps que  le geste et la parole.
Adolescents ou  quadragenaires, vieilles filles ou  matrones,  ivrognes  ou  pede­ rastes, employes, manoeuvres ou intellectuels de gauche, ils sont plus que diverses facettes de l'homme  quebecois. Presque tous "en-dessous de la moyenne", comme Gratien  Gelinas le disait de Fridolin,  ils en devoilent les dessous, le  conditionne­ ment  psycho-sociologique. Voix sans visages d'un  pays incertain, ils  appellent,  ils
explorent,  ils nomment.  Le monologue  est un  moyen de  depasser  (sans  tout  a
fait  en sortir)  la  jonglerie  hivemale,  le repliement  meditatif  sur soi. Le  person­ nage  est encore  seul, mais  il est seul avec  d'autres,  solitaire-solidaire,  puisqu'il jongle devant  un public, et qu'on  decoupe, on organise sa  jonglerie. De  jongleux melancolique  et sedentaire  il est devenu  jongleur:  joueur, rieur  en  meme  temps que revolte et tragique.
La  recente  Sagouine   acadienne  d'Antonine   Maillet,  admirable  excroissance
ou  rejeton  naturel  des Crasseux, est-elle une  piece, un  discours, un  recit?  C'est un monologue "pour  une femme seule" qui a trouve son auditoire  et sa memoire:

Ah  ! c'est  point   aise  de  te  faire  deporter coume  <;a,  et  de  crouere que  tu  y laisseras  queques  plumes  dans  ta deportation. Ca  se paye ces voyages Ia. C'est  vrai que  tu fais  parler  de toi apres: ils te dounont toute  sorte de fa<;on de  beaux  noms, coume  Evangeline et  les saints  martyrs  canadiens. lis  t'appelont un  peuple  heroi:­ que  et  martyr et  ils te  jouquont quasiment dans  Ia niche  de  !'Ecce  Homo  ( ...) C'etait  une   belle  histouere,  c't'elle-la  a  Marie-Stella  pis   Evangeline;  ben   moi j'aimais encore  mieux  les contes  de mon  defunt pere.

Citoyenne d' "En-bas", fille et femme de pecheurs, nee "quasiment les pieds dam: l'eau", un peu morue a !'occasion, la vieille femme de menage  a pour  tout  decor "son  seau,  son  balai  et  ses torchons",  comme  Fridolin  avait  son  chandail   de hockey, sa fronde, sa chaise et sa casquette de travers. L'anti-Evangeline  s'adresse
"a son  eau  trouble",   elle se decrasse  apres  avoir  decrotte  tout  le  monde.  La
Sagouine,  qui est a elle seule "un  glossaire, une race, un envers de la medaille", un livre d'images  et de  ]os Graphie, est une mane 	a la frontiere  de
!'observation  et du  reve, du subconscient et de la lucidite.  "La  moman" et "La femme  de 47 ans" de Jacqueline  Barrette  ( a-dit-qu'
ines montrealaises,  durcies et rongees par  la mecanisation,  la  publicite,  les uues
sexees;   plus  genees  et  plus  genantes   parce  que  moins  folkloriques:   elles  ne composent aucun  tableau,  aucun discours; elles se decomposent.

LE  MONOLOGUE QUEBECOIS


Sx LE  MONOLOGUISTE est un  "raconteur bien  ordonne  qui commence  par  soi-meme"  (selon la formule  de Jean-V.  Dufresne), Yvon  Des­
champs est le mieux ne et le mieux ordonne des conteurs. Il est ne pauvre,  pogne, imaginatif   et  un  peu  delinquant, typiquement   montrealais,   dans  un  quarrier Saint-Henri qui  evoque  Bonheur  d'occasion mais  aussi le  Plateau   Mont-Royal de  Michel Tremblay. "Mon   personnage, c'est toute  rna  jeunesse. Et cette  men­ talite  qui  est mienne  par  moments.  Ce sont des souvenirs du  passe. Il  faut  que ce soit (_;a",  dit-il  dans  une  interview  a Jean  Royer.  Il  faut  que  ce  soit a depart   (Dans  ma  cour:   "les seize portes s'ouvraient  et  les trente-deux  bras se rabattaient sur les enfants"), un Deschamps refoule at reapparu, mais aussi plus et moins que  Deschamps.
Baptiste est l'ouvrier  colonise, aliene, qui se repose et se complait  dans  rincon­ science, l'asservissement, la servilite. Il se fait le domestique  de son  patron  ( "un  bon boss"), allant  jusqu'a  tondre  son gazon le dimanche  et a  accepter  avec re­ connaissance  un verre  de biere tiede. Niais, niaiseux, Baptiste l'est sans retenue;  inspire et bavard,  il ira cependant au bout de son  personnage, en decouvrira  les limites, les tares. Il est a l'origine  d'un  langage,  d'un  registre, d'un  style, qui  le traduisent  tout entier,  puis le trahissent, le depassent, l'entrainent a se (re)definir. D'explication   en  explications,  le  personnage  se  noue  et  se  delie,  se  deplie,  se multiplie.  Devant  l'autorite, le  travail,  l'argent  ou le bonheur,  ses reactions sont attendues.  Face a sa femme  (morte)   eta son petit, elles sont deja  plus ambigues. Par  rapport  a la politique, aux mass-media, aux  jeunes, a la nouvelle culture,  le heros de Deschamps est nous tous, non seulement quebecois mais americain,  occi­ dental.  Par  exemple  dans  Nigger Black, Le Foetus, Cable TV, sur  la guerre  et la vie, la racisme et les communications  non-communicatives.
Les  monologues  de  Deschamps  naissent  et  se  developpent   diversement,  de
!'observation  aussi bien que de la memoire, par l'ecriture,  le rythme, la musique. Les Unions qu'ossa donne, construit comme une chanson (six couplets qu'interca­ lent  un  refrain  musical)  fut  d'abord  un sketch ou Gilbert  Chenier  jouait I'em­ ploye et Deschamps  le patron; apres deux semaines, on renverse les roles et !'im­  provisation  fonctionne  le plus naturellement  du  monde,  si bien  que  l'interprete se retrouve  auteur  d'un  texte  qu'il  n'a  jamais redige. Il  n'a  pas ecrit  une seule ligne non plus du long Cable TV   ("un  gag", au depart). Les  Anglais, pourtant  assez subtil, fut improvise cinq minutes avant  d'entrer en scene pour le spectacle Poemes et chants  de la  Resistance.  Le  Honte  a commence  par  une  dizaine  de phrases, enrichies peu a peu des anonnements  et des aneries de cette bonne femme

LE  MONOLOGUE QUEBECOIS



( adepte  des  hot  lines  radiophoniques)  qui  trouve  que  les  Canadiens   fran<_;ais "i sont  pas  capa'd's'exprimer", et  "quand  i  parlent,  on  les  comprend   pas". Pepere et Le Foetus, par contre, furent  rediges d'un  jet et d'une  fa<_;on definitive. En general, un monologue  atteint  sa taille et sa forme apres cinq ou six mois de vie publique.  Certains se presentent comme de la provocation  directe,  l'agression d'un  public trap  bien assis, trap  gentiment  dispose.
"Comme  la poesie de Gilles Vigneault,  la prose populaire  d'Yvon  Deschamps se developpe toujours  a partir  d'elle-meme, sans jamais se disperser;  et, avec une rigueur  fascinante  a saisir  le fouillis presque desesperant  du  paradoxe  et  de  la contradiction ( ... )  Deschamps a invente la logique pas-d'allure, l'anti-verite,  le contre-mensonge".1  For<_;ant la dose, il fait du poison un contrepoison,  du somni­ fere  un  reveil. Utilisant  les termes  les plus  a  terre  (une  manifestation  devient du "marchage en gang dans 'es rues"), un accent nasal, des evidences grossieres, des contradictions  apparentes et  boiteuses-"Nous aut'  on  n'a  jamais  eu  d'ar­ gent,  mais <;a  nous a pas empeches de travailler",  ou le lien  causal  est souligne par  la coordination-, Deschamps les redresse et les fait  parler.  Ses pleonasmes sont delirants, ses onomatopees  ant du sens, ses platitudes de l'epaisseur, ses pieti­ nements  du  mouvement.  Il  rend  audibles, presque  tangibles,  l'absurdite et  l'ab­  surde.  S'tessdrardinaire  ! Au  Pere qui demande,  d'une  voix mal  endimanchee: "Les  petits  gars,  si  on  arait   de  I'argent,   que  ferions-nous-tu   avec",   l'enfant  repond,  imperturbable: "Peut-etre que  pourrions-nous-tu  nous acheter  une ma­ chine  avec"  (L'Argent) .Remarquons  enfin que  le Bonheur  et  divers  Proverbes ou Dictons se promenent  en chair  et  en os, comme des vieillards fantomatiques, radoteurs,  dans  les monologues  de  Deschamps  ( Le  Petit  ]esus les assimile aux grands-pretres). La  personnification  de l'abstrait  est ici denonciation des cliches, de la routine verbale impersonnelle.
On est pogne mais ... ON  VA S'EN  SORTIR, ce titre deja long et apparem­
ment  clair,  Deschamps  l'explique  ou l'explicite  ainsi:  "On va  aller  se  pogner dans  autre  chose, mais on  n'a  pas le choix. Et  puis apres,  on  recommencera  a s'en sortir".2   Il n'y a d'issue et meme de fait irrefutable  pour  personne sinon la mort, "epanouissement  total de la vie", dira-t-il ailleurs. Il n'y a que des issues partielles,  partes  qui  ouvrent  sur  d'autres   murs  et  d'autres partes:  l'indepen­ dance  du  Quebec  en est une a ses yeux, comme la liberation  sexuelle, la syndi­ calisation, la tolerance, etc.

LE  MONOLOGUE QUEBECOIS




EANCOIS  HERTEL, qui fustigera plus tard  le miserabilisme de Marie-Claire  Blais et du groupe de Parti pris, se plaignait apres Tit-Coq dans des termes  analogues  a  ceux  de  Victor  Barbeau,  fondateur  de 1'Academie  canadi­ enne-fran<;aise:  "Notre culture   est  desesperement  peuple !"  et,  ajoutait-il,   "si passionnee !"  Selon  lui,  on  peut  assister a  des  "vaudevilles"  comme  ceux  de Gelinas  (l'aurait-il dit  de  Bousille, sa  meilleure  piece?)  dans  "n'importe quel cabaret  parisien  comme  les Deux-Anes  ou le Theatre  de  Dix-Heures". Gerard Pelletier,3    qui  rapporte ces propos  de l'exile, demande  au  critique  de  "faire  la difference entre  les blagues a fleur de peau des chansonniers montmartrois et le caractere  profondement  humain  des sketches de  Fridolin".  De meme, le specta­ teur  doit  aujourd'hui distinguer  entre  des  imitateurs  ou  chansonniers   (au  sens parisien)  comme Jacques  Normand ou  Claude  Landre,  les Jerolas  ou les Cyni­ ques, qui s'engagent  dans  l'actualite la  plus immediate,  et des auteurs-composi­ teurs comme Gilles Vigneault  ou  Georges Dor qui, a cote de leurs chansons, ont developpe  avec bonheur  des monologues souvent tres proches du  theatre.  Ceux­ la sont des caricaturistes  ou  des  joumalistes;  ceux-ci sont  presque  des ecrivains. Ils ont  cree des types, des  mythes, un ton.  Leur  voix est ailleurs  que  dans  leurs cordes vocales; leur  musique est dans le langage.
On  pourrait  encore citer des poetes, tels Miron,  Chamberland, Peloquin,  Du­
guay,  Michele Lalonde  ou Michel Garneau,  comme exemples de cette litterature orale et prophetique. La Nuit  de la poesie n'etait  pas toujours  poetique, mais elle etait  toujours  theatrale ou dramatique. Elle etait  le monologue a  plusieurs voix d'un   peuple4    qui  cherche  a  se  reconnaitre   pour  s'unir.  Du  libre  et  disparate Show  de  vot'  vie  (par   la  Quenouille   bleue  a  la  discotheque  "Chez   Dieu") au   Show   de  la   parole  ou   Peloquin   fait   reculer  la  mort,   ou   Duguay   fait vibrer  a  l'unisson,   jusqu'au   "boutte",  jusqu'au   "Toutte",  la  syllabe  sacree: Ommmmmmmmmmm ... -d'un  show  a  I'autre  (et  depuis  L'Osstidcho   de Charlebois,  Forestier et Deschamps), chansons,  jeux, monologues, parole et  ( du moins chez Duguay)  silence s'intercalent  et s'interpenetrent.

J'ouvre la porte, rien. Je ferme la porte, rien.
J'ouvre laporte, rien que moi-meme, gratte,  frappe  et  joue Robert  Charlebois  (Margot).
Car comment voulez-vous parler, chanter ou rire, C'que  vous voudrez,

LE  MONOLOGUE QUEBECOIS



Car  comment  voulez-vous c'que vous voudrez
Quand  la vie s'en est allee sans vous en parler ... (LeMont  Athos)

Les "expressions occultes" du  Zirmate  de  Peloquin, l'infonique ou  infoniaque Lapocalipso  de  Duguay  ( infonie  = "symphonie de  l'infini"), Sur  fil  metamor­ phose ou  Les Oranges sont  vertes, de  Gauvreau, sont-ils  poemes  ou  spectacles?
Et les "Monologues de !'alienation delirante" de  Miron?  Fran($oise Loranger cite justement ce poeme en postface  a Medium  saignant 5  - a mains  que  ce ne soit en preface  a cette  piece "avec  un seul  personnage." ( "une arne  aussi nue  que  possi­ ble")' qu'elle revait  d'ecrire apres  deux pieces "collectives":

... moi je gis mure dans la boite cranienne depoetise dans rna langue et mon appartenance dephase  et decentre  dans rna coincidence ravageur  je fouille rna memoire et mes chairs jusqu'en les maladies de la tourbe et de l'etre
pour  trouver  la trace de mes signes arraches  emportes pour  reconnaitre  mon cri dans l'opacite  du  reel ...

Le  monologue, qu'il   soit  poetique, comique ou  dramatique, est  toujours  "de­ poetise", "dephase et decentre". Il est un mur sonde, un sol fouille,  ravage, un cri sourd  ou  per  ant,
Quand   lparl'tout  seul   ( 6ooo   exemplaires   vend us)   ou   ]' parl'  pour  parler,
ecrivait durant la Crise  des annees  30 Jean   Narrache (pseudonyme transparent d'Emile Coderre). "J'ecris pour  etre  parle" est  le  titre  plus  dynamique,  deja theatral, d'un poeme  de  jeunesse de Dube:

J'ecris pour etre parle
Et pour qu'il soit possible
a mon frere  inconnu
D'entendre couler  mes larmes
et rna joie se debattre
Entre  les quatre  grilles des prisons de mon reve".6

Dire  pour ne  pas etre  dit,  prefere   pour  sa  part   Gilles  Derome  ( c'est  le  titre­ poeme  de son  recueil), auteur d'un Qui  est Dupressin? qui  fut,  en  1g62,  apres celles de Languirand, la premiere piece antidubeenne, anti-psychologique et anti­ realiste,  du  theatre quebecois.   Dans  taus  les cas il s'agit  cependant  d'un ecart  entre  dire  et parler,  entre  ecouter et entendre, entre  ecrire  et creer:

LE  MONOLOGUE QUEBECOIS



on n'ouvre pas les yeux sans tuer quelque mystere beneficiant en silence
de notre contumace,

declare  Gerald  Godin  dans  son  "Cantouque franc,;ais  dit  du  temps  nouveau". Voir n'est pas regarder,  n'est pas savoir. D'un  oeil, d'une  oreille, d'une  bouche a
!'autre, il y a un sous-entendu,  un malentendu,  un inter-dit  et un interdit.


LE  MONOLOGUE joue un role important dans le theatre  pro­
prement  dit:  dans les pieces de forme conventionnelle  ou traditionnelle, davant­
age  encore  dans  les structures eclatees du  nouveau  theatre.  Et  je pense mains ici aux  longues  tirades,  morceaux  de  bravoure  ou  professions de  foi,  qu'il  est facile de reperer un peu partout, qu'a  des recherches et expressions de soi totales, comme  les confessions a  Ia fois personnelles et historiques  de  Ia matriarche   du
Temps  Sauvage, de Ia Mere du  Marcheur,  de Jean  a Ia fin d'Un   fils   a tuer, de
Brutus enfin ou on a !'impression  que "les personnages se parlent  non point pour se comprendre  mais  pour  s'expliquer; et  non  point  pour  s'expliquer  a !'autre, mais a soi".7
Les drames realistes de Dube font une place de choix a l'oraison funebre et amoureuse   (Zone), a  l'autoportrait des parvenus  (Bilan)   au  plaidoyer  quasi­ judiciaire   (Au   retour  des  oies blanches),  a !'allocution  inconsciemment  auto­ critique  des separatistes  de salon  ( celui des Beaux  Dimanches  est celebre).  Plus significative est Ia courbe  descendante  que  dessinent les dialogues  des  protago­ nistes :"l'echange verbal s'acheve  presque immanquablement en supplication,  en aveu d'impuissance  ou en cri de desespoir".8   La structure  des pieces de Dube est parallele,  symetrique: elle est  d'ailleurs  fondee sur  le couple,  aussi bien dans  le cycle populaire  que  dans le cycle bourgeois de !'oeuvre.  Les figures, le style sont ceux de l'inventaire, de Ia repetition,  de Ia reprise, du "cercle  qu'il  faut  rompre apres  en avoir fait  le tour  pour  qu'il  cesse d'etre  le tombeau,  Ia cage et le vais­ seau ou les generations  precedentes se sont trouvees emprisonnees".9
La majeure  partie  ce de qu'on  appelle le theatre  quebecois n'est au fond que des monologues esquisses, esquives, ou encore developpes mais juxtaposes. Si I'intrigue  (Ia  ou  on  en  veut)   est souvent  Iache,  le denouement   arbitraire, les
dialogues maladroits  et artificiels, les monologues, eux, sont le plus souvent reussis. C'est  le cas non  seulement  de  Bien  a  moi,  marquise  (Marie Savard), de  La
Duchesse  de  Langeais,  de  La  Sagouine,  de  Solange   (Jean   Barbeau)   ou  du


32

LE  MONOLOGUE QUEBECOIS



Pierre Sigouin  de Jacques  Hebert,  pieces a un seul personnage,  mais des Grands Departs  et  des Violons de  l'automne, d'Encore cinq  minutes et  d'Un Cri  qui vient  de loin,  pieces elaborees  a partir  d'un  ou de plusieurs monologues differes,
entrecoupes, morceles.
Ces demenagements   sur  place,  ces transports   interrompus,  ces  plaintes,  ces espoirs, cette protestation,  cette revendication,  cette douleur  complaisamment  ou courageusement  etalee,  ces cris qui  viennent  de l'enfance,  ces families en  pieces detachees  (suivant  le titre de Tremblay), ces femmes et ces hommes qui essaient de se donner  un nom, un visage, ce sont des monologues en situation  et en action.
Leur  desordre  meme  repond  a une  necessite, obeit  a des lois. Le  joual  par  ex­
emple, le sacre, le blaspheme,  les gestes manques,  le travestissement  (des sexes, des ages, des conditions  sociales, des sentiments)' !'auto-destruction par  l'alcool, le suicide, la prostitution,  l'exil. "On  ne peut dire le mal, le pourrissement, l'ecoeurement   dans  un  langage  serein,  correct;  il  faut  que  mes  paroles  soient ebranlees  dans  leur  fondement   meme,  par  le  destructuration  qui  est  celle du langage commun,  de la vie de tous".10
Il devient de plus en plus evident, a mesure que ses pieces sont creees, que  la
production de Michel Tremblay  n'est pas due au hasard ou au miracle. Des Belles­
soeurs a Marie-Lou une unite et une progression organiques  s'imposent  au  spec­
tateur  et  au  lecteur.  Le  theatre  de  Tremblay   a  des  principes  de  construction solides et  precis:  non  pas d'abord   le  joual, le  personnage  feminin  ou  le cadre montrealais  (cuisine, taverne, club),  mais cette forme  (theme et structure)  qu'est le monologue. Lorsqu'il  evoque les influences qui l'ont  marque,  Tremblay  men­ tionne Gelinas, Dube,  les choeurs grecs, Beckett, "le  plus grand", et,  inattendu,
Shakespeare, "a cause demon grand  amour  pour les monologues qui  n'en  finis­
sent  plus." 11 La  Duchesse de  Langeais,  "plus  femme  que  toutes  les femmes!", commere,  vaniteuse,  perverse, masochiste, "une  grande  artiste"  dans  son genre, n'en  finit plus d'imiter  et de s'imiter,  de faire  du  theatre  dans  le theatre  et des oeillades, des apartes  dans  le monologue. La  Berthe  des Trois   petits  tours  sait qu'elle ne sortira  jamais de sa cage de verre de caissiere. Le "Showtime! Show­ time!"  du doorman (au  "Coconut Inn")  n'est pas pour elle, mais elle tient, sans
illusion, a ce qu'on  lui laisse ses illusions: "Qu'on me sacre la paix, pis qu'on  me
laisse rever! C'est tout ce qui me reste !" Cela, elle le fait tres bien, se donnant le replique avec une verve triste, consciente de son retard  et de ses limites, et  pour­ tant  capable  de s'inventer  "une  vraie vie de vraie Star  d'Hollywood !"  Dans  A toi  pour toujours, ta Marie-Lou, dedicace effacee d'une  photo  jaunie, le quatuor


33

LE  MONOLOGUE QUEBECOIS



est  divise  par  couples:  le  pere  et  la  mere,  l'un   devant   ses  bouteilles   de  biere vides, l'autre son  tricot  sur  les genoux; les deux  filles, la  celibataire casaniere  et la chanteuse western  soi-disant emancipee. Tous  sont  immobiles  dans  leur  espace respectif   ( sauf  cette  demiere, Carmen)  et  fixes  (au  sens  psychanalytique) sur une  epoque et  des  evenements  passes.  Cadavres en  sursis  qui   racontent,   pre­ parent et  ( re) vivent  au  ralenti leur  mort.  Manon repete  sa  mere,  Carmen  re­ prend   le  geste  desespere  de  son  pere:   l'aneantissement du  noyau  familial  ( un accident-suicide em porte  Leopold, Marie-Louise et 1'enfant  qu'elle  portait).
Le  phenomene est particulierement visible dans  les spectacles  les plus  recents,
qu'il  s'agisse  de  revues  improvisees  et ephemeres comme  Finies les  folies!  ( contre le  projet   de  loi  63)   ou  Hello  Police,  de  creations  (plus  ou  mains)   collectives comme  celles du  Theatre du  Meme  Nom  et du  Grand Cirque Ordinaire, ou  de pieces proprement dites,  lues au  Centre d'essai  des Auteurs  dramatiques:  Dimi, de  Marc-F. Gelinas,   Les  Pigeons  d' Arlequin, de   Michel   Greco,   "western  in­
terieur", "theatre de  la  lucidite  sur soi-meme,  theatre d'introspection",  Triangle
a  une  voix  ou  ce  Geste  parte, d'Andre Caron, qui  presente  son  oeuvre  comme
"l'art de  ne  pas  dire  ce qu'on a  a dire  et  prendre quarante millions  de  detours pour  y arriver". Wouf   Wouf  aussi,  la  machinerie-revue de  Sauvageau, est  un monologue interieur  traduit  en   parodies,   en  parades,   en  numeros  de  cirque, peuple  de  reves  concrets,  d'actions simultanees et  contradictoires, parcouru  sur­ tout   par  un  intense  desir  et  des  besoins  elementaires:  la  faim,  la  soif,  l'envie  d'aller pisser et de lancer,  libre  comme  l'air,  le cri  de Tarzan:  "Haaaaaaaaaaa­ aaa  ... ! ! !"
Nos monologues sont  tres  proches  des  bulles  et  du  trait  des  bandes  dessinees, ou l'important est ce qui  est absent,  suggere,  et que  le spectateur ajoute, imagine, comme  le  reconnait  Deschamps. Jean   Barbeau   est  l'auteur de  Solange,  confes­ sion  d'une ex-religieuse,  d'un Goglu  immobile et  masturbatoire, et  d'autre part  des  quatorze stations au  paste  de  police  d'un  Chemin de  Lacroix12    laicise,  et d'un  Ben-Ur    (Benoit-Urbain  Theberge)  qui   passe  de   l'album  de   famille   a Zorro, The Lone  Ranger, etc. "C'est de valeur  que tous ces heros-la soient  amer-  icains ... Pas  que   j'en  ai  contre   les Americains, mais ... il  me  semble  que  ce serait  plus l'fun  si ... si on  avait  les notres,  nos heros ..." 13 En  attendant qu'on se decide  entre  Dollard des Ormeaux et Chenier,  Ben-Ur  collectionne les joueurs de  hockey  et  est  bien  content de  jouer  du  revolver  dans  un  uniforme gris-bleu d'agent de la  Brook's  ("SCcurite  depuis 1867 ...").




34

LE  MONOLOGUE QUEBECOIS


"NOTRE THEATRE,  dans  sa  forme  la  plus  spontanee,   res- semble a une soiree de famille",  observait Jean-Claude Germain,  dont  l'equipe, le T.M.N., produisit  un  Diguidi,  diguidi, hal  hal  hal  ou la "sainte  trinite  que­
becoise"' son pere, sa mere et son fils, est amenee  a quitter sa chaise et a marcher
a quatre  pattes. Avant  et  jusque dans l'obscurite finale, la  Mere  prononce: "Je
veux plus avoir pitie de personne ... je suis tannee  de passer rna vie a m'excuser
... Je sais pas pourquoi  je parle mais y faut  que  je continue  ( ...)  Je veux etre libre  tout  court ... je veux  etre  liiiiibbbrrreeee ... je veux etre  libre  de  le dire
sans  avoir  a le crier ..."  Laver  son tinge  sale  (en  famille)   etait  d'ailleurs  le
titre d'un  montage de scenes choisies par Andre Brassard, et qui allaient  d'Henry Deyglun au T.M.N. Meme dans un radiotheatre  aussi symboliste que  Les Invites au proces, d'Anne  Hebert, l'homme  qui, "pour  s'etre reserve un seul petit placard
pour son linge sale, se croit  a l'abri  de la  crasse pour  le  restant  de ses jours",
devra  admettre qu'on  lave son linge sale en famille. "La  Fete  de  Fridolin", un des meilleurs sketches sur le titi montrealais, se terminait  par le rappel hygienico­
moral  de la mere a son fils: "Fridolin, c'est samedi  a soir ... Ca  fait  qu'avant
de te coucher, donne ton coeur au Bon Dieu, puis jette ton corps au linge sale".
Corps voulait dire maillot  de corps, mais l'ambiguite  est savoureuse.
Une  soiree de  famille,  c'est  toujours  un  remue-menage,  un  lavage  de  tetes et de sous-vetements, un  brassage du  refoule qu'on  refoule encore.  Ce sont  des epanchements  et des confidences, des retraites et des agressions, de longs silences brutalement  rompus, des incomprehensions et des discours paralleles. Peu de veritables dialogues, conversations  et discussions. On  defend  mains  un  point  de vue qu'on  ne se defend soi-meme, globalement. Les affirmations  sont des affirm­ ations  de soi. On  raconte  des  histoires et on  raconte  son  histoire.  Avee  atten­ drissement et fureur,  gene et sans-gene, de fa<_;on aussi drole que  pathetique.
Faut-il  rattacher  cette fa<;on de faire  ( ou de se representer)   a une  tradition
orale  particulierement   riche,  reprise dans  le domaine  du  conte  par  un  Ferron, un Theriault, un  Carrier?  Sans  doute,  mais cette tradition   elle-meme  doit  etre
reliee a certains aspects de notre geographic et de notre histoire:  l'isolement  des
rangs et des fermes, la rigueur  de l'hiver, la longueur  des voyages, l'exil  saison­ nier des forestiers, etc.  Les temps  faibles et  monotones  etaient  ici  brusquement  coupes par des temps forts, des fetes, aussi rares que violents. La  parole eclatait soudain  apres des jours, des mois de solitude et de silence. A ce  propos, la mise
en scene de La Guerre,  yes sir!, de Carrier,  contrairement   a ce qu'ont  note des
chroniqueurs,   parait  tout  a fait  appropriee  a la  piece et  a la  tradition.  Cette


35

LE  MONOLOGUE QUEBECOIS



altemance, voire cette coexistence sur le plateau  d'une  toile grisatre,  d'un  espace vide, demesure  (a la Lemieux), et d'autre  part  de scenes interieures  debordante de  vie, de  couleurs,  de  mangeaille  et  de  passions ( un  Massicotte  brueghelise) ,
rend tres bien compte de ce double rythme:  ralenti  jusqu'a l'immobilite,  accelere
jusqu'au  tourbillon.
Nous  pouvons  passer sans  transition  de  la  guerre  de  la  Conquete   a la  sou­ mission, de la  resistance  passive a la  Revolte  de  1837-38,  de  la  Confederation  parlementaire  aux   plebiscites   anti-conscriptionnistes,   du   duplessisme   a  cette
reforme  agitee qu'on  a  appelee  la  Revolution  tranquille  ou The   Not  So Quiet
Revolution, comme  du  jeune  a l'ivresse, du  clericalisme  a !'indifference  relig­
ieuse, de la glace au soleil. "Faire la revolution, c'est sortir du  dialogue domine­
dominateur; a proprement parler,  c'est divaguer.  Le terroriste  parle  tout  seul",
explique  Hubert  Aquin; "au  theatre  ne doivent monologuer  que  les personnages qui hesitent indefiniment,  qui se trouvent  aux prises avec la solitude deformante du  revolutionnaire ou de l'aliene.  11 n'y a de monologues vrais que  dans !'inco­ herence.  L'incoherence  dont  je parle ici est une des modalites  de la  revolution, autant  que le monologue en constitue le signe immanquable".14




LE MONOLOGUE  est  par  excellence l'aire  et  l'art   de !'anti­
heros, du sous-personnage,  de l'individu  emiette et perdu. Ses parcelles d'human­ ite sont d'autant plus emouvantes  qu'elles sont derisoires.15   Ne  cherchant   pas a nous en imposer, la voix des monologues, cassee, rugueuse,  repetitive  et toujours
chaude,  s'impose  a elle-meme, se decouvre  une histoire, parfois  un  corps  (pour
la  souffrance)   et  un  visage  (pour   le  rire).   "J'ai !'impression  que  toutes  les grandes  tragedies quebecoises vont etre droles ( ... ) ' comme si notre  plus grand malheur etait  arrive en I 763 et que plus rien de pire ne peut maintenant arriver. Ca  ne va peut-etre  pas si mal.  Et c'est peut-etre  comme <;a  qu'on  est universe!. Notre  douleur  voit  grand. On  n'est  pas tout seuls. On  en voit d'autres qui sont
mal pris," declare Jean  Barbeau  dans la preface a son Chemin  de Lacroix. "Bon­
heur, viens-t'en, viens-t-en vite, parce que moi je m'en vas! ...", criait Deschamps
a la fin de son monologue  le plus naivement  tragique.  Qui  est menace  de  dis­
paraitre?  L'homme  et son milieu, sa collectivite (sa nation)   indissociablement.
Le monologue  est toujours  la voix de plusieurs en un seul, le silence de taus en chacun.  11 est deleste et lourd,  fragile et tenace, sorte de memoire  du  futur
au  passe, ou d'imagination a partir  d'un  reel invraisemblable.  Le monologue est

LE  MONOLOGUE QUEBECOIS



tout   entier present et  actuel, parole ou  silence irrecusables, mais  i1  deporte  con­ stamment !'attention vers  ce  qui  aurait pu  ne  pas  etre,  vers  ce  qui  pourrait  etre  autrement. Interrogation, exclamation ou  points de suspension, il  ne  connait pas le  mot   FIN. Noeud sans  denouement, sa  structure est  l'attente,  le  recommence­ ment   (done 1'espoir),  meme si son  theme est  la  fatalite,  I'impuissance, 1'empris­ onnement, l'angoisse. Le  monologue quebecois vit  de  ces  contradictions entre la forme et  le  fond, !'instinct et  la  conscience, le  quotidien et  l'evenement. Est-il destin ou  liberation? 11 se nourrit du  theatre et  de l'histoire ( et  il les nourrit) en attendant que ceux-ci, pour un  temps, le  remplacent.




NOTES

1 Jean-V. Dufresne, "Deschamps quatre", dans  Actualite sur scene,  programme du spectacle  de  l'automne I97o  .a la  Place  des  Arts.-Voir, du  meme  auteur, Yvon
Deschamps, Montreal, Les Presses de l'Universite du  Quebec, "Studio", I97I.
2    Programme du  spectacle. Supplement de  Quebec-Presse, 6 fevrier   I972,  p.  3·­ On  n'est  pas sorti  du  bois est le  titre  d'une comedie  musicale  distanciee,  exorcis­ ante,  critique, de  Dominique de  Pasquale   (Montreal, Lemeac,  "Repertoire que­ becois",  I 972). Gilbert  David  note dans sa presentation: "Le Theatre "quebecois" n'en  finit  pas  d'achever le Canadien Fran<;ais:  c'est  un  meurtre legitime   qui  res­
semble  a un  suicide" ( p. 7) . "Avee  les sauvages,  c'est  le cri  de guerre que  je vais
lancer", dit  Pet-le-feu, un  des trois personnages trop  blancs,  trop  pales  de  Lende­
main  d'la  veille,  monologues  d'Odette Gagnon.
3   "Culture peuple", Le Devoir, I 2 fevrier  I 949, p. g.
4    Gerald  Godin  disait,  a propos  de la tournee  "engagee" de Mouloudji  (celebrant le Paris de  I 870)  et des Poemes et chants  de la Resistance  II  ( apd:s  nos "evenements d'octobre"): la difference c'est  que  notre  Commune nous  la  vivons  actuellement.
5   Montreal, Lemeac, "Theatre canadien", I970-La  critique du   Montreal  Star voyait  d'ailleurs Medium  saignant  comme   une  non-piece,   un  non-spectacle, "a prolonged  cry of  frustrated  rage", "an  exorcism  of fear and  a litany  of hate". "Si vous ne pouvez  pas  parler, criez!",  conclut  Loranger (p.  I39).
6    Marcel  Dube,  Textes et  documents, Montreal, Lemeac, "Theatre canadien D-I", Ig68,  p.  I4.
7   Jean  Ethier-Blais, "Le  Theatre de  Paul  Toupin, Le Devoir, I6 decembre rg6r, p. I2.
8   Maximilien Laroche, Marcel   Dube,  Montreal, Fides,  "Ecrivains canadiens  d'au­
jourd'hui" 1970, p.  roo.
9  Ibid., p.  I  12.
10  Paul  Chamberland, "Dire ce que  je suis",  Parti  pris, vol. III, no. 5,  janvier I965,
P· s6.
11   "Entrevue avec  Michel  Tremblay", Nord, vol. I, no.  I, automne I971,  p. 6g.


37

LE  MONOLOGUE QUEBECOIS



12  "Ca  parle,  la  majorite silencieuse   ( ...)  Ca  parle  mal, a pas  directement aux  autres, mais a
a	(Le   Chemin  de  Lacroix   suivi   de  Goglu,
Montreal, Lemeac, "Repertoire quebecois", I 97 I, p. 49) .
13  Ben-Ur, Montreal, Lemeac, "Repertoire quebecois", I97I, p.  98.- Albert  Mill­ aire,  directeur du  Theatre Populaire du  Quebec, rappelle  le principal  element  de sa  mise  en  scene:   "Nous avons  assis le  personnage de  Ben  a  l'avant-scene, nous lui  avons  donne un  carton plein  de  comics,  nous  lui  avons  reserve  un  bon  pro­  jecteur,  et c'est  la que  s'est  engage  le grand  monologue  du  debut  de  la  deuxieme partie. Ce  grand  monologue a ete  mis en  pieces et  nous  nous  en  sommes  servi au
debut  et tout  au long  de la representation" (Ibid., p.  s-6. C'est  moi qui  souligne).
14   "Profession: ecrivain", Parti  pris, vol. I,  no.  4, janvier   I964, p.  27.
15   Recemment, chez Sol  (Seul), doux  et auguste  clown  de  Marc Faureau.
























I! 	artk§	=
A. G. Bailey "Into  the flooding tide 	w
M	to seek the consolation  of the waters, 	M
to find the depths a life of blessed peace

. McCLELLAND & STEWART I The Canadian Publishers
At Good Bookstores Everywhere $5.95 cl.

FATHERS AND  SONS




Marilyn].Davis



A RECENT ARTICLE by Ronald Sutherland, "The Calvlll­
ist-Jansenist  Pantomime,"1   compares  English-  and  French-Canadian  literatures
as  reflectors  of  Puritanical repression  in  Canadian society. Sutherland  argues that Canada  remained

more faithful to  the Puritan  ethos than has the United States of America. And what is even more significant, Canadian  Puritanism has evolved much  the same form of expression in Protestant English Canada  as in Roman  Catholic Quebec.

English-Canadian Calvinism  shares a common denominator with  the Jansenism of French-Canadian Catholicism. The root of both is Augustinian  theology as interpreted by Calvin,  and  by Jansen  after  him.  "In its doctrine  of hereditary corruption,  universal deprivation, and  complete loss of spiritual  freedom  on the part of man," says one authoritative source, "Calvin  takes over almost unchanged the  doctrine  of Augustine."2    Similarly, says another,  "Jansen adopted  in  their entirety  the most rigid of St. Augustine's formulas, and  adhered  especially ... to the  most rigid  [gratuitous predestination].... " In  treating  of the  Fall of man Jansen  assumed "a  very pessimistic standpoint  in which he presented  as absolute the power of concupiscence over free will, thenceforth inclined to sin."3
The  doctrine  of predestination  affirmed by Calvin  and  Jansen  raised  thorny
problems of divine grace for orthodox  theologians. Given  the total  depravity  of man  since  the  Fall -not  only  in  his  spiritual  nature   but  also in  his  human powers of intellection and will-then "all man's works are contaminated by sin" (NCE,  II,  1092),  and  human  activity is impotent  to establish a proper relation­ ship with god. It  is an image of man  corrupted  into a "horrible deformity,"4  as Calvin  put  it. Salvation  then,  is absolutely  in  the divine  will  and not  at  all in man's  merits  and  good  works, for predestination  either  to  election  or  reproba­  tion  is  presented  as  independent  of God's  foreknowledge  of  individual   merit.

39

FATHERS AND SONS



Those   foreordained  to  eternal  damnation are   justly  treated since  all men  are wholly   perverted.  Those   foreordained  to  eternal   life  acquire  it  only  because "God's grace  is irresistible.  Just  as sinful  man  necessarily wills evil, so the  elected or  justified  man  necessarily conforms to God's  decree"  (NCE, II, I092). Spiri­ tually speaking, man  is abased  to nothing.
The  invincible logic   of  Calvin's  doctrine  may  be  partly   attributed  to  his rigorous  training in logic and  law,  and  to a tendency  to see God  "in  terms  of his supreme power  that   is absolute law ... " (NCE, II,  Iogo). Thus, "justice, in some  sense,  may  be  vindicated on  the  lines  of  Augustine   and  Calvin, but  not love;  for  if God  could  save,  why  did  he not?"  (ERE, III,  I52). Jansen's work was  "immediately  accused   of  renewing   the  errors  of ... Calvin" (NCE, VII,
820), and  condemned. In  I 730,  following  political  persecutions, the anti-Jansen­ ism   bull   Unigenitus   (I 7 I 3)   was   proclaimed  law   in   France.   Subsequently, Jansenism  moved   underground and  became  "entrenched in  the  mentality of a minority clan,  narrow, surly,  and  irritable ... " (NCE, VII,  824). Signs  of  a "martyr   mentality"  emerged,  frequently  accompanied  by   an   "eschatological mentality"  which   conceived   the  end  of  the  world  near  at  hand   (NCE, VII,
824). Calvinist   theology   triumphed mainly  in  Scotland, Jansenism  in  France, the   two  cultures  which   most  significantly   contributed  to  the  early  growth   of
Canada.


HUGHMACLENNAN  indicates,  in his essays, his awareness  of the peculiar  influence of religion on the Canadian psyche:

In  addition  to the repressions enforced  by nature,  there are few nations in which established religion has had  a greater success in curbing exuberance.  The  authority of the Quebec  priest over  his parish is famous. In  the English-speaking  provinces Calvinism has been endemic from the beginning.5

And although MacLennan has not to my knowledge specifically pointed  out the Augustinian root  to  both  Jansenism and  Calvinism,  he is certainly aware of its dual  heritage  in Christian life:

From  St. Augustine we accepted  the vision of the City of God, and  mankind  has been  better  as a  result.  Also from  St.  Augustine the Christian  religion  accepted for  centuries  the  view that  man,  though  God's creature,  is utterly  vile, and  failed to realize that  this opinion was the purely personal result of St. Augustine's disgust with his own former life of debauchery and sensuality.6

FATHERS AND SONS



To  examine doctrinal similarities is inadequate, however,  since  both  systems assumed   different shapes  in  different countries, under   new  conditions, without abandoning their   fundamental principles.   When  the  Scottish   Church  adopted the   Westminster  Confession    (I 646) ,  for  example,  it  passed   from   Genevan­ Calvinism to  the  Puritan pattern.7  In  fact,  Puritan Covenant  theology modified Calvinism since  Puritans made  "God's absolutism   tractable  to  man's ability  to conform," so that  now:

man's  duty  was to fulfill his contract  with God. Since God had  made the contract in the image of legal and  trade  agreements of the time, His demands  were reason­ able  and  humanly  possible of fulfillment.  Thus,  Calvin's  God  of  predestination and  irresistible  condemnation  became  a  Puritan   God  who  could  be  served  by righteous  living and  who would thereby consider those so living among  the elect.
'(NCE, II, 1093-94.)

The   continued emphasis on  original  sin  and  human depravity made  mortifica­ tion  of  flesh  in  the  Old  Adam   one  of  the  central duties  of  Christian life,  and lent to Puritan devotion  a sombre  and gloomy character.
"Often I have  said  to myself that  my grandfathers three  times  removed  lived
in a culture as primitive as Homer's," said  MacLennan. And indeed  the environ­ mental harshness  of the  Scottish  Highlands was  peculiarly  suited  to  the  growth of Calvinism. When  they emigrated to the  Canadian Maritimes  "with them  they brought-no  doubt of  this -that nameless  haunting guilt  they  never   under­ stood.... "8  It was reinforced in an  austere  land  with  a  harshness  of its own,

a part  of Canada  where nobody is able to change  the landscape. Along the Atlan­ tic  coast  of  Nova  Scotia  you  grow  up  with  the  conviction  that  everything  in nature  here is as it is forever, and  that  man, living with the shifting immutability of the ocean and  the unshifting immutability  of granite rocks, can never dominate his own fate.... 9

In  Each Man's  Son, Dr. Ainslie well knows "there was a rock in them  all, buried deep in the past of his own race."




IT IS  THE  PURITANICAL EFFECTS  of both  Calvinism and Jan­ senism   that  MacLennan presents   as  significantly   determining the  relation  be­ tween  fathers and  sons in  two  novels which  are  filially connected:  Each Man's  Son  (I95I) and  The  Return  of the Sphinx   (I967). In  Each  Man's  Son,  Mac­ Lennan focuses  on  a fatherjson situation to  present  his  theme  of Calvinist guilt

FATHERS  AND SONS



which  haunts an  entire   Scottish, Cape  Breton  community like  a  doom.  In  his "Author's Note" to the  first edition  MacLennan refers to the "ancient curse, intensified  by John Calvin  and  branded upon  their  souls by John Knox  and  his successors-the belief  that   man   has  inherited from  Adam   a  nature so sinful that  there  is no  hope  for  him  and  that,  furthermore, he lives and  dies under  the wrath  of  an  arbitrary God  who  will forgive  only  a  handful of  his elect  on  the Day   of  Judgment.mo  George   Woodcock   describes  this  "sickness"   which  Mac­ Lennan sees, "as  the  principal internal enemy  of our  western civilization".11  The  result  is a society  too sub-consciously guilt-ridden to live fully or love well.
'The  theme  arises early  in the  novel when  Dougald MacKenzie, wise man  and father-figure  to  Dr.  Daniel   Ainslie,  bluntly   asserts:   "You   haven't  forgotten a single  word   you've   ever  heard   from  your  own  Presbyterian father.  You  may think  you've  rejected   religion  with  your  mind,  but  your  personality has no more rejected   it  than  dyed   cloth   rejects  its  original   colour."  MacKenzie  continues quietly   in  an  ironic   parody of  Calvin's pessimistic  sense  of sin,  then  he  again addresses  Dr.  Ainslie.  "I'm a Christian, Dan,  but  Calvin  wasn't one  and  neither was  your  father. It may  sound   ridiculous  to  say,  in  cold  words,  that   you  feel guilty  merely  because   you're alive,  but  that's what  you  were  taught to  believe until  you grew up."
MacKenzie's words  set  Ainslie  brooding about   this  "burden of guilt"  passed
from father to son, in the following  way:

But why must  he, Daniel  Ainslie, forever feel guilty before he could reason away any  cause for  guilt? ... MacKenzie  had  told him  that  although  he might  be an intellectual  agnostic,  he was an emotional  child in  thrall  to his barbarous  Presby­ terian  past.  As he  thought  this, he felt guilty again.  But why? Was there no end to  the  circle  of Original  Sin?  Could  a man  never  grow up and  be free?  It was deeper  than  theory  and  more  personal.  There  was Margaret -he  felt  guilty be­ fore  her,  guilty  in  his soul.  Why  again?  Merely  because, when  he  had  married her, he had  been so swayed by sexual desire? As he thought  this he saw her anew, as he had  seen her for the first time, that  wonderful, white firm body so eager for pleasure  with him,  himself desperate  for the  joy in her, yet at  the same time half afraid  and  half  ashamed.  Why again?  What  was wrong with  desire, except  that within  himself it was overpowering  and he feared it? Why did he fear it, since she had  always been able to satisfy it? Because he had  been taught  to fear it. Because it led hellward. But  he was a physician, a learned  man  of  forty-two years, and he no  longer  believed  in  hell  and  damnation. No, but  he  did  believe, and  believed because it was true, that he had  permitted  the fables of  childhood to destroy much of Margaret's happiness.  So the circle was complete again. Any way he regarded himself, he was guilty, and there was no way out.

FATHERS AND  SONS



So, "the  curse of his ancestors"  has been passed from father  to son, and  made Ainslie-against his will-a prisoner of his father's  past, chained  to his father's image of god-the-father seen as a harsh, Old Testament Jehovah,  rather  than  as a New Testament  god of love and mercy.
"Submission to God's will expressed itself in self-control" for "man's depravity
necessitated  a  stem  and  repressive moral  discipline"  where  unchastity,  for  ex­ ample,  was  sin,  not  venial  weakness. Also, where  even  children   are  "cursed creatures"   because  of  original  sin,  distrust  of  child  nature   led  to  distrust  of "natural feeling".  Thus  it  is that  Ainslie orients  himself almost  exclusively to­ wards his brain  in order  to keep "emotional  distance"  from  his  wife,  Margaret. Pleasure,  for  Ainslie, is medical  work which  relaxes  "the  tense  muscles of his back".  Yet his medical  potentialities as a neurosurgeon  are not realized, since to seek "success" is to the Calvinist  mentality simultaneously a command  and a sin. "The  face of  [Ainslie's]  father  flashed before his eyes. How  could he ever hope to win the  kind  of struggle  such  a father  bred  into  his  son? The  old  Calvinist had  preached  that  life  was  a  constant  struggle  against  evil, and  his son  had believed him. At the same time he had preached  that  failure was a sin. Now the man  [Ainslie]  who had  been the  boy must ask, How  could a successful man  be sinless, or a sinless man successful?"
Any dissipation of wealth  and  energy was "sternly  denounced  and  repressed"
in  Puritanical  Calvinism,  "time  and  talents were not  to be wasted.... Idleness was a sure sign that one's standing in grace was doubtful.  No one should be unemployed."  Ergo, Ainslie's few spare  moments  are  filled with  his translation of  Homer's  Odyssey   without  his awareness that  he  is on  a strange  pilgrimage himself. The study of Greek also keeps him apart  from  Margaret. Dougald Mac­ Kenzie diagnoses Ainslie's increasing irritability  as the "hypertension" of  a  man who  "courts  unnecessary  work"  and  who "flogs"  himself into  reading  Homer.  Pointedly  MacKenzie  adds,  "no  man can deliberately  exclude his wife from the centre of his life and  hope to escape the hounds." Then,  more bluntly: "as long as you've been married  to Margaret  you've resented her because she hasn't  been able to wash away your sense of sin."
Like MacKenzie,  Margaret is sensitive to her husband's  belief that  to work as
he did was senseless. "No  wonder, she thought now, growing up with those wild, solemn, Bible-reading Highlanders  all around  him, looking out at the glory of an innocent  world,  Daniel  had  been  unable  to  prevent  a  need  growing  in  him, until  now that  need was higher  than  a mountain." Ainslie's need is for a son to "give  purpose  to  the  universe"  and  to  be  "the  boy  he  might  have  been,  the


43

FATHERS AND  SONS



future  he can  no longer  attain." Having  in the  past performed  a  hysterectomy on  his wife  (which  now  compounds  his guilt),  Ainslie must  look elsewhere for a "son,"  and  arbitrarily decides young Alan MacNeil will fill the role. He arro­ gantly tramples  over the loving kindness of Alan's mother, Mollie MacNeil, as he does over her absent  husband  Archie, who is a coarse man  of  brawn,  not brain. Alan  is a  son  "conceived" in  Ainslie's intellect,  destined  to  become  a  man  of brain  unlike his real father,  and  freed from "everything  in  his  background  that would  try  to  hold  him  down."  This  is arbitrary  social  justice  devoid  of love. Significantly  Ainslie's awareness  of the  "sonship"  of  Alan occurs  when  after  a successful brain  operation  he took young Alan on an educational trip  to Louis­ burg.  With  a  sense of  Calvinist  predestination  Ainslie feels that  this  "had  not been an accident."
The  wise-man,  Dougald   MacKenzie,  is again  the  bearer  of truth  to  Ainslie when  he speaks  of  the  primary  importance  of a  loving  person  above  all  else in the  world.  MacKenzie   knocks the  bottom  out  of Ainslie's illusion  that  his mother  was to be condemned  as a weakling and  his father  revered as an arche­ typal,  strong-willed  Presbyterian.  Ainslie describes the hardship  of his  boyhood and  proudly  says:  "all  of us [are]   well-educated,  thanks to my father.  Mother thought  it was more important for us to eat than  to learn. She had  none of his will power."  In  Ainslie's Calvinist  eyes she wrongly placed the carnal above the intellectual.   MacKenzie  sets Ainslie straight  in no uncertain  terms. It was only his "father's driving  ambition," he says, which  "forced  his  whole  family to go hungry."   All  this  time,  adds  MacKenzie,   Ainslie's mother  unobtrusively  gave her  portion  of food  to  her  children  to keep them  healthy. She  died  from  mal­ nutrition,  after  Ainslie's father  curtly  dismissed  MacKenzie as her  doctor  after the  latter  blamed  Ainslie's father  for her  condition. "I wouldn't  talk  about  her lack of will power if I  were you.... You  would do well to honour  your father less and your mother more. She was a very loving woman."
The  father  image  which  had  formed  the  cornerstone of Ainslie's life briefly merges  with  his memory  of  "the  expression in  Mollie's eyes as she  comforted Alan.  Then  ... Mollie's  eyes ... were  the  eyes of  his own  mother." As  Mac­ Lennan  puts it, "the  little boy he once had been still longed to be loved by some human   being  as  Alan  was  loved  by  her."  At  this  point,  MacKenzie  states  a deeper  truth,  the  significance  of which, Ainslie is not  yet able  to  grasp: "You aren't  looking for  a son, Dan.  You're  looking for a God."  As  Peter Buitenhuis puts it:

44

FATHERS AND  SONS



Dr. Dougald's  story suggests that  Ainslie has suppressed the normal  love for his mother  and  fixated his affections on his father  instead. This appears  to be why he has  such  a  strong  urge  to  be  a  father  himself. He  has  pushed  Mollie  and  her maternal rights  into  the  background  as a form  of revenge for  his mother's  sup­ posed  betrayal.  He  has  also  been  unable  to relate  emotionally  to  his own  wife, Margaret, because of his crippling  emotional  negation. In  the  gap left  by his loss of religious belief, he had placed the ideal of fatherhood.12

But  Ainslie's  stubborn mind  fiercely  rejects  the  wisdom  of  the  old  man's truth. Mollie  he sees as  merely  "a good  woman ... and  Alan  deserves  far  better than that.... nothing is going  to stop  me. Nothing." Ainslie's  choice  ultimately  pre­ cipitates the  catastrophe that   emerges  from  a  tangle  of guilty  relationships. "If  God  looked  down  on  them  that  summer," says  MacLennan,  "the kind  of God their   ministers  had   told  them   about, He  must  have  been  well pleased,  for  by summer's end  all  of  them  except   Alan  were  conscious  of   their  sins,"  and   the Calvinistic sense  of  doom  hangs  over  what  George  Woodcock describes  as this "little society  [which  is]  bound   together  by a  common  faith  in its own  damna­ tion."13
The  brutal catastrophe, however,  does not occur  until  Ainslie  releases  his grip on  Alan  with  a sense of gratuitous love, and  frees himself from  the  burden of his father's harsh  Old  Testament God  whom  he now sees as "nothing but  the inven­ tion of mad theologians" and  a "fear" that had

hobbled his spirit. The  fear of [this]  curse had led directly to a fear of love itself. They were criminals, the men who invented  [this]  curse and inflicted it upon him, but  they  were  all  dead.  There   was  no  one  to  strike  down  for  generations  of cramped  and  ruined  lives. The  criminals slept well, and  their  names were  sancti­ fied.

Now  Ainslie experiences  the  loss of Alan  as the loss of God, since both  are  a loss of  something larger   than   his  own  life.  Ainslie's  despair   is  a  form   of  spiritual death manifested   as  total  negation. Ainslie sees only  "a  world  without purpose, without meaning, without intelligence; dependent upon  nothing, out  of nothing, within  nothing; moving  into  an  eternity which  itself was nothing." In  this con­ dition  of "total emptiness" in which  Ainslie "had reached  his core"  and "stopped" he acquires  "the freedom  of not  caring," and  "in  that  moment he made the  dis­ covery  that  he was ready  to go on with life," and  that  "now  he could  once  more think  about  the people around him."
Freed   now  from   Puritanical fear,  Ainslie  looks  upon  Alan  snuggled  protec­
tively in  Margaret's arms.  "It was then  that  Ainslie began  to cry.... It was the


45

FATHERS AND SONS



first time Margaret  had  ever known him to be unashamed  of showing emotion." Release from the shackles of Puritanism  is like a classical purgation.  The  novel ends  with  Ainslie  talking   to  MacKenzie  in  the  realization  that  he  has  acted "through  arrogance.... Through total  incapacity  to  understand  that  in  com­ parison with a loving human  being, everything else is worthless."




E          evokes the father/son relation­ ship between the  middle-aged  Alan Ainslie (Alan  MacNeil of Each Man's  Son) and  his twenty year old son Daniel,  named  after  Alan's  adoptive  father.  In  the rg6o's in Montreal,  open hostility develops between the English-speaking federal­ ist father,  and  his French-speaking separatist son. The land  is again accursed, as the title indicates. Of it, MacLennan said this:

I understand  the inner sense of the sphinx to be the breakdown into destruction of the  Father-Son  relationship within the Oedipus Complex. To  overthrow the tyranny of the father  in order  to live is the duty of  any son, but this must be recovered, and  in  the  last Oedipus  play, of course, the  father  asserts his right against rapacious revolution. Polyneices [Oedipus' son], comes back, as it were, with the sphinx operating  in him, as he operates in today's universities and  all over the world.14

The  father/son riddle  of the  6o's  has no easy solution. The  "son-hungry  man" of  Each  Man's   Son,  Dr.  Daniel  Ainslie, "did   not  live long  enough  to  know whether  the  educational experiment  he had  performed  on  the  adopted  orphan had succeeded or failed." This novel invites the reader to judge.
Dr.  Daniel  Ainslie raised  Alan  without  superstitious  religion, but  also taught that  "his life ought  to be some kind of Pilgrim's Progress to some kind of City of God."  As Dr.  Daniel  required  a substitute  for lost ancestral  religion, Alan now seeks fulfilment in political ideals. Working in External  Affairs had been "almost like a  religion  to  him,"  and  currently,  federal  union  is Alan's  spiritual  omega from "the  sense of infinity that  lies in the hush over the deltas of huge northern rivers.... " Even  young  Daniel  describes Alan as "a saintly  kind of man.  He's willing to put  up  with  anything  they do to him so long as he thinks it's for the sake of the country.... " Alan,  like Dr. Daniel, needs children,  and  "seemed  to love this huge, mostly unknown  country as some people love the idea of growth in  a  child.... " Herein   lies  the  root  of family  tragedy  since  Alan  places the "sonship" of his country  above  immediate  concern for  Daniel,  his bloodson. A

FATHERS AND  SONS



Calvinistic sense  of  duty   keeps  Alan  almost  exclusively  in  Ottawa, too  distant from  Montreal and  young  Daniel  who feels himself  "orphaned" from  his father and,   as  a  French-Canadian,  culturally "orphaned"  in  the   New   World. "The pride  of  the  unappreciated ... [is]  the  strongest  and  most  self-destructive  emo­ tion  anyone  can  nourish," says one  of  two  wise voices in  this  novel.  The state­ ment   exactly   describes   Daniel   whose  hostility   is  intensified   by  the  lingering influence  of a puritanical priest.
The  austere piety  of Jansenism  prevented  filial closeness to God.  Christ  was "a
severe  and  inscrutable redeemer" for a God  whose commandments were impos­
sible even  for  the  just  who  wished  and  endeavoured to obey  them   (NCE, VII,
825). Young  Daniel, like his grandfather Dr. Daniel  Ainslie, has rejected religion intellectually, but  is emotionally crippled  by  the  remains  of  puritanical  Jansen­ ism,  and  bears  essentially  the  same  burden of guilt.  The  "sphinx" has  returned. The  resultant unhealthy incapacity to love not  only mars  Daniel; it  explains, for Alan Ainslie, the Quebec Revolution:

... no  people in history has ever  tried to break with  a strict  Catholicism  without turning  to nationalism  or some other  kind of ism as a surrogate  religion. As I  see it,  that  is the  essence of  the situation  in Quebec  today. The  problem  there  isn't economic,   it's   psychological. ... What's   happening   in   Quebec ... is  something deeper  than  we've ever seen before in Canada.  It's  a genuine revolution in a way of life, and  I don't  have  to remind  you that  all revolutions  have  neurotic  roots.

This   general   theory   is  applied  specifically   to  the   "neurotic  and   self-willed" Daniel  by a wise, European voice in the novel.  Marielle warns  Daniel  that  there
is

nothing so terrifying as self-willed ignorance. I wish you would stop being roman­ tic about  Europe  and  the Old  World  [wars and  revolutions]. People there under­ stand  things it  will take you North  Americans another  century  to learn. You are all  puritans  over  here  and  don't  even guess what  it does to  you.... Young  men like  you  never  plunge  into  movements  like  this  without  some  kind  of  personal reason. Usually  they don't  understand  what it is until it's  too late  and  sometimes they never understand  it.

Later,  Marielle asks Daniel why  he is "so  afraid  of being  a man," and  suggests "if a man  fears  [to  love],  then  it is very natural for him to talk and  dream about bombs  and   war." The   "revolutionary" effects  of  severe  sexual   repression   are described  by MacLennan in a very curious passage.
After   participating  in   a  separatist-oriented  television   broadcast,  Daniel  is
simultaneously "intoxicated with  a feeling of power" and  morbidly hypersensitive


47

FATHERS AND  SONS



to women on the street as "raw  sex on display." Mouthing  sayings of his separa­ tist father-figure,  the ironically-named  Latendresse, Daniel interprets "the  sexual explosion" as a prelude  to the collapse of an era:  "a  Mardi  Gras before another  of  history's  lenten  seasons  ushers  in  the  day  of  retribution  and  atonement." Daniel's  destructively apocalyptic  mood shares in the eschatological temperament of repressed Jansenism  already  discussed. His lust and hate focus on the buttocks of two  girls, a  "plump one  wobbling  and  a  lean  one popping  up  and  down".  Leanness merges with the thin  outline of a  Montreal skyscraper, symbol of Eng­ lish domination,  and  it is difficult to tell  whether  Daniel, referring  to the "thin  one", means the building or the girl or, subconsciously, both:

Yes, he thought, yes! If you chose that thin one you could do it.... If you placed the explosives at exactly the proper balance points you could bring that  thin one down. You could bring it down screaming and grinding and trembling ...

Rape  of human  being and  rape  of the physical environment  fuse in a sick mind which cannot  see repressive sexuality fostering angry, frustrated,  and  destructive impulses.  It   is  "love-hunger   growing  imperceptibly  into  hunger  for  power." Daniel's  sister Chantal  evokes the inner  ugliness by describing "a  puritan  when the  bottom  falls out  of his character  and  all those polypy things that  are inside of puritans  come crawling out for a Mardi Gras."
Alan  Ainslie sees the violent side of the Quebec  Revolution as part  of a "uni­ versal  disease"  which  "came  when  humanity  lost its faith  in  man's  ability  to improve his nature."

When people can no longer believe in personal immortality, when society at large has abandoned  philosophy, many men grow desperate without knowing why.... Some of them will do anything-no  matter  how hopeless, criminal or idiotic - merely to have people mention  their names and  recognize that  they exist. ... A senseless crime can be one way of passing into the only kind of immortality this sick epoch understands ...

Chantal illuminates  the  central  dilemma  in  both  novels:  "to  love  a  person and  be unable  to help him-that's the most terrible thing in the world."  Mean­ while  Alan  has  learned   the  humanist  truth  that  both  the  individual   and  the nation   must  "school"   themselves  toward   civilization.  "One   more  step  would have freed  us all, but the sphinx  returned," and the land feels anew the curse of ancestral  guilt.
Perhaps  there is no immediate  answer to the Canadian riddle of the sixties, or
as yet, to the  universal violence of which violence in Canada is one small  part.

FATHERS AND  SONS



Therefore,  to conclude  that  "the  sphinx  has returned  to the  world  before"  and the world survived, is at best a brooding optimism, yet it is all one can draw  out of MacLennan's historical perspective. Still, to be able to pose the riddle in its localized form, is a small step forward  for man, and  one for Canadian literature in so far as MacLennan believes that "the substance of any living literature  must come out of the society to which the writer belongs.m 5
In  an  essay written  during  the  194o's,  MacLennan stated  that  "the  psycho­ logical mould  which was set in Canada  in the early days" lay in its three found­  ing   peoples:   French-Canadian  colonists,  United   Empire   Loyalists  from   the American   colonies, and  Highland   Scots. Each  had  its  peculiar   puritan   back­ ground,  and  each  was a dispossessed people. Thus,  while the  French-Canadian must come to grips with the British conquest, the Highland  Scot had  endured  a more  devastating  humiliation  after  the Battle of  Culloden  when  the clan system was ruthlessly and  systematically  destroyed.  Perhaps  the  three  central  founding  cultures of early Canada share a greater similarity of experience than  their differ­ ences permitted  their members to see. Could her people examine  clear-eyed their historical  roots, they would  discover  that  the essential Canadian problem  exists inside,  not  outside  her  borders.  One  pathway  toward  national  self-knowledge lies  in  the  mutual   exploration  of  the  growth  of  both  French-   and   English­ Canadian culture as expressed, for example, in Canadian literature.
History  reveals, says MacLennan, a dominant  impulse in  Canada "to  retain
in  her  own  eyes the  kind  of personality she  feels she has, even  though  she has never  been able to define it in words." In  this, both "French and  English  have an overriding  common  aim  upon  which the Canadian national  character, what­ ever its individual  manifestations  may be, firmly rests.m6  It is in no way deroga­ tory of Hugh  MacLennan to say that  much of his value as a novelist is  precisely this: that he seeks to define the elusive Canadian  truth in words.



NOTES

1 Journal  of Canadian Studies, V (May 1970), 10-21.
2    Encyclopaedia of Religion and  Ethics  (Edinburgh 1918)  III,  150. Cited ERE in text.
3   The New  Catholic  Encyclopedia  (New York 1967)  VII,  820. Cited NCE  in text.
4   John Calvin, Institutes of the Christian Religion, 1.15+
5   "The Canadian Character" in Cross-Country (Toronto 1949),  p. 8.
6   "A Would-Be Saint" in Thirty and Three  (Toronto 1954), pp. 216-217.


49

FATHERS AND SONS



Encyclopaedia Britannica (London 1967), XVIII,  462.
8    "Scotsman's Return" in Scotsman's Return and Other  Essays (Toronto 1961), pp.  10, 8.
9    "Confessions of a Wood-Chopping Man" in Scotsman's Return and  Other Essays,
p. 8g.
10   Quoted in  George  Woodcock's Hugh  MacLennan (Toronto 1969), p. gr.
11  Ibid.
12  Peter Buitenhuis, Hugh  MacLennan (Toronto 1969), p. 51.
13  Woodcock, p. gg.
14    In Buitenhuis, p. 66.
u  "Literature in a New Country" in Scotsman's Return, p. 135·
16   "The Canadian Character" in Cross-Country, pp.  10-17.













SEVEN 	PERSONS
REPOSITORY

A New Creative Writing Magazine from  Western  Canada

POETRY	FICTION	ESSAYS

Published Quarterly 	$2.00 Per Year

Box 52, Seven Persons, Alta. JoHN  HARRis & BoB ATKINSON
EDITORS, PUBLISHERS AND  PRINTERS




so


NOUVEAU ROMAN CANADIEN


Joseph Pivato

"LIFE   WRITES LOUSY PLOTS!"  Humphrey Bogart  once ob- served, indicating  an  awareness of the role of the artist and  the  imagination in
transforming reality  into  art  and  ultimately  into  a  new  reality.  The   nouveau roman of the last two decades is a good paradigm  of recent developments  in the transmutation of reality by a literary  form, the novel, and  by its techniques.  Le couteau  sur  la  table  by  the  French-Canadian  poet,  novelist  and   film-maker, Jacques  Godbout,  is a  novel that  demonstrates  many  of the  techniques  of  the nouveau  roman  as it  has been fostered  by the  French  novelists:  Nathalie  Sar­ raute,  Alain  Robbe-Grillet,  Michel  Butor  and  Marguerite   Duras.  While  God­ bout's  Canadian  novel  is concerned  with  the  national  co-existence  of   French and English, its style indicates an awareness of a universal phenomenon, a fascin­ ation for technique,  an interest in the process of creativity itsel£.1
Anyone who has read  Le couteau sur la table will notice its affinities with film and will realize that  it cannot  be read as a traditional  novel, as a linear  exercise in  realism  or  naturalism.2   Rather   a  nouveau  roman  must  be  understood   as a studied  dramatization of the creative  process itself, the conscious activity  of the novelist at  work. The  nouveau  roman can thus be compared  to other  art  forms such as music, theatre  and  especially the film where it has been  understood  for a much  longer time that  a work of art  may be shown to be a process as well as a product.
In  the  film,  L' Annee  derniere  a M arienbad  (I g6 I)' director  Alain  Resnais
achieved  this effect of the creative  process by alienating  the spectator  from  the movie through  a variety of techniques:  re-echoing of scenes by verbal and  visual juxtaposition of details; interpolation  of flashbacks, some so brief as to be almost subliminal; dream  sequences;  rhythmical  repetition  of images  and  the  use  of several  alternate  denouements.  The  result of these devices seems to  be  to  dis­ tinguish  representation  from  reality, to define the true  context  of the  particular art  form. Robbe-Grillet  wrote the script for this film in its entirety and, as in his

NOUVEAU ROMAN CANADffiN



own cine-roman  and  film, L'I mmortelle  ( I 963), he provided  a shot by shot  de­ scription  of the  film  as  he  imagined  it,  including  camera  movements,  sound, music and  dialogue.  In  these films as in  his novel, La  jalousie,  Robbe-Grillet's  images depict  subjective  life, not  outer  reality. Since the  events  are  happening  in someone's mind, the images follow no normal chronological or logical sequence but  the  para-logic  of a  dream.  The  universe in  these films  and  novels is in  a perpetual  present  tense.
There  seems to  be a  relationship  between the interest  of these authors  in  the film medium  and  their  nouveau  roman techniques. Thus  while in the past many novelists  have  written   for  film,  none  has  shown  such  affinities  between  the techniques of their  two media.  In  addition  to Robbe-Grillet's  collaboration  with Renais  we also have  that  of  Marguerite  Duras  with  her  scripting  of  his film, Hiroshima mon amour  ( I959). Godbout  himself has several films to his credit­ among   them:   Huit   temoins   ( I964), Yul   871   (I966),  and   Kid   Sentiment (I 967), for  the  National   Film  Board.  Speaking  about   himself   Godbout   has stated,  "Ce  que  je puis affirmer aujourd'hui c'est que le cineaste fait vivre l'ecri­ vain;  aussi bien au  plan  financier  qu'a  celui des contacts avec la realite."3
Just  as the film director  manipulates  the camera  lens to give us a unique  but relative point of view, the nouveau roman author  controls his first person narrator for the same effect. He has rejected  the device of the traditional omniscient  nar­ rator.  Since  we no  longer  really  believe in  this  convention  of  representing  fic­ tional  reality Nathalie  Sarraute declares that:
selon toute apparence,  non seulement le romancier ne croit plus guere a ses  per­ sonnages, mais le lecteur, de son cote, n'arrive  plus a y croire ... Nous  sommes entres dans l'ere du soup'<on.4


IF WE LOOK   AT  Godbout's  treatment  of the elements of time, memory, language  and objects, especially by the use of cinematic  techniques,  we
see that  Le couteau  sur la table deals with the interior reality of mental  process, the rhythm  and  flow of emotion. Time is the one great dimension against  which Godbout's  novel brings all its resources to bear. Traditionally novelists narrated events in  cosmic time  and  thus  generally followed the linear  movement  of the sun,  the calendar  and  the  clock. These  novelists made  it quite  clear  when  they deviated from chronology by flashbacks and recollections. Godbout  has flagrantly broken this conventional  time sequence. In trying to redefine the proper  territory of fiction  in  response  to  the  challenge  of scientific knowledge  and  social  and

52

NOUVEAU ROMAN CANADIEN



political  change  in Canada and  the world,  Godbout has asserted  the  importance of the  role of imagination.
The  action  in Godbout's novel  takes place in the reflective  consciousness  of the novelist.  The  author's memory  and  imagination are  used  to  dramatize the  pro­ cess of creation. This  involves  a  partial or  total  disconnection of the  mind  from events  of the external world  and  from  public  time.  An  important element  of  the independence of the  reflective  consciousness  is thus  its capacity for  denying the chronology of the  past.  The  new order  which  the mind  inevitably gives to events will  be  more  personal   and  revealing  about   the  narrator. In   Le  couteau  sur la table, then,  we seem to be dealing  with  at least two time scales:  cosmic  time,  the time  of  public  reference,   and   private  or  phenomenological  time,   that   of  indi­  vidual  experience.
In  Butor's  La Modification time  is manipulated by using  the  device  of a  rail­ way  journey  between  Paris  and  Rome.  In  Godbout's nouveau  roman  a  central image  is the  railway  trip  of the  protagonist-narrator and  his girlfriend,  Patricia. This  train,  which  comes from  Vancouver and  crosses the  map  of  Canada, moves through  real  points  in  space  and   historical  time:  Medicine  Hat,  Qu'Appelle, Assiniboia,  Neepawa, Kingston, Long  Sault.  This  journey,  the  measured routine of army  life, references  to years  and  to the  ages of himself,  Patricia and  Made­ leine,  are  points in public  time  against  which  the mind  of  the  narrator can  move freely.  The  narrator's first  weekend  meeting  with  Patricia  is iterated over  and over  again   in  his  mind,   irrespective of  the  clock.  All  their   weekends   are  one weekend  that  exists outside  of calendar time.  These  are soujourns in an  artificial  space:

Si les oasis ont  toujours  quelque  chose d'artificiel,  une allure  figuee.... L'artifice du Lake etait  attachant....

The  love of the :French-Canadian narrator and  the  Anglophone Patricia exists in  an  oasis, artificially  created, outside  public  time  and  space,  as if it  were  only possible in such  an  incubator. This  seems to  be why the  narrator can  leave  Pat­ ricia  and  then  return   to  her  and  start  the  association  all  over  again. In  a  sense their  relationship never  stopped, since it exists outside  calendar time.  The  reality of  their  love  is a  mental creation of  the  narrator, an  image   that  moves  irre­  spective  of the seasons  which  shift  freely from  one  paragraph to  the  next  in  the novel.
Despite the freedom  of the  reflective consciousness, the  relationship of the  nar­
rator  and  Patricia has limitations, even in  the  mind:


53

NOUVEAU ROMAN CANADmN


C'etait un amour  curieux  et presque a sens unique:   je revais d'elle  toute  la sem­
aine, mais parce que nous etions de langue et de culture differentes  j'avais peine a
imaginer  ses jours, ses pensees, son enfance.

The  imagination of  the  narrator seems  unable  to  transcend the  cultural  differ­ ences  of  French and   English   and   the  lack  of shared   experiences, all  of  which exist in  public  time.  The  imagination needs memory  and  memory  exists in  time. In  the  reality  of  time  the  narrator  confronts the  impossible,   the  incommunic­ ability  that  exists between  two  beings. And  thus despite  his love,  Patricia always remains  a stranger to  the  narrator who  himself  remains  nameless:
Je  n'arrive  pas a m'expliquer ce besoin que  j'avais d'une  femme  qui  me flit a ce point  etrangere ... une  peau  nordique ... des  cheveux  d'un   blond  nordique ... j'allais pouvoir m'acheter une identite.

The   narrator moves  caressingly  over  Patricia's lovely,  white   body  as  the  train moves over the map  of Canada: all unknown entities. Patricia's body, like the geography of the  nation, is constantly being  rediscovered:
Patricia  demeure   toujours   trop  longtemps  sous  la  douche,  comme  s1  elle  n'en avait  jamais fini de retrouver  sa virginite ou son teint.

While  the  French narrator seeks his identity  in  Patricia's  Anglo-Saxon body, the  reality  of physical  contact, and  while  he sees this girl as "le  moyen  terme  par lequel   j'entre  en  contact charnel avec  les  cent  quatre-vingt-dix millions  d'indi­ vidus  qui  m'entourent," he  also sees her  as  an  escape  into  oblivion:   "Patricia, viens  deshabille-toi, viens  au  lit  eteins  la  lumiere fais le vide  j'ai  besoin de  vide de  noir  de  desir  tiens  leche  rna  main." Is this  the  self-annihilation that   French  Canada fears  from  too much  association  with  the mass of North American Eng­  lish culture? With  the  necessity of contact  comes  the  risk of assimilation.
Je suis bien en toi, dans  toi, colle a ton corps je t'aime  Patricia  j'aime  ta peau, le grain  de ta peau.... Je suis bien dans ta peau.

As the  close-up  views of Patricia's skin indicate, the  narrator is attracted by her affluence  and  beauty   but  on  another level  he is also  repelled   by  her  and  seeks consolation in the  working  class French-Canadian,  Madeleine.
While  the  mind  of the  narrator moves freely  in space,  manipulating time,  it
also confronts us with  reminders of the  linear  time-scale.  The  news story  in  the first  chapter from   (note  the  title)   Time  magazine draws  us into  public  reality. This  ominous note  about American nuclear  weapons  and  the  other  news  refer­ ences in  the  novel to plane  crashes  and  FLQ bombings  create a doomful  pattern

54

NOUVEAU ROMAN CANADIEN



in the  time-free movement of the  narration. To  these emblems of death is added the narrator's consciousness of his own mortality and  his fear of extinction:
J'ai  peur de mourir tout a coup, j'ai peur ... de crever sans avoir fait  un seul geste qui soit humain,  sans laisser derriere  moi autre  chose que  moi qui  refroidis,  moi qui  pourris,  moi humus  dans  le roc et  la glaise.... Demain  je meurs:  qui  saura que  j'aurai  existe?

The  irrepressible force  of time  hits the  narrator most strongly  with  the  mean­ ingless  death of Madeleine. Not  only  does the  narrator find  himself  in  the  hor­ rible  loneliness  which,  like  Pascal,  he  has  dreaded throughout  his  life  but   he realizes  that   with  the  death   of  Madeleine's unborn  child,   his  child,  his  fight against   time  has  been  frustrated. His  wish  to  transcend time  and his  death by perpetuating himself in  the  creation of new life has died  with  Madeleine:

Madeleine  qui aimait  la  vie mourait  stupidement; mais ce qui  me  terrifiait  le plus ... c'etait  surtout  ce  silence  enorme,  inattendu;  Madeleine   mon  amour   ne
pouvait  desormais ajouter  un mot a ce qu'elle avait dit, ne pouvait  plus repondre,
ne pouvait donner  naissance a ce fils que ...

This  constant, and  often sudden, juxtaposition of phenomenological time  with public  time  creates  a  pattern of  tension,  a  poetic  pattern in  the  novel  that   has a subliminal effect  on  us much  like the  films of Renais,  Lefebvre  and  Godbout himself.  The  reflective  consciousness  struggles  against  linear  time  by  producing an   artifact that   has  dimensions  outside   time.  Godbout's fascination  with   the problem   of  time  in  literature and   film  is shown  in  his  essay,  "Le Temps:  La Poesie du  Cinema."

Le pouvoir de suggestion de la poesie peut donner  naissance au  pouvoir d'explor­
ation du  temps qui appartient au cinema.

Les arts  ne sont, comme  les religions, que des tentatives  desesperees de controler le temps.

La  qualite  de la vie d'un  peuple  ne depend  plus aujourd'hui que  du  choix  qu'il fait  dans son emploi du  temps.5



E    most closely associated  with  time  in  the crea­ tive consciousness is the  memory.  In  Le  couteau  sur la table  the  workings of the memory  are  exercised  through  interior monologue, involuntary  memory  and   a kind  of subliminal recall.  Godbout's interior  monologues  are  not  in  long  Joyce-

55

NOUVEAU ROMAN CANADIEN



ian  tirades  since, in  a sense, the  whole novel is a  monologue.  But  we do  have repeated  use of mental  digressions, and  digressions within  digressions, to which Godbout  draws our attention by the use of parentheses and  ellipses. By this nar­ rative  mode  the  action  remains  in  the  narrator's  mind,  and  thus  it is his  con­ sciousness that  informs  the  entire  novel. The  time  shifts,  the  juxtapositions  of the  narrator's return  to  Patricia  with  the  death  of  Madeleine  or  with  another  memory,  explore  the  operations  of the  mind  speaking  to  itself.  Every  time  the narrator recalls his reunion  with  Patricia  his mind  associates  parts  of their  con­ versation  with  a  different   object  or  sensation.  The  narrator's dialogues  with Patricia  are reconstructed  in various ways as the mind plays freely with time and space. With  these repeated  recompositions of the  mind  Godbout  is drawing  at­ tention  to the fact  that  his non-linear  narrative  is the creation  of a consciousness temporarily  disconnected  from  the  reality  of  conventional  dimensions  of  time and  space.  In  Godbout's nouveau  roman,  as  in  Godfrey's  The  New  Ancestors, the play of the mind  as embodied  in the  narrative  is constituted  by the freedom to  rearrange  images  or  memories  of the  past  without  reference  to  a  perceived reality.
Godbout's  protagonist-narrator demonstrates instances of involuntary  memory. Like Marcel  in  Proust's  A la  recherche du  temps  perdu, the  narrator fixes his mind  on an object  or physical sensation which in tum  initiates the unintentional recall  of a series of associations  and  memories. The  narrator could  be  kissing Patricia,  or  observing  her  taking  a  shower  or  getting  dressed  and  the  mental process begins :

Patricia  met sa robe avec !'attention  delicate des fleurs filmees au  ralenti  et se transforme en tache de sang contre le mur, en salvia, comme il y en avait au pied des baraquements de l'Intendance.

The  action  of Patricia  dressing makes the  narrator think  of a flower filmed in slow motion,  a  blood  stain  and  finally the salvia  near  the  army  barracks  and the associated unpleasant  recollections of army life. With this cinematic technique of the  transformation of one image into another  we see that  the  process is not logical but psychological. Did the narrator leave the restrictions of the army only to become captive to Patricia's  sensuality?
At other times the involuntary memory seems to operate  at a subliminal  level in which the narrator is not  fully conscious of the significance of the  objects to which his mind keeps returning. Several images, which recur in the course of the narration and  which go almost unnoticed,  culminate  in a climax that  is brought

NOUVEAU ROMAN CANADIEN



to  crisis  by  the  shock   of  Madeleine's accidental death.  Several   times  in the novel the  narrator mentions that  he hears a cry. The  idea  of breath and suffoca­ tion  reappears. If Patricia is finally  killed,  the  narrator has  strangled  her.  The  image  of an  abandoned child  occurs  in several  places.  Madeleine's  unborn baby is, in a sense, a lost child.

L'appel  strident  des sirenes....
Le cri d'un  enfant  va se repercutant dans la ville devenue  boite a echo.


Seul, se retrouver  seul comme un enfant abandonne  par son equipe et qui ne peut plus jouer, seul, face au vent vert et frais des collines rasees....

The  subtle  repetition of such  images  throughout the  novel  reflects  elements  of the  narrator's subconscious. There seems to be a memory  in  the  narrator's mind which  he is either  trying  to forget  or recall or both.  In  the  climax  of chapter 75, the  narrator's horror  of  being  left  alone,  abandoned, and   his fear  of  death are brought to the  surface in a series of triple  repetitions and  an  hallucination. The narrator's response  to seeing  Madeleine's dead  body is one  of suffering:

J'avais  mal  au  coeur  et  le besoin de  m'oxygener  l'emporta  .... et  derriere  j'en­
tendais les cris de rnon fils peut-etre.

De temps a autres  l'appel  guttural  comme celui d'une  poulie  roullee,  d'un  faisan cache dans les buissons, rn'etait  pretexte a reprendre  haleine....

This paragraph is followed  by a parenthetical digression which  seems to be an hallucination of an  incident in the  narrator's past:

Je  suis seul, incapable   de  courir,  je  recule  epouvante,  de  plus  en  plus  vite,  a mesure que la peur  gagne ... de temps a autre  le cri guttural d'une  sorciere dont je reconnais les traits sans pouvoir la nommer me force a reprendre haleine....

This  series  of  associations  is  followed  by a  childhood  memory   of  the  narrator lost in the snow storm  at  five years of age:

Dans la neige cette fois. J'ai  cinq ans. Je ne vois rien dans la  tempete  ni rna mere
... j'entends  le  cri  guttural  d'un   homme  qui  hurle  a  perdre   haleine.... Une chambre  d'hopital ... le linge est blanc et la main de rna mere;  je me  rendors.

The  lost child  is not  only  the  narrator at  five but  also the  narrator's child.  The cri is both  their  cries. But  while,  for the  narrator, the  blinding whiteness  of the snow storm  has become  the white comfort  of the bedsheets, either  with  his mother


57

NOUVEAU ROMAN CANADmN



holding  his  hand  or  with  Patricia,  for  his  child,  the  breath  has  been  stopped forever.
But  there is something  more going on in this cinematic  repetition  and  juxta­ position of images. Is it possible to see these memories of the child  abandoned by his team as a racial memory of French  Canada? Is it possible to associate the fear of being lost in the snow, the narrator's horror of death  without  progeny and  of suffocation,  with  the  natural instinct  of a  race for  perpetuating itself physically and  culturally?  One  recalls Jean-Pierre  Lefebvre's  film, ]usqu'au  cceur, with  its repeated  colour shots of frogs being swallowed by  larger animals  of prey.




E           which show the operation  of the memory are successful devices for communicating the process of the reflective consciousness because  they  always  use objects  of  the  external,  visual  world  in which  to anchor  the  emotional  import  of the  thoughts.  In  Godbout's  nouveau roman  the objects are  the contents  of the narrator's consciousness, which can  be roughly  identified  with  that  of  the  author   himself. Without   the  objects  there would  be no self in  the  novel and  without  a self no objects. As in  a  film, this presence of selected things in the work is evidence that  a reflective mind  is there to sustain  them. Objects  such as Patricia's  red dress, the bed,  the artificial  lake, the C.N. train  and  the knife, that  have become the property of the consciousness, are significant for that  consciousness.
In  Le  couteau  sur la table  the  mode of narration  is an  implicit  one,  the nar­
rator  remains silent on the explicit meaning of the stream of objects, images and events of which  the  novel is an  inventory.  As  in  the film, L'Annee derniere  a
M arienbad,  the  responsibility for  abstraction  is surrendered  to each  member  of the audience, who can at least be confident that each one of the images or objects is of significance. Since in the nouveau  roman the narrator  is stripped  of his tra­ ditional  powers of  conceptualization, the  communication   relies on  the  mental picture  formed  by the  reader,  sometimes only on  the subliminal  level.  By this elimination  of  the  intermediary  presence,  Godbout  is attempting a  more  im­ mediate  mode  of fiction  in  which  the  reader  is confronted  by  the  contents  of another  consciousness, objects assembled with an artistic intent. Godbout  is nar­ rating  with the unique  but relative point of view of the camera lens.
The  visual orientation of the narrator is constantly evident.  Early in the novel
he caresses Patricia's  naked  body with his eyes:

NOUVEAU ROMAN CANADffiN



Je  la suis des yeux, dans  une caresse avouee; son dos blanc  raye par  les taches de lumiere  que  le store venitien  laisse couler entre  des lames  horizontales,  un  corps zebre,  puis le noir, l'ombre....

The final  close-up  images  in the  novel emphasize  the  visual  perspective:
Le couteau  restera sur la table de la cuisine. Aucune trace de sang sur les tapis. The  ambivalence of  the   knife  image   is  reinforced   by  its  visual   quality. The
violence  suggested   by  the  knife  seems  to  be  tempered  by  its  position   on   the kitchen table.  Is the  knife for dining  or killing or for both?
As  in  the  stream   of  consciousness  work  of  Proust   and   Joyce,   in  Godbout's nouveau  roman  the  powers  of  the  mind  and  language are  combinatory rather than inventive. The  imagination has  to  work  with  public  facts  that   have  been absorbed into  the  individual consciousness  and  retained  in  the  memory. It is the discontinuity  of  these  objects   and   our   language,  a  discontinuity  reflected   in our   direct   perceptions of  the  external  world,   which   enables   us  to  select  and combine them  into  a fiction.  It is this technique of direct  perception that  God­ bout  demonstrates in his film, Kid  Sentiment, a cinema-verite work  that gives the impression that  it has  produced itself. Godbout then  operates poetically  in  prose and  film  since,  "The poetic  function projects  the  principle  of  equivalence from the  axis of selection  into  the  axis of combination."6
In  his work Godbout upholds the freedom  of the mind,  a free  mind  which  be­ stows  significance   on  things   by  the  use  of  language.  The   literary  artist   uses language to  transform a  world  which  is desacralized, demythologized,  a  world which  no longer  has absolute  or  essential  meaning. Godbout has said:

L'ecriture litteraire  est  une  exploration  du  langage,  comme  on  dit  que  les  cos­ monautes  explorent  l'espace. 11 y a  un  espace dans  les mots, entre  les  mots,  que l'ecrivan  fouille....


L'ecriture veut faire  degorger  les mots. Le cinema  veut  faire  degorger  le temps. La  problematique   du  langage,  sondee  par  le style d'un  ecrivain,  donne  !'oeuvre litteraire.

C'est  a ce point  precis que l'ecriture  litteraire  et le cinema  se peuvent  rejoindre:
dans  la poesie.7

By trying  to employ  language in a way similar  to that  in  which  a film-maker uses time, Godbout, like McLuhan, is anticipating changes  in perception and sen­ sibility  that  have  yet to come to pass. Thus  just as the  protagonist-narrator in  Le

59

NOUVEAU ROMAN CANADIEN



couteau  sur Ia table  is struggling with  the  stereotypes  of  English  and   French, so  Godbout in  his  nouveau   roman  is  rebelling  against   literary  habits,   against formal stereotypes which  have come to be accepted  in Canadian literature as rep­ resentative and  indispensable rather than  relative.  To the  authors of the  nouveau roman, both  in  France and  in  Canada, the  novel is in need  of  redefinition, and  the  responsibility  of  the  writer  is to show  the  function   and  fonn  of fiction,  and  by extension,  what  the  role of the  imagination is in our  lives. But  this  is both  a difficult  and  dangerous experiment for  to  change  aesthetic   conventions is ulti­  mately  to help in  changing reality.  Godbout  himself  has been  quoted as saying:

J'ecris  pour les memes raisons qui font que  j'aime, que  je marche,  que  je lis, que j'agis; pour  connaitre.


Le roman d'ajourd'hui ne peut  etre qu'une  fac;on de vivre c'est-a-dire,  je crois, de connaitre  d'experimenter la vie dans le mystere de !'oeuvre  d'art,  et souvent d'etre heureux.8


NOTES

1 Ronald   Sutherland, "The  Fourth   Separatism,"   Canadian  Literature,  No.  45:
7-23, and  also in  Second   Image, 1971, briefly discusses the  theme  of  Godbout's
novel as do:  Maurice  Blain, "Conscience de l'Etrangete," Cite  Libre,  XV,  No. 76
(Avril,  1965),   29-32  and  Rene  Garneau,   "Revolte   plutot   que  revolution,"   in
Presence  de la  critique, ed.  Gilles Marcotte,  1966.
2   This  is clearer  in the French  edition,  used throughout  this essay (Montreal:  Edi­ tions du  Seuil, 1965).  The  McClelland  and  Stewart  edition  of  Penny  Williams' translation  is somewhat  adequate.
3   "Le  Temps:  La Poesie du Cinema," Canadian Literature, No. 46, p. 84.
4    L'ere  du  soupron:  essais sur le roman, (Paris:  Gallimard,  1959),  pp. 71 and  74·
Canadian Literature, op. cit., pp. 85-88.
6   Roman  Jakobson,  "Linguistics  and  Poetics," in Essays on  the  Language  of  Liter­
ature, eds. S. Chatman and  S. R.  Levin  (Boston:  Houghton   Mifflin, 1967),  p.
303.
7    "Le  Temps:  La Poesie du Cinema," op. cit., p. 85.
8  In  Rejean  Robideaux,  "Une approche  du  'Nouveau  roman'," Incidences:  revue litteraire, No.8 (Mai,  1965),  pp. 12-13.









6o


LITTERATURE  DE QUEBEC

Langue et Identite




Naim Kattan





Q.PRENDRE   LA  m<>ure d'une  reaJitC qu'il  tente  de saisi>­ avant  de  l'assumer,  le  romancier  du  Quebec  doit  inventer  un  langage  et,  en s'ecartant de la tradition  franc;aise, prendre le risque de reduire son propos a une
attitude,  un geste, une prise de position qui l'enferment  dans  une voie sans issue.
Un  des  premiers  a  l'avoir   pleinement  compris  est  Rejean   Ducharme   qui,
surtout  dans  L'Avatee  des avales, a chemine sur la corde  raide,  dans  un  jeu de bascule entre  le langage  et l'identite.  Pour inventer  un langage  qui  corresponde
a une identite  emergeant  difficilement de l'ombre,  il a invente  un langage  ayant
souvent,  peut  etre  trop  souvent,  recours a des jeux de mots. Dans  sa  piece  Le
Cid  maghane  Rejean  Ducharme  met en opposition  le langage  parle  direct  et la langue  apprise,  litteraire,   qui  relie  a une  tradition   et  a un  pays  lointain:  la
France.
Ce  dilemme  est-il insoluble?  Dans  un  roman  tres  brillant,   D'Amour, P.Q.,
Jacques  Godbout  en fait  le tour. Deux  jeunes secretaires vivent ensemble. L'une d'elle  tape  a la  machine  les manuscrits  d'un  ecrivain.  Celui-ci  ecrit  dans  une
langue qui se veut pure, qui est surtout recherchee, ampoulee;  la dactylo, directe et  spontanee,  s'insurge  contre  !'artifice.  Elle corrige  le texte  et,  non  satisfaite, rencontre  l'auteur, lui insufle, avec son corps et son langage,  un veritable elan  de vie. 11 ecrira  desormais sous sa dictee, sous la dictee du  reel et du vecu. Faut-il alors ecrire  dans  le langage  direct,  celui que  l'on  parle?  Mais  lequel?  Le  joual
pose plus de problemes qu'il  n'en  vesoud. Le langage  parle est  a la fois multiple
et ephemere. 11 appartient a une classe sociale, a une ville, a un  quartier, a un metier,  a une generation.  11 se transforme  constamment.  L'ecrivain  qui  en  fait
usage est toujours  depasse. S'il est veridique, il apparait plus artificiel,  plus tra-

6r

LITTERATURE DE QUEBEC


ditionaliste,  que  celui qui se rattache  a une veritable  tradition  litteraire.  Car  les oeuvres ne naissent pas uniquement d'un  rapport  avec la vie, elles naissent egale­ ment  de la litterature. Et en  verite cette langue  "jouale" n'est  pas un  decalque
du  reel.  Pour  donner  lieu  a des oeuvres,  elle doit  etre  inventee,  elle doit  etre
artificiellement  creee.
Andre  Langevin  publie  un nouveau  roman. 11 brise un silence de quinze ans. Dans ses precedents  romans, il a evoque le mal de vivre de l'homme  qui etouffe dans l'espace ou il est oblige de vivre, qu'il  s'agisse d'une  petite ville miniere au d'un  Nord  de  neige et de glace. Dans son nouveau  roman  l'Elan d'Amerique,
l'espace physique et l'espace interieur sont mis face a face. L'espace exterieur n'est
pas interiorise dans la conscience et le personnage qui est constamment  en quete d'une  identite  est  toujours  en  fuite,  a la  recherche  d'un   nouvel  espace,  force d'avoir   recours   a  des  langues   etrangeres,   qu'il   s'agisse  de   I'anglais   ou   de
1'espagnol.
L'un  des personnages est une femme francophone nee aux Etats-Unis. Elley a vecu, elle s'est mariee mais elle est en perte de personnalite. Un autre  personnage, un bficheron fruste, oblige de vivre avec des Anglais, qui le dominent  parce qu'ils l'obligent  de  changer  de langue  pour  gagner  sa  vie, ne  trouve  meme  pas  une
consolation  a  cote  du  veritable  indigene,  l'Indien  qui  resiste  un  peu  mieux
puisqu'il  a  une  plus grande  habitude  de  la  menace  qui  pese sur  son  identite. Leur rencontre de circonstance  ne les unit pas car si l'Indien  trouve dans la neige et la glace un espace nature!, le quebecois cherche une liberte, une epreuve qui confirmerait  sinon sa force du mains son existence. Une danseuse peruvienne  lui donne  le seul  cadeau  qu'il  ait  rec;u: un  amour  intense  et  ephemere.  Des lors cette chaleur  qu'elle  evoque  devient le rappel  lancinant  d'un  espace ou il  pour­ rait  se mouvoir  naturellement; non  dans  la lutte  et la  recherche  d'une  victoire sur une nature  hostile, mais dans le bonheur  et le bien-Ctre offerts gratuitement, sans  contre-partie.  L'Elan   d' Amerique,   cet   animal   sauvage,   est   finalement
vaincu.  L'homme et  la femme  qui  ant  voulu se mesurer  a l'espace  perdent  la
bataille,  ils sont  vaincus.  lls  n'ont  gagne ni liberte,  ni identite.  Ce sont  des  vic­
times et leur defaite est en pure perte.
Dans  Un  reve quebecois, Victor-Levy  Beaulieu ne tente  pas de  reinventer  le joual, i1 emprunte a la langue  parlee des mots, des expressions. Dans la recherche
d'une  adequation entre le reve et la realite psychique de ses personnages, et des mots  qu'ils  utilisent  pour  les exprimer,  la  langue  diminuee  correspond  a une
identite  tronquee.  Le  reve quebecois  est en  realite  un  cauchemar. Un  homme prive de tout son etre tombe dans la folie quand  il s'aperc;oit de son impuissance

LITTERATURE DE QUEBEC



face au reel. 11 ne lui reste qu'un ultime recours:  son miserable corps qu'il  utilise pour  torturer  sa femme.  Sa  violence est derisoire, inutile.  Le  corps  qu'il  mal­ traite,  qu'il  detroit,  ne lui donne  meme pas la mesure d'un  monde exterieur.  Sa violence l'enferme  dans  une prison ou il se trouve finalement  seul. 11 n'a  d'autre issue que de se detruire  lui-meme n'ayant  pas trouve le moyen de sortir de sa co­ quille. La  bataille etait  perdue  d'avance.  Aucune  identite  n'etait  au  bout  de la route  sauf !'expression  de  l'impasse,  de !'exasperation.  Sans  doute  si une  issue semblait  possible, la langue  aurait  ete un  refuge, une  coquille,  qui  paradoxale­ ment,  l'aurait libere de son ghetto.


























		I!!. 	ERS 	I




m
M	Busting knuckles shoeing the gelding
Enforcing rhythms coloured with blood" 	The Work of Hands
f!i	McCLELLAND & STEWART I The Canadian Publishers
f!i 	At Good  Bookstores  Everywhere $4.95 cl.
mmm

POEMS  BY SJIINT-DENYS-GJIRNEJIU



These   poems, all taken   from  the  body  of verse  posthumously  published   under  the title  Les Solitudes, are  already   familiar to  French   readers;   some  of  them   have been  anthologized, and  many  individual lines    quoted    in    articles    and 	critical studies.    They   have    thus    entered    the mainstream of  French-Canadian  poetry, and  undoubtedly  influenced  its  progress during    the   1950's.   The  actual   manu­ scripts, however, show  they  were  in  vari­ ous  stages  of completion at  the  time   of the  poet's death  in  1948; at any  rate they




WHJIT JIM I DOING

What  am I doing hanging to this rope
This rope, a star suspended  by its light alone, Shall I die hanging  here
Or  die like a drowned  man weary of his shipwreck
Who slips into the all-embracing sea That  true  sister who embraces us Transposes  the light as we descend
And holds it against our eyes, filling them full


Remember the sea that  cradled  you
Old  deadman swung to the soundings of the lead, Companioned by green light,
Disturbing  with  your wash the order of her motion
Over  the beds of the unnumbered  waves,
And now stroked  by seaweed in the quiet depths Remember  the waves and  how they cradled  you Old deadman buried in silence undersea.


Translated by John Glassco



were  not  fair copies, and  the  poems must be regarded  as "work in  progress". But though unfinished, they  are  far  from  be­ ing   fragments:  the   openings,  key   lines and   closes  are  there, the   direction  and plan apparent; all that  is wanting is  the final  polish  such  a  meticulous  writer  as Saint-Denys-Garneau gave  everything  he wrote.   The    French   text   is  that   of   the Poesies  completes edited   by  Robert  Elie and  Jean  Le  Mayne (Fides, Montreal & Paris, 1949).                                             J.G.





)INOTHER IC)IRUS

It's  out of the wind it's in the wind
It's only a hole we make in our passage through  it
A knot we tie in the fleeting thread  of time


And well we know that across this slender thread  we've made, Across these shaky stations built on the journey of our  going, There  is only a cry towards the depths that  are forever
There  is only a cry
from a place that lasts forever
Where the stems of the fruits are already broken
And all the stalks of the flowers and petals of the flowers are devoured
Where these feather-wings of our waxen soul have already melted
Only feathers in the wind feathers floating on the wind
With no home port.

SAINT-DENYS-GARNEAU



IT IS THEY ...

It is they who have killed me
Struck  me in the back with their weapons, who killed me Struck  me to the heart  with their  hatred,  who killed me Struck  on my nerves with their howling, who killed me

It is they in their avalanche  who have crushed me
Splintered  me like a log of wood


Snapped  my nerves like a cable of iron wire cut short
When  all the threads in a wild bouquet
Spring  out and curl back in quivering points


Who crumbled  my body like dry bread Picked my heart to pieces like a crust Scattered  it all into the night

They  have trodden  it all down without even seeming to Without  knowing or wanting to know or being able to know Without  thinking,  without caring
Only by their terrible mysterious strangerhood
Because they did not come to me to embrace me


Oh  into what  wilderness we must go
To die quietly by ourselves.






JIFTER THE OLDEST

After the oldest of the vertigoes After  the longest of declines And  the slowest poisons
One  day at noon
Your bed as certain as the tomb

66

SAINT-DENYS-GARNEAU



To our bodies fainting on the sands
Yawned  like the sea.


After the slowest of approaches
The  fieriest of caresses
After your body a pillar
Bright and  consummately hard
My body a river outspread and pure to the water's edge.


Between us the ineffable happiness
Of distance
After the brightness of the marble
The  first movements of our cries
And suddenly the weight of the blood
Foundered  within  us like a shipwreck
The  weight of the fire fell on our perished hearts


After the final sigh
And the fire had crossed the shadow on the ground
The  cables of our arms are cast off for a mortal  journey
The  bonds of our embraces fall of themselves
and go adrift on our bed
Stretching  out now like a desert
And all the inhabitants are dead
And our perished eyes see nothing more
Our  eyes blinded  by the pupils of desire
As our love vanished like an unbearable  shadow
And we felt our isolation rising like an impassable wall.


Under  the red sky of my eyelids
The  mountains
Are companions of my arms
And  the forests burning  in the darkness
And the wild beasts
Passing with the claws of your fingers
0 my teeth
And the whole earth dying in a vise

SAINT-DENYS-GARNEAU



Then  blood covering the earth
And  the secrets burnt  alive
And  all the mysteries tom to pieces
Night  was delivered in our final cry


It  was then she came
Again and  again
It  was then she passed through  me
Again and  again
Bearing my heart upon her head
Like an urn which kept its radiance.



JIDVENTURINGS

Adventurings have come to us from the world's end
When  you come from afar it is not to remain  there
(When  you come from afar it was because you had to leave) Our  glances are tired of being swept by the same trees
By the saw against  the sky of the same trees
And our arms of sweeping at the same place forever. Our  feet no longer fixed us there to the earth
They  were drawing  our bodies to days beyond our sight.


Imperative departures have been ours
From the first departure of all and thence unendingly
Beyond our sight and into a horizon of renewals
Which is only this appeal from afar that shapes the landscape
Or  that  cliff-like barrier
Which lashes the rage of our desire to know
And whose weight winds up within us
The spring of our saltation


We have not had too many snows to eat
We have not had too many winds and storms to drink
We have not had  too much ice to carry
Nor too many dead to carry upon our icy hands

68

SAINT-DENYS-GARNEAU



There  are those who could not leave
Who dared  not wish to leave
Who had no joy in their eyes with which to kiss the spaces Who had no lightnings of blood in their arms to open them They fell asleep on the benches
Their  souls were stolen from them while they slept
They awoke with a start like those servants
Whom the master surprises at their idleness


We, we had no desire to stop
We had  not too much  weariness to conquer For the franchise of our gestures into space For the freedom of our eyes on every place
For the free bounding  of our hearts over the hills


And there are those who did not wish to go
Who wished not to go but to stay


We look at them and shrug our shoulders
We are not of the same race.


They  have awakened,  these animals in the pen Who spend their soulless ardour  in the brothels And  return  to a mindless sleep
They have awakened, these book-keepers, busybodies, Devourers of neighbours, classifiers of sins,
Collectors of taxes, inchmeal assassins,
Eaters of souls, the well-pleased, the prudent, Arse-kissers, bootlickers, bowers and scrapers,
Who renounce longwindedly and with perfect composure, Having  nothing  to renounce.

This is a country of little creatures to be stepped  on
You cannot see them because they're dead
But you'd like to boot them in the behind
And see them underground for the sake of the beauty  of unpeopled space.

6g

SAINT-DENYS•GARNEAU



The  others, we are the wild ones, we are the all-alone
In our heads there is only the thought of embracing
We have only the taste for going forth, the taste like a hunger
We are already  where we are no longer
We have no business here
We have nothing  to say and we hear no voice of any friend.


MUSIC  AND MEDICINE



Michael Beausang



1:SEARCH  FOR  NATIONAL AND  PERSONAL IDENTITY, thooe precarious  and  related  modes  of  being  essential  to  action,  dominates   all  that
Hubert  Aquin  has  written.  Yet, as is true  of all major  writers  committed  to a cause,  his  art  successfully  transcends  the  self-imposed  limits  of  a  litterature engagee. This is not to say that  his novels should be bowdlerized of their  political message in order  to appeal  to English-speaking Canadians. Apart  from insulting the intelligence of prospective readers, such a proceeding  would  misrepresent  his work as a  whole. Still, it appears  to be true  that  from  a critical  point  of view Aquin's  dedication  to the cause of Quebec separatism  has produced  an excessive political bias in  assessments of his work, with  the  result that  the  reasons given for his genuine  distinction  as a novelist are often the wrong  ones, and  few  con­ certed efforts have been made to come to terms with either Trou  de  memoire  or L'Antiphonaire.
To  explore  a  relatively  uncharted  area  has its compensations.  It also has its dangers. L'Antiphonaire is an extremely complex book and a brief attempt  to summarize  the plot, though  bound to betray the sophistication of its sexual wit, is unfortunately  necessary to our  argument.  Initially  a straightforward story  nar­ rated  by an ex-medical student,  Christine,  married  to an  epileptic  named  Jean­  William  Forestier, it quickly develops into an involved account  of rape,  murder  and  destruction,  in  which  alternating   personalities, living in  different  historical periods,  echo  and  counterpoint  one  another  in  a  clever,  if  bitter,  antiphonal exercise. The  nub  of  much  of  this  activity  is Christine's  thesis -a  survey  of medical  science in  the sixteenth  century  which singles out  for special  attention  Jules-Cesar  Beausang,  a disciple of Paracelsus, who, among  other  things,  advo­ cated  the adoption  of the experimental  method,  and  penned  a  notable  descrip­ tion of epilepsy.
Shortly  after  the  opening  of  the  novel,  Christine's   husband   undergoes  an epileptic  attack,  his ninth,  and  in  the course of her efforts to  obtain  drugs  for

MUSIC AND  MEDICINE



him she is "violated" by a Californian  pharmacist.  Parallel  with these events, in literary space if not in time, Renata  Belmissieri, a Renaissance  courtesan  whom Christine  describes  as  her  double,  sets  out  to  deliver  Beausang's  final  manu­ script  Traite des maladies  nouvelles  to a Chivasso printer,  Carlo  Zimara. Raped by Carlo,  Renata  sees justice done  when  Carlo  is stabbed  to  death  by his wife, Antonella.  But  her  troubles  have  only begun.  She is next  sexually  molested  by Chigi, an abbe of Turin, who hands her over to the police as Zimara's killer, and, doubling  for  both  the  printer  and  Beausang,  heads off  to  France  with  the  un­ repentent  Antonella,  leaving  Renata  to  be hanged  for  a crime she  never  com­ mitted.  Once  in  Lyon,  Chigi  alias Zimara  alias  Beausang, manages  to  make  a living on  the strength  of Beausang's  reputation  and  manuscript,  and  ironically, and  aptly enough,  dies of syphilis, one of the new diseases described by the great doctor.
This  is,  roughly  summarized,  the  Renaissance  wing  in  Aquin's   picaresque
comedy. On  the modem  side, Christine  manages to make herself the focal point of as disastrous a web of events as those enveloping her Renaissance counterpart, Renata. Jean-William, having  discovered  the  identity  of  the  pharmacist   who violated his wife, shoots him. But Christine has more than one beau to her string. She  returns  from  California   to  Montreal  to  her  lover,  Robert  Bematchez,  an ambitious  Quebec  politician.  Jean-William  follows, and  guns down  Bematchez who is committed  to the Sacre  Coeur  hospital with severe damage  to the  head and  central  nervous  system. Somewhat  disconcerted  at  the  prospect  of  having a  second  invalid  on  her  hands,  Christine  compromises  herself  by  capitulating before the sexual advances  of Robert's  doctor, Albert Franconi.  But by now she is a  tortured, demoralized,  not  to  say,  abused,  young  woman,  and  unable  to equate  her  acts  with  her  ideal  self, she commits  suicide. Jean-William follows suit, and the final entry in the novel is a letter from Franconi  to his wife Suzanne, informing  her that  he, too, is about  to put an end to his days.
Clearly,  Beausang's  Traite  des  maladies   nouvelles,   Christine's   "La   science
medicale  au  XVIeme  siecle", and  Aquin's  novel, are all one and  the same,  re­ lated  mirror-images  of the  creator  reflecting upon  his own  work.  What  we  are reading  is at  one  level  a  political  allegory  in  which  Christine's  "crucifixion" symbolizes the  exploitation   of  Quebec,   both  by  her  own  politicians   (Robert  Bernatchez)   and  American  interests  (Christine's  abortive  affair with  Robert  W. Shact  and  her  rape  by  the  California   pharmacist).  Her  pregnancy  by  Jean­ William  at a time when, as we shall see, she herself  appears  to have contracted  syphilis, would seem to convey Aquin's  reservations about the direction events are

MUSIC AND MEDICINE



taking in Quebec. In a word, Quebec is ill, and the extensive medical and pharmaceutical drama  culminating in the death  of Christine might  well be taken as a fictional  memento mori of the  province's aspirations  to  political  and  social independence. Thus, infidelity is the key-note of the novel in so far as the human relationships  are concerned,  but  politically this "lack  of faith" would  appear  to reflect Aquin's  disenchantment with the betrayal of a revolution.
But, as we noted earlier, the subject of Aquin's  revolutionary  commitment has tended  to divert attention  from  the technique  of historical  parallelism  by which social and  political comment are passed on to the reader. As the title of the novel suggests, the  idea  of manipulating a  continuous  parallel  between  a  twentieth­ century  story  and  the  different  episodes comprising  a  sixteenth-century tale  of intrigue,  appears  to have originated  in the author's interest in music.




ANTIPHONY IS   LITERALLY  the  art  of "counter-sounding", of playing off one choral group  against another.  This, is, of course, exactly what Aquin  does in UAntiphonaire, where modem  and  Renaissance  choral  groups counterpoint one  another  across an  acoustical  gap  of well  over  four  hundred years. Such  "musical  accords"  enable  him  to propose a  resolution  to  the  prob­ lem of time and  history in the context  of the novel, at  the same  time  that they serve to illustrate what Ulrich and  Pick, speaking of Hebrew responsorial singing, have  called  "the  expression of one  thought  in  two  different  ways".1  However, despite  the  wide  range  of  meanings  acquired   by  the  words  "antiphon" and "antiphony" through  the  ages, it  is, perhaps,  most  useful to  interpret Aquin's art  of counterpoint  in the  restricted sense of a sentence or  passage sung  by one choir  in response to another.
As a musical form  antiphony  is of special interest  to  the  writer  because  tra­
ditionally it places most emphasis on a faithful interpretation of the text. Indeed, until  the eighth  and  ninth  centuries  Antiphonaries  included  nothing  more  than the texts, and under the influence of the sixteenth-century  revival of interest in classical literature,  the  musical contemporaries  of Jules-Cesar  Beausang  applied themselves to the exegesis of liturgical  texts with  fresh energy. As for  the  texts featured  in  early  Christian  antiphonal singing,  these were  borrowed  from  the Jews, with each choral  group  singing successive verses of a  psalm.  But, in  trac­ ing the downfall of Christine, Aquin  would appear  to be especially  interested  in the  Holy Week use of antiphons  deriving from  the Song of  Songs.2    By relating

73

MUSIC AND  MEDICINE



Christine's promiscuity and syphilitic calvary to the liturgical theme of the unio mystica between Christ  and  the Church,  and the impending  crucifixion of Good Friday,  Aquin  reinforces  his presentation  of the  Quebec  situation  and  parodic­ ally reminds us that  separatisme  aims at religious, as well as political  emancipa­  tion.  Here,  again,  one  recognizes a savage portrayal  of the  violation  of revolu­ tionary  trust for as Isidore Epstein  reminds us, the original  Canticle  of Canticles "glorifies  perfect  love that  remains  constant  and  steadfast  amid  all  allurement and  seductive inftuences."3
Rhythm  is basic to musical expression, yet it also has an important place in medicine  and  sexual  activity.  A  patient's  pulse-beat  is an  index  to  his state  of health  and  an important aspect of Jules-Cesar  Beausang's contribution  to medi­ cine is his insistence on  "l'aspect   clinique  de  la  medicine,  !'auscultation". Yet, when two beat as one, as Dr. Franconi  acknowledges to his  wife, the keeping of rhythm   becomes  doubly  difficult:   "Notre   harmonie  s'est  transformee   en  une discorde  permanente." Christine  also admits  to  a  fear  of  having  offended  the reader  with  "mes  harmonies  discordantes,  rna  deformis  conformitas". But  the explicit analogy between sexual possession and surrender  to music is most clearly drawn  in  the scene  in  which  Renata  is seduced  by  1'Abbe  Chigi:   "Renata se laissait bercer par  la musique  psalmodiee du  Cantique des Cantiques: elle etait ravie, elle voulait  etre  la  plus belle des  femmes ... Elle se laissait caresser div­ inement  par son mystique epoux." As John  Hollander  notes:  "It is natural  that the  various  meanings  of  the  word  ravish  (violent  sexual  possession, bewilder­ ment,  ecstatic  separation of  the  soul from  body)  should  tend  to  cluster  more about  the erotic senses when  applied  to music. The  overtones of 'rape'  become increasingly   prominent   in   its   more  generally  applied   cognates   'ravish'   and
'rapture' ..."4    Yet  what  is most striking  about  Aquin's  account  of  Chigi's  ex­ ploitation  of Renata is not  the  lascivious Abbe's sexual ineptitude,  but  the  fact that  his climax should be made synchronous with an epileptic seizure on Renata's part.
This startling  equation  between epilepsy and the sex act is undoubtedly  one of the  most  significant  organizational  elements  in  the  novel.  We  can  begin  to account  for  it  by  noting  that  the  medical  characteristics  of seizure  are  often "musically"  expressed  as an  interruption of the  body's  rhythms:   "The   rhythm of the body when orderly  spells health.  Dysrhythmia  is a disease."5   Man  is, in a sense, a  musical  instrument regulated  by the  automatic   periodicity  of his own heart-beat. Furthermore, as Dr.  William  Gordon  Lennox  points out:   "Orgasm is a sensory-motor seizure, a fact succinctly phrased by the Romans: 'Coitus brevis

74

MUSIC AND MEDICINE



epilepsia est'."6   But  the  notion  that  the sex act  is a  gentle  epilepsy has  an  ex­ tremely long  and  well-documented  history and  the  first indication  of its  wide­ spread acceptance  appears  in its attribution  to Democritus  of Abdera  by  no less an  authority   than  Galen.  Reference  has already  been  made  to  syphilis  in the novel, and  Owsei Temkin's  remark  that  "It did  not escape the attention  of the Renaissance  physicians  that   many  syphilitics developed  epileptic  convulsions"7 also helps to explain the simultaneous presence of both ailments in l' Antiphonaire.
It is no secret, moreover, that  the greatest challenge to medical science in the Renaissance  was that  posed  by syphilis. Now,  Christine  informs  us that  Jules­ Cesar Beausang's concepts of medical practice were elaborated  in the year I 530. Why this particular year should  be invoked in the context  of  syphilis seems ap­ parent  from a number  of references to Girolamo  Fracastoro. It was inI 530 that Fracastoro's  poem, Syphilis sive Morbus Gallicus first appeared, giving the name "syphilis" to what was known to the Italians of the time as "the  French  disease". Similarly, the reason for dubbing  Beausang  (an  anticipation of Harvey?)   Jules­ Cesar  is  probably  that  the  Roman  emperor  represents  a  classical  instance  of epilepsy: "The  aura  mentioned ... of tingling and trembling  of one foot, spread­  ing  upward,  suggests a  cortical  lesion,  arising  perhaps  from  his Caesarean   de­ livery, or, as Barois suggested, from syphilis, for was he not  the  'husband of all the women in Rome?' "8
Renata  Belmissieri, Christine's  double, is conjured  up by her "quand je tente, par  projection,  d'imaginer et de figurer une femme en proie aux spasmes  recur­ rents de la crise d'epilepsie."  Elsewhere, she is described by Antonella  as a  pros­ titute.  Antonella  herself is accused  of prostitution  by Robert  Bematchez  while Christine admits  that  in Jean-William's eyes "j'etais  deja  pure  putain ... Depuis je semble  me  conformer  a  cette  image  de  moi-mon  comportement  me  fait horreur". In so far as sixteenth-century  values impinge upon the novel it is useful to  recall  Armen  Carapetyan's  comment  that   "Never  before  had   prostitution been granted  the  freedom  and  social sanction  which  it  enjoyed  in  the  Renais­ sance".9 By all accounts  one can  make a strong  case  for  regarding  the  text  of
1'Antiphonaire  as the  memoirs  of an  educated  Montreal  courtesan  undergoing
treatment for advanced  syphilis. But if this is so, the memoirs also epitomize  the political sickness and  exploitation  of Quebec  both  by  her  own  "doctors" and outside "consultants". No surprise, then if her condition fails to improve,  and  if, in Beausang's words, "l'humanite toute entiere continue d'attraper la Grande Verole."
The  advantage  of giving Christine's  physical and  psychological sickness a  Re-


75

MUSIC AND  MEDICINE



naissance dimension is that it immediately brings into play a fundamental assump­ tion of medicine in the  period:  that  of the natural analogy between  macrocosm and  microcosm. For  Paracelsus  (and  Beausang is, after  all,  a  disciple of Bom­ bastus)  the health  of the individual  cannot  be divorced from  events in the out­ side world:  "Earthquakes and  falling sickness have  the  same  causes ... for  the motion  of the earth  is also the  motion  of man  and  is  experienced  by all which grows on the earth"/ 0  or as Beausang puts it in the novel:  "La  terre vit comme taus les etres vivants;  elle est une personne plus grande,  plus vaste que les autres creatures de Dieu."
Rather  surprisingly,  then,  Christine  turns out  to be French-Canada's Hotspur ("Diseased  Nature  oftentimes  breaks forth/In strange  eruptions"), and  nothing could better describe the gamut  of the author's  attempts  to imaginatively  rehab­ ilitate the patient  than  that  ancient  adage  of Demetrius:  "Medicine, to  produce health,  has to examine  disease, and  music, to create  harmony,  must  investigate discord".11  Whatever  one's views on the state of the province, it is impossible to deny l'Antiphonaire its due place alongside the wittiest and  best-conceived works to emerge from  Quebec  at  this or any other  time.



NOTES

1 Homer Ulrich and  Paul  A. Pisk, A history  of  music  and  musical  and  musical  style
(New  York  and  Chicago, 1963)   p. 11.
2   For  the  Song  of Songs  motif  see pages  87-95,  117, 119,  123,  221, 224,  228,  233-
234·
8    Isidore  Epstein, Judaism   (London, 1959)   p.  77·
4   John Hollander, The untuning of the  sky  (New  York, 1970)   p. 200.
5   William   Gordon  Lennox, Epilepsy   and  related  disorders  (Boston   and   Toronto,
1 960)  Vol. I. p. 4·
6   Lennox, p. 3·
7   Owsei  Temkin, The  falling  sickness  (Baltimore and  London, 1971)   p.  187.
8   Lennox, op. cit. Vol.  II p. 707.
9  Armen  Carapetyan "Music and  medicine  in the  Renaissance and  in  the  17th  and
18th   centuries" in  Music  and   Medicine  ed.  Dorothy   M.  Schullian  and   Max
Schoen   (New  York,  1948)   p. 135.
10   Lennox, op. cit. Vol.  I. p. 3·
11 Plutarch, "Demetrius", in The lives of the  noble Grecians and  Romans trans. John
Dryden, revised  by Arthur Hugh   Clough   (New  York,  Modern Library, n.d.)   p.
1073·


review articles





LIVESAY'S TWO SEASONS


Robin Skelton




DOROTHY  LIVESAY,  Collected  Poems: The  Two  Seasons.  McGraw-Hill Ryerson.


DoROTHY LIVESAY  begins  the foreword to her Collected  Poems with the statement: "These poems written between
I 926 andI 97 I create  an  autobiography; a psychic  if not  a literal  autobiography," and   thus  directs  our  attention rather to the   personality  than   the   philosophy  of the  collection.   We  are  not,  it  seems,  to look  for  an  intellectual schema; we  are not  to  think  of  the  poet  as a  teacher in the   way   that    we   think    of   Yeats,   or Stevens,  or  Pound; we are  not  to expect the vatic,  the prophetic, the oracular:  we are  simply  to take  the  poems  as the  story of  a  life,  its  passing  thoughts,  its  occa­ sional   intensities,   its  doubts,   its   confu­  sions, its sudden  clarities.
The book  certainly  seems to be of this kind.  There are  many  occasional   poems, many    anecdotes;  the   language  is   fre­ quently   a  little   pedestrian,  a   little   too casual,  so that  we feel the  poet's modesty may  have  led her  to accept small  returns rather   than    labour    for    masterpieces. Many   of  the  images  are  commonplace; many  of the  cadences  are  tired  and  pre­ dictable. A  good  many  poems  would  be improved  by  cutting; some  miss the  tar-
 get completely.  The  dramatic poems are often  marred by conventional rhetoric. Thus  in A Prophet  of the  New  World  we read,  with  a sinking  feeling,  the  line  "He is my  son.  Louis  Riel,  my  son,"  and,   a little  earlier,   the  Yeats-like   "What  poet, or what  dreamer, caught in  music  of his own  imagining?" Cliches   are   not  infre­ quent:  "fevered spirit",  "air  is  sweet",  "blot   out   the  memory", "bright  golden wings"  are  some  of  them.  Lapses  of  this kind  might  well  destroy  one's  faith in  a poet of less obvious integrity, but Dorothy Livesay's   work   reveals   such   passionate  honesty  of  feeling,   and   such   consistent  moral  courage, that  even  the  grossest de­ fects   become,    like    those   of    Thomas Hardy, curiously endearing. It is as if the poet were more concerned with  the  poem itself   than   with   the   reputation  of   the poem,  more  concerned  to  spell  out   the thought and  feeling  in  simple  and  direct  ways than  to labour after  an  elegance  of sophistication that  might pervert the meaningful into the marmoreal. This is clearly  an  honest  book.
Honesty  is  not  often   considered  to  be among  the  supreme poetic  virtues. Poets

77

REVIEW ARTICLES



should   be  good   liars,   said   Yeats,   who was  one.   It  might   even   seem   that   in stressing  Dorothy Livesay's  honesty  I am damning  the  book  with   the  faintest  of praise. Such  is not my intention; I am concerned only  to  suggest  that   the  styl­ istic  defects   appear  to  derive  from  the same  cause  as  the  poetic  excellence: an integrity  of   feeling    that    distrusts  the straining   after    rhetorical    effects,    and seeks to explore  the  texture of human ex: perience in  "a  selection  of   the  language really  used by men".
Such  language must  necessarily  include the platitudes, the cliches and  the stock expressions  of current speech  as did  the language  of  Wordsworth,  and   it   must, like   the   language  of   Wordsworth,   at­ tempt the impersonation of the unsophis­ ticated  memorialist, and  the innocent vis­ ionary.  Dorothy  Livesay's  poetry  is cap­  able,  not  only  of  Wordsworthian leisure­ liness  with   its   attendant  subtleties and  longueurs, but  also of  the  gnomic  clarity  which  illuminates the  Lucy   poems,  and  which   is   characteristic  of   those   later romantics, Emily  Bronte  and  Emily Dick­ inson,   whom   Ms.  Livesay  celebrates  in one  of her  poems. Thus we  read:

I saw my thought a hawk
Through heaven  fly:
On  earth  my words  were  shadow  of
His  wings, his cry.

How  many  clouded  days
Precede  the fair -
When  thought must  unrecorded  pass
Through sunless air.
(I Saw  My  Thought.)

and  the  two-line  poem, Going to Sleep

I shall  lie like this  when  I  am  dead - But with  one more  secret  in my head.

In  these  intense  lyrics  of  the  1g2os  Dor­ othy  Livesay indicates one of the primary impulses  in her early  work-the impulse
 to record,  to set down,  the  moment. The language  of   these   lyrics   is  traditional, non-innovative, and  occasionally has that wayward  oddity  which  is characteristic  of Emily  Dickinson. The  poem  Now  I  am Free  exemplifies  this.

Now, I am free
But prejudice
Will creep  like moss
On  an  olding  tree.

Shall  I then  be
My parents' child­
A desperate grasp
Towards fixity?

Here I wonder  why, if there had to be a comma   in  the  first  stanza, it  should   be after  "Now" and  not  after  "free"; I  am teased  by the word  "olding" used instead of "aging", and  curious why  the  slightly clumsy    sound    of   "Towards"  is   used rather   than    the    more    obvious    "At"? There are answers  to these questions.  The smoother  "At"   would     not    give    the "grasp" the  awkwardness required, and the word  "olding", because at a slight distance  from normal speech, suggests  a straining  to  capture  the   thought,  and thus  gives  a  stronger impression   of  sin­ cerity.  Nevertheless   I  cannot  help  being doubtful  of  my  own   explanation.  This doubt  is unhappily increased when  I read adjacent poems and  perceive slipshod or­ ganization,   and   unnecessary    common­ places.

My guardian angel, sick and  sad at heart
Now turns  away his head
And stands  beside the  door, where  long ago
He stood  beside my bed.
(The Husband)

From   this  it  seems  that   there   has  been some architectural upheaval; the door is now   placed   where,   long   ago,   the   bed stood.  It seems improbable. And  why,  if we are  to punctuate at  all, is there  not  a

REVIEW ARTICLES



comma   after   "heart"?  Should   not   the word  "where" be replaced with "though"? Ellipsis is perhaps responsible for some clumsiness. The second  verse of this poem runs:

How  I remember his bright golden  wings
To  comfort me  at  night
That now  are  folded back  as  though to  fall
In  lonely  downward flight.

This   appears to  say  ' "I  remember" the "bright golden   wings"  in  order   to  com­ fort   myself'  but  that   cannot  be  correct,  for  later,  in  the  next  stanza,  we  are  told that  "My  guardian angel  hears no prayer  from  me."  We  must  be  required  to  un­ derstand the  verse  to  mean  "How I  re­ member  his bright golden  wings that  used to comfort me  at  night." I  don't under­ stand   the  reason  for   the  word   "How", nor  why it  is  necessary  to  remember the wings if the angel  is standing in full view at    the    door.   And,    surely,   the    word "flight" implies  the  use of wings?  If the wings are folded  back  the angel  will drop like a stone.  The poem  concludes:

My  guardian angel hears  no  prayer from me-
l worship earth and  sky:
He  goes  the  way  of childhood, all  too  far
For  me  to  hear  his  cry.

This   is baffling.  How   can  he  be  out  of earshot  if he is standing by the door, un­ less, of course his wings are "folded back"  in  such  a  way  as  to  block  his  ears?  In what  way is he "all  too far"? In order   to assent   to  this  poem   we  are  obliged   to accept  the  confusion  of  the  statement as evidence  of  the  speaker's  emotional dis­ turbance, and   thus  regard  it  as  a  valu­ able  element  in  the  poem's  over-all  mes­ sage,  just as we are  obliged  to accept  the clumsiness   of   diction    and   the   careless punctuation of  other poems  as  evidence of sincerity.
 It   becomes,  unfortunately,  something of a strain  to perform this  manoeuvre in poem    after    poem,    especially    when    it seems clear  that  straightforward  problems of grammar have been left unsolved. The moving  poem,  Comrade, is flawed  by grammatical errors.  It opens:

Once  only  did  I sleep  with you
And  sleep  and  love again more  sweet  than I
have  ever  known; without an  aftertaste.

To   what   does  the  word   "sweet"  refer? Surely    the    sense    demands   "sweetly" which  would  spoil the  rhythm. And  that semicolon  looks very strange. The phrase (baffling  in meaning) "without an  after­ taste"  hangs  in  mid-air like  an  advertis­ ing slogan. The second  part  of  the  poem begins:

My  dear, it's  years  between; we've  grown up  fast
Each  differently, each  striving by itself.

Why  "itself"? Clearly  because  to  say "herself" or "himself" would  suggest homosexuality. Were  this fourteen line poem, separated into  paragraphs of eight and  six lines,  to  be  the  sonnet  it  is  not, one  might   suspect   the   awkwardness  to have   been  caused   by  the   exigencies   of rhyme,  but  the poem  is unrhymed. Might I  suggest,  keeping   the   low-key   diction, that  the  problem  could  be solved  by  re­ writing   the  flawed  line  as  "Each  differ­ ently,  each  struggling on  alone"?  It's  no worse  than   the  original  and   is  at  least grammatical.
Some  of  the  defects  of  Ms.  Livesay's poems appear to stem from a wish to assemble   the  perceptions  in  an  impres­ sionistic  manner, rather than  in  conven­ tional  syntax.  In "Call my People Home" we find  the lines

We  go  out  towards misty  islands
Of  fog  over  the  river

79

REVIEW ARTICLES



Jockeying for  position;
Till morning steals  over,  sleepy,
And  over  our  boat's side,  leaning The word  comes,  Set  the  nets! Hiding the  unannounced prayer Resounding in  the  heart's corners: May  we  have  a  high  boat
And  the  silver  salmon leaping!

Here,  the unnecessary semi-colon  after "position" blocks the flow of the sentence, and  the absence  of quotation marks  slows the   reader   down,   while   the   word   "re­ sounding" is surely  wrong; how  can any­ thing  "unannounced" resound? And  why does the character already in the boat  ask for  a  "high boat"? The  word "high" is as adventitious a piece of flummery as one might  hope  to find. Nevertheless this long poem   for   radio   is   effective   as  speech;  its  punctuation   and   sometimes   broken­  backed  syntax, are  not noticeable when  it is read  aloud,  and   the  succession  of  im­ ages   and   parenthetical   comments  pro­ duces   a   powerful  effect   upon   the   ear which  is,  in  these  days,  less educated to detect  faults  of  structure in  spoken  ma­ terial  than  in music.
Here  I find  myself  thinking that  much of what  I have  noted  may be the  product of historical influence. When  Ms. Livesay began  writing  the  poetry  audience in Canada was  both  sparse  and   uncritical; there  was little  incentive to polish,  to  re­ vise  to  perfect   niceties  of  structure  and diction. Poetry  itself  was  enough! More­ over,   reviewers   and   readers   responded more  to  the  sentiment than   to  the  style, and  took  the  intent for  the  achievement as  long   as  that  intent   fitted   with   the social  prejudices and  beliefs  of  the  time. Thus one  can,  in  part, forgive  the  appal­ ling  doggerel   of  some  parts   of  Dorothy  Livesay's  Depression  Suite; it  has  all  the anger  and  compassion demanded  by the situation  in  the  early   thirties. One   can

8o
 understand  that   the   compulsion  to  ex­ press  could  override the  duty   to  perfect  the  statements. The  same  might  be  said of  the  poem  on  the  Spanish  Civil  War, Catalonia, and  of that  on  Louis  Riel.  In all these  the passion, the concern, emerges  powerfully,  and  perhaps  one  should   not criticize  the style of an  outcry, any  more than   one  should  condemn  the  incoher­ ence  of a keen. If we agree,  however,   to let our standards  fall  in  this  way, we are pandering to that  very insensitivity which, in a different manifestation, causes  the social  ills  against   which   we  rail.  If  we accept   a  poem  for  its  courage, its  social awareness,  its sentiment, and  relegate considerations of artistry to a lower  place, we are  liable to end  up by regarding Fer­ linghetti as superior to  Wallace  Stevens,  and   considering  a   protest   march  as  a more  significant  contribution  to  cultural health    than    a   symphony. This  is,   of course,   a   conclusion    many    have    now reached,  perhaps   without  realizing   that  when  a society  judges  the  significance of art  entirely  in  terms  of  its  message  and sentiment, it  is in  danger of  establishing a  tyranny  of  popular  prejudice  hardly less  damaging  to   the   collective   psyche than   the  censorship   of  the   totalitarian states, and, in losing all interests in mere artistry, destroying  all  hope  for  a  collec­ tive  insistence   upon   clarity   of   thought, orderliness  of behaviour, and impartiality of justice.
Such   general   reflections   may   be   re­ garded as being  out  of place  in  a  review of a  book of poems,  but  I  feel  that they may   serve   to  explain   why,   in   reading Dorothy  Livesay's   work   I   find   myself sympathizing with,  and  even  applauding, the   honesty   and   courage   of   her   state­ ments,  even as I condemn  the  poetry  for its amateurish clumsiness and  its aesthetic

REVIEW ARTICLES



imprecision. I would like to come  to a different verdict, but  cannot, in  all  con­ science,  do  so. To  be accepted as  a  poet of  significance   one  must   do  more  than mean  well;  one  must  write  well.
This  is true  of my  reading of  the  first two thirds  of Dorothy Livesay's  Collected Poems, always excepting the early intense and  lucid  lyrics  from  my  judgment, for these are often both moving and precisely shaped.  It   is  not   however   true   of  the book's   last   third,    which    contains  the poems written since I956 when  Dorothy Livesay's  Selected Poems appeared. After I 956 the  earlier  prolixity  and  syntactical disarray seem  to  have   been  almost  en­ tirely   conquered.  The    punctuation   re­ mains    arbitrary  on   occasion,    but    the poems  have  a  new  force  and  clarity,  a new  directness   and  sense  of   form.  Con­ sider  the  poem,  Widow, of  I958-g:

No  longer  any  man  needs  me nor  is the  dark  night of love coupled
But  the  body  is relentless, knows
its  need
must  satisfy  itself  without the  seed must  shake  in dreams, fly up  the  stairs
backwards.

In  the  open   box in  the  attic a  head  lies, set  sideways.
This head  from  this  body  is severed.

The  purist  might  object  to the  juxtaposi­ tion of a voiced and  a voiceless "s" in the tenth  and  in  the eleventh line,  but  apart from  this the  poem is flawless. It is clear, passionate,  balanced, and  crowned by an image  of  magnificent power  and  severity. A similar strength and  power is presented  in   the   zestful   poem    The    Incendiary (though  its  one  comma   is not  needed) , and  the  direct  speech  and  vigorous  tone of   Ballad  of Me  is impressive.  There is real economy  of language here:

Everyone expected guilt
 even  I-
the  pain  was  this:
to  feel  nothing

This  poem first appeared in The  Unquiet Bed  ( I967),  Dorothy Livesay's  most  im­ pressive collection.  Making  the  Poem, ut­ ilizing  an  open   form   and   owing   some­ thing  to the  Imagist-Black Mountain tra­  dition,  is both  effective  and  poised.  The sixth  and  final  section  reads:

Sleep  is the  cave  of  the  self infants sleep
Narcissus
in  the  cave  of  mirrors sleeps
the  old wake  early dream
rarely
the  dawn   birds  make
a  thankful music

Subtle,  and  well organized, it  has  purity of tone  and  strength of diction. In  these poems   images   which    in   earlier   years would have been fumbled and  blurred emerge  with  clarity.

your  bones  may  melt in  me
or  in  another woman
the  essence  is
to  catch the  bird  in  season hold,  hold  a snowdrop
capped and  cool in  the  cold  snow
then  let  it  go

In this section of the Collected  Poems the passion and the poetry fuse, and the later poems  are  equally   deft   and   poised  and strong.   It   is  as  if  all   the   honesty,   the sincerity,  the courage, of the earlier  poems have  now come  together with  a real con­ cern  for  poetry   as  an  art.  The  descrip­ tions are  more  vivid  than  before, and  the technique  is   more   assured.  Indeed   it seems as  if  the  book's  subtitle The  Two  Seasons could   be  made  to  refer   to  the

8r

REVIEW ARTICLES



two periods 1926 to 1956 and 1956 to the present.  This  sudden  revolution may seem strange,   and  yet  it  is not  without  prece­ dent.  In  1910  when  W.  B. Yeats  was 45 years old he published The Green Helmet  which  signalized   a  fundamental  change  in  his poetry  and  led  him  to  the  greatest  of  his  works.  In   1956  Dorothy  Livesay was 47· It seems that  in the middle forties some  poets  are   rewarded  for  long  years of service  and  given  new  powers.  Be that  as it  may,  the  poetry  of  Dorothy Livesay in  the  period   since   1956  entirely  alters my earlier  view  of  her stature and  posi­ tion.  From  being  one  who  might  reason-
 ably be regarded as a worthwhile minor poet  of irreproachable honesty  and  vari­ able  quality,  who  had  a  secure  niche  in one of the smaller  rooms  in our  national hall of fame,  she must  now  be considered  a  poet  whose economy  of  language, clar­  ity of vision,  suppleness  of  cadence, and  strong sense of form, place her  well above many of her contemporaries, and  lead one to  hope  that  the  second  of  her  two  sea­ sons  rnay prove  longer  than  the  first  and  that   the   publication  of   her   Collected Poems may turn  out  to be even more pre­ mature than   Yeats'   Collected   Poems  of
1933·



A TILTING EQUIPOISE

Christopher Xerxes Ringrose

RALPH GUSTAFSON,  Selected Poems.  McClelland and  Stewart, $5-95·
RALPH  GUSTAFSON,  Theme and  Variations  for Sounding Brass.  Progressive Publica­
tions   ( Sherbrooke, Quebec), $1.00.


THE PUBLICATION of these two books of poetry  by Ralph Gustafson raises the question  of the effectiveness of Mr. Gustafson's  very  distinctive  poetic   tone, as well as  the  larger  question as to what tone and approach is appropriate to the kinds    of   material   he   is   handling   in Theme  and    Variations  for    Sounding Brass, which  is "dedicated to the victims"
-of Prague 1968, Kent State 1970, Viet­ nam   perennially,  Quebec   1970,   Biafra, Bangladesh; or  even  if  one  can  talk  of "tone and  approach" in  considering such matters.
The   Selected    Poems   are   taken   from Flight    into    Darkness     ( 1944),   Rivers among   Rocks   ( 1960),  Rocky Mountain Poems    ( 1960),  Sift    in   an   Hour glass ( 1966)  and  Ixion's Wheel  ( 1969). Since
 
Ixion's  Wheel  was itself something of a "Collected  Poems"  of  the  sixties,  41  of the   poems   in   the   Selected    Poems   are making   their   third   appearance  in  book form.  There  are some revisions  here, usu­ ally  to the  good.  To  take  two  examples: "Mausoleum Hunting:  Ravenna" (from  Sift  in an Hourglass)  has been  improved by the removal  of the  last four  lines, and some laborious  punning on  sans  eire/sin­ cere in "The Fall of Icarus" (from  Ixion's  Wheel)  has been eliminated.
Reading   through   the     1 2 1     selected poems  makes  one  more  than  ever  aware of  Mr.  Gustafson's recurrent  themes, which  were discernible in his poetry from the beginning: primarily his sense of the mysterious  co-presence   of  life  and  death in  the  world,  in  the  imagination, in  art,

REVIEW ARTICLES



an equipoise tilting  delicately  towards the grave.   The   poet  who  in  r 944  spoke  of "The apple   twixt  the  tombstones  of  my teeth" notices in rg6g Shakespeare's monument marked with  a  skull,  and  re­ marks   that  "death's abovejall of  us".  If the  concern  with   death  and   dissolution  is pervasive,  so too is the interest  in myth and    history,    especially   the   hinterland where   the  two  combine,  and   the  desire to see Agamemnon, or  Icarus,  or Joan  of Arc,  or   the   Pharoahs  in  the   here   and now,  with  what  they  stood  for  persisting into    the   present    moment.  These    two thematic  strains  obviously   run   parallel,  and  they can come  together  very prettily,  as in  "The  Valley  of Kings" :
They weren't far  wrong:
the   body  kept
to  keep  the  soul.
Light falls  across  the  Nile.
I dip  my  hand
over  the  felluca's edge.
Golden! Golden!

One   sees  here   too   that   sense  of  place which    is   important  in   many    of   the poems:   the  reacting mind  before  the Rockies, Ravenna or Rouen,  recreating significance imaginatively-a kind of superior  tourism.
It  has   to  be  said,   though,  that   the further one pursues  these themes, and  the more  poems one reads,  the more  tiresome Mr.  Gustafson's verse can  become.  He  is not  a  poet  to  read  in  any  quantity, and one  may  on  the  face  of  it  wonder   why, for  surely  we  have  in  him  a  resurrection of Metaphysical Wit-that seriousness without solemnity,  a blending  of passion, wit  and  erudition which  modern  ortho­ doxy   presents   as  the   highest   mode   to which  we can  aspire.  But  this sophistica­ tion  is embodied in  a  peculiar tone -a somewhat  prissy,  heavily  mannered  tone
-which begins  to grate  on  one.
 To    progress    through   the    Selected Poems  is  to  come  with  disturbing  regu­ larity  on    those  affected,   mannered phrases: "If  a   man   goes   through  the crust  his leg melts.jl  have seen  this thing  happen",  "Aspects   of    Some   Forsythia Branches", "Aphrodite's  laugh   was  cer­ tain/ (These  are reliable reports)", "The second   time   I   shuddered   with    love,/  (You   remember,   we   were   so   placed/ Passion  was  visual:", "Ahead, we  could see/What choice was. There wasjNo par­  able   in   it.",   "I took   it   from   her,/My finger  lashed  with  the stuff"; or  the  pair of  brusque  opening  lines:   "There was  a care  needed; stones/On  the   path   could break  the ankle", "A fire should  be made alsojTo stare  at".  The  mannerism is present  too in the  prefatory note: "If the music  was  not  in  jeopardy, for  the  sake of  exactness   I  have  occasionally altered a  word  or  a  phrase". The   desire  not  to put  "the  music  in  jeopardy" issues in  the careful, "musical" deployment of  conso­ nant  and  vowel,  as in  the  alliteration of "Prelude 2", with  its  description of Pan:

Slant eyes  thwart
The staggering straw
Sweet  still  with  the  wet  of water
Where one
Hoof  bubbles   the  tilted  stream.

But "the  music" sounds  within a highly self-conscious verse whose movement is oblique  and choppy.  A good deal of the foregoing   may  derive  from   Mr.  Gustaf­ son's  evident   admiration for  Browning; often   he  speaks  like  a  close   relative   of Bishop  Blougram, and  Browning's influ­ ence  comes  out  strongly  in  the  dramatic monologue "Michelangelo Looks Up  Not Sleeping:  The   Duomo  Workyard, Flor­ ence."
This  mannered tone tends in the poems of  the  fifties  and   sixties   (and   especially

REVIEW ARTICLES


the more recent ones)  to be linked to a mordant   jocosity;    in    comparison   the earlier  poems  from  Flight  into  Darkness are more dense and intense, determinedly dislocated  in their syntax, as in "Lyric Sarcastic", which  is very much  of the Preview/First Statement era of Canadian poetry:

What brink  and   bastion bound can  make
Against the  common sea  delays
Of  dart and  dazzle,  crumple rake
Of  sun  off ocean's cornice, rays?

The  somewhat shapeless  accumulation of wit  which   forms   this  and   other   poems from Flight into Darkness ("Biography", "Idyll for  a Fool",  "Ultimatum", "Flight into  Darkness")  tends  to  give  way  later in his career to meditations sparked by specific   places   or   incidents-as  in   his witty  consternation "On the Top  of  Mil­ an  Cathedral", where  Cokes  from  a red refrigerator  compete  with   "the   Virgin  Mary   and   Christ   holding/Open   like  a miraculous cardiac  his  bleeding/Heart". But  the  pitfall  of  this  material is the  ob­ vious  one:   that   Mr.  Gustafson  becomes our  urbane and  allusive  tour  guide,  hav­ ing   interesting   thoughts  on   everything from   the  Trevi  fountain  to  mosaics  in Istanbul,   from   the   Vieux    Marche  at Rouen   to Cairo  Museum, Mount Revel­ stoke  to  Franz  Liszt's  grave,   the  fall  of Icarus  to   Dachau  seen   from    a   train  window.
The  tone of the  poetry  is, as I said, dis­ tinctive,  but  one senses a degree  of  strain  when  it  is  asked   to  cope  with,  say,  the elegy   for   "S.S.R.,  Lost   at   Sea"  from Flight  into  Darkness, where the language seems   too  fussily   self-conscious   for   the subject. I am not suggesting  that  the sub­ ject calls for  the  unleashing of the  flood­ gates  of  grief,  but  here  as elsewhere  too much   seems   written  with   the   eventual

REVIEW ARTICLES



excavations of practical criticism  in mind
-in particular  the   guiding  metaphor which  opens and  closes the  poem:

What heave  of grapnels will  resurrect the fabric
Of  him,  oceans  drag, whereof  he  died, Drowning sheer  fathoms down, liquid to
grab on-

0 let  the  heart's tough riggings salvage him, Only  whose  lengths can  grapple with  these
dead.

The  comparison may   be  unfair,  but   I cannot help thinking here of the noble simplicity  of Wilfred  Owen  at  the  end of a poem  with a similar  theme: "And  each slow  dusk  a  drawing-down of  blinds"­ the   inadequacy  of  the  gesture,   and   by implication the poem, in the face of grief.
Which  brings  me  to Theme and  V ari­ ations  for Sounding Brass, which,  in view of  my  reaction   to  the   Selected   Poems) strikes   me  as  the   most   interesting  and difficult    project  Mr.   Gustafson   could have   undertaken. The  attempt to  write poetry  about  the  sufferings  and  violence of  Bangladesh  and  Prague, America  and Canada,  is difficult  enough  by any stand­  ard,   but  for  a  poet  of  Mr.  Gustafson's particular  manner and  characteristic ap­  proach  the problems  are  very great.  This is not  to  suggest  that  the  writing of "so­ cial  poetry"   (if we must  call  it  that)  in­ volves  some  spurious  technique  of   im­ personal   reportage;  Mr.   Gustafson   has rightly   seen  that   it  has  in  fact   to  keep before  us  the  individual reacting  mind. The poems  in  this booklet  are  full  of in­ dignation,  but    eventually   they   centre  around  the  difficulty  of   responding  hu­ manely  to what  our cameramen bring  us; they   are   also   about   the   language  we apply   to  violence,  and   about   the  moral obligation  to be compassionate. But  com­ passion  before  the  bland  eye of television
 can  be an impertinence, and  as Mr. Gus­ tafson  says  in  the  last  lines  of   his  final poem, "The trouble  is there  is toojMuch death     for    compassion".    Furthermore, photographs of the suffering or dead  can become "A bunch/Of shots for a text".
Well,   Mr.   Gustafson  has   specialized
for  some  years  in  "shots  for  a  text", the conversion   of  mythic  and   historical  ma­ terial   to   sardonic  wit-Joan	of    Arc bums  like "any  haunch/ of meat  bought  by a  housewife/ in  the  marketstall", Sa­ vonarola  "set   himself   alight",  and   Ag­ amemnon home  from  the  wars,  "Silence, silence   beyond    that   door" -we   have them  all  in  the  Selected   Poems,  along­  side   the   assertion    that    "Grief's  love's origin". But  the  insouciant sophistication obviously has to give way here,  as he says in speaking  of the  deaths at  Kent  State:

Islip
From  parable, sarcastic with
Didactics 0 to  plain
Statement! These four  are  dead,

But  even  plain   statement  won't   wholly serve our  purpose,  as Mr.  Gustafson  goes on  to  reflect  in  the  third   section,  "And Still  These  Deaths Are  Ours", which   is an   examination  of   three   heartbreaking photographs from   East   Pakistan  of  the drowned, the  dying  and  the  suffering. At first  sight  they  seem  far   from   the  con­ densation  and   impersonality  of   myth­ the clean  evidence  of an  Icarus or  Mino­  taur-but  even  in  the  photographs the suffering  becomes half  present,  half myth­  ical,   our   response   more    dutiful  than  spontaneous. The  poet wants  to  hold  on to  the  real,  almost  as  expiation, but ... "a   bunch/ Of   shots   for   a   text.... We forget. Already  we have  forgotten."
To  go on  making  careful poems in  the face  of it  all  is perhaps to  hoist  a  draw­ bridge   of  aestheticism,  and   one   senses

REVIEW ARTICLES



that  Mr. Gustafson is unsure  whether to remain in control, or let go of his normal lapidary  style  in   the   interests   of   "sin­ cerity". He  can   still  be  inappropriately fussy,  annotating  a  pun  on  "mordent", but  one  hears  something  new  in  the  in­ dignation  at   the   pious   rhetoric  of  the Quebec revolutionaries:

Murderers and  advocates of murderers
As innocents
 Attend the  courts, Their  innocence
The virtuous mutilation
The   necessary   brains
spilled  on  the  ignorant street

While the booklet as a whole is perhaps something  less  than    a   success,   it   is  a valiant    attempt   on   difficult    material; one's final impression  is of a justifiable bewilderment before  the  awful  facts.



TERRITORIES ENCLOSED
BY SINGING
Germaine Warkentin

w.  H.  NEW,  Articulating West: Essays  on  Purpose  and  Form  in  Modern  Canadian
Literature. new  press.  $7.50.


IN INDIAN BELIEF, Anna Jameson  noted  in  I837,  the  West  is  the oldest  of the spirits  that  inhabit the card­ inal  points  of  the  compass;  indeed, he is the  father of  all  the  others.  The   newer peoples  of  North  America brought  with them  a different concept of "west". Built into  the  mystique  of European culture is the  idea  that  the  west embodies the  cha­ otic,  the  non-human, the  unarticulated. Spenser's  history  of Britain in Book II of The Faerie  Queene begins:
The land, which   warlike Britons  now  pos­
sesse,
And   therein  have   their  mightie empire raysd,
In  antique times  was  salvage wildernesse,
Unpeopled, unmanurd,  unprov'd, unpraysd.
(F.Q. II, x,  5)

Three  and   a  half   centuries  later,  con­ templating  the   massive   indifference  of one  of  the  great  Manitoba lakes,  Marg­ aret   Laurence's   Vanessa   McLeod  feels the  same  frisson:

86
 No  human word  could  be applied. The lake was   not   lonely   or   untamed.  These  words relate to  people,   and   there   was  nothing of people  here.  There was  no feeling about the place.   It existed   in   some   world    in   which man  was  not  yet  born.

Like  the  Amerindians, Western  Euro­ peans  (the  name  is full  of  paradox) spir­ itualized  their  directions.  As W. H.  New reminds   us  in  his  stimulating collection  of essays,  Articulating West, "the north  is the  region  of  the  intellect, the  south  of the  senses,  the  west  the  domain  of  the demons,  the  east  of  the  gods."  This  was not  a  static  situation, of  course.  Knowl­ edge  moved,  and  because  it  seemed  god­ like,  its  movement   was  always  from  east to west, out  of the eastern  seat of ancient wisdom  into  the  realm   of  the  demons,  conquering fear  and   turning chaos  into order,  so  that  what   before  was  non-hu­ man  became invested  with  our  lives and,  like  us,  became  articulate. And  the  pro­ cess   was   teleological;  its  aim   was  the

REVIEW ARTICLES



achievement of the perfectly  articulate community, where  men  created the  good state  as  they  realized  their  most  specific­ ally  human  endowment, the  use  of  lan­ guage.
Whether  in   the  classical   formulation
of   the   levels  of  style,  or   in   the   post­ Renaissance  sense  of   the   "purely   liter­ ary",   the  instrument  of  this   movement was always  the  idea  that  some  literature is more  appropriate than  others for artic­ ulating  this  purpose,   that  some  authors are  truly  masters,  that  there exists in fact a  "great  tradition"  which   is  central  to man's    effort   to   cultivate  himself.    Yet against  this struggles  the  power of "west"  itself.  Wallace Stevens'  intrepid  traveller

... studious of a self  possessing  him, That was  not  in  him  in  the  crusty   town From   which he  sailed.
As   he   moves   west,   the   centre    of   his reality  moves with  him,  and  he knows
The man   in  Georgia  walking  among  pines
Should  be  pine-spokesman.

And   then   of  course   there   is  the  dread reality   of  the   social   achievement   itself, the  bitter  colonial  struggle. George  Mac­ Donald Fraser's Flashman, charging into an  Afghan  citadel   (in  the east, of course, but  let  it  pass),  mutters  proudly  to him­  self  "To hell  with  these  blackamoors­ we are  Englishmen!"
New's  collection  of essays on  "purpose
and   form   in   modem  Canadian   litera­ ture"   takes  us  away  from   the  achieved  perfection of  the classical  dream  of "ter­ ritories  enclosed  by  singing" into  an  ex­ ploration  of  the  process  of  articulating the   new   land   itself.   Thus,  though  he seeks  the   shaping  myths   of   our   com­ munity's  self-knowledge,  his  models   are less in  Frye's  eternal   archetypes than   in Eliade's  profound  sense  of  the  force  of
 the   temporal.  And    his   task   is   made harder yet because  it  is shadowed by the contemporary  fear   that    words   are   no longer  merely  difficult,  but  impossible­ indeed,    by  a   pervading   vision   of   the whole  cosmos as "west".
The  essays collected  here first appeared in journals particularly concerned with literary   life  on   the   edge   of   the   great tradition:  Canadian Literature, The Journal of Commonwealth Literature, Poetry Australia, and others. The earliest (rg63)  is  on  W.  0. Mitchell;  most  of the others have been written since 1967. New's preoccupation is with the very contemporary;  though    there   are   essays on  Niven,  Pratt, and  Carol   Coates  Cas­ sidy, most of the  rest  are  on  writers  who are  still  on  the  scene  or,  like  Malcolm Lowry,  somehow  still  ahead  of  us. Since every  critic  is in  a  sense  shaped   by  the people he works on,  readers can  use these essays to sketch  New's  growth  as  a critic  from  his early essay on the transition from childhood   to  maturity  in  the   novels  of W.   0.  Mitchell,   through  his   work   on MacLennan, Laurence, Lowry,  Wilson, Richler,  Avison,  and   Godfrey.  And   we can  sense some of the areas  he has still to explore   in   the   absence    of   studies    of Grove, Leacock,  Callaghan, Davies,  and Atwood.    (There  is   some   attention   to French-Canadian literature, but  this is basically a book about English-Canadian writing,   and  no  guesses  are  hazarded  as to the relationships between  them.) The promise   that   this  growth is  in  store  for us is heralded in  the  splendid concluding essay on  Earle  Birney  as  "spiritual  geog­ rapher" which  attracted so much  atten­ tion  when  it  appeared in  the  Canadian Forum  last  fall,  and   was  in  fact   espec­ ially   written    for   this   book.   But    that  growth   is  still  to  take   place.   The  sum

REVIEW ARTICLES



effect  of  Articulating  West   is  of  a  div· ersity of matter only partially explicated, and  of a set of possibilities  searching for a critical method  to give them  authority.
The   essays  in   Articulating  West   are not   organized   chronologically. Rather, they   offer   us  three   ways  of  getting at what   is, despite   the  independent  nature of  each  piece,  a  central argument. The first way is through the essays themselves, in which  we can  study  New's critical strategies at  work.  Second, there  is a compact, highly  allusive  introduction which   begins   to   build   a  shape   out   of these  pieces.  Third, there   are  the  them· atic   sections   in   which   the   essays  have been  grouped,  and   which   have   an  im­ portant role  in  working out  the  signific­ ance  of  the  introduction.
In  the  earliest  stratum, the  individual
essays, New functions both  as scholar  and critic.  As scholar  he  courageously  begins his chapter on  Avison  with  an  early  un­ distinguished poem  that  startles one  into realizing  the extent of this  poet's growth. Elsewhere  he  reminds us of  Pratt's edit­  orials  in Canadian Poetry Magazine, and illuminates  the   meteorological  implica­ tions  of  the  title  Barometer  Rising. But as  a  critic,  he  is clearly   testing  his  own possibilities,  and  the  results,  while  defin-
 itely  thought-provoking, are   not  always even.   They   range    from    the   numbing seriousness   and    structural   disunity    of "Carol Coates Cassidy  and  the Form Dis­ pute"   (I97I),  through  a   patient   and earnestly  impersonal exegesis of the  nov­ els of Frederick Niven  (I g67), to a  truly sensitive and  knowledgeable discussion  of Lowry's 	October    Ferry	to    Gabriola, (I972), a  posthumous novel  by a writer  with  whom,  as  his  excellent   short   book on  Lowry  indicates, New  is  particularly sympathetic. In  general, New   is  most comfortable  in   an   impersonal  analytic mode;  even  his  most  sensitive  and  chal­ lenging  essays tend  to evade  the problem  of evaluation, or  to peter  out  in snobbish and   perfunctory  terminal   verdicts.   Yet his  impersonality  functioning at  its  best can  lead  to  truly  evaluative statements; behind  the tragic failure  of Return of the Sphinx, for  example, he  unerringly dis­ cerns   the   excellences   that    might   have made  it an  extraordinary  novel.
Paradoxically,    though    New     writes more  often  about   fiction,  his  critical method  seems primarily shaped by his experience of  poetry.  As the  title  of  the book  above  shows,  he  is fascinated with language, and  it  is  its  complex   nuances and  possible  ambiguities that   chiefly  in-







SEX&
DEATH
AI Purdy
 

"Behind me in the  mountain pass another man stumbles among  rocks and stars
he knows  about  me and  I   know about him we  plan to get  together sometime
then  have a word  with you"


McCLELLAND & STEWART I The Canadian Publishers
At Good Bookstores Everywhere $6.95 cl. $3.50 pa.



88

REVIEW ARTICLES



terest  him. Thus, despite  his stated  inter­ est   in   form,   he   tends   to   miscalculate effects   created  in   the   way   a   novel   is structured. His  treatment of   the  ending  of Ross's  As For Me  and My  House is a case  in  point; he  contends  that   its  am­ biguity   is  a   deliberately   created  effect, though   there   is  room  to  argue   that   the structure of  the  work  perhaps directs  us into  an  ambiguity  which   is  not  the  re­ sult of the  characters' confrontation with experience,  but  of  Ross's  own  technical problem  in  telling  us  about   it.  Another  instance  is  afforded by his early  reading  of  the  ending of  The   Apprenticeship of Duddy  Kravitz,  which  suggests  that   the novel  ends  in  a comic  triumph; reserva­ tions  in  a  couple   of  later   pieces  imply New  may  have  concluded that  this  end­ ing is a darker one  than  he had  thought. Moving   within    the   large   structure  of Pratt's poem  Towards  the  Last Spike,  he is never at  home;  his method  shines  with Birney  and  Avison,  where  language and form can both be controlled in a smaller space.
It is in the  terse,  almost  aphoristic introduction  he   has   recently    built   on these  diverse  elements   that   New  estab­ lishes  the  meaning he  has  found  in  the process  by  which   our   unknown   "west"  has  been  given  voice  and  language. Full of  tantalizing  brief   references   to  works not  treated   in  the  essays, it  attempts to weave  the  threads  of  modern Canadian literature into  a  single  fabric   that  inter­  prets  the  classical  problem   of  "articula­ tion".   His  argument   is  that    Canada's basic    regional     identities,   "east"   and "west",   are   tensely   opposed,    yet   only loosely  tied  to  their  geographical mean­  ings. But we persist in  trying  to use them as  if   they  signified  something exact.  In actuality, he writes,
 The physical realities represented by "East" and  "West" shift  as  the  ideas of "East" and "West" alter, and   the  interaction between knowledge and  imagination that affects  this process   of  change also   characterizes the method by which a  writer wrestles  life  into an  artistic form. To speak   the  language  of "West" is not  to  be  merely regional in  bias, therefore, but   to  articulate the  tension  be­ tween  order and  disorder, myth  and  reality, that   underlies Canadian  writing.

This  is a  huge  project. New  has  clearly taken  on not merely our  bedevilling myth of wilderness, with its psychic and social implications, but  the   raging dispute over  the  relationship of artistic form  and reality  as  well.  As he  gamely  admits  to­ wards  the  end  of his introduction,

The problem has  not  simply  been  one  of distinguishing between appearance and reality, or  between  life  and   form, but   also one of explaining the  compulsions of a wilderness  myth   without either defining it or  surrendering  to  it.

Courageous as this  stance  is, it  is a  lim­ ited  one,  and  its limitations emerge from the  stress  on  tension   and   ambiguity  in the  critical   method   of  individual essays, and   from   New's  related  hostility   to  the idea  of   "defining". "Perfect  order,"  he muses, "seems  alien  to  the  Canadian im­ agination, steeped  in  the  ambivalences of reality  and   the  limitations of  art." The attempt  to  rescue  language  and   create it anew thus takes place within a set of imaginative possibilities in which such a project  can  hardly  be envisioned.
New's  solution   is on  one  hand   to  re­
ject  naive  realism  with  its  contempt for the  visionary  element   in  art,  and  on  the other  hand  to repudiate just as firmly  the concentration on pure form  that  he feels leads to devitalized convention. For  New, the  poetry  is not  in  the  poem,  which  he sees as "history's artifact, already behind the poet, who has moved  on"; it is rather

REVIEW ARTICLES



in  the  process of  making  poems,  the  ex­ perience  of seeing and  creating that  new world.   He   distinguishes  in   the   modem period   two  stages  in  this  movement  to­ wards  process,  the  first  composed   of  the writers    from    Leacock   to   MacLennan, who   faced    the   elementary  problem   of how  to  develop  a  language of  art   that  could   articulate  "place" with  authority, and   second   the   writers   from   Klein   to Godfrey  who  take  up  the  exploration of language  itself,  in  the  process  transform­ ing  "the  frontier  from   a  physical   to  a metaphysical place" and  making  it  poss­ ible  to  explore  the  wilderness  within   us, as well as that  without. This  is very valu­ able,   for   New   is   identifying   a   crucial  phase in the development of any Western  literature:  the turning of what  begins  as mere  "place" into  a  country of  the  im­ agination, and  he points  to the  vital  role of  poetic   language  in  creating  that  de­ velopment.
Yet there  are  two difficulties  here. The
first relates  to the  question  of form.  New tries very hard  by focussing  on our  built­ in  duality  not  to  abolish  the  security  of "east".  But   by   distrusting   form,    and abandoning  the   poem    as   artifact,  he seems  to  cut   us  off  from   preserving   a continuous dialogue with "east", one  that  is vital  to  the  audience,  even  if  the  poet can  somehow  set it aside as he constantly gives new realization to his art.  Form  is a level  of  reality  in  itself,  full  of  its  own energy  and  history.  And  as a  member  of the audience, I  cannot leave  the  poem  as artifact   behind,  for  it  will  keep  on  re­ turning  to talk  to me,  whether I want  it to or  not. The audience too has its poem to  make, one  built  on  these artifacts, and held  communally.
On   the  second  question, that   of   pur­
pose,  New  is more  elusive  and  explora-

go
 tory,  and   the  reason  perhaps is  that   his real   argument  about    purpose    IS     con­ tained   less  in  the  introduction   than  in the  sections  into   which   the  book  is  or­ ganized.    At   the   beginning    are    those essays  (not   a  very  satisfactory  lot,  as  it turns  out)   which  attempt  to  deal   with the  creating of  a  language of  myth  out of such  diverse  elements  as Niven's  sense of exile or  Cassidy's  inadequate struggle  with  the  relationship between   form  and matter.  New's  view  is  that   when   these constituent  elements   of   psychic   experi­ ence  give  birth  to  the  created  work,  the process is fundamentally a  technical one: "the unbounded landscape becomes  what  it  is  by  the  way  it  is  made." The   next section   is  devoted    to   the   conflict   be­ tween  purpose  and  form,  to the  problem  of  ordering  this  reality   so  we  can   talk about  it,  and  the  ironies  that  seem to be the result. "Ending the Liberal  Pageant", which  follows, gathers a  set of essays es­ pecially concerned with problems  of a colonial society emerging not into  the revolutionary confidence which  New  de­ tects  in  Barometer   Rising,  but   into  the chaos  of   the  sixties,   the   "disappointed decade".
At   the   end   of  the   Liberal    pageant, New concludes, "the ironies are dark, the humour  is  brittle,   and   any  affirmations are    a   little    wistful    in    an    uncertain world."  "Developing the Textures of Language" takes  us  beyond  this  despair into  what  New hopes will be a fresh  way of locating  the world  through a  reinven­ tion of the poetic function so  radical  that  it  may  even  leave  the  "reality" of  the language    completely   behind.   What    is created   as a  result  New  in  the  final  sec­ tion   characterises   (in   a   phrase   drawn from   Birney)    as   a   "soundless fugue". The    image    is    terrifying:    profoundly

REVIEW ARTICLES



formal,  yet  somehow   with   the  despera­ tion of Munch's great  picture "The Cry".  In its light,  one  begins to conceive  of our evolving  tradition as  a  kind  of ectoplas­  mic  fabric  shivering  and   re-forming in the cold ether  of the modern cosmos with a ghost-like  tenacity of purpose,  yet with­  out  sound.   In  articulating our  west,  we have  arrived  not  at  the  timeless  creative dialogue  between   form  and   matter, but at  silence.
"My  work consists of two parts," wrote Wittgenstein  to  a  friend, "the   one   pre­ sented  here  plus all that  I have  not  writ­ ten."  It is in  the  final  section  of  Articu­  lating   West   that   New  goes   beyond   the limitations of his own  view, and  seems to suggest  the  shape  of a book  he has  yet to write.   Here    he   gathers,   whether  con­ sciously or  not,  the articles on  those  sem­ inal   masters   of   Canadian  literature  on whom    he   has   so  far   tested    himself:  Lowry,  Laurence,  Godfrey,   Avison,  and Birney.  Each   of  these  essays  seems  fo­ cussed  on  a different attempt to  find  an exit from  soundlessness:  in Birney's  sense of  spiritual  progression,   in  Lowry's   per­ fect  circle of the angelic  and  demonic, in Avison's  discovery  of  the  poet's  capacity to  celebrate, in  Godfrey's The  New  An­ cestors,  where  "the   end  of  the  visionary African  search   is  a  generative  commit­ ment  to  social  identity too."  New  recog­ nizes that  it is in the "historical anguish" of  this  confrontation  between   form   and purpose   that   art   is  created. But  as  the shape   he   had   given   to   his   own   book clearly  suggests, the result  is not  a sound­  less  "process"  that   leaves  the  reality   of language behind, but  something infinitely more  natural and  historic: the  dynamic
 creation  of  the   voice   of  a   community from  the  things  "made" by  the  poet  as he  works,  then  known  and   treasured  by those who  listen  to  him.
Surveying   under   New's   guidance  the
range  of these writers'  achievements, one at  length  senses a  possible  third stage  in the historical evolution he has described earlier.   For  these  are  the  writers   of  the future -though  one  of  them   has  been dead   for  sixteen   years -and   they   are involved in a task sketched out here, but somehow not yet recognized. They  have passed  beyond  our  preoccupation of  the past   twenty   years -exploring  the   text­ ures   of  language-and   taken   up   an­  other:  teaching us  how  to  use  it.  One  closes The  Stone  Angel  or The  New  An­ cestors  (one  profoundly  traditional, the other   revolutionary)   knowing that   after their   achievement, it  is  no  longer   poss­ ible  to  write  English-Canadian fiction  in the old way, that  in a dialogue with  these "artifacts",   one   has   been   brought  be­ yond   one's  limits,   and   set  free   on   the frontier of   art.   At  the  farthest  edge  of "west",  we  come  to  a  new  and   hopeful  relationship   with   "east",  and   the   walls of  the  garrison  fall  away  at  last.  That's worth  crossing  seas  to  find.  One   closes Articulating West  feeling  that  its interest arises in being able to lead us up to this frontier, but  that  in  his fixation  on  dual­ ity  and   ambiguity,  with   his  belief   that  poetry   can   no  longer   be   anything  but process, New has not  yet  perfectly  articu­ lated  the powerful  momentum of his own thesis.  Whether  he  is  the  Moses  of  our little exodus, or perhaps its Joshua, it will be exciting  to  see.

SURVIVAL OF THE FITTEST

Herbert Rosengarten


HAROLD HORWOOD,  White Eskimo:  a Novel  of Labrador. Doubleday.
JOHN  BUELL, The Shrewsdale  Exit.  Farrar, Straus  and  Giroux.
JOY  FIELDING,  The   Best  of Friends. Longmans.


MARGARET    ATWOOD's recent survey of Canadian literature has given fashionable prominence to the theme of survival, the grim struggle  man  wages against   the  vast  and  hostile  land  around him.  The instinct   to  survive   must  be  a strong   element   in  any   frontier  society; and  Harold Horwood's book White  Esk­ imo,  with   its  emphasis  on   the   physical hardships of life  in  the  remote  ice-lands  of  Labrador,  fits  neatly   into   the   cate­ gory  distinguished  by  Ms.  Atwood. The  novel's  central figure   is  a  white   adven­ turer   called   Esau  Gillingham,  who  ap­  pears  to  the  Eskimos   to  be  gifted   with magical  powers  because  of  his  skill as  a hunter   and   trapper.  He   lives  with   the Eskimos,  takes  one  of  their  daughters  as his  wife,  and  seeks  to  revive  their  pride in their ancient heritage. But his dreams crumble  when   Abel,  his  Eskimo  "song­ brother," is shot, in circumstances strong­  ly pointing to Gillingham  himself  as  the murderer;  and   he  is  charged  with   the killing. On  his release from  prison,  he re­ turns  to  Labrador,  renews  his epic  hunt­ ing   expeditions,   and    eventually  disap­  pears  on  a   journey   to  the  Land of  the Dividing of   the  Waters, an  almost   un­ chartered  region  in  the  interior.
As  a  narrative  of  action  and   adven­ ture,    White   Eskimo   is   excellent;  Mr.  Horwood can  spin  a  good  yarn,  and  his descriptions    of    dangerous   journeys through a  hard  land   are   dramatic  and
 convincing. But   the  author  is  not  con­ tent  to present  merely  a good  story;  like Conrad, whose  presence  hovers  over  this book   (and   who   is  once   mentioned  by name) , Mr. Horwood wants  to make  his tale  serve  deeper   purposes.   He  gives  it the  quality  of  myth   by  associating  his hero   with   Gilgamesh,  god-hero  of   the ancient  Assyrian  epic;   the  preface  ack­ knowledges   the   author's  debt   "to   the scholars   who  first  deciphered  the  Sum­ erian  cuneiform"; and  in case  the reader  should   miss  the  parallel,  the  characters who narrate Gillingham's history make an explicit  comparison. The  reader  may feel that   the  author's  signals  here  are  some­ what   heavy-handed,  and  not  altogether necessary;  for  it  is  obvious  enough   from the narrative that Gillingham is intended to appear as a  god-like  figure,  whose vis­ ions   are   not   imaginary,  whose   mystic powers will enable  him  to lead  his chosen people  to  a  new  greatness. The   Eskimos regard  him as the  White  Spirit,  endowed  with  immortality and  supernatural pow­ ers;  and   by  the   end   of  the   book,   the reader is meant  to feel that  such  worship is not  misplaced. But  Gillingham's  char­ acter  is an  uncomfortable mixture of no­ bility and  brashness,  the  mighty  and  the mundane; and   his  heroic  image  is  not enhanced by such expressions of his views as   his   contemptuous  dismissal   of   the "white  racist  government in  St.  John's," or his denunciation of Robert  Browning:

REVIEW ARTICLES



"Stick  a braggart like Browning  down  in the  hills  above   Okak   Bay  and   he'd   be dead  by  sunset." Though  Gillingham speaks   at  other   times  with   a  more  ap­ propriate elevation, one can't help feeling that   this  idol  has  feet  of  clay;  and   the author's  attempts  to  give  Gillingham  a spiritual  dimension make  his  character's aspirations  seem  pretentious rather  than  divine.
As  if  the  stone   tablets   of  Gilgamesh were   not   enough    to   weigh   the   story down,  the  author intersperses passages of historical explanation  or  social  criticism, on   such   subjects    as   the   contribution made  by  the  Hudson's Bay Company to the  opening-up of  the  land,   the  impact of   the   missions   on   native   life,   or   the power-seeking by a few individuals under the  veil  of  philanthropy. Such   passages are  presented in  the context  of  conversa­ tions   between   the   characters;  but   they are   usually   sensed   as  intrusions,  as  ex­ pressions   of   authorial  opinion  and   ex­ perience,  rather than   as  ideas  emerging  from  the  action  itself.  It  is  part   of  Mr. Horwood's  purpose   to  show  the  deleter­ ious effect of white  law and  religion  upon the   once-rich  life  of   the   Eskimo;    and where   this   cannot   be   dramatized,  it  is simply  stated. That  Mr.  Horwood  loves Labrador  and   its   people,   and   is  con­ cerned   for   their  survival, is  evident   on every   page;  but   in   his   zeal   to   argue  their  case,  his  novel  sometimes   becomes a  tract, the  story  giving  way  to  polemic.
John    Buell's   novel   The   Shrewsdale
Exit involves  survival  too, but  at  a grim­ mer  level,  for  the  forces  to  be  overcome  here  are  within  men  themselves, and  the obstacles  more daunting than  the hazards  of an  Arctic winter. In  a cool, almost  re­ portorial   style,   Mr.   Buell   recounts    the attack by  a  motorcycle gang  on  a  vaca-
 tioning  family,  in  which   the  husband is beaten    unconscious,    and   his   wife   and daughter are  raped   and  brutally  slaugh­ tered.  Joe  Grant seeks  vengeance: when the   police  investigation  falters   for   lack of   evidence,   he   takes   matters  into   his own  hands,   hunts   down   the  murderers, and  tries  to shoot  them.  The judge  who sends  him   to  prison   draws   the  obvious moral:  the  law  exists  "to   maintain   in society  an  order   whereby   such  penalties as  befit  crimes  will  be  imposed   by  law and   not  by  individuals,  however  justifi­ ably  angry." But Joe  is  unconvinced: he escapes   from   prison,   goes  into   hiding,  and  waits  his opportunity to strike  again.
The  dilemma presented here  is a fam­
iliar  one,  though  at  first sight  it seems  to admit  of a quick  solution. The  reader's sympathies are  all  with  Joe: his  life  has no  purpose   without  his  family,  and   the only  meaningful course  left  open  to  him, the  only  way  of  asserting   his  very  exist­ ence,  seems  to  be  to  punish  those  who were  guilty  of  the  crime.  But  Mr.  Buell does  not  allow  us to  be  blinded  by emo­ tional  logic;  for  he  shows  how,  in  pur­  suing  the  killers,  Joe becomes  as  brutal, calculating and  inhuman as they  are.  To recover  his  humanity, Joe  must  come  to terms  with  life,  and   recognize   the   laws which  govern natural  process  as  welL as personal   relationships;  and   in   the   last part  of  the  novel  he  takes  the  "Shrews­ dale  exit,"  a road  leading away from  the main   highway    to   a   rural   community, where  he lives for some weeks as a farm­ hand. He  still  plans  revenge; but  imper­ ceptibly    he   is   changing.   Finally    Joe learns  that  one of the  killers  is dead,  the others  close  to  arrest   by  the  police : the urge  for  vengeance  dies, and  he  is ready to pick up  his life again.
This  is an  interesting and  provocative


93

REVIEW ARTICLES



novel, working  at  the level of moral  fable as  well  as  of  action   and   suspense.  The author's  intention  is  to  take   us  beyond the external manifestations of violence  to the  effects  of such  violence  upon  an  or­ dinary, "decent" member of society,  who becomes   tainted  by   the   very   evil   he wishes  to  destroy-not  a   new   theme,  certainly, but  handled here  with  subtlety and   understatement. The   emphasis   on the  healing  powers  of  nature  may,  how­ ever,  seem  an  oversimplification  of  the issues  raised   by   Joe's    experience;  one might  ask, for  instance, whether his urge for  revenge would  have  disappeared as it did,  had  the  murderers of  his  wife  and  child   remained  indefinitely  beyond   the grasp of the law. In  the final analysis Joe survives   only   by   accepting  the   system
 which,  for  a  time,  had  turned  him  into a  cold-blooded killer  and  a  convict; but Mr.   Buell  does  not   ask  us  to  consider whether Joe's  acceptance is a  fair   price to pay  for  survival.
A  nature cure  might   well  be  the  an­ swer   to  the   heroine's  problems   in   Joy Fielding's  book  The   Best  of   Friends,  if only  to rescue  her  from  the  hothouse at­  mosphere of the  bedroom. Caroline Bea­ con   is  a   neurotic   young   woman    who takes  refuge  from   a  disastrous marriage in  a  dependent  relationship with  Cathy, a dynamic and  successful girl  whose self­ confidence  is  reassuring to  the  somewhat timid   Caroline. Caroline's  story   is  told through a mixture of flashbacks,  interior monologues,  and  conversations with her psychiatrist; and   as  the  tale  of  her  hu-






In association with Canadian Literature
the University  of British Columbia  Press
publishes  the  Canadian Literature series of reprints and  original  essays

WYNDHAM    LEWIS IN  CANADA
Edited  by George Woodcock, Introduction by Julian Symons
110 pages 	paper  cover $4.00
"Wyndham Lewis in Canada is a fascinating volume ... In  its hundred and  ten  pages,  the  editor has  assembled  a  range  of writing  which  not only  gives  a  satisfying  sense of 'covering' Lewis's stay in  Canada from late 1940 to 1945, but also shows consistent  good taste and  intelligence." Rowland Smith  in The  Dalhousie  Review.
DRAMATISTS   IN  CANADA
Edited  by William H. New
212 pages 	paper  cover $5.50
MALCOLM   LOWRY:  THE  MAN AND HIS  WORK
Edited  by George Woodcock
184 pages 	paper  cover $4.50
THE SIXTIES: Canadian Writers and Writing of the Decade
Edited  by George Woodcock
138 pages 	paper  cover $3.50



94

REVIEW ARTICLES



miliations  in   marriage  and   the   subse­ quent  friendship with  Cathy  unfolds,  it emerges  that  Cathy  is a creature of Caro­  line's   imagination,   invented  to   remove her  sense  of  guilt  and  failure about   her sexual  life  in  general  and  an  abortion in particular.  Miss Fielding has  constructed a  neat  little  story;  and   with  a  technical skill  that is praiseworthy in  a first  novel, she   manages    to   hold    back   the   truth about  Caroline's mental  state   until   late in the  plot  (though when  the  psychiatrist does  pierce  the mystery,  he has  the air of a  magician producing a  rabbit from  his hat).
Miss  Fielding's  intention  is  evidently
to  show  how  conventional  social   press­ ures  can  inhibit or  pervert   our  sense  of ourselves:  Caroline  is  driven  into   mar­  riage  because of an  unwanted  pregnancy, then   into   a  psychotic   state  because  she cannot  shoulder the  burden  of  guilt  as­ sociated  with abortion. But while  the  psy­ chological basis of  the  action  is convinc­  ing  enough, it  does  not  save  the   novel
 from  the  charge  of superficiality, for  the serious  questions  raised  by Caroline's  ex­ perience  are  dealt   with  rather  perfunct­ orily,  while   the   author   spends   a  great  deal  of  time  regaling  us  with  Caroline's sexual  experiences,   oral,  anal,   and   mis­ cellaneous.  Swear-words  and  sexual  ath­ letics  are   undoubtedly  a  means   of  de­ fining   character,  but   here    the   means  sometimes   becomes   the   end;  Caroline's character remains  as  imperfectly-realised and   two-dimensional   as  the   caricatures of  her   nice,  middle-class  family   or  her brutal,  selfish   husband. This  is  not   to deny  the  book  a  degree  of  realism  in  its depiction of human relationships: people do treat each  other as objects, to be used for  personal  satisfaction; and  survival  at this  level  is  as  tough   as  anything Mr. Horwood's Eskimo  trappers have  to face. But  one  cannot   help  feeling  that  a good blast  of  Arctic   air   would   do  more  for Caroline than all  her  visits to  the psychiatrist.




BEHIND THE AVANT GARDE

Anthony Appen:::,ell


MATTHEW  EDEN,  Conquest before  Autumn. Longmans  Canada.  $7·75·
JIM  WILLER, Paramind. McClelland  & Stewart.  $7.75.
WAYLAND DREW,   The Wabeno Feast.  Anansi. $7·95·
THOMAS  YORK,  We, the  Wilderness. McGraw  Hiii-Ryerson.  $6.g5.
KENT THOMPSON,  The Tenants were  Corrie  and  Tennie.  Macmillan. $6.95.


FIVE NOVELS  picked  out  of a recent  season-all  by Canadians, all but one   set   in   Canada,  and    all   but   one written  in  what   one  can  only  call  Ex­ perimentalesque. That  is to say,  they dis­ locate   time   sequences,   mingle   the   fan-
 tastic  and  the  realistic,  and  bleed  actual­ ity  into   illusion,   as  the  fictional   mode now   expects;   there   is   little   manipula­ tion  of  language, and  it  is  obvious  that
-if the  writers   have   read   their   Joyce
-they have   recognized   his  route   as  a


95

REVIEW ARTICLES



one-way,  one-time street.  There is  noth­ ing  in  them,  in formal  terms,  so  novel as the  fiction  which   Anansi  published  two or  three  years back  during  the  brief  life­ time  of Spiderline  editions; these  are  the second  rank  of  the  movement, willing  to occupy   the   ground  won   by  the   avant garde  but  not to  take  avant  garde risks.
In  the  same  way,  the  ideas  these  writ­ ers  express   are   not   especially   original; they   are   concerned  with   such   topical  matters as  the  perils  of  computerization, as the  threat of  pollution  and  the  waste­ ful  use of  resources,  as  the  alienation of modern  man,   as  the   Indian  seen   as  a sacrificial and sacrificed priest  of life according to nature.
Only  one  of  the  five  novels  does  not make  use of any  of these favourite topics of  Canadian writers   in  the  1970s.  It  is the   least   well   written   and    the    least mentally provocative: Conquest before Autumn  by  Matthew  Eden.  I   mention it  partly   because   it  belongs   to  a  genre rarely attempted by Canadians-the thriller-and  partly   because   it  displays a political  naivete  which  Canadians once possessed to a high degree, but which one hopes  is no  longer  typical.  Conquest  be­ fore Autumn in fact  develops  a cold  war plot    of   a   former   American    minister  (with   secrets)    kidnapped  by   the   Rus­  sians;   the  problem   is  solved  when   CIA  men    (yes,   Mr.    Eden    can   still   make heroes  of them!)  retaliate by  kidnapping a   Russian    minister    and   negotiating  a barter. Mr.  Eden   is  Canadian born  and lives in Montreal; these  days  it  is rare  to encounter a  Canadian writer who  ident­ ifies   himself   so   closely  with   American attitudes. But  there  is no  need  to labour the nationalist point; Conquest before Autumn is a dull  thriller even  in  its own

g6
 terms,  pedestrian in  pace  and  all-too-ob­ vious in denouement. My view  that  there are  no good Canadian  thriller writers  re­ mains   unshaken;  we  are   neither as  ac­ tively   experienced   in   violence   as  the Americans  nor   as   ritually  involved   in conspiracy  and  murder as  the  British.
Paramind   is  also  an  unusual kind  of novel for a Canadian to write; unlike Conquest  before  Autumn, it is a good example   of  its  genre,   which   is  science­ fiction-cum-dystopia. Though  there  have been  quite   a  number  of   actual experi­  mental  Utopian colonies on Canadian soil, we   have -as    George    Woodcock     re­ marked   in  The   Rejection  of  Politics­ been  singularly  unproductive in  literary  utopias    or   anti-utopias;  de   Mille's    A Strange  Manuscript  found  in  a  Copper  Cylinder  remains   virtually  alone   unless, as  Woodcock does, one finds a disguised utopianism  the  most  significant element in  the  work  of  Marshall McLuhan.
Jim  Willer,  the  sculptor author of Paramind, has  obviously  read  McLuhan with  attention; he  has  equally  obviously, as a  contemporary artist, listened  to  the unthinking enthusiasm with  which  the devotees  of  intermedial  art   have  talked of  modern electronic  developments; he has considered  these  matters with  alarm, and  he has  produced a  novel,  set largely in  his  own  Vancouver in  the  21st  cen­ tury, which chronicles the   eventual triumph of  the  Machine over  Man.
It  is not  a  new  theme  or  a  new  kind
of plot, and  most of the basic ideas Willer advances   can  be  found   in  one  shape  or another in classic anti-Utopian  writings, such  as  Forster's "The  Machine Stops", Zamiatin's We, Huxley's Brave  New World  and  Orwell's 1984. Willer  has ob­ viously read so widely -he is very adept

REVIEW ARTICLES



in the language of modern science and pseudo-science-that one cannot doubt these  works  were  among his models.  In­ deed,  as well as sharing with  them  in  the general  attack on  the  increasing  penetra­ tion  by  political   and   economic  corpora­ tions  into   human   privacy,  and   on   the consequent   development   of    means    to condition  thought  and   adapt  men   to follow   the   will  of  the  state,   Paramind echoes  specific  elements  of  these  novels. Like the people of "The Machine Stops",  the majority of the population of Willer's New  World  has  already become  depend­ ent  on  a  managed environment which  is virtually  a  great   machine. As  in  Brave New  World   and   1g84-and  in  Wells's A  Modern   Utopia- this  population  is divided   into   castes  of  rulers  and   ruled, in  Paramind's  case  the  Frogs,  who  form the  technocratic managing caste,  and  the Sensates,   who,  like  the   proles  in  1984, are allowed  to follow their own life of controlled   leisure;    as   in   Brave   New World   pleasure  -derived   largely   from sex and  drugs-is  an  important element in disciplining the  population, and  neur­ ological   adjustments  rather   than   pain are  used  to  eliminate the  inclination  to rebel.
I   note   these  echoes   merely   to  show how firmly  Willer  participates in his  tra­ dition  and  is aware  of  it; he  restates  in terms    of    the    seventies    the    problems which   the   earlier   dystopians   stated   in terms  of  their  particular  decades,  and  in this   kind   of  cautionary   task   repetition and   revision   are  both  necessary.  Willer fulfils  the  role of  reviser  with  wit  and  a good  deal  of  natural  eloquence, so  that  his  book  is  freshly  inventive   in  descrip­  tive  detail  as  well  as  up-to-date in  pro­ viding a  perspective related  to that  of the
 science  fictioneers  who  in  recent  decades have  tended   to move  into  dystopian  ter­ ritory.  The   climax   of  Paramind  in  fact owes  more  to  a  strain   of  science  fiction stemming  from   Karel  Capek   than  to such  essentially   political   books  as  1984. Basing  his  conclusion   on  an   intelligent development  of   the   text-"Wherever Matter is, you will find  Mind  -latent or manifest"-Willer  shows  Computer  27 transforming itself   into   Paramind,  cap­  able  of  a  level  of   independent  thought higher   than   that  of   man.   Paramind,  as all  novels  of  warning must   be,  is  pessi­ mistic   in   its   denouement;  Kasgar,  the creator of   C.27,   realizes  its  powers   too late,  and   is  killed   by  his  own   creation before  he  can   destroy   it.  Like   Forster, Zamiatin,  Huxley,   Orwell, all  the  great  dystopians,   Willer   gives  us  no  fictional  hope;  his  intent   is  clearly   didactic  and magical -to enact  the  tragedy  symbolic­ ally  in  the  hope  that   thus  men  may  be led  to avoid  it.
A  similar   didactic  motive   partly   in­ spires   Wayland Drew's  The    Wabeno Feast. Drew  has  already written  a  great  deal  journalistically on  the  threats  posed by  technological   development  and   hu­  man  greed  to the environment and  hence  to  man  himself.  The  Wabeno  Feast is a restatement   in   quasi-mythical  form   of these  arguments.  It is in  part   a  futurist novel,  but  more  emphatically than Para­ mind it shapes links between  past,  present  and   future.  Drew,   like  Orwell, sees  no need  to  evoke  a  nightmare of  domina­ tion  by  irresponsible scientists  and   para­ human   machines;  he   believes   we   will never  get  as far  as that,  since  the  break­ down of technological civilization long before it reaches its theoretical peak is inevitable  owing   to   the   proximate   ex­ haustion of  world  resources.

97

REVIEW ARTICLES



Essentially, Drew  sees modern man as faced  with  a  dilemma which  up  to  now he  has  not  solved  and   which  indeed   he may be incapable of solving.  It lies in the division  that  has  existed  in  the  minds  of men  since classical  times  between  Nature and   Reason.    To   live   only   by   Reason leads   to  the   technological  hell;   to  live only  by Nature presupposes a  resolute refusal  of  anything  but   the   basic  tech­ niques  of a man  working  with  his  hands  and   the  natural  materials that  are  im­ mediately available.  Even   the  desire  to find  a  middle   way  may  be  seen  as  per­ verse, for,  as the  Indian  chief  is made  to say in  the  interpolated  diary  of an eight­ eenth  century  fur  trader, "If a man  were sane,  he  would  have   no  need  to  recon­ cile  these  two!"
The  wabeno  feast  of the title  is a cere­ mony  of  destruction and   self-mortifica­ tion  performed by a  sect  of  Indian sha­  mans  whom  McKay,  the  fur  trader, en­ counters  on   his   journey   into   the   pays d' en  haut.  The  evil  celebrations of  this cult   seem   to   spring   from   a   collective madness  like  that  which  Drew  sees afflict­ ing  modern  man  and  leading out  of  the careless  world  of  mid-twentieth  century  boyhood  in  which  the  leading characters begin, into  the  twilight  where  power  fail­ ures, failures  of supplies,  social  disorders,  all  presage   the  doom   of  civilization, as men  flee  into   the  cities  and   out  again, and  only one  man  and  his woman  return to  the  wilderness  that   can  regenerate  it­ self  and   them.   The   dislocation  of   our world  is  mirrored  in  the  dislocation  of the  novel,  moving  erratically-within  a general  drift  towards destruction -from time   to   time    and    from   character  to character.
Books like Paramind  and  The  Wabeno
Feast  demonstrate  that   the   social   pre-

g8
 occupations of modem writers,  while as insistent  as they ever  were in  the  thirties, are less politically sectarian and  also less constrained  to  a  quasi-realistic pattern than   the  fiction  produced in  the  period when  rebellion  was dominated by  Marx­ ist  ideologies  and   was  expected   to  find its  expression  through that  bastard style known  as Socialist  Realism. Undoubtedly concern   for  the  Indian  peoples  of  Can­ ada,   divided   from   a  significant   past  of their   own,  unable   to  shift   their   minds  completely  into  the white  man's world,  is one of the dominant elements  in Thomas Yorke's  gauchely   titled  We, the  Wilder­ ness. Essentially,  this  is the  story  of  the twentieth century consequences of   nine­ teenth   century   attempts to  reshape In­ dians  into  Victorian  Anglicans. The  vill­ age  where  the  novel  is set was converted by  a  missionary  whose  story,  is  not  his character, closely resembles  that  of the celebrated  William   Duncan  of   Metlak­ atla,  and  what  we see, through  the  eyes of the  present  Indian  inhabitants  and  of the  white  doctor  who  is the  old  mission­ ary's  son,  is the  way  in  which  what  the Victorians   considered   the   gift   of   life eternal has in fact  been  a gift  of mortal­ ity,  the  succession  of suicides  paralleling the  death in  life,  the  sheer  accidie,  that  is  the fate  of a  people  whose  communal existence  has lost its wholeness  and  hence its  meaning.
We, the Wilderness, is a  novel of min­
or but  genuine  merit; Thomas Yorke shows a lyrical sensibility and a sense of mythopoeic power  which  one  would  like to see developing.
Minor   but  genuine  merit   would  also seem  to  characterize  Kent   Thompson's The   Tenants   were  Corrie  and  Tennie. Here the social elements are peripheral, centred   mainly   on   Canadian-American

REVIEW ARTICLES



love-hatred, and  this fragile  tale of a schoolmaster's moral  collapse  when  he buys a duplex and becomes a landlord emotionally involved  with  his  tenants, is mainly  interesting as a  wry  and  at  times
 very   amusing  fantasy  on   the   ways   in which  an  attempt to retreat from  the ob­ ligations  of the  real  world  can  merely en­ mesh  one  in  the  equally  confining webs of illusion.




































ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
ffi	'Whors 5o [3jg	Earle :·!can't helfeeling s_ort of proud

ffi	Abouf
 8.rn 	IIs We who ve done II

ro	GREEN?
 
an irerevoergrsainbilce dreeaacthtioant last

I ey done it all in four generations
mad
ffi	& finished the Original Plan 	ffi

ffi
 •	before 1984"	ffi
What's  So Big About  GREEN 7	ffi

ffi	McCLELLAND & STEWART I The Canadian Publishers 	ffi
ffi·	At Good Bookstores Everywhere S3.50 pa. 	ffi
ffiffiffiffiffiffi ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi

99

BOOKS IN REVIEW









TELEGRAMS AND ANGER


BRIAN   MOORE,   Catholics.   McClelland   and
Stewart.  $4·95·
HUGH  HOOD, You  Cant  Get  There From Here.
Oberon.  $3·95·

0NE IS  INSTINCTIVELY HOPEFUL  that political    novels   will   be   revealing. The fact  that  they discuss  public  issues entails an  immediate expectation of significance or  profundity. Yet  for  all  this  superficial promise,  there  are  remarkably  few  politi­ cal  novels  which   can  in  fact  make  any claim  to profundity. Without imaginative genius  their  impact normally  depends on recognition or  identification.  The reader  either  sees the  analogy  between   fictional and  real  events  or else  recognizes  that  in the   workings    of   the   novel   the   inner  mechanism of  political  institutions is be­ ing revealed  by one who  really  knows. In the  best  political  fiction,  however,   there is paradoxically little  interest  in the work­ ing  of   political  institutions  per  se.  The  nature   of  authority,  the   faithful  inter­ locking of public  and  private worlds,  the hollowness  at the core of the theoretician, these classic themes  derive  their imagina­ tive  hold  on  a  reader   from   the  clarity and   perception  with   which   the   private  world  is presented. In  works  as varied  as Shakespeare's history  plays  and  Conrad's novels, it is the wholeness with  which  the


100
 characters have  been  created that  condi­ tions  our  understanding of  the  political issues in which  they are  publicly  trapped. Even   Orwell's  political   fiction  is  at  its best  when   he  himself   or  his  persona   is described  reacting to  the situation which is his ostensible  subject.
Brian   Moore's   new   novel,   Catholics, and  Hugh   Hood's  You Cant  Get  There From  Here  do  not  transcend  the  realm of  their   public  concerns. Their  interest lies in their  credibility; the accuracy with which   their  events  evoke  the  world  we know  now  or  are  likely  to  know  in  the future. The detail   in  their   created  set­ tings is lifeless;  the  characters  exemplary  rather than  living.
Catholics  is set in  the  future-at  the end of the  twentieth century. A Catholic priest from  an order  firmly  established  in the  ecumenical  movement  is  dispatched as   Plenipotentiary   to   a   remote    island abbey off the Irish coast. His task is to persuade the Abbot  and  monks to cease saying the old Latin  mass. The  revival  of the old custom has been the subject of a television documentary, and  has caused herds  of  pilgrims  to stampede each  week to the  "Mass  rock"  on  the  mainland  op­ posite  the  island.  The ecumenical  move­ ment   (with  its  headquarters in  Amster­ dam)    is  likely  to  be   distressed   at   the resurgence    of    sectarian   customs    at   a moment    when   an   apertura   with   Bud­ dhism  is  imminent.
His setting  gives  the  author ample op­ portunity to develop  the irony implicit in "advanced" religious views: the "correct" attitude towards  the  mass  is  that  it  is a symbolic   act   alone;  God   is  not   really present; the  miraculous  element   of faith is  removed.   The   Plenipotentiary  meets sullen opposition from  the isolated  monks who  see  their  rituals   as  essential   to  the

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



mystery   of  their   faith. The   Abbot   is  a prelatus nullius  (nobody's priest); he can ignore  the  advice  of  his  provincial. It  is for   this  reason   that   the  Plenipotentiary has to visit the abbey. After a night of skirmishing  with    the    Abbot    and    his simple-minded monks, the Plenipotentiary departs with  the  Abbot's   assurance that the old heretical practices will cease. The irony  of  the  Abbot's  rights  as  a  prelatus nullius  are  the  centre  of attention,  how­ ever.  He  himself  has  ceased  to  hold  the absolute  faith   which  the  old  rituals   pre­ suppose.  It is an  empty, symbolic  act  (in keeping   with   the  blandness   of  the  new creed)   that  he  accepts  the  directive and persuades  his  flock  to  obey.  He  cannot, however,   pray  with   conviction.  God   is not  in  the  tabernacle.
Brian   Moore's   narrative moves  firmly
and  quickly.  There are  graphic  descrip­ tions  of frugal  life on  the island.  But  the book  is  really  too  slight  to provoke  one into  caring. Its  message-that faith  de­ pends  on  mystery  and  ritual  -is  hardly  worth  its  one  hundred and  seven  pages. The reader certainly gets little  more  than  a sardonic preview,  presented for its own sake,  of  the   demystification  of   Christi­ anity.
You   Cant   Get   There  From   Here   is more exotic and  less lightly woven. The setting  is Leofrica, an imaginary state granted  independence from   United  Na­ tions  trusteeship in  the  opening  chapter. The country's only  export is  ground-nut oil,  processed   in  an  American  refinery. The provisional President/Prime Minister is Anthony  Jedeb, son  of  a  local  tribes­ man  turned  trader, and  the  only  Leofri­  can  to  hold  a  graduate degree   (an  Am­ erican   M.Agr.Sc.).
The  country lurches  from  empty  inde­
pendence into  chaos.  Its  two  tribes  grow
 increasingly  distrustful of each  other. Its new paper  currency does not even  attract pilfering  from  the  dockers  unloading the first  issue.  While   the  American  Ambas­ sador   and   Soviet   Trade   Commissioner compete  to   provide   services   and   offer favours,  the secret  agents  of their  respec­ tive  countries  see  to  it  that   relations are ruptured, each  hoping to land   the  other  with   the   unenviable  task   of   being   big brother to Leofrica. The American agent  (Jedeb's  private secretary)  burns   down the  American refinery;  the  Soviet  agent
(the  woman  whom  Jedeb  loves  and  ele­
vates to the cabinet) has the Russian cartographic expedition killed  by  tribes­ men.   The    reward    of   the   superpower double-dealing is  that   they  leave  China holding  the  baby. Through  the  machina­ tions  of  the  Albanian  representative, the inland   tribe  declares  itself  an   indepen­ dent  republic  under  the  imaginary lead­  ership   of  a   murdered  cabinet  minister  and  the real  leadership of the  police  offi­ cer  who  murdered  him.   While   Chinese jets  from   the  secessionist   republic  buzz the  town, Jedeb  attempts to escape  from his  riot-torn capital, but  is gunned down by  his  ex-fiancee's   agents   as  he  tries  to swim  the  border  river.
Apart   from   the   recurring  motif   that power  politics  are  dirty,  there  is little  to hold   the   book   together.  Some   readers have seen an analogy between intertribal jealousies in Leofrica and  the hostility between French and  English  in Canada. There is  little  reason,   however,   to  read the  novel  as  a  Canadian  parable;  and even less illumination if one does. No character emerges  from  the  tableau with life or vigour. The  reader's sympathies cannot  be formulated, let  alone  engaged. For  all  Hood's  wealth  of  journalistic  de­ tail,  the  country   and   its  people  remain


101

BOOKS IN REVffiW



two-dimensional, described at  length, but without any imaginative life of their own. The  twists  of  the   plot   are   unexpected and  far  from  tedious.  Aside  from  exces­ sive explanations of  the  history  and  cul­ ture  of the  region,  the  narrative  is enter­ taining. But  political  revelation is not  at hand. The reader  is in no danger of hav­ ing  his  prejudices  challenged on  the  via­ bility  of  emerging  states,  the  fatuity of a two-nation concept, the cynicism of the superpowers,  or   the   wickedness   of   the world.
ROWLAND SMITH



POISONED   BY THE SYSTEM

JOHN   METCALF, Going   Down  Slow.  McC!el­
land  and  Stewart.  $5-95·

METCALFE'S   FIRST  NOVEL is a free-swing­ ing  and  very funny  attack  on  the  Estab­  lishment. The  target   is  The  System,  not simply  the  Montreal  high  school  system but   the  whole   North   American  credo: athletics  and   sports  cars   are  important but  art   isn't;  conformity  and   hypocrisy will  be  rewarded; and  what  matters can be  put  on  a  Kardex file. The   treatment is comic  but  the  humour is black,  and  at times  as  bitter   as  the   bile  that   teacher David  Appleby  retches  up  at  the  novel's end.
Appleby  (advance oneself  by giving  an
apple  to  the  teacher?)  is  a  young  Eng­ lishman   just  over  from   Britain, a  new­ comer   to  the   teaching  game.   A  latter­ day  Quixote, he  thinks  he  can  vanquish prejudice,  prudery  and   pettiness  single­ handed. He does get in quite  a few blows

I02
 and   succeeds   in  making  his  antagonist look thoroughly ridiculous. It's  a  Pyrrhic victory,  for  The   System  defeats   him  in the end.
Metcalf  is already known  for  his short
fiction.  The   Lady  Who   Sold  Furniture, a collection  of short  stories, was published in  I970,  and  his fiction  has  appeared in periodicals and  anthologies. Several  of these short  pieces have  classroom  settings and   themes  which  anticipate  this  novel. They  depict  a  system  that  tends  to  bru­ talize  teacher  and  student alike,  a system penalizing  the   imaginative and   forcing  the   independent  spirit   to   conform.  In Going Down Slow, David's fellow teacher  Jim  is willing to play by the rules of those in  power.  Jim  goes in  for  guidance, ad­  ministration, and higher degrees. He ends with   a   fat   OISE   grant  and   a   white Galaxy  500 with red upholstery. David,  a born loser, gets to retain  his hated  job, at the  cost  of  betraying his  girl  and  sacri­  ficing   both   his   freedom    and   his   self­ respect.   In  capitulating  to  The   System, it's downhill  all  the way. David, like The System, is going down  slow, and  the  pro­ cess isn't  always pretty  to watch.
Genuine satire  has a coral  base, and Metcalf   is  a  moralist,  an   idealist-cum­ cynic, although that  seems  like  a strange  combination. Not for him  the serious and sentimental diatribe  against the  attitudes represented by principal McPhee and  the city  Board.  David's  little   jokes  include  the  invention of a non-existent historical journal,  the O.N.Q. (Oxford Notes and Queries).  The    principal   swallows   the bait,  hooked  by the word  "Oxford".
David  tells McPhee that he's merely trying  to force  his students "into writing about   real  things  and  real  feelings  in  a real  world". McPhee  prefers   the  policy of  the  Board: sex  may  have  a  place  in

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the nation  but  at least  it can  be excluded from   the  schools.  The   principal  doesn't know   the  meaning  of  the  word   bowd­ lerize  but  he  thoroughly  approves  of the idea.   MacLennan's   Two   Solitudes  is taught in a bowdlerized  version.  After all references  to sex have  been  carefully  ex­ purgated   from   the   novel,   the   Toronto scholar   responsible   for   editing  the  cas­ trated   text  and  supplying  the  questions for  high  school students has  the  gall  (or is  it,  David   wonders,   a  finely  developed sense  of  humour?)  to  ask:   Does  Mac­ Lennan  adequately  account  for  Marius'  attitudes  and   actions?   The   answer   re­ quires  the student to know  the very parts which  have  been  carefully  removed  from his edition.
Since  David  has  not  yet been  granted his  Permanent Certificate-this  is  the principal's big stick-he  is forced  to submit  to Bunceford's demonstration  les­ son in composition. The  lesson  consists in the department head's  reading from what he  calls  a  beautiful   descriptive  passage written by the  famous  British  author Sir Compton  Mackenzie. The  heavy-handed sentiment  and  flowery  rhetoric is choice material for a satirist  like Metcalf. Bunce­ ford's   preferred  rhetoric   ("the   fairest dearest inn down  all that  billowy London  road")    offers   an   effective   contrast  to David's  goal  of exposing   his  students to real  feelings  in  a  real   world.   Montreal taverns  are  more  likely  to  be  called Whisky  A-Go-Go   than   Basket   of  Roses Inn,  Compton Mackenzie's choice.
School  texts  for English  seem  to  begin and   end   with   M oonfleet    (a   touch   of hyperbole  here)  and  the librarian is a faithful  consumer    of   the   products  of Time-Life Inc. Many teachers dislike reading;  some   write    abominable   neo­ Wordsworthian poems,  which  David  en-
 joys   reciting  aloud    when    drunk;  and most  of  the   teachers  fear   sex  like  the plague.  The department head's  grade eleven students claim  that  Bunceford  tra­ ditionally turns  over  two pages in a Latin  text  to  avoid  a  photo of  a  naked  statue. Principal   McPhee   confiscates    half    of David's class display  of  photographs, un­  moved   by  David's  plea  that   the  photos are  from  an  internationally famous   col­ lection.  As  McPhee solemnly  points  out, "the  area  of  sex is a sensitive  one."
Susan  Haddad, David's precocious stu­ dent   and  his  mistress,  is  a  richly  comic Lolita,  one  of  the   best  creations  in the novel.  At  one  point,   in  a   gesture  pro­ phetic   of   his  final   capitulation,  David urges  her  to study  for  her  coming  exams and  plan  on going  to McGill.  Susan  pre­  fers  to  retain   her  freedom. Earlier, she has  refused  to  comment on  four  lines  of Bunceford's  poetry   (lines   that   compare with  the  best-or  is it  the  worst?-of Sarah Binks, the Sweet  Songstress  of Sas­ katchewan). Susan  wrote: "I don't want to   waste   my   time   writing    about  bad poetry."  The  nation's Buncefords do  not take kindly  to honesty  such  as this.
Although a summary of the novel's concerns suggests something out  of This Magazine is About  Schools, this is fiction not  journalism, and   rather brilliant  fic­ tion  at  that.  Teacher David   tells  Susan that  a writer  depends  upon  literary  tradi­ tion.  Writer Metcalf   has  obviously  taken his own  advice.  Many of  his comic  tech­  niques  are  straight  out   of   Firbank  and  Waugh. One  of the  most  effective  is the cumulative or running  joke, as when  Jim  tells  David    to  go  into   guidance  if  he wants  to get  ahead; five chapters further on we find Garry has gone into  guidance. No   further   comment   here,    as   David  stares  at  the  announcement.  References


103

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



to the stuffed squirrel that  accompanies David   and   Susan  on  their   night  on  the town  are  funnier with  each  recurrence.
The  element  of fantasy  found  in many
of  Metcalfs stories  is  negligible   in  this novel,  but  mordant humour is a common denominator. The   novel  is  told   in   the third  person,  but  centred in David's icon­ oclastic  point  of  view  and  his  wry  sense of  humour. David   has  his own  standard of  values   ("His bank  of  free  Sick  Days already overdrawn in  bed  with  Susan") and   they  are  not  those  of   The System. The    story   takes   on   something  of   the bouncy,  irrepressible  manner of  its  lead­  ing  character.
In  the  first  half  of  the  novel,  David's sense  of superiority to  the  Montreal  Ya­ hoos may begin  to irritate you. But as the trap   closes  around  him   (his  contract  is yet  to  be  renewed, and   just  what   other  job could  he  hold?) , as his friend   Garry
betrays   him   and   Jim takes   off   in   his
Galaxy soo, you're likely to agree with Metcalf:   vomiting  is   the   suitable   re­ sponse  to the obscenities  of The System.
PATRICIA MORLEY

THE VATIC
UPSURGE

JOE   ROSENBLATT,  Bumblebee  Dithyramb.
Press Porcepic. $6.g5.
TIM INKSTER,  The Topolobampo  Poems. Press
Porcepic.  $3·95·
ELDON  GARNET,  Angel. Press Porcepic.  n.p.

THESE THREE  BOOKS are  symptomatic of a  recent  upsurge  of the  "vatic" voice, of the  Blakean  prophetic stance, of the  poet as  dark   seer,  oracle.   I  don't mean   that these  poets  actually   profess  to  be  magi­ cians,  but  that   they  render the  ordinary surfaces  of  everyday   existence  always  in
 psychedelic  colours, and  always  in height­ ened  hallucinatory tones.  On  the  whole, I   think   that   what    is   intended  to   be "exalted" or bardic  is often  only strained, like the  too-bright  smile  of the  hysteric.
Let  me  begin  with   Rosenblatt  to  try and  pin  down  what  I  mean :  There are a  number  of  poems  in  this  new  collec­ tion from  two previous  books. The Uncle  Nathan   poems,   "Metamorpho",  I   Get High    on   Butterflies    poems,    etc.   were found, with slight  variation, in The LSD Leacock and Winter of the  Luna  Moth. Perhaps now, seen in the  company of the bumblebee  poems,   these   earlier   poems are  given  a  new  context, adumbrate  the new  poems?  Or  are  they  simply  here  to pad  out  the  new  book?
In one way, this new collection  is the logical culmination of certain obsessive themes,  images,  etc. in  the  earlier  books. Both of the earlier  books had  a very aca­ demic, literary, EngLit allusiveness: "No! I  am  not  Prince   Metamorpho,  nor  was meant  to be ... ( "Metamorpho I") "Ly­  ing  out   on  Dover   Beach ... " ("Meta­ morpho III")   "Why   he'd  scare  a  grass­ hopper'' in  "Sapphire"  was  "Why  he'd scare  a grasshopper out of Kafka" in  the same  poem  in LSD  Leacock, which  may indicate that  the  poet  had   become  con­ scious  of  this  direction in  his  work  and was revising  to  make  the  poem  less allu­  sive. There  are,  as well,  in  these  poems, lingering Eliotic  juxtapositions of the vul­ gar  and  the learned: "If I could  rise like a spirit  from  a shawl/ I'd  trade my orig­ inal  Capt. Marvel  comic  book ... "
Another  obsession seen  in Rosenblatt's
work   is   with   animal   imagery:   many poems about grasshoppers, bull frogs, butterflies, bats, pigs, mice, penguins, crickets,  tadpoles,  fish,  eggs  (if  they  can be  seen  as  at   least   potential  animals)

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



and, of  course,  bees.  Perhaps all  of  this can   be  seen  as  an  attempt to  get  away from   the   wiseass  academic  bent  so  dis­ cernible in  the  other  poems  and  towards  a  simpler, more  organic and  natural do­ main.  There is an exuberant  spirit  in the bumblebee  poems,   but   I   feel  that   the Dionysian   enthusiasm   is   not   so  much wild freedom as it is cold calculation, like the  stylized  posed  emotion  in a Gericault painting. At  their  best,  these  poems  ex­ hibit  a  childlike  wonder   and  fascination with   life  in  its  smallest  forms.  At  their worst,  they  are simply  rhetoric.
Gamet's  Angel  is  made   up   of  forty
poems,  most  of  them   brief,  divided   into three  sections.  The  first  section,  "Super­ man," consists  of fifteen  poems,  most  of them  about past sexual  encounters, imag­ ined  sexual  exploits,  about   the  persona's  voracious ego,  many  of  these  in  a  tone of  wry  self-congratulatory mockery.  The  second  section  is "Waiting: in  thirty-one parts",  and  seems  to  be a  more  leisurely exploration of the same  territory as  "Su­ perman". The  tone of bombast  and  boast is muted here,  but  the  ego  obsession re­ mains  the  centre   of  rapt  attention, with all the details  of a vacation diary: "I the jealous  lover  fumbling over  morning tea I  wake  early  and/ perform the  ritual   of
breakfast coffee au lait and  croissants  ..." Why do poets like to think  the reader will be  interested  in  the  details   of  someone else's  vacation? It is a  bit  like  watching somebody's travel  slides;  your irritation is increased  by   the   knowledge    that    you could do the same thing if you had the effrontery.
The  third  section, "The One-Winged Angel,"   consists  of  more   poems   in  the mood  of "Superman": "in  her  legs i see the forest  of my desires ... " ("Desires") "where blaring   through your  pale  open-
 mouth    surprise/  would   thrust  her   hot and   sweaty   Newfoundland hand/ down into  your  pants ..." ("An Insult  to San­ die.")    I  can  discern   no  reason  for  this section  being set off by itself. The  poems here   do   not   rise   above   the   level   of those in "Superman" and  could  easily be placed  back  there.
Tim   Inkster's Topolobampo Poems  is
divided    into   two   sections,    "Just   Like Tom  Thumb's Blues"  and  "The  Topolo­ bampo   Poems".   The  second   section   is further subdivided into  a travel sequence: "Starting  from   Toronto,"  "arrival:  late morning", "morning of  the  second  day:  pre-dawn", "the  third day", and  "toronto four   days   later".   These  poems   are   in the same ego-absorbed mood  as  Garnet's travel  poems. Women  are  seen  as "black angels"  in  several   poems  by  both   poets, witches   who   challenge  the    ego's   ma­ chismo.  There is a  frenzied   tone  of  sur­ realism: " ... a  one  arm   midget/  parad­ ing/  in drag in a dunce cap ... " ("Memo to a some-time  whore.")  There  is nothing generic,   nothing  intrinsic  in  the   poems to  provide  a  reasonable context  for this fevered heracleitan   transformation  of everything simple  into  something fevered  and  nightmarish.
The  second  section,   the  travel   poems, as  in  Gamet's "Waiting",  uses  the  im­ pact  of foreign  environments on  the  per­ sona's   sensibility   as   a   device   for   the "plot" of the  poems. See  the  ego  expand in  Mexico!   Watch   him  discover  a dead fish  on  the   beach!   Why   are   poets  still agonizing  over  animals found  dead   here and  there?
Ultimately, Inkster has a more  realistic style  than   Gamet, with  an  eye  for  con­ crete   details   like   Rosenblatt's.   But   the primary  impulse   in  Topolobampo  is  to soar  off this solid  base into  some  kind  of


105

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



mystic  circus.  The overall   effect  of  this book is a mirror image  of Garnet's.
Press  Porcepic   has  begun  its  existence with some beautifully produced books: complementing type fonts  (g  pt. Century Medium  in  all  three   for  the  text,  titles and  headings variously  14 pt. Italian Old­ style, Libra, and  18 pt.  Bembo  Roman) , elegant   paper,   creative and  striking art work   (Rosenblatt's is  his  own)   and  at­  tractive, even  exquisite  wrappers.
But  I  am  perhaps more  disappointed in  the   poetry   than   I  would   have   been had  the books been themselves less attrac­ tive. As it is, I have  a kind  of  Emperor's New  Clothes  feeling.  I  feel  as  if  I have been  had,  and  very skilfully.
EUGENE MCNAMARA


SPIES AND TEMPESTS

E.  G.    PERRAULT,   The   Twelfth  Mile.  Double­
day, $5·95·

The  Twelfth Mile, E. J. Perrault's second novel,  is  described   on  the   jacket  as  "A Novel   of  Adventure  and    Espionage at Sea".  As such  it  is  undoubtedly  success­ ful;    it    advances   with    ever-increasing tension  to  a  dramatic  and  moving   con­ clusion. Each  of the events that  are woven into  the  plot  is  plausible, and  the  tale  as a  whole  is  told   with   almost   repertorial realism.
The principal characters are paradoxi­ cally  not  human. They   are  a  tug  boat, small   but    tremendously   powerful,  the Haida  Noble  (out  of  Vancouver-Cap­ tain,  Christy  Westholme) ; a massive  and awkward   off-shore   oil  rig,  "the  biggest semi-submersible drill  rig in existence", BUTCO   I7    (owners,   British    United
 Traction, and  manned largely  by  Ameri­ cans,  including an  American  oceanogra­ pher,  Michael Volkoff)  ; an oceanographic research   vessel, the  Irkutsk   (owner, the Russian  Academy  of  Sciences-Captain, Mikhail    Kutskov) ;   and   the   sea - or more  specifically the waters  of the  Pacific Ocean, off the southwest tip of Vancouver Island.  And  of  all  the  characters, the  sea is the most  powerful; lashed  into  fury  by Hurricane Faith  and  driven  into  an even greater   madness   by  the   sweeping   force of  a  giant   tidal   wave-or   tsunami­ born of the collapse  of "100 miles of rock structure along  the  Aleutian Trench", it is  the  sea  that   brings  sudden   death   to BUTCO 17 and  eventual destruction to the  Irkutsk,  and  drives  the  Haida  Noble to the  brink  of an  ocean  grave.
I have  suggested  that  a feeling  of authenticity permeates The Twelfth Mile. The  author moves with  an ease bred of personal  knowledge  of  the  Pacific  coast, and  also of patient research, through the technical  language  of  tug  boat   and   oil drill  operations and  the  scientific  termi­ nology   needed    to   describe    a   cyclonic storm   and   a  tsunami.  The  seed  of  the novel  was  probably   planted in  his  mind  some six or more  years ago when  he pre­ pared  the  text  and  supervised, for  Island  Tug  &  Barge  Limited, the  publication of Ocean Highway, which  appeared in 1967 as  the  company's centennial  project.  It contains stories of many  a long tow, many a rescue, and  many  a salvage  job by such famous  work-horse   tugs  as  the  Sudbury and  Sudbury  II, and  its illustrations sig­ nificantly  include  photographs of  difficult operations with  oil rigs.
Among  the other ingredients embedded in  Perrault's mind  by the  time  he began to  trace  the  plot  of  The   Twelfth  Mile were the tensions created  by the activities

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



of  the  Russian  fishing  fleets  just  outside the   twelve    mile   limit    off   Vancouver Island   and   by  the   presence   of   oceano­ graphic vessels in  the  Pacific,  as  well as vivid   memories   of   Typhoon    (or   Hur­ ricane)	Freda   that    swept   across   the Pacific  Northwest  coast  in   Ig62,  drove through Vancouver, and  left  in  its wake vast  areas  of  destruction: a  disaster  that  was   soon   followed,    in I g64,   by   the powerful  tidal  wave-or tsunami-that thrust down  from  Alaska  along  the  west coast of Vancouver Island, pushed  up the Alberni  Inlet, and  eventually penetrated bays,  channels  and   river   mouths  along the  coast of  Washington and  Oregon.
These,  then,  were  the  basic  materials that  Perrault refined and  blended into a realistic   yet   fictional   account  of   what could  happen-what might  still happen
-in the   Pacific  waters   off  Amphitrite Point, not far from the fishing village of Ucluelet on the southwesterly shore of Vancouver Island.
All I  need  say in summary of the  plot is that  it opens  with  the  Haida Noble on a  routine  assignment, to  bring  BUTCO
I 7  into   winter harbour-and  ends   in violent  conflict  between   the  tug  and  its skipper,  Westholme, and  the  Irkutsk  and its  captain,  Kutskov.  For   the   tug   has linked  up  with  the  Irkutsk  as it  is about to be driven  on  the  rocks off Amphitrite Point  (well within  the  twelve  mile limit)
-and the  Irkutsk  is a spy ship as well as
an oceanographic research  vessel. Also involved   in   the   closing   stages   of   the drama are the  American scientist  Volkoff (an   oceanographer,  true,   but   also  em­ ployed  by  an   American federal   agency for  "a   specialized   kind   of   watching"), and  the  Russian  doctor, Larissa  Lebedo­  vitch,  a  humanitarian  and   a  woman  of infinite  kindness  and courage.
 Almost inevitably, the dialogue between the opposing  characters reflects their political ideals and beliefs, yet Perrault creates   no  dark   villains  and   no  shining heroes. Westholme, the Canadian, is basically  apolitical, and  wants  only  to go about  his job to the best of his ability.  He always  considers  the  welfare  of his small crew and the safety of his boat, yet he is willing  to  risk  much   against great   odds to  save  the   lives  of  people,   no  matter whence they come or what their political beliefs may be. Volkoff, the American, is intelligent  and   courageous,  but   at   his worst moment, blinded  by his political naivete, he would gladly see the personnel of the  Irkutsk  at  the  bottom of  the  sea. And   Kutskov,   the   Russian,  rigid,   dis­ ciplined,  ruthless, and completely obedient to the dictates  of the  state,  is nevertheless a man  of undoubted courage, of integrity, and  of profundity of feeling, who,  in  the last moments of action, achieves  a nobility that  evokes the sympathy of the reader­ at  least of  this  reader.
In the final analysis, Perrault lifts his "Novel   of  Adventure and   Espionage at Sea"   into   a   plea   for   international   co­ operation and  understanding. At  the end of  the  last  chapter the  members   of   the United Nations  Committee on the Peace­  ful  Uses  of the  Sea  Bed  and  the  Ocean Floor  (a committee touched on in earlier chapters) are back again  at the conference table  around which  they  have  held  end­  less arguments that  have  borne  no  fruit.  This  day  the  room  echoes  with  charges  and    counter-charges,   affirmations  and denials-all based   on  the  scanty   news they have  received  of yesterday's incident on the  Pacific coast. The chairman, tired and frustrated by political  casuistry and evasion, says wearily: "We have many things  to  resolve ... all  of  them,  without


107

BOOKS IN REVIEW



exception, of  the  utmost   importance to survival   and   international  welfare.  Ad­ journment then  until  after  lunch ... and please,  gentlemen, let  us apply  ourselves earnestly  to the issues at  stake."
So ends  this tale  of adventure and espionage. There may  be faults  in  the technicalities, but  I am  unaware of them, and  the coincidence that  brings together hurricane and  tidal  wave may  perhaps be questioned,  but   this  is  certainly  a  con­ junction    that   is  possible   if   not   highly probable. And  in  its general effect  this is a  good  novel  which   adds  to  its  writer's achievements.                             s. E. READ


PERHAPS PROFOUND

GEORGE BOWERING,  George, Vancouver. Weed­ Flower  Press, $2.00.
VICTOR COLEMAN,   Old  Friend's  Ghosts. Weed­ Flower  Press, $3.00.

WEED/FLOWER PRESS IS a one-man oper­ ation   run  at  minimal cost,  yet  its  books are    always   meticulously and   chastely done,  and  its  list to date  shows  true  per­ ceptiveness  regarding contemporary poet­ ry. While  the two books under  review are minor  works, each  is by a good  poet  and each contains fine poetry.
Bowering's   George,   Vancouver   mixes fact and fancy, reminding us of Olson's curious  iambic  (curious, perhaps, because it is iambic) :  "Off-shore, by islands hid­ den  in  the  blood" -for that  is the spirit of the  poem,  discovery  and  not  transfor­ mation, uncovering the  hard fact.
The  uncovering has  momentary  inter­ ruptions, such  as the  question  marooned on  p.  11 : "Does  anyone  by  the  name  of Vancouver/ live  in Vancouver?"-an approach almost  in  the  manner of,  say,

108
 Ron  Padgett; but  we are  not  marooned for  long  and  we  continue  through  sub­ stance,   ably  navigated,  until   we  reach: "I  keep  losing sight  of the  subject/ Cap­  tain  Vancouver seems lost  in  the  poem". Even  though  this introduces a passage of some  tension,  we  know  here  for  certain  that   we  are  not  in  the  presence  of  that  Coleridge   (invoked   in  the   text)   whose Ancient Mariner "stoppeth one of three", but  rather of S.T.C., theorist  of fancy.
Contrasted  with  the  unforced  mythos of  Rocky   Mountain Foot,  George, Van­ couver   is  small   work,   though,  happily, just as grounded upon  tangibles. Perhaps "grounded" is more  than  apt. Strikingly,  despite  this being a voyage poem, a poem of movement, there  is a preponderance of objects, -potatoes,  pines,  islands,  valu­  able  plants,  seed  collections, -and  two of the 30-odd  pages are a list of names of vessels  which   sailed   off  the   Northwest Coast  in  qg2.
Such   catalogues   recall   Williams   and
Olson   (and   even   Whitman)  and   offer their own satisfactions,  but here the poem is  taken   over   by  names   and   rendered static.  Rather out  of scale, too, is the  use of found  passages. All this  pragmatic in­ sistence  is set over  against   mere  intima­ tions   of   "a   felt   presence"   recognizing,  perhaps, of the  voyager,  that  "it  was no grail/ he  was  after,   he  was  not/ sailing with  that  kind  of  purity" -a summing­ up appropriate also to the poem's making.
What  I  value  in  the  book is a  charac­ teristic   cleanness   of  line.  While  it   has obvious sources, George, Vancouver, as a Bowering  work,  is  a  small   piece  of  an interesting larger picture.
A   "quiet"  poetry,   Victor    Coleman's
work shows (perhaps too overtly in this collection?)   influences  of   Williams­ Zukofsky-Olson-Creeley. Coleman has

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



their   habit   of  private reference   ("Wie­ ners/  alone  in his little room in Buffalo"), which   gives  much   of  the  writing a  de­ liberately contingent air,   reinforced  at times  by  (deliberate?)  flatness. Quietness is integral in  another  way,  for  Coleman is  a  genuinely  contemplative  poet   who can, occasionally, be very moving.
In  an  "argument" poem  such  as "The Air   of  York   Sings",   a  text   on  Robert Kelly's  characteristic declaration:  "how dare/ Canadians not  be/  americans", flat­ ness of tone,  with  its  unsuccessful  sound puns ("Cold can/aid an/air")    and  phrases  such  as "an  inability to  produce  density",  tells  against   the   force  of  the argument.
Sound  is the  clue  to  Coleman's  work. It  dominates the  group   of  Susie  Asado poems,  but  these do  not have  the  vitality of,  say,  bp  nichol's  soundpoems  because the  run  of  sounds  conveys  a  crossword­ puzzle   effect   rather  than   pure   music. Other pieces, such as "For Tune" and the Zukofskyish  "After  Reading SPRING & ALL,  ALL  IN  ALL, & ALL", work  very well,  making one  realize  that  the  core of Coleman's  work  is "the  protein of  lan­ guage",  as  sound,  presented, for  he  feels that  "The vocable  of the  printed poem/ strangles in binding".
One  difficulty in gauging this  book on its own  terms  is the  presence  of so many influences  peering  over  the  poet's  shoul­ der.  A pervasiveness  of Williams, a touch of Creeley  and  Olson,  overt  responses  to Pound  and  Zukofsky-and  there  is even one  to  Frank   O'Hara.  As  one  tuned   to the   same   set   of   general   influences,    I sympathize and  am  interested; but  it  is not easy to identify, yet, what  is distinctly  Coleman.
Most  distinct  is that  sense of quiet al­
ready  referred  to, evident  in "The Butter-
 fly" or  (both  Williams-like and  Zen-like) "The Natural Is":

The exercise  of the  milkweed is to push  itself  up,  flower into a huff  of down.

Only  incidental that it draws great welting hives  on  the  head and  arms  of Elizabeth.

Everything in  Coleman's  universe   is  its own  natural function, so that  abstraction is  prostitution, "The  State is  a  whore", money is "hypocracy" (sic), and  the divi­ sions  of  "The  Left   &  the   Right"   are equally  immoral. Such  considerations are set off against  the virtue of acceptance, of "No  purpose". Such  considerations are, if not  commonplace, certainly  not  uncom­ mon today. Their signposts  here  are help­ ful  enough,   though  many,   perhaps,  do not  need  them,  while  the  ones  who  still prefer  "the   balance" of  "The  Complete Room"  to human  messiness  and  warmth may  be  unreachable.  Probably  they  are not, but these muted poems  are  not likely to be the means.
Coleman's strength is in his music, and he does avoid  "the  pleasant whining of a mandolin", offering  something more aus­ tere, less self-indulgent. A propos  of  that, he can assure us, beautifully:

I salvage  the  poem  from  the  heart bent  against too easy speech,
put  my mouth to its mouth
and  breathe the  music in.

As a declaration of intent this seems fair, and   accurate. The  best  of  one  eye love and Light Verse can take such lines as epigraph. Old Friends' Ghosts adds some­ what  to  an  exciting  prospect,  that  when Victor   Coleman   discovers   a   music   en­ tirely  his  own  it  will  be  beautiful, and perhaps profound.

MIKE DOYLE

109

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



DISTORTING MIRROR

GWENDOLYN MACEWEN,  Noman, Oberon. $2.95

IN Noman, Gwendolyn MacEwen has woven  a mediaeval tapestry of  short stories,  whose  warp  is a  tradition of  cul­ tural   mythology   and   whose  woof  is  the Canadian  (Kanadian to the  author)  ur­ ban   landscape.  The   ritual   figures   and conventional   symbolism   which    lavishly decorate  MacEwen's   poetry    and   prose are   brought  to  life   in   a   confrontation with  reality.  The  golden   arrow   becomes bow   and   arrow,   the   messiah   becomes social  iconoclast,  and   the  horsemen ride right   out   of   Revelation  into   a  modern  country carnival. The process of revitaliz­  ation   takes  the  symbolic  figures   of  her stories  out  of  allegory  and   the  so-called Dark  Ages into  a  modern baroque sensi­ bility.  The   energy   of  MacEwen's   prose and poetry  manifests a philosophical mannerism. Beyond the gilt of her gestalt, there  is  fire.  Beyond  the  answers,   there are  questions.  As Kanada moves into  her Renaissance, MacEwen  records   her  his­ tory   with   the   language  of  a   universal  sibyl.
Embracing the  shared   cultural  history
of the Kanadian Indian, Gypsy, Jew  and Anglo-Saxon, MacEwen's stories  are  the one and  the many  united  symbolically   in the   figurative  and   material  arch.  The arch   is the  way  to  a  higher reality  and one of several motifs woven through the collection  of stories.

There,  beyond    the   arch,  is   the   forest. There is  the  naked, ancient door. You  have only  to pass  under the  arch to  be free,  to  be away   from   this   place,  but   you   watch  the arch and  grow  afraid, for  the  arch is  watch­ ing   you.   The  Little  King  and   the   Fairy

I I 0
 Queen are  watching you.  And  all  the  trees are  silently  screaming.

In "Kingsmere", the denigration of a former  Prime  Minister's attempt to trans­ plant  European civilization to the Kana­ dian  landscape, MacEwen  focuses on  the artificial  gothic  arch  as a  possible escape from  the  tensions  of  past  and  present  to a  transcendental  reality,  Noman's land,  where  unity  in  multiplicity is possible. In counterpoint   to   the   urban    jungle,   for which King's ruins  are a false alternative, MacEwen describes  the forest  and  primal  mnocence.
One   way  back   to  the  forest   through
the arch  is through the experience of purifying  fire.  In  "Fire" and  "The  Sec­ ond   Coming   of  Julian  the   Magician", lovers  undertake a  ritual  burning of  all their  material objects  and  are  cleansed.  The   phoenix    rises   out   of   ashes   from Woolworth's. Snow is death, myth  frozen into  history  and  beyond  the  comprehen­ sion  of  people  determined  to  find  their identity   and  ultimate  redemption. Snow is  the   jewel   trapped  in   a  gold   setting  and  fire is  the  living  object.
Noman   is  the  medium  for  salvation,
like  Julian in  MacEwen's  novel,  Julian the Magician, the messiah.  He is the magician   who  will  act  as  the  catalyst  in his   own   experiment.  In    spite   of   the weight  of her  imagery  and  the  complex­ ity of her  philosophy,  her  stories  are  hu­ man   and   humorous.  Noman   is  a   joke, human and  divine. Names  do  not  matter and  are changed  at will, just as masks are put  on  and   taken  off.  Canada as  Kan­ ada  is  interchangeably the real and the mythological country.
The  confusion  of  realities,  which  is a
problem  of language and  communication, leads   in   the   stories   to   madness    and

BOOKS IN REVIEW



murder  against    the   cacophonous   back­
ground of  the  Kanadian city.

"I wish   I  could   tell   you   that  this   city was   just    another  myth,  but    it's    not.    It smacks   too  much of  reality."
"Well,  what  else."   I  cried,  exasperated
with  you.  "First it's  a whale  house, then  you want   it  to  be  a  myth-couldn't it  just  be a  city,  for  Heaven's sake?"
Noman, like F. in Cohen's Beautiful Losers, orchestrates the jokes and  the tragedies. Gwendolyn MacEwen shares Leonard Cohen's preoccupation with the ecumenical possibility in the emerging Kanadian cultural consciousness. Unlike fellow  philosophers of  the  Kanadian  ur­ ban   ghettoes -Mordecai   Richler,   who maintains  a  Jewish   point   of  view,  and Margaret  Atwood,   who  would  extricate herself  from   history-Cohen  and Mac­  Ewen  attempt to fuse  in  fire  the  hetero­  geneous elements  of the vocabulary. They draw  their imagery from past and  present and   the  result  is  fantastic but  never  in­ credible.
In  "Day  of  Twelve  Princes", a  gothic tale of madness and incest, masks and unmasking,  Samuel,  the   young   protag­ onist,  escapes  his house  of  death-in-birth on  a romantic quest  for  the  carnival, his world   in   microcosm   and  one   he   can handle, because  there  is  no hypocrisy  at­  tached   to its  illusions. MacEwen's stories are a carnival, full of pageant and beauty, misery and  ugliness.
Anyway, when   I was  eighteen, I  went  to work  in  the  carnival. I thought I'd  find  the first  and   the  last  of  the  world's real  people there  in  that wild  crossroads of  cultures ... But  I didn't have  time  to  learn the  craft, so I became a clown.  I had  great conversations with   myself  as  I  was  cleaning up  after the show.  "I'm not  a  clown   I'm   a  genius", I'd say   to   the   mirror ... "Under  this   absurd mask  I am  a  holy  man."
The great  human circus  is reflected  in mirrors  and   mirrors   do   not   lie,  or  do
 they?  "I am  already   the  distorter, I  am already  the mirror." The  writer  is the mirror, but  then  the  writer  distorts. Like Virginia Woolf in Between the Acts, MacEwen deliberately comments on her function  as  mirror and   then   warns   the viewer  to beware.               LINDA ROGERS


SUSPENSEFUL SEPARATISM
MICHAEL  SHELDON,   The   Death   of a  Leader.
McClelland & Stewart Ltd. $4·95·

MICHAEL SHELDON's  latest   book,  Death of a Leader, is a gripping mystery  novel of  political   intrigue. But   although  it  is billed  as  "topical", it  is  not  really   very closely related  to current events.  That Montreal happens to  be  the  setting and that   bits  and   pieces  of  Pierre   Trudeau, Rene   Levesque   and   a  number of  other real  Quebeckers happen  to  be  incorpo­ rated   in  the  characterizations  are  prob­  ably incidental. The  book's purpose is not to offer insight  into Canadian affairs  and personalities, but  to entertain; and  enter­ tain  it does.
It  is, of course,  difficult  to  talk  about Death   of a  Leader   without  compromis­ ing   the   book's   principal   quality-sus­ pense.  Sheldon   writes  in  the  best  tradi­ tion  of  the  "whodunit".  A  murder  has been   committed, and   the   reader  soon learns  that  many  people could  have  been responsible. Motives-political, personal and  philosophical -abound. The victim  was  a Separatist leader   whom  a  variety of  friends  and  enemies,  French and  Eng­ lish,  Separatist and   Federalist, rich  and poor, male and  female,  are  pleased  to see out  of the way.
The  hero  of Sheldon's novel,  Marc De
Montigny, is a diplomat who  has  just  re- I I I

BOOKS IN REVIEW



turned   from   Paris.   He   is  asked   by  the Prime  Minister, an old friend, to find out why the murder has taken  place. De Montigny is not a James  Bond superman, but  he  is not  far  off.  And  a good  bit  of his undercover work is conducted in bed with  attractive women.
The  book moves  quickly,  and  suspense is  effectively   maintained  until   the  very end.  All in all, an entertaining and  well written spy  story,  Death   of a  Leader   is the  best of Sheldon's four  novels  to date. Perhaps the  author has  at  last  found  his ideal  genre.
RONALD SUTHERLAND


KNOW WHAT TO SEE
DOROTHY   FARMILOE,   Blue    Is   the    Colour    of
Death. Fiddlehead  Poetry Books,  $ r.oo.

Now  MORE THAN  EVER before  we are be­ ginning to seriously comprehend  what we had  once  taken   for  granted:  the essen­ tiality  of  the  natural  world,  the  endang­ ered environment, and  our living  relation  to  it.
Dorothy Farmiloe's  fourth  volume   of
poems  is an  anguished document in  that direction,  particularly  the  long  ecology­ collage  poem  from  which  her  book  takes its title.
"Blue  Is the Colour of Death" is virtu­
ally, as its subheading says, "a  short  his­ tory  of  Southern  Ontario"  rendered  in diverse  but   complementary  perspectives.  Farmiloe's poetic  diction  assimilates   the terminological   categories    of    sociology, geology,  and  other  sciences  to  present  a total    vision   of   her   environment. The title's  ambiguity  may  sound   like  an  af­ fectation  to  some,  but  it  should  be  kept


II2
 in mind  that  "blue" is also the colour   of a  robin's  egg, ferrous sulphate, despond­ ency,  etc.; thus  the  chromatic  metaphor is a valid  one.
Structurally,  the   poem   progresses  fu­ guelike   over   twenty-four  strophes,   and historical  fact  merges  into  irony until  the whole   thing   rains   down   like   a  baleful  warning. Man  must  live as a  part  of na­ ture  rather than  apart from  nature. The  poem's   true  meaning  is  man's   ultimate survival  depending on  that axiom.
"Blue  Is the Colour  of Death" is Farm­ iloe's  most  ambitious work  to  date.  And it's  a  shame   that   some  of   the  stanzas  were    transposed    accidentally    by    the printer. In  a  technical sense,  it's  ironic  too.
The book's second section, "Third Thought Poems,"  contains incidental pieces,  all  of  which   allude   in  one  way or  another, to  man,   nature and   death. The  dominant mood of these short  poems is one  of  existential absurdity. They  ex­ plore   the   human  condition,   alienation and   solitude,   and   the   futile  search   for meaning and  reality.
Poems    like   "Postmortem   After    the
Quarrel", "Watching the  Late  Late News", and  "After Technology-What?" aggravate the situation with a code of emergency. These  are  powerful and  ruth­ less  compositions,  and   their  imagery   is severe  "as   the   furious   protest   inside   a lightbulb seconds  to  blackout." Only  in two  poems  does   Farmiloe  vacillate   be­ tween  morality  and  humour.
The  effect of a book like this is almost
cathectic; it  sears  the  psyche  and  leaves the  reader numb   with   his  own  impres­ sions. You  can  feel Farmiloe's  words  like "guerrilla cells blasting  what's left of the flesh."  Intense   concentration,  a scalpel­  sharp   sensibility,   word-as-seed,  and   the

BOOKS IN REVIEW



imaginative  magic   of  language -these are  aspects   of  her   creative  vision:   she knows where  to look and  what  to see.
LEN  GASPARINI


NATIVE COUNTRY FOOD

JAMES   HOUSTON,   The  White Dawn.  Long­
man, $7.95·

HousTON  isn't  subtle enough  about trans­ lating  the  Eskimo  mind  into English; he doesn't  care  much  nor  he is  disturbed by the differences.  Consequently he's written a bad  book. There is little speech  rhythm  in  the  speech,  no  organic  organization, really  no  theme,  when   the  death of  the Eskimo culture is such  a profound occur­  rence.   But   Houston  wrote   The   White  Dawn as if  igloos were  built  on  the  Rue Morgue.  His  love  for  the  Eskimo  is the same kind of love that  Lawrence analysed in  his  essay on  Poe.
But  the  book  raises  certain issues. Houston has been at the benevolent spearhead of  the  white  world  in  its  con­ tact  with  the  Eskimo.  He  should  inherit  the   work   of  men   like   Rasmussen   and M'Clintock.  Yet   in   his   novel   we   see behind  the benevolence the destruction of prhnitive    society.    The    White  Dawn, thought of  as a popular document, could be   replaced   by  I, Nuligak   and   Across Arctic America by Rasmussen. But the essential  purpose  of  the  book,  to  the  re­ viewer,   makes   it   representative  of   an­  thropological literature.
The  key to the book is the treatment of the  shaman. The  author  chose  an   un-
 pleasant,  fat,  greasy  figure  for  a shaman and   a  near   idiot   for   an   assistant. The choice  is  of  symbolic   significance,  as  is the Red  Canyon, the redness  of which reminds  me of "The Masque of the  Red Death". The angakok  conducted a  cere­ monial  performance  but   afterwards Avinga,   the   crippled   Eskimo   narrator, stumbled  on the mechanics of what  could be  a  trick.   But   the   mechanics,  to  my reading,     were    unimportant;    Houston quietly communicated his white  suspicion and  unbelief.   The whole  weight   of  the book focuses on Houston's essential  state­ ment;  the   shaman  is   a   fake.   For   in denying  the reality  of the shaman's magic he denies  the very fabric of Eskimo  life.
The   reader   gathers from   The   White
Dawn that  magic  was  a  sideline  interest of the  Eskimo.  But  really  it pervaded the whole   of   life.   The  concerned  student thinks  of it as engaging the  Eskimo  mind in  a  way  similar   to  our   experience  of Newtonian  physics.   The  average  man, not  a professional  scientist,  is inarticulate about  Newton.  But  he lives out  of a  per­ ception  of  the  world  for  which  Newton  makes sense, believing  absolutely  that  the sun  is a  ball  of  gas.  The  Eskimo on  the other   hand   carried  his  weather  amulets and  thought  the  sun  a  conscious  being. Houston doesn't  so  much  as glimpse  the difference.    By   making  the   shaman  a charlatan  he  makes   the  substance of  all Eskimo life a matter of ridicule. Which  is what   our   civilization  has   done   to   the Eskimo;  here  in  Inuvik, when   you  buy reindeer meat  from  the government herd,  the  Eskimo   has  been  trained  to  call  it
'native country food'.
COLIN ROSS





113

BOOKS IN REVIEW



THE INSOLENT INFINITY

CLARK  BLAISE,  A  North  American Education.
Doubleday. $6.g5.

THis COLLECTION  of Clark  Blaise's fiction is most impressive, if at times not fully satisfying.  Both  these  facts  arise  from  the use Blaise makes of an autobiographical voice, the ability, which is his particular talent, of  creating  the  illusion   that   the reader   is the  confidant of  an  author  re­ lating  anecdotes of  an  intimate and  re­ vealing   nature.  This   sense  that   one   is dealing  with   autobiographical  fiction   is unavoidable; it  comes  from  the  feel  of the  stories, it is insisted  upon on  the  dust jacket, it is mused  upon  by one of Blaise's narrators:

I used  to write miniature novels,  vividly imagined, set  anywhere my  imagination moved     me.    Then  something slipped. I started writing of myself  and  these  vivid moments in  a  confusing flux.

Within his stories Blaise's protagonists experience just such moments in just such flux,  and  their  experiences are  shared by the  reader   as well  with  striking  immedi­ acy.  Blaise  has  elsewhere  disavowed   the short  story  as shaped  by Joyce  and  Hem­  ingway,  but  his stories  are  still  more  tra­ ditional  than   experimental  in   form­ and  their conclusions  frequently have  the appearance of Joycean epiphanies. How­ ever,  rereading shows these  to be  pseudo­  epiphanies  which    serve   not   to   reveal something, but   to  lead   the  reader back into  the  depths of the  story,  leaving  him to reflect  on the  experience  more  than  to understand it. Thus in "Eyes", the  short­ est but  perhaps the  best story  of the  col­ lection,   the  conclusion functions  not  as

I 14
 resolution   but  as  emblem, encapsulating the emotional mood  of  the  story  (indeed of  the  book), one  of  alienation,  disloca­ tion-a    mood    the    story   creates    not through  straight-forward   narrative,  but through  careful  juxtaposition of  not  ob­ viously  related  incidents.
It is in  the  creation of  these  small  in­ cidents   of  dramatic impact  that   Blaise shows his skill, finding  them  in  the  most mundane events  and  structuring his nar­ rative  around them.  Often this can  be as nightmarish as  the  surrealistic  reality  of the   roaches   in   "Extractions   and   Con­  tractions".  Cleaning  his   infant's  bowel movement from  the  apartment carpet:

For   a  minute  or   two   it  goes  well,   then I notice  glistening shapes staggering from  the milky   foam;  the   harder I  press,   the   more appear. My   child   has  roaches, his  belly  is teeming,  full   of   bugs,    a   plague  of   long brown   roaches  is living  inside   him,  thriving on  our  neglect. The  roaches creep and  d rt in   every    direction,  I   whack     them    with wooden brush  but  more  are  boiling from  the foam  and  now  they  appear on  my  hand  and arm. I see  two on  the  shoulder of my  white shirt. I  shout   but   my   throat  is  closed ... These are  not  my  son's; they  are  the  rug's. The other side of  this  fine  Irish rug  that  we bought  for  a  house   in  the  suburbs that   we later   decided  against,   this    rug    that   we haven't  turned in  months and   haven't  sent out  to  be cleaned, is a sea  of  roaches.

This  passage also illustrates Blaise's  tend­ ency  to focus  on  the  trivial  stuff  of  quo­  tidien  life, with  the  inherent  danger that  goes  with  such  focus-that  of  creating minimal  art, of working  one remove from the  journal. But  the  stories  are  consist­ ently  made  artful  by their author's knack of  imparting or  implying  significance   m the events  that  he  chronicles:

The elevator opens  on  I I and   two  students turn  away, seeing  that it's  full.  We  stop   on ro  but   no  one  is  waiting. We  are  trapped by   the   buttons  other   people  press   before  they  take  the  stairs.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



The  dissatisfaction I  feel  in   reading this  book  centres   around  two  problems created by the  use of autobiography. The first of these is the  problem  of form.  The stories   are   divided    into   three    groups, "The  Montreal  Stories", "The  Keeler Stories", "The  Thibidault Stories", each featuring  a  different central  character. Yet  the  presentation of these  stories  as a collection,  the  similarities-despite   the differences-between   their   heroes,   the unifying    impression    that    the    sum   of these  stories  depicts  "a  North   American education" of  one  man,   the  writer   who stands   behind   these  various   characters, all  this  implies  an  overall   unity   that   is elusively   not   quite   there.   Together  the stories achieve  an impact that  they would lack  separately, but  at  the  same  time  the inconsistencies between  them,  their  shift­ ing protagonists, are distracting. It makes the  reader  wish  that   the  work  had  been revised so that  it would  come together as a  whole.
My  other, perhaps less important,  ob­ jection  is that  the author-reader intimacy this  book  achieves  is sometimes  with  an author  who  does  not   like  himself   very much-with   the   consequence  that   we are  perhaps less  desirous  of the  intimacy than   aware  of  having  it  forced  upon  us. At its least unpleasant (though still some­ what  grating)  this  comes  across  as  the self-pitying tone of the Thibidault  stories, but  at  its  most  mannered -in the  prig­ gishness  of  the  narrator in  the  opening story  who  masks his insecurity  behind  an aura  of self-love-or at  its  most  intense
-in the  self-loathing that  runs  through all   of   "Extractions  and   Contractions"
-it makes for a strained, rather schizoid, relationship between  the  reader   and   the teller  of the  tale.
But  these  are  small  reservations, and
 A  North  American  Education  is a  work worth  reading for  its sharply drawn  por­ trait  of a  man  adrift between  three  cul­ tures:  the  United  States,  English   Can­ ada,  French Canada. The  book  is full  of the  knowledge  gained   by  individuals en­ rolled  in  Blaise's  North  American class­ rooms,  of  the  kind  of   hard   lessons  that  must   be  mastered   by   the   small   boy  of the final story, a young French-Canadian growing   up  in  Florida:   "that  whatever the    comforting    vision    before    him ... something  dreadful  could   suddenly  cut him down without warning"; "that noth­  ing secret and  remote was ever lost in the world,  was  ever   perfectly   private." Or, catching a strange and  monstrous fish of some sort  and  having it  mysteriously  de­ voured  before he can  bring  anyone to see it,  the  sense  that  "the fish  at  his  feet  or whatever it had  been,  had  seen  the  worst thing   in  the  world,   whatever  that   was. The  boy   knew   now   that   both   things existed,   the   unnameable   fish   and    the thing   that   had   eaten   it,   and   knowing  that,  he felt  he had  seen  the worst  thing  too."
This  is the  essence of  Blaise's  method. The  innocence of a small  boy fishing,  an idyll   that   turns   suddenly  sinister-for the  catch   is  never   the  expected  bream nor the longed-for perch; instead dredged up from the depths are those submerged moments of memory when the world was stripped  of   its  illusions   and   was   seen without   those   confidence-inspiring   ap­ pearances  we  have   all   been   taught   to seek.   In   one   of   the   work's   epigraphs Blaise  quotes   Sartre  on   the   way   that  memory  condenses  "into a  single  mythic moment   the  contingencies  and  perpetual rebeginnings of an individual human his­ tory."  This  is a  part   of  Blaise's  method surely,  but  the  rest  is to choose  a certain

BOOKS IN REVIEW



kind  of moment  even  among these,  what he has described  as the incident which contains "the  hint  of unfathomable com­ plexity,  the  insolent   infinity   that  defeats our  humanity". Or  as the narrator at the end  of "Words for  Winter" says, "I who live  in  dreams  have  suffered   something real, and  reality  hurts  like nothing else in this  world."                 RUSSELL  M. BROWN


LETTERS


SIR,
Having been mystified  by the lack of critical attention paid  in Canada to the work of Mavis  Gallant I was delighted to read  Peter  Stevens'  very  acute article  on this  fine  writer   in  Canadian   Literature No.   56.  Perhaps  it   was  the   expatriate nature of her  writing or possibly the lack of  flamboyance  which   caused   this  inex­ plicable    neglect.    I   hope   Mr.   Stevens' article  will direct  new attention  to her.
R.A.D.FORD


SIR,
I  would  hate   to  leave  readers of  "A Poet    Past   and    Future,"  the   amusing article  by Patrick Anderson in  the Spring issue, with  the impression that  I am  "the most incommunicative and  letter-shy of editors." After  all,  editors   should   be  re­ sponsive   people,  if  not   responsible  per­ sons, and  should  this  canard get  around, it  would  be bad  for  business.
For   the   record:  I  answered all   the letters   Mr.  Anderson  sent  me,  not  that there  were  that  many,  and  I  did  so with great  pleasure,  if not  despatch. Why,  on one  occasion   I  even   sent   him   a  cable. I  wonder   how  many  editors  send  cables these  days?            JOHN ROBERT COLOMBO

II6
 ON THE VERGE



***   Heather Robertson. Reservations are  for Indians. James  Lewis & Samuel. $4.25.  Heather Robertson  is  a  good   journalist and   a  patient investigator, and   in   Reservations  are   for   In­ dians   she   presents  a   stirring  account -im­ pressionistic  in  its  vividness  yet  supported  by a solid  framework of facts-of  what it  is and  has  long  been  to  live  as  an  Indian in  Canada. Canada's Indians are  not  the worst-off   people  in  the  world.   It would   be  putting the  wrong case  to  claim   that  they  are  as  deprived-or anywhere  near   it -as   most   people   in,   say, Bangladesh  or  Bolivia.  And   Heather  Robert­ son  implies   no  claim  of   this   kind.   What  she does  reveal   and   document  relentlessly is  that in  the  country  that   was   theirs   before   anyone else claimed it,  the  Indians, man  for  man,  are  given   the   chance  of   enjoying  a   far   smaller share    of    affluence   than  any   other  class   of Canadian.  It may  be  argued that  affluence   is worthless.   Well   and    good.    But    if   affluence exists   it   should   be   available  for   all   men   to claim  or  reject according to  their   inclinations. And   this  choice,   as  Reservations  are   for  In­ dians   makes   abundantly  clear, exists   less  for our  native peoples  than it  does  for  most  other Canadians. So  is  justice   mocked.


*** MARTIN ROBIN.  The Rush  for Spoils. McClelland  &  Stewart, $5.95. The  Rush    for Spoils, which  is sub-titled "The Company  Pro­ vince  1871-1933", is a  partial  political  history  of   British    Columbia; apparently a    second  volume, bringing  the   story   up   to  the  end   of the  Social  Credit era  in  1972,  is due  to appear shortly.  Mr.   Robin  has   an   interesting   story to  tell.  Out   of  a  number of  possible  theses  to explain the  peculiar politics  of  British  Colum­ bia,  he  has  chosen   that  which   interprets it  in terms  of  the  ruthless exploitation of  the  natural resources  of   the   province  by   national  and  international  capitalism, with  the  politicians as the   servants   of   those    interests. It  makes   a dramatic tale of villainy supported by stupidity and  servility, but  Mr. Robin has  perhaps made  his case  too  obvious  by adopting a  percussively jocose  manner and  a  style  which  one  can  only call   political commentator's  baroque. He   has some  good  anecdotes, some  curious revelations, and   some   sharp  insights.  They  would    have  been  more  convincing if  they  had   been  more simply  told.
