$r .25  per copy


CANADIAN
l TERATURE N°·37


Summer, 1968


FEDERJ.ITION OF LETTERS


Articles

BY A. J. M. SMITH, GARY GEDDES, CARLO FONDA, RONALD  SUTHERLAND

Translation

BY JOHN  GLASSCO

Chronicle

BY NAIM  KATTAN

Reviews

BY A. W. PURDY, JULIAN SYMONS, MARY  JANE EDWARDS,
GEORGE  WOODCOCK, GEORGE  BOWERING, ROY MC SKIMMING, W. H. NEW, DAVID N. ROBINSON, TONY KILGALLIN, WILLIAM F. HALL, PAT  BARCLAY, CHARLES W. HUMPHRIES



A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW







AWARDS AND INITIATIVES






Tms YEAR  the  jury for  the  Governor-General's Awards  has departed  in two directions  from  past practice. It  was not new for them to grant no  award  for  fiction  in  English;  the  infrequency  with  which  good  Canadian novels appear  forced  such  abstention  on at  least one past  jury. But it was new to take advantage  of this lack and  to give two poetry prizes instead to books be­ tween  which  the  judges  found  it  hard  to choose-Eli Mandel's  An  Idiot   joy and Alden Nowlan's  Bread, Wine  and Salt. Everything is to be gained from such flexibility, which, if persisted in, would remove what has been one of the standing  objections  to annual  literary  awards-that in lean years undeserving  books are rewarded,  while in fat  years good books go unacknowledged.
The  other departure-as I assure myself from a list which forms an appendix to  the  book in  question -has been  to issue the  non-fiction  award  for  the first time to a work of reference-Norah Story's The  Oxford  Companion to Cana­ dian History  and  Literature. While in 1967 there appeared  other  excellent  non­ fiction books which have gone unrewarded  as a result of this decision, one cannot dispute that such a monumental work as The  Oxford Companion deserved special recognition.  It  has  faults-of  omission more than  commission-but  these are matters for a close review rather  than for an editorial comment. At the same time, like the  Literary  History  of Canada,  it is the kind of work of  pioneer research which will be permanently valuable  to Canadian  literary scholarship  and whose very shortcomings  will stimulate  others to compensate for  them.
Yet one still wonders  whether  it should  be rewarded  under  a category  mani­ festly  meant  for  books  that  make  original  statements  on  their  subjects  rather than for source books. Surely this is a case which reinforces an argument  we have often made: that  there should  be awards  that acknowledge services to literature, which may take the form of reference works like The  Oxford Companion, success-

3

EDITORIAL



ful and  creative editing, or the efforts of  those tireless middlemen  who still use radio  and  television for the fostering of Canadian writing  and  the  maintenance of Canadian writers. We are far  from  grudging  Miss Story  the  recognition  she has received;  we applaud  and echo it. But we also believe this might have been the appropriate occasion for the Canada Council  to widen its system of awards so that  all kinds of services to literature  may come within  their scope. We would like, to  give only one  example,  to see Robert   Weaver  receive some  handsome and  resounding  acknowledgment  for  the long, dedicated  and  varied  services he has  performed  for writing  in  this country  by his work  as anthologist,  as critic, as editor of Tamarack   Review  and  as one of the most tireless workers to sustain a standard of excellence in the literary  programmes  of the CBC.
This  brings  us, by a devious route,  back  to The  Oxford  Companion, and  to
the two important fields of Canadian  literary information which it barely touches. One -where Miss Story  regretfully admits  the  limitations  imposed  by lack  of space-is that of literary magazines, which, except for a few very minor and capricious entries, are dealt with in a single summary  article. The  time has come, surely, for  a  thorough  history-cum-reference  book, with  decennial  supplements, to  cover  the  past  history of the literature  magazine  in  Canada and  to  keep us informed of what is happening in a field which in recent years has shown interest­ ing  new  departures.   We  recommend  this  to  the  Canada Council  as  a project worth  financing  and -if  necessary -organizing.
We  also recommend  a  somewhat  different  approach to  another  field barely covered  by the  0 xford  Companion -the  Canadian Broadcasting  Corporation in its role as the most important  single promoter  of Canadian writing and patron of Canadian writers over the past generation.  A vast task of research and publica­ tion  is here  required.  There  is a  whole history  of  the  CBC  in  literature  to  be written.  Thousands  of valuable  radio  talks-including important  critical state­ ments,  occasional  essays, fragments  of  autobiography   and   biography-have gone unpublished  because the CBC has never produced a regular  journal like the BBC's  Listener.  And  there  is a  whole genre  of  radio  drama of  which  only  a minute  proportion  has ever gone beyond the one,  two or at most three perform­  ances given on  the air. At present the CBC has a small publications  department which  prints  selected series of radio  lectures.  This  work should  be extended­ if necessary with special government  aid offered  through  the Canada Council­ so that  at  least  the  best of the  now  buried  works of literature  which  the  CBC commissioned  and  performed  may  be  available  in  a  more  permanent  shape.  It may be objected  that  the CBC is still faced with an enormous  task in presenting


4

EDITORIAL



the actualities of the day, without  imposing on it a major extra  burden  of  resur­ recting  and  assessing its past. But it could throw open its vast files to  controlled research  in  co-operation  with  the  Universities. What  subjects  for  hungry  thesis writers must lie concealed there!

* 	* 	*
WE WELCOME a new series of paperbacks,  the Laurentian Library,  published  by Macmillan.  Although for several years Macmillan  have in fact been releasing paperback  editions of many of their books, they have been the only  major  Canadian house  to  delay  the  initiation of  an  actual series.  The Laurentian  Library,  starting   with  books  by  Hugh   MacLennan,  Morley  Cal­ laghan,  Ethel  Wilson  and  other  leading  Macmillan  authors,  makes a good  be­ ginning  in  terms  of quality,  and,  given the  record of excellent books for which Macmillan  holds the copyright,  one can expect much of the series.

* 	* 	*
NEW UNIVERSITY  JOURNALS  are emerging  at  such  a pace in Canada  that  it is difficult to give them more attention  than  mere bibliographical notation.  In  some cases that  is all they deserve; the pressure to publish for sur­ vival alone  among  academics  is equalled  by the  pressure to publish for  prestige alone among  academies, and  many  journals now appearing  on the North Ameri­ can  continent  have  no other  evident  reason for  existence than  the  ambition  of their  initiators.  Mosaic,  whose first number  was published in October  last year by the University of Manitoba, under the editorship of  Kenneth  McRobbie,  may well be one of the exceptions, for it begins with a definite and attractive  purpose. It  is a  journal  "for  the Comparative Study of  Literature  and  Ideas",  and it has established  an  ambitious  plan  of issues, each  devoted  to  a specific theme  con­ nected with comparative literature. The opening issue is concerned  with "Litera­ ture and  history",  and  includes  contributions from, among  others, C. V. Wedg­ wood   (in  condescending  mood), Robin  Skelton  and  Michael  Hamburger. It is a  magazine  worth  following.










5


THE CANADIAN  POET



Part I. To Confederation



A.]. M. Smith









BEFORE CONFEDERATION  there  could have been no poet to reflect a national  identity because there was as yet no political framework  to link
the  various widely separated  regions together  and  no economic  or social factors in  common.  Until  almost the mid-nineteenth century,  the  task of subduing  and settling  the  wilderness  absorbed  the  energies  of  our  people  and  though  there existed  a  number  of  busy  communities-Scottish,  French,   and  English -in the  Maritimes,  Lower Canada, and  Upper  Canada, they  had  little to  do with one  another.  What  they shared  mostly was loneliness and  a sense of local  self­ reliance. The  War of 1812 and the rebellions of 1837 brought  Upper Canada to an  earlier  realization of the advantages  of union  than  they did Nova Scotia or, of course, Lower Canada. Actually, it took the War  between  the States and  the accelerating  economic  and  military  disentanglement  of  Great  Britain  and  the Colonial  Office from  the  affairs  of  England's  trans-Atlantic  provinces  to scare the various colonies into a realization that  they would  have  to  stand  together or divided  they  might  fall-into  the  hands  of  the  armed  and  aroused  Northern  states, if  Britain,  as at  one  time seemed  likely, should  provoke  a war  that  the colonies feared  and did not want.
The  idea of something in common, the aspiration towards  union, and the hope
of an eventual federation found expression in the writings of versifiers and essayists long before social and  economic conditions made  Confederation at first a possi­ bility and  eventually a necessity. The  ideal of a national-or  rather,  perhaps,  a continental-identity was found thrilling by poets, or would-be poets, who hoped

6

THE  CANADIAN POET



that  a national  bard  would arise to hymn the glories of a new nation in the north. Thus,  Standish  O'Grady wrote in 1842 in the Preface to The Emigrant, A Poem: "This   expanded   and  noble  continent  will no  doubt  furnish  fit matter  for  the Muse. The  diversity of climate,  the richness of soil, the endearing  qualities of a genial  atmosphere  must  no doubt  furnish  a  just excitement  to the  poetic mind, and  arouse that  energy correspondent  with a richness of scenery, which the con­ templative  mind  will studiously portray."
In  spite of these natural advantages,  however, a poet of commensurate great­ ness was slow in  appearing.  Twenty-three years later Henry  J. Morgan, writing in  his  valuable  Sketches of Celebrated   Canadians, had  to  admit  that  "We  in
Canada are unfortunate enough not to have had many persons entitled to the distinction of being marked  as poets, though possessing every facility that  a grand and scenic country  possesses, capable  of exciting the proper inspiration  and spirit of poetry."
We  are  tempted  to feel such  remarks-especially a phrase  like "the   proper inspiration ... of poetry" -to  be incredibly  naive. Yet the idea  that  the  Cana­ dian  poet or often, rather,  the Canadian, that mythical figure, is a product of his natural  environment   and  at  once  in  both  a  regional  and  continental  sense ex­ presses and  is formed  by  his surroundings  appeared  early,  and  is with  us still. The  question  has always been, of course, whether the  ubiquitous  wilderness and the northern  climate in a mainly empty semi-continent was to stimulate  or intimi­ date.  On  the whole, our  poets- (and  here I mean all of them,  modern  as well as ancient)  -have written  out  of the  conviction  that  the  challenge  creates  its response;  and  while  the  terror,  that  Professor  Northrop  Frye sees as providing the great  tragic theme of our poetry, is real and intense, our poets have fought it.
Occasionally,  the  wilderness triumphs,  as in Birney's "Bushed," where  a stoic endurance   becomes  the  only  response;  but  usually it  is man's  courage  and  re­ sourcefulness in subduing  the wilderness that is stressed, as in Isabella Crawford's "Malcolm's Katie"  of 1884 or Pratt's  "Towards  the Last Spike" of  1952.
The  idea  that  the  rigorous  climate  and  the  many  natural  obstacles to be  en­ countered  in the north  and west preclude the development of intellectual  life and the creation  of art  and  poetry had found expression very early and may be taken as presenting  a diametrically  opposite but equally sentimental  point of view from that of Standish  O'Grady or Dr.  Morgan. Mrs. Frances Brooke, in the first Cana­  dian  novel, The History  of Emily  Montague, written as far back as 1769, makes her  heroine  write  home  to  England  from the snow-covered city of  Quebec: "I no longer  wonder  the  elegant  arts  are  unknown  here;  the rigour  of  the climate

7

THE CANADIAN POET



suspends the very powers of the understanding; what  then must become of those of the imagination?  Those who expect to see 'A new Athens rising near the pole,' will find themselves extremely disappointed. Genius will never mount  high, where the faculties of the mind are benumbed  half the year."
This  is still a  note to be heard  in  English  reviews, even occasionally in such capable  publications  as TLS and  the  New  Statesman, of Canadian, or  rather, Colonial  books. This  view has the authority  of Professor Toynbee,  who notes in his Study  of History that a line drawn somewhere-just a few miles, one gathers, north  of Boston, marks  the boundary  beyond  which  no intellectual  maturity  or artistic excellence can be expected.
Another  problem  that  poets and  men  of letters  in  pre-Confederation British North  America  saw  confronting  them  was  their  belief that  this was a  country without  a  mythology. Mrs.  Traill,  in  her  account  of pioneer  life in  Otonabee County,  The   Backwoods of  Canada  ( r836)  laments  the fact  that  this is a new country, unsanctified by myth or legend, settled by matter-of-fact folk who have neither  time  nor inclination  to people  the forests with  deities or the  mountains with nymphs. This state of affairs was thought  of as denying to the poet an audi­ ence interested  in what a poet  (even in the wilderness settlement)  is interested in by definition -the traditional  classical myths of European  culture.
This attitude  too persisted a long time, and is responsible for much of the imita­ tive "literary" poetry of the eighties and the nineties. The so-called Confederation poets, in one aspect of their work, sought to import from English romantic  poetry a mythology they might well have found  elsewhere in the tales and  beliefs of the Indian. Both  Charles  G. D. Roberts  and  Duncan  Campbell  Scott made  the at­ tempt;  but  only the latter  was successful-and that  in a surprisingly small pro­ portion of his total work.
Only  very  late -after  the  work  of  anthropologists  and  scholars  like Sapir,
Barbeau,  and Alfred Bailey-has it become possible to make genuine poetry out of the native  mythology of Canada, as for example  in  the translations  of Haida poems by Hermia  Harris Fraser or a few of the poems of Alfred Bailey, or to deal dramatically  and sympathetically  with the Indian, as in John  Newlove's moving poem "The Pride."  An exception must be made,  of course, for "The  Forsaken" and  "At  Gull  Lake"  by D. C. Scott, the first dating  from  1905 and  the second from  1935,  both  of them  products of  Scott's  lifeswork in  the  Department of Indian  Affairs.




8

THE  CANADIAN POET


0NE   MYTH, however, did seize the  imagination  of Cana­
dian  poets, and  that  is the myth  of the machine, especially the machine that be­
comes a means of transportation and serves to draw us together. Lighthall speaks of the  poetry in  his anthology  of  I88g  as a  poetry of the  canoe;  with  Pratt  it becomes a  poetry  of steamship  and  transcontinental  railway;  with  F. R.  Scott and  Birney it is the airplane-"Trans Canada" and "North Star  West."
"In   Canada," Northrop  Frye  has written,  "the  enormous  difficulties and  the central  importance of communication  and  transport,  the tremendous  energy that developed  the fur  trade  routes, the empire  of the St. Lawrence,  the  transconti­ nental  railways,  and  the  northwest  police patrols  have given it the  dominating role in  the  Canadian  imagination." It  is Pratt  certainly,  as Frye  affirms, who has most fully and  most  dynamically  grasped  this fact, but  it is  not  Frye alone, nor the modern  poet alone, who has seen the machine as monster or giant. Sang­ ster, the  best of the  versifiers that  James  Reaney  calls the "dear  bad  poets Who wrote Early in Canada," has a good descriptive piece, written in dashing couplets, on the noise and  excited  astonishment  as the Iron  Horse bursts for the first time into the forest clearing and its sparse settlement. In some of the spirited Spenserian stanzas  of his long  Byronic poem, The  St. Lawrence and the  Saguenay,  he des­ cribes an excursion steamer  winding its way through the channels of the Thousand  Islands. He passes easily from  the myth of the Red  Man to  the myth of the ship as fiery dragon,  a living monster:

Many a tale of legendary lore
Is told of these romantic Isles. The feet
Of the Red Man have pressed each wave-zoned shore,
And many an eye of beauty oft did greet The painted warriors and their birchen fleet, As they returned  with trophies of the slain.

That was the past. And now all has returned to primeval loneliness once again ... "Save  where some  vessel snaps  the isle-enwoven chain,"  and  the  poet  watches with an animating  eye "the  strong steamer, through the watery glade, Ploughing, like a huge serpent from its ambuscade."
This  was in  I856.  But  already  Sangster,  and  therefore,  it  is certain,  others along the northern  shores of Lake Ontario,  were thinking of a unification of the Canadian colonies. When the monument to Brock was dedicated  at Queenston Heights on OctoberI 3,I 859, Sangster wrote a poem for the occasion-a clarion

9

THE CANADIAN POET



call to Canadians to unite  again  as they had  been  united  when  they  repelled  the invader in  1812.

One voice, one people, one in heart
And soul and feeling, and  desire!
Re-light the smouldering martial  fire, Sound  the mute  trumpet,  strike  the lyre, The hero deed can not expire,
The  dead still play their  part.

Raise high the monumental  stone!
A nation's fealty is theirs ...

A nation's  fealty. In  1859?  This,  of  course,  is not  fact,  not  even  at  the  time it was written a  certain  feasibility. It was aspiration, hope,  an  ideal  desideratum
-not politics  but  poetry  (and, ironically,  when  compared with  Emerson's great "Concord Hymn", written  for  a similar  occasion, pretty  hollow  poetry). But  it demonstrated the  birth of a feeling in the hearts and  minds of the people of Upper Canada at  least  that  a  regional  isolation  was  not  enough. Those  like  Sangster, and  others  I shall  turn  to in  a moment, who  were  concerned with  the  develop­ ment  of  poetry  and  letters  in  the  new  country were  particularly  anxious that   a nation  should  be created  that  might  produce, and  be worthy  of, a national poetry.  The idea  of a distinctively  national poetry  was  born  at  the same  time  as the idea  of a distinctive nation.
The  first Canadian anthology  of verse was published in 1864,  the Rev. Edward Hartley Dewart's Selections  from Canadian Poets, and  the editor  wrote a long Introductory Essay  that   must  be  regarded  as  a  manifesto of  the  new  national poetry  that  might  be expected  from the new nation soon to be born.

A national  literature   [wrote  Dewart]   is an  essential element  in the  formation  of national  character.  It is not merely the  record  of a country's  mental  progress:  it is the  expression of its intellectual  life, the  bond  of national  unity, and  the guide of national  energy. It may be fairly questioned, whether  the whole range of history presents the spectacle of a people firmly united politically, without the subtle but powerful cement of a patriotic literature.

These  brave  words are followed  by a realistic  appraisal. Dewart continues:

There  is probably no country in the world making  equal pretensions to intelligence and  progress, where  the claims of a native  literature are so little felt, and  where every effort  in  poetry has been met with so much  coldness and  indifference  as in


10

THE  CANADIAN POET



Canada.  And what  is more to be deprecated  than  neglect of our most meritorious authors,  is  the  almost  universal  absence  of  interest  and  faith  in  all  indigenous literary  productions ...

The  cause  of  this lamentable indifference, the critic went  on  to affirm, was in part  the  wide  prevalence of  low  and  false  conceptions  as to  the  nature and  in­ fluence  of poetry  itself, but  in  Canada a more  important reason  was to be found in  the  inferior  status  of  a colony.

Our  colonial position, whatever  may be its political advantages,  is not favorable to the  growth  of an  indigenous  literature.  Not only are  our  mental  wants  supplied by the  brain  of the  Mother  Country ... but  the majority  of persons of taste and education  in Canada  are emigrants  from the Old Country, whose tenderest affec­ tions cling round  the land  they have left....


This  curse of colonialism, it can  be added  a hundred years later,  did  not leave us after  Confederation; E. K. Brown,  writing  in  On  Canadian  Poetry  (I943), puts  his  finger  on  the  colonial  spirit  as  the  chief  diluter of  our  poetry  just  as Dewart did -and  so many  years and  so many  political changes  later!
Dewart's anthology appeared  three   years  before  Confederation. Its  chief  in­ terest  today  is its  Introduction. The  only  poems in it  that  are  worth  preserving  are  one  or  two  by  Sangster, a  couple  of rhymes  by Alexander  McLachlan, and one or two  passages from  Heavysege's Saul. Canadians had  to wait  until  thirteen  years  after  the  first  Dominion Day  for  the  appearance of  a  second survey of Canadian   poetry. This   was  W.  D.  Lighthall's Songs  of the  Great  Dominion,  published  in  London in  I88g.
Here  the  cautious and  rather gloomy  sobriety  of Dewart has  been  replaced  by a  full  fledged   patriotic enthusiasm. It  would  seem  that   Dewart's faith   in  the efficacy of a national federation to bring  a national poetry into  being  had  already been  amply   justified  by  an  abundance of  good  works.  "The poets  whose  songs fill this  book,"  wrote  Lighthall,

are  voices cheerful  with  the  consciousness of young might,  public wealth, and heroism.... The  tone  of  them  is courage-for to hunt,  to fight,  to hew out  a farm, one must  be a man! Canadians  are for the most part  descendants  of armies
... and  every generation  of them has stood up to battle.... The  delight of a clear atmosphere   runs  through   it  too.... Canada,   Eldest  Daughter  of  the  Empire,  is the  Empire's  completest  type! She is the full-grown of the family-the one first come of age and  gone out into  life as a nation....


I I

THE  CANADIAN POET



A good many summers ago I was conducting  a seminar in Canadian literature and  history at  the University of Toronto  with  Professor Donald  Creighton,  and I remember  his  bewildered  amusement  when  we  read  this  passage. That  this should  have been written in the year of Canada's most serious and  almost disas­ trous  economic  depression was  not  beyond  comprehension  perhaps,  but  it  was almost beyond  justification.
Yet  I  must  make  the attempt.  To  begin with,  Lighthall  could certainly  look with  pardonable pride at  the poetry available  for his anthology  when compared with that  of his pre-Confederation  rival. Here  now were poems of Isabella Craw­ ford,  Mair, Roberts, Lampman, Wilfred Campbell,  and Duncan Campbell  Scott
-the earliest,  and  some of the  best, pieces by the  poets who were later  to be known  as The  Confederation  Poets or the poets of our "Golden  Age". Secondly, when you read the poems collected in Lighthall's  anthology-it is still by far the best of the early anthologies-you will find that  the poems are filled with a spirit of cheerfulness and  wonder,  delight in  the  beauty  of nature,  and  confidence in man's  power  to  conquer.  What  actually  the  appreciative  critic is  expressing­ and  so are  the  poets -is  a general spiritual  sense of euphoria  induced  by Con­ federation -a  certain  indefinable  spirit  of confidence  that  economic difficulties and  political differences could not destroy.
Its  best expression is the least explicit-in the mythopoeic  passages of  Craw­ ford's  "Malcolm's Katie",  in Roberts'  sonnets of the New Brunswick  landscape, and  in Lampman's painterly evocations of the woods and  hills around Ottawa in winter or midsummer. These are Canadian poetry. Let us look, however, at some of the more explicit treatments of the Confederation theme. In some of the pieces by  Mair  that  came out of the Canada  First  movement  and  in  the very explicit Confederation  odes of Roberts we shall see what  people felt they ought to feel. (It  is in the true poems of Roberts, Lampman, and Scott that we find what they really felt-and  in some cases, to the  justification of  Lighthall, the  two are  not  very far  apart.)




CHARLES MAIR was  the  poet  who  most  clearly  and  con­ sciously set himself to advocate and celebrate  Canadian autonomy.  Like Sangster before him, he had  been hailed as a national  poet, and  he thought of  himself as one. In  addition,  he took an active part in politics, being one of the five original members  of  the  Canada   First  movement,  when  it  was organized  by  William

12

THE  CANADIAN POET



Foster  and  George  Denison  in  I868  and  later  he had  the  distinction  of  being held a prisoner by Riel during  the first Red River Insurrection. As to the "Cana­ dianism"  of  Mair's  poetry,  Professor Norman  Shrive in his recent  biography  of the  poet,  tells us how  two  of the  earliest effusions of Mair,  "The  Pines" and "Summer" were read  inI 862  before the Botanical Society of  Canada at  King­ ston and  elicited the praise of the Reverend Principal Leitch of Queen's. Of one, he said, "it is a truly Canadian production, inspired by an acquaintance with and love of the forest";  of the other,  that  it "has more of the old world stamp." For many of the critics of Canadian verse in the nineteenth and the first three decades of the twentieth  these were the comments oftenest made. And they were intended  as high compliment.  If the Canadian poet could be uniquely and yet vaguely and generally "Canadian" and  yet at the same time write like an English poet he was to be given the highest  praise. Col. Denison  knew better  what  was wanted  of a poet, particularly  a practical  poet, and after the publication of Mair's first book of poems, significantly entitled  Dreamland, he wrote in a letter to his friend:

For  God's   sake  drop   the  old  style.  You're  living  in  a  new  world  and  you  must write  in  the  language of  the  living  to living  men ...

And  the good soldier continued:

Most  Canadian poems  should  be published  with mild Eau  Sucn!e style of names­
such as "Midnight Musings" or, what  is more  to the point,  "Nocturnal Emissions."

Mair  did occasionally speak out, and  the lines he wrote to commemorate Wil­ liam Foster, the leading  spirit in the Canada  First movement, who died in I 887, are a clear manifesto  of the aims and  hopes he held for the future  of the  young Dominion.

. .. Throw sickly thoughts aside­ Let's  build  on  native  fields our  fame; Nor  seek  to  blend  our  patriot's pride With  alien  worth or alien shame!

First  feel  throughout the  throbbing land
A  nation's pulse,  a  nation's  pride­ And  independent  life-then  stand Erect, unbound, at  Britain's side.

This, one feels, is a piece of classical verse in which each word and  phrase has a precise significance,  explicit  or  implied.  What  these  are  we  cannot  be  certain

THE CANADIAN POET



from  the  poem  alone, -and  this is a defect  it shares  with  a good many  other political or  patriotic  poems -but  from  the writings, letters, and speeches of the members  of the Canada  First movement we can learn  enough  about  their  views to interpret  "alien  worth" as British worth and  "alien shame" as American shame
-an  implication  in  the  word  "alien"  found  as late  as the  Massey Report,  by the way-and  that  "Erect,  unbound,  at Britain's side" means "courageous, free, equal  and  ready  and able to come to Britain's  aid, not timidly depending  on her aid."  A more  independent  statement  than  Kipling's  much  later  famous  phrase about  Mother  and  Daughter.
Yet the limitations of Canada  First and  Mair's  views about Canadian unity are very clear. Professor Shrive speaks of the movement's self-destructive weakness. "Decrying   provincialism,  it  was itself provincial,  even  parochial.  Culturally   it was  militantly  anti-Ultramontane and  anti-French. Socially its members  repre­ sented  the  'respectable',  even, as in Denison's  case, the  upper  classes." The  na­ tional  unity,  in  other  words  to  be advocated   and  stimulated, was  an  English, genteel,  and  Christian  one. It was a union  embracing  only Upper  Canada, the dominant English minority of Lower Canada, and  the Maritimes.
This  dream  of a limited union was shared  also by the so-called Confederation
poets, particularly  Roberts and  Wilfred Campbell,  and  the anthologist  Lighthall, but it has been revealed for what it is-only a dream -by the two great events in  the  history of Canada  since the end of the Second  World  War-the influx of European immigrants  into our rapidly expanding cities and  the awakening  of Quebec.  Robert's  finely phrased  and  classically modulated   lines beginning  "0
Child of Nations, giant-limbed"  are perfectly turned  and  present a truly inspiring picture  of an  ideal,  strong, free, independent, and  unified  nation-but it was only a dream,  a dream  made  unreal  by the fact  that  it  was dreamed  by only half the nation.



PIPER OF MANY  TUNES


Duncan Campbell Scott



Gary Geddes








W.AT STRIKES ONE   moot fmcibly  about D. C. Scott  ;, his versatility, his wide range of ability and interest; he is, in fact, the one breath of fresh air escaping from  the mixed bag of Confederation  poets. Scott not only has  a  deep  response  to  nature,  like his contemporaries,  Roberts,  Carman   and Lampman, but  he has also added  to this a genuine appreciation  of the savage, a Browning-esque  monologue,  and  a sophisticated sense of form  and  mission. And yet, in spite  of this diversity,  there is an  unexpected  narrowness  in  the  way in which critics have discussed his poetry. In his own time, Scott complained  about "the  cant  of  the  more  careless critics to keep clinging away  that  all Canadian poets are  nature   poets".•  Half  a  century  later,  his public  image  is equally  dis­ torted: Pelham  Edgar  has found it necessary to rationalize Scott to the twentieth century  by singling  out  Scott's  "original  response to  the  wilder  aspects of  the Canadian scene".Recognition of his primitive verse was necessary and  justified, but  what  began with  Edgar  as a special emphasis has become in the intervening years  an  institution.  It  is now  possible, for  example, for  Professor Daniells, in The   Literary  History  of Canada, to conclude  that  Scott's  reputation   rests ulti­ mately on a small group of poems, such as "Night  Hymns on Lake Nipigon",  and that "only  nature  [italics mine],  and preferably nature in her most primitive and untamed  aspect, is capable  of releasing Scott's powers as a poet".3 This one-sided view of Scott's  poetry  indicates  a failure  to see him  within  the  context  of the nineteenth  century, where most of his best verse belongs; furthermore, the attempt  to modernize Scott  obscures his larger significance. Scott was already sixty when "The  Wasteland" was published  and  he was too firmly rooted  by age and  tem­ perament  in  the  nineteenth  century  to respond favourably,  no less creatively, to

IS

DUNCAN CAMPBELL SCOTT



the prophecies of Yeats and  the arid, shifting sands of the twentieth  century. To expect Scott to be concerned with imagistic modes, cross-fertilization of metaphor, and  so on,  would  be tantamount to expecting  the later  Milton  to have written neo-classical satire. If evaluation of his poetry is to have any meaning, Scott must be re-classified; he must be seen alongside not his temporal  but his spiritual men­ tors-Coleridge, Tennyson  and  Arnold.  In  what  follows, then,  I have  tried  to approach  Scott's  poetry through  the medium  of his published letters, with a view to dispelling a number  of misconceptions concerning  his aims and  achievement; at  the same  time,  I  have  been  tempted  to look freshly at  some  old favourites, especially "The Piper of Arll".
To  re-classify Scott as a nineteenth-century poet is less seriously limiting than one might think. "Give me some credit for logic as applied to aesthetics", he wrote in 1905, "for  I declare that  I value brain  power at the bottom of everything. If you call me  a nature  poet you will have to forget some of my best work".4 These are  not  the  words of a man  denying his artistic  destiny, but  rather  the sincere expression of a desire to be seen in the right perspective. Scott fully understood the place of nature  in his poetry, but  he believed that  some of his best work derived its stimulus  from  elsewhere-from man  and  from  the  life of  the  imagination itself. I would like to discuss his poetry from these three points of view-nature, man,  and  the life of the imagination.  This  plan  is not  meant  to provide a rigid tripartite division of Scott's poetry or to suggest arbitrary pigeon-holes for poems having  an integrity of their own; on the contrary,  it is a more fertile and flexible way  to  approach   Scott, and  one  which  is at  least  consistent with  his expressed views of his poetry.
Scott responded to nature  in the best traditions  of romanticism -appreciation without  prostration.  While unwilling to prostitute  himself emotionally and  artis­ tically to the enchanting  elements and terrain  of Canada, Scott nevertheless recog­ nized  their  imaginative   possibilities. "The life  of  nature", he  declared,  "is  as varied and  complex as the life of the spirit and it is for this reason that man finds in nature  infinite  correspondences with his spiritual  states." 5  Fundamental to this impressionism,  however, is the  understanding that  nature  is  not  a repository of "truth", but  rather   the  means  by  which  man's  own  important sensations  are elicited and  activated.  Nature  remains subordinate to man,  a vast reservoir from which he draws  at will; it is but one of the means  by  which man  may penetrate  to the truth  of his own sensations. Scott quoted  Amiel's statement  that "landscape is a state of soul", insisting that  "in  the apprehension of some such truth  lies the sole excuse for  poetry in which nature  is described." 6

DUNCAN CAMPBELL SCOTT



In  "The   Height  of Land", his most philosophical poem, nature  becomes an incentive  to  reminiscence  and  reflection. The  poet stands on the uplands  in the serenity of evening, brooding about the lives and ideals of men. His senses sharpen to the hush of wind and the play of moths around  a low fire, so that he can almost hear  the  "gathering of  rivers in  their  sources".  As he surveys the  land  in  this hyper-sensitive state,  a  mysterious  "Something   comes by flashes/  Deeper  than peace,"  as unexpectedly  quiet  and  intriguing  as the calm at  the eye of a  hurri­ cane.7 At  that  moment  the state  of the land  may be said  to reflect  exactly  the state of the poet's mind. The symbiosis is prelusive to finding a "deeper meaning" than  is written  on  the surface  of things. The  poet's emphasis  is centred  not  on the details of the physical scene, but on the impression which it fixes on his mind;  thus, it may be seen, his reflections on life constitute a somewhat  higher  level of participation in nature-that is, a philosophical rather than  a purely descriptive involvement.
Scott's insistence, that  nature  can only provide correspondence to man's spiritual states, is perhaps  more rigorous than  his practice  justifies. In the same poem, for example,  a  significant  change  of  pace  occurs. Suddenly the  smell of  charred ground  transports  the poet back in time to a bush-fire he has experienced:


Then  sudden I  remember when and  where,­ The last weird lakelet foul with weedy growths And slimy viscid things the spirit loathes,
Skin of vile water over viler mud
Where the paddle stirred unutterable stenches,
And the canoes seemed heavy with fear, Not to be urged toward the fatal shore
Where a bush-fire, smouldering, with sudden roar
Leaped on a cedar and smothered it with light
And terror.


There  is something  more instinctive  than  rational  in the way this image is  pre­ sented.  Although   the  landscape  is technically  a state  of soul, the  image  of  the predatory  bush-fire seems rather  to have been dragged up involuntarily from  the poet's subconscious  than  to have  resulted from  a conscious search for secondary correspondences.  The  sheer force and  immediacy  of the experience  clearly indi­ cates that  Scott's  response to nature  was, at times, stronger  than  his theory sug­ gests. Certainly  this passage supports  the emphasis that Daniells and  Edgar  place on Scott's susceptibility to the more turbulent  aspects of his environment.

DUNCAN CAMPBELL SCOTT



Similar  spontaneous  responses to nature  occur in "September" and  "In  Win­ ter",  but Scott is at his most lyrical and unrestrained  in "Ecstasy". Witnessing the upward  flight and the jubilant morning song of the shore-lark, the poet is moved
to ecstasy:
The shore-lark soars to his topmost flight,
Sings at the height where the morning springs, What though his voice be lost in the light,
The light comes dropping from his wings.

Mount, my soul, and sing at the height
Of thy clear flight in the light and  the air, Heard or unheard in the night in the light
Sing there! Sing there!

Coming  in  the  wake of Shelley's "To  a Skylark",  "Ecstasy" invites comparison. As Dr. Johnson  would have observed, Shelley's imagination  soars higher  and  is longer  on  the wing;  his intellectual  and  artistic  powers equip  him  for  a  more profound and sustained flight. "Ecstasy" does not pretend to be profound or philosophical.  Whereas  Shelley  uses the  flight  as  a  sustained  metaphor,   Scott keeps to its simpler, more immediate  appeal.  Less ambitious  in scope, "Ecstasy" is  nonetheless skillfully contrived;  it  is also free  from  the  undue  strain  which length  and  poeticality place on Shelley's poem. With  an almost breathless rhyth­ mical sweep, a pronounced  absence  of simile and  poetic diction, a predominance  of crisp consonants and  light palatal  vowels, Scott captures  the upward  flight of the shore-lark. And this is no small accomplishment  with a lark of  the less sophisti­ cated, Canadian, shore-bound  variety !
From  the poems already mentioned, it would  not be difficult to equate  Scott's
rejection  of the  "nature poet" label  with  Wordsworth's  post facto denial  of his own  phrase,  "worshipper  of nature". No doubt  both  poets do protest too much. At the same time, however, Scott was too classical in his tastes to countenance  an over-abundance of feeling and  a deficiency of art.  Nature  poetry, characterized in his mind by excesses of emotion and description, stands here opposed to "brain power"  and  "logic  as applied  to aesthetics".  As such it is below the dignity of serious poets. "One  of my faiths is expressed by Ben Johnson  [sic]," Scott said, " 'It  is only  the  disease  of  the  unskillful to  think rude things greater  than polished'." 6 Like Jonson himself, Scott was a careful craftsman.  "You could find plenty to say about metre and I have invented  not a few new stanzas," he insisted. "I have  not  been  self-conscious in  practice;  my desire  was to  make  the  thing under  my hands as perfect as I could make it." 9

18

DUNCAN CAMPBELL SCOTT



Scott  was pleasantly  surprised to have  pointed  out  to  him  by E. K. Brown  the "intensity and  restraint" in  his  poetry.10   Consciously or  unconsciously,  Scott  had long  been  pursuing this elusive goal.  In  his introduction to Lampman's Lyrics of Earth, he quoted Coleridge's famous  statement: "In poetry  it is the  blending  of passion  and  order   that   constitutes perfection"." Scott's  respect  for  the  guiding and   restraining  influence of  traditional forms  and   metres  parallels   Coleridge's claim  that   metre  originates psychologically,  "to  hold  in  check  the  workings  of passion".'2   Control is the  standard for  both  art  and  life. In  "Ode for  the  Keats Centenary", Scott  praises  Keats,

Who schooled his heart  with passionate control To  compass knowledge, to unravel the dense Web of this tangled  life.

"The Woodspring to the  Poet" describes the "vast  wave of control"; "In a Coun­
try  Churchyard" asserts  the  "moderate state  and  temperate rule".




E CLASSICAL   BALANCE  between  passion   and  order,  which Scott  shared  with  Coleridge and  Arnold, is best illustrated in "At  Delos",  a poem which  is unexplainably absent  from  Brown's  edition  of  the  Selected  Poems, but
included in A. J. M. Smith's The  Book of Canadian Poetry:

An iris-flower with  topaz leaves,
With  a  dark  heart  of deeper  gold, Died  over Delos when light failed
And  the  night  grew cold.

No wave fell mourning  in the sea
Where  age on age beauty had died; For  that  frail  colour  withering  away
No sea-bird  cried.

There  is no grieving in the world
As beauty fades throughout  the years; The  pilgrim  with  the weary heart
Brings to the grave his tears.


"At   Delos"  illustrates finely  the  meeting  and  mingling  of  the  classical  and  the romantic in Scott; it is a  beautiful and  delicate  rendering of a romantic grief  at

rg

DUNCAN CAMPBELL SCOTT



the passing of beauty, handled  not subjectively but impersonally, and with classical restraint.
While  admitting   the influence of nature  in  his poetry, Scott  hoped  to  make clear  that  his main  interest  and  stimulus  was in  man.  "It is inevitable  that  we
should  deal  with  nature  and somewhat  largely,"  he wrote  to J. E. Wetherell in
r8g2, "but  I think it will be found that much  of this work rises from and returns again  to man  and  does not exist from  and  to itself." 13 Even  his impressionism, which asserts the superiority of the impression to the object, reflects Scott's humanism.  Similarly, he despised all types of artistic escapism and obscurantism as much  as he despised the mindless veneration  of nature,  because both led away from the proper study of mankind. He had only contempt  for Yeats, who required a "fund  of Irish legends to set imagination  aglow".14
In  "Ode for  the  Keats  Centenary", Scott  lamented  the  loss of beauty  from
life-"Beauty  has taken refuge from our life,/  That grew too loud and  wound­ ing" -but  his  Indian   and  habitant   poems  reveal  that  he  discovered  beauty again  in  the  very noise and  wounds he had  lamented,  in  the  beauty  of human  suffering. In  "The Height of Land", Scott paused to "Brood on the welter of the lives of men",  but  he did  not  pause long;  he  plunged  beneath  the  surface  of beaver-skins and  tail-feathers into the dark  recesses of the human  heart. And the raw life he found  there is quite distinct from anything outside of Pratt in antholo­ gies of Canadian poetry. The  tragic killing of  Keejigo in "At Gull Lake:  August,
I 8I o" is a dramatic tour de force:

At the top of the bank
The old wives caught her and cast her down
Where Tabashaw crouched by his camp-fire.
He snatched a live brand from the embers, Seared her cheeks,
Blinded her eyes,
Destroyed her beauty with the fire, Screaming, "Take  that face to your lover." Keejigo held her face to the fury
And made no sound.
The old wives dragged her away
And threw her over the bank
Like a dead dog.

The  strength  here is not descriptive but  dramatic; Scott  combines the economy of the ballad,  the human  interest of the drama, and the suspense of both.


20

DUNCAN CAMPBELL SCOTT



The  difficulty Scott  had  in  subduing  his subjective  and  descriptive  impulses was largely dispelled when  he embraced  the human  drama. In "At  the Cedars", a  fascinating  dramatic monologue,  the  narrative  is exceedingly  stark-boiled right  down  to the skeleton.  Bones, at  any  time, are  provocative,  and  these are no  exception;   consequently,   the  temptation  to  find  allegory  in  the  suggestive names-Isaac, Baptiste  and  Virginie-and the  diabolus  ex  machina,  is sub­ dued only by the rapid pace and intensity of the narrative. As in the ballad, much of the success of "At  the Cedars"  depends on what is left unsaid;  the poem gains considerably  by the  indefiniteness of the  motives in the suicide of the  nameless sister of Virginie :

There were  some girls, Baptiste, Picking berries  on  the  hillside, Where the  river  curls, Baptiste, You  know -on  the  still side; One was  down  by  the  water She  saw  Isaac
Fall  back.

She  did  not  scream,  Baptiste, She  launched her  canoe;
It did  seem,  Baptiste,
That she wanted to die  too For before  you  could  think The birch  cracked  like a shell In  that   rush  of  hell,
And  I saw  them  both  sink.

To  call Scott  a poet of nature  in these poems can only be justified if one means what Dr. Johnson  meant when he applied the same label to Shakespeare-human nature.
While responding  creatively to man and nature, Scott also rejoiced in the fervid
life of his imagination. "The life of poetry is in  the imagination," he  insisted, "there  lies the  ground  of  true  adventure  and  though  the  poet's  mind  may  be starved and  parched  by the lack of variety in life, he persists nevertheless to  make poetry out of its dust and ashes." '5 Much of his poetry finds its life not in external stimuli but  in an  internal  compulsion, in the "volcano",  as Scott called the ima­ gination.'6   And  it  is there-in  the  heat  of imagination -that  one  of  Scott's finest poems arose, Phoenix-like from the ashes. "The  Piper of Arll" stems from, and  is itself a poem about  the life of the imagination.

21

DUNCAN CAMPBELL SCOTT



"The  Piper"  has had a poor press; critics seldom fail to mention it, but always for  the wrong  reasons. John  Masefield, the  poem's  most vigorous supporter,  no doubt  began  this negative reinforcement. Faced  with  the challenge of defending "The   Piper"  against  a  charge of meaninglessness, Masefield side-stepped  the is­ sue: "let it escape", he said of the symbolism, the "romantic mood and the author's  dream  may be of deep personal significance and  joy, even if the author's thought eludes  us." •7   Criticism  of  this sort  we can  do  without.  Indeed,  nothing  could have  been more damaging  to the poem's reputation at a time when wit and  in­ tellect  in  poetry  were at  a  premium.  Subsequent  criticism  reveals quite  clearly that   Masefield  unwittingly  closed the  doors  on  serious  study  of  "The Piper": Pelham  Edgar,  for example,  praises the  poem  as  "musical  incantation"; W. J. Sykes asserts that it seems "too tenuous, too  unsubstantial to induce  that  'willing suspension of disbelief' " and  lacks "concrete meaning"; Daniells also notes that "Even  the often quoted  'Piper  of  Arll' is lacking the compulsion of true magic"; even E. K. Brown, whom the meaning does not elude, nevertheless finds the poem a "mass of suggestions which do indeed lack definiteness." '8
Criticism of "The  Piper"  seems based on the mistaken  assumption  that  mean­
ing  and  indefiniteness  are  mutually  exclusive. That the  poem  is intentionally vague  and  mysterious  there  can  be  little  doubt.  "At  the  root  of everything  is mystery," Scott wrote. "Poetry illuminates this mass of knowledge and by inspira­ tion  will eventually  reach the core of the mystery." ' 9  He preferred  the poetry of Maeterlinck,  who was "endeavouring  to awaken the wonder-element  in a modern way, constantly expressing the almost unknowable  things we all feel." go  To  con­ vey the mystery and wonder surrounding  our daily lives, the poet requires a special vocabulary.  As Scott says in "Meditation at Perugia": "Our common words are with deep wonder fraught". Scott laboured,  of set artistic purpose, to leave "The  Piper"  indefinite  and suggestive; he aimed at a fusion of  form and  content. "He  may not care for the mystical," Scott said of his critic, Sykes, "but  there is more in 'The  Piper of Arll' than  he seems to have discovered." g,
"The  Piper"  may be seen on one level as an  allegory of the artist. Living in harmony  with his idyllic environment,  the artist is confronted  with a vision of loneliness to which he responds creatively. When the vision passes and inspiration dies, his remorse drives him to such distraction  that  he abuses his powers of  com­ passion and  communication:


He threw his mantle on the beach, He went apart  like one distraught,


22

DUNCAN CAMPBELL SCOTT



His lips were moved -his desperate speech
Stormed  his inviolable thought.

He  broke his human-throated  reed, And  threw  it in the idle rill;
But when his passion had its mead, He  found  it in the eddy still.

Through conscious  self-renunciation  the  artist  begins  to  heal  and   he  resurrects out  of  the  ashes  his initial  heart-felt response  to the  vision. When  this is  accom­ plished,  in  a  burst  of selfless creative  energy  he pours out  his soul in  perfect  har­ mony  with  the  world  and  is reunited with  his  dream-vision in a  beautiful im­ mortality.
The nature of the  poetic  experience, thus  oversimplified,  is essentially  religious, and  it  is almost  certain that  Scott  intended the  parallel  to  run  throughout the poem.  Given  his desire  for  indefiniteness  and  suggestiveness, it would  be trite  to observe  that  the image  of the  three  pines in "The Piper",

There  were three  pines above the comb That, when  the sun flared and  went down, Grew  like three  warriors  reaving  home
The  plunder  of a burning  town,

is  less obviously  and   less effectively  symbolic  than   the  similar  image  in  Eliot's "Journey of  the  Magi". Scott's simile  works  well  as a  symbolic  pre-figuring in nature of the piper's experience: as the image of the plunder-laden warriors comes at  sunset,  is lost in  the  night,  and  then  returns, so also the  piper  receives, loses, and  then  regains  his artistic  "loot" -his inspiration -from the vision ship. The problem  of the  loss of inspiration is stated  more explicitly in "Prairie Wind":

But the vision you found in the twilight, You could  never again  recapture,
It was lost in one careless impulse
In  the first wild rush of the rapture.

The  piper's  loss, however,  is not so permanent; he is able to recapture the fleeting vision:

He mended  well the patient  flue, Again he tried its varied stops;
The  closures answered  right and  true, And  starting  out  in piercing drops,

DUNCAN CAMPBELL SCOTT



A melody began to drip
That mingled with a ghostly thrill
The vision-spirit of the ship,
The secret of his broken will.

The  "secret of his broken will" may mean simply the necessary conversion of inspiration  to elbow-grease which all serious artists learn, or it may refer to what Eliot calls "depersonalization" -"a continual  surrender ... to something  which is more valuable. The  progress of the artist is a continual self-sacrifice, a continual extinction of personality." 22
The  poem  does support  a  religious interpretation of the  image  of the  three pines. The  piper  responds to God as the bay responds to the ocean's  tides. The vision-ship comes with an angel at the bows, who departs  just as the piper achieves his immortality.  The  piper's  broken will corresponds, of course, to the Christian paradoxes  of  life in  death,  fulfillment  in  self-sacrifice and  knowledge  through child-like faith.  At the moment of his mastery over passion and  power, the piper is standing  at the foot of the three pines, "Immortal for a happy hour". The piper must  learn  the lesson which the woodspring  teaches in "The Woodspring  to the Poet": "Give,  Poet, give!/  Thus  only shalt  thou  live./ ... Give as we give  un­ bidden." This  responsiveness or sympathy  cannot  be achieved otherwise than by instinctive  humility,  by an  unconscious giving of self. This  achieved,  the  piper's powers are restored:
He, singing into nature's heart, Guiding his will by the world's will, With deep, unconscious, childlike art Had flung his soul out and was still.

He  has experienced  the reconciliation  which was achieved  by the Ancient  Mari­
ner, when he blessed the water snakes unawares.
The  intriguing  conclusion of "The  Piper",  in which the intimations of immor- tality are realized, is the artistic equivalent of Elijah's translation:

And down she sank till, keeled in sand, She rested safely balanced true,
With all her upward gazing band,
The  piper and the dreaming crew.

And there, unmarked of any chart, In  unrecorded depths they lie, Empearled within the purple heart Of the great sea for aye and aye.

DUNCAN CAMPBELL SCOTT



Their eyes are ruby in the green
Long shafts of sun that spreads and rays, And upward with a wizard sheen
A fan of sea-light leaps and plays.

The  T empest-Iike sea  change  implies a concept of art  as stasis. Life, in Scott's poetry, is a movement  towards eternal  rest, a rest which is common  to all men­ the poet, the religious and  the oppressed of every kind. Even the violent death of Keejigo  in  "At  Gull  Lake"  becomes a  release from suffering,  a final,  beautiful merging with  the natural cycle of the universe. The  accompanying storm  brings the rainbow;  the moon changes its shade for the perfect glow of  the  prairie lily. Her  death  is a victory, a final reward: "After  the beauty of  terror the beauty of peace".  Like Keejigo, the piper achieves his rest; first his will  and  then his body merge with  the harmonious  cosmos.
So  much  for  the lack of meaning  in "The Piper". Most  of what  is best in poetry, as Frost suggests, is lost in the translation.  While a too extensive explana­ tion  of  "The Piper" would  destroy  a good deal of its magic,  existing  criticism deserves to be challenged. What  is important  in the present discussion is that the poem  be  reconsidered  as  fundamental to  an  understanding of  Scott's  poetic achievement.  These  remarks  are  a suggestive  rather  than  an  exhaustive  step in that  direction.




NORTHROP FRYE  has  cited Scott's  poetry  as  a  pnme

DUNCAN CAMPBELL SCOTT



kind: he must  write those which  will guide  and  inspire  youth,  "Till over his spirit shall  roll/   The  vast  wave  of  control"; he  must  nurture the  creative spirit  with poems  like "The Piper  of Arll" -

Give them songs that  charm  and  fill The soul with an alluring pleasure, Prelusive to a deeper  thrill,
A richer tone, a fuller  measure;

and,  finally,  he  must  administer to  the  dead  souls of  academe and  the  market­
place  a particularly metaphysical cure :

Helve them a song of life,
... Proud  pointed  with  wild  life, Plunge it as the lightning  plunges, Stab them to life!

This  broad  view of the function  of poetry  beggars  the  notion  that  Scott  was only a nature poet.  Whatever his creative  stimulus -whether  nature, man, or the life of  the  imagination-Scott directed   his  various   melodies  to  the  needs  of  the human heart; and if his poetry has a wide-spread appeal, it is because  Scott  was a piper  of many  tunes.




NOTES

' More  Letters  of Duncan Campbell  Scott  (2nd  Series),  selected, edited  and  pub­
lished  by A. S. Bourinot, Ottawa,  1960, 68.
2   Pelham   Edgar,   "Duncan   Campbell  Scott,"   Leading  Canadian   Poets, Toronto, Ryerson, 1948, 213.
3  "Crawford, Campbell  and  Scott,"  Literary  History  of Canada,  edited  by Carl  F. Klinck,  Toronto, University of Toronto  Press, 1965, 421.
4   Some  Letters  of Duncan  Campbell  Scott  and  Others,  selected, edited  and  pub­
lished by Arthur  S. Bourinot, Ottawa, 1959, "Autobiographical Note."
5  Editor's  introduction  to Archibald  Lampman's Lyrics of Earth, Toronto,  Musson,
1925, 44·
6  Lac. cit.
7  All  citations  from  Scott's  poetry,  unless otherwise  indicated,   are  from  Selected Poems,  Toronto, Ryerson,   1951,  and  The   Poems  of  Duncan  Campbell   Scott, Toronto, McClelland  & Stewart,  1926.

DUNCAN CAMPBELL SCOTT



8  Some  Letters, op. cit.
9   Ibid., 30.
10  On Canadian  Poetry, Toronto,  Ryerson, 1943, 122. " Lyrics of Earth, 45·
·Biographia  Literaria, II, 49-50.
•3   More  Letters, 68.
'4 Ibid., 25.
'5 Lyrics of Earth, 37·
•6  Some  Letters,  29.
•7   Quoted in Brown, op. cit., 124.
•8  Edgar,  op. cit., 2 r 7; "Duncan Campbell Scott," Queen's  Quarterly, XLVI,  1939,
6o, 52; Literary  History of Canada, 418; Brown, op. cit., 124.
•9  More  Letters,  28.
o Ibid.,  25.
·
22    "Tradition and  the  Individual Talent."
23 Literary  History  of Canada,  825.


LE PRIVILEGE   DE VIVRE


Rejlexions sur Robert Choquette



Carlo Fonda






  DEFINIR   l'oeuvre   poetique   de  Robert   Cho­ quette, sinon comme une priere que le poete adresse a Dieu pour le remercier du privilege de  vivre, d'exister? La  plupart  des poemes de Choquette sont, en effet, des chants en l'honneur  de la beaute du monde.
C'est  Jean  Hytier,  je crois, qui,  dans  son etude  de  styles, donne  le nom  de theme  a  "un  sentiment  special et  present  qui  joue et se satisfait  dans  les  com­ binaisons  d'images."  On  conviendra  que  c'est  precisement  cet etat  affectif qui fait le fond de la reverie poetique de Robert Choquette.
Dans le Proloque  de ses Oeuvres  Poetiques, le poete dit  nettement  son dessein. Ainsi la premiere image qu'il dresse est celle d'un  homme que sa passion empeche de s'accommoder  de !'existence ordinaire.  D'une  part, il est possede d'une  soif de plenitude,  d'autre part, d'un  besoin de s'aneantir. Dans la solitude ou il se retire, il s'efforce de s'elever dans sa poesie a une conscience distincte  de celle de com­ muns mortels:

Je monterai toujours, pensif comme le soir, Oubliant peu a peu la rumeur des villages
Et les pactes menteurs qu'entre eux font les vivants, Jusqu'a ce que mon coeur soit seul avec les Vents.

Mais le poete n'est certes pas soucieux de construire sa propre image pour les generations a venir et voila qu'il  mettra  toutes les ressources de son arne poetique a soutenir  un seul developpement  d'images  et d'idees. Une  extreme sensualite et une extreme musicalite se trouveront ainsi combinees et entremelees  pour peindre

ROBERT CHOQUETIE



les beautes, les seductions, les couleurs de son pays natal. Designant  de Ia main Ia splendeur  qui s'etale  devant  le voyageur solitaire, le poete se fait  pretre et guide pour evoquer Ia presence au monde d'un  pays unique:  le Canada. Theme genera­ teur de sa poesie, ce pays de reve n'est pas seulement Ia cle d'un  tresor de pensees fecondes, il est avant  tout le monde de silence qui force Ia reflexion a se detacher du  songe, ou  l'isolement  mene  Ia contrainte  de  penser et l'homme  a  demander  pardon   pour  s'etre  nourri  de  mensonges. Enfin,  il est le seul  refuge  ou !'arne s'abandonne a Ia contemplation de l'imperissable purete de Ia nature  qui alors se confond  avec Ia poesie elle-meme.
II a visite !'Europe ou "tout  est connu de l'homme a Ia nature." II a vu Rome etemelle,  Venise, Florence  et  Verone,  puis Ia Suisse et "!'eclair  des glaciers" et enfin  Ia  France  "aux  sveltes cathedrales"  mais ce qu'on  trouve  la-bas,  c'est le passe. Voila  pourquoi   c'est  seulement  dans  son  grand   pays  tout  neuf  et  sans mesure qu'il  eprouvera  !'exaltation presque physique d'avoir  tout l'avenir.
Poete, done,  par son amour  du sol natal  il en chante les grandeurs et le futur
glorieux:
De qui, mon Canada, serions-nous done jaloux, Quand nous tenons encor l'heure preparatoire,
Ce privilege unique, a benir a genoux,
De savoir nos lauriers les plus beaux devant nous,
D'avoir devant nous notre histoire?	(Retour d'Europe)

Dans  ses  poemes,  que   nous  osons  appeler  patriotiques,  le  Canada  palpite, respire, se fait  chair  vivante.  On  y goute Ia chaleur des maisons couvertes par Ia premiere  neige d'automne. On  y respire Ia senteur des sapins  qui  en rang  nous accompagnent et  le  charme des  bois  ou  "Ia  vierge nature  chante  le nom  du Canada!"; on y hume l'arome des saisons: le printemps "calme dans le vent pur", l'ete  "moite", l'automne qui  apporte  les vents du  Nord  "diaboliques vengeurs", l'hiver  qui "efface les laideurs  boueuses des etangs".
II n'y a pas longtemps, Louis Dantin,  dans sa preface a Emile  Nelligan et son Oeuvre, se plaignait  qu'il  n'y ait eu qu'un  seul poete, Pamphile  Lemay, "dont  Ia vision poetique  se soit  nettement  restreinte  aux  hommes et aux  choses de notre pays".  Mais en lisant Choquette, on n'y trouve guere de poeme qui ne contienne pas un souvenir,  une impression,  un objet  qui  rapelle le Canada. A Florence, il se promene le long de 1'Amo, et visite les somptueuses eglises et les riches musees. II en rapporte  une admiration profonde  dont  temoignent  les vers qu'il  compose a  l'honneur   de  Ia vieille Europe.  Mais !'atmosphere  qui  plane  sur  ces poemes, c'est celle de sa terre  natale.  Sans  doute,  il a  beaucoup  admire  les tableaux  de

29

ROBERT CHOQUETTE



Botticelli  et ceux du  Perugin  mais, lorsqu'il veut  reprendre la palette  pour  les  re­ produire, c'est  aux  couleurs,  aux  sons,  aux  impressions   de  son  pays  qu'il  fera appel.  Ainsi, cette  Vierge du  Perugin a pour  decor  un  paysage  qui  n'est  pas celui de la Toscane, mais, au  contraire, celui d'un pays -le Canada-ou  les images ne sont  lirnitees que  par !'horizon et  par  le ciel, au  sens litteral et au  sens figure.
Dans  les vers suivants,  on voit la neige indifferente, meme  implacable, qui  pese sur  un  pays de reve. On  admire les multiples  combinaisons de formes,  de couleurs qui  unissent  mille rythmes d'images au sein de l'univers cependant que  le portrait central de  la  Vierge  Marie,  par  une  subtile  correspondence, exprime tacitement ce qm  unit  le monde  materiel  et  l'univers spirituel:

Votre front est plus pur que les neiges intactes. Le murmure confus de nos coeurs moribonds
Fait a vos pieds sacres le bruit des cataractes
Que chantent dans la brume et dans les soir profonds.
Vierge du Perugin, o Vierge immaculee ... Repandez a jamais la lumiere etoilee
Qui filtre entre vos cils, o reine des blancheurs!
(A' la Vierge du Perugin)

Mais  c'est  un univers fraternel auquel i1reve, et Choquette essayera de decouvrir l'harmonie primitive du  nouveau  monde  pour  inviter  ses freres  a entendre l'appel
du  Prince-des-Oiseaux et  s'orienter vers  l'amour humain, comme  un  peuple  en adoration. L'Amerique du  Nord  etait  un  eden  de  bonheur car  la  nature y etait prodique de  ses dons.  Royaume de  surabondance et  de  fecondite, elle etait  un monde d'innocence et de  beaute:

Alors, les caribous marchant dans les roseaux
Levaient a chaque pas d'innombrables oiseaux,
Et les banes de harengs, au temps des saisons neuves,
Luisaient, tels que des rais de solei!sur les fleuves. Le grand aigle de mer qui rasait les sapins
Faisait courir son ombre au penchants  des collines;
Et l'aurore emplissait l'oeil rose des lapins ...

Et tousles animaux dont la foret regorge
S'unissaient a la voix des hommes triomphants
Dans l'ivresse de vivre et d'etre  des enfants.

Telle etait 1' Amerique indompree et sauvage.
(Le  Chant  de l'Aigle Rouge)

30

ROBERT CHOQUETTE



Le  heros  de  ce  monde etait   comme  un  enfant   qui  porte  dans  leur  plus  pur eclat  les plus  beaux  dons  de  Ia nature: l'ampleur sereine  du  ciel, le charme  in­ cantatoire des plaines,  le chant du  desir de vivre et le poeme  de l'amour humain. Et  void  que,  "debout dans  le  jour  qui  commence", il chante "l'hymne  au  pays devant le lac immense":

0 mon pays, salut dans le ciel elargi! ...

Et voici que mon arne entr'ouvre sa paupiere
Et pose sur la vie un long regard d'amour  ...
Je reve de courir dans l'aurore, a travers
Les plaines, enjambant les houles des collines
Et portant sur mon dos le carquois du soleil!
Je veux remplir mes mains d'etoiles cristallines
Pour les faire rouler sur la terre en eveil Et, drape  du manteau  de l'aurore fleurie, Etreindre sur mon coeur le coeur de rna patrie!

Or,  cette  aurore nouvelle  qui  a  jadis brille sur le crepuscule de son pays eveille chez  le  poete  beaucoup plus  qu'un simple  souvenir   d'un  paradis commun du bonheur primitif. II decouvre que  le lieu et le principe  de  cet antique reve de  Ia plenitude vitale   n'est   pas  dans   ce  qui  parait aux  yeux  du  monde,   mais  en  ce qui  existe  dans  le secret  du  coeur; c'est  Ia Ia seule  demeure de  son  authentique sejour.  Est-ce  que  ce n'est  pas  dans  le coeur,  et dans le coeur  seul, que  se cache et  vit  cette  loyaute   totale   de  l'homme  envers  Ia  nature, cette  correspondence pleinement harmonieuse  entre   les  creatures de  Ia  terre,  cette  vision,  enfin,  de l'amour  humain  dont   l'oeil   pur   d'une epoque   perdue   etait  capable?  Certes, l'homme est  devenu   sordide et  mechant le  jour  ou  il  est  devenu   l'esclave  des "passions voraces", ou  il s'est  empare de  "Ia  hache  fratricide." En  apprenant a hair,  il a commence de  mourir. Et le poete deplore  l'affreux avantage de Ia "que­ relle des races"  compare a }'indefectible jeunesse, a !'incomparable beaute de son pays:

Car ces conflits mesquins, ces troubles desastreux Qui retardent tes fils ne sont pas faits pour eux; Pour eux les fronts virils, les tetes orgueilleuses
Dont la gloire est d'atteindre aux cimes rocailleuses


11 croit  que   toutes  les  contradictions, toutes  les souillures  humaines peuvent etre  purifiees  par  l'innocence du  coeur.  II veut  dire  par  Ia l'ignorance enfantine

ROBERT CHOQUETTE



qui, comrne Ia charite dont parle Saint-Paul, croit toutes choses. C'est ainsi qu'aux miseres, aux cruautes, aux aveuglements du monde, 1'Aigle Rouge oppose, par Ia bouche  de  son  barde,  Ia fraicheur  et  Ia  jeunesse de son  pays. C'est  ainsi qu'il portrait  Ia purete qui epouse le pardon:

Pays de l'avenir, que tes enfants s'unissent! Prete-leur ta jeunesse et qu'ils s'y rajeunissent! Fais qu'un grand ideal ou qu'un orgueil fervent Illumine leur arne et les pousse en avant!

Mais Ia jeunesse, cette possession incorruptible, est, comme Ia purete, le privilege de Ia douceur des cieux, de Ia foret giboyeuse, des champs de semence. Car qu'est­ elle, au fond, sinon soif illimitee? Soif du solei!, done, du "soleil de I'Amour" que toute conquete exalte et nulle possession n'apaise:

Ce jour ou tes enfants que Ia brume aveugla, Enterrant a jamais Ia hache fratricide, Regarderont monter devant eux, par deJa
La foret giboyeuse et les champs de semence,
Le solei!de I'Amour ouvrant son aile immense!

Mais si le pays natal est presque constamment  present dans !'oeuvre  du poete, Dieu  apparait aussi dans  sa puissance creatrice  et  paternelle.  Pourtant, le Dieu de  Choquette  n'est  pas le Dieu de Ia Bible. Sans  doute,  le poete est de famille catholique  et  pratiquante, et il en garde  toujours  le souvenir  comme en  temoi­ gnent,  par exemple Cantique  du  ]eune Pretre:

0 mon Pasteur, je t'aime et tu me fais heureux
Jusqu'au fond ebloui demon  coeur renebreux!

Que je sois digne au moins demon  saint ministere!

ou Priere du M atin:

Deposes-y, Seigneur, tes vertus eternelles, Fais refleter sur nous ta oeleste clarte. Mets Ia stabilite dans nos ames fuyantes,
Lave l'iniquire dont nos mains sont ployantes, Epure jusqu'au fond nos coeurs mysterieux.

Mais Ia presence de Dieu demeure,  comme Ia vie elle-meme, claire et obscure en meme temps. Et Ia vie est un probleme qui se pose a chaque  instant  de notre
existence ephemere,  meme si ce probleme  trouve  sa  solution  en  Dieu  qui  seul donne  a l'homme  sa y,eritable esperance:


32

ROBERT CHOQUETTE




Oh! laisser ici-bas la miserable fange,
La chair ou l'esprit pur, fait d'amour  et d'orgueil, Se tourmente et se mange ...

S'envoler vierge et libre et choir au pied de Dieu!
 





(Ode  aux  Etoiles)


Ainsi,  il lui  arrive  souvent  de  confondre son  amour  de  Dieu  avec  son  amour de la  Nature qu'il  voudrait concilier,  completer et  justifier l'un  par  l'autre. Voici Cimetiere au  Printemps, qui  voudrait etre  un  rappel  de  la  profondeur de  notre
misere  et  qui  est, en effet,  un  hymne  admirable a la terre  qui  recele le germe  de
la  vie, a la terre  qui  abrite des valeurs  et des etres qui sont sacres:

Anges sculpres, ouvrez vos deux ailes de pierre, Et que toutes les fteurs relevent leur paupiere
Pour voir le soleil neuf grandir  a I'horizon!

Et toi, place discrete ou repose rna mere,
Ou l'arbuste immortel et jeune et frais toujours
Semble avoir retenu le parfum de ses jours
Et ne ternit le sol que d'une ombre ephemere;

Mais,  a mesure   que  nous  penetrons plus  avant   dans  ses  poemes,  Choquette nous  para.lt assez loin  de la croyance car il confond  tout. Sans  doute, Dieu  existe pour  lui,  mais  c'est  un  Dieu  de poete,  nous voulons dire  par  13.  un  Dieu  symbole
d'un besoin  d'absolu. Dans  Nostalgie, c'est sous les especes de !'amour que  Dieu se manifeste, mais  cet Amour est a la fois dionysiaque et voluptueux:

Amour germe de l'etre, amour, source de vie, Essence creatrice  au Createur  ravie,
Verbe de l'absolu, de l'espace et du temps!
0 fontaine, combien mon arne inassouvie
Se plonge en ton cristal et s'abreuve longtemps.

Melancholia ou  se fait  jour  l'effort  ambitieux du  poete  pour  dechiffrer la vie peut  bien  para.ltre  une sorte  de  reproche que !'artiste adresse  a Dieu:

...... Seigneur, pourquoi fis-tu
Sans limite notre arne et le corps si fragile? Pourquoi  tant d'ideal, tant d'amour  et d'ardeur,
Si l'on est enlise dans la chair, o Seigneur?



33

ROBERT CHOQUETTE



Cependant, il a besoin de Dieu:

Seigneur, je ne suis rien qu'une argile souffrante; J'ai mon neant dans l'etroitesse demon  oeil. Pardonne-moi, Seigneur, mon miserable orgueil.

Fait-il  conclure que le poete a voulu illustrer Ia misere de l'homme  qui saurait perdre  Dieu  ou bien qu'il  a voulu seulement  decrire,  comme du  reste l'annonce le titre Melancholia,  un etat de solitude et d'abandon? "Oh! viens remplir de Toi l'abime  demon coeur!"  Mais l'espoir en Dieu demeure,  car:

Sans Toi je ne suis rien que la forme d'un songe
Un melange effrayant de boue et d'ideal.

Cet  espoir, pourtant,  on ne saurait  !'interpreter comme  une profession de foi. II reflechit, dirais-je, un etat  d'ame  singulier, un sentiment  beaucoup  plus qu'un besoin de l'esprit. Comme dans Gehenne d'ailleurs  ou il nous donne Ia de  de son doute blaspheme:

0 Maitre qu'adorait rna mere, Ne fussiez-vous qu'une chimere Je veux vous aimer malgre moi

Certes,  c'est un besoin qu'il  exprime,  mais c'est un besoin de tendresse et non pas de croire:  en fait, c'est de son besoin de tendresse que le poete nous parle, et Ia tendresse, le sait-on, s'accompagne  toujours de Ia melancolie, sentiment  dont le doute est le symbole, et dont I'echo sont les accents de notre tristesse infinie:

Fais-moi meilleur, fais-moi meilleur, ouvre mes yeux, Que le courage y rentre avec l'azur des cieux!

Le meme theme, ille reprend dans L'Homme, quoique  le sentiment  qui habite ou constitue  ce poeme ne soit plus l'espoir en Dieu, mais le songe permanent que chacun  porte  en  soi et  dont  l'essor est Ia conscience  d'un  manque,  d'un  vide, qu'engendre !'imperfection  de l'existence. C'est l'antique reve du bonheur adami­ que qui  a formule Ia loi intime de la nature  humaine  et dont l'exigence est cette
soif d'absolu  qui donne a Ia vie toute sa valeur et tout son mystere:

L'homme, eternel trompe que l'espoir desaltere, Inlassablement cherche a comprendre la terre,
A deviner quel crime on lui fait expier ...


34

ROBERT  CHOQUETTE


Et que malgre la chair il se souvient du ciel! ... C'est cela, cet espoir, le magique levain
Qui fait que l'homme garde a jamais ses chimeres.

Et  pourtant c'est  cette  chair  tout  a l'heure meprisee  qui  provoque l'esprit,  qui est le premier  moteur du genie humain:

Eh! comment ferait-il sa route seculaire,
S'il n'avait  dans son sang l'heroique liqueur, S'il n'avait  la jeunesse eternelle du coeur?

Chez  Choquette, ce qui  frappe, pourtant, c'est que sa poesie n'est pas de nature mystique. Au  contraire, c'est  une  poesie de  Ia vie, de toutes  les formes  de Ia vie, c'est  une  poesie  de  Ia  nature, de  toutes  les manifestations de  Ia nature. Certes, il y a  une  multiplicite de  themes  qui  s'entrecroisent dans  ses poemes: Ia liberte, l'amour, Ia  creation de  l'oeuvre, Ia louange  a  Dieu,  l'homme dans  son  etemite agissante,   mais  ce  n'est   pas  dans  cette  richesse  que  son  imagination aime  a  se mouvoir   pour   y  puiser  ses symboles  et  ses metaphores. C'est  Ia  beaute de  Ia nature, Ia beaute de son pays encore si vierge que le poete  a choisie comme  patrie de  ses songes.  C'est   Ia,  autour des  villages  agenouilles  de  son  sol  natal qu'il  a entendu ces appels  et  reve  dans  ces silences par  qui se cree l'Inconnu divin:

Le ciel net ou fleurit l'aurore Decoupe haut le cap sonore, Et le village de Grand-Pre
Se reveillant  tout empourpre
Fait sourire chaque  toiture ...

0 vision des chers aieux,
Legende aux parfums merveilleux! Lumiere  dans notre ombre opaque,
Doux reve ensoleille de Paque!           (Paques  Anciennes)

On  voit,  done,  comment l'ame sensible  du  poete, toujours soucieuse  de saisir l'eurythmie d'un paysage,  sait  trouver sa charniere autour de  laquelle  s'ordonne l'harmonie d'un lieu  cheri.  De  meme dans  cet autre  poeme  Pfiques:

Sous le soleil d'avril qui flambe dans l'azur
La campagne  du Nord s'etale et se deroule
Avec ampleur.   Tout  est calme dans le vent pur. La neige, amoncelee aux bras des sapins, croule ...

35

ROBERT CHOQUETTE



Car c'est au vieux Quebec la fete du printemps, La fete du clocher qui fait les toits plus proches. Jour de Paques, jour d'or ou la Terre  a vingt ans, Eclosion du coeur, renaissance des cloches!
Ainsi,  c'est   a !'image   pittoresque, a la  sensation   visuelle  qu'il   faut   toujours revenir  chez  Robert Choquette. Voici,  par  exemple, comment, sous !'image pittoresque que  le poete  developpe  sous son  aspect  concret  et  visuel, l'on  trouve
!'explication d'une realite  spirituelle  ou  d'une verite  religieuse:

Glebe feconde ou les epis chantent en choeur, L'ame du peuple a pris racine dans ton coeur
Et tu nourris sa jeune vie ...

Glebe dont le ble mur peut nourrir  tant de monde, Sois genereuse et bonne a celui qui feconde
Et qui met l'avenir dans ton sein ...

Glebe d'ou monte au ciel un chant laborieux.
(A la Terre  Natale)

C'est  pourquoi, estimons-nous, les visions de  Choquette sont  si exactes  et  pre­ cises et les accords  qu'elles entament entre  elles sont  toujours "aussi doux a I'oreille que  la lueur  de  l'aube  est douce  a l'oeil." Sans  doute,  nous  avons  taus  connu  la
frai:cheur  penetrante de  l'air  dans  une  foret  de  sapins.  Nous  y avons  goute  cette legerete  qui  renouvelle  le corps  et le spiritualise. Dans  Sous  le Sapin  la saveur  de
la nature vit a la fois reelle et irreelle:

Est-il rien de plus doux qu'un  reve qu'on  habite Un jour entier, pres des sapins, sous le ciel bleu? On oublie un moment la ville qui s'agite,
On n'a jamais ete plus intime avec Dieu.

Ainsi !'amour, que  ce soit !'amour de l'epouse, d'un fils, de la nature, pour  les morts,  a  toujours pour  decor  un  coin  du  Canada cheri.  Et  (Aimer, I, 94)   c'est "de  plonger  son  corps  parmi  les sapins  verts."
Mais  parmi les images,  c'est  sans  doute   a la  mer  que  le poete  donne ses pre­
ferences.  La  mer,  symbole  de  perplexite  et  d'elans sans issue, toujours evocatrice de  desirs  et  de  detresse,  de  violence  et  de  calme   mysterieux, renferme en  son etre !'essence  du  reel et la fugacite  de !'existence qu'elle change, par  le mystere de ses formes  infinies, dans  J',eternite du  proces createur.
Ainsi  la  mer,  qui  est  constamment presente dans  la  poesie de  Choquette, de-

g6

ROBERT CHOQUETTE



viendra le maitre du  chant dans  ce deuxieme volume d'Oeuvres  Poetiques. Suite Marine,  l'a  defini  le  poete; mais  aussi epopee  d'un homme  qui  avec  Ia mer,  et Ia mer  en  lui,  parcourt le beau  pays, le ciel qui  l'encompasse, Ia vie qui  l'habite et  finalement ses reves.
Dans  le  Prologue, Ia mer  nous  est presentee  comme  l'annonciatrice et  Ia dis­
pensatrice du  neant meme, hors duquel  surgit  Ia creation  dans  toutes ses angoisses, et toutes  ses contradictions, et tous ses mysteres:

Masse de nuit feconde ou les premiers and tres Chercherent dans l'effroi leur forme et leur couleur; Paradoxa!abime ou !'animal est fleur,
Ou Ia plante respire et devore Ia bete,
Ou Ia mort et !'amour  et !'amour  et Ia mort
Passent de l'un a !'autre  en une vaste fete

Mais  voici  qu'une  evolution s'opere grace  a laquelle  on  passe du  pittoresque au  symbolisme.  La  mer  est comparee au  coeur  de l'homme et, notons-le  bien,  Ia comparaison est  tres  precise,  soit  parce  que  les deux  termes   (mer  et  coeur)  ne
sont  jamais  fondus  l'un  a l'autre, soit  parce  que  l'image  ne quitte  pas  complete­
ment  le domaine intellectuel:

Mer, image du coeur, changeant,  nouveau toujours, Cercle d'ombres et de clarues, dont les contours Fiottent  dans les vapeurs floconneuses du songe! Tenebres  de Ia mer, nuit du coeur, que prolonge Toujours plus d'ombre  encore....

Mais  il y a  plus, car,  lorsque  Choquette etablit  les termes  de ses equivalences, il reste toujours dans  le domaine de Ia comparaison. Le point  de contact entre  le comparant et le compare n'est  jamais  quitte  par  le poete, meme  dans  les details:
Et dans le coeur aussi s'avancent  tour a tour
Et reculent,  pareils aux puissantes ma11ees,
Le doute et !'esperance, et Ia haine et !'amour; Et sur le coeur aussi des barques sont parees,
Et dans Ia nuit du coeur des carenes sombrees
Pourrissent lentement autour  de leur secret.

En  opposition avec  cette  image  en  meme  temps  claire  et  complexe, voici  une image  de Ia meme  mer  remarquablement contractee; dans  La Maison sur la lY!er, c'est  toute  Ia vie humaine qui  est ici deroulee.  Les deux  termes  consideres  sont Ia mer  et Ia mort,  mais I'image est une seule:  Ia spirale  de Ia vie:

37

ROBERT CHOQUETTE



... Entre nous et le reve
Circu]e cette odeur qui hante le cerveau, L'apre odeur de Ia mort qui feconde Ia vie. Nourrice alimentant  l'eternel  renouveau, Tueuse dont Ia faim n'est jamais assouvie,
La mer jette a nos pieds ses morts et ses vivants.

Finalement, Ia mer  apparait sans secret  dans  un  flamboiement qui  est comme un  reflet d'eternite:

La mort, Ia mer, !'amour  ... Car c'est !'instinct  d'amour
Qui, dans Ia mer, commande  a des forces enormes
D'assouplir, d'embellir, de varier leurs formes; Puis Ia mort entre en jeu qui, demain,  a son tour Devorera !'amour  qui l'avait fecondee;
Jusqu'au  jour oil Ia mer inquiete, obsedee
Par le desir, obscur, !'instinct  aveugle et sourd,
Fera recommencer aux etres comme aux chases
L'enchainement sans fin de leurs metamorphoses.

Dans  La  Plage, Ia vision  de  Ia mer  est statique et  dionysiaque. La  mer  est le sphynx, l'enigme vive qui  inspire  depuis  toujours en  tout  poete  un  besoin  d'in­ nocence  et  de  purete  premiere. Besoin anterieur a l'histoire done  et dont  Ia mer est Ia seule source,  car c'est en elle seule que se deploie Ia lenteur d'une contempla­ tion sans  terme  et d'une interrogation sans lendemain:

.... Et lamer, Ia grande inspiratrice D'espoirs batis, en ecume dissous, Accompagne ces voix defuntes;  Ia nourrice
Des rythmes des plus forts, des rythmes les plus doux.

Le deuxieme volume  des Oeuvres Poetiques, done,  n'est  qu'une suite  de varia­ tions  sur  le theme  de  Ia mer,  semence  et fruit  de  Ia victoire  sans  cesse  prolongee contre  Ia  mort.  Certes,  chaque poeme  pousse  son  ciel et  dicte  au  poete  ses p11e­ ferences.  Ainsi,  ce sont  les paysages  marins-parfois  des saynetes-qui lui ont ete des animateurs et lui ant  parfois  impose  ces passages de l'alexandrin au verset et meme  (La  Nuit Millenaire)  au vers blanc.
Mais  il a  plus  car  Ia mer  n'est,  pour  Choquette, que  Ia forme  intelligible de cette  conjugaison de  toutes  les existences  liees en  hymne et  s'elevant a Dieu.  La

mer, qui  ne se maintient en elle que par le mouvement et le rythme, est le symbole de cette oscillation  continuelle entre  l'etre  et le non-etre a travers  laquelle l'univers

ROBERT CHOQUETTE



progresse et se metamorphose. La mer, ou Ia vie ne dure  que grace a des morts partielles, est !'image  de l'etemire  cachee dans l'unite  du  temps ou "nuit  et jour perd son temps a rattraper le Temps". La mer qui s'ouvre, inonde et profere, est Ia figure ideale  de !'amour qui  provoque  et fait  naitre  le songe permanent  que chacun  porte  en  soi, et  que  le  poete  nomme  ISEUT. De Ia cette  nostalgie  in­ formulee,  cette indefinissable  aspiration  qui  hantent  cette Suite Marine, et  dont Ia douceur  n'est ni dans le souffle ni dans le chant, mais dans l'etemite. En effet, qu'est-ce  que  ce chant  sinon  une  suite  de  reves, de songes singuliers, a  Ia  fois vagues et puissants  comme  Ia mer  elle-meme, et dans lesquels !'esprit  s'enfonce pour  se  perdre  dans  l'etemite  meme  du  desir  amoureux:  ".... lseut,  vivant mirage,  Je  volerai  vers toi, mais  tu fuiras  toujours".  Mais  Ia mer  est domaine plus vaste encore que le songe:

Et lamer chantera vers notre caravelle
Comme chante la mer depuis les premiers  temps
Et comme  chantera dans la suite des ages
La mer aux mille voix, mer aux mille visages,
Qui,  toujours plus nouvelle en ses flats palpitants, Toujours se rajeunit et se recr·ee en elle,
Toujours reste pareille  ala mer eternelle.	(La  Figure  de Proue)



























39



TO SIR JOHN A.
MAcDONALD













The  long  rhymed  satire A Sir John  A.  MacDonald, which  concludes the  post­ humously   printed  Poesies   Religieuses et  Politiques  (.lv/ontreal,  1886),  was composed  during  Riel's  exile in  the  United  States and  is dated  «St.   joseph, Dakota, August 1879". It is the only item in the collection which holds any interest today:  all  the  other  fruits of  Riel's  muse  were  of a  lamentably devotional  or panegyric nature, and though  affording some interesting  comparisons- as when jesus  Christ  is  praised  for being  more  «affable"  than  Louis  XIV   and  «even
more  bewitching   than  Bonaparte" -they  can  have  little  value  except  to  the student  of Riel's  own  compelling,  twisted  and  strangely  attractive  personality. But  this  unique  example  of his  political verse- whose  eloquence,  diffuseness, inordinate  length  (it runs to almost 500 lines), as well as its tendency to wander, recall the  great  patriot's speeches themselves-is  notable  for spirited invective, command  of doggerel and macaronic rhymes, and  for several passages of genuine fire  and  pathos. The   following translation, an abridgment  limited to reproducing the best portions of the poem, is presented as no more than a kind of  precis; any­ one seeking the whole poem is referred to the original. -In this English version, only such liberties have been taken with the text  as were imposed by the absolute necessity  of  producing  a  version using  the  same  broken  rhyme-scheme;  for a literal  translation,  no  matter  how  much  more  «faithful", would  have  failed to convey anything  of the  force and  flavour of the original, or to render the curious mixture  of  wit verging on buffoonery  and  rhetoric spilling over into  the absurd,
which  makes this poem a good deal more than  a literary curiosity.
J.G.











By Louis Riel



Translated by John Glassco



SIRJOHN A. MACDONALD doth govern  pmudJy
The  provinces from which his power flows;
While  his bad  faith  perpetuates my woes - And  all his countrymen applaud him loudly.

Despite  the  peace he owes me, and despite
His pledge to honour in the deed and fact
What was our Pact' And is my right,
For seven years now Sir John has warred  with me.
A faithless  man's a vulgar man, be he
Either a wise man or a witling born: And so I hold him up to scorn.

He  meant to cast into obscure disgrace
The  Bishop of Saint  Boniface; "
Then finding  his mistake, he made  a show of candour
And sought  to save his face
Before His Grace
By bidding this good Pontiff  Alexander Appease the Metis and  their proper  wrath, And  to be sure to let them understand
They'd followed the right  path
In taking  up their own defence,


41

TO  SIR  JOHN A. MACDONALD



Since the vile Schultzes3 and  MacDougalls4
Had all received a rightful reprimand
For causing us, with their damned  drums and bugles, Such dire alarms
When they took arms
Against us, sans authority
Of Her Most Gracious Majesty.

He played the Bishop false, and then belied
Him with fair words and with such politesse
As cloaked his wickedness,
And pleased his party and his gang beside.

For all his plots in their deceitful dress, For all his pride in his own cleverness, He'll answer one day to a wrathful  God For all the injustice he hath sown abroad.
He's a fine speaker is the Parliamentary chief, And sits among the great ones of the land;
But once Sir John's become so many grains of sand, God will arraign him at His Judgment Seat,
Where he must stand.

In eighteen hundred  and seventy-three, With poor Upine5 in gaol
And Manitoba in her agony,
And I a hunted man with all men on my trail,
Sir John offered me thirty-five thousand  dollars6
If for three years I would desert my nation
In all her dolours,
And leave my friend Lepine in tribulation, With bleeding feet and hands Captived in iron bands! 7
* 	* 	* 	*
How happy was I one fine day to view
Sir John laid low, with all his wretched  crew !8

But still his projects were much narrower  in scope
Than  those of Edward  Blake9 and of MacKenzie.' 0


42

TO  SIR  JOHN A. MACDONALD



When Blake closed off the future-and our hope -
'Twas then, in a fine frenzy,
That  he announced  the Price of Blood," And, bidding justice cease,
Destroyed an innocent people's livelihood
By thus condemning, in its leaders, the Metis.

Almighty God! Protect Thy poor Metis
Almost abolished by the English race ...

And as for your, Sir John,
I do not wish your death should be
Too full of suffering, of course; But what I'd like to see
Is that you should feel some remorse, Because, you Vampire, you have eaten me.

* 	* 	* 	*
Canadians!	The English whom you trust
Are neither generous nor just, But quite the opposite.
Open  your eyes, and be convinced of it!

Carthage ne'er boasted of her Punic faith, Because her sons had still some self-respect. But see the modern Englishman, erect
In all his shameless brag
Of British justice and the British flag!
Too well we see in all his actions
How he aspires, if none gainsaith, By every means to make us Anglo-Saxons.

But Lower Canada was never born to perish.
Her bishops are all ready, I believe,
To endure the loss of all they cherish,
If need be, rather than to leave
You, John, to do just as you please
Whene'er  you mean to make them hold their peace.


43

TO  Sffi JOHN A. MACDONALD



And the good God has given me strength  and heart, And I'll not die without declaring war,
The war of sense and art And of the rights of man Against all that you are.
My strength is in my gift for suffering;
I am the man to leap into the ring, And give all that he can
And more than John  Bull reckons: He has gored me all too often with his hom;
I'll beat him yet; and I shall have for seconds
Princess Louise and the Marquess of Lome.

* 	* 	* 	*
I laugh at those who place
Vile flattery above
The sacred love
A man feels for his native land and race; And at Lord Dufferin I can laugh indeed,
That  still-born child launched  from old Erin's womb,
Who did not come
Into the world headfirst, but by his bum.••

He and his wife have now re-crossed the ocean.
We saw them leave with no profound emotion ...

They've had illustrious successors Sprung from the marquisate  and royal line. A poor and almost peasant stock is mine,
But through it I pretend
Unto the principality
Of moral principles, and will defend
The Good against all bad oppressors; And this is why
I hate a policy that's  based on Vice, And its employ
Even in a Viceroy.


44

TO SIR JOHN A. MACDONALD



The  unjust  man  lives peacefully in his house of clay; But its foundation will collapse some day.
Be sure that  Washington is closer, in our view,
Than London, and  your neighbours worthier far than  you !

If God saw fit to cut us off from France In spite of all the bonds of our affection,  Remember also that  the power she can advance May in a twinkling  break old Albion's sceptre.
Take care:
I, I am watching you. 	Beware!
Your  whole empire, and all those who have kept her Glorious, fall apart.	Too long and  much  too often She's thrown false dice upon her mouldy  coffin.

And all too long the children  of New France
Have borne the English yoke; And  will not miss the chance
Of crushing a decrepit  race, and so revoke
The rule of those who, in a pride not to be borne, Have  governed them with such inveterate scorn!


FOOTNOTES

I The  amnesty promised in 186g to all metis involved in the Red River insurrection.
2   Msgr. Alexandre  Tache,  Riel's early patron.
3   Dr.  John   (later  Sir  John)   Schultz,  a leading  figure in the  "Canadian" party  in
Manitoba,  and Riel's arch-enemy.
4   Ron.  William  McDougall,  Minister of Public Works in Macdonald's first cabinet. Appointed  Lieutenant-Governor of Rupert's  Land  in  186g, he was ignominiously turned  back at the border by an armed band of metis.
5  Ambroise  Lepine,  Riel's  lieutenant   throughout   the  insurrection  of  186g-7o, and
president  of the court-martial which imposed the death sentence on Thomas  Scott.
6   This has never been confirmed.
7   Lepine was arrested in 1873 on a charge of murder.
8   Macdonald's government  was defeated in 1873.
9   Liberal premier of Ontario in 1871.
10  Alexander Mackenzie, who headed a Liberal government in 1873.
" Blake's  government   offered  $s,ooo  for  the  apprehension  of  Riel  and  Lepine  as the murderers  of Scott.
!2  This reference is obscure.


45


THE BODY-ODOUR OF RACE



Ronald Sutherland







L.PROBLEM  OF   RACE  and  ethnic  relations  has never been a major  concern  of Canadian  Literature.  By contrast,  the great  American  classics
-Moby  Dick, the  Leathen;tocking  tales, Huckleberry Finn-have all focused upon  the communion  between persons of different  races, and  this theme has per­ sisted in the works of Faulkner,  Porter, Baldwin,  Ellison and many others. These writers,  it  would  seem, either  concluded  or  sensed  that  the  realization  of  the American   Dream,  indeed  the  survival  of  the  American  nation,  would  depend upon  the  ability of people of different  ethnic  origins  to  learn  to live  with  each other  in a mutually satisfactory manner.  And to the outside observer of  the United States, it is becoming increasingly clear that  this thesis is all too true. As a matter of fact,  we can  go a step further  than  the survival  of the United  States-it  is now clear that  the survival of man will be ultimately determined  by the capacity of the various peoples of the world to  live together in reasonable harmony.
For  Canadians, looking at  the  problems south  of the  border  has long been a comfortable  spectator  sport.  It  is right  that  American  authors  should  be  pre­ occupied  with  race and ethnic relations -after all, the Americans  brought most of their  miseries upon  themselves, and  the  Negro situation  in  the United  States, because of hardcore  ignorance and  prejudice,  has progressed no more than from a  frightening   atrocity  into  a  frightening  mess. In  Canada, on  the  other  hand,  all has gone  relatively well. There  are  not  enough  Negroes to  create  a real dis­ turbance,  and  the  most prominent  are  generally  great  athletes or  football  stars who seem satisfied to function as idols in a nation  of the under-exercised. Outside of  the  occasional  claim on  real estate  in  downtown  Brantford, Ontario, or  the

THE BODY-ODOUR OF  RACE



contention that old worm-eaten  treaties entitle them to all the amenities of modem medicine, or slight misunderstandings  about what constitutes a murder,  Canadian Indians   and  Eskimos  have  come  up  with  very little  that  the  R.C.M.P.  could not handle. The  tourist trade,  profitable sale of little birchbark  canoes, structural steel construction   jobs for  the  more energetic, and  the complete  annihilation  of the  Beothuks of  Newfoundland before they  could  become  a  problem, have  all helped  to preserve the  national  peace of mind. And so far  as the Jews are con­ cerned,  ever since a pioneer farmer  called Abraham,  as one story goes, supplied the site for a famous  battle  near  Quebec  City, people of Jewish extraction  have always seemed  to fit quite  smoothly into  the Canadian scene, if  not  entirely so into the stock exchanges and the school commissions. Indeed, Jewish writers have made  such  a  disproportionate contribution  to  what  is  significant  in  Canadian Letters  that  without  them  the field would be a  Barebones'  parliament,  complete with generous share of Roundheads.
There  has been, nevertheless, and there continues to be a great deal of friction in Canada  between  what  are sometimes referred to as the  two "founding races"
-English-speaking Canadians and French Canadians. Of course, in the strictest anthropological sense the term  "race"  should not be used to distinguish either of the  two major  ethnic  groups  of Canada  from the other.  So far  as I can  deter­ mine, there is no true  racial divergence between French  and  English  Canadians. Les canadiens, having  come largely from  Normandy,  Brittany  and  Picardy,  are the result of a mixture  of many strains, including the Celts, Germanic tribes such as the  Franks,  Jutes  and  Frisians  as well as the  Norsemen  or  Normans,  not  to mention  a number  of exiled  Highland  Scots and  wandering  Irishmen.  English­ speaking  Canadians, strange  as it may appear  to some, are more or less a blend of  exactly  the  same  elements,  with  a  good  measure  of  Norman   French  blood thrown  in besides. The  notion of a uniform  mentalite  anglo-saxonne, despite the exclamations  in Daniel  Johnson's  recent book Egalite ou lndependance, is about as valid  as the  notion  that  British,  Canadian and  American  beer are  identical. Like that  other  catch-all  "the  Latin  temperament," it is a term far easier to use than  to  justify, and  I strongly  suspect that  both  of these expressions, handy  as they may be to resolve the irresolute, are completely meaningless.
The  fact,  however,  that  there  are no true  racial differences between  English­ and  French-speaking   Canadians has  not  prevented  the  emergence,  reflected  in Canadian Literature, of the ugly phenomenon known as racism. A set of attitudes which has single-handedly  filled the chamber of twentieth-century horrors, racism is  defined  in  the  Standard  College  Dictionary  as "an  excessive  and  irrational

47

THE  BODY-ODOUR OF  RACE



belief in or advocacy of the superiority of a given group, people, or nation, usually one's own, on the basis of racial  differences  having  no scientific  validity." Racism, then,  does not  require  that  there  be any real differences of race;  it simply  requires an irrational belief in the superiority of a given group on the grounds of supposed differences.  In  Canada, compared   to the  United States  and  South  Africa,  racist attitudes have  often  been  well disguised,  of  a subtle  and  covert  nature, aroused in many  instances by individuals and small groups to exploit  a particular situation.
In  his poem  "Political Meeting," the  Montreal poet A. M. Klein  put  his finger on  it  brilliantly. The  poem  concerns  a  rally  addressed   by Camillien Houde, the former mayor  of Montreal, in the wake of conscription in 1942.  I can  recall as a small  boy witnessing  such  rallies, and  I have  always  marvelled at  the  power  and detailed  accuracy of Klein's  description -the absence of the religious brothers, signifying  the  Church's unsure  position,  the singing  of "Alouette," the  joual,  the clever  tum   of  phrase,  the  hypnotic   force  of  a  skilled  orator. Here  is  how  the poems ends:

Worshipped and loved, their favorite  visitor,
a country uncle with sunflower seeds in his pockets, full of wonderful moods, tricks, imitative  talk,

he is their idol: like themselves, not handsome,
not snobbish, not of the Grande Allee! Un  homme!
Intimate,  informal, he makes bear's compliments

to the ladies; is gallant; and grins;
goes for the balloon, his opposition, with pins;
jokes also on himself, speaks of himself

in the third person, slings slang, and winks with folklore;
and knows now that he has them, kith and kin. Calmly, therefore, he begins to speak of war,

praises the virtue of being Canadien,
of being at peace, of faith, of family,
and suddenly his other voice: Where are your sons?

He is tearful, choking tears; but not he
would blame the clever English; in their place he'd do the same; maybe.

Where are your sons?
The whole street wears one face, shadowed and grim; and in the darkness rises
the body-odour of race.'

THE BODY-ODOUR OF RACE




BEFORE CONSIDERING the observations made by Canadian writers on racism and  cultural  identity, however, I wish to examine certain  racist ideas which can  be found  in the personal philosophies of a few Canadian  writers themselves. I  have  tried  to limit  the examination  to  certain  significant  authors, and to those ideas which by virtue of being apparently widespread or especially persistent,  continue  to  have  repercussions in our  own day.  It  is necessary, also, to  try  to  distinguish  between  the  conviction  of superiority  which  characterizes racism  and  simple  cases of  exaggerated  pride  in  the  presumed  merits  of one's ethnic group.
Among  minor  writers of English Canada, for instance, there have  been many
who  were  carried  away  by  exaggerated  pride.  One  need  only glance  through Edward   Hartley   Dewart's   Selections   from  Canadian  Poets  to  find  choice  ex­ amples.  Here  is Charles  Sangster,  a  poet  of considerable  talent  in  more  sober moments,  beginning  his "Song  for  Canada":

Sons of the race whose sires Aroused  the martial flame, That filled with smiles
The triune Isles,
Through all their  heights of fame!

With  hearts as brave  as theirs, With  hopes as strong  and  high, We'll  ne'er  disgrace
The  honoured race
Whose deeds can  never die.•

More apropos, perhaps, in this time of bilingual cheques and  bonused govern­
ment clerks, are lines such as the following from Pamela Vining's  "Canada":

Forests,  whose echoes never  had  been stirred
By the sweet music of an English  word,
Where  only rang  the red-browed hunter's yell,
And the wolf's howl through the dark sunless dell.3

And one could go on and on. But verses such as these merely indicate  an over­ flow of spontaneous  patriotism,  coloured by a normal enough  preference for one's own ethnic  culture.  There  is a profound  difference, it seems to me, between this kind of expression and  the attitude  which can be detected in the work of Susanna  Moodie, the English lady who roughed it in the bush- to a certain  extent, that

49

THE BODY-ODOUR OF  RACE



is. For  she was seldom  reduced  so low as to be without servants and  a good liquor supply.
Mrs.  Moodie  was manifestly  convinced of the superiority of the  particular  class
of  English  gentlefolk  to  which  she  belonged, and  she  makes  the  idea  clear  in passages such  as the following in her  book Roughing  It in the Bush:

The  hand  that  has long held  the sword, and  been accustomed  to receive implicit obedience  from  those under its control,  is seldom adapted  to wield the spade and guide  the  plough, or  try its strength  against  the stubborn  trees of the forest. Nor will such  persons submit  cheerfully  to  the saucy familiarity  of servants,  who,  re­ publicans in spirit, think themselves as good as their employers.4

Moodie   makes  the  same   point   many   times,  always  carefully   differentiating between  "superiors" and  "inferiors." She speaks  of the  "vicious,  uneducated bar­ barians, who  form  the  surplus  of  over-populated European countries." At  one point  she  observes:   "The semi-barbarous Yankee  squatters, who  had  'left  their country for  their  country's  good,'  and  by whom  we were surrounded in our  first settlement, detested  us ..." And  to  this last  remark  of Susanna Moodie's, one  is tempted to  reply  "No  Wonder." In  many  respects  her  classification  of people  is reminiscent of  Samuel  Richardson in  Sir  Charles  Grandison,  where  he  divided his characters into  three  categories: men,  women,  and  Italians. Only  for Moodie the  classes would  be English gentlemen, English  ladies,  and  barbarians.
Of  course,  her  standards for  herself  were  exceedingly   high.  Here  she  is  ad- mitting to  an  "unpardonable  weakness":

In  spite  of  my  boasted  fortitude-and I think  my  powers of  endurance  have been  tried  to  the  utmost  since  my  sojourn  in  this  country-the rigour  of  the climate  subdued  my  proud,  independent  English  spirit,  and  I actually  shamed my  womanhood,  and  cried  with  the  cold.  Yes, I ought  to  blush  at  confessing, such  unpardonable weakness; but  I was foolish and  inexperienced,  and  unaccus­ tomed to the yoke.

After  having  read  the works of Susanna Moodie, one is left with  the undeniable impression   that  everybody-Irish, French-Canadian, Scottish, Indian, low born English  and  especially  American-who is not  of her  particular caste  has  been hopelessly  predestined to insignificance, ipso  facto. Moreover, her  attitude, which appears to  be  essentially  unconscious   and   without malicious   intent, led  her  to remarkable  conclusions   on  occasion.  Speaking  of  the  cholera   doctor   Stephen Ayres,  for  instance,  she   comments:  "A  friend   of  mine,  in  this  town,  has  an original portrait of this notable  empiric-this  man  sent  from  heaven. The  face

THE  BODY-ODOUR OF  RACE



is rather handsome, but  has  a keen, designing  expression,  and  is evidently  that  of an  American from  its complexion and  features."
Now it may appear to some that  I have been looking at the writings of Susanna Moodie  with  a magnifying glass, considering  that  she did  no more  than  echo  the accepted   English  spirit  of  her  time,  but  certainly  through a  magnifying glass is the  way  Mrs.  Moodie consistently  looked  at  herself. I  do  not  deny  the  merits  of her literary  achievement -her keen eye for appropriate detail,  her ear for dialect, her  capacity to capture scenes and  moods.  Nevertheless,  throughout her  work,  as throughout  the  works  of  Ralph  Connor, to  name  one  other   obvious  example, there  is always the disconcerting body-odour of race, the undertone of racism. Not the  screeching, messianic   racism  of  a  Houston   Stewart Chamberlain, the  man who  talked  with  demons and  who sowed the field which Adolf  Hitler  was to har­ vest, but  something perhaps almost  as malignant in  the long run,  because it is in the  form  of a deeply  ingrained pattern of thought, a conviction  which  may even be  unconsciously   held.  Furthermore, it  is the  very  conviction   which  in various  guises  has  haunted and  continues to haunt a nation  which,  if it is  going  to sur­ vive, must  perforce  develop  a modus  vivendi  for people of different ethnic  origins.
Moodie  herself, it should  be pointed  out, merely chanted a common tendency  of many   nations,   a  tendency  which   was  perhaps   an  inevitable adjunct  to  strong cultural identification, a tendency which  in most circumstances was probably not of great  harm  or  consequence. What is important to us here  is that  the  Moodie attitude has  not  died  a  natural  death, but  continues  to  infect  the  thinking of many   English  Canadians, and   that  in  the  particular  circumstances of  modem Canada it could  be of vital  consequence.
It is  the  kind  of  attitude, whether conscious  or  unconscious, which  has  often
thrown  up  a  formidable  psychological   barrier   to  satisfactory  and   harmonious relations between   Canada's two  major  ethnic  groups.  One  becomes  aware of it in  letters  to  the  editor, in  statements by  university  professors,  in  articles  such  as the  recent  Chatelaine feature called  "Women of Ontario," in pronouncements of the  Canadian Legion,  in  parliamentary speeches, in the  Protestant school  boards of the  Province of Quebec which  objected  to the suggestion  of the  Parent Com­ mission that  they  integrate with  the  French Catholic system.  For it is well known that  the  English  Protestant system  has always  been  superior  to its  French-Cana­ dian  counterpart, and  for  obvious  reasons.

THE BODY-ODOUR OF  RACE



A NUMBER  OF   ENGLISH-CANADIAN WRITERS,  especially in recent  years, have been conscious of the lingering  miasma  of racism in Canada.
They  have  dramatized  and  satirized  it, moving  further  and  further  away  from the spirit typified by Susanna  Moodie. As Canadian poets have turned  from landscapes  to social and  psychological realities, they have become increasingly sensitive to the false values in established Canadian patterns  of thought  and have reflected  this sensitivity in  their  poems. Among  the  more  obvious examples  are Earle  Birney's "Anglosaxon  Street",  Frank  Scott's  "The Canadian Social  Regis­ ter",  and  Ralph  Gustafson's  "Psalm  23".  In  several  poems  by Irving  Layton,
A. J. M. Smith,  or Alfred Purdy, one finds less explicit  but equally effective re­
action  to the Moodie attitude.  In the area of prose writing, Sara Jeannette Dun­ can's The  Imperialist reveals a tone in striking contrast  to that found in Susanna  Moodie's  work. Mitchell's Who  Has Seen the Wind, Ross's As For Me  and My  House,  Graham's Earth  and  High  Heaven,  and  especially Hugh  MacLennan's Barometer Rising and Two  Solitudes may be added  to the list.
It is of interest to note, incidentally, that  whenever  there is a confrontation of races  or  ethnic  groups  coupled  with  racist  ideas,  a  variety  of myths  inevitably springs up. In the United States, there is the well known myth of the extraordinary virility of the Negro, which most probably arose from the fear that the Negro constituted  a  threat  to  the  supposed  purity  of  the  white  race.  Stressing  in  its earliest form the idea that the Negro male was possessed of violent, uncontrollable animal  passions, it presumably acted as a taboo to protect white women. The cohabiting  of white men with  Negro women,  of course, was always regarded  as a special service to genetic improvement.
Now  in  Canada, one  ethnic  myth  which  has  developed  is that  the  French­
Canadian girl  is more  highly sexed than  her  English-speaking  compatriot,  and this myth, still very much  alive, has had  a whole complexity of effects. It is diffi­ cult  to say exactly how such  a myth could  have  taken  root. As Gilles  Marcotte  points out  in his Une  Litterature  qui se  fait,5   a series of early  French-Canadian novels, seemingly in an attempt  to gild the  pill of military defeat, presented love affairs between British men and alluring  French-Canadian maidens,  and in each of  these  affairs  the  girl,  having  reduced  her  suitor  to  blubbering  incapacity,  haughtily  refuses to  marry  him.  The  best of  these  novels, Philippe  Aubert  de Gaspe's  Les  Anciens  Canadiens,  a  book  rich  in  fascinating  detail  about  early Canadian life and mores, tells how the handsome Archibald  Cameron  of Locheill, desperately in love with Blanche d'Haberville since the prewar days when he had

THE BODY-ODOUR OF  RACE



lived in  Quebec  as a guest of her family, is forced  to take part  in the defeat of the French  regime and  consequently loses his true love.
Perhaps  the  romance   theme  in  novels such  as  Les  Anciens   Canadiens had something  to do with  the emergence of the French-Canadian-girl myth. A more probable explanation, however, is racist conviction of the type seen in Susanna Moodie's  writing. Since the possibility of ethnic intermixture  in colonial Canada almost   exclusively  involved   English  men  and   French-Canadian  women,  the English women  being either  here with  their husbands or left at home, the myth focused on the threat  of the French-Canadian female rather  than the male. When, for example,  Frances  Brooke, in The History  of Emily  Montague, is not ranting about  "the  mild genius of our religion and laws, and that spirit of industry, enter­ prize, and commerce,  to which we owe all our greatness," she is strongly suggest­ ing through  the tone of the letters which make up her novel that French-Canadian girls  are  abandoned  coquettes,  more  passionate  than  sensible,  with  a  definite inclination  toward  seducing  the  unwary  English  gentleman.  Thus  it seems quite plausible that  the myth  of la  femme   fatale  canadienne traces back to the feeling of superiority and female possessiveness of  the colonial English ladies.
In  addition  to  the  myth  just described,  there  are several others, such  as the notion  that  French   Canadians are  deficient in  business sense, or  that  Roman Catholicism  and  the  French  language  are  mystically interdependent. These  last two are  now in a state  of decreasing currency and  may soon disappear  entirely. The  sex myth  of  the  French-Canadian girl, however, like the sex myth  of the Negro, continues  to hold ground  because of an intriguing  reversal of social  per­ spectives. When  these  myths  emerged,  the  ascendency  of  the  animal  passions was  generally  held  to  be  the  essence of  human  depravity.  But in  the  last few decades, positions have  changed  drastically, and  now any indication  of  powerful heterosexual  drive,  reasonably  free from  neuroses, perversions and  inhibitions,  is regarded  as a  recommendation rather  than  a condemnation.  Consequently,  the erstwhile  targets  of these sex myths have  now become the  contented  guardians.  And as the American  Negro writer James  Baldwin might  put it-the chickens, baby, have come home  to roost!




TuRNING  To THE LITERATURE  of French  Canada, it  must  be said at the outset  that  the kind of racism which has found its way into the works of certain  French-Canadian writers is more obtrusive than  that in English-Cana-

53

THE BODY-ODOUR OF  RACE



dian  books, sometimes entirely devoid of subtlety. This  fact is both a good thing and  a bad  thing.  It is good in that  readers  have been able to apprehend  imme­ diately  the  position of  a  particular  author  and  to  react  accordingly.  It  is bad in  that  some have reacted  by embracing  the racist attitudes  extolled. In  the case of Lionel Groulx's  DAppel de la race, for instance,  such  distinguished  critics as Camille Roy, who was to become Rector of Laval University, Louvigny de Mon­ tigny,  and  Rene  du  Roure,  Stephen  Leacock's  old  friend,  reacted  immediately against the thesis presented by Groulx. On the other hand,  the influence of Lionel Groulx, through  his writings in history and literary history as well as the novel in question, has been immense and  remains unbelievably strong. Seldom has a man with such misguided ideas been able to  guide so many. Though there  are some other obvious examples.
L'Appel de la race is the story of a man  called Jules  de Lantagnac who goes
to  a classical college, then  completes law studies at  McGill.  He sets up practice in Ottawa and  manages  to build a clientele of prosperous  businessmen. Eventu­ ally  he  marries  an  English-Canadian   girl  called  Maud   Fletcher,  after  she  has changed  her  religion. They  have four  children-Walfred,  Nellie,  Virginia  and William-who,  naturally enough, grow  up  speaking  the  language  of  their mother,  the  boys eventually  attending  the  Jesuit's  Loyola  College in  Montreal, and  life for  a time is peaceful,  prosperous and  pleasant  for everyone. But  then Jules de Lantagnac visits some relatives back in Quebec, and while there he hears f appel  de  la race. He  becomes possessed of guilt  feelings  about  having  betrayed his ancestry.  Upon  his return  to Ottawa, he  begins  regular  visits to an  Oblate  priest,  Father   Fabien,  who  becomes his  personal  confessor.  He  also begins  to practice  French  again,  to teach  it to his children,  and  he tries to create in them a sense of their French heritage.
The   rest  of  the  book  presents  a  number  of  startling  developments.  Jules  is elected to parliament  and  becomes entangled  in the controversy over Bill 17, an unfortunate piece of legislation pertaining  to the  teaching  of French  in Ontario schools. Lantagnac is asked to speak against the bill in parliament, and for reasons that  are  not made clear his wife Maud  decides that  if he does make the speech, she will leave him. Lantagnac, accordingly,  must choose between his immediate family and his ancestral loyalty. Egged on by Father  Fabien,  he decides in favour of his ancestors and  makes the speech. Then  unlike those legions of women who periodically  threaten  to  leave  their  husbands,  Maud  sticks to  her  word,  packs her  bags and  gets out.  Nellie and  William decide to go with  her, while Walfred and  Virginia stay with the old man. Virginia  finds herself moved to enter a con-

54

THE  BODY-ODOUR OF  RACE



vent,  and  Walfred changes  his name  to Andre,  which  is understandable enough under   any  circumstances.
Now  we need  not  be  concerned with  the intricacies  of the  plot of L' Appel  de la race,  nor  with  the  political  implications. I, for one,  agree  with  Lionel  Groulx that  the  treatment of French Canadians in school systems outside  of Quebec has often   been  an  injustice, brought  about   mainly  by  an  overdose  of  the  Susanna Moodie  creed.  What does concern  us here, however, is the authorial comment on race  contained in  Groulx's novel.
Mason   Wade, the  American historian of  French   Canada, has  observed  that "Groulx is  a  disciple  of  the  historical  school  of  the  Count de  Gobineau," and "was  greatly  affected  during his studies  in  Switzerland and  France by  the  anti­ democratic  ideas   of  Charles  Maurras  and   Maurice   Barres." 6   Joseph   Arthur de Gobineau, of course, is the man  who influenced  Houston  Stewart Chamberlain and  whose  racist  theories  prepared the  way for  Fascist  ideology. Gobineau him­  self,  it  would   appear, never  entertained  the  thought   of  genocide, but   he  was greatly  instrumental in bringing about  that  cruel, ironic twist of fate  which  caused the Jews,  whose  ancestors invented racism,  to become victims of the  unspeakable perversions  and  atrocities which  racist  theories  can so easily promote.
In  L' Appel  de la race, Groulx actually  quotes from  Barres  and  from  Dr. Gus­ tave  Le  Bon's  Lois  psychologiques de l' evolution  des  peuples, published  in I 894· Le  Bon,  a  French doctor   and  sociologist  who  died  in  1931,  published  some  17 volumes  over  a period  of fifty years. The  passage from  his work  cited  by Groulx  is as follows :
Between two superior  races as close to each other  as the English and  Germans  of America,  crossbreeding  may  be an  element  of progress. But it always constitutes an  element  of degeneration  when the races, even if superior, are too dissimilar.
To  interbreed   two  peoples  is  to  change  at  the  same  time  their  physical  and mental   constitutions ... Thus   at  the  beginning  the  personality  remains  very  ir­ resolute  and  feeble,  and  it  requires  a  long accumulation  of  hereditary  traits  to become established.  The  first effect of interbreeding  between  different  races is to destroy the racial soul, that  is to say the complex of ideas and common sentiments which is the strength  of a people, and without which there can be neither a nation not a homeland ... It is therefore  right that  all those peoples who have attained  a high  degree  of  civilization  have  carefully  avoided  mixing with  foreigners.7
Lionel  Groulx's novel  is essentially  an  application of  these ideas,  granting the premise  that  French and  English  Canadians are  too dissimilar  to  be successfully crossbred,  to the  situation in Canada. In  a conversation with  Lantagnac, Father Fabien  says:

55

THE BODY-ODOUR OF  RACE



Who  knows if our former  Canadian aristocracy  did  not owe its decadence  to the mixture  of  bloods which  it  accepted  too  readily,  and  too  often  actually  sought after.  Certainly  a psychologist would find it of great interest to observe the descen­ dants  of that  class. Does it not seem to you, my friend, that  there is a good deal of trouble  and  silly anarchy  in  the  past  of these old families?  How  do  you explain the delirium, the madness with which the offspring of these noblemen have thrown themselves into dishonor and ruin? 8


Frantic  condemnation of  mixed  marriages, meaning primarily those  between French-speaking  and   English-speaking Canadians,  is  splashed   throughout the pages of L'Appel  de la race. Groulx  speaks  of the  "cerebral disorder, the psycho­ logical  dilution" which  results  from  such  ignoble  combinations. He  is  careful  to point   out,  incidentally, that   the  English  are  a  "superior race" along  with  the French, but  the  true  texture  of his thought comes  to the  fore  in  an  illuminating manner  when   he  has  Lantagnac make   the  following  observations  on  his  four children, to whom  he is giving lessons in French:

Lantagnac had  only distantly  followed  the  education  of his sons and  daughters. He knew the basic qualities of their temperaments, but little or nothing about  their essential characters.  Their  success having  always been assured  by a good measure of intelligence, he had  never bothered  to think more about  them. But now he was discovering  in  two of  his pupils  a  kind  of  unhealthy  imprecision,  a  disorder  of the thought,  an incoherence of the intellect  which he did not fully grasp. It was a sort  of  incapacity  to  follow a  line  of  reasoning  to  a  conclusion,  to  concentrate diverse impressions or slightly complex ideas around  a central  point.  It was as if they had in them two souls, two warring spirits which alternately  dominated. And strange   to  say,  this  mental  dualism  manifested  itself  especially  in  William  and Nellie, the  two who were predominantly  of the well defined type of the Fletchers. Whereas   Wolfred  and  Virginia   almost  exclusively  resembled  the  French   race, with the fine, bronzed features of the Lantagnacs and the equilibrium of body proportions,  the  older  daughter   and  younger  son,  in  contrast,  with  their  blond hair  and  pale complexions, their lanky and  somewhat  thread-shaped builds, strik­ ingly resembled their mother.9

It does  not  seem  to have  occurred to  Canon Groulx  that  William  and  Nellie were  hardly the  products   of  virgin  birth, that  they had as  much  redeeming Lantagnac blood  in  them   as  Walfred  and   Virginia. He   takes  an  almost  dia­ bolical  delight  in  describing  the  younger  son,  William. At  another point  in the story he says:
William  remained  always the  same, with  his stubborn  and  choleric  spirit.  As he grew older the Saxon traits became stronger in his face and long adolescent's body.

THE BODY-ODOUR  OF RACE



The  set of his forehead  became more rigid, the pout of his lips more arrogant, and  one nearly always saw him walking along with his neck arched and his fists half closed, like a rugby player.10

With regard  to "Saxon  traits,"  by the way, there is some difference of emphasis between  Lionel  Groulx  and  Susanna  Moodie, as might  be expected. Describing her  son  Donald,   Mrs.  Moodie  says that  he  had  been  nicknamed  "Cedric  the Saxon;  and he well suited the name, with his frank, honest disposition, and large, loving, blue eyes." As they say in French,  chacun  son gout.
In  the matter  of "superior  races," then, it is clear that  Groulx  felt some races to be more superior  than  others. As a matter of fact, the good canon's  most bitter invective is reserved for the  Irish  Roman  Catholics, whom  he accuses of serving their  Anglo-Saxon  masters  with  a  "slave  mind."  For  a  historian,  incidentally, Lionel Groulx  was on many  occasions superbly indifferent  to history-no "slave mind"  his. He seemed  to feel so strongly about  what  he calls "les affinites  pro­ fondes"  between  French   Canadians and  Catholicism,  that  one  wonders  if  he would  include  the  Pope  as a legitimate  believer.
But it will serve no good  purpose to explore L' Appel  de la race further.  The book is a racist, idiosyncrasized morality  play, lacking even the merits of a good description  or  a  clever  tum  of  phrase.  Outside  of a  small,  privately  published treatise by Pierre-Paul  Rioux called L'Espoir  du Canada   franfais  and the various pamphlets  written  by Adrien  Arcand,  former  leader of the former  Quebec  Nazi Party,  there is nothing  else I know of in Canadian Literature that is quite in the same category. A hint of racism occurs in Felix-Antoine Savard's Menaud  maitre­ draveur, but Savard  is too sentimental  to be vicious.
So much,  then, for the racist ideas in English-Canadian  and  French-Canadian Literature.   If the  expression  of  these ideas is stronger  and  more  bitter  on  the French-Canadian side, the difference in degree is no doubt  explained  by the fact that   French   Canadians  have  long  felt  themselves to  be  fighting  for  survival. Susanna  Moodie  spoke from  a position of security; Lionel Groulx  had  his back against  the wall. It is therefore  partly understandable that  the attitudes  of Groulx and  his followers should  have  gone  to extremes, especially when  one  considers that  they are reactions to similar attitudes in a presumed opposing camp. Which, of course, is the ominous  aspect of racist tendencies in a society of mixed ethnic groups-they inevitably  produce a reaction, which inevitably results in a setback for  the  cause  of  tolerance  and  compatibility.  Or  to  use a  phrase  which  would perhaps be more meaningful  for the Reverend Canon  Groulx, the cause of  Chris­ tian  brotherhood.

57

THE  BODY-ODOUR OF  RACE


tiE REAL PURPOSE  of this study,  however,  is to provide  some­
thing  more   than   a  display  of  the  dirty  linen  of  Canadian Literature. When   a
nation   is  composed   of  two  major   cultural groups, with,  as  Earle  Birney  aptly put  it,  "parents  unmarried and  living  abroad," and  when  each  of these  groups is susceptible to  the  very  notion<; most  certain to  create  misunderstanding and hatred, can  a  complete  breakdown of  relations be  avoided? Assuming   that   we want  to  preserve  this single  nation, and  I think  that  we have  a  commitment  to do so, a challenge to our resources of humanity and  understanding, and  a chance to prove  a vital  principle  to the  world -assuming  that  we want  to preserve  the union,  is there  any  way  to solve the  disease  of national schizophrenia? I believe there  is,  and   I think   that  certain   Canadian writers   have  already provided the diagnosis  and   treatment.
But  before  we have  a look at  these writers,  it is necessary  to  determine exactly what  is meant   by  the  terms  culture and  cultural identity. For  clearly  the  major concern   of  French Canadians such  as  Lionel  Groulx, and  the  motivating force behind  Quebec separatism, is the avowed desire to preserve  an established cultural identity; while  for  English  Canadians the  big problem of recent  years, a problem which  has  been  discussed so often  that  it  is becoming a  national neurosis,  is to discover  whether such  an  identity  actually  exists.
The   famed   comparative ethologist  Konrad  Lorenz, in  his latest  book,  called On  Aggression, offers an  important insight  into  the  nature of culture. In  answer to his own  question, "What is culture?" he says:

A system of historically developed social norms and  rites which are passed on from generation   to generation  because emotionally  they  are  felt  to  be values. What  is a value?  Obviously, normal  and  healthy  people are  able to appreciate something as a  high  value  for  which  to live and,  if  necessary, to  die, for  no other  reason than  that  it was evolved in cultural  ritualization  and  handed  down to them  by a revered elder.  Is, then, a value only defined as the object on which our instinctive urge to preserve and defend traditional  social norms has become fixated?  Primarily and in the early stages of cultural  development  this undoubtedly  was the case. The obvious advantages  of loyal adherence  to tradition must  have exerted  a  consider­ able  selection  pressure. However, the greatest  loyalty and  obedience  to  culturally ritualized  norms of behaviour must not be mistaken for responsible morality. Even at  their  best  they  are  only functionally analogous to  behaviour  controlled  by rational  responsibility."

To   people   like  Susanna   Moodie,   Frances  Brooke   and   Lionel   Groulx,  this simple,  scientific  explanation by Konrad Lorenz  would  be the  blackest  of heresies

THE BODY-ODOUR OF  RACE



against  all that  is noble,  pure  and  praiseworthy in  human experience. Yet, what Lorenz  says  is  unquestionably, indeed  startlingly true.  Cultural identification is no  more  and  no  less than   an  emotional involvement, an  infatuation if you will, with  a particular set of social norms  and  rites. And in the majority of cases, what are  thought of  as values  are  merely  the  arbitrary "sweet  nothings" of  an  ethnic love affair.  It must  be  pointed  out,  however,  that  because  cultural identification is not  attended by bolts of lightning and  a voice from  the  heavens,  it is none  the less a  necessary  condition for  the  average  human being,  and  particularly for  the creative   writer. It is  as  necessary  as  emotional involvement with  other   human beings is necessary  for  the  normal person. It provides  the framework, the  pattern of attitudes and  approaches to life which  permit  the individual to begin function­ ing meaningfully. But as Konrad Lorenz explains, there is the danger that cultural identification will  be  confused   with   rational  responsibility,   that   a  person   will hold  those  norms  which  are  sanctioned by his own  culture to be  absolute  moral principles.  And  because  of  the  high  emotional element  involved,  any  attempt to re-establish   a  proper  perspective is  like  trying   to  explain  reality  to  a  lovesick adolescent.
Taking into  account these observations on the significance  of culture, one  must come to the following  conclusion: Since the worth  of any cultural identity resides in  its  usefulness  in  permitting  individuals to function   meaningfully, to  adapt to the  social  and  psychological realities  of a  particular time  and  place,  then  it  is a mistake  to  think   that   a  culture ought  to  be  preserved  simply  because  it  exists. Fanatic devotion, such  as that  of Lionel  Groulx,  to any established  culture for its own  sake  can  become  childish  irresponsibility. Cultures must  evolve with  chang­ ing  patterns of life.  Those   aspects  of any  culture which  become  obsolete, which  become  impediments rather than  aids to the individual in his struggle  to achieve  a measure  of success and  happiness,  should  not  be preserved. Let  them  enter  the realm  of nostalgia; let  them  become  art  forms  along  with  Marshall McLuhan's superseded   media. For  when  it so happens that  a  particular  cultural mystique is prevented from  evolving  to fit with  reality,  the  people  who  are inadvertently en­ gulfed  by  that   mystique   will suffer  undue  anxiety  and  frustration. Lorenz   des­ cribes in detail  the situation of the Ute Indians in the U.S.A., for instance, whose apparatus of  cultural  identity has  not  undergone sufficient  adjustment  to  the modern American way of life. These Indians suffer more frequently from  neuroses than  any  other  human group, says  Lorenz.  But even more  fascinating is the  fact  that   the  Ute   Indians have  a  rate  of  automobile accidents  which  "exceeds that of  any  other   car-driving human  group." Now  anyone  who  has  had  occasion  to

59

THE BODY-ODOUR OF  RACE



drive a car in Quebec  Province does not have to be told that  the rate of  automo­ bile accidents there is not far behind that  of the Ute  Indians."1  And  anyone who has  read  Hubert  Aquin's  Prochain Episode, or Jacques  Godbout's  Le Couteau sur la table, or any of a dozen other  recent French-Canadian  novels, will imme­ diately appreciate  how involvement with cultural  elements which are maladjusted  to reality can  produce frustration  and  despair.
Many  French  Canadians,  of course, have long been aware  that  the established
ethnic  culture  of  French  Canada, with  its emphasis  on  unwavering   continuity and  its isolationist tendencies, represents an obstacle  to progress in a number  of fields, including  industrialization  and  education.  But one does not erase an emo­ tional  involvement in a day or two, as the Lesage government  found  out  in the last provincial election. If, however, the culture of French  Canada has up to now hindered  the group's  adaptation to  the Twentieth   Century,  then  the culture  of English Canada has been equally effective in  hindering  that  group's adaptation to  the fact  of French  Canada. Distinguished  English-Canadian  scholars are still descanting  upon  what  was guaranteed  or  not  guaranteed  by  the British  North America  Act, as if that  mattered  a damn  when  there  are social  realities to  face. And  the question  remains-what, if anything,  can  we  conclude  about  all this?
I mentioned earlier that certain works of Canadian Literature offer insight into the  problem  of ethnic groups and cultural  identity.  In  particular, there are Yves Theriault's  Aaron,  and  Hugh  MacLennan's Two  Solitudes.  The  first of  these novels, Aaron, does not in fact deal with relations between French and English Canadians; the story is about  a Jewish boy in Montreal. It is of interest to note, moreover,  that  almost all the recent French-Canadian novels which discuss  rela­ tions  between  ethnic  groups  have  involved Jewish  characters. These  novels in­ clude  Claire  Martin's   Quand   j'aurai  paye  ton  visage, Jacques  Godbout's   Le Couteau   sur la  table,  Robert  Goulet's  Charivari,  Claude  Jasmin's   Ethel  et  le terroriste, and  the  book which nearly won France's  Prix  Goncourt,  Rejean  Du­ charme's  L'Avalee  des avales. It is evident, however, that in each of these novels the  Jewish  figure  operates  as a  symbol  with  which  the  French  Canadian can identify,  and  that  in effect the authors  are  more or  less vicariously exploring the situation  of the French-speaking  Canadian in North America.


IN THERIAULT's  Aaron,  three  possible approaches  to culture and  cultural  identity  are  outlined.  First  there  is the  position of Aaron's grand­
father  and  guardian,  Moishe, who sticks to every detail  of the Orthodox Jewish

6o

THE BODY-ODOUR OF  RACE



culture,  ready to endure  every inconvenience, refusing to adapt  in any way, satis­ fied  to  remain  poor  and  despised  by many  of those in  the  community  around him. Secondly, there is the attitude  adopted  by Viedna,  the beautiful Jewish girl whom  young Aaron  loved and  lost. She decides that the solution to  the problem of  racial  discrimination  is simple -one becomes assimilated  to  another  ethnic group.  When  Aaron  meets  her  again  after  a long separation  and  calls her  by name,  she  corrects  him.  "Je   ne  m'appelle  plus Viedna.  Je  m'appelle Cecile," she says. Then  she goes on to explain:

You  remember I spoke  to  you  about  it,  Aaron.  The  only  condition of survival  is this-stop  being  Jewish.  The Jew  can  accomplish   anything, provided he  is  no longer  Jewish.  Consequently we ... we are  French, you see!  My  father is pulling certain strings  to  obtain French citizenship  for  us.•3

The  third  position  is that  initially  decided  upon  by Aaron  himself.  He  will continue  to think  of himself as a Jew,  he will not try to be what  he is not. At the same  time, he does not wish to follow in his grandfather Moishe's footsteps. He  wants  to  abandon   the  isolationist  aspects of Judaism   and  to  adapt   to  the society in  which  he finds  himself. Eventually,  however, before  throwing  Aaron out of the house, Moishe manages  to make him feel such a painful sense of guilt that  the  boy reacts  desperately.  At  the end  of the story  the  reader  is told  that Aaron  has changed  his name  and  is left to speculate what  will become of him.
Of  the three  attitudes  to  cultural  identity  presented  by Theriault, clearly the author,  despite his understanding and  admiration  of it, is not recommending  the standpoint of  Moishe,  for  whom  there  is no  question  of  adjustment to social realities.  Governed  by  a  multitude   of  restrictions and  taboos,  the  leftovers  of adjustment  to the  realities of an  age more than  two thousand  years in  the past, subjected  to constant  pressures and inconvience, Moishe's position invites frustra­ tion  and  tragedy.  This  point  is made  clear  in  other  Canadian  novels  besides Aaron.  One  thinks immediately  of Abraham  in Adele Wiseman's gripping  story The   Sacrifice,  or  of  the  Zeyda  in  Mordecai  Richler's  The  Apprenticeship   of Duddy  Kravitz, and  Son  of a Smaller  Hero, or the parallel  examples of Father  Beaubien  and  the  Westmount  group  in Hugh  MacLennan's Two  Solitudes. The  Moishe  attitude,  then,  is that  a  culture  must  be preserved  simply because it is there.  Generally,  this  attitude is  reinforced  by a  great  super-structure of rites, traditions  and  religious dogma  within  the culture  itself,  and  of course, it is the prime cause and sustenance  of racist philosophy.
The   Moishe  attitude   thus  coincides  in  essence with  the  position  of  Lionel

THE BODY-ODOUR OF  RACE



Groulx and  the  various  extremists  of English  Canada; and  when  it happens that any   culture  is  preserved   unchanged  beyond   the  point  of  usefulness,  then   the continuity must  be partly  attributed to  the  Moishe  way of thinking. I say partly attributed because,  as happened in  the  case of Aaron, excessive coercion  to  em­ brace  an  ideology  which  is too  prohibitive, too far  removed  from  actuality,  can very  often  drive  a  person  to total  rejection  of it.  Or  as happened  with  the  hun­ dreds  of thousands of French  Canadians who  emigrated to  New  England, when a  static  and  obsolescent  set of values is confronted by a strong, dynamic culture, more  favourable to the  self-realization of  the  individual, the  result  will  be com­ plete  assimilation   into  the  new  culture within   two  or  three  generations. Thus when  a static  culture  is maintained without change, the  Moishe-Groulx attitude is only  partly  responsible.  Of  greater significance is  what  can  perhaps be  called the  facility  for  assimilation  of surrounding ethnic groups.  Ironic as it  may  seem, the  English-Canadian attitude typified by Susanna  Moodie, with  its exclusiveness and  its tendency since the days of  Thomas  Haliburton to shun  the  dynamic, has probably  done   more  to  preserve  French-Canadian  culture in   North   America  than  the  attitude exemplified  by  Lionel  Groulx.
Which   brings  us to  Theriault's second  approach to  cultural identity, that  of Viedna-Cecile.  The   tone  of  Aaron  strongly   suggests  that   the  author does  not favour  Viedna-Cecile's solution.  She  has  decided   to  become  completely  assimi­ lated; and  to do so she is prepared to deny  her  true  identity. The first  wealmess in  this approach is that  it  may  not work,  and  Viedna-Cecile will be caught in a ethnic  no-man's land.  In  another of his poignant short  poems, A. M. Klein  cap­  tures  the  idea  precisely:

Now we will suffer loss of memory:
We will forget the things we must eschew. We will eat ham, despite our tribe's tabu,
Ham buttered ... and on fast days ... publicly ...
Null, then, and void, the kike nativity.
Our family albums we will hide from view. Ourselves, we'll do what all pretenders  do, And like the ethnics mightily strive to be. Our  recompense? ... Emancipation-day!
We will find friend where once we found  but foe.
Impugning epithets will glance astray. To gentile parties we will proudly go; And Christians, anecdoting  us, will say:
"Mr.  and Mrs. Klein-the Jews, you know...." '4

THE  BODY-ODOUR OF  RACE



The  novel Under the  Ribs  of Death, by John  Marlyn, provides a vivid drama­ tization of the same idea. Sandor  Hunyadi  is ashamed of his Hungarian cultural identity,  and  he  attempts   to  submerge  it  completely. He  changes  his  name  to Alex Hunter. Eventually,  however,  in  a scene reminiscent  of Anton  Chekhov, he finds himself alone  staring  at  a  beetle;  he  has  not  been  accepted  into  the English-Canadian establishment,  and  he is no longer able to  join even the circle of his immediate  family.  Noah, in Richler's Son of a Smaller  Hero,  has a similar experience.
Assimilation, evidently, is a more complicated process than  one would suspect. As I intimated   earlier,  it can  take  place involuntarily  when  a static  culture  en­ counters a dynamic  one. Yet, as Theriault, Klein, Marlyn  and a number of other writers make clear, when an individual  consciously sets out to become assimilated by another  ethnic  group,  the  consequences most likely will be isolation and  de­ moralizing  loss of self-respect. A person cannot simply dismiss all the habits and associations which  result from  emotional  involvement with  a  culture.  Moreover, the great  majority of people, it seems, would never dream of  attempting  to do so. Assimilation is like romantic  love -it cannot  be charted  or forced; if it is going to happen,  it will take its own natural  course.
Theriault's third   approach   to  cultural  identity,  that  which  Aaron  first con­
siders adopting,  is both  more simple and  more complex than  the other  two, but to my mind it is the only intelligent and legitimate approach. It is a course some­ where in  between  blind  devotion  and total  rejection, and  it is motivated  by the normal  human  desire for self-realization. In  effect, it is an  attempt  by  the indi­ vidual  to adapt  to the social realities in which he finds himself  without denying his identity.  But he must of necessity abandon  those aspects of  his ethnic culture
-the taboos, the racist notions of purity and superiority, the inculcated  pseudo­ religious duty  to  protect  and  preserve traditions-which interfere  with  accom­ modation  to a broad  community  of human  beings.
In  other  words, the individual  must treat  culture not as an  untouchable  mys­ tical force, but as a set of social norms which permit him to be himself, to be part of a special community,  and  at the same time to live with people who are not of his special  community.  His  self-respect must  depend  upon  himself  and  his per­ sonal  achievements  rather  than  upon identification  with  a  culture, and  once he comes to that  realization  he will regard  other  people accordingly. Reversing the decision of Jules  Lantagnac in  L'Appel de la Race, he must  put  his natural  in­ clinations, his own happiness  and  that of his dependents,  before any duty to pro-

THE BODY-ODOUR OF  RACE



teet a cultural  mystique. For surely a culture  is there to serve people rather  than people to serve a culture.
In  both  Barometer  Rising and Two  Solitudes,  Hugh  MacLennan, the author who  has  probably  examined  the  problem  of  Canadian cultural  identities  more closely than  any  other,  provides a strong  tonal  endorsement  for  our  third  ap­ proach.  The  characters  Geoffrey Wain,  Marius,  Athanase  Tallard, Huntly  Mc­ Queen  and  Father  Beaubien are all warped  one way or another  by their feelings of obligation to an ethnic ideology. Each one is prevented from obeying his natural inclinations.  Wain  and  McQueen  are materially  successful, but from the human  point  of view they are  grotesques, both  given  to  ruthlessness disguised  as  duty, Wain  finding  human  contact  only in  the  paid-for  embrace  of  his  pitiful  little mistress and  McQueen  sharing  his dream mansion on the mountain with a Persian cat  and  a photograph  of his mother.  Marius  and  Father  Beaubien stew in their own  venom,  while old  Tallard   re-enacts  a  Greek  tragedy.  On  the  other  hand,  Wain's  daughter Penny and  her boyfriend  Neil free  themselves to  adjust  to life abandoning the  prejudices of the old Halifax society. Yardley, Paul and  Heather  in Two  Solitudes also insist upon being themselves rather  than  the serving vessels of a cultural  ideology. And it is clear that  Hugh  MacLennan  presents their atti­ tude as the only acceptable approach  to cultural  identity in Canada.
But  as illustrated  in Two  Solitudes as well as in  Aaron  and  Son of a Smaller Hero, even for those who see culture in the  proper  light, there is one major ob­ stacle  to  uneventful  and  natural  implementation  of  the  third  approach -the accusation  of being a traitor  to one's ethnic  group.  Moreover,  as Lionel  Groulx contends  in L' Appel  de la race, once the  barrier  is lowered  just a bit,  once the exclusiveness is dropped,  total  assimilation is sure  to follow sooner or  later.  My answer  to Groulx  is simply this:  whenever  there  is danger  of an  ethnic  culture disappearing,  then there is something seriously wrong  with it, and it is ready for the museum case and the social history textbooks. When, to use the Lorenz phrase, a set of social norms and rites are impediments  rather  than  aids to the individual, then it is time for them to be either modified or permitted  to die.



IN THE  CASE of French-Canadian culture, incidentally,  the influence of Groulx and  his disciples notwithstanding, modification is indeed beginning  to  take  place. From  all appearances, the  cultural  ideology of French
Canada is becoming less static, stronger and more practical. It is being put to the

THE  BODY-ODOUR OF  RACE



test of twentieth-century reality, and  the revered traditions  du bon  vieux  temps
-huge families, classical college education for the elite, distrust of everything foreign  and  especially of  France,  pea  soup  instead  of  chicken  in  the  pot,  the parish  priest as a unique link with absolute truth-these traditions  have already gone the way of the snows of yesteryear. There is now a strong possibility, indeed a  probability,  that  French  Canada, released from the duty  of preserving  an ob­ solescent status  quo,  will emerge  with  a viable, distinctive and  highly  dynamic new cultural  identity. The  phenomenon  is reflected in the vigour and  variety of recent  literary  production,  in  the  works of  Bessette, Godbout,  Major,  Martin,  Blais, Aquin,  Ducharme and  a  number  of others, and  especially  in such  novels as Jean  Simard's  Mon  Fils  pourtant  heureux  and  Richard  Joly's  Le Visage  de fattente,  where the customs of the good old days are significantly treated  as sub­ ject matter  for nostalgia rather  than patterns for modem living.
Some of these authors,  as I  pointed out  earlier, also dramatize  the frustration and  anxiety which are in large  part  the lingering effects of the old static culture. For  the influence of the philosophy of Lionel Groulx can  no doubt  be more ac­ curately  calculated  in  automobiles  wrapped  around  trees at a hundred  miles an hour  on antique  roads, than  in genuine  French-Canadian  accomplishments. But undoubtedly   the  most fascinating  aspect of the emerging  new cultural  identity of French  Canada is that  it may well replace the old  group  inferiority  complex by a sense of confidence,  which, coupled with the right attitudes  on the  part  of English Canadians, could lead to a highly satisfactory modus vivendi in Canada.
It would  appear   that   attitudes  in  English-speaking  Canada  are  also  being modified. Whereas  the racism of French  Canada  simply perpetuated  the vicious circle of racist  action  and  reaction,  producing  only antipathy, Quebec's  current "quiet  revolution"  has aroused a great deal of interest and sympathy. The changes taking  place  in  English  Canada are,  of course, not quite  so dramatic. Having never  been  homogeneous  in  the  first place,  and  having  always been  quite  un­ avoidably  affected  by the  culture  of the  United  States, an  awareness  of  which has too often  led to the  neurotic  pointlessness of anti-Americanism,  the  English­ speaking  elements  of  the  Canadian population  are  now searching  for  the kind of cultural  distinction  French  Canadians have always had. And ironically enough, if there is indeed  the possibility that  one of the major ethnic groups of  Canada is eventually going to be assimilated by the other, it could well be the new French­  Canadian cultural  identity  which  comes out  on top. One  need  only witness the recent  frantic   rush  among   English-speaking  businessmen in  Quebec   and  else-

THE BODY-ODOUR OF  RACE



where for courses in French  conversation, to realize that such a speculation is not entirely groundless.
Whatever  might come to pass in the far distant future,  however, need not con­
cern  us here.  Free from stunting  racist philosophy,  this nation  will grow in  the natural way  that  it  should,  adapting  to  the  exigencies of  each  successive age. Canada  may  always have  two  principal  ethnic  groups  and  a  variety  of other smaller  groups,  but what  all these groups  already  have  in  common  has in fact created  a  distinctive, all-embracing  Canadian mystique, something  independent of and  transcending  the separate  ethnic identities. For as I pointed out in a pre­ vious study,'5 it can be shown that  the major  literary  works of both  English and French  Canada share a common spectrum  of basic themes.
The  problem of ethnic relations, on the other hand,  as we observed at the very beginning of this analysis, has so far never been a basic theme of Canadian Litera­ ture. And  perhaps this fact is a good omen. It can be said, nevertheless, that  cer­ tain  Canadian writers have provided insight into the subject of ethnic co-existence. As  Susanna   Moodie,  Lionel  Groulx,  John   Marlyn,  Hugh  MacLennan, A.  M. Klein  and  Yves Theriault  each in his own  way makes  clear, with  regard  to cul­ tural  identity  both fanatical  devotion  and  total  rejection  are  negative  attitudes, tending  to foster  racism, hatred,  frustration, isolation or  needless discord. These attitudes  have existed and  continue to exist in Canada, but there are indications, reflected  in  the  more  recent of  the  works  examined,  that  as a  nation  we are steadily evolving away from the limitations of Lionel Groulx and Susanna Moodie. We  are  beginning  to  comprehend  the significance  of the  Rilke lines quoted  by Hugh   MacLennan in  Two   Solitudes  that  "Love  consists in  this, that  two soli­ tudes  protect,  and  touch and greet each other." We are rightly not about  to lose our  separate  cultural  identities,  but  we are  beginning  to  realize that  the  value of any ethnic culture in a nation such as ours can never depend  upon its power to isolate people from one another,  that  Canadian consciousness can be a good deal more  than,  to   use  MacLennan's own  phrase,  "race-memories lonely in  great spaces."


FOOTNOTES

' Canadian Anthology, ed. C. F. Klinck and  R. E. Watters  (Toronto), pp. 392-393.
•  Selections from Canadian Poets  (Montreal, I864), p. 106.
3  Dewart,  op. cit., p. I02.
4   Roughing It in the Bush  (Toronto, I923), pp. xviii-xix. s U ne Litterature qui se fait (Montreal,  I 962),  p. I 5·
6  The  French-Canadian Outlook (New York, I946), p. I 24.

66

THE  BODY-ODOUR OF  RACE



7  Cited  inL'Appel de la race (Montreal, I962), p. I3I.
8   Groulx, pp.  I 30- I 3I.
9   Groulx,  p. 130.
10  Groulx, p. 168.
11   On  Aggression, trans.  Marjorie Latzke  (London, 1966), p. 236.
12  Although I  have  been  unable to  obtain  exact  statistics  pertaining to  the  various
regions  of  Canada,  Insurance  company officials  have  assured   me  that   accident
rates  in  Quebec, especially  in  the  Chicoutimi area,  have  always  been  significantly higher  than  elsewhere.
13  Aaron  (Montreal, 1965),  p.  I43·
'4  Canadian  Anthology, p. 383.
15  "Twin Solitudes," Canadian  Literature, No. 3 I  (Winter, 1967),  pp. 5-24.







LETTRE DE MONTREAL


Une ville internationale


NaimKattan






GRAcE A  L'EXPO   67,  Montreal  fut  dmant  six mois un centre culturel international, la capitale mondiale  des arts et des lettres. Le festival mondial  en  fut  vraiment  un:   orchestres  symphoniques,  troupes  d'opera,  com­ pagnies  theatrales  se sont sucoedes a  un  rythme  dechaine.  Sur  le terrain  meme de  l'Expo,   spectacles,  conferences,  manifestations   folkloriques  completaient   la fete architecturale que tous les pays, ensemble, s'offraient.
De tout  cela que reste-t-il? Bien sur, le public  montrealais  est maintenant plus exigeant.  11 sait  ce que  les meilleures troupes  peuvent  accomplir.  De plus, il a pris le gout du spectacle et il est fort possible, qu'au  cours des mois et des annees qui  viennent,  ce gout  se  traduira   par  un  appui   beaucoup  plus  manifeste  aux artistes du cru. Je voudrais toutefois souligner d'une  maniere particuliere deux manifestations,   moins  spectaculaires  sans   doute,   mais  dont   les  consequences peuvent  etre,  a long terme, considerables:  la  rencontre  internationale des poetes et le colloque sur le theatre.
Depuis de  nombreuses annees les ecrivains et les artisans  du  theatre  canadien vont d'une  capitale a l'autre  ala rencontre  d'ecrivains,  de poetes, de metteurs en
soene, de decorateurs, de techniciens du theatre. Ce furent  toujours les Canadiens qui  faisaient  les premiers pas, invitant  parfois a Toronto, a Montreal  ou a Van­
couver telle ou telle personnalite, ou bien, faisant  eux-memes le voyage pour aller la  voir chez elle. Et voila que soudain  la metropole  canadienne devient  un pole d'attraction. Sans se faire trop  prier, des artistes et des ecrivains de tous les pays

68

LETTRE DE MONTREAL



voulaient faire le voyage a la Terre des Hommes. Ainsi, Montreal meritait le derangement. L'on  voulait  bien  traverser  l'Ocean   pour  y  venir.  Les echanges avec  les  autres  pays  s'equilibrerent  ainsi. 11s  s'effectuaient   desormais  dans  les deux  sens. Pour  les Montrealais, et dans  une plus large mesure  pour !'ensemble des  Canadiens,   il  s'agit  d'un   changement  profond  dont  les repercussions  psy­ chologiques sont difficiles encore  a mesurer. Ainsi, nous Canadiens  nous pouvons etre interessants. Nous pouvons attirer  chez-nous les autres  pays, non pas a cause de notre richesse naturelle, a cause de nos etendues et nos possibilites economiques, mais en  raison  du  dynamisme  de  notre  culture,  et  cette  culture  prouve  qu'elle est, manifestement, au diapason du monde.
Les discussions qui eurent  lieu au cours de ces rencontres ne bouleverserent pas la  vie  litteraire  ou  theatrale   d'aucun pays. Mais  ce n'est  la  qu'un   detail,  fort secondaire  apres tout.  L'important, comme c'est le cas de toutes les recontres du genre,  c'est le contact  personnel  qui s'est etabli  entre Canadiens  et etrangers. 11 est difficile de savoir  quels projets furent elabores au cours de ces quelques  jours brefs  et  intenses.  D'ores  et  deja  l'on  peut  en apercevoir  les augures.  Un  met­ teur  en scene vient  deja  cette  annee  travailler  pour  une  troupe  de  Montreal  et une  piece sud-americaine sera  presentee  a  l'Universite  Simon  Fraser.  Ces pro­ jets ont pris naissance a Montreal. A Montreal des poetes canadiens se sont entre­ tenus  avec des  poetes  americains,  polonais, franc;ais,  non  pas comme  de  jeunes admirateurs  receptifs,  mais  comme  des egaux  qui  ont  autant a  donner  qu'a  recevoir.  Et  les ecrivains  de  tous  les pays sont  partis  avec la  conviction  que  le Canada existe sur  le plan  culturel.  Certes, c'est  un  pays dechire  mais qui  etale ses contradictions.  Est-ce le moyen de les assumer et de les depasser? L'on  ne sait encore. Mais ce pays divers a un respect tel de la liberte que des ecrivains venant des antipodes  se sentent  a l'aise et c'est  ici qu'Andre Frenaud  a fait Ia connais­ sance  de  Denise Levertov  et  que  Guillevic a  pu converser  avec Robert  Lowell. Les Canadiens  etaient  des  participants et Montreal  offraient  son hospitalite.
Ainsi les Canadians peuvent  etre des partenaires  et s'ils s'aperc;oivent ainsi que
leur culture est entree  dans  une phase nouvelle, qu'elle atteint  l'age adulte, ils ne peuvent  pas ne pas prendre  acte du defi que cela leur pose. 11 n s'agit plus d'etre des coloniaux,  des parents  pauvres,  des freres cadets que  les aines protegent  de leur  hauteur. Ils doivent  desormais se defendre  a armes egales. C'est le point de depart; l'on traverse la ligne du risque, mais la bataille n'est point gagnee.





6g

LETTRE DE  MONTREAL


IL   y  A  UN   AN,   les ecrivains  canadiens  etaient  a l'honneur   a Paris:  Marie-Claire  Blais remporta  le Prix  Medicis pour  Une saison dans la vie d'Emmanuel;  Rejean  Ducharme  suscita un interet  vif et parfois equivoque; l'on
a parle  de Jean  Basile, d'Hubert Aquin ... Cette  annee  d'autres ecrivains  pour­ suivent  leur  carriere  en  France:   Jacques  Godbout  avec Salut  Galarneau, Jean Basile  avec  Le  grand Khan.  Et  les Fran  ais
Brault puisque les Editions Grasset publient son recueil de poemes paru precedem­ ment  a  Montreal.   Les Fran ais                                                                              re­ gionalistes  de  la  litterature  fran aise?
americains de langue fran aise?
bien definie de ce cote de !'Atlantique? Ce sont lades questions auxquelles l'on ne peut donner  de reponses definitives car ce sont les oeuvres qui parlent. Et il serait hasardeux  de  conclure dans  un sens ou  dans  l'autre. Ce qui  est important  c'est que  les Canadiens  fran ais
tentatives et de leurs decouvertes litteraires et artistiques. Et ce n'est plus la parure
exotique  dont  on  les affublait  de  force  qui  assure  maintenant leur  presence  a Paris.  Et  l'on  ne  considere  plus  leur  manque de  raffinement  culture!  comme l'attribut de  cousins aimables  mais peu  evolues, mais  plutot  comme  une  carac­ teristique  d'un  groupe qui a garde intactes  les sources primitives de !'instinct.
En d'autres termes les Canadiens fran  ais aise
le defi qu'a  pose l'Expo 67 aux Canadiens  fran($ais: faire leur entree sur la scene mondiale  tout  en  gardant  leurs caracteristiques.  Bien sur, il ne s'agit  Ia que  de premiers pas. Les veussites ne sont pas encore suffisamment  nombreuses pour que cette route que l'on commence a explorer ne soit pas semee d'embuches. Ce n'est la  qu'une  etape.  L'etape  suivante,  plus ardue  sans doute,  permettra aux  Cana­ diens,  non  seulement  de  prendre  la  mesure  de  leur  autonomie  culturelle,  mais aussi d'en assurer la persistance. Les Canadiens  n'auront plus besoin d'une  avalisa­ tion  etrangere,   fut-elle  fran aise,
les talents  d'ici.  Il  faut  que,  pour  cela, l'on  atteigne  suffisamment  de maturite, que  l'on soit sur de son propre  jugement. Une  telle attitude  n'a  rien a voir avec le desir de  proteger  les ecrivains et les artistes, locaux,  mais de les traiter  selon leurs merites.
Cette demarche n'est point facile car l'on chemine sur un sentier borde de deux
provincialismes.  D'une  part,  l'on  ne  reconnait   que  les avis de  l'etranger  pour s'assurer  que  ce que  l'on  produit  au  Canada merite !'attention. Le second pro-

LETTRE DE  MONTREAL



vincialisme,  non  moins  nefaste,  recele des relents  de  chauvinisme: I'on applique un  traitement special  aux  oeuvres  canadiennes. II est normal, bien sur,  que  l'on s'interesse  a  ce  qui  exprime la  realite  du  pays ou  l'on  vit.  Mais,  de la  a  ne  pas exiger que cette expression ait une resonance,  non pas uniquement locale, mais universelle,  il y a  un  pas  que  certains  esprits franchissent sans hesitation. Et c'est Ia encore  que  l'Expo 67  a  fourni  aux  Canadiens !'occasion  d'une confrontation avec  le  monde, car  une  culture n'est  vivante  que  si elle  est  contestee,  non  pas
uniquement  a l'interieur des  frontieres   d'un pays,  mais  egalement sur  le  plan
mondial.







GROVE'S  LETTERS

I have  been  authorized by Mrs. Frederick   Philip  Grove   to  attempt   to collect and edit the letters of her late husband,  the Canadian  novelist Frederick Philip  Grove.  I should  be most grateful if any of your readers who have Grove letters  in  their  possession would  get  in touch   with   me.   I   should   be  glad   to receive  copies  of  these  letters,  or   the letters  themselves.  Any  letters  entrusted to  me  would  of  course  be  treated  with the greatest care and returned to their owners once copies have been made.
I  should  also be glad  if  your readers
would   supply   me  with   the   names  of persons who, they believe, might be in possession of  Grove  letters.

DESMOND PACEY,
University of New Brunswick



review articles




ACHIEVEMENT AND MONUMENT
 




A. W.Purdy



Poets  Between  the  Wars.  Edited  by  Milton   Wilson.  New  Canadian Library
(McClelland  &  Stewart).  $2.95.


THIS BOOK   IS  THE THIRD in a series   that   has   presented   the   work   of better-known  Canadian  poets  in   large­ sized  chunks,  in  opposition   to  the  usual practice of a few poems each from  many poets.  In   this  latest  book  there  are  five poets,  and   the  title  has  the implication for  me that  poets were writing  frantically before   the  inevitable  war  stopped   their writing.
Of  these  five  poets,  Smith   and  Scott are  associated  with  the  beginnings of modern  poetry   in  Canada. They  colla­ borated  in the 192o's on the McGill Fort­ nightly  (the  inevitable  English-sounding title),  with   Smith  becoming since  then the   grand   panjandrum  of   anthologists and  critics,  and  Scott  achieving fame  as lawyer  and  civil  rights  leader  as well  as poet.
Looking   at   their   poems   now,  Smith seems to me more closely bound to the restrictions of  technique than  Scott.  The latter has  an  amazing  variety  of  themes and  construction, and  shifts from  metrics to  loose  speech   rhythms with   practiced ease.  His  ability  to extract  snobbish  quo­ tations   from  the  invitation sent  to  pros­ pective  members  of the  Canadian  Social
 Register   and   blend   them   with   his  own sharp asides,  makes  an  hilarious poem.
I see F. R.  Scott  as a  nationalist poet, but  also humanist in a wider  sense, satir­ ist  and   lyricist.  His  "Lakeshore"  is  still, after   many  years,  a  magnificent  portrait of  humanity.  And   "Laurentian  Shield" is  clear   and   explicit,   a  poem   realizing  that  the  perennial possibilities of  Canada have  always  remained  unfulfilled  in  the north.  Scott   has   never   been   anything else  than   clear  and  easy  to  understand, a  quality  difficult   to  achieve  and  which certain  unperceptive critics  have derided. If only   through  the   sheer   variety   and diversity  of  his  poems,  I think  Scott  will be around for  a very long  time.
A.  J. M.  Smith  is, of  course,  a  pro­
ponent   of   classicist   diction    and   phil­ osophy,   as   perhaps  exemplified   by   his poem,    "Like   an    Old    Proud    King". Smith's poetry, however, has moved  from this ascetic stance to something more  per­  sonal   which   surely   amounts  to   a   late blossoming. But  the  selection  in this book does   not   fully   indicate  Smith's  poetic renaissance.
E.  J. Pratt, from   the  time  of  his first
emergence  in   the   rg2o's,   has   achieved

REVffiW ARTICLES



the greatest  reputation of any Canadian poet.  The   selection   here  of  "The Great Feud", "Towards  the  Last  Spike", and three  shorter poems,  is probably the  best that    could   be   made    in   keeping  with space    limitations.   Any    description   of Pratt I ever  read   labels  him  as  one  of those  grand-sounding creatures, "epic poets". He deals with large themes, man against  nature, scaly  breeds  versus mam­ mals,  disaster   and   triumph  on  sea  and  land.  His lines are  generally marked by a heavily   stressed   metric  beat;  he  avoids entirely    anything   personal  in   his  own poems.    In   this   minority  view,   Pratt's metric beat   and   reiterative  polysyllabic habits  have  the effect of making many  of his  poems  excruciatingly  dull.  Some  do not   share  this  opinion,  but  even   apart  from  method I find  little  to  interest   me in  an  imaginary battle   between  the  race of   reptiles  and   the  clan  of  mammals.
However, in  Pratt's narrative poem  of the  C.P.R.'s construction, the  aforemen­ tioned  heavy  beat  becomes softer  and  not so  obtrusive.  One   hears  of  Scots  whose "oatmeal  was  in  their   blood,"  and   the food  bequeathed "The  power  to strike  a bargain  with  a foe,/To win  an  argument upon    a   burr -"   And    the    Canadian Shield  above  Lake  Superior is conceived  in  the  well-known  lines:

On  the  North  Shore  a  reptile  lay  asleep­ A  hybrid   that   the  myths  might  have  con­
ceived,
But  not  delivered, a progenitor
Of  crawling,  gliding  things  upon  the  earth.

Also  a  picture of  John Macdonald  get­ ting  drunk  and   hearing  part   of  a  con­ temporary song in  his imagination:

"We'll hang  Riel  up  the  Red  River, And  he'll  roast  in  hell  forever,
We'll  hang   him  up  the  River
With   a  yah-yah-yah."
 That fragment of song from  the  past  re­ tains   a   curious   authenticity   across   the years.
"The  Last   Spike"  seems   to   me   the
most readable of Pratt's poems. Certain others  have brilliant and  memorable pas­ sages, but  remain indigestible as a whole. I  think    Pratt's  large   reputation   will gradually subside  until  it finds  its proper  level, that  of something  more  than  com­ petence,    but   something   far    less  than  genius.
Milton    Wilson   says   in   his   note   on
Dorothy Livesay that  she has an "imagis­ tic   and   epigrammatic   quality"   in   her earlier   poems.  And  that  in  the  Thirties "she  added   to  this  a  new  expressiveness of  form  and  style  and   a  new  range  of social  and  industrial  material." At  one time  I  thought that  accurate and  slightly forbidding description of Livesay's earlier self would  apply  forever,  and  that  it was all that  could  be said for  her.  But on her return in  1g63 from  a teaching stint  in Rhodesia, she encountered the so-called "Black  Mountain" verbal  and  idiomatic techniques, and  adopted them,  with some personal  variations, as her own.
In   some  ways  Livesay   was  always  a deeply   personal   poet,   though  her   lan­ guage   was  not   particularly   original  in those   early   days.   But   recently    a   new frankness and  more  modern idiom  have resulted   from   both   experience  and   en­ counters  with   "new"  techniques whose prime   concern   is  the   live   "sound"  of poems.

And  what  fantasies   do  you  have?
asked  the  psychiatrist
when   I  was  running  away  from  my  hus­
band.

Fantasies?   fantasies?
Why surely  (I might  have  told  him)
All  this  living
is   just   that

73

REVIEW ARTICLES



every  day  dazzled gold  coins falling
 

through   fingers.
 from   any  other   country-unless  such  a group should  include one of the very few
outstanding figures  like  Neruda or  Qua­

So  I  emptied  my  purse for  the  doctor
See!  nothing  in  it
but  wishes.
He  sent  me  home
to  wash  dishes.

A. M. Klein  has written  no poems since
1951,  but   he  remains   a  compass   point and  beacon  of  comparison for  other Canadian poets, particularly Jewish  ones. Layton has learned from  him, and  prob­ ably Leonard Cohen  has too. Klein wrote poems  of  tremendous  "Jewishness" with an  erudition and  knowledge  of  his own tradition that  is  probably  without equal.  He  used  conventional metrics,  but varied them   in  surprising ways  so  that   mono­  tony  is  rarely  present  in  his poems.  And above all, his poems contain  transmissible emotions:

And  those assembled  at  the table  dream
Of  small   winds   that   an  April   wind  doth scheme,
And  cry from  out  the sleep assailing  them:
Jerusalem, next   year!  Next   year, Jerusalem!

This vivid  Zionist  emotion  is one  reason why  I would  place  Klein  near  the top  of any  list of Canadian poets. It is a quality entirely  absent  in  E. J.  Pratt, whose  per­ sona  seemed  to remain  always aloof  from his poet's  voice.
All  the  poets  in  this  book  are  nearly
6o years of age or well past it. (Of course, Pratt is  dead.) It is doubtful if  any  of them  will  add  very much  to  the  quality of work already written; but their  total quantity of work will probably  increase. None  of  them  is great,  but  all  are  more than competent. They  compare, I think, favourably with  a similar  group  of poets





74
 simodo.
The  reader    is  not   likely   to   be   en­ thralled or fascinated or carried  away by these  poems,  but  he  can  and  should   be very  much   interested  by  what  has  been done  in  the  past.  For  that  is  the  key:  all these  poets  seem  to  me  to  belong  a little behind   the   present  moment,  embalmed just five  minutes  ago.  They  recede  while you   look   at   them  (and   this   is  not   a writing-off   or  dismissal) .  Their  work  is both    achievement   and    monument.  I think  that  none  now will break  from  the self-imposed bonds of style, idiom and personal mentality. At  least  it seems  un­ likely,  despite  Livesay's  recent  mutations of  style.
And  that  is not  to  take  anything away
or  lessen  this  body  of work.  But  in some way,   fulfilment  negates   potential. The trails have all been blazed, the roads cut through the  jungle, and one stays on the known   paths.
And  since  this is an  odd  way to end  a
review,    here's    another  incident  that might  be relevant. A few weeks ago at Kingston,  Irving   Layton  told   me   he was  going  to  the  Far  East,  and  planned to  remain there  for some  time -in an attempt to break  out  and  away  from  the paths and   trends  of  his  previous  poems. After  the  first  vital  rush  and  the authen­ tic  un-selfconscious voice  falters,  such  a break   (not  a  retreat)   might   be  the  way to   do   it -find   something  somewhere that  may  trigger  the  undiscovered reality  in  your  mind.


MAN  OF THE THIRTIES

Julian  Symons


GEORGE  wooococK, Selected   Poems.  Clarke  Irwin.  $3.50.


ISUPPOSE   THE  FIRST THING to   be   said   about  these   poems   is  that almost   all   of   them    date   back   twenty years or  more.  Perhaps not  quite  all, for the  dust  wrapper is not  correct in saying that all of the poems come from Mr. Woodcock's three  previous  books of verse
-there  are  half  a  dozen  previously  un­ collected,    which    I   gather  have   been written  in   Canada. This  is  not   just  a pedantic note. The point  is that as a poet Mr.  Woodcock   belongs  to  England, and to  the  English  Thirties.  The poetic  style and   social   attitude   shown   here   could, indeed,  hardly  have been  nurtured in any other time.  He  is  very  much   a  "period" poet,  a still rather  neglected figure  in  the movement of  which  Auden  was the head and  shoulders.
To say that  George Woodcock worked under   the   shadow   of   Auden   is  not   to deny   him   a   distinctive  personal  tone. His  best  poems  fall  into  two groups.  The first,  and   more   powerfully imaginative, deal with an invented scene or story in realistic  yet fabulous terms. "The Island", which   is  rightly   familiar  from  antholo­ gies, is one  of  the  finest  of  the  poems  in this  kind.  A  group of  men  come  to  an island,  and  find,  capture  and  torture an inhabitant in  the  attempt  to  make  him tell    some    secret    about   hidden   gold. Under  the   torture  his   joints   burst,   fire jets from  the  ruptures.

Then  lay  before   us  on   the   rigid   rack
Straw  limbs  and  a  horse's  polished  skull.
Gulls mocked  as walked  away  across the sea
 
The  man  we hunted   but  could  not  keep or  kill.

A  parable  is intended, but  what  is it? Is  there   a  significance  in  the  fact   that the  leader  of  the  men  has  the  name  of the Antarctic explorer, Scott?  The  final meaning  remains  evasive,   but   the  deli­ berate   ambiguity  increases   rather   than  diminishes  the  effect  of the  vivid  images and   the   direct   narrative   style.   Other poems  like  "Gods" exploit   this  vein  of fable,  sometimes   ironic,  sometimes mys­ terious.  With   it  goes  a   powerful   visual sense,  seen  particularly  in "White" and  "Snow  in London", which  is perhaps  the finest  poem  in  the  book.
The   other   group of  poems  show  that
sense  of  a  doom   both  dreaded  and  de­ sired  that  is the  particular Thirties  hall­  mark,  together with  the  flatness  of  tone and   the  optimistic belief  in  an  ultimate virtue   resting   in  the   working  class  that  also  characterized  the   period.   A  poem like   "Sunday   on    Hampstead    Heath" shows exactly  what  I mean. The flatness is here,  quite  deliberate and  rooted  in  a distrust   of  histrionic  gestures,  but  still  a little  dismaying:

Here   on  the   hilltop   my  friends   and  I  sit down.
They    talk   of   prisons; 	the   conversation
falls
And  I  say: 	"One evening  we must  drink
at  the  Spaniards".

The   optimism  comes  in  a  later   verse which  envisions  the  ugly and  stunted creeping   "towards  a  world   more   great

75

REVIEW ARTICLES



than   the  moneyed   hopes  of  masters  can ever shape". The  attitude conveyed  in poems   like  these   is  alien   to  the   young who  begin  today  in  total   distrust  of  all group  merits.  Today the  optimism  looks too  easy, but  for  all  their  illusions  about the  working   class  the  Thirties poets  ex­ pressed  the  essence  of their  time  at  least as well as Ginsberg and  Ferlinghetti con­ vey theirs.  Poems like "Wartime Evening  in  Cambridge" and   "Waterloo  Bridge"  (and  some which  are  not  reprinted here, like   "Now",  the   first   poem   in   Wood­ cock's   first   collection)   lose  nothing  by their  sense  of  immediacy. They  are  tied to  events  at  the end  of the  Thirties and  the  beginning  of  the  Forties,  yes, but  a great  deal  of  what   was felt  at  the  time,




CONTACT
 the   anguish,  the   desire,   the   hope,   still comes  across  the  bridge  of  years.  Which is   saying   simply   that    these   are   good poems, inspired  by genuine feeling, and composed  in  a tradition which demanded of a poet  a high  degree of visual accuracy and    of   intelligent craftsmanship. The social  realism   (nothing to  do  with  Rus­ sian   social   realism)   which   demanded that   the   poet   should  compose  with   his eye  upon  the  subject,  and  which  deeply distrusted    abstractions,    was   in    many  ways  a   fine   discipline.  In   the   Thirties tradition   George  Woodcock has   an honourable  place,   and   it  is  a  pleasure to  see  the  best of  his  poems  collected  in a  single  volume.







Mary Jane Edwards



MICHAEL   GNAROWSKI,   Contact   1952-1954·  Being   an  Index   to  the   Contents  of Contact, a little  magai!:ine  edited   by  Raymond Souster, together   with  notes  on the  history  and  the  background  of the  periodical.  Delta  Canada. N.P.


CANADIAN  PERIODICAL   PUBLI­ cations  have  played  an  important  role in the   history   of   Canadian   literature.  As early   as  I 778,   Montreal's   Gazette   lit­
thaire   published   original    poetry    and
essays by Canadian writers. A similar  role has  been  played  since  then  by such  peri­ odicals   as   the   Literary  Garland,  pub­  lished  in  Montreal  from   1838  to  1851, and   Contemporary   Verse,  published   in Victoria from   1941  to  1953. Sometimes  called  "little magazines", these periodical publications have  generally  had  a similar history:  they  have  been  the  special  con­ cern  of  one  person  or  one  small  group;
 
they   have   had   a  small   circulation and little   financial support;  and   they   have been  published for a relatively  short  time. But  despite  their  ephemeral and  precari­ ous  existence,  they  usually  have included the  works  of the  most  exciting  writers  of their   time   in   Canada. Their   policy  of publishing  works   by   Canadian   writers  has  been  particularly important for  Can­ adian poetry,  for  poetry  has  been  usually the  major,  sometimes   the  sole, staple  of these  little  magazines.
One   such   periodical  which   appeared
in   Toronto in   the   195o's   was  Contact.
Edited  by  Raymond  Souster, it   was  a

REVIEW ARTICLES



mimeographed magazine with  a  circula­ tion  of about  150  published in  ten  issues between  January 1952  and  March 1954· Dedicated  to   poetry,    it   published  the works of Canadian  poets. Thus, it  was a typical  Canadian  periodical  publication. However,  it   was   also   unusual  because Contact  endeavoured  to  be  an  interna­ tional  little  poetry  magazine as  well.
Souster's  editorial policy was suggested
in  the  epigraph of the  first issue of  Con­ tact   and   in  a  note   on   the   title  in  the second   issue.  Quoting  from   Jean   Paul Sartre,  Souster   announced   in   the   epi­ graph  that    Contact   was   designed   for poets  who  wished  to achieve immortality "by  fighting  passionately in  our  time,  by loving  it  passionately, and  by consenting to   perish   entirely  with   it".   Reminding readers  of  the  first  Contact, a  magazine edited   from   1920   to  1923  by  William Carlos  Williams   and   Robert   McAlmon whose  policy  was  "faith in  the  existence of  native  artists  who  are  capable of hav­ ing,  comprehending,  and   recording  ex­ traordinary experience",  Souster  con­ firmed  that   his  Contact  was  designed  to provide   an  outlet   for  poets  in  Canada. Then, adding his  own  note  on  the  title, Souster  stated   that  Contact's  pages  were "open,  not   merely   to   Canadian  poets, but   to  poets  everywhere" and   thus  de­ fined   Contact's  international  character.
The  contents of  the   magazine  show
how  well  Souster   carried out   his  rather complex   editorial  policy.   He   published poems   by  Canadian  writers  like  Louis Dudek  and  Irving Layton, older  poets in the  sense  that   they  had   been  publishing poetry  in  volume   form   since  the  194o's but   newer   poets  in  the  sense  that   they had  not  received  much  critical attention. that  they were  passionately committed to contemporary  life,  and   that   they   were
 experimenting with  new  forms  and  dic­ tion to express this commitment. He pub­ lished   poems   by  Canadian   writers   like Eli  Mandel, Gael  Turnbull,  and   Phyllis Webb,  whose poems  were  not issued in  a volume  until  1954.  He  published poems by  contemporary  American  writers   like Cid  Corman, Charles Olson,  and  Robert Greeley.   He   published    translations   of poems by contemporary European writers  like  Gottfried Benn,  George  Seferis,  and  Jean Cocteau. And  he published reviews, articles,  and   notes  on  poets  and   poetry. These   included  Robert  Greeley's   "Note on  Canadian  Poetry" in  which   he  ana­ lysed the influence  of English diction and  rhythms  on   Canadian   poetry   and   de­  cided   that   they  "dulled" the  Canadian poet's  sense  of  place  and   prevented  the  development   of   a   "major"  poet    in Canada.
The  importance of Contact in  the  his­
tory of Canadian poetry stems from this combination  of  poetry   and   critical  ma­ terial  from  Canadian and  non-Canadian writers.  By including Canadian material, Souster  provided a magazine where  Can­ adian  poets could  talk  about, and  experi­ ment    with,   new   forms,  diction,  and  content  in   their    poetry.    By   including non-Canadian  material,  he   put   Cana­ dian  poets in contact with  American and  European  poets   who   were   also  experi­ menting with,  and  talking  about, poetry.  And  by combining  Canadian, American, and   European   poets,   and   by  ignoring British  poets,  he  implied   that   the  future of Canadian  poetry  was  not  with  British poetry  but  with  American and  European poetry,  an implication which  did,  in fact,  point   to  a   new   emphasis   in  Canadian poetry.
Contact  also  served   two,  more   prac­
tical   functions. It  helped    to   establish

77

REVIEW ARTICLES



Contact  Press  which  published   between I952 and  I954 such books as Cerberus: Poems  by  Louis  Dudek,  Irving  Layton, and  Raymond  Souster; Canadian  Poems
1850-1952, edited  by Louis Dudek  and Irving Layton; Irving Layton's Love the Conqueror Worm; and  Trio: First Poems by  Gael Turnbull, Phyllis Webb, Eli Mandel.   The   notices   which   these   vol­ umes  received   in  Contact  helped   bring attention to  their   authors both  in  Can­ ada  and  in the United State  and  Europe. In   Irving  Layton's case,  this   attention led  in  I956 to  William  Carlos  Williams' introduction  to   a   volume   of   Layton's selected   poems,  The  Improved   Binocu­ lars, an  introduction  which   resulted   in Layton's  critical  recognition in  Canada and  in  the United  States.
Unfortunately, despite  its  interest  and importance,  Contact   itself  has   received little  critical attention. Furthermore, it is virtually unavailable today. Recently, however,  Michael Gnarowski  prepared Contact  1952-1954: Notes on the History and  Background  of the  Periodical  and an  Index, the  third   in  his  series  of  In­ dexes  to  Canadian  little  magazines.  As well  as  an  author-title-subject  index   to the   contents  of  the  magazine,  Contact
1952-1954 includes  a collection  of  mate­
rial   relevant  to  Contact:   "Some  After­ thoughts  on   Contact   Magazine"  by Raymond Souster;  "Notes on  the  Back­ ground  and   History  of  Contact   Maga­ zine"  by  Michael  Gnarowski; a  "Select Bibliography of Articles and  Readings Having Reference to Contact Magazine"; and   a  reprint of  four  letters  written  by Ezra   Pound    to   Louis   Dudek   in   I95I and   I952.
In    "Notes  on   the   Background and
History  of Contact  Magazine",  Gnarow­
ski  tells  in   a  carefully   researched   and
 well-documented  article   Contact's  story. The   story   begins   in   June I 95 I when Raymond  Souster, in  a  letter   to  Louis Dudek, first  suggested   the  need  in  Can­ ada  for  "a  poetry  mag  with  daring and a  little   less  precious   an   attitude" than  Contemporary   Verse  and  Northern   Re­ view.   It  ends   in   February  I954  when Souster  announced  that   the  last  issue of Contact   would   appear  in  March  I954· Gnarowski's   article   focusses  on   the   in­ fluence   of   Louis   Dudek,  Cid   Corman, and    Robert   Greeley    on   the    editorial policy  of  Contact. And   he  argues   that  these  three  were  involved  in  "a  tug-and­ pull   situation"  in   which   Corman  and Greeley  saw  Contact  as  "a  purely  inter­ national   little    magazine"  and    Dudek  "saw   Contact   not   only  as  an   interna­ tional    little   magazine, but   also   as   an emancipating  agency   which   would   free Canadian poetry,  and  be instrumental in countering the  influence  and  authority" of  John  Sutherland's  Northern   Review.
From    the    evidence  that    Gnarowski
presents  and  from  Contact  itself, there  is no doubt of the validity  of Gnarowski's argument. But  there  is also  no doubt, as Gnarowski says, that  Souster shaped  the magazine to suit himself.  Souster,  for example, printed as  the  leading editorial in  the  first  issue of Contact Louis Dudek's Polemical "Oil Sont  les Jeunes?", a  call for   young    Canadian  poets   with   ima­ gination,  concrete  images,   energy,   and thought to write  poetry  which communi­ cated    "something   worth    saying"  in   a world   where   it   was  "beginning  to  rain bombs".    However,  he    later  ignored  Dudek's   suggestion  that    he   should   be allowed  to "editorialize more".  Similarly, he  continued to publish Canadian poetry despite  Cid  Corman's comments that  the Canadian poems  which  appeared in  the

REVIEW ARTICLES



second  issue of  Contact were  "amateur­ ish".  Thus, Souster  maintained Contact's dual    character   as   a  typical,   although non-polemical,  Canadian  periodical pub­  lication  and as an  international, although unusually  Canadian, little  poetry  maga­  zine.
Since    Contact	1952-1954    with    its valuable  articles    about,  and   index   of,
 Contact    has  appeared, one   hopes   that the   periodical    itself   will   be   reprinted. In    "Afterthoughts"   Souster    mentions that   the  Island   Press  of  Toronto  plans to   offer   an   offset   reprint  of   Contact. Such   a  reprint   would   increase   the  use­ fulness  of  Contact   1952-1954   and  allow more   readers   to  contact  this  important little  magazine.




DISTANT  FOREBEARS
 


George Woodcock



MARGARET WARD LABARGE,  Saint  Louis. Macmillan.  $9.25.
MICHAEL   MACKLEM,   God   Have   Mercy:   the   Life   of  john   Fisher  of  Rochester.
Oberon Press.  $6.25.
Ross WILLIAM COLLINS,  Calvin  and  the Libertines  of Geneva.  Clarke  Irwin.  $4.50.


CANADIAN   WRITERS still   do not  produce many  biographies of figures outside  the  history  of  their  own  country, and when three such books appear close together,  and   all  concern   men   of   reli­ gion  who  died  more  than  four  centuries ago  (in  one  case  almost  seven  centuries ago), one  is tempted to wonder  whether there   may  be  in  this  very  fact  a  Cana­ dian   implication.  Are  we  beginning  to reach   farther  back  into  our   roots   than  the   English   eighteenth  and   the   French seventeenth century?  Are  we  re-asserting our  links  with  the  greater past  of  Euro­ pean   civilization?   Examine  the   figures chosen  by  these  biographers, and  an  in­ teresting    pattern   emerges.   Margaret Ward  Labarge, Canada's  leading medi­ aeval   historian,  writes   the   life  of  that saintly crusader, Louis  IX  of France. Michael Macklem rearranges the modest known  facts  on  John Fisher,  the  Bishop of  Rochester  who  was  executed  at  the orders  of  Henry   VIII, and   joined  King
 
Louis  in  the  company of  the  Saints  four hundred years later.  In Calvin and the Libertines Donald  Blackley gives its final form to a study of the famous reformer which  Ross  William   Collins  left  incom­ plete  at  the  time  of  his death.
That  a  Canadian  historian, sister  of
the  Mason  Wade  who  wrote  the  classic history  of  the  French  Canadians,  should be  interested   in  St.   Louis   becomes  the more   comprehensible  when   one   reflects that   Louis  not  only  lived  in  her  chosen period    in   European  history,    but   also created   a  pattern  of  religious  militancy among   French   rulers   which   re-emerged at  intervals until   the  end  of  the  seven­ teenth   century,   and   which   gave  much  impetus    to   the   establishment  of   New France. One  has only to read  seventeenth century  documents like  the  Jesuit   Rela­ tions and  the  letters  of Marie de l'lncar­ nation    to   realize  how    close   to   the mediaeval  world   of  St.   Louis   were   so many  of the people  who came  to Quebec

79

REVIEW ARTICLES



four  centuries after  his death. The  first Canada was in fact  a product of the last and  only  successful  French  crusade.  The St.  Lawrence might   more  appropriately have  been  named  the St. Louis.
There  is  no  need,  of  course,  to  ela­ borate  on the  appropriateness of a Cana­ dian   scholar   having   chosen   Calvin   for his subject. The  wonder  is  that we have not produced more  books on that  unlove­ able   dyspeptic, but   perhaps  the   reason is that   his  heritage,  transmitted through our  Scottish  ancestors, has even  now  not wholly  left  us. Still,  too many  Canadians follow  Calvin   in  being  reluctant to  ac­ cept   the   elementary  proportion  that   a man's life-no matter how grotesque he chooses  to make  it -is his own  and  that within  it  he should  be allowed  to  act  in any   imaginable  way  that   does  not   de­ monstrably harm  others.
If St.  Louis  can  be seen as the  distant
patron  of  a   Quebec  that   is  only   just passing  away,  and  Calvin  as  the  malign genius   of  much   that   our   fathers  prac­ ticed   and   endured  in  Halifax  and  To­ ronto   and   Vancouver, it  seems  at   first sight   more   difficult   to  fit  John   Fisher, that    unfortunate  man   so   tortured  in mind   as well  as  body, into  the  ancestral pattern. And  yet is  there  not  here  some­ thing   that   suggests  the  characteristically English  contribution  to  our  history -a self-conscious  rectitude, a stubborn stand­ ing  out   in  the  stream   of   history  which has  brought more  than  one  great  Cana­ dian   figure   to  tragic  or  ludicrous  ruin,  which  has characterized whole communi­ ties  like   Victoria  and   Westmount,  and which, foursquare in the way of Quebec's angers,  seemed  until  very  recently  to  re­ enact  that  situation which  exists  only  in the  minds   of  problem-weavers,  the  im­ moveable object   confronting  the  irresis-

8o
 tible  force?
For,  much   as  Michael  Macklem tries to   present   a  convincing  picture  of  his subject  as  a  gentle   and   appealing man killed   by  others   for   his  principles, one feels a deepening conviction, as one reads the  evidence, that   Fisher  was at  least  in part   the  victim  of  his  own  deep  obstin­ acy.   Perhaps  such   an   obstinacy,   on   a more  than  human scale, is what  provides  martyrs, and  perhaps  that is what  in  the  end  makes  martyrs  repellent to  ordinary men.    I  confess   to   being   repelled    by Fisher, as I am  by  St. Louis  and  by Cal­  vin,   not   because   of   their    beliefs,   not because  of  their  austerities, but  because their  righteousness was merciless  not only to  themselves  but to others as well. Self­ sacrifice  is  generally   admirable. The sacrifice   of  others   is  always   detestable, and  none of these men  whose biographies I am  discussing   had   any  scruples   when it   came   to  adding  to  the   holocaust  of victims  to  religious  bigotry.
To   quote   only   one  incident  in   God
Have  Mercy, in  1530 a  priest  named Thomas Hitton, who  had  accepted the heresies   of   William  Tyndale,  was   ar­ rested.

In  due  course  he was brought before  Ware­ ham  and  Fisher   and   examined   for  heresy. For  five  days  the  two  bishops  laboured   to persuade    Hitton   to   return   to   the   com­ munity   of  the   faithful,  but   he  steadfastly refused   and   at   length,   on   the   fifth   day, they   turned    him   over   to   the   secular   au­  thorities.   In   accordance   with   the   law,  he was duly  burned  as a  heretic  at  Maidstone. Fisher   no   doubt   saw   Thomas  Hitton  as one  of  those  who  laboured   in  the  vineyard to  despoil   the  people -as  he  himself  put it  in  his  address  to  the  Lords-of  "their auncient  and  catholyke   faith" ...

No  doubt he did,  but  that  cannot  justify him.  However, we  might   pass  this  pas­ sage  over   without  criticizing  Macklem's

REVIEW  ARTICLES



presentation   if   we    assumed    that    his failure to  condemn Fisher  was  due  to  a desire  not  to  judge  the  past  by the stan­ dards  of  the   present.  But   he   ends  his book  with  an  appeal to  compassion that  overleaps  Fisher's   age  and   takes  no  ac­ count   of  his  nature.

We  have  learned  that   the   last   word   was not   spoken   when   this   helpless   man   was broken  on the  wheel,  nor  when  the  Armada was driven  from  the  coasts  of England, nor even   when   the   map   was   painted    British red  in  latter   days.  For  we  have  learned   at length   that   no  last   word   will   be  spoken as long as any man remains outside the community  of   history,   beyond   the   reach of  pity  and  love.

Apart from   the  fact   that   Fisher   was not  in fact  executed  by being  "broken on the  wheel"   but  by  beheading  (or  is the author merely  being  clumsily  metaphor­ ical?)    in   glossing   over   Fisher's   nega-
 tive acts and  concentrating on the  aspect of  the   Christian  martyr  Mr.   Macklem himself  is  taking   his  subject out  of  the "community of  history"  by dividing  him from  the  age he helped  to make.  We are bound   to  ask  at  this  point   the  burning question  about  that other "helpless man", Thomas  Hitton,  whom   Fisher   handed over   for   burning  and   whose   fate   Mr. Macklem    passes   over   so   lightly.   How were  pity  and  love  shown   to  him?  Hit­ ton,  standing on  his  principles,  was  the victim   of   Fisher's   bigotry.   Fisher,   also standing on  his  principles,  was  the  vic­ tim   of   Henry's   policy.   As   victims   we must   pity   both,    but    not   forget    that  Fisher  and  Henry  stand  together as des­ troyers  of  the  helpless.  Fisher  was  killed by  a   merciless   code   he   willingly   used against   others.   It is  the   effort   to  gloss over  his hero's  deadly  bigotry  that  spoils



exciting I absolute ly superb/protean


"David Helwig  is one  of  the  most  exciting poets  in  a  long  time ... his  book  is  abso- lutely superb  ... full of verbal  energy.  There are   no   poses ... his  work   is  marvellously controlled ... a  virtuoso performance ... protean." (Eli  Mandel and  Keith Harrison, CBC  Toronto) .
A "vision  of remarkable coherence, maturity and  power." (Tom Marshall, Quarry).
A "tremendous contribution to Canadian letters." (Michael Yates,  CBC  Vancouver).
 81 poems and 3 plays
227 pages four-colour softcover
by Sarah  Gersovitz
$3 at your bookseller's


box 1245 station b ottawa 4
oheron press



81

REVIEW ARTICLES



Macklem's book. God Have Mercy is eloquent  special   pleading; it  is  not  ob­ jective  biography.
The   same   is  true  of  Calvin  and  the
Libertines of Geneva. The facts that Professor  Collins  provides  about  Calvin's life are  the familiar ones, and  his attitude is clearly  partisan, though  it  is an  over­ simplification for  the  blurb-writer  to de­ clare  on  the  dust  cover  that

Professor  Collins   saw  Calvin   as  an   essen­ tially   likeable   man,   husband   and   friend,  and  not  the  harsh  "Protestant pope" of the popular  imagination.

No-one  can  be moved  to "like"  the  man who   destroyed    Servetus   so   mercilessly once  he  got  him  into  his  hands,  or  who so cruelly eliminated his enemies in the contest  for  political   power  in  Geneva.
These  incidents Professor  Collins  does
not  wholly  gloss over.  He  gives Servetus his  due   as  a   man   of  prickly   sincerity long  ahead   of  his  time;  he  tells  us  that his   execution  was   "the   great   blot   on Calvin's  career".  But   by  isolating   the episode  for  special  attention in  this  way he  fails  to  perceive-or at  least  to  ad­ mit-that  such  "blots", far  from  being exceptional, provide one of the dominant patterns of Calvin's life. Was  the  execu­ tion   of  Servetus  really  any  worse  than  that  of the  obscure  Jacques Gruet, whose principal offense was that he believed  the state   should   not  interfere  in  matters of conscience  and  who  had  the  temerity  to call   Calvin    "a   'great    hypocrite'   who wished   to   have   himself  adored   and   to have  'the  dignity  of our  holy  father the pope"'?   Was  it  worse  than   the  execu­ tions   of   Calvin's  Libertine  enemies   in
1555  for   having  raised  a  riot-execu­ tions   bungled   by  the  headman so  that  the  victims  suffered  agonies  unintended by the  court   that  condemned them?  On
 this  occasion,  with  a  revolting and  typi­
cal  callousness,  Calvin remarked:

I  am   certainly  persuaded  that   it   is  not without  a   special   judgment  of  God   that they  have  both  undergone, apart  from  the verdict   of  the  judges,  a  prolonged   torment under  the  hand  of the  executioner.

In  spite  of such  cruel  episodes, in spite also of the  puritan dictatorship in Geneva which  Calvin  engineered with  such  poli­ tical   skill,  Professor  Collins  clearly  pre­  fers  him  to  his Libertine  opponents, and  in  demonstrating this  preference he does the    Libertines   notable   injustice.  They  were  people  of  a  variety  of  natures, and  there  were among them,  as well as honest pioneer   free-thinkers,  those   who   loved wealth  and   power   and   had  their   moral frailties.   But   bigotry   and   the   peculiar form    of   physical    cruelty    that   accom­ panies   it  were   not  among  their  faults.  They   stood,  in  their   own  ways,  for  the freedom of  personal   life  against   the  im­ positions  of state  and church, and  to give them  insufficient  credit in  order  to  build up   the    case   for   Calvin    is   to   distort  history.
Such    cnt1c1sms   cannot   be   brought
against   Margaret Wade Labarge. Her Saint  Louis is a  notable successor  to  her biography  of  Simon   de  Montfort,  pub­ lished  a few  years  ago, and,  in  my  view, an   improvement. It  fills  an  astonishing gap,  for  only  one  biography  of St.  Louis had  been  published in English,  and  that
67  years  ago.  In  no way  can  Saint  Louis
be  regarded as fitting  into  the  traditions of hagiography as commonly  understood. It is  the  Life  of  a  king  who  was  also  a pious   man,   and   whose   piety   combined with   policy  in   determining  his  actions. There is the  same  mingling of  self-morti­ fication  and  cruelty  to  those  who  do  not share   his  faith   that   one  encounters  in

REVIEW ARTICLES



Fisher,   and   Mrs.  Labarge  does  not  at­ tempt   to conceal  or  to  excuse  the  extent  to which  Louis  suffered  from the faults of his age or  the  peculiar  narrowness of the holy   man's   life   as  it   was   seen   in   the thirteenth  century.   She   shows   adeptly  how   private  austerities  were   reconciled  with Louis's conceptions of a king's  rights and   duties,  so  that   the  royal  Saint   was also  an  expert   politician  who   carefully  built  up  his  power  at  the  expense  of  his barons,  and  who  saw  the  crown   of  the religious   life   in   terms   of   the   knightly  codes  of  ritualized violence  that   charac­ terized   the   warrior  caste   to   which   he belonged; the  highest  homage he felt capable of giving  to  God  resulted  in  the grandiose and  expensive  follies of his crusades.
 Besides   creating   a   portrait   in   the round   of  this   extraordinary  man   who was one  of the  most  important rulers  of mediaeval  Europe,   Mrs.   Labarge  has constructed  the   picture of  an   age  that could  build-as well as the  grimly  utili­ tarian   military   installations  of  the  cru­ sade  port  of  Aigues  Mortes,  which  still stand   among   the   dismal  salt  lagoons  of the   Camargue-that	Sainte   Chapelle which   also  survives   as  a  monument  to all  that   was admirable in  the  mediaeval world.  Within  its crystalline felicities one feels  a  gratitude  to  St.  Louis  which  few kings inspire  at  such  a distance  or at  all, yet  his  reign,  like  the  lives  of  Balzac's courtesans,  had  its  miseries  as well as its splendours.  Mrs.  Labarge presents  them  all.


















Write or Phone

THE UNIVERSITY  BOOK   STORE
Vancouver  8,  B.C.	
 Text
Trade
Medical

whenever you need

BOOKS
 
Technical Hard Back Paper Back


CANADIANA  ACCUMULATES


An Editorial Michelin


Centennial  Year  and   the  months  that   have  followed   its  end   have  de­ posited  a  vast  jetsam  of  books on  the  Canadian past  and  present, which pile  our  editorial desk  like  a  Pacific  coast  after   a  high  storm.  Most  of them   are  not,  strictly,  literature, though some  have  literary  merits,  but they  have  too  much  to  do with  the  world  which  the  Canadian poet  and  novelist   and   literary   critic   interpret  to  be  entirely  ignored.  Last   year, trying   to  make  our  way  in  the  flood,  we  published  a  potted   survey  of such  books  to  mid-Centennial ("Centennial Tide",  Canadian  Literature
33) . Now  there   are  too  many   even   for  that   kind  of  treatment, so  we have  taken  a  leaf  out  of  the  Michelin guide,  graded our  piles  of  books by the  stars,  and  gone  one  better  than Michelin by eliminating the  non­ books  and  sheer  bad  books that  scored  One  Star and  Two  Stars.  Those  that   remain,  we  consider,  have  enough merit  to  have  made  them  worth  writing, and   publishing; that   there   are  so  many   of  them   which  are  in some  way worth  recommending suggests  that, if the  Centennial did  noth­  ing  else,  it  did  foster  the  production of  a  fair   number of  useful  books that  otherwise  might  never  have  seen  print.


***** The  Polar Passion by Farley Mowat (McClelland  &  Stewart, $I 2.95). A  fascinat­ ing   anthology  of  the   narratives of  men   who, from  the beginning of European exploration, sought  the   North  Pole.   Spectacular   contem­ porary  illustrations.
***** The   Opening  of  the  Canadian    West by Douglas Hill   (William Heinemann, $8.50). An   excellent,  highly  readable  and   ably  con­
densed account of a complex and  fascinating period   of  Canadian  history.   The  best   yet  in its  field.
***** The   French  Canadians,  r76o-rg67  by
Mason  Wade  (Macmillan,  2  volumes,   $8.95
each).  Another best.   Wade's  book,  for   years out  of  print, is  the  most  copious and  authori­ tative   account   of    French-Canadian    history  and  culture in  English and  the  present edition brings it  completely up  to  date. An  indispens­ able   background  volume   for   the   understand­ ing  of  Quebec today.
*****  Canada:    Europe's    Last    Chance    by Claude Julien  (Macmillan, $6.50).  A  French journalist considers Canada  today, and  argues
Canadian  survival is  essential   to  save  Europe from   American  domination.  An   antidote  to
 
the   pessimism  of  those   who  see  Canada  pos­
sessing  no function in  the  contemporary world.
***** This  was   Expo    by   Robert   Fulford (McClelland   &    Stewart,  $12.50).   Probably the   best   account  we  shall   have   of  a  strange interlude that may  have  become as much a landmark  in   our   political  as  in   our   cultural
history. Fulford  not  only  describes brilliantly; he  also  draws eminently sound solutions.  Pro­ fusely   illustrated.
***** Word   from New  France, the Selected Letters of  Marie   de  !'Incarnation, translated and  edited by Joyce Marshall (Oxford, $6.5o). Letters of  one  of  the  great personalities of seventeenth-century   Quebec, which    reveal vividly the  motivations of the  first  French in Canada,  and    their   response to   the   barbaric world  they  entered.
***** Attack    on   Quebec   by   Harrison  Bird (Oxford, $6.75). The most  recent of Bird's excellent series  of books on hostilities on  the Canadian-American  border. History in  the school  of Parkman, vivid,  human, carefully studied  and    constructed.
***** Safeguarding  Canada,  1763-r87r    by
J.  Mackay  Hitsman.   Account  of   Canadian

REVIEW ARTICLES



defence policy  from  the  Conquest to  the withdrawal  of  the   British  garrison.  Detailed, lucid, independent in  its conclusions. A good successor    to   Hitsman's  The  Incredible  War of  IBI::l.
**** Canada: A  Geographical Interpretation
edited   by   John  Warkentin  ($12.95).  The
centennial  project  of   the   Canadian   Associa­
tion  of  Geographers, a  massive  volume  of nineteen detailed  essays  on  Canadian  regions and  themes. An admirable presentation of the physical background,  and   a  very  useful  source of  information.
**** Confederation  at   the   Crossroads:  The
Canadian Constitution  by  E.  Russell   Hopkins.
(McClelland &  Stewart, $22.50). A lucid  and well-constructed account, by a parliamentary counsel, of the  evolution of the  Canadian constitution,  its   working   and    the    problems that   presently   assail     it.   Absurdly  priced, though,  for   a   400-page  book   with   no   illus­ trations!
**** Canada's North by  R. A.  J. Phillips (Macmillan,  $7.95).  Sound,  all-round  survey of  our   Arctic   and   sub-Arctic  regions,  mingl­ ing  geography and   anthropology,  natural his­ tory   and   anecdote;  interesting  out-of-the-way facts;  an  intelligent look  at  future  needs.
**** Frozen   Ships  by  Johan  Miertsching (Macmillan, $6.50).  First   published  version, edited  by  L.   H.   Neatby,  of   the   diary  of  a German  Moravian  missionary who  spent four frozen-in winters, 1850  to 1854,  on an  Arctic expedition in search of Franklin. Naive  and moving account by a likeable man of a most unlikeable experience.
**** The  Colour of  Canada  by  Hugh  Mac­ Lennan,   Canada  North   by   Farley    Mowat, Historic  Headlines,  edited  by   Pierre   Berton (McClelland  &   Stewart, $4.95 each).   Prob­ ably   best   volumes  to  date in  Canadian  Illus­ trated  Library  Series, whose  standard to  now is  extremely uneven.  MacLennan  writes   with a   slightly  hazy,   nostalgic  style   that  suits   an anthology  of    romantically   chosen  Canadian scenes;  Farley   Mowat  tells   with   appropriate vigour  and    condensation   the    story    behind the    white   man's  penetration   of   the    north, well  illustrated  with   prints and   photographs; Pierre Berton assembles a group of literate journalists who  write, with  varying eloquence, on  sensational Canadian  episodes.
**** The Big  Ship  by  Henry  A.  Larsen (McClelland & Stewart, $7.50). Posthumous autobiography  of   the    last    great  Arctic   ex­ plorer,  who   took   the   St.  Roch  through   the  North-west  Passage.
 **** Saskatchewan  by  Edward  McCourt (Macmillan, $6.50).  An  excellent  roving  ac­ count of  the  most  typical of  the  prairie  prov­ inces,  and   an  eye-opening experience  to  those  who   have   merely   darted  through   what  they consider  an  endless   monotony on   the   Trans­ Canada   Highway.  Variety,    history,   atmos­ phere.
**** Contemporary Canada, edited  by R.  H.
Leach  (University of  Toronto Press,  $10.75).
Twelve   scholars,  eleven    of   them    Canadian,
writing  under  the   auspices  of  Duke   Univer­ sity's     Commonwealth   Studies    Centre,   dis­ cuss  Canada's  character  and   problems.  Some  bludgeon  one   with   jargon;  others  write   with clarity  and   brilliance, and  the book  is  packed with   sound   information.
**** Changing Perspectives in  Canadian  His­
tory,  edited by  Kenneth A. MacKirdy, Vyes F.
Zoltvany, John  S.  Moir   (FitzHenry &  White­ side,    $10.95). Another  useful,    American­ sponsored   handbook    (this     time    by    Notre Dame).  Copious extracts  from   contemporary documents  and   later  historians   are   used   to document  points    of   view   on   key   events  in
Canadian  history.
*** Newfoundland:  Island   into   Province  by
St.   John   Chadwick   (Cambridge   University
Press).  Needed,  knowledgeable  and   not-too­ dry  account of  constitutional  history  of  New­  foundland from  anarchic  beginnings  to  Small­ wood's present.
*** The   Newfoundland  Journal  of   Aaron
Thomas, I794,   edited by   Jean  M.   Murray
(Longmans, $8.50).  An  eighteenth-century sailor's  account  of   Newfoundland.  Tall  tales
and   true   ones.
*** Canada  and    the   American  Revolution,
I 774-I 783  by Gustave Lanctot  (Clarke Irwin,
$6.75). Mainly   a  study   of  changing attitudes of  canadiens  to   both   Americans and  British
during  the   War  of  Independence.
*** Yankees at  Louisburg  by  G.  A.  Rawlyk,
(University  of  Maine, $2.50  U.S.).  A   well­
organized account of  the  siege  and   capture of the  fort  of Louisburg by  New  England militia
in  '745·
*** Community  in   Crisis   by   Richard  Jones
(McClelland &  Stewart, $5.00). A  sympathe­
tic   Anglophone  puts    the   Francophone  case. Well   written  of  its  kind.
*** My   Country,  Canada or  Quebec?   by Solange Chaput Rolland (Macmillan, $4.50). Narrative  of   a   French-Canadian  journalist's
trip,   seeking  acceptance,  through  English Canada.  Madame Rolland wears  her  heart on her  sleeve,  and  sometimes uses it  as a  weapon

REVIEW ARTICLES


*** Canadian   Annual   Review,  1966   (Uni­ versity  of  Toronto Press,  $25.00).  The  sum­ mary   of  a   year's   events,   useful   as  ever   in public   affairs,   but   inexplicably   omitting   the customary  chapter on  literature,  though  there are  two  chapters  on  Canadian  drama,  so that playwrights  appear  bilingual  and  poets dumb.
*** An  Independent Foreign Policy  for  Can­
ada, edited  by Stephen Clarkson   (McClelland
&   Stewart,  $4.95).  A   timely   collection   of views   on   our   foreign   policy   and   where   it should  go.
*** So Little  for the Mind  by Hilda Neatby (Clarke   Irwin,    $2.95).  Paperback    reprint, with  new introduction, of a  famous  denuncia­ tion    of   Canadian   educational    approaches. Alas,  it  is  still  almost  as  pertinent  as  when it  appeared  fifteen  years  ago.
*** Confederation r867;  Riel; Canada Votes,
179I-IB91;  Dieppe   1942;   1837:   Mackenzie;
(Clarke  Irwin,  $2.50  each). Canadian  Jack­
daws:   draw-your-own-conclusion  kits,  each album  containing contemporary prints or photographs,  maps,   facsimile   posters,   news­ papers,    relating    to   its   event,   with   concise
historical  summaries.  As well as the facts of history,  they  bring  its  ghostly  touch.
*** Approaches   to  Canadian  History,  edited by   Carl   Berger    ($1.50),   Upper    Canadian
Politics  in  the  rBso's,  edited  by Craig  Brown
( $1.50),   Confederation, edited    by   Ramsay Cook   ( $1.95),  Politics  of  Discontent, edited by  Ramsay   Cook   ($1.50). First   volumes  in the  University  of Toronto Press's useful  Cana­ dian   Historical  Reprints  series,  consisting  of important essays rescued  from  the  back  num­ bers  of  historical   journals.



















86
 *** The  Nation   Makers  by  Joseph  Schull (Macmillan,  $3.95).  A  light,   summary   ac­ count  of  events  leading   to Confederation  and the  men  who made  it. Conciseness  rather  than  originality  is  its  virtue.
*** The   Assassination  of  D'Arcy   McGee   by
T.   P.   Slattery  (Doubleday, $7.95).  A   mis­
titled  book.  It  is really a  Life of McGee,  with only   the   briefest   account   of  the   event   that
made  him Confederation's martyr. A further volume,   on   the   assassin's  trial,   is  to  contain what  we  are  led  to  expect  in  this  book.
*** The  Gunners of  Canada   by  G.  W.  L.
Nicholson    (McClelland  &  Stewart,  $1!1.50).
An   account  of   artillery  in   Canada  up   to
1919.   Important  as   a   pioneer   book   in   its
field,  but  liable  to  get  bogged  down  in  detail
like  gun  wheels  in  mud.
*** Ideas in  Exile:  A History  of Canadian Invention   by   J.  J.  Brown    (McClelland   & Stewart,  $r5,ooo).   Fascinating in   its   early
chapters, dealing  with Canadian pioneer technology,   but  somewhat   axe-grinding when the  author  reaches   modern   times.  The   price leaves  one  reflecting  that  an  invention  missed by  Canadians  was  the  cheap   book.
*** A    Voyage   of   Discovery   to   the   North
Pacific Ocean  by William  Broughton (General
Publishing, $23.00).  A  handsomely   produced facsimile  edition of  the  narrative of a famous
voyager   who   touched   on   Pacific  Canada  in
the  179o's.
*** Brant  County:  A  History,  1784-1945   by
C.  M.  Johnston (Oxford, $4.50). Good  local
history,   keeping   minor   details   in  check,  and
describing   important  trends  and   personalities with  appropriate conciseness. The  slight  rustic pomposity   is  curiously   fitting   to  the  subject.
G.W.






UNIT  STRUCTURES

LIONEL  KEARNS,  Pointing. Ryerson.  $3.95.

IN  A   LETTER  IN    an  early  issue  of  Tish (no.    I I,  July    I g62),  Lionel    Kearns wrote: "Prehension and  articulation, the formulation  of  speech,  are  one  and   the same  act ... The poem's  linguistic  func­ tion   can   be  called   communication,  but its   musical   function   is  evocation.  And this   musical-evocative    characteristic  is most   important,  because   it   is  the   dis­ tinguishing feature of  poetry."
Those   early   issues  of  Tish   were   not
popular among Eastern Canadian poets, critics,  and  especially  reviewers,  who looked   down   on  the  Tish   Coast  move­ ment   and   Kearns in  particular,  because they  still  felt   that   they   had   to  protect the  lyric  ignorance which  was  the  estab­ lished   stance   from   which   to   compose Canadian  poetry.   They  were  scared   off and   into   unqualified   mockery,   by  any signs   of   study   and   knowledge  of   the makings  of speech  and  the  poet  voice.
Kearns has a large  talent, firmly  based in any tradition we have from  modern Canadian poetry,  but  he is also a student, a  craftsman, the  like of  which  is seldom seen  here.  He  is by profession  a linguist, by impulse  a  poet.
These  are  early  Kearns poems  for  the
most  part,  his collected  short-takes. There are   other   books  soon   to  come   out,   in which  he  presents  the  longer  forms  and social  addresses.   But  here   we  have   the clean short lines (not Jines, really, but phonemic clauses),  concrete  nouns,
 Japanese-like  clarity   and   resonances,   as in   one   poem   where    he   re-enacts  the sound  of an axe heard  across a Kootenay lake:

Each stroke distinct

Echoing once
in the distance

This poem, like many of them, shows a concern   with   the   poetic   act,   the   poet looking  for  his  lyric  base  before  singing on  any  world  stage.
Fortunately that   is  not  the  sole "sub­
ject matter" of the  book.  The scenes  in­ clude   B.C.  mountains,  Mexican   towns, and  Vancouver streets.  Two  people who show   up   consistently   as   thematic  per­ sonages   in   the   poems   are   the   poet's father, recently  gone,  and  Jesus,  as  the man  mistrusted   and  mistreated  and  fin­ ally  misused  by  hurried  and   unthinking men. He is seen  as hounded by the Shrine circus,  lonely  on  his  tree,  getting hung  up  for  love.
For  these  men,  and   for  others,   there
is a sense of compassion  makes itself felt strongly   throughout  the   book,  compas­ sion   for   old   and   poor   men,   suicided women,  dead  animals. And  there  is also a curious  laconic  sense that  goes with  it, something  that  makes  itself  felt in images almost  surreal,  but  presented in a candid  voice.  Kearns   is,  after   all,  the   unusual  successfully  ironic  poet   in   the   country, naive-macabre    where    Canadian   poets have  so far  been  only  successfully  naive or  successfully  macabre.

This  time in the darkness
a twelve-foot  pleasure-launch sleek and gleaming  white

The  crew (both  male and  female)  in bikinis

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



And  in tow
two water-skiers doing  acrobatics

At the back of the boat
instead  of an outboard-engine

A man
has been bolted into place

He kicks his feet
in frantic propulsion

His arms are  fastened to the steering  cables

Blood trickles into  the water

His neck
Seems broken  too

But now
there  is scarcely any noise

For  the  boat
is moving faster
than  the speed of sound.

GEORGE  BOWERING


SUBVERSIVE
LIGHT

Nevertheless These  Eyes by Roy Kiyooka. The
Coach   House   Press.  $2.50.
One I Eye I Love   by   Victor    Coleman.    The
Coach   House   Press.  $2.50.

THE WORD  common to  both  these  titles is  their   authors' ruling  metaphor:   eyes, not   only   as  the   instrument  for  seeing, but  as  the  anguished need  to see, to  ap­ prehend that   light  that   Victor  Coleman defines   as   necessarily   subversive.   Both poets    have    conceived    their    books   as journeys   towards   such  light,  to  be  read as unities,  rather than interim collections of  poems  whose  only  relationship is that  they  were  written  by  one  man  during a certain  period.
Both  poets  are  also  hungry,  and  that gives  a  sharp edge  to  their   vision.  But

88
 Roy  Kiyooka  is far  less omnivorous than Coleman; you picture him as a decidedly thin,    ascetic   figure,   who   chooses   with great   fastidiousness  what   will  make   his meal.  In  Nevertheless These Eyes  he  be­ gins   by  trying   to   understand the  con­ tradictions inherent in  ever  seeing  at  all

my eyes	my eyes, are they only a prism a plaything for dreamers with idle  hands? poised in mid-air  my hand remembers yesterday's  colours and  tomorrow's too

As  a  painter  concerned with  another form   of  seeing,   Kiyooka   struggles   with the  failure of any  beautiful surface to realize  the  complexity of human  feeling. In the  first  part  of his book he expounds this theme almost  exclusively  through the imagery    of   faces   reflected   in   mirrors: the  distorting mirrors of  love  and  mem­ ory.

Who among you can say
what  mirror held
her  image
most perfectly?

But the mirror-image metaphor wears thin in several of the poems. Sometimes Kiyooka   finds   no  very  original  use  for it   but   arbitrarily  sticks  by  it  any   way, instead of moving  on  to something fresh. He finally escapes this restriction in the book's   second   part,  exploring his   am­ bivalences   more  concretely and  under   a greater  variety   of  terms:  the  beauty   of "ugliness", the  deathliness of  art, "angels  and  dirt". It is as if the  poet is beginning to  fulfil  his  own  instructions  from   part
one,   where   he   wrote   "the  task I is  to
paint    her  I in   a   thousand  guises".   But these  poems,  varied  in  execution as  they

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



are,   adopt  a   tiresomely    didactic  tone, and  it is only  in  the  third  and  final  part that Kiyooka really frees himself from rehearsed  conclusions.    In   the   one  long poem  that   makes  up  this  section,  he  re­ gains  the  ability  to surprise with  a  swift grace   of   rhythm  and   line   that   distin­ guished    his   earlier  book,   Kyoto   Airs. Moving  spontaneously   through  a  series of  lyrical  impulses,  he  sustains  so lightly in  these  lines  the  burden of  the  rest  of the  book:

I am waiting
for  what­ ever  pleasure Love. 	Go then
in quest of a gleam in an  eye, phosphorescence
in  a transparent skull.

Victor  Coleman in One IEye ILove also writes  about   mirror images.  But  instead of simply  contemplating them, he smashes them  and  draws  the  blood  of poetry  with the  fragments.

The dream saw  the  suicide then, the  wrist  or  the  jugular cut  thru with  pieces  of
the  shattered whole  image.

The dream saw  the  blood  there pucker up from  veins,
fall  over  the  wrist  to find its  own  image.

To divine his own image, Coleman juxtaposes  poetic  fragments of very  indi­ vidual   natures. These fragments  can  be considered as the  poems  within  the book, as the  numbered sections  within  a  poem, the  stanzas  within a  section,   and   some­ times even  the  lines within  a stanza; that  is how  resourceful a  poet  he is, and  how dense   he  has   made   the   texture  of  his verse.   Each    of   the   fragments  has   its
 separate tone,  rhythm and  colour,  so that the interplay among them  achieves  a swirling,   self-transforming  motion,  like the fine accompanying drawings by Bob Snyder.  Coleman's own  phrase  for  it (while   speaking    of   "lucidity")  is  that the  fragments "concuss  one  another into speech".
All  this  might  amount  to  little  more
than   clever   word   games,  as  admittedly some   of  Coleman's  previous   work   has been, were he not so ready  to risk a great deal  of self-revelation in  these  poems.  In
OneIEye ILove Victor Coleman ceases to
be one of the  new academics of North American    poetry,  satisfied   with   exem­ plifying  the  Black  Mountain  poetics;  he achieves  an  individual  vision  in  an  indi­ vidual    way   and    comes   very   close   to achieving   Lawrence's  ideal  of  making   a book  out   of   everything  you  are  at   the  moment of   composition.
Writing in  a variety of senses of broken communication, burnt-out  love  and  mu­ tual   exploitation  by  lovers,  nations  and  races,  he  can   be  painfully  detached  in analysis  or  painfully  intimate  in  sadness, moving  from   the  joylessly cerebral   per­  ception   of  sex  in  "Cunnilingus" to  the  affecting simplicity of these lines:

It is good  to hear your  voice  once  more in  this  poem; good  to see the  real  color of your  hair  &  eyes here;
good  to hear  the  breath fill up
your  wasted  breasts although they  speak of not  wanting me.

But   more   often    Coleman  moves  on   a delicate    balance   of   tensions    between these  extremes  of  mind  and   heart: "the
eye  sees  I where   mind's heart's trod".
His  poetic  line  and   his  line  of  thought are   both   constantly  interesting,  because the  rhythm  of  both  is constantly capable of surprise.  He  may begin metaphysically,

8g

POEMS IN REVIEW



but is ready to get physical at any time ("shitty diapers  I can't  bear to touch"). Similarly, he  achieves great power through a fusion of public and private realities:

& a flag raised on Iwo  ]ima  or Seoul or Da Nang or in The Dominican Republic
is not worth  a stiff prick to the man who raises it

It is such  resilience  of mind  and  heart that    is  most   striking   about   OneIEye I Love. Combined with  Coleman's  ability
to  write   dramatic  verse,  the  absence  of which    in   New    Wave  Canada   caused Ralph Gustafson  to lament  so sadly, it produces an  undeniably rich and  original book  of  poetry.
ROY MAC  SKIMMING



POEMS FROM ALL SEASONS

HOWARD  SERGEANT,   ed.,    Commonwealth
Poems   of Today. John   Murray.

No    ANTHOLOGY    ever    assembled    ever satisfied  its  readers-perhaps  not  even its  compiler, whose  first choice  of poems will  often   not   coincide   with   what   the copyright holders  allow him  to use. Non­ literary matters like  politics  also  compli­  cate   the   issue.  Howard   Sergeant  notes some  of  these  things  in  the  introduction to  his  Commonwealth  Poems  of Today; we  accept   his  apology  for  the  omission of   some   poets   [omitted:  P.  K.   Page, Phyllis Webb, Wong  Phui  Nam,  R. A K. Mason,  A. R. D. Fairburn, etc.], for  the many  who are  represented make  this the most   usable   Commonwealth  anthology to  date,  even  if  the  "ideal" one  remains to   be   assembled.   His   limitation  of  the

go
 poems  to  those  in  English  is  understand­ able,  though  the  few  translations he  in­ cludes   make   his  policy  a  little  inconsis­ tent.  His  method  of contending with  the South   African   question,  moreover,  is, though somewhat clumsy, all that  is poli­ tically    allowed    him.    "South   Africans  Within    the    Commonwealth"   includes  writers  of  the  quality of William  Plomer  who  are  living   in   Britain,   but   we  also know  about younger  South  Africans  like Sydney Clouts, whose excellent  work we would   (perhaps inconveniently) also like to  see represented.
Mr.   Sergeant's  book  is  full   of   lyric poetry,  but  all  this means is that  narrative
writers-E.  J. Pratt, Roy  Campbell -
have   been   left   out.   It  is  a   twentieth­ century  book,  with   a   concentration  on recent   writers.   It  is  artistically a  highly inconsistent  book,  but  this  is  to  be  ex­ pected   when   poets  are   chosen   because they    are   "representative"  rather   than  "good".  Yet there  are  good  poems  here. Some   of   them   are   largely   unknown  in Canada,  like  the  work  of  the  Malaysian poet, Goh  Poh  Seng.  Undoubtedly much  of   the  Canadian work  is  unknown  else­ where,  equally  unjustifiably. Poems by Atwood, Avison,  MacEwen, Birney, Lay­ ton,   Cohen   and   Newlove  are  excellent. The  list  seems  comprehensive:  but  how much  use is an  anthology that  represents a   poet   by  generally  one   and   certainly ( Souster   being  the  sweepstake winner)  a maximum  of  four   poems?   It  could  en­  courage close reading of  given  texts,  but all   too   often   a   book   like   this   simply lends  itself  to  the  construction of  mam­ moth overgeneralizations. Herewith some of  them:
1.   The  opening section (Australian
verse)  is interminable because it's  bad and   bad  because  it's  wordy,  but  it  is

POEMS IN  REVIEW



offset by the  lyrics of Randolph Stow and  Judith Wright.
2.  It is remarkable how  few  really  good
poets  there   are   today   in  the  British Isles-Ted   Hughes, Philip   Larkin, Norman MacCaig maybe-and how many  seem  so  incapable of  escaping the  past,  of  using  details,  and  of  let­ ting   their   poems   create  their   own forms.   Too   many   are   artificial   and too  obviously  so.
3· Restraint and  precision characterize much   recent   Indian writing. The poems  build  philosophies out  of  per­ spectives;    landscapes   viewed    from various    angles    become   images   for states  of  mind.  Singhalese  and  Rho­  desian  poems  present  interesting con­ trasts,   for   their    value   lies  in   their evocation  of  character, which  in turn  involves  us  in   trying   to  understand human  complexity.
4·   There is  an  immense   variety  of  out­ look  in  the  African  countries  repre­ sented   here -Gambia,  Kenya,  Mal­ awi, Nigeria,  Sierra Leone,  Tanzania, Uganda, and  Zambia-and it would be  disservice  to  their   writers to  class them  as one group. The wry humour, the  insistence  on  human dignity,  the use   of   drum   rhythms,  myth,    and metaphors   of   conflict,    camouflage, and   metamorphosis  all  take   varying forms.   One   interesting   difference  is that   between   Ghanaian  visions  of  a hopeful  future  (Kwesi  Brew,  George Awoonor- Williams)   and  Nigerian visions of sadness  (J.  P. Clark,  Chris­ topher   Okigbo,  Gabriel  Okara) - perhaps reflecting the  societies  them­ selves?
5·  New   Zealand  poetry   is  better   than
 Australian poetry-witness  Allen Curnow, Kendrick Smithyman-but extraordinarily   introspective, and partly for this reason bears the closest affinity  with  Canadian  writing.
6.   Pakistani     poetry    shows    substantial talent-particularly   interesting   be­ cause  it  is  so  recent.  The   best  selec­ tion  is a recent  one:  Shahid  Hosain's anthology   of  six  poets,  First   Voices  (Oxford, 1965).
7·  Much  liveliness pervades  West Indian
literature, but  there  are more  good novelists  than  good  poets.
When   Derek   Walcott  speaks   of   his "sense  of season",  however,  he  brings  us back  to  one  of  the  pervading themes  of the entire anthology: the relationship between man and  his  environment. Awoonor-Williams speaks of the  vultures coming  "in  the  season  of  burning feet";
Irving Layton  notes "how  unseasonably I
leaf    and    blossom    uncurl  I and    living things  arrange their  death"; Ted  Hughes
writes   that    "The  sun   is  behind    me. I Nothing  has  changed    since   I   began.  I My  eye  has  permitted no  change." And
Allan  Curnow writes:  "the eye scans risky horizons  of its own I In unsettled weather, and   murmurs  of  the   drowned I Haunt
their   familiar  beaches...."   The   land­ scape  begins as an  external reality, but  it ends  by being an  internal one.  Time has the   power  to  recreate  landscape;  land­ scape  and  time  together   influence   man.  Possibly   nowhere  is  man's   complex   re­ sponse   to  these   influences   shown   more clearly  than  in such  an  anthology as Mr. Sergeant's, where  the material allows a comparative   study    of   literature   from every  season  and   from   all  parts   of  the world.

W.H.NEW



91

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



THE TOTAL  I


P.   K.   PAGE, Cry   Ararat.  McClelland   &  Ste- wart.   $4.95.

EvERY  TEN  YEARS or so Canadian readers are   offered   a  book  of  poetry   by  P.  K. Page.  Cry  Ararat,  a collection  of  poems new and  selected, is the offering  for the decade sinceI 954· By reasonable calcula­ tions,   the   book  is  at   least   three   years overdue. The  wait,  however,  has  been worthwhile,  for   Cry   Ararat   is  a  well­ edited, highly  integrated book.  It brings together P. K. Page  as a poet and a visual artist, creating  for  herself  a  new  world in  which  to  function.
Of  the  seventeen new  poems  featured in Cry Ararat, the eight which form the section,   "Landscape  with   Serifs",   show the  direction  that   Miss  Page,  in  recent years,  has  taken.  It is a section  in which the  eye of  the  artist  and  the  ear  of  the poet    are   particularly   evident,  and   in which  landscapes of foreign countries dominate.  The   poem,  "Bark   Drawing", for   example,  is  set  in   Australia.   Miss Page's  artist's eye, looking  at a bark drawing, sees men  as  "string thin"   and fish as "fine-boned as a comb."  Both are hieroglyphs,  part   of   "an   alphabet  the eye/   lifts  from   the  air",   that   the   poet must   learn   to  sound.   Miss  Page  listens and   from   the  landscape  represented  by the  drawing comes  an  intricate  pattern of  sound,  sound   that  she  records  in  the latter half  of  the  poem.  Only  when  the eye and  the  ear  come together, "two senses/  threaded through/ a knuckled bone,"  as  they  do  in  this  poem,  can  the full   power   of   P.  K.   Page's   poetry   be realized.
Image and  sound  merge in most of the
new   poems   in  Cry   Ararat.   In   "Cook's

92
 Mountains",  where    the   sight   of   Aus­ tralia's  Glass   House    Mountains   silvers the   poet's    tongue  with   "paradox   and  metaphor", with  the  power to  transform the  world   with  words, the  scene  is des­ cribed   both  visually  and  auditorily:

Like  mounds  of mica, hive-shaped  hothouses, mountains of mirror  glimmering they form
in  diamond  panes  behind  the tree ferns of the dark  imagination.

In  this  poem,  sound  quite  appropriately captures the  wonder   of  the  poet's  vision as she  matches the  "shape and  name" of the  mountains to her  perception of them. The main   weakness  in  the  poetry   of
P.  K.  Page,  if  there   is  any,  is  the  ten­
dency  to  be  carried away  by sound  pat­ terns  or  to have  unusual imagery obscure  the   meaning  of  a  poem.   Miss   Page   is aware of this.  In  the poem, "After Rain", she says:

And choir  me too to keep my heart  a size larger  than  seeing, unseduced  by each
bright  glimpse  of beauty striking  like a bell,
so that  the whole may toll,
its meaning shine
clear  of the  myriad  images that  still - do what  I will-encumber its pure  line.

It is  precisely  these  tendencies about which she speaks in her title poem "Cry Ararat":

A single leaf can  block a mountainside.

Yet,  the  mastery  of  intricate patterns of sound   and   the   use  of  unusual  imagery are   the   characteristics  that    distinguish her  poetry. Continuing the  metaphor of the  leaf  from   the  poem,  she  proclaims:

all Ararat be conjured by a leaf.

P. K.  Page  can  do  no  more  than  con­
jure  a world  by using the  techniques that

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



she  knows.  "Cry   Ararat" is a  statement of those  techniques. It is also a testimony to  them.   It is  in  this   poem   that   Miss Page  reveals  her   process  as  a  poet  and as an  artist :

Do  not  reach to touch it nor  labour to hear. Return to your  hand
the  sense  of the  hand;
return to your  ear
the  sense  of the  ear.

Cry  Ararat contains the best of P. K. Page's  work.  The  eye and  ear  that  have given  us  the  poems,  and   the  hand   that has given  us the line drawings which illustrate them,  are  extremely   fine.
DAVID N. ROBINSON




WAITING FOR THE END

JIM   BROWN, If  There  are  Any   Noahs,  Very
Stone House.
HARRY HOWITH,   Total War.  Contact  Press.
JOHN   NEWLOVE,  What They Say.  Weedflower
Press.

BROWN:  "it   doesn't  make   a  fuck   of  a lot I of  difference I how  your  poems  get published"; Howith: "Reader, my poems
are I written   to   move    you. I Are    you moved?" Newlove: "But  what  if I refuse
to let a category I you can  usurp  trickle I
out  of a poem ..."; Pound: "I believe in every  one  writing poetry   who  wants  to; most  do ... but  I do  not  believe in every man ... printing his  sin."
If publication is  really  the  auction of
the   poet's   mind,  the   bids  for   this   trio are  going  to  be low.  The  average life of most  of these  poems  is  ro minutes; after
that,   euthanasia  for   % of  each   collec-
 tion,  and  a  harvest  of  the  wheat  among the   chaff,  for   the   remainder.  He   who would  save  his  poetry  must  first  lose it.
First,  Jim  Brown's   corpus. After  cor­ recting  the spelling  of Radison and Gros­ siellieurs,   Marvel,  and   recepticle,    the reader  is confronted with  an  apocalyptic viewpoint  stressing the necessity for "some
eternal  submarines", a Ia On  the  Beach.
Smile  you may,  but  Jacques  Piccard, son of the inventor of the bathyscaphe, also doubts  that mankind will last out  the century,   and   plans   immediately  to  sub­ merge  himself in  a 4-6 week  trial  under­ water   free  drift   from   Florida  to  Nova
Scotia.   As  for   Brown,   "we   will  lie I in
suspended   animation I under    the   polar ice I until  the    questions I have    been solved."  His  Book  of  Revelations,  guilt­
edged,  for  "Guilt is  a  perfect  disease", is at times impressively  chameleonic. "Chasing Daphne" is a commendable variation on  Pound's M auberley, out  of Gautier. "Poem   for  my  father"  applies an  Old  Man  and  the  Sea  verbal  clarity to   an   Izaak   Walton-like  vignette.  "A tree person"  updates Dante's woods-men and  Whitman's leaves, while "Project" makes   phrase-waves   out   of   lines   like "Days   crash   inward  like   blown   eggs". Cut   the   early   Cohen-  narcissistic  hair­ saving  poems,  and   immature  fragments, still  embryonic   still-born  inclusions,   and you  have  a  precious  handful, worthy  of entering  two  by  two   into   that   eternal submarine.
"The  Secret   Life   of  Hank  Heming­
with"  is  indicative of  Howith's  aversion to "pisspot  poetry" in favour of more stridently moving chamber music. As "a careerist    in   pee-are",  he   regards   old­ fashioned    poetry    as   "an   anachronism, like spats".  Remedy -a pastiche of pun­ is-mightier-than-the-word poems; "it  was

93

BOOKS IN REVIEW



the   Holland  Tunnel  that    got   her   in dutch";  whore-and-piece parodies,   "the hero  took  twice  as  many  women  as he'd ever  met", political  potshots,  surprisingly few   "advertisements  for   myself",    and globaloney  anecdotal  one-liners   ranging from  the  "Viet King  Cong",  to a  potato blurb  by the Duchess of Idaho, to Broken Bottle,  Labrador.  McLuhanesque in  his interpretation of  war  in  this  global  vil­ lage  as  an  analogue of  experimentation, his Howithzers scatter  shrapnel at a wide variety  of targets.  Among  his best poems are  "In This  False  Dawn", an  execution resonant of  Orwell's "A Hanging", "Song  For  An  Early   Autumn", the  book's  last poem  and  one of the few that  reveals the serious  face  of  the   jester,  "Break"  with the    silences   of   separation   unchanged since   Meredith's  "Modern  Love",   and "A  Time   to  Mourn, A Time  to  Dance" which  contains his neo-Virgilian criteria for   poetry:  "Of   total   war,  and   of  the
dance  I of  humid   seasons, I of  love  and
loss  I  sing. I And  they  are  everything."
Newlove's    fifteen   poems   centre   pre­ dominantly upon  garbage,  disease,  civil­ ization, sadness and  death  with an apoca­ lyptic    despair     closer    to    hand    than  Brown's.   Newlove's   eyes  see   a  "redone redundant    civilization"  as   befitting    a student  of  urbophrenics, the  science  of sick  cities.  As in  his  previous  poetry,  he allows  phrase  and  fragment  to  multiply as  jigsaw  pieces  to  create  a  poem,  often a   confessional    explanation   as   in   "By Main  Weight"  where   "that   which   ap­  pears  is never  / just what  is  want". Un­  like  Brown  and  Howith, he  knows  when
"there's no  getting   near I the  centre  to­
night", the  difference  between  a  hit  and a  near  hit.  He  does  strike  the  bull's-eye in   "The  Witch", evoking   "the  infinite one  a.m.  of the  mind's  backwater /where

94
 solid  objects   melt,  brain's ice  melts  & f one   small   stick   floats   in   the   liquid   to poke   out   poems."    The   title-poem   de­ lineates   the   frustration  caused   by   the poet's   inability   to  derive   an   inner  sus­
tenance from  his  life, "no  matter f what
they  say."  Using  McLuhan's melange of Wordsworth and  Riesman, "I  wandered lonely as a crowd", he sees himself as "innocent garbage" in a weird  and horri­ fic  nightmare  sequence. The  remaining poems  fall  short   of  his  best.
Surprise being the  least durable of aesthetic  responses,   all   three   poets   fail at  times  to  transmute the  personal   into the poetical. To quote  Frank  Kermode, "Novelty  becomes  the  inflation of   trivi­ ality;    the    apocalypse   is   signalled    by trivial   games,  mostly  not  original". The villain?    Question  the   pseudo-poet,  the seductive typewriter  which,  according to McLuhan, "fuses  composition and  publi­  cation, causing  an  entirely   new  attitude to  the  written  and  printed word." When  all  the  poet  can present  are  his  privates, it's   time   to   throw   these  minnows   back for  creative  processing.
TONY KILGALLIN




BANKS AND DRIFTS

BERNARD  EPPS,    Pi/garlic   the   Death.    Mac-
millan.  $4.95.
AT  ONE POINT in   Mr.  Epps'   novel,  its lively if somewhat hackneyed  hero, Dou­ gal  the  School,  buys a  book.  He  likes it. It seems  to  him  superior to  "windy  Vic­ torian  treatises   in  praise  of  virtue   and windier   modern novels  in  praise  of  God knows  what." A  neat  way  of  putting it but   double-edged and   dangerous  when

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



it appears in a new novel ambitious to be taken  as in  praise  of  "Life".

All  is  one.     The  life-force is  the   miracle, the  common-or-garden miracle the  only miracle.... One  thing  is   as   good    as   an­ other.    Praise   the     Lord.... Birth    is    a miracle.    Life    is   a    fascinating    mystery. Death    is   of    no    consequence-a     little  bald-headed  twirp  with   knobby  knees   and  a  runny  nose.     Pilgarlic.      [Thus  Dougal the  School in  his  diary.]

As  with  so  many   novels  in  praise  of "life" (from Joyce through Lawrence, Sherwood  Anderson,  to   Steinbeck and John P. Donleavy-and possibly Kerouac-the names  that  suggest them­ selves  to  me  as  Mr.   Epps'  literary  an­  cestors)   the  logic  of  fictional event  and action   rather   contradicts than  confirms the  extended  Whitmanesque meditations on  Life,  Death, the  tyranny of  "things" and  so  on.
Dougal   the   School    (-master,  that   is, in   the   small   Quebec  village   of   Storm­ away)    detests   his   wife,   drinks   a   lot, teaches    school,   visits   Milly-on-the-Hill (the   village  whore   with  heart   of  gold), hates   T.V.  and   modern   conveniences, and,   after   a  scene  of  joyful  destruction in which  he punches his wife, and  wrecks his  home  "climbs ... (naked and  new as a  babe)  ... through  deep   woods   to  the untouched  Crown   land   on   the   highest and   roughest country  where  beaver  and deer  live  and  hide.  Alone  with  the  hills and  the  wind,  alone  with  the  trees  and the  racing  clouds,  alone  with  his rushing blood  and  the  weathers of  his  mind,   he can  listen  for  poems  and   nothing  inter­ feres."
As  he   wanders  up   and   away   he  is
passed   by  Pilgarlic  the   Death,  the preacher,  going   down,   predictably and symbolically     towards    Stormaway,  its lights   "winking in  the   cup   of  the   hills
 like a handful of fallen  stars". Need  one say  more?  Dougal   drops  out; of  Death into  Life  says Mr.  Epps,  insistently; out of  the  only  life  there  is into  the  void  is what  the  events  of the  novel  tell.
It's  unfortunate that  Mr.  Epps  should be so intoxicated by this  stuff.  It inflates (as  the  examples suggest)   while  debas­ ing  his style;  it  leads  to images  at  which the  senses boggle and  the  mind  faints.  It makes  parts  of his novel  (particularly its prologue   and  first  chapter)  ridiculously  pretentious and    smothers   others    that  show   real  energy,  control  and   fictional  talent.
One   such   part   involves   the   story  of Alan  the pigman's wife. Her  husband cannot   give her  a  baby.  She  suggests  to Long  George   (who   lives  happily   in  sin with   Missy   and    their    eight   children) that  he "make" one  with  her.  He  agrees. Alan,  when  he  learns  of this,  rejects  her, but  in  a  final  scene,  melodramatic but powerfully  rendered, in  which   the  child is born and she dies, he accepts  the child, takes  it  to  Milly-on-the-Hill  (grubby white-goddess)  and  a few days  later  cuts his  throat. It's  in  the  telling  of  this  tale (I use the word  "tale" deliberately) that Mr.   Epps'    style   shows   bite,   that    the action  (as in the  "seduction" of Long George)   has  a  fine  comic  edge.  This  is true   also  in  some  of  the  action   of  the tale   of  Dougal   the   School.   It's   in  the simple  unpretentious presentation of  dia­ logue   and   action    and   setting -in   the simple  telling -of   these  tales  that   one feels  one  is tasting  something  of  the  ex­ perience   (at  times  horrifying in  its bleak emptiness)  of  the  village  life  of  Storm­ away  that  Mr.  Epps  knows.
To  get  to these  passages, however,  one
must  struggle   to  clear   away  or   plough through  huge  snow  drifts   and   banks  of

95

BOOKS  IN  REVIEW



blank    pretentious  "significance". Mr. Epps    has   organized    these   banks   and drifts  neatly in places and  with great economy    (his   novel   is  short)    but   it's my  opinion that   if  he  had  been  content to  tell  the   tales  of  Dougal   the  School, Alan the pigman and Milly-on-the-Hill, instead  of attempting a Great  Canadian Novel,  his success might  have  been small but  would  have  been quite  real.
WILLIAM F. HALL


UNCONSOLING
TALES

Canadian   Winter's  Tales,  edited   by  Norman
Levine.  Macmillan.  $4.25.
Canadian  Winter's Tales  is a  volume  of short  stories  collected with a subtle touch. Not  only  are  the  tales  not about  winter; they are not even aggressively Canadian. Norman Levine, who both  edited  and contributed  to   the   collection,   has   had the  enterprising idea  of selecting  a group of  stories   on   the   basis  of  theme.   Thus his  title  alludes   to  a  remark   Mamillius makes   to  Hermione  in  Act  II of  The
 Winter's  Tale:   "A   sad   tale's   best   for winter." The  total  effect  of  the  book  is not   unlike   that   of  a  "mood"  recording which    might    have    been    designed    to create  or   accompany  a  feeling   of   sad­ ness-"Music   to   Remain   Unconsoled By",  perhaps.
The writers  included in  the  collection
are,   in   order   of  appearance,   Malcolm Lowry, Brian Moore, Morley Callaghan, Hugh Hood, Margaret Laurence, Mavis Gallant, Mordecai Richler, Norman Levine,  and  Ethel  Wilson. "Under the Volcano", the  short   story  which  Lowry wrote   in  I936  and   which,   we  are  told, was  "the   first  version  of  what   later  be­ came   the   novel",   makes  a  splendid  be­ ginning  to  the   book.  Although  all  that  happens is a  bus  trip  taken  by the  Con­  sul,   Yvonne  (here  his   daughter),   and her  fiance  Hugh to  the fiesta  at  Chapul­ tepec,  Lowry   brilliantly  infuses  this simple   plot   with  incredibly  rich,   poetic and  characterizing detail. It is the  most impressionistic of  the  stories,  developing its    theme   of   moral    degeneracy   with many-layered symbolism and mellifluous wit, as in the description of the Consul "wishing  profoundly he  could  get  as far








Rlchanb asel & company, 1nc.

Scholarly Books in the Arts and Sciences



PORTLAND, SAN   FRANCISCO, LOS  ANGELES, DENVER, CHICAGO, NEW YORK



g6

BOOKS IN REVIEW



away   from   the   scene   as  possible ... to somewhere where  great  gourds  of mescal crouched".
Unexpectedly,  the   disappointment  of the  group   turns   out   to  be  provided   by Morley   Callaghan,  whose   "It Must   Be Different"  describes   a   situation  which might  have  interested Chekhov if he had written  for   a  girls'  magazine. A  young girl,  newly in  love, is left  frightened and insecure    by  the   sight   of   her   old   and tired   parents  asleep.   We   are   told   that she wants to "resist the things that had happened  to  them", but  Mr.  Callaghan does  not  show  us the  alarming "things". The  result   is  that   the   reader's   under­ standing  of   the   heroine's   problem    re­ mains  as fuzzily defined  as her own.
Among    the    more    successful    stories Hugh  Hood's "The End  of It" stands  out as a perceptive character study  in a care­ fully   built-up  setting.  Like   Bud   Schul­  berg's   "Sammy", Hood's  producer  hero has   the   obsession   to   run,  although  he earns  our  sympathy in  his pursuit of  the perfect   documentary  film.
The    collection   is  aptly   rounded  off with   Ethel   Wilson's  absurd    but   unde­ niably eerie story, "Mr. Sleepwalker". Up  to  this  point,  a  whole  spectrum in  som­ bre  tones  has  been  presented, from   the understated  tragedy  of  Margaret  Laur­ ence's   "A  Bird   in   the   House"  to   the sour   humour  of   Richler's  "Playing Ball on   Hampstead   Heath".  By  ending  the book  on  a  sly   note  of  surprise,  Levine neatly    purges   the   emotions  previously aroused.
Canadian  Winter's  Tales   is  a   book which  deserves  to  be read.  Once  read,  it is likely to be remembered and  reread, whenever  the   age-old   desire   to  hear   a "sad   tale"  recurs.
PAT BARCLAY
 THE PROVOKER


My  First Seventy-Five Years. Macmillan.
$2.95·
ONE OF CANADIAN  HISTORIAN   Arthur Lower's  former  Queen's students said  of him: "... his  bark  is far  worse  than  his bite.   He   only   speaks   provocatively to wake  the class up, and  to try to get them to  do some  thinking of their  own." And that,   surely,  is  the   real   purpose of  his candid   autobiography. He  is  still  teach­ ing,  still  using the  Lower  method :  over­  state  and  thus  agitate and  stimulate the student,  forcing   him   to   formulate  but never,    never   regurgitate.   The   autobi­ ography is one  more  set  of  lessons from  an    elder    teacher;   not    lessons   to    be learned   by  rote,  but  lessons  designed   to brush   away   the   mental  cobwebs.  As  a consequence, he   offers   those   sweeping Lower    generalizations  throughout   his life's  story,  and  a  few  of  them  must  be quoted.
Lower on society:  "the majority is invariably vulgar." On  education:  "To­ day   relatively   few  high   school  students can   spell   more   than    simple   words   or write   understandable,  simple  English,   a situation  which   did   not   exist   one  life­ time   ago."   On   writing   local   history: "Why  practise  on  a bicycle if you intend  to  try  to  drive  a  car?" On  Queen's: "I would   hardly    give   it   high   marks   for imaginativeness or originality." On  being Canadian: "If  we  skip  the  state  of  na­ tionalism   we  become   not  internationals (there are  no  such  animals)  but  Ameri­  cans.  It  is as  simple  as  that." There are  many   more  similarly   provocative state­ ments  scattered   throughout  the  book  in biting  English.
Some   people,   wounded    to  the   quick


97

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



by such  remarks,  would  quickly  respond that     Lower    was    at    it    again,    being opinionated, pompous,  arrogant, or  even foolish.   But   they   would   be  wrong   and they  would  be  wrong  because  they  were wounded; after  all,  he  must  have  struck a  tender   spot,  he  must  have  hit  a  raw nerve.   That  is  what   he  is  out   to  do: force  a  reaction which  causes  the  reader to ponder what  has been said. As a result the   book   is  something  more   than   an autobiography; it is a prod  for  the mind.
There  are,   of  course,   the   customary
features of  an  autobiography  and   these in   themselves   make   for   useful   reading because    of   his   frank    statements  and honest   recollections.   His   early   days  in Barrie,  Ontario, occupy  some of the  best pages  as  he  dissects  both  the  town  and its   product,   himself.  He    notes   how Methodism  shaped   him  in  one  fashion while   his  father's brand   of  imperialism helped  to  produce a  Canadian  national­ ist.  He   details   his  formal   education  at the   University   of  Toronto   and   his  in­ formal    enlightenment   in   the    summer  forests of Northern Ontario, forests which affected   him  in  much   the  same  way  as Canada's  landscape  touched   the  Group of  Seven.  This  section  is followed  by his naval  experience during the  First  World War  and   his  civil  service  career   in  Ot­ tawa  under   Adam  Shortt. Post-graduate work  at  Harvard removed  him  from  the gray  dullness  of  the  nation's capital   and
 his first academic appointment was at Wesley   (United)  College   in   Winnipeg just  one  month  before  the  Great   Crash of  1929.  His  removal   to  Queen's at  the end  of  the  Second  World  War  took  him away  from  the  prairie city whose physical state   he   loathed  but   whose   people   he loved.
His  battles-big  and  little-are  also duly  recorded, the  most  important  being his  perpetual  struggle   in  the  interest   of civil   liberties;  a   particularly   neglected issue when  wartime patriotism and  post­ war  hysteria  caused  much  of  the  public to   ignore   the   matter. The   reader   can also  follow   the   author  as   he  agonized  over  what  Canada  should  do  in  the  face of  Hitler's rise:   how  to  go  to  war  and  make   it  clear   that  Canada  did   this  as an  independent   nation   and   not  an  im­ perial    ally    (it   could   not   be   done,   a saddened    nationalist   realized,    because Canada   was   just   a   pawn).  And   it   is comforting  to   find   that   he,   too,   finds H.  A. Innis' writings  obscure-or worse
-although   the    economist's  ideas   are still  brilliant.
Arthur  Lower   has   written  an   auto­
biography  that   is  full   of  life   and   the reader  speedily  acknowledges that  the author has  had  a life that  is full.  And  it all comes down  to this:  he is still educat­ ing,  in  the  best  sense  of  that  word,  be­ cause   he  finds  all  around   him  an  edu­  cation.

CHARLES W. HUMPHRIES











g8
