$r .25  per  copy


CANADIAN
l TERATURE
N°·27

Winter, 1966


TIME 	JIND	FICTION


Articles
BY S. E. READ, RONALD  SUTHERLAND, ROBERT  HARLOW, SHEILA A. EGOFF, M. E. R.

Chronicle
BY D. A. CAMERON

Reviews
BY A. J• M. SMITH, JEAN-GUY PILON, WILLIAM H. NEW, DONALD  STEPHENS, M. W. STEINBERG, G. P. V. AKRIGG, WALTER D. YOUNG, WILLIAM H. MAGEE, MAURICE HODGSON, S. E. READ, CARL F. KLINCK, FRANCES FRAZER,
JOHNS. CONWAY, AUDREY HAWTHORN

Annual Supplement
CANADIAN LITERATURE CHECKLIST,  1965



A QUARTERLY  OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW









A QUALITY
OF NEGATIVES





THERE ARE,  no doubt,  peculiar  qualities  to Canadian  litera­ ture.  These  particularly  show  themselves in university classes where the students are  interested  in  what  has  happened  in their own country,  and  in  what is hap­ pening  now. But they, like the literature  they examine, look to the future.  Some­ where during  a course in Canadian literature  a student  asks me where Canadian literature  is going?  When  will the great  Canadian  novel be  written?  When,  the great  Canadian poem?  Rarely  does anyone want to play  the role of prophet; it is an  impossible task. But  together,  we seem to have tried  to answer these ques­ tions. What  we come  up  with  is a quality  of negatives.  Because an  editorial  is naturally limited, to repeat these here is perhaps dangerous because of the general­ izations involved.
The  fresh, young, and  delightful minds with which I work feel that  all litera­ ture  in  Canada never quite  comes off. When  we talk  about  the  better  novels, there  is always something  wrong.  Either  the  plot is too pat,  the  pace  too  awk­ ward,  the characterization too one-dimensional. They agree that  Who  Has Seen The  Wind  is a good novel, but they underline this with "of its kind". Admittedly,  Mitchell has grasped  the quality of the boy and the wind;  but the novel does not rank  with  the great  novels written  outside of Canada.  They like  the importance of environment in  As For Me  and My  House, but  many  of  the characters  are too shadowy,  too diffuse. The  Loved  and the  Lost has an  important theme, but the symbolism  is too obvious. Their  final evaluation  is  always tinged  with am­ bivalence;  the novelist has tried, has done a good job in many things, but not in all facets of his art;  his work never is whole. Some novelists reach for it, but the sustained  totality  never appears.

3

EDITORIAL



These students also try to explain why. Admittedly, often, the explanation  is intangible.  But through  the  past five years together  we have  reached some con­ clusions for explanations. There  is the  passionate complacency  of the  Canadian writer  and  the  Canadian reader,  and  not  the  passion usually equated  with sex. Everything  is taken seriously even by the humourists. At times the complacency becomes smugness, for some writers cry to their  readers  that  they  have accom­ plished something. And because the country has not emerged as a totality, absurd local loyalties to various writers quickly made  a distorted  pastiche of both  value and  accomplishment  on the Canadian literary scene.
Then  there is the  more obvious conclusion:  the limitation  of the imagination
and sensibility that makes it impossible for most Canadian novelists to write about sex in  any  mature  or distinguishing  way. Perhaps  the  approach  is not  even  a civilized one. Novels that came out last autumn clearly show this lack, where sex is marked  by childish  embarrassment  or  not-so-subtle  innuendo. Both  novelists and  poets have a great deal of learning to do in this area, for a sophisticated  ap­ proach is needed. Just because more history is made in the boudoir does not mean that  most sex is learned behind the barn.
It is a growing literature, but often it is only in a process of germination. There is the occasional writer who reaches beyond this stage at some point in his writing: Morley  Callaghan, Adele  Wiseman,  Phylis  Webb.  But  Canadian  writers  and readers  have only recently decided  that  complacency  must go, and  these people are  a minority.  What  is going to happen?  Above all, a maturer approach  to the human  situation is essential, so that completeness in character and conflict emerge. And where is it all going? In comes an age of satire, or, more probable, a roman­
tic revival?

D.S.




4



THE MAZE OF LIFE

The Workof
Margaret Laurence




S. E. Read







D.JOHNSON  in his "Preface to Shakespeare" comments
trenchantly  on  the hazards  of evaluating  that  which is new in  the realm of the
creative arts. "To  works ... of which the excellence is not absolute  and  definite, but gradual  and  comparative; to works not raised upon  principles demonstrative and  scientific, but  appealing  wholly to observation and  experience,  no other  test can  be applied  than  length of duration  and continuance  of esteem." Yet the new must be tested and appraised,  and esteem or condemnation  rendered, long before the  passing of the  traditional century,  "the  term commonly  fixed as the test of literary  merit."
To  criticize  the  writings  of  Margaret   Laurence  is to  criticize  that  which  is new-very  new. Five years ago her  name was unknown  to the reading  public. Today,  as the result of the publication  of four works, three of which appeared  in a  few  brief  months  in  1963  and  1964, she is recognized in  many  parts  of the English-speaking  world as a serious writer who has already  achieved  greatly and who gives promise of even greater  achievement. I realize, of course, that  the ex­ cellence of her  works "is  not  absolute and  definite," but  when  I read  her  pages I feel certain  that  her  means  are  just, and  "Applause,  in spite of trivial  faults, is due."
Margaret  Laurence  is a Canadian, born in Neepawa,  Manitoba, a very small prairie  town  somewhat  to  the  northeast  of  Brandon.  She  graduated from  the

5

THE MAZE OF  LIFE



University  of Manitoba  but shortly after found  herself in the British protectorate of Somaliland  (now  part of the Republic of Somalia) , the young wife of a British civil engineer. She then moved to the Gold Coast  (now Ghana) ; later, for a brief period,  to Vancouver; then  back to England.  But wherever  she goes, she looks, sees, records, studies, and remembers. For she had  the eye of an artist and from the world of her experience she draws the materials  for the  patterns  of her  writ­ ing. And  the  patterns  are many  and  varied.
Though the  establishment  of her  reputation has been brilliantly  rapid,  this is not to say that  she sprang full armed from the head of Melpomene, or some such suitable  muse. From childhood on she has studied and practised the craft of story telling,  and  readers  of Prism and  Queen's  Quarterly  may  recall  a  few of her short  stories published  in the late  195o's. But her first novel, This  Side  Jordan, did not appear  until 1g6o, to be followed, after a silence of more than  two years, by The  Prophet's  Camel Bell (1963), The  Tomorrow Tamer   (1963), and  The Stone  Angel  ( I 964). It  is on these books that  her  present  reputation  rests.
The   Prophet's  Camel  Bell makes the best starting  point  for an  article of this
general  nature.  It  most fully reveals the writer  herself -her  character  and  per­ sonality,  her attitudes  and opinions, her sensitivity and  her reactions to the world around  her, her  ability to observe and interpret, her approach to the business of writing.
The  work itself does not slip easily into any rigid category. It starts like a journal and  in  some  parts  reads like a  journal.  But  basically it is a commentary  on  a people-the  Somalis-and on  their  character, their  ways of  life,  and  their literature. It also contains a series of sharp,  penetrating sketches of  individuals­ Somalis,  Italians,  British. But free of dates  and  the  binding  restrictions of time, it  has  a  timeless feeling about  it that  sets the  work quite  apart  from  the usual books of travel  and  adventure  in distant  and  exotic parts.
Mrs. Laurence  was twenty-four or less when she went to Somaliland  as the wife
of an  English  engineer, who had  been appointed  by the  British Government  to direct the construction of a series of ballehs or earth dams along the southern edge of  the  Protectorate, just to  the  north  of  the  Ethiopian boundary.  The  area  is known  as the Haud. On its northern  edge is Hargeisa,  the only town of any size, and  it is no centre  of civilization. The  economy of the country is poor;  the chief occupation is grazing camels and sheep; the population  is almost entirely Moslem; the  number  of Europeans  is very small;  and  the heat  can  be extreme.  Yet into the Haud  Mrs. Laurence went, to be with her husband  as he surveyed the project and  as he supervised the building of the ballehs that  were to store water  and  to

6

THE MAZE OF  LIFE



bring some  assurance of life to the animals and  the people of the land. Conditions were  tough   and   the  hazards real.  Yet  it is  from this   background that   Mrs. Laurence drew  the fabrics  for the Prophet's Camel Bell; and-if I may hazard a guess-it is within  this  circle of time  that  she began  to mature as a writer.
If she  had  not  been  herself  she  might  well have  become  a memsahib, a  well behaved, tea-going wife  of  a sahib.  This  would  have  been  the  right  and  proper thing  to  do.  But she saw  the  distance  which  the memsahibs "put between  them­ selves and  the  Somalis" and  quickly  took the  unconventional road. Within hours of  arriving at  Hargeisa she  had  gone  to  the  town's  centre  on  foot  ("European women  did  not go to the Somali  town  alone, and  no European ever went on foot. It simply  wasn't done."); she soon entertained Somalis  in her  house;  and  before long she  moved  into  the  wilderness  to live with  the  working crews. Actions  such as  these  require courage, independence, and   perhaps a  good  sense  of  humour. Mrs.  Laurence has  all  three.
But  she  did  not  do  these  things  just  to  be  contrary. She  wanted to  learn,  to know,  and  to  acquire materials from  which  books might  be made.  She  not  only observed  and  listened, with  keen eyes and  delicately  atuned ears; she also studied works on  Somaliland  (for  example,  Richard Burton's classic, First Steps in East Africa), and  immersed herself in the language and  the unwritten literature of the people.  In  brief,  she became a thoroughly disciplined  and  a hard  working scholar and  writer.
Two  works  resulted. The first, A Tree  for Poverty, a translation of traditional
though  unrecorded tales and  poems, was published  by the Somaliland government in  1954;  the second, The  Prophet's Camel  Bell, appeared almost  a decade later, in  1963.  I have  not  seen  the  earlier  work,  but  one  chapter in  the  more  recent book is entitled  "A Tree for Poverty" and  contains  critical  comments on the litera­ ture  of the Somalis,  as well as extended  examples of poems and  tales. Included are one  belwo, a short  love poem; an extract  from  a gabei, the  highest literary  form, impressive   in  proportions and   technique; and   two  thoroughly  delightful tales, rapid  in  movement, rich  in  humour, and  revealing  Somali attitudes towards life, death, and  Allah.
All in all, the Somaliland venture  must have been a rich one for Mrs. Laurence, and  by  the  time  she  moved  from  Somaliland into  the  Gold  Coast  (still  not  yet Ghana)  she  had   become   a  skilled  stylist,  a  sharp observer   of  landscapes and people,  deeply  involved  in the study  of language, folk lore, myths, and  traditions. She  was  ready   to  begin   the  groundwork for  her  volume  of short  stories,  The Tomorrow-Tamer, and  the  novel that  brought her initial  fame, This Side Jordan.

7

THE  MAZE OF  LIFE


IAM  NOT  QUITE SURE  when  the  Laurences went  to the  Gold
Coast,   but  it  was  in  the  period  of  transition -shortly before   Ghana  became
independent in  1957· Certainly the  atmosphere of change-of  breakdown and building, of white  withdrawal and  black upsurge, of uncertain conflict  and  deep­ rooted  suspicion -runs through all the stories and  through the  novel, a unifying,  binding current.
Ten   stories  in  all  compose  The  Tomorrow-Tamer. Nine  of  them  had  been
previously  published  in magazines  and  periodicals from  1956  to 1963. All of them are gems,  though  some more  finely cut  than  others,  and  the  volume  is unified  by a common theme-the  dying  of the  old  way  of life  and  the  birth  of  the  new. The  Tomorrow-Tamer has  been  wisely chosen  as the  core  story  for  the  volume. Not  only  is it  the  best story,  but  it best expresses  the  inevitable conflict  inherent in change.
In  bare  outline the  story is simple.  A  bridge  is to  be  built  across  the  river Owura. The   bridge  will link  the  village  Owurasu with  the  outside  world.  The village  is old  and  primitive,  in  the  grip  of  the  ancient gods  and  the  old  super­ stitions.  The   bridge  is new,  modern, and,  to  the  villagers,  a  mystery.  Will  the river  god be offended  by the structure that  slowly begins to span  the waters?  Will the  destruction of  the  sacred  grove  bring  disaster? At  first  the  young  man  Kofi is  the  only  villager  the  council  of  elders  will  allow  to  work  with  the  invading labour force.  When  no harm  comes to him, other  villagers  are  allowed  to join in the work.  Kofi becomes  their leader; then, in his own  mind,  he becomes the priest of the  bridge.  He  will tend  it; fearless he will tame  it.  In  his  pride,  he climbs  to the  highest  beam  of  the  great  structure, and  standing erect on  the steel he gazes even  higher -into the sun.  Blinded  by the sudden brilliance, he loses his balance and  plunges  to his death  in  the waters  far  below.

As for  the  people of Owurasu,  they were not surprised.  They  understood  per­ fectly  well what  had  happened.  The  bridge,  clearly,  had  sacrificed  its  priest  in order  to appease  the  river. The  people felt  they knew  the  bridge  now.  Kofi had been the first to recognize the shrine, but he had  been wrong about one thing. The  bridge was not as powerful as Owura. The  river had  been acknowledged  as elder. The  queenly bridge had paid its homage and was a part  of  Owurasu  at last.

This  conflict,  clearly  symbolic,  is repeated with  varying patterns in  the  other stories-at times  with  humour, at times with  a touch  of sentiment, at  times with irony  and  bitterness. "The  Merchant of  Heaven", the  tale  of  Amory   Lemon,

8

THE MAZE OF  LIFE



"proselytizer  for a mission known as the Angel of Philadelphia," is a bitter and acid comment  on a salvager of souls who is no better than  the witch doctor  in a bush  village;  "The Perfume  Sea"  is a delightful  tale of Archipelago,  "English­ Style Barber  European Ladies' Hairdresser,"  who managed  to survive the impact of change  by merging his interests with that of his manicurist and  beautician  and painting  a new sign that  read :

ARCHIPELAGO  &  DOREE

BARBERSHOP ALL-BEAUTY  SALON
African  Ladies a Specialty


And  "The Pure  Diamond   Man"  is a good-fun story of a fast operator,  Tettel, who tries to make quick money by selling the secrets of village magic to an ama­ teur  anthropologist  only to be caught  in his own trickery. It is satiric,  but not as serious a study  of change  as the other stories I have mentioned.  All in all it is a collection of delightful  and  brilliantly told tales. I shall say more later about  the distinguishing  characteristics  of the style.
To  date,  Mrs.  Laurence  has  had  two  novels published-This Side   jordan and  The   Stone  Angel.  The  first  (and  it is the earlier)   belongs to  the African period;  the second is purely Canadian in its setting.
This  Side  jordan continues  the theme that  runs through  the tales. The  setting
is again Ghana; the time, the transitional  period of Ghanaian independence. The action stems from the problem of adjustment-the adjustment of the African to
a new-found  freedom;  the  adjustment of the English to a radically  and  rapidly changing  position. The  characters  are neatly arranged  in two opposing groups - Africans  on  the  left, English on  the  right;  and  the  action  is skilfully developed (though  at  times it seems slightly artificial or contrived)  so as to bring  the two groups  spasmodically   together.   Irritation, suspicion,  anger,  even  hate  are  the recurring  results when their paths cross.
Johnnie  Kestoe, the principal English character, is an opportunist-aggressive, short-sighted,   intolerant,   and  self-centred.  As a  new  employee  of  the  Textile Division of a long-established  English firm, he does not understand  the world he is in, nor does he want to. Only at the end does he shift ground  slightly, but then by necessity more than  desire. His dramatic  opponent,  Nathaniel  Amegbe, school­ master  at  Futura  Academy  (principal and owner, Jacob  Abraham), is unquali­  fied, underpaid, somewhat  stupid, slightly dishonest, and, still close to the primi-

9

THE  MAZE OF LIFE



tive ways and  superstitions of the bush  village from  which  he came,  confused  and frustrated by Christianity, education, and  city life. But,  unlike  Kestoe,  Amegbe  is something of an  idealist,  though  slightly  tarnished, and  can  dream about, and  is willing  to work for, a better  world in the not too distant future.
This  balance of opposites is neatly extended to include the two wives. Miranda, the  wife  of  Kestoe,  is painfully  curious  about the  African way  of life  and  em­ barrasses   the  sensitive  Amegbe  at  every  turn. Aya,  Amegbe's wife,  is  ignorant, suspicious,  hostile.  Both  women,  as  the  novel  opens,  are  pregnant;  and,  as the novel  comes  to its close, they find  themselves  together in hospital,  each  awaiting the  common  experience of  birth.   Within  hours,   to  each  a  child  is  born -to Miranda, a girl,  Mary; to Aya, a boy, Joshua. And  with their birth, hope for the future is also born-the new  Mary  may  bring  a new love,  the new Joshua may well lead  his people  to "this  side Jordan."
Around this central four revolve a half dozen or more other  characters -black
and  white.  None is perfect, either  in virtue or villainy; all are caught in the whirl­ pool of change, all are  confused,  each  in his own  degree.  Some  resist and  break; some  compromise and  survive. All are sketched  with  penetrating insight and  con­ siderable sympathy. For-if  I  read  it  aright-this  is a  novel  that  damns no one  completely. Rather it is a novel that  pleads  for  understanding and enlighten­ ment. As such,  it  was,  and  is, a  successful  and  exciting  work.  As such,  too,  it creates   its  own  limitations -for it  is a  novel  that   deals  with  a  problem   of  a moment, and,  with  the  passing of time, its reason  for being will be darkened, and interest  in it will decline.
With  the  writing  of The  Stone  Angel, Mrs.  Laurence reached full maturity as
a  novelist.  In  my  opinion  she  must  now  be  considered as  a  significant literary artist-on  any  terms.  For  here  she  has  created a  great  central character,  un­ trammeled by  bounds of place  or  time;  and  has  handled her  core  theme -the aging  of a  prideful, independent woman -with  profound sympathy and  telling conviction. This  is a  novel  that  should  appeal to many  readers for  many  years to come.
The   book's   jacket  describes  the  work  as  a  "novel  with  a  Canadian setting." True. Part of the  action  unrolls  in  Manawaka, a small  town  somewhere on  the prairie; part  in a nameless city (Vancouver-perhaps) on the  western seaboard. But these settings  are condiments. They  give flavour  or spice, but  they are not the essential  food.  That is Hagar Shipley,  an  old  and  stubborn woman  of  ninety, who is "rampant with  memory," but  who also finds that  each  passing day has for her  a rarity  which  must  be treasured and  admired.

10

THE  MAZE OF  LIFE



It  is the weaving of these past and  present strands  that  makes the final fabric of the  work.  Through an  alternating  pattern  we are  given the story of her life and the account  of her last struggle to maintain  her independence; and  when the weaving  is done,  we see her  as a character  portrayed  with  deep  understanding and sympathy.  This  autobiographical technique-combining as it does reminis­ cence  and  stream   of  consciousness-may  produce  some  flaws  and  certainly demands  suspension of disbelief; but it is handled  with skill and  daring  and  pro­ duces a fast moving story and a strong feeling of tension.
Hagar  Shipley is a Lear-like figure. She is prideful, stubborn, hard, opinionated, and confused. Like her Biblical namesake, she wanders in a wilderness of her own making. Like the stone angel that stands over the remains "of her who relinquished her feeble ghost as I gained  my stubborn one," she views her world with sightless eyes, for the marble  monument  was "doubly blind, not only stone but unendowed with  even a  pretense of sight. Whoever carved her  had  left the eyeballs blank." But,  like  Lear,  she -Hagar -through  the  agony  of  her  last  days,  achieves vision, understands human  suffering, and reaches out her hands in a dying gesture of love.
The  time span of the final action is short-a few days. But these days are rich in experience and  deep with meaning. They frame her last struggle to retain her independence.  Against  her  are  ranged  her  disintegrating  body, a bumbling  son, Melvin,  and  a  plotting,  offensive daughter-in-law,  Doris. Against the attacks of the flesh she is helpless; against the scheming of her human  opponents she stands firm. With  the sharpness  of an old vixen she rightly foresees their plan to place her in "Silverthreads," a nursing home where "Mother will find the companion­ ship  of those  her  age,  plus every comfort  and  convenience,"  and,  with  animal courage, she seeks salvation  in flight.
Alone, by the edge of the sea, she takes refuge from storm and cold in a crumbl­ ing  cannery  building.  She  seeks and  finds courage  not  through  hymns  or  the Twenty-third Psalm, but through  lines from Keats:


Old Meg was brave as Margaret Queen, And tall as Amazon;
An old red blanket coat she wore, A ship hat had she on.


She reviews the darkest moments of her life-the deaths of her drunken  husband and  her favourite  son John,  upon  whom she had lavished her  affection only to


I I

THE MAZE OF  LIFE



have  him  become her  Ishmael, whose hand  was "against  every man,  and  every man's  hand  against  him." Then  into the blackness of her night comes a fool-a vague  parallel,  perhaps,  but  a parallel  none the less of Lear's  fool-a  tippling insurance  salesman,  Murray  F. Lees. Together  they fill their  bellies with  cheap red  wine,  then  tell, each  to  the other,  sad  tales of loss and  of sorrow. And  to Hagar,  as she listens to Lees and  as she receives from  him  understanding and kindness,  comes  understanding   of  self and  the  realization  that  tragedy  is  the common lot of man.
A few days later, after being found by her distraught son and  daughter-in-law, old  Hagar  dies in hospital, but  not before she has shown,  through  acts of  kind­ ness to those  around  her, that  she has found  a  new  meaning  to life.  Through freely giving of self, the old stone angel at last receives eyes and sees with terrifying clarity that she herself has been the cause of her blackened  years. "Pride was my wilderness, and  the  demon  that  lead  me was fear.  I  was alone,  never anything else, and never free, for I carried my chains within me, and they spread out from me and shackled all I touched."
It is the creation  of Hagar  Shipley that  clearly marks-for me at least-the emergence of Mrs.  Laurence  as a fine novelist. For the first business of a serious novelist is the  creation  of character.  And  when  any  particular character  slips, almost imperceptibly  perhaps, beyond the realms of obvious fiction into the world of reality then  the summit of the novelist's art has been achieved. Such is Hagar. She  belongs  in  that great   company that  begins with   Chaucer's Monk  and Pardoner,  Prioress and Wife of Bath and stretches through  the works of the great down to our present day. At times vicious and vulgar, irascible and prideful, stub­ born  and  independent, she is by no means loveable;  but she is capable of pro­ found  feelings and  in  the end  demands  respect.  I'll  forget,  eventually, Johnnie Kestoe and  Nathaniel  Amegbe;  but  I'll  not forget  the Stone  Angel. I  may even see her from time to time-on the street, in a bus, or in a hospital ward;  for she is timeless and  the world is her home.
It is evident  from  what  I have already said  that  Margaret Laurence  can  tell
a good story-short  or long, skilfully handle  tense dramatic situations,  observe with microscopic eye the societies in which she has lived, and  create  memorable characters.  But she can  also write extremely well. Her  command  of language  is sure  and  controlled.  Each  word is precisely chosen  to  produce  a desired effect, and  each sentence  is carefully structured  to fit the  mood  of the  moment  or the motion of the action. Through  her extraordinary powers of observation combined with  her sure grasp of words she can transport  the  reader  into far-distant  lands


12

THE  MAZE OF  LIFE



where  sights, sounds, smells,  colours form patterns quite different from those  we encounter in our  own  round of life. Take, for example, a brief  passage from "The Merchant of  Heaven"  where the  narrator and   Brother Lemon, the  evangelist, walk  through the  streets of a Ghanaian town:

On  our  second  trip,  however,  he  began  to notice  other things.  A boy with sup­ purating yaws  covering nearly  as much  of his body  as did  his shreds  of  clothing. A loin-clothed labourer carrying a headload so heavy  that  his flimsy  legs  buckled and   bent.   A  trader  woman   minding a  roadside   stall  on  which  her  living   was spread -a  half  dozen  boxes of cube  sugar  and  a  handful of  pink  plastic  combs.  A  girl   child   squatting modestly   in  the  filth-flowing gutter.  A  grinning  penny­ pleading gamin with  a belly outpuffed by navel hernia. A young woman, pregnant and  carrying another infant on her  back, her placid  eyes growing all at once  proud and  hating as we passed  comfortably by. An old  Muslim  beggar  who  howled  and  shouted sura  from  the  Qoran, and  then,  silent,  looked  and  looked  with  the  un­  clouded  innocent eyes of lunacy.

Or take   the   opening lines  of  "The Tomorrow-Tamer," lines  filled  with   rapid movement, strong colours, and  local  lore:

The dust  rose like clouds  of red  locusts around the  small  stampeding hooves  of taggle-furred goats  and  the  frantic wings of chickens  with  all their  feathers awry. Behind  them  the  children darted, their  bodies  velvety  with  dust,  like  a flash  and tumble of  brown  butterflies in  the  sun.
The young  man  laughed to  see them,  and  began  to  lope  after  them.  Past  the palms  where  the  tapsters got  wine,  and  the  sacred  grave  to  Owura, god  of  the river. Past  the shrine  where  Nana  Ayensu poured  libation to the dead  and  guardian grandsires.  Past  the  thicket   of  ghosts,  where  the  graves  were,  where  every  leaf and  flower  had  fed  on  someone's  kin,  and  the  wind  was  the  thin  whisper-speech of ancestral spirits.  Past  the deserted  huts, clay walls runnelled by rain,  where  rats and  demons dwelt  in  unholy  brotherhood. Past the old men  drowsing in doorways, dreaming of women,  perhaps, or death. Past the good huts with  their  brown  baked walls  strong against   any  threatening night-thing, the  slithering snake  carrying in its secret  sac  the  end  of life, or  red-eyed  Sasabonsam, huge  and  hairy,  older  than time  and   always  hungry.

Or  again, this   passage from  The  Stone  Angel,  which further illustrates Mrs. Laurence's profound powers of perception, her  delicate handling of language, and her  ability to  penetrate the  workings of  the  mind. Old  Hagar, having fled  from her  family, sits  alone in  the  forest. Her mind wanders freely,   the  movement  is slow,  poetic:

THE MAZE OF  LIFE



Now  I  perceive that  the  forest is not still at  all, but  crammed  with  creatures scurrying  here  and  there on multitudinous  and  mysterious errands.  A line of ants crosses the tree  trunk  where I'm  sitting. Solemn and  in single file they march  to­ wards  some miniature battle  or carrion  feast. A giant  slug oozes across my  path, flowing with infinite slowness like a stagnant creek. My log is covered with moss­ I  pluck it, and  an enormous  piece comes away in my hand.  It's  long and  curly as hair,  a  green  wig suitable  for  some  judicial owl holding  court  over  the  thievish jays of scavenging  beetles. Beside me grows a shelf of fungus,  the velvety under­ side a mushroom  colour, and  when I touch it, it takes and  retains my fingerprint. From  the  ground  nearby sprouts  a scarlet-tipped   Indian  paintbrush-that's for the scribe. Now we need only summon the sparrows as  jurors, but they'd condemn me quick as a wink, no doubt.


With  equal  skill,  Mrs.  Laurence handles  the  dialogue of  her  characters. She has a fine ear for conversation, and  through the nuances of idiom,  the tonal varia­ tions that  exist between  young and old, native  and  non-native, and  the vocabulary differences between   educated and  uneducated she  keeps  her  characters sharply  apart. She  rarely  fumbles,  for  she  is a genuine artist  in  the  handling of words. There is little padding. Each  word-even each sound-has its place in the over­ all  pattern. As a  result,  she is effective,  persuasive,  and  at  times  deeply  moving.
But she is not  effective  and  moving  merely  because  she  writes  well. In  the last analysis,  I believe that  her potential greatness - a greatness  not yet fully realized
-lies in  the  fact  that  through all her  works runs  a deep  and  passionate  interest
in  human beings.  From  The  Prophet's Camel  Bell through to The  Stone  Angel there  is an ever-present call for understanding and  tolerance between  individuals, of different races or of the same  race. In  none of her  works is Mrs.  Laurence just a slick and  a brilliant teller  of tales,  nor  a cold,  albeit  perceptive analyst.  She  is deeply  moved,  I am sure, by the tragedies  of human existence,  by man's  constant frustrations as he  tries to work  through the  Minoan maze  that is life. She  writes because  she is impelled  to write,  not  as a propagandist or an  orthodox moralist, but  as one willing to wrestle unceasingly  with the human dilemma. Her far distant ancestor  is the unknown author of Job  who in his own questioning anguish  cried:


Oh that my words were now written! Oh  that they were inscribed in a book!
That with an iron pen and lead
They were graven in the rock for ever!



SARA  JEANNETTE DUNCAN

Personal Glimpses



M.E.R.



SARA JEANNETTE  DUNCAN's The  Imperialist is known  to Canadian readers, but  only in  recent  years have  biographers and  critics  made an  effort   to  write  about   the  successive  phases  of  her  career:  as  a journalist in  Canada, a novelist  in India and  England, and  latterly an  aspiring playwright in London. A thesis by Miss Rae E. Goodwin, a  postgraduate student working  under   Professor  Gordon Roper at Trinity College,  Toronto, has  established  the  facts  about S. J.D.'s early  journalism; a thesis on the English-Canadian-American  novels is being  prepared by Mr.  T. W. McGuffin; and  the  manuscripts of a dozen  plays  are  under  study  in  the  Library of  the  University of Western  Ontario, having recently  been  deposited there  through the kindness   of  Mrs.   P.  V.  Cotes  of  Oxshott, Surrey   (the   widow  of Everard Cotes) .
Sara  Jeannette Duncan was  the first  wife of Everard Cotes,  and
sometimes signed  her  works  as  Mrs.  Cotes.  She  died  in  rg22  and was   buried    beside   the   parish   church   in   Ashstead,  near   Epsom, Surrey.  No  one   now   has   in timate  knowledge of  the   novelist's Indian and  English   periods   to  match   that   of  Mrs.  Sandford  Ross ("M.E.R.")  of  Combe,   in  Oxfordshire,  the  author of  this  brief, but  skillfully  revealing,   sketch.  Mrs.  Ross,  a  niece  of  S.J.D.'s  hus­ band,   was  a  youthful guest  in  the  Cote's   home  in  India  and  was with  her  aunt   when  the  latter  died  in  Ashtead.
CARL F. KLINCK





IT WAS 'N  MY    EARLY TEENS that I fim came to  know
Sara  Jeannette  Duncan-Aunt Redney. Till   then   she   had  been   merely the
Canadian Aunt in  India who  wrote books-and especially a little  blue  covered book  called Sonny  Sahib.  There were  no  pictures in  this  book  as  there were  in

PERSONAL GLIMPSES



later  editions, so that  I was surprised to find anything  to attract  me in it in those youthful days. But I read it many times and always ended in tears for the mother­ less little  boy who "did  not tell", and  old Tooni  who had  kept  the  Memsahib's  Bible safely as proof  of Sonny Sahib's  parentage. I  was told that  the story was based on an incident  of the Indian  Mutiny,  but I do not know if  that  was a fact. I  do know  that  in later years the author  told me of all her  books that  slim little early  one  had  paid  her  royalties ever since it  was first  published.
I  think  that  Aunt  Redney  was not  often  in  England  during  the  first ten or twelve years of her  married  life, for  I do not  remember  seeing her much  until I was about  fourteen, though she told me that she had seen me as a baby in London. Later  my family lived in the country and it was on a country  walk in our village that  I  have  a clear  picture  of her. There  was a little shop that  sold fish and  on the  marble  slab was a heap of winkles. Aunt  Redney  asked me what  they were and said she had never seen them before. I had to confess that  I had never tasted one,  but  that  our  nursemaid  said  they were "lovely",  and  you got them  out  of their  shells with  a  pin. My Aunt  said at  once that  she must  try one in spite of my saying they were horrid little sea snails. The shopman  was very much amused at  being asked for one winkle! However a pin was found  and  rather  to my sur­ prise the  winkle did  come out  on the end of the  pin and  Aunt  Redney  popped it into  her mouth.  She chewed it and chewed it as we walked on, but at last she threw  it out  and  said it was a tough  proposition.  At that  moment  a  small dog came in sight, and seeing something  being thrown  out he thought  it worth while investigating  and  he  also started  to chew;  however  he very soon  gave  up  and spat  it out,  which tickled Aunt  Redney  who said -"There -you see he agrees with  me, so I don't  want any more winkles.''
I  suppose  she  returned   then  to  India,   possibly via  Canada unless she  had
been  there  first,  as she generally  visited England  and  Canada when  she came from  India,  sometimes with my Uncle  and  sometimes by herself.
In  re-reading  The  Imperialist recently I was reminded  that  the authoress was staying  with us in Hertfordshire  just before a General  Election  and  that  she was extremely  interested  in  the  canvassing  and  posters, and  asked  many  questions about  it  and  may  have been taken  to some of the local  meetings addressed  by the  candidates  or their friends. I can  remember  being told that  she was writing a  hook and  wanted  to see how such election  preparations compared  with those in Canada. The  Imperialist was of course the book, though  at the time I did not know that it was her only one apparently  that had its stage and setting in Canada, her  birthplace.

16

PERSONAL GLIMPSES



After  this she must  have  been more in  India  than  anywhere  else for there is a fairly long gap when I do not remember her or my Uncle for more than passing glimpses until the Spring of 1912 when I went with her to India,  and I remember how great  an  interest  she took in choosing pretty frocks for me and  making  all the  arrangements for  the  voyage out.  In  those days there  was no such  thing  as air-conditioning in  the  cabins and  fans were luxuries, so I  was much  impressed to see an electric fan in her cabin and to be told that it was a "compliment" from the shipping  company  or her publisher, I do not remember  which.
We  arrived  in  Bombay  where  my  Uncle  met  us on  my birthday  and  Aunt Redney  got me a charming little necklace of Indian  gold and  turquoise  which I still possess.
We went straight  up to Simla, then the summer capital  and seat of government
for  the  hot  season, and  where  Aunt  Redney  had for  some years been  very  in­ terested in converting  poor  bungalows into charming  dwellings. We went to  the one  she  had  been  working  on  the summer  before and  she had  made  it a  very delightful  home. It  was called "Dormers", and  we had  brought  out with  us her new  materials  for  the  furnishings.  Ivary-coloured  linen  with  a  design of  moss­ rosebuds and  said  to  have  been designed originally for  Queen  Victoria's  yacht, and  soft green  velvet for long doors and  French  windows.
Sara  Jeannette Duncan  did  much  writing in Simla and  her normal  hours for it were from  I o a.m. to 2 or 3 p.m. Before I o a.m. she had sometimes been riding with my Uncle  before breakfast, and after the meal she did her interviewing with the khansamah  (cook)   and  the khitmagar  (head  house servant)   and  then often she strolled  round  the garden  with me and  talked to the mali about  the flowers and what he was to provide for the table if there was a dinner party on. I well remember  that  early Spring  in her garden,  a narrow ledge cut out of the hillside and  facing  the  gorgeous  range  of snow-capped  Himalayas,  and  at  our  feet  a bed  of  lilies-of-the-valley  which   the   mali  called   "Lili-he-lili",  which  greatly charmed  her.
Sometimes  on  a  Sunday   morning  there  would be a  "breakfast" party  atI o
a.m. I was aware of the great interest my Aunt took in the political situation  then in India,  with  all the  talk  of removing the capital  from  Calcutta and  making  a New Delhi, and  I  do not  think  it would be going too far  to say that  she had  a good  deal  to  do  with  the  outcome,  especially as to the  positioning  of the main buildings. Certainly  there  was much  talk in high places as well as at the Sunday breakfasts.  Later  in  Delhi  the  original  foundation  stones familiarly  and  affec­ tionately  known  as George  and  Mary  for obvious reasons,  were found  to have

I7

PERSONAL GLIMPSES



flitted  in  the  night  to where I presume they may still stand.  It was all very  in­ teresting and  exciting to me who saw how much  my Aunt's  influence and advice was sought.
Normally the writing hours were spent in her bedroom,  where propped  among
pillows she would  work with  pencil and  paper,  and  one  just did not venture  to disturb  her  during   that  time.  She did  not  have  a  mid-day  meal,  nor  did  my Uncle, so I lunched  in solemn state alone!
During  the rainy month, August I think it was, there was a weekly "At Home", when  many  people came to tea  and  talk and  I used to think  what  a channing and  wonderful  hostess she was.
At  the  end  of the  Simla season that  year  the  government  and  everyone else went down for its cold weather in Delhi, and the inauguration of it. The opening ceremony  made  history in more ways than  was intended,  by the bomb  throwing at  the Viceroy,  and  the marvellous behaviour  of the  processional elephants.  My Aunt  was  among  those who  wondered  if  this  incident  would  spark  off more trouble,  and  the  air  was tense and  electric.  We  were so near  it all  there,  and the  day  before  I  had  ridden  the  processional route  all through  old Delhi  upon the Commander-in-Chief's elephant  in the  rehearsal  for the next day's  pageant. This  elephant  was directly behind  the one carrying  the Viceroy when the bomb fell into  the  back compartment of the Howdah killing one of the  jamadars  and slightly wounding  the Viceroy. The  inauguration ceremony  was cancelled  natu­ rally,  and  a  uniformed  rider  came  galloping  to  the  place  where  everyone  was waiting for the procession to arrive to announce  the cancellation and give the news.
Aunt  Redney  had  a  busy time  that  first season in  Delhi,  and  she met  many people  and  was consulted  on  many  important matters,  but  I  rather  lost touch then  as I was summoned  home suddenly owing to my Father's death,  and  I did not see my Aunt  again till she came to England  later in  I9I3. It may have been that  year  that  she had  for a time  a charming little  house in the  Chelsea  area, and  I  was often  there with her, but  I remember  her more after  the start  of the I9I4 war  when  she  returned  from  Canada via  the  U.S.A.  and  gave  us all  a graphic  description  of  her  voyage when  the  Captain prevented  the  ship  from being  torpedoed  by flying the Stars  and  Stripes.  He  had  very many  Americans aboard  and  so saved the ship, though  I  believe she was sunk on her  next trip.
In March I 9I 5 I returned to India with Aunt  Redney;  the War was in its early stages and  a British ship that  passed through  the Suez Canal  a few days before us had seen the bodies of Turks  floating in the Canal  as the result of an engage­ ment  with  our  troops.  We  reached  Bombay  without  incident  and  went  on  to

I8

PERSONAL GLIMPSES



Simla  to  the  pretty  house -Dormers.  I  chiefly remember  that  my Aunt  was much  occupied  with  a  play she wrote then  to raise funds for  War  Charities.  It was called "Brown  with an E" and was put on the stage by the Amateur Drama­ tic Society of Simla, in which there were some very good performers. I  think the name  was changed  later  when it was put on in London  also for War  Charities. I  know that  still later  when  it  reached  the provinces it had  been so  vulgarized that  my Aunt  had  her  name  taken  off the  boards.  I  do  not  know  how  much money the charities got from it, as I did not go with her to England then.  Need­ less to say there  was a Brown without  an "E"; both were young soldiers enlisted for  the  War  and  came  from  very different  ways of life. The  mix-up  lent  itself to comical and  ridiculous positions made much of by the Author.
Aunt  Redney  did  not  return  to India  nor could I get to England,  as by then women and  children  were not allowed to travel.
At  the end  of the  War  my Uncle  retired  and  I went Home  to England  with him and  joined my Aunt  in her Chelsea house. Then  she and  my Uncle started to look for  a  home  near  London,  but  in the  country.  In  the  early Spring  they found  one  at  Ashtead  in  Surrey,  and  I  was busy helping  with  all the  business of alterations  and  moving and  furnishing,  so it was not till May that  we moved in to a  very  unfinished  interior.  My Aunt  was also busy with  her  writing,  so I had  my hands  full indeed.
Alas -she  was never  to see her  plans all finished and  the  new carpets  laid. My Uncle  was going daily to London as he took on some work for an American newspaper.  Just  after  breakfast one morning in June  I went in to the garden  at a call from  Aunt  Redney-she  was standing  on a flower-bed  with  a fork in her hands, and said "I feel awfully queer." I got her to bed with hot bottles, and then ran across to some kindly neighbours to ask who and where was a doctor;  then I
'phoned  my Uncle. I don't  know now how long she was ill-perhaps ten days­ but  I was with  her at the end and she turned  her head  towards me and  opened her wonderful  blue eyes, so live and clear, as if she would impress something  on my mind,  and  then  closed them for ever.











19


THE VITAL PRETENSE

McDougall's Execution






Ronald Sutherland












BEFORE PunusiUNG the novel Execut;on, Colin McDougall allowed himself fourteen years to ponder his experience of World War II. During that  time he was able to consider the aftermath of the war, and to develop a sense
of perspective and interpretation which has made  his novel something  more than simply  another  story of  military  adventure.  The  adventure and  the  drama, of course, are  there.  But also there, one can  find  a significant  insight into  what  is perhaps  the  fundamental pyschological  problem  of  the  Twentieth  Century - the  problem  of  accepting  life itself as  meaningful   when  the  age-old  props  of expected  success, religious conviction, and  the  challenge of tomorrow  have been knocked away.
The  novel got off to a spectacular  enough  start  with  the  Governor  General's Award for Fiction, but in the seven years since its publication  it has been virtually ignored by the critics. It would seem, nonetheless, that  a good deal remains to be said  about  Colin  McDougall's  Execution.  Whether  or not  to a degree intended by the  author,  the more extraordinary  thematic  aspects of the novel are camou­ flaged  by a surface  of deceptive simplicity. Concentrated to the  point  of  almost hypnotic  effect, charged  with dramatic  irony, the  book makes unusual  demands upon  the  reader's  critical attention.
The  plot of Execution  hangs upon the ancient  literary device of a journey, but


20

THE   VITAL PRETENSE



it is so stripped  of inessentials as to  resemble a stream  of consciousness. The separate,  yet closely integrated and  often skilfully counterpointed episodes blend into a series which progresses rapidly, perhaps too rapidly for anyone to assimilate the full texture  of meaning  in the course of a single reading.  In  the first episode, Krasnick, a stolid farm  boy from  Manitoba, is refusing to shoot his Bren gun at a group  of Italians  performing  a cavalry  charge. Once  assured  that  he need not shoot the horses, but only the men off the horses, Krasnick  steadies his gun, and with quick bursts of fire he slaughters the moustached giant in the lead and brings the charge  to an end as efficiently and  finally as modern  warfare  terminated  the chivalric  notions of days gone by. Thus, from the very outset, McDougall  makes clear  that  he  is  not  concerned   with  heroics -there  will be  no storming  and holding  of the  British square.  But like any other modern  military  novelist, he is concerned with the great levelling power of a bullet; and the episode of the horses, recalled a second time at the end of the novel, serves neatly to underline  the de­ valuation  of human  life brought  about  by war.  More  precisely, Execution  is in large  part  a study  of the effects of killing, with or without  benefit of law  court, upon  those who perform  and  witness it.
The  first  effect,  ironically  enough,  is one  of exhilaration, when  Pachino  is totally  destroyed  "by  express command  to provide a  beacon  for ships and  air­ craft"  and  Castello  Donato  is captured.  John  Adam discovers a "mad  grandeur  in  the  concept  that  cities should  be made  funeral  pyres,"  and  even  the  gentle Padre  Doorn  finds it impossible to summon  up pity and  regret. But  McDougall cuts the exhilaration  short;  when the two harmless Italians  whom the Canadians have  befriended,  Little  Joe  and  Big Jim,  are crudely executed  by  Brigade com­ mand  in  the  barnyard   serving  as Battalion  headquarters, the  effect is crushing disillusionment.   McDougall   handles  the  scene  with  sharp,  fitting  detail:   the prisoners, six revolver bullets pumped  into their bodies, are writhing  in a manure pile, and Adam must rush in to finish them off with bursts from his tommy-gun - an  act grotesquely  parallel  to Krasnick's  merciful  killing of the wounded  horses at  Castello  Donato.  The   whole,  sordid  barnyard  execution,  in  fact,  is vividly contrasted  to the first engagement,  in which Adam gallantly  refused to accept the sabre the defeated  Italian  officer no less gallantly offered him, in which the Cana­  dians toasted  their triumph  from vats of vino rosso, and in which Adam  actually contemplated  riding  on  one of the captured  white chargers  to make  his tour of inspection.
The  barnyard  execution is the first major pivot upon which the novel revolves. Presented  with  such  realism  that  it  is entirely believable, it  is nevertheless a


21

THE   VITAL PRETENSE



shrewdly calculated  device:  here  is the  ultimate brutality, the  very  antithesis of goodness,  mercy,  nobility, and even of efficiency. It cannot be rationalized as "part of  the  game", as were  the  disagreeable aspects  of Pachino and  Castello  Donato. Moreover, it is not a routine  brutality of the dehumanized Hun; it is commanded, perpetrated and  sanctioned by Canadian vested  authority. One  wonders  what  the verdict   of  a  tribunal would  be  in  respect  to  the  responsibility of  Mitchell, who disobeyed  an  order  in not shooting  the two Italians on sight,  of Brigadier Kildare, who  issued  the  order, and  of Colonel  Dodds,  who decided  that  he had  no choice but  to  see that   the  order  was carried  out.  McDougall, of course,  had  witnessed enough  of  the  military   to  know  that   in  every  army   there  is always  a  sadistic Sergeant Krebs  available.
Execution  is haunted by  the  idea  that,  immersed in  the  barbarism of war,  a
sensitive,  thinking person  is in  danger  of  becoming dehumanized. Through the episode  of  the  barnyard killing,  this  process of dehumanization is speeded  up  in the  cases  of  Adam and  the  Padre. The  average, generally  unthinking soldier  is not in quite  the same  danger, he accommodates without losing his sense of human identity. When   the  old  farmer whose  son  has  been  destroyed   by  a  shell  burst begins  to  pound   his  head  on  the  ground and  scream  "Mio bambino!   M orte! Morte!   he  is stopped, it is true,  by a hard  slap  on  the  face.  But  when  Ewart, as the   platoon  is  about   to  move  off,  callously  asks,  "Hey ... What  about   those chickens?" the  reaction  of the  others  indicates that  they  have simply  conditioned their  feelings,  not  relinquished  them.
John Adam and  the  Padre, on  the  other  hand, do go through a  period  when the  sense  of  human identity  is lost.  After  the  barnyard  execution, Adam  feels violated: "as  he  walked  he wanted to cry out  for  his lost innocence. It was like the  time,  he  remembered, that  first time  when  he  was seventeen and  he walked away  one  rainy  night  from  visiting  a  brothel." To  carry  on,  he must  develop  a protective shell  of  efficiency:  "Perhaps, he  thought, the  only  end  in life is to be functional: to  do  one's  job is as much  as a  man  can  ever  do."  Yet by the  time of the  death of Rifleman Jones,  both  Adam and  the  Padre have  regained a sense of human identity.




T.IE SHOOTING  of  Jones by  a  Canadian firing  squad is, of course,  the climax  of the novel. Jones is unquestionably blameless, yet McDougall


22

THE  VITAL  PRETENSE



makes  the  strange circumstances leading  up  to his  trial  and  conviction seem  as real  and  believable  as  those  surrounding the  barnyard  execution. Jones  has  no idea  of  what  is  happening when  Frazer  takes  him  to  the  hideout  of  a gangster ring  composed   of  Americans, Canadians, Italians, and  even  Germans. But  he and  an  American thug  are  the  only two captured when  the  U.S.  military  police move  in. The activities  of the gang,  the  raid,  and  the consequent death of one of the  American  policemen, receive  wide  publicity  in  the  newspapers. The  people at  home  in  North  America, understandably, are outraged; strong  political  pres­ sures  are  brought to bear  for swift retribution. The  Americans convict  and shoot "their boy"  with  no  delay,  and  the  Canadian Army  is expected   to  do  likewise with  Jones.  For  the  Canadians, however,  there  is an  embarrassing  delay, owing to  the  technicality that  Jones  is entirely  innocent.
This  execution, and  Jones  himself, are meaningful in a variety of ways. Jones is a symbol  of purity  and  innocence, which  are  destroyed  by the  war.  At  his trial  it is  argued   that   he should   never  have  been  placed  in  a  combat unit,  to  kill and perhaps be  killed;  but  then  what  man  ought  to be so  placed?  In  the  Jamesian sense, he is the  nai:ve goodness of the New World  being confronted by the schem­ ing  evil of the  Old.  He  is the  thoughtless  boy who becomes  a man overnight, in the last few hours  actually strengthening Adam  and  Padre Doorn, who, ironically,  have  come  to  protect  him.  There are  parallels  between  the  death  of Jonesy  and the  crucifixion   of  Jesus:  both  are  put  to  death   because  of  political   and  social pressures;  each  forgives  his executioners. But  these  echoes should  not  be forced to the  point  of considering the episode allegorical.  General  Kildare, for example, does  not  wash  his hands of the  affair; his commutation of  the sentence is simply not  accepted  by  the  higher   authorities. Adam   and  the  Padre walk  with  Jones  to the stake,  but  they  are  not executed,  as were the thieves with Jesus.
In  essence,  Rifleman Jones  represents  the  two Italian boys slaughtered in  the Sicilian  barnyard and every other blameless person subjected to the anti-order, victimized   by  the  madness that  is war.  "The truth   was  that   Jonesy  had  done nothing wrong  at  all, unless  perhaps  it was to be born  what  he was, to be what he was."
The   two  bitter  men  who  are  with  Jones  when  he dies  have  done  everything in their  power  to prevent  the injustice; but after  the execution is performed, both men  feel "in  a sense,  perhaps, restored  to whatever  they  had  been  before  Sicily." It  is  not,  however,   the  execution itself  which  has  this  regenerative effect,  it  is Jones's  attitude. The man  Adam  and  Doorn  had  thought to be simple-minded, to  require sheltering from  the  realities  of life, demonstrates that  it is possible to

THE  VITAL  PRETENSE



face knowingly the  ultimate  brutality of life without  being reduced  to the brute. But he is able to do it because he does not attempt  to understand  life; nor does he descend ino the hell of being unable to love. His final words are spoken out of concern  for the safety of Adam.
The execution of Jones has tremendous dramatic effect. It occupies a climactic, dominant position in  the book, and  the reader  is almost  forced  to search  for a master  key to the novel's meaning in the incident  itself. It may well be that  this is a flaw in  McDougall's  work. Since it diverts attention  from  the deeper issues of Execution,  the issues which take the novel beyond the range of the usual mili­ tary story. It is important to recognize that  Jones'  death  is neither  mystical nor crucial  in  the  thematic  sense, but  merely a foil for  McDougall's  major  theme. Jones does not attempt  to understand  life; for those who do try-Padre Doorn, Bazin and  John  Adam-there is a descent into  hell, a  journey to the "heart  of darkness."  Bazin  does not survive the  war,  but  the  Padre  and  Adam  are  both able  eventually  to  readjust  to reality;  the death  of  Jones  simply marks  the cul­ mination  of that  readjustment.  The  quality  which  elevates Execution  above the ordinary  is not  McDougall's  analysis, however  impressive it is, of the process of dehumanization; nor  is it  his study  of  accommodation to the state  of war,  the type of study which characterizes every military  novel. The  true elevating quality is  McDougall's  analysis of the  intricate  process of  regeneration.  In  presenting, through  the characterization of  Adam,  a painfully  acquired  attitude  which  per­ mits that  character  to live  with  twentieth-century reality, McDougall  achieves a positive note generally absent from  the modern  novel. This  positive note, more­ over, has bearing upon the whole age. The  wartime setting of Execution operates as a magnifying glass.
Probably  the  most  complete  and  succinct  statement of  current   psychological
problems is that  of Viktor  E. Frankl,  discoverer of the  psychiatric  technique  of logotherapy.  According  to Frankl,  the dominant neurosis of the World  War  II and  post-war periods can be traced  not to the Freudian frustration  in sexual life, but  to "the  failure  of the sufferer to find  meaning  and  a sense of responsibility in his existence."' Frankl, who spent the war in a concentration camp, points out that  a  preconceived  set of  attitudes  toward  the  world  can  be shaken  by "the mental  agony caused by the injustice, the unreasonableness  of it all." He observes that  "it  is a peculiarity of man  that  he can only live by looking to the future - sub specie aeternitatis." Setting aside the Freudian principle of "will-to-pleasure" and  the Adlerian  "will-to-power,"  Frankl  introduces  the "will-to-meaning," and asserts that  "what  threatens contemporary  man is that  which I call 'the existential

24

THE  VITAL  PRETENSE



vacuum'   within  him."  Logotherapy  is essentially the  process of conquering  the neurotic effects of boredom and disillusionment by providing a "will-to-meaning." In  Execution, McDougall  also tackles the  problem of the "existential  vacuum" and  comes up  with his own solution.
Christianity,  of course, is in the western hemisphere  the major  pattern  of set,
basic attitudes  toward  the world. In Execution,  McDougall seems to suggest that this  pattern   can   prove   inadequate. Padre  Doorn  is a  sincere and  intelligent Christian  at  the  beginning  of the  book, "a  man  at  peace with  himself and  his God."  One imagines that had Doorn lived in more tranquil  times, he would have become  a  gentle,  inspirational   pastor. At first he is able  to fit the  war into  his pattern  of basic attitudes; the Canadian soldiers are crusaders going about  God's work. Then  comes  the  shock of  the  Sicilian  barnyard. Like  Adam,  his initial reaction  is to fill the  vacuum  with functional  activity;  he becomes a graveyard ghoul-"happy only when he had a burial to conduct." He finds himself leaning toward  the  Roman   Catholic  rites and  sacraments  because in  them  "everything was provided for." But the emptiness within the Padre is so great that he becomes demented.  Using a smoke bomb for cover, he steals an alleged piece of the True Cross from the Chapel of the Sacrament of the Church of Sant' Agata. He reasons that  with this relic he will be able to focus God's attention  on the insane slaughter that is taking place, and  that a God of Pity and Love cannot  permit such wanton destruction  of  the  innocent  to continue.  Along with  what  is left of the  Padre's set pattern  of attitudes,  the piece of the True  Cross is "ground  into  dust on  the Hitler  Line."  Philip  Doorn  must now develop a new "will-to-meaning."
In contrast  to the Padre, there is little Frazer, who regards the world as a crude, godless, loveless rat-race.  Faced  with  the  revelation  of  the  war,  his  pattern  of attitudes proves much more adequate than the Padre's. Completely self-reliant, fearless, he is one of the few soldiers to survive the insane attack at Monte Cassino. Frazer, however, is fit only for the battlefield. When not in action, he is continually in detention.  Naturally, he is the one to join the gangster  ring.
The  pattern   of  attitudes  which  Bunny Bazin brings to  the testing ground  of
World  War  II is somewhere  in between the Padre's  and  Frazer's.  He  has faith in the goodness of individuals,  but he thinks of life as a hopeless paradox:  when Adam visits him at a sniper post, he is shooting his rifle at the enemy while con­ jugating  the  Latin  verb  amare. In  conversation  with  Adam,  he  reveals  his thoughts:


.... if you dare look at  the thing-instead of building up and hiding behind a

25

THE  VITAL  PRETENSE



shield of competence ... What  it's about, of course, is execution.  It started  in that Sicilian  barn-yard,  with  your two Italians-big  Jim  and  little  Joe, did  you call them?-when  you stood by and acquiesced in their  execution-... and  remem­ ber-execution  is the ultimate  injustice,  the  ultimate  degradation of man.  Look what it's done to the Padre, that  poor bastard  Philip Doorn....
. . . . Don't  ask me what  the answer is ... Perhaps  it is man's  plight  to acquiesce. On  the other  hand,  even recognizing execution as the evil may be victory of sorts; struggling  against it may be the closest man  ever comes to victory.

Bazin  understands what  is troubling Adam, and  his  words  provide  the  latter with  elements  for  a readjustment to life; but  he is convinced that  his own  fate  is to be killed. Unable to formulate a "will-to-meaning," in his subconscious, perhaps even in his conscious  mind,  he wants  to die,  just as a person  who drives at ridicu­ lous  speeds  on  a  dangerous  highway   is  probably flirting  with   a  subconscious death-wish. When Adam  learns  that  Bazin has been  killed  by a sniper's bullet,  he speculates on what  a "beautifully conceived stroke of fate" it would  be if perhaps, as  he squeezed  the  trigger,  the  German soldier  had  been  conjugating the  Latin  verb  to love.






ATEVER                 of attitudes John Adam brings to the  war,  after  the  Sicilian  barnyard, as we have  noted,  he offsets the  vacuum within  him  by complete devotion  to duty.  What Frankl calls  the  "Sunday  neu­ rosis" -an  awareness of  the  lack  of content in  life  when  the  rush  of the  busy week is over-hits Adam  when  he goes on leave  to Bari. There he meets  Elena,
a  young  prostitute to  whom  he feels immediately attracted.  Elena,  whose  name means   "light" or  "torch," is  much   like  Dostoevsky's   Sonia. She  is  obviously different from  the  two  hardened "pros" who  are  with  her.  Eventually she  takes Adam to her  home:

That first time, as they sat together on her bed, his hands  feeling the texture of her flesh, Adam  wondered  for a fantastic  instant  if the  parents  in the rooms out­ side, waited for the creak and groan of bedsprings, and how they planned to spend the I ,ooo-lire  note. There  had  even been a formal  offer of wine; and  that-for a blazing moment-sent Adam  blindly, furiously mad  with  anger. The daughter  of the  house represented  the family's capital: they sent  her out  to earn  the food they  must  eat ... But  Adam's  anger  cooled.  What   the  hell,  he  thought:  much

THE   VITAL PRETENSE



worse things  than  this  happen  in wartime ... He declined  the offer of wine and followed Elena into her room.


Once  they  are  in  bed  together, Elena  pleads  with  Adam  to say the  words "Ti amo"   before  taking   her.  But  Adam   has  visited  Dostoevsky's  hell;  he  has  been moving  toward the state  of "being  unable  to love" by willing that  he never  again become  emotionally involved.  His response to the girl lying naked  in front  of him is "Go  to  hell."  Then suddenly, because  his withdrawal is not  yet complete, he understands why Elena  is making  such  a strange request: the young  girl is suffer­ ing  what   for  her  is  the  ultimate brutality, and  she  is  attempting  to  offset  the existential vacuum  within   her  by  pretending that  she  is  with  her  lover.  "Io  ti amo,"  he repeats. "It was pretense,  but  he had given  her something; and,  oddly, he felt  better  at once,  as though  he had  also given something to himself."
Adam's initial   reaction   to  Elena's request  is perfectly  understandable. He  re­ sents  the  idea  that  she  is refusing  to face  all the facts  and  is trying  to make  her life slightly  more  than   functional. He  resents  it  because,  as  Bazin  correctly  ob­ serves,  he  has  made no  such  attempt himself.  Withdrawal is clearly  the  easiest, perhaps the normal recourse  when one's sense of human identity has been violated. His  experience with  Elena  causes him  to realize for  the  first time  that  no matter what  the  circumstances, an  individual may still retain  a measure  of  control  over the  spiritual depths   to  which  he  can  be  reduced. He  also  realizes  the  essential nature of a certain kind  of pretense  in creating a tenable "will-to-meaning." It is not the  pretense  of falsification  or self-glorification,  but simply the process of mak­  ing  one's  condition  sufferable, perhaps even  meaningful, by stressing  the  be in what could be. In  other words, if one is to develop  an adequate working  relation­ ship  with  accepted reality,  then  sooner  or later  one must go beyond  what  can  be objectively   demonstrated as scientific  fact; one  must  create  for  oneself  a set  of life-justifying premises,  a  glass  through  which  the  world  appears tolerable and reasonably comprehensible;  in  short,  a vital  pretense.
Sinclair  Ross, in his novel As For Me and My House, presents some interesting
reflections  upon  the  same  principle:

Religion  and  art ... are almost the same thing anyway. Just  different  ways of  tak­ ing a man  out of himself, bringing him to the emotional pitch that  we call ecstasy or  rapture. They're both  a rejection  of the material,  common-sense world for one that's  illusory,  yet somehow  more  important. Now it's always when  a  man  turns away from  this common-sense  world around  him that  he  begins to  create,  when he looks into a void, and has to give it life and form."

THE  VITAL  PRETENSE



Before the Twentieth  Century  and  its emphasis upon scientific truth  and  the material  fact,  the  majority  of  people,  it  seems,  unwittingly  and  automatically acquired  the vital pretense. The  mind of a child instinctively embraces it. Chris­ tianity  furnished  it ready-made,  called it "faith," and  insisted upon it;  the most twentieth-century-minded of the disciples of Jesus was forever  branded  with the pejorative  title of Doubting  Thomas.  The  problem  of our  age, clearly, is that  a significant number of thinking people, especially young people, cannot get beyond Adam's   initial   reaction  to  Elena.  Like  Salinger's  Holden  Caulfield,  basically honest  with  themselves and  seeking the objective  truth,  they  perceive only  the "phoniness," the pretense. Like McDougall's  Padre Doorn, they discover that  the Christian-Judaic pattern  of  beliefs is convenient  and  functional  up  to a  point, but that it no longer can explain and  justify observable phenomena in an accept­ able manner.  In  an age of increasingly efficient mass murder,  the doctrinal  flaw which  Voltaire  put  his finger on -"Thou  shalt  not kill, except  with the sound of trumpets  and  in large numbers" -glares like an open wound.  What is mani­ festly wrong can  no  longer be explained  away by such strategems  as predestina­ tion, the unknowable will of God, or the divine plan that is beyond human  under­ standing, with their resultant  policy of laisser-faire. The  Christian  Church, ironi­ cally, is being forced to de-emphasize those aspects of its teaching  which for cen­ turies supplied,  albeit  unintentionally,  the vital  pretense to millions of  believers; leaders  of the  Church  appear  to have sensed that  the  kind of faith  with  which she  is traditionally  associated is no longer viable-it is 2,ooo  years  too late  to provide  evidence for  the Doubting  Thomases,  and  mountains  today  are  moved by bulldozers. Like John  Adam,  indeed  like the legendary  Adam,  many  people in  the  post-war  world  are being left to their own  philosophical  resources, while life  around   them,  projected  right  into  their  living rooms  by  the  television net­ works, is a context  of disorder, slaughter  of the innocent  and  large-scale human  depravity.   McDougall's   Execution, far  from  "ending in  a   philosophical  and ethical fog,"  not only dramatizes  the emerging  major  problem  of the Twentieth  Century,  but  points to one kind of solution based  upon simple experience of life.
The  lesson Adam  learns from  Elena, then, is that  unreality  can sometimes be used  to  make  reality  endurable,  and  without  presenting  too great  demands  on the critical faculty. He has experienced the emotional sterility of withdrawal  from life, but after his meeting with the girl, he is inspired to grope for a personal "will­ to-meaning." He accepts Bazin's observation that  man cannot  eliminate injustice, and  that  the world is bound to remain an arena of crudities. In  this respect, there IS   no self-deception;  the world and  life are accepted  for what  they  are. But he

THE  VITAL  PRETENSE



learns to curtail  his demands -there are no such things as absolute  justice, per­ manent  happiness, or realizable peace on earth. But one can struggle for  justice, as Adam  does in the Jones affair, and the struggle itself is a victory. For the indi­ vidual, moreover, there can be long moments of complete happiness, provided he preserves his capacity  to love, and  is willing to suspend  his  disbelief  and  allow himself  to  be  transported   by the illusion of permanence. The  emotion  of love, however short-lived  and  likely to be unsustained, is none  the less legitimate  and humanizing. This attitude  blossoms for Adam in the joy of  his sojourn  with Toni. Earlier  in  the  book,  another  instance  of  the same  attitude is provided,  when Sergeant  DiCicco dismisses the war during a leave by stacking a few tins of bully beef on  a  kitchen  table  and  living for five days as  the son-in-law  of an  Italian  family.
The  new Adam  is a less efficient fighting machine,  but  he is a human  being again, and  the experiences he has undergone have the inevitable  effect of  height­ ening  his sympathy  for other  human  beings. He develops  a sense of  the shared challenge of life. Tortured by the screams of a woman whose husband, child and home  have  just been  destroyed  by Canadian artillery,  he  desperately  wants  to register  his compassion.  Looking into  the  woman's eyes,  the  only words he can muster  are  "Ti amo-lo  ti  amo,"  but  something  of  the  significance  of these words for Adam is communicated  to the woman and she becomes relatively calm. At  the  end  of  the  book,  when  Adam  is thinking  about  the soldiers who  have served under  him, he says:  "Each  one of them, in  his fashion, was a good man. The  trouble was that  they were men, and being such, they were caught  up in the strangling  nets which man's  plight cast over them:  they could not always act the way their goodness wanted  them to."
As we have  seen,  the  execution  of Jonesy marks the  culmination of Adam's
readjustment. He is now conditioned  to resign himself to the inescapable depravi­ ties and injustices of life without resigning from life itself. At the same time, how­ ever, he can  avoid the abyss of stark cynicism and the spiritual sterility of laisser­ faire; he  can  struggle  against  injustice.  By accepting  the  vital  pretense,  he can recharge  himself emotionally  and  sustain  a personal  raison dJetre. He  does not have,  it  is true,  a  defined  code  of ethics;  for  McDougall  suggests that  funda­  mental  moral issues can not be resolved by a code of ethics. The  new John  Adam has something  far  more simple and  effective, far less professional and susceptible to  the  deteriorating influences of  the  nuclear  age-he  has acquired  a genuine compassion for his fellowmen. In his characterization of John  Adam,  McDougall thus  takes what  is in fact  an  ancient  philosophy of life, strips it of the accumu-

29

THE   VITAL PRETENSE



lated   paraphernalia of centuries, and  shapes  it  to  fit  the  major demand of our times.



LE ARTISTic  QUALITIES of Execution are  concordant with  the significance of its  theme.  The  style is laconic,  touched with  poetry  on  occasion,
and  ideally suited  to the dramatic quality  of the  material. When  dialogue is used, it  rings  true.  Perhaps the  most  notable  aspect  of  McDougall's style is a  device which  creates  a verbal  echo of the impact  of war  upon  the  participants; he  pre­ sents  a  passage  of flowing, descriptive prose, then  shatters the  effect of  order and calm  with  a single shell-burst  phrase.

Brigadier  Kildare,  he told  the  Padre,  exalted  the  Scottish  Borderers  as a  subtle means  of  humbling  the  regular  officers under  him  and  infuriating those above. Then   Major  Bazin smiled gently at  the  Padre's  puzzlement  and  told  him  not to worry if it didn't  make sense; so many things did not after all. One  thing, at least, which  the  Padre  understood  was  the  crushing  burden  of responsibility  that  this man  bore. As they stood at  the  rail  together,  in this moment  of crisis, the  Padre could  imagine  the  stern  look on  the  face beside him, those blue eyes clouded  in sombre  reflection of the next  terrible  decision to be made.
The  Brigadier  tapped  his cigar ash on the rail. "Got  'em  by the balls, Padre?"
he inquired  courteously.


McDougall has a particularly keen eye for scenic and  ironic  detail. His descrip­ tion  of the  attack at  Caielli,  for  instance, is a  tour  de  force.  A  panoramic view of  the  action  is  punctuated by glimpses  of  the  thoughts of  the  various  soldiers, then   there   is the  strange   tranquility which  grips  everyone  during a  lull  in  the German offensive: "There was  a gentleness  about  every soldier  in  Caielli.  Each was  considerate toward  his fellows. Faults  and  meannesses which  at  other  times would   have   drawn quick  anger   were  overlooked." When  Adam is  consulting  with  a  British  tank  Major  about  siting guns  before  the  battle begins,  he casually notes  that  "his  plump jowls were exquisitely shaven; his face  had  a pinkish  tinge, as though he had  come fresh from his tub  and  toilet lotions." But even this minor detail   is  tinged  with  irony;  after  the  attack, Adam   finds  the  tank  commander dead:  "It  must  have  been  an A.P.  shell because  the  Major had  no head: there  was  only  the  red,  meaty stump of his neck."

THE  VITAL  PRETENSE



The  way  in  which  each  small  detail  contributes  to  the organic  unity of the novel is indicative  of great  care  and  artistic  skill. The  seemingly  unimportant character   traits  of  Ewart   and  Krasnick,  for  instance,  take  on  fascinating  sig­ nificance  when  the  latter  hears  about  D.D.T.  There   are  the  incidents  of  the crimson  wine  spilling  on  Adam,  the  secret of Fergus-Cohen  and  Kildare,  the church  which serves as a latrine,  the effect of the ordered stand  of pines, the big sergeant  weeping after he had given the command to the firing squad,  the pitiful old soldier  Perkins,  whose life has  no meaning  outside  of the  military  context, and numerous others. The combined effect of all these details is a total and power­ ful impression of war-its thrills, its horrors, its glory, its boredom, its madness, and  ironically, its momentary  periods of profound  peace.


1  Gordon  W.  Allport, in  Preface  to  Frankl, From  Death-camp  to  Existentialism, trans. Ilse Lasch (Boston:  Beacon Press, 1959),  p. x. Other  references are to text of book.
2  New Canadian Library N4 (Toronto, 1957), p. 112.









BASTARD BOHEMIA

Creative Writing in the Universities







Robert Harlow











IT rs DIFFICULT, in an  age  when mo" of  the  fine "'" '""' taught  on campus,  to keep patience with those who oppose Creative Writing as a legitimate  university  pursuit.  Musicians,  painters,  actors,  dancers,  can  come  to the campus  and  few eyebrows are raised, but let there come a writer to the uni­ versity and  even before his first drink  at  the  Faculty  Club  he is asked to  argue the  proposition  that  writing  cannot  be  taught. The  lady  of  the streets  who  is asked by every neophyte whoremaster how she got into the business can be no less bored than  the writer by this kind of importunity. The  point is, you cannot teach philosophy  or  mathematics  or  physics or  political  science either -not,  at  any rate, at the level the poor writer's interlocutor  is insisting upon. What  he is really saying is that  you cannot  teach a Dostoyevsky how to be Dostoyevsky, or a Dick­ ens how to be Dickens, or an Eliot how to be Eliot. As usual, he is dead  right.
There  should  be an answer to these attacks, a definitive one, but unfortunately there  is none.  There  are, however,  points that  can  be made  about  writers  and writing students  on campus. My own belief is that  writing workshops are valuable adjuncts  to  learning  the  craft  of writing.  I  did  my own  graduate work at  the oldest and  the best known of them and,  looking back, I consider the experience to have been a valuable one whose positive aspects outweighed  the negative ones

32

BASTARD BOHEMIA



by  a  considerable margin. Now,  fifteen  years  later,  I have  come  back  to  teach at  a university  where  the  climate  for writers  and  writing  courses is favourable. I write  these remarks, therefore, from a privileged vantage point,  and  I make  them with  the  hope  that  they  will be of help  to advocates  of Creative Writing courses and  that  they  might  rally  some support from  the  uncommitted.
There is  nothing new  or  startling   about  offering  creative  writing  courses,  at
least  in  North America. Eugene  O'Neill attended one  fifty-odd  years ago; Ten­ nessee Williams  and  Arthur Miller were Theatre Guild  drama students just before the war.  Writers with  styles and  interests  as widely separated as Wallace Stegner, Robie  Macauley and  Flannery O'Connor attended the  fledgling  Iowa  workshop in the thirties  and  forties.  In  1965, the students  of that  writing  centre will publish eleven  novels  and  seven  books of poetry,  and  its staff  will have  published  half  a dozen  volumes  by  the  end  of the  year.  Iowa  is exceptional, of  course;  its work­ shop  has  been  in  operation for  nearly  a  generation and  it  is  rich  in  university  support and  grants and  scholarships so that  it can attract the best student writers.  A great  number of campuses have  flourishing  full-time writing programmes, and the  university   or  college  in  the  U.S.  without at  least  one  writing  course  in  its calendar is the  exception in the mid-sixties. The argument about  the fact of writ­  ing  courses  on  American  campuses has  been  over  for  nearly  fifteen  years,  and published  authors, even  quite  famous  and  influential ones, are  as much  at  home as faculty  members as-say, Galbraith, Bundy, Van Allen, or Milton  Eisenhower.
In Canada, the  argument is hardly  begun,  but  there  are  writers  on most cam­ puses, and  Toronto, Sir  George  Williams  and  the  University of New  Brunswick have at last established writers-in-residence. The author just chosen for the Toronto post  is  Earle   Birney,  who  for  nearly  two  decades  has  been  the  country's best­ known  and  most  forceful  advocate of creative  writing  as a  legitimate university  pursuit. His elevation is poetic  justice of the right  and  proper kind. After  nineteen years of struggle, the  single  course  he began  giving in 1946  at  the  University of British Columbia has expanded to become  the only Creative Writing Department in  the country. Among  academicians, and oddly  enough among  writers  too, there  are  still residual  doubts about the  validity  of this kind  of  creative  pursuit. What lingers,  is, on  the  one  hand, the  view of the older generation of authors that  bo­ hemia  is the  place  to learn  to write,  and,  on  the other, the  academic view  that  writing,  like making love commercially, is best  kept in its own  district  and  desig­ nated   by lights  of  an  appropriate colour. The  two  views  merge  in  the  end  and  may  perhaps be dealt  with  concurrently  as  we go along.
Bohemia   (I use  the  word   here  to  mean   the  "territory" the  writer  inhabits


33

BASTARD BOHEMIA



intellectually and  spiritually but  not necessarily physically:  Henry  James "lived" there as certainly as Balzac did)  has a strong appeal.  It is far from deserted. Nor should  it  be. Bohemia  is freedom  from  compromise -the  kind  a  man  makes when he takes a job and must conform to specifications set up by one managerial system or  another.  It is freedom  from  commercial commitments which  say "Fashion  sells" and  "Give  people what  they want". It is freedom from the  pres­ sures of the manners  and mores of society-which are always designed to prevent the  boat  from  rocking under  those who have got it made. It is intellectual  free­ dom  from  philosophies-political, economic, psychological  and   religious­ which  are  largely  deterministic,  naturalistic,  anti-individualistic  and   Philistine despite much  protestation  to the contrary. There  are fashions and fads, commit­ ments and  philosophies in bohemia  too, but  it is a good place and  must be kept well populated-the best suburb  of the conscience, without  which the whole of our  moral and  cultural  heritage  might  perish.
Fortunately  bohemia is portable.  Perhaps  it began  that  way. When  the Chris­ tians  triumphed in  Rome  and  outlawed,  among  other  things,  the  theatre,  the players took to the Roman  roads and played split weeks at country fairs for nearly a  thousand   years  before  the  onset  of  the  Renaissance  eventually  broke  down enough  of  the  prejudice  against  the  theatre  to  allow  its  re-establishment  as a national cultural  venture. The writers, meanwhile, became churchmen. For them, bohemia was not a physical thing but a state of  mind, eminently  portable. It was not  cowardice  that  made  them  join the  church. Writers  have  always gathered around  centres of power. Like gamblers, they want  to be where the action is; it is what they write about. The church, the court, the civil service, parliament, even the military,  have all housed writers at one time or another  during  their careers. It  has only been since the Industrial  Revolution  that  there  has been no natural  centre of power and patronage. The writer also was disinherited when the machine arrived  and  God  was turned  into a  loyalty oath,  the king into a figurehead  and the  priest into  a  social worker.  He  was once  again  forced  to take  his bohemia with him as he disappeared  into the streets where patronage was nil and starva­ tion  probable.  Bohemia became  a  very real and  physical thing,  and  a centre of power in its own right, but now its structure  has begun  to break down  because a funny  thing happened  on the way to the end of the second millenium: the writer found  a new patron  in the University.
The  University  has always been a patron  of course-of  dead  writers.  Dead writers are the only manageable  kind, and  it seems quite  natural  in times when the University  was not a great centre of power that  it eschew live ones. But now

34

BASTARD BOHEMIA



the University is a prime influence-perhaps second only to Government itself­ where some of the most important problems and ambitions of our time are being served. The  younger writers  have recognized this and  have begun to  understand it  as the  first  "closed"  centre  of  power since before the  Industrial  Revolution which offers both patronage and residence. Physical bohemia is no longer a place where the writer  must  reside while he learns and observes; it has become again a state  of mind,  and  the move to the campus is, among other  things, convenient. Writers have always taught  and coached and influenced other writers, in garrets, in  coffee-houses, in  country  homes, or  by personal  correspondence  and  by the dissemination  of  their  opinions  and  work.  Now,  with  a  preponderance of the young who are interested  in writing attending colleges and  universities the venue for this activity has shifted to the campus. There seems small cause for alarm.






Y.T THERE   REMAIN  reservations  about   the  writer  leaving bohemia  to become a teacher. There  is the fear voiced by the older generation of authors of selling out, of coming under the thumb of the patron  power, of serving the power rather  than  criticizing it, of being made a slave of a new kind of  con­ formity, of having  no time to write. Is it a good thing to leave physical bohemia and accept patronage?
For  the  journeyman   writer  who  has  had  commercial  success-as  for  the author  with  private  means or a rich wife-there seems no imperative  reason to live and  work on campus,  but  for the developing, emerging  writer  the negative aspects are perhaps  outweighed  by the positive ones. Within  writing programmes there is a minimal  amount  of compromise necessary; forced commitment to com­ mercial fashion  is non-existent; the distance from the actual  pressures of  society as a whole is a comfortable  and  necessary one;  there is time alloted  during  the year  to  write;  and,  as  I have  already  suggested, the  University  is  a  centre  of influence  and  therefore  a good  place for a writer  to be. This  is not  to say that the campus  is a  chaise-longue without  hurly-burly. There  are students to teach, written  work  to criticize, visiting firemen to entertain, functions to attend,  com­ mittees to be avoided, interdepartmental competition and politics to be fended off, necessary administrative duties to perform;  but when living costs such an alarm­ ing  amount  even  in  physical bohemia,  the  campus seems a  good investment  in time  and  effort  for  the  emerging  writer.  Perhaps  as many  authors  are  lost to

35

BASTARD BOHEMIA



poverty,   journalism, hack  writing  and  too  much  time  on  their  hands  as are  lost to  teaching schedules,  regular  pay,  meals  and  holidays,  and  a life that  forces  a planned  work  schedule.  The  I 8th  century   musician-composer, I  am  reminded, had  to come  to  the  salon  with  new dinner music  on  a regular  basis and  he also had  to  put  up  with  giving music lessons to his patrons and  their  friends,  but  his workroom was clean  and  neat,  his status  was  good,  and  there  was time  enough left over  to turn  out  a considerable amount of music that  will live as long as there are  orchestras to  play  it.  The   University  is a good  thing,  by  and  large,  for  the emerging writer,  provided  that  he is not simply  a product of the campus and  has never  left it. Faculty status for the writer should, ideally, be earned  and  not follow as a result  of receiving one or two post-graduate degrees.
There are  dangers, of course.  One,  again  suggested  by the older  writers,  is that being  secure  the  campus  author will not  write.  The  answer  to  this, if it is true, is to  remove  the  security.  Publish  or  die. There will never  be so many  positions open  to writers  on campus  that  there  will not  be competition for them.  The one­ shot  wonders and   the  pure  hangers-on may  be  easily  weeded  out  and  shipped  back  to  bohemia. Another   danger   is that   the  writer,  if  he  lives  and  works  on campus, will  become  cut  off from  the  world,  from  reality,  will  become institu­ tionalized. Writers  tend  to retreat from  the  world  when  they write,  and  the cam­  pus  bears  considerably more  relation to reality  than  does bohemia. In  any event, by  the  time  the  writer  has shown  he  has  talent and  has  begun  to develop,  the experience he  will use as a  basis for  his work  has  mostly  been  gathered, and  the rest  of his life  will only add  depth  to it,  confirm  it, consolidate it.  Experience is intellectual, emotional and  spiritual as well as physical  and, finally, it furnishes  a way  of looking  at  life however  and  wherever  it  happens. What a great  number of  people  mean   by  experience   (when they  worry  about a  writer's  involvement with  society)   is subject   matter. If subject  matter were  the  major consideration then  Arthur Haley  could  have  written  Crime  and  Punishment, but  total  experi­  ence is a prime  criterion and  that  is why Dostoyevsky  wrote it.
A  third  danger is that,  in  trying  to  become  a teacher, the  writer  will become an  academic bent  on turning out  carbon-copies of himself. It is a problem  he will have  to work out  himself, and  the odds are tough. We live now in a society where job-training has  become  a prime  concern, if not  a compulsion, and  where  almost any  real effort  (other than  mandatory lip service, ironically enough)  toward  pure education is liable  to be regarded as tantamount to  being  soft  on  Communism. It follows,  then,   that  one  of  the  biggest  problems  the  writer-teacher may  have to face  is the  tyranny of the  textbook-the training manual. Teaching manuals

BASTARD BOHEMIA



are written invitations  to professors to cease educating and  begin training  by rote, and  they are  invitations  as well to the student  never to enter  the library  except to find a table  at which to eat lunch or to find a Friday  night  date. The  writer­ teacher,  despite  administrative pressures, must  avoid  both  the  manual  and  any suggestion of rote; his business is to help the student-writer  solve his writer's prob­ lems and  not  his career  problems.  The  present  job-training  system is a vicious one, but it is fashionable; however, it would be unfair  to locate the blame for it anywhere in particular. Systems grow in response to felt needs and  expedients of all kinds, and  they  habitually  become larger than individuals.  But, still, it is the present system that  allows the antiphonal academic  to flourish. Perhaps  the way to begin stopping  this statement  and  response training at the undergraduate level of universities is to encourage  students  to participate  in the kind of courses that can  be taught  in no other  way  than  by the lecture-workshop  method,  until such time  as it is possible to  persuade  the whole academic  community  that  there are other  ways of handling large student bodies than are presently in force. I have no hope  that  the  University  will return  to its primary  role any  more than  I expect the Church  to  return  to the simple teachings of Christ. The  community  we live in is fighting for survival. The  two great explosions of our time -the population and  the  nuclear-will, it seems, allow none of us the luxuries of real academic standards,  leisure and  intimacy.  We must find them where  we can. If the Uni­ versity, at almost every level, is not to become entirely a trade school, then some of the students  some of the time must be free to indulge themselves in some of the conditions  that  lead  toward  pure  education.
If I have digressed it has been primarily  to suggest that  the writer-teacher  on campus might, despite orthodox  faculty fears, be a force for good. There  is a new kind  of crisis in  education.  There  is not only a demand  from  society that large numbers of students  be trained,  but there is a demand  that  the experts who teach solve some of society's most  pressing problems. But  to teach  under  the  present system exhausts the professor and makes it difficult for him to meet either demand. Changes  must  be made.  The  problems society faces do not  require  trained  per­ sonnel;  rather  they  require  educated  people. I regret the aphorism  because it is only going  to lead  to arrogance: it may be possible that  the writer-teacher  is a harbinger  of  that  necessary change.  Here  is a  man  who  comes to  the  campus and, from all available evidence, flourishes. Why? Perhaps it is because the subject he teaches cannot  be taught  in the manner  the present system calls for. Student writers  cannot   be  trained; they  can  only be  educated.  A  department trapped happily in this kind of circumstance  bears watching. Its administration necessarily

37

BASTARD BOHEMIA



breaks with some present academic routines. Its approach necessarily involves the student  doing  more  and more productive, self-educative  work and  receiving less and  less spoon feeding as he approaches  the B.A. level. Teaching  the student  in a writing  class is similar to coaching an athlete  who can  run a little and  who must be made  to run  a lot. Oddly,  this is called  training,  and  the  training  we do in classrooms is called education. But the help given a man which enables him to see how to run faster and farther  is conducted  with a subtlety  not usually associated with training.  It becomes physics, chemistry, anatomy,  strategy,  discipline, direc­ tion. Were  the coach able to retain  his youth  he would  become a better  runner himself. Thus  with the writer who comes to campus  to teach. He does not simply instruct  a student  in the mysteries of a mechanical  process. Writing, too, becomes a number  of other things. It also becomes anatomy,  strategy, direction, discipline, as well as psychology, anthropology,  philosophy-it becomes finally  shared  ex­ perience, and  the teacher gathers strength  and stimulation  from having to articu­ late  that  experience.  In  the  orthodox  department at  the  university,  under  the present  undergraduate system, the instructor  must  somehow  inject  the  contents of a course into the student: the writing instructor's problem is the opposite. The  case for  forming  and  observing separate  writing  departments at  universities lies here;  drawing  a course out of a student  instead of  injecting  it into him may not be a new idea, but I doubt that it's a working one at the moment.
A student  does not take  writing courses because  they are easy; they are  not. He  must  prove,  whether  freshman  or graduate student,  his abilities before the course begins, and  he must be accepted as educable  by the professor to whom he applies.  This,  of  course, is when  examinations  should  be conducted-before, not after  the course is given. There seems no logical reason why a student  should be allowed  to take a course dealing with  philosophies of the nineteenth  century just  because  he  has  passed five largely  unrelated   courses  the  year  before. An examination  should  be given before the course to make sure he is ready to tackle the  problems  it raises. This  would ensure  a student's  interest  in  the course,  be­ cause he already  has an investment in it;  it would cut lecture time to  a minimum and  class time considerably. It would also reduce the student population to those who are educable. The rest could go to training  schools where they would become technicians  and   therefore  useful citizens  instead  of   disoriented  and  often  dis­ illusioned holders of meaningless consultative  or  "teaching" degrees.
Once  accepted  into a class, the writing student  becomes a member of a small group  (fifteen at most)  and it meets perhaps once a week for a couple of hours. He sees his instructor  regularly as his own work progresses, and  he faces public

g8

BASTARD BOHEMIA



criticism of his work from  other students  during  class time. He is not taught  in the accepted sense; he is tutored,  drawn  out, channelled,  cajoled, pushed toward becoming capable  of making his own rules in terms of his own work and viewing the world through  his own eyes. There  are no texts, no hard  and fast techniques or  methodologies, no  parroting. The  student  reaches into himself, and,  whether he becomes a writer or not, he will never be the same again so long as he may live. He has made something  of his own, something original and therefore unique. He has, in effect, played God  (that  most exhilarating of all human  pursuits), modelled a little universe, peopled it, judged them good or bad, punished or rewarded them, pitied  or  reviled  them,  and  perhaps, if he is really going to be a writer,  he has learned  something  about  compassion.  He  has been forced  to look at  the  place where he lives and has necessarily wanted to see patterns,  meanings, significances. As his confidence  grows, he stops gaining only knowledge and  begins achieving understanding -the Cain-mark, surely, of someone  who  has  had  the  courage to murder  rote in order  to free himself to create. As things stand  now, this is very different  from  applying  one  of  Newton's  laws, remembering   that  Hardy  con­ sidered himself an ameliorist, or conjugating  foreign verbs, but even these things, all of them  I  think,  must  become more attractive  and  interesting  because sud­ denly, in  the  first romantic  excess that  follows creative  commitment,  everything is of significance  and  importance.  In  the successful  creative  mind -writer  or otherwise-this voracious intake of equally weighted facts and impressions gra­ dually solidifies into  a  healthy  and  hard-nosed  wonder  and  awe that  is a prime requisite for important original  work. Whether the student  gets this far or not is less important than  the fact that he has learned something about teaching himself. Seldom does this happen  now until students reach graduate school.




OuR WORKSHOP  METHODS  at  my  University  differ  from instructor  to instructor, but each of us would agree, I think, that  our approach  is
eclectic. Our  understanding is that on the undergraduate level we are dealing with the results of nearly two decades of home and school environment and  training. While our  students  are  bright  and  more than  usually sensitive, the majority  of them  are  far  from  original,  and  their  lights  are  hidden  under  bushels of  pre­ cooked, pre-digested  and  canned  cultural  responses. The  only "teaching" tool we have at our  command is that  they are  all at  the point  of rebellion. They  know


39

BASTARD BOHEMIA



something is  wrong,   that   life  should   not  submit  to  the   patterns suggested   by father's politics and  business ethics, the fearful  symmetry of mother's morality, the anaemic compromises of teacher's rote, or even  the  appealing romantic cynicism of  the  powerful   teenage  sub-culture from  which   they  are  struggling to  become separated. To  serve this groping  for originality  by suggesting  simply  another  pat­ tern  would  be disastrous.  Our  approach is basically  one  that  is designed  to  keep them  moving  toward freedom  of thought and  response  while  at  the  same  time applying some of those attributes of writing  that  seem  to us to be common to fine literature from  the  Greeks and  the  Bible to the  present.
At first glance,  this seems an essentially conservative approach. In fact, it is just common sense.  One  cannot  teach  originality; one  can  only  preach  awareness  of the  conditions which  allow originality, and  for  my own  part  this is what  writing workshops  are  about. Nor  does this mean  one  teaches  simply  techniques; rather one  insists on  a concern  for craft  because  this concern will free the  young  writer toward   getting  down  on  paper  the  only  original thing  he  has  to offer: his own unique   response  to  being  alive  and  having  to die.  Human systems may  be bad, but  the  divine  one  is palpably  and  tragically  and  illogically  impossible.  It is basic to all art.
This,  then,  is what   happens at  a  workshop session:  over  a  work  brought to
class, a student writer  confronts a dozen or so of his peers who  react  as best they can  as intelligent readers  and  an instructor who insists that  the craft  of the writer meet  and  serve  the  intentions of the work  being  considered. It is out  of this con­ frontation that  critical  and  technical  discussions grow.  A student whose mind  is a blunt  instrument will soon  be  confronted with  the  fact.  Someone  whose  vision of life is clear  and  individual will be encouraged and  will gain confidence quickly.  Each  work is not  just a problem  extracted from  life  (although that  is its genesis) but  is also  a  problem  in  art.  Technical concerns  become  apparent quickly,  and  gradually  the  workship   members  learn  for  themselves -and  in  terms  of  their own  work -about  the  uses and  abuses  of  techniques.
In  the  freshman and  sophomore years,  it  is difficult  to  conduct a  workshop without the help  of an anthology  of stories, plays and  poems.  Few of the students
-however much  they have read-know how  to read.  And  none of them  knows how  to  read  for  craft.  It is in  this area  that  pure  instruction is valid.  The  faster writing  students learn  to read  as writers,  the quicker  they will advance as writers. Hand a  class of  beginners  Henry  James' "The Real  Thing" and  most  of them will simply  be bored. Take  them  through it in terms  of the  problems James  solved in  order  to  be  able  to tell the story  and  they  will at  least  be impressed. Each  of

BASTARD BOHEMIA



them  has  observations and  chunks  of experience  that  seem  unwriteable because they do not  "scan" as narratives. Give them  Flannery O'Connor's "A  Good  Man is Hard to  Find", which  is at  first glance  a straight narrative, and  they  will  im­ mediately   be  involved  in  a search  for  meaning in  terms  of the  craft  of  selection  and  deletion. Gradually, as  we read  more,  they  begin  to see that  writing is an impressionist's art.  Soon  they  are  turned inward   to  begin  developing their  own sensibilities  and  outward toward  the human condition in  terms  of their  own  ob­  servations about  it.  Seldom  do big miracles  occur,  but small  ones do all the  time.
Personal  writing  problems  are talked out in the instructor's office. These sessions
often seem to lead  nowhere, but  I believe contact  with  the instructor on a tutorial basis is an  absolute   necessity,  and  one  which  is becoming increasingly a  luxury as universities  grow larger  and  the staff-to-student ratio  becomes smaller.  A "hung up" student is a "hung up"  writer.  One  does not need  to be a psychologist  to be a writing  instructor, but  it helps.  For  the student, writing  stories or  poems for  con­ sideration in the  workshop is an  exhilarating thing,  but  it is also competitive and  traumatic, as many  learning situations are-educational theorists to the contrary. The   hour   or  so  the  student spends  each  week in  the  office of  his  mentor may  mean   the   difference between  beginning  to  educate  himself   and  sinking   per­ manently into  the  easier  and  more  immediately attractive  training programmes he  is experiencing elsewhere.  My  own  belief  is that   a  student who  shows  some  promise  should  be kept  writing until  it is apparent  his  personality and  ingrained sensitivities  cannot support the  kind  of disciplines writing demands. Literary his­ tory  shows  us that  some  have  been  able  to write great  works  at  twenty-one, but it  is more  usual  to find  authors achieving greatness  a decade or  two later.  I, for one,  do  not  want  to take  the  chance that a late bloomer  will be killed off by the  kind  of  monolithically conformist  welfare  society  we  have  developed   in  the  twentieth century.
This  brings  us to the  question  of worth.  The  academic complains that  creative writing  is not  a discipline. The  older  generation of writers  complains that  work­ shops are  a waste  of time.  I suspect  they are,  in the  end,  saying  the same thing: writing  is a God-given gift;  why try to teach it? The  implication  also resident here  is that  the  writer  is God-protected and  slightly superhuman. He will  write  what­ ever the  odds.  Let  us look  at  some facts.  Canada has  two  cultures: French and English.   The  English-speaking Canadian  has  little  literature  to  speak   of,   no theatre and  no cinema. This  is a culture dedicated to our  perversion  of the Amer­ ican  dream which  seems  to  say  that   every  log  cabin  should   house  a  potential statesman and  every stump ranch a possible Faulkner. Obviously, this is not  true,

BASTARD BOHEMIA



and  because of it we assume ourselves to be a second class people. That is not true either. There  are Canadian  artists and craftsmen  all over the world, singing, dancing, directing, acting, writing, painting, to the greater glory of other cultures. We  have  refused  them  patronage.  The  result is that  today  there  is literally  no audience here for our writing, our theatre or our cinema. In Quebec on the other hand,  culture  has  always  enjoyed patronage. The   National  Film  Board  has allowed a cinema  to begin flourishing there;  government  prizes and grants  have given  the  kind  of  leadership  that  has  resulted  in  public  support  for  literature and  the  theatre.  Soon,  I  should  imagine, some of  the  arts  in  Quebec  will be nearly self-sustaining.
But, it is pointed out, Quebec is a closed society, a culture  that will die without forced feeding. I wonder  if  the effect of the facts of English-speaking  Canadian culture  is much  different. The  worth of patronage  of any sort at this time seems obvious. The  worth  of any  programme  designed  to  foster  writing  of any  kind is  unquestionable.   And  the  worth  of  a  creative  writing  workshop  within  the UDiversity community  is three-fold:  it encourages writers in a culture  which has not produced a public to encourage him; it produces, over the years, an influential audience  made up of former students;  and it acts as a focus of interest in writing within  the larger community,  which in turn, will help produce  a wider and more receptive  audience.
One  more question remains:  the question of the validity of the Creative Writ­ ing Degree. It is a question that could only arise out of a training-oriented society. A degree should be a badge proclaiming a student  educated  rather  than trained. It  should  be  a  prize for excellence and  not  a  piece of paper  stating  the  world owes the  holder  a  living. The  creative  writing  graduate is not  trained; but  he may, in the end, be the better man because of it. In  any event, there seems little harm in giving a man a degree for doing something original. We have been giving them  for  years  to students  who have done  absolutely  nothing  original. If some department head  mistakes it for a degree in English-well, caveat  emptor  -he may find he has hired an individual  mind.
It  is obvious, then,  that  the writer does not need  a degree, any more than  the musician, the painter or the actor. What he needs is a place in which to apprentice as a writer, a place where he can have the time and  the leisure to develop, inde­ pendent  of the  pressures of our incredible society. The  Creative  Writing Depart­  ment  is an  innovation,  a  startling  one  both  to  the  academic  and  the  old-line writer.  It  seems to insult the status  quo  rather  than  simply  upset  it. Yet it is a necessary thing,  I believe, or it would not have rooted  and grown so quickly and

42

BASTARD BOHEMIA



tenaciously in so short a time. I believe, too, that the pressure for creative courses in  general  and  writing  courses in  particular  will only become  more  widely felt as time passes. Gradually,  for good or ill, as it is in the U.S.A., so will the campus in Canada become the place to learn to teach oneself to write. And -barring a complete  take-over  of  the  university by the  business mind -the  emerging,  the journeyman,  and  even the emeritus author  will find the university a place where interest in his work and his coaching abilities will always be resident. As his wel­ come grows and  his students  flourish it will seem neither strange  nor illegitimate that  Canadian writers  work on Canadian campuses within independent depart­  ments dedicated  to writing  poetry, prose and  drama.
Canada has had small success in producing a worthwhile body of writing under the aegis of commercial  enterprise  and  physical bohemia.  Perhaps  the time has come to accept  the fact of patronage  and  encouragement  offered by universities as a likely means of achieving a reasonable interest in our own writers and  their writing.













43


CANADIAN HISTORICAL FICTION FOR CHILDREN

A Survey






Sheila A. Egoff









ITIS  A WRY coMMENTARY  on the state of Canadian historical fiction for children  that  a consideration  begins with  the most basic question:   Is it historical fiction at all? Historical fiction is surely nothing less than the imagina­  tive  recreation  of the  past. The  good  historical  novel involves  the  reader  in  a bygone  era,  dramatically   and  emotionally.  Such  a  recreation  of  the  past  must depend  on a nice balance  between the contending  pulls of  imagination and  au­ thenticity. Accuracy is important, for, like all "adjectival novels", historical fiction depends in large part for its appeal on the facts which it embodies. Put vegetation on the  moon and  science fiction becomes only fiction. The  historical  novel need not  represent  quite  wie es eigentlich  gewesen  sei, but  plausibility is essential.
Even more necessary is the writer's evocative skill. No conscientious accumula­
tion of data itself can create the conviction which a successful historical novel demands. Only invention can bring the reader to an identification with the past, living it rather  than  studying it.
The   artistic  problems  inherent   in  the  historical  novel  are  compounded   in
the  works  intended  for  children.  Events  must  be  more  closely winnowed  and sifted;   character   more  clearly  delineated,   but  without  condescension  or  over­ simplification. The  child must be moved rather  quickly into  the consciousness of another  time and  his imagination  immediately  stirred to it. Because the child has greater  need for self-identification with a hero than  has an  adult,  the  past must

44

HISTORICAL FICTION



become the  present  and  the  present  the  past to such  a degree  of intimacy  that entry  from  one to  the other  passes almost unnoticed.  All this takes more rather than  less talent.
It  is against  these standards of historical fiction -the  standards exemplified
by Hope  Muntz  and  Rosemary  Sutcliff in England,  Zoe Oldenbourg in France, Esther  Forbes in the  United  States-that Canadian achievement must be measured.  Only  a misplaced  patriotism  can take comfort  from  the  comparison.
For  Canadian historical fiction for children has, by and  large,  been a failure.
Its  virtues have  been manifest  in the reporting of history;  its failings have been literary.  Canadian writers may take full credit for the conscientious and accurate assemblage of dates, names  and  events. But their plots are manipulated and  the characters  they invent  are papier-mache.  They recount the past, but they seldom recreate it. They seem to have decided to parcel out so much history and so much narrative,   and  they  have  commonly  weighted  the  parcel  in  favour  of history. How they love to teach it-not only dates and places, but how to prepare pem­ mican,  how  to  make  candles,  how  to tan  a deer hide,  how to construct  a  Red River  cart,  all interesting  in  themselves but  misplaced  in  the  pages of a  novel.
Olive  Knox's  The   Young   Surveyor  is typical  of  this  pedagogical  approach. It  is based  on  the  Jarvis  survey  for  the  Canadian  Pacific  Railway  in  British Columbia  in  I875-85.  A seventeen-year-old  boy accompanies  Jarvis  and  learns surveying from him. The  reader  perforce learns it too, since the first two chapters consist  of  little  more  than  questions  and  answers on  the  subject.  The  Young Surveyor  represents most of the faults to which its genre is liable. Dismiss it then as an  individual  mistake?  Alas, no. For sales appeal  is not synonymous with in­ trinsic merit. Diluted  history of the Young  Surveyor type has its market,  and thus its own  raison-d'etre. Such  markets  are best exploited by standardized  products. Understandably then,  the  most recent trend  in Canadian  historical  fiction is for books to be commissioned by publishers and written to a formula. Formula  books are  designed  to constitute  part  of a series-such  as the  "Buckskin  Books" and the  "Frontier Books". Not  that  the  series link is in itself  necessarily damaging.  Arthur  Ransome's  Swallows and Amazons, Edith Nesbit's The Bastable Children, the Narnia  books of C. S. Lewis, the Eagle of the Ninth group  by Rosemary Sut­ cliff-all  these "author-series" books show that  their  originators  had  so much to say that  their  joy and  activity spilled over into another  book.
The  Canadian  "publisher-series" books, however, read  as if specific data  had been fed into  a computer.  Each  book is by a different  author,  but the similarity of their  instructions  is clearly  reflected in the  result. The  formula  seems to call

45

HISTORICAL FICTION



for the following ingredients:  history must be deadly  accurate; history must take precedence  over  fiction;  don't   narrate-just  report  event after event   after event;  don't  worry  about  style or characterization; limit  the  vocabulary  to the number  specified by educationists as normative  for the age group.
The   Buckskin  Books, the  publisher  would   have   us  believe, are   "exciting stories for  younger  readers, tales of action  and  adventure set against  the  back­ ground  of rousing events in Canadian history. They  are books full of  lively inci­ dent  that  provide children with a wide and wonderful  variety of  good reading." Against these claims may be placed the following analysis. Each book consists of no  more  than   I 22  pages and  no  less than   I I 3· The  vocabulary is stringently limited: except for the proper names, the words are those derived from the text­ books produced  for the age group. In each book  (ten  have been published since
I g6 I ) , the story line is a thin thread of Canadian pseudo-history with fiction lying uneasily amid  the fact. They  have been prepared  for children  eight  to ten  years of age, presumably  on the assumption  that  fairy  tales and  fantasy  are no longer proper  fare.
If we take two typical books in this series we find that they have themes familiar in North  American  children's literature. In The  Great Canoe, by Adelaide Leitch, a  little  Indian boy  attaches  himself to a  famous  explorer;  in  Father  Gabriel's Cloak,  by  Beulah  Garland  Swayze, a white  girl  is captured   by Indians.  These are  young  heroes with whom the reader  can  identify  himself, the settings of the novels are authentic, and in The  Great Canoe, there are convincing  descriptions of  Indian tribal  beliefs, customs  and  rituals.  Less successful are  the  style and characterization. In  The  Great Canoe there are frequent  lapses into comic book vocalisms:   "Ai-ee!  Pffah!  YI-i-ee !",  while the  method  of bringing  Champlain down to a young child's level is to write, "Champlain's face fell. 'Don't you think I was rather  clever in the woods'?, he asked disappointedly."
The  degree of over-simplification is seen in such paragraphs as this from Father Gabriel's  Cloak:   "She  was a quiet  girl, small  for  her  age  and  dark.  Madame Lemieux  had  been worried about  her that sununer. She had  had a fever, so they had  cut  her  dark  hair close to her  head.  But by early September  she was much better."  The  best books in this series are those with little or no attempt  to establish a  definite  period  in  history, such as Catherine Anthony  Clark's  The  Man  with Yellow  Eyes and  Benham's The  Heroine of Long  Point. But the overall impres­ sion of the series remains that  they are  designed  for  an  uncritical  market,  with little else to recommend  them than  their "Canadian content". No one denies the need for Canadian historical fiction, particularly in the schools, but the question

HISTORICAL FICTION



is whether Canadian history,  Canadian literature or  Canadian children are  well served  by such  baldly  commercial products.
One  has to admit  that  there  are few better  books in their own class with which to compare the  Buckskin  Books. Historical fiction for the eight  to ten age group  is certainly   difficult   to  write.   Yet  there  are  enough   good  examples to  carry  the point,  such  as  The   Emperor  and  the  Drummer  Boy  by  Ruth Robbins, The Matchlock  Gun  by Walter Edmonds, and  The  Courage of Sarah Noble by Alice Dalgleish.   Each  of  these  takes  a single  incident  and   tells it simply,  but  drama­ tically;   each   of  them  is  thrilling enough   to  carry  the  unusual  words  with  the simple ones.
The   Frontier Books  exemplify   the  deficiences  of  the  "formula story"  at  the older  age  level.  Described  by  the  publisher   as  historical   novels,  they  are  com­ pletely  based  in  history  and  no  fictional  characters of  any  consequence  appear in  them.  Typical of  this series is  fohn  Rowand, Fur-Trader, by Iris Allan.  It is the story  of an  actual fur-trader who left his home in  Montreal as a boy of four­  teen  to spend  his  days  with  the  Northwest  Company. We  follow  his rather un­ eventful  life  until  he  dies at  the  age  of sixty-two. The  outstanding happening is the  amalgamation of the  Northwest Company with  the  Hudson's Bay Company (an  event  which  most adults will recall, without excitement, as thoroughly enough  covered   in  textbooks). In  similar   vein  is  Horseman in  Scarlet, by  John   W. Chalmers,  recounting  the   career   of  the  famous  Sam   Steele  of  the  Northwest Mounted Police.  The  book  is a mere  refurbishing of facts:

"Why  is it called  the  Dawson  Road,  Sergeant  Major?" Sam asked. Coyne was unable  to  answer  that  question,  but  Ensign Stewart  Mulvey  could.  "Dawson  is the name of an engineer  who laid it out a few years ago", he explained.  "It really isn't  a  road;  it's  more  of a  trail  where  a road could  be built.  It roughly follows the old  trade  route  of the  Nor'westers. It starts at  Prince  Arthur's Landing,  near Fort  William,  and  follows  the  Kaministikwia River west  and  north  past  the Kakabeka  Falls to the Junction of the Shebandowan."
"Then  west to the Matawin  and Oskandagee Creek", Big Neil continued. "From
there past the end of Kashabowie  Lake and along the Windigoostigwan  Lake and some other  waters  to the  Maligne  River."


One  feels sorry  that  Sam  asked  the question.
Their evident  dullness  aside,  the plethora of factual  information in the Frontier Books  raises  doubts as to  whether they  are  even  seriously  intended as  fiction. Perhaps it is fairer to see them  simply as an attempt to make  history  more  palat-

47

HISTORICAL FICTION



able,  just as the rules of  arithmetic  may be more easily learned  when set to some rhyme.  The  Frontier   Books seem  to say, in  effect,  that  a  child  would  not  be interested  in  reading  a purely factual  account  of say, La  Salle's life, but  might be  induced  to  swallow  the  intellectual  pill  of  history  or  biography  when  it  IS sweetened by a slight coating of fiction.




Is
Much  biography  appearing  today  for both  children  and  adults  is overcast  with fiction. The  best ones, even for children, use the fictional element cautiously, such as Geoffrey Trease's  Sir Walter  Raleigh, where  conversation  is kept to a  mini­ mum  and  where  there  is some  historical  evidence  for  such  conversation. But when reading  Sir Walter  Raleigh there is no doubt  that  one is reading biography.  History, biography,  historical fiction should be used to reinforce one another,  not to  cause  confusion  between  fact  and  fiction.  With  the  advent  of the  Frontier  Books, Canadian authors  appear  to be missing the  advantages of fiction while depreciating  history.
Admittedly,  Canadian writers  have  a  harder  task  in  dealing  with  history as material  for  fiction  than  do  their  counterparts in  Great  Britain,  France  or the United  States.  Where  are Canada's revolutions, civil wars, medieval pageantries or "ages of kings"? Perhaps Canada, "the land of compromise", has had a history too underplayed  to  provide the conflicts that  form  the  basis for a good rousing tale.  It would  be  quite  a feat  to  write an  interesting  children's  story based  on Baldwin  and  Lafontaine's  theory of responsible government.
Yet, however  valid these excuses, the range  of historical  topics represented  in Canadian children's  literature  still seems extraordinarily narrow  and  the  treat­ ment  of them  unnecessarily bland. The  choice of themes, for example,  is almost invariably  obvious:  either the subjects that  the textbooks label as "important" or those  which  have  their  colour  already  built-in:  life  with  the  Indians,  the  fur trade,  the  Rebellion  of  1837,  the  Caribou   Gold  Rush,  appear  over  and  over again. Against this heavy prepronderance can be set only a few exceptions which show the fresh resources that  can be discovered  by the exercise of ingenuity  and originality:  John  Hayes' tales of the Selkirk Settlers and of the Fishing Admirals of Newfoundland; Thomas  Raddall's  account  based  on the  attempted revolt in Nova Scotia in  I776;  Marion  Greene's effective use of the turbulent Ottawa of the  I82o's  as setting  for her Canal  Boy.

HISTORICAL FICTION



The  rest is almost silence, and of events after the Riel Rebellion there is nothing at  all.  Many  episodes in  our  history,  both  great  and  small,  have  as  yet  been ignored.  Where  are  the  books based on such themes as the flood of immigration or the Fenian  raids?
Even  more  puzzling is the  authors'  self-imposed limitation  of pitch. There  is no  reason  to  believe  that  Canadian  children  are  uniquely  appreciative   of the virtues of restraint,  but those who write for them prefer gentility to gusto. Even so competent  a novelist as John  Hayes almost never exploits the conflict inherent in his well-chosen subjects. His Land Divided, for example, is about the Acadians, tragic  victims in  a  war  that  settled the fate  of empires. But  no need  is felt for emotion  or  taking  sides. Give the  young hero a father  who is an  English  army officer and  a mother  who is Acadian. Have Michael's Acadian  cousin Pierre even help in the search for Michael's  father  when the latter is captured  by the French. In  tum,  of course, Michael's  father  will kindly and courteously help his Acadian relatives live well in the foreign town to which they are banished. So well, in fact, that  the impression is left that  they will be far better off there any way. Michael's mother  is no  dramatic problem,  either;  she takes the  oath  of loyalty  to  King George. Why in the world did Longfellow become so emotional about Evangeline?
Even in Hayes'  Treason  at York, blandness and impartiality set the prevailing tone. The  issues would seem to force a choice -after  all, Canada was invaded in the War of 1812-but Hayes somehow enables hero and reader to escape involvement.  A neighbour's  brother  lives across the border, so the hero bears no sense of  enmity  to  the  American  adversary.  In  many  ways the  book is a  plea against  fighting  with  our  neighbour.  This  is admirable  morality  but  does not satisfy the claims of either entertainment or historical truth.  Hayes assuages feel­ ings when it would have been more valid and dramatically  effective to strengthen  them.
Only in his book on the Rebellion of 1837, Rebels Ride  at Night,  does Hayes finally come  round  to committing  a hero;  the  protagonist  definitely takes sides with  Mackenzie,  though  characteristically  enough  more  for  personal  than  for political  reasons.  This  clearness  of  identification  makes  Rebels  Ride  at  Night perhaps  the  most satisfactory  of Hayes' books and  certainly  far  better  than  the other  two  books on  the same subject,  Emily Weaver's The  Only  Girl and  Lyn Cook's  Rebel  on  the  Trail.  In  these two novels, the  Rebellion  is seen from  the periphery  by  young  heroines.  While the families in  both  books are  alarmed  by the mild attachment of an elder son to Mackenzie's cause, the Rebellion  itself is



49

HISTORICAL FICTION



treated  as a  pointless scheme  of a foolish few. The  authors  imply  that  a little more patience and equanimity  would have desirably obviated  the whole incident.
In  the light of the foregoing discussion, it comes as no surprise  that  Canadian historical fiction gingerly sidesteps the greatest issue in Canadian history-the conflict  between  French  and  English. The  five books for  children  dealing  with the events culminating  in the battle of the Plains of Abraham and beginning with G. A. Henty's  With Wolfe  in Canada  are all by British or American  authors. It seems  as  though  for  Canadians   the  emotional  implications  of  this  theme  can hardly  be  toned  down,  and  that  therefore  it  is thought   a subject  best avoided altogether.  At the same time, the scarcity of material  on the  age of exploration and  the  French-Indian wars seems beyond  explanation. Only  three  Canadian authors  (Fred  Swayze in Tonty  of the Iron Hand, Adeleine Leitch in The  Great Canoe,  and  Beulah Garland  Swayze in Father Gabriel's Cloak)  have dealt  with this period. Even the story of our great heroine, Madeleine  de Vercheres, beloved in  the  textbooks,  has  been  left  to our  American  compatriots  in such  books as Madeleine  Takes  Command   by  Ethel  C.  Brill and  Outpost   of  Peril by  Alida Malkus.
The  overall  impression  that  Canadian writers  withdraw  from  the emotional impact  of historical  fact is strengthened  when  one examines  the two really out­ standing  historical  novels for  children.  Both of these-Roderick  Haig-Brown's  The  Whale  People and Edith Sharp's  Nkwala- might indeed more properly be described  as anthropological  novels. They  deal, not with recorded  events or with personages from  history, but with a social setting no more specifically defined in time and  place than  British Columbia  "before  the white man  came". This is not to say that  the narratives are not based on solid historical research. The historicity is evident, but it is never obtrusive;  fact underlies every fictional event but never dictates its pattern.
Nkwala  and  The  Whale  People also offer some useful lessons in design. Both employ a short time span-Nkwala a few months and The  Whale  People about two  years. By contrast,  most other  children's  historical  novels, with  an  "other­ directed" structure  imposed  by history book or  publisher,  attempt  to  cover too long  a  period. Fred  Swayze's Tonty  of  the  Iron  Hand, for  example,  chronicles twenty-six years of Tonty's  experiences; Olive Knox's  Black Falcon twenty years of a white  boy's life with the  Indians.  And  most others  not  much  less. This  in­ sensitivity to the need for dramatic unity is also manifested  in the  pervasive ten­ dency to complicate  plots and  proliferate  details. The  typical  novelist is likely to march  his hero from fort to fort, from battle  to battle in such confusing itinerary

50

HISTORICAL FICTION



that parts of the book must often be re-read in order to determine  what is actually taking place.
Simplicity  goes  with  artistic  integrity.  Nkwala  and  The   Whale   People  are
again  the obvious examples.  John  Craig's  The  Long Return  is another.  This is the story of a white  boy captured  by Ojibway  Indians.  He  lives with  them  for several years and  becomes fond of them. When  he makes his escape, he does so almost  with  reluctance. The  plot is exciting  but it  is also simple.  And  there  is not a date in the book; Craig takes ample opportunity  to concentrate on character and style and the development  of credibility. So too with John  Hayes' Dangerous Cove.  The  Fishing  Admirals  on  their  yearly trip to  the  fishing banks  of  New­ foundland  put  into  force their  charter  to drive the settlers away from  the coast. The  two  heroes  help  to  oppose  and  ultimately  to  defeat  them.  A  simple  and credible  plot, the sharp  focus produced  by a short  time span,  and  a  fast-paced narration combine  to  achieve  a successful integration  of history and  invention.






IN THE   FINAL ANALYSIS, John  Hayes  and  The   Dangerous Cove may indeed serve to represent the typical virtues of good Canadian historical fiction for children.  The  Whale  People and Nkwala are far better but they stand well apart  from  the rest;  probably superior writing is always sui generis. For the group  as a whole, the claims must be much more modest, but nonetheless hardly negligible.  Canadian  children  will learn  some history from  these  novels. They will find  considerable  variety  in  the settings;  in their  overall  range  from  New­ foundland  to British Columbia  these books well portray how "the  east-west dream does mock the north-south  fact".  They give some sense of the vastness of  Canada  and  its varied scenes. They  succeed often enough in giving the lie to the premise that  Canadian history need be dull. There  can really be no despair for historical fiction in Canada when  it can  produce as subtle and  sly a view of  history as is offered in James  McNamee's My  Uncle  foe,  ( Ig62). The  protagonist  only re­ members  Riel  as a  dinner  guest  in  his father's home;  the  Rebellion  is never actually  encountered. Yet  both  the  man  and  his  movement  are  fully  realized. A  wealth  of meaning  is conveyed in  brief  compass  ( 63  pages), and  a door  is opened  on the  privacy of history.
Canadian history is not easy to dramatize.  If it does not conform  to the usual pattern  of bloodshed  and  victory,  dynamic  personality  and  odd  characters,  its

HISTORICAL FICTION



interpreters in  fiction  have  perhaps  the  burden  of  developing  new  forms.  But even so, adventure  may appear  in many guises and a story is every bit as exciting whether  it has  a  battle  between knights in  armour  or  a skirmish in  the  Arctic forest, a boy adrift on the Sargasso Sea or wrecked on the shore of Lake Superior. Good historical fiction will impart  at least the distinctive flavour of Canada's historical  development  and  conceivably a more  universal  meaning  is also within reach.  The  major  revelation  of historical  fiction  for  children  may  well be  the unfolding  of man's steady search for order.  Perhaps  Canada, above all countries, has this to offer to its children and to children  everywhere.


















52




chraaicle




LETTER	FROM LONDON

D. A.Cameron
ATA  CENTRAL  LONDON playground much frequented by
Cockney  mums  ("Cor stone  me, luv!  'ave  a go at  the gee-gee!"  a lithe  dark­
haired  young  mother  watched  my two-year-old son. Suddenly  she boosted him into  a swing and  pushed  him. When I came, she heard  my accent;  she asked if I  were an  American.
"A Canadian," I said, "from Vancouver. And you?"
"From  Regina.  Well, originally from Delisle, Saskatchewan."
Her  husband  is a  poet;  he works for  a  London  publisher.  They  came  after throwing  up graduate study at the University of Toronto. But not  just struggling poets come here;  several  established younger writers are currently  living in  and around  London.
The  longest stay in  England  has probably  been that  of Norman  Levine, who came in 1949 and  has been in England more or less ever since, chiefly in St. Ives, Cornwall.   Canada   Made   Me   ( 1958)   announced   his  disenchantment  with Canada, a country composed of "the throwouts, the rejects, the human  kickabouts from Europe", and  he seems established in England.  At the moment he is in Fredericton  as writer in residence at the University of New Brunswick, where he is working on a novel, his first since 1952, but  the brevity of his stay there may be underlined  by the  fact  that  his wife and  three  daughters have  remained  in Cornwall.  Yet  his roots  are  Canadian, and  as his most recent  book, One  Way Ticket  (I 96 I ) , shows, the short stories which have been his main output  in the last ten  years are often  set either in  Canada  or in the  artists'  colonies of  Corn­  wall;  the workaday  life of England  has drawn  little of his attention.
Mordecai  Richler  has lived in England  off and on for nearly fifteen years too, currently  in  Kingston-upon-Thames, a  market  town  that   preserves  its  own character  despite  its assimilation  into metropolitan London. Richler owns a hand-

53

LETTER FROM LONDON



some old  tree-shaded  house there:  does this mean  he regards  himself as settled in  England?  "I don't  really regard  myself as settled,"  he  replies,  but  he finds London  a pleasant  and convenient  place to live. He  visits Canada for about  six weeks most  years, and  last summer  he intended   to  make  his first  visit  to  the West, writing about  the Calgary Stampede  for an American  magazine,  but work on "a  new long novel, set in Canada  and  England" intervened.  Part  of the convenience  of living in London  is its centralization:  "Everything's in  London
-movies, TV,  radio,  publishers, magazines, everything."  For  a  writer  like Richler,  this centralization  is useful; he does a movie script  every year, and  an increasing  amount  of literary  journalism for  periodicals like the  New  Statesman and  Encounter. Would  he ever go back to Canada? Maybe;  he finds Montreal exciting and  Toronto increasingly agreeable,  but  on  the  whole  Canadian cities are too small to provide stimulating  people in the numbers  that  London  or New York can  afford,  and  they are  much  more difficult  places in  which  to  make  a living. But  he finds  himself unable  to  write  novels of English  life. "One  is  al­ ways an outsider  here, or at least I am,"  he says, "I see things from the outside, I wasn't  brought  up  here. I  don't  know what goes on in an Englishman's home."  Margaret   Laurence  agrees-"Anyway,  there are   plenty of  good  English novelists who can describe it from the inside" -but unlike the other  two  novel­ ists she does not find it easier to earn  here. She does not do TV  or  movies, and she has only done the odd book review for BBC radio.  Most of her work appears  in the  United  States  and  Canada.  Mrs. Laurence  has  recently  been  writing  for Holiday  and  Maclean's,  and she has  just finished  her  third  novel. It is a short
novel set, like The  Stone  Angel, in a small prairie  town-"the last one  that'll
be set there.  I finally got out of that  town."
Where  she  got  to  is a  comfortable  home  in  a  village  in  Buckinghamshire about  twenty-five  miles from  London.  She  does suspect  she  might  go  back  to Canada  in a few years, but after bouncing from  Winnipeg  to London  to Somali­ land  to Ghana  to Vancouver  to London  to Buckinghamshire  she feels-under­ standably -inclined  to stop for a while.
A  certain  catholicism  about  the  literary  atmosphere   in  Britain  strikes  Mrs. Laurence  as beneficial, especially for  a  writer  from  a small  literary  community like that  of  Canada. "You  want  your  novels to  be  read  because  they're  good novels, not  because  they're  Canadian  novels. And  here -all  right,  you're  a Canadian, so  what?  The  question  is, are  your  novels  worth  reading?  I'm  in­ terested  in  what  can  be done with  the  novel form;  whatever  I write  is  always going to be Canadian, because I'm  a Canadian. But that's  not the main  point."

54

LETTER FROM LONDON



Yet Canadian opinion  matters  to her:  "There's nothing  like the reaction  of your own people. They  were there, they know what you're talking about  and  whether you've caught  it." The  cosmopolitanism  of London,  the escape from  provincial­ ism, seems to be a genuine attraction to most of the Canadians who have chosen to try their  hands  here.'  Norman  Levine feels that for anyone from  Canada who intends  to be a writer,  the English experience is a very valuable one;  it "makes him realize quickly that  he's playing in the big league and  that  if  he's any good he's got to take on the big boys."






AFTER ALL THIS,   it  is surpnsmg   to  discover  that,  aside from the novels of Mazo de Ia Roche, whose complete works seem to be in print, Canadian books are hard  to find and  little known. The  former  literary  editor of the  Spectator, Ronald  Bryden,  who spent  his teens in  Canada and  studied  at the University  of Toronto, says that  too few Canadian books of any  kind make their way to Britain,  that  Canadian literature  is in need of an introduction here, and  that  such  writers  as Hugh  Maclennan   and  Earle  Birney certainly  deserve more attention here than  they have yet received, though  Levine and  Richler  are known through  their work in English magazines. Again, it is hard  to believe that the Tamarack Review is not in any of the libraries of London  outside  the British Museum  and  Canada House, but I have never found it elsewhere. Even current Canadian best-sellers seem to be unavailable  unless they are simultaneously  pub­ lished here:  I had  to have a copy of Simma  Holt's Terror  in  the  Name  of  God air-mailed  from  Toronto   when  I  needed  it  quickly. And  even  good  academic libraries,  like those  of  University  College and  the  University  of  London,  have very few Canadian books.
The  absence of Canadian books from  the  University of London  Library  can
be partly  explained  by the British view of Canadian literature  simply as a  part of Commonwealth literature, and by the increasingly strong development  of Commonwealth literature  studies at the University of Leeds, rather  than  at Lon­ don. The  School of English at  Leeds offers a seminar course which is  each  year taught   by  a  Visiting  Lecturer  from  the  Commonwealth; in  1964-65  Carl  F. Klinck  taught   Canadian literature.  Various  members of  the  School  have  con­ nections  with  Australia,   New  Zealand, India and   parts  of  Africa;   Professor Douglas  Grant   has  taught   at  Toronto   and  edited  the  University  of  Toronto

55

LETTER FROM LONDON



Quarterly. In 1964 the University of Leeds also held the first Commonwealth literature  conference;  a number  of the  papers  read  then  have  been collected in a new book, Commonwealth Literature, ed. John  Press (Heinemann Educational Books, 2 5 s.) . In addition, the School of English has established the new ]ournal of Commonwealth Literature,  edited  by Arthur  Ravenscroft; and  last fall  Pro­ fessor A. N. Jeffares chaired  a steering committee  which set up The Association for  Commonwealth  Literature  and  Language  studies,  to  encourage  study  and research in these areas.
The  overpowering  feature  of  London  at  the  moment  is the  pervasive  sense that as the world centre for literature and scholarship in English it is dying. In California  a few  years ago a story was current   about  the  member  of  a  major state  university's  English  department going  to  London  on  sabbatical;  his  col­ leagues  begged  him  to  rush  word  of  the  coming  fashions  in  scholarship  and criticism.  They  shortly  received  a  wire:   DONNE  FALLING.  POPE   STEADY.   BUY  TENNYSON  NOW. Again, when T. S. Eliot set out  to make himself a literary style­ setter sixty years ago, he left the U.S.  and  settled in  London.  It is that  kind of power  that  London  is losing. Obviously the  English  universities, the  great  Eng­ lish libraries  and  the  London  publishing  houses will continue  to  be  influential, but  increasingly the fashions in literature  and  scholarship  are  being set in  New York.  Prominent   North  Americans  still come  to  London:  last  winter  I heard lectures by Northrop  Frye, Lionel and  Diana  Trilling  and  Cleanth  Brooks. But they do not come like pilgrims;  they come to visit, not  to stay, and  the writers, students  and  academics  who  are  here full-time  are  unanimous that  the  future belongs to America.
You hear it everywhere. At a July 1st party Canadian academics from various disciplines-English, German,  art history, psychology, philosophy, political science, economics -agreed  without dissent that  the lead in their subjects either had  been or soon would be taken by the Americans.  "I can  afford the luxury of a  British  PhD," said  one  ambitious  young  political  scientist,  "only  because  I took  the  M.A.  at  Chicago."  When  you  ask  Mordecai   Richler  whether   New York  will eventually  displace London  as the  centre  of the  literary  world in  the same  way  that  it  has  become  the  centre  for  medicine  and  science,  he  replies flatly, "New  York is the centre  of the literary  world"  and  goes on to  point out that even leading British intellectual  periodicals like Encounter  are now to a considerable  extent  controlled and  edited by Americans,  and  that  British fiction, for example, is wallowing in the proletarian  trough  through  which North Ameri­ can  fiction passed thirty  years ago.

LETTER FROM LONDON



Things  are shifting  this way for the simplest, crassest of reasons:  the force of money. Sentimentalism  aside, culture can to some extent be bought, and the Americans  are  buying it. Paintings  and sculpture flow steadily across the Atlantic, the  most important recent  purchase  being Norton  Simon's  acquisition  of  Rem­ brandt's portrait  of  his son;  the  crusty  reactions of  the  London  daily  press to Simon's  difficulties in  bidding  at  Christie's  revealed  the  resentment  such  pur­ chases  often  evoke.  (Margaret  Laurence  noticed  the  same  resentment  in  the British reviews of Saul  Bellow's Herzog:  "I wonder if it  didn't  get an  unusually rough time here  just because it was so well received in the States.") Analogously, wealthy American  university libraries with no shortage of space  are snapping  up the rare books, the manuscripts,  the holograph letters. Scholars follow the librar­ ies; and if you total the original appropriations to establish the libraries of all the new British universities put  together, you arrive at an amount  less than  the Uni­ versity of California  alone spends on its normal acquisitions  in  a  year.
An  interesting  variation  on  this  purchasing  is the  hot  pursuit  of  writers  by American  university libraries wanting  to buy their manuscripts.  Many  writers - Margaret   Laurence   among  them-have  been approached  by  Boston  Univer­ sity;  but  the  fabled  institution  is the  University of Texas,  which  has  acquired the manuscripts  of Norman  Levine's Canada  Made  Me  and  One  Way  Ticket, and  which has been extremely active in purchasing  manuscripts  of recent books. The  enterprise  is almost  sure  to be worthwhile;  a  university  can  accumulate  a large collection of manuscripts  at relatively low prices when  the writers are  just becoming  prominent,  and  even  one  important   manuscript  could  conceivably repay a fairly large  programme.  The  whole thing has a Texan  flavour  about  it, and  it has given rise to a number  of wry jokes: someone has  remarked,  for in­ stance,  that  young men  now write novels not for the royalties, but  so that  they can sell the manuscript  to the University of Texas.
An  Indian   with  a  wide  acquaintance from  all over  the  Commonwealth  re­ marks that  Canadians are  much  more critical of Britain than Australians, Indians  and  others,  much  more  aware  of the  power of America  and  of  the  dramatic  changes in human  life that  technology is bringing. Perhaps  the Canadian experi­ ence of what  tends to be felt as American  domination  is the  prototype  of what now  faces  Britain  and  will eventually  face  countries  like  Australia  as well. If Canadians are  unusually  aware  of the spread  of U.S. influence,  it  may  be that we are aware  of its advantages as well as its costs:  certainly  we are  less patient with squalor  and  inefficiency. There  can  be no  doubt  that  Britain  is becoming more  modern,  which  is perhaps  simply  another  term  for  "American":  super-

57

LETTER FROM LONDON



highways are  modern if you like them,  American if you don't. As Britain is ab­ sorbed,  culturally  as  well  as  politically   and   economically, into   the  American empire, the sensation  of a North  American in  London must  be rather  analogous to that  of a  Roman in Athens: it is a charming place,  and  you can  acquire all kinds of cultural and  intellectual souvenirs; you can learn so much that it changes  your  character. But  for better  or worse  you have  left  the  future  at  home.


1  I am  eager  to acknowledge the help of many  people in preparing this Letter,  but especially the candor  and generosity of Mrs. Laurence, Mr. Levine and Mr. Richler. My only regret is that  space allows me to include  so few of their very thoughtful comments.

















ss



review articles




A FATAL MISTAKE
 


Lf. .lkf.


NORMAN  SHRIVE,  Charles  Mair:  Literary  Nationalist, University  of Toronto  Press.
$7-50.


PROFESSOR  SHRIVE'S   BIOGRA­ PHICAL  and   critical  study   of  a  famous  Canadian  poet  of  the  last  century   pre­ sents  us with  a  kind  of  Platonic  ideal  of what   such   a  work   ought  to  be.  It is scholarly,  copious,  fully documented, well written, objective  without  being  dry  or
evasive,  and  reasonably critical. It stands
with  Chittick's Haliburton and  Klinck's Wilfred  Campbell  as  our   most   perfect examples of a very respectable genre,  the literary biography. In   Professor  Shrive's book (as in  Klinck's but not in Chitticks) we  see  the  form   at  its  purest.  The  sub­ ject   is  so  mediocre  an   artist   that   the scholarly   biographer is set  free  to  exer­ cise his craft  under  what  might  be called "laboratory conditions". The  result  is a model  for  future  biographers  who  have the   good   fortune  to  find   a   more   sig­ nificant  subject-a  Lampman, say, or  a Pratt.
I  do  not  intend to  suggest  by all  this
that   Mair   did   not   have   an   interesting career   or  that   Professor   Shrive   has  not made  an  interesting and,  indeed,   a  use­ ful  book of it.  However, I  would  like to have   seen   the  biographer   disassociate himself   more   explicitly  from   the   myth that   Mair  has  any  major  significance  as a  poet  or  man  of  letters.  How  and  why such  myths  arise,  how  they  are  dissemi-
 nated,  and   why  they  persist:   this  is the real problem for the Canadian literary biographer to come to grips with. In the present   case   the    reader  is  left   pretty much  to speculate for himself on these matters   and   to  come  up  with  such  an­ swers  as  his  knowledge and   experience provide.
On  the  other   hand, it  may  be  urged
that   detachment is the  special  virtue  of this   kind  of  biography-the facts   are left   to  speak   for   themselves,   and   the reader  is skilfully invited  in as a sort of collaborator. Perhaps this is so, but the method   would   have  been  more  success­ ful  had  a  certain irony  been  allowed  to creep  in.  The   danger, of  course,  is that  the  Stracheyian  biographer  may  demon­ strate   an   unconscious  and    unmerited superiority  and   make  fun  of  his  victim from  a standpoint that  would  have  been utterly incomprehensible to the subject  or to  the  men  of  his  time.  This   Professor Shrive  never  does, and  it  is not  the  least of his merits.
Mair,  nevertheless, was  not  a very  at­
tractive   character  nor  a  very  consistent one. One cannot help being glad he isn't around  today.   "The  priests   Mair   con­ sidered   disloyal   because   they  were  Ro­  man  Catholics and  owed  allegiance only to  Rome.   As  French   Canadians   they

59

REVIEW ARTICLES



were  antipathetic to British  rule,  since it was  still   too   early,   he  felt,   to  expect loyalty  from  a  conquered race.  Orange­ ism,  however,   Mair   loftily   despised ...
'A  coarse  brawling  pack  of  vulgar  ruf­
fians  and  imposters,'  he  classified  them;
'God  help  Protestantism in  Canada if it has to be defended by that contemptible trash'."
On  July  1, r8gr   ("there was an  ironic date"), he  wrote   to  his  friend   and  ad­ mirer,   the  swashbuckling Col.  Denison:

To  Canadian literature I  have  given  more time  and  labor than it  deserves.  Canadians are   mainly  barbarians  and   consist,  ninety­ nine    out   of   one   hundred,  of   backs   and  stomachs. To   expect  our  polished  boors  to enjoy   art  in  any  of  its  developments is  too much.
I am  done   with   the  "Canadian  public," which   consists   of  mere cattle or  worse.  It will   take    a   hundred   years   to   lift    such swine   as  compose  it   out   of   the   ruts   and troughs  and   swills   they   delight  in ...

The  provacations for  this  testiness  were mainly  personal-family troubles,  finan­ cial  troubles,   imperceptive  reviews,  and wounded vanity.  The great  poetic  voice of  the  Canada  First   movement   and   of the  British  Protestant  West  felt  himself and   his  cause  alike  were  something less than  triumphant.
Earlier, when  he   had   been toiling
assiduously  to   bring his  masterpiece Tecumseh  to  a  conclusion   he  was  held up   by  frustration  and   nervousness   lest justice should  fail  in   Regina. "The opinion  of   the   best   people   here,"    he wrote   Denison   from   Windsor,   "is   that Riel   should   be   hanged  ... nothing  but hanging will  suit  the  right  public  mind of  Ontario."  He   complained  that   he could  not  "get  down  to work on Tecum­ seh- I  don't believe  I  shall  be  able  to do  much   until  after  ... that  hanging!" Mair, of course,  had  been  personally  in-

6o
 volved,  and  it  is the  story  of  his  adven­ tures  during the  Red  River  Insurrection of  r86g  and   of  his  involvement  in  the Canada  First   movement  that    has   the greatest  historical interest. It is clear  that whatever virtues  Mair  lacked, courage, energy,  and self-confidence were  not among   them.
The story  of  Mair's  literary career   is
-one hardly knows  what  adjectives to choose:   pathetic, instructive, heroic, mis­ guided, typical-each of  them   has  its application. In  a  sense, Mair,  like Heavy­ sege   and    Sangster  before   him  (and others  since) , was  the  willing  victim  of the  colonists'  desire  to  demonstrate that  they  could   produce a  poet  of  as good  a class as  those  of  the  old  world  and  who therefore must  write  in  the  language of the  old  world.  This  was  a fatal  mistake.
Mair's last  days, spent  as a kind of professional  "Old Poet," lionised  by J. L.
Garvin, Katherine  Hale,   Lome  Pierce, and  the  C.A.A.  generally, do more  credit to  the  old  man   himself  than   to  his  ad­ mirers.   If there    is  something   pathetic about  his  attempts  to  make   something out  of "the Futurists, the Obscurantists," and   the  new  poetry   of   Miss  Edith   Sit­  well,   there   was   a   wry   humour  in   his diatribes  against  "lady  litterateurs" and  the  Miss Crochets of the  time  and  some­ times  an  unexpected note  of humility, as
when   he  protested  in  a  letter   to  J.  L.
Garvin that  he was not "one  of Canada's greatest men  ... neither an  angel  nor  an evangel" but  really  "a  very unpretending old  fellow ... vain   enough   to   think   he has written something that  will live."
I do  not  need  to  repeat   what   I  have written elsewhere  in  praise  of a fine des­ criptive passage  in  Tecumseh  where his imagination  caught  fire  as  he  contem­ plated   the  vast  expansive of  the  western

REVIEW ARTICLES



wilderness.  These, and  a few verses from
"August", "The  Fireflies",   or  "Winter"
that   still  appear in  our  anthologies are
 all  that   is  left  of  the   "something that will live."
It is a sobering  thought.




TROIS OUVRAGES  SUR LE
QUEBEC

Jean-Guy Pilon


Quebec   States  her  case. Ed.  Frank  Scott  and  Michael  Oliver.   Macmillan. $1.95. HERBERT E. QUINN,  The  Union  Nationale. University  of Toronto Press. $2.95. THOMAS SLOAN, Quebec:  the Not-so-quiet  Revolution. Ryerson. $3.50.


L'EXPERIENCE  DE LIRE, en an­
glais  et  a Ia suite,  trois  ouvrages   recents
qui  portent sur  Ia  situation  politique   et
culturelle au  Quebec, vaut  d'etre tentee pour  un  lecteur de  langue franc;aise. Des evenements bien connus  paraissent ainsi tantot   eloignes,   tantot  plus  rapproches; des  attitudes  de   certains  hommes   poli­ tiques  prennent aussi des dimensions que I'on  ne  soupc;onnait pas.  Car,  pour  moi, tous  les ev,enements   dont  il  est  question  dans   ces  livres,  se  deroulent  habituelle­ ment   en  franc;ais,  si  je  puis  m'exprimer ainsi.  Or,  voici  que  Ia vie autour de moi est  decrite  dans  une  autre langue,   avec tout   ce  que  cela  suppose   d'adaptations necessaires-ces ouvrages s'addressent
quand  meme   a  des  lecteurs   de  langue
anglaise-mais aussi de distance. Je veux
dire que  je reagis de fac;on  un  peu differente quand je lis, traduits en anglais, des  articles de  Gerard Pelletier ou d'Andre Major. C'est  done,  pour  un  lec­ teur  de langue franc;aise, un depaysement assez considerable que de lire ces ouvrages  dont   je  m'empresse de  dire   qu'ils   sont remarquables.
 Le premier, intitule: Quebec States her case est un  recueil  d'articles parus sous les signatures Ies plus  diverses, dans  les journaux et  revues du  Quebec:  La Presse, Le  Devoir,  Cite   Libre,  Liberte, etc. S'y ajoutent aussi quelques discours d'hommes politiques, comme Jean Lesa,ge, Pierre Laporte et Daniel Johnson. Ces differents textes,  signes  par  Andre  Lau­ rendeau,  Gerard   Pelletier,  Leon   Dion,  Andre  Major et  plusieurs  autres, ont  ere reunis  par  Frank Scott  et  Michael Oliver
dont  on sait !'interet qu'ils  portent a tout
ce qui  se deroule  au  Quebec. La  traduc­ tion en anglais  a 'etc faite  par  une equipe de  specialistes.
Autre  fait  a considerer: ces articles  et
discours  ont  ete  choisis  a cause  de  leur clarte,  parce  qu'ils  s'encha.lnaient bien  Ies
uns aux autres et exprimaient ainsi plusieurs aspects, complementaires si on veut,  d'une pensee  qui  n'est  pas  toujours
facile  a  saisir  dans  sa  globalite; ils  ont
aussi  ete  groupes   dans   cet  ordre  parce
qu'ils  portent sur une periode  bien p11ecise de  I'histoire  du  Quebec, ce  que  les  edi­ teurs  appellent "the  years  of   unrest" et

6r

REVIEW ARTICLES


qui  vade l'hiver I96I  a l',ete I963.
Le  second  ouvrage, plus  considerable, est  un  ouvrage d'historien et  un ouvrage fort   bien  documente. En  intitulant   son livre The  Union Nationale, M. Herbert F.
Quinn a  voulu,  a travers  un  parti  poli­
tique qui fut puissant, l'Union Nationale, etudier plus  specialement !'evolution  des
idees  au  Quebec, de  I936  a  I960,  mais
aussi  a  travers  un   homme, Maurice
Duplessis,   juger   de   !'evolution  du  na­
tionalisme canadien-franc;ais.
Il faut  bien reconnaitre que durant presque   25 ans,  Maurice Duplessis  a ete non  seulement la figure  dominante de  la scene   politique  du   Quebec,  mais   qu'il a aussi  marque profondement tous les milieux  sociaux et  culturels, par  ses prejuges, ses  rancunes et  ses  haines,  ses mots  d'esprit et ses generosites  subites,  le patronage generalise et la corruption systematique.
M. Quinn etudie tous les aspects du regime  Duplessis, ses antecedents, ses lignes de force, ses moyens, sa "doctrine", et  ses consequences.
Ce  livre  sera  d'une tres  grande utilite
aux   chercheurs  et  aux  historiens,   car  il repose   sur   une   documentation  de   pre­ miere  main  extremement   variee   et abondante.  M.   Quinn   reussit  la   une bonne  synthese  de cette periode d'histoire.
Le  troisieme  ouvrage dont   je voudrais parler  ici   est   du   a  un   journaliste  de
Montreal, M.  Thomas Sloan,  qui  com­ prend   les situations et  sait  les  expliquer clairement. Son  livre  s'intitule:  Quebec, the  not-so-quiet  revolution.
Ce  petit  livre est excellent.  Avec beau-
 
coup de justesse et de nuances, M. Sloan decrit  les changements survenus  au  Que­ bec   depuis    I 960   et   trace    un   tableau general   de  la  situation  politique  auquel on   ne  peut   a  peu   pres  rien   reprocher. L'auteur est non seulement  bien informe, mais il est aussi bien  intentionne, et il est honnete.  S'il   ne   passe   pas  sous  silence l'immobilisme cree au Quebec par l'Union Nationale pendant 25 ans, il ne minimise  pas  non  plus  la  responsabilite des  Cana­ diens  anglais  dans  les troubles  actuels  et le  refus  de  plusieurs  d'entre eux de  juger du  Quebec sainement.
Qu'il s'agisse de la politique, de l'econo­ rrtie ou du nationalisme canadien-franc;ais, M. Sloan  voit clair  et  juste. Son  chapitre
consacre  au  clerge  et  a son  role  en  poli­
tique   est  cependant  un  peu  plus  faible. Par  contre, le  dernier  chapitre consacre a la Confederation est vraiment excellent. Passant  en  revue  les differentes solutions qui ont actuellement cours, M. Sloan en developpe  plus  specialement  une,   celle des  etats   associes.
Voila  un  petit  livre  qui  devrait etre genereusement distribue a travers  tout  le Canada anglais,  pour  que les lecteurs puissent  mieux  comprendre le Quebec et les exigences irreversibles des Canadiens franc;ais,  et  mieux   voir  le  Canada  dans son ensemble, d'un point  de  vue general. Car  c'est  un fait  que  le !'eveil du  Quebec et  la  dynamique qui  l'anime ont  permis a tous d'apercevoir nombre d'absurdites quand il ne s'agissait  pas  purement et simplement d'injustices flagrantes qu'on se plaisait  auparavant a nier.  Et  il parait que  tout  cela  ne  fait  que  commercer ...


A SEARCH  FOR  SENSIBILITY

William H. New


The  Book   of  Canadian  Prose:    Vol. 1. Early   Beginnings  to   Confederation.  ed.
A. J. M. Smith.  Gage. $6.oo.


NEW NATIONS EVERYWHERE can  expect,  in  establishing themselves,  to be  encountering  two   common  experi­ ences:   the   expansion and   development of   a  physical   environment,  and  the
development  of  satisfactory  social   rela­
tionships  between   indigenous and  immi­ grating peoples.  Their  ways  of   meeting  these situations-their  histories, in effect
-will reveal  their  differences. Their  in­ dividuality is based  on  an  approach  to a land  and  a relationship both  with  colon­  izing  and   neighbouring  countries,  and that 	basis  is  generally   quickly   estab­  lished.   But  often   it  generates  rebellious  or  self-protective  impulses   which   result in  independence  before  the  individuality has  itself   been   realized.   Individuality, moreover-an attitude to self and  a full habitation of  that  self-can  be a  much  more  positive  quality than   rebelliousness and,  as such, more difficult  to apprehend. Such,  at  least,  was  Canada's  experience. One  is  again  led  to a  recognition of this
by  the  selections   included  in  A.  J. M.
Smith's  recent   anthology, The  Book  of
Canadian  Prose.
This  volume  (No.  1: Early  Beginnings to Confederation) appears to  be the first of a three-volume series, planned as a companion  to   the  same editor's  The Book   of  Canadian  Poetry.    A  different sort  of  problem besets  it.  An  anthology of   poetry   must   choose   between    depth and   breadth  of   coverage,  and,  some­ times,  between   "representative" and
 "valuable" works.  An  anthology of short stories faces a similar choice. But a work which   avowedly   aims   to   illustrate  the "effect  of  geography, climate, and  poli­ tics upon  the  sensibility  of the  Canadian people"  must  choose  its  selections  essen­ tially  from  non-belletristic writings.  The  inherent  difficulty  in  this  lies in  the  fact that  political  discourses,  traveller's jour­ nals,  and   geographic commentaries are not   normally   of   a   length    that    makes them  readily  usable  in  an  anthology.  A job for  a good  editor, perhaps, and  cer­ tainly  Professor  Smith   is a  good  editor, but  the  items  he includes  are  not  at  the last  as  self-contained  as  one  would  like to see them, nor do they connect smoothly  into  a larger  single unit as a book.
There  are   noteworthy  exceptions  to this,  such   as   Patrick   Campbell's "The Story of David Ramsay", Alexander Henry's "The  Massacre at  Fort  Michili­ mackinac", and   Samuel  Hearne's "The Slaughter of   the   Esquimaux".  All  are stylistically  simple  but   climactic narra­ tives, told  vigorously  and   making excel­ lent  use  of   pertinent  details.   Yet  other  works by  these  writers  add  to  the  book's patchiness  rather than  help  it  to  become a  unified  patchwork.  Another  exception is  Joseph   Howe's   "An   Open  Letter to Lord  John  Russell",  which  is also  vigor­ ous,  though anything  but  simple,  in  its rhetorical exposition   of the  needs  for  re­ sponsible  government.
The  difficulty  facing  Dr. Smith is most

REVffiW ARTICLES



evident  in   the   few   selections   he   in­ cludes   from  belletristic  writings.  Sus­ anna  Moodie's description of Uncle Joe's  family  is built  in  to  Roughing  It  in  the Bush; it forms  an  integral part  of  a fully created social  experience in  the  Ontario backwoods.   Here,   removed   from  that  context,  it  amasses   characters  to   no achieved  end   and  finally  tails  away   in apparently petty   detail.  The  several opinions of   T.  C.  Haliburton's  Sam Slick,   the   Clockmaker,  fare   somewhat better, for  they were originally  conceived  as  a   series   of  related  but   individually whole   units.  Sam's  character  is   re­ created, as  it  were,  by each  of  his  opin­  ions.  Though each  of  them  may  give  a slightly  different slant   towards  both  the clock   salesman    and   the   land   through which   he  travels,  Haliburton's  end  pro­ duct  is not  what  Forster  called  a fiction­  ally  "round"  human  figure.  The  eight letters   from   Frances  Brooke's  epistolary novel,  The   History  of Emily  Montague, fare  worst,  however.   They  lead  the  edi­ tor  into  making a rare error  in fact  and an   equally   challengeable  critical   inter­ pretation, and  unfortunately these  pieces open   the   anthology. His   introduction tells  us  that Mrs. Brooke's heroine writes:  " 'The  scenery  is  to  be sure  divine,   but one  grows  weary  of  meer  scenery' ", yet one  comes  across  this  affirmation,  some
 sixteen  pages further on, in  a letter  writ­ ten  by  Ed.  Rivers.  Professor  Smith  also accepts  Ed's  assessment  of  the  Indian­ "the Noble    Savage    of    the   eighteenth century   philosophe"-as   being   Mrs. Brooke's. But  in context, Ed's  letters  and comments  are  superficial; until  the  con­ clusion   he   neither   knows   himself    nor perceives   the   realities   lying   behind   his "romantic"  dream  of    "Canada".  Ara­ bella    Fermor   does,   and    Mrs.   Brooke carefully juxtaposes   Ed's   observations with   those   of   Arabella,  to  end,   in  the novel,  with   a  witty   and   ironic   percep­ tion   of   her   society.  But   the   selected letters   do  not  do  this,  and   one  should have  preferred  to  see  them   replaced  by some  of  the  letters   of  Governor  James  Murray.   Similarly, Susanna  Moodie's Preface   to   Mark  Hurdlestone  would have   been  preferable   to   the   material from  Roughing  It  in  the  Bush, and  one of  Thomas McCulloch's Letters of Me­ phibosheth Stepsure might have replaced some  of  the  Haliburton material.
This  is, of course,  a Book of Canadian Prose, and  another approach to the work might  emphasize  the   stylistic   develop­ ment  that  took place  between exploration and  Confederation. Many  of  the  writers,  such  as Hearne, Henry,  Alexander Mac­  kenzie,  and  William  Dunlop, have  a de­ ceptively  simple  style  that  reveals  a wel-






REVIEW ARTICLES



come  control over  the  movement of  lan­ guage.   Their  syntax   is  straightforward, their  level of diction  is suited  to the  nar­  rative  reporting of  their  work,  and  their accurate  sense   of   the   value   of   detail  gives   their    writing   colour    and   imme­ diacy.   David   Thompson's  style   is  dis­ tinctly   weaker, being  somewhat more circumlocutory, but  even  it  does not suf­ fer either  from  the  purple patches  which afflict Jacob  Bailey or  from  the exclama­ tory  self-righteous  indignation-"Oh, ye dealers  in  wild  lands", "Verily we  have learnt",  "cANADIANS!"- that   interrupts Mrs.  Moodie   and   W.  L.  Mackenzie. In a  way  they  anticipate  Frederick  Philip Grove, but fortunately Bailey's wit, Mrs. Moodie's  sense  for   character,  Halibur­ ton's   gift   for   dialect,  and   Campbell's deadpan  (or  is it  unconscious?)  humour add  a  lightness  to  the  book.
The   two  master   stylists  are  undoubt­ edly  Joseph   Howe   and  D'Arcy  McGee,  both  in  the  oratorical  tradition of  nine­ teenth century  political prose.  Their ora­  tory  is  not  hollow,   however; their  con­ scious  sense  for   rhetoric,  for   the  force of  parallel  structures, for  the  theatrically valuable effect  of repeated word  and phrase,   contributed  palpably  to   Cana­ dian   development. The  quality  of  their prose  promises  much  for  writing in Can­ ada,   but   unfortunately   Professor Smith
-perhaps with  an  eye towards the  suc­
ceeding  volumes -is  not  so  hopeful. The "Introduction", which,  as in most
anthologies, is in many  ways the most valuable  part   of  the   book,  largely  con­ cerns  itself  with a Canadian "sensibility". The  topic  is nebulous, and  the  prolifera-
 tion  of  words   like  "usually" and  "gen­ erally"  does not  help  to give it form.  But the   concrete  examples  from   Canadian prose   do.   The  editor   suggests   a   twin dialogue-Canadians    developing atti­ tudes   about    England   and   the   United States-which  ultimately  resolves  itself in  individuality  and Confederation. Can­ ada,  however,  remained  somewhat enig­ matic  after  that  time,  and to what extent Confederation  was  a  "resolution"  is  a moot   point.   Certainly  one  is  impressed in  this  anthology by the  recurrence of  a few  ideas.  The  U.S.A.   is  seldom  men­ tioned,  in  Bailey,  W. L.  Mackenzie, and  Haliburton, for example, without a refer­  ence   to  the   opposition   between   "free­ dom"  and  "slavery"; similar  reference  to Britain,   in   Mrs.  Brooke,   Mrs.   Moodie, Haliburton,  and   Macdonald,  raises   an opposition  between  an  "aristocratic hier­  archy"  and  "independence".  Amongst these  ideas  Canada wavers,  but  perhaps the  destination is perceived   when  Howe writes   that    the   only   replacement  for British  government  he  would   accept   is one   that    would    combine  a   "stronger executive  power  with  more  of individual liberty".  Confederation seems, in fact,  to have  aimed  for  this  and  thereby  to have influenced   the  direction  of   Canadian growth.
Professor  Smith's work  is an  introduc­ tory  one,  then,   useful  for  a  short,   but ultimately  unsatisfactory,    dip    into eighteenth and  nineteenth  century prose in  Canada. Perhaps if  it  directs   readers back  once  again  to the original materials, it  serves its  purpose  well.






AT LAST,
MR. MCCOURT

EDWARD MCCOURT,  The Road  Across Canada.
Macmillan.  $4·95·

EDWARD McCouRT has written novels about  life in  Canada, and  none  of them are  very  good: his  fictional  world  is for the  most  part  sterile.  The CBC  has seen its way to produce Fasting Friar for sum­ mer   viewing   on   television,   but   readers  would  do  a lot  better to read  The  Road Across Canada, for in this book  McCourt has  finally  reached  toward  something of value.   For   his   next   book,  or  group   of books,  Mr.  McCourt should  do  a  com­ parable study of each  Canadian province,  for  he studies  the  country well. Gone  are the artificial plot structures, the strictures of   the   academic  in   writing   fiction.   At last,  Mr.  McCourt has found  himself.
In  the  summer of  1963  McCourt and his   wife   set   out  to  drive the   Trans­ Canada Highway from  St. John's, New­ foundland, to Victoria, British Columbia. They  took  their  time, and  they  observed the   country  with   careful   and   watchful eyes. This  record  of  their  journey  is easy to  read; there  is  a  smoothness  about  the prose  rarely  found in  travel   books, and  particularly   rare   in   anything  else  that  Mr.  McCourt  has  written.
Mr.   McCourt  is  a  scholar,   and   the book draws on his interest in history and humanity. It combines a philosophy about Canada as  a  land   with  a  future, but  it is also  aware of  the  tourist  as he  travels

66
 across  the  vastness  that   is Canada. It is often   critical  of  what   Canadians  have done   with   their   land,   but  Edward  Mc­ Court loves his own  country and  he can­ not  be  critical for  too  long.  He  is  never sentimental, either;  I  say  this  knowing  that  others   may  think  the  book  tends  to be   that    way.   But   the   sentimental,  as Somerset   Maugham  says,  is  those  emo­ tions   that   one  does  not  like.  I  like  the emotions in  Mr.  McCourt's book;  he  is proud   of  Canada,  and  he  does  not  con­ sider  it naive  to say so; nor is he too blase not  to admit it.
The best  way  to learn  about  this  book is to  look  at  some  of  the  things  he says. "In Canada there  is too  much  of  every­ thing. Too  much  rock, too much  prairie, too  much   tundra, too  much  mountain, too   much   forest.   Above  all,   too  much  forest.   Even   the   man   who  passionately believes that  he shall  never see a poem  as lovely  as  a  tree  will  be  disposed  to  give poetry   another  try   after  he  has  driven  the  Trans-Canada  Highway."
About   Newfoundland  "there  is,  and was, more  in  that  society to deplore than to   praise:  the   enormous  gulf   between rich  and   poor ... the  expensive  and  in­ efficient  system of denominational educa­ tion; neglect  of  the  arts,  and  an  outlook  on   life   bounded  for   too  many   by  the limits  of  the  local  parish."
Yet   Newfoundland, like  Prince   Ed­
ward   Island and   Nova  Scotia,  is a  land that   McCourt loves. He  fills his  descrip­ tions  with   reports of  occasional  encoun­ ters  with   other  tourists,  and  natives.  He catches  the authentic flavour of the Mari­ times  that  few  have  been  able  to  put  on paper.   To   most   Canadians,  the   Mari­ times   are  economically poor, full   of people  who  have  only  the  past  to  grasp  on  to.  But  the  beauty  is often  forgotten

BOOKS IN REVIEW



in statements about  the  rising  tides of the Bay of Fundy, or statements of economic listlessness. For  McCourt, instead, in New Brunswick  "cows  graze  knee-deep in lush pasture grass, elm  trees  line  the Highway on   either   side   and   sometimes   meet   to form an arch  overhead, flower-bordered white frame houses bask in the warm sunlight,  and   the   broad   island-studded river  flows slowly  past  on  its  way to  the sea. All the elements of the idealized  rural scene are  here -the  kind  of scene I saw on farm-machine-company calendars when   I was  a  small   boy  on  the  home­ stead,  which  even  then  seemed  to me too beautiful   to   be   true.    But   rural   New Brunswick  at  its best makes any  calendar picture of  rustic  pulchritude  I  ever  saw look  a  bit  drab."  This   is  ordinary  lan­ guage,  but  the  rhythm is rich  and  pure; the   words   may   be   trite,   but   they   are exact; and  Mr.  McCourt has  caught the essence  of   the  landscape he  describes.
He   comments  wittily   about  Quebec and  Ontario, and  fills them  with his imagination. He  feels that  Mackenzie King's   Kingsmere is  "immensely  com­ forting" because  its contrived  ruins show "there is hope  for  us yet". He  loves Sas­ katchewan  for   no  other   reasons  except that  it  is flat  and  airy,  and  says of Vic­ toria,  B.C., that "Victoria is not England; she  has  simply  played  on  her  origins  to give  the  tourist  what   he  wants ... Vic­ toria  belongs  properly to  Disneyland".
This   is  but  a  bit  of  McCourt. He  is
superb  at descriptions, and  catches  his summer  in  the   palm   of  his  hand, and never  quite  lets  it  go;  he  saves  it  all  for his  reader. He  makes  the  journey  excit­ ing;   he  respects   his  country and  is  not afraid  to say so; and  his respect  is tinged with  the ability  to criticize  when criticism  is  due.   The  trip   across  Canada  was  a
 rare   one   for   the   McCourts  and    The Road  Across Canada  is an  exposition of their  rare experience. I think  it will make Canadians want  to see their own country; I know  it   made   me  want   to  go  back over  it  all  again.
The  illustrations by John A. Hall  are good, and  nicely placed.  My only reserva­ tion  is  that   McCourt seems  at  times  to criticize  with  one  hand, and   then   over­ load  with  praise  with  another, as though he  may  be  afraid   of  offending anyone. But  perhaps it  is  a  good   thing   that   no one  can  be  offended   by  his  book;  Mc­ Court is  not  the  kind  of  man   to  easily hurt; his  judgment, too,  is too  exact  for that.    But   he   can   talk   about   Victoria having   "perpetrated the  most  successful hoax  in the  history  of tourism", and  then  say  about   the   Gulf:  "I  am   convinced that   had   the   ancients   who  dreamed  of the  Blessed Isles  lying  far  to  the  west - and   in  some  instances  spent  their   lives searching  for  them -ever  reached Vic­ toria   and   the  islands   of   the   gulf   they would   have   been  content  to  search   no farther".
This  seems  an  example of  pulling out the stamens  to geld  the lily, but  Mr. Mc­ Court  cannot  be  criticized   for   being   a gentleman in his own country, when  most people   who   write   of   Canada  are   any­  thing  but.
DONALD STEPHENS


ASPECTS OF YEATS

The World   of W. B. Yeats: Essays  in  Perspec­ tive. Eds.  Robin  Skelton   and  Ann  Saddle­ myer.  University   of  Victoria.

Too OFTEN  MEMORIAL  POEMS   or commemorative collections of essays, prompted though they may  be by worthy

BOOKS IN REVIEW



sentiments,  are   not   really   memorable, and  represent, one  feels, a duty  fulfilled. Occasionally,  however,    they   pleasantly surprise   the   reader   by  their   perceptive and   sympathetic  treatment  of  the  sub­ ject.  The  World  of W.  B. Yeats, edited by  Robin   Skelton   and  Ann  Saddlemyer and  published by the  University  of Vic­ toria  in connection  with  theW. B. Yeats Centenary  Festival  recently   held  at  the University, is an  example of such  a suc­ cessful  presentation. This tribute toW. B. Yeats  does credit  to the  editors,  the con­ tributors and  the  sponsoring University.
Of  the  seventeen  essays in  this  collec­ tion,   eleven   are   by  the  two  editors,   a remarkable   scholarly   contribution.  Al­ though normally for  such  a  symposium one  would  prefer selections  from  a wider range  of writers in  order  to gain a greater variety  of  critical points  of  view,  this  is
 no  serious  matter here,  because  the essayists in this volume  are not concerned solely with  presenting appreciations of Yeats   or  critical  analyses  of  his  works. In so far  as these  essays relate  directly  to Yeats,   they   outline,  for  the  most   part, the  many  aspects  of  Yeats's  contribution to literature, more  particularly to the  re­ vival  of Irish  culture. They  concern  also the  achievements of  those  writers,  such as  Lady  Gregory, A. E.,  and  John  Mil­ lington  Synge,  who  were  intimately  asso­ ciated   with  Yeats.
Out   of  this  book  emerges   an  aware­ ness of Yeats's  manifold  interests, activi­  ties and  achievements:  his scholarly work in  Irish   history   and   legend;  his  subtle and   discerning  study  of  Blake;   his  in­ terest   in   the   preternatural  and   his  in­ volvement   in   theosophy;  his  attraction to  the  French symbolists;   his  participa-



The Colloquial Style in America
by
Richard Bridgman



Fascination with  the sound  of one's voice is as compelling  for  a nation  as for  an individual. In this study  the author examines  the change  in American  literature from  the beginning of the nineteenth century, when the American writer prided  himself on his ability  to "write  like an Englishman", to  the  emergence of  a  recogniz­ ably   indigenous  style   a   hundred   years  later.  This  study  focuses on  the  work  of  Henry  James and   Mark   Twain,  then   follows  their  influence on  Gertrude Stein,   Sherwood  Anderson,   Ring Lardner and  the  early  work  of  Ernest  Heming­  way.    $7.25
OXFORD


68

BOOKS IN REVIEW



tion  in  the   Irish   nationalist  movement, briefly through   political  action,  but mainly   through  his  efforts   to  create   a living culture out  of what  seemed  a dead tradition;  his   building  up   of  an   Irish theatre, and  his  inducing many  to  write for  it; and  above  all,  of  course,  his own poetry   and   plays,  which   are   the  fullest and  finest  expression  of Yeats  the  artist, and   the   most   worthy   achievement  not only  of  Irish   literature, but  probably  of all  literature written in  the  English  lan­ guage   in   the   twentieth  century.   What  does   not   emerge    clearly   enough   from these  essays, though  brief  references  are made   to  it,  is  Yeats's  attempt  to  fuse these  varied  interests into a unified system of ideas.  To  some extent  this was a forced  effort   by  Yeats,  but  he  was  not  entirely  wrong  when  he  stated that  for  years  he tested   all   that   he  did   by  the   need   to hammer  his  thoughts into  unity,  and  he was convinced that  his love of literature, his  belief  in  nationality and  his form  of philosophy  were  "a discrete expression  of a single  conviction." The seemingly  dis­ parate efforts  grew  out  of each  other and had  a common core;  they  were  attempts to  create  and  express  a  vision  of  reality
which,   while   centring  on   Ireland,   ex­
tended   to  all  life,  including  the  reality beyond  the  senses.
These  essays do  much  more  than  pre­ sent aspects  of Yeats's  various efforts and those of his close associates. They  convey a great  deal  of useful information regard­ ing  many  less  well-known  phases  of  the Irish  cultural  renaissance in  which  Yeats  was so  significant a figure.  Essays on  the Abbey  Theatre, on  the   little   magazines  and  on  the  press in  Ireland, are  valuable contributions  to   our   knowledge  of  the social and  literary context that  Yeats  did so much  to bring  into  being and  which at
 the same  time  helped  to shape the  poet's imagination and work. The scholarship entailed  in   these   essays   is   impressive. The  usefulness of this information to the student of  Yeats  and  of  Irish   literature makes  one  regret   all  the  more   the  fact that some  important areas are not covered in this book, or are inadequately dealt  with:  for example, the  contribution by the  Fay brothers, the  work  of Padraic Colum,  the  activities  of  the  political societies in  the  I8go's.
One  further comment. While  the  edi­
tors   indicate  in   the   Introduction that their  intention is  to  relate Yeats's   work "to  its  background  and   to  the  work  of the   poet's   friends   and   contemporaries" and   that   they  do  not  intend  primarily to  discuss his  work,  nevertheless one wishes that  they  had  provided more  op­ portunity for  critical analyses  of  Yeats's  poems   and   plays   so  that    the   g,eneral reader,  who   is  not   familiar   with   the  learned   journals   that   are  readily   avail­  able in academic circles, could  have  been made  more  aware  of  the  richness  of tex­ ture   of  Yeats's  work. For   the  scholarly  reader, the  argument  that   there   exists already a  vast critical literature on Yeats  has  no  force.
M. W. STEINBERG

WELL-SPUN  SCHEME

NORTHROP FRYE, A Natural Perspective: The Development of Shakespearean Comedy and Romance. Columbia  University  Press. $3.75.

IN  I963, IN A  NOTABLE  SERIES   of  Bamp­ ton  Lectures  delivered at  Columbia Uni· versity,  Professor  Frye  set  forth a  thesis that   Shakespeare's  four   final   romances "are the inevitable and  genuine culmina­ tion   of   the   poet's   achievement".  Now revised,  and  published  in  a  most  attrac-

6g

BOOKS IN REVIEW



tive format by Columbia University Press, these   lectures   fill  the   present   reviewer with  mounting irritation and  deepening admiration.
The  irritation springs   from   the   fact
that  Frye  is the great  Aristotelian of  con­ temporary criticism,  constantly categoriz­ ing,  obsessively  setting   up  parallels and antitheses, and   forever  coming   up  with another neat literary paradigm. The  pres­ ent   book,   for   instance,  begins   with   a declaration   that   all   literary   critics   are either (a)   "Iliad critics",  centring their interest in  tragedy, realism,  and  irony, or (b) "Odyssey  critics" (among whom  Frye numbers himself)   centring their  interest in  comedy   and   romance.  We  are   then given   three   principles which   lie  behind the  Odyssey type of criticism and launched  on  a   journey   which   ends   up with three moral levels being found to correspond with  three  groups  of  charac­ ters  in  The  Tempest. Through  it  all, the categories are set forth with such remark­ able  literary sensitivity, such  firm  though quietly  spoken  authority, and  such  seem­ ing  precision, that  it is hard  to keep from being  hypnotized into  acquiescence. One  sees  why  the  author's Anatomy  of Criti­ cism has  become  a  vade  mecum for graduate students in  English.  Frye's  tidy formulae really do seem at times to define the  development of Shakespearean  com­ edy  and   romance.  But  often  when  one pauses   for   a   double   take,   doubts   and misgivings  arise.
The sad  truth is that,  with  his splendid
schemata,  Professor   Frye  starts   twisting the  plays  ever  so slightly,  and  sometimes not so slightly, to make them  fit. And this is where  irritation begins. Consider  the author's  proposition that the comic dramas centre  about  two cycles, those  of the  disappearing and  returning  heroine,
 or  "the white   goddess" and   "the   black bride" as  he  prefers   to  call  them.  What are  we to make  of the  following declara­ tion?

We may call  this,  the  movement  opposite  to that  of  the  white  goddess,  the  cycle of  the black   bride.   I   take   the   word   black  from the Song of Songs, although Julia, Hero, Hermia, Rosaline,   and   Juliet   are  all  asso­ ciated  with  the  word  "Ethiop." (p. 85)

One   can   only   reply   that   Shakespeare, when  he  has  a  pair  of girls on  the  stage, often   finds  it   handy  to  distinguish   be­ tween   them   visually   by  having   one   a blonde   and   the   other  a   brunette,   and  that  Juliet after  all  is  likened  to the  rich jewel in an Ethiop's ear, the Ethiop being not  Juliet but  the  night.  Then again,  it is true  that Shakespeare like Plautus  often pits  young  lovers  against hostile  parents, but one boggles when,  to fit The  Tempest  into  the   pattern,  Frye   makes   a  hostile father  out   of  Prospera.  At  the  back  of the  mind,  one  hears  Shakespeare's  Pros­ pero  speaking his  wonderful lines:

I have  done   nothing  but  in  care  of  thee, Of  thee,  my  dear   one,  thee,  my  daughter

So glad  of this as they  I cannot  be,
Who  are surprised  withal,  but my rejoicing
At nothing can  be more.

Or,  again   with  The   Tempest, though a stage   of  confusion concerning  identity may be part of the Shakespearean comic cycle, surely  Frye  is utterly  wrong in mak­ ing  the  question of who  is rightful  Duke  of  Milan   "merge  with   a  theme  of   un­ certain identity". If the  audience  knows anything it  is that  Prospero is the  right­ ful  duke!
One  of  the  more  amusing passages  in
this book occurs when Frye turns to The Winter's Tale,and unco-operative Shake­ speare   does   not   come   up   with  one   of those  balances and   antitheses  for  which

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the   author  yearns:  "In  The  Winter's Tale there  might  have been a winter  song in  the  first  part  to  contrast with  Autoly­ cus'  song  of  the  daffodils  which  begins the second." "Might have been"-those saddest   words!  But   Frye,   abhorring  a vacuum,  decides   that   the  place   of  the winter  song   is   supplied   by   the   story (never   told)   of  the  old  man who  dwelt by the churchyard.
One  turns  to  those  things  in  this  book which  arouse   the  liveliest  admiration - the   skill,   like   that   of  a  surgeon,  with which   dissections   are   made,  the   utter lucidity  and   rightness   of  the   phrasing, the  breadth of  learning, never  obtrusive but  always  available. Frye's  chronic sche­ matic  way  of  thinking  may  impel   him to some odd  conclusions, but it also stimu­ lates  him  to  a  series  of  brilliant  insights.  It is for  these  perceptions along  the  way that   one  is  chiefly  grateful.  Thus, in  a passage which  may  become  a locus classi­ cus,  he  superbly  defines  the  relation  of literary criticism  to the  actual experience of reading a book. Again  and  again  Frye is so  right-Jonson  does  instruct us  in the  art  of  enjoying  Jonson,  he  is indeed
a  way  station  on   the   road   to  Beckett,
there   is  a  world   of  difference  between imaginative faith   and   the  suspension   of disbelief.   Nobody  has   offered   a   more penetrating statement of  what   is  wrong with  sentimentality in literature than  that which   Frye   offers  in   his  final   chapter. One  remembers gratefully  what the author has  pointed  out concerning Shake­ speare's  "operatic"   mode    of    handling themes,  and  the co-presence of the elegaic and   the   ironic   at   the   close  of  Antony and  Cleopatra. Again   and  again   Frye's  schemata, even  when  one  cannot accept  them  as valid,  make  one look at the  plays in  new  and  rewarding  ways-Timon is
 
















a humour character, and  there  are paral­ lels between  Timon and  Prospero.  Often Frye's own   categorical  thinking does  coincide   with   the  hierarchical  thinking of  the  Elizabethans  and  yield  truths.
What  it  all  boils down  to  is that  Frye
is one of the most stimulating critics writ­ ing  today.   Anyone   interested in  Shake­ speare   will  benefit   from   his   book.  But Heaven  help   the   reader   who   is  naive enough   to  believe  all  Frye's dicta, or  is not  aware  of  the  danger of  listening  too credulously   to  a  seductive spinner  of schemes.
G. P. V. AKRIGG

BOOKS IN REVIEW



BIOGRAPHICAL OMNISCIENCE

BRUCE HUTCHISON,  Mr.  Prime Minister,
1867-1964.  Longmans.  $7.50.

BRUCE HUTCHISON  has  joined the parade to the publishers to catch  the centennial boom   in   Canadiana  with   a  book   that has   been   characterized  as  popular  his­ tory.  The  assumption behind   this  cate­  gory is that ordinary history isn't popular; it  takes  a  clever  writer  to  make  it  truly edible.  The problem  is  that  popular his­ tory  isn't  history  any  more  than  popular philosophy   is   philosophy.    What    Bruce Hutchison  has  done  with  this  book is to flesh  out  certain facts  with  the  product of   his   curiously   Victorian  imagination entombed  in   the   hideous   extravagance of  his  prose.  He  clearly  wants  to  make the   prime   ministers   of  Canada live  for his  readers. For  some  he  may  succeed; for me he remains the Tretchikoff of Canadian  journalism.
To  be fair  to him,  he does point  out in
a  foreword  that   this  "is  not   a  formal book  of  history", thus  avoiding   the  risk of dullness; it  is rather "a  tale  of  adven­ ture   at   the   apex   of  Canadian   power". But  he spoils  this honesty  by adding that  the narrative is "much less plausible  than  fiction". Unless  he  has  invented  a  new category, one  can  only suspect  he means  that  this  book is the whole truth.
Of  course  it is far  from  the  truth. The person  who  manages to read  all of it will find  that  dates,  names  and  incidents cor­ respond  with  facts  more soberly recorded elsewhere.  But  there  the  coincidence be­ tween   Hutchison and  history   will  end.  The reader   will finish  the  book  with  the feeling  that  somehow all Canadian prime

72
 ministers  were remarkably alike, differing only   in   the   degree   Hutchison  likes  or dislikes  them.
He  does  try  to depict   their  differences
but   one   of  his  major  deficiencies   is  a total  lack  of modulation in narrative style and  descriptive technique. For  him,  like those   worthies   who   write   for   Reader's Digest,   there    is   drama  in   everything. Consequently there  is drama in  nothing.
He   writes   with   an   omniscience that would  have  driven  Mackenzie King  mad with   delight   and   envy.   Not   only   does Hutchison describe events for which there can   be  no  possible  record -and  this  is particularly true  in  those  sections  where he  describes  prime  ministerial  boyhoods with   remarkable intimacy;  he  also  des­ cribes  the  innermost thoughts of his sub­ jects. It may be that  those prime ministers  who   were   and   are   his   contemporaries told   him   what   they   were   thinking;  as for the  rest it can only be pure Hutchison.
The effect  of this  applied by one  man to  the  minds  of fourteen is to give them all  a  remarkable degree  of similarity. All of our  prime ministers think  like Bruce Hutchison. If this  is true  it  accounts for a  lot  of  this  country's  problems.
And the book is badly damaged by Hutchison's  uncontrollable  appetite  for the  purple, the trite, and the mixed meta­ phor.  He  writes this of Laurier's speeches:  "They seemed  to be built  by an architect, stone  by  stone.  They soared  into  Gothic  towers,    flying   buttresses   and   intricate groining. They  bloomed like stained  glass windows. They  rang   like   cathedral  chimes." He  describes  Sifton  as  "a  man  of  steel";  arguments  and   events   "strike  at  the  vitals" or "cut like acid" and  "the die is cast"  at  least once in every chapter. Finally   he  perpetuates this  monstrosity: "McGee   withdrew  also,   in   an   act   of

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



generosity, to  be rewarded a few  months later   by  the  bulJet  of  a  Fenian assassin in  an   Ottawa  street   where   Macdonald knelt  in  tears over the body of his friend." Like  Laurier's stained glass and  intricate groining, Hutchison's  purple  passages tumble over  one  another in  baroque  en­ thusiasm  until    the   reader   chokes   and suffocates  after  fifty  pages.
The  book    does,    however,    have   its lighter   side.  We  are   told   that   at  sixty­ seven   years   Louis St.  Laurent   "had learned   to  be  himself"  and   that  Lester Pearson,    "the  lonely   extrovert",   has   a mind   which   "constructed  by  layer  in  a series  of   Chinese   boxes   had   never   re­ vealed  its inner contents to any colJeague, perhaps  not   even   to   its   owner".  But Bruce   Hutchison  knows.
WALTER D. YOUNG



NARRATIVE
IN NOSTALGIA

PHILIP CHILD,  The   Wood   of the  Nightingale.
Ryerson Press.

PHILIP CHILD's  new  poem  The  Wood  of the  Nightingale   shows  that   a  narrative set  entirely  out   of  Canada, and   out  of North  America too,  can   be  of  national significance. It  can  even  contribute to  a national myth.  For  Canadians the  effort demanded by the First World  War turned it  into   a  unifying effort   which   brought together as  one  soldiers  from   previously self-centred  provinces    and   regions.   To Child   a  major battle   like  that   of  Ypres was  a  modern "Marathon"  and  for  the returned soldiers and ail the soldiers' fami­ lies the  battle  names  "lie  deep  as myths".
The action  of Child's poem  centres  on
 three  Canadian soldiers  at  the  front  and in  No  Man's Land, here  a much  blasted tangle  of foxholes  and  tree stumps  called the Wood of the  Nightingale. The  one survivor,  Hugh  Kingdom-Forty-Years­ Ago,  reflects   on  his  relations  with   the other  two, on  the  enemy,  and  on his own earlier  reflections.   As a  deeply  imagina­ tive  human being  who  sees his  career  as soldier set against  thousands of years of warfare in  France, Hugh is the  man  of Love caught  in the duty  of fighting.  As a character  study,  his  brother Ken  stands out   more   sharply   as  a  man   of  "closed mind  and  steadfast heart", a hero  whom we  are  told   Homer  might   have   called "The Single-Minded One". So does Ken's bitter  enemy, "Killer" Spurge, the  jeering, dare-devil fatalist  haunted   by  his   boy­ hood  killing  of  his father. The  stories of these  three  at  the  front emerge  in a suc­ cession of solid  and  vivid  scenes, such  as Hugh's first  killing  in  cold  blood  of  his alter  ego on the German side, a poeticalJy inclined   letter   writer   named   Hugo.   All the incidents and people set Hugh reflect­ ing on Time, the historic  span  of Western civilization,    and  Man's  place  in   the world,  in  a way  generally  reminiscent of the  English  novel  of  the  192o's.
The   two   plot  strands  which   finally
emerge provide  considerable suspense and intensity  in  the  latter half  of  the  poem. The  love  rivalry  of  Ken  and  Spurge,  in which   Spurge  manages  to   poison   the mind  of Ken's   girl  and  marry her,  pro­ vides   the   background  for   a  climactic inner   struggle   on   Spurge's   part  as   to whether   he  will  murder  Ken  during  a final   raid   in   No   Man's   Land.  Hugh's problem   develops   when  he  falls  in  love with   Hugo's  sister   when  delivering  the letter  Hugo  had  been writing when  Hugh  shot   him.

73

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



The poem succeeds remarkably in keep­ ing  clear  Hugh's many  philosophical re­ flections  as well as the story itself and  all of  Child's  varied  interests.  The  musings on  Time and  Flux  as a challenge  to hu­  man  worth  range  through a  wide  scope of history with  assurance, from  the hallu­ cination  that  Caesar's legions are  tramp­ ing the Roman road  in the foreground to the  image  of  Life  as the flight  of a  bird through  a  room,   as  recorded   by  Bede. The  war is in fact only a vivifying short version   of  man's  situation  in   the   uni­ verse:  "At  crossroads  with eternity, time­  span/ Is  under   fire."  To  set  against  the horror  of  mass   killings  of   unidentified soldiers,  Child   offers  a  belief  in  Love  as the  ennobling human  quality.
Of   Child's  earlier  books,   the   novel
God's  Sparrows   seems  closest  to   The Wood   of  the   Nightingale.   The   poem stands   beside  the  novel  for  its  presenta­ tion  of  battle scenes  with  a  realism  un­ rivalled   elsewhere   in   Canadian   fiction.
 Nothing is more praiseworthy in the poem than   the  way  Child  visualizes  the  horror of these scenes without becoming morbid, and  yet never  loses sight  of the solemnity of single  deaths against  a setting of mass death. The chief   advance of  the   poem over   the   novel  in   the   handling  of  the war  comes in its more  unified  integration into  the  total  narrative. In the  novel  the war   merely   provides   a  convenient  call for   action  which    can   test   theories   of man's  love  and   duty.   In   the  poem   the war  is the  whole  world  as Child  presents it, for it represents this No Man's Land called  Life,  and  only  Love  makes  it bearable.
Another  major  achievement  of  The
Wood  of the  Nightingale  appears most clearly  in  contrast to  Child's long  poem of   1951, Victorian  House.  Both   poems are   reflections    on   memories  and   so  a mood  of nostalgia  dominates them. Noth­ ing  is  more   difficult   for  a  writer   than  to  present  this  very   human   mood   rna-







74

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



turely.  If he  avoids  sentimentality, he  is doing  much, but  the  positive  strengths of vigour  and  intensity  almost  always  baffie him.  The earlier poem  does  avoid  senti­ mentality, but  at  the  expense  of  power. In   The  Wood   of  the   Nightingale  the nostalgia   is  solid  and  forceful:

And    they    have    known  the    coming  back from  battle.
The coming back,   they  few,  who  but  a day
Or    two   ago   were   many:  gas-soaked,   un­
shaved,
Stinking of cordite and  of rotten mud,
Crawling with  lice.
This  mood  also extends from  Hugh's own associations  to  his musings  on  history:

Stone axes,  spears, then arrows flashing by, Pilum and  gladius-the Roman eagles  pass: Innumerable odysseys  of men
Gone to  the  shades.
It is an  artistic triumph of  the  poem  to capture this  difficult  mood  so well.
In language, metrics and imagery, Child  exercises considerable agility in maintaining  his  effects   for   some  6,ooo lines,   but   the   effort   sometimes   shows. Most  of the  time  the  language is  reason­ ably   vivid   in   descriptions and   easy  in dialogue, although  the  occasional  phrase  seems  rather  too   formal  or   too  slangy (such   as   "orts   of   havoc",  "a   pukka meal") .  The   blank   verse  lines  can   ac­ commodate at once serious reflections and realistic   dialogue,  although  once   in   a while   the   dialogue  is  strained  by  the iambics    ("'You're   looking pale.   First one,  cold  blood,  eh,  Hugh?'").
The  Wood  of  the   Nightingale  must
stand  beside T awards  the  Last  Spike  and A Suit  of Nettles as a serious  attempt to present  the  dilemma of modern man  in a Canadian situation. In such  a  compari­ son  Child's  outstanding  strength  is  the sense   of   a   self-contained   but   realistic world.  Ranging  from  childhood and
 growing   up  through  war,   love,  old  age and   eternity;  depicting  practical  men, misfits and  visionaries; intensely  recalling beauty  side   by  side  with   brutal death; dramatizing quarrels of frustration, quar­ rels of hatred, and  the  end  to quarrels in No Man's Land, the  poem exudes a sense of whole  life.	WILLIAM H. MAGEE


MACKENZIE ROMANTICIZED

PHILIP   VAIL,  The   Magnificent  Adventures  of
Alexander   Mackenzie. Dodd, Mead. $4-95·

ExPLORERs'  JOURNALS inevitably reflect more  the purpose of the  journey  than  the personality   of  the  explorer. Thus,  it  is not  strange that  in reading Hearne's journal  one encounters first the primal wilderness and secondly a man reacting vigorously  to  it,  or  that  in  David  Doug­ las'  journal   one  has  a  greater  apprecia­ tion  of  the  West  Coast  in  1825  than of Douglas  himself,  and  finally that  Alexan­ der  Mackenzie's journals  show  primarily the  young  North West  Company partner searching for  new  trading  domains and  only  by  inference  his  attempts to  over­ throw  Simon MacTavish's Montreal hier­ archy. It would  take  a vivid  imagination, and   sources of information other  than Mackenzie's own  journals, to conceive  of this Scot as a romantic swashbuckler dedicated to the extension  of the British Empire  and  as  one  able  to  rise  to great heights  as  orator and   fighter   in  protec­ tion  of his troublesome band of voyageurs  and  their  great   destiny.
In   his   oppressively-titled  biography,
The  Magnificent Adventures of  Alexan­ der   Mackenzie, Philip  Vail   gives   the reader   just such  a  romanticized  portrait.

75

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Vail   does   not   attempt  to  hide   behind the   guise   of   biographical  novelist,   but gives a  factual and  adventurous account of Mackenzie's boyhood  in  the  Hebrides, the  years  in  Montreal as a clerk  for  the North  West Company and, of course, a detailed account of Mackenzie's explora­ tion   of   the   Mackenzie  River   and   the cross-country journey  to Bella Coola. The exploratory trips   form   the  basis  of  this book and  for his information the author is dependent solely  upon  Mackenzie's own journals, for   he  makes  no  reference   to other  sources  in  his  short   bibliography. He   has,  by  exaggerating  fact,  ignoring fact  and,  at times, by changing the word­ ing  of  the   journals   themselves,   created  an   heroic   character  overshadowing the fur   trader   who   monotonously  recorded every   movement  of  the  party   from  his position   as  Bourgeois   in  the  middle   of their  enormous canoe.
In   reading The  Magnificent   Adven­ tures  of  Alexander  Mackenzie  one  tries naturally  to  assess  the  literary  value  of the  biography and  to determine the  type of reader to whom  it is directed. At times Vail    succeeds   in   cutting   through  the heavy   prose   of   the   published    journals  and   recreates  some   of   the   excitement that    must    have   attended  these   great  achievements.  Particularly is this  true  in Vail's   rendering  of   Mackenzie's party tracking its  cumbersome canoe   through the Peace River canyon, and later in his description  of   the   explorer    hacking a trail  over  the  elusive Continental Divide. But  even  at  the  most  dramatic moments his style, a monotonous series of short declarative  sentences, though   it  destroys the  verbosity  of the  original, replaces  the latter with a manner hardly less palatable.
As  biography this  book  cannot  satisfy the  historian who  wants  facts  and  foot-
 notes,  nor  the  casual  reader  of biography who would balk at the style, nor in its romanticizing could  it hope to gain  new popularity  for  Mackenzie through the medium of  fiction,  which  the  book  does not  and  cannot claim to be. The style and approach seems to be aimed  at  juvenile readers who  might  be attracted by Vail's muscular portrayal of Mackenzie as a Canadian hero  of  the  wilderness,   but  it can   hardly  be  satisfying   to  the   serious reader conscious of the paucity  of good research and  writing on this enigmatic Canadian  explorer and  fur  trader.
MAURICE HODGSON


RICHARDSON'S LETTERS
Selected   Letters of Samuel   Richardson, edited with  an  introduction by  John   Carroll.  Ox­ ford.

SAMUEL   RICHARDSON  was  an  extraordi­ nary  character. By  profession  he  was  a printer, skilled,  industrious,  and  success­ ful.  By avocation (and  also  by accident) he  was  a  novelist,   who  produced  three  lengthy  and  slow-moving epistolary works totalling  nineteen  volumes-Pamela, or Virtue  Rewarded    (I 740), Clarissa;   or the  History  of a  Young Lady  (I747-48), and  the  History of Sir Charles  Grandison (I 753).  In  his spare  time  he visited  with adoring  but   highly   virtuous   ladies   and  carried on a massive correspondence with a host of  friends and  acquaintances, male and   female.  A  six-volume edition  of selected letters,  edited   by  Mrs.  Anna Laetitia Barbauld, was published in  I 8o4. Today his  novels are  seldom  read  except by those  students who  are  required to do so  by  those   scholars   who   recognize   the genuine contribution  that  Richardson

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



made  to  the  development of English  fic­ tion. As for  the letters, they have gathered much   dust   since   the   days  of   the  good Mrs.  Barbauld. It  is  to  the  letters   that  Professor  John Carroll, of  the  University  of  Toronto, has  addressed  himself,  with a  rare  combination of  personal  courage, scholarly  patience, and  editorial  skill.
The  task    was    a   formidable  one.
Though  Richardson,  before   his  death, had  carefully collected  and  edited  his letters,  many   went  through the  auction­ eers'  hands  in  the  early  nineteenth cen­ tury. Six folio volumes  of  them  eventually found   rest   in   the   Victoria  and   Albert Museum, but  others  were  scattered  far and   wide   and   are   now   in   numerous libraries  as well as in the hands of private collectors. With  the  persistency  of a good academic  Sherlock  Holmes,  Professor Carroll   has  traced    nearly   all   of  them down. But  faced  with  an  unwieldly  mass of  material, he  decided  not  to  follow  in the  footsteps   of  Mrs.  Barbauld. Rather, he  selected   for   publication  only  "those letters  or  passages  from  letters  that  bear on the themes  and  characters of  Richard­ son's   novels,  on   his   craftsmanship  and literary  judgments,  and on  his own  per­ sonality."
The decision  was a wise one. Richard­
son was not one of the great  letter  writers of  his  age.   Not   only   does  he  lack  the brilliance, charm, wit,  and  incisiveness of Walpole or Gray; he is also, all too often, pompous,  dull,   repulsively  pious,  and boringly  self-centred. As Boswell  records it:  "Richardson had   little   conversation, except   about  his  own   works,  of  which Sir  Joshua  Reynolds said  he  was  always willing  to  talk,  and   glad   to  have  them introduced.  Johnson,  when   he   carried Mr.  Langton  to  him,  professed   that   he could   bring   him   out   into   conversation,
 and  used  this  allusive  expression, 'Sir,  I
can  make  him  rear.' But  he failed... .'' Yet  Professor  Carroll should   be richly
rewarded  for   his  efforts   by  the  thanks,
spoken   or   unspoken,  of  all  students of the  novel  and  of  the  eighteenth century. His  introduction is excellent, and  all  of the letters  he has so carefully chosen, I 28 in  all,  give  clear  evidence  of  meticulous scholarship and   wise  selection.
S.E.READ



BRITISH IN THE BUSH

ANNA BROWNELL JAMESON,  Winter Studies  and Summer    Rambles   in   Canada; Selections Edited  by Clara  Thomas. New Canadian Library,  McClelland & Stewart. $r.so.

MRs. JAMESON's  Winter Studies and Summer Rambles in Canada has  been mentioned more  often  than   read  during the past hundred years. Few Canadian antiquities have   achieved   such  celebrity on  piece-meal acquaintance.  Soon  after its first appearance in  three  volumes (London, I838), the  book was  abridged, and it is still printed with numerous omissions.
In  1852, a  "new" London edition, en­
titled  Sketches in  Canada, and  Rambles Among   the   Red   Men   was   put   on   the market, chiefly  to  record,  as  the  Preface stated, Mrs.  Jameson's "adventures and sketches  of character and  scenery  among the    Red-skins."  This  emphasis was strengthened by the  dropping out  of "all that  was of a  merely  transient or  merely personal  nature, or obsolete  in  politics  or criticism." Canadian   editions  in   the twentieth  century  have   been   prepared with   a   finer   sense   of   Mrs.   Jameson's achievement, but  still  with  omissions  of

77

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



"personal" items.  The whole  thousand­ plus  pages  of  the  original  can  be found  only  in  library  treasure-rooms.
Mrs.   Clara  Thomas  has   joined   the other Canadian editors in aiming  to keep alive  the  winter  and  summer  sketches  of Upper Canada in  I836 and  I837, rather than   the   literary  studies   which   occupy much   space  in  the  original. This  is  evi­ dent   although  Mrs.   Thomas's  own  in­ terests  are  more  literary than  historical. Her  selection  of sketches  may  be part  of a  larger  pattern involving her  forthcom­ ing  biographical volume  on  Mrs.  Jame­ son;   and   her  choices  may  be  governed  by insights  into  the  character, sensibility and  intelligence of  the  author, which  not even   the   whole  of   Winter  Studies and Summer  Rambles  could  display.
It  is  well  known,   for  example, that
Mrs. Jameson was persistent in feminist propaganda; yet  Mrs.  Thomas has  kept to  a  minimum  the  author's  needling of readers  about  the unhappy position of women  in  genteel  or  pioneer  society. On the  other   hand, Mrs.  Jameson's concern for   particular  women    like   Mrs.   Mac­ Murray and   Mrs.  Johnston-shown in the  printed  sketches -gets  to  the  heart  of   the   matter,  and   the   heart   of  Mrs. Jameson. She said, elsewhere  in Winter Studies, that  she could  not  think  the supposed    interest   of  society  in   general to  be more  important than  the  "honour, rights, or happiness of any individual, though  the  meanest." A  man   attracted her   also,  if  he   was  individual,  in   the sense   of   "self-educated,  and   what   are called  originals".
Like so many of the  hundred-odd British authors who  published books about  Upper Canada in her time, Mrs. Jameson was  here  inspired   or  provoked to  write  in  her  liveliest  and  most  anec-
 dotal  vein. Her  description of Colonel Talbot and  his barony  is a celebrated example. "Few  European women   of  re­ fined  and   civilized   habits" had  gone  as far  as she to invite  adventures for a book. She  was as happy in showing  off  her  de­ tailed  knowledge of Indian life, acquired on  an  almost   reckless  trip  to  the top  of Lake   Huron.  To   this   day   she  can   be quoted  beside   Schoolcraft   for   evidence regarding  the  Chippewas.  Some  of  this, unfortunately,  had   to  be  cut   from   the NCL   edition; one  sympathizes with  the I852   editor's  preference for   rambles "among the  Redskins," and   regrets   the dropping of  sections   on  Indian folklore  and  songs.
Mrs. Thomas has not lost this noted British  author in  the  bush,  but  the  exi­ gencies of editing have  left few reminders that  Mrs.  Jameson had  gone as deep  into the  world  of  continental art  and  litera­ ture   as  she  had   gone  far  into   the  Old Northwest. She  read  and wrote in darkest  Toronto with  the  same  flair  for  pointed  anecdote that   gives  life  to  her  Indians. It was her  secret  that  books and  personal adventures  are   all   one   world.  Travel books were  obviously sources  of informa-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



tion  for  her,  but  Goethe, Byron  and Sternberg were also in her  personal  scene. There is  not  much  of  this  characteristic blend   in   this   new   volume,   but   one   is happy  to find  Mrs. Jameson writing,  and the  editor  including, the  remark that  Dr. "Johnson knew  absolutely   nothing about women."
CARL F. KLINCK




A PUSH FROM THE AUTHOR

JAMES REANEY, The  Boy with an R in His
Hand.  Macmillan.  $3.95.

ON   MAY   I8,   I826,   members   of  Upper Canada's Family  Compact  were  stag­ gered   and   outraged  by  a  violent,  semi­ slanderous attack from  the printing-press of  a  red-wigged little   Scot   of  volatile  temperament and passionate Radical con­ victions.   William   Lyon   Mackenzie  was celebrating the  second  anniversary of his Colonial  Advocate   with  a  wicked  salvo at  the social  pretensions and  private lives of   his   favourite  political    targets. The next  Advocate  renewed   the  personal  on­ slaughts.  Soon afterward  a   band   of young   Tories spent  a  bright  summer  evening  wrecking Mackenzie's  press, mu­  tilating  or  scattering  some  of   his  type, and  dumping the  rest into Lake  Ontario, while  Mr.   Justice the  Honourable Wil­ liam   Allan,   unmoved  by  the  appeals   of Mackenzie's son  and  a  press  apprentice, looked  on  smiling. The  consequence was ironic:  Mackenzie had  been  in  financial straits,   and   the  Advocate  would  almost certainly have  gone   under  had   a  court  not felt compelled, despite  the  power and
 prestige  of  the   defendants'  families,   to grant substantial damages for  such  open vandalism.
A fictional  witness of the  printing-press
riot  is the  hero  of  James   Reaney's The Boy with  an R in  His Hand,  a novel for children portraying York in the year lead­ ing up to the Tories' mistakes and less suc­ cessfully  telling   a   story   of   two   young brothers   whose differences  symbolize, from  a partisan viewpoint, the differences separating Tory  from  liberal and  the elite of Upper  Canada from  the hoi polloi. As the  story  opens  in  the  summer of  I 825, Alec  Buchanan,  imaginative,  humane and   courageous,   and   his  elder   brother Joel,   timid,   orthodox,  and   anxious   to please-an   incipient  Tory,  have   been sent  from  the  Red  River   Settlement to their   Tory   uncle  in   York.  Toronto's quaint  little  forebear is rapidly sketched in  the  opening pages  as  the  boys  make their  way from  the  wharf  to their  uncle's mansion  past  such  scenes  of  local  colour as  the  public  execution  of  a  cow  thief. Thereafter  Joel   dutifully  fades   into   his uncle's  drawing-room and  office and  the background   of   the   story,   while   Alec, banished  from  the  polite  world  as much for  his  free,  defiant   spirit   as  his  youth, befriends   servants,  pigs,   a   caged   bear, and   Mackenzie's  boy   apprentices-all equally  uncouth, according to  his  uncle. Ultimately and   rather  implausibly,  Alec is apprenticed to Mackenzie and  the stage is set for  a dramatic contrast of Joel  the Compact  tool   and   Alec  the   instinctive moralist  on  the  day  the  Advocate's  press is demolished. Alec retrieves one  piece of type  from   the  lake -an  R  of  the  cast branded  on   the  hand   of  a  servant  girl wrongly   convicted  of   robbing  Bishop Strachan and  figuratively branded on the forehead  of Radical Reformer Mackenzie.

79

BOOKS IN REVIEW



As  history  brought to  literary   life  the book   is  exciting   and   informative. The almost  black-and-white treatment of  poli­ tical   and   social  issues  is  defensible,  for the   stupid, arrogant  tyrannies   of  many Compact  members   are   amply  docu­ mented. And  despite  Mackenzie's spora­ dic descents to yellow-press tactics, which Reaney  does  not  omit  from  a  generally  very  favourable  portrait,  the  fire-eating editor  usually  championed good  causes.
As a series of pictures  the  book is also often   effective,   for   the   author  has   an artist's eye for  essential  detail.  And  Alec shares some of his author's picturesque imagination:

... the   elegant  windows   seemed,  to   Alec, to frown at  them.
"Where have   you  been?" said   the  study window  on   the   left.   "And  who   have   you been   with?" asked   the  drawing-room  win­
dow  on  the  right.

But  as a novel  the  book somehow  fails to jell. Mr.  Reaney  seems more interested in   history   and   printing-presses  than   he is in  his  plot  or  his characters. Many  of the  fictitious  events  are  merely  reported in  stark  narrator's sentences  or  in  letters
-both of  which  methods   preclude  im­
mediacy. And there  is more violence  than credibility  in  both   characterization and unhistorical  action.   A  real   Tory, Mr. Jarvis, whose pastime  it was to ride down Mackenzie's apprentices, appears here  as a faceless,  nearly-incredible Brom  Bones; a fictitious  villain,  earless, menacing Mr. Jakes,  is somewhat less human than  the bear   who  is  his  nemesis.  Moreover,  be­ cause  of the  heresy that  children must be written down  to  (a few stiltednesses  sup­ port  the possibility)  or because he is more skilled  at  dramatic  characterization than  the  prose-fiction  varieties,  Mr.  Reaney  is prone   to  spell  out too  much.  Of  Uncle

So
 John  we   are   told,    "... his   voice  was growly,  and  his mouth was always  twist­ ing into a scornful  smile at those he spoke to,  as  if  he  didn't think   they  were  his equals."
I  suspect   that   children  will  read   the book once with some interest, but remem­ ber  it  as rather highly-coloured  and  con­  trived.  At  the  book's  beginning Alec falls into   the  harbour. At  the  end  he's  over the  side  again, "unbelievable  as  it  was." Unbelievable that  he should  fall, yes, but this   time   he  didn't. In a  fit  of  artistic tidiness,  Mr.  Reaney  pushed  him.
FRANCES FRAZER


A SPIRITUAL RENEWAL

The  Oxford    Movement.  Edited   by   E.    R.
Fairweather.  Oxford.  $7-75·

IN  THE RETROSPECT  of  over  a  hundred years, the Oxford Movement can  be seen to  have   brought  to  the  whole  Anglican communion  a   spiritual   renewal   which was  far   more   than  a  mere   revival   of antiquarian  rituals or  outdated  dogmas. Indeed, it  would  not  be too  much  to say that  the  Oxford Movement strengthened the   Church  at   a  time   when   it  seemed dependent on  either the  dry  rationalities of  William   Paley's   Evidences  of  Chris­ tianity or  the  narrow  individualistic fun­  damentalism of  the  Evangelicals, neither of  which  was  to  survive  the  questioning spirit  of  the  post-Darwinian era.  But  as Professor   Fairweather,  in   his  introduc­ tion   to   this  selection   from   the  writings  of  six   of   the   leading  members  of  the Oxford   Movement, rightly   if  somewhat grandiloquently states: "Over against  the aridities  of   empiricist   philosophy    and

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Utilitarian ethics,  the  Tractarians sought a renewed  awareness of transcendent mystery  and   a  renewed sense  of  human life  as  guided  by  a  transcendent  power to a transcendent goal."
The Oxford Movement was  part  of a
much   wider   reaction  to  the   heady  en­ thusiasms  touched off by the  French Re­  volution. It was  not  merely  in  the  poli­ tical  field  that   many  men  distrusted  the attempt to  build   the  Kingdom of  Man  by legislative  decree.  Newman's sermons  from  the  most  influential pulpit  in  Eng­  land  expressed  doubt about the  usurpa­ tions  of  reason,  while  W.  G.  Ward   held to   supernaturalistic  conceptions  of  hu­ man   life  which   were   distinctly  foreign even  to  the  majority of his fellow  Angli­ cans.   Yet   it   is  significant that   it   was Keble,   the   most   loveable  of   them  all, who  raised  in  his  Assize  sermon-here given   in   full-the   political   challenge, which   brought  up   the   whole   issue  of Church and  State.  National apostasy  was the  prospect  which  Keble   feared   if  the Church of  England allowed  its  Erastian tradition  to condone the  reforming, even revolutionary,   measures   taken    by   the secular   government.  Against   the  oppor­ tunism    of   contemporary   opinions,    the Oxford Movement turned  men's   atten­ tion  back  to what  they believed  to be far more   secure   foundations,  both   for   the Church  and   for   the   individual.  The apostolic   succession   and    the   apostolic  tradition   were   the   bases  on   which   the English  Church had  stood  firm  through­ out   all   the   storms   of  the   Reformation and  which  were  now  being  seduced  by a to  date. The Church, they  affirmed,  was "liberalism" which  sought  only  to  be up not  a voluntary society set in a pluralistic community,  but   rather  a   divine   body possessing  an   intrinsic  authority   which
 the State  had  not given  and  which there­ fore  it  could  not  take  away.  The  task  of this  divine   body  was  to  re-enact  God's  divine   economy   by  showing   forth   His saving  and  self-revealing  action  through the  life  of  the   Church  and   the   sacra­  ments.  The   Babylonian  captivity of  the English  Church must  be  resisted  and   a return made  to  the  life-giving   doctrines on which  the Church had  been  based for so  long.  Tradition  was  therefore not  to be   embraced  in   a   reactionary  and backward-looking manner, but  rather to be held on to as the guiding star  of surety in  a  world  in  pursuit of  superficial and transient novelty.  Keble's sermon on "Primitive Tradition"  expresses  elo­ quently  the  positive  reply  to  the  relativ­ istic  and  liberal   questioning of  so many  doubters.
It was of  course  unfortunate that   the Oxford  Movement  had   so  little  knowl­ edge   of   other    Protestant   communions that   its members were  all  too  easily  led to   believe  that   only   by   embracing  the absolutist   claims   of   Rome  could   their position  be given  final  authority. In  fact this  is  not   the  case.   Anglo-Catholicism has proved  its intrinsic validity,  especially in  the  non-Erastian circumstances of the British  dominions  or   the   U.S.A.,   using many   of   the   arguments  here   cited   by Newman  and  Ward before  their  conver­ sion. Professor  Fairweather  is right,  how­ ever, to give generous excerpts from  their  writings  on  the  need  for  relating morals  to   theology,  because  holiness of  life  through  continued  dedication  to  a  life of   prayer  and   sacrifice   became and   re­ mained   the   guiding  star   of  the  Trac­ tarians' preaching. Their emphasis on the Church as the  Body of  Jesus  Christ, and the continuing need  to discern  the Lord's Body through the sacraments is here well

81

BOOKS IN REVIEW



brought out.
Perhaps, however,  it was the human qualities of  the  Tractarians, rather than their writings, which led to their great influence.  They    all   originated  from   a close-knit, ahnost  suffocating, clerical so­ ciety,   in   which,   as  Geoffrey   Faber  has pointed   out,   psychological    trends   and pressures  were  very evident.  Yet their  in­ tegrity,  their  high-minded seriousness and their    earnest  determination  to   uphold  their    principles  make   them   attractive figures still. Professor Fairweather's selec­ tion   from   their   extensive   writings   now enables   us  to  know  them  better.
JOHNS. CONWAY



POPULARIZED MISINFORMATION

JOSEPH  H. WHERRY, The  Totem Pole Indians.
Longmans. $8.25.

THIS  IS AN  example of popularised  mis­
information.
"Anthropologists  have   reliably  reported that  this  tribe  erected totem  poles  rooo years  ago."
"This clan .... whose  origins  trace  back
to  the  Biblical  flood."
"... Petroglyphs predate totem  poles  be­ cause   of   the   comparatively   unskilled formative technique."
The writing varies from vulgar: "What made these  Maritime aborigines  tick?"  to unintelligible: "a  materialistic society tempered  by  an  aboriginal  transcenden­ talism,   this  culture  could  not  be  static.  Its  very  nature  encouraged  daring reck­ lessness."
It is, perhaps above  all,  silly.  "Super­
stition,  common  among   aboriginal  cui-
 tures,   combined  with   an   abstract   reli­ gious   concept  was  destined   to  produce a  vast  mythology." "The  developmental stages of mystical devolution to the trans­  formable supernatural beings might  have been  reversed." "The  myth  of the  canni­ bal  giants  lives on  in  the  modern timber giant   the    Susquatch.   Much   evidence links these  subhuman upright walking forest  giants to the abominable snow man of India, Nepal,  and  Tibet."
There are  photographs of various sorts, and  crude line  drawings.
It is armoying to  think  that  a  book of this inferior quality will probably  be seen by  a  wider   public   than   that   small  gem of  ethnographic writing by Philip  Druc­ ker,  Indians  of the  North  West  Coast, although it  costs  four  times  as  much   as the  Drucker book.  ($8.25  to $1.95).
AUDREY HAWTHORN


CllNJlDillN 	LITER/lTURE - 1965
















Jl  CHECKLIST  EDITED  BY RITJI BUTTERFIELD


ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE
compiled by Rita Butterfield










COLLECTIONS

FOWKE, EDITH. Traditional singers  and   songs from    Ontario.   Collected  and    edited   by Edith Fowke,  musical transcriptions by Peggy  Seeger, illustrated by Katherine  Boy­ kowycz.  Don  Mills,  Ont.,   Burns   and MacEachern; Hatboro,   Penn.,   Folklore Association, 1965.   2 1 o  p.
GREEN, H.   GORDON.   A   countryman's   Christ­ mas.    Fredericton,   N.B.,    Brunswick    Press [1965 ]. 170  p.
HAMILTON, ROBERT M.  Canadian  quotations
and    phrases,  literary  and   historical.  With an   introduction  by  Bruce   Hutchison.  To­ ronto,  McClelland  &   Stewart   [ 1 965] (Canadian  best-seller library). 2 7 2 p.  (First published Toronto, 1952).
MAC KENZIE,  W.  ROY. Ballads   and   sea   songs
from  Nova   Scotia. Don   Mills,  Ont., Burns and   MacEachern, 1965.  42 1  p.
SMITH, ARTHUR  JAMES MARSHALL  ( ed.). The
book   of  Canadian  prose: vol.  1.  Early  be­
ginnings to  Confederation. [Toronto, Gage,
1965].


FICTION

ALLEN,  soL   BARNEY. The   gynecologist.   To­
ronto, Rock   Pub.  Co.,  1965.  352  p.
CLARKE, AUSTIN C.  Amongst thistles  and thorns. Toronto, Montreal, McClelland & Stewart  [ 1 965].  183  p.
DAVIES, ROBERTSON. Tempest  tost.   Toronto,
Clarke, Irwin [I 965]. (Clarke Irwin  Cana­
dian  paperback CI-II) 284  p.  (First  pub-
 lished    1951).
DUFFIELD, DOROTHY  DEAN (TATE).  Harbour lights,  by  Anne  Duffield. Ulverscroft,  Lei­ cester  [F.   A.  Thorpe,  1 965].   (Ulverscroft large  print  series)    224   p.   (First   published London,  1953).
EATON, EVELYN SYBIL MARY.   The  king   is  a witch. London,  Cassell    [ 1965]. 262   p. ENGELAGE, WILLIAM.  The   worthy  and    the
wicked.  [Newmarket, Ont.,  I965].  I73   p.
FRIESEN, PAUL. Bitter  body.  Toronto,  Heine­
mann [1965]. 243  p.
GILZEAN, ELIZABETH  HOUGHTON  (BLANCHET).
Part-time   angel,  by   Elizabeth  Houghton
[pseud.]. London, Mills  and   Boon   [1964].
192   p.
GODFREY,  DENIS. No  Englishman need   apply. Toronto,   Macmillan  of   Canada   [1965].
272  p.
GRAY,  SIMON. Simple  people. London,  Faber and   Faber [1965].  293  p.
GROVE, FREDERICK  PHILIP. Fruits of  the  earth.
Introduction by  M.  G.  Parks. Toronto, McClelland & Stewart [c1965]. (New Canadian Library, 49).  (First published Toronto,  1933).
HAILEY, ARTHUR. Hotel. New   York,  Double­
day,   1965.   376  p.
HAMM, WILLIAM. The gray  shadows of  death. Winnipeg, Thirteen  Green  Pub!.    [ci964].
160  p.
HARLOW, ROBERT.  A  gift  of  echoes.   Toronto, Macmillan of  Canada [1965]. 248  p.
HOLMES, REX. The last  summer, memories of
the   Peace River  country. New   York,   Lon-

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



don,    Toronto,   Baxter  Publishing  [ 1965].
178  p.
HOUGHTON,  ELIZABETH.   See: GILZEAN, ELIZA· BETH HOUGHTON (BLANCHET).
HOWARD,  HARTLEY.   See: OGNALL,  LEOPOLD HORACE.
ISRAEL,   CHARLES    E.   Shadows on   a   wall;   a novel. Toronto, Macmillan of  Canada [1965]. 350  p.
KROETSCH,   ROBERT.  But   we   are   exiles.   To­
ronto, Macmillan of Canada [1965]. 145  p. MEADE, EDWARD F.   Remember  me.  Introduc­ tion  by Norman Shrive. [Toronto]  McClel­ land   &   Stewart   [c1g65].   (New  Canadian Library,  no.   47)    238   p.   (First   published
London, 1 946) .
MOLLEY,  PAUL.   A  pennant  for   the   Kremlin. Garden City,  N.Y.,  Doubleday, 1964.  185 p. MONSARRAT, NICHOLAS.  The pillow  fight. Lon­
don,   Cassell   [1965]. 347   p.
NEWMAN,  c. J. We   always   take   care   of  our own,   a  novel.   Montreal, Toronto,  McClel­ land   &  Stewart [ 1 g65]. 2 72  p.
OGNALL, LEOPOLD  HORACE.  Department K,  by
Hartley Howard  [pseud.]. London, Collins,
1964.  (A  Collins thriller)  192  p.
-. Out  of   the    fire,    by   Hartley   Howard [pseud.]. London, Collins, 1 g65.  (A  Collins thriller)  1 g 2 p.
o'GRADY,  ROHAN.   Pippin's  journal, or,  Rose­ mary  is   for   remembrance.   Illustrated  by Edward  Gorey.  [London]    Panther  Book [ 1 g64].  1 go  p.    (First   published  London,
1962).
ORVIS, KENNETH.  Night without darkness. Toronto,  Montreal,  McClelland &  Stewart [1 965].  224  p.
ROSS,   WILLIAM   EDWARD  DANIEL.   Murder at
city    hall,    by   Dan  Ross.    New    York,    T. Bouregy   [c1g65]. 191  p.
SHELDON,  MICHAEL.  The unmelting pot.  Lon­
don,  Hutchinson [1965].  208  p.
SMITH,  HARVEY H.   Shelter Bay,   tales   of  the Quebec north shore. Illustrated by Jack Tremblay. Toronto,  Montreal,  McClelland
&  Stewart [1964].  222  p.
STEVENSON,  WILLIAM.  The  bushbabies. Illus­
trated by Victor Ambrus. Boston, Houghton,
 Press,  1 965.   183  p.
WALKER,  DAVID HENRY.  Mallabec. London, Toronto, Collins, 1965.  223  p. Also:  Boston, Houghton, Mifflin,  1965.   245  p.
YOUNG,  PATRICIA.  The  prophecy.  Milwaukee,
Bruce   Pub!.   [ 1 965]. 208  p.


POETRY

BATES,    MAXWELL.    Far-away flags   [Victoria,
1964]. [6o]  p.
BOOTH,   LUELLA.   For   the   record.   [Frederic­
ton,   N.B.]    Fiddlehead  Books,   1965.   63   p.
-. Love is bright round my shoulders.  [Isling­
ton,  Ontario, author, 1965]. unpaged.
BOURINOT, ARTHUR  S.  He  who  has  looked  on beauty; six  poems,   1965.   [Ottawa, author,
1965]. 8  p.
BROMIGE,  DAVID.  The gathering. [Buffalo, N.Y., Sumbooks, 1965].  41  p.  (350   copies).
CHILD,  PHILIP.   The wood   of  the   nightingale. Toronto, Ryerson Press  [1965]. 152  p.
CLIFFORD, WAYNE.  Man in a window. Toronto,
Coach House Press  [ 1965]. 65  p.
COHEN,   LEONARD  NORMAN.  The spice-box  of earth.  New    York,  Viking   Press    [1965].
88  p.  (First published Toronto, 1961).
COOMBS,    WILLIAM    GORDON.    Senioribus (for older    people);  verses.    [Parksville,  B.C.]
1965.  41  1.
EADIE, TOM;  MARSHALL, TOM;  and   NORMAN, COLIN.  The beast   with   three backs.   [Illus­ trated by  Ralph Allen]. Kingston,  Ontario. The Quarry Press  [1965]. 63  p.
FINNIGAN, JOAN.  A dream of  lilies.  [Frederic­ ton,    N.B.    Fiddlehead    Press,    1965].   (A Fiddlehead book). 64  p.  (500  copies).
FREEBAIRN,   ADAM  LEES.    Rhymes of   an   old
timer:  Kootenai Brown, Massacre Butle, Lemon   mine    and    others.  Pincher  Creek [Alta. 1964]. 122  p.
GABRIELLE     [Pseud.].  See.   PARKS,    GEORGINA
(HOULDSWORTH).
GIBSON, MORLEY ALLEN.  Songs  of the  prophets and   other poems. Lunenburg,  N.S.,  printed by  the  Progress Enterprise Co.,   rg65. 32  p.
HINE,  DARYL.   The  wooden horse.   New  York,
Atheneum, 1965.  58  p.

Mifflin,  1965.  279  p.
VIZINCZEY,  STEPHEN.    In  praise of   older women; the  amorous recollections of Andras
 HODGSON,
Leaves.
22  p.
 CATHERINE   CECILIA   ( HAGGMAN).
[New  Westminster,  B.C.,    1964].

Vajda.   [Toronto]   Contemporary  Canada
 HOWITH,    HARRY.   Two    longer  poems;  the

ENGLISH-CANADIAN  LITERATURE



seasons   of  Miss   Nicky,   by  Harry  Howith; and   Louis   Riel,   by  William  Hawkins.  To­ ronto,  Patrician  Press,   1965.   67   p
HUNTLEY, WALTER H.  Homespun poems,   a collection of so human interest poems, original   and    inspiring. [Cooksville, Ont. Sunrise Productions,  1965].  28  p.
JAMES,  FERGUSON. Tales of  the  pioneer days; a  collection  of  poems   on  Hanna  and  dis­ trict. Hanna, Alta. [1964]. [73] p.
KEKEs, ANNE.  The suspended landscape. [Fredericton, N.B. Fiddlehead Press,  1964]. (A  Fiddlehead book). 48 p.
LAYTON,    IRVING.    Collected poems.    Toronto, Montreal,  McClelland  &   Stewart  [ 1965].
354  p.
LOWTHER,   ROY.  Cross-country  rhymes.  Van­ couver, Labor Poets  Workshop,  1965.  36  p. MCCARTHY,   BRYAN.  Smoking the  city,  poems. Toronto, Montreal, McClelland &  Stewart
[1964]. 88  p.
MASON,  ROBERT  GREG.  The coyote's call. [Saskatoon, Sask.,  Saskatchewan Farmers Union,  1964].  32   p.
MATHEWS,    ROBIN   DANIEL   MIDDLETON.   Plus
;;;a  change. [Edmonton, 1964]. 22  p.
MAYNE,   SEYMOUR.   Tiptoeing on   the   Mount. [Drawings by Viviane. Montreal,  1965] (McGill Poetry   Series,   no.  9) .  2 8  p.  Also: Montreal, Catapult  [1965]. 28  p.  (Second edition with  four  poems  added).
MORTON,  JAMES.   After   ninety; birthday  and other  poems   of   a   nonagenarian.   [Sidney, B.C.    Printed  by   Peninsula  Printing;   dis­ tributed  by  Gray's Pub.,   1964]. 76  p.
MURRAY,   RONA.   The  chanted
couver, Klanak  Press,   1965.  61  p.
NAPORA,    PAUL   EDWARD.    Hiroshima. San  An­
tonio,   Texas, Naylor [1965].  21  p.
NEWLOVE, JOHN.   Moving in  alone. Toronto, Contact Press   [ 1965]. 83  p.
PARKER,   WILLIAM   WILDER   MCKINLEY.     Can­
ada's 100  birthday verse,  or,  Rhymes from the   northwest,  book   IV.   Edmonton,   1965.
51  p.
PARKS,  GEORGINA ( HOULDSWORTH).  The death  ride,   by  Gabrielle  [pseud.].   Winni­ peg,   Columbia Printer  [c1965].  93  p.
PARR,  MICHAEL.   The green fig  tree.  Toronto,
Macmillan of Canada, 1965.  83  p.
PURDY,  ALFRED.   The Cariboo horses.  Toronto, Montreal,  McClelland  &   Stewart  [1965].

86
 112  p.
RODEFER,  STEPHEN.   The knife,   poems.   To­ ronto,  Island  Press    [1965].  [36]  p.   (360  copies).
ROBINSON,  BRADFORD.    Suddens, poems.  Illus­ trated by Alan Suddon. Toronto, Aliquando Press,  1965.   26  p.  (120  copies).
ROBINSON,    BRIAN.    Laytonic  love,  poems.
[Montreal,  1965]. [12]  p.
sANDERs,  ED. Peace eye. Buffalo,  N.Y.,  Frontier
Press,   1965.   unpaged.
SHIFFERT,   EDITH  (MARCOMBE).  For  a  return to  Kana; island   poems.  Denver, A Swallow [c1964]. 48  p.
SHORT,  VICTOR. Golden grains and  silver  nug­
gets;  poems.    New    York,    Carleton   Press
[cr964]. (A  Lyceum book). 62  p.
SKELTON,   ROBIN.  A   ballad  of   Billy   Barker.
Victoria,   B.C.    Morriss  Printing    [ 1965].
16  p.
-. An    Irish   gathering.   [Dublin]   Dolmer
Press   [1964]. 22  p.
SOUSTER, RAYMOND.   Ten elephants on  Yonge Street,  poems. Toronto,   Ryerson  Press [1 965 ]. 84 p.
TUPPER,   WELLESLEY  FENWICK.  Ships on   the
tide.   [Ottawa, 1964]. 32  p.
WAH,    FRED.    Lardeau, selected first   poems. Toronto,   Island   Press    [ 1965].  unpaged. ( 350  copies).
WEBB,   PHYLLIS.    Naked poems.    Vancouver, Periwinkle  Press   [ 1965]. unpaged.

DRAMA

BELLOW,  SAUL.  The last  analysis, a  play.  New
York,   Viking  Press   [196s]. 118  p.
CROTHERS,    TOM.   Speak for   life;  a   play   in three   acts    by   Tom   Crothers  and    John Madden.  Saint  John,  N.B.,    1965.   52   I. (400   copies).
DUNSTER,   CLAUDE.   C   and    p;  a   play.   New
York, Steele Enterprise  [1965].  87  p.

ESSAYS

HOWSE,  ERNEST MARSHALL. People and  prov­
ocations.  Toronto,   Ryerson  Press    [196s].
169  p.
MACLENNAN,  HUGH.  An  orange from  Portu­ gal.  Thornhill  [Ont.]  Village Press  [1964]. [ 13]   p.  (57  copies).
MARSHALL,  KATHLEEN   ( TEW). Sitting on  the

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



curb; essays.   [Illustrated by  Elsie  Pike Lerman.  Paris,  Ont.,   Paris    Star,   1964]. I 7I  p.

HUMOUR

BERTON,  PIERRE  FRANCIS  DE MARIGNY. My war   with    the    2oth    century.   Foreword  by AI  Capp.  Garden  City,   N.Y.,   Doubleday, I965. 198   p.
CLARE, JOHN. The passionate invaders. Garden
City,  N.Y.,  Doubleday, 1965.  208  p.
FRISE, JAMES. Birdseye Center,  with   a  com­ mentary by Gregory Clark and  introduction by   Gordon   Sinclair.   Toronto,   Montreal, McClelland  &   Stewart    [ 1 965].  unpaged.
GELLER, VINCENT. Candid  Canadiana.    [To­ ronto, Celebrity  Publishers, 1965]. 64  p. HIEBERT,  PAUL GERHARDT. Sarah Binks.  Intro­
duction by  A.  Lloyd  Wheeler. Toronto, Montreal, McClelland & Stewart [cr964]. (New   Canadian  Library,  no.  44).  155   p. (First published Toronto, I947).
LEACOCK,  STEPHEN  BUTLER.  Frenzied  fiction.
Introduction   David  Dooley. Toronto,  Mc­ Clelland  &   stewart  [ 19651·   (New   Cana­ dian  Library,  no.  48).  r6o   p.   (First   pub­  lished   London, 1918).
WHALLEY, PETER. Broom, brush  and   bucket, the  good   old   days   of  Mrs.   Beeton's  house­ wifery    revisited.   Toronto,    Ryerson    Press [ 1965].  100   p.

BIOGRAPHY

BANFILL,  B. J. Nurse of  the  Islands. London, Wm.  Kimber [1965].  I9I   p.
BISHOP,  WILLIAM ARTHUR. The  courage  of
the   early   morning, a  son's   biography of  a famous father, the  story  of  Billy Bishop. Toronto, Montreal, McClelland &  Stewart,
1965.  21 I  p.
BLACK,  ERNEST G. I want one  volunteer.  To­
ronto, Ryerson Press   [1965]. 183  p. BRAITHWAITE,  MAX. Why   shoot   the   teacher?
Toronto, Montreal,  McClelland &  Stewart
[r965]. r62  p.
CARR, EMILY. Klee  Wyck.   With  a   foreword by  Ira Dilworth. Toronto, Clarke, Irwin [1965]. (A  Clarke Irwin Canadian  paper­ back  Cr-9). 111  p.
COSGROVE, EDMUND. Canada's fighting pilots. With   a  preface  by  Air  Marshall  Hugh L.
 Campbell [and]  drawings by  the  author. Toronto, Vancouver, Clarke, Irwin,  1965. (Canadian portraits). 190  p.
DICTIONARY of Canadian biography. George W.
Brown,  general editor. Vol.  1  rooo-to-1700. Toronto, University  of  Toronto  Press [1965]. 755  p.
ECCLES, WILLIAM  JOHN. Frontenac, the  Court­
ier    governor.  [Toronto]  McClelland &
Stewart [I965].  (Carleton Library no.  24).
358  p.  (First  published  I 959).
FULTON, ARABELLA   (CLEMENS).  Tales of  the trail. Montreal, Payette Radio, 1965.  378  p. GRAY, LILLIANE  A. Where lies  the  future? New
York,  Vantage Press   [1965]. 290  p.
GRAYSON,  ETHEL KIRK. Unbind the  sheaves. [Saskatoon,  Sask.,    Modern   Press,    I965].
'57  p.
KINGSTON, REBA (RIDDELL). Living in clover.
Philadelphia, Dorrance [cr965].  142  p. LLOYD,   WILLIAM. A   cleric's  tales.   Montreal,
Wallace Press  [1965, cr964].  128  p.
LONN, GEORGE. Canadian profiles; portraits, in charcoal  and   prose  of  contemporary  Cana­ dians of  outstanding  achievement.  Vol.   1. Introduction by  Louis   S.  St.  Laurent. To­ ronto, Pitt   Pub.   [ cr965].  256  p.
MCCLUNG, NELLIE LETITIA (MOONEY).  The stream  runs   fast; my  own   story.   Toronto, T.  Allen,    1965.   316   p.    (First   published
'945)·
MCINTYRE,   MARGARET. Place   of  quiet  waters.
[Don   Mills,     Ont.,   Longmans].   [ 1 965].
282  p.
MUTCHMOR, JAMES  RALPH.  Mutchmor,  the memoirs  of  James  Ralph  Mutchmor.   To­ ronto, Ryerson Press  [ 1965]. 244  p.
MYLES,  EUGENIE LOUISE.  The   emperor  of
Peace   River.  [Edmonton, Institute  of   Ap­
plied   Art,   printed  by  Co-op   Press,    1 965].
310  p.
Our  living   tradition,  Fifth  series.   Edited   by Robert  L.  MacDougall.  [Toronto],   pub­ lished   in  association with   Carleton  Univer­ sity   by   the    University  of    Toronto  Press [cr965]. 179  p.
RICHARDSON,   EVELYN M.  Living  island.   To­
ronto, Ryerson Press  [1965]. 216  p.
RIVETT-CARNAC,  CHARLES. Pursuit in  the  wil­ derness.   Boston,    Toronto,   Little,    Brown  [1965].  343  p.
SCHULL, JOSIPH.  Laurier, the  first  Canadian.

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



Toronto,  Macmillan   of   Canada,  I g65.
658   p.
SHEPHERD, GEORGE.  West  of yesterday. Edited with  a commentary by John H. Archer. [Toronto]  McClelland &  Stewart [cig65]. I57   p.
Who's  who   in   Canada;  an   iilustrated   bio­
graphical  record of  men  and  women of  the time,  I964-65. Toronto,  International  Press [cig64]. I63I    p.
WILSON, AMY v. No man  stands alone. Sidney,
B.C.  Gray's Publishing, I965.  I38  p. WRIGHT, J. F. c. The Louise  Lucas story; the
time   tomorrow.  Montreal,  Harvest  House
[I965].   (Emulation Books). I37   p.

JUVENILE
ABERCROMBIE,  EDITH. The winter flower,  and other  fairy   stories,  by  Anne   Montrose [pseud.]. Illustrated by Mirces Vasiliu. Toronto,  Macmillan  of   Canada  [ci964]. I43   p.
BASSETT,  JOHN   M.  Frontier  in   flames,   the
Fenian invasion of the  Niagara Peninsula. Illustrated  by   Leslie    Callan. Toronto, T. Allen    [I 965].  (Young  adventurers  series,
2).  I IO   p.
BEMISTER,  MARGARET. The arrow sash,  a novel of New  France for  young  adults. Illustrated by Hans Zander. Toronto, Vancouver, Mus­ son  Book  [I965]. I68  p.
BICE, CLARE. Hurricane  treasure. Written and
illustrated  by   Care  Bice.   Toronto,   Mac­ millan of Canada [I965]. I9I   p. Also: New York,  Viking Press,   I965.
BREMNER, LOIS. The lodge  of  Omal. Toronto,
Ryerson Press  [Ig65]. 84  p.
CAWSTON,  VEE. Matuk, the  Eskimo  boy.  Illus­ trated  by  Haris  Petie. New  York,  Lantern Press,   and    Toronto,  G.   McLeod    [ rg65]. unpaged.
CHILDERHOSE,  R.  J. Fighter pilot. Illustrated
by  William Wheeler. Toronto, Montreal, McClelland &  Stewart [rg65].  I58  p.
COLLINS, ROBERT.  Rory's wildcat. Illustrated by Douglas Johnson. Toronto, Montreal, McClelland &  Stewart [Ig65].  I6o   p.
COOPER, ROY. "The  man    who   painted   pic­
tures" and   of  how   he  was  helped  by  girls and   boys  to  paint  the   bt
Illustrated  by   Christine  Fisher  and   Leon
Fisher. [n.p., n.d.]  unpaged.

88
 COPLAND, DUDLY. Two stories  of Qokpik the ogling Arctic owl.  Illustrated by James Simpkins. Montreal,  Canadian Century Publishers,   distributed    by    Specialty   Ad Sales,   Ig6s. unpaged.
CREIGHTON,   L VELLA  SANDERS  BROWNING (BRUCE). Tecumseh, the story of  the Shawnee chief. Illustrated  by William Lytle. Toronto,  Macmillan  of  Canada,  I965. (Great  stories of  Canada, 30). I 59  p.
DARRES, ALICE GERTRUDE (FRUDE).   Christo­ pher's story,   Book   2.   [Bear  River,  Annap­ olis  Co.,  N.S.,  cig65]. I6  p.
DUNFIELD, H.  CLIFFORD. Rusty   and   Susie,   a delightful tale  of beavers and  their Indian friends. Illustrated  by Ray  Taylor. Toronto, Vancouver, Musson Book,  I965. I8o  p.
FAULKNOR,  CLIFF.  The  white   calf,   the   story of  Eagle   Child, the  Piegan boy,  who  found a  white   buffalo calf  said  to  have  been  sent by the  Above  One. Illustrated by Gerald Tailfeathers.  Boston, Little, Brown   [ I965]. I8o  p.
GOODSPEED,  DONALD  JAMES. See: REDMAYNE, JOHN.
GURNEY, JOHN  ERIC. Gilbert. London,  F. Muller [Ig64]. [63] p.  (First published Englewood Cliffs,   I963).
HARRIS, CHRISTIE LUCY (IRWIN).  West   with the  white chiefs.  Woodcuts by Walter Ferro. New  York,  Atheneum, I965.  2I4 p.
HAYES, JOHN  F.  Flaming  prairie,,   a  story   of the  northwest rebellion of  I885. Vancouver, Toronto,  Montreal,   Copp,  Clark   [1965].
3I3 p.
HILL, KAY. Badger, the  mischief   maker.  Illus­ trated by  John  Hamberger. Toronto,  Mon­ treal, McClelland &  Stewart [I g651· g6  p. HOUSTON,  JAMES.   Tikta'liktak,  an   Eskimo  legend.  Written  and    illustrated  by   James Houston.  [Toronto]  Longmans of   Canada
[I965]. 63  p.
LITTLE, JEAN. Home from   far.   Illustrated  by Jerry Lazare. Boston, Toronto,  Little, Brown   [I965]. I45   p.
MCFARLANE, LESLIE.  The  last   of   the   great
picnics.  Illustrated   by   Lewis    Parker.   To­ ronto,   Montreal,   McClelland  &    Stewart [I965].  99  p.
MAITLAND,  HUGH. Brad   Forrest's London  ad­
venture.   Toronto,   Longmans  of   Canada
[I 965]. (Brad Forrest adventure series  8).

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



'57 p.
-.Brad Forrest's  New   York   adventure. To­
ronto, Longmans of  Canada  [ 196s].  (Brad
Forrest adventure series  5). 158  p.
-. Brad    Forrest's   Halifax  adventure.   To­ ronto, Longmans of  Canada [1965].  (Brad Forrest adventure series  7). 158  p.
-. Brad    Forrest's  Yucatan  adventure.   To­ ronto, Longmans of  Canada [ 1965].  (Brad  Forrest adventure  series  6). 157  p.
MERRIAM,  EVE. Small fry.  Illustrated by  Gary MacKenzie.  New    York,    Knopf  [cr965]. [40] p.
MILLER, ORLO. A  sound  of   voices.   Toronto, Ryerson Press  [1965]. (Canadian Careers Library). I52  p.
MONTROSE,  ANNE. See; ABERCROMBIE, EDITH. Nunny  bag   4,   Canadian  stories   for   six-   to nine-year olds.  Illustrated by  Lauretta Rix.
[Scarborough, Ont.]  W.   J. Gage  [1965].
'33 p.
PERREARD,  SUZANNE (BUTLER).  Starlight in Tourrone. Illustrated by Rita Fava  Fegiz. Boston,  Toronto,   Little,   Brown     [1965].
108  p.
REANEY, I AMES. The  boy   with   a   R   in   his hand,  a   tale   of   the    type-riot  at   William Lyon   Mackenzie's printing  office   in   1826. Toronto, Macmillan of Canada, 1965.  I07  p. REDMAYNE, JOHN  (pseud.).  Substitute general, a  Peter Maclean story.   Illustrated by John Lawrence. Toronto, Macmillan of  Canada,
I96s.  158  p.
RUBABOO   4,   Canadian  stories  for   boys   and girls  from   ten  to  twelve.  Illustrated by Rita
Briansky. [Scarborough, Ont.]  W.  J. Gage,
1965.  183  p.
sT.  PIERRE, PAUL. Boss of  the  Namko drive,  a story  from   the  Cariboo country. Toronto, Ryerson  Press   [ 1965].  I IS   p.
SEAGER,  JOAN. Mystery at  Lynx Lodge.  Illus­ trated  by  Douglas Johnson.  Toronto,  New York,  London,   Sydney,   McGraw-Hill [I96sJ. "4 p.
sHIPLEY, NAN. The railway builders. Toronto,
Ryerson  Press    [I965].  (Canadian Careers
Library). ISO p.
SWAYZE, FRED. Iroquois  war   trail.  Toronto, Ryerson Press   [I965]. I46   p.
-. The  rowboat war   on   the   Great  Lakes, I 8 I 2-I8I4.  Illustrated by  Paul  Liberovsky. Toronto,   Macmillan   of    Canada  [I 965].
 (Great stories of Canada) . 1 I 9 p.
WARREN,  ARNOLD.  The  stolen seaplane.  Illus­ trated by James Walker. Toronto, Montreal, McClelland &  Stewart  [ 1965].  I6o  p.
WILKINSON,  DOUGLAS. Sons  of  the  Arctic.   Il­
lustrated by Prudence Seward. Toronto, Vancouver, Clarke, Irwin,  I965. I79  p.
WOOD, HERBERT FAIRLIE.  See:   REDMAYNE,
JOHN  rpseud.].
WRIGHT,  RICHARD. Andrew   Tolliver.    Illus­ trated by Lewis  Parker. Toronto, Macmillan of  Canada [I965].  IOS p.
WUORIO,  EVA-LIS. The  island  of  fish   in   the
trees. Illustrated by Edward Ardizonne. London, D. Dobson [I964]. 56 p.  (First published Cleveland,  I962).
-. The land    of  right  up   and   down.  Illus­ trated  by   Edward   Ardizonne.   Cleveland, World  Pub. [I964]. 6o  p.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

BUTTERFIELD,   RITA  ( ed.)     "Canadian   litera­ ture- I964; a checklist." Canadian  Litera­ ture   23:8I-Ioo,  Winter  I965.
CANADIAN  LIBRARY   ASSOCIATION.    COMMITTEE
ON CANADIAN BOOKS.  YOUNG  PEOPLE'S  SEC­ TION. "Canadian  books,   I964."   Canadian Library   22:I74-I8o,  November    I965.
CANADIAN PERIODICALS   INDEX: an  author and
subject index. vol.  17,  I 964.  Ottawa, Cana­ dian   Library Association and   National  Li­  brary  of Canada,  I965. 475  p.
CANADIANA,    I950-I962  Index.  Ottawa,  Na­
tional   Library of  Canada, 1965.   2 vol. CANADIANA,    I964,  Ottawa,  National  Library
of  Canada,  I965. 2  vol.
JAIN,  SUSHIL KUMAR (Comp.). Poetry   in Saskatchewan; a bibliography. Regina, Regina Campus Library, University of Saskatchewan, 1965. IO p.
"REPERTOIRE  BIBLIOGRAPHIQUE. X- Littera­
ture-Eloquence." Culture 26:20-22, 52-3,
76-7,  Mars, Juin, and   Sept.  I965.
TANGHE, RAYMOND. Bibliography of Canadian bibliographies, Supplement  I 962  and   I963. Compiled  by  Madeleine Pellerin. Toronto, Bibliographical   Society  of   Canada,   I964.
27  p.

BOOKS  AND   READING

CANADIAN    CULTURAL INFORMATION   CENTRE.

8g

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



Cultural   and    educational   special  writers with  Canadian daily  newspapers. Redacteurs specialises  en   culture  et   en   education  au service des   quotidiens canadiens. 7th, January  I965.  [Ottawa,  I965].  IS  p.
DAVEY, FRANK.  "Tribute  to    the    printer."
Canadian Literature 24:52-54, Spring I965. HARE, J.  "Canadian literature in   the   Harris collection."   Culture   26:326-7,  Septembre
I 965.
MCCLELLAND, J,  G.  "The  publishing  scene, an  interview." Canadian Author and  Book­ man   40:3-5,  7,  Summer  I965.
PERCY,  H. R. "Literature and  the  law." Cana­
dian  Author and  Bookman 4I: 7-9, Autumn
I 965.
QUILL AND QUIRE. "Canadian  book  designers win  international awards." Quill   and  Quire
3 I : I o- I I,  November-December  I 965.


PERIODICALS

NEW TITLES
Cyclic literary magazine. Vol.   I, no.  I: June I965. Edited by R. Hallis. 282o  Ekers  Ave., Montreal, P.Q.
Emeritus.   Vol.     I:  Spring   I965.   London, Ontario,   University  of   Western  Ontario, under the  authorization of the University Student's  Council Commission for  Publica­ tions.
Other   voices;  an   independent   quarterly  of poetry. Vol.    I, no.   I: Spring  I965.  Poets Workshop Guild,  I226 Richmond St.,  Lon­ don, Ont.
Pique     [no.] 1.    [I96s?]. Young   Bourgeois Artists' and   Authors' Association at  the University of  British   Columbia, Vancouver, B.C.


HISTORY AND CRITICISM
COLOMBO, JOHN   R.  "Letter  from   Toronto." Canadian Literature 23:53-62, Winter I965. GNAROWSKI,   MICHAEL   (ed.).  "Index to CIV /n a  little  magazine edited  by  Aileen Collins in  association with  Jackie Gallagher, Wanda Staniszewska, Stan  Rozynski  in  I953 and  I 954   for   a   total  of  seven   issues,  an author/title  index with  select  subject head­ ings." With   an  introductory note   by  Louis
Dudek. Culture  26: 220-238,  J uin  I 965.

go
 -. Index to  Direction, a little magazine edited by  Raymond Souster, William Goldberg, David Mullen between November I945  and February I946  for a total of ten issues; an author/title  index with  sele.ct subject  head­ ings.  [Quebec, Culture, I965].  I4  p.  (First published in  Culture, I964).
MITCHELL,  PETER.  An    index   to   Maclean's
Magazine,   I 9 I 4- I 937.    Ottawa,  Canadian Library   Association,   I965.   (C.L.A.    Oc­ casional papers no.  47).


LITERARY  HISTORY  AND CRITICISM

GENERAL
DAVIES, ROBERTSON. "The   northern   muse."
Holiday, April    I964. p.   I0-2I.
JONES, D. G. "The  sleeping giant." Canadian
Literature 26:3-2I,  Autumn I965.
KLINCK, CARL FREDERICK.  Literary  history of Canada;  Canadian  literature  in   English. General Editor:  Carl F.  Klinck. Editors­ Alfred   G.   Bailey    [and  others. Toronto]. University of  Toronto Press  [I965]. 945  p. "LETTERS  IN  CANADA: I964".  University of Toronto   Quarterly.   34:349-507,   Summer
I 965.
MCPHERSON, HUGH. "Canadian writing, pres­ ent  declarative."  English  I 5 : 2 I 2-2 I 6, Autumn  I965.
ORYOL, LIA.  "Canadian   authors  in   Russian
translations."   Soviet   Literature   Monthly
I965 no.  3,  p.  I89-I9I.
WILSON, EDMUND.  0 Canada, an  American's
notes    on    Canadian   culture.  New    York, Farrar, Straus and  Giroux [ci964, I965]. Also:  Montrea,                                     I965.
245  p.

POETRY
DAVEY,  FRANK. "Black  days  on  Black   Moun­
tain." Tamarack Review 35:62-7I,  Spring
I 965.
FOSTER  POETRY CONFERENCE, Foster,  Que., I 963.   English  poetry  in   Quebec;  proceed­ ings  edited by John Glassco.  Montreal, Mc­  Gill  University Press,   I965.  I36  p.
GNAROWSKI, MICHAEL. "Anti-intellectualism in
Canadian   poetry."   Canadian  Author   and
Bookman 40:3-5,   Spring  I965.

ENGLISH-CANADIAN  LITERATURE



MANDEL,  E.  w.  "A   lack   of  ghosts:  Canadian poets and  poetry." Humanities Association Bulletin   16:59-67, Spring 1965.
SMITH, A. J. M. "A   rejected preface."  Cana­
dian  Literature 24:6-9,  Spring  1965.


INDIVIDUAL   AUTHORS

CARR, EMILY
TURPIN, M. The life  and   work  of  Emily   Carr ( I 87 1-1945) ;  a selected bibliography. Van­ couver, B.C.  School of  Librarianship,  Uni­ versity  of British  Columbia, 1965.  (Western Canadian  contributions to  librarianship, 2).

CHILD, PHILIP
MAGEE, WILLIAM H.    "Philip   Child;  a    re­ appraisal."  Canadian Literature 24: 28-36, Spring  1965.

COHEN, LEONARD
PURDY, A.  w.   "Leonard,  Cohen:  a  personal look." Canadian   Literature  23:7-16,  Win­ ter  1965.

DAVEY, FRANK
TALLMAN,  WARREN. "Poet in  progress." Cana­
dian  Literature 24:23-27,  Spring  1965.

DE  LA  ROCHE, MAZO
LIVESAY,  DOROTHY.  "The  making of  Jalna, a reminiscence." Canadian Literature 23:25-
30,  Winter  1965.

DUDEK, LOUIS
GNAROWSKI, MICHAEL. "Louis Dudek, a note."
Yes,  I4: 4-6,  September  1965.

HALIBURTON, THOMAS CHANDLER HARDING, L. A. "Folk language in  Haliburton's humour."    Canadian Literature  24:47-5I,
Spring 1965.

JOHNSON, PAULINE
VAN  STEEN, MARCUS. Pauline Johnson, her  life and   work;  her   biography  written  by,  and her   prose   and    poems  selected  by   Marcus Van  Steen. Toronto, Musson [1965]. 279  p.

KLEIN, ABRAHAM M.
GOTTLIEB,  PHYLLIS. "Klein's  sources."  Cana­
dian  Literature 26:82,  Autumn  1965. LIVESAY, DOROTHY.  "The  polished lens,  poetic
 techniques  of  Pratt  and   Klein."  Canadian
Literature   25:33-42,  Summer  1965. MARSHALL, T.   A.   "Theorems   made   flesh,
Klein's  poetic  universe." Canadian   Litera­
ture  25:43-52, 'Summer 1965.
STEINBERG, M. W. "Poet of a living  past, tradi­ tion   in   Klein's  poetry."   Canadian   Litera­ ture  25:5-2o,  Summer  1965.
WADDINGTON, MIRIAM. "Signs on  a white field, Klein's Second Scroll." Canadian Literature
25:21-32, Summer  1965.

KNISTER,  RAYMOND
STEVENS, PETER.  "The old   futility of  art: Knister's poetry." Canadian   Literature   23:
45-52,   Winter  1965.

LEACOCK, STEPHEN
CAMERON, D. A. "The  enchanted  houses:  Le,a­
cock's   irony."  Canadian Literature   23:3 I-
44,  Winter  1965.

LOWRY, MALCOLM
KILGALLIN, ANTHONY R.   "Eliot,  Joyce    and
Lowry."   Canadian  Author    and   Bookman
40: 3-4,  6,  Winter  1965.
-. "Faust  and   Under  the   Volcano."  Cana­
dian  Literature    26:43-54,  Autumn  1965. MAGEE, A.   PETER.   "The  quest     for    love."
Emeritus  1:24-29,  Spring 1965.

MAIR, CHARLES
SHRIVE, NORMAN.  Charles Mair,  literary   na­ tionalist.  Toronto,   University  of   Toronto Press  [1965]. 309  p.

PARKER, GILBERT
ADAMS,  JOHN  COLDWELL. "Sir   Gilbert Parker as  a  dramatist." Canadian  Author  and Bookman  40:5-6,  Winter 1965.

PIERCE, LORNE
DICKINSON, c. H.  Lorne Pierce, a  profile.  To­
ronto, Ryerson  Press   [1965]. So  p.

PRATT, E. J.
LIVESAY, DOROTHY.  "The  polished lens,  poetic techniques of Pratt and  Klein." Canadian Literature   25:33-42,  Summer  1965.

PREWETT, FRANK
WADDINGTON,    MIRIAM. "Voices  from    exile."
Canadian  Literature  26:59-63,  Autumn
1965.

91

ENGLISH-CANADIAN  LITERATURE




ROBERTS, CHARLES G. D.
GOLD, JOSEPH.   "The precious speck   of  life."
Canadian  Literature  26:22-32, Autumn
,965.

ROSS, SINCLAIR
STEPHENS,   DONALD. "Wind, sun   and   dust."
Canadian  Literature   23: 17-24,    Winter
1965.

SERVICE, ROBERT W.
BUCCO,  MARTIN.   "Folk  poetry   of  Robert  W. Service." Alaska Review  2:16-26, Fall  I965.

SOUSTER, RAYMOND
CARRUTH,   HAYDEN.   "To  Souster from   Ver-
 mont."  Tamarack Review   34:81-95,  Win­
ter    I965.
GNAROWSKI,    MICHAEL.    "Raymond  Souster:
'Au-dessus de  Ia melt e' Mars I965.

WEVILL,  DAVID
WADDINGTON,    MIRIAM.    "Voices  from    exile."
Canadian  Literature  26:59-63,   Autumn
,965.

WILSON, ETHEL
SONTHOFF, H.  w.  "The novels  of  Ethel  Wil­ son."   Canadian Literature    26:33-42, Autumn 1965.





THESES

compiled by Carl F. Klinck



IN  ENGLISH

BALLSTADT, CARL P.   A.   The   Literary  History of the   Strickland  Family.  For   Ph.D., The
University   of    London   (Professor  J.    R.
Sutherland).
COWPERTHWAITE, (MRS.)  AVONNE ELIZABETH. Harmony  and  Discord:  A Study  of  the Transition  from   the   Old   to  the   Modern Ways   of  Life   as  Handled   by  a  Group   of Prairie  Novelists.  For  M.A.,  St.  John's  Col­ lege,    University   of   Manitoba    (Professor G.  L.  Broderson).
DAWSON,  DAVID    ANTHONY.  Where   the  Orders Are- original   poems.  For   M.A.,   Univer­ sity    of    British  Columbia  (Professor R. Harlow).
FISHER,  MRS.  ELSPETH.   Robertson  Davies  as
a  Satirist.  For    M.A.,  University  of   New
Brunswick (Professor Fred  Cogswell).
HADDON, RONA  JEAN  MURRAY. The  Enchanted Adder- original  poems. For  M.A.,  U niver­ sity    of    British    Columbia    (Professor   J.
Zilber).
HARDER, HELGA IRENE. English-Canadian poetry,   1935-1955:   a  thematic   study.  For
 M.A., University of  British   Columbia  (Pro­
fessor  D. G.  Stephens).
HARRISON, RICHARD TERRENCE. The   fictional world  in   four  novels  by  Brian  Moore.  For M.A., University of  British   Columbia  (Pro­ fessor  D. G.  Stephens).
HAWKINs,  w.  J. The   Life  and  Prose  Fiction
of Thomas H.  Raddall. For  M.A.,  Univer­ sity  of  New  Brunswick (Professor  Desmond Pacey).
MCNEIL,   FLORENCE ANNE.  Interior  August­
original   poems.   For    M.A.,  University  of
British Columbia  (Professor J.  Zilber).
MAYBEE, JANET.   A  Calendar   of Theatre  Per­ formances  in  Halifax  1Bso-188o. For  M.A.,  Dalhousie   University   (Professor   John   D.  Ripley).
MYLES,   (MRS.)    E.   The   Self   as  Theme  in
Grove's  Novels.  For  M.A., University of Alberta  (Edmonton),  (Professor E.  W. Mandel).
ROBERTSON,  INA  VIRGINIA. From Tree  to Tree.
For   M.A.,  University  of  British   Columbia
(Professor J. Zilber).
SAFDIE, GABRIEL. Fo(u)r One.  For  M.A., Uni­
versity  of   British  Columbia   (Professor  J.

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



Zilber).
THOMPSON, DAVID GLEN.  Thomas Chandler Haliburton and  the  Failure   of  Canadian Humour. For  M.A., St. John's College, Uni­ versity  of   Manitoba   (Professor   G.   L. Broderson) .
THOMPSON,  ERIC. R. J. C. Stead, Prairie  Poet
and  Novelist. For   M.A., University of  New
Brunswick (Professor Fred Cogswell).
THOMAS,  HILDA  L.  Malcolm Lowry's "Under the  Volcano": an  interpretation. For  M.A., University  of   British  Columbia   (Professor D.  G.  Stephens).


IN  FRENCH

BANCE,  PIERRE.   Beauregard et  son  temps. For Ph.D.,  University  of   Ottawa,  I964.   (Pro­ fessor  Paul  Wyczynski).
 BLANCHET,   URBAIN.  Etienne Parent: ses idees pedagogiques et  religieuses. For  Diplome d'Etudes Superieures,  Laval  University (Professor Leopold Lamontagne) .
DOSTALER,  YVES.   L'opinion   canadienne-fran­ faise  devant  le  roman au  XIX• siecle.  For Diplome d'Etudes  Superieures, Laval  Uni­ versity    (Professor   Henri  Tuchmaier).
LECAVALIER,  ANDRE.  La  Satire sociale  dans  le
roman   canadienne-franfais  d'apres-guerre
(Professor H.  A.  Freeman).
TREMBLAY, JEAN-PAUL.  Aime-Nicholas  dit Napoleon Aubin, sa  vie  et  son  oeuvre. For Doctorate es Lettres, Laval University  (Pro­ fessors   Marcel  Trudel   and    Henri   Tuch­ maier).
XAVIER-MARIE, SOEUR,  O.S.G.  Les   personnages des   romans  de   Jean   Filiatrault. For   Mai­ trise   es  Arts,   Laval  University    (Professor Henri Tuchmaier).











Dictionary

of Canadian Biography
 

VOLUME I, 1000-1700

EDITORS:   George  W.  Brown,
Marcel Trudel, Andl'e  Vachon

The  first volume  of the  most important Canadian reference  work  ever  published, and  a  book that  will be read  with enjoyment by anyone  interested in  the history  of Canada. Includes
594 biographies, by leading authorities, arranged alphabetically and  fully indexed.
$rs.oo
Laurentian (de  luxe,  limited)
edition, $5o.oo
French-language editions   available  from
Les  Presses de  l'universite Laval


UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO PRESS




93


LITTERJITURE

CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE

liste etablie  par Susan Port









ANTHOLOGIES

Concerto sans  rimes.  Montreal, Editions Sans le  Sou,  1965.  24  p.
DUBE, RODOLPHE.  Antho{ogie 1934-1964. Paris,
Editions  de   Ia   Diaspora  Franc;aise,    1964.
144  p.
Ecrits   du  Canada Franr;ais, nos  rg-20.  Mont­
real,   rg6s.
Emourie IX. Quebec, Editions de !'Arc, rg6s.
107  p.
HERTEL,   FRANCOIS  voir   DUBE,  RODOLPHE.
Phosphorescence, par  Rosaire Boilard et autres. Montreal,  Editions Nocturne, rg6s.  77  p.
THERIO,  ADRIEN.  Conteurs  canadiens  franr;ais.
Montreal,  Deorn, 1965.  322  p.


ROMANS ET NOUVELLES

ALLEN-SHORE,  LENA voir  SHORE, THERESE. AQUIN,  HUBERT.  Prochain episode. Montreal,
Cercle  du   Livre  de   France,  rg6s.  160   p.
ARCHAMBAULT, GILLES.  La  vie  a trois.  Mont­
real,    Cercle  du    Livre  de   France,   rg65.
178   p.
BESSETTE, GERARD.  L'incubation. Montreal, Deorn, rg6s. I78  p.
BLAIS,   MARIE-CLAIRE.   Une saison  dans  {a  vie d'Emmanuel. Montreal, Editions du  Jour, rg6s. r28  p.
Bosco,  MONIQUE.  Les   infusoires. Montreal, Editions HMH, rg6s. 174  p.
CHATILLON,  PIERRE.  La   terre   promise.  Ecrits du  Canada Franr;ais  20:  :ur-232,
CHENE,   YOLANDE. Peur   et  amour. Montreal, Cercle du  Livre de  France, rg6s. 177  p. COURTOIS,  JEAN-MARIE.  Trois contes: un  noii{

94
 acadien; a  une   jeune  amie; histoire   de  rat.
Quebec, Editions de  I'Arc,   1964.   49  p.
FERRON, I ACQUES. La  nuit. Montreal, Editions
Parti Pris,   rg65.  134   p.
FUGERE,  JEAN-PAUL.  Les  terres  noires.  Mont­
real,   Editions HMH,  1965.   rgg  p.
GIGUERE,    DIANE.    L'eau  est   profonde.   Mont­
real,    Cercle  du    Livre  de   France,   1965.
141  p.
GODBOUT,  JACQUES.   Le   couteau  sur  {a  table.
Paris, Editions du  Seuil, 1965.  157  p.
GODIN,  MARCEL.  Ce   maudit  solei!.  Paris,  Edi­
tions  Robert Laffont, Ig6s. I92  p.
GRIGNON,  CLAUDE-HENRI.   Un homme et   son peche. Montreal,  Centre  Educatif  et   Cul­ ture!, Ig6s.  rg8  p.
JASMIN,   CLAUDE. Pleure   pas, Germaine.  Edi­
tions   Parti Pris,   rg6s. I67   p.
KATTAN,    NAIM.   L'arrivee. Ecrits   du   Canada
Franr;ais   rg:2I9-246,  Ig6s.
LAURENDEAU,  ANDRE.  Une   vie  d'enfer. Mont­
real,   Editions HMH,  rg6s.
LEMOINE,  WILFRID.  Le   funambu{e. Montreal, Cercle du  Livre de  France,  rg65.   rsB  p. MAHEUX-FORCIER, LOUISE. L'i{e  joyeuse. Mont­
real,   Cercle  du    Livre  de   France,   rg64.
171  p.
-. Triptyque. Ecrits du  Canada Franr;ais 20:
177-rgi,  rg6s.
MAILLET,   ANDREE.  Les   remparts  de   Quebec. Montreal, Editions du  Jour, Ig6s. rBs p. MAJOR,  ANDRE. La   chair   de  poule.  Montreal,
Editions Parti  Pris,   rg65.  rBs  p.
MAJOR,   CLAUDE.  La   fin   d'un   rnonde.  Ecrits
du  Canada Franr;ais  20:131-142,  1965.
MARCOTTE, GILLES.  Retour a Coolbrook. Paris,
Editions Flarnrnarion,  rg65.   224  p.

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



MATHIEU,  CLAUDE. Deux  nouvelles. Ecrits   du
Canada Franfais 20: I93-2og, I965.
-. Le  pelerin  de  Bithynie. Incidences 5: 26-
37,  avril   I964.
NAUBERT,  YVETTE.  La  dormeuse  evei[lee.  Ot­ tawa,    Cercle  du   Livre  de   France,    I965.  I84  p.
OUVRARD,   HELENE.  La   fieur  de   peau.  Mont­
real,  Editions du  Jour,  I965. I94  p.
PETRIN,  LEA.  Violence   chez    Sam    Gareau. Ecrits    du    Canada   Franfais   20: I43-I75, I965.
RENAUD, CHARLES.  L'imprevisib[e   Monsieur
Houde.  Montreal,   Editions  de   !'Homme, I964.  I46   p.
RICHARD,  JEAN-JULES.  Le   journal   d'un   hobo.
Montreal, Editions Parti Pris,   I965.  292  p. RoussAN,   JACQUES DE.  Penultiemes.   Mont­
real,   Editions  a Ia  Page,   I g64.   I I 2  p.
SHORE, THERESE.  Ne   me   demandez  pas  qui
je suis, par  Lena  Allen-Shore, pseud. Mont­ real,  Librairie Ia  Quebecoise,  I965.  234  p. THERIAULT,  YVES. Aaron. Montreal,  Editions
de  !'Homme,  I965.  I58   p.
-. Contes  pour   un   homme  seul.  Nouv.  ed., suivie  de  deux contes inedits. Montreal, Editions HMH,  I965. 204  p.
THERIO, ADRIEN.  Conteurs  canadiens  franfais.
Montreal, Deom, I965. 322  p.


POESIE

BASILE,  JEAN voir BEZROUDNOF F, JEAN BASILE. BEAULIEU,  MICHEL. Le   pain  quotidien. Mont­
real,  Editions Esterel,  I965. g6  p.
-. NICOLE BROSSARD   et   MICHELINE JORDY.
Trois. Montreal,  Presses   de   l'A.G.E.U.M., I965. 9I   p.
BERTRAND,   PIERRE.  Qnze  poemes  en   forme
d'evidences. Ecrits  du  Canada Franfais 20: II7-I29,  I965.
BEZROUDNOFF, JEAN BASILE. Journal poetique,
1964-1965, par  Jean  Basile,   pseud.  Mont­
real,  Editions du  Jour,  I965. 95  p. BRASSARD,   ROLAND. Esquisses.  Quebec,   Edi­
tions  Garneau,  I965.  I 23  p.
BRAULT, JACQUEs. Memoire. Montreal, Deom, I965.   79  p.
BRIEN, ROGER.  Le   jour  se !eve.  Trois-Rivieres,
Editions du  Bien  Public, 1965. 459  p.
-. Promethee.  Trois  Rivieres,  Editions  du
Bien   Public,  I 965.  4  vol.
 BROCHU, ANDRE. De/it  contre  de/it. Montreal, Presses  de  l'A.G.E.U.M.,  I965. 57  p.
CASAVANT,    RICHARD. Symphonic   en    blues.
Hull, Quebec, Editions Sans le  Sou,   I965.
55  p.
CHAMBERLAND,    PAUL.  L'af/icheur   heur[e. Montreal, Editions Parti  Pris,   Ig6s. 78  p. COLANGELO, LEONI. Trajectoire. Montreal, Edi­
tions  Ia Quebecoise, I 965.  42  p.
Concerto sans  rimes.  Montreal,  Editions Sans le  Sou,   I965. 24  p.
DEBIEN, LEON.  L'espace  intime   du    temps. Ecrits  du  Canada Franfais 20:43-85,  I965. DEZIEL,   JEAN-LAURENT. Jean-Lou    raconte.
Hull, Que., Editions Lions, I965. 64  p.
DUCLos,  JocELYN-ROBERT. Poemes  en   verts.
Montreal, Editions Sans  le  Sou,   I965. 62  p.
-. Tams-tams. Hull, Que.,  Editions Sans   le
Sou,   I g64.  6g  p.
DUGUAY,   RAOUL. Poemes.  Ecrits   du   Canada
Franfais 20:87-I 10,  I965.
Emourie IX. Quebec, Editions de !'Arc, I965.
I07  p.
FECTEAU,  HELENE. Poemes. Ecrits du  Canada
Franfais 20:III-II5,  I965.
GADOURY,    NICOLE.  Arabesques  matinales.
Montreal, Editions Nocturne,  I965.  I34  p. GARNEAU,   SYLVAIN. Objets  retrouves.  Mont­
real,  Deom,  I 965.  33 I   p.
GIGUERE,  ROLAND.  L'Age de  [a  parole.  Mont­
real,   Editions de  l'Hexagone, I965.  I70   p. GIRY,  MARTIAL. Odes    a    Vesper.   Chateau­
Richer,  Que.,   Editions  Marie-Mediatrice, I964.  I3 I  p.
HARVEY, JEAN-CHARLES.  Des bois, des champs,
des  betes.  Montreal, Editions de  !'Homme, I965. 130  p.
HORIC, ALAIN. Atomises.    Ecrits  du    Canada
Franfais  Ig: 149-I7o,   1965.
LABERGE,  MARIE.  Halte. Quebec, Editions de
I'Arc,  1965.  58  p.
LALONDE,   ROBERT. Rafales  de   braise.  Mont­
real,  Editions Atys,  I965. n.p.
LEVESQUE,  RICHARD.  Treize, suivi  de  Ophelia.
Hauterive,   Que.,   Editions  Viking,   1965.
67  p.
MAILLET, ANDREE. Le   paradigme  de   ['ido[e; essai-poeme de  phenomenologie. Montreal, Amerique Fran'taise, 1964.  59  p.
MALOUIN,  REINE  ( VOJZELLE). Signes  perdus.
Quebec,  r 964.  95  p.
MARIE-ANASTASIE,  SOEUR. Miroir  de  [umiere.

95

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



Montreal, Deom, 1964.  95  p.
MATHIEU, PIERRE. Partance. Montreal,   Edi­
tions  Ia  Quebecoise, 1964.  61  p.
OUELLETTE,  FERNAND. Le  soleil  SOUS   la  mort.
Montreal,   Editions  de   l'Hexagone,   1965.
64  p.
PAGEAU, RENE.  Solitude  des   Ues.  Montreal, Editions de  I'Atelier, 1964.   77  p.
PALLASCIO-MORIN,  ERNEST. L'heure   intempo­
relle.  Quebec, Garneau, 1965.  103  p. PARADIS, LOUIS-ROLAND.   Paral/e/e charnel.
Drummondville,  Que.,  Editions  de   !'Axe,
1964.
PELOQUIN,  CLAUDE. Les    mondes   assujettis.
Montreal,  Collection  Metropolitaine,  1965.
76  p.
Phosphorescence, par  Rosaire Boilard et autres.
Montreal,  Editions  Nocturne,  1965.   77  p. PIAZZA,  FRANCOIS. Les  chants   de  l' Amerique. Longueil, Que.,  Image  et   Verbe,  Editions
le  Crible, 1965.   28  p.
PONTAUT,  ALAIN. Les  yeux  de  givre.  Ecrits  du
Canada Franfais 19: I7I-196, 1965. PREVOST,  CLAUDE. Apres-soutfle.  Montreal,
Editions du  Vulcan, 1965.  13  f.
SAVARD,   MARIE. Les   coins   de   l'ove. Quebec, Editions de  I'Arc,  I965. 74  p.
TREMBLAY, GEMMA. Cuivres et  violons  marins.
Montreal,   Editions  de   l'Hexagone,   I965.
saP·
-. Poemes.  Liberte   7:362-371,  juillet-aoilt
1965.
VANIER,  DENIS. ]e.  Longueil, Que., Image et
Verbe, Editions Ie  Crible,  I965. 38  p. VARENNES,  PIERRE  DE voir  VILLEMURE, PIERRE. VIGNEAULT, GILLES. Avec  /es vieux  mots. Que­
bec,  Editions de  !'Arc,  I964. 88  p. VILLEMURE, PIERRE.  Les  insolences d'un
separatiste, par   Pierre de  Varennes, pseud. Montreal,  Editions Actualites, 1965.    16  p.


THEATRE

FERRON, JACQUES. La   sortie.   Ecrits   du  Can­
ada  Franfais 19:  I09-I47,  1965.
LORANGER,   FRANCOISE.   Georges.... Qh!
Georges. Ecrit  du  Canada Franfais 20:9-42,
1965.
-. Une maison  ... un   jour. Montreal, Cercle du   Livre   de  France, 1965.   I5I   p.
MAILLET,  ANDREE.  Le    meurtre   d'Jgouille.
Ecrits   du     Canada   Franfais   I9=53·I07,

g6
 1965.
SAVARD,   FELIX-ANTOINE. La   Dal/e-des-morts.
Montreal, Fides,   1965.
THIBAULT,  ANDREE. Elisabeth. Ecrits  du  Can­
ada  Franfais I9:9-52,  I965.

ESSAIS

PANNETON,  PHILIPPE.  Confidences, par  Ring­ uet,   pseud.  Montreal,  Fides,    1965.  200   p. PELLERIN, JEAN. Le  calepin du  diable;  fables et   ineffables. Montreal,  Editions  du   Jour,
I96s.  I25   p.
RINGUET  voir  PANNETON, PHILIPPE.
SIMARD,  JEAN. Nouveau  repertoire. Montreal, Editions HMH, 1965.  4I9  p.

SATIRE ET HUMOUR

BRIE, ALBERT.  Les   propos  d'un timide.  Mont­ real,   Editions de  !'Homme,  I96s.  94  p. THERIO, ADRIEN.  Le   mors   aux   /lanes.  Mont­
real,   Editions Jumonville, I96s.

BIOGRAPHIES

DESBIENS,  JEAN-PAUL.  Sous    le   so/eil   de   la pitie.    Montreal,   Editions  du   Jour,   I965. I22   p.
FAUCHER,  CLAIRE (MONTREUIL). Dans  un  gant de  fer,  par   Claire Martin, pseud. T.r. Montreal, Cercle du  Livre de  France, 1965.
240  p.
GAGNON, MARCEL-A. Le cie/ et l'enfer d'Arthur Buies.  Quebec, Presses  de  l'Universite Laval, I965. 36o  p.
MAJOR, ANDRE. Memoires d'un  jeune  canoque.
Action nationale 55:245-249, 369-377, 496-
502,   oct.-nov. I965.
MARTIN, CLAIRE voir  FAUCHER, CLAIRE  (MONT­ REUIL).

LITTERATURE  DE  JEUNESSE

CLEMENT, BEATRICE.   Ma/menoir  le   mauvais. Quebec, Editions Jeunesse, 1964.   I42  p. CORRIVEAU,  MONIQUE. Le   maitre  de  Messire. Quebec, Editions Jeunesse, 1965.  142  p.
-. Max.   Quebec,  Editions  Jeunesse,  I965.
137  p.
DAVELUY, PAULE.  Cinq  filles    compliquees.
Quebec, Editions Jeunesse, 1965.   I48   p.
-. Sylvette sous  Ia tente  bleue. Quebec, Edi-





The Hudson's Bay Company has,for  nearly three centuries,been in the North. Now,as in the early days,our interest  is held by those people and events which have helped shape the developing destiny ofthis part of our country.OWe publish a quarterly magazine (in its
46th year),devoted to the past and presentofthe Northland.0The subscription is $2.00 a year,or $5.00 for one 3-year subscription.
The Beaver
H·udson's Bay House,Winnipeg 1,Manitoba




97

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



tions  Jeunesse,  1964.  168 p.
DURAND, LUCILE.  La  montagne et ['escargot. Montreal, Centre de Psychologie  et de Pedagogie,  1965.  59  p.
ESTRIE, ROBERT D'  voir  MATTEAU, ROBERT.
MAILLET,    ANDREE.   Le    chene    des   tempetes.
Montreal, Fides,   1965.  115 p.
MATTEAU,    ROBERT.    Alerte     chez    [es    Cerfs­ V olants, par   Robert d'Estrie, pseud.  Mont­ real,   Editions de  !'Atelier,  1965.  206   p.
MIVILLE-DESCHENES, JEAN.  La  maffia  du  pen­
sionnat. Montreal, Fides,   1964.  106 p.


BIBLIOGRAPHIES

ASSOCIATION  DES  EDITEURS  CANADIENS.   Cata­ logue     de    ['edition   au    Canada    frant;ais. Montreal, 1965.  278 p.
BOSA,  REAL.  Organisation bibliographique au
Canada  franc;ais.   Association  Canadienne des  Bibliothecaires de  Langue Frant;ais. Bul­ letin  '':18-19,  mars   1965.
CENTRE   D'INFORMATION   CULTURELLE     CANA­ DIANNE.     Canadian   cultural    publications. Publications culturelles  canadiennes. 13. ed.  Ottawa,  I965.
HAMEL,    REGINALD.   Bibliographie des   Jettres
canadiennes-franc;aises.  Etudes Frant;aise s
I: 115-172, I-XXXI, I-XLV, fev.,  juin,  oct.
1965.
HARE, JOHN   E. Bibliographie du  roman canadien-frant;ais  1837-1962. Montreal, Fides,  1965.  82  p.
JAIN,  SUSHIL  K.  French-Canadian literature
in   English.  Canadian  Author   and   Book­
man    40:19,  4I: 12-13, summer,  autumn
1965.
LAVAL. UNIVERSITE.  FACULTE DES LETTRES. DEPARTEMENT D'ETUDES  CANADIENNES.   Ca­ hiers   de  bibliographie I. Index  de  "Gants du  ciel"   (1943-1946). Quebec,   1965.   '4 p.
Livres et  auteurs canadiens: 1964. Montreal,
Editions Jumonville,  1965.
PORT,  SUSAN.  Canadian literature, I964.   Lit­ terature canadienne-franc;aise.   Canadian Literature  23:92-100, winter   1965.
VARENNES,  ROSARIO DE.  Panorama deJa biblio­ graphie canadienne.  Association  canadienne des    bibliothecaires   de    langue    frant;aise. Bulletin  II:13-17, mars   I965.
Vient de Paraitre; bulletin du  livre  au Canada frant;ais.    Montreal,   Conseil    Superior  du

g8
 Livre. no   1-	1965-
WATT,   FRANK  w.  Letters  in  Canada: 1964. Livres en  franc;ais.  University of Toronto Quarterly 34:464-498, July   1965.

REVUES

La  Barre  du  Jour; revue  litteraire bimestrielle.
Montreal. v.  1-	1965-
Etudes Frant;aises;  revue   des  lett res  frant;aises et  canadiennes-frant;aises. Montreal,  Presses de    l'Universite   de    Montreal,  v.    1-
1965-
Vient  de  Paraitre; bulletin  du  livre   au  Can­ ada  frant;ais. Montreal, Conseil  Superior du Livre. no   1-         1965-

LINGUISTIQUE

ANJOU,  JOSEPH  D'.  Au   service   du   franc;ais.
Voir  numeros mensuels de  Relations.
DARBELNET,  J.  Pour   une   meilleure  coordina­ tion  de  Ia  recherce et  de  Ia  documentation en   terminologie. Culture  26:328-330, sept.
1965.
GENDRON,  JEAN-DENIS.   Phonetique    ortho­
phonique  a l'usage   des  Canadiens   frant;ais.
Quebec, Presses  de l'Universite Laval, 1965.
266  p.
LAPLANTE, RODOLPHE. Les Franc;ais  contre Je franc;ais.  Action N ationale 55: 104-108, sept.
,965.
Les  problemes de  Ia langue. Devoir  56: 16-17,
30 oct.  1965.
SLOWE,   GERALD.   The   French   language  in
Canada  today. Modern  languages 46: 104-
109, sept.   1965.
STOKER, J.  T.   Spoken French  in   Newfound­
land. Culture 25:349-359, dec.   1964.


HISTOIRE  ET CRITIQUE LITTERAIRES

OUVRAGES ET ARTICLES GENERAUX
BEAUREGARD,  HERMINE.    De   Maria  Chapde­
laine a Elaine Bedard. Liberti  7: 353-361,
juillet-aout   1965.
BELLEAU,  ANDRE.  Litterature  nationale et marche   internationale.   Quebec  64: 71-73, mai   1964.
BROCHU,  ANDRE. La  nouvelle relation ecrivain­
critique. Parti  Pris  2:52-62, jan.   I 965.

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



Le    Devoir.  Supplements   litteraires.   Devoir
56; I3·44, I3·44; 8  avril, 30  OCt. I965. ETHIER-BLAIS, JEAN.   L'Hexagone.  Etudes
Franfaises I: I I5·I2I, juin   1965.
HAYNE, DAVID.  Les  grandes options de  Ia litterature canadienne-franc;aise. Etudes Franfaises 1 : 68-89, fev.  1965.
KATTAN,  NAIM.  Lettre   de    Montreal;   une
nouvelle  litterature?    Canadian  Literature
24:47-51, spring 1965.
LAROCHE, MAXIMILIEN.   Quebec  et   Hai:ti   Jit­ teraires,  I.  Action  Nationale   55:237-244, oct.   1965.
-. Litterature du  Quebec et  d'Haiti, II-III;
les  grands traits.  Action N ationale 55:359-
368,  489-495, nov.,  dec.  I965.
MAJOR,  JEAN-LOUIS.  "Parti   pris"   Jitteraire.
Incidences 8:46-58,  mai   1965.
Nouveaux  mythes et  nouvelle sensibilite dans
Ia  litterature   canadienne-franc;aise. Devoir
56: II·I3,  I5,  8  avril   1965.
SUGIYAMA,  TERUYO. Aperc;u  sur  Ja  Jitterature du    Canada   franc;ais.     The   Maple   Leaf (Tokyo) 5:16-I9,  jan.  1965.
TOUGAS, GERARD. Histoire   de   la   litterature
canadienne-franfaise. 2.  ed.,   rev.  et  augm. Paris, Presses  Universitaires de France, 1964.
312  p.
VANASSE, ANDRE. La    notion   de   d',etranger dans  Ia litterature canadienne, I-III.  Action Nationale 55:230-236,  350-358, 484-488, oct.,  nov.,  dec.  1965.

LEROMAN
CLOUTIER,  CECILE. Le   nouveau  roman   cana­
dien. Incidences 8:2I-27,  mai    1965. COLLET, PAULETTE, L'hiver   dans    le   roman
canadien franfais.  Quebec,   Presses  de
l'Universite  Laval,  1965.   284   p.
ETHIER-BLAIS, JEAN. Letters in  Canada:  I964. Livres en franc;ais.  Romans. University of Toronto  Quarterly 34:475-485,  July   1965.
-. Une nouvelle litterature. Etudes Franfaises
I; I06-IIO, fev.   1965.
HARVEY,  JEAN-CHARLES. Opinion  canadienne sur  le  roman.  Liberte 6: 441-45I,  nov.-dec. I964.
MARCEL, JEAN. Un  semestre de  romans et de romanciers. Action Nationale 54: I02I-I028, juin   1965.
MARTIN, CLAIRE. A   propos  de   ces   nouvelles
techniques. Incidences 8:15-20,  mai   I965.
 ROBIDoux, R. Une approche du  "nouveau roman". Incidences 8:5-14,  mai   1965.
Le    roman  canadien-franc;ais;  evolution,
temoignage,   bibliographie.    Archives   des
Lettres Canadiennes. T.3. Montreal, Fides,
1964.  458  p.
WYCZYNSKI, PAUL.   Vers    Je   roman-poi:me.
Incidences 8:31-38,  mai   I965.

LA  POESIE
CHAMBERLAND,  PAUL. Fonction sociaie  de  Ia poesie.   Lettres  et   Ecritures  2: 20-21,   nov.
1964.
CLOUTIER, CECILE. La  jeune poesie  au  Canada franc;ais.  Incidences 7:4-11, jan.  1965.
LEGARE, ROMAIN. Religion   et   poesie    cana­
dienne-franc;aise, Culture  26: 270-280, sept.
1965.
PREFONTAINE,  YVES. Poesie  pas  morte.  Main­
tenant 42: 2II-213, juin   I965.
SYLVESTRE,   GUY. Letters  in   Canada:   1964. Livres  en   franc;ais.    Poesie.    University  of Toronto  Quarterly 34:464-475, July   1965.

LE  THEATRE
ETHIER-BLAis, JEAN. Letters in Canada:  1964: Livres  en   franc;ais.   Theatre.  University  of Toronto  Quarterly  34:485-486, July   1965. SABBATH, LAWRENCE.  French theatre in  Que­ bec.   In   John   T.   Saywell, ed.,   Canadian Annual   Review   for    1964.   Toronto,   Uni­
versity   of  Toronto Press,  1964.  463-469.
Le  theatre au  Quebec vu  par   des  Quebecois.
Devoir  55:38, 30  oct.  1965.


OUVRAGES  CONSACRES AUX   ECRIVAINS

ANGERS, FELICITE
BROCHU, ANDRE. Le  cercle et !'evasion verticale dans  "Angeline de Montbrun," de Laure Conan.  Etudes   Franfaises   1:90·100,  fev.
1965.

BAILLARGEON, PIERRE
BAILLARGEON,   PIERRE. Discours  sur   Jes  "Me­
disances". Cite   Libre  I5: 23-28,  avril   1965.

BLAIS, MARIE-CLAIRE
MARCEL,  JEAN. L'univers  magique de  Marie­ Claire Blais.  Action N ationale  55:480-483, dec.   1965.

99

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



CHAPMAN, WILLIAM
MENARD, JEAN.   Un    poete    oublie;   William Chapman.   Incidences 3:29-42,  oct.   I963. William Chapman et  le prix  Nobel.  Incidences
3=50-55, oct.   I963.
CONAN, LAURE voir   ANGERS,  FELICITE.

DESROCHERS,  ALFRED
WARWICK,  JACK. Alfred Desrochers, reluctant regionalist,  Queen's  Quarterly 7 I:566-582, winter  1965.
FAUCHER, CLAIRE (MONTREUIL) ROBIDoux, REJEAN. Claire Martin  romanciere.
Etudes   Franfaises   1 :67-86,  juin   1965.

FERRON, JACQUES
MAJOR, ANDRE.  Jacques Ferron, le  jour  et  Ia nuit.   Action    N ationale    55:98-ro3,   sept.
1965.

GRANDBOIS, ALAIN
HAMELIN, JEAN. L'integrale de !'oeuvre poetique d'Alain Grandbois. Quebec  64:2 r-
23,  mai  1964.
MARCOTTE, GILLES.  Alain     Grandbois;   une poesie  attentive a toutes les  voix  du  monde.
Quebec  64:14-20, mai  1964.

HARVEY, JEAN-CHARLES
CHARLAND,  ROLAND-M.   Jean-Charles  Harvey.
Lectures   12:3-7, sept. 1965.

HEBERT, ANNE
AMYOT,  GEORGES.  Anne  Hebert  et  Ja   renais­
sance.   Ecrits  du  Canada  Franfais   20: 233-
253,  I965.
PAGE, PIERRE. Anne  Hebert. Montreal,  Fides,
1965.

JASMIN, CLAUDE
MARCEL, JEAN.   Pleure  pas,   Jasmin.   Action
N ationale  55:93-97, sept.   I 965.

LANGUIRAND, JACQUES
ROBIDOUX,   REJEAN.  Lettre  a  Jacques   Lan­
guirand. Incidences 4:46-51,  jan.  1964.





100
 LAPOINTE, GATIEN
BERTHIAUME, ANDRE. Gatien  Lapointe,  OU l'apre merveille de  vivre.  Ecrits  du  Canada Franfaise   20:255-272,  1965.

LASNIER, RIN A
N * * *  Un    chef-d'oeuvre  meconnu ... sinon meprise! Action  N ationale 54:682-698, mars I965.

LE  FRANC, MARIE
LECLERC,  RITA. Marie LeFranc et  le  Canada.
Lectures    11:174-175, fev.   1965.

MELANCON, JOSEPH-MARIE DUROCHER, OLIVIER. Lucien Rainier; J'homme.
Revue    de   l'Universite  Laval   19:531-550,
fev.   1965.
-. Lucien Rainier et  sa  correspondence.  Re­
vue  de  l'Universite Laval  19:305-321, 442-
450,  dec.  1964.  jan.  1965.

PANNETON, PHILIPPE
MARCEL, JEAN.   Retour  a  Ringuet.   Action
Nationale   55:345-349, nov.   1965.

PERRAULT, PIERRE
MARCEL,  JEAN.  Pierre  Perrault,  poete. Action
Nationale   54:815-82r, avril   1965.

PINSONNEAULT, JEAN-PAUL MELANCON, ANDRE. Jean-Paul   Pinsonneault.
Lectures 12:35-38,  oct.   I965.
RAINIER,  LUCIEN  voir    MELANCON,    JOSEPH­ MARIE.
RINGUET  voir  PANNETON,  PHILIPPE.

ROY, GABRIELLE
LE  GRAND, ALBERT. Gabrielle  Roy   OU    J'etre partage.  Etudes    Franfaises    1 :39-65,  juin
1965.
VACHON,  GEORGES-ANDRE. Chretien ou   Mon­
realais. Maintenant 38:71-72, fev.  1965.

THERIO, ADRIEN
LE  HOUILLIER, GUY. Adrien  Therio.   Lectures
II: 151-153, fev.  1965.
