$3.00  per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE
N°·78
Autumn, 1978


WRITING FOR CHILDREN


Articles

BY  MORDECAI RICHLER, MARGARET ATWOOD, DIANNE WOODMAN, ELISABETH HOPKINS, CHRISTIE HARRIS, J. KIERAN KEALY, MICHAEL GREENSTEIN


Poems

BY ALEXANDRE L. AMPRIMOZ, DENNIS LEE, ELIZABETH BREWSTER, DAVID KNIGHT, THERESA  MORITZ, TOM WAYMAN, RON   MILES


Reviews, Opinions,  and Notes on Criticism

BY STEPHEN SCOBIE, HILDA THOMAS,  JOHN  LENNOX, LINDA LEITH, FRANCES FRAZER, J· KIERAN KEALY, G. V. DO\VNES, JACQUES MICHON, NICHOLAS  CATANOY, GEORGE WOODCOCK, ERIC  THOMPSON, EUGENE MCNAMARA, PATRICIA KEENEY SMITH, P. MERIVALE, E. D. BLODGETT, WAYNE GRADY,  PETER SUCH, BRANDON CONRON, ANN MANDEL, W. H. NEW


A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW







THE ENJOYMENT OF OVERREACHING




THis  ISSUE  FOCUSSES on children's  literature  in Canada, on the  joys and  the  pressures of creating  it, and  on some of the  problems  associ­ ated  both  with  writing  for  children  and  with  finding the  books that  have been written  with children in mind. Some of these problems have to do with language. Dianne   Woodman   mentions,   for  example,  the  difficulty  of   locating   French­ language  children's   books in  Western  Canada,  which  is  vexing  for  booksellers and  bookbuyers alike. Neither  group wants to order books sight unseen. Yet both want  access to  the  best of children's  literature,  for both  have  an  investment  in children -hence in the future -and therefore in the prospect of their children's facility in  Canada's two official languages.  Regional  truths  deeply and  variously affect  people's  daily  lives. But  part  of every  Canadian  child's  national,  federal birthright  is that  of access to both English and French. Deliberately to deny such access comes close to  being  an  immoral  act.  One  understands  it,  perhaps,  if it derives  from  ignorance  or  fear.  But far  more  difficult to contend  with  are  the accidental  denials,  the oversights or the  preconceptions that  prevent  information from  being  readily  circulated. If local  booksellers cannot  rely on  publishers in both  languages  giving  them  adequate  information  to order stock wisely, then it would be a useful effort for publishers collectively, or publishers in collaboration with  the Secretary  of State,  to set up regional or provincial information  centres. By this  I  do  not  suggest  setting  up  propaganda  houses. But  booksellers-and the  general  public-need  access to  permanent  available  displays of whatever works are in print, so that  they can choose wisely for their own community: their customers, their family, and themselves.
Denying access to either  language  may result for any number  of reasons. But
like any repeated  practice,  it gives the impression to readers or listeners that  the subject  doesn't  matter.  A society that  tolerates illiteracies in  national  television and  radio  daily news broadcasts  should  not wonder idly why a younger genera-

2

EDITORIAL

tion does not see the need to master grammar. And a society that  effectively says to its children  that  they don't  need to learn English or French should not wonder at  a  pervasive linguistic  intolerance  or a studied  lack of enthusiasm.  Such  atti­ tudes  are  not  natural. But  they result from  the force of a daily  education, and they  run   totally  counter   to  the  notion  of  egalitarian  opportunity  we  loudly espouse, and  to  the  actuality  of mobility  which is-or  ought  to  be -part  of every modem child's expectations.
There  do exist various aids for enquiring  adults and inquisitive children. There are bibliographies, and reference libraries, and critical periodicals like Canadian Children's  Literature.  There  are  some splendid  children's  magazines,  including Owl   (flamboyantly  investigative  about  nature), Canadian  Children's  Magazine (inventive  in  its use of games, and  intelligently conceived),  and  in many  ways best of all, Video-Presse from  Montreal.  Profusely illustrated  in colour, and cap­ tivating  for  children  who  read,  Video-Presse  contains  cartoons,  games,  quizzes, narratives,  and scientific documentaries; it takes children's  actual  lives seriously, and  shows what  with  imagination  and  effort children  can  do;  it  focusses each issue on  a special  topic, and  over a year's subscription supplies  children  with a kind  of mini-encyclopedia  on  a  whole subject;  and  it amply  demonstrates  how education  can  go hand-in-hand with  entertainment. No  library should  be with­ out such journals; no child should be denied access to them.
Librarians,   teachers,  parents,  and  other  powers-that-be,  unfortunately,  often hesitate  before exposing children  to a challenge which -like long words, com­ plex sentences,  and  a  second  language-they  themselves perceive  as  difficult. But as is the case so many times, the problem is less the children's  than their own. Many  educators  and  officials designing new school curricula,  for example,  try to resolve  the   problems  which  they  encountered   in  school  rather  than   to  take account  of whatever  problems  teachers  and students are  currently  facing. Simi­ larly,  unthinking  institutions  often-often  even  in  the  name  of  standards­ perpetuate  misconceptions about  literature  and learning. And they do so without taking  account  of  the  average  (or  the extraordinary)  contemporary  child's  life. Television,  for  one  thing-which  is a  visual  medium  all  right,  but  intensely verbal as well-has increased  many  a child's ability to read early. A lot of the messages are  repetitive,  but  they  are  also  linguistically quite  sophisticated.  To tell a  child  that  the  message flashed on  the screen "doesn't  mean  anything" is implicitly to say that  reading doesn't matter. To dismiss, either directly or tacitly, a  child's  growing  capacities  for  reason-for  mental  activity -is to say  that schooling  doesn't  matter.  And  to  insist that  children's  reading  ought  to follow culturally  archaic  or semantically  deprived  models that  have nothing  to do with their  own experience  and  observation  of speech and  the world is to engender  a distaste for all language: for books, for reading, and for the worlds of words. If language  doesn't  mean,  if  it  isn't  to be  taken  seriously, if it  conveys only  the

3

EDITORIAL

banal  and  the  factitious,  and  if it doesn't  provide enjoyment,  why learn  it? Or put  another  way,  why  teach  language -however  formally  or  informally-in such a way that  negative  attitudes  towards language come into being at all?
Bruno  Bettelheim,  writing  in  a  recent  issue of Harper's   magazine,  takes  up many of these issues. "If the  child,"  he writes, "is to realize his potential  to talk
-and  his potential  to read -the  necessary skills must be encouraged.... Only if  the  words he learns enrich  his life and  increase the pleasure he receives from talking  will he wish to keep adding  new ones to his vocabulary.... If the parent shares  his  enjoyment   in  overreaching   himself in  this  manner,  the  word  soon becomes  a  permanent   addition   to  the  child's  vocabulary.  The  child  begins by trying  to  participate  in  what   he  views as  his  parent's  magical  ability  to  use complex language; in his efforts to make this 'magic' his own he ... develops the ability to comprehend  more complex thought  processes.... "
"Without an  earlier  commitment  to  language  through  such  positive experi­ ences" -and  the  important point  here  is that  the  sharing  of  enthusiasm  for language   is  a  large  social  phenomenon   and  not  solely a  family  possibility - "words  will  remain  for  the  child  just  that: abstract,  and  devoid  of  personal meaning,  useful for communication, perhaps, but essentially unattractive."
Bettelheim  goes on at  some length to chastise the makers of textbooks for not taking  vocabulary,  syntax,  or  children's  social roles seriously, for  unpardonably underestimating children's abilities and  children's  capacities, and  for  reinforcing negative cultural  attitudes towards the power of intellect. He makes a good point. And  there  is a  profound  sense in  which  the  imagination,   just as much  as the intellect, has to be free to try to overreach. But then  he goes on to reveal a bias of his own, to curtail  educational possibilities, and  to define the limits of  enjoy­ ment  in an  unjust  way:  "Learning to read is serious business for the child, and
... the  pleasure  that  can  be  gained  from  reading  is a  serious  pleasure,  not  a vacuous one. There  is no reason why our basal readers could not confer dignity on learning  to read.... For it is this pleasure, and  not the delights of teasing, or joking, or  jumping  wildly, that  is the  pleasure inherent  in literacy."  I  have no quarrel  with  the serious intellectual  pleasure of reading,  nor with  the  dignity of learning  to read. But one of the great enjoyments of reading is that  it also allows us some moments  of freedom  from the seriousness in our  lives. To  be unable  to enjoy fantasy, to be unable to distinguish between fantasy and reality, to be unable to see the relevance of fantasy to reality: these are the characteristics  of the person who is unable  to laugh.  And  the  person without  enough  sense of his  language to enjoy its jokes, its jumps, and its ways of voicing life's incongruities is a solemn pedant   and  a  social  autocrat. Bettelheim  must  know  better.  Any society that values  intellectual  growth  in  its children  and  intellectual  flexibility in its adults has to know better.  And  that  society must remember  also how to encourage  the growth  and  the flexibility:  by providing access to language,  by taking delight in

EDITORIAL


intellectual and  imaginative overreaching, by  expressing pleasure when art and life  give   pleasure, and  by  relaxing in  laughter against the  autocrats for  whom order is unchanging and rigidity is king.

W.H.N.






)IG)IINST  THE WISH OF BOROMEO

Alexandre L. Amprimoz


In the Roman dusk,
against the wish of Boromeo, the wind  rose like a lonely idea.

Merisi,  pale
from  years of blanc d'Espagne,
took the thought with usual violence:
the solar fist
reducing ancient rules to shape  and  colours,
according to El Greco's  old testament.

The  wind rose not like a dogma but like a strong  faith
and  the  cardinal mumbled to the painter:
"Someone should  mould, away from  usual doctrines, a theory  of icons
aching with solitude
like Anthony in his empty land."

Against  the wish of Boromeo
Merisi spoke of the true, the real and  the living.

In  the isolated  mind  the Greek  diminuendo, the mannerism in decay and the art  of imitation
all sank below the will of fresh anatomies.


5

WRITING JACOB TWO-TWO






Mordecai Richler










W-NG ABOUT WRlTING ;,something I find excrutiating, embarrassing,   even  dangerous,  and  so  I  usually  beg  off  such  an  assignment, pleading  a  slipped  disc,  other  commitments,  or  falling  back  on  my  favourite A. J. Liebling anecdote.
The  late A. J. Liebling, a superb stylist, was once sent a batch of how-to-write
books for  review. He  promptly  returned  them  to the editor  with  a note saying the only way to write was well and  how you did it was your own damn  business.
0, I agree, and  how I agree, but I have also, alas, agreed to write something for this special issue of Canadian  Literature on the writing of books for children, and what follows is to honour that commitment.
I  have  five children  who, when  they  were very young, were told  again  and again  it  was too early for  them  to read Cocksure. Or  even The  Apprenticeship of  Duddy  Kravitz. Well  then,  one of them  asked, not unreasonably,  isn't  there anything  of yours we are not too young to read? The short answer was no, but  I also promised that one day I would write something that would be just for them; and that's how I came  to write  jacob Two-Two Meets The  Hooded  Fang. The book was meant  to be family fun,  with  certain  built-in  family  jokes. It  began, innocently  enough,  as a  bedtime  tale  told  to amuse our  youngest child, Jacob, and as it made  him  (and  even the others)  giggle I started  to write it down.
To backtrack  briefly.
As a child, I never read  children's  books myself, but cut  my intellectual  teeth on  Superman, Captain   Marvel, and  The   Batman,  moving  on  from  there  to Ellery Queen  and  Perry  Mason, and finally, at the age of twelve or thereabouts, to  the  first  novel  that  I  ever  read,  All  Quiet  On  The  Western  Front. So my experience  of children's  books, such as it is, came to me from  reading  aloud  to our children,  an office that is usually filled by my wife. In  reading aloud to them

6

WRITING JACOB TWO-TWO

I was somewhat shocked to discover that  a few classics old and  modern,  and  the incomparable Dr. Seuss, aside, most children's books were awfully boring or insufferably didactic  or sometimes both. These dreary, ill-written books were conceived for  profit or  to teach  the kids racial  tolerance, hygiene, or other knee­ jerk liberal  responses. In  Canada, tiresome Eskimo or  Indian  legends seemed to be the  rule. In  contemporary children's  stories parents  were never  hungover  or short-tempered  and  the  kids  were  generally  adorable.  I decided  if  I ever  got round  to writing a book for  my kids its intention  would be to amuse. Pure  fun, not instruction, is what  I had in mind.
But  I resisted sitting  down  to  jacob Two-Two for more than  a year, because I also have a prejudice  against  children's  books, too many  of which are  written by third-rate  writers for children  already old enough  to enjoy at least some adult books. Say,  Mark  Twain,  some Dickens, certainly  The  Scarlet  Pimpernel,  and our own Farley Mowat  on the north. Put simply, I think bright  children  beyond the age of twelve are ready for the real stuff, properly selected. Presented  with it, they will respond or are already beyond the pale, destined to be Reader's Digest subscribers no matter  what you do.
So  jacob was to be for the younger child, our Jacob actually,  who was not yet ready  for adult  books. Writing  it, really, was not very different  than  writing  an adult  novel, which is to say it was largely hard  work, and,  as is usually the case with me, went through  many drafts. I did not worry overmuch  about  vocabulary, my feeling being that  if a child didn't  understand  a word he could look it up in a dictionary.  On the other  hand,  I did feel a rape scene might  be inappropriate. I wrote it, first of all, for my own pleasure (and in fulfilment of a rash promise) . Of course, I hoped, as I always do, that it would appeal  to a large audience, but that is never a consideration in the actual writing.
Something else.
I have  no  special  attitude   towards  children  as a  breed.  They  are,  after  all, merely little people, some of them obnoxious, many more stupid, and a few, a cherished few, absolutely enchanting.
The  success of  jacob  Two-Two has surprised,  even embarrassed  me. It  was immediately  accepted  for  publication  in England  and  Canada and,  after some­ thing like seven rejections in the  U.S.A., was finally taken on there by  my adult book publisher, Knopf.  It  has come out in a Bantam  edition  and  will soon be a Puffin. It  has been  translated  into several languages.  Christopher  Plummer  has done a delightful  recording  of the story and  there  has also been  a  film version, which may be released one of these days. The  Children's Theatre in Toronto is to  present  a  musical  adaptation this autumn.  Most  delightful  of all,  hardly  a week goes by when I don't  get a batch of letters from children in Canada  or the United  States. They want to know if it's a true story or just something I made up out  of my own head.  My favourite  letter, one I keep pinned  to a board  on my

7

WRITING JACOB TWO-TWO

office wall,  is from  a boy  who  begins  by saying,  "I really liked  your  book Jacob
Two-Two Meets The  Hooded Fag."
Ironically, I suppose, jacob Two-Two, in hard  cover, has already outsold  even my most successful adult  novel, St. Urbain's Horseman. Maybe I missed my true vocation.







PERCY
 


Dennis Lee


I

Percy was a pixie,
A pixie of renown.
He played his little pixie pipe
All around  the town.

He played a pixie hornpipe
He played a pixie lay
And people came from blocks around
To hear  the pixie play.

For Percy played it roundabout
And Percy played it square
And Percy played the rhythms
That were dancing in the air.

But Percy had a problem
And here is what it was:
He loved his sweet old mother, but
She looked like Santa Claus.

Her beard was overwhelming.
Her  belly was a sight.
And Percy wondered why this was, As any pixie might,

For other little pixies never
Had  to shave their mother, Nor wrap her in a table-cloth
When visitors came over.

8

POEM

So Percy's  pixie piping
Grew  wizened, bleak and  mute, Till  Percy sold his pixie pipe
And  bought a business suit.



II

Returning from  the office
One  windy winter day
Percy met  a wizard
With  an eye of steely grey.

He spoke a sudden warning,
Which  sounded fierce and  weird:
"Don't feed your  Mum chrysanthemums­ Or else she'll  grow a beard.

"And  if she's  beaten  with  a cat
Her  stomach's sure  to swell." Percy gave a cry of grief
As to the road  he fell.

"I fed my Mum chrysanthemums! I beat her with a cat!
And  that  is why her beard  grew long
And why she seems so fat!

"Alas for all my piping
Alas for all my glee
My Mother looks like Santa Claus
And all because  of me."

Then Percy stumbled home again
And took his business suit
And gave it to a Mission for
The  Wholly Destitute.

He went to seek his pixie pipe
He sought  for forty days
He cried, "At  last I comprehend
The  error  of my ways."

And in that  time of trial
He wandered high and low, A pixie with a burden
Of remorse  and  burning woe;

9

POEM

Yet he received  a vision
Of what  his life was for,
And  he regained his piping  lip
And all his pixie lore.



IJJ

Now Percy is a pixie
Of consummate renown. He plays his little  pixie pipe
All around the town.

He plays the pixie hornpipe
He plays the pixie lay
And people  come  from miles around
To  hear  the  pixie  play.

And yet, if all the truth be told, They  come to watch  another:
A slim, clean-shaven dancer  by
The name  of Percy's Mother.

She dances like a leprechaun
She dances like an elf
She dances like a ray of gold
Upon a silver shelf.

Her  slender  belly shimmers
Her  step is sweet and  thin
And she displays, while Percy plays, A lean  and  silky chin.

And  sometimes when  the people
Begin to clap and stare,
They ask him why his mother's face
Is so devoid  of hair,

And how she keeps her waistline
At an age when  others spread. And Percy gives a crinkled  grin
As though his wits had fled:

"If Mother gets too bristly
If Mother gets too fat
I stroke  her with  chrysanthemums
And  feed her like a cat."

10

POEM

Then Percy and  his mother
Both solemnly arise
And Percy pipes them off again
With  glory in his eyes

And all his pixie piping is
Hosanna in the street, A ticklish hallelujah
For  the music in their feet,

And Percy's  mother dances
Like a prophetess of old,
And all their  ways are silver ways
And all their  songs are gold.












I JITTEMPT  ONCE MORE TO CONJURE

Elizabeth  Brewster


Smaller, colder  again
I crouch once more over paper pen  in  hand
as always comforted by these words.
As always?

Is it gone, then,  the lifting spirit that  could alter  all
make  the world  whirl and shine?

Wand, wand, come again.
Come,  Grimalkin, my cat, come.
Invisible cards,  open your pack like a fan -
let out king, queen,  knight, serving-man.

I I

POEM

Black  books of memory,  I conjure you-open. I raise the dead.
Yellow as goldenrod
the child's hair  wound  in a curl in my mother's Bible
flies again to the child's  head.
Am I that  child?

My Bonnie lies over the ocean my sister sang
in the house with  diamond­
shaped window panes.

We walked  by a green shore the seashore
tonguetwisting our  tongues while  the wind  sang.

0 Bonnie  knight crusading over sea,
what  happened to your handsome armor?
You are drowned, you have never reached  me.

The old king and  queen lie in  the snow-cold burying ground
under  the dark  boughs
of fir and  spruce.

Where are  the little princesses who lived in the turreted palace? Their serving-man, old Time,
has turned his malice
against their  buttercup-golden crowns

Oh,  yellow gold of goldenrod and  yellow
dandelions turned white blowing  fluffed
seeds away








12

PRODUCTION PROBLEMS




Margaret Atwood






J,,. NO  AUTHORITY ON  CHILDREN'S BOOKS, either as a <eader or as a writer. As a reader, I tend to choose books for my child that will not drive me crazy the tenth, fiftieth or hundredth  time I read them. I like them to have a
strong  plot, humour,  and  bright  pictures, though  I  require  these things not out of any  theory about  what  such  books ought to be, but simply because they hold the interest of small children.
I suppose I hope that  the stories I write will have similar  qualities.  I haven't written  very  many  children's  stories. Those  I have  written   have  been  for  the youngest age group  possible. They  have simple plots and  vocabularies,  they are very short, they tend to rhyme, and they always have happy  endings.
A critic of the  type  prone  to  analyzing Beatrix  Potter's  Dark  Period  would
probably say that  I write these stories not just for children but for myself, because I can do things in them  that  the age denies me in adult fiction and  poetry. Such an analysis would not be entirely wrong:  I wrote Up  In The  Tree, for example, at  the same  time  I was writing  Surfacing. Perceptive  readers  may  find a  simi­ larity in theme, though a slight difference in treatment.
Writers  who  work  in  various  forms are  always in  danger  of  being  thought frivolous. This  comes from the specialist view that  we tend  to have, now, about all forms of work. "Work" is the one narrow area you are supposed  to dedicate yourself to. "Work" is what  you don't enjoy. "Work" hurts. "Play," on the other hand, is enjoyable, but, because of the absence of pain, it is somehow not serious. Sooner  or  later,  every  writer  encounters  from  almost  every  interviewer  some question  aimed  at  getting  the  writer to divulge how much  he suffers. Descrip­ tions of suffering somehow validate  a writer in the eyes of his audience.  This is probably  why writing  for  children  is still viewed  as a  kind  of  non-writing: it doesn't  look as though  it hurts  enough to be taken seriously. It does no good to say that  your "adult" writing, even your most dismal and  depressing stories and poems, is a joyful experience. If writing contains pain, it must have been painful to do.

13

PRODUCTION PROBLEMS

And  I know many  will flinch in disbelief when I say that  in some ways Up In The  Tree  was a much  more  painful  book to work on than  Surfacing  was. Not that  it was painful  to write;  but,  in a fit of enthusiasm,  I had said  that  I would illustrate it myself. And that was when the pain set in.
Up In The  Tree  is not "Canadian" in content;  in fact, I think self-consciously
"B is for Beaver" books for children  are probably a mistake, since it is very hard to make them interesting.  ( "Q is for the Queen of England"  would have exactly the  same  problem.  Children   instinctively  rebel  against  books  that  are  heavily weighted  in  favour  of  instructing   their  minds  as  opposed  to  delighting  their imaginations.)   So the writing of it had nothing to do with my Canadian citizen­ ship. But the choices about  the illustrations-how many, how big, what kind of printing,  how many colours -had a lot to do with the fact that  the book would be  published  in  Canada. Anyone  who has shopped  for children's  books  knows what   the  competition   is  like.  Low-priced,  excellent,  four-colour   English  and American  books abound. Canadian books are often either higher-priced  or some­ what  drab.  Why?  It's  the economics of publishing once  more:  except  for block­ busters like Alligator  Pie, the  print  runs in Canada simply aren't  large enough to bring the price down.
All the choices I made  about  the appearance of the book were determined  by
this fact. Up In  The  Tree  was originally to have been eight by ten, with alter­ nating  two- and four-colour  two-page spreads. To cut costs, it came down to four by five, with two colours throughout. To save on typesetting, I hand-lettered the whole  thing.  At  one  point  I  was going to do the  colour  separations  myself, to avoid  those costs as well, but  I  found  it too painful  to  work with  acetate  film, so my  publisher  took this over.  I  did  the line drawings  and  the  publisher's  art department did  the  overlays for  each  colour. What  we  avoided  by this method were the  high costs of photographing a finished,  painted  picture  and separating  the  colours  afterwards.  But  because  of this, and  the  two-colour  limitation,  the illustrations  have  a  rather   stencil  or  folk-art  quality.  I  would  have  preferred watercolour,  which allows for more blends and shadings, but we had to be aware at every turn of the necessity of keeping the cost down. That is why the trees are blue  rather  than  brown  and  the sun is pink rather  than yellow. Pure economics.
Why  was this experience  so painful? Only because I didn't  know what  I was doing. Although  I had  once done lettering and illustration for the poster business I  ran  in youth,  I'd  forgotten  everything  about  it, and I  was faced at every turn with my own incompetence  and  with the strictures of the form. How do you get everyone's heads and  bodies the same size? How do you draw a giant owl, flying, sideways?  I tortured   myself with  peeks at Helen Oxenbury  and  other  mistresses of the art.  I longed for an art  course or for some catastrophe  that  would get me out of this mess. Measured  on the pain scale, Up In The  Tree is my most serious book.

PRODUCTION PROBLEMS


But  the  lesson,  if any, is that producing books for  children in  Canada  is some­ thing like  making movies  for  adults in  Canada. The small  potential market limits what you  can  do  successfully and still  compete with  the  low  prices of  imports. Does  this  mean that in order to  have  a financially viable children's book  culture, unsullied  by  subsidies  or   special  tariffs,  we  will  have   to   practice  a   kind   of minimalism?






IN THE GJIRDEN
OF THE LOST CHILDREN

David Knight


In the mansion of lost children white  predominates
and sometimes  in their minds there are no more  walls
as such
but long unsought limits respected
disquieting in their  precision;
the small details of half-remembered realities  traced  and
traced  again
with  painstaking attentiveness.

In that  garden they are like children in their innocence and trust;
mute  to the  world their  thoughts
a solitary  walk through landscaped lawns that  slip away.

The  lost children linger among the paths and hedges trimmed so neat
and  with infinite  patience
they wander and  murmur their  legends to the uncaring flowers.

CANADIAN  CHILDREN'S BOOKS
A Bookseller's Point of View





Dianne Woodman








CAN vou IMAGINE a Canadian b"'u.ellcr NOT written by either  Berton,  Mowat  or  Laurence  which  has sold 125,ooo  copies since it  was published  four  years  ago?  It's  a  runaway  Canadian   success now  in  its sixth printing,  a book of poetry written  by a serious academic  with a sense of humour and a love for the sound and feel of words.
This  incredibly  successful  book  is of course  Alligator   Pie,  a  Canadian  chil­ dren's  book,  whose  author, Dennis  Lee,  is becoming  as familiar  to  Canadian children as their favourite figures on television.
They  love his rhymes,  his sense of the absurd and  the rollicking good humour
of  Alligator   Pie  and  his  other  two  books for  children:   Garbage   Delight   and Nicholas   Knock. Combined  sales of  these three  titles are  over  20o,ooo  copies. Not bad by any standard.
For many years now, publishers have told us that  they can't  publish children's
titles  because  they  can't   make  any  money on  them  and  they  can  quote  quite dismal  sales figures to support  their  case. But then  we look at  the  phenomenal success Lee and  his publisher Macmillan  of Canada  have had and we realize that there are people out  there  who are willing to support  Canadian children's books if they are of quality,  have integrity and are not sloppily put together.
May  Cutler,  publisher  of  Tundra books, provides another  example  of  high
quality  children's  book  publishing  that  has been successful commercially. Mary of Mile  18 by Ann Blades was the first book Cutler published, and it has done extremely  well, both  in  Canada and  abroad,  as have the  Kurelek  titles she has published.  Cutler  appears to  be  the  only Canadian publisher  who aggressively seeks foreign sales and  is making  an effort to buy the rights of acclaimed  Euro­ pean children's books to introduce to the North American market.

A BOOKSELLER'S VIEW

The  success stories of Dennis Lee and  May  Cutler  are reflections of the scene today in children's  books in Canada. There  are a lot of things  happening across the  country  and  one  of  the  most encouraging  is  the  number   of independent bookstores specializing  in  children's  books. They  stretch  from  one  end  of  the country  to the other.  In  the Toronto  area  alone there  are four, one of them  the well-known  Children's   Bookstore which  has  had  a  spectacular  success in  only four  years. It wasn't  the first children's  bookstore in  the country-that  honour goes to  the tiny Storybook  Comer  in Toronto-but it has done  a lot to make Canadians aware  that  the children's book industry in Canada  does exist.
Word  of mouth  is still what  sells books best-provided  the  books are  avail­ able in bookstores when people are  talking about  them. But next to that, it is the newspaper  and  magazine  bookpage  that  generates sales. It's  encouraging  to see the  Globe  and  Mail  featuring  more  and  more  reviews of  children's  books and Chatelaine   often   featuring   children's   book  reviews  in   Michele   Landsberg's  column.  The  Edmonton   ]ournal  now has a children's  page  and  regularly  runs book reviews written by children.
These are helpful sources for the bookseller who tries to keep up with the latest publications.  So  is  Canadian   Books  for Children  by  Irma   McDonough. The second  edition  of  this  excellent  bibliography  has  just  been  published  by  the University  of  Toronto   Press.  It  gives a  very  complete  list of  children's   books published  both in  French  and  in  English. In  Review, edited  by McDonough, is another  good  source  of reviews of children's  books along  with  Quill  & Quire, the newspaper of the book industry.
In  Edmonton   we're  fortunate to have  a  number  of people interested  in  and
active in the promotion  of books for children. The  Children's Literature Round­ table  is a  group  who  meet  informally  once  a  month  to discuss their  favourite (and  sometimes not  so favourite)   children's  books. The  University  of  Alberta, like most universities across the country, now offers courses in Canadian children's  literature  which  are  always oversubscribed. Jon  Stott,  one  of the  lecturers  and most popular  professors in  this field, issues The  World  of  Children's  Books, an informative   quarterly   distributed   nationally   and   internationally.  It features reviews of children's literature of Canada  and all over the world.
The  Children's  Book Centre  in Toronto,  formed  last year  through  funds  pro­
vided mainly by the Canada  Council, was created to foster public awareness of Canadian children's  books. Their  Children's  Book Festival, promoted  across the country  last  November,  was a great success. Booksellers, librarians  and  teachers who  participated   in  the  promotion  found  both  children  and  parents  eager  to read more and learn more about  Canadian  books.
To  get adequate  distribution  of the 55  "Choice" Canadian children's  books picked for promotion last November, the Centre had to rely on the good will and co-operation  of  the  independent   bookstores across  the  country,  because  they

A BOOKSELLER'S VIEW

appear  to  be  the  only  retailers  prepared  to make  a special effort  on  behalf  of children's  books.
The Big Three-Classic's, Coles and W. H. Smith-didn't show any interest. In  fact, the chains  have so far  ignored the renaissance in children's  books in this country.  And that  despite the dilemma of many people in many areas whose only access to books for sale is through a chain bookstore.
Last  November  chain  bookstores lost a lot of money when they didn't  bother to stock the children's  books recommended  for the Children's Book Festival. According  to an Edmonton  school librarian  who'd  planned on buying the recom­ mended  titles at a chain store, all she found  was Anne  of Green  Gables!
When  she came  to our  store, she was delighted  to find an entire store fixture
set aside for the display of the  CBC Choices. She was able to get everything she needed at one store in one single shopping trip.
There's a certain  mystique about children's books that seems to scare booksellers
off and  perhaps  we should  be making  an  effort to help them  to demystify  chil­ dren's  books. My  dream  is to see a team  of two or three  knowledgeable  people travelling across the country giving short workshops on children's books for book­ store personnel. It's  a field that  demands a lot of knowledge and the standards of children's  bookselling in chain  operations  could  be raised  considerably  if mana­  gers, buyers, and  people working on the floor could attend these seminars. Perhaps the Canada  Council is listening?
In the meantime,  the Canadian children's  book market is getting stronger and
publishers are  beginning  to realize it. Picture  books and fiction for older children are steadily improving  but it's in the area of nonfiction publishing that  Canadian books are  most lacking. There's  virtually nothing for preschoolers and  very little for children  aged  6 to 9 years except for a few titles on  our  native  people and some sport books.
The  age  9  to  I 2   nonfiction  books are  more  numerous  but  they  are  mainly
books that  have been produced  for the educational  market and  have had a spill­ over onto the trade  side. Fitzhenry  & Whiteside is doing more than  most in this dual field but it still isn't enough.
The  Alberta  government  has  just announced  an  $8.5 million publishing  pro­ gram  to  produce  books  with  Canadian  content  for use in Alberta  schools  and one  can  only  hope  that  some  of  the  titles  will  be suitable  and  available  for distribution  to the general public through bookstores.
McClelland  & Stewart  is a  publisher  that  has  consistently produced  quality
children's   books.  It  recently  reinstated  the  Little  Brown  Canadian  Children's Book Award  which  over and  above a cash prize guarantees  publication  in both Canada  and  the United  States. The  juvenile paperback series "Canadian Favour­ ites" has kept in print  a number  of Canadian children's classics including several of the L. M. Montgomery titles.

18

A BOOKSELLER'S  VIEW

The  past fall season, McClelland  &  Stewart  published  twelve new hardcover books of children's  fiction and  launched  the ambitious  but  ultimately  unsuccess­ ful M agook series.
What  went  wrong  with  Magook?  Despite two years of "market research,"  it
seems the marketing  aspect didn't  come off too well. The  format  of the M agooks is awkward.  Neither  a magazine  nor a book, their size is an  in-between  defying display on conventional magazine shelves or regular paperback  racks so the mass­ market distribution M&S counted on just didn't happen.
From a bookseller's point of view we did quite well with them and  utilized the
dump  bins provided. We weren't  happy with the fact that we had to compete not only  with  supermarkets   but  also  with  Scholastic  for  the  market.  Their   price offered  through  the  schools  was  lower  than  we could  sell them  for  and  that seemed unfair.
The  M agooks look attractive, are slick and  have lots of appealing  colour for kids, although  they are  bound  in such a way that they are difficult for a child to hold  and  read  easily. It was an  an ambitious  undertaking  and  it's  unfortunate that  the  marketing  got  off track.  Booksellers did  their  part  to  get  behind  the project and so did school and public librarians.
A lot of people  want  to buy  Canadian   books for their  children  and  go into
bookstores specifically looking  for  them.  Although  we feel that  Canadian  chil­ dren's books shouldn't  be put in a separate "Canadiana" section, for the conveni­ ence of our  customers we put small red maple leaf stickers on  the spines so they can  be easily seen on  the shelf. Some of the most popular  books at  the Village Bookshop  are  Canadian  titles, such  as  Hug  Me,   jacob  Two  Two   Meets  the Hooded  Fang, Little  Badger and the Fire Spirit, and, of course, the Dennis Lee books.
Selling children's  books in Canada means an equal measure of satisfaction and
frustration. It's  frustrating to be unable to find a good source of bilingual  books as well as other  foreign  language  editions of the classics. We have a number  of schools in Edmonton  that  have instituted a bilingual Ukrainian-English program (as  well as  French-English)  and  so far  we have  found  only  one  title  for  the beleaguered  school  librarians-Kyrylo, The   Tanner- published  last  fall  by Kids Can Press.
We'd  like to carry more books by French-Canadian writers  and  would like to
know  the  availability  of  English-Canadian   books in  French.  There's a  French edition  of  Anne  of  Green  Gables  listed in  Canadian  Books  for Children.  The publisher is Hachette  but  we've been unable to find a source for Hachette books. We're  hampered  in Western Canada by lack of access to wholesalers who distri­ bute  this type of  book. A letter  we wrote  to a  wholesaler  in  Montreal  a  few months  ago  remains  unanswered   and  will  have  to  be  rewritten  in  rusty  high school French, it seems.

19

A BOOKSELLER'S VIEW

It's  frustrating to open  Hurtig's Canadian  ABC  Book for  the first time. Any attempt  to be original, funny  or "Canadian" is negated by racial and sexual stereotypes that  make  the  book objectionable  to adults and  less than  educational to  Canadian children.  It's  another  example of the urgent  need for  professional editors  who  care  about  quality  and  integrity  in  Canadian books for  Canadian children.
There's  a lot of satisfaction  in reading at our weekly story hour  Maria  Camp­
bell's newly published  Little  Badger and the Fire Spirit, and  having the children respond so positively to the  warm  and  loving text and illustrations  that  they ask for the book to be read to them again and again.
There's the satisfaction  of Hug  Me, written by Patti Stren,  a young Canadian woman  who studied  with  Maurice  Sendak and  who has produced  a small gentle book  whose text  and  illustrations  are  what  picture  books are  all about.  Neither would  be  complete  without   the  other.  There's  satisfaction  in seeing  children respond to the honesty of the story and pictures.
I  find  it  encouraging   that  we sell more  preschool books than  books in  any other  age category. More  young parents are trying to introduce their  children  to books than  ever before. Although  we haven't  detected any sales resistance to the expensive hardcover  picture  book, the paperback picture book is becoming increasingly popular. There  aren't  enough Canadian books done in this format. Elizabeth  Cleaver's  How Summer Came to Canada went out of print  recently in cloth and  will be reprinted  this summer in paperback. That's good news and one hopes other publishers will follow suit with their out of print books.
We  now have  a  public  most eager  to know more about  Canadian children's
books;  we have  reviewers in  the  media  willing to do their  part;  we have com­
mitted  and  knowledgeable  booksellers all across the country  (albeit  not enough)
-now  all we need are  Canadian publishers who will overcome  their  reticence, hire  good  children's  editors  and  designers and  make  an  aggressive aim  at  the market.
Patsy  Aldana,  the  new  president  of  the ACP  and  the  head  of Groundwood Books, a new publishing company specializing in children's books, was quoted recently as saying that  Canadian publishers in 1977 produced  only 6o children's books and  made  a plea for government assistance to increase this number substantially.
Greater  quantity,  unfortunately, doesn't  mean  better  quality.  May  I  make a final  plea  for  professionalism?  May  publishers  be  inspired  to  hire  competent children's  editors from  wherever  they can find them. We need editors who have a knowledge not only of the  Canadian scene but also the international world of children's  literature. They  should  have an awareness of racism and sexism at the very youngest age levels, an eye for illustration as well as content, and the honesty to produce  books that  will be loved by children and adults everywhere.

20

A BOOKSELLER'S VIEW


CHILDREN'S  BOOKSTORES
NOVA   SCOTIA The  Book Room
1664-1666  Granville  Street,  Halifax,  B3J 2N7
A Pair of Trindles Bookshoppe, Old  Red Store
Historic  Properties, Halifax,  B3L 1W5
Readmore Books
Bayers Rd. Shopping Centre, Halifax,  B3L 2C2
QU:eBEC
Books and  Things
Box 214, Morin  Heights, P.Q. JOR lHO
ONTARIO
E. Lindsay  Rogin Ltd. Children's Books & Toys
691 Ouellette Avenue, Windsor,  N9A 4J4
A Different Drummer
513 Locust Street, Burlington, L7S 1V3
The  Albion Bookshop
376 Old  Kingston  Rd., Highland Creek
Green  Gables  Books
40 Main  Street  North,  Markham, L3P 1X5
Glengarry Bookstore
45 Main  St. S., P.O. Box 819, Alexandria,
KOC lAO
The  Children's Book Store
108A Avenue  Rd., Toronto, M5R  2H3
The  Gallery  Shop, The  Art Gallery  of Ontario
317 Dundas St. W., Toronto, MST 1G4
Longhouse  Bookshop
630 Yonge Street,  Toronto, M4Y 1Z8
SCM  Book Room
333 Bloor St. W., Toronto, M5S 1W7
 

Storybook  Corner
3 Bedford  Park Avenue, Toronto, MSM 1H8
Books and  More Books
41 Brock Street,  Kingston, K7L 1R7
The  Bookery of Ottawa
463 Sussex Drive, Ottawa, KlN 6Z4
MANITOBA
Child's  Play:  Toys for Children, Ltd.
100 Osborne  Street,  Winnipeg,  R3L  1Y5
Growing  Minds Ltd.
441 Portage  Avenue, Winnipeg,  R3B 2C9
Toad  Hall Toys
250 McDermot Avenue, Winnipeg,  R3B OSS
SASKATCHEWAN The  Bookworm's Den
Grosvenor  Park Shopping Centre, Saskatoon
ALBERTA Aspen Books
# 1-10808  Whyte Avenue, Edmonton, T6E  2B3
The  Village Bookshop
10212- 140 Street,  Edmonton, T5N  2L4
BRITISH  COLUMBIA
The  Cat & The  Fiddle  Bookshop
4529 West lOth Avenue,  Vancouver, V6R  2J2
Duthie's Books for Children
915 Robson Street,  Vancouver, V6Z  lAS
Hager  Books
2176 West 41st Avenue, Vancouver, V6M  lZl











CANADIAN AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available at
the bookstore
UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
2075  WESBROOK PLACE
VANCOUVER, B.C. V6T lWS /228-4741



21

THE TALE OF A STORY




Elisabeth Hopkins







cmLDREN'S BOOKS HAVE BEEN Of/l'eat interest to me for the  past seventy-nine  years;  that  is as far  back as I can remember.  I could read when  I  was four  years old and  a year later  I  was reading  books for pleasure. I read  anything  I  could  get  hold  of and  was fond  of the  many  well-illustrated books  that   were  then  available   at  low  prices. Books for  the  Bairns  and  the Bouverie  Series  of  books  cost I d  each  so  were  well  within  the  range  of the majority  of our  budgets.  Much  of what  I  read  would  now  be frowned on, not by children,  but  by psychologists, teachers and other interested adults, parents excluded. The  latter  naturally  want to share the tales they enjoyed in their youth with  their  offspring. They  do  not care if the book is sexist or whether  the hero is a boy or girl;  nor do children.  Like the majority of children  I identified myself with  the  hero, were  he male  or female. I  thoroughly  enjoyed a moral  tale and Grimm's  Fairy Tales  did  not frighten  me as I realized the stories were not real. We  had  no  horrors  in  our  lives and  it was exciting to  read  about  them.  It  is strange  that  after  centuries  of fairy tales, there  now seems to be a movement  to have them banned.
For some years I was manager  of a bookstore and  became interested  in books from  another  angle. Of course adults  buy far more children's  books than  do the children  themselves.  I  observed  that  the  younger  children,  even if they  could read,  chose by  the  illustrations,  whereas older  children  wanted  to  know about the  book's contents  and  were always pleased if the scene was set in a place they knew. Unless they themselves painted or drew, illustrations meant little to them. Parents  tended  to look for old  favourites of their  childhood.  Other  adults  were more choosy and  were sometimes  chauvinistic  in their approach. Teachers  were critical  and  viewed  the  matter   from  all  points, but  naturally  their  own  tastes tended  to  influence  them,  irrespective  of the  worth  of  the  book.  I  recall one customer,  an elderly Canadian who wanted  a book for a ten-year-old.  I showed her a classic, published  in  the  Everyman's  Library. She gave it a brief look and said  "Too   English."  I  pointed  out  that  though  published  in  England  it  was written  by an  American  about  a little American  boy, but  this did  not alter her


22

TALE OF A STORY

obvious  prejudice,  one  that  prevents  our  children  from  sometimes  having  the best of the arts.
When  buying  I  tried  not to let my preferences blind me, but  I found  it hard to accept books with grotesque or even hideous illustrations or with babyish or ungrammatical  language.   I  could  not  see  why  lambs   (not   yet  called  "baby sheep")   which  are  beautiful  animals  should  be given enormous  eyes, legs like stilts and outsized ears-caricatures in fact. I came to the sad conclusion that it was a reflection of the ugly world in which we live, peopled by those whose chil­ dren  are  raised  where  there seems to be little of real  beauty. But let  us  expose our  children  to all  that  there  is and  one way to do this is through  books,  well­ written  and  illustrated.  Every book written for children  must  perforce be educa­ tional,  for  they  are  learning  and  expanding  their  vocabularies.  For  this  reason they  should  never  be  written  down  to,  and  what  is written  should  be  clear, concise and grammatically  correct.
Those  of us who can  remember  our  childhood  know that  much  of our  time was spent  in  an  imaginary  world.  One  could  easily pass from  the  real  to  the unreal. I used to envy the little girls in Mrs. Molesworth's delightful stories, "The Cuckoo Clock" and  "The Tapestry  Room," who had such wonderful  adventures when they went through  the thin  veil of the prosaic real world into the mystical fairy  one.  Chilren  lose this gift soon enough,  so we should  do  nothing  to  dis­ courage it.
Having these thoughts in mind, I was delighted when David Robinson of Talon Books asked me to  write  and  illustrate  a  book for  children.  I  had  in  the  past entertained  some of my small friends with stories I  had  written  and  illustrated for  them. Although  I  was pleased with  the idea  I  had  also some trepidation. I had  destroyed all that  I  had  written  in the past, so I had  to start  from scratch and learn  all the technicalities. Fortunately  I had  David  to teach  and  guide me. Living on a small island, as I do, I could not go to book stores to see how others approached   the  matter  and  I  did  not  have  the  benefit of  a  public  library.  I thought  all I had  to do was write a story, do some illustrations and send them to the publisher to do the rest. I soon found there was more to making a book than that.  Instructed   by  David  and  with  help  from  experienced  friends,  I  became absorbed in the craft.  There  was much to learn;  the illustrations  had to be done to exact  measurements  and  there  had  to be the right number  of them. The  text had to be cut so that  it would fit into the space allotted  to it under  the picture. I  learnt  what  the  expressions bleeding  and  scripture  meant.  I wanted  the  book to be entertaining, and  from  what  I hear it has proved so, in spite of its moral bias. By stressing that  the animals  lived peacefully and  omitting  all reference  to belligerency,  I  hoped   that   children  might  realize  that   one  can  obtain   one's desires and  needs by love and  honesty without  any fighting.  I  hoped,  too, that the readers  would be made  aware  of the fact  that  beasts are  part  of nature,  as

TALE OF  A STORY

we ourselves are,  and  that  they should  be treated  with  compassion, mercy and justice and not exploited for our amusement or pleasure.
Having  decided  on the fairy tale pattern  I had to think of original  characters, and  a  cougar  won.  I  could  not  recall a  cougar  being the  hero  of a  book for children.  So  The  Painted Cougar was conceived and  I  got  to  work.  I  do  not know now how I began  or whether  illustrations or the text came first;  probably first one and  then  the other. But I had my cougar hero to work on and  now had to send him on his adventures. For some years I had been painting  beasts deco­ rated  with flowers and symbols. Sometimes they wore wrist watches, necklaces or other  adornments. I felt I could use this fantasy on Leon, as I named the cougar. In  his anxiety  to please and  win his lady love, he could have his body decorated with  paintings  of the  various things, new and  exciting to him, that  he had seen on his journey from  the desert to man's  world. This gave me the opportunity of introducing a  dragon,  always  a  favourite  with  children,  which  with  a  kindly snake  performed  the  beautifying.  I gave the story an  unexpected  (I hope)  end­ ing with a slight moral tone.
Various alarms  and  excursions occurred  when it went to the printers. Although
I had  many  people  read  it  and  report  on mistakes or omissions in  the  text or pictures,  some  crept   in,  and   David   would  come  rushing  to  the  island  and patiently  point  out  what  was wrong  and  wait  for me  to correct  it. I am  now much  more tolerant  of mistakes I find in books which have been carefully edited!
At last it was finished and  the first copy was in my hands. To me the months
spent on the  book were instructive,  fulfilling and satisfying, in spite of the mixed feelings of pride and  unworthiness  I experienced when I first saw it in print.






Jl  GIRL IS FJILLING
 


Theresa Moritz


This leg with silver stocking and red toenails
I found while I was counting zinnias,
is no more a curiosity than the gloved hand
on the neighbor's porch
or the ear the mailman found and carries with him now
for listening.

POEMS

They tell us
legs and  arms and  hips gather
at the subway's  remoter stations and  torsoes are propped
in phone  booths or with the mannequins in display  windows
and  fingers bundled three and  four  together are distributed in boxes
emptied of their  greeting  cards.

A girl is falling from  the roof
of a high rise in the suburbs and  as she passes every story she offers to the lookers-on
a hand  a knee a face.
But her situation arouses little interest.



THE FROZEN CHILD

I liked it when  the frozen child came  to visit me.
We cut out ice box cookies
and  from  the freezer  I would bring  him a finger or some  toes
he dropped the last time he was here.

He could  sit very well in a while and  always wiped  up the water that  collected around his feet.
His favorite stories made him melt too fast
so we read  about dancing snowmen and  birds preserved in ice for spring and  the perennial flowers buried  alive in the frozen  ground.

I thought he must  have come
to help me understand his accident
or to warn  me of the coming  Ice Age. But yesterday on a frosted  windowpane he scratched a question mark,
and  I did not let him in.

IN TUNE WITH TOMORROW





Christie Harris








w.LE GROW>NG UP  ON  A  FRASER VALLEY farm,] liked going for the cows. Along the trails from the pasture, I could belt out  bits from Tennyson  and  Sir  Walter  Scott  without  anyone but  the cows hearing  me. And who were they to call anyone else stupid?
My father  was the storyteller in our family. Neighbours found amazing excuses
to come round  in the evenings or on Sunday  afternoons. And  although  his tales usually started  with "I mind  the  time ... ," we all realized that  they were more hilarious  than  true.  At  least, my mother  used to shake her head  over them and say, "What will people think of Ireland?"
Personally, I thought  Ireland  was great, filled as it obviously was with  prank­ sters, ghosts, "gentle  bushes"  and  deliciously shivery happenings.  I also  thought stories  were  great.  Clearly,  if they  had  any  purpose, it  was  entertainment. Of course the stories in the Sunday  School papers -for which I could hardly wait
-did seem to feature  worthier  characters.  But it took all kinds to make a world
-all kinds of stories.
Much  as I loved stories and  enjoyed pouring words on to paper, and  made my high school  pocket  money  writing  the  local news for the  weekly Columbian, I never  thought   of  being  a  writer.  Teachers  said  I should  be  a  mathematician. Instead,  I became  a primary  teacher.  And now that  I had an audience  infinitely more responsive than the cows had been, I plunged into story-telling.
It  was like a flash from  Heaven  the day it struck me that  I could tell my own
stories. Ideas  flooded  in so fast  that  I  could scarcely wait  for  recess, noon and after school. It  was hard  on  the school's foolscap supply;  but  at  the end of two weeks, I had  nine little nothings  to offer the Vancouver  Province for its weekend children's  page. And when they took the lot, I knew I had found  my thing.
By the  time I was married  and  starting  to raise my own  audience,  everybody was into radio.  We were all trying to write scripts; and  I, at least, was shooting mine in to the infant  CBC with  a lot more enthusiasm at my end  than  at theirs.

IN  TUNE  WITH  TOMORROW

However,  when Vancouver  had  to produce  A Child's Dream  of the  Coronation for  the  Official Programme  on the day of George VI's  crowning,  they  commis­ sioned  me to write the  book-and-lyrics for an hour-long  juvenile musical fantasy.
After that,  I went flat out for radio writing:  adult  and  juvenile plays, humor­
ous sketches, women's  talks, school broadcasts,  whatever-they-were-buying. And it was marvellous.  Every domestic disaster  could be turned  magically  into $25; and  I was never really convinced that it was juggling a career  with five children in  a big, inconvenient  old house in the country that  was turning  my hair  white before  I was thirty-five.  Radio  was so exciting  that  I  might  never  have  come round  to  books if Longmans  hadn't  asked me to turn  an  adventure serial  into my first book, Cariboo  Trail, published the year I turned  fifty. Not  unnaturally, my  pioneer  family  on  the  Trail   was Irish,  as my  pioneer  family  in  the  later Forbidden Frontier  was. I knew how it was with Irish  people. I could really see them  and  hear them as they moved through  the plot. So I could make others see them. A basic in writing stories.
When  I needed  young characters,  I could use my own children  and  the desk
full of notes I was making on them and their friends -making because I couldn't resist jotting down  the fascinating  things they said and  did. Children  were such interesting  people! They  were  even reluctantly  co-operative.  "We  know  you're just nosey, Mom,"  one of my daughters  told me. "But  we'll pretend  it's  because you're a literary lady, and tell you what you want to know."
Later, three of them really told me what I wanted to know about their growing­
up. They gave me mountains  of taped confessions to add to the notes in my desk. And  we all pretended  that  You  Have  to Draw  the  Line  Somewhere, Confessions of a Toe-Hanger, and  Let  X  Be Excitement were just fiction. Why they told me the  truth  on  those  tapes  was explained  by  my  toe-hanging  daughter one  day when she found  the confessing a bit rough.  "The  kids'll know if it's phoney," she told me. Another  bit of wisdom I treasured; you have to be honest with children.
When  I meet my young readers on tours, I find they delight in knowing that these family stories are the Awful Truth, remembered  with humour. And there's no need to tell them  about  the tears I shed and  the gasps I stifled, hearing  the Awful Truth from those tapes and wishing I could have done my part over again, better. Yet even remorse is to be treasured;  for when you're a writer,  no matter what  you're  going through,  part  of you is always standing  off there,  observing how it  feels to be going through   that.  Sooner or later,  you're  going  to  have  a character  filled with  remorse, or fear, or delight. And you'd  better  know how it feels because "The  kids'll know if it's phoney."
It's  one thing  to get into  the skin of people you've lived with. It's  something else again  to  get  into  the skin  of  people of another  time, another  culture.  Yet many of my books deal with  the  Northwest Coast Indians  of "Once in the days of very long ago, when things were different.... " I've always sensed that  people

27

IN  TUNE WITH TOMORROW

are  much  the same  under  different  skins; it's  the  code they  live by that  makes them  feel differently  about  the  things that  happen  to them.  Understanding the code of the Northwest Coast Indians, knowing their culture and their homeland involved  a  total  immersion  that  started  for  me  with  a  family  move  to Prince Rupert  in 1958.
Then,  a  series for  School  Broadcasts  plunged  me into  research;  research  led
me to the  tales collected  by ethnologists at  the turn  of the century -tales that seemed  to me  to match  the sophistication  of Northwest  Coast  Indian  art;  and trying  to  understand those  tales led me to knowledgeable  Indian  friends. Then, as always, natives were wonderfully generous in helping me to understand.
It was excitement  about  the magnificent art of Charles Edenshaw  that inspired Raven's   Cry,  the  true  story  of  a  line  of  Haida   Eagle  chiefs  who  were  great illustrators  of  the  tales  as  well as  great  chiefs. Before  I  started  talking  to the family on  the Queen  Charlotte  Islands, I had  many sessions with Bill Reid, the superb  artist  who  had  agreed  to be art  consultant  and  illustrator  for the  book. It was he who helped me to understand  the tragic sense of shame that had overwhelmed  a  proud,  artistically  gifted people at the coming of the white man.
By the  time  I  had  heard  the family stories, and  had  followed clues through old ships' logs in  the  archives,  I  had  become so immersed  in  that  world that  I began  to think  I was tuning  in on an old Haida  spirit.  I'd  run into something  I just could  not  find out  about.  I'd  go to bed worrying about  it. And, again  and again,  I'd  wake  up  knowing  what  had  happened,   just as if someone  had  told me. When  I'd  check out  the  idea,  again  and  again  it seemed  to be what  must have  happened.  But  when  I  mentioned  the old Haida  spirit  to my family, my scientific son said,  "Mom, you know  that  the subconscious is like a computer; feed  in  enough  good  data,  and  it's  going  to come  up  with  some  pretty  good answers."
Well, maybe.  But  I  rather  liked the old spirit idea. And  I like it even better
now, when  there  are  scientists who are  not all that  sure that  there aren't  spirit beings around  us.
It  was Raven's  Cry  that  first startled  me into the thought  that  the old Indian notions are very much  in tune with today, maybe even more in tune with tomor­ row. And that's great;  it's the adults of tomorrow I'm  writing for.
In  that  book there's  the  vision of Condohahtgha, the old shaman  who went
into  a  trance.  His spirit  self climbed  up  the sky ladder,  looked down,  and  saw Haida  villages wiped out  long before they actually  were wiped out  by smallpox. I  had  a little trouble  tracking  down  that story;  people were clearly embarrassed about  it. "Maybe it was  just a dream," they would tell me. At  the  time, I  was inclined to agree.
Then  the  book came  out.  And  my youngest son, a student  in the  6o's, said,
"Mom, my friends  are  very interested  in  that  recorded  case of astral  travelling

IN  TUNE WITH TOMORROW

-you know, out-of-body  experience." They  were interested,  too, in the  part  at the end  where Bill Reid had said he felt the ghost of Charles  Edenshaw  making him do his Haida  art a certain way.
I realized  something.  Not only was this old Indian  occult  thing  in  tune  with
today;  the old Indian reverence for nature was also very right for our ecologically­
oriented  youth.
The  natives had  claimed that  plants had a spirit self as well as a physical self. So, if they  needed  to cut down  a tree, they talked to it, explaining,  apologizing
-a practice  that  was scoffed at  as superstitious  nonsense. But now, isn't  every­ body  talking  to  a  tree?  Aren't  scientists wiring  plants  up  to  a  polygraph  and discovering that they can even read your mind?
There's  even the odd scientist postulating an invisible world around  us, a world of matter   vibrating  at  such  a  high frequency  that  we can't  tune  in  on  it. But WHAT   IF  people living closer to nature,  people with keener senses heightened by prayer  and  fasting,  by hypnotic  drums and  dancing,  actually  were tuning  in to ghosts and  spirits  who  really were there?  It's  a  likely enough  WHAT IF  to make  it  an  exciting  time  to  be  working in  Indian  legends. For  me,  it  adds  a whole new dimension. Once  More Upon  a Totem has more spiritual  depth  than my earlier Once Upon  a Totem.
But! I write about  such things because I'm  fascinated  with them,  not because
I think  children  will be. Only after  the fact have I discovered that  children  are just as fascinated as I am.
Maybe   we  share   the   "growing   edge"  my  Atheneum   editor,   Jean   Karl,
mentions in From Childhood  to Childhood. "Most  good authors  are people who need to explore in this way, who are never satisfied with the limits of truth  as they have seen them, but  who are always searching for the new that  lies just beyond." That  I believe. And  if my "growing edge" ever begins to wither,  I may not stop writing; but I'll certainly stop writing for children.
So what  about  looking at  those old tales with Space  Age eyes? I've  had  two sightings  of what  I  know were  UFOs.  After  the second -in  that  way  a  new thing   suddenly   hits  something   lurking  down   there   in  the  subconscious-I thought,  "The Sky  Man  of  the  legends really did  come, from  Space."  In  the Northwest   Coast  Indian   versions, he  came  from  the  sky  and   carried  off  an Indian  princess, returning  her many years later under  marvellous  circumstances. And  now, when  I  re-read  several of these versions, I was agog over the Space clues I found  in them.  Why hadn't  I thought  of it before? But now that  I  had thought  of it, Sky Man  on the Totem Pole? was on its way. Again, I was writing it because I  was fascinated  with the idea, not because I thought  children  would be. Though  they are.
Those legends  have  no truck  with the  Old  World's  epic battle  between Good
and  Evil-a  concept  that  could be a hangup  from medieval  Church  thinking?

IN  TUNE WITH TOMORROW

In  the native  tales, everything  has potential for good or evil, depending  on what you do. And  that's  an  ethic  today's  children  can identify with. They  know that if  we  don't  show  enough  respect  for  our  seas and  our  rivers and  our  forests, something terrible is going to happen.
It's  been suggested  to  me  that  I  must  be into  Women's  Lib  too, the  way  I make  women  and  girls so important in my M a use Woman stories. But  in that matrilineal  society, women and girls were important; they carried  the great bloodlines. And  Mouse  Woman may be for real. Who  knows? Maybe she's still lurking  around  there,  in  that  fourth  dimension of matter,  waiting to bring back proper order to the world.
In  the old  collections, there's  never a special story about  Mouse  Woman. I'd been studying them for years before I fully realized that whenever a young person was tricked into trouble, or got himself or herself into trouble, this little character always turned  up. I thought  about  her a lot, and I talked to the late Wilson Duff of the  University  of British  Columbia  about  her before I agreed  with  him  that she represented  the  Indian  concept  of making  things equal.  Children  caught  in an encounter  with a Supernatural Being certainly needed a friend  to keep things equal. And this Good Fairy of the Northwest Coast was such a perky, imperious little busybody that  I could use her to bring back some of the fun and excitement I've always felt belonged in those stories.
After  all, as  I'd  always known, stories were basically for entertainment. And
they were for everybody:  men, women and children. The Indians'  tales had been for all ages. As  my father's  had  been. And as I think  mine are. I don't  think  I write only for children.  Neither  do other  people. Although  Raven's  Cry  wears a children's   medal,   the  University  of  Alaska  uses it  as  a  textbook  on  Culture Contact.  If a story can't  capture  the interest of adults, it's not likely to captivate their children.
On  one  of my  tours,  when  someone asked me how many  more books I was going  to write,  I said, "Oh, one of these days they'll find me slumped  over my typewriter.''
After the session, a boy came up to me and said, "When  they find you slumped over your typewriter, you'll still be writing good stories."
He  knew  it  was  the  stories  that  were  important, not  the  storyteller.  And perhaps  that's  all the  writer of children's  books really needs to remember.










go

HERSELF, W}ILKING
 


Tom Wayman


Why is she walking  there in June on the path through the pine forest, eyes on the soft earth
with its needles and  cones, looking for acorns, chestnuts,
eagle down,
gull feathers,
her long skirt swaying in the wind?

Where is she going climbing the winter  road out of town, snow
sliding  from  the trees
in the weak sunshine, herself warmed
by her  walk
but her breath rising, her hands cold and  moist forming a snowball, throwing it away into a white field?

And what  is she doing at her  kitchen  table
on a stormy  morning, lights on since eight, the rain drumming
on the house  roof,
the woods and  the dock soaked  with  it,
while she,
sitting at her  table, working,
meanwhile goes walking
on the rain-swept rocks by the turbulent, difficult sea?

THE FLAME-LIGHTER WOMAN

Catherine Anthony Clark's Fantasies


J.Kieran  Kealy





LUGH CATHERINE  ANTHONY  CLARK is acknowledged"' "Canada's first serious writer  of fantasy  and  the only one  who has  produced  a substantial   body of work,m  most  critics minimize the significance of her  contri­ bution  to  Canadian literature because of her apparent   reluctance  to  provide  a truly  Tolkienian   "subcreation,"2    a  clearly defined  and  totally  separate  fantasy world.  Sheila  Egoff's  response  to  Clark's  imaginary  worlds  is  typical:    "Clark  seems doubtful  about  her  own medium  and  is seldom willing to  take more than two steps into the world of fantasy."
But  then,  should  one  expect  more of a writer  fettered  by a  culture  which is
simply too young to allow the creation  of acceptable fantasy? As Egoff remarks:

Canada  lacks most of the requisites that provide a hospitable context for the production of fantasy. For one thing, there is no tradition of "faerie" comparable to the oral literature  of older countries. Canadian writers in general have hardly sniffed at the fumes of fancy or the nonsensical.

The  problem  with such  discussions is that  they tend to judge a fantasy in tenus of what it is not rather  than  allow it to be what it is. What  I will examine in this paper  is what  one  does find in Clark's  work:  a  unique  approach   to the entire concept  of  fantasy,  one  which  suggests that  Canadian  culture  does  not  make fantasy  impossible.  Rather it  provides  influences  (specifically, Indian  legends) which produce  a kind of fantasy  which is rather  different from that  found in the European  tradition.
The  key to understanding Clark's  approach  can be found in the first sentence
of her  first book, The  Golden  Pine Cone  ( 1950): "Not  very long ago, and  not very far  away  lived  two  children,  Bren  and  Lucy, with  their  parents  in  a big log cabin."  The  brief introduction announces immediately  that  this fantasy will not  exist in the dark  past of fairy  tales or myths, but in the still living tradition of Indian  legends, a tradition in  which it is often difficult to distinguish between the natural and  the supernatural, the real and the fantastic, or as Clark suggests, between  the Inner  and  the Outer  Worlds. The  fantasy, the magic, the influence of the supernatural are  always there -in the real world-awaiting the imagi-

32

CLARK'S FANTASIES

native, sensitive person. Thus  Clark's  refusal to write traditional fantasies  allows her  to explore  the  actual  mythology of the lands in which her stories take place. But she does not tum  to these legends simply because they are the most accessible or  the  most  authentic  remnants  of  Canadian mythology.  Rather, she  does so because they  provide the most effective framework  for presenting  certain  deeply felt beliefs about  the community  of man in a troubled world. Clark's six fantasies present  a clear  portrait  of a  utopian  world in which each man  must accept  his social responsibilities and  ultimately  his place in the world. By transporting her protagonists  to the land  of Indian  myth, Clark  does not create  a new world, but instead  simply describes the magical  world that  actually  exists within  the beliefs of the Indian  culture.  In doing so, she may well be providing what is a distinctly Canadian  fantasy,   one   which   reaffirms  the  basic  cultural   traits   that   define Canada, at least as she envisions the country.
Perhaps  the most obvious distinction to be made between Indian  and European fantasies  is their  differing  attitudes  toward  good and  evil. Simply stated,  Indian legends  do  not  portray   life  as  a  constant   struggle  between  absolutes.  Egoff criticizes Clark's fantasies because they reflect this belief:

There is never a gigantic struggle between good and evil-a theme that is at the root of many fantasies, such as Lewis's Narnia books, The Tree  That Sat  Down by Beverley Nichols, The Doll's  House  by Rumer Godden, and a host of others. It  is the edge of darkness that gives the best fantasy much of its depth, meaning, and value.

But  are  such  absolute  distinctions  necessary for  "true" fantasy?  Clark  clearly does not  think  so, and  I  do  not feel that  this belief in  any  way diminishes  the meaning that  one can find in her tales. Rather  than focus on "gigantic  struggles" between  good  and  evil,  Clark  chooses to  concentrate   on  the  dilemma  of  the individual.   Again  and  again,  she  tells the  tale  of  how  an  isolated,  alienated person finally comes to recognize and  accept his social responsibility, his place in his family  or  tribe.  In  this world, man  is neither  good nor evil. He  is simply a fallible human  being who must learn the value of belonging to his society.3
Nasookin, the "villain" of Clark's first book, The  Golden Pine Cone, is a good
example  of her  approach   to the  problem of good and  evil. Nasookin  is at  first presented  as  a frightening  demonic  force with  the  power to bring  chaos  to his entire  world,  but  Lucy, the child-heroine  of the story, hears his drum  song and knows immediately that he is not an ogre but a lonely man :

"I  do not know what makes me cry. I think it's the drum. The drum talks against your words-it  has its own speech. And it keeps saying that  you are  sad and never at peace, for you have been a wicked man."

The  implication  is obvious:  the  drums sing the song of Nasookin's soul, a soul which obviously wishes to leave behind this life of evil:

33

CLARK's FANTASIES

"Yes, it is a sad  song  after  all," said Nasookin in a muffied voice. "But  it is too late for me now, Little Squirrel."

But  of course,  it  is not  too late.  Because of the  courage  and  perseverance of the two  children   from  the  Outer World,  Nasookin  is redeemed. Ironically the culmination of The  Golden  Pine Cone is not the return  of the magical pine cone, but   the   wedding  of  Nasookin   and   his  beloved   Onamara, a  ceremony which symbolizes the return of order  to a previously troubled world.4
Clark's portrait of  Princess Onamara  provides a  clear example of  what happens when  one  abandons all social responsibility. Doomed  to live on a floating island  when  she  betrays   her  family,  she  becomes,  literally,  heartless.  When   her heart  is restored  at  the  end  of the story, she returns to her world,  having  learned the terrible  loneliness suffered  by the heartless.

The  ice-cold flesh of the  Princess was growing warm; there  was pink in her pale­ brown  cheeks. Standing there,  laughing  with  joy, she was lovelier  than  she had ever  been. And  then  she wept, thinking of the wasted years behind  her,  until her lover  took  her  hand.  Then  she laughed  again  with pure  happiness  that  loss and loneliness were all gone by.




IN HER SECOND BOOK,  The  Sun  Horse ( I 95 I ) , Clark  develops more fully the personalities of her protagonists. Mark  is an orphan who has recently been  forced  to  move  to  a  new  home  in  the  wilds of British  Columbia. Here  he meets  Giselle,  a  young  girl  who  is trying  to learn  the  fate  of  her  father, a man who  has  apparently abandoned his entire  family  in  his search  for  the  legendary Sun   Horse.   Thus, both   protagonists feel  betrayed, obvious  candidates for  the kind  of  escape  offered   by  the  world  of fantasy.  But  Mark and  Giselle  do  not retreat  or  escape  into  some  kind  of  dream   world.  Rather they  consciously  set forth  on  a  quest  to  find  Giselle's  father, a  journey  which  involves  a courageous confrontation with  the  supernatural, the  fantasy  world.  Clark's protagonists are never passive dreamers; they are active doers.
The   precarious psychological state  of these protagonists does allow them, how­ ever,  to  learn  more  from  their  adventure than  do  the  rather innocuous  brother and  sister  of The  Golden  Pine Cone.  In  addition, Clark's decision  to  make  her protagonists more  complex allows  her  to develop  more  fully  her  examination of the  alienated man, for  now the  protagonists, too, must  learn  the value  of becom­  ing  useful  members of  their  families  and  their  community.  Initially, Mark   and Giselle simply  learn  to respect,  trust,  and  love one another. Ultimately, however,  they  come  to  appreciate the  value  of  all social  commitment, of caring for  one's fellow   man.   This   realization  is  symbolized   by  their   rediscovery   of  their   own

34

CLARK'S FANTASIES

families.  Giselle's  father returns, and  the  family  is once  again   together. Mark, too, finds that  he is no longer an orphan; he has a place:

The  Gunnings  were  overjoyed  to have their  boy Mark  safe back again.... Aunt Bessie got  home  in  time  to  see Mark  safe and  sound,  but she wept  a good deal when  she  hugged  him  for  she  had  given  him  up  for  dead.... Both  uncle  and aunt  could  not do enough  for  Mark.... Yes, they had loved him before, but now he was like their own son to them.

And  yet,  despite  these  rather sentimentalized reunions,  The  Sun  Horse is far more  than  the  story of the  emotional growth  of two disturbed children. It is also about  the sacrifices that must  be made  to re-establish  a stable  community, to save man   from  his  often  destructive desires.  Michael, the  old  sourdough who  helps the  children  redeem  Giselle's  father, has consciously  chosen  to remain  in  Forget­ ful Valley.  In  his youth  he had  killed a man  in revenge,  and  this remote valley is his self-imposed   prison.  Thus, the  children   must  convince  him  not  only  of  the value  of  others,  but  of  his  own  worth.  And  the  children   do  redeem  this  bitter  man,   through  their  love,  but  more  importantly, through  their  selflessness.  For Michael  recognizes   that   there   is something special   about  these  two  outsiders, something that  evokes hope:

"You  see, Giselle,  you  and  Mark  are  the  only  persons who  have  come  to  this country  for an  unselfish reason. You have a sort of magic of your own. I feel it and  your  father   has  begun  to  feel  it.  Perhaps  you  will  win  out  in  this  plan. Nothing is hopeless-you make me feel that."

And  this something special,  this  "sort  of magic," does save  both  Michael and Mr.  Martin. But  it is a magic  that  comes from  within,  not from  without, for  the most  consistent   quality in  all  of  Clark's   heroes  and   heroines  is  their  courage, their  refusal  to quit, whatever the  odds  might  be. In  Clark's world,  the  heroine does not  wait  for  the  sudden intervention of a miraculous fairy-godmother, nor does  the  hero  carry  a  magical sword  and  wear  a  cloak  of invulnerability. Like their   counterparts in  Indian legends,  Mark  and   Giselle  must   fight  their  own battles.  They  defeat  their  adversary, the Thunderbird, only after  an arduous trek to his nest, and  their  lives are  protected  not  by some mystical  force  of good,  but by  a  bat  whom   Giselle  befriended on  her  first  day  in  the  Inner  World. It is precisely this  kind  of courage that  receives the praise of the most curious  creature that    the   children    meet   in   this   wondrous  world,   the   magical  Flame-lighter Woman:

"You  two have shown more gumption  than  I expected. Grow  up as you are now and  you may amount  to something. In my time, children were expected  to act for themselves early  and  not  to  sit  round  waiting  for  things  to  be done  for  them. They  helped  themselves and  worked. That's how the Great  West opened  up."

Although Clark's third   fantasy, The  One-Winged  Dragon  (1955), begins  as


35

CLARK'S FANTASIES

a  rather straightforward account of  the  quest  to  restore  a  lost  relative, in  this case the  mysterious Kwong Ho's  daughter, it quickly strays from  the  actual quest and   focuses  instead   on  the  two  central   figures,  Michael and   Jenni, and   their growing   understanding of themselves  and  their  families  because  of their  associa­ tion  with  this other  world.  Michael and  Jenni are  clearly the  most complex pair of  adventurers in  any  of  Clark's books.  Michael has  just  moved  to  the  country with   a  family   burdened  by  a  father who  selfishly  puts  his  writing above   his family.  Jenni, on  the  other   hand, is one  of  those  emotionally  troubled younger  children  whose  fear   of  being  ugly  and   unloved   causes  them  to  be  incredible brats.  Thus, the  "aliens" in  The  One-Winged  Dragon  are  the  children them­ selves, and  the  quest  they  undertake is more  internal than  external. Though they do  rescue  and  return  Kwong Ho's  daughter  Kuniang, they  also discover  them­ selves in the  process. They  change from  troubled, isolated individuals into selfless, giving  members of society. Like Mark and  Giselle, they must  first simply  learn  to get  along  with  one  another, but  Jenni's overt  paranoia makes  even  this  relation­ ship  difficult  to achieve. Fortunately, Michael immediately recognizes  the  root of Jenni's problem:

And the lonely, frightened  look he had seen on her face when they had  quarreled came  back to him. There  was one thing that  really frightened  Jenni,  and  he knew inside  him  what  it  was. She  was afraid  that  no one  would  ever  love  her.  He couldn't help feeling sorry for Jenni; she was so often in trouble.

Within the  fantasy of  the  Inner World, Jenni comes to  recognize  her  problem, and   as  her  relationship with  the  kindly  Yatunga develops,  she  begins  to  admit her innermost fears:

"I know I say crazy things, but I get the awfullest feeling sometimes that  nobody loves me  because  I'm  so ugly. Then  I get mad  and do bad  things. I used to be bad at home because I was miserable and hated myself."

Like  Michael in  The  Golden  Pine Cone, Jenni must  learn  first  to  appreciate herself;   only   then   can   she   rejoin   the   world   about   her.  And   the   significant responsibilities of  the  quest  help  Jenni grow  and  gain  confidence in  herself. But her  real  growth is the  result  of  the  selfless love given  to  the  child  by Yatunga, Jenni's surrogate mother:

This  Indian  woman  loved her dead daughter  so much, and  Jenni  wondered sadly if it really made any difference  at home that she herself was gone. It was a dreary thing  not  to  be  loved  and   very dreary  not  to  feel love. She  had  felt,  without knowing  it,  that  there  was something  wrong  with  herself. She  was always mad and  cross with  people. People wouldn't  be as she wanted;  they had little  time for her.  Perhaps  it  made  a difference  being outside  of time, as the  Luck-Spirit  told them   they  were.  Oh,  she  could  love  now.  She  loved  the  affectionate   Indian woman whose heart  was so open.

CLARK'S FANTASIES

Once  she is outside  of time, forced  to look carefully at  her  life, Jenni  sees how ridiculous  it  is always  to  demand   that  people be what  she  wants  them  to  be. Once free of her selfish demands, she can both love and be loved.
In The  One-Winged  Dragon, Clark stresses once again the need for all isolated
individuals   to  return  to  their  societies, in  particular  their  families. Kuniang is returned  to  her father,  and  the two children  return  to their  homes, finally able both  to give and to accept  the love necessary to keep any family alive:

Jenni was carried into  the  house,  clinging  to her  father's neck; and  then  she was in  her  mother's arms  with  all  the  joyful family  round  her,  kissing  and  exclaiming over  her.  The  little  girl  knew  then  that  she  had  her  own  place  in  the  family­ that   the  others  had  missed  her  and  wept  when  she was  gone.  Yes, it  was  just as Yatunga had  said-every child  has his love-place  in the lodge  though much  may not be said about  it.

Michael's   reunion  is  equally  ecstatic,  for  his father  has  finally  recognized  his familial  obligations.  As Yatunga  suggests, "It made  a  difference  being  outside of time."
In  The  Silver Man   ( 1958), Clark  once  again  concentrates  on  the  psycho­ logical   dilemma   of  her   child   adventurers.   Gilbert   Steyne,   another   orphan, becomes  so  disillusioned  trying   to  fit  into  his  Aunt   Rhoda's  household,  an environment  dominated   by  her  Saturday   bridge  lunches,  that   he  decides  to escape.  While  awaiting  the  boat  that  will take him to his  freedom,  he wanders into  a  museum,  where  after  admiring  a  grand  Arctic fox  and  a Yukon  mam­ moth,  he is suddenly  drawn  mysteriously into a museum  office, where he sees a crystal held in an eagle's claw:

He  bent  over  and  picked  up  the  crystal,  turning it so that   the  rainy  light  of day streamed down  on  to the dew  drop at  its centre.  The  drop  gleamed; it dazzled  his eyes. They  were  full  of  flashes,  as if the  crystal  were  now  all  about   him  and  he could   not  see.  Then his  breath   was  torn   from   him  and   he  felt  as  if  he  were whirling through space. Everything was dark.

When  he awakens he is on  a forest trail, and  the fantasy  begins. Thus,  for the only time in her career,  Clark  suggests the  possibility that  the fantasy is nothing but a dream. The  Arctic fox and  Yukon mammoth  miraculously reappear in the Inner  World,  and  when  the fantasy  ends, Gilbert is staring  at  the same crystal.
Whether   the  story  is a  dream   or  not  does not  really matter, but  what  this
unique  entry into the fantasy  world does ensure is the reader's  complete involve­ ment  in the  development  of Gilbert.  It  may or  may not be his dream, but  it is certainly  his story.  In  order  to  make  the  focus on  Gilbert  even  more  intense, Clark  has Gilbert  go alone  into  this mysterious world. Once  there,  he is joined by two young girls:  the enigmatic  Fringa and  the kind  and  generous Kawitha, sister of Kunshat,  the  Silver Man.  The quest that  these  children  undertake  is a

37

CLARK'S FANTASIES

familiar  one:   they  must  rescue  the  enchanted  Kunshat  and  return  him  to his
troubled family and tribe.
As in The  One-Winged  Dragon, however, the quest to the lost relative is not the  primary  one  in  The  Silver Man, for  Gilbert's  most significant  discovery is his realization  of the enduring  value of a truly selfless life. This theme is enunci­ ated specifically by Uncle Barker5  when he compares Fringa  and Kawitha:

The  great  bearded  man  looked keenly at  Kawitha under his grizzled eyebrows. "Ai, you long for him. You have a loving heart, Kawitha. It  is a great thing to have much love, though one suffers from it. Love has a magic, powerful enough."

Kawitha clearly possesses the magical quality talked about in Clark's first fantasy, and Uncle Barker realizes that  Fringa does not possess it:

"Perhaps  Fringa  was born  without  a  heart-or  with  a  small one. She cares nothing for our trouble.

One  suspects that  Clark  is also gently comparing  the love that  she finds in  the culture  of the Indian  with  the culture  of the White  Man.  But whatever  Clark's designs might  have been in  her creation  of these two characters, it is quite  clear that  Gil compares  them, and in doing so learns a great deal about  his own moral commitments.  In  perhaps  one of the most truly heroic moments in all of  Cana­ dian  children's  literature, he  gives up  his life with  Kawitha  to save  the life of her brother.  And though  the loss is bitterly felt, somehow the act brings with it a peace and serenity he has never known.



UNFORTUNATELY, MOST  SERious CRITICAL  examinations  of Catherine Clark's  fantasies  end  with The  Silver Man, the final two books being simply  dismissed as "more  of the  same": the same two  adventurers, the same Indian    environment,   and   the  same  basic  characters.  But  though   there  are obvious  similiarities,  there  are  also significant changes  which  occur.  To  ignore them  is to  ignore  perhaps  the  most important   development  in  Clark's  literary career, for in these last two books Clark does not try  to synthesize the European and   Indian   traditions.   Finally   realizing  the  basic  incompatibility  of  the  two cultures, Clark  turns, happily one suspects, to the Indian  culture and  an environ­ ment  that  need not be populated  by imps, goblins, water spirits, and frog skins.6
These final books also return  to the far less complicated portraits of the adven­ turing  children  that  one finds in her first two books. In fact, the central figure in The  Diamond Feather ( 1962), is not a child at all, but an  unnamed prospector who is simply referred  to as the Frozen Man. Unlike the various enchanted  men and  women of earlier stories, this man has consciously abandoned his family and all  his  social  responsibilities.  It  appears  initially  that  he is merely  a  victim  of

CLARK'S FANTASmS

"silver  lust" -the  insatiable  desire for  wealth.  But  his motivation  is far  more complicated, for  the  reader  soon  learns that  he has  left  his family  because  he feels  trapped,  oppressed  by  the   responsibilities  of  taking   care  of  them.  He desperately desires to be free.7   When his wife accuses him of being a totally selfish man,   he  realizes immediately  the  inherent  truth  of  her  accusation.   When  he leaves,  he  takes  with  him  the  diamond  feather  of  the  magical  bird  that  once charmed   his  children  and  is  the  sole  joy in  his family's  life  and   a  constant reminder of his own deficiencies:

"I got  mad and  I  said to her, 'Then  I'm  going for keeps and  what's  more I'll take that darned Feather with me.' And I tore it off the wall and locked it up in the iron trunk with my ore samples.''

But not long after  he leaves, an avalanche  buries the house, and  when he returns he  finds  nothing.  His  punishment  for  his crime is to be chained  to this  place forever, a frozen man in a frozen world:

"But  I  was chained here, you might say. Every time I went off the place some­ thing  happened  to me so I  had  to turn  back. I  knew something was  working against me. This place got colder and colder and me with it.''

With   the  warmth   of  human   love  missing, the  man  has  become  frozen;   his insatiable  desire for freedom binds him instead to the place where he abandoned his family.
What  saves this torturned  man is love or, more specifically, the love of Firelei,
the tiny girl who, with her brother Jon, journeys to this enchanted  world. The uniqueness  of this little girl is recognized immediately  by the Wise Owl, the first of  the  creatures  that  the  children  meet  in  this  magical  place.  Because  of the courage  and  love of the  children,  the  Frozen  Man  is finally reunited  with  his own  children.  This  reunion  allows Clark  to enunciate  her  belief that  man  must learn  to forgive, to leave behind  his hate and  revenge. While the  Frozen  Man's children  hate  him,  they  too  are  prisoners, a  state  symbolically  represented  by their  imprisonment  in Whitebird  Valley. They free themselves when  they finally forgive  their  father  and  follow him  to the  land  where their  mother  walks with the  dead -the  land  of Heart's  Desire. In  death  the family  is finally reunited.
In   The   Diamond   Feather  Clark  introduces   her  audience   to  a  far   more
elaborate   view  of  the  community  of  man  than   that  presented  in  her  earlier works, for she now considers not only the living, but the dead  as well. It is clear, for example,  that  the Frozen Man  finally finds his serenity not in this world, but in  the  next.  When  Firelei  finds  it  impossible to  discover  the  reason  why  her friends  had to die, the mystical Singer consoles her, and in doing so provides the reader   with  a  simple  but  eloquent  explanation   of  the  place  of  death   in  the universal cosmos: "everything in its season." Omantha's response is more specific:

39

CLARK'S FANTASffiS

"They are happy. They are free," said Omantha, softly. "They have gone to their mother. They had the courage to try  and save their father, but his time and their time had come."

Freedom  from  the  concerns  of man  comes only  with  death.  It  is this freedom that  the  Singer  describes throughout the story, the  belief that  man  is free only when he learns to recognize his place in this world and in the great world beyond:

Now he sang with power and  the people sat silent thinking of the beauty of the world; of budding Spring and burning Summer; of the changing colours of Fall and  of the changeless death-white snow. He sang of the stars in their courses, of silver dawns and the day's burning close. And the song mounted and spoke to them of love and of loss, of joy, and deep rest. The whole of life flowed by.




CLARK's PORTRAIT OF  THE  COMMUNITY of man culminates in her final book, The  Hunter  and the Medicine  Man  ( 1g66). The story begins when   two  somewhat   alienated   children  climb  a  mountain   to  escape,  albeit briefly,  from  the  oppressive  housekeeper  who  is  caring  for  them  while  their mother  is in hospital.  While  on the mountain,  they find a mysterious lake, and when a great fog shrouds the lake the fantasy begins. They have moved from the Outer  to the Inner  World.
In  this story, however, Clark's main interest is not in the invading adventurers; she leaves the children  as quickly as possible to focus on the true hero of the tale, the  enigmatic   Hunter, blood  brother  of the  Indian   chief,  whose rescue is the object of the quest and  the basis of the children's adventure.  Totally disillusioned with  man  and   his  selfish  ways,  the  Hunter   has  abandoned  his  tribe.  When Richard, the  young  boy,  suggests that  "there's  nothing  wrong  with  the  world but   people,"  the  Hunter  quickly  agrees.  But  through   the  intercession  of  the children  and  the  kindly  Mrs.  Buck -the  female  equivalent  of the  prospector who appears  in  most of Clark's  novels-the  Hunter decides to return  to man's world  and  save  his brother,  realizing,  finally, that  true  peace must  be earned. And  the  Hunter does find  his  peace,  although   (like the  Frozen  Man  and  his family)   only in  death.  Through the  Hunter's courage,  the  victory is won and now the children  can return  home. But this time the children do not move from a specific Inner  World  back  to a specific Outer  World. They  do not awaken in a cave or a museum, suddenly  discovering that  their  journey into fantasy is over. They  simply ride over  the  mountain,  knowing that  Mrs. Buck is always on the other  side  awaiting   their   visits. As Mrs.  Buck says,  "You're   one  side  of  the mountain and I'm the other. We sure won't forget each other."
Thus,  in  her  last  book,  Clark  finally discards any  pretense of presenting two separate  worlds; she returns  to the  time of Indian  legends, when there were no

CLARK'S FANTASIES

distinctions between  what  was reality and  what  was fantasy.  Here  there is only one world, one in which magic is just across the mountain.
When  the  children  return  to their  homes, they find that  order  has also been restored there -their mother has come home:

"What's that  in  the  yard?" she cried.  "It's not  the  truck.  Oh  Rick! It's  the  car!"

"Mum and  Dad,  they're home! Home!" cried  Richard, and  he  pressed  Heron in the  flank.  Side  by side  the  children galloped   up  the  lane  between   the  pastures, shouting and  hallooing as  they  rode  towards  the  ranch-house and  its open  door.

This  open  door is a remarkably  apt  image for Clark to leave the reader  with as she  ends  her  career  as  a  fantasist,  for  in  a  sense  it  suggests  her  own  quest. Initially she may have tried to formulate a Canadian mythology which brought together  the  Indian   and  European   traditions.8    She once  even  tried  to  include the  Chinese  tradition.  But she  ultimately found  that  the  tradition   which  most clearly reflected her own view about man and  his possibilities was the one outside her own open door, the myths of her beloved British Columbia  wilderness.
Catherine  Clark's  six fantasies  preach  a common sermon, one  which is some­ what  unusual  in  the  world  of  fantasy  and  which  may  help  in  some  way  to explain the  uniqueness of  the  Canadian culture that nurtured  her stories. She  demands  that  man  be  a  doer,  that  he  have  the  courage  to  confront  his problems  and  achieve  his goals. She  does not  allow  the  intercession  of fairy­ godmothers or ever-benevolent  gods. Man  must  fight his own battles. Above all, she demands  that  man  be selfless, that  he care  for  his  fellow man  and  realize his inherent  duty to mankind.  She not only chronicles the rewards given to those "special"  people  who  are  selfless, but  she  also  suggests the  bitter  loneliness of those who are selfish, whether  they are trapped on a silver island or frozen in an icy  cabin.  Finally,  Clark  demands   that  we  recognize  our  place  in  the  great cosmos, that  we realize that  "everything  [has]  its season." Once  man  realizes his place -his  relative  insignificance in  the  great  scope of beings -perhaps  then he will realize the ridiculousness of pride and  join his fellow man. Her  heroes do not aspire to be leaders or to find great treasures. Instead,  they simply try to find their   place-to  realize  that   they  belong  to  a  community   and   have  certain obligations to it. The  children  return  to their families, the hunters  to their tribes.
Catherine  Clark's fantasies are not without faults. But I have tried to overlook
these and  concentrate  on her very significant accomplishments.  Above all, Clark is true to her own demands. She is a doer-a writer of six fantasies in a country with absolutely no tradition  of fantasy. And she is a dreamer-a woman  who sincerely 'believes that   the  world  would  be  a  better  place  if we left  ourselves behind  and  moved  toward  others. But she is not  a  hopeless idealist;  she wholly realizes the difficulty of the task. She reminds one of the marvelous Flame-lighter

CLARK'S FANTASIES


Woman of  The Sun Horse, who  each  night goes forth on  her  lonely  quest to save mankind:

"Three times  is all  I'm  equal to,"  she  croaked. "I  have  got  rheumatism with  the mud.  But  I'll  find  a way  yet  to make  all flames  burn  as one flame.  When  I do, I shall  learn   the  secret  of  men's  souls. For  souls  burn  like solitary  candles. I  could break  a  soul's  shell  if Icould  shatter a flame.  For  a  moment souls can  meet like flames  but  they  go back  to their  solitary  burning and  Ihave not  found  the way to change it. If I could,  there  would  be no more wars and  no more hatred. Ah, me!"


NOTES

1 Sheila   Egoff,  The  Republic of  Childhood, 2nd  ed.   (Toronto:  Oxford, I975), p. 70.
2    J. R. R.  Tolkien, "On  Fairy-Stories," The  Tolkien  Reader   (New  York:  Ballan­ tine,   rg66), pp.  3-84.  See  particularly  Tolkien's discussion  of  the  creation of Secondary Worlds,  pp. 36-39.
3  This  emphasis on  the  fallible  nature of man  is clearly seen in the legends  collected by  George  Clutesi. Son  of  Deer,  for  example, is initially  presented as the  heroic saviour  of his world,  but  dies ingloriously  because he kills without sufficient  reason. See George  Clutesi, Son  of Raven, Son  of Deer:  Fables of the  Tse-Shant  People (Sidney,  B.C.:  Gray's, I g67).
4    Compare  this  with   the  conclusions   of  most  traditional  fantasies,   in  which   the emphasis   is  on  the  defeat  of  the  antagonist rather  than   on  his  rehabilitation. Modern  fantasists such   as  Tolkien  and   C.  S.  Lewis  are  clearly   within   such  a tradition, for  they  present  life  as a  struggle  in  which  order  can  be  restored  only after  the destruction of the forces of evil.
5   Uncle   Barker   is  a  kindly   prospector  who  befriends   the  children, a  figure  who appears in some form in all of Clark's fantasies.
6  One   need  only  examine the  list  of  characters that  Clark  provides   at  the  begin­ ning  of  each  book  to  discover  The Diamond   Feather's  obvious  movement away from   the   influence   of  the   European  tradition. One   simply  does  not  find  the assorted   Squareheads  and   Frogskins   that   populated her  earlier   fantasies.  Only the  curious   Rock-Puck  bears   any  resemblance  to  the  goblins  and  elves  of  the fairy   tale,  but  Clark   includes this  figure  for  a  very specific  reason.  He  becomes an  overt  image  of  what can  happen to  Jon  if  he  continues in  his  mischievous  ways. When  the  Rock-Puck offends  the Glass-Witch, he  is imprisoned in  a  body of  stone,   thus   becoming  little   more  than   a  clumsy  gargoyle.   Thus Clark   gives both  Jon  and  the  reader  a concrete example of what  happens to those who follow only their own selfish whims.
7   Clark's obvious  criticism  of  this  inordinate desire  to be free  of all  responsibilities contrasts  sharply  with   the   glorification  of  such  figures  in  American  children's books, the  boy heroes  of Mark  Twain being  the most obvious  examples.
8    Joan Selby  investigates  the   influences   on  Clark's early  fantasies in  "Catherine Anthony Clark:  Myth   Maker," British  Columbia  Library   Quarterly, Vol.  24, No.  3  (January Ig6I); and  "The Creation of Fantasy: the  Fiction of Catherine Anthony Clark," Canadian Literature, I I  (Winter Ig62).

THE APPRENTICESHIP OF NOAH ADLER



Michael Greenstein




WHITSCRITICAL AND POPULAR succEss as both novel and  film, The  Apprenticeship of Duddy Kravitz has eclipsed Richler's only other novel that  deals entirely  with  the  Montreal  ghetto-Son of a Smaller  Hero­
and  while most critics agree on the superiority of the later work, it is unfortunate that  Richler's second novel has been written off instead of written  about. To the charge   that   the  earlier   work  lacks  the  aesthetic  distance   of  the  more  fully developed  novel, one can  appeal  only to  the impact  of immediacy  in Son  of a Smaller  Hero.1   To  the  charge  that  Noah  Adler's indecisiveness demonstrates  a lack  of  control,  one  can  counter  merely with  an  Empsonian  defence  of  ambi­ guity.  Does  Richler  provide  an  unambiguous  statement  at  the  end  of  Duddy Kravitz? If the less mature   work does lack the  development  of  Richler's later period,  it at  least offers a  tighter  unity because of the absence  of  excursions to New York and Toronto.
Richler employs the same satiric devices in both  novels from the simple slogan or one-line  advertisement,  a form  of graffiti, to  the  juxtaposition  of the sacred and  the  profane,  the  lofty  ideal  with  the  vulgar  reality, the  sublime  with  the ridiculous. Melech's secret box which contains sacred scrolls and  the letters and photographs  of Helga  provides  the central  example of satiric  juxtaposition,  but there are other instances. For example, Richler contrasts the Prudential insurance salesmen  selling security  with  the  psychological insecurities  of  so many  of the characters.  He  plays off against  each other  the  neon lights of the  Queen  Mary Road  Jews and the guiding light that recalls Jacob Goldenberg's  death  for Leah, his daughter: "the  gathering  yellow fog of exploding yellow lights." This  "light" imagery  also  plays  a  role  in  Melech's  relationship  to  his  "lost"  children,  his grandson  and  Helga's  child.  He  dreams  of  Noah:   "He   could  have  been  the brightness of my old years," and recalls the blond brightness of Helga, the dancer, and  her  blond son. But  the  most celebrated  instance  of satiric  juxtaposition  in Son  of a Smaller  Hero  is the funeral  with its cinematic  montage,  each  member of the family commenting  vulgarly on the religious prayer for the dead.

43

RICHLER'S  NOAH ADLER

However, like The   Apprenticeship of  Duddy  Kravitz,  Son  of a Smaller  Hero is concerned  with  more serious matters  than  ethnic satire, namely,  Noah  Adler's initiation  and  self-discovery. Though  older  than  Duddy,  Noah  shares  the same premature aging  that  Duddy  displays:  "He  was twenty years old, but  his fore­ head  was already  wrinkled. His eyes, which were black, were sorrowful and deep and   not  without   a  feeling  for  comedy."  These  revealing  eyes seem  to  be  a common   physiological  and   psychological  trait   among  members  of   the  Adler family.  Noah  has  inherited   his eyes from  his  grandfather   whose  "smouldering  black  eyes" stay solemn  even  when  he laughs with  his  grandchildren. Melech's youngest son, Shloime, a year younger  than  his nephew  Noah,  has "two  sullen, malicious  eyes" half-concealed   beneath  drooping  eyelids.  During  the  course of the  novel  Noah  must  reject  these  members  of  the  family  whom  he  resembles physically, but  not  psychologically;  yet  he must  go beyond  mere  rejection:   to find  himself  he  must  see through   them  and  replace their  false values  with  his own definite values.
To  follow Noah's  process of self-discovery, one should  consider  the  names of the Adler family, for, like the "eyes," they provide important clues and ironic commentary  on  the  characters   and  their  interrelationships.  Adler  is a  Yiddish name  for  eagle, king of  the  predatory  birds;  the Adlers are  predators  to Noah who  refers often  to  their  cage from  which  he hopes to escape. Melech,  king in Hebrew,  "ruled   all  his own  children  by authority," identifying  himself in  the novel's final rhetorical  question  with  King David:  "Hadn't the Angel of Death passed over King David because he was at his prayers?" David's son was Solomon and   Shloime   means  Solomon.   Richler's  ironic  inversion  is  readily  apparent: Solomon  was known for  his wisdom whereas Shloime goes against  justice in the Panofsky robbery  and  commits  arson when he sets fire to his father's  office. The oldest son Wolf, another   predator, wiggles his ears and spends most of his time in the den.
Indirectly   Noah  can  be  related  to  the  Biblical Noah.  At  Wolf's  funeral  the self-righteous  Uncle  ltzik  exclaims,  "If there's  another  flood ... Noah  deserves to be dead,"  and  if Richler  does not provide the ark metaphor, Desmond  Pacey does:  "the  ark  Noah seeks out  of the flood is integrity and  freedom, and  these, at  the novel's end, he sets out to seek in Europe."2  Richler does repeat the image of  the  drowning   man  in  his  boat  during  Noah's  period  of  mourning   for  his father.  "He  held on to sleep the way a drowning man must cling to his share of driftwood.  Each  morning  there  was the feeling of his ship being pulled back into a whirlpool.  Noah  rowed madly with both oars. But the oars were broken." This bateau  ivre  reappears  after  his mother's  heart  attack:   "The broken  oars burst free of their locks. The  boat itself broke up underneath  him. And Noah, who did not  call out for help, felt the waters close over him."  Perhaps  he has picked up the image from  his mother's  vision of the dark  fog swirling beneath  heavy seas.


44

RICHLER'S NOAH ADLER

After  the flood the Biblical Noah  is discovered in his drunken  nakedness by one of  his  sons,  but  Richler  inverts  that  story  by allowing  his inebriated   Noah  to uncover  the  truth   about  his father  and  his grandfather. As a  witness to  their psychological nakedness, he strips  away the  illusions surrounding his father's "heroic" act.3
The  Adlers are related  to one another  not only in name and  appearance, but also  in  behaviour,  for  there  is considerable  interplay  among  members  of  the family so that  one member  tends to identify with another: Noah is the son of a smaller  hero  who, in turn,  is the son of a smaller hero. The  problem  of identity is central  to  the  novel as Noah  seeks to discover himself, and  he does identify with  his grandfather even though  they have partly rejected each other. Mter the robbery  at  Panofsky's, Shloime  confronts  Noah:  "We've  got  a lot in  common, you know. We're  both lone operators,  eh? We both like shiksas-dames-and we  both  don't   give  a  damn   about  eating  kosher."  Noah  interrupts sharply: "We've  got  nothing  in common."  Though  still doubtful  of his directions  in life at this time,  Noah  is right in refuting this attempted  branding of him,  rejecting his  uncle's  psychological  kinship  as well as his criminality  in  order  to  achieve individual  freedom.  However,  when the recalcitrant  switches his tactic  of  identi­ fication  from  himself  to  Melech,  the  identification  is much  more  difficult  for Noah  to  deny  and  he senses that  he  has  come  closer to  the  target  of  Noah's identity  crisis. Whereas  earlier  Noah  rejects any resemblance to  his young uncle, now he simply stares at  him, horrified, unable  to respond. Just as Noah  and  his grandfather have reversed roles, it occurs to Noah that  "Shloime was his father turned  inside out."  Like the  "shifting  of the ghetto  sands,"  these shifting  roles between grandfather and  grandson, and  between oldest and  youngest sons, make it difficult for Noah to emerge from the Adler cage as a free individual.
Substitution  of another  member  of the family for oneself is a  means  of  self­ deception  or evasion of the problem of identity. The son does not become a man until he has stepped  out of his father's shoes; the father cannot  remain  a man  as long  as  he  pins  all  of  his  hopes  on  his children.  Melech's  justice  toward  his children  is nothing  more than self-punishment:  he takes the belt to Shloime only to  punish  himself  and   purge  his  guilt-ridden  conscience;  he  wants  to  punish Noah  because  he  had  loved  Helga  and  had  deserted  her.  Son  and  grandson become scapegoats  for  him,  and  out  of this confusion  among members  of the Adler family,  Noah  must  forge his own identity. When  Noah  discovers the  past relationship  between his grandfather and  Helga,  he thinks that  the old man  did wrong to punish the family. By the end of the novel  Noah realizes that  his young uncle had  been wrong in his identification  of  grandfather and  grandson,  for the harsh   patriarch,  in  Noah's   place,  would  have  told  his  grandfather  that   his youngest son  had  started  the  fire. Noah,  however, substitutes  human   mercy in

45

RlCHLER'S NOAH  ADLER

place of Melech's divine  justice thereby cutting some of those familial ties which confine and confuse.
If Noah rejects identification  with his uncle and his grandfather, he also refuses to  replace  his  father   after  Wolf's  death  for  his mother's  sake.  He  "won't   be another  of her  dead  saints  that  she can take down  off her shelves and  dust like her  bits of china." Noah  refuses the  roles that  his relatives want  to impose on him, unwilling to play the drunkard to satisfy his uncle's needs for him to be the family's  alcoholic.  Uncle  Max  thinks  he can  count  on  his nephew  for  political purposes since Noah  is the  son of a hero, but  Noah  responds by mimicking  his father's  gestures. "Standing in  the  darkness, he wiggled his ears and  raised  his eyebrows. Experimentally." Having  mastered  and  negated  the lupine  role, Noah succeeds in  his experimental parody,  for he is able  to sort  out  the interrelated lives of his family and  arrive  at an identity independent  of the other  Adlers. He will be neither martyr  nor scapegoat;  his father had been both.




AN ADDITIONAL  COMPLICATION   in  these intermeshed  lives involves the two women in Noah's life-his mother  Leah and  his lover Miriam, a French  Canadian with  a  rather  Hebraic  name.  For Noah  the women became interchangeable,  just  as  various  men  in  the  family  are  interchangeable, and ultimately  he must  reject  both  in order  to gain  freedom. They  hold on  to him tenaciously,  presenting   him  with  another  dilemma:  forced  to  choose between two women, he rejects both.  Leah is the Biblical wife of Jacob; in the novel she is the daughter  of Jacob  Goldenberg  whom she loves far more than her husband.4
Miriam's  cleaning  up after  him reminds Noah of his mother, and his relationship
with her begins to duplicate  the maternal  one. Like Leah, Miriam  needs security; she has no identity of her own, no inner strength, no vision. There  is a dichotomy in  her approach to living  just as there is a dichotomy  in  Noah's existence:  part of her  wants  the security  that  is Thea  and  another  part  of her wants love. She remembers that  Noah  had once said that  the decision she had come to in  choos­ ing  Noah  in  place of Thea  had  been no decision at all. Noah,  on the contrary, weighs his choices throughout the novel and by the end makes his choice.
But before Noah  can  make the  proper choice to arrive at his own identity, he must  be able  to distinguish  right from wrong, and  positive from negative within himself, his family, the ghetto,  and  the world beyond. When  Noah  first appears as the novel opens, he is outside of the ghetto in a rented  room, yet the magnetic pull of his ghetto  memory  forces him to think  of Aunt  Rachel,  his mother,  his father,  and  his grandfather. Outside  he feels empty, lonely, and  isolated;  inside he  finds  the  atmosphere   stifling  and  imprisoning.   Divided  between  the  two

RICHLER'S  NOAH ADLER

worlds, a  tightrope  walker,  he must  distinguish  and  choose the  boundaries  for his own existence to liberate  himself from the imbroglio  of family  relationships.
Richler  turns  immediately  from  Noah  to a description  of the ghetto,  a laby­
rinth  through  which  the  Adlers wander  aimlessly and  out  of which  Noah  must emerge  having  selected  the  proper  path.  Although  it has no  real  walls and  no true  dimensions, it exists, and  it is up to Noah  to discern what  is real on either side  of  these  illusionary  walls.  The  tripartite ghetto  has  its  own  distinctions according  to  vertical  social  mobility:  the  Queen  Mary  Road  Jews,  the  Park Avenue Jews, and  the St. Lawrence Blvd. Jews, each group  reflecting the three generations  of the  Adler  family and  stages of Noah's  development.  These  class differences appear  at  the cemetery. "A green iron fence separated  the synagogue lot from  the lots of other  congregations and societies. The  Workman's Circle lot was located  on  lower  land.  Marshland.  Distinctions  did  not  end  at  the  grave after  all." By leaving  the  ghetto  Noah is able to gain  the  proper  perspective to understand  the dimensions, distinctions, and deceptions in his Jewish background.
As soon as Richler completes his description of the ghetto, he returns  to Noah's
room  on  Dorchester  Street  and  delineates the  boundaries  of rectangular  down­ town  Montreal   which  also  define  and  make  distinctions.  Once  he  leaves  the ghetto,  Noah  becomes perplexed  (Richler's  rapid structural transitions mirroring  his character's wavering state of mind) : "He  had expected that  by moving away from  home  something  wonderful  would  happen  whereby  he  would  end  up  a bigger and  freer man.  Instead,  there  was only this  anguishing.... At  home  his indignation  had nourished him. Being wretched, and in opposition, had organized his suffering. But that  world, against which  he had  rebelled, was no longer  his. Seen  from  a  distance,  it seemed  full  of  tender  possibilities, anachronistic  but beautiful. ... All  the  dictums  of  the  ghetto  seemed  unworthy  of  contempt  in retrospect."  Noah  remains  ambivalent  as a  Jew  and  a  Canadian when  he  tells his grandfather: "everything  is falling  apart  around  you. Your  sons are  Cana­  dians. I am not even that.... I'm sort of between things." Noah  has to reject his negative views, his opposition to his environment,  and substitute  positive commit­ ment in order to become a man who overcomes confusion.
Throughout the novel Noah  recognizes the need to combat  his self-destructive, nihilistic  tendencies.  "It's not  enough  to  rebel,  he  thought.   To  destroy.  It  is necessary to say yes to something."  "Noah  had  renounced  a  world  with  which he had  at least been familiar  and  no new world had as yet replaced  it. He  was hungering  for an anger  or a community or a tradition  to which he could relate his experience." This quest for the positive and renunciation  of the negative recur after  his father's  death  when he spends time with his mother's side of the family in Ste Agathe.
Ste Agathe had  been a  revelation. A shock. The  people, the laws, that  he had rebelled against  had  been replaced by other,  less conspicuously false, laws and

47

RICHLER'S  NOAH ADLER


people while he had  been away. That  shifting of the ghetto sands seemed terribly unfair  to him. If the standard man  can be defined by his possessions, then rob his house and  you steal his identity.  Noah had supposed himself not to be a standard man.  But  his  house  had  been  robbed  and  his identity  had  been  lost.  He  was shaken.  Not  only  because  he  felt  a  need  to  redefine  himself,  but  because  he realized,  at  last,  that  all  this  time  he  had  been  defining  himself  Against. Even death  was something  he  did  Not  Want.  He  avoided  Panofsky. That   man  knew what  he  wanted.  What  he  wanted  was positive and  required  a bigger reply than No.

This   passage  marks   a  transition  in  Noah's search,   for  he  is  able  to  find  the "positive" in  an  individual whom  he  respects.  Before leaving  for  Europe, Noah discovers  the   positive  answers  to  Miriam's earlier   questions  thereby  solving  his dilemma.
He could  tell her  that  he wanted  freedom and  that  innocent  day at  Lac Gandon and  the first  days of their  love and  many  more evenings with  Panofsky and  the music of Vivaldi  and  more  men  as tall  as Aaron  and  living with  the  truth  and maybe, sometime  soon, a wiser Noah in another  cottage  near a stream  with a less neurotic Miriam.  Oh, he wanted  plenty. I'm free, he thought.

Perhaps Noah's realization suggests  Richler's view  of the  proper  way  of life for the   ethnic   community:  the   Jew   should   not  define  himself   through  negative insecurities and  defences  in  response  to  anti-semitism. As  Noah  says, "there is a certain  kind of Jew  who  needs  a Goy badly," the way his grandfather "needs  the Goyim."   Instead,  Richler  advocates the   replacement of  false  dimensions with positive commitment to ethical, aesthetic, and scholarly traditions.
If Noah's major philosophic change  is from  negativism  to a  positive  affirma­ tion,   his  second   conversion   is  from   relativism   to  independence.  Originally he remarks, "Nothing  is  absolute   any  longer,  Mr.  Panofsky.  There  is  a  choice  of beliefs and  a choice  of truths to  go with  them.  If you choose not  to choose then  there   is  no  truth  at   all.  There  are   only   points  of  view."  This  relativism   or subjectivism  is  in  direct   opposition   to  Melech's absolutism   with  all  of  its stern answers.  By the  end  of the  novel  Noah  wants  to  abandon  his  previous  position and  deny  relatives  and  relativism. "He  wanted some  knowledge  of himself  that  was  independent of  others." Through independence  and  affirmation  Noah  sees the distinctions, makes his choices accordingly, and gains his identity.
The  shift  from  relativism  to existential  independence, in place of confused interdependence,  occurs   in   Noah's  belief  in   God,   a  theological  and   ethical problem   posed  by the  novel's  epigraph, "If God  did  not  exist, everything would be  lawful." He  contemplates Dostoievski's  statement: "He began  to  understand that   God  had  been  created by  man  out  of  necessity. No  God,  no  ethic-free­ dom.  Freedom  was  too  much   for  man.  I  was  wrong  to  worry  about God,  he thought. I  don't believe  in  Him  so He  doesn't  exist. My grandfather believes in Him  so  He  does  exist."  This  relativism  brings  him to an  existential  position: "I

RICHLER's NOAH  ADLER

did  not make my mother  to suffer or my father  bewildered, or my grandfather hard.  I should have had the right to begin with my birth.... It's  all absurd,  but here I am." Later he distorts the epigraph: "If God weren't  dead  I guess he'd be editing   Time  today."   Creating   his  being  out  of  virtual   nothingness,   Noah dismisses the theology as well as the ethics of his immediate  forefathers.
Noah's  humanity, love, and  mercy supplant  his grandfather's sense of divinity,
justice, and  punishment.  For  the  elder,  what  is lawful  (in  Dostoievski's  hypo­ thesis)  is absolutely clear  because  of his firm belief in God.  The  first  and  last sections of the novel end  with  almost the same words:  "Each man  creates God in his own image. Melech's God,  who was stern, just, and  without mercy, would reward  him  and  punish  the  boy.  Melech  could  count  on  that."  So, for  him, everything  is lawful or  full  of law  because  God exists;  nevertheless, when  frus­ trated,  he admits:  "There is no  justice in  this world.  God  don't  listen always. Not like He should, anyway." Retributively he is punished by his grandson's love. Whereas  earlier  their  love had  been severed by an  indelible slap, reminiscent of the slap Duddy  Kravitz  receives from  his father,  Noah kisses his grandfather at their  final  encounter.  "After   he  had  gone  Melech  touched  his cheek  and  felt that  kiss like a burn.  He touched  his cheek and felt that  he had  been punished."  The  novel comes full circle as Noah's love punishes and  defeats his grandfather's injustice.



STRUCTURALLY, RICHLER  DIVIDES THE   NOVEL according  to the seasons. The  stifling heat  at  the opening suggests the ghetto's  claustrophobic atmosphere,  and  autumn  in  the second section is likened to the family's  threats and  Melech's laws which are "like autumn  leaves that, once flung into the wind, scattered  and  turned  to  dust."  "Autumn had  come swiftly  to the  ghetto.  The leaves ... tumbled downwards  dead." Section Three  begins with a description of Montreal's  frozen winters  followed by spring  thaw,  while Section  Four  returns to  the summer  of Wolf Adler's  funeral.  "Ah,  it was a fine day.  You  can  have your slap-dash of an autumn  day with insanely bright leaves falling at your feet, you can  have the dreams  of your loose spring evenings that  end  up  being  just dreams, you can even have all the snows of winter, but give me a white day with a  blue sky and  a dazzling  yellow sun."  These seasonal descriptions  provide  the atmosphere  for  Richler's  Montreal, natural  beauty contrasting  with  the sterility of coal and  cast iron  inside the  ghetto.  Like Simcha  Kravitz  but  unlike A. M. Klein's "Jewboy" in "Autobiographical" who "Dreamed  pavement  into pleasant Bible-land,"  Melech Adler looks down from his balcony and frowns at the weeds struggling  up  through  fractures  in  the sidewalk. When  Noah  returns  to visit his mother,  he notices that  her Japanese  gardens are not thriving  in  the sun. "The rubber  plants, shrivelled, had  been bleached brown. The soil had turned  to dust."

49

RICHLER'S  NOAH ADLER

This  contrast  between  seasonal,  natural  beauty and  the ugliness of the ghetto is spelled out musically in Vivaldi's  Four  Seasons. "The  first time Noah had been to a concert  the orchestra  had  played The Four  Seasons  by Vivaldi  and  he had been so struck  by it that  he felt something like pain. He  had  not supposed that men  were  capable  of  such  beauty.  He  had  been  startled.  So  he  walked  out wondering  into  the night,  not  knowing what  to make of his discovery. All those stale lies that  he had  inherited  from others, all those cautionary  tales, and  those dreadful   things,  facts,  that   he  had  collected, knowledge, all  that  passed away, rejected,  dwarfed  by the  entry  of beauty into  his consciousness." This  aesthetic revelation of true  beauty  contrasts  with the revelation of false beauty in the lives of the Goldenbergs.
The  passing of  the seasons also  points  to the  importance  of time, for if the ghetto  can  be defined  according  to its illusionary spatial  borders, it  can also be defined in temporal  terms. The  walls of the ghetto are the habit of atavism, while Queen  Mary  Road  with its well-to-do Jews rejects history:  it is a street without a past.
Memory  plays  an  important role as Richler  resorts to flashbacks  to  portray
Noah's  past.  Noah  remembers  a  Friday  evening long ago at  the  hall of a local youth group where the speaker had been an angry Polish Jew with bad memories; his parents had been killed in the concentration  camps and he had been "swindled by memory."  Noah  listens to the speaker beside his friend  Kogan  whom he has already  committed  to memory,  like other  ghetto children  who  are  ghosts of the past. Melech lives in the past because of his strict adherence  to the Judaic  heri­ tage, but  this is undercut  by his secretive past with Helga, the dancer, "Dancing away from  him, like the  years." He  never forgets his God  whereas his grandson believes that  in order  to be liberated  from God one must  forget  Him, but then wonders  whether  one  can  forget.  Noah's  mother  also lives in the  past  as she repeatedly  recalls the light  at  her father's  death.  The relationship between Theo and  Miriam  is founded  on mistaken memories before the war. "Memory swindled them.  That   wretched  night  took on glamour  in retrospect." Richler  repeats the same  phrase  that  he  had  used  earlier  to  refer  to the  Polish  Jew  at  the youth gathering  and  later  to refer to Wolf's death.  Memory is a swindler, for it can rob the  present  of  its  truth   and  substitute  a  false  past  which  acts  as a  crutch  to support  those who cannot  cope with the present. When  Miriam  leaves Theo, she "expected  that  there  would be a sadness shared, or a kind exchange  for the sake of memory,"  and  when she lives with Noah in Ste Adele her insecurity about the present  forces her  to  think  about  the  past.  "The  time of beauty  and  the  wild years too, Chuck  and  Theo,  Paul,  were all stale memories. She dipped into these memories the way other  women dip into their knitting-bags." Soon she starts "to dip  more critically into her memories." As Miriam  reverts to the past, Noah sees her as passee, and  asks himself, "What  do you do with used people?" Thus, the

50

RICHLER'S  NOAH ADLER

past is a false escape  from  the  present,  and  the future, though hopeful  for  Noah, remains a question  mark at the conclusion  of the novel.
In  the  end  does  Noah  manage to break  free  from  all of  those  confining and restricting forces-the walls of the  ghetto,  the  cage  that  the  Adlers  inhabit, the padlocked  box, and  the string  that  tightens  around his heart?  During a rainstorm up  in  the  Laurentians Noah  senses  the  freedom   away  from  the  prison  of  the ghetto  as he imagines  himself to be a horse galloping to the top of the  highest  hill, his own  Ararat, and   braying louder  than  thunder. But  his answer  is silent,  for ironically,  he keeps secrets from  those in the family  who previously  had attempted to withhold the  truth from  him. He internalizes the secrets of the  padlocked box: first,  he  does  not  reveal  to  his mother  the  truth that  his father died  looking  for money; second,   he  conceals  from   Melech  the  fact  that  Shloime  set  fire  to  the offices;  and   third,   he  does  not  inform   Max  that   his secretary Miss  Holmes­ whom  Max  trusts  absolutely-has been  using  him all along.  He eats out  of her hand  as long  as she keeps sugar  in it.5 This  St. Urbain "horseman" with  blinders  is a different breed  from  Noah  whose clear sight penetrates the fa<;ade and  welter of his family  to gain a new vision of himself.



NOTES

1 These criticisms have been made  by the TLS, July 29, 1955; by George Woodcock in  the "Introduction" to the New Canadian Library  Edition of Son  of a Smaller Hera,   reprinted   in  Mordecai  Richler   (Canadian  Writers),  pp.  23-29;  and   by Hugo  McPherson   in  Literary   History   of  Canada, ed.  Carl  Klinck   (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1965), p. 714.
2   Desmond   Pacey,  Creative  Writing  in  Canada   (Toronto:  Ryerson,  1952),   pp.
265-66. Compare  the image with D. G. Jones' list in Butterfly on  Rock.
3  The  heroism  may be judged by comparing  the act with that  in Adele Wiseman's The Sacrifice  when  Isaac  rushes into  the  burning  synagogue  to save  the  Torah and  later  questions  the  meaning  of  "heroism."  The Sacrifice   (Toronto:  Mac­ millan, 1968),p. 212.
4    A  parallel  stereotype  may  be  found  in  Leonard  Cohen's  The  Favourite Game
where the son must flee from a domineering, widowed mother.
5  The  reader  is able to recall Noah's  first encounter  with Miss Holmes in the Cafe Minuit, though may not immediately recognize her. More troublesome is the introduction  of Jerry  Selby in  the Bar Vendome  and  his reappearance later.  If Miriam  had  been  his intimate  secretary, she should  have recognized him; other­ wise why does Richler bother  to mention  the name of the minor character?

R.R.1, TRURO
 


Ron Miles


The grey-haired man  behind the  plow keeps falling
down  because  his harness is too short. The horse
is cursed  for lack of sympathy, the  ground
for  being  humped and  bored.

Inside the  former mansion dust-lined glassware  shoulders to the edge  of chests and
added shelving.  Mrs.  Archibald regrets-although she, disappearing, cackles -that  we missed
the  tidal  bore.

The loungers' television  purples into  blue; the shower  stammers and  is cold; the  mattress  sags
in  four  directions.

But  in  the morning Mrs. Archibald, six dollars pocketed, will dust
wash  vacuum air  the
room  and  pay  her  taxes
while  the  black-eyed  cat  exudes another thin-toothed yawn

and  we, too fat  to blink
at  faults,  too  black  to praise this  thin  existence
heave our luggage through another groaning doorway, entering wind  as brisk
as  theft.


review articles


A SCHEME IS NOT A VISION

Stephen Scobie

DENNis LEE, Savage  Fields:  An Essay in Literature  and Cosmology. Anansi, $12.95;
paper  $5·95·

MY INITIAL, and  somewhat frivolous, reaction to Dennis Lee's Savage Fields: An  Essay in  Literature  and  Cos­ mology was to see it as a kind  of  "Son  of Survival."  It has the same Anansi format, lots of short  chapters with  snappy titles, little  rows of asterisks  between  every  sec­ ond  paragraph, all  the  trappings of  pop philosophy  and  an  Instant Theory:  just add  hot air  and stir.
This  flippancy is  unfair, for  both  At­ wood  and   Lee  are  serious  writers  with serious  things  to say:  but  the comparison does  nevertheless   point   to  similarities in both  the  strengths and  the  weakneses  of the  two books. Both  of  them  make  excit­ ing  reading:  they  are  original, contro­ versial,   and   thought-provoking. Taking the  trouble  to  disagree   with   Atwood  or Lee is a more  worthwhile critical activity  than  nodding along  with  the  bland  ban­ alities of many  other  critics.
But  Survival  and  Savage  Fields share the same faults  too. Both  of them  present a Theory, or a System,  which  is so simul­
taneously  overgeneralized and oversimpli­
fied that its value, even as a provisional theoretical construct, is severely compro­ mised.   (Lee's   introductory   chapter  at­  tempts  to  outline a  total  cosmology  and philosophical world-view  in  a  mere  nine pages!)   And  both   of   them,   despite   re­ peated  protestations to the contrary, twist and distort  their literary evidence to make it  fit  into   the  categories  their   theories have established.
 Lee  begins  by setting up  an  image  of "two fluctuating fields of force," which  he calls  "world"  and   "earth." This   dich­ otomy  corresponds only  roughly  to  what we  traditionally  call   "civilization" and  "nature": Lee  is at  great   pains  to  insist that  "world" and "earth" are  continually interacting and  indeed co-extensive with each other. The image of two overlapping fields  of  force  allows  him  to  escape  the static  image  of  two separate entities. (It is interesting to note  that  when  a literary critic  these days wants  a really  authorita­ tive image,  he  tums to science, especially  to physics.)
The  image  of the fields is an attractive one, and  in many ways a useful one. With its  affinity  to  the  Structuralist  emphasis on  relations between   things   rather than on things themselves, it offers a possible model  for  the  analysis  of so-called  "post­ modemist" writing, which   is  an  art of process rather than  of product.
One  wonders immediately, however, about  the  exclusive  nature of the  image. Why  only these  two  fields, "world" and "earth"? Couldn't the  model  of the fields of force  be  applied in  many  other  ways, to avoid,  for  instance, the  heretical  divi­ sion  of  "form" and   "content"  into  sep­ arate categories?
And,  much   more  seriously,  why  "sav­ age"  fields?  For  Lee,  the  essential  char­ acter  of the interaction of  these  two fields is conflict.  "The first  fact  of  life  is that  the   beings   which   make   up   world   and

53

REVIEW ARTICLES



those  which  make  up  earth are  engaged in war against  each  other." "'To be' is to be in strife." Here  Lee seems to have been carried away  by the  cuteness  of  his own title.  Indeed, he  admits late  in  the  book that  "I knew the  title before  I knew what the  title  meant." The  word  "savage" (which, unlike "fields," is not at all scien­ tific  or  objective)  determined  from   the start   the   nature  of  the  fields  that   Lee would  see. This  initial  and  fatal  precon­ ception is, I believe, the fundamental mis­ conception of the whole book.
It would   obviously   be  futile   to  deny that  the  world  as  we know  it  contains a vast  amount of  strife,  violence,  destruc­ tion,  and  agony. But  to declare  that  such strife  is the  only reality,  that  it  is the fac­ tor  which  ddermines all  other  factors  of human   experience,  is   an   act   of   such extreme  pessimism    that    it,   in   effect, throws  in  the  towel  at the  start  of round  one. No wonder Lee's  vision leads only to "destructive  madness,  lobotomy, and  sui­ cide": his initial  assumption surrenders to such   nihilism   without  even   a  show   of resistance.
Although  the   destruction  which   Lee sees  as  the  ultimate  consequence of  his world-view ought, theoretically, to  ema­ nate    as   much    from    "earth"   as   from "world," in fact  he sees it mainly  in  terms of  the  latter-mainly, that   is, in  terms of human consciousness.  From  one  point of  view,  Savage   Fields  is an  attempt to provide a  philosophical   justification  for the  ecological  movement :  man  is, by de­ finition,   a  polluter. In  Lee,  we  see  the Puritan  guilty   conscience   of   a   disillu­ sioned  liberal  run  wild:   not  far  beneath the   aphoristic   surface  is  a   good   old­ fashioned  breast-beating  hysteria.
In theory,  the  system  of Savage  Fields is amoral: earth  earths and  world  worlds, and  that's all there  is to it. But, as I have suggested, the moral bias of the book in practice is very much  against "world." Human consciousness is seen as a destruc-

54
 tive force. Thus  there  is no distinction, in Lee's  system, between  a  man  who  chops down a tree to build a fire to save his wife and  children   from  freezing,  a  man  who chops  down  a  tree  to  make   money  and doesn't  give a damn  about  what  he's do­ ing  to the  environment, and  a man  who chops down a tree to get wood for a violin. Lee's  system  would   force   us  to  see  all three    as   aspects   of   "world,"   and    as "strife," "assault" against  "earth." Such a conclusion  is manifestly absurd.
As a general  philosophical theory,  then, Savage  Fields seems  to me  to be simplis­ tic,  contradictory,  and   inadequate. But one  might  be  prepared  to  adjust to  the shortcomings of  the  system  if  it  were  to provide   a  framework  and   a  vocabulary for   an   accurate  account  of   two   such seminal  and  difficult  books  as  The Col­ lected  Works  of Billy the  Kid  and  Beauti­  ful   Losers.  Although  Lee  says  that   his book is "only  incidentally a work of  liter­ ary  criticism," it  is  nevertheless  on  the strength  and   accuracy  of  that  criticism  that  it must  ultimately stand  or  fall.
In  my view, it  falls.  Lee's  accounts of Ondaatje and  Cohen contain some  bril­ liant   insights,  and   many  individual   re­ marks  which  illuminate  moments in  the texts -but in each case, the general  drift of the argument is, I  believe, a distortion of the book that  is actually there  in front of him, misreadings so fundamental that  their  value  as  any  kind  of  evidence   in support of  Lee's  more  general claims  is nil.
Lee sees The  Collected  Works of Billy the  Kid  as a book whose "subject ... is the strife  of  world  and  earth," and   he  sees Billy as "an  instrument of murder, a citi­ zen of world." It is certainly true that the book is about  violence, and  many of Lee's comments on the ways in which  violence suffuses   the   most    seemingly   innocent images are excellent.  But his view of Billy as  the  chief  exponent and  illustration of the  destructive nature  of   "world"  leads

REVIEW ARTICLES



him  into  an  almost   ludicrous distortion of the  character Ondaatje  presents.
At  one  point,  Lee  says of Billy, "That is  why   he  murders  so  casually,   almost absent-mindedly, out  of the  periphery of his vision." Like "savage fields," it's a fine phrase; the  only  thing  wrong  is that  it's not  true.  At no stage  in the  book is there an  incident  in  which   Billy  kills  in  this way. In  fact,  it is almost  a commonplace of  Ondaatje criticism   to  point   out   that Billy throughout the  book  is seen  as  vic­ tim,  not  killa. All  the  rna jor  killings  in the    book -Tom    O'Folliard,    Charlie Bowdre,  Billy  himself-are perpetrated by Pat  Garrett. The closest Billy comes to being  a cold-blooded killer is his shooting of the cat  Ferns:  an  act  of mercy  killing, performed at the request  of Sally Chisum, and  conduct d,
mindedly,  not  out   of  the   periphery  of
vision,  but   with  intense   awareness and concentration.
Lee's  argument  for  Billy  as  the  per­ sonification   of   destructive    "world"  is based  on  the  poem  about  "the moral  of newspapers or  gun." Lee says that  "Billy kills  by  adopting" that  ethos,  and   "Be­ cause   Billy  embraces   that   ideology,   he can  'walk  off'  nonchalantly as the  bodies he  has  shot  writhe  and  die."  This  is just so much  nonsense.
Lee's   quotation  of  Ondaatje  is   mis­ leadingly   selective.  He  begins  his  quota­ tion  conveniently after   the  line  "so  if  I had  a newsman's brain  I'd say...." What  Lee  presents   as  a  definitive   account of Billy's ideology  is in  fact,  in  the  poem,  a hypothesis,  a  speculative  "if   I  had   ... then  I  would." Two  further points  follow from  this.
The first is that  the context  into  which Ondaatje sets  the  poem  makes  it  quite clear   that   Billy does  not   have  a  "news­ man's brain," that  he does not  "eliminate much," that   he  does  not  "walk   off  see none  of the  thrashing." The poem  is im­ mediately   followed    by    Billy's   intense
 recollection  of Charlie Bowdre's  death, coupled   to  the  image   of  the   "headless hen": and   just  two  pages  later   we  en­ counter  the  chicken   in  "After  shooting Gregory." In  this  latter poem  Billy does, for the one and  only time in the book, try to be the  kind  of killer  Lee says he  is­ and  he can't do it. He "was about to walk away  / when  this  chicken" bizarrely  and  comically  prevents  him.  Given   the  asso­ ciation  of the chicken  with Billy's memory  of  Charlie Bowdre's  death, we can  surely conclude  that  it is a fundamental element within  Billy's own character which  is pre­ venting  him from  adopting "the moral  of newspaper and  gun." Lee's version  of the character may  be  true   of   the  legendary Billy,  the  black-hearted  villain   of  melo­ dramatic fiction: but  it  bears  no relation at  all  to  what  Ondaatje's poetry  says.
The   second  point   is  that, while  Billy does not  and  cannot act  in  this  mechan­ istic and  cold-blooded way, he does never­  theless understand it, and  is fascinated by it. He may w:1tch "the stomach of clocks" for  hours,  but  he  emerges  "living." This  fascination is  natural enough:  Billy  has to  know  his  enemy,   and   the   character who  does  fulfill  all  the  attributes which Lee mistakenly  gives to Billy is, of course, Pat  Garrett. (Lee,  incredibly, makes  no distinction between   Billy and  Pat-just as  he   makes   none   between    Sally   and Angie-further examples of the coarsen­ ing  effect  of his  reductive categories.)
Lee's  failure   to  see  that   Billy  under­ stands  Pat  but  is not  the  same  as  him  is part   of  a  larger   failure.  Billy,  he  says, "seems  to possess no  inner  life  at all,  to move  through life  as  a  self-less  automa­ ton."  It  is at  moments like  this  that  one wonders  which  book  Lee  has been  read­  ing:  it certainly doesn't appear to be On­ daatje's. For  Billy  does  of  course  possess an  inner  life:  that  of  the  artist, that   of the   consciousness   which   perceives   and gives expression  to  the  contradictions of his experience. Ondaatje makes  this clear

55

REVIEW ARTICLES



throughout the book, starting in the most obvious  place  of all: the  title.
It is,  I  concede, common  practice  to refer  to The Collected  Works of Billy the Kid:  Left-Handed  Poems   by  the   con­ venient  short  title,  Billy  the  Kid, as Lee does  on  all  but   three   occasions.  But  in Lee's   case   the   omission    of    "collected works,"  with  its suggestions  of  Billy as in some sense the author, or at very least the persona, of  the   whole  book, is  sympto­  matic.  Lee  never  sees  Billy as  the  source of  consciousness  in  the  book,  and   never allows the possibility to emerge that  he is in any  way  an  artist.
The reason  for  this  is that  artists  don't belong  in  savage  fields   (as  I  hinted   at earlier in my question about the  violin carver) . The  artist,   above   all  others,   is the   exemplary  figure   of  the   man   who brings "world" and  "earth" into  harmony with  each  other; in  the  artist's  imagina­ tion,  and  in  the  delight of his audiences, the   contradictions  of  savage   fields   are resolved   and   transcended.  There  is  no strife. The fields are  not savage.
But Lee, stubbornly clinging to his sys­ tem, cannot admit this possibility. There­ fore  he  attempts to  reduce  Billy  to  the same  destructive level  as  Pat  Garrett. As a  result,  he  misreads the  character, dis­ torts  the  whole  book,  and sacrifices   the values  of accurate criticism to  the  sterile pessimism  of his inadequate theory.
Lee's  treatment of  Beautiful Losers  is, if  anything, even  more  misleading than that  of The Collected   Works of Billy the Kid, and  it is especially  disturbing to see the  extent   to  which  early  reviewers  wel­ comed  his as<;ault on Cohen's novel. Sam Solecki   in   The  Canadian   Forum    saw Lee's  criticism  as "consistently intelligent and   satisfying,"  naturally, since  he  also claims   that   Beautiful   Losers   is   "very definitely  a  minor  novel." Robin  Skelton in  Books in Canada  also finds  Lee's  criti­  cism  "perceptive," and   claims   that   "his analysis  of  the  reasons  for  the  failure of

s6
 Cohen's novel  as a  work  of art  are   [sic] particularly  instructive."  To   be  fair   to Lee, it was not his intention to encourage such   reactions;  he   still   sees  Beautiful Losers as  a  great  though flawed  master­ piece. But his astonishing dismissal of the  final  seventy  pages  leaves  the  door  open for all those who can't be bothered to face the total grandeur of Cohen's accomplish­ ment.
Lee  gets  off  to  a  bad   start   with   his assertion that Beautiful Losers presents a myth  of  Canadian history  in  which Catherine Tekakwitha marks  the Fall. "Catherine's virginity," he says, "was  an act  of blasphemy," and  he  uses the story of the  spilt  wine  to  illustrate "the infec­ tion of her  new sensibility."
Douglas    Barbour,   in   his   important essay  "Down  With   History"  (reprinted in Michael Gnarowski's Leonard  Cohen: the  Artist  and  his Critics)  has established the anti-historical stance of Cohen's novel. The  book's whole structure is directed against   the  concept of  linear   time;  his­ tory   is  an   oppressive   force   which   has reduced  the  narrator to a "pitiful hunch­ back."  It seems  strange, then,  that   Lee should  try  to  reinstate a  linear  myth  of paradise, fall, and  redemption. That just isn't  the  way the  book  works.
But of course Lee is wrong about Catherine. If her  virginity were  a  "blas­ phemy," then she would  never occupy the central position  she  does  in  the  novel's quest.   She   could   never   be  seen   as  an aspect  of Isis, as a bringer of  apocalypse.
In  fact,  Catherine in  her  highly  con­ scious  rejection  of  sexuality   is  fully  as sexual  a  character as either F. or Edith. To Catherine, after  all, the Andacwandet, or   Fuck-Cure,   is   "acceptable":  it  is  a mode of existence which  she understands, but  has  knowingly  rejected. (Lee,  in  an incredible  piece   of   Orwellian   double­ think,  contrives   to  see  this  statement by Catherine as a distortion  by  the  narrator of   Catherine's "real"   opinion-as    if

REVIEW ARTICLES



somehow  there  were a "real" version, outside  of what  Cohen tells us, that  would correspond to  Lee's  mistaken  interpreta­ tion.)
Catherine approaches sexuality  with  a single-minded absolutism which  acts as a disrupting force  in  every  social  situation she  encounters, whether in  her  own  vil­ lage,  at  the  polite  French  dinner  table, or  in  the  Jesuit  mission.  Everywhere she goes, she produces a fruitful hysteria,  the breaking of  systems  into  stems.  Lee  sees the   story   of   the   spilt   wine   as   "blas­  phemy"; Cohen's  word  for  it  is "apoca­ lyptic."
Lee, however,  cannot take seriously the idea   of  apocalypse, for  to  do  so  would mean  taking seriously  the  book's  ending. And,  like  the  idea  of  the  artist,  the  idea of  apocalypse cannot exist  in  savage fields. So Lee sets out on an elaborately perverse destruction of Books Two and Three.
His argument seems to be that  the undermining  of  F.'s   character  in  Book Two  somehow   invalidates  the  vision  of Book One.  Quite the  contrary is in  fact true.  Book One  has  been  concerned with the transformation of its central character into  a "beautiful loser": someone  who is beautiful  because  he  is  a  loser,  who  by losing  all  traces  of  personal   power  and even identity is able  to become "disarmed and  empty,  an instrument of Grace," and thus  move  into  an  apocalyptic  transcen­ dence  of time  and  history.  But  the  title is plural:  F.   also   must   be   made  into   a beautiful  loser.  Now,   F.'s  character  all the  way  through  has   been   that   of  the winner,  the   master   of   every   game   he plays. So the only way for F. to transcend his  limitations, to  become  as  he  advises his pupil  not  a magician but  magic  itself, is for  his whole character, style, and  per­  sonality   to   be  destroyed.  This   is  what happens in  Book Two; Lee  describes  the process  quite accurately, but  he  entirely  misses its point.  It is not  the  invalidation
 of  Book  One,   but  its  extension, its  con­ firmation, its  consummation. (For  F.  to stay  as  he  is, for  F.  never   to  become  a beautiful  loser:    that   would   invalidate Book One.)  Without the assault on  F. in Book  Two,   Book  Three  would   not   be possible.
My  argument here  is not  as  full  as  I would  like to make  it. To  counter Lee,  I really need to put forward a complete alternative  interpretation  of   the   novel, and  that  would  go far  beyond  the  bounds of  a  review  article. I  can  only  refer  the reader  to my account of Beautiful  Losers in  Leonard   Cohen, which   will   I   hope make  clear  my own  reading of the  novel. Lee's  reading leads  him  to  see Beautiful Losers  as  a  fractured  failure, in  which Book  Three makes   no  sense;   I  would argue  that    my   view   allows   us   to   see Beautiful Losers as a successful unity, crowned   by  Book  Three.  My  view  ac­ counts  for the structure of the  novel as it actually stands; Lee seems to want Cohen  to  have  written  a  different  novel,  and,  not finding  it, Lee is forced  to dismiss the novel  that  Cohen  actually wrote.
It is  worth   noting  what   Lee   would have  us leave  out  when  he claims  that  it is "finally  a  waste  of  time" to  read   the final seventy pages: F.'s "Invocation to History"; the account of Catherine's mortifications; the  associations of   Cath­ erine  with  "ordinary eternal  machinery"; the  praise  of  the  Jesuits  for  their  heroic choice    of    "Possible    Miracle"   against  "History";    Catherine's    sublime     dying prayer,  "Oh  my  Lord,   play  with   me"; the  image  of  the  System  Theatre's neon sign  breaking "system" into  "stem"; F.'s vision of  the  newsreel  invading the  fea­ ture; and  all of Book Three. It is  an  in­ credible  list, the heart  of the novel: with­  out  it, Beautiful  Losers doesn't make  any sense  at   all.  Lee's  suggestion   is  like  a critic  casually  proposing that   we  can  do without the Fifth  Act of a Shakespearean

57

REVIEW ARTICLES



tragedy: it's  not  criticism at  all, it's van­
dalism.
"No  one," writes Dennis Lee, "is asking
Beautiful  Losers  to  have   a  happy  end­ ing."  We  may  well  ask,  why  not?  Why should   any   critic   make   presuppositions about the directions an artist's vision may lead  him  in?  The  only  reason  would  be if  he  were  a  critic  stuck   with  a  system that   doesn't  allow   for  the  possibility  of happy    endings.  "Joy,"   says   Leonard Cohen   (on  one  of  the  pages  which  Lee would   delete).  "Didn't  I   promise    it? Didn't you believe  I would  deliver?
This  has been  a  polemical review,  and my intention has  been  to  mount an  all­ out  assault  against what   I believe  to  be an  ill-considered book;  but  I  would  like to return in closing to my initial comment
 that   Dennis Lee  is  a  writer   worth  dis­ agreeing with.  Despite  Savage  Fields,  I retain  a great  respect  for Dennis Lee, not only as a poet, but also as a critic  (I think his   earlier  essays,   such   as   "Cadence, Country,  Silence"   and   "Running  and  Dwelling: h•)mage to AI  Purdy" are  bril­ liant). But there  has always been  in Lee's work  a  hint   of   intellectual  rigidity,   of allowing himself  to be trapped too easily into   limited  choices,  either  for  dichoto­ mies.   Any   student  of   Leonard  Cohen  should   know  that   "A  scheme   is  not   a vision,"  and   that   systems  are   valuable only when  broken  into  stems. If Lee  can loosen  up  a  little,   and   allow   his  ideas more light and air, out of unsavage fields something yet might  grow.




HISTORY-MAKING
 


Hilda Thomas


MILTON  ACORN, Jackpine Sonnets. Steel  Rail.
N.  BRIAN DAVIS, ed.,  The Poetry  of the  Canadian People   1720-1920. NC  Press.
DAWN FRASER, Echoes From  Labor's War. Introduction by David Frank and  Donald
Macgillivray. New  Hogtown  Press.
RICHARD WRIGHT  and  ROBIN ENDRES,  eds.,  Eight  Men  Speak. Introduction by Robin
Endres. New  Howtown  Press.


NORTHROP  FRYE PRESIDES over the critical g<'-rrison against which  Milton Acorn  hurls  many  of his verbal  polemics. It may seen  odd,  therefore, to invoke  his authority in a review  of Acorn's Jackpine Sonnets. Some   words  of  Frye's   though, seem  particularly apt:

Every  good  lyrical poet  has  a  certain  struc­ ture   of  imagery  as   typical  of  him   as  his handwriting,  held    together   by   certain  re­ curring metaphors, and  sooner  or  later he will  produce one  or  more  poems  that seem to   be  at  the   centre  of   that structure.... The poet  himself  often   recognizes  such   a poem  by  making it  the  title   poem  of  a  col­ lection.  They   are   not   necessarily  his   best poems,  but   they  often  are, and   in  a  Cana­ dian  poet    they    display   those    distinctive
 
themes ... which   reveal   his  reaction to  his natural and  social  environment. Nobody but a  genuine poet  ever  produces such  a  poem, and  they  cannot be faked or imitated or voluntarily constructed.

Milton  Acorn  is a genuine poet. The  title poem  of  his  collection   I've   Tasted My Blood which in  1970 earned him the Canadian  Poetry   Award   and   the   title "The People's  Poet" attests  to the validity of   Northrop  Frye's   contention.  In   his earlier    volumes,    In    Love    and    Anger
{ r 956)   and   Against   a  League   of  Liars
( 1960), and  in The Island  Means  Min­ ago    { 1975)    for    which    he    won    the Governor General's Award  for poetry,  the official  mark   of  recognition,  Acorn   has

REVIEW ARTICLES



consistently displayed "those distinctive themes  . . . which  reveal  his  reaction   to his  natural and  social  environment." As a Marxist and  a revolutionary, Acorn himself  would  certainly want   to  include the  word  "political" along  with,  or  per­ haps in place of, the social in defining  his themes.  For  Acorn  is determined to con­ front   in  his  poetry  what   Miriam Wad­  dington calls  the  "denied realities" -to "reclaim and bring to the surface  the cast­ off and  denied  elements in  our  national life."
In  Jackpine  Sonnets Acorn  pursues  his dominant  revolutionary  theme   in   such
poems  as "The Craft of Poetry's the Art of  War," "To  a  Goddam  Boss"   (How can  you buy me now in these times  when
it's  sung I How  I  ripped lyric  fragments
from  the devil's  bloody  tongue?) and  the
brilliant  "Pigs,"  which    in   its   opening
stanza  uses the primary colours  and  naive images  of a child's  drawing to bring  into vivid and shocking focus the historical in­ sight  of the  last  couplet:

Truck's painted red,  sun  yellow,  pigs  quite pink
From  sunburn-I wouldn't be  surprised:
It being  precious little they  get
Of  wind  and  sun.  Now  here's this  jolly  trip. Never  mind  ... They don't feel  burnt  yet And  never  will-the  way  things are  set.

So far  they've been  well  kept  by  the  man; Confined, but  otherwise done much  good  by Nourishing meals,  delivered right on  time. Now comes  this surprise ... A world  to scan While  they  zip through it.  There's another
sky
Higher and  brighter than above  their  pen.

Filling their  eyes with  nearness and  distance; Two  of  them  stand up,  almost   like  men­ Balancing by  forelegs  on  top  of  the cab; Like  the Cabot Brothers, gazing wide  ahead. It's for  this  they  were  bred,  born, doctored,
fed.

The   volume   also  includes  poems   of  a more  personal  nature -although  Acorn would  rightly  object  to the  implied  sepa­ ration  of  the  personal   and  the  political.
 "Sonnet Written Coldly  Lest  I Cry," for instance, about the  murder of poet  Patri­ cia  Lowther, demonstrates the  fusion  of the  two  in  Acorn's  work.  In  fact all  the poems,  even  the  most  introspective like "The  Wake-Up  Raven," are   character­ ized  by  images  of  violence,  of  fear  and  death, of  "agonies, insults and injuries-" as in the poem  whose  title  might  serve as Acorn's  poetic  credo:  "!Use the  Whole Environment for  a  Medium!" There are also  attacks on  other  poets  and   critics. One   poem  entitled  "Shoot  Yourself   or Shit   Yourself"  is  addressed  to   "Friar Northbush" who "would'ev dressed  us all
True Tory  Blue I Masqued goalies  wav­
ing  archetypal symbols-."
What  distinguishes Jackpine Sonnets from  Acorn's   earlier volumes  is  his  un­ typical  insistence,  emphasized in the title, on  the  formal aspect   of  his  work -his attempt, chaotic in expression  and  deter­ minedly  polemical in  tone,  at  a  poetics. This   is  not   to  say  that   Acorn   has  ne­ glected  form  in  the  past.  As he  declares  immodestly   in  the   "Tirade  by   Way  of Introduction,"

Previously my  books  have  been   noted   for  a variety of stylistic types.  I doubt if  through all   those   years   I  wrote more   than  three poems  altogether in  the  same   mode.  Prac­ tically  all  were  examples of formal  elegance, used  in  free  fashion.

True (or nearly  true) enough. But in ad­ dressing   himself   so  belligerently to   the subject  of  technique, and   in  giving  the discussion  such  a  prominent place  in  the collection,    Acorn    distracts  the   reader  from the themes  of his poems, and invites the response which  has typified Canadian criticism  of separating form  and content and  treating content as essentially  irrele­ vant-the   very   attitude   which   Acorn castigates   in   "Shoot  Yourself    or   Shit
Yourself"  as   "negation I  For   cause   of
class, all which  motivates I Poets  to soar
and  swoop  amazed."
That this  un-Miltonic splashing about

59

REVIEW ARTICLES



in  the  shallows  of literary criticism is not profoundly meant  may  be deduced from the   brief   excursion   into   the   subject   of prime  numbers-"the thirteen-line prob­ lem" -about which  Acorn  says:

Mad fantasies like  these  are  mental  exer­ cises  a  poet   goes  through to  impress  some idea  on  his  mind. Many  forget  the  original intent and concentrate  on the  fantasies.

What must  be taken  seriously,  though,  is Acorn's  very real concern with craftsman­ ship,  with  the  search   for  a  form   which can  be "loaded" with  the  burden of  his savage  and  passionately  political   themes.  Again  Frye  (pace) has defined  this prob­  lem, if from  a very different perspective:

the   poet's  quest   is  for   form,  not   content. The poet  who tries  to make  content the informing principle of  his  poetry can  write only  versified  rhetoric, and  versified  rhetoric has  a  moral  but   not   an   imaginative  signi­ ficance....

Frye goes on to say that

A  sonnet has  form  only  if  it  really  is  four­ teen   lines   long:  a  ten-line  sonnet   padded out  to  fourteen is still  a  part of  chaos, wait­ ing  for  the  creative word. I  mean by  form  the    shaping  principle   of    the   individual poem,   which   is  derived   from  the   shaping principles of  poetry itself.

With  the  conception of form  as shaping principle Acorn would undoubtedly agree. And it scarcely matters whether his short, intricately-patterned  lyrics  can   properly be  called   sonnets.  (Ezra   Pound   would have it that  t.he sonnet  form  was found  by some chap  who set out  to write  a canzone and   got   stuck   in   the   middle.  Milton Acorn's  Jackpine  sonnets,    in   contrast, might   be  described   as  having come  un­ stuck in the middle.) What matters is the dialectical play  between   form   and  con­ tent,   between   the   technical   devices  of rhythm, internal and  end  rhyme,  asson­ ance, and  metaphorical language, the last of which  Frye  identifies  as  the  most  im­ portant  poetic  principle. In   his  experi­  ments with form, Acorn  is striving for the

6o
 mode which is best suited  to express the dynamic  tensions of the  Canadian scene: a  form  that  will serve  in  the  realization of  the  long-suppressed tradition  of  radi­ cal  dissent.  Jackpine sonnet  will  do well enough  as a name, if Acorn's description of it as a "realisant" is adopted: "It has a basic form, yes, but grows  to any shape  that  suits  the light, suits  the  winds, suits itself."
The  antecedents of the  tradition of radical  dissent which  is finding  expression in poets like Acorn are,  for the most part, of historical  interest  only.  This  is not  to deny the value of publications like The Poetry   of  the    Canadian  People   1720-
1920,  Eight   Men  Speak,  and    Echoes From Labor's War, all of which  appeared in 1976. Brian Davis, editor of The Poetry of the Canadian People, has taken  his cue from   Edward   Hartley  Dewart  who   in
1864  published    the   first   anthology  of Canadian  poetry,   Selections  from    the Canadian  Poets,  but   with   a  somewhat altered   intent.   Where   Dewart  saw   "A national literature" as  "an   essential  ele­ ment  in  the  formation of  national  char­ acter," Davis  sees  "The  literature  of  a class"  as  "an   important  element in  the formation of  that   class's  character." In speaking    of   "the   duality   of   political thought  which  produced ... a literature of conservatism  on  the  one  hand, and  a suppressed  literature of  dissenting radi­  calism  on  the  other," Miriam Wadding­ ton  comments  that  "these  dualities have often  remained   nebulous and   confused, and  it  has been  hard to  understand  pre­ cisely  where  to  locate   them."  The  dis­ torted  emphasis in Canadian literary criti­  cism  on  mythic  or  "apocalyptic"  inter­ pretation in  preference to  a  historic  ap­  proach,  on  form  at  the  expense  of con­ tent, should  not  be attributed, as it is by Davis, to conscious political  motives. The critics,  after  all, are  as much  products of the conservative tradition as are  the dra­ matists  and   poets,  and   throughout  our

REVIEW ARTICLES



history   it  is  that   tradition  that   has  tri­ umphed. The  crux  of  the  problem  may be located, if not  precisely,  then  at  least with  some  hope  of shedding light on  the subject, in  the  failure of the  Mackenzie­ Papineau  Rebellion of  1837·
Mackenzie, a Scot  who emigrated to Canada in  1820, was undoubtedly aware of the violent struggle then going on in England for  freedom  of the  press, under the  leadership of  journalists  like Richard Carlile and  William  Cobbett. Mackenzie was certainly in line  with  the  impulse  of rational enlightenment in his desire to overthrow the feudal  system of land  ten­ ure  which  at  that  time  impeded  the  de­ velopment  of  industry   in   Canada,  and prevented  even   those   simple   improve­ ments  such  as water  mills  and  foundries in  the  rural  communities. The  failure  of the  rebellion which  he led had  the  effect of  retarding  the  political   and  economic development  of  Canada  for   at   least  a generation,  and  of inhibiting the  growth  of that autodidactic artisan culture which had already matured in England. In  The Making of the  English  Working Class, E. P. Thompson observes:

This was the  culture-with  its  eager disputations  around  the   booksellers' stalls, in  the  taverns, workshops, and  coffee-houses
-which Shelley  saluted in  his  'Song to  the
Men  of   England'  and    within  which    the genius of  Dickens matured.

It was in a similar  climate  of radical fer­ ment   that   Milton   wrote.  Under  the  en­ trenched rule  of a conservative merchant class, no such culture developed, or could develop,  in Canada.
Confederation served to consolidate the
conservative rule. As F. W. Watt  remarks,

It  has   long   been    recognized that  the creation  of   the   Dominion  of   Canada  in
1867   was   primarily  a   conservative   act­ conservative in  the  sense  of   attempting  to preserve  in   the    new   political  entity  the
character, traditions, and   advantages of  its colonial components, and  to avoid  a  revolu-
 tionary rupture  with   the   circumstances  of the  past.

Confederation had   the  further effect  of intensifying the  split  between the  found­ ing  nations,  and  of  preventing  the  pos­ sibility  of  a  "fruitful  collision"  between  the two cultures. Malcolm Ross describes Canadians as  "bifocal." The  question is whether we are  also binocular-capable of seeing,  albeit  with  double   vision,  two cultures and  two classes through our  pre­ scribed  lenses.
Frank  Watt offers a detailed and  sym­ pathetic survey  of  the  "spirit of   protest  and   dissent   which,   sometimes   deliber­  ately,   resisted   the   main   current,  and which  as a consequence of  the  necessities of nation-building  was  almost,  but  never entirely,  stifled."  That  it  was  not  com­ pletely lost from  view is attested to by the poems  collected  together in  Brian  Davis' anthology. Davis draws  his material from radical  journals such  as the  Colonial  Ad­ vocate,  the  Ontario Workman, and   the Western   Labor   News, from   the   Labor Reform  Songster  of 1892,  and  from  col­ lections   of   folk   songs   and    individual volumes  like  Wilfred   Gribble's  Rhymes of Revolt. The  quality of the selections  is, naturally, uneven.  The best  of  them  are bold  and  direct,  belonging to or growing out  of  the  folk  tradition. The worst  are doggerel,  versified  rhetoric in which  even the  moral  significance  is obscured by the turgid  language. This   unevenness is not the problem,  however.  There is some sift­ ing to be done,  and  as W. A. Deacon sug­ gested  fifty years ago,  it is a  problem for criticism,  not  an  excuse  for  ignoring the material.  But   the   volume   is   oddly   ar­  ranged  and  carelessly documented. In  the Introduction, Davis is loud in his criticism  of the academic establishment for having  "studiously   ignored    the   poetry    of   the Canadian  people," and   for  having   lent themselves  to  "the  continued care   and upkeep  of  a  largely  imitative and  often subservient  culture." But  it  is clear  that

REVIEW ARTICLES



Davis has drawn heavily on the work of scholars like Marius Barbeau, Helen Creighton, and  Edith  Fowke,  whose con­ tributions he does not adequately acknowl­  edge   in  the  text; he  is  also,  evidently, indebted to Primary  Sources in Canadian Working Class  History  r860-1930   which he  mentions without  naming either  the authors  (R.  G.  Hann,  G.  S.  Kealey,  L. Kealey,   and   P.   Warrian)  or   the   pub­  lisher  (Dumont Press Graphix and Jimuel  Briggs  Society) .  It is  impossible   not  to sympathize  with   Brian   Davis   in  his  at­  tempt to  "make  available  for   the   first time  a  record   . . . of  our   own   cultural achievements" in the interest of "building a new, more egalitarian society." But this record  must  be seen  in  its historical  con­ text,  and  it certainly deserves  more care­  ful   scholarship  than    Brian   Davis   has brought to the  task.
Echoes   From   Labor's   War   by  Dawn Fraser,  a  reprint of verses  first  published in   1926,  is  well   introduced  by  David Frank  and   Donald  Macgillivray. The editors,  like Davis,  believe  that  "Literary historians have  paid  too  much  attention to  the  'official'  poets  in  our  history  and have   ignored   the   work   of  the   popular local  poets  likFraser, who  belong  to an entirely different  tradition."  This  tradi­ tion  is "animated by  ideals  of  morality, by a  sense of class  and  community, and  by an  aspiration for  social  and  economic  reform."   Fraser's   verse,    though   occa­ sionally sentimental and  self-conscious,  is no  blunt  instrument. His  attacks on  the bosses who,  it must  be admitted, were  as absurd  as they were  vicious in their treat­ ment  of  the  Cape   Breton   miners  of  the
2o's,  catch  the  idiom   of  the   people  in their  direct, humorous language. At  his best,  as  in  "He   Starved, He  Starved, I Tell   You,"  Fraser   remains  very  firmly rooted  in the oral  tradition-a tradition which  is still alive  in Cape Breton  today. The  historical  background  provided  by the  editors  of Echoes  From  Labor's  War
 makes  a real  contribution to a  neglected area  in  Canadian  cultural  history.
In  Eight  Men  Speak, Robin  Endres makes an  even more  important contribu­ tion  to the  recent  endeavour  to "encour­ age historians of Canadian radical move­ ments to make cultural history an integral part   of  their   research  and   analysis."  S. Jamieson, writing  of the neglect  by Cana­ dian   historians  of   trade  union   history, called it a "conspiracy of silence."  Endres  suggests   that   critics   like   Frye   and   his "student  and   popularizer, Margaret  At­ wood"  are  guilty  of  a  (perhaps uncon­ scious)  conspiracy to exclude  radical cul­ ture   from   critical  consideration   in   the interest   of  the  continued  dominance of their own bourgeois ideology. This  charge  must  be  taken  seriously,  especially  with regard   to  Canadian  drama, if  only  be­ cause of  the  blank  ignorance on the  part  of  most  students  of  the  existence   of  a radical  dramatic literature, and  the  lack of    critical studies  of  Canadian  play­ wrights.   George   Ryga,   for   example,  is often treated as if he were the magical progeny  of  the  stony  fields  from   which he sprang, without literary antecedents of any kind  (and  certainly not national antecedents!).
In tracing the development of the Canadian  Workers   Theatre  Movement and  its origins  in  the  international  politi­ cal  theatre of  the  2o's  and  30's,  Endres  relates   theatrical techniques to  themes, and  shows how  the  influence  of  the  agit­  prop  tradition is still  evident  in  Canada today.  Her  essay raises a  whole  series of questions  for study.  The plays themselves are  less likely  to  be  seen  as  material for future productions.  The most  impressive is  the  title  piece,  which   dramatizes the attempted  murder  of  Communist  Party  leader  Tim   Buck  by  prison  guards who fired  into   his  cell  in  Kingston  Peniten­ tiary,  where Buck  was imprisoned under  the infamous Section  g8. A factual report  of   this   incident  can   be   found   in   the

REVIEW ARTICLES


Report of the  Royal  Commission to  In­ vestigate   the   Penal   System  of   Canada (Ottawa, I938). The  play takes the form of a trial,  using to good effect  the various techniques  of  agitprop  theatre. That  it cannot be performed  today  is as much  a comment on the suppression of Canadian labour history  as  on  the  literary  merit  of the  work.  In  describing the  efforts  made  by the  Canadian government of  the  day to   prevent  the   play's   being   produced, Endres provides  a convincing demonstra­ tion of why, in the words of  Frank  Watt,  "The  tradition  in   Canadian   dramatic writing   has  never  been  continuous." Of the   other    plays   in   Eight   Men   Speak, Mary  Reynolds' "And  the Answer Is" has a  feel  for  language  and   character  that leads  one  to ask  what   happened to  this promising  writer. Dorothy Livesay's  "Joe Derry"  sheds  an  interesting sidelight  on her   recently   published autobiographical work. But  although as  Stanley   Ryerson says  on  the   dust   jacket   of  Eight   Men Speak, "the themes aren't obsolete," these "scripts and   polemics" can  do  no  more than  revive  in us the  desire  to  recover  a past  of which  we  have  been  largely  de­ prived.
That process  of  rediscovery   is of  im­ mense  importance, not  because  it  intro­  duces  into  Canadian  literary  criticism  a hitherto missing  element of  ideology. On  the contrary, what  it does is  to make  vis­ ible  for  the  first  time  the  unrecognized ideology  which  has  constituted the  myth of  Canadian   literature  throughout  our history,  and  which  has at  once generated and  been  affirmed  by a critical approach itself    assimilated   to    the    same    myth. Roland  Barthes in  his  Mythologies  sug­ gests  that   myth  "has   the  task  of  giving historical  intention a natural  justification, and  making   contingency  appear eternal. Now  this  process is  exactly that  of bour­ geois ideology."  He goes on to say that

just  as  bourgeois ideology is defined by  the abandonment of the  name  'bourgeois', myth

6g

REVIEW ARTICLES



is  constituted  by  the   loss  of  the   historical quality of  things.... The world  enters  lan­ guage   as   a   dialectical   relation    between activities, between human actions; it comes out   of   myth    as   a   harmonious   display  of essences.  A c:onjuring trick  has  taken place; it   has   turned   reality  inside   out,  it   has emptied  it    of   history   and    has    removed from   things   their  human  meaning so  as  to make   them   signify   a  human  insignificance. The  function  of   myth  is  to  empty reality: it   is,   literally,  a   ceaseless  flowing    out,   a haemhorrhage,  or   perhaps  an   evaporation, in short  a  perceptible absence.

In  Barthes' definition, "myth  is  depoliti­ cized  speech"  which  imposes  a  "second­ order  language, a metalanguage" between  the object  named and  its reality  in  terms of  human  action:  a  language of  images designed  to  preserve  the  world  by giving to   what   is  contingent  and   historically determined the  appearance of  being natural, essential,  eternal.
A dilemma arises here  in that  the language of bourgeois  ideology  embraces all  that   is  generally  understood  by  the term   literature. It  is  "rich,  multiform, supple":

The oppressed makes  the  world, he  has only an   active,  transitive  (political)  language; the oppressor conserves it, his language is plenary, intransitive, gestural, theatrical: it is Myth.

Left-wing myth,  by contrast (and  Barthes is explicit  that  "The Left" is also a mask which generates its own metalanguage), because  it "defines  itself in relation to the oppressed, whether proletarian or  colon­ ized" must  either  borrow  the language of the   oppressor,  or   confine   itself   to   the language of the oppressed, which is "poor,  monotonous, immediate":

This essential barrenness produces rare, threadbare myths: either transient, or clum­ sily  indiscreet;  by   their  very   being,   they label    themselves  as   myths,   and   point  to their  masks.... One  can  say  that  in  a sense, Left-wing myth  is always an  artificial myth,  a  reconstituted myth:  hence  its  clumsiness.

Barthes  identifies a number of "rhetorical
 forms" as  being  characteristic of   bour­ geois myth.  Among  them  are "The Priva­ tion  of History" (that is,  abstracting the object  from  its historical context), "Iden­ tification" (the  inability  to  conceive   of the   Other,  or,  at  best,   the   placing   of the  Other in  the  realm   of  the  exotic) , and   "Tautology"  (the   solution  offered  by  Margaret Atwood's "Victor-Victim" schema: "Tautology is a faint  at the right moment, a saving aphasia") . These con­ cepts   may   afford   a   useful   insight   into  such questions  as Why are there  so many isolated  figures in Canadian fiction?  Why so many  first  person  narrators, many  of them   women,  who  are   traditionally  re­ garded   as  non-persons? Why  so few  In­ dians,  heroes,  lovers?  There may  be,  as Barthes  suggests,  "isoglosses  of  a  myth," but neither the seasons nor  the geography of Canada, though  they account for much that  is present  in our  literature, are suffi­ cient  to account for what  is absent.
Barthes'  "Myth  Today"  was  written
over two decades  ago. That his approach to   literature,  and   that    of   other   neo­ Marxist  semiologists,   has   had   so   little impact  on   Canadian  literary   criticism  may  be in  part  because  of  the  unavaila­ bility  of  material  like  that   included  in Eight  Men Speak, Echoes  From  Labor's  War, and   The Poetry  of  the  Canadian People,   a  problem   which   continues  to frustrate  Canadian  scholars.  It is  more  likely,  though, that  as  Frye  says  in  the Conclusion to the first edition of Literary History  of  Canada, "Cultural history  ... has  its  own  rhythms"; "there must  be a period   of  a  certain  magnitude  ... in which a social imagination can  take  root and  establish  a  tradition." That Canada as  a  nation   never  fully  accomplished its bourgeois  revolution, and  hence  failed  to escape  the bonds of a colonized  tradition, may  help  to explain  why  "There are  no Canadian writers of whom we can say ... that their readers can grow up inside their work  without ever  being  aware  of a  cir-

REVIEW ARTICLES



cumference." This  same  historical peculi­ arity   may  account for  the  absence   of a self-confident opposition to that  tradition.
Frye's  1964 assessment of Canadian literature when viewed  through Barthes' improved  binoculars  takes   on   the   ap­ pearance  of  an   elegant  but   vanishing dream -a  bush  garden,  perhaps, but  a garden nonetheless,  in  which  there  is no room  for  the  irreducible Other. Frye  is quick  to  poi,lt  out  that   "new   conditions give  the  old  ones  a  new  importance, as what  vanishes  in  one  form  reappears in another." What  is now  appearing,  how­ ever, is not what  Frye envisioned :  a post­ Canadian culture in which  "the interplay of  sense  impressions   is  so  complicated, and  exhilarating, that  the  reader receives no  sense  impression   at  all."  It is  rather those  formerly  denied  realities  which  are asserting  themselves  in  the  work  of poets like Milton  Acorn. This new thrust is well described   by  Barthes in  Writing Degree Zero,  again  written in  the  so's:

There is ... in  every  present mode  of  writ­ ing  a  double  postulation:   there  is  the im­ petus  of a  break  and  the  impetus  of  a  com-
 ing   to   power,  there  is  the   very   shape  of every  revolutionary situation, the fundamen­ tal   ambiguity  of  which   is  that  Revolution must  of necessity  borrow from  what it  wants to  destroy, the  very  image  of  what it  wants to  possess.  Like   modern  art  in  its  entirety, literary writing carries at  the  same  time  the  alienation of History and  the  dream of His­  tory; as  a  Necessity, it  testifies   to  the  divi­  sion  of  languages  which  is inseparable from  the  division  of  classes; as  Freedom, it  is the  consciousness  of   this   division  and   the   very effort   which  seeks  to  surmount it.

As Victor  Hopwood says in the Literary History  of Canada, "Canadian conscious­ ness ... was born  literate and  historical." It is from  that  very  historical  conscious­ ness, from  tho:! sense  that  history  is made  by men and  women,  that the conservative tradition  strove   to  alienate  us.  Milton  Acorn   (can   that   really   be  his  name?) offers  proof   that   it   was   not  altogether successful:

I cannot say  I never looked   back. From then   on   I looked   front  and   sideways, up and   down,  back   and    outside,  inside  too. Never  front and  centre. Front and  centre is a   bourgeois  concept.   But   from    that   day forward I knew  who  I was.





CRITICS & PUBLISHERS
 


John Lennox


JOHN MOss,  Sex   and   Violence  in  the   Canadian Novel:  The  Ancestral Present.
McClelland & Stewart,  $6.gs.


As  A  FOUNDER  AND EDITOR of the  Journal  of Canadian Fiction  and  as the  author of Patterns  of Isolation, John Moss has established  himself  as a percep­ tive,  energetic  and  controversial  critic  of the   Canadian  novel.   One   of   the  criti­  cisms levelled at Patterns  of Isolation was that   it  subordinated the  individuality of the  works  under  examination to  the  in­ terests  of Moss's  thesis.  In  Sex  and  Vio­ lence   in  the   Canadian  Novel,  Moss  is
 
extremely  anxious to abjure the reductive tendency   of  broad   critical study  and  at several  points   he  reiterates that   "this   is not  a  thematic study.  Sex  and   violence provide    organizing   principles,   not   an hypothesis." Unfortunately,  this  repeated disavowal  of thematic structuring and in­ tention   may   alienate rather  than   con­ vince many  readers. Moss's  approach in­ volves three  stages-first,  the  examina­ tion of individual works in  and  of them-

REVIEW ARTICLES



selves;   second,   the   positioning  of  each work   within   a  larger,  synthesizing  pat­ tern; third,  the formulation, based on the larger  pattern, of consequent characteris­ tics of the Canadian literary and  cultural imagination. These  three stages are  inter­ dependent,  but   are   often   brought  to­ gether   by  Moss  with  discriminating in­ tensity.
The  preface and   first  chapter of  Sex and Violence are  involved  in a definition of what  is meant   by the  title.  According to  Moss,  sex in  the  Canadian novel  "re­ lates  more   readily   to  personal  identity" and  "has  no meaning, implies  no  judge­ ment." Violence  "lends itself  to sweeping moral   visions"  and   "demands  a  moral  response  to the conflict  that  generates it."  While  sex and  violence  are  universal in fiction,  Moss  argues  that  the  remarkably high incidence of both  is distinctive to the Canadian novel.  The range  of  possibili­ ties falling  within  the purviews of sex and violence  is broad. Sex encompasses every­ thing  from  puberty,  through  heterosexu­ ality and  homosexuality, to pornography. Violence  means  anything from  "battered egos to genocide." Literary violence, Moss suggests,  is  related  to  our   historical  ex­ perience while  the  importance of  sex  in our  fiction  has  its  origins  in  the  history and  influence  of  popular  literature. To­ gether, sex and  violence  "give  us an  elo­ quent vision  of our  collective  identity as Canadians."
Implicitly present as  eminences grises in Moss's  preface  and  first  chapter is the work  of  three   critics-Ronald Suther­ land's Second  Image, Margaret Atwood's Survival  and   Leslie  Fielder's  Love   and Death  in the  American Novel. Moss con­ tradicts Second  Image  when  he warns  of his  intention to  show  later   how  "Cana­ dian   literature  is  an   English   language literature, quite  separate from  Quebecois literature or from  the various ethnic liter­  atures   of  this  country."   In  contrast  to what    is   suggested    in   Survival,   Moss

66
 argues  that  "violence  marks  the  struggle for life and  against  death" and  allows the novelist  to  discover   "the   moral  dimen­ sions of  his  universe." Violence  and  sex together   are   constructive  in   providing either   for  "visions  of  moral  identity" or for  an  examination of moral  identity. In contradistinction to  Fiedler's  view of the American  novel,   Moss   states   that    the Canadian novel "is virtually barren of the classic  theme  of  love  and  death in  tan­  dem, fused as one dynamic theme." Love and  death as literary themes  are  possible only  in  an  established  society.  Sex  and violence   are   the   themes    of   a   culture "where  the  quality  and   the  existence  of the society are both  in doubt." Thus, the Quebecois novel  is characterized by love and  death  whereas  the  Canadian novel is preoccupied with  sex and  violence.  This last distinction is theoretically interesting, but   not  sufficient  to  my  reading of  La Guerre, Yes  Sir!, Mad  Shadows, and Kamouraska, all of which  are  used as examples  in lvfoss's distinction. Constant throughout the  preface and  first  chapter is the sustained  connection between  liter­ ature  and   society.   Moss   concludes  by saying  that   "there  almost  certainly is a higher  incidence   of  sex  and  violence  in the Canadian novel than elsewhere,  prob­  ably  because  in  no  other  tradition does community  consciousness   coincide  with preoccupations of  the  contemporary  im­ agination in quite  the  same  way,  to  gen­ erate  these responses."
Subsequent chapters deal  either with  a single work or several  works grouped and studied  in relation to  a  particular aspect of the sex and violence motif.  In addition, the  thesis of the study  often  gives way to a  discussion of the  form  or  technique of individual novels. The second  chapter, "Rites of Passage,"  deals with  the  role of sexuality  in  the  depiction of  young  pro­ tagonists   created    by  writers  like   Alice Munro, Clark  Blaise,  John   Glassco  and John   Metcalf.  As  the   chapters   unfold,

REVIEW ARTICLES



Moss develops  his study  through the  use of a critical  spectrum which  moves  from works in which  sex dominates to those in which   violence   is  most  important.  His first  close  reading comes  with  his  third chapter which examines sexuality  in Lives of Girls and Women. This  is a fine inter­ pretation  deepened  by  what   Moss  ac­ knowledges  as a shock of recognition and by the  fascinating linking  of the  persona  of Del with Alice Munro. The next chap­ ter    focusses   on    Margaret    Laurence's Manawaka  works,  particularly  The   Di­ viners,  in   terms   of   the   way   Laurence handles "the  conflict   between   roles  im­ posed by gender  and  what  we sense is our essential  self somewhere  deep  within us, surging  randomly  to  the  surface." One chapter  discusses  novels  in  which  sexual triangles  predominate for  different  the­ matic    and   formal    purposes.    Another chapter  argues  that  the  Deptford trilogy is  exemplary of  fiction  where   "violence obtrudes on sexuality." Surfacing  and  St. Urbain's Horseman are examined to show the  difference between  quests for  identity and  quests  for self. Moss goes on  to  talk about the  fusion  of  sex and  violence  in works  which  he  describes  as  experimen­ tal. Then, in separate chapters devoted  to each    of   these   experimental   novels - Beautiful   Losers, The   Disinherited  and The  New Ancestors-he discusses how the first  two fuse sex and  violence,  while  the third  treats  them  in  juxtaposition. Works at  the  violent  extreme of  Moss's  critical spectrum  are  examined  in  chapters  en­ titled  "Violence and  the  Moral  Vision"  and  "Genocide: The  White  Man's Bur­ den." Among  the  works  studied  in  these chapters, it  is Wiebe's  The  Temptations of Big Bear which seems to hold  for Moss the   greatest  fascination   and   challenge. His distinction between moral  and  spirit­  ual  vision  in  Wiebe's  novel  is succinctly  expressed.   In   the   penultimate  chapter, the   articulation  of   identity  and   moral consciousness  is  examined  in  relation to
 humour in the fiction of Robert Kroetsch and  Leo Simpson.
The    final    chapter,   "Gathering  the Canadian Identity," is broad  and contro­ versial  in  its synthesis.  It is  persuasive in its  situating of  the  Canadian  novel  in  a third-world context, in its endorsement of Commonwealth literary studies  and  in its discussion  of  voice or  language in  Cana­ dian  fiction. It is vague  in its generalized enumeration  of  the  development of  un­ specified   fonns   and   conventions  influ­ enced   by   tl1e new   subject-matter  con­ nected  with  Canada. It is zealous  in  its description of  the  need  for  the  contem­ porary Canadian literary critic to demand of  himself  "a  social  responsibility,  even sometimes  at  the  expense  of  his  literary  vision."  It is most  contentious in arguing for  the  existence  of  two entirely separate literatures  in   this   country-Canadian and  Quebecois. To argue  for a character­ istic preponderance of sex and  violence  in the  Canadian  (English)  novel   through intensive  examination of  specific  texts  is one   thing.   Quite  another  is  to   argue, without a  similar   intensive   examination of the same  motifs  in  the  fiction  of  Que­ bec,  that   "Canadian literature  does not include  the  literature of  Quebec  written in French-except through wishful think­ ing  and  tremendous cultural  naivete."
John  Moss is a skilled and  intelligent reader  of our literature. His thesis is used to select  and  organize   rather than  inter­ pret  the  works  he  deals  with.  Moss  may be  admonished  for  his  socio-literary ob­ servations, particularly  in  the  last  chap­ ter, and for his view of  the critic  as "guru, guide  and  impressario   [sic]."  There is, however,  a persistence  in  the  way we im­ plicitly ask our  literary critics  to interpret our  imaginative culture and  then   just as persistently   tell   them    that,  having   at­ tempted to do so, they  have  presumed or erred  or failed.
The  book's  physical  details  provide the author  and   readers  with   reason   to  be

REVIEW ARTICLES



alarmed about  the attitudes of editors  and publishers. Presumably McClelland  & Stewart felt that  Sex  and Violence in the Canadian  Novel   would   be  an  event   of some   importance  in   Canadian   literary studies. Why, then,  is this book so slipshod in  its  physical  presentation? There is an inexcusable proliferation of typos -care­ less, egregious  or simply funny. Some pro­ vide  unintentional  comic  diversion. Ex­ amples -the  synopsis  of  one  story  des­ cribes  a  young  girl's  "public hairs"; the examination  of  Fifth   Business  mentions the  short   reign  of   "King Edward IV"; the  protagonist of  Atwood's Edible  W o­ man  is "Marion  McAlpine"; the  protag­ onists   of   Surfacing   and    St.   Urbain's Horseman  search  "for   whom   they  are."  And  the proof-readers have  left  the critic bereft  of  defences  in  their  verification of "a single critical  approach that  is as muti­  form   as  the  literature it  considers." In addition,  the  Index is indefensibly awry. For 	example,   Jack 	Ludwig's    Above Ground  is listed on pages  21, 31, 38, 39 in the  Index, whereas  the  actual  references are  found  on  pages  26, 36, 43· However, one cannot thereby  conclude that  the In­ dex  references  are  consistently  five  pages behind  where  they are actually located  in the  text.  Charles Yale  Harrison  is listed on   pages   230  and   231   in   the   Index,  whereas   in  the  study  itself  he  is  men­ tioned  on  pages  232 and  233· This  inac­ curacy   may   be   the   result   of  computer
 typesetting, but even if this were the case, where  were the publisher's proof-readers? Such errors  and inconsistencies serve the reader   badly  and   the  writer   far  worse. What  was the commitment within  the editorial department of one of our senior publishing  houses  in  the   production  of this book?
Editorial standards are  also implicated in   the   need   for   some   clarifying and simplifying  of the book's prose style which occasionally    becomes   gluey   in   phrases like,  "It is  one   of  those   novels  which might  readily spawn  an autochthonic pro­ liferation of commentary." Other editing might  have helped to temper what appear to be Freudian slips which are delightfully appropriate  to  the  nature of   the  study, but  not  altogether supportive  of  its seri­ ousness.   Example -"Wander   through Washington, D.C. and  marvel  at  the neo­ classical erections."
This  book  provides a  valuable,  intelli­ gent and controversial examination of the contemporary  Canadian novel  by an  ex­ tremely  close  and   perceptive reader. He and  his  readers deserve  far  better  treat­ ment  at  the  hands  of his publishers  both in the quality and  professionalism of phy­ sical  production and  in serious editorial responsibility.  A  corrected edition is  re­ quired   immediately  and   McClelland   & Stewart  should   move  quickly   to  get  it in  press.




HAUNTED  BY "CAN LIT"
 


Linda Leith


DAVID STAINEs, ed.,  The Canadian  Imagination: Dimensions  of  a Literary  Culture.
Harvard  University Press,  $ro.oo.


SOME OF THE  MOST TELLING impressions created by this collection  of essays on  Canadian literature are  unin­ tentional. Theditor, David Staines, and

68
 
the  eight   eminent  contributors  presum­ ably intended us to learn something from all the information about our literary  cul­ ture  that   we  are  showered   with  in  this

REVIEW ARTICLES



volume,  and  although the  book makes no pretence of being comprehensive it would indeed  be quite  possible  to glean  from  it a  fair  idea  of most  of  the  significant de­ velopments in  English   and   (to  a  lesser extent)  French-Canadian  poetry,  prose, and  drama.
Why is it then  that  one can finish read­
ing  the  collection with  a  most  curiously lopsided  impression of  what  is most  im­ portant in our cultural life? Why is it, for example, that  ghosts and  the supernatural come   to   assume   such   an   inordinately major  role?   When    one   sets   the   book down  one  knows  full  well  with  one  part  of one's  being  that  there have  been scores of worthy   writers  in  Canada. How  does it happen, then,  that  instead  of any  com­ prehensive  view,  one  finds  one  has  be­ come  secretly  convinced that  only  a  tiny clique    of    literati-notably 	Northrop Frye,   Margaret  Atwood,  Earle    Birney and,  perhaps, Douglas  Bush and  Marshall
 McLuhan -deserve   any   senous atten­
tion?
One   might,   of  course,   want   to  argue that   these  writers  have  some  special  im­ portance, but nowhere does anyone argue that  in  this  volume: rather it  remains a sly  but  potent   impression  created-not by  any  one  contributor in  particular­ but by the number of  times certain names  and  ideas recur.
It all  begins unambiguously enough­ distressingly  so-as David Staines in the opening sentences  of his Introduction in­ forms  us  that   the  Dominion of  Canada was  formed   in I 867   under  the   British North  America  Act,  that   Newfoundland joined   the  dominion only  in   I949,  and  that  at  the  same  time  Canada is old  as a   place   of   European  settlement.  This,  and   subsequent  references  to   Vikings, Canadian  geography, "A  mari  usque  ad mare"  and    regionalism   are    soon   ex­ plained: the  volume   (although  "of  im-







The 	Antigonish	Review

A quarterly


Publishes stories, poems, articles and reviews of a literary  and cultural nature.

$5.00 per  year


St. Francis  Xavier  University
Antigonish,  Nova Scotia




6g

REVIEW ARTICLES



portance to Canadians") is addressed primarily to a "foreign audience." Staines, who introduced a course on Canadian literature at  Harvard, in  I976 organized a lecture  series to supplement that  course. Northrop Frye,  Margaret  Atwood, Brian Parker, Marine Leland and  Marshall Mc­ Luhan  all  presented lectures that   pro­ vided  the  basis for  the volume, and  Peter  Buitenhuis,  Douglas  Bush   and   George Woodcock   wrote  complementary studies at  Staines'  invitation.
So we now  know  why we are  given  so much  basic information about  things Canadian, even  if it  remains distracting. One   may  also  be  permitted  to  wonder how necessary it really  is. While  there  are undoubtedly  untold  millions   of   Ameri­ cans   (and   Canadians, for  that  matter) who  do  not  know  the  date  of  the BNA Act, etc.,  surely  most  of those  who  get as far as reading The  Canadian Imagination  are  unlikely  to  want  or  need  to  find  ele­ mentary facts  about   history  and  geogra­  phy  in  a  book  on  Canadian  literature.
Staines is not  the only one who  may be faulted for  being  too  informative. There appears generally   to  be  a  prevailing  as­ sumption  among  the   contributors   that  they   are   writing  for   a  readership   that  knows  practically nothing about  Canada and   its  culture. This  assumption  would on  its own  not  be  a  disadvantage, but  it becomes  so when  the  result,  as too  often in  this  volume,  is  that  analysis  makes  far too  much   room  for  facts  about   writers,  for  lists  of  works,  and   for  detailed  plot summaries.  The   sheer  weight   of  all  the information  included between   the  covers of the  volume  is partly the  reason  why it leaves  so  little  real  impression  and  why the occasional  striking comment acquires  all   the   more   significance :  so  too   the colour of a drab suit of clothes may go unremarked if it happens to have  vividly coloured buttons.
"Haunted by Lack  of Ghosts" is North­
rop  Frye's  opening study  of  patterns  in

70
 the imagery of Canadian poetry.  It is a fascinating essay.  Frye  explains  that   he used the last line of Birney's  poem "Can.­ Lit." as  his  title  because  there  are  gods here   in   Canada -natural   gods -and that  we have  offended them  by the  way in which we have treated nature. Canada, he  says  interestingly,  finds  the  environ­ ment  less impressive  than  oppressive: "It is not  only  that  nature is so big  and  the winters  so cold,  but  also  that   there  is a lurking  feeling that  if anything did speak to  the  poet  from  nature it  would  speak only to condemn." We can  make  no con­ tact  with  the gods of this land  because  of what we are, and  what  we did. However, there   is,  according to  Frye,   a  new  link being  forged  between   man   and   his  en­ vironment in Canada by some  of  the  re­ cent   poets   (Newlove,   Musgrave)   who write  of  attitudes  appropriate to  people who  really  belong  here,  who  are  immi­  grants no  longer.
In   I945 Poetry published a  review  of
E. J. Pratt's Collected  Poems  which  as­
serted   that   the   poet's   work   was   both
dull  and   a  hundred  years  out   of  date. Peter  Buitenhuis sets out  here  to  defend the  poet  against  this  accusation by  argu­ ing that  it is only in an anti-historical age of  poetry  such  as  our  own  that   such  a charge  would ever have been laid.  Unlike  other  modern  poets,  Pratt was  rooted  in history  and  in an  awareness of his coun­  try's  past,  and  if  even  Buitenhuis will ad­  mit  there   was  something "slightly ana­ chronistic" about  the  poet's  imagination, he  will  nonetheless   insist  on  the  virtues  rather  than  tl1e faults  of such  a perspec­ tive. Quoting Birney's "Can.Lit.," Buiten­ huis then comments: "Pratt suffered  from no  lack  of ghosts,  and  he  was  able  over the years to create  a usable past for the contemporary Canadian imagination."
It's   not  that  Frye  and   Buitenhuis are arguing along similar  lines  (although in some   ways  they   are),  but   rather  that there   are  uncanny  connections  between

REVIEW ARTICLES



their  essays in ways that  acquire added significance   through  repetition. The  use of  Birney's  poem  is the  most  striking of these  connections, but  by  no  means  the only one. The  sheer  number of times that the names  Frye, Pratt and  Atwood  are mentioned in these essays is extraordinary.
Frye,  too, has  mentioned Pratt, but  to identify  him  with  the  earlier poetry  that saw  nature  as  oppressive   and,  notably, to comment that  Margaret Atwood  has inherited Pratt's instinct  for  what  is im­ aginatively central in  the  Canadian  sen­ sibility.   (On   the  basis  of  this  volume  it might  well  be argued  that  Birney  should share   in  that   honour.)   Atwood's  book, Survival, Frye  suggests,  has  become  very influential  partly   through   its   inspired  choice  of a  title:  "the  word  'survival' in itself   implies   a   discontinuous  series   of crises, each  to  be  met  on  its  own  terms, each  having  to face  the  imminent threat of  not  surviving." Later  in  his  essay  he remarks  that   "Even   in  Pratt, society  is held  together only  by the  emergencies of
'survival'."
Buitenhuis refers  not  only  to  Atwood, but  also  to Frye:

There is a good  deal  of  the  survivor instinct in  Pratt's work,  but  it  is not  often the  grim and   desperate affair   that  Atwood makes  it out   to   be.  In   one   of   Pratt's  most   typical poems,   "The  Truant,"  survival becomes   a joyful   as  well  as  a  defiant necessity. The poem's   purpose   is   to   show    the    undying spirit of  man   when  confronted  by  the  ulti­ mate   tyrant,  the   Panjandrum,  who   repre­  sents   himself    as   God,  but    is   merely,  as Northrop Frye  has  noted, "the  mechanical power  of  the  universe."

Almost   immediately  afterwards   Buiten­ huis  quotes  at  some  length  from  Frye's introduction  to   the   second   edition  of Pratt's  Collected   Poems,  supporting his own  contention that  Pratt  was  an  origi­ nal,  unperturbed  by  the  poetic  trends  of his day.
The   third   essay,  George   Woodcock's
"Possessing   the  Land:  Notes  on  Cana-
 dian  Fiction," is for  various reasons  dis­ appointing for  those  perusing it  with an eye  to  discovering  new  insights  into   its subject,  but most  rewarding for any  who, sensitized   by   the   connections   between  Frye's essay and  Buitenhuis', have started noting  recurrences.
Woodcock,    first   of   all,   quotes   Frye twice in his opening three  pages, and  then again  a few pages  later  on.  (He  also  re­ fers to Atwood on several  occasions.) Two  of  these  quotations are   taken  from  the Literary  History  of Canada, a  work  that  Woodcock  has obviously  relied on heavily  in  what  turns  out  largely  to  be a  listing and  description of  prose  fictions  written in Canada and  by  Canadians. The main  argument of  the  essay  is that   Canadian fiction  has in the  main  bypassed  realism :

Canadians,  faced    with    the    wilderness  on one  side  and  a  dangerously powerful  neigh­ bour  on  the  other, had  little doubt  as  to  the  actual  nature  of   their   predicament;  what  they  needed was  the  combination of  myth­ ology  and  ideology  that would   enable them  to  emerge from  mere escapism and   present a  countervision  more   real  than actuality.

And,  he  goes  on,  since  the  later   192o's there  has developed a genuine Canadian twentieth-century romanticism.
Debatable as this is (Atwood disagrees completely),  it  is  thought-provoking,  a fact  that  makes  for  all  the  more  frustra­ tion  when  one  discovers   that  Woodcock  practically abandons it  as  an  idea  when discussing  the  specific  works.
The  romanticism he writes  of uses "fantasy and  dreams as paths  to reality," accepts  "myth  as  the  structure that  sub­ sumes  history," and   "in  its  ultimate  de­ gree   of   the   fantastic"   recognizes    and  unites  with  satire,  its  opposite. In  many ways Woodcock  too is on the  track  of the "ghosts" mentioned  by  Frye  and  Buiten­ huis.
Margaret Atwood's essay follows: "Can­ adian   Monsters:  Some   Aspects   of   the Supernatural in  Canadian  Fiction," and

REVIEW ARTICLES



the  opening sentence begins:   "I first  be­ came   interested  in  Canadian   monsters,  not,  as  you  might  suspect,  through poli­ tics,  but   through  my  own   attempts  to write  ghost  stories...."  The  impression that,  in  terms  of its concerns, this  collec­ tion  of  essays forms  an  integral work  is confirmed.
Unlike   Woodcock,  Atwood   considers
that  the  mainstream of Canadian  litera­ ture  has been  "solidly social-realistic," on the  whole  confining itself to ordinary life on  middle   earth,  and   she  suggests  two reasons  for  this:
The first  is that   the  Canadian fiction  tradi­ tion    developed   largely   in    the    twentieth century, not   the   romantic  nineteenth. The second   is  that   in  a  cultural  colony a  lot  of effort  must  go  into  simply  naming and  des­ cribing  observed   realities, into  making the  visible  real  even  for  those  who  actually live there.  Not   much   energy  is   left   over   for exploring  other, invisible realms.

Her obvious differences with  Woodcock notwithstanding, Atwood  too is clearly thinking along  some  of the  same  lines as the  earlier   contributors  to  the  volume: she proceeds  to quote  from  what  she all­ too-appropriately describes  as  Earle  Bir­ ney's "much-quoted" poem "Can.Lit." as well   as   from    Irving   Layton's   "From Colony   to  Nation,"  and   to  ask  if  this ghostless, unmagical,  prosaic  image  is (or ever  was)   really  true  to  Canada or  its literature. The balance of her essay shows her  doing  hec  bit  to  bring  forward some examples to   prove   the   existence   of   a supernatural  or  magical   undercurrent in Canadian   literature. Again   it   is  disap­  pointing  to find   her  shying   away   from comments  and   conclusions, mainly  con­ fining  herself to descriptions of her exotic literary finds.
While  not  quite  so  tightly   interwoven
as  those  in  the  first  half  of  the  volume, the four  concluding essays have,  with one notable exception, by  no  means  escaped the  incestuous  influence  that  Can. Lit. seems  to exert  over  its commentators.
 Douglas  Bush, writing on Stephen Lea­ cock, does  his generally worthy  essay no good when  he gives in  to  the  temptation to claim an admittedly tiny thread of per­ sonal connection with Leacock  (via James  Wetherell, principal  of  Strathroy Colle­ giate  Institute while  Leacock  was  a  stu­ dent   there,   and   possibly  provincial  In­  spector  of  Schools  who once  commended Bush). One ends  by liking  Bush nonethe­ less,  as  he  is so  anxious   to  attribute the inclusion  of such  trivial  reminiscences to the  garrulousness of  a  self-indulgent old age.  (But  what   is  Peter   Buitenhuis'  ex­ cuse?  After  referring to  Pratt  simply  as Pratt in his opening pages,  and after  dis­ cussing  the  role  played  by  Victoria Col­ lege  in   the   nurturing  of   many   strong  teachers,  critics and  writers such  as Pratt himself,  Frye,  and  Atwood, he  self-con­ sciously mentions "It was at Victoria Col­ lege, as a  fledgling  assistant professor  of English,  that  I first met  Ned  Pratt.")
The  sixth  essay, and  the  one  that  im­ mediately   follows   the   one   by   Bush,   is Brian   Parker's  "Is   There  a   Canadian Drama?" "I have," Parker  begins,  "bor­ rowed  my  title  from  Douglas   Bush"­ specifically  from  Bush's   1929  article   in the  Commonweal entitled "Is  There a Canadian Literature?" Parker goes on to quote  what  he considers  to be Bush's cru­ cial  remark   from  the  conclusion  to  that  article:  "The  best  Canadian  writing   is moving  away  from   the  local  and   paro­ chial   to  the  local  and  universal, and  it can  be increasingly  judged  by other  than  domestic standards." A sketch  of the  de­ velopment of Canadian theatre, and spe­ cific  discussions   of   Michel   Tremblay's Forever  Yours, Marie-Lou,  James   Rea­  ney's  Colours  in  the  Dark,  and  George  Ryga's The Ecstasy of  Rita  Joe follow, as Parker  argues  that  there  is indeed  a par­  ticularly Camdian drama of good quality.
In  the  interesting theoretical  part   of his discussion  he  refers  significantly  both to Frye's view that, coming  on  the world

REVIEW ARTICLES



scene  so late,  Canada is inevitably  com­ mitted  to   a   modern   international   art  style   (which  he  characterizes  as  spatial  rather  than   linear,  imaginative rather than  rational), and   to  Marshall McLu­ han's theory  of a modern sensibility so changed by  electronic technology and speed of communication that  it sees things always  in  terms  of simultaneous pattern. Parker also,  in  the  same  context,  refers to Harry Levin's  comments in his address to the  Canadian Comparative Literature Association    in    1972,   in   which    Levin pointed out  that  a  lack  of a  specific  na­ tional  identity may, in fact,  be culturally enriching.
This  latter remark leads  us directly  to the iast essay in the collection, "Canada: The   Borderline Case," in  which  McLu­ han  argues  that  in  the  new  world  of to­ day our  very lack of a solid identity is an advantage.  The   big   powers,  he  writes, have    seen   their    identities  perforated; Canadians  have  learned  to  live  without such    strongly    marked   characteristics; ergo Canadians  are  now  better  off:  "the  interface  is where  the  action  is."
It  may  well  be  possible  to  argue this case  convincingly, but  McLuhan's  argu­ ments  are  never  sustained well enough  to support the  ideas  he  throws  out,  and  his essay  degenerates into  a  series  of  rather foolish  comments on  the  differences be­ tween  Europeans and  Americans, and  on the  in-between-ness of  Canadians.
There is a loose thread in  this cultural mesh,    and,  hardly    surprisingly,   it   is Marine Leland's discussion  of "Quebec Literature  in   its   American  Context." Here  alone  one looks in vain  for the kind of connections that  are so remarkable among the  other  contributions to the volume.  Here  alone  one finds no hanker­ ing  after   absent   ghosts -nor  even  Mc­ Luhan's attempt at  creating a  virtue out of necessity-since here alone the ghosts are both  ever-present and known  to be so.
Although Leland does make  a not  very
 enlightening attempt  to  situate  Quebec literature in  the  American context  early on in her essay, she soon leaves that  rather unprofitable subject  aside.  Instead she devotes  the bulk of her attention to a sur­ vey of Quebec literature in  its  own  cul­ tural  and  political  context.  Many of  her comments  are   of   considerable  interest, but  why is it that not a single contempor­ ary Quebec writer  is named, let alone  dis­ cussed?   The  names   Lemelin  and   Roy alone grace  her  analysis  of the  post-1945 period. Shortage of space  was not  the problem: she  indulges in  a  fairly  exten­ sive  (and  surely  misplaced)  discussion  of the impact that  the Cegep system has had on the province's cultural development.
She concludes that Quebec literature is indeed isolated. The poets, novelists and playwrights of French Canada, she main­ tains,   all   appear  free   from   other   con­ temporary literatures: the  literary influ­ ence  of France  diminished  after   the  sec­ ond   World   War;  that    of   the   United States  and  the Latin American countries is  practically  non-existent;  and   English and French Canadian literatures have exerted   no  influence   on  each  other.
Her  title,  it  thus  turns  out,  is  mislead­ ing:  Quebec literature has  no  American context   worth  discussing.  Leland herself is well  aware  of  this,  and  one  is led  to wonder  whether the title  was not Staines' idea  rather than  her  own.
We are  left with  a picture of the liter­ ary life of Quebec that  has nothing to do with  the  cosiness  of  the  literary  life  of English  Canada and  that  shares  none  of the  latter's  concerns with  absent   ghosts. So,  in  its  entirety, The  Canadian  Ima­ gination  leaves  us  with  a  more  accurate impression    of   the    literary  culture   of Canada than  David Staines had  any right  to expect  could  be created from  a volume  that   in  many  ways  promises   more   than  it  delivers.  It  will  surely  reveal  more  to its  foreign  readership than  only  literary dimensions.

73


b::ks in review


CRAWFORD'S FAIRIES

ISABELLA VALANCY CRAWFORD, Fairy Tales of Isabella  Valancy Crawford, edited by Penny Petrone. Borealis Press.

THE SHINY PINK AND WHITE  paper cover of this collection  of fairy  tales -quaintly lettered, prettily illustrated, and flimsy­ is appropriate to the contents:  six quaint, pretty, flimsy  stories.  Where  did   Penny Petrone  find   them?  Unlike   her   earlier  Selected     Stories    of    Isabella    Valancy Crawford   (University  of  Ottawa Press),  this  book  contains no  editorial material. The  reader   is  left   to  wonder  whether these tales were dug out of the trunkful of manuscripts that  stood  before  Katherine Hale   as  she  composed  her   volume   on Crawford  for   the   Makers  of  Canadian Literature series  ( I923)   or  whether they have  been  unearthed from   the  morgues  of  newspapers and  the other ephemeral publications from  which  the  poet  Craw­ ford   earned  sketchy   payments   for   her prose  potboilers.
Whatever their provenance, these stories might  better  have  been  left  in peace  and obscurity. They   are   unlikely   to  interest anyone   except   the  most  devoted  Craw­ ford  enthusiasts, and  even  these  are  un­ likely  to  find  in  them   much  sustenance for their enthusiasm. In her poetry, Craw­  ford  had  several  "best" styles. She  could WTite lushly  passionate  but   reassuringly  precise descriptions of nature; quirky,  pro­ vocative  expressions of complex thoughts and   emotional  states;  carefully inoffen­  sive  but  exuberantly comic  pioneer   dia­  lect  poems  ("Old Spookses'  Pass,"  "Old Spense," "The  Deacon and  His  Daugh­ ter"). She  sometimes  approached Blake­ ian  mysticism,  as in  the  brotherly invita­ tion   of   Evil   to   Good    that    concludes

74
 "Gisli, the Chieftain." She could  be effec­
tively laconic:

"... the  flesh  that   I wore  chanced to  be
Less of my friend than my enemy.

"So  bury  it  deeply-strong foe,  weak friend-
And  bury  it cheaply,-and there its  end!"
("His Clay")
But  in these  principally flat and  ornately verbose  stories,  little  of  her  intelligence, her  verbal   flair,  or  her   humour  is  ap­ parent.
Of the six, "The Waterlily" is the most satisfying  as a story. The fairy  Roseblush has  been  abducted by Prince  Crystalcoat of  the   water-beetles.  Her   admirer,  the fairy   Goldenball,  sets  out   to  find   and rescue  her  with  the  blessing  of  Oberon and   Titania,  here   a   boringly   dignified pair  of fairy  royals of the  type scornfully described   by a  T. H.  White   character: "people  with   bluebells    for   hats,   who spend   the   time   sitting   on   toadstools" (these two occupy a velvet-covered mush­ room dais) . Goldenballlocates Roseblush  easily, so there  isn't  much  suspense.  But there  are somcharmingly though tritely­  described  pictures: the  absurd   but  com­  placent    gossiping   beaux   of   the   beetle court; the  magnificent waterlily  glowing with  the  magic  light  of its  fairy  captive  as it emits her musical  lament. And  there  is  an  effectively  abrupt shift   to  human perspective  when  a  good  little   girl  en­ listed by Goldenball plucks the enchanted waterlilly  and villainous Crystalcoat is cut down  to size:  "an  ugly  black  beetle  ran out  of the  heart  of the  flower,  and  gave her  chubby  wrist  a  vicious  nip."
Next I would rank "The Vain  Owl and the Elf," not for its plot but for a walk-on character, Swift the squirrel, a more obliging  than  ardent suitor  of his cousin Jettie.  His   character  is  amusingly   re­ vealed  as Jettie  begs help  from  an  elf  to escape   her   engagement  to   a   pompous owl. Swift  is broken-hearted, she says.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



"Oh, certainly," replied Swift, turning his head   quite  over   his  shoulder, in   order  to observe   the  elegant markings of  the  fur  on his  back.

Swift  is likely to kill himself,  she says.

"Most  decidedly,  adorable  Jettie!"   re­
marked Swift  politely.

Moved  more  by his own  love of mischief than  belief in Swift's  suicidal passion, the elf distracts the poor,  unlovely owl into lifelong  bam servitude by playing  on his vanity.
Vanity   is also  the  moral   pivot  of  the
two least storylike  tales in the book. "The Rose and  the  Rainbow" is a fable  on the theme  of Rupert Brooke's  "Heaven," in­ volving  a  number of  self-ful  envisioners of celestial  delights.  The  rose  defines  the moral,   a  Hans   Christian   Andersen  fa­ vourite: "in  this world everyone  sees with his own  heart  and  wishes, and  is all  the world  to himself." And vanity  is explicitly
 condemned  in   the   poem   appended  to "The Rival  Roses,"  though it  is hard  to see how  the  catastrophe of  the  frail  tale was invoked  by it,  unless  one  believes  in a  fanatically puritanical  Providence.  (A bad misprint, "due need" for "due meed," further confuses  the  issue.)
The  two remaining tales are thin, wish­ fulfilling fantasies-one about  a romance between  a bewitched butterfly prince  and  a  queen  of  violets,  the  other  of  a  ship­  wrecked    child    tended    by   fairies   who sound  (and  look, in Susan  Ross's delicate drawings)  scarcely  big  enough  to  splint her  eyelash,  should  she  break  one.
Of  course  there  is a qualitative  differ­ ence   between   weak   stories   by   an  able writer  and  weak  stories  by an  inept  one. These   are  a  cut   above   the  ones  ordin­ arily  displayed   on   supermarket  shelves. The book  is also  several  cuts  bigger.  As someone   once   remarked,  children  are often  given  huge  books  with  large  print





Artcore Publishing & Communications Ltd.
Large format Western  Canadian fine art reproductions: THE APPLE by Ernest Lindner
SURVIVORS' ISLAND by Toni Onley

THREE OWLS by Jack Shadbolt

See our  colour  ads  in  artmagazine, beginning September /October,
1978,  with  Lindner's   The  Apple,  or  write   for  brochure   to  Artcore Publishing, 3506  West  28th  Avenue,  Vancouver, Canada   V6S  1S2. You've  been  reading Canadian literature for  some time-now  put Canadian art  on  your  walls. Artcore  Publishing will send you, free, a concise guide to  sources of  Canadian fine  art  reproductions and Canadian limited  edition prints.  We'II  also  explain the  difference between  them.




75

BOOKS IN REVIEW



when  they  tend  to  have  short  arms  and
20: 20 vision.  Perhaps children who  can get  by  the  archaic  aughts   and   naughts will  mildly  enjoy  hearing the  Crawford tales   read   by  long-armed grandparents with  Victorian tastes and  failing eyesight. But  they  could  do  better. So  could  Isa­ bella  Valancy Crawford.

FRANCES FRAZER


NARNAUK & BADGER

CHRISTIE  HARRIS, Mouse Woman and  the  Mis­ chief-Makers. McClelland & Stewart, $7·95· MARIA CAMPBELL,   Little Badger   and   the  Fire
Spirit. McClelland & Stewart, $7.95.

READERS  FAMILIAR with  the  work  of Christie Harris are  well aware  of her  in­ terest  in the  lore  of the  Northwest  Coast Indians and,  in  particular, her  affection  for  Mouse  Woman, a supernatural being whom she first discovered in Boaz' collec­ tion of  Tsimshian myths  and  who has be­ come  the  central figure  of  her  last  two books,  Mouse  Woman and  the  Vanished Princesses and  Mouse  Woman and the Mischief-Makers.
This  second  collection  of  tales,  chron­ icling  Mouse  Woman's encounters with  a series  of  both   human  and   supernatural mischief-makers, is not as successful as the first,  perhaps  because  only  four   of  the seven   tales  appear   to  be  derived   from sources  which   do,  in  fact,   include  this attractive little narnauk. Ms. Harris seems to  have  exhausted  the   potential  of  the character  in  the  first collection, and  thus is  forced   to  invent   shrewish   wives  and magical   talking   blankets  to  fill  out   the tales. This  is nowhere more  obvious  than in the last tale, which  purports to relate Mouse  Woman's own childhood. In the original text, the Mouse  Woman, no rela­ tion  to  the  kindly  grandmother figure  of the  Boaz  texts,  is  not   forgiven  for  her transgressions, and  dies. Thus Ms. Harris
 not only distorts  the substance and mean­ ing of the original  legends,  but  more  im­ portantly in  terms  of  examination of the text   as  an   independent  entity,    she   is forced  by  the  nature of  the  collection  to include   a  central   figure  who  often  does very little  to enhance the  narrative flow of individual stories. Thus the Mouse Wo­ man,  so enchanting and  attractive in the first collection,  becomes a bit of a burden to the  storyteller in  this  text.
Both  collections,  finally,  include  illus­ trations   by  Douglas   Tait,  and   the  full page etchings  in Mouse  Woman  and  the Mischief-Makers are  perhaps  even  more evocative  than  those in the first collection.  Unlike  Christie   Harris'  adaptation of various Indian legends, Maria Campbell's Little  Badger simply celebrates one of the proud  legends  of  her  people.  This  gener­  ously illustrated  text  tells the  delightfully simple  story  of  how  a  blind  Indian boy, Little  Badger, bring fire to his people. But beyond  the  tale itself,  Ms. Campbell also tries  to  establish   the   context  in  which such  tales are  passed on, for  this is a tale told  to  a  little  Indian girl,  Ahsinee,  by her grandfather Mooshoon on her  eighth
birthday.
In her first book, a brutally frank autobiography called   Half-Breed, Maria Campbell explored  a life which  included drug  addiction, prostitution, and  a  ner­ vous  breakdown. She  ended   her  history by  saying  that   she  no  longer  favoured armed   revolution, but  believed  that  one day,  very  soon,  people   would   set  aside their  differences  and  come  together, be­ cause ultimately they would see that  it is the  only  answer.   In  her  first  children's book,  Ms.  Campbell  reasserts   this  same belief  in  love and  in  the  community, re­ turning to  the  legends  that  first  instilled that  optimism  when  she was a child.
Little  Badger  succeeds  in  his quest  be­ cause  he  is drawn   magnetically  forward  by the beating  of the drum of  his friend,  Grey  Coyote.   But  when   he  does  come

BOOKS IN REVIEW



forth   from   the   Fire   Spirit's  cave   with both  fire and  sight  (inspiration), he sud­ denly  realizes  that   the  drum   that  drove him  onward was  his own  heart  and the heart  of all men -the pulse of  the world, the  music of the  universe.
In  her  first children's book, beautifully illustrated by Vancouver artist  David MacLagan, Maria Campbell presents  one of  the  most  moving adaptations  of   In­ dian  legend  to appear in recent years. Let us hope, like Ahsinee,  that  there are many more  stories  to tell.
J. KIERAN  KEALY


A SINGER'S WORLD

GEORGES DoR,  Si  Tu   Savais. Les  Editions   de
!'Homme, $s.oo.

THIS AUTOBIOGRAPHY by a popular singer, a balladeer, with  a preface by the admir­ able  Gaston  Miron, is the  appealing and artless  account of the  life of a really  nice guy  whose  family,   had   his  Irish   great­  grandparents  landed   in   Boston  rather than   Quebec,  would   have   merged   into the  American scene  with  no further ado.
But they did land  in Quebec, becoming part  of the  French community, their chil­ dren  and  grandchildren marrying among  the  local  population in  small  towns.  In
I 93I,  Georges  Dor  (the  Irish  name  Dore lost its final  vowel)   was  born,  to become among   other   things   a   "poete-chanson­ nier."  The  word   "poete" is  important, for  Georges  Dor  is  more   than   a  singer. He  has  not  only  written and   published  poetry,   but  also  novels;  he  is  now  run­  ning a summer theatre. Although he con­ fesses to  being  "bilingue par  atavisme," he  is  a   long  way   from   being   another Beckett, and  Miron  makes  it  quite  clear, with  the daggered elegance of which  only French  is  capable, that  he  is not  a great musician either. He  does  not  pretend to be;  he  speaks  to  the  heart, and   if  the
 music is as banal  as "Tipperary," it does not  lessen its appeal.
For Francophones, the story will be the cheerful and perceptive account of a local boy from  a  small  town  making  good  in the big city. For Anglophones the interest is wider. Those  of us who live a long way from  Eastern   Canada forget,  sometimes, that   there   are  pleasanter  manifestations of  the  Quebec  spirit   than   Pierre  Tru­ deau's   intellectual  arrogance,  and   that  the  parallels between   the  average man's  life in Quebec and  that  in  the  rest of the country  are  curiously  close.  Like  thou­  sands   of   other   Canadians  from   small towns,  Georges  Dor  worked  at  a  variety of jobs all around the  province  before  he emerged  from CBC  to earn  his living ex­ clusively   as  an   entertainer.  Like   thou­ sands of others,  he en joyed his childhood, his  schooling   and   his  exploration  as  a young  man  of a  big  city and  the  North. Like  thousands of  others,   he  married a wife  who  is a  real  partner  (she  ran  an art   gallery   for  several   years)   and   they have children. An ordinary North Ameri­  can  success story,  in  fact.  The  charm  of the  account  lies  partly  in  these  resem­ blances,  and  partly in  the  very  real  dif­ ferences.  Georges   Dor   himself   is   con­ scious   of   being    caught    between    his "americanite" and  his  "quebecitude."
Without becoming  too ponderous about the political scene, one has to take it into account in explaining the success of the many "chansonniers" who have  no real counterparts in  the  rest  of  the  country. I can't  imagine, at the moment, people wildly  acclaiming a  song  about   working on  the  Deas  Lake   railroad  and  longing to be back in Vancouver (Earle Birney's poem   "Eagle   Island"  is  the   nearest   I know   to   that   kind   of  nostalgia). The closest analogy in modern terms which springs  to mind-omitting Homer, the ollaves, and the troubadours-is the nine­ teenth-century English  music-hall, where audience and  singer  alike  shared,  rather

BOOKS IN REVIEW



closely, basic conceptions, experiences and a sense of humour, creating the feeling of intimacy which  springs  from  an  uncon­ scious  acceptance of  a  familiar  identity. But the songs coming  from Quebec mean more  than  this, for they reveal  identity.
The  whole explosion of literature in Quebec during the  last  twenty  years can only  be  understood  in   terms   of   politi­ cal, economic, and  intellectual  factors.  It would  be  simplistic to  say  that, because Wolfe  won  and  Montcalm  lost,  none  of the  philosophic  ideas  of   the  eighteenth century, which  became part of the Ameri­  can  and  the  French  traditions, were  ab­ sorbed  into  Quebec.  But  the  persistence of the  influence  of a seventeenth-century Church, protected later  on  by  the  BNA act, did  produce a situation which  has no counterpart in other  Canadian provinces, in  England, in  France, or  in  the  United States.  The  social  and   intellectual  isola­ tion   of   schools   and   colleges    (French­ speaking) which  persisted  until  after  the Second  World   War  has  meant  that   the present  generation of  Quebecois are  hav­ ing   to   deal   with   the   phenomenon  of three or four revolutions at  the same  time
-the anti-clerical, the  industrial,  the technological,  the   Marxist,  the   Maoist. A yeasty combination, a heady  ferment which any community would find difficult to digest.
Inevitably, the search  for identity, itself part  of the modern anguish, becomes crucial  for  Quebec, and  the  song-writers respond in their way to a public need to define,  positively,  what  one  is. They  ex­ press, for  the inarticulate, what  the latter  yearn  to  hear   but  cannot  easily  say  for themselves. As Florenz  Ziegfeld remarked in a similar  connection, they are showing the  people  their  dreams. It  hardly   mat­  ters  whether  the  poetry  is  good  or  not, whether  the   music  is  original;  the  im­ portance lies in  the  bond  between  singer and  audience.
Georges Dor's  "americanite," which we
 all share  in a sense -our music,  our  lan­ guage,   our   clothes -- does   not   protect him,  sadly,  from  the  effects  of  a  rather terrifying parochialism. One  can  sympa­ thize  with  his experiences in  France-a culture  as  foreign   to  him  as  to  anyone  from  an  up-country town  in  B.C.-but one  regrets  that  his  world  seems  to con­ tain  no contact with  the  rest  of Canada except  through CBC colleagues in Mont­ real,  and   indeed,  no curiosity   about  it. Both  he  and   we  are   the  losers,  for  the country  can   ill   afford    to   be   ignorant about   its  moderate and  civilized  citizens who  will  all  ultimately be swallowed   up in  the  American dream if  they  insist  on destroying   their  own.  Perhaps a  spell  at CBC  Vancouver, if  he  would   return  to broadcasting,  would   help   Georges   Dor expand his vision.
G. V.  DOWNES


LES LIEUX  COMMUNS DE LA CRITIQUE

BOUCHARD, DENIS,  Une  lecture d'Anne Hebert.
La   recherche d'une  mythologie. Collection
"Litteraturc"; Montreal: Hurtubise HMH.
BOUCHER,    JEAN-PIERRE,     Jnstantanes de    la condition   quebecoise.  Collection   "Littera­ ture"; Montreal: Hurtubise  HMH.
Melanges de  civilisation canadienne-franfaise oflerts   au   professeur   Paul  Wyczynski.  "Ca­ hiers  du  Centre de  recherche en  civilisation canadienne-fran<;aise";  Editions   de   l'Uni­ versite  d'Ottawa.

CES DERNIERES ANNEES  les etudes  consa­
crees  a  la  litterature   quebecoise,  issues
principalement des  miliex  universitaires, ont  augmente a la  mesure  de  la  produc­
tion  litteraire elle-meme. Mais  en  meme temps que l'on constate le dynamisme des etudes quebecoises, il faut  deplorer une stagnation et un immobilisme dans  les criteres  et les methodes qui leur servent d'appui. Je  citerai, entre  autres, les  der­ niers  essais de Jean-Pierre Boucher  et  de

79

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Denis Bouchard, qui sous des aspects, parfois, de modernite, reeditent les lieux communs du discours  sur  la litterature.
Boucher presente  onze  articles  consa­
cres  a autant d'auteurs:  des  extraits de
Nelligan, Laberge, Ringuet, Roy, Lange­
vin,  Bessette,   Miron,  Ferron,  Aquin   et
Ducharme servent  d'illustrations a ce qu'il
appelle "la  condition  quebecoise." Alors
que son sujet  se pretait a une  reflexion  et
a une  prise de  position  epistemologique a
la fois sur  le texte  et  sur  la societe, Bou­
cher  ecarte  toute  question de methode ou de theorie et prefere  plutot repeter les stereotypes de la critique traditionnelle endossant  ainsi   ses  presupposes   ideolo­ giques.
L'oeuvre litteraire  est  definie   comme
!'expression d'une  realite, tantot collective ("Alain est un  personnage typique et ex­ prime   un  aspect   fondamental de  notre  arne   collective")' tan tot  individuelle ("Laberge decrit   done  avec  minutie une scene  qu'il  a du  longuement  observer  en plusieurs occasions"). La  forme  de !'oeu­ vre  de  la  meme   maniere  est  presentee comme  un  reflet  direct   de  la  realite: le sonnet de Nelligan  designe l'enfermement psychologique et social  de sa collectivite; dans  Bonheur  d'occasion   "Le   temps  des verbes,  passe  simple,   imparfait,  present, illustre   le  triomphe  de   l'immobilisme";
!'utilisation de la premiere personne gram­ maticale  dans   Le   libraire   symbolise   la volonte  de puissance de la nouvelle  bour­  geoisie quebecoise des annees I g6o; le jeu de  mots  chez  Ducharme  indique  notre dangereuse   tentation  de   fuite   hors   du reel; etc.... Tous  ces rapprochements en­ tre le texte et la societe sont la plupart du temps  fort  hasardeux parce  que,  comme  l'admet  !'auteur  lui-meme, "la   jonction  entre ces structures formelles et les struc­  tures  sociales  est  ressentie  intuitivement, avec  tous  les  risques  d'erreurs que  cela entralne, plutot que  demontree  scientifi­ quement." Au lieu d'etablir le reseau sym­ bolique  dans  lequel  l'extrait  qu'il  etudie

8o
 s'inscrit,  c'est-a-dire de le siteur  dans  la structure propre  au texte pour  montrer ensuite   la  fonction   de   celui-ci   dans   la societe  qui  l'accepte et le classe, Boucher
passe   directement   de   l'extrait  a  une
interpretation  sociologique empirique et
gratuite.
S'il emprunte parfois  un vocabulaire propre aux  sciences  du  texte   ( narrateur, point  de  vue)   il ne  tient  pas  compte du
sens que  l'on  a  donne a ces  notions.  En
identifiant  par   exemple  le  narrateur  a
!'auteur, il  fait  disparaitre la  pertinence de  cette   opposition  et   du   meme   coup toute  l'efficacite  methodologique du  con­ cept.  De  meme  le  personnage du  recit n'est   pas  defini   comme   un   signe   mais comme  un  etre  vivant: Boucher  trace  le portrait  moral  et  psychologique  d'Alain
( Poussiere  sur la  ville) ,)  de  Jodoin  ( Le libraire),  de  Mille   Mille    ( Le   nez   qui voque)  ; il  parle  de  leur  nature, des  as­ pects   de   leur   personnalite,  il   juge   et critique leur  comportement.  Mille  Mille  et  le narrateur de  Prochain  episode  sont traites   de  reveurs,  d'incapables et  d'im­ puissants,  complices  de  notre  echec  col­
lectif.  Boucher  reprend a son  compte la
these de lkandre Bergeron  qui accusait le
heros   d'Aquin  d'etre   contre-revolution­
naue.
La premisse dont  decoule ce discours moralisateur c'est le principe de realite, le souci  de   conforrnite  a  "la   realite  telle qu'elle   est."  Selon  le  critique le  danger qui guette le sujet c'est "l'incapacite chronique d'affronter le  reel,  de  le  mal­ triser,  de  l'organiser," car  l'homme  doit
sa survie  "a sa capacite d'adaptation au
reel."  Mais de quel  reel s'agit-il? De celui
que  produit la  doxa, !'opinion commune, le gros  bon  sens poujadiste et  anti-intel­ lectuel   qui   privilegie   les   enonces   pro­  saiques  et tautologiques:

J'ai choisi delibe11ement d'ecrire dans  une langue  simple,   depourvue  autant   qu'il  se peut   du   jargon   pseudo-scientifique souvent
a Ia mode.  Si  j'ecris, c'est  pour etre  lu.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



La  bete  noire  du  cntique c'est  celui  qui n'ecrit pas comme  tout  le monde: par exemple Nelligan  "designant par  un  ridi­ cule   'cohortes  bovines'   ce  que   tout  le monde  nomme  un  troupeau de vaches ou de boeufs"; Miron  ala faveur de I'auteur parce   que   lui  parle   d'une  "poignee de porte  arrachee"; y a-t-il quelque chose de plus concret, de plus reel?  Pour  etre  real­ iste il faut  etre  prosaique. Pour  etre  real­ iste  il  faut  aussi  enoncer  des  evidences (ex.: "Cette  rive  est  basse. Au  sens con­ cret,  elle  est  done  de  peu  de  hauteur"), et  reproduire  les  idees  rec;ues sur   notre passe, !'alienation collective  du Quebecois et  son  "incapacite chronique d'affronter le reel."
Sur  ce plan  Denis  Bouchard, dans  son essai sur Anne  Hebert, ne le cede en  rien
a son  collegue; il semble  puiser  ses  refle­
xions  aux   memes   lieux   communs.  Lui aussi s'en  refere  constamment a "l'ame quebecoise" et  a "notre psychisme collec­
tif." On  retrouve la meme  conception romantique de  la  litterature comme  ex­ pression  de  l'etre  national.  Bouchard  de­ finit  par  exemple   Le  Tombeau des  rois en  ces termes:

Ce  recueil  est une sorte  de systeme  mythique de  tous  nos demons assembles de  force  dans un  carnaval souterrain ou  ils sont  forces  de
se  soumettre  a  l'epreuve  de   l'autocritique.
Les  poemes  se  lisent   comme  des  voix  trou­
vant  leur  unite  ultime dans  notre collectivite qui  les entend pour  Ia  premiere fois.

L'oeuvre serait la revelation du refoule collectif; ailleurs  Bouchard n'hesite pas a
declarer  que  "Anne   Hebert  s'efface   en tant  qu'individu pour  se transmuer en la voix du  Quebec."
Je ne m'attarderai pas davantage sur cette   etude ayant   dit   ailleurs dans   Les lettres quebecoises, ce que j'en pensais, j'ajouterai simplement qu'il  s'agit  d'un essai  divise  en  quatre parties:  les  deux
premieres, consacrees  a la poesie, etudient
"la   presence   de   Saint-Denys  Garneau
dans !'oeuvre" et nous livrent une analyse
 du Tombeau des rois, tandis  que dans  les deux suivantes  Bouchard aborde les recits (Le  Torrent, Les  chambres de  bois,  Les Enfants du  Jabbat). Enfin  une  longue bibliographie,  qui   s'averera  un   instru­ ment   utile  pour   celui   qui  voudra  faire l'histoire de la reception des  textes  de cet auteur, termine ce  travail.  (On  ajoutera
a cette  liste  les  reMrences   suivantes qui ont  echappe a notre  critique: pour  Ka­
mouraska, Times  Literary Supplement, 2 avril1971 et La Presse, 2  mai  1971;  pour Les   enfants  du   sabbat,   les  articles   de Pierre  Vallieres  dans  Le  Jour,  13 septem­ bre 1975 et 31 octobre 1975. Une correc­ tion:  p. 234, il faut lire I 975 au  lieu  de
1976.)
Les  analyses  de  Bouchard et  Boucher
ne  depareraient  pas   le  recueil   de   Me­
langes que les Editions de l'Universite d'Ottawa dedient a Paul  Wyczynski  pour
oelebrer  ses vingt-cinq annees d'enseigne­ ment  et  de  recherches au  Canada, on  y retrouve  quelquefois le  meme  esprit.
Textes  de creation, textes de critique et travaux   d'histoire litteraire se  succedent ici  dans  le  desordre qu'impose la  distri­ bution   alphabetique   des   collaborateurs. Dans  la  premiere  categorie  de  textes  on lira   des   poemes   de  Cecile   Cloutier  et de  Felix-Antoine  Savard, une  narration de  Louise   Maheux-Forcier  inspiree   des Chants  de  Maldoror et  une  farce   bour­  geoise de  Gerard Bessette  ecrite  dans  un moment  ou  le romancier dut  se prendre pour  Feydeau.
La   categorie  critique  est  de   loin   la mieux  representee. Adoptant !'approche thematique qu'on  leur  connalt,  Eva Kushner  resume   la   poetique  de   Gilles
Henault et Jean-Louis Major, disant  son attachement a la poesie du  pays, regrette
que  celle-ci  s'essouffie  chez  Claude  Pre­ fontaine. Deux   critiques  tentent   de  re­ habiliter des  textes  injustement  negliges selon  eux:  La   Minuit  de   Savard  que Jacques   Blais   recupere   en    faisant  la preuve   de  la  coherence et  du  foisonne-

8r

BOOKS IN REVIEW



ment  hermeneutique du  texte  et la poesie patriotique de Cremazie qu'Odette  Con­
demine s'applique a revaloriser malgre le
desaveu  du  poete.  Antoine Sirois  et  Jack
Warwick  poursuivent  leur   recherche  en
litterature  canadienne comparee, le  pre­
mier  s'arretant a !'image du  Mont Royal
et  le second  au  mythe  du  Nord  dans  les
romans canadiens et  quebecois. 11 faut situer  aussi dans  la  perspective  compara­ tiste  l'essai  de  Bernard  Julien  qui   rap­  proche  le Ti-Coq de  Gelinas d'une piece de   Dumas   pere.   Avee   un   regard  plus sociocritique  Maurice Lemire observe  la
societe  de  I8so  a travers  Charles  Guerin
et  Pierre  Page  nous  dit  que  la langue du
texte  liW raire
destinataire. Quant  a Rejean  Robidoux
qui  nous  parle  de  la  vocation de  l'ecri­
vain chez Gabrielle Roy, et P.-H. Lemieux qui  retrace !'evolution de  la  conscience chez  Philippe Aubert de  Gaspe   pere,  ils
nous   ramenent  a une   lecture   biogra­
phique   de !'oeuvre.
La   troisieme   categorie  d'articles   con­
sacres  a des sujets  d'histoire litteraire  est
sans  doute  celle  qui  convient le mieux  a
cet hommage. John Hare vient  confirmer
l'authenticite des memoires d'un "obscur
aventurier quebecois," Robert Chevalier, reecrits  par Lesage en I732; David  Hayne propose  un  nouveau critere de  periodisa­ tion  en  Iitterature  quebecoise;  Paul  Gay montre !'influence du  pape  Pie XII et de Chopin  sur   un   poeme   de  Gustave  La­  marche et  Pierre Savard fait  l'inventaire des  recits de  voyages en  Europe de Que­ becois  (conn us et inconnus) depuis  I 8so.
Comme on  le voit  par  la  diversite des approches et  des  sujets,  ce  recueil  s'ad­
resse a plusieurs  lecteurs. Cependant  tous
se  retrouveront a la  meme  enseigne   du
confort  intellectuel  que   nous   procurent
ces savantes etudes  qui  ne  posent   jamais la  question du  role  et  de  la  fonction de la  litterature, ni des  conditions de !'ana­ lyse  litteraire. Tout  se  passe  comme   si
!'intervention des sciences humaines (lin-
 guistique, psychanalyse,  sociologie  marx­ iste)   n'avait rien  modifie  aux  etudes  de litterature; aucun dialogue  par  exemple (sauf  chez  Major)  avec  les  mouvements contemporains qui  tentent de faire  avan­ cer  cette   reftexion.   On   croirait  que   la critique universitaire n'a  pas encore  con­ nu sa revolution  tranquille.

JACQUES MICHON


CANLIT ABROAD

V.   TEODORESCU  and   P.  NEGOSANU, Jnte[egand zapada   [Anthology of  English Canadian Poetry]. Editura U nivers   (Bucharest).
AL.  ANDRITOIU  and   U.  SCHIOPU,  Anto[ogie de
poezie   canadiana  de   limba   franceza    [An­ thology   of  French  Canadian  Poetry].  Edi­ tura   Minerva. (Bucharest).

AN INCREASING AWARENESS  of Canadian poetry is slowly producing a number of translations into  German, Spanish,  Ital­ ian,  Russian,   Dutch, Polish,  Greek  and even  Romanian. Two  recent  anthologies coming  from  Romania  explicitly confirm  this   statement. The   English   Canadian poets and  poems included in the first an­  thology,  lntelegand  zapada    (translated, the  title  would   be  "Understanding  the snow":  exactly  what   that   means  is any­ body's  guess),  are  the  personal choice  of V.  Teodorescu, a well known  poet and translator, and  of P. Negosanu, an equally well known  writer  and  translator of  Eng­ lish literature. Quality seems guaranteed. Even  the  package  is  promising with  at­  tractive  layout  and  graphics.
The  poets are  presented in chronologi­
cal order and the five page introduction offers  a  panoramic view  about  English­ Canadian poetry,  written for  the  curious reader   who   knows   nothing   about    the Canlit   scene.  I  am   aware   that  no  an­ thology  can  ever  be  complete. Neverthe­ less, I should  have  liked  to see poems  by Pratt,  Le  Pan,   Avison,   Fiamengo,  and several  others.  In  spite  of  this  objection,

BOOKS IN REVIEW



the  general quality  of  the  translations  is good  and  the language has the lively im­ mediacy of living  Romanian, and,  when appropriate, a refreshing colloquial sound.  Some  poems  are  left  as  more-or-less raw literal   equivalents.  But  more   often,   the editors  have translated regular rhyme into blank   verse,  slant   rhyme,   or  occasional  rhyming  patterns   that    would   approxi­ mate  in  Romanian  its normal frequency of  rhyme. A comparison with  the original poems will reveal a style that  is natural, smooth   and   unpretentious. The  transla­ tions also contain that  felicitous  union  of image   and   thought.  Somehow,  miracu­ lously,  Teodorescu and   Negosanu   have captured  the   essence  of   the   Canadian soul and  reproduced  sensitively  the  intri­ cate   combination  of   feeling   and   music which   characterizes  the  original  works. lntelegand   zapada    is   a   valuable   an­ thology,  one  that  shows  a  great  deal  of hard  work  and  dedication.
Some  one  hundred and   fifty  years  of French-Canadian poetry  are  compressed into the second anthology-Antologie de poezie   canadiana   de  limba    franceza - edited   and   translated  by  Al.  Andritoiu and 	U.    Schiopu.   Meritoriously,   the authors found  room not only for the more established poets but  also for young  poets as well. In  a work of this range  and  size, certain   omissions    are    understandable. However, omission  of such  poets  as  Jac­ ques  Brault, Claude Peloquin or  Michel van  Schendel are  to be regretted.
The anthology opens  with  an  excellent analysis  of French Canadian poetics, dis­ cussing  the  links  between   the  historical  evolution   and    the   aspirations   of   the French  Canadian   people.   The  second part   of  the  anthology  contains  a  well­ balanced    selection    of   poems,    ranging chronologically from Franc;ois-Xavier Garneau to  Andre   Payette.   In  addition, each  poet is preceeded by a brief but pre­ cise  bio-bibliographical note.  The  trans­  lations  are  uniformly readable despite  the
 different style and  moods  in the originals, and   the  rhythm and   rhymes   are  accur­ ately  reflected   (Romanian pennits trans­ posing  some  poems  almost   literally, and the transpositions here  often  vibrate with nearly  the same intensity as the originals). There  are   a  few  curious  renderings - curious  not  so much  for  their  relative ac­ curacy,  but  because  they  sound  like  Ro­ manian words or expressions  taken  out  of an   idiomatic  dictionary.  For   the   most part,   however,   the  poems  are  creatively translated and  present  a faithful and  full­ spectrum  picture   of   French-Canadian sensibility.
NICHOLAS  CATANOY


RETURNS
AND DISTANCES

PATRICK   ANDERSON,   Return to  Canada.  Mc­ Clelland & Stewart. $4.95, paper. A Visiting Distance. Borealis.

PATRICK ANDERSON'S LAST BOOK to be published    in   Canada,  The  Colour    as Naked, appeared in  I953· Already, after a  decade   of  residence    (I 940  to   I 950) during which  he became  a Canadian citi­ zen, he had  returned to England, and  for many  years he stayed  away  from Canada.
He   made   a  first   return  visit   in  I 97 I,
though  England still remains his place  of residence.   But  Canada  is  once   again   a place of publication for him. After twenty­ three  years in which  he did  not publish  a volume  of  poetry   anywhere,  two  of  his books of verse have appeared  here  within  a  few months of each  other:  A  Visiting Distance,  published by  Borealis  Press late in   I976,  and   Return   to  Canada, pub­  lished  by  McClelland  &  Stewart in  the spring  ofI 977.
The  double  event  is made all the more
curious  by the  ethically strange fact  that
the  books  largely  duplicate  each   other. We   have   become   used   to   writers  like

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Earle   Birney   inserting  favourite  poems from  past  collections into  new  volumes, but   always   after    an   interval  that   has allowed  the original volume  to go out of production.  In   the   case   of  Anderson's books, quite  a  number of  the  best  poems appear in  the  two  volumes  almost  simul­ taneously; nevertheless, the  general level of  Return  to  Canada  is  notably   higher  than   that  of  A Visiting  Distance,  which contains a much  larger  proportion of the kind  of  second-drawer  poems  which  do not  quite  come  off  in  terms  of  total  re­ sponse  but  which  poets  are  often   reluc­ tant   to  abandon  because   they  are  tech­ nically  competent  and   a  good   deal   of work  has gone into  them. Since  so much of  the  good  work  is duplicated, I  would advise readers who are curious about this figure from our literary past to buy merely Return  to Canada;  it is the  better value, in design  and  in content.
Patrick Anderson has always been a difficult  writer  to place  in terms  of  tradi­ tions.   Undoubtedly  he   has   a   place   in Canadian literary history.  For about four years-from 1942  to  1946-he  played
a catalytic role as the  energizing force in the circle which published Preview and which  prolonged the Montreal movement
in  poetry   that   had   begun   in  the  193o's with  Smith, Scott  and  Klein.  It would  be inexact to say that  he introduced the tradition of the English  1930's into Cana­ da,  as has  sometimes  been  suggested; A.
J. M. Smith had  published in New Verse
and   Dorothy  Livesay   was   writing  "so­
cially conscious" poems influenced by Day Lewis and Spender years before  Anderson appeared  in  Montreal. But,  because  he came  after  the later  1930's,  during which poets  like Dylan  Thomas, George  Barker and  the Twentieth Century  Verse  group moved  into  prominence in  London,  An­ derson   did   bring   an   enriched   tradition with  him,  and  so  he  was  an  important visitor  at  a  time  when  Canadian poetry  was   moving   into   its   modernist   phase,
 which   it   did   by   escaping   (insofar    as quasi-political terms  apply  in such  a con­ text)    from   colonialism   into  cosmopoli­  tanism  before finally attaining a degree of national   self-definition. The  cosmopoli­  tanism   took   two   directions;  while   the First  Statement  group  of  Layton, Dudek  and    Souster    loosely    represented   the American strain  derived  from  Pound  and Williams,  Anderson more  than  any other single  figure  was  the  dedicated  transmit­ ter  of  the  British-European  strain   that  was  projected  mainly  through  Preview. This  crucial  historical  role has made  him seem a more  effective  poet  than  he actu­ ally was, for at  that  time  he appeared to overshadow  poets  like  P.  K.  Page  who have   since  shown   themselves   to  posses more  authentically original talents.
While  it  is very  easy to  define  Ander­ son's catalytic function and  his emphatic historic  role during a brief  but important phase   in  Canadian  poetry,  it   is  much  more   difficult -particularly   three   dec­ ades  after   those  heady  times -to  come to  terms  with  Anderson  as  a  poet.  We have so long been used to thinking of him in  terms  of  the  handful of poems  repro­
duced  in A. J. M. Smith's Book of Cana­
dian Poetry, and especially of his medium­
long -and  possibly best-piece, "Poem on  Canada," that   to encounter his work spread  over  two  volumes  with  a  total  of
260  pages,  including  many   poems   that have  not  seen  print before,  forces  a new assessment. How  good a poet  has he ever been?  And  where  does he  really  belong? They   are  both   hard   questions  to  an­ swer. The  publisher's blurb  for A Visiting Distance described  him as a "mid-Atlantic poet," arousing the absurd  vision of a her­ mit  versifying  on  an  ocean   raft  to  the tune of Mother Carey's  chickens.  A trans­ Atlantic man  might be a  better  descrip­  tion of Anderson, for  he  has  had a curi­ ous double  career  on the  two sides of the ocean,  as  a  prose  writer  in  Britain   (for none  of his travel  books and  autobiogra-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



phies   has   been   published  in   Canada) and  a poet  here  (for  none of his books of verse has been published in Britain where his poetic reputation has always been minuscule). There is not  very much  evi­ dence  to suggest  what  Canada  meant  to him  in  the  years  of  absence  during the
195o's and  most of the 1 g6o's, but  he tells us  in  the  Preface   to  Return   to  Canada that    "I  began   writing  again   when   I learned that   there  still  were  Canadians, both   old   and   young,   interested  in   my work."  Leaving aside the oddity of this confessed   motivation, let  us  be  content for  the  present to remark on  the recipro­ cal  process  of  catalysis   that  appears  to have   been   at   work.   Originally  in   the
194o's  Canada seems  to  have  stimulated Anderson to his first significant work  (for having  been in the thick of English  poetry publication in 1940 when  Anderson left I can  vouch  that  he had  published nothing significant  in  Britain);  Anderson in  turn
 stimulated other   poets  in  Canada; and now,  years  later,  the  process  swings  back and   Canada  stimulates him   to   poetry once again. However, all  this may  be simplified  for  his audience in Anderson's Preface, since a significantly large number of  the  poems  Anderson prints in  his  two new  volumes  have  nothing at all  to  do with  Canada, being  English  countryside verse  of  a very  traditional kind.  At  the same   time,   there   is  no  doubt  that   his period   in  Canada thirty years  ago  does have  great   personal significance for  An­ derson  in the  1970's, rather as a lost land like that  which  le Grand Meaulnes sought  in Alain-Fournier's novel.
But  leaving  aside  Anderson's personal myth and  his paradoxical sense of identity with a country he voluntarily left 27 years ago  and  to  which  he  has  not  chosen  to return  permanently, one  is impressed - on considering his work-with the acute self-definition  that    occurs    in   a   poem






SUBSCRIBE TO THE  FIDDLEHEAD LITERARY MAGAZINE

Short  Stories  -  Poetry  -  Drama  -  Art  -  Reviews
Subscription Rates 4 Issues  $8 ( $9 U.S.) Contributions  should  include  (Canadian)   stamped,  self­
addressed  envelope  or   International  Reply Coupon.

THE  FIDDLEHEAD The  Observatory U.N.B.
Fredericton, N.B.
E3B 5A3

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



originally  written in  1944  about his first days on the  North American continent ("Train  Whistle: Vermont"), where  he describes  himself  as "an  Englishman full of words." Full  of words  indeed, for  one of Anderson's weakening faults  is a  fail­ ure -more   pronounced   in   his   recent poems -to  recognize   when  he  has  said enough. In  A  Visiting  Distance  particu­ larly,  there  are  whole  groups  of  poems  in which  one  has  the  sense of  prolixity  run­  ning  on like an  eloquent  tap  as the  poet ruminates and  reflects and aphorizes very intelligently, but  without any  real  intui­ tive discipline.
And   here,   I think,   we  are   near   the
essence of Anderson's work. It is often brilliant, but  in  the  manner of  a  verse­ writing Paganini,  all  virtuoso  effect,  all mental skill,  and   sometimes  this  is  pre­ cisely what  is needed  by the occasion. This  is why  his  "Poem  on  Canada" -which is reproduced in its entirety in  Return to Canada-was  such   a   stimulating  and  such  a  historically important  work;   no Canadian poet had yet found  the sheer intellectual effrontery to write  a virtuoso piece  of  this  kind  about Canada, full  of strident baroque images,  occasional flash­ ing insights,  and  splendidly  orotund rhe­ toric.

For  see, she  says,  the  salmon pointing home from  the  vast  sea,  the  petalled plethora
and  unplumbed darkness of the  sea, she says;
gliding along   their silvery  intuitions
like current in  its  cables, volt  upon  volt,
to  flash  at last,  sparking the  mountain falls
of Restigouche-spawning a silver  million.

A dazzling end  indeed  -and  such  pyro­ technics  were needed  in Canada then, but now there  is a feeling  of excess in phrases like  "the  petalled plethora"  and   in  the image  of salmon  gliding  "like  current in its cables, volt upon volt."
Anderson came   with  a  mental carpet
bag  filled  with  fashionable devices  from the  English  193o's  and  early  critics  were easily  led   to  compare  him   with   Dylan

86
 Thomas and  W. H. Auden. But  the  only poets  who  really  resembled   Dylan   were those   who   shared    his   background   of Welsh  chapel   rhetoric, from  which  An­ derson's  past was distant, and  there never have  been authentic Audenists other than  Auden.   It is  true   that  Anderson  wrote  some  poems  that   read  like  pastiches   of Auden   (like  "Song  from  a  Play")  and Thomas (like "Capital Square") as many other  poets  did  thirty-five  years  ago,  but he  has  wisely weeded  most  of  these  out of his  new collections,  and  what  emerges  is probably as near as we shall get to the authentic Anderson  in his various  moods.
It is the  work  of a  travelling minor English  poet,  who  writes  some  acute  ob­ servational poems on the places he speeds through and  the  places  where  he  roosts a   while.    His   long   pseudo-philosophic pieces  about   the  condition of  man   tend to  run  down  into  twentieth-century ren­  derings  of  Young's Night  Thoughts, and  he  is at  his  best  in  poems  where  he  re­ counts   and   comments  with    a   certain irony on  what  he has seen:  poems  about people    like   "Aunt   Hildegarde"   ("Be
assured   that   her   lonely  dress I  is  con­
temptuous of loneliness")  or  about  ani­
mals like "Fox" and "Monkey in Malaya" ("fling   on   my   heart    your   long-arm'd
love! I your mushroom-coloured ears and black I  attenuate  hands    and    athlete's
back I and round  head  like woollen ball, I
and  sigh,  and  be  no  weight  at  all.")  or
about   scenes,  like  "The  Pine:  Christie­
ville"  (though here  one is forced  into  an uncomfortable comparison with  A. J. M.
Smith's "The Lonely  Land," which  is a
similar  but  far sparer and  better poem) .
Reading Anderson's poems  as they are now  collected -the  lively  young  pieces of the 194o's and  the more  sombre  pieces of the late 196o's and  197o's-one is im­ pressed  by a quality  of intellectual  virtu­ osity,  of deliberation, of  versatile  crafts­ manship that   can   range  among  formal  patterns, accompanied by  an  inability   to

BOOKS IN REVIEW



fuse feeling and artifice as a consummate poet does. Casting back for  resemblances, I am reminded not of Thomas and Auden with whom Anderson has so often  been compared in  Canada, nor  of  the  Cana­ dian  poets with  whom  he was connected, but  rather of English  writers  of  the 192o's
-like Aldous  Huxley  and  the  male Sit­ wells-who developed intellectual themes in  polished  verse,  with  well  turned con­ ceits,   but   who   never   quite  satisfied   as poets.  One  such  writer,  Humbert Wolfe, now  almost  forgotten but   then   fashion­  able,   wrote   a   stanza    that    has   always stayed  in my mind.

Spring, like  the  Chinese
Sculptor's art
Has  all  of  beauty
Save  the  heart.

It struck  me  that   this  applied far  more exactly  to Humbert Wolfe's  poetry  than to either  spring or Chinese art.  He was in fact defining  a flaw in mannerism, and  he himself  was a mannerist. So, in my  read­ ing, is Patrick  Anderson.

GEORGE WOODCOCK


MARKING TIME

R. GORDON HEPWORTH, The  Making  of a Chief.
The Sono  Nis Press.

As  A  YOUNG  DOCTOR  just  out  from  Eng­ land  in  the  mid-rg5o's, R.  Gordon  Hep­ worth   practised   for   a  year  on  a  small prairie  Indian  reservation. The  Making of a Chief is a novel  based  on his experi­ ences.  As fiction,  it  is  flawed  in  several fundamental  ways;  on  the  other   hand,  it is an  interesting failure since  its theme involves  a  knowledgeable  and  forthright attack  on  Canada's  official   policies  to­ wards  the native people.
The   thrust   of  the  attack is  aimed   at
the  inadequacy of  health   care   facilities on the reserve and  the maladministration of  the  services  in  general. Certainly, the
 band   at  Squibb   Reserve   is  not  without blame for its misfortunes. Diseases caused by  indiscriminate  fornication,  adultery, drunkenness, and  poor hygiene are among the   many   problems    the    authorities - Catholic priests  and   Indian  Health  Ser­ vice  personnel  -must cope   with.  Still, notwithstanding the  almost  wilful  acqui­ escence  by  the   hereditary chiefs  of  the band  to the  hopeless  situation, the  larger share  of  the  blame  falls  squarely on  the Whites.   With   a   few   pitiful    exceptions (and    these    cowed    by   the    customary timidity  of bureaucrats before  their  supe­ riors) ,  they   connive   steadily   to  worsen matters   by  denying  the   Indians  proper medical  attention.
It is an old  tale  of arrogance, procras­ tination and   powerlessness.  The  root  of the problem, of course,  lies in the evils of a  system  which  is out  of  date   and  self­ perpetuating. For  example, according to its  treaty   with   Ottawa  the   band   had been  promised  only  the  maintenance of a   "medicine   chest"  for   its   immediate health   needs.  But   times,   and   attitudes, change.  Having watched his  mother die because  an  emergency operation was not performed, the young chief of the band, Albert  Running Up   Hill,  is  determined to get his people  a better  deal.  Naturally, he meets quick opposition from  those government administrators whose only interest  is the  status  quo,  that  is, control of the purse-strings and  the continued passivity of the  Indians. In  the  words  of the  rather cynical   narrator of  the  story (not   the  author) :  "Time was  the  only
remedy.... to  sedate   the  passion  of  the
Indians."
Ironically, the  young  chief  is "made" in   two   contradictory  senses.   First,   he learns  to distrust  White promises  and through shrewd  politicking with  the  civil servants  gains self-respect and  the admira­ tion   of   his  people.   But,   second,   he  is made  a  pawn  in  these  skirmishes, by his wily  foes,  and  ultimately is  outmanoeu-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



vred. Yet at the end he has shown  Indian and   White   alike  what   non-violent  pres­ sure   can   provide -a  still  sub-standard but  greatly  improved  treatment centre.
Clearly  Hepworth sympathises with Albert's struggle. But his method of story­ telling  undermines his  point  of  view. He uses a doctor-administrator as  his omnis­ cient  narrator, a man  who  appears to see and  hear  all but  who keeps a deliberately low  profile  in  order   to  retain the  confi­ dence  of his superiors. The  device  might  have  worked  had  the  narrator been  kept studiously   neutral,  but  in  the  end  he  is seen  to  be  a  crafty  opponent of  Albert.  His cynicism has been alluded to;  in fact,  throughout the story, the  reader comes to find  his  personality more  and   more  dis­ tasteful   for,   despite   his   profession,  he places  more  faith   in  red   tape   than   the Hippocratic Oath. In  short,  he is an  un­ reliable   narrator,  particularly   when   he feigns ignorance of events  he should  have known     about     until     the     concluding chapters.
Obviously, this  narrative fault  tends  to
lessen the impact  of the story. The heavily
episodic   nature  of   the   plot    (and   the burden of repetitive intrigues) are also flaws. The authenticity of  Hepworth's descriptions of life on  the  reserve  is  like­ wise   marred  by   several   melodramatic characterizations:   Albert    appears   the more   "white" the  more  he  is  thwarted by "black" officials such  as the  incompe­ tent    Dr.    Hawke    and   the   sly   Father Creevy.  On  the  other  hand, some of  the minor   characters are  well  drawn, espe­ cially  Meade, the  agent, and   Miss  Pur­  gass, the  public health nurse.  Their dedi­  cation   to   duty,  under  difficult   circum­ stances,  is seldom  appreciated on  Squibb  Reserve.
In a "Preface" to the novel, J. Michael
Yates   reminds   the   reader    that   even   a cursory  glance  at the media  is convincing evidence   that   the  Indian "wars" of  the past   "are  happening still."   Whether at

88
 Wounded  Knee   or   beneath  the   Peace Tower    in   Ottawa,  the    confrontations break  out  with  increasing frequency, like a rash on the body politic. Of course governments are  not solely to blame  for fostering  racism.  Nevertheless, it does appear that  the  slow, painful integration of  Indians into  Canadian society  is  hin­ dered   by  the   reservation  system  which treats   them   as  unwanted  children,  and  impedes    their    efforts    to   achieve    full equality  before   the   law  in   the  land   of their  birth.
ERIC  THOMPSON


IN A HIGH CLEAN STYLE

IRVING  LAYTON,   For  My   Brother   Jesus.  Mc­
Clelland  & Stewart. $4.95.
DENNIS   LEE,   The  Death   of  Harold   Ladoo.
Kanchenjunga Press, n.p.
c. H. GERVAis, Poems for American Daughters.
Porcupine's Quill.  $2.95.
THERE IS  ALWAYS a temptation in  a  re­ view  like  this  one,   where   one   is   con­ sidering  several  books,  to  give  grades  or prizes, to rank  the  books in a hierarchical order.  I am  trying  to  resist  this  tempta­ tion, because  these three books have little in common with one another. Let's  see if I succeed.
For My  Brother  Jesus. What to say of this amazing, provocative, annoying and
prickly book? Layton's purpose is set out clearly in the Foreword: to reclaim  Jesus for  the  Jews  and   to  expose  the  funda­ mental   lie  of  Christianity, a  lie  which gave   aid   and   comfort  to   antisemitism through  the  ages.  With   the  zeal  of  the freshly converted, Layton is curiously  like the man who went  off into the woods and came  back  having  reinvented  the  type­ writer.   I  mean   that   seeing   Jesus   as  a great  Jewish  prophet is not  a  new  idea and seeing Christianity as the  prime  force

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



in  history  for  antisemitism is not  either. The Second  Vatican Council may  have been  moving  too late  and  doing  too little when  phrases   like  "the  perfidious Jews" were  finally  striken  from  the  liturgy, but the  recognition of guilt  was there.
Fortunately, many  of the  poems  in the
collection seem  to  have  little  to  do  with the polemical stance  of the Foreword and can  be simply  read  as distinguished addi­ tions  to  the  Layton canon. Such  poems as  "Ulysses   in  Spetsai" and  "Seduction of   and   by  a   Civilized   Frenchwoman" show  Layton's sharp acidulous eye prob­  ing  at  its  best,  and  especially  in  "Seduc­ tion,"   his  manipulation of  languages in a kind  of  tumbling acrobatic verbal  rush destroys   verbal    pretension  with    clear­ eyed wit.
He  switches  mood  in "For My Distant
Woman," a  delicate love  poem -

as  the  sun's semen  enters the  crimson flowering
and often, as  now,  like  the  first  heavy  gout of  rain
that  makes  it  toss and  shiver  on  its  tender stem.

Then he  uses grimly  jocular  rhyme  in "Fiasco", turns  tender again  in  the  nos­ talgic   "On  Revisiting Poros   After   an Absence of Ten  Years", rips into Christian hypocrisy  and  false piety  in other poems and  rushes on.
The word  "runt" occurs  often  in  these polemical poems. It seems for  me to sum up  his mordant vision of a contemporary landscape peopled   by  pygmies,  a  world given over to pimps, life-haters, feeble androgynes, the quoters of other men's words. The longer  poem "The Arch" says it all in the final image of a broken  ruin looking  like a "faded grin."
Layton never stands  still. There have been  twenty-five   volumes  of  poems  and the  singing  never stops.
Dennis  Lee's   The   Death   of  Harold
Ladoo  is  one   long   poem,   an   elegy,  a eulogy,  a  diary,   a  love  letter, a  cry  of
 

A MAJOR  NEW  REFERENCE BOOK
TWENTIETH CENTURY CHILDREN'S  WRITERS Preface  by Naomi   Lewis
Edited  by  Daniel  Kirkpatrick
This completely new  reference work  gives detailed information on  630  English-lan­ guage authors  of   fiction,   poetry  and drama for   children.  Each   entry  includes a biography, a complete  bibliography, and  a signed  critical essay. Many of the  writers comment on  their  own  work.  The  bibliog­ raphy  lists all  the  entrant's works  and   the nature  of  each   publication   (i.e.   fiction, poetry,  play   or   non-fiction).  Illustrators names  are  included as  well  as  details of any  published book-length  critical  studies of  the entrant's work.  There is  an  appen­ dix   on   late    nineteenth   century  writers who   have   influenced  the   authors  of   the main   body  of  the  book.  A  supplementary essay  discusses   important  modern   child­ ren's   writers  whose   work   is   available  in English translation. Some  150  critics  have  contributed essays  to  the  book.
Advisory  Board: Peggy Appiah Gillian A very
Dorothy Butler
Marcus Crouch
Roger  Lancelyn Green
Virginia Haviland
Ethel  Heins  Naomi Lewis Donnarae MacCann
Nellie McCaslin Irma McDonough Marcie Muir Nancy Schmidt Rosemary Stones Zena  Sutherland
John Rowe Townsend
Geoffrey  Trease
Lee Wyndham
First  Edition:  1700  pp.,  approx. 7 x 9Y2
$50.00
Order  through  your   bookstores  or   from the   Trade  Division:
HMacmillan
The Macmillan  Company  of Canada Limited
70 Bond Street, Toronto MSB 1X3



8g

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



pain,    an   attempt  at   exorcism.  I   am tempted to say  confessional, but  am  too conscious  of  how  patronizing that   term has  come   to  be,  and   how   far   short   it falls   in   describing  this   poem's  painful honesty.   In   wry   bitter  self-condemning mockery,  Lee tells the story  of his friend­ ship with  Harold Ladoo, young Trinidad­ born   novelist,  who  came   to  Canada  in
I 968  and   who  was  murdered during a visit to Trinidad in  I973·
Lee  creates  a  mask  of self-denigration
to good  effect.  His  persona insists on  see­ ing himself  as a typical  white  liberal aca­  demic, living in a life-denying urban land­ scape.  I  say "persona"  because  although Lee   continually  signals   that   this   is  no mere  book,  that   he  is writing  truth, not fiction,  he does create characters in a pat­  tern  of  attraction-repulsion which  I  find definitely  histrionic. In  keeping  with  his mask  of self-contempt and  loss, Lee  uses a diction  which is spare,  dry and  minimal, befitting  the  pervasive  tone   of  loss and grief.
The Death  of Harold   Ladoo  appears, at  first  glance,   to  be  a  radical shift  in subject and  style for  Lee.  From  the pub­ lic  voice  of  Civil   Elegies  to  the  private chant of  this  present book  seems  a  long way to go. Yet  there  are similarities: for one,  the   use  of  the  self-mocking  mask, and  the  strong  and  persistent sense of an erosive   death-seeking  in   contemporary society.
C. H. Gervais' Poems  For American Daughters is a very  small  book.  (I seem, unconsciously,  innocently, to  have  fallen into   the  grading trap.  I  have   arranged my review  from  the  thickest  to  the  thin­ nest. Yet I insist that  I make  no brief for less or more  quality. Each  of  these  books deserves  our   passionate  attention on  its own  merits.) There are  only  twenty-four poems   in   this   book,  all  of  them   short lyrics.
But  I feel that  it is an  important  book. I  have  watched Gervais's progress  from

go
 the   mid-Sixties,   from   the   private,   per­ sonal  Sister  Saint   Anne   through  Other Marriage  Vows, and  A Sympathy Orches­  tra up to Bittersweet, his largest and  most comprehensive  collection  in   I972.  With  each   book,  his  grasp   on  technique was more  sure  and  his  subjects  less personal,  more external, in a steadily  widening per­ spective.  Poems For American Daughters represents an  intensification rather  than a  "breakthrough."
The "American Daughters" appear in a found  poem from  the  New  York  Times Book Review, but  they are also the people living  in Canada near  the  American border,   brought  up  on  American radio and  tv, seeing  American movies,  dream­ ing in American.
Gervais makes  real  magic  out  of this familiar territory. In "Charles Atlas" he lifts a crude  ad out of the back of a comic book  and   turns   it  into   enduring  myth. But  in  "His  Father," and  "Good   News" and  "That Friday   Night" he  uses  what appear  to  be  vividly   actual  "case   his­ tories,"  focusing  in  on some  telling  point  until  the whole person  comes alive for us. Often he  uses the  metaphor of  photog­ raphy   as  if   (for   example in   his   love poems)  he wanted to preserve and  fix the passing moment.
What else are  poems  for?  Lee  ended his long poem with  the  phrase  "In a high clean   style."  Layton,  Lee   and   Gervais have each,  individually, achieved  this. Their poems open our eyes, radically alter our  perspective, shake  us from  our  com­ fort.
EUGENE  MCNAMARA






ED.   NOTE:   All  of  Baba's  Children, by  Myrna Kostash, is  published by  Hurtig of Edmonton, not  M  & S, as given  in  CL  No.  77·

BOOKS IN REVIEW



A VARIETY OF VOICES

susAN MUSGRAVE, The Impstone. McClelland and  Stewart.
IAN    YOUNG,   Common-or-Garden Gods. Cata- lyst.
DAVID BERRY, Pocket   Pool.  Peppermint  Press.

THE  EFFECT OF Susan  Musgrave's poetry in The  Impstone  is soothing, even  though the  subject   is  largely   death.  In  simple, subdued, mellifluous  language, the reader is invited  to flow, to escape  into  cool fan­ tasies  of  the  unconscious life,  to  experi­ ence  its  purity. So  there  is  numbing fre­ quency  in  the  use of particular motifs - animals,  the  moon,  the  sea,  fish,  blood, bones,  skull,  skeleton   and   dust.   One   is lulled and  rocked  and  longs for something hard   or   harsh   on   which   this  smoothly morbid   landscape  might   falter. But  for Musgrave,  "death  is   the   same/ in   all languages."  The    poems   are   open   and direct, almost  to a fault; they lack surprise
 and  idiosyncrasy; they  deepen  too slowly as products of a long singular simmering in one place -three years in the Queen Charlotte Islands.
This  fact  and  its artistic  results  prompt a  serious   question.  Is   there   wisdom   in setting  up  a life this way?  Whatever hap­ pened   to   poetry   of   the   common   life? However   accurate  Musgrave's  responses to specialized  isolation  may be, they attest  to an  over-focussed sensibility,  in  danger of cutting itself off.
While her  style strikes an appropriately contemporary low  key-short  lines  and plain    diction-Musgrave's    preoccupa­ tions  seem  romantic,  but  in   no  new  or modem way. One  does not find the elabo­  rate   passions   of   the   Romantics  them­ selves,  nor   the  driven  quality and  com­ pulsion   to  theorize   that   Lawrence  had,  nor the tortured brilliance of, say, a Plath. However, Musgrave does make something of  the  male  as  predator; an  incantation





Fiddlehead Poetry Books

(from  the current list)

The  Ordinary  Invisible Woman, by Gwen  Hauser, $5.00
Poems and Elegies 1972-1975, by DavidS. West, $4.50
The  Assassination of Colour, by Eldon Grier,  $5.00
Wind  Sun Stone and Ice, by D. H. Sullivan, $3.50
The  Ultimate Contact, by Kathy  Tyler, $4.00
Tell-Tale Feathers, by George Swede,  $4.00
The  Loneliness of the Poet-Housewife, by Mary  Humphrey Baldridge
Against The  Cold, by Alexandre Amprimoz, $4.00

Order  from FRED  COGSWELL P.O. Box 4400
English  Department, University  of New Brunswick
Fredericton, N.B.  E3B 5A3
(CATALOGUE SUPPLIED  ON REQUEST)



gr

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



to  death  recalls   the   alignment,  of  her poetic self at least, with the slightly older American generation of "extremist" poets, and  there is a telling quote from Berryman. Derivative  poetry   is  the  last thing  one wants  to advocate, but given Musgrave's subject  matter  and   her  fra­ gile, rather conventionalized  approach to it, she  does  risk some  unfavourable com­ parison.
Her  talent  is exemplified in particular poems. "Chiaroscuro" conveys an instinc­ tive identification with  the symbols of the
North  Pacific  Coast: moss, stone,  fungus, water.   She   seems   entirely   convincing when  she  asks "How could  I live/  south of  anywhere-." A  piece   called   "The Impstone" belongs  to  this  area  of  Mus­ grave's  imagination and  is an  intriguing fable  of  civilization's  evolution,  or  devo­ lution,   extending  the  "stone" metaphor naturally but  significantly. On  the  other  hand,  her   use   of   "frog"  elsewhere   as emblematic of evil, danger, perhaps even as an animal familiar, seems arbitrary and confusing. If this creature has to do with actual myth,  then  poetic  use of it  is still obscure. Fortunately, other collaborations with    presumably   indigenous   myth    or legend  do  produce a  kind  of  meditative verity.
There is in The  Impstone  some  prom­
ise of a strident tone  that  gets away  with the  corny   line,  entered  and   slightly  al­ tered,   trades   moon  child  for  witch  hag, grieves  unprettily over  female  victimiza­ tion,  is bitter  and  blunt  about childbirth. Potentially,  this   poet   has   the   snap   of satire.  Too   often,   though,  anger   evapo­  rates and  we're  left with anti-climax. This  happens also  to strong images  which  dis­ sipate  either into  the same  beguiling flow of  overworked  words,  or  into  split  pur­  pose. Buried  in abstractions, or the muted  parts  of  poems, are  some gems:  someone  is  "struggling  like  af  crowded room  to/  recover    silence;"   or   this:   "Only  the dead/ can ... leave   you    at    the/  cross-
 roads/ scribbling   in  their   dust." Certain poems  manage  a  persuasive combination of personal history and mythic strength: "Skookumchuck," for example, claims  an affinity  felt  with  Emily  Carr which  is no doubt  genuine.
Finally,  several pieces have  the force of real incident. In "Recovery," there are people:  Frances,   the   nurse,   the   judge, and  references  to a  traumatic experience that   allow   this  work   to  achieve   poetic
signal from a depth of suffering. "Jugger­
naut" also  reveals  figures  from   the  past
who  have  somehow  contributed  to  pres­ ent  disintegration. This  dimension  of the painful and  personal,   these  acts  of  con­  fronting rather  than  romantically dilut­ ing  may  be a rich  poetic  vein  for  a poet of acute sensitivity  and  feeling  and,  it  is hoped,  a  fuller  technical range,  to  mine further.
By   contrast    to   Musgrave's  perhaps over-conscious efforts to be serious, Ian Young's  poems in Common-or-Garden Gods seem at peace with themselves, and none-the-less communicative. The person­ ality  emerging   from   this  writing  is  one with a talent  for enriched living and care­ ful  listening.   As  one  poem  puts  it,  "no  renunciation/ but  a  following   through." Consequently, there is a stimulating mix­ ture   of  expression   to  be  sampled,  and  much  of it is sensual.
One  of the  dominant moods  is a  kind
of	sun-shot    melancholy,   a    nostalgia (which   combines  both  appreciation and anticipation)  for  friends   or  lovers  gone, "for  Billy, for Mac,  for Craig and  Chris, for  the  night   train,/ for  the  best  of  it." Some  poems are  characterized quietly  by an   implicit    knowledge    that    though  a moment  of  joy be marked   by nature, by the   garden    tortoises   who   "come  out, blinking,   slow/  only  on  sunny   days/  for visiting lovers," it may be too exquisite  to last.  Young  is good  at  catching kinds  of ecstasy. In  fact the love poem,  so difficult to write,  is enticingly  done  in  this  book,

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



"Letter to Bellingham" for example. This is partially due to a kind of haiku-like reticence;  just  the  right   touch   is  main­ tained. Some  longer  poems  trace the  his­ tory of a relationship, highlighting, amaz­  ingly,  those  aspects  which   do  translate, without   themselves   being  destroyed. Often,   too,   the   vigour    of   passion    is regarded as a species  of noble  "lion strength."
The  characteristic of  sharing  is  very strong; the  poet  is  generous, his  poems open   and  inviting. Often,  the  invitation is to male homosexual love, as when he regrets  "the hazy  vision/  of well-married men/ living with  wives/ they  hardly know." Generally, it is to delicious enjoy­ ments   of  many   kinds.   Young   offers   a sensibility  delightful to know, as in "Sky/ Eyes," and  "Fireflies," which  deftly  build and  interweave to compose their  totality.
Unhappiness is also freely  transmitted. Odd, uneasy   thoughts, feelings  and  en­ counters,  are   followed   with   precision. "Rob, Polishing  His  Motorbike" presents the  problem  of  perceiving -how one sees a  friend,  how   he  sees  himself,   how  to write it. While there  is sadness and  empti­ ness  in   this   poet's   world,   there   is  also acceptance, and  it is never  naive:

We love one another and  have something  in common   though  we  don't   speak  of  it,  but fall, slowly, into categories  the world will remember  us by.

"Yuletide Story,"  from  which  these  lines come,  has  an  autobiographical tone  that is  masterly.  Frequently, Ian  Young  con­ veys  the  mystery  of  ordinary  experience often  relating to filming  or  photography, sometimes   to  words  themselves.  He  is a very   rewarding   poet   to   read,   offering interest, pleasure, and  a sense of glowing life.
David   Berry's  caustic little   poems   in
Pocket  Pool have a directly conversation­ al  tone,  but  a  variety  of  voices.  We  are spoken  to  by Jack  the  Ripper, John  the
 Baptist,   Theodoric, Judas  Iscariot, and various  exponents of ancient Eastern wis­ dom,   to  name   but   a  few.   One   might  regard   the   book  as  a  collection  of   the "detritus,"  to   use   one   of   Berry's   own words,   from   civilization.   The  problem  seems to be what, if any,  of  this debris  is worth   salvaging? Value   judgments  are not  made. Subjects are  given  equal time and    cleverness   of    expression,  whether literary   parody    or   dream  lunacy.   Fre­  quently  cliche  is  used  with  darkly  comic effect. Jack  the Ripper ends a very touch­ ing  attempt  to  elicit  our  sympathy with the   line   "There's  No   Rest    For    The  Wicked."    There   are    often    ludicrous images-the "fat lady of the sonnets" has "Teeth like tombstones"-and accurate ones-"Even  the   self-inflicted   wounds are  harmless/ here,  like  cutting  yourself with   paper:/ you   can   cut   yourself   to pieces, smiling." Other metaphorical uses run   from   the   disturbingly  and/ or   hu­ morously  surrealistic to  the  merely  silly.
Enjoyed   cynicism   plays   a   significant role. It may be the only pure emotion left. "Killing Spiders" is one of several  poems making a nasty point about automatic voraciousness,  and  elsewhere the mouth seems to be the only properly functioning organ,  or  location  for  the  only  sensation we know,  to  be  bitterly savoured: "Life is  long,  decay's   a  transient,/ thing   only the  taste  lingers,  dissolves."  Many poems end  in  a combination of disappointment and indifference: the accident victim of "Lady in  the  Gutter" is efficiently,  cal­ lously  dealt  with; the  persona  of  "Make Mine  Sarsaparilla" gives up on  the Hun­ like Scouts of his boyhood memories when he  realizes  they  have  "drifted into  obvi­ ous occupations" such as chopping meat  for  Dominion  stores.  "Love In  The Kit­  chen" details  a  bored  predictability that  is uncomfortably realistic. With such un­ rewarding observations, the  poet is left to make  his patterns. They are  sharp, nega­ tive,  and   hilarious at  once,  constructed

93

BOOKS IN REVIEW



with   a  quick   twist  of  the   kaleidoscope from  scraps  of life:  private, public, past, present, conscious,  unconscious. Book and print  are tiny; the result is pointed but fleeting;  you  feel  it  sting,  but   can't   re­ member why.
The  disillusioned satiric  centre of  the book may be found  in many  telling  lines: "Tired  of   sacrificing   himself/ at   other people's   expense/ he  proclaims himself/ an  apostle  of  lost causes,"  "knowing  you are/ not  renewable," but   "from  birth   a silent/ turning  into  stone." For   man   in his  obsolescence,  "there is an  eternity of dying." Even   Judas  Iscariot's  flippancy only accentuates the bleakness  of a life. Finally,  and  most depressingly, there is futility.  The  "last  survivor" is left to admit that  "Everything bred  without him."
The conclusion of Pocket  Pool, with  its Oriental  riddles,    might  have    supplied some  saving   sanity   and   resolution  as  a balance to Berry's  prickly  version  of life, but  really,  we remain with  stunned  obvi­ ous   answers   to   seemingly   non-sensical  puzzles.  Perhaps because   the  book's  sar­ donic   tone   is  already   well   established, these final  parables don't  provide enough  of the  release possible with true  Zen illog­ icality,   and   we're   left   with   a   kind   of hollow  laughter.

PATRICIA KEENEY SMITH


MAINSTREAM CURRENTS

RONALD SUTHERLAND,   The   New  Hero:  Essays in   Comparative  Quebec/Canadian   Litera­ ture. Macmillan, $5.95. Where  Do the Mac­ Donalds    Bury    Their    Dead?.   Paperjacks,
$2.50·
BoTH THE TITLE and  the  subtitle of The New    Hero    are   somewhat  misleading: "The  New   Hero"  is   simply   the   lead article, and  the book as a whole  ( 97 pages of  text)   is a  mixed   bag  of  literary/ cui-

94
 tural  criticism,  in  which  the  literary seg­ ments    are    not    heavily    comparative, though   Sutherland's   criticisms   of  indi­  vidual  authors are much  enhanced by his ability  to  put  them  into  bicultural con­ texts.  The  essays on  Quebec authors in particular   are    good    introductions   for Anglo-Canadian readers, though it seems less likely that  Quebec readers  would benefit from, say, his rather sketchy Robertson Davies  essay.
"The New Hero" itself is both  the most substantial and  the  most  comparative of these pieces;  I found  it  more  speculative than  definitive,  however, as the "new heroes"   come   from   a  small   sample   of novels over a very short time, and are, arguably, individual aberrations for the "norm" of  Canadian  heroism    (if  what that  is has  yet been  clearly  determined), rather  than   a   genuinely  new   develop­ ment.  "The new  hero  . . . has  suddenly  exploded  from  the pages of  Canadian fic­ tion,"  though   he  has  been  "lurking" in earlier  works, "playing a secondary role":

Now  he  is  the  main   character  playing the dominant  role,    and    he   is   not    the   end­ product of a long  struggle with  himself.  He is strong, self-reliant, self-trusting, confident, and   highly  individualistic,  but   unlike    the legendary  American  hero   of  similar traits, he   is   not   the    self-righteous  exponent   of established  national values. He  is  respected, however  grudgingly at times,  without being respectable in  the  conventional sense.  Actu­ ally,  he  seems  to  operate outside  the  scope of   respectability.  Undoubtedly   he   reflects changes   now    taking   place    in    Canadian society....

This   more   assertive   new   hero   is   con­ trasted   with   the   "pretres  manques" of earlier  stories,  who  blame  themselves  for their misfortunes and wallow in their own weaknesses.  Sutherland's chief  examples are  in  contrasting pairs:  Sinclair Ross's Doc   Hunter   (Sawbones  Memorial)  so much more self-confident than  Philip Bentley;  Adele  Wiseman's Hoda  (Crack­ pot)   so  much  more  individualistic than

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Abraham (The Sacrifice); Andre Lange­ vin's  Pierrot ( Une  Chaine  dans le  pare) so  much   more   self-reliant than   Doctor Alain   Dubois    ( Poussiere   sur   la   ville). Sutherland is too modest  to  note  that,  in a kind  of self-fulfillment of  his prophecy, he  has  himself  created a  "new   hero"­ Ti-Mac from  Where Do the MacDonalds Bury Their Dead?
The  MacDonalds is  as  full   of  local (Montreal) colour  as if decades  of  Cana­ dian-written  anonymously North  Ameri­  can  novels  had  to  be atoned  for  in  one fell  swoop,  and  as  burdened  by cultural allegory  as  if  the  case  for  biculturalism rested  upon  the strong  but average  shoul­ ders  of  his  New  Hero,  as  it  does  even upon  his bicultural nickname. The macho  melodrama  which  sweeps him  up  would seem   almost   irrelevant   to   the   book's themes  were it not that  (and  with  no At­ wood copout, either) only the Americans are  the sickies. A pop thriller, a good fast
 read   in  itself,  has  been  grafted  onto   a rather sentimental story  about an  over­ sexed, but  very decent  (Scots)  Canadian, "operat [ ing]  outside  the  scope of respec­  tability," and his equally decent  (French) Canadian friends. Ti-Mac is colour-blind when in America, where  he has the nicest black   and   American  friends    (only   the whites   are  sickies.)   All  this  in   turn   is grafted onto an Information Canada bul­ letin about  why the Quebecois want  inde­ pendence-but   clearly,   if   we   all   got along  as well with  them  as Ti-Mac, they might  well  not  want  it. There is enough French and  joual in the  book  to make  its Anglo    readers    happy    that    they    took French  in   'igh   school,   without   being enough   to  inconvenience  them   if  they didn't take  it in college.  There is an  aw­ ful lot of sex, jolly at  the  time,  but as one thinks   back  on  it,  really   very  discreet.  Such   screwing,    drinking  and   fighting  heroes,  male  chauvinist pigs of  the  nicer





LADY	SET in the foothills of Alberta,
The  Lady  of the  Strawberr£es  is the
story  of a 10-year-old girl's struggle to come  to terms  with  reality and the threat  it presents to her  own cherished fantasies.
THIS contemporary story
sensitively  captures the intricate
web of feelings characterizing the
end  of childhood.



$7.95 case.  96  pages. Illustrated.
Available in October.

PMA Books



95

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



sort, are  better  drawn by far in the  novels of  Robert Kroetsch, whose  New  Heroes are  more  reflective,  self-aware and  three­ dimensional  than    Ti-Mac  and   just   as virile  and  jolly.
Sutherland's essay on Fifth  Business un­ fortunately attempts to cast Dunstan, too, as a  New  Hero.  No doubt  he is, in some ways,  but  the  analogy  between   him  and the  heroes  discussed  in  the  earlier essay can only be drawn at the price of radical­ ly  overestimating  the  self-confidence he has  acquired  by  his  "middle years,"  and underestimating  the  extent to  which  his integration is  a  process   not  to  be  com­ pleted  this side of Zurich: precisely "the  end  product of  a long struggle with  him­ self."  Likewise,  making Dunstan's  char­  acter  a  kind   of  metonym  for   the   new shape  of  Canadian identity, though  evi­ dently    true   in   very   general   terms,   is stretched  past   the   point    of   usefulness when    Dunstan's   self-investigations  are paralleled to  "a  new  spirit  of  inquiry, a desire  to probe  . . . the  darker aspects  of the Canadian  totality."
Fifth  Business, being  written in the first person,  is described  as "another  offshoot of  the  ancient   monologue form," to  ex­ amples   of   which   Sutherland   dedicates  what  I consider  to be the most substantial and  fascinating essay in this volume,  that  on   Yvon   Deschamps.   Sutherland  con­ siders   Deschamps'   monologues  as  both literature and  cultural commentary, and here  shows  clearly  and  provocatively the links  between   them.   He  is  detailed and informative about  Deschamps' forms and structures  and    particularly   helpful  on Deschamps' language:  joual  used  in  sa­ tire.  The  essay is only  marred by a  very odd   introduction, where   all  first-person  narratives  are   pooled   together  in   one "phenomenon" of  monologue, alleged  to appeal  especially  to  Canadians  (of  both cultures).  First  person   narratives of  an explicitly  "written" character-e.g.  As for  Me  and  My   House, Fifth   Business,

g6
 and   Prochain   Episode, are   not   distin­ guished,   as  monologues, from  texts  like Huckleberry  Finn,    which   may   indeed  have   some  affinity   to  spoken   tradition, and  might  thus provide some useful ana· logue  to  the  almost  wholly  oral   mono­  logues of Quebec.
The other  three  writers  Sutherland discusses are Grove and  (in one essay) Langevin and Bessette. The  inquiry  into whether Grove  was  a  realist,  as  he  him­ self  maintained, or  a  naturalist,  as  the standard  critical   definitions  would  sug­ gest, proceeds  rather schematically to opt for the latter, and concludes (more  inter­ estingly)   with  a   tribute  to  Grove   as  a cultural  thinker.  The  Langevin-Bessette essay  tries,  perhaps  rashly,   to  establish "distinctly Canadian" motifs, but  is with­  al  a  useful  and  informative introduction to   these  authors. The   account  of  Bes­ sette's La Bagarre makes one wonder if perhaps Ti-Mac did  not  take some of his origins  from  there.  If so, it  would  be  al­ most  the  only  example  of  a  bicultural influence   that   I  could  extrapolate from  the  contents of this  book.
The  remaining essays include  an agree­ able   survey   of  chiefly   Anglo-Canadian war    novels   and    two   more    culturally
oriented  pieces,   "Tabernacles  a  douze
etages" and  (the  concluding essay)  "The
Mainstream."  These   latter  two   incline
towards  liberal  humanist rallying cries­ "even   more  communication" -and to­ wards  cultural optimism. One is grateful for  the details,  selected  by a keen as well as  human eye, one  is  approving  (inevit­ ably)   of  the  sentiments, and   yet  some­ times skeptical  of the  prognosis.
"The Mainstream" is also  more  com­ parative  than    any   other    essay   except  "The New  Hero." Sutherland  adds  the somewhat  uneasy  metaphor of   the  title to the rapidly  growing  collection of meta­  phors  for  two literatures in  one  land,  to which  his  original   "ellipse"  was  such  a notable contribution."Mainstream" seems

BOOKS IN REVIEW



to signify not what  Canadian literature is, as one would  suppose  from  normal usage, but   what   by  Sutherland's  political  syl­ logisms it ought  to be and  is  perhaps be­ coming:  two  literatures  mutually aware,  and   taking  each  other  into  account. So that   trickle  of  authors  who,  like  Hugh MacLennan    (affirmatively)   or   Hubert Aquin  (negatively) are already thinking biculturally, constitute, proleptically, the mainstream. This  is surely  ideological wish-fulfillment blurring,  with  a  rash though  praiseworthy optimism, the  terms of literary  criticism.
P. MERIVALE


INTERLACED PLOTTING

MARGOT NORTHEY,   The   Haunted   Wilderness: the  Gothic  and  Grotesque  in  Canadian  Fic­ tion.  University of  Toronto  Press, $4.95.

THAT CANADIAN  literature is  composed of  two languages, each  of which  partici­ pates  in major Westem cultures, and  has enjoyed   contributions  from   Ukrainian, German,  and    Icelandic,   marks    it   sui generis as an object  of  comparative study. That its literature is of a minor  character, when   viewed   against   the   traditions  of English,   French,  and   American  litera­  ture, makes it difficult to evaluate, for the critical   attitudes that  these  three   litera­  tures  have  generated  cast  such  a  shade over  our  literature  that great   tact  is re­ quired  to assert what  is native and what is not. This, of course, is not a new problem,  nor  is it exclusively a literary one. At the risk  of   echoing   Northrop  Frye's   query, "Where is here?," as a way of indicating the  context   of  our   literary situation, it should  be said that  an  adequate  criticism of Canadian literature depends upon  how it  is  placed,   and   it  must   be  located   at once in a North  American and  European zone  of significance   so  that,   paradox  as
 it may appear, its native  contours may emerge.   Canadian   criticism  by   nature faces  an  ambiguous  task,  and   its  basic gesture  must  be circumspect.
The achievement of Margot Northey's monograph, The  Haunted   Wilderness, when    measured   against   some    recent
studies  of English-Canadian fiction,  is the relatively modest role that the adjective "Canadian" plays.  By  refusing,  further­ more   to  isolate   a  dominant   theme   de­ signed  to assert  a  central  Canadian cul­ tural   point  of  view,  the  book  is assured  of further distinction. As the sub-title im­ plies, Northey  has chosen a type of fiction that  has  not often  claimed critical atten­ tion,   inasmuch   as   the   relationship  be­ tween  the  gothic and   the  grotesque and a   "national   experience"  do   not   come quickly   to  hand. For   the  sake  of   con­ venience,   the  book  is  divided   into  two sections, addressing nineteenth- and  twen­ tieth-century   fiction   respectively.   Each section  is provided  with  brief  considera­ tions of a  methodological character, and a series of  characteristic examples drawn from  English   and   French  (with   a  rare exception, in  translation, alas)   are  ana­ lysed.
The   major   critical  problem  that   the book   raises  is  reflected   in   the   use   of "gothic"  and    "grotesque"   as   literary terms. As she declares  in the introduction:

Both   terms   involve   a  subjective  and  often symbolic  vision  of  experience  which invokes feelings    of   fear    or   horror,  although  the grotesque may  frequently have  a  comic  side as  well.  Both  suggest   distortions in  charac­ terization, although  the   grotesque   leans   to visual   ugliness   and    bizarre   juxtapositions, whereas  the    gothic   may   only    give    two­ dimension portraits  with  emphasis on  a  few exaggerated qualities.  Both   the   gothic and  the     grotesque    present    mysterious,    non­ rational   levels  of  experience, whether  one  chooses   to  call  these   the   dark side   of  the soul,  the  night  side  of  life,  or  the  impulses of  the   id;  both   react  against  the   conven­ tional  ordering of  reality, seeking in  strange  ways  a  truth  beyond the   accepted  surface

97

BOOKS IN REVIEW



of   life.   Sin   and   death  are   the   dominant themes of  both.

Although  the  author  hastens   to  qualify these  qualifications by  indicating that gothic was the mode of the nineteenth century, and  grotesque the  contemporary mode,   the   definition  is  so  inclusive   of both   that   one  wants   to  know  why  the need  for  two  terms.  Analysis  of  the  two kinds  of fiction  indicates, moreover, that both  modes  serve  different  purposes. While  the  gothic  is not  as  revolutionary as  English   examples imply,   the  pattern seems to be one of virtue and  goodness triumphant. The gothic, as Northey sug­ gestively  argues,   is  overcome in  Cana­ dian  fiction  by the  sentimental.  No  one, however,   would   state   that   the  same   is true  for the grotesque. The exhaustion of human will  in  Blais'  novels,  to  cite  only one author, is so  persuasive that  one can understand   why   Marxist  criticism  can hail  the  grotesque  as  a  cultural defeat.  The author appears, therefore, to be more exercised  by the  consistency  of her  thesis than  by the truth of the text  when  she concludes her  analysis  of La Guerre, Yes Sir!  with  the  observation that:  "Carrier gives no  real  hint  of  the  shape  of  things to come,  but  the  undying energy  of his characters and  the constant upsurge  of humour against horror, precludes a vision of total  despair." A reading of King  Lear might   lead   to  the  same  conclusion, but Carrier shares  with  Blais  a  sense of  me­ tonymy  in which  humorous elements  are only introduced in order to be suppressed. While   the   book   demonstrates,  then,   a credible    line   of    development  for   the gothic  romance, the  relationship between  gothic  and  grotesque is  tenuous indeed, and  perhaps  the  brevity  of  the  book  or the  paucity of material may  prompt the sense  of  weakness  in  the  method.
The  treatments of W acousta  (a Cana­ dian   prototype)  and  Kamouraska   (psy­ chological   gothic)   are  particularly well developed. For   W acousta   she  confirms,

g8
 without  acknowledging, Marcia  Kline's distinction between  American and  Cana­ dian  approaches towards the  terrors   na­  ture    holds    (Beyond    the    Land    Itself [Cambridge, Mass., 1970] ) . While Ameri­  can  fiction  appears to opt  for  the  primi­ tive as opposed  to the civilized, Canadian fiction   views  the  latter  as  "unsuitable" and  the  former  as  "a  terrifying alterna­ tive."  Without  taking  into  consideration D. H. Lawrence's statements on  the  im­ pact  of  nature on  the  American spirit,  some  attention should   be  paid  to  Leslie Fieldler's  study  of  the   gothicization  of nature in Charles Brockden Brown's crea­ tion  of the  "haunted forest" (the  phrase  is  Fieldler's).  Similarities, in   fact,  be­ tween  Brown  and  Richardson  make  the kind    of   distinctions that    Kline    and Northey draw  difficult  to  accept. Other assertions  are equally awkward. Why, for example, is Hebert's  use of psychological analysis  "more  obviously  modern" than  Poe,  Conrad,  James, and  Dostoyevsky?
Certain  chapters, notably   the   discus­
sion of Wild  Geese and  Surfacing, suffer from  brevity,  for  surely  "sociological gothic," so  far   from   being   a   paradox, has  long  enjoyed  popularity as  melodra­ matic  romance,  and  thus deserves careful scrutiny  from the point  of  view of literary sociology.  Furthermore,  Surfacing could have  borne   fuller  analysis,  inasmuch as the  dialectic of the  plot  persistently aims at a resolution  of some of the dichotomies already  set forth  in  W acousta. Since  the strength of her  study  lies here,  one  won­ ders finally, leaving aside the often  forced conjunction    gothic-grotesque,   whether the  kinds  of  conflict,  ambiguity, and  in­  terlaced  plotting that  Northey is adept at identifying could  not  have  formed   more explicitly  the argument of the  book.

E. D.  BLODGEIT

BOOKS IN REVIEW



OF WARS & MEN
TIMOTHY  FINDLEY,  The   Wars.  Clarke, Irwin,
$g.gs.
W. A.  B.  DOUGLAS   and  BRERETON GREENHOUS,
Out  of the  Shadows:  Canada  in  the  Second
World War. Oxford University Press, $I4·95·
PHILIPPE  VAN    RJNDT,   Blueprint. Lester and
Orpen, $g.gs.
RECENTLY THERE HAS BEEN a resurgence of  popular interest   in  books  about  war, both   in   this  country  and   abroad. The lifting  of  the  veil of  silence  around  Bri­ tain's  "Ultra Secret" has undoubtedly led to the beginnings  of a series of re-apprai­ sals of events  in  the  Second  World  War period,  and  the best-seller  status  of books such   as   A   Man   Called   Intrepid  and Bodyguard  of  Lies  testifies  to  this  inter­ est.  In  Canada, books  such  as  Heather Robertson's A Terrible Beauty  and  Barry Broadfoot's Six  War  Years  have  enjoyed popular and  critical  success. None  of this is surprising; the  subject   of human  con-
 flict has fascinated men  of all ages. But it is clear  today  that  war-whether of the Total, brush-fire, terroristic, or  Cold  va­ rieties-and  its  myriad   effects   on   the lives of millions  of  people  is a  real  pre­ occupation.
The  three  books  under review  here  all share  this preoccupation and  are,  indeed, serious  responses  to  the subject. Findley's The Wars  is a  novel  about a  young offi­ cer's experiences in  the  First  World  War, but  in  terms  of its theme  it is more  than  a conventional tribute. Rather, because of the honesty  and  intensity in its expression of the  whole  horror of armed  combat, it is  surely   one   of   the   most   remarkable novels of war  ever  published. Out  of the Shadows  is,  as   the   authors   explain,  a "popular overview  of the events that com­ prised Canada's part  in the Second  World  War," but  even  so  it  amounts to  an  il­ luminating-and    controversial -treat­ ment  of an  as-yet little  understood period



CANADIAN  MATERIALS

NOW ... FOUR  ISSUES PER  YEAR! 	NEW FORMAT!

READ ...


About microfilm ... hooks ... audiotape  ... periodicals  ... about  EVERYTHING  that has been produced in Canada for elementary and secondary schools

CANADIAN MATERIALS ... it's all there in  the reviewing periodical for teachers and librarians. Subscribe today!

Drop us a letter  and a cheque for $15. We'll make sure you receive all four issues.

Canadian Materials
Canadian Library Association
151 Sparks Street
Ottawa, Ontario
KIP 5E3


99

BOOKS IN REVIEW



of our  history.  Van  Rjndt's Blueprint differs  greatly  from  the  preceding  books in   the   sense  that   it   is  a   novel   about espionage activities in  the  Soviet  Union and  in  West  Germany, but  it,  too,  offers us a perspective on man's consuming hatreds in a war-like  situation.
Findley,   a  novelist  in  his  late  forties, has  had  indifferent success  with  his  pre­ vious books, although his scripts for CBC's  The  National Dream and   ]alna  have  earned  him  a  measure of   attention. In deciding to write The Wars he must  have been  aware of the  potential  of failure in dealing freshly  with  a  war  about which so   much    has   been   written,   including novels   and    memoirs   by   such   famous  names  as  Ford,  Cummings, Graves, and  Remarque.  Probably his  motivation was more  personal; it appears that  his  uncle, a  Canadian army   veteran of  the  Great War, was his model for the novel's hero, Robert Ross.
Robert's story begins in April  I9I5, the month of the first bloody encounters at Ypres. When his beloved, hydrocephalic sister dies by accident, the young man decides  to bury  his sorrow  by enlisting in the Canadian artillery branch. By Febru­ ary  Igi6, he finds  himself,  a  newly-com­ missioned  second  lieutenant, in charge of an ammunition supply  unit at the front  in Belgium.  Soon  the  Germans  open   their  offensive  against  the  Allied  salient  at  St. Eloi, and  Robert is caught  up with  other  soldiers in the rout  which follows. Slightly  wounded, he is sent  on  leave  to England where   he  renews   a  relationship  with   a beautiful but  aloof   girl  of  noble   blood. Their  affair  is  a   bittersweet  interlude, for  Robert is soon  back  in  the  mud   of Flanders with  his unit.
The crisis in the  plot really occurs  as Robert  makes   his  return  to  war.   One night  he is sexually assaulted by unknown soldiers; and   shortly   after   this  outrage, in  a  moment  of  madness,   he  shoots   a superior officer for allowing men and  ani-


100
 mals to be sacrificed  needlessly  during an enemy  bombardment. His  fate  is sealed: pursued   by  military   police  to  an  aban­ doned  barn  (where  he has tried  to shelter  his unit's  panic-stricken horses)  he is him­  self shot  and  captured. Court-martialled, Robert survives  the  war   but   dies  blind and   insane   in   I922,    having  not   quite  reached  the  age of 26.
Findley's   characterization  of  his  hero is  always  sure-handed-realistic,  never sentimental. Robert is extremely reticent, introspective, hardly ever  voicing  a  per­ sonal  opinion; but  we  know  him  by  his actions,   by  his  fortitude in  the  face  of danger, by his selfless care  of the  fright­ ened   animals   he  seeks  to  protect  from man's  brutality-most of  all, by the  un­ spoken  yearning of his soul to live amidst  the mindlessness of slaughter. He is a true hero,  an   exemplar   of  courage.  Findley has  achieved  something very  fine  in  his delineation of  the  human spirit,  despite  the  prevailing fashions  of our  anti-heroic age.
The   author's  narrative  method  and powers  of  description are  also  extremely effective.   Findley's   technique   resembles Wiebe's  in The  Temptations of Big Bear; the  character and  his story  are  carefully reconstructed out  of the clippings, diaries, reminiscences, and  "facts" of history, pro­ viding  the reader  with  a new sense of the reality  of  the  past.  The  atmosphere  of war  is caught  consistently;  the  elabora­ tion of small details  stamps on our  minds the fury of bombardment, the inescapable claustrophobia  of   life   in   the   forward trenches,  the terror of death by drowning in  the  mire  of flooded  fields,  and  much else besides.  Finally,  the  use of  bird  and animal  symbolism  throughout the  narra­ tive-though at  times forced-is effec­ tive  in  revealing  Robert's motives,  espe­ cially   his   determination  to  save  some­ thing   of   value   out   of   the   carnage  of death.
Out   of  the  Shadows  conveys   a  very

BOOKS IN REVIEW



different  impression of  the  meaning of war  in human affairs.  Written by  profes­ sional   military  historians,  it   is   aimed nevertheless at  the  layman  who  wishes a short,  readable account of  how  the  Sec­ ond  World  War  affected Canada's social, political, and   economic  life.   (Naturally, the   book  contains  chapters  on  the   na­ tion's  military contributions to  the Allied effort  as  well.  Ironically, in  this  regard, the  authors  conclude  that   "in   the  final analysis Canada's effort  was not  essential to winning the  war." Perhaps not,  given the   enormous  resources   of  the   United States; but  such  a statement is bound  to anger, and  to  hurt, many  people  in  this country.)
Among  the important developments in the period discussed by the authors the economic transformation of the country brought about by the  necessities of war is seen as perhaps most noteworthy. From almost  a  standing start, Canadians were able  to achieve miracles  of production in the space  of a few years. The sluggishness of  the   Depression  yielded   to  a  highly­ efficient   war   economy   in   which   every Canadian had  a  job and  some  real  hope for  the  future. At  the  end  of  hostilities Canada's place  as a  middle-power in  the world  community was asssured. All of this is the stuff of contemporary myth  and  has often   been   discussed   by  other    writers. What Douglas  and  Greenhous manage to clarify  is  the  deliberateness  of  the  pro­ cesses  of  change,  how   the  problems of poor  utilization of civilian, military, nat­  ural  and  financial  resources were  solved by   shrewd   political    policies    and    the willing  co-operation of  Canadians. The photographs which   accompany  the  text add   substantially to  the  impression  cre­ ated  of a nation at war.
Philippe van  Rjndt still hasn't reached the  age  of thirty  but  already he has  won a reputation as a promising thriller writer. (Currently, he lives in Toronto; his earlier novel  was called  The  Tetramachus Col-
 lection.) The  plot  of  Blueprint is much too  detailed  to  summarize,  but   in   the mode  of  its  genre,  spy  fiction,   it  tells  a hard-hitting story  of  murky   intrigue. In essence, Captain Alexander Roy  of the Soviet military espionage branch becomes a victim of the sinister  Bibnikov,  the chief of the KGB's  Special  Investigations unit. Van  Rjndt takes  too  many  pains  to keep his story-line  clear,  and  the  book is much too "talky" throughout. The denouement is melodramatic. Still,  these  faults aside, the  novel  serves  as  a  grim   reminder of how  perilously  near  the  surface smile  of detente lie the fangs  of war.

ERIC THOMPSON



ONE CROWDED DIMENSION

DAVID    HELWIG,   The    Glass  Knight.  Oberon,
$8.95  cloth,  $4.50  paper.

WHEN DAVID HELWIG   published his  first novel,   The  Day   Before   Tomorrow,  in
1971, it was suspected that  his talents, though   considerable,  were   not   those  of the novelist. This  suspicion was strength­ ened in 1974 by the appearance of Atlan­ tic  Crossings, a  book  of  poem  sequences  in   which   Helwig's  quite   genuine  con­ cern  for  the  processes  of  history  seemed to   have   found    its   appropriate   form. With  The  Glass  Knight,  however, Hel­  wig returns to  the  novel,  and  our  earlier suspicion is confirmed: though Helwig writes well, what he writes are not good novels.
The   Glass  Knight  is  in  fact   an  alle­
gory, in the same  sense that Morley  Cal­
laghan's  early   novels   were   called   alle­ gories:  tolerantly, but  with  a  faint  tinge of  regret.   Although Helwig's two  prin­  cipals,   Robert  Mallen  and   his   schizo­ phrenic  girlfriend,  Elizabeth,   are  both

101

BOOKS IN REVIEW



interesting and  complex as characters, neither  quite   comes   alive   as  a  human being.  Both  are  rather bloodless embodi­ ments of contrasting ideas, facing cameos, than  the ruthless  portraits of humanity in conflict  one feels they  were meant to be.
Though the  characters are one-dimen­ sional,   it's   a   crowded   dimension.  The  novel  moves  loosely  around the  idea  of pain  and  its consequent awareness: while Canada  undergoes  its  mildly   traumatic FLQ   crisis   in   late  I 970,   Robert  and Elizabeth's relationship undergoes a simi­ larly  mild   disintegration. Robert,  forty, divorced, a fragile  knight in glass armour, seeks out  pain  because  of  the  awareness  (his  quest,  you  see).  Elizabeth,  as  cold and   unyielding as  one  of  Picasso's  blue nudes,   avoids  awareness  because   of  the pain.
On   the   allegorical   level,   Elizabeth   is
Canada: she  is  bilingual but  predomin­ antly  English,  she  consistently  turns  her back  on reality  in order to nurse  her  illu­ sions  of  peace  and   progress   (and   gets away with it in the end,  by the way), and Robert even refers  to her  rather fearfully  at  several  points  as "quelques arpents de neige."  Robert's allegorical equivalent is less   heavy-handed  (and   therefore  less effective) .   He    bewails    Elizabeth's   in­ ability   to  stare   down   life,  but   he  is  as unable   to  determine  the   course   of   his own  pilgrimage as  (presumably)  the rest of us poor  peregrines. Everyman? Every­ canadian?
The comparison with  Callaghan is not
entirely gratuitous:  Callaghan's  early novel,  A Broken Journey,  may  profitably be seen as The Glass Knight's  grandsire. There is  the  same   Marxist economy   of style,   the   same   Freudian  teasing,    the same  wooden  dialogue that  too often de­ scends  into  an  improbable  exchange  of soliloquies,  and  the  same  intense, brood­  ing  attachment to  the  minutiae of exist­ ence.  But  Helwig  lacks  Callaghan's pro­ saic instinct, a  lack  that aids  the  writing


102
 but  hinders the  novel.  Though his  ran­ dom incidents  are  all thematically linked,  they do not add  up to a plot. They rather crowd one another off the page than pro­ vide  the   unity  and   direction   the   novel needs.
Despite  the rambling and  the brooding, despite  the  confusion of  historic   process with  politics,  the  mood  of the  novel  is a compelling  one.   Helwig's  real   strength lies in his ability  to isolate  and  to define, in his sensitivity  to the  aching bones beneath  the   skin   of   experience.  As  a novel,  The  Glass Knight  is the  work  of a fine poet.

WAYNE GRADY





*   PHILIP  RESNICK.  The Land   of Cain. New Star  Books,  paperback, $6.so.  JOHN  n.   HAR­ BRON. Canada without Quebec. Musson, paper­ back,    $6.g5.  These  two   books,   one   frankly tendencious and  the  other unadmittedly eccen­ tric,  have   in  common  the  comforting  conclu­ sion  that   English Canada  can   get  along   very well  without Quebec. Philip  Resnick  sub-titles his  book   "Class   and   Nationalism  in   English Canada,"  and  writes  from   an  openly Marxist standpoint,    attempting    to    show    how    the emergence of   nationalism  has  coincided  with  class changes in Canada, and  arguing that   the Canada   which   can   survive  the   departure  of Quebec  will  be a  socialist  one.  He  ignores the crucial  question of  whether true  federalism­ as  distinct  from   Trudeau federalism-might render the  choice   unnecessary through the development  of   an   imaginative  co-operative and  libertarian socialism rather  than the  state socialism   he  appears to  favour. So  does  John Harbron, who  provides an  unusual and  some­ what    colourful  view   of   Quebec   politics    by treating the   French Canadians  quite seriously  as  Latin  Americans, and  ignoring the  brutali­ ties  of Latin American  politics   to suggest  how Quebec -and  English  Canada for  that   mat­ ter-might    benefit    from    the    examples   of Mexico,   Brazil,   etc.  in   creating  independent societies  within the  hemisphere. One   wonders whether  the  remedy  might not  be  worse  than whatever ills  afflict  us  now.
L.T.C.





NEWS FROM NOWHERE
Davey)s Criticism

IN MOST PERIODS of our cultural past, Canadian artists  in  every  field  have  had to  live  with  the  tension  between  accept­ ing  or  rejecting foreign  aesthetic  ideolo­ gies  that   came  as  part  of  their  colonial  packages.  Fortunately,   since   the   nine­ teenth century they have increasingly pre­ ferred   to  grope  for   and   to  grow   their own.  In  particular, the  sixties  American style  didn't  thrive   too  well  in  Canada. Because  our  artists  soon  realized  the  so­ called   Internationalist school  was  really America  writ   large   there   was   a   more abrupt turning away after  the usual flirta­  tion.  What use to a country  deeply  com­ mitted to  humanist  struggles and  a  con­ cern  with  documenting the  essential  hu­ man  quandaries of  culture clash  was  an ideology  dedicated to  an  assertion   of  in­ dividual will  with  an  emphasis   on  fad­ provoking innovative technique? Remem­ ber  the  New  York  art  critic,  writing of William  Ronald's large abstracts, who was impressed  with  "the overwhelming power of the  artist's will"?  And  remember how, having played  the  power  game,  Ronald came  back home with  a Ginsbergian howl reduced to clowning for  us on  radio  and T.V.?
Just   as  the  predispositions  of  our  so­ ciety and  our creative urges are becoming clearer  in  all  areas  of  our  thought and feeling,   just  as we are  coming  to  realize how   unique  and   potentially  important we are  as an alternative North  American society,  just  as our  art  is confidently be­ ginning to express ourselves without self­ consciousness  about  the  things  that  really
 
matter, Frank  Davey,  editor of  the  criti­ cal journal  Open  Letter, produces a guide to   our   contemporary  literature,   that,  propagandizing and  cleverly slanted, seeks to  assert  a  sixties  approach  to  creativity that   even  ten  years  ago  only  served   to bamboozle   a  few  of  our   young   writers  until  they found  their  own  voices. There is much  of a  feeling  in From  There To Here   that   its  production  was  provoked by  the   spate   of   thematic  criticism  of which  Survival  was  the  main   wave  and the one most clearly  nationalist. "Viewed from the seventies, McLuhan would  seem to have been more  a symptom of his time than  its master," says Davey  in his intro­ duction.  On  's
Davey  himself  and  the  sensibility  set  for
which  he is the apologist (or  would  wish to be)  can  be seen  in  the  same  light.
Davey discusses sixty contemporary authors, in   eparate articles. Roughly, however,     the    pieces    fall    into    three groups: hatchet jobs, apple-polishing  jobs, and propaganda jobs. The hatchet-jobs, although  genteel,   are   directed  towards the Atwood-Anansi group  in the main, supposedly  for  their   polemical  national­ ism although the most  vicious is reserved for   Graeme  Gibson,   whose   innovative prose at first glance  might seem  to be at­  tractive   to  Davey's  sensibility   but  which is dismissed in words which  might  equally  apply  to the work  of  many  people  whose work   Davey   espouses:  "The  elaborate narrative   methods  are   annoyingly  pre­ tentious in that  they suggest a profundity that   they   do  not   deliver." The  apple­ polishing  jobs are directed to older impor­ tant  member3  of  Canada's  literary com­ munity  and  tend  to be cautious in expres­  sion,    sometimes    damning   with    faint  praise.  The  propagandizing  articles are those  which  detail   the   work   of  writers  whose   work    seems   to   fit   easily   into  Davey's ideology of sensibility.  In  a great  number  of  cases  these  are   writers   who were  associated  with  Davey  in  the  Black

rog

OPINIONS & NOTES



Mountain derived  Tish  group, plus a few others   who  have  come  along  since  then and  have  fallen  somewhat under its  in­ fluence,  especially  some  attached  to  the Coach  House  Press in Toronto.
This  group  was, and  continues to be, a very consciously avant-garde expression, one determined to obtrude itself onto  the world   at   large   willing   or   no.   Tish,  5 ( 1g62)  contained an  editorial by David Dawson   under  Davey's  editorship  which is reprinted with  the article on Davey (written by Tish   member Bowering)   in a  blurry  miniature which  in  part reads:
After   four  issues  we  now  know  what  we want  to   do.   We   have    reached  the   stage where we can  say  NO; we can  reject a good poem   if  it   does   not   interest  us.  The  fact that it  may  be  good  does  not  alter the  fact that  it   may   not   work   the   way   we  feel   a poem  should work.  We print poems  that conform to our  taste, poems  which move somewhat in  the  same  direction as our  own.

Twenty-eight years  ago,  the  Automa­ tists of Quebec, in  their manifesto, Refus Global,  introduced  many  of  Davey's  no­ tions -especially  the  idea  of  unlocking the  creative  powers of  the   unconscious. Theirs  too  was  a  search   for  new  forms through  which  to  express  the  notions  of a  new  society.  Unfortunately  they  also went  to  another cultural centre for  their inspiration, to Andre  Breton  and  the sur­ realists of France, believing  the repression  of  the  old  order   required a  strong and internationally   acclaimed   ready-made aesthetic. But,  interestingly, this  manifes­  to, unlike  Davey's,  made  it  clear  that  an Exclusivist ideology  such  as Davey  seems to express,  was detrimental  to  their  ulti­ mate  purposes. In  fact, Borduas  later  felt that  what  the  Automatistes thought was surrealism was nothing of the  kind,  but a liberating  force  self-generated, as  it  has turned  out  to  be.  (Interesting when  we remember that  Borduas' apprenticeship and  inspiration grew  out  of  his  associa­ tion  with  the  self-taught and  remarkable traditionalist, Ozias  Leduc.  An  example


104
 of   the   old   truth  that    what    the   best teachers   teach   is  not  fact  or  technique but attitude.)
In   his  introduction,  Davey   perceives the retribalizing effects of the post-electric age  as creating conditions favourable for decentralizing publishing and other powers. These  are notions  derived, of course,  from  McLuhan as  much   as  At­ wood's  Survival  thesis derives  from Frye. This  is a  healthy   sign  since  McLuhan's contribution to the forms of contemporary literature  in  this   country   has   not   had  sufficient  notice.  (The  best  argued essay in From There to Here  by the way is the one  on  Frye  which   goes  straight to  the throat  by  seeking   to  dispossess  the   na­  tionalists   of  much  that   they  feel  to  be Frye's received axioms.) But when  Davey says that  "Mandel extended McLuhan's theories   to   literature,"  his   traditional academic bias that  one  idea derives  from another cannot  accept that  two men may independently  respond   to  the   pressures of  their  age  in  their   own  characteristic ways. Mandel's open-field  approach to criticism and verse had more to do with introducing "the  whole  man" into  areas grown   markedly one-dimensional than with  creating an  ideology  of method. In all   of   Mandel's  writings    the   fettering power of ideological bias is protested vigorously  (in Silent  Speaking Words for instance). Mandel's attempt to  open  up critical  sensibility  to a multifarious range of expression  on  its own  terms  is concor­ dant   more  with   his  view  of   the  multi­ cultural and  mosaic  society he lives in, as well as, one suspects,  with  his friendship with  Irving  Layton. The  fact  that  Man­ del   can   write   a   critical   article    called "Criticism  as   Ghost  Story"  which   sees Atwood's  Survival as  the  beginning of a new  strain  in  criticism   and  at  the  same time  write   a  congratulatory  paragraph on  the  back  cover  of To Here  attests  to his   quite    human   admiration  of   both writers'   clever  and   creative  minds,  and

OPINIONS & NOTES



also  to  his  eclecticism.  Perhaps  at   the time  of writing the  notice  for  Davey  he was not aware of the fact  that  Davey's apparently liberating rhetoric was in fact an  ideology   of  an  insidious   kind.  Man­ del's  retrospective article on the poetry  of I975   published   recently   in   Books   in Canada   is  an  interesting  article to  read in this regard.
Davey's   ideology  favours   "the  pre-re­ flective consciousness," the "phenomenol­ ogical," "multi-phasic" or "random" ap­  proach  to   form   and   content,  with   an emphasis    on   the   use   of   "particulars" over    "logicoriented"   platonic  struggles with   the   general and   the  abstract.  In these   ways,   Davey   asserts,   our   writers have  moved   beyond  the  "old  packages" and  "control" of the modernists and  their obsession  with  artificial  mythologies. In Davey's words, "Like  the electronic media themselves,  post-modern Canadian  writ­ ing  is  phenomenological in  content, pre­ senting  the  unprocessed pre-reflective phenomena of perception rather than ra­ tional  reflections  of the modernist writer." Although it is not at  all obvious from  his prose  style  in  this  book,  Davey  prefers "pure  noun    in   kinetic    context"   and "indirection." Of   course,  both   notions, usually  expressed   as  "cut  out  the  adjec­  tives"  and   "suggestion   is  stronger  than  statement" have  been around a lot longer than    Davey    has.   And   the   expression "leave  your  brains  in  the  drawer" when writing   first   drafts   has   probably  equal antiquity.
As an  example of this system's method let  me  quote Davey  on  Bowering's Geneve:

His  most  interesting and   original  poetry to date is Geneve, a  book  based  on  the  thirty­ eight   trump and  court cards of  the  Geneva tarot  deck. Here,  in   a  further  step  in  his quest    for   personal  and    literary   integrity, Bowering shuffles  the  cards into  an  order he will  not  know  until the  book  has  been  writ­ ten,   and   disciplines  himself   to   record  his spontaneous  response to  the  upturned  card
 before  turning to its successor. In this  poetry, truth  is  a  constantly developing thing, an interaction  between various phenomena  in­ cluding the  poet.

I find no mention in his lexicon,  nor evi­ dence  in  Davey's  poetry,  of  the  polysyn­ thetic   charging of  language  into   meaty  conglomerates that  signifies true  tribal  ex­ pression   with  its  tendency  to  verbalism that   makes   static  description  into   true  process,  resonant  with  ambiguity-only an  emphasis  on colloquial collages.
Davey's critical  tendencies are to favour
the lyric expression and its "Post-Layton" developments, over  the  narrative-per­ haps because of the lyric's particularity, narrative  and   longer   forms   tending  to deal  with  large  general issues.  Much of this preference derives  from  the Black Mountain  school   although  that   move­ ment's avowal  of  the  oral  was  the  more seductive reason  for  its  Canadian accep­ tance   since  the  oral  had   been   the   real basis for Canadian poetry  for generations. This   emphasis   on   the  short   form,   par­  ticularly   the  "amatory  lyric"   which   he propounds as  the Canadian development from   the   Black   Mountain  school    (see Bowering  article)  blinds   Davey   to   the long-standing tradition in Canada of the uniquely   Canadian  documentary  narra­ tive  form.   This   form   Dorothy   Livesay marvellously analyzed  for us in her essays on  that  subject  in  Canadian  Literature, Contexts of Canadian Criticism and  else­ where.    Strangely,   or    perhaps   not    so strangely,   Davey   mentions  not   a   word about  Livesay's researches  or of her  book, The  Documentaries (I g68)  in his article on  her,  preferring instead to  summarize her   influence   on   Canadian   writing  as author of some of the "most  sensitive  and powerful   poems  of  feminine sexuality  in our  literature." The   persistence  of  that form  in  its  contemporary  expression through  Pratt,  Birney   and   Dennis  Lee and  latterly Don  Gutteridge and  Gary Geddes,  goes  unremarked by  him  prob-


105

OPINIONS & NOTES



ably   because   it   refuses   to   fit  into   his theory  of  the  random, multi-phasic and pre-reflective expression  he admires. Such epics  require  work  and  intelligence  con­ sciously applied to bring  them  to fruition. Consequently  he   prefers   the   lyrics,  or "other poems," in Civil  Elegies and Other  Poems.
Further, the  lyric  as  an  expression   of
intensity   which   Livesay   has  shown   was often  a spin-off  from  the matrix of the documentary, has, in the sixties and seventies,  been  incorporated, in  the  ma­ jority of publications, as part  of a  poem­ sequence. As  such,  the  lyric  in  Canada has   been    employed   as   a   monitor  of changes   in  the   poem-cycle,  having   the same  relationship to  a  larger  conception as  the  short  story  has  to  the  rhetoric of the   novel.   Similarly,  Davey   includes   a preponderance of short  story writers  over novelists  in  his  book.  But  here  again  we see even  these  writers  expressing   a  con­ cern  not  with  the short story  in isolation  but  as  elements  of  a  quasi-novelistic se­ quence. They  include such  minor  figures as Clark  Blaise,  whose  writing will illus­ trate  what  I mean, yet strangely exclude others  such   as  Ray   Smith, of  a  much more experimental and  lusty stripe.
The  lyric as entity  unto  itself is rarely printed as such except  in small magazines (the  same  could  apply   to  short  stories) towards  which   of  course  Davey   is  pre­ disposed.  Thus  perhaps his  notions  are derived   from   that   rather   limited   view, being, as Bowering  puts it, "a  determined mover   in   the   little-press   world."  The  amatory lyric, in particular, seems to have rediscovered   the   musical    roots   it   lost when it was ripped from  the canzone  and sonetta some five hundred years ago, and it  can  now  be found   comfortably assert­ ing itself in the  best of our  popular songs. That  Cohen's lyrics  should   have  moved in  that  direction is not  entirely an  acci­ dent.  And   when    McLuhan   speaks   of popular music  as being  "the literature of

106
 the  new  generation" he  is in  great   part right.  This  movement may  have  helped make it clearer  to Mandel and  others  that Layton's  poetry   is  more   directly   con­ cerned  with moral  imperatives and myth­ making  than  with  sexual adventures.
What  Davey  has  failed  to  recognize  is that  retribalization and  the  re-emphasiz­ ing of the old oral  tradition in Canadian writing  has  led  not  to  a  pure  abandon­ ment  of "old  packages," but  a search  for ways  to  recombine   the  powers  of  those forms  into more  Homeric ones  that  deal documentarily and  directly  with  the pro­ cesses of our society and  the human quan­ daries  they  evoke.  Poets  attempt  to  cap­  ture   some  of  the  effects  of   prose,  and  prose   writers   have   attempted   to   bring poetry's  resonances and ambiguities to the novel. James  Reaney's documentary lyri­ cism  has  finally  found   its  home   in  his impressive  stage-saga   of  the  Donnellys; and   what  can  be  said  of  Michael On­ daatje's  dramatic  prose-poem comicbook lefthanded rediscovering of the  nature of American Mythmaking in The  Collected W arks  of  Billy  the   Kid?   Even  our  his­ torical  documentary prose drifts  towards poetry  and  the novel. Read  the involving social history of the  Metis  in  Woodcock's Gabriel   Dumont,  for   example.  Found poetry,  which Davey espouses as evidence of  the   use  of   particularity,  also   more  properly fits into  the  documentary mode  and  is thus more widespread than  among the  members of  Davey's   Sensibility   Set. John  Robert   Colombo   is  its  best  prac­ titioner, gleaning  from  the stubble of his­ tory   and   literature  some   extraordinary gems.  Colombo's   Canadian   Quotations, in  fact,  is his  masterwork in  many  ways, a  documentary  narrative epic  in  found form  combining an  amalgam of scholar's knowledge   and   poet's   sensibility   into   a lexicon of rich texture and  evocative particulars. (The book's  publication  per­ haps  came  too late  for Davey  to  make  a comment  on it.)

OPINIONS  & NOTES



Concrete poetry,  with  its typographical and   later   pictorial  arrangements  is  an­ other  favourite of  Davey,   but  again  it made   only  a  flurry   in  Canada.  It  was really  an  attempt  to  render those  visual ironies   of  its  preceding fad,   the  haiku, which  also  didn't lend  itself  too  well  to good  poetry  here  since  it  depended for much  of its effect  on  an  interplay of the idea    with    the    aforementioned   visual ironies  of  its  ideograms and  their  place­ ment  on  the  page.  With  a  western  phon­  etic  alphabet such  things  are  more  diffi­ cult  if not  impossible. But  the exercise  of both     of    these    internationalist   styles, though   somewhat   contrived  and   often being  neither good  art  nor  good  poetry, can  sometimes   be  "interesting" as  they say.
Davey   also   seems   unclear  what   he
means  by the words  "technique" and "form," sometimes  using them  both in the same  phrase. Since  throughout the  book there  is a  theme  in  most  of  the  articles that   the  random and   multi-phasic  form is the  poet's  means  to  counter the  "con­ trol  orientation" of  his  society,  it  would appear  that   this   anarchic   structure  is actually  form   used  as  symbol!   But,   to Davey,    literature   is    politics    anyway: "Every poem,  film or  novel  carries  in its form   political   implications." That  he should  so chide the  modernists for "pole­  mical  verse"  seems  ironic  when  all  that has  happened  in  Davey's  sensibility  is a shift of "message" from  content to form.
What   we  are  left  with,  then,  is really an  emphasis  on technique. George  Grant (again   in  a  book  that   goes  unremarked by Davey)   has  shown  us how  this  obses­ sion  with   technique  is  indisputably  the major characteristic of  American society which he woefully predicts will ultimately engulf   us.  I'm  referring  to  Technology and Empire. This  concern with technique leads Davey to write  a rather one-dimen­ sional  article about  someone  like Layton,  for  instance,  whom   he  sees  as  perhaps
 contributing to  "the fact  that  colloquial, open-form and  process  poetry  has  in  the last  decade  come  to  dominate the  older academic modes,"  rather than  appreciat­ ing  that   what   Layton  really  taught  us was  attitudinal  as  in   Mandel's  case­ how  to  relish   our   lives  and   speak   the heart's truth bravely, freely,  with as much craft   as   one   can   muster.  Rosenblatt's Bumblebee Dithyramb, the  title  poem  of which  is the  most  engaging chant-poem written     in    Canada,   with     marvellous buzzes,  shifts   and    counterpoints   which when  read  properly has  held  vast  audi­ ences spellbound in Bee-ness, can only be seen by Davey as "transparently modelled  on  the sound  poetry  of Bill  Bissett."  (As if  his  friend   Bill  Bissett   had   invented chants.)
The  "particularity" that   Davey  makes much  of might  at first glance  attach itself to Livesay's notions  of documentary form. But a closer look will show that Davey's particulars are  not  of  the  same  order  as Rudy  Wiebe's  or Dennis  Lee's  but  are in­ stead attached to the writer's ego. Davey's  Sensibility   Set  assumes   "the  concept of the poet as knowing  more than he under­ stands-a concept essential  to Bowering,  Coleman,   Gilbert    and    Nichol."   And again,   about  Gilbert,  he  remarks,  "Gil­  bert's  experiental  world  is  that   of  most men   alive   in   these   decades, mundane, trivial, thoroughly non-spectacular." In Gwendolyn McEwen's work  he admires "the   explicit   references  to  the   personal life of the  writer." Except in the  genuine talents   of  Bissett  and   others   whom   he largely  misrepresents (there is more con­ trol  in  Bissett's  work  than  Davey  would admit) Davey's  "particular" is  too  often the  banal.
A strangely  Calvinist notion  seems to govern  this  sensibility.  Although its  rhe­ toric is one of liberation and multifarious­ ness, it  exercises  itself  in  diligent exclu­ sion, of the richly imaged, the envisioned, the  informed and  the  well-wrought. For


107

OPINIONS & NOTES



years  the  Shoenberg school  tried  to steer clear  of  "accidental harmonies" in  their twelve tone constructions. Cage-style soundscapists  similarly   still   avoid   any­ thing  suggestive  of "music" in their tones. Just  as Cage  is now  seen  by  young com­ posers as an acoustic engineer rather than  a composer, so Davey may  be thought of as a linguistic engineer rather than a poet. Speaking of  Davey's  confrontations with writers  and  critics  Bowering  says, "In the majority  of   cases   his   stand    is  better­ researched and  more sensitive  in the area  of   language." Calvinist also  is  the  idea that  somehow   the  writer   is  chosen,  be­ comes  one  of  the  elect; and   once  he  is certain of  that,  all  he  has  to  do  is  let  it all  go,  man,  and  the  universal  angels  of poetry  will speak  through him.
Davey's  analysis  of Frye  is directed  to­ ward  a  justification of  this  last  position.  He  speaks  of  Frye  as  having  been  mis­ understood (true) and  misapplied (true) , then  ends: "Frye's theory  of composition
-based on  Blake's  dictum, 'the  authors are  in  eternity' -resembles that  of such contemporary  pre-reflective writers  as Gerry  Gilbert, Daphne Marlatt, George Bowering,  Victor Coleman, B. P. Nichol, and   Bill  Bissett. . . . They   are   the   only writers   who   have   shown   faith    in   the ability  of the  universe  to direct  composi­ tion   through  open,   random,   or   multi­ phasic  forms,  or  a  belief  that  the  'craft' of writing involves  a listening to 'Mother Nature'."
I'd  like to dispute that  contention. It is extremely likely, though I have  not asked him,  that  Frye came  to that  idea  through his friendship with  Ned  Pratt, whom Davey accuses of "overtly fabricated crea­ tions"  among other   things.  Just  after  he died,  Viola  Pratt told  me that  Ned  wrote purely   by  "working  with   the   gift  lines from   heaven."  Every   creative   activity  depends  on  inspiration;  there's  nothing new  in  that.  What  has  to  follow  is  an application of learned craft to illuminate

I08
 the inspiration's true  nature. As the Eski­ mo  poet  puts  it,  "Let me  breath  of  it"; and  then  begins,  "I have  put  my  words in order  on the threshold of my  tongue." To   quote   Frye  again, "The   vision  in­  spires  the  act,  and   the  act   realizes  the vision."
Where  Davey  basically  goes awry  is in his superficial  application of McLuhan's principles of communication theory  to contemporary literature. McLuhan  is a self-confessed  footnote  to  Harold  Innis, a man who worked with documentary particulars "in  the field"  to grow insights about  the nature of society of stunning brilliance. McLuhan's  ideas  are  an  "in­ nering" of his theme  that  societies  grow in  response  to  the  nature of  their  tech­  nologies. But that  man  is a  puppet of his technology  has  never  been  an  idea  held by McLuhan; as  we  approach  the  mid­  seventies   it  becomes   clear   that  under­ standing the  consequences  of  our   tech­  nologies  and  engaging in  human choice about    their    use   is   as    important   as "Understanding Media" rather than  en­ gaging  with  it  in  an  anarchic passivity, as Davey,  in his  introduction, advises  us to  do.  The  anthropologists  Bailey  and especially   Edmund  Carpenter,   McLu­ han's    earth-bound   inspiration,   under­ stand  more  profoundly that   there  exists a   symbiotic relationship between  tech­ nology and  culture, just as one  exists be­ tween  culture and  language, and  as  one exists  between  the  poet  and   his  inspira­ tion.  The   Innuit carver of   pre-Houston times  in  discovering  and  elucidating the forms hidden  in bone and ivory exercised his will neither aggressively nor  passively, but  in  such  a  way  that  through a  pene­  trative  consciousness  he  found   the  form hidden  there,   then   through  his  skill  il­ luminated it  "from within."
Although he would  deny it, Davey's sensibility, perhaps stereoscopic-even flashing   and   iridescent-is    still   essen­ tially   plastic   and   on   the   surface,  still

OPINIONS & NOTES



related to the  multiple perspective of cubism  or the veer into dreamscapes of surrealism. (The revival  of surrealism in the  Southwestern United States  might  be noted here.)   As such, although it offers participation-inviting advances on a New­ tonian single  point  of view, it  falls short of an  X-ray  vision, an  entering  into  the sttuctural essence of  things, a penetrative consciousness that   engages   with   reality  illuminating it from the inside. One  could also  contest  Davey's  comparison  in  his introduction of literature with  the pheno­ menological   basis  of  science  since  con­ temporary  science   has   given   way   to  a direct  study   of  the   invisible   laws   that  govern the  appearances of reality  rather than   of  the  interactions between  pheno­ mena.
In Crusoe, Eli Mandel's recent  book of poetry,   which  Davey  fails  to  include in his article on  him,  the  jacket  copy  warns of   "some   new   poems   whose  simplicity and  stark  diction may  startle  some readers." The last poem, Lake Wabamun, indicates clearly  the  poet's  movement to­ wards   a   penetrative  dialogue  with   the essentials  of his environment and  a recog­ nition  of  the  power  of simple  language:

each day !/step/farther/into dark water/ ... to  have  come  to  this/simplicity/to  know/
only/  the  absolute/
calm/lake/before/night

It is  this  notion  of  an  illumined  reality that   underlies Frye's  belief  in  his  intro­ duction to  Dialogues Sur  La  Traduction (between Frank  Scott  and Anne  Hebert) that,  contrary to  Robert  Frost's   notion,  poetry  CAN  be  translated;  what  cannot are  merely  "the linguistic  accidents."
The  reading of  the   work  of  over   a thousand  Canadian  writers   in   the   last few  years,  many  of them  established authors,  and   my  direct   correspondence with   them,   has  convinced  me  that   the voice   of   the   seventies,   unlike   that   of Davey's  self-ordained  avant   garde,    is
 more   concerned  with   the   outer    world than  with  the  inner: the  dive  into  our­ selves has become  the dive into  the other.  And   the   language   employed   is   more simple  and  directly  communicative  than  the esoterica  of  Davey's card-games with human    sensibility   or    his    obfuscatory articles  in Open   Letter.  Hopefully, the critic's  role  as  specialist-interpreter  will soon  become  obsolete,  and  our  literature will  be able  to speak  for  itself.

PETER SUCH


MUNRO'S WONDERLAND

ALICE   (LAIDLAW)  MUNRO,  who  sold  her first  story  when   she  was  eighteen,  was born  and  brought up  on  the  outskirts of Wingham, Ontario, where  her  father was a  fox  farmer. From   her  early   teens  she began  recording in  a vein  of reminiscent realism  the events and  people  of ordinary life  around her.  After  a  couple of  years in  the  Honours  English   programme at The University of  Western Ontario,  she married  in I 95 I a  fellow  student,  Jim Munro,  and   moved   to   Vancouver.  In I968 she  gained   widespread  recognition with  Dance of the  Happy  Shades, which won   that  year's Governor  General's Award   for   Canadian  Fiction.  A   later novel, Lives of Girls and Women ( I 97 I ) , and  another  collection of  stories,  Some­ thing  I've   Been  Meaning   to  Tell  You
( I974),  have  confirmed  her   position   as one of Canada's foremost current writers.
The  influences,  talent and  developing technique of Alice Munro as a short  story writer  are  the! particular concern of  this essay.  In   Literary   History   of   Canada ( I965)  Hugo  McPherson shrewdly  notes that  she captures the flavour and  mood of rural  Ontario and  "this region  takes  on something  of   the   macabre  atmosphere

109

OPINIONS &  NOTES



that   we  associate   with   Truman  Capote and  Carson McCullers." During an inter­ view  in  I97I/ after  acknowledging Eu­ dora    Welty   as   probably  her   favourite author,   Munro   remarked, "If  I'm    a regional   writer,  the   region   I'm   writing  about has  many  things  in  common with the  American  South....  A  closed  rural  society with a pretty homogeneous Scotch­ Irish  racial strain  going  slowly to decay." Also cited  as being  of  particular interest  were  Southern  writers   Flannery O'Con­ nor  and  Reynolds Price,  as well as Mid­ western  author Wright Morris. Their  in­ fluence,   though,  was  less  "in   terms   of form  and  style" than  "in  terms  of  vision."  Although there  are  obviously  vast  dif­ ferences   between   Munro's  own  country and  the  American South,  some  attitudes are  common to both  societies: an  almost religious   belief  in  the  land   and   the  old rural  cultural  values; a sense of  the  past and   respect  for  family   history,   however unremarkable  or  bizarre  it  may  seem  to outsiders:  a  profound  awareness of  the Bible  which  is reflected  in  the  very  lan­ guage  and  images  of speech; and  a  Cal­
vinistic  sense of sin.
Also influential in  Munro's artistic de­ velopment  was   journalist James  Agee's experiment  of   integrating   photography and   text   in  his   joint   publication  with photographer  Walker  Evans   of  Let  Us Now  Praise Famous  Men   (I g6o) . Like Agee,   Eudora  Welty   had   also   learned  through photography  "to  see widely  and at close hand  and  really for  the first time the  nature of  the  place   I'd   been   born into."2   Both   her   interest  in   grotesques  who  fail  to  understand  themselves,   and her   technique   may    be   recognized  in Munro's descriptive style. In  her  "The Ottawa Valley," for  example, the  narra­ tor  remarks significantly about  her  way of ending that  story:  "I didn't stop there,  I  suppose,  because  I  wanted  to find  out more,  remember more,  ... bring  back  all I could.  Now I look at  what  I have  done


I IO
 and  it  is like  a  series  of  snapshots,  like the brownish snapshots with fancy borders that   my   parents'  old   camera  used   to take."
The   author, in  a  passage  in  the  Epi­ logue of Lives of Girls and  Women, talks about  her  desire  to write down  and  cap­ ture  the  reality  of  Jubilee town:

And  no  list  could hold  what I wanted, for what   I wanted was  every   last   thing, every layer  of speech  and   thought, stroke of light on  bark  or  walls,  every  smell,  pothole, pain, crack, delusion, held  still  and  held  together
-radiant,  everlasting.

This  intense  feeling  for  the  exact  texture of  surfaces   and   the   tone   of   responses makes far greater demands than  any cinemagraphic technique can  adequately meet.   It   requires   a  style  more   akin   to what in contemporary painting is often called  "magic realism." Among  those loosely categorized in this group, Alice Munro has  noted  a  particular  apprecia­ tion  for  the  American  Edward  Hopper's paintings of  ordinary  places -a  barber  shop, seaside cottages, a small town street,  roadside   sna:::k bar  or  gasoline   station. Canadian   painters   like   Alex   Colville,  Tom  Forrestal   and  Jack  Chambers have  also  influenced   her.  While   all  of  these artists  express  themselves  in  individually different   styles,   the   overall   impression which they convey is one of acute  percep­ tion  of  their  environment. They  exercise the selectivity of the expert  photographer;  yet  by some  personal,  humanizing stroke each object  or nuance in their  painting somehow  appears to have  a special signi­ ficance  in  its  relationship to  the  rest  of the picture. There is a kind of  illusionary  three  dimensional aspect,  a super  realism or  magical  and  mysterious  suggestion  of a soul beyond  the objects depicted, which leaves the viewer participant with  greater insights  and  an  increased  sensitivity  to­ wards  the world  around.
Such an impression Alice Munro can create   in   her   extended  images,   which

OPINIONS &  NOTES



often  evoke in the reader an intuitive awareness of  a  story's  entire   impact. In Dance   of  the   Happy Shades   this  tech­ nique   can   be  observed   in  a  number of descriptive  passages.  Frequently  the  au­ thor   arrests   or  suspends   motion   before returning to action, as in the still painting description  from  "Thanks for  the  Ride"  of a typical small  town  near  Lake  Huron, after  the  summer vacationers have  gone home:

It  was   a   town    of   unpaved,  wide,    sandy streets  and    bare    yards.  Only    the    hardy things   like  red   and   yellow   nasturtiums,  or a  lilac  bush  with  brown curled leaves,  grew out  of  that cracked earth. The houses  were set  wide   apart, with   their own   pumps and sheds  and   privies  out  behind; most  of  them were   built   of  wood   and   painted  green  or gray   or  yellow.  The trees   that grew   there were  big willows  or  poplars, their fine  leaves greyed   with   the  dust. There were   no  trees along the  main  street, but  spaces  of tall  grass and  dandelions and  blowing thistles -open country  between  the   store   buildings. The town   hall   was   surprisingly  large,  with   a great bell  in  a  tower, the  red   brick   rather glaring in  the  midst   of  the  town's walls  of faded,  pale-painted wood.  The sign   beside the  door  said  that it  was  a  memorial to  the soldiers   who   had   died   in  the   First   World War. We  had   a  drink out   of  the  fountain in  front.

A winter  parallel to this scene is provided in  the  final  paragraph of "The Time  of Death," which  presents  various  responses to  the  fatal  scalding of  a  slatternly  wo­ man's    infant.   In    the    description    of "wooden  houses   that   had   never   been painted, with   their  steep   patched  roofs and   their   narrow,  slanting  porches,   the wood-smoke  coming  out  of  their   chim­ neys  and   dim   children's  faces   pressed against  their  windows" and   "dead gar­ dens"  the  fidelity  of  this  pictorial detail reflects the bleakness  of the situation. Yet as snow begins to fall "slowly, evenly," it blankets  in whiteness  the harshness  of the tragedy  and  the pathetic feelings of the people  involved.
While  the  Southern writers  mentioned
 earlier undoubtedly influenced Munro's descriptive style, it was their  expression  of the  profound  dignity   of  even   the  most trivial  events  of  every  day  life  to  which she especially  responded. Later, when  she first discovered Patrick White through his Tree  of Man ( 1955), this feeling  for  the inherent  beauty   of  every   earthly  thing was reinforced: for  her,  too, a lowly ant or  a  gob  of  spittle   could   be  worthy of appreciative contemplation. There is are­ markable similarity between  the  imagery  of White  and  Munro-probably because of their  similar  apprehension of  the "holi­ ness"   of   all   aspects   of   life,   in   which "beautiful or  ugly  had  ceased  to  matter because   there   was  in  everything  some­ thing  to be discovered."
The stories of Dance  of the  Happy Shades  can  be examined in  the  order  in which    they   were    written.  Three   the author labels  as  "sort  of  exercise  stories
... not  specifically  imitative, but  they  fit into  certain patterns."3  All these  treat  the maturing process of the young as recalled later,  and  depend partly for  their  effect on  a  bifocal   point   of  view  that   sees  a situation from  both  an adolescent and  an adult perspective. "Day  of the Butterfly," with its delicate echo of Benjamin Frank­ lin's   "The  Ephemera;  An   Emblem  of Human  Life," depicts with  compression and   polish   not  only   the   complexity  of youthful feelings  in  the  face of  inexplic­ able  tragedy   but  also  youth's serene  ac­  ceptance  of  death.   In   "An   Ounce  of Cure" a mature woman  wryly recalls  her humiliation  over  a  youthful drinking es­ capade. Her  sophisticated  and   intimate rapport throughout with  the reader closes on  a  delightfully conspiratorial  note  as she  revisits  her  home   town  to  attend a funeral at  which  the  undertaker was the person  responsible   for  the  unhappy  epi­ sode:  "I saw him looking  over at  me with an  expression   as  close  to  a  reminiscent smile as the  occasion  would  permit, ... I gave him a gentle uncomprehending  look

I I I

OPINIONS &  NOTES



in return. I am a grown-up woman  now; let  him   unbury  his  own   catastrophes." The  adolescent male  narrator of "Thanks for  the  Ride," a  vivid  dramatization of the   humiliation  which   the   poor   suffer from the affluent, after a bottle of bootleg brew and  "headlong sex in a bam," is stricken  by his date's farewell  double entendre  uttered  in  a  voice  "crude, ... abusive  and  forlorn."
In  the   "first   really   painful   autobio­ graphical story,"  entitled "The  Peace  of Utrecht," Helen  returns, after  a ten years' absence  on  the  West  Coast,  to  her  home town  Jubilee for  a  visit with  her spinster  sister   Maddy. To   Helen   the   local   life seems empty  and  forlorn. Her  recollection of an ailing  "Gothic" mother, "one  of the town's  possessions  and  oddities, ... strug­  gling in that house of stone  until  the very end," are depressing. An old  history  note from  High  School   days,  "The Peace  of Utrecht, 1713, brought an end of the War of  the   Spanish  Succession,"  opens   the door  to less gloomy memories of youthful activities and  suggests  a  kind  of  parallel to  Helen's  m-vn break   with   the   past  of Jubilee. This  return visit  has  not  been  a success. The sisters belong to two different worlds. A renewed association with  two tough-fibred old aunts, imbued with "a simple   unprepossessing materialism ... the rock of their  lives" and  adept at ironi­ cal acceptance of their  own eccentricities, is painful because of the way they have preserved not  only  her  mother's clothing but   also  a   vivid   memory   of  her   final agony. Their preoccupations intensify  the narrator's sense  that  "nobody speaks  the same language."
An eleven-year-old girl is the central figure in "Boys and  Girls," which  explores the  different roles  and   temperaments of the two sexes as society expects them to develop. To  the  young  narrator, who en­ joys helping her  father on  his  fox  farm  and  is much  more  useful  to  him  than  is her  younger  brother Laird, "work  in  the

Il2
 house   was  endless,  dreary  and   particu­ larly depressing; work  done  out of doors, and  in my father's service,  was  ritualisti­ cally important." The  word girl, formerly innocent  and   unburdened,   becomes   "a definition ... touched with  reproach and  disappointment."   Although   she   accepts  the   necessity  in   rural   existence   of  the death of animals, she cannot stop  herself from  trying  to  help a doomed   horse   es­ cape.   Laird's   pride   in   assisting   in   the mare's  slaughter  makes  her  realize   that  her  father's dismissal  of  the  incident­ "she's   only   a   girl" -may be   a   valid remark.
As expressed dramatically  later   in Munro's novel, there  may be "a change coming  . . . in   the   lives   of   girls   and women" when they will not be dependent on the categories  and  roles in which  men often   arbitrarily  place   and   try   to  keep them,  but  that  change has  not  yet come in "The Office"  or in "Postcard." In the first of these a married woman  decides  to get  a  place  in  which   to  do  her  writing away   from   her   family.   Her    husband, "who does not really want explanations," agrees.  Renting a  suitable office  from  a Mr.  Malley,  she soon  finds  his attentions a  source  of  irritation.  Although she  re­ jects his offer  to  install  comfortable  fur­  nishings, Mr. Malley  with  his patronizing view  of  her  writing as  a  therapeutic fe­ male  hobby  and  his craving for  intimacy is  not  easily  discouraged. In   his  "obse­ quious  hunger" to  have  his own  experi­ ences  recorded, he  details  the  calamities and  betrayals  of  trust  which  he  has  suf­ fered. Despite her annoyance the writer listens,  but  after   finding   him  one  night reading her  manuscript, henceforth  locks her  office door. When  he berates her  and suggests that she is using the room for purposes   other   than    writing,  she   con­ tinues  unrepentant until  his  trumped-up charge   that   she   and   her   friends  have  covered  the washroom  walls with  obscene graffiti  makes  her  decide  to  leave.  In  a

OPINIONS & NOTES



neat  switch  of roles she pictures him creating his  own  fiction  out  of  the  epi­ sode:

Mr.   Malley with   his  rags  and  brushes and pail   of  soapy   water,  scrubbing . . . at   the toilet   walls,  . . . arranging in  his  mind  the bizarre but  somehow never  quite satisfactory narrative  of  yet   another  betrayal  of  trust. While   I arrange words,   and   think it  is my right  to  be  rid  of  him.

In  "Postcard" a spinster  receives  a postcard from a middle-aged beau Clare MacQuarrie,  holidaying in   Florida,  on the  same  day  that  she learns  of his  mar­ riage  there.  Helen's reflections  on her  too easy   but   passive   compliance   over   the years  with  his  wishes,  and  her  ironically  confident expectations of   marriage with him  once  his mother  is dead,  lead  her  to conduct a noisy mini-shivaree outside  his home.  The  response  of "fat, comfortable sleepy-faced" Clare is simply to tell her to go  on  home   and   give  his  love   to  her momma. "It didn't bother him  too much how   I   was  feeling  . . . he  was   a  man who  didn't give out  explanations,  maybe didn't have any. If there  was anything he couldn't explain, well  he  would  just  for­ get about it."
In    "Walker  Brothers  Cowboy"  and "Red Dress-  I 946"  the  narrator is once more a young woman  recalling childhood experiences. In  the  first, she accompanies her    father,  a   travelling   salesman    for Walker  Brothers patent  medicines, on an afternoon  sales   trip   through  the   "flat,  scorched, empty" countryside. A visit en route  to an old flame,  Nora,  grown  coarse and  blousy, reveals  a new and  enchanting dimension   to  her   father's  personality. Nora's   gran1aphone   records    of   dance  tunes somehow  bring  a mood  of lightness to   the   Depression  era   of   the   'thirties, when  the rural  scene is so bleak  that  even when  children "play  I Spy  ... it  is hard to find  many  colours.  Grey  for  the  barns and  sheds  and  toilets  and  houses,  brown for  the  yard  and   field,  black   or  brown
 for the dogs. The rusting cars  show rain­
bow patches."
"Red  Dress - I 946"  traces  the adoles­ cent  embarrassment, intermittent  despair  and  exhilaration of  the  narrator  during an  episode  that  centres on  a  Christmas school  dance  for  which   her  mother has made   her   a   red   dress.   In   delightfully comic  vein  the  girl's  various  moods  and the  unexpectedly happy  outcome in  the process  of  indoctrination  into  social  and sexual    conventions    unfold.    Her    final realization neatly sums up  the  teen-ager's perennial  problem  in  measuring up  to a mother's    expectations:    "I   understood what  a mysterious  and  oppressive  obliga­ tion  I  had,  to be happy, and  how  I  had almost  failed  it,  and  would   be  likely  to fail  it,  every  time,   and   she  would   not know."
A central story  in  this  collection,  and the  "closest" to  the  author, is "Images," a young woman's recollections of an out­ ing with  her  father. An intricate series of contrasts  is  presented:  outdoor  activity and  the pervasive  aura  of an unexplained malady;   apparent   jollity    and    genuine  misery;  death  and  life; images  and  actu­ ality.  Behind  such  outward reality  as the practical  jokes   of   the   father  and   his homely  cousin  nursing  his pregnant wife, the   sensuous   apprehension  of   pungent odours,  dead  muskrats caught  in  traps, and   a  meeting  with   a  hatchet-carrying hermit  who  lives with  his whiskey-drink­ ing  cat  in  a roofed-over cellar,  at  whose initial   appearance the  narrator is  petri­ fied "like a child  in an old  negative, elec­ trified  against   the  dark   noon   sky,  with blazing    hair    and   burned-out  Orphan Annie  eyes," there are  mysterious  aspects larger  than  life. Like the gigantic shadows cast  by an  oil  lamp,  they  forbode ill but also  provide  comfort. This   is  a  strange  story,  replete with  concrete imagery  and suggestive   overtones,   that   demonstrates the  author's  acute  perception of  smells and  tastes as well as of sights  and  sounds

OPINIONS & NOTES



and  their  associations. Her  father's boots, for  example, are  "as  much  an  index  to himself   as  his  face  was.  When   he  had taken  them  off they  stood  in a comer of the   kitchen,  giving   off   a   complicated smell of manure, machine oil, caked  black mud,  and  the ripe and  disintegrating ma­ terial  that  lined  their  soles. They  were  a part  of him,  temporarily discarded, wait­ ing."
From  her  day's  tramp along  the  trap­ line  and  the  visit  to  the  hermit's  abode,  the  girl,  privy  to her  father's  acceptance of  the  oddities of  life,  returns  home  no longer   in   awe   of  her   spinster   cousin's bossiness.

Like   the   children  in  fairy   tales   who   have seen  their parents make  pacts with  terrifying strangers,  who   have    discovered   that    our fears   are   based   on   nothing but   the   truth, but   who  come   back   fresh   from   maiVel!ous escapes   . . . like  them, dazed   and   powerful with  secrets, I never  said  a word.

In John Metcalf's The Narrative Voice (I 972), after  rejecting one  critic's  inter­ pretation of "Images," Alice Munro com­ ments  that  "symbolism  is infinitely  com­ plex  and   never   completely  discovered." Her   own  is  not  consciously  planned or arranged,  but   rather   "found."  Various pictures  in the mind  begin  to move "out­ ward, in a dim uncertain way" as memory and imagination blend into action  or feel­ ing that  becomes  as true  as elements in a dream seem  true.  In  this  way,  the  title story   of   the   volume,    "Dance  of   the Happy Shades," was molded into her own terms from  an anecdote heard  at a family dinner  party.   "The I  of  the  story  is a masquerade, she  is  a  little   middle-class girl  I  never  was,  an  attempt to  see  the story through the eyes of the relative  who told  it  to me. But  once  I got  used to be­ ing  her  I  could  . . .  remember things - the  house,   the  dresses,  Mary   Queen of Scots;  I was not  told  any  of that  ... the kind  of remembering I mean  is what  fic­ tional  invention is."
 In    "Dance"  the    narrator   and    her mother reluctantly attend the  annual recital     of    aging,    quixotic,   and    im­ poverished  music teacher Miss  Marsalles. Her  diminished living  quarters  are  clut­  tered  with  old  furniture, books  and  pic­ tures.  Marauding flies  buzz  over   sand­ wiches  already  curling at  the  edges  and flat,  iceless  purple  punch   in  a  cut-glass bowl.  After  the  embarrassed young  nar­ rator  has finished her "dogged and lumpy  interpretation of Handel" she is followed by a group  of retarded children who  play various  pieces on the  piano. "There is an atmosphere in  the  room  of  some  freakish  inescapable dream." Then  one  girl  plays "something fragile,  courtly and  gay,  that  carries  with it the  freedom of a great  un­ emotional happiness." Miss  Marsalles, to whom  "no  gift is unexpected, no celebra­ tion  will come  as a surprise," announces the   title   of   the   piece,   "Dance  of   the Happy  Shades," and   those  in  the  audi­  ence  somehow   feel  that   they  have   wit­ nessed an act of magic, "perhaps not alto­ gether  in  good  taste,  ... a  communique from the other  country" where  Miss Mar­ salles lives.
This  first volume  reveals  that  Alice Munro can  treat  a wide  range  of themes with  a technical framework that  is, in her own  words,  "very  traditional, very  con­ ventional." In  all  but  three  of   these fif­ teen stories  the  point  of view is  that  of a child   or   adolescent,  modified   or   con­ trolled   to  some  extent  by   the  lapse   of time,  new  insights  and  perspectives  be­ tween  an  incident and  its  recording. In only  one  is the  narrator  or  reader's sen­ sorium  a  male.  In  each,   the  characters are  seen  in  a strongly  presented physical setting,  in  which  the  surfaces  of  life,  its texture,  sounds  and  smells  are  described  with  exactness  of  observation  and   deli­ cacy of language. The focus is fairly  nar­  row and  highly personal, in the sense that "the emotional reality," though not  the events,  is "solidly  autobiographical."

IIS

OPINIONS & NOTES



Although  the   stories   have   no  formal sequence,  thy
velopment of  a  sensitive  young  girl  into womanhood. They   capture in  dialogue, characterization and  description the prac­ ticality  and   hardships,  seasonal  rhythms  and  vitality  of rural  and  small  town  life, the  barriers between   the  young  and  the old,  the  poor  and   the  afHuent,  the  sick and  the well. Secrets and a lack of genuine communication  between  family  members  or  friends  often  lead   to  guilty  estrange­ ments;  unawareness of  a  situation, per­  haps  because  of  a  selfish distaste  for  un­ pleasant  things  or  a  fear   of  ridicule, is common; the  pressure   to  conform is  re­ lentless,  and  failure of will to make one's own  life  is  too  frequent. The  treatment of   these   various   themes   is   everywhere touched   with    humour,    compassionate irony, and  a comprehension of the absurd  and  grotesque.  Common  experiences  be­
come  unique, yet universal, expressions  of ·
what   it  means   to  be  alive   during  this period.
In  her latest  collection, Something I've
Been Meaning  to Tell  You  ( 1974), Alice Munro moves into  a larger, more cosmo­ politan  world.   Only   six  of  the  thirteen
stories are rooted in what was formerly considered Munro  country. The other seven have contemporary urban  settings, with   landscapes  as  different  as  a  train from   Calgary  to  Vancouver,  the   West Coast,  the  Ottawa Valley,  and, by  allu­ sion,   even   Europe  and    North   Africa. There  is  a  wider   variety   of   characters also,  fewer  girls  and   young  women  and  more middle-aged or elderly people.  Most of the  stories  are  longer. There is a  ma­ ture   awareness  of   the   complexity  and fragility  of human  relationships, the  con­ fusing  standards  of modern city  life, and  the conflict  of  generations. Satire is more common.  These new  aspects  are  ordered with  the  same  characteristic  perception, subtle  interplay of  emotions, droll  sense of  humour, and  ironic  compassion.

116
 Although arbitrarily chosen  thematic headings cannot adequately reflect  the overlapping and  variety  of minor  motifs in  individual tales,  four  kinds  of  stories seem  to emerge : first, those in which  are blended   a  number of  related  themes­ the  essential  individualism  of  each   per­  son,  the  impossibility   of  complete com­  prehension  of  one's  own   self  let  alone  another's,  the  self-deception,  buried   re­ sentments,  and   often   unwitting  vindic­  tiveness   of   human  personality;  second,  stories reminiscent of Dance in their  focus on  relatively simple  emotional situations; third,   stories   which   offer  especially   re­ vealing   insights   into   the  author's  tech­  nique; and  finally,  narratives in  which  a sense of personal guilt  is  pervasive.
The  title  piece,  "Something I've  Been
Meaning to Tell You," a good example of the first group,  is a finely orchestrated dramatization of the underlying tensions and ironies of close relationships. An omniscient author  introduces the  reader through the sensorium of a frustrated spinster,   Et   Desmond,  to  her   beautiful elder   sister   Char,  her   ailing   husband Arthur Comber, and  a handsome former boy friend  Blaikie Noble. Et, "who didn't like  contradictions ... mysteries   or   ex­ tremes," ironically   creates   a  private  fic­ tion  that  her  sister's  youthful  attempt  at suicide,   her   frigid   tolerance  of  Arthur, and  her  sudden death are  all  connected with     a    fatal     attraction    to    Blaikie. Through the  recurring  images and  allu­  sions time flows easily backwards and  for­ wards  as on the little stage  of Mock  Hill a  range  of  human emotions  is portrayed with   a  gently   comic   undertone  that   is conveyed  overtly  in the  names  of the set­ ting  and  characters.
Et's fantasy, plausible and ambiguous enough for a reader to speculate about  its validity,  is presented with  splendid irony. She also sees a mythical parallel when Arthur in a foursome game  of "Who am I?" chooses to be Sir Galahad:

OPINIONS  & NOTES



'You   should have  been   King Arthur ... King Arthur is your  namesake.'
'I should have.  King Arthur  married to
the  most  beautiful  woman in  the  world.'
'Ha,' said   Et,   'We   all  know   the   end   of
that   story.'

Char's  only   response   to   such   ruthless shafts  is to retreat to the  piano.  Her sud­ den   demise,   occurring  within   hours  of hearing  Et's   maliciously   fabricated  ru­ mour   that   Blaikie   has  remarried,  is  as tidy and  inscrutable as her  face  in death.  The reader  is left  wondering whether Et ever  will  tell  her  ingenuous  brother-in­ law that  his adored Char had  "swallowed  blueing  once  over  a  man   that   wouldn't have  her."
"Memorial" is a complex study  of the
sterility  involved  in excessively organizing and  ordering one's  life. The reader's sen­ sorium  is Eileen,  a relaxed  divorcee visit­ ing  in  Vancouver a  younger  sister  June  and  her husband Ewart whose son Doug­  las  has   been   killed   in   a  car   accident. Ewart  is rich  and  inoffensive. June is ag­ gressive, a participator in  outdoor sports, growth     groups,    Yoga,    transcendental meditation, gestalt-the whole gamut of modem fads. Even  in  bereavement she is apparently coolly efficient.
After  the  Memorial Service  the  house
is filled with  friends  and  neighbours. The teenagers,    clad   in   fringed    shawls   and trailing dresses, smoke pot to guitar music in the  recreation room.  The older  people drink  upstairs. To  Eileen  there  is an  air of  unreality  about   the   whole   occasion. The  funeral service seems a kind of fraud. The  affectations of  June and  Ewart­ exotic   art,   miniature   Japanese  garden,  adoption of two children of Indian  blood
-all appear  artificial  posturing. For
Eileen,  "the  only thing  that  we can  hope for  is  that   we  lapse  now  and   then  into reality."
Wandering out  later   that   night  for  a
breath   of  fresh  air,  she  allows  a  rather drunk  Ewart to seduce  her.  "Why Not?"
 she thinks, in a way that reveals how she rationalizes events  just as her  more meth­ odical  sister  "works  out" and  finishes  off her  past:

What Eileen  meant to Ewart, she  would  tell herself  later, was confusion. The opposite of June,   wasn't   that   what   she    was?    The natural thing for  a man  in  pain  to  look  for, who   loves   and   fears   his   wife.   The  brief restorative dip.   Eileen  is  aimless   and  irre­ sponsible, she  comes   out   of  the  same  part of the  world  accidents come from. He  lies in her   to   acknowledge,  to   yield-but    tem­  porarily,  safely-to   whatever  has   got   his son,   whatever   cannot   be  spoken  of  in   his house.   So   Eileen,  with   her   fruitful  back­  ground  of    reading,  her    nimble  habit   of analysis    (material  and    direction   different from  June's but   the   habit  not  so  different, after  all), can  later explain and   arrange it for  herself.

Deception of one's  self and  others under­ lies  the   parting  between   the  sisters,  as June   attempts  gropingly to   understand her son's death. Eileen, outwardly tactful and   concerned  but   actually  cold   and tired,  wants  "mostly  to get  away.  It was an  effort  to put  her  hand  out.  Acts done without faith   may  restore   faith. . . . she had  to  believe and  hope  that  was  true." In   "The  Spanish   Lady"  a   wife,  en route  home  to Vancouver, reflects on the affair  between  her  spouse  and  his  para­ mour. Two attempted letters  neatly intro­ duce  the  dichotomy of  her  attitude to­ ward  them.  The first letter  is au-courant liberal in its rationalization of her  feeling of  jealousy;  the  second  is reproachful of their   cruel   deceit.   The  crumpled   notes quickly  and  graphically illustrate the  in­
tricacy  and  frustration of the situation.
As the  narrator amusingly and  ironic­ ally reviews the details  of their friendship, she imagines  returning home to find them together   in  bed  and   responding  to  the situation in two different ways:  first, in a sophisticated  fashion   ("Would you like a cup  of  coffee,  I imagine you're   awfully tired?"), and  then in an outbreak of rage, hurling  things  at  the  bed,  screaming and


II7

OPINIONS & NOTES



beating "their bare  bodies  with  the hair­ brush." Despite her  sense of  outrage and betrayal, however,  she herself  admits: "I have  lied  as well as I  have  been  lied  to. Men  have  expressed  ravenous apprecia­ tion of my nipples and  my appendix scar and  the moles on  my back  and  have  also said  to me, as it is proper for  them  to do,
'Now  don't make  too big a thing of this,' and  even,  'I really  do love  my wife.' "
During the  train   trip  a convert to  the Rosicrucian  concept  of   previous   exist­ ences  engages  her  in conversation  claim­  ing  that  he was once  a  conquistador and she a Spanish lady whom  he had  left  be­ hind.  This  theory  of "fresh  starts" has  a certain appeal. But at Vancouver station, witnessing  the sudden collapse  and  death of an  anonymous old  man,  the  narrator feels  that  by his last  agonizing cry,

everybody  alive,   is  pushed  back.  . . . As  if we  were  all  wound up  a  long  time  ago  and were  spinning out  of control, whirring, mak­ ing  noises,  but   at  a  touch could  stop,  and  see  each   other for   the   first   time,  harmless and  still.  This is a  message; I  really  believe  it  is;  but   I don't see  how  I  can  deliver it.

Situated between  narratives of such emotional intensity  and  sombre  overtones are  two tales, "How I Met  My Husband" and  "The Found Boat,"  which  provide a kind of relief from  the  tensions  portrayed in adult relationships. Both  return to the late  'forties and   serve  as  a  reminder of the happy  aspects  of innocent young  love viewed in retrospect. The  first is a charm­ ing  presentation in  appropriately  rustic imagery  and language of a poor farm  girl, her  awe  at  her  employers' automatic ap­  pliances, coloured bathroom fixtures  and three-way mirror, her  delight in secretly trying on her mistress' elegant clothes,  her naivete and  trust  in  love, and  finally  the indulgent and  patronizing pleasure she seems to take  in her  husband's version  of their  romance: "He  always  tells the chil­ dren  ... how  I went  after  him  by sitting  by the  mailbox  every  day,  and  naturally

118
 I  laugh  and  let  him,  because   I  like  for people  to  think  what   pleases  them   and makes  them  happy."
"The Found  Boat," in the same remin­ iscent  vein   of  childhood  days,   actually suggests  by  its  vernal   setting,  heroine's name,  and  the interplay of  sunshine and  water some of the freshness of an unfallen Eden.   Two  schoolgirls,  Eva  and   Carol,  find  an  abandoned  rowboat during  the Wawanash River  spring   flood  and   help three  boys repair  it. After  the  launching down  river,  they eat  lunch  together in an abandoned railway station, dark  and  cool, its floor littered with  broken  glass and  its walls  covered  with  suggestive  graffiti.  In a  game  of "Truth or  Dare" all  agree  to strip   off   their   clothes   and   run   naked across the sunlit fields to swim in the cold river. The  new awareness and  sexual awakening which  the episode  brings is conveyed  in  delicate imagery   as  the  ini­ tial  taunting between   the  boys and  girls gives way to a spirit  of co-operation, and,  on  Eva's   part   at  least,  even  a  sense of privilege  in sharing  work. Although both girls  apparently  return   to  their   former  mocking   attitude   toward   the   boys,  the "pride,  shame,   boldness,   and   exhilara­ tion" of the experience in maturation will obviously  remain.
Among   the  stories  most  arresting for their  critical insights  into  the author's technique are "Material," "Marrakesh," "Tell  Me   Yes  or   No,"    and    "Winter Wind."  "Material"  tells  how   a  writer, Hugo,  transforms a personal incident into fiction. His former wife muses about his publication  with   devastating  satire   on how  "Outrageous writers  may  bounce from one blessing to another nowadays, bewildered, as  permissively   reared  chil­ dren   are   said   to  be,  by  excess  of   ap­  proval." Mocking the  book  jacket  blurb,  tearing   apart its  half  lies  of   Hugo's ex­ periences    as   "lumberjack,   beer-slinger, counterman,"  she  ridicules   his  image  as "not  only fake but  out  of date."

OPINIONS & NOTES



You  should  have   said   you'd  meditated  for a  year  in  the  mountains of  Uttar  Pradesh; you should have said you'd taught Creative Drama to autistic children; you should have shaved  your   head,  shaved your   beard, put on   a  monk's cowl;  you   should  have   shut up,  Hugo.

This  is a very complex, ironic  and comi­ cal story that  touches  on such themes  and  tensions  as the amorality of  artists,  creat­ ing  from   "scraps and  oddments, useless baggage," a  "hard and  shining, rare  in­ timidating quality";  the  tenuous tie  that  holds  men  and  women   together in  love, "as  flimsy as a  Roumanian accent  or  the calm curve of an eyelid, some half-fraudu­ lent  mystery''; the  way  that   men,  what­ ever their  temperaments, know "how  to ignore  or  use things....  They  are  not  at the  mercy."  Dialogue, description, and reflection  all unite  in a realistic  and  ironic interplay of character and  events  to evoke in  the  reader  a rich  and  varied  response.
In spite   of  its  exotic   title   the   main action  of "Marrakesh" is set  in  the  Wa­ wanash  River  district. Related  from  the point of view of an omniscient author, the story's  chief  sensorium is a  retired school teacher,  Dorothy. Her   granddaughter, Jeanette, college  professor, wearing "jeans and  a peasant blouse" arrives in a foreign sports  car  for her annual visit. Her  lament  that "technology and  progress are destroy­ ing  the  quality of  life"  in  the  old  town reminds  Dorothy  of  her   own   youthful love of the picturesque and  hatred of change. In maturity, though, even super­ markets  with   their   asphalt  parking lots "would do for her  to look at, beautiful or ugly had  ceased  to matter, because  there was  in  everything  something to  be  dis­ covered."
One  evening she  listens  while  a neigh· hour   Blair  King   and   Jeanette over  gin and  tonic  exchange various travel experi­ ences, including a strange story with  sug­ gestive  overtones about  robbery and  at­  tempted seduction by Arab  youths in Mar­ rakesh.  Later that  night,  unable  to sleep,


120
 Dorothy   sees   her    granddaughter  and Blair  unclothed  in  his  porch,   "guzzling and  grabbing ... relishing  and  plunder- ing  each   other....  helpless  and   endan· gered  as  people  on  a  raft  pulled  out  on the  current. And   nobody   would  call  to them." Shaken  by this sight,  Dorothy re­ treats   to  her  own   porch, where   with  a wry   comic   note    she   reminds  herself: "Strength is necessary,  as  well  as  some­ thing  like  gratitude, if  you  are  going  to turn  into  a lady  peeping Tom at  the end of your  life."
In  "Tell Me  Yes  or  No"  a  narrator has  an   imaginary  conversation  with   a dead  lover  a3 she  recalls  their  affair  and tells of a later  trip  to his home  city. Dur­ ing  this  visit  she  haunts  the   bookstore  which  his widow  operates  until  one  eve­ ning  the latter  gives her  a bag of opened  letters  and   asks  her   to  leave.  Ironically the  letters  are  not  hers,  but  those  of an­  other   woman   who   has   become   frantic because  she  has  not  heard   recently  from her lover.
Moving with  the  temporal fluidity  of internal  monologue, the  story  is  rich  in imagery,    descriptive  detail,    and    inner revelation  as  the   narrator  attempts  to understand the  deceased  as well as  their relationship for  the  previous   two  years. Their initial meeting had  taken  place  in an  age  of  "childbearing ... docility  ... love of limits" when  both  lived with  their spouses on the edge of a West Coast cam­ pus.  Years  later,  the  now  divorced  nar­ rator  and  the  journalist  meet  again  "un­ expectedly in  a  city  where   neither  ... lived."  After  a  pleasant lunch   reminisc­  ing  together in  a  way  that   rekindles  the earlier    mutual    attraction,   they    drive through the  twilight   to  meet  her  plane.  As the  narrator notes,  "love  is not in  the least unavoidable, a choice is made." The surrender in  a  noisy  airport hotel  is  the beginning  of   an   affair    that    is  chiefly nourished  by  an   exchange  of  fanciful letters.  He  writes,  "I do  think  of you I

OPINIONS & NOTES



suppose  as a warm  and  sentient   flood ... and  I  have  the  normal   human  concerns with  being  overwhelmed, which  is  what floods do." She  replies  in coyly suggestive Emily    Dickinson    fashion    that    she   is "nothing but  the  tamest  creek  you could go  wading  in,"  and  continues to  play  a kind  of  charade designed   to  make  their love  seem  "harmless and   merry."  Now, faced  with  his loss, she reflects

how  women   build   their   castles   on  founda­ tions   hardly  strong  enough  to   support  a night's shelter; how   women  deceive  them­ selves  and   uselessly  suffer,  being  exploitable because of  the  emptiness  of  their   lives  and  some  deep-but  indefinable, and  not  final!
-flaw  in  themselves. And  further and  fur­
ther    along    this   line    which    everybody   is
learning these   days  like  an  easy  song.

Virtually the  last  letter   from  her  un­ known  rival  begs the  dead  lover  to write and  "please, tell  me  yes or no."  Imagin­ ing  the  life of this  woman,  who has suf­ fered  like  herself,  the  narrator can  only answer  the  persistent  question "How are we  to  understand  you?"  by an  imagina­ tive dismissal  of  the  entire  experience:

Never  mind. I invented her.  I invented you, as far  as  my  purposes go.  I invented loving you  and   I invented your  death. I have  my tricks  and  my trap doors,  too. I don't  under­ stand their  workings at  the  present  moment, but   I  have   to  be  careful,  I   won't   speak against them.

"Winter Wind" returns to Wawanash with  a woman's reminiscence of a winter storm  during her  high   chool
cause of the weather she stays in town for a few nights with her grandmother and great-aunt  Madge,  whose   house   is  as "cozy  as  the  inside  of  a  nutshell." The family  picture of her  great  grandparents on  the  wall  fascinates the  girl  and  sym­ bolizes the personal  sacrifices made by her ancestors  to carve  out  an ordered  way of life.

The  parents are   seated. The  mother  firm and   unsmiling, in   a  black   silk  dress,   hair scanty  and  centre parted, eyes  bulging and
 faded. The father handsome still,   bearded, hand-on-knee, patriarchal.  A   bit   of   Irish acting here.  A  relishing of  the   part,  which he might as well relish since  he cannot now escape   it?  When young   he  was  popular in taverns; ... but  he  gave   up  those  ways,  he turned his  back  on  his  friends and   brought his family here,  to take  up  land  in  the  newly opened Huron Tract.  This photograph was the sign and record of his achievement; respectability, moderate  prosperity, mollified wife  in  a black  silk  dress,  the  well-turned­ out   tall  daughters.

Commenting on  the  different marriages of these two sisters and especially of the grandmother's "self-glorifying" renuncia­ tion of a former lover, the narrator muses about  the accuracy of her depiction:

... how   am   I to   know   what  I  claim  to know? I have  used  these  people, not  all  of them,  but   some   of   them    before.  I  have tricked   them    out    and    altered  them  and shaped them  any  way  at  all,  to suit  my  pur­ poses. . . . I stop   and   wonder, I  feel  com­  punction. Though  I  am   only   doing   in   a large  and   public  way  what has  always   been done,  what my mother did, and  other people  did,  who  mentioned to me my grandmother's story.

Yet   the   implication   that    her    grand­ mother  has   been   "stubbornly,   secretly,  destructively romantic" has  not  been  in­ vented:  "we  get  messages  another  way,
... we have  connections which  cannot be investigated, but  have  to  be  relied  on."
In   many   of  the  stories  already  com­ mented   upon  there  can  be  noted  an  ex­ pression  of a sense of guilt  for  uncharit­ able  thoughts, acts  of deceit  or omission. In  the  last  group  to  be  discussed,  regret  and  remorse  are pervasive motifs. "Walk­ ing  on  Water," set  in  Victoria and  sug­ gested  by a  publicity stunt there  of  tele­ vision  comic  Paul  Paulsen, describes  the tragic  failure of  a  young  Zen  adherent's experiment in  psychic  control over  mat­ ter,  as seen  through the  perspective  of a retired   druggist. The  difficulty  of  bridg­  ing   the  generation   gap   is  vividly   por­ trayed   in   realistic   dialogue  and   sharp imagery,   as  he  attempts  to  understand

121

OPINIONS & NOTES



the  sense  of values  of  the  flower  people. His  touching  concern  for   their   welfare and  poignant foreboding reach  a climac­ tic  note  with  his  eventual  feeling of dis­ orientation  in   their   brutally  existential dismissal  of the  victim's fate: "he  wasn't  one  of  us. . . .  he  was  fairly   old. . . . If that's what  he  was going  to do,  then  no­ body ought  to stop  him,  should  they?  Or  feel sad about him."
In "Forgiveness in  Families" an  elder
sister   recollects    with    biting    satire   the career  of her  hippie   brother, "a  child  of nature," as he calls  himself.  His early in­ dolence    was   a   constant  worry   to   his widowed    mother:   "Until  recently   the country did  not  pay  you  to  sit  on  your uppers    and    announce   that    you    had adopted a  creative life-style."  But  in  his mid-thirties, decked  out  in long hair, san­ dals  and   a  priest's   robe,  he  can  collect  welfare.  When, partly because of his own neglect,   his  mother is  taken  to hospital seriously  ill, he  brings  along  a  troupe of his fellow  dervishes  for  an occult  healing  ceremony  to  which   she  later   attributes her remarkable recovery. Although grate­ ful,  the  sister  is  shocked  to  realize  that  subconsciously she had  wished her mother to  die  as  proof of her brother's careless irresponsibility.
In  "Executioners" an   older   woman anaesthetizes  with    whiskey   unpleasant memories "running  underground ... spurting  out   at   another  place" in  her mind.  Taunted as a girl by a bootlegger's son, she  dreams of vicious  revenge  upon him, of "driving spikes into  his eyes" and jabbing  him  with  his knife  until "venom­ ous  substances   would   spurt  and   flow." She  also  recalls  playing  happily with  the family   of  her   parents'  grotesque  maid,  whose  two  brothers  frolicked like  magic clowns. Actually they are  tough  and  ruth­ less to enemies  like the  bootlegger. When  his house  is set afire and  both  he and  his son   perish   in   the   flames,   the   narrator

122
 realizes  that  she has  been an  accessory  in spirit  to the actual executioners.
"The  Ottawa  Valley," final   story  of this  volume,  is  another  reminiscence of a childhood experience by a mature woman. During  World   War   II she  ac­ companies  her   mother  on  a  visit  to  a blunt-tongued but  good-natured  spinster cousin,  Aunt  Dodie, in  the  Ottawa Val­ ley. The woman reminiscences about such amusing incidents as the  time  they sewed the fly up on a summer worker's overalls,  plied  him  with  lemonade, then  watched from a hiding  place  as he tried  to relieve himself,  "fairly  clawin' and  yankin' every which  way"  until   he  "just finally  went past caring and gave up and  ripped down his overalls  altogether and  let 'er  fly." In recalling   this   and    other   stories,    the cousins'  versions often  vary and  their dif­ ferent   responses  are  comically  revealing of their different temperaments and sensi­ bilities.
During the  trip  the  girl  is made  pain­ fully aware  of her  mother's  deteriorating health,  scientifically  documented  in  the story  by  the  inclusion  of  an  entry   con­  cerning  Parkinson's disease  from  a medi­ cal encyclopaedia. Even  in simple  games like  matching bits  of  recollected poems, the generally  shared  knowledge of the ill­ ness brings  embarrassment as the  subject of death inevitably  recurs.  Preoccupation with  her  mother, the  narrator  admits, is central in the story:

it is to reach  her  that this  whole  journey has been   undertaken. With what purpose? To mark   her  off, to  describe, to  illumine, to celebrate, to  get  rid, of  her; and   it  did  not work,  for  she  looms   too  close,   just   as  she always   did.   She   is   heavy   as   always,  she weighs  everything down, and   yet  she  is  in­ distinct,  her   edges   melt   and   flow.  Which means  she  has  stuck   to  me  as  close  as  ever  and  refused  to fall  away,  and  I could  go on,  and   on,  applying what skills  I  have,  using  what   tricks  I  know,  and  it  would  always  be the  same.

The spectre  of a  gifted,  eccentric and

OPINIONS &  NOTES



ailing  mother haunts much   of  Munro's fiction,  and  appears either  briefly or  as a dominating figure  in  several  of  the  col­ lected stories. She is a central character in Lives  of Girls and  Women.  Frequently associated   with  her  is a  daughter whose growing  maturity brings  a sense  of  guilt for   her   own  lack   of   understanding  or compassion. Another   less  individualized but   equally   recurring  figure   in  various aspects   is  the   man,   whether  single   or married, who uses or ignores  women  and events  at  his own  whim.  There is also a whole range  of  other characters that  have been  imaginatively created out  of vividly recalled  memories. For the most part  they are    unsophisticated   people    who    only vaguely comprehend the meaning of their own lives. The  reader is taken  with  them through  a  series  of  rather  subtle,   low­ keyed  circumstances  in  which   the  con­ tinuum is often   disrupted  and  then  re­ established in a way  that  alters  both  the reader's as  well  as  the  characters' emo­ tional  awareness,  and leads  them  both  to a  significant  or  fresh  conception of  the world.  Most  of  the  tales  are   presented from  the first person  point  of view. Even in  those few which  happen to be written  in  the  third  person  the  narrative voice is that   of   the   central   figure.   This   tech­ nique allows an intimate rapport between reader  and narrator. The blending of past and  present often  generates the energy of the  story  as  the  perspective  continually shifts.  In  some  tales  the  first  paragraph is a microcosm of the whole; in others  the ending contains   the  vital  clues  required to reveal  the full deployment of fictional forces. Some move forward more  by dia­ logue  than  description. In   virtually  all, the  rhythm  is achieved by a  balance of the parts  which defies rational analysis.
Morley  Callaghan once  remarked that good  stories  are  written "out of  a  kind of feeling for life and  people  drained through whatever peculiar intellectual system  you  have,  or   whatever  kind   of
 heart   you  have." Alice  Munro's  special distillation of  personality  is  revealed   in the quiet  humour, gentle  irony, and  com­ passionate  understanding with  which  she treats  her themes. Her  uniqueness lies not only  in  the  special  angle  of  vision  from which  her characters are seen, but  also in the lasting impact which  they have on the reader. They   are   memorable for  them­ selves as well as for their  symbolic signifi­ cance.  Many   are   representative  of  par­ ticular life  pattems,  revealed  often  in  a single picture, in the fashion  of Sherwood Anderson,   of   "lives   flowing   past   each other." But  they  still  remain  individuals who  become  permanent  personal posses­ sions of the reader. Her writing is original, not  for  its technical  innovation or  inter­ pretations of  the  atomic age,  but  rather for its fragile insights  into  the complexity of  personal  relationships. Her   narratives spring   from   an   imaginative,  intelligent and  unpretentious individuality to which fiction is a natural recourse. They are  in­ dependent,  absorbing,  and   realistic   ex­ pressions   of  the   profound  disturbances and magic of ultimate  human reckonings.

BRANDON CONRON


NOTES

1 With   Mari   Stainsby,  British   Columbia   Li­ brary Quarterly, 3.'i (July 1971), 27-31. See also     Graeme    Gibson,    Eleven     Canadian  Novelists  (Toronto, 1973), p. 248.
2   One   Time, One   Place:   Mississippi   in   the
Depression/A Snapshot   Album    (New  York,
1971 ), p. 3·
3 See   John  Metcalf,  "A   Conversation  With Alice  Munro," Journal  of Canadian Fiction, I, 4  (Fall 1972), 54-62.








123

OPINIONS & NOTES



CRITICAL  STREETS
Tallman's Criticism

THE   HOUSE OF  CRITICISM,   like   Henry James' house of fiction,  has as many win­ dows  as there  are  critics  to look  through them.  However, the  reader of  Canadian literary criticism   might   be  forgiven  the impression   that    the   Canadian   critical house  is  practically  windowless   save  for one  large  pane  in  an  upper   back   room where   most  of  the  country's  critics   are crowded,  jostling each  other  in  an  effort to  look  out   at  the  same   view:   the  fa­ miliar   bleak  landscape,  the  one  or  two small figures bent  in postures  of suffering, the  solitary  house  in  the  distance, prob­  ably a farmhouse.
Few windows  of the critical house  face the  street,   the  neighbourhood,  the  c ty, the  social  scene.  E.  K.  Brown,   lookmg down   from   the   top   floor   front  during World  War  II, intelligently and  broadly surveyed   the  economic, cultural, and literary scene  of the  time  and  concluded gloomily  that  the  social  conditions of the country were  not  friendly to  creative composition and  not  likely  to improve as long as literature and  society remained separate and  the  fate  of literature left  to
the  hope   for  individual  geniuses.
Robert McDougall, twenty  years  later, complained in "The Dodo  and  the Cruis­ ing Auk,"  published in Canadian  Litera­ ture,  that  Canadian writing, especially  its fiction,   singularly  lacked   any   social   or cultural consciousness,  that  there  was an "abnormal absence   of   feeling  for  class" and  for  the  relationships between   people within   a  society.  An  extraordinary fear and self-doubt, originating in puritanism, prejudice,  and   in   a   theory    of   nature which  emphasizes  an  individual's  psycho­ logical  quest  before  any  collective effort, resulted  in this lack of  social observation;
-and "as the private worlds enlarge, the


124
 worlds of social relationship diminish." A more   significant   reason   McDougall  ad­ vanced,  however,  had  to do with  the uni­ formly  academic training of most  of  our writers  then,  who  came  from  well-to-do  middle-class  backgrounds,    lived    their formative years  in  institutions of  higher  learning, and  produced prose  and  poetry written   "neither  by   Brahmins  nor   by proles" -literature neither high nor low, merely  academic. "And  how," McDou­ gall  asked,  "is  one  to  expect   from  these closed, circumspect, and  intellectually sophisticated ranks a dynamic view of society?"
What  McDougall wrote  then  about Canadian  writers   was   largely   true   of critics  as  well-indeed they  were  often the  same   people.   And   while   there   are some writers  now writing out  of different and  more varied  backgrounds and experi­ ence,   the   prevailing  criticism   still   pre­ sents  the  same  frigid,   static  scene  Mc­ Dougall   saw.  Northrop   Frye's   cultural and   social  essays,  however  brilliant  his literary   theory,  dispose   one   to  imagine  that  his critical window  is stained glass or that,   like  the   Lady   of  Shalott  in   her tower,   the  world   comes   to  him   in  the darkened reverse paraphrases of a mirror.  In  the  critical   vision  of  Atwood, Jones, and  others,   the  Gothic  or   tragic   land­ scape and  the private world  predominate
-vacant  eye-like   windows    or   blinds
drawn  down.
No one should insist that criticism  must merely  reflect  literature  any  more  than that   literature must   reflect  society.  Mc­ Dougall  was not asking  for  a sociological literature but  for  a  "kind of  turbulence that  encompasses  the  whole  of  the  social mosaic"   and   makes   possible   within   it, freedom  of choice and movement for the individual. Henry James, having built  his house  of  fiction,  goes  on   to  insist  that house, windows, and passing  human scene are  as nothing  without "the posted  pres­ ence  of  the  watcher,"  the   eyes  at   the

OPINIONS & NOTES



window, and  what  those eyes see. And by knowing of what  this watcher has been conscious,  James says, "I shall  express  to you  at once  his  boundless   freedom and his 'moral' reference."
There is  something  peculiar  and  re­ stricted in  a  "moral reference"  which  is consistently and  chillingly  devoid  of any sense of communities of  men  or  the  exis­ tence  of men  as city dwellers,  as citizens. A repeated emphasis, in literature and  in criticism, on  Land, on  nature as  terrible  and overwhelming, on private anguish, is exclusive.  Indeed, I would  argue, though it  is  not  the  principal intention  of  this article, that   such  emphasis is  a  way  of excluding from a place and  a share  in the literature  all   those-the	majority  of people -who have  no history  of contact with  "the land," who  can  never  own  it, who live in cities, are  cosmopolitan. They are   excluded  by  experience  foreign   to them  and  by threat, from  something that is valued  in  this society-intimacy  with and   ownership  of  land,   and   therefore barred from  a sense that  they are  part  of that  written world.  In  this literature and criticism  of ownership, "back  to the land" stories    (re-claiming it),   novels   about restoring or returning to ancestral homes, tales  of  getting  in  touch   with   roots  or family   trees,   critical   reiteration  of  our wilderness heritage, are further versions of the same  exclusivity.
One   critic,   though, for  nearly  twenty years, has been looking  through a ground floor front window at the street and city outside,   keeping   a  clear,  compassionate, and  lively eye on the "godawful streets of man." That phrase,  borrowed from  Jack Kerouac, is the title of a collection of Warren Tallman's essays making up the No. 6, Third Series issue of Open Letter, edited  by Frank Davey  and  published by Coach  House  Press. As with Open Letter's previous  collection of Sheila  Watson's stories  and  criticism,  it's  a  valuable gathering,  I 2    essays  covering   a   period
 from  I958 to I973, and including three pieces printed for  the  first time.  Tallman has been and  is an influential teacher and presence  at the University of British Columbia,  highly   regarded  by  students and  writers  besides the  Tish  poets  he has been  associated   with.  As  a critic, he  is known  especially  outside  Canada for  his articles   on  American writers  (reprinted in   this  book)   and   as  the   editor,  with Donald Allen, of The Poetics  of the  New American Poetry.  This  Open Letter  col­ lection  allows  readers to see clearly  what  Tallman's main  concerns have  been over the years. Those  concerns, it seems to me, have   been   urban   and   communal,  local and    linguistic,    continental  and   demo­  cratic.
The  first essay, on  Kerouac's style,  be­ gins with a vision of all cities fallen in the post-World War  II world,  a grim sight, a grim  fall,  but  perhaps fortunate, for  out of the  wreckage  a  new  city  can  be built.  Not  the  same  kind  of  city,  but  the  city re-occurring as speech: "almost  the  only workable    polis   in   our   time   is   words, speech,   language,  because   they  form   a plane    at   which   communication,  com­ munity,  communion  are   still   possible." Throughout the essays, Tallman attempts to describe and discuss this city and  its inhabitants, the verbal  neighbourhoods writers   fashion   to   make   themselves  at home, and  the condition of those who are excluded or cast out from  the city into silence. Language, in the Beat collapsed Kerouac world,  is a means  of survival, improvised to the  rhythms and  stresses of tl1ose godawful streets,  words  driven  by the  energies  and  needs  of  living.  If Kerouac's outcasts   have   no  more  com­ munity   than   the  given  moment,  his  fic­ tions create  possibilities for  the future. In his trust  in fictions,  in making  the  world in language, Tallman gives the writer an important  social  function, at   the   same time as he urges him  to come down  from

125

OPINIONS & NOTES



his lonely prerogatives and  listen  to the sounds  of those  mean  streets.
Kerouac's beat  songs,  Ginsberg's mad howl songs, the broken bell songs of Hart Crane are  the  "music of  this  world," a music which seems to Tallman the true sound of modern language, and  a world where communion is not a religious sacra­ ment   with   hymns   but   a  happy  coinci­ dence  of  friends   meeting on  the  corner,  all  trying  to  tell  the   news  at  once.  Not that  "Jerusalem" isn't  a fine anthem, but most  of  us  don't live  there.  Central  in Tallman's writing is his insistence  that  an ear   finely  tuned   to   the  grand   arias   of Theme,  Meaning,  Idea, and   Art  won't  hear  the stret
for   help-just  outside  the   door.  That
deafness  is a crude distortion of all music. In  "Wolf  in  the  Snow:  Modern  Cana­ dian  Fiction" (recognized for  years  as a major critical article),   Tallman  writes that   "finer   is  relatively   crude,  because frequently untrue, and crude can  be rela­ tively  fine.  All  too  often,  in  fiction  as in life,  those  pretensions which  we seek out because  they  make  us fine  provide   false furnishings for  the actual house  in  which we live. This  fine is crude."
The   juxtaposing   and   transposing  of high  and  low, exalted and  mean,  shapes all  of  Tallman's essays. He  sees, for  ex­ ample,  that   the  disturbing split  between form   and   language  in   Hugh   MacLen­ man's  novels results  from  the  pretence of intellectual  depth   MacLennan   imposes on  his  characters,  an  impossible   fac;ade, "so  false  that   [he]  is  incapable of  ani­ mating it  because   it  has  so  little   to  do with   the  profound  naivete   and   relative  crudity  of   response   in  which   MacLen­ nan's  true  force  as  an  artist   is  rooted." The   Irving  Layton  that    Tallman  ad­ mires is not the acclaimed rhetorical Prospero  but   the   Caliban  who   is  "not afraid to  reveal  the  badness  of  his  bad­ ness,  the  inner  imbecilities and  cruelties  that  gnaw  and  fester  those  times  the  self
 turns  savage  under the  whips  and  knives of the  times. Most  of us cooler  customers haven't nearly his nerve for letting the crudity  show  even  though it  can  be  the very  ore  in which  vital  energies  are locked."
Not  surprisingly, then,  Tallman began to  write  about   Mordecai  Richler before that  author had  much   Canadian  recog­ nition.  As well as being  a critic  who  has also  gone  to  the  streets  for  his  subjects,  Richler  has   in   his   fiction   consistently played   off   the  crude  and   the   fine.   A "battle of  the  brows"  Tallman calls  it, high  against   low,  where  the  lows  have  Richler's "special  affection because  their  wackiness   provides   the   'inner  life,'   the responsive   energy,    that    lends   shaping force  to  his  imagination." And  Tallman sees   that   Richler's  best   writing  comes when he tramforms the grimmest, most tawdry,   ugly,  and   stupid   aspects  of  life into  high  comic  vision.
This   double   vision  of  life  derives   in English   literature,  especially   in   satire, from  Swift,  who  understood that  every­ thing  spiritual and  exalted  in our  lives is mocked  by  a  gross  and  corporal  parody  of it which  we try to ignore. Tallman and  Richler  share  a sense  that  the  crudity of the  fool  who  persists  in  his  folly  is finer than    the   refinement  of   a   middle-class establishment liberal,  the  real  low-brow.  It's   a  conservative   position:  man   had better  attend to  the  business  of living­ and   writing-and  leave  the   towers   of organization	and	ideology 	to 	those climbers  who  want   to shut  out  the  low­ down   music   of   turbulent  St.   Urbain streets.   Duddy   Kravitz,  in   his   crude originality, is a mug who "can  make  with the  music,''  and   "the   music  in  Duddy Kravitz is where  in novels it always is, in the  style."  It may  be a  harsh  music,  but "What are  the disorders,  dissonances,  and disarrangements of  modern  writing   but the bells that  break  the towers."
It is in  this  broken  world  of language

OPINIONS  & NOTES



the writer  lives, his writing no more com­ plete  nor  whole  than   his  life,  than  any life. "Life  is the  value," and  "the visions of fiction" a major way  of  knowing  that life,  of  knowing   "the   actual  house   in which   we   live."   The   writers  Tallman goes to are  those  who most  seem  to  him to enter  the  language,  live  in  it,  and  re­ enact  the  energies  of  living,  whose  styles appear to  improvise  a  world   in  words. William   Carlos  Williams' localism,   "his intensified  preoccupation  with   the  mat­  ter  at  hand"; Robert Greeley's  domestic, related   world   of   concentrated   percep­ tions;   Charles  Olson's   "rooted"   intelli­ gence  prowling  the  home  of  his  body in the  neighbourhood  of  particularity ("the body  in  which   we  dwell,   our   eyes  are home,  our  ears,  our  intellects, emotions
-a human  house") ;  Robert Duncan's long  residence  in "the natural habitat of poetry"; D. H. Lawrence's animating consciousness  mediating  between   the world's  life and  the  rich  images  of mind;
-Tallman writes of these.  And  of  Gins­ berg,   Kerouac,   Richler,   whose   words travel   the  lousy  neon  holy  pavement of New  York,  San  Francisco,  Montreal.
If other  critics  have  written at  greater
length about all these writers, few have entered into   the  spirit   of  their   writing, that  is, their style, in quite Tallman's way, his   own   style   quickly    taking    on   the rhythms  and syntax of, say Kerouac or Greeley, and  even, in one essay, of Henry James.  It's  active  writing, in  the  act  of staying close to shifts of perception in a writer,  to  the  text  at  hand. Tallman has his  own   stylistic   marks,   too,   quick   to fashion epigrams, borrow  from  nursery rhymes,   folk   tales,   popular  slang   and song.  If sometimes   a  little  fanciful, it's animated writing, and  never  dull.  Meta­ phors of music and  dance, absorbed  from Williams,    are   intrinsic   to   his   critical  vocabulary:   he's   always   aware   of  the voice and accent  of  language on the page. Pictures,  too,  are  everywhere. In  several
 essays,  Tallman  turns    the   action    and theme of novels or poems into canvases, critical   landscapes of  Lawrence's  novel­ las,   Greeley's    poems,    some   Canadian novels. These  pictures are  less landscapes, though,  than   portraits,  with   people   ar­  ranged  from  foreground  to  background, illuminated and  evaluated  by the  light  of their  varying  energies.  The human image predominates, and  if  there  are  beasts,  if this continent is a grey wolf whose shadow  is underneath the  snow,  the beast  is soon transformed   into    "old   mother   North America  with  her  snow  hair,  her  moun­ tain  forehead, her  prairie eyes, and  her wolf teeth,  her wind songs, and  her vague head   of   old   Indian   memories."  Time  turns  into place in "the  vicinity  of World War 1," and  place into  time at "long past World War  II o'clock." We are  mothered by the land  we live on  and  at  the end  of "Wolf  in the Snow,"  even  desolate  Cana­ dian  houses  are  repossessed,  the  gods  of life  returned to  them.
Houses,    as   bodies,    as   language,   as houses,  safe  as,  are  everywhere in  Tall­ man's   essays,  and   houses   return   us  to James,   certainly  the   guiding   sensibility behind   this  criticism.   There  among  all those moderns  is the writer Tallman calls the  "most  complete of  our  artists," who wrote  again  and  again  of  the  paradoxes of crudity  and  refinement,  the  ironic  re­ versals  of  high  and   low  in  society,  the ambiguities  of  value   in   Old   and   New worlds.  James   understood  the  principles of  exclusivity   in  society,  and   saw,  too, society  as  a  metaphor  for  inner   condi­  tions.  He  composed  social  portrait after  portrait, pictured  houses  and  rooms,  but they are  canvases  tracing the  motions  of
a mind,  and  structures opening into  an intelligence and  out  to  the  reader. The
intricate perceptions of  James  or  one  of his hyperconscious characters  are  as  pre­ cise  as  those  of  Olson's  "proprioceptive man," and  the inclusivity of a James  sen­ tence  has  the  same  origins  as  the  com-


127

OPINIONS & NOTES



prehensive attention  shifts  in  a  Williams story. Tallman's modernist paradigm of "self as subject, writing  as verb,  living  as object" echoes  the  architect of the  house of fiction: artist  as consciousness,  form  as medium, human scene as object. And "reader as correspondent" puts  the  same obligation  on   us  as  James' exhortation that   we  be  "finely  aware and   richly  re­ sponsible." Olson's   biological  metaphors of "sensibility within  the organism" recall James' image  of sensibility as a soil out of which  subjects spring.  "Experience ... is our   apprehension  and   our   measure  of what  happens to  us  as  social  creatures" writes James, a measure  variable enough to   please   Creeley   and   Williams.   Tall­ man's   essay  on  The   Princess  Cassimas­ sima,  taken,    I   believe,   from   a   Ph.D.  thesis, and  one of the earliest  pieces here, shows how much  of James' technique and thought  he  has  absorbed. What  James  wrote  of the  famous  Chapter 42 of  Por­ trait  of a   Lady-"It was  designed   to have  all  the  vivacity  of incident and  all the economy  of picture" -is a good des­ cription of a Tallman  essay.
Like James, Tallman is an  urban man, an urban critic,  though never, like James, urbane. He is an enthusiast, who, like the late film critic  James Agee, writes most perceptively  when   he  can   admire  and love his subjects,  and  who finds moments of beauty  to applaud in  the  most  flawed creations. And what  he praises in Richler, a  forgiving scepticism, is  his  own  attri­ bute,  too. "Just as  [this  scepticism]  cuts against  everybody's  pretensions that  they are  better  than  they  actually are,  it  cuts against fears that they are  worse." Resist­ ing  romantic  views of nature, he  is ill at ease   with  W.  0. Mitchell's brand of Wordsworthianism in Who  Has Seen the Wind, believing  that  a  soft-focus  version of  the  social   realities   of  prairie  small­ town  life disguises, perhaps even accepts,  real cruelties. While  beautiful passages in "Wolf  in the Snow" respond  to  the silent
 aching  loneliness at  the heart  of the Can­ adian novels  he  discusses,  Tallman  sees that   silence  as  a  kind   of   death. I  was reminded many times reading these essays of  Frost's  poem  "The  Most  of  It," with its cry into  the  wilderness  that  what  life wants  "Is  not  its  own  love  back  in  copy speech  /  But   counter-love,  original  re­ sponse,"  and  its final  vision  of  the  mute  beast   at   the  heart  of  nature: -"And that   was  all."  To   that   ambiguous "all" many responses are  possible. D.  G. Jones suggests in the conclusion to Butterfly on Rock that  Canadian writers  tell us to take courage,  go into  the  wilderness, and  em­ brace   the   beast  as  ourselves.  Margaret Atwood  at   the  end   of  that  dark   back­ ground   to Canadian  literature, Survival,  stoically  mentions  there  are  a  few  points of   light   out   there -somewhere - to keep   away   predators. The  beast   could appear as a political  animal or a pet illu­ sion.   Others  might   say  "that's  all?   so what?" Tallman's response  is, in  effect, "go  home  where  you  belong."
That "home" is not necessarily a Cana­ dian  home,  a  regional   home,  or  even  a city home,  but more  like where  the heart is, a body that  speaks. In  this sense, Tall­ man,  whose interests  are  not confined  by national boundaries but  only  by those of language, is our most domestic critic.  But it's difficult  to be at home,  in language or in  community, if  vested  interests, politi­ cal  and  financial,  or  philosophical  and aesthetic, beat at the door or plot schemes of  urban  renewal.  The democratic spirit of   Tallman's essays-I    suppose   some would  call it "American" -is less inter­ ested in imagining a Canadian  Whitman (surely  a contradiction in  terms)  than  in imagining an original  response  to the de­ mands  of  ar.  unimagined  place.  "North America,  with   its  essentially   unformed, misformed,   or    mis-informed    environ­ ment" needs   the   voices  and   words   of people, or writers, who can build that city

OPINIONS &  NOTES



of language, form a community to answer the silence  of space.
In  "Wonder Merchants: Modernist Poetry  in Vancouver During the  196o's," Tallman traces the history of one such response  (begun  about the  time  McDou­ gall  was writing his article) , the response of young  students and  writers, there  and then,  to American modernist poets-espe­ cially those writers who are the subjects  of Tallman's other  essays. Modernism, in his view, is a more immediate, practical, and radical response to the present  world,  and to  those empty  western  spaces,  than Hu­ manism (represented by Layton, Souster, Dudek, Purdy,  etc.)   or  Eclecticism  (Bir­ ney, Mandel, Avison, etc.). "Modernism caught on  in  the  Canadian  west  because it  was  right  for  the  west,  where  the  en­ vironment is so open  and  undefined that  the  self stays open  and  undefined, child­  like, perhaps, easily given  over  to a sense of inner  wonder." Modernist writing oc­ curs  as part  of  living and  both  take  place in a particular locale and  in the world  of language at  large,  a  shared community. Frank  Davey, in  his introduction to The Writing   Life:    Historical    and    Critical Views of the  Tish  Movement  (the  short title  taken   from  the  title  of  a  Tallman essay) , grandly links this modernism to a tradition which includes  Arnold, Pound, Whitehead, Heidegger, Merleau-Ponty, Buber,  Marx, Unamuno, Jaspers, among others.   Tallman, characteristically,  con­ centrates on  recreating the  sense  of  dis­ covery,  the delight, and  the necessity, felt by  young,  literarily-unsophisticated  peo­ ple in  the  presence  of modern writers­ living   examples;  their   realization  that even  here, maybe  especially  here,  writing  was  possible.  I'm  here,  you're  here,  he's here:   think   what   we  can   do,  together, with  that.
Writing seen  not  as  "literary" activity but  as "living," both  Tallman and  Davey stress, involves the writer  more  fully with his immediate community and  with  cui-
 tural  and  social activity  everywhere. The writer  has a social office to perform, and what  he  writes  is important as  informa­ tion. As Williams  puts  it,

It is  difficult to get the news from  poems
yet men  die  miserably every  day for  lack
of what  is found there.
What McDougall called our "obligation to debate perpetually the  credentials of the social plan" receives  more  honour from modernists and  communalists than  from nostalgic  solitaries  wandering the  soil of their  ancestral acreages. The  excitement of finding  community in language is close to a "turbulence encompassing a whole society," opening possibilities for doing, making,  and  saying.
One  minor  curiosity  in Tallman's criti­ cism  is his quickness   to  attribute  excep­  tional  abilities in writers  to some strain  of non-Anglo-Saxon blood  (Wah's  Chinese, Kiyooka's  Japanese  backgrounds; Wil­  liams'  Spanish,  Kerouac's  French-Cana­ dian   origins)   or   to   foreign   experience (Marlatt's  far-Eastern beginnings). And Tallman's  communal vision  understand­ ably  limits  the  sympathies he  can  extend  to tl10se writers  who are drawn to psychic or  physical  extremes "where  there  is no social fuel,"  those  isolatoes  and  their quarrels with large  beasts. Too,  when  one stays a lot at  home,  it's  tempting to  take out  an  insurance policy,  and  there's  per­ haps a touch  of protectiveness in some of the essays, particularly in  "Wonder Mer­  chants."  But   more   typically,    Tallman keeps an open  door policy, everyone  wel­ come  who  cares  for  language and  treats  it well.
In  fact,  I  think  that, in  keeping   with
the  spirit   of  these   essays,  Open  Letter might have given more welcome to those readers  who have  not  previously encoun­ tered  Tallman's work.  While  the issue is well-designed   and   the   essays  speak   for themselves,  a  gesture   beyond   the   com-


129

OPINIONS & NOTES



munity which already knows Tallman would have been graceful: a note on his career, some explanation for  making  a collection    at   this   time -something   to give  the  issue  the   sense  of  occasion   it deserves.
McDougall  had   hope   that   the  Cana­ dian  imagination, a flightless dodo, could be  transformed into,  at  least,  a  cruising  auk.  Twenty years later, Tallman tried  a more   ambitious   metamorphosis.  In   the conclusion to "Wonder Merchants," and the  book,  Tallman  gathers into   the  al­ chemical  studio  of his prose  all  the  west­ ern poets whose work he has sketched out as "a picture from  the west." Then aban­ doning   portraiture,  he   uses   decoupage and  assemblage  to fashion  a life-size mon­ ster,  "The Poet."  Taking the humours of the   poets  and   the   powers  of   place,   he bubbles  up a potent home-brew, a critical  elixir  which  translates the  creature into, naturally,   human  form.    And   sends   it stumbling  towards the  East.
I  don't  think   it's  arrived  in  Toronto yet,  but  last summer, in  a community of dedicated young southern Saskatchewan poets,  I  heard one  of  them,  in  a  poem, tell about  some gophers in  the  sky  teach­ ing  human beings  to  fly. Had  Tallman's poet-beast reached  the   prairies?  With local visions like that  one, it isn't  going to reach  the East without further transform­ ations. And will all the critics finally leave that  back  window and  take  to the  streets to stare  in  wonder?  I can  hardly wait.

ANN  MANDEL


CHILDREN'S  EYES

THE BURGEONING INDUSTRY in children's literature has  resulted   in  a  wide  variety of  recent   publications. Some  have  been given  more  publicity than   they  deserve, but  unfortunately many  others  go unpub­ licized or unnoticed. The animated  vege-
 table  stories  of The Hole  in  the  Fence/ Mes  Amis, mon  jardin, for example (two colourfully   illustrated 	1975    volumes, which   come   for   those   interested  with teachers' guides),  are   published   by  the Federal  Department of Health and  Wel­ fare   under   the  aegis  of  its  drug  abuse programme. And  since  the  unhappy de­ mise   of   the    government    publications bookstores, it has become increasingly  dif­ ficult  to  find  out   what  the  government printers do publish. Which is all the more the  pity when  the books are  as delightful as  these:   cleverly  drawn  and-despite the    occasional    moral    solemnity-ac­ curately  evocative  of  children's  school­ yard  and neighbourhood confrontations.
The    lavish   use   of   illustration  and colour contributes immeasurably to the appeal of these books, but  it is a pressing Canadian problem  to maintain such standards. Talonbooks does  a  handsome job  (more appealing to adults  than  to children, I  think)  with   Elizabeth  Hop­ kins' primitivist drawings for The Painted Cougar.   And   McClelland  &   Stewart's admirable  Magook   series   ($1.95  each)  maintain high  standards,  too,  though   it is in  temporary  abeyance  after   the  first four  issues precisely because of marketing and  budget. Particularly attractive in the first  four  issues are  Ann  Blades'  illustra­ tions,  Kathryn  De   Vos  Miller's   nature drawings, and  Madeline Kronby's always inventive bilingual stories. But however attractive each  issue is, magazine market­ ing  is different from  book  marketing; it depends   on  return custom,  and  lives on change,  on  the reader's excitement at  the prospect  of  the  Next  Issue.  Not  to  pro­ duce  new issues soon will mean  Magook's demise  for   letting  that   expectation  dry away, which  (given its quality) would  be unfortunate; it would also be an unhappy blow against all such publishing ventures.
Of   the   new   books   out,   some   relate directly   to   television   programmes and have  almost  a  built-in  audience because

OPINIONS & NOTES



of   that.   Methuen's  The   Dog    Power Tower ( $5.95;  $3.95 paper) derives  from "Mr. Dressup." Prentice-Hall's The Gift of Winter  ($6.95), by  John   Leach   and Jean  Rankin, was a CBC special  in 1974; delightfully drawn  and   amusingly   con­ ceived, it has, however,  a curiously wishy­ washy    sense   of    characterization.   The  figures Malicious and  Rotten promise well enough; but  their   (for  some  reason  ad­ verbial)  antithetical counterparts Goodly and Nicely do not get well enough off the the page.  They  are  not  meant, of course, to  be genuinely  Good   or  Nice.  But  the impulse  to allegory in the context of fable loosens what could otherwise be a small classic  of  a  winter   world's   imagination.
The  contrast between   these  books and another half  dozen  is only partly  that be­ tween   colour   and   lack  of  it.  Elizabeth  Cleaver's  paintings  for   William   Toye's  retelling   of  The  Loon's  Necklace  (Ox­ ford, $5.95)   are in fact in colour,  but  the trouble  with  them,  as  always,  is that  the colours  she chooses have  little  to do with the  environment  she  pretends  to  draw; the  borrowing of   Coastal  totems   as  an all-purpose  Indian  Image is an  endemic cultural  problem, but   to  match it  with the  colour blue  is to  ignore  the  realities even more. And least successful as a genre in   modem  Canadian  children's   story­ telling  is that  of retelling the  myths  and legends  of other  or older  or previous  peo­ ple.  Two  of  the  three  books  from  Kids Can   Press-K yrylo    the   Tanner,  The  Shirt    of   the   Happy   Man,  and    How Trouble Made  the  Monkey Eat  Pepper ($2.95  each)  -at  least  have  the  benefit of including  written  texts  in  the  original  Russian  and  Italian, but  they  (and  even the  English-language West  Indian story) sound like translations, the conversational structures  are   made   to  sound   artificial, and  the  vocabulary underestimates what children  can   absorb.    Mariam  Habib's African  stories  (The Lost Child, Vantage Press, $5.95)   are  for  older  children, and
 are more directly  culturally rooted  in Tanzania, but for all that  will give any enquiring Canadian child  a  better   sense of  the  world  of others.  Informative in  a different way is Ingeborg Marshall's Beo­ thuck    resource-book The   Red    Ochre
People   (]. J. Douglas, $6.95), which  is
useful  more   for  its  precise  drawings of
artifacts than  for  its Europeanized  draw­ ing  of  people  or  for  its simple  text.  And of  the  four   volumes   in   Fforbez  Enter­ prises'  new  Karpet  series  for  very  young children ($1.69,  or 4 for $5.95), the  two by Sue  Ann  Alderson  are  marred by be­ ing  imitative fairyland  exploits   with  an intrusive moralism, while  the  two  by Ray Logie,   despite   the   archness  that   some­ times  intrudes  upon   his  linguistic  play­ fulness, are entertaining stories. Catherine MacKenzie's illustrations to Logie's  work, moreover,  particularly to  The Houseless Mouse, are a pure  delight.
There have  also  been  a  series  of  fic­ tional   narratives appear,  some  of   them  more   interesting  for  their   authors  than  for   their    stories.   Marian   Engel's   My  Name  Is Not  Odessa  Yarker (Kids Can) is a  mechanical identity tale,  perhaps of most  interest   as  an  elliptical  footnote to Bear.   Gladys   Hindmarch's   The  Peter Stories    (Coach   House)   uses   children's rhymes   (Peter  and   the   pumpkin  shell, Mary   Contrary)  to  tell  adult  fables  of male-female relationships. And  there  are new  teenage narratives:  Eugenie Myles' Little  Cayuse   (Nelson),  full  of confron­ tations  with  prairie  nature and  exploring the  necessity of  bravery; D.  H.  Turner's To   Hang   a  Rebel   (Gage), which   tells the stirring adventures of a boy who  lives in  Mackenzie's home at the time of the Rebellion  and   becomes   a   spy  for   the cause;   and  Sheila  Bumford's story  of  a dog's  life during World  War  II, Bel  Ria (McClelland &  Stewart, $zo.oo),  enjoy­ able  for  readers   who  enjoy  their  senti­  ment   on  the  surface,  though  the   more compelling  because   it   doesn't  deign   to

OPINIONS & NOTES



oversimplify  its language along  the  way.
I leave  for the  last a curious  and  lively
book   by   Kenneth  Dyba,    Lucifer    and Lucinda 	(November	House, 	$6.95), partly  because  it's  so naively engaging­ the  story  of  an  orange  eat's love  for  a little   girl -and partly   because    it's   so deliberately contrived  as  to be an  adult's book most of all, and certainly a book for an  adult to enjoy  reading to a child.  It's  full   of   the   same   quirky   humour  that  marked  Dyba'Sister  Rexy; it's  a  tale  of magic  and  transformation  (though  this theme  is a  little  forced), of adventurous travel  (through the  Canadian cat  jungles of the Hoodoos, Pincher Creek,  Neepawa, Dryden, and  Fredericton), and  of   pun­ ning  political   satire with  the  mildest  of edges.   There  are   echoes   of   Margaret Laurence's  mole   story   in  it,  but   Dyba sounds  a voice of his own. Here the  nar­  rative  matters less than  the  texture, and the result  is one of those startlingly direct  revelations  that   comes  when   the   adult  world  is recorded with  the  illusion  of  a child's  sophisticated eyes.
W. H. NEW


REFERENCES

A  VARIETY  OF  NEW VOLUMES is  now available from  Detroit's apparently  inex­ haustible  Gale   Press.  They  include  the first volume  of  Twentieth-Century Liter­  ary   Criticism    (comments   on   creative  writers  Igoo-Ig6o; $42.00), and  the  sec­ ond   volume   of  Contemporary  Authors (permanent series:   i.e.  biocritical   notes on  now  deceased   authors  mentioned  in earlier  volumes  of CA; $42.), neither of much  relevance to  Canadian writing. In Contemporary Authors (volumes  69-72), one finds brief notes on people  like Moshe Safdie,  but  little  more.  In  Contemporary Literary   Criticism, volume   8   ($42.00), however,  are  to be found  extensive selec­ tions  from  criticism   of  the  work  of  At-
 wood, Clarke,  and  Moore,  particularly useful in that it draws attention to an international range  of reviews. And  in R. B. Slocum's valuably  annotated  compre­ hensive   Biographical   Dictionaries   (2nd  supp.,   $35.00),  substantial  sections   are devoted   to  Canadian  books  and   Cana­ dian subjects.
Gale  also publishes  a  number of  refer­ ence  books  for  those  interested  in  chil­ dren's writing:  Dennis   La  Beau's  index to biographical information on children's writers  (included are Montgomery, Haig­  Brown,   Harris,   and   others)   is   called Children's   Authors  and   Illustrations ($I 5.00) ; and  there  are also two substan­ tial illustrated reference works that  would be  of interest  to  teachers  and  inquisitive students:   Yesterday's  Authors  of  Books for  Children   (2nd   volume   in   a  series;
$25.00)  and Something About  the Author (volume   I 2;  $25.00). The   latter is  the least interesting-biographical and bibli­ ographical snippets  primarily to give rudi­ mentary information. Haig-Brown  is the only  Canadian included in  this  volume. (Houston and  Takashima appear  in vol­ ume  I 3·)  The  former  work  is a splendid compilation  of  biographical  and  biblio­ graphical  information, with  illustrations from  original  works  and  from  films  and other  adaptations. One finds twelve pages of  helpful   commentary  on  the  works  of John Buchan  here, for example, and Lucy Maud  Montgomery  appears  in  volume  one. If there  is so far  little  on  Canadian writers  themselves, there  remains a lot of material on books Canadian children still read,  and  the quality of the production is consistently  high.
From other  presses comes another spate
of  books  for  academic reference shelves. Teachers of junior and  senior high-school Canadian Literature classes may find use­ ful  a  series  of guidebooks  (lessons  ideas, research  suggestions,  notes, etc.)  released by CanLit (P.O. Box I 55 I, Peterborough, Ontario) . Most  widely  to  circulate  (in

OPINIONS & NOTES



paper,  at  lower  cost,  $6.95)   among  stu­ dents,  however,  will be Michael Gnarow­ ski's  revised  version  of  his  helpful intro­  ductory A  Concise  Bibliography of Eng­ lish Canadian  Literature (McClelland & Stewart);  it  guides  students sensibly  to major  works  and   major  criticism. Un­  happily it  resolves  the  perennial "Who's Canadian?" problem  by leaving  out  both Lowry  and  Moore.  The nationality  bat­ tle persists.
From   Clio   Books  in   Santa  Barbara comes  Narda Lacey  Schwartz's  Articles on  Women Writers   ( $24.95)  ; her  net  is wide,  and   Canadian  women   are   listed, but  the  critical   listings  are  highly  selec­ tive. And from  the University of  Toronto Press  come  Ontario  and   the   Canadian North    ( $25.00), a  valuable  descriptive, indexed    (and   illustrated!)   contribution to local  history  research  compiled by W. F.  E.  Morley; and  Canadian  Selection ($35.00), compiled  by Edith Jarvi et al. Jarvi's annotated catalogue is designed  as a guide  to libraries  interested in  building  their   collection   of  Canadian  materials, and I am  sure it does its exhausting task (in  1060 pp.)   with  much  skill. Yet  I am somewhat puzzled  by the  criteria for selection.  Books, anthologies, journals:  a variety   of  works   is  included.  But   one checks out  books of this kind  by checking what  one  knows  best. I am  delighted  to find I am included for five books, but not sure why others-Four Hemispheres, for example, and  a  Commonwealth  Litera­ ture   bibliography-are   omitted.    Some Commonwealth  books  are  in;  some  are left  out.   Happily  the  editors   have   not exerted  a  bias against  comparative criti­ cal  studies.  But  why  a  bias  against  the comparative  anthologies  that   show  an­  other  face  to  the  same  endeavour? And why a  bias,  in a library  guidebook of all places,  against  comprehensive  bibliogra­ phies?   One   finds  parallel  action   taken against other  writers  as well. The novelist and  story  writer  Jack   Hodgins is  repre-
 sented  by his three  most  recent  titles,  but the high-school  anthology which  we  pre­ pared  together  some years ago, Voice and Vision  (still  available from  McClelland
& Stewart)  is not  to  be found. The  rea­ sons  for  editorial selection   in  Canadian Selection   are   not  clear.  Readers should  use it,  but  enquire  beyond it  as  well.

W.H.N.

w


NOW IN PAPER

AMONG RECENT PAPERBACK publications are  several  welcome  volumes: Clara Thomas'  lively  and   sensitive   biography of   Anna    Jameson,   Love    and    Work Enough  ($6.95), and  the third  volume  of James  Eayrs'  spirited history  In  Defence of Canada   ($8.95), both  in  the  Univer­ sity of Toronto  Press'  University Paper­ books series;  the  revised  version  of Peter  Such's  novel  Fallout  (NC  Press), a frag­  mentary  but  in  retrospect  youthfully vi­ sionary indictment of Canada's  uranium­ boom  history; Dorothy Livesay's  selected poems,  The  Woman I  Am   (Press  Por­ cepic,  $3.95) ; Barry  Broadfoot's  settlers' book,   The  Pioneer   Years    ( Paperjacks,
$5.95); and  for  thriller-followers who haven't  already   found   it,  Tom  Ardies' Their Man  in  the  White House  (Paper­ jacks,  $ r.so).  Promised in  paper is  yet another thriller, the  captivating fiction­  alized  story  of   French  political   intrigue which  John  Ralston Saul  has  called  The Birds  of  Prey  (Macmillan, cloth  $9.95).

W.H.N.

I33

ON THE VERGE

****   MAURICE CARRIER &  MONIQUE  VACHON. Chansons Politique  du  Quebec, vol.  1  ( 176s­ r833).  Lemeac. "Political"  is  defined  widely in  this  collection, and   the  songs  range  from  a graceful tribute to Lady  Carleton to a  militant pro-British r8o 7 song  (tune:  Yankee Doodle) , and  from  a  spirited assertion  ( ("Ciel, protege notre     bon    Roi/ Et    conserve-nous   Georges  Trois")  to   an   equally   spirited  denunciation ("A   ces  viis  despotes Anglais/Non cette  race adultere/ Retournera en   Angleterre"). Notes, scores   and  informative tables  support the  texts of   thsongs  themselves and   provide  a  lively insight  into  phases  of Quebec's cultural history.

W.N.

***  MALCOLM M.  THOMSON.   The Beginning of the  Long   Dash:   A  History of Timekeeping in    Canada.   University   of    Toronto    Press,
$r 7.so.   From   astronomical  clocks   to  chrono­ meters  to cesium  atomic standards, methods of timekeeping  have   changed   radically  in   just over  a  century. Told  here  are   the  stories   of the   people    and    the   ambitions  that   effected  such  changes in  Canada. What comes  through, both   in  the  narrative as  a  whole  and   in  the detail of  the  research and   the  illustrations, is a sense  of  the  extraordinary  technological debt  that    the   culture  broadly  owes   and   scarcely understands.
W.N.

***   MICHAEL    MACKLEM.    Liberty and    the Holy  City. Oberon, $r 7.so.  Michael Macklem disclaims  the   intent  of  writing  a  "history  of liberal   thought."  Nevertheless, his  method  is historical   as  he   investigates  key  thinkers in England 'from   John of  Salisbury, who  in  the twelfth  century  believed  that   "liberty  was  a privilege belonging exclusively to  the  c urch," through the  various twists  and   broademngs of the  idea  of freedom and  its  relation to  justice, until, having found inspiration in  Milton   and a congenial spirit in  T. H.  Green, he comes  to a  conclusion which   he  himself   admits   is  only a  halt  on  the  way.  "It had  become  clear  that liberty  is  in  fact   a  means   of  grace   or   it  is nothing. Unless,  in  other words,  spiritual  con­ ditions are  in  themselves relevant  to the  State, there   can   be  no  such   thing  as   personal   im­ munity. But  if  the  State  exists  to  promote the
spiritual  as  well   as  material  interests ?f  the
individual, liberty must   be  the  first  of  rts  ob­
jectives.  For  the  difference between good  and evil  is  liberty itself.   The holy  commonwealth

134
 
is a commonwealth of free  men." This is a thoughtful  and  thought-provoking book,   but the   thought .is  essentially  in   the   history, and it  is  as a statement of  where  we  have  reached rather  than  where we  might  go   that   it   has value.
G.W.

***   CRAWFORD  KILIAN.   Go   Do  Some   Great Thing.  Douglas &  Mcintyre,  $r2.9S· One   of the  more  neglected episodes of early  British Columbian history was  the  arrival, during the Fraser Valley gold  rush  of  r8s8, of several hundred  free   blacks   who   had   found  life  in­ tolerable   in    California.   For    decades    they formed an  important element in  the population of  Victoria;  they   prospected and   traded  in the   Cariboo;  they   pioneered   as   farmers  on Salt   Spring  Island  and   in   Saanich.  In.  the early  years,  while  there were  many Amencans in  Victoria, they   were  still  subject to  a  good deal   of  prejudice,  which  may   have   been  one of  the   reasons   why   they  generally supported the  entry of  British  Columbia into  Confedera­ tion.    Altogether,   the    story    of   the    migrant blacks of British Columbia is an  interesting one,  and   it  is  surprising that  Go   Do  Some   Great  Thing   should  be   the   first   book   devoted  to them.   Perhaps  it   is   because   information   is slender; certainly Mr.  Kilian has  at  times  ex­ tended   himself    excessively    over   matters   of general British   Columbian. hist ry
the  kind  of  reader who  wrll  prck  this  book  rs
likely  to  be  familiar. But  it  is  a  well  written book,  and  a  needed addition to  western  Cana­ dian   regional history.
G.W.

***  RICHARD   J.  SCHOECK,    ed.   Review   of National Literatures, 7  ( 1976), $8.oo. A  spe­ cial  Canada issue.  It  might not  seem  possible that  something new  could  be said  about  Cana­ dian  Solitudes, but  this  issue  contains a  prob­ ing  historical article othsubject. !hwh le
issue   in  fact    has  a  hrstorrcal, descnptrve  bras
-u;eful  for'  reinterpreting Pratt,  and   inter­ esting   on    Laurence  and    Hebert-but     it breaks  down   (or  perhaps only  displays  the  bias of  its  own  time) when   it  turns predictive and  insists  on  identifying a "genuine national litera­ ture" with  biculruralism.
W.N.

***   THOMAS YORK. And  Sleep in the  Woods. Doubleday Canada.  Narratives  of  conversion are   always   fascinating,  especially to  the  un­ converted. Partly this  is  because of  a  curious contradiction  between the  deep  privacy  of the

ON THE VERGE



process  of  conversion and  the  publicity of  any attempt  to  describe  it.   However  honest  may have   been   the   experience, there  is  a  certain self-advertisement that seems  inconsistent with spiritual   enlightenment   in    books    like    St. Augustine's Confessions or  Newman's Apologia pro  Vita  Sua. The other reason   why  the  un­ converted are  so drawn to  the  flame -or  the ignis    fatuus-of   the   conversion   narrative  is the  feeling all  sceptics  share -but  rarely con­  fess-that  they  too  may  be  travelling on  one of   the   many  roads   that   lead  to   Damascus. And   Sleep in  the  Woods  satisfies  both   reasons  for  fascination. Thomas York,  who is a novelist  as  well  as  a  United  Church  pastor, certainly makes  the  literary  most  out  of  the  narrative of his   flight   from   the   American  south  to   the Canadian  woods  and   the   spiritual  visitations that  ensued.  One  does   not   doubt  his  experi­ ences,  but  still  finds  it  odd   that he  can   write  of  them  so  volubly   and   with   such   deliberate artifice. At  the  same  time,  as  a  fellow  man  of letters,  one  is struck   by  the  haunting specula­ tion  of   how,  if  one  were  after all  converted, one  would   fulfil   the   normal  writer's  urge   to tell.  And   Sleep  in  the   Woods  is  a  book   too self-conscious to be memorable, but  it  provides some  interesting glimpses  of  the  inner life  of a reasonably good  novelist.
 **  Hommage a Lionel Groulx, sous  Ia  direc­ tion   de  Maurice Filion. Lemeac. n.p.  Lionel  Groulx, the  patron intellect of Quebec  separa­ tism,  was  born  a  hundred years   ago.  He  con­  structed  or   reconstructed  many   of   the   myths  that  glorified    the   past   of   New   France,  and  more   than any  other  writer  he  was  the   pro­ tagonist of a  racial  interpretation  of Canadian history.  In   the   cult   that  now    elevates  his name   one  sees  strange  political combinations, for  Groulx  himself  was an  intense conservative, one  of  the  leaders of  the  Quebecois version of Action  Fran aise
and   Franco, if  not   of   Hitler,  yet   one   finds
among   his    pious    admirers   such    soi-disant
social  democrats as  Rene  Levesque. Levesque is   one   of   the   contributors  to   H ommage   a
Lionel  Groulx, a centennial tribute to  the con­ troversial Canon,  who  was  born   in  1878  and  died   in  1967  during another  centennial, that  of  the   Canadian   confederation  which    he   so thoroughly   distrusted.  Hommage  is  in   three  parts: a  group of  academic studies of  Groulx; a group of tributes by famous living  Quebecois, including  Levesque; and   a  group  of   unpub­ lished  fragments by  Groulx. It  is  useful   read­ ing  for  those  who  are  interested  in   the   roots of   the   Parti  Quebecois  and   the   ideology  it represents.

G.W.

***   GEORGE  RADWANSKI.   Trudeau.  MacmiJ­ Jand  of Canada. $14.95. Trudeau is  a  portrait in  depth of  the  man   who,  at   the  moment of writing, is Canada's Prime Minister. It is based on  long conversations with  Pierre Trudeau and  on   months  of  discussions with   his  associates, and   it   is  supported  by   George   Radwanski's considerable knowledge of  the  permutations of Canadian  politics   during  the   decade of  Tru­ deau's  administration.   Since    Trudeau  is  in fact  much  less a private figure than Radwanski tries  to  persuade  us,  there is  not  a  great deal in  the  way  of  revelations that  will  surprise or be useful  to either the  Prime Minister's friends or  his enemies. Those who  detest  him  will find themselves confirmed  in  their  reasons   for  do­ ing  so, and  so will  those  who  admire him. But this   does  not   mean   that  Mr.   Radwanski  has been   neutral; it  is  obvious   that   the  blue  and  basilisk  eyes  directed on  him  during  his  inter­ views  have   not  been  without their  effect, and he  ends   his  book  with   a  justification of  Tru­ deau's policies  so  partisan  as  to  diminish con­ siderably any  pretensions  his  book  may   have to being  an  objective study.
 G.W.

**  PETER   sUCH.     Vanished  Peoples:  The Archaic  Dorset   and   Beothuk  People   of  New­ foundland. NC   Press.  Archaeologists  and   an­ thropologists  are    all   too   often    prisoners  of their   specialist  vernaculars,   and    this   means that one  is usually  relieved when  a professional writer   who  makes  no  claims to  be  a  specialist in  such  fields  decides  to  write   on   their  sub­ jects,  and   does  so  with   modesty and  lucidity. This Peter Such, the  novelist, has  done in  his illustrated  book   on   the    original   peoples  of Newfoundland. Everything he  tells  us  can   in­ deed   be  found   with   labour  elsewhere, but   he has   brought  it   together   interestingly,   trans­ lated   it   from   the   jargon,   and   presented  us with  a readable and  useful  short   history of  the extinction of  peoples.
L.T.C.

·:+          JESSIE  8t    WREFORD  WATSON.   The   Cana­ dians:    How    They  Live    and    Work.   Griffin  House, $8.95.  Part   of  a  uniform series,  this  is a  highly   introductory,  highly  generalized  ac­ count  of   the   society   for   potential  travellers, better  on   geographical   implications  than  on history   or   Art   or   food.   The  literary  section  scarcely    reaches     the    196o's,   and    painting largely  closes with  the  Group of Seven.

G.W.	W.N.

135
