$1.25  per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE N°·48

Spring,1971



JISPECTS OF LJIYTON


Articles

BY  PATRICIA KEENEY SMITH, ELIZABETH WATERSTON, RUDY WIEBE, LAWRENCE W. JONES,  ANDREAS SCHROEDER, WILLIAM H. NEW

Translation

BY  JOHN  GLASSCO

Review Articles and  Reviews

BY  MIRIAM WADDINGTON,  DOUGLAS BARBOUR, MATTHEW CORRIGAN, ALAN  SHUCARD, PHYLLIS GROSSKURTH, AUDREY THOMAS,  RUDY WIEBE, RODERICK HAIG-BROWN, KEATH  FRASER, A. W. PURDY, DONALD STEPHENS, BARBARA  THOMSON  GODARD

.   Annual  Supplement
CANADIAN LITERATURE  CHECKLIST,  1970


A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW










NEW TRENDS
IN PUBLISHING (2)






HAVING  FOUNDED House of Anansi, and  having in the process created a facility of a kind Canada has never had before for publishing experimen­ tal  fiction,  Dave  Godfrey  moved  on  to establish, with  two  partners,  the  more politically-oriented  publishing  house called New Press-or, to use its own typo­ graphical  style -new press. When it was first announced, and the founders made  their  smiling  debut  in  a  Time  report,  new  press took  the stand  for  Canadian nationalism.  At  that  time  I  put  a  testing question  to  see  just what  intellectual rigidities  this  might  conceal.  Dave  Godfrey  assured  me  that  the  definition  of nationalism was in no sense restricted; an anarchist regionalist, for example, would not be turned  away.
And  it  is this  malleable,  undogmatic  quality  that  I  find  the  most attractive quality of new press. Its partners are businesslike, but unpushing.  Indeed, the only letter  they failed to answer was that  in which I talked of writing a piece on their work, and  asked for information. Other  publishers would have tumbled over their own  ankles  to  answer.  new  press merely ignored  the  request,  and  one sensed behind the ignoring less a radical independence than  a gentlemanly  disinclination to carry too far the imperatives of trade.
When  I  consider  the  pile of new  press books which  lie before  me-by  no means  a complete  batch  since some have percolated  to reviewers-I am rather amazed  that  a publishing  house which sets out with such an  apparently  narrow intent could be so catholic in its actual productions.
To  begin, there  is no evident attempt  to restrict the range of publication  to the political and the polemical. The most impressive of all new press books to date has

3

EDITORIAL



been  Dave  Godfrey's first novel, The  New  Ancestors, a book of such  quality that one feels a kind  of awe at the thought of what  his next  may  be. All the assurance, the accomplishment far beyond promise that  went into Godfrey's volume  of stories, Death Goes Better with Coca Cola, are  here  magnified into  a fictional  edifice  in which   hallucination  and   reality  reflect  each   other in  an  extraordinary feat  of experience transmuted.
The  one  disadvantage of having  published  The  New  Ancestors, so far  as new
press is concerned, is that  in imaginative quality, in  power  of writing and  in sheer intelligence, it overshadows everything else the  house  has yet produced. And  this even  though the  press's  few  books  of  verse,  picked   by  the  editors  individually because  they  like them,  we are  told,  have  certainly been  above  the  recent Cana­ dian   average. The  best  of  them,  even  better  than Henry Beissel's Face  on the Dark, is Charles Wright's The  Grave of the Right  Hand, and  this, incidentally, is
a book  by an American poet who appears to have  no Canadian links-a sign, if we needed  any, that  new press's nationalism is no kind  of acrid  xenophobia.
But fiction and  verse remain  the smallest  group of titles in the list of new press's
publications.  It   includes   as  well  such   curiosa   as  the   Canadian  Whole   Earth Almanac, a fascinating compendium of rustic campishness which  every quarter provides  a mass of information on the  "natural life",  collected  with  an  enterprise in  research  and  an  efficiency in collation  lacking  in  most  actual rural  communi­ ties;  indeed, I suspect  its main  public  will be among urbanites who still dream of going  to  the  land  or -as  I do -remember  with  mingled  nostalgia  and  disgust their  own failures  in the simple life.
If only  the  straighter books  that  new  press  publishes had  the  originality and charm and  occasional startling good sense of the  Whole  Earth  Almanac!  Perhaps I have  been  unlucky  in the  examples  that  have  kept  their  places on my editorial shelf,  but  even if these are not the  best, they obviously  represent what  new  press's editors  think  is worth   publishing. And  some  of them  are  mediocre by any  stan­ dards. Comparing The  New  Ancestors with  a  clumsy  chunk  of partisan  propa­
ganda like Ed Broadbent's The  Liberal Rip-0If or a stodgy  piece of thesis-writing
like John W.  Warnock's Partner to Behemoth: The  Military  Policy of a Satellite Canada,  I can  only feel astonishment at the editorship that  can  produce all three from  the same  house.
It would  of course  be unfair  to condemn all new  press's publications other  than fiction  and  verse  on  the  strength of  the  most  unattractive. I have  just  finished reading Margaret Daly's  account of the  CYC, The  Revolution Game,  and  that strikes  me  as  excellent   radical   reportage. But  it  is above   the  average, and   to

4

EDITORIAL



balance it there  are  too  many  pieces of well-meaning bookmaking of a kind  that has lately  become  over-popular in Canada-the volumes  written by a group  and always sagging towards the  lowest level of competence, such  as Why Wilderness, a turgid  symposium on an  impeccable cause, and  Pollution Probe, which  affronts the  intelligent reader with  its condescending and  jargon-ridden presentation.
If such  books are examples, we do not yet appear to be developing the tradition of polemical writing which  Canada so notably  lacked  in the  past  and  which  is a symptom of emerging political  maturity. Yet new press could be a veritable school of such  writing, if only its editors  would set out to revive in Canada the true  craft of pamphleteering. The  political  pamphlet is a form  which  has its own laws and rewards. It is characterized by a conciseness of form,  an economy  of verbiage and a  simplicity   of statement which  demand strength of opinion   and   do  not  evade literary   grace-as  the  example of such  noted  recent  pamphleteers as  Bernard Shaw,  George  Orwell, Herbert Read  and  Aldous  Huxley  has demonstrated. The relentless  lecturing of  the  thesis-maker, the  chaotic  rambling of the  symposium partakers: these  have  no  place  in  the  art  of pamphleteering. Indeed, one  of its attractions lies in  limitations which  the  real  pamphleteer accepts  with  the  same joy  as  a  Welsh  poet  writing to  an  elaborate formula for  an  eisteddfod. In  the classic ages of the  pamphleteers-and the Thirties was probably the last of them
-the custom  was  to fit pamphlet lengths  to the size of sheets of printing paper; the  preferred lengths  were  16,  32 and  64  pages,  and  the  art  was  to  get  all one wanted to say into  one  of these lengths.  Anything over 64 pages was regarded as over-expansive, and  the  real  pamphleteers despised  the  writer  who  needed  more space  to  express  what   he  meant   with  force  and  clarity  and  with  enough   well chosen supporting facts and  quotations.
Cheap modem printing techniques have  their  advantages, but  they  also mean that   many   books  which   should   never  appear are  published, and   that  subjects which  demand the  clear  and  economical statement of the  pamphleteer are  sub­ merged  in  volumes  of  200 or  300 pages,  lost in tedious  argument and  pointless detail.  I hope  new  press continues to give free  rein  to novelists  and  poets if they are  as good  as those  it has so far  published. But it really should  get its polemicists into  trim,  and  nothing would  be better, I suggest,  than  a series of  pamphlets on urgent  Canadian issues, with  a 64-page  nozzle that  would  make  the writers  build  up their  eloquence under pressure.                                                                            o.w.






5



IRVING LAYTON AND

THE THEME OF DEATH





Patricia Keeney Smith










IT SEEMS  GROSSLY  CONTRAD,CTORY to  a.=ciate a vigorous and  volatile enfant  terrible  of Canadian letters with the subject  of death  in any remote way. Layton himself, however, is the first to admit that there is an obvious, profound  and  multi-faceted  connection  between death  and  the image of the sun which  persistently and  provocatively animates  his poetry. The  Layton  individu­ ality-his restless energy, his warrior words, strong verbs and startling metaphors,  constantly  wrestling  with  meaning,  actively  and  obstinately  as life  itself, their "panache and  chutzpa," to quote one review of Selected  Poems, is a function  of his  basic relationship  as poet and  man  to the force of death.  Strife, to adapt  a comment  of Kaufmann's upon  Nietzsche, is a feature  of his absolute. The  con­ stant  tug of war between life and  death,  between  creation and  destruction  is the very definition of life. Layton sees life as a series of  contesting opposites, all varia­ tions of the basic tension. Poetry is his expression of the contest, and  he identifies poetry as " ... an ironic balance of tensions."1 For Layton,  the life force or crea­ tive process is possible only through some form of death.
Looking at the bulk of Layton's poetry from this point of view, one discovers in it a compelling story, the final chapter  of which  reveals a creative  giant,  closely related  to the  Nietzschean "overman," for whom "the  will to power," which also underlies  all life, is possible only through  death.  The  two writers  meet at  many other points, both imagistically and philosophically.
Of  course, the realm of nature  exemplifies the creation-destruction cycle at its
most innocent,  at its purest. That  Layton takes his initial impulse from nature  is

6

THE THEME OF  DEATH



evident  in  many  poems,  the  most obvious  being a kind  of "nature" poem,  deftly handled, that usually  provokes  questions  about  his role  as creator, or  about  the condition of art  itself. "Red  Chokecherries" serves to illustrate with  fiery urgency a process of destruction that  is both  recognized  and anticipated.

In  the sun
The  chokecherries are a deep red. They are like clusters of red jewels.

They are like small rubies
For a young queen who is small and graceful. When the leaves turn, I see her white shoulder.

They are too regal to eat
And reduce to moist yellow pits. I will let the air masticate them

And the bold maggot-making sun. So I shall hardly notice
How perfection of form is overthrown.

The  particular life of cherries  is brief, perhaps a summer's length, perhaps a day's; it is also beautiful and  intense. The  fruits  perish when  they  reach  perfection. The sun that  nourishes them  also destroys them.  Nature's procedures are self-sufficient. Sun  and  air  perform the inevitable. The  extermination of any organic thing  is the dissolution of  an  individual form  of  nature into  her  undifferentiated life-death cycle. Man, however,  tends  to complicate matters.
The  world  of art  is alluded to in the  word  "form." Art,  the  hopefully perma­
nent  legacy  of man, art  as well as nature, is subject  to continuing change. This  is not  an  easy  premise  for  man  to accept, and  yet it is based  on  one  magnificently simple  principle, stated  now  by Nietzsche: "Everything that  is generated must  be prepared to face  its painful dissolution  ... , because  of the  constant proliferation of  forms   pushing into  life,  because  of  the  extravagant fecundity of  the  world will,"2   that   is the  creative principle. Thus, as the  perfection of  natural form  is overthrown constantly, art  repeatedly crumbles  back into life.3
The  irony  of this  fact  for  Layton  is best expressed  in a group of poems which
may be called  the  "graveyard poems," the most outstanding of which  is "Cote des
Neiges  Cemetary."

As if it were a faultless poem, the odour
Is both sensuous and intellectual,

Layton  expresses  sneering distaste  for  monuments-graves and  poems.  He    IS


7

THE THEME OF DEATH



exultant  with the knowledge that they cannot  last but must dissolve back into the flow of life. There  are no permanent  structures.  What  the poet understands over and  above  the  insult to life sustained  by senatorial  statuary  and  wasting  mauso­ leu_ms  is " ... our  mortal  tongues furred  with  death:/ A ghost city  where  live autumn birds  flit."  Birds over a graveyard,  this image for life's irrepressible  up­ surge  through  death  is triumphant. Graveyards  as human  monuments  represent death  and  life; but  they also insure life through  death. Hence, they constitute an "Undying paradox!" in which Layton can rejoice as a man and as a poet.
Because death  is not, for man, the pure process it is for nature, some of Layton's "nature poems''  point to man's complexity, and  to his consequent  dilemma,  more than  they  do  to nature's  simplicity. "One View  Of  A Dead  Fish" contrasts  the difference between nature and man with telling precision:

Had it been a drowned child
it should have owned some proof of birth, of sagacious forbears
for this neutral water:
someone to mourn, a name.

But being a rotting fish
its fins, a red streak in the crumpled water, mattered to no one
nor the white
of  its decomposing beauty.

Ludicrous its solemnity on the throbbing water.

One feels the poem's pain, only in its allusions to man, whose consciousness of the anonymity  of death,  and of its ravages, brings him a terrible awareness of suffer­ ing, a feeling of uncomfortable ambiguity towards an oblivious nature.
Another  group of poems deals with the old age and  death  of persons for whom
Layton  has a particular  and passionate love-his mother,  "Keine  Lazarovitch," his father, "Death of Moishe Lazarovitch,'' an old Spaniard, "Ballad  of the Old Spaniard," and a very old woman, "To a Very Old Woman." These people are as vividly and  often violently as much a part of the life force as the leaves on trees. Usually they have lived vigorously and so have long courted  death; when it finally takes them,  they treat  it as rudely and familiarly  as they might treat an old lover. Those are the people to whom there is no need for Layton to preach life, but from whom he learns it. "Gift,"  however, provides an exquisitely understated  rendering

8

THE THEME OF  DEATH



of the poetic association between the audacious simplicity of old age and the implacable  march  of the seasons.

Under the despoiled tree, her park seat
soft with golden leaves,
the wrinkled disconsolate woman crimsons her lips.
A breeze detaches the last red leaf
and lays it at her feet.

The  gestures in the  poem are delicate, but they are also ruthless. Nature  and  the old  woman  provide  each  other  a fittingly lovely elegy for the  annihilation that cannot  be stopped.



EROTIC  LOVE,   too,  involves a  creative  death.  Layton's  love poetry typically  develops what  Nietzsche calls the creative  " ... Eros ... " to be found  where  "The male  insect sacrifices itself to  beget  offspring,  and  thus  to achieve  a  form  of  immortality  ... (in)  ... rebirth."4    "Winter Light"  is a  love poem whose very title announces its duality. Light in Layton's poetic is most often the light of fire and  sun, while winter is negation. Love includes both. Shiva, the startling  manifestation of love, is a more accurate symbol of both the creative and destructive  powers of love. Shiva  dances in creation  and  this startling  form  ap­ pears where  the poet creates, in his bedroom and on the streets of his neighbour­  hood, Somerled  Avenue. An almost cosmic joy is caught  in the exuberant  image of a million  roosters crying  up the sun. Yet, Dionysian ecstasy  is premature, or perhaps  immature. For  both  Layton  and  Nietzsche, the  true  Dionysian  spirit includes  Apollo the  giver of forms, the maintainer  of harmony. "Winter Light" ends  in Apollonian  serenity:  "at  night when we embrace  j we hear the silence of God."  It is not often that  Layton leaves his sun behind,  but the final lines of this poem bring  a  brief serenity  with the night, a momentary  respite from life's con­ stant clamour,  a glimpse of the eternal order in the cosmos.
"Thoughts in the Water," while not strictly a love poem, is blatantly sexual and
... put[s]  into opposition ... " the basic forces of female fertility, or formlessness,


9

THE THEME OF  DEATH



and  the intrusive  male intelligence. It identifies drowning as a prelude to rebirth and so is an important development in the evolution of the creator, or "overman." The  poet's voyage of self-discovery is a symbolic drowning and  is depicted  in this poem as sensual abandonment and then as savage sexual rape. The warning  blow strikes in the third stanza :

I feel
her deep vibrations as if a seaplane had plunged his ruinous shadow
like a sword through her coiling body.

She has been taken  by sheer and wilful force; the weapon  used is murderous. She has been truly ravaged.  At the same instant, her brutal  lover has been thrust from
her:  "I fall from  her  clasp, shuddering,  I a senseless interloper,  afraid ... " He
pays  the  penalty  of  sexual  union-everything  for  a  brief  instant,  and   then nothing: "see I shall  rise on the water I drowned,  and  dismally rise ... " He is drowning; his body rises and  falls on the waves. In  the  rising is implicit rebirth.
New and  vigorous life is the result of sexual spending.  The  Nietzschean sense of drowning  is the experience of the Dionysiac state. It is a continuing  delight in the generation  and dissolution of forms of life that leads to an intuitive  understanding of " ... the  eternal  condition  of things, ... "5    Eli  Mandel  describes the  action "Thoughts in  the  Water" in similar  terms:  "If the  poet  drowns  in the  female element, that  happens  because, though he is the formative  principle, she is the generative  one."6
The  poet,  in  his celebration  of the life force, must  also experience  the  death which it brings. He celebrates nature,  the Dionysiac reveler, and suffers the pas­ sionate  death  of disintegration.  Good poems rage and  bum  " ... all things ... " This is the kind of death  described by Layton in most of his poems about  poem­ making.  Their  central  figure can  be identified  as Layton's  version of the  noble savage embodying  " ... a wonderful sensuousness, ... rich uncorrupted instincts,
... exuberant   rhythms."/ or as the  Nietzschean  " ... primary  man ... ",S close
to  nature.  The  Dionysiac man  is the  " ... enthusiastic  reveler ... a  prophet  of wisdom  born  out  of  nature's   womb;  a  symbol  of  the  sexual  omnipotence  of nature."9
If the creative artist experiences the death  of the Dionysiac, he also experiences the death of the Apollonian. In order to create his poem, the poet must finally differentiate  himself from nature,  abstract  himself from the flux of time. He must, that  is, contain  primitive energy by means of the Apollonian  powers of form, and


10

THE THEME OF DEATH



for  an  instant  outside  of all quotidian  reality, experience  the death  of an  abso­
lute.  This  fusion  is best expressed by one of Layton's  own  poems,  Esthetique: "Out of ... burning  comes I Mozartian  ecstasy leaping  with the  flames." Hence the  poet suffers. Cognizant  of the antinomies of his own existence and compelled
to  wrestle  with  them,  he  is "A  quiet  madman,   never  far  from  tears ... " His defeat  and  rejuvenation  is conveyed by the one image. He lies within nature, experiencing  the very heart of its paradox for him:

I lie like a slain thing
under the green air the trees inhabit, or rest upon a chair
towards which the inflammable air tumbles on many robins' wings ...

With  "The Birth of Tragedy,'' Layton perceives a unity through  opposites, "tree, mould  on tree -". He sees in nature's  pattern  of life and  death  his own death and  rebirth  through  poetry. As Mandel  puts it, "Poetry  appears,  then, as a kind of death  because,  just as 'Living  things  arrange  their  death,'   'seasonably'  or in the 'fruition' of poetry, so poetry too 'composes' its own death," 10 of perfect forms or  "flowering  stone".  The  gods who  can  "sustain ... " the  antinomies  of  exis­ tence, " ... passionate meditations", are finally the gods of a Nietzschean creator,
Dionysiac man himself, and for Layton, the poet.


LIKE   BLAKE,   Layton  identifies  the  zombies  of
 

society  m

terms of its restrictive structures: school, church, state. Such institutions  prohibit
strength  and  joy, instinct and passion, and so prevent any kind of creative activity. It is not surprising  to find in Layton's  poetry that many people exemplify for him a  mode  of living most accurately  described  as death-in-life.  On  his value scale, this state excludes both significant life and significant death.  A life of any quality must support  the  tension  between life and  death, since the more intensely life is lived, the closer death is. "Against This Death" dramatizes the importance of these
concepts. Death-in-life  is depicted in the first stanza as" ... respectable I death",
"served  up I like ice".  It is "slow, certain". By contrast,  vigorous  death,  which
presupposes  vigorous  life, is a  function,  in  this  poem,  of the  flesh, the  life of nature,  of erotic love, and of the artistic imagination.  Layton's long list castigating society's deadbeats,  from "sterile academics" and ending with "social workers and
psychiatrists",  is now a familiar  one. "Woman in the Square" and  "Westmount


I I

THE THEME OF  DEATH



Doll" deride sexlessness. "Bishop Berkeley Goes to Bed" is one of his most succinct and  effective satires on the evils of intellectualism.  "Sheep,  Me, the P.M., and the Stars," and  "Paging  Mr. Superman" prove to be consuming satires on the ridicu­ lous ignorance and the gullibility and weakness of modem  man.
One  of the  most memorable  images, however, of the superman who combats such withering  anonymity is contained in "For  Mao Tse-Tung: A Meditation on Flies and  Kings."  Christianity  is, for  Layton,  chief among  life-deniers  and  this poem  proves to be one of his most effective indictments against  its emphasis on piety, humility  and other-worldliness. It fiercely dramatizes  the creator  as a revo­ lutionary  figure deriving strength  from his isolation, and  wielding a  reckless and passionate  cruelty  before  him  which  will "Smash  insects ... ",  "Feast  on  tom flowers.... ".
Thus  we come directly to the question  of whether  and  in what  manner  man
abuses his power over life and  death.  Man,  as he destroys merely for the sake of destruction,  is revealed by Layton in poetry of scathing  social comment, concen­ trated  in  his two  books, Periods of the  Moon  and  The  Shattered  Plinths. Man gropes, for  the  most part,  in  a dismal chaos of war, sickness and  sadism.  Even Layton's  sun image, normally radiating  with meaning  as the creative eros of the universe, becomes enfeebled,  devoid of its power.  Any  affirmation  of cruelty or suffering by creative man is remarkably absent in these books.
This  is not  true  of those poems illustrating  the  deaths  inflicted  by man  upon nature. Such poems express Layton's "most important working out of a murderous desire ... "11 Here,  according  to Layton,  man  has a terrible  responsibility for he takes advantage of an  innocent victim who also provides the artist with his basic impulse to create.  Psychologically, then,  man's  perversity is comprehensible.  Yet, the creative superman  must affirm the most despicable act of his corrupted  power, in  order  to  convert  that  power  to its creative  potential.  So, through  such  fine poems as "Bull Calf"  and  "Cain," man struggles mightily  with  his primitive in­ stincts, is humbled  to see how  base they can  be, and  is finally reinforced for  an eventual triumphant act of creation. Man's instinct to destroy need not destroy him. "A  Tall   Man   Executes  a  Jig"  completes,  in  one  of  Layton's  major  poetic achievements,  Layton's  poetic story of man  as he responds  to death.  That  story turns out to be about  man as poet, and  ultimately, of course, about  Layton him­ self. It takes us through  various experiences of man, as a living death  himself, as the murderer of both himself and  nature,  and  as the victim of his own creativity in which  his destructive  powers are affirmed in the "Joy,  and fullness of feeling,

12

THE THEME OF  DEATH



that  is the  core of the  creative mystery." This  poem sees man  and  nature joining together in creation through death.
The  "tall  man" is, of course,  the  potential creator. The  poem  takes us through
the  deepening levels  of  his  meditation when  he  questions traditional  modes  of suffering-pagan,  Christian and   Hebrew. While  retaining all  three,   he  tran­ scends each  of them  in a series of richly subtle transitions, sweeping them together in an  orchestrated movement in which  the strident  tones of the  primitive creator mingle  with  the  tragic and  triumphant strains  of the  informed  creator in  perfect and  beautiful harmony.
Man   is  at  first  at  one  with  nature, feeling  the  sun  and  grasses,  hearing the sounds  of  birds  and  flies. Attempting to identify  the  flies, who  begin  to  distract him slightly,  he concludes only that  they must  represent  the frenetic energy  of life itself:  "Nervous dots". He  still maintains unity  with  nature. Slowly,  he begins  to differentiate, to theorize. However, man's theories  are  inefficient  to deal  with  life forces,  and  so, according to  Layton, are  his abstract forms.  Mind  versus  matter produces the  " ... savage  nightmare" of a Euclid.  Nature then  intrudes, and  the "tall  man" is assaulted   by the  tiny insects. They  leave  their  "orthodox" unrest  to become  imprisoned in the  hairs  on  his arm.  Their  energy  has  been  orthodox for them,  their  transformations effected  by the natural forces of sun  ("jigging motes") and   wind   only.  Thus, even   though  they  are  now  restrained, they  cannot  be changed from  what   they  are-chaotic  energy.  Yet,  this  early  attempt to  form the formless prefigures  the  role of the creator. Immediately, in fact,  the "tall man" feels imprisoned like the  flies, an  insect only, in the thick  grasses and  flowers,  and he  begins  to  recognize,   not  only  the  enormity  of  his  task,  but  its  monumental importance. His  potentiality as creative  man-artist,  philosopher or  lover-is predicted in  the  references to Donatello, Plato  and  the  universal lover  in Stanza III.
However, such  power  is as yet unsubstantiated possibility only. The  "tall man"
has evolved  no aesthetic structure out of nature, and  the flies still swarm  "Without sense  or  purpose ... " to  become  "Meshed with  the  wheeling  fire  of  the  sun". The  sun  image  also suggests  the  extent  of man's  power,  its ambivalence in  both making   and   taking away,   and   the  suffering   to  be  paid   for  that   power. The reference  to the  dying  sun  as a " ... god ... " not only implies  the  eventual evo­ lution  of the  "overman" who  must  "go  down" before  he may  rise enriched,  but also the  death of all orthodox gods and  hence of Christ. The sun  bleeds to death in  a  memorable image  symbolizing both  the  blood  of Christ  which,  for  Layton, has  failed  to  redeem   man, or  even,  for  that  matter, to  recognize man, and  the

THE THEME OF  DEATH



violent blood sacrifice of the creator who must first destroy in order to realize the "Ambition, ... " of his creative imagination, his " ... pride, ... " in his human magnitude and  the " ... ecstasy of sex". Blood alone is no salvation for man, nor is  a  spiritual   ethos,  and  Layton's  disappointment  in  Christianity  is  captured poignantly in a few lines:

He stood still and waited. If ever
The hour of revelation was come
It was now, here on the transfigured steep.
The sky darkened. Some birds chirped. Nothing else. He thought the dying god had gone to sleep:
An Indian fakir on his mat of nails.

That  he accepts this failing is evident in the very duality of the sun image, particularly as  it  leads  him  directly  in  Stanza  V  to  examine  for  validity  the Hebrew  tradition symbolized as mountain  peaks abruptly   piercing  the sun.  So, the poem returns  to human terms, as Layton  points out the great relevance of the Hebrew  tradition which, in its wait for a redeemer, seems to epitomize man's long suffering.  Yet, the  purpling  hills are " ... silent  as time,"  and  the creative  man must find his own answers.
The  direction  now is downwards, and the "tall  man" drops the " ... halo / Of mountains, ... " as emphatically  as he doffed " ... his aureole of gnats ... " The object  of the  remainder  of the  poem is a snake,  perhaps  the only true  inheritor and  preserver of the earth.  In its death,  and  in particular the "tall  man's" dying with it, the snake represents the wisdom of the earth.  Its temptation is ultimately
a temptation to knowledge, for in life it had been:

The manifest of that joyful wisdom,
The mirth and arrogant green flame of life;
Or earth's vivid tongue that flicked in praise of earth.

It is the culminating symbol of Layton's many creature  deaths and  man's compli­ cated  relationship  to  those deaths.  "Your  jig's up; ... "is  a  death  knell  for the snake as well as an anticipation  of the man's necessary death. The sun has become "A  blood-red organ in the dying sky", a shrunken  phallus, an image of exhausted energy. The  frantic  daylight energy of nature  has subsided. Night is coming on. Symbolically, the "tall man" is about  to discover his own darkness through  which he will be reborn in his own light, in this case, the transformation through  him of nature  into art.

THE THEME OF  DEATH



Beside the rigid snake the man stretched out
In fellowship  of death; he lay silent
And stiff in the heavy grass with eyes shut, Inhaling the moist odours  of the night
Through which  his mind  tunneled with flicking tongue
Backwards to caves, mounds,  and sunken  ledges
And  desolate  cliffs where came only kites, And where of perished  badgers and  racoons  The claws alone  remain, gripping the earth. Meanwhile the green snake crept  upon  the sky,
Huge, his mailed  coat glittering with stars that  made The night  bright,  and  blowing thin  wreaths of cloud Athwart the moon; and as the weary man
Stood  up, coiled above his head, transforming all.

For  Layton, the  story  must  never  end; he does not  accept  final solutions,  even artistic   ones,  for  the   condition  of  art   is  its  constant  destruction  and   renewal through time,  and   while  he  lives, it  seems  he  will  write.  Hence, the  life-death cycle,  with  many  stories  yet to tell, seems an  appropriate metaphor, both  for the author's activity  and  for his continuing output, whatever its subsequent direction<; are likely to be.


REFERENCES
1 Layton, Irving.  A  Red   Carpet   for the  Sun. Toronto:  McClelland and  Stewart
Limited, 1 959· Introduction.
2   Nietzsche,  Friedrich. The Birth  of Tragedy and  The  Genealogy of Morals, trans. by Francis Golffing.  New York:  Doubleday & Company, Inc.,  1956. Pp. 102-103.
3 Layton discusses  this  further in  the  Foreword to A  Red  Carpet   for the  Sun.
4  Kaufmann,   Walter.  Nietzsche,  Philosopher   Psychologist   Antichrist, Cleveland: Meridian Books, The World  Publishing  Company, 1950. P. 290.
5 Nietzsche,  Ibid., p. 51.
6   Mandel, Eli.  Canadian Writers &  their  Works:  Irving   Layton. Ed.  by  William
French. Toronto: Forum House  Publishing Company, 1969. P. 39·
7  Layton, Irving. The Swinging Flesh, Toronto:  McClelland and  Stewart Limited,
1961.  P. xiii.
8  Nietzsche,  Ibid., p. 8.
9  Ibid., p. 52.
10  Mandel, Ibid., p. 25.
11 Ibid., p. xxii.



IRVING LAYTON


Apocalypse in Montreal



Elizabeth Waterston









MONTRFAL rs A GOOD  MOTHER for mystics. She presents essences: serenity,  brassiness, squalor;  slum,  cathedral, suburb; glare  of  neon,
gloom of mountain, slime of waterfront.  She is "full of perverse appetites  I devout,
beautiful I cobras in the snow, I white foxes, priests' surplices".
But Montreal,  having bombarded  the senses with experience,  presents multiple ways of imaging  the  stimuli.  Double-language  signs act  as the  inescapable  re­ minder to every child that there are at least two ways of naming  everything in the city. If the growing child in Montreal  is Jewish, he will add two further languages as the channels for his sense of the world -Yiddish, the mamma-language, and Hebrew,  the  language  of ritual  and  learning.  And  if  the  young  man  is a  poet, tending to concentrate with extra sensitivity not only on the world about  him but on his own response to that  world and on his own  power to express response, he will be encouraged  by such a city as Montreal  into a readiness  to work through  symbols. For here is the manifest city of  dreams. Here  is the city that corresponds to a sociologist's archetype,  a city of  visible levels and limits, of discernible hinter­ land and  heart.  Such a city  reinforces the poet's anagogic  sense of the oneness of the world of dreams and the world of experience.
In several major  poems, Irving  Layton has moved from  mystic contemplation
of  a  moment  in  his  experience  in  Montreal   into  a  powerful  universal  vision. Sometimes he swells into the fury of an apocalypse.  (Such  a fury bums  in "Im­ proved  Binoculars"). Other   poems  (such  as  "Reconciliation")   begin  "betwixt  the harbour  and the great Crucifix", but lead to a delirium  of love rather than of destruction.  In  "I saw a faun  on Somerled Avenue", he presents a comic subur-

16

APOCALYPSE IN MONTREAL



ban  fantasia, with  a wry aftermath. Finally, in recent years, he has reduced  the turbulence  of  Montreal  to a memory of the city, seen from  far away  ("On this Far Shore"), or remembered  as a vast echoing emptiness -a memory that  brings "joyful peace and wonder" ("Silent Joy").
Now that  Layton  has left Montreal,  both physically and  poetically, it is worth
taking a look at his work to date, to see what he has made of the city-and what it has made  of him. In The  Whole  Bloody Bird, Layton  has structured an entire volume around  his sense of place. Notes or observations crystallized from his travels lead  to  a  set  of aphorisms,  and  finally spin  off into  poems;  the  whole  process begins each time with response to a particular  locale. So too, in the main body of Layton's  earlier  work,  the  process of  poetic  refinement -from  fact  to idea  to poem-begins most often with a particularized  sense of place. And the place, for the younger Layton, was Montreal.



IRVING LAYTON's earliest volumes Here and Now,  Now is the Place, The  Black Huntsman, Cerberus, and  Love, the Conqueror Worm, exposed the  zones  of  Montreal   life that  would  stir  the  young  poet.  De  Bullion  Street,
shoddy  habitat   of  rouged  whore  and  transient  soldier,  "rich I Suburban  West­
mount  that  squats  upon  a slum"  ("Excursion"); Mont  Rolland,  the Laurentian antithesis  to  the  daemonic  city-centre;  St. Helen's  Island,  a  place of nightmare memory  to  "Odysseus  in  Limbo"; McGill,  where  Apollonian  values are  dese­
crated  in  "Philosophy   34"; "the  lighted  cross I that  shines steadfast  upon  the
city I with the faith  of its shareholders" ("Compliments of the Season")  -these
are the places named  in the earliest poems.
But it is in "Reconciliation" that  Layton makes his first full use of the city. This poem notes the physical poles of height and depth. In a sweeping vision it sees the wintry tensions of Montreal, the antithetic  whiteness of fox furs and surplices, the Cross on the mountain suggesting both suffering and light, the perverse appetites for devotion  and  for beauty. Yet the city, in winter, conciliates and  cancels these oppositions:

Betwixt the harbour And the great Crucifix the snow falls
white and astringent.

The poet finds in this Montreal  a metaphor for human oppositions:

APOCALYPSE IN  MONTREAL



You are like my city
full of perverse appetites ...

He  concludes the  poem  with  a  brilliant  consummation, both  personal and  civic, a "double marvel":

and in the tinfoil air
I doubly marvel
that  after estrangement should  come
such fine unhoped-for
delirium.

In  1954,  '55,  and  '56,  volumes repeat  the range  of place references, but change the  emphasis, and  change  also the  metaphoric application of Montreal places  to human problems. In  Cold Green Element,  In the Midst  of My  Fever, The  Long Pea-Shooter, The  Blue Propellor, The  Bull Calf,  and  The  Improved  Binoculars, certain   place  names  sharpen the  poet's  focus on  Montreal's centre. He  introduces "The Main  Street  that  leads to the  Mountain" (in  "Personae"), the  Westmount of "Lacquered  Westmount Doll",  Place  d'Armes, where  the  poet,  turned statue, witnesses  the  terror  of the  city  (in  "God, when  you speak") . This  focus  on  the centre  of Montreal is climaxed  in "Winter Fantasy".
"Winter  Fantasy" specifies "the explosion  of  Peel  and  St.  Catherine" as  the scene  of a terrifying vision. The  choice  of this down-town corner, rather than of the  mountain or the slum,  reflects the  poet's  growing sexual  tension  and  his dread of that  fury,  the  modern woman. Peel and  Ste. Catherine: an  intersection deeply symbolic.  Peel, the  business street,  male,  English-speaking, leads  down  to Windsor Hotel   and   the  Canadian Pacific  Railway   Station, or  up  to  McGill  University; Ste.  Catherine, the  glittering French and  feminine street  of shops,  moves  beyond Eaton's and   Morgan's to  The   Gayety,   Dupuis Freres, and   the  Church of  Ste. Marie. Of  course  the  intersection is an  explosion ! Yet  here  the  poet  pitches  his poem,   under   green   neon  signs.  Here   ghosts  arise,   ravens  shriek   at  the  poet's "distaste for  winter", and  at  his dread  of the  frenzied shoppers and  of his  con­ suming   spouse.  Against  the  terror   of  this  hectic  and  love-lost  corner,  the  poet raises his hand.

. .. raising my hand ...
I made lo! the Cross which inflames our city plunge hideously through the electric air
and turn into windowlights which glowed only through the recollection of former  brightness.

APOCALYPSE IN  MONTREAL



The  Cross here, I think,  implies the persistence of form  (whether  religious, mari­ tal, civic, or commercial) . The  city inflamed by this cross is a purgatory. In this city, tramcar and  newsvendor,  cigarette butts and shawled women are all variant versions of the  motif of reduction  and  abandonment and  wastage. All are shells, all are like the "white  columns of lost & found".  And all accrue at the "explosion of Peel & St.  Catherine". In  the down-town  centre of Montreal Layton  finds a symbol of his emerging vision of modern marriage.
The  snow-covered  mountain can  still offer  a  momentary   panacea.   "Mount
Royal"  presents  a  vision  of  delight  and  affection.  On  the  mountain the  fast­ moving  skis and  the  shouts  of  the  skiers lead  the  poet  from  his  "litanies  of sorrow".

Approach, fill your pockets with so much free affection;
praise this mood
more fragile than a poet's oath.

Further  poems from  this period specify and  respond to the Montreal  suburbs. Here the city's map  becomes a medium for social rather  than for personal revela­ tions. In  "Lachine, Que.", blast furnaces and  red-brick houses of the workmen's
suburb  lie  "glistening I at  the  foot I of  the  highway".  In  Cote  St.  Luc,  early
morning  peace and  construction, children's  dreams and  quiet study all jostle for room in the poet's mind, against memories of

the black bitter men­
my kin-
the inconsolable, the far-seeing
("Early Morning in Cote St. Luc")

The  poet  is  uneasy  and  hostile in  the  suburbs.  "One of the  better  suburbs  of Montreal" furnishes the ironic scene of "Me, and P.M.,  and the Stars". The  poet passes on the word that  God is slowly decomposing, leaving only an odour "in the better churches of the city".
Those  "better churches", and  their  secular equivalents,  are specified, and  re­ jected also. Notre Dame Cathedral, "this immense and ugly edifice" houses incon­ gruously the statuettes  of Ezekiel and Jeremiah,  "incensed", captive in the spidery church.  "Drunk on McGill Campus" again mocks the University as dessicator of joy; "University  Buildings" add the "pale  yellow, geometric" hives of  Universire de Montreal  to the  picture  of institutional failure. "Pine  Avenue Analyst" briefly

APOCALYPSE IN MONTREAL



and  sardonically adds  the  Montreal address  of the modem psychiatric priesthood.
The  specific localism  of these  poems, however,  was being  supplemented in the mid-'5os by a more  universalized  poetry.  The  down-town street  of "Composition in Late  Spring", the  tenement  room of "Eros Where the  Rents  aren't High", the suburban  garden  of  "Summer  Idyll",  the   burning  orphanage  of  "Improved Binoculars"-these scenes, though redolent  of  Montreal to the  Montrealer, are really without specific placing. They  might  map  any modem city.
There are,  however,   two  poems  of  around  1956  which   show  an  important transition in  Layton's response  to  Montreal in  particular. The  first  is "Spikes". This  strange  poem   begins  in  a  night  without  moon  or  stars,  when  "suburban windows  gleam  like tombstones". The  poet,  meditating on  this dark  city, "sullen and  arbitrary", finds a new message of continuity, in spite of death and  difference, from  father to son.  He  puzzles over  his child's level glance, wondering if he has won this peace  for his child through his own encounter with  the city;  because

so often with white face I have wept
in your great empty pall-black squares.

The   poem  ends  with  this  memory  of emptiness at  the  heart of the  labyrinthine city.
The  second  poem,  "Boardwalk at Verdun" looks outward, away from  the  city. Here  at the riverfront,

birds
fly far out
over the water; and return.

So too  the  hot  citizens  on the  Verdun ferry,  the  swimmers, the  gulls, the  insects, move  out  over  the  water.  The  diver  "plunges knifelike  to sever  his roots". The poem  is a  meditation on motion  and  pattern. Beyond  the  meditation hovers  the awareness that  Montreal is an island, rimmed by possibilities of escape.


ER THE TIME BEING,  Layton remained in  Montreal, writing m  I957  and   I958  a bitter  series of poems on tension  in marriage, hostility  within
the community, bickering among poets. The  poems collected  in A Red  Carpet   for the Sun  end with a repeated rejection  of the city-every city.

And leaving the city for the country and  man's ungovernable appetite

20

APOCALYPSE IN  MONTREAL



for malice and his evil wit,
I am more at home among dead moles.
('Warm Afterdark")

He  moves  (in  "For  Mao  Tse-Tung")  to a "remote  and  classic lake".  He leaves only the fa<;ade of himself painted  on "Venetian  Blinds"  ("bought from a  mer­ chant  comer  Craig  and  Main"). He rails at Westmount for bepraising false poets ("Transmogrification"). Then  from this cluster of hostile poems a new Montreal  place-name  emerges:  "Cote  des Neiges Cemetery".  Layton of course had written effectively about  a cemetery  in the earlier poem "Cemetery  in August",  but now the cemetery is named,  and  the poet fixes on the tomb  of  "Moise  Wong, alien/ and  quaint  among  French  Catholic  names". "And  this formal scene is a kind of Poetry", he notes-a poetry, we feel, peculiar to this alienating city.
Sociologists tell us of the death  of modem  cities: the loss of symbiotic interplay
of regions and  biotypes, the loss of ecosystem. Layton,  poetically, is reflecting the general  malaise of all modem  cities, and  adding  his own baffled sense of the un­ readiness of  Montreal  to find a  place for  him  anywhere  in its great  concentric circles from summit  to suburbs.  In early poems he had  ranged from the heart  to the  hinterland of Montreal  and  back, in flickering but  passionate response. Now he was finding  the sense of flexibility and  renewal lessening, both in the city and in  himself.  Increasingly  this  city seemed "tomb-oriented" (in  Lewis Mumford's phrase). For  a poet-even  a poet who would include  "cemeteries" among  the "List  of my Delights"  (The Whole  Bloody Bird) -the cross of death  as a civic nucleus could no longer vitalize the city, or the poem.

But beauty to be beauty should be flawed
not dead.

Our  last glimpse of the  city in this group  of poems is caught  from  the Lookout (in  "Mute in  the  Wind"). Here,  beneath  the cold white  balustrade  is stretched a bleak canvas of snow, marked "perennis".



l:E POET  BEGAN his travels:  to Rome, to Paris. The  Swinging Flesh, and  Balls  for a One-Armed  juggler, mark  his first travels, physical and mental,   away   from   Montreal.  He  took  with  him  Canadian  touchstones.   In "Piazza  San  Marco" he hears echoes from Ste. Agathe, and from Belmont Park. When  he returned, he sprayed  place-names in sardonic  profusion:  Hampstead,


21

APOCALYPSEINMONTREAL



where  the   "bored   young  wives"  use  their  convertibles,   and   where  eloquent bankers  offer patronage; Victoria Square,  where the stony Queen  turns her back on manly reality;  Ruby Foo's, where Yom Kippur Jews from Cote St. Luc, Hampstead, and  Town of Mount  Royal do their "Stocktaking on the Day of Atonement"; Desjardins;  Sherbrooke Street, where tourists stare  (in "The Archi­ tect"); the  Oratoire St. Joseph  (in  "Agnus  Dei"). It seems as though  the first trips  abroad  had  confirmed  Layton  in his poetic method,  confirmed  him  in the feeling  that  the  very particularized  allusions to  Montreal   places  would serve to create  a symbolic map of a recognizable city of modem consciousness. The  map is surveyed now in a consistently ironic tone.
Abroad  again,  and  new poems celebrate Spain.  El Caudillo,  Alicante,  Denia: these  are  the  place  names  of the  1964  poems of  Laughing  Rooster. They  are capped,  however, by the fantastic return  to Montreal  in "I saw a faun on Somer­ led Avenue".  Somerled is a long, broad, colourless, duplexed  and triplexed street, leading  west through  Notre Dame  de Grace  (pronounced  uncompromisingly  by English-speaking  Montrealers "Notter  Dam de Grass"). Somerled leads not up to the mountain  but to West Hill High School and to the new suburbs "out" in Cote St. Luc. On such a street, all Montreal's  people, menacing  to a poet, appear: the disc jockey, the insurance agent, the social worker. But a wintry miracle of poetry occurs.  A sparkling  faun,  prophetic,  rejuvenates  all  values. "Even  professors of Englit / when  they  pranced  on the  same spot sparkled." But  the faun  is killed, melted, buried, and the poet adds

I . . . closed the window on some broken stars
and made myself a cup of tea.

So much for creativity and spontaneity in the suburbs. Briefly, in "Winter Light", the faun's  mood  of shimmering  freedom  and  brilliance  is recaptured. Here  pas­ sion, rather  than  poetry, fills the suburban street with an affirmation of the possibility of peace and  joy:

Shiva dances on Somerled Avenue and in our bedroom
A million roosters cry up the sun;
at night when we embrace
We hear the silence of God.

Further  trips  to Europe  in 1968 brought  disillusioned awareness of the "shat-

APOCALYPSE IN  MONTREAL



tered  plinths" of human ideals. In this awareness  the suburban promise of  Somer­
led faded. The  poet turned to the bitter lessons of Israel for his next  poems.
He saw still from  that  far  shore  "the great  city I love and  hate". "On this Far Shore" presents  a reprise of the mood of "De  Bullion Street". Brutality, repulsion, outrage -with these the  poet tries once more to shock the conformists out of civic pride.  The  sounds  of De  Bullion  Street,  the stink of its garbage pails,  have  their persisting  equivalents:

... the brutal cries of hunger and love ... and foulness that like an escaping gas
issues from the defeated and the sick.

The  rouged  whore, young  soldier,  the Oriental, the shipjack of De Bullion  Street, are  replaced by a more  bourgeois,  and  perhaps more perverted cast of characters:

Boy-lovers, typists, thieves, professors:
they jostle each other in restaurants.

But  the  source  of  the  poet's  ironic  disillusionment is now  not  merely  local,  but universal.  In   "De   Bullion   Street", the   reptilian   street   invaded  and   perverted virgin  consciousness.  In  the late poem,  memory  is invaded ultimately by the sound from  the  sky  ("where poetry  is")   of an  Israeli  youth  on  a  propaganda  mission, dropping a Torah from  a helicopter, "on  the small stones". The  city of the youth­ ful  poet thus  remains in the maturing consciousness, but fused now  with universal contemporary distress and  confusion.
But finally, in  rg6g,  Layton  came  back to a memory  of his city in "Silent Joy". "The great  empty  pall-black squares" seen at the heart  of the city in "Spikes" now are  remembered  as  a  cathedral. The  snow  of  early  poems  is gone; vines  grow instead.  The   old  menacing lanes,  as  of  the  De  Bullion  district, are  cooled  by shadows. In  cemeteries there  is a hum  of persistent  though meaningless life.

Remembering
St. James Street, Sunday mornings
-a vast empty cathedral,
my footsteps echoing in the silent vaults rooms on quiet afternoons, alone
or with one I love deeply- shadows, cool and long, in hot lanes insect-humming  cemeteries

23

APOCALYPSE IN  MONTREAL



and  light dripping from  vines
in globules of rose, of pale-green

I am so utterly  filled
with  joyful peace and  wonder my heart  stops beating  ...

The  gentle  light  in this poem is a fitting conclusion of the long, varied series of poems filled with the lights of Montreal. The series had begun with the vicious red lights of De Bullion Street:

Below this broad  street  inverted bell-jars Hanging from  wooden  crucifixes  drop Tiny  moons upon  the shaven  asphalt.

Then  Layton  had moved to dim the lights of suburbia,  in "Me, the P.M. and the
Stars":

The  windowpanes yellow with warmth and  light made  a perfect  target
for a piece of coal embedded
in the white and  innocent snow.

He had watched the city in flames through his "Improved Binoculars":

Then the dignitaries rode across the  bridges  under an auricle  of light which  delighted them,  noting  for later  punishment those that  went  before.

He  had  rejoiced  in the  "melting-butter sun"  in "Composition in Late  Spring", but had recognized that in "Lachine, Que.,"

the  skies
crimson  with  sunset disappear
into  blast furnaces.

But in retrospect it seems he had caught  best the "light  show" of Montreal  in "Winter Fantasy". In the last prophetic stanza of that  fine poem, the hectic neon of the city, and the inflaming Cross, were replaced finally by a calmer glow:

All night, all night,  the autos  whizzed past me into heaven,  till I met men going there
With  golden  nails and  ravens whose wings brushed  the night  up the tall sides of buildings
and  behind  them in the morninglight the windows  shone like saints pleased with the genius that had  painted them.



PASSAGE	BY	LAND




Rudy Wiebe




INEVER   SAW  A  MOUNTAIN  a<  a  plain  until  I was twelve, almost  thirteen.  The  world  was poplar  and  birch-covered;  muskeg hollows and
stony  hills; great  hay sloughs  with the spruce on their far shores shimmering  in summer  heat, and  swamps  with wild patterns  burned  three  and  four, sometimes five feet into  their  moss by some fire decades before, filled with  water  in spring but dry in summer  and sometimes smoking faintly still in the morning light where, if you slid from your horse and pushed your hand into the moss, you could feel the strange  heat of it lurking.
In such a world, a city of houses with brick chimneys, telephones, was less real than  Grimms' folk tales, or Greek myths. I was born in what would become, when my  father   and  older  brothers  chopped  down  enough  trees for  the  house, our chicken  bam; and  did  not speak English until I  went to school, though  I can't remember  learning  it. Perhaps  I never have (as one former professor insists when he  reads  my  novels) ; certainly  it  wasn't  until  years later  I  discovered  that  the three miles my sister and  I had meandered  to school, sniffing and  poking at pussy­ willows and  ant  hills, lay somewhere  in the  territory  Big Bear  and  Wandering Spirit  had  roamed  with  their  warriors  always  just ahead  of General Strange  in May and  June,  1885. As a child, however, I was for years the official flag raiser (Union Jack)   in our one-room school and during the war I remember wondering what  it would  be like if one day,  just as I turned  the comer  of the pasture  with the  cows, a huge car  would wheel into our yard, Joseph Stalin emerge and from under  his moustache  tell my father  he could have his farm back in Russia, if he wanted  it. Then  I would stand  still on the cow path trodden  into the thin  bush soil and  listen, listen for our  cowbells; hear  a dog bark some miles away, and a boy  call;  and  wonder  what  an  immense  world of  people -I  could  not  quite imagine  how many-was now doing chores and if  it wasn't for the trees and the

PASSAGE BY LAND



curvature of the earth  (as the teacher said)   I could  easily see Mount Everest somewhere a little south of east. Or west?
My  first sight  of the  prairie  itself I do not  remember. We were  moving  south, leaving  the  rocks  and  bush of northern Saskatchewan for ever,  my  parents said, and  I was hanging my head  out  of the  rear  window  of the  hired  car,  vomiting. I had  a weak stomach from having  been stepped on by a horse, which sounds  funny though I cannot remember it ever  being so. Consequently, our  first day  in south Alberta the driver  had me wash his car and so I cannot remember my first glimpse of the  Rocky  Mountains either.  It was long  after  that  that  anyone explii.ned  to me  the  only  mountain we could see plainly  from  there  was in the  United States.
But sometimes a fall morning mirage  will lift the line of Rockies  over  the level
plain  and  there  they  will be, streaked  black in crevices  under  their  new snow with wheat  stubble for  base and  the sky over you;  you can  bend  back forever  and  not see its edge.  Both  on  foot  and  from  the  air  I have  since  seen some  plains,  some mountains on several  continents; jungles;  the  Danube, the  Mississippi,  even  the Amazon. But  it  was  north  of Old  Man  River  one  summer Sunday when  I was driving my father (he  had  stopped  trying  to fatm and  he never  learned to drive a car) to his week's  work pouring concrete in a new irrigation town,  that  we got lost in  broad  daylight  on  the  prairie. Somewhere we  had  missed something and the  tracks  we  were  following  at  last  faded  and  were  gone  like  grass.  My  father said in Low German, "Boy, now you tum  around."
I got  out.  The grass crunched dry  as crumbs and  in every  direction the  earth
so flat  another two steps would  place  me at the  horizon,  looking  into  the  abyss of the  universe.  There is too much  here,  the  line of sky and  grass rolls in  upon  you and   silences  you  thin, too  impossibly  thin  to  remain in  any  part   recognizably
:yourself.  The  space  must  be broken  somehow  or  it  uses you  up,  and  my father
:muttered in the car,  "If you go so far and  get lost at least there's room to go back. Now
in a wrinkle  of the land -the prairie  in Alberta is not at all flat, it only looks like that  at  any  given  point-white  crosses beside  rails  that  disappeared straight as far  in either  direction as could  be seen.  We had  not  crossed a railroad before  but the  tracks  could  no more be avoided  here than  anything else and  some connecting
,road to the new town  must be eventually somewhere beyond.
In  that  wandering to find it is rooted,  I believe,  the feeling  I articulated much later; the  feeling  that   to  touch   this  land   with  words  requires an  architectural structure; to  break  into  the  space  of  the  reader's mind   with  the  space  of  this western  landscape and  the  people  in it  you must  build  a structure of fiction  like

PASSAGE BY  LAND



an engineer builds  a bridge or a skyscraper  over and  into space.  A poem,  a lyric, will not  do.  You  must  lay  great  black  steel lines of  fiction,  break  up  that  space with  huge  design  and, like the  fiction of the Russian  steppes,  build  giant  artifact. No song can do that; it must  be giant fiction.
The way  a  man  feels  with  and  lives with  that  living  earth   with  which  he  is always labouring to live. Farmer or writer.




















Subscribe before August!

Canadian  Literature  has long held its price below that of most comparable  journals,  but continually  rising costs now force us to the third increase in subscriptions in twelve years.
From   August  1st,  1971,  the  subscription  rate  for  Canadian
Literature, both in Canada  and abroad, will be as follows:

IYEAR, 4 NUMBERS
$5.50
2 YEARS, 8 NUMBERS
$10.00
3 YEARS, 12 NUMBERS
$14.50
The price of single copies will increase to $2.00 each.

Subscriptions at the existing  rate of $4.25 will be accepted  up to the 31St  july

HASTEN AND  SAVE!



THE CRUISING AUK
AND THE WORLD BELOW





Lawrence W  Jones










GORGE JOHNSTON ;. surdy an anomaly among  the present generation  of Canadian poets. His work defies classification, refuses to fit any of the dominant  patterns  such as that  of metaphysical  exploration   (as  exemplified by Margaret  Avison)  or that  of verbal and  intellectual subtlety  (as exemplified by Stanley  Cooperman), yet in its own curious  way  it is every bit  as effective. It  is also, for  the  most part,  a more  truly  "Canadian" poetry  than  that  of  his contemporaries  in  the  images it  evokes and  the  way  of life it  describes  (a  fact which must please Mr. Johnston's  militantly pro-Canadian colleagues at Carleton University).
Although  much of The  Cruising Auk  (I 959)  and  Home  Free (  966)  is about the  city of Ottawa and  its people, George  Johnston   consistently  finds elements in our  country's  capital  (as does Raymond  Souster  in  Ontario's capital)   which are  symptomatic   of some  confusing,  often  sickening  tendencies  in  urban   life. It is this which places his work outside the pale of the merely "regional". Evidence of this is perhaps  the very popularity of The  Cruising  Auk, which, for a collection of poetry,  has sold  rather  widely across Canada and  is presently going  into  its seventh printing.
However, for those of us who know George Johnston it is perhaps  difficult to square  away his incisive poetic comments, his function  as a cultural  seismograph, with the  man  himself. For he is both  a scholar  of some  repute   (his  translation of the Old  Norse Saga of Gisli was published by the  University of Toronto  Press in  I963)  and  a Quaker  whose views on pacifism are  both  well-known and  well-

THE  CRUISING AUK



exemplified  by his life. The scholarship would  seem inimical to the  folksy charm exuded  by his lyrics  (although not to the starched black  humour which  underlies them); the  pacifism,  although it  appears in  many  of  his  poems   ("Under  the Tree" in  Home  Free  is  the  best  example, "War  on  the  Periphery" and  "The Hero's Kitchen" in The Cruising  Auk  being  others), would  seem  out  of keeping with  his unrelenting attack  upon  certain  types  of people.  But  Johnston manages to avoid  either  unsophistication or  blatant indictment by  a technique most often used in fiction -that of the  microcosm.
The  world  he  portrays, taken  in  toto,  is a self-enclosed  one.  The   people  who populate it and  the  actions  which  take place in it are reflections  of the real world, as  though   the  poet  were  making   his  observations from   the  surface   of  a  pool, which  means  that things  are  often  grossly distorted, grotesque, absurd. Like  the goldfish  in  "Life from  a  Goldfish  Bowl",  the  poet  himself  "notes the  goings-on with  goggle  facej Of  all  the  world  around about  in  air", and   draws  for  us  a serio-comic picture of  its  insanities.  I would  like  to  look  briefly  at  this  micro­ cosmic  world  Johnston details,  at  the  almost  Swiftian  satire  which  arises from  his portrayal (which has its undercurrent of serious  commentary) and  finally  at  the peculiar  style  the  poet  employs  in  order  to frame  his lyrical  pictures.
The  first striking thing  I notice  about  Johnston's world  is the  presence  in  it of
a great  number of weird  people.  Their names  are  chosen  with  Dickensian care: Mr.  Goom,   Mr.   Boom,  Mrs.   McGonigle,  Mr.   Murple, Miss  Decharrnes, Mr. Byer, Dr.  Gay,  Joad-the list seems endless. And  most  of them  seem  to  be less individuals than  personifications of  traits  which  belong  to identifiable groups  in our  society: middle-class businessmen,  spinsters  in their second childhood, giggling young  things,  bachelors who seem to be eternally  out  "on  the town". In "Escape", for  example, we  hear  of  a  belated   affair   between   the  conscience-stricken  Mr. Smith  and  the  vulture-like widow  Mrs. McGonigle:

Fleeing from Mrs. McGonigle, Mr. Smith Took refuge in a public telephone booth Whence he rang, as he always did, forthwith, The gospel tabernacle, home of Truth.

Mrs. McGonigle meanwhile searched the streets
Asking herself as she did so why she did.
His life with her she knew was a nest of sweets
From which he beat it, now and again, and hid. The poet,  tongue-in-cheek, sums  up  the situation neatly:
29

THE CRUISING AUK



Truly a man is never lonely here
And least of all at the moment of wild escape
In the telephone booth, a moment of bliss and fear
Between this world and the next, between fire and rape.

The   last  line  of  this  poem  is evidence  of  a  technique George  Johnston  con­ stantly  uses in evoking  his microcosmic  world -the inflation or  elevation  of the inconsequential and  seemingly  ordinary. The  denizens of his world  become mock heroes  and  heroines.  In  "Fun" we clearly  see  a  parallel with  the  story  of  Snow White;  Elaine   "sleeps  in  her   maiden   bed" while   across   the  street   the  seven boarders dream  about  her. In  "Music on the  Water" a  modern-day Cleopatra

comes in her little boat
When the air is warm on the smoky river, afloat, Making her presence felt in her flickering oars:
A journeying wound between the fragile shores.

Nights of splendour she's been to splendid men, Swallowed them whole and spit them up again, Mter  which they've forgotten  her perhaps-
As though she might have remembered  them, poor chaps.
Rather than  an  Egyptian lullaby,  the song she sings  is a "Pentecostal hymn." According to which Earth's glories are rather  dim
Whereas the rewards of the just are very bright; Low kind of song, but it serves her turn all right.

Some  of the  poems'  titles even  reflect  this mock-heroic dimension. In  "Queens and   Duchesses" the  subject   is  the  promiscuous life  of  one   Miss  Belaney   who "doesn't remember who kissed her last/ But he did  it good,  all right" but  around whose  head  shines  a  "haze of  gold". If  Miss  Belaney's pleasures   make   her  a queenly  sinner, Mr.  Boom is "A  Saint" because

his sufferings
Put him in the know of things, Teach  him what is what and what In spiritual things is not.
And when he looks upon us all His heart contracts into a ball Which is the perfect form of grief; Its perfectness provides relief.

THE  CRUISING AUK



In  these cases and  so many  others  we are confronted with  recognizable character­
types  whose  attitudes toward life are  satirized,  never  directly  condemned.
The  activities  in which  these delightful people engage,  although utterly  human, even  mundane, are  also  blown  out  of  proportion. In  "Art and   Life"  the  poet describes  the  artistic  ablutions of Sadie  McGonigle  who has

spent the afternoon with suds and water And creams and mud;  her lines and points are put And every inch is tender to the view-
Elegant  work of art and artist too. but  who  has dressed  up only  to be undressed:
Sweet love, that takes a master piece like this
And rumples it and tumbles it about, Why can he not be happy with a kiss?
He turns the shimmering object inside out
And all for life, that's enemy to art.
Now where's your treasure, little scented heart?

Again,  in  "Mail-Order  Catalogue" the  comprehensiveness  and   unfailing  regu­
larity  of the  contents cause  the  poet  to remark  that

In spring and fall, when serious young men Comfort  themselves that all that lives must die, Tax  and the teeming catalogue again
Come round, and give mortality the lie.

The same  kind  of satire  can  be seen  in "Mrs. McGonigle on  Decorum," "Home Again" and  "Dust," and  it brings  to mind  the sardonic humor with  which  James Thurber always  viewed  domestic  life.



SIGNIFICANTLY, much  of the activity  so satirized throughout Johnston's poetry  is city-related. For,  as  I  mentioned earlier,  the  city  is  really the  cosmic  entity   which   the  poetry  reflects.  Occasionally  this  is  obvious,  as  in "The Alderman's Day  in  the  City" and  "Love  of  the  City". In  the  former  the fairy-tale pattern of the  poem  almost,  but  not  quite,  covers  up  the  fact  that  this lazy city official is lining  his pockets  at  the  city's expense:

Up at his desk the alderman
Wags with his tar-warm feet;

THE CRUISING AUK



He puts his boots in the city
Whose own back yard is sweet.

In  the  latter  the  poet  makes  a more  general  comment about  the  artificiality and the suffocating nature of urban  life. In this  city  that  has  "moved us in",

The yellow sky comes down and fills the room; Dirt  on the floor is kind, the walls are kind, Everyone's kind to us wherever we go.

And  the  poet  asks the rhetorical question:

... truly when death comes where will he find A better room than here, better arrangements, More courtesy, more eager friendliness
Than  in this excellent street-scattered city,
This home, this network, this great roof of pity?

Clearly,   there  is a serious  side  to  all  of  this  Thurber-like lighthearted satire. There is always a meaningful comment made  by effective satire  or  parody, and  it seems to me that  George  Johnston is very concerned about  the  passivity of people in  the  urban mileu, about  the  non-commital nature of  people's  lives in  the  city. There is a general feeling  of helplessness  conveyed  in  Johnston's  descriptions of his  McGonigles and   Murples,  a  feeling  which   comes  across  openly   only  infre­ quently, as it  does in  "Flight," where  the  poet  watches a  crow  taking  off  from one  barren tree in search  of another:

Caw! he cries, as though he knew Something worth his while to do In an empty tree elsewhere;
Flap! he takes his blackness there.

Me too! I would like to fly Somewhere else beneath the sky, Happy though my choice may be Empty tree for empty tree.

Much the  same  feeling  is articulated  in  the  final  stanza of  "In It", where  the poet  declares:

The world is a pond and I'm in it, In it up to my neck;
Important people are in it too,
It's deeper than this, if we only knew;

THE  CRUISING AUK



Under  we go, any minute -
A swirl, some bubbles, a fleck....

The submission  to the  "destructive element" which  is implied  here  may  come in  the  form  of  routine drudgery which  holds  us captive  in  the  city's  grasp.  This is the  problem  with  "The Queen of Lop"  who

works all day at a big machine that lops and lops and lops; At five o'clock she does her face and the big machine it stops; Home again on a public bus she goes to her little flat,
Cooks a chop and forgets the lop and the wash-up and all that.

Even  in her  dreams, as the  poet  tells us later  in the  poem,  when  she  tries  to  find some  vicarious  excitement in  "a  boat  on  the  ocean  dark   and  queer" she  finds that  "the  big machine is aboard the boat"-there is no escape.  Not  only is there this  routine of  the  work-a-day world,  but  there  is the  smug  complacency of  the settled  routine of  marriage, as we see in  "Domestic" :

A man should build himself a house and put himself inside
And fill it full of furniture,  and get himself a bride
To fill it full of cooking smells and pickle smells and wit
And all in pleasure breed it full and make a nest of it.


The repetition of "full" here  only serves to emphasize the emptiness of the way of life  being   described.  Likewise,   the   mock-heroic   nature  of   Johnston's   people serves  to  point   up  the  unheroic, unchallenging nature  of  their   lives,  which   is perhaps the whole  point  of the satire.
In  any case, if this  reading of much  of The  Cruising Auk  is correct, we might
ask whether the  poet  suggests  any  alternative to the frothy  existence  he  portrays. While  it is not  the  poet's  function to offer solutions  to society's  problems (indeed, poets are  notoriously bad  at  that), I think  George  Johnston suggests  at  least  one possibility:  that   we  need   to  consciously  seek  our   own  freedom   from   slavish routine, perhaps by  the  use of our  imagination. In  "This Way  Down" the  poet admits that   "my   roof  is  wide  to  Heaven" and  asks  the  vital  question:  "Why am  I not then  airborne?" This  is where  the cruising  auk  of the  title  poem  comes in.  The bird  is simply   a  symbol  of  the  imagination which   has  freed  itself;  his virtue  is that  he  is airborne, and  this  is why  we  must  "rejoice in  him,  cruising there". We  must  strive  to  extricate ourselves  from  the  life  which   the  bird  sees as he looks down  upon  us:


33

THE CRUISING AUK



Our  unheroic mornings, afternoons
Disconsolate in the echo-laden air-


To  change   this  life,  the  poet  seems  to  be saying   (as  does  Raymond Souster  in "Good Fortune" in The  Colour  of the  Times) we must  take  charge of our  own lives rather than  waiting  passively for something to  happen. This  much  is clear, I think,  in the final  poem in The  Cruising  Auk, "0 Earth, Turn!" which  I quote here in its entirety:

The little blessed Earth  that turns
Does so on its own concerns
As though it weren't my home at all; It turns me winter, summer, fall Without  a thought of me.

I love the slightly flattened sphere, Its restless, wrinkled crust's my here, Its slightly wobbling spin's my now But not my why and not my how: My why and how are me.



W.vs IN   WHICH  we  may  exercise  our  whys  and  hows  are suggested  in  some  of  the  more  serious  lyrics  in  Home Free  (a  book  which  has
unaccountably not  lived  up  to  the  promise  or  popularity of its  predecessor). In the  stylistically-superb "Under   the   Tree,"  for   example,  we  are   exhorted  to recognize  our  complicity   with  the  judge  and  the  rest  of society  when  a  man  is condemned to hang. "We  hardly  know  each  other," says the  poet,  "But  here  we meet,   under   the   hanging  tree."   In  subsequent  sections   of  the   poem   various individuals and  groups are described-the judge himself,  religious  people, the condemned man's  relatives  and  friends-and we  can  see  how  each   of  them avoids  having   to  think  about  capital   punishment. The  religious  folk  justify  the hanging by soliciting  the will of God,  by placing  their  emphasis upon  the  "mean and  casual" murder itself and  not upon  what  led up  to it; the man's aunt and  his erstwhile   cronies   drown   any  serious  considerations  in  small   talk,   in "notions soaked   in   beer." Finally,   the   poet  says,  we  must   consider  the   paradox that although the  Earth is the  "pit  whence  we were  dug" it is also  by  necessity "the garden in which  we grope/ For  love."

34

THE  CRUISING AUK



In  the  book's  title  poem,  "Home Free", Edward is given  a  chance to  break the  bonds  of  a deadening life, but  refuses to  take  the  chance:

Edward  sweats for a fortnight,  the salt is in his shoes. Who knows about angels until he hears the news? Who knows about gardens until he smells the pit? Edward  is holding a pass, and he's afraid of it.

What Edward cannot understand is that  the  world  is a garden only  if you make it so in spite  of the  ugliness;  in  "Love  in  High  Places"  he  prays  that

in Canada  there must be
Somewhere
Surely a pleasant, sheltered garden, Green and fair,
Maybe even way down in the city
In its own air,
Where there would not be births or dreadful  pain, And fun
Would have no exquisite hook inside it;


Edward does  not  feel  himself  part  of  what   the  poet  calls  elsewhere   (in  "The Creature's Claim")  the  "creatureliness of  Earth", and  so  in  the  final  poem  in Home   Free  we  find  him  "asleep   where  brown  stalks  fuss  and   wave/  And   a squirrel has  planted oaks beside his grave."
Although the  poetry  of Home  Free is not  generally  as effective  as that  of The
Cruising Auk-Johnston seems much  more  at home  when  dealing  with  his little microcosmic world  of  Murples-all  of  the  poetry  is consistent   in  style.  Unlike other  Canadian poets, Johnston eschews experimentation with  rhyme  and  phrase­ ology.  But  the  very  presence  of  rhyme  and  regular  metre  gives  emphasis to  the routine he  often   describes.  Occasionally  he  resorts  to  couplets,  as  in  "A  Little Light" in The  Cruising Auk;  but  most common  is the  rhyme scheme  a-b-a-b and its variations, which  is apt  for  what  Johnston has  to  convey.  Where the  poet  is most  inventive (and  here  his  vast  knowledge  of  the  history  of  the  language is useful)  is in  the  matter of diction. He  is fond  of  creating words  to match sounds
-as  seen   in   the   "kechunk" of  anchored  boats   in   "Poor  Edward"  or   the "kaplink" of falling  hairpins in  "Dust," and  of simply  creating words  to  fill his lyrical  needs: "gogglesful" in "Elaine in  a  Bikini"  and  "emplaned" in  "Dust". Often, slang  is used  to  give  a  clearer  idea  of  the  level  of  life  being  described:

35

THE CRUISING AUK



"neither  I  suppose  I  ain't" ("A  Saint"), "no  dice"   ("Domestic")  and  "shot down"  ("On the Porch")   are examples.
I began by saying that George Johnston  is an anomaly  among  Canadian poets. But  as  I  have  tried  to  point  out,  his is a  unique  kind  of  poetry  with  its own values, with its own valid statement  to make. Taken  together,  the poems of The Cruising Auk remind  us of the urban  dilemma  we are faced with and with which we must cope. The symbolic people and  events in George Johnston's little world shed  light  on  their  counterparts  in  our  real  world.  And  we are  forced  to  ask ourselves, as we watch the auk cruising overhead: "Why am I not then airborne?"







Men Who  Helped Make Canada

MACNAB OF DUNDURN by Marion MacRae illustrated/$12.50
Sir   Allan   MacNab was  an  influential  member of  the  government of  Upper Canada and   joint premier from   1854   to  1856.   He  will  also  go  down   in  history as  the  man   who  built   Dundurn Castle in  Hamilton, Ontario. Around the  character of  this  man   and   his  famous house  Marion MacRae, author  of  The  Ancestral Roof, has  constructed a  fascinating architectural detective story.  Photographs, line  drawings, floor  plans,  maps.

THE PAPER TYRANT
John Ross Robertson of The Toronto Telegram by Ron Poulton
illustrated/$6.50
A  well-known columnist's  objective  yet  sympathetic delineation of  the  complex founder  of  the powerful  Toronto  newspaper which   began  as  The  Evening Telegraph. A  man   of  many   and varied  interests, John  Ross  Robertson  donated  a   large  part  of  his   personal fortune  to  the internationally-known  Hospital  for  Sick   Children. He   was  also  interested in  freemasonry and Canadiana; and  he was known  as the  Father of Amateur Hockey in  Canada.

NOT A ONE-WAY STREET
The Autobiography of James S. Duncan illustrated/$9.25
In a  book  that reads like  the  Who's Who  of  the  business world,  the  man  who  helped steer  the world-wide Massey-Harris Company through two  wars  and  three Depressions tells  the  absorbing story  of  his  life.  Jim Duncan was  the  friend, business  associate and confidant of important  men from   Canada and the  U.S.A. to  England, Russia  and  Australia; yet  today he  remains as  forth­ right and bluntly honest as when  he began  his career in  1910.

from   CLARKE, IRWIN & COMPANY LIMITED
791 St.  Clair Avenue West, Toronto 10, Ontario



THE POETRY OF GEORGE JONAS


A Critical Map


Andreas Schroeder



There  is no conflict that love or bullets
Could  not resolve in time.

George Jonas  ("Peace")


INVARIABI.Y, the  ll'"''"'' literatme i'one of attack; one ha<
only  to  begin  naming authors from  the  top  of the alphabet ( Benn,  Brecht, Bec­
kett,  Brach,  Baudelaire, Breton,  Camus, Cortazar, Celine, Dostoyevsky, Dlirren­ matt, etc.,  etc.)   to  realize  that   harmony and  equality in  literature  are at  best stylistic  elements, at  worst  the  worm  of paralysis gnawing at  the  base of irrecon­ cilable  issues. The technique of assault  is the  result of, or  partner to, the  tremen­ dous  amount of energy  released  in  a great  work  of art,  either  as a  result  of the artist's desperation over  his  suspension  between  the  two  extremes  or poles of  a given argument, or his fury  at realizing  the equal  validity  of any two contradictory statements. In  short,  everything is and  is not;  a premise  that  has driven  many  an artist  to metaphysical (and often  physical)  suicide.
A  Canadian  poet   whose   literature stands   as  a  distinctive example of  such energy  is Hungarian-born George  Jonas,  presently  a drama producer and  script editor  for CBC  Radio in Toronto, author of The  Absolute Smile and  The  Happy Hungry  Man.
What strikes  one  first about the  poetry  of George  Jonas is its quiet  but  almost malignant  tyranny, directed simultaneously at  himself,  his reader  and  those  who populate the spaces  around him.  As if to clear the stage  before  the  battle, the first poem ofT he Absolute Smile, "For the Record", sets the record straight:

37

GEORGE  JONAS



I think that I live in a street
Where the evenings are decidedly darker, A citizen of what is said to be a country, In the year nineteen-sixty-four.

All the snow melts around April,
In August there is nothing to wait for, The  Fall is established in November, January  is mostly Winter.

A woman claims to be my wife
On  the strength of which she lives in my house. But I am also dangerous to some animals
And have at times been observed to eat them.

I have little to say about the structure of society, There  may be certain letters to write occasionally, Certain  amounts to pay when they become due,
But it is against the law for some people to hurt me.

In view of this I continue to lead What  I am told is an existence Weeks ending in Sundays
Unasked questions scrupulously unanswered.

The   bleakness,  an  important part  of this  poem  as well as many  others  in Jonas' books,  here  tends   to  function  both   as  a  twilight backdrop  against   which   the "facts" of the  poem  are  paraded, as well as a depressant to reduce  the  impact of several  scarcely-veiled threats which  will become  open  declarations of war later  in Jonas' verse:

But I am also dangerous to some animals ...
But it is against the law for some people to hurt  me....

The   bleakness  will  remain  a  constant, however, changing in shade (though not in  identity)  only  occasionally  when  Jonas  offsets his viciousness  with  an  insolent laughter or sarcastic spoof.
By  way  of  further introduction Jonas   (in  the  second   poem  of The   Absolute
Smile, entitled  "Introduction") sketches a quick  rough outline of his own  person, just enough  to give  the  reader  an  indication of his "qualifications" and  his point of view:

... Easy to hurt by silence and by sound
I, as most men, increasing and alone

GEORGE JONAS



Grow horrible, and search in my wound,
From live trees cut a crutch on which to lean.

Springs are incidental  to what I have become
And Winters affect me not at all:
I keep alive by breathing and in some
Ways I resemble myself even more.

I murder  in the inside darkness, I
Have learned  to slice an apple and not touch it; The  universe recedes in disarray
I sit in metal towers and I watch it.

But I'm  making a note of things I do not like
And I do not like anything. Today
The  notes are multiplying in my scroll of black
You are in it, so is she, so am I.

(TAS:  p. 3)

In  this poem,  along  with  a reinforcement of the threat, we find the  first sign of its opposite,  the vulnerable side of the man :

Easy to hurt  by silence and by sound ...

This  side  will be exposed  repeatedly throughout Jonas' verse, though as a rule  it is found  lying  behind  heavy  barricades or guarded by a well-aimed covering fire of  abuse  or  laughter. Its  discovery,  however,   is an  easy  task,  for  Jonas has  no intention of hiding his feelings; he is simply  unwilling  to sell those  he has on the open  market in  pre-packaged cliches which  wouldn't fit them  in any  case. There is a ruthless  "honesty" about his poetry that  precludes  all sympathy, pity or Freud. Jonas makes  no excuses and  seeks no  justification  for his actions.  I will have  more to observe about this point  later on.
I have  said  that  Jonas' poetry  is a poetry  of attack; as such it makes  frequent
use of the element of surprise. Often  a poem leads off in low-key fashion, progress­ ing from  the  playful  to the  insolent  to the  cynical  to the  blatantly nefarious. One  reads  along  the  lines  of what  appears to  be a  relatively  peaceful  poem,  actually entitled   "Peace", and   suddenly finds  one  has  strayed  unwittingly  into  a  dense patch  of vicious  observations:

I wish to make a positive statement
Of happy hunters  returning  from the woods. Wardens of dwindling flocks, serious concern Dwells in their moist and beautiful eyes.


39

GEORGE JONAS



There is no conflict that  love or bullets
Could  not resolve in time.
Gardens are carefully  planned. Long  rows of roses sit
In  all directions around any house.

There is always a period  of peace
Between  two blows, when  a smiling  landscape Surrounds with  blue light the resting  warrior. The  raised arm  hardly  shows among the ferns.

At such times rabbits  jump out of their  trenches And stand  listening  at the entrance of the field. Worms pop out of the ground  in open  amazement, Sharp-beaked birds freeze unfailing in their  dive.
The moment is guarded by dustbins along  the streets
Of low and crippled suburbs  where  later
Children come out of hiding and  women  pause  for  breath. Hate, suspended, sways gently  back and  forth.
Rats  are pacing  the floor, thinking,
A loaf of bread  cuts itself into warm  slices, A glass of milk travels  to India,
Warships lean on their  guns and  close their  eyes.

The beauty of such moments is hardly useful Except for the purpose  of missing a heartbeat, As old men sit at tables, ready  to talk.
For  there is nothing to talk about. (TAS: p. 5)
The "period of  peace between two  blows" might well  describe the  time between Jonas' first  and  second book  publications; the  second blow, entitled The  Happy Hungry   Man, is a   progression  of  offhandedly laconic, often  faintly  desperate thoughts and  "irrelevant" stage directions punctuated by sudden, coolly sarcastic,
indifferently snide and ruthless comments:


Outraged
 

executives  caught  in air  raids

Whimper in the most gratifying way

Conquering crews in capsized  tanks
Burn  for some time and  grow very peaceful

Nor is it necessary to look for the spectacular
Small  tumours mollify malignant old women  ... (HHM: p. 37)

GEORGE JONAS



We  will  have many more opportunities to see this side  of Jonas' thoughts; what may   now   be   important  is  to   determine  just  what sparks this   disillusion, this isolation:

Moses and  I Must  have  climbed  different mountains
Or  must  have  been advised  by a different  god
For look at the writings on the rocks in my hand:

It seems I may not respect my parents
Or  my neighbour's right  to the things he believes he owns, Or  the lives of those I consider  to be my enemies.

Before you begin to envy me
Remember only this:
My god's  bidding is as remote from my nature
As your god's is from  yours And  I find his commandments As difficult  to keep.

(HHM: p. 34)

The poet  is forced by the  dictates of his own  nature to live in the  very  teeth of all accepted  (normal,  usual)  moralities, all  understood  corollaries of  conduct and belief:

Being alive  you will be disappointed
By disappointing your  nature
Or  being  disappointed by it;
Whether you're  finally awarded or avoided
Whether you're  looking for caresses or for kicks.

Being a woman  you'll often  be confronted
By confronting your sex
Or  being  confronted by it;
Whether you're  called, challenged or comforted
Whether you're  looking for caresses or for kicks.

But  being  alone,  you'll  nevertheless  be tempted
By tempting your own self
Or  being  tempted by it;
Whether your emotions  are accomplished or attempted Whether you regard  yourself as owned or rented Whether you're  looking for caresses or for kicks.

GEORGE  JONAS




Yeah, well
 
who will know if we ever meant it

Whether we played the game or threw a fix
Whether my lines were loving or pointed
Whether we were looking for caresses or for kicks ... 1

With  Jonas it is virtually  impossible  to tell whether he "played the game  or threw in a fix."  He  is too self-conscious an  artist  to  be hog-tied  by simple,  quick-drying solutions, and   too  conscious  of  being  conscious  to  trust   himself  even  when  he thinks  he is being honest. He realizes that  a man defines himself as much  by his imagination as he does by his instinctual impulses:

Coming from the tribe
In which angels abide I always told the truth When I thought I lied ...

(TAS:  p. 6r)

This   thoroughgoing suspicion  of  himself  is  one  which   every  conscious  man eventually faces  as a  major  issue, and  in Jones' work  this distrust  is paramount, being   the  source   of  both  his  laughter  and   his  refusal   to  take   himself  overly seriously.  Hence the  attitude, tone and  point  of view in his work.  But what  snaps such  a  comment back  into  balance is the  ruthlessness  of which  such  a man  be­ comes  capable, once freed  of this cumbersome sense of self-importance. Suddenly anyone, anything can  (must) take  on  whatever degree  of importance  he chooses to attribute to it; everything becomes the  helpless plaything of the man who is no longer  a slave to faith  or belief  (conviction). Such  a man  chooses  (or is forced, by his  very  suspicions,  to  choose)   his religions  and  morals  with  all  the  carelessness and  passing  interest  of a  bored  tyrant, who  may,  at  any  given  time, decree  that  such  and  such  a  thing  or  idea  be henceforth sacred, killing  those  who  refuse  to bow or attempt to disagree.
Such  an  insolence,  inevitably,  breeds both  raw  violence and  jagged  despair, but
since  the  public   arena of  Art  demands formality, these  must   be  chiseled  and shaped into  a  more  manageable construction. An  indication of  this  is found in The  Happy  Hungry  Man:

I know it is easy to exaggerate
The importance  of any event in childhood
I mentioned the whole thing in (	) And instead of dwelling on it I will Continue  with some light

GEORGE  JONAS



Subversive  verse
Trying  to make despair respectable ...

(HHM: p. so)

"Trying to make  despair respectable" is thus  part of the  objective of Jonas' verse, but  the  word  "respectable" in this context  does not imply  making it acceptable to the  world  at  large.  It means  attacking this despair  even  while  acknowledging its power  and  presence,  even  while admitting one's own vulnerability to it. It means all-out  war,  not  only  with  the  reasons for  despair,  but  with  the  reader  who  has the  audacity to watch  the  fight.  But this act of war is not to be confused  with  an act  of hope.  Jonas has  no  hope,  in fact,  refuses to accept  such  a crutch even if it were  logically  possible.  It is the  hopeless  condition  of a  Sisyphus  that  makes  his condition  "respectable",  that    demands  of   us   that    we   "imaginer   Sisyphus Heureux".
Therefore, Jonas has  no  use for  peace.  The  concept  is treated in his poetry  at various  times as either  impossible or to no point:

Peace herself will come
Peace herself will come
Peace herself will come tonight

She will take off her clothes She will take off her clothes Naked she will lie with me in bed

And nothing  I do will change me
And nothing I do will change her
And by morning the night will be over

("An Intercourse  With  Peace," TAS:  P·34)

The  same  thing goes for  love. Damned by his nature to live a life which  upends all  the  commonly accepted forms  of feelings,  he finds  himself  incapable of more than  the mechanics of them :

Through  some chance mutation
Poor G.J. has no organ to love with The way he sees with his eyes Tastes with his tongue
Thinks  with his mind
Screws with his penis
Scratches and bites with his nails and teeth

But having the urge to love

43

GEORGE JONAS



He tries loving with his eyes
His teeth and nails
His mind 	tongue    penis
And it still surprises him
That  he's not quite satisfied ...

(HHM: p. 28)

The  result  is that both  the  poet's  actions  and  his  person  appear to have  become inhuman. He  has  come  to  the  point  where  even  God  cannot help  him,  for  his minimum requirements for a satisfactory life have  become  so large  that  even God cannot afford  to give them any longer:

Of course, there will be a few even (God)  cannot  help.
A few who are unable to find a place in this soap opera of a world
Misfits, who are not at home, no matter  what,
In  this fat, happy, cause-and-effect, give-and-take universe
A few vicious saints who want all or nothing. (TAS: p. 7)

This  is the essence of an uncompromising view which  gives Jonas' poetry  its "monstrous" effect,  its insolent  yet unflinching demands which,  finally,  are  those of a man  who plays his stakes dizzyingly high,  plays the game  to win, hands  down. Total  destruction, the other alternative, has nothing to do with losing. A man  who has the  nerve  to  risk so much  so ruthlessly  no longer  fits into  the category which includes  losers. And so Jonas draws his conclusions:

I try but I cannot confirm or deny it
I can do nothing to prove or justify it
I could apologize but after all
I am not even certain that it is my fault.

I do not know what to make of inhumanity Beyond sharing and understanding it, Inflicting it and having it inflicted upon me Every day usually before noon.

And I have slowly come to the conclusion
That I am not a very personal thing,
My food has also known the pleasure of eating,
And some say my own soul could go on living without me. (TAS: p. 56)

GEORGE  JONAS



His realization is reflected  in his description of the people  around him.  A woman becomes little more than  an enumeration of parts, functions:

On occasion, a pair of thick ankles
And tidy breasts sit with me in the car
And the mind runs sharply through its ducts
And tall trees whistle by ...

(TAS:  p. 24)

or, in "Eight Lines for a Script  Girl" :

I almost know you now. You are your name,
The substance of your skin, the movement of your eyes, The line of your lips, the texture of your hair,
Your phone number, the colour of your voice.

You are your breast's shape, the full length of your limbs, You are your smile, your nailpolish, your dress.
Later  I'll know you more. Still later
I'll know you even less.

(TAS:  p. 30)

A  striking  resemblance between   Jonas'  condition and   the  one  described   by Camus in  his  "The Myth   of  Sisyphus" may  be  relevant  here.  In  the  section "Absurdity and  Suicide" Camus discovers:

Men  too, secrete the inhuman. At certain  moments of their lucidity, the mechani­ cal  aspect  of  their  gestures,  their  meaningless  pantomime  makes silly  everything that  surrounds  them.

The leap  from  this  position  to  the  Absurd   in  Jonas' books  is extremely short. Several   sections  of  "The  Happy Hungry Man", written in  a child-like  lilting rhythm, seem  to spin  off into an  absurd   joke; the flippant, almost  cursory  quality of many  of Jonas' poems  carry  this frame  of mind  to a number of quasi-hilarious,
quasi-deadly-serious conclusions,  all of them  characteristic of the  "bored tyrant" :









or:
 The  happy hungry man believes in food
The  happy homeless man believes in a home
The  happy  unloved man believes in love
I wouldn't  mind believing in something myself. (HHM: p. g)



45

GEORGE JONAS



At present I still have
A choice of deaths,
I could, for example, die of a difficult disease
For medical science and I could
Die for a stranger who has never learned  to swim. I could also die for the Queen.
These are quite honourable  deaths
But they don't appeal to me. I think I'll die for Barbara.

(TAS:  p. 25)

This  concerted suppression   of  all  undue sentimentality accounts directly  or  in­ directly  for  much   of  the  power  of  Jonas' work.  As such  it  appears to  be  very much  a  part  of Jonas' nature, and  it is certainly part  of the  reason  why he never actually  complains in any  of his poems.  Jeers,  yes, or  provokes,  but  never  com­
plains.  In  a recent  letter  to J. Michael  Yates  (Aug.  13/69) he refers half-jokingly
to an  entertaining little  "level  system"  which  he  uses to describe  various  types of people  and  their  attitudes about  living;  his own  attitude becomes  clearer  here:

... It  is not  a  value system;  the  four  levels of which  it  consists do not  form  an ascending  scale, but could be described, using Shakespeare's  works as an example, as follows. Level one is people who like Shakespeare  as a matter  of course, because his greatness  is taken  for granted  the same way as winter's  snow or summer sun­ shine; level two is the people who dislike Shakespeare  for the same reason:  that is, because they quarrel  with  all  the obvious facts  in life and  challenge  in  the most serious and  humourless manner  everything that seems to be part of the human con­ dition.  Level three  is the people who find Shakespeare  delightfully funny,  because he is really a scream,  just too much,  camp  if you will, but  who are  nevertheless enjoying him fully in this fashion. Finally, level four are the people who really know that  Shakespeare is indeed a great writer having come to this conclusion after inde­ pendent study and experience.

Jonas goes on to say that  he is himself a "level  three" person,  which  is certainly in  keeping  with  the  mood  of his poems,  give or  take  a few grimaces. The  comic element  in his verse helps save it from  coming  to idealistic  conclusions he cannot seriously  accept   in  any  case.  There are,  in  fact,  no  solutions   anywhere -only re-locations of the constantly inevitable nonsense:

It makes no sense, yes.
There's no good reason for it, no. So don't  believe me, don't.
Say it's a passing mood.

GEORGE JONAS



Go on, ship  wheat  to Asia, Clear  slums,
Redistribute wealth, Rehabilitate  prisoners, Liberate the  oppressed, Educate the  ignorant,
Construct a condition of justice.

But Asia won't be full until  Europe  goes hungry, Slums  will relocate themselves,
Wealth will find its own level:  a slope
Which  it seeks with  the physical force of water
And  just as relentlessly (But  don't believe me) Don't believe when  I say
The  prisoners  will become  jailkeepers

And  the  jailkeepers  prisoners, Don't believe me when I say
Your  teachers  will spread  ignorance
And your scientists destruction. "What would  you have us do then?"
I would  have  you do exactly what  you're doing: Clear  slums,
Educate the  ignorant. Liberate the  oppressed.

Oh,  it makes  no sense, I admit, There's no good reason for it, no.

(HHM: p. 51)

Predictably,  critics have  complained  about  the  no-exit signs  in  Jonas'  poetry. They have found it  too  difficult to stomach a  poet  who  not  only  recognizes that his  demands on  the   world around him   are  unjust, but   refuses to  apologize or accept the  customary guilt  for  an  anti-social stance:

I try but I cannot confirm  or deny it
I can do nothing to prove or justify it
I could  apologize  but after  all
I am  not even  certain  that  it is my fault. (TAS: p. 56)

47

GEORGE JONAS



The closest  that Jonas ever  comes  to  an  apology is in  a  poem ironically entitled, "Apology":

I cannot be shown
I cannot be shared
No one can learn  me.

I am  not what  I say
I am  not what  I do
I am  not my friends.

I die too fast
I am  born too often
No one can  talk to me twice

I am  not at home in my skin
I do not sit like a spider
At the centre  of my nerves

Mirrors do not reflect me
Sound  waves do not bounce  off me
I am not revealed  in my dreams.

No  explanations, No  affiliations Nothing.

Without inlets, from  a distance, I can only be punished
I can only be forgiven.

(TAS: p. 59)

In another letter to  J. Michael Yates, Jonas comments on  his  position in  this regard. He  refers  here  to the  condescension of critics who  attempt to treat him  as a  moral cripple:

... The condescending part  I am  used  to;  it is the  normal reaction of a "feeling" person   toward an  "unfeeling" one.  If you  make  the  mistake  of seeing  the  world objectively and  in some kind  of perspective (and  yourself  too since you are  part  of the  world)  you  will  be  accused  of-or  at  best  forgiven   for-your  "attitudes" since  most  people,  being  healthily   subjective, cannot conceive  of  a  cast  of  mind which   (to  use a simple  example) can  regard  its own  desires  as unjust but  still not feel  guilty.  Most  people  either  believe  that  what they  want  is right,  or  they  have  a conflict.  They  can't imagine  a  person  not  equating his own  desires  with  universal justice,  unless  he feels remorseful  and  beats  his chest.  The  absence  of this beautiful defense  mechanism that  permits  most people  to think  that  they rightfully own what

GEORGE JONAS



they would  like to have  is interpreted, depending on the  temperament of the critic, either  as pure  evil, or nihilism, or as an attitude, something in the nature of a noble fantasy  ...

and comments on the  "two contradictory" statements:

... If Iwere  to  tell  someone  that  I prefer  brief  relationships to marriage because women  are  different but  wives are  the same,  they would  accuse  me of  facile  cyni­ cism  and  of  treating women  as objects.  The  fact  that  I could  tell  them  the  same thing   about men   being   all  different but  husbands   being  all  the  same  wouldn't pacify  them; and  since it is not my problem  anyway I won't  tell them.  Neither will I tell them  that  the  very  opposite  of what  I said  (to stick with  the same example) is also  true; you  can  never  learn  anything about marriage  in  general, only  about marriage with  Miss X,  Miss  Z, or  MissY. If I  told them  both,  they'd  ask me how Ireconciled  the  two  statements, to which  I would  have  to say that  I haven't the slightest   intention of  reconciling  two  contradictory statements both  of which  are true.  They  can  be true  without reconciliation, which  is one of the things that  makes my life very  sad  without  making me worry  about  my sadness  in the  least. I might cut my throat one day butI  can't pretend that  it's important ...

If there is any  doubt about the  mood, the  tone  and  the  attitude of Jonas' work, I think this  terse  comment dispels  it.  It  is both  an  explanation and a caution not  to fall  into   the   critical trap of  attempting to  neutralize Jonas'  poetry by  "looking heavenward and  pronouncing that the   world   will  be  better for  this  criticism." Jonas makes no  pretense of rebuilding the  universe he  has  destroyed, nor  does  he show  any  desire to see anyone else do it for him. In a reaffirmation which is almost manifesto-like, Jonas sums it  up  in  a poem   entitled simply "Twenty-Eight  Ex­ planatory Lines":

Whereas I do not deny
Anything I may have said before
Let me add: ultimately
I have  less and  less love
And  I'm saving  it more and more.
Let me also say that  no one ever came near  me
Even of the few who tried
And if I had  a fault, well, it was mine
And I was wrong  by right.
Not proudly, not asking to be excused
And not even  to set the record  straight
I say this merely  to say it.
For soon I will believe in myself
And  think  that  the food I eat is mine,


49

GEORGE JONAS



Mine  are the women  I enter
And  the list of my assets will grow longer
As I grow shorter  on time.
No complaints, but  I want  to live
And  there is only so much  life
And  I cannot  share  it with anyone
Having an obligation to myself
To  play it safe.
Soon, I know, my eyes will deepen
My nostrils will open wide
I will be happy, happy-and even now
Nothing could  happen to you
That I would not  take in my stride.


Notes

1 This  poem,  contained in the original  manuscript of The  Happy  Hungry  Man, does not appear in the published  version.
2   All references to THE ABSOLUTE SMILE are  referred to in this essay as (TAS:
p. 	) ; references to THE HAPPY HUNGRY MAN  are  listed  as  (HHM: p. 	) .
1 Correspondence listed is from the files of J. M. Yates.



























50




CAROL COATES CASSIDY AND THE FORM DISPUTE




William H. New







No-ONE WHO NOW READS the eady i.;u., of the Canad;an Poetry  Magazine   can  be  insensible to  the  apparent 193o's  proliferation  of  re­ doubtable   poems  by ladies  with  three  names.  Writers  like Anna  Letitia  Wales, Maisie  Nelson Devitt,  and  Jessie Playfair  Bickford sprinkled  the  journal's  pages with   sincerity,   piety,   and    (when   World   War   II   demanded   it)  ,a   rather  conventional-sounding  patriotism.  It is work  like theirs  that  had  inspired  the anonymous  Scott-like  "God   Bless the  C.A.A. !" in  The  Canadian  Mercury  in
1929:

Rosie wrote some little  rhymes For the Birdseye Centre Times: Gushing friends  did then  explain: "This will surely bring  you fame! You must  join the C.A.A."


By September   1945  their  pseudo-Romanticism  gave the  CPM  a  reputation for having a "Keats-Shelley  complex", a charge which the new editor, Watson Kirk­ connell,  attempts at  once  to  refute.  0. W.  Macdonald, who  had  started   the attack   (in the  Canadian   Author  and  Bookman), wanted  another  Kipling  or Service after  all,  and  by implication  Kirkconnell  dismisses their  work as "dog­  gerel".  The  C PM,  he adds,  has printed  some experimental  verse, and  (quoting Croce)  insists that "Art is form and nothing but form."
Neither  the  charge  nor  the  defence  was particularly  novel. In  the  December
1928 issue of Canadian  Mercury,  for example,  Leo Kennedy  had  quoted  S. I.
Hayakawa's  barbed    classification  of  Canadian  poetry   as   "Victorian,   Neo-

CAROL COATES CASSIDY



Victorian,  Quasi-Victorian,  and   Pseudo-Victorian"  and   himself   called  for  "a Canadian Whitman, ... a man  of his genius  and  spiritual breadth" to "correctly interpret  the   whole   Canadian  consciousness." Just   as  Kirkconnell's statement prickles  with  thorny   problems  involving  the  difference between the  form  of art and  the  form  of doggerel,  so Kennedy's raises some  question as to how  to define "correct". But in talking  of "spirit" and  the "whole consciousness" of a people, he allows art to be made  up of more than simple external structure. Which  could take us back  to sincerity  and  patriotism again,  although-if  injected with  the genius of a Whitman -probably of an unconventional kind.
A. J. M. Smith's rallying  cry in the unused  preface  he wrote for New Provinces
in 1936 to some extent  bridges the gap between  Kennedy and  Kirkconnell. Speak­ ing  for  Pratt, Scott,  Smith,  and  Klein  as  well  as for  Kennedy and  himself,  he characterizes their  purpose  as one  of  "attempting to  get  rid  of the  facile  word,  the stereotyped phrase  and  the  mechanical rhythm", and  of  "seeking, as the  poet today  must,  to  combine  colloquialism with  rhetoric." Spirit  and  structure are  to come  closer,  in  other  words,  to  being  united   and  indivisible. In  the  particular form  of a given  poem  will be embodied the sensibility  it attempts to convey, and  thus,  antedating McLuhanism, the rhetorical medium becomes  at least part  of its colloquial message.  But if the  method  is mechanical and  the  home  truth  trite,  or if the  rhetoric is shallow  and  it still characterizes both  technique and  idea,  then  no  correspondence between  medium and  message  will salvage a  poem  from  the junkpile. Archness  and artificiality do sometimes  afflict poems  by Smith  and  Scott,  but  it is the other disease of being possessed by stereotypes that  makes the work of Anna  Wales, Vesta Pickel, and  Jessie Bickford so much  less artistically adept.
That both  camps should  find in the CPM an outlet  for their  work is paradoxi­
cal  itself;  that  E.  J. Pratt  should  as editor  allow  it even  more  so, for as his own writing testifies, he  respected  his craft.  In  the  second  issue of the  journal (April
1936), he  enunciates his editorial policy:  for  "tolerant consideration of genuine poetic  effort  and  against  identity  with  any form  of aesthetic whether old or new." He   was   against   only   "fatuous  sentiment",  in  fact,   and   the  July    1936   issue elaborates:

Rhyme  and  metre  do not make a poem;  they produce  nothing  but doggerel. The real  flesh and  blood of poetry lies in turns  of phrases, vivid images, new and  un­ usual thoughts  and  manners of expressing them. A good poem is good  because it is an  unusual,  imaginative,  arresting  way of  writing  English.  We  do  not  speak  in poetry, except at rare moments;  and if a poet writes so simply as to give the effect of spoken language, that effect is all the more startling  and novel.

52

CAROL COATES CASSIDY



In  the 196o's such an assertion sounds slightly weary, and  perhaps  even in 1936 the schoolmasterish  tone reflects Pratt's  tiredness with the excess of two hundred manuscripts  he read every week. What it also does, however, is indicate one of the reasons  for  the  apparent gentleness with  which  Pratt   exercised  his acceptance policy; what  interested  him about  a work was not its intellectual  toughness or its stanzaic  structure but  its lines, its imagery,  and  its individual  phrases. A single striking  epithet  was taken  as the  promise of a poetic talent,  and  thus  redefined, "form"-whether intentional  or accidental,  germane  to the  poet's ideas or  un­ related to them -proved a touchstone to merit once again.

1:SEE CAROL CoATES  CASSIDY's   NAME in print  is at once to suspect  her of the same  poetic sins as all the other  tripartite ladies, and  to read
Pratt's   May  1940  review  of  her  Ryerson  chapbook  Fancy   Free   ( 1939)-in which he finds her "free of cliche" -is to suspect him of his accustomed genero­ sity. But such  a  judgment  here would  be a distortion. Though  never a  polished writer, Carol  Cassidy did possess a talent for poetry, and  Pratt  was quite  justified when he accepted  her work for its occasionally arresting line and its frequent  ease with imagery.
Her  career,  however, was short-lived,  beginning with undergraduate verse she
distributed  among  friends  in Vancouver  about  1930 and  lasting into the 194o's. Since then she has effectively disappeared  (into English progressive-educational circles), and is not even mentioned  in the recent Oxford Companion to Canadian History  and  Literature. The  omission is a genuine oversight, for particularly dur­ ing  the  first  decade  in  which  she  published,  her  work  represented  a  definite experimental departure in verse form in Canadian  poetry. From  1925 on, F. R.
Scott  and  A. J. M.  Smith  had  attempted   to free  Canada of  poetic  lushness;
Raymond   Knister  and  (later)  Dorothy  Livesay had  discovered  ways of uniting the lyric voice with a social conscience. But in Carol Cassidy's work there operates an  exotic imagism  that  came  in part,  no doubt, from  the  American  movements of the  1910's  and  192o's  which  intellectually  influenced  Smith  and  W. W. E. Ross as  well.  It  emerged  also from  her  emotional  sensitivity  to  the  exactness, spareness, and  diminutiveness  of symbol that  characterized  the art of her native Japan. "Form  in poetry ... is moulded  by content-also by the environment  of the poet," she states in her foreword to Fancy Free, and the culture  that prompted her best poems was Oriental.
Born Alice Caroline  Coates, in Tokyo, the daughter  of an authority  on Japa-


53

CAROL  COATES CASSIDY



nese  Buddhism, she  returned  there   in   1930,   with   her   photographer  husband Eugene  Haanel Cassidy, and stayed in the country till 1937· Fancy  Free illustrates the  influence of  Eastern  "poetry, painting, flower  arrangement", and  again  the Foreword expresses the author's intention and  expectation:

Eastern  art  excels in suggesting what it does not say. Therefore a ruthless selectiOn of significant  detail  is of paramount importance. A poem may consist of less than a  dozen  expressions, yet the imagination  and  the  technique  which  inspired  their choice and  execution  are calculated  to create  an illusion of the whole through  an illumination   of  the  part-an  illusion extending far  beyond  the  confines of  the actual  presentation.

The  function  of the reader,  therefore, is an  active  one-to  become a creator,  to compose, so to speak, the sestet to the sonnet  the artist  has started  for him. This is done by reflecting with more than usual care upon the tonal and rhythmic qualities of every word, savoring to the full each literal and emotional connotation.

Her  aim  is overt  in  "Gift", where  she expresses  the  desire  to  bring  to the  reader "only  a  poem,  I exempt  from  the  bonds  of  time  and  space,  I infinite  and  ever­ lasting", and   the  effect  is  uninspiringly flat.  The  platitudinous  abstraction en­
courages only  a weary  reaction, and  the  timeless, spaceless  illusion  for  which  she strives eludes both  her and her readers.
Curiously, it  is those  poems  more  specifically  founded in  the  immediate that transcend space   and   time.  Influenced  by  the   haiku,   they  work  with  precisely observed  details  which,  perceived  as images,  communicate more  than their  literal meaning. The imagery  of "Japanese April", for  example, is quite  conventional:

April  Earth,
a spring bride,
with cherry petal confetti to congratulate.

Yet  tightly  controlled, as here,  it  reaches  out  beyond  the stereotype to express  a sense  of  delicately   recurring beauty. The  control lies  in  the  form.  Letting the image   stand   unexplained in  one  part   of  the  poet's   method;  maintaining tone through internal vowel  harmonies-here, in  the  a's, e's, and  i's, circling  at  the end  to the same sound  with  which  the  poem  begins and  so aurally reinforcing the idea  of recurrence-is another. "Korean Dancer", though longer,  uses a similar assonant technique. Beginning  "A  white  miracle of motionless  satin", it closes this way:

54

CAROL  COATES CASSIDY



dips and streams, flirts, exults, despairs,
till suddenly fluttering, abandoned  falls a symbol of coquetry completed.

An ominous gong crashes the clapping across a stage searching for light.

The   psychological  and   political  implications of  the  final  two  lines  give  the poem  a depth and  humanity that  phrases like "white miracle" do not at first lead us to expect. The personification of the scarf in the catalogue of verbs also might seem a little stale -yet it is that  kind of animation which  allows the last two lines to  work  symbolically as well as  pictorially. It is a human situation, not  an  inert one, that  the  poem is about.
Political  situations motivated the  writing  of quite  a number of Carol  Cassidy's poems,  but  abstractions generally  take  over from  images  in them,  to their  detri­ ment.  Excerpts from  "Four Poems:   Bushido,  1937" will  illustrate. The second part   of  the  sequence, entitled   "Troop Train", opens  with  an  intentional  tonal  flatness  that   admirably conveys  the  poet's  horror  at  the  blind  power  of  a  war
machine:

On  the day of the tiger,
twenty-six cars packed with khaki bodies ride out into the rain-soaked night
to be shot.

The  bodies cheer,
wave paper flags and sing­
sing on their way to be shot.

The repetition later  gets too  easy, however,  and  Part  III adds,  cloyingly,  "But  I must still the  protest  in my throat". Part  IV, echoing  the initial  rhythms of  Mase­ field's "Cargoes", returns briefly and  effectively to the theme  of the war industry:

Fifty-four  bluejackets in neat white boxes,
shipped  home from Shanghai ready  for  burial.

But  when  the  poem,  striving for  climax,  proclaims  "what heaviness  they  hold", we  are  removed again  from  the  illusion  of the  image  and  thrust   uncomfortably back into the world  of the stock response.

55

CAROL  COATES CASSIDY




DURING WoRLD  WAR  II  itself, Mrs.  Cassidy's publications were privately  printed-The Tale  of the Celestial Tea  Pot  ( 1943), or the brief mimeographed  excursion into fanciful drama  called The  ]a de Heart  (copyrighted by the Junior  Leagues of America Inc. in New York in 1946). Rather  like "The Emperor's   New  Clothes"  in  tone,  combining  a  sense of  comedy  and  a  verbal rhythm, its social moral is less pointed and less clear. An emperor  banishes a poet; the emperor's  daughter  grows up and falls in love with the poet, who (magically) is connected  with the return  of a jade ear-ring  that  her brother  had tried to steal from  her years before and  had  lost; the self-exiled brother  returns  as a prisoner; and  the  playlet ends happily  when the emperor  recognizes his prodigal  son and allows his daughter to choose her own husband.  The  jade ear-rings and a migrat­ ing wild goose are  recurrent  images to argue the necessity for the poet's vision in the modem  world,  but neither  the method  nor the message is particularly  fresh, and  the Orientalism  is by now an encumbrance rather  than an ornament to her style.
When she turns  directly to the war, her poems are even less successful. Like so many  Canadian  writers,  she  was  committed   to  the  cause  and  aghast  at  the destruction  of lives, and her poems split in two directions-to the hyper-patriotic ("Open wide  the  airways  of the  world")   and  the  maudlin   ("Is  that  Human
Lives Limited? I May I speak to God, please? I ...yesterday I lost my son.... I
I must  have another.") Objectivity  was hard  to achieve, and  the controlled  dis­
tance  that  imagism  demands  is lost even from  the following excerpt  from  "May
1941":

... in the brain,
guns thunder the minutes down, and marching feet
trample the ecstasy of May.

All these verses are contained in a handsome hand-printed volume  (reviewed favourably  both  by Pratt  in the CPM  and by E. K. Brown in UTQ's "Letters  in Canada 1941")   published by the Caronell  Press in Toronto and  variously titled Poems and  The   Return  and  Selected  Poems. Besides the  new works, it reprints pieces that  had appeared  in journals like Chatelaine and Canadian  Forum as well as the CPM. Several were to be printed again in Invitation to Mood  ( 1949), and except  for a few privately  distributed  volumes and  whatever  verse Mrs. Cassidy may have written since, this constitutes her complete canon. The best works among

CAROL COATES CASSIDY



them  remain those  that  capture images,  and  in individual lines she again  reveals her craftsmanlike commitment to the beautiful in Japanese culture:

the fingers of a flower master coaxing a chrysanthemum
to lift its tired head- (The  Return)

Stare straight  up through  the incredible blue to see the oblique wings of a bird
slicing the sky
(Summer  Reverie)

... against the ice-stencil of a window, one leaf, a green flame,
leaping from a dry and brittle stick. (The  Flame)

The day, brittle with ice, snaps  underfoot
(First Flight)


But  her  rationalizing defence of such  a commitment still intrudes into  her  work; poems that  could stop with an image go on to explain it, and the initial effect is undermined. Though  the  poet  affirmed  that  the  reader  should  also  be  creator, rarely  is the  promise fulfilled. Possibly because the journals  in which she published so demanded, her  poems generally  end up insisting on a particular response in an unsubtle fashion.




E PROBLEM  can  be approached in  another way  by  looking again  at  the  critical   pronouncements of the  Canadian  Poetry  Magazine. Pratt's eclectic  policy  is  reaffirmed in  March 1943  when  W.  E.  Collin  translates Guy Sylvestre's  article on Saint-Denys Garneau:

Poetry  is the  art  of signifying, by means of words, bearers  of rhytlun  and  image, what  things say to our faculties of knowledge and love taken in their  totality. That which  makes  poetry  art  is essentially the creation  of a beautiful  intelligible form; what  distinguishes  it from  the other  arts is its own peculiar  means of expression: the human  word animated  by its essential rhythm and delivering fancies conceived in the mind and heart.

57

CAROL COATES CASSIDY



But running  counter to it, though apparently  not in direct conflict or open dispute, were two other critical attitudes. The first is that represented  by Clara Bernhardt's statement in  December  1939 concerning  the  poet's  function: to make a reader see, like the  blind man  in John's  gospel-the good poem will have "an  idea or thought", "emotion", "music",  and  be "sincere".  (It  is this concern for sincerity which seems to have guided the naming of the "prize" poems in the journal each year.  The  sentiment  expressed seems  to  have  been  more  important than  the quality of the line.)
The  other  attitude is couched in Watson  Kirkconnell's  assertion in September
I944  that  the  magazine  "will now carry  articles on form  and  poetic law."  The word "law" is the troublesome one, for by June  1945, under the guise of continu­ ing Pratt's  policy, Kirkconnell  turns  to attacking  Spender  and  Eliot  for "lawless originality",  "novelty  without clear significance".  As a result, with the rules thus effectively decided in advance,  experimentalism fades; sentiment again  takes over from verse quality; and  (for all the resurgence of fresh talent that appeared  while Earle Birney was editor from September  1945 to June  I948)  the future  character  of the  journal  was set. Vanity  presses started  to  advertise  in  it, and  with  their vacuum seal of approval, the CPM ceased to be a significant voice.
The  exact  direct  effect of such a dispute on a writer like Carol  Cassidy is im­ possible to gauge, yet it is obvious that her own writing falters because of  just this internal  conflict. The cause of form is espoused, while the poet gives birth in the same  breath  to the "preaching", the "stuff of prose", that  during Birney's editor­ ship,  Charles  Bruce's  "Remarks  on Verse"  vehemently  decried.  When  Ryerson brought  out  Invitation  to Mood  in  I949, nothing  much had changed.  The  occa­ sional  sociological  poem  like  "Black  Reverie",  about  Paul  Robeson  and  race prejudice,  is interesting  for  its concern,  but  even  that  expresses a  conventional  "white  liberal"  position, and the poem  (like many others in the book, "inviting" a particular "mood") seems in retrospect a little highflown.
Repeated   here,  too, are several  pieces from  her I 94 I volume  which  indicate an attempt  to arouse  jocularity, but their mood is one less of humour  than  of  un­ fulfilment. "Humour" is "the  Alchemist" in "Parting", for example,  but the love poems are wry. "Meeting", similarly, begins equably enough:

The other side of argument we shall meet again,
I know,
after the silence.

With what speech shall I greet you then?

CAROL COATES CASSIDY



a laughing  quip, perhaps,
or a level maxim to formulate the spirit's unity?
But  it  goes on  to  plan  the  other  person's  glacier-like  response  before  it happens and-therefore-to  formulate an  equally  glacial  reply.  Hence there  is no  real humour and  no release.
"Greeting Card" expresses most directly  the poet's wish:

Upon  the chaste scroll of the New Year, I would inscribe for you
with bold and flowing strokes, the Good Luck symbol,
and  with full brush delineate,
the ideograph of Laughter.

In  the  light  of other  poems,  that  "would  inscribe"  takes on the  tone  of powerless desire  rather than   firm  intention; contentment seems  beyond  reach,  and  in  the last  poems  of the  book,  all of which  seek transcendent revelation and  use phrases like  "the path   to  peace", "the karmic  toll",  and  "the Cosmic  Will",  the  poet's need  for  a  "symbol of the  Infinite" within  which  to walk  embraced,  aware, and circumscribed, is palpable. In a poem like "Museum Piece"  lies her only apparent
answer:

On  the ancient  fresco from the monastery of the Joyful Conversion, are schoolboy names, scribbled with surreptitious  brush,
upon the sacred folds of Buddha's robe.

Brought  now to the World of the Western Sun from far Shensi, how curious that the mischievous have achieved immortality beside the sublime!

Here  the  poet still wavers,  however,  between  a relaxed  acceptance of the fact and an  almost  Calvinist upset  that  it should  be so. The  poem  itself gains  from  such ellipsis, but  as an eschatalogical answer it would obviously  prove within  this frame of reference  uncircumscribing and so unsatisfactory.
Quiet   and  deceptively atonal, the  poem  is one of the  best  of her  later  works, but  during the  1940's  when  the  poetic  climate  in  Canada changed so radically, she  ceased  being  an  innovator and  her  position  among Canadian writers  con­
siderably   waned. The  qualities for  which  A. J. M.  Smith included her  "First
Flight" in  his  first  Book  of Canadian  Poetry  ( 1943)  were  not  developed, and from   subsequent  editions she  has  been  excluded. For   all  her  commitment to imagism,  she  was  never  really  able  to  reconcile  language and  perception in any

59

CAROL  COATES CASSIDY



consistent way. Her doctrine of poetic form did not in her own writing withstand the pressures of conventional techniques, and so -like the journal that discovered her-she  was  capable  of  uncritically  publishing  some  amazingly  flaccid  lines. Other   times  she  pared  her  words down  till  only  illusive images  remained;  by bringing  them  together she could illuminate  the world she saw, and suggest in a few details the larger issues that she accepted as infinite and human  truths. "Today I am a god," she wrote in Fancy Free, "for I have made a universe with flowers." On  rare occasions it was so, as when in Invitation to Mood she asks "Would  you with boundaries bind the subtle spaces of affection?" and answers:

Sooner count sand, crack stars,
or gamer moonbeams in a sieve.

At those times, however uneasily, she became  the  poet she had  the talent  to be.


































6o



Consolatory Epistle
to Genereux Labadie,  Esq.


Who Complained that his Talents and Verses
Received no Reward from the Government





oseph
translated by ohn





0thou who, otherwise  unknown, dost merit
The  fame  my pen shall cause thee to inherit,
Thou who dost droop,  poor prisoner of the times, Labadie, 'tis to thee that  I address these rhymes! Aye, when  I see thy Talents all unnoticed
I echo and  approve thy scorn and  protest, And  do agree  we Versifiers offer
A most improper subject  to the scoffer.
My friend, I know thy halting, homely muse
For  pompous eulogy gives no excuse;
But after  all, the gifts thou  hast were meant To  be sustained by such good government As-when it classifies the human race­ Should always put the Poet in first place: And this of ours, my friend  and similar,
Has  never  known  how valuable we are.
-0 shame indeed  upon this land: to see
The  poor reward of men like you and  me!
Like me, whose verse, whose music and  whose wit
Should make  my name  illustrious,  I submit,

CONSOLATORY EPISTLE



Yet who must live in lowly village pent Quite unrewarded  by the Government; Like thee no less, who for thy daily bread Must daily sell thy Muse's maidenhead, And must at dinner-time remark with rue,
"This is my breakfast and my supper, too." Thus are we quite passed over and disprized,
Our  wit and genius go unrecognized,
And on the List our names are never found
When Governmental  jobs are passed around;
Whilst many a man -their names I will not mention - Thanks to his name alone, enjoys a handsome  pension. Who are these fellows? Some are military men, Thoroughly unfamiliar with the pen,
Who find, because a bullet broke their leg or arm, The State will lodge and feed and keep them warm; Or else they're notaries, prothonotaries,
Clerks, judges, doctors, even apothecaries! For on the list of pensioners, you know,
All trades and all professions make a show - Except the Poet's. What a curst injustice!
Ill fortune, for our sins, hath cruelly thrust  us
Into a land whose people have no taste,
Or what they have is squeamish and debased: They'll  praise a soldier who has courted death; The  breathless poet merely wastes his breath.
-Shame on our land! What lessons hence will draw
Th' Algonquins, Topinambous, Iroquois, Who, though devoid of letters and of arts, At least allow a man to show his parts? Why, do they not revere their sorcerers, Their tumblers, prophets and astrologers?

Survey the world, from Lapland  unto Ind, And wit is honoured everywhere, you'll find, Except in Canada, whose graceless brood Withholds from talent even a livelihood.

CONSOLATORY EPISTLE



My own experience is the bitter proof: Exiled from France and my ancestral roof, I made my way to Canada, and here
Was welcomed with all manner of good cheer:
I'd  no complaint.  But-music? Oh, the pity! At table, naught  but some old drinking ditty; In church, two or three worn-out old motets Sung to a gasping organ out of breath.
Oh, hideous all. So, for my soul's release, See me composing music! First, a piece
For some religious business-grave or gay? Was it, or was it not, for Christmas Day?
I can't  remember; but I mixed up wholly
Gaiety, pathos, sweet, sour, melancholy,
Through every flat, sharp, natural ran the gamut: Never before was I so brilliant, d--- it!
And what was the result? Why, in a rage, They said my airs were fitter for the stage.
One swore the service almost made him dance,
Another urged I be sent back to France; Everyone fell upon me in a rout;
The Sex joined in (especially the devout) : "Good  God," said one, "this irreligious din Would lead the Saints in Paradise to sin."
"0 Christ," another said, "when the notes swell
'Tis like the imps at loggerheads in hell!"


'Twas  then, apprised of Novelty's reward, I saw my hopes all going by the board.
-Well, to the ear (if at all delicate) My music, shall we say, is rather flat: But did they want a Handel, a Gretry?2
By God, then, they must find him oversea! And my own little public work, I thought, Deserved a better public than it got.
Say, artist, what's the hardest sentence known? To be applauded by your friends alone.

CONSOLATORY EPISTLE



So I abandoned this ungrateful  style. But my reverses, working up my bile,
Only increased the thirst for deathless fame:
Still, by my talents, I would make a name! My gifts I questioned and assessed again, And then an Opera3 issued from my brain, And then another. Two of 'em-no less:
"They'll speak of me for once and all, I guess. Everyone shall acclaim and cosset me;
But I will build upon my modesty: Honours shall rain upon me, day by day, But like a King I'll give them all away."
I've told thee how I (in my simple way)
Built all my hopes upon an opera.4
Well, it appeared  at last.-0 happy night! Only an author  knows such keen delight.
They laughed, and laughed, and laughed. But that was all: No tiniest crumb of praise did me befall;
And worst of all, the beauty of my verse
Earned not a syllable in the newspapers! So, make yourself a literary whore,
Go rack your brains to please the theatre-goer: He will applaud  you, yes; but of his troop
Not one will offer you a bowl of soup.


Thou see'st, dear Labadie, my cursed fate, And how it is our duty, early and late,
To rail against our wretched lot, and  rightly. Only complain beneath thy breath, and lightly, And if they laugh at thee-why, be not sad: My own reception, see, was just as bad.
Yet I affirm my play was excellent,
And if it gained no proper compliment Why, 'tis because the literary gift Receives, in Canada, the shortest shrift.
-I know thy verse so miserably goes
The  reader might as well be reading  prose;

CONSOLATORY EPISTLE



Yet, were't  a hundred  times more boring still, It should have payment from the public till. But no ! Soon as I speak of thee, my friend, Fountains of laughter to the roof ascend;
A rhymester, eh? No, they prefer, by far, A master mason or a man of war.

Let me repeat the phrase that Boileau made: The saddest occupation is the poet's trade. But let us not be too downhearted: see,
We both are writing for Posterity.
Others,  'tis true, have lived to see their story Inscribed  on tablets of immortal glory: Gresset5   and Despveaux,6  feted and famed, Saw, in their day, their genius acclaimed; Du Belloy, Ronsard, Racine and Moliere
Were petted, paid and crammed with costly fare; Whilst we, yokefellows in this land together Whose spirit is as icy as its weather,
See both our talents frozen by the times.
But future  readers shall acclaim our rhymes, Shall laud my prose and love thy versicles, Seeing our beauties through new spectacles. This vision of the future I can see,
And prophesy such fame for you and me
As shall make us renowned through Canada
And hailed from VaudreuiF  to Kamouraska.8



AFTERWORD




JOSEPH QUESNEL ( I 749-I 8og)  cutun unusual figure in the early  cultural   history  of  Lower  Canada. Born  and   educated   in  Saint-Malo, France,  he passed an adventurous youth as a naval officer, visiting India, Mada­ gascar,  West  Africa,  the  Antilles and  Brazil. In I 779, while in  command  of a

CONSOLATORY EPISTLE



vessel illegally  running arms and  supplies  to the  American revolutionaries, he and his  ship   were  captured  by  a  British  man-o'-war  and   taken   to  Halifax  where, somehow-apparently   through  the   influence  of   General  Haldimand,  then recently  appointed Governor of Quebec -he  became a naturalized British sub­ ject.  Mter   a  trip   of  exploration to  the  Mississippi  he  settled   in  the  village  of Boucherville, on  the  south  shore  across the  river  from  Montreal, where he man­ aged  a  general store,  became   prominent in  local  politics  and  rounded out  his activities  by  writing   music  for  the  Church and   plays  and  comic operas  for  the Montreal theatre  (against which  the  redoubtable  Bishop  Plessis was  constantly fulminating), as well as poems and  occasional  verse for the newspapers of the day.
As an accomplished musician,  playwright and  man of the world, a dedicated anglophile  and   Royalist,  he  was  inclined   to  look  down   on  the  people  among whom  he had  at last cast his lot. This attitude has been requited by most French­ Canadian  critics  and   literary   historians,   who  have  shuffled  him  in  among the primitifs  canadiens  and  auteurs microscopiques  of  the  early  nineteenth century, thus  most  unfairly  downgrading his talent. He  certainly  does  not  deserve  to  be ranked  with  the Bibauds,  Mermets, Aubins  and  Deromes who were his contempo­ raries.  His  poetic  style, though  leaning  almost  too  heavily  on  Moliere,  is elegant, ironical and  graceful; his genius  was for good-natured satire controlled by a fine sense of form; he was perhaps  the most farftung metrical disciple of Boileau.
Of  Genereux  Labadie, the  addressee   and   stooge  of  this  Epl!re  consolatrice,
nothing is known  except  that  he was a highly respected schoolmaster of Vercheres, Que.,  who in  I 797 composed  a ten-couplet French version of God Save the King, and  who  was described  by Huston in Le Repertoire  National of I848  (where the Epltre  first  appeared in  book  form)  simply  as  "mauvais  poete."  Lacking any sample of Labadie's own work, we have no way of verifying  this  judgment.
For   the  French text  of  the  following   poem,  and   for  biographical details  of Quesnel  himself, I am indebted to Michael  Gnarowski, who is presently preparing a selection  of  Quesnel's poetical  works for  publication under the  auspices  of the Lande Foundation at  McGill University. For the notes on his career as a musician
I acknowledge with  thanks  the help I received  from  Helmut Kallman's A History
of Music in Canada  (University of Toronto Press,  Ig6o).
J.G.







66

CONSOLATORY EPISTLE



Notes

1 Boucherville, Que.
2  Andre  Gretry ( 1741-r8r3), one of the founders of French comic opera. His Richard
Coeur  de Lion  is still performed.
3  Quesnel wrote   at   least   four   "operas,"  Lucas   et  Cecile,  Republicains  franfais, L'Anglomanie, ou  Le  Diner  a l'anglaise, and  Colas et Colinette, ou  Le  Bailli Dupe.
These  were  in fact  drawing-room comedies  in prose, interspersed with  arias sung  to an instrumental accompaniment, but apparently without overtures.
4  Probably  Colas  et Colinette, his finest work, first performed in Montreal in  r 790. It was successfully  revived  by the  CBC in December rg68, with  Pierrette Alarie  in the
leading   role.  The  influence of  J.-J. Rousseau's  Le  Devin   du  Village    (1753)   is
noticeable throughout the composition.
5  Jean-Baptiste  Gresset    (qog-1777), a  popular  poet  and   playwright,  now  almost forgotten.
6  Cognomen of  Boileau.
7  Village  on the Ottawa River  a few miles west of the Island of Montreal.
8  Hamlet on the south  shore of the St. Lawrence, about  25 miles south-west of
Riviere-du-Loup.



review articles


POET  WITHOUT  MASKS


Miriam Waddington


R. A.  D.  FORD,  The  Solitary  City.  McClelland and  Stewart. $4.95.


IT  IS  REMARKABLE that,   in R. A. D. Ford,  Canada should  have an ambassador who is a poet. It seems some­ how   over-cultivated,  non-tribal, and nineteenth century European rather than  stylishly  global-or  what  is  even  more ominously stylish  these  days -continen­ tal.  The link   between  government  and poetry  is usually  found  only  in  emerging cultures where  writers  have  been  able  to combine revolutionary politics and  public office without apparent harm  to their  art. I am  thinking  of  Aime  Cesaire  of  Mar­ tinique who  celebrated his country so magnificently in  his  poem  Return to  my Native   Land, and  of China  Achebe  with his stories about  the African spirit. These writers were and are lovingly engaged in defining   their   own   cultures   in  spite   of being surrounded by older, richer, and possibly more  complex ones.
Ford   of  course  is  no  revolutionary; a historian by training, he  became  an  am­ bassador  even  though he happened  to be a  poet before the days of poetic residencies and   college   casebooks.  Because   he  has lived   so  much   of   his  life  abroad-as Canadian  ambassador  to  Yugoslavia, Colombia, the   United   Arab   Republic, and  now the U.S.S.R.-he writes out  of
a kind of cosmopolitanism or internation-

68
 alism  that   Canadians don't easily  recog­ nize  or   accept.  Internationalism   in   art  and   scholarship, as  I have  recently   dis­ covered,  usually   refers   to   what's  going on  in  the  United States and  Britain, and not   to   what's   happening  in   Russia   or Brazil.  When  we  are  actually confronted with  a  writer  who  has  assimilated a cul­ ture  other  than   the  American or  British,  and  whose work  shows  it, the  experience is  so   unfamiliar that  we   are  either uninterested or pretend that it hasn't happened.
This  unfamiliarity applies  especially  to
Russian (and  other  Slavic)   poetry  which is almost  the  polar  opposite of modern American poetry. The sense of  human community, however achieved   and  how­ ever  illusory,  still  informs Russian  poetry  (as   Ford's  translations  show)   and   the belief  that   life,  hope  and  wholeness  are not  all  used  up  yet,  lends  vitality  to  the languages. Where  real  sorrows,  hungers, deaths  and   injustices  exist,  and   people  haven't  been  stunned,  drugged, shamed and  lulled  out  of their  ability  to feel and  recognize   them,   poets  don't   have  to  in­  vent   monsters, or  label  their   myths,  or justify  madness or  lean  over  abysses  for one more  lex>k at  their  own  reflections.
Before  discussing  Ford's  poems  I have

REVIEW ARTICLES



to say that  I am  very much  against  poets publishing   their    translations  of   other poets  along  with  their  own  work.  From my  own  experience I know  the  kind  of identification and  intense  imaginative effort   which   has  to  go  into   translation. All the same,  translations ought  to be published separately. They  do not belong to the  translator, and  Ford's new book consists  of  thirty   translations and  thirty­ seven  original poems.  Many  of  the trans­  lations  have  previously  been  published  in periodicals.   They    are   certainly  worth  gathering  together  but   since   I  cannot read  the  poems  in their  original Russian, Serbo-Croat, or  Portugese (there are  also three  translations from  the  French)  all  I can  say is that  Ford  is, to  his credit, one of  the  few  poets  who  at  least  knows  the languages  he  translates  from,   and   who has   lived   in   the   countries  where   the poems  originated. This   means  he  brings far  more  contextual understanding to his translations  than   those  poets  who  work (in teams and with immodest blindness) without such  knowledge.
Possibly because  Ford  has lived so long in exile, the  language he uses for his own poems  has  taken  on a deliberate and sculptural quality. It is austere and  care­ ful, sometimes  laboured, has large, slowly­ achieved   outlines, and  when  it  moves,  a lot  of  emotional weight  goes  into  it.  He compresses   " ... the    flash   of    truth
across I The eye    And  the  sudden  com­
ing   down  to   earth I And    the   world squeezed  into  a word  or two."
Ford's concerns are  social  and  psycho­ logical; he  is  absolutely  honest  without being  confessional, and   he  is  completely unsentimental.   He   often   has   awkward moments -mostly   in   the   area   of   ex­ pression-but he  never  has  false  ones. He  doesn't imitate  anyone and   is  curi-
 ously  free  of  American  and   British  in­ fluences,   and   he   doesn't  bother   much  about  keeping  his eye on  the public. He's  no  actor,  no  mask-wearer.  He  treats his reader   like  an   equal   without  trying   to either  enchant or  outwit him.  When   he gives us Chile  he does so without dipping into   the   costume   box   or   resorting  to special  lighting. Brazil's  rivers  are  dry  as
death " ... there   is   nothing  left I But
dust  on the  bare  earth  I An arroyo  of the
heart."
Disaster  and  self -destruction  1urk everywhere;  they   may   even   be   inter­ changeable:

And behind  the mist I see Black waters  with  the look Of invitation to disaster,

Or  self-destruction -in  our
Days it is all
The  same

Death  is inevitable, but  because  it is real, it may be melancholy or tragic, but  never gloomy  or  depressing.  Only   fake   death and  suffering   are  gloomy  and   miasmic. Ford  accepts  that  even  for  the  poet, "horizons  are  not  limitless." Life  is  cir­ cumscribed,  unyielding   to   the   human will,   and   unmalleable  by   the   dream: "closed  and  barred  are  all the doors." At best,   life   is   filled   with    unanswerable questions:

how much  can  one comprehend, include  in a glance?
How much  of love and  death  intrudes?
Is snow-blindness  perhaps a fault
And the images of these years of glass?

Snow-blindness;  we  carry   with   us  the faults  and  limitations which  our environ­ ments  have  built  into  us. Ford's environ­ ment   is  both   inner  and   outer-social, physical   and   psychological. Hemisphere is part  of it, climate and  specific location another.  Not  surprisingly, climate is the

6g

REVIEW ARTICLES



source   of  many   of  Ford's   images;   it  is the presence in his evergreen forests and frozen  clearings:

The silent  tree  of evening Smudged on  the  plain, Through its  falling leaves A faint funereal song.

And  trembling you  fear, As I do,  without reason, The  entrance  unperceived Of  the  cold  season.

Climate also  serves  to  diagram the  psy­ chological  gap   between   human   feeling and    action,  between   imagination   and what  is possible:

Like  words  of good  intent The desperate drops of rain Never reach  the  ground
But  disappear again
 Into the  acrid clouds
Into the  years  of drought.

Ford   sees  dissolving   structures  every­ where;  faceless  souls,  systemless  hearts,  earthquakes,  love's   upheaval and   a  fu­ ture  "Barren in  the  night  / Burnt  across with  fear". His is a locked  world,  capable of  being  unlocked   briefly  by  the  "testa­ ment   of  love".  Yet  he  is  able  to  remain somewhere in  the  poetic  centre   of  still­ ness,  fully   aware and   finding  value   in survival.  His   learning  of  the   languages of  other poets  has  certainly enlarged his vision,  toughened  his  mind  and  softened  his  heart.  He   has   written  some  grave,  beautiful,   deeply  honest    and   haunting poems;  but  Iwish  he  would  come  home where the summers are longer,  and  where  time is getting shorter.



THE COMMON CRAVING

Douglas Barbour

ROSE  ROSBERG. Trips  - without  LSD. Fiddlehead  Poetry Books.  $2.00
ROBIN  MATHEWS.   This  Cold  Fist. The Author, Carleton University. $1.00
MALCOLM  MILLER.  The  Kings  Have  Donned  their  Final Mask. Tundra  Books.  $2.95
PATRICK   LANE.   Separations. New/Books. $2.50
RICHARD  GELLER.  Iowa.  The Cummington Press.  NP.
DOUGLAS LOCIIHEAD.  A & B & C &. Three Fathom Press.  NP.
GAIL Fox.  Dangerous  Season. The Quarry Press.   $2.50.


THE ONLY THING these seven books have in common is their appearance in  this  review; and  the  common  craving for  our  attention that   they  display  in  a wide   variety   of  covers,   bindings,   types and   poetics.  But  only  a few  are  able  to hold  that   attention all  the  way  through. Most  of  them   fail  to  do  so, for  reasons that  should  become  clear  below.
Rose  Rosberg  is  an   American  and   I
am   led   to  wonder   why  Fred   Cogswell should   practically initiate  the  Theodore

70
 
Roberts  Fund   series  with   a  book  by  a non-Canadian. I don't want  to be overly prejudiced about this, and if it were a collection  of outstanding poemsI wouldn't make  a sound.  But  there  are  a number of Canadian manuscripts seeking publication right   now  that   are  as  good  as  or  better than   Trips-Without LSD. This  is not to say  that  these  poems  are bad,  it's  just that  most  of them  aren't  especially  good. There are  only  about  three  poems  in  the book  that  catch  my  interest.

REVIEW ARTICLES



Miss Rosberg  uses all  the  poetic  tricks, but somehow her  poems  remain dull. One exception, "Tiger  Hunt  in   New  York" does achieve  a near-Blakean intensity: if only  the  many  others that   try  to  do  so did!   Her    attempt  at   a   "rna jor"   long poem,  the dramatic "Night Thoughts", is far   too   diffuse   and   vague    to   hold   a reader's attention throughout. Fred Cogs­ well  says  that   "Guide"  is  "one  of  the most  perfect   and   memorable  statements of the  objectives  of art" that  he has ever read,   and   it's  certainly one  of  her   best efforts,  mainly   because  there  are  no  ex­ traneous words,  and  everything moves to one  end.  Most  of  these  poems  lack  such unity,   however,  and   her   rhythms  often falter    and   die.   Compared  with   either  Gwen  MacEwen or  Margaret Atwood  (a not   unfair   comparison, I  think),  Rose Rosberg  just isn't  writing exciting poetry.
Robin  Mathews is probably best known for    his    pro-Canadian,    anti-American stand  with  regard  to our  universities, but he has been writing poetry  for quite  some time. This Cold  Fist is a privately printed book which demonstrates throughout his pro-Canadian  stance, one  with  which   I fully   sympathize.  But,   can   politics   and the  "rhetoric of fury" make  for good poetry?   Yeats   never  thought so,  and   in this case I must  agree.
Perhaps this book's greatest unconscious irony   resides  in   the   basic   style  of  the poems.  It is a  style  capable of  some  wit and   a  very  idiomatic  use  of  language, and  the  creator of this style is none  other than   that   famous American  poet,  Laur­ ence  Ferlinghetti. Now,  while  there   can be  no doubt that  many  young  Canadian poets  have  learned from  American men­  tors  (including George Bowering,  against  whom  Mathews launched a vicious attack upon  his winning the  Governor-General's
 

•

selected stories  of Frederick Philip Grove

edited with an introduction and notes by Desmond Pacey

In   many   respects   a    tragic figure  in Canadian literature, Frederick   Philip  Grove   (1871-
1948)  presents  in  his  writing
the   insight, the   sincerity and power    that    was  part   of  his
personality. The  25  stories  in­ cluded   in  this  volume,   many  of  which   appear  in   print  for the    first   time,    provide   the reader with  some  hint  of  the greatness  that was in  Grove.  Variety   is   the  outstanding characteristic of the  collection. Time, characters, settings and moods  change and   vary  with each  individual  piece  demon­ strating the  author's craft  and  versatility. A  Canadian  publi­ cation. April. $7.95

RYERSON PRESS/ McGRAW-HILL, CANADA
330  Progress Avenue
Scarborough, Ontario

REVIEW ARTICLES



Award  this  year), surely a true  Canadian poetry,    even    while    incorporating  the
 LET GOD
bear  up

lessons other poets have taught, will have its  own  form,  its  own  idiomatic sound? AI Purdy  (whom Mathews  obviously admires) writes this kind of poem. Robin Mathews doesn't. The content  may  be Mathews, but  the  voice  is Ferlinghetti's, as in  this  poem  about Jacques  Cartier:
 the  mountain  ranges
boulders
on  the  backs  of men
are  deforming let  god
bear  up
what  must  be borne
man's   business is  buoyancy
let god

all  his  work  came  to  nothing and so he  went  back  to St. Malo
 suffer  love
 
for  all  mankind

where  he  died
looking  out  over  the  bay that  is shaped  like
a  croissant
 his  embrace  spans  planets

arms  around
 while  man

towards  Canada the new  land dreaming a  dream
in  which  he  saw  the  cold  fist open  wide
and   he  saw  men   living  in   harmony   and
riches ...
and  they  said  the  captain's dream
was a dying  madness
all false
faux  comme  un  diamant du  Canada

The  Kings  Have  Donned  Their  Final Mask is a beautifully designed and printed book.  Tundra Books,  which  is  self-con­ sciously  Canadian,  obviously  intends   to offer  its  readers  books  which   are   both visually and  intellectually attractive. Like Robin 	Mathews',	Malcolm 	Miller's poetry  owes  a  great  debt  to Ferlinghetti, and   while   he  has  some  very  interesting ideas,  Ifind  his  work  too  often  fails  as poetry.  Miller   is obviously  attempting a kind  of satire,  and  some of his sallies are very  witty,  but  his  language is too  often abstract,  lacking    the   concreteness    and explicitness  that    poetry   must   have.    I recognize  that   this  use of  abstract lang­ uage  is deliberate on  his part,  an  aspect
of his satiric  method, but I cannot  agree that  such  a  method is viable.  Ienjoyed this book, but  only in a half-hearted way. If you like  poems  like the  following,  tllis book is for  you:
 a single woman
must  be content
with  making  angels drool

Patrick Lane  writes  about personal reality:  things   he   has   done,   things   he has  seen,  people  he  has  known.  His method, or  lack  of  it,  results  in  a  very uneven  book.   Sometimes  he   finds   the right  words  for something ("Avenue C") and  the  result  is a stunning poem; other times  he  merely  reports an  incident ("Water  Truck")  and   there   is  nothing more  to it than what  the mere  words say. But  for  a  string   of  words  to  become   a poem,  the words  must  do double duty, pointing  far   beyond   their   mere   desig­ nation. Lane's problem  seems  to  be  that  his   approach  doesn't   acknowledge  this fact,  and  so the  good  poems  are  acciden­ tal.  Because  he  refuses  the  challenge of poetry -to   use   craft    to   give   specific poetic    form   to   'experience-the   book lacks  unity.
There is,  however,  a  major theme of guilt  and  loss which  gathers a number of the  poems,  both  realized  and  unrealized, into  a  unified  group. Again  and  again  a poem  celebrates a  memory  of  something in  the  past,  now irrevocably lost. A  num­ ber  of  these   poems,  such   as  "Natasha"

REVffiW ARTICLES



and  "Testaments", occur  near  the end  of the  book,  and  in  their  full  development of this  theme  in  terms  of sexual  relation­ ships,  they  show  what   Lane  is  capable of. They  make  me  think  of  some of John  Newlove's  poems,  and  contain a depth  of feeling  not  present in  the  mere  incident poems.

The grass  you  crushed  as  you  rolled   away have   brushed  the   leaves   between  us
into   a  bed  of  broken  stems
Don't ask  again.
When I hurt you  it wasn't anger. You  want to  know   my  dreams.
You   want  too  much.

In my  dreams I see
the  men  and   graven women huddle  beside   the   stacks
of  starving children at Dachau. Come away from  the  fence.
In   the  distance  between  us you're like  a  body  left   behind
at Treblinka. We  must make love  again.

I  promise you  I  won't sleep. I won't look  at the   sun.
Keep me  awake and   my  eyes,
born   to  a  futile anger, will  relearn their gentleness.
Awake, I  keep   alive
the   mockery  our   fathers left   us;   asleep they  lie  with  me  in  a  common grave.

Richard  Geller   is  a  young   American now teaching at  UBC.  His Iowa  is a per­ fect  example of  private  press  printing at its  best.  The   book  is  beautiful in  itself. The added  fact  that it is a poem sequence  in  four  parts  which  works  admirably for the  most part  makes it a pleasure  to own.
The   first   part,  "Summer",  is  made
up of a series of portraits, the voices of various   representative  Iowans, and  des­ criptions of the  countryside and  towns  of the  state.  It is  the  weakest  section,  for some  of  the  segments fall  flat,  the  con­ nections  are  not  always clear,  the  verse is sometimes  too prosaic. But there  are good bits,  too.  "[And]", a  single  short  poem,
 "Indian Summer", is a good  example of
Geller's  work:

Floating mathematician:   rainbow bearded and   dressed   in  lavender and   silver,
figuring on  your   fingers -
so  much   here,  so much there and  obviously
a  million suns  banking into  curves -effort- lessly  pulling
rings  of  spinning planets with   them.
Moving slowly  through the   noon heat
a  breeze   lays  patches of  ripples. The river  silence drifting,
each  curve and   bend  poised. Butterflies light  ivory  above
the  lush,  waxed green of  the banks.

And   the  breeze   winds  a faint long  tone. Brown  leaves  touch, quicken the  river
as  the  sky
begins  a  crescent of  white frost  and   blue.
Thoughts of  her  have  been
like  slivers  of  glass  on  porcelain, Father.

"Fall" returns to  the  method of   "Sum­ mer",  but  with  a  greater control  of  tone  and  method. The imagery   here  is  fuller  and   more   unified.   There  is  an   almost  Keatsian lushness  to some passages which I like very much.  Finally, in "Here", the  poet personally  takes account of the land­ scape  through  which  he  has  moved   his poem.   He   makes   brilliant  use  of   The Tower  of  Babel theme in reference to the  Corps  of  Army  Engineers' building of the Coralville    Darn.    The    exploitation   of Nature is seen  here,  as elsewhere  in  this poem,  in  a  darkly   ironic   perspective.
Richard Geller's concerns are  natural ones, and  he has obviously learned how to give them  full expression. I hope  he stays in Canada.
Douglas  Lochhead's A & B & C & is
another small,  private edition. There are
34  loose  pages,   and   the   poet   has   left plenty  of room  on each  one, "so that the reader   may   write  down   his  own   philo­ sophical   flashes."    It's    a   little   like   bp

73

REVIEW ARTICLES



Nichol's  box of a few  years ago, and  just about  as enjoyable. Lochhead insists that it is Canadian, concrete, foolery, and fun. It is  all  these,  and  one  can  only  enjoy, enjoy,  when  made  a present  (Lochhead's gift)  of such  an alphabet. There are only sixty  copies,  though,  which   is  going  to lessen  the  fun.   Let   Lochhead  have   the last  word: "Word-play (play  is a word) it is, for  all  who  would  play."
I   have   saved   Gail   Fox's   Dangerous
Season  to  the  end,  because  it  is the  only book of this  bunch that  I can  unhesitat­ ingly recommend. Mrs. Fox has created  a book,  every  page   of   which   moved   me. Her  mind  ranges  over  a great  variety  of ideas  and  interests,  but  her  poems always deal with one basic concern: the problem  of love  and  human loneliness.  Her  voice is not  loud  or  raucous, and  she does  not indulge in rhetoric, but  there is a quiet intensity   to  everything she  says, so  that her   poems   remain  with   you  long  after you have  put  the  book down and  gone on to other things.
One   reason   for   this  is  her  very  fine sense of  rhythm and  of language. She  is like  Pat  Lane  in  that  her  poems  emerge from  her  own  experiences,  both  her families,  her  friends, the  everyday  diffi­ culties  of  living.  She  is very  unlike  him, though, in  that  she  brings  a  much  finer sense of  craft  to  each  poem,  and  always makes   her   language   go   beyond   mere
 statement by  creating images  and  meta­ phors  that   deeply  resonate   in  the  mind.  When  such  technical competency is added  to  an  open   and  cleansing sanity,  poems of   real   merit   result.   Here   is  the   title poem:

I think you  meant to  rake yesterday, today I  did   it and   found  green  shoots pushing up,  accusingly.
I  gripped the   rake   harder and   stood   where  you
would   have stood, uneasy with   the  raw  look  of  things, unable to  leave   the  place where grass  blades began
to  travel to  the  trees, their shadows cutting
deeply on  my  feet.

Did  you  mean to  rake yesterday? Sometimes I don't know   what  you  mean and
I stand in  places where
you  would   stand and
find   that  nothing is  safe, spring arriving  and   lighting
its   pale,   green fuse ...

In  the  final  section  of the  book,  there is a  series  of  poems  on  her  son  that  are full  of  love  and   wonder, and   the  boy's own  "delight with  becoming". These poems  are  simple  with  the simplicity  that only comes  after  great  effort,  and  suggest that  Mrs.  Fox  will continue to create her beautiful  and   deceptively  simple   poems for some time to come. I look forward to reading them.



LOWRY'S LAST NOVEL
Matthew Corrigan

MALCOLM LOWRY,  October  Ferry to Gabriola. Nelson, Foster & Scott. $8.25.


THERE IS LITTLE EVIDENCE that   Lowry   could   have   turned  the  un­ finished  manuscript of  October  Ferry  to

74
 
Gabriola   into   as  fine  a  novel  as  Under the  Volcano. Lowry  was simply  not  of a mind   to  finish  things   the  last  ten  years

REVIEW ARTICLES



of his life. There is not  the  same  urgency in  Gabriola   as  in  the  great   novel.  Vol­ eana's  flaws  are   justified  by the  charac­ ter's   propulsion  toward   self-destruction, a propulsion that  will  probably read  to a later  age as clearly  as Ahab's does to our own,  despite some  of  the  same  kinds  of language  excess.   We   never   doubt  the seriousness of Geoffrey Firmin's katabasis.  Gabriola  has the same seriousness  but the  action  is missing  to anneal the whole, the action-toward-death. Gabriola  represents the  volcanic state  of  mind  drawn out  to a   fine   tremor  of   existence:  given   the option of joy over the earlier novel's imperative of  despair. We  know  Dante's paradiso is  duller   than   his  inferno   and we  know  why  it  has  to  be  so.  Religion and   art   do   not   overlap  without  some loss of nerve.  This  is not  to say that Gabriola  doesn't work.  It does  work  but it   works   as   something   different   from what  it pretends to be.
Because  he laboured on it  painstaking­ ly the  last  ten  years  of  his  life Gabriola manages to survey beautifully that  period of  Lowry's  creativity, a  period   that   rep­  resents  in  many  ways his conversion  back to   life.   If  there    are   any   doubts   after  reading  the  letters  and  short  stories  that  it was a fertile period, Gabriola  puts these to  rest.  As a  piece  of  writing it  achieves moments of  lyric  and   philosophic grace that  equal  anything written in  the  twen­ tieth  century; moments that  spring from such   a   quietness  of   spirit    (a   quietus, even)   it is difficult  to peruse them  in  the context of a work  that describes  itself on the surface as a novel.
The infernal and  paradisiacal  (Erida­
nus)  poles that  divided  and  ruled Lowry's thinking are  felt  once  again, though the pull    is   positive    throughout,   inclining finally   toward  a  synthesis   of  salvation,
 even of grace. The theme  is dispossession, eviction.  Ethan and  Jacqueline Llewelyn are under  edict of eviction  from their squatter's shack at Eridanus, on the north shore  of Burrard Inlet, opposite Vancou­ ver.   They    have    shared    two   years   of extraordinary, primitive joy:  a  joy based on   the   near   totality   of   their   rebellion  against  a  polluted, plastic  age  (the  year is I 949) ;  based  on  a  simple  return  to nature  and   a  learning  to  love  the  ele­ ments  of that   nature; but  based  also  on an   Ockham  balance   achieved  between  reality  and  fear,  of  which  fear  Llewelyn has the usual Lowry inheritance.

For   the  first  time   they   had   both acquired, though  they   didn't  know   it   then,  a   com­ plete   faith  in   their  environment,   without that  environment ever   seeming  too  secure. This was  a  gift  of  grace, finally   a  damna­ tion,   and   a  paradox  in   itself   all  at   once: for  it didn't need   to  seem  secure  for  them  to  have   faith  in   its  security. Or   the   little house   itself   didn't  need   to.  The   very   im­  mediacy  of   the   eternities   by   which  they  were   surrounded  and   nursed;  antiquity of mountains,  forest,  and    sea,   conspired  on every  hand to  reassure and  protect them, as with    the    qualities  of    their   own    seeming permanence.... Eridanus  was.

Essentially the novel takes place in Llewelyn's  consciousness,  though of such a symbiotic  and  cosmic  nature is that consciousness that it tends to become whatever   it   considers    or   momentarily takes  cognizance of. The book is this consciousness in the state of becoming. Present action  takes place on a bus from Victoria to  Nanaimo, where   the  Llewe­ lyns  board   a  ferry  for  Gabriola  Island. They  have  heard  of a sea-captain's house for  sale on  the  island  and  they  are  jour­  neying  to inspect  it. Should  the  house  be unsuitable there   is  a  tract of  land   they can   buy  running  down   to  the  sea,  and  Llewelyn  is  prepared, as before,  to  build

75

REVIEW ARTICLES



a  house  with  his own  hands.  Present  ex­
periences  tend  to be few and  far  between
-an incident in  a  Nanaimo tavern, something seen  from  the  window  of  the bus -experiences which propel  Llewelyn back  into  his past.  The  trip  is laced  with minute correspondences which  secure the past  in a state  of webbed  terror. Most  of the  time   we  are  delving  so  deeply  into the past that  its own past becomes signifi­ cant.  The past within  the past is explored in  depth, so that  everything gives way to and   becomes  part   of  everything else :  a single   continuum  of    consciousness    in which  time  is  technically suspended.
The ferry  is actually taken  but  returns because  of  a  sick  passenger.  The  whole trip    (Eridanus: Vancouver:Victoria:Na­ naimo)    seems   to   enact    a   geographic flirtation with  Eridanus, as though  some­ thing  in  the  elements  refuses to let  them travel   far  from   home;   at  several   junc­ tures  they find  themselves  pointed  home­  ward,  the significance  of which  does  not escape Llewelyn.  The book ends with  the travellers once  again  ferrying   across  the strait  to Gabriola. Instead  of taking  us to the island, however, Lowry lets Llewelyn envision   their   new   life  there,   a  vision very  close structurally to  the  one  at  the end  of  V olea no,  where  Firmin   imagines a  similar   Canadian  paradise. This  sud­ den  projection forward  optimistically at the    end    presages    an   escape   for    the Llewelyns  from  the  past  that  has  terror­ ized   them. At  least  this seems to  be Lowry's  intention. When  the ferry returns to  discharge its  sick  passenger   the  even­ ing  newspapers  are  taken  on  board.   As the  ferry  approaches Gabriola they  read in   the   paper   that   city  council   has   re­ prieved   the  squatters at  Eridanus. They are  free  to  return from  exile.  Since  they are  already on  their  way the  prospect  of
 a  more   permanent  home   on  the  island takes   on   a   new   significance.  It is  as though  they   have   eased   clear   of  their doom,  have  escaped  the  punishment that has  been  threatening throughout.  Salva­ tion  is  felt  as  a  moment of  release  that  comes  when  least  expected  in  the  throes  of  an  ordeal; it  is  something to  remain humble about, for it  retains  as its present  heritage the  remembrance of  what   it  is like  to  suffer  exile.  Such   is  the   Lowry synthesis. We glimpse  it partially in "For­ est  Path to  the  Spring" and  in  Dark  as the   Grave;  in   Gabriola   it  is  given   its longest  moment. What is amazing is that it  thrusts  through  the  unfinished   manu­ script  with  the  clarity and  consonance of a single state  of mind, suggesting  that  all of  Lowry's   later   work  was  reaching  to­ ward    this   conclusion.  Surprisingly,   his plan  for  a  continuum of works  scanning the  upsweep   of  the   Divine  Comedy be­ comes a reality  with  this book.
That  Ethan Llewelyn   is  a  forty-year old  retired criminal lawyer  is almost  ir­ relevant to  the  book.  Why  he  has  given up  his Toronto law  practice to settle in a west coast  shack  is never explained. The  book   in   fact   is  about   Lowry's   life  at Dollarton, British Columbia: his struggle with   actual  and  spiritual eviction,   with alcohol,   with  guilt, with  God.   At  times Lowry  manages  to  objectify   his  ordeal, to  disguise  it  in  the  fear  or  thought of an  Ethan Llewelyn,  as when  Llewelyn  is riddled  with  guilt  about not  defending a fifteen-year old  boy  sentenced to  be hanged,  a   cowardice  he  connects   with an  earlier  incident at  university when  he failed  to prevent a young friend  from hanging  himself.   Llewelyn   is  every   bit as infirm  as  Geoffrey  Firmin, with  occa­ sionally   some   of  the   same  insight  into  the   mystery   of  that   infirmity.  What  is

REVIEW ARTICLES



most unfinished in this book concerns Llewelyn  the  lawyer  and  the  reasons  for his  retreat. Lowry's   working notes  indi­ cate  some  of  the  things   he  intended  to add    to   facilitate  our   believing   in   his character on objective as well as personal  grounds. Evidently, we were  to be shown how  Llewelyn   had  defended  a  man   he believed  innocent, only  to learn  he was a murderer.  Thus  his  disillusionment  and his   retreat  from   civilization. That  the book  works  as  well  as it  does  despite  its factual   imperfections  and   its  structural imbalance indicates, I  think,   the  degree to  which   Lowry   was  no  mean   charac­ terizer,  and  no ordinary novelist. Finally, it  doesn't matter who  Llewelyn  is  trying to be;  he is the  Lowry  persona, he could be no other. The book is the mind  of the author  at   work   phenomenologically  on the   raw   substance   of   experience,  nar­  rowed   as   that   experience  was   through his  choice of life-style, through his con­ sciously  cultivating one  species  of  suffer­ ing,  through his  latent  Manicheism.
Llewelyn's external world  makes  a bizarre   kind   of   sense.   It  is  constantly telling him something about himself, pumping him with information to help overthrow  the  fear   that   the   world   has gone   mad.   There are   few  inert   or  iso­ lated    facts.    Films    that    Llewelyn   sees become   more   real   than    life   itself.   He becomes  the  "Wandering Jew" in  a  film of  that   title.   He  suffers   that   becoming.  Nothing exists  for  him  without  prehen­ sion,  without  intentionality. The  moun­ tains   spining  British   Columbia  are  one geologically   with   the   infernal  Ixtacci­ huatl   and   Popocatepetl  of  Volcano. In his  drunkenness  Llewelyn   is  capable  of merging consciousness   with   Noah,  Swe­ denborg, Edgar Allan  Poe,  Geoffrey Fir­
 

Shaw

Seven Critical  Essays

NORMAN ROSENBLOOD,  editor

Shaw's  keen   wit   and   sensitive awareness  of social   issues   have  delighted  and  stimulated many    theatre   lovers.    These  incisive    essays examine  his   skill    as   a  dramatist and    the tradition   of    ideas     that   helped   shape  his dramatic technique.
$6.00


The Grasping
Imagination

The American  Writings of
Henry James

PETER BUITENHUIS

Peter   Buitenhuis argues convincingly that  the more  obvious  international aspect of James' fiction  has overshadowed its equally distinct American aspect.  In  his  examination of the American content  as  it evolved   in  successive works, Professor Buitenhuis clarifies and heightens  the   dramatic  confrontation  of   the Old    World   and  New-the   central   concern of James' fiction.
"Unsensational and   eminently readable,  [this book]   brings  the  best  kind  of  key  to a  reading of  James: a lucid   intelligence and   knowledge illumined  by   personal  insights."  New    York Times
$12.50

University of Toronto Press

min,  and   others.   The   ghost   of   Poe  is	 	

77

REVIEW ARTICLES



omnipresent throughout. Llewelyn looks like Poe physically  (to say nothing of the spiritual resemblance). As a student he attended  Poe's  alma   mater.   The   day  of the  bus trip,  aside  from  its being the day on which  his student friend  hanged  him­ self twenty  years before, is the hundredth anniversary of Poe's death.
Everything  is  connected  with   every­ thing  for    those  with    pure   vision. The men's section  of  a  bar  in  Nanaimo (which   has  "an   ugliness  the  world  had not  thought of before")  seems to take on the   "perfect  outward   expression   of  his own   inner   soul,  of   what   it   meant,   of what   it  did,  even  of  what  awful  things could   happen  in  it."  Words   overheard are    "addressed   mysteriously    to   Ethan himself;   and   moreover ... every   phrase  [has]  another   meaning,  perhaps  many meanings,  intended  for  his  ears  alone."  Llewelyn   has   been   introduced   to   the Cabbala  by  his  wife  Jacqueline's father, a  "white  magician" with  sundry   occult powers, and  that  too gets drawn  into  the overall flow of consciousness.

In fact  he  could  sum  up  no  better their life on  the  beach than to  say  it  had  heen,  in  a manner, his cabbala, in  the  sense  that, if he was  not  mistaken, that  system  might  be regarded on  one  plane as a means  less of accumulating  than  of  divesting   oneself­ by   arrangement,   balancing   them    against their  opposites -of   unbalanced ideas:  the  mind, finally  transcending both  aspects, re­ gains   its   lost   equilibrium,  or  for   the   first time   truly  discovered it:  not  unlike, Ethan sometimes  supposed, the  modern process  of psychoanalysis.

When   things   are   going  well  there   is this perfect symbiosis between man and environment,  between self  and  God. Their  shack,    unlike    their    other    two houses    (both   of   which   burned    to   the ground  mysteriously) , means  more  than the   usual   abode:  "they   wear   it  like  a
 shell,"  they "love  it like a sentient being." Eridanus  exemplifies   a  religious  whole­ ness and   love  is the  cement that  secures it   fast.   Eviction,  or   its   threat,  is   thus taken  as symptomatic of some overlooked and   unconfessed   evil.   Llewelyn   has   no difficulty   screening  his  past  for  the  ap­  propriate   evidence.   He   sees   himself responsible for   his  friend's  suicide;  he sees  himself   a  failure  as  a  lawyer   who might  plead  eloquently for  the  abolition of  capital  punishment, and   for  the  life of  the   boy  murderer. There is even  the fear   that  he  has   become   too  possessive about    Eridanus.   Guilt    is   never    that  simple  or   unilateral,  however.   Llewelyn has  the  added   torment of terrible  visions
-visions of chaos  and  not  of some principle of good controlling the reeling world.  His greatest despair comes when under the influence of alcohol.
Significantly, Llewelyn  cannot avoid peering  into   such   depths.  He   needs   a sense of hell  in  his life almost  in order  to keep  his joy sensibly bound. Once he envisions  this hell it is enough. An inverse spirit   resembling  hope   begins   to   point him  in  the  opposite direction and  he sees with  cleared vision.

What was important was that he was now convinced there must  be some  complete triumphant counterpart, hitherto based  on hearsay  or   taken  on   trust, of  that   experi­ ence   he  had   had, or  almost had:   as  there must   be  of  that abyssal   region,  some  spiri­ tual   region   maybe   of    unborn   divine thoughts beyond our  knowledge....
Mightn't he equally well consider that he'd been   vouchsafed, was  so  being   vouchsafed, a  glimpse into  the   very   workings of   crea­ tion    itself?-indeed   with    this   cognition Ethan  seemed   to  see  before  his  eyes  whole  universes  eternally  condensing   and    recon­ densing themselves out  of  the  "immaterial" into  the   "material",  and  as  the   continued visualization  of   their   Creator,   being radi­ ated  back   again.  While  meantime  here   on earth  the   "material"  was   only   cognizable

REVIEW ARTICLES



through  the  mind of  man! What was  real, what imaginary? Yes,  but  couldn't the meaning, the   message, for  them, be  simply that there had  been   a  message  at all?  Yes, could   he   not   just   as   well   tell   himself, as Cyprian  of   Antioch,  that  here    God   had beaten   the    devil    at  his   own   game, that magic was checkmated by miracle! Ethan drank  half    another  beer.    Gone  was   his fright. In   its  stead  was  awe.  In  the  begin­ ning  was  the  word. But  what  unpronounce­ able  Name had  visualized  the Word?

The  only  drama is that   between  pres­ ent    and    past    consciousness; the   only action   the  will  of  the  moment  grappling with  a mute  past,  not so that  it can strike out  in  pure  action, but  rather  so that  it can   enlarge  upon   itself,  so  that it  can know  itself.  The process  is  self-defeating because  of  its  intoxication,  its  solipsism. Few  prose  writers of  the  modem period have  tried  (have tormented) the moment of  consciousness   as  Lowry   does  in  this work.  What he  seems  to  be emphasizing is the  compulsion of  modern man  to  re­ work  past  consciousness; suggesting  that  if  man  is to  constitute himself  as  a free individual  he  must   first  make   sense  of the   nightmare of  his  past.  The   posture of  Lowry's  later   work  is retrospective in this   sense.   Terror  is  something  experi­ enced  when  one  realizes  the  significance of  the  past,  when   one  sees  the  connec­  tion; it  does  not  consist  of   any  present  threat.  Since  all  of  this  ratiocination  is intended as a  kind  of  reparation for  the future, the  present  moment tends  to  be overlooked, if  not  also  to  be  underlived. There  is  almost  no  active   present   tense in this work.
The  fact  is  Lowry  came  to  think  this way  as a  writer. It  represents a  danger­ ously  close  perspective  for   a  writer   to have  unless  he  is a  phenomenologist and his  subject,  quite  unabashedly, is the  re­ duction of  consciousness.  Dangerous  be-
 cause  you can't locate  the  infinite  in  the general  labyrinth of human mind  except in  terms  of  a  general   intentional  struc­ ture.  The  result  at  best  is but  a  frenetic scaffolding that   gives  the   sense  of  the  impending event  but  never  the  spectacle itself.  The   prose   takes  on   the  tortured shape  of  the  quest  in  its  circumlocution. The  shape  of Gabriola  is that  of a vortex  out  of which  something material is about to   be  hurled.  Often   nothing  is  hurled clear; no  meaning  is  adduced and   past consciousness  is swept  into  present.
Lowry's   is  the   problem    of   the   poet turned  mystic,   of  learning  to  face   the fact  that  everything that  comes  from  his creative  unconscious is part  of everything else  in  the  order   of  creation, and   must be   attended  to,   must   be  set   down   in chiselled  stone  prose,  if the  final  balance is to  be maintained. Editing, or what  for the  average novelist  amounts to an  ordi­ nary  task, is lost sight  of in Lowry's later  work.  Certain parts  of  Gabriola  give  the feeling  that   at  some  later   rereading the author would   have  trimmed  or  deleted them.  Yet the  same pieces show  us some­ thing   of  the  difficulty  of  doing   this  for Lowry,  because in  some  way  they  con­ trol  parts  of  the  larger  whole;  they  give the   feeling   of   belonging.  There   is   a strange  logic   behind    the    excess    (the plethora) of this manuscript, a logic akin to that  of dreams. It defies ordinary day­ light    understanding  yet   demands   our  attention.  I  am   thinking of  the  way  a person we know  reveals  himself or herself totally   in   a   dream,  becoming   through word  or  deed  a  full  being  and  doing  so in  terms  that seem  totally  appropriate to that   person; so  that   on   awakening  we think    "Yes,   that    is   exactly   what    she would  say, how  she  would  act." Though nothing of  the  sort  had   taken   place   or

79

REVIEW ARTICLES



would   ever   take   place   in   real   life  the dream   had  effected  the  imaginative leap that   life  was  too  shy  or  slow  to  make. The   ontological  accuracy  of  the   thing strikes  us. It is the  same  with  the manu­ script    of   Gabriola.   Lowry   was   right,  finally,   to  believe   in   his  continuum  of works  as  he  did,  to  respect  the  presence of  every   wandering  beggar   that   passed through   his  consciousness,  lest  the  indi­  gent   turn  out   to  be  Christ   in  disguise. Reading  Lowry,  if  one  does  it  properly,
 requires more   than the  usual  suspension of  disbelief.  If the  writing works  for  us it  does  so  not  because  it  is fiction  on  its way  to  becoming a  novel,  but  because  it entails  a vision  of a higher  order  of  crea­ tive   existence altogether  than   we  ordi­  narily  get  in  modern  literature. It would be difficult  to imagine a later  age making anything  like   a  fair   assessment   of  our own  without such  a testament, bleak  and  solemn  as it tends  to be.




THE O-ZONE
AND OTHER PLACES
 





Alan Shucard


ANDREAS SCHROEDER, The Ozone  Minotaur. Sono Nis  Press. $s.oo.
GEoRGE BOWERING, The Gangs  of Kosmos. Anansi. $2.50 paper ($s.oo cloth). HARRY HOWITH,  Fragments of the  Dance. Village Bookstore Press.
IAN YOUNG, Year  of the  Quiet Sun. Anansi. $1.95.


THERE WERE TWO  noteworthy events  in  Canadian poetry  in  a group  of volumes   published  in  Canada in  I g6g : George  Bowering  put  out  another  good, competent collection, The  Gangs of Kos­ mos,  and   was  awarded  the   Governor­ General's Prize;  and  Andreas  Schroeder produced as exciting, as excellent  a book of  poems   as  has  come  from   any   press anywhere  for   a  long   time.  The   Ozone Minotaur, for  whatever reasons,  has won no award; only  the  admiration of almost all  who  have  reviewed  and  all  who  have read   it.  The book  reveals  so  boldly,  so clearly,   so   poetically  what  sensitive people-particularly sensitive young people-see  as  the   elemental truth  of the   world   at   present, and   presents   the reality  so starkly  that  praise  for  the  book

So
 rings extravagantly hollow as the poems engulf   the  adulation  and   make   it  seem like mere molecules  of ink on paper or vibrations of  air  in  a wind.  Perhaps that
is why the  Foreword by J. Michael Yates
strikes one as unnecessary advertising, a circus barker's side-show cry to view something patently beautiful.
It is  not  important that  Yates's  Fore­ word  is untrue so much  as that  it is unim­ portant  next   to  Schroeder's   work,  and  cites  irrelevancies. Schroeder  may  have  been  twenty-two when  The Ozone Mino­  taur  appeared, but   the  question of  ma­ turity, or  its  lack,  never arises  from   the reading of  the  book;  to suggest  that  it is a remarkable work  by a twenty-two-year­ old  is  simply  not  so significant   as to  say that  it  is  a  remarkable  book.  To   label

REVIEW ARTICLES



Schroeder an  enfant  terrible or any other sort  of enfant  is to do him  a disservice in the same  way as it would  be to apply  the term   to  Keats,  or   to  many   others;  he may  some  day  be more  mature, but  he is indisputably a  grown-up poet  now.  And to say that  Schroeder is "a member of a race of young  writers unique in the tradi­ tion   of   Canadian   writers-cosmopoli­ tan,  multilingual, multi-medial ... " is to wave  the  Maple  Leaf  needlessly. Schroe­  der   was   born   in   Germany,  and   Yates himself   was  born   and   raised   below  the border; and  there are  centres of cosmo­ politanism,   multilingualism,  and   multi­ medialism outside of   Canada-in London,  in   New   York,   in   Africa,   for example. No, Schroeder stands  above  this kind  of  salesmanship on  the  pedestal   of The  Ozone  Minotaur itself;  Yates  meant no  harm   and   could   evidently  not  resist reacting to  the  book  in  his  own  way.  It is writers  like Schroeder, a fine poet  who happens  to  be  writing in  Canada,  who will  unselfconsciously establish  Canadian literature as a  notable force  in  the  world of  letters  if  they  succeed  in  ignoring the chauvinistic blandishments of  people  at­ tempting-with  the   best  of   intentions
-to manufacture an  instant and instan­ taneously renowned Canadian  literature. Leonard Cohen speaks  to  a  large  inter­ national audience, and  many outside  of Canada are  mildly  surprised to  discover that  he is  Canadian;  but  what  does that  really  matter?  Names   such   as  Atwood, Avison, Bowering, and,  one expects, Schroeder, will  become   familiar  outside of  Canada because  the  writers are  good, and   in  spite  of  the  promoters of  Cana­ dian   literature.  It was   only   after   the Americanists  of   the   post-revolutionary period,  the  Connecticut  wits  and  others,  ceased  laboring  to  create  an   American
 literature  that    American  literature   re­
laxed  and  incidentally created itself. What makes  The  Ozone  Minotaur so
excellent  is its  taut   power; it  is a  preci­ sion  watchspring wound   so  tightly  that  to  read  it  is to sense  the  capacity of  the verse suddenly  and  violently  to let  go;  it is to enter  the  cell  with  the  machinery of the  world's   violent  zeitgeist, to  feel  and  see its  tick  and  tock,  and  to  be  horribly  fascinated at   what  it   might  trigger. Through three  zones Schroeder takes  us, where  we  move  only  in  possibility,  never in  certainty, until  we complete the  book and  finish in what  Yates  rightly  calls the "O-Zone", the  point  at  which  we realize that  there is only the possible, where,  as Schroeder has explained in Zone II, there
is "nothing now I But the absolute knowl­
edge I Of  the  ability   to  kill."  The  gra­
phic, superb first poem of the collection, "Introduction", establishes Schroeder's credentials as  the  stunningly scary,  thor­ oughly   articulate  guide   to   the   under­ standing of  his  unreal   reality,  existence  in  a verbal  Marienbad. The  nightmarish specificity  of  description  is  perfectly matched with  what  occurs  in  the  poem, as is the case through most of The  Ozone Minotaur;   Schroeder  does  not  write   of just  men,  or  even  of   three   men,  but  in particular of "three  men  in  tails walking
across I your   cornfield   to   the   creek"  in
the  evening.  He  then  tells  us "why  they exist":  one  walks  along  one  side  of  the
stream   "measuring  holes   in   the   sand  I
with a small  tape  measure that  I is alive." He  shouts  across  occasionally to the  man on   the   opposite  bank   who   "is   sifting debris I into  a notebook  ... " and "meas­ uring    the    size   of I the    sand    grains." Schroeder, with   the   great   exactness  of his   verse   and   vision   of   incertitude,  is
partly  these  men,  but  if he is to  be iden-

81

REVIEW ARTICLES



tified  with  any  of them,  it is chiefly with the  third   man,   the  man  who  treads   in the  middle of  the  stream   and   steps  on the fish and  merges  with the fish, for they
"swim  through I him    and    he   walks
through  the  fish."  The   academic  meas­ urements are  taken  at  the  verges,  but  it is at  the  centre that  things  are  happen­ ing,  unpleasant  things,  such  as  stepping on the  fish. And the unpleasantness (often  frustrated   relationships  described    with the  delicate  toughness of a  spider  web) arouses the  capacity for  mayhem: "Cables" concludes with  the  poet  stand­
ing  "motionless, I while  the  hammer  in
my  fist I grows  steadily   larger  I and   the time I short";   "Sands"  has   the   poet's companion leaving  "wild,  like a man  I in the skin of a bear  that  is I not yet killed"; and  "The Signal", one of the  last  poems in   the   volume,   bears   reprinting  in   its
entirety  because  it  reflects  both  the  un­ compromising frustration and  rising  tide of violence of the  poems, and Schroeder's arresting, precise imagistic form :

Now is the  time.
My hands  appear in many places
I have  never  been;
A drunkard, bottling silence
on  an ocean  rock.

The white  hand  creeps among white  things,
bone  lightning, lean
like a hungry  rock,

and  in my tight  clenched  fist a razor
splits  the  wind.

Schroeder takes  his audience to those places in the Now, to where he hovers in "Tracks"  "suspended in  the   silence   of this  wilderness", and  he  leaves  them splitting  a   wind    with    a   razor    never
 named   in  so  fragile  and   forceful   a  way before.  That is what  makes  it  important that    the   book   be  read   widely   without regard    to   mere   matters  of   nationality, and  that  Andreas Schroeder give to liter­ ature  another  poetic    statement   of   his vision as soon as he is ready.
George  Bowering's The  Gangs of Kos­
mos,  Harry  Howith's Fragments  of  the Dance,   and   Ian   Young's  Year   of  the Quiet  Sun  are  all  good  works,  certainly worth  a  reader's investment of  time  and thought. Perhaps their  limitation is exag­ gerated  by  their   publication  so  close  to The  Ozone  Minotaur; perhaps  it is only by comparison  that   they  do  not  stir  the spirit    deeply.   Each    of   them   tells   the reader   in  interesting  new  ways what  the reader   tends   frequently  to  be  aware   of himself; that  is, good  poetry.  Schroeder's volume  tells  the  reader  things  that  went nameless for him  before; that  is, excellent  and  extremely  important poetry.  Bower­ ing  is fine  to  read  anywhere and  he pre­  sents  another  instalment of  the  straight­ forward  record    of   a   sensitive   man   of many  preoccupations   among  whose friends  one  would  like  to  count   himself. Howith's  fourth  volume   is  best  in   the love  poems,   and   best  there   when   he  is most   conversational.  When   the   reader finishes  with  the  others,  he  will probably find  the  Young  collection worth  the sell­ ing   price,   although  the   book  may  well leave   him   with   the   sense  that   he   has read   it   all   before   somewhere, in   little  magazines or  the  odd   thin   volume.  But it  is a long  way  from  the  visionary  Now of  the  O-Zone to  any  of  the  other  col­ lections-certainly  farthest to   Young's  Year of the Quiet  Sun.







CROWDED SPACE


ANTHONY BLICQ. The   Rise  and  Fall of Married
Charlie.  AndreDeutsch. $6.95

ALLEN TATE once   remarked  that  "Lit­ erary   criticism   is  perpetually  interesting and  perpetually impossible."  It  is perpe­  tually  interesting because every  new work forces   one   to   question   the   validity   of one's    reactions.  It   is   also   perpetually impossible   to   come   to   any   unqualified evaluation.  There  is  always   the   uneasy question, suppose   I  am  terribly, terribly  wrong?   A  new   novel  is  a   particularly difficult   test  of   the  continuity and   con­ sistency    of    that    elusive    thing   called "standards."  A  responsible  critic   knows that   he   must   somehow  reconcile   these with  an open  acceptance of the possibility of   doing  things   in  a  new  way.  In  sum, ultimately   all   we   can   say   of   literary criticism  is that  it is a response  to a work which  has filtered  through a particular sensibility.
Anthony Blicq's The Rise and Fall of Married    Charlie   elicits   ambivalent   re­ actions  such  as  these.  It is  workmanlike, not   badly    written,  and   its   author  is obviously  sincere  and  intelligent. But  as a  novel  The  Rise  and   Fall  of Married  Charlie   just  doesn't  hang  together very well.
The  most egregious flaw is its wavering
perspective. The  narrator,  Charlie, seems intended to represent the most unpleasant anti-hero of  them   all.  A  Canadian  ex­ patriate writer  in  his late  twenties, Char-
 lie marries  a rich,  neurotic English girl, Jenny.   After   he  has  alienated  her  rela­ tives,   run    through   her    money,    and hastened   her   ruination  as  a  singer,  he deserts   her   for   a   prostitute   whom   he impregnates.    The      sub-plot     concerns Jennie's aunt, Barbara, whom  Jenny  has always   been    encouraged to   flatter  in order  to inherit her  money.  Barbara has been married to Harry, a beefy American adventurer  (an  older  version of Charlie) , who has deserted  her through a trumped­ up  plane  disaster  in  which  he appears to have  been  killed. Harry, in  turn,  marries  Kate,   a  blowzy   blonde,  who  had   been living  with   Harry's  lawyer,   Keiv.   Keiv is a  handsome opportunist  who  is work­ ing for  both  Barbara and  Keiv.
All this muddle comes to the boil when Barbara is vacationing in Athens  and recognizes  Harry passing  in  a car  on  the street.  She  summons Keiv  from  London to  track  down  her  missing  husband, but since it is imperative to Keiv  to convince Barbara   that   Harry  is  really  dead,   she loses patience with   his  lack  of  initiative and  impetuously calls  on  Charlie as  the sort  of man  who  would  get  on  with  the job. In the meantime, Jenny, who has surrendered all her self-respect, follows Barbara  to   Athens   to   plead   for   some money.  In the  end,  everybody  comes out losers.
It is a  bit  of  too  much, isn't  it?  And,
believe me,  I've  left  out  lots of the  com­ plications   in  order   to  stress   the   major  outline.   But,   as   I  started to   say,   the greatest  weakness  of the  book is the shift­  ing  perspective. Charlie  is  the  narrator. Credibly  he  can  be  in  only  one  place  at one  time.  But  he knows everything about everybody  else in the book, what  they are doing,  what  they  are thinking, what  they are  feeling.   Now   Anthony  Blicq  might

BOOKS IN REVIEW



argue   that    this   is  only   a   new-fangled version   of  the   magisterial author,  and that  he  is entitled to  write  his book  any way  he  likes.  Very  well,  but  he  has  to grant  concessions   to   his  reader   to   the extent   of  seducing him  into  believing  in the  validity   of  his  intentions. The  diffi­ culty  with  preternatural  perception  such as Charlie's is that  we  never fully  believe in Charlie. Charlie's behaviour is brutally  callous; how  then  can  he  depict  Jenny's anguish   with  such  compassion? When  it omes
Icularly  his reminiscences of his Canadian
background -a  whining note  of naivete suddenly appears:  a  jarring   contrast to the cosmopolitan world of international finance  in  which   the  action  takes  place.
The action is on  the  level of a spoofy
Jams
sus:am  suspense  and  narrative pace,  but he IS more  ambitious than  this. He wants to get  inside  his  characters as well.  As a result introspective analysis is clumsily engrafted onto a thriller. Graham Greene is one  of  the  few  writers  who  has  been able   to  fuse  the   two;   but  Greene   is  a dangerous writer  for  a fledgling  writer  to emulate.
The Rise  and  Fall of Married  Charlie suffers from  an  ailment common  to most hard   it  is  to  get  one's   early  works  re­ first   novels -hypertrophy   of   material. The author has  tried  to cram  too  much lumber-symbols,    parallels,   characters, settings,  action-into too  frail  a  build­  ing.  No  wonder it  collapses around  him. But  some   of  it   can  be  salvaged   for   a structure with  a  sounder foundation and simpler   lines.
PHYLLIS GROSSKURTH
 HEEEEELLLPI

CHARLOTTE    FIELDEN.    Crying    as   She    Ran
Macmillan. $5.95   cloth,  $2.95   paper. 	·

IN   THE   BEST   of   all   possible   worlds, perhaps, no humane reviewer  would  send in  a  review  of  a  book  he  really  disliked. Particularly if  the  book in  question were a   novel   and   the   reviewer   were   also  a novelist,   and   knew   only   too  well   how important-from  the  point   of  view  of fellowship money  and  future publication
-a good  review  can  be. I was  tempted,
therefore, to  send  this  book  back,  to  be passed  along  to someone  else who  might be more  sympathetic. I have  not  done so chiefly  because  I feel  it  is time  someone  came  forth to say very  plainly  that  there  is  a  lot   of  bad   stuff    (particularly  bad prose,   particularly   west-of-Quebec  bad prose)   being  published in  Canada right now,   and   somehow  this   little   book   is typical.  With these  prejudices established and admitted, I begin.
Crying   as  She   Ran   is  primarily the story  of  Sarah Wei!,  her  childhood  her pub:r.ty,	her 	coming-of-emotional-age. Orb1tmg   around her  tale  are  the  stories of her  family,  father, mother, two sisters, her  boyfriend Ron   (blue-eyed  and  Cath­ olic), her  aunt, her  cousin,  a  perverted Hebrew teacher and  a queer and crooked  goy  wheeler-dealer  who  is  the  eventual means to the  end  of Father  Wei! and  the family's   short-lived    halycon	days    of wealth  and  wall-to-wall. The short  novel ( I 64  pages)  is highly  melodramatic and crammed full  of all  possible  cliche situa­ tions.   But   this   is  not   the   main   fault. (Life,   too,   is   crammed  full   of   cliche situations  and   highly   melodramatic  at least  40%  of the  time.)  The main  fault, Ithink,  is  that   Charlotte  Fielden   has

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



chosen   to  tell   her   tale   in  imitation  of Joyce's  Portrait  plus  Brigid  Brophy's Joycean  technique plus free-form poetry, and  to do  this one  must  have  a very fine ear indeed. Mrs.  Fielden, unfortunately, appears to be virtually tone-deaf.

Sing   along
Right or  wrong
It's Yuletide
In with   the   good-and-bad-tide
Out with   the   Jewish yidtide
Happy Hanukkah and  a Merry Christmas
To   you  too
Hallelujah....
She   left   the    towel    and    the   dish   on   the
counter and   walked out
of   the    kitchen   thinking  a   half-wiped
thought....
Mark's arm   a  long   sticky   snail   coming out of  its  molasses shell....
Cloppity-clop. Cloppity clop.  Sarah's  sneak­ ered    feet    stirring  up    the   ravine   dust  flopping around.

Granted  the   sneakers  are   too  big,  can they really go cloppity-clop? (She isn't wearing horseshoes  or Dr.  Scholl's  health sandals.)
I  admit I've   selected   these  examples carefully  and  given  nothing of  their context.  But   I  wonder not   just  about Charlotte  Fielden, but  about   the  editor who  allowed   this  stuff   to  pass,  like  the Angel  of  Death,  without comment.
Another drawback is that  although the story   is  presumably  Sarah's,  the   omni­ scient  author lets  us into  the minds of all the   other    characters,   both   major    and minor. This is really  too  much  of a good thing,    and    in   the    end   fouls   up   the Joycean   effect   the  author  is  striving  so hard    to   maintain.    (And    the   Joycean  effect  is  meant to  be  obvious   from   the first. The  book  begins:

Once upon a  clock  there was  a  little girl who  had  a bald  spot  right in  the  muddle of her   head. Middle muddle piss  and   puddle.
Her    name  was   Sarahlah  quite   contra­
raJah.  Her garden grew.   Her  garden grew.
 The  book is too short to allow this general think-in.   In    the   case   of   Lil,   Sarah's mother, it almost  works  because in her sections  there   is  a  more  lyrical  and   less cutely  ironic  tone; but  even  here  we are too aware  of the author's smiling presence and  become  uneasy.
The  Jewish  question is not dead,  nor is
the  novel  of  coming-of-age, whether in Samoa  or the  Good  City  of Toronto. But both  are  dead   here   because  the  author chooses to put style ahead  of deep feeling, to 	experiment	with 	techniques 	like Riiiiiiiiiiinnnnnnggg or  Heeeeeeeeeeellllp instead  of making us really  aware  of  tele­ phones  and  terror. All writing is a  trick, of  course,  a  technique, a  magic-lantern show. But  the  feeling  behind  the  writing must    be   real.    Here   it   doesn't   work.
The   very   last   page   of  the   novel,   a highly-charged re-creation of the  Passing of the  Angel  of Death, seen  through the eyes and  emotions   of  Sarah as five  year old shows what  Mrs.  Fielden  could  do  if she'd  just forget  to be so clever.  It made my   hair   stand    on   end.   But   just   one page??
Canada encourages cuteness  and  clev­
erness  in  its writers. Why,  I still  haven't figured  out.  Because  big boys don't cry? Because we don't want  to be called provincial?  The   big  publishers certainly ask    for,    and   get,    big-city     slickness. "Slick" doesn't  necessarily  mean  profes­ sional -not   in   any   good   sense   of  the word.
This  is, says the  jacket,  the  first  book
of a  trilogy.  Good.  That gives Charlotte Fielden  more  time  to  find  herself  (there is little  doubt in  my  mind   that  she  can write,   if  she  wants   to)    and   maybe to make   me  more  interested in  Sarah and the  Wei! family  as a whole.
AUDREY THOMAS

BOOKS IN  REVmW



PUSHED BACK TO THE RIDGE

MORT  FORER.   The  Humback. McClelland and
Stewart,  1969.  $7.95

THE   GREATEST   STRENGTH    of  this   first novel  is  its  subject:  the  Metis  of   Man­ itoba   living   on   the   gravel   ridge   (the  Hum back)  between  Canadian Shield and prairie.   They    are    a   people    between worlds;   from   their   spine  of   rock   they make  forays  down  to  the  rich  plain,  the women  to  birth  in  the  Ste  Therese Hos­ pital   or   to  stockpile   Hallowe'en  sweets in   Winnipeg,  the   men   to  have   drunks and  brawls.  The  men,  however  are  most truly   themselves   when   they  leave   both the  plains  and  the  Humback settlement; their   work  is  cutting cordwood   on  the Shield   and   sometimes, like  the  Hermit, they  retreat into  it  never  to emerge.  The women's world,  for  all  its  seeming  stab­ ility, is the  more  teetering;  they  have  no bush retreat to balance the pull of  prairie  and  city. If, like 'Toinette and  Colombe,  they are  not  nailed  to  the  ridge and  "the  book" in  Abe Epp's store  by  their almost unbelievable  number  of   children,  then like  Marcie or  Lu-cil  they  can  slide  un­ noticed  off  the  ridge  and  disintegrate in either  the  city or  the  bush.
A   mother   lode   for   fiction,   beyond doubt. Yet  the  Metis  until  now  has  had almost  no  place  in  major Canadian writing. The realists  of the  twenties: Grove,  Stead,  Ostenso, were chronicling settler-homestead life  and  the  Metis  had no place  there; but even in contemporary fiction  like  Gabrielle Roy's  Where  Nests the   Waterhen  or   Margaret  Laurence's The Stone   Angel  the  bare  contact with Metis is seen as disaster  by French and British  Canadians alike.  They   are   peri-

86
 pheral, bottom  class, and  apparently not worth  extended fictional  treatment. Forer has  tried,  and  good  for  him.
Forer  achieves his  best  with  the  char­ acters  Joshua  and   'Toinette.  Joshua  is the   bush   foreman,   sixty-five   years  old, a singer  and  thinker. When  he speaks  of

... long   ago,   early   in   my   father's  time, when  men  like
us grew  out  of  the  backs of horses and  had legs  that
were  like chickens

or  helps  the  people  to see their  plight  by asking  the  unanswerable, "Why did  they nail  Jesus  to  the  cross?",  the  reader   has a sense of the  people,  listening,  breathing, being. 'Toinette is forty, mother of  seven­ teen   (she  has  "lost" six), a  huge  plum tree of a woman  dropping her fruit  every fall  and  willing  to  make  babies even  for her   daughter  Annabelle;  she  knows  all the  "things about the  world   you  never challenge with thought-the seasons, the nature of man,  the  bearing of children." The  story centres about her.
Though not as outstanding, Forer  has other successes:  muscle-bound Leo, epil­ eptic  Lu-cil, lean  and  mannish  Georgette who  cannot in the  long  run drive  her  car carefully enough, Marie  who  insists  she has  had  a  virginal  (though undoubtedly not   an   immaculate)   conception.  He   is less  successful  with   the  storekeeper, Abe Epp,  and   almost   silly in  the  portrait of the  priest.
Forer seems to struggle with the 'type' character that  Epp  inevitably is;  he  tries to  make  the  trader  exploiting the Hum­ backers  human by  giving  him  one  turn  into   humanity:  in   the   end   Epp   is  as unsuccessful  in  coping   with  the  outside world  as  they.  All  this  manages to  do  is give  him  two  dimensions instead  of one. His   beginning    a   beard    to  prove    his

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Humback-ness-well! The priest is com­ pletely  one  dimensional; his only  charac­ teristic  is his sex-and-death  hang  up.  He is  boring,   not  because   his  problem   is so but  because  he is handled  with  a kind  of deliberate obtuseness.
The  novel has   an   authenticity   of
detail   which   is  amazing, but  stylistically it  is marred. One  cannot read  it  for  the pleasure of  its  prose.  Almost  always  the conversations   (especially  in   the   Metis useage  of "there") sound  life-like,  genu­ ine,  but  invariably the  rest  is  wooden  or positively   clumsy.   The   author  tries­ very  hard, seemingly-for an  individual style,  but  he  was  never  able  to  quite  lift me  into  his  language so  that   I believed it. On  the first  page:

Beside  her,   and in  the  curve of  each   huge arm, an infant
curled into the  shape of  "C" slept.  Behind her,   bed-head
to   her   bed-head,  the   boy-bed    with    three boys,  and right-
angled to  the  boy-bed, foot  to  bed-foot, the girl-bed with
three girls.

There may  have been  worse sentences published last  year,  but  I  hope  not.
For all the rich possibilities the setting provides,  there  is little  sense of landscape. That is  due  to  Forer's  inadequacy  both as  stylist   and   story-teller.  He   gives  us much   detail,   yes, and  genuine, but  it  is report, tour  guide  stuff:   one bit and  then another  bit  and   then   another. He  does one  thing  at  a  time,  only,  and  when  he tries  to  work  at  several  levels,  as  in  the
a la  The Double   Hook  introduction, he
must   make   sure   by  taking   us  over  the same   terrain  again, more   prosaically, a few  pages  later. And   unfortunately the same  sense of  "more of  the  same"  arises out  of  the  incidents in  the  latter half  of the  book before  Forer  can  reach  his 'big
 scene' and end  it. That is too bad, because he has great things here in terms of both people,  landscape and  story  strength.
The   work  as  a  whole  give  me  a  dis­
turbing (perhaps not  quite  legitimate  in a critical sense, but still very disturbing) sense of the inadequacy of this  particular writer's  vision of the  humanity that  is his subject.  The   Humbackers may  have   no sense of their  history,  that  a  century  ago they   ruled  the   rich   plain-granted; but  surely  for  the  reader   this  fact  must echo  more  deeply   than   one  almost  un­ noticeable   mention  that    the   Humback Road  was first built  to bring  in "avenging soldiers".   Again,   Joseph    and   'Toinette can perhaps  only know the world as great impersonal  evils-slick   pavement,  fire, government-but    surely   we   must   see clearer  responsibility. To  recognize  great  good  one must  be able  to  recognize  great  evil;  how  great  a  novel  can  arise  out  of the  attitude "nobody can't help  nuttin"?
Having   said   which,  let  me  say  again how  good  it  is  that   at  last  we  have  a realistic  (not romantic, like Bugnet's Nipsya) novel whose subject and sole concentration is a most  unjustly neglected part  of the Canadian people.  It has some beautiful characters and  some  exciting situations. It should  be read  widely.
RUDY WIEBE


CANADIAN  HERO

ROY DANIELLs,   Alexander Mackenzie  and   the
Northwest. Oxford. $6.oo.

CANADIANS are very close to their heroes, especially  in  the  west  and  far-west. The experiences  of a Thompson, Fraser, Mac­ kenzie or Vancouver, though  different in scale, are  not  really  remote or  difficult  to imagine.  The realities  of bush  travel  and

BOOKS IN REVffiW



river  travel, the  uncertainties of the mountain passes, the loneliness and gloom of  the  long  inlets  are  familiar to  many of us. Even the half-blind plunge across untracked country towards  a doubtful destination is something we may have known.  Yet  the  difference  in scale makes the  whole  difference between  the  heroic and  the ordinary; the shared  experience merely  sharpens appreciation of this dif­ ference.
In   addition  to  the  sense  of  nearness, there   are   always  the   journals,  carefully kept,  meticulously detailed, more  or  less readily   available,  leaving  comparatively little  room  for  conjecture, yet leaving  so much unnoted-perhaps 	even    un­ observed.  They    challenge,   irritate   and amaze -challenge   the   imagination   to fill  the   gaps,   irritate  because   so  much that  could  be there  is not, amaze  because so little  is really revealed  of the men  who took part  or their feelings. David  Thomp­ son is, of  course,  the exception; a humor­ ous, kindly  man,  readily  affectionate and a   vivid   narrator.   Alexander  Mackenzie is close to the type-matter-of-fact, con­ cerned   only   with   his  purpose   and   the practical  value   of   his   observations to those who might  come after.
But  there  is  no  escaping  the  journals. In  a very real sense they are  the measure of  the  journeys  and  the  men  who  made them  and, to some extent  at  least, revela­ tions   of  character.  In   this   account  of Mackenzie, Professor  Daniells has  drawn extensively   on  Mackenzie's  own   journal  of  his  two  great   voyages,  to  the  Arctic and  Pacific  Coasts  of    Canada.  He sketches background,  reveals  purpose, makes   comments, and  all  this  is  effec­ tively  done;  but   the  great   moments  of the  journeys  and  the real  nature of Mac­  kenzie  are  revealed  only  in  the  carefully

88
 chosen   quotations. For   all  their   flatness and  calmness,  there  is an immediacy of language  in   them    that    cannot  be   re­ phrased    or   re-interpreted  without   loss. This  was  how  the  man  saw  himself,  his companions,  the   strangers   he   met   and  the  country he  faced.  That  and  nothing else, even  though it may  be only partially expressed,  is the  essential  truth. Another man  in  the  same  place  at  the  same  time would   have   seen  companions, strangers and   country  quite  differently  and   that,  too,  if  he  were   honest   as  most  of  the travellers  were,  would   have   been  essen­ tial  truth.  But  a  later writer in  another time  can  do  little   to  change or  expand the  record.
The quality of Mackenzie's determina­
tion  and  performance is perhaps best judged   in   the   light   of  the  much   cele­ brated    journey    of   Lewis    and   Clarke  across   the  continental  United  States   to the   mouth  of   the   Columbia.   He   was twelve  years  before   them,  much  farther north, in  country that  was  generally  less known  and  more  difficult, his destination far   less  certain.  He   had   tried   once  al­ ready,  following the  river of his name  to the  Arctic   Ocean  in  a  journey   scarcely less  difficult   and   dangerous.  His   party  was  tiny  and  self-dependent, his  mission scarcely  more than an  idea  of his own.
Professor Daniells' book makes all this clear  and  the  account of  the  actual  voy­ ages  is,  as  always,   breathtaking  because the  imagination is left  free  to work  on so much   that   is  unstated. The  author has difficulty  in   developing   the  youthful Mackenzie, about  whom  it  would   seem that   very  little   is   known,   and   the   at­  tempted  reconstruction  is  awkward and unconvincing. But his examination of Mackenzie's  later   life  in   the   fur   trade does much  to explain the  powerful  forces

BOOKS IN REVIEW



that   moved  him  to  such  feats  of  leader­ ship  and   physical  endurance,  and many comments throughout  the  narrative are revealing    and   valuable.   The  brief   ac­ count   of  Mackenzie's  navigation instru­ ments  and  methods  is  especially  interest­ ing.  In the  last  few  pages  of  the  book, Professor  Daniells gives brief  scope  to his own  poetic qualities and  sends  the reader  back  to  look  at  certain passages  with  a new   eye.   It is  tempting  to  wish  there could   have   been   more   of   this,   woven through  the   book  as  a  whole.   But  the written  record   inhibits the  legend  while it enhances the  performance.
RODERICK HAIG-BROWN


RJCHLER'S
CANADIANA

Canadian Writing Today, ed.  Mordecai Rich- ler.  Penguin.  $2.15.

IN HIS INTRODUCTION to this Penguin anthology edited  essentially for  non­ Canadian  readers, Richler the  Expatri­ ate    seems   at   odds    with    Richler   the Nationalist:  the   second   evoking   a  self­ deprecatory  flair   for  a  culture  the  first has   trouble  taking  seriously.  Instead  of redressing  cliches   more   popular  among  Canadians than  anyone  else,  Richler   re­ furbishes them  in  an  amusing but  mean­  ingless  way.   Though  "charged   with promise"   Canadian  culture  is  an   "em­ barrassingly grandiose" one  of the "world's  elected    squares",  these   "im­ mensely boring" inhabitants  of   "the white,  Protestant, heterosexual  ghetto  of the  north."
But  if  Richler is  a  wobbly  success  as editor -and  there  are  other imbalances
-his contribution to  the  anthology as a fiction  writer   is steady   proof  of  his  real
 genius. In  "Dinner  With   Ormsby­ Fletcher" he  satirizes  a  family  of  British WASPS   with   some   adroit   observations that   link  particular  individuals to  their  foible-riddled  class.  This   selection   from  St   Urbain's   Horseman, his   novel-in­  progress,  admirably  restrains outrageous situations   in   a   way   which    anticipates more  convincing characters  than  certain critics  could   discover   in   his  last  novel. Unlike his Introduction that  tries to have it  two  ways, this  piece  confirms  the sure­ ness of the  artist  inside  his  material.
Such  sureness  does  not  lack  either   in "An   Evening    Out"  by   John    Glassco, whose recollection of  three rotating whores  inside  a  Paris   brothel on  a  fra­ grant  summer  night,   manages  nicely  to satiate   our   interest  whetted   earlier   at dinner   with   buttered   snails.   For   those attracted by more characteristically Cana­ dian  institutions,  Norman Levine  invites them   inside "Slaughterhouse", where promiscuity    among  employees    takes   a back  seat   (in  the   parking lot)   to  fore­ ground   dismemberment of  freshly  assas­ sinated  cattle.  And  with  at  least as much  immediacy  in  a scene  from  Fortune  And Men's Eyes,  John  Herbert  reels  off  the  banter   of   young   homosexuals  inside   a Canadian reformatory.
Other writers   prefer  to  probe  asylums
even  less familiar-themselves. If, as Frye says in  his "Conclusion" to Literary History  of Canada   (and  Richler includes a portion) , self -conflict  is the  measure  of a  mature writer, then   certainly  the  ex­ tract  from  A  Jest  of God  would  confirm Margaret Laurence an accomplished art­ ist  for  any   reader   unfamiliar  with   her novels.  Similarly   Hubert  Aquin   on  the basis  of  his  neurotic Separatist  narrator from Prochain  Episode; and Brian Moore  for  his "Preliminary  Pages  for  a  Work

8g

BOOKS IN REVIEW



of Revenge" in which a surface irony enhances  the   narrator's  desperate   sin­ cerity.  In  Canadian  Writing Today there are,  too,  the  skirmishes  of  Margaret  At­ wood's   interior  landscapes  she  external­ izes  in  order  to  isolate  reality  from   an encompassing  domestic  horror:

... when I dream images
of daring escapes through the snow
I find  myself  walking always over  a vast  face which  is the  land-
lady's, and  wake  up  shouting.

The   landscape of  Birney's  "Way   to  the West"  appears a culmination of the metropolis Frye envisions as a natural evolution of  the  garrison,  poet  recogniz­ ing industrial Sudbury for the urban  cess pool  it  is, here  headed  for  the open  land requiring neither fort  nor city.
Yet   from   such   an   open   land   Alice Munro returns with  an ineluctable meld­ ing  of perspective and  apprehension to a small   Ontario  town.   That  return  cul­ minates the  best  short  story in  the  book, "''\'alker  Brothers Cowboy".

So my father drives and  my  brother watches the  road and   rabbits and  I feel  my  father's life  flowing   back   from   our   car   in  the   last of  the  afternoon, darkening and  turning strange,  like   a  landscape  that   has   an  en­ chantment on  it,  making it  kindly,  ordinary and   familiar  while   you  are  looking  at   it,  but  changing it,  once  your  back  is  turned, into   something  you   will  never   know,   with all   kinds  of   weathers,   and   distances  you cannot imagine.

Richler's  attempt  to  balance   French and    English    writing  is  commendable, and  he  does  not  fail  to include  essays by Pierre  Elliott  Trudeau and  Hector de Saint-Denys-Garneau which  argue  the fatuity  of  Separatism.  But   generally   I find  his  anthology perfunctory rather than  imaginative. That brings  us back  to editorial  balance.   While   region  is  men-

90
 tioned  as a  tangential principle of  selec­ tion,  nothing here  conveys  an  expression of  the  West  Coast.  Which  isn't  a  neglect in  itself,  unless  to say that  an  artist  who lived  there  and  wrote  probably  the  best ever  Canadian short  story,  "Forest Path  to the Spring", is absent.  Malcolm  Lowry aside,  where  is Dave  Godfrey, mentioned fleetingly  in  the Introduction? And  while Richler  might be excused   (he  makes  no all-inclusive  claim)   for  omitting certain integral  poets -Avison,   Mandel,  Page, Livesay,  to name  four-the poetry  selec­ tion   in  comparison  to  the   prose  is  de­ cidedly  lean.
Otherwise  Richler  appears  to  believe
Tamarack   Review  the  only  little  maga­ zine   in   Canada   publishing   worthwhile writers-as  opposed   to  five  British  and American   periodicals  from    which    he draws   material  by  both   expatriate  and at-home  Canadians.  Why   not   have   in­ cluded  a talented  new  poet  from  Quarry or   Prism,   Fiddlehead    or    West   Coast Review?   Or   less  iconoclastically,  have inserted    a   piece   of   prose   by   Morley Callaghan, whose  national  neglect  Rich­ ler   decries   in   his  Introduction,  and   to whom   he  dedicates the  anthology.  Such a  selection, say Chapter  XXVI of  That  Summer in  Paris-in  which   Callaghan recalls   his  infamous  boxing   match   with Hemingway  while  Fitzgerald  keeps  time
-might have  complemented those other gymnastics  Glassco   remembers  with   his own  two friends from  the  same  period  in Paris.   But   more   importantly  it   would have  illustrated the  crisp  diction George Woodcock's essay finds lacking  in Callag­ han's most  recent   novels;  and,  for  that  matter,  uncovered a  notable  expatriate who  lived  among the  most famous of the century,  one   who   returned   to   Canada (as  did  Woodcock  himself). Not  that   I

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



find  it  "disheartening", as  Richler  does, that  a quarter of the  writers in Canadian Writing Today live abroad; I happen to think,  if the  present numbers of  wander­ ing  knapsacked Canadians are  meaning­ ful,   that   the   expatriate  experience  will prove  even more significant for Canadian literature. But  reading through this  an­ thology  as a British  reader might, writing  as  I do  from  that   country, somehow  it would  interest  me  to know  that  at least a few  artists  have  actually returned to  the land  confirmed in  this  collection as such a  promise  in  cultures, such   a  challenge  in expanse.
KEATH  FRASER

CALM SURFACES DESTROYED

JOHN    NEWLOVE,   The   Cave. McClelland &
Stewart. $4-95·
SoMETIMEs I  think   if  I see  that   word "honesty"  used  to  describe  a  poet   just once more, I'll grow talons and claw the blurbwriter until  he emits  shrieks  of pain that   are   nothing  if  not   "honest". The way   blurbwriters  use  the   word,   it   be­ cames  a  rank   and   smelly  cliche,  and it certainly doesn't describe  John  Newlove's poems  in  The Cave   nearly  as  well as  a wolf-whistle on  a  street   corner  encircles and  worships  a pretty girl.
Neither  do   Newlove's  poems   "speak
plainly    about  plain    themes,"   however much  they  may  appear to  do  so.  Super­ ficially, perhaps, the  human  realities  and politics  of love are  simple, but  only from the  outside.  Newlove  is  inside.  Take  this line  from  A Young  Man: "I still dream  of  the  perfect  moment occurring": then later,  in  the same  poem: "But  I saw the dead  bodies / floating on  the river."  That
 kind   of  thinking destroys   placidity   and the calm surfaces  of things  for ever.
John  Newlove  has   always  used    a
stripped-down language, in  which  deco­ ration   played   small   part,    and   in   The Cave   this  quality  is  even   more  in  evi­ dence.    In    earlier  books   there   was   a brooding  undercurrent   of   domesticated despair,  along  with  recurrent gaiety  and intensity.  There  was  self-pity  and  navel­  watching, and  nearly  complete awareness of these things in himself. There was also derision   at   his  own   weakness   that   be­ comes  a  metamorphosed strength.
All these things  are carried to a near ultimate  in   The  Cave, except    that    I think  any trace of gaiety has disappeared. Bryan  McCarthy, in Smoking the City, dived   into   these   blackest   places   of  the human  psyche,    and   has   not   surfaced with  another book  since.  One  might speculate   that the  reason  for  this  failure is  McCarthy's own  failure as  a  writer: or   else  that    joylessness   carried    to   its extreme is a dead  end,  a blank  wall con­ fronting  the    mind.    I  hope   Newlove's  present  attitudes do not lead  to this blank wall:   he  is  only  32  years  old,  and   his poetry has not quite  become merely bitter  philosophy,   if  only  because  it  has  more flesh attached.
But  there  is also wit  attached to  some
of   Newlove's    bitterness,   as   in   Never
Mind:
Never  mind your  jealousies and leavings;
she is beautiful and  kind  to you;
if you took  hers,  she  took  your  leavings.
To  be  jealous of a loving  woman for loving is foolishness -she'd  not  love  you
if she were  not; and  where'd your  jealous
loving
be? These meetings and Iovings and  leavings
ought to be comfort, not  distress, to you.
It is a greedy man  who  acts  as you,
one  who  cannot have  enough of loving and  always  plans his leavings.

gr

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



And  what  is one  to make  of this auto­ biographic fragment: "I  act  the  part  / my   youth    derided:   half-success / in   a limited  circle?" I feel an  odd  embarrass­ ment   reading  that   line,  and   wonder   if Newlove    feels   he    is   hypnotized    and trapped  by  this  "half-success" which  he probably accounts failure.  But  I've  never thought  Newlove  a failure,  for  his poems have always seemed  to me to by-pass such words  as failure or  success. The  very act of  writing a  poem  or  a  novel  or  what­ ever,  is an  act  of faith  that  makes what­  even  happens to  the  end-writing-product rather   irrelevant   when   set   beside   the writer's own pride in his work.
Many   of  The   Cave  pieces  are   love
poems,  of  a  grinding intensity   one  can expect   from   Newlove.   The   themes   are black,   admittedly,  but   sometimes   leav­ ened  by wit  and  such  plays on  words  as the aforementioned "leavings". And there is a  vision  of existence  in  the  title  poem that    seems   to   alleviate  the   blackness somewhat, unless  this  reader  is  deceiving  himself.  That poem ends:

Beyond  the  planets,
beyond   the  dark  coffin,  beyond  the  ring  of stars,
your  bed  is the  shining tree-lit cave.

However, I  remain  dissatisfied   with this book, despite its merits. Despair and bitterness   are   sometimes   good   material for poems; but some kind of magnificence and/or  profundity has  to  come  out   of them.   Poems  are  refracted  in  each  case from  a particular personal  life, and  taken in  total   I  suppose  it's  possible  to  recon­ struct    that    life.   When   the   poems   are one-sided,  this  seems  to  me  due   to  the limitations of the  writer-which I hope is not the case with Newlove.
A. W. PURDY



92
 FLUID TIME

SINCLAIR  Ross,  Whir  of  Gold. McClelland &
Stewart.  $6.50.

Whir  of Gold, Sinclair Ross's third  novel, is much  better  than  his second, The  Well, but  it  does  not  have  the  subtle  qualities and  excellent writing associated  with  As For Me  and  My  House. It is a curiously simple  story,  with  a  conventional  begin­ ning,  middle, and   end,  tied  together by flashbacks   to  the   youth   of   the   hero   in which  he  points  out  to us  and to his girl friend   why  it  is  that   he  behaves   as  he does.
Sonny,  the  major character, is an  age­ ing  prairie  boy  living  in  Montreal,  un­ able  to find  a  job as a musician, recover­ ing   from    a   bad    cold,   and    living    in humble   circumstances. He  meets  a  girl from  the  Maritimes, Mad,  and  they  live together  for   a  few   weeks.  During  this time    they    both    recollect    their    youths when   they   wanted  to  make   their   mark on   the   world,   Sonny   as  a  player   in  a popular  orchestra and   Mad   as  the  wife of   someone   with   whom   she   could   be happy,  someone   who   was   'right'.  The story  has  the  usual  flavour  of  two  social misfits   who   get   together  because   they need   each   other,  because   both   would have been better to stay in their familiar environment rather  than   try  to  be  suc­ cessful  in  the  big  city.  Sonny  eventually is  conned  into  a  burglary  by  his  neigh­  bour  in  the  rooming house  in  which  he lives,  only   to  be  abandoned   by  his  ac­ complice who  takes  all  the  money  from the    burglary,   and    to   recover    from    a wound   in   his  foot   caused   by  a  police­ man's bullet.  For  all his guilt  feelings and ego  trips,  Sonny   is  at   times  difficult   to take,  and  Mad   ends  up  the  sympathetic character   in   the   novel   mainly   because

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



she is so uncomplicated by life and  wants merely  to  enjoy   simple   pleasures   which she justly deserves..
The  story is well written. Ross has a wonderful capacity for  putting the  right word in the right place. His usual fine descriptions of  the  prairies  are  there; his one  new venture is to explain by descrip­ tive  means   primary  emotions.  He   does this very well, and  his metaphors for love are  well  conceived and  often  very  mov­ ing.  He  captures the  right  word  for  all things,  creating an  easy  moving structure that    wanders.    back    and    forth    across Sonny's  mind  with  finesse and  taste;  it is something that    appears  to   be   easily achieved  but   it   is   also   obviously   very carefully  worked   out.   The   language  of As  For  Me   and   My   House   is  its  most compelling  feature,  and  the  same  can  be said of  Whir of Gold.
Though Ross remains a careful stylist with   his   use  of  metamorphic  language and  his choice  of diction, he  has  written a very simple story of two people coming together for  a  short  moment in  time,  to break  up  their  relationship as Sonny  tells Mad   to  leave  his  life and  to  forget  him. The   reader   knows  that   the  relationship will  end  because   of  the  general   tone  of sadness   in   the   book,   but   he  is.   led   to expect   something  to  happen  which  will make  Sonny  realize  that  Mad  is the right girl   for   him.   He   doesn't,  and   for   that reason  the  book is a disappointment. Not that   I require a  happy   ending, but  Mr. Ross  created the  desire  for  one.  The ap­ prehension  of  life  produced  in  Whir of Gold  is neither bold  nor  fresh;  it  is as if it  had   been  conceived  as  an  after-mid­ night  story  to  lull  the  mind  temporarily, but   then   to  surprise  with   an   unhappy ending.  It  is  possible  for  writers  of  Mr.  Ross's  talent   to  make  something  serious
 out  of an ordinary story;  he has provided the  ordinariness, but  for  some  reason  re­ fuses  to  assume   an   attitude   toward   it beyond recognizing that  ordinariness. This  refusal  prompts the  reader   to won­ der  whether Mr.  Ross  realizes  how  very ordinary his  story  is.  In  any  event,   the novel  comes to life only  when  Sonny  has been  wounded   and   Mad   takes  over  as the    character   of    some   strength.  One  wishes that  she  had  forced  Sonny  to stay with  her;  she is capable of making  some­ thing  out of  both of them.
This quality  underlines the major characteristic  of  the   book  and   tells  me something  quite  basic  about   Mr.  Ross as a  writer:  he  is  primarily  a  short   story stylist.  The   whole  concept of  this  novel is oriented  to the  form  of the  short  story. The   plot  is  simple,   the  moment  is  ele­ mental, and  the time is of the short, fluid moment. Whir of Gold  could  have  been written  in  a  third  of  the  space, with  the wounding of  Sonny  serving   as  the  high point  or  climax  of  the  story.  The reader  would   be   satisfied   with    an   unfinished ending,   where   things   are   not   resolved, because   the    form   itself   lets   a   writer  create  things  that  do not  complete them­ selves. The  ending that  Mr.  Ross has put on  the  novel is artificial  and  is really  not necessary.  The   plot  could  have  stopped in   time,   and   the   reader's  imagination could  carry  the  ending in  any  direction. But  Mr.  Ross  does  not  do  this,  and  in­  stead,   disappoints  his  reader.  Nonethe­ less, the  book was a pleasure to read,  for Mr.   Ross   talks   about    things    that    do matter, that  matter very much. The  scene when   Sonny   and   Mad   first   go   to   his room  is  particularly well  done.   Both  of them   are   tentative  and   uneasy,   partly frightened of emotion  and  partly  search­ ing for it, and, quietly  and  subtly revealed

93

BOOKS IN REVIEW



by  Ross,  the   whole   scene  is  most  con­ vincing. It is  moments like  it  that  save Whir  of  Gold   and   that  indicate Ross's greatest capacity-the  fluid  moment as revealed   in   the   form  of   a  short   story. I   look   forward  to  his   next   book;   one hopes   it   will   be   a   collection   of   short stories.
DONALD STEPHENS


TWO  LITERATURES: TWO  SOLITUDES

CLEMENT  MOISAN. L'/lge  de  /a [itterature  can­
adien,ne.  Editions  HMH.

AN  IMPORTANT yet disappointing event  is the  publication of  the  first  comparative history  of  English  and  French-Canadian literature, L' age  de  la litterature  canad­ ienne. Important it  is, for  until  now  the student of  Canadian  literature  has  gen­ erally  dealt  only with  the literature in his own  language because  of  the difficulty  of access  to  the  literature  and critical   tech­ niques  of  the  other  "solitude". This   in­ formational  vacuum  has  been  well-filled by  Clement   Moisan's  book,  for   he  has given  detailed  descriptions of  the  move­ ments and  critical positions  prominent in Canadian  letters.   Thus   there   is  now  a valuable tool for  the  student, the  general reader   and    particularly   the    foreigner interested  in  Canadian  intellectual  dev­ elopment.  Seemingly,  also,   through   his detailed  description of the  past,  particu­ larly   the   recent    past,   the   author  has achieved his aim  of  predicting the future of  Canadian  letters:  greater   exploration






94
 of   the    interior,   a   more    international concern.
However,  it   is  the   generality  of  the survey  which  makes  it  so  disappointing. For the critic interested in either or both Canadian literatures, L'age  de la  littera­ ture   canadienne  contains  nothing  but  a collection  of  quotations   and   judgments proferred  by  many   eminent  writers   in previously    known   works.   The  original contribution of  the  study  is to  proclaim that    the   two   literatures  are   so  closely parallel   as  to  be  one.  But  even  this  has already  been  stated  by  Ronald  Suther­ land,   whose   basic   division   of   the   two literatures  (first  sketched out  three  years ago  in   this  journal)  has  been  followed faithfully by Moisan. Indeed, the  area  in which   the  most  fruitful  exploration  has only  just  begun,  the  study  of  the  themes of the literature, its myths and  those of society, has been  left  untouched. Happily, perhaps, as this leaves  more  scope for  the rest  of  us.
In  spite  of the fact  that  Moisan's study contributes little  new  to  our  understand­ ing  of  Canadian  literature,  and   that   its method  and   intentions  resemble   greatly  those  of the  critics  he feels are  "declasse" because   of  their  interest in  finding   the point    of   true   independence  for   these minor  literatures of  two  great  languages, it  will  form   a  very  useful  guide   in  the  many  undergraduate courses  in  compar­ ative  Canadian literature now  springing up   in   the   universities.  For   this   reason alone,  one can  look forward to the  trans­ lation   by  William   Kingsley  which  is  to appear shortly.
BARBARA THOMSON   GODARD


CJINJIDIJIN LITERJITURE -1970

















]I CHECKLIST EDITED  BY RIT]I BUTTERFIELD



ENGLISH-CANADIAN

LITERATURE


Compiled  by Rita Butterfield




COLLECTIONS
KROETSCH, ROBERT. Creation, by Robert Kroetsch, James Bacque and Pierre Gravel. Toronto, New Press, 1970. 213 p.
RASMUSSEN,  BERYL G.  The  leaves are silver. Saskatoon, printed by Modern  Press, 1970, cr969. 40  p.
RUSH,  JERRY M.  comp. Solitudes; an anthology of Canadian student  poetry and  prose. Rich­ mond   Hill,  Ont.,   Scholastic  Book  Services,
1970.  77 p.

FICTION

BLICKER,    SEYMOUR.   Blues   chased   a   rabbit.
Montreal, Chateau Books, 1969.  296  p.
BLICQ, ANTHONY.  The rise and  fall of married Charlie.  London, A.  Deutsch,  1970.  281  p. BRANDIS, MARIANNE.  This spring's so:wing. To­ ronto,  McClelland &  Stewart,  1970.  214  p. BUTLER,  JUAN.   Cabbagetown  diary;   a   doc­ umentary.  Toronto,   Peter    Martin,    1970.
206  p.
CALLAGHAN, MORLEY. The loved and the lost. Toronto,  Macmillan of  Canada, 1970.  234 p.   (Laurentian  Library)     (First   published
195 I).
CALLAGHAN,  MORLEY.  Strange   fugitive.  With an  introduction by Robert  Weaver. Edmon­ ton,  M.G.  Hurtig, 1970.  266  p.  (Canadian Reprint  series)   (First   published  1928).
CHARTERS,  MICHAEL.   Victor   victim. Toronto, House  of Anansi,  1970.  186 p.
CLARKSON, ADRIENNE. Hunger trace. Toronto, McClelland &  Stewart, 1970. 306  p.
DAVIES, ROBERTSON.  Fifth business. Toronto, Macmillan of  Canada, 1970. 314  p.

g6
 ENGEL,   MARIAN.  The   honeyman    festival.  To­
ronto,   House  of  Anansi,   1970.  131  p.
EVANS, CICELY LOUISE.  Nemesis  wife. Toronto, Doubleday Canada,  1970.  253  p.
FIELDEN,   CHARLOTTE.   Crying   as  she  ran;   a novel.  Toronto, Macmillan of Canada, 1970.
224  p.
FORER, MORT. The  humback. Toronto, McClel­
land  &  Stewart, c1969.  315  p.
FRY, ALLAN. Ho:w a people  die. Toronto, Doubleday Canada, 1970.  167 p.
GALLANT,   MAVIS.   A   fairly   good   time.   New
York,  Random House,  1970. 308 p.
GARBER, LAWRENCE.  Circuit. Toronto, House of
Anansi,   1970.  196  p.
GARNER, HUGH.  A nice  place to visit. Toronto, Ryerson  Press,  1970.  255  p.
GARNER, HUGH.  The  sin sniper, a novel. Rich­ mond    Hill,    Ont.,    Simon   &   Schuster  of Canada, 1970.  279  p.
HELWIG,   DAVID.  The   streets  of  summer.  Ot­
tawa,  Oberon Press,  1 970.  188  p.
HOOD, HUGH.  A  game  of touch.  Toronto, Longman Canada, 1970.  1 92  p.
!ANORA, CLAUDIO. Sint  Stephen; Canada; Poly­ phemus'   cave  and  the  Boobieland   Express. Toronto, New  Press, 1970.  124  p.
JANES,   PERCY. House  of  hate.  Toronto,  Mc­ Clelland &  Stewart, 1970. 320 p.
LAURENCE,    MARGARET.  A   bird  in   the   house.
Toronto,   McClelland   &    Stewart,    1970.
207  p.
LAURENCE,  MARGARET. The tomorrow  tamer, Introduction by Clara  Thomas.  Toronto, McClelland  &   Stewart,  1970.   (New   Can­ adian  Library, 70)   (Reprint of  1963  ed.).

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATlJRE



LEVINE, NORMAN.  From   a  seaside  town.  To­ ronto,  Macmillan of  Canada,  1970.   220  p. LOWRY,  MALCOLM. October   ferry to  Gabriola. Edited   by    Margerie    Lowry.   New    York,
World, 1970.  338  p.
MARKOOSIE. Harpoon  of the  hunter. Illustrated by Germaine Arnaktauyok. Montreal, McGill
-Queen's University Press,  1970.  81  p. METCALF,  JOHN. The  lady  who  sold  furniture.
Toronto, Clarke Irwin, 1970.   150  p.
MOORE, BRIAN. Fergus,   a  'novel.  Toronto, McClelland &  Stewart, 1970.   228  p.
OATEs, JOYCE CAROL. Them. New  York, Van­
guard  Press,   1969.  soB   p.
OUTDOOR  WRITERS OF CANADA.  Stories  of the outdoors, an anthology. Vancouver, Mitchell Press,  1970.  140  p.
PAYERLE, GEORGE. The   afterpeople. Toronto, House of  Anansi, 1970.   137  p.
RENAULT, MARY.  Fire   from  heaven.   Toronto, Longmans Canada,  1969.   37 5  p.
RIPPON,  MARION. Behold,  the   Druid   weeps.
Toronto, Doubleday Canada, 1970.  232  p. ROSS,  SINCLAIR. A   whir   of   gold.   Toronto,
McClelland &  Stewart, 1970.   215  p.
ROSS, WILLIAM  EDWARD DANIEL.  Christopher's mansion.    New    York,   T.   Bouregy,   1969.
190  p.
ROSS, WILLIAM EDWARD   DANIEL. The    foe  of Barnabas Collins. By Marilyn Ross  (pseud.). New  York, Paperback Library,  1969.
ROSS, WILLIAM  EDWARD DANIEL.  The   house of Haddon.  By   Leslie    Ames    (pseud.).   New York,  Arcadia House, I969.  I92  p.
ROSS, WILLIAM  EDWARD DANIEL.  Resort  nurse.
By  Rose Dana  ( pseud.). New York,  Arcadia
House, I 969.   I 92  p.
ROSS, WILLIAM  EDWARD DANIEL. Summer  rom­
ance. London, R.  Hale,  I969. I87  p.
RULE, JANE. This is not  for you. Toronto, Doubleday Canada,  1970. 284  p.
SCHWARZ, HERBERT  T. Elik  and  other  stories. Illustrated by  Mona Ohoveluk. Toronto, McClelland &  Stewart,  I970. 79  p.
STEVENSON, LESLIE.  Civil   servant.   Ottawa, I970. 234  p.
sucH,  PETER.  Fallout.    Toronto,   House  of
Anansi, I969. 143  p.
 TOPPING, c. w.  Jewish   flower  child.  Toronto, McClelland & Stewart, I970. 224  p.
WEES, FRANCES SHELLEY. The  last concubine.
Toronto, Abelard-Schuman, I970. I9I   p. WIEBE, RUDY. The   Blue  Mountains of China.
Toronto,   McClelland   &     Stewart,   I970.
240  p.
WRIGHT, RICHARD. The  weekend  man. Toronto, Macmillan of  Canada, 1970.  26I   p.
WYATT, RACHEL.  The  string   box.   Toronto, House of  Anansi,  I 970.   246  p.
YOUNG,  PHYLLIS BRETT. A  question   of  judg­ ment.   Toronto,  Longmans  Canada,   I969. Also: London, W.  H.  Allen, 1970.  255  p.


POETRY
ABBEY, LLOYD and  FERNS, JOHN. The antlered boy. Fredericton, Fiddlehead Poetry Books, I970. 52  p.
ARCOTT, HUGH   and    RUTH.   Homofisheraul.
Fredericton, Fiddlehead Poetry Books,  I 970.
48  p.
ATWOOD,  MARGARET.  The   journals of Susanna
Moodie.  Toronto,  Oxford  University Press,
1970.  64  p.
ATWOOD, MARGARET.    Procedures   for    under­ ground.  Toronto, Oxford   University   Press,  I970. Sop.
BALL,  NELSON.  Force   movements, rg66/69.
Toronto, Ganglia, I969. II! p.  (Gronk Series
3  no.  4).
BEDWELL,  BILL. Satan  in  Sackcloth.  Frederic­
ton,  Fiddlehead, I 970.  40  p.
BIESSEL, HENRY. Face  on  the  dark.  Toronto, New  Press,  I970. Unpaged.
BISSETT, BILL. S   th  story  J  to.  Vancouver, blewointment  press,   I 970.
BLEEKS, PHILIP  C. Cinders   for the  eye;  mind exercise by  Philip C. Bleeks.  Art  quickies by Arthur  Horsfall.  Winnipeg,  printed  by Baker,   I970. s6 p.
BOOTH, LUELLA. The   love   poems   of  Luella Booth. Fredericton, Fiddlehead  Poety Books, I970. 52  p.
BOWERING,  GEORGE. George  Vancouver, a  dis­
covery   poem.  Toronto,  Weed/flower  Press,
1970.  39  p.

97

ENGLISH-CANADIAN  LITERATURE



DOWERING,   GEORGE,  editor. Vibrations;  poems of  youth. Toronto, Gage   Educational  Pub.,
1970·  53  p.
BROWN,  JIM.   Forgetting.  Vancouver,   Talon­
books   [1969?]  unpaged.
BROY, EVELYN J.  Almanac  of  absence. With illustrations  by  Eva   Janouchava.  Windsor, Ont., Sumner Pub.,  1969.  39  p.
BUNNER,  FREDA. Of  joy  and  despair. Toronto, Baxter Pub!.,  1969.  68  p.
CAMPBELL, A.   P.  The first time   I  saw  the  sea, and   other   poems.  Charlottetown,  St.  Dun­ stan's  University Press,  1969.  50  p.
COLOMBO,  JOHN    ROBERT,  editor. How    do   I
love   thee. Edmonton, M.  G.  Hurtig,   1970.
184  p.
COLOMBO,  JOHN    ROBERT.  Neo   poems.   Van­
couv.er,  Sono  Nis  Press,  1970.  86  p.
Contemporary poetry   of  British  Columbia, volume r.  Edited by  Michael  Yates.  Van­ couver, Sono  Nis  Press,  1970.  252  p.
CORMIER,  LOUIS.   The  silent   cowboys  of  the east.  Fredericton, Fiddlehead, 1969.  28 p. CRAWFORD,  TERRY.  Lost   neighbourhood.  Fred­
ericton,   Fiddlehead   Poetry   Books,    1969.
28 p.
ECKERT,  ROSEMARY. The  story  of  Cinderella. Toronto, Weed/flower Press,  1970.  r6  p. ELDER,  BRUCE.  Bruce   Elder. Montreal,  Delta
Canada,  1970.   (Quarterback 2).
EVANS,  ROBERT.  Song   to  a  seagull, a  book  of Canadian  songs   and    poems.    Contributing consultant:  Craig Davidson. Design  &  illus­ trations by  Peggy  Steale. Toronto,  Ryerson Press,  1970.  104  p.
EVERSON,   R.    G.    Selected  poems, 19!:20-1970.
Montreal, Delta Canada, 1970.
 FLANAGAN,   ROBERT.   Body. Toronto,  House of
Anansi, 1970.   95  p.
FORSYTHE,  KATHLEEN.  Inside me.  Fredericton, Fiddlehead  Poetry Books,  1969.  24  p.
FOWKE,   EDITH,   camp. Lumbering songs   from the   northern   woods.  Austin,  University  of Texas Press,  1970.   232  p.
FOX,  GAIL,  Dangerous season.  Kingston, Ont., Quarry Press,  c 1969.  6o  p.
FOX, GAIL. The royal  collector of dreams. Fredericton, Fiddlehead Poetry Books,  1970. r6  p.
FREEMAN,   ELAINE.   Poems    from   Hope.   Fred­
ericton,   Fiddlehead   Poetry  Books,    1970.
20  p.
GADD,  MAXINE.   Hochelaga.  Vancouver,   blew­
ointment press,  1970.   Unpaged.
GERVAIS, c. H. A  sympathy  orchestra. Frederic­
ton,  Fiddlehead Poetry Books,  1970.  28 p.
GIBBS,  ROBERT.   Earth  charms heard   so  early.
Fredericton, Fiddlehead  Poetry Books,  1970.
64  p.
GILLIS,  FRANK.  The hitchhiker. Fredericton, Fiddlehead  Poetry Books,  1969.  24  p.
GNAROWSKI,     MICHAEL,     editor.   Three   early poems   from  Lower Canada. Montreal,  Law­ rence M.  Lande Foundation at  the  McLen­ nan     Library,   McGill     University,     1969.
96  p.
GUTTERIDGE, DON. Riel. 2nd  ed. Fredericton, Fiddlehead, 1970.  52  p.
GUTTERIDGE,  DON.   The  village   within.  Fred­
ericton,   Fiddlehead    Poetry  Books,    1970.
72  p.
HALL,  SHELAGH   N.  Pictures in  words,  poetry

FARMILOE,    DOROTHY.    Poems    for    apartment dwellers.   Fredericton,    Fiddlehead   Poetry
 and 	poetry
Unpaged.
 zn	prose. 	Victoria, 	1970.

Books,  1970.  48  p.
FETHERLING,  DOUG. My  experience in  the  war. Toronto, Weed/flower Press,  1970.  1 1 p. FINNIGAN,   JOAN.   In    the    brown  cottage    on
Loughborough  Lake.  Toronto,  Printed  for
C.B.C. Learning  Systems,    1970.   Unpaged.
FINNIGAN, JOAN. It was warm  and  sunny  when
I   set   out.  Toronto,  Ryerson  Press,    1970.
96  p.
FISCHER,  HEINZ.  'Gnu   soup.  Fredericton,  Fid­
dlehead  Poetry Books,  1969.  48  p.

g8
 HAWKES,   ROBERT. First  time   death.  Frederic­
ton,   Fiddlehead  Poetry Books,   1 970.   24  p.
HORNSBY,   RICHARD.   Richard  Hornsey.   Mon­ treal,	Delta    Canada,     1970.     Unpaged. (Quarterback  3) .
HOWITH,    HARRY.   Fragments of    the    dance. Cover and   illustrations by  William A. Kim­ ber.    Toronto,   Village  Book    Store   Press,
1969.  70  p.
INKSTER,   TIM.   For    Elke.  Toronto,  author,
1970.   24  p.

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



JOHNSON,   JANE.  Never the   sun.   Fredericton, Fiddlehead, 1970.  28  p.
JONAS,    GEORGE.   The   happy   hungry  man.
Toronto, House of  Anansi, 1970.  58  p.
JULIAN,   MARILYN  GRACE. Marilyn Grace   jul­ ian.  Montreal,  Delta  Canada,   1970.   Un­ paged. (Quarterback 4).
JUNGJC,   ZORAN.  I   ,will  kill   a   purple    fish   for you:   poems. Vancouver, Talonbooks [1969]
36  p.
KEELER,   WALLY.   Walking on   the   greenhouse roof.  Montreal, Delta Canada, 1970.  109  p. LABUTE,  DAVID.  She's sitting waiting  four?  the
negative. Toronto, 1970.  42  p.
LACHANCE, BERTRAND. Eyes  open. Vancouver, blewointment press   [ 1970 ?].
LANE,   M.    TRAVIS.   An   inch  or   SO     of  garden.
Fredericton,  University of  New  Brunswick,
1969.  30  p.  (The New  Brunswick chapbook,
6).
LANE,   PATRICK.    On    the    street.  Vancouver, Very  Stone House, 1970.  Unpaged.
LANE,  PATRICK.  Separations. Trumansberg, N.Y.,   New/Books, 1969.  Unpaged.
LAW,  CARL.  Carl   Law.  Montreal,  Delta  Can­ ada,  1970.   Unpaged.  (Quarterback  5). LAWSON, DAVID.  Peregrine. Ste.  Anne  de  Belle­
vue,  author, 1970.  16  p.
LEIGH,   SIMON.  The  bleeding  clock.  Frederic­
ton,   Fiddlehead  Poetry Books,  1970.   36  p.
LEWIS,  J.   MICHAEL. The  prayers   of  a   dark monk. Vancouver, Very  Stone House, 1970. LIVESAY,    DOROTHY.     Plainsongs.  Fredericton,
Fiddlehead  Poetry Books,  1969.  32  p.
LOCHHEAD, DOUGLAS and  SOUSTER, RAYMOND, editors. Made in  Canada: new  poems  of the seventies.   Ottawa,    Oberon   Press,     1970.
192  p.
LUDWIG,  JACK  and   WAINWRIGHT,  ANDY,   edit­
ors.  Soundings. Toronto,  House of  Anansi,
1970.   126  p.
MAAT,    GEORGE    EMANUEL.      Whisper- then listen    for    the    echo . ... Vancouver,   Inter­ media, 1969.   Unpaged.
MACDONALD,   BERNELL.    I    can    really    draw eagles.  Fredericton, Fiddlehead Poetry  Books,
1970.  32  p.
MAC DONALD,  GOODRIDGE.  Selected poems. Fred­
ericton,   Fiddlehead   Poetry   Books,    r 970.
48  p.
 MC'FADDEN, DAVID. The great  Canadian sonnet. Story  by David McFadden. Drawn by Greg Curnoe. Part  I.  Toronto,   Coach   House Pub., 1970.  216  p.  (Beaver little  books).
MAYNE,   SEYMOUR.   Mouth.  Kingston,  Ont., The Quarry Press,  1970.  61  p.
MICHALSKI,  RICHARD. Chapped lips. Windsor, Ont., Author, 1970.  16  p.
MIDDLETON, HELEN   E.  Poems    for  the   people.
Wyoming, Ont., 1970.  48  p.
MILLER,   MALCOLM.   The  kings    have    do•nned their    final  mask. Montreal, Tundra  Books,
1969.  63  p.
MUSGRAVE,  SUSAN.    Songs    of   the   sea-witch.
Vancouver, Sono  Nis  Press,  1970.
NELSON, SHARON  H.  Sharon H.  Nelson. Mon­ treal, Delta Canada, 1970. Unpaged.  (Quar­ terback   6).
NEWLOVE, JOHN.  The cave. Toronto,  McClel­
land  & Stewart, 1970.  88  p.
NEWTON,   STUART  and   DAVIS,  IRA.    Poems, 3¢
each.  Vancouver,  1969.   17  1.
NICHOL, B. P.,  editor. The cosmic  chef. Ottawa, Oberon Press,  1970.  So  p.
NICHOL, B.  P.  Nights on  Prose mountain;  some scraptures   sequences.   Toronto,    Ganglia,
1969.   r6  p.  (Gronk ser.  3,  no.  6).
NICHOL, B.  P.  The true  eventual story  of Billy the  Kid. Toronto, Weed/flower Press,  1970. II p.
NITKIN,    DAVID.   David    in   blue.  Downsview, Ont.,  printed  at  the   Coach  House  Press,
1970.  55  p.
NOWLAN,    ALDEN.    Playing     the    Jesus    game.
Trumansburg, N.Y.,   New/Books, 1970.
OATES,    JOYCE    CAROL.   Anonymous  sins   and other   poems. Baton Rouge, Louisiana State University  Press,   1969.   79  p.
ONDAATJE,  MICHAEL.   The  collected works   of
Billy   the   Kid.  Toronto,  House of   Anansi,
'970. 105  p.
PARSONs,  R.   A.   Interludes. Toronto, published for  the  author by Ryerson Press,  1970.  81  p.
PERRO, BRUCE.  The obnoxious few. New  York, Vantage Press,  1969.  124  p.
PHILLIPS,   DAVID.   Wave.  Vancouver,    Talon­
books,  1970. 611   p.
PILOT,  JOE.   Search for  the   infinite "I". n.p. [1970?]. Unpaged.

99

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



PILOT,  JOE.  Some   thoughts  while   searching.
Victoria,  1g6g.   45  p.
PITTMAN, AL. Seaweed  and  rosaries. Montreal, Poverty Press,  c1g6g. 37  p.
PLOURDE,   MARC. Touchings. Fredericton,  Fid­
dlehead  Poetry Books,  1970.   28  p. PLOURDE,  MARC. The  unicorn  dance. Frederic­
ton,   Fiddlehead,  1970.   28  p.
POLSON, DON. Don   Polson.   Montreal,  Delta
Canada, 1970.  Unpaged.  (Quarterback  7).
 THISTLE,  MEL.  Time  touch   me   gently.   To­
ronto, Ryerson Press,   1970,  So  p.
TIERNEY, FRANK M. Come   climb  a  mountain, and  other  poems.  Ottawa, University of Ottawa Press,  1970.  57  p.
TRACEY, NEIL. Voice  line.  Fredericton, Fiddle­
head   Poetry Books,  1970.  24  p.
VARNEY, EDWIN. Summer  songs.  Vancouver, Midnight  Press,   1970.    13  p.
WAGNER, D. R. Sprouds  and  vigables. Toronto,

PURDY, A.  W.  Love   in
Toronto,   McClelland
128   p.
 a  burning   building.
&    Stewart,    1970.
 Ganglia  Press,   zg6g.   12  p.  (Gronk, ser.  3, no.  7).
WAINRIGHT,  ANDY. Moving outward. Toronto,

RANKIN,  ROBERT J. Yesterday's tomorrow.  n.p., Lighthouse Press,  1g6g.  Unpaged.
RAPPAPORT, HENRY. Heat in the heart,  poems. Vancouver, Sunshine Press at  Intermedia, I970. 40   p.
RASMUSSEN, BERYL G.  Pebbles  in   the   sand.
Saskatoon, Modern  Press,  1970.   34  p.
REID,  JAMIE. The   man  whose  path was on  fire.
Vancouver,  Talonbooks, 1g6g.   43  p.
REJGO, ANTS. Window poems. Toronto, Weed/
flower   Press,  I970.  I3  p.
ROBB, WALLACE HAVELOCK. The Tyrian quill. Kingston, Ont.,  Abbey   Dawn  Press,    1g6g. I63  p.
ROBERTS,  PHILIP.  just  passing through.  Lady­
smith Press,  c1g6g. 31  p.
ROBINSON,  BRAD. The  rainpipe  poems. Toronto, Weed/flower Press,  1970.  4  p.
ROBINSON,   BRAD. Skin   scales  for psoriasis  suf­
ferers.   Toronto,  Weed/flower  Press,    1970,
16  p.
ROSEBERG, ROSE. Trips-without LSD. Fred­
ericton,   Fiddlehead   Poetry    Books,    1 g6g.
56  P·
scoTT,  ANNE.  The   lovers.  Fredericton,   Fid­
dlehead  Poetry   Books,   1970.   32   p. SHUCARD,  ALAN. The   Gorgon  bag. Ladysmith,
Que., Ladysmith Press,   1970.  32  p.
SMITH,  D.  c.  D.  C.  Smith. Montreal, Delta Canada, 1970.  Unpaged, (Quarterback 8). SPERL,  ALLAN. Space   available.   Fredericton,
Fiddlehead  Poetry  Books,   1970.   28   p.
STUMP, SARAIN. There is  my  people  sleeping.
Sidney,  B.C.   Grays   Pub!.,    1970.
TENNANT, H.   M.  Trees   along   the   way   and other  poems. Ottawa, author, 1g6g.  25  p.


100
 New  Press,  1970.   Unpaged.
WARR, BERTRAM. Acknowledgement   to   life. Foreword  by  Earle  Birney. Toronto,  Ryer­ son,   1970.   g6  p.
WEST, KEN. Wire. Vancouver, blewointment press,  1970.   Unpaged.
WESTON, GARNETT.  Death  is  a  private  affair; collected    poems.    Victoria,  Morriss  Print. Co.,   1970.   151  p.
YACOWAR, MAURICE.  No  use shutting  the  door.
Fredericton, Fiddlehead Poetry Books, 1970.
28  p.
YANDA,  DORIS ELIZABETH.  Canadian tapestry, poems.    Winnipeg,   Trident   Press,     1970.
199  p.
YATES, J. MICHAEL. The Great  Bear  Lake meditations. Ottawa,   Oberon  Press,    1970.
106  p.
ZANES, JOHN.  Athena  and  high  voltage. Fred­ ericton, University of  New  Brunswick, 1g6g.  (New  Brunswick   chapbooks, 5).  25   p.

DRAMA
GRAY, SIMON.  Dutch    uncle.   London,  Faber and   Faber, zg6g.  g6  p.
RYGA,  GEORGE.  The   ecstacy  of Rita   joe.  Van­
couver, Talonplays,  1970.   go   p.

ESSAYS
PENFIELD, WILDER. Second   thoughts,  science, the   arts   and   the   spirit,   with   a   French­ Canadian epilogue.  Toronto,  McClelland & Stewart,  1970.   I58   p.
ST. PIERRE, PAUL. Chilcotin holiday.  Toronto, McClelland & Stewart, 1970.   144  p.

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



HUMOUR

ALLEN, ROBERT  THOMAS. Children, wives  and other   wildlife. Toronto, Doubleday Canada, I97o. 227  p.
DOBBS, KILDARE. The  great    fur  opera.  Illus­ trated by  Ronald Searle. Toronto,  McClel­ land   &  Stewart,  I 970.   I 24  p.
GREEN, H.  GORDON. Goodby  little   town.  To­
ronto, McClelland  &  Stewart,  I970.   I42  p. HUSTON,   MERVYN J.  The  great    Canadian
lover   and  other   commentaries and   conceits.
With an  introduction to  the  new  edition  by
Art  Evans. Edmonton, M.  G.  Hurtig, 1970.
144  p.
LEAcocK,  STEPHEN. Feast  of Stephen: a  Lea­ cock anthology.  Edited by Robertson Davies. Toronto,    McClelland    &     Stewart,     I970.  r6o   p.
LEACOCK,  STEPHEN.  Last   leaves. Introduction by  J. M.  Robinson. Toronto,  McClelland &
Stewart,   I970.   (New    Canadian   Library,
69).
NEEDHAM, RICHARD. The  hypodermic   Need­ ham. Toronto, Macmillan of  Canada,  I970.  I27   p.


BIOGRAPHY

BEST, RUTH SHOWELL. Strawberries all  year round.   Toronto,   McClelland   &    Stewart, I970.  I92   p.
BLACKBURN, JOHN  H.  Land  of promise. Edited and   with   an  introduction  by  John  Archer. Toronto,    Macmillan   of     Canada,    1970.
256   p.
BURNS, E. L. M. General Mud; memoirs to  two world   wars.  Toronto,  Clarke,  Irwin,   I970.
254   p.
GILLEN,  MOLLIE. The  prince    and    his   lady.
Toronto, Griffin House, 1970.  314  p.
GLAssco,    JOHN.   Memoirs  of   Montparnasse.
With  an   introduction  by   Leon    Edel.   To­
ronto, Oxford University Press,  1970.  24I  p.
GRAY,  JAMES. The boy   from  Winnipeg.  Illus­ trations   by    Myra   Lowenthal.    Toronto, Macmillan of  Canada,  I970.  256  p.
HENRY, ANN. Laugh  baby   laugh. Toronto, McClelland & Stewart,  I970. 350  p.
 HOOD, HUGH. Strength down centre; the  Jean Beliveau  story.    Scarborough,  Prentice-Hall of  Canada,  I970.  I92   p.
JACKMAN, s.  w.   Portraits  of   the   premiers.
Sidney, B.C.,  Grays Pub., I 970.  272  p. KARRAs,   A.  L. North to  Cree  Lake. Illustrated
by   Laszlo    Kubinyi.   New    York,    Trident
Press,  I970. 256  p.
LANDON, FRED. An  exile   from  Canada to  Van Dieman's Land. Toronto, Longman Canada, I 970.  32 I  p.   (Reprint of  I 960).
LEGATE, DAVID    M.   Fair    Dinkum.   Toronto, Doubleday Canada,  I970. 254  p.
MACINTYRE, D. E. Prairie  storekeeper. Toronto, Peter  Martin,  I 970.    I o I    p.
PATERSON, RUTH  and    JACK.  The  Cranberry Portage; gamblers and  bush  pilots, love and survival   in   a   frontier   town. Toronto,  Mc­ Clelland &  Stewart, 1970.   208  p.
PEATE,  MARY. Girl    in   a   Red    River   coat.
Toronto, Clarke, Irwin,  I 970.  I 30  p. MCCORKELL,   EDMUND J.   Henry  Carr,  revo­
lutionary.  Foreword  by   Claude  T.  Bissell.
Toronto,  Griffin House,  I 970.   I 65  p. SHAW, CHARLES AENEAS.  Tales of  a  pioneer
surveyor.  Edited   by   Raymond  Hull.  To­
ronto, Longman Canada,  I970. 208  p.
SLATER, PATRICK. The yellow  briar,  a  story  of the  Irish  on  the  Canadian countryside. With an    account   of    the    author   by    Dorothy Bishop.   Toronto,  Macmillan,  I970.    I96   p. (First  published  I 933).
SMEETON, MILES.  '... Because   the   Horn    is there  .. .' Sidney, B.C.,   Grays  Pub!.,   I 970. I69   p.
SPEAIGHT, ROBERT. Vanier,  soldier, diplomat and   Governor  General,·  a   biography.   To­ ronto, Collins, 1970. 488  p.
SYMONs, R.  D.  The  broken snare.   Toronto, Doubleday Canada,  1970. 224  p.
TETso,   JOHN.  Trapping  is  my   life.  Toronto, Peter Martin,  I 970.   I I 6  p.
WILSON, CHARLES. Mapping  the  frontier. Edited and with  an  introduction by George F.  G.  Stanley. Toronto, Macmillan of  Can­ ada,  I970.   224   p.
WILSON, CLIFFORD. Campbell  of  the    Yukon. Toronto,   Macmillan   of    Canada,    1970. I92   p.

101

ENGLISH-CANADIAN  LITERATURE



JUVENILE
BREDIN,  THOMAS. From   sea  to  sea;  Alexander
Mackenzie.   Toronto,  Longman  Canada,
1970.   r6o  p.
cooK, LYN. The  magical Miss  Mittens.  Illus­ trated by  Mary Davies. Toronto,  Macmillan of  Canada,  1970.   233  p.
CUTT, w. TOWRIE. On   the  trail  of Long  Tom.
Toronto,  Collins,  1970.
EDGAR,   MARY s.  Once there   was   a  camper.
Toronto, G.  R.  Welch,  I970.
FRY,  ROSALIE K.   Gypsy  princess.    Illustrated by   Phillip  Gough.  London,  J.  M.   Dent,
rg6g. go  p.
HILL, KAY. More   Glooscap  stories.  Illustrated by  John  Hamberger.  Toronto,  McClelland
& Stewart, 1970.  192  p.
LAURENCE, MARGARET. jason's quest. Toronto, McClelland &  Stewart, 1970.   224  p.
MCLAUGHLIN, LORRIE. Shogomoc  Sam.   Illus­ trated by  Randy Jones. Toronto,  Macmillan of  Canada, 1970.   64  p.
MELZACK, RONALD. Rauen,  creator    of   the world. Illustrated by Leslie  Gal.  Toronto, McClelland & Stewart, I 970.  g6  p.
MOISErwiTSCH, CAREL. The I2  days  of  Christ­ mas.  Ottawa, Oberon Press,  1970.   IS  p. o'BRIEN, ANDY.  Young hockey   champions. To­
ronto, Ryerson Press,   c1g6g.    1 os   p.
RABY,  ORMOND.   Fessenden, radio's   first  voice. Toronto, Macmillan of Canada, 1970.  224 p. TOYE,  WILLIAM.  Cartier   discovers   the    St.
Lawrence.  Illustrated   by   Laszlo   Gal.   To­
ronto, Oxford  University Press,  1970.  32  p. WUORIO, EVA-LIS. The  singing    canoe.   Illus­ trated  by  Irving  Baker. New   York,  World
Pub., Ig6g. s6 p.

LANGUAGE
FETHERLING,  DOUG. "Speak American or speak English: a  choice of imperialisms." Saturday Night 8s: 33-34. September  r 970.
ORKIN, MARK M. Speaking Canadian English, an  informal account of the  English language in   Canada. Toronto,  General Pub!.,    1970.
276  p.
ROGERS,  P. w. "Unlocking the  Canadian  word hard  [Review article]."  Queen's  Quarterly n:rrr-123, Spring  1970.

102
 BIBLIOGRAPHY

Canadian  ethnic  studies,  bulletin  of  the   re­ search   centre  for  Canadian ethnic   studies. Edited   by    Alexander   Malycky.    Calgary, University of  Calgary. Vol.   r,  no.  1   ( rg6g) contains "Bibliographical data  on  ten  Can­ adian ethnic groups in  the  areas  of  univer­ sity    research,   periodical   publications  and  creative literatures."

BOOKS AND READING

"Arts in   the   politicians eyes."   Canadian Lit­
erature  43: 3-9,  Winter  1970.
GOODMAN, EILEEN.  The Canadian writer's  mar­ ket.  Toronto,  McClelland & Stewart,   r 970. g6  p.
HULL,  RAYMOND.  "Books   and   authors."  Can­ adian Author & Bookman 4S: 4-s, I 6,  Sum­ mer    1970.

PERIODICALS

NEW TITLES

The  Antigonish review. val.   1,  Spring  1970. Quarterly.  Department  of   English, St. Francis  Xavier  University, Antigonish, N.S.
Cyclops. No.  I, February IS,  Ig6g.  Edited  by Ian Young, SI3 Blantyre Ave.,  Scarborough, Ont.
First   Encounter,  I970.  Annual.  Published in co-operation with  the Student Administrative Council of  Mount Allison   University.
lngluuin.  Vol.    r,  April     1970.   Semi-annual.
S3SS   Walkley  Ave.,   Montreal  I6s,  Que.
Newspacket. Vol.  r,  Spring 1970.  Stephen Leacock Associates, c/o The Public Library, Orillia, Ont.
Salt. Vol.   1, Spring,  rg6g. Quarterly. Tegwar Press,    1 1 1 g-13th  Ave.   N.W.,  Moose Jaw, Sask.
Synapsis. No.  r,  rg6g. Ganglia Press,  Toronto.
Tuatara. No.   r,  Fall    rg6g. Semi-annual.  7S9
Helvetia Cres., Victoria,  B.C.

HISTORY AND  CRITICISM

"The  fiftieth  year    of   the    'Review'".   Dal­
housie Review so:s-g,  Spring  I970.
LEIBL, ANNE.  "Canada's  underground  press."

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



Canadian  Library   journal  27:16-23,   Jan.­ Feb.   1970.
"Recollections  of    the    Forum."    Canadian
Forum so:31-57,   April-May  1970.

LITERARY HISTORY  AND  CRITICISM

GENERAL
ALLAN,  IRIS. "Making  history live." Canadian
Author & Bookman 46:4,16,  Winter  1970.
BROWN, LLOYD w.   "Beneath  the   north star: the  Canadian image in  black  literature." Dalhousie   Review    50:317-329,   Autumn
1970.
DOBBS,  BRYAN GRIFFITH. "A  case  for  Canadian literature."  Western Canadian Studies in Modern Languages and  Literature 1 :44-50,
1969.
DUNCAN,  CHESTER. "The  University of  Man­
itoba  as   a   literary  environment."  Mosaic
3: 34-38,   Spring  1970.
GROSSKURTH, PHYLLIS. "The Canadian critic."
Canadian   Literature    46:55-61,    Autumn
1970.
HARLOW, ROBERT. "Birth  of   the    butterfly."
Canadian  Literature   46: 95-ror,   Autumn
1970.
JONES,  D.  G.  Butterfly  on   rock,  a  study    of themes and  images in  Canadian Literature. Toronto, University of  Toronto Press,  1970.
197  p.
KIRKCONNELL,  WATSON.  "Ukrainian literature in  Manitoba." Mosaic 3:39-47, Spring 1970.
KLINE, MARCIA  B. Beyond   the  land  itself, views of nature in Canada and the United States. Cambridge, Mass., Harvard University Press,
 wooDcocK, GEORGE. Odysseus ever  returning: essays on Canadian writers and  writing. Introduction by William New.  Toronto, McClelland & Stewart, 1970.  158 p. (New Canadian  Library,  7 1 ) .

FICTION

MCCOURT, EDWARD.   The  Canadian West    in fiction.    [rev.   ed.].  Toronto,  Ryerson Press,
1970.  128  p.
SIROIS, ANTOINE. "Deux litteratures." Canadian
Literature 43:36-41,  Winter  1970. SUTHERLAND,  RONALD. "The  Calvinist-Jansen­
ist   pantomime:   an    essay   in   comparative
Canadian  literature."   journal of  Canadian
Studies 5: 10-2 1, May  1970.
WATERSTON, ELIZABETH.  "The politics  of  con­
quest  in  Canadian historical fiction." Mosaic
3: 1 r6-124, Fall   1969.

POETRY

ABBEY,  LLOYD.  "The  organic  aesthetic    [opin­
ions  and   notes]."  Canadian Literature 46:
103-4,   Autumn  1970.
BARBOUR, DOUGLAS.  "The young  poets  and  the little   presses,     1969."   Dalhousie   Review so: 112-125, Spring  1970.
CARDINAL,  CLIVE H.  "Some  Polish- and   Ger­ man-Canadian   poetry."   Canadian   Ethnic Studies r :67-76, December 1969.
DAVEY,  FRANK.   "The Sono  Nis  Press: a  crisis in  B.C. letters?" British  Columbia Library Quarterly 33:3-6,  April   1970.
DJWA,   SANDRA. "Canadian   poetry  and    the computer." Canadian Literature 46:43-54,
Autumn 1970.

1970.   75  p.
"Letters in   Canada,  1969." Edited  by  David
M. Hayne. University of Toronto Quarterly
 DOYLE, MIKE.  "Notes  on   concrete
Canadian  Literature   46:91-95,
1970.
 poetry." Autumn

39:324-453, July  1970.
LYNDON, PATRICK.  "Literature and   mass  med­
ia." Canadian Literature 46:6-ro,  Autumn
1970.
MCCLELLAND, JOHN.    "Is  there  an    English Canadian   Literature?"    Canadian  Forum so: 240-241, October 1970.
STEVENS, PETER.  "Canadian   artists  as   writ­
ers." Canadian Literature 46: 19-34, Autumn
1970.
 DUDEK, LOUIS and  GNAROWSKI, MICHAEL,  edi­ tors.  The making of modern poetry  in  Can­ ada; essential  articles  on  contemporary  Can­ adian   poetry   in   English. Toronto,  Ryerson Press,  1970.  303  p.  (First published 1967).
DUDEK, Lours. "The mirror of  art:  relations between French  and   English literature in Canada."  Culture  31:225-231,  September
1970.
LINDAL, w.  J. "The contribution of  Icelanders


103

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



to    Manitoba's   poetry."   Mosaic    3:48-s7, Spring  1970.
MUISE, D. A. "Some Nova  Scotia poets  of Confederation." Dalhousie Review so:71-82, Spring  1970.
PAGE, P. K. "Traveller, conjurer, journeyman."
Canadian   Literature     46: 3S-42,    Autumn
1970.
PEARLMAN,  ROWENA. "Yiddish-Canadian  poet­
ry and literature." Canadian  Ethnic  Studies
1 :S9-6S, December  1969.
"The  poetry scene: Edmonton" by Douglas Barbour. "Windsor" by  Eugene McNamara. "Fredericton" by Kent Thompson. Canadian Forum  so: 179-18s,  July-August 1970.
ROBBINS, R.  CYNEWULF. "A   plea   for   crafts­ manship  in   poetry."   Canadian   Author   & Bookman   46:14-s,  Winter  1970.


JUVENILE

MCKIM, AUDREY. "Want to write  for children?" Canadian   Author     &  Bookman     4s:1-2, Spring  1970.


INDIVIDUAL  AUTHORS

ANDERSON,  PATRICK
RINGROSE, CHRISTOPHER XERXES. "Patrick Anderson and   the  critics." Canadian  Liter­ ature  43: 10-23,   Winter  1970.

AVISON,  MARGARET
REDEKOP,  ERNEST. Margaret   Avison.  Toronto, Copp Clark,  1970. IS2  p.   (Studies in Canadian literature).

BEGG,ALEXANDER
STUBBS, ROY  ST. GEORGE.  "The  West's first novel."   The    Beaver    300:14-17,   Winter
1969.

BIRNEY, EARLE
NOEL-BENTLEY, PETER  C.  &    BIRNEY, EARLE. "Earle  Birney: a   bibliography  in   progress
1923-1969."  West   Coast   Review   s:4s-s3, October  1970.
PURDY,  AL.   Earle    Birney.    Toronto,   Copp Clarke,  1970.    (Studies  in   Canadian   Lit­ erature).

104
 BOWERING,  GEORGE
DAVEY,  FRANK. "The message  of  George  Bow­
ering, play  ball." U.B.C. Alumni  Chronicle.
24:13-1s, Summer 1970.

CALLAGHAN, MORLEY
WALsH, WILLIAM. A  manifold  voice, studies in
Commonwealth  literature.  London, Chatto
&  Windus,  1970. p.   18s-212.

COHEN,  LEONARD
ONDAATJE, MICHAEL. Leonard  Cohen. Toronto, McClelland  &  Stewart,  1970.   64  p.   (Can­ adian  writers series,   s).
SCOBIE,  STEPHEN.   "Magic,   not    magicians,
'Beautiful losers'   and  'Story of  0'."  Cana­
dian  Literature 4S: s6-6o, Summer  1970.

CRAWFORD, ISABELLA  VALANCY BESSAI, FRANK. "The  ambivalence of  love  in
the   poetry  of  Isabella Valancy Crawford."
Queen's Quarterly 77:404-418, Winter 1970.

GORDON, CHARLES  W.
GORDON, CHARLES. "Ralph  Connor  and    the new   generation."  Mosaic   3: 1 1-18,   Spring
1970.

GROVE, FREDERICK  PHILIP BIRBALSINGH,  FRANK. "Grove and  existential­
ism." Canadian Literature 43:67-76, Winter
1970.
PACEY,  DESMOND.  Frederick    Philip    Grove.
Toronto, Ryerson Press,  1970.   202  p.  (Cri­
tical   views  on  Canadian  writers.) SPETTIGUE,  DOUGLAS. "Frederick  Philip Grove
in  Manitoba." Mosaic  3:19-33, Spring 1970.

HALIBURTON,  THOMAS CHANDLER LILJEGREN, s. B. Canadian history and Thomas Chandler  Haliburton:  some  notes  on  Sam Slick.   Upsala,  A-B  Lundequistska  Bokhan­ deln,   1969.    (Upsala  Canadian studies, 8
&  g).

HIEBERT, PAUL
HIEBERT,  PAUL.  "The  comic   spirit  at  forty below   zero." Mosaic  3 :sB-68, Spring  1970.

KLEIN, A.M.
FISCHER, o.  K. "A. M.  Klein's forgotten play."
Canadian Literature  43: 42-S3, Winter 1970.

ENGLISH-CAN.\DIAN LITERATURE



MARSHALL,  THOMAS. A.  M.  Klein. Toronto, Ryerson Press,   I 970.   I 92  p.   (Critical  views on  Canadian writers).
WADDINGTON,  MIRIAM.  A.  M. Klein. Toronto, Copp   Clark,   I 970.     145    p.    (Studies   in Canadian literature).

LAMPMAN, ARCHIBALD
GNAROWSKI, MICHAEL. Archibald  Lampman.
Toronto, Ryerson Press,   I970.   256  p.  (Crit­
ical   views   on   Canadian  writers).

LAURENCE,   MARGARET
LAURENCE,	MARGARET.	"Sources."     Mosaic
3 :8o-84, Spring  I 970.

LEACOCK, STEPHEN  BUTLER
DAVIES, ROBERTSON. Stephen   Leacock.    To­ ronto, McClelland &  Stewart,  I970.  (Cana­ dian   writers series,  7) .
KIMBALL, ELIZABETH.  The man  in  the  Panama hat.  Toronto, McClelland &  Stewart,  1970. I74  p.
LEGATE,  DAVID M. Stephen Leacock. Toronto, Doubleday Canada,  1970.   296  p.

LEPAN,  DOUGLAS
HAMILTON, s.  c.  "European emblem and Canadian   image :     a    study     of    Douglas LePan's  poetry."  Mosaic  3:62-73,  Winter
1970.

LEVINE,  NORMAN
 EPSTEIN, PERLE. "Swinging the  JnaeJstrom, Malcolm  Lowry   and    jazz."   Canadian   Lit­ erature   44: 57-66,  Spring  I 970.
NEW, w.  H. "Lowry's reading, an  introductory essay."  Canadian Literature 44:5-I2, Spring I970.
SERREAU, GENEVIEVE.  "Le retour aux   sources
[review article]."   La    Quinzaine  litteraire
105:9-IO, Nov.   IS,   1970.
TIESSEN, PAUL G.  "Malcolm  Lowry   and   the cinema." Canadian Literature 44:38-47, Spring  I970-

LUDWIG, JACK
LUDWIG,  JACK. "You  always go  home  again."
Mosaic   3: I07-I 1 I,  Spring  I970.

MACEWEN,  GWENDOLYN
ATWOOD,	MARGARET.  "MacEwen's    muse." Canadian   Literature    45: 23-32,     Summer I970.

MACLENNAN, HUGH
COCKBURN,  ROBERT H.   The  novels   of  Hugh
MacLennan.    Montreal,    Harvest    House,
1970,  c1969.   165  p.
LUCAs, ALEC. Hugh  MacLennan.  Toronto, McClelland &  Stewart, 1970. 6I   p.  (Cana­ dian  writers series,  8) .
SUTHERLAND,   RONALD. "The  fourth   separa­ tism." Canadian Literature 45: 7-23,  Sum­ mer   I970.

MAC MECHAN,  ARCHIBALD

"Norman  Levine, an   interview." by  John  D. Cox.   Canadian  Literature  45: 6I-67,  Sum­ mer   I970.

LIVESAY, DOROTHY
 MCBRINE,  R.    W.    "Archibald
Canadian  essayist."  Dalhousie
23-33,  Spring  1970.

MITCHELL, W. 0.
 McMechan,
Review  so:

LIVESAY,  DOROTHY.  "A     prairie    sampler."
Mosaic 3:85-92, Spring  I97o.

LOWRY, MALCOLM
BENHAM,   DAVID. "Lowry's  Purgatory,  versions of   'Lunar   caustic'."   Canadian  Literature
44:28-37,  Spring  I970.
COSTA, RICARD  HAUER. "Malcolm  Lowry   and the   addictions of  an   era."  University of Windsor  Review  5: I-Io,  Spring  I970.
DURRANT, GEOFFREY. "Death  in    life,    neo­ Platonic elements in 'Through the Panama'." Canadian Literature 44: I 3-27, Spring I 970.
 SUTHERLAND,  RONALD. "Children of the chang­
ing    wind."   Journal   of    Canadian   studies
5:3-11,  November  I970.

MORTON, W. L.
MORTON,  w.   L.   "Seeing  an  unliterary   land­
scape." Mosaic 3: I-IO,   Spring  I970.

NOWLAN,  ALDEN
BLY, ROBERT. "For  Alden Nowlan with  admir­ ation." Tamarack Review  54:32-38,   I970. FRASER, KEATH. "Notes  on   Alden   Nowlan."
Canadian   Literature    45: 4I-5I,    Summer
I970.


105

ENGLISH-CANADIAN  LITERATURE



PRATT, E.   J·
DAVEY,  FRANK.   "E.  J. Pratt,  apostle of   cor­
porate man." Canadian  Literature  43:54-66, Winter   1970.
SMITH,  A.   J. M.    Some   poems of E.  J. Pratt,
aspects   of  imagery   and  theme.    St.   John's
Memorial  University,  e1969.    20   p.    (The
Pratt lecture, 1969).

PURDY, A. W.
BOWERING,  GEORGE.  "Purdy:  man   and   poet."
Canadian  Literature  43: 10-35, Winter 1970.

REANEY, JAMES
REANEY,  JAMES.   "Manitoba as  a  writer's environment."    Mosaic     3:95-97,    Spring
1970.

RICHLER,  MORDECAI
SHEPS, G. D. On Mordecai  Richler. Toronto, Ryerson Press,  1970.   126  p.  (Critical  views on  Canadian writers).
WOODCOCK,   GEORGE.   Mordecai   Richler.   To­ ronto,  McClelland  &  Stewart,   1970.  62   p. (Canadian  writers series,  6) .
 ROSS, SINCLAIR
FRASER,  KEATH.   "futility  at  the   pump;  the short stories of Sinclair Ross." Queen's Quarterly 77: 72-80, Spring  1970.
ROSS,    SINCLAIR.    "On  looking back." Mosaic
3:93-94,  Spring  1970.

RYGA,  GEORGE
CARSON,  NEIL.  "George Ryga   and   the  lost country."   Canadian    Literature   45: 33-40, Summer  1970.

SEEL, ELSE
BOESCHENSTEIN,   HERMANN.  "Else See!,  a German-Canadian   poetess." Canadian  Eth­ nic  Studies 1 :51-58, December 1969.

WISEMAN,  ADELE
WISEMAN,    ADELE.   "A   brief    anatomy  of   an honest attempt at  a  pithy statement about the   impact  of   the   Manitoba  environment on   my   development  as   an   artist."  Mosaic
3 : 98-106,  Spring  1970.
















Write or Phone

THE  UNIVERSITY  BOOK STORE
Vancouver 8, B.C.	
 Text
Trade
Medical

whenever  you need

BOOKS


106
 
Technical Hard Back Paper Back

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE


LITTERATURE

CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE

liste etablie par Pamela Piddington




ANTHOLOGIES

L'amirondeau. Alma, Que.,  A.  Girard,  I969.
93   p.
-.Alma, Que., A.  Girard, 1970.  65  p. BOSQ.UET, ALAIN. Poisie  du Canada  [nouv. ed.,
augm.]  Paris,  Seghers;  Montreal,  HMH,
I968. 271  p.
Ecrits  du  Canada    franl(ais. no   27.  Montreal, I969. 253  p.
-.no 28.  Mont!'eal,  1969.  256   p.
-. no  29.  Montreal, I 970.   248   p.
-.no go.  Montreal,  1970. 254   p.
PILON, JEAN-GUY, ed.   Poemes  70;  anthologie des  poemes de l'annee  au Quebec. Montreal, L'Hexagone,  I970.  109  p.
THERIO,  ADRIEN, comp.  Conteurs   canadiens­ fran(ais:    epoque    contemporaine    [2e    ed.,  augm.]  Montreal,  Deom,  I97o. 377  p.
TOUGAs, GERARD.  Littirature  canadienne-fran­ l(aise   contemporaine;     textes    choisis     et annotes  par    G.   Tougas.   Toronto,   Oxford University Press,  I969. 310  p.

ROMANS ET NOUVELLES

ACQ.UIN,  HUBERT.    L'antiphonaire;    roman.
Montreal, Cercle du  livre   de  France,  I969.
250  p.
ARCHAMBAULT,  GILLES. Parlons  de  moi;  recit complaisant, itiratif, contradictoire et  pathi­ tique    d'une     auto -destruction.    Montreal, Cercle du  livre de  France,  1970.  204  p.
BASILE, JEAN voir  BEZROUDNOFF, JEAN-BASILE. BEAULIEU, MICHEL.  je  tourne   en  rond,  mais c'est    autour     de    toi;    roman.    Montreal,
Editions du  Jour, 1969. 179  p.
BEAULIEU, VICTOR-LEVY.   La   nuitte    de   Mal­ comm  Hudd; roman.  Montreal,  Editions du Jour, 1969.   229  p.
 -. Jos connaissant;  roman. Montreal, Editions du    Jour, 1970.  250  p.
BENOIT, JACQUES. Patience et Firlipon; roman d'amour.  Montreal, Editions du  Jour, 1970. I82  p.
-. Les  voleurs;  roman.  Montreal, Editions du
Jour, 1969.   240  p.
BERNARD, ANNE. Le chemin  de la cOte; roman.
Montreal, Cercle du  livre  de  France, 1969. I43  p.
BEZROUDNOFF,  JEAN-BASILE. Les   voyages d'lrkousz [sic]  par  Jean Basile  [pseud.] Montreal, HMH, 1970.   I69  p.  [Titre de  Ia couvertur.e:  Les  voyages  d'Irkoutsk ].
BLAIS, MARIE-cLAIRE.  Les  apparences; roman,
3e  tome   des  Manuscrits  de  Pauline   Arch­
ange.   Montreal,  Editions  du   Jour,   1970.
203  p.
-. Les   voyageurs    sacrls;    rlcit.  Montreal, HMH, 1969.   I IO p.
BLANCHONT, PHILLIPE  voir    JOANNETTE,   RI­ CHARD.
BOsco,  MONIQ.UE.  La  femme  de  Loth;  roman.
Paris, Laffont,  1970.   281  p.
BREARLEY,  KATHERINE T.,  et   MCBRIDE,  ROSE­ BLANCHE,  comps.   Nouvelles    du    Quebec. Scarborough, Ont.,  Prentice-Hall of Canada, I970. 228  p.
BRossARD,  NICOLE. Un   livre.  Montreal,  Edi­
tions  du  Jour,  I970. 99  p.
BRUNANTE,  FRANCOIS.  L'homme  qui  Se  cher­ chait  un   fils; roman.  Montreal,  Cercle  du  livre  de  France,  I970. 247  p.
BUIES, ARTHUR.  Un   pays  a inventer, suivi  de
L'oeuvre impossible; textes  choisis  d'Arthur
Buies.   Etudes    franl(aises   6: 299-388, aout
I970.
CARRIER, ROCH. fl est  par lfi, le  solei/; roman.
Montreal,  Editions du   Jour,  1970.   142   p.


107

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



CHARBONNEAU, ROBERT. Jls    possederont     la terre; roman, precede d'une chronologie, d'une   bibliographie  et   de   jugements    cri­ tiques. Montreal, Fides,   1970.   r8r   p.
CHATILLON, PIERRE. Le   journal  d'automne  de placide   martel; recit  potftique. Montreal, Editions du  Jour,  I970.   I Io  p.
CHOQUETTE,  GILBERT.  La  defaillance;  roman.
Montreal, Beauchemin, I969. 192  p.
CLARI, JEAN-CLAUDE.   Catherine  de   I   a  IV;
roman. Montreal, Cercle du  livre  de  France,
1969.   205  p.
CLEMENT, MICHEL. Confidences d'une  prune; roman. Montreal,  Editions du   Jour,  I970. Ill p.
COLLETTE, JEAN-YVES. La   vie   passionee de
Sainte  Sonia   Petrovna.  La   barre   du   jour
22/23:  2-51,  nov.  I969-fev. I970.
CONTE, GENEVIEVE. La   chouette. La  barre  du jour  22/23:   58-72, nov.   1969-fev.  1970.
Contes  et   nouvelles  du   Quebec:  concours r.
Sherbrooke, Cosmos,   1970.  58  p. CORRIVEAU,    MONIQUE (CHOUINARD). Le    te­
moin; roman. Montreal, Cercle du  livre  de
France, I969. I48  p.
couTURE,  GILBERT.  La  tole.  Montreal,  Cercle du  livre  de  France, 1970.  98  p.
DAGENAIS, PIERRE.  Le  feu sacre;  roman. Mont­
real,  Beauchemin, I97o. 374  p.
DESROSIERS, LEO-PAUL. Les engages  du grand portage; roman, precede d'une  chronologie, d'une   bibliographie  et   de   jugements    cri­ tiques. MOlltreal, Fides,   1969.  2I9 p.
DORE, MARC.  Le   billard   sur  la  neige; roman.
Montreal,  Editions  du   Jour,  I970.  175  p.
DOUTRE, JOSEPH.  Les   fiances  de   r8r2; essai de   littirature   canadienne. Montreal,   Per­ rault,   I844;  Montreal,   R6edition-Quebec, I969. 493  p.
DUDAN, PIERRE.  La  terre  a une  taille  de  gu2pe.
Montreal, Presses  libres,  1970.  2 17 p.
FERRON, JACQUES. L'amelanchier; recit. Mont­
real,   Editions du  Jour, 1970.   163  p.
-. Le  ciel  de  Quebec. Montreal, Editions du
Jour,  I969. 403  p.
-. Le   salut   de   l'Irlande;  roman. Montreal, Editions du  Jour, I 970.  22 I  p.
FORCIER,  LOUISE  (MAHEUX).  Une    forDz pour


108
 Zotf;   roman. Montreal,  Cercle du   livre   de
France,  1969.   203   p.
FORTIER, JACQUEs. Nerfs et  danse.  Shcrbrookc, Cosmos,  1970.   78  p.
FUGERE,   JEAN-PAUL.   L'orientation;   roman.
Montreal, HMH,  I 970.   rso   p.
GAGNON, ALAIN. Le   "pour"  et   le   "contre;" nouvelles.   Montreal,   Cercle   du    livre    de France, 1970.   I2I   p.
GAGNON-MAHONY,   MADELEINE. Les    morts­
vivants;  nouvelles. Montreal,  HMH,   1969.
174  p.
GAUDET-SMET,  FRANCOISE. Celebration de  fer­
able.    Montreal,   Morel,   I970.     Iv.     [non pagine]
GAUTHIER,  LOUIS.   Les    aventures   de    Sivis Pacem et  de  Para  Bellum. Tome  I-  Mont­ real,   Cercle du  livre   de  France,  1970-
GIRARD,   RODOLPHE. Marie    Calumet.  Illustra­ tions   par   A.   Bourgeois  [ et   autres]  Mont­ real,     I 904;   Montreal,    Reedition-Quebec, I969. 396   p.
GODIN, MARCEL. Une dent  contre  Dieu; roman.
Paris, Laffont, 1969. 210  p.
GRAVEL, PIERRE. A  perte  de  temps. Toronto, Anansi; Montreal, Parti  pris,   I 969.   I 17  p.
HEBERT, ANNE. Kamouraska;  roman. Paris, Editions du  Seuil,  I 970.  249  p.
HEBERT,  LOUIS-PHILIPPE.  L'heure.  La    barre du   jour  22/23:  73-78, nov.  I969-fev. I970.
JOANNETTE,  RICHARD. Les  pelerins  de l'absurde et  autres   histoires, par   Richard Jouannette [sic]  Montreal, Aries,   I970. 127  p.
JOUANNETTE, RICHARD voir   JOANNETTE,   RI­ CHARD.
LABBE,  JEAN PIERRE. Le  marque du  signe  des murs;  roman. Windsor, Que., Les   Auteurs
11eunis, I 970.  87  p.
LAMARCHE,  JACQUES-A.  Le  royaume detraque;
roman. Montreal, Cercle du  livre  de  France,
1970.   182   p.
LAMIRANDE, CLAIRE  DE. Le  grand  elixir; roman.
Montreal, Editions du  Jour, I969. 265  p.
LA    ROCQUE, GILBERT.  Le    nombril;   roman.
Montreal,  Editions  du   Jour,  I970.  208   p. LESCARBEAULT,  GERALD. Le   plat  brise; roman.
Mont11eal, Cercle du  livre   de  France,  1969.
IOI  p.

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



LESCURE, PIERRE. Luridan; recit.   Montreal, HMH, 1970.   143  p.
-. Les    rives    de    /'Hudson;    roman.   Paris, Editions du  Seuil, 1969.   220  p.
MAHEUX, GUY. Guillaume  D.;   roman.  Mont­
real,  Cercle du  livre  de  France, I 969.  !58 p.
MARMETTE,  JOSEPH.  Joseph Marmette. Textes choisis  et presentes par  Roger LeMoine. Montreal,  Fides,  1969.   94  p.
MARTIN, CLAIRE.  Les  morts; roman. Montreal, Cercle du  livre  de  France, 1970.   152  p.
MONTREUIL,  GAETANE  DE. Dan  Rowney;  nou­
velle.  La  barre  du   jour  22/23:  88-99, nov.
1 969-fev. 1970.
OUELLETTE-MICHALSKA,   MADELEINE. Le    jeu des    satsons.    Montreal,   L'Actuelle,    1970.
138   p.
PARADIS,  SUZANNE. Les   haut   cris;  roman  (2. ed., rev.  et  corr.]  Quebec, Garneau,  1970.
!66 p.
PETROWSKI,  MINOU   ( VISDA-DIDELOT).   fleu­ reusement  qu'il    y  a  les   fleurs . .. ;  roman. Montreal, Cercle du  livre  de  France,  1970.
204  p.
POULIN,  JACQUES.  Le    coeur    de   la   baleine bleu;  roman.  Montreal,  Editions du   Jour,
1970.   200  p.
POUPART, JEAN-MARIE. Ma   tite   vache   a  mal aux   pattes; roman. Montreal, Editions du Jour, 1970.   244  p.
ROY, GABRIELLE.  La  riviere   sans  repos.  Mont­
 TURGEON, PIERRE.  Un,   deux,   trois;  roman. Montreal, Editions du  Jour, 1970.  171  p. VADEBONCOEUR, PIERRE.  Un amour /ibre;  recit.
Montreal, HMH,  1970.   104  p.
VILLENEUVE,  PAUL. Satisfaction  garantie;   re­
cit?   Montreal, Langevin,  1970.   157  p. WEINIGEL, LEON.  Tel  que[;   roman  (Ire  ed.
canadienne]  Montreal, Belier,   1967.   157  p.

POESIE

L'Amirondeau. Alma, Que.,  A.  Girard,  1969.
93  p.
-. Alma,   Que., A.  Girard,  1970.   65   p. BEAUCHAMP, GERMAIN. La messe ova[e;  poeme.
Montreal, Editions du  Jour, 1969.  96  p.
BEAULIEU, MICHEL.  Charmes  de   [a   fureur.
Montreal, Editions du  Jour, 1970.  75  p.
-. 9 poemes.  La  barre  du  jour  24: 2-1 I,  mars­
avril    1970.
-. Sous-jacences. Images  de   Roland  Pichet.
Montreal   [s.   e.]   1970.    16  f.  et   planches dans   un  etui.
BERTRAND,  PIERRE,   et   MORENCY,  PIERRE.
Poemes  r. St.  Constant, Passe-partout, 1970.
15  p.
BERTRAND,   PIERRE. Poemes  :: .    St.   Constant, Passe-partout, 1970.   15  p.
BissoN,   MARIUS.  R.eflexions  d'un   croulant
[par M.  B.]   Hull  [196?].  28  p.
BIZIER,  RICHARD. Poemes.   Action    nationa/e
59:475-479,  jan.   1970.

real,  Beauchemin, 1970.  315  p.
SIMARD,  JEAN.  La   separation; roman.  Mont­
real,   HMH,  1970.   145  p.
 BOSQUET, ALAIN. Poesie ed.,     augm.] 	Paris, HMH, 1968.  271  p.
 du    Canada  [nouv. Seghers;   Montreal,

TETREAU, JEAN.  Treize   histoires  en   nair   et blanc;   nouvelles.   Montreal,   Editions   du Jour,  1970.   212   p.
THERIAULT, YVES. Ashini.  Ouvrage  pl'eoede d'une chronologie, d'une bibliographie et  de jugements critiques.  Montl'eal, Fides, 1969.
167  p.
-. Le   dernier  havre.  Montreal,   L'Actuelle,
1970.   143  p.
THERIO, ADRIEN. Conteurs  canadiens-franr;ais: epoque contemporaine. [2e ed., augm.] Montreal, Deom, 1970.  377  p.
-. Un paien  chez  les  pengouins; recit. Mont­
real,  Cercle du  livre  de  France, 1970.  153  p.
 BOULERICE,   JACQUES.    Elie    Elie    pourquoi ( poemes   de   /'emotion  fragile   et  du   virage en  vue)   Montreal, Editions du  Jour,  1970.
6! p.
BRAULT, JACQUES. Suite  fraternelle. Ottawa, Editions   de   l'Universite  d'Ottawa,    1969.
39  p.
BROSSARD, NICOLE.  Extrait,    et    Fragm.ent;
poesie.  La  barre  du  jour  22/23:  52-57, nov.
1969-fev. 1970.
-.Suite logique; poemes. Montreal,  L'Hexa­
gone, 1970.  58  p.
CADIEUX, PIERRE.  Amour   tiede.   Montreal, Editions  neigeuses, 1970.   20  p.

109

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



-.La campagne   du   parti  poetik.  Montreal, Editions neigeuses, 1970.  61  p.
-. Manifeste  ozer. Montreal, Roy,  1970.   7  f.
Cahier de  poesie  I II. Liberte  1 2 :55-84,  mars­
avril  I970.
CHOQUETTE,  ROBERT. Poemes choisis;  precedes d'une   chronologie,  d'une  bibliographie  et d'un  texte   de  Jean  Ethier-Blais. Montreal, Fides, 1970.   209  p.
CLERCS DE SAINT-VIATEUR. Poesie,  manege d'etoiles. t.  2.  Montreal, Centre de  psycho­ logie   et  de  pedagogie, 1969.   125  p.
CLOUTIER,  CECILE. Poemes.   Liberte   68; 31-38, mars-avril  1970.
COGSWELL, FRED. One   hundred   poems   of modern   Quebec. Fredericton,  Fiddlehead Poetry Books,  1970.  91  p.
DAOUST,  CARL. Pour  y  croire  encore;   poemes et   lithographies. Montreal,    [s.   e.]   Ig68.
7  f., 5  planches.
 GERVAis, GUY. Polsie   1. Montreal,  Parti  pris,
1969.   128  p.
GIGNAC,  RODRIGUE.  Suite .... Quebec, Editions de  l'Hote, 1970.  115  p.
GLASsco,  JOHN,  ed.  The   poetry of French Canada   in   translation. Toronto,  Oxford University Press,  1970.   26o  p.
GUTMANN,  HELENE. Pour  durer.  voir  MICHEL, LUC. Clairs-obscurs.
HEBERT, LOUIS  PHILIPPE.  Les   mangeurs   de terre   [et   autres  textes].  Montreal, Editions du   Jour, 1970.   235   p.
LABBE,  JEAN PIERRE. L'apocalypse selon Uon.
Ill. de  Marc  Lefebvre. Windsor, Que., Les
Auteurs reunis, 1970.  37  p.
LABERGE, MARIE. Solei[   d'otage.    Quebec, Garneau,  1970.   79  p.
LACROIX,  GEORGETTE.   Entre   nous . .. ce  pays.
Quebec, Garneau,  1970.   103   p.
LALONDE, ROBERT. Charivari  des rues;  poemes.

DESROCHERS,    CLEMENCE. Sur    un d'enfant.   Presentation   de    Marcel Montreal, Lemeac, 1g6g.  199  p.
 radeau
Dube.
 Montreal, Atys/Fraternalisme,  1970.   67   p. LANDE, LAWRENCE MONTAGUE. L'accent    est dans  la  diversite. Montl'eal   [s.  e.]  1970.   3

DES ROCHES,  ROGER. Corps accessoires; poemes.
Montreal,  Editions du   Jour, 1970.   55  p. DOR, GEORGES.  ]e chante-pleur encore;  poeme.
Longueuil, Emmanuel, 1969.  63  p.
DUBOIS, MICHELLE. Poemes   pour   les  yeux   et les  mains. Etudes   franfaises 6; 447-456, nov.
1970.
DUCHARME, REJEAN.  La   fille  de   Christophe Colomb. Paris, Gallimard,  1969.   232  p. DUMONT, FERN AND. Parler de septembre. Mont­
real,  L'Hexagone,  I 970.  77 p.
DUPUIS,  RAYMOND. Vehiculement. Montreal, Editions  neigeuses, 1970.  59  p.
ETHIER-BLAIS, JEAN.  Asies;  poemes.   Paris, Grasset, 1g6g.  93  p.
EUGENE, JEAN-PIERRE. Le  poetyron.   Sillery, L'Arc,  Ig6g. 118  p.
GARNEAU,  SAINT-DENYS.   Poemes  choisis;  pre­ cedes   d'un  chronologie, d'une  bibliographie et  de   jugements critiques.  Montreal,  Fides,
1970.   141  p.
GEOFFROY, JACQUES.  La catoche orange. Mont­
real,  Parti pris,  1970.  53  p.
GEOFFROY, LoUis.   Le  saint  rouge  et la  peche­ resse	(notes    pour     une    choreographie). Montreal,  Editions du  Jour,  1970.  96  p.

IIO
 brochures.
LAROCHELLE, JEAN   WILLIE.   Lunes    d'auril.
Saint-Hyacinthe, Gaudet, 1g6g.   100  p. LASNIER, RINA.  La   part   du   feu.   Montreal,
Editions du  Songe, 1970.  91  p.
LECLERC, FELIX. Cent   chansons.   Montreal, Fides, 1970.   255  p.
LELIEVRE,  SYLVAIN.  Chansons. Sillery,  L'Arc, Ig6g. 70  p.
LEVESQUE,  ANDREE.  Nocturnes  de  Nathanael;
poemes   en   prose.   Montreal,  Beauchemin,
1g6g.  74  p.
LIMET, ELIZABETH. La   voix  de  mes   pensees. Tome 1- Montreal, Les  Presses  libres,   1970- LORANGER, JEAN-AUBERT. Les    atmospheres,
suivi   de   Poiimes.  Montreal,  HMH,   1970.
175  p.
MAJOR, ANDRE.  Poemes  pour  durer.  Montreal, Editons du  Songe, 1g6g.   gi  p.
MAURICE,  MIREILLE.  Longue-haleine;    recit­
poeme.  Montreal,  Cosmos, 1970.  106  p. MENARD,  JEAN. Inextinguible. Ill.   par   Ilgvars
Steins.  Quebec,  Garneau,   I 969.   66   p.
MICHEL, Luc. Clairs-obscurs    [suivi   de]   Pour durer    [par]   Helene  Gutmann.   Windsor, Que., Les  Auteurs reunis, 1970.  34  p.

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



MIRON, GASTON. L'homme rapaillJ. Montreal, Presses   de   l'Universite  de   Montreal,  1970.
171  p.
-. Poemes. Etudes   fran(aises  6: ISI-192,  mai
I970.
NADON, ROBERT. Rythme  a  haute   tension. Montreal, Editions neigeuses, I970.  [non pagine].
PAGEAU, RENE. Rumeurs de  Ia nuit. 4 gravures de Marcel Ducharme. Berthierville, Chez l'auteur,  I970. 93  p.
PARADis, SUZANNE. Pour voir les plectrophanes raitre.  Quebec, Garneau,   I 970.   89   p.
PELOQUIN,  CLAUDE. Le  repas  est  servi.  Mont­
rea],   Par   ]'auteur  (Eternite),   I970. I23   p.
PERRAULT,  PIERRE. Poernes   du   temps  present.
Maintenant  10 I: 306-307, dec.   I 970.
PILON, JEAN-GUY, ed.   Poemes  70;  anthologie des  poemes  de  l'annee   au  Quebec.  Mont­ real,   L'Hexagone,  I970.  I09   p.
-. Saisons   pour   Ia  continuelle. Ill de   Bella
Idelson. Paris, Seghers,  I969.  42  p. PORTAL,  MARCEL. Guipure    et    courtepointes
(poemes). Montveal, Cosmos,  1970.   I76   p.
POULIN,  SABINE. La   chair   et   l'eau.   Sillery, L'Arc, 1970.   7I   p.
PREFONTAINE,   YVES.  Deb8c/e,    suivi   de   A l'oree   des  travaux. Montreal,  L'Hexagone, I970. 79  p.
-. Le grainier;  poeme. Gravures [par]  Marie­ Anastasie. Paris, Edition du  Grainier,  I 969.
36  p.
PREVOST, CLAUDE. Le    miroir    desembaumi;
poemes.  Montreal, Vulcain,  1969.   4I   f.
Q.UESNEL,  LOUIS-JOSEPH:. Selected   poems  and songs after  the manuscripts in the Lande Collection.  Quelques  poemes    et   chansons selon    les   manuscrits   dans    Ia     collection Lande. Montreal, Lawrence Lande  Founda­ tion    at  the    McLennan    Library,    McGill University, 1970.  6o  p.
RACINE, LUC. Opus  I. Montreal,  Editions du
Jour, 1969.   74  p.
-. Villes.  Montveal, Editions  du   Jour,   1970.
56  P·
RIOUX,  H:ELENE. Suite    pour   un   visage.   Ill. [de]  Michel  Alain  Forgue.  Montreal, Rapailler,  1970.   I   v.   [non  pagine].
 ROBERT,  GUY. Litterature  du  Quebec:   poesis actuelle.  Nouv. ed.,  remaniee et  augm. Montreal, Deom, 1970.  403  p.
ROYER, LOUis.  Poesie  0. Sillery,   L'Arc,  1970.
96  p.
SIMONEAu,  JEAN.   Re-]ean.  Windsor,  Que., Les  Auteurs  reunis,  1970.   27  p.
souBLIERE, ROGER.  L'anti-can. Montreal,  Edi­ tions  Pro-Con, 1969.  1oo  rondelies dans une  boite   cylindrique.
STRATFORD, GASTON  JAMES. Tetrasordide, 1 et
2. Windsor, Que., Les  Auteurs reunis, 1969.
42  p.
TREMBLAY, GEMMA.  Les seins gorges. Montreal, Editions  du   Songe,  I969.  89   p.
-. Le  tishbite.  Action   nationale   6o:173-I 75, oct.    1970.
TROESTLER,  GHISLAINE.   F/eurs    du    temps.
Jonquiere, CEGEP de  Jonquiere, I97o. 45 f.

THEATRE

DUBE, MARCEL.  Au   retour   des  oies  blanches; piece en dew:  parties et quatres tableaux. Montreal, Lemeac,  1969.   I89   p.
-. Le coup de l'Etrier, et  Avant  de t'en  aller;
pieces. Montreal,  Lemeac,  I 970.  126  p.
-. Florence   [nouv.  ed.].   Ottawa,  Lemeac, I970.  I50  p.
DUFRESNE, GUY.  Cap-aux-Sorciers. Montreal, Lerneac, 1969-       v.1:  Fabienne.
-. Le  cri  de  l'engoulevent;  piece.   [Precede de notes  preliminaires d'Alain Pontaut. 2e version    de    Ia   piece].   Montreal  Lemeac, I969. 123  p.
GURIK,  ROBERT. A    coeur   ouvert;   tragedie­
bouffe.  Montreal,  Lemeac,  1969.   82   p.
-. Le  pendu;   piece  en  deux  actes. Montreal, Lerneac, 1970. 109  p.
JASMIN, CLAUDE. Tuez le veau  gras. Montreal, Lerneac, I97o.  79  p.
LAURENDEAU, ANDRE.  The/ltre. Montreal, HMH, 1970. 208  p.
LEVAC, CLAUDE. Son    pere,   OU   Si   ]e  fils  ne meurt;  canevas pour  un   spectacle.  Etudes fran aises                             1970.
LORANGER, FRANCOISE,  et    LEVAC,  CLAUDE. Le chemin du roy; comidie patriotique. Montreal,  Lerm!ac,  1969.   I 35  p.

I I I

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



-.Double jeu;  piece  en  deux  actes.  Notes  de mise  en  scene   d'Andre  Brassard. Montreal, Lemeac,  1969.   212   p.
-.Medium saignant. Montreal, Lemeac, I970.
139  p.
PONTAUT, ALAIN. Un bateau   que  Dieu  sait  qui avait  monte et  qui  flottait  comme il  pouvait, c'est-ii-dire  mal.   [Ottawa?]  Lerneac, I970. I05   p.
 roman  d'aventures.  Desbiens, Editions  du
Phare, I969. 106  p.
GENEST, MARIE A. Les   morceaux  de  solei[  de Memnoukia [par]  Marie Bernard [pseud.]. Montreal, Education  nouvelle, I969. I37  p.
MAJOR, HENRIETTE. A  Ia  conquete  du  temps.
Montreal, Education  nouvelle, I 970.   I22  p.
Wampum.  Charlesbourg, Association co-opera­
tive   pedagogique  du   Quebec,  I968.  38   p.

QUESNEL, franc;ais.
1970.
 LOUIS-JOSEPH.    Les    republicains
La   barre   du    jour   25:64-88,  ete
 
BIBLIOGRAPHIES
AGENCE  LITTERAIRE  DES CANADIENS-FRANCAIS.

SAUVAGEAU,  YVES.  Wouf   Wouf;  machinerie­
revue  de  Sauvageau. [presentation de  Jean­ Claude Germain]  Montreal,  Lemeac,  I970.
109  p.
TheD.tre-Quebec. v.  I-  I969- Montreal, Centre d'essai  des   auteurs  dramatiques  de   Mont­ real.   4  fois  par   annee.
THERIAULT, YVES.  Fredange,   suivi    de    Les terres  neuves. Introduction de  Guy  Beaulne. Monti'eal, Lemeac,  I970.  I46   p.
TREMBLAY,  MICHEL. L'effet des  rayons  gamma sur   les   vieux-garr;ons, d'apres  !'oeuvre  de Paul  Zindel. Montreal, Lemeac, I970. 70  p.
-.En pieces   detachees, et   La   Duchesse    de
Langeais.  Montreal,   Lemeac,  I970.  94   p.
-. Lysistrata, d'apres Aristophane; adaptation.
Montreal, Lemeac, 1969.  93  p.
WALTHER-SISKOU, SUZANNE. Le temoin. Mont­
real,  Beauchemin,  I969. 83  p.

ESSAIS, LETTRES, MELANGES LITTERAlRES

BAILLARGEON,  PIERRE. Le  choix; essa1s.  Mont­
real,  HMH,  I969. I72   p.
DESCHENES, CLAUDE. Pensees.   Livre    premier. Trois-Rivieres,   Editions   du    Bien    Public, I967. 3I   p.
DUDAN, PIERRE. Les   cent   pas  dans   ma   tete. Montreal,   Editions   de    !'Homme,    I969. I9I   p.
OUELLETTE, FERNAND. Les    actes    retrouves;
essais.  Montreal, HMH,  I970. 226  p.

LITTERAlURE DE JEUNESSE

BERNARD,  MARIE  voir  GENEST, MARIE  A. CLEMENT,  GERARD. Alertes   au    lac    Castor;

I I 2
 Titres  canadiens-franr;ais traduits au Canada et/ou    traduits  et    publies     a    l'etranger.
Montreal,  Conseil superieur du  livre, I 969.
35  p.
ASSOCIATION DES   UNIVERSITES     PARTIELLE­ MENT OU ENTEIREMENT  DE   LANGUE FRAN­ CAISE. Catalogue  des   publications   periodi­ ques   universitaires  de   langue   franr;aise.  2e ed.   Montreal,  AUPELF,  1969.   I50   p.
Canadian books  in  print. Catalogue des livres canadiens    en     librairie.   I967-   Toronto, Comite  du   Catalogue  des   livres   canadiens en  librairie, 1968- annuel.
Catalogue  de   /'edition  au   Canada  franr;ais:
1970-1971. Montreal, Conseil superieur du livre,  I 970.  56 1  p.
Letters in  Canada:   I969. Livres en  franc;ais.
University of Toronto quarterly 39:324-459, July  I970.
Livres  et   auteurs  quebecois  1969;  revue crttzque de  l'annee litteraire. Montreal, Jumonville,  I970. 1188 p.
Bibliographie,  generale,  I 969:  p.   274-1185. Etudes de  Ia litterature canadienne-franc;aise publiees  au   cours  de   l'annee   dans   nos
revues:  p.  1171-273·
NAAMAN, ANTOINE  YOUSSEF.  Guide    bib/io­ graphique des  theses   littbaires  canadiennes de   1921   a  1969. Montreal,  Cosmos,    I970.
338   p.
PIDDINGTON, PAMELA. Canadian literature  1969.
Litterature   canadienne-franc;aise. Canadian literature 44: I Io-I  I9,  spring  I970.
POTVIN, CLAUDE.  Sources bibliographiques sur Ia  litrerature enfantine au  Canada  franc;ais. Association   canadienne   des   bibliothecaires de   langue  franr;aise.  Bulletin. v.r6,   no   2:
55-61, juin   I970.

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



QUEBEC. BIBLIOTHEQUE  NATIONALE. Collection jacques Mordret. Quebec, Ministere des affaires culturelles,  Ig6g. 72  p.
QUEBEC.  MINISTERE  DES   AFFAIRES    CULTU­ RELLES. Bibliographie   du   Quebec.   Annie
1968.   Montreal,  Bibliotheque nationale du
Quebec, I970. 97  p.
-.Bibliographie du  Quebec. Ig6g- Quebec, Bibliotheque  nationale  du   Quebec.   trimes­ riel.
SANTERRE, RICHARD. Bibliographie   des   imp­
rimes    franco-americain	parus     a   Lowell,
Massachusetts de  1837  a  1968. Manchester,
N.H., Ballard, Ig6g. 59  p.
VANNIKOVA, NINEL'    IVANOVNA. Kanadskaia literatura   na    frantsuzkom    iazyke     ( 1945-
1965).  Moscow, "Vysshaia  Shkola,"  Ig6g. g6  p.

OUVRAGES CONSACRES A l'EDITION

CARTIER, GEORGES. L'edition  au   Quebec   en
1969.   Vient  de   paraltre   v.  6,   no  3: 19-2I, sept.   1970.
HEBERT, I ACQUEs. Obscenite et  Iiberti. Mont­
real,  Editions du   Jour, 1970.   rgi  p.
Livres-actualite	1: I-12,     juin/juillet 	I967.
Paris,  Information,   promotion  et   culture. [numero consacre au  Canada].
QUEBEC.  CONSEIL SUPERIEUR DU LIVRE.  Livre blanc     sur     /'affaire   Hachette.    Montreal, Ig6g. 6  f.
-. Memoire  sur  la   protection  de   Ia  librairie et   de   !'edition   quebicoises;  presente ... a
!'Honorable  Jean-Noe!  Tremblay,  ministre
 des    affaires  culturelles.  Montreal,   Ig6g.
5  f.
Revision   de    Ia   loi    du    droit  d'auteur   au
Canada.  Vient  de   paraitre     v.  6,   no    I:
27-30,  mars   I970.
RICHER, I ULIA. L'edition  quebecoise en  quel­ ques  !ignes.   Voir   chaque  numero  d'Action nationale.

LINGUISTIQUE

BARBEAU, VICTOR. Le    franyais     du    Canada. Nouv.  ed.,  rev.  et augrn. Quebec, Garneau, I970. 303   p.
BELISLE, LOUIS-ALEXANDRE.  Petit   dictionnaire canadien de  Ia langue   franyaise.  Montreal, Aries,  1969.  644  p.
BONIN,  RENE.  Reflexions   sur    Ia   toponymie chez    nous.    Action  nationale 58:444-455, jan.   Ig6g.
COLPRON, GILLES.  Les    ang/ismes   au    Que­ bec;  repertoire classifie.  Montreal,  Beauche­ min,  1970.  247  p.
CONSEIL DE LA   VIE FRANCAISE  EN AMERIQUE.
Un Quebec franyais. Quebec, Ferland, Ig6g. ISI   p.
FILLION,  KONRAD. Essai  sur  !'evolution du  mot "habitant"  (XVIIe-XVIIIe  siecles). Revue d'histoire  de   l' Amerique  franyaise   24:375-
401,  dec.   I97o.
HEBERT, ANNE, et  SCOTT, FRANK. Dialogue  sur
Ia   traduction  a  propos    du   Tombeau   des
rois.  Montreal, HMH,  1970.   rog   p.
HOUSE, A.  B., et CORBETT,  N. L. Sur l'origine de   Ia  prononciation  icit   "ici"  au   Canada






RJchaRb aset &  company, 1nc.


Scholarly Books in the Arts and Sciences


TORONTO
PORTLAND, SAN FRANCISCO, LOS  ANGELES, DENVER, CHICAGO, NEW YORK



II3

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



franc;ais.   Le   franfais moderne 38:147-150, avril    1970.
 L'lllettrl. v. 1- 	jan.   1970- Beaulieu. mensuel.
 Terrebonne,

KELLY,  LOUIS  GERARD, ed.    Description    et mesure  du   bilinguisme:  un   colloque   inter­ national.  Ottawa,   Commission   canadienne pour  !'Unesco; Toronto,  University of  To­  ronto  Press,   1969.   442  p.
La  langue franc;aise  face  a Ia  science.   Affaires
universitaires/University  affairs    v.   1 1,   no
I :7,  1970.
PAGEAU, SERGE. Lexique  franfais-esquimau. Quebec,  Direction   generale  du   Nouveau­ Quebec  du   Ministere   des   richesses    natu­ relles,  1970.  44  f.
QUEBEC. OFFICE DE   LA    LANGUE FRANCAISE.
Canadienismes  de   bon   alai.  Quebec,  1969.
37  p.
SAVARD,    JEAN-GUY, et   ROBERTS, JACK.  Les indices d'utilitl  du  vocabulaire  fondamental franfais.  Quebec,  Presses  de  l'Universite Laval, 1970.   169   p.
TAAFFE,  GERALD. Joual. Saturday night. v. 85, no.  4:26-28,  1970.
THOMAS, PAULE ROLLAND.   Vocabulaire   tech­ nique   de    la    bibliotheconomie   et    de    la bibliographie,  suivi    d'un    lexique   anglais­ franfais.   Montreal,   Association   canadienne des  bibliothecaires de  langue franc;aise,  1969.
187  p.
VINAY, JEAN-PAUL. Codage  automatique  et dictionnaires. Memoires de  la  Societe   royale du  Canada v. 4,  no  7: 103-115, 1969.

REVUES

Les   cahiers, Franfois-Xavier   Garneau.  v.   !­
 Jeunesses  littlraires.   v.    5;  nov.     1967-nov.
1968.  Montreal. 4  nos.  irregulier.
Continue   Jeunesses  littlraires   du    Canada franfais.
Continue  par   Jeunesses littlraires  du   Que­
bec.
Jeunesses  litteraires   du    Canada  franfais.   v.
1-4; dec.  1963-juin 1967.  Dorval [etc.]  4 v. irregulier.
Continue par   Jeunesses littlraires. Jeunesses littlraires   du    Quebec.  v.   6-
sept./oct.  1968- Montreal. 4 fois  par  annee.
Continue J eunesses littlraires.
SOCIETE DES ECRIVAINS   CANADIENS.  Bulletin.
no  1- 	196 ?- 	Montreal.
Thldtre-Qulbec. v.  1-         1969-         Montreal, Centre d'essai des auteurs dramatiques de Montreal. 4 fois  par  annee.

SATIRE ET HUMOUR

BOUCHER, DENIS.  Petit    livre    jaune-stone,  OU Cirque  multicolore   de   phrases    inutiles  et sans  suite. Wickham, Que., Publications du Clan  polychrome, 1970. 65  p.
Dictionnaire  politique et  culture! du   Quebec.
Liberti 6 1 :7-64,  1969.
-. Ier   supplement. Liberti  68:6-30,  1970. DUGUAY,  RAOUL.  Le  manifeste  de  l'infonie;  le
Tout-Art-Bel.  Montreal,  Editions du   Jour,
1970.   IIO,(III(a))-III(h) p.
FALARDEAU,  CLAUDE. La   negresse   blonde  aux yeux   brides. Montreal,  Presses  libres,   1970.
126  p.

1969- irreguJier.
 Quebec,  Ecole   normale  Laval.
 LATULIPPE, GILLES. Une  p'tite   vite/   Montreal, Editions de  !'Homme,  1970.   125  p.

Canadian books  in  print. Catalogue des  livres
canadiens  en   librairie.   1967-         Toronto, Comite  du   Catalogue  des  livres   canadiens en  librairie, 1 968-         annuel.
La   conchyoline, v.    1- 	mars    1969- Chicoutimi, Cercle litteraire  Louis   Dantin. semestriel.
Delirium   tres    mince.   Cahier   1- 	hiver
1968/69-       Montreal,  Editions  Refermer avant d'allumer.
Ellipse. no   1-           automne  1969-           Sher- brooke, Faculte  des  arts,  Universite de Sherbrooke. trimestriel.

I 14
 
BIOGRAPHIES
ALLARD, MICHEL.  Henri-Louis  Duhamel  du Manceau   et   le   Ministere  de   la   Marine. Preface de  Roland Lamontagne. Montreal, Lemeac, 1970. 1 1 1 p.
DESILETS, ANDREE.  Hector-Louis Langevin, un pere  de  la  ConfCdlration canadienne, r826- rgo6. Quebec, Presses  de  l'Universite de Laval, 1969.  461  p.
DUFRESNE, ANNE-MARIE DE    LAUNIERE. Ma tante;  la   vie   de   Flore   Pigeon.   Trois-Riv­ ieres,   Editions du   Bien   Public,  1969.  62  p.

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



GAGNON, MARCEL-AIME. Jean-Charles Harvey, precurseur de la revolution tranquille. Mont­ real,  Beauchemin, I97o. 378  p.
GERMAIN, LUC.  Mes   amours   &  mon   pays.
Granby, Editions  de  !'Est,  I969. 68  p. GROULX, LIONEL. Mes   memoires.  t.  1:1878-
1920.  Montreal, Fides,   I970. 437  p.
-.Roland-Michel Barrin  de  La  Galissoniere,
1693-1756.  Quebec, Presses   de   l'Universite de  Laval, 1970.  102  p.
JOUVANCOURT,  HUGHES DE. Clarence  Gagnon.
Montreal,  La   F egate,  I970-    I48   p. LAPALME, GEORGES-EMILE.   Memoires.   Mont­
real,  Lemeac, I 969-70-   2 v.
LE  MOIGNAN,  MICHEL. Le   pere  Antoine   Ber­ nard,  historien  de  la Gaspesie  et  du  peuple acadien.     Quebec,   Editions     gaspesiennes, I966.  I23   p.
MARTINEAU,  DENYSE. Juliette   BCliveau. Mont­ real,  Editions de  !'Homme, I97o. 2I8  p. NADEAU, EUGENE.  La  femme  au coeur  attentif:
Mere  Gamelin. Montl'eal,  Providence-Mont­
real,   I 969.  3 I 7 p.
RACINE,  JEAN.   Souvenirs   en   lignes   bristles.
Montreal,  Lemeac,  I 969.   207  p.
TOUPIN, PAUL. Mon   mal  vient   de   plus  loin.
Montreal, Cercle du  livre  de  France,  I 969.
108  p.

HISTOIRE ET CRITIQUE LITTERAIRES
OUVRAGES ET ARTICLES GENERAUX AQUIN,   HUBERT.   Litterature   et    alienation.
Mosaic  2:45-52,  I968.
BEAULIEU, VICTOR-LEVY.   Quand   les  ecrivains quebecois   jouent  le  jeu!  Montreal, Editions du   Jour, I9]0. 268  p.
BISSONNETTE, PIERRETTE. "Vaincus  dans   Ja lutte,   ils    ont     triomphe   dans   l'histoire." Revue    de   l'Universite  d'Ottawa.  40: I4o-
148,   I970-
BRUNET, BERTHELOT. Histoire de la litterature franr;aise. Montreal, HMH,  I970. 237  p.
CARRIER, GILLES.   La    critique   est-elle    une science?  Etudes    franr;aises 6:221-226,  mai I970-
CHAMBERLAND, PAUL. L'art au  Quebec; Je triomphe de Ia communication. Revue d'esthetique 22:225-235,  juillet-sept.  I969.
 Concours litteraires  du  Quebec.  Vient de paraitre v. 6,  no  I: 10,  mars   I970-
DUHAMEL, ROGER. Lettres    canadiennes-fran­ c;aises:  Correspondence,  souvenirs et   essais. Revue  des  deux  mondes  1 1:360-369,  1969.
ETHIER-BLAIS,  JEAN. Une  explosion creatrice.
Quebec   17: 13-24,   mars  1970.
GAY,  PAUL. Notre   litterature:  guide  litteraire du Canada  franr;ais. Montreal, HMH, 1969.
214   p.
LAVOIE, ELZEAR. La    clientele   du    "Courier du    Canada."  Culture    30:299-309,   I 969;
3 I: 40-57,   I970.
LEBEL, MAURICE.  L'enseignement  universitaire de   Ia   litterature   canadienne-franc;aise au
Canada  et   a  l'etranger.  Culture    3 I :238-
244,   1970.
MAILHOT, LAURENT.  La  critique.  Etudes   fran­
r;aises 6:259-276, mai   1970.
NOGUEZ, DOMINIQUE. La    Jitterature   aujour­
d'hui. Etudes  franr;aises 6: 91-95, 1970. OTTAWA. UNIVERSITE.  CENTRE  DE RECHERCHES
EN   LITTERATURE CANADIENNE·FRANCAISE.
Recherche    et   litterature    canadienne-fran­ r;aise. Textes  publies  sous   Ia   direction  de Paul    Wyczynski,   Jean   Menard  [et]  John Hare.  Ottawa,    Editions   de    l'Universite d'Ottawa,  1969.  297  p.
PAYETTE,   ANDRE.  Sept  ans   plus   tard.  Liberti
67: 3s,  jan.-fev. 1970.
Les   prix   litteraires   I 969.   Livres   et   auteurs quebecois 1969. Montreal, Jumonville, I970, p.  II.
Les   prix   litteraires  [ 1969-]   1970.   Vient   de paraltre v.  6,  no  3:13,  sept. 1970.
Le  Quebec   et  sa  litterature; notes   et   docu­ ments,  compte   rendus,  informations,  biblio­ graphie.   Paris,    Colin,   1969,    p.    737-912. [Reimpression  de   Ia   Revue   d'histoire   lit­ teraire  de  la  France  v.  69,  no  5,  sept.-oct.
1969.]
Rencontre des  Ecrivains, 8e,  Ste.-Adele, 1970. Travaux. Liberti 69:5-126,  mai-juin  1970. ROBERT,  GUY. Aspects  de  la  litterature  quebe­
coise. Montreal,  Beauchemin,  1970.   191   p.
ROUSSEAU, GUILDO. Prefaces  des romans quebecois du  XIXe siecle. Sherbrooke,  Cos­ mos,  1970.   I II  p.
SIROis, ANTOINE. Deux litteratures. Canadian literature  43 : 36-41, winter  1970.

I 15

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



SUTHERLAND,  RONALD. The fourth separatism. Canadian literature 45: 7-23,  summer 1970. VACHON, G.-ANDRE. Faire Ia litterature. Etudes
frant;aises  6: 3-6,  fev.    1970.
VIGNEAULT,  ROBERT. Chronique:   l'essai   que­
becois   1968-1969. Etudes  fran(aises  6:105-
120,  fev.  1970.
Voix et  images du   pays  II I. Litterature  que­ becoise.  Sillery,  Presses   de   l'Universite   du Quebec,  I97o. 336   p.

LE ROMAN

BERTHIAUME,   ANDRE.  Chroniques:   Je  roman.
Etudes  frant;aises  6:489-503, nov.  1970. FALARDEAU,   JEAN-CHARLES. Quelques   signifi­
cations  du   roman  quebecois. Societe   cana­
dienne  et  culture  franljaise:  colloque  inter­ national  organise    a  l'Universite  de   Liege, le   31   janvier     zg6g.  Liege,   Universite de
Liege,  1970, p.  25-33.
HAYNE,  DAVID M. Sampling the  harvest.  Cana­ dian   literature 45: 98-99,  summer  1970. KATTAN,  NAIM.  Douze   nouvelles.    Canadian
literature 43: 77-78,   winter  1970.
LEGARE,  ROMAIN.  Le  roman. Culture 31:245-
248,   1970.
LEMIEUX, GERMAIN.  P/acide-Eustache:   sources et  paralleles   du  conte-type 938. Quebec, Presses  de  l'U niversite Laval,  19 70.  214  p.
LEMIRE, MAURICE.  Les  grands  themes  nationa­ listes  du  roman historique  canadien-franljais. Quebec,  Presses  de  l'Universite Laval, I970.
28I   p.
MAJOR,   JEAN-LOUIS.   Pour     un    lecture   du roman  quebecois. Revue  d'esthetique 22:
251-261, juillet-sept.  1969.

LA POESIE

Archives   des   lettres  canadiennes.  t.   4:   La poes1e   canadienne- franc;aise;  perspectives historiques et  thematiques, profils  de  poetes, temoignages, bibliographie. Montreal, Fides, I969. 70I   p.
CLOUTIER, CECILE. La   poesie   contemporaine du  Quebec. Revue d'esthetique 22:236-250, juillet-sept.   1969.
DOBBS, BRIAN GRIFFITH. Poesie   et   critique  a
l'Universite de 1'Alberta. Vient  de   parartre
v.  6,  no   I: 1 I-I2, mars   1970.

n6
 DUDEK, LOUIS. The  mirror of  art:  r.elations between  French  and    English literature  in Canada.  Culture  31:225-231,  1970.
EMMANUEL, PIERRE. La   poesie    franc;aise   du Canada  vue   de   Ia   France.  Societe   cana­ dienne  et  culture  frant;aise:  colloque  inter­
national organise   a  l'Universite de  Liege   le
31   janvier   zg6g. Liege, Universite de  Liege,
1970,   p.  37-55·
GODBOUT,   JACQUES. Le   temps:  ]a   poesie   du cinema. 	Canadian    literature    46: 84-89, autumn  1970.
MARCOTTE,   GILLES.  La    poesie.    Etudes   fran­
t;aises 6:227-241, mai  1970.
-. Le   temps  des   poetes;  description  crztzque de la poesie actuelle au Canada fran(ais. Montreal, HMH,  I969. 247  p.
[Comprend des  bibliographies]
PILON,  JEAN-GUY. La   poesie   et  le  monde technique.  Memoires  de   la   Societe   royale du   Canada 4: II7-II9,   I969.

LE  THEATRE
BOUTET, EDGAR.   85   ans   de   theatre  a  Hull.
Hull, Societe historique de  !'ouest du  Que­
bec,  1969.   6o  p.
DOAT,  JAN. Theatre partes  ouvertes. Montreal, Cercle du  livre  de  France,  I 970.   I30  p. GODIN,  JEAN-CLEO.  Chroniques:   le   theatre.
Etudes  franljaises  6:504-5 I 1,  nov.   I 970.
KATTAN, NAIM. Le   ree[  et   [e  theatral;  essa1.
Montreal, HMH,  1970.   I88  p.

OUVRAGES CONSACRES AUX ECRIVAJNS

AQUIN, HUBERT
BELANGER, JEAN. L'Antiphonaire. Etudes franljaises  6:2I4·2I9, mai    I970.

AUBERT DE  GASPE, PHILIPPE LACOURCIERE, LUC. L'enjeu des  'Anciens  cana­
diens.'  Cahiers de  dix   32:223-254,  I967.

AUBIN, NAPOLEON
TREMBLAY, JEAN-PAUL.  A    [a   recherche   de Napoleon Aubin. Quebec, Presses  de  l'Uni­ versite Laval,  1969.   I87  p.

BESSETTE, GERARD
SMART, PATRICIA. Re!ire "L'incubation." Etudes frant;aises  6: r 93-213,  mai    I 970.

LITIERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE




BRAULT, JACQUES
BELLEAU, ANDRE.  Quelques  remarques sur   la poesie  de Jacques Brault. Liberti 68:85-93, mars-avril  1970.
MAUGEY, AXEL.  Hommage   a  un    poete    du
Quebec:   Jacques  Brault.  Action  nationale
59=592-60.t-,    Ig70.

BUIES, ARTHUR
VACHON, G.-ANDRE. Arthur   Buies,    ecrivain.
Etudes  fran!{aises 6:283-1195, aout   I97o.

CARRIER, ROCH
DIONNE, RENE. La   guerre,  yes  sir!   Relations
33 I: 279-28 I,   Ig68.
-.-.Relations 334:13-16,   1g6g. SUTHERLAND,  RONALD. Crossing the  thin   line.
Canadian literature 44: 88-8g, spring  1970.

CHANTAL,  ALMA DE
METIVIER, HENRI.  Miroirs  fauves  d'A!ma  de Chantal.  Action nationale 58:816-817, avril Ig6g.

CHATILLON, PIERRE
METIVIER,  HENRI. Les  cris  de  Pierre Chatillon.
Action  nationale  58: 818-820,  avril    1 g6g.

COSTISELLA, JOSEPH
LAMARCHE, GUSTAVE. "L'esprit revolutionnaire dans Ia  litterature  canadienne-franc;aise" de Joseph Costisella. Action  nationale 58: 8114-
827,  avril   1g6g.

DUBE, MARCEL
HAMBLET, EDWIN. Le   monde  clos;   Du!Je   et Anouilh. Canadian literature 45:52-55, summer  1970.
-.Marcel Dubi and  French Canadian drama. Jericho, N.Y., Exposition Press,  1970.  112 p. Bibliographie: p.   109- 1 1 2.
-. The  North  American  outlook  of   Marcel
Dube and   William lnge.  Queen's  quarterly
77=374-387, autumn  1970.

DUCHARME, REJEAN
CHOUINARD,  MARCEL. &ejean Ducharme:  un langage violente. Liberti  67: 109-1 go,  jan.­ fev.  1970.
DASSYLVA, MARTIAL. Quand Rejean Ducharme "Maghane" notre histoire. Quebec 18: I04- I07, mai   1970.
 MAILHOT, LAURENT. Le    theatre  de   Rejean Ducharme.   Etudes   fran!{aises    6:131-152, mai  1970.
SUTHERLAND,  RONALD. Children of  the  chang­ ing    wind.    journal    of    Canadian   studies/ Revue d'etudes canadiennes v. 5, no. 4:3-11, Nov.  1970.

ELUARD, PAUL
POULIN, GABRIELLE.   Les   miroirs   d'un  poete; image   et  refiets   de  Paul  Eluard. Montreal, Bellarmin,   1 g6g.   170   p.

FERRON, JACQUES
DERY, DANIEL. Le  bestiaire dans  Papa  Boss de Jacques  Ferron.  Action   nationale  59: gg8- IOo6,  juin    1970.
LAROCHE, MAXIMILIEN. L'imitation   originate dans   "Le  petit chaperon rouge" de  Jacques Ferron.  Action  nationale 59:68o-683, mars
1970.
MARCEL, JEAN.  jacques   Ferron    malgre    lui. Montreal,  Editions  du   Jour,  1970.   112 1  p. Bibliographie:  p.   21 7-2 1 g.
VANASSE, ANDRE.  La     theatre   de    Jacques
Ferron:   a   Ia    recherche   d'une   identite.
Livres  et  auteurs quebecois 1969.  Montreal, Jumonville, 1970,  p.  219-230.

GRANDBOIS, ALAIN
POULIN, GABRIELLE. La  poesie  d'AJain  Grand­
bois.   Relations  345: 22s,    1970.
Prix,  David   1970.   Vient de   paraitre  v.  6,  no
1 :g,   mars   1970.

GRANDPRE,  PIERRE  DE
RICHER,  JULIA. Histoire de  Ia  litterature  fran­ c;aise   du    Quebec-Pierre    de    Grand pre.  Action nationale  59: 805-806,  avril   1970.

GROULX, GILLES
PERRAULT,  LUC.  Groulx:  une   critique  de   la vie   quotidienne.  Quebec   18:113-115,  mai
1970.

GUEVREMONT, GERMAINE
CHARLAND,  ROLAND-M.   Dossiers   de   documen­ tation  sur   la   litterature   canadienne  fran­ liaise:    Germaine    Guevremont.   Montreal, Fides,  1 g6g.  56  p.
CIMON,  RENEE. Germaine Guevremont. Mont­
real,  Fides,   I g6g.  55  p.

I 17

Ll'ITERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



HAYNE, DAVID
TOUGAs,  GERARD. Une moisson  pour  le  specia­
liste.     Canadian   literature   43 :99,   winter
1970.

LABERGE, ALBERT
BEAULIEU, MICHEL. Les   inedits  d'Albert   La­
berge,     souvi    de    Correspondance;   lettres ecrites a Joseph-Alphonse Beaulieu. La barre
du   jour  114:55-56, mars-avril,   1970.

LAMARCHE, GUSTAVE
PAGEAU, RENE.  Le   Conte  des   sept   jours   de
Gustave Lamarche. Action nationale 59:
491-503, jan.  1970.

LAPOINTE,  PAUL-MARIE
LAFLECHE,  GUY.  Ecart,   violence  et   revolte chez  Paul-Marie Lapointe. Etudes frant;aises
6: 395-·P 7,  .nov.  1970.

MARTIN,  CLAIRE

VANBRUGGHE,  ANNICK. De  la  tentation  de  la lucidite   a !'amour   depoetise:   "Avec  ou
sans   amour"  de   Claire  Martin.  Livres    et auteurs  quebecois  1969.   Montreal,  Jumon­ ville,  1970,  p.  1131-1136.

MONTREUIL,  GAETANE DE
SAINT-PIERRE,  MARCEL. Les  inedits de  Gaetane de   Montreuil.  La    barre   du   jour    1111/113:
79-87,  nov.  1969-fev. 1970.

NELLIGAN, EMILE
BISSONNETTE, PIERRETTE, et  BOUCHARD,  JEAN­ PIERRE.  Analyse   de    "Clavier    d'Antan," poeme   d'Emile  Nelligan.  Revue   de   l'Uni­ versite  d'Ottawa 40:599-604, oct.-dec. I970.

OUELLETTE,FERNAND
BEAULIEU,  VICTOR-LEVY. Litterature quebecoise.
Des    actes   d'amour:    Fernand   Ouellette.
Liberte  70:8 I-84,   juillet-aoilt   1970.

PAGEAU, RENE
METIVIER, HENRI.   "L'ombre  de   J'hiver"  de Rene Pageau. Action nationale 59:6os-6o7, fev.   I97o.

PANNETON, PHILIPPE
DIONNE, RENE. La  terre dans  "Trente arpents" de Ringuet. College et  famille 115:133-157, I968.

118
 PANNETON, JEAN. Ringuet.  Montreal, Fides, I970. 190  p.

PILON, JEAN-GUY
BONENFANT,  JOSEPH.    Lumiere   et    violence dans la poesie  de Jean-Guy Pilon.  Etudes frant;aises  6:79-90, fev.   I970.
LEDuc,  PAULE. Mystere et poesie  dans l'oeuvre de   Jean-Guy  Pilon. Livres  et  auteurs   que­ becois    1969.  Montreal,  Jumonville,    1970,  p.  1144-1147·
MAJOR, ANDRE. Un   retour de  Jean-Guy  Pilon.
Quebec. I6:IIO-IIII,  mai  1969.

QUESNEL, LOUIS- JOSEPH
BURGER, BAUDOIN. Les  inedits de  Louis-Joseph
Quesnel.  Le   barre   du    jour   115:6o-63,   ete
1970.

RACINE, JEAN
GUTWIRTH, MARCEL MARC. Jean   Racine:  un itineraire poetique. Montreal, Presse  de l'Universite de  Montreal, 1970.  178  p.

RINGUET  voir  PANNETON, PHILIPPE

ROY, GABRIELLE
BLAis,  I ACQUEs. L'unite  organique de  "Bon­ heur d'occasion." Etudes frant;aises  6:115-50, fev.   I97o.
BRUN,  HENRI.   "Bonheur   d'occasion"  ou    le salut  par    le   guerre.  Recherches   sociogra­ phiques  1 o:113-35,    1969.
GROSSKURTH,  PHYLLIS.  Gabrielle Roy.   To­
ronto, Forum  House,  1969.  64  p.
THERIO,  ADRIEN. Le   portrait  du   pere    dans "Rue   Deschambault"  de    Gabrielle   Roy. Livres et  auteurs quebecois I 969. Montreal, Jumonville, 1970,   p.  1137-1143.

SAGARD-THEODAT,  GABRIEL WARWICK,   I ACK.   Sagard   l'oublie.   Etudes
frant;aises  5 :88-91,   1969.

SAVARD, FELIX-ANTOINE
DAIGNEAULT, YVON. "Menaud maitre-draveur" devant  la    critique,   1 937-1967.  Livres   et auteurs  quebecois  1969. Montreal,  Jumon­ ville,   1970,  p.  1148-1161.

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE




THERIAULT,  YVES
SMART, PATRICIA.  Une   analyse  psychocritique du  "Dompteur d'ours" d'Yves Theriault. Revue    de   l'Universite d'Ottawa 40:5-24, jan.-mars 1970.

TREMBLAY, GEMMA
PAGEAU,  RENE. Coup  d'oeuil  sur   !'oeuvre de
Gemma  Tremblay.   Action    nationale    6o:
86-96, sept. 1970.
 l'enfer des  femmes. Etudes   franfaises  6 :96-
104,   fev.   1970.

VADEBONCOEUR, PIERRE
BEAULIEU, VICTOR-LEVY.    Pour  saJuer    Pierre
Vadeboncoeur. Liberte  70: 3-Io,  juillet-aoO.t
1970.

VIGNEAULT, GILLES
GAGNE, MARC. Essai    sur    Ia   thematique   de
Gilles  Vignault [sic]. Culture  31:3-23, mars

TREMBLAY, MICHEL 	1970. MAILHOT, LAURENT.  "Les   belles-soeurs"  OU



ON THE VERGE


***  WILLIAM ORMSBY. The   Emergence    of the   Federal  Concept   in  Canada,  1839-1845. Toronto,  $4.75· We   are  inclined to  think   of the  federal concept in  Canada as an  emergent of   those    years    from    I864  to    I867    during which    Confederation  came  into    being   as   a political reality. In  fact, it  appeared as  a  de­ fensive  reaction  against  the   irrational   unity  imposed  on   the   two   provinces of   Upper  and  Lower Canada  as  a  result of  Lord  Durham's half-visionary and    half-moronic   report   of I839· Dr.   Ormsby  here  traces the  emergence of    the    concept    among   both     English   and  French  speaking   leaders,  and   suggests,  if  he does   not   state,   the  inevitability  which   it  as­ sumed because  all  the  other alternatives were so  much  less  desirable. It  is  a  book  that de­ serves  better  presentation. Unfortunately, while  the  production standards of  the  University of Toronto Press  have in  general gone  far  ahead (witness  the    superb  visual    look   of   Walter Young's  Anatomy  of   a   Party- noticed above) ,  the  Canadian  Studies in  History and Government series,  to  which this  book  belongs, form    a   backwater   where   the    currents    of change  have   not   reached,  and   it  is  hard  to envisage  a   more  dully    conservative  format than that to  which Dr. Ormsby's book  is  un­ justly  condemned.
***  JOHN  C. RICKER .!It     JOHN  T.  SAYWELL.
The   Story   of   Western Man,  Clarke  Irwin,
$I7.50.  2  vol  boxed   set.   The first   volume   of this  history was  noted in  CL  41.  The complete
text   is   now   out,  bringing  the   story   to   the
196o's. The text,  in  the  second as  in  the  first
 
volume, is  meagre, but   the  iJJustrations, once again, are  astonishingly well-selected. "But  to get   the   feel  and   colour  of  the   times,   rather than the  musculature of  events" -we  repeat our    past    comment -"it   is   a  book    to   be recommended ... "

***   LESLIE ROBERTS.  Montreal: From  Mis­ sion Colony  to World  City.  Macmillan, $8.95. Masquerading  as   local   history,  this   book   is really  the  product of  a  strongly  regional sense of  Canadian  history. As  a  Montrealer, Leslie  Roberts is convinced that  his city  is the  centre of  its  land   and   of  the  universe its  inhabitants observe,  and    therefore   what  he   gives   us   is not   the   account  of   events  in   one   Canadian city   (though  these  of  course play   their part) but   a  narrative in  which   the   whole   story   of the  land is  told  as if  it  were  observed through a   long-distance   telescope  rotating   from    the summit  of   Mount   Royal    (an   approach  basi­  cally    no    different   from     the    history   seen through   the   telescope  of   the    St.   Lawrence Valley  which   is  purveyed  by  Donald  Creigh­ ton).  It gives  old  events a  new  look,  and   as Mr.    Roberts  introduces   enough  unfamiliar facts  about  Montreal itself   to  spice   the   nar­ rative, the  result is a  highly idiosyncratic book which    I  would    place    as   the   author's  most readable book  to  date.

**  WALTER TRAILL. In  Rupert's Land. Edited by    Mae   Atwood.   McClelland   &    Stewart,
$7-95·  To  be  the  son  of a  distinguished father is   a   burden,  hence  the    scarcity  of   second­ generation  geniuses.  How   much   more   to   be

II9

ON  THE  VERGE



the     son    of    a    distinguished    blue-stocking mother!  Walter  Traill  was   descended  from the   formidable  Strickland  family   which  con­ tributed  so  much  to   the   early   literature  of Canada;   his    mother    was    Catherine   Parr Traill, his  aunts Susanna  Moodie  and   Agnes Strickland, his  uncle  Samuel Strickland, for­  midable and  copiously  published writers all  of them.  Small   wonder   that-though    Walter Traill  still  felt   the  family   urge   to  record  his experiences    (and   interesting  some   of   them  were   as  a   Hudson's  Bay  Company  officer  at the    time    of    the    Red    River    rising) -the literary  fervour had  diminished so far  that   he never  sought publication, and  only  in  his  last years-six    decades  after    the   events   he   re­ corded -gave his  papers to  a  young  relative to  edit  and   publish. His  recollections  are  thus late  in  appearing; by now one  has  learnt from  other  sources most   of   the   day-to-day  details of  life  in  the  declining fur  trader's west  of the late   186o's, and   there   is  really  little new  that  he  has  to  give  us:   little  except  the  freshness  of   familiar   experiences   seen   again  through another young  eye from the  past.

**  LAMBERT   DE      BOILIEU.     Recollections of Labrador Life. Edited  by  Thomas F.  Bredin. Ryerson, $5-95·  Pretentiously introduced,  this is  the   unassuming narrative  of  a  young  Eng­ lishman   who    for    five   years    in   the    185o's managed  a   trading  and   fishery   post   on  the shores   of  Labrador. There are  adventures­ some  dangerous-but the  most  appealing as­ pects    of   Recollections  are   provided  by   the details  of   Labrador   daily   life   more   than    a century ago,  told  with  a  kind  of lucid  candour of   which    the   mass   media  have   robbed  the  ordinary man   today.  For  Lambert de  Boilieu  was   essentially  an  ordinary  man,   and   in   his revelation  of   the   normal  existence  of  fisher­  men,   Indians and  Eskimos  in  Labrador of  the past   lies  the  main   justification  for  reprinting this  interesting  but   most  undramatic  book.
**   SIR   FRANCIS   BOND  HEAD.   A   Narrative.
With   notes   by  William  Lyon   Mackenzie and
edited  by  S.  F.  Wise.  McClelland &  Stewart,
Carleton  Library,  $3·35·   Sir   Francis   Bond Head, Lieutenant-Governor of  Upper Canada from    1835   to    1838,   was   a   richly   eccentric Victorian  man    of   letters,  and    perhaps   the strangest of  many  odd  figures  chosen  to  repre­ sent    the    Imperial  Majesty  in   Canada.  His strangeness-disastrous    administratively­ gave   colour  to  his   travel   narratives,  notably Rough   Notes    Taken    During     Some    Rapid Journeys  Across  the   Pampas and   Among  the Andes ( 1828)  and  Bubbles   from  the  Brunnens

120
 of  Nassau    (1866),  but   the   tasks   of   govern­ ment shrivelled Head's literary as  they  did  his political abilities, and   A  Narrative  is  interest­ ing  chiefly  for  its  revelation of  two  rival  para­ noias -that  of  Head convinced that  William Lyon  Mackenzie  was  his  evil  genius, and   that of   Mackenzie-in  his   hurried  notes   to   the Narrative-obviously    convinced of   the   re­ verse.  A  document  which  reveals how  curious
-beneath  its  deceptive carapace of  greyness
-Canadian  history can  so often   be.

**   MARTIN   ROBIN.    Radical   Politics   and Canadian  Labour,  I880-1930. Industrial  Re­ lations  Centre,  Queen's  University,  $7-95·   A useful  account of  the  relationship  between the  labour   movement   and   radical    politics   in Canada   between   the    early   years    of   trade unionism  and    the    onset    of    the   Depression. Professor  Robin  moves   with   assurance  in   a field  as yet  little written of in  Canada, and  his book  is a  useful-if  stylistically rather grace­ less-contribution   to   the   socio-political  his­ tory  of our  country.

* MICHAEL    FILEY.    Toronto: Glimpses of  the
City   that   Was. University of  Toronto   Press,
$7-95·    An    album   of    old    photographs   of Toronto, from   the  early  186o's, gathered  from the   collection  of   Michael  Filey.   Historically mildly interesting;  many of them, for  example, provide  good   visual    background  for   Callag­ han's early  novels.  But  aesthetically  they  suffer  from   the  civic   ugliness out   of  which  Toronto is only  now  emerging.

* PAUL  NANTON.  Arctic Breakthrough: Frank­
lin's    Expeditions   I8rg-IB47·  Clark   Irwin,
$6.50. It  is   hard  to   know   whether  to   class
this  piece   of  bookmaking as  a  reprint  or  an
original  work,    for   it   is   essentially  a   para­ phrase,   with     lengthy   quotations   from    the original, of  the   records  Franklin  published of his  first   two   expeditions. As  the   narrative of the  1 81 9-2 2   expedition was  republished in  its entirety  last   year, and  the   narrative  of   the second   will     follow     shortly,   Mr.     Nanton's labour  of   retelling  seems    superfluous,  since he   adds  no   important  thoughts of   his  own, and   does   not   even   trouble  to   note   how,   in Franklin's own  accounts of  his  early   journeys, one   sees   the   inflexibility  of   mind    that  was largely  responsible for  his  eventual  tragedy - a  real   tragedy of  pride. To  the   third  exped­ ition and   the  searches for  Franklin, with   their extraordinary  results in   terms   of  discovery, a meagre  twenty  pages   are   devoted.
