Sr.oo   per  copy




CANADIAN l TERATURE N°·5









\,Y olf in  the Snow

BY  WARRE:\ TALL:\IAX


The  Bridge or  the Stokehold?

BY  ETHEL WJLSO:\'


Aspects  of Leacock

BY  R.  E.  W.\T1'ERS .\.D


Less than  a Life

BY  RODERICK H.\lG-BRU\VN





A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW








SUMMER THOUGHTS

Instead of  an Editorial




I  HAVE  ALWAYS THOUGHT  that  an  editor  approaching the  summer  issue of his magazine  should  be allowed  some license, some freedom   to  leave topicalities aside  and  pass into  speculation and  the daydreams appropriate to an  August  afternoon. Even  the  cloak  of the prophet, cautiously  assumed,  may not  be out of place,  and  so I use this summer opportunity  of  putting into   print  some  speculations of  the present  and  future of writing  in Canada which  have  long floated  in my mind.  For  once  I am  picking  the  highlights  and  ignoring the  shadows. There will be autumn and  winter issues, after all.
Let  me begin  by saying that  it seems to me that  any literature, before
it can produce  major  writing, must have first attained a minimum degree of complexity and  self-consciousness.  Any idea  of a  Golden  Age  when men  composed  great   works  of literature with  simple  naturalness is at best  a  delightful myth.  As any  classicist knows, the  attainment of  the kind  of simplicity  and  directness  which we really value in literature-as distinct  from  bucolic idiocy-depends on the prior  acquisition of a high degree of sophistication and on the establishment of a tradition of experi­ ence  that  comes from  the  long living into  an environment. Colonists do not  produce fine  literature, though  explorers,  returning to write  in  the lands they left, often do.
As an  example of what   I  mean  by the  simplicity  and  directness  we value,  let  us take  the  writing  of Hemingway, whose qualities often  lead to his being opposed  in the minds of critics to obviously complex  writers like Joyce  and  Proust.  But  in fact  Hemingway's starkness  comes at  the

3

SUMMER THOUGHTS



end  of  generations of very self-conscious  thinking  about  writing  in  an American environment, and one can hazard the proposition that Ameri­ can  literature had  to go through   the  dark  mazes  of  Melville  and  the parenthetical exercises of  James  in  order   to  stand  in  the  clean,  well­ lighted  place  of the  Hemingways-a clean,  well-lighted  place  which  is nevertheless liable  to lend itself to the Mithraic  darknesses of the corrida.
It seems  to me  that  literature in Canada, after  a  time  lag  owing  to the  country's later  development, is now reaching a stage not unlike  that of literature in America  at  about  the  time  when  James  began  to make his  historic  analyses  of  the  nature   of fictional  process.  To  begin,  as  a pioneer   country where   people  were  concerned  with   the  problems   of making  a new life and  a new society, Canada tended  either  to produce work  that  did little  more  than  echo English,  American and  French pat­ terns,  or to produce direct  reportage and  fairly  direct  satire  like that  of Haliburton. The  pushing out   to  the   frontier  tended to  perpetuate the  pattern by its insistence on  the  value  of raw  rather  than  rendered expressiOn.
During the  past  two decades,  however,  there  has been what  I see as
a  mutation in  Canadian writing,  a  quite  astonishing advance in  com­ plexity  of  feeling  and  also  technique. We  can  see  this  particularly in poetry,  in  the  poetry  of Jay  Macpherson and  James  Reaney,  of P. K.
Page  and  A. J. M.  Smith  and  Douglas  Le  Pan; we can  see that  even
Irving Layton, who  shouts  like a  primitive, is really  a  sophisticate  ca­
pable  of handling his chosen forms with  great  deliberation, and  that be­
hind  the massive facades which E. J. Pratt raises like Cyclopean masonry
there  is a cunning  architect directing the strokes of the apparently rustic
workman. I would certainly  be willing  to match  the work of the poets I have  mentioned, and of others  as well, against  the kind of poetry  I have seen  coming  from  England  during  the  195o's.  Recently, it  is true,  one has  heard  complaints that  the past few years  have seen a diminution of the  Canadian poetic  urge  of the  194o's; perhaps they  have-I am  not at  all  sure  of  this-but when  we see it  all  in  the  perspective of time  I still  think  that  these  twenty  years  between  1940 and  1960  will appear to us as a crucial  stage in the development of a mature native  poetry.
To  a less extent,  the advance  in complexity applies  to other  forms of literature. In  fiction, for  instance, there is a quickened urge  towards experimentation, towards  forging  more  complex  instruments for deline-

4

SUMMER THOUGHTS



ating   human  predicaments. Ten  years  ago  Malcolm Lowry  seemed  a rare  and  magnificent bird  to roost in the western  Canadian woodlands. Now, with  writers  like Richler  and  Sheila  Watson  and  Brian  Moore  at work, I do not think  this would still be the case. We can see even a basic­ ally conventional novelist like Hugh  MacLennan, despite a naivete which still astounds one,  working  with  a growing  complexity of  craftsmanship and  a growing  assurance of mastery.
In fact,  literature in this country  is producing an ever-growing variety
of responses to Canadian existence, and it seems to me that  the maturity which  such  versatility suggests  is confirmed   by  the  emergence at  the present  time  of an  increasing interest  in criticism  as a form  of writing which  has a necessary  part  to play in our literary pattern. In  this direc­ tion, of course,  Northrop Frye has been our great  pioneer, presenting a nobly wide view of the critic's  function,  and one need hardly stress either  the  international  recognition he  has  gained  or  the  influence  he  has wielded  over   a  whole school of  younger Canadian  critics  and  even younger  Canadian poets.  In  another way,  the support which  Canadian Literature  itself  has  received  during  its first year  provides  a suggestive indication of the  position  which criticism,  as a form of writing, is begin­ ning  to take  in our  literary world.  I do not  rejoice,  of course,  over  the presence  of criticism as such;  as Oscar  Wilde warned  us long ago, it can be a very barren process unless it is sympathetically linked with  the cur­ rents of creativity. But I believe that  criticism  does have a creative func­  tion  when  it  becomes  part  of  that  process of  exploration, of  thinking about  literary forms,  which  results in experimentation, and  I hope criti­ cism  in  Canada  will  develop  along  such  creatively  exploratory lines.
It would  be unwise to make any emphatic prophesies  about  what  may emerge  from  these signs of movement  and  growth  in Canadian writing. No movement in the arts  can either  be planned  or foreseen in detail.  On the  other  hand, one  may  be  justifiably  tempted in a summer  season  to a little  frank  daydreaming, and  one may find some food for daydreams in the  fact  that  on  occasion  important changes  in  the  general  literary climate   have   begun  in  minor  traditions. It  was,  after  all,  in Norway that  Ibsen  initiated a change  that  affected  the  whole  look of European drama, and  in the  petty  and  powerless  kingdom  of Provence  that  the character of  post-mediaeval lyric  poetry  was established. Perhaps it  is not  too much  to hazard a wild hope  that  in some country like Canada

5

SUMMER THOUGHTS



we might  see-for example-a sudden  move  towards  a  break  in what critics  the  world  over  are  calling  the  crisis in the  novel, the stagnation in fictional  forms  that  has been hardening over the past  two decades.
Daydreams apart, let us draw satisfaction from  the fact  that  literature in Canada is a growing  art.  It  is constantly receiving  new writers  from abroad and  sending out its native writers  to explore  the world beyond­ as  James  and  Turgenev did  so importantly in the  formative stages  of other  literatures. It  is a  literature which  as it  grows  becomes  less and less content   with  itself, which  is full of  tentative variety,  and  which  is not  easy  to  define.  We  may  indeed  recognize  at  last  that-as a  mini­  mum-present-day writing  in Canada is something more  than  the  pro­ duct  of  the  remittance men  of European traditions,  something more than  the shadow  of literature in America.  What  that  something more is we find it harder to say, and  I am  not sure we should  pursue  it beyond rather  tentative general  thoughts.  After  all,  it  is  the  individual books and  the individual writers, each secure in his autonomy as an artist,  that  should  first  concern  us. Later, when  we have  considered, criticized  and  appreciated such  works and  such writers,  it will be time for the literary historian to come  and draw  his conclusions. To fire the melting  pot here and  now, to attempt anything more than  the provisional establishment of common  denominators of contemporary Canadian  writing,  to see in it features  that  are  easily and  patriotically identifiable, may  do some ob­ scure service to political  nationalism. It can  only do disservice to litera­ ture itself.
Yet,  in the  meantime, one can  at  least consider  the  possibilities. And
if here  I  have  emphasized  what  is encouraging in  them,  there  will  be plenty  of  time  for  winter thoughts on  what is wanting in  Canadian writers and writing.














6



WOLF	IN THE	SNOW

PART ONE
Four Windows  on to Landscapes


Warren Tallman

In   the   essay  commenced  below   Warren Tallman  bases  a  study   of  modem  Cana­ dian  Fiction  on  five  books  which  he  con­  siders  particularly significant as  examples of  literary  attitudes in  this  country. They  are  As For Me  and  My  House  by Sinclair Ross, Who Has  Seen  the  Wind by W.  0. Mitchell, Each  Man's Son  by Hugh Mac­ Lennan, The   Mountain  and   the   Valley by  Ernest  Buckler,   and   The  Apprentice­ ship  of  Duddy Kravitz by Mordecai Rich­ ler. In this first part  of the  essay Mr. Tall­ man  presents   a  consideration of  the  first four  novels  in  their   setting   of  Canadian life.


TENTER the fictional house these novels form is to take up  place  in  rooms  where  windows  open  out  upon  scenes in  Saskatche­ wan,  Quebec and  Nova  Scotia:  two  prairie  towns,  one  farm,  a small seacoast  city and St. Urbain Street  in Montreal. In order to prevent  view
from   jostling  view  it  is convenient   to single out  the  characters Philip Bentley  (As  For Me  And  My  House), Brian O'Connal (Who Has Seen The Wind), David   Canaan (The  Mountain And  The Valley), Alan MacNeil (Each Man's Son)   and  Duddy  Kravitz   (The  Apprenticeship of Duddy  Kravitz), letting their  lives suggest the details  which  make  up the study. Since  these five form into a handful,  it is best to enter  the fic­ tional  house at  once and  move across rooms to where  the windows open out.
From  whichever window one chooses to look, at whichever person, the initial  impression gained  is that  of his isolation. Superficially, this isola­ tion traces  to the ways in which each is alienated from the natural child-

7

WOLF IN   THE SNOW



hood  country   of  ordinary family  life.  In  As  For Me  And  My  House, Philip  Bentley has this comfort  stolen from him even before it is provided when  his  unmarried father, a  divinity  student, turned atheist,   turned artist, dies before  Philip  is born. That the son is cast by this deprivation into  the  limbo  of  an  uncreated childhood becomes  evident  when  he emerges  into  adult   life  also  a  divinity  student, turned atheist,   turned artist, struggling without  success to discover  the father he did not know while married to a woman who is all too obviously more a mother to him than  she is a wife. In The  Mountain  And the Valley, David  Canaan is gifted  with yet cursed by reactions far too intense ever to mesh except occasionally   with  the  more  ordinary  responses of  his  brother, sister, parents and  grandmother. When  he fails in a school play, his family  has no resources with which to meet  the violence of humiliation which fairly explodes  within  him.  His childhood  and  youth  are  a long succession of such  intensities  leading  to  such  explosions.  Each  time  the  pieces settle back  together, he finds himself inched  unwillingly  away from others onto a precarious plane  of solitary  being from  which  he can communicate his extravagant reactions  only by other  extravagances which  further empha­ size his growing isolation.
If David's is the most painful  face turned toward us, Brian O'Connal's
is the  most  deceptive.  Even  as Who  Has Seen The  Wind  opens,  he is shown  growing  away from  his family  in order  to follow impulses  which bring   his  struggling  consciousness into contact  with what are  des­ cribed  in the  preface  as "the  realities  of birth,  hunger, satiety, eternity, death." But if Brian appears to discern  a deeper  than  familial ordering of experience in and around the Saskatchewan town where  he grows up, the  persons  and  personifications  which  illustrate  his  discernment tell, I think,  quite  another story. They  tell of a sensitive  boy's attempts to re­ concile  himself  to the  human viciousness and  natural desolation  which characterize the  town  and  the  prairie. Of  this  conflict,  more  in place.  Unlike  Philip,  David and Brian, Alan MacNeil in Each Man's Son is less an  individualized child  and  more simply  the  naive  witness  to a stylized pattern of adult  conflict. Thus  he is the puppet son to each  of three  dis­ parate fathers: Doctor  Ainslee,  the  type  of inhibited intellect; Archie  MacNeil, the  type  of   unthinking  animal force; and   the  Gallic  Louis Camire, the  type  of  passionate  spontaneity. Because  the  larger  human pattern of which these men are  parts  has been broken,  each partial man

8

WOLF IN THE SNOW



struggles  toward  a different  solution  to his incompletion, one  which  ex­ cludes  the others.  When  their  longings for wholeness draw  them  to Alan and  his mother, the pattern will no longer knit. Alan's role as each man's  son is to witness the gradual forcing  together  of these disastrously alien­  ated men.
The  kinds  of  alienation which  I have  sketched  point  to  a  common
problem. When  the hazards of life reach  out to disrupt  families  and iso­ late  children it  is almost  certain that  such  children will  respond  with attempts to create a self strong  enough  to endure  the  added stress and more  extreme fluctuations  of  experience. Yet  the  very  disturbances which  create a need  for such strength frequently conspire to take  away the opportunity. Prematurely conscious of weakness in the face of experi­  ence, the  timid  self stands  back from contention. And much  of the isola­ tion  is in  the  standing back. Yet  to lose out  in  this way  is to gain  in another. For  so persistent and  powerful  are the mysterious  forces which drive  self on its  journeys  toward  some measure of fulfillment  that  when the  journey  is interrupted self will  either  struggle  to  make  the  island upon  which  it  finds itself  habitable, or-if  particularly hard-pressed­ may  strike  out  for  new islands  of its own making.  To  know  experience or  novels even  cursorily  is to  realize  that such  attempts are  among  the decisive gestures  of human experience. The  more  vital  the  attempt, the more  interesting the discoveries, the more illuminating the  journeys. But to say all  this and  then  turn  to Philip,  David,  Brian  and  Alan  is to en­ counter difficulties.
First  Brian.  Throughout Who  Has Seen The  Wind  we are  shown his
growing  consciousness  of the  grim  passive cruelty  of the  prairie and  of the  only  somewhat less grim  active cruelties of the  community. The prairie doesn't  care  and  the townspeople  care too much,  but in all of the wrong  ways.  Mitchell would  have  us understand that  Brian  attains  in­ sight  into  deep  permanent forces  of  man  and  nature and  so  becomes reconciled   to  the  problems  of his existence.  But  if the  winds  and  gods of the  prairie and  the  town are  shown ministering to the evolution  of a troubled   boy's  consciousness,  there   are  many  reasons  to  question   the nature of their  influence.  For  what  Brian  actually  discovers and  enters  into  is somewhat uneasy  communication with  a  hierarchy of odd  and withdrawn persons,  most  of  them  caught  up  as  he  is in  attempting to resolve the dilemma of their alienation from the community. At the head


9

WOLF IN   THE SNOW



of this hierarchy are several disaffected  persons whose professional stand­ ing  gives  them  precarious  half-footing in  the  community:  Hislop,  the enlightened minister  who  is forced to  leave; Doctor  Svarich, Miss Thompson, the  school teacher  with  whom  he  has  had  an  unsuccessful love  affair   elsewhere,  and  Digby,  the  school  principal.  Because  these humane persons  are  only half  accepted by a  community which  they in turn  only half accept,  they lead incomplete, almost  inert  lives.
Brian's  more active  education begins where  their  influence  leaves off: with  his  uncle  Sean,  whose intelligent efforts  to cope  with  the  drouth are  met  by a  human  inertia  so perverse  that  he is reduced   to random cursing; with  Milt  Palmer,  the  shoe and  harness  maker,  who  eases his discontent with  the  jug he keeps under  the counter in his shop and  the copy  of  Berkeley's  philosophy  he  reads  and  discusses with  Digby,  pre­ sumably  to get  at  the nature of existence,  actually to escape  the  point­ lessness of the existence he leads;  with Ben, the  town ne'er-do-well, who makes  his still and  his gifts as a  raconteur the  basis for  contact with  a community that  otherwise  despises him;  with  the son, young Ben, who responds  to  his  father's disgrace  by a  withdrawal  so marked   that  his human impulses  only glimmer  at  depths of his  remote  eyes;  and  with old Sammy, the town idiot, who lives almost  totally  withdrawn in a self­ built  insane  asylum at  the outskirts  of town,  his intelligence-that light which  keeps the  human psyche habitable-lost in the nightmare clutter which existence becomes when the light flickers out.
It is all but impossible to accept  Mitchell's inference that  contact with
these  persons serves to reconcile Brian's  consciousness to the "realities of birth, hunger, satiety,  eternity,  death." What  he  learns,  if anything, is that  the  kinds of suffering which  afflict those who are  completely alien­ ated  from   the  community are  far  more  damaging than   the  kinds  of suffering  which  afflict those  who are  only  partly alienated. It  isn't  sur­ prising  that  the two most vivid portraits in the novel are those of young Ben and  old Sammy,  the two most severely withdrawn of  all the persons represented. Young  Ben appears to Brian  in  unexpected  places  and  at unpredictable moments with all of the suddenness  of a hallucination pro­ jected  from  Brian's  unconscious. To  be Brian  in the kind of community Mitchell  represents is to  be not  far  from  young Ben.  And  what  is old Sammy in his age and  insanity  but  young Ben  later  on and  farther out on the  road  leading  away from  contact with other  human beings. What

10

WOLF IN THE  SNOW



but  negative  lessons can  Brian  learn  from  such  dissociated  beings-so grim a school of lives!
Nor  is it  possible  to  accept  the  protective,  but  not  very  protective,
screen of humour with which Mitchell has softened and attempted to humanize the  world  Brian  experiences.  Here  contrast is helpful.  The mordant western   humour of  Mark  Twain,   Ambrose  Bierce  and  Bret Harte derives the tensions which make it effective from  these writers' awareness of the overt savagery  of the settlement years. In Brian's world the  savagery   is still  there-the gratuitous cruelty of  the  community drives  the  Chinese  restaurant owner  to despair  and  suicide-but it has become   socially  organized,  hence  acceptable.  Mrs.  Abercrombie, the town  assassin,  is  also  the  town  social  leader.  However, the  intended humour of the scenes in which her control over the school board is finally broken  is without animation because  it is without true  animosity.  The firing  of the  enlightened minister,  the exclusion of the  Chinese  children from  the community, the suicide of their  father, the sadistic  persecution of Young  Ben, as well as the constant  badgering of the school teachers, provide  cause  enough  for  any  amount  of enmity.  But far  from  being a gesture  of delight  at  the  downfall  of a despicable  person,  the humour  is simply a  droll and  softening pretense that she  never was  actually dangerous.
The  need  for  this  pretense  is not far  to seek or at least  to suspect. If the  town is presided  over  by Mrs. Abercrombie, an incarnation of com­ munity   enmity   toward personality-let  them  be  citizens  instead-the prairie is presided  over by old Sammy,  an incarnation of  the disintegra­ tion which  is likely to overtake all but  the most resourceful personalities when  the  individual self wanders  beyond sphere of human community. These  two represent the  actual, the most powerful  of the gods who pre­ side  over  Brian's attempt to establish  contact  with  human and  natural forces  which  will sustain  his precocious selfhood.  And  despite  her overt hatred of  the  diversity  and  freedom  that  are  essential  for  self-nurture, Mrs. Abercrombie is less fearsome  than  is old Sammy  who presides with his  mad,  mumbled  incantations over  psychic chaos  and  old  night.  Or  let  us say  that the  open emptiness of  the  prairie is humanly more frightening than  the huddled pettiness of the town. Because this is so, the town must  be sugar coated  with humour  so that  the lacklustre perversity  of the place will seem merely  droll, hence bearable. But readers who find


II

WOLF IN   THE SNOW



it impossible  to swallow Mrs.  Abercrombie under  any circumstances at all  will  feel  that the  failure of  the  humour reflects a failure of  the novel  to confront the  actuality which  it  suggests. As a place  for  Brian to discover a community which will foster self-growth, the town in its resourcelessness more   nearly resembles the   prairie. The  humour  is scarcely  a compensation for such desolation.




To TURN TO  the more severe isolation  from which  David Canaan suffers in The Mountain and The Valley is to encounter a more intense  but  scarcely  a  more  successful attempt to discover  new ground
upon  which  the  withdrawn self might  stand  in its efforts  to move  into presence.  During his childhood  and  youth  David's vivid impulses fasci­ nate his  family and  friends. Mutual  responsiveness brings on that gradual blur  of familiarity which  can  cause  us to notice  least those per­  sons we know  best;  but  when  responsiveness  is somehow short-circuited the one who stands  apart becomes impressive  in his otherness.  Through­ out childhood and  early youth David  moves among others  with  the aura  about  him of the chosen person, the mysterious  Nazarite who is motioned toward an unknowable destiny by unseen gods. But what  is an advantage during his early  years becomes a disadvantage later  when  the appealing mystery  of his loneliness  becomes  the  oppressive  ordeal of his unbreak­ able  solitude.  More devastating still, at  no point  in his life is he capable of actions  which  might  rescue him from  the limbo in which  he dwells.
He  carries  on a correspondence and  later  a friendship with  the  Hali­
fax  boy, Toby,  but  makes  no attempt to visit Toby  and  explore  possi­ bilities  for  new  experience  in the  city. He  is conscious of talents which might  open  experience out  for  him  so that   his self could  follow into presence.  But  he  turns  his back  upon  these  talents and  remains  on  the farm  even  though  aware  that  it is his prison  rather  than his promised  land.  He  quarrels with  his parents but  seems  unable  to move  past  the evident  incest  barriers  which  bind  him  to them  even  as they  shut  him away  from  them.  That the male  mountain and  the female  valley of the title  loom  up  so prominently in the  novel is surely  a sign, here  as with Wordsworth, that  natural objects  have  been endowed with all the seem-

I2

WOLF IN THE  SNOW



ing  numenousness of their  inaccessible  human  equivalents.  Conversely, other  persons  in  the  novel are  invested  with  a deceptive glamour. The breath  of life fans  the  nucleus  of David's  impulses into  a glow, but  be­ cause  these  impulses are   checked they  never  achieve   the  release of communication, much  less communion. Unable  to  know  his  family  in their  ordinariness, he must create  his own knowledge in the image  of his arrested, his childish  and childlike  psychic life. Consequently his parents are  perceived  as mythical, almost  biblical beings and  this appearance is sustained  as long  as David's response is intense  enough,  the  glow white hot. Such intensities  are as much the hallmark of the novel as a markedly devitalized humour  is  the  hallmark  of  Mitchell's. But  like  Mitchell's humour, the intensity  is badly flawed.
For  David  is trying  to sustain  an  illusion. Whenever  the  hot  impulse
cools the  glow  goes out  of  the  novel  and  we see David's family and friends  for  what  they  are,  very unbiblical,  unmythical, ordinary human beings. At  no time  does his friend  Toby  demonstrate those distinguished qualities with  which  David  invests him.  His sister  Anna  is represented as soul of David's soul,  but  it is only possible for  David  to sustain  this sublimated conception by overlooking the almost overtly incestuous  basis for their  relationship. Only the looming  mountain can provide  adequate expression  for the childlike  awe with which he regards  his father. In  his relations  with  others  David  is much  like one  inside  a  house  which  he cannot  leave  looking  out  at  persons he has never known  because he has never  actually moved  among  them.  As one by one these persons depart, he  begins  to  notice  the  emptiness,  room  leading  silently  to  room.  The novel is an account  of David's  attempt to ward  off such knowledge.  But fathers and  mothers die,  and  brothers,  friends  and  sisters-soul of  his soul-depart. Until  only the  grandmother is left,  calling  out  "Where is that  child?", even  as the  child,  unable  to endure  both  an outer  and  an inner  emptiness,  goes at last up the snow covered mountain into the final dimension  of his solitude.  The  emptiness,  the silence and  the snow into which he sinks down at the end of the novel figure forth  the constant nothingness against  which  his bright  intensities  had  beat,  thinking it the high shores of this actual world. His life would be pathetic if it were not heroic.
The  heroism  is in his effort, in the extreme  tenacity with which David
clings to the sources of his suffering, and  it is in the novel, in the record

WOLF IN THE SNOW



of  that  suffering.  The  very intensity  which  creates  those  illusions  with which  David  tries  to live also creates  a distinctive  lyric  exaltation. Be­ cause  perception is so consistently at fever pitch,  the descriptive surfaces of the  novel are  exceptionally fine-grained, the communion with nature, with  appearances, with  actions,  so close  that  many  passages  read  like lyric  poems.  But  paradoxes  are  endless, and  if the  unreleased  intensity  which  is a  tragedy  for David  becomes an  advantage for  the  novelist  it in turn  becomes another kind of disadvantage for the reader. For Buckler has  no  compositional  key  except maximum intensity.  Sentence  after  sentence  is forced  to a  descriptive  pitch  which  makes  the  novel excep­ tionally wearing to read.




0NE TURNS with something like relief from  the kind of  illusions  with  which  Brian O'Connal  and   David   Canaan seek  to escape  isolation  to  the  blunt  but  subtle  absence  of such  illusions in  As
For Me  And  My  House. The  bleak assumption of this beautiful novel is that   Philip   Bentley  has  no  ground   whatsoever  upon  which  he  might stand, no  communion at  all  through   which  he  might   discover  saving dimensions  of  self.  The  overwhelming desolation   which  rims  Horizon around-the hostile  wind,  the  suffocating  dust  and  sand  and  the  even more  suffocating  and  claustrophobic heat-recurs on the  pages of Mrs. Bentley's  diary  as outward  manifestation of the  inner  desolation  felt  by her  husband. All  that  Philip  can  claim  or  cling  to is his maddeningly inarticulate impulse  to create. The  novel is less like a story than  it is like a  cumulative picture  in  which  Ross, by a  remarkable, almost  tour  de force  repetition  of  detail, grains a  central scene   upon  the  reader's consciousness so that  all  other  details  and  even  the  action  of the  novel achieve  meaningful focus in relation  to the  one scene  at  the  center, re­ peated  some  thirty  times. It is of course  that  in which  Philip  is shown retreating to  his  study  where  he  will sit  interminable evening  super­  imposed  upon  interminable evening,  drawing or fiddling  at drawing, or staring with  baffiled intensity at drawings  he has in some other  time and place  tried  to draw.  Yet, "Even though  the  drawings are only torn  up or  put  away  to fill more boxes when we move, even though no one ever

WOLF IN THE  SNOW



gets  a  glimpse  of  them  .  . .  still  they're  for  him  the  only  part  of life that's real or genuine." The  novel is a projection through the medium  of Mrs.  Bentley's  remarkably responsive consciousness of the  despair  in which  her  husband is caught, "some  twisted, stumbling power  locked up within  him  . . . so blind  and  helpless it  can't  find  outlet,  so clenched with  urgency  it can't release  itself."  And  the  town  itself, with  the  dust "reeling in  the  streets", the  heat  "dry  and  deadly  like a drill" and  the wind  "like  something solid  pressed  against  the  face",  is simply  a place name  for the limbo in which Bentley lives, "a wilderness outside  of night and  sky and  prairie with  this one little  spot of Horizon  hung  up lost in its immensity" beneath which "he's as lost and alone."
Philip's need  to escape  from  this isolation  drives him  to art.  But  just as he can  find no terms  under  which  he may act  as a self so he can find no  terms  under  which  he may  act  as an  artist.  His most  characteristic drawing is a  receding  perspective in which a looming  false-front  build­ ing gives way to a diminished next  building,  and  a next, and  a next, an endless progression  which  provides a portrait of the monotony  of  his own being. The  novel is a study of a frustrated artist-actually, a non-artist­ one unable  to discover a subject  which will release him from  his oppres­ sive  incapacity to create. The excellence of the study traces to the  remarkable  resourcefulness with which Ross brings into place  the day-to­  day nuances  of Mrs. Bentley's struggling consciouness as he builds up her account of an  artist  who  cannot  create  because  he cannot  possess him­ self and  who  cannot   possess himself  because  there  is no self to possess. Certainly there  are  more deep-reaching portraits of the artist, for in this novel all  is muffied  within Philip's  inarticulation, but none  that  I know represents with  so  steady  a  pressure  of felt  truth the  pervasive  under­ mining   of  all  vital  energies  which  occurs  when  the  would-be artist's  creativity is  thwarted. No momentary exuberance survives. The  flowers won't  grow.  The  adopted boy, for  whom  Philip   tries  to  provide  that  childhood he did not have himself, cannot  be kept. Neither  can his horse. Neither  can his dog. Nothing can drive away the "faint old smell of other  lives" from  the  house. No one and  nothing  can intercede to shut  out the wind,  prevent  the  dust,  lessen the  heat  in which  the  Bentley's  are  "im­ bedded   ... like insects in a fluid that  has congealed." Not once in the novel does Philip  break  through  the  torment  of his constraint to utter  a free  sentence.  Even  when  his wife confronts  him  with  knowledge of his

WOLF IN   THE SNOW



covert  love affair  with Judith West  his response, beyond  the  endurance of  even  an  Arthur  Dimmesdale, is silence.  But  if  the  beauty  is in  the detailing, it does not trace  to the dreariness which is portrayed. It traces to the constant  presence in Mrs. Bentley's consciousness of an exuberance which  flares  up  like matches in  the  wind  and  struggles to survive,  a counter-impulse within  her  by which  life attempts to defeat  the  defeat. This  bravery  loses out to the dreariness-the flowers won't grow-but in the process of struggling it animates the novel.
However, there  is no mistaking the  meaning which  events  bring  into place during the last distraught days which the diary records when Judith West  dies  and  even  the  wind  rebels,  blowing  the  false-front town  flat. When   creative power  is  thwarted, destructive power  emerges.  "It's hard," Mrs.  Bentley tells us, "to  stand  back  watching a whole life go to waste." But  the  diary  is an  inch  by inch  representation along  the  walls of her  resisting consciousness of the  relentless  crumbling under destruc­ tive  pressure  of her  husband's life and  hence  her  own as the  undertow of  bitter   silence  about   which  the  portrait is  built  drags  these  prairie swimmers   under   wind,  under  dust,  under   heat,  to  that  ocean  floor  of inner  death upon  which  such  silence rests,  strongest  swimmers most deeply  drowned.
There is a  superb  scene in  which  the  Bentleys  walk  during an  April
snow storm  to the outskirts of town:

The snow  spun   round   us  thick  and  slow  like  feathers till  it  seemed  we  were walking on  and  through a  cloud.  The little  town  loomed   up  and  fell  away.  On the  outskirts we  took  the  railroad track,  where   the  telegraph poles  and  double line  of  fence  looked  like  a  drawing from   which   all  the  horizontal strokes   had been  erased.  The spongy flakes  kept  melting  and  trickling down  our  cheeks,  and we  took  off  our  gloves sometimes   to  feel  their  coolness  on  our  hands. We  were silent  most of the  way. There was a hush  in the  snow  like a finger  raised.
We  came  at  last  to a sudden   deep  ravine. There was a hoarse  little  torrent at the  bottom, with  a  shaggy,  tumbling swiftness  that   we  listened   to  a  while,  then went  down  the  slippery  bank  to  watch. We  brushed off a stone  and  sat  with  our backs  against the  trestle  of  the  railway  bridge.  The flakes  came  whirling out  of the  whiteness,  spun  against  the  stream a  moment, vanished at  its touch. On  our shoulders and  knees  and  hats  again  they  piled  up  little  drifts  of silence.
Then the  bridge  over  us  picked  up  the  corning  of  a  train. It was  there  even while  the  silence  was still intact. At  last  we heard a distant whistle-blade, then  a single  point  of  sound,  like one  drop  of water in  a  whole  sky. It dilated, spread. The sky and  silence  began imperceptibly to fill with it. We steeled  ourselves  a little,

16

WOLF IN THE  SNOW



feelinthe  pounding onrush in  the  trestle  of the  bridge.  It quickened, gathered, shook  the  earth, then  swept  in  an  iron  roar  above  us, thundering and  dark.
We  emerged  from  it  slowly,  while  the  trestle  a  moment or  two  sustained the
clang  and  din.  I glanced at  Philip,  then  quickly  back  to  the  water. A train  still makes  him   wince  sometimes. At  night,  when  the  whistle's loneliest,  he'll  toss a moment, then  lie still and  tense.  In  the  daytime  I've  seen  his eyes take  on a quick half  eager  look, just for a second  or two, and  then sink flat  and  cold  again.

The   hushed, almost  sealed,  inner  silence  which  is  the  price  Philip Bentley  pays for  his failure to summon  self into  presence  is not  broken but  poured momentarily full  of  the  "iron  roar  . . .  thundering and dark" which  in times past had signalled  to him an escape from  the deso­ lation  of  his childhood. Even  on  this forsaken  April  day  it  echoes into lost  realms  of self to  those  times  when  his eyes took  on a  "quick  half­  eager  look" until  the weight  of silence reasserts itself and they tum  "fiat and  cold" like the day. When  an artist  in fact discovers that  close corre­ spondence to  life  which  he  is always  seeking,  life  takes  over  and  the details  of  representation become  inexhaustibly  suggestive.  D. H.  Lawr­  ence's  unhappy lovers have  wandered  through  Sherwood Forest  to just such sudden  "deep ravines" and  have half glimpsed  the "shaggy  tumbl­  ing  swiftness"  which  they,  like the  Bentleys, have  lost from  their  lives. And  James   Joyce's  depressed  Dubliners  have  had   the  same  universal angel  of silence  shake  snow  into  drifts  upon  "shoulders and  knees and hats" as the pounding onrush of the train,  thunder in the blood, dwindles and  disappears, leaving  the scene, "distorted, intensified, alive with thin, cold  bitter  life".  It is not surprising  that  the departing train  draws  Mrs. Bentley's  thoughts-it  is one pathos of the novel that  we never learn  her first name-back in the longest retrospective passage of the diary  to her husband's childhood in  search  of the  bitterness,  constantly emphasized, which  gradually seals him in, seals her out. Nor is it surprising that  later when she becomes aware  of the force of mute  passion with  which Judith West  breaks  through Philip's constraint she is at  once  reminded of the April  day she and  her husband "sat in the snowstorm watching the water  rush  through  the  stones"-the  silence, the  snow, the  water   and  the stones-the  story  of  their  lives in  a  profound   moment, a  magnificent scene.




I7

WOLF IN   THE SNOW



IF KNOWLEDGE oF Philip  Bentley's  uncreated childhood comes mostly through  the indirection of his adult  life, our knowledge  of Alan  MacNeil's isolation and insecurity  comes through the indirection of the adult  conflicts he witnesses. And most of the adults in Each Man's Son can  be  known  only  through   the  additional indirection of the  assigned part  each  plays in the general  scheme of conflict which  MacLennan has
devised.  They  are  like those  persons  in  actual life whose  roles  become masks  concealing self from  access.  Such  arrangements are  as  unsatis­ factory  in novels as they are in actuality. Self is the centre  of  being, the source  of our  most  vital impulses, and  when  those fictional persons who enact  the artist's vision of life are  not directly  related  to the artist's self, they will inevitably speak and act mechanically, without true animation. This  is so decidedly  the  case in  Each Man's  Son-as  in  MacLennan's fiction  as  a  whole-that any  attempt to  understand  Alan  MacNeil's plight   must  be  an  attempt to move  past  the  masks  MacLennan has created in order  to reach  what  is vital,  the  source  rather than  the sur­ faces of his vision.
The  mask in Each Man's Son-as, again,  in all of MacLennan's novels
-is made  up  of  the  pseudo-sophistication, the  surface  civilization  in terms of which  the portrait of Doctor  Ainslee is built.  MacLennan never wearies  of extolling  his surgical  prowess and  yet his human savoir faire and  yet his intellectual probity. He is the fastest  man  in North  America with  an  appendectomy and  other  doctors  stand  by, not  to help,  but  to hold  the  watch   on  his  performance, noting  afterward with  knowing glances  that  Ainslee  has done  it again.  If I seem  to be suggesting  that Doctor  Ainslee is Walter  Mitty  played straight, this is less an accusation than  it  is an  identification. For it is not,  as MacLennan would  have  us believe, residual  effects of Calvinistic sin which constantly unsettle  the doctor's composure. It is the all but impossible  facade he seeks to main­ tain, so false that  MacLennan is incapable of animating it because it has so little  to do with  the profound  naivete  and  relative crudity of response in which  MacLennan's true force as an artist  is rooted.
If all the world were true there would be no place in fiction for falsity. But, notoriously,  the world is far from true, and Doctor  Ainslee's cultural veneer  is all  too accurate in its patent falsity-true of Ainslee, true  of a good half of MacLennan's protaganists, true-above all-Df most North

18

WOLF IN THE SNOW



Amt>ricans, who  also  adopt   European disguises having  little  or nothing to do with  the self beneath, the source of vital energy.  Constant anxiety is the  price  Ainslee  pays  in order  to maintain his facade. But if  Mac­ Lennan would  have  us  believe  that the  reason for  the  anxiety  is the Calvinism, a  more  apt  explanation for  both  the  anxiety  and  the  mask comes to us from  the other,  the vital side of the novel.
The  night  that  Ainslee operates upon Alan he flees to the harbourside
from  the strain  of both  a professional and  a personal involvement-cut­ ting  the  child  he hopes  to adopt-and experiences a partial breakdown in  which  "his  mind  was  pounding with  its own  rhythms and  his body was out  of control." To  escape  the panic  that grips him,  he runs up the wharf.

Before  he  realized  that his feet  had  caught  in something soft he  plunged forward, an  explosion  of light  burst  in his head  and  his right  temple  hit  the  boards.  For  a moment he lay  half  stunned, trying  to understand what  had  happened. He  rolled to  get  up,  and  as  he  did  so, the  hair  on  the  nape  of his  neck  prickled. He  had stumbled over  something alive,  and  now  this  living  thing  was  rising  beside  him. He  could  smell,  feel  and   hear  it,  and  as  he  jerked  his  head  around he saw  the outline of  a  broken-peaked cap  appear against  the  residual light  from  the  sea. It rose on  a pair  of huge  shoulders and  stood over Ainslee like a tower.

The  tower  is Red  Willie  Macisaac, and  Ainslee in his fear,  repugnance and  anger  shouts out,  "You  drunken  swine, Maclsaac-don't you know who I am?" This  outcry  under  these circumstances does much  to illumi­ nate the novel.
For  the  drunken swine,  Red  Willie, is one of the group  of incredibly naive  and  endlessly  quarrelsome displaced  Highlanders whose portraits in  their  really  superb clarity  and  exuberance make  up  much  the  most vital part  of the novel. These Highlanders, doomed  to wear  their  vitality away  in  the  dreary Cape  Breton  Island  mines, rebel  like the  profound children they  are  by recourse  to the only political  action  of which  they are  capable, their  endless  evening  brawls.  The  sum  of their  whimsical and  powerful  impulses  is crystalized into the portrait of their  downfallen hero,  Archie  MacNeil, the  finest single portrait in MacLennan's  novels.
Now  the  main   use  to  which Doctor Ainslee's mask-his  civilized facade-is put  is to hold  these impulses in check. A word  from him and the  miners  back  away,  chagrined. When  he cries  out,  Red  Willie  be­ comes  contrite. But  the  identification is surely  much  closer.  When  the

WOLF IN   THE SNOW



rhythms of Ainslee's mind and  body become separated and  he trips over and  becomes  mingled  with  Red  Willie  there  is reason  to  believe  that "this  living  thing  . . .  beside him"  is simply  the  self behind  the  mask, the vital,  violent  being held in check by the civilized surface.  That Ains­ lee can  and  does check Red  Willie is an  obvious victory for Ainslee and  it is a tragedy  for Alan's actual  father, Archie.  For Ainslee stumbles over Red   Willie  immediately after  Archie   has  been  ruinously  defeated in Trenton. And  the  voice  that  emerges  when  he  lies  tangled   with  Red Willie  mutters, "There was dirty  tricks in the States  last Friday  and  by chesus I am going  to kick them  up your ass." The  blame  is, if dubiously  aimed,   properly assigned. The  conflict  at  the  heart  of the  novel is be­ tween  the civilized facade  maintained  by Ainslee and  the naive violence of the  place  represented by Archie MacNeil.
Alan  is caught between  the violent needs which  drive  his father away
on the forlorn  prize fighter's Odyssey in which  his one-time  physical magnificence becomes the  dupe of  unscrupulous promoters and  the counter   needs  which  drive  Ainslee  to  fill in  the  chinks  of  his cultural facade by inching  his way through  the alien  Greek of the classical Odys­ sey. Both  men  want  to save Alan  from the  mines, those  holes  in  the ground  which  give nothing  and  take  everything away,  but each  tries  to do so in ways which  rule  out  the  other.  At the  conclusion of the  novel, when  Archie  prevails  and  smashes down  his wife and  her  lover and  he and  Ainslee  confront  each  other,  it  is the  civilized  surface  confronting the  violent  self among  the ruins created by their  tragic  alienation.


(The second   part of  this  essay, in  which the  four   novels  are   related  to  the  urban fiction  of  Mordecai Richler, will  be  pub­ lished  in   the  next  issue   of   Canadian Literature.)













20



A	SPECIAL TANG:

Stephen Leacock's
Canadian Humour


R. E. Watters


A WELL-KNOWN ODDITY  of Canadian literature is
the  fact  that, out  of all  our  authors,  the  two who  have  achieved the
greatest  reputations in the English-speaking world  have  been humorists. We ourselves have  tirelessly repeated that  the best of our literature is our poetry,  but  that  world  has  paid  our  poets little  attention on either  the popular  or  critical levels.  Abroad,   even  our  fiction  has  made  greater impact  than  our  poetry.  Our  humorists  are fewer  than  either  our  poets or novelists, yet two of them have caught  the ear of the world. Thomas Chandler Haliburton was in his day  this continent's best-known  author on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic; and  in  the  present century Stephen Leacock  is  read  almost  everywhere.  To  explain  all  this  as simply .the "mystery  of genius" or perhaps an "accident of international preference" may  be  nothing more than obscurantism. Perhaps one  should ask whether or not  there  is something  in the soil or environment of Canada especially  favourable to humour, something that  perhaps imparts a special "tang" to it, a flavour obtainable from no other source and there­ fore  valued   abroad for  its  uniqueness, detectable  even  if  undefined.  A  close  examination of  some  of  Leacock's   humour  may  reveal  some characteristics which  produce  whatever  special "tang" or flavour  it has, and  at  the  same  time  may suggest how this unique quality is related  to Canadian life.
"Canadianness" is not  something  which  I  believe  either  increases  or lessens the  literary merit  of a work. Although a literary evaluation of Leacock's humour is outside  the  direct  concern  of this paper, the point of view taken  must  be explained. As everyone  knows, national qualities


21

A  SPECIAL  TANG



in a work of literature-especially when  they are  Canadian-have been praised  by some as a strength, denounced by others  as a weakness, and disregarded  by  many  as  irrelevant. The   first  attitude is  usually  con­ sidered   the  most  objectionable,  but  in  my  view  all  three  are  equally  wrong.  The  third   attitude  ("irrelevance")  is, in  criticism,  particularly mischievous  because superficially  it seems so impeccable. Nevertheless it is seriously wrong,  because it fails to discriminate  between the processes of understanding a work and of judging its excellence,  and  whenever  the understanding is incomplete the  judgement will  be  unsound.  Precisely because  the "content" of a work is really inseparable from its "form" or "expression" no aspect  of that  "content" can  be irrelevant to the com­ plete critical process. National differences  are  readily  acknowledged and  even carefully  analyzed  in an author's language; even when his language is English,  attention is paid  to idiomatic variations between,  let us say, usage in Great  Britain,  the United  States,  and  Australia. But little or no attention has been given to national differences  in less tangible  but more significant  matters such as general  outlook,  unspoken  assumptions about motivation and  behaviour, and attitudes towards certain issues of human existence.  While  the  facts  of life may  be  much  the  same  everywhere, their interpretation may differ in extremely  significant  ways.
My  conviction   is that  Leacock wrote Canadian humour, that  our
national characteristics shaped  it,  and  that   they  are,  in  turn,  revealed by it.  Just  as American humour  can  be distinguished from  English,  so can  Leacock's   be  distinguished  from  both.  Since  Leacock  himself  was interested in the  national  characteristics of humour he cannot  be  num­ bered  among   those  who  consider  the  "national" quality of a  work  of literature as  either   regrettable or irrelevant. Of  course,  he  readily  ad­  mitted   that  humour everywhere  has a common basis and  warned that  national  distinctions   could  be  overdrawn.  Nevertheless,  he  firmly  be­ lieved  that   "the various circumstances of  environment, of  national character, and  of language, at least emphasize and  make  salient  certain aspects  of  national humour."'  Repeatedly he  addressed himself  to  the challenge of distinguishing  between  English  and  American humour. In
1914 he saw in the  jokes of the  two countries a "divergence of national taste"   which   he  considered   "really   fundamental":   "The  Englishman loves what  is literal .  . .  . The  American . . .  tries to convey the same
' His  article on  "Humour" in  Encyclopedia Britannica  ( I945), I I:885.


22

A  SPECIAL  TANG



idea  by exaggeration."His remarks  here  were followed  over  the years by many  more,  too many  for  me  to summarize. For  instance, he is  re­ ported  to have  once told  Cyril Clemens  that  "English humour is always based  on  fact,  whereas  American humour  often  deals  with  what  really could  never  have  happened except  in  the  imagina tion."3   He  has an entire  chapter on "National Characteristics" in his Humour, Its Theory and Technique ( 1935), and  he had  further comments  to make  a couple of years later  in Humour and Humanity ( 1937).  In this book he goes into social  history  to  explain   the  greater  popularity of  the  pun  in  English humour than  in American, and  to explain  why the humour of bad spell­ ing, once so prevalent in the United  States, never caught  on in England.4
He  analyzes  typical   English  and  American  jokes to  demonstrate  the
national differences.  "There is," he says, "a  broad  distinction  to be made between  jokes that  proceed  by telling  the  truth  and  thus  landing us in a sort  of impossibility,  and  jokes that  proceed  to state  an  impossibility and  land  us in a truth. These  contrasted types correspond very much  to the   formal   aspect (not the  inner) of  typical British and  American jokes." 5
Unfortunately, Leacock  seldom  talked  directly  about  the characteris­ tics  of  his  own  humour, and  said  even  less about  Canadian humour  generally.   It is certain, however,  that  he  never  grouped   himself  with English humorists. Instead, he  spoke  of  himself   as  an  "American" humorist, though  he used the word in its continental rather than  national sense. The  fact  that  he often contrasted the humour  of Britain with that  of the  United  States,  but never  (so far as I know)  made  Canada a part­ ner  in any  contrast, suggests to me nothing  more  than  his awareness of what  would  most  interest   his  international public.  As for  his  national public,  Canadian interest  must  have  seemed  negligible,  if he  took as a sign the amount of  attention given to discussion of Canadian humour in our  periodicals.
Critics  and  reviewers  in England  seem more perceptive than  those in
the  United  States  of certain differences in Leacock's  humour from  both


2    "American Humour", Nineteenth Century, 76:455-456 (Aug. 19I4).
3  CYRIL CLEMENS,  "An  Evening with   Stephen  Leacock," Catholic  World  I 59:240  (June
I940).
4   Humour and  Humanity (London, Butterworth, I937), pp.  42-49.
5   Ibid., p.  2 I g.

A  SPECIAL  TANG



British  and  American. As with  Canadian speech,  the "American" char­ acteristics in  things  Canadian are  plainly  evident  to  Englishmen. But British  characteristics were  also  readily  found  in  the  humour, perhaps because  English  readers  wished  to have  some claim  on  the  man  (after all,  his first six years  were  lived  in  England!) . The  Americans felt  no such need to discriminate, to look for differences; unlike the English they had  nothing to gain, and  had  no need  to placate their  neighbour to the north. Canada had  never  asserted  her  rights  in any aggressive  manner; some  Canadians, indeed,  still  think  of   Leacock  as  an  Englishman in exile.
But  the  perceptiveness  of English critics,  with  one notable exception,
had  more  width  than  depth. Leacock  was regarded as something  like a literary mason, skilfully applying  English craftsmanship to American materials. No  thought was given  to the  possibility  that   he  might  have quarried some of his own stone, invented some of his own methods, ori­ ginated some  of  the  final  design.  Sir  Owen  Seaman  (of  Punch)  once spoke  of Leacock's  humour  as being "British  by heredity" with  "some­  thing  of the  spirit  of American humour   by force  of  association."6   An­ other   English  critic  described  Canada as "a  sort  of  half-way house  in letters  between  U.K.  and  U.S.A.", and  therefore  found  no surprise  in Leacock's having  discovered "the hilarious  mean between  American and English  humour":

His  fantastical ideas are  often  in  the  nature of American hyperbole-but they  are developed in  English  fashion  as a  rule,  in  a quiet  and  close-knit narrative  which has none of the exuberance of the typical  American humorist.7
The  notable  exception  is J. B. Priestley, who finds specific and  positive Canadian  qualities in  Leacock's  "outlook,   manner, and  style",  which, he says, not only "belong  to the man  but  ... to the nation":

Very   adroitly  he  aimed   at  both   British  and   American audiences, but  he  never identified himself  with  either; always,  at  least  when  he is at  his best, he  remains a Canadian  ....
The best of Leacock  exists somewhere between-though at a slight angle from­
the  amiable nonsense  of characteristic British  humour (e.g.  Wodehouse)  and  the


6  Quoted  by  Ralph  L.  Curry,  Stephen  Leacock, Humorist  and  Humanist  (Garden  City, N.Y., Doubleday, 1959), p. 152.
7 The   Living   Age,  311:353  (Nov. 1921).  [An  anonymous article  reprinted in  The  Living
Age from The  Morning  Post of Sept. 29, 1921.]

24

A  SPECIAL   TANG



harci  rutting-  wit  and  almost  vindictive satire  of much   American humour  ....
It is in  fact  the  satirical humour of a very shrewd  but  essentially  good-natured and  eupeptic man,  anything but  an  angry  reformer. And  two sorts  of readers  may find   it  unsatisfactory; namely,   those  who  prefer  humour  to  be  the  nonsense  of dreamland, in the  Wodehouse manner, and  those who regard humour as a weapon with  which  to attack the world.6
Beside  these  words  we might  place  an  extract  from  Lister  Sinclair's essay entitled "The Canadian Idiom":
We  are  beginning to  realize  our  position  in  the  world,  and  it  is precarious. We lie between  the  greatest and  grimmest of the Grim  Great  Powers  .  .  .  and  in  the middle of  the  night   we  sometimes   dream   of  hot  breath quietly   playing  on  the backs  of  our  necks  .  . .  .  We  are  very  small  in  population .  .  .  [yet] we  wish to be influential; we have  a small  voice, but  we wish to make  it heard.9
Mr. Sinclair  also refers to what he calls the "calculated diffidence" of Canadians as  being  a  kind  of "protective colouration", and  goes on to assert   that   the  characteristic Canadian  method   of  making   our  small voice  heard   is  the  use  of irony, "the  jiu-jitsu of  literature ... the weapon  of Socrates ... the  principle  of letting  the  giants  destroy one another by their  strength."ro
Not  only  in  the  mid-twentieth century but  throughout our  history Canada's position  has  been  "precarious". With  inner  tensions  between our bi-racial cultures and  provincial  sectionalisms; with geographic, economic,   and   military forces  pulling  vertically   within   the  continent, and  with  historical, nostalgic,  and  institutional ones pulling  horizontally across the Atlantic; with  our vast territory  and strenuous climate dwarf­ ing  and  threatening our  numbers and  our  energies;  with  all  the  com­ plexities, in short,  which  we fully recognize but cannot  wholly command, the  outlook  of Canadians on  the  world  and  on human  relations  is far from  identical with  that  of  Englishmen  or Americans.  We  have  never known  the  easy  national security  and  laurelled  self-confidence out  of which  may  issue the  "amiable nonsense" of a  Wodehouse, nor  have  we ever  had  the  wealth   and  strength which  can  both  provoke  and  with­ stand   the  iconoclastic   satire  of  a  Sinclair  Lewis.  While  one's  home  is being  shaken   by  violent  winds,  one  neither  blows  bubbles  nor  batters  another member of the  household.
S  The  Bodley Head   Leacock, Edited and   Introduced by J. B. Priestley (London, The  Bod­
ley  Head, 1957), pp.  10-12.
9  MALCOLM  ROSS    (ed.),  Our   Sense   of  Identity   (Toronto, Ryerson, 1954),  pp.   236-237.
ro  Ibid., p.  240.

25

A  SPECIAL  TANG


As A   PEOPLE  bent  on  self-preservation, Canadians have  had  to  forego  two  luxuries:  that  of forgetting themselves  in gay abandon and  that  of losing their  tempers  in righteous  wrath. Yet  there
is a kind  of humour  that  combines full understanding of the contending forces with  a wry recognition of one's ineffectiveness  in controlling them
-a humour in which one sees himself as others see him  but without  any admission   that   this  outer  man  is a  truer portrait than the  inner-a humour  based  on  the  incongruity between   the  real  and  the  ideal,  in which  the ideal  is repeatedly  thwarted by the real  but never quite anni­ hilated. Such  humour  is Canadian.
What Lister  Sinclair  calls  our  "calculated  diffidence" would  never
draw  attention to itself in humour  by exuberant slapstick or by linguistic pranks  in  the  form  of explosive wisecracks-and there  is little  of either in  Leacock.  The  Socratic  irony  of letting  the  giants  destroy  themselves by their  own  utterances is a  standard device  of Leacock-witness,  for example,  the  self-destruction so  wrought   amongst   university  adminis­ trators and  professors, high financiers,  clean-government reformers,  and church boardmen in his Arcadian Adventures With the Idle Rich. Here  Leacock  may be, in Priestley's phrase,  "anything but an angry reformer", yet a  reformer he  unmistakably is. So also with  the Sunshine  Sketches.  Both  these  books  display  neither   the  "amiable  nonsense"  of  a  Wade­ house  nor  the  "hard cutting  wit  and  almost  vindictive satire  of much American humour." Good-tempered restraint is less easy to detect  than  slashing  attack, and is perhaps less colourful to watch,  but it has its own unique  value.  Given Canada's "precarious" situation of inner  and  outer  relationships, self-restraint means  self-preservation. We  cannot  enforce  change or reform  with a scourge or bludgeon,  because  the tightrope we walk  is no place  for flailing arms. The  Canadian satirical weapon  is, of necessity,  the  scalpel  of the  cool surgeon  or  the  quick  flip of the  judo expert.
In  his recent  biography  of Leacock,  Ralph L. Curry  frequently refers to  Leacock's "favorite character, the  little  man  in the  society too com­ plex for him",  who preserves "his dignity  by continuing, in his ignorance, to  act  like  a  man"." Wearing his American spectacles, Mr. Curry  has


I I 0p. cit., p. 242  et  al.

A  SPECIAL  TANG



misread   Leacock,  for   the  "little man" he  describes is portrayed by various  American humorists but not by Leacock.  In the light of his own description, it  is rather surprising  that  Mr.  Curry cites  "My  Financial Career" as  a  good  portrait of Leacock's  "little  man". The  protagonist of this most famous  of all Leacock's sketches is certainly not an innocent overwhelmed by an  environment too complex  for  his understanding.
The  truth is very  simple: Leacock's  "favorite character" was indeed
a "little man" but  he was a Canadian type, not an American; and  "My Financial Career" is a good portrait of him but only when its Canadian subject  is properly identified and described.  In this sketch Leacock intro­ duces  us  to  a  somewhat diffident  young  man  who,  he  tells  us,  knows "beforehand" what  is likely to happen but  who  nevertheless enters  the bank   undeterred  by  this  knowledge.  The  young  man   has  formed   an ideal  of saving  his  money  and  he considers  the  bank  the  best place  to accomplish his purpose.  He  understands the essentials of  banking,  if not the  details; he understands how he appears to others  (confused,  incom­ petent, helpless, etc.)   and  also why he appears so; he understands what  he  does wrong  while  he  does it; and  above  all  he  understands himself thoroughly, past  and  present,  both  his inner  self  and his outer  appear­ ance.  Far  from  preserving any "dignity" by "continuing in his ignorance, to act  like a man", he is acutely handicapped by the  very completeness of his knowledge.  It is true  that  he cannot  control  his nervous  reactions  any more  than  he can  change the atmosphere of the bank-the humour  lies in  just this ineffectiveness.
Throughout the sketch  the humour  sparkles from  the changing facets
of the young man's  "identity", how others see him and how he sees him­ self, the  incongruities between  appearance and  reality.  Besides his own true  identity there  is mistaken  identity,  assumed  identity,  and  apparent identity. For  instance, the  bankers mistake him  at first  for  "one of Pinkerton's men",  and  then  for "a  son of Baron  Rothschild  or a young Gould"; later  he  himself  tries to act  or look like an insulted  despositor or  an  irascible curmudgeon; and  at  the  end  he appears to the  bankers  as an utter  fool. All the  while his essential nature remains  intact  and  un­ changed, despite  all the  environmental entanglements. Unable  to adjust his inner  self to an  environment  too powerful  for him, he retreats under  a  barrage of laughter. But  consider  the  ending  of the  story.  Following the  description of the  roar  of  laughter he hears  as the bank  doors close

A  SPECIAL  TANG



behind  him come  two concluding sentences:


Since  then  I  bank  no more.  I  keep my money  in cash  in  my trousers  pocket  and my savings in silver  dollars in a sock.


In  short,  this  diffident  young  Canadian's initial  intention of saving  his money  has  been  quite  unaffected  by what  has  happened to him  in the banlc  Wryly  recognizing  once more  his inability  to cope  with  the over­ powering  atmosphere of the  banking  world,  he  changes  his method  of money-saving  to one which is free from external pressures and is entirely  within  his own control.  In  his own way this "little man" has solved his problem-a richly  humorous  one for  the  reader, to be  sure,  because  of the  incongruity  between  the  ideal  of  his  intention  and  the  reality  of his sock.
I have laboured the analysis of this story not because  I think  that Lea­ cock while  writing it intended consciously anything like a  commentary on the  Canadian national  character, but  because  I believe that  we have here  a prime  example  of how an author's outlook  on life, including his interpretation of  the  ridiculous  or  amusing, is coloured  by  the  social environment and  the people he knows best. And for Leacock  these were not  English,  not  American,   but  Canadian. That  last  sentence  of "My  Financial Career" is pure  Canadian.
The  little  Canadian of  this sketch  is encountered elsewhere  in  Lea­ cock. Take,  for example,  "The Awful Fate  of Melpomenus Jones". Here  the  protagonist again  finds himself caught in an environment not of his own  making-the social context  of expected "white lies"-for  which  he is again  morally  and emotionally unconstituted. Jones is introduced as "a curate-such a dear  young man, and only twenty-three", whose problem  was  that  he "simply  couldn't  get  away  from  people". As Leacock  bril­ liantly  explains  the  difficulty, "He  was  too modest  to tell a lie and  too religious  to wish to appear rude."  Here  is the scalpel  stroke,  laying bare the  twisted  values in modern  society-the reversal  of sanctions  between  the  ideal  and  the  real, where  the white  lies of social politeness  demand and  receive  the  homage  due  only  to  religious  truths. The  dilemma is funny  to  us  because  of the  incongruity between  the  momentousness of the  ideal  principle and  the  apparent triviality of the  real  predicament. But  consider  the  significance  of this little  Canadian's "exit  line":

A  SPECIAL  TANG



. . .  he sat  up  in  bed  with  a beautiful smile of confidence playing  upon  his face, and   said,  "Well-the angels  are  calling  me;  I'm   afraid I really  must   go  now. Good  afternoon."

In  that  beatific  "Good  afternoon" the little curate finally departs on his own terms:  truth and  politeness  here  at  last coincide.  Though he must die  to be true  to himself,  he has solved his problem  to his perfect satis­ faction! And  again  there  is the ironic  incongruity between  the  ideal  of his simple  intention and  the  reality of his drastic  method.
Again and  again  in Leacock's  humour-particularly in the writings of
his  best  years,  between   1910  and  the  early  192o's-we  encounter this same "little man" exposed to pressures of various kinds from our complex society,  yet  maintaining both  his  dignity and his  identity. He  is not baffled by the  complex  world,  though  he may  be frustrated by its over­ whelming powers; he  is sustained  not  by ignorance but  by his integral understanding of  his own  nature and  position  within  the  world  he in­ habits.  It is of course  not  a  world  peculiar  to  Canadians,  as Leacock's wide  popularity attests,  but  perhaps from  longer  experience Canadians have  learned how  to treat  it humorously.
The   diffidence  of  Leacock's   little Canadian must  not  be  misinter­
preted  as an  unreadiness to set forth  his own clear  convictions. Take, for example, "Are  the  Rich  Happy?" Here  the little  man  reports  faithfully the  answers  given  by the  rich  themselves  to his inquiries,  but  he is not for a moment taken  in by the sob stories he hears.  He is merely allowing the  giants  of wealth  to destroy  themselves  with  their  own  tongues,  just as they had  in another sketch entitled  "Self-Made Men". The  observant little  inquirer in  "Are  the  Rich  Happy?" delightedly helps in the  rout, indeed,  by quietly  loosing such  barbed  shafts  as these:

My  judgement is that  the  rich  undergo cruel  trials  and  bitter  tragedies of which the  poor  know  nothing .  .  .  .
The  rich  are  troubled by money all the time  .  . .  .
I have  seen  Spugg put  aside  his glass of champagne--or his glass after  he had drunk his champagne--with an  expression  of something like contempt  .  . .  .
Yet  one  must  not  draw  a picture of the  rich in colours  altogether  gloomy.

And  then  comes  the  ending  of the  report,  which  shows the  little  man's full  ironic  understanding. The  rich  Overjoy  family,  he  is told,  is now "absolutely cleaned  out-not a cent  left."  On  closer  inquiry,  however,

29

A  SPECIAL TANG



he finds  that  the  Overjoys  haven't sold their  mansion-"they were  too much  attached to it"-nor given up their  box at  the  opera-they  were "too  musical" for  that.  Nevertheless  by general  report they  are  "abso­ lutely  ruined   . . . .  You  could  buy  Overjoy-so I  am  informed-for ten  dollars." Then he shifts  from  his ironic  reporting  to  a final  direct  comment of his own:  "But  I observe that  he still wears a seal-lined  coat worth  at least five hundred."
In "We  Have  With  Us Tonight" the little  man  is a travelling lecturer subjected night  after  night  to the  bumbling rudenesses  and  absurdities of pompous  chairmen. The  world of the lecture circuit  bothers  but does not  baffie him.  Though he cannot  evade  the  institutionalized rules and procedures, he can  analyze and classify them.  He can  even extract from them  a  wry  amusement at  his  occasional  discomfitures as  well  as  his petty  triumphs. In  "The Man  in Asbestos"  he  refuses  to  yield  to  per­ suasion  or example that  a future  Utopian society free from  toil and risk and  tension  is preferable to our  own;  whatever the  stresses and  strains  of our  present  world  he has no desire to escape  to a brand new one. In "Homer and  Humbug" he  is again  resisting  the  pressure  of organized opinion-the  demand on him  to admire as supreme genius what  in his personal  judgement is nothing  but "primitive literature". In "Roughing It in the  Bush"  he is opposing such conventional patterns as that  physi­ cal discomfort  is a requisite for proper  moose-hunting; he has been quite  content  for  ten  years with  his own pattern of high  living in the  wilder­  ness. And for a final example consider "The Transit of Venus,"  a short story  about  a professor of  astronomy  in love with  a student. This  "little man"-Leacock's  own  term  for  Lancelot  Kitter-is inexperienced in the  ways of love  rather  than  ignorant of them; he  lacks knowledge  of women  but not of his own state  of mind.  When  he is inept  in a situation he knows he has "failed  again". He is fully aware of what  he should  do, of what  is expected of him;  he just cannot  do it. The  story has the con­ ventional  happy   ending,  not  because  he  is forced  or  manceuvred  into something  he  does  not  want,  but  only  because  an  opportunity comes along  with  no  distracting cross-currents to  prevent   his grasping it.  No doubt the girl makes it easy for him-but again  the ending  is significant. This  little  professor  of astronomy  does not  weakly  join  the  girl's  orbit; instead, she  is swung  into  his to become indistinguishable  from  "any other  professor's  wife".

A  SPECIAL   TANG



All th s"little men"  know their environment, know themselves, know what  is expected of them; sometimes  they cannot  conform,  sometimes they will not, but invariably they draw  their strength from within them­ selves. The  world  they choose to live in is a huge one,  just as the clothes Stephen  Leacock  chose  to  wear  were  always  several  sizes too  big for him. Yet the essential size and identity of the man inside is unaffected  by the  bigness outside,  even  though  to outsiders  the appearance may seem ridiculously dwarfing.
Leacock's  Canadian archetype is therefore  radically different in out­
look from  such  a character as Benchley's  befuddled  little  man  in an in­ comprehensible world,  or  Thurber's Walter   Mitty,   who  can  live  only by escaping  into a fantasy  of his own making. To Leacock's "little man" the  world  is not incomprehensible, nor does he want  to escape into fan­ tasy.  He  wants  to continue living in this complex  world,  preferably by making  changes  in  it  to  suit  himself, but  if  this  is  impossible-as it usually  is- then  to live in  this  world  somehow  without  sacrificing  his self-respect,  his principles, or his continuing identity. In  an  ideal  world one  should  be able  to  reconcile,  through  knowledge  of both,  the  outer pressures  and  the  inner  desires. But in  the  real  world  the  actual power to shape  and  achieve  may  be lacking. Incongruity between  the  real and the  ideal  is everywhere a basis of  humour-but which  aspect  of the real and  which aspect  of the ideal are not everywhere given the same empha­ sis. As  Leacock  said: "The  various  circumstances of  environment, of national character, and of  language, at least emphasize and  make salient certain aspects  of  national  humour."" If my analysis  of some  pieces of Leacock's work is valid, then certain  salient characteristics of his humour  are  unmistakably  national. In  our  precarious  and  complicated circum­  stances,  and  given  our  national character, Canadians must  either  cry with frustration or laugh  with  Leacock.
All through our  history,  the favourite intellectual game  of Canadians
has  been  to measure  ourselves against  the  British  on the  one hand  and the  Americans on  the  other.   We  have  tended  to  define  what  we are almost  exclusively  by detecting our differences from  both. Consequently, if any  people  anywhere should  be especially skilled in the  comparative study  of human beings considered as groups or types rather than  as indi­ viduals, it should  be us. And we should also be equipped to tell the world
••  See footnote •, supra.

A  SPECIAL  TANG



whatever  insights  into  general   human nature such  processes  provide. Now consider  what  Leacock says:

Comparison is the  very soul of humour .  .  .  . It is the  discovery  of resemblance and  the  lack  of it  that  builds  up  the  contrasts, discrepancies and  incongruities on which   .  . . humour depends.

As Leacock  well knew, poetic imagery  also springs  from  the  perception of similarities and  differences;  but  humour, not  poetry,  builds upon  the resultant discrepancies and incongruities, particularly as applied to types of human nature and typical human behaviour. For  generations, then, Canadians have  cultivated the soil from  which  humour springs,  and  we therefore should  not  be surprised  that   out  of Canada have  come  two great  humorists to whom  the  world  has given its approval. Men every­ where  can  detect  and  savour  a special  "tang" without caring  about  its special  ingredients or even its origins.
It is noteworthy that  Haliburton's humour is almost  entirely  the result
of scrutinizing the differences between Americans, Nova Scotians, and Englishmen. The  neglect  into  which  Haliburton's humour has  fallen  is usually  attributed to the lost appeal of dialect  humour. A better  reason may  be that  he concocted  his Canadian humour for too restricted a con­ temporary market-for the  provincial  societies of England, the  Eastern United  States,   and  Nova  Scotia; his  "tang" is  too  crude  for  general modern taste.  Leacock's  blending  is much  subtler-he left  out  almost entirely such  a  strong  ingredient as dialectal differences-and  thereby  he  provided a  refined  seasoning  for  the  humorous feasts  of  the  entire  western   world,  not  merely  for  the  Atlantic fringe.   Canada  has  other  humorists besides  Haliburton and  Leacock; they  are  lesser  men,  per­  haps,  but some day the world may discover them  too.














32


CRITIC
OR	ENTERTAINER?

Stephen Leacock  and
The Growth of Materialism

F. W. Watt

The social scientist  and  especially  the stu­ dent  of  political   economy  is  compelled  to make   his  peace   with   satire   or   humour. The  callous  vulgarity which  characterizes the  humour of  the  medical  profession   is paralleled  by   cynicism  in   the    social scientist.                                        H.   A.   INNIS.
Stephen  Butler   Leacock   ( 186g-1944).



AT THE TURN OF  THE  CENTURY  Canadian society was  undergoing changes  so drastic  as to constitute a social  revolution. The  agrarian and  industrial "boom" following  the opening  of the West brought the  Canadian economy its first great  period  of material expan­ sion, returned the  social order  to a state  of flux, stimulated the specula tive spirit  and  the  accumulation of wealth,  and  encouraged a  mood  of political  and  commercial optimism.  It  was an  era  to which  Canadian writers  for the first time applied  the term "materialistic". This is the era that  gave birth  to Stephen Leacock,  Professor of Political Economy and Humorist, and,  to an extent  scarcely yet realized, stamped his work with its imprint.
It  is the  Arcadian   Adventures, with  its destructive satirical portrayal of a rampant plutocracy, that  marks  an extreme  of social consciousness and  the closest approach to sustained  social criticism  in Leacock's work. Nowhere  else is it quite  so simple a matter to see the objects  of his con­ demnation and  his standards of judgment; and nowhere  else, at the same time,  is the  element  of kindliness  (which,  as we shall see, he considered a necessary  part  of the  highest  form  of humour) spread so thinly.  Lea­  cock's portrayal of the ethos of the plutocracy  centres  on the Mausoleum


33

CRITIC  OR   ENTERTAINER



Club:  "The  Mausoleum Club  stands  on the  quietest  corner  of the  best residential street  in  the  City.  It  is a  Grecian building  of white  stone. About   it  are  great   elm  trees  with  birds-the most  expensive  kind  of birds-singing in  the  branches." The  conjunction of childlike  pastoral purity   and  simplicity  and  the  artificial  powers  and  splendours of  the wealthy  is an incongruity Leacock allows mainly  to speak for itself:

The  sunlight flickers  through the  elm  trees,  illuminating  expensive nursemaids wheeling   valuable  children  in  little  perambulators . .  .  .  Here   you  may  see  a little  toddling princess  in a rabbit  suit who owns  fifty distilleries  in her  own  right. There, in  a  lacquered perambulator, sails past  a  little  hooded   head  that  controls from  its cradle an  entire  New  Jersey  corporation. The United States  is suing  her as  she  sits,  in  a  vain  attempt to  make  her  dissolve  herself  into  constituent com­ panies   .  . .  .  You  may meet  in  the flickered  sunlight any  number of little  princes and   princesses  far  more  real  than  the  poor  survivals of  Europe. Incalculable  in­ fants   wave  their   fifty  dollar   ivory  rattles   in  an  inarticulate  greeting to  one  an­  other .... And  through it  all  the  sunlight falls  through the  elm-trees, and  the birds  sing  and  motors  hum,  so that  the  whole  world  seen  from  the  boulevard of Plutoria Avenue  is the very pleasantest place imaginable.

The  princes  of  the  Old  World  and  those  of the  New,  the  hum  of the motors  and  the  singing  of the  birds, small  innocent children and  giant soul-less capital enterprises,  fifty dollar  ivory rattles  and  elm-trees  in the sunlight,  all  together  in the  same  idyllic scene  form  an  active  complex of incongruities. In the  next  paragraph the  complexity gives  way momentarily to a direct  and  harsh  contrast:
If you were to mount to the roof of the Mausoleum Club itself on Plutoria Avenue you could  almost  see the slums from  there.  But  why should  you?  And  on the other hand, if  you  never  went  up  on  the  roof,  but  only  dined inside  among  the  palm­ trees,  you  would  never  know  that  the  slums  existed-which is much  better.
It is significant   that  Leacock  was  typically  less concerned with  such overt  contrasts between  the  palaces  of  the  rich  and  the  hovels  of the poor  than  with  incongruities within  the  life of the  wealthy.  He  sought to  explode  that   life's  myths  and  belittle  its  attractions, rather than  to attack its villainies. The  wealthy  exploiter  in Leacock's portrayal attains none of the  grandeur of evil. Thus,  that  "wizard of finance", Mr. Tom­ linson, emerges  from the darkness of his backwoods farm  into the highest circles  of plutocratic achievement despite  his earnest attempts  to avoid the  greatness thrust   upon   him.   Mere ignorance of  the  mysteries  of

34

CRITIC  OR  ENTERTAINER



finance  faiJs him,  and  even  his most determined violations  of common sense business practice cannot  make  him  the  poor  man  he involuntarily left  behind  him.  The  cult of money-making is debased  to the level of its newest idol, a simple, ignorant farmer whose allegedly gold-bearing farm has transformed him  into "Monsieur  Tomlison, nouveau capitaine de Ia haute  finance en Amerique", as Paris called him, an unhappy man whose fortune  grows no matter how he tries to lose it. The  qualifications of the members   of  the  Mausoleum Club  appear in  a  changed   light  in  their mistaken  admiration for Mr. Tomlinson; they remain  neither  admirable, dangerous or evil, but merely objects of scepticism  and  ridicule.
In  similar  fashion  when  the spectre  of labour  unrest  appears in Lea­ cock's  Arcadia, it  is merely  an  opportunity for  the  wealthy  to  display their   ludicrous   self-centredness  and  inconsistency.  "Just  imagine,   my dear," says  one  rich  lady  to another, "my  chauffeur,  when  I was  in Colorado, actually threatened to leave  me merely  because  I  wanted to reduce   his  wages.  I  think it's   these   wretched  labour unions." The  "wretched  labour   unions" threatened  the  very  heart   of  Arcadia, the Mausoleum Club,  by a  strike  of the  catering staff  at  a moment  which proved  embarrassing for Mr.  Fyshe, the successful financier: "Luxury!" he was exclaiming at  the beginning  of  the sumptuous dinner  scene set to trap  the  (non-existent) fortunes  of the Duke of Dulham, "Luxury! .... It is the  curse of the  age. The appalling growth  of luxury,  the piling up of money,  the  ease  with  which  huge fortunes  are  made   .  . . these  are the  things  that  are  going  to  ruin  us." Mr.  Fyshe's  propensity  for social revolutionary doctrine, however, did not survive  the  test:

"Eh? What?" said Mr.  Fyshe.
The  head   waiter, his  features stricken  with  inward agony,  whispered again. "The  infernal, damn   scoundrels!" said  Mr.  Fyshe,  starting back  in  his chair. "On strike! In this Club! It's  an outrage!"



BuT THE Arcadian Adventures, even though  its thesis is modest  and  uncontentious, makes  Stephen Leacock  appear more  of a socially  purposeful satirist  than  he really was. His work as a whole  is not contained within  the level of that  severe, obvious and  well deserved criticism  of the vices and follies of the over-privileged which is character­ istic  of  the  Arcadian  Adventures.  Nor  is there  more  justification  else-


35

CRITIC OR   ENTERTAINER



where  for an attempt to define Leacock as a writer  with serious interests in  radical   reform.  On  the  contrary, Leacock  looked  upon  himself  as a humorist   (that being  for  him  the  term  of wider  range) rather than  a satirist,  and  freely confessed himself to be a Tory  in politics. Like Lucul­ lus Fyshe, Leacock  could have claimed  himself  to be, on the basis of the Arcadian  Adventures,  something  of a  "revolutionary  socialist".  But  in The  Unsolved  Riddle  of Social  justice  ( 1920), his most  elaborate and explicit  discussion of the politics and economics of contemporary society, he denied  himself  this possibility once and  for all:  the  book is primarily a  critique of  radical idealism,  an  attack  on  the  socialist  answer  to the "riddle of social  justice".  In 1907 Thorstein Veblen,  whom  Leacock  had known  during   their  post-graduate days  at  the  University   of  Chicago, indicated his awareness  of the  fact  that  socialism  for  many  serious ex­ ponents  of  radical ideas  had  passed  out  of  the  Utopian phase.  "The socialism  that   inspires  hope  and  fears  today," Veblen   wrote,  "is  the school of Marx. No one is seriously apprehensive of any other  so-called socialistic  movement, and  no one  is seriously  concerned to criticise  or refute  the doctrines set forth by any other  school of socialists."[  Leacock  himself  ostensibly  did  not agree  with  or did  not  know  this argument of his brilliant acquaintance. The Unsolved Riddle  is concerned with refut­  ing socialism as it is described  in Edward Bellamy's  Looking Backward;  and in the fact  that  it repeats  the task undertaken in Canada by Goldwin Smith  a generation before,  it suggests the  course  of thought (or lack of it)  on such matters undergone  by certain portions  of the Canadian intel­ ligentsia  during  these years. "The scheme of society outlined in 'Looking  Backward',"  Leacock  asserted,  without  alluding to other  socialist  writ­  ings, "may  be examined  as the  most attractive and  the  most consistent  outline  of a socialist state  that  has, within  the knowledge of the present
writer,  been put  forward ... No better  starting point  for the criticism of collectivist  theories can be found  than  in a view of the basis on which is supposed  to rest the halcyon life of Mr.  Bellamy's  charming common­ wealth." "Nor   was ever,"  he  claimed,  "a  better  presentation  made  of the  essential  program of socialism."  Without  undue  difficulty  Leacock  succeeded  in knocking  down  this idealist  of a  former  era. Socialism,  he concluded  his  analysis,  would  function  admirably in  a  community of saints,  but  for  ordinary human  beings  it  would  be  unworkable. "With
r    I. Kipnis. The  American Socialist Movement, p. 4·

CRITIC  OR   ENTERTAINER



perfect  citizt>ns any government is good," he argued   (apparently he was no more  aware than  the  theorist  he was criticizing  that  the  public  and private   virtues,   the  motives  of  the  individual and  the  organization of social relations,  are  never in a simple causal relationship). "In a popula­ tion of angels  a socialistic commonwealth would work to perfection. But until we have the angels we must keep the commonwealth waiting." The  movement towards socialism,  he  warned,   using  the  apocalyptic image that  runs through the  book, will lead "over  the edge of the abyss beyond which  is chaos."
Not  only  did  Stephen Leacock  differ  with  socialism,  as he saw it,  in regard  to solving the problem  of social  justice, but, as one would expect, he differed  in his analysis of the conditions  which  gave rise to socialism. He saw the same kind of inequalities and incongruities in the materialistic society of 1920  as did  the  radicals:
Few   persons   can   attain  adult  life  without  being  profoundly  impressed  by  the appalling  inequalities of  our  human  lot.  Riches  and   poverty   jostle  one  another upon  our  streets.  The tattered outcast  dozes on his bench  while  the  chariot of the wealthy  is drawn by. The palace  is the  neighbour of the slum. We  are,  in modern life, so used to this that  we no longer see it.

But  Leacock's emphasis  was different.  While  socialists  were  crying  out against  the  suffering  of the  underprivileged, Leacock  counselled  against what  he  assured  the  reader  was a  kind  of sentimentality which  might lead  to unfortunate social consequences:

An  acquired  indifference to  the  ills  of  others   is  the  price  at  which   we  live.  A certain  dole  of  sympathy, a  casual  mite  of  personal  relief  is the  mere  drop  that any one  of us alone  can  cast into  the vast ocean of human misery. Beyond  that  we must  harden ourselves  lest we too perish.
We  make   fast  the  doors  of  our  lighted   houses  against the  indigent and   the hungry. What else can  we do?  If we shelter  one  what  is that? And  if we try  to shelter  all, we ourselves  are shelterless.

For  Leacock  the  root of social evils lay not at all in the nature of the political  or  economic  system,  but  entirely  in  the  nature of man.  Thus, the war of 1914-18 for Leacock was a demoralizing force because it gave cause  for  an  outbreak of the old Adam:,  "A  world  that  has known  five years of fighting  has lost its taste  for the honest drudgery of work. Cin­ cinnatus will not go back  to his plow, or, at the  best, stands sullenly  be­ tween  his plow-handles arguing for a higher  wage." But Leacock's most

37

CRITIC  OR   ENTERTAINER



important difference  with  the  socialists was in regard  to the  concept  of freedom. Leacock,  in the tradition of nineteenth century  Liberalism, maintained that   in  his society  the  individual, whatever his hardships, was a free agent; the socialists were arguing that  political freedom  was meaningless  in the face of economic slavery. Leacock  wrote:
Yet  all  [men  in our  society]  are  free.  This  is the  distinguishing mark  of them  as children of our  era.  They  may  work  or stop.  There is no compulsion from  with­ out.  No man  is a slave. Each  has his 'natural liberty', and  each  in his degree, great  or small,  receives his allotted  reward.
But  although Leacock  was conservative  in  his  rejection of the  blue­ print   state,   and  in  his  refusal  to  "sentimentalize" the  lower  levels  of society,  his awareness  of the  vices of modern industrial civilization  did not  allow  him  easily to become  an uncritical spokesman for reactionary Toryism.  In  the  Unsolved Riddle,  while  condemning socialism,  he also condemned  the  nineteenth century   doctrine of  laissez-faire  individual­ ism. Fifteen  years later  in the  midst  of the  Great  Depression,  his was a somewhat chastened and  reformed individualism: "I believe," he wrote, "that the  only possible basis for  organized  society is that  of every  man  for  himself-for himself  and  those  near  and  dear  to  him.  But  on  this basis  must  be put  in  operation  a  much  more  efficient  and  much  more just social mechanism."
There was something remarkably anachronistic about  Leacock's failure   (though  himself  an  economist)   to  understand those  economic factors  of the modern  world which were making  freedom  and individual­ ism in any simple sense impossible. InI 936 he complained:

I  cannot bear  to think  that  the  old  independent farming is to go:  that  the  breezy call  of incense  breathing morn  is to be replaced by the  time-clock  of a regimented, socialized,  super-mechanized land-factory. We must  keep  the  farmers. If they can­ not  regulate the  'how  much' of  their  production, let  them, as  they  used  to, raise all  they  damn can,  and   then  fire  it  around everywhere-pelt  one  another  with new-mown hay and  sugar beets. But don't  lets lose them.

If such  gaiety  and  gusto seem a little  remote  from  the  actual conditions of farming and  marketing in the mid-thirties, on the other  hand  Leacock had  no  illusions  about   rural  life  as such,  despite  such  parables   of  its virtues  triumphing over the  decadence of the  city as that  of Mr. Tom­ linson,  "wizard of  finance".   Having   been  raised  on  an  Ontario  farm  "during the  hard  times of Canadian farming", Leacock  could  claim  as

CRITIC  OR   ENTERTAINER



he did in tht" Prt"face to Sunshine  Sketches  of a Little  Town that  he had seen  "enough of farming to speak  exuberantly in political  addresses  of the  joy of early rising and  the deep sleep, both of body and intellect,  that is induced  by honest  toil."
Leacock   has  been  described   (by  Desmond Pacey)  as  a  "country
squire" upholding the "eighteenth century  values:  common  sense, bene­ volence, moderation, good  taste",•  but he apparently  believed there  was nothing in his own age which  approximated or even partially embodied  these  values. The  mild  eighteenth century  satire  of Addison and  Steele, certainly, was  based  on  the  kind of positive faith  in man and in society which  Leacock  frequently and  explicitly  renounced.  Leacock's attitude was more akin to that  of cynicism, the cynicism of Diogenes, for example,  of whom it has been said:
He  would  deface  all  the  coinage  current in  the  world.  Every  conventional stamp was false.  The  men  stamped as generals  and  kings; the  things  stamped as honour and   wisdom   and   happiness and   riches;   all  were  base  metal   with  lying  super­ scription.
Leacock's extensive  dissertation, Humor, Its  Theory and  Technique
( 1935), reveals  more  about   the  author than  perhaps any  other  of  his works.  Especially  it  throws  light  on  the  basic attitudes which  led  Lea­ cock to squander his talents  in a mass of books turned out for the Christ­  mas  book-trade, to  use his humour  sparingly  as a  weapon  or  a  tool of criticism,   and  by and  large  to  accept  the  social  status  quo  despite  his criticism  of it, rather than  to try to alter it. In that  work there is, indeed,  praise  for  the  two  "greatest"  humorists, Charles  Dickens  and  Mark  Twain, because  each  in  his own way "sought  as a  part  of his work  to uplift  the  world  with  laughter." There is also  condemnation for  those modern writers  who merely  aimed  at pleasing the  masses, the "ten-cent crowd":

Please  the  public! That's the  trouble  today  ... with  everything that  is written to  be  printed or  acted, everything drawn, sung,  or  depicted. Nothing can  appear unless  there  is money  in  it  ... It  is the  ten-cent   crowd   that  are  needed  if  pro­ fits  are  to  be made, not  the  plutocrats. Hence has  been  set  up  in  our  time an unconscious tyranny  of  the  lower  class.  The   snobbishness  of  the  term  may  pass without apology  in  view  of  the  truth of the  fact  ... It is the  wishes  and  likings of the  mass which  largely  dictate what  the rest of us shall  see and  hear.

2   Creative Writing in  Canada. p.  101.


39

CRITIC OR ENTERTAINER



But  these  remarks cannot be  taken as support for  a kind  of humour which is devoted  to immediate social or moral  purposes.  On the contrary, Leacock  has just as little use for that  type:  "Much of our humour now­ dare  one  say,  especially  in  America?-is over-rapid, snarling,  and  ill­ tempered. It  is used to 'show  things  up',  a vehicle  of  denunciation, not of pleasure." The  satirical  aspect of humour must always mind  itself lest it  become  simply  "mockery,  a  thing  debased  and  degraded from  what  it might  have  been."  Somewhere  in the course of  history, "mere vindic­ tiveness  parted company  with  humor,  and  became  its  hideous  counter­ part,  mockery", but still "too much of the humor  of all ages, and  far  too much of our own, partakes of it."
The   highest  humour,   then,  is such  that   it  will  uplift  the  world  but
nevertheless avoid  denunciation and  mockery.  Leacock  apparently  sees this  type  in  the  portrayal of  Mr.  Pickwick,  for  example,   who  "walks through life conveying with  him the contrast between  life as it might  be and  life as it is." Humour  of this kind  depends on a clearly  understood and  firmly  held pattern of values, manners, and  presuppositions. The difficulty  arises  when  one  attempts to  infer  such  a  pattern from  Lea­ cock's own  works. Sunshine  Sketches  holds out  the  best promise of  such a pattern, and  readers  have professed to find it there.  Leacock's Preface  offered  the  lead,  touching  as it  does  at  its conclusion  tenderly  on  the "land of hope and  sunshine where little  towns spread  their square streets  and  their  trim  maple  trees beside placid  lakes almost within  echo of the primeval forest," and  asserting  the  "affection" at  the  basis of its  por­ trayal.  Mariposa, the most peaceful  and  the most foolish of small  towns, stands  as an  unconscious critique of the  big city ways it tries to ape.  Yet Mariposa itself does not contain  a pattern or even hints of the good life, unless we choose to pitch our understanding at the level of the beguiling  narrator. There is nothing  admirable,  nothing fine,  nothing dignified, nothing sacred  in  Leacock's  portrayal of  the  little  town:  all its coinage is defaced. The  only virtues  are  its sunshine  and  its littleness,  its failure to  achieve   the  larger  vices of  modern  industrial urbanism, hard as  it tries to do so.

CRITIC  OR   ENTERTAINER


0NE  IS  TEMPTED to say  that   Mariposa's  curiously nostalgic  appeal lies not in its positive attractions but in its success in transforming great  evils into  small, its rendering innocuous  if not inno­
cent  the  worst aspects  of our modern  world.  Much  of Leacock's writing answers  to  the  same  formula. "In  retrospect," Leacock  claimed in  his book on humour, "all  our  little  activities  are  but as nothing, all that  we do  has  in it  a  touch  of the  pathetic, and  even our  sins and  wickedness and crime  are easily pardoned in the realization  of their futility." It is by this  perspective that  Sunshine  Sketches  charms  the  reader, by making the "real" pleasantly innocent,  not by comparing it with the "ideal", the "might have  been".   We  are  perhaps to  understand that  humour  "up­ lifts"  the  reader  by bringing  him to this Olympian height  of contempla­ tion.  In  Leacock's philosophy  the ideal  is illusory. On occasion  he him­  self  may  have  looked  back  longingly  at  "the  wholesome days  of  the eighties or nineties," or at the simple life of the farmer, but at other  times he repudiated such attempts to escape the present:

Each  age sees the  ones  that  preceded  it through a mellow  haze of retrospect; each looks  back   to  the  good  old  days  of  our  fore-fathers ... Each  of  us in  life  is a prisoner. We  are  set  and   bound   in  our  confined  lot.  Outside, somewhere, is  in­ finity.  We  seek  to  reach  into  it and  the  pictured past  seems to afford  us an  outlet of escape.

But in the end, "Escape is barred."
Humour as  Leacock  conceived  it lay at  the  heart  of his philosophy, in fact was his philosophy:

.  . . humor in  its  highest   meaning and  its furthest reach   .  . . does  not  depend on  verbal  incongruities, or  on  tricks  of sight  and  hearing. It finds  its  basis in  the incongruity of  life  itself,  the  contrast  between   the  fretting cares  and   the  petty sorrows  of the  day  and  the  long mystery of the tomorrow. Here  laughter and  tears become  one,  and  humor becomes  the contemplation and  interpretation of our  life. In   this  aspect   the   thought of  the  nineteenth century far  excelled   all  that   had preceded it.  The very  wistfulness  of its  new  ignorance-contrasted with  the  bar­ ren certainty of bygone dogma-lends it something pathetic.

The  allusion  to nineteenth century  agnosticism  is by no means irrele­ vant.  It is the  doubt  about  man's  ultimate significance  that provides  the basis for humour at  its highest,  for the universe itself is a kind of "joke"

CRITIC  OR  ENTERTAINER



in which  the  trivial  and  futile  aspirations of mankind are  the crowning incongruity. Humour
. . . represents an  outlook  upon  life,  a  retrospect as  it  were,  in  which  the  fever and  the  fret  of our  earthly  lot is contrasted with  its shortcomings, its lost illusions and  its  inevitable end.  The fiercest  anger  cools;  the  bitterest of hate  sleeps in  the churchyard and  over  it  all  there  spread  Time's ivy  and  Time's roses, preserving nothing but  what  is fair to look upon.

Presumably the best joke of all, conducive  to the most tears and  the most laughter combined, will be the apocalypse  as Leacock  describes it:

Thus does  life,  if  we  look  at  it  from  sufficient distance,  dissolve itself  into
'humor'. Seen  through an  indefinite vista  it  ends  in  a smile.  In  this, if what  the scientist tells  us is  true,  it  only  offers  a  parallel to  what  must  ultimately happen to  the  physical  universe  in  which  it  exists  . . . . At some  inconceivable distance in  time  . . .  the  universe  ends, finishes;  there  is nothing left of it but  nothingness. With   it  goes  out  in  extinction all  that   was  thought of  as  matter, and  with  that all  the  framework of  time  and  space  that   held  it,  and   the conscious life  that matched it.  All ends  with  a cancellation of forces  and  comes  to nothing; and  our universe ends thus  with one vast, silent unappreciated  joke.

For Stephen Leacock  as cynic there  was no "might have been" except in a wistful  and  illusory nostalgia,  and  even here  his sense of the follies and  shortcomings of men  would  not  allow  him  to  be  blinded.  It  was easier for him, with his belief in the futility  of man's  petty actions  to take his role of artist  lightly, to observe the evils of his society without bitter­ ness or  indignation, accepting and  defending the  world  as he  found  it, and  to  turn  his  irreverent humour  on  every  aspect  of  experience and upon  all manner of people  and  things. But perhaps after all he was less like Diogenes, who also credited  the world with  no virtue, yet who asked its princes  nothing in return  but that  they "stand a little out of his light", than  like that  other  cynic, Teles, who taught the docrine  of self-love and received  money  from  the  hands  of rich  patrons  with  words  like  these:  "You  give liberally  and  I take valiantly  from you, neither grovelling  nor demeaning myself  basely nor  grumbling."  For Stephen Leacock  was a part   of  the  prospering materialistic  civilization of which  he  wrote; he was sometimes its critic, but always its entertainer.





42



THE	BRIDGE
OR THE	STOKEHOLD?

Views of the Novelisf s Art

Ethel Wilson

These remarks on  the  novelist's  attitude formed  the   substance  of   a   talk   which Ethel   Wilson  delivered   as  part of  a  sym­ posium  sponsored  by   the   Humanities Association in  Vancouver  in  January,
1g6o.

0UR  SUBJECT is Canadian Literature, and  you will be justified in saying, "She did not talk about  Canadian Literature." And  I shall  be  justified in saying, "Oh, yes, I did,  really. I talked  about
an approach to making  it."
These  remarks should,  I believe, have  a bearing  on Canadian novels. It would  be easier  to  talk  about  Samuel  Hearne's journeys,  or  Donald Creighton's life of Sir John  A. Macdonald, or Miss Neatby's fine formid­ able book on education, or Margaret Ormsby's History of British Colum­ bia, or  Charles Camsell's Son  of the  North, or  Roderick  Haig-Brown's books about   waters, and  fly-fishing, or  R.  M.  Patterson's Dangerous  River, or  Wallison's Place Names  of British Columbia, or James Gillis's naively solemn  and  funny  Cape  Breton Giant, and others,  with  pleasure  and detachment.
But in  the  matter of Canadian novels I  have  to choose between  two positions-detachment and  involvement. They  are  separate and  dif­ ferent. Detachment is the  easier  position  (that is, to some extent,  your position), but I have to choose involvement.
Turning to my private addiction, writing,  I am  not consciously aware in  my  personal act  of writing   (how  could  one  be?)  of "the  Canadian novel" or "the English  novel" or "the American novel",  as the critic  or the  critical reader must  be aware,  and  as I am  aware  when  I transfer


43

THE  BRIDGE OR  THE STOKEHOLD



to the  position  of the critical reader. When  I think  of the  universal  yet private and,  I hope, critical approach as a working  writer  to this novel itself,  the  happier I am-free, and  devoid  of personal or national self­ consciousness,  which  is the  way  I  like  it.  Self-consciousness  is a  triple  curse.  But in retrospect I see my Canadianness, for example, in that  my locale in a sustained  piece of writing  (that is, in a book)  has to be British Columbia. There are other  places in the world  that  I know and love, but none  that  I know,  and  feel, and  love  in  the  same way. But  I did  not choose it. It chose. It is very strong.
If one moves over from  the place of the  person  engaged  in this parti­
cular  act  of writing  to the  place of the  person  on  the  bridge  looking at the  view  and   interested in  "the" Canadian-or  any   other-novel,  I assure  you  that   your  view  from  the  bridge   (which   I  also enjoy  enor­ mously when  I am  there)   differs from  the  view in the stokehold  where the stoking goes on. I should like to talk, a little,  from  the stokehold.  Let us consider  one  childishly  simple  yet eternally complex question-from what place do  people in  a  work  of  fiction   (the  "characters")  arise, swarming like moths from the dark into the area  of  light,  illuminated by that   novel?  The  question  is at  once  universal  and  particular, whether one is a West Indian or a Canadian.
Character and  plot are  a kind of chicken  and  the  egg, depending on
the writer.  Happily, the material and structure and population of a novel lie  within  a  writer's   ambience and  choice, unlike history  where  the question  of technique and  approach would always baffle some of us; but this private  piece of work, when finished, may take a place in a national literature as a Canadian novel, if the natural infusion  is strong  enough, and  if it  is good  enough, or  bad  enough. It  is a sort  of distillation of the  writer.   I  shall  try  to  present,  briefly,  considerations of origins  of "characters" that  seem valid  to myself. The  first  examples come  from two great  writers  outside our time and  place, and  none the less valid for a Canadian writer.
In  the second introduction to the novel Victory) Joseph  Conrad states
with  simplicity  the   natural way  in  which  he  first  comes  to know  his characters  (which   then  take  shape  in  a  world  which  is both  his inner world  and  an  outside  world), and  it  is a  way  that   I  understand and believe  in.  A  novelist  is, no doubt,  a  born  watcher. He  may  not  be as planned and  deliberate as a bird watcher, yet he cannot help  watching.


44

THE  BRIDGE OR  THE  STOKEHOLD



Th{' gr{'at writer  Conrad, a small man  of sombre  mien,  walks along 'the quayside  or  sits down  at  a cafe  table,  and  he watches.  That watching, passive as it is, is also an actively functioning part  of anyone who in some degree  becomes  a novelist.  Conrad  observes a man,  a woman  (never  to be seen by him,  perhaps), and  that  man, that  woman,  is his. There may not be a studied  imitation, but there  is a sort of active  principle at work, a  union.  He  sees  a  look  and  perhaps only  a  look-yet what  is more powerful   than   a  look?-or the  abstraction in  a  look,  even; and  the woman  who looks will live and  breathe and feel and speak and  take her part  in some future  story  (in Victory, it may be)  and  become  a person who affects him, and  us, deeply. Her  actions will be implicit  in that  look and  will somehow derive from   the  same  source,  whatever that  same source  may  be.  Even  her  death  will derive  from  it.  That look lights  a slow fire in the  writer  Conrad who--observe-is  a Pole but  writes as an Englishman.
Further, much further, went   Marcel Proust. Towards midnight Proust,  a  very sick man,  muffled up, arrives  at  the  house of old friends whom  he has not seen for a long time-M. and  Mme.  de Caillavet who have  a  young daughter Simone.  I quote  from  Maurois' Life  of Proust:

"Madame, what   I  ask  of  you  now  is that  I  should  be  permitted to  see Mlle. Simone  tonight."
"But  Marcel, she has been in bed for ages!" "I implore you, Madame ..."
Simone   was  brought  downstairs ... What was  it  he  hoped   to  find  in  her?
The  impressions that   he  needed  in  order  to paint  the  portrait of  Mlle.  de  Saint­ Loup,  the  daughter of  the  woman   whom  the  Narrator had  once  loved.

You and  I can see those large dark  eyes mournfully  exploring the face and  demeanour of the  young girl.  We see him  returning in haste  to his room. But  Proust  sometimes  blended  many persons. In  his own notes he says:   " (Felice-a  certain Marie-another old  servant  from  the  Illiers days-Fran _;oise) ."
Proust  is  not  wholly  in  fashion  now,  although  book  succeeds  book about  this enigmatic man.  Perhaps too much  has been said. His reputed colossal  faults   do  not  concern  me  at  all.  His  achievements do,  very deeply.  What  has he to do with Canadian Literature? He has to do with our   universal   master   and  servant   Time,   and  with  people  moving  in Time.


45

THE  BRIDGE OR  THE STOKEHOLD



A novelist may be exposed to the temptation of portraying some tanta­ lizing  intimately known person. If the  novelist  yields to this temptation and  turns  this person loose into  his book, he may  produce  a better  book than  he could otherwise have done, but at the high cost of peace of mind.  Not so, naturally, if the work is planned as a commemoration of love, or an explanatory or affectionate  commentary. There is a temptation which I can  only describe  as excruciating; for truth is far  far stranger than  fic­ tion or may be much  more interesting, and  who knows the temptations?
I  do.
My  own  experience,  which  is not great  but  varied  enough  for  refer­ ence, indicates to me the curiously wide spread  or narrow concentration of influence  in the origins of stories and  characters. A novel of mine, or its  main  character, grew  directly  from  a few words dropped almost  at random in a  previous  book. The  words  were,  ". .  .  formed  other  con­ nections." What   connections?  I had  never  seen  and  did  not  know  the girl in question.  She did not exist in my knowledge  any more  than  a fly in  the  next  room,  but  I considered  certain aspects  and  likelihoods,  and wrote  a  book  called  Lilly's  Story.  On  the  way,  characters multiplied, their  outlines  at first dim, later clear. I cannot  imagine willingly employ­ ing  even  a marginal character  without  knowing  his outside  appearance so well that  he could be identified  in the street  by myself and for my own purposes.
Speaking still of people in a book, there  comes the influence  of light,
which  may change  everything. There was, lately, a freighter which, surprisingly, came  to anchor  very close to shore and  just below our study windows.  It  caused  me intense  and  daily  pleasure. On  a grey  evening, the ship was a lovely ghost. On a fine morning the freighter was dazzling white  where  the  sunshine  fell and  the  silver  gulls flew over.  The  light faded, and  the ship became a dirty  tub. The  ship was the same ship;  the light  was different; its effect was perhaps false.  Upon  us all, light  falls, and  we seem to the  beholder  to change; and  upon  the  impending work of the novelist, light falls, and changes a scene and  the people in a room. In  the  book Victory, a false light falls upon  the man  Heyst and  its effect is lethal.
Somewhere, I think, the person in a story must touch  not only the con­ structive imagination, but also the earth   (that is to say, the writer's own experience)  in  the  course of the  struggle,  and  receive  life  and  strength

THE BRIDGE OR  THE  STOKEHOLD



from that  earth.
There is a skilful writer  who seldom presents  visual characters. They present  themselves  through the medium  of conversation. Yet a character occasionally  rises into  view,  like the  body of a  seal showing  through  a breaking wave.  Here  is Bullivant: "Bullivant   relaxed   his  bearing  and turned towards  Horace almost  with a smile, being adept at suggesting a facial  movement   without executing  it."  That is not  much; but  we see plainly   that   below  the  wave,  where  the  writer's   mind  exists,  there  is Bullivant  and his unsmiled  smile.
It seems to me  that  the  problems  of the stoker  (or  the craftsman, or the artist) are  universal, for people who are writers  are first writers, and then  they are  Canadian writers, Polish, French,  Russian,  English writers. I understand so well what  the Canadian novelist Mordecai Richler  said when  he was asked,  "Are  you a Jewish  writer  or a Canadian writer?"
He  answered, "Neither. I am a writer." Yet he is a Canadian writer,
and so am I.











Early Canadian Printing

The probable author of the verses reproduced on the following page is  William Brown, founder, printer and   editor of  the  Quebec Gazette, a  bilingual weekly  newspaper that  appeared first  on  June
2 I,  I 764.  Broadsides such  as  this  appeared some  years  in  French, some  in  English, and   were  distributed annually to  the  hundred or so subscribers within  Quebec City.










47

	·	'(-:\'(-:Jl(:"((:
= =
 
N otfi":O!Jt,.,_: J§.
.	+<>+X


y	TT	T	TT	T	T	YYYTTTYT	T	Y
N	E 	W - Y	E 	A 	R' s 	:g:(
						V 	E 	R 	S 	E 	S 	•'
l•)l(•.c(

s-_e)C(*+
·. -·: :!.:	Of   the
 
PRINTER's LAD
 
who carries  abo11t  the
 +•  ·
:!
.&

·e)i·l(-*.*:	ou E  B E  C	G  A  Z  E  T T E
 +•)ll(eau'

		-	T 0   THE 	·""·
., ...	)Ci••;o:.i!"
= =lt
......,.:(	...ll:(c:. i
: ::	J A N U A R  Y   1,   1785.
) •)!J(•-<  t- 	_.,_.,..,........._!y worthy good mailers,  whether  warriors  or civil, 	)(•'11..•/1


&.•.:J«:.• ;(
 12..r,.o..·...,-. ,.
 In venre.   comes to tempt  you,  a poor pn•nter 's  d.:v1'I•	)••')•II*(••""]'


r...j,o)ll(·•-t:t:
 •'t"•••M • "'! f Tho' a tempter  and devil,  not to  fi'l he inclines you, 	+..l«e!o•w't-

		f1 	But better to leave you,  he hopes,  than  he finds you :	:::•
::ii! !: 	T By the  ufe of   one virtue,  to  cover  all   fms, 	;:: :\
;-e·)o;(*;'$.	The  hint's  rather broad,  but he prays you'll excufe it, 	+•)ll(•..f..
	w· ·+	+·.··-:.,"
..2•';/l..*t,'( 	It  may be alk'd  with great  ,·ull:ice,  wherein  lies my merit?
•)(*((	From   Cadmus ot old,   the  black-art   I inherit:	:.;,.)0(.
j; !!	The  thoughts  of all people, with eafe I make known, 	::: :,\
· •'*: 	And fecrets moll: deep,  by my art are full !hewn.	:f..l«•
.,R•)Il(*!:	When   Incubus-like, on  the  prefs  my  weight   lies, 	;'lC(•
-	As foon it conceives and in labour loud cries;	... .
•XI:"+	Then  to  my own  offspring  as  midwife  l ll:and, 	;o.•)l(•
.r,e•:ef:"*.+l(	Full   form'd  the  young  bJntling  comes  forth   at  command  J 	+'"lC(.•)'

=·· =
 
A  bantling  moll: learned  in  both  french   and  englilh,	+*):..""

• •.0::
 As  all  true  grammarians  very foon  may  dill:inguilh.
l
 +••::

So  wondrous  intelligent,    it  tells  al
 the  news,

•.ll("':t	Of  N<Jbolu  and  Rajahs  and  both  the  <Jippoos.	)(,.):;(•
•·1•«·.:.!-:.	With  the  Rrijjias and  Porte  it  very  familiar  is, 	+..)a(.

•):!..
 But  almoll: forgets  what  a  doing  in  England   is, 	"' •
r	i 	,

Of  our  eve
 lov'd  mother
 t  fays ve1v little, 	;o",; •

		-•.:(	J	.....   .
·)!:(*.(	Ot  news  more domell:ic, what's  worfe,  'tis  quite  dry, 	;o.•J. .


sw-•;, •,).1,(*·...(._	Thefe  •£aults  1• t gives  hopes,  at .a
 
future day,  men dm'
 g, 	. ;·;>-··

t: :

.>,et*·•"""' -"..'-·;
 1f on  its  fair  words  there  be any  depending.
 .............

)(•:.'to
* '•(
:M.:
!-.:)(• 	Whence   hopes you  may  form,  in  procefs  of  time,

· • •
 In  a  carriole,  with  Roberts,  the  galaxy  to  climb :
 +"*•


._ •let •.:
 Or,  failing  of  that,   in  Blanchar
To heaven,  w.u hout  t he  pn.e1,1..s·
 d s  batteau,
1ree,  you  may  go.
 •+-'-• ';• •)

*"*•
f :•)l(*!:	At  the  foot  of  Parnaffus,  how  wits  wildly  range :

tf·)•.·)l=l(-":+:.
 Where   attempting fome flowers  poetic  to  pluck, 	)'i•!«e

""'  _::::
•)
 By  Canada  frons t hey fin d  t h em  aII  1n1.ruck .	,:.!-:.-·,*..,.!•.c'l

+.::
· ·::	Of  erring-faints, hurricanes,  or  a {hong gale. 	.a
*
::.)1:(.
)1(:+	Then goods  new  imported,  of  feven years  long  !tanding,

! :..
)!•)I( !..!
 With !hop-dull:  ingrain'd, and  worn  thread-bare by  handling.	:C.-•:.•
Thefe,  Sirs, are  its  merits,  no  great  things   'tis  true  J
By  your  kindnefs encourag'd, it greater   may  do. 	+•!«•
For. what  of  your  bounty  may  fall  to  my  !hare,	:;.: :

\•lOt*)!(	l w11h you  many  many  an  happy  NEw-YEAR. 	:0:• •
x .,.:o.:...-::-·:_ ·-:·c•o:t•to::)l(::.:t:.;n :o:::o::;:o: )l(!:o-:):·
.....	·'<\&:.=ooff'\fr.:.tf'\ro.  ,.,Jf o#''.....,..'Yc.- 	-:il



WHY I AM
AN EXPATRIATE


Norman  Levine


0N  A HOT JUNE DAY in 1949 I sailed from Montre­ al. I stood by the rails on the deck of the British freighter that was taking  me to Newcastle. From  the  first mate's  cabin  a record  was playing  Bye, Bye, Blackbird. I remember watching  the Mountain, the Sun Life Build­
ing, the Jacques Cartier bridge, and wondering  when I would see all this agam.
I had  left Canada once before, in 1944, on a troopship. Then I took it for granted that  I would come back. This time I was far less certain.
I was leaving for a stay in England  of at least two years. For I had  just received  a five thousand dollar  fellowship  with  which  to continue post­ graduate work at London University on my proposed  thesis: "The Decay of Absolute Values in Modern Society". But I knew, even then, that I had  no great interest  in the academic. It was, mainly, just the means of getting me over. And I wanted to get over because of the English girl who sat be­ side me at McGill  and took the same courses as I did and who was return­ ing  home,  to  London, after  graduation; and  also, because  I had  in my Gladstone bag the manuscript of my first novel. The publisher  in Toronto had  read it and said I would have to get it published in New York or Lon­ don;  then  he would look after  the Canadian market.
These  were, as I remember them, my immediate reasons for sailing up
the  St. Lawrence on the  freighter. But why I stayed  on in England and became  an expatriate goes back much  further, and  may account for the mixed sentiments I had  leaving Canada on that  hot June day.
It began,  I imagine, when  I was five; when  my mother took me one morning from  the house on St. Joseph  in Ottawa, crossed St. Patrick and walked  to York Street, and  left me at the public school to begin my first day. I could not speak  a word of English.
I was brought up in an orthodox  Jewish  home. My parents, and those


49

WHY I AM  AN  EXPATRIATE



who came  to visit them, spoke only Yiddish  with  a few Polish or Russian words  thrown  in. Everyone  else in that  street,  and  those surrounding it, was French Canadian. The  hostility and  indifference of this neighbour­ hood, and  the close-knit set-up of the small Jewish community, tended  to keep us children fairly immune  from any contact with  Canadian society, except  for  going  to school-but that  was close  to home,  and  remained Lower  Town.
It wasn't   until  I went  to High  School  that  I began  to leave  Lower Town. (Although there had been the odd sortie: like going for blotters  to the stores on Rideau, Sparks,  and Bank-selling exhibition tickets oppo­ site Zeller's  on Saturdays--or once, when I was around nine or ten, run­  ning  away  from  home by hitch-hiking with  a friend  to what is Uplands Airport today  but  what  used to be farmland, and  being brought back by the police) .
The  best  thing  about  High  School  was  getting there-riding  in  the
early  mornings,  especially in the fall along  the Driveway, by the Canal, on the blue CCM bicycle with the handlebars turned inside out, until you came  to the  Avenues, on the opposite side of the  city. Otherwise it had little attraction. We went to that particular High  School because our par­ ents couldn't afford to send us to university. And we remained there until, legally, one was free to leave;  then we would go and  work in the govern­  ment.
For the  two and  a half years that  I went  there  I spent  my time doing shorthand, bookkeeping,  filing,  typing,  and  writing business letters.  In spare  hours  we had  some English, very bitty; some geography, and Ca­ nadian history. We were also taught  penmanship and  everyone came out of  there  with  that  easy-to-read  mass-produced commercial style.  (I re­ belled  against  this to such an  extent  that  I can  hardly  read my writing  today). Then we had  salesmanship. We  had  to go in front  of the class and  pretend we were selling something-a car,  a house, or life-insurance
-to a classmate, while our teacher  criticized  our  technique.
Although I wasn't  getting  much of a formal education at High  School I did get one from  a different source. I became a member of a left-wing Zionist  youth  movement. Originally it consisted  of my friends  who now lived in the neighbourhood, around Murray Street. We had built a ping­ pong table  together and used to go out skiing in the Laurentians or swim­ ming at Britannia and Hog's Back. Then someone older came from Mon-

50

WHY I AM  AN  EXPATRIATE



trcal and invited  us to join the youth movement.  We wore grey-blue shirts with  green  kerchiefs  at the neck, just like Boy Scouts. But our immediate aim was to end up in Palestine and live and work on one of the kibbutzim.
We  rented   a clubhouse-a bare  room  above  a shoe-store  on  Rideau Street-and we would  come  here  at  nights, on weekends, whenever  we were free. We drew up schedules, and  read Marx, Adam Smith, Dos Pas­ sos, Steinbeck, Hemingway, Veblen,  and  gave lectures  in front  of  each other.  We pooled our spending  money. We ate pork on the Sabbath. We sang Ballad for Americans. And we argued  about  religion, free love, capi­  talism  and  communism, Hedy  Lamarr, The  Book of  The  Month Club selections,  Gloomy Sunday,  and girls.
As soon as I could, at  sixteen,  I left High  School,  and  worked  in the government as an office boy until  I was eighteen.  The  year was 1942. So I joined up as aircrew  with the RCAF, and after training out west gradu­ ated  as  a  pilot  officer  and  eventually  ended  up  with  429  Squadron at Leeming,  Yorkshire.
The  kind of life I suddenly  found  myself leading in England was com­ letely different from what  I had known in Canada. All the time in Otta­ wa I was conscious of living on Murray Street, Lower Town,  but that one didn't belong;  the  appeal of the left-wing  Zionist youth  movement was that  it recognized  the fact  that  to be Jewish  here  in Canada meant  that  you were excluded  from  feeling that  you belonged to what  was going on in the country. In England I found myself being attended to by a series of batmen, all old enough  to be my father. We ate in a fine mess. A string  quartet played  for us while we had our Sunday  dinner. And on the wall above us was the Rokeby Venus. We lived well. We had lots of money to spend. The  uniform  gave us admission to all sorts of places. And perhaps because  one  was  twenty,  I suddenly  found  myself absorbed  in "living", where  before it seemed one was just hanging around, marking time.
Occasionally I would  be made  to realize the distance  that  had  grown between  myself and  my background. My father, though  he was able  by this time to speak a hesitant English-was unable to read or write it. And by the  time  I went  overseas,  though  I could with difficulty make  myself understood in Yiddish-!was  unable  to read  or write  it. Consequently we were unable  to communicate and  had to keep silent.




51

WHY I  AM  AN  EXPATRIATE


IREMEMBER  not  long after  the  war  was over going  to see a film, "The Best Years of Our  Lives". I don't  remember it as a parti­ cularly  good film. But it did touch on that  feeling  that  one had when re­
turning to Lower  Town-to the banner  on the  wooden  verandah saying WELCOME HOME SON; the peddlers' horses and  wagons parked  on both sides on the street; the eyes of middle-aged women staring from be­ hind  lace  curtains-that one could  not  go back  to this  past. Whatever issues the war  had  been fought  over, I now found  myself  fighting  a per­  sonal battle  as well.
At first this took strange forms. I found myself pretending that  I didn't live in Lower  Town.  I would get off the street car on Laurier in order  to walk through Sandy Hill, rather than take one to let me off on St. Patrick, which  was only a  block away  from  home.  I  began  to live in a fantasy world:1 pretending that  I wasn't  Jewish, giving myself fictitious  parents. And I started to write, a novel, set in Austria. (Needless to say I had never been to Austria-but had read  the week before a book about  Vienna  that was lying around the house) . The  clubhouse,  politics, going to Palestine, didn't interest  me. The  rift the war had opened  up was too violent for me to pretend to forget that other  way of living which seemed so much freer and  less provincial. The  price  I had  to pay, I could  not have realized at the  time.
But  the war  was over, and  something  had  to be done.  I decided  to go to university-mainly to postpone  the  decision  of what  to do. I did not want  to return to work in  the  government. I decided  on McGill  partly because  I have always liked Montreal: for us from  Ottawa it meant  'the big time'.  And  I  remembered as a child  fruit-peddling with  my father, crossing over the small bridge by Lansdowne Park  and  seeing-when the wagon came up to the rise-the Redmen  playing  rugby in the stadium. It was only a glimpse, but long enough  to decide  me on McGill.
At university  I was in my element-mainly because  I could not take it
seriously. I graduated with two degrees, first class honours,  various prizes, a scholarship, and  the five thousand  dollar  fellowship.  Even at the end, I was unable  to take any of this seriously because I considered all along that my presence  there  was something in the nature of a fraud.
The  only reason I was able to be there  in the first place was because of the Veteran's Act; fifty per cent of my flying class was killed. And on top

52

WHY I AM   AN EXPATRIATE



of that,  on my first day  I  was asked  to fill in a  registration card.  They wanted  to know my entrance qualifications-]unior Matric. Not having it, I filled in the first figures that  came into my head.  Had  anyone  bothered to check  up,  that  presumably would  have  ended  that. But  they  didn't. Since  then  I have  always nourished  a soft spot for the academic when it deals with human nature.
At  McGill  I continued to play out  this fantasy.  It was, on the whole,
very pleasant. I found  myself going to magnificent  houses with  clinging vines, sloping lawns, flower beds and  rock gardens.  From  their  windows I could  see the city below with its churches  and bridges and factory chim­ neys. Occasionally I did make a gesture. I took a room in an old cellar on Dorchester Street, next to the boiler. The slot of a window faced the rail­ way lines. The  room  was narrow, dingy, and  there  was always a film of grit  on the  walls and  my face  when  I woke up. My friends would come here in their  fathers' cars, have a good look-they put this down to some perversity  on my part-then we would leave and drive comfortably away to the  cottage with  the  period  furniture; the top fiat with the  butler; or cocktails  at the Berkeley. But throughout this, and the dinner-dances, the nice people,  the lectures,  the talk, and  the all night  balls:  "There was," as  Sir  Thomas Browne  has said,  "another man  within  me  that's angry with  me."
By the  time  I  left  McGill   I  was  pretty confused. Things seemed
so far  to have fallen in my lap, as long as I continued  to play this game­ which  was, for me,  just a series of pretenses. The postponement of any decision,  which  I got by going  to university, was now up. The  choice  I had  to make  was either  to continue  the way I had, and  it seemed all too easy and  attractive to do so--or else try to come to terms.  I didn't think I could do this by living in Canada, where I would always feel a sense of betrayal.
I had  by this time  also realized that  all I wanted  to do was write. And I  knew  that   this  would  be  easier,  at  the  beginning,  away  from  home. Writing, in  the  immediate circle  of relatives  and  friends,  was resented; even  though  they paid  lip service to it. Mainly  because  I did not follow their  own ways of existence.  It shocked them that  I should  try to 'make a living' from something so precarious as writing poems, stories, or novels. They  would  have  said  nothing against  me if I  had  gone  door  to door selling life insurance.

53

WHY I AM  AN  EXPATRIATE



So I came over to England.
But  postwar  England  came,  at  first, as something of a surprise. War­ time  England meant  for me  a life of abundance, care-free good  times, new experiences. Now, it meant  sharing  with another Canadian a peeling flat that  was falling to bits; queueing  up once a week for the cube of but­ ter,  the  small  Polish  egg,  the  bit  of cheese,  the  few  rashers  of  streaky bacon,  the  ten  cigarettes under  the  counter. And  also, perhaps for  the first time in my life, I began to accept my past, and to understand myself; by some irony, the closer I came to that,  the closer I began understanding my fellow-man.




Now, I like going back  to Montreal, Ottawa, Lower Town. After  I have lived in England  for a few years, I feel it necessary for this reminder; it somehow puts certain things right for me; and  I en­ joy being  back.  Whether I live in Canada or  not,  that  doesn't seem so terribly  important at present.  I find it exciting  whenever I return, while I don't  find that  about  England.  I guess I could live in England another ten years without feeling any compulsion  to write about it. But I find it a good place to live and work-I feel pleasantly anonymous. What  happens when  I have  run  dry of my Canadian  things?  I don't  know. That is the price  one has paid  for living away. But it doesn't  concern me as yet, and in any  case one always falls back on the personal.  A British  novelist who read  Canada  Made Me said, "You  know I think  what  you really would like to have  been was an orthodox Jew." Perhaps. But that  is impossible in the world  I know. And, although my parents could not have known it, it all  began  with  the sound of a schoolbell on that  first morning when  I was five. What followed was inevitable.













54



LA VIE LITTERAIRE
AU CANADA FRANCAIS:

Essai de  Bilan pour tAnnee 1959-1960



Jean-Guy Pilon





REVOIR, apres  quelques mois, les evenements  mar­ quants d'une annee   litteraire, c'est  s'exposer,  a  coup  sur,  a  des  oublis graves qu'un lecteur  pointilleux serait en droit de relever. C'est pourquoi je m'engage dans  ce  bilan  avec  une certaine crainte et en  prenant, au
point  de depart, Ia precaution d'avertir ceux qui  me feraient l'honneur de me lire, que cette  synthese n'est sO.rement pas complete; malgre toute l'objectivite que  je voudrais lui assurer, elle demeurera quand  meme personnelle,  c'est-a-dire que  certains  evenements  ont  pu prendre a mes yeux une  dimension que  d'autres observateurs peuvent  fort  bien ne pas leur  accorder, et vice-versa.  Qu'on le veuille ou non, des evenements en apparence minimes  ont  parfois  une importance qui  les rend  plus neces­ saires  et significatifs  que  des machines  considerables.
Ainsi en est-il de Ia troisieme  rencontre des ecrivains canadiens qui eut lieu  dans  les Laurentides, a quelques  milles de  Montreal, du  16 au  18 octobre  1959.
Pour  en  bien  saisir  le sens et  Ia portee,  il faut  d'abord en  esquisser
l'historique. C'est  a l'ete  1957 que les Editions  de l'Hexagone ont lance l'idee  d'une rencontre annuelle des poetes canadiens. J'avais deja,  pour rna  part,  en  assistant  aux  Biennales  Intemationales de Poesie, en Belgi­ que,  pris conscience  de Ia necessite de reunir  les poetes, moins peut-etre pour  faire  une lumiere definitive sur les notions de poesie et de langage, que  pour  les obliger  a  un  dialogue  qu'il  n'est  plus  possible  de  refuser. Cette  initiative nouvelle  avait suscite assez d'enthousiasme pour que nous decidions  d'en   publier   les  textes  ( c'est  l'origine   du  livre  La  Poesie et


55

LA  VIE  LITTERAIRE AU  CANADA  FRANCAIS



nous) et pour que nous prenions la decision de tenir  une rencontre sembl­ able  chaque annee,  en  l'ouvrant de  plus  en  plus  aux  autres  ecrivains.  Ainsi,  le  deuxieme annee,  nous  avions  invite  les  poetes  canadiens de langue  anglaise  et  les critiques.  Ces nouveaux contacts furent extreme­ ment  enrichissants. La  troisieme  rencontre fut  done  une  rencontre des poetes, romanciers et dramaturges, c'est-a-dire une rencontre d'ecrivains de  toutes  disciplines.  Encore  la,  nos confreres de  langue  anglaise  ont voulu s'associer au mouvement.
La  rencontre de 1959, organisee  par  Femande St-Martin et Michele Lalonde, avait  comme  theme  Creation  et langage. Dans  une  remarqu­ able  conference, Mme.  St-Martin precisait   des le debut,  toutes  les re­ sonances du theme choisi:

Les problemes les plus  fondamentaux qui  peuvent s'offrir  a la pensee  sont  ceux du  langage, car  de  Ia fa'>on dont  le  language s'elabore "spontanement" en  nous
. .  . c'est-a-dire sous  les influences  concerrees  et  tyranniques de  notre  culture et
des societes  qui  nous  entourent, dependra la  structure de  nos emotions, Ia qualite de  nos  relations  aux  choses  et  aux  etres,  la  nature de  nos  recherches, de  notre activire  et de notre volonte de creation.
L'on  sait  maintenant que  toute  expression  humaine, toute symbolisation: gestu­ elle,  sonore,  plastique, scientifique ou  verbale, est  une  forme  de !angage.  Si  nos debats   nous  conduisent a examiner le langage verbal, c'est-a-dire celui qui  utilise les mots ecrits ou  paries,  il faut  malgre  tout  garder constamment present a !'esprit Ie fait  que  ce langage  verbal  n'est  que  I'un  des Iangages  possibles a l'homme, que  l'une des  formes  ou  methodes qu'il   a elaborees, pour  s'exprimer lui-meme et  ses relations avec le monde.
Ce  langage verbal  a-t-il  pour  fonction   d'exprimer Ies memes  realires  humaines que  le  lang;age  plastique ou  scientifique ou  musical? II  semble  essentiel  que  des ecrivains se posent  la question et y repondent.
Le  langage verbal  peut-il  ou doit-il  se referer aux  memes  emotions, aux  memes perceptions du  reel,  aux  memes  realites  internes et  extemes que  celles  auxquelles se referent les autres Iangages humains?
Le  langage est-il  creation? A que!moment le devient-il? S'il  n'est  pas  creation d'un  monde abstrait, purement humain, quelle  est  exactement sa  fonction chez l'homme? Une   reuvre  peut-elle encore  etre  dite  "de creation" lorsqu'elle ne fait que  mimer   le  langage   quotidien, les  dialogue et  Ies habitudes ve,rbales de  ceux qui  ne sont  pas ecrivains? A queUes conditions? Le  langage conserve-t-il Ia meme fonction quand il est  utilise  par  l'homme moyen,  l'homme de  la  rue  et  quand il est recupere par  le travail  de l'ecrivain? En  un mot, Ia fonction d'ecrire exige-t-elle un   certain  maniement  des  mots  differents  du   simple   exercice   spontane  de  la parole?

LA  VIE   LITTERAIRE AU   CANADA FRANCAIS



Robert  Elie,  qui  devait  traiter plus particulierement de "Langage et roman", declarait, dans  un expose qu'il  convient  de relire:

Le  roman n'est  pas  description, mais, comme  le poeme  ou  la tragedie, le tableau ou la symphonie, il est creation. II ne s'agit  pas d'un  retour vers le passe, aucune­
ment  d'un exercice  de  memoire. Proust  n'est  pas aussitot  parti   a la  recherche du
temps  perdu que  c'est  un  monde  nouveau qu'il  edifie,  ou ses modeles  ne peuvent
se reconnaitre, ni  lui-m me
la vue  de  Delft,  se croit  fidele  a ce qu'il  voit, et pourtant aucune photographie ne
ressemblerait a son  tableau. Proust,  plus  encore  que  Vermeer, nous  propose  une image  vivante de son  monde interieur qui  s'ouvre  a plus grand que  lui-m me
On  comprend que  je n'aie  aucune sympathie pour  ce langage qui  se veut  per­
sonnel  et  a la  portee de  tous  le monde.Qu'un  romancier traite cavalierement le dictionnaire et  la grammaire m'importe assez peu s'il a le sens de !'image, si d'une image  il fait  un monde et refait  le monde.
Est-il  necessaire  de  dire  que  je ne connais pas d'illusion plus  dangereuse en  art que  le  realisme, la  recherche de  la  vraisemblance, la  crainte des  situations  ex­ tr mes,
qui peuvent s'allier ala sottise.

Jacques Languirand, en abordant le meme theme sous un eclairage semblable, mais en dramaturge cette  fois, allait  soulever de vives discus­ sions. La derniere demi-journee etait  reservee a un echange  de vues entre  les ecrivains  de langue  fran<_;aise et les ecrivains  de langue anglaise.
L'une des  questions  qui  allait   revenir  le  plus  souvent  au  cours  des debats  et qui devait  egalement donner  lieu a une interrogation collective, fut celle de Ia realite  canadienne, c'est-a-dire est-ce que les ecrivains canadiens refletent, consciemment  ou  non,  une  realite  canadienne et d'autre part, quelle  est cette  realite  canadienne. La question  est vaste et
extremement difficile a demeler; elle souleva  cependant assez d'interet
pour  que  l'assemblee suggere  d'en  faire  le theme  de  Ia prochaine ren­
contre  qui  doit  avoir  lieu  a l'automne Ig6o  et que  Michele  Lalonde et
Jacques Godbout ont accepte d'organiser.

QuELQUES semaines  auparavant, les prix  litteraires de Ia Province  de Quebec, cette fois en poesie, avaient  ete attribues. Lepre­ mier  prix  etait   accorde a  Pierre  Trottier pour  son  recueil  Poemes  de Russie   (Editions de  l'Hexagone)  et  pour  un  manuscript  qui  doit  etre  publie  au cours  de l'annee: Les belles au bois dormant. Les deux  autres
prix allaient a Ronald  Despres  (Silences  a nourrir de sang)  et a Jacques

57

LA  VIE  LITTERAIRE AU CANADA  FRANCAIS



Godbout  ( Les  paves sees et  un  manuscrit a  paraitre en  1g6o) . Pierre
Trottier, diplomate de carriere, sejoume presentement a  Londres. Jac­
ques  Godbout, realisateur a !'Office National  du  Film, est  directeur­
adjoint de la revue LIBERTE 60. En plus d'etre un des jeunes ecrivains  les plus actifs, il mene  une carriere de peintre avec autant de succes.

C'EST Fran<;ois Moreau, un autre jeune  ecrivain  cana­
dien  qui  vit  momentanement a Londres,  qui  avait  remporte le prix  du
concours annuel de  pieces de  theatre organise par   le  Theatre  du
Nouveau-Monde. Sa  piece  Les Taupes, publiee  par  la  suite  dans  Les
Ecrits du Canada  franr;ais, est impitoyable pour  une certaine bourgeoisie qui cache  ses tares sous un vemis apparent. On assiste a la degringolade
d'une famille  "bien" qui, jusque la, avait  porte  un masque.  Mais tous les masques  tombent, les uns apres  les autres,  dans  un climat  de haine  qui s'aggrave sans cesse. La  piece  de Fran<;ois  Moreau a suscite diverses reactions  qui ne l'ont  pas empeche,  au contraire, de demeurer a l'affiche plusieurs semaines. Fran<;ois  Moreau possede de  belles qualites de
dramaturge et  il sait  ecrire  une  langue  nette  et  belle,  ce qui  n'est  pas toujours le fait  de ses confreres  dramaturges plus connus.

VERS la  meme  epoque-la rentree comporte toujours quantite de manifestations-une des joies des intellectuels du Quebec a
ete  d'apprendre le lancement de Canadian  Literature, a l'Universite de
B.C.,  revue  qui  sent  le  besoin  de  publier  des  textes  ecrits  en fran<;ais.
Dans  cet immense  pays ou les distances  empechent souvent  tout contact humain, !'apparition d'une  revue comme celle-Ia est de nature a permet­ tre  des echanges  de vues qui  n'auraient jamais  ete  possibles autrement.
Le  role qu'ont a jouer les revues dans la vie intellectuelle d'un  pays est
un  role  de  premier plan.  Non  seulement   la  revue  tient  compte   de  la

litterature qui se fait,  mais elle est en mesure  de provoquer des reuvres, de  donner   un  public  a des ecrivains.  Canadian  Literature  a ce merite
d'apporter aux  lecteurs  de l'Ouest  du  pays certaines donnees  sur la vie litteraire canadienne de langue  fran<;aise et de faire  connaltre aux intel­ lectuels  de  langue  fran<;aise ce qui  peut  se faire  chez  nos  confreres  de langue  anglaise.  Cette  preoccupation est necessaire  dans un pays comme  le  Canada ou  le  role  de  la  litterature et  de  l'ecrivain  n'a  jamais  ete exagere  par  qui que ce soit. L'action entreprise par Canadian  Literature

LA  VIE  LITTERAIRE AU  CANADA   FRANCAIS



est d'autant plus interessante qu'elle  est susceptible  d'unir les provinces extremes du pays.

DEPUIS une  dizaine  d'annees,  l'un  des principaux  edi­ teurs  de  Montreal-Le Cercle  du  Livre  de  France-organise  un  con­ cours  annuel de  romans. Le  jury,  choisi  parmi   les critiques  les  plus competents, determine  le  gagnant d'apres les manuscrits  presentes  au concours.  Plusieurs  de  nos meilleurs  romanciers  ont  ainsi, soit au debut  de  leur  carriere, soit  un  peu  plus  tard,  obtenu  ce prix.  En  1959, c'est Pierre  Gelinas  qui  etait  couronne  pour  son premier  roman  Les vivants les morts  et  les autres. Ce  livre  raconte !'experience politique d'un  homme  qui, apres  certains evenements intemationaux, cesse de croire en la  mystique  du  parti et  en quitte  les  rangs. Si le livre  est interessant  a plusieurs  points  de  vue comme document, il ne s'impose  pas comme  un roman  de  premiere force.  La  part  du  reportage y est  trop  importante pour  permettre a !'auteur une construction de roman, la dimension d'une  uvre
nification  est a retenir  pour notre milieu qui fomente  souvent des revoltes sans  les  pousser  a bout.  Pierre  Gelinas  est un  ecrivain  qui  continuera
d'ecrire, voila qui est rassurant.

EN  1ANVIER,  la  revue  Cite  Libre  a  fait   peau  neuve. Publiee  irregulierement, trois ou quatre fois par annee  depuis  1950, Cite
Libre a ete,  je crois, a l'origine  d'une  certaine ·evolution de notre  milieu.
Ses  prises  de  position  sur  les  problemes  sociaux  et  politiques ne  sont
jamais  passees inapen;ues. Se definissant comme une revue catholique de gauche, Cite  Libre  n'a   jamais  hesite  a  s'opposer  nettement a  la  hier­ archie,  lorsque  le besoin s'en faisait  sentir. Cette  revue a ete un des poles de  resistance  au  cours  de  la  derniere   decade.  Elle  aura  contribue,  je crois, a creer  un peu plus de liberte  dans notre milieu, ne serait-ce qu'en  demasquant des influences occultes.
Apres  10 ans,  un choix  s'imposait  aux  animateurs de Cite  Libre:  ou
cesser de  paraitre ou  reorganiser l'equipe et relancer la  revue  sous une forme  nouvelle.  Cette derniere solution, heureusement, s'imposa.
Cite  Libre  parait maintenant tous les mois et sa diffusion  a ete con­
siderablement agrandie. Le format  a ete change  et tient  maintenant du magazine. Les collaborateurs sont plus nombreux et si l'on a voulu con-


59

LA  VIE   LITTERAIRE AU  CANADA FRANCAIS



server  a la revue des articles  bien documentes et tres fouilles, on a egale­
ment  fait  un effort  particulier pour  y introduire des articles  plus courts qui  se  rattachent  necessairement a  des  evenements moins  eloignes  et
susceptibles  d'interesser un public  moins restreint. Cite Libre est la seule revue du genre au Canada, et le prestige  personnel  de ses directeurs con­ stitue la meilleure  recommandation.

C'EST a la fin de janvier  egalement que !'affaire Time  a souleve !'interet de  toute  la population de  Montreal. Rappelons brieve­ ment  les faits.  Un  des numeros  du Time  consacre  au  probleme mondial  du  surpeuplement a ete saisi par  la police.  Le chef  de  l'escouade de la moralite a ordonne cette  saisie jugeant  que  l'image de la couverture de
la  revue-une noire  dormant  le sein a son enfant-etait obscene et pre­
judiciable  a la sante  morale  de  la population. On  voit  des maintenant quel  degre  d'imbecilite une decision semblable atteignait. 11 va sans dire
que  je n'aurais pas mentionne  cette  saisie n'eussent  ete les consequences, et  l'une  d'entre elles est  particulierement  revelatrice. Deux  jours  plus tard,  le quotidien La Presse publiait les protestations de vingt-sept ecri­ vains,  artistes  et professeurs contre  cette  saisie et contre  toute forme  de censure  policiere.  A rna connaissance,  c'est la premiere fois que les intel­  lectuels  reagissaient aussi  rapidement, et  les  protestations  individuelles
s'ajoutant les unes aux autres, ont donne lieu a une protestation collective
dont on a peu d'exemples ici. Ayant participe de tres pres a I'organisation
de cette  protestation, je constate  que  les intellectuels joueraient de plus
en plus leur  role dans la societe si on leur  en fournissait  !'occasion. Indi­
viduellement, ils s'interessent   a tous ces problemes mais  prennent  rare­
ment position en  public. Leur influence ne  s'exerce que  si tout est organise  ou canalise  par  une association  quelconque. Les associations  ne semblent  pas se preoccuper de cet aspect  de la vie ni du  role de l'intel­ lectuel  dans la societe; c'est pourquoi  il devient  urgent  que quelque chose
soit fait  en  ce sens. La  creation  d'un  centre  fran ais                               a
Montreal est probablement de nature a faciliter ce role des intellectuels
et des ecrivains.


IL CONVIENT egalement de souligner que Radio-Canada a diffuse, sur son reseau fran  ais,  a compter du mois d'avril une serie de
dix  emissions  intitulees  "Anthologie sonore  de  la  poesie  canadienne".

6o

LA  VIE   LITTERAIRE AU  CANADA FRANCAIS



Les  poetes  les  plus  r presentatifs
quelques-uns de  leurs  poemes  et a les enregistrer  pour  cette  anthologie sonore. Les documents ainsi accumules  par  Radio-Canada sont evidem­ ment   tres  precieux. C'est  Fernand Ouellette et  Gilles  Marcotte qui etaient charges  de  rediger  les textes de presentation de chaque poete.,

EN  AVRIL  egalement, LIBERTE  6o,  }a seule  revue  lit­ teraire du Canada franc;ais, a publie des traductions de six poetes cana­ diens de langue  anglaise: Jay Macpherson, Louis Dudek,  Anne Marriott, P. K. Page, Irving Layton  et Raymond  Souster. Ces traductions remarqu­ ables, effectuees  par  Georges Cartier, ont ete publiees  en regard  du texte original.  Un  tel geste qui s'ajoute a d'autres, peut  amener des contracts plus etroits  et un enrichissement de part  et d'autre.

CES DOUZE MOIS de vie litteraire, s'ils ont ete fertiles en evenements de  toutes  sortes,  n'auront pas vu paraltre d'ceuvres import­ antes,  a !'exception des  deux  livres de  Paul  Toupin:  Souvenirs pour demain  et  Le Mensonge. Je crois en effet qu'une annee litteraire qui ne voit  pas  paraitre des ouvrages d'Andre Langevin,  de  Gabrielle   Roy, d'Alain Grandbois, de Robert  Elie, de Jean  Simard,  de Fernand Ouel­  lette,  de Jean Filiatrault, pour ne mentionner que ceux-la,  est une annee
mediocre. L'annee 59-6o  le fut,  a ce strict  point  de  vue,  meme  si elle
vaut  pas d'autres aspects  que  je me suis efforce de resumer.
Sans  jouer au  prophete, il m'est  permis  d'annoncer que les prochains mois  nous  apporteront, autant en  poesie que  du  cote  du  roman,  des ceuvres importantes. Et c'est  peut-etre la seule consideration encourage­ ante  qui se degage  de !'enumeration que  j'ai tente  de faire.















61






CLOTHES IN SEARCH OF
AN EMPEROR


Jack  Ludwig



ONCE UPON A  TIME a guild  of dedicated tailors  turned out a robe so magnificent word  got  round it was made for an emperor. So an emperor's progress was announced through the  land. Every­ one  bowed  before  the clothes which  were so magnificent they  naturally  walked  by themselves. But   a  child untutored by tailors  cried   out:
"Look, look, the clothes  are without an emperor!"
To  my  parable I hopefully add  yet.
We   Canadians  have  just   begun   to write.
I'm delighted to see a magazine called Canadian Literature; I applaud the  ap­ pearance of a Canadian Literature section at   the   annual  meeting of  the   Modern Language Association; I hope  for  much
-that the   Canada Council's aid   will give   Canadian  writers   time   to  do   the things they  haven't yet done,  that  the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation's interest, encouragement,  and high standards will bring  to a large public a literature serious and complex, that  a vigorous  publishing industry will push the sale of work  of high  quality. But let's distinguish between  the  attitudes  and audience helpful to the  writing of signifi-
 cant   literary   works,  and   the  writing of those works themselves. To parody what Gertrude Stein said to  Hemingway: "Hopes, Canada, is not  literature": "Grants, Canada, is not  literature": "ln­ digenuity, Canada,  is  not  literature."
We  are  not   yet  an  emperor.
Our  best so far  is not so hot. Touchy stances  will  not  make  it  better. The  job we must do is encourage (but  not falsify) hope   for   a  Shakespeare,  but   not   treat what   is  available  as  Shakespeare.  We think   we  know  what   we  are  not -we are  not American, nor are we British,  but we also should  know  that  these  two  par­ ticular  negatives do  not  make  a  positive.  Writing is  never   aprioristic.  The writer  who   sets  out   to   sound   Canadian  will probably  end  up like the young  Southern belle of Randall Jarrell's  tale,  who came  up  to  New  York  and  was  told  so often,  "honey, whatever  you  do  don't ever  lose that   charming  southern  accent," that  in time  she  began  to  sound   like something right  out  of  "Amos  and  Andy".
Just  how significant is it to be or sound Canadian anyway? Is it  only  Russia  that we pick up  from  Crime  and  Punishment and  The Brothers?  Do  we  really  go  for the  nonsense  about hearing the  sound  of

OPINIONS AND   NOTES



Nova  Scotia's waves in the  poetry  of this writer, or  the  sweep  of the  bleak  prairies in that  of another? And where does the Canadian ocean or prairie  end and the American  begin?   And  what   happens to Americans who tune  their ears in Nova Scotia  or Canadians who do the same in upper   Maine?
The  problem, again   as  I see  it,  is  to have   a  literature that   doesn't   apologize for   the   fact    that    significant    acts   and actions  go on in Nova  Scotia, or Toronto, or Vancouver; but  the creation of signifi­ cant   action   and   meaning  is  a   private, almost  hermetic act,  and  not  really  sub­ ject  to  prescription from  even  the  most friendly of sources.  The point  hasn't been made   often   enough:   we  clearly   under­ stand  the  power  of  the  enemies  of litera­ ture   to  thwart it,  but  we  mustn't think  that  substituting friends for  enemies  will produce  it.  Build  the  finest  theatre, pre­ pare  the  most  tutored audience, and  you may  still  not  come  up  with  Shakespeare. Canada  is anxious for  a significant litera­ ture,    a   significant  music,   a   significant sculpture  and   painting:  let  the   friends of  the  arts  not  press  too hard, nor  make fake  though friendly claims  for  what  has been   done   up   to  this  point.  If we  are liberated from  colonial  status  and  paro­ chial  attitudes we  won't  mind  admitting that  our  best  this-or-that isn't  really  very good  at  all.
A colleague of mine  attended an inter­ cultural conference sponsored  by the Uni­  versity   of  British   Columbia's  Extension Division  in  Vancouver last summer: she swears  (if  she  weren't a she  I might  not believe  her)   that  a  prairie university pro­  fessor  put  the  Canadian situation before the   conference  in  these magnificent words:
"How  do  we  establish   an  indigenous
 culture?"
In the question one can hear  the gentleman's obvious answers: first a Royal   Commission  on  The  Establishing of an  Indigenous Canadian Culture, then a few grants here  and  there,  a fine assort­ ment    of   cultural  carrots  and   cultural sticks,  and  Canada's in  business!
Do   we  have   so  much   un-indigenous culture in  Canada that  we can  tum our attention to being  different from  the  rest of  Western Civilization? What  does  this attitude do  but  shut  out  the larger world and  time  to which  any  culture must  ulti­ matel}:" belong?   In   our  fear   of-if  you will excuse the social science expression­ replicating Britain or  America, we tempt a   greater   danger-setting   up   strictly Canadian   hierarchies  of   the   here   and  now  which  mistake  clothes for emperors, which   pretend  the   pillow   on   Falstaff's head  is  a  crown, and  he  a  true  king.  A fake  hierarchy  of  the   here   and   now  is necessarily    absurd;  no   amount  of   de­ fensiveness   can   stop   the   outside   world from   eventually  fitting  the   Canadian hierarchy  into   the   larger   hierarchy  of Western Civilization in its complete scope of space  and  time.  Let's  not  set  up  atti­ tudes   and  scales  of   judgment which,   of necessity:, prove  absurd  when   what   we have  is measured  by what  Western Civil­  ization   not  only  has  now  but  has  in  its rich  past. Sealing our  self off to establish an   indigenous culture  assumes   that, in our  desire   to  be  major league,  we  will, possibly,  treat our  best  philosopher as  if he  were  Plato, our  poet  as Shakespeare, our  Prime  Minister-say-as  a combi­ nation of  Solon  and  Pericles.  Ranked in the family's hierarchy, father may seem a great wit,  but  in  the  town  he's   just  an­ other  bore; in  the  town's  hierarchy  the local  poet  is a  nightingale  Keats, to  the

OPINIONS AND   NOTES



nation  but one more dull thrasher. I make the  point  too  harshly,  perhaps, and  too frequently,  doubtless; but   what   I  fear most in Canada is a parochial defence against charges of  being  parochial.
Let's knock off this nonsense about an indigenous culture and  let  a little  outside air  blow  into  our  Canadian world.  Give people like Dwight MacDonald and other cultural  commissars and  foundation heelers  the  opportunity to look at  us and pass opinions. If our  world  is flimsy as a pack  of cards   that  outside air  should  be allowed  to  blow  it over.  If MacDonald's roughing  us  up   makes   a  difference  to what's  going   on  in  the  arts,   then,  per­ haps,   better it  should   not  go  on.  Only  when  we  let  America work  us  over  will our  own  working-over of  America have  any  real  meaning. Only  when   the  false icons  are  cleared   off our  mantel will  we be able  to swing  away  with style at  those cluttering the  American and  British  dis­ play  places.
But   let's   not   take   the  easy  way  and pummel the  worst  America-the movies, juke boxes, Luces,  TV, Madison Avenue, Edgar  Hagerty  and  Charlie   Eisen­ hower, sane-solid-and-being-built-up­ Nixon. Take a sly peek at  the  music, art,
 and   lecture   announcement  columns of the  New  York   Sunday Times and  recog­ nize the other  America; measure our own literary   men   by  what   goes  on  monthly  and  quarterly in  twenty  or  thirty  Ameri­  can   journals;  crass  commercial  payola­  rigging   America   is   an   easy.  mark.   The other   America   I   refer    to   belongs   to Western  Civilization  as  I would   like  to see  our  arts   belong.   Because   we  as  yet have  no  emperors, let's  not  deny  Ameri­  ca's:  they,  not  we,  have  had  a  Melville,  a Twain, a Whitman, a James: they, not we, have  a  Frost  and  a  Faulkner.
Earlier  in this century, another country full of hope and empty  of power made a determined  effort   to  re-establish   an  in­ digenous   culture  and   language,  turned wildly nationalistic, its whipping boy not America  but  England. What came of it?  Little.   Ireland's  Gaelic  Revival  kick  is over   (sad  it  was  while  it  lasted). Two  writers  emerged from  the Ireland of that  nasty hate-filled  time-Joy.ce and  Yeats, predictably,  I   submit,  anti-Gaelic  Re­ vival.  Two  writers who  looked  over  the heads   of    the  establishers-of-the-indige­ nous,  the  blurb-writers,  puffers, bleaters who   wanted  a  literature  on   their   own un-literary terms;  two  writers who  real­ ized  how  literature could   be  hemmed in by friends  as  well  as  by  enemies.  Litera­ ture  is not  culture-building. Good  inten­ tions  may  make  mountains out  of  mole­ hills, but, in the  perspective that  opeiUless in time brings, a molehill  will be no more than  a molehill.
So much  for  Jeremiah.
We, as  I said  before,  have   just  begun to  write.  We  are  Canadian  writers, not Canadian writers. Rather  than imitate Ireland in  the  nineteenth and   twentieth centuries, perhaps we should  imitate the England of  the  sixteenth century which

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



(see Ascham)  believed  itself poor  of language and  tradition and  therefore, in­ stead   of  isolating  itself  from   the  larger  European heritage, addressed  itself  to im­ porting, stealing, borrowing, building out of that  greater tradition a significant art  in  England. This  was a  land,  remember, that  had  had  its Chaucer  and  Langland, its Malory and  More: it underestimated, not overestimated its past and  its present, and,  doing   so,  prepared  the  way  for  a true   estimate  of  its   magnificent   Eliza­ bethan future.
Better  still  I suggest  we get the culture kibitzers  off our shoulders where,  perched like parrots, they poke their sociological beaks  into  our  literary work,  squawking "are you indigenous, indigenous, awk, in­ digenous?" Let   the   eye  of   imagination and  compassion play freely over the world scene.   Let's   open   that  e}le to  Canada. Polemic  won't do it for us. What's needed is the  writer's eye. And right  now. Before the  uniqueness of  Scot,  Ukrainian, Jew, Pole,   German,  Hungarian  becomes   the tired, proper,  correct  middle-class, mid­ dlebrow,   civil-servant-like  Anglo-Saxon to   which-sadly,    sadly-all    Canada seems   this  grey  day   to  aspire.   Give  to­ getherness and  respectability a little more  time  and  the  boys will get the indigenous culture  they  opt  for-a  faded  Brother­ hood   of  Anon}mlity  more  faceless  than  suburban America.
L,crt's attend  to   the   country,  not   so much to its literary reputation. Writers should   catch   the  beauties  of human  uni­ qu ness
Hu.tterites,  Doukhobors,  a  banquet  for
Gogol-human faces, forms, stances, dreams, destinies: Quebec, Nova Scotia, Manitoba, the  North, the Maritimes, the Prairies, the Coast, Toronto, Montreal, concrete stages  for  significant   drama, as

66
 long  as  the  writer's e}le cuts  through the cliche  and  oversimplification of our liter­ ary   past,   as  long   as  his  eye  sees- joy, suffering, hate, love, fear  in, possibly, the least  likely of places.
May  I  run  the  risk of sounding rather brutal? If  I choose  to  stand   in  a  tradi­ tion   why  not  the  one  to  which  Tolstoy and  Flaubert and  Dickens belong,  rather than   to  the  one   that  includes   Leacock,  de  la  Roche, and  Buchan? Who  will  be of greater help  to a Canadian writer  who wishes  to write, say, only  of Canada, the writers  of  the  first  grouping, or  those  of the  second?
Frankly I  see  no  choice.  I'm   glad  we have  critical journals and  courses  to con­ sider  Canadian  literature. But  I  address  myself  to  writers   of  fiction,  poetry   and  drama  and   say  what   I am  almost   sure does  not  need  saying   (it's  that obvious). Our own  literature is poor. It needs rich­  ness.  We  are   just  starting  to  write.   We can't  be   hemmed  in   by   our   national borders.
We  have  the  clothes; it's  time  we had an  emperor.


THE NEGRO IN
CANADA
I am  writing a history  of the  Negro  in Canada, in which  I hope  to include a chapter on  how Canadian writers have viewed  the  Negro.  I would  welcome  in­ formation from  your  readers as  to  those Canadian  novels   (other  than   those   of Callaghan, Roy  and  Richler)  which  con­ tain   references to  Negroes.
Robin W. Winks, Department of History, Yale  University,
New Haven, Conn., U.S.A.


review articles




LESS  THAN A LIFE
 


Roderick  Haig-Brown



BERN  ANDERSON.  Surveyor of the  Sea:   The Life  and  Voyages of Captain George
Vancouver. University of Toronto Press. $6.75.


N 0  EXPLORER is  more  com­ pletely  and  intimately associated with  the Pacific  Northwest, especially Washington, British   Columbia and   southern  Alaska, than  is Captain  George  Vancouver, and probably none  has  left  a  more  complete record   of   his   work,  yet   he   remains   a shadowy,  elusive   character-remote as the   golden   figure  on   the   dome   of  the Legislature in  Victoria-to most  people who  live in  the  area  today.
There is good  reason  for  this. Vancou­ ver was by no means  a showman. He  was a practical, hardworking seaman and  na­  val   officer,  without  family   or  other   in­ fluential connections to advance him in a fiercely competitive service,  and  he seems to  have  maintained  most  of  the  time  a large-scale sense of inferiority. He  had  no inclination to dramatise himself or his mission,  the  men  who  served  under   him or  the  difficulties   and  dangers they  met with.  He  understated almost   constantly, but  never  with  any  intention of creating an  effect.  He  simply  saw  risks and  hard­ ships as part  of the  job, important only in so far  as they  affected it.
The job itself  was  essentially  undram­ atic,  a  matter of  skill  and  care,  endur­ ance,  patience and  sustained courage ra­  ther  than  one  of  sudden and  spectacular
 achievement. Only   in  retrospect and  in the light of later  developments do its dramatic values  appear. Few people in Vancouver's own  time were equipped even to imagine the immensity of his undertaking and  achievement, and few people to-day who  do not  know  the Northwest   coastline fairly  intimately can understand the measure of dedication and integrity, to say nothing of the skills of command and  diversity  of human adjust­ ment,  that  went  into  the Great Survey.
In addition to these disadvantages, Vancouver's character has  been  still fur­ ther  obscured  by the  apparent contradic­ tions of his irascible nature, his unfailing­ ly humane and  considerate treatment and  generous  assessment  of all  native  peoples he  met  with,  the  somewhat harsh  disci­ pline  he maintained in  his ships, the  real concern   he  showed   for   the   health  and  welfare of  his officers  and  men.  In  other  words,  it  is  not  easy  to  make  a  hero  of him,   without  reproach,  nor   can   he  be shown  as a  dramatic villain, the success­ ful  fate  of  his  brother  officer  and   con­  temporary, Captain  Bligh.
Admiral  Anderson's book faces all these difficulties  and  contradictions and  has something to contribute on most of them. His chief concern is with  Vancouver as a

REVIEW  ARTICLES



surveyor  and  naval  officer, and  it is here that   his  contributions are  greatest.  Any­ one  reading Vancouver's own  Voyage   is made aware of  the  meticulous  care  with which   the  surveys   were  conducted,  the instruments checked and  the  findings  re­ corded.  But   to   the   layman  the   exact methods used are  a little obscure, and  the extraordinary  detail  in  which   the  most intricate stretch of coast in the world was outlined  seems  little  short  of miraculous. Anderson explains that John  Hamilton Moore's The  Practical  Navigator  and Seaman's Daily  Assistant  was almost cer­ tainly   the   technical  guide   used  for  the work.  He  describes  in  convincing  detail  the   procedures  suggested  for  making a running  survey   from   the  ships,  as  was done  wherever  the  coastline  was reason­  ably  open,  and  the  more  difficult  prob­  lems of the small  boat surveys which were essential   in  the  narrow inlets  and   arms and   among  the  islands.  He  also  gives  a clear   idea  of   how   Vancouver  probably  adapted  Moore's "small   harbour" tech­ niques  to  fit  the  needs  of  his small  boat work  which  covered in  all  an  estimated ten thousand miles, mostly by rowing.  No one  who   knows   the   Voyage   or  who  is reading it  for  the  first  time  can  fail  to find  these  explanations enlightening and satisfying.
Admiral Anderson also keeps  Vancou­
ver's  function as  commander  of  an  ex­ pedition  of  a   hundred  and   fifty  men, through four  and  a  half  years  of  condi­ tions  almost  constantly trying  to  morale, in proper perspective. He is not uncritical and  his habit  of constant reference  to the several   unpublished   journals   of  officers serving  under  Vancouver throws  a good deal  of  contemporary light  on  many  in­ cidents  that  are  open  to controversial in­ terpretations; but  his general  conclusion

68
 is that  Vancouver's discipline, except  on a  few  occasions  of  uncontrolled  irascibil­ ity, was sound  and  consistent and  not un­  duly  harsh  by the standards of the  times and   the   very  real  exigencies  of  the  im­ mediate  service.   This   conclusion  is,  in fact,   pretty  well  inescapable, since  both officers   and   men   carried  out   their   ex­ tremely  demanding duties  with  unfailing loyalty and  efficiency throughout the voy­ age, and  this could  hardly  have  been pos­ sible had  there  been  any  real  sense of  in­ justice  and  harsh  dealing.
Vancouver's fits of unreasonable anger have  puzzled  other authors, including his own  officers and  Archibald Menzies  who, as surgeon-botanist, took care  of him during the  latter  part  of  the   voyage. There is no doubt that  Vancouver was a sick man, or that  his sickness was progres­ sive, eventually causing his death in  I 798 at  the  age  of forty-two or  three.  Several  authors have suggested that the cause  was tuberculosis,  a   common   disease   among seamen of  that  day.  Anderson feels  that  the  hyperthyroidism  of  Graves's  disease more  closely fits  the  symptoms. If this  is so, it seems to make  Vancouver's tenacity of purpose the  more  remarkable, and  the comparatively even  tone  in   which  his Voyage is written a feat  of almost  super­ human control.
The rather sharp differences with Menzies,  who  was  undoubtedly a charm­ ing  person, have  tended to  put  Vancou­ ver in an  unfavourable light. Yet  the  two seem  to  have  been  on  good  terms  more  often than  not and  when the length of the voyage   is  considered,  with  the  strength of character and  dedication  of both  men and  the  narrow quarters of  the  ship,  any type  of  progressive   sickness  would  seem enough to  put   these  disputes  in  proper proportion. The same is true  of Vancou-

REVIEW  ARTICLES






ver's  occasional ill-tempered outbursts to his  officers,  which   certainly did  nothing for  morale. But  the  worst  disservice these things   have  done  his  memory   is to  con­ fuse  the  Camelford affair.  Anderson has examined this  thoroughly, from  all angles open   to  him,  but  has  been  able  to  shed little  new light  on it beyond  showing  that  the   matter  was  completely  investigated by the  Admiralty after  the voyage and  no action  was   taken  against  Vancouver. Camelford   was   a   thoroughly  spoiled young  man,  probably an  aggressive  psy­ chopath, and there  is little  doubt that  he earned  whatever happened to him in the course of the  voyage.  But it would  still be satisfying  to  know  exactly  what  did  hap­ pen  and  how  he earned it.
Admiral Anderson has  made  good  use
of  his access  to  the  unpublished  journals of Bell, Puget, Manby, Swaine, Whidbey and  other officers and  midshipmen of the expedition. Frequent  quotations give depth and  proportion  to  Vancouver's one-man  view   of   things,   yet   they   sur­ prisingly  seldom  affect  Vancouver's  own story  in  any  important  particulars.  This reader felt  some  regret that  the  Admiral
 did  not  draw  more  freely on  his own ex­ perience   of  the   coast,  as  he  did  in  de­ scribing  the  difficulties of  the  Columbia Bar,  to  round   out  and  emphasise the  re­ markable seamanship  shown  by the  cap­ tains  of  both   vessels  in  the   expedition. Some  comment on  Broughton's  feat   in sailing  the Chatham through rocky Chat­ ham  Channel and  right   to  the  head  of Knight  Inlet,  for  instance,  would   have been of real interest.
Admiral   Anderson  subtitles   his  book The Life  of  George Vancouver, as  well as  an  account of  his  voyages.  It is  less than   this.  The truth is that   no  one  has yet been able to write a Life of George Vancouver, simply   because   too  little   is known of him and  too much  is unresolved in  what  is known.  Anderson has  been  no more  successful  than Godwin or  Meany or  Howay  and  it  remains true  that  Van­ couver's own  account of the voyage is the richest  and  fullest  account of  himself.  No one  has  yet  been  able  to  retell  the  story of   Vancouver's  relations   with   Quadra and  Pomurrey and  Kamehameha or  the grounding of  Discovery  in  Queen Char­ lotte  Sound or the meetings  and  incidents with   native   peoples   of  the   Coast   even nearly so effectively  as Vancouver himself told  them.
This  raises an  interesting literary point. Can anyone hope to improve upon an explorer's original  account  of  his  ex­ periences,  provided the  man  himself  was reasonably truthful   and   literate?   Who would  try  to  improve on  David  Thomp­ son's   brilliant,  heavily   punctuated,  un­  orthodox narrative?  Alexander MacKen­ zie was clear  and  vivid,  immensely  effec­ tive  at  his   best.  Even the  insensitive Simon  Fraser  seems  to  rise above  his ca­ pabilities  in  describing his  journey  down river.  All  these  accounts have   a  quality

6g

REVIEW  ARTICLES



of  immediacy, a  characteristic and  con­ temporary use  of  language and  sense  of values   that   no  later   writer  can  possibly achieve,   and   Vancouver's   best   is  the equal  of any.
In  retelling  the story of the voyage, Admiral Anderson often  loses or detracts from  Vancouver's own  values.  This  is a pity.  No one should  feel that  Surveyor  of the   Sea   is  an   adequate   substitute  for reading Vancouver himself,  though it  is an  excellent   preparation and  would  add
 life to the  reading in many  places. The Voyage is often   pedestrian and  is  neces­ sarily  loaded  down  with navigational and  other specialised details,  besides  which  it is by no means readily available. But it is still   the   best   way   of   getting  to   know George    Vancouver   and   to   understand what   kind  of  a  man  he  was.  A  tightly  edited edition  with  a  good  biographical foreword  would  seem  a  logical   venture for  some  Canadian publisher in the  near  future.




GUMDROPS
AND MAPLE  SUGAR
 





Gerald Newman



Canada on  Stage, edited by Stanley Richards. Clarke, Irwin. $3.50.


IF  I  REMEMBER   correctly,   I took  part  in my first  play when  I was six years old.  I remember very little  about  it. There was  a character in it, I think, named Mr.  Gumdrop. I don't know  if I played   that   part   or  another one.  But  it doesn't really  matter because,  besides  re­ taining a lingering fondness for his name­  sake,   he  doesn't  mean   anything  to  me now.  I didn't know  who  wrote  the  play or where  it came  from.  I still don't know, but it doesn't bother me. I enjoyed  myself.
This is the  most important thing  I learned from  my first experience of the theatre: it is not  necessary to know where good  things  come  from.
Stanley  Richards is an American. Dur­
ing   the   past   few  years  he  has  taken   a good  deal  of interest in theatrical matters in this country-holding seminars, adjud­ icating at  play  festivals,  and  so on.  And
 as a result of these experiences, besides forming certain ideas about  the state  of Canadian drama, he has come across a sufficient  number of  more  or  less  indige­ nous  plays  to make  a volume  of some 324 pages,  which  he  now  presents  to  us. Mr.  Richards is quite insistent  that these plays are  Canadian  plays. Apparently, what  he learned  from   his  first  experience of  the theatre was  not  what   I learned. That is his  privilege.
To  be fair,  Mr.  Richards doesn't claim that the  plays in  this book are  good  plays He   avoids  any  such  outright evaluation but  chooses,  rather, to describe  them  the long way around:


The Canadian one-act plays  in  this  collec­ tion  are   varied in  theme, style,  and  subject matter. They  all  have a  tone   of   authenti­ city,  and every   one  of  them,  including the lightest of   comedies,  contains food   for

REVIEW  ARTICLES



thought. But  above  all,  they  are  eminently actable.
This  sounds  dangerously cautious to  me
-almost as  if  the  editor, when   he  set about his  job,  had  said  to  himself: it  is better  to   have   plays   such   as   these   in print than   to  have  no  plays  at  all.  I  am tempted to  believe  that   that   is what   he did   say,  but   it  is  a  temptation I  can't give   way   to   very   easily.  Mr.   Richards seems  to  regard  the  present  publication as  part  of  a  series of events  of some  his­ torical importance:
Canadian dramatists are  now  becoming as professional as  their American, English and French counterparts.  Perhaps they  are   not yet   as  well   known internationally,  nor   do their  efforts  bring  the   same   stampedes  to the   box-offices   of   the    world's  playhouses, but   they   are   on  their  way.... Now,  I  be­ lieve,   the   rebellion  against  the  sterility  of the  native Canadian theatre has  finally  and  resolutely begun.
The   implication  of  this  statement  is,  I think, quite clear:  we  are  asked  to  be­ lieve  that   the  plays  in  this  book  are  re­ presentative of those  which  have at  least taken  the  right  turning and  which form,  if  nothing  more,   the   rear-guard  of  the rebellion. I cannot accept graciously even so modest  a  concept of their  worth.
Mr.  Richards would  perhaps describe these   plays,   if  anything  can   be  so   de­ scribed,  as  being  on  the  verge.  I  used  to think   that   this  was  the  way  I  would  ex­ pect  a Canadian to  talk  about  what  had  been  done  in  the arts  in  his own  country. Artistically, in  my  experience, Canadians regard themselves as a people  continually in  a  state  of  becoming:  we  aren't there  yet,  but  we soon  will be.  I find  this  atti­ tude  both depressing and  inaccurate-de­ pressing because  it carries  with  it a strong tendency to discard  those anomalies of creation which do not seem to fit into a chosen   theory   of  becoming  (but   which,
 nonetheless, may be the most valuable products of our  work)  and  inaccuratB be­ cause  it  also  carries   with  it  the  tempta­ tion  to  consider   as  an  interim  develop­
ment  that  which  has  already gone  as far
as  it  can  go.  I  must   suggest,  therefore, that   Mr.   Richards, during  his  visits  to Canada,  has   managed  to   acquire  this particular aspect  of  our  thinking in. full measure.   I  cannot see  that   the  playhe has  chosen  are  indicative of  any  signifi­ cant   change in   our national   writing habits.  They  do not  differ markedly from  plays  I  remember   reading  fifteen   years ago.
Mr.   Richards  tells  us  that   Canadian
playwrights  are  becoming as  professional as those of other countries. I don't believe it. What  he  really  means, I think,  is that Canadian playwrights are  becoming as professional   in  their   way  as  those  else­ where  are  in  theirs.  But  even  if   this  is what  he does  mean,  I am  afraid I  really can't   agree.  Canadian  playwrights  have been quite  professional for  a considerable length   of   time-professional,  that   is,  in the only sense of the  word  which  has any meaning in  our  theatre: proficient in doing  well what  has  been  done  before.  I have very little  to argue about with the authors included in Mr.  Richards'  book concerning the way they handle their methods of communication. Quite simply, regarded as  possibly significant  contribu­ tions to theatrical literature, I don't think that    those   methods  of   communication are,  at  this  date, worth  repeating. Ulti­ mately   then,   I must  say  that   I do  not find  either   that   these  plays  have  a  tone of authenticity or that they  are  eminently actable.
This   review  is, strangely  enough, not an attack  on a number of conscientious playwrights who  have  no way of answer-

7

REVIEW  ARTICLES



ing what  must seem to be a considerable amount of gross injustice. Indeed, I must confess  that, if the  plays are considered separately and  not  in  the  context  of  this book,   there   is  in justice  in   the   review: generalization has forced me into being distinctly  unjust   to  two  of  the  authors and  somewhat less so to several  others. Retribution will come when all the plays, in  spite   of  what   I have  said,  are  pro­ duced  and  thoroughly enjoyed. That is as it should  be.
The true  source  of  my  indignation  is
the editor. I feel very strongly  that  he has put    a   burden  of   responsibility   on   his authors  which   they   had   never   thought of bearing and  should  not  be expected to bear.  Mr.  Richards has undertaken a mis­ guided  crusade for which  I cannot thank him.  He  should   have  realized  before  he began   that, if  he  wanted   to  compile   a book  of  important  dramatic  writing, he would  have  to draw  from other media  in addition  to  the  stage.  Such  writings   do exist  in  this country. And he should  have  realized  that  the fact of Canadian author­ ship  can  bring  about a sense of  national pride  only  after a play  has been  read.
I should  like to end  by quoting a short scene from one of the plays Mr. Richards considers suitable  to  his  argument. The scene is the home of Miss Betsey Barony. Working for her, but not present, is a Hungarian refugee  named  Zanorin. With her  at  the  moment is her grandniece Liz and  her  servant Dan   Loamy,  who  has  a great  aversion  to all foreigners  and, there­ fore, to Zanorin. Miss Barony has a secret vice:  she is devoted  to horse-racing (sig­ nificantly, her   nickname  is  Bets). Dan  shares  her   predilection. As  the  scene opens,  Bets  has  just successfully wagered  for   herself   and   Dan   on  a  horse  called Maple  Sugar:

72
 DAN: •••  I siy  as  'ow   bettin' on  an   'orse nimed Miple Sugar is the  same  as puttin' your  money   in  Gov'mint bonds,  sort  of.
LIZ: A most  unique viewpoint on  gambling.
DAN:  Investin' is  the  word, miss.  Investin' in  a good  Canidian stock.
BETS: Livestock. (ALL laugh.)
LIZ:   Dan! I've never   known you  to  laugh before. And-you've  got  a   dimple! Tut-t-t. You   look   like   a  couple of   can­ aries  who've swallowed the  cat.
DAN:  Ain't we  told   to  promote goods  mide at  'orne?  Wot's  more    'ome-mide than Miple Sugar?
BETS:   Dan, I'm   afraid I've got  a shock  for you.
DAN: Wot? Didn't  Miple Sugar win?
BETS:  He  won  all  right. But  it's  about that
"home-made"  business.
DAN: Miple Sugar's mide   right 'ere. BETS:  Not  this  Miple-Maple Sugar. DAN:  'Ow do you mean?
BETS:   You   know   how   we  both   believe   in blood lines? Well, this Maple Sugar was foaled  in   Canada, right  enough-but­ his  dam   was  already  bred  before she  was
imported from  France. An  immigrant! With another little immigrant-very  im­ minent!
DAN:    Naow! But   'is   sire   was   h'English, wasn't 'e?  Wasn't 'e, mum?
BETS,  shakes    head:   His   sire   was   a   stud from-Budapest.
(Dan is stunned.)
LIZ,  to  Bets:   Well! For  a  respectable  spin­ ster, you  certainly  know  your  biological details!
BETS:   My  dear Liz,   I've raised   goats   and
guppies! Dan, while   you're still  speech­ less,  let   me   point  out   that  you've  won nearly two  hundred bucks  on a colt  whose pappy came  from  the  same  home  town  as Zanorin. Blood  will  tell,  you  always say.
Zanorin turns  out  to  be  a  famous  Hun­ garian violinist,  long  thought  dead,  and presumably lives happily ever  after.
There is,  in  the  book,  nothing  worse
than  this.

VENTURE ON THE VERGE
 





George  Woodcock


THOMAS  H.   RADDALL. At  the  Tide's Turn   and  Other  Stories.  New   Canadian
Library. McClelland &  Stewart. $1.00.
STEPHEN   B.   LEACOCK.  Arcadian   Adventures with  the  Idle   Rich.  New  Canadian
Library. McClelland &  Stewart. $1.00.
WILLIAM  HENRY  DRUMMOND. Habitant   Poems.   New    Canadian  Library.  McClel­
land &  Stewart. $1.00.
Poets  of the  Confederation, edited  by  Malcolm   Ross.   New Canadian  Library.
McClelland &  Stewart. $1.50.


WHEN  Malcolm  Ross  began to edit  the  New  Canadian  Library series of paperbacks for  McClelland & Stewart, there  were plenty  of reasons  to watch  the venture with   much   more   than   ordinary interest. Many  minor-and some major­ Canadian classics  were-and  still  are-­ out  of  print. Many   good  books  with  an experimental  flavour   deserved  a   wider public   than   they  could  find  in  $4  or  $5 hard cover  editions. And  it  was  evident  that, for various  reasons,  Canadian books rarely  found   their  way  into  world-circu­ lated standard collections like Everyman's Library  and  World's  Classics. There seemed  an  excellent scope  for  an  enter­ prising  publisher to start  a series of inex­ pensive  books that  would  make available to a wide  public  the  best  books by Cana­ dians   and   interpreting  Canadian life. With   daring, such   a  series  might  com­ pletely   change the  nature of  Canadian publishing, and  also  give  a  considerable stimulus to  writing itself.
With  the  addition of four  new volumes this  summer, the  New  Canadian Library now has twelve titles to offer, and this is enough to  justify  at  least  a first  estimate on  the  value  of  the  series  as  it  now  ap­ pears.
I would   begin   by saying   that I have
 not yet been stimulated to enthusiasm. Indeed, I am  disappointed by  the  hesi­ tant   and  conservative  impression  which the   selection   so  far   evokes.   There   are some good  safe  works  on  the  list, but  no good  dangerous  books,  and  one  is con­ scious too often  of  being  in  the  presence of  the  worthy  second-best.  That feeling is  not  at  all  dispelled  by  the  efforts  of some of the writers contributing introduc­ tions to persuade us that  manifestly  minor  writers-even in  Canadian terms-are in the  big leagues  of  world  literature. When  Arthur Phelps,  for   instance, solemnly states  that  William Henry Drummond's verse "is an achievement within the tradi­ tion of Chaucer, Burns and  Wordsworth," what  can   we  do   but   laugh?  And  it  is time  critics  in  Canada gave   up  raising laughs for  the  wrong  reasons.
When   the   first  eight   volumes   of  the series appeared there  was, indeed, enough to give mild encouragement to one's anti­ cipations. They included one  novel excel­ lent  by any standards-Sinclair Ross's As for Me  and  My   House;  a  volume  by
Grove-Over Prairie   Trails-which I
read  for  the  first  time   and   found   very fresh and interesting;  a  good   Mac­ Lennan novel-Barometer  Rising; one of the  best  French Canadian  novels-Gab-

73

REVIEW ARTICLES



rielle Roy's  The  Tin Flute. These  formed a sound  and  solid  quartet, and-though neither  book   has   ever   appealed  to  me greatly-!can accept the literary-histori­ cal  justifications for  including Leacock's Literary   Lapses   and   Haliburton's  The Clockmaker. Two  out  of  the  eight  early titles,  admittedly, weakened   the  impact of  this  first  group.  Morley   Callaghan's Such  is my  Beloved  is a poor  keeper; its flaws  of  feeling   and   psychology  become more  evident with  age, and  re-reading it
impressed one more than ever with the conviction that  Callaghan is a good short story  writer  but  a  poor  novelist. The last of the eight  volumes,  Charles  D. Roberts' The  Last Barrier, was a series of  fiction­ alised natural history  pieces based on out­ dated biological   concepts,  and  one  won­ dered   by  what   literary  claims  such  pon­ derous  over-writing might  offset Roberts' dubiously  scientific  view  of  the  animal world.
However, here were  six reasonably sound   selections   against   two  fairly  obvi­ ous duds.  Admittedly, only Sinclair Ross's novel  shone  with  the  indefinable  lumin­ osity  of  a  real   master-work,  and  there  was  a  striking lack  of  the  fresh  and  ex­ perimental. But, one  felt  justified in hop­  ing,  after  laying  down  its foundations of good safe works, the series might  begin to build  with  more daring.
This  is one  of the  reasons why the pre­ sent  group of  four   volumes  is so  disap­  pointing; it is more,  not less conservative. And  the  general level  of  quality is con­ siderably lower  than in the original  eight.
Admittedly, there  is Leacock's  astrin­ gent   Arcadian  Adventures  with  the  Idle Rich,  one  of  the  best  of  his  books.  But what   balance is there in  a  selection  that  includes two  Leacocks in  its first  twelve titles?

74
 If  there seems   little   justification for two  Leacocks among  the  early  volumes of  the  New  Canadian Library, it is hard to find  any  justification at  all for  includ­ ing  Thomas H.  Raddall's At  the  Tide's  Turn. In  his introduction  to  this  volume  of  stories,  Allan  Bevan  begins  by  telling  us  that   Raddall is "one  of  the  relatively small   group  of   Canadian   authors  who earn   their  living  by  the  pen". One  won­ ders  what   this  may  have  to  do  with  his excellence  as  a   writer-did  not   Elinor Glyn  and  Edgar  Wallace make  excellent livings  without literary pretensions of any kind ?-until  one has  read  the  stories  se­ lected  to represent him. Then one realizes that, apart from  their  money-earning pos­ sibilities,  there  is very  little  to  be said for them. Mr.  Raddall presents  a series of imaginary incidents, most  of  them  set in the  Maritimes during the later  eighteenth century. He  is a good  historical  research­ er, and  his stories contain some pleasingly  authentic detail. But  they interest one  as the  cases  in  a  rural  museum might, and  they  are  not  much  more  alive  than   the  contents of  such  cases. Trite little  situa­ tions-historically  probable   situations­ are  created and   acted  out  by characters sketched  so  shallowly   that   one   cannot even   begin   to   judge   the   psychological plausibility  of  their   actions.  Mr.   Rad­ dall's   stories,   indeed,  are   written  for people   who  like  to  take  their   history  in pre-digested   form,  not   for   those   who have  a  mature  interest in  fiction,  and  it is  strange to  find  them   in  a  series  that purports  to   be  ruled   by  literary rather than antiquarian values.
A similar objection is provoked by Drummond's Habitant  Poems. These are interesting literary curiosa; they  tell us much about popular Canadian taste in those  happily past  days  when  the  public

REVIEW  ARTICLES



recitation of  bad  verse  was  a  recognised form   of   en lcrtai nment. But   to   treat Drummond seriously  as more  than  an outdated popular versifier,  or  to suggest that  his grossly sentimental fake-dialect "poems" tell   us  anything penetrating about French Canadian life, is just about as absurd as to uphold Uncle Tom's Ca­ bin as good  American writing or a really authentic picture of American society. In fact,   this  volume raises  very  sharply  the question whether the  literary  historian in Dr.  Malcolm Ross   may  not  have   tri­ umphed over  his critical  alter  ego in  de­ termining his selections  for  the  New Ca­  nadian Library.
The last  volume, Poets  of the  Confed­ eration, is  curiously  labelled  as  a  New Canadian  Library Original;  in  fact  it contains only  poems  published  long  ago. It is a selection  of work  by Roberts, Car­ man,   Lampman and  Duncan  Campbell Scott,   and   for  those  who  want   an  ade­  quate and  handy selection of the work of these  tum-of-the-century Canadian poets it  is  well  prtjpared. But   it  is  a  volume  with  a  curious and   enlightening imbal­ ance.  For,  brought together in  large  re­ presentative groups of their  poems,  these four  writers take  on a quite striking hier­  archy  of quality, and  one  is impressed  by the  fact  that, while  Roberts  and  Lamp­ man  and  Carman  still seem-in the gen­ eral  perspective of  English-speaking liter­  ature-rather  unexceptional inhabitants of  the  late  Victorian undergrowth, Scott  speaks   out,  despite  his   exasperatingly romanticist  affectations, in  a fragiley  but undeniably individual voice, a voice com­ bined  with  a quite original poetic  appre­ hension  of   the  Canadian  scene. Such  aspects of Scott, of course, have  been well
discussed   by  A.  J. M.   Smith,  but   this
particular arrangement of  poems  makes
 them  remarkably evident.
But,  if we  have  the  poets  of the  turn­ of-the-century fairly   represented  in  the New  Canadian  Library,  where  are  the poets  of  this  century? And  why,  except  for  Mr.   Raddall's antiquarian  fiction, have  the  most  recent  selections  all  been devoted to writers  fairly  well away  in the past?  During the  last  thirty  years  or  so, far  more  works  of  good  literary   quality have  been  written in Canada than  in the two pioneer  centuries before, yet only five out of twelve  titles so far  published in the New   Canadian   Library  belong   to   this vital  period,  and only  one-Mr. Raddall of  all  people!--out of  the  four  volumes  now  presented. This emphasis on  earlier writing-and not  always  the  best of  it­ is  laid  at  a  time   when   many  excellent  recent  volumes  of verse, fiction  and  criti­ cism by Canadian  writers go quickly  out of  print  and  become  difficult  to find  be­ cause their  publishers will not risk further hardcover editions. It  is  time  Canadian publishers  and  editors learnt the lesson of the  quality paperback  revolution in  the  United States; surely  the  New  Canadian Library might be  better  used  to  put  that  lesson into  practice, to  publish  our  more  vital  books inexpensively, than  to perpet­ uate  in the minds  of ourselves  and  others  the  feeling   that  writing in  Canada is a pretty  dull  business  after  all.
I wish the  New Canadian Library well, since  I realize  what  it  might be, but  un­ less something more daring appears under its covers than the four  volumes now pre­  sented, I fear   my  wishes  will  not  be  of much  avail.







75








THE DRAMATIST  AS MECHANIC

ARTHUR   HAILEY.   Close-up:    On   Writing   for
Television.  Doubleday. $4.50.

CANADIAN television  drama production­ with  the exception of  CBC Folio produc­ tions, the Canadian contributions to Ford Startime and  one out  of ten plays on GM  Theatr has
air  of good  stage  repertory. It suffers  of course  from  the  same  handicaps as does repertory theatre. There is a very limited pool  of  actors.  There is a  lack  (outside Toronto)  of  adequate studio facilities and money. Some of the actors, directors, script   editors   and   playwrights  involved are  not  thoroughly at  home in their med­ ium; while  others regard it  as  no  more  than  a way station to what  they regard  as better  media,  the  movies  or  the stage.
While   most  of  the   plays  Mr.  Hailey includes in Close-up,  with  their  crowded scenes and  violent  action, sug.gest that  he writes  with  his eyes on  Cinemascope  ra­ ther   than   a  2 I" television   screen,  one could   certainly  not   include   him  in  the class  of  amateur. He  is all  too  much  of the   professional.  His   preface   would   be perfectly   in   place  in  a  magazine  like Writer's  Digest with  its ancient formulae for  slick magazine success.
"The  most   important  ingredient for any  successful  television  play  is a  strong story  line.... I ... devise a story  plot  us-
 
ing  this  simple  three-part formula as  an aid  to thinking :
I. Set  a situation.
2.  Create a problem.
3· Resolve (though not  necessarily solve)  the  problem.... Let humor in. Oc­ casional laughs provide a   leavening warmth in  any   drama,  no  matter  how serious," etc. etc.
Mr.   Hailey   moreover  has  a  method: the   "researching"  method. And   every play in his book shows how well he has followed   it.  Flight  to  Danger  shows  us the inner workings of an Air Traffic Con­ trol  centre; Diary  of a  Nurse  the  inner  workings  of  a hospital; Course  for  Colli­ sion  the   inner  workings   of   the   North American Radar  Defense  System. All have  a great air of  authenticity; but  none  of  them  shows  us  the  inner   workings  of human  beings.
Mr.  Hailey  remarks at one  point  in his preface that  "any  diligent mechanic could piece  a  play  together with  research and nothing more" without "a feeling  for ef­ fective  drama, plot and characterisation." It is unfortunate that all his plays appear to  be  the  work  of  such  a  mechanic  (an  excellent one),  who can  manufacture with  skill  one  kind of  rather crude ma­  chine,   designed  always   from   the   same blueprint. A  professional  (in  one  case  a bank  vault  expert, in another a nurse) extricates some innocent non-professional (a little boy, a sick lawyer)  from some horrifying predicament. Time  is  usually of  the  essence  in  the  extrication. In one minute  the   V2   rocket   will  explode. In one  minute the  supersonic jet-planes will collide. The inexperienced pilot must bring  in  the  airliner the  first  time  round for   there  are   passengers aboard  at   the point of  death. Adventure   Time   at  the "adult" level.

BOOKS IN   REVIEW



As this  suggests,  Mr.  Hailey  is an  ex­ pert  at  the  kind  of  mPchanical  suspense that   can   operate  effectively  only  if  the characters are  sufficiently stereotyped and  the  dialogue uninspired so  that  the  view­ er's  attention is in  no  way diverted from the  efficient  running  of  the  machine.
On   the  television   screen   Mr.  Hailey's
plays  bear  the  same  relation to those, for example, of Paddy  Chayevsky, as the de­ tective  stories  of Erie  Stanley Gardner do to  the  novels  of  Hugh  MacLennan. In print they  lose  even  their  entertainment value,  and  lacking the  kind  of perceptive and  technically  informative commentary with  which  Paddy  Chayevsky  accompan­ ied   his   Collected   Plays  they   offer   the would-be  television   dramatist the  worst kind  of example. Moreover they  remind one  of  another quality Canadian  televi­ sion shares  with  repertory: a  timid  fond­  ness  for   plays   that   make   no great   de­ mands on  anyone,  participator or  audi­  ence.  What is  most  disturbing about  this is the lack of  exploitation of the resources of the medium, particularly of its subtlety  and intimacy, to which  all pay lip-service. One  remembers original  television  plays (Twelve  Angry  Men, Marty, for  exam­ ple)   that   have  exploited these  resources, and   realises   that    none   was   Canadian. One  further remembers that  all  the  best Canadian  productions have  not  been  of original  plays   but   of  adaptations  from other media. One  can  only  hope  that  all those involved, especially  Mr.  Hailey  and his  fellow   playwrights,  will   turn   away from  the  stage  and  the  movie  screen  and fix  their   whole  serious  attention on  the medium in  which   they  work,  a medium
I
I
I
I
 

BEYOND  THE  OLD BONE  TRAIL
By  Evan Davies and
Aled   Vaughan

A   first-hand  story   of   pioneering  life fifty  years   ago  on  the   western prairie told   by   a   man    who   sailed    steerage from  England, made his way  to  Saska­ toon   and   then  struck out   northward to   homestead  in   the   wilderness.  An impressive and    authentic   record  of man's triumph  over   the   wilderness.
A  Cassell   Book 	$3.75

CRillSING THE NORTH  CHANNEL

Kenneth   McNeill  Wells

The  North  Channel of  Lake   Huron lies  between, Killarney, where the Georgian  Bay  ends   and   the  Island of St.  Joseph,  125   miles   westward. Mr. Wells provides not  only  a guide for cruising these  waters but  a running commentary on  the  impact of  history upon    this    waterway   by   which  the white    man  first   came    to   the    Great Lakes,  the  prairies and  the  Mississippi.
Fully illustrated.	$s.oo

THE  GREATEST PROBLEM
And  Other  Essays

F. L. Lucas

A new collection of essays on a wide variety of subjects-from literature to over-population  by  one   of   the   really great  critics  of  our   generation.
A   Cassell   Book. 	$7.00


BRITISH BOOK  SERVICE (Canada)  LIMITED
1068 BROADVIEW AVENUE TORONTO  6, ONTARIO

L-----------------------------··-------
77

BOOKS IN REVIEW



THE ELEMENTS OF NATURE, THE ATOMS OF SOCIETY

FRED   BODSWORTH.   The   Strange   One.  Dodd
Mead. $s.so.
ROBERT   HOMAN.   Dust   Before   the    Wind.
Clarke, hwin.  $3.25.

THE   MAIN   ACTION  in  both  these  novels takes   place   in   northern  Canada.  Dust before  the  Wind focusses on six members of a work gang  in Labrador; The Strange One  concerns a man and  a barnacle goose, both  originally from  the  Hebrides, and  an  Indian girl who has spent  most of her   life  among   whites.  The  three   find love,   danger  and   reconciliation  in   the lower  Hudson's Bay  region.  Not  to  give
the   impression  that   this  is  a  menage   a
trois,  I should  mention that  the  barnacle
goose  mates   with   a  Canada  goose  and that the   progress of  their  romance  is made  almost   rigidly   parallel   to  that   of the  human  beings.  The   author's  know­ ledge  of birds  and  of the  north gives him the   material  for  his  main  conflicts,  be­ tween  mating and  migrating instincts  in the  goose, and  between  different cultures (and   different  goals  within  one  culture) in   the   people.   Unfortunately,  like   the hero  of his  novel,  Mr.  Bodsworth is torn between   a  romantic and  a  realistic  view of  life.  As  a  romantic, he  gives  us  the consciousness  of  the  goose  in  anthropo­ morphic abundance:  "He  had  been  fly­ ing  about   three  hours when  he  began  to fear  he  had  made  a  choice  he could  not carry  out." But  as a realist  he has a tend­  ency  to  drop  into  scientific  commentary about nature. To take  a glaring instance, Chapter 49 begins:
 Another  dawn  came  and  the   barnacle was   still   flying   over   empty sea,   and    now the   rigors of  the   flight  were   beginning  to leave    their  imprint.  He   had   started  with a  body   fattened so  that it  was  twenty-five per  cent   heavier than normal. To maintain his   powerful  forty-mile-an-hour   flight  his body  was  converting fat  into  energy at the rate of  about one  per  cent   of  body  weight per  hour.

Fortunately this tendency is less present in   the   main    (or   human)  part   of   the book. But  even  there the  realist-romantic split  is evident. Mr.  Bodsworth gives  to an ambitious white  man  the conflict  of whether  to  marry  an   Indian girl  or  to pursue status in the civilized world. The problem  is  suitably  complicated  by  the girl's  own   conflict   over   whether  to  live with her tribe, whose ways are no longer natural to her,  or  to  try  to make  a go of it  in  the  white   man's world,  where  she can seemingly  be accepted only as a pros­ titute or a waitress.  But isn't  the situation falsified   by  the   author's  giving  the  girl superior intelligence and  striking  beauty, by white  standards?  These attributes are  fit   trappings for   romance  but   not   for creating "real"  problems, as  the  author seems  to  wish  to  do.  To  give  Mr.  Bods­ worth   credit,  however, he  does  put   the girl  in  many  realistic situations, most  of them   having  to  do  with  her  relation to the  tribe  and  its  environment  (the  con­  flicts  in  civilization of  both  protagonists tend   to  be  oversimplified  and   melodra­ matic).
To sum up, this novel is not for the sophisticated reader.  Its  lack  of   psycho­ logical  subtlety is matched by  an  appro­ priate  style.   The  writing is   clear   and  straightforward   throughout,  with   the virtues  of  expositional prose, but the vices of   overemphasis  and   oversimplification, not  to  mention  triteness   in  the  face  of emotion.

BOOKS IN   REVIEW



In  contrast to  Mr.  Bodsworth's schem­ atized  plot and  conventional writing,  Mr.  Homan in  Dust  before  the  Wind  has  a distinctive manner which  is an important key to his attempt and  its failure. He  uses the   present   tense  almost   throughout, a device quite  appropriate to his style which has the virtue of being concentratedly ac­ tive,  tense  and  graphic, but   which  fre­ quently   succumbs  to  the   vice  of  being sordid,  brutal or  merely   rhetorical. The  pitch  of   his  writing goes  well  with   his aim,   which   seems  to   be  to   render  the state  of  lost  souls  with  no  future and  a past  each  wants  to cancel. The fact  that  the  novel  contains many  discrete actions  but  little   plot   might  be  seen  as  contri­ buting to the same  end-portrayal of a stratum  of  society   which   has  been  dis­ placed  or  has  dispossessed  itself.
But  having  followed   Mr.  Homan  this




NOW  AVAILABLE


More  Letters of
Duncan Campbell Scott

( :. nd series)

Selected and Edited by Arthur S.  Bourinot (with some  personal
recollections by the  Editor)

PRICE  $2.50
LIMITED  EDITION


ORDERS TAKEN  NOW FROM:
ArthurS. Bourinot
I 58  CARLETON  ROAD ROCKCLIFFE,   OTTAWA
 far,  your  reviewer  can  only  stagger  back with  the  dread   words  "imitative fallacy" on   his  lips.  Novels   may   portray  social chaos,  but  they  must  show  a  pattern  be­ hind  it; they  cannot be successful  if  they themselves  are  chaotic. Of  the  six  char­ acters  on whom  the  author focusses, only one comes to any sort of  end in the novel. Why  it should  be  he  rather than   any  of the  other  five, we  cannot discover  in the  six flashbacks  (all  eleven  to  fifteen  pages long and  all  in  the  present tense, for  the most  part).
Mr.  Homan  is  obviously   an  English­
man  who, equally  obviously,  has  been  in a  Labrador work  camp. He  would  seem to have found in  the  elemental bleakness of the north  a fitting  objective correlative for   the  lack   of  human  purpose in   his character's lives  which   allowed   them  to go  there.   In   fact,   the   author  seems  as


The
Fiddlehead

a arterly
:llfagazine of Prose and Poetry

For  a subscription to THE FIDDLEHEAD, or  a sample copy, apply to  THE FIDDLEHEAD, University of  New Bruns­ wick,  Fredericton, N.B.   1  year,  $2.00;
2   years,  $3.75; 3  years,  $s.oo.



79

BOOKS IN REVIEW



much  interested  in the cosmic scene as in the  social  one.  In  one  evocation  of  the north,  he falls into the second person.

Silence you can hear, cold that burns you quicker    than   fire.   Then   again   the   wind comes out  of  the  north.  The  trees  tremble, eddies  of sand  spurt  upwards,  little  twisters roam  along, spinning and whirling  to sink again.   A  loveless  land,  a  killer  where  the cat  and   mouse  ice  lurks,  ready  to  pounce back.  The green-eyed   hag,  whose  eyes are an  ice  waste  where  red  rivers  flow.

Like better  authors  before him,  Mr. Ho­ man   has   been   embraced  by  La  Belle Dame  Sans  Merci.  We  can  sympathize with the despair which informs his novel; for all his image-filled language, however, he  renders   not  the  active  shape  of  life but its body sucked dry of spirit.
ELUOTT   GOSE

SHALLOW
SEA CHANGES

NICHOLAS   MONSARRAT.  The   Ship   that   Died of Shame  and Other  Stories. British Book Service. $3.50.

IN A POSTSCRIPT, Mr. Monsarrat explains the  origin  of  The Ship   that   Died   of Shame, the  title  story of this collection. He  himself was once offered a job, smug­ gling, by a man  he had served  with dur­  ing  the  war.  Mr.  Monsarrat  became  a civil  servant   instead,  but  Bill  Randall, who tells his own story in The  Ship  that Died of Shame, accepts the offer, suffers the loss of his self-respect  and finally the consequences of his choice. The  weakness of  the  story  can  be  traced  to its origin; for  Bill  Randall, though  he  continually and self-consciously admits, "It would be wrong to say I hesitated for very long; or even at all,"  maintains  a moral view un­ believable  in  even  the  most  reluctant

So
 smuggler. Bill Randall is obviously a mis­
placed  civil servant.
Seven  of  the  ten stories in  the  collec­ tion  are  written  in  the  first  person,  and many  of  them  are  based  on  the  same kinds of personal experience, which have suffered  too  shallow  a  sea change  to  be successful.  In  Up  the  Garden  Path  Mr. Monsarrat  hims.elf is  the  narrator, even more  self-conscious than  Bill Randall in admitting his own limitations. He is an established  writer  who   has   been  ap­ proached  by a  young man  for  money to finish  a  novel. The  young  man  borrows excessively  not  only  from   the  narrator but  also from  other  writers,  lives exces­ sively, and  shows  none  of  the  qualities that  might  make him a good writer;  but in  the  end  his  novel  is a  great  success, and  he pays his debts. Mr. Monsarrat ad­ mits that  the story came out of a personal experience  of   a  less  happy   kind.  The  character  of  the  young  man  retains  too much of  its original model to be convinc­ ing in  the improved  moral climate.
Licenced to Kill is perhaps  the most serious of Mr. Monsarrat's failures of im­ agination. The  narrator  of  this  story, while  on  his honeymoon  years  after the war,  meets a  man   he  trained  to  kill. "Murderer" Martin has  not  adjusted  to

BOOKS  IN REVIEW



peace   but   continues  to  practice his  old skill. The  narrator feels that  Martin is somehow  his own creation and  therefore takes  the   responsibility of  tracking  him down  and  killing him. The emotional identification  both  men  feel  could   have made as interesting and  profound a story as Conrad's Secret Sharer. Instead Mr. Monsarrat relies on an ethic that  makes Martin a  monster, the  narrator a  clean­ living,   clean-killing hero:  "But  then   I shot  straight. It was the  least  I could  do, for   the  man   who   had   twice  saved  my life."
If Mr.   Monsarrat wrote   to  entertain
without posing  serious  human  problems, neither  his   lack   of   perception  nor   his narrow piety  would  be so evident. But he is  sincere.  In his  occasional piece  about Dunkirk, I Was There  (though Mr. Mon­ sarrat was  not  there), his  sincerity is  a virtue that  carries the  story. But  there  is no  Prose  Laureate. In  short   stories,  pa­  triotism and  nostalgia  are  not  often  ade­  quate  substitutes for   insight   and   judg- ment.	JANE RULE

THE PLAIN UNTRUTH

JAMES  MCNAMEE.  Florencia  Bay.  McClelland
& Stewart. $3.50.

PATRICK  CROGAN, the  protagonist of Mr. McNamee's  novel,   arrives  on   the   west coast  of Vancouver Island to pan  for sea­ gold.  Encamped, he  draws   the  Voyage of  the  Beagle  from  his  suitcase,  and reflects.

A book  was a packaged comrade, and  had its  own   conceits, its genialities, and   it coloured   the  truth  or  spoke  it plain.
There is certainly plenty  of  plain  speech in  this novel, for   Mr.  McNamee has chosen  to write  in  the  tough style. Some-
 times  this  is effective, and   sometimes  it reads  like a parody of Hemingway:
"Camping out?" "For  a while." "Just  get here?" "Just."
"Where do you come from?"
"Originally, or  where  do  I come  from  this
time?"
"This time."
"Vancouver."
"Where do you come from originally?"
"Alberta."
"That's a big province."
"Quebec, Ontario  and  B.C. are  bigger."
It is not  plain  speaking, however,  but the  colouring of  the  truth, which  wrecks this novel. For  the  whole  plot  is based on a false premise: that  Indian tribal  law dictates  that  a chief's eldest  child  shall  be married  before   any  of  the  younger  sib­ lings. In  the  novel,  Crogan is  befriended by  an   Indian  chief,   Charlie  Jack,   who forces  him   to   marry  his  eldest   child,  Monica,  so that  her younger brothers may be released  from official  celibacy.  But, as
I am  assured  by  the  anthropologist, Dr. Wayne  Suttles, of  the  University of  Brit­ ish Columbia, no record  of such a custom  exists among  the  North-west  Indians.
And  how does  Charlie Jack  force Cro­ gan  to marry  Monica? By  employing his many   Indian  "cousins",  who  appear as so many  Mafia-like henchmen, willing  to murder with  no  more  motivation than a nod  and  a  wink  from  Charlie. (And,  it should   be   added,   extended  credit,  for Charlie has  made a  fortune fishing  and bootlegging). Even  if we grant Mr. Mc­ Namee his fictional premise, the unheard­ of tribal  law, we still have  to swallow  his situation which  suggests  that, in  1948, a prospector of European descent, free, and thirty-three, can  be  forced   at  gun-point into  a marriage with a convent-educated bitch  of   a  Vancouver  Island  chief's daughter   without  even   having  been   to

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



bed  with  her!  The mind  boggles.
The more  we read,  the more it boggles. We  note,  in  passing,  the  introduction of the  extremely sympathetic Hope  Wiston, an   English  divorcee  with  soft  contours and  a warm  and  understanding manner, who,  the  author suggests,  is attracted  to and  attractive to Crogan. She is the com­ plete  antithesis of  Monica.  We  may  feel Hope is  too  good  for  Crogan,  who  has already shown   himself  to  be  that   unat­ tractive type  of personality, a  mixture of the   stubborn  and   the  weak,  but  if  the author says  "the heart  has  reasons",  we are  willing  enough to hear  him  out.  And then, at  three-quarter  mark,   we  finally lose  Hope.
But   it   is  the   conclusion   that   really destroys  the  novel.  :Mr. McNamee's deus ex   machina  is  a  seedy  old   prospector, Saul  Finlay,  who "lays hands on" the pert Miss   Jack.  Her   family   is  up   in  arms within  the   hour.  The   old  lecher   must have   Indian  justice   meted  out   to  him! Who  prevents the  crime?  Why, Pat  Cro­ gan,  of  course.  He  finds  the  old  miner's odour, appearance and  very presence  ob­ jectionable, as indeed  anyone  might,  but "no   man   is  an  island", after  all.  So  he steps out  of  character and  bargains  Saul's  life for  his, by promising to marry  Moni­  ca,  the girl he  hates,  the girl we all hate, if  the  Jacks  will  let  Finlay  go free.  Any sane  person,   and   we  are  led  to  believe Crogan has his feet  on the ground, would realise  the  lesser evil would  be to let Saul take  his  chances. Mr.  McNamee, if one for  a  moment ignores  his apparent blind spot   in   sketching  sympathetic Indians, shows a certain ability  in the  delineation of aharacter. Does he really think  Crogan would   have   volte-face'd in  such  an  im­ possibly  idealistic manner? Surely  not.
DAVID BROMIGE
 DECEPTIVE SIMPLICITY

Public Servant, The  Memoirs of  Sir   Joseph Pope,  edited    and    completed   by   MAURICE POPE. Oxford, $4.50.

READING  Sir  Joseph  Pope's   Memoirs  is like  taking a  brief  motor  tour  of his  na­ tive   Prince Edward  Island:  there  is  a deceptive serenity and  simplicity about it all.  One  feels  when  it  is over  that   there  must  be so much more  there  than meets the  eye.
The man  does not emerge, is barely glimpsed  within   these  pages.  True, one sees some sort of man-but he is a stereo­ type  of  the  nineteenth century  "Ready, aye  ready!" British  colonial. Of  course,  it may  be  argued that   Sir  Joseph  was  this man; but  he  was  obviously  much more  besides. He  was a convert to Catholicism, an   old-fashioned  man   of   "virtue",  the friend and  confidant of  both  Macdonald and  Laurier, the respected dean  of feder­ al  civil  servants,  a  diplomatic negotiator of   sufficient   skill  to  impress   Bryce  and Spring-Rice, an  adviser   on  much  more than protocol to Governors-General, and a  warm-hearted  loyal friend to  many. But,   beyond   a  realization of  his  loyalty and  discretion, one  does not  emerge  with a satisfying  picture of the man: good, dependable old  "Joe". The memoirs are well  titled  Public  Servant:  the  unofficial man  is missing, and  one feels cheated.
There is no easy judgment on the value of  this  book. It will  be  useful  as a docu­ ment   on  the   history   of  certain  govern­ ment  departments and  administrators. The diplomatic and  political  historian will  be  interested  in  what   it  reveals   of men  like Sir  Wilfrid  and  Lord  Grey,  but it adds  nothing to what  Pope  had already

BOOKS IN   REVIEW



written of Macdonald. The social  histor­ ian  and  the general reader  will find some good stories,  a sympathetic  picture of the problems   of  the   French   Canadian, a delightful  glimpse of   riding  the  cow­ catcher on  a  C.P.R.  locomotive through the   Rockies    (with   Lady   Macdonald!) , a cool reception  from that  wily Japanese Foreign   Minister,  Tadasu  Hayashi, a warm  loyalty  to  friends such  as  the  ill­ fated  General Maude  of  Mesopotamia, and  a rather tedious description of Cana­ da's  negotiations over  pelagic  sealing  in the   Pacific,   to  suggest   a  few  plums   at random. It  is  a  potpourri,  as  memoirs often  are,  but  its limitations will seem too narrow  to  many   readers.  Pope's   public life and  recorded reflections  were so cen­ tered   on   politics,   protocol, and  probity  that  one hardly senses his Canada beyond its  official  and   political  life.  Moreover, the  Pope  Memoirs  also  suffer  from  cer­ tain   fatal  defects   as  a  literary  achieve­  ment.
The book is divided  into  two  parts: an
autobiography covering Sir Joseph's early and  middle years  from  his  birth  in  1854 to 1907, and  a biographical memoir writ­ ten   over  thirty  years ago  by  his  son, Lieutenant-General Maurice  Pope,  com­ pleting the  story  to Sir  Joseph's death  in
1925. The  biography covers later  years of great   importance in  Sir  Joseph's  public life-the negotiations with  Japan over Oriental  immigration, his  part   in  the founding of Canada's Department of  Ex­ ternal   Affairs,  the  Sealing  Conference of rgrr, the fall of the Laurier Government, World   War   I, and   the  founding of  the federal Civil  Service  Commission.
It is  regrettable  that   Sir   Joseph   did not complete his autobiography. Although General  Pope  had   access  to  his  father's pre-arranged papers and  to  his "copious
 

diaries", the  biography is  disappointing. In  the first two-thirds of the  book, Sir Joseph's narrative flows, although his writing  suggests frequently that  the hand that  framed countless  official addresses  of welcome  and  parliamentary addresses  to the  Crown,  was ill at  ease  when  it  took up the litterateur's pen. His son, however, shows  no literary skill whatever, and  has obviously been swamped by his material. The   occasional   warmth and  humour of Sir Joseph's reminiscences are  lacking en­ tirely in the  biography. We are wrenched from   one  theme   to  another,  with   little  continuity  or   balance,   and  less  insight.  Indeed, the  pleasure in reading a memoir lies in  the  writer's  assumptions or  judg­  ments  as to what will later  be considered significant.  This   virtue  is   lost   in   the second  part  of  Public Servant.  Where  an attempt is  made to suggest  the  setting  of Sir  Joseph's later  career  we have  lost the spirit  of memoirs, are  not  in the  realm  of good  biography, and  find  the  pedestrian style  of a  poor  textbook on  incidents in the  Canadian past.
The  index  is excellent, the  format ad-

BOOKS  IN REVIEW



mirable, the  illustrations in  keeping  with the  spirit   of  the   autobiography.  That spirit  is Sir Joseph's, of which  we have tantalizing glimpses: above all, of the attachment to England through the old Empire. One  suspects  that  the epilogue, which   touches   on  this  theme,  is a  later product of General Pope's  hand. It is in marked contrast with the bulk of the biography-imaginative, fitting,  and  a well-turned assessment of a great public servant  of colonial  Canada.
ALAN WILSON


EAT WELL
OR NOTHING
WILL COME OF IT!

Sverdrup's Arctic  Adventures. Ed.  T. C.  Fair­
ley.  Longmans. $6.oo.

WHAT IS IT LIKE to spend  four  years in the   Arctic,   three   of  them   out  of  touch with   all  other   groups   of  men,  even  the most  northern of  the  Eskimo?  One  an­ swer  is to  be found in  Sverdrup's  Arctic Adventures, the  explorer's  own  story  of his  expedition north  and  west  of  Baffin Land  in   I 8g8- I go2.  Previously,  Otto Sverdrup had  been  the  captain of  Nan­  sen's   Fram  on   the   famous   Norwegian drift   voyage  across  the  polar  sea  ( I893- g6) . Then,  in  I 8g8,  in  command of  his own   expedition  of   I 5  men,   he   again headed the  Fram into  the Arctic  ice. He hoped   to   penetrate  beyond   Baffin  Bay and  explore   the  region  north  of  Green­ land.   On   the   first   attempt   the   ice  in Smith's  Sound   proved   impassable,  and  the  Fram wintered on  the  east  coast  of Ellesmere Island.  Here, in  Sverdrup's words,  is  the  terror  of  the  Arctic   night
 and  the  spirit  in which  Sverdrup and  his men  faced  it:

The light died   away  across  the  mountains, and   slowly   vanished,  while   over   us  crept the    great  shades  of   the   polar  night,  the night  that  kills   all   life  .... For   a   few days   longer  we   were   able   to   see   a   faint light on   the   highest mountains  at   noon­ a   suspicion  of   dawn  in   the   south   which told   us  that there was  life  still  to  be found somewhere in  the  world   .  . . .  Here came Franklin,  with    129   men.   The   polar  night stopped  them;  not  one   returned.  Here came Greely, with  twenty-five men; six  re­  turned  ....  And  yet,  in  spite  of  all  that had   happened,  in   spite   of  all   the   horrors that  had   been  experienced, we  felt  on  the  whole  secure.  For   science   has  triumphed­ cold  and  scurvy and  hunger need  no longer tyrannize over  us.

During the  winter Sverdrup crossed Ellesmere Island to Bay Fjord, beyond which  he saw unknown land.  His account of  the   sighting  of  Bay  Fjord  brings   to mind   the  strong pull  of  the  writings   of earlier  explorers on  the  poetic  imagina­ tion.  Indeed, it sounds like  raw  material for  Keats' lines  on  the  discovery  of  the Pacific  and  Coleridge's  description of Antarctic  1ce:

Such  a surprise was it, and  so grand the panorama  which   opened  out   to  view,   that we  both   burst into a  cheer.  Directly  below us  lay  the  fjord,  broad and  shining,  with­ out   so  much  as   a   flake   of   snow   on   it­ only  ice,  nothing but  ice,  crystal  clear, like a   huge  fairy  mirror.  And    on   the   other side   of   the fjord  was   a   huge   chain  of mountains, several thousand feet  in  height, with   snow-filled  clefts   and   black  abysses.

Yet  even  in  the  moment of triumph, the characteristic practical humour of  Sver­ drup is present:

A   confounded  blast  was   blowing up there, right through all  the  poetry, and  yet we  stayed, spellbound. Had we  been  warm and   less  hungry, there is no  knowing what we   might  not    have   done-stood  on   our heads, written  verses,  or  some  other mad-

BOOKS IN   REVIEW



ness.  The    situation,  at   any   rate,   taught me  one  thing.   and   I  had   had   experience of  it  before:   if  you  are  confronted  with  a great   sensation,  or   a  difficult   choice,  eat first,  and   eat   well,  or   nothing  will  come of it.

When   the   channel to  the   north   was still  blocked  with  ice  the  following  sum­ mer,   Sverdrup  sailed west   into  Jones  Sound, north of Devon  Island and  south  of  Ellesmere. Here  the   Fram  spent  the next  three  winters, while  her  crew  made  dog sled expeditions into  the surrounding seas and  islands. Altogether they  mapped
10o,ooo  square miles,  totally  uninhabited and  previously  unexplored, including the Sverdrup Islands, the  largest  island  being oil-rich   Axel  Heiberg, the   land   sighted from  Ellesmere the  first  winter.
Sverdrup told  the  story  of  his  expedi­ tion  in  New  Land, published in  Norwe­  gian,   English  and   other   languages   in
1904.  It is  a  pleasure  long  overdue  to read   a  new  edition, called  Sverdrup's Arctic Adventures. T. C.  Fairley,   the editor, has  cut   the  original two  volumes to  something  less  than   one-third  their former  length, and  judiciously revised the original translation. From  the story slow­ ly emerges  a  humane modern  Viking  of science:  modest, determined,   objective, concerned  always   for  the  welfare  of  his men.  These, with  a touch  of drollery,  are the   qualities that   allowed   him   to  lead
 without violence  or   dramatics  fifteen men   cut   off  from  the   world  for  four years.  Sverdrup's carefully controlled imagination reveals itself in his sense for scenery,  animal life, and  the  Fram.
To   Sverdrup's narrative, Mr.   Fairley
has  added   a  valuable epilogue, covering Sverdrup's later  life and  the  diplomatic dispute between  Norway and Canada over   his   discoveries, in   the   course   of which  Canada evolved  her  ingenious sec­ tor  theory  of  Arctic  sovereignty.  In  the end   Norway  yielded   her  claim  to  Sver­  drup's  islands,   mainly   because  she  was unwilling to effectively  occupy them. One hopes  that  the  all  too  obvious  lesson  has not   been  lost  on  the  Canadian  govern­ ment,   since  Canada  too  could   lose  her Arctic  islands  by  failing  to  be the  leader  in settling  them.
V.  G.   HOPWOOD


STRUGGLE AND FLIGHT

MARTIN  ROHER.    Days    of  Living.   Toronto, Ryerson. $4.25.
LOVAT   DICKSON.    The  Ante-Room.  Toronto. Macmillan. $4.25.

As EXAMPLES of Canadian autobiograph­ ical  writing,   these  two  books  are  as  far apart as Cape Race  and  Nootka Sound. The one is an intimate journal, something very   like  a  sixteenth  century  common­ place  book;  the  other is almost  a novel.
Martin Roher's is one  of  those  books
which   it  is  almost   impossible   to  review with complete objectivity. Only the superhuman critic  could  read  it without finding  his  judgment involved, one  way or  the  other, with  his emotions, for  Days
of  Living  is  an  account of  the  author's

ss

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



struggle   to  live,  as  intensely   as  he  can, his  days  of  dying.
Discharged  from   an   R.C.A.F.   hospi­
tal   at   the  age  of  twenty-two, suffering from   an  incurable kidney  condition, he stretched, by  what   seems  to  have   been sheer  force  of  desire,  the  six  weeks  pre­ dicted   for  him   into  almost ten  years, most  of which  he spent  in bed. His book is  a  series  of  impressions,  ranging from mere  jottings  to  brief  informal essays, of the  lives of others  around him,  of spring  and  hope  and  love, of his desire  to write,  of  his  growing faith,  and   finally,  but briefly,  of  his  approaching death.  It   is simply  and  for  the  most  part  sensitively written,  with   a  tenderness  which   never quite  slips over  the  edge  of  sentimental­ ity.  Its  intensity of  personal  feeling  and  vividness  of   expression go  far  to  out­ weigh   the  unevenness and  occasional banality of  its  style.  An  honest,  realistic  and   unsophisticated  account  of  the  ob­ servations and  introspections of a  young man  who  would  not  lose, though full  of pain,   this   intellectual  being, Days  of Living,  if  not  in  the  strict  literary  sense a  "good"  book,  is  certainly  a  moving, though at  times  a painful  one.
The  title of Lovat  Dickson's  The  Ante­
Room  has   a  double   significance. Not only   does   this  account  of  the   author's early  life  stop  short  at  the  threshold of his career as editor and  publisher; it  de­ velops  the  theme of  the  individual  who longs  to  belong  but  stops  short  of  com­ mitting himself  fully  to any  experience.
The son  of a Canadian mining engin­ eer·with more  charm than  judgment and  more taste than  responsibility, Lovat  Dickson  sees his  childhood as a series of migrations-from  Australia to  Rhodesia, to England, to Canada and  back  to Eur­ opeEach  move   brings  its  own  adven-

86
 tures,  its  new  interests, but  each  involves the  tearing  up  of  roots,  the  severing   of bonds.  By the  time  this perennial expatri­ ate   reaches   his  teens  he  has  formed   the habit   of  not  loving  too  well  that   which  he  must  leave  ere  long.
The habit  of detachment is as evident in  his  point   of  view  as  in  his  story,  for this  is less an  autobiography than  an  in­ timate but   highly objective  biography written  in  the  first  person.  Its  hero  ex­ periences  the   extremes  of   good   and   ill fortune as he  progresses from  the  wilder­  ness of the  outback to  the gracious living of  a   privileged  class,  from   the   genteel shabbiness of a London suburb to pover­ ty in Ottawa, from  the  depths of despair  in  a  mine-pit  to  an  intellectual awaken­ ing  at   the  University of  Alberta. He  is quick   to  take  advantage of  such  oppor­ tunities  as  come   his  way,  but   the  fatal pattern  persists.  In no activity, in  no  re­ lationship  does  he  allow   himself   to  be­ come  fully  engaged. Always  the  inexor­ able  logic  of  self-determination  drives him  to  close  the  door  on  a  friend   or  a cause   in   order   to  open   another  which  leads  to a  new  and  more  promising ante­ room.
This story  of the  development of an engaging if not  always  admirable person­ ality  is  told   without  extenuation and  without self-dramatization. Its techniques are  those of  the  competent novelist  pro­ pounding and  fully  illustrating his theme
-even to the  syntactical carelessness which   Professor   Broadus complained  of in  the  essays  of  that   over-confident but likeable  as well as promising first-year student, Lovat Dickson.
MARION  B. SMITH

BOOKS  IN REVIEW



LETTERS FROM AVONLEA

WILFRID  EGGLESTON  (ed.). The Green   Gables Letters:  From L. M. Montgomery to Ephraim   Weber, 1905-1909. Ryerson. $4.00.

THE   FIFTEEN letters   in  this  book  were written to a homesteader in  Alberta  who had  literary aspirations. They cover  the years  before  and  after  the  publication of Anne   of   Green  Gables  and   reveal   the friendly   and   cheerful  spirit   of  a   hard­ working   woman   who  faced  success  with the  same  tempered  good  humour as she had  earlier faced  many  a  frustration.
Although Ephraim Weber  dreamed of a  literary career, he  seems  to  have  been one  of  those  persons  with  more  desire  to be a writer  than  to write.  Yet  we can  all be grateful to  him  for  eliciting and  pre­ serving   these  letters,   and  for  asking  the questions whose  answers   we  are  glad  to have-questions about how  and  where  Miss  Montgomery  got  her  ideas,  about  her literary markets and financial returns, about her interests and friends. She freely responded  with   news  about  herself  and  her  writing, her  thoughts on  such  things as religion  and mental telepathy, and  her suggestions  of   possible  subjects   for  his pen.    (There  is  little   sign  that   he  ever seriously  worked   on  her  suggestions;   he eventually  became a high  school  teacher, apparently a good  one.)
By I 905  Miss  Montgomery was  thirty­ one,  had  been  freelancing for  more  than  a decade, and  had  survived years of "icy rejection slips".  As she  said,  "Whatever gifts  the gods  had denied  me they  had  at least dowered me with stick-to-it-iveness." Her   earnings  in   I 905   she   reports  as
$591.85.   The  next   year   brought   over
$8oo.   Her   steady   productiveness,  how-
 ever,  can  only  be  appreciated  by  learn­ ing  the rates  of payment:  poems averag­ ing  perhaps five  or   six  dollars, short  stories   bringing   anywhere   between   five dollars  and  a  rare  forty  dollars,  with  "a good price"  being twenty-five dollars.  Be­ cause Canadian  magazines paid  even  less than  American, she sent  them  only  what  she could  not sell in  the  United States.
In her letter  of May 2, I907 she writes:

I must  simply   tell  you  my  great  news  right off! ... I am    blatantly  pleased  and proud and  happy  ....
Well,  last  fall  and  winter I went  to work and   wrote   a  book. I didn't  squeak a  word to  anyone about it because I feared  desper­ ately   I  wouldn't find   a   publisher   for   it. When I  got   it  finished   and   typewritten I sent   it   to   the   L.   C.   Page   Co.   of  Boston  and   a  fortnight  ago,  after  two   months of suspense   I got  a  letter  from   them   accept­ ing  my  book  and  offering to  publish it  on the  10-per  cent royalty basis!  . . .
Its   title   is  Anne  of  Green   Gables   and
the   publishers  seem   to   think  it   will   suc­
ceed  as  they  want me  to  go  right to  work
on a sequel   ....

This  passage  runs  directly counter to  the widespread  notion   that    Anne   first   ap­ peared   as  a  serial   in  a  Sunday  School weekly  and  that   its  popular  success  sur­ prised  everyone.   In   the  same  letter   the author describes her  book as "a  juvenilish  story, ostensibly  for girls;  [but] ... I am not   without  hope   that   grown-ups  may like it  a little."
Published  in  the  spring of  I goB, Anne
went  through six editions before  the  end of the  year  and  the  author had  a file of a hundred reviews, almost  all "kind and flattering beyond  my   highest  expecta­ tions."  A flood  of  letters to  her  showed that  grown-ups had  indeed liked it--such men  as Mark  Twain, Bliss  Carman, and Sir  Louis Davies.  Twain's  remark is well known:    "the  dearest and   most   lovable  child in fiction since the immortal Alice";

BOOKS  IN  REVIEW



but  Miss Montgomery also quotes  for her correspondent part  of a New York Times review: "A  mawkish, tiresome impossible heroine, combining the  sentimentality of an  Alfred  Austin  with  the  vocabulary of a George Bernard Shaw. Anne is a bore." She  reports the royalties from  Anne  for
1908  as  $r,73o.oo-nine cents  per  copy out  of the wholesale  price of ninety  cents. Something over  19,200  copies  had  been sold  in  less than  nine  months.
Before  the end  of 1go8, however,  there
were moments when the author, burdened with  correspondence, avowed  herself as "horribly tired" of "that detestable Anne." Yet  she  never   lost  sight  of  what  to  her was  the  cardinal point: the  book's  suc­ cess  would   free   her  from  "hack  work"  and   enable her  "to   write  up  only  ideas  which  would  appeal to me ... write sole­ ly to please  myself .... I wrote Anne  that  way....  But  of  course  a  writer  who  is struggling  up   can  seldom  afford   to  do this  at  first.  I've  served  a  long and  hard








88
 apprenticeship-how hard no one  knows but  myself. The world  ... doesn't  hear  of all  my early  buffets  and  repulses."
Thanks to  Ephraim Weber   and  Wil­ drid   Eggleston,  the   world  now  knows more  than  it did before  of both the strug­ gle and  the success.
R. E. WATTERS



A SHORT NOTICE

A recent  addition to The Reference Shelf,   a  series  published  by  the  H.  W. Wilson   Company, is  Canada, edited   by Gladys  Engel  Lang   ($2.50). It is a  kind of  anthology, intended to inform  Ameri­ cans,  and  consisting mostly  of  condensa­ tions  of  newspaper and  magazine articles and  of official informational literature. It contains some  thirteen pages  on  various  aspects  of  Canadian culture, almost  half of   which   consists   of   a   piece   from   an American   quarterly  on   why   Canadian culture  must be  absorbed  by  American. As   information  this   section    is   almost worthless.  Vague "controversial topics" have  been  chosen,  but  there  is no specific discussion  of  literary or  artistic trends in Canada, and  the only writer  or artist mentioned  is  Lister   Sinclair, who  is  in­ troduced merely  to be refuted. In  a bibli­ ography of further reading for the Ameri­  can  aspiring to  a  knowledge of  Canada the  only  books  that   can  be  regarded as illustrating Canadian  literature are  five novels;  one  is  by  Gabrielle Roy,  and  of the  remaining  four,  two  are  by Thomas B. Costain and the  others by John Mant­ ley  and   Bart   Spicer. Can   one   wonder that   so  many  earnest people   below  the  border  doubt   that  literature  exists   in Canada?
