$2 .oo per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE N°·61

Summer, 1974



FIFTEENTH :ziNNIVERS:ziRY  ISSUE



Articles

BY MIKE DOYLE,  MICHAEL ONDAATJE, SUSAN ZIMMERMAN, NANCY J. CORBETT, PETER THOMAS,  FRANK DAVEY


Review Articles and Reviews

BY AUDREY  THOMAS, DOUGLAS BARBOUR, B. RAJ AN, HENRY KREISEL, MAX DORSINVILLE, GEORGE  BOWERING, W.  H. NEW, RUSSELL M. BROWN, DAVID EVANS, DIANE  BESSAI, HERBERT ROSENGARTEN,
ELIZABETH WATERSTON, GEORGE  WOODCOCK, S. R. MCGILLIVRAY,
PETER STEVENS, FRED  COGSWELL, LINDA  ROGERS, PHYLLIS GROSSKURTH


Opinion

BY FRANK BIRBALSINGH


A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW



e it11rial 	





WHEN DID
IT ALL BEGIN?





THERE  ARE TIMES these days  when one  wonders dazedly whether "Canadian  literature" is fact  or  monstrous fantasm. A  whole  army  of protagonists from   Margaret Atwood   to  the  editors  of  Alive  have  embraced  its cause  with  varying degrees  of  militancy,   to  the  extent,  in  the  case  of  the  Alive group,  of  offering  themselves  as  martyrs  to  the  cause  of  CanLit by defying  the Guelph  bylaws against selling  papers  in the streets.  (Needless  to say, if we do not go all the  way  with  Alive's  views of what  Canadian literature is or may  become, we condemn, on general  grounds of the freedom  of speech  and  writing, any laws or by-laws that  interfere with  the free dissemination of the word -of  any word!) The  teaching of Canadian literature courses in the  universities  has proliferated
to such  an  extent  that  where,  twenty  years ago, a single teacher might  be allowed
to conduct one course at a university, now there are whole sections of English departments on  many  campuses which  are  devoted  to what   has  become  a  sub­ discipline  of its  own.  Canadian Literature  long stood  in  solitary  isolation  as  the only  journal  dedicated to the criticism of Canadian books, but  now it has become like the  central trunk  in  a great  banyan, with  journals  devoted  to mere facets  of Canadian  writing  (two already appearing on   Canadian  fiction  and one  announced on  Canadian  criticism) taking  root  around it.  Publishers,  of course, have  welcomed   the  surge  of  interest  in  Canadian writers,  and  houses  devoted specifically  to  publishing Canadian  books  have  increased  vastly,  while  popular magazines  like M acleanJs and  Saturday Night  have  bent  to the wind  of opinion.
I find  myself reacting in  two ways to such  developments. The  first of these, of course, is natural to a member of the relatively small group  of people  who worked in  the field a decade and  a half  ago when  Canadian Literature began  to appear

3

EDITORIAL



(for  this  number  celebrates  the  fifteenth  anniversary  of the first issue in August
1959). I find  myself a little incredulous,  wondering whether it is all real, whether it will last or somehow dissolve into that Shelleyan limbo where

faiths and empires gleam, Like wrecks in a dissolving dream.

On  reflection,  I reach  the conclusion that  such fears themselves are insubstan­ tial. The  present  self-conscious aspect of the Canadian literature  movement  will doubtless  tone  down  into something  less strident,  but the movement  itself repre­ sents a  genuine  mutation in the way our society views itself. On  the less worthy level, one  can  point  to the infrastructure of a literary world that  has developed on  the  campuses,  in  the  media,  in  the  world  of  publishing,  in  the  network  of small  presses and  little  magazines  and  poetry  readings that  makes a closely-knit literary  ambience  such  as has never before existed in Canada. It is unlikely that this  will  easily  be  dismantled   or  that  those  who  live within  it  will be quickly deflected  from  their  present  preoccupations.  On  the  higher  level, it is by now quite  evident  that  Canadian  writing  has become not merely a distinctive form of literature in  English,  but  also  the  verbal  manifestation  of  a  culture  attaining maturity.
So, even if the cant  of CanLit  is likely to be forgotten as our literary  maturity
is prolonged  into a tradition we take for granted,  it is impossible to imagine that we will ever go back to the colonial attitude  which assumes that  the products of the  classic European literatures-or of the imperial  American  literature-are necessarily better  than  our  own. We shall continue  to recognize that  while there is a universal dimension of criticism within a language in which all works may be judged in relation  to each other, there is also a particular one in which works can only be judged in accordance  with  their appropriateness  to time and  place. And so, if Shakespeare  or Stendhal  is complete in the sense of being good for all men at all times, there are certain  books in any culture whose goodness indeed may be local in relevance yet in local terms may also be complete. There  will no longer be any need for a Canadian to think himself provincial if he elects to take to that mythical desert island of the quiz-masters  not only his Shakespeare  and  his War
and Peace but also his A. J. M. Smith anthology.
But this brings me to my second reflection:  that  the general public mistakenly tends  to see all  this  concern  for  Canadian literature  as something  new. Yet in reality it is new only to the academics and  the media. To  Canadian writers it is an  old theme. Even  before Confederation  the Canada  Firsters were speculating


4

EDITORIAL



on  the  proper  concerns of a  truly  national  literature,  and  I am  reminded  by a recent  batch  of reprints  how consistently the idea of a distinctive  body of  Cana­ dian  writing,  and  the  hope of a  body of writers becoming  economically  free to express their  country's  nature  and  future,  persisted through  what  we often  think of nowadays  as a dark age of mental enslavement to colonial impositions.
E. K.  Brown's  On  Canadian  Poetry  (recently  republished  by the  Tecumseh Press of  Ottawa), not  only  contains  Brown's remarkable  analysis  of Canadian literature and  its problems at the crucial time of the mid-1940s -an analysis to which  Margaret  Atwood is clearly indebted in formulating  her ideas on colonial­ ism's effect on literature-but also reminds one of Charles  G. D.  Roberts  and his  dream  of "starting   a  Canadian  literature", and  of  Lampman's  delight  on reading  Orion  "that such work could be done by a  Canadian, by a young man, one of ourselves," and  of Lampman's own lecture in  1891 in which  he declared that in the Canada  of his time people were too busy to read with any discernment,  but  that   the  time  would  come  when  the  country  would  develop  "a  literary market and a literary atmosphere."
One  might expect such sentiments to be quoted  by Brown as a critic seeking a form for the Canadian literature  he prophetically saw taking shape  around  him; one  might  expect such  remarks  from poets who in  verbal  imagery  stood in  the same  relation  to an  awakening  Canadian  consciousness as the  Group  of Seven did in visual imagery.
What  I find  more impressive is that  other  writers at  the  tum  of the  century
with  much  less national   inclinations  were  also  concerned  about   literature  in
Canada. Three  recent  titles  in  the  University  of Toronto   Press's  Literature of Canada  reprints are Robert  Barr's The  Measure of the Rule, Robert  J. C. Stead's The   Homesteaders  and  Frank  Parker  Day's  Rockbound. Among  them,  there is
no doubt  that  in literary terms Rockbound  is the only real re-discovery:  a strong novel of the  harsh  life of fishermen  on the Atlantic  coast, remarkably  untram­ meled by the stylistic affectations  and moralistic fads that afflicted most Canadian fiction  published  before  1930.  Stead's  and  Barr's  novels,  while  they  have  an interest  in  terms  of social  and  literary  history, are  hopelessly  scarred  by their times, and are hard  books to read for their own sakes. One could apply very aptly to  them  some  shrewd  remarks  about  Canadian writing  up  to  World  War  II which E. K. Brown makes as an aside in On Canadian Poetry:

Nothing is so difficult  for  a Canadian as to give a living  presentment of a natural human individual. Canadian  biographies never  put  before  the  reader a man  in his habit  as he walked  and  talked; they are  the equivalent of marble busts. Canadian

5

EDITORIAL



novels are full of characters  who are simply the porte-parole of their writers, or conventionally humorous  nondescripts, or pale idealizations.

But  that   is not  the  point   I am  trying  to  make,  which  is that   of  these  three novelists  one,  Frank Parker Day,  was  hailed  by  Archibald MacMechan  for  the specifically  Canadian  quality of  his  writing   and  for  bringing true  realism  into Canadian literature, while  both  Stead  and  Barr  went  beyond  presenting a recog­ nizable  Canadian tone  in  their  novels  to an  explicitly  expressed  concern  for the conditions  under   which   Canadian  writers  worked   and  for  the  prospects of  a Canadian literature. Barr's point  of view was essentially economic,  and  his main  argument in his long I 899  essay on "Literature in Canada" is summarized thus:

What  chance  has Canada then  of raising a Walter  Scott? I maintain  that  she has but  very little chance,  because she won't pay the money, and  money is the root of all literature.

Somehow, he concludes,  we must  educate people to spend  less of their  money on booze and  more  on  books. And  Stead  in 193 Iwrote an essay in the  "Origin and Trend of Canadian Literature" in which  he found  comfort  in its amateur status, its surviving optimism, and  its "lack  of that  emphasis  on  sex which  is found  in much   of  the  current literature of  both  the  United States  and   Great Britain." Stead   also  complained  of  the   economic   difficulties  that   prevented  almost   all Canadian writers  of his time  from  living  by their  typewriters, forgetting that  this was hardly consistent  with  his praise  of their  amateur attitude to writing.
These   will  doubtless-in  I974-appear primitive  viewpoints, but  they  do
emphasize that,  among writers  at  least,  the  matter  of Canadian literature is not a  new  subject  of discussion  and  concern. Indeed, it had  been  clearly  there  from the   moment  Canadians  recognized themselves  as  Canadians, and   that   process
began in the bitter  lessons of I 8I 2.

GEORGE WOODCOCK















6

PROTEUS
AT ROBLIN LAKE


Mike Doyle





RECENT COMMENTATORS have sugg.,ted that  AI ( o• A.W., Alfred,  Alfred  W.)   Purdy  is, in  Margaret  Atwood's  phrase,  a  poet  of "many over-lapping  self-created  versions". George Bowering, in  his Purdy  monograph, says  of  the  earliest  version,  perpetrator   of The   Enchanted   Echo  (I 944), "he seemed to think  that  the poet had to be a sort of Emily Dickinson, maybe with a moustache". Mention  of Emily Dickinson in the same breath  as The  Enchanted Echo is gross flattery  to that  jejune conglomeration  of verses, yet Bowering has a point. He cites a quatrain which does sound like Emily Dickinson, the resemblance deriving  from  the  fact  that  Purdy,  too, seemed to need to make poems in fixed stanza forms, many of them standard  in nineteenth-century hymnology. The Enchanted  Echo  demonstrates  two things about  Purdy,  both crucial.  First, even in the formal strait-jacket  he provides himself, he has an ear. Second, perceptible when The  Enchanted  Echo takes its place in the Purdy ceuvre, this is the initial promulgation  of poet Purdy,  Purdy  Mark  One  (so to speak, since we are in the Air Force)  at "a sort of moral attention".
The  last phrase comes from the narrator  of The  Great Gatsby. Scott Fitzgerald told  us that  Jimmy  Gatz  (i.e.,  Jay  Gatsby,  earlier  version)  derived  from  "his Platonic  conception  of himself". The  Enchanted  Echo  reveals what  conception of "the  poet",  and  himself as poet, Purdy  developed from  the  age of thirteen, when he began to write the stuff, up to his mid-twenties when he was unwittingly ( unDucharnpishly) a moustachioed Emily Dickinson. One can think of numerous examples of poets whose first books are awkward  or amateur  beyond belief (two well-known examples:  John  Crowe Ransom,  William Carlos  Williams). Closest parallel  to Purdy  among  "colonial" poets is his New Zealand  near-contemporary Louis Johnson,  whose Stanza  and Scene  (I 945)  bears the same relationship  to
Johnson's   mature   work as The   Enchanted  Echo  does to  Purdy's.  Some  poets,
from  their  beginnings,  produce  highly developed and  beautifully  finished work, usually in small quantities.  Dylan Thomas is a fine example. Others, and Johnson

7

PROTEUS AT ROBLIN LAKE



and  Purdy  are  two,  grow  and  metamorphose  in  public. Such  poets  are  more available  to  negative  criticism,  often  known  for  their  mistakes and  limitations, but  they  seem  to  need  publication  for growth.  Today,  Purdy  rejects  that  first public version of himself, regarding the work of that phase as "crap". No wonder! for  both  technique  and  substance  are  routine,  mechanical,  stock-response. The large gestures of the verse bear no relation to Purdy's day-to-day life. They intro­ duce  us  to  someone  apparently  plugged  in  to  the  whole  range  of  "king  and country"  cliches.
We  know  today  that  Purdy  was never  really like that.  Part  of  him  was, of course, if The  Enchanted  Echo has any truth  to it at all, but all of him, no! He did  not  even  begin  to  get  all  the  possibilities of  himself into  that  early  book, which was an act of homage to an outdated  and extremely provincial conception of "the  poet",  and  which  shows only that   (like Jay  Gatsby)   he had  to  begin somewhere. Seemingly, he began from a position of extreme cultural  poverty and met the need to externalize  his sense of vocation in a book, an echo because of a sense, perhaps, that he was talking only to himself.
What  happened   next  may  seem surprising.  As far  as book publication  goes,
nothing  happened  for more than  a decade. A first book, apparently, rid Purdy's ego system of a  need. He submerged.  A restlessness, physical and  psychological, showed itself in  his way of life:  running  a taxi business in Belleville, Ont.,  and working in various  factory  jobs, just as in the thirties he had  ridden  the freights across  the  country.  That, says  Bowering, is  "the  stuff  literary  legends ... are made  of",  but  such  a legend  had  already been pre-empted  at least a generation earlier by the old Georgian  poet, W. H. Davies, who told us about  it in The Autobiography  of a Supertramp, fifty years ago.
Who  knows what  inner  reasons Purdy  had  for his courses of action?  But the
"legend", when  matched  up against the poetry of the late 1950s (such  things as the  pervasive archaisms  and  "poetical" language  of Emu,  Remember!) gives a distinctly  schizoid impression.  As far  as the  craft  of poetry is concerned,  Purdy had simply gone further  into the British tradition.  He had exchanged  the Quiller Couch schoolboy stereotype of the poet for another and livelier one, but still a stereotype.  Yet  there  are  signs of growth:  a developing consciousness of sound, language,  a sense of the immediate  environment-of what is actually and physi­ cally around  him, and  of the  poem as part  (an  important  part  for him)  of the process  of  being  alive.  He  has  begun  to  choose  better  models,  in  particular Hopkins, whose device of hyphenated  phrases he adopts in  (as Bowering acutely observes)  a "striving  for openness and the natural motion in freedom".

8

PROTEUS AT ROBLIN LAKE



During  the late I 95os, the new influence of William Carlos Williams was being felt among  Canadian poets. Up  to this point  Purdy  had  shown  himself to be a typical  colonial  poet  (easily  matchable  with  poets in  Australia,   New  Zealand, South  Africa and  elsewhere)  but now he, too, began to show signs of Williams's influence-in his explicitly-stated  concern with particular objects, in the run of his lines, and in his conscious concern with craft  (though  he labelled it, less than happily in the circumstances, "the crafte so Ionge to Ierne" ) :

I forget  whether I ever loved you
in the past -when you enter  the room your climate is the mood
of living, the hinge of now,
in time the present tense. Certainly you are  the world I am  not done  with
until  I dispense  with words-

Yet  Purdy  was already  too  much  himself to  be  confined  by another  artist's conception   of  reality  and   the   poet's  relation  to  it,  even  one  as  seminal   as Williams's. Purdy's eclecticism, his protean  personality, first shows itself markedly in  The  Crafte  So  Longe  to  Lerne  (I 959),  sometimes destroying  the  particular poem, as in "Whoever  You Are",  with its metamorphic  sentiments,  which curdle at  the  end  into  "romantic" melancholy. Underlying  a  number  of the  poems of this  period is a strange  fear  of disintegration  (see "Whoever  You Are",  "After the  Rats",  "Vestigia", "At  Evergreen  Cemetery"  and  even  "On  the  Decipher­ ment of Linear  B", which  portrays the work of Michael  Ventris  as a threat  to a cherished   perception   of   history.  A   half-submerged   "romantic"   nostalgia   is betrayed  here both  by the theme  and the poem's closing cadences.)  In  contrast, Purdy shows himself as Alfred W. Purdy, somewhat learned  but tongue-in-cheek, in "Gilgamesh and  Friend", where he uses controlled lightness of tone to interfuse condensed  mythology with  contemporary  details and  tone of  voice. Equally suc­ cessful, and  more  important, is "At  Roblin  Lake",  introducing the  locus of so many future  poems, which  was to give Purdy a  central  fixed point in the local. Several  facets,  versions,  of  Purdy  merge-the  bookish  Alfred   W.,  the  self­ observer, the punster, the vulnerable:

... wondering at myself, experiencing for this bit of green  costume  jewellery the beginning of understanding,
the remoteness of alien love -


9

PROTEUS AT ROBLIN LAKE



From  some poems in this volume  one has a sense of disintegration -already men­ tioned, from  others  "the beginnings of understanding". Seen in the long perspec­ tive  of three  decades  of published work,  perhaps the  key moment of  The Crafte  So Longe To Lerne is in the conclusion of "At  Evergreen Cemetery":

Myself, having the sense of something going
on without my knowledge, changes taking place that  I should be concerned with,
sit motionless in the black car behind the hearse
waiting to re-enter a different world.

AN ADMIRER  of  Purdy   has  described   him  as  being  "very
Canadian  without  being   provincial",  offering   an   unconsciously    backhanded
compliment. Why  has  Purdy become  so significant  a poet for Canada today?  To an   outsider   Canada  must   present   a  somewhat  puzzling   international  image: innocent  yet  canny, straightforward  yet  oblique,  open  and  yet shut  in,  eclectic and  yet groping for  a single  image  of itself. Some  or all of these  characteristics apply  to  Purdy, who  seems as much  as anyone  writing  today  to sense what  it is, the  Canadian  thing,   the  local  thing,   and  whose  work  may  be  seen  as  a  slow unpeeling, a groping towards the core of that  thing.
Years  ago,  reviewing  The Crafte So  Longe  to Lerne,  Milton Wilson suggested that, "Purdy has  to find  his directions by indirections; poetically  he needs to be devious." Part  of the  explanation may  be in Purdy's intuition of the gap  between his fellow Canadians' daily experience and  his own vocation  ("Canadian  without being  provincial") :

Now I am a sensitive man
so I say to him mildly as hell
'You shouldn'ta knocked over that good beer with them beautiful flowers in it'
So he says to me 'Come on' so I Come On
like a rabbit with weak kidneys I guess
like a yellow streak charging on flower power I suppose
& knock the shit outa him & sit on him
(he is just a little guy)
and  say reprovingly
'Violence will get you nowhere this time chum


10

PROTEUS AT  ROBLIN LAKE



Now you take me
I am a sensitive man
and would you believe I write poems?'
But I could see the doubt in his upside down face in fact in all the faces
'What  kinda poems?'
'Flower poems'
'So tell us a poem'
I got off the little guy but reluctantly for he was comfortable
and told them this poem
They crowded around me with tears
in their eyes and wrung my hands feelingly for my pockets for
it was a heart-warming moment for Literature
and moved by the demonstrable effect
of great Art and the brotherhood of people I remarked
' -the poem oughta be worth some beer' It was a mistake of terminology
for silence came
and it was brought home to me in the tavern that poems will not really buy beer or flowers or a goddam thing
First,  an  aside  on  provincialism. I  do  not  believe  a  poem  such  as  this  could have  been  written  by an  English  poet until  the rise, in recent  years, of live poetry in centres  such as Liverpool  and  Newcastle.  It could,  however,  have  been written by any  number of Australian or  New Zealand  poets in the last forty  years. More to our  present  point: the energy  with  which  this incident is portrayed locates  the great  advance of Purdy's work  in the  early  I g6os. At its worst  such  energy  and self-mockery  results in a leer, a display of knowingness, but the best work in Poems for all the  Annettes, for example, is due  to a tension  between  energy  and  watch­ fulness,  energy  and  diffidence,  energy  and  scepticism.  An earlier introversion has been  superseded by something more  positive. Sometimes  the new energy is mani­ fest  in  sweeping  declarations, catalogues  of whole  masses, but  in such  instances  the  energy  is largely  of  the  surface  and  largely  lost. Where  it  really  counts  is in the  exploring of a  relationship with  one  other  person,  a  situation at  once  open and  closed, tentative and  yet assured.  This  is why the whole  notional framework of Poems  for all the Annettes is a happy one.
Simultaneously Purdy  seems  to grapple  with  the  shape  of a  human exchange and  the shape  of a poem,  as in "Encounter", a  (finally  unsuccessful)  piece about


I I

PROTEUS AT ROBLIN LAKE



loosening  a screw in a pantry door  which had  been fixed in place by another man a  hundred years  earlier. The   poem's  very  occasion  demonstrates Purdy's sensi­ tivity  and  alertness,  but  he lets it diffuse into stridency, first betrayed  by a verbose elongating of the line and  finally  by capitalization. Yet there  has been an encoun­ ter and  it is precisely revealing  of Purdy's strength that  he can realize he is talking  about   "the  metaphysical notion  about  how  we're  all interconnected",  but  makes us feel  the  palpable human  reality  of  his nineteenth-century  counterpart. (This poem  too,  incidentally, has  its  provincialist   element: the  poet  imagining what  others  must think  of his being a poet -"a phony".)
With   recurring amazement  and   admiration one  meets  Purdy's sensitivity  to "the one important thing  among  so much  meaningless  trivia/ the one thing  that always  eludes  you,"  of which  he meanwhile professes, "Nothing is said or can  be said." Elusiveness  is directly   related  to  life's limitless  possibilities,  the  quality  of experience, the process, painful enough  and yet open:

every decision, word, thought, positive act,
causes the sum of the parts of a man's self to change and he betrays himself into the future day after day

But  this  is "talking about it",  one  reason  why this poem,  "Collecting the Square Root  of Minus  One", appeals to  me less than  the finely realized  concreteness  of "House  Guest",  where   Purdy combines  the  texture of  a  two-way   relationship with  the  fabric  of  his own  mental  interests  and  experiences.  Technically hardly more than  a list, an enumeration, much  may be learnt  from "House Guest" about Purdy's skill  in  handling  his  materials, his  adroit   use of  line  breaks  and  con­ junctions,  his  laconic   eloquence, and  the  absurdity and  yet  appropriateness of detail:

Every night the house shook from his snoring a great motor driving us on into daylight
and the vibration  was terrible
Every morning  I'd get up and say 'Look at the nails­
you snored them out half an inch in the night-'
He'd believe me at first and look and get mad and glare
and stare angrily out the window while I watched  ro minutes of irritation
drain from his eyes onto fields and farms and miles and miles of snow

Since  the  guest  spent  so much  time  there  pounding nails, the  psychology  of this


12

PROTEUS AT ROBLIN LAKE



is acute,  and,  indirectly, is a strong  expression  of affection  for  the  guest,  who  is
close enough  to the  poet  to be included  in his characteristic self-mockery.
As  its  title  suggests,  many  of  the  two-way  relationships in  Poems   for all the Annettes centre  on  women.  "The Old  Woman and  the  Mayflowers" epitomizes what Gary Geddes  (in a recent article on Purdy) calls Canadian "orneryness", portraying the  end  of a  woman   who, "after almost  8o  years  of bitchiness", had died in a field :

She'd picked maybe a dozen mayflowers before dying, and a goat ate them
out of her hand.

Ending in  an  understatement and  diminution, Purdy yet has made a local myth, thereby   giving   Ameliasburg  Township  a   meaningful  name.  Once   again   the reader  is aware of a closeness, poet to subject, and  perhaps the old woman is even a surrogate for the poet.
A  woman   is also  focus  of "Archaeology of Snow", frequently seen  as centre­
piece of Poems  for all the  Annettes, with  its complementary statements:

we encounter  the entire race of men just by being
alive here

and

a few more moments
to hang in a private gallery of permanent imaginings

Here  we  perceive  another element  of  the  tension  which  gives  Purdy's work  its vitality.  He  is public,  he  is the  globetrotting Canadian  who  makes  pronounce­ ments  about  public  events,  but  one feels in the  texture of his work  that  he is also intensely  private and  that,  in  the  end,  may  be the  more  interesting thing  about  him.  Of course, encountering "the entire" human race is not,  of itself, just public.  Again,  the  poet  feels himself  part  of a vast  process;  but the  meat  of the  poem  is a human encounter and its reverberations.
Open  form,  particularly the fragmented beginning,  establishes the poem's exploratory nature. The   protagonist  has  lost  his girl-friend, Anna, laments the loss,  but  does  not   romanticize  it.  Something,  at  once  comical   and   beautiful, ephemeral and  tangible, remains  with him:

PROTEUS AT  ROBLIN LAKE




Day after next day




printed  there
 
I found her heavy buttocks in the snow

like a Cambrian  trilobite

Except the girl was not there but was there also somehow

Later  he refers to her as "Helen of Illyria  with the big behind", at once humaniz­ ing the  myth  and  mythifying the  human. Chill  weather  helps retain the lost girl's imprint, as though in some sense she is invisibly there; but  with warmer weather, new season,  spring, she  will disappear inevitably, because  the large  process of the
universe  continues. But  has she gone?  Purdy's "Platonism" intervenes to save her:


the form is HERE
 
has to be must be

As if we were all immortal
in some way I've not fathomed

and  the  poem  resolves itself into  a sense of the "grandeur" of the interpenetration of all things  into  one,  including the humans, of whom  "there's no end."
Purdy's strength shows  here  in  his correlation of a sense of the  immensity of flux and  the  fleetingly  possessed and  mock-heroic human, in the antithesis implied by  the  title-"Archaeology  of Snow"-that man  leaves  traces  though almost everything melts  away.  One  thing  I have  not  perhaps sufficiently stressed  may be indicated in  these  opposites: Purdy's inclusiveness,  his capacity to  bring  to  bear many  facets  of his personality. This,  as much  as anything, serves to make  Poems for all the  Annettes a landmark in his career  and  in Canadian poetry.



E N The Cariboo  Horses was published in  1965 it con­ firmed  Purdy's public  status, but  more  than  one commentator remarked  that  no poem  in  the  volume  is the  kind  of "finished  structure which  focuses  and holds attention".  Mercurial as  Purdy is,  that   is  not  surprising. The   most  significant pieces  in  The Cariboo   Horses  have  not  a  memorable facade but  a  presence,  a texture, which   permeates. Some  features  of  Purdy's craftsmanship  at  this stage  will show what  I mean.
My first-year  English  grammar text informs  me that,  in verbal  structure, "The

PROTEUS AT ROBLIN LAKE



continuous forms  denote an  action,  an  event,  or  a  condition that  is incomplete and  still continuing" :
At 1oo Mile House the cowboys ride in rolling stagey cigarettes with one hand reining
restive equine rebels on a morning grey as stone
-so much like riding dangerous women with whiskey coloured eyes-

Purdy is  attached  to  objects,   particularly what  Williams  once  called  "the raw beauty  of ugliness":
the football players
ride in colourless convertibles their upholstery worn down
to foam rubber quivering tho it is still
quite  beautiful-

But, despite  this, he is a poet of the verb and  many  poems in The  Cariboo Horses gain  their immediacy and  emotional force from the verb-form (responding to Heidegger's dictum that  the  human condition is to be there.)  Poem  after  poem moves  in  the  continuous form;  even   ("My  Grandfather Talking-go  Years Ago") remembered incidents, are recreated  as if happening now.
Such  technique is one  index  of Purdy's  sophistication, but  other  methods also contribute to the  poems'  momentum. In many instances  the  poem is a continuum, its forward pressure developed through the deployment of verbs, on the one hand, and   link  words,  conjunctions,  transitions, on  the  other.   Used  at  line  ends  or beginnings, such devices can control  the pace:
dreaming not of houris and other men's wives but his potash works and the sawmill hearing only the hard tusked music of wheels turning and hardly ever heard anything soft he
did not know one March that June was early ...

Gary  Geddes  asked  Purdy, in  an  interview,  whether the  open-endedness of  his poems  is merely  a  "device".  Acknowledging some debt  to Olson,  Purdy  agreed, but  said  it  is also  "a  philosophy". If so, it is indicative of one  more  version  of Purdy. Casting   our   minds   back,  momentarily,  to  a  phrase   in  "Archaelogy of Snow", I  suggested  that   "the form  is HERE" carries  "Platonic"  overtones (i.e., that  one  element  behind   Purdy's experiences  is a vision of an  ideal  experience), but  more  deeply  felt  is the  sense of the  leaving  of human traces.  Their qualities

PROTEUS AT  ROBLIN LAKE



of presentness and  movement  make Purdy's  mature  poems highly dramatic. We are immediately involved in the process of his responses. We may then ask:  what is the  nature  of those responses? What  answers does Purdy  have?  I tend  to dis­ agree  with  those  who  suggest  that  none  is offered;  gradually  coming  into  the work is a feeling for the specific occasion, person, object. Instead  of  Plato's chair:
I see the myth of God is a kitchen chair
full of wormholes
and fall down and worship

The  flux itself is for  Purdy  an  answer, and  a sufficient answer.  His grandfather tells him "you don't  clast stop/  or everything would fall down" and all indications are  that   Purdy   believes him,  profoundly.  Life is that  and  nothing   more,  the movement   through, -though  his  imagination   longs for  it  to  be  more,  as  he suggests in  "Method for  Calling  up  Ghosts",  with  its wish image  of the  dead leaving white-painted trails. Meanwhile,  experience is of "fumbling to stay alive/ and  always the  listening."  Stoppage  is death  for Purdy,  as is revealed  even in a casual  phrase  such  as "television's  awful semi-colon"  (an  informative side-light on his technique) .
To  return  to the kitchen  chair.  Cast up in the flux, it has particularity, but it
is also common,  and  representative-of  what one lives with day by day, "full of wormholes".  Such  an  attitude is movingly captured  in "The Country  North  of Belleville",  a  poem  of the  harsh  farmlands,  which shares something  with such "provincials" as Williams, and  Patrick  White in his great  novel of pioneer farm­ ing, The Tree  of Man. Deeply conscious as he is of the countryside  in question, "the  country of defeat",  where "Old  fences drift vaguely among the trees", Purdy speaks  as one  whose restlessness has drawn  him  away,  but  who  is  drawn  back albeit reluctantly to "the same/  red patch mixed with gold".
1      Time  and  space, spartan time and  empty-or snow-filled -space, predomi­ nate  in The Cariboo   Horses.  If Poems  for all the  Annettes marks  the  moment when Purdy's creative energies gathered into a cohesiveness which comes through, at  its  high  points,  as fierce  joy, The Cariboo  Horses follows up  by confirming that  he is a Canadian poet. Purdy's  answer to Northrop  Frye's  (and  Margaret Atwood's)   question,  the  Canadian question,  "Where  is Here?", is now in  the texture of almost every poem. One  could argue ad nauseam  about  the meaning of "provincialism" (as  I  would argue  that, seen from London  or Paris, Canada is "provincial", but  then  I do not consider "provincial" to be a term  of deroga-

!6

PROTEUS AT ROBUN LAKE



tion), but  I note simply that  many foremost Commonwealth  writers continue  to feel the need to come to terms with European  culture. Purdy is manifestly Cana­ dian  partially  because his consciousness is a link-point between  past and  present, between   European    (but   also  North  American)   history  and   "the  country  of
defeat":


Here  we are
 
Euclid  and  Ptolemy and  I

walking  along  the dusty road

From  this point on Purdy  will be much preoccupied with the question of how, in what manner,  Canadians dwell in their homeland.
Something  of that  manner  he offers in himself-a mixture of understatement, self-mockery, pathos and comedy, beautifully evident in the two poems "In the Wilderness"  and  "One   Rural  Winter",  both  narrative  in  their  basic  thrust.  In the first, his encounter  with the Doukhobors at Agassiz is an encounter  also with Canadian history. Admiring the spiritual strength of these people, he knows throughout that  he is not  one  of them,  but  merely taking  notes in  "a  steno's notebook".  The  resulting complex stance is fruitful  and  revealing. Objective  and yet self-mocking, he perceives both the grandeur  and  comedy of "the  nay-sayers and spirit-wrestlers of the Kootenay".
Self-mockery controls  "One   Rural  Winter",  miniature  mock-epic  of a "jour­
ney", to a distant outdoor  john in the midst of snowbound winter:

The  earth  is frozen
the beautiful trees are frozen even the mailbox  is frozen
& I'm  getting a little chilly myself

He  journeys between Muse and  everyday reality, between the girl he goes out to meet  ("my  most delicate imagining") and the dwelling held together  by pounded thumbnails,  his necessary haven  (the  journey too is necessary!)  On  his return:

the WIND
steals all my internal heat
my heavy body is doped  with wind and cold and  the  house door
drags  me into the hall and  the door knob
is a handle  I hold onto the sky with

Purdy  is not a poet of "gems"  (his  discursiveness alone would make that  diffi-

PROTEUS AT ROBLIN LAKE



cult), but The Cariboo  Horses is a rich book of which much  more could be said. A grasp of the central  image in "One  Rural  Winter",  however, may convey the book's  substance  and  the  core  of Purdy's  work, the quality  which  endows  the best of it with its peculiar excellence. A lone figure struggles with a harsh environ­ ment to reach the goal where he can commune with his imagination? Or is it just a  guy answering  the  need  to relieve himself, in difficult conditions?  In  entering Purdy's  world it is hazardous  to forget the necessary existence of  either  the shit­
house or the sky.


l:oAY, a  common  feature  of  Canadian  poetry  is the  book with the single, explicit  (usually factual)   theme:  Louis Riel, the mounties. Some
good  books have  been  produced  this  way, some very dull,  but  the  interesting thing is the desire to shape  a book of verse around  a significant theme, often the pioneer quality  of Canadian life in the not-too-distant  past. Al Purdy, still in his fifties, anticipated much  of this in the explorations of his own work, and  perhaps his North  of Summer (I g67)  started the whole trend.
Never particularly  conscious of the poetry of epiphany or the lyric moment,  he
travels, steno's  notebook  at  the  ready, going after  poems. The  assumption seems to  be  that,  given  contact  with  his sensibility, there  are  poems everywhere. His task is to draw  them forth.  In North  of Summer, using a familiar figure, he evokes his own role:

listening
reaching under the stone
to the far side of the world into space and beyond space

He is both maker  and  medium.  In a "Postscript" to North  of Summer he details the  external  circumstances  of his rg65  Arctic visit, starting  from  Frobisher  Bay, going north  to the Arctic  Circle, journeying by canoe to the Kikastan  Islands in Cumberland Sound  (merely  recording the names here gives the project a degree of concreteness). Writing  at every stage of the way, afterwards,  as he tells us, he "worked  on the poems for more than  a year". Thus  we may adduce  at least two distinct  stages  of  deliberateness,  of calculation  in  working  these  poems, which have been described as "journalism". Yet there is a further  element, in which,

On the country road these spring days odd things happen

PROTEUS AT ROBLIN LAKE



brown men in mukluks climb
the snake fences with Norris Whitney's sheep
near Ameliasburg
and I'm afraid  to mention it at the village store

Purdy  knows  his facts,  and  carries  them  lightly,  but  his attention, concentration, does  not  stop  there.  He  absorbs  first the  book information, next  the  on-the-spot details.  He  does not  pretend  to be other  than  what  he is, a traveller come to look and  listen,  but  his opening lines  (above)  should  warn  us that  something more will emerge.  When  he  ponders,  "About the  poems:  they seem to me like a set of binoculars  thru  which  you  can  view the  Arctic ... What I'm  doing  here  is  pro­ viding  my own  particular kind  of optic  glass,"  the  remark  has more  range  than  may seem so at first, for everywhere he is conscious of the Arctic in the perspective of   Western    history,   of   "the  Innuit/ The   People/ these   unknowable  human beings/  who  have  endured  5000 years/  on  the  edge  of  the  world," who  yet fit into  the  world  of Achilles,  Picasso,  Odysseus and  Maple Leaf  Gardens.
Purdy  carries  the  book with ease, enabled  by a verse-line which  he handles consummately well.  Capturing the  bleak,  brooding  quality  of the  landscapes, he is never  pretentious and  his characteristic self-mockery  does not  desert  him  (see, for example, the  witty  "When I Sat  Down  to Play the  Piano", another outhouse story).  Notebook-carrying Purdy sees himself  as  one  of  the  "white men/ who were  also  visitors/ and  thought to  be human", for  better  or  worse  bringing the twentieth-century to  this  arid  outpost.  If this  were  all  the  book  has  to  offer  it would   be  thin   pickings  indeed,   but  behind  the  cultural ambassador is another Purdy,  the one whose vision may on occasion stretch  to "the  other  side" of things:

the sea crowded with invisible animals the horizon full of vague white shapes
of icebergs in whispering lagoons where
Old Squaw ducks are going
''ouw-ouw-ouw'' And I think of the other side of that sound
I have to
because it gathers everything all the self-deception and phoniness
of my lifetime into an empty place
and the RUNNER IN  THE SKIES

19

PROTEUS AT ROBLIN LAKE




I invented
 
as symbol of the human spirit crashes like a housefly

my only strength is blind will
 
to go on


A pity, perhaps,  that  the latter  part of this passage is over-explicit to a degree, but the  lines  touch   on  something   notable:   first,  Purdy's  image  of  the  spirit  as "runner", second  his puritanical conception of life as "blind  will" pitted  against "self-deception  and  phoniness". As ground for such a struggle he has a preference for  spartan   landscapes  and  there  may  be  more  than  a  touch  of  resemblance between this "empty  place" at "the edge of the world" and the country around Belleville.



LIKE EARLE  BIRNEY,  to whom Wild  Grape  Wine ( 1968)  is dedicated,  Purdy  has taken  to travelling a great  deal. In  the interview first  pub­ lished in Canadian  Literature 41, he told Gary Geddes "somehow  or other one uses up  one's  past,"  and  later  added,  "I like to think of a continual  becoming and  a changing  and a moving." Wild  Grape  Wine (as its blurb tells us)  includes poems  on  Mexican   poverty  and  post-revolutionary  Cuba,  but  the  book's  con­ siderable   strength   derives  largely  from  Ontario  poems  such  as   "Wilderness  Gothic",  "St  Francis  in Ameliasburg"  or "Skeleton  by an Old  Cedar", or from the pre-history of the North American  sub-continent  in "The Runners".
Since 1968 four major  Purdy collections have appeared. Two of these together, Love  in  a Burning   Building   (1970)   and  Selected  Poems  (1972), are a substan­ tial  retrospective.  The  others, Wild   Grape  Wine and  the recent Sex  and  Death, are   both   extensive  and   wide-ranging.   The   moment  seems   propitious  for  a summing-up,  but  this is not easy since Purdy  is both elusive  and  multi-faceted.  Joker,   traveller,   mythographer,  political  commentator,   wine-maker,   common man,  archaeologist,  poet -all  these versions of Purdy  have  been ably  touched upon by McCallum, Bowering, Lee, Atwood, Gary Geddes and others. Something beyond  these  Purdy   personae  is at  issue.  Margaret Atwood  perhaps  located  it when,  reviewing  North  of  Summer,  she  said,  "One   of  Purdy's  specialities  is catching himself in the act."
Purdy  has proved  many things:  among them, that a boy from Hicksville with
the worst, most platitudinous and tum-ti-tum  sense of poetry can become a subtle and  sensitive craftsman, and  that  through  the  imagination  it is possible to see

20

PROTEUS AT ROBLIN LAKE



Canada clearly  and  see it  whole  (however  spreadeagled  and  sectarian  it  may seem geographically and  politically). To my sense, however, he has one major problem to solve before moving on.
Wallace Stevens put it that  the distinctive characteristic  of good poems is "the
presence  of  the  determining  personality".  In  that  sense  Purdy  is  very  much present, but often too much and too self-consciously. Sometimes he is too obviously the  succinct  recorder:   details  with  moral,  as in  "Beothuck  Indian  Skeleton  in Glass  Case  (St.  John's   Museum,   Nf!d.)",  which  opens,  flatly,  "Six  feet  three inches/  a man of 40".  This kind of economy may easily be justified (and,  in fact, is essential)  but it can also have a certain air of banality, like the TV ads in which the husband lies beside his wife in bed at night after having taken  his indigestion pill. Dialogue:  She:   "Feel  good?"  He:  "Feel  great!" Of  course, thousands  of dollars  depend  on  the  omission of those  pronouns,  etc.,  but  the  outcome  is a travesty of honest conversation.  When Purdy's  notebook is more evident than  his spark, his efficiency more obvious than his insight, his work can resemble that ad. This   plus  a  certain   discursiveness  prevents  Wild   Grape  Wine   from  being  as satisfying as The  Cariboo  Horses. Yet there is much excellence in the book:  the almost uncanny depth  and  rightness of "The  Runners"  (a touchstone,  as Dennis Lee notes in his eloquent  response to the poem),  the zest of "The Winemaker's Beat-Etude"  (with   its  "GREAT  JEROBOAM/ that   booms  inside  from  the  land beyond  the  world"-presumably  the  land  of  the  Sky  Runner, found  in  a moment  of earthly  release),  and  the crucial discovery of a tone of voice in such cornerstone  poems as "Wilderness  Gothic", "Roblin  Mills",  "The Runners" and "My Grandfather's Country", in which Purdy appears to be establishing Canada's psychic bearings.
That   he  could  not  do  with  vague  generalizations  and  he  achieves  his tone
partly  by knowing a great  deal,  factually. Avid bookstore browser and  collector of Canadiana, Purdy  has grounding  in Canadian  history, ancient  history, world affairs, art,  myth,  psychology. Since the basis of most of his verse now is  story­ telling  (note  how, in recent  books, the characteristic  poem length is two to three pages)  he can deploy a great deal of information. A resulting journalistic element in the poems is an added  dimension of self-consciousness. Self-admittedly, he goes looking  for  poems the  way  another  man  would  go on  safari.  Sex  and  Death contains great slabs of poems got from a trip to South Africa. Nothing wrong with that, except that it presents a paradigm case of the risks involved. Going to South Africa one is, inevitably,  the  liberal  visiting fascist/racist stronghold.  From such a preconception, the poems can begin to write themselves.

21

PROTEUS AT  ROBLIN LAKE



Purdy's  Ontario poems  feel (I,  as immigrant,  can suggest no more)  as if they have a deep rightness not present in his South Africa/Cuba/Etcetera "trips". In Sex  and  Death  particularly  one encounters  the  journalist who goes to the  places he writes  about  in  order  to authenticate his "literary  product" ("At  Acayucan we stopped/ to water and feed/  the engine's horses").
Deliberately sought "experience" has as its corollary in this instance the poet as
observer at a distance,  able to throw in an occasional knowing aside ("I'm being too clever about  it of course") . Purdy seems to have given up, for the most part, the  participatory verb-forms  of The Cariboo  Horses. Often  a static,  ponderous quality  has seeped into  the  verse. One  cannot  but admire  "Hiroshima  Poems", for  example,  for  their  competence  and  unexceptionable  sentiments,  as a  man's offering of "a  part  of himself not even original"  but necessary. Necessary obeis­ ances to the horrors of our  world, such poems are not the true  depths of  Purdy. Rather   the  essential  tone  of voice  (the  voice as essence),  the  equally  essential participation, reach  us again  in, say, "The  Horseman  of Agawa".  Here we are not  buzzed by overt  reference  to "identity  questions", but  watch  a  reaching out for a "secret  knowing"  beyond words. Purdy is beginning to grope not only with the problem of "Where is Here?",  but the ontology of selfhood.
What  I  am  saying,  I  suppose,  is that  many  poems display  too much  Al and
Co., but reveal too little Purdy. Perhaps it is churlish, however, to ask for an artist attributes   he does not  wish for  himself? Purdy  ends the  main  part  of Sex  and
Death:

And we the third persons
are a kind of privileged children
suspend judgment sometimes and not loving ourselves
love the mystery
and do not understand it

The  poem is called  "Observing Persons". But what  mystery is this? As I  have worked with  Purdy's  poems, ranging  from doubt  as to their value, to the excite­ ment  of fully discovering  a  zestfully genuine  poet, to the sense of some  elusive element in the work  (a depth  glimpsed, fleetingly, occasionally, then gone, gone) I  have  been reading  also the  new edition of Merton's  Seeds  of  Contemplation:
"Contemplation ... is the experiential  grasp of reality as subjective, not so much
'mine'   (which  would  signify  'belonging  to  the  external  self')   but  'myself'  in existential mystery." What has this to do with Purdy?
Here and there in his work of the past few years are poems in which Purdy the


22

PROTEUS AT ROBLIN LAKE



personality  and   pundit IS   completely submerged,  where the  sense  of  subject  is
totally empathetic:

And  I do not know why
whether because I cannot  hunt  with the others or because  the things I have done are useless
as I may be useless
but there is something here I must follow into  myself to find
outside  myself in the mammoth
beyond  the scorn of my people who are still my people
my own pain and  theirs
joining the shriek that does not end that  is inside me now
The  shriek flows back into the mammoth returning from sky and stars
finds the cave and  its dark  entrance brushes by where I stand  on tip-toes
to scratch the mountain body on stone moves past me into the body itself toward  a meaning I do not know
and  perhaps should  not ...

Far  deeper than surface coruscations, fluid  in  movement and of  the  exact tonal essence,  in  such   poetry participation  and   self-definition merge  in  a  way  which suggests (through  vibrations as  much as  words) that Purdy may  yet  take  us  to realms unexplored. Thoreau  once   said,   "I have   travelled much  in   Concord". Purdy may   have   the  means to  do  likewise  around Ameliasburg. A  year  or  two ago  he  professed  to  be  "running out  of  places" to  travel to.  But   then he  was referring only  to places  out there.


O'HAGAN'S
ROUGH-EDGED CHRONICLE

Michael Ondaatje
TEFASHION  m our gene,.tion of auth= ;, to have ,toties
of  heroes  told  by  anti-heroes.   Narrators   have  gradually   forced  themselves­
along with their inhibitions and qualitative  judgments-on to the original source of  the  story  until  their  books  have  become  psychological studies or  witty  and ironic  narrations.  Some of the  best literature  in the last century  has emphasized this style. Wilkie Collins, fascinated  by the  way a  jury discovered the eventual truth  of an incident  by hearing  several witnesses in a court of law, used a parade of narrators  in The  Moonstone. Nabokov's Pale Fire and Robert  Kroetsch's The Studhorse  Man   are  two  satirical  examples  of  how  narrators  insist on  making themselves the  heroes  in  someone else's tale,  and  this quality  is parodied  even more succinctly in Costa-Gavras' film The  Sleeping-Car Murders, where relatives of the deceased arrive  at  the police station and insist on talking about  their lives and their problems. The  hero has been qualified or masked to death and we have to go back to Joseph  Conrad  to find a moderate  and  humane  balance  between story teller and  central  character. Yet even Conrad's compassion and  identifica­ tion suggests a  great  weakening  in the status  of the  hero. The  power  of Greek tragedy  was after  all caused  by the very fact that  the narrators, or Chorus, had no true  understanding of the dogmatic, determined  power of the central charac­  ters. Kurtz  is the only one of Marlow's human studies who is allowed that  power.
It is the result of a literary evolution that allows one to read several exceptional examples of complex  narrative  devices while it is difficult to find books in which the  original  myth  is given  to  us point  blank.  The  writing  may  be finer, more careful, more witty, but it has lost that original rawness.
About  six years ago  I  read  Howard  O'Hagan's Tay   fohn  and  just recently
read  it again.  I've  read  little else of his work, mainly because his book of short stories-The  Woman who  got on at  jasper Station-is  almost  impossible to find. When  I spoke to other  writers about  T ay ]ohn, most said they liked it but that  the  book was flawed  or  badly written  at  moments. Yet I  can  think  of no novel that  has got as close to that  raw  power of myth as O'Hagan's book does.

O'HAGAN'S CHRONICLE



And although  his book also moves out into the control of its narrators, the power of the hero's story is left intact  and virtuous. The source is not qualified.
The  story O'Hagan tells is built around  the legend of the Yellowhead  Pass, of Tay John whose name is a bastardized version of Tete Jaune. The book is in three sections.  Part   I: "Legend" is about  Tay  John's  father,  Red  Rorty,  who  goes among  the Shuswap  tribe  with  religion in his head, impregnates  an  Indian  girl, is murdered.  The girl dies while pregnant but a baby is found crawling out of the grave six months later. The  tribe brings up the boy who has no shadow, for "he was not born as other children between the ground and the sun where his shadow could find him."  He is given a shadow, made  human,  but  eventually  leaves the tribe.  Part  2 : "Hearsay" is the  recollection of a  narrator Jack  Denham,  who speaks of two incidents  in Tay  John's  life that  he or his friends witness. Part  3: "Evidence" -without a finding -deals largely with the growing civilization of the railroad  hustlers, ending with Tay John's death/disappearance with a woman into the earth once more.
The  story is powerful because of the way O'Hagan has found it and  retold it. Narrators   stay  in  the  background,   and  although   Parts   2   and  3  are  told  by Denham  in a technique  very similar to the narrations  of Conrad's Marlow,  the cast is small and  the  mysterious centre is given power  to grow.  O'Hagan, one senses, truly understands  where the dramatic  sources of myth lie. Myth is biblical, surreal,  brief, imagistic.  There  are  three  or four scenes that  take  up  not  much more than  an eighth of the novel but whose strength invades the rest of the book. They  are  the  remnants  left to story-tellers-a fight with  a bear,  the  chopping off by Tay John of his own left hand on a fur trader's table....

"So you know him?" I asked.
"Know  him?"  McLeod  rose, pushed the dishes back from  the table top and pointed to some dark stains in the wood....
"Look at that-what do you make of that?" he said.
I  looked closer. "Blood, perhaps. I  don't  know." It  was a  great  wandering black stain, like the map of Russia.
"Blood. You're right, man, that's what it is. And I can't wash it off. I've scrubbed and soaped and still there it is, and I have to eat off it.... "

We follow Tay John's  path with fascination and horror.



MYTH IS ALSO   ACHIEVED by a very careful  use of echoes
-of phrases and  images. There  may be no logical connection  when  these are

O'HAGAN'S CHRONICLE



placed  side  by side  but  the  variations are  always  there  setting  up  parallels.  Tay John chops  off his hand; the  woman Ardith cuts off the nails of a baby  bear  to stop  it scratching her  and  the  paws  bleed.  After  the  bear  fight,  Tay  John slices off its head  and  leaves  it in the  branches of a tree;  Red Rorty's brother commits suicide  in a tree  (Red himself  having  been tied and  burned  to a tree); Tay  John chases  an  escaped   horse  and  is seen  with  some  of the  hairs  from  its  tail  in  his hand; after  a fight  from  which  Tay  John escapes we have this description:

One  of the men  remained  standing  in a dazed fashion gazed at some yellow hair clutched  in his fist. He shook his head, opened  his fingers. The  yellow hair floated to the floor. ...

Some  of these echoes  are  more  obvious  than  others,  and  in fact  the  weaker  ones are  more  suggestive.  In  any  case  the  use of echoes is crucial  to  the  myth  in  the book for the action  in the  novel turns  in on itself, is incestuous.  O'Hagan is aware that legend  needs only  two or three  images  to sustain  it; myth  breeds  on itself no matter what  the situation or landscape. This  is especially important, for the land­ scape  is  being  changed with  the  coming  railroad; the  fragments and  formulas  however  will repeat  themselves for ever.
The  most  consistent  and  carefully  plotted  image  is Tay  John's birth  from  and eventual disappearance into  the  earth. The  only other  story  of O'Hagan's that  I have  read-"The Teepee"  (reprinted in  Rudy  Wiebe's  Stories  from Western Canada)-ends this way:

From the doorway I watched  him go along the ridge and down it, wading through the  willows that  in  the  moonlight  rose around  him, around  his legs, his hips, his shoulders  until  at  last,  when  against  the  gleaming  river  his head  dropped  from view, it  was as  though  he  had  walked  down  among  the  roots, under  the  faded grasses, into the earth  to which he was a closer neighbour than I.

That image  is the  central one  in  T ay  ]ohn. At  various  times  we get scenes like this one after the bear fight:

Then   the  mass  quivered.  It  heaved.  A man's  head  appeared   beside it,  bloody, muddied,  as though  he were  just being born, as though  he were climbing out of the ground.

or later:

His legs were spread,  each foot firmly set. Yet it was not an impression of solidity he offered, so much  as one of emergence-from the ground  itself, as though  he had sprung up there a moment before my arrival.

O'HAGAN's CHRONICLE



On  rereading the book I felt that  perhaps these images of Tay  John's link with the  earth  were heavy-handed. But in fact  they  physically  parallel  the  strange and dark  asides  of Jack  Denham in  a crucial  way. The  suggestion  in  the  last  quota­ tion  is not  one  of  power  but  of  fragility.  Tay  John  is little  more  than  seasonal grass.  He  has to disappear. From  the  very beginning he is part  of the mechanics of nature and  the  fateful  metaphor will also assure his rebirth. Images revive. As his mother was  buried  pregnant -so  he goes into  the  snow  at  the end  with  his dead  and   pregnant woman. And  the  pulling  of  the  toboggan  which carries  her reminds us subconsciously-with no mention  made  of it- of  his shadow. Early on in the book this is said :

Men  walk  upon   the  earth   in  light,  trailing  their  shadows  that   are   the  day's memories of the  night.  For each  man  his shadow is his dark  garment, formed  to the  image of his end, sombre and  obscure as his own beginning.  It  is his shroud, awaiting  him  by his mother's  womb  lest he forget what,  with  his first breath  of life, he no longer remembers.

These  asides  must  be seen in  the  light of Tay  John  coming  out  of or  going  into the  ground. They  are  on  one  level  the  voice of Indian legends,  on  another the world-view of O'Hagan. They   unify  the  book  by being  the  mediation  between the  physical  glimpses  of  the  myth.  They  are  a  part  of  a  comical  vision  of  the world  to  the  likes of Jack   Denham who  sees all  civilization   as  ephemeral, and tragic  to those who take their foothold on the earth  too seriously.

He  fled from  the  old. He  looked for  the  new. Yet there  is nothing  new-these words, nor their meaning-nothing really new in the sense of arrival  in the world unless an odd meteor here and  there. We have a million tons of them and  their dust a year. To-day  was implicit  in time's beginning. All that  is, was. Somewhere
light glowed in the first vast and  awful darkness, and darkness is the hub of light. Imprisoned  in  its fires which  brighten  and  make  visible the  universe, and  shine upon  man's  face, is the core, the centre,  the hard  unity of the sun, and  it is dark.
All that  is not seen is dark.  Light  lives only in man's  vision. Past our stars, we think, is darkness. But here, we say, is light. Here is light where once was darkness, and  beyond  it,  farther   than  our  eyes can  see, than  our  greatest  telescopes can pierce, is darkness still.

The  witnessing  of myth,  its arrival and  disappearance in the midst of civilization, Tay   John's fragility  of  position,  must  be  seen  in  this  context. Man  becomes  a pulse  of  light  in  a  dark  landscape. He  disappears into  historical   time  and  re­ emerges  in  an echo. Tay  John is the  progression  made  from  the  blood  of a dino­ saur.  As in Birney's "November walk near  False Creek mouth", man  is placed  in

O'HAGAN'S CHRONICLE



a  context   by the  eye  that   can  see  a  million  miles  up  past  shelves  of clouds  or downwards through shelves of the sea.

He  listened to the seconds, ticking, measuring his mortality,  theirs the only sound in all eternity  where  suns flamed  and  stars wheeled and  constellations  fell apart. A woman's laughter  reached me from the building. I shook myself. ...

The  civilization  growing up  around Tay  John is ludicrous  in its self-importance. In  the  midst  of its birth/ death it feels no need to destroy  him;  it doesn't  have to; the  book contains no obvious  myth  of the scapegoat removed  from society. Every­ thing  will disappear. Dabble's dream of a "Lucerne in the  Rockies" -a sort  of Banff  Springs   Hotel   before  its  time-in  the  end  rots  under   the  snow.  "You  might  say Dabble left  barely  a trace  behind." Even  New York,  one of the steps along  the  way  for  the  woman  Ardith, echoes  Conrad's sepulchral  city in  Heart of Darkness:

It was there in that  sculptured  city, in that  outpost of man in time, in that  white tombstone of the future,  that she met the Canadian man of railways.

0NCE  o'HAGAN has established  the  base of the  book-the myth  with  its  power  and  fragility-he  is able  to  tum  to  the  role of the  story­
tellers.  These  men  are  separate from  the source  of power.  They  may  eat  off the table  which  has soaked  up Tay  John's blood but  they get no closer. In the superb scene  in  which  Tay   John fights  the  bear,  Jack   Denham, who  witnesses  it,  is separated by a raging river  he cannot cross but  which is only two yards wide. He is unable  to cross over  into  the  arena of pure  myth.  And  not  till the fight is over does Denham provide  a social context:

He  had  won. We  had  won. That was how I felt. I shouted.  I did a dance.... A
victory is no victory until it has been shared.

And  so  the  event  becomes  the  centre  of 'Jackie's tale'  told  to  his cronies  in the bars  Denham inhabits, and  for  the  rest of the  book it is Denham who searches for  "the  remnants of  his  presence". Denham, we  discover,  is one  of those  men who loves the wilderness  as opposed  to "the treacherous period  in town" but who is still overcome  by raw nature:

... when  you tum  your  back  upon  it you feel that  it may drop  back again  into the dusk  that  gave it being. It  is only your vision that  holds it in the known and created  world. It is physically exhausting  to look on unnamed  country. A name is

O'HAGAN'S CHRONICLE



the magic  to keep it within  the  horizons. Put a name  to it, put  it on a map, and you've got it. The  unnamed-it is the darkness unveiled....

"Yellowhead,"  "Yellowhead." I  had  to give a name so that  I could  help  him­ morally, you know. I had  to align him with  the human  race. Without  a name no man is an individual, no individual wholly a man.

If there  is irony  and  qualification in the novel it is directed  not towards the source of  the  myth  but  to  the  story-teller's need  for  order.  Tay  John comes  into  the world  without a name  or shadow  and  he is given several names  and  several  kinds of a  shadow  "to  align  him  with  the  human race". But  words  we  have  seen  are part  of the  imperialistic disguise for an  unnamed country, the social mask  for the amoral human grass.  Words  bring  morality  and  immorality. Tay  John  himself says hardly  more  than  two sentences  in  the whole  book. The  action  of the  novel begins when  Red  Rorty  the  trapper takes the words of a preacher literally:

We who believe ... are a small army. We must go out and  take our message to all the world....

He  bums down  his cabin  and  goes among  the  Shuswaps,  a John the  Baptist  to Tay  John's later  arrival. Most  revealing  on the status  of the word is Rorty's death when he is tied to a tree and  his beard set on fire:

With  the fire his mouth  opened  to shout but  no sound came from it. Yaada  took a small round stone and shoved it between his jaws, and it stayed there, as a word he tried to utter, while the flames began to roar around him....
While the ground  was yet hot and smouldered, Yaada and some others returned. They found  the skull, fallen to the ground and caught  in the black twisted roots
of a tree. The  stone was still between its jaws. Yaada  took a stick and pointed. "See!" she said, "he was a great liar, and the word has choked him!"

Religion,  like the  word,  brings  values which  are  totally  unnatural to the land­ scape,  and  it takes  men such  as Father Rorty  with  his "priestly arrogance" down twisted  guilty  paths  to suicide.  Even Tay  John in his hand-chopping scene echoes his father's naive  belief  in  words  and  metaphors  and  performs the  act  yelling, "If your  hand   offend  you -cut  it  off."  It is his  one  unnatural act  and   he is replenished   later  on  with  a  steel  hook. The  Shuswap tribe  is also  riddled   with custom  and  words  and,  although they are "closer  neighbours" to the  earth, Tay  John  leaves them  when  their  ceremonies and  laws limit  him. They  too are  wait­  ing for the moral voice of a leader.
As a  narrator Denham is saved  by his neutrality, his interest  in  other  words.
"In  Edmonton I  saw  no  newspapers for  several  days.  I was  too  much   taken,

O'HAGAN'S CHRONICLE



maybe,  with  the  labels  on  whisky  bottles.  Good  reading  that.... " He  has  his own  flippant life to live. He  is not, like Conrad's Marlow, living almost  by proxy. He knows the story will exist without him.

Not that  I feel any responsibility to Tay John,  nor to his story. No, not at all. His story, such  as it  is, like himself, would  have  existed independently  of me. Every story-the  rough-edged  chronicle  of a  personal destiny-having its source in a past  we cannot  see, and  its  reverberations  in  a  future  still  unlived -man, the child of darkness, walking for a few short moments in unaccustomed  light-every story  only  waits,  like a  mountain in  an  untravelled  land,  for  someone  to come close, to gaze upon  its contours,  lay a name  upon  it, and  relate  it to the  known world. Indeed,  to tell a story is to leave most of it untold.

Denham is not  the secure,  more  assured  narrator of Conrad's Europe, but  a voice genuinely   apt   for  describing an  unfinished   legend  that  is  reshaping before  his eyes. Tay  John's life is seen  only  in  the  brief seconds of lightning in  the  night; the  rest is tentative meditation. The  source  therefore dominates our  minds.
For  these  reasons  the  style  of  the  book  and  its themes  are  sensitively  linked. There is for instance a very specific way in which  O'Hagan describes  his charac­ ters  and   this  structure of  characterization parallels  the  movement of  the  whole book.  Take the  first  descriptions of Red  Rorty. In  the  first sentences  that  deal with  him  we see him as a fragment of the landscape: "In   188o one man remained by  the  Athabaska river  where  it  flowed  through the  mountains." Then we are given one  detail  about  Rorty-his ability  to shout.  Then  the paragraph ends by moving  from  the clear  image  into something that  is almost  mystical:

At other  times he would shout when there was nothing  to shout for, and would listen  and  smile when  the  mountains  hurled  his voice-rolled it from  one rock wall to another,  until it seemed he heard  bands of men, loosed above him, calling one to another  as they climbed farther  and higher into the rock and ice.

The  long  shot,  then  the  close-up,  then  the  eventual dissolving out  of focus  into something mysterious  and  uncaught is the  general  movement  of the  whole  book. After  the  tough, tight  power  of the first two sections the last section is diffuse and scattered -literally  "Evidence -without   a   finding."  This   has   an   irritating effect  on  the  reader. For  instance-where the  book should  be reaching its crisis or  denouement, four  pages  from  the  end,  O'Hagan suddenly  introduces a new character-witness, Blackie, and  gives us a portrait of him that  takes up two of the last four  pages. The  story is taken  away from Tay  John. What is important about legends  now is the  effect  they  have  on other  men.  And, as with  all stories told, it is crucial  for us to trust and  believe in the character of the story-teller.

O'HAGAN'S CHRONICLE



The  dispersing  of tension  in this way is, I think,  intentional on O'Hagan's part. The  narrative force is lost because  in this new civilization  legend  tends  to have  a more  decorative  role,  something  heard  about   in  bars,  with   hideously   little  to distinguish it  from  the  drama of  rumour. Tay  John and   Ardith not  only  dis­ appear into  the  earth, they  disappear from  the  minds  of  men  who  have  other  things to do.

I  remembered,  too, that  woman  was the death  of heroes and  the  destruction  of heroes'  work-but heroes,  those vulnerable  men,  are  gone  from  the  earth,  and woman's power therefore no longer what once it was.

Both  Tay  John   and  Ardith, though  hero  and  heroine,  have  lived  on  the  boun­ daries  of civilizations. Tay  John, when  we think  back,  is the  accidental  intruder in  every scene -in the  world  of the  Shuswaps,  with  the  Aldersons,  in  the  resort at  "Lucerne". He  is given  new  names  in  every setting  and  he slides  through all his roles like water.  He  leaves  just fragments of his myth  behind, he has no cause or  motive  or  moral   to  announce and  as a  result  is  of  no  worth  in  these  new societies  of commerce, religion,  and  imperialism. His life, in  the  midst  of all the words, is wordless-as the  core of the sun, which gives off so much light, is pitch black.  He  is vulnerable to fashion  and  progress and  his only strength is the  grain  left in the memory and  in the hope  he will emerge in the future in different forms.


























31


LIVESAY'S HOUSES



Susan Zimmerman


t IS  PERHAPS  NATURAL that  Dorothy  livesay should  write about  houses, for  the  identity  of woman  has always been  tied  to  the  home. A
home, generally speaking, is a house with a wife and mother inside it; the woman is the  keeper of the  hearth.  As a  young girl, she must choose whether  or not to accept  this  role. The  question  will depend  on her need of a  hearth  for  herself; she will usually find that  if she needs one, it is she who must tend  it. Signpost, one of Livesay's earliest books, is about such a choice. I would like to begin with that  book, examining  in detail  the story told within it, then  look more briefly at some of the later  poetry in which the question is restated and  answered  afresh.1
In  the epigraph  to Signpost, the poet describes the two alternative  ways of life
between  which every individual  must choose. As we shall see, the decision is especially difficult for the  woman,  and  it is particularly  a woman's  development the poet traces.2    The  choice, then, stimulated  by the spring, is between digging in one's  garden   (intimately   associated  with  houses  throughout   the  poetry)   and following "the  flight of the crows"  (who lead an uncertain  but free life, "led by a veering sign-post"). The  dilemma  is presented lightly here; it is only if we have read   later   poems,  from  "City   Wife"  to  "Page   One",   that   we  recognize  its importance.
Yet the title of Part  One,  "Sober  Songs", may give us a clue. The section deals
primarily  with  the  individual's  attempt  to be free, to escape all enclosure. The woman  here identifies  herself with  the outdoors  rather  than  the four  walls and hearth  which are her traditional domain. The first poem, "Staccato", takes place inside a  house, but  the  writer  feels uneasy. Even in a warm  bed she is not safe from night, wind, or the phantom of a man. So in "Weapons" she moves outside:

Lest I be hurt
I put this armour on: Faith in the trees,
And in the living wind.

32

LIVESAY'S HOUSES



To  keep her integrity,  she feels she must turn  away from  the  man.  She tries to protect  herself from  injury  by  not  believing what  he says;  she  is cynical  and refuses to commit herself in a human relationship:

Could I have thought there was something greater
For my heart to gain
By running away untouched, unshackled, Friends only with sun and rain?
("The Unbeliever")

She wants,  above all, to be secret. She knows that  a woman's  nature  makes her "as  earth  upturned, alive with  seed",  but she had  hoped  to keep this from  her lover. She  realizes now  that  she is bound  and  free at  once;  consequently,  real escape is impossible -the lover, or any man, may know her passion, her thoughts, even her body, for they are all revealed in the spring, her special season ("Sun"). So her very "weapons" give her away. Now she is as vulnerable as the first crocus. Her  "spring" is threatened  by a "breath  of winter": there is something  about  the lover "relentless/  as the March  wind's arrow"  ("Ask of the Winds"). The  young woman  becomes wistful, a quivering  bird  ("If Looking Were Saying"), wonder­ ing how the lover will react if she visits him unasked  ("Interrogation"), afraid a single word from him might make her tense heart "snap" ("Climax") . She who had  faith  in the living wind is now betrayed by it, for the night wind, unlike the daytime  wind, belongs to the man.  In his garden, alienated,  left out of his "radi­ ance",  she stands shivering from the cold  ("Alienation"). She dances once more, but  only because of his "blindness":  "Your  blindness saves my self's integrity."  She tries to reveal herself subtly, through  the sign-language of colour, but he wil­ fully  misunderstands  ("Perversity"). Even  her friendship  with  the sun  is over, now that she has learned to weep :

I dread the sun
For his fierce honesty. ("In  the Street")

She  has  learned,  too,  how  to  reckon  the  damage  done  by sorrow  ("Song  for Solomon"). She  realizes that  the  man  does not  love, as she  does, immediately and  with passion; his loving is "too slow" for her ("The Difference"). The lovers part,  but are held together ("Chained") ; the woman finds herself unable to escape his "cobweb  image"  ("Dust") ; and  the thought  of him still fits "like  a  glove" ("Time"). A house, appropriately enough, symbolizes in "Neighbourhood" this lost human  relationship, which had disrupted her earlier relationship  with nature.

33

LIVESAY'S HOUSES



In  the last "Sober  Song",  "Wilderness  Stone", she falls asleep at the edge of a field, dreaming  of a  house with  a  warm  fireplace. She did  not  need this house before the lover invaded  her skies; in the daylight, she was friends with sun and rain. But waking in the cold night which is his symbol, she realizes her homeless­ ness: allegiance to field, sun, and  rain are no longer enough. She needs a hearth, after all.
In  Section Two,  "Pastorals", the woman  chooses to go indoors.  "Threshold" documents  the change;  much  is gained, but something is lost as well:

This is the door: the archway where I stopped To gaze a moment over well-loved fields Before I sought the fire within, the bright
Gold sunlight on the floor, and over all,
Upstairs and down, some clear voice singing out
Music I knew long since, but had forgot.

Now she can only look out from her doorway at "the  fields of noonday sun"; but she has found something she needed, "a resting-place":

Balanced for this brief time between the thought
Of what the heart has known, and must yet know.

There  follows a period  of peace. The  natural  things of her youth on the prairies had  filled  her  with  excitement-"sharp  pain/  Sudden  and  sweet",  a  "quick pulse",  "wonder", "delight" -things she knows she could still experience. But a quieter  beauty is taking  possession of her:  the "orderly succession" of Ontario roads  and  fields, "a  sober-mantled   loveliness", contentment. There  is a  place inside  her  for tamed  things  as well as wild:  "This  land  grows like a garden  in my heart" ("Sonnet  for Ontario"). A gentle sun pierces the clouds; a lonely tree
-like her-becomes  "surrounded by its neighbour  trees"  ("September  Morn­ ing"). She sees the  joy of the brown earth  again, and realizes that though people cannot stay in a "sun field/  Of wayward grass", nature's wild raspberries, grasses, and  bees will inhabit  it (" 'Haunted House' "). Nature has become separate from the woman, though  it gives her joy: the lovers share a moment of perfect intimacy among  the  delphiniums  by opposing  themselves in  laughter  to "the  sober-sided bee" ("The Intimates").
Her  thoughts  go  back  in  time;  her sympathy  grows broader.  When  she was young,  rain  and  wind  had  meant  only her  love and  her  "love's  house";  now, looking back, she thinks of her grandmother and her grandmother's house, understanding something  of  the  nature  of the  place  and  the  woman  ("Green

34

LIVESAY'S HOUSES



Rain") . She  begins to analyze  people outside herself:  the "people  of the farms" in  "Prince  Edward  Island", the  old men in "Vandal" and  in "Old  Man". All three  of these poems are  written  in the third  person; the last, "Old  Man",  deals interestingly  with the male problem of getting back to the hearth  he has left, "the glowing fire, the steady certain light". But this seems to turn the woman's thoughts back to her own situation  as keeper of the hearth: the final poem of the section, "City  Wife",  is once  more  written  in  the  first person. Spring  has come  to the young wife in the poem; and spring, we remember from the epigraph,  "is for ever a  question".  So  the  city  wife  asks  herself  questions,  suddenly  enchanted  by "knowledge  of  wind  and  sun  on  open  fields". Reality,  she  has decided,  is the "scarlet  sun",  or  perhaps  the harsh song of the crow. The  crows turn  her mind "from  quiet  thought,/ Serenity,  to unexpected fire". Her  very heart  becomes an open  field  upon  which  she  feels "slow  feet  treading". She  has  discovered  the incredible  beauty  of the wild cherry trees, and she is afraid. She runs away, but:

No! the spring sweetness was too much: a voice
Seemed  to cry loud  and louder: Turn! Turn once-

She is afraid to look again at the loveliness behind her

... lest any evil chance
Should  tell us how life vanishes ...

As she walks homeward,  she hears "lost ecstacy fall back". She hopes to bind her husband  to her in  the quietness of the dark,  but still the wild crows haunt  her:

Is it a song they shout­
Or a warning cry?

She cannot  finish her song, for her husband  is coming home. She cannot  hurry her spring-time,  but  must be silent again,  as the elm at the gate/  Which  broods till the time of leaves". She longs for joy and  passion, but the elm advises her to be "still  and  enduring". So she waits. There  is a suggestion that,  by identifying with  the  city wife, the  poet has become dissatisfied. The  winter inside was long; spring is coming.
In  Part  Three,  "Variations", the woman  examines  her  position. She  has, by
this time,  taken  up  her role of housewife in the most literal sense of that  word: that is, she has been joined for ever to the house. If Solitude or Loveliness should knock at her door, the house itself will deliver her message; she cannot,  for she is now "a  thing  they'll  not meet"  ("Testament"). She takes up a woman's  ways, stealing the poppy from the field and enchanting a farmer on the road  ("Fable").

35

LIVESAY'S HOUSES



She cannot  live with  magic  and  joy, but must shake the stars from her hair "to be common  again,/ To  have common  care". Joy is a "snare" and  a fearful one at that  ("Song  for Departure"). She wonders if her freedom might ever return:

If I should walk lightly again
As the swallow flies,
My feet in time with the rain, My head in the skies....
("Daedalus")

Then,  perhaps,  she could  kill her own fear, restore her own pride. The relation­ ship  with the lover is tainted.  The  woman  criticizes the man's  ways of  thinking, which  "are  cold  and  waxen  and  remote"  ("Sea-Flowers"). Their  conversation has become "biting analysis"  ("Consideration"). Yet she stays where she is; and the following confession, tossed off lightly in "A  Confidence", is significant from someone who has considered following the flight of the birds:

Once I am in a place, it's hard to get out, It's hard to get away:
Once I sit down anywhere
I like to stay.

In  autumn   the  couple  share  one  day  of  truce,  though  both  are  described  as "thieves",  who are "in  the noose" ("In the \Vood"). Then  presumably the truce is over,  for  the  woman  leaves  the  house, only to discover that  her  spirit stays behind.  It  is interesting  that  the "stranger" says goodbye to the House itself, not to the man inside it  (and  notice the capital  letter) . The  woman still runs in the halls of the house, and stands grieving at the gate. When night falls, she too must go inside and climb the stairs, for she is "fast rooted to this place". ("Farewell.") Finally, in "Protest", the woman  defends herself from attack.  Can  I help it, she asks, if the spring-time  makes me, like the maple, remember "solitude"  and inde­ pendence?  Can  I  help it if I see the flock of crows pinned  against  the sky, and "seize  forgotten   ecstacy"?   It is  my  fault  that   the  winter  is  over;  is  it  any wonder  if, instead  of the washing,  I "hang  my secrets on the line?" Perhaps she is suggesting  that  solitude  and  flight  have  been  unfairly  denied  her,  and  that writing these poems releases her frustation, and gives away her "closed thoughts", her  dissatisfaction. But she is still caught:   though  she expresses herself, she uses the language  of housewifery. Though  she leaves the house, her spirit belongs to it. She does not seem to believe any more that following the birds is a real possibility in her life.

LIVESAY's HOUSES



IT WAS  MANY YEARS before Livesay returned  to this problem in its personal and sexual aspects. In the social poetry of Day and Night, she did not forget about  houses or the flight of the crow. She had decided, however, that
individual  liberty  would  have to wait for social liberty. The  crow still appeals  to the young, this time to the outrider:

The  thing  I feared,  the crow
Was hoarse  with calling, whirling, diving down
And suddenly his urgent  social bent
Was answer  to my inwardness.
("The Outrider")

He  leaves the  house for  the  city, but  learns  that  there  is "no  milk  nor  honey flowing there".   When  he  returns,  "the  house/  Receives him  without  wonder." Signpost had  been a question;  "The  Outrider" answers it in social terms:

This  is your signpost: follow your hands,  and dig. After,  the many will have parachutes
For air delight.	Not veering with the crow
But throbbing, conscious, knowing  where to go. There's time for flying.

The  horror  of  capitalist  industry  was that  it infected  the  home,  the  bed,  the heart:

We bear  the burden home to bed
The furnace glows within our hearts.... ("Day  and  Night")

And, as in "The Outrider", Livesay asks the individual  to put aside his personal desires for love or  liberty  in  the  interests of the  revolution.  "West  Coast",  too, deals with  the  problem:   Livesay's own house had  to make  way for the  huts of the shipbuilders.  Was it worthwhile?  It  was essential that  the decision be made according to social rather than personal criteria.
This social concern  of Livesay's, once awakened,  was not lost, though  later  it
takes second place to more personal questions. After the war, she was no longer certain  of the  proper  prioritie8; as many readers  have noted,  her  Marxist  evan­ gelism is replaced  by compassion. Houses and  homes remain  at the centre of her concern.  In  "London Revisited"  (Poems  for People), the  poet describes  a  tour of the ruined  houses of the city:  "long fingered wall", "house disembowelled",  a bombed cellar full of grass and goldenrod. She had not come to London  for this,

37

LIVESAY'S HOUSES



but for "printed Golders dancing" and  "happy  Shepherds hunting". Instead  she falls in the dark, and recaptures the terror of homelessness:

And above, no ceiling. And below, no wall.

Nothing,  no "mushroom  houses", can erase the past, when "winter  was".
Similarly, Call  My  People  Home examines in its broadest sense the concept of "home", using  it  to  condemn  the  treatment of the  Canadian Japanese  during World  War  II.  Livesay  tells how  the  Japanese  had  wanted  "to  make  a  home near  water"  and  "put   down  their  roots".  The  Isseis tell what  home  meant  to them:   the  uprooting; the  fisherman  explains:  "Home  was my boat"  and,  after thirty  years, the internment is "the  end of my boat, my home". The  Niseis had "called  British Columbia  home"; now they learn they were wrong. The  Mayor, who knows what  is needed, says: "This  is your home." He vows that  by spring, "This  village  would  be  home."  Then  comes another  choice, another  move, "a prairie  place called  home".  Finally, the  Niseis discover the real meaning  of the word:  "Home ... is where  life is." It is "something  more than  harbour",  more than   family;  it  is  "labour,  with  the  hand  and  heart",   and  something  much "rougher",  "tougher",  "more   magnetic"   than  anything   they  had  known.  All Livesay's compassion and  understanding is expressed through  these homes and uprootings.
But by this  time  much  of Livesay's concern  had  once more become  personal
and  sexual.  In  Poems  for People,  for example,  we find alongside such  poems as "London Revisited",  "Of  Mourners", and  "FDR", the intensely personal "Page One". This  poem  describes one of the key experiences in Livesay's own life.3   It uses the winter-spring  polarity we have seen in Signpost, and once again the flight of the  birds is a symbol of freedom. The  poet goes back to her first house, her father's,  describing  her life inside it as "ten  frostbound  winters". The  young girl is "manacled", "in  bondage"; even  play is "an  ordeal  to be endured". In  the wintry landscape  of her youth, she sees how the boy-shapes of trees are made into "ladies"  by the snow. The  snow is lovely, of course:  in  winter  there  are  "glass palaces" about  which a girl may dream. She can trace the life of a princess in the crystal;  she can  pretend,  for a time, to be that  princess. The  romantic  fantasies of young girls have their beauty:

0 might there always be
Those wishes three

That dazzling evanescent dress

g8

LIVESAY's HOUSES



Those pearls, those tears
That  slipper made of glass - But not for me.
This  is no  Cinderella: "The ice that  bound  her  could  not  be her  home." So, in the  spring,  she  responds  to the  cry of the  wild geese. Her  ambition is not  simply to leave  this  house  for  one  of her  own:   no, the  geese know  of a whole  forest  to be conquered and  she  too feels "no  one  home  hers, but  all homes  to be found." More   than   twenty   years  later,   Livesay  retells  the  experience in  prose;  she  still insists  that  she  had  been  in  bondage,  and  recounts  with  joy her  first  liberation, the liberation from  childhood:

... I was  really  lifted  from   the  earth   to  see  the  sky itself. ... And  I saw  the horizon!  I saw its farther  shores. From that  day onward  I had  a different  feeling about  my  father's   house-the small  white  clapboard   house,  the  brown  fence railings, the boundaried street-these were no longer the hedge to keep me home. These  had  been like fetters,  holding me down. My two hands  soared  upward, ... longing to break forth free where there was only earth  and sky, and a race of geese going north.  ("A Prairie Sampler''.)

Instead of  "going north", we  have  seen  that   the  poet  goes  to  a  new  house, becoming  wife and  mother. She  celebrates  this  position,  but  knows  its cost. The mother "cannot walk  alone"; "she  cannot  think  alone" ("The  Mother",  Poems for People).  The   woman, like  the  female  pheasant, is  "pinioned". The   poet  is glad  to  bear  children, but  she  wants  the  choice. So she is distressed  by the sight of the pheasant and  her warden:

... he : pleased grin, smile slant on him
Swore she'd breed yet!   And nevermore would soar
Into the cloudy image of her lair.
("Pheasant", Poems  for People.)
Certainly she loves the hearth and the keeping of the hearth: At the end of a day my hands hold heat;
Dipped in the fire of love, they burn
Like radiant  isotopes, to illustrate
Where hours went:  hot in the washing water.... ("'Invisible Sun'", Call My  People Home.)

Her  hands  go from  child's  face  to oven, from  cupboards to the  making of beds. They  are "scalded" and  "burned" during  the day, but this enables  them  to shape

39

LIVESAY'S HOUSES



"an  invisible sun"  in  the night,  "to  be the  veins of warmth  within  a  room",  a source of power and of love.
Still,  this  woman  never  quite  fits the  conventional  stereotypes,  not  even the ones she  documents  in  her  own  poems. Her  dreams  and  desires are  for  much more than  "land, ... four walls,/  Four  hands in a green garden" ("The Travel­ ler",  Selected  Poems). She is not  "essence of serenity" in  a  narrow  room. Nor could anyone say of her what she says of the "geranium":

Whatever falls
She has no commentary
Accepts, extends....
("Bartok and the Geranium", Selected  Poems)

She is "daylight", but not content  to be daylight only; she cries for darkness and knowledge:

Bind me with ropes of darkness, Blind me with your long night!
("Nocturne",  Selected  Poems)

She  refuses to be merely what  "men  prefer"; she insists on her own freedom  to experience  everything,  to  be "mainland" rather  than  "island", to turn  to every orchard,   hollow,  mountain, field,  and  road  rather  than  "forever  winding  in­ ward"  ("Other", Selected  Poems). She hears with sorrow the old "battle of  the bone"  between  the  sexes  ("Wedlock") ,  and  wonders if some  unity  cannot  be
found:

One unit, as a tree or stone
Woman in man, and man in womb.
("On Looking Into Henry Moore", Selected  Poems)

So with  this desire for unity,  Livesay comes back in The  Unquiet  Bed to the problem of houses and  freedom.  In "Ballad of Me", she reviews her life, remem­ bering an attempt  to escape house and husband:

And  what   fantasies do you have?
asked the psychiatrist
when I was running away from my husband.
But her  purse has only "wishes"  in it;  so the  psychiatrist solves her  problem  by denying it:

He sent me back home to wash dishes.

LIVESAY'S HOUSES



Increasingly, she is concerned  with reaching a compromise. In "Roots", she remembers  Lowry:  how, in "a  house indifferent  to strangers",  he was not indif­ ferent.  And  there  are  other,  small compromises -ways to bring  the outside in, "the  sea  roaring/ into  the  living-room".  She returns  once more  to  the house of her childhood,  from which she had escaped so many years before, and remembers that  spring  had  come even to her father's  house, a "wild  birth" of nasturtiums.  In  the same way, she had been planted in that garden  "and never transplanted". The  picture  of  her  childhood  is much  more complex  now  that  it  had  been in "Page  One",  for there  is value in the garden  as well as in the flight of birds.
The  woman  has learned  to regard  her housewifery with humour; she makes a
truce  with  the  house.  "In   between  the  everyday  bread  of  doing",  of cleaning sinks and  tubs  and  vacuuming rugs, she "sandwiches"  the reading  of poetry. It is true that she uses the imagery of housekeeping to describe her reading: search­ ing for "secrets" instead of linens on a shelf; "looking for silver spoons"; cleaning out  an old trunk  to find the  poet's "photo  of himself". Yet she shares the young poet's struggle, though she will never tell him so:

... his nakedness
awkwardly visible behind the shining suit
and his eyes, wrestling are mine also.
("To a Younger Poet")

The  compromise  1s  most  clearly  stated  in  "Woman   Waylaid". There  must  be days  when  the  woman  will refuse to  collect wood for  the  greedy,  gaping  pot­ bellied stove. As Peter  Stevens says, "She  makes her choice as individual woman and  she is free to make that  choice."5   Of course, it will be a cold night; but the demands  of housewifery  must  occasionally be resisted if the  woman  is  to  retain her individuality. When she sits in the open doorway, she is part of  nature again:

I am a banquet bussed	huzzahed!
("Empress")

She can feed on the morning sun, be "one/ with rolling animal life" ( "Sunfast"), no longer  alienated  from  her  own element. Perhaps,  like the  "Pear Tree", she can stretch  herself, "grow  and  glow" without  tearing  up roots:  have the advan­ tages of flight and of the hearth.
Finally, the  "unwithered" woman  is ready to try loving again,  provided  that love makes room for her, and recognizes her individual nature:

LIVESAY'S HOUSES



I'm not just bones and crockery
("The Unquiet Bed")

She had  escaped  one set of "chains"; now she hopes for a love that  "might  set men  free/  yet hold  them  fast/  in loyalty". She tries to assess frankly  what  moti­ vates each partner  in "Four  Songs". But sexual love seems to require "The Tam­ ing"  of the woman;  she had  learned  the meaning of the words "Be woman" in an act of housewifery, cooking for a man and being told "Do what I say, woman." Yet she still requires shelter and so is vulnerable:

I drown
in your identity
("The Touching")

She  begins once more "to  walk with pride",  as she had anticipated in Signpost; as her past shrinks behind  her, once again her head is in the air, and she is taller ("A  Letter") . In  exchange,  she has become uneasy inside the house, as she was in  the  first poem  of Signpost -the  phantoms  are  back:  "Sometimes  the  room shakes"  ("And  Give Us Our  Trespasses"). She dances differently,  is "no  longer desperate"; at  the same time, she is totally vulnerable, "undressed  to the  bone", with  no  defences left  ("The Notations  of Love"). She has come to depend  on the hearth and the bed, "the  paraphernalia and props" of love:

without the body of your house
I'd have no home.
("Moving Out")

At the end of the personal poems in The  Unquiet  Bed, in other words, we see the poet "moving  out"; she has  made  peace with  housewifery but  not  with  "love's house", to be found only in the man's body.
Her  attitude  toward  the houses in her past has mellowed. In  the dedication  to
The  Documentaries,  she pronounces  a kind of blessing on them:  on her father's house and  her grandmother's house, her love's house, prairie  houses, Vancouver houses, a house in a field, a house in the city, the houses she had escaped and the houses she had  built. She realizes, perhaps, that they have been the vessels of her life:  in  houses she has  been child,  lover, wife, mother,  hostess, guest, above  all woman. Her life can be summarized  by a list of houses, and to these she dedicates
her book:

For all the houses - and those who came.6

LIVESAY'S HOUSES



The  importance of her personal houses for the social poetry is emphasized  by introducing and  ending  the  "documentary" poems with  "two  subjective,  auto­ biographical  poems".


IN LIVESAY's   LATER WORK,  the  two  editions  of  Plainsongs, we find  the  woman  grown older  and  perhaps  wiser. She knows she is "bound", but  knows also not to believe the lover when he pretends to come only "for self­ seeking ease"  ("The Cave") . Once she had  been afraid  of being touched;  now
she realizes it is "not  to be touched"  that  brings old age and insanity into her life ("Sorcery"). Because she  is old,  she  must  live inside:   "a  sceptred  bird"  has pecked out  her eyes; and  she dreams  that  she moves "in  darkness now",  behind closed windows  ("Dream"). When  the lover refuses to marry  her, she finds her­ self in a familiar  place, the dark garden  from Signpost  ("Auguries"). She knows how to recognize the signs of parting-in "Auguries",  "The Sign", "The Unin­  vited".  At last she can move in and out of cages, but she is old and  alone. So she bird-watches  instead  from her window, sees "bird  life free".  More  and  more the house becomes a vantage  point from which she observes the world. In the warm cabin,  she  remembers  freedom  and  love "when  there  was no cabin  built"  but only the house of love:  "its foundations  our arms only" ("Birdwatching"). Now, however,  she needs the fire and  the four  walls. Under  her  windows, the  young and  the free march  with flowers (" 'The  Metal and  the  Flower' ") . She worries about  children,  grandchildren, the  world. Though  she  has come  to terms  with her own past, she does not think  that the limitations placed on her as a girl were right. She describes the process of repression, using imagery reminiscent  of "City
Wife":

... a girl in spring
looking at green fields unfolding must be blinkered
hands re-folded
A girl longing for breath of wind	of love? must turn in a narrow bed clean white sheets
hand-washed and hung on the line	in the sun and never dance
on the clothesline herself

43

LIVESAY'S HOUSES



And the moral is this:

You did not find everything you wanted but you learned to accept everything you found.
("Centennial People")

Not  Dorothy   Livesay.  When   the  man  leaves  her,  she  recovers  her  freedom, moving "up the  mountain" ("Another Journey"), measuring  herself as an indi­ vidual  and  a  woman   ("The  Operation"), wondering  whether  bisexuality­ which  had   first  called   her  indoors-or asexuality  is  really  more  advanced ("De-Evolution").
The  second edition  of Plainsongs  also emphasizes the house as vantage  point ("Where I Usually Sit"). It is more concerned with the houses of the past, how­ ever-concerned,  first of all, that  they be retained,  for it seems that  birds can only be free where the old houses stand:

hold	hold the houses down
build fences round the birch, the rowan tree where robins still may come
("Edmonton Suite")

There  is concern  also with  the  old houses as "Canadiana": the grandmother's house, a weather-stained house on the beach  ( "Seashelter"), a "House  Amongst Trees".  They  are  "The Artefacts". She can hear the  breathing  of the old house though  the  young  cannot; she  alone  understands  its sleep and  its movements, values its history, and knows its place in time:

In the middle of the night the house heaves, unmoored launched on a vast sea.
("The Artefacts: West Coast")

The  poet leaves us with a "Weather Forecast" for her life and  the world. She carries  "leaf  shells" into  the  house, which has become a place of safety for her. She is sixty years old, she tells us, and  it is autumn; but "spring  is still/  a veri­ fiable/  possibility."
She lives inside the  house, "behind  glass", because the world is "frosted  with
snow"  ("Where I  Usually Sit"). Never does she give up her bird-watching,  her hope  of spring.  She  has  bequeathed  her  dreams  of freedom  to the young, who may be able to fulfil them: she hears behind "The  Children's  Letters" a familiar

44

LIVESAY'S HOUSES



voice   "stuttering/ at  the   sky/ 'bird ... bird  ... ' ". They relive   her   youth,  her "Halloweens"; perhaps their choices  will be different; they  cannot help  but  learn from hers.


NOTES

1 As my concern is largely  with  "Woman" in Livesay's  poetry,  and  I deal  primarily with   the  lyric  poetry,   I  review  much  ground  covered   by  Peter   Stevens   in  his article, "Dorothy  Livesay: The  Love  Poetry" (Canadian Literature 47:  pp.  26-
43,  Winter I97I).  However, my  viewpoint   is not  the  same  as  his, and  in  most cases my reading of individual poems is quite different.
2    This  is generally true,  I  think,  of the lyric poetry.  In  the social  poetry,  the  poet  is
equally  concerned with  male  and  female  approaches to freedom   and  the  hearth.
3   She  writes  in  How  Do  I  Love  Thee   that  the  poem  is "personal" and  "about my
Winnipeg childhood"  (ed.  John Robert   Colombo, Edmonton, Hurtig,  I970,  p. I 2) .  Furthermore, she  retells  the  experience in  an  autobiographical memoir, "A
Prairie Sampler" (Mosaic  3: pp. 85-92, Spring  I97o).
4    I  assume  this group of poems  is from  New  Poems  (I 955), of which  I was unable
to find a copy.
5    Peter  Stevens, "Dorothy Livesay: The Love Poetry", p. 26.
6    The   book  itself  is full  of  houses,  of course -a  neighbour house  ( p.  2) , and  the house  in  "Ontario Story"   (p.  6),  as well  as  those  I  have  already mentioned in "The Outrider", "Day and  Night", "West  Coast", "Call  My  People  Home", and "Roots".




INCREJISE IN SUBSCRIPTIONS

Regrettably, owing  to increased  costs and  a lower advertisement income due  to publishers' economies,  we are obliged to increase  our subscription rates. From  the  IstJanuary I975, they will be:

I  YEAR    -$  6.50
2 YEARS- $I2.00
3 YEARS- $I7.50

All subscriptions received  before  Ist January next will be at  the present rates.  But  even  at  the  increased  rates, Canadian Literature will still be one of the best bargains in the field of periodicals.

For  the  time  being,  the price  of single copies will remain $2.00.

HURRY TO SUBSCRIBE AND  TAKE ADVANTAGE  OF THE PRESENT RATES!



45


CLOSED CIRCLE


Nancy J. Corbett





QE OF   THE  MOST   finp=ive qualities  of  The   Double Hook  is the fineness of the correlation  between content, form,  and  tone. All are spare,  elemental,  and  dramatic. From  the essential simplicity of the work,  many meanings open out and  reverberate  so that  finally a great depth  is achieved; the structure  is a skeleton and  the  author,  instead  of padding  it with  flesh, polishes the bones until they glow.
The  novel's structure  is that  of classical comedy, concerned  with the social relationships  of a small  community  and  the transformation   of that  social order from  the  grip  of the  old  regime  into  a  more  vital,  life-oriented  one.  The  fact that  there  are  elements of tragedy  contained  in the transformation  is quite  con­ sistent both with Aristotle's definition of comedy and  with the example  of  Eliza­ bethan  plays of that  genre.
The  setting  emphasizes  the  isolation  of  the  little  community  in  which  the
drama   takes  place. The  bare,  dry  hills enclose the  people, setting  them  apart as if on  a stage,  and  imparting a quality  of self-containment  to  what  happens there.  There  is no  tie to  the  larger,  external  world,  and  apparently   no  one  to discover or care about  the murder  of Mrs. Potter.  Not even God watches  them; as Ara says, "there  were not enough  people here to attract  his attention." Burials and   births  are  handled   by  the  community  alone,  which  is  thus  a  law  unto itself,  and  a  harsher  law  than   any  an  outside  authority   could  impose.  Only James  Potter  tries  to find  a  way  out  of the  isolated, enclosed setting,  and  the road  he takes is a dead  end,  barricaded  by his mother's spirit.
It is essentially a childless setting, in spite of Angel's ragged  brood who are in the  beginning  merely misfits trailing  after  their  mother,  who is like a  stray  cat "trying  to step  her  way  through  the  puddles  of the  world.  Fighting  the  dogs. Mousing for her  young."
The  objective world pictured  in the novel reflects an invisible, absolute  order;
the  condensed  syntax  and  clustering  of  images  around   the  central  metaphor of the  double  hook  creates  intensity  and  underlines  the  classical structure and

CLOSED cmCLE



bare  setting. These  spare,   terse  qualities   are  reflected  in  the  style  and   tone  of the  prose;  for  example, the  account of  the  murder on  which   the  book  hinges occupies  a single  paragraph:

James  walking away. The  old  lady falling.  There  under  the  jaw of  the  roof. In  the vault of the bed loft. Into  the shadow of death.  Pushed  by James's  will. By James's  hand.  By James's  words:  This is my day. You'll  not fish today.

The  characters fit into  this dry,  spare  world  precisely  and,  like  the  units  of a constellation, take  their  unique places  in  the  novel's  symbolic  pattern. Without always  being  explicitly  described  as such,  they  represent  objective forces such  as Destruction, (Mrs.   Potter, Greta)  Fear   (Coyote,  Mrs.  Potter)  Creation, ( Gret­ chen,   Felix)   Light,   (Heinrich)  and  Insight   (Kip, Coyote)   as  well  as  unique individuals. There are  many  references  to the  elemental nature of the  characters also,  Mrs.  Potter  and   Greta   representing Fire  and  Air;  Ara,   Water;  Lenchen, James and  Angel,  Earth; and  Felix,  Air. The  images  of these  people  and  their world  form  an integrated pattern which  is as economical,  complex,  and  carefully  structured as a poem; the  mystical  truth  embodied in  the  novel  is  ideally  suited to  its  narrow,  pseudo-poetic form.  By isolating  her  characters as  if  on  a  stage, and  focussing  the  pitiless eyes of the sun  and  Coyote  upon  them,  Sheila  Watson  achieves  an  intense,  transcendant quality  which  supports the spiritual and  myth­  ological content of the novel effectively.
The theme  of  the  novel  is the  end  of the  old  order  and  the  birth  of  a  new one,  but  this  transformation does  not  result  solely from  James's physical  action. Awareness,  consciousness,  is necessary  to  accomplish  it, and  therefore the  theme of sight  and   insight  is woven  into  every  page  of  the  novel.  Each   character  is defined  in  terms  of  how  he sees, what  he sees, and,  perhaps most  importantly, how  he feels about  seeing.  It  is not  ordinary perception which  is the  issue here, but  a kind of seeing through or beyond  ordinary events in order  to discover  their hidden meanings. This  recurrent theme  rests on  a  very  profound and  extended cultural base;  the idea  of a special  sight  is familiar  to all mystical  thought, from the "Third Eye" of the  enlightened holy man  of the  East  to the  general  descrip­ tion  of individuals who  possess prophetic powers  as "seers"  or  visionaries". "He that  has eyes to see, let him see";  and  "There is none  so blind  as those  that  will not see."


IN THE  BEGINNING of The  Double  Hook,  the  land  and  the people  are  parched, sterile,  and   hopeless  under   the  dominance of  Mrs.  Potter

47

CLOSED CIRCLE



and  Coyote. Both of these characters  are omnipresent  and  all-seeing;  as it says in the first line, all the action takes place "In  the folds of the hills/under  Coyote's eye". His extraordinary sight,  however, as well as Mrs. Potter's,  is used only for spying. The  old lady sees all, but  in a very important  sense she is blind, search­ ing with  a lighted  lamp  for something  in the  broad  daylight,  something which she never finds. Coyote,  the  outsider,  inspires fear  in  the  people  because  he is inhuman and  detached  from  the community,  uninvolved  and  therefore  merciless as he laughs at what  he observes. He is a totemic figure  who releases spirits and controls them,  and  his creative  power is used perversely.

Coyote made the land  his pastime. He stretched out his paw. He breathed on the grass. His spittle eyed it with prickly pear.

The  life-giving forces of  breath  and  water  eye the  land  with  monstrous,  spiky plants;  the eyes he creates  and  uses are  hard  and  troublesome  to  people.
Under   the  influence  of  Mrs.  Potter,  the  individuals  of  the  community  are isolated from each  other  and  inarticulate.  They are  blinded  by wilful ignorance and  the denial of perception,  a deliberate  refusal to see which stems from fear: as Kip  observes, "Angels  can  see but  Theophil's  let  fear  grow  like fur  on  his eyes." Ara is aware of her lack of perception and says bitterly to William, "Could
I be blinder  than  I am? Seeing things only in flashes." The  Widow insists, fear­ fully, " I hear  nothing.  I see nothing."  Mrs. Potter  is, like Coyote, an  inverted figure with great emotional  power, having given life only to strangle it. Her grip extends beyond  the  human  community  to the barren  land  itself, since  she "was there  in every fold of the  country,"  and  it lasts beyond  her  death  because she has created  a successor in  her  daughter,  Greta.
More than  any of the others, Greta  is the victim of the old woman's  negative,
life-fearing aura,  and  although  she had  been as eager as James  to be rid of her oppressive presence, she is not freed by her mother's  death.  On  the contrary,  she inherits  the  old  woman's  characteristics  and  takes  her  place  as  mistress of the sterile  house. As James  soon  realizes, Greta  has merely  replaced  Mrs.  Potter: she had

... sat in the old lady's chair. Eyes everywhere. In  the cottonwoods the eyes of foolhens. Rats' eyes on the barn  rafters. Steers herded together. Eyes multiplied. Eyes. Eyes and  padded feet. Coyote moving in rank-smelling.
Nothing had changed.

Ara reflects, after Greta  destroys herself by fire, that  Greta "had  inherited destruction.... She lived no longer than  the old lady's shadow  left its stain  on

CLOSED  CIRCLE



the  ground. She  sat  in  her  mother's doom  as she sat  in  her  chair." Part  of  this doom is the rigid, fear-based repression which masquerades as morality in the wasteland of the  old  woman's world.  The  grip  on  the  young  girls is particularly harsh; William  admits that  Greta  was the  victim  of far  more  pressure  than  he or James,  and  that  she  too  had  once  been  as free-spirited as they.

You  wouldn't  know  how she was. Sliding  down  the  stacks  and  falling  into  the creek. Ma  was hard  on  her,  he said. She  thought  grief  was what  a  woman  was born  to sooner or  later,  and  that  men got  their  share  of grief  through   them.

For  a short  time after  her mother's death, Greta  tries to manipulate the  power she feels is now rightfully hers. She denies the truth and  refuses to "see", snapping at  Angel's  question, "Why don't  you  take  your  own  lamp   and   go  looking  for something?" and  warning Ara  not  to interfere:

You've  been  seeing  things,  Ara  . . .  Like  everyone  else around   here.  You've been  looking  into  other  people's  affairs.  Noticing  this.  Remarking  that.  Seeing too much.

But  she  is  literally   burning with   resentment, destroying   herself  finally   because she  "never thought of  anyone.   Not  even  herself.  Only  what   had   been  done  to her."   Identifying  with   her  mother, she  projects   her  self-destructiveness  on  to James,  saying  that  he will kill her  too  and  comparing herself  to  a  moth  drawn into  a flame.  She is a victim  of the old order,  her mother's order, but  James asks, "must  the  whole  world  suffer  because  Greta  had  been  wronged?"
The  answer  is no. With  the old woman's death, a new force  has  been  released and  Greta  is too closely tied  to  Mrs.  Potter's identity to survive  her  destruction. At  Greta's death,  Coyote  cries  ironically,   "Happy are  the  dead/for their   eyes see no more." In  the  living,  however,  changes  begin  to take  place.  Ara,  dry  and barren, fearful  that  William  is the  father  of Lenchen's child,  has  a vision  as she walks toward the house where  Mrs. Potter  lies dead  of a dry stone  coming  to life:

She  bent  towards  the  water.  Her  fingers divided  it.  A stone  breathed   in  her hand.  Then  life drained  to its centre.

This  vision, so reminiscent in its quality  to that  of the  narrator's  experience who looks into  the  drained pool in  Eliot's  "Burnt Norton" and  sees it suddenly "filled with  water  out  of sunlight" is repeated for  Ara.  With   Greta's death Ara,   the dry one,

remembered  how she'd  thought  of water  as a  death  which  might  seep  through the dry shell of the  world. Now her tired eyes saw water  issuing from  under  the

49

CLOSED CffiCLE



burned  threshold. Welling up and flowing down to fill the dry creek. Until  dry
lips drank. Until the trees stood knee deep in water.
Everything shall live where the river comes, she said out loud. And she saw a
great  multitude  of fish, each  fish springing arching  through  the slanting  light.

Through Ara,  William  comes to see that  his perception  is not  deep  enough. She tells him, "You're seeing things all the time, but  you never look at anything here" and  he finds, on reflection, that  this is true: "... I've  not seen what  was growing up in my own yard.  It's  like a man  who stands on a rock looking over a valley. He doesn't  notice the rock, he said. He  just stands on it." His basically positive view of life, that  "it's  better  to be trusting  and  loving",  begins to come closer to realization.
Heinrich   moves  from  the  fear  he  felt  at  "seeing  light  the  way  I've  never noticed  before"  to  an  acceptance   that  he  must  "be  born  into  a  light  which burned  but  did  not  destroy."  When  Greta  bums  herself to  death,  he  is able, with   William   and   Ara,   to  contain   the  destruction   and   stop   the  fire  from spreading.
Lenchen  is subjected  to the same uncharitable   hardness as was Greta; in her
mother's  eyes, she is "a  fat  pig of a girl" once she has lost the price of marriage, her  virginity. But unlike  Greta,  Lenchen  has strengths  which save her. She  has spirit and independence, and is not cut off from the natural  world. As her brother Heinrich  says, she "was  part  of any animal she rode. Moved with its movement as if she and  the  horse breathed  with the same lungs. Rode easy as foam  on its circling blood. She was part  of the horse. Its crest and  the edge of its fire." This unity  with  life and  movement  makes  her  strong;  she  is not  destroyed  by  the rejection  of her  by her  mother  and  lover. She is a  physical and  creative  force, and as the values of the community  move from death  toward  life, her guilt  ("all because of me the  whole world's  wrecked")   is transformed  into  absolution  and regeneration  of the society.
Kip's role in the novel is that  of Coyote's human  counterpart. He has a unique
gift of perception; Coyote calls him, "Kip,  my servant  Kip".  But seeing implies responsibility;  it is Coyote's  lack of responsibility that  makes his omniscience so frightening.  Unlike  him, Kip  is tied to the human  community  and  it is his  per­ version of his special  gift,  by trying  to  blackmail  Lenchen,  which  leads  to  his punishment.  He  is not  allowed  to  retain  his place  as seer  and  messenger  if he abuses it. James,  the  most active  agent  in  bringing  about  the  change  from  old to  new,  blinds  him  with  a  whip.  This  is not  the  gratuitous  act  of  violence it might seem, but  comes only after  many  warnings  from Heinrich,  William,  and

so

CLOSED CIRCLE



Theophil. Kip  himself accepts  responsibility for  bringing  it  about: "I  kept  at him  like a  dog  till  he  beat  around  the  way  a  porcupine  beats  with  his  tail." Like  Lenchen,  the  blinded  Kip  turns  to  Felix  for  help,  and  it  is  this  which causes Angel to leave Theophil, who refuses to "see",  and  return  with  her  chil­ dren  to Felix. Because she  had  seen things  through  Kip's  eyes, she  mourns  his blinding:  "Who'll see anything  worth seeing now?" Angel is aware  of the  heal­ ing quality of Felix's spiritual  gifts, but she returns  to care for Kip and  Lenchen because, as she says, "there's things  to be done  needs ordinary  human   hands."



l:E CONFLICT between the older,  repressed,  death-oriented figures and  their  children  resulted  in Lenchen's  exile, Greta's  death,  and  Kip's loss of sight.  Through James  and  Felix,  however,  a  new  way  of  life is made possible for the  future.  James  is the physical father  of the  new order;   he does what  not  even  God  could  do -he  stops  his mother's  fishing.  His  strength  is thus established at the beginning:  "This is my day."  (p.  rg)  and  although  he is unable  for a  time  to  assert  himself positively to take  her  place,  his action  has been decisive, and  he is determined  to break  his mother's  hold  completely.  He tries first to escape her influence  by running  away;  he rides to the distant  town, only to learn  that  distance  is not  the answer. The  town  is merely an  extension of the wasteland  he has left, and  is full of its reminders. The  first thing  he sees there  is the river,  and  "the  dark  figure of his mother  playing  her  line out  into the  full flood."  He  spends  his time  in  the  town  in  the  company  of Traff,  the man  whose thick yellow hair  reminds him of Lenchen.
After  losing the  money  for  his escape in  an  encounter  with  a  whore,  James thinks  of Lenchen  and  their  coming  child,  and  "saw  clearly  for  a  moment  his simple hope." From secret lovemaking, denial, and escape he moves to openness, determination, and  a sense of the  values in his life:  "Whatever the  world said, whatever  the girl said,  he'd  find  her. Out  of his corruption  life had  leaved and he'd stepped on it carelessly as a man steps on spring shoots." The  change  which has taken  place in  him is rewarded; fate grants  him a new  beginning  when  he returns to find his mother's  house in ashes. He experiences liberation  and  rebirth with this dramatic ending  to his mother's  power:  "He  felt as he stood with  his eyes closed on the  destruction  of what  his heart  had  wished  destroyed  that  by some generous genture  he had  been turned  once more into  the  first pasture  of things."  He resolves to build  a new house, for himself and  Lenchen.  His trans­ formation  and assumption of responsibility most clearly exemplify what  Margaret

sr

CLOSED CIRCLE



Morriss has called "the  religious ritual celebrating the re-entry of love into the wasteland."
As James  creates a new world  through  his actions, Felix Prosper  nurtures  the growth  of that  world  and  takes  his rightful  place as its spiritual  father.  In  the beginning  he is inert  and  passive;  his indolence has caused Angel to leave him, and  he  passes his  days  "sitting   there  like the  round  world  all  centred  in  on himself",  his mind  recalling  fragments  of the  Latin  mass, impotent  and  irrele­ vant.  He  considers chasing  the  old  lady out  of his pool, but  cannot  make  the effort. His images are  all religious;  "St.  Felix with  a death's  head  meditating", "anointed",  but  they  are  only fragmented   reminders  of his  abdicated   role. He exists, he accepts:  "Things came. Things went." And he turns away from drink­ ing the  cup  of "her  bitter  going"  which  Angel left to  him.
When  he is needed,  however,  he begins to come to life. He  takes Lenchen  in
and,  not knowing what else to do, he blesses her. It is, he murmurs, "lntroibo­ the  beginning."  Then  Kip  comes to him and  Felix, making  a  great  effort,  goes for Angel. Finally direct,  he says "I need you" and  to this, she  can  respond.  He is useless in practical  matters,  but  his union with  her gives him  strength  so that he is able, when the time comes, to help deliver Lenchen's child. He also takes on his family  responsibilities as he  has  never done  before:  "When  a  house is full of women and children,  Felix said, a man has to get something for their mouths."  His initial  paralysis has been replaced  by leadership; the return  of Angel restores the satisfying balance  between  his vision and  gentleness and  her  practical,  intui­ tive wisdom.
In  the  end,  Kip  accepts  his altered  state  and  finds a  home  for  himself with Felix, and  Lenchen  becomes a madonna, bearing  new hope for  them  all. Even her bitter  mother,  who had supported  the old order, finds that  "there  are things so real that  a person  has to see them.  A person can't  keep her eyes glazed over like a dead  bird's  forever."  She  repents, opens her  heart,  and  is able  to find  a place for the new child.
The  community  experiences  a  collective miracle  of unification,  centering  on Felix's house. It is marked  outwardly  by the birth of Lenchen and  James's  child, and  inwardly  by Felix's experience  of transcendence  as he watches  the  birth:

If only he could shed his flesh, moult and feather  again, he might  begin once more. His eyelids dropped.  His flesh melted. He  rose from  the  bed on soft owl wings. And below he saw his old body crouched down like an ox by the manger.

He  is the  spiritual  father  of  the  new  baby  (whom  Lenchen  names  "Felix"),


52

CLOSED CIRCLE



just as James  is the physical one. The  victory of life and  unity over the divisive force of fear  is accomplished;  a  new order,  more  vital  and  more  humane,  has replaced  the old.
The  clarity  and  concentration   of the  dialogue  and  description  in  the  novel are outstanding. The  work appears  simple because of the spareness  of the style and  the primitive,  circular  movement from death  to life which is simultaneously its structure  and  its content.  It  has a classical effect, a feeling of ongoing  truth which  is not  bounded  or  limited  to specific time  or  place  or  people,  and  this elemental  nature  is emphasized  by the fact  that,  throughout  the  novel, the lines between  man  and  landscape  are  blurred.  Coyote, who  makes fear  articulate, is both  animal  and  human,  a figure of prophecy and  adversity. He speaks last.
It is clear that  the new order is not a simple replacement  of the old repression
with  unrestricted  freedom,  but something  more subtle  and  difficult:  an  accept­ ance  of the  dual  nature  of existence, and  a  refusal  to let  the  presence  of fear continue  to dominate  the  community.  Fear  is still  present,  but  it  is no  longer omnipresent.  As the  child's  birth  symbolizes hope,  Coyote's  final  message is a reminder  of the price of hope:  life is both pain  and  pleasure,  and  if the  pain is not  accepted  and  dealt  with, it will grow and  overwhelm  the  community.  Life is a double  hook,  and  both sides are  swallowed  together  or  not  at  all.

When you fish for the glory you catch the darkness too.... if  you hook twice the glory you hook twice the fear.
























53


PRIAPUS IN
THE DANSE MACABRE

Peter Thomas



ROBERT KROETSCH's  three   novels,   But We  A" Eriles (1965), The  Words  of My  Roaring  (1g66), and  The  Studhorse  Man   (1970) reveal  an  increasingly confident literary  personality. Talking to Peter  Sypnowich of the  practice of fiction,  Kroetsch insisted  upon  total  dedication through act  of will:

I do agree you have  to give your life to it. That's  what Canadians  shy away from
-the act.  This  surrender of  the will-the  Americans did  it to us, the  weather did it, the English did it-is a good old Canadian  characteristic.

This  assertive  view shows  itself in  the  novels as a species of vitalism: Kroetsch's heroes are compulsive actors,  doers, drawn into the paradoxes of apocalyptical romanticism, especially  in  sexual  terms.  Reviewing The  Words  of My  Roaring, Clark  Blaise quoted Blake -"the  road  of excess leads to the  palace  of wisdom"
-a view which  he found  "happily confirmed" in that  novel. Despite  the preten­ sion  of  its  title,  the  anthology Creation,  recently  edited  by  Kroetsch,  illustrates this central obsession  with  the creative  and  self-destructive aspects of  the assertive ego.  But  Kroetsch  has  been   aware   from   his  first  novel  of  the  duality in  his romance of the  extreme situation. The  drive  to freedom  is also a quest  for death. Whatever the  egotistical   assertion  achieves,  it  is an  ambiguous  triumph. This  is extended, furthermore, into  the  artist's relations  with  his  created   world.  In  his Introduction to  Creation,  Kroetsch quotes  Heinrich  Zimmer  in  The  King  and the Corpse:

The  involvement of the gods in the web of their own creation, so that they become
... the harried  victims of their  creatures, entangled  in nets of not quite  voluntary self-manifestation,   and   then   mocked   by  the   knowing  laughter   of  their   own externally  reflected  inner  judge:  this  is  the  miracle  of  the  universe. This  is the tragicomic romance of the world.

The   "harried  victim" of  his own  "creatures", the  artist  is mocked  by  what  he makes.  The  act  of creation is a  tragicomic revelation.  The  "externally  reflected inner  judge"  refers  directly  to what  Kroetsch  calls in an interview with  Margaret

54

PRIAPUS IN  THE DANSE  MACABRE



Laurence  "this  doppelganger  thing"; the romance of assertion, and the grandeur of defiance, are always mocked by the "inner  judge". In the same interview with Margaret  Laurence, he reiterated  the theme:

Tragedy looks a  bit  pretentious now. At  least  to laugh  is ... absurd? A ferocious hope, maybe?

Further,  and  with direct  reference to The  Studhorse Man, he set the terms of his fictional mode:

Comedy  tells you that  there  is no cause and  effect,  that  chance operates against  it. The  studhorse-it's not moral  or immoral.
What  is surprising,  in  view of the assurance of these remarks,  is that  Kroetsch has evolved so rapidly from the manner of But We  Are Exiles, where "this doppelganger thing"  was a grim wrestling-match indeed. Kroetsch's  priapic  hero has  been  transformed   from  the  principal  in  a  claustrophobic, inward-turning personal catastrophe, to the fool in a cosmic comedy.



kE THEME of But We  Are Exiles, is drawn,  as the epigraph suggests, from the  myth  of Narcissus. In  the opening  scene, Peter  Guy,  pilot of the  Nahanni   jane,  a  Mackenzie  River  working-boat,  is peering  over  the  bows into the water.  He seeks the body of Mike Hornyak,  the boat's  owner, drowned when he leaped overboard,  burning, after an explosion. At first, Guy imagines something  emerging  to "entangle him",  apparently  "his own  face"  which offers to "kiss" him. This  implicit  identification  of Hornyak  with  the image  of Guy's self-love becomes  clear  as  the  novel  progresses, with  the  doppelganger   theme given one of its familiar variants as the narcissistic mirror-reflection.
The  action of the novel covers two journeys. Forced to abandon the search for
Hornyak,  the Nahanni   fane proceeds down-river to the sea with its cargo before turning  to  make  the  home-run  to  Yellowknife. This  return  is complicated   by worsening  weather  conditions,  since the delay of the search  has taken  the  boat into the dangerous  late fall. Unexpectedly,  Hornyak's  faceless body is discovered on an island by two Indians,  who tow it in a canoe to the Nahanni  fane. Rather than  take the corpse aboard,  the  crew place it, still in  the  canoe, on an  empty barge they are pulling. Thus  Guy is "tied" to Hornyak  as he contrives to pilot his boat through crisis to safety.
Even  in outline,  Conradian  analogues  suggest  themselves,  particularly The
Secret Sharer. The  quest for the Other,  the river journey motif, and, in the pilot


55

PRIAPUS IN THE DANSE MACABRE



role,  the  typical  Conradian  theme  of  freedom-through-mastery may  be  noted. These  structural  analogues  do  not,  however,  end  here.  Guy  is implicated   in Hornyak's  death   (he  handed  an  unmasked  light to the latter  as he went below to inspect the boat), and the pattern  of crime, guilt, and expiation is self-evident. Moreover,  the crew are at first quietly pleased by Hornyak's death  (they despised him) , but  as the  boat  experiences  more and  more difficulties they turn  on Guy and lay blame. This, with the pilot-role, the "tying" of the corpse, and the Every­ man   symbolism  of  Guy's  name,  inescapably  recalls "The  Ancient   Mariner". Hornyak  also has "a  tattoo  of a ship in full sail" on his arm. With  the  presence of Kettle  Fraser,  Hornyak's  wife on  board,  one crew member  complains  of her "showing  up like some kind of a haunting  spirit that  won't let  us alone".
It  is not  Kroetsch's  indebtedness  here which  concerns me. It  is possible that But  We   Are  Exiles  was  his  personal  Battle  of the  Books, but,  more  generally speaking, it is the moral opposition  the analogues suggest which throws most light on  his  development   to  The   Studhorse   Man.   For  the  third  analogue  is with Kerouac's  On  The   Road  or  even,  perhaps,  the  frenzied  car-drives  of  All The King's  Men. The  ConradjKerouac opposition is between disciplined self-mastery and  the  ultra-romantic dream  of total  Experience-that other  myth  of "free­ dom"  which  consists of the  repudiation of all law save the egotistical assertion.
Hornyak's appeal is emphatic:

"Chaos, boy. Stay young and  hang loose." And Mike fed more gas to the wild horses under the hood of that black Rolls.
And  the  flat  country  then.  Dusty and  dry. Dry and  dusty and  hot.  Wheat country.  And  the  first elevator.  There  at  Dufresne, alone and  reaching, like a great damned phallus, like one perpetual hard-on.

This  assertion, the willed chaos, finds in Sex its field of metaphor. As Kettle says of Hornyak: "He  consumed  me the way he consumed everything.  You lived for him,  Peter.  Either  you lived  for  him  or  you stopped  living."  Kettle  speaks as Echo, fading  in the self-sufficing fire of ego. The  phallus is, of course, Hornyak's emblem   (as  his  name  implies) :  an  instrument,   the  adage  insists,  without  a conscience.
But to "kill"  the  ego-drive,  as Guy seems to do, is too simple a solution. For
Hornyak  also poses the question of freedom which surfaces throughout the novel. The  energy and  vitalism of self-love retain  their attraction,  since they repudiate guilt.  Guy's  "freedom" is freedom  to  endure   ("Running and  searching.  That was it.")   and to find in the pilot's role the release of mastery. Even this, however, may be seen as a form of masochism, or at least puritanical  self-indulgence, and

PRIAPUS IN  THE DANSE  MACABRE



another  kind of egotism. The  ambiguity  of this yearning  to be free and  alone in Guy's  terms is expressed by Kettle's  father,  who refuses ever to leave the North. "A  man  is free here. You ever heard  the word? He  is so free that  nothing  else in the world is ever as good again.  Never. But it's like a screwing jail, this place." The  return  of Hornyak  makes Guy "burst  back to life" -only  to recognize his own   form   of  self-love:   the   puritan's  tight-lipped   pride.  Kettle   clarifies  the dilemma  in her plea to him (revealing, as Echo, that in loving both Hornyak  and Guy she recognizes the two faces of Narcissus)  "Break the mirror  for me. Break it,  break  it  please, smash  it,  Peter.  Listen  to  me, smash  it."  Guy  must  accept oneness with Hornyak, and the conclusion of the novel symbolizes this paradoxical fusion of identities.  Racing  against  time,  the  Nahanni  Jane loses headway  in a blizzard  on  the  Great  Slave  Lake  and  the  crew  decide  to cut-away  the  barge carrying  Hornyak's  corpse. In  the worsening conditions, Guy is pitched  on to the barge and cannot return to the Nahanni Jane. Thus Narcissus challenges Tiresias's prophecy  in the novel's epigraph   ("so  that  himself ... he know")   by approach­ ing  the  canoe  and  Hornyak.  The  faceless condition  of the  body  (echoing  The  Secret  Sharer)  is a revelation  to Guy of his own emptiness;  he  climbs into  the canoe,  under  the  blanket  which  provides the  only  warmth  on  the  barge,  and thereby "joins"  with the image he has tried to reject. Narcissus dies in the knowl­ edge of his own sterile infatuation; the egotistical assertion, for all its dynamism, is a kind of death. The  vitalist is acknowledged as a frozen, headless corpse.



l:Is LAST IMAGE permits a leap forward  to Hazard Lepage, the  Studhorse  Man   himself  lying  frozen  on  the  slab  in  the  Coulee  Hill  beer parlour,  for  Kroetsch  has  remained  faithful  to  his obsessions. But  the  shift  in tone, from introspective agony to comic picaresque, is also indicative  of increased control and confidence as Kroetsch defines his mode.
The  Words  of  My   Roaring  offers few easy literary  analogues.  The  questing
hero  undergoes  a significant  revision, however, as the scene is shifted  from  the Mackenzie  to  rural  Alberta.  While  the  mythic structure  of But  We  Are  Exiles and  the large natural  symbols of river, sea, and annihilating snow can hardly be ignored,  the  texture  of the  prose, even the frequent  thought-stream passages, is essentially realistic. But the prose is itself a product of Guy's consciousness:  being repressed, cryptic,  and  unable  to  respond adequately  to the  power  of the  Mac­ kenzie  setting.  Almost  as  if  he  sensed  the  lost opportunity of  his  first  novel, Kroetsch  expressed  the  expansive,  potentially  poetic  Hornyak-consciousness  m

57

PRIAPUS IN  THE  DANSE MACABRE



The  Words  of My  Roaring, abandoning Guy's taut limitations. In Johnnie  Back­
strom, undertaker  of Coulee Hill, the priapic hero is now comic:

My name, let me say once and for all, is Johnnie Backstrom, and I am six-four in my stocking feet, or  nearly so, a man  consumed by high ambitions, pretty well hung, and famed as a heBer with women.

Against  Hornyak's  consuming  triumphs  we may now measure  Narcissus as anti­ hero. The  death-lust  of the ego is expressed, comically, by Backstrom's profession (at  which, as the novel opens, he is failing).  The  paradox of  will-to-live as drive­ to-death   is  symbolized   by  Backstrom's  big  black  hearse   (itself  a  version  of Hornyak's  arrogant   Rolls) . It is this hearse which  Backstrom  uses for drunken,  randy  excesses, and  for  the  purposes of the  election  campaign -providing  the main action of the novel-in  which he is a candidate.  The  doppelganger theme is here reversed in its operations.  Driving home from a beer parlour in the hearse, Backstrom  injures  his friend,  Jonah  Bledd. Industrious,  a  model of consistency and  responsibility, a good family  man  of few words, Jonah  embodies the life of disciplined  self-control-being  a  weaker, less dramatic  shadow  of Guy. Losing his job because of the injury, Jonah's sense of order and  justice is shattered; his anxieties lead him to suicide, by drowning in a lake. Backstrom's guilt is explicit: "In  a way it seemed to me  that  I had killed Jonah," while at the same time, "I was feeling as if I had drowned." "Hornyak", then, has killed "Guy"-the moral register  which  controlled,   at  least  somewhat,  his apocalyptical   yearnings.  The motif  of death  by water  persists in  Kroetsch's  fiction to  become central  in the symbolism of The  Studhorse  Man.
Free  of  Jonah's  restraint,   only  one  figure  stands  between  Backstrom  and Hornyak's  "chaos". This  is Doc Murdoch,  his rival candidate,  who officiated at his birth,  loved  his mother,  and  tells the  people, "only  maturity  can serve our needs." The  ego-conflict of But We  Are Exiles is now extended  to the struggle of the prodigal against  the  just father.  Backstrom's "platform" consists of the single, absurd  promise that  he will bring  rain  to the drought-stricken  prairies and save the crop. Reason,  the slow unfolding of human  trust, and  patience,  are opposed by a kind of magic-man  in cap  and  bells. The  clown and  his magic -are these truer  to the nature  of Backstrom's  profession, death, than  the physician's faith in human  intellect and  measured  experience? Backstrom again echoes Hornyak: "Sometimes  I think  that  chaos is the only order. The only real order."
Probably  the  most definitive single scene in the novel (and  one of Kroetsch's

PRIAPUS IN  THE DANSE  MACABRE



finest to date)  shows Backstrom attending  a rodeo and  witnessing the death  of a clown in the arena:

The body mangled and ripped by those gouging horns, the innocent figure muti­ lated,  rolled and  trampled  in  the stinking dust.  The  spirit  struck  into  frantic despair;I saw it all right.

The  image  of  the  broken  clown  converts Backstrom,  for  the  first  time,  into  a figure  of eloquence  and  power.  He  has  his  text in  the  absurd  violence  of the scene which, by extension, becomes the justification for his own clownish defiance of all  order.  Jonah   Bledd's  name  suggests only too clearly  the  bleeding  victim with his faith in moral design. When rain does fall on the eve of the election, the clown appears confirmed in his "wisdom".
But Backstrom's  relations  with  Murdoch  work against  a simplistic conclusion
in  the  triumph  of chaos. On  election-eve Murdoch  is called out  to the  compli­ cated  labour  of an outlying farmer's  wife. Her child is still-born, and  Backstrom must bring a coffin. As Backstrom and  Murdoch  ride together,  the former impli­ citly  accepts  the  subservience  of  his role  (the  dealer  in  death)   to  the  latter's.  Murdoch   has  always  represented  moral  authority  to  Backstrom:   "All  my life when things got tough  I went  running  to Murdoch"-but the egotistical asser­ tion denies Doc's kind of love. Backstrom leaves, "driving  hard for the old chaos."  Though  he is capable  of guilt, and at first wishes to concede victory to Murdoch, the last scene of the novel shows Backstrom driving towards an election-eve meet­ ing  under  a  compulsion  to  go  on competing.  In  The  Studhorse  Man  there  is reference to John Backstrom, MLA.
As in  But  We  Are  Exiles, the sexual theme  expresses the  life-forcer's  will to
assert most explicitly. But while Kettle Fraser's role as Echo only emphasized  her essential insubstantiality, Helen  Murdoch,  daughter  of the  Doc, is given depth. She is the  virgin-queen  Backstrom  must  possess ("I  hated  her  innocence") ; as they make love repeatedly and nightly in the Doc's much admired garden the symbolism is clear:  the desecration of beauty by primitive energy. Caliban  has enraptured Miranda under  the eyes of the good and  wise father.  Yet Backstrom, unlike Hornyak,  is dignified by guilt and by insight into his own desperate course. It  is Helen  who  makes fitting  comment  on  his condition -for Woman   must preside over Priapus's defeat, as she has served his triumph:

I've  watched  you, Johnnie.  You talk.  You hunger  and  thirst.  You strike and thunder and roar. You're never still a moment. But in the end you smash.

The  virgin and  the clown, Priapus  mocked by death,  the drive to freedom  as


59

PRIAPUS IN  THE DANSE  MACABRE



drive  to  oblivion-Kroetsch's themes  clarified  in  The  Words  of My  Roaring, enriched  by the  comic  mode  which  dispelled the neurotic  intensities of his first novel.
It is impossible to escape the impression, too, that The  Studhorse Man  was not recognized, lying like a chrysalis in the shadows of its antecedants. At first, the note  is  supercilious,  when  Backstrom  admits:   "I'm not  ashamed   to  say  that somehow or other  I enjoy the smell of horse-shit once in a while." But as he drives "for  the old chaos" along  Route  3I 3, he is permitted  a glimpse of "his" fictional evolution:
I saw two horses in a yard,  a gelding,  its tail putting up a vague  resigned  resistance to  all  the  swarms   of  flies,  and  a  stallion: a  big stallion,  pale  blue,  ignoring the flies, pawing  at the post to which it was chained.
The mighty blue stallion, Poseidon, which Hazard  Lepage, hero of The  Studhorse Man, leads about  the country  (with  a gelding),  is in a natural line of progression towards  the  ultimate,  simple,  mastering  phallus-symbolic of creative  mastery. The  transition  from  Guy  (with  the implication  of a tethering  rope)  to Hazard, the "free" victim of chance, is clear.



IT IS  SELF-EVIDENT that  Kroetsch  is fascinated  by the sheer license of fiction-not only in accepting  the "tall story" tradition, for which Backstrom is a natural subject,  but  also as release from the  puritan  prose of the Guy-consciousness. The   limitations  of  the  roaring-boy  hero  within  a  realistic frame  are,  at  the  same  time,  themselves obvious. There  is just so much  to  be found  in  that  surrogate  rebellion  (inoculated  by comedy)  which  the  picaresque offers, unless it accepts  its own  anarchic  logic. Within the  realistic frame  (how­ ever  flimsy)  the  picaresque  hero  is confronted  by the  representatives  of  social order  in due succession. But  there  is no progression, no expansion,  of  the terms by which  he is defined.  He  is, indeed,  restricted  by the very custom  and  social convention  against  which  we see him. The  picaresque is limited  by  the laws of chance,   not  "probability".  Furthermore, the  "pure"  picaresque  hero  is  truly heroic in so far  as he carries  the  total moral  burden.  He is not a  representative of society (and  therefore  "obligated") ; his only order is his quest for purpose or his  flight  from  persecution.  Yet  he  exposes the  irrationality  of  his context  by revealing  its frenzy  to  destroy  him  or its inability  to do so. "Society",  in  these terms,  is bound  by  its  own  causality  and  structure.  The  improbable,   the  un­ tethered, unrealistic picaresque is its unadmitted  dream of release.

6o

PRIAPUS IN  THE DANSE  MACABRE



Hazard  Lepage,  the hero of The  Studhorse Man, takes Kroetsch  far from the repressed prose of his first novel to what  might  be called,  using Robert  Schole's term,  the "fabulating" mode. The  fabulator  "asserts the authority of the shaper, the fabulator  behind the tale" and "delight in design, and its concurrent emphasis on the art of the designer, will serve in part to distinguish the art of the fabulator from  the  work of the  novelist or satirist. Of  all the  narrative forms, fabulation puts the highest premium on art and joy." Furthermore:
... The  really perceptive writer  is not merely conscious that  he is using mythic materials:  he is conscious that  he is using them consciously. He  knows, finally, that  he is allegorizing. Such  a  writer, aware of the nature  of categories, is not likely to believe that  his own mythic lenses really capture  the truth. Thus his use of myth will inevitably partake of the comic.

It  is this last  point  which  distinguishes, I  believe, the  mode  of Kroetsch's  most recent  novel from his first. Self-conscious use of myth is one thing;  self-conscious self-parody in the  use of myth  is another.  In  this Kroetsch  has moved from  the dramatic  fable to the complex and essentially comic "fabulation".
The  Studhorse Man  is narrated by Demeter Proudfoot, a madman who chooses
to spend his time in the asylum seated in his bath-tub.  His name, and  the device of  the  "tale  told  by an  idiot",   proclaim  the  assault  on  realism  which  persists throughout. "This   portentous   volume"   (as  its  own  last  words  describe  it)   is strewn with a kind of haphazard (the pun is intentional  and functional)  allusive­ ness, so that  an  air  of intellectual  activity, if not of cohesiveness, is  established very quickly. While  the  Narcissus myth provides the central  thematic  thread  of But We  Are Exiles, the myths of Demeter and  Poseidon  (the name of Hazard's fabulous blue stallion)  are fragmented  and distorted schemes of  reference in The  Studhorse  Man. Their  order  is mocked as it is utilized.  What is consistent is a wholesale pattern  of  recurrence,  an  unabashed  use of  coincidence  and  analogy so that  a sense of order  is implied  despite the lack of  a  binding  metaphor. The texture  of The  Studhorse  Man  is rich and various; what  may be suggested here (selectively, for  the  novel  deserves fuller  treatment)   is  the  manner   in  which Kroetsch gathers up the threads  of his past fiction in this most recent work.
Hazard  Lepage  has one aim:  "I am  breeding the  perfect  horse";  his quest is
for mares for Poseidon to serve. But Hazard  has a "preposterous fear of death ... especially death at sea" as a result of  the warning given to him by an old woman in a flooded farmhouse in France  during the fighting at Passchendaele  Ridge  (his father  was killed at  Dieppe). Substantially,  the novel turns  on the  pun  of mare (sea),  which  Hazard  fears as death  while seeking compulsively for the  "mare"

61

PRIAPUS IN  THE  DANSE MACABRE



of his need.  The  Rolls,  the  black  hearse,  and  now the stallion  that  is both  death and  life. At  the  end  of the  novel,  Poseidon  kicks Hazard to death. In  a brilliant late  scene,  Hazard is literally brought back  from  the dead  by Martha Proudfoot, his long  intended, in the  refrigeration-room of the  Coulee  Hill  beer-parlour. The central thematic pun is made  explicit:

Martha was champion  against  our  promised end. Death was a nightmare presence bent  on  snuffing Hazard  into  a  longer darkness;  it was the  crone  and  succubus, the  ancient  fiend  turned  female  that  in  the  night of dream  has fatal  intercourse with  men.  Yes, and  the  moon  was a cold bright  disc on  the sky:  Mare  Frigoris, Mare  Hiemis, Mare  Incognito.

Where   Hornyak and   Backstrom had  served  the  priapic  authority of their  own egos, Hazard achieves  a kind  of grandeur (despite  his own  formidable bedding) by leading everywhere on foot the  animal whose phallic  majesty  so diminishes  his own.  Hazard bows  before  "the huge  and  penetrating rage  of the  stallion's  pas­ sion to  possess";  his own  condition, part-parodied as it is, is potentially tragic:

He was the man from whom each farm must have its visits; yet he must eat alone, travel  alone,  work  alone,  suffer  alone, laugh  alone, bitch alone,  bleed alone, piss alone, sing alone, dream  alone ...

Caught between  "the stallion's passion  to  possess" and  Mare Incognito, Hazard is fated  to flee the sea and  seek the  mare  and  find they are  the same  thing.
Everywhere Hazard  goes,  the   ambiguous dream   "mare" calls  him.  Fleeing from  pursuers,  he collapses  in a  railroad car  upon  a shipment of bones:

And  he  was  embracing   the  bones,  gently,  blindly,  embracing   the  hard  bones, dreaming  the  flesh, embracing  already  a dreamed  woman,  the soft large  breasts that no man could drive from his dreaming.

Breasts and  bones:  the  doubleness of existence  in hazard  -and between  Hazard and  Martha (and her  mares)  stands  Tad Proudfoot, her  uncle.  Tad's function throughout  (as  the  name  implies)   is to  be Adversary,  the  authority who  must deny  Hazard's quest:

That  old son of a bitch of a Tad ... he told me he'd give the mare for nothing if
I promised never to have it bred. Figure that one out.

Mocked  by the  father-figure, Hazard himself expresses the  eternal creative rebel­ lion.  Advanced on  his quest,  he  takes  up  with  Eugene  Utter, the  image  of "old  chaos"  itself, whose  most  significant act  is to burn  down  to the  ground a school­ house  in which  he and  Hazard intend  to shelter,  naked  and  frozen  from crossing

PRIAPUS IN  THE DANSE MACABRE



an ice-strewn  river. Utter  has no "quest"  except the revelation  of chaos, the act of denial,  the repudiation  of reason. "We are free men at last",  he can say, stand­ ing by the smouldering  ruin. Doomed, as he seems to be, to live in extremis  with Utter   at  his  side,  Hazard's search  has  itself caricatured   the  social  images  of permanence  and ordered  rule. By a process too complicated  to summarize  briefly, he adopts  an  RCMP uniform  while himself fleeing from the  law-and  in this condition  finds temporary  sanctuary  in a Home  for  Incurables, where  he meets an assortment  of aged decrepits, including Torbay Proudfoot,  the "oldest surviv­ ing member"  of the clan. Expressing by his uniform "the  eternal  violence of law and  order" Hazard  plays cards  with the  assembly and  wins every trick, until  he realizes that  Torbay  will not try to win. "I goddamned  well want to live for ever too,"  the  latter  insists. The  Incurables are  those who hold on to life as minimal existence.  Their   degradation  is  expressed  by  the  activities  of  Stiff  and  Hole, fornicating  publicly,  a   wrestling  heap  of  filth  and  wasted  flesh.  The   sexual motive must be the drive to master and to seek, "to breed the perfect horse," if it is not to be a perverse expression of horror of life.
Hazard   flees from  the  Incurables  in  a  clergyman's  dress,  no  more  effective
against the true chaos than the police uniform, as Kroetsch "fabulates" a complex fictional world in which History and "Society" are mocked by chance  and irony. In  a  very  funny  early  scene,  Hazard   takes  refuge  in  the  provincial  museum, housed in  the  Legislative Building in Edmonton.  Just  before he enters  he comes across the spectacle of Poseidon rising in splendid  anger against  a bronze statue of a  rearing  horse. The  spectators  insist on Art's triumph  over life:  "The  artist has done it.  In  bronze. Forever."  Art, too, mocks Hazard's search for perfection in  the  living  flesh. It  is, however,  an  artist  who comes to  Poseidon's  defence. Ludicrous  though  the  whole scene is  ( Kroetsch  has a genuine  flair  for  farce), the  import  of  P.  Cockburn,   curator  of  the  provincial  museum,  and  an  artist herself,  choosing  Poseidon  and   Hazard   before  the  bronze,  is  clearly  another repudiation of formal  law. Taking  Hazard  within,  P.  Cockburn  succours  him upon  an  antique  bed  upon  which  three  wax figures stare:   an  Indian   chief,  a buckskinned  early  explorer,  and  a  red-coated  Mounted   Policeman.  Canadian History?  Hazard   repudiates  this encapsulated  order,  too-this  mummifying  of the  living truth.  Characteristically,  his response to the brooding  stare  of History is crude and emphatic: "I screwed the ass off her."
Hazard's concern  is with the source, not with the structures  of time.  It  is sig­ nificant  that  Poseidon came  to him as a gift from an  unknown  Indian,  whom Hazard  saved from drowning.  Out  of the original land,  a gift from  the original

PRIAPUS IN  THE  DANSE MACABRE



men, and, in the drowning  motif, a reminder that the fabulous stallion must him­ self lead  Hazard   to  death  in  the  unknown  waters. His clergyman  role  parodies Hazard's religious meaning,  ministering to the great horse. It is here that Kroetsch most expresses the  fabulator's disbelief in "his  own mythic lenses":  for  Hazard  remains in service, the clown who serves the king, finally destroyed by Poseidon's hoofs. Hazard  has no vision of the creation myth in which he acts:

'The stallion Eternity
Mounted the mare of Time,
'Gat the foal of the world.'
(W. B. Yeats, "Tom at Cruachan") Hazard's fall from  mythic  pretensions  (even such  as farce and  parody  allow
him)   comes before  his death.  "Saved" by Martha from Mare  Incognito,  he is repudiated   by  his chronicler,   Demeter  Proudfoot,  for  compromising  his quest. "You  have  betrayed  your own  cause."  In  the last scenes of the novel, Demeter steals both  Poseidon  and  Martha's five mares and  attempts  to hold out  against all  comers  in  Hazard's farmhouse.   The  madman  preserves  the  dream-the "uttermost" of them all. In the final irony of the book, Eugene Utter  and Martha take  up together  and  Poseidon  becomes "the  busiest creature  in all of Alberta" in the new industry  of PMU   (pregnant mare's  urine)  used in the production  of oral contraceptives.  The  creation  myth concludes not with a bang but a whinny.
In tracing  Kroetsch's  progress from fable to fabulation  certain conflicts appear.
They  are  embodied-and there  is some self-mockery here-in  the  person of Demeter  Proudfoot. The  observer sitting  in  his bath  is surely derived  from the famous example  of Diogenes the Cynic, who took up residence in a Tub  best to display  his contempt   for  luxury  and  the sensual  world.  For  Kroetsch's  priapic heroes  are  seen  (after   he  broke  the  mirror  of Hornyak)   as essentially absurd questers  compelled  by  the  sensual  itch  yet  denied  the  consummation   they  so passionately wish. For  all the  energy and  joy of Kroetsch's  fictional  world, it is realized  by a  mind  which  distrusts  its own compulsions. As the name  Demeter suggests, furthermore, the goddess of fertility and  growth  becomes, in The Stud­ horse  Man, the  cause  of  Hazard's death   and,   by  extension,  the  reducer  of Poseidon's myth  to prophylactic  technology. It is a "cynical" conclusion.


E. J. PRATT:
Rationalist Technician



Frank Davey





LITTLE  HAS BEEN WRITIEN about  E. J. Pratt's handling  of language   and   poetic  form.  His  early  reviewers  and   critics   (Brown,   Pierce, Norwood, and  Collin)  noted mainly his "vivid rhetoric", "surge and swing", "muscular  lines", "energy  and clamour",  plus the epic point of view of his narra­ tive poems. Later critics (Sutherland, Dudek, Sharman, Frye, Buitenhuis, Smith)  have  become overwhelmingly  preoccupied with  the  thematic  implications of his work. Even  Frye's  recent  comments on Pratt's  use of the  epic  mode  have  been directed  more toward  explaining  certain limitations in the intellectual  content  of the poetry than toward illuminating  its craft.1
Only  A.  J. M.  Smith   has  attempted   any  detailed  examination   of  Pratt's
imagery.  Although  he  too is more  concerned  with  implication  or  content  than with  technique,  his few  technical  comments  are  illuminating. At  one  point  he tells us, "The qualities  of the writing are speed, tautness, objectivity,  and sharp­ ness."2 At  another,  "This  is the  poetry of wit."3  As most students  of  Canadian poetry  know, wit,  objectivity,  tautness  are all qualities  Smith  has sought  in  his own  poetry. Smith  has, of course, found similar  qualities  in  the  work of many poets he admires.  Nevertheless, in Pratt's  case I believe he is  extremely close to the  truth.  In  fact,  I suggest  that  Pratt's  concepts of poetic  form  and  language are  precisely of  that  rationalist  kind  most familiar  to  Canadian readers  in  the
work of A. J. M. Smith.
An examination  of Pratt's work reveals that  he shares Smith's  concept  of the poet as a detached,  dispassionate observer, that  he believes in the myth of poetic objectivity. He appears  to view the universe as rationally ordered,  and  to see the poet's task as consciously imparting a similar order  to the creative  work. Above all, Pratt,  like Smith,  can  be seen to stand  outside  rather  than  inside his poetic materials, shaping  them  through  sensibility and  intelligence, rationally confront­ ing "problems" of convention, language, and form.

E.  J.PRA'IT



Pratt's shorter poems  readily   betray   these  beliefs. They   are  nearly   all  fitted smoothly  into  received  verse patterns. The  point  of view is that  of the  essayist or commentator.

The snarl Neanderthal is worn Close to the smiling Aryan lips. The civil polish of the horn
Gleams from our praying finger tips. ("From  Stone to Steel")

Let the mind rest awhile, lower the eyes, Relieve the spirit of its Faustian clamour: An atom holds more secrets than the skies,
Be patient  with the earth and do not cram her

With seed beyond the wisdom of her soil. ("The Good Earth")

There is little  sense  of  subjectivity in  them,  even  when  the  pronouns "I"  and "my" replace  the  usual  "we" and  "our". The  pronouncements are  made as ones of fact rather than feeling.

His [ death's] medieval grace is gone­ Gone with the flame of the capitals
And the leisure turn of the thumb
Leafing the manuscripts.
("Come  Away Death")

A  number of  these  "essay" poems  are  made  to  appear "poetic" through orna­
mentation with imagery and  metaphor.

Where do you bank such fires as can transmute
This granite-fact intransigence of life, Such proud irenic faith as can refute
The  upstart logic of this world of strife - ("The Mystic")

The  imagery  here  is not  endemic to the  thought; it is applied arbitrarily by an authoritarian  craftsman deliberately forging   a  specific  effect.  In  some  "essay" poems, such  as "The Baritone", a portrait of Adolf Hitler, Pratt creates  elaborate analogies which  provide  a synthetic interpretive framework for the  burden of the work.  The result  is clearly   a  poetry  of  the  performing intelligence, of  wit;  it presents  what   is  technically propaganda-subjectivity masquerading as objec­ tivity.

66

E.J.PRAIT



He ascended the rostrum after the fashion of the Caesars: His arm, a baton raised oblique,
Answering the salute of the thunder, Imposed a silence on the Square.
For three hours
A wind-theme swept his laryngeal reeds, Pounded on the diaphragm  of a microphone, Entered,  veered, ran round a coil,
Emerged, to storm the passes of the ether,
Until, impinging on a hundred  million ear-drums,
It grew into the fugue of Europe.

Such   decorative  and   argumentative use  of  metaphor also  becomes  one  of  the principal devices of the long narratives.
A few of these short  poems achieve the economy, the impersonality, and the fascination with   pattern of  Smith himself-notably  "The Shark", "The Drag Irons", and  "Frost" -although in most of them lapses into conventional abstrac­ tions  and  rhetorical syntax  give  a  most  uneconomical appearance.  Nevertheless, even  these  lapses  betray   a  form  of  rationalism. The   rhetoric is  another sort  of received  form,  the superimposing of an intellectualized structure on  reality  in the faith  that  such  a structure will fit. The  abstractions show a mind convinced of the objective reality  of classification  and  generalization, a belief  very important to a poet  who  also  writes  epic  narratives. In  the  epic  such  formulaic classification  ("Hector of the  shining  helm") and  abstraction ("eorlic  ellen") allow  for quick identification by the  poet  and  instant  recognition by the reader, so that  both  can pursue  the  narrative line without interruption by anything like literary ambiguity. In   Pratt's  early  lyrics  they  suggest  only  a  sentimental  belief  in  a  regularized
universe.

Here the tides flow,

... with a lusty stroke of life

That  they might run
Within the sluices of men's hearts, Leap under throb of pulse and nerve, And teach the sea's strong voice
To learn the harmonies of new floods, The  peal of cataract.
("Newfoundland")

Beneath   the  facade of  cliche,  metaphor, and  rhetoric  are  certain   large  assump-

E.J.PRA'IT



tions:  that  life is struggle  ("lusty  stroke"), that  man is mechanical  ("the sluices of men's  hearts"), that  the  universe is possessed of increasing  order  ("to  learn the harmonies of new floods") .



l:E FACT THAT many  of Pratt's  "lyrics"  are  actually  short narrative  poems again  points out his rationalist stance. There  are two approaches possible in the narrative: the subjective, in which the narrator can be within the story (The  Seafarer, The Rime of the  Ancient  Mariner, or in prose Richardson's archtypical  Pamela) or the objective, in which he is excluded from it  (Beowulf, The   Rape   of Lucrece, The Rape  of the  Lock, or  Fielding's equally  archtypical Tom ]ones) . Of  all of Pratt's  narratives  only "The  Iron  Door" is of the former type,  and  even  in  it  Pratt  casts himself as a  passive observer  and  focusses the narration  on what  happens  before him rather  than on what happens  within him. The  remainder  of Pratt's narratives  are of the objective kind,  that  in which the writer  stands  apart  from  his materials  and  in  which  he aspires toward  Smith's ideals  of  impersonality   and   detachment. These  narratives,   like  all  of  Pratt's shorter  poetry, have very little explicit emotional  content. There  are no intimate relationships  between  characters,   just  as  there  are  no  expressions of  intimate emotion in the lyrics. These characters  are viewed from a distance, given identity only by their  roles in  the  plot-a  hero dog, an anonymous life-saver, a recalci­ trant  "truant". All become generic-the dog standing for its "breed", the truant for mankind.
It is not  surprising  that  when  attempting  longer  poems Pratt  turned  to the epic mode. In  longer  poetry the epic is the natural  correlative to the impersonal lyric. The  epic poet is totally detached  from the story he is telling. He deals with it  from  a  god-like  stance-impersonally, making  little  attempt   to involve  the reader  emotionally  with its characters.  The  plot of the poem  (comparable to the "pattern" of the lyric)  is more important than  its characters. The  latter,  in fact, are  usually kept from  having any large personal significance by a studied  avoid­ ance  of psychological verisimilitude  in their  characterizations. They  are  viewed externally,   superficially,  and   identified   usually  by  formulaic,  synecdochic,  or metonymic  tags  ("Apollo  of the silver bow";  "Diomede  of the great  war cry"). Or  they  are  characterized by  their  birth  and  genealogy, the  process involving that essential of rationalism, deductive logic.
In  the  epic, the  myth  of objectivity  which  possesses the impersonal  lyricist is
joined  by the  myth  of omniscience:  the  poet must appear  to know the story in

68

E.J.PRATT



its  absolute  form.  The  poet  becomes an  authority,  responsible for  his culture's history and  obligated  to maintain  at least a pose of infallibility. The  epic world is orderly  and  one-dimensional;   it  is conscious of  few enigmas  about  its own character. It  is rationalist  to the  point of believing that  men are identifiable  by tags and  banners,  that  there  is only one story implied  by any  one  event,  and, above all, that  this story is knowable  by man.  The  fact  that  the  most that  any so-called "objective" writer  can  achieve is subjectivity in the guise of objectivity is simply overlooked.
Two of Pratt's  first three long narrative  poems are mock-epic  ("The  Witches'
Brew" and  "The Great  Feud"); the third  ("The Cachalot") has a number  of mock-epic elements. The  mock-epic is even further  removed from objective reality than  the epic itself. As in the epic, its conventions are fixed and  dominant, and bear  no  necessary relationship  to the actual  materials  of the  poem,  but  outside the conventions the  poet is free to manipulate  the materials into whatever shape best serves his personal and  formal  conceptions. The  form  requires no material, historical, or  psychological realities. It is witty, fanciful,  wilful, and  synthetic.  It possesses a reality fabricated  in the human mind as opposed to a reality discovered in the circumstantial world. Described phenomenologically, the mock-epic offers a forged consciousness.
In  each  case  Pratt   presents  reportorially  scenes no  human  could  observe - "The  Great  Feud" is set in the Pleiocene; "The  Witches' Brew" and "The Cacha­ lot" are set for the most part  underwater.  The  reportorial  mode is total.  Despite "The Great Feud" being subtitled "A Dream of a Pleiocene Armageddon", neither
it  nor  its companions  contain  any suggestion of authentic  dream  consciousness. The  octosyllabics are terse, direct, and mechanically rhythmic. The  point of view is clearly objective.

And thus it was throughout the whole
Sea-range of the Australian zone The fear of racial doom was thrown Heavily upon the piscine soul.
A futile anger like a curse
Only made confusion worse.
{"The Great Feud")
The imagery of these poems is the imagery of the inventive intelligence: The bellows of his lungs might sail
A herring-skiff -such was the gale
Along the wind-pipe; and so large

6g

E.J.PRATT



The lymph-flow of his active liver One might believe a fair-sized barge Could navigate along the river;
("The Cachalot")

As long as Pratt  is dealing with mythological creatures and arbitrary  plots, and a  deliberately  superficial  poetic  mode,  his  manipulativeness  can  be  delighting despite the resultant  inconsequentiality. But in the documentary  narratives  Pratt's synthesizing  habits  are  more  troublesome.  Their  subjects  are  historical  events; their  agents  are  individual  human  beings with separate  and  complex  identities which cannot be summed up in a deft image or a clever analogy.
Pratt  appears  to  have  done  considerable  research on  the  events of all these
documentary  narratives.   Carl   Klinck  tells  of  Pratt's   sailing  on  a  Canadian destroyer  in  preparation  for  writing  Behind  the  Log.4     A  number  of  sources, including  Klinck  and  Dorothy  Livesay,5   report  his spending  at least several days aboard  the  United  States  Lines'  Roosevelt  before beginning The  Roosevelt  and the  Antinoe.  Klinck  remarks  that  "he  examined,  with the technique  of a detec­ tive, every deck, every log and  barometric  reading,  and  every person  available where the liner docked in New York."6  Brebeuf and his Brethren is based on the thirty-volume  jesuit  Relations;  Towards  the Last Spike on  newspaper  and other records of the  CPR's  construction.  In  all this research  Pratt seems to have been prepossessed with  the  material  and  technical  aspects  of  his subjects.  Northrop  Frye recounts :
In search of a monosyllable that would convey the hardness of rock, he ransacked a department  of geology until he extracted the word "schist." While he was work­ ing on Behind the  Log, anyone in a naval unifonn he met would be backed into a corner and  forced to reveal what he knew (or, more frequently, did not know) about the anatomy of a ship.7

Pratt  shows no corresponding interest in non-quantifiable  or non-factual informa­ tion. The  only  reality  which interests  him is the  knowable one -that  of miles, tonnage,  names,  quotations, that  which can  be weighed, cited, documented, or otherwise  rationalized.  There  is no mystery or ambiguity  in these documentary narratives.  "This strangely  reasonable  poet,"  as Klinck  terms  him, 8  writes as if personality can be summarized  in a few phrases, moral qualities in a genealogical metaphor,  motivation  in a single analogy. His research into his characters  appears  to stop on the  threshold-with, in the case of  Captain Smith  of the Titanic, a list  of  ships  commanded,  misadventures  encountered,   and  commands   issued. Material reality is assumed to contain, if not be, the whole.

E.J.PRATT



The  Titanic  and  Towards  the  Last Spike  are  excellent  examples  of  Pratt's rationalist  method in action. In each case the point of view is that of the detached, omniscient  observer. In The  Titanic  he ranges throughout  and  around  the ship, seeing the birth of the iceberg, knowing the contents of the ship's hold, overhear­ ing conversations in the saloon,  witnessing physical combat  in the gymnasium,  a poker game in a lounge, the officers' activities on the bridge. In Towards the Last Spike he pretends to oversee Parliament, the construction sites, John  A. Macdon­  ald's thoughts, William Van Horne's dreams. The poet's private responses to these various events are concealed. In actual fact the majority of these events have been fabricated   by  the  poet  and   passed  off  as  actual.  Klinck's  account   of  Pratt's "reasoning  concerning  the  poker game in The Titanic"9    makes clear the shrewd calculations  involved in such a fabricating process. Pratt's  rule seems to be that if an event is not totally knowable  (and no event is), one must fake total knowledge. The  existence of ignorance,  ambiguity, or mystery is not to be admitted.
In both works Pratt's  diction reinforces the overwhelming tone of confidence established  by  the  omniscient  point  of  view. The  standard  Pratt   theme  that nothing  need be impossible to reasoning man is paralleled by an implicit assump­ tion that  nothing  need be impossible to the careful poet. He can appear to know his subject  absolutely.  Research  can  give his diction  two  certainties:  concrete detail  and  numerical  exactitude. Invention  can give it a  third: dogmatic  meta­ phor.  The  poet who can  witness every event on a ship sinking  ten  years in the past is thus also one who need only declare a modifier or announce a metaphor  to  have  these become arbitrarily, through  his own  authority,  "true". This  bold­ ness of diction,  metaphor, and  analogy was suitable to the  crafted  gaiety of the mock-epics,  and   inspired   his  early  critics  to  those  comments   about   "infinite gusto",  "boisterous  writing",  "energy  and  clamour."  But in later  poems such as Towards  the Last Spike, where  the reader  can  use his own  experience  of literal reality as a partial  check on the fitness of  the poet's figures, this temerity can lead to the inappropriate impression of extravagance and whimsy.
The  most obvious characteristic of the diction of both these poems is that  it is overwhelmingly   specific-an  important   quality  for  a   poet  in   creating   the impression that  he is totally  in  control of the substance of his narrative. Pratt's research has been scrupulous in gathering together the physical trappings of his subject:  the Titanic's "tungsten chandeliers", "Chinese lanterns", "columned smoke",  "burnished tile", "fiddleys",  "bunkers", and  "boiler  rooms";  the CPR's origin  in  "rolling   mills  and   the  saws  that  shaped   "poles  and   sleepers",  its prairie  roadbed  of "black  alluvial  mould",  its "shovel gangs",  "spiking  gangs",

E.J.PRATT



"fish plates",  and  "double  jacks". Where his research could not have sufficed, he has  synthesized  details  and   presented  them  as document.  In  The   Titanic   the wrestling holds and boxing blows demonstrated in the gymnasium  ("Russian Hammerlock", "Polish  scissors", "German crotch",  "left  hook",  "right  uppercut which  Jeffries  took  from  Johnson")  are  probably  of this  kind;  the  numerous passages of dialogue undoubtedly are. In Towards  the Last Spike the thoughts attributed to George  Stephen,  the  passage telling of Van  Home's scraping  at  a frosty window  with  his jackknife, the passage in which Macdonald seizes a tele­ scope,  and  the  passage  beginning  "Van  Home  took off j His  Coat"  appear  of dubious authenticity. A historian could probably find many more.
The  second important characteristic of Pratt's  diction in these poems is that  it
is consistently enumerating-again a characteristic  which helps the poet toward a tone of confidence and  knowledgeability. We are told that  the Titanic's funnels have  "thirty  feet  of bore",  that  her  length  is "from  gudgeon  to the stem nine hundred  feet",  that  her  engineering  staff number  "thirty-five", that  her captain has "thirty  years of service",  that  she has "seven decks of steel",  "three  electric lifts", that  her tonnage  is "sixty thousand  tons of sheer flotation", "fifty thousand gross". Just before the collision, Pratt writes,
The ocean sinuous, half-past eleven; A silence broken only by the seven
Bells and the look-out calls, the log-book showing
Knots forty-five within two hours....
When the ship is sinking, we are told that number three boat, with "sixty-five capacity", is launched   with  only  twenty-four  aboard,  that  number   one,  "her space is forty",  is launched  with  only twelve, that  number  ten is launched  with a "load  of sixty" who collectively weigh "four  tons" and  takes "sixty seconds of descent" from davits to water.
In  Towards  the Last Spike  Pratt  uses diction of a similar numerical  specificity.
Dollars, miles, the duration of speeches, the length of work shifts, the age of rocks, the  thickness  of  strata   are   all  given  precise  quantity   or  measure.  Although Macdonald, Van  Home,  Smith,  and Stephen, the major figures of the poem, are cast  as  romantic   visionaries  who  make  their  dreams  dominate   the  obstinate weights  and  dimensions  of  material  reality,  it  is  to a  large  extent  by  relying himself on these weights and  measures that  Pratt  attempts  to make both dream and  dreamer  tangible  to  his  readers.  Thus  Macdonald  and  his fellow railway builders  appear   to  succeed  despite  measurable  reality;  Pratt   as  poet  succeeds because of it.

E.J.PRATT



Even  when  attempting to characterize these dreamers directly,  Pratt resorts  to a  rationalizing technique:  metaphor-which is the  third  and  most  outstanding characteristic of  his  diction. Metaphor in  Pratt's work  tends  to  be  a  restricting device.  The subject  of the  metaphor is compared to a term  or set of terms  either less complex than   the  subject  itself, or  possessing a  complexity irrelevant  to the subject. The effect  is  to  simplify  or  rationalize the  subject, to  make  it  appear definable  and   comprehensible  when  it  has  been  neither   defined   nor  compre­ hended. The subject is presented as if "dealt with" when  in fact  its own  particu­ larity and  individuality have been totally avoided.
The most  striking  example of  Pratt's  presenting metaphoric whimsy  in  the
guise of historic  understanding is the well-known  "oatmeal" passage  of Towards the Last Spike-one of several  metaphors by which  the  poet  pretends to under­ stand  his CPR dreamers.

Oatmeal was in their blood and in their names. Thrift was the title of their catechism.
It governed all things but their mess of porridge Which, when it struck the hydrochloric acid With treacle and skim-milk, became a mash. Entering  the duodenum, it broke up
Into amino acids: 	then the liver
Took on its natural  job as carpenter: Foreheads grew into cliffs, jaws into juts. The meal, so changed, engaged the follicles:
Eyebrows came out as gorse, the beards as thistles, And the chest-hair  the fell of Grampian rams.
It stretched and vulcanized the human span: Nonagenarians  worked and thrived upon it. Out of such chemistry run through by genes,
The food released its fearsome racial products:­ The power to strike a bargain like a foe,
To win an argument  upon a burr,
Invest the language with a Bannockburn, Culloden or the warnings of Lochiel, Weave loyalties and rivalries in tartans, Present for the amazement of the world Kilts and the civilized barbaric Fling,
And pipes which, when they acted on the mash,
Fermented  Lullabies to Scots wha hae.

Critics  may  delight  in  the  wit  of such  a  passage,  yet it  remains despite  all  its


73

E. J.PRATT



intrinsic qualities a  sentimental and  spurious  treatment of its subject. Elsewhere Macdonald is metaphorically portrayed as the  merchant wooer of British  Colum­ bia,  which  is in tum portrayed as an aging  maiden. Van  Home is usually painted as  a  military   conqueror,  although also  variously   compared  to  a  bobcat, Paul  Bunyan,  and   the   Flying   Dutchman.  Donald  Smith   is  compared  to  "Moses, Marco-Polo, Paracelsus," in addition to being characterized as

A Scot with smoke of peat fire on his breath - Smith?	Yes: 	but christened Donald  Alexander And loined through  issue from the Grants and Stuarts.

All such  metaphorical and  genealogical characterizations are merely  referential to the  reality  of the  man  characterized. They  substitute a rational concept in the place  of that  more  difficult  thing,  actuality. The characterizations of The Titanic are similarly  oversimplified by the use of metaphor. The  various  financiers aboard are  summed up  as  "Gray-templed Caesars  of  the  world's  Exchange". A  young boy who surrenders his place in a lifeboat is said to pile

The  inches on his stature as he gave
Place to a Magyar woman and her child.
The  immigrants aboard are  given  a particularly prejudicial image  by Pratt's use of metaphor:

In steerage-seven hundred  immigrants!
Smith thought of panic clutching at their throats, And feared that Balkan scramble for the boats.

In  each  case the  subject  has been  unfairly  treated; the metaphor has said  far less than  needed  to be said while pretending to say all.

ALL oF  THESE  CASES of characterizing metaphor can  be loosely grouped with  a larger  species of metaphor in Pratt: interpretive metaphor.
In  the  narrative poems such  metaphor is Pratt's usual  way of dealing  with  diffi­
cult  aspects  of actuality. We  find  such  a metaphor at  the beginning of Brebeuf:

The winds of God were blowing over France,

The air was charged with song beyond the range Of larks, with wings beyond the stretch of eagles. Skylines unknown to maps broke from the mists And there was laughter on the seas.

74

E.J.PRATT



Here  the  simplifying  images  of  soaring  nature  enable  Pratt   to  avoid  dealing directly  with  the  potentially  troublesome topic of religious inspiration. Towards the  Last  Spike  contains  the  most spectacular  such  metaphor in  his work:  the reptile  image  he gives to the  Laurentian  Shield.  Pratt  appears  to become more fascinated  with this metaphor than  he is with the actual  building of the railroad. As a result the reader  is shown very little of this part  of the railroad's construc­ tion.  Instead  he reads of a  reptile sleeping, folding, curling,  drowsing,  and  stir­ ring;  reads of its "rock  and  mineral mattress", its "spotty carboniferous  hair",  its "scales", its "drowsing coils", its "higher vertebrae", its "deep layers and arteries",  its "table-clothes  of sphagnum moss", its "counterpane of leather-leaf  and slime". Most important, he never does see this section of the railroad  completed, or learn how  Van  Home  overcomes  the  final barrier  of  muskeg. The  metaphor causes Pratt  to evade the  literal  building.  Despite his usual show of numbers  and  par­ ticulars-shovels, pick-axes, black powder, abutments,  trestles, "three  engines", "seven tracks" -he  has in fact substituted  an interpretive  rationalization in the place of the actual event. The struggle between the lizard and man may be Pratt's interpretation of the event, but  it is not, as Pratt  pretends, objectively the event. The event was both the metaphor and much more.
What  is typical of this metaphor  is that  it is tangential  to actuality.  It  repre­ sents a movement  by the  poet away from the matter  of the poem  (which  would have its own rigid requirements) toward an intellectual fabrication which can be almost  as arbitrary  as the  poet  wills. It  imposes on the  matter  of  the  poem  an interpretation preconceived  by the poet which may or may not be a property  of that  matter.  Pratt  is thus  enabled  to create  his own Van  Horne,  his own  Mac­ donald,  or  his own  Captain Smith  under  the cover of  presenting historical fact. Further,  the non-metaphoric aspects of his diction, its enumerating and specifying qualities,  as well as  providing  the  poet  with  a  non-mysterious  and  intelligible working surface, serve to mask his metaphoric caprices with a veneer of factuality.
Metaphor is such a ubiquitous  property of Pratt's  diction  that  throughout his work it appears  as an entrenched writing habit. Many of these metaphors  are of the casual or colloquial sort that  one is hardly aware of when writing or reading.

Water was swirling up the slanted floor
Around the chair and sucking at his feet.
(The Titanic)

More developed kinds appear  as habitual means in Pratt  for avoiding the delinea­
tion of human  personality. Military metaphors are especially frequent.  Passengers


75

E.J.PRATI



on  the  Titanic  are  said  to  rally  from  flight  "as  if  [stiffened  by]  the  rattle  of a drum." Her  diners  mass  before  the  saloon  "like  storm  troops  before  a  citadel." In  Towards the Last Spike almost  every participant is characterized at some time in military  terms.

But here this was a theme less vulnerable
To fire, Macdonald thought, to Blake's gunfire, And yet....

Here he [Van  Horne] could clap the future on the shoulder
And order Fate about as his lieutenant....

The men were fighting foes which had themselves
Waged elemental  civil war....

Into this scrimmage came the fighting men....

. . . their weapons were their hands And backs, pickaxes, shovels, hammers, drills, And dynamite....

Still  other   metaphors appear  to  be  attempts to  make  physical   reality  more colourful   and  interesting than it  might  otherwise  appear. The reptile  metaphor for the  Laurentian Shield  certainly appears touched  by this motive.  In  the follow­ ing  passage in which  Macdonald reflects on the task of building the CPR, several metaphors appear chiefly decorative:

But this would be a longer tug
Of war which needed for his team thick wrists
And calloused fingers, heavy heels to dig
Into the earth  and hold-men with hull's beef Upon their ribs. 	Had he himself the wind, The anchor-waist to peg at the rope's end?
'Twas  had  [sic] enough to have these questions hit
The waking mind:	'twas much worse when he dozed; For goblins had a way of pinching him,
Slapping a nightmare on to dwindling snoozes.

Occasionally Pratt's fondness  for such decoration causes the metaphors to become badly  mixed. Here  the  Titanic's  adversary iceberg  is transmogrified from  calf, to ship, to island within  six lines.
Calved from a glacier near Godhaven coast, It left the fiord from the sea-a host
Of white flotillas gathering in its wake,
And joined by fragments from a Behring floe,

E.J.PRATT


Had circumnavigated it to make
It centre of an archipelago.

Later  a Titanic distress rocket is an arrow, a spire, and a parasol within three.

An arrow of fire,
A fourth sped toward the sky, its bursting spire
Topping the foremast like a parasol
With fringe of fuschia, ...

In  these instances  Pratt's  inventiveness  has overreached  itself. Had  he confined himself  to  perceptual   responses  to  actuality,   no  such  confusion   could   have occurred.   Instead,   by  responding   intellectually,   he  departs   from   actuality's inherent   order,  and  enters  the  separate  world  of  human  invention -a  world which is not only separate and arbitrary  but fallible.
I believe it unquestionable  that  throughout  his career, in both lyrics and narra­ tives, Pratt  was an impersonal,  manipulative,  synthesizing, rationalist  craftsman.  He  is certainly  not  an  anomaly  in  Canadian poetry, and  not,  as  Earle  Birney once suggested, "old-fashioned".10   He is squarely in the  cosmopolitan-tradition­ alist stream  of A. J.  M.  Smith,  Robert  Finch,  P. K. Page,  James  Reaney,  Jay Macpherson, and Eli Mandel -a stream guarded since the fifties by the criticism of Northrop  Frye. It should be seen as no accident that among  the most enthusi­ astic of Pratt's  later commentators have been Reaney, Smith,  and  Frye. Reaney's defence  of Pratt's  narrative  methods  is a simple statement  of a  poet's authority  and  license -"The  poet ... can  take  imaginative leaps that  the  historian  does not have to take." "The  poet is allowed a view of another  reality." 11 Of course a poet can  do these things, but  not, as Pratt  does, in order to pass such leaps and views off as objective  fact.  Later,  Reaney  praises Pratt  for  "purposeful distor­ tionsm2 of  history, for  exaggerating  it  "sky high"/ 3   for  creating  scenes  which "ring   true  poetically".14    All  these  are  praises of  the  fabricating consciousness which  superimposes its own structure  on reality and  decorates  that  reality  with synthesized effects.
There  is, it should  be noted,  a  remarkable  congruity  between  Pratt's themes
and  his techniques. As I  have argued  in an earlier article,15   he is throughout his work an apologist for the  Pelagian view of man-that  view in  which mankind can,  by social co-operation,  discipline, vigilance, the application of reason,  and the suppression of individualism,  overcome any difficulty. That is, corporate man can  be the  rationalist  craftsman  of his own destiny. In  his writing  Pratt  adopts the point of view of the impersonal spokesman for mankind, adopts group values,

77

E. J.PRATT



and   writes  social  epics.  He   represses  overt  statements of  individual  sensibility, masking  these  as objective statements of fact.  In  technique he  regards  his mate­ rials as impersonally as the  Pelagian regards  the universe -as things  to be speci­ fied,  counted, or  altered as  the  intellect  requires.  As a  result,  more  so  than  the work  of any  other  Canadian poet,  Pratt's poetry  becomes  dedicated to the cele­ bration of  human  ingenuity and   craftsmanship. Its  themes   honour  rationalist hopes,  its  form   exemplifies   rationalist  methodologies. Even   its  limitations are faithful to the character of the Pelagian/humanist dream.

NOTES

1 "Silence in the Sea," in David G. Pitt  (ed.),  E.]. Pratt (Toronto: Ryerson, 1969), pp. 124-138.
2     "Some  Poems  of  E.  J. Pratt: Aspects of  Imagery  and  Theme," in  Pitt  ( ed.),
E.]. Pratt, p. 142.
3   P. 148.
4   Henry  W. Wells and  Carl  F. Klinck, Edwin]. Pratt  (Toronto: Ryerson, 1947),
p. 52·
5    "The Documentary Poem:  A Canadian Genre,"  in  Eli  Mandel   ( ed.), Contexts
of Canadian  Criticism  (Chicago: University of Chicago  Press, 1971),  p. 278.
6    Edwin]. Pratt, p. 52.
7     "Editor's Introduction," The  Collected  Poems of  E.  ]. Pratt, 2nd ed.  (Toronto:
Macmillan,  1958), pp. xvi-xvii.
8    Edwin]. Pratt, p. 52.
9    P. 46.
10  "E. J. Pratt  and  his Critics,"  in A. J. M. Smith  (ed.),  Masks of Poetry (Toronto:
McClelland  and Stewart,  1962) , p. 94·
11   "Towards the  Last  Spike:   the  Treatment of a Western  Subject," in  Pitt  ( ed.),
E.]. Pratt, p. 76.
12  P. 78.
1a   P. 77·
14  P. 79·
15  "E. J. Pratt: Apostle of Corporate Man,"  Canadian  Literature  43 ( 1970), 54-66.


review articles




CLOSING DOORS

Audrry Thomas


coNsTANCE BERESFORD-HOWE, The Book  of Eve. Macmillan. MARIAN ENGEL,  Monodramas. Anansi, $7-95·


WHEN   NORA slammed the door on her doll's house she was young, beautiful and  presumably in good health. Not that  it wasn't  a courageous gesture­ it was, it was. But  one sensed  that  what­  ever  she  decided   to  do she  would  prob­  ably  be all  right.  (And  her  husband was well  and  prosperous; there   were  maids, and  the  faithful old  nanny  to look  after Nora's   doll-children,  just    as   she   had always  done.)
In   contrast,  we  meet   the  heroine   of
The  Book of Eve after  she has closed the door.  ("On the stairs  came his thin  voice,
'Eva!' I  closed  the  front   door  on  it.") The  novel is told in the past  tense-Eva remembers   both  actions   that   led  up  to, and  actions  that  came  as  a  consequence of,  her  sudden   decision   to  drop   out  of marriage  and   the  middle-class.  This   in itself is interesting (I have always wanted to  know  what   happened  to  Nora),  but what  makes  Eva's  departure really aston­ ishing is that  she is sixty-six years old, has just   received   her   first   old-age   pension cheque,  and  has a bedridden and  (seem­ ingly)   helpless  husband who  is  crippled  by arthritis. In this case the husband takes the  place  of Nora's children, but  there  is no kind  old  nanny  to carry  on  when  the
 
heroine  so suddenly and  categorically opts for  life  over  mere  existence. In  the  few hectic  moments she devotes  to  her  pack­ ing,   Eva   is  very   clear-eyed   about  the comic aspects of her romantic flight.
What  I  packed  first    (the  whole   thing took    only    ten    minutes)   was    Wuthering Heights and  a poetry anthology from  my bedside shelf; but  I didn't forget the  grosser animal   and    also    took    along  my    blood­ pressure  pills,  glasses,  hairbrush and  warm old-woman underpants.
Is  this  possible?  Would  a  middle-class ageing   lady   really   do  such   a  thing,   or doing,  make a succes of it-as Eva even­ tually  does.  (As  Marian  Engel's heroine remarks  in  another context, "the  impor­ tant   thing  is willing suspension  of  disbe­ lief.")   Ten  years ago  it  might  have  been really difficult to believe in Eva. It's  easier now-we're coming  to  accept  and  wel­ come  the women  with  long, grey or grey­ ing,  un-permed hair,  often  un-made-up, in  trousers   and   without  those  "founda­ tion"   garments  so  essential   to  our   own mothers' sense  of   propriety. Sixty-six  is pretty   late,  it's  true,   but   nevertheless  a possible improbability. And  for Eva  what  lies ahead cannot be worse than  what  lay behind.
It would   have   been   different if my   life

79

REVIEW  ARTICLES



before  Bert   got  arthritis  had   been  full  of colour  and  interest  and  the  richness  of love and  loving. But if you don't mind my saying so [she's  composing  a letter  to God]  I got a damn   small  share  of  those  things,  so small that   coming   up   to  my  seventieth  year   I couldn't help  feeling  both  cheated  and panicky.

Guilt   she   does   not   feel   (maybe   the older   you  are   the  less guilty   you  would feel about making such  a decision?) and she tackles her new life with "a quite objective interest in  what  would  happen next."
What happens is that  the way down  (a basement suite in the poor section of Montreal) proves to be the way up. Eva, alone  for  the  first  time  in  years, explores old loves and  griefs  in  the  nighttime and scavenges   for   bits   and   pieces   she   can pawn  during the  day.  She  becomes  very ill and she has to fight her own deep depression   (we  can  never  slam  the  door on  ourselves)    as  well  as  the   Montreal winter. The book is brave  and  comic, and there  are some good vignettes  of the other misfits  whom  she  meets  at  the  boarding house.  (And  a  very  nice  scene  with  her chic-hip  favourite  grandchild  who   has been  "slumming"  in  a  pawnshop. The very   young   are   embarrassed  when   the elderly  break  out  of their  moulds. "Like, Gran, aren't you  wondering now  sort  of who  you are?" "Like no,"  I said  coldly.)
What I didn't like about the  book was its  happy   ending. Not  that   Eva  doesn't have a right  to be happy. And she doesn't go  back   home,   a   sadder    but   a   wiser woman, like  the  awful   heroine of Doris Lessing's  much   publicized   but  in  many ways  much   inferior new  novel.  But  she does  find  a  boy  friend, a  lover,  superb cook and  refugee.  I guess  I  really  would have liked to see her end  up making it on her  own,  as a shining example to all  the

8o
 rest  of  us "sisters",  maybe.  Johnny  Hor­ vath   just  misses being  a  stock  character (broken  English  but has read Goethe, has the   "European   sensuousness"   or   what  James   might   call   "appreciation") .  He teaches  Eva  how  to  really  live -and  to laugh. It's rather too pat.  Never  mind­ it's a book worth  reading. Men  won't  like it   very  much (notice that beautiful actresses  always play Nora)   but  that's all right  too.  There will  be more  and  more novels  of  this  sort  as  women,   even  old women,  examine and  reject  the roles they have  been  conditioned to  receive  grate­ fully, like heirloom  silver, from society.

Do you realize, I wonder  [she says in her letter  to God], what submerged identities women  like  me  can  have?   How  repressed and  suppressed  we  are  by  a  life  that   can give  no  kind  of  self-expression? ... To  live locked  up.  Never  spontaneous. Never  inde­ pendent. Never free, even  to use  those four­ letter  words we all  know,  because  the  chief duty   of  females,  we  were   taught,  was  to practice   the   restraints   of   civilization,   not explore  its possibilities.

M onodromos is also a quest  novel, in a way, and  as literature  is perhaps superior to  The  Book  of Eve.  But  then   I  am  a sucker   for   exotica,   and   when   Marian Engel  starts  one of her "lists": "Lemons, fat-rinded oranges,  bay on the branch (Daphnis), tomato paste on paper squares, Jerusalem artichokes, purple French artichokes, onions,  potatoes,  car­ rots, tin toys, frozen octopus  from Greece, dead  hanging sheep  on  hooks,  rice  pud­  dings,  Indian custard like  rosewater  jun­ ket, Armenian pancakes spread  with meat and sumach ... cheese  pies,   pumpkin pies,  and   curled  sheets  of  dried  apricot paste  that   look  like  sheets  of  fly poison put  out  in  summer  in  a  pie plate; water jars with vestigial penises and  breasts, pin­  headed   penny  banks   like  the  Venus   of

REVIEW ARTICLES



Willendorf   with   the  slot  in  the   wrong place-and  so on and  so on and  so on,"
I am  completely hooked.  And  yet that  is one  thing   that   disturbed  me  about  this novel;   the   place    [Cyprus]  is  so  much more   interesting  than    the   people   Ms. Engel   chooses   to  write   about.  Maybe, after  Durrell, it's  pretty difficult  to write about   that  section  of  the  world.  Where are Justine, Pombal, Scobie, Nessim, Pursewarden? There is no one  character in  M onodromos strong   enough   to  carry the  weight  of the  power  of the  island  it­ self.  The   heroine,   Audrey,   is  thirty-six,  Canadian, and  living in London, working  for a sort of import-export private investi­ gating  firm  when  she  has  word  that  her estranged  husband   Laddie is  in  trouble and  needs her to come  to his rescue. This reversal  of male/female roles is very nice, by   the   way,   until   we   learn    (I)   that Laddie never  sent  the  wire  and   ( 2)  that Laddie is an  ageing  homosexual. She leaves  the  damp of  London and  her ail­ ing   lover   Max   and   goes  not  really   to Laddie's rescue but  to sun  and  a change  of scene. "You  say you go for the weather or  to  see the  landscape,"  she  says, "but  without people you do not survive."
As luck will have  it, she meets a whole crew  of  interesting people,  but  they  are not really very interesting to the reader. Laddie,  who  is  desperately  missing  his titled  lover  Eddie   (who  has  in  turn  run off  with  a  new  lover  and   left  a  pile  of debts  behind) can't stand  the sight of his ex-wife  whom  he  passes off  as his sister. The  relationship between  the  two is very well done. All the old anger  and humilia­ tion is there  in Audrey's relationship with Laddie. They  throw up old failures  in one another's faces;  they  want   to  hurt   and they do.
When  Audrey  finally  takes  a  summer
 lover   (the   father  of  one   of  his  piano pupils)    Laddie is  delighted. Mr.   "X.", well-to-do,   with   a  wife  in  Switzerland, would like Audrey  to meet  the wife when she returns, though of course once this happens they cannot be lovers  any more. Very  sophisticated  stuff,   and   a  far  cry from  Eastern Canada. Audrey  herself knows this -her innocence is dangerous. Towards the end  of the  book she says:

I crawl   back   to  bed  feeling hollow,  hol­ low,   hollow. I  have   been   insolent   in   my innocence, I think. I have  shaken a  hand I ought to  have   kissed.   I have  fussed  about with   the  surface of  things. I  have   behaved badly.  I have  been  wrong. That has  nothing to do with  anything.
There is nothing to  understand. There is no  understanding.

Still this is a beautiful book. With  the heroine one explores the round town, the beaches,  the  personalities of  the  inhabi­ tants   and   of   the   expatriates   who   live there.  The  history  of the  island  is told  in a series of asides  (to  the audience and  to Max)   and  reading them  makes one want  to  go  there:  the   heat,  the   beauty,  the great  mix  of races  and  religions.  Yet  the
heroine   herself   remains  only  an   eye - albeit  an  educated  eye.  We  really  don't care   very  much   what   happens  to  her. She   is  a  sort   of  personification  of  the CANADIAN  CONSCIOUSNESS.  The  old,  old world  defeats  her  and  she  returns to the more familiar world  of Britain when  "for
a  long   time   I  haunt olive   merchants, speaking  to them  in  borrowed words."
One  reviewer  said  M onodromos was a "travel book",  and  this is absolutely  right. Cyprus  lives  and   breathes and  takes  on depth through the  heroine's observations. It's a brilliant book and one I highly recommend.  Yet   at   a   human  level   it failed  to  engage   me  as  its  inferior, The Book of Eve, did.

81

REVIEW ARTICLES


ORIGINAL PEOPLE

Douglas  Barbour


PETER  sucH, riverrun. Clarke, Irwin. $5·95·
RUDY WIEBE,  The Temptations of Big  Bear.  McClelland & Stewart. $8.g5.


IT'S A PRETTY  GOOD YEAR that brings  us  not  one,  but  two  good  fictions about  this country's original people.  This has been a good year.
I  agree  with  Stephen Scobie's  sugges­
tion  in Maclean's, that  riverrun is a kind of  lyric  counterpoint  to  Big  Bear's   epic music.  Like  Wiebe,  Such  uses  the  avail­ able  historical   documents  with  great  in­ sight   and   empathy. His  sweepingly   im­ pressionistic  presentation  of the  last  Beo­ thuks   is  successful   on   the   whole,   and deeply  moving  towards the end.  Such  has been  accused  of  overwriting in  riverrun, but   I   feel  his   lyric  intensity  hauls   the reader    into   his   characters'  minds   and mores,  their  special  vision  of  the  world they move through. It is a deeply religious vision,  and  Such's   accomplishment is to make  that  vision  come  alive  in  his prose. riverrun  details   the  complete destruc­ tion of a people from  the inside. Through­ out,  the pain  of the ending is implicit,  yet
when  it comes it is tragically intense.

Soon   I  alone will   be  left   to   carry  the burden   of   the    People's   presence   in   the People's forests.   What shall   I say  when   the trees  and   waters ask  me?   Where have   you lost   them, Shawnadithit?  Where  have   you lost  your  People? ...

I'll sing  you  a  song  of your  People. Of  how you  were  a  beautiful woman of  the  People, and    how    you    bore    two    daughters  who became  the   last   of   the   People,  how   you were  the  mother of one  daughter especially, Shawnadithit, who  was  left  behind with  no one  to  sing  for  her  at  the  hour   of  her  own death  who  went  unremembered, the  last  of the   People   in   the   whole   high   land   of  the
 
long  lakes  and  speaking  rivers   that run   to the  sea  forever,  bearing  no  longer  the  liv­ ing   People    through  the    frogback   rapids, bearing only  the   dead leaves  of  the  woods in  autumn.

It is riverrun's  achievement that  it is that song  of  remembering Shawnadithit longed  for so despairingly. Such  useless singing  is so often  what  makes  art.
The  Temptations of Big Bear does for
his People what Such's remembering does for  the  Beothuks,  and  more,  much  more. Rudy   Wiebe's   first   three    novels   were good, but  Big Bear represents a quantum jump  beyond  their  achievements. He  has created  in the Plains  Cree chief, Big Bear, a character who is truly  alien  to most of his readers,  and  yet he has simultaneously built   up   such   a  complete  and   massive vision of this man's  perceptions, we are drawn  into full acceptance of his point  of view. Wiebe's achievement here is to con­ vince  us  that   the  white   man's  view  of things   is  strange   and   somehow   wrong, and   that   the  Indian's  perception  is  the truer  one.
Rudy  Wiebe tells us in a note that  "No name of any person,  place,  or thing ... in this novel has been invented." It has been built on a factual  base. Yet he adds that "Despite that,  and  despite  the  historicity of dates  and  events,  all characters in this meditation upon  the  past  are  products of a particular imagination"; for Big Bear is a true fiction, a literary creation; yet a "meditation upon  the  past" is the best definition    of   this   work   that    could   be

REVIEW ARTICLES



given.  Takmg us with him, he enters, through  his  prose   exploration  of   past events  and  experiences, the  very  texture of  the  lives of his characters, Indian and white.  Moreover, he, the meditator, is always  there,  hovering  over  his creation/ re-creation of a lost world, mediating between  our world and it, occasionally offering  philosophical insights  concerning the  few artifacts from  it which  have sur­ vived    (a   photograph  of  Big   Bear,  for example), and  how they affect  him,  how he  perceives  and  experiences  them.  Yet the level of meditation is but one of many layers  in  this richly  textured  palimpsest.
For  this is an exciting  and  arresting narrative, gripping in its violence  and passion. As we follow Big Bear in his attempts, first to preserve  the  freedom  of his People,  then  just  to preserve  them  in peace  as  the  whites  inevitably take  over the  land   he  loves,  the  land  of  which  he says, "Who can receive land?  From  whom would he receive it?", and, finally, in his doomed  attempts to prevent  the young braves  from  going  to useless war,  we are brought to understand just how profound this  "savage's" comprehension of human nature is.
The novel  is not  told  from  Big Bear's
point  of view alone,  however: Wiebe  has created a whole gallery  of substantial and fascinating  characters,  each    of   whom "tells" some part  of the story. As a result, the  range  of  events  which  is covered  in this  novel  is presented in  all  its complex variety. Various whites,  as  well  as  other Indians, are  viewpoint  characters  in  dif­ ferent    sections,   and   each   is   presented with  great   empathy and  understanding. Slowly   but   surely   Wiebe   builds   up   a complex, kaleidoscopic vision of the whole period  the  novel covers, a completely felt
 and minutely  registered versiOn of the prairies  at that  period.
Big Bear talks occasionally of the power of words, and  he speaks  as a man  of  wis­ dom and  power.  Rudy Wiebe knows  that power;  and  recognizes a correlative power as  well,  that  of  voice:  on  one  level  this novel  is  concerned   with  the   relative human validity  of  different voices. This  is why  he  makes   us   "listen"  to  so  many characters   "talking,"  each   one   with   a different voice.
Many of these voices are granted their own   set-pieces,   small   tales   within    the larger   narrative,  necessary   tiles   in   the grand   mosaic  of  the  whole   book.  John
1-fcDougal, missionary, Edgar Dewdney, Department  of  Indian  Affairs,   the  sar­ donically   reasonable "Canadian   Volun­ teer",  all  tell  their  stories  in  unique  per­ sonal  idioms.  As well,  there  are  the  sec­ tions presented from  the points  of view of Big Bear's  sons, or from  that  of the  vital and  intelligent young  woman, Kitty  Mc­ Lean,   who   learns   more   than   she   may realize  from  her  contact with  Big  Bear. Another major  set-piece  is the  terrifying kaleidoscope  of  many  voices which  is the Frog  Lake  massacre.
Towering over  all  these  voices,  how­ ever,   is  Big  Bear's   awesome,   oracular presence.  Whether it's  his speeches  to the other  chiefs,  his  ruminative participation in the last  buffalo hunt, or  the incredibly moving  funeral song  for  his  second  son, Twin  Wolverine, counterpointed,  in  one of  the  most  technically daring scenes  in the  book,   to  the   passionate  colloquy between his son and daughter-in-law, Kingbird and  Sits Green  On  The Earth, concerning the  parenthood of an  about­ to-be-born   child,  Big Bear's  voice  is the resonant  centre   about  which  the  whole narrative turns.  Wiebe has created a style

8g

REVffiW ARTICLES



for  this  incredible voice  that   fully  wins our  belief  in its greatness and  power.
Nevertheless, a  number of Eastern  re­ viewers  have  attacked Wiebe's  "style" in this  novel.  It should   have  been  further edited, says one;  it  is too  difficult   to  no purpose, says  another.  But,  the  style  is both  the man  and  the book and  its mean­  ing is all that the words say. Maria Camp­ bell  has  suggested   that   if  one  accepted the   Indian  belief   in   spirits,   then   one would   have   to  believe   that   Big  Bear's spirit  spoke through Wiebe when he wrote the book. I take this as the highest  tribute she could  pay to an author who has articulated the whole spectrum of Indian life and  faith,  their  sense of their  place in the   universe.   Wiebe   has   granted  us  a
 vision  of  our  own  past  that   tells  us  not only  where   we  have   come  from   but   a great  deal  about  where  we are  now.
I don't think  we can  ask much  more of a novel than  that  it create for  us a world which  is so achingly  real  it  becomes  our world   while  we  read.   Big  Bear's   voice always speaks that  world,  a world  of difference elsewhere  in which  we may perhaps see  ourselves  anew   even  as  we see, perhaps for  the first time,  the  People as they must have been. The Temptations of Big Bear is a richly human, mythic, religious work. Those  readers who pass it by will be the  poorer  for  their  act,  for  it is a book that  will enlarge and  enrich  the imaginative lives of all who  read  it.




THE PINNACLE OF PERIL
 


B. Rajan


A.   s. P.  WOODHOUSE, The   Heavenly  Muse.  A  Preface  to  Milton. Edited  by  Hugh
MacCallum. University  of Toronto  Press.


A.  S. P. WOODHOUSE'S   influ­ ence  as  a  scholar   and  educationist  does not   need   to  be   underlined  in  Canada. There can  scarcely  be a Canadian school of  consequence in  English that   does  not owe something to the  Woodhouse legacy. As a  publishing scholar, however,  Wood­ house  seems  to  have   shared  with  other  Canadians a  reluctance to  commit him­  self  to  the   cold   performance  of   print.  The  result   was  that   The  Poet  and  his Faith,  published in 1965-the year after  his death, has  been  the  only  book  so far to stand  in his  name.  It is a slender  book which  gives little  indication of the quality  of a mind distinguished in its judgements by  weightiness,  deliberative force and  a remarkably full  and   fully-shaped  know-
 
ledge of the seventeenth-century theologi­
cal  and  political  background. Woodhouse's deepest  commitment was
to  Milton   and  ten  years  after   his  death
that    commitment  is   represented  by   a book  dexterously   edited   by  Hugh   Mac­ Callum  from   published  papers,   revised versions of published  papers  and  material in  manuscript. The  H eauenly  Muse  can be  regarded as  the  advanced  draft of  a book  that   was  never  completed  and   as some of it is more  than a generation old it  is naturally not  always  abreast of  the current state  of  scholarship and  current enthusiasms in  interpretation.
Woodhouse  described himself  as a  fol­ lower  of  the  historical method at  a  time when   the   New   Criticism  was   at   the

REVIEW ARTICLES



height   of  its  influence. The   view  of  the poem  as a self-sustaining language object standing apart from  history  is not  really a view which  New  Critics  would  endorse but it serves to define an extreme to be avoided. In  a different way the mythic approach can  excuse  itself  from   history and    Woodhouse  was   no   lover   of   the mythic approach. The  intermediate area can  comprise   the  history  of  ideas,  theo­ logical,  political and  literary  history, bio­ literary criticism, ceuvre criticism, and  the scrutiny  of mind,  milieu  and  moment as they  come  to  fruition in  the work  of art.  All  these  possibilities   are  authorized  by Woodhouse and   together they  constitute the  territory where  most  schools  of  Eng­ lish  discover  their  raison d'etre.
Milton   of  course  is  the  right   kind  of
author  to  reward   a   traditional  scholar amply    endowed.  The   Heavenly   Muse exhibits  several  of  the  results  of  this  en­ dowment;  but   it   also  sets  itself   apart from  other scholarly  books on  Milton by being  possibly  the  first  book  since  Till­  yard's  Milton   (1930)  to  cover  the  entire  range    of    Milton's   poetry   and    prose. (Books  on  Milton  which  are  written as part   of  a  series  on   "standard  authors" are  not  covered  by this conjecture). The  splendid   isolation  of  Woodhouse's  book is a  melancholy comment on the progress of specialization. But his overall  approach does  not  have  all  the  consequences one hopes  for  from  it.  Though "the   bearing of one  poem   (or  prose  work)   upon  an­ other" is  specifically   announced   among  Woodhouses' concerns, there  is  relatively little   exploration  here   of  the   interrela­ tionships   not  simply  of   concern,  but  of structure, imagery, decor  and  tactics  that subsist   between   Milton's   major   poems. The    crises   of   choice,   the   cumulative definition    of   man's   responsibility  and
 freedom   through  varied   settings,  differ­ ent  agents,  and   the  creative  use  of  the genre  as a style of insight  are  not  matters that  interest   Woodhouse greatly,  at  any rate  at  this stage.
Among   the  responsibilities of  the  his­
torical  critic  is "to   detect  the  character and  direction, the  pattern as  it  were,  of the poet's  development" and  "to  fit the undated  poems  into   this  pattern". The first essay in Woodhouse's book sees the "pattern" in Milton's early  poetry  as beginning with  a  tentative  commitment to sacred  poetry in the Nativity  Ode, pro­ ceeding  through a subsequent  vacillation between  the  secular   and   the  sacred   and culminating in a final commitment to the sacred   of  which  "How soon  hath Time
..." is  the   record.   The  more   diffident hero of W. R.  Parker's biography, is in contrast  to  this  Milton   firmly  aware of his  destiny,  "smit" early  with  "the  love of sacred song". Both  "patterns" have evidence  to support them  and  both  affect the  dating of certain problem   pieces, notably Ad Patrem. The chronological exercise may not be capable of yielding definitive results as we learn from  the controversy  over  the dating of Samson Agonistes (in which  Woodhouse takes a position    between    the    contending   fac­ tions). Perhaps more  important  than  this caution  is  the   point   that   while   "How soon  hath   Time   ..."  may  be  a  decisive event   in  Milton's  inward   biography  as Woodhouse  reads  it,  it  is  not   the  most important of  the  early  poems  as  litera­ ture. As an  imaginative  achievement, as an  entrance  into   the  world   of  Milton's poetry  and  as an  early  rehearsal of struc­ tures  and  strategies  which  the  later  work was  to  explore,  it  is  The   Nativity   Ode which merits  a degree  of attention which it  is  not here  accorded.

REVIEW ARTICLES



Among   the  more   important offices of a historical critic is to recover "forgotten assumptions  and   expectations,  aesthetic or intellectual", which  bear upon our understanding  of  a  poem.   "The   Argu­ ment  of  Milton's Comus", which  Wood­  house  published   in  1941,  and   which   is perhaps  the  essay  which  established  his reputation as a Milton critic,  is concerned with    an    "assumption"    which    Wood­  house found  crucial to the  understanding of  both  Spenser  and   Milton. This  is the relationship between  the  realms  of nature and  grace,  a relationship of continuity in the  pre-lapsarian world  but  one  which  in the post-lapsarian world can range from discontinuity to sheer incompatibility, depending  on   the   view   taken    of   the damage  done   by  the  Fall.   We  can   see another version  of this relationship in the distinction between  the orders of nature, mind   and  charity,  developed by  Pascal. A twentieth century version  put  forward by T. E. Hulme, was found  influential by Eliot  among  others.
The    chapter  on    "Comus"  in   The
Heavenly  Muse    is  based   on   the   two articles   which   Woodhouse  published  on the   Ludlow  masque.  Its   terms   of   dis­ course    remain    important  in   any   full understanding of  the  poem.  Nevertheless it  is in  the  chapters on  Milton's political thought  and   on   Milton's  theology   that  Woodhouse's   talents    are   seen   at   their best.  His  remarkable knowledge  of  tract  literature and  his capacity to cut  through the   proliferations of controversy to the principles   which     however     confusedly, were  at  stake,   join  with  a  readiness  for incisive judgements all the more striking because   they  are   so  fully  informed. In particular,  he   notes   that    "liberty  and order-an order  at once rational and moral-are  the   twin   poles  of  Milton's

86
 thinking." Indeed  liberty  as  Milton  con­ ceives  it  "may   be  not  inadequately  de­ fined as order  self-imposed   from within." But  if  the  individual is  to  be  free  from the   "circumscription  of  strict   laws"   to work out  the consequences of the  "better covenant" written   in  his heart, the  state must  stand  aside from  all that  appertains to his inward  life. Milton's main  concern is that   the  state  should  stand   aside  and his sense of the  regenerate individual's relationship with  it seems dominantly defensive.   This   is  why  Woodhouse can say  that   Milton   "knew   nothing  of  the great  democratic experience, the  experi­ ence of trying  to persuade your fellows to be wise, and  when  you  fail,  of  acquiesc­ ing in  their  unwisdom  until  you  can  per­ suade   them." On   Milton's  "contemptu­ ous dismissal of the  will of  the  majority" when  it  appears to  endanger the  rights  of   the   elect,   Woodhouse  can   be   even more   crushing:   "he   acquiesced   in   the principle which is the negation of all democracy  and  destroys  it  at   the   root: the  principle of  might   till  right  is ready, the belief that  you can establish  justice presently   by  one   more   act   of  injustice now."
The Sonnet,  according to Wordsworth, became  a trumpet in Milton's hands,  but the  trumpet of  his prose, as Milton  him­ self  recognised,  sounded   notes  that  were "dolorous" and  "jarring". In  the  cooler element  of  poetry  with  his  singing  robes about  him,  the  range  of  Milton's under­ standing  can   be  more   spacious.   When  the quarrel is with  the  self and  not  with others   it  is easier  to  ascertain  what   the quarrel really  meant.  Paradise  Lost  must ask   not   only   why   the   revolution  was betrayed   but  whether  all  revolutions are fated  to be betrayed. A revolution is not a rebellion but many  rebellions  call them-

REVIEW ARTICLES



selves revolutions. To  learn  the  lessons of history  and  to ensure  that  New  Presbyter is not Old  Priest  writ  large  we must  learn of rebellion  in its history  and  its anatomy.
There is a sense in which  Paradise Lost
can   be  regarded  as  a  huge   preface   to history  so that  the  last  two  books are  not simply its end  but  its climax,  the  purpose of   its   educational   effort.    Woodhouse might  not  have  been  unprepared to look at  the  poem  in  this  way  but  this  is not the  treatment which   survives.   What   we have  is a relatively  brief exposition  of the theme  and   pattern of  the  epic  followed by  a  more  ample   consideration  of  how the  pattern is elaborated. It  may  be said at   the  outset   that   Woodhouse's   under­ standing of what  he  calls  structural pat­  tern   is  predominantly  generic   and   that the   genre   is   predominantly  classical­ Virgil  and  Homer are   the  only  models considered.  Milton's main   innovation in taking  over  these models  seems  to be the devising  of  a  double  protagonist, Christ­  Adam.  The  result  is that  one  protagonist can  function in an  epic  and  the  other  in a   tragic   perspective  and   that   the   true heroism  of  the  superior  protagonist  can be  defined   against   the  false  heroism  of the antagonist (Satan)  and  the imperfect heroism 	of	the 	inferior    protagonist. These   observations  have   their   place   in our   understanding  of  the  poem   but  its structural pattern is not  really  accounted for  via  the  double  protagonist or  via the four  areas  of  action   which   Milton  sub­ stitutes   for   Virgil's  two.   In   inheriting structures which  are  more  than  generic, the  poem   relates   them   to  characteristic structures of  its own  and  it  is the  inter­ play  thus  achieved   which  constitutes the poem's  form  or  more  correctly its  world. Since  the  concerns  of   the  poem  are  de­ fined  by  the  world  in  which   those  con-
 cems are engaged  it can be said that  the structure  is   the   issue,   or    (to   borrow Eliot's  phrase)   that  the detail of the  pat­ tern  is movement. These  possibilities are not  taken  up  by  Woodhouse and  it is not clear  that  he  would  have  been  interested in  them.
In  the  chapter on  Paradise   Regained the   recovery   of  "forgotten  assumptions and  expectations" could   have   been  car­ ried  further. It  is  true  that   for  Milton's contemporaries "the  first   temptation  to distrust," was  "balanced  by  the  third   to presumption, the  extreme  of  defect   bal­ anced   by  the   extreme   of   excess."   But when   Paradise   Regained   is  read   inno­  cently  rather  than   historically, the  scene on the pinnacle is anything but a tempta­ tion  to  presumption. The  innocent read­  ing happens to be right.  The pinnacle in Paradise   Regained    is  a   place   of  peril. For   Milton's  contemporaries  it   was   a place  offering  an  entirely  adequate  foot­ hold  from  which  one  could  retreat  to  a flat  roof  and   then   descend  modestly   by the  staircase,   having  refused  to  perform an   unnecessary   miracle. One  needs   the additional "assumption" of  what  the pin­  nacle   was,  to  define   the   full   scope   of Milton's innovative  treatment, an  inno­  vativeness  now obscured  precisely  because the  climax  "belongs" so decisively  to  the poem,  as  the  fullfillment of  its  evolving logic.
In commenting on The Heavenly Muse
the  critic  should  be aware   that  the  book is less than  complete and  that  even  if it were, no scholar would have both the equipment and  the  temperament  needed to explore the variety of approaches demanded   by   Milton's   work.    Wood­ house's  main  strengths lay  in  knowledge  of  the  background  and   the  inheritance, a  well-proportioned  power  of  exposition

REVIEW ARTICLES



and    a   firm   grasp   of   main    principles. These   virtues   are   apparent  in   a   book which    satisfyingly   reflects   Woodhouse's
 teaching both  in what  it contains and  in the way in which it has been  put  together by its editor.




THE PRAIRIE  OBSERVED
 


Henry Kreisel


LAURENCE  Rrcou,  Vertical Man/Horizontal World: Man  and  Landscape in  Cana­
dian   Prairie  Fiction.   University   of  British   Columbia   Press.   $8.oo   hardcover,
$4.50  paper.
DONALD   o.   STEPHENS (editor),  Writers   of  the   Prairies.  University   of   British
Columbia Press. $5.50,  paper.


THE  THREE prairie  provinces are among the most sparsely-populated regions of Canada. Even  today,  the popu­ lation   of  Manitoba,  Saskatchewan, and  Alberta   combined   is   only   about  three  and   a  half  million.  Yet this  region   has, almost   from   the  beginning of  its  settle­  ment,   impressed   itself   on   the   literary imagination. It provided a  vast  and  dis­ tinctive stage  on  which   the  destinies of the  men   and   women   who  settled   there  played  themselves  out. And if  the societies that   were  created  lacked  sophistication, they  nevertheless had  a kind of elemental grandeur.  Even  when  they  were  restric­  tive   and   narrow,   they  seemed   to   call forth,  as  in  Sinclair  Ross'  work,   or  in Martha   Ostenso's,  a   passionate,  indeed heroic, response.
Even  a  partial roll-call   of  the  writers who  have  lived on  the  prairies, and  have observed  and  written about life there,  is impressive: Ralph Connor, Philip  Grove, Robert Kroetsch, Margaret Laurence, W.
0. Mitchell,  Martha   Ostenso,  Sinclair Ross, Gabrielle Roy, Robert Stead, Adele Wiseman, Rudy  Wiebe.  There are  of course   many   others,   but   these   are   the writers   whose  work  forms   the   principal body    for   critical  examination  in   two books  recently   published by  the  Univer-

88
 
sity  of  British  Columbia  Press:   Writers of the  Prairies, a volume  of essays edited by  Donald  G.   Stephens,  and    Vertical Man/Horizontal World: Man  and  Land­ scape  in  Prairie  Fiction   by   Laurence Ricou.
Taken together, these  two books  made it possible to claim  that  the  writers of the prairies   have  created  the  most  compre­ hensive  and  most  distinctive  body  of fic­ tion  in Canadian literature.
Although  there   is,  almost   inevitably,
some  overlap   in  the  materials,  the  two books  are  quite   different  in  conception and  execution. In a number of instances, Mr. Ricou refers to articles reprinted by Stephens,  and   indeed   pursues   and develops ideas that  are only sketchily out­ lined  by  some  of  the  critics  included in the  Stephens anthology. In  this sense the two  books complement  each  other.
Mr. Ricou's book is the first sustained examination of  a  clearly  definable  body of an  important regional   literature  since E.  A. McCourt's The  Canadian  West  in Fiction appeared in  1949, nearly  a quar­ ter  of  a  century   ago.   McCourt's   book was  a  most valuable  contribution to  our understanding of a  region  that   is gener­  ally  badly  understood  (or   perceived  in simplistic   cliches)    by   the   majority  of

REVIEW ARTICLES



Canadian intellectuals. But  much  has happened, since  McCourt wrote,  to raise the  level of literary analysis  in Canadian criticism,   and   Ricou's sophisticated  me­ thodology   reflects  this  development.
Ricou's  central achievement is that  he
has taken a metaphor ("vertical man, horizontal world"), and  has attempted to exploit    its   possibilities    to    the    fullest extent. Clearly,  by concentrating on  this one  controlling metaphor, some  breadth of vision is sacrificed.  But  what  is gained is a  sharply  focussed  analysis  in  depth.
Mr.  Ricou  isolates  certain pivotal  ap­
proaches, and  then  organizes his  discus­ sion  around  them.  Thus  he  illuminates the   way  in   which   the   prairie  may   be observed,   from   "the  benign   prairie" of Robert Stead,  to the "implacable prairie" of  Grove,   and   the  "eternal  prairie" of W. 0. Mitchell. The  method works  and provides  important insights.
A critic using Mr. Ricou's methodology runs  some  risks. There is the  temptation to stretch the  material that  is to be examined in  order   to  make  it  fit  a  pre­ conceived  thesis, to  devise  a  scheme and then   to  search  for  the  appropriate ma­ terial  to serve the scheme.  Mr.  Ricou  has avoided  that  temptation. He  has allowed the  material  to  shape   the  thesis  and  to demonstrate  that   the   controlling  meta­  phor  is  both  valid  and   illuminating.  Of particular interest  is  his  treatment, in  a long  introduction, of  the  writings  of the early visitors and explorers  of the prairie region, for their spontaneous and  often artless comments  reinforce the organic nature of  Mr. Ricou's controlling metaphor.
Above  all,  Mr.   Ricou   is  aware that setting   alone   "does   not   fundamentally alter  the  theme  of fiction," which,  as he says, must  ultimately be  concerned  with
 "man's consideration of  his  own  nature in  the  universe." What  he  does  show  is that  "the   landscape, and   man's   relation to it, is the concrete situation with  which the  prairie artist   initiates his  re-creation of  the  human experience."
In  certain  respects,  Donald  Stephens' introduction  to   Writers  of  the   Prairies would  have  served  better as a  preface to Ricou's   book  than  to  his  own,   for  the "combination of  landscape and   climatic environment [that]  determines the whole range  of  themes  in  the  literature of  the prairies,"  to  quote   from   Mr.   Stephens' introduction, fits Mr. Ricou's scheme,  but does  not  really  encompass the  range   of critical  articles  in the  Stephens collection of  essays. For  one  thing,   though all  the essays deal  with   writers of  the  prairies, they  don't all  deal   with   the   prames  as such. Thus,  Roy   Daniells' fine   essay "Glengarry  Revisited"  is   a   perceptive study  of  Ralph  Connor's Ontario  back­ ground, and   beyond   that, of  the  tradi­ tions   of  the   Scottish   Highlanders   em­ bodied  in Connor's heroes; Frank Birbal­  singh,  writing   on  "Grove  and   Existen­ tialism", argues  that  Grove's preoccupa­ tions, in spite  of  the  setting of his novels, are  primarily  European.  Helene Rosen­  thal goes out of her way to abstract Adele Wiseman's  novel  The Sacrifice   from  its specific setting  in Winnipeg; and  Morton Ross'  essay on  Kroetsch examines styles of  perception rather  than   landscape and environment.
Stephens also  claims   too  much   when he   asserts   that    "the  literature  of   the prairies  makes peculiar demands on the critic,   forcing   him   to   involve   himself more  directly   than   usual  with  the  crea­ tive  process  of  the  artist   at  work," and  that   "rather  than   remaining  objective, the  critic   must  become   part   of  a  land-

Sg

REVIEW ARTICLES



scape  that  is both  fictional  and  real." In fact,   most  of  the  essays,  such   as  A.  T. Elder's essay on Stead, W. H.  New's essay on  Mitchell, and  Sandra Djwa's essay on Ross,  are  cool  and  objective  assessments of  the  writers  whose  work  they  analyse.
There was  a  time  when  it  used  to  be said that  Canadian literature could  not withstand analysis  that  used sophisticated critical methodology. If this  myth   needs further  exploding, both   the   Ricou   and the   Stephens  books   provide  more   am­ munition. What  the  Stephens  collection
 makes very manifest  is how much we are indebted  to  George   Woodcock  and   to this  journal,  in which  most  of the  essays first  appeared.  For   it  is  to  Woodcock's credit   that   he  was  one   of  the   first  to realize  that  such  writers as  Connor and Stead,   long   neglected,  had   still   some­ thing  to  say  to  us, and  encouraged and  commissioned   literary  scholars   to  write  about   them.   And  Woodcock  knew  also that   our   literature  was  sturdy   enough, and  rooted  enough,  so that  it  would  not be  blown  away  by critical winds.




VIVRE EN CE PAYS
 


Max Dorsinville


MARCEL DUBE,  Textes et  Documents.  Lerneac.
---,De l'Autre Cote du  Mur. Lerneac.
---, Le  Temps des  Lilas. Lerneac.
JACQUES GODBOUT et PIERRE  TURGEON,  L'Jnterview. Lerneac.
ANTONINE  MAILLET, Les  Crasseux. Lerneac.
---, La  Sagouine.  Lerneac.


]'imagine  qu'ecrivant au  gre de  la  contingence des  etres  et  des  choses le critique ne saurait rendre compte de realites   autres que  celles  exprimees par des   correspondances   pen;ues    par    une
sensibilite  sienne  et  autre a la  fois,  eta­
blies au  contact d'oeuvres et  de moments
privilegies.  Tant est-il  que  l'ecrivain, comme  le critique et autres hommes habi­ tant  un meme  espace et vivant  une meme temporalite,  se  reconnaissent   dans   une cristallisation  degagee   de  toute  emprise  etrangere a celle d'un air  du  temps  vecu dans   de  communes   frontieres.  Aussi  le fait  du  hasard reunit  trois  auteurs d'alle­ geances  litteraires  diverses,  et dont  l'ecri­ ture   par  le  biais  de  la  comparaison lit­ teraire et  culturelle ressasse  le  destin  de
1'Amerique francophone.  Voila  que  par­
dela  les idiosyncrasies  un  levain  litteraire

go
 
quebecois   para!t  essouffie et  qu'un  vent fort,  gonfle de vitalite et  de sante,  souffle du  cote  de 1'Acadie.  L'historicite  impose et situe  le temps  de  l'ecrivain.
Ce sont les annees  cinquante: regne du duplessisme, de la "grande peur", des colleges  classiques,  des  horizons  bloques, des  murs  et  des  etats   de  siege  derriere lesquels  des  energies   jeunes   et  enthou­ siastes se meurent d'inanition  quand elles ne  se  contentent  de   reves   par   ailleurs jamais  rejoints  au   jour  du  reel.  C'est  le monde  de Marcel  Dube cerne  dans  toute son   exactitude  et   son   etendue  des  ses premieres pieces  en  I 950-53.  Ce  monde  d'infinie  tristesse,  peuple   d'ecorches  vifs aux  noms divers, aux  constantes sures du reve  trahi,  des  impuissances et  des com­ promissions,   a   l'unite  de   la   vision  du
monde  propre  a Dube  et a la generation

REVIEW ARTICLES



Iitteraire precedente des Saint-Denys Gar­ neau   et  des  Anne   Hebert:  la  nostalgie  des  jeux  innocents de  l'enfance se dispu­  tant   a la  douleur du  quotidien  de  l'age  adulte. Textes  et  Documents, recueil  de prefaces  de  pieces, de  poemes  inedits,  de
nouvelles  et d'une piece radiophonique, permet de suivre  Ia demarche de la sensi­ bilite   dubeenne  de   I 95 I    a  I 973·  A  ce volume   essentiel   pour   les  chercheurs  et
chroniqueurs qui  auront a faire  l'exegese
de !'oeuvre complete du  premier grand dramaturge quebecois  s'ajoute De rAutre
Cote  du  Mur, anthologie de cinq  courtes pieces,  Ia  plupart  inedites. On   pourrait reprocher  a  l'editeur  d'avoir   Iitterale­ ment  mis .a sac des tiroirs  qu'il  eut,  dans certains cas,  mieux   valu  garder  fermes. Plusieurs  de  ces courtes  pieces   ( Rendez­
vous   du   Lendemain [I972],   Le   Pere Ideal   [I972]) me semblent etre des brouillons ou  des  textes  qui  furent  peut­ etre  refuses,  tandis  qu'une piece  telle que Les  Freres  Ennemis  (I 960) '  presentee a
Ia  television,   souligne   a  l'instar  de   De
L'Autre  Cote   du  Mur    ( I952)  Ia  cons­ tance  des  themes,  Ia recurrence  des per­ sonnages-types  et  !'emotion   indefectible de  DuM. Cette  derniere  piece   partage avec  Zone   (I 953)   et  Bal  Triste  (I 950, premiere piece  de  Dube, encore  inedite)
!'importance  de    poser    les   jalons    du monde  organique dubeen. L'auteur avoue dans   Ia  preface   de   l'anthologie  que  si "De  L'Autre Cote   du   Mur  ... n'etait qu'un projet  [cependant] je prends cons­
cience  tout  .a  coup  que  ce  n'etait qu'un
premier croquis, que Ia premiere rnaille d'une longue  chaine, lourde a porter cer­ tains  jours".  Le Temps des Lilas  (I958), ici  en  "edition  scolaire   pour  l'enseigne­ ment   du   fran ais
notee   par   Kelly   Ricard,  rappelle  com­
ment   chaque piece  marquante de  Dube
 est  un  microcosme renvoyant  inevitable­ ment  au macrocosme ou les Tarzan, Fred,  Romeo,    Joseph    Latour    correspondent structurellement aux  Ciboulette, Denise,  Florence,  Marguerite et autres visages de
!'adolescence ou de la  jeunesse  belle de generosite et d'amour malheureusement detruite.
Mais  c'est  un  monde clos  que  celui  de DuM,   monde   d'une  sensibilite jouxtant un  stade   historique ou  tout   au  Quebec etait  signe de refus,  parce que  le Quebec n'osait   pas  croire  en  lui-meme. De  plus en plus, il me semble que Ia critique exhaustive historique qui  se fera  de Dube s'attachera a demontrer comment Ia grande  tristesse   de   ce   dramaturge  fut celle de son pays subissant de profondes mutations  alors   meme    que   les   pater­ nalismes officiels, devant !'evidence crois­ sante  des  malaises  et  des defaites, main­ tenaient que  rien  ne  devait  changer au Quebec.
Pas de tristesse chez Godbout, certaine­ ment  pas dans le monde des patates frites et  des  hot  dogs  de  !'lie  Perrot de  Salut Galarneau    (I 967) ,   pas   dans   celui   de Couteau sur la Table   (I965)  habite par un  Quebecois errant,  mais   allegrement, dans    l'americanite   encerclee   dans    Ies etreintes  de  sa   blonde  maltresse  anglo­  saxonne.   Pas  de tristesse  non  plus  dans
!'Aquarium (I962),   premier roman   du jeune ecrivain depeche professeur de fran­
<_;ais   en  Ethiopie, et  retra<_;ant un  itine­ raire  a Ia  Hemingway ou  .a  Ia  Graham Greene;  c'est-a-dire  celui   d'un   homme
sur  d'habiter non  pas  un  mais  le monde
a Ia mesure de ses ambitions. Godbout est
son  propre  personnage,  image   pour image:  l'homme des annees soixante, Mcluhanien, ouvert  sur  Ie monde  et se voulant  degage  des emprises  d'une  tradi­ tion   lineaire,   Iivresque,   obsedee   par   Ie

gr

REVIEW ARTICLES



"cogito ergo  sum"; bref,  l'homme par excellence des mixed media. Poete, romancier, cineaste  et  dramaturge  puta­ tif si l'on  en  juge  par  L'Interview, piece radiophonique   ecrite    en    collaboration avec  Pierre  Turgeon,  Godbout c'est  tout cela.
Godbout poursuit dans  cette  piece,  qui est l'histoire d'un truand racontee sous forme  d'entrevue accordee a  un  jouma­ liste   de   la   radio,    certaines   demarches surtout d'ordre forme!amorcees dans son demier roman, D'Amour, P.Q. ( 1972). II s'agit  de  la  question du  langage et  de  la "litterarite". On  sait  que  D'Amour, P.Q. est structure par  une  dichotomie  linguis­ tique: d'une part  l'entreprise de creation romanesque  exprimee  dans   un  franc;ais universe!,  et  d'autre part le sabordage de l'entreprise  par    des   secretaires-dactylos chargees de  mettre  au  propre le  manus­ crit   et   qui   contestent  dans   le  langage joual de  la  generation des  CEGEPS les fondements  linguistiques de !'oeuvre. Le roman   se  termine par   la  conversion de
!'auteur,  d'Amour,  a   la   culture  de   la contestation  lors  d'une  entrevue   radio­ phonique ou  il va  jusqu'a renier  la vrai­  semblance de 1' ecriture dans  une  epoque dominee par  la  parole  electronique. On  voit  bien  comment  L'Interview recoupe deux    donnees   precises    du   roman:  le langage du   truand  est  la  parole   de  la classe  laborieuse de  l'est  montrealais; et dans son immediatete electronique elle se veut  expression   directe,  vivante, et  non "litteraire", de  cette   "realite  qui  est  la notre", dont   parle  souvent   Rene  Leves­ que,  cet  autre produit des  mixed  media.
Mais .a certains egards  le projet est anachronique,  ou   du   moins   problema­ tique,  lorsqu'on songe  aux  attitudes qui le sous-tendent. La sensibilite est celle du groupe de  Parti  Pris, en  ce qu'elle revele

92
 une  obsession de se rapprocher du  prole­ tariat   par   le  biais  du  langage  et  de  la thematique. Mais  Godbout  bute  sur  les meme   aretes   qui   mirent   un   frein   aux  exercices   des   Chamberland,  Maheu  et autres.  Lorsqu'une litterature se voulant proletarienne n'est  pas  issue d'une  sensi­ bilite  elle-meme   proletarienne,  d'un   mi­ lieu  vecu  et  senti   par  !'auteur   de  l'in­ terieur   (pensons   a   Michel    Tremblay) celle-ci  devient  un  exercice  litteraire qui s'il  ne  temoigne  pas  d'une certaine nos­ talgie   de  la   boue   bien   romantique  du moins   reftete  le  malaise  certain  d'ecri­ vains    d'origine   et    d'education   bour­ geoises, malaise  d'une classe sociale d'ail­ leurs,   a   la   recherche   de   valeurs   soi­ disant  authentiques.  L'histoire de  Chico  Tremblay, le truand,  gunman a la  petite  semaine  de  la  pegre  locale,  comme  celle de  Thomas   d'Amour,  sont   des  miroirs
reftetant   l'ambiguite  de   l'ecrivain  a  la
croisee  des  cultures du  college  classique
et  du  CEGEP, de  l'age   de  l'ecriture et des mass media, du  langage international et du joual montrealais, et meme d'Outremont et de la rue  Papineau. Le choix de reconcilier  les contraires par le melange    des   genres   est   peut-etre   ine­
vitable   a l'age  electronique, selon  God­
bout.   Mais   cela   donne   une   salade    (je pense   a  D'Amour,  P.Q.)    qui   deplait autant a Jean  Ethier-Blais, ecrivant dans
Le Devoir, qu'a  Claude Jasmin, ecrivant dans  Le Journal de Montreal. Du  moins c'est un exercice de style dans  le ton de la culture Pop qui ne cesse de fasciner God­ bout   depuis   quelque   temps,   lorsqu'on pense  a ses  longs  metrages,  Kid  Senti­
ment et IXE-13.
Mais  il y a la un  signe  d'essoufHement et une forme de decadence lorsqu'une litterature qui prend  son essor dans les annees  soixante   fonde   dans   une  decou-

REVIEW ARTICLES



verte  du  pays natal  et une reconnaissance de  l'homme inscrit  dans  la dune
que -dont  la symbiose est celebn!e  dans des romans et des recueils de poesie aussi puissants que Prochain Episode et Terre Quebec-a recours   a des  themes  et  a des sources  d'inspiration de partout et de nulle  part. Bien  sur,  la  culture Pop  que revendique Godbout ne connalt pas de frontieres. Elle  est  produite par  les gens qui  de  Paris  .a  Liverpool, de  San  Fran­ cisco a Ste-Pie-de-Bagot, se reconnaissent a leurs cheveux,  a leur musique et a leurs blue  jeans dans  cette  "solidaritude" dont parle  Charlebois.  A  cette  exception que Charlebois ou  Dylan  sait  que  les entrees se font  chez Barclay  ou Columbia et que les recettes  sont calculees  a la loupe  apres les spectacles  a guichets fermes a L'Olym­ pia ou au  Madison Square Garden.
La  est  le  merite des  "crasseux",  per­ sonnages  de la premiere piece d'Antonine Maillet, des  laisses  pour  compte histori­ ques,  mais  ayant   une  conscience   innee des   possedants  et   des   possedes   de   ce monde,  depuis  que  leur  petit  village  du fond   de  l'Acadie  est  separe   entre   gens d'En  Bas   et   gens   d'En  Haut.   Mais l'Acadie  c'est   plus.   Telle    qu'exprimee sous   la   plume   prolifique  de   Madame Maillet,   I'Acadie   c'est   Ia   sagesse  et  Ia conscience seculaires du  lieu  de  l'homme dans  un  temps  et  dans  un  espace  oublies ou violes par les autres  nord-americains, oublieux de leur propre histoire.  Les deux pieces,  Les  Crassev.x  (rg68)  et  La  Sa­ gouine    (I 97 2) ,    expriment    le    meme monde  d'Acadiens qui  s'ils ne  furent pas tous deportes en  Louisiane ne  connurent pas  un  meilleur  sort  pour  autant. Tenus a l'ecart du mouvement  de la modemite, ils surent   planter  des  racines   profondes,  et dans  leur silence seculaire fac;onner un folklore  et une identite qui  dans  !'oeuvre
 d'Antonine Maillet viennent bousculer certaines idees rec;ues et remettre en ques­ tion   le   role   que   Lesage    et   Levesque reservaient, il n'y a pas si  longtemps, aux minorites francophones  hors  du  Quebec dans   un   dessein   sentant   fort   le   colo­ nialisme.  Ces  Acadiens ne sont  pas  Que­ becois,  ni  Franco-Americains, ni Franco­ Ontariens, mais   bien  franchement  eux­ memes  avec  leur  langage dru,  truculent, archaique, juteux, leur  etrangete a l'egal  de  leur  coin  de  pays  qui  chez  plus  d'un Quebecois de  passage  seme  l'effroi.   Un  effroi   apparemment   provoque  par   des etendues inconnues, comme  perdues au bout   de  tout,   loin   des  lieux   rassurants qui  vus  de la-bas semblent etre des metropoles.
Le   Quebecois  de   passage    reconnait dans le paysage acadien le Quebec d'autrefois,  pre-urbain,   rural    et   tradi­ tionnel,  et n'aime pas ce souvenir. L'Aca­ die  pour  lui  c'est  la  defaite sinon  la sur­  vivance   menacee  de   partout;  c'est   la Nouvelle  Angleterre de l'exil  de plus d'un oncle  ou  d'une tante  parlant un  franc;ais bizarre. L'Acadie, c'est le Quebec d'avant la "Revolution  Tranquille", petit  pays et petit   peuple  exposes  a  l'etouffement  et subissant  la  hargne de  ceux  qui  s'appel­ lent  aujourd'hui Jones  tandis  qu'hier ils se   nommaient Gordon. L'archetype de I'Acadie  est present dans la memoire quebecoise  de plus en plus refoulee main­ tenant  que   le   reve   de   I'Amerique  est devenu   le  reve   quebecois,   cette   ameri­ canite  dont  revent  les  heros  de  Dube  et que  ceux  de  Godbout ont  fait  leur,  avec les  ambiguites   que   cela   suppose. Cette americanite qui  permet a Charlebois de constater  que   "Vivre  en   ce  pays   c'est comme  vivre aux  Etats-Unis" depuis  que "la  repression,  la  violence,  la  loi du  plus fort" sont devenues  un heritage commun.

9.1

REVIEW ARTICLES



Le  Quebecois n'aime pas  l'Acadie, car  il n'aime plus  son  passe.  Mais  l'Acadie  est
La   dans    !'oeuvre  d'Antonine   Maillet,
defiant de sa sante  un Quebec lance  dans une   course   folie   au   progres   a  la  Baie James, a l'aide des  I.T.T. et  des  super­
ports  pour  les supercargos de Monsieur Onassis,   ce  Quebec au  stade   du  Cons­ ciousness II dont  parle Charles Reich, sur et arrogant de lui-meme, mais sur la pente  de la decadence si I'on en croit l'image re­ flechie dans  le Rejane  Padovani de Denys Arcand. L'Acadie de  Don  l'Orignal, de la   Sagouine,  de   Citrouille,  de   Michel  Archange  et   autres  personnages savou­ reux  et  authentiques est la conscience du Quebec,  le  rappel de  cette  veracite que chantait  hier   encore    Felix   Leclerc    et Gilles  Vigneault.
Disons-le  tout  haut: si la litterature de
1'Amerique  franc;aise  se cherche un  deu­ xieme souffle, c'est  de l'Acadie qu'il vient, et c'est  Madame Maillet qui poursuit au­  jourd'hui le  grand   dessein  des  meilleurs ecrivains   quebecois   des  annees  soixante­ celui de saluer  et de chanter un pays dont  on  reconnait etre  natif-natal. Mais  ceci
 dit, il est des questions qui s'imposent. Quelle  duree  et surtout quelle  continuite peut-on  entrevoir  pour   une  facture  lit­ teraire relevant  essentiellement du conte?  L'ecriture qui se fait  parole  pour  rendre compte  d'une culture orale, l'ecrivain qui s'efface  devant le barde d'une collectivite ou  prime  le sens  communautaire, la lan­
gue  parlee  qui  fait  palir  la  langue  aca­
demique, la vie donnee a des personnages
fabuleux portant  haut  le symbolisme  du cycle vital,  la litterature qui se fait  si peu litterature  parce   qu'elle  est  d'abord et avant  tout  conte,  mythe,  £eerie, magie­ n'est-ce  pas  la l'enfance de  toute  littera­ ture    nationale,   celle   de   l'Irlande,  de l'Ecosse,  du  Quebec et  d'ailleurs? Force  est de constater que ce vent frais qui  nous vient  de 1'Acadie  porte  en  lui-meme les germes   d'une  evolution  la  condamnant au  sort  de  toute culture vehiculee par  le livre. C'est  done  dire  que  l'outil-symbole de la rupture du monde  de l'oralite qu'est  le  livre  des  lors  qu'il   est  choisi  comme moyen  de communication et d'expression culturelles signale  au  depart  la  desinte­ gration  de  l'univers  folklorique  acadien








CANADIAN  AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available  at
the bookstore
UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
2075  WESBROOK PLACE
VANCOUVER, B.C. V6T 1W5  /228-4741


94

REVIEW ARTICLES



dont    l'authenticite   s'ancre   dans    cette oralite qu'evoque Madame Maillet. Don l'Orignal, la  Sagouine, Michel  Archange sont freres  et soeurs d'Euchariste Moisan, de  Menaud et  de  Floralie;  comme Azarius et Rose-Anna Lacasse ils seront inevitablement plonges  dans  la modernite et  produiront les fils et les filles auxquels nous  renvoient  Dube  et  Godbout.  Pour
 !'instant, reconnaissons que  ce village  des Crasseux, si evocateur du village  de La Guerre, Yes  Sir!  et  autres villages  de  la memoire  collective,  cette  Sagouine qui est une  Maman Plouffe  "liberee", nous  rap­ pellent   par   le  pouvoir de  !'imagination
que  le  monde   est  a base  de  correspon­
dances.  L'Acadie, c'est  nous  tous.




SUITCASE POETS


AL   PURDY, Sex  & Death, McClelland &  Stewart, $3.50.
 


George  Bowering

EARLE BIRNEY,  What's so Big About Green? McClelland & Stewart, $2.95.


THERE ARE  SOME POETS  who hide personality, some who reveal it while ostensibly    doing    something   else,    and some   who  ask  the  reader  to  engage   it because  their  work  is to  begin  with expressive.  Among  the  last  group, in varying degrees, I would find Margaret Atwood, Michael Ondaatje,  John  New­ love  and  David   McFadden.
AI Purdy  is the extreme case.  He  now employs  his personality, familiar (familiar as  hell,  Purdy  would  say)   to  his  reader­ ship,  as the  main  organizing  principle of his poetry.
Purdy  has  not  made  any  formal  inno­ vations   in   his  verse   since   the   volume called  Cariboo  Horses, I965. He generally  makes   a  poem   of  one   stanza   with   no regularity of line, no normal  punctuation save  the  upper-case letter  at  the  start  of a  sentence,  and   hardly   any  use  of  the line for rhythmical meaning-that is, on the  page a line that would  reach  primary  juncture at  its end  looks  just  like  a  line that   would  be  enjambed. It can  lead  to problems  for  the  reader:

Africa  of the  rain  forests  the storybook
 
country
of Rider Haggard and  Joseph Conrad and  breast-beating gorillas ignorant of
English
lions  like  yellow cadillacs

That is,  there   are  English   lions,  but   I don't  think  that  Purdy  wants  them  here. When  Purdy  reads  aloud  he never stum­ bles, but  the  other  reader might.
So  the   reader   is  that   way  distanced from  the speaker  and  the speaking of the poem;    and    distanced  further   by   the usual  first-person   voice  of  the  narrator, which   makes   of  the   reader  a   receiver rather than  a conductor of the words. (Hence   personality; and   further, in  the sense  of  "a  personality.")
And  many  words. There are  about   I 20 pages of poetry,  on extra-tall sheets, little white  space,  and  pretty long  lines.  A lot of  Purdy,   generally   Purdy  the  traveller we  have  come  to  know  in  recent   years. (In   fact   I am   waiting  for   Purdy   and Birney  to  meet  by  chance in  an  airport, if  there   is  one,   in   Gulripshi.)   In   this volume  we get  poems  on  the  trail  across all Canada, on  a  troller  off B.C.,  as well as   datelines   in    South   Africa,     Italy,

95

REVIEW ARTICLES



Mexico,   Greece, Turkey, Crete, Japan. There are  poems,  too, set in  other places on  the  globe,  though written during one of the  poet's  visits to Ameliasburg.
It is a strange poet,  who  resembles  a journalist, a man  satisfied  with  his talent, who  goes  through space,   time,   and   the news, finding  topics.  A kind  of New Journalist of verse.  He  is quite  aware of that   role,  writing  poems   during  assign­ ments   for  Maclean's  magazine,  "cover­ ing"  events  such  as  RFK's  assassination, or  the  Canadian  occupation  of  Quebec, and  publishing  poems  in such  journals  as Weekend,   Globe &  Mail,  and    Star Weekly.
One  feels that  some of the  poems, such
as   the    anecdotal  " 'Sizwe  Bansi  is Dead' ",  telling   of  an   experience  in   a theatre in  South Africa,  should  be made into  short  stories.  But  Purdy never  writes short  stories.  It is a  problem  the  reader cannot evade: Purdy's poems  sound  like prose  sometimes. Hulme  said  that   prose is a  RR  train   that  gets  you  to  your  des­ tination,  and   that   poetry   is  a   walking  tour  with  step-by-step  observation  of the here.  Williams  said  that   prose  describes the   given   world   and   poetry   invents   a world  to  be  discovered. On  these  terms, Purdy  is not a  prose  writer. But  the  stuff doesn't  always  seem  like  poetry   either.
Or  it is loose poetry.  It is certainly not artifact, in the  Yeatsian sense. It is not compressed   language, not  redolent  with pun  and   rime  and  metaphor and  ambi­ guity.  One's attention stays  in  the con­ tinuous   present, but  it  is  not  a  stacked  present; the  past  and  other  and univer­  sal are  not zipping  past one's ears. If they are  to  be  there  Purdy  will  mention that  he was led  to think  of  them. No allusion,  then,  save  the  overt  one.  Purdy  is telling stories  and  anecdotes,  and   he  wants   to

g6
 make  sure  the  point  is clearly  taken.  The arresting   images    are    the    only    non­ onward  features,  and    they   work   best when   they  are   not   quite   as   bizarre  as Purdy  oft  likes  to  make  them.  Consider this  nice  observation  from  a  train   win­  dow  in  Yugoslavia:

buried in  snow space  folded  on  itself  by mountains where   old  kings  with   purple carbuncles doze  fitfully  thru a  dream of  trains
Beyond   the   white village unfindable again fields  where  cattle have   traced a  diagram in  snow  of  24  hours of  their   lives

Poems   such   as   "Athens  Apartment" are  really  diary  entries, and  I  think  that that  form, a journal, is what  Purdy  offers, a  day-by-day   accounting of  his  life  and thoughts; and  we ought to read  his book that  way. It doesn't then  have  to be  des­ cribed  as  verse  or  prose-it is  a  series of entries,  and  we too may  enter  without thought of  purpose. The  pieces  (poems)  are  not,  again,  artifacts. Purdy  took  care of  that   problem,  discarding  artifact  as principle, in  Poems   for all  the  Annettes, Ig62.
That throws  us back,  logically,  on per­ sonality.  The   test  becomes  not  whether the  poem  is  perfectly made  (in  an  age when,  imitating  reality,   art's  old  game,  Warhol's  paintings  deteriorate  in  a  few years,  right  on  your  wall), but  whether the  personality  and  story  are  interesting. They  are  to me, who  like  the  idea  for  a while of the muse  as a sensible  next door neighbour  with  varicose  veins in  her legs and  slightly  messy  hair.
The    personality   as   familiar  to   the extent of being homely, offers in good company,  relaxed   speech,   ruminative rather than  contemplative or  meditative, the   more   formal    modes.    In   terms   of rhythm, Purdy  is a minimalist, as we all are  when  among  friends. This  friend  has

REVIEW ARTICLES



come  home  and  now he tells the  story  of his travels  and  observations; he is the complete nonreligious humanist whose main  definition of  human is Purdy,  and we   are  expected  not   to   be   too   much different.
We stay-at-homes are  treated to many
fine off-hand evocations of visual images, snapshots, often,  by a  tourist:

only  a  waterfall lost  in  the  Canadian  bush which   has  had   nothing written about it except when   autumn leaves  drifting on  the
foam
are  crimson letters

He's  a  domestic poet,  for  all  the  travel, and you take him fast, like domestic champagne.
One  does  notice  some  changes   in  the
personality.  There  is   not    nearly  so much of the ribald, exaggerating fantasy Purdy   now,  perhaps  a  sign  of  growing age  and  seriousness,  a willingness  to become laureate. But one will still find vintage  Purdy, trying  to  destroy  the poetical,   and    the   anti-poetical,   which latter is discovered to  be  poetical-get­ ting  rid  of this  continuously, and  getting thus  to the  moment, the  bare  naked  mo­ ment,   free   from   all   threatening  meta­  phor,  keeping  that   circle  of  bay  leaves off  his  head :

Chronos thy  servant approaches
in  a  71  Ford  at 30  mph  respectfully
with  an  offering of adjectives and  green birds
refrigerated verbs  and   medium cool  nouns
wherefore  then   do   the   ex-dancehall  owner and  my  housewife chant  ecstatically
in  unison   "Yea marvellous fantastic tremendous"?
I mutter under my  breath "Get ye  hence debased semantic carrion vultures
bastard offspring of  a  nonplussed polysyllabic pictograph  get  lost"
"You're fulla shit" my  housewife says and   I am   relieved

"The  Horseman of   Agawa"  will  be
 one of the  main  Purdy  poems  when  they are all sorted  out  decades from  now. Looking with  his wife at  the  200-year  old Indian  rock-painting under  the  cliffs  of Lake  Superior, the  poet  is back  into  one of his richest  themes,  the  destruction wrought by  time,  and   the  amazing  sur­ vival of human works  through  time, and  the  closeness of the  present  artist/viewer to  the  original one.  Purdy's  response   is typically    to   express   his   feelings   while guarding  himself  against  the  accusation of being  a  sensitif:
the  Ojibway artist stood   there balanced above water like  us
and  drew   with  his  fingers on  the  stone
canvas
with  fish  eggs  or  bear   grease to  make   the painting  permanent
pitting fish  eggs  and   bear  grease against eternity
which  is kind  of ludicrous or  kind  of beautiful  I  guess
But it is an  unusually sensitive  and  beau­ tiful  poem,  and  cannot be described. It is a  great  accomplishment,  for  here  Purdy  manages  without  compromising his bluff posturing to   make  beautiful  and   true  metaphor  convincing about the  actuality not  of   sex  and   death, but   of  love  and  history.
About  the  title:  Purdy says  he  called the  book  that  because  he  had  discovered that   what   an   early   Vancouver   manu­ script-rejector  said   is  true-his   poems are  all about sex and  death. Actually six of  the  poems  are  about  sex,  and  five of those  are  not  at  all  "sexy." Fourteen are about  death. Two  are about  both. Thirty­ eight   are   primarily   about   neither,  but rather about  such  subjects   as  race,  poli­ tics, exile,  history,  ageing,  money,  booze, and  art.  But  then  Purdy has  his  hedge: "For  in  my  book,  sex  and   death  must always include love  and  life."
In  the making of What's so Big About

97

REVIEW ARTICLES



Green?, Birney must  once  again  have driven Jack  McClelland and his printers batty.  This   new  collection continues in the  anti-book tradition of  Rag and Bone Shop, featuring such   vagaries   as  a  see­ through  poem,   boxes  of  print,  differing  type  sizes,  unusual  spacings,  and   espe­ cially  noteworthy here, two-tone print,  in this  case  black  and  green.
Looking    back   at   earlier  books,   one notices  that  Birney  has always been inter­ ested  in  visual  effects  on  the  page,  and in  the  carrying  over   into   the  poem   of found   objects  such  as  tourist  brochures, wall-signs,  etc. But  in  the  last  decade he has moved  bodily into the  area  called  the interface,  between  poem  and   visual  art.
One  wants   to  remark  that   his  moves
through the interface are often  academic, somehow  at the spectator's vantage point; but  then  there  are  his "Alphabeings", the creatures, animals and  others,  crudely drawn with  the letters  that  make  up their names.  Now  that  is something that  every ten-year-old   kid   has   done,    and    there Birney   plunges,  into   the  risk,  the  dare. Aw,  my  kid  could   do   that. So  why  is that  a criticism? Indeed.
But  I still feel that  all this is not  really
the avantgarde. Birney is usually,  in these japes, doing  something exciting and play­ ful  for  his own  amusement, and  that   is okay.   But   the   reader  is  not   similarly energized. The   reader   is  having  a  story without a storyteller, and  he  and  Birney might  wave  at one another, as the  boy in the  swimming  hole  and  the  driver  of the passing   locomotive   might   wave   at   one another. If  you   remember that,  you'll know  it's  a  nice  experience.
So one  looks  through the  book, enjoy­ ing some parts  more  than  other, the  way you  did   with   your   Christmas  stocking.  Personally,  I  don't like  a  certain  mixing

g8
 of   visual  and    sound,  the   making a poem  about a  mountain appear  moun­ tain-shaped. Is one  supposed   to  contem­ plate  it?  I  think  that  once  that  has  been done,  with  for  instance  Herbert's altar, it's  done.  What more  can  further shaped poems  offer  but  more  shapes?   And   we already   have  those shapes  anyway.
More   interesting  is  a  concrete  poem that    makes   one   pay   attention  to   the design   of  the  print,  or   the   design   the print  makes  anew.  Rather than   copying a design  already  more  interestingly made by a skyline or a mountain or a falling airplane. Even  with  concrete poetry  one does   better    to   imitate  than    to   copy nature.
That  is  what   Birney   does   magically ( ? )   with  his black  and  green.  A curious thing    happens -sometimes   when    you tilt the page the black type seems to turn green,  especially   if  you've   been  looking at  green,  the  alternative. I  mean   this  is right  now happening even with  the  black ink  (I  think)  I  am  using  to  make  these notes. Often in  a poem  that  is nearly  all black, the line you are presently reading seems  to   turn   green   before   your   eyes, while  the  others  in  the  periphery remain black.
There's the thematic contention of the book taking  place.  The  book takes  place. The  green  of life  and  nature versus  the black   of  industrial   (industrious)  greed and  death. The  dialectic or  rather strug­ gle  is of  green  vs. greed,  both  energetic but  not  to  be confused. But  in  the  shift­  ing  light  they  are.
What a peculiar  book-review to be writing! I  feel like asking  the  printer of CL  to- (no, no, Birney, hands  off!). On the  cover  of the  book  there  is a  picture of laughing Birney  standing like  a giant

REVIEW ARTICLES



with  his bearded head  poking up through a  triangle in  a  geodesic  dome.
Still,  with  all  the  fun  of  the  other, its
essential   head-clearing,  I   prefer  Birney the  logopoeic.  Compared with  Purdy, he has very clear line notation, not for a syncopated or moment-oriented rhythm, but  the sure sense that  comes when  clause and  line find their  junctures equal:

The   first   deer   must   have   come   in  a tremble
to  drink at  that Lake
noses  wrinkling at  the  stink
Only  their   taut ears  to  tell
if a  cougar moved   in  the   tree-limbs

That is a stanza  from  the  title  poem, a fine  six-page  piece  that   tells  of  the  pre­ historic    rise   and    approaching   fall   of nature's green.  Portraying the  coming  to the  lower  mainland of B.C.  by  the  white men,  it  offers  these  terrific  lines:

They slashed   in  roads
ran   power   lines  over   the   balding  ridges sawed   the  big  firs  into  suburbs
ground small  pines  into  Sunday
Supplements
& multiplied that  old  mephitic stink
into  a  general sulphite wind

It is a very engaging ecopoem, ecological conservation being  a lifelong  Birney  pur­ suit.  In  fact   the  whole   book  takes  that  highly  pertinent but  surprisingly seldom­ treated subject   as  its purpose. I  remem­  ber  being  deeply  impressed   and   moved by Birney's  reading  of  the  title  poem  at a  symposium  in  Calgary in  Feb.  1973.  I also remember his black  prediction about the  future of  the  ecosphere. So  the  end­ ing of the poem shows men removing the green  of the west coast  and returning the place   to   the   condition   of   lavaic   pre­ vegetative  earth, to get  us, as a yahoo  in the  poem's  drama  says,  "in  step  with  all the  other   planets".  Profound  and   final boosterism,  eh?  The  poem  operates in  a
 bitter  ironic  mode,  not  a  common thing in  these  days  when  it  might  seem  likely. Most   of   Birney's    central  cares   and main  tricks  are  to be found  exampled in the  collection. There  is the  satiric  poem with  the  half-found  ironies,   "Messyjests for  a  Kinageing Kitchmess". His  politi­ cal protest  poem, "I Accuse Us", is better  than  Purdy's because  the  points are  made  quicker   and   without  the  blurring slow­ ing   phrases    such    as   Purdy's "and  I
wouldn't be surprised ..." etc.:

Yes sir  we're the  biggest seller of  napalm &  phosphorus
the  U.S.  ever  had
though of  course   we  howl
every  week  on  television
when   the  bastards drop it  all on  somebody's  kids
Don't think   we  haven't got  a  conscience­
who  sent  a  whole  children's  hospital
to South Vietnam?    0 sorry  no that   was  the  British

"I Accuse  Us"  was  Birney's   Centennial poem.
There is a found  poem,  made  from Rudyard  Kipling's  18go  views  on  Van­ couver.  There is the  most  complex  tone poem  I  have  ever  heard -English sylla­ bles compiled   and  scored   to  imitate all the sounds  heard  in  the  train  from  Lon­  don  to  Swindon.  Birney  gives an  alarm­ ing  reading  of  it.  There  is  that   trans­ parent  poem,   which    apparently   reads from  one  side  only,  and   the  reason   for that   is  rather opaque, and   the  poem  is hard  to read  or to see through, the letters being  scattered in  a  circle,  and  it's  hard to get around that  or  to get  a line  on  it.
There is an  amusing sequence of  dia­ lect  adventure poems,  in  which  we  are treated   to  a  view  of  the  agonies  of  an official  Canadian  poet  touring the  Aus­ tralian  universities.  Birney  finds  that   the dopes in Australia are  very  much  like the dopes  back   home,  boosters   and   profes-

99

REVIEW ARTICLES



sors, kid-athlete mothers and  drinkers.  A bonus  for  the author is that  there  he gets to practice his mocking  dialect verse in Strine.
But finally Birney's great  concern is the dying  earth. He  does  not  offer  any  hope or method of salvation. He  has been  here long  enough   to see the  changes wrought on  the  earth, sea and  sky of Vancouver. He   is   Canadian   enough  to   take    the geology  as  theme  and  its  aeons  as scope (as  did  Pratt and   Scott), but   he  is  far enough into  the century Laurier promised us to see how "puny" men  could  not only subdue but  obliterate the  wild.  It is as if
 the  Group of  Seven  paintings could  in­ clude  an  oil slick or some  sawed-off  hill­ sides. "The Shapers: Vancouver"  is  an­  other  good  ecopoem,  in  which  as  always we are  shown  a  comparison  between   the Indians who  were  married   to  the  land here, and  the whites  who murdered them and  raped  it.  The   poem  is made  of  the high-performance vocables we have come to expect  of its author:

in  the  screaming chainsaws we hushed   the  old  dreamers
in  the  hullabaloo of  bulldozers
dynamite dynamo crane dredge combustion buried   them  deeper than all  compution




LOWRY BY DAY


DOUGLAS DAY, Malcolm Lowry.  Oxford, $10.00.
 

W.  H. New


BECAUSE   MALCOLM LOWRY embroidered and  invented so much  of the private life  he  wrote  into   his  novels,  it always  comes  as something of  a  surprise to realize  how  ordinary much  of  his real life was. His English  upbringing was con­ ventionally  middle-class;  his  distaste for the   English    public    school   system   was probably  not  unusual  among  boys  who have  suffered   it;  and   if  his  alcoholism  was  an  unpredictable  illness,  his  choice of  alcohol  as  a  means  of  escaping emo­ tional  problems was  by  no  means  extra­ ordinary.  Yet   the   combination  of   his experiences  led  him  to  become   a  quite  extraordinary   writer,   one   whose   emo­ tional    engagement   with    daily    events heightened their  significance  for  him and expressed  itself in an elaborate and some­ times  overripe prose  style.  Rejecting his background,   Lowry    travelled   through Europe,  Mexico,  Canada, and   parts   of Asia  and   the  Caribbean, yet  tried   con-

roo
 
stantly  to please  the  parents from  whom he   was   increasingly    alienated. If  he worked  out  in  his  books  an  order   that he  could   never  adequately  grasp   in  his life, we have also to note  that  his unrest, too,  entered   his  fiction.   His   books  are witty;    they   have   imaginative breadth; and  for  the most  part  they  remained  in­ complete. His vision and  his realities were recurrently at  odds.
When Conrad Knickerbocker died, Douglas Day took on the difficult  task of differentiating between   fact   and   fiction in Lowry's life and writing the "official" biography. He  travelled  to  England, Spain,  Mexico, and  Canada in Lowry's footsteps; he  interviewed numbers of people who knew Lowry and  could recol­ lect  him in vivid detail; he had  access to a  number  of  Margerie   Lowry's  private papers; and in producing a brightly  read­  able volume, he found himself  confronted inescapably  by the difference between  the

REVffiW ARTICLES



man  and  the  fictional character. His choice,   under  these   conditions,  was   to focus on Lowry  the  alcoholic, Lowry  the syphilophobe,  Lowry   the   latent   homo­ sexual,    and    (the    inference   is   Day's) Lowry  the suicide.  Certain grotesque and horrifying stories  come  to light  in such  a catalogue -the fact  that Lowry  was con­ sidered  for  a  lobotomy  two  years  before his death, for  example -and  such  inci­ dents  are   told  with  reportorial  smooth­  ness. But  they tend  to draw  our  attention away from Lowry's strengths to his weak­ nesses, and  though  Day  attempts to elu­ cidate the  relationship between   them,  he remains,  as a biographer, more  fascinated by  his  subject's  idiosyncrasies  than   re­ spectful of  his  subject as  a  writer   or  a human being.
Day  does  admire Under the  Volcano,
of course. Indeed, he goes to great  lengths to  summarize  the   work   and   trace   the course of its composition. But such efforts to   make   his   biography  a   "biocritical" study  seem  to  interrupt  (or  even  in  the Mexican  section,   to   replace)   the   bio­ graphical narrative more  than  to  add  to it. Perhaps in part  because  he can express no  praise  for  any  of  the  rest  of  Lowry's work-thereby displaying a  curious  in­ sensitivity  to the strengths of  Hear  Us 0
Lord -his basis for interpreting the man
is  founded   in  his  response   to  a  single book.   The    Consul's   personal    hell   in Under the Volcano is, as it were, magni­ fied into  Lowry's  total  life.
Even   the  structure  of  the   biography works  to  this  end.  In  emulation  of  the form  of Under the  Volcano, Day  has chosen   to  tell   the   last   events   first,   to have  his readers  understand Lowry's  life by the  manner of  his leaving  it.  Such  a form in the novel serves the function of reinforcing the  themes  of death, percep-
 tion, and  re-creation; it helps establish Lowry's  use of circular patterns and  his notion  of serial  time. But in the biography the  arrangement throws  an  emphasis on the    alcoholic     and     uncreative   Lowry rather than   upon   the  passionate writer, and  that  remains  the filter  through which we glimpse  the  man  alive.
There   are    strengths   in    the    book.
Explorations into  Lowry's  childhood and education led Day  to dispute some of Knickerbocker's published findings; he acknowledges Suzanne  Kim's   fine  work on  Lowry's  early  publishing; he  extends our knowledge of Lowry's  career  as a songwriter; and   (himself  fluent  in  Span­ ish)   he  adds  substantially to  our  under­ standing  of   Lowry's   relationship   with Conrad  Aiken   and   of   his   months  in Spain  and  France during I 933 and I 934· Yet  the  years  in  Mexico,  unfortunately, remain  mysteriously   shadowy. If proto­ types    are    found     in    Cambridge   for October Ferry's  Peter  Cordwainer  story, no original emerges in Day's Mexican searches  for  the  evil  influence, Stanford, in  Dark  as the  Grave. More  puzzling  as a deficiency, Day treats Lowry's years in Canada   with    a    perfunctoriness  that seems  especially  curious   when   one  con­ siders  that   they  were   Lowry's   happiest and  most  productive. Though  Day  relies repeatedly on interviews for  his informa­ tion,    he   interviewed    remarkably   few Canadians  (among  whom   Earle   Birney, who  knew   Lowry  well  and   has  edited  some  of  the  manuscripts,  is  not   to  be counted) , and  he seemed  to find  those he did  interview  largely   uncommunicative. Lowry's  last  years and  his years of young manhood  thus come across as the drama­ tic frame around bland  years of creativity, rather than  a prelude to and  decline  from a fragile  pinnacle of success.

101

REVIEW ARTICLES



It seems as though there  is a basic fail­ ure   here    to   appreciate  what   Canada meant  to   Lowry.    Certainly it   was   a "hostile",  ugly,  philistine  world   to  him when  he first arrived; it  never  altogether lost   those   attributes.  But   it   also,   he realized  later,  had  a stern  blue wilderness  beauty. It  was  an   ephemeral   paradise against which  he could  measure his  taste of  hell,  and   it  was  as  much   of  a  key experience as  Mexico  in enabling him  to construct   his   mythic  landscape.  What was  involved   in   that   landscape  was  a Jungian  sense  of  a  balance between   op­ posites:  Canada and  Mexico  were  never separate  from  each  other in  Lowry's  fic­ tional  world.  Day  acknowledges that, in his   comments  on   Lowry-the-artist.  But when he  turns  to the  man,  his American fascination  with   Freud reconstructs a Lowry  in whom  id and  ego were at  war:

Years of clinical psychiatric study have demonstrated quite convincingly that  a condition like  protaxis ... has  its origins in the  very  earliest stages   of  character  forma­ tion:  those  which   are subsumed  under the general  rubric  of  orality. In   this  develop­ mental  phase,  the   key   transaction  is  'self­  object  differentiation'....





















102
 Fortunately  the   ponderousness with which  these oral  fixations  are  asserted  is out of character with  the rest of the book. But  the  interpretation asks  for  one  side or  the  other   of  Lowry's   personality to win,   never   for   there   to  be   a   balance between   the  two.  A  balance,  however, was  what   Lowry  constantly looked  for; it is what  Canada came  to  represent for him,  and  what  his  most  equable  charac­ ters  managed,  however   impermanently, to find.
One comes away from Day's pages fascinated  by  the  portrait  that   emerges there.  A difficult and  subjective man,  the Lowry  of  the  book  was  never  free  from fear. Words were his grasp on sanity, drunkenness  his  release   from   the   pres­ sures of knowing  himself, lying his way of constructing  a   new   identity.  He   lived under   enormous  pressure   and   he   died alone. The  achievement of the  book is to obtain   from   its  readers   both   an   over­  whelming pity and  an  overpowering dis­ gust   for  a  man   undergoing  such   daily trial.







FREEDOM TO DEPART


ROBERT  KROETSCH,   Gone   Jndian.   new   press,
$6.gs.

ALTHOUGH Robert Kroetsch is primarily a  western  writer,   he  is intrigued by  the North. It  was  the   setting   for   his  first novel, But We  Are Exiles, and  now, in his fourth  book,   he  attempts  to  encounter fully   the   significance   of   this   half-real, half-hallucinated northern landscape, this unknowable region where  the world is reduced  to its basic elements and  beyond that   to   a  final   void.   In   Gone   Indian Jeremy   Sadness,  an  American graduate student,  arrives   in   Edmonton   (one   of those gateways  to the North) in search  of a future in the Canadian West, drawn  by the  Canadian  North. He  comes  seeking the   wilderness   and   in  quest   of  a  new identity (he is fascinated by Archie Belaney, that civilized Englishman who transformed himself into "the  truest Indian of them all", Grey Owl), but  he is ultimately  in  flight   to  something  much more   frightening: "I  am   looking   for nothing. The  primal  darkness.  The  purest light.  For  the  first  word.  For  the  voice that  spoke the first word. The  inventor of zero."
Gone Indian  is the concluding work in Kroetsch's Out   West  trilogy,  which   has now  moved  from  the  depression   thirties (The   Words  of My   Roaring)    through
 
the forties  (The  Studhorse  Man)  into  the seventies. Each  of the  novels in the trilogy deals   with    the   passing    of   an   era,    a moment   of  crisis  which   forms  one  more chapter in the  history  of the Apocalypse: each   examines  the   particular  myths   by which   its   society   defines   itself,   wittily interweaving other mythic structures drawn  from  the  larger western  tradition, and-in  Gone   Indian- blending  in Indian myth  as well to form  a complexly layered whole beneath  a  deceptively simple surface.  The  title changes that  this final  book  of  the   trilogy   went   through suggests the several  ways the novel works. The  original   ti tie,  Funeral Games (Kroetsch says  he  abandoned it  as  "too Graeco-Roman"), invokes  Book V of the Aeneid,   where    the   funeral  games   for Anchises  celebrated  by  Aeneas   and   his men  serve  as  a  kind  of  societal   passage rite  marking the death of the old  Trojan order  and  the  turning toward the  yet  to be   created  Roman  world.   Within  the novel the  Notikeewin winter games  serve a similar  function: by  diverting Jeremy from  his  job  interview at  the  University of  Alberta  they  divorce   him   from   the competitive urban culture  he  has  left  in the  northeast, and   thereby prepare  him for   his   final   plunge    into    the   North. Kroetsch's second  working title,  Falling, emphasizes   the   personal  aspect   of   the novel:  Jeremy's perception of  his life as perpetual  falling/failing,  and   his  final realization that  falling toward death is an inevitable  part  of life  and  that  falling  is the  payment for  flying.  Finally   the  title Gone Indian  (with  the  intentional  ambi­
guity  of  "Gone")  catches a  number of
the  dominant  themes   in  the  book:   the North  American fascination with  and search for the Edenic, pastoral world; the novel's   ironic   play   with   urban  man's


103

BOOKS IN REVlliW



romanticization  of  the   Indian  and   the lost  culture he  represents; and  finally  its very serious play with  the Indian trickster myth, especially the figure of the sleeping giant  who is represented by the wounded, unconscious Roger Dorck. Dorck, whose presence  is felt  throughout the  book  (in the opening chapter Jeremy mistakenly acquires his baggage  at  the airport), rep­ resents  not  only  the  phallic  potency  that  Jeremy  lacks,  but   also  the  creative un­  conscious  that  Jeremy would release.
These  various  levels of the  novel  work
together to say something about the soci­ ety  that  Kroetsch visualizes  as  coming  to an  end  in the  seventies: the competitive, technological,  highly   rationalistic  order  which   has   rendered   Jeremy  impotent. Carnival-- the  ritualized  breakdown of order-frees Jeremy from  the work ethic  but  thrusts him  into  a new world  of con­ tests  and  competitions. Jeremy  enters   a snow-shoe   race   and    wins;    in   Dorck's  absence  he  is  made   to  judge   the   three  finalists   in   the   Winter  Queen  beauty  contest. However Jeremy's racing victory brings   him   only   another   disaster;  he learns   more   from   watching  an   Indian  choose not to win a dog-team race, seeing there  the  absurd  arbitrariness of a  world in  which  "the difference of six feet,  after those  fifty  miles, made one  man  a loser" and  observing the  "magnificent  indiffer­ ence"   of  the  dogs  to  their  loss.  Jeremy  relates  this  perception to  the  final  trans­  formation  of  Grey   Owl:   "The  hunter who  would  not,  finally,  hunt. The killer refusing    to   kill."   The  senselessness   of competition   becomes  similarly   apparent when  Jeremy discovers  the beauty  contest is  unjudgeable  ("I  have  never  in my life seen  three  people  who  looked  so exactly like each  other  as those three  girls."), and that  he, trained by the academic world  to


104
 judge  ("[I] wanted to write  in  the mar­ gins  of  those  lives:   Awk.  Frag.  Emph. Cap.  Fig.") is the  man  least suited to the role for he is himself  in  flight from  judg­ ment-from  the  debilitating  judgment of  his  dissertation  advisor   (Mark Mad­ ham,   who   is  also   the   narrator  of  the novel) , from  the  castrating  judgment of his wife, and from  his own  ceaseless, self­ deprecatory evaluations. The beauty  con­  test  intentionally evokes  the  judgment of Paris, that  rigged  decision  that  began  the destruction of an  entire civilization, but Jeremy  revises  the  archetype by refusing to   accept    the   alternatives  as   defined, thereby  freeing  himself from  the demands for  performance that   had  rendered  him physi.cally and  spiritually impotent.
In the novel's conclusion the sleeping Dorck   rises  at   last,  signalling  Jeremy's own  freedom  and   his  recovered   vitality. But it is an ambiguous, partly  ironic, freedom   that  Jeremy attains-the  free­ dom  to  depart into   that  Northern  void at  last,  to  embrace the  inviting silence, perhaps  to  find  a  new  life,  perhaps  to perish  there.
Gone  Indian is a fine  book,  providing a fascinating conclusion to Kroetsch's vision  of  the  development of  the  Cana­ dian   West   as  emblematic   of   twentieth century  social change. It is a book which should  be read  at least  twice to penetrate beneath its surface, but  that  is a compli­  ment  to Kroetsch as story teller.
RUSSELL M. BROWN


A CANADIAN  NOVEL

c.  J·  NEWMAN,  A  Russian  Novel. New  Press.

HEMINGWAY  once  said   that   his  writing was   good   enough    to   give   him   confi-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



dence  in a contest  with  Flaubert but  that he  was  not  ready  to  enter   the  ring  with
Tolstoy.   C.   J. Newman,  in   A  Russian
Novel, has entered the ring  not only with
Tolstoy   but   with   Dostoevsky   and   Solz­ henitsyn.  It was, of  course,  no  great act of humility for  Hemingway  to  find  him­  self  less  impressive   than   Tolstoy.   New­ man's novel is a more complicated matter in   this   respect,   for   the   reader   is  con­ stantly   being  reminded  of  novels  much more  impressive than  the one  he is read­  ing. A Russian Novel has quotations from Dostoevsky   as  epigraphs  to  four   of  its five  books;   it  includes   several   passages (for  example, a  description of  the  Mos­ cow   Ministry  buildings    lighted    up   at night  for quota-filling workers)  similar  to passages  in  Solzhenitsyn's  The   First Circle.  The novel  is  dedicated  to  Solz­ henitsyn,  "for  his life and  work".
David  Miller,  a Canadian writer and editor,  persuades  his  publisher  to  send him to Russia so that, while collecting material for a book on the Russian novel­ ist  Vinogradov,  he   can   take   the   slim chance  of   somehow   smuggling   out   of Russia  and   into   the  hands of  his  pub­  lishers  a  suppressed  manuscript, another First  Circle   or   August   1914,  perhaps. The   plot  develops  around  Miller's rela­ tionship   with   Vinogradov's  young   wife (an unconvincing relationship resembling those  in  a  James  Bond  story  for  elapsed time   between   "hello" and   love-making and  a Jules  Peiffer  cartoon for excruciat­ ing    self-consciousness),   his    interviews  with   others   who   have   been   associated with    Vinogradov   and    his   experiences with  Russian  security  measures.  The sig­ nificance   of  the  book,  however,   derives from   Miller's   real   reason   for   going   to Russia-a     vast    sense   of    moral    in­ feriority   as  a North   American, a  Cana-
 dian, who has never had  to suffer or risk anything for  freedom   and   literary  crea­ tivity,  which  are  meaningless  until  paid for.
The  novel opens  with  the death of Miller's mother, a Russian  who emigrated to  Canada  but   never   lost   the  capacity and  willingness  to suffer  throughout her life  that   Miller   sees  as  a  Russian  char­ acteristic. His mother is like, in her suffer­  ing  if  not  her  complexity, the  heroes  of Tolstoy     and,     especially,     Dostoevsky,  whose  novels  have  established  for  Miller  what   complete  and  genuine moral exis­ tence  is. Considering the  examples of his mother, the great  nineteenth-century Rus­  sian  novelists  and   the  courage of  Solz­ henitsyn,   Miller   feels  impoverished,  de­ prived   of  the  opportunity  for   a  heroic  or  simply  meaningful life  by  a  "moder­ ate"   and   "mundane"  Canadian  society in   which   commitment   to   people    and  ideals    is    buried     under    consumerism, tolerant    mediocrity   in   government,   a press  so  free  that   courage is  eliminated from   the  list  of  qualities a  good   writer  must  have.
When   Ratin, a  kind  of  prophet,  who is  later   imprisoned  as  an  enemy   of  the state,  thrusts a manuscript into  Miller's hands,  Miller  keeps  the  manuscript, defying  the  orders  of  Stolyapin, his  offi­ cial  host,  and   the  police.  His  reflections  on   his  own   act   articulate   the   central moral   dilemma with   which  Newman  is concerned:

. . . He  wondered   if  Stolyapin   could   hear, just  as  he  did,  the  effect,  in  his  voice,  of long  years  of  moral  erosion   that   undercut the  value  of  his  taking   a  stand,   since  he lacked  the  authority  to  imagine   the  worst that  might  result  from  it. Was  this  because he  was  a  Canadian, he  wondered, and  so he  had   always  enjoyed   the   fruits   of  the American   system   without  having   had   to acquire  the  ruthlessness,  the  arrogance, and

BOOKS IN  REVffiW



finally   the  blood-guilt in  which  that  system had    been    created?  Or  was   it   something more   personal, something  that  came  from his  own  life,  from   hard  decisions deferred?

Miller   sees, in  the  evils  of  Soviet  re- pression,  the conditions for testing  human courage,	endurance, 	commitment 	to other   people,  the  honesty  of  writers. In effect,   because   of  his  personal  and   na­ tional  sense of immaturity, he  envies  the Russian   people   their   clear  challenge  to be  their  best  selves  and  Russian   writers  their  opportunities  for  heroic  expression  of   politically    unacceptable  truths.   In short,  Miller  is a card-carrying romantic. One   can   understand  his  emotional  dis­ satisfaction with  his  country's via  media and   his  longing   for   scenes  where   true tragedy  is possible, but  there  is something decadent  about   his  visit  to  Russia   (he himself    realizes    the    contradiction    in­ volved in conning his publishers into pay­ ing for  his chance to have  more  real, less capitalistically inane,  experiences). "His  trip   to  Russia   was   to   be,  for   him,   an exercise in entering into  all sorts of situa­  tions  he  had  allowed   himself   previously to be excluded  from,  as his life narrowed down    around   him."   The   equivalent would    be,   I   suppose,    something   like Solzhenitsyn's asking  to  be  put  in  a  pri­ son  camp   so  that   he  might  experience the  heights  and  depths of  human nature, test  his  own  strength   and   write   a  fine novel  about   it-on  the  proviso  that   he could  be released  any time  things  became  too difficult.
The  story  is told  in  the  third   person, but    the   angle   of   vision   is   so   nearly Miller's  own   that   the   book  is  autobio­ graphical  in  effect.   There  is  almost   no distance   between    author    and    central character,  so   it   is   difficult   to   decide  whether Miller  is intended to be accepted

106
 as admirable (which  he is not)  or as the misguided  pursuer   of  a   rather  strange brand   of  holiday  excitement  (which   he is) . If the  latter is  the  case,  the  novel leaves   us   convinced    that,   though   you may earn  money  and  counter the  regrets of middle-age by adopting another coun­ try's  political   evils  as  your  own  enemy, you  are  not  apt   to  save  your  immortal soul.
This  is "a  Russian   novel"  in  the  fur­ ther  sense  that  it  includes   long  passages of  dialogue in  the  simultaneously emo­  tional   and  cerebral  manner of  Dostoev­  sky's and  Solzhenitsyn's works. Newman's greatest  success  is  in  some  of  these  dy­ namic   and   engaging    passages.   On   the whole,  however,  the  book  takes  no  risks stylistically.  It is  journalistic, competent; there is nothing as lyrical as, say, the magnificent "Ark" chapter of  The  First Circle  or  as movingly  simple  as  the  style of One  Day  in  the  Life  of Ivan  Deniso­ vich.
Newman's reach  has exceeded  his grasp in this novel,  but  his failure to do  justice to the complexity of the moral  issues he raises is more interesting than  the facile cleverness or refined despair  of so many contemporary  novels.
DAVID  EVANS


WEST INDIES: HERE AND  THERE

AUSTIN    CLARKE,   Storm    of   Fortune. Little, Brown  $8.95, (cloth).
HAROLD   SONNY    LADOO,  No   Pain   Like   This
Body. Anansi. $8.50 (cloth), $2.95   (paper).

AusTIN  CLARKE's   NEW  NOVEL Storm of Fortune  is the second  volume  of a  trilogy begun  with  the  I g67  publication of  The

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Meeting Point. It picks up from  the mid­ crisis ending  of the  first  book  to  develop further  the   intertwined   stories   of   the group  of West Indian friends coping  with immigrant life of Toronto in  the  Sixties. Much  of the  novel's  focus is still on  Ber­ nice  Leach,  middle-aged  live-in  maid  at the wealthy  Forest  Hill home of the Burr­ manns.  It  dwells further on  Bernice's  up­ tight  relationship  with   her  erratic  mis­ tress,  and  with  the  loneliness  and  insula­ tion   of   the   Barbadian  woman's  three years   in   this   "savage"  place   with   its riches,  its snow,  and  its decided  coolness to black  people.  Also forming a  continu­ ing  picture of  the  below-the-stairs world of  The Meeting  Point  are  Bernice's  best friend  Dots  who  is a  Rosedale maid,  the latter's husband  the  unemployed rapscal­ lion   Boysie   Cumberbatch,  her    newly­ arrived  sister  Estelle  who  causes  compli­ cations  through Sam  Burmann, and  the lusty   German  maid    Brigitte    from   the Gasstein's  across  the  road.  In  both  these novels  it  is as  if  the  flat  characters of a Dickensian  world   have   come  into   their own   at   last,   playing    their    tragi-comic roles  in  a  manner which  owes  much  to Clarke's extraordinary  facility   with   the Barbadian  dialect    his   characters   speak and   think   in:  "much like  Shakespeare and  not  too far  from  the  Bible,"  he told Graeme Gibson  lately.  Rather in keeping with  this is a  splendid scene  in  Storm  of Fortune   in  which   Bernice   bristles  with indignation when  searching in  vain  for a particular  passage  in   a  purloined  New English  Bible:

"And  what  the   hell   this   book   mean    by saying   who   followed   the   new   way.  Which way  that  is?  Are  they  telling me  something
'bout a  road   or  a  street, or  something  like that?"

No,  "This isn't   the  way  the  Bible  does
 say  things,  man!" Nor  do  these  charac­ ters  find   the  new  way  of   their  present  lives an easy one  to follow. There are  the memories  of  "village  days  of  youth  and  freedom   within    the   poverty   and    sun­ shine  and  sea"  and  there  is the  loneliness of Toronto where  to  be made  aware that  you  are   the   only   black   person   on   the underground  is  a   recurring  desolation. For  the  Canadian  reader   to  see  himself through the  barely  suppressed smoulder­ ing  of  these  dark  eyes it  is a  jolting  ex­ perience,   but   it   is  also  a  relishing   one when   Dots,  Estelle   or  Boysie  make   the occasional  score   for   their   side,   for  ex­ ample  Dots against  the  studied   indiffer­ ence  of a  head  nurse:

"Get up,  get,  man, and   attend to  we! Be-Christ, we  ain't waiting. We  tired waiting!"

To  a  degree,  the  waiting and  frustra­ tion  and   spoiled   dreams  predominating in The  Meeting Point  are  over  in  Storm of  Fortune. The  novel  begins  sombrely enough   with   the  first  of   its  three   parts  entitled  "Violence and  Fear at  the Base". Bernice   is  still   the   deceptively  simple combination  of   warmth, spite,   priggery  and  decent  pride.  She  is  the  hardest  to dislodge  from the  habits  of  recent  years, but  in  all  of  their   lives  turning  points gradually emerge  for  what  seems like the better.  Dots  is  the  first  to  make  a  deli­ berate   effort  to  throw   off  the  servitude and  insulation  of  Rosedale and  its  like. She tries to incite  Bernice  with her newly­ found  philosophy  of happiness in Canada:

If you  could   push  a  heavy   bundle-buggy o' groceries  with   a   couple  thick   porterhouse steaks   in   it,   with    a   case   o'   beer,   and   if your    refrigerator   full    up    with    food    for Sarduh night, your   blasted foots  cocked   up on  a  chair and   you  sitting down   in  front o'  that   thirty-inch  television watching coloured  television,  child,   you    is  people.


107

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



But   in   this  country,   if  you  don't    possess them  material   thing,  you  ain'  people.  You ain'  nobody.  That is all  that  counts  in  this place.
While  the  full  implications of  this remain for a future novel, this one does provide  a   sense  of   the   amazing  gusto with  which   these  people  can  live  when freed to do so. Even Boysie, after an hilariously abortive attempt  to be a  jani­ tor   at   the   Baptist   church  house,  starts  out  on  his own  as a cleaning  contractor. This  makes  it possible for  him to host  the exuberant  wedding part   for  Henry and Agatha at  his  own  apartment, an  occa­  sion,   however,    counterpointed   by   the tragic   potential   of  its   inevitable  racial  implications and  leading to the  pathos of Henry's still  mysterious  death at  the  end of the  book. Austin  Clarke is not  writing
	. 	'
The  narrative line   is  no  more  com­
plete  than   it  was in The  Meeting  Point, and even if it should  be rounded out in subsequent work, story sequence  per se seems to matter less than  that  this novelist should   continue  to  create his  Brueghel­ like  canvasses   with   their  rich  and   con­ trasting detail   and  mood.
Quite a different novelistic  imagination
is at  work in Harold Sonny  Ladoo's brief


108
 and spare first novel, No Pain Like This Body. In  subject  matter there  is a  rough parallel   to  be  found   between   this  book and   Clarke's  earlier    Amongst   Thistles and Thorns  ( r g65)   insofar  as  both  deal with childhood  experience in the West Indies.  However  there  is an  impressionis­ tic  quality  to  Ladoo's  picture of  a  tum­ of-the   century   east   Indian  community which     contrasts    with    Clarke's   more matter-of-fact  realism.  This is a  novel of greater formal  unity  than  Storm  of For­ tune,· it too anticipates a future sequence  to    include    life    in    Canada,   yet    its characterization is less tangible and  it reproduces a simpler  and  less compelling English  dialect.
The  harsh  little story tells of a few days in the lives of a family  living  on  the edge of the Tola settlement on Carib Island during  the  August   rains.  Its  events  are seen primarily from  a child's view, reveal­ ing the terrors of a small  boy's illness and death   with  its attendant  folk-rituals and superstitions.  "Dese    chirens    going    to come  man   and  woman  in  Tola" is  the pathetically  persistent  cry of the agonized mother  toiling  for  the  meagre   existence the  rice-fields  supply.  Ladoo's choice  of the  rainy  season as setting  intensifies  the dismal struggle  for mere existence  against the   menacing  power   of   the   elements. This  Eden  gone awry is the purlieu of the unpitying God of the sky who, to the children, never  winked,  slept  or  ate  but "just   lived  in  heaven   and  stared   at  the earth   all  the  time."  The rain  falls  "like fat  white  worms invading the  earth from above," the  wind  is "as  a  claw  from  the shapeless  darkness" and  clouds  are  "like a  black  spider  with  a  huge  body".
Atmosphere,  and   the   primitive  emo­ tional  response  to  it,  are  all  in  this  little  book. There is the  temporary brightening

BOOKS IN REVIEW



of the dark little house for the traditional wake   with   its  gathering  of  neighbours, story-telling and rum. Human existence emerges in its simplest yet most powerful extremes. "Trobble is for everybody," but only  the  strong   may  survive   it.  Twelve year-old   Balraj  frantically  tries  to  save his beloved  crappo fish; old  Nanny  beats her  drum   with  all  the  love  and  strength at   her    command   to   save   her    grief­ frenzied  daughter from  the  hidden  dan­  gers  of  the  forest.  Their  chances  of suc­ cess  seem  negligible,  but  amazingly  the life force  persists,  embracing all  the  vio­ lent  oppositions  and  contradictions of  a world  which  yet  hints,  as  in  the  Hindu terms,  of a  unity  in  its  total  design.
DIANE  BESSAI


PREFERABLE PARADISE

w.  o.  MITCHELL,  The   Vanishing Point.  Mac­
miilan.  $9-95·

THE TITLE of W. 0. Mitchell's new novel alludes   to  the  pictorial device  by  which converging lines, meeting at a "vanishing point" on  the  horizon,  create the  illusion of depth; and  the novel itself is concerned with  the  lines  men  draw  for  themselves and  for  others  in  their  desire  to  impose order,  purpose,  direction, on  human  life. That this is at  best an illusory goal  is the conclusion   reached    by   The   Vanishing Point,  which  describes   the  uneasy  rela­ tions between  an  Indian band  and  white administrators  on   a   reserve   in   the Albertan foothills.  The  representative of white   authority   is   Carlyle    Sinclair,  a thirty-six  year  old  widower   who  acts  as both schoolteacher and agent on the Para­ dise  Valley  reserve;  despite  the  in differ-
 ence of the members of the  band,  Carlyle establishes a degree  of order among  the children under  his tutelage, and  wins a grudging respect  from  their  elders.  After nine frustrating years, his efforts  to bring the   Stonys   into   the   twentieth  century seem  to  have  met  with  at  least  one  suc­ cess:   one  of  his  pupils   has  passed   her· examinations, and  begun  her  training as a  nurse  at  the  city  hospital.  Early  in  the novel, Sinclair   travels  to  the  city  to visit the girl, Victoria, only to find that  she has disappeared from  the  hospital, and  in all likelihood  taken  up the life of prostitution so  often  the  fate  of   Indian girls  in  the city.
Mitchell deals  sympathetically but  un­
sentimentally  with   the   problems  which confront  white  administrators of  Indian affairs.  By  white  standards, the  Indians of Paradise Valley  are  slovenly,  lazy and unhygienic; but  every  effort   by  official­ dom  to improve   the  situation is  vitiated  by  ignorance or  misunderstanding of native    culture   and   tradition.  Though Sinclair  is himself an  instrument of white government, he is not  blind  to its follies; he  hates  the  Ottawa  bureaucracy, "the slow  and   narcotizing  routine-the  im­ personal  red  tape  that  formalized hunger and  sickness and  death." But  the  Indians anger   him   too,   by  their   reluctance  to abandon the  old  ways, and   their  refusal to  adopt   white   standards.  Yearning  to reach   them,  Sinclair seeks  a  bridge  like that   which   connects  the  reserve   to  the highway   and   the   world   outside,  "some sort of suspension  bridge  that  could  carry hearts   and  minds   across  and   into  other hearts  and  minds." Through his love for Victoria, he learns  that  a man  must  build such   bridges   himself   by   accepting   his responsibility  for  his fellows,  not  by seek­ ing  to dominate them.  At  the  end  of the

109

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



novel,  Sinclair  joins  the  reclaimed  Vic­ toria   in  a  ritual   Indian  dance;  he  has ignored    official   advice   not   to   become personally   involved; and  he  has  lost  the desire   to  alter   the   Indians'   self-image, learning instead  to accept  them for  what  they  are.
The message  of The  Vanishing   Point,
that   all  men  are  brothers and   thus  ac­ countable to each  other, is one  to  which no   reader    will   take   exception,   though some  may  wonder   how  Carlyle's  belated  discovery   of   this   principle  is   going   to affect  policy decisions  in the Department of  Indian Affairs.  The  sentiments which Carlyle  expresses, or  which  are  expressed through  him,  do  not  lack  conviction or appeal; but  Carlyle  himself,  primarily a vehicle  for the author's ideas,  never  really comes  to  life  as  a  character. His  creator endows   him  with  a  very  active   interior life,  granting  us  frequent entry   into  his inner  thoughts  and  fantasies, as  well  as his   recurring  childhood  memories;  but the  insights  we  gain  do  little  to  explain  why Carlyle  feels or acts as he does. That his  Aunt  Pearl  produced white  stools, or that   his  best  friend    caught  diphtheria from  him   and  died,  suggest  possible sources  of guilt  and  alienation, but  these reminiscences seem at best tenuously asso­ ciated   with   his  adult  motivation.   The  early death of his wife in childbirth might  be expected  to have  serious consequences, and  perhaps explains  his feelings for Vic­ toria; but  that  part  of  his  past  is hardly  dealt   with  at  all.  The  problem arises  in part  from Mitchell's   desire  to   work obliquely  towards  the creation of charac­ ter,   conveying   personality  in  spurts   of dialogue, fragments of memory  or descrip­  tion,  the   meaning  of  which  become clearer  as  the  novel  progresses; but   the piecing-together process takes a long time,


I 10
 and  in  Carlyle's   case  doesn't   seem  com­ plete -he  remains   flat  and  featureless.  The  object  of his devotion, the "little lost lamb"   Victoria, is  even  less  clearly  rea­ lized; although we learn something about  her  from  Carlyle,  and  hear  her  speak  on occasion, she is a colourless  and  indistinct figure  throughout.  It  may  have  been  the author's intention to show  her  only through Carlyle's   eyes, first  as  a  symbol of  the   teacher's  mistaken  beliefs  about the future role of the  native  Indian, then as  simply  a  young  woman   reaching out to him with  her love. Either way, Victoria is little more to us than  a name.
The  reader  may also be puzzled  by the
novel's fluctuations of tone,  and  the sev­ eral   shifts   of  narrative  viewpoint.  The  serious and  the comic are complementary moods, and may exist side by side without any  sense  of incongruity;  but  the  comic elements  of The  Vanishing  Point do  not always contribute to the novel's essentially serious  purposes.  It seems  hardly  appro­ priate, for  example, to turn  the  death of Esau  Rider,  Victoria's father and  the dignified symbol of a past era, into a grotesque farce involving a faith-healer's delusions of power and a prostitute preen­ ing  herself  in  her  outfit  as  Miss  North­ West  Fish   and   Game    1954·  A   further diffusion  of effect  occurs  when  the  novel leaves  Carlyle  Sinclair  for  lesser  figures like  the  wily Indian  Archie  Nicotine,  or the  Reverend Really  Richards, a  bush­ league  evangelist  with  an  eye to  the  big time.  These  characters are  amusing  and well-drawn,  but   they   assume   a  promi­  nence in  the story which  is out of propor­ tion  to  their  rOles; lodging  the  point-of­  view in Archie  or Richards only blurs the narrative focus, and  diverts  our  attention for   too   long   from   the   novel's   central issues.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



The Vanishing Point is on surer ground in  portraying the  white  officials who  run Indian  Affairs: Fyfe,  the  regional  direc­ tor,   who  sees  all   Indians  as  "tenninal cases  to be  made  comfortable as possible within the  terms  of the  reserve system - the   budget   and   the   Indian  Act -and the  civil  service  machinery"; the  bumb­ ling   Reverend  Dingle   who   for   twenty years  has  "indulged himself  in  a  sort  of absent-minded  masturbatory  loving-kind­ ness  that  has  borne  no  fruit"; Sheridan, the  Indian agent,  who  has  worn  himself out  in  thirty-five  years  of  administrative service,  only  to  reach   the  hopeless  con­ clusion  that  "an  Indian does as he damn pleases." Sanders, the  doctor  whose  area includes  Paradise  Valley,   is  one  of  the few   to   recognize   that   it   is  the   system itself,  "the reserve-system  slough -tepid with  paternal help", which  is sapping the strength  of   the   native    Indian.  At   the same  time,  the  reserve  does serve  to pro­ tect   the   Indian,  to  maintain,   however unsatisfactorily,  a  way  of  life  which   in many   respects   seems  preferable  to  that led  by  the  white  man; Paradise may  no longer   be  perfect,   but  its  native   inhabi­ tants,  poor  and  diseased  as they  may  be, are  more  admirable, more  enviable even, in Mitchell's view, than  the pale-skinned, half-dead souls which  dwell  in  the world of   department  stores,   greenhouses and gas stations.
HERBERT ROSENGARTEN


A SMALL MERCY

Selected   Stories   of   Duncan   Campbell Scott, ed.   Glenn   Clever.   University    of   Ottawa Press.

GLENN  CLEVER   includes a  surpnsmg bibliography on  Duncan Campbell Scott
 in his new selection of Scott's short stories. The  surprise  lies  in  the  range  of  angles from   which   Scott   has   been   viewed­ Scott  and   the  Indians, Scott  and   music, Scott   and   landscape, Scott  as  travelling companion. Also surprising is the absence of  focus  on  Scott   as  story-teller.  Scott's publications  in   the   fonn  spanned sixty years-from   I 887   to   I 947.   His   tales ranged  from  idylls through melodrama to domestic  comedy.  Yet  no-one  has  traced  the interplay  between  the  stories  and  the poems,  or  watched   the  evolution of  fic­ tional  taste  and  technique in  this  rna jor writer,   or   the   impact  on   him   of   his friends, his editors,  and  his audiences.
The  Clever  bibliography, unhappily, does  not  list  the  original place  and  date of publication of  the  stories.  Nor  does it add  a list of the many  uncollected stories. The  order  of Selected  Stories  is Clever's, and  the seven-page introduction  does not explain   his  principles of  inclusion,  omis­ sion, or sequence.
From   the   Village  of   Viger  volume,
I 8g6,   Clever    selects   four    stories   that pander  to  a  taste   for   allegorical  senti­ mentality   ("Bobolink"  and   "Paul   Far­  lotte") and  for courtship plots  (rollicking in "The Wooing  of  Monsieur Cuerrier," icily manipulative in  "No. 68 Rue  Alfred de   Musset").  He   excludes    the   Viger stories   of   darker   tone,   such   as   "The Tragedy of  the  Seignieurie" and   "The Pedlar". He  thus soft-pedals Scott's latent  sombreness,   and   wrongly   suggests   that  Scott's  antagonists  do  not  embody   "real malevolent  evil".
True enough,  the  Viger  volume  is generally   veiled  in  prettiness,  the  "pale light through the willows" by the River Blanche.   Perhaps  the   glow   came   from Scott's  personal   happiness in  the  I 8go's, in   a  "circle   of  affection"  as   husband,


II I

BOOKS IN  REVffiW



father, friend, reinforced by a circle  of admirers of his poetry  and  his prose.
The  Witching of Elspie volume,  1923,
shows a major change of tone. It is tempt­ ing to explain  the shift  from village  idylls to wilderness  scenes of  primitive suffering  and  endurance as the  result of changes  in the author's life. The deaths of Lampman and  of Scott's daughter and  the accretion of heavy official duties  in the Department of  Indian affairs  did  darken the imagina­ tive   screen.   But   the   shift   can   also   be imputed to a continuing exploration of changing  styles  in  the   short   story,  and also to an  intensified  awareness of  Cana­ dian   motifs.  Years   later,  the  Canadian would  reprint one of those stories  to back up  its definition of a  "Canadian" story:  "'The Vain  Shadow'  tells of actors  who are not  native  to this land,  yet they move against  a  sombre  background  of  loneli­ ness and  isolation,  so  that   there   springs from  them  actions  that, under other cir­ cumstances would   be  unaccountable. It is  the  moving   of  the  spirit   of  the  land itself.   This, ... rather  than  its   setting, makes a Canadian story."
Clever,   the   modern  editor,  does   not give  any  comparable explanation  of  the term    "Canadian."  He    does,   however, select from the Witching volume  excellent examples of Scott's  new wilderness  range in  setting   and  in  mood:  "Spirit  River'' and  "Expiation." Clever  adds  the  attrac­ tive folkloric  "Winning of  Marie-Louise," with  its  Canadian  variants  of  the  ritual  testing  of a hero.  ("Labrie's Wife,"  good as it  is, might  well  have  been  by-passed, as  already   accessible   in   Rimanelli  and Ruberto's  Modern   Canadian   Stories,  as well   as   in   Knister's   Canadian   Short Stories.   On  the   other  hand,  Witching  might   well  have   furnished  other  selec-

112
 tions,  perhaps in  place  of  the  also  over­
anthologized "Paul Farlotte.")
Ryerson,  in  r 945,  reissued  The  Village of Viger  with  attractive wood-cuts,  and went on to do a similar  volume  of Scott's odds   and   ends:    late   and   early   stories, poetry,  essays, collected  in  The  Circle of Affection,  1947. Clever  reprints the  title­ story,  an  embarrassing late  bit  of  senti­
mentality. A. J. M.  Smith  once  referred
to  the  "tremulous and   feverish  quality" of  some  of  Scott's  verse:   the  phrase  fits "The  Circle   of  Affection." If  Clever's idea  was  to  illustrate Scott's   late  use  of the  modern   realities  of  Ottawa,  "Flash­ light"  might  have  made  the point better. From    the   early   stories   in   the   Circle volume Clever chooses "Charcoal." (This  story  first  appeared as  "Star-Blanket" in The  Canadian,   1904:   an   intriguing change  of title!)   In  a setting  somewhere between  Montana  and  the  Kootenays, as Clever   says,  "The  free   prairies   Indian staggers  in  the  tragic  snare  of encroach­ ing civilization."
It is not  "Charcoal," however,  but  the late  story  "Clute Boulay"  that  is placed at   the  end  of  Clever's Selected  Stories. "Clute Boulay" is a powerful  culmination of the wilderness vein of the middle  years, but  it  adds  some  sense of survival.  After the horror  of its action, Clute  goes "as an animal  does who is satisfied. He went into the deepest  forest, and  for a long time  he could  be heard  crashing through the underbrush."  But   as  in   the   poem   "At Gull   Lake,"   Scott   concludes   "after  the beauty  of  terror,   the  beauty   of  peace": "stars   in   the   tranquil  heaven    looking down  at  stars  in  the  tranquil water." He adds  to the catastrophic end  the small consolation  that  Agatha survives,  and  so does Thomasine, daughters of the two matings  of the old fierce lawless Clute.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



To   return  from   a   re-reading  of  all Scott's   stories  to a  consideration only  of those selected  by Clever  is to feel a sense of disappointment and  loss. A collection, rather than  a selection,  is what  we need. Clever's  introductory notes  are  clear  and orderly  but  many  of  his comments seem perfunctory: settings-pastoral,  or  else wild   and   lonely;    characters-"mostly plain  and  simple folk"; openings-most­ ly   descriptive.  (The   last   point    needs sharp  checking against Scott's  later method). Clever's analysis  of syntax  and rhythm, on  the  other  hand, is intriguing, with  its  references  to  the  "long  swells of almost  anapaestic flow, the cadence  gen­ erally  running in groups,  each  of  four  to five  main  stresses, spread  over  some twelve   to   thirteen  relatively   unstressed syllables."  More  cryptically, Clever  refers to   the   "r3,    25,   70,  and   40   rhythmic peaks"  in  the  four  phases  (sic?)   describ­ ing   aspects  of   the   setting  of   "Paul Farlotte."
Like  Scott   we  should   be  grateful  for
small  mercies. If we don't get a clarifica­ tion   of  Scott's   total   performance  from this   little   volume,   we   at   least   get   an enriched  experience  of  some  of  his  best stories.
ELIZABETH WATERSTON


A MAGIC HOUSE OF ICE

CHARLES G.  D. ROBERTS, Selected  Poetry and Critical  Prose. Edited  by W. J. Keith.  Uni­ versity of Toronto Press.  Paperback.  $5·95·

THE  CONFEDERATION  Poets  have  tended to narrow down  in critical esteem from a quartet to  a  duet.  Carman and  Roberts are dismissed as derivative lightweights; Lampman  and   Scott   are   discovered to
 have   depths   and   complexities hitherto unsuspected and  are  elevated -together with  Isabella  Valancy Crawford-as the true  precursors of a national poetry. And there  is enough   in  the  way  of  individu­ ality  and  scope  of  feeling  about Lamp­ man  and  Scott  and Crawford-and per­  haps  enough  genuine  poetic   superiority
-to make such  a view at least  plausible.
For one remembers so many  shallow, lilt­ ing  verses  by Carman, so  much  Tenny­ sonian  or Arnoldian pastiche by  Roberts, that  it  is easy if one  is not  an  aficionado of early  Canadian poetry  to dismiss each of them  with the credit  for a single poem, to   think   of  Carman  as   the   author  of "Low Tide  on Grand Pre" and  of Roberts as  the  nostalgic  elegist  of  "The Tantra­ mar   Revisited",  and   to   leave   them   at that.
W.  J. Keith's  new   collection  in   the
University   of  Toronto Press's  Literature of  Canada series-Selected  Poetry  and Critical   Prose of  Charles G.  D.  Roberts
-is unlikely,  indeed, to change the view of   many  readers  who    have  already reached    such   a   conclusion   that    both Lampman and Scott  are subtler  and more versatile  poets  than   Roberts and  to  that extent  better  poets  also. Keith himself,  in fact,  implies  a limited  esteem  for Roberts as poet  when  he remarks that  "his  stories of  the  wild  represent his  most  satisfying
-because most  original -contribution
to literature". Yet  he also suggests  that  a long  period   of  studying Roberts has  led him to revise his originally dismissive judgments of certain poems,  and  the selection he now presents  is obviously intended  to  display   Roberts  at   his  best from  the viewpoint of a late twentieth century reader.
To  a great  degree  Keith is successful in
his aim.  He  departs from  the  methods of

II 3

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



selection  by mood  and  subject  which Roberts used  in  presenting his own poetry, and adopts a chronological method, choosing  what  seem  to  him  the important items  from   the  thirteen  indi­ vidual   volumes   of  poetry,   from   Orion,  and Other  Poems in  r88o, down  to Can­ ada Speaks to Britain in 1941. Importance in  this sense clearly  has  two  meanings; it includes   poems   which   Keith   considers the best of Roberts' works, but also poems whose  inclusion  their  popularity, or  the author's  own  evaluation, or  some  other  factor  distinct from  the editor's own taste, has   made   indispensible  for   a  selection chosen  with  the  historical as well  as  the critical eye.
Thus, any  reader who  is not  a Roberts
enthusiast-and few of them  can remain
-will  find  many  flat  and  tedious  poems that  seek conventionally to evoke conven­ tional   responses.   Too   often,  Roberts  is seen playing  his self-chosen  role as Cana­ dian  laureate. And too often he is emulat­ ing the  poets  he admired, and  presenting imitations of  Arnold  and  Shelley  that  are creditable  but  no more.  Yet  the  effect  of reading the Keith selection, with  its clear demonstration of the  fluctuations of Roberts' poetic  achievement (he quotes approvingly  Pacey's   description  of  it  as "a rapid  development, a sudden decline, a  long  silence,  and  a  late  revival")  is to show  Roberts as a  more  interesting poet than  he appears in the uncritically assem­ bled original  volumes  or in the poet's own selection.
Keith's fresh  arrangement, indeed, has
thrown into  relief  poems  not  usually praised among Roberts' achievements. There is, for  example, "Actaeon",  pub­ lished in  r886, which  for its final ominous  lines  alone   deserves   to  be   remembered among  Victorian narrative verse:
 ... but  when  sense  grew  clear  Once  more,  I  only  saw  the  vacant  pool Unrippled,-only saw  the  dreadful sward, Where dogs  lay  gored, or  moved   in  fretful
search,
Questing uneasily; and  some  far  up
The slope,  and  some  at the  low  water's edge,
With   snouts set  high   in  air  and   straining throats
Uttered keen  howls  that smote   the  echoing hills.
They missed  their  master's form, nor understood
Where was  the  voice   they  loved,   the  hand that reared ;
And  some  lay  watching by  the  spear  and bow
Flung down.
And  now  upon   the  homeless   pack And   paling stream  arose   a  noiseless  wind Out of  the  yellow  west  awhile, and  stirred The  branches down   the   valley;  then   blew
off
To  eastward toward the  long  grey,  and  died
Into the  dark, beyond   the  utmost verge.

And,  curiously  counterpointing it,  there is the  fragment of Indian myth  encapsu­ lated  in "The Departing of  Clote  Scarp", with  its  final  scene  of  the  god-hero de­ parting  in  despair   at   the  evil  deeds  of men.

And  when   the  beasts  could  see  his  form   no more,
They  still   could   hear    him,   singing  as   he sailed,
And  still  they  listened, hanging down   their heads
In long  row,  where   the  thin   wave  washed and  fled.
But   then    the   sound  of  singing died,  and when
They lifted   up  their   voices  in  their   grief, Lo!  on  the  mouth of  every  beast  a  strange New   tongue! Then  rose  they   all   and   fled
apart,
Nor   met   again  in   council  from   that  day.

Instead, of course,  they went  off to enact the   mutual  violences   that   Roberts   de­ scribes in his animal stories.
Among the other poems, though "The Tantramar  Revisited" stands   up  in  its majestic   nostalgia  and  "The Iceberg" is

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



an  interesting attempt  to  break   free  of conventional form  and  also an interesting anticipation of  Pratt's "The Titanic", it is the  sonnets  in  Songs  of the  Common Day  that   most  attract the  modern ear, with  their  intense  visuality,  their  immedi­ ate sense of episode  and  scene. Even  here the   diction   is  at   times   over-archaic - there  are  too many  murmurs and  plaints and   ancient memories-but   often   the success in creating a concrete, apprehen­ sible image -of salt flats or cow pastures or  clearings -carries  the  antique  word or sentiment in its flow, as, for example, in this sestet :
The wastes   of  hard and   meagre weeds  are thronged
With   murmurs of  a  past  that time  has
wronged;
And  ghosts  of many an ancient memory
Dwell   by  the   brackish  pools  and   ditches blind,
In  these  low-lying pastures  of  the  wind,
These  marshes pale   and   meadows  by
the  sea.
There are single imagist  lines in these sonnets   that   no  poet  could   better, such as:
The crying  knives  glide  on; the  green swath lies  ...
and   passages  like  the  octet   to  "Winter Fields" that  are as good as much of Hardy and   make   one  lament  that   Roberts  so rarely wrought his best:

Winds here, and  sleet, and   frost   that  bites like  steel.
The low  bleak  hill  rounds under the  low
sky.
Naked   of  flock  and   fold   the   fallows  lie,
Thin streaked with  meagre drift. The gusts reveal
By fits  the  dim  grey  snakes   of  fence, that
steal
Through  the  white dusk. The  hill-foot poplars sigh,
While  storm and death  with  winter
trample  by,
And   the  iron   fields  ring   sharp, and   blind
lights  reel.
 I finished  reading this selection  with  a heightened esteem for Roberts' poetic powers,  but   also  aware that   only  occa­ sionally  were  those  powers  bent  to  their  highest  tension.  It was still  impossible  to deny that, compared with Lampman and  Scott,  he remained a poet unfulfilled.
Appended to  the  selection  of poems  is a  group    of   Roberts'   critical  essays - hitherto uncollected-which  mostly  ap­ peared  round about the  turn  of the  cen­ tury.   His   taste   was  conservative;   even when he  talked of  "characteristically modern verse",  he  chose  Joaquin  Miller to  praise  in  preference to  Whitman. But he   did   have    a   prophetic  sense   of   a distinctive Canadian  literature  emerging (expressed  as early  as  I883 in  his lecture on "The Beginnings  of a Canadian Liter­ ature") , and  he went  so far in I 886 as to admonish fellow  Maritime writers   (in an article  entitled "The Outlook for  Litera­ ture")  to  avoid  provincialism and  think in Canadian terms.  Thus, in his ideas  on poetry  at  least,  he was a true  Confedera­ tionist.  And  here  and  there  in  his poems
a  genuine Canadian  voice hesitantly makes  itself heard, in  "Songs  of the Common  Day"  especially,  but  occasion­ ally elsewhere. Who, after  all, but a Cana­ dian  could  have  written a  poem  that  so clearly  made  a habitation  out  of the very rigours  of our  land  as  Roberts did  in  the poem  "Ice" where  he  seems  so aptly   to answer  Voltaire with  his  acres  of snow?

When    Winter  scourged  the   meadow and the  hill
And   in  the  withered  leafage  worked  his
will,
The water shrank, and   shuddered, and
stood  still,-
Then built   himself   a  magic house   of  glass,
Irised   with  memories of  flowers  and   grass,
Wherein  to  sit  and watch the  fury   pass.

GEORGE WOODCOCK

I I 5

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



CRAWFORD REPRINTED

ISABELLA VALANCY CRAWFORD, The  Collected Poems. Introduction by James Reaney.  Uni­ versity  of  Toronto Press.  $I 2.50  hardcover,
$3.95 paperback.

THE ORIGINAL EDITION by John Garvin of Isabella Valancy Crawford's Collected Poems   has  long  been  out   of  print   and virtually inaccessible  to all but the most persevering  and   lucky  reader. It would have   seemed   a  cruel   fate   to  Crawford herself that her work should have become almost    the   exclusive   property  of   aca­ demics,  since  she  struggled  for  years  to gain  the  attention of a wider  public.  The  publication  of   this   reprint   promises   a wider   reading  public   for   the  poems  of this enigmatic figure.
Aside  from  the  poems  themselves,   the
most  interesting feature is  the  introduc­ tory  essay  by James Reaney;  Reaney   is, of   course,   the   man    whose   pioneering essay  on  Crawford  in  1959  was  largely responsible   for   the   renewed   interest  in her work. As Reaney  suggests, there  seem to  be  two  distinct schools  of   Crawford critics.  The earlier   group,  roughly   con­ temporary  with  Crawford  herself, is typified  by  the  enthusiastic  and  slightly breathless praise  of  Katherine Hale  and Ethelwyn  Wetherald. They  praise  Craw­ ford's lyric gift, her lightness  of fancy  and above  all  her  fortitude in  trying  so des­ perately   to  succeed  in  the  most  difficult circumstances. The  second  group, includ­ ing  Reaney   himself,  Northrop  Frye,  and Dorothy Livesay,  focuses its  attention on Crawford's subtlety   and  the  mythopoeic powers  of  her  imagination.  These  critics dismiss  the  qualities praised  so much  by the  earlier  group  as either  Victorian  gift


II6
 book   rhetoric  or   irrelevant  to   literary study.  Indeed, the pronouncements of the two  groups  are  so  disparate as  to  make one  wonder   at  times  whether  they  are even dealing  with  the same  poet.
This  division of attitudes emerges nice­ ly in  Reaney's  introduction as  he  quotes  liberally   from   the   popular  English  and  Canadian journals  of the day, on  the one hand,  and  from  his own  earlier essay on the  other.  However,  while  there  is some attempt to reconcile  the  two views, there  is something basically unsatisfactory with the suggestions  that  all  would  have  been right had Crawford had the benefit of a discriminating readership, and  that  the literary  values of Crawford's day are radically   different  from   our   own.   The point  is, whether Crawford devotees  past and  present  like it or not, Crawford's was a very uneven  talent. Some of her work is of the Victorian gift  book calibre  and  no appeal to extra-literary considerations can excuse  it.   Poems   such   as   "Love  in   a Dairy", "Said  the  Thistle-Down", and "Said the  Daisy" are  embarrassing. Equally   important, however,  is  that   the poet  was  capable   of  such   fine  lyrics  as "Said   the  Canoe", "The  Lily-Bed", and "Between  the Wind  and  Rain" as well as the magnificent   narratives. The poetic imagination did  not  always  rise  to white hot  temperatures, but  when  it did  it  pro­ duced   the  work  that   has  attracted   the attention of  the  Reaneys,  the  Fryes  and the Livesays.
Reaney   rightly  cites  some  of  the  bio­ graphical problems  connected with Craw­ ford  studies,  such  as  the  general  uncer­  tainty   about   the   dates   of   the   several family moves and  the date  of the death  of Dr.  Crawford.  (According to  the  ceme­  tary  records  in  Peterborough  it  occurred in early July of I875.)  But there  are other

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



more  puzzling  and  potentially more fruit­ ful   issues  to  be  resolved.   There  is,  for example,  the   notation  in   the   cemetary  records    that    Emma  Naomi,   Valancy's sister,   was   born   in   Wisconsin.   Family records   indicate that  a  younger   brother, Stephen, was  born  in  Ireland. The   two records,    if    accurate,   suggest   that    the Crawford  family  originally emigrated  to the   United   States,   returned  to  Ireland and  then  came  to Canada. There is also the question of residence  in France. This assertion  arose very early, appearing, as Reaney notes, in some of the obituary notices.   While   almost   certainly  false,  it has  been   re-asserted   from   time   to  time and  needs to be resolved. These  and  other puzzling   questions   need  to  be  answered. As Reaney  notes, one need is that  for a definitive biography.
The most serious omission in Reaney's otherwise fine  introduction  (or  'collage', as  he calls it), is the failure to deal  with the most puzzling and irritating literary question of all:   the  relationship of John W. Garvin to the text of the 1905 edition. There is  a  fair   amount  of  evidence   to suggest  that  Garvin assumed   more  than the duties  which editors  normally take on. Whether or not it is possible to determine the exact  extent  of Garvin's influence, the basic issue must be confronted.
The Crawford material, held  by the Douglas  Library at Queen's University, exists  in  the  form  of  manuscripts,  some old newspaper clippings,  and some old galley-proofs. None of these sources is complete in itself and  therefore none  can serve as a check on any of the others to determine  total   textual    accuracy. The best   of   the   three  sources, naturally enough, is the  surviving manuscript  ma­ terial   which  seems  to  be  in  Crawford's own  bold,  decisive  script.  The  next  best
 source  is  the  newspaper  clippings,  pub­ lished during Crawford's lifetime. Finally,  there  are  the  remaining  galley-proofs of the  1905  edition.  All   three   sources   are replete  with  emendations, additions, and deletions.  The changes take  the  form  of partially  re-written lines,  different words inserted, and  portions of the poetry  which are  simply  struck   out.   In  some  cases  it seems  clear   enough  that   the  correcting pen  was  Crawford's. In  other cases  the situation is not so clear.  Some  other  per­ son's  pen  has  made  some  of  the  correc­  tions. The  question is, whose  pen  was it? As  an  example of  some  of  the  changes  made,   there   is  the   poem   entitled  "A Battle." The    1905  version  of   the  poem contains   the  line,  " ... her  fingers  drip/ Pale,  silvery  tides."  The  newspaper clip­ ping which served  as the source  published the   line   as   " ... and  from   her   fingers drip/ Pale  tides of  silver," which  is better  poetry   than   the  amended  version.   And yet  it  is the  amended version  which  has been passed on to posterity.
As others  have  discovered, and  as Dorothy   Livesay  has  shown,  Garvin  was not  above  re-arranging  Crawford's  work to suit  his own  aesthetic sensibilities.  For example,  "The Dark  Stag", a lyric which in  North  American imagery recounts the classical  myth  of  the  slaying  of  night  by the forces of day, is really  part  of a much longer  incomplete narrative  poem.  Sev­ eral   other   well  known   Crawford   lyrics similarly  belong  to longer  narratives from which  they were removed to be published separately in Garvin's edition.
It seems clear  that  some precise  biblio­
graphic work  needs  to be done.  In  addi­ tion   to  the  need   for  a  definitive   biog­ raphy,   there   is  an   even   more   pressing  need for a definitive text.
S. R. MACGILLIVRAY


117

BOOKS IN REVIEW



AN HONEST VOICE


DALE  ZIEROTH,   Clearing.  Anansi.  $6.95  cloth,
$3.25 paper.


lN "PRAIRIE  GRADE SCHOOL", the opening poem of Clearing, Dale  Zieroth returns to the   crumbling  place   of   his   education, where   he   spent   his   time   "memorizing rules that  were intended/ to last for life." Though the  school  has physically disinte­ grated, "nothing seems changed". Yet the school   "remains/ useful   only   as   land­ mark" for  those  who  return, the  home­ coming  sons of farmers who have changed as much  as the school. The rules have not lasted; indeed, as part  of their  education, students were  also  made  aware of  inevi­ table  mutability. Zieroth  remembers how here  he  discovered   that   he  "controlled nothing ... growing   afraid/ for  the  first time of ordinary trees."
This  volume  is subtitled "Poems From
A  Journey" and   the   poems   record   the poet's  travels  from  his  prairie home,  his life in the city, his return to his past, until he  moves  on  further west  to  the  moun­ tains. The poetry  is an attempt not simply to regain  control over  his life  by evoking his  prairie past,  for  he  has  known  since his   schooldays that   nothing is  fixed enough    to   be   subject   to   control,  but rather to revisit  places in order  to dredge  up  memories  so that  he can  try to under­ stand   how  inexorably the  simplicities of his early life  have  turned to complexities and  how  everything, like   the prairie school, has broken  down.
As  he  looks  back,   he  remembers the
problems  of small  town  life:  the  collapse of farms,  the lack of amenities, the failure of  harvests.  The young  "stand  waiting/ with   their   hands   made   fists  in/ pockets

II8
 that  are  empty"; they  wait  to  take  their chance   to  leave  this  prairie isolation - "north  of   here   is  nothing" -for   they wish  to  travel   two  hundred  miles  south to Winnipeg, as that  "is  where  the world begins."
But  cities  offer  no solution. Groups  of people in the city move endlessly "like a defeated army". The poet senses at  times that  perhaps he does  have  some measure of  control   over  his life,  but  he  discovers that   it   is  a  false  sense,  for   monotony returns, each day filled with "stony sense­ lessness that  changes   nothing".  And  the mind   tries   to   cohere   around   a   vague search  for  a  political   answer,  an  "angry ideology  of  random targets  and  stones".  One  poem details  the collapse  of the city, another repeats  the disturbing knowledge  of the  discrepancy  between  the  rich  and poor  in  the  city  in  rather cliched  terms, though  ironically  in  the  same  poem  the young  revolutionaries wishing  to  revita­  lize society can in their  turn  think  only in cliches drawn from  reading their  political mentors.
Zieroth   turns  to  personal relationships
as  perhaps  the  only  viable  answer.  For him, love may be able  to bring  unity  to a life  the  poet  feels  is  sliding  away  from him. He searches for a solution  in a world where  things  "have no core"  but only his wife and  friends  can  offer  anything. The return   to  his  old  home  on  the  prairies, while it stirs reminiscences, only confirms that    you   can't  go   home    again,    even though  now he perhaps understands his family more.
Still, the  simplicities  of a past  life can­ not  be revived,  so he  moves on, reaching down  to  the  myths  of  the  land,  finding  some peace  and  acceptance with  his wife in the mountains. The book  closes with a sequence of poems which relate  a growing

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



awareness of his place  within  the  moun­ tainous   land,  although,  writing  for  his wife,  he finds  that  "we  have  not  left  the old pain/ behind, we have merely/ found  inside  it a clearing that  is calm." Gradu­ ally  the  sense  of  belonging increases  till the  book  closes  confidently: the  last  line is "first  promise of home".
Zieroth  writes in an uncluttered, almost prosaic way, relying on occasional short similes  as  almost   his  only  rhetorical  de­ vice.  The   style,  however,   has  a  cumula­ tive  effect,   convincing in  its  honest  at­  tempt   to  root  through the  past,  to  root out  the meaninglessness and fina1Iy to root down  into  a life discovered  and  accepted on its own terms.
There is  a  group   of  Canadian  poets
one  can  call  unacademic and  unliterary, a group  writing a genuinely oral  poetry which  each  poet  has  welded  together out of his own life and  reading without resort­ ing to any  theoretical notions about what constitutes a true spoken language within a  poem.  Poets  such  as  AI  Purdy,   Alden Nowlan,   Patrick   Lane,  Red  Lane,   Tom Wayman, Milton  Acorn,  the  later  Earle Birney,  perhaps  David   McFadden, and  in  some  of  their  poetry,  Andy  Suknaski  and  Bill Bissett make  up  this group. And Dale   Zieroth   belongs   with   them.   The  writing   of   this   group,   worked   out   by trial-and-error in  their   poetry,   is  paral­ leled  by such  poets  in  the  United  States as  Rexroth, Snyder  and  Bukowski  (with perhaps a  side  glance  at  James  Wright) and  is a truer  oral  poetry than  that  stem­ ming  from  the  mystic  breath-analysis of Olson  and  Greeley.
Such  a method  of writing  poetry has its dangers: it  can  lose its  focus  in  extran­ eous detail, it  can  be alternately coy and brash,  it  can  present   platitude  as philo­ sophic  solution, it  can  over-dramatize, it
 can offer  the trivial  and  the serious with­ out  distinction, but  at  its  best  it  presents  openness  to real experience and maps  the responses of an honest  mind.
Zieroth   at   times   certainly  has   these lapses, and  his sense of doom  seems some­ times  to  be  too  heavy  for  the  details  he includes  in  his  poems.  The  poems  about personal  relationships are not always suc­ cessful:  they are rather repetitious in their analysis   and   often   the  language  is  not responsive enough to the emotional range  he seeks to express. Still,  the volume  in its entirety presents  a genuinely honest  voice, showing  the  fascination of a  poet's  mind with his own past, trying  to make  sense of the  present  and  finally  resolving  the  be­ wilderment  in  a  vision  that   takes  in  the personal  and  the outer  landscape.

PETER STEVENS



CANADIAN ESSENCE

A.   o.  BAILEY,  Thanks  for  a  Drowned  Island.
McClelland & Stewart. $5·95·

A. G. BAILEY inherited poetry  as  part  of the cultural tradition in Fredericton that centred  in the first quarter of this century around Christ  Church cathedral and  the University of New  Brunswick  and  which glorified  its  most  famous   exponents, Sir Charles  G. D. Roberts and  Bliss Carman. In   his  own   early   books,  Songs   of  the Saguenay and  Tao, A. G. Bailey reflected this  heritage. As  a  graduate student at the  University  of  Toronto, however,   he became  aware  of the  new  poetry  of Eliot and   Pound, and   this  awareness shaped the  future direction of his sensibility  and technique. At first,  the  influence of Eliot

ll9

BOOKS IN REVIEW



proved   too  overpowering, but  gradually by constant experimentation, A. G. Bailey evolved  and   matured a  distinct style  of poetic   presentation  that   embodies   both the  personal  dimension of experience and the   social   dimension  of  scholarship  in history  and  anthropology, a blend  that  is quite   unique in  our  literature. His  is a difficult  poetry  in  which   the  rich  ore  of meaning lies deep  and  has  many  ramifi­ cations.  Take "Ideogram", for  example:

spacialesque trumpets corrode the  haute peaks  of  the  world
with  spiral  blasts  to  remember  Reason who  gambled with  Freedom for  a
pennyworth of salt,
forsaking the  sun,  tumbling about the  clouds
to  rivet  without fail,  to  fail
clutching his  bosom  with remembrance
nimble feet   we  had, dancing
to  the  crisp  tune of  crustaceans
and   so we  came   to  grips  with   the  godhead deifying the  joints, whirling
on  a  spoke  of  the  sick  wheel

Like  so  many   of  A.  G.  Bailey's  poems, "Ideogram" is concerned with  process­ in  general,  the   dialectic  opposition  be­ tween  quality rooted   in  time  and   place and  quantity rooted  in  space  and  move­ ment  is expressed  in  this  poem; the  par­  ticular instances  lie in the eighteenth cen­ tury Europe  (first stanza) and  nineteenth century   Europe   (second   stanza). Given these  hints,   the  poem  loses  much   of  its obscurity,  the gamble "with Freedom for a  pennyworth  of  salt"   is  of  course   the French  Revolution initiated  by  reaction against  the  gabelle  or  salt  tax-a  revo­ lution  in which  the "sun" (the  heir of the "Sun  King", also Apollo)   is deserted, and in  which  Reason  is certainly taken  for  a ride  and  a tumble in  the  clouds  and  left to clutch  "his  bosom with  remembrance". The  "nimble feet" of  the  second  stanza refer  to the  mental exercises  necessary  to cope   with   the   discoveries   of  men   like


120
 Lyall and  Darwin   ("the crisp tune of crustaceans"). These  discoveries  led of course to the central problem  of the nine­ teenth  century  intellectuals, how to "come to  grips  with  the  godhead",  a   problem  resolved   by  deifying   a  kind   of   limited  specialization and  accepting the Jeansian view of existence,  our  role in  time  as be­ ing synonymous  with  our  role in space­ a point  of reference  on the revolving  arm  of a galaxy  (the  milky way) , the  stars  of which  are  rushing away  from  each  other toward  irreversible entropy -in  another sense, the  Eastern  "sick"  wheel  of mate­ rial existence.
I  have  dwelt   perhaps  too  long  on  a brief  poem,  but  it is characteristic of the compactness, the  aptness  and  originality of illustration, the absence  of cliches, and the   mental    and   emotional  range    and grasp  of the poetry  of Thanks for a Drowned  Island in general.
My own appreciation tends  to lie most with  those  difficult  poems  that   I  under­ stand   best  conceptually.  I   thrill   to  the cosmic irony of "Shrouds and Away" and "Hochelaga", to the beautiful imagery  of "The U nreturning",  to  the  wistful  long­  ing  for  what  might  have  been  embodied in  "Border River",  and   to  the  sense  of the  purposeful  mystery  of  history  incar­ nate   in   "Angel  Gabriel";   nevertheless, one  poem  which   defies  rational exposi­ tion is the crown of the collection.  "The Winter   Mill",   it  seems  to  me  expresses better  (because  less pinned  down to speci­ fics) than  any essays by Margaret Atwood or  Northrop Frye  the  essence  of  what  I like to think  is Canadian :

The winter mill  will  not  return  this often
a  granary for  months of  ill at ease.
Nor  will  the  thaw  engage to  round and soften

BOOKS IN  REVmW



the  burden of  its  coffin; from   the knee
to  thigh  and  upwards cold  as any  fish
hook
will  it  look  to  sweep  a  mist  from  sunken
eyes,
nor  gather to  its  heart its  cherished april.
Of  it  with  book  and   pen  record these
cries.
The  winter ambit has  us  with   its finger,
and  muscle  hardens when  it  seems  to break
like  tooth  once  bitten and  forever
ache.
And  there's no  stoic  tethers soul  to eye
with   batting of  this  scene   that   only waits.
FRED COGSWELL


MAGICAL MUSIC

SUSAN    MUSGRAVE,   Grave-Dirt   and   Selected
Strawberries. Macmillan.
PAULETTE GILEs,  Waterloo Express. Anansi.

ALMOST  ALONE in the magic forest, Susan Musgrave  blends   her   own:  weird   voice with  those  of  nature personified.  Sounds of the rain forest echo poems in her skull, boiling with  the witch's  brew;  moss and seaweed  and  trees  twisted  into  toads.  In her third book, Grave Dirt and Selected Strawberries, nature,  refracted  off  fairy lenses, assumes all the  classic human dis­ guises, goes through all  the  jigsaw  possi­ bilities of one living landscape.
The  book is divided  into  three sections; "Grave Dirt", the  personal   voice,  "Kis­ katinaw  Songs",  ritual   voices,   and  "Selected  Strawberries",   the   babble   of the  conventional  wisdom. All  emerge from the same Pandora's box, cedar  lined with moss, pine needles and  rotten fish.
Musgrave's wilderness   is  magical   and she is a  character in  her  own  fairy  tale,
 the  wizard  of  poems  which  spring  from her  intercourse with  tides  and  seasons  in the dark  woods.

Her   heart  is  a  bone laced   by the
moon's pull.

The   magnifying glass  she  presses  to  the forest  floor  enlarges   into  grotesques the central issues of her  own  life as a woman in the macrocosmic world  of humans who have   shaped    their    own   impulses    into myth.   Her   landscape  is  burdened  with the  traditional struggle  of  things  animal and   vegetable   for  survival.  Moss  copu­ lates  under the  glass and  becomes  meta­ phor.    Humour  is  the   leaven   of   these strange couplings. The  poet  is a  woman  bleeding   through  all  the  seasons  of  the moon, but managing to laugh  at the crazy lunar mysteries. Grave  dirt  is fertilizer for the new generation.

We  never   touched though his  sea-blood warmed  with   mine. Sand   and  salt burned-
the  sweet  smell sent  my
moon's heart
coughing its  sad  laugh.

In "Kiskatinaw Songs",  the personal voice  becomes  the  song  of  the  shaman, and   witch   becomes   witch-doctor. The songs  of  experience  become  legend.  Al­ most as if the words  were  to be carved in bark  or  written in  damp sand,  they  are pared   to  the  bone.  The  language comes out  of  the  forest  and  the  antique mouth of  the  West  Coast   Indian. The poet  is only  the  medium.

Listen  to  me.
Now  I must  go away.

Lest  we  take  it  all  too  seriously,  the fragile  transformation of event  into  ritual is  finally   parodied  in   "Selected Straw-


121

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



berries". Strawberry, everyone's splendour in  the  grass,  threatens to  become  mouth and   gobble   her   whole   mythical  world. Tired   of  the  discipline of  metaphor, the poet dumps the whole spice-box  of words. Strawberry becomes  all the shibboleths as she rattles  through the catalogue from nursery  rhyme  to Greek  tragedy, "Straw­ berry at Colonus". Squished, it sends blood in all directions.
While  Musgrave examines the  universe
from  a fixed point,  Paulette Jiles flashes words through train  windows. Every poem in  her  first  book,  Waterloo Express, is a frame   in  a  travelogue. The   poems   are points   in  the  locus  of  a  journey   which takes  the  character everywhere in search of an author.

Snatched   loose    from    my   baggage    and address,  goodbyes  falling
away  in flakes  of dead  skin,  you'd  say  I
was a high
pariah, sleepless and  nowhere  to go.

The  secrets  of each  new  landscape are released  with  terrific  energy  as  the  poet tears  through earth and  air  in  the  search for  herself.  She  becomes  the  vehicle  she rides, burning steel and  cresting waves, learning and  looking.  In  the  process, she leaves   the  feminine  stereotypes behind. She  has  taken  over  the  traditional  terri­ tory   of  the   masculine  romance   figure, understanding earth  and   water,   which have  no dominion over her. She is always ahead  of the seasons.
There is a price to be paid for freedom.
The people  who  stand   like  signposts  on her  life's  highway  have  been  left  behind and  there  is some pain  in the  history  that is crammed like baggage  in  her  brain  as

She  evaporates  through the  window her  skull  roughened   by  thoughts
of revolutions  and  circuses.

Jiles  is a lyric  poet  tumbling songs off


122
 the high wire where she skips alone. The dizzy music is checked  only when she stumbles  on  the  similes  she  has  failed  to heat into metaphor. The fantasy is aborted when  we collide  with  "like", the clumsy  reminder that  we are  only  riders of the  subway  and  not  astronauts. There is no time in Jiles' fast ride for ordinary machinery.  The   images   have   a  life  of their  own.
In visual terms, the poems are like the paintings of Marc  Chagall. Gorgeous dis­ connected  figures  float   by  on   wisps  of cloud  and  magic  carpets of  flowers.  All the   paraphernalia  of  life's  circus   is  as­ sembled  in a giant  mobile moving  in the wind.
So  much  nervous  energy  is consumed in the  effort to organize and move through the  jumble  of images.  It is given off in the music of exposed nerves. The sounds  of ordinary life,  selected,  become surreal, a neurotic accompaniment to the poetry.

Over  your  voice my mind
snaps  taught  as a  sheet  in  a  high  wind.

In the process of trying on countries, people  and  suits  of clothes,  Jiles  has  be­ come   a  troubadour.  Music   is  her   real author. It is the  sound   of  the  footsteps that  keeps her walking.

The  holes in  my shoes speak  up ; they  are the  underground
eyes of my feet and  have observed  the  ways and  means  of the  road  with  the
patience  of  the  Newfoundland  jackass. Now  that   I  am  mending  their  laces, how  close  they  are  to  my heart.

Always  she  is listening,  trying   to  find some   meaning in  strange voices; the scream  of wheels  on  track,  the  noises of loving  and  dying,  and  the  wise conversa­ tion of birds.
LINDA ROGERS

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



THE SOUND OF NEMESIS

JACK  LUDWIG, A  Woman of Her  Age.  McClel- land & Stewart.  $7·95·

SoME YEARS  AGO  Jack   Ludwig wrote  a short  story about a rich old Jewish  matron who descends  from  her  Westmount  man­ sion   to  make   periodic   forays   into  the Yiddish  world of her girlhood. A loveable crone,  apparently she  haunted  Ludwig's  imagination to  the  point  that  he had  to write a novel around her.
Mrs.  Coffman is long and  spindly, un­ sentimentally aware of the ravages eighty­ five  years   have   wrought  on   her  lean shanks.   But   she   is  still   proud   of   her ancient  reputation  as  a  flaming radical  and  she  has, as the  psychiatrists say, ego strength. She  is  carelessly  rich -appa­ rently  she  has  fourteen handbags stuffed with money. From  time to time she wishes that   she  had   some  worthwhile  way  to spend  the  rest of her  life -like studying  law,  for  instance-instead of  whizzing past  the  panorama of  life  in  her  chauf­ feur-driven car,  occasionally getting out to  mingle  with  the  masses.  She  believes, you   see,-or   Ludwig  would    have   us believe-that she has some vital  rapport with  an  American draft dodger, a young mother with a baby, and a kosher butcher who still secretly has the hots for her. But don't mistake  her  for  Pippa passing,  un­ knowingly  changing the lives of  those she encounters.
All right,  we have a character emanat­ ing vitality  in search of-what? Granted, it's  old-fashioned  to  expect   a  story-line any more,  although permissible to hint  at the  possibilities of one. If we simply  have the  flux  of  life  bouncing on  Mrs.  Goff­ man's  sensibility,  we  might  as well  read
 Mrs. Galloway.  The  conventional solution would be a series of flash-back  memories revealing something of  how  the  old romantic is now sitting in  her  limousine. Whether Ludwig contemplated this method   and  discarded it  because  it  had been   done   so  many   times   before,   one simply  doesn't   know.   In   any   event,   as readers,  we  might  as  well  discard  curio­ sity because it's never going to be satisfied. I may be a deviationist but it seems to me that  the  one  bread-and-butter demand a good novel has always elicited  is curiosity,  and  if the  reader's curiosity  isn't  catered to  in  some  measure   he  is  going  to  feel unfulfilled  and  disappointed.
But back to Doha Coffman and all that vitality. Have there been any significant relationships in  her  life?  Well,  there  was her  husband who  died  at  55 after  refus­ ing  surgery.  A  clue  that   Mrs.  Goffman didn't  share   some  of  that   vitality   with Mr.   Goff man?   Who   knows -since   he disappears in a paragraph? But  that  was a  long  time  ago, he's  dead,   and  appar­ ently  Ludwig   intends  to  concentrate on the present.
We then switch to her sexy ex-daughter­
in-law,  Shirley,  who  appears as an  A No. r  Bitch  who,  word  has  it,  had  a  former lover-why  did  he  have  to  have  a  bad case of acne? -down  in  the  kosher  dis­ trict.  There is a hint  of a suggestion  that  she  was  with  Maxie   the  night   her  hus­ band Neville jumped  from his Westmount bedroom   window.   Moreover,  she  never sees Mrs. Coffman nowadays. Significant?
Then there  is another ageing  son, Sid­ ney,  who  lives with  his  mother  and  is a limping   pack   of  frustrations.  With   his homburg pulled   down  over  his  ears,  he must  be a dull  companion for the  bounc­ ing  Doha.  In  one  hilarious scene -not unlike   the  set-piece   at   the   progressive


123

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



school in Richler's Cocksure-Sidney fantasizes the rape  of his over-weight secretary.
Things are  now  becoming very confus­ ing  for  your  Common Reader.  Have  we really   been   reading  carefully   enough? Have  we been  taken  in  by rumour, trick­ ery,  or  fantasy?  Did   Neville   leap   from that  window  because  he  couldn't consis­ tently   make   it?   Did   Shirley   leave   the house  that   night  with  the  baby  because she   was   terrified   of   Neville's    schizoid paranoia? And  that knocking at  the door in the middle of  the night  which  a dishev­  elled  Doba  rushes  to  answer. "If no  one was there,  it would  not  be the first time."  The sound  of  Nemesis.  Could   it  be that  our  darling,  loveable,  old  Mrs.  Coffman is  just  another castrating Jewish  mama? Oh dear.
PHYLLIS GROSSKURTH



ON THE VERGE

*****  PIERRE BERTON, Klondike. McClelland
&  Stewart, $I o.oo.  This  is a  reprint, with con­
siderable additions  and   revisions, of  what  has
become  something  of   a   classic   of   Canadian non-academic history. It has  stood   up  surpris­ ingly  well  in  the  fifteen years  since  it  was  first published,  and    remains   unchallenged   as   the best  history of  the  last  great gold  rush.  Berton  felicitously  combines  the flexibility of  journa­ listic   writing with  sound   research and a  good overall  sense   of   historical  composition.  The result   is  a  broad   vista   of  events fascinatingly populated.

*****   MARCEL  TRUDEL,   The   Beginnings   of New  France,  15114·1663. McClelland &  Stew­ art,  $I 2.50.   The  completion of    volumes  in series  rarely follows   the  intentions  of  publish­ ing  programmes, and   The  Beginnings  of New France, which  is  No.  2   in   the I8  volume history  of   Canada   known   as   the    Canadian
Centenary Series,  is  in  fact   almost the  last  to appear. But   it  is  worth  waiting  for.   In   con-
 structing it,  Professor Trudel  has  in  fact  con­ densed   a  series   of  three  works   covering   the period   from    1524   to   I663  which   had   previ­ ously  been  published in  French, and  has added material from   other  books  and   new  material. The material -translated  by Patricia Claxton
-has not   appeared  before   in   England, and
the   work   of  condensation  and   insertion  has been  skilfully  done; the  reader who  comes  new to  Professor  Trudel's work  would  not  be aware of it  if  he were  not  forewarned in  the  preface.
Both  author and   translator get  off  to  a  some­ what   halting start,  but   they   build   up  steam quickly, and   the   result   is  a  fluent,  balanced and  very enlightening introduction  to  the  early  history  of  New  France, setting it  firmly  in  the context  both   of  world   events at  the  time  and  also   of   the   native  societies   into   which    the French pioneers  intruded.

****   ABRAHAM    cowLEY.    The    Civil    War, edited  by  Allan   Pritchard.  University of  Tor­ onto    Press.   $10.00.  Abraham   Cowley's    un­ completed  heroic   poem,   The   Civil  War,  was long  thought lost,  possibly  destroyed  by  Cow­ ley with  the  exception of  the  fragment entitled A  Poem  on  the   Late   Civil   War   which   was published  by  an   obscure  bookseller  in   I679 and   later   included  in  a   number of  Tonson's miscellanies.  Recently,   however,   Allan    Prit­ chard of the  University of Toronto discovered, in  the  Cowper family papers entrusted  to  the Hertford  Record   Office,   a  manuscript  of  the whole   poem  as  it  was  abandoned  by  Cowley in   1643  after   he   realized that  Royalist    for­ tunes  had   taken   an  irremediable turn   for  the worse   at  the   Battle  of   Newbury.  A  further copy   of   the   poem,    parts  of   it   probably  in Cowley's  hand, later came  to light  in  the  same cache   of  manuscripts.  Now   Professor Pritch­ ard  publishes for  the  first  time  what-in  his­ torical  terms-is    a   significant  addition   to mid-seventeenth  century   English  poetry.    In terms  of quality one  can  speak  less confidently. Cowley   may  have   had   the   epic   ambition;  he did  not  have   the  epic  power, and   he  is  likely to  be  remembered, as  he  was   before,   mainly as a fine  lyricist  with  an  elegiac turn  of mind, and   a  gentle,  civilized    essayist.   Perhaps  the most   significant  aspect  of  The   Civil   War   is that   it  reveals  a  contentious and   uncharitable side  to  Cowley's   character which   his  familiar works  do  not   lead   one   to  expect, and   so  we realize  how  the  poet  matured with  experience. Professor   Pritchard has  edited The   Civil  War with   such   monumental  thoroughness  that   the scholarly apparatus  takes   up  more   than  twice as  much  space  as Cowley's poem.






NOVELISTS AND THE NATION

MANY  COMMENTATORS have  tried  to dis­ cover  or define  the  precise  characteristics of  Canadian  nationality.   Generally   the views of  literary  commentators-novel­ ists-have been  regarded as impractical or   irrelevant.   Yet   Canadian  novelists, writing  in  English,  provide  an  illuminat­ ing  commentary on  prevailing attitudes toward   nationality  that   have  evolved  in their   country  since   the   middle   of   the eighteenth century.
The History  of Emily  Montague is an
early novel which  describes Canada as a colonial  or provincial outpost. With  its action  set in  the  period  immediately  fol­ lowing  Wolfe's   great   victory,   the  novel consists   of   letters    exchanged   between protagonists who are  drawn  largely  from English   army   personnel,   their   relatives and  friends.   As one  of   these  correspon­ dents  writes:

It  [Quebec city,  or  Canada] is like  a  third or   fourth  rate   country  town   in   England: much  hospitality, little   society,  cards,  scan­ dal,  dancing, and  good  cheer; all  excellent things   to  pass  away  a  winter  evening.

Frances  Brooke, the English  author of the novel, spent  five years in Canada as wife of  the  chaplain to  the  Quebec garrison. The  society that  she saw is made  up pre­ dominantly  of  expatriate   military   and administrative personnel  who  feel  loyalty not  to  Canada, but  to  their  native  land
-England. If life in Canada is simply a
 means  of  serving  England, it  is not  sur­ prising  that   Mrs.  Brooke's  characters do not show much  evidence  of  local loyalties. The  image  of Canada  as an outpost of Empire  lasted   for   almost   one   hundred years  after  The History   of  Emily Mon­ tague.  This   image   can   be  seen,  for  ex­ ample,  in  the  novels of  John Richardson who  wrote  in  the  first  half  of  the  nine­ teenth   century   and  was  the  first  native Canadian novelist  to  achieve  wide  recog­ nition.    Richardson   attempts  to   define wholly   Canadian   sentiments  and    atti­ tudes,  and  in his fourth novel  The Cana­  dian   Brothers,   one   of   his   protagonists
illustrates this attempt when  he says:

I too  am  a Canadian, but  so far  from endeavouring  to   repudiate  my   country,  I feel  pride  in  having received my  being in  a land   where   everything attests the  sublimity and   magnificence  of  nature.  Look   around you ... and  ask  yourself  what there is in  the wild  grandeur of these  scenes  to disown!
Ostensibly   this  assertion   of  native   pride denies   provincialism.  But   the   speaker's self-proclaimed patriotism,  based  purely on his admiration of the  Canadian  land­ scape,  entirely   lacks  the  conviction  that might    be   conveyed    by    deeply    rooted  psychological  traits  or  actual habits   and customs.  It is forced  patriotism prompted partly   by  the  fact   that   Canada's  ambi­ valent   cultural   association  with    Great  Britain   encourages Canadians,  to  some extent,  to  repudiate  their   own  practices in  favour   of  English   customs   and   man­ ners.   Thus,  far   from   asserting  native pride,  this patriotic statement rather con­ firms Canadian provincialism.
A similar  portrait of  Canadian  society is given  by one  of  Richardson's  contem­ poraries,  Thomas Chandler  Haliburton. Haliburton is  not  a  novelist;  he  is  best remembered for  his  work  as a  social  and political commentator and  for his humor-


125

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



ous fictional sketches. In the sketches, he ex;resses his views through a roguish Yankee  pedlar,  Sam  Slick,  who  is almost certainly speaking  for his creator in the following  typically  forthright  pronounce­ ment:

Provincialism and  nationalism are different degrees  of  the   same   thing, and   both   take their    rise    in    the    same    feeling,   love   of country.

Here,  in fact,  Haliburton does more  than confirm    the   portrait   of   provincialism given  by  Mrs.  Brooke  and   Richardson: he  argues  that   provincialism is the  early stage of an evolutionary process in which unstable feelings about Canada will grad­ ually   acquire   stability  and    eventually form   the   solid   core   of   truly   national sentiment.
After Confederation, attitudes toward Canadian nationality underwent a change that   is  reflected  in  the  literature of  the period.  Novelists  no  longer  viewed  Can­ ada  as  a  colonial   outpost  lacking  estab­ lished  local  customs  and  manners; they saw  instead   a  "colonial  nation", that  is, a  country  which   retained  strong   social and  political  links  with  England but  still possessed  an  independent  culture of  its own. This ambivalent portrait of a "colo­  nial nation" is reproduced most vividly in the  novels of Sara  Jeannette Duncan. In her  best  known   work,  The   Imperialist, the  patriotic Canadian  hero  loves  Eng­ land with as much  devotion as he does Canada. As he contemplates his first visit to  England, the  hero,  Lome Murchison, tells his sister Dora :

I've   been    reading  up   the   history  of   our political relations with   England. It's  aston­ ishing   that we've   stuck   to  her  through, but you   can't  help    seeing   why-it's   for    the moral advantage. Way  down  at the  bottom, that's what it  is. We have  the  sense  to want  all we can  get  of  that sort  of thing. They've
 developed the  finest  human product there is, the  cleanest, the  most  disinterested, and  we want to  keep  up  the  relationship-it's important

Such fawning admiration for England seems to throw suspicion on Murchison's love  of  his  own  country; but  he  speaks with greater conviction than  Richardson's Nature-loving enthusiast mentioned earlier.  It was the  peculiar  historical situ­ ation  in  which  he lived  that allowed  him and  many  of his countrymen  to see Can­ ada  both  as a colony of  Great Britain  and a separate nation  in its own right.
Murchison's views are  conditioned  by
events during a period when the British Empire was in its prime. Because of her military  and   economic    supremacy,  he could envisage Britain as the centre of a stable,  social and  political  union  in which all  her  Imperial possessions, colonies and dominions  alike,  would   link  themselves for   mutual  benefit. This  world-wide, English-speaking Commonwealth may seem impractical to us today;  but  in Sara Jeannette Duncan's time  it  was seriously contemplated by many leading public figures. While each British territory would yield  up  some  of  its  sovereignty   in  the interest    of  collective   security,   it   could expect  to develop  and,  in large  measure, retain  its own independent national char­ acter.   This  was   the   hope:   that   each nation  would  have  greater  scope for  de­ velopment within  the  security  of a  com­ mon,  supra-national   British   framework. But shifts  in the balance of world  power, coupled  with  the  growth  of local  nation­ alisms  the  world  over  were  to doom  this grand  and  benign  Imperial scheme, mak­  ing it, in  due  course,  both  irrelevant and anachronistic.
With  the demise of colonial  nationality a  fresh   concept   of  Canada  came   into

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



focus  in  Canadian fiction.  Neil  Macrae, the   hero   of   Hugh   MacLennan's   first novel Barometer  Rising envisages a new nation  stretching from  the Atlantic to the Pacific,  and   from   the  Arctic   ice  cap  to the Great  Lakes. Macrae's Canada is:

this  anomalous land, this  sprawling waste  of timber and   rock  and   water where the  only living   sounds   were   the   footfalls  of  animals or   the   fantastic  laughter  of   a   loon,   this empty  tract of primordial silences  and  winds and   erosions   and   shifting colors,   this  bead­ like  string of  crude towns  and  cities  tied  by nothing but   railway tracks, this  nation un­  discovered by  the  rest  of  the  world  and  un­  known   to  itself,  these  people  neither Ameri­  can   nor   English,  nor  even   sure   what  they wanted  to  be,  this  unborn  mightiness, this question mark,  this  future for  himself, and  for  God  knows  how  many millions of  man­  kind.

Although Canadian society is an  unstable mixture  of   cultural  elements    that   are partly  British  and  partly  American, Mac­ rae  foresees  the  assimilation of  these ele­ ments  into  a  new  and  stable  union  that would   be  neither British   nor  American, but   distinctly   Canadian.   Moreover,  he expresses  the  rather  idealistic hope  that  the new Canada will be such  a significant development  that   it  would   affect   "God knows  how  many  millions  of  mankind".
Macrae's idealism  was obviously shared by  Hugh   MacLennan  and   by  a   great many  Canadians. It  underlies the  emer­ gence   of  a  new  world   order   in   which Canada will play a significant and indeed central role. As Macrae reflects:

But  if there  were  enough Canadians like himself,     half-American   and     half-English, then  the  day  was  inevitable when  the  halves would   join  and   his  country  would  become the    central  arch    which   united   the    new order.

What is envisaged  is the  growth  and widespread application of a broad, urban­ industrial, technological culture  and  way
 of  life  which   would   form   the  basis  not only  of  the  Canadian  nation but  of  na­ tions  all  over  the  world.  Canada  would thus  have  an  open  culture, exclusively  its own,  yet  readily  accessible  to  the  wider world   community.  But   as   MacLennan himself   was   later    to   realize,  the   new nation  was unlikely  to  emerge  so long  as the  problem  of  Quebec's assimilation re­ mained. In  his  sixth  novel,  The  Return of  the   Sphinx,  Neil   Macrae's  buoyant idealism has vanished, and is replaced instead  by disillusionment and  regret.
MacLennan's  fiction   fairly   represents
the  rather hazy and  confusing or  contra­ dictory   image   of  Canadian   nationality that  is to be found  in  the  novels of many of his contemporaries. Some  novelists  are skeptical   of  the  very  idea  of  an   exclu­  sively Canadian  nation that  is also inter­ national in  character. The  hero  of  Fred Bodsworth's   The  Atonement of  Ashley Morden is a  typical  spokesman for  Can­ ada's  international  culture.  When   he  is asked   by  an   army   official   to  carry   out research  in germ  warfare, the hero objects on   the   grounds  that   he  is  an  interna­ tionalist: "I'm  an  internationalist. I rec­ ognize  one   allegiance ... mankind -all mankind." But  the  official challenges the whole idea of an  international state:

It's   [the  international state]  not   created yet, and  it doesn't look  as  if it's  going  to be created  for   a   long    time.    Until  then    all you've  got  to pay  that proud and  pious allegiance is a  dream. You're afraid to  face up  to  the  world   we  have,  and   you're using this  internationalism thing as a front to hide behind.

From the  bland unconcern of Mrs. Brooke's  characters  to  the  blunt  scepti­ cism of Bodsworth's army  official, Cana­ dian  fiction  reproduces a  national image that  is sometimes  ambivalent, often  con­ tradictory, and always vague.

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



Three main  changes  have  been  noticed in  the image  of Canada that  is presented by  the   novelists   we  have   discussed.   At first Canada is shown  to be a colony or provincial outpost; then  it is presented as a  "colonial nation"; and  then  finally,  by the mid-twentieth century, there is scarce­ ly  any  consistent   image   at  all.  We  may suggest  two factors  as a possible explana­ tion of this inconclusive pattern. The first is that  the original conception of Canada was  dictated   by   military,  political  and diplomatic   considerations  which    have gradually   disappeared : in  other  words Canada,  in  its present  form,  is playing  a role   that   no  longer   exists.  The second factor  is the unavoidable proximity of the U.S.A.  whose  size  and   power  make   the emergence  and   ultimate  survival   of  a truly  independent Canadian  nation  im­ practical,  unlikely,   perhaps   undesirable.

FRANK BIRBALSINGH


FRYE ENUMERATED

FROM SCARECROW  PRESS of  New  Jersey  comes the  first   definitive  checklist  of  works   by  and about Northrop Frye.  Northrop Frye:  An Enumerative   Bibliography   ( $5.00)   is    com­ piled  by Robert B. Denham. It begins with  an introductory essay  that   is  rather  simplistic in its  adulation,  but   the   actual   list,  with   more  than three hundred items  by  Frye  himself  and  almost five  hundred  pieces  relating to  him,  is remarkably  thorough in  its  coverage, embrac­ ing  even  relatively obscure  but  sometimes per­  ceptive  notices in   provincial  newspapers, and  its  adequacy in  this  respect makes  it  a  neces­ sary  handbook  for  any  reader engaged in  the intensive study  of  Frye  and   his  achievements.
 PRAIRIE BIBLIOGRAPHY

AFICIONADos  of western history and  literature will welcome  the appearance of a second  and enlarged edition of Bruce  Braden Peel's  A Bibliography  of the   Prairie   Provinces to  1953 with   Biographical Index.   (University  of   To­ ronto  Press,  $45.00).  This  invaluable  check­ list  first  appeared in   I 956; a  supplement was issued  in  I 963;  now  the  information has  been collated  and    new   titles   added,  so   that    the Bibliography contains  more than  4,400   anno­ tated entries, beginning with  the  Kelsey  papers which,   though   published  only   in   the    I 920s, actually   date  in   terms   of   composition  from
I 692  and   represent  the  earliest known record of  the  Canadian  prairies.

G.W.


EVERYMAN'S CHECK LIST

FoR   THOSE  who   want  a   handier  reference book  than the  massive  and costly  Watters Checklist, Michael Gnarowski's Concise  Bibli­ ography of English-Canadian Literature   (Mc­ Clelland  &  Stewart,  paperback,   $2.95)   pro­  vides   a   much    needed   guide   to   the    major Canadian  writers of   the   past   two   centuries, listing  their  significant works  and in  each  case noting the  most  useful  critical essays  relating to  them.  It is to  be  recommended to  students and    teachers,  but   especially  to   the   general reader who  needs  a  convenient guide  which  is neither  expensive  nor  unwieldy  but  which   at the  same  time  is  thorough.

L.T.C.


A.A.
