$5.00  per copy




CANADIAN l TERATURE N°·81
Summer) 1979


THE NINETEENTH  CENTURY

Articles

BY DAVID JACKEL, L. R . EARLY,  ROSMARIN IIEIDENREICII,
CATHER I NE  SHELDRICK ROSS, D. M. R. BENTLEY, T. D. MACLULICH, LESLIE MONKMAN, RAMSAY COOK 	'· 	.

Poems

BY GLEN SORESTAD, FRED  COGSWELL, RON  MILES

Reviews

BY TOM  VINCENT, SUSAN WOOD, S. E. READ, LORRAINE WEIR, DICK HARRISON, CLARKE BLAISE, DIANE  BESSAI, PETER QlJARTERMAIN, KEITH GAREBIAN, R.  B.  HATCH, AL  P URDY,  M ICHAEL GREENSTEIN, LINDA  ROGERS, RON  MILES

Opinions and  Notes

BY HENRY KREISEL, LEON SLONIM, DOROTHY  FARMILOE, MARY  JANE  EDWARDS, GARY A. BOIRE, GEORGE  WOODCOCK


A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW










VOICES FROM THE PAST







"As TO  GHOSTS OR  SPIRITs," wrote Mrs. Traill  in The  Back­ woods of Canada, "they appear  totally banished from Canada. This is too matter­  of-fact country for such supernaturals to visit. Here there are no historical associa­ tions, no legendary tales of those that came before us. Fancy would starve for lack of marvellous food to keep her alive in the backwoods." From  our own vantage point in time, such a dearth  no longer confronts us. The work of anthropological  investigators like Marius  Barbeau  has familiarized  us  with  the stories and  tradi­ tions of our native peoples; and folklorists like Helen Creighton,  Edith  Fowke and Germain  Lemieux  have recorded  an impressive variety of songs, tales and super­ stitions handed  down by generations of French and English Canadians. We have our heroes and villains, our myths and monsters; and every region of Canada  can boast its legendary, literary or historical associations. Sadly, to most of us the cul­ tural  and  political history of  our  country  still remains a blur,  and  we are  more familiar  with  the  legendary  exploits of other  nations'  heroes than  with those of our own. This is less true, perhaps, in Quebec, where the homogeneity of a society long closed in on itself  has facilitated  the survival and  encouragement of cultural  traditions.  English  Canada, by contrast,  too often seems impervious  to its past, eager to establish an  unmistakably  modern identity.
So books like Pierre Berton's The  Wild  Frontier (McClelland & Stewart), un­ satisfactory  as they must  seem to a  professional historian,  have  a  value  beyond their obvious popular appeal: they put us in touch with our past, and bring before us the men and  women who, through  their ambition, or greed, or love of adven­ ture, opened up this country and laid the foundation of our society. Berton focusses on individuals  whose lives were filled with action:  men like Wilfred Grenfell, "the perfect schoolboy  hero"; Sam  Steele, the  Mountie  who  commanded   the force's

3

EDITORIAL

cavalry during the 1885 uprising; Almighty Voice, the Cree Indian  whose defiance of white  man's  law led to the last outbreak  of open  warfare  on  the  Canadian frontier.  There  is of course a  danger  in  dwelling  too  fondly  on  such  exciting moments in our past, the danger that we may romanticize  and thus falsify our ancestors' achievements. To Berton's credit, he avoids this pitfall;  he takes note of the Hollywood glamour that  has invested our  notions of the frontier,  and  rejects it. "We tend to overlook the pain of exploration," he observes in his preface;  "The country was opened up at dreadful cost. Most frontier chronicles are also chronicles of human  misery."
A very different  picture of Canada's past emerges from Beverly Fink Cline's compilation  Louisa Clark's Annual  1843  ( Poroepic), the third  in a series of slim volumes in which  excerpts from  journals like the  Literary  Garland  are  blended with  writings  by a  fictional "Lady  Writer  Residing  in  the  Town  of  Goderich Canada West."  Short  pieces on slavery or  the  poor sit side by side with  songs, recipes, and  engravings of romantic  landscapes.  This  kind of pot-pourri  was not unusual  in Victorian  publications, and  its resuscitation  here does have a certain charm. At the same time, however, the effect is to make our ancestors seem quaint, sentimental,  or merely silly. We cannot  make the past come alive simply by imi­ tating it: ultimately, that can only produce a sense of its remoteness.
A more direct  means of contact  with the  past is provided  by the camera.  The
development  of photography  antedated  Confederation by some thirty  years, and consequently we possess excellent photographic records of various aspects of  nine­ teenth-century  life in Canada, notably in the field of portraiture. George  Wood­ cock's Faces From History: Canadian  Profiles & Portraits (Hurtig) is a splendid collection of a hundred  and twenty portraits,  each accompanied by a concise and lucid commentary  summarizing the life and achievement of the subject. Woodcock has gathered  the politicians and the businessmen, the rebels and the writers, who shaped  our  country  and gave us a cultural  heritage  worthy  of respect, not con­ descension. John  A. Macdonald  and  Louis Riel;  William  van  Horne  and  Alex­ ander  Graham Bell; Emile Nelligan and  Emily  Gowan  Murphy: here  they sit, mutely reminding  us that we have a rich and complex  past-that  Canada is no longer a "young" country. The  poses are often stiff and  awkward,  a reflection of the difficulties facing  early photographers;  nevertheless, the  portraits  still tell us much about  the personalities of the sitters, and  give a valuable  human  dimension to dry historical fact.
In the last dozen years we have been well served by publications  documenting our past in pictures, most memorably by the McGill University Press edition of Portrait of a Period, a fine selection by J. Russell Harper and Stanley Triggs from the Notman  archives. More recently, local historians  have dug into  municipal  or provincial archives, to produce collections like Vancouver's First Century: A City
Album  1860-1960  (J. J. Douglas), or Old  New  Brunswick:  A Victorian  Portrait,

4

EDITORIAL

edited  for  Oxford  University  Press by Richard  Vroom  and  Arthur Doyle. The importance of such records is unquestionable; but there is still an element of  un­ reality about  many  of these "views" of early Canada.  The  neat  New  Brunswick townscapes,  the  spotless shop  fronts  and  tidy streets  photographed  by George Thomas  Taylor  and  Isaac  Erb are as carefully posed and arranged  as any studio portrait.  The  camera  may  not lie, but it doesn't  necessarily tell the  whole truth either. In  this respect the work of the photographer  is comparable  to that  of the landscape  artist;  both see with an interpretative eye, and  the image they convey reflects something  of their  personal vision. A good example of  nineteenth-century landscape art is provided by the work of Joseph Legare, the first native Canadian landscape-painter, whose pictures are collected in a  handsome  catalogue raisonne prepared  for the National  Gallery of Canada  by John R. Porter. One of the most striking pictures, in subject if not in execution, is Legare's depiction of the meeting in 1826 between a group of Hurons and the English actor Edmund Kean, on the banks of the Saint  Lawrence: an encounter which, in composition and  choice of detail, is charged  with  extra  significance by  the artist  to emphasize  the  contrast between two utterly  different  civilizations. Such curious incidents abound  in our annals, and deserve to be better known.
Literary scholarship  has not lagged behind in the recovery of our  past, though it is still difficult  to obtain  good texts of works published  before  the  twentieth century. An important contribution  is the series of reprints  issued by the Univer­ sity of Toronto Press, under  the general editorship of Douglas  Lochhead.  Latest to be published  in this series is Barrie Davies' edition  of  At  the  Mermaid  Inn: Wilfred Campbell, Archibald Lampman, Duncan Campbell Scott in The Globe,
1892-3, an invaluable  collection of articles that impresses one by the breadth  of the
writers' concerns and  the maturity  of their intellectual outlook. Campbell, Lamp­ man and Scott  wrote on topics very much  alive today:  the rights of  women, the spirit of nationalism,  the existence of a Canadian literature; and as the editor notes in his introduction, " 'At  the  Mermaid  Inn'  makes it clear  that  there  is a  con­ tinuum of sensibility and a history of ideas which ought to enable us, in future,  to be more specific and confident about  the implications of the word Canadian when we speak of Canadian literature."
The  work of modern  anthologists  has been especially useful in  establishing  a sense of a  Canadian literary  tradition  in  both  prose and  poetry:  collections by
Ralph  Gustafson,  A. J. M. Smith,  Carl  Klinck and Reginald  Watters  have been
instrumental  in giving impetus  and direction to the study of our literature. Their work has been ably  carried  on  by Mary  Jane  Edwards'  four-volume  anthology The  Evolution of Canadian Literature in English (Holt,  Rinehart & Winston), and most recently by the two volumes of Literature in Canada, edited for Gage by Douglas Daymond  and  Leslie Monkman. These  anthologies, designed for college and university use, reach a much wider audience than critical histories such as the

5

EDITORIAL

Literary History of Canada, and are at least as influential  in forming public taste. Inevitably,  anthologists can only hint at the wealth  of material  from which they have made their selections, and  the general  reader  may be forgiven for thinking that  fewer than  a dozen Canadian  poets were at  work in the nineteenth  century. In fact, as Gordon  Roper  pointed out some years ago in Read  Canadian,  more than  five hundred  writers braved the adverse conditions of publishing in Canada to  produce  between  them  over eight  hundred   volumes  of  verse. Most  of  these have  gone down  the  dusty  road  to oblivion,  deservedly  perhaps; but  they  are evidence of a more vigorous intellectual life than  one might  have suspected. In  a new anthology  from Quebec,  Anthologie  de la poesie quebecoise du  XJXe  siecle (1790-1890)   (Hurtubise HMH)  John  Hare  presents selections from  the  poetry of more than forty writers, few of whom are likely to be known outside their native province, yet whose works constitute a tradition  vital to the successful development of better-known  poets. In his preface, Hare asks, "aurait-on connu I'oeuvre geniale d'un  Nelligan, sans la centaine de poetes qui l'ont  precede?" The  writer, like other artists, is nourished  by the achievements of his predecessors, which form a living and continuous tradition  drawn on and modified by successive generations. Noth­ ing is to be gained by uncritical admiration  of our ancestors, by exaggerated praise for minor or insignificant writers; but we should be ready to respect their contribu­  tion, and  acknowledge their  place in the literary landscape that  once seemed so desolate to Mrs. Traill.
H.J.R.












CANADIAN  AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available at
the bookstore
UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
2075  WESBROOK PLACE
VANCOUVER, B.C. V6T 1W5  /228-4741


6


OCEAN TO OCEAN
G. M.Grant's (round unvarnish'd  tale'




David Jackel







GEORGE MONRO   GRANT's Ocean  to Ocean  has often  been described as a classic Canadian travel book, and rightly so. Few other  works of its kind retain  their  appeal  three  generations after  publication,  when the novelty of the  experiences  described  has  long  dissipated  and  the  writer  himself  has  long ceased to be a figure in the  popular  mind.  Grant still speaks to us, more than  a hundred  years after  his journey, and  his book would, I think, stand  comparison with such non-Canadian classics of the genre as Defoe's Tour  through  the Whole Island of Great Britain and  Boswell's journal of a Tour  to the Hebrides. Such a comparison  is not, however, my purpose here. Although  Grant's Ocean to Ocean is, indeed,  a masterful  travel  narrative,  it is also much  more  than  that,  and  just how much  more does not seem to have been recognized. In  the revised Literary History of Canada R. G. Moyles does make brief reference  to Grant's "narrative stances"  and  proposes that  we view the  book as a  "combination of  adventure­ story and  mythic chronicle."1 These comments are suggestive, but  they do not go nearly far enough  to explain either the significance of Grant's ideas or his artistry in expressing them.  The  word  artistry I choose deliberately,  because  a  literary analysis of Ocean to Ocean reveals that Grant has, notwithstanding his disclaimers, done  more than  simply forward  to the printer  the notes hastily taken  during  his transcontinental journey. A close reading of the book, with particular attention  to its narrative  method,  its structure, and its recurring themes, shows that  its author  was no mere diarist but rather  a prose writer of some considerable  talent who has produced  an important document  in Canadian cultural  history. Ocean  to Ocean gives us a vision of social and  political relationships akin  to that  afforded  by the major Victorian  novelists, an expression of the aspirations and ideals of an influen­ tial segment of  nineteenth-century Canada. What  we see in Grant's work is not so much a vision of the west as it was in 1872  but of the west as Canada of the post-Confederation period  wanted  it to be. It  is the intensity  of this vision, and the moral basis on which it rested, which give Ocean to Ocean  a significance not

7

OCEAN TO  OCEAN

usually  found  in travel  narratives. Close reading will  reveal  this, and  something more.  Beyond  the  significance  that  Grant intended, there  is in his book  a further value for the modern reader,  who can learn  from  it how even the laudable aspira­ tions of moral  men  can be corrupted by the means  they  choose for  realizing them.  The  lesson is not,  of course, a new one, but  at a moment in  history when  we are once  again  attempting to articulate national ideals  we might  do worse  than  con­ sider   the   intellectual  strengths   and   weaknesses   of  one   of   our   most   patriotic ancestors.
Grant himself insisted that  Ocean to Ocean was not a work of art:  "The book,
except  the first chapter and  the last, is simply  a Diary, written as we  journeyed." 2
This  point  is made several more  times in the opening and  closing chapters. In  his introduction Grant says that  the book "consists  of notes" presented to the  public "just as they  were  written" so that  his readers "might see,  as far  as  possible,  a photograph of what  we saw and  thought from  day  to day":

A more  readable  book could  have  been  made  by omitting  some things,  coloring others,  and  grouping  the whole; but, as already  explained,  the object  was not  to make a book.

Grant begins  his  concluding chapter  by  stressing  once  agam the  factual,  non­
literary  quality of his narrative:

The  preceding  chapters  are  transcribed -almost  verbally-from a  Diary  that was written  from day to day on our journey from Ocean,  Ocean-ward. The  Diary was kept under  many difficulties. Notes had  to be taken, sometimes in the bottom of a canoe and  sometimes leaning against a stump  or a tree;  on horseback  in fine weather,  under  a cart when it was raining  or when  the sun's  rays were fierce;  at night, in the tent, by the light of the camp-fire in front; in a crowded wayside inn, or on the deck of a steamer in motion.

From writing done in such unfavourable circumstances what  else can we expect but a "diary," or  "notes," or a "photograph"? Grant assures  us that  his object  "was not  to  make   a  book"  but  to  deliver  "a  round unvarnish'd tale." In  echoing Othello's words  here  Grant  obviously intends to give us one  more  example of his commitment to truth and  plain speech.  Some  readers, however, will wonder  why Grant is so insistent  on this point; unlike Othello, Grant is addressing an audience which  has  not  yet  accused  him  of anything, and, furthermore, if  his  audience knows Shakespeare's play Grant's allusion  to it will only increase  their  suspicions: "I think  this  tale  would  win  my  daughter  too,"  says  the  Duke,   after   hearing Othello's vivid summary of his "round unvarnish'd" account.
Grant's disclaimers, then,  draw  attention to  themselves,  and  encourage us  to look for other  evidence that  he did in fact set out "to make  a book." Such  evidence is not difficult  to find. One  of the most striking instances of Grant's "coloring" of his materials may be found  in the way he creates a personality for  himself as nar­ rator  of  his own  book,  a  personality  based  on,  but  differing in  significant  ways

8

OCEAN TO  OCEAN

from, that  of the "real" George Monro  Grant.  The  narrator of Ocean  to Ocean presents himself as "the Secretary," an energetic, enthusiastic tourist eager for adventure,  seldom perturbed  by the inconveniences of travel, and  noticeably fond of campfire meals. When the steamer Frances Smith  makes its slow progress from Collingwood to Thunder Bay the Secretary notes that  its "needlessly long delays" nevertheless provide his party with an opportunity  for a daily swim.3  When rapids must be shot on the Maligne River the Secretary finds in the experience not danger or inconvenience  but rather  pleasure, "a fascination ... , as of music or poetry." When dinner  is delayed one evening in the mountains the Secretary finds that  the cook's "under-done bread"  will serve very well for making toast to take the edge off his hunger.  He then does full justice to the supper which follows, a meal com­ posed of "excellent" trout  and grilled beaver:

In due time everything was ready, and the five who had never tasted beaver, pre­ pared themselves to sit in judgment. The verdict was favourable  throughout; the meat tender, though dry; the liver a delicious morsel, and the tail superior to the famous moose-muffie.

Many other  meals are described with similar enthusiasm. The  party's first supper of fresh buffalo meat is termed "an event in our journey";  the merits of pemmican are extolled on more than one occasion; and Doctor Moren's "plum-pudding," concocted of berry pemmican, flour and water, baking soda, sugar and salt, is presented as one of the culinary triumphs of the expedition. An attentive  reader of Ocean  to  Ocean  will notice  that  there  is almost  as much  direct  and  detailed description of meals as there is of the landscape through which Grant's party passes.
What emerges from passages like these is the picture·of an open, uncomplicated, cheerful man, fond of the simple pleasures of life. The Secretary is, in other words, not a man to be taken too seriously, and this impression is reinforced by his presen­ tation  of himself as something  of a comic figure.4   He is absent-minded  at  times, leaving the expedition's  thermometer  hanging on a tree on one occasion. On horse­ back he can be ludicrously impetuous, risking his neck as the expedition  makes its way through  the mountains:

... though a great improvement on the breakneck hills we had been going up and down all day, the clumps of willow and alder stubs and roots kept the horses from venturing on much beyond a walk, -except  the Secretary's, a mad brute called "the fool" which dashed on after the "bell" at such a rate that the rest of the party in following more slowly looked round to pick up the remains.

Even the Secretary's  sermons turn out to be the material for comedy;  throughout the book a running  joke is made out of their length and  their reception  by other members  of the  party.  Despite  their  length,  however, the sermons are straight­ forward  and  non-sectarian, in  keeping  with  the  easy-going  personality  of  the Secretary.  His  political  views find similar  expression;  the  British  connection   IS

9

OCEAN TO  OCEAN

defended, the menaces of the United States are emphasized, and  a spirit of national pride  is everywhere evident,  but  we are  not conscious of any  partisan leanings on the narrator's part.  On  the one occasion  when  the  names  of Canadian  politicians are mentioned, the Secretary avoids their  party  connections and  stresses instead  his theme  of national pride:

we saw the photograph  of an old friend, John Holmes, of Pictou, Nova Scotia, who has been well called "the  oldest and  youngest Senator  of the  Dominion;" and  at Prairie  Portage,  those of the Governor  General,  the  Premier,  Sir  Francis  Hincks, Alexander McKenzie, and others of our public men, adorning  the walls, so that  we were reminded that, although in a new land, we were still in our own Country. Everywhere, in conversation  with the people, we found  the rising of that  national sentiment,  that  pride  in their  Country  and  interest  in  their  Statesmen,  which  is both  a  result  and  a safe-guard  of  national  dignity  and  independence, as  distin­ guished from a petty provincialism.

In  politics,  as in  religion,  the  Secretary seems  to  profess  a  commitment to  the virtues  of tolerance and  co-operation.
The virtues  were also professed by George  Monro Grant, and  put  into  practice, too, as the  record  of his life clearly  indicates.Like the  Secretary he  was, as well,
a  man  of great  eagerness  and  energy.  "Eagerness," say  his  biographers, "is the
word  which  perhaps comes most readily  to mind  when  one  recalls  his aspect.... Energy, boundless  and  absorbing, ran  with  the  eagerness." 6   Something of Grant does, then,  shape  the  personality  of his narrator, but  there  are  other  traits  which the  two do not share.7  The  Secretary's fondness  for meals  must  be set against  the testimony of Grant's son that  his father felt "little regard ... for what  he ate  and drank."8  The  Secretary's unfailing good humour was not always  evident  in Grant himself,  whose  generally  "cheery and  resolute  spirit" was  occasionally offset  by "nasty irritability" and  "warmth of  temper,"9   and  whose  sense  of  humour  was combined with "a capacity  for sarcasm."10  The Secretary's ecumenical tendencies can  be discovered  in Grant himself,11 but  Grant's own  vigorous  Presbyterianism, and  his impressive  influence  as pastor  and  preacher, are  not  qualities assigned  to the Secretary. Ordained in 186o, Grant threw  himself into  his work with  his usual energy, and,  in 1863, when not yet twenty-eight, he was called  to the charge  of St. Matthew's, Halifax, "the  largest  and  most influential Presbyterian Church in the province."12 His sermons, unlike those of the Secretary, were no joking  matter:

Quick  comments,  made  vivid  by their  pungency,  came  from  him  when  he  was suddenly aroused. A few may still remember the vibrant  notes of a voice that  must have  shaken  quite  a few out  of their  self-complacency  and  self-righteousness,  at some of the morning and evening services in old St. Matthew's.18

In  politics,  as  in  religious  matters, Grant was  rather  different from  the  self­
effacing  Secretary:


10

OCEAN TO  OCEAN

t

In  I865-I87o Grant had  shown  himself willing to engage  in  partisan politics in order  to ensure  Nova  Scotia's entry  into  Confederation, demonstrating a flair  for the  platform and  a skill in  debate equal  to that  of  his former political  mentor, Joseph  Howe.  This  activity  did not sit well with several  members of his congrega­ tion  ("Why the  devil  don't you stick  to  your  damned preaching  and  leave  the politics  to  us,"  said  one  prominent merchant) / 5 but  it  established  Grant   as  a political  figure  of importance in Nova Scotia,  and  reveals  that  he had  developed  firmly-held  views on national issues several years before taking  his transcontinental JOUrney:

Nova  Scotia  is too  weak  to  be able  to exist by herself,  and  too  valuable  to  be allowed an independent existence. If a nationality distinct from that of the northern states cannot  be formed, Canada  must fall into the hands of the United States, and we sink or swim with Canada.16

These  remarks are  from  a speech  Grant  delivered  in  I865, and  they  make  clear his commitment to  unification as the  means  of preserving a  Canadian identity.
Something more  than   national pride  inspired  this  commitment, however.  Grant had  done  missionary  work in the slums of Glasgow while attending university,  and he had returned to Nova Scotia convinced  that British North America could afford a refuge  to the  victims  of industrial squalor.17  This  conviction added strength to his political  views, and  encouraged him to participate in the  creation of a united Canada.




GEORGE MONRO  GRANT wAs, UNQUESTIONABLY, a man  of acknowledged ability  and  importance, far  more  impressive than  the  note-taking Secretary who narrates Ocean to Ocean. This latter  figure is Grant's own creation, designed  for  the  purpose of  disarming the  reader. As his son  noted,  another of Grant's distinguishing characteristics was his "consummate cleverness," his ability to sway others  through a "sensitive adaptation of address  to the man  before him.m8
The  narrative method of Ocean  to Ocean is just such  a "sensitive adaptation of
address," enabling Grant to present,  unobtrusively, a carefully-considered political position.
The  structure of Ocean to Ocean, evident  in the  way Grant chooses to empha­
size certain recurring themes, provides  the clearest indication that  Grant intended not  merely  to  "make a  book"  but  to  make  a  book  which   would  serve  specific political   purposes.   In  almost   every  chapter, except  for  those  dealing   with  the


I I

OCEAN TO  OCEAN

expedition's passage through the Rocky Mountains, he stresses the opportunities for settlement afforded by northwestern Ontario and the prairies. Neither the Indians nor the climatic  conditions present obstacles to settlement; all that  is required­ and  Grant   reiterates  this point-is  a  railroad.  But  the  railroad  is  central  to Grant's argument in yet another way. Not only will it solve the problem of how to settle the  west, it will also ensure Canada's survival.  If the  west is settled  then Canada will become  a unified transcontinental nation,  able  to  resist the  threat  posed by its democratic  and  expansionist neighbour  and  to  preserve the morally superior  political institutions which derive from  the  British  tradition. This  two  part thesis is clearly present in Ocean to Ocean,  and Grant has carefully arranged  his materials  to make them support  his argument. Once again,  we have evidence that the book consists of something more than mere "notes" taken by the Secretary.
From the time the expedition leaves Thunder Bay until it reaches Fort Edmon­ ton Grant  repeatedly  directs our attention  to the agricultural potential of the ter­ ritory through  which they pass. The land near Shebandowan is "good country for emigrants  of the farmer  class," "acknowledged  to be splendid  farming country."  "The time will come," he says, "when every acre of these banks of Rainy river will be waving with grain, or producing rich heavy grass, for countless herds of cattle."  Manitoba lacks nothing  but  "good industrious settlers";"1 9   "Those  great  breadths  of unoccupied  land are calling 'come, plough, sow, and  reap us'." The  land  near the Touchwood  Hills is even "better  adapted for farming  purposes" than  the open prairie, "being  well wooded, well watered, and  with excellent and  natural drain­  age." The  country  near  Fort Carlton  "could  easily be converted  into  an earthly paradise"; "Its  only fault is that it is rather  too rich."  Near  Fort  Edmonton  the Hudson's  Bay Company  is reported  to have run  a large and  productive  farm  on the same land  "for  thirty years without any manure  worth speaking  of being put on it."
Not only can the intending  settler expect a land of unbounded fertility, he can also look forward  to a life lived in a healthful  and invigorating  climate and to the complete absence of any difficulties with the native  population. The  winter is said to be "pleasanter than in Ontario,  Quebec,  or the  Maritime Provinces. There  is no severe weather till the beginning of December." The  weather conditions experi­ enced by Grant's party are so "delightful" and "exhilarating" that, as the narrator says, "We  ceased to wonder that we had not heard  of a case of sickness in one of the settlers' families." "The  air is pure, dry and bracing  all the year round; giving promise of health and strength of body and length of days." The Indians  are said to be no more threatening than the weather:

This  is a  matter  of the  utmost importance  to  the  intending  settler. When  we returned from our expedition, the Chief was interviewed at Ottawa  by a deputa­ tion of  the Russian sect of Mennonites, who are  looking for  the  best  place in America for their constituents to settle in, and one of their first questions referred

12

OCEAN TO  OCEAN

to this. He answered it by pulling a boy's knife out of his pocket, small blade at one end, corkscrew at  the other, and  told them  that this was the only weapon  he had carried  while travelling  from Ocean  to Ocean;  adding  that  he had  used only one end of even so insignificant a weapon, and  that end not so often as he would  have liked. [This  is part  of a long passage not in the diary.]

Grant does, of course, recognize  the presence of the Indians in the  Northwest, and devotes some space  to a discussion of how they should  be treated. He  is impressed by their qualities of "patience, endurance, dignity and  self-control" and  notes  with approval their  loyalty  to  the  Queen. If, he suggests,  the  Canadian government adopts a  "paternal" policy,  makes  treaties  with  the  Indians and   provides them with reserves "that no one can invade," and encourages them to become  Christians and  turn   to  farming, then   the  Indian  population will  not  suffer  unduly  when immigrants take  up  the  prairie land  for  agricultural purposes.  "At   all  events," Grant concludes, "there are  no  Indian difficulties in our  North-west."20   Of  the Metis  little  is said.  The  events  at  Red  River  only a few  years before  are  termed "Riel's ... little  rebellion," and  the Metis way of life is seen as incompatible with the  new  uses to which  the  prairie will be put: "A  man  cannot be both  a hunter and  a farmer; and,  therefore, as the buffalo  go west, so will the  half-breeds."
Soil, climate, and  a tractable native  population all combine to make  the North­ west "a great  field for  colonization." But  to bring  the settlers  a railroad  must  be built,  and  it is this crucial  point  to which  Grant subordinates the  other aspects of his argument. Even  before  the  party  leaves southern Ontario Grant has  begun to suggest  the  advantages of railway  construction. "Collingwood," he  notes,  "is  an  instance  of  what  a  railway  terminus does for  a  place.... Around  the  town   the country is being opened  up, and the forest is giving way to pasture and com-fields." Manitoba, which  has even better  land,  will be similarly  opened up once a railroad has been built:

The  ancient  maxim  had  been,  'settle  up  the  country  and  the  people  will  build railways if they want  them.' The  new and better maxim is, 'build  railways and  the country  will soon be settled.'

If only Canada would  adopt a vigorous  railway  policy, "the  ever-increasing  cur­ rent  of  emigration from  the  old  world  must  flow  into   Manitoba, and   up  the  Assiniboine, and   Saskatchewan  rivers."  The   future,  indeed, of  the  Northwest depends on the construction of a railroad, and  this point  is clearly stated in one  of the key passages of Ocean to Ocean:

in the elevated  part  of the country in which we were, extending  north-west  from Fort Ellice, light frosts are not unusual in July or August. They are not so heavy as seriously to injure  grain  crops;  but  still they must  be regarded  as an  unpleasant feature  in this section of the country. The  general destruction  of the trees by fires makes a recurrence  of these frosts only too likely, till some action  is taken  to stop the  real fountain of all  the evils. If there  were forests, there  would  be a greater

OCEAN TO  OCEAN

rainfall,  less heavy dews, and  probably  no frosts. But it will be little  use for  the government  to issue proclamations  in reference  to the extinguishing  of camp-fires, until there are settlers here and there, who will see to their observance for their own interest. Settlers will plant trees, or give a chance of growing to those that sow themselves, cut the grass, and prevent the spread of fires. But settlers will not come, till there is a railroad  to bring them in.

The  railroad is obviously central  to the first part  of Grant's argument, the solution to the  immediate and  practical problem  of how  the  west is to  be opened  up  for agricultural settlement.
The second  part  of Grant's argument is similarly  focused,  although the  problem
addressed has moral  as well as practical implications. The railroad here  becomes the  key to national unity  and  national survival:

Let  [the  west]  be opened  up  to the world  by rail and  steamboat, and  in an  in­ credibly short  time the present gap between  Manitoba and  British Columbia  will be filled up, and  a continuous  line of loyal Provinces extend  from  the  Atlantic  to the Pacific.

Canada thus unified  will retain  its British connection, "bound up with  the  Empire by ever-multiplying and  tightening links"; "Her traditions, her  forms,  her  moral elevation, her  historic  grandeur shall  be ours forever." This, claims  Grant, is the true  destiny of the British provinces of North  America, to remain British and  "Not to  ripen  and  drop, one  by one,  into  the  arms  of the  Republic." The   Canadian Pacific  Railway, viewed in this way as the means  by which  Canada is to be saved, is transformed from  a mere railroad into a moral agent, "one of the  most gigantic public  works  ever  undertaken in  any  country by any  people," a  contribution to "the cause of human liberty  and  true  progress."
In  this  moral  drama of which  the  CPR becomes  the  hero,  the  villain's  part  is played  by the United States. Grant draws  attention, throughout Ocean to Ocean, to  the  clear  and   present  danger   which  American aspirations represent, and   he loses no  opportunity of contrasting American values  (or  the  lack  of them)  with the merits of British  traditions and  institutions. Grant does admire the "character­ istic energy" which  led  the  Americans to build  railroads and  open  their  western territories, but  this is more  than  outweighed by  his emphasis on  less admirable qualities.
At  Sault  Ste.  Marie, for example, Grant notes  that  there  is no  canal  "on  the British  side  of the  river,"  and  he  then  stresses  the  advantage this  has  given  the Americans:

The  most ordinary  self-respect forbids that  the  entrance to our  Northwest  should be wholly in the hands of another  Power, a Power that, during  the Riel disturbances at  Red  River,  shut  the entrance  against  even  our  merchant ships.  In  travelling from Ocean  to Ocean through  the Dominion, more than  four  thousand  miles were

OCEAN TO  OCEAN

t
'
To  make  the  point  inescapable Grant returns to it  at  the  end  of  his  chapter: "The eastern  key to  two-thirds of the  Dominion ... is in  the  hands  of another Power...."21  The following  chapter is similarly  constructed. At  the  "North-west Angle" of  the  Lake  of  the  Woods  attention is drawn to  the  irregularity of  the boundary line, another instance of "the superior  knowledge and  unscrupulousness of our  neighbours." Later we are  told  that  difficulties in  arranging a  treaty  with the  Indians near  Fort  Francis can be attributed "in great  measure to the fact  that Indians from  the  United States  had  been  instigated   by  parties  interested in  the Northern Pacific  Railway to  come  across  and  inflame  their  countrymen on  our side  to make  preposterous demands." This  issue of Canadian-American  relations is returned to once again, for emphasis,  at the end of the  chapter.
In  Manitoba Grant reports that  unfavourable comments about the area's pros­ pects  are  all  American-inspired, and  that  "a  knot  of  touters   and  indefatigable sympathizers with  American institutions ... had  been at  the bottom  of the  half­  breed  insurrection." Later in  the  chapter he  contrasts  American policy  towards the  Indians unfavourably with  that  exercised north  of  the  border, and  states  that  American corruption in this matter is of a kind "that seems to be inseparable from the management of public  affairs in the Republic." American policy in this matter is criticized  again  as the  party  journeys westward from  Winnipeg, and  the  activi­  ties of "Yankee free-traders from  Belly River" who enter  the  country to sell rum  to the Indians are twice noted  as grounds for the immediate introduction of Cana­ dian  law and  order  into the area. In British Columbia Grant finds further evidence  to  support his  claims  for  the  superiority  of  British  institutions, contrasting the violence to be found  in mining camps below the border  with  the order  and  justice prevalent  to the  north.
In  Grant's conclusion to Ocean to Ocean this superiority is forcefully  asserted,
as  Canadians are  urged   to  protect   themselves  against   American influences   by remaining British :

A nation grows, and its Constitution  must grow with it. The nation cannot  be pulled up by the roots,-cannot be dissociated from its past, without  danger  to its highest interests. Loyalty is essential to its fulfilment of a distinctive mission,-essential  to its true glory. Only one course therefore is possible for us, consistent  with the self­ respect  that  alone gains  the  respect of others;  to seek, in the consolidation  of  the Empire, a common  Imperial citizenship, with common responsibilities, and a com­ mon inheritance.

As Carl  Berger  has argued, "Canadian imperialism  was one  variety  of Canadian nationalism-a type of awareness of nationality which  rested  upon  a certain understanding of  history,  the   national character, and   the   national  mission." 22

OCEAN TO  OCEAN

Ocean to Ocean is one of the earliest  and  most significant statements of that im­
perialist  philosophy  which  would  become  more  prominent after  188o.
Grant's book  has, as well, political  significance when  viewed  in  the  context  of the  187o's. In  its emphasis  on the railroad and  on the settlement of the  west, and in the way in which  these are argued  for, Ocean to Ocean can  be seen as an  early attempt to  define  what  would  be  termed  the  "National Policy."  John A.  Mac­ donald  had  "appropriated" this phrase  in February of 1872,23 and,  although the idea  of a national policy "had not fully crystallized and  did  not  rise  to dominate the campaign" of 1872, it was, as W. L. Morton has said, "present in all its parts":

the work of political union had to be completed  by a railway to prevent  local  dis­ satisfaction  and  American  competition,   renewed   in  the  form  of  the  Northern  Pacific. It was necessary also to complete the work of political union by making the Dominion  a  national  economy, complete  with  prairie  wheat  lands,  Pacific ports, and  industries  in both east and  west. In  the last session Hincks had  already  made the first move in this direction by raising the tariff once more to a general level of
15 per cent. It was the first formulation  of that  "national policy" of which Canada First  was  speaking  in  confused  terms,  and  which  Macdonald  was  to  make  an economic policy.u

Grant was, despite  his narrative stance,  no neutral in politics. He had  worked,  and was working,  for the cause of Confederation, and, according to his son, "speaking broadly, he was a Conservative from Confederation till I 8g3";25 his friend  George Parkin described   Grant as Macdonald's "ardent supporter in  the  great  lines  of policy by which  Canada was consolidated."26   Ocean  to Ocean shows  that  Grant not  only  supported the  policies, but  helped  to  articulate them  and   make  them popular; the  "notes" taken  on  his western  journey  are  given  shape  and  purpose by the  political  vision which  he, and  others  like  him,  possessed.


A FULLER AWARENESS OF   ITS INTENDED POLITICAL signifi­ cance  helps  to  explain  some  odd  details  in  the  publishing history  of  Ocean  to Ocean. Grant had  claimed  that  his intention was "not to make  a book," and  that
his "diary was not  written  for publication, or,  if printed at  all, was to have  been for private circulation only."  His readers  are,  therefore, asked  to excuse  the  "little personal details" which  have  been  included and   the  "many  literary mistakes" evident  in  the  book.  Grant was  urged,  however,  by  "those who  had  a  right  to speak  in  the  matter," to  publish  his notes  because  they  "contained  information that  would  be of interest  to the  general  public, and  of value  to intending  immi­ grants." The names  of "those  who  had  a  right  to speak  in  the  matter"  are  not given,  but  we  may  safely include  among   them   that  of  Sandford  Fleming, "the Chief" of the  expedition. Fleming  was not merely  Engineer-in-Chief  of the  Cana-

OCEAN TO  OCEAN

dian  Pacific Railway;  he had  been, since 1858 when he published  A  Railway  to                           !
I
the economic and political necessity of a transcontinental railroad. The effect which Grant's  "notes"  could  have,  in strengthening popular  support  for  the  railroad, would  not have been lost on Fleming. Indeed,  the expectation  that  Grant  could make a publishable  book may have inspired Fleming's original  decision to make him one of the party. Grant  himself gives a rather off-handed  explanation  of his presence on the expedition at the beginning of his second chapter: "1st July, 1872.
-Today, three friends  [Fleming,  Grant,  Moren]  met in Halifax,  and  agreed to travel together  through  the Dominion from the Atlantic to the Pacific."27   Fleming and  Grant   were  friends,  and  Fleming  was one  of  Grant's   parishioners  at  St. Matthews.  He certainly  knew Grant  well enough to know what  kind of notes he would take, and  we are entitled  to suspect at least a touch of disingenuousness in Grant's introductory explanation  of why the book was published.28
This  matter  of publication  is raised again  in the concluding  chapter,  but  here a different point is made. The  notes, Grant  says, "were written out in the first few weeks after our return, as it was desirable, -if  published at all -that they should be in the printer's  hands at once." Grant  returned  to Halifax  in November  1872, and  Ocean  to Ocean  was published  "early  in the next  year,"29   leaving  us with the strange  case of a book-one which was not to have been published at  all­ being rushed through  the press with great speed, so quickly in fact that the author  was given "no sufficient opportunities to correct the proofs." The explanation  for this haste may be found in the circumstances of late 1872, and it affords one more example of the book's intended  political significance. In the fall of 1872 and early in 1873 Macdonald was still wrestling with the problem of how to form an accept­ able company to build the CPR; Grant's  book, if quickly published, could appear  in time to do the government  some good:

the whole history of the railway had been one long, unbroken misfortune. The new board [of which Fleming was a member], with its elaborately graduated  scale of provincial representation, and its almost complete lack of capital, was a pompous fraud.  Everything depended  on Allan's success in London;  and  Allan, as  Mac­ donald knew only too well, was a selfish, unskilful, unreliable man.  The  railway and the government were far from being out of the woods. Macdonald  might yet have to admit  the failure of his railway policy; and in Montreal a  rumour  per­ sistently circulated that  the overthrow of the government at the  next session was a certainty.30

Grant's concluding  chapter, in particular,  with its insistence on the importance of the railway  to Canada's survival,  takes on  a deeper  meaning  when  read  in  the context of the political events which surrounded  its publication.
That the book was, in part,  written for a specific set of circumstances  becomes clearer when  the first edition  of Ocean to Ocean is compared  with the second, a

OCEAN TO  OCEAN

"revised  and  enlarged"  version published,  perhaps  coincidentally,  in  1879, soon after  the Conservatives had  returned  to power. A revised edition  ought  to have given Grant  the opportunity  to correct those "many  literary  mistakes" for which he apologized in his preface to the first edition. Not all of them are corrected, however,S1 suggesting that this mattered less to Grant  than  he had earlier claimed. Furthermore, although  the second edition  is "enlarged" by the  addition  of new information, it has also been shortened  at  two crucial  points, both  having  to do with  the  reasons for  publishing  the  book. The  claims  that  the  diary  "was  not written for publication, or if printed at all, was to have been for private circulation only,"  and  that  "those  who had  a  right  to speak  in  the  matter" urged  him  to publish because his notes "contained  information  that  would be of interest to the general  public, and  of value  to intending  immigrants," are  both  dropped  from introductory   chapter  of the second  edition.  Also  omitted,  from  the  concluding chapter,  is the remark  concerning  hasty publication  ( "... it  was desirable, -if published  at  all -that  they should  be in  the  printer's  hands  at  once"). These comments are not instances of "literary  mistakes";  rather,  they are examples of a rhetorical  strategy  no longer justified by immediate  political circumstances.
Grant  was to say, many years after the publication  of Ocean to Ocean, that  his
western journey had confirmed his belief in Canada's destiny:

This journey resolved the uneasy doubt in my mind as to whether or not Canada had a future;  for from the day we left Collingwood till we reached Victoria, the great possibilities of our great North-West impressed us.32

This  remark  is often quoted,33  and  made  the  basis for a claim  that  Grant's  trip across Canada was "the turning  point in his life," creating  his vision of Canada's future.34  There  is some truth  in this view, but, as his life and  his book make clear, Grant's vision of our national  destiny was as much  confirmed  as created  by his experiences  in  the summer  of 1872. As was the  case  with  another   ardent  im­ perialist, in slightly different circumstances,  the country  Grant  saw "fell  into the lines of his imagination,"35   and  nearly everything  he discovered  on  the  prairies appeared  to conform  to the shape  of that  national  policy formulated in  eastern Canada. The creative energy which marked Grant's personality is apparent in this imaginative  transformation, but equally apparent to a modern reader are the ways in which Grant's  imagination  encourages him to assume, too easily, that  the west will be simply an extension of eastern Canada and  that  the means used to achieve this will harmonize  with the lofty moral  purpose  of  preserving  British values in North  America.
It is not in his view of the native inhabitants of the west that  Grant's  intellectual difficulties are most obvious. No more than  any intelligent  man  of his time could he have foreseen the enormous problems which even a humanely  paternal  policy would  not solve. Nor is his failure  to understand the  problems of the  Metis sur-

18

OCEAN TO  OCEAN


prising; here, too, he was not alone. 36  The issue is much  larger  than  this, and  arises from  what  can  only  be termed a failure  of imagination, a failure  to imagine  that the  aspirations of western  Canadians might  differ  from  those  of  the  east.  Grant wanted to believe  that  the  prairie  west would  become  "the very  backbone of the Dominion," the  area  "most  strongly  imbued   with  patriotic sentiments"; but  he also believed  that  this sentiment would  not  be different from  what  was found  in the  east,  merely  stronger. That the  rigours  of  the  western  climate, the  sacrifices required of those who  would  endure  it, and  the essentially  colonial  relationship in which  they  would  stand   to  the  rest of Canada, might  all  combine to  produce a different sentiment, Grant could  not  imagine. A summer traveller, not  a settler, and  conditioned by  his Maritime and  Scottish  experience, he  could  not  see the regional  nature of  his own  national policy, nor  could  he see  how  it  denied  the possibility of other  regional  interests.
The west he sees becomes  too often  the west he wishes to see, and  his commit­
ment  to British  values  leads  him  to imagine  a British  landscape:

Lakelets and  pools, fringed  with willows, glistened out  at almost every turn of the road-though many of them were saline. Only the manor-houses and some gently­ flowing streams  were  wanting,  to make out  a resemblance  to  the  most  beautiful parts of England.

a country of unequalled  beauty and fertility; of swelling uplands enclosing in their hollows lakelets, the homes of snipe, plover and duck, fringed  with  tall reeds, and surrounded with a belt of soft woods; long reaches of rich lowlands, with hillsides spreading  gently away from them, on which we were always imagining  the houses of the owners; avenues of whispering trees through which we rode on, without ever coming to lodge or gate.

The  English  country estate  will be recreated  in western  Canada, rich  in tradition and  charged with  all  the  associations  that  make  it an  emblem  of British  culture. But the prairie  is not quite  an English landscape, nor is it the landscape of southern Ontario, as Grant does recognize  in other  comments  which  he makes:

There  is no limit to the amount  [of land farmers may  break up]  except  the limit imposed by the lack of capital  or  their own moderation. This  prairie  land  is the place for steam ploughs, reaping, mowing, and threshing machines. With such machinery  one family can do the work of a dozen men.

The  vastness of the  land, and  the  urgency  of the  American threat, justify the  use of technology in the  opening of the  west.
Later  writers  were to show  us, however,  that  technology was not a means  to an end  but  a value  system  of its own.  In  Fruits of the Earth we meet  another man from  eastern  Canada, one  who  came  west with  a similar vision,  "of  a  mansion such  as he had  seen in Ontario, in the remnants of a colonial  estate -a mansion dominating an  extensive  holding  of land.... "37   Grove's Abe Spalding would  also

19

OCEAN TO  OCEAN

use machinery to conquer  the land,  and  would  lose his family,  and  his values,  in the process. Grant, of course, distinguished "true  progress" -the advancement of British  civilization -from  mere  material progress.  But  in  Canada one  was  to corrupt the other. Railroads, and steam  ploughs, were to impose values far different from  those  Grant so passionately  defended  in  Ocean  to Ocean.
Grant's description of Collingwood provides  one  clear  example of his inability
to assess the effects of material progress:

Collingwood  is an instance of what a railway terminus  does for a place. Nineteen years ago, before the Northern  Railway was built, an  unbroken  forest occupied  its site, and  the red deer came down through  the woods to drink  at  the shore. Now, there is a thriving  town of two or three thousand  people, with steam saw-mills, and huge rafts from the North that almost fill up its little harbor,  with a grain elevator which lifts out of steam barges the corn from Chicago,  weighs it, and  pours it into railway freight-waggons to be hurried down to Toronto, and there turned into bread or whiskey, without  a hand  touching it in all its transportations or transformation.

Mechanization displaces not only the wildlife, it removes  the human element  from the scene as well. The  ominous  qualities  of the  passage  linger  in our  minds,  and return   in  full  force  when  Grant reaches  the  Rocky  Mountains and   proceeds  to transform them  into  a symbol of Canadian spiritual values: 38   "mountains elevate the mind,  and  give an inspiration of courage  and  dignity  to the  hardy  races who own them,  and  who  breathe their atmosphere." The claim  is still moving,  but  we can  no longer  believe  it,  and  we  are  likely  to  answer  with  the  words  of G.  M. Grant's grandson:

That conquering  relation to place has left its mark  within  us. When we go into the Rockies we may have the sense that gods are there.  But if  so, they cannot  manifest themselves to us as ours. They are the gods of another  race, and  we cannot  know them because of what we are, and what we did.39

Technology was  the  means  by  which  eastern   Canada was  to  preserve  its  great tradition, but  the  costs involved  are  ones  we  have  not,  until  recently,  chosen  to assess. In  future, one suspects, our  national aspirations will need  to be shaped by a moral  imagination as fervent,  but  rather more  humanly reasonable, than   that which  we find in Ocean to Ocean.


NOTES

1 Literary History  of Canada, Carl F. Klinck, gen. ed., 2nd ed.  (Toronto:  University of Toronto  Press, 1976),  p. 361.
2   Ocean to Ocean (1873; facsimile rprt. Toronto: Coles, 1970).  A line by line com­ parison  of the first edition with  the surviving  notebooks  in which  Grant  kept  his diary shows that  the notes were not always published  "just  as they were  written." (The  diary  was kept  in  three  notebooks;  the  first  and  third  of these  are in  the Public  Archives  of  Canada:  G.  M.  Grant   Papers,  vol. 8.)   There  are,  not  sur­ prisingly, several stylistic changes from the original; there are also, of more impor-

20

OCEAN TO  OCEAN


tance,  several  passages  in  the  published   text  that  do  not  appear in  the  diary.  In these  passages  Grant stresses  various  aspects  of his  argument by summing up  his evidence and  drawing conclusions on such  matters as the railroad, the  Indians, the future of the  Canadian west, and  the  dangers of American influence. In  this essay I have  indicated significant  additions or revisions when  I quote  from  the  published text.
3 Although there  is some  criticism  of the steamer's dilatory captain in  the  published text  (see pp.  I5-I6), this is a softened  version of what  appears in  the diary,  where Grant makes  reference to the captain's "repeated humbugging." In  a letter  of July I8 to his wife Grant criticizes  the captain even more strongly: "He  wasted  so much time  the  last  two  days  that  several  of  us formed   ourselves  into  a  deputation, & waited  on  him  to remonstrate. As he made  but  a weak-kneed defence we pitched into  him  unmercifully; & he has  been  better  since. He  is a good  looking, counter­ jumping sort  of  a  young  fellow"   (Grant Papers,  vol.  34). In  the  published  text Grant does not  mention the deputation or his part  in it; to do so would  be at  odds with  the  role he is creating for himself.
' In  the  diary  Grant begins  by writing  in  the  first  person,  but  he  quickly  shifts  to third-person neutrality or to the first-person  plural. This enables  him  to present him­ self more  effectively  as "the  Secretary." For  publication he  eliminated  these  early instances of the  first person  to make  the  narrator's viewpoint consistent.
See
Morang, I904). See  also  George  MacLean Rose,  ed.,  A Cyclopedia  of Canadian
Biography  (Toronto: Rose,  I888), pp. 388-91.
6  Principal Grant,  p. 500.
7   Missing  completely from  the  published   text,  but  evident   in  his  letters  to  his  wife (Grant Papers, vol.  34), is the  real  loneliness  Grant felt,  particularly in  the  early part  of the  journey. Deeply  in love with his wife, and  made  more  aware  of his love by separation from  her,  Grant was "half  inclined" by the  time  he  reached Fort Garry to turn  back,  "but as you exhort  me to go on,  I pick  up courage" (letter of August  I). Without Jessie Lawson  Grant, it seems, we would  not  have  had  Ocean to Ocean.
8  Principal Grant, p. 474·
9 Principal Grant,  pp.  472, 473·
10 Obituary notice  in  Proceedings and Transactions of the  Royal Society of Canada,
2nd series, vol. 8  (May  I 902), p. vii.
11 See Principal Grant,  ch. 25, "Religious Life and  Teaching."
12  Principal Grant,  p. 58.
13 C.  Prescott McLennan,  "Church  Memories of  Halifax," Dalhousie  Review,  22 (I942-43)'  I72-
1' Principal Grant, p. 89.
1 Principal Grant, pp. 97-98.
16 Principal Grant, p. 94·
17 James  Angrave, "William Dawson,  George Grant and  the Legacy of Scottish  Higher
Education," Queen's  Quarterly, 82  (I 972), 88.
18 Principal Grant, p. 502.
19 In  the  diary  Manitoba is said  to lack  nothing but  "a few  lowland  Scotchmen to show  the  people  how  to farm." The  revised  version stresses the  need  for settlement

21

OCEAN TO OCEAN

of the west, and  it also removes  (as some other  revisions  do)   what  Grant seems to have  recognized  as his own  bias in favour  of Scottish settlers. Sufficient  evidence of this bias does, however,  remain in the published text.
20   These  observations come from  a section  Grant added to  his diary  when  preparing it for  publication.
21  This  passage is not in the diary, and  it represents another occasion  on which  Grant departs from  his stated  purpose  of presenting his notes  "just as they were  written."
22   The Sense  of Power:  Studies in  the  Ideas  of Canadian  Imperialism,  1867-1914 (Toronto:  University of Toronto Press, I970), p. 9· Berger  analyses  Grant's  views, but  concentrates on  his activities  after   I88o.  Although Ocean to  Ocean is briefly mentioned, it is treated as a travel  book, "which exulted in the discovery  of the west and  the huge  resources  of the  new Dominion" (p.  25), and  not  as an expression  of Grant's political  thought.
23  Donald Creighton, John  A. Macdonald: The Old  Chieftain (Toronto:  Macmillan,
1955)' p. 120.
24   W. L. Morton, The Critical  Years   (Toronto:  McClelland & Stewart, 1964), pp.
269-70.
2    Principal  Grant, p. 348.
26   George  R. Parkin, Sir John  A. Macdonald (Toronto:  Morang, 1909), p. 329.
27   The  explanation given by Grant does not fit the facts.  Moren did  not accept Flem­ ing's invitation to join the expedition until July  4, and  this acceptance took Fleming by surprise, as is shown  by his telegram  to Moren of July  5: "See  Rev. Mr. Grant who  intends going  as far  as Manitobah  [sic] scarcely  thinking  you  would  decide  favorably I have since leaving partly  committed myself to another gentleman whom I  must  consult   again  will  telegraph tomorrow night"  (PAC:   Sandford  Fleming Papers,  val.  77). These  difficulties  seem  to have  been  sorted  out, but  they  suggest that  the expedition was not organized in the  way Grant says it  was  (and  Fleming's telegram reinforces  the suggestion-see note  7, above-that Grant had  not firmly committed himself  at  the  outset  to a  transcontinental trip).  In  addition, we may question  whether Grant and  Moren were "friends" at  the beginning of the  journey.  In  a letter  to his wife dated July  I 5 Grant says:  "I  dined  at  the  hotel  today  with the  party.  I like them  all but  Dr. Moren: he is very obliging  but  I don't like him"  (Grant Papers,  val.  34).  This  attitude seems to  have changed in  the  course  of the expedition; see,  for  example, Ocean   to  Ocean, p.  2I6.  Grant's view  of  Colonel  Robertson Ross, on  the  other  hand,  seems  to  have  changed for  the  worse.  In  his letter  of July  I 5 Grant told  his wife that  the  Adjutant General was "going  to be a pleasant companion." Writing  to  his  wife  from   Fort   Carlton on  August   16  he reported: "The  Adjutant General  & his  son  we  dropped at  Red  River,  as  they couldn't keep  up  with  us, &  we are  not  at  all  sorry  for  sundry reasons-that I'll tell  you of again" (Grant  Papers, val.  34). The important point  is that  "the Sec­ retary" who  narrates Ocean  to Ocean  does not  necessarily  display  Grant's personal opinions of his companions.
28   In a letter  to Fleming  of May 12, 1873, Grant acknowledges the extent  of Fleming's involvement  with  the  book:   "What an  amount  of  trouble you  have   had.   Any balance that  may accrue  from  the sale of the  book  belongs  by right  to you-not to me;  for  yours  was  the expedition, the  idea  of a  book  on  the  subject, the  risk and expense  of printing, the trouble of superintending & bargaining & making  maps  or stealing  them"  (Fleming Papers,  vol.  I8). Fleming's letterbook and  his diary  for
1873 show that  in December  of  I872 and  January of  I873  he was taking  an  active part  in the book's production (Fleming Papers, vols. 63 and  81) .

22

OCEAN TO OCEAN

29    William  L. Grant, "Introduction" to Ocean to Ocean  (Toronto: Radisson  Society,
I925), p. xiv.
3° Creighton, p.  I52. It is worth noting  that  Macdonald was in  Ottawa, considering
the  railway  problem, when  Fleming  and  Grant arrived there  in  late  October on
their  homeward journey.
31 The  second  edition has  been  reprinted (Edmonton: Hurtig, I967), with  an  intro­ duction by Lewis  H.  Thomas. As an  example of an  obviously-needed  correction which  Grant did  not make see the original  edition  (p. 358)  where Britain is mascu­  line in one sentence ("The Fatherland") and  feminine  in the next  ("Her traditions, her  forms  ... ") .
32  "Thanksgiving and  Retrospect" (I 902). Quoted in Principal Grant,  p.  I 3I.
33   See,  for  example, Mary Quayle Innis,  Travellers  West   (Toronto:  Clarke, Irwin,
I956), pp.  222-23, and  Pierre  Berton,  The  Great Railway  (Toronto:  McClelland
& Stewart, I 970),  p. 43·
3   Wilfrid  Eggleston, "The Dream of 'Geordie' Grant," Queen's Quarterly, 6o  ( I953),
568.
35 The allusion  is to Lorne Murchison, the central  figure of Sara  Jeannette Duncan's
The  Imperialist  (I904; rprt. Toronto:  McClelland & Stewart, I97I), p.  II2.
36   It must  be added that  Grant was  more  sympathetic to  Riel  than   many  English­ speaking eastern Canadians. He  wrote  to Fleming,  on  July  29, I886:  "Yes-the N-west Insurrection was a blessing in disguise [in showing the value of  the railroad],
& I don't see the  necessity for  hanging that  poor crank  Riel.  Banishment or  impri­ sonment would  be punishment sufficient, in my opinion. He  was the spokesman of the  Metis; & if they were  to blame  so was our Govt; & on  this occasion,  Riel  mur­ dered  no one"  (Fleming Papers, vol.  I8).
37  Frederick Philip  Grove,  Fruits of the  Earth   (I 933;  rprt. Toronto:  McClelland &
Stewart, I965), p. 23.
88 Grant's treatment of  the  mountains is another example  of his arrangement of his materials. The party  spends  an entire  day approaching the  Rockies,  but  Grant says almost  nothing about the  mountains in  this section  at  the  end  of chapter VII. He delays  his commentary until  the  beginning of chapter VIII, so as to lead  up,  most effectively,  to the  passage quoted.
811    George  Grant, Technology and Empire  (Toronto: Anansi,  I969), p.  q.


















23


MYTH AND PREJUDICE IN KIRBY, RICHARDSON,
AND PARKER



L. R. Early






TE VIOLENT CLASH oF THREE CULTURES in Canada during the eighteenth  century  seems to offer an  ideal  setting  for  the  classical historical novel as Lukacs  described it. Crises like those  in  New  France  and  among  the Indian  nations,  the disintegration  of feudal societies before the onslaught  of  im­ perialism, the drama  of ambush, siege, and conquest, are the stuff of which Scott and  Cooper  made  their  books. Yet  the  best  known  of  our  nineteenth-century novelists who dealt  with New France  and  the  Indian   Wars  had  preoccupations  other  than  the dynamics of history. Notwithstanding the research that  undergirds  each  work, John  Richardson's  Wacousta   (I 832),  William  Kirby's  The  Golden Dog  (1877), and  Gilbert Parker's  The  Seats of  the  Mighty (I8g6), are shaped as treatments of myth rather  than  representations of history. Richardson's Intro­ duction  to the 185 Iedition of W acousta, Kirby's subtitle, "A Romance," and the melodrama of  both  works,  qualify  their  claims  as  chronicles  of  the  past.  The anomaly  is that  their archetypal  perspectives ultimately  seem more credible than Parker's  novel, which contrives a specious verisimilitude.  While none of the three
is significantly original, they are worth more attention than A. J. M. Smith thought
when, in Masks of Fiction, he dismissed our nineteenth-century novelists in general, and  Richardson,  Kirby,  and  Parker,  in  particular. A  reading   of  their   work reveals a variety of currents in the literary  imagination  of early Canadians, and illuminates the characteristic hesitation between tradition and naturalization in colonial literature.
Many of our nineteenth-century  poets vitiate their response to the Canadian landscape  because they imitate the styles rather  than  the motives of the great Romantics.  Similarly, The  Golden  Dog and  Wacousta  suffer  (though  they also gain)  from their authors' fascination with sensational  aspects of Jacobean  tragedy. Though  Kirby and Richardson use features we commonly associate with historical romances  and  Gothic  novels, the  kindred  and  prior  influence  of the  Jacobean drama, especially  of Shakespeare,  is everywhere  manifest  in  their  work.  The

24

MYTH AND  PREJUDICE


strength of conception and  the stylistic excesses in Wacousta and  The Golden  Dog are equally  a consequence of their  debt  to Jacobean vitality; the  Jacobean myths implicit  in Kirby  and  Richardson merge with  ironic  treatments of the  idea of the New World  as Paradise Regained. In The  Seats of the  Mighty, Jacobean elements are minor,  but  certain cultural prejudices  are embraced with  an enthusiasm quite distinct  from  the  visionary  integrity of the other  two books. "Myth" and  "preju­ dice"  are, it seems to me, useful terms for two kinds of mythology which Northrop Frye identifies  in his Conclusion to the  Literary  History  of Canada:

Literature ... is conscious mythology:  it creates an autonomous  world that  gives us an  imaginative   perspective  on  the  actual  one. But  there  is another   kind  of mythology, one produced  by society itself, the object of which is to persuade  us to accept  existing social values. "Popular" literature,  the kind that  is read for relaxa­ tion and  the quieting  of the mind, expresses this social mythology.

Richardson and  Kirby on  the  one  hand  and  Parker on  the  other, illustrate just this distinction.
At moments of great  tension  or import  Kirby,  especially,  is apt  to make  direct allusions to his models,  as when  La  Corriveau "makes assurance doubly  sure" by stabbing the  poisoned  Caroline de St. Castin,  or when  Le Gardeur de Repentigny is summed up as "more sinned  against  than  sinning." Kirby's taste for extravagant metaphors and  set-piece  monologues, prose emulations of the blank  verse fireworks popular with  Jacobeans, is nowhere  indulged more freely  than  in the soliloquy  of the  ambitious Angelique des  Meloises,  who  decides  to  have  her  rival,  Caroline, murdered:

She sat still for a while, gazing into the fire; and  the secret chamber  of  Beau­ manoir again  formed  itself before her vision. She sprang  up, touched  by the hand of her good angel  perhaps,  and for the last time. "Satan whispered it again in my ear!"  cried  she. "Ste.  Marie!  I am not so wicked as that! Last  night  the thought  carne to me in the dark-I shook it off at dawn of day. To-night  it comes again,
-and I let it touch me like a lover, and I neither withdraw my hand  nor tremble!  To-morrow it will return  for  the last time and stay with  me,-and  I shall let it sleep on  my  pillow! The  babe of sin will have  been  born  and  waxed  to  a  full
demon, and I shall yield myself up to his embraces!"1

The   reminiscence of  Milton here  is mixed  with  echoes  of  such  scenes  of  self­
consecration to evil as Lady  Macbeth's and  Edmund's. (Kirby excels in mimicry
-his picturesque narrative  poem,  "The U.E.: A  Tale of  Upper Canada," reveals  an  altogether different set  of  literary  voices.)   Angelique experiences  in­ wardly  the  kind  of Faustian  psychomachia that  is dramatized in  her  role  as  the bad  angel for both  Bigot  and  Le Gardeur, in opposition to the good  angels Caro­ line, Amelie de Repentigny, and  Heloise de Lotbiniere.
As for Richardson, the opening scene of W acousta -a midnight alarum on the
ramparts upon   the  apparition in the  fort  of a  shadowy visitant   who  (we  later

MYTH AND  PREJUDICE

learn)  seeks vengeance-is heavily in debt to the affair at Elsinore. Hamlet seems to have been a  particular  favourite  of Richardson's: considering  the  mysterious visitor, one of the garrison's officers declares that  "there is more in all this than  is dreamt  of in our  philosophy";  and  later  the condemned  sentry  Frank  Halloway recalls Clara de Haldimar, who once tended his wounds, as "a  ministering angel." Ellen Halloway's  mad scene toward the novel's end evokes Ophelia's  shade, as do Amelie in The  Golden Dog and Poor Mathilde  in The  Seats of the Mighty.
In whatever form, pure or bowdlerized, in print or on stage, Jacobean conven­ tions evidently had a powerful appeal  to the imaginations of Kirby and Richard­ son. The  portentous Riddle of the Golden Dog and  the "Prophecy" of W acousta's subtitle both stress the persistence of old grudges in inflaming passions, the motive so characteristic  of Renaissance tragedy.2   Indeed, Richardson's choice of an epi­ graph is explicit:

Vengeance is still alive;  from  her  dark  covert
With  all her snakes erect  upon  her  crest,
She stalks in view and  fires me with  her  charms. (Edward Young,  The  Revenge: A Tragedy)
Young's play was first produced in  172 1, long after  the heyday of the Jacobeans, but the role of Richardson's Wacousta as an implacable  seeker of retribution  who becomes monstrous as the criminal he pursues, is in the tradition of revengers who stalk  the  English  stage  from  Kyd  to Shirley.  Wacousta also  recounts  the  con­ spiracies and counter-plots of Pontiac and his foes, and stresses the ruses of disguise and  entrapment popular  upon  the seventeenth-century stage.  The  Golden  Dog weaves its course through  a  tangle  of murder   plots and  palace  conspiracies­ Ang,elique's design against  Caroline, fulfilled through  the subtle device of a  poi­ soned bouquet,  and the scheme of Bigot to assassinate the Bourgeois Philibert.
Jacobean tragedy  turns upon the irony that  an aristocratic milieu, presumably the apex of "civilized" humanity, becomes the very core of corruption  and violence. In The  Golden  Dog riot (that  of the citizens against  the corruption  of Bigot and the Friponne) is, as in Shakespeare, the symptom of a diseased order. In fact the very middle of the book presents a long digression connecting La Corriveau  and her  murderous   arts  with  the  vicious courts  of  Renaissance   France  and  Italy, favourite  settings for all the major Jacobean  tragedies.  While  the novel is an  his­ torical  romance  in the grand  manner, set against  a panorama of European  and North American  history, a recognizably Canadian environment is all but  absent;  as  Northrop   Frye  noticed  in  The   Bush  Garden,  "the   forlorn  little  fortress  of seventeenth-century  [sic]  Quebec,  sitting  in  the  middle  of  what  Madame de Pompadour called  'a few arpents  of snow,'  acquires  a  theatrical  glamour  that would do credit to Renaissance Florence." Kirby  may have found  his "situation" in the history of New France, but his imagination  had other bearings.

MYTH AND PREJUDICE

The society of Richardson's Fort Detroit is not as stylized, though  the foppish­ ness of Sir Everard  de Valletort  and the aristocratic demeanour  of the officers are somewhat  in  the  manner  of Jacobean  portraits;  however,  Wacousta's setting  is much larger  than  the fort, which is only a dubious refuge from the terrors of the surrounding forest. The  novel  develops a  vision of  the  world  as a  chamber  of horrors;  its plot is a  pattern  of shattered  hopes and  renewed  catastrophes.  The  relentless piling on of atrocities, the bludgeoning of morale in the beleaguered gar­ rison of the tale and in its readers alike, resemble the most savage creations of the Jacobean   mind,  plays like Tourneur's The  Revengers Tragedy   and  Webster's The  White Devil,  works which  have  been  well described  by Frye  in  Anatomy  of Criticism as "the sixth phase of tragedy, a world of shock and horror  in which the central  images are images of sparagmos, that is cannibalism,  mutilation, and torture." Such  a  vision becomes  attenuated  among  the  Graveyard   poets, then revives with a shock in the rise of the Gothic novel among such writers as Monk Lewis in England  and Brockden Brown in America, who preceded  Richardson  by a  generation.   Like Cooper's  The   Last  of  the  Mohicans,  to  which  Richardson acknowledges a debt in his Introduction, W acousta borrows from the Gothic tradi­ tion the fleeing maidens,  the  pattern  of  escape and  recapture, and  the dominant  theme  of terror.  Richardson  explicitly  contrasts  the terrors  of the  forest and  its lurking savages with a nostalgic regard for Europe:

When the eye turned woodward it fell heavily and without interest upon a dim and dusky point known to enter upon savage scenes and unexplored countries, whereas whenever it reposed upon the lake it was with an eagerness and energy that em­ braced the most vivid recollections of the past, and led the imagination buoyantly over every well-remembered scene that had previously been traversed, and which must be traversed again before the land of the European could be  pressed once more. The forest, in a word, formed, as it were, the gloomy and impenetrable walls of the prison-house, and the bright lake that lay before it the only portal through which happiness and liberty could be again secured.

This is the Gothic  image par excellence, echoed by other  Canadian settlers, most notably by Susanna  Moodie twenty years later.




BuT THE  ESSENTIAL MYTH WHICH APPEALED to Richardson and Kirby reaches back beyond the inventors of Gothic fiction. It was likely quite consciously that  both  novelists adopted   the  elemental  plot  of  many  Jacobean tragedies. Plays by Shakespeare, Tourneur, Webster, and Ford portray  the dissolu­ tion of an all-but  harmonious  order into chaos masked by a false regime; genuine order  is usually restored, but at tragic cost, and on a level inferior  to the original order.  This  plot appears  in Jacobean  works with a frequency  which suggests the

MYTH AND PREJUDICE

energies and significance of myth. And of course it has obvious affinities with the Biblical story of Eden, the Fall, and the survival of Adam,  Eve, and their  progeny in an  imperfect  world. Hamlet  himself indicates  the  parallel  in his sense of the world as "an  unweeded garden," growing to seed. Both the Biblical and Jacobean versions emphasize two themes especially: the struggle of Good and  Evil, and the role of sex in the disintegration of order.
Kirby's  novel offers a paradigm  of this myth. It begins with a chapter, "Men  of
the Old Regime," in which Peter Kalm, a Swedish visitor, compliments  Governor
De la Galissoniere on his city:

"'See Naples, and then die!' That was a proud saying, Count, which we used to hear as we cruised under lateen sails about the glorious bay that  reflects from its waters the fires of Vesuvius. We believed the boast then, Count. But I say now, 'See Quebec, and live forever!' Eternity would be too short to weary me of this lovely scene-this  bright Canadian morning is worthy of Eden, and  the glorious land­ scape worthy of such a sunrising."

The course of events will reflect a heavy irony on Kalm's courteous remarks. Even as he speaks, a cartel of exploiters, the Friponne, is undermining the Old Regime. The  stable  and  harmonious  order of an earlier  time is chiefly represented  in one of its hardy survivors, the honest old Chevalier  La Corne St. Luc. It is also sym­ bolized by the feudal Seigniory of Tilly, whose scions, Le Gardeur  and Amelie de Repentigny,  become the focus of a personal tragedy  that  also proves a tragedy for New France.  Le Gardeur's rashness enables the agents of the  Friponne  to dupe him into killing the Bourgeois Philibert, centre of resistance to the cartel,  and the father  of Amelie's betrothed,  Pierre Philibert.  Greed  in the  Intendant Bigot, un­ scrupulous  head  of the Friponne,  and  ambition  in the  beautiful  villainess Ange­ lique des Meloises, bring about  the destruction  of the best young women and  the loss of the best young men in New France. The predators thrive until Quebec falls to the  English, when order is restored under  Sir Guy  Carleton,  whose role here parallels  those of Shakespeare's  Fortinbras  and  Malcolm.  In  the final scene La Corne St. Luc has accepted service under Carleton,  illustrating  at once a link and a break  with the past.
The  conflict in The  Golden Dog is unambiguous: it pits the Friponne  against
the  Honnetes  Gens;  the dark  vaults of Bigot's  house of debauch, Beaumanior, against   the  airy  rooms  of  the  Manor   House  of  Tilly;   La  Corriveau's  silver poniard   and  infernal  cabinet  of  Italian   poisons  against  the  lamp  of  the  Re­ pentigny  nuns  and  the  "golden  casket  of  Venetian   workmanship"  which  the Bourgeois Philibert  makes a  betrothal  gift  to  the  ill-starred  lovers,  Amelie  and Pierre. The  characters  of the tale are also simply drawn,  generally resembling the stock  figures of  the  overripe  Jacobean   stage:   Villainous  Favourite,   Lecherous Duchess, Hired  Cutthroat, Ruined  Prince.
Destruction  of sexual innocence is deeply  implicated  in the  myth  of the  Fall,

MYTH AND PREJUDICE

and Shakespeare, Webster, Middleton, and other Jacobeans represented sexual infatuation as the seed of corruption  and  violence. The  Golden  Dog echoes the antifeminism  of the Renaissance stage in certain  remarks of Bigot and  his hench­ man,  the  misogynist  Cadet,  and  in  the  polarized  stereotypes  of   Angelique  as Temptress and Amelie as Amazing Virgin. The twenty-seventh chapter, "Cheerful Yesterdays and Confident Tomorrows," portrays the "green woods and still greener meadows of Tilly" as a fragrant pastoral paradise, the fondly remembered scene of childhood  friendship  and  the chaste stirrings of love  between Amelie and  Pierre. Amelie, a  blusher  in  the  best sentimental  tradition, is described  at  one point  or another  in the novel as saint, Madonna, and a "good angel," the inspirer of virtue in Pierre. After  her  brother  slays Pierre's father,  she enters a convent and  fulfils her role, the virgin as martyr.  The sexual passions of  the virtuous are never con­ summated  in The  Golden  Dog, whereas "the  fair, false woman,"  Angelique, ulti­ mately becomes the  mistress of Bigot, "this inscrutable  voluptuary," in the final diseased era of New France.  And over the  whole tale broods the absent  but  all­ powerful figure of the King's mistress at Versailles, La Pompadour, whose whims and  intrigues  have  no little  part  in the fatal  weakening of the French  empire  in Canada. Early in the novel La Corne St. Luc fumes about the absence of "any law left us but  the  will of a King's mistress." It is a distant  but  kindred  echo of the dying Hippolito  in Middleton's Women Beware Women:

Lust and forgetfulness has been amongst us, And we are brought to nothing.

John  Richardson's evocation of the myth is as shadowy as his novel is generally more intense than  Kirby's. His tale of wilderness, fire, and bloodshed has a cruder and more authentically frontier character  than Kirby's elegantly conventional narrative. The  patterns  explicit in The  Golden Dog are more fitfully developed in W acousta, but they are there. In the final part of the book, the renegade Wacousta, whose vengefulness  has  made  him  an  ally in  Pontiac's  attack  on  Fort  Detroit, explains his motives to his captive, young Clara de Haldimar. As Reginald Morton, a young soldier stationed in Scotland some twenty-four years earlier, he discovered and  fell in love with  Clara  Beverley, a maiden  whose misanthropic  father  raised her in a hidden  oasis in the Highlands: " 'a garden  abounding  in every fruit  and flower that  could possibly live in so elevated a region; and this in time, under  his own culture  and  that  of his daughter,  became the Eden it first appeared  to me'." The  point is reinforced  by the  presence of tame  animals in the oasis and  by the resemblance  of its mountain fastness to the  "steep  savage  Hill"  which  protects Eden in Milton's  epic. Morton-Wacousta recalls how he persuaded Clara Beverley to abscond from  the secluded  eyrie, only to lose her to the envious rivalry of his treacherous  friend,  De Haldimar. The  parallels with Genesis are inexact,  but  the stern  father,  the sweet  dalliance,  and  the  flight of the  couple  from  a  paradisal

MYTH AND  PREJUDICE

place, form  an  approximate version. Morton  embodies  the  roles both  of Adam (overwhelmed  with  sexual adoration)  and  Satan   (first  as Tempter, later  as a usurper of the divine prerogative of retribution). De Haldimar's role is also that of the Seducer. The  main  plot of Wacousta  follows Morton's attempts  to avenge his wrongs against  De Haldimar  (now  in  command  of  Fort  Detroit)   and  the latter's three children by Clara Beverley. So an idyllic order of sorts is shattered  by treachery which leads to anguish and carnage on a grand  scale. Among the prin­ cipal characters  only Frederick de Haldimar, the elder son, and  his cousin Made­  line, survive. Peace is eventually  restored, but in a terse final chapter  which does little to dissipate the atmosphere of despair.
The  struggle in W acousta is less plainly a case of Good against  Evil than  the one in The  Golden Dog. Wacousta owes as much  to Byron's heroes as he does to the  villains of Renaissance  tragedy:  associated  with  barbarous infidels, he  is a sexual prodigy, and he nurses an incurable  psychic wound. His adversary, Colonel de Haldimar, is also complex.  Notwithstanding Richardson's declared  repulsion from  him in  the  Introduction to the  1851 edition,  a  case can  be  made  for  De Haldimar as  an  exemplar  of  competence  and   responsibility.  His  harshness  is chiefly and implausibly exhibited against the Halloways. The  terms appropriate to Richardson's vision are not Good and  Evil, but  the  more ambiguous  contraries, Order  and Energy. While the warring savages are referred to at times as demonic, they are not envisioned as racially wicked-in fact it is the renegade  Morton  who manipulates  them as agents of destruction. The selfless love of the Indian  woman Oucanasta is clearly contrasted  with Morton's  selfish passions, and  the final pros­ pect of peaceful  friendship  between  the  Indians  and  the  children  of  Frederick and  Madeline  suggests something  like a  reconciliation  of barbaric  energies with civilization.
In  Patterns of Isolation in English Canadian  Fiction, John  Moss makes a con­ vincing case for the relationship among two of the De Haldimar children, Clara and  Charles, and  their friend Sir Everard  de Valletort, as an  implicitly  perverse pattern  of "incipient  incest, homosexuality, and impotence." Wacousta's intent  to violate the daughter  of the woman he once loved, redoubles  the incestuous over­ tones. Like so many  tragedies, Richardson's novel links forbidden  sexuality  with horrendous  violence. The subliminal  pornography  which  Leslie Fielder  argues as central  in the American  novel, is clearly one of the  main  sources of the  curious power which sustains W acousta despite its creaky structure and  implausible  dia­ logue.3 Kirby's women are polarized as Seductress and  Virgin.  Richardson, how­ ever, unites the features of Venus and  Madonna in his description  of his heroine, Madeline  de Haldimar. During  the  massacre at  Michilimackinac, in  a scene of pornographic virtuosity, Richardson  combines suggestions of voyeurism, deflora­ tion, rape, and murder, as Clara, barricaded  in the blockhouse, watches the abduc­  tion of Madeline:

MYTH AND PREJUDICE


A tall savage was bearing off the apparently  lifeless form of her cousin through  the combatants in the square, her white dress stained all over with blood and her beauti­ ful hair  loosened and  trailing  on the ground. She followed  with  her  burning  eyes until  they  passed the  drawbridge  and  finally disappeared  behind  the  intervening rampart, and  then,  bowing  her  head  between  her  hands  and  sinking  upon  her knees, she reposed  her  forehead  against  the sill of the  window  and  awaited  un­ unshrinkingly,  yet in a state of inconceivable agony, the consummation of her own unhappy  destiny.

There only remains one  ultimate fillip when  we later  learn  that the  "tall  savage" was in fact  a disguised  woman, the squaw  Oucanasta, whose  purpose actually has been to rescue Madeline, unharmed though  bloodstained, from  the slaughter. The consummation of the implicit sadism in Richardson's novel comes when  Wacousta plunges  a dagger  into the  virginal Clara, just before he is himself slain  by Oucan­ asta's  brother.
The  myth of the Garden assumed  a special meaning for certain North American writers who were tempted to regard  colonization  and settlement as opportunities to avoid  the  corruption of European culture and  establish  Eden  in the  New  World. In  the literature inspired  by this idea,  which  culminated in the  work  of Thoreau and  Whitman, the wilderness  offers an "area of total possibility" for the American innocent, an area  that  remains as long as some frontier  exists.4   It is, of course, an essentially  anti-social myth,  for as soon as the innocent solitary  is confronted with the  wills of other  individuals, the  dream  is broken.  Such  a vision  is never  enter­ tained  in Wacousta  where  the  Old  World  resumes  its conflicts  in  the  New,  the latter envisioned (as  we  have  seen)   as a  dismal  "prison" opposed   to  a fondly­  remembered Europe. In  The  Golden Dog, the  Bourgeois  Philibert  provides  the nucleus  of a new commercial society in Quebec distinguished by its  justness from the decayed  feudalism back  in France. But this embryonic community is destroyed when  the  corrupt Old  Order infects  the  New, a human  inevitability symbolized by the immigration of a Machiavellian poisoner, the mother of La  Corriveau:

Marie  Exili landed  in  New France,  cursing the Old  World  which  she had  left behind, and  bringing as bitter  a hatred  of the New, which  received her without  a shadow  of  suspicion  that   under  her  modest  peasant's  garb  was  concealed  the daughter and  inheritrix   of  the  black arts  of  Antonio  Exili  and  of  the  sorceress La Voisin.

The   dream   of  Paradise Regained is shattered  by  the  course  of  events  in  The
Golden Dog. First  Acadia falls, then  New France.




kE CRUCIAL EPISODE IN  THE CONQUEST OF   NEW  FRANCE  is the  setting  for  Gilbert Parker's The  Seats of  the Mighty, a  much   slighter   and

3I

MYTH AND  PREJUDICE

slicker work  than  either Wacousta  or The  Golden  Dog. In  contrast  to  Kirby's rhetoric and Richardson's somewhat laboured  prose, The  Seats of the Mighty pro­ ceeds quickly and  vigorously as told in the first person by Moray,  the  protagonist Parker  based on Robert Stobo, a Scottish major  who actually  escaped from Que­ bec City in time to participate in its siege and  capture  by Wolfe in  1759· And in contrast to the earlier books, there are few specifically Jacobean  or Gothic elements in Parker's  novel. Much of it describes Moray's  detention  in the Quebec  Citadel,  but  his is a strictly  literal dungeon,  with  none  of the symbolic  or  pyschological value of Richardson's "prison."  And  though  there  is much  stabbing  and  killing throughout, it is presented in the manner of adolescent fiction or of much television violence, as painless and bloodless excitement. Only one peculiar and rather gratui­  tous chapter,  "In  the Chamber  of Torture," strains the limits of a "respectable" account  of violence. Parker  included  in  the  first  edition  prints,  maps,  and  an excerpt from J.  M. Lemoine's The  Scot in New  France which deals with Stobo. But though  the plot follows historical events in some detail,  the significance with which  Parker  invests them depends on three  popular  myths of a rather  different sort than  the literary archetypes which shape Wacousta  and The  Golden  Dog.
The  first of these is the chauvinist myth of Anglo-Saxon  racial superiority.  Like Ranald   Macdonald in Connor's  The   Man   from Glengarry   (another novel  of racial self-congratulation), Moray  is conceived as an epic hero for a democratic age.  An  individual   of humble  origin  who  represents  his  people's  strengths,  he becomes the  hinge  of national  destiny:  it  is Moray's  honourable   refusal  to  co­ operate  in  La  Pompadour's intrigues  which -in  the  novel-precipitates  war between  France  and  England;  and it is his intelligence of the secret path  up  the cliffs to the Plains of Abraham  which leads to General  Wolfe's victory. Moray is the emblem  of bourgeois Protestant  virtue  against  the vices of royalist  Catholic France.  His arch-enemy and tormentor  is Doltaire,  bastard  son of King Louis, La Pompadour's spy, and  Moray's  rival for the love of Alixe Duvarney, the novel's heroine. Rationalist  and cynic, Doltaire regards life as sport, and his abiding  prin­ ciple is expediency;  he is only more refined than  the other  French  nobles whose vanity  and  corruption  undermine  the  effort  to  defend  Quebec.  The  moral  dis­ approval  which prescribes Parker's  treatment  of the French  aristocracy is coupled with a contempt  for the superstitious  peasantry  which  reaches its absurd  climax in the scene of Moray's escape from a cha.teau: fantastically  disguised as a witch, he paralyzes his guards  with terror. Even  those  French  characters  whom  Parker presents sympathetically  undergo a kind of  exorcism. Moray  humiliates one of his "friends," the Chevalier de Ia Darante, and slays another, the soldier Gabord. Alixe, for his sake, defies her Church,  State,  and  countrymen  in a spectacular  scene at the cathedral in Quebec. But the essential locus for the novel's racism is Parker's  comparison  of Wolfe and  Montcalm,  the  two  historical  figures most familiarly associated with the Conquest:

MYTH AND  PREJUDICE

In  Montcalm  was all manner  of things to charm-all  save that  which presently filled  me  with  awe,  and  showed  me  wherein  this  sallow-featured,  pain-racked Briton was greater  than  his rival beyond measure:  in that  searching,  burning eye, which carried  all the distinction  and greatness denied him elsewhere. There resolu­ tion, courage, endurance, deep design, clear vision, dogged will, and heroism lived. 5

This  list  of  merits  in  fact  summarizes Moray   himself:   he  is a  set  of  principles incarnate, a static  character untroubled by doubt  or inner conflict,  and  unlikeable compared to Doltaire, the  much  more  alive, attractive personality. This  is not,  I think,  deliberate ambiguity, but  reflects a confusion  of values  which  troubles  the whole  narrative, and  which  appears also in  Parker's treatment of the  woman  in his story.
Indeed, a second  popular prejudice which  shapes The Seats of the  Mighty is a bourgeois  view of sexuality. If Wacousta and The  Golden  Dog are types of Gothic and   Historical Romance,  two  of  the  major   traditions  distinguished  by  Leslie Fiedler  in  Love  and  Death  in  the  American Novel, Parker's book shows  aspects of the third,  the sentimental tale of seduction. Certainly Doltaire's subtle arguments and  Alixe's  successful  resistance  dramatize the  moral   primacy   of  "heart"  over "head" in   the   best  sentimental  manner.  By  Fiedler's  account,  this   tradition descends from  Samuel Richardson's Clarissa to a debased popular form  in the nineteenth century; in  this  later  version  Clarissa's originally complex  Seducer  is split into two simple  figures, villain-ravisher and  hero-rescuer, with  both  of whom readers   vicariously   identify, more  or  less consciously.  Something very  like  this psychic pattern underlies the scene which  brings to a climax  the romantic conflict in The Seats  of the  Mighty. Moray, hidden  behind  a tapestry in  the  Convent of the  Ursulines, eavesdrops upon  Doltaire's efforts  to seduce  Alixe. The  latter  is at this point still a virgin  despite  Doltaire's pursuit  and  despite  her marriage, secretly and  in  prison,  to  Moray. Parker's characterization of  Alixe  is extremely  ambi­ valent.  As Elizabeth Waterston notes  in her  very  perceptive  Introduction  to  the New Canadian Library reprint of the  novel:

For the nice young ladies who constituted  so powerful a part  of the reading public in the  18go's, Alixe is a real gem:  a pure young girl who manages to dance  like a courtesan,  lie like a Machiavelli, dress first like an officer then like a nun, slip undetected  by sentries and  even by her grim-faced  father-and  all in the  name of virtue and  constancy!  She is indeed a "most  perfect of ladies" for satisfying the needs of lady readers.

The other  major female  character, Mathilde, just reverses this measure  of sexuality and  innocence: a "ruined maid," victim of the libertine Bigot, she is portrayed as asexual  and  pious, a penitent in a scarlet  robe. The  erotic  tensions between  Alixe and  Moray are  heightened by her chaste  visits in disguise  to his cell, and  by her flagrantly voluptuous description of dancing:

33

MYTH AND  PREJUDICE

"As I danced  I saw and felt a thousand  things,  I can  not  tell you how. Now my feet appeared  light as air, like thistledown,  my body to float. I was as a lost soul flying home, flocks of birds singing me to come with them  into a pleasant  land.
"Then all  that  changed,  and  I was passing  through  a  bitter  land,  with  harsh shadows  and  tall,  cold mountains.  From  clefts and  hollows figures flew out  and
caught  at me with filmy hands. These melancholy  things pursued  me as I flew, till my wings drooped, and  I felt  that  I must drop  into  the  dull  marsh  far  beneath,
round  which travelled a lonely mist.
"But  this, too,  passed, and  I came  through  a  land  all  fire, so that,  as  I  flew
swiftly, my wings were scorched, and I was blinded often, and often missed my way, and  must change  my course of flight. It was all scarlet, all that  land-scarlet sky and scarlet sun and scarlet flowers, and the rivers running  red, and men and women
in long red  robes, with eyes of flame, and  voices that  keep crying,  'The  world  is mad, and all life is a fever!'"

I quote  this  passage  at  length  because  it  is  part   of  the  symbolism   by  which Parker  reaches  toward a third  cultural myth,  the  one which  brings  the  novel to a close. The  long-prevented and  long-sought consummation of Moray's and  Alixe's love is associated  with  a motif  of scarlet  images,  for  which  the  refrain  is a  voya­ geurs' song which  both cherish:

"Brothers,  we go to the Scarlet Hills :
(Little gold sun, come out of the dawn!) There  we will meet in the cedar groves;
(Shining white dew, come down!) There  is a bed where you sleep so sound, The  little good folk of the hills will guard,
Till the morning wakes and your love comes home. (Fly away, heart,  to the Scarlet  Hills!)"

The  motif  also includes  Mathilde's red  robe  and  a  painting by Doltaire of Alixe which  has a "red  glow."  Furthermore, British  redcoats achieve  the  fulfilment of Moray's patriotic desire, the  taking  of Quebec, simultaneously with  the  achieve­ ment of his romantic purpose. At the end of the novel he journeys in quest of Alixe to  the  Valdoche Hills,  covered  with  "crimsoning maples." This  final  chapter is intensely lyrical in its description  of Moray's response  to an idyllic Canadian forest, his sense  of harmony with  its creatures, and   his sacramental  gestures:   "I came down  to the  brook,  bathed  my face and  hands,  ate  my frugal  breakfast  of bread, with  berries  picked  from  the  hillside,  and,  as  the  yellow  light  of  the  rising  sun broke over the  promontory, I saw the Tall  Calvary upon  a knoll.... " Of  course he finds Alixe. Ultimately, The  Seats  of the  Mighty affirms  the  notion  of a  New Eden  in  the  New  World: "Master-Devil" Doltaire  is  thwarted and  a  Canadian Adam and  Eve take  possession of their  paradise. Parker does  offer glimpses  of a more  tragic   vision  through  two  minor  characters, the   barber  Voban   and   the cuckold  Argand Cournal, but  such  intimations are  effectively  submerged in the rush of lyricism, sentimentality, and  wish-fulfilment.

34

MYTH AND PREJUDICE

The  popular  prejudices  which shape The  Seats of  the Mighty  are  myths of a kind inferior to the more enduring images of man's fate which Kirby and Richard­ son assimilated from their literary sources. And it is fascinating that these two early Canadian  novelists found  aspects  of  their  form  and  meaning  in  seventeenth­ century  works which preceded  the rise of the novel proper. Kirby's  vision is ulti­ mately and  deeply ethical,  a thinking  conservative's  affirmation  of the  value of traditions and the danger of their perversion. Richardson is less a moralist than an explorer  of the  psychological underworld.  Of  other  nineteenth-century novelists who  wrote  about   the  Conquest,   Philippe  Aubert  de  Gaspe  remains  the  best example of one who took a more strictly historical view of his subject,  as opposed to the mythologizing done by Richardson, Kirby, and Parker.  Amplified by abun­  dant  local colour  and  by  numerous  cautionary  tales, the  central  concern  of Les Anciennes  Canadiens   ( 1863)   is with  Canada's central  historical  problem.  De Gaspe urges French-Canadian reconciliation  to the fact of the Conquest,  as well as an  ideal  of  communal  service  associated  with  the  Seigneury.  The  relations among his characters  form an allegory of the relation between English and French Canadians,  as is also true  of Mrs.  Leprohon's  minor  novel of Montreal  society after the Conquest,  Antoinette  de Mirecourt  ( r864).
Closer to  our  own  time,  writers  such  as  Hugh  MacLennan  and   Margaret Laurence  have  dealt  with  "the  present as history"  (Lukacs'  phrase)   and  have achieved compelling insights into the gains and losses we inherit from the embroil­ ment  of Indian, French,  and  English here  two centuries  ago.  In  The  Diviners Laurence  deliberately  explores the relation  between history and  myth, and  this is also the  crux  of Rudy  Wiebe's  The  Temptations of Big Bear and  Peter  Such's Riverrun, recent  treatments  of "the  past as history."  It  is harder  to  distinguish myth from prejudice in our contemporaries than in our ancestors. But we do have the advantage of ancestors like Richardson and Kirby, and of the foundation they provide for our hindsight.


NOTES

1 The Golden Dog:  A Romance of the  Days of Louis Quinze in Quebec, Authorized
Edition (Montreal:  Montreal News Company, 1903), pp.  252-53.
2   "The Prophecy: A Tale  of  the  Canadas," is the subtitle  of  the  first edition,  pub­ lished  in  London in  1832. My  references  are  to Wacousta: A Tale  of the  Pontiac  Conspiracy (Toronto:   McClelland & Stewart, 1923). The   paperback  versions  of both  W acousta  and  The Golden Dog  in  the  New Canadian Library  are seriously abridged.
3 See Love and  Death  in the  American Novel  (New York: Stein and  Day, 1975). Richardson's fascination with  sexual  abuse  and  ferocious  violence  continued to his last  novel,  Westbrook) the  Outlaw)·  or) The  Avenging Wolf, written in  1851  and recently  rediscovered and  reprinted (Montreal:  Grant Woolmer Books, 1973).

35

MYTH AND  PREJUDICE

4  The  phrase  is from  R. W. B. Lewis, The American Adam (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1955), p. 99· See also David  W. Noble, The Eternal  Adam and  the New  World   Garden  (New  York:  Grosset  and   Dunlap,  1968). Similar   tensions between  ideas  of East and  West and  of South and  North, as they inform Canadian
literature, have been pointed  out by Vv. H. New, Articulating West   (Toronto:  New
Press,  1972), and  Allison Mitcham, "Northern Utopia," Canadian Literature, 63
(Winter I 975) , 35-39·
5  The Seats of the  Mighty, Introduction by Elizabeth Waterston (Toronto:  McClel­
land  & Stewart, 1971), p. 145·
















THE RJIVENS

Glen Sorestad


Not  minutes  after  the dust  and  sound  faded after  Middleton's victorious  militia
had  quitted  their  zareba  near  Batoche taking  with them  what  they had  brought, all they had  plundered, and  Riel  besides,

two  black-garbed sisters from  Batoche flapped  about the empty  encampment, alert  eyes probing the trenches,
darting through the  trampled  grasses as they scavenged  for left-overs,

seizing a cast-iron pot or kettle  here,
a fork discarded or perhaps forgotten, a cup  whose owner  no longer  needed
the  early morning chill  dispelled  with  tea, removed  forever  from such  concerns
by a shot from  Dumont's rifle.


NARRATIVE  STRATEGIES IN LAURE CONAN'S
Angeline de Montbrun


T





CRrnCAL sTunms  PUBUSHED on  Angiline  de  Mont­ brun, from the appearance of the novel in 1881, seem to reflect with some fidelity the development  of literary  criticism in Quebec.  The  earlier  articles  tend  to be didactic, positivistic, and biographical,  whereas in the more recent studies the focus is clearly ideological  in interpretation  (including  those studies  with  a  Freudian  bias)  and formalistic in analysis. Correspondingly, since I 88IAngeline de Mont­ brun has been variously viewed as the story of a "beautiful soul" and of its exem­ plary renunciation  of life, as an account of the personal life of Felicite Angers, as the  unconscious  revelation  of an  Electra  complex in  the  religious obsession of a young girl, as "un  cas patent  de masochisme moral," 1 and  even as an allegory of the situation  in  Quebec  before  and  after  the  conquest.2   In  fairness  to both  the earlier and later critics, one ought to mention that many of the more recent publi­ cations refer freely to the biographical and historical background  of the novel, and that some of the earlier studies anticipate  the psychological and  philosophical im­ plications the novel bears for the modern reader.
Angeline de M ontbrun  was enthusiastically received when it first appeared,  and
it has continued  to interest critics, mainly because of the possibilities of  interpreta­ tion it  offers in  the  light  of modern  psychology. The  richness  of  its symbolism reveals itself to a great extent in the thematic structure of the novel, and these sym­ bolic and thematic features, in turn, are themselves represented  in the overall nar­ rative structure.  An analysis of the narrative modes (epistolary, third-person  narra­ tion, and  journal)  and  the sequence in which they occur may thus serve as a key to an interpretation.
One  of the main  criticisms of the novel has been based  upon  the fact  that  it uses three different  narrative modes and thus lacks unity. In fact, these three types of narrative,  and  the sequence in which they are used, constitute  the basic narra­ tive strategy  of the  novel in that,  first of all, they demonstrate by  means  of the features  particular to  them,  the  novel's internal  development  (one  can  hardly speak of a plot). Secondly, the absence of a narrator in the two main parts of the

37

ANGELINE DE  MONTBRUN

novel, the epistolary and the journal, forces the reader  to take over this function, and the author  thus succeeds in obtaining  a maximum of reader  participation.
The  narrative  voice in a traditional  novel usually determines  relationships, recognizes motives, and, depending  on whether  the narrator is outside  the novel or a character  within it, serves to resolve inconsistencies, reliably evaluate  char­ acters, and so forth. In short, it is the narrator  who lends the novel its cohesiveness. In novels where there is no narrator,  it is the reader  who must "organize" the text in such a way that  it becomes meaningful, and  the "unity" of  a text consisting of a selection of letters, a  brief narrative  account  and  journal  excerpts  lies in  the meaning  it takes on as he does so. As we shall see, in  Angeline  de M ontbrun  the reader  is forced  to "re-organize"  his text  again  and  again,  and  the  meaning  it takes on for him changes accordingly.
It  is, however, not only the combination  of various  narrative forms which, in Angeline de M ontbrun, constitutes a deviation from the traditional novel. We find a number  of features which represent significant deviations  from  the conventions attending  all three narrative forms. The epistolary form, for example, usually used to effect a gradual  revelation of events, characters and  their  relationships  and  to offer different  points of view to the uninitiated  reader, functions somewhat differ­ ently as Laure  Conan  uses it in Angeline  de M ontbrun. Most of the  letters are exchanged  between  Maurice  Darville,  who  is with  Angeline  and  her  father  at Valriant, and his sister Mina, who, in turn, corresponds with Emma S., an intimate  friend.  Angeline, like her father, speaks in only two letters.
The  basic external  situation  is stated  in  the  very first letter  from  Maurice  to Mina.  Maurice  is deeply in love with Angeline, and  is about  to ask her father for her hand in marriage.  Except for the fact that  the demand  is made  and  granted, and  that  we learn, in a letter from Mina  to Emma,  that  Mina  is secretly in love with Charles de Montbrun, a fact the reader has deduced  long before the explicit confession, nothing "happens" in this first part of the novel. Nor are the characters developed in the sense that  they "grow"  in any way in the first section. Maurice is a  sensitive,  artistic,  romantic  young  man  whose  communicative talents  are musical rather  than  verbal, and  he has fallen in love with Angeline at first sight. His idolization of her seems in keeping with his romantic  temperament, and indeed Angeline is described  not  only by Maurice   but  also  by  Mina  and  Charles  de Montbrun in  terms  which apply  to the ideal  romantic  heroine. She emerges as the image of purity and beauty, an innocent young girl with an almost excessive attachment to her  father.  Charles  de  Montbrun also represents  an  ideal  in  his way:  he is the mature,  experienced,  wise, fatherly  figure,  restrained,  pragmatic, yet with  an  enigmatic  charm   (shared  by Angeline)   which  Mina  calls  "mont­ brunage."
As to varying points of view manifesting themselves in the letters, there is never any issue on which the characters  essentially differ. Only  in Mina's  letters do we

g8

ANGELINE DE MONTBRUN

detect  a note which is somehow more intimate,  which contains  a part  of herself not evident in her other letters. Thus  the situation lacks drama: the reader  never has any reason to doubt  that  Maurice  will succeed in  winning  Angeline's  hand. The  characters,  as we have seen, do not develop, and  there is no element of  sur­ prise in any of the letters, unless we regard  Mina's  declared  love for  Charles  de Montbrun as such.




IN VIEW OF  THE  READILY RECOGNIZABLE CLICHES  presented in the letters, what  is it that  holds the attention  of the  reader,  and  what  meaning does he give to these letters? Obviously, the writers of the various letters  (i.e., the author  behind  them)  must make some sort of selection as to what  they choose to report  to  the  addressees. It is this selection  of scenes, incidents  and  character descriptions  that  the reader  must somehow  juxtapose and  relate  to one another. Since his information  is not complete, his imagination  is put to work to fill in the gaps, and it is this his own filling-in of the gaps, or, put more technically, the high degree of indeterminacy of the text, to which the reader  responds.
In  the reader's  reception  of the text, two factors external  to the text  operate.
First of all, his experience of life will tell him that the world of the author's text he is reading is unreal, not of this world. Secondly, his familiarity  with other texts which  bear some relation  to this text will come into  play. In  view of these two factors, he interprets and allegorizes and thus arrives at a "text," or a meaning of the text, which is different from, or goes beyond, the author's text.
In  Angeline  de M ontbrun  the romantic  idyll presented by the text is sketched
rather  than  precisely drawn.  Like the characters who inhabit  it, it is unmistakably paradigmatic in function,  engaging the consciousness of the reader in calling forth all the associations available  to him which fit this paradigm.  Angeline, beautiful, charming,  innocent,  affectionate,  and  of good family, is loved by Maurice,  who is handsome, talented,  honourable,  and of equally good family. Charles de Mont­ brun  is an ideal father,  a wise, noble and  charitable  man.  Mina,  who later  joins this trio, has only charming faults:  social sophistication  and  a certain  amount  of feminine frivolity.
The  setting  in which we find these four fortunate  human  beings is a secluded manoir  overlooking  the St. Lawrence. The  garden  surrounding the  house is not geometrically  laid out,  but  is a veritable  "garden  of Eden" in  which  the  plants are allowed to grow as they will, and are cut back and  tended  only to the extent that  they can  be en joyed all the more by the inhabitants of Valriant. A pond at the end of the garden,  with Angeline's swan gliding over it, completes the idyll.
Valriant is repeatedly referred to as a "paradis  terrestre." The reader's interpre­
tation of the text depends not only on his recognition and acceptance that  this is


39

ANGELINE DE MONTBRUN

so, but  also on his response to it, i.e., to remain  within  the metaphor, it depends on whether  he chooses to enter this paradise or not. As Andre  Brochu has pointed out, what is recounted is not so much a story but a state;  this state of beauty and innocence,  this world of high moral  ideals, full of a goodness to which  evil has not yet become a necessary corollary may represent  a "paradis terrestre,"  but  it alludes, inevitably, to celestial paradise. Thus Valriant as it emerges in the first section of the novel, lies outside reality and  becomes almost a mythical  place. In its beauty  and  very irreality, it represents a place or rather  a state of longing for the reader. This longing has to do with a sense of loss usually associated with childhood  and  youth,  but  it  is also associated  with  the  biblical  significance  of paradise.
The  biblical parallel is abundantly clear, yet what  we have before us is by no means  a clear-cut  allegorical pattern,  though  Angeline  comes close to  being  an allegorical figure. She is the person most talked  about  in the letters, yet remains strangely  vague and  remote. Maurice  emerges as a sort of Werther, whose heroic attributes  are artistic rather than virile. Charles de Montbrun, perhaps because he is older, does communicate  some sense of the presence of shadow  in the "paradis terrestre"  which  is Valriant.  There  is reference  to  the  death  of his wife, to his former military career, and so forth. In short, he is the only character, really, who has a "past." His role as father  of Angeline and  "maitre de ceans" gives him an authority  which invites allegorical interpretation.
The  most "real" person is Mina  Darville. As a sophisticated  society belle, and by her implied  resemblance to Mme  de Repentigny,  we have some idea  of her physical appearance. She constitutes a sort of narrative  centre for this part of the novel since she is the sender  and  recipient  of most of the  letters.  Also, because of her  physical distance from Valriant, she seems sufficiently detached  from  the situation  there  to  represent a  more or  less reliable  point  of view. In  Mina  the author  presents us with a character  with whom we can identify. Her  "seduction" by Valriant, when she arrives there, may be seen as coinciding with the reader's.
The first section of the novel ends with a letter from Mina to Maurice, a reversal of the opening letter, which was from Maurice  to Mina.  In a sense this last letter marks  a final response to what is expressed in the first. The  postscript,  normally used to add something trivial or forgotten to an already  finished letter, contains a reference, teasingly meant, to the state of marriage.

P.S.-Sais-tu que le rnariage  est le doux  reste du  paradis terrestre. C'est  l'Eglise  qui le dit  dans  Ia  preface  de  Ia messe  nuptiale. Medite cette   parole  liturgique et  ne m'ecris plus de lamentations.

There  is thus an opposition between the postscript, added  at the end, and its mes­ sage, which expresses anticipation. This  contradiction becomes ironic in  view of the later events since the anticipation  is not fulfilled. The "paradis terrestre" which

ANGELINE DE MONTBRUN

is prophesied  for the future  (in  the marriage of Angeline and  Maurice)   actually lies behind  them. They  lose their  paradise  (represented  by their life at Valriant) and  both enter  a very personal kind of hell. This postscript, then, in view of the subsequent  development  of the novel, represents the height of irony since, in retrospect, the  reader  will recognize, along with the characters,  that  at  the  time of the writing of that  letter paradise was, in fact, about to be lost, not gained. The postscript marks  the  climax of the novel in that  it designates the  point of tragic reversal and functions  as an ironic comment on it.




l:E BRIEF PIECE OF  THIRD-PERSON NARRATION in which  the events  leading  to  the  tragedy  are  recounted -Charles  de  Montbrun's death, Angeline's fall, disfigurement  and  renunciation  of marriage, and  Mina's  entering a convent-is dialectical in structure.  On close reading, there seem to be not one but two narrative voices, one stating the objective facts, the other commenting  or reflecting on them. The opening of this second part may be taken as an example. Voice One  states:   "L'ete suivant,  M.  Darville  revint  au  Canada." Voice  Two reflects:  "Le  bonheur  humain  se compose de tant  de pieces, a-t-on  dit, qu'il  en manque  tou jours quelques-uns  ... ," etc. There is also a clear distinction between the voices made by the way they refer to the characters. Voice One, the formal  or "objective" narrator, refers, for example, to "Mile de Montbrun," "Mile Darville," titles which strike the reader,  to whom the heroine is "Angeline" and  her friend is "Mina," as formal  and  remote, and as being spoken with a sense of distance  to the person and events referred to.
Voice One reports a fact: "Dans l'hiver qui suivait Ia mort de l\1:. de Montbrun, Mile Darville entra  au noviciat des Ursulines." Voice Two  comments:  "Angeline ne s'y opposa  point, mais Ia separation  lui fut cruelle. Elle aimait  Ia presence de cette chere amie, qui n'osait montrer  toute sa douleur."
The  significance  of this  dual  narrative  position lies in  the  fact  that  the  one (Voice  One)   is solidly situated  within  historical  reality,  within  the  real  world which seems so distant  from and irrelevant to life at Valriant.3  Time, at Valriant, is cyclical, measured  by the alternation  of night and day, the seasons and the tides. This cyclical representation of time, or its non-existence, is an important aspect of Valriant   as  "paradise." The   non-existence  of  time,  which  is  conceived  of  as eternity, in the first part of the novel contrasts dramatically  with the episodic time of the second. Charles de Montbrun cannot die at Valriant. His death,  like Ange­ line's fall and  disfigurement,  must take place in a world outside it, and the second part of Angeline de M ontbrun, with its completely different narrative  mode, repre­  sents a completely different world from the first.

ANGELINE DE  MONTBRUN

The bridge between the two parts is formed by the second narrative  voice. The sympathetic commentator is, as it were, on intimate  terms with the characters. He has known the "paradis terrestre," so to speak, and so becomes the voice of regret expressing its loss. In a way, this second voice anticipates  Angeline's mourning  as it echoes through  the  journal. It is a voice with  which  the  reader,  who,  through Part  I, has also known the "paradis  terrestre," can readily identify.
As Andre Brochu  has pointed out, this piece of narrative represents the "coup
de pouce  de l'auteur" which  changes the  novel from  the  representation  of one state  (happiness)  to another   (unhappiness) .  Its  very  brevity  imitates  the  mo­ mentariness,  the short duration  of the incident  which  brings  about  the  tragedy. This section of the novel has often been criticized for the lack of  credibility of the chain  of events set in motion  by Charles de Montbrun's death. It seems to me, however, that  the question of credibility does not apply  here, since with  Charles de Montbrun's death the novel becomes more and more self-consciously allegorical. Angeline's fall and disfigurement can certainly be taken as a fall from grace. Her renunciation  of marriage  and subsequent self-isolation may  be seen as a gesture of atonement. What  is missing, in this allegorical  interpretation, is the  nature  of Angeline's "sin." It is around  this problem that  the journal itself revolves.
The  reader,  when  he has finished reading  these few pages of narration, is not
so much incredulous  as mystified. From here on, his participation in the text in­ volves him, emotionally, in that  he sympathizes  with  Angeline.  But the  reader's activity is bent on the search for the reason behind Angeline's self-imposed unhap­  piness, and  the  presumed unhappiness of Maurice  and  Mina.  The question, too, is whether indeed it is self-imposed.
It is the journal which demands the most radical re-organization of the "reader's text" we have already referred to. For not only has life changed  for Angeline. The entire world of the novel, created by the reader as well as by the author, and, figura­ tively speaking, dwelt in by them both, has also been transformed. Angeline, whom the reader knows only as an ideal or prototype of beauty and innocence, whom he has tended  to view allegorically, suddenly stands  in the foreground  as a psycho­ logically highly problematical  figure. Through her  journal,  in which she reflects on her memories of people and events in her former life, we realize, suddenly, that  she has been problematical  all along. Confronted by the Angeline of the  journal, the reader is forced to re-interpret  much of the text of Part  I. His ability to do so depends  upon  the effectiveness of what  I will  call "bracketing."
In reading  the  journal, with its constant  references to the Valriant  of the past, the reader calls to mind the corresponding scene as it has been revealed to him in a letter. Two contrasting versions of an event are now available  to the reader, and he must re-interpret  the entire text in terms of that  contrast.
This  ability  to bracket  is also significant for  the  interpretation of the  text  in that certain  references, casually made in the first part and seemingly without con-

ANGELINE DE MONTBRUN

text, in retrospect  reveal themselves as prophetic of the future,  and  the text there­ fore becomes charged with irony. The reader, then, brackets a fact if he remembers it at a designated,  i.e., appropriate spot later  on in the text. The richness of the text thus depends to a large extent on the reader's ability to bracket. The  novel is full  of  such  self-allusiveness, but  a  few  examples  may  serve  to  illustrate   the principle.
For  example,  Angeline's  lightly made  suggestion to "demondaniser" Mina  is
ironically prophetic.  Mina's  experience at Valriant  indirectly causes her to "leave the world" by entering  a convent. Maurice's singing, referred to in the first letter, takes on a new significance when it is associated with the scene at the pond,  with the swan ;• with the reference, by Mina,  in a comical context, to a song he sings, sotto  voce:

Ah! gardez-vous de me guerir! J'aime mon mal, j'en veux mourir;

and  with  Angeline's  memories  which  she  enters  in  her  journal   (for  example, "Tantot, j'entendais  un passant fredonner:

Que le jour me dure, Passe loin de toi!

C'est  Maurice  qui  a popularise  par  ici ce chant  melancholique   auquel  sa  voix donnait  un charme  si penetrant").
Another  form  of self-allusiveness is the  presentation  of former  events, in  the journal,  which  have  not  appeared  in the letters. The  absence  of these events in the  letters  are  perceived  as significant  gaps  by the  reader,  who  has shifted  his point of view from that of the letters  (i.e., primarily that  of Mina)   to Angeline's. A key episode is recorded by Angeline in her journal entry of August 4· She remem­ bers a  riding  excursion  she made  with  Maurice  and  her  father.  They  had  en­ countered  a storm, and her horse had bolted. She had fallen, but  was saved from serious mishap  by Maurice's intervention.  At a nearby  cottage,  where they seek shelter from  the storm, she is offered dry clothes (of white and  blue, the virginal colours she always wears) , and is given a mirror to admire herself in.

Ma toilette finie, elle [la  jeune fille] me presenta un petit rniroir, et me demanda naivement si je n'etais pas heureuse d'etre  si belle?-si  j'aurais pu supporter  le malheur d'etre defigune

This incident,  like so many  other flashbacks in the  journal, ironically  anticipates or foreshadows what will happen. Even more ironic is the conclusion of Angeline's description of the landscape,  after the storm.

L'orage avait cesse. La campagne refraichie par la pluie resplendissait au soleil. La rosee scintillait sur chaque brin d'herbe, et pendait aux arbres en gouttes brillantes.

43

ANGELINE DE  MONTBRUN

L'air,  delicieux a respirer, nous apportait  en  bouffees Ia saine odeur  des foins fauches, et Ia senteur aromatique des arbres. Jamais Ia nature  ne m'avait  paru si
belle. Debout a Ia fenetre, je regardais emue, eblouie. Ce lointain immense et magni­
fique, ou  Ia mer eblouissante se confondait avec le ciel, m'apparaissait  comme
!'image de l'avenir.

This is a side of Angeline which Mina, in her letters, never reveals to the reader, nor, in fact, do any of the others, including Angeline herself. It seems that  we get to know Angeline only in the journal. She reveals herself, or this side of her, only after it has ceased to exist. Thus these reflective flashbacks catch  the reader, who has oriented  himself mainly  by Mina  Darville  in the  first  part,  completely  un­ awares. The  narrative shift of focus seems highly significant, for the  juxtaposition implies a superimposition,  by the  author,  of the  characters  of the  two  women. Potentially "sisters" due to the anticipated sequence of events in Part I -Angeline marries Maurice,  Mina marries Charles de Montbrun -the two become "sisters" in their mourning,  in their renunciation  of the world, in their self-imposed seclu­ sion. Mina enters a convent (neither Angeline nor Maurice seems to have any ink­ ling as to the  real motive),  and  Angeline retreats  to Valriant, which is now no longer the "paradis terrestre," but the "paradis perdu."
The two "states" we have referred to (happiness and unhappiness) as constitut­ ing, broadly speaking, the themes of the novel, are conceived of by the  reader in temporal  terms, in terms of a "before"  and "after." This kind of  conception  coin­ cides with  Angeline's  own  in  the  journal. It is, however,  only  in  terms  of the events described in the direct narration  that  the terms "before" and  "after" take on any meaning at Valriant.  For the Valriant  we experience after the events is as detached  from  reality as was the  "paradis  terrestre," and  the  same  concept  of timelessness applies to it. The  "journal," therefore, if one takes the word literally, becomes an ironic comment  on itself:  the dates  prefacing  each  entry  are  mean­ ingless.
Symbolically, the most striking feature of Angeline's journal is the ambiguity of pronoun  reference. In her musings over the past, often in the form of prayer, the pronoun  "il" or "vous" is at times three ways ambiguous  in that  it could refer to her father, to Maurice or to God. Her mourning  is thus not clearly associated with the death  of her father, or her loss of Maurice,  or her inability  to love God, but is a state  which derives in equal measure from all three.  Her longing  represents an undifferentiated longing  for  her  father,  for  Maurice,  for  communion   with  the divine.  Unconsciously, the three seem to have  become fused into one for  her, a unified trinity in which, however, her father still figures dominantly. She is unaware that  she is not making a distinction, and  her memories of the  past show that  she is still innocent  in that she does not recognize guilt  (the  sin of idolization  of her father,  for example)   as her  motivating  force.  For  the  reader,  Angeline's  "sin" seems at first to lie in her repressed love, her repressed passion for her father, and

44

ANGELINE DE  MONTBRUN

since these feelings are reciprocated, or rather originate with the father,  it is really he who is "guilty" if one sees a  psychologically incestuous relationship  between the two.
If one searches more closely for a causality, the initial event leading to the "loss
of paradise" is not Angeline's fall and disfigurement, nor her refusal to marry Mau­ rice, but  Charles  de Montbrun's death.  The  implications, if we identify  Charles de Montbrun's fatherly  and  authoritative role in the  first part  as an  allegorical counterpart of the divine, are atheistic in the Nietzschean sense. The loss of "para­ dise," for Angeline, thus becomes strangely literal, and the death of  her father, for which she can find no consolation  by addressing God, has, in a sense, condemned her to the suffering she is experiencing.
Just  as the epistolary form was appropriate to the sense of communion  at Val­ riant,  where the letters represent  the very sense of community  expressed in them, the  journal is the appropriate expression of an isolated, lonely individual:  it is a form of self-dialogue. Reflective, with only one point of view, the  journal reveals Angeline's  progressive detachment from  reality  to the  point  where  reality  itself seems  to  coincide  with  her  own  preoccupations.  This  illusion  is  effected  in  a number  of ways, and  is one  mode by which the allegorical  level  of  the novel is sustained.
One example is the choice of names of the characters who are mentioned in the journal.  As Angeline  takes  on  more  and  more of a  saintly  resignation,  as she becomes more and more associated with sacrifice and sisterly love, there occur occasional references to her mother,  and in her prayers she turns  more and  more frequently  to the  Virgin.  Correspondingly,  there  are  at  least three  Maries  who occur in the journal, for all of whom Angeline feels a sisterly devotion and  affec­ tion. The  Indian  girl, who has waited for her baptism to die, is christened "Ange­ line"  by the  missionary  who  performs  the  rite. Veronica  Desileux,  whose story represents, in miniature,  the fate of Angeline in the novel, leaves Angeline a legacy, both literally and  metaphorically. The  feminine principle figures more and  more prominently  as a source of redemption  and salvation.
This  progressive fusing of the reality around  Angeline with Angeline's state of mind  is ambivalent in its effect. On  the one hand, she is more and  more at one with  the world around  her, more and  more in harmony  with it, a development signalled by the way she sees the sea (symbolically the source of all life, a mother image as well as an image  of passion)  and  the sky (associated  with  the  divine, the spiritual,  the ideal)   come together  at the  horizon. Both the sea and  the sky are symbols of infinity, and so this apparent union seems final. On the other hand, this sense of oneness with the universe and with God for which she is striving has as its consequence her ceasing to be as an individual. What she is striving for, and progressively attaining, is a transcendent  state behind which, however, is also con­ cealed a death  wish.


45

ANGELINE DE MONTBRUN

The tri-structural form,  then,  expresses a triadic conception of the  universe  as it is represented in the  novel. This  triadic principle applies  to Angeline's  percep­ tion  of the  universe  (sea, sky and  earth) as well as to the  seasons  (winter, as the season  and  symbol  of death  is "silent" and  therefore cannot  be  expressed  in  the novel). The novel represents  a progression  from  a state  in which  the  coeur domi­ nates  to a predominance of arne. The  body, the  realm  of the physical  holding  the two together, so to speak, is insignificant, and  yet the  cause, the  origin  of all that  happens. Most  obvious  of  all  is the  "trinity" constituted  by  Angeline's father, Maurice, and  God.
As we have already  suggested, there  is also an epic progression,  expressed  in the three  sections,  which  moves from  the  ideal  ("paradise") to the  real  (the events which  lead  to the  tragedy) to a third  state  which  represents an  attempt to regain the ideal. Even without the specific references  to Dante, one can see in Angeline de M ontbrun  not only an  inversion  of the self-conscious  allegorization of the  Divina Commedia, but  also an allusion  to the  Vita  Nuova, which  is also determined  by this triadic principle.
It is in a Dante quotation, too, in terms of which  the tragedy of Angeline might be summed up, a quotation in which one can also see this triadic principle at work. As Angeline and  Maurice look  out  at  the  landscape, after  the  storm, Maurice smilingly  quotes  "dans cette belle langue italienne qu'il affectionait:  'Beatrice regardait le del, et moi je regardais Beatrice'."


NOTES

1 Jacques  Cotnam, "Angeline de Montbrun:  un cas patent  de masochisme moral,"
Journal  of Canadian Fiction,  2, no. 3 (I972),  I52-6o.
2 This  interpretation, which is based on what seems to me to be merely an excursus in Angeline's  journal  entry  of 25 September,  is presented  by Andre  Brochu  in  a study entitled "La Technique  romanesque dans Angeline de Montbrun," L'Instance critique   (Montreal: Editions Lemeac,  I974), pp.  II2-20.
3 It is interesting  that although  temporal  references are made in the first part  of the novel, e.g., the  engagement  period  of Angeline  and  Maurice   is specified-such references are always associated with a reality outside  Valriant. For example, during the engagement  period Maurice goes to France.
4 The symbolic ambivalence of Maurice's singing at the pond with the swan seems obvious:  the  swan's  song is an  expression  of a  premonition   of  death.  However, Maurice's  song is an expression of longing for Angeline, who is, in this scene, closely associated with "her" swan. Gaston Bachelard,  in L'eau  et Les Reves  (Paris,  I 942), observes about  the swan as symbol:  "Le  cygne, en litterature, est un ersatz de la femme nue. C'est Ia nudite permise, c'est la blancheur immaculee et cependant ostensible.... Qui  adore le cygne desire la baigneuse"  (p. 50).


I. V. CRAWFORD'S PROSE FICTION




Catherine Sheldrick Ross







CRAWFORD's  UTERARY REPUTATION will be bared,  as she expected it would, upon  her poetry and especially upon  her verse narratives.  She undoubtedly  saw herself as a poet who must interrupt  her real work long enough to write popular  romances for money. There  is, nevertheless, a continuity  in her work that gives the prose its special interest. In the poetry and prose alike, her characteristic mode of perception  is romance. Consistently she sees experience  in patterns  provided  by myths  and  fairy tales. Sleeping Beauty, the spring  maiden who is pricked by the thorn  of winter and sleeps in a trance  until the bright Solar hero  comes to  drive  away  the  chill  mists-Sleeping Beauty  lies behind  both Brynhild in "Gisli the  Chieftain" and  many of the heroines of the  prose stories. Both the poetry and the prose use as their basic structural principle the solar myth of the sun god's struggle  with darkness. The  conflict of light  and  dark, summer and winter, becomes a metaphor for the thematic dialectic of love and death,  hope and despair. In "Malcolm's Katie," for example, Crawford  uses the seasonal myth of the struggle between  the North and South  Winds to align the parallel  plots of pioneer history and  the love story of Max  and  Katie.  Similarly,  her incomplete novel, Pillows of Stone ( 1878), uses the eclipse of the sun to co-ordinate  parallel themes and events. The  prose work merits study because in it we can see a gifted writer battling  more or less successfully with commercial necessity. She is adapting popular  fictional  conventions  to the development  of her structure  of solar myth and  to the expression of her central  vision of the conflict of opposites reconciled by sacrificial love.
In  her edition  of Crawford's poems, Katherine Hale  ends her "Appreciation"
with this postscript:

A small  trunk   full  of  her  manuscripts stands  before  me  as  I write.  Not,  alas,  of poems newly discovered, but  of old stories and  novelettes written in her  clear  deli­ cate  handwriting on paper now yellow with age. The  trunk  is crammed with  them; there  are  hundreds of closely written pages.

47

CRAWFORD'S PROSE FICTION

Commentary upon this trunkload of inaccessible work has until recently amounted to little more than  Lawrence Burpee's judgment  that  "although her prose was of some merit, it was not the medium best suited  to the peculiarly lyrical cast of her genius"1 and the comment on A Little Bacchante in the Varsity  (Jan. 2 3, I 886) to the effect that  "the  novel of Isabella Valancy  Crawford, in the Globe, is vastly superior  to the ordinary  run  of newspaper  fiction."2  After  the  death  in I 936 of Crawford's literary  executor, John  Garvin,  the manuscripts found  their  way into the Lome  Pierce collection and are now in four boxes in the Douglas Library  at Queen's  University. Garvin evidently intended  to edit a book of Crawford's prose, but died before anything  came of the project.
Most of the Douglas Library manuscripts  are fiction -seven fairy tales, half a dozen completed  short stories and seven or eight short  story fragments,  and  ten novels.3  Of the novels, only two, Helen's Rock  (eighteen  chapters, dated  April  I I,
1883)  and Monsieur  Phoebus (thirty-seven chapters  and several pages each from
chapters  fifty-two to fifty-five) are  near  to being  complete.  Along  with  various other fragments are the opening eleven chapters of The  Heir of Dremore; two incomplete  versions of From  Yule  to Yule; or Claudia's  Will;   two  incomplete drafts of The  Halton  Boys, described on the title page as "a story for boys"; and
157 foolscap leaves of Pillows of  Stone;  or Young  Cloven-Hoof  (Chapter V of
which  is dated  June  13, 1878). Crawford's  obituary  in  the  Evening  Telegram (Feb.  I4,  I887)   says, "a  continued  story entitled  'Married With  an  Opal; or a Kingly Restitution' is at  present running  thru  a serial  published  by the Toronto News Company." The  Toronto  News Company  has not yet been tracked  down, but  more than  350 foolscap leaves of the manuscript of Married  With an Opal can  be  found  in  the  Douglas  Library  collection,  catalogued  severally  as  "Old General  de Berir-Untitled story about"  and  "Unidentified Manuscript." The manuscripts  that  have been preserved represent  probably  much  less than  half of Crawford's total  prose output. Lawrence  Burpee  says, "At  the  age of fourteen, she wrote stories for Frank  Leslie's Magazine  and  soon became  a constant  con­ tributor  to this and  other periodicals."
Frank  Leslie's Popular Monthly is our best clue to the market  that  Crawford was trying to please. Acceptable stories relied on familiar  romance  formulas:  the conflict between the steady-eyed hero and the villain of the deepest dye; the heart­ less step-mother; the beautiful heroine who must marry the man she most despises; the disinherited  son or nephew;  revenge plots;  the child stolen away in  infancy; disguises and  mistaken  identity;  identical  twins;  sudden   paralysis or  blindness; deathbed  confessions; and  miraculous  resurrections.  The  popular  features  of the current  fiction that  Crawford  had  to imitate  turn  out  to  be  those highly  con­ ventionalized  formulas  that  have always been  popular  from  New Greek comedy to the present.
Not surprisingly  then, Crawford's  plots, like Dickens',  are  derived  from  fairy

CRAWFORD'S PROSE FICTION


tales.  Her  earliest  prose  pieces are,  in fact,  actual  fairy  tales.  Later  stories  ad just the  fairy  tale  plots and  symbolism  to the slightly more  realistic  form  required   by the magazine market. The fairy  tale, "Wava, the Fairy of the Shell," for example, is an  early  version  of Crawford's solar  myth.  Goldie,  a  human child,  is snatched from  the tempest by Wava and  her fairy band:

The  waves were thundering in.... Just as the fays reached  the beach, the moon struggled for an instant  through  the dense clouds, and on the crest of an advancing wave the fays beheld ... a child ... whose long hair streamed  out  like threads of gleaming gold on the dark and troubled waters.
As the  huge  waves reached  them,  the mermaids  laid  the  child  at  Wava's  feet,
and as they were borne swiftly back by the receding monster,  they sang loud above the noise of the tempest-

"Take the waif and love her well
Wreathe  her round with fairy spell
In  thy rosy bowers
T'is a gift we snatched for thee
From the all-devouring  sea,
Strew  her path  witl1 flowers."

Crawford's characteristic opposition of light  and  dark  is developed here  in  the conflict  between  moon  and  "dense  clouds,"  "gleaming gold" hair  and  "dark and troubled waters," golden  child  and  "the all-devouring sea."
Another early fairy  tale, "The Waterlily" (signed "I.V.C., 18, North Douro"),
is about Roseblush, who  has  been  abducted from  her  suitor, Goldenball, by  a wicked   black   beetle,  Prince  Crystal   Coat,   and   imprisoned  inside   a  waterlily. Radiant spirits,  presiding over  the lily, sing:

"On  the lake the lily lies
Glimmering  in the silver ray
In its bosom pearly-white
Sad and  tearful dwells the fay. Sprite,  nor fay, nor elfin hand
E'er can break the potent spell. Yet an earthborn child  has power.
This  is all that  we may tell."

The "earthborn child," Maggie, picks  the  lily, and  her  kiss of  love  defeats  the
"potent spell":

As the boat touched the shore Maggie and Tommie  jumped out, and  Maggie gently kissed the white  petals of the lily. In  a second a great  and  wonderful  light shone round  them, and  a burst of harmony made the very air tremble. The  petals of the lily slowly opened, and a creature no larger than a moth,  but of the most exquisite beauty,  unfolded  her large,  rose-coloured wings, and  rose from a golden couch in the centre of the flower.


49

CRAWFORD'S PROSE FICTION

Here again  we have Crawford's organizing myth of the conflict between light and dark that only human love can resolve. Moreover she is experimenting with motifs that  recur in most later versions of the myth in both her poetry and prose. We can distinguish the rival suitors, one good and one evil; the imprisoned  and  disguised heroine;  the "potent  spell" that is broken by the love of a girl-child;  the canoe on the water;  and,  most important,  the mystic flower of love.
A late story, "The Lost Diamond of St. Dalmas,"  translates  this fairy tale struc­
ture into a somewhat  more realistic form. A precious diamond,  lost for fifty years, is reborn on Christmas day from the heart of a great aquatic  lily that  flowers only once in ten or twenty years:

the greenish  sheath burst, and  let out  the glorious  mystery  of petals  and  a  piercing flood of leaping fire.... From  the unsealed  lips of the  blossom had  rolled  a star,  a flame,  a fire, that  blazed in unspeakable glory.

Crawford  is drawing  upon Eastern  mythology for her image  of the diamond  on the lotus, but its symbolic function  is clearly similar  to the "great  and  wonderful light"  that  rises from  the  "golden  couch  in  the  centre  of  the  flower"  in  "The Waterlily."




CRAWFORD INVOKES THE  MYSTIC FLOWER whenever  the epiphany  of love is reached that gives meaning to the rhythms of life. Her world is a constant  struggle  of pairs of opposites reconciled  by sacrificial love:  light  and dark,  summer  and  winter, fertility and  drought, hope  and  despair,  wealth  and poverty, creation and destruction, hunter and quarry, eagle and dove. In "The Waterlily"  and  "The Lost Diamond," she uses the lily or lotus as her symbol for painful experience transformed  by love. Elsewhere she uses a mystic rose that resembles the multifoliate sunlit rose in Dante's  Paradiso. In  "Malcolm's Katie,"
love has "its own sun, its own peculiar sky, I All one great  daffodil."  In  the  re­
demptive final chapter of Helen's  Rock  called "Love is Lord of All," Helen declares that  love is "a  star and shines alone-a flower and  grows alone.  Only God can build the star and mold the flower."
Crawford's paradiso of love is a bright flower. Her inferno  is a dark stoney vortex of despair.  In  between is a  purgatorial  world  of conflict,  called  in "Malcolm's
Katie"  the "dark  matrix" of Sorrow "from  which the  human  soul I Has its last
birth."  In  Crawford's stories we can  distinguish  three  character   types who  cor­ respond  roughly  with  Dante's  three  levels of inferno,  purgatory,  and  paradise. Some few are  unregenerate  inferno-dwellers,  totally  cut  off from  love  and  pre­ sented in images of granite and the swirling vortex of dry dust. More, like Alfred in "Malcolm's Katie" or Claudia  in From  Yule to  Yule, have  essentially loving

50

CRAWFORD'S PROSE FICTION


natures, but  have  responded to the pain  of experience  with  cynicism,  despair, and a deliberate hardening against emotion. And  finally there  are  the Beatrice  figures who  beckon  the  purgatorial soul toward  Crawford's paradise of love.
Claudia is typical  of  those  characters who  must  endure purgatorial pain  and sorrow  before they can  regain  their  capacity  to love. We are  told  that  "at  twenty­ one she had  become scornful of the world, at twenty-two tired  of it, and at  twenty­ three  was settled  into  calm  cynicism." She is like Alfred  who  wrestles  against  the giant  of pity and  love that is "bursting all the granite in  [his]  heart":  "Life  is too
short  for  anguish  and  for  hearts! I So  I  wrestle  with  thee,  giant,  and  my will I
Turns down  the  thumb" ( "M.K.", IV). The  explanation of Claudia's despair  is a  less intense,   prose  version  of  Alfred's   remarkable speech   to  Max   that   ends, "Nought is immortal save immortal-Death!":

The  discovery of one age became  the doubt of another,  the laugh  of a second, a bygone scientific superstition  in the third ... [Claudia] wanted  from Life a rock of some kind to stand on, and console herself for past deceit by saying "Here  is Truth
-I can  demonstrate by  numbers-by  calculations,  by experiments  ... "  [Her rejection  of all she could  not prove made]  her existence parched  and  siccous as a dried  leaf-she steadily repelled the shining finger of Science when it pointed,  as it always does, towards the awful Poems of the unknown-... she felt, with suspi­ cion, that  Science  had  some of the unreliable  blood of Art  in her  veins-was  a near kin of Poetry and  a relation  of Painting  and Music.

Scientific facts provide no secure footing. The only "rock  ... to stand  on" in Craw­ ford's  world  is love. Therefore, what  is important is the  ability  to feel:  sorrow,  if it keeps this capacity alive,  is redemptive. Here  is Crawford's analysis in  chapter eleven of Helen's Rock:

She [observes]  with dull horror  that the petrifying process of anguish is commenc­ ing in her nature.  Oh, far more terrible to face the Medusa  and feel  the quivering flesh losing its humanity-the blood pausing in chill stillness in  the  arteries,  the marble  death  turning  the rosy heart  to a dumb,  chill stone-the  grand  power of saying "I live-I feel" fading before those awful eyes-than  to cringe, to lament,  to suffer and  retain  the God-like capacity of sensation. Despair, like a dark  planet, may roll in a golden atmosphere  of hope-to outgrow its anguish;  not to be able to suffer, to weep or to complain  means an inner and  terrible  death.

As Crawford puts it in "Malcolm's Katie," "Who curseth  Sorrow  knows her not at all." Sorrow  is the "dark mother of the soul," and  an "instrument I Close clasped within  the great  Creative Hand."
In the prose romances, Crawford takes the melodramatic convention of the suffering  heroine   who  goes from  one  frightful agony  to  another, and   uses it  to present her vision of the creative and purgatorial role of pain  and sorrow.  Claudia's aunt  is moved  by her niece's relentless hardness  to exclaim:

CRAWFORD'S PROSE FICTION

"Heaven pardon you, Claudia. You  will  have  to  suffer  tortures manifold and terrible before  your  wicked  will melts-pangs  I dread to  think  of. Twice  within twenty-four hours  you have  stood  on the  threshold of death and  you are  still iron
-iron-what  pangs  will melt  you, girl?"
"I know  of  none.  Did  I,  I  would  court  them,  for  all  this  is like a  cross of fire
upon  my breast."

The pattern here  in  From Yule  to Yule, and repeated frequently elsewhere, is the descent of the  purgatorial soul  into  a dark valley  of soul-making, which the  stories translate into  the  romance conventions of  madness, amnesia, poverty, attempted suicide, and almost fatal illnesses. By the  end, however, the  character is redeemed, and  images of darkness, granite, and  "dumb, chill  stone" give  place  to  images of light, the  flower  of love, and  the "rosy  heart."
Crawford's third character type  is an  innocent figure whose  suffering is sacri­
ficial  rather than  purgatorial and   whose  role  is  redemptive. She  is essentially a Beatrice, although she  may  be  called  Katie in  "Malcolm's  Katie," Betsie-Lee in "Old  Spookses' Pass," Thea in Pillows of Stone, Rosamunda in Married  With An Opal, and Moyna in  The  Heir  of Dremore. The  mystic rose  or  lily is invariably invoked in  her  honour. Miranda Farn is  renamed Rosamunda. Thea  has  "the perfection of  the  rose  at  the  mystic  moment  known only   to  the  Gods." In  the following scene  from The   Heir  of Dremore, the  Beatrice for  the  crippled Felix Dremore is his daughter Moyna, whom he  supposes dead:

no tidings  came  to lost Moyna  ... Felix sat  erect  ... in  the  attitude of one  about to  spring   up  and   hurl  himself  against   Fate-his  head   slightly   forward  as  he plunged his sense of hearing far  into  the silence  which  was yet so full  of  sound­ the  sound  of  the  sea-the  waves, the  wind-dead  voices  as  far  as he  was con­  cerned  for none  of them  brought tidings  of his child  to him.

. . . On  the  threshold ... stood  a woman  with  the  face  of a smiling  and  powerful Angel ... an absolute light seemed to strike from  the fair,  flawless ivory of her  noble and  delicate face.  Her glances rushed  into  the room  winged  with  joyous glory.... a slight starry  radiance seemed to shimmer  over her grand brow ... Neither spoke .. . Felix had  lost all power of speech-and for a moment she forgot  all else in gazing at  him  ... He  tried  to cry out  to her,  but  speech  would  not  come  any  more  than hearing-he leaned  more  forward looking  at  her-she was motionless  except  for those  outstretched arms-He  leaned  forward still  more-breathless-intent on those  wonderful eyes-She had  come  to him  with  news of Moyna  ... Would  she never  speak  ... ? But  perhaps she  was speaking-and that   the  physical  tortures racking him  prevented her  voice reaching him-He  must  hear  her.... He  shud­ dered  from  head  to foot  and,  with  a groan  he  did  not  hear-rose  to his  feet­ swaying, in his grand  stature, like a lofty oak.

In this  passage, romance conventions arrest and intensify the  moment of  aware­ ness and beatitude. Felix is suspended in time, leaning forward, straining ahead "in  the  attitude of  one  about to  spring up  and hurl himself   against  fate."  But   this

52

CRAWFORD'S PROSE FICTION

tightly sprung energy is held static. Crawford is giving us, not a narrative  of things happening in succession, but a motionless tableau. Everything is concentrated upon the straining  of these two separated  figures to reach each other. Felix is "intent  on those wonderful  eyes." Moyna,  who is described in Chapter  One  as Felix's "one link with love," guides him with her eyes to salvation, as Beatrice does Dante. The imagery makes Moyna's angelic role unmistakable:  "smiling and powerful Angel," "absolute  light,"  "winged  with  joyous glory," "starry  radiance." The  visible sign of Felix's redemption  is the  recovery of his ability to walk, a conventional  plot device in romance.
Another  Beatrice  figure,  Rosamunda  in  Married  With An  Opal,  performs  a redemptive  role that  is sacrificial. This story takes the form of the descent of the girl-child into a dark  underworld  of suffering and loss of identity,  followed by a re-emergence into light. Miranda Farn  is a forlorn fourteen-year-old  waif who is abandoned and  left for dead  by her bridegroom. She is subsequently  adopted  by the  wealthy  Mr.  Vintamper and  substituted  for  his supposedly  dead  daughter, Rose. Miranda becomes Rosamunda  or rose of the world, an innocent  party in a revenge plot to deprive Vintamper's nephew, Harold,  of his inheritance. She, of course, loves and  pities Harold, and her enforced participation in the revenge plot drives her to madness and a suicidal leap into a deep abyss. Just before this crisis, Rosamunda kneels between her biological father and her adoptive father,  saying:

"You who bought me and you who sold me, have mercy on me. Give me back my oath. Don't be so cruel to me. I love you both. Why have you combined to torture me, to degrade me, to drive me mad?"

She undergoes madness, symbolic death,  disfigurement  ("few  would  have  recog­ nized  the  superb  Rosamunda Vintamper in  the  disfigured  wraith  in  the deep chair") -and  rebirth.  By the end, all disguises are put aside, true identities  are revealed, and  Rosamunda's marriage  to Harold  is celebrated  as a  "kingly  resti­ tution."
This is the happily-ever-after of the fairy tale and the conventional shape of comedy. The stories are linked by this structure  to poems like "Gisli the Chieftain," "Old  Spookses' Pass," and "Malcolm's Katie"  which move toward  reconciliation. While revenge usually provides the initial energy to set Crawford's plots in motion, their direction and final destiny are controlled by a power of love strong enough  to bring about miraculous  conversions, recoveries from amnesia or madness or death, and recognitions of identity of both the self and the beloved. In most stories there are characters  who have two sets of names. The comic action of the plot uncovers some hidden  fact  that  allows each to adopt  his proper  name, as, for example,  "I am the little Rose you thought  dead!" in Married With An  Opal. Typically,  by the end, time  has made  a "kingly  restitution" to the disinherited  child or to the lost prince.


53

CRAWFORD'S PROSE FICTION



CRAWFORD's STORIES HEIGHTEN THE  OPPOSITION   between good and evil in the dialectic characteristic  of romance. But Crawford  is also con­ cerned with relationship, integration,  and reconciliation. To show hidden relation­ ships among characters, she repeatedly uses devices of substitute  or stolen children, forged  wills, missing heirs, and  unexpected  legacies, and,  most  important, step­ brothers   and  identical   twins.  These  last  two  devices  function  to  distinguish opposites and  then  to draw  apparent contraries  into significant  relationship.  In The   Heir  of Dremore, Felix is the  crippled  heir  who  has  been  cast out  by  his demonic father,  "Brute" Dremore, to live in a mud  hut. He looks "like a grand effigy of some martyred  king." He has a "noble head, ... kind, gay, sad, restless brilliant blue eyes." His step-brother  "Black" Desmond, " 'Brute'  Dremore's black­ guard son," is a Heathcliff type with a "sullen young face, great restless fiery black eyes, a coarse red-lipped mouth, stonily set jaws, and a low broad brow drawn  into a settled scowl-a form of continually repressed passion rather  than  of malice." The step-brothers exaggerate differences inherited  from  their  different mothers in a  way  that  suggests the  opposition  of  calm  and  storm  in  Wuthering  Heights. Chapter Two closes as Black Desmond looks at Felix's "mud  hovel ... and beyond it to the bleak grandeur  of DTemore House": " 'Yes!' he said heavily, 'It'll  come! and  it will grow between you and  I, Felix, like a stone  wall-and  you'll  never know what it is-and while I'm going headlong to the Devil, you'll be wondering why even you can't  hold  me  back.' " Desmond  sees a  stone  wall  of difference separating  dark  and  fair,  Hell  and  Heaven.  But  the  story,  though  incomplete, provides  clues that  these  step-brothers  were  to  have  been  reconciled  after  the fashion  of the  Dark  and  Bright  twins in  the  epilogue  to  "Gisli  the  Chieftain." There, the contraries developed throughout  "Gisli"  are  brought  into relationship in the image of the clasped handshake:

Said the voice of Evil to the ear of Good, "Clasp thou my strong right hand,
Nor shall our clasp be known or understood
By any in the land.

"I, the dark giant, rule strong on the earth; Yet thou, bright one, and I
Sprang from the one great mystery-at one birth
We looked upon the sky.

. . . toil with me, Brother; but in the sight
Of men who know not, I stern son shall be
Of Darkness-thou of Light!"

In Pillows of Stone  and The  Halton Boys, Crawford  uses the motif of twinship,

54

CRAWFORD'S PROSE FICTION

much  as Dombey  and Son uses the remarkable resemblance between  Alice Brown the  convict  and  the  proud  and  wealth  Edith  Dombey,  to link the  extremes  of the social order. One  twin is raised at home in a loving and  wealthy  family. The  other, stolen  away  as  a  child  or  otherwise  debauched, is exposed  to  a  life  of  poverty, drunkenness, or crime. A character in Pillows of Stone is so moved  by the startling contrast between  Florian Dutrom and his drunken, tuberculosis-ridden twin, Clyffe, that  she exclaims: "Oh Father! ... Clyffe might  have been  like this  nature, who, made in Thy  image, is not yet defaced  by sin."
In The  Halton  Boys, Lyon  has been stolen  as an infant and  raised  among  con­
victs. He is discovered, and  his twin  brother goes from  his exclusive  public  school to meet  his lost double:

Lyon saw a slight, tall, muscular  lad ... his eyes steady as stars, and sharp as spears in the intensity  of his gaze.... a frightful  feeling of superstitious  dread  suddenly assailed his darkened  and  tempestuous mind.... Where had he seen [Larry's  face] before? With  him, but dark  as a demon's  then, in frightful  city prisons:  with him in loathsome  city lairs where  thieves lurked, and  murderers  hid in  their  darkness from the darker shadow of the gallows. With him, sullen and lowering, in vagabond marches  through  the leafy country-with him, ferocious, scowling, savage, in all the turnings  and  twistings of his miserable existence; aye with  him now, with the sunken,  glaring  eyes of a wolf .... he stared  into those other  eyes, so familiar,  so strange.

The scene closes with  the statement: "Behind [Larry] slunk  a terrible shadow  of himself, his double  in dingy rags, a fearful  travesty of the fearless and  faithful lad." These  twins  interconnect  the  world  of  the  gentleman  with  the  "frightful  city prisons"  and  "loathsome city lairs." The  metaphor of twinship, moreover, suggests that   the  Bright  and  Dark   brothers, or  the  upper  and  lower  worlds,  were  once identical and  may be so again.
In  Crawford's mythic   structure,  reconciliation of  opposites   and   redemption requires  sacrifice,  and  each  story  has its sacrificial  figure.  Sometimes, as in  From Yule  to Yule: or Claudia's Will and  Pillows of Stone, this sacrifice occurs explicitly within  the frame of the solar myth.  In From Yule to Yule, the suffering victim  is a man-child, found by  Claudia on  her  estate  one  Christmas inside  the  oak  tree, "Seven  armed Dick,  beloved  of the  Druids." Claudia adopts him  and  calls him Dick in the first draft  of the story, a name that  suggests his identity with  the sacred oak tree that, in the Balder  myth,  must annually be cut  down  as a ransom  to bring back  the sun  at the  winter  solstice. In  the curious myth  that  Crawford is develop­ ing, Dick  is a "stalwart young  man  well over six feet," whose misadventure with "Seven  armed Dick" on that  first Christmas has made  him a baby  again, deprived of memory  and  of speech.  Claudia is like Sleeping  Beauty, a counterpart to the frozen  winter  landscape that must  be  brought back  to  warmth and  life. As one

55

CRAWFORD'S PROSE FICTION

character  puts it, "She closed her heart wi' bars and padlocks when her step-sister
Miss Rosalind, as was only sixteen, run away wi' a Frenchman four years ago." The  more Dick's innocence reminds Claudia  of the runaway  Rosalind, the more
Claudia  finds herself torturing him. On the second Christmas,  Dick twice risks his life in twenty-four  hours to rescue his beloved persecutor, first from drowning  in a deep  pool, then  from fire, "strangl[ing]the fiery serpents  eating  her  with  his own  naked  hands."  Threatened  by a bullying servant  with  the  terrors  of being confined in the clockroom, he flees once again to his hiding place in "Seven armed Dick":
The  clockroom! that  arsenal of terrors, with  its gallows-like beams, its ghastly shadows, its mammoth spiders and black flags of cobwebs and, crowning horror, that  throbbing, pulsing, whining mass of iron life, mysterious and frightful-the works of the clock!
Claudia finds him on this second Christmas in the oak tree, with Christ's stigmata on his "burned hands, raw and  blistered." In  the third  section of the story, Dick is the male counterpart to Shakespearean  heroines like Hermione  and Perdita  who withdraw, undergo ritual death, and then return. Dick's return  is a magical event, only slightly disguised. As would  happen  in fairy  tales, Claudia's deathbed  for­ giveness of Rosalind  in her will on the third  Christmas  restores Dick to her. She goes out  to "Seven  armed Dick" and  finds there,  all together,  Rosalind  and  her husband  and  Dick, "not the immature soul she had  known, but  the one she had dreamed  of." The hanged male god has completed  the cycle from infant to trium­ phant  bridegroom  and  has awakened  Claudia  from  her  winter  trance  to spring renewal.
Pillows of Stone  has two sacrificial victims-Clyffe in the main plot and Thea in the subplot. The sacrifice of Thea  is explicitly introduced  in a context  of solar eclipse, drought, and the decay of nature. We first meet Thea  and her father wait­ ing for the eclipse in their manor retreat. The countryside is parched  with drought, "drowned in a cruel affluence of light and heat": the poor [are becoming]  "more hollow-eyed,  looking  prophetically  to  the  added   pinch  of  the  thumbscrews  of Poverty turned  by the cruel long-continued  drought"; "Nature seemed fixed and a change  impossible." This oppressive waiting  for something  to happen  matches the characters' interior  condition. Thea  has given  her oath  when she "first could lisp" and  has renewed her consent "year  by  year" to be the sacrificial victim in some "hybrid" plot of "honor,  revenge, even-handed justice, [and]  intrigue." "I had rather  dash breathless into an  unexpected  chasm than  be pushed leisurely to the edge of the Tarpeian  rock," she says. Her  father,  like Andromeda's father  or
like Jephthah, is responsible for her plight and sadly calls her "the sacrifice, every
beauty  and  grace but an added  garland  to deck  [her]  for the knife."
The  long waiting  period ends with the simultaneous  coming of the eclipse, the raincloud,  and  the stranger  from  New York City  who is to take Thea  away  to

CRAWFORD'S PROSE FICTION

fulfil her  oath.  Before  the  eclipse, "the  world  was rolling  in  an  atmosphere  of molten gold and azure.... The  Earth  was a Delilah shearing  her mighty Samson the sun of his strengthgiving tresses":

Suddenly the gilding of the Earth seemed to begin to die of itself;  the sky was bold, bright  June blue,  the Sun  except  for a slowly widening jet crescent  encroaching on him  was as fierce  in his golden  wrath  as ever, and  it was as if the  Earth alone  was swooning before   his  arrows. Presently   the  azure  arch   sickened   to  grey,  the   jet crescent   waxed   across   his  disk. . . . the  greyness  steadily   deepened  and   solemn shadows  crept  into  and  swallowed  the remaining light.... It was not a long affair, the  black  body moved  in front  of the golden  shield,  with  a mystic slowness, leaving behind  her  a waxing  orb  of gold. She passed as a spirit  into  the  brightening azure like a queen  through the  gates  of sapphire high  lifted  before  her  the  last  folds  of her royal robes sweeping into space, chaired by the sudden shrill glad carol  of birds, and  all  the gay sounds  of the  second  matin  her  progress  had  given  today,  and  the sun rolled  on shaking his terrible  mane  of fire, unconquered, exultant.

Just then a raincloud appears, and the pattern of darkness as preliminary to rebirth is repeated.  "That cloud  fascinates me," says Thea,  "how  glaringly spotless the sky was just now, and  see-that  cloud has risen from  the sea into  a black Alp with violet peaks and  chasms of jet, into which the sun  is about  to be hurled." "Were  we Heathens ... we should  hurry  to the temples and  sacrifice," says her father.  In  the original  myth, Thea  would be the vestal virgin sacrificed to bring back the sun from his dark eclipse and to give rain to the parched  earth.  Here in a displaced version of the myth, Thea's  sacrificial role is translated  into the  part her father  has bound  her to play in some mysterious revenge plot. Thea  submits with a "rapt look like Jephthah's daughter  and  [leans]  against  the gilded pile of the organ as against an altar of sacrifice." On various levels, from the mythic treat­ ment of the eclipse to the sentimental  romance of Thea's story, the three parallel events establish the sacrificial role as a necessary one in the rhythm  of  dark  and light, drought  and fertility. The  eclipse of the sun by the moon and  his reappear­  ance "unconquered, exultant" comes closest to the pure form of the solar myth that lies behind  so much  of Crawford's work. The  interweaving  of  the  three  events repeats the technique  of "Malcolm's Katie"  in which Crawford aligns the chang­ ing seasons, pioneer history, and the love story of Max and Katie  as different ver­ sions of the same cycle.
Consistently, then,  despite the evident need to compete for  magazine  markets with May Agnes Fleming and  Mrs. E. D. E. N. Southworth, Crawford  continues to develop her central  vision. Interesting  in themselves, the stories illuminate  the handling  of narrative in poems like "Old  Spookses' Pass," "Gisli the Chieftain," and  "Malcolm's Katie." Taken  as a whole, the prose fiction is further  evidence that  Crawford  is a mythopoeic  writer intent on developing from scattered sources a single unifying structural myth.

57

CRAWFORD'S PROSE  FICTION

NOTES

1 "Isabella Valancy Crawford: A Canadian Poet," Poet-Lore, I3  (Oct. I90I), p. 577·
2  A Little Bacchante was published  in the evening and  not  the morning edition  of the Globe. The  Ontario Archives  holds  the  Evening  Globe issue of January 2 I, I886, which  contains Chapter IX,  "In the Presence  of the Tempter."
3 There is a  bibliography for  Crawford's manuscripts in  A Catalogue  of Canadian Manuscripts  Collected by Lorne Pierce and Presented to Queen's  University, com­ piled  by Dorothy Barlowe (Toronto:  Ryerson, I946), pp.  I00-104.














SHIP OF GOLD

Emile Nelligan


Hewn  out  of solid gold, a tall ship  sailed:
Its masts reached  up to heaven, on  unknown seas; Venus,  naked,  her hair  cast to the  breeze,
In  too-hot  sun, stood at  the prow  unveiled.

But  then one night,  on Ocean's cheating wave
While  Sirens  sang, it struck  a reef  head  on,
And  dreadful shipwreck  beat  its hull  right  down
To  plumb  the depths  of that  fixed Gulf,  the grave.

A gold ship,  whose translucence in each  part Disclosed  the treasures  that  those impious tars, Disgust  and  Hate and  Madness, fought to keep.

How  much  remains  after  the storm's brief  wars? And  what  of that  deserted  craft, my heart?
In  Dream-Abyss,  alas, it foundered deep!

(translated  by Fred Cogswell)


PAN AND THE CONFEDERATION POETS




D. M. R. Bentley




An  unknown race and  people occupy
That land:  are they, perhaps,  from our same  stock
Or  do they  boast an ancient  ancestry Derived   from Pan, inheriting  from times Gone  by a land  of woods and  fertile  fields And  cities needing  not the rule of law?

-Stephen Parmenius, De Navigatione (1582) trans.
David  B. Quinn and  Neil  M. Cheshire



ONE OF   THE POEMS  rn ARCmBALD  LAMPMAN',  Akyone volume of 1899 is "The Song of Pan"  which was first published in the July 18g6 issue of Harper's  Magazine. In this brief lyric, Lampman  recounts  the legend of
how Pan,  the Arcadian  goat-god  who is the patron  of shepherds  and  of forests, came to have a pipe made  of seven reeds. "Mad  with love," Pan  had  "pursued" the maiden Syrinx until, when he "had  nearly I Touched  her," she was changed by the nymphs of Arcadia  into a "reed."1  This "reed" was cut  by the sorrowing
god and  "Deftly  fashioned" into "Seven I Pipes" (the syrinx)  through  which he "poured   his pain"  over the  loss of the  maiden  "Unto earth  and  heaven I In  a piercing strain." Lampman concludes "The  Song of Pan"  by drawing  a parallel between the "god" and  the "poet." Both are lured on by "Beauty," he observes, which "Flies, and ere they know it I Like a wraith is gone";

Then they seek to borrow
Pleasure still  from  wrong, And  with  smiling  sorrow
Turn it to a song.

In  "The  Song of Pan" Lampman uses the goat-god's  bitter-sweet  song on  the syrinx as a parallel for the joy and pain (his somewhat lame oxymoron is "smiling sorrow")   of the creative  act.  Although  this poem was published  in  Lampman's

59

PAN  AND  THE POETS

last volume,  it is not the only parallel  drawn  in his work between  Pan  and  the poet; nor is "The Song of Pan"  the only poem by a Confederation  poet in which Pan  plays a central  role. In the following pages an attempt  will be made to show that  Pan's  various attributes  and  associations-his dualistic  nature,  his pastoral setting, his musical abilities, and his supposed death-made him a potent image, not only of the poet, but also of human  nature  and of Nature  itself, for the 'Con­ federation' group,  for-besides  Lampman-W. W.  Campbell,   D.  C.  Scott, Charles G. D. Roberts and, of course, Bliss Carman.
There  are two other poems in Lampman's canon  which deal explicitly and  at
length with the figure of Pan. The first is a Petrarchan sonnet in Among the Millet (I 888)  entitled "The Poets." In this poem, which Raymond  Knister has described as a "deeply shaded caricature,"2  Lampman  suggests that  poets are the "Children of Pan" because they, like Pan,  are "Half  god,  half  brute,  within  the self-same
shell, I ... I Who  dream  with  angels in the  gate  of  heaven, I And  skirt  with
curious eyes the brink of hell." Although  the  Pan-like  poets themselves represent a yoking together  of the divine and  the brutish,  these opposites serve to polarize their  fellow  humans:  there  are  "some,  the  few,"  who  love  the  "Poor  shining angels" but  the  majority  of people are frightened  by the  "goatish  smell" of the "Children of Pan." On one level, then, Pan-who, in his sinister aspect, has by tradition the ability to cause panic -is an apt and appropriate image of the poet as outcast,  as a being who, perhaps in part  because he changes "with  every hour from  dawn  till even," is beloved only by a  coterie  and  rejected  by the  mass of society. Needless to say, the conception  of the  artist  as an  alienated  outsider  is Romantic in its origins; but it also echoes forward  to modern  and,  indeed, con­ temporary  notions of the poet's position in-or outside-Canadian society. Per­ haps  because  it  is a  "caricature," Lampman's sonnet  is a  telling,  if  somewhat exaggerated, depiction  of the relationship  between  the  poet and  society  as it has developed from the Romantic to the Modern  tradition.
In the sestet of "The  Poets," Lampman draws further  parallels between the poet
and  Pan. Addressing the "Children of Pan"  directly, he says:

Half brutish, half divine, but all of earth,
Half-way 'twixt hell and heaven, near to man, The whole world's tangle gathered in one span,
Full of  this human torture and  this mirth:
Life with its hope and error, toil and bliss,
Earth-born, earth-reared,  ye know it as it is.

Since we have already  looked at "The Song of Pan," perhaps  the first thing  we notice  here is the  catalogue of opposites-"torture" and  "mirth," "hope" and "error," "toil" and  "bliss"-which, besides echoing forward  to the later  poem, make Pan's  dualistic nature an appropriate representation  of the dualism of  man­ kind in general and of the poets in particular. The  thrust of this passage is that  the

6o

PAN  AND THE POETS

"Children of Pan" are the scene of a constant strife between, on the one side, their "brutish," lower  parts  and,  on the other,  their  "divine," higher  parts  and  that, because of this, they are all too earthly and human. Although  the "divine"  part of the "Children of Pan" is not stressed in "The  Poets," it is clear from Lampman's essay on "The Modem School of Poetry in England" (c. 1885)  that  the part  of man  which  partakes  of the  divine is equally  and,  indeed,  more  important than that which is "Earth-born, Earth-reared." After expounding  the theory (which he took from Alfred Austin's essay on "Old  and New Canons of Poetical Criticism") that  poetry is "the  'Transfiguration of Life,' meaning  Life with the  halo of the imagination   thrown  over  it,"  Lampman   observes that  "human nature  may  be represented by the ancient  Pan-half  human  and half beast-but the human  is the mightier part,  and the whole is ever striving to be divine."3 And he continues:

The main current of the human spirit ... is setting eternally toward a condition of order, and divine beauty and peace. A poet may never have uttered this thought, may never perhaps have been even conscious of it, but  unless the general body of his work is in some way accordant with it, unless his transfiguration of life has in some way tended  to strengthen and glorify the universal yearning for order and beauty and peace, the heart of man will keep no hold of it.

Implicit  in this statement of the function  of the poet and, beyond that,  of what is worthwhile  and  enduring  in  poetry, is the idealistic meliorism  which  Lampman shared  with  his fellow  Confederation   poets Scott  and  Carman. It is precisely because the  poet,  though  confined  by the  body and  the senses, has an  impetus towards the divine that he is able to assist mankind in its progress towards an ideal, spiritual state.  Not without  reason is "The  Poets" bracketed  in Among  the Millet by "Aspiration" and  "Truth," two sonnets which are  indicative  of the role that the "Children of Pan" must  play in assisting the "best  upward  movement  of the human  race."4   It seems clear enough, then, that the primary  characteristic  of Pan
-the  fact  of his being  part  animal  and  part  god  (or  man)  -made  him  for Lampman the perfect symbol of the dualistic nature  of man, and, concomitantly, of the poet, whose task it is to encourage a yearning for the divine and, by so doing, to assist mankind  in its movement  up the evolutionary ladder.
The other  Lampman poem in which Pan  plays a central  role is the "Favorites of Pan."  This,  one of the  longer  poems in the  Lyrics of Earth  volume was first published as the "Successors of Pan"  in the April 5, 1894 issue of The  I ndepen­ dent, which was edited from  18go to 1892 by Carman. The  "Favorites of Pan,'' which  is Lampman's most  extended  and  important   treatment of  the  goat-god, breaks naturally  into three  parts, each consisting of six, four-line stanzas. The first part deals with the "long ago" before the Greek gods had succumbed  to the mortal blow of Christianity and "left this earth." Drawing on the mythical  association of Pan  with  the  noon-hour,  Lampman imagines  a time  when  there  came  "to  the tired  listener's  ear  / ... at  noonday or  beneath  the  stars"  what  he would  have

PAN  AND  THE  POETS

recognized  as  "the note  of Pan." In  the  Arcadian setting Pan's music  had  the power  to  dispel  "every   brooded   bitterness" from   the   listener's "soul"  and   to
replace  these with  "an  unnamed delight- I A sudden brightness of the  heart  I
A  magic  fire  drawn down  from  Paradise." This  transformation, which   usually derives from  Nature itself in Lampman's poetry,  enabled the  Arcadian listener  to see, "far  beyond  his eyes,"

The  loveliness and calm of earth
... like a limitless dream  remote  and strange
The  joy, the strife, the triumph  and  the mirth, And the enchanted  change.

From  the first six stanzas  of the "Favorites of Pan" it can  be seen that for  Lamp­ man,  the  goat-god's music  was  a force  which  enabled the  listener,  not  only  to transcend the  vexations  of the  mundane, urban life, but  also to achieve  a dream­ like, pastoral vision of both  the human and  the  natural worlds.
The  second  part  of the "Favorites of Pan" focuses not on the Arcadian past  but on  the  Canadian present  when,  though  "Pan has  gone  ... the  infinite  dream I Still  lives for  them  that  heed." "In April,  when  the  turning year  I Regains  its
pensive youth," says Lampman,

To them that are in love with life
Wandering  like children with untroubled eyes, Far from the noise of cities and  the strife,
Strange flute-like voices rise

At noon and in the quiet of the night
From every watery waste; and  in that  hour
The  same strange spell, the same unnamed  delight, Enfolds them in its power.

The  characteristic Lampman references in this  passage  to "April," to the  "noise" and  "strife" of "cities," to the "noon" hour,  to the  "flute-like voices" of the frogs, and  to the  child-like  naivete  of those who would  imaginatively participate in  the "unnamed delight," indicate that  the "Favorites of Pan" may  provide  the  key to a full  understanding, not  only  of  the  Lyrics  of Earth   volume   (where Pan  also appears in "The Return of the Year" and "June"), but  also of such  central poems as "Heat" and  "The Frogs." For is it not  possible that  the significance of noon  in a poem such as "Heat" and of the frogs in the  poem that bears  their  name  derives, at least in part,  from  their association  in Lampman's mind  with  Pan,  whose music, whether heard  in  Arcadia or imagined in  Canada, frees  the  sensitive  listener  to
enter  into  the  "endless  dream  1 The  high  Lethean calm"? If such  a  possibility
were allowed  it  would  place  Pan,  himself  a type  of the  poet  who  was wont,  like the  Lampman of "Heat," to  "lean  at  rest"  during the  noon-hour and  who  im-

PAN  AND  THE POETS


parted  to the  frogs  their  "wisdom won  without a quest," very near  to the  centre of the Canadian poet's  thought and  writing.  It remains  to the third  and  final part of the "Favorites of Pan" to explain  how the frogs came  to possess the  enchanted and  enchanting song of Pan.
At the time  when  Christianity was in its ascendency, when  (and  perhaps we can
detect   a hint   of  Lampman's  anti-sacerdotal bias  here)   "the new  strains /  Of hostile  hymns  and   conquering faiths  grew  keen,"  the  "old," Greek  gods  "fled silent  and  unseen" from  "their deserted  fanes." Pan,  too, was "sadly  obedient to the mightier hand" of Christ  and, in "sore  distress," cut "new  reeds" on which,  as he passed from  "land to land" by "sinuous stream  or grassy marge," he "blew  / A note  divinely  large,"

And all around  him on the wet
Cool earth  the frogs came up, and with a smile
He took them  in his hairy hands, and set
His mouth  to theirs awhile,

And blew into their velvet throats;
And ever from that hour the frogs repeat
The  murmur  of Pan's pipes, the notes, The  answers strange and sweet;

And they that  hear them are renewed
By knowledge in some god-like touch conveyed, Entering  again  into the eternal  mood
Wherein  the world was made.

Of  course,  Lampman's assertion  that  Pan  is not  effectively  dead,  that his music may still be heard in the  voices of Nature, is not especially  original: virtually all the  poets whose  work  he  knew  well-Wordsworth  and  Shelley  with  their  "In­ visible" and  "universal" Pans, Keats with his "realm of Flora  and  old Pan," Emer­ son with his "eternal Pan," and  even Arnold, who contrived to be "breathed on by the  rural  Pan" in  "Kensington Gardens" 5  -perceived  the  goat-god  to  be  alive and   well  in  Nature. Indeed, this  was  very  nearly  commonplace in  nineteenth­ century  literature, particularly that  of the  fin-de-siecle. Nevertheless,  Lampman's choice  of the  frogs  (creatures  whose  amphibious nature supplies  something of a parallel  for the goat-god's dualism)  as a vehicle for the music of Pan  constitutes an original turn on a stock theme.
Whatever it may suggest  with  regard  to the  derivation or originality of  Lamp­ man's conception of Pan,  the  poem  which  we have  just examined  indicates that for  the  Canadian poet  the  Greek  god  was a vital  force  to be experienced in  the Canadian forest.  By  giving  imaginative credence   to  the  perception  that   Pan's music can be heard in the "murmur" of frogs Lampman, in effect, gives a mytho­ logical  dimension to Canadian nature. When  Lampman  published  the  "Favorites

PAN  AND THE POETS

of Pan" it had  been many  years since Andrew  Shiels had  regretted  the lack of "classic rivers and sylvan brooks (each bearing  its own specific legend ... ) "6   in Canada and  many years since Charles Sangster  had  observed that  no nymphs or neriads or gnomes appear  out of the "crystal streams" of the St. Lawrence  "To
Charm  the  pale  Ideal  Worshipper I Of  Beauty."7   Yet  the  Confederation poets
were still searching for figures to mythologize the Canadian environment, to affirm the existence here of a mythic heritage that stretched  back to the roots of Western civilization. Lampman's Pan  is both  ubiquitous  and  indigenous: he sings out of the heart  of Nature,  which is at once universal  and  local,  past and  present. As we shall see in a few moments, Lampman's conception  of Pan  as a force infused in  and  speaking  through  physical nature,  and,  indeed,  as a  metaphor for  that nature,  was shared  by both Roberts and  Carman.




GIVEN THE usE LAMPMAN MADE  OF   PAN, both as a type of the  poet and  as a power in nature,  it is hardly surprising  that  W. W. Campbell should  have  mourned  his memory  in  "Bereavement   of  the  Fields"  (I 899)  by likening him to "some rare Pan of those old Grecian days."8  Nor is it surprising in view of the friendship  that  existed between Lampman and  Campbell -the fact that  they were for  a time  neighbours  in  Ottawa and  for  a  time,  with  Duncan Campbell  Scott,  co-authors  of the  Mermaid   Inn  column  in  The  Globe -that Campbell, too, saw Pan as an apt image of the poet. Campbell  was, by all accounts, of  a  more  melancholy,  pessimistic complexion  than   Lampman and,  hence,  he tended to see both the myth of the goat-god and the fate of the poet through dark­ tinted  spectacles. Campbell's  incidental  references to Pan,  in "The  Lyre  Degen­ erate" ( I905)  and  in "The  Tragedy  of Man" ( I9I5), tend  to bear  out  Carl Klinck's  observation  that,  characteristically,  he "dwells  ... less upon  the joys of Pan's  songs than  upon  the  tragedy  of his life and  death."9    This  observation  is directed  specifically at Campbell's  only extended  treatment of  Pan -the  poem entitled  "Pan  the  Fallen"  which  was included  in  his third  volume, The  Dread Voyage  and Other  Poems (I 893).
Campbell's  Pan, a less attractive  figure even than  the one in Lampman's "The Poets,"  is a "grotesque  shape,"  "Part man,  but  mostly beast,  I Who  drank  and lied, and snatched  what bones I Men  threw  him from  their  feast."  In  "Pan the
Fallen,"  the god  with "pipes  and  goatish  hoof"  is a  moribund figure of fun,  a clown and an entertainer, whom "man  despised I ... And still would have it so." Beneath Pan's "sardonic" mask, "Elfin music," and "clownish  play," however, the
speaker of the poem discerns a gaze which is directed towards  "some far heaven I Whence  a  soul  had  fallen  down."  Eventually  the  "careless"  people  who  had rewarded  Pan for his entertainment with "earthflung pence" become "tired  for a

PAN AND THE POETS


time of his antics" and leave him to starve and, ultimately, to die in the "dust"  of the "empty" marketplace. But in death  the god's "tired  face" is "turned towards heaven"  and  suffused  by  a  "softer  light"  and  a  "peace  ineffable."  "Pan   the Fallen" concludes with a description of the reaction of the "careless" people when, in the moonlight, they discover the dead god:

the people, when they found him, Stood still with awesome fear.
No more they saw the beasts' rude hoof,
The furtive, clownish leer.
But the lightest spirit in that throng
Went silent from the place,
For they knew the look of a god released
That  shone from his dead face.

Although,  as Klinck says, Campbell  does not "labour  the obvious moral'"0  of the poem, it is abundantly clear that  in "Pan  the Fallen" he is dealing  with the fate of the poet in a callous and  unthinking  society. While Campbell's  sombre-and slightly sentimental  -use of Pan  as a type of the poet is reminiscent  of  Lamp­ man's  "The Poets," "Pan the Fallen" also echoes forward  to such poems as Lay­ ton's "Cold Green Element" and Klein's "Portrait of the Poet as Landscape." Like the later Canadian poets, Campbell  offers a dark, albeit not unrelievedly negative, view of the poet as an outsider to whom recognition comes, if at all, too late.
While Lampman's "The Poets" may well have supplied some of the inspiration
for Campbell's  "Pan the Fallen,"  it has been suggested by Sandra  Djwa  that  in the  "Favorites  of Pan" Lampman himself owes a debt  to an  earlier  Canadian poem:  "The Pipes of Pan" by Charles G. D. Roberts. 11 Since it was published in Roberts'  second  volume, In  Divers Tones  (I 886), "The Pipes of Pan"  was not one of the pieces in Orion  and Other  Poems (I 88o)  which had  had  a catalytic effect on Lampman in c.I 881.  Nevertheless, the transplanted hellenism of "The Pipes of Pan" recalls the poems in the Orion volume which by Roberts'  own ad­
mission are  "harsh   and  ill-formed  ... I Of  alien  matters  in  distant   regions I
Wrought in the youth of the centuries.m 2   (It might also be noted that the epigraph to Orion and Other Poems is a prayer in Greek beseeching Pan to make the speaker inwardly  beautiful.)   Roberts'  aim in  "The   Pipes of  Pan," however-an  aim which most certainly  looks forward  to the  "Favorites  of Pan"-seems  to have been to assert that  the music of Pan  can be found by those who are  receptive in Canadian nature.  Even the  pattern  followed by Roberts in "The Pipes of Pan," which is to focus first on the Arcadian  past and then on the Canadian present, is similar to the one followed by Lampman in the "Favorites of Pan."  There seem to be ample grounds, then, for confirming Lampman's debt to Roberts in this instance and  for asserting  that  "The Pipes of Pan"  is a seminal  document  for  the  Con­ federation  poets' conception  of Pan.

PAN  AND  THE POETS

"The Pipes of Pan" consists of forty-six lines divided into four stanzas, three  (the first two and  the last)  of eight lines each  and  the  remaining  one  (the  third)   of twenty-two  lines. In  the  paired  stanzas  which  open  the  poem  Roberts  gives a dreamily   atmospheric  description  of  the  "vale"   of  the  Greek  gods.  Roberts' "Tempe" is a cosy pastoral valley "within shepherding watch of Olympus"; and it is "Walled  from the world forever under a vapour  of dreams." Within  the vale of Tempe  flows "sweetly the river Peneus" whose banks are frequented  by centaurs, dryads, and nymphs. With the third and longest stanza of the poem the focus is narrowed  to a  "nook"  where  "Two  rivulets fall  to  mix  with  Peneus."  This  is where the elements of air, earth,  and  water  commingle  ("grass  waves in the ...
water,"  "roots"  "Twist  thro' dripping  soil," "the  air  I Glooms with the dripping
tangle  ... of branches") and where Pan,  whose form represents the fusion of the earthly and the divine, comes to rest when "his piping I Flags." On this "pregnant earthly spot"  Roberts imagines Pan "breaking and  casting away"  his "pipes out­
worn" and fitting "new reeds to his mouth with the weird earth-melody  in them,  I
... alive with a life able to mix with the god's."  When  Pan  blows a "searching sequence" of notes on his new pipes "a bird stirs and flutes in the gloom IAnswer­ ing."  But  Roberts'  main  interest  in  "The   Pipes  of  Pan"  is not  the  goat-god's
Orphic ability to charm the creatures of the natural world  (this forms the subject of the  related  poem entitled  "Marsyas") ;13 rather,  his concern  here  is with  the "outworn pipes" which are carried away by the river Peneus. Pan's  "God-breath lurks  in  each  fragment" of these  pipes "forever," and  they  are  "Dispersed  by
Peneus I ...I Over the whole green earth and globe of sea ... I ...to secret spots,
where in visible form I Comes not the god, though  he comes declared in his work­
ings."  Like Lampman after  him, Roberts  asserts that  the spirit  of Pan  lives on, that  his music can be heard  by "mortals" who, whether  at "morn," or "eve,"  or "noondays" find these pipes, play them, and  "fling  them  away.'  The  mechanism through   which  Roberts'  mortals  can  apprehend  the  music  of  the  goat-god  is clumsier and less imaginative than  Lampman's use of the frogs as vehicles for the "note  of Pan." Yet the concluding stanza of "The Pipes of Pan," which turns on the effect of Pan's  music on the "mortals" who  have  played  the  reed and  been infected  by the "God-breath" within them, is, if at all, only marginally  less effec­ tive than  the equivalent  passages in the "Favorites of Pan":

Thereafter
Creeps strange fire in their veins, murmur strange
tongues in their brain, Sweetly evasive a secret madness takes them, -a charm-struck Passion for woods and wild life, the solitude of the hills. Therefore they fly the heedless throngs and traffic of cities, Haunt mossy caverns, and wells bubbling ice-cool;
and their souls

66

PAN AND THE POETS


Gather a magical gleam of the secret of life, and the god's voice
Calls to them, not from afar, teaching them wonderful things.

Thus  Roberts, anticipating Lampman  by several years, affirmed that  the spirit of Pan,  surviving  in  his discarded  pipes, calls upon  man  to escape  the  hustle and bustle of the city and  to venture  forth into Nature, into "the  solitude of the hills." Once led out of the city and  into the country, the receptive  individual  will learn, under the instruction  both of nature  herself and of the imminent  Pan, the "secret of life" and  other  "wonderful things." Clearly, for Roberts,  Pan  was a dynamic force compelling man  to read  and  teaching him to understand the books of Life and Nature.
It cannot have escaped notice how closely Roberts' Pan, inhabiting  his Arcadian river valley, breaking his outworn  Pipes, making new pipes, and coaxing a response from  a  bird  with  his  music,  resembles another  Confederation  piper:   Duncan Campbell  Scott's "The Piper  of Arll"  ( 18g8). It would probably  be imprudent, in the absence of documentary evidence, to argue for a direct influence from "The Pipes of Pan" to "The Piper  of Arll." Nevertheless, there  are enough  similarities between the two  poems, and  enough  congruencies between  "The  Piper  of Arll" and the myth of Pan, to indicate that at the very least, Scott's piper-who is very clearly a type of the artist14 -may be considered as a cognate  of Pan.  It  might not even  be too  far-fetched  to suggest that  "The  Piper  of Arll"  is Scott's  self­ contained,  symbolist version of the poet-Pan  figure which,  as we have  seen,  was given poetic utterance  by both Lampman  and Campbell, his friends and associates. Certainly  there  are  numerous  details in "The  Piper of Arll," including, perhaps, the title itself/ 5   which are suggestive of the Pan  myth. Like  Pan, Scott's  piper is
depicted as a protector of sheep (he "lived within the grove f Tending  the pasture
of his sheep")   and,  again  like Pan,  he plays a pipe which is made  of a "reed.ms Indeed,  the piper of Arll's pastoral "reed"  is "human-throated," recalling, on one level, the myth  that  Pan's  syrinx was made from a maiden  and,  on another,  the association made by Lampman between Pan's music and the poet's song. Gary Geddes, in his suggestive article on Scott's "Piper  of Many Tunes," has argued that the ballad  contains  two major  themes:  a primary  theme  turning  on "the  nature of the  poetic  experience," and  a secondary,  but  related,  theme  which  is of  a "religious"  nature. As Geddes  has convincingly argued,  Scott  probably  intended to suggest a  parallel  between  "poetic"  and  "religious"  experience  in  the  poem. With this in mind, it is permissible to wonder whether  Scott did  not have at the back of his mind the various  (and  contradictory)   traditions  that  Pan  was himself a type of Christ  (both  were shepherds)  who, paradoxically,  perished at the time of Christ's  victory over the  Pagan  world on the cross. Such  an  association adds resonance to the "three pines" above the piper's "comb," to the "angel  ... at the prore"  of the mysterious ship  which  proves fatal  to  him,  and,  of course, to the

PAN  AND  THE POETS

death  and, finally, the "translation" of the artist-piper. Scott may even have been familiar with the legend, traceable to Plutarch, that  Pan's death  was first reported to the  passengers on a ship  bound  for  Italy.  With  the  addition  of some  poetic alchemy on Scott's  part, this legend could have been transformed  into the tale of the piper who drowns aboard the "outland" ship that sails into his "cove." Be this as it may, however,-and it would clearly be unwise, without  embarking  on a Lowesian journey on the road to Arll, to insist too strongly in the matter -there are ample  parallels  between Scott's piper and  the  Confederation  Pan.  For Scott, as for  Lampman and  Roberts,  the figure of the  piper  who,  in  life, sings "into
nature's heart,  I ... I With deep, unconscious, childlike art" and, in death, attains
a kind of immortality  in art  and  nature  was a  potent  image  of the  poet himself and,  beyond that,  of a pastoral ideal which to him was the very source and sub­ tance of poetry.



IT IS   FITTING THAT THIS  DISCUSSION of  Pan  and  the  Con­ federation  poets should end with Bliss Carman, the writer  who made  a  veritable cult of the goat-god and gave his name to the five-volume series entitled The Pipes of Pan (1902-1905). Of all the Confederation  poets, Carman drew  most exten­ sively on the myth  of Pan,  making  the goat-god  a symbol of "the  mystical con­ fluence of Earth  and Spirit in nature  and  man."17   John  Robert Sorfleet has per­
suasively argued  that a major theme of Carman's work from the nineties onwards was the "kinship  among all that exists."'8  It is hardly surprising, therefore, that  in the early years of the present century, Pan, traditionally symbolizing the fusion of the earthly  and  the divine, the physical and  the spiritual,  became,  not only  Car­ man's  "favourite deity," but also an "up-to-date figure in  [his]  cosmology."
In  the title poem of The  Pipes of Pan series, Carman, like Lampman in "The
Song of Pan," rehearses the myth of Pan's  pursuit  of Syrinx and  his construction of his pipe from "a swaying river reed."19  He then proceeds to assert, in stanza after stanza, that Pan's spirit, an omnipresent and omniscient  power in history, in man, and  in nature,  can  still be apprehended in  "Mountain brook,"  "orchard bird," and,  indeed,  in  all the voice of creation.  Carman's exhaustive,  and  exhausting, catalogue  of these various voices includes, amongst others, frogs (of course) , cric­ kets, cicadas, owls, cattle, horses, sheep, wolves, eagles, and even mink and moose
-all of whose "bubbling notes once ran I Thrilling through  the  pipes of Pan."
In short, "The  Pipes of Pan"  makes it abundantly clear that,  for Carman, Pan is a "world  deity,"20  an ever-present force both  in the  world of nature  and  in the affairs of man.  Following a  poem on "Marsyas," whom  Carman, like Roberts, perceived as a cognate of Pan, the first volume of The Pipes of Pan continues with related  poems such  as "Syrinx,"  "The  Magic  Flute,"  "A  Shepherd in  Lesbos,"

68

PAN  AND  THE  POETS

"The Lost Dryad," "The Dead Faun," and "A Young Pan's  Prayer,"  this last of which is less a treatment of the Arcadian god than an expression of Carman's own poetic and spiritual  aspirations. A detailed  examination  of these poems, let alone of the others in the five Pipes of Pan volumes which partake of the Pan myth either explicitly or implicitly, is beyond the bounds of the present undertaking. Suffice it to say that, for a time, Pan stood at the very centre of Carman's conception  of the essential unity of creation and was for him a figure whose eternal pipes, when heard by the young Pan-poet, could restore to him the elemental power of nature.
James Cappon  is right in observing that the Pan of Carman's later  poetry is no longer the "world  deity" of The  Pipes of Pan but, rather, is a more muted and less omnipresent  god who symbolizes merely "a  wild music of nature." Nevertheless, whether  his pipes are  heard  in the song of Catskill thrushes,  as in  "Pan  in  the Catskills," or in  the music of a hurdy-gurdy  man,  as in "The Urban  Pan,"  the goat-god  is still very much  alive in the less vigorous but  often  technically  more accomplished  poetry of Carman's last period (I go5 and following). The  nostalgia evoked by the pipes of Pan  in these later  poems is a nostalgia for a lost, pastoral ideal located in an Arcadian  world whose memory enables the poet to transcend for a moment  "the  noise of truck and  van" and to participate in "the  springtime of the world."21  It is tempting  to see the vanished, halcyon past for which Carman laments in "The Urban  Pan" as the pastoral  past, not merely of Acadia,  but  of America too; for byI go6 when this poem was first published in the May 5 issue of the Saturday Evening Post urban life was, increasingly, more of a reality for more people than  were the pastoral  haunts  of the typical Confederation  Pan.
The  Confederation  poets,  like their  predecessors and  contemporaries   in  the United States and the United  Kingdom, each succeeded in different  ways and for different reasons in giving a local habitation  and a name to Pan. Yet behind the differences which characterize  the treatment  of Pan by Roberts, Lampman, Camp­ bell, Scott, and  Carman there  are several notable similarities. For  nearly  all the Confederation  group, the dualistic Pan is a type of the pastoral poet who, because he is in tune with and even a part of nature, is an outsider in the cacophonous world of the city. For most of them,  perhaps following Wordsworth and  Emerson,  he is also a force which is infused into and speaks through  all creation, a metaphor for the  natural world  itself, calling  the  receptive listener,  the  Pan-poet, away  from the  "noise  of truck  and  van,"  the  "throng and  traffic  of the  cities," into  com­ munion with the undying soul, the immortal  heart, or the primal  unity of Nature.  What  Pan  offered to the Confederation  poets was an imaginative  means of par­ taking, not only in the eternal  power of nature, but also in a vanished, and vanish­
ing pastoral  ideal. A. J. M. Smith,  in his "Rejected  Preface"  to New  Provinces
(  936), looked back on earlier Canadian poetry and saw all-too-many  uninspired
"exercises ... concerned  with pine trees, the open road, God, snowshoes or Pan."22
And, almost exactly forty years earlier, in a brief discussion of Lampman's Lyrics

6g

PAN  AND  THE POETS

of Earth in  The Atlantic Monthly for  September 18g6,  an  anonymous reviewer, after noticing the  "sound" of the  "syrinx" and the  presence of Pan  in  the  volume, had   commented that "perhaps we  demand something more than this  from   our poets.... "23   There is an  element of truth in  both these  observations, but  it  need not  blind us to  the  fact  that   Pan   was  for  a time a vital force in  the  environs of Ottawa and  Fredericton, and in  the  imaginations of the  Confederation  poets.



NOTES

1 The Poems  of Archibald  Lampman (including At  the  Long  Sault), ed. and  intra. Margaret Coulby  Whitridge (Toronto:  Univ.  of Toronto Press,  I964).
2   "The Poetry  of  Archibald Lampman,"  in  Critical   Views of Canadian Writers: Archibald  Lampman, ed. and intra. Michael Gnarowski (Toronto: Ryerson,  1970), p. I I6.
3  Archibald Lampman: Selected   Prose, ed.  and  intra. Barrie  Davies   (Ottawa:  Te­
cumseh,  I975),  pp. 93-94·
4   "Two Canadian Poets:   A  Lecture," University of Toronto  Quarterly, I3   (July
I944)' 407.
Particularly useful  in regard   to  the  background of  the  Pan  myth  in  English  and American literature have  been: Helen  H.  Law,  Bibliography of Greek  Myth  in English   Poetry   (Oxford, Ohio:  American Classical   League Bulletin   27,  I955), Douglas  Bush,  Mythology and  the  Romantic Tradition in  English  Poetry  (Cam­ bridge,  Mass.:  Harvard Univ.  Press,  I969),  and  Patricia Merivale, Pan the  Goat­  God:  His Myth in Modern Times (Cambridge, Mass.:  Harvard Univ. Press, I969).
6  "Preface," The Witch of Westcot,· A  Tale   of Nova  Scotia  ... (Halifax:  Joseph
Howe,  I 83I ) , p. [ 2].
1 The St. Lawrence and the Saguenay and Other Poems,· Hesperus and Other Poems, ed. and  intra. Gordon Johnston (Toronto:  Univ.  of Toronto Press,  I972), p.  II. See also Charles Sangster, Norland   Echoes  and  Other Strains and  Lyrics,  ed. and intra. Frank M. Tierney (Ottawa:  Tecumseh, I 976),  pp.  9- I I.
8 The Poetical  Works of Wilfred Campbell, ed. with  a Memoir by W. J. Sykes  (Lon­
don: Hodder and  Stoughton, n.d.).
9  Wilfred Campbell (Toronto:  Ryerson,  I942), pp.  I I9-20;  see alsop. 52 for  the possible  influence   of  John   Fiske,  Myths and  Myth-Makers  ( I872)   on  "Pan  the Fallen."
10  Ibid., p.  I 20.
11 See "Lampman's Fleeting  Vision," in Colony  and  Confederation: Early  Canadian Poets and  Their Background, ed. George  Woodcock (Vancouver:  Univ.  of British Columbia Press,  I974),  p.  I32·
12 Poems  (Boston: L. D. Page,  I907).
13 Both Pan and  the satyr Marsyas engaged  in musical  contests  with  Apollo, the former in the so-called  "Judgement of Midas" and  the latter preceding the so-called "Flay­ ing of Marsyas."
14 See  Milton   Wilson,  "Scott's Drowned Poet," and  Gary  Geddes, "Piper  of  Many
Tunes: Duncan Campbell Scott," in Duncan Campbell Scott: A Book of Criticism,

PAN  AND  THE  POETS

ed. and  intra. S. L. Dragland (Ottawa:  Tecumseh, 1974), pp. 136-38 and  pp. 165-
77; both  first published in Canadian Literature.
15 Although Scott's suggestively Scottish  "Arll" could be a contraction of "Ar [gy] ll," it is also suggestive  of the  word  All, recalling the eroneous  tradition that  "Pan" was derived  from  the  word  for all  (Pan). The  goat-god  is also supposed  to have enter­ tained  "all" the gods. There is a sense in which  Scott's  piper  is "The Piper of All."
16 The Poems of Duncan Campbell Scott  (Toronto: McClelland & Stewart, 1926).
17  James  Cappon, Bliss Carman and the  Literary Currents and Influences of His Time
(Toronto: Ryerson,  1930), p. 117.
18  "Transcendentalist, Mystic,  Evolutionary Idealist:  Bliss Carman,  1886-1894,'' in Colony   and   Confederation:  Early  Canadian  Poets  and  Their  Background, ed. George  Woodcock, p. 203.
19 Pipes of Pan  (Boston: Page,  1906).
2° Cappon, p. 202.
21   The Poems  of Bliss Carman, ed. and  intra. John  Robert Sorfleet   (Toronto:  Mc­ Clelland & Stewart, 1976) .
22   Quoted from   the  text  of  the  "Rejected  Preface" contained  in  A.  J. M.  Smith,
Towards a View of Canadian Letters  (Vancouver: Univ.  of British Columbia Press,
1973), pp.  170-73,  and  reprinted in  Michael  Gnarowski, ed.,  New  Provinces   (To­
ronto: Univ. of Toronto Press, 1976), pp. xxvii-xxxii.
23   "Comment on New  Books," The Atlantic Monthly, 77 (September 18g6), 425-26.



LIVES OF THE POET

Ron Miles


To  biographers, in rebuttal, these facts.  We whored  little and only  for  reputation's  sake. Alcohol  and  drugs  were  like
chocolates to  the  matron, merely ensuring the  inevitable, rarely adding an  ounce  to the  burden.

Politics?  Aesthetics? Metals  to  harden the  mind, apologies  for  drought. Sweethearts abandoned, friends  we fought, only the hazards of living enough.

What remains, to explain, to rebuff, massive  egos and  sexual  perversion?
More  meek,  more  natural than  a third-hand  version.

CANADIAN EXPLORATION AS LITERATURE




T. D. MacLulich



T.F<RST  THREE CHAPTERS oF   THE  Litewy Hi<to•y  of
Canada can be seen as raising an interesting  problem  in literary  theory:  In  what
sense should the writings of the Canadian explorers be viewed as "literature"? Certainly  exploration  writing cannot be viewed as part of the literary mainstream. In fact, it is quite probable that the explorers are allotted their place in the Literary History  more as auxiliaries to cultural  history than  as full members of the  belle­ lettristic community.1 On the other hand, exploration  writing exercises a consider­ able fascination over many readers. The writings of the explorers tell many exciting stories of adventure,  relate many entertaining and  even amusing  anecdotes,  and introduce  the reader  to a gallery of interesting  and  unusual  characters. In  some way, then, a number  of  conventionally  "literary" qualities have found  their  way into the writings produced by the explorers. Nonetheless, to argue that  exploration writing is literature  simply on the grounds that  it can be approached in a literary manner  is surely to avoid the real issues. The  pertinent  questions are:  Have  the explorers'  literary  qualities arisen  by accident  or  design?  And  are  these literary qualities pervasive and consistent enough to constitute a set of literary conventions?
In his well-known "Conclusion" to the Literary  History  Northrop  Frye roundly asserts that  the explorers wrote with "no  more literary  intention  than  a  mating loon." Frye's contention may be sound when we are dealing  with explorers whose accounts  were intended  only as a  rough  diary  of their  journey,  or  as a  private report to their European  backers. But the situation  changes when an explorer pre­ pares his journal for publication. Then  he faces the essentially literary  problem of revising his original account of daily occurrences into a form which  will maintain  the attention  of his prospective readers. As Victor  Hopwood  astutely  points out, accounts  of exploration  usually must  be subjected  to a  considerable  amount  of revision before they are ready for publication:

Exploration tends to be repetitive, and  the fourth  or fifth adventure  with a bear, boring, at least in the telling. If journals are to become interesting to the ordinary

EXPLORATION AS LITERATURE

reader,  they  need suppression of repetitive detail, expansion with  incident  and description and development of direction and purpose.2

The  explorer  must  choose which  events to record and  which  to omit;  he must select some events to stress and others to pass over lightly;  he must decide on the amount  and kind of interpretive commentary he will offer; and above all he must shape his account  in accordance  with his own sense of the pattern  inherent  in his personal experiences.
The  transformation which an exploration  account  undergoes  before it is  pub­
lished can  be clarified  by comparing  the literary  activity  of explorers  with  the literary efforts of historians. The comparison will be based on an analysis of  histori­ cal writing  borrowed  from  Hayden  White's  massive study  of  nineteenth-century historiography, Metahistory. White argues that the bare chronicle of events which is the historian's  starting  point  possesses no intrinsic shape  or meaning. It is the historian  who transforms  a mere chronological sequence of events into a "story"  by associating particular events with "inaugural motifs," "transitional motifs," and "terminal motifs." Before the historian goes to work, each event

is simply "there" as an element of a series; it does not "function" as a story element. The historian arranges the events in the chronicle into a hierarchy of significance by assigning events different functions as story elements in such a way as to disclose the formal coherence of a whole set of events considered as a comprehensible pro­ cess with a discernible beginning, middle, and end.3

But the historian does more than simply bracket a portion of the historical record within a kind of verbal  punctuation marks;  he shapes each story in a particular manner.  According  to  White,  the  historian  patterns  the  broad  outline  of each historical story after one of the four mythoi identified by Northrop Frye in Anatomy of Criticism. That is, the  historian shapes his stories as either  Comedy, Tragedy, Romance,  or Satire. This shaping  of the historical record into one of Frye's cate­ gories White labels "emplotment."
White's analysis of historical writing is relevant to a consideration of exploration writing because the explorer  is in fact a kind of historian.  Like the historian  the explorer  is engaged  in imposing order on a set of events which are given rather than  imagined. White writes that  the historian

confronts a veritable chaos of events already  constituted, out  of which he must choose the elements of the story he would tell. He makes his story by including some events and excluding others, by stressing some and subordinating others. This process of exclusion, stress, and subordination is carried out in the interest of  con­ stituting a story of a particular  kind.4

This  description  of the historical process is very similar to Hopwood's  account  of the changes an explorer's  journal must undergo before publication. Both Hopwood and  White describe a process of "exclusion, stress, and subordination"; moreover,

73

EXPLORATION AS LITERATURE

Hopwood's  "development  of direction and purpose" is parallel with White's "em­
plotment"  into a story of a "particular kind."
In applying White's  concept of "emplotment" to exploration  writing only one change  in White's  analysis must be made:  a different  set of narrative  categories must be used. Exploration accounts seldom, or never, fall into the areas of Comedy or Satire. Moreover,  although  many exploration  accounts  are emplotted  in ways that  resemble Romance  and Tragedy,  explorers do not possess the wide scope for action available to characters in many works of the Romantic and Tragic  modes. (In  particular, explorers are much less powerful than  those Romantic heroes for whom the laws of nature are suspended.)  AB a result, it is most convenient in the present discussion to use a typology of narrative  which directly pertains to accounts of exploration.  It is the contention of this paper  that  most accounts of exploration are emplotted in one of three ways, either as quests, as odysseys, or as ordeals.
When an explorer sets out on a journey, he usually has a specific goal in mind. If his journey is successful, it is quite natural  to make the attaining of the goal the central  theme  of the ensuing narrative.  The  result  will be an  account  in  which every episode will have a clear relationship  to the explorer's  progress towards  his goal, an account structured  as a successful quest. Events and  people will be men­ tioned only insofar as they either help or hinder  the attainment of the goal. The  dangers and hardships encountered  will be emphasized.  The  journey  will be por­ trayed as a succession of crises, in each of which some obstacle is overcome, rising to a climax with the final attainment  of the goal. This authorial strategy results in a swiftly-moving, straight-line  narrative,  focused on limited  issues. The  explorer himself appears  as  a  determined  and  forceful  hero,  a  conqueror.  Such  heroic explorers tend  to resemble each  other,  all displaying  bravery,  physical strength,  resourcefulness, and unflagging determination.
There  is, of course the  possibility that  an  explorer  may  fail  to  complete  his journey, due to circumstances beyond his control. The  obstacles may be too great or  he may lack  the  requisite  resourcefulness and  strength  of character. Such  a failure is usually accompanied  by great suffering and  hardship; in extreme  cases the  explorers  may  die.  (Accounts  of an  exploring  party's  extinction  have  been preserved because in some cases the explorer's diary-notably Scott's -has been recovered  after  his death.)   When  an  explorer  tells a  story  of disaster  or  near­ disaster, his account  may aptly be termed an ordeal. The  action of an ordeal  will focus on  the  attempts  of the  exploring  party  to ensure  their  survival, and  the thematic  focus will fall on  the  human  capacity  to  endure  privation.  A further  thematic   emphasis  will grow  out  of  the  means  by  which  rescue  or  escape  is achieved,  whether  Providential,  fortuitous,  or  brought  about  by human  means. The  climax of the  account  will be the eventual  rescue or escape itself-or  the final scene of disaster.

74

EXPLORATION AS LITERATURE

A third  possibility arises when the explorer's  goal is only of secondary  impor­ tance  in comparison  with  his desire to obtain  an overall  view of the  unknown regions he is traversing. Then, the incidental details of the journey become the main focal point of the account. The  explorer describes the things seen and  the experi­ ences undergone  for their own sake rather  than simply as adjuncts  to a quest for some specific place or object. Such an explorer often gives extensive descriptions of the lands  and  the  peoples he encoWlters, and  may  describe  his  own  gradually growing  understanding of  a  non-European way of life.  Focusing  on  incidental  details in this way results in a loose and  digressive structure,  which  may  be des­ cribed  as an  odyssey.  Like Homer's  wanderer  the explorer  will often  seem more interested  in  his immediate  surroundings  than  in  reaching  his distant  objective. Such odyssean explorers display a greater range of personality traits than do heroic travellers or sufferers. The  personal interests of  an odyssean traveller  determine  the centres of attention  of his narrative; individual  characteristics  are  allowed a greater expression than  in a quest or ordeal.




l:E THREE  FORMS OF   EXPLORATION  ACCOUNT  do  not  cor­ respond directly to Frye's typology of narrative  forms, but  they can  be related  to an  overlapping,  but  less inclusive, set  of  fictional  categories.  A  heroic  quest­ explorer, who succeeds either  by mental or physical force in overcoming  all diffi­ culties, will emerge as an inflexible and indomitable proponent  of a fixed scheme of values, rather  like some of the righteous heroes of  certain  quest-romances.  On the  other  hand,  an  explorer  who  undergoes  an  ordeal  emerges as an  enduring  sufferer,  rather  like the  heroes of certain  simple  tragedies.  Most  explorers  who depict their  journeys as either quests or ordeals cling to the values of their society of origin,  and  seek to impose  themselves and  their  purposes on  both  their  own subordinates and  on the native  peoples they  encounter.  In  contrast,  an  odyssean explorer  adapts   himself to  the  non-European  conditions  with  which  he  is sur­ rounded; his account  depicts a learning  process analogous to the education  or ini­ tiation  undergone  by the central  characters  of many novels. Thus,  the correspon­ dences  between  the  three forms of exploration  account  and  ordinary forms  of fictional narrative may be summarized  in a simple diagram:5

Quest 	Odyssey	Ordeal
(success)	(failure)
Romance 	Novel	Tragedy

As the diagram  suggests, the three  kinds of exploration  account  are  not  abso­ lutely distinct categories, but rather  are convenient labels to identify portions of a literary continuum. Quest and ordeal are the extreme points, polar opposites. An

75

EXPLORATION AS LITERATURE

account emplotted as a  quest  emphasizes  the  explorer's success  in  attammg  his goal;  an account emplotted as an ordeal stresses difficulties and  suffering  which  are not redeemed  by success. The  odyssey falls between  the two extremes; an odyssean explorer places  less emphasis  on  his desire  to  reach  a  particular goal,  and  pays more  attention to the incidental details of the  journey.  Moreover, the  three  forms are not necessarily mutually exclusive, but may exist in combination. For example, an  account may combine  the traits of quest and  odyssey, or of odyssey and  ordeal. Or  an  odyssey may  contain  incidents  emplotted as a quest  or as an  ordeal -and so on.
Nonetheless,  in any individual account one of the three  forms  will dominate. To
explain  why, we can again  appeal to White's analysis  of historical  writing. White remarks that  historians' stories fall into simple  pre-existing patterns

precisely because the historian is inclined to resist construction  of the complex peri­ peteias which are the novelist's and the dramatist's stock in trade. Precisely because he is not  (or claims not to be)  telling the story "for  its own sake," he is  inclined to emplot his stories in the most conventional  form....8

Like the historians  described  by White,  explorers  are also relatively  unsophisticated storytellers,  who tend  to emplot  their stories in a simple  manner. Once an explorer has decided  how  he interprets his journey  (a  decision  which  may  be either  con­ sciously or unconsciously  made), he normally presents  the  details  of his journey  in a way that  supports his overall  vision of what  he has accomplished.
The emplotment of an  explorer's story  in  one  of  the  three  forms  is signalled principally through large-scale structural features; that  is, the  explorer expands or otherwise emphasizes those scenes and  incidents which  reinforce his interpretation of his experiences, and  compresses or omits scenes which  do  not  contribute to his chosen  interpretation. However, he  may  also  explicitly  signal   his  intentions  by attaching verbal  motifs to certain  events  and  at  times  by making overt  authorial statements of purpose. For  exam pie, in Voyages  from Montreal Alexander  Mac­ kenzie clearly  warns  his readers  to expect  the  undeviating, relentless movement of a quest  account:

I could not stop to dig into the earth,  over whose surface  I was compelled  to pass with  rapid  steps;  nor could  I turn  aside to collect  the  plants  which  nature  might have scattered  on the way, when my thoughts  were anxiously employed in making provision for the day that  was passing over me. I had  to encounter perils by land and  perils by water;  to watch the savage who was our guide, or guard  against those of his tribe who might meditate  our destruction.  I had, also, the passions and  fears of others  to control  and  subdue. To-day,  I had  to assuage  the  rising discontents, and  on the morrow,  to cheer  the fainting  spirits of the  people  who accompanied me. The  toil of our navigation  was incessant, and  oftentimes  extreme; and  in our progress over land,  we had  no protection  from  the severity  of the  elements, and possessed no accommodations  or conveniences  but  such  as could  be contained  in

EXPLORATION AS  LITERATURE

the burden  on our shoulders, which aggravated  the toils of our  march,  and added to the wearisomeness of our way.7

In  contrast to Mackenzie, David Thompson allows his attention to wander  freely away  from  the  actual progress  of his travels,  and  expands incidental happenings until  they become  the main  features of his account. Thompson's awareness  of this trait  in his Narrative is indicated when he remarks, after  delivering one of his most famous  digressions   (that on  the  two  races,  man  and  beaver), "From this  long digression,  I return to my travels  in the  Nut  Hill."8  Even  when  he inserts into  his account a portion of his journal describing  a mid-winter journey  over  the prairies, Thompson's purpose  is not  simply  to  describe  his geographical progress,  but  to make  clear the  nature of the experience he has undergone:

As my journey to the Mississourie is over part of the Great  Plains, I shall give it in the form of a  journal,  this form, however dull, is the only method  in my opinion, that can give the reader  a clear idea of them.9

In  these passages, and  in others throughout the Narrative, Thompson's awareness of the odyssean  nature of his account is clear to the attentive reader.
It should  be apparent that  the  present  argument does not support a theory  of
environmental determinism. It  might  seem  that  whether an  explorer  undergoes an  "ordeal" or completes a "quest" is not a matter of authorial choice,  but  is the result  of the  actual physical  conditions he encounters. Of  course,  the  influence  of external conditions cannot be disregarded. But subjective factors  are also extremely important-one man's ordeal may be another man's  odyssey. For  example, sup­ pose  we  compare Luke   Foxe's Northwest Fox;  or,  Fox   from  the   North-West Passage (I 635) with Thomas James' The  Strange  and Dangerous Voyage (  633). These  books both  describe  expeditions made  to Hudson Bay in the same  year, yet they  present  very different pictures  of the dangers and  difficulties  of such  a  navi­ gation. The  easy voyage  experienced by Foxe  and  the  difficulties encountered by James probably have  as much  to do with  the  personalities of the two  captains as with the actual conditions encountered.
Examples drawn from  the  early  records  left  by French travellers also help  to illustrate how a writer's attitude can  colour  his presentation of his experiences.  At one extreme is the  trader and  adventurer Pierre  Esprit  Radisson:

I took my gun and goes where I never was before, so I choosed not one way before another. I went  [in]   to the  wood some three or four miles. I find a small brook, where I walked by the side awhile, which brought me into meadows. There  was a pool where  were a good store of bustards. I began to creep  [as]  though  I might come near. The  poor creatures,  seeing me flat upon the ground,  thought  I was a beast as well as they, so they came  near  me, whistling  like goslings, thinking  to frighten  me. The  whistling  that  I made them hear was another  music than  theirs. There  I  killed  three,  and  the  rest scared, which  nevertheless came  to  that  place

77

EXPLORATION AS LITERATURE

again  to see what  sudden sickness befelled their  comrades.  I shot again;  two paid for their curiosity.10

Surely  Radisson  has embroidered this scene  more  than  is necessary  merely  to get his story  told;  the  additional details  reflect  his zestful  delight  in the  free  hunting life. At  the  other  extreme  are  many  of the  writers  in  the  ]esuit Relations, who present  life with the "savages" as a kind of penance, a purgatory on earth. "A soul very thirsty  for  the  Son of God," writes  Father LeJeune, " I mean  for suffering, would  find enough here to satisfy it."11 LeJeune's preconceptions, even more  than actual physical  conditions, seem to underlie  this remark.
The wide applicability of the  proposed  classification of exploration writing can be suggested  by undertaking a brief survey of some of the major Canadian accounts of exploration. Among  the records left by the early  northern voyagers, the ordeal  is the  predominant form. The  nature of these accounts is well indicated by Tryggvi
J. Oleson,  in  his  history  of  the  early  exploration of  territories now  included  in
northern Canada:

The  annals  of these expeditions are  records of courage,  perseverance,  and  almost incredible  endurance amidst some of the harshest  and  most difficult natural condi­ tions ever encountered  by man. They are  true  tales of heroism, for  the  Canadian Arctic ... can  be the deadliest of all regions to those who bring little  more  than ignorance  to the conquest of it. And this was the case with  the great  majority  of those who, in the beginning of the seventeenth  century,  ventured  to penetrate  its ice, fog, and  mists-in  what  can only be described  as frail  little  barks, fitted  for little  more  than  coastal  navigation  or  for  sailing  the  high  seas  under  the  most favourable  conditions.12

As Oleson's comments indicate, the  keynotes  of  these  accounts are  danger and hardship. Some  of the accounts are  one continuous succession  of perilous experi­ ences, brought on by the ice and storms of northern water.  Dionyse Settle's account of Frobisher's second  voyage conveys the  helplessness all of these navigators must have felt at times:

the ship and  barkes ... were forced  to abide  in a cruell  tempest, chancing  in the night amongst and in the thickest of the yce, which was so monstrous, that even the least of a thousand  had been of force sufficient, to have shivered our ship and barks into small portions, if God  (who in all necessities, hath  care  unto  the infirmitie of man)   had  not  provided  for  this our  extremitie  a  sufficient  remedie  through  the light  of the  night,  whereby we might  well discerne  to  flee from  such  imminent danger,  which we avoyded with 14. Bourdes in one watch  the space of 4 houres. 13

Although these accounts may often  be, as Oleson  says, tales of heroism,  the  chief characters are  not  heroic in the  usual sense. The early  voyagers  do not  strike  the modern reader  as determined and  powerful, but  as beleaguered and  confused. Whatever discoveries  they  make  seem  fortuitous, as  their  tiny  ships  drift  at  the

EXPLORATION AS  LITERATURE


mercy  of wind  and  current. The voyagers may  be personally  brave  and  at  times reckless,  but  their  stories  illustrate the  small  scope  of  man's knowledge and  his helplessness in the face of natural forces.
The presentation of a voyage as an ordeal  is most pronounced in those accounts
which  tell of  enforced winterings in  Hudson or  James  Bay.  To  the  dangers of northern navigation these accounts add the hardships of a long, dark  Arctic winter. Such  misadventures befell  Hudson in  1610-11,  Bylot in  I6uz-13, Jens  Munk in
161g-2o, and  Thomas James in 1631-32.  James,  the last of the early seekers after a Northwest Passage,  depicts  his voyage as beset by difficulties  right  from  the  time he left  England. Once  he reaches  Hudson Strait his difficulties  are  multiplied  by the  ice and  storms  he encounters there,  so that  on numerous occasions  he  writes as though  destruction is imminent:

All night, the Storm continu'd with Violence, and with some Rain in the Morning; it  then  being  very thick  Weather.  The  Water  shoal'd  apace,  with  such  an  over­ grown Sea withal,  that  a Sail  was not to be endur'd; and  what  was  worse,  there was no trusting  to an Anchor.  Now therefore we began to prepare ourselves, how to make a good End, of a miserable tormented  Life. 14

As well as describing such  overt  dangers,  James has an  astute  eye for  the  small personal  details  which  make  his men's  plight  more  moving and  immediate to the reader. His eye for the  pathetic is well illustrated in his description of the last days of one of his men, in jured  when  ice caused a capstan  to get out  of control:

The  19th, our  Gunner,   (who,  as you may  remember,  had  his Leg cut  off)   lan­ guish'd  irrecoverably,  and  now grew very weak; desiring, that,  for the little Time he had  to live, he might  drink  Sack altogether; which I order'd  he should.15

Throughout the account James goes out of his way to enlist the reader's sympathies by describing the  difficult  conditions under  which  the  men  laboured, their  poor equipment, and  the  weakness  of their  conditions  as a result  of scurvy.




IN LATER YEARS, WHEN  MOST EXPLORERS were either  men connected with  the  fur  trade  or  had  acquired experience in  wilderness  travel  in some other  way, the chances of an expedition turning into  an ordeal  were lessened. However, when   an  inexperienced  traveller   ventured forth,  especially  into   the extreme conditions of  more  northerly regions,  disaster  could  still strike.  A  vivid example is the first overland journey  of John  Franklin, which  records  the gradual disintegration of his party  into  starving near-skeletons, beset  by the  twin  spectres of death and  cannibalism:

We now looked  round  for  the means of subsistence, and  were gratified  to find several deer skins, which had  been thrown away during  our former  residence. The

79

EXPLORATION AS LITERATURE

bones were gathered  from the heap of ashes, these with  the skins, and  addition  of
tripe  de roche,  we considered would support  us tolerably  well for a time....
When I arose the following morning, my body and  limbs were so swollen that  I was unable  to walk more than  a few yards. Adam  was in a still worse condition, being absolutely incapable  of rising without  assistance.  My other  companions  for­ tunately  experienced  this inconvenience in a less degree, and  went to collect  bones, and some tripe  de roche which supplied us with two meals. The  bones were quite acrid, and  the soup extracted  from them excoriated  the mouth  if taken  alone, but
it was somewhat milder when boiled with tripe  de roche,  and  we even thought  the mixture  palatable, with the addition  of salt, of which a cask had  been fortunately left here in the spring. Augustus today set two fishing lines below the rapid. On his way thither  he saw two deer, but had not strength  to follow them.18

The stiffness of Franklin's language, his inability to convey  an  emotional response to the  situation he  depicts,  adds  an  ironic  dimension to  the  account. The  reader perceives  that   the  self-control   which  is reflected   in  Franklin's unflappable tone mirrors the  rigidity  of personality which  is partly  responsible  for the  plight  of the expedition.
Franklin's difficulties  arise largely  because  he is a British  naval  officer sent  out by the  Admiralty rather  than  an  experienced northern  traveller. More  typical  of Canadian  explorers are  the  two  fur  traders  Alexander  Mackenzie and  Samuel Hearne. Both of these explorers  utilize Indian methods of travel  and  rely to a great extent on Indian helpers. However, their  journeys  represent two very different approaches to the  explorer's task. Hearne's method is to cut  his party  to the mini­ mum  -one  man  -and   place  himself   under  the   protection  of  a   prominent Indian  and   allow  the  Indians' normal   wanderings  to  carry   him  into regions unknown to Europeans. In  contrast, Mackenzie forces  his party  ever onwards, in spite  of the  frequent hostility  of the  natives  and  the  occasional  reluctance of  his own  men.  Hearne adjusts  himself  and  his  purposes to  the  Indian way  of  life; Mackenzie, although necessarily  using  Indian  methods of  travel  and  relying  on the  natives  for much  of his food, bends the  natives  to his own  purposes.  In  other  words,  Hearne presents  his travels  as an  odyssey  whereas  Mackenzie presents  his two  journeys as successful quests.
In  their  books the  two men  create  very different authorial personalities.  Mac­ kenzie emerges  as a heroic figure. He does not  change in the  course of his travels; instead, he imposes  his values on  his companions and  on  the  Indians. There are no real digressions in Mackenzie's account; every event  is either  a step towards the goal or a setback  to the progress of his journey. The recurrent theme of  Mackenzie's account is the overcoming of an obstacle,  whether human or  physical. He  empha­ sizes the  danger and  hardship of his  journeys,  and  makes  it  plain  that   his own personal  efforts are  the primary factor  in overcoming the obstacles  his party  faces. Most often it is the natives he must manipulate into serving  his purposes; but  upon occasion  it is the fears of his own men he must control:

8o

EXPLORATION AS  LITERATURE


I brought  to their  recollection,  that  I  did  not deceive them,  and  that  they were made acquainted with  the difficulties and  dangers they must expect  to encounter, before  they  engaged  to accompany  me. I  also urged  the  honour  of  conquering disasters, and  the disgrace  that  would attend  them on their return  home, without having attained the object of the expedition. Nor did I fail to mention  the courage and resolution  that  was the peculiar  boast of the North men; and  that  I depended on them, at that  moment, for the maintenance of their character. 17

If Mackenzie is a hero, Hearne is more like an anti-hero or a picaresque figure. Hearne's virtues  are  endurance, adaptability, and  tolerance rather than  forceful­ ness and  overbearing strength. In  fact,  Hearne's efforts  to  influence  his  Indian companions are  often  quite  ineffectual. His  strength   of  character  emerges  only indirectly from  his story,  for  he seldom  stresses the difficulty  of the  journey,  and  does not emphasize his own  role in ensuring  its completion. Rather,  Hearne pre­ sents himself as a relaxed, inquisitive, and  at times amused  spectator of life among the  Indians. He  often  gives  the  impression  of enjoying  their  erratic, unplanned mode of existence:

The little river lately mentioned, as well as the adjacent  lakes and ponds, being well­ stocked  with  beaver,  and  the  land  abounding  with  moose and  buffalo,  we  were induced to make but slow progress in our journey. Many days were spent in hunting,  feasting, and drying a large quantity of flesh to take with us, particularly that of the buffalo. 18

The choice of pronoun here seems to indicate a tacit identification with the Indians. Hearne has  adjusted completely  to the  Indians and  to  the  natural environment. He implies that  the world contains more than  one way of looking at things; whereas Mackenzie admits only one correct  viewpoint.
Mackenzie and  Hearne have long been well known. But David  Thompson, who is probably the  most outstanding of all Canadian explorers,  was for a long time  a relatively  neglected figure.  In  particular, only  in the  past  fifteen  or  twenty  years have the remarkable literary merits of Thompson's account of his travels come to be adequately recognized. Nonetheless, as Victor  Hopwood insists, Thompson's book "belongs among such  master  works  as Cook's  Voyages, Darwin's Voyage of the Beagle,  Doughty's Travels in  Arabia   Deserta,  Bates'  Naturalist   on  the   Rivers Amazon, and  Stefansson's The Friendly  Arctic." 19  Thompson's Narrative is a good illustration of  the  literary   problem  posed  by an  odyssean  account. When  an  ex­ plorer  understands his journey  as either  a quest  or an  ordeal, many  of his literary decisions  are  virtually made in  advance, or  at  least  are  confined  within  narrow limits.  But  an  odyssean  explorer  must  choose  his own  thematic focus, and must organize a  mass  of  details  in  a  way  that   is both  consistent   and  interesting. In general terms,  there  are two main  themes which an odyssean explorer  may empha­ size:  his own  initiation into  the  ways  of  the  wilderness  and  its  peoples,  or  the

81

EXPLORATION AS LITERATURE

nature  of the native way of life as understood by the natives themselves. We might call these two themes the personal and  the anthropological approaches.
In  contrast  to Hearne's  personal emphasis, Thompson's Narrative stresses the anthropological approach.  His Narrative  tells the story of a lifetime spent  in the Northwest as a fur  trader and explorer, but also presents an extensive description of the  geographical  regions over which  he has ranged  and  gives a sympathetic portrait  of the native peoples of these regions. This  wide range  of subject-matter encourages a digressive structure,  with many passages of summary  and description inserted into the narrative, as well as many anecdotes illustrating features of native life. Frequently,  too, Thompson  gives insights into native life by assigning Indian characters  the role of spokesman for the native  way of life. Thompson  succeeds brilliantly  in combining his life-story with a "scientific"  account  of the Northwest and its peoples. He emphasizes the westward progression of his travels through various  geographical  regions, so that  from  one  perspective  his book is, as John Warkentin  points out, a skillful regional geography  of the  Northwest.20  As well, he adds an ethical dimension to his portrayal of the Indian. The details with which Thompson  fills out  his personal story-Indian legends, anecdotes  of Indian  life and  history, details of Indian  belief and  customs, descriptions  of the animals  he sees and the land he traverses -are all designed to expound  the nature  of Indian life, and to make clear the tragic decline of the Indian  as a result of contact  with Europeans. Thus, Thompson's  account, by portraying  the extinction of a vital and harmonious  non-European  culture,  has the ultimate  effect of presenting an impli­ cit critique  of European  society.
The  element  of social commentary  is common  in odyssean accounts.  For  ex­ ample, Vilhjalmur  Stefansson's The  Friendly  Arctic  also presents an alternative  to the usual European  way of seeing the world. In  this case, it is Stefansson himself who embodies the alternate  vision. To the Eskimo's methods of  northern  survival Stefansson adds  a few scientifically based contributions of his  own and  presents himself  as a  kind  of improved  Eskimo,  combining   the  native's  adaptation  to northern  conditions with the European's rationality  and freedom from superstition. Stefansson's ostensible purpose in the book is to prove a thesis about  methods of Arctic travel. Stefansson believes in the existence of game in the unexplored regions of the polar lands and ocean, and he believes in his ability to secure food by hunt­  ing this hypothetical game. He does not want to arrive at some particular  place so much as to prove that it is possible to travel more or less indefinitely, with a mini­ mum  of supplies and equipment,  by obtaining  food from  the land.  Therefore,  he need not organize his account as a quest, but can adopt  the looser, more digressive, odyssean approach. In fact, a description of the daily life of his party is his prin­ cipal means of proving his thesis. However, from  this near-idyllic  description  of northern  camp life emerges the implicit message of Stefansson's account, a critique of the over-complicated  and  artificial nature  of civilized life.

EXPLORATION AS  LITERATURE

Stefansson emerges as the hero of his account;  but he is a hero with an odyssean slant. His prime attibute  is not the ability to perform heroic deeds, but his superior knowledge of the Arctic  regions and  his skill in living there.  Every detail in The Friendly Arctic  is arranged  to highlight  what Stefansson refers to as his  "polar­ craft." Unlike the American  explorer Robert Peary, with whom he contrasts him­ self, Stefansson does not marshall his intellectual and physical resources to direct a journey of conquest;  his intelligence is used to come to terms with the environment, not  to subdue  it.  "I have  always  been  temperamentally  inclined  to  deal  with natural difficulties by adaptation and  avoidance  rather  than  by trying  to over­ whelm them," writes Stefansson. 21 His whole book supports  this self-analysis.
One  major  conclusion suggested by the preceding survey of Canadian explora­ tion  writing  is that  over  the  years odyssean accounts  have  almost  entirely  sup­ planted  accounts  emplotted   as either  quests or ordeals.  Such  a  change  is only natural. Inadequate equipment and  inexperience  with  northern  conditions  left the early explorers open to the difficulties which led them  to present their experi­ ences as ordeals.  Increasing  acquaintance with  wilderness  conditions,  and  espe­ cially the adoption of techniques  borrowed from the Indians and Eskimos, enabled travellers  to  venture  forth  with  greater  safety and  a  greater  chance  of success. However,  improved  exploring  techniques and a more complete  understanding of the  northern  environment were not the only factors encouraging  the  production of odyssean accounts. Perhaps  even more important  were the gradual  diminution of purely economic incentives for exploration and the spread of a scientific outlook throughout Western  society. The scientific attitude  encouraged  a more  disinter­ ested and objective scrutiny of the remote regions of the world, which in turn was conducive to the writing of odyssean accounts of exploration.
This paper began with a question, to which we can now return. Certainly exploration  writing  cannot   be  viewed as "pure" literature   in  the  conventional sense. But it is a form of writing into which literary considerations enter in  impor­ tant  and systematic ways. An explorer chooses the form of his story from within a restricted set of literary strategies, and he shapes his narrative throughout in con­ formity  with  the  underlying  thematic   concerns  entailed  by  his chosen  way  of understanding his travels. Moreover,  the three forms of the  exploration  account embody  three  of the  most hallowed  of literary  themes. The  quests of the heroic explorers reveal powers of mind  and body beyond the reach of ordinary  mortals; the wanderings  of the odyssean explorers expose the reader to modes of behaviour and of thought  that  are beyond the range of everyday experience;  and the ordeals undergone  by those explorers  who suffer a series of  misadventures  show the in­ credible strength  of man's  will to survive. Thus, the three  forms of exploration account  highlight  respectively the explorer's achievements, his education  and ini­ tiation, and the testing of his faith and endurance. These are themes whose endur­  ing interest for readers has been proved time and again over the years. In its own

EXPLORATION AS LITERATURE


way,  each kind  of  exploration account tells  a story  which, like  the  stories told  in so  many conventional works  of  literature,  reveals an   unexpected   dimension  of human  possibility.

NOTES

1 In  the "Introduction" to the Literary  History  the editors  remark: "This book treats, not  only  works  generically   classified  as  'literature,' but   also,  chiefly  in  separate chapters, other works  which  have  influenced literature  or  have  been  significantly related  to literature expressing  the cultural life of the country." Literary  History  of Canada: Canadian Literature  in English, ed. Carl  F. Klinck  et al.  (Toronto: Univ. of Toronto Press,  I965), p. xi.
2  "Explorers by Land: To  I86o,"  Literary  History  of Canada, p. 25.
3 Metahistory: The  Historical   Imagination in  Nineteenth-Century  Europe   (Balti­
more: Johns Hopkins Univ.  Press,  I973), p. 7·
4  M etahistory, p. 6, n. 5·
The necessity  to  invoke  the  category   "Novel" points   up  an  om1ss1on in  Frye's typology  of narrative. As White  points  out,  Frye's  "method of analysis  works  well enough on second-order literary  genres, such as the fairy tale or the detective story," but  "it is too rigid and abstract to do justice  to ... richly  textured and  multi-levelled works"   (p.  8,  n.  6).  Historically, more  complex or  "mixed" modes  of  narrative evolved  out  of the simpler  traditional forms  when  authors fused  the characteristics of two or more  traditional forms, or when  (as in Don  Quixote) they subjected the conventions of a traditional form  to a sceptical or "realistic" examination. The end point   of  this  historical   progression   was  the  mode   of  narrative  we  loosely  term "Realism," of which  the  Novel  is the  prime  representative. Therefore, in  order   to cover  the  entire  range  of narrative possibilities,  Frye's  four  modes  must  be  under­ stood  to cover  a wide range  of variations on  the  basic  types  he describes,  and  the admittedly somewhat catch-all category  "Realism" must  be added to Frye's scheme.
White  finds Frye's  four categories adequate for his discussion.  However, White  is dealing with  nineteenth-century historians, and  historical writing did  not  become thoroughly "realistic" until   the  twentieth century. If White   were   to  extend   his analysis  to  twentieth-century  historians, he  might well  feel  the  need  to  invoke  a category of historical writing  analogous to  the  Novel.
6  M etahistory, p. 8, n. 6.
7  The Journals  and  Letters  of Sir  Alexander Mackenzie, ed.  W. Kaye  Lamb  (Cam­
bridge: Cambridge Univ.  Press,  I97o), pp. 58-59.
8  David  Thompson's  Narrative, 1784-1812, ed.  Richard Glover   (Toronto:  Cham­
plain  Society,  I 962), p. I 54·
11  Narrative, p.  I 61.
10  The  Explorations of Pierre  Esprit  Radisson, ed.  Arthur T. Adams   (Minneapolis: Ross & Haines, I 96 I) , p. I 26.
11 The ]esuit  Relations and  Allied  Documents, ed.  R. S. Mealing (Toronto:  McClel­
land  & Stewart, I963), p. 33·
12 Early Voyages and Northern Approaches (Toronto:  McClelland & Stewart, I963),
p. I6I.
13 The Principal   Navigations, Voyages, Traffiques  and   Discoveries   of  the   English
Nation, I2 vols. (Glasgow: MacLehose, I903-05), VII, 2I6.

EXPLORATION AS LITERATURE

H The   Dangerous Voyage  of Captain  Thomas James  (Toronto: Coles,  I973),  pp.
37-38.
1  Dangerous Voyage, p. 5 I.
16 Narrative of a Journey to the Shores of the Polar Sea in the Years 1819,20,21, and
22 (Edmonton: Hurtig, I969), pp. 439-40.
17 Journals and  Letters, p. 299·
18 A Journey  from Prince of Wales's Fort in Hudson's Bay to the Northern  Ocean in the Years  1769, 1770, 1771 and 1772, ed. Richard Glover   (Toronto:  Macmillan, I 95s), p. I75·
19   "Introduction," Travels  in  Western  North  America,  1784-1812, ed.  Victor  Hop­
wood  (Toronto: Macmillan, I97I), p. 34·
20   "Early Geographical Writing in  English  on  British  North America," in  Papers of the Bibliographical Society  of Canada,  I2  (Toronto, I974), pp. g8-7I.
21 The  Friendly Arctic:  The  Story of Five Years in Polar Regions  (New  York:  Mac­
millan,  I 92 1 ) , p. 103.












Fiddlehead Poetry Books

(from  the current  list)

COUNTRYSIDE CANADA, by James  Wreford, $5.00
PHOENIX RISING, by Kathleen Forsythe,  $4.00
ON  THE BROKEN MOUNTAIN, by Norman Newton, $3.00
GAMES LIKE PASSACAGLIA, by Elizabeth Harper, $4.00
INSIDE, by Anne Scott,  $6.00
A SPLIT IN THE WATER, by Candace James,  $5.00

Order  from FRED  COGSWELL P.O. Box 4400
English Department, University of New Brunswick
Fredericton, N.B.  E3B 5A3
(CATALOGUE SUPPLIED  ON REQUEST)


RICHARDSON'S INDIANS



Leslie Monkman




No WRITER OF  MNETIENTH-cENTURY CANADA   mo" fully
explored  the  literary  potential  of the  Indian   than  Major   John  Richardson. In
novels such as W acousta ( I 832)  and The  Canadian  Brothers  ( I 840),  Richard­ son's interest is in the conflict between red man and  white man on the Canadian­ American  frontier.  In  later  formula  novels such  as  Hardscrabble   ( I 85 I )  and W au-Nan-Gee  ( I 852), he more directly appeals  to the American  reading  public by shifting his focus to the events preceding the founding  of Chicago. Yet Richard­ son's interest  in the Indian  was not limited  to an  exploration  of his potential  in frontier fiction; Tecumseh (I 828), a narrative poem paying tribute  to the Indian  warrior  whom he met as a young man, was Richardson's first published  volume, and references to the Indian  and Indian cultures appear  repeatedly  in his volumes of history and autobiography. Throughout his work, Richardson  affirms his admir­  ation for the red man, and in later works such as "The North  American  Indian," he writes movingly of his  concern for the extinction  of the  Indian  race.  Yet he consistently separates  red  and  white cultures into distinct  orders  and,  despite his stated  esteem for  the  Indian, ultimately  presents  the  red  man  only  within  the context of savagism.
Richardson's interest  in the Indian  may  have stemmed  in  part  from  his own
family history; the question of whether or not his maternal grandmother was an Ottawa Indian  has not yet been conclusively answered.1 No such genealogical connection  need be assumed, however, in order  to explain  his interest  in the red man;  in Eight Years in Canada  ( I847)  and "A Trip  to Walpole  Island  and Port Sarnia" ( I849), he documents his own first-hand  contacts  with the Indian, and one of his most treasured memories was of fighting by the side of Tecumseh  in the War of I 8 I 2. Combined  with these personal experiences was his reading  of works such as Alexander  Henry's Travels and Adventures in Canada  and the Indian Territories ( I8og)  and his fascination with the novels of James Fenimore Cooper.
In  an abridged  edition of Wacousta  published  in  the  New Canadian  Library
series, Carl  Klinck  reprints  what  we are told is Richardson's introduction to the I 85 I  edition of the novel. However, the first two paragraphs of this introduction in which Richardson  explicitly acknowledges Cooper's influence are not included:

86

RICHARDSON'S INDIANS

This  Chapter, written  eighteen  years subsequent to the  original  publication  of W acousta in  London,  will be found  unavoidably  replete  with  egotism.  By none will it be more  readily pronounced  such than  by those who are most open  to the charge  themselves. Without  its exercise, however, the  object  of this  introduction would not be gained.
As the reader  may be curious  to know on what basis, and  in what  manner  this story (of which I have certainly robbed that first of vigorous American novelists­
the "Last  of the Mohicans" Cooper-which tale, albeit I have never read a novel by another  author  twice, I have absolutely devoured three times,)  was suggested to me, and  on  what  particular portions  of History the  story  is founded,  I am  not aware  that  this introductory Chapter, which I have promised  my Publishers, can be better  devoted than  to the explanation.2

At  the  time  of  the  publication of Wacousta, three  of James Fenimore Cooper's "Leatherstocking Novels" had  been published: The  Pioneers (1823), The  Last of the  Mohicans  (I826) and  The  Prairie (1827). But Richardson's interest  in the American novelist  also encompassed the later  novels in the series, The  Pathfinder (I 840)   and  The  Deerslayer (I 84I), as revealed  in the  enthusiasm expressed  in Eight  Years  in Canada  (I 847)   in  a description of his thoughts while  travelling through upper  New  York  state:

Never were the characters in Cooper's  "Leather Stocking"  and  the  "Pathfinder" more  vividly brought  before my recollection. This  was the sort of scene in which he loved to introduce them,  and,  I know not how it was, but  with  what  dreamy state  of  half  consciousness  which  a  solitary  traveller  awakened   early  from  his slumbers, feels in a situation  of this kind, when the fancy is fully at work, I looked, at each  moment  expecting  to see a deer or a wild turkey arrested  by the crack of a rifle and  a hunter,  equipped  as the charming  Indian  novelist has  painted  him, issuing in the pursuit of game.3

Despite  Richardson's  acknowledged familiarity with  Cooper's work  and  his  con­ fession to having  "robbed" the story of W acousta from  the  American  master,  his work  rarely  indicates the  kind  of explicit  debt  declared  by  Richardson. Yet  if he does not owe details  of plot structure and  character to Cooper, he does share  per­ spectives  on   Indian  culture  which   have   been  identified   by  twentieth-century critics in the  American novelist's  work.
Paul  Wallace, one of several  critics who have debated Cooper's role as "Indian novelist," argues  that  Cooper's principal source,  John  Heckewelder's Account  of the  History, Manners  and Customs  of the Indian  Nations, Who Once  Inhabited Pennsylvannia  and the Neighbouring  States ( r8Ig),  provided the  novelist with  a basic  distinction that  pervades his  work.4   Wallace  contends that   the  Indian  in Cooper's novels  is  either   part   of  a  band   of  demonic   fiends   (as  embodied in Cooper's "Mingoes") or a member of a tribe of noble savages  (Delawares such as Uncas or  Chingachgook). This  kind  of  tribal  distinction   emerges  most  promin­ ently  in a story  published in  185o,  "The Sunflower. A True Tale of  the  North-

RICHARDSON'S INDIANS

West," and  in Richardson's later  novels Wau-Nan-Gee and  Hardscrabble. Thus, in Wau-Nan-Gee, the narrator comments on  the  red  villain  of the  novel,  Pee-to­ tum:

It has already been remarked that Pee-to-tum was not a genuine Pottowatomie,  but one of that  race whose very name is a synonym with treachery  and  falsehood-a Chippewa. With low, heavy features; a dark scowling brow; coarse, long, dark hair, shading  the  restless, ever-moving  eye that,  like  that  of  the  serpent,  seemed  to fascinate  where most the cold and slimy animal  sought  to sting;  the broad, coarse nose;  the  skin  partaking  more  in  the  Chippewa, of  that   offensive,  rank  odor peculiar  to the Indian,  than any others of the race.5

The  same  Pee-to-tum becomes the rapist  of the  novel's  heroine, and  in the  face of such  grotesque villainy, his heroic counterpart, the  Pottowatomie, Wau-Nan-Gee, is almost  overwhelmed. Wau-Nan-Gee, a literary  descendent of Uncas  of The  Last of the Mohicans, quietly  accepts  that  his love for  the  white  heroine  must  remain platonic and  functions as a diligent  and  constant agent  of virtue  throughout the book. His only reward, however, is to be damned as an  Indian by the heroine  who refuses to make  tribal  distinctions after  her  rape  by Pee-to-tum.
Although Richardson clearly intends the  reader  to acknowledge the injustice in the heroine's condemnation of the entire  Indian race, her attitude is closely related to  the  perspective that  recurs  most  frequently in  his  work.  In  his  discussion  of James Fenimore Cooper's treatment of the  Indian, Roy  Harvey Pearce argues that  in the  United States,  by 1825,  the idea  of savagism  had  overwhelmed other perspectives  on  the  Indian, and  he  identifies  this  perspective in  Cooper's work. Within this context, the Indian's life

could not be said to be one totally superior or inferior  to that of a civilized man. It did not make sense to view his state as one either  to be aspired to or to be dismissed with unfeeling contempt; rather it was to be seen as the state of one almost entirely out of contact,  for good and for bad, with the life of civilzed men. 6

Within this  perspective,  one  can  freely  praise  a  "good   Indian," but  implicit  in this  praise  is the  idea  that  the  Indian is being  weighed   by  a  different scale  of values  than   would  be used  to  assess a  "good   white  man." Richardson's shared acceptance of the ideology that  Pearce  identifies  in Cooper's work can  be demon­ strated through an examination of his two best-known novels and  of his poetic tri­  bute  to Tecumseh.
In  W acousta, the  opposition   between  savage  and   civilized  worlds  is initially
established  in  terms  of  setting   through a  continuing contrast between   North America and  Europe. Sir  Everard Valletort asserts  that  he  would  prefer  the  life of a barber's apprentice in London  to his role as lieutenant in the  midst  of  Cana­ dian  "savage scenes." For Valletort, the civilized world of Europe and its extensions  in the  forts  of  North America  are  always  preferable to a surrounding  wilderness

88

RICHARDSON'S INDIANS

identified  with  Indians.  Richardson's narrator,  however, adopts  a  more  neutral stance in contrasting  the Indian  furnishings of Madeline De Haldimar's apartment at  Fort  Michilimackinac with  European  decor and  simply  notes  that  "nothing could be more unlike the embellishments of a modem European boudoir."7  Within the context of savagism and  civilization, positive and  negative values need not be assigned; instead,  the emphasis falls on the existence of two distinct orders.




l:E SEPARATION OF  THESE ORDERS in Richardson's perspec­ tive provides a key for understanding the  transition  of "civilized"  Sir  Reginald Morton  into  "savage" Wacousta.  In  the Scottish  highlands,  Morton  meets and falls in love with Clara  Beverley in a setting described in the language of conven­ tional  pastoral. On  a bank, "formed  of turf, covered with moss, and interspersed with roses and honey-suckles," Clara sits as "the divinity of the oasis." To Morton, she is a true "child  of nature" in what he calls "the Eden of my love." Inevitably, when the innocent  Clara  is removed from this Edenic setting and  exposed to the fallen world of the Scottish  army  camp, she falls prey  (according  to Wacousta)  to the perfidy of De Haldimar and the world which he inhabits.  When the conflict between  Morton  and  De Haldimar resumes in  North  America,  De Haldimar is still resident  in  an  extension  of the garrison  he  inhabited   in Scotland.  Morton,  however, has become  Wacousta,  an "altered  being" who  resides in the camp  of Pontiac, a setting which Richardson  juxtaposes with the European  retreat of Clara Beverley's father.
The  difficulty of access to both settings is heavily emphasized.  Wacousta  des­ cribes at length  his difficulty and  athletic  feats in crossing the crags and  fissures that  separated   him  from  Clara's  home.  Similar  difficulties are  encountered   by Frederick De Haldimar as he is led to Pontiac's  camp:  "At length they stood on the verge of a dark and  precipitous ravine, the abrupt  sides of  which were studded with  underwood  so  completely  interwoven  that  all  passage  appeared   imprac­  ticable." Both settings are frequently identified as oases, a word that does not occur in the novel out of this context: Pontiac's  camp is "a  sort of oasis of the forest, girt around  with a rude  belt of underwood," and  Clara  Beverley's home is "this garden-this paradise-this oasis of the rocks."
Clara  Beverley's father  creates  a  retreat  from  civilization  which  Richardson
presents in the trappings  of traditional  pastoral.  Pontiac's  camp,  also opposed  to the  civilized  world  of army  and  fort,  is not  idealized  into  pastoral  but  rather emerges within  the context of savagism. In this camp, we find not pastoral "chil­ dren of nature" but female inhabitants

supporting in their  laps the  heavy  heads of their  unconscious helpmates, while  they occupied  themselves   by  the  firelight  in  parting the  long  black  matted hair   and

Bg

RICHARDSON'S INDIANS

maintaining a  destructive  warfare  against   the  pigmy  inhabitants  of  that   dark region.

Richardson clearly  does not idealize Pontiac's camp into  pastoral as he does Clara Beverley's  oasis,  but  neither   does  he  present   the  savage   oasis  as  an  inherently demonic world  in simple  contrast to that  of the  Scottish "goddess."
The  figure  who  transforms the savages into  a "legion of devils"  and  "fiend-like
bands" is Wacousta. This  man,  so consumed by  his  desire  for  revenge  that   he crosses the  barriers separating civilized and  savage  orders, becomes  a larger than life Satanic figure, exploiting  the worst instincts  of the savage  Indians. During the abortive battle following Pontiac's ruse of the lacrosse game as a means of entering the fort, Wacousta's face is

painted  black as death  and  as he stood  under  the  arch  of the gateway,  with  his white  turbaned  head  towering far above those of his companions,  this formidable and  mysterious enemy might have been likened  to the spirit of darkness  presiding over his terrible legions.

In   his  maniacal hatred   of  the  husband  and   family   of  the  woman   he  loved, Reginald Morton rejects the  world of civilization and  becomes  not  just "a savage both  in garb  and  character" but  the chief of demonic savagism.
Pontiac, the  historical  chief  of  the  Indians, assumes  only  a secondary role  in W acousta. Even  the order  in which  Richardson presents  the events of the  Detroit attack weakens  the dramatic impact  of the Ottawa leader's role. The introduction to the novel tells us of the lacrosse ruse;  we see its execution and  failure; only then does Richardson provide  a flashback  to the  Indian encampment where  we hear Pontiac outlining the plan  to his warriors.  Such  a sequence of events does little  to focus  our  attention on Pontiac since  his words  present  "old  news."  Even  in  this scene,  Wacousta's response  is the  most significant element; reacting to  Pontiac's plan,

the warrior's  swarthy countenance  kindled into  fierce and  rapidly  varying  expres­ sions. A thousand  dark and  complicated  passions evidently  struggled  at  his heart,  and as he dwelt leisurely and emphatically  on the sacrifice of human  life that  must inevitably  attend   the adoption  of the  proposed  measure  his eye grew  larger,  his chest expanded, nay, his very nostrils appeared to dilate  with  unfathomably guile­ ful  exultation.  Captain   De  Haldimar   thought   he  had  never  gazed  on  anything  wearing  the human  shape half so atrociously savage.

Significantly, as soon as Wacousta is killed,  Pontiac arranges for  peace  with  the garrison. The  malevolent savagism  of  Wacousta  gives  way  to  the  benevolent savagism  of the young Indian who slays him.
Even Richardson's "good savages" remain  decisively separated from  the civilized order.  The   young   Amazon,   Oucanasta, is  saved   from   drowning  by  Captain Frederick De  Haldimar, and  although she  falls in love  with  him,  "she  knew she

go

RICHARDSON'S INDIANS


was very foolish  and  that an  Indian girl could  never  be the  wife of a handsome chief of the  Saganaw." Any  possible marriage between  Oucanasta and  Frederick is unthinkable in the context which  the novel establishes;  such a union  would  join two disparate orders, the savage  and  the  civilized.8
Richardson's narrator  does  not  simply  ascribe  negative values  to  the  savage
world  and  positive  qualities to  the  representatives of civilization. Repeatedly  he focuses on the duplicity, injustice and  treachery of both  European civilization and its new world extensions. What he does insist on is the separation of the two worlds into separate orders  and  the  measure  of Wacousta's uniqueness and  of his fall lies in his having  transcended the  barriers separating these orders.


0NE OF  THE  MOST INTERESTING  treatments of this separa­ tion  between  savages  and  civilized  societies  in  Richardson's work  occurs  in  the  sixth  chapter  of  The   Canadian   Brothers.9    Richardson  places  in  conversation,
General Brock,  Commodore Barclay and  Colonel  D'Egville of the British forces in the  War  of  I8I2 and  an  American captive, Major Montgomerie. The chapter begins with dinner host D'Egville apologizing to the American commander for the inclusion of Techumseh and  three other  chiefs at the table. To his relief the Ameri­ can ascribes  his apparent distraction to other  factors.  Richardson's narrator main­ tains  an  objective stance  in  regard  to this slighting  of his Indian  hero.  After  the departure of  the  Indians at  the  conclusion  of dinner, conversation turns  to  two major  questions: the  British  use of Indian forces against the  Americans and  the historical  record  of the British and  the Americans in their  treatment of the Indians.
The most  surprising element  in  the  treatment of  these  questions is the  cold
objectivity of Richardson's narrator. He  presents  both  sides of the  conversation, but  in  fashion   uncharacteristic of  Richardson's work,  the  narrator in  no  way directs  the  reader's response.  Thus,   Major  Montgomerie argues   the  following positions either  to the  assent  or polite qualification of his listeners:

if instances have occurred  wherein the sacredness of treaty has been violated, it has only been where the Indians  have refused to part with their lands for the proffered consideration  and when those lands have been absolutely indispensable to our agricultural  purposes.

The  factual errors in  Montgomerie's argument are  simply  glossed  over  and   he proceeds to further analysis:

The  uneducated negro is, from infancy and long custom, doomed to slavery, where­ fore should the copper coloured Indian  be more free? But my argument points not at  their subjection. I would merely show that,  incapable  of benefitting  by the ad­ vantages of the soil they inherit,  they should learn to yield it with a good grace to

9I

RICHARDSON'S INDIANS

those who can. Their wants are few, and interminable woods yet remain to them, in which their hunting pursuits may be indulged without a fear of interruption.

The  inevitable submission of the individual  perceived  as savage  to civilized man could  not  be presented  more  clearly. General  Brock  points  out  the swift  disap­ pearance of congenial landscapes for the Indian, but finally all concur in the quiet conclusion that  the Indians  of North  America  will disappear, "gone, extirpated, until scarce a vestige of their existence remains."
Discussion of the treatment  of the Indian  by the United  States and Britain leads to the conclusion that  both  nations have been guilty of treachery  and  duplicity. None of the participants, however, seems particularly  concerned about these reflec­ tions on his nation's  policy. When Commodore  Barclay  tries to state Tecumseh's case by cataloguing  the  injustices suffered  by  his  people,  Major  Montgomerie grants  his points and  asserts that  they in no way affect  his own  position which is simply to defend American policy in terms of "civilized" necessity and precedent set by British, French or Spanish governments. Even when General Brock attempts  to defend Indian scalpings, the reader's involvement in his arguments  is minimized by the awareness that all of this discussion is in some sense pseudo-argument, since each of the participants  bears the same assumptions regarding the irreconcilability of civilization and savagism and the inevitable dominance of the former over the latter.
If any Indian  could have altered Richardson's sharp  distinctions between civili­ zation and savagism, it would have been Tecumseh.  Richardson's respect and  ad­ miration  for  the  Shawnee  chief is reiterated  throughout much  of  his  work.  In Eight Years in Canada, he recalls fighting by the side of Tecumseh  in  the Battle of Moraviantown and remarks on the imposing physical appearance of  the chief­ tain on that  occasion:

Not an hour before he fell, he had passed along our line in the elegant deer-skin frock, fringed, and ornamented with the stained quills of the porcupine, which he usually wore, and which, on this occasion, surmounted a shirt of snowy whiteness. In addition to this, he wore a plume of white ostrich feathers.10

In  The   Canadian  Brothers, Richardson   returns  to  his  treasured   memories  of
Tecumseh  shaking him by the hand  before the start  of this battle, and in his War of  1812  he reproduces  the speech delivered  by Tecumseh  in  which  he opposed General  Proctor's  decision to retreat  from Amherstburg and  Detroit.
Tecumseh  is consistently described in almost adulatory tones. The only successor to Pontiac  as a leader capable of uniting a number  of diverse Indian  tribes, he is also presented by Richardson as Pontiac's superior. In The  Canadian  Brothers, Tecumseh  is "one  of those daring  spirits that  appear  like meteors, few and  far between,  in  the  horizon of glory and  intelligence,  ... possessed of a  genius  as splendid  in conception, as it was bold in execution." The  qualities  in Tecumseh's

92

RICHARDSON's INDIANS

character  that are most frequently acknowledged are the pervasiveness of his influ­ ence and  the authority  which he commands  among the united  tribes. Just  as the eye of Pontiac  controls the actions of his warriors in Wacousta, Tecumseh in The  Canadian  Brothers supervises the movements of his followers.
Yet in spite of Richardson's obvious admiration  for the Ottawa warrior, Tecum­
seh never emerges as anything  other than  the best of savages. Thus,  he is assigned "a  power of analyzing  motives which has never been surpassed  in savage life";11 his death  is seen as "the  destruction  of all that  was noble and  generous in savage life,"12 and if he possesses some "civilized" virtues, immediate  associations link him with the "savage qualities" of Tamburlaine or Genghis Khan. 13
Even in Tecumseh or The  Warrior  of the West, a narrative poem written  "to rescue the  name  of a  hero from  oblivion,"H  Tecumseh  ultimately  emerges as a savage rather than simply as a man. In the opening canto, after a description of the victory of the Americans over the British in a naval battle at Amherstburg during the  War  of  1812, Richardson  introduces  Tecumseh  with  all the  epithets  of the heroic leader:  "towering  warrior," "godlike form," "monument of strength." Yet as Richardson  sets the scene for the land battle at Amherstburg in the final canto, Tecumseh's  Indians  paint  themselves "half  white, half black," looking "like wild fiends, raging  to  devour,"  and  Tecumseh  emerges as the  embodiment  of satanic savagism:
Amid that scene, like some dark towering fiend, With death-black eyes, and hand all spotted o'er, The fierce Tecumseh on his tall lance lean'd,
Fir'd with much spoil, and drunk with human gore.

Despite Richardson's view that  Tecumseh  represented  the  hope of his people to sustain some kind of independent sovereignty and that  his death  marked  the end of any hope of aboriginal survival in North America, his admiration for the Indian leader  was consistently qualified  by a perspective separating  savage and  civilized orders.
In the first paragraph of Richardson's War  of 1812, he asserts that  "much  has been said and  written in respect to the Red-men of the forest;  but  I do not recol­ lect having ever met with a detail sufficiently accurate  to convey a just idea of the character  of these people."15  The crucial obstacle to Richardson's answering of this problem lies not in the absence of sufficient detail but rather  in basic assumptions regarding  savagism  and  civilization.  In  "A  Trip  to  Walpole  Island  and  Port Sarnia," Richardson  praises the "native  dignity and  simplicity"16  of the Indians  of this area  in  contrast  to "the  loathsome  hypocrisy  of civilized life."  He  even asserts:

if I could always see them as then presented to my observation, I could willingly pass the remainder of my days among them-a son of nature and subject only to nature's laws.


93

RICHARDSON'S  INDIANS


Emphasis must fall on the first word  of this comment, for  Richardson could dream of  a  return to  primitive bliss, but  his  way  of  seeing the  red  man was  insistently dichotomous in its separation of civilized  and savage worlds.


NOTES

1 The issue was first raised by Derek  Crawley in "Did  Major John Richardson Have Indian Blood?" Canadian Notes and Queries, 9 (June 1972),  4-5. Further circum­ stantial evidence  was presented by Donald Smith  and  David  R. Beasley in Canadian Notes and Queries, 12 (November 1973), 6. In The  Canadian  Don Quixote ( 1977),  Beasley  assumes  Richardson's Indian ancestry but  presents no  further evidence  to support this view.
2  John Richardson, Wacousta  (New  York,  1851),  p. iii. In  his bibliographical study of Richardson's works, William  F. E. Morley  notes the first instance of this omission in  the  1906 edition of W acousta published  by the  Toronto  Historical Publishing Company.
8  John Richardson, Eight Years In Canada  (Montreal, 1847),  p. 161.
4   Paul  Wallace, "Cooper's Indians," New York  History, 25 (October 1954),  423-46.
5  John Richardson, Wau-Nan-Gee  or The  Massacre At Chicago  (New  York,  1852),
p. 8o.
6  Roy  Harvey Pearce, Savagism and Civilization   (Baltimore, 1965),  p. 199.
7  John Richardson, Wacousta  (New  York,  1851),  p. 125. All subsequent references are  to this revised edition.
8  Twenty years after  the publication of W acousta, the same pattern recurs  in Richard­ son's   treatment  of  the  relationship  between   Ampata  and   Major   Mordaunt in "Ampata! A Tale  of Lake George."
9 It is presumably this chapter that  Richardson sent to the King  of England, request­ ing  permission   to  dedicate the  novel  to  his  Majesty.  Normally the  king  did  not accept the  dedication of novels but  Richardson was proud  to report  that  his book, "from its historical character, was deemed  of sufficient  importance  not  to  be con­ founded with  mere  works  of  fiction."  John Richardson, The  Canadian   Brothers (Montreal, 1840),  p. x. All subsequent references are  to this edition.
10  Richardson, Eight Years In Canada, p. 130.
11  Richardson, The  Canadian Brothers, p. 62.
12  John Richardson, War of 1812 (Brockville,  Ont., 1842),  p. 125.
13  Richardson, The  Canadian Brothers, p. 173.
14  John Richardson, Tecumseh  or The  Warrior  of the West  (London, 1828),  p.v.
15  Richardson, War of 1812, p.  1.
16  John Richardson, "A  Trip to  Walpole Island  and   Port   Sarnia," The   Literary
Garland, 7, n.s. (January 1849), p. 2 1.







94


NEGLECTED  PINE BLASTERS




Ramsay Cook






NEARLY TWENTY  YEARS AGO  F. R. Soott and  A.  J. M. Smith  published the first edition of The  Blasted Pine. In  doing so they provided, in addition  to amusement, convincing evidence of a vigorous Canadian tradition
of social satire. They spread their net widely in their search for satire, invective and disrespectful verse, and  hauled in a bountiful catch. Nevertheless two writers, now nearly forgotten, who surely deserve to be considered as an important part of that tradition,  escaped  the  net. These  two satirists, T.  Phillips  Thompson  and  John Wilson Bengough  belong  to the second of the two classes into  which  Scott  and Smith separated satirists:  "the romantic or revolutionary"  (the first being "classical or conservative") .
Much  of the  best work of Thompson  and  Bengough was  produced  during  a period of profound social tension in Canadian  society. During  the late 188o's and early 18go's the country began to undergo the painful transformation from a pre­ industrial  to an industrial  society. Some of those growing pains were reflected in testimony to the Royal Commission  on the Relations of Labor and  Capital which reported   in  188g.1   The   period  was  one  of  economic  depression,  monopolistic growth,  working class slums, agrarian  discontent and  labour  strife. It was also a time during  which there was a good deal more questioning of the established veri­ ties of religion and  society in  Canada  than  has yet been  analysed  by historians. Thompson  and Bengough were only two of a fairly numerous group of social critics and  reformers who made  their  dissenting voices heard  during  a decade when, as one  of Sara  Jeannette Duncan's  characters  remarked  sardonically  in  A  Social Departure  ( 1893) : "Life amounts to very little in this age if one cannot  institute a reform of some sort, and  we were glad of the opportunity to identify ourselves with  the spirit  of the  times. We were thankful,  too, that  we had  thought  of a reform before they were all used up by more enterprising  persons, which seems to be a contingency not very remote."
J. W. Bengough is the  better  known of these two writers, for his brilliant  car­
toons have often  been reprinted  to illustrate the events of Canadian political life


95

NEGLECTED PINE BLASTERS

during  the  age  of  Sir  John  Macdonald.   His  Caricature   History  of Canadian Politics is a classic of Canadian political satire  and  cartooning  and  has recently been  reissued in  an  abridged  edition.  Yet Bengough  the  reformer,  the  prohibi­ tionist, proponent  of woman's suffrage and  single tax  missionary  remains  in the shade. The  pages of Grip, a weekly magazine  of humour  and satire  published in Toronto  between 1873 and 1894, are filled with puns, poems and short stories as well as with cartoons, all designed to deflate the  pretentiousness  of Canadians in every walk of life-politicians, businessmen, clerics and not least of all the literati. In doing so Bengough hoped not merely to make his readers laugh but also to prod them  into  accepting  some  of  the  panaceas  he  believed  would  create  a  better Canada.
In these efforts Bengough was often assisted by another  dissenting Toronto journalist, T. Phillips Thompson. 2   Thompson  was British born  but spent  nearly all of his adult  life in Canada,  except for a brief period of residence in the United States in the 187o's. Like Bengough he had only a modest education,  but his intelligence,  wit, and  capacity  for  work knew  no limits.  His  journalism,  which ranged  from  detailed  investigations of industrial   conditions  to  broad  slapstick, appeared  in a wide variety of publications in Canada, the United States and Great Britain. His natural  radicalism evolved through several phases from Henry George's "single tax,"  Bellamyite socialism to an eventual  resting  place somewhat  akin  to Marxism, though  no form of orthodoxy ever sat well with him. The  high point of his career  spanned  the 188o's  and  18go's  during  which  time  he was associated with  the Knights  of Labor.  In  those same  years he  published  his only full-scale statement  of his social  philosophy, The  Politics of Labor  ( 1887). In  the  early nineties he briefly edited his own newspaper The  Labor Advocate and later assisted Bengough at  Grip.  His prose was clear and  sharp,  his ear  for  rhyme good and, when  dealing  with social and  political topics, he could  express passionate  anger and  powerful  rhetoric.  Like Bengough  he  rarely  took  himself  too  seriously or lapsed  into  excessive moralism.  Unlike  Bengough,  whose  Christian   reformism stopped short of any fundamental  attack on Canada's developing capitalist system, Thompson  believed that "justice  and  not charity  is what  is needed and  that  it is the process of getting and  not that of giving money to which attention  should  be directed."3 Yet despite some political differences, Thompson  and Bengough shared an ability to translate into satire their dissatisfaction with the established order. Together  they were a raucous pair of voices poking fun, often hurling derision, at the political, economic, religious and cultural orthodoxies of late Victorian  Canada.
Some of their verses deserve to be better  remembered  than  they are since most are  buried  in the  pages of Grip and  some in  even  more  obscure  places. I  have gathered  a small selection of these verses, those  which  are  among  the  best and which express the range of the social concerns of these two satirists. The  first four poems, with one exception, are signed by Thompson. The  unsigned  verses, "The

g6

NEGLECTED PINE BLASTERS


Monopolist," came,  I suspect,  from  his pen  also. In  any  event  it seemed  worth including if only because  it so nicely anticipates B. K. Sandwell's lines:

Toronto has no social classes­ Only the Masseys and the masses.

The other  three  poems  all  come  from  Grip and  were  probably written   by  Ben­ gough.  Though three  are  signed  by other  names,  that  should  not  be  taken too seriously for Bengough constantly invented  new pseudonyms for himself.  (He  even drew  cartoons under two names -J. W. Bengough  and  L. Cote.)
On  the  whole  the  poems  are self-explanatory for anyone with  even  a nodding acquaintance with  Canadian history.  Perhaps only  the  name  of  Colonel  R. G. Ingersoll  needs  a  comment. He  was  a  leading   U.S.  exponent of  atheism, and occasionally  appeared on  Canadian  platforms. Thompson himself  was  a  Theo­ sophist,  and  was deeply interested in religious questions  as well as in developments in  the  United States. It would  be unnecessarily  gilding  the  lily to  remark   upon  the  contemporary significance of the  final two poems.

NOTES

1 Greg Kealey, Canada Investigates Industrialism (Toronto, I973).
2  See Jay Atherton, "Introduction" to T. Phillips Thompson,  The Politics  of Labor (Toronto, 1975), pp. viii-xxiv; Russell Hahn,  "Brainworkers  and  the  Knights  of Labor:  E. E. Sheppard, Phillips Thompson  and  the Toronto News,  I883-1887," in Gregory S. Kealey and  Peter  Warrian,  Essays in  Canadian Working Class History (Toronto, I976),  pp.  35-57; Ramsay  Cook, "The   Professor  and  the  Prophet  of Unrest,"  Transactions of the  Royal  Society  of Canada, Series 4, Vol.  I3  (I975), pp. 227-50.
8 Labor  Advocate, I,  I  (December 5, I 890).


MR. SHYLOCK IN HIS DEFENCE

Sell you out?  why, of course, For the payment is due;
No, I've  no remorse
For my treatment  of you.
Pack! Travel! Dig out! for  the  bailiff
Is here, and  the purchasers  too.

"A  hard  bargain  I made
When  I sold you the  place, And  the terms of the trade
Would  old Shylock disgrace!
Cent  per cent at  the least on my outlay!" Well, how does that  alter  the case?

97

NEGLECTED PINE BLASTERS

"Kept you slaving  for years
For  mere  clothing and  bread, See your children in tears
And  your  wife almost  dead,"
The old story-I know it by heart-
Stop-I've got none -I know  it by head.

Now listen:-You've  had
The  full swing of your  jaw, Called  me everything bad.
You feel better? haw! haw!
First  and  last, let me tell you I claim
Nothing more  than  my rights  by the  law.

When  I  throw  you outdoors
And sell off your last cow,
'Tis  the  writ  that  empowers
And  the  courts  that  allow;
What? "Law isn't  justice."  Indeed, and
Why  ain't it, and  wherefore and  how?

Why,  you  block-head, you fool, You ineffable  ass-
'Tis  the  people  who  rule­ Not a  privileged  class-
'Tis  you and  your  neighbors  who  vote
For  the  laws which  our  law-makers  pass.

You've  a vote and  a voice
When  election  comes  round,
'Tis  the men of your choice
Who  with  power  are  crowned;
They  are  just as you want  them  and  make  them, And suit you right  down  to the  ground.

"They don't?" Then the blame
Rests with you every bit; You've  the  power  all the same
To  choose  whom  you see fit.
Did  you stand  for  good laws-equal  rights?
No you  just voted  "Tory" or  "Grit".

You're a fool for your  pains, Like the rest of your class,

g8

NEGLECTED PINE BLASTERS


While   the  toiler  remains
Still  a party-led ass;
He  must  carry  the  burden  for idlers
And feed on more thistles than  grass.

So clear  out  with  you-go!
Naught care  I for your  grief, What to do you don't know?
Why,  turn  beggar  or thief,
Or  go to your  Grits  or your  Tories
And  ask them  to give you relief.

Phillips Thompson

Grip, 32,  no. 815  (January 19, 18Bg), p. 37·




SWJISHBUCKLER DENISON

Piff! Paff!  Pouff!  Tara para  poum! I am  ze general  Bourn!  Bourn!
-Grand Duchess

Swashbuckler Denison  rose at the  board; He  laid  his hand  on the hilt of his sword, (Poetical licence) , and  loud  he swore
That his fighting men would  shed seas of gore
In  many  a battle and  many  a raid,
Ere  Canada should  with  the  Yankees  trade!"

With  many  a pompous pot-valiant brag
Of "loyalty" to the "good  old flag",
He  curled  his moustache and  pawed  the  air, As he execrated the Yankees  there.
Had  the U.S.  army been  anywhere near,
The bravest  had  trembled with  abject  fear.

Oh,  he is a terrible, terrible  man!
This  martial chief  of the  Denison  clan;
"He was nursed  in a buckler  and  fed with  a blade," And  war  since  his boyhood  has  been his trade!
He reckons  his victories  up by the score,
And  quenches his thirst  with  his enemies'  gore!


99

NEGLECTED PINE BLASTERS

Rings  the world  with  this hero's  fame? Do  the Yankee  children dread his name, And  cower and  quake  if perchance is said By nurse or mother that  word  of dread?
Is his prowess written  in history's  page,
With  the mighty  deeds of the  present age?

Pshaw!  Swashbuckler Denison  ne'er  has stood Where  the field  was reddened with  hostile  blood! He  conquers  foes whom  he  never  saw,
With  the big "prave 'orts" of his mighty  jaw!
No spurs were ever obtained in fight
By this swaggering,  blustering carpet-knight.

Swashbuckler Denison -soak  your  head! Though ancient Pistol is long since dead, In  your braggart speeches we seem  to hear The voice of that  revenue-patriot near.
"Fighting men" -Bah! Put  your  brains  to soak! Such  rant's too stale  to be even  a  joke.

Phillips Thompson
Grip, 30, no.  ll (January 14, 1888), p. 6.



fiLWJIYS WITH YOU

"The poor ye have  always  with  you." What  a true  and  consoling  verse!
It is so ordained from  the outset
It is part  of the primal  curse.
God  wills that  some should  be wealthy, And  others  their  lot endure,
And learn  to suffer in patience,
For  they were meant  to be poor!

The  preacher put  it so plainly
In his sermon  last Sunday night, His  talent  for exegesis
Never showed  him in a better light. These  Socialist  agitators
Who are kicking against the rod, Are  trying  to war  with  Nature
And  combat the  will of God.


100

NEGLECTED PINE  BLASTERS


"The poor  ye have  always with you." It is part of God's  gracious  plan
To  show forth his wisdom and  justice, And  humble the  pride  of man.
We must  banish  all vain  delusions,
And  meekly  accept  what's  given. What's earthly dross? If we bear  the cross
We shall  get our  reward  in Heaven.

Now  that's what  I call sound  preaching, Such  talk  goes right  to the  point.
When  infidel  Socialist  doctrines
Are putting things  out of joint. But  I fear  that  Dr. Sleeker
Has  another church in view: "A wider  sphere of influence,"
And  a larger  salary,  too.

I reckon  we'll  have  to see him, And  go one  better  to keep
This faithful shepherd from  leaving
To  the  wolves his straying sheep.
He'll  stay if we put  up a grand  new church
And  give  him more  "earthly dross".
Well, the  hands at  the  mill shall  foot  the  bill, I cannot afford  the loss.

They can  stand a cut in wages, Say another ten  percent.
And  those  tenants of mine  in the corner block
Must  pay me an  increased  rent. "The poor  ye always have with you."
Makes my duty  as plain  as day, What God  ordains is not  for  us
Rebelliously to gainsay.

I should  be an  unfaithful steward
Of  riches  which  God  has given, Did  I fail  to garner the golden  store
And  hold  it in trust  for Heaven,
I give to the Church and  mission schemes
Fully  ten  percent or more,
And  by charity organization strive
To succor  the starving poor.


IOI

NEGLECTED PINE BLASTERS

The  girls in the mill they tell me
Will frequently go astray.
I can  only afford  to pay them
About  forty  cents  a day.
There are plenty  to work for  that  figure.
And were I to give them  more, We  never could  pay the dividend
We always paid  before.

But a Magdalen Asylum
Has  been founded by my aid
And  soon to the topmost  storey
'Twill  be crowded I'm  afraid,
For  the poor  we have  always  with  us
Ah! sad that  such  things  must  be, But  I'm  no infidel scoffer to scout
The  justice of God's  decree.

Phillips  Thompson

The  Labor Aduocate, 1, no.  1   (December 5,  tBgo), p. 5·




THE MONOPOLIST

I came  to a works at a railway  side,
A half a mile long and  nearly  as wide,
With  millions of lumber  and  an  army  of men, Toiling at furnace, hammer and  pen.
"What a most magnificent plant," I cried;
And  a man  with  a hump  on  his back  replied: "It's Massey's"

I entered a hall so grand  and  gay,
To  witness a concert, the  best of the  day
Presented to people,  the rich  of the  land,
In a palace supposed  for  the laboring hands. "A  monstrous  edifice  this,"  I sighed;
And a man  with  a diamond ring  replied, "It's Massey's"

As I passed by a dairy  farm,
With  cattle  stocked,  sleek as a charm, And  equipment the  best, it's  hard to beat,

102

NEGLECTED PINE BLASTERS


Yes, even  the  King's  could  scarce  compare, "What an  unconceivable place," I cried
And  a man  with  a pail  replied, "It's Massey's"

I stopped at  the door of the city church
Where  sinner  and  saint  the truth go to search, And  wisdom  from  above  is imparted
To  the  meek  and  humble  hearted; I asked  for a seat  unoccupied
And  a man  with  a plug in his hand  replied, "It's Massey's"

I went  to the only place left, I'll  take
A chance in the  boat on the  brimstone lake; Or  perhaps I may be allowed  to sit
On  the griddled floor of the fathomless pit. But a leering  lout  with  horns on his face
Cried  out  as he forked  me off the place, "It's  Massey's"

The  Toiler, 4, no. 8  (January 29, 1904), p.  1.




THE POLITICIJIN (After Hudibras)

Once  wishing  to improve  the State, I stood  forth as a candidate,
To  profit  all was my intent,
When  first returned to Parliament,
And  being  filled  with  thoughts sublime, I chose  the  Independent line.

In Ottawa when  I arrived,
I watched how  hard  each  party  strived, Into the  public  to instill,
They  were  the men  to fill the bill, And  would  the  opposing  side decry, Charging them  with  hypocrisy.

Blake would  arise with  pompous  song, And  impute evil to Sir John,
Sir  John would  answer,  "Never snake,

NEGLECTED PINE BLASTERS

Hid  in the grass," came  up to Blake,
In  turn  their  followers smile and  frown, As a see-saw goes up and  down.

Blake anything he has to say, Can put  in such  a pungent way, If you believed  one half  he said,
You'd  think  before  you went  to  bed, "From rosy morn,  to dewy eve,"
Sir  John's idea  was  to deceive.

Sir John  with  sword  of keenest  wit, "Sans  merci", scarifies the Grit­ Will almost make it plain  to you, They're wrong  in everything they do, Such  wily talent  could  I borrow,
I'd  start  in life as young "To-morrow!"

Young  politicians on each  side, Men  wiser than  themselves  deride, And  waste  the  hours  for  debate, Their small  ideas  to propagate,
Then thinking they have saved  the Nation, Pleased, they adjourn for irrigation.

When  I commenced my maiden speech, Tory, and  Grit,  I tried  to teach,
That sneers  at  what  each  other  meant,
Would  ne'er  improve  the Government, But if they hand  in hand  would  go,
The country'd get a better  show.

But  being to each  side too bold I soon was left out  in the cold, For  party  spirit  put  on shelf Nobody  would  get any pelf,
And  when  there  are  no signs of booty, How  can a Statesman do his duty?

He  knows that  each  constituent  wishes, To  have  his share  of loaves and  fishes, If he gives neither fish nor  bread, They'll choose another in his stead,

NEGLECTED PINE BLASTERS

So tries to secure  for each a crumb, Never  forgetting number One.

A.K.T.

Grip, 25, no. 4  (July  25, r885).







PREPJIRING FOR THE ROYJIL SOCIETY

The Royal  Society  shortly  will hold
Its  annual meeting, as we have  been  told; And  as I'm  a member, it's time  to prepare
Of  the  honor and  glory to claim  a due  share.

I'm  down  for  a paper-a paper  on what?
Two  ideas  on  the  subject are  more  than  I've  got. But  who  much  attention on such  things  bestows? At  the  Royal  Society  everything goes.

I've  surely  got something around lying loose That on such  an  occasion  may come into  use. Some  juvenile  essay, some truck  filed away,
For  which  no live journal or monthly  would  pay.

I'll  rummage my pigeonholes, hunt  high  and  low,
To find  some  kind  of paper-I've plenty,  I  know­ On  some  loyal and  splurgy  and  broad  sort of theme,  Rhetorical, vapid  and  vague  as a dream.

"The future of Canada"-college oration.
Well,  that's rather stale.  "The Canadian Nation" - That's a  trifle  more  modern-perhaps it will do, With  a little  retouching from  fresh points  of view.

It went  all  the  rounds  of the magazine press, And  one  after another refused  the  MS.
I put  it away,  for one  never can  tell
When such  things  may  come  handy-'twill do  very  well.


105

NEGLECTED PINE BLASTERS

But stay-here's another-that's better for sure; "The Growth of Canadian Literature."
It's  a little  bit fresher,  and  so I won't need
To  change  it at all-it's already to  read.

That too was rejected  by each  magazine, I'd  really forgotten it ever  had  been.
But  now will be printed at  last  when  I've  read  it, Though it brings in no money,  'twill add  to my credit.

In she goes-so  that's settled, my mind  is now  free, My  task is accomplished, and  shortly  you'll  see
That I'll  loom fairly  large  at  the  meeting below, While  in  the  "Transactions" my paper will go.

Grip, 36, no. 22 (May  30,  rBgr ), p. 348.



MJINUFJICTURING NJITIVE LITERJITURE

Jiggins

I am a literary man,
I'm  anxious  all should  know  it. Can  I write  verse? I think  I can -
Why, then,  I'll  be a  poet. I'll  get me out a book of rhymes
Like this-or even  neater, On  subjects suited  to the  times,
In  easy flowing metre.
I rather think  I know  the  trick, The  patriotic racket,
I'll  plaster  "loyalty" on thick, There's no  one  dare  attack it.
I'll  work Canadian spirit  in,
'Twill  be appreciated,
And  though  the thing's  a trifle  thin, My fame  will be created.

Biggins

I want  to write an article
Over  my well-known  name.

106

NEGLECTED PINE BLASTERS


Not  that  I care  a particle
For  literary fame;
But literature must  be sustained
In this our  native  land;
Even  though no reward  be gained, My  task  is truly  grand.
Whatever shall  I write  about?
I really  do  not  know.
Oh,  yes! There's Jiggins'  book just out, It's  got to have a show.
It's  overpowering rot,  that's sure,
As every  critic  knows,
But  then  it's  native  literature, And  what's Canadian goes.

Higgins

A paper I have  got to do
For  Scribbler's Magazine.
Such  opportunities are  few, And  also  far  between.
"Canadian Literature" 's my theme
I've  done  the  poets all,
And  Goldwin Smith, whose self esteem
Is  very far  from  small.
There's Biggins, who has asked me to
Work  in his grand  critique
Of  Jiggins  and  his volume  new,
'Twas published in  the Week.
"Exhaustive" -yes, to put  it plain, It makes  me very tired.
I'll  say that  "Biggin's  easy vein
Is very much  admired."


Stiggins

My lecture on "Canadian Thought" Is hardly yet complete.
I'll  mention Higgins-yes, I ought, He'll  never  fail  to treat.
We  had  a beer  last afternoon, And  then  he lent  me two.
Said  he, "You're going to lecture soon; Be sure  that  when  you do,
You say a word  or two for me,


107

NEGLECTED PINE BLASTERS

For if you scratch  my back, I'll do the same for you, d'ye see?"
He knows the ropes, does Jack. He lent me Scribbler's Magazine,
It's awfully stupid stuff,
But lest he think I'm  acting mean, I'll give the usual guff.

And thus a literary name
Is very often made,
By working the log-rolling game
Among the aspirants for fame. "There's  tricks in every trade."

Grip, 33, no. 9 (August  31, 188g), p. 134·














Deep-Tap Tree	Alexander  Hutchison


"Sheer  delight in the just right word ... beautifully   found and  per­ fectly placed "-George Starbuck.  "Expressing his commitment to
an 'austerity  simple as water,' Hutchison  utilizes the rich tex­ ture of his Anglo-Scotch vocabu­
lary to evoke  the stark setting of
his native land. He exhorts  his   4"­
reader to intuit  'tongues/prece-""
dent/original,' while also prov--;
 TO FREYJA

i teto clear up the obsc¥"- 	anct,fristled field
t1es	Library Journal. 	•	his my chastity sold to dwarfs
4
paper, $3.50	. 	
""""'!!a	v
Straddled-in-blood

The University of Massachusetts Press
Box 429, Amherst, MA 01002



108
 keep me from the wounds of distance









NEW BRUNSWICK CLASSIC

EUGENE   [DOUGLAS S. HUYGHUEj, Argimou. A Legend  of The  Micmac. Halifax,  1847;  re­ printed   by the  Ralph   Pickard   Bell  Library,  Mount   Allison  University,  Sackville,  N.B.,
$s.oo  paper.

IN THE WAKE OF CONSIDERABLE scholarly activity  in the  regional  history of Atlantic Canada, the  last  few  years  have  seen  a growing interest in  the  literature of  the Maritimes  and    Newfoundland    beyond the   usual   concern  with   such   "nation­ alized" figures as Cannan, Roberts, Pratt, and   Buckler.  Most  of   those  involved   in these  regional   literary  studies   are   from Atlantic Canada, and  (not  surprisingly) they  tend  to approach  their  literature as part   of   a   distinct   social   and   cultural reality  east  of  Quebec that   emerged  in the  late eighteenth century and  has con­ tinued in spite  of rumours to the contrary since  r867.
This   strong sense  of  regional   literary and  cultural  distinctiveness has  recently become  more  apparent in scholarly writ­ ing  on  the  authors of  Atlantic  Canada and  their  works. This  feellng marked the special  1976 issue of  Canadian Literature on  Maritime  writers  (Nos.  68-69)   and,  almost   at   the  same   time   (May  1976), manifested  itself  clearly  in  the  proceed­ ings  of  the  first  Colloquium on  Atlantic Canada  Literature held  at   UNB- Saint  John, sponsored by  the  Atlantic Canada Institute. The record   of  that  conference was published in the Atlantic Provinces Literature Colloquium Papers by the ACI in early  1977  (write: Secretary, ACI, rr
 Armshore     Drive,     Halifax   B3N r M4). Now,  with  the  reprint of  Douglas  Huy­ ghue's   Argimou,  the  first  of  a  projected "Maritimes  Literature   Reprint   Series,"  the  R.  P. Bell Library  of  Mount Allison University   has  contributed   significantly to  the  growing  momentum in  the  study  of the literature  of Atlantic Canada.
Mount  Allison's   involvement  in   re­ printing  Maritime  texts   is  a   laudable response to the lack of available materials necessary   for   developing the   study   of Atlantic Canada literature in  the  class­ room.  It is  to  be  hoped  that  they  will continue (perhaps even  accelerate)  their production   of   such   volumes,    for   the greatest   weakness  of  these  works  is  that  they  cannot   stand  alone.  They need   to be viewed in the social  and  cultural con­ text  from  which  they  grew  and   in  the company of  other  works of the same time and  place.
At  present,  it  is very difficult  to  place a   work   like   Argimou    (first   published serially  in  r84r)  in  an  appropriate  con­ text  - literary,  social,   cultural  - one which   would    draw    out   its   particular strengths and  provide  an  insight into  its raison   d'etre.  We  simply   do   not   have enough   information   about   the   literary and   cultural  environment  of  the   Mari­ times  in   the   184o's,  and   there   are   no other  Maritime  texts  from   that   period  readily  available. This   creates  an   irre­ sistible temptation to set the work against what  we know of British and  American literary culture of the period. Yet, in spite of their apparent compatibility, these contexts introduce sets of literary and cultural expectations which  are essentially alien  to the  work  in  question and  make unfair demands upon  it,  expectations which   more  often   than  not  obscure   or distort  our appreciation of the peculiar dynamics of the  work.
To  some extent, Gwen  Davies  yields to this temptation in her  generally helpful introduction  to  the  text.  She  begins  by

109

BOOKS IN REVIEW



relating Argimou  to  the  development of the  "Indian  captivity tale" in  North American fiction.  No doubt the novel (nominally at  least)  is related  to this tra­ dition. Set at  the  time of the  fall of  Fort Beausejour  ( I755), the  story  deals  with the  efforts  of a  young  Englishman  and  a young  Micmac chief  to track  and eventu­ ally   rescue    their    respective   lady-loves from  a band  of Malecites. Yet, in spite of its  narrative pattern and  the  publication of some other  "Indian tales" at this time, there   is  really  little  evidence  to  suggest that   the  writing of   Argimou  was  gener­  ated   or   fundamentally  shaped   by   the author's  consciousness  of a  specific  liter­ ary  tradition.
To  probe  the  peculiar  character of the book,  one  must   look  beyond  the  narra­ tive   pattern  to   the   dynamic   elements  which  shape  the  spirit  of the  fiction  and which   underlie  its   conception.  In   this regard, there   were  two  intellectual and  emotional  preoccupations of  the  period which   seem   pertinent  here.   The  first (which  Gwen   Davies  discusses  to  some extent)    was   a   deeply   sympathetic,  if sometimes   idealized,   response    to    the plight  of the Indian, a response  based on a  profound respect  for  the  Indian's fun­ damental  humanity. I  suspect  this  view was  rooted   in   the  complex   moral   and  religious  vision  of  the  age  which  insinu­  ated   a  governing sense  of   decency   and Christian  responsibility into all aspects  of human activity. The most  tangible  effect of this moral  sensitivity  on  the  prevailing attitudes toward the  Indian can  be found in   the   humanitarian   work   and   sympa­  thetic   writings   of  men   such   as  Moses Henry  Perley,   Indian   Commissioner  in New  Brunswick, and Silas Tertius Rand, Baptist    Missionary   to   the   Micmacs  in Nova  Scotia. Both  were  Huyghue's con­ temporaries and   were  among  the  edu­  cated,  enlightened social  leaders  of  that generation. In  this  context,   the  sympa­ thetic tone  of Argimou  is not  an  isolated

I 10
 or  novel  phenomenon, but  reflects  a  hu­ manism that  lay at  the heart  of the intel­ lectual  and  moral  vitality  of that society.
However, the  Indian was not  only  the focus  for  a  certain moral  sensibility; he was an  integral part of the  native  history of the  "country" and  as such  was part  of another  significant preoccupation of  the period. I refer  to the growing  sense of provincial and  regional identity which emerged co-incident  with  American  na­ tionalism, but  was  based  on  a  perceived social  and   political maturity  which  cul­ minated in  the  movement for  responsible  government. This sense  of  maturity was in  part  articulated  by counterpoising the settled  present with the unstable  past,  the period  of civility  with  the  period  of wil­ derness.  We can see elements of this pro­  cess as  early  as  Goldsmith's The   Rising Village   ( I825)  and  find  it  explicitly  ex­ pressed  in  Fisher's The   Lay  of the  Wil­ derness   ( I833).  For   Maritimers   (long  before Longfellow's Evangeline), the  his­ tory  of   Acadia in   the   late   seventeenth and  early   eighteenth  centuries was  the stuff  of their  national myth.  The dangers to  life  and   limb   and   the   instability  of French-Indian-English relations were dis­ tanced and  placed   in  perspective in  the present  through forms  of literary  roman­ ticism.  This romanticized   vision  of  the past  gave  special,  unique meaning to  the now-settled terrain; it was a kind of testa­  ment   to   the   duration   of   human  pres­ ence  in  the  area; but  most  of all, it  pre­  sented  a heritage  which  could  be appre­ ciated in  literary  form  because  it  would not  and  could  not  ever  return. The key implication was that time and  the society had  grown beyond  this. Thus, the roman­ tic   past   became  an   affirmation  of  the mature  present, and   it  turns   up  in  this role  again and  again in  Maritime litera­ tury  of  the  nineteenth century.
Argimou, then,   is  not  a literary  ano­ maly  or  accident. It is very much  a  part  of the  intellectual, emotional, moral,  and

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ontological preoccupations of Maritime Canada in  the  184o's.  But  it  is difficult to  see  it  in  this  context, to  see  how  it gives  insight  into  the  dynamic human expectations of  its  time,   because  Cana­ dian   literary critics  and  historians have explored so little  of the world  from  which it draws  its life. As a  result,  it is only too easy  for   us  to  underestimate  its  value. Clearly, it  is  not a British   or  even  an American  classic,  but  it  may  be  a  New Brunswick  classic, which  makes  it  rather special  for  those  interested  in  Maritime literature.
TOM VINCENT



FOUND HISTORY

RICK  SALUTIN  and  THEATRE  PASSE  MURAILLE,
1837:   William  Lyon   Mackenzie  and   the
Canadian  Revolution. Toronto:  James Lori­
mer,  $7.95  paper, $14.00  cloth.
1837: William  Lyon  Mackenzie  and the Canadian   Revolution, by  Rick   Salutin and    Theatre  Passe   Muraille,   is   pre­ sented   as  "a  history" and  "a  play."  It's  also a process. The bulk of the book, 182 pages,  is Salutin's  revisionist  account of the  1837  uprising,  significantly  called   a "revolution." Here,  and   in  the  play,  he dismisses the "myth" of a  band  of pitch­ fork-carrying  yokels, led  by the  fiery but incompetent  Mackenzie, in  comic  flight from  the  equally  comic  Bond  Head, the whole  incident forming a Monty Python­ esque  curtain  raiser   which   "made  pos­ sible responsible government ... the goal that  was not  achieved by force  was then achieved   peacefully."  Rather,  he   says, "Independence is  the  goal  in  the  play, and   the  overthrow of  political  control. The play ends  tragically, with  a hanging, and  the  implication that the  goal  of the revolt-independence-has  still  to  be won,  in  our  own  time."
 Salutin's view of the  uprisings  as a movement by the common people, the farmers,  to throw  off economic inferiority imposed  by  their   colonial   position,  and his continual connections to  contempor­ ary economic  and  political  issues, set him off from  "traditional" historians. His ver­ sion  of  history  is  always  highly  partisan (he's  notably  weak  on  the  failure  of the rebellion) ,  often   simplistic,   generalized, and   poorly   documented   (was   Robert Gourlay  really exiled,  as Salutin  implies, just because he documented farmers' grievances?) .
But Salutin  isn't  writing for  historians.
He's  writing  for ordinary Canadians, and this means  "starting very far  back:  other countries may  have  to  relive  or  reinter­ pret  their  past,  but  they  know  they  have a  past.  In  Quebec they  may  hate  it, but it's  sure  as hell  there. English  Canadians
... must be convinced there  is a past that is their  own."
Even   while  disagreeing  with   Salutin, I found  his opening chapter, on the economic/social  conditions  which   pro­ duced   the  uprisings, far  more  clear  and useful  than  my  constitution-and-politics­ oriented  history  texts.  His  oversimplifica­ tions  made   me  go  to  more   "scholarly" sources  to find  another version  of "what really happened." This  is one of Salutin's successes:  making Canadian  history  im­ portant  enough   that   you  will   want  to seek out more information. Moreover, the focus  on  social  conditions,  documented by  plenty   of   effective   quotations  from contemporary sources, and  packaged with lots of  illustrations, accomplishes two im­ portant things.  It makes  the  essay  inter­ esting; and  it  gives  the  reader  not  facts to  memorize,  but  a  sense  of  shared   hu­  man   experience.  1837's   real   revisionist view of Canadian  history  is not  political  but emotional: a new view of that  history as ours, vital  to our  lives today.  Thus the process  begins.

II I

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Salutin's   historical  research    on   the
1837   uprisings   became   the   basis  for   a unique  theatrical  project, in   collabora­ tion  with  Theatre Passe  Muraille, an  ex­ perimental  group    attempting  to   give documentary form to aspects of Canadian life. Salutin  presents an informal diary  of his work  with cast  members  to enter  the spirit  of  1837,  to  live out  their  own  re­ bellion, whether they were walking  down Yonge  Street in  a snowstorm  and  realiz­ ing  in  their   toes  that  "December was  a hell of a time to make a revolution  here," or  lashing  out  against the  colonialism  of contemporary Canadian  theatre.
As the  actors  felt  their  way into  r837, so   their    improvised  expressions   of   its reality    became    1837.   The    play   itself opened in  Toronto in  January 1973;  it was   reworked  for   an   Ontario  tour   in
1974,  and   the  printed version  was  "as­ sembled" after   that tour.  The  collective creation is a  collection   of  sketches: Act I depicts the economic and social frustra­ tions  of the  farmers, Act  II the  rebellion and   its  aftermath,  concluding  with   the execution of  two  leaders :

MATTHEWS:  Sam,  we lost­
LOUNT: No! We haven't  won yet.
The trap  falls. They dangle by the  ropes.
BLACK.

As  a  production, 1837  depends   heavily on  the  effects  created by  blocking,  pac­ ing,  blackouts, mime,  the sheer energy  of the Passe Muraille players, and, of course, audience  response.   As  a   production,  I found  it  extremely  effective. As a script,  it stands up, is more cohesive and  power­ ful  than   I  expected  (especially   the  Ed­  ward  and  Mary  scenes) ; I can  hear  real people  talking. The  process  that  carries  essay into  production into  printed play is flawed,  of course; but  ultimately, I  think it has its desired  effect. Taken as a whole, it  provides a  good  start   at  making   our history  our  own  shared  experience.

SUSAN   WOOD

112
 ANCIENT AND MODERN

w. o.  HARDY,  The  Scarlet  Mantle. Macmillan,
$12.50.
WILLIAM  DOUGLAS FRASER,  Nor'east   for Louis- burfl. Amethyst  Publications, $5.95  paper.
The Scarlet Mantle and Nor'east for Louisburg-two   historical  novels.   But they  are  poles  apart-in  time,  in scope, in size, and  in success. One  is major; one is minor; one ranges  through great  events in  ancient  history; one  concentrates on two  small  conflicts  significant in  the  un­ folding of  Canadian  history,   both   rela­  tively  recent,  both  on what  is now Cana­ dian  soil.
Fraser's work  is, without question, the minor  one.   An   experienced  writer   for radio  and  television,  a news editor and  at one   time  a  merchant seaman, Fraser   is also a  Nova  Scotian and  is obviously  in­ terested in  the  history  of  the  Maritimes. But  Nor'east  for Louisburg is, as far  as I know,  his first novel, and  it centres on the two   famous  sieges  of   Louisburg -the massive    French   fortification  on   Cape  Breton   Island-the   first   in    1745,  the second  in  1758.  The novel  itself  is cast in  the  form  of a  fictional  autobiography, supposed written in  r8oo by an aging Jonathan  Steele,   who   had   served   as  a youth  of eighteen with  the  poorly  trained and  badly  organized New England forces under William Pepperell during the  first attack, and  as a sea captain in command of his own  vessel during the second. The work  as a whole, however,  is weakly structured, the  plot  inconsequential,  un­ convincing, and   at   times  melodramatic, and   the   handling  of   characters  super­ ficial.   Yet   the   dialogue  is  often    well flavoured and   some   of   the   descriptive passages  excellent.
In  short, the  work  will  probably not
have  a wide appeal to the general reader, but  to those  who  have  seen the great  his-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



torical  reconstruction that  has been under way  in  Louisburg since   the I g6o's  this tale contains much  that  may be of special interest to them.  The book itself is well produced and   has  excellent  illustrations
-reproductions of  eighteenth-century engravings and  ten photographs of Louis­ burg  as it is today.
In   contrast, The  Scarlet   Mantle.  A Novel  of Julius  Caesar,  is a monumental work,  massive  in  size, rich  in  detail,  and firm   in   construction.  In   a   preliminary note   the  author  warns   the   reader   that this "is  not  a history," but  in spite  of the denial  the story is firmly  based  on histori­ cal  facts-facts  that   cover  those  com­ plex  years  of  Roman  history  from  54  to
48 B.C.
W. G.  Hardy is, without doubt, a  re­
markable person.  An  experienced  novel­ ist, a distinguished scholar who has writ­ ten  with  authority on  the  civilizations  of Greece  and  Rome, he  was also  professor of  classics  at   the  University  of  Alberta  for  some  forty-four  years  and   he  walks with an easy and  a firm  tread  through the corridors of ancient times.  He  must  have made  his first  bowing  acquaintance  with Caesar  some  seventy   years  ago  and   he clearly   knows  about all  that   there  is  to know about  the career of his chosen  hero. He  draws  freely  and  frequently on  Cae­ sar's   Gallic  Wars   and   Civil  War;  Sue­ tonius's The  Twelve  Caesars; Plutarch's Parallel  Lives;   and  Appian's History   of Rome. He  also  has  read   with  care  such modern works as Ferrero's Life  of Caesar and  Mommsen's History  of Rome. So the basis of his  account of Caesar's meteoric  rise  to  power  is  historical, vivid,  lively, entertaining, and, at  times,  enthralling.
And   here   is  where   fiction   enters   the picture.  Though  much   of  the   work   is given over to descriptions of battles, cam­ paigns,  invasions,  massacres,  destructions of towns  and  villages,  and  debates in the senate  at  Rome, the  whole of the  book is fleshed  out  by the  use of  lively  and  con-
 vincing   dialogue,  most   of   which,   cer­ tainly,  finds  birth in  the  muscular  ima­  gination of  the  author  himself.  Most  of the major  characters are historical figures
-many well known  to even the casual reader of Roman history, some perhaps, somewhat dimly  remembered-Caesar himself,  Crassus,  Pompey,   Cicero,  Clod­ ius,   Fulvia,    Mark  Anthony,   Labienus, Cato,  Vercingetorix, and  Cleopatra. But many  fictional  characters  are  also  intro­ duced   - legionaries,   prostitutes    (low and  high-class),  farmers, publicans, and tradesmen.   High    among    them    stands  Fadius,  first  met  as a legionary, who  ad­  vances  to the  rank  of centurion, and  be­ comes  a   bodyguard  of  Caesar   himself. And  it  is  through  Fulvia's eyes that   we see  the  dynamic  power   of  Caesar   as  a leader  of  men,  and  through his reactions we  also feel  the  brutality and  barbarism of  the age.
The tale starts to unfold with Caesar's second  invasion  of  Britain, moves  to  the long  and  difficult   subjugation of   revolt­ ing Gallic  tribes,  and  ends  with  Caesar's crossing of the  Rubicon, his  final  victory over his ex-friend and arch-rival Pompey, at  Pharsalus, and   the  romantic  meeting between  Caesar  and  Cleopatra in  Egypt.  The  work is not always  easy to read,  but firm  at  the  centre stands  Caesar,  a mili­ tary  genius,  a  man   often   motivated  by high  ideals,  but  also  a man  lusting  after power,  willing to sink to bribery  and duplicity, and  still  finding   time  for  pas­ sionate  love  affairs,   especially  with  Ser­  vilia, the half-sister of Cato and  a woman  of great  political  influence.
All in all  this  is a  brilliant work,  well written by a  most  accomplished scholar, stimulating  and   challenging  to  read.   I came   to  the   end   with   regret,   but   was pleased  to find  on  the  last  page  an  edi­ torial   note  informing me  that   the  final stages of Caesar's life will be unfolded by Dr.  Hardy  in  a continuing  volume  to be entitled The  Bloodied  Toga. Obviously  it

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



can   be  said   (with   apologies  to  Shakes­ peare  and  perhaps to Cleopatra)  that  age has   not   withered  him   nor   has   custom staled  his  rich  variety.  He  is  now  in  his eighty-fourth  year-a   stalwart  scholar  and  a subtle  and  convincing portrayer of the  great  Imperator-Julius Caesar.

S. E.  READ



RADICAL  ORDER

FRANK  R.   SCOTT, Essays  on the  Constitution­ Aspects of Canadian  law  and  politics. Univ. of Toronto Press, $2s.oo, paper  $7.50.

Law  is enforced   by  the  State  because  it  is law; it is not law merely because the State enforces it.

Order the beauty  even of beauty is . , ,

THESE ARE  FRANK  SCOTT's epigraphs to this volume  of selected  essays and  papers first published over  the period  from  1928 to  I97I  during which  he  was a  member of the  Faculty of Law  of McGill  Univer­ sity. Synthesizing the  two great principles of Scott's legal career as shown so lucidly in these  essays, these  two statements (the  first   from    Sir   Frederick    Pollock,   the second  from  Thomas Traheme)  provide  a  fitting  introduction  to  both  tone  and theme  of  this volume.  In  one of his early papers  on  "The  Development of  Cana­ dian  Federalism"  ( I93 I)   Scott  empha­ sizes that  "the  effort  to discover  what  has happened  [to   the   Constitution]  in  the courts,  and  to state  in ordinary language the  developments of these years, must  be made,  because  the ordinary citizen  is just as vitally  concerned in this matter as the lawyer." It is clearly  for  both  that  Scott has written all of these essays despite their publication over  the  years in such  places as   the   Canadian   Bar  Review   and   the Canadian Journal of Economics and Poli­ tical  Science.  The duty  to  speak  clearly and   precisely  of  complex  and,  at  times,
 arcane  issues   rs  never   forgotten.   Tra­ herne's sense  of  the  beauty  of   order   is preserved alongside the  civil  libertarian's insistence   on  human  rights  in  a  society which,  as  Scott  demonstrates  on  numer­ ous  occasions  here,  has  frequently oper­  ated  in violation of them.
It is a combination which  reminds one
of George  Orwell, especially  in a series of four  magnificently argued and courageous essays  ("The Trial of the  Toronto Com­ munists"-1932, "Freedom of  Speech  in Canada"-1933,    "The   Deportation  of Japanese Canadians: An Open Letter to the  Press"- I946, and  "Duplessis v. Je­ hovah"-I947)    in  which   Scott  stresses repeatedly that  Canadian "doublethink" must  be  cast  aside  in order that  we may perceive that  Canada has  not  been  dis­ pensed   from   abuses   of   human  rights.  "The  Canadian  constitution, unlike   the American,  guarantees  neither  personal liberty,  private  property  nor   religion," Scott   reminds us in  the  immediate  con­ text  of  the  trial  and  conviction of  Tim  Buck  for  his political beliefs. Speaking of the  deportation of the Japanese in I 946, Scott  writes:

We  are   all  immigrants  in  Canada,  except the  Indians and   the  Eskimos,  and  no  citi­ zen's  right   can  be greater  than  that  of  the least   protected  group.   Every   Canadian  is attacked  in  his  fundamental  civil  liberties by  this  policy  [of   deportation]. To  find  it
>ponsored  by   a   government  bearing    the
.name   Liberal    and    not    objected    to   by
vigorous   public   protest,   warns  us  how  far our  standards  have  sunk  during   these  past
years,    despite    our   military    victory    over
Nazism.
The   real   problem   we  have   to  solve  in
Canada has  nothing directly  to do with  the
Japanese at  all:   it  is the  problem  of  racial
intolerance.

Sent  to fifty-five Canadian  newspapers on
4 January I 946, this letter  was published in only eleven.  In his comments prefacing this  paper, Scott  notes  that  "Even today Canadians have  no constitutional protec-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



tion  against  the  punishment of exile once the   War   Measures  Act   has   been   pro­ claimed, for by Section  6  (5)  of  that Act anything  done   under  it   shall   not   be deemed   to   be  an   infringement   of  any right  or freedom recognized  by the Cana­ dian  Bill of Rights." There is a "need  for active   civil  liberties  associations  in  this country," Scott  wrote  in  1947;  there  is a need   for   the   Bill  of   Rights  to   be  en­ shrined    in   the    Constitution   as   Scott wrote  in  1947;  there  is a  need  for Cana­ dians  to  be  constantly vigilant  about  the ways  in   which   law   is  enforced  in  this country.   In  "Wade v.   Egan:  A  Case Comment" (I 936)  Scott  describes  a case for false arrest and  imprisonment brought by a  labour leader who  was  arrested  on a charge of sedition. After  detailing a number of irregularities and  injustices in the  proceedings, Scott  quotes  a comment made   in  an   earlier sedition   case  to  the effect   that   more   prosecutions  for  sedi­ tious  words  had  been  made  in  Alberta  in two  years  than   in  England  in  over  one hundred. His  acid  conclusion:  "Perhaps an  ordinary citizen  may  be  permitted to suggest  that   it  would  be  more  useful  if, instead    of   merely   calling   attention  to these   marvellous   Canadian  records    in despotic government, something effective were  done to  put  a  stop  to  them." And in  his  great   essay,  "Freedom  of  Speech in  Canada," Scott   stresses  another  fact equally  obvious  today: "Canadian  news­ papers   for  the  most  part   are  owned  by interests  and  make  their  profits  from  ad­  vertisers   who   are   for  economic  reasons opposed   to  freedom  of  speech   for  radi­ cals."
Scott's  concern with  freedom of speech
and  his  understanding of  life  in  Quebec are fused  in another group of essays likely to be of interest to the general reader. Beginning   with  a  study  of  "Nationalism in  French Canada"  (I 936)   and  includ­ ing "Canada, Quebec, and  Bilingualism" (I 947) ,  "Canada  et   Canada   franc;ais"
 ( I952), and  "Language Rights and  Lan­ guage   Policy  in  Canada"  (I 97 r),  Scott  has  endeavoured  to  present   with  a  wise balance   of  urgency   and   good  sense  the vital  importance of  bilingualism, of Que­ bec,  for   the  survival   of  Canada.  Con­ cluding  his long work as a member of the B. and  B. Commission, he wrote  that  his experience   on   that    Commission   "con­ vinced  me that  an  equal  partnership be­ tween  two cultural  communities in  Can­ ada   was  a   workable   concept.... [but] Whether  Canadians will accept   the  idea  and  bring  it  steadily   into   being  is  their decision.  I  for  one  have  faith   that   they will  accept    the   great   challenge rather than  fall  back  into  obsolete  forms  of  the nation  state."
Realism and goodwill are the qualities Scott invokes in our approach to the "language question." They  are  qualities equally   characteristic  of  his  writing  in these  essays. A  sane  book,  the  summing up  of  a  lifetime's  dedication  to  radical order,  Essays  on   the   Constitution  is  a survey of, a report on, our  constitution as a  nation   as  much   as  on  the   document which   was  our   inception. "Changing a constitution," writes  Scott  in  his  Preface, "confronts a society with  the  most impor­ tant  choices,  for  in  the  constitution will be found  the philosophical principles and  rules  which   largely   determine  the   rela­  tions  of   the  individual  and   of  cultural groups  to  one  another and   to  the  state. If human  rights  and  harmonious relations between  cultures are  forms  of  the  beau­ tiful,  then  the  state  is a work  of  art that  is never  finished." One  would  hope  that  in   the   constitutional  debate   which    is about  to involve  all of us, and  in  English  Canada's   struggle   to    understand   the reality  of  contemporary  Quebec, Scott's words   would   be   listened   to   with   new attention. Winner  of  the  Governor-Gen­ eral's   award    for   non-fiction  for    1977, Essays  on  the  Constitution is  a  book  of considerable importance for our  future, a

I I 5

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



record  of a  voice  which  has  long spoken with courage and  eloquence.

LORRAINE WEIR



THE O'HAGAN  RANGE

HOWARD o'HAGAN,   The  Woman Who   Got  on at   jasper  Station   & Other  Stories. Talon­ books, $4-95·The School-Marm Tree.Talon­ books,  $5·95·
TALONBOOKS    DESERVES  CREDIT  for   do­ ing   a   little   belated  justice   to   Howard O'Hagan's talent. The  Woman Who  Got on  at  Jasper Station  & Other  Stories is not  a  reprint of  the  1963  Alan  Swallow edition; they  have  rearranged  and  reset it,  adding four  stories  and  dropping the longer   piece  "The  School-Marm Tree" from  which  the novel was developed. The  School-Marm Tree  is the  first edition of a  novel  completed  in  the  195o's;  it  in­ cludes  a  sensitive,  lyrical  introduction by P.   K.   Page.   The  two  are   companion volumes,  well  designed   and   graced   by cover  pictures  by the author's wife, Mar­ garet  Peterson.
Readers of The  Woman  will encounter
again  the style which gave Tay  john its appeal, but   they  will  also  discover   the
considerable range  of O'Hagan's  stories.
The first  and   last  selections  are  repre­ sentative. In  "The  Teepee," the  narra­ tor's   clean,   hard   directness   of   assertion  wins the  reader's confidence.  His descrip­  tive  power  derives  partly  from  precision, an impressive  particularity of detail  about  mountain experience, but  more   from  a richness   of   metaphor   which   not   only creates sensory  vividness  but  makes  con­ crete  a  living  response  to  the  mountain country O'Hagan has known  and  clearly loved:

Above,   a  mountain  rose.  It rose  in  ledges and  great hanging cliffs. It thrust itself urgently up  out   of  the  earth and   was  still shaking from   its  shoulders  rock  and   strug-

116
 gling  timber  and   white  cascades  of  water whose   rumble reached me  where I stood.

Such   freedom  of  metaphor  is,  I think, part   of   that   exuberance  in   O'Hagan's style which breaks out in epic catalogues, absolute statements, and  piling  up  of epithet,  and   in  similes   which   seem   to court   incongruity.  Occasionally  the   in­ congruity jars, as when an O'Hagan char­ acter   is  punched  and   "dropped   to  one knee   as   though  he   had   found   a   sud­  den   and   perplexing  sorrow  among  the grasses," but  usually  its nearness  is a posi­ tive  resource,   a  way  of  opening up  un­  expected   reaches   of    perception   while holding them  in  perspective with  a  hint  of  ironic  humour.  Take the  line  in  Tay  John  where  the  snow  falls "like  the  visi­ ble  remorse   of  an  ageing   year,"  or  the moment in  "Teepee" when  the  narrator first meets  the  Metis  woman  he will bed: "She  passed me as though I were a stump and  she a woman  riding on a fateful mission."  Here   is the  half-ironic  sugges­ tion  of  a  depth into  which  the  narrator will venture in  relative  ignorance.
Thematically "The Teepee" is also cen­ tral   to  O'Hagan's  interest in  the  White civilized  mind  encountering the power  of the  wilderness. The  Metis  woman's hus­ band  will not bother to punish  the  narra­ tor  for  his trespass. Then "having shown me  the  contempt of  his strength and  the disdain  of his charity," he disappears into the  willows along  the  river  "as  though  he had  walked down  among the roots, under the faded  grasses, into  the  earth  to which he  was  closer   neighbour  than   I."  The ending, reminiscent of Tay  John, empha­ sizes that  mysterious power  in nature with which    the   mountains  and    the   native people  are  identified. Two cultures have met,  and   the  one  is stronger because  of its  nearness  to  that  power.
The collection  closes with  its title story. "The Woman Who  Got on at Jasper Sta­ tion" narrates in  a minutely  sensual  way

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



an  inconclusive encounter on  a  train  be­
tween  a doctor's wife and  a young sailor:

The sailor's shoulder touched the  woman's. Against her  thigh he  pressed   more  strongly. She   thought  she   felt   its   pulse,  the   blood urgent  beneath  the   cloth.  Lulled  by   the train's motion, they  did  not  speak, they  did not  move,  involved in  a  slow  conspiracy of flesh.

The mountain setting is not incidental; it is  a   macrocosm  of   the   tiny,   universal drama within  the  railway  coach,  the struggle   between   the   wilderness   within and  the  civilized  surface of  the  woman's life. But the focus of attention upon that moment of internal moral  conflict  makes the story entirely  different from "Teepee." The two stories, in effect,  take  the  reader a  good  distance from   the  world  of  T ay John  toward   that   of  The   School-Marm Tree.
The  School-Marm Tree  will inevitably be read  in  the shadow of Tay  John. The action   is again   generated by the  painful
tension  between  man's dream of  civiliza­
tion  and  the  dark  realities  of  the  wilder­ ness.  And  The   School-Marm  Tree  will suffer  by the implied comparison because O'Hagan  seems   to   have   moved   away from   the  deepest  sources   of  his  power. While Tay  John's strongest appeal was at a  subconscious,  mythic, archetypal level, the  action  of  the  later  novel  tends  to  be conscious,  psychological, and  "social" in the  basic  sense  of  the  word.  The differ­  ence in the  title  symbols is revealing. T ay John, the yellow-haired mixed-blood, car­  ries wordlessly  at  the centre of the action  all   the   struggles    between    Indian  and White, wilderness  and  civilization, spirit and  flesh, light  and  dark, life and  death, which   animate  the   story.   The   school­ marm tree  is a  pine  whose  top  has  been broken  off,  its  place  taken   by  two  giant  limbs.  It is  a  suggestive  symbol for  the divided  will of  O'Hagan's  heroine, Selva Williams, but  it  is  static, appearing  in only three  key scenes. The narrative focus
 is within  the  consciousness  of Selva,  and though  she is a credible and  significant character, she  lacks  the  immense sugges­ tive power of Tay  John. Selva,  a working  girl   who   lives   in   the   mountains  and dreams   of  the  cultivated   salons   of  the East, is faced with  choices  represented by the  men  in  her  life. Slim  Conway, silent and   crudely  physical,   is  identified  with the  wilderness.  "They knew  one  another only  through   their  flesh and  behind  that  wall  of flesh they  were  strangers." Peter Wrogg, a wealthy  Englishman from Montreal,  represents  the   cultivation  of the  East  but also its lack of vitality.  "His was a frail  vessel, but  one  strong enough to  contain  her   hopes  for  a  while.... " The  third  to appear, Clay  Mullory, is al­ most  too  predictably  a  compromise  be­ tween   the  two.  A  mountain  man  edu­  cated,  like O'Hagan himself,  at  McGill,  he understands dreams but grasps reality  firmly.
On   the  other  hand,  the   comparison with Tay  fohn may be unfair and  even misleading.  In  part O'Hagan is making articulate some of what  is implicit in  the symbols of the earlier novel, and  to that extent   he is  diminishing his  theme. But he is also moving  to another phase  of the experience of souls  pinned   between  civi­ lization    and    wilderness. The   School­ Marm   Tree   is  set   much   later,  in   the
1920's,  and  among a  non-native  popula­ tion for whom  conscious  choices  between  civilization   and   the   wilderness   at   least seem to be possible. It is predictable that  the action  will be more psychological and  social,  less symbolic  and  archetypal. The question  is whether  O'Hagan works  well in this new mode, and  in general he does. Scenes  in  the  dance-hall, the   beer  par­  lour,  and  the  mountain chalet are  effec­ tive, though some of the love scenes, such as the  runaway horse  and  Selva's  seduc­  tion  by  Clay  on  a  mossy  slope,  bring  to mind  too  many  cliches.  The continuing power  of the  mountain  descriptions sug-

I I 7

BOOKS IN REVIEW



gests that  O'Hagan was attempting  to combine the  new  mode with  the old,  but the  reality  of the  natural setting  tends  to overshadow more than complement the psychological action and  Selva's pale dreams.
Readers  will  probably   find  The  Wo­
man the more satisfying of the two books. While  The  School-Marm Tree  is an  un­ equalled  evocation  of  that   feeling,  fa­ miliar   to  so  many  northern  Canadians, of  being  stranded  on  the  thinning  edge
of the inhabited world, I cannot shake the
conviction that  it could  have  been a  bet­ ter  novel,  considering O'Hagan's  genius as  a  writer. My   judgment   of   the  book goes  not  so  much   against  O'Hagan, as against    the   Canadian   literary   scene   of his time. Like his contemporaries Sinclair Ross  and   George  Bugnet,  O'Hagan  has worked  without the stimulation of a lively critical  response  or  the  assurance of  an intelligent readership among  his country­ men.   We  should   be  grateful  that   The School-Marm Tree  is a good novel;  we should   not  hold  it  against  O'Hagan that he   once   published  a   great   novel   like Tay  John.
DICK HARRISON


AT HOME
IN ALL VOICES

LEON    ROOKE,    The    Love    Parlour.   Oberon
Press,  cloth   $g.gs; paper   $4-95·
LEON  ROOKE,   The   Broad  Back  of the  Angel.
Fiction    Collective,   cloth     $9-95;    paper
$3-gs.
You  REMEMBER  THE OLD STORYLAND LIMITED?  Half  an  hour,  there  and  back. Little  stops   along   the  way,  quaint  sta­ tions,   scenery   like   a   picture   postcard, friendly   passengers,    velvet   banquettes, polished    mahogany   trim.   Redcaps  al­ ways helpful, conductors who  knew  their business,  announcing the  stops  in  plenty

II8
 of  time,  taking  your  elbow  as you edged out    the   door-remember    that?   You felt  good   after   every   trip,   relaxed,  res­ spected.
Then the Twentieth Century Express roared  into   town.   They   cut   the   staff, ripped out  the  upholstery and  left a blind old man  in blue  rags  behind, who cursed as he  punched the  tickets.  No more  por­ ters.   No  more   little   stops.   Washed-out scenery   too -just the   backs   of   tene­  ments  where,  approximately, lonely  men in shirt sleeves flicked the butts of loosely­ rolled  cigarettes into  the  dust  swirls  left by   retreating  winter   ice,   exposing   the brownish  clumps of dying grass feebly fed by  the  anemic turds  of sullen  pets.
After  the bankruptcy came  the Great Reorganization.  Sleek   wagons   of  vinyl and  plastic -amazing what  they  can  do with  old cattle cars.  But confusion reigns. Computers prove  whimsical. So many conductors,  so   many    uniforms.   Some­ times    they    help,    mostly    they    babble snatches of poetry  and  philosophy  mixed with  lyrics of old  dog  food  commercials. You've got  to be sharp to make  any sense at  all. I end  up  taking  tickets  or wearing a red cap  and shlepping  (how  did  I even learn   that  word?)  heavy   bags.  No  one knows  where  we  are,   or   the  names   of towns.   Acrylic   posters   block   the   win­ dows.  The ticket  destination reads  only: THERE.
Which   brings   me,   approximately,  to Leon  Rooke,  at  home  in all  conventions, in all uniforms, all voices. Twenty-one stories  are  reprinted in  these  two  collec­ tions;   with  inevitable overlaps  the  thir­ teen    stories   in   the   Fiction   Collective selection   reduce   to  ten  not  available in the    Oberon.  The   0   selection    has   a "modern" bias;   the  FC  is  more   "post­ modern,"   a    little    zingier    and    more American  in  feel.  If  you  like  Leonard Michaels, Max  Apple,   some  of  Russell Banks,  some  Barth   and   Barthelme, give the  FC  edition a  try.  Both  are  bargains.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



I'm  slightly  biased  towards the Oberon selection. I'm   predisposed, as  is Rooke's friend   and  selector-of-stories, John  Met­ calf, to the ominous landscape, the single, apt  detail   ("The sun,  obscured  though  it might  be, was hot  on  the side of  her  face and  a fly was crawling on  her  neck-or perhaps it  was  sweat  ... "),  and   I like the  voice  of  untethered  consciousness  as it shuffles and  deals-I  like those  things more    than    incessant   wit   and    parody. (The  three  "Magician"  stories  and   the two "Friendship" stories  in the  FC  selec­ tion  are   sometimes funny  but   I  didn't reread them. Clear them  away and  there's still  more  honest    fiction in  that   edition than   you're   likely   to  encounter  in  any book of stories  currently on  the  market.) The   Oberon  selection, by  contrast,  has only   one   story   I'd   remove-"If Lost Return  to   the    Swiss   Arms" -which, despite  its  0. Henry   Award   some  years back,  seems  to have  been  conceived  in a pre-modern idiom.  The rest  of  the  book is gold.
I'm  much   taken  with  the  Mexican-set "For Love Of-" ("-Madeline, Elea­ nor,  and   Gomez")  series  of  stories  and  Oberon reprints all  three.  With  FC  you get only two panels  of what is obviously a triptych: two of the  three  is a mutilation. FC, however,  will give you a scarey, dead­ pan  gem  called  "Wintering  in  Victoria" (Rooke's  home,   incidentally)  which   is available in  Canada only  in  an  Oberon annual. It  should   be  permanently gath­ ered  in  this country, with  the  best of his work.
Even  as it stands, I judge  the  Oberon collection of  Rooke's short   fiction  to  be the most technically accomplished, most perfectly realized and easily the most psychologically  sophisticated   ever   pub­ lished in this country. I only wish Oberon had   a  way  of   distinguishing  this  book from   the   dozens   of   drab,   perfunctory efforts  they've  published in  the past. And should  an  FC  editor be  reading this,  it's
 only  fair   to  point   out   that   he/she  did something   far    worse:     in   "Dangerous Women"   (known  as   "Call  Me   Bella­ donna" in  Canada)  a  character's  per­ fectly   reasonable  allusion   to  Watergate ("Here it  was    973  ... ") has  been  ... what,   freshened? . . . to   "Here  it   was I977 ... " thus  transforming a  sluggard into  a catatonic.
What   should   be  emphasized  is  this: in   both   collections  there   is  more   than one masterpiece. FC's  title story would qualify,  plus "Wintering"; Oberon's little volume is a feast.  "If You Love Me  Meet Me  There" and   "Memoirs  of  a  Cross­ Country Man" are so intense,  so perfectly implanted   as   voice    (post-Modernism's victory   over   Modernism)  as  to  be  un­ paraphrasable.
One  doesn't "enter" such stories in the conventional  sense.   Instead,  they   enter you.
CLARK BLAISE



REGIONS OF PLACE
AND MIND

WADE  BELL,   The  North   Saskatchewan  Riuer
Book. Coach  House.
ELIZABETH BREWSTER, It's  Easy to Fall on the
Ice. Oberon, cloth  $9.95; paper  $4·95·
WHILE  OSTENSIBLY A  COLLECTION  of short  stories,  Wade   Bell's  North  Saskat­ chewan  River   Book  maps   its  northern Alberta  territory by strategies  rather res­ sembling    those    of    improvisational   re­ gional docu-drama. Bygone press snippets and   other   memorabilia  are   interfaced with contemporary and  historical  fictions, sketches  and   commentaries which  com­ bine  to  create a  somewhat  ironic  over­ view  of  the  development  of  civilization in  the area.
The main  routes  of Bell's map  lead  to and  from Edmonton. A focal image  is the

II9

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



High  Level  Bridge  whose full span domi­ nates  the  cover  in  an  early  photograph showing  the  train  on  the upper  level and the  astonishing contrast of  the still virgin wilderness  of the  river banks  below. The  voices  speaking  throughout  the  volume are  diversely  public  and  private. Autho­ rial   editorializings  establish   the  general  tone  of  ironic  retrospection in  combina­ tion  with  "found" voices from  the  past, the latter set as if in  newspaper columns. Typographically  the   columns   are   con­ tinued    for   a   few   paragraphs   into   the succeeding  personal  stories  or  sketches. While  this  strikes  one  as  an  odd  design procedure-particularly since the stories are given  their  own space as independant pieces  on  pages  following-the contri­ vance  seems  intended in  a  two-fold  way to suggest  both  linkage  and  separation of the "found" and  fictional  material. While the   procedure  is  a  little   precious   as  a means  of binding the  divergent elements of  the  book  into  a  whole,  it  is a  novel effort  in  print   terms  to create   an  effect approaching media  cool.
Further, the reading of the book works effectively  if one  follows the  implicit  sig­ nals   for   cross-reference  as  well  as   the explicit  ones  for ordinary continuity. For example, the  motif  of  the  bridge  itself, which  emerges   both   in  public  and  per­  sonal dimensions, reaches  its most explicit point   towards  the   centre  of   the   book. Under  the   title   "Another   Goddamned Horse" appear the  following:

The   bridge  was  there.  The   railroad   made its   penetration.  The   past   died.   Only   the future  existed   then  ... You   were   strong now  and  could  settle  all  questions  the  way you  wanted   them  setlled....

While  much  of  the  public  and  fictional life  in  the  book  belies  the  confidence of this statement, both the repression and repressiveness  of  the  past  are  suggested by indirection as well. Earlier  is the  pro­ vocative  title: "In Edmonton there is no History   only  news."  This   is  Bell's  own


120
 heading for  an  early  news  editorial  de­ ploring  failure  to  pay  treaty   money   to the   Mountain  Stonies,   the   point   being that    whites   cannot  yet   afford    to   an­ tagonize  "the only  Indians the  Blackfeet  are  afraid of."  The bridge,  as initiator of the  ruthless growth to  the  energy  capital of  today,  has  now  turned  even  the  self­ interest of  this  sort  of   territorial  worry into  little  account.  That  the  past  seems increasingly  irrelevant is the  cynical  sug­ gestion  which   begins  in  column   typog­ raphy immediately following  the editorial about  the  Stonies.   Entitled "Phantoms," it  introduces a slick cowboy  image  of the contemporary "Man from  Alberta" who, among other  things   "radiates the  spirit of free enterprise that  develops  the area's abundant  resources." This  ersatz   crea­ ture  is surely  the  justification of  the  In­ dian's indictment in "Stupidity has come to  the  Plains," his a  voice from  the  sup­  pressed  past  which  no amount of "news" in the cult  of progress can entirely silence.
However, despite the novelty and inter­ est   of   presentation,   this   book    would hardly rise above  the level of easy sarcasm  if a facile  conception of  historical  water­ shed  were all it offered. But such passages also serve  as contexts  for complementary personal images of the bridge and  its vari­  ous   meanings. The   story   "1912:  The Bridge    Beginning,"   for   example,  is   a spare   first  person   narrative by  a  work­ man  who  lives in  sight  of the  "half-built and  ugly" structure which  is also his live­ lihood. For  him  the  bridge  means  death, the death of his fellow workman in a fall into "the green  soft garden of leaves very far below" -the threat of his own death if  he stays.  "The Suicide   Bridge" is an­ other first  person  piece,  a  sketch  from  a reminiscent voice  heard elsewhere in  the book;   on  this  occasion   it  speaks  of  the days -when   streetcars also  rode   the   top level, of the  sensation of looking  down  at the  river  "the water  flashing  through the railway  ties,"  of boys pretending to  push






Two books edited and introduced by
Dick Harrison
The rising  new exponent of Western  Canadian literary history



Best Mounted Police
Stories

Mounted Police  stories,  victims of Hollywood's search for easy glamour, have languished in obscurity too long. Here are 22 of them, all by renowned storytellers, to remind  us of Canada's "westerns," which celebrate law rather than disorder, authority  rather  than rebellion, and still generate excitement.
254 pages,9 x 6, i/lus., Mylar laminated
cover, $9.95.  ISBN 0-88864-0544.
 Crossing Frontiers Papers in American  and Canadian VVestern Literature

Eminent  historians  and literary critics from both  sides of the border  explore the  different  perceptions Americans and Canadians have of  the concept "West" as reflected  in their  literature and history.
208 pages, 9 x 6, Permoline cover,
$10.00. ISBN 0-88864-058-7.




The University of Alberta  Press
450 Athasbasca Hall
Edmonton, Alberta
T6G 2E8

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



each  other  out  the window, of a girl who threw  herself off the  bridge one night.
There are various  other  Edmonton and district   pieces  in  The North  Saskatche­ wan  River  Book, several with a folklorish ring,  relating to  life  near  the  bridge  or along    the   river   banks.   By   themselves these  are  often   slight,  but  in  the   total complex   have  appropriate places.  Two,  at   least,   transcend  the   improvisational method-which is to say that  while they belong  in  the  book, they could  also stand apart from  it.  "Conversion" is a  power­ ful  tightly  developed  tale  about  a  nine­ teenth-century  missionary   in   the   Fort  Edmonton-Smoky Lake vicinity; his well­ meaning intentions undergo  a stark  trans­  formation in a  terse northwestern version of  the  Heart  of  Darkness  confrontation. A   story   called   " (a   mellowdrama) " is perhaps  the  best  demonstration of  Bell's ability  to  balance  tone,  characterization and action, in a witty account of an enig­ matic   hashish-smoking shopkeeper  who provides   various   exotic   satisfactions  to initiates among the  local  matrons of  his small   northern  town.  The  tidy   resolu­ tion   of  the   plot   also  makes  a  suitable closing  to  the  book:   a  lightly  rendered solution   to  the  present   day  problem   of tedium  in  an  incompatible  environment.
Elizabeth  Brewster's   It's  Easy  to  Fall on  the  Ice  is a  collection  of  ten  stories, several previously published, which also provides  a  certain regional  focus:  either the  actual setting   is  New  Brunswick   or the  characters are  often  from  that  locale. Regionalism in itself, however, is not as important a  thematic or organizational point  as  in  Bell's  book.  Brewster  is  pre­ sumably   setting   her   stories  in   environ­ ments  she knows best, but the experiences of her  characters are  less an expression  of place  than  personality and  private angst.
In  contrast to the improvisational free­ dom  inherent in Bell, It's  Easy to  Fall on the  Ice  is a studied  collection, containing a series  of stories  which  work  a little  too

122
 earnestly for  obliquity. These are  stories of   women,    the   heroines   ranging  from young    adulthood   to   middle-age,   with time  settings  dating from  the  late  194o's to  the   present.  Brewster   provides  care­ fully observed  details  of the lives of  office girls,  librarians, young  writers,  graduate students in  London, and   something  of the  aging  process  itself.
She is quite  good at  rendering the diffi­ dent, inexperienced heroine who  is alter­ nately  asking  for  and  shrinking  from  ex­ perience: for  example, in  "The  Conver­ sion"  which   observes  a  naively  religious girl's  confrontation in  the  raw  with   the mechanics of sex. The  experience of an­  other    young   woman's   inept    effort    to drown   herself   for  love  is  realized   with some   poignancy  in  "Comfort  Me   with Apples," although the  motive  for  the action   is  less  convincing.  Brewster's strength as a short  story writer  does not include the power to chart  emotional temperatures. Her  references to close per­ sonal  relationships, whether  between  the sexes or friends or relatives, fall flat more  often  than  not.  Chatter, description, and coy  innuendo are  seldom  effective   sub­ stitutes for  emotional reality   (in  the  title story,  for  instance) .
The least  successful   stories  are   those which   dissipate   their  effect  through a rather cumbersome chronicle structure, as in "Strangers," which  tells of student life in  a  London  hostel,   or  "Flower Girl," which covers some ten or so years of the narrator's life  for  the  ostensible  purpose of recounting her  association with  an ad­ miring   teenage student  with  aspirations to write. The narrator herself  has already  achieved a modest  reputation as a writer. The "flower   girl,"  who  haunts her  idol with  both  eagerness and  bouquets, even­ tually  comes  to an  unfortunate end.  The narrator, who has been more embarrassed than    pleased    at   the   attention,  grows older,  has  moved about a good  deal,  and in  due   course  discovers   the  fate  of  the

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



girl-all  this for  the  flimsy irony  of the "no  flowers"  request  at her  one-time ad­ mirer's funeral.
The most  successful  story  in  this  col­ lection,   because   the   most  compact  and single-minded in intent, is "Silent Movie." It  speaks  with  sensitive  objectivity of  a newly-widowed woman  arriving alone  in Paris  and  undergoing all the  nervous  ten­ sion  of  the  inexperienced  traveller  who figuratively is deaf  to communication be­ cause  of  the language barrier. Here  the careful  accumulation  of  detail   provides  the  shape   of  a   real   experience,  while several    of   the    older    stories,    such   as "Flower Girl," make   only  tentative,  ra­ ther   mechanically  rendered   gestures   in this  direction. Elizabeth  Brewster's liter­ ary  reputation has a much  firmer  founda­ tion in her poetry than  in It's Easy to Fall on the  Ice.
DIANE BESSAI



WEST COAST, PLACELESS

ROBIN  SKELTON   and   CHARLES   LILLARD,   eds.,
The    Malahat  Review,  No.    45    (January
1978): The  West  Coast  Renaissance. Vniv.
of Victoria, $g.oo.

FRED  CANDELARIA, ed.,  New:   West   Coast.  72
Contemporary British  Columbia Poets. New
Poems- Autobiographies-Commentaries.
West  Coast Review Books/lntermedia.  (Also published  as   West   Coast   Review, XII/2,
1977-)
ANYONE   TURNING  TO    THESE   two   an­ thologies  with  the  hope  of getting a clear and  comprehensive picture of West Coast  writing   will    be    disappointed;    some writers  get  more  space  than  others, some appear in only one of the two anthologies, and   others,  of  course,  do  not  appear at all.   Of   the   g8  British   Columbia  poets whose  work  appears in  these  two  books, only  13  appear in  both. These are:  Eric
 Ivan Berg, Marilyn Bowering,  Fred Can­ delaria,  Mike    Doyle,    Charles   Lillard, Rona  Murray, Susan  Musgrave, Rosalind  MacPhee, Florence McNeil, George  Mc­ Whirter, Robin  Skelton, Sean  Virgo,  and  Fred  Wah.  Not  in  itself  a  bad  list, per­  haps-but surprising when  you consider  some of those who  appear in only one of the  two books:  Patrick Lane, P. K. Page and   Phyllis  Webb   (all  of  whom  are  in Malahat  Review); Earle  Birney, Bill Bis­ sett,  George  Bowering,  Michael  Bullock, Gary   Geddes,   Lionel    Kearns,  Dorothy Livesay,  Daphne  Marlatt, Stan   Persky, Andreas   Schroeder,  George   Woodcock
and  J. Michael Yates   (all  in  New: West
Coast). One  might  wonder, too, whether
all the writers  included are  indeed  "West Coast" writers  (like, say, Seymour  Mayne who is a Montreal poet,  or Gwen  Hauser of  Toronto). There is  no  work  whatso­ ever  from   Robin   Blaser,  Frank  Davey, Gerry   Gilbert,  or   Roy   Kiyooka -and while  in Malahat  Review  there  are  two short    stories    (by    Rona    Murray   and  Sean   Virgo)    and   three    critical  essays (on  Patrick  Lane, Susan  Musgrave, and  P.   K.   Page),   there  is  no   prose   from Gladys Hindmarch, Jane Rule, or Audrey Thomas (to  name   but  three).
Statistically, the  unwary   reader   might be  further misled : if  page  count   is any index  at all of literary merit, then-tak­ ing both  anthologies together-the most significant  B.C. writer is Sean  Virgo  (who lives  in  Newfoundland)  with   42  pages ( 38  of  them  in  M alahat) ; he  is closely followed   by  Susan   Musgrave  who   has some   26  pages   of  work   (including  12 pages of reproductions of worksheets in Malahat)   and  a  g-page  essay about her, and  by P. K. Page  (6 pages of work  plus a 27-page critical essay about her). Rona Murray gets 22 pages  (all her own work), Patrick  Lane  gets 15  (4 of them  by him) and   Marilyn  Bowering,   who   wrote   11 pages on Lane, gets a  total  of 20.


123

BOOKS IN REVIEW



All  this,  of  course,  sounds   like  mere captiousness,  but   there   is  a   difficulty: what  function, precisely, do such antholo­ gies as these serve, what audience do they appeal  to?   As  a  fairly   well-established  "International Quarterly of Life and  Let­  ters,"  no  doubt  with  a  fairly  wide  circu­  lation  outside  both British  Columbia and Canada, the Malahat  Review might  well, in  this special issue published  in celebra­  tion  of   the  seventy-fifth  anniversary  of the  founding of  the  University   of  Vic­ toria, be presumed to aim at  reflecting, as accurately as possible, what  it calls "The West  Coast   Renaissance." Obviously,  as Robin    Skelton   remarks,    "there  are   of course  horrendous omissions of which  we are fully aware"; obviously, too, the most efficient   way   to   convey   an   admittedly "untidy"  literary  and   artistic    scene   is to print a lot of short  work  (poetry espe­ cially), offer  a number of  reproductions of paintings and  sculpture  (the  Malahat Review  gives us a generous 25, including the  cover), and   a critical  essay or  two. In  his  "Comment"  Robin  Skelton   ( cau­ tiously   identified   by   co-editor    Charles  Lillard  as "probably the world's authority on  poetic  technique")  remarks   that   the West  Coast  scene  is  untidy  because  "we have  been  spared   a  Breton  or  a  Pound  and   we  have   not   been   blessed  with   a Yeats,"    and   seeks   to   demonstrate  the thesis that  there is a close parallel  between the Irish  Renaissance and  the West Coast one:   what   we  need  is a  Yeats.  Most  of the work  in  this anthology, consequently, appears to  be  written by White  Indians who  seek  to  get  at   the  "psychic"  land­ scape  of the  West  by drawing  on  North­ west  Indian legends  and  myths  in  com­ posing   what   Skelton  calls   "symbolist" poetry  which  "attempts rather  to express the numinous than  to delineate the physi­ cal  universe." The  difficulty  with   such writing  is not so much that  it is a kind of fashionable  latter-day Pauline   Johnson­ ism  (which it is) , as that  the experiential

I24
 world  which  presumably gave  rise to  the poem  is screened and  filtered   through a body of material, or of presuppositions, or of  stories   and   tales,  which   are   at   base literary in  origin-the  world   as  talked about rather than   the  world  as  lived  in
-and the  poem  itself  (as exemplified  in this   issue  of   M alahat)   belongs   to   the realm  of Art  with a capital A. The poems of Susan  Musgrave and  Sean  Virgo  are decidedly  bookish   in  flavour:  their   re­ sponse   to  landscape  is  not   so  much   a matter of physical  or sensory /sensual im­ mediacy as  it  is of  preconceptions, of  a sort  of  scholarliness:  the  outsider  (even if    "Native  Born")   playing    intellectual and verbal games in order  to express a meaning or  intention which   exists  prior to  the   poem   itself,  independent  of  the people   and   the   landscape  they   inhabit which   is supposed   to  have  given  rise  to it, and  prior  to  the  language in  which  it seeks  "expression." The   poem   is  locked into   the  mode   of  simile,  and   the  word seems  continually  to  be  gesturing or pointing away  from  itself  towards  some­ thing  else, some  place  else. The language becomes    empty:   like   much    "Interna­ tional" writing, it  ends  up  coming  from no place.
This  in  itself  is  not  necessarily  disad­ vantageous  or  reprehensible  in  an  aca­  demic  or scholarly world,  or in  the world of the poem  as it has been  taught in text­  books like Understanding  Poetry. Neither is it, perhaps, necessarily  uncharacteristic of  British   Columbia   writing.  But   in  a critical "Guide to the West Coast  Renais­ sance" at  the  end  of  Malahat, in  which he  consistently  mis-spells  Charles Olson's name  (and   to  which   he  appends some quite  useful  checklists), Charles  Lillard  is at some  pains  to  point   out  that   B.C. writing has  at  last  outgrown the  "basic­ ally  regional" school  of  "Black   Moun­ tain." And  in saying  this, he misses some­ thing: in  insisting   on  the  "immediate," the   so-called   "Black   Mountain"  writer

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



demands that  the  poem  be a direct  testi­ mony of the  writer's intelligence  meeting  the world  head-on, and  that  the poem  be an  engagement of  the  poet  with  the lan­ guage,  dense,  packed, substantial, actual, in which  and  by which  he sees the world.  Exploring  the  language  as  it  moves,  as the  word  moves,  responsive  to  the  possi­ bilities   of   what    the   words   themselves would  do in  the  utterance, the  poem  be­ comes  an  enactment and  discovery  of  a world  which   is always   (or  seeks  to  be) particular  rather  than   abstract  or  con­ ceptualized.  Ideas,   meanings,  emerge - and  the  process  of  reading  the  poem  is the  process of opening up  to the  perceiv­
able   world    (of   wordsf things)    without
seeking conclusions. The landscape of the
West Coast,  whatever it is, is certainly immediate, and  it demands risk.
"We  must  understand what  is happen­ ing,"   Ezra   Pound  enjoined   his   fellow poets   in   1948  or   so;  Fred   Candelaria offers  New:  West  Coast  as an  attempt to be "representative" so that  we  might  in­ deed  discover  what is going  on.  Wisely, he eschews "-isms" and  similar labels, and in  calling   the  West  Coast  "new" and  a "search for,  need  for  wilderness," points to  the  element of  risk  the  landscape de­ mands,  and  which  the  act  of  writing  it­ self demands. In his very brief "Introduc­ tion" he refuses to theorize  further, other  than  to call  West Coast  writing "cosmo­  politan,"   "rich  and   vital."  Perhaps  he shares  Robin  Skelton's co-editor, Charles Lillard's feeling,  expressed  in New:  West Coast,  that  "West coast  poetry  bores me; my   own   contributions  to   the   body   of coastal  work annoys  me  [sic]." Certainly, he declines  to  theorize  about it,  but  pre­ fers  to let a large  body of work  speak for itself-and this is the great virtue  of the anthology. Yet its usefulness  (and  it feels, too, like a  textbook)  is limited, occasion­ ally   by   the   vacuous   self-appraisals  of
some  of  the   poets,  and   by  evidence   of haste:  "Several poets  whom   we  wished
 to  include  were  away  or  their  mail  was lost or delayed, and others  did not have anything on hand at  the moment to offer for  publication. Some  manuscripts came in  too  late  for  consideration." The  diffi­ culty  of encyclopaedism is that  one can never  be successfully  encyclopaedic:  the two  anthologies  would  have  enabled  us to   see  British   Columbia  writing   more steadily  and  clearly,  understand what   is happening, had  they been more clearly in opposition, had  Candelaria played  Pound  or   Breton   to   Skelton's  academic  Irish Renaissance.
PETER  QUARTERMAIN













Out-of-Print

CANADIANA BOOKS
and
PAMPHLETS





HURONIA-CANADIANA BOOKS
BOX  685
ALLISTON, ONTARIO  LOM lAO

Catalogues free on request




I25

BOOKS IN REVIEW



SUB-CAMP

OPAL   L.  NATIONS,  The   Strange   Case  of   In­
spector  Loophole. Vehicule  Press, $I.oo.
ANDRE   FARKAS,    Murders    In   The    Welcome
Cafe. Vehicule  Press.
JOHN  MCAULEY,   Nothing   Ever   Happens   In
Pointe-Claire. Vehicule  Press, $2.50.
EDDIE sucKLE, and thats  all. Air Press, $Io.g5,
$5.95  paper.
GERRY GILBERT,  Grounds.  Talonbooks.  $5.95.

CAMP, IT  APPEARS,  HAS GENERATED  its own sub-species through a sensibility of artifice  and  exaggeration. The  sensibility is unmistakably modern  in its attempt to resist the elements of "high  culture" and in its dichotomy of the merely  naive  and the starkly self-conscious. Unlike Camp, which  (as Susan  Sontag asserts)  always sacrifices content to style, sub-Camp doesn't divorce itself from content but approaches  it   playfully   while  still   pro­ fessing  a  serious  aesthetic and/or  moral attitude toward  nature and  literature.
In Opal  L. Nations' eighteen-page short story The  Strange  Case of Inspector Loophole and in Andre Farkas' verse Murders  In  The  Welcome  Cafe,  we see the  humour of sub-Camp, the  parody of demode  styles:  of  the  conventional  mys­ tery-thriller,  the  sinister,   cynical,  urban  wit of Raymond Chandler, the emphatic­ ally dramatic, tautological  verse  rhythms  of T. S. Eliot.  But  always  the  eye winks at  the  hand   writing the  spoofs,  and  so, while  there  is a  parody,  the  comic  tone reveals  a  deliberate  lack  of  seriousness. Mannerisms  are   to  be  chuckled  at   for their   own  sakes :   "her  cool   finger   tips run  / across my neck followed  by a shiver of an address   j that  is Deja  Vu familiar" (Farkas). And  there is always an  under­ tone  of kidding:

How does one enter  anyplace where  one has never  been
but expects all
or
almost all that  will be
 with a swagger? I a firm push?
knowing  it MUST be a PUSH
knowing  that   the  door  will bow  before  the
PUSH
WELCOME!it will admit in defeat
or with a sigh? I a defeated lean?
knowing  that  the  door  will bow before  the lean
WELCOME! (Farkas)

Like its parent Camp, this sub-Camp punctuates things  dramatically, but  takes typography  as   a   metaphor  for   life   as theatre or  mimesis.
And yet, while the sub-Camp writer de­ ludes  himself  about the scope of his  tech­  nique,   his  subject   is inadequately  devel­  oped  and  remains merely  skeletal.  M ur­ ders  lacks   incandescence   and   ends   in mediocrity, while  Loophole  never  really transcends its subliterate, peurile  humour or  obvious  black  comedy,  and  ends  with a  literary  whimper despite  the  pyrotech­ nical climax. No more  than  an embarrass­ ing  parody of  a  mystery  with  symbolist overtones, it  begins  with  a  run-on  sen­ tence,  proceeds with  barbarous  punctua­ tion   ('"Illustrated  London  News?", re­ peated   Loophole.'), and   the  final   page contains a  simile  of   earth  boiling  "like simmering  plum  jam"  (my  italics). The bizarre  flavour  of  a thriller where  chame­ leons are  the true characters is wasted  on a cast of caricatures which are low in con­  tent  and  form. Inspector Loophole, Dr. Morbid, Sgt.  Creep-the  names  tell  all we are  supposed to know, but  there  is no real  comedy  of humours, and   the  whole piece reads like a rank  amateur parody.
Camp writing has roots in an old tradi­ tion  of extravagant effects. Susan  Sontag identifies   the   eighteenth   century   as  its source   with   the   mannerist  artists,    the euphuistic  writers,  the  dandy  aristocrats, the   plumed   musicians.  But   sub-Camp (which has its roots  in Dada, Surrealism, Symbolism, Concrete Poetry, etc.)  reveals its vision  in  fragments and  so, instead  of failing   by  daring  too  much, it  fails  by

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



sanctifying the  prescription that  less mat­ ter is more,  that  a catalogue of  sensations  can  substitute for articulate control.
John  McAuley's Nothing  Ever   Hap­ pens in  Pointe-Claire, for  example, hints at  emotions in slivers and  with  a casual­  ness  that   betrays  an  inchoate craft.   His "Nightmare" poem  is  fragmentary, and his  title-poem  is  tenuous and   banal.  He never  convinces us that  he can  "make his words/ float  in  celebration" for  he  lacks both  the imagination and  technique to go beyond  jejune   humour  ("if  the  universe was  square/ i  would still  be/  around/ somewhere") ,  colloquialism  ("you're  a hot   tomato"),  and   images   that   are   as banal  as they  are stale.
The  sub-Camp writer  mistakes  his peu­ rility   for   freshness,   his  audacious   self­ confidence for  inspirational  vigour,  and  his naivete  for artistic wonder. Things get much  worse,  however,  when  he  turns  to parody,  for   then    every   simple-minded scribbling is  proffered as a refreshing ex­ ample of  dazzling  wit.  McAuley's mono­  graph on chocolate is done  in the manner of  a  serious  scientific  survey  with  Low­ ney's   Law   serving   as   an   authoritative principle: "The quantitative relationship between    the   flavour    and   mouthful  of chocolate was initially  described by  Low­ ney.   He   observed   that    a   mouthful  of chocolate  was   inversely   related    to   its flavour-if   the  chewing  rate   was  held constant." Now  in  itself-when   circu­  lated  unpretentiously among close friends  and colleagues  in a boring  undergraduate university    course-these   lines   have   a certain  escapist   value,   but   when   read some   years   after   Leacock's   "Boarding­ House   Geometry" and   Monty  Python's satire   on  existentialist   soccer,   it  is  de­ cidedly  sophomoric.
Sub-Camp, therefore, is bad  to a point of  being  laughable, but   not  bad   to  the point  of being enjoyable.
Several  of  the  characteristics of Camp
survive  in  sub-Camp-among these  be-
 ing   a   taste   for   the   androgynous,  the double  sense  in  which   some  things  can be taken,  a  flamboyance of  presentation, an  attempt at  intensity, and   totally  sub­ jective  standards of  judgment.  We  note all  this  in  Eddie   Suckle's   novel,  which does  try to escape  the  revolting  press  re­ lease gush that  threatens to choke  it. This  is a  story  of  a  love  triangle  with   Billy Crossit,  a  novelist  who  names  his  books after    lovers;   Frank   Drury,  a   wealthy homosexual  who  needs  Belle, his wife, to fill a  frightening void;  and  Steven   Den­ nis,  the  lead  singer  of  Malcolm and  the Mau-Maus. In  a  single  day,  the  charac­ ters criss-cross in sexual promiscuity. Love is satirized  corrosively  and  so is art,  and both  themes  are  co-ordinates in  a  hectic story. Billy, the bisexual  artist, screws the Muse,  and   she,  him.  The  moon   is  his symbol,  but  it  is  so hyperbolically trans­  mogrified   into   melodrama  that    Billy's attempted  anagnorisis in  a  suicidal   mo­ ment  is  surrealist kitsch:  "Land  was  as unstable  as  water,   was  not   to  be  clung to  but  treaded   and   swum  strongly   with pride and originality, vitality  and  stamina springing  from   the   imagination. There came   the  sound   of  a  great   splash,   and the  moon's  nacreous turbulent arrow hit Billy smack  in  the  chest." This   botched suicide  is a  rite  de  passage, and  Billy  be­ comes  an  "All-American slut" who  seeks divine  beauty  in either sex. Frank  Drury, who  is  cuckolded   by  Crossit,  also  seeks this  in  his homosexuality, but  no  resolu­ tions  are   offered   in   this   black   comedy  where   the  artist-figure,  in   a  parody   of James,   Hemingway, and   Baldwin,  goes yearningly  towards Paris.
There is certainly a strong  androgynous motif  in the  book  with  graphic scenes of sex, violence, and  self-mocking irony,  and Suckle's  dialogue-which is usually  un­ bearably  arch   at  solemn  moments-be­ comes  nicely  bitchy  in  its  faggot   argot. There  are   some   flamboyant   absurdist effects,  but   the  prose  is  often   ungainly


127

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



("He  thrust and   churned  downward  as she,  of  course,   similarly   upward   did"), the  dominant  literary  technique is  that of  a  reproduced  telephone conversation, the  misspellings  grossly repulsive  ("hom­ mage,"  "benificent,"   "androgenous," "Sonntag"), and   the  punctuation  is  so poor  that   the  work  reads  like  the  effort of a sub-literate.
Sub-Camp  writers   often  drum  them­ selves  up  awesomely   as  whirlwinds and  geniuses  who  are  interested in "personal truth" or "the living  truth." But they fail to live up  to  their  boasts. Gerry  Gilbert's Grounds,   for   example,  comes   prefaced with  hype  by  Robert Greeley who  writes of "the shy excitement" of Gilbert's voice and  of a writer  who is "a very fast, sweet, perceiver, the sweet Jesus of local streets." After  this,  I expected a major  revelation
-at  the very least,  a minor  miracle.  But
all I got were  lists  (topics for  poems that Gilbert never wrote) , banal flatness  ("one time/ I found   soc/ & handed it  over  to the bigger boy/  who said it's mine/ & he's still   wrong"),  witless   junk    (the   word "bark" is repeated 374 times on the same page) , pop  sociology  ("all  the  workers  I met  were  on  their   own  side/  screw  the rich/ the  upper class  has fucked  off/  the middle  class has  fucked  up/  the  working class  is fucking on"),  tedious  documen­ tary  realism  that  is so clinical  it  must  be a  form   of  self-therapy for  Gilbert  ("So  we went  down  to the  harbour beach  and  dug holes & discovered fingers in the sand and  made castles and  walked to the water over the soft sand  way out past Smeaton's Pier  and  it  got  cold  and   windy  so  we had  an  ice cream cone  and  rolled  home up  the  Stennack") .
Sub-Camp, like  Camp, must   be  out­ rageous-as when  Gilbert  edits an inter­ view  with  himself,  offers a  photocopy of a deliberately illegible  piece  with  an  aw­ ful  title  pun   ("Ruled  Feint"), writes  a practical joke  called  "Sculpture," muses self-indulgently  about  the   word   "and,"

128
 and   tells  us  with   breathless excitement that  "one  of  the  few  things  I  am  tonite is stoned"-as if we couldn't guess!
Sometimes the audacity is accompanied by sporadic displays  of some small  talent. There is a  single  good  satiric  paragraph in  "The Slug  Liberation Act,"  and  Gil­ bert  is capable of  facile,  whimsical  lyri­ cism: "caterpillar/ if  I  pat/ your  head/ your   mad/ feet   will/  stop   still/ do  you purr/ is your fur/ warm/ my worm/ done
/ I  touch/ your   hair/ much/ why/  arent youf  a  butterfly?" But  in general  Gilbert shows only fragments from a stoned  mind
-pieces  moving   in  fits  and   starts   that don't make  a large  meaning. More  often than   not,  they  are  not  even  vaguely  in­ teresting or  useful.  When   Gilbert  turns  serious,    he    falls    into    Camp :    "when America speaks  it's  the  belly of  the con­ tinent  rumbling/ when  Canada  is  silent it's  thinking."
Perhaps, the  ultimate purpose of  sub­ Camp is  a  revival   of  Dada  in  modern dress,  for   freakishness  is  turned   into   a cult.  Self-indulgent ripeness  is all. Gilbert  himself  records: "I am everything I see," but   this   is  not   involvement  or   art­ merely  immersion and  shapelessness.   Of course,   his  poems   are  not   supposed   to mean   anything in  "massman" language. They  are empty like a cup and  are  meant  to  assert  that  "the shape  of  that  empti­ ness  is what  a cup  is."  But  we  mustn't think  too hard  on this  pseudo-philosophy or  we'll  end  up  with  Gilbert, laminating hollow gimmickry and  useless fragments.

KEITH GAREBIAN

w

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



TIME'S MOTION

ELIZABETH  JONEs, Flux.  Borealis, $4·95·
PIER   GIORGIO  DI    Cicco,   The Circular   Dark.
Borealis.
E.   D.  BLODGETT,  Sounding. Tree   Frog  Press,
$4·95·
THE PUBLICATION IN   1972 of Elizabeth Jones'  first  book  of poems,  Castings, showed  the  beginnings of an unusual  lyric talent. Flux, her  second  book, reveals masterly  strides   in  diction and   lyricism. For  those for whom  poetry  is sound, lan­ guage  rich  and  sensuous  to the  ear,  Flux should   come   as  sheer   delight.  Do   not, however,  be misled  by the  title.  In  these days of the  imitative fallacy,  it is  natural to expect  that  the  flux will  be created  by a  disjointed syntax,  its  existence   proven  by  leaving   the  reader  directionless. But Jones    writes    about   homely,    everyday  events  with  a deftness  that   both  sets the outlines and  reveals  the  paradoxes.
The number of strong  lines  that  allow
the  world   to  be  seen  as  if  for  the  first time  is truly  staggering. She  has  pigeons that "strut  away/ on   pink fastidious claws"   as  well  as  abstractions  such   as Charity  or   Agape,   "signifying  no  vain heave  of  the  affections/ but  order   quiet and   due   observance.... " The  conson­ ance,  the assonance of the diction creates  a  quiet   harmony in  which  the  rhythms  can   modulate,  often   to  sharp  trochees,  keeping   the  reader  continually alert.  In her   recording  of   natural  details,   Jones  reminds   one   of   the  post-Confederation poets at  their best. Yet  the  analogy  is not altogether   accurate:  Jones   has  no  nos­ talgia  for  past  time; nor  does she portray the  natural scene  for  what  it  can  reveal of  another, transcendent, existence.  She glories  in  the  surfaces   of  life  for  what they  reveal  of  their  own  textures.
Particularly   delightful   is    the    way Jones   manages  to  convey   her   own  ex­ periences   without  any   of  the  grim  ba­ nality  usually  associated with  first-person
 expression   nowadays.   In   the  title  poem and  in several  others,  she contrasts her childhood in  South Africa  with  her  new life in Canada. Highly  selective with autobiographical details, she tells us noth­ ing  of  her   education  in   Scotland   and France, nor  of her  experiences of teach­ ing at  Memorial  University. Indeed, one has  to guess  that  she is married and  liv­ ing   in   the   Annapolis  valley   with   two daughters.  Her  purpose  is to convey first the  "southern" qualities of South  Africa
-"a tropical night" with  "sway of  mos­ quito  net/  lights  of  passing  cars,"  creat­ ing  the  sense  of  thousands of  unnamed, unrealized  possibilities. And then she con­ trasts  this  with  her  present  adult  life  in "northern" Canada-a closing round  in the long, dark  nights, a perfecting of past possibilities  that   have   now  been  pieced together.   Yet    the    antinomy   between south-north and  youth-age is not  the end point.  The  poem  goes on  to develop  the contrast, throwing the  reader back  into the  ongoing   flux  of  a  Canadian  spring day,  light  reinvoking the  "dark circle  of love"  in  new  beginnings that  are  always beginning.  Jones  has the superb  ability  to write  about things  as they  are  in flux, as they  appear at   moments of  completion and  as they  tumble into  flux  again.  The patterns  are   there,   but   the   poetic   line creates  and  is not delimited by them.
Much   of   the   quiet   beauty   in   these poems  comes  from   the  liquidity  of  the verse. Using  the  short,  so-called  half-line of  free  verse,  she  varies   the   length   to effect  a  continual  expansion and   com­ pression.  A typesetting nightmare  that   is well worth  the  effort,  her  irregular  lines capture the  poem's  sense of  ebb and  flow. Developing  this  same  feeling   of  move­  ment  is Jones' use  of  the  long  sentence, her   piling   phrase  on   phrase,    to   turn images  round,  modifying  them,   playing  out  the  changes. "Family," for  instance, is one  long  sentence in  which  Jones  des­ cribes her grandfather who felt more love

129

BOOKS IN REVIEW



when  delivering
the  babies of narrow pelvised  black
women
 small  criticism  of a  poet  who  has  placed the  child  once  again  at  the  centre of the

after riding twenty  miles
into  the  cold  night-bitten hard-rocked kloof
than when  caressing my grandmother with  her  thick  fair  hair
her  proud and bitter Dutch spirit.

And  yet at  the  point  when  one  imagines the  sentence must  end,  it  turns  on  itself to picture the grandmother in her  role as healer  of children.
Here  is no gravel-voiced Upper Cana­ dian  or  even  some  steely-mouthed  west­ coast   surrealist,   but  a   woman's    voice modulating   timbre   to   suit   her   many moods.   There   is  also   a   tenderness,  a sense of  creation as a response in kind  to a   world   perceived    as   "other,"  but   to which  the  poet  still  belongs.  Actions  do not occur  alone,  but are part  of the poet's mindscape  in  which   all  things  connect. At   times,   one   can   sense  in   the   back­ ground  a Christian training. In  "Stations of  the  Cross,"   for  example,   we   follow Jones  on a  tour  of a Catholic cathedral:
We are  aware of the fine balance of  Christian paradox
the  flying  buttress
the  Gothic Arch.

Yet  the  structure, beautiful   as it  is, eventually is too complex.  Jones  becomes lost  in  the  "metaphysical mathematics," the figure  of Christ  "stiffens  to a cipher," and   the   "mind  rests/  almost   thankfully in the tomb." Nevertheless, a resurrection still awaits-the opening of the  door  to where, outside, "the sun dazzles/  the beg­ gar  is still  there."
In a few of the slighter  "social"  poems, I detected what  appears to be a tendency to preach  at people whom Jones does not admire,   people    who   are   too   precise. Jones   obviously   prefers  flux  to  the  "in­ telligent   poise."   Yet  she  herself   has  an artful intelligence, her poems being poised examples  of  flux.   For   her   more   social statements, then,  Jones  might  do  well to cultivate the  muse  of  satire.  Yet  this is a
 "fierce   rose"  as  a  celebration of  life  it­
self,   of   the   tension   between    flux   and structure.
Turning from  Elizabeth Jones  to  Pier Giorgio  di Cicco in his recent collection  of poems  The  Circular  Dark is like  leaving the  country for  the city,  the light  for  the dark. At twenty-nine years of age, di Cic­ co  is  much   better    known   than   Jones,  partly   because    of   his   three    previous  volumes,   but   also  by  his  having  edited  several  small  journals and  his  new  posi­ tion   as   Associate   Editor   of   Books   in Canada.   Living    in   Toronto  may   also have  helped.
At  first  reading, di  Cicco's   poems  do not  compare well with  those of Elizabeth Jones.   His  short   spare   lines,  the   bleak images  of an  indifferent society,  and  the poet's    obsessive   concern  with   his   own lack  of motivation seem at  first sight  un­ original. Moreover, the  collection  is  very uneven, with  the  best poems coming near  the  end.  The first section,  La  Gente,  re­ veals  di  Cicco  as a  rather  cocky,  aggres­  sive young  man; the poetry has a nervous energy,  a sharpness  of image  that  is both pleasingly  showy and a little thin.  A num­ ber of the poems are  about  teachers with whom  he  studied at  Toronto. These  are amusing, even  a little  malicious,  the  sort of thing that  a clever  undergraduate says when  he  feels he  is suffering  through his education  at  the  hands  of poseurs. Yet  it is  only   when   di  Cicco   begins   to  write about his return to Italy  in 1974 that  a largeness   of  conception and  a  new  spa­ ciousness  of syntax  begin  to be felt. And the  real  dividends of this freer  style come in  the  last section,  "The Circular  Dark." The   last   poem,   "The  Only   Heavens," begins "Leave alone the beautiful things./ They   will  be  without  us";  it  indicates a new kind  of  detachment, a breaking from the  manacling romantic myth  which  sees the  writer  as creating the  universe.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Also reinterpreting the  romantic mythos,    is   Ted    Blodgett's   Sounding, where  the  essential  feature is a  universe of  beauty   in  ecstatic   movement. I  have left Blodgett to the  last  because  he is the most difficult of the three, and Sounding invites   many   rereadings.  Indeed,  there were  moments when  I found  myself fantasizing about di  Cicco's  studying comparative literature under  Blodgett  at Alberta: the  meeting of poets might  have led to one  of di Cicco's  illuminating "faculty" poems.  All  this  is not  to  deny the  seriousness  of Blodgett's undertaking. But  where  to begin? To describe  the book as a long  poem  in which  Blodgett relates his own  spiritual journeying through the life of Vincent Van  Gogh  from  the  time of  his  great   painting period   at  Aries, to his stay  at the  asylum  in  St. Remy,  and then  to his final  suicide  at  Auvers,  gives the  reader   only  a  handle for  the  poem, not  the  poem   itself.  Blodgett  takes  the reader    outside    history   altogether,   dis­ penses  with   the   normal  mind-patterned modes   of   perception,   and  throws   the reader   into  the  dynamism of  experience itself.  The   poem  begins  by  re-experienc­ ing  Van  Gogh's  intensity in  his  prolific "yellow" period, after  he had  been intro­ duced  to  the  new  colours  of Seurat and Degas.  In  following Van  Gogh's   tracks, Blodgett  learns

yellow
was the only  way
you laughed.

This  is no discussion  of Van  Gogh, how­ ever, but  a living  through him. When  in Aries, Blodgett, too, hears "yellow/ echo­ ing under  foot." Seeing also that  "flowers
/ foamed  against Vincent's mouth," Blod­ gett  walks  into  Vincent's mouth,  in  the same   way   that   Milton  entered   Blake's metatarsal.
Sounding   is  a  difficult   poem,   and   it
certainly helps  to  have  at  least  a  passing acquaintance  with   the   events   of  Van
 Gogh's  life. It may also help  to read Blodgett's  first  book of poems, take away the   names   (I975),  for   which    Coach House   Press  designed   a  brilliant cover with  a  red  chair  surrealistically imposed upon   a  recently   harvested  prairie  field. The   point  is  that  after   the  names  have been taken away, one is left with mystery, everything  potentially being everything else. Chairs  are  no  longer  simply  chairs but  also  part  of  the  infinite  possibilities. In  Van  Gogh's  case,  the  paintings  por­ tray  strongly  tl1e process  by  which  each  object  partakes of the  creative force  ani­ mating all  life.
Near  the end,  Blodgett  himself  has be­
come the painter:

i vincent
from winter where  the high  tiding of blue
bells upon  the air

have never veered  again.

He   escapes   the   profane  to   enter    the sacred -the  world  of  blue  that   is  also blue  bells. Van  Gogh  died,  his  painting did not, and  in becoming Van Gogh, Blodgett  reenacts the  process  of  naming for   "the   name   is  all/  told   now."   The name  is all,  but  all  in  the  naming.
Curiously,   all  three   poets  portray the flux of time. Jones  celebrates the  fact,  di Cicco wrestles with  the poses necessary  to retain  balance,  and  Blodgett recreates the




CANADIAN LITERATURE

We  offer  4  catalogues   yearly  relating  to  our social,  political,  economical  and  cultural  his­ tory-usually  some  interesting CanLit  titles. Send $3.00  (refundable).
SPECIALTY BOOK CONCERN
Founded   1938
11 Dundas Street  East
WATERDOWN, ONTARIO LOR2HO

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



whorl  itself.  A revelation seems at  hand, for  is flux  not  also the  principal concern of Ondaatje, Mandel? indeed,  most writ­ ers of our  time?
R.  B.  HATCH


WORK CAR NO.10557

MARJORIE LISMER BRIDGES, A Border of Beauty, Arthur   Lismer's  Pen and Pencil. Red  Rock,
$16.95.
THIS   BOOK ABOUT ARTHUR LISMER, a member of the  Group of Seven,  sent  me back  to John McLeish's biography of  Lis­ mer  (September Gale), and  also to Peter Mellen's lavish art  book about  the Group. Fifty  years after  the  original  furore these painters aroused  in Canada, an  uproar of violently  dissenting critics,  then  rebuttal and  attack of Lismer,  A. Y. Jackson  and Lawren  Harris,  the  explosion   of  words seems quite  unreal.
The  Group's paintings were  "like  the inside  of a drunkard's stomach" was  the gist of one  critical  onslaught. Hector Charlesworth of Saturday Night  and S. Morgan-Powell  in  Montreal  were  fore­ most  of the Group's assassins in  the early I g2o's;   but   everyone   took   sides,   wrote letters  to newspapers, fired salvoes almost as  firey  as  exploding  shells  during  the recently  ended  World  War  I. Said  Wyly Grier  of  Toronto, " I  have  seen  several [such] groups  wax, wane  and  die.  They  died   from   many  causes,   the   chief   one being  that,  having  a  central   doctrine or dogma,    they    all   painted   very   much alike."  A. Y.  Jackson, in  answering this partly valid  objection to the  Group, was more  than  capable of  holding his  own:  "Now  say, like good Canadians, we don't  care  if  we  aren't  articulate, or  whether the archaeologist of the future digs down here  and  finds  nothing but  Ford   parts! Now  art  is what  makes  a  nation  articu­ late,   not  alone   painting,  but  literature, drama,  music,   sculpture,  and   architec-
 ture,  and  every  great   nation  must  create these  things  for  itself.  Art  is the  voice of a nation  speaking through time."
Here   the   rhetoric  melds   with   truth, and  I find Jackson very convincing: "Art is the  voice of a nation speaking through time." Of  course  that  gives  rise to  many further  questions:  Is  art  objectively truthful, or does it convey  its own subjec­ tive kind  of truth? And  what about Kip­ ling's  "Old wars, old  peace, old arts  that  cease"?
In   Igr8 J. E.  H.  MacDonald, Frank
Johnston and  Lawren Harris painted in
Algoma   in  northern  Ontario,  living   in
work  car  No.  10557,  a  moveable studio and   springboard  to  the  wilderness.  Lis­ mer,  Jackson and  others  also went  north  during  the   next   few  years.  They   were joined   by  Varley   and   Tom   Thomson. The  country moved,   stirred  and   stimu­ lated   them.  One  reason  for  this  stimulus may  have   been  because  the  freedom of nature is very different from  any  possible human freedom: it consists of trees, lakes and   rivers  becoming  themselves   in  their own   way,   without  interference  except  from   weather  and   fire   which   are   also natural things  (of course I don't mean campfires) .   The  society   of   trees   and rivers meant much  to members of the Group.
In  any  event,   the  paintings they  pro­ duced  were  dramatic and,  I think, some­ what   akin  to  the  French  Impressionists. But  just "somewhat": no one could  really mistake  their  landscapes  for  French Im­ pressionism.   However,    perhaps   Wyly Grier  did  have  a  point:   there  was some similarity  in   their   painting.  But   that  wasn't  very  important at  the  time,  when the Group  was a national movement ( al­ though it  included no members from  the west  or  Maritimes until  Emily  Carr be­ came   an  honorary  member  somewhat later),  and   their   blazing   melodramatic landscapes etched themselves into  the Canadian  consciousness.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Time passed, and each member  of the Group became   more  and  more  his  own man.  Tom  Thomson drowned when  un­ fairly   young,   but   left   a   magic   legacy. Lawren   Harris   moved    and    changed, roamed  through a personal  gamut of de­ velopment,   his    beginnings    having    no seeming  connection  with   what   he  pro­ duced  near  the end  of his life. Fred  Var­  ley,  maverick  and   individualist, painted people    as   well   as   the    land,    painted "Vera," and  left  his own snub-nosed face grinning derisively  at  tradition. J.  E. H. MacDonald -well, it  may   be  that   he was too old  to absorb  more  than  the  ini­ tial  impetus of  the  Group, but  that  ini­ tial impetus was sufficient  explosion.  And Jackson, so verbal  and  personally  adven­ turous,   more  closely  identified  with   the Group  than   any  other  member,  never­  theless did  not  move  from  his beginnings  in any significant way, as Harris certainly did.  Arthur  Lismer,  whose  pen  and  pen­ cil drawings are  the subject of his daugh­ ter's book, seems frozen back in that time when  all  the  mud-slinging was going  on, and  is principally identified with  that  one fine  painting, "September Gale."
Lismer was, and became  more and more as time  passed,  an  academic, a teacher, a man who told others verbally what their paintings should  be, who corrected faults, who pointed  at shortcomings. He occupied a succession of such jobs, positions, appointments at  various  art  schools, aca­ demies  and  colleges.  Critics  labelled  him a   Sunday   Painter,   which    epithet   he wryly    acknowledged.    When    Jackson, MacDonald,   Harris,    Varley    and    the others  were exploring a full gamut of the seasons  in  painting,  Lismer   joined  them only  in  spring  and  summer for  the  most part   ("September  Gale" must  be an  ex­ ception  to  this).  He   had   to  support  a wife  and  daughter; he  had  little  money, in  fact  was  broke  or  nearly  for  much  of that early  time.
 The  indigent  artist  or poet  or whatever is an eternal  theme  even  now -now that all  the  historical  patrons and  subsidizers have  boiled  down   to   (in   this  country) The  Canada Council. Writer in  rags  in a garret, painter the  archtype of Cary's Gulley   Jimson  - these   stereotypes are still  valid   despite   artistic   helper-outers, not  least of which  is The  University.
And  it  was  always  so. There were  al­ ways two choices or possibilities  of  escape for  artists:   take  a  chance on  your  own ability  to survive in the rough-and-tumble workaday  world,  or else grab  at an estab­  lishment   teaching   job  or   various   other  kinds  of  sinecure.  And   it  was  never   a really    simple    choice.    Sometimes   the mavericks  exult  far   too  much   in  being that,  academics ditto,  each  thereby  losing some part  of  their  original far-away aim and  object. Then limited  success for  the few,  for   either   academic  or   maverick,  which  again   erodes   original  vision  and impetus.
Getting back  to Lismer: did  he do that in  order  to survive,  grab  a  teaching  job and   become  a  Sunday  painter,  become that   rare   thing,   a  great   teacher? Too easy  and  simple   to  answer   yes;  he  did that  for  good  and  valid  reasons.  I  don't know, but this book and the McLeish biography  certainly raise the question  of maverick  versus  establishment man.
Lismer's    drawings   in   A    Border     of Beauty seem  to  me  mundane, ordinary, as if one of his own more accomplished students   had   executed   them.   Of  course they are  capable, with  art  school  virtuo­ sity,  tag  ends  of  ability,  splintered frag­ ments  of vision,  something to  keep  your hand   in,  casual  impressions   of  nothing that  meant much.  I feel sad  about them. As if all the original passion,  the  elemen­ tal  savage  thing  that  changes and  never changes   and   which    echoes    unknown  depths  in our  echoing  selves-as if these things  had  died  or  quietly   been  glossed over by a job at the  Montreal Art School.

133

BOOKS IN REVIEW



I'd   rather  look  at   "October  on   the North Shore" or "The Guide's  Cabin" which  are  also Arthur Lismer,  which  are real  as "the inside  of a drunkard's stom­ ach," not  just  an  establishment  autopsy.  An   aspect,  vision,   something   without name  shines  there.  Something  done  well for its own sake, for all our sakes later­ was done  then.  I  pay homage  to that.
A.  Y.  Jackson   said  it  best:    "Now   a last  word,  because  tomorrow we  will  all be  academic. And  when  the  last  cow  is taken   from   the  drawing room  and   the walls  are   alive  with   red  maple,   yellow birch,   and   sparkling snowscapes,   I  can hear  the  young  modern painter up  north say to his pal,  'There's the  trail  those old academic Johnnies, the Group of Seven, blazed.' " And  they  did.

AL  PURDY



DOWN AND OUT ACROSS CANADA

SYDNEY HUTCHESON,  Depression Stories. New
Star Books,  cloth $g.gs, paper $3·45·
SILVER  DONALD  CAMERON,   The   Education   of
Everett   Richardson. McClelland  & Stewart,
$4·95·
DOROTHY   LIVESAY,   Right   Hand   Left   Hand.
Press  Porcepic, $I 5.oo,  paper $6.g5.

LILLIAN HELLMAN's description of "penti­ mento" -"the  old  conception,  replaced by a  later  choice,  is a way of  seeing  and  then seeing again"-differs from Dorothy Livesay's  approach to the past as outlined in The  Documentaries:  ''Generally it has seemed   better    to   leave   the   work   un­ touched, as  a  record   of  the  times;  for, though some of  the lines and  patterns are not  all  that  might   be  desired,  I  believe that   the   veracity   of  the   material  and  mood  is  more  important than   the  occa­  sional  sentimentality of expression  or  the lack of  polish in style.'' Yet, "pentimento"

I34
 may  be applied to  the  technique of  jux­ taposing photographs, articles,  letters, stories,  plays,  and   poems  of  the  thirties with   contemporary  commentary   in   the three  different typesettings of  Right Hand Left Hand.
The title  points  not  only  to the  politi­ cal polarities of the decade-fascism and communism-but also to the physical ac­ tivities  involving both  hands  of the work­ ing class. Employer commands employee: "Pick  them  up  with  your  left  hand  while your  right  hand   pulls  the  lever!" Or,  in Regina, while staying  with  her cousin, Livesay  has  to conceal  her  leftist  identity ("the right  hand  was uppermost"), so she leaves for Calgary where  there  is some confusion as to  the  "right" side of  town. She   also   uses  the   dichotomy  in   male­ female   relationships in  the  thirties: "In theory,  we  were  free  and  equal   as  com­  rades  on  the  left.  In  practice, our  right hand was  tied  to  the  kitchen  sink!"  The  subtitle,  "A  True  Life of  the  Thirties: Paris,  Toronto,  Montreal, The West and  Vancouver.  Love,   Politics,  The  Depres­ sion and Feminism," seems to indicate the variety  of  territory covered, yet in  addi­  tion Livesay devotes  chapters to New Jer­ sey and  Spain. Indeed, everything and  the kitchen sink find  their  way into  this book.
The  opening chapter, covering 1928-32 and  the  trans-Atlantic experiences of  To­ ronto and  Paris, is characteristic of  a less­ than-strict  adherence  to   the   unities   of time,   place,   and   genre   throughout  the book. Nevertheless the variety  sustains  in­ terest,   the  old-young  woman   effectively recounting  the  emergence  of  the   poet's  talents and  political   views  four  decades  ago. The provincialism of Toronto is miti­ gated   by   university  friends    like   "Jim" Watts, her father's position  as manager of the  Canadian Press,  and   ultimately, her experiences  in   Paris.   She   mentions her love affair in Paris but fails to develop it, turning instead to a  memoir in  praise  of Raymond Knister, followed  by a  critical

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



attack on  the  decadence  in  Eliot's   and
Edith Sitwell's poetry.
Returning from  Paris,  Livesay  takes up social work in Montreal. Her  commitment to Marxism is evidenced in  the  style and content  of  poems   such   as  "An   Immi­ grant," which   describes   in  clear  diction the  eviction   and   murder  of   Nick  Zyn­ chuk.
In  the  middle sections  of the  book she resides  for  periods  in  Toronto and  New Jersey,  repeating her  socialist concerns­ variations on  the  same  themes-so  that  few  individual  pieces  stand   out   beyond the others  as examples of excellence.  Sev­ eral   of  her   poems,   such   as  "Day   and Night" and    "The   Outrider," have   ap­  peared  earlier  in   Livesay's Collected Poems.  In  the  italicized commentary  of "Toronto   I934"  she  discusses  her  story "Six Years," but  the story does not appear until  two  chapters later. While  her  trip out  west  does  eventually  provide   a  geo­ graphical break, no artistic change occurs.
A  more  precise  change takes  place  in the  chapter  on  the  Spanish  Civil   War with Norman Bethune's letter  to New Frontier and  an  interview with  Heming­ way   which  launch  Livesay   into  her  comments and   poems,  "Catalonia" and "Lorca," on the War.  In the final chapter Livesay   returns  to   Vancouver  in   I 939 with her husband, Duncan Macnair. After presenting  the   violent    attacks  by   the RCMP on  Steve  Brodie,   the  post  office leader, Livesay  withdraws, settling  down to  family  life  on  the  North Shore  after active   participation in  the  cause  of  the left  through  the  decade. This  silence  at the  beginning of World   War  II forms  a curious  conclusion.
The  editors  have  undoubtedly had both hands full  arranging all  the  materials. In the  same  breath of the  Introduction that David  Amason talks  about the  literature of the  period  being  filled  with  pathos  and bad  grammar, he  is guilty  of solecism  in a related   field,  for  he  mis-spells  "social
 fermant" and  at  the  opposite end  of the book  Comintern  becomes   "Commitern"
-excusable  errors  if  one  takes  into  ac­ count  the astigmatic pressures of the triple typography.
While out west, Dorothy Livesay wished
to  reach   Fernie, B.C.,  in  search   of  the story  of men  locked  out  in  what  was  al­ most  a  ghost   town.   Sydney   Hutcheson moved  to Fernie in I 908 (one year before Livesay's  birth)  and  recalls  the  fires and the  strikes  at  the  coal  mines. In  Depres­ sion Stories Hutcheson offers twenty short  sketches,  which   are  appropriate for  the disjointed, episodic life of a transient able to  find  only  temporary  jobs. The  stories are  followed  by an  appendix containing a  glossary  of  "transient lingo,"  but  one wonders whether monetary items  such  as "buck,"  "four  bits,"  "copper," "lucre," and  "fin"  are  so  obscure   as  to  require definition.
The  titles of the first two stories, "Graz­ ing"  and  "Roaming," suggest  the animal level to which the transient was frequently forced  to descend: "The  only  difference between  me and  a horse  was  that  I wore clothes." The titles also indicate the tran­ sient quality  of  Hutcheson's activities dur­ ing the Depression; he spends a lot of time on  trains moving from  one  town  to  an­ other  in search of some form of temporary employment. He  travels  by boxcar  as far east as Quebec where conditions are far worse than  out  west. The turning point  in Hutcheson's  life  occurs   during  a  snow slide when  a rock fractures his skull caus­ ing  narcolepsy, a  condition   resulting   in excessive sleepiness.  He visits a number of doctors  and  hospitals and  describes  con­ ditions   in  several   British  Columbia hos­ pitals.
Hutcheson explains the  background of his socialism and in a brief philosophic chapter, "Free," he speculates on freedom and  responsibility. Although a socialist, he is against  welfare  measures  that  destroy individual initiative to work.  "In  I940-I

135

BOOKS IN REVIEW



the  Unemployment Act was brought into being,  and  after  every  citizen  in  Canada had  been  stamped with  a permanent number for the first time, that  was the beginning of the end."
While  Livesay  and  Hutcheson portray
company-owned towns out west, Silver Donald  Cameron presents the struggles between  labour and  management on  the east  coast  during the  Nova Scotia  fisher­ men's  strike  of  I970-71.  Cameron  struc­  tures  The Education of  Everett  Richard­ son  on   the   hypothetical  progress   from Grade  School  to  High  School  to Junior College to University to Graduate School with each stage separated by an Interlude. This  pattern of labelling  is highly ironic, for  the  level  of education of Richardson and   his  fellow   workers   falls  far   below those chapter titles. Like Dorothy  Livesay and  Sidney  Hutcheson, Everett  Richard­ son undergoes a socialistic apprenticeship. With  the help  of a tape  recorder, chroni­ cler  Cameron retains  the  oral  quality  of the  Nova  Scotia  regional   tales,  much  as Hutcheson  has  done   directly   in  British Columbia.
Cameron makes  no  pretense  at  objec­
tivity,  siding  with  the  striking  fishermen, yet  he  does  present   fairly   the  manage­ ment's  point   of  view.  He  admires   the fishermen's courage and  practicality in a hostile  environment   where   drowning  is common. No matter  how hard  the fisher­ man  works,  he  never  surpasses  the  less­ than-$I-an-hour exploitation of a  feudal society:  in  I 972  the  Richardsons did  not have  a flush  toilet.  The  strong  personali­ ties of the  antagonists result  in  dramatic confrontations in  Canso  Straits between Donnie  Cadegan, the manager of Acadia Fisheries,  and  Homer  Stevens,  president  of  the   United   Fishermen  and  Allied
\Vorkers. Between  these two lies Everett Richardson, Everyman of the  fishing world; beyond  them are the multinational corporations of England and  the  United States,  and  the  competing unions  of  the
 independent Seafood  Workers  and  the American controlled Food Workers. The clergy are  soon forced  to take sides in the strike, and  the most sympathetic, Ron Parsons,  Anglican rector  of Canso,  even­ tually  loses his pulpit because  of  pressure  from  the  Nova  Scotian  Establishment on the Church.
Ostensibly about Everett Richardson, the book is in fact more about politics, business, religion, and social structure in Nova  Scotia   than   about any  individual. We lose sight of Richardson for long stretches  both   before  and   after   his  sen­ tence   of   nine   months   for   contempt  of court.
At  the  very  centre of the  book, as  the strike  drags on  through  the  summer of
I 970,  Cameron interrupts  the  narrative briefly:    "Cherished  reader,  if  you   are bored  by now  I  don't blame  you." Cam­ eron   then   points   to  a  problem  common to all  three  books  under  review:  "If this were  a  novel  I  could  wave  a  hand   and abolish  the  tedium. But  it's  not  a  novel:  these  are  real  people,  real  events." With the more  recent  genres  like  the  new  jour­ nalism and  Livesay's documentary poems, traditional categories disappear, so that  it is  in  vain   to  compare  Livesay's   poetry  with   the  poems  of  Auden,   Spender, or Day  Lewis, whom  she  praises.  It is also unfair  to  ask  Cameron  and   Hutcheson to treat  social  problems  in the manner of Dickens, Zola,  or  Steinbeck. Cameron blames  the  boredom on the  company ads by Booth  and  Acadia, but  these capitalist statements are  too brief  to have a monop­ oly on  tedium. How  stimulating are  most of the  journalistic articles  in  Right  Hand Left  Hand?
After  pleading for the reader's patience, Cameron  promises   something  livelier   in the  next   interlude, a  promise   which   he does  fulfill  in  "Country Cunning and Unofficial Life." The  "folk" anecdotes give a lively account of dodging  the police and  stories  swapped  in  the  garage. One

BOOKS IN REVIEW



wishes   that    Cameron  had    entertained with   more   "unofficial  life,"   particularly since he himself  recognizes how trying official life can  be.

MICHAEL GREENSTEIN



SNOW WHITE AND ROSE RED

SYLVIA FRASER, A  Casual  Affair. McClelland &
Stewart, $12.95·
THE VERY CASUAL COVER of Sylvia Fraser's latest  novel  is variations on  the  theme  of black  and  blue  with  the  obligingly synes­ thetic  author wrapped in a  matching en­ semble  on  the  back.  The  whole  works  is not  done  up  in  cello,  but  then  you can't sell cello  for  $12.95· With  the  exception of a single  drop  of  blood  and  one  pastel garden  insert,   this  is  the  last   touch   of colour   until   The  Man  From   Glad,   her White  Knight, finally, on page 267, cracks open   the   seamless   flesh   of   the   White  Princess,  formerly a  scullery  maid.  This  is no  mean  feat,  as  we know  from  fairy­ tales  they  don't  bruise  easily.
A Casual Affair  is described as a  mod­ ern  fairytale, and,  assuming the reader  is as   thick   as   the   paper   McClelland  & Stewart lavished  on  this spectacle, Fraser  has   explicated her   allegory   with   every
stroke  of  the  pen.  She  is the  Bad  Fairy,
pointing  her   colourless   odourless   wand at every metaphor, giving  a wonderful freshman tour  of phallic symbolism.  And just  in  case  the  cold  snow  flurry  of  sex, sadism  and  naive  political commentary obscures  what is actually going  on in  the chapel perilous, she  lays  it  all  on  for  us dullards  in   the   final   pages.   What  she really wanted to say all along  was

that Western materialism had  developed because  of   the   repression  of   the   body   in favour of  the   head -the  external body  of concrete and   steel, as  compensation. Much
 good   had   come  from   such   a  concentration of   energy.    A   flowering  of   the    arts    and sciences.  But  now  it  was  time  for  the  Planet Earth to get  its  head  together.

Now we are delivered  from  the white radiance of interminable couplings in the glass tower to the globe of many  coloured glass, and  not  a moment too  soon.
The  White    Knight  and    the   White
Princess,   ostensibly   pawns   in   a   game, remain  nameless   and   have   no   reality. There  is  no   touching,  just   the   White Knight  limping   from   square  to  square down  the road,  dragging his wilted sword, and   the   White    Princess   humping  the gothic peaks of her own autoromance, watching all this with  a  jelly eye and recording it with  her  camera. By the end, she has consumed  all  the  raw white  meat and  is reborn,  in water; where  else, for Lycidas  your  sorrow  is not  dead.
The dialogue  in A Casual Affair should
have  been written in bubbles.  The words, never  more  than  cartoon captions, defeat their own comic intention and  become parodies of themselves  rather than  of the modern romance genre  which  Fraser ostensibly intends to satirize.  She  has for­ gotten    that    the   leaven    of   humour   is reality.  The  closest  we come  to  the  real prismatic  core   of   the   White   Princess, which  is all  scullery  maid after  all,  is in the   fantasy   chapters   which    are   inter­ spersed with the narrative. But realization of  the  interior  antagonists, Knight  and  Lady, is denied  in  the  almost  compulsive separation between  idea and symbol, body and  mind,  fantasy  and  reality.
Integration  of  all  this  mess,  pleasure and   reality,   which    Marian  Engel   has more or less managed in Bear, may  be too much   for  the   White   Princess   living   in feverish  neatness  in a white  apartment in the  glass  tower,  but  it  might   have  been the substance of a real  comedy.  What we are  left  with  is a Freudian notebook  and not  a  fairytale  at  all.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Since we are intended to consider the novel  as literature, there  is the obligatory Canadian content, an eskimo allegory,  an angel  in the snow which is de rigeur in Canadian fiction,  and  cheeky allusions  to an  ex  cabinet minister  with  pewter  hair, a  gleaming facade and  a  mouth   as  foul as our  own  White  Knight. Apply soap  to this  and  other places,  as granny used  to do, and we are left with a Harlequin Romance, which  would  be  a  bargain   at a fraction the  price.
LINDA ROGERS


BOXED SET

ROBERT  ALLEN,   The  Assumption   of  Private
Lives.  New Delta,   $2.50.
CYRIL   DABYDEEN,    Goatsong.   Mosaic   Press/ Valley  Editions,  n.p.
MICHAEL HARRIS, Grace. New Delta,  $3.00.
BOB    MCGEE,  The   Shanty-Horses:  James  Bay
Poems.  New Delta,  $2.50.
ANNE  MCLEAN,  LIL. New Delta,   $2.50. RICHARD  SOMMER,  The   Other  Side  of Games.
New Delta,   $2.50.

THE   PROSPECT  OF  REVIEWING   six  slim books  of often-thin verse brings  to mind a well-known Canadian  poet's  method  of dealing with   the  plethora of  books  sent his way. Only a few gain shelf space; the majority are  boxed  for a  five-to-ten-year period  of maturation. When  the box is opened, the  verses  do  not  begin  to  sing any  better than  before; but  the  books containing  them   fetch   hard   cash   from out-of-print dealers.Sometimes that seems the  only  justification for  the  publishing of relatively new  poets.
The word  relatively is crucial   because five of the six poets under review have published books before. Of  the five, three have  produced  new  volumes  that   could be considered worthwhile only as first books. Richard Sommer's The Other  Side of Games  is dominated by attempts at profound  word-play which  seem  to exist
 only  for  their  own  sake.  Otherwise, the style is mostly prosaic; ideas, shallow  ones at  that,  always  take  precedence over  their language. Some   of  the   verses  near   the end  of  the  book  are  stronger, but  Som­ mer's  general artistic creed  can  be  found  in  the  conclusion of  a  particular  poem:
"don't leave  poetry   to  the  poets, I don't
try  to  write  a  poem,  I write  one. I just
pick up a pencil  & write  one." Somewhat
better  is  Cyril   Dabydeen's  Goatsong, a collection   of   narrative  and    anecdotal pieces   that    make   obvious   observations about poverty,  love,  and  human  cruelty. Dabydeen is  usually  content to  confront the reader with  unheightened fact. Some­ times   the  details   are   carefully  selected,  but  the  points  to which  they lead  are  too insistent 	and 	repetitive.	Technically, Dabydeen is reasonably smooth. His lines, however, are   too  short  to  permit much  development  of   emotion;  and   they  are  short  consistently,  regardless of  the  sub­ ject  or  mood.   A  more   judicious   editor might   have    helped    him    greatly,    and saved  the reader from  blatantly sentimen­ tal    passages,    the    triteness    of	"Lady Icarus"  (about Maria,  who  fell  from  a hotel), and  the apostrophizing of a tourist  magazine. There are some good  poems  in Goatsong:  Dabydeen has an  eye for  ten­  sions,  even  if  he  often   fails  to  develop  them. But there  aren't enough  for a book. Maybe  his  other  book  published  in  the same  year  contains  Dabydeen's best  for I977· Bob  McGee's The  Shanty-Horses: James   Bay  Poems  ranks  as  a  first  book also,  because   it  lacks  control. Straining to  find  metaphor, McGee  fabricates too many,  some  ludicrous: witness  the  refer­ ence  to a  beaver's "jaw's chainsaw." Be­ cause   his  form   is  heavily  narrative,  he offers  much   that  is prosaic,  and  his  line endings are often  arbitrary. Also arbitrary
-and inexplicable-is his use of a capi­ tal letter at  the  beginning of each stanza. But  McGee, like  many  poets  writing in Canada, is admirable for  his  attempt to

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



deal  with  the  contemporary landscape - or  with  the  landscape in a contemporary way.  His  mistake   is  to  impose   external metaphor in an  attempt to catch  the big­ ness. That bigness must  be distilled  in its own  terms. Restraint seems to be the key, and   McGee   shows  promise   of  learning restraint,  most   notably    in   a   satisfying "Epitaph" for   another  McGee  (maybe an  uncle).
In  an  order of increasing quality, The
Assumption  of  Private  Lives  comes
fourth.  Robert  Allen   has   a   talent   for getting into  the experiences of other peo­ ple,   for   condensing  the   historical   past and   the   dramatic  present. Too   often,  though, Allen  is descriptive  rather  than  engaging.  Wordiness and   the  lack   of music  retard the verses, and  many  of the endings fail-either  because the  point is pushed  too hard, or  because an  imagistic  flatness  conceals  meaning. But  several  of the  poems  are  rescued  by a fine humour; and    the    coincidence   of    condensation, witty  metaphor, and  a colloquial rapport with   the  reader  makes  "The Old   Men Picnic  in High  Park" worthy of anyone's attention.
Attention  to  Anne   McLean's  LIL   at this  point   does  not  rank  it  higher   than those books already mentioned. Rather, it is separated from  the  rest because  its sta­ tus  as  a  first  book  allows  for  a  leniency
not   accorded   the   others.  On    stylistic grounds as  well,  LIL   is  set  apart. At  a
glance,  this book is like Ondaatje's Billy: a  collage  of  materials, set  as  a  Western, challenging  the  frontiers  between   prose and   poetry.  But  it's  not.  Generally, the poems  are   prose  in  the  line  lengths   of verse;  the  prose,  after  an  interesting  few pages,  is self-conscious.  The problem   of response,  ultimately, is to determine what Anne  McLean intends. Has  she  written
 a  parody  of  Westerns, an  exploration of the  art  of  narrative, a  metaphysical treatise,   or   an   allegory   on   Canadian­ American   relations?   Probably  all  four; but  which  is which,  at any  given  time? When   dancehall-girl  says  to  gunslinger,
"Maybe he found  it difficult  to breathe I
the  air  of  an   alien   mythology,"  is  the
reader   prompted  to   ponder,  laugh,   or cry? And how  serious  is a work  in which
she  says, later, "But  Slade, I'm  afraid I
your   trouble   I is  seeing   double"?   Mc­
Lean's intent is undoubtedly serious,  but
her  craft   conveys   intent  only   half   the time.
Michael    Harris  also   encourages  the reader  to consider halves.  Grace is split,
almost  down  the middle. The first thirty­ eight  pages exhibit invention  unchecked: metaphoric  shifts  and   wordiness   crowd the   page;   rhythms are   allowed   to   in­ dulge    themselves; a   tendency   toward unstressed  syllables  at  line-ends dissipates energy;  and  the occasional accuracies dis­ appear in  the  mass. One  suspects  Harris of  demanding  his  poem  from  each  day, and  of  insisting that  it be published. The last  twenty-six  pages,  on  the  other  hand, are  clean  by  comparison. This   series  of poems entitled "Death & Miss  Emily"­ about   the  poet  Dickinson  and her  final, successful   suitor  - contains  some   ex­ tremely compact and satisfying  lines. One  should complain that  Harris over-explains a few points, and  that  energy  runs  down (into  abstractions)  near   the  end  of  the series;  but  the  historical fiction  provides  a  frame within  which  Harris  successfully arranges metaphor.  Those  twenty-six pages  are  the  best,  by  far,  in  these  six books.  Shelf  space   for   Miss  Emily,  ap­ proached by  (and   approaching)   Death; box-like limbo  for  the  rest.
RON  MILES







ROY DANIELLS
1902-1979

IT  WAS MY  WIFE  WHO  NOTICED the  brief obituary notice  in the Edmonton Journal and  called  out  to  me  that  Roy  Daniells had   died.   The  news  came   as  a  shock, even  though I had   heard   only  recently that  he  had  not  been  too well. I thought of the last time we had  met, at Bill New's house  for  dinner in  December   of  1977.
Roy had  not  been  well, and  he had  come
 worout, somehow. The  country  would surv1ve.
But now he himself  was no longer  here. I  went   upstairs  and   took   Deeper   Into The Forest  from  the  shelf.  It was  Roy's first volume  of poems,  published in 1948. I  read   for  a  while.  They   are   haunting poems.   I had   forgotten  how   haunting. One  in particular seemed  to have  been written for  just  this  moment.

Let   the  soft  darkness cloud  and  cover  me, The cord   be  loosed, the   ponderous golden
bowl
Broken, the  last  word  spoken; let  the  howl
Of  the  dog  his single token  of sorrow be. Give   the   grave-digger  ale,   the   man-of-law
his  fee,
And  go at eve, I pray  you, say to the  owl
Good-bye, for  me;   to  the  long-legged foal
Under the   beech,   Good-bye; to  every   tree
Good-bye, good-bye, good-bye!

through a rather rough  period,  but when he  and   Laurenda came  into   the  living room,  his  great   presence  at  once  mani­ fested   itself.   Tall,  slightly   stooped,  he seemed   to  belie  his  75  years.  The   voice was as firm and  resonant as ever, and  he told stories  with  the same dramatic verve that  always made it a pleasure  to be with him.
Towards  the   end   of  the  evening   he tired   a  bit,  but   afterwards,  when  Lau­ renda  kindly  offered  to drive  me  back  to my  hotel,  his energy  came  surging back, and  in  the  car  he  talked  with  great  ani­ mation.  He   talked    of   going   to  Rome again.  Then he  told  an  astonishing story of a visit  to the  Vatican  archives,  and  of being  allowed   to  hold  in  his  hands   an original letter  that Michelangelo had  sent to Julius II,  asking  the  Pope  for  money. "How  awesome  it felt  to hold  that  letter  in  one's  hands," Roy  said.
Then  we  spoke   of  matters  closer   to home.  He  was worried about  some of the things  that  were happening in Canada, above  all about the  future  of  Confedera­ tion, but when  we parted  he was buoyant, his  handshake  was  firm.  Things  would
 Who   called
Death the  last  enemy, not  the  first  of friends?
Who  in  a  distant field  would   place  our
peace?
When I am  dead, when  I am  dark  and  cold,
Take then these  thanks, my  God, for  my release,
That for  this  life  thy  kindness made amends.

Roy  Daniells  was  deeply  aware  of the tragic  and  melancholy nature of the  hu­ man  condition. But  precisely  because of that   awareness he  had  an  extraordinary zest for life and  experience. He was above  all a marvellous teacher  of literature, who could   transmit  his  enormous  knowledge and  scholarship to  freshman and  gradu­ ate  student alike. He  believed  in  the  hu­  manizing and  civilizing  mission  of  great  literature.  He   believed    that    literature really  mattered,  that it  was  essential   to the life of an  individual as well as to the life  of  a  nation.  And   his  students  res­ ponded to  that vision,  and  to  the  clarity and  grace  with  which  he could  explicate the  most  complex works  of  literature.
The literature of  the  seventeenth  cen­ tury,  particularly Milton, and  the  Cana­ dian    literary  tradition   were   his   chief

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



interests.  In  the  purely  Canadian context, he  belongs  to  that  small  group  of  Cana­ dian  scholars  who  helped  to establish  the study  of  Canadian  literature  as  an  im­ portant academic  discipline.
He  never  confined himself  to a narrow textual or  severely  technical scholarship. His  was  an  extraordinary,  wide-ranging mind.   In   Milton,  Mannerism and   Ba­ roque   ( 1963)  he  examines the  works of Milton   in  the  context of  a  great inter­ national  tradition  of   literature and   art.  And   when   he   writes   about    Canadian literature, he  does  so with  a  full  aware­ ness of all  the historical and  cultural fac­ tors  that  have  gone  into  the  making   of this  country  and   that   have   created  its special  problems. One   need  only  look  at his  chapter on   the  development of  our literature from  Confederation to the First World   War   in   the   Literary   History   of Canada   ( 1965)  or  at  his  long  essay on Canadian poetry  and  the Canadian  novel in The Culture of Contemporary Canada
(  957)   to   become   aware of   the   wide frame  of   reference  within   which    he
worked. At the same time, he was always aware  that   he   wrote   from   a   Western point  of view.
A  flight   across   Canada  (he   wrote in   The Culture  of  Contemporary Canada)  reveals that  the   major  landing  fields   are   few   in number and   that each   has  its  own  merits  as a point from   which   the  country as  a  whole could be  assessed.  The centres are  few  and become  more  widely  separated until the  last is reached on  the  edge  of  the  Pacific. From this  point  of  vantage (or  disadvantage)  the "commercial  empire  of  the   St.   Lawrence" will  seem   a  long   way   off;   so  will  French Canada,  and,  even   more,  the    Maritimes. But  this  country has  never   had  a true  focal point  since   the   fall   of  Quebec, has   never felt  as  a  "precious stone   set  in  a silver  sea.
... " The  Westerner can   therefore  permit himself   to   hope    that  his   own   view   is  as valid  as another's; he may  even  borrow from Californians  the   confidence that  the   West most   clearly  embodies  the   formative   pro­ cesses  of  the   frontier, an  understanding of which   is   the   first   necessity   to   an   under­ standing of  the  country.
 His  love of  the  land,  of  the  great  ter­ rain  as  he often  called  it,  was  deep  and  abiding. It  manifested itself   in   casual conversations  as   well   as   in   numerous comments in his writings, above all in his book    Alexander    Mackenzie   and    the North    West   (I96g). "It  is  perhaps  at Great  Slave Lake  that  Mackenzie's world opens  around one  to  produce the  fullest shock   of  recognition,"  he  writes.   "The world   of   affairs,  communications  and  news  is  very  remote and   the  real  centre of  things seems here  in this nexus of land, water  and  spreading sky." He feels the presence of Mackenzie here, on the beach of  the  great  lake,  and  he  bids  him  fare­ well, "watching him  withdraw into earth  and   air  and   water, here   present  in  all their  immensity."
There is in this passage something akin to religious awe. For Roy Daniells was a deeply religious man. His poetry above all testifies to  that. Like  so much  else in  his character, his  religious  feeling  was  com­ plex.  He  allowed   me  one  rare  moment of insight  into  that  part  of his being.
It was in  Ottawa, where  we had  met at the annual meetings of the Learned Societies.  It was  a  hot  and   humid  eve­ ning,  and  he  asked  me if I wanted  to go for  a  walk  with  him.  We  strolled  along  the  river,  talking. He  was  a  marvellous observer  of the  university  world,  and  the stories  he  told   were  always  full  of  wit and  irony.
All at once  he grew  serious,  even  som­
bre. Some  time  ago, he said, he had  sud­ denly  realized   that   according to  a  strict  fundamentalist  Christian   interpretation, the  Jewish  friends whom  he  loved  could not enter  Paradise because  they were  un­  baptized. That  realization came  as a  ter­  rible  shock  to  him.  It was shattering, he said.  It  forced   him   to  make   a   radical reassessment  of  his  faith.
I did  not  know  what  to say, and  for  a
long  time  we  walked  on  in  silence.

OPINIONS AND NOTES



Then he said,  "When the  time  comes, I shall  meet  you in  Paradise."
Was there a touch  of irony in the voice?
I  could  not  detect it. Was  there  a  glim­ mer  of a  smile  in  the  eyes?  I  could  not see it.  But  suddenly, as we  walked  on  in silence  beside  the  Ottawa  river,  the  mo­ ment  became inexpressibly moving.

HENRY KREISEL




D. C. SCOTT'S "AT GULL LAKE: AUGUST, 1810"

THE  LATER  PHASE of Duncan Campbell Scott's career  as a  poet,  that  is, the  long decline  which  set in after  the  publication of  Via   Borealis  in   I9o6,  is  marked   by only  a  handful  of  distinguished  poems, among  which  must  be counted "Lines  in Memory  of   Edmund  Morris"  ( I9I5), "Powassan's Drum" ( 1926), "A  Scene at Lake    Manitou"  and    "At   Gull   Lake: August,   I8IO"   (both I935). The  last  of these,  in  particular,  has  been   receiving increasing attention,  indeed   is  close  to attaining in the Scott  canon  a position  of centrality  comparable  to   that   held   by "The Piper  of Arll." Yet  no  one,  to my knowledge, has so far  commented on  the source  of the  poem; this despite  the  fact that  its title, so specific as to time  (August
18I o)   and   place   (Gull   Lake) , suggests that  the  narrative of the poem  relates  an actual, historical event.
Indeed the poem  is based on chronicle,
and how far we choose to believe the chronicle  itself   must   depend  on   how much  truth we attribute to  the  words  of the  fur-trader, Alexander Henry   (the younger; d.   I8I4), for  it  is  in  Henry's JournaP-more specifically, in the entry
 for  Aug.  29,  I8oo2 -that  the  source  of "At  Gull  Lake: August,   I8Io" is  to  be found.
This  fact  is of more  than  trivial  interest because  a  comparison of  the  two  narra­ tives -Henry's   and    Scott's -with   a view  to discerning how  Scott  confronted and  transformed his material, will lead  to a  finer  understanding of  Scott's artistry as a writer. For  this reason  I quote  in its entirety  Alexander  Henry's  narrative of the   incident,  noting   meanwhile  certain points    of   fact   at   which   Scott's   poem diverges  from  its  source:

At  night 13  was  troubled  by  the  visit  of a young  womanfrom the  other side  [of  the river]   which   nearly   occasioned  an    ugly affair. About ten  o'clock she  came  into my tent without solicitation. I was  asleep;  she awoke   me   and  asked   for   liquor.  I   recog­ nized   her   voice5   and   knew   that   her   hus­  band,6  the   greatest  scoundrel of   them   all,  was exceedingly  jealous. I  therefore  advised her   to   return  instantly,   and    not   let   him know   she  had   been   here.  She   requested  a dram, although she  was  sober. I offered her  a   little  mixed    liquor,   which    she   refused, telling  me   she   wanted   'augumaucbane.' I was  obliged  to  open  my  case  and   give  her  a glass  of French brandy, which  I made her  swallow    at   one   draught;   but    whether  it actually choked  her  or  she  was feigning, she fell   down  as   if    senseless   and    lay   like   a corpse. I was  anxious to  get  her  away,   but  my  endeavours  were  in  vain; it  was  totally dark   and  I  began to   believe  her   dead. I thought  to  draw her   to  the   tent   door, and woke   up   my   servant,  whom    I  desired to assist  me.  I sent   him  for  a  kettle of  water, which I  poured over   her   head    while   he held   her   up; a second was  applied  in  the same  manner, but  to  no  purpose. I became uneasy  about  her,  and    sent   for   a   third kettle,  the   contents of  which    I  dashed in her  face  with   all  my  strength. She  groaned, and   began  to  speak. I lost  no  time   before sending  the    man    to   conduct  her    to   her canoe. In a  half  an  hour she  returned, hav­ ing   shifted  her   clothes  and    dressed   very fine; her  husband being  an  excellent  hunter and without children, she  had  always plenty of  finery. She   told   me  in  plain  terms  that she  had   left  her  husband and  come  to  live with  me.  This was  news  I  neither expected

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



nor   desired. I  represented to  her   the  im­ propriety of her  doing so, her  husband  being  fond  of  her  and  extremely  jealous.  Her an­ swer  was,  that she  did   not  care  for him  or any   other  Indian, and   was  determined  to stay   with   me  at  the   risk   of   her   life.  Just  then  we   heard  a   great   bustle   across   the  river,    and   the   Indians   bawling  out    'take care!'  We   were   going  to  be  fired   on.  We saw  the  flash  of  a gun,  but   it  appeared to miss  fire.  I had   no  doubt  the   woman  was the   cause    of   this,   and   I  insisted on   her  returning  to   her   husband;  but   she   would  not.   Observing  that  the   men   had   made  a fire,   I called   my  servant  and   desired  him to  take   her  to  the   fire  and keep   her  from  troubling   me   again.  This  he    did    much  against  her  inclination,  being compelled to use  main  strength, and   by  good   luck   got her   on   board  a   canoe  that  was   crossing. The  noise  we  had   heard on  the  other side was  made by the  husband, who,  knowing of his wife's  intention, had  determined to shoot  at  my  tent; but   his  gun   only  flashed, and  his  brothers took  it  from  him.  On  his  wife's return  he   asked   her   where  she   had   been. She  made no  secret of  the  matter, but  said she  was  determined  to  go  with   me.  'Well, then,'  said   the   Indian,  'if   you   are   deter­ mined to  leave  me,  I will  at least  have  the  satisfaction  of   spoiling  your   pretty  face.'  He caught up  a  large  fire-brand, threw her  on  her  back, and  rubbed it  in  her  face  with  all his might, until  the  fire was extinguished. Then  letting   her   up,   'Now,'  says   he,   'go and   see  your   beloved,  and   ask   him   if  he likes  you  as  well  as  he did  before.' Her  face  was in a  horrid condition. I was  sorry  for it; she   was   really   the   handsomest  woman   on the  river,  and   not   more   than I 8  years   of age. Still, I can  say  I never  had  connection with   her,   as  she   always   told   me  if  I  did that  she  would   publish it  and   live  with  me in  spite  of  everybody. This I did   not  wish, as   I  was   well   aware  of  the   consequences. Thus ended a very  unpleasant  affair, with the  ruin  of a pretty face.


NOTES

1 New   Light    on   the   Early   History   of  the Greater   Northwest. The   Manuscript   Jour­ nals of Alexander Henry  ... and  of  David Thompson ... I 799-IB I 4·  Exploration and Adventure among  the  Indians   on  the  Red, Saskatchewan,    Missouri 	and 	Columbia Rivers,   ed.   Elliott  Coues    (N.Y.:  Harper,
 I Bg 7 ; rpt.   3  vols.  in  2,  Minneapolis: Ross
&  Haines, 1965), I,  7I-73·
2  Scott, for  what reason we  do  not  know, advanced  the   date of  the   incident  by  ten years.  The place  was  also  changed - from Henry's Red  River (in  southern  Manitoba) to   Gull   Lake    (in   Alberta,   just   north  of Red   Deer);  Gull    Lake    is   mentioned   in Henry's journal (II,  637)   but  not  in  con­ nection with   the   incident  under  discussion here.
a  The "I" is  Alexander Henry  himself; the name  "Nairn" is Scott's invention,  appear­ ing  also  in   his  short   story,   "In   the   Year  r8o6" (The Witching of Elspie, I923).
4  The woman   is  unnamed in  Henry's  narra­ tive.  Scott's "Keejigo" is  an  invention; he may  have   taken the   name  from   a  glossary  in  Henry's Journal  (II,  536)  where "Keji­ kong" is  listed   as  the   Ojibway  word   for "sky."
6   Though  Henry  here   indicates that  he  was at least  acquainted with   the  woman, she  is not  mentioned in his Journal prior to this incident.
6   Her   husband  was  Tabashaw, the   chief   of the band  of Saulteaux which  accompanied Henry at  this   stage   of  his   journey.  Taba­ shaw  is mentioned several times  by  name in Henry's Journal  (see  the  Index,  vol.  III of Coues' edition); a footnote (1, 53)   informs the  reader that he was  "killed  by Sioux late  in  IBo7."

LEON SLONIM



I. V. CRAWFORD:
THE GROWING LEGEND

RESEARCH INTO THE LIFE OF  Isabella Valancy Crawford, Canada's first woman poet  and   freelance  writer   to  make   her living almost  entirely from  her  writing, is beginning  to  proliferate, and  although a number of interesting facts  have  come  to light  recently,  there  are still large  gaps  in her story. Information about the Toronto years is particularly vague.  When exactly did  she  and   her  mother, Sidney  Craw­ ford,   move  to  Toronto and  where   did

OPINIONS AND NOTES



they  first  live?  We  simply  don't  know. The little  we do  know  for  certain  about this  period  is what  Crawford herself  has left  us  in  the  brief  autobiographical sketch she wrote for Seranus, the literary editor of Week:

I am  of  mingled Scotch, French  and  Eng­ lish  descent, born   in  Dublin,  Ireland. My father was Stephen Dennis  Crawford, M.D., M.R.C.S.  England,  and  !.M.B.A. Canada. I  am   his   sixth   child   and   only   surviving daughter.  I was  brought  to  Canada by  my parents in  my  earliest childhood, and   have  never   left   the  country since   that period. I was  educated  at home,  and  have  never  left my  home   but  for  a  month, that  amount of absence being scattered over  all  my life.  My father  settled  finally   in  Peterborough, On­ tario, where  he passed  on.  My  mother and  I then  came  to  Toronto where  we  have  since resided.   I   have    written   largely  for    the American    Press,   but    only   published   one volume of  my  own  account, "Old  Spookses' Pass:   Malcolm's Katie and   Other  Poems", which  appeared in  1884,  in Toronto, and  is decorated with  press  errors as  a  Zulu  chief is  laden with   beads.   Voila  Toutfl

What year  did  the  surviving Crawfords move  to  Toronto? Was it  in  1876,  after the  sister,  Emma  Naomi,   died?   Or   the spring    of    1879,   the   year    Crawford's poetry   began   to  appear in  the  Tor onto Telegram? Or in 188o, as is assumed  in Peterborough? Again,  we don't know.
We  have   something more  definite   to go  on  after   that,  however,   from   these entries   in  the  Toronto City  Directories dated as indicated:

1883   Sidney Crawford, wid  of  Stephen D, rms,  214  Adelaide  W.
1884  Mrs.  Crawford, bds,  214 Adelaide W.
188s  Crawford, Miss  Isabella  V,  bds,   180
Adelaide   W.
Crawford,  Sidney, wid  Stephen,  bds,
180 Adelaide W.
1886  [no  entry]
1887  Crawford,  Miss   Isabella  V,  bds,   57
John.

These   dates  should   be  moved  back  one year. In the 188o's, the City Directories, published  at   the  beginning of  the  year

144
 indicated, contained the  information for the  previous  year.  (This was  not  true  of the   187o's.)   Thus  the   notation  in   the City  Directory for  1883, for example, means  that  the  Crawfords were  living  at
214  Adelaide W.  in  1882.
Some  interesting observations can  be inferred  from   these   entries   beyond   the fact  that  they  establish  specific  addresses for  some  of  these  years.  A  point  of sorts can  be made  about the  use of Crawford's given  names  since  some difference of opinion  exists   over    whether   she   was known   as   Isabella  or   Valancy  to   her family.   The   case   for   Valancy  can   be traced  to a story in Katherine Hale's biographical sketch  in her introduction to Isabella    V alancy   Crawford  which   she edited   in  1923  for  the  Makers of  Cana­ dian  Literature series. Hale reports a Miss Wallis    recalled     hearing    Peterborough children,  who  were  following  the   poet, taunting her   with   the  unfamiliar  "Va­ lancy." But  in  those  days  girls  were  fre­ quently   called   by   their    double    given names, and  it is possible that  the children, having  heard  the   poet   called   "Isabella Valancy,"  picked    up    the   Valancy   to taunt her with.  It  is more  than  likely that members of the poet's  immediate family called  her by her double  name at times, shortening it  later   to  Isabella. Her  bro­ ther,  at any  rate,  referred to  her  as  Isa­  bella.2    The   listing    in   the   Directories seems  to  support the  evidence  that   she was  called   Isabella  by  those  who  knew her.
Far   more   intriguing  is  that   notation "bds" in the Directory entries.  It has been assumed, up to now, that  in Toronto Crawford and  her  mother lived  either in a  couple   of  rooms  or  in  what   was  then known  as a flat, the  forerunner of today's apartment. No  attention  has  been  paid to the fact that in four of these Directory entries, Crawford or her mother are listed as boarding, not  rooming. This  opens  up a  whole  new  field  of  speculation about

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



the  kind  of life  the  Crawfords were  sub­ jected  to  while  they  were  living  in  To­  ronto. The  boarding houses  of   that   era had   a   distinct   character   of   their   own that   ought   to  add  background  richness to  the  poet's  biography when  it is finally written.
For  it  would  appear from   the  Direc­ tory  entries   that   the   Crawfords  moved frequently from  boarding house  to board­ ing  house  along  Adelaide. Not  only  that,  but  they  were  often  in  debt  to  the  land­  lord  or  landlady.3  This  is  apparent from calculations in  the  poet's  handwriting on the   cover   of   the   memorandum  book tucked  in among her  unpublished manu­ scripts  in  the  Lome Pierce  collection   at Queen's   University.  Here,  considerably tidied   up  and   with  the  numbers of  the bank  notes deleted, is the  rough  account­ ing of rents  paid  in  I885  in  the  order  in which  they  appear:

Paid  rent  in  full  January 8 18Bs
Paid  rent   up  to  the  first  of  April  188s
Paid $7  on  account of  rent to  the  first  of
May
Paid    all   rent    due    Miss   Harrison  up    to
July  1st
Pd  rent  to  Sep  1st  to  Miss  Harrison Pd  Miss  Harrison rents   to  Oct   1st Paid  Miss Harrison $3-50 cents on
December 15,  1885
Feb   2nd  pd  Miss  H.  rent   up  to  Feb  1st
[!886].

Let  us backtrack now and  pick up Miss Harrison's history-at least,  as much  of it as can  be ascertained from  the  Direc­ tories. For  a number of years in  the '7o's, a   Mrs.   Mary   Harrison, a   widow,   had been  operating a  boarding  house  at  No. I  Duncan, corner of   Adelaide. She  did well  over  the  years  and in  I877  bought  two  houses  across  the  street   at  2I6  and
2 I 8 Adelaide.  She opened  a confectionery
at  2 r 8  and   rented   2 I 6  to  a  Mrs.  Mary Keenan who operated it as a boarding house.   In   r88I    Mrs.   Keenan  Jied   or moved  and  Mrs.  Harrison took  ,JVer the
 operation of  both  the  confectionary and the boarding house, for she is listed as the householder for  the  double  address.  Both businesses were,  obviously,  too  much  for her as she was by now getting on in years. So in  I 882 she again  rented  the boarding house,  this time  to a Mrs.  Margaret  Col­ ville,  and   she  herself   returned to  con­ centrating on  her  confectionery. In  I884 she retired.
The  boarding house  at  2 I 6 Adelaide  is now  listed  as  being  run  by  Miss  Jennie [Jane]  Harrison and   the   confectionery by Mrs.  Agnes Dooling, wife of William. The   Directory  tells  us  that   Mrs.   Mary Harrison was boarding with  the Doolings in   I885.   This    raises   some   interesting questions.  What relation was Jennie Har­ rison  to  Mrs.  Mary  Harrison-daugh­ ter?   niece?  sister-in-law?  And   why  did Mrs.  Harrison choose  to  board  with  the Doolings instead  of next door  with Jennie who was in all likelihood  a close relative? There must certainly be a fascinating hu­ man interest  story  buried  under  the dusty archives   the  year  that   Isabella  Valancy Crawford's  path   crossed   that  of  Jennie Harrison.
For  I submit  that  this is the Miss Har­ rison  to  whom   Isabella  Valancy  Craw­ ford  owed  the  rent  in  r885. This  is the only Miss Harrison in  the  Directory who could   have   been   operating a  boarding house,  and  we  know  that   2I6  Adelaide  W.  had   a  boarding-house  history.  This  establishes   another  address -2 I 6  Ade­ laide  W.-for  the  Crawfords for  I885. It is interesting that  in one of Crawford's stories, The  Halton  Boys/  written under the  pseudonym  of Denis  Scott,  the open­ ing  scene  takes  place  in  a  confectionery. The   descriptive  details   for  this   scene could  have  come  from  the  confectionery next  door   to  Miss  Harrison's  boarding house.
The   table  of  addresses   for  Crawford from   I882  to  r887  can  now  be filled  in to look  like this:

I45

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



Dates 	Addresses 	Landlady or Landlord


1882
1883
1884
1885-Feb. 1886
1886-Feb. 1887
 
214  Adelaide W.
214  Adelaide W.
180  Adelaide  W.
216  Adelaide W.
57  John
 
Mrs. Harriet Farquharson Mrs.  Harriet Farquharson Thomas Carradice
Miss  Jennie Harrison
Mrs.  Charles Stuart




Isabella Valancy Crawford died in Mrs. Stuart's arms  the evening  of February 12, I887. The  cold she had  at  the time prob­ ably  aggravated the  heart  condition with which  she  was  affiicted  and   which  had taken  other members of  her family. There are  several  inaccuracies  in  this  obituary write-up which  appeared in the Globe on February  I5, I887:

Miss  Crawford was  a  daughter of  the  late Dr. Stephen Crawford of Peterborough, and was   born   in   Ireland  near   Dublin.  When about five  years  of  age  she  was  brought to this  country by  her  parents, and  afterwards lived  for  some  time  in  France. She  was  an accomplished French  writer and  once  wrote a story  in  that language. For  the  past  ten  or twelve   years   Miss   Crawford  has   lived   in Toronto with  her  mother, the  last sixteen months of  her   life  being   spent   at No.  57
John Street. The deceased's literary labours
were    extensive  and    she   contributed   con­ tinually  to   Frank  Leslie's   magazines   and  other publications....

The Globe  definitely  erred  in stating  that Crawford had "lived for some time in France." In  her letter to Seranus she said she had  never  left  home  but for a month and   that   amount of  time  was  scattered over all her life. The write-up was also in error  in  its statement that  she  had  lived at 57  John   Street for  "the   last  sixteen months of her  life." According  to the last rent  notation on the cover of her memor­ andum book, she was with Miss Harrison until  February I,  I886. Such errors  leave the  rest of the article open  to doubt  also. If, however, it  is correct in  one  instance
-that she had  lived  in Toronto "for  the past   ten   or   twelve   years" -then   the
 Crawfords probably moved  to Toronto soon after Naomi  died.  And if so, they probably lived somewhere on or close to Adelaide Street moving  from  boarding house  to  boarding house.
The   last  point   to  be  emphasized here
is  the  prevalence of  boarding houses  in the Toronto Crawford knew. In  that  era, when   apartment  living   as  we  know   it today had not yet been devised, living in rooming and  boarding houses  was a  way of  life  for  single  persons.   On   May I 4,
1877, a year  after  the  earliest  speculative
date   for   the  Crawford's arrival  in  To­ ronto, the following letter appeared in the Evening Telegram  in  the  column   titled "What the  People  Say"   (Letters  to  the Editor):

The number and  respectability of many  first class  boarding houses  of  Toronto strike the stranger as  the  most  peculiarly interesting feature  of   your    charming  and    attractive city.  Much can   be  said  in  favour of  board­ ing   house   keepers  generally,  who   through their  own   negligence  or   good   nature  are frequently  imposed upon   by  their  boarders.
That the  business is a  very  lucrative one
is fully  demonstrated by  the  fact   that there are  so many  engaged in  it.  No  licence being required, the   risk  is  trivial when   compared with   ordinary business  risk.  A  lien  law  per­ mits   them  to   seize   and    sell   the   personal effects,     tools    or    baggage   of    delinquent boarders, affording ample  protection against the  loss;  the  law  also  permits the  boarders' goods   and  chattels,  if   found  on   the   pre­  mises,   to   be   seized   for   default.  Too   fre­ quently  boarding  house   keepers  are   found to  be  grasping  unscrupulous  and   irrespon­ sible.
Boarding house   keepers of  t!Iis  rank   do
not  hesitate after the  most  profuse promises

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



of good meals  and  comfortable bed to fum­ ish  their  victims  with  tainted,  rank  or  un­ wholesome   food   and   sleeping   apartments infected  with  vermin.
An instance  of this  kind  can  be found  on
a  certain   street   in  this  city.  The   building was formerly  occupied  as a hotel and  at one time  contained  30 boarders   the  large  ma­ jority  of  whom  were  strangers in  the  city who  were  attracted by the  inviting  appear­ ance of the  building and  the promises of the unreliable housekeeper. One  of  their  many victims,  a  carpenter  from  Lower   Canada, came   to   this   house.   Recently   he  became delinquent  in  his  board  bill  and   his  tools, valued   at   over   $1 oo  and   clothing,  were seized  without   a  moment's warning  and  he was turned into  the  street,  the  housekeeper refusing  to allow  him  to take sufficient tools to earn  his living  and  pay his bill. The  case is one of extreme hardship.
A  VICTIM

In    I 88 I   there    were    sixteen    boarding houses on Adelaide Street W. alone,  all within a few blocks of Yonge. Since these sixteen  are  listed  in  the  Business  Direc­ tory,  we can  assume  they  were  the  com­ mercial   or   semi-commercial   type   com­ plained  of   by   "Victim"   above.   There must  have  been  a like  number of private homes    announcing   ROOM    TO  LET  by means  of a sign in  the parlour window  in front  of the  lace curtain. Mrs.  Farquhar­ son,  the  Carradices and   Miss  Harrison, with  whom Isabella Valancy boarded on Adelaide, are  not  listed in the Business Directory. Even  though the Crawfords lived in "respectable, first class" boarding houses, it would  still have  been a rootless and  worrisome  kind  of life.
The  era   of   the   ubiquitous  boarding house  is over.  Having grown   up  in  one run  by my widowed  mother in the 1930's, I feel a special  affinity  for Crawford and for a way of life that  has vanished. Today better   pensions  and  other social  benefits have  rendered it  unnecessary for  widows and  lower  income  families  to supplement their  incomes   in  this  manner, and  any­ way  the   clientele has  disappeared   into apartments. For  the  Crawfords, though,
 in  the  I88o's,  living  in  boarding  houses was the way of life they knew intimately. Some of those houses were undoubtedly clean  and  comfortable, but  others   must have been pretty rough places. We will probably   never  know  the  full  extent   of the worry,  humiliation, and  heartbreak suffered   by  Crawford  during  the   years she and  her mother lived on the Adelaide Street   strip,   frequently  behind   in   their rent,   frequently  moving.   But   the   basic outline is beginning to take  shape.

NOTES

1 In "Isabella Valancy  Crawford," Frances  S. Harrison    (Seranus),  Week   (February   24,
1887), 202-03.
2   In  a  letter   to  John   W.  Garvin   written  in
1905·
a  Attention was  first  drawn   to  this  by  Mary F. Martin  in "The Short  Life of Isabella Valancy  Crawford," The  Dalhousie  Review,
52  (Autumn, 1972), p. 395·
4   Unpublished   manuscript    in    the    Lome Pierce  collection  in  the  Douglas  Library at Queen's  University, Kingston.

DOROTHY  FARMILOE



THE CASE OF
Canadian Homes

Canadian Homes; or The Mystery Solved. A   Christmas Tale,  written  by  "Maple Knot, Author of 'Simon  Seek'," and  pub­ lished  by John Lovell,  "Printer and  Pub­ lisher"  of Montreal, in  1858,  is in  many ways an  unusual work of fiction. Accord­ ing  to  contemporary sources,  its  author was  hired  by Lovell  to  write  a  novel  to support the  campaign  to  get  the  Cana­ dian    government   to   adopt   protective tariffs. Because it was part  of  this political movement, Canadian Homes  was itself a "home manufacture."1  Lovell, moreover, printed  many   copies  of   the   novel   and

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



sold  them  very  cheaply; he  advertised it in many Canadian newspapers  and maga­ zines  and  sent  review  copies  to  several;  and  he arranged for  its immediate trans­  lation   into  French.  To  tell  the  story  of this    extraordinary    case    of    Canadian Hames  in  Canada  is one  purpose  of this essay;  the   other   is   to  relate   its  rather curious  epilogue,  which  occurred not,  as one   might   expect,  in   Canada  but   in France.
Little  is known  about  "Maple Knot,"
the   pseudonymous author  of  The  Life and  Adventures of Simon Seek; or Cana­ da  in  all  Shapes   and  Canadian  Homes.
Contemporaries such  as  Henry   J. Mor­
gan and  Andrew  Learmont Spedon, how­
ever,  attribute these  works  to  Ebenezer
Clemo.  In  Sketches of Celebrated  Cana­ dians,    and    Persons    Connected     with Canada, Morgan  discusses  the  composi­ tion  of  Canadian  Homes

Mr.  Ebenezer Clemo

A  native of  London, England, who  came to    Canada   in    1858.   He    was,    although young, a  person  of  great  genius  and  ability. On    his   arrival  in   this   country,  he   was reduced to such  necessity  that  he  applied to Mr.   Lovell   for   employment  as  a  message boy;  but   Mr.   Lovell,  knowing his  acquire­ ments,  engaged  him   to  write   a   couple  of books    on    Canadian  life.   Hence   "Simon Seek" and   "The  Canadian  Homes"   which appeared  in   the   same   year,  works   not   of the  highest standard  of  literature certainly, but  evincing much  talent  and  giving  a good insight into  Canadian character  and   life.2

The arrival, thus, of a penurious "genius" in  Montreal  provided   one  circumstance for  the  composition of Canadian Hames.
Another was provided  by the campaign
for the adoption of protective tariffs in Canada. This  campaign reached  a climax in April  1858, when a convention of manufacturers was held  in Toronto, and an  Association  for  the  Promotion of Canadian Industry was formed. A "mem­ orandum" drawn up  by  this  Association outlined  a   variety    of   tariff   proposals.
 "Tea,  Coffee,    Sugar,  Molasses,"  and other  "articles entering largely  into  con­ sumption in this  country" were  to be ad­  mitted free of duty,  "or  at the lowest pos­ sible   rate   consistent  with   the   require­ ments   of  the   Revenue."   Manufactured goods,   however,  were   to  be  subject  to duties   ranging from   10  to  30  per  cent.  "Books,   Drawings   etc.,"   for   example, would  be subject to  "a  duty  of  10 to  15 per  cent";  "Clothing  and   Wearing Ap­ parel,  30 per cent." 3 Since Alexander Til­ loch Galt,  the Canadian finance  minister, did  raise tariffS on some imports in  I 858-
1859, this protectionist campaign was not unsuccessful.
One  of its leading spirits  was  William Weir.   A  Scottish  immigrant,  Weir   had left  Montreal  for  Toronto in   1856.  In
1858,  he  was  secretary of  both  the  con­ vention   and  the  Association.  From  1857 to    1859,   moreover,   he   published    the Canadian   Merchant's    Magazine   and Commercial Review, a  monthly   journal particularly interested in "everything con­ nected  with  the advancement of the vari­  ous  branches  of  our   Home   Industry,"4 and  for  a  few  months in  1858-I85g, the Protectionist,   And    Advocate   of  Home  Industry, a  weekly  newspaper.
In   the   late   185o's   both   Lovell   and Clemo   were  associated  in  various   ways with  Weir.  Thus, it  was  probably Weir, this early  promoter of what  became  after Confederation  a  crucial   plank   in  Mac­ donald's  National  Policy,  who  provided most   of  the   "facts"  for   Clemo's  novel about the  "great  commercial distress"  in Canada in 1858. For in Canadian Homes, Clemo  tried  "to  produce a  tale  of Cana­ dian   life  that  might   beguile   a  winter's evening.... but at the same time, through the  medium  of  the  scenes  and  the  char­ acters introduced, to effect, as far  as con­ sistent and  convenient in  a  work  of  fic­ tion,  the  other and  more  important  ob­ ject''  of  supporting the  need  to  protect Canadian  manufacturers.5






THE  COACH	HOUSE PRESS

401  (rear)  Huron Street, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 2G5


The Long Poem Anthology
Michael Ondaatje, editor

Omitted  by most anthologists because of their length,  these works represent  important new  directions  in  Canadian  poetry  and  in the  form  of  the  long  or  'serial'  poem.  The  poems  have  been selected  to show  the  diverse range  of subject  and  method  that nine contemporary poets have brought  to this form.
The   Long   Poem   Anthology   includes  an  introduction  by  the editor,  a statement  by each author  about  the poem and  its form, a bibliography  of each author,  and suggested further  reading.  In all but  one case  (Nichol's  The  Martyrology)  the complete  texts appear.  More  than  half of these poems are presently out of print. It is hoped  that  this collection of book-length poems will, for the first time, make possible the serious study of this form  and  these poems in University and College classrooms.

Also available from Coach House

Roy Kiyooka, The  Fontainebleau  Dream Machine
Daphne Marlatt, Steveston Robert Kroetsch, Seed Catalogue Robin Blaser, The  Moth Poem bpNichol, The Martyrology Book IV Don McKay, Long Sault
Frank Davey, King of Swords
George Bowering, Allophanes
Stuart  MacKinnon, The  Intervals

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



Clemo's "beguiling" tale  is set  in  To­ ronto  during a  few weeks in  mid-winter. Its  chief  characters  are  members  of  the Mordaunt family  and  their  friends  who have  come  to Canada  because  they  have been  promised  good  jobs by " 'the  news­ papers,   and   them  pamphlets that   came from   this  very  town.' " When   the  story opens,   no   member  of   the   family   old enough   to  work  has  a  job,  and  without decent  housing,  clothing, and  food,  they are  becoming desperate. One  son, Mark,  has  turned  to  drink   and   to  arson; an­ other, John, has begun  to steal. A daugh­ ter,   Madeline,  is  being   seduced   by   a "libertine soul,"  himself  a  jobless immi­  grant who  has  become  a  thief  and  who has   promised   Madeline  money   to  help her  family.  At  this  point,  the father, Ed­ ward,  decides  to free his family from  their despair   and   temptation  by  leaving  with friends   for  the  United  States  where   he knows  they  will  find  work.  The  family's departure,   however,   is  complicated  by Madeline's disappearance. The  plot  then centres  on  the  adventures of  Madeline; Sam   White,   a   negro   who   rescues   her from  her  seducer; the  Borrowdales, who befriend   her;  Fleesham and  Squobb who try  to  have   her  imprisoned; and   Mark and  William, her fiance, who have stayed in Toronto to find her and who finally succeed. By the end of the story all the characters  have    returned   to   Toronto, been  redeemed, and -through  Borrow­ dale's    efforts-found    work.   The  tale ends  with  a  description of  the  party   to celebrate  the   marriage  of   William   and Madeline.
In addition to his plot and characters, Clemo  used  other aspects  of his winter's tale   to  support  his  thesis  that   Canada must abandon "Free-Trade" and  adopt "Protection," which,  according to the novel,  is actually Free Trade as practised in  all  countries except  Canada  anyway. The  epigraph to one of his chapters is Johnson's definition, "Protection: defence
 from  injury.'' The name  of Fleesham, the Free-Trade merchant who pursues Made­ line, suggests the  quality of both  his pub­  lic and  private morality. Borrowdale, who helps  Madeline and  eventually finds  jobs for  all  the  characters, is a  Protectionist. He  can  begin  to  find  jobs  for  them  be­ cause  by  the  end  of the  story,  the  Cana­ dian  government has  adopted some  new tariffs. Mr.  Sherute, the  tobacco  manu­ facturer who  hires  Sam  White,  explains, "'The late  changes   in  the  Tariff, how­ ever,  have made  a great alteration for the better.  Although  the   protection  is  not sufficient,  and  not sufficiently secure  from repeal,  to warrant  any  large  extension  of our   business  and   premises,   yet  there   is a  wonderful  improvement with  what  we have,  on  previous years.  And  there   is a manufactory now  building in  Montreal, in  consequence of  the  New  Tariff, that will  employ   several   hundred  hands. So that  this is encouraging'." As well as these speeches  on the advantages of Protection, Clemo, repeating the motif  of his subtitle, frequently challenges his readers to solve the  mystery  of Canada's economic  prob­ lems  themselves.  As the  Mordaunts leave for  the  United States, Clemo asks "why" and   concludes, "This  is  the  mystery,  0
Canadians, that  ye have to solve!"
It was  not  only  the  text  of  Canadian
Hames that  supported this pre-Confeder­ ation   brand   of  Canadian  economic  na­ tionalism.  In   a   note   from   "The  Pub­  lisher," John  Lovell  explained:

This  Book, from  a Canadian pen,  is printed at   Montreal,  from   TYPES  manufactured by C. T. Palsgrave,  Esq., proprietor of the Montreal Type  Foundry.
The    PAPER    on   which    the    Book   is
printed has been manufactured by Messrs. Alex.   Buntin,    &   Co.,   proprietors  of   the
Valleyfield  Mills,  Beauharnois, C.E.
Thus  it  will be seen that  this  Work  is in
every  sense  of  the  word  a  Canadian   pro­
duction.

Lovell  also  included the  "Prospectus" of the  Protectionist  in  the  advertising  rna-

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



terial   which   followed    the   end   of   the story.
But  to  believe  in  "Protection" and  to
produce  a  "home  manufactured"  book to  support it  are  of  limited value  unless one  is also  prepared to  market the  pro­ duct   well  and   widely.  One   of  the  most unusual  features of Canadian Homes was its   marketing.   Obviously,   even   before Clemo  had  finished  the manuscript, John  Lovell   had   made  several   key  decisions about Canadian  Homes:  he had  decided  to  print   3o,ooo   copies   of  the  novel  in English;  to   have   the   novel   translated immediately   into   French  and   to  have another   2o,ooo   copies   printed  in   that language; to sell Canadian  Homes for 25 cents   a  copy,   half   the   price   of  Simon Seek;  and  finally  to  advertise the  novel as widely as possible.
On   December  22,  1858,  John   Lovell prepared  the  following advertisement:

A BOOK FOR THE  PEOPLE Will  be  Published on  Friday next,
Canadian Homes; or,  The  Mystery Solved.
A  Christmas Tale.
By  the  author of  "Simon Seek." ·
This work  is of vital interest to every Canadian.  The  narrative  is   calculated  to excite   the  attention and   arouse the  feelings of   the   reader,  while    the   scenes   portrayed are   of  daily   occurrence. The  writer  holds
up   to  view   in   its   true  light    the   bane  of
Canada, and   every   man   in  the   Province is interested in  the  elucidation of it.
The publisher is issuing an  edition of go,ooo.
The  work   is  now   being  translated  into
the   French  language,  of  which   an   edition of  2o,ooo  will  be  printed, in  order that  the entire population of  Canada may  be  led  to take  a  determined interest  in  the  important matters of  which the  Work   treats.
The Working Man, the  Capitalist, the Young and   the   Old, every   class  and   every individual  in   the   community  should  read this  Tale.
For  Sale at  the   Book  Stores throughout
Canada. Price   25  cents.
The Trade and  Country Merchants  sup­
plied   on   reasonable  terms    by  Wm.   C.   F.
 Caverhill,  Bookseller and   Stationer,  Yonge
St.,  Toronto or  by JOHN LOVELL
Publisher.a

This   advertisement  ran,    usually   more than  once, in such newspapers as the Brit­ ish  Daily Whig   (Kingston),  the  Cana­ dian Statesman   (Bowmanville),  the  Co­ bourg  Star  and  Newcastle  District  Ga­ zette,  the Gazette  (Montreal), the  Mer­ cury   (Quebec),   the   Protectionist   (To­ ronto), and  the  Transcript   (Montreal). A similar  advertisement announcing the publication   of   the    translation   of   the novel appeared in such French-language newspapers  as  L'Ordre   (Montreal)  and Le Pays (Montreal).
Since  Lovell  often  seems  to  have  sent an   advance  copy   of  Canadian   Homes
along   with   his  advertisement, many   of the newspapers also reviewed  it. On December  30, I858,  the Canadian States­ man published  a review typical of  several that  appeared:

"Canadian Homes" is  the  title  of  an  excel­ lent  Christmas tale,  by  the  talented  author of   "Simon  Seek"-"Maple    Knot."   The object of   the    "Canadian   Homes"  is   evi­ dently  to   place    before   the   mind    of   the Canadian  public the   true  condition of  the laboring classes,  and   to  point out  a  remedy  for   providing  them   with   employment; - and   also  points out   the   preventive  to  vice among the  lower  classes.  We  are  glad   that  "Maple  Knot"  has   taken  up   the   subject.: and   we  hope  that he  may  be  successful   in averting  the   calamity  that  appears  to   be fastening   upon   this  country, viz;  the   exis­ tence  of a  large unemployed pauper popula­ tion.
It would  be a lasting disgrace to Canada, if,  with  all  her  internal  wealth, and  unem­ ployed  advantages, she  allowed her  popula­ tion  to  starve, for  the  want   of  proper pro­
tection. In  "Canadian  Homes" the  subject is  ably  discussed;  and   Protection  vs.  Free Trade forms  the  basis  of  the  argument. We advise   every   person    to   buy   a   copy.   The price  is only  25 cents. For  sale  at  the  States­ man office, by Climie & Brother.
We  may  mention that   J. Lovell,  Esq.,  of Montreal is  the   publisher; that  the  author is  a   Canadian -The   paper  and   type   of Canadian  manufacture, and   that   the   work

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



is   purely   a   Canadian   production. -Mr. Lovell  will  please  accept our  thanks for  the advance copy  sent  us.

Not all the reviews were favorable, however.    The  Protectionist, which,   as might  be expected, reviewed  the novel enthusiastically  and   published    two   ex­ cerpts   from   it,   both   referred    to   and quoted  from  negative reactions  to  Cana­  dian  Homes. On  December  go,  r8s8,  in " 'Canadian Homes' and  the  Free Trade Journals," William  Weir  wrote:

We  are   glad   to  notice   that   some  of  our Toronto "Squobbs" are  already wreathing under the  severe  castigation administered to them   by  the  author of  the  above   tale.  Un­ able   to  find  fault  with  the  work  itself  as  a literary  production, they   take   refuge  in   a vile   attempt  to   ridicule  the   sufferings   of our  poor  honest  unemployed  artizans, whose cause   "Maple Knot" with  a  true   patriotic spirit so  ably  advocates.
Let   every   friend  of  Canada get  "Cana­ dian Homes," and  judge   for  himself  of  its merits.

One  week later,  in  "The Condition of the  Working Classes,"  Weir  quoted  ex­ cerpts  from  a review of Canadian Homes  in  the  British  Whig:

"We have  read  several of the  opening  chap­ ters,   and   look   upon    them   as   gross   libels upon  Canada. The scenes  of  misery,  starva­ tion, and   outrage  therein  depicted  do   not exist,  for  every  man,  woman  and  child   that  rwill work,  can  always  find  it. The proof  is, that no  single  article furnished by  a  Cana­ dian  mechanic, save  and  except the  Printer, can   be  procured  without  great   delay   and solicitation. Let  a  man order, even  in  King­ ston,  a coat,  a pair  of  boots, a set of  chairs, a buggy, a  double harness, or  anything to  be made, and   the  days,  and  sometimes week's he'll have   to  wait,  show  how  unjust is  this writer's assertion that  mechanics in  Canada cannot  find   employment.  Wherever  scenes just  like  'Maple Knot' describes exist,  they proceed  from  idleness or  dissipation."

Weir then,  of course,  attacked the Whig's point  of  view.  "Our  neighbour," he  be­ gan, "must be living in blessful ignorance of the  real  state  of  the  country."
 When   Le  Foyer  canadien   ou  le  my­ stere  devoite. Nouvelle du  jour  de  Noel,  the    French    translation   of    Canadian Homes,  went   on  sale  in  early  January
1859,  it  did  not  receive  as  much  atten­ tion  as  the  original. Its  publication  did not  go  entirely  unnoticed,  however. On  January I I,  I859, L'Ordre acknowledged receiving its  copy  of  Le  Foyer  canadien  and  opined  that  after  a  quick  glance,  it appeared   "charmante  et   merite    d'etre lue." The writer added, "M. John Lovell, J'.editeur,  merite certainement  du  public Iitteraire,  par   les  efforts   constants et  le
zele qu'il  met  a :repandre Ie gout  de Ia Iit­
terature en Canada. Nous esperons  que le
Foyer Canadien tire  a so,ooo  exemplaires
s'epuisera en  peu  de  temps.  Ce  ne serait
que   reconnaissance  et   justice."   On   the
same day, Le Pays published a long and generally favorable review of Le Foyer canadien   and  an  excerpt from  it.
By  late   January  I 859,   the   story   of Canadian Homes and  its French  transla­ tion  virtually came  to an  end  in Canada. Certainly  today,   for   many   reasons,   in­  cluding the  aesthetic one  that  Canadian Homes has  not  worn  well  as  a  work  of fiction,  neither the  novel,  nor  the  names  of  the  people  associated   with  it,  nor  the movement it   supported  are   household words.  But  what an  unusual case  it  had been  in   the  annals of  Canadian  litera­ ture! Its hired  author; the close collabor­ ation  involved  in  its  production  between the  writer and  the  businessman; the marketing campaign which  accompanied its publication; the number of copies printed; its immediate translation into French; the  discussion  it  evoked   in  the press;  its espousal  of  ideas  not  dissimilar to those of many  contemporary Canadian nationalists: all  these  aspects  make  it  a unique work  of  Canadian fiction.  Cana­ dian  Homes is unique in another  way as well, for  in  I 866  what  might  be  called  a second  edition of  Le  Foyer  canadien  was published  in  Paris.

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



The  main  link between  Le Foyer cana­ dien  published in  Montreal in  I 859  and  L'Enfer   et  le  paradis de  l'autre  monde published  in Paris  in  I 866 is Henri-Emile Chevalier. Chevalier, a  native of Chatil­ lon-sur-Seine, Burgundy, lived in Canada, chiefly  in  Montreal, from   I853  to  186o, when he returned to France. During these years,   Chevalier  supplemented  the   in­ come  he  earned as  a  journalist writing for, among other periodicals, Le Pays, by translating  from    English    into   French. One  work  which  he  translated was Can­ adian  Homes.  Although in  a  note  dated "Montreal, 28 decembre,  I 858,"  H.E.C. warned "que  la traduction de cet ouvrage est  une  traduction  libre,"7    in  fact  Che­  valier's   translation   was   faithful  to   the original  English   text.  Moreover, its  au­  thorship was  ascribed  to  "Maple Knot," and   both   John  Lovell's  note  about   the book as a Canadian product and  Clemo's preface  about  his  protectionist  purpose  were  carefully reproduced in  French.
In    addition   to    the    different   title, several changes occurred between  the first and  second  edition of the  French transla­ tion  of Canadian Hames. Chevalier's note about the  translation,  Lovell's  comments about the book's production, and  Clemo's preface were dropped. Chevalier added  a dedication; a preface dated "Paris, juillet I866" written  by himself; and  the  occa­  sional  note  to  explain a  term  like  "row­ disme"  as   "tapage  avec   violence,"  be­ cause  "Je  ne  connais pas  de  correspon­
dant  a  ce  mot   en   fran!;ais."8    He   also
made  emendations to  the  text.  Some  of
these  changes were  necessary  because  of the book's publication outside  Canada. Others were  necessary  for  two,  more im­ portant  reasons:  Chevalier  himself   be­ came  the  author of  L'En fer et le  paradis de l'autre  monde;  and  although  the  plot of   L'En fer  remained   substantially  the same   as   Le   Foyer   canadien,   its   thesis changed from  a  justification of  "protec­ tionism" to  an   argument  in  favour   of
 Canada's   annexation   to 	the    United
States.
There are  reasons for this change. Che­
valier  was all his life anti-monarchist and pro-republican.  Outside  of   France,  his most admired republic was the United States;  his   most    detested   Monarchy, Great   Britain.  Even  though his own  so­ journ in New York City in the year before  he came  to  Montreal had  not  been par­  ticularly   successful,   he   was  even   more disoriented  among   the    fundamentally conservative, devoutly   Roman  Catholic Canadiens.  The  most  immediate reason for  the  change,  however,  is explained by Chevalier in his "Preface":

II y a quelques mois,  j'habitais une  petite ville  bourguignonne, renommee pour ses usines  metallurgiques. Un   jour,  il  m'arriva
d'assister a une  reunion chez  des  forgerons,
qui   temoignerent !'intention   d'emigrer  au
Canada, parce  qu'on  y  parle  la langue franraise.   Connaissant,  par    un   sejour  de
plusieurs annees, le pays ou ces braves gens voulaient aller,  je  combattis leur   projet.
"Rendez-vous aux  £tats-Unis, puisque votre
desir   est  de  quitter Ia  France, leur   dis-je: mais gardez-vous de porter votre  intelligence et  vos bras  dans  les colonies britanniques de
!'Amerique du  Nord."
Et  je donnai mes  raisons.
Ces  raisons, on  les trouvera exposees  dans
ce  livre,   publie, pour  Ia  premiere  fois,  en
1857,  a Montreal, et  tire   a cinquante  mille
exemplaires, tant   en  fran<;ais  qu'en  anglais.
Si quelques-uns des  motifs  qui  l'ont dicte n'existent plus,  comme le  traite de  recipro­
cite   entre  le  Canada  et   les  £tats-Unis,   il n'en  est   pas   moins    toujours  vrai   que    Ia Grande-Bretagne   decourage    systematique­ ment   l'industrie  et   les  arts  utiles   dans   ses colonies; que,  chaq ue  annee,  les  Canadiens eux-memes fuient une  patrie oil  ils  ne  trou­ vent   point   de  travail,  malgre les  immenses ressources  naturelles dont abonde leur  pays.
II  n'en   est  pas   moins   toujours  vrai   que le Canada ne  sera  jamais prospere et  grand
que  lorsqu'il se sera  annexe a Ia Republique
des  £tats-Unis.

To  transform Canadian  Hames from  a pro-Canadian  protectionist  novel  into  a pro-American,  annexationist  one,   Che­ valier   had   to  make   some   far-reaching

I 53

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



emendations to the  text. Among  those he made  were to change  Borrowdale and  his supporters   from    "protectionnistes"  to "annexionnistes" and  to change  Fleesham and    those    who    supported   him    from "libres-echangistes" to  "loyalistes." Since to wrench  Clemo's text so sharply  and  to keep  the  same  characters and  plot  were almost  impossible,   L'En fer et le  paradis de f autre  mande  became  a  very  confus­ ing  novel  indeed.   Despite   its  confusion, however,   it  retains   enough   of   Le  Foyer canadien   and,  therefore,  of    Canadian Hames,  to  be  considered   as  another­ albeit    revised   and   stolen-edition   of Clemo's novel.  It  seems  fortunate, then,  that   when  Chevalier  published   this  re­ publican  edition  of Canadian  Homes, its original   author  was  dead   and   its  first publisher   presumably didn't  know   that  Chevalier  had  dedicated this new version
of  the  novel  "AfM. John   Lovell I  Im­
primeur a Montreal  (Bas-Canada) I Te­
moignage de  haute estime."

NOTES

1 Maple  Knot, Author  of "Simon  Seek,"  etc. etc.,  Canadian Homes; or, The Mystery Solved.   A     Christmas   Tale    (Montreal: Lovell,  I 858), p.  I 31.
2  Henry   James   Morgan,   Sketches  of    Cele­ brated   Canadians, and   Persons  Connected with    Canada   (Quebec:    Hunter,   Rose, I862), p.  766.
s "Prospectus of  the  Protectionist,"  in  Cana­
dian  Homes, I858.
4   [Prospectus], Canadian  Merchant's  Maga­ zine   and   Commercial Review,  Volume    I, Number   I   (April   I857), 1.
5   Canadian Homes, pp.  [ v]-vi.
a  Gazette, December   29,  I858.
7  Maple   Knot,  Auteur   de   Simon  Seek,  Le Foyer  canadien ou  le mystere   devoile. Nou­ velle  du  jour de Noel,[Traduit par H. Emile Chevalier.]   (Montreal:   Lovell,   r8sg), p. vi.
8  Emile  Chevalier, L'Enfer  et  le   paradis   de l'autre monde  (Paris: Librairie centrale, I866), p. 93·

MARY JANE  EDWARDS

154
 THE PARABLE AND THE PRIEST

RECENT CRITICS OF MORLEY CALLAGHAN have  focused   on  the  writer's  predomin­ antly   moral   qualities. Hugo  McPherson views  Callaghan as  a  "religious writer," one  who  "has  given  us  a  modern vision of the  human  condition." Brandon Con­ ron  points  to Callaghan's explorations of the    complexities   of   individual   moral choice,    and    sees,   as   the   basis   of   his thought, an acceptance of the Sermon on the  Mount as a "desirable guide  to life." In  a  similar   manner,  George Woodcock is able  to place Callaghan in a "great tradition" of Bunyan, Swift,  Orwell, and Gide, viewing his works as "essentially moralistic novels."1  Such  critical  apprai­ sal   is   not    surprising.  For   Callaghan, above   all,  is  an  artist   intent  on  the  in­  vestigation of  what  is vital  in  individual human experience. His fiction  transcends the  merely  topical  and  dwells  within  the realm  of the  universal. Callaghan's topoi are   "the   central   issues   of   life"   itself:  freedom,  responsibility, the  extent  of de­ terministic influences-in    effect,   the world  of  the  self  in  its  relation to  other men,  society,  and  God.  It is the  purpose of this discussion  to examine one of the principal means  by which  Callaghan  ex­ plores  these  crucial   questions: his  use  of the  parable and  the  priest.
M.  H.  Abrams defines  the  parable in
its simplest form as "a short narrative presented so as to stress the implicit  but detailed analogy between  its component parts  and  a thesis or  lesson  that  the  nar­ rator is trying  to bring  home  to us." Like the  moral  fable,  the  parable  is dependent on  the  author's  successful  manipulation of   stylistic   simplicity and   economy   of character   and    description.    Language, structure, and  the rudiments of plot must all  appear  to  be  simple   and   uncompli­ cated. The  attraction of  the  parable, of

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



course,  is its adaptibility in rendering the complex simple,  the  mysterious more palatable. As Callaghan himself  remarks of   Christ's  "baffling   parables" - they contain "the  knowledge, the  intuitions of imagination."2
Callaghan's affinity  to the  parable is evident in his self-imposed discipline  of "aesthetic artlessness": the  creation of a literature that  does  not  "feel  or look like literature."3   In   That   Summer  in  Paris ( rg6g)   he  relates   that   his  aim   to  "tell the   truth  clearly"  led   to   a   somewhat radical approach to  the  business of  writ­ ing fiction:

It was  this:  strip the   language, and   make the  style, the method, all the  psychological ramifications, the  ambience of  the  relation­ ships,    all    the    one    thing,  so   the   reader couldn't make  separations. Cezanne's apples. The  appleness apples. Yet  just  apples.

This  dictum, coupled with  Callaghan's aversion to explicit metaphor ("I'd be damned if  the  glory  of  literature was in the  metaphor"), would  result  in  a  prose form  bereft,  for  the  most  part, of  orna­ mentation  or   irrelevant  detail.   Callag­ han's   language is  always  simple,  direct, and  straightforward. And, like the parab­ olist's,  his  method  relies  heavily  on  the use of simplified structure, few main  pro­ tagonists,  and  close attention to a central moral   issue.  Admittedly Callaghan's  de­ liberate terseness  borders  in places on the journalistic. His dialogue occasionally suf­ fers  from  an  intrusive artificiality,  while recurring  passages   of   monosyllabic   de­ scription sometimes  tend  towards monot­ ony. Fortunately  the stringency of theory in  most  cases  is  loosened  in  actual prac­  tice. Symbol, associative imagery, and  the infrequent   use   of   evocative  metaphor combine  to produce an effective  variation of  parabolic fiction.
"A   Predicament,"  first   published  in
Pound's exile in 1927, represents an early exploration of the  parable's aesthetic po­
tential. The story  deals  ironically with  a
 dilemma faced  by a young  priest,  Father Francis.  The  plot is a simple one:  while hearing  penance on a Saturday afternoon the   priest   is  confronted  in  the  confes­ sional by an obstreperous drunk who mis­ takes  him  for  a  conductor of  a  Toronto bus.  Father  Francis is  flustered immedi­ ately, uncertain whether to report his pre­ dicament to his superior, or  to deal  with the  matter  himself  in  order   to  avoid  an embarrassing disturbance. He  grudgingly decides  on  the  latter course,  temporarily evades  the issue by hearing another peni­ tent  (whose sin, ironically, is deception), then  disposes of his irritant  by acting  the role of a conductor:

[Father Francis] said  impatiently: 'Step lively  there; this  is King and  Yonge.  Do you want  to go past  your  stop?'
'All  right, brother,' the  man  said  slowly,
getting up  clumsily.
'Move   along  now,'   Father  Francis  said
authoritatively.
'I'm moving'; don't get so huffy,' the  man said,  swinging aside  the  curtains of the  con­
fessional,  stepping out  to  the  aisle.

Despite  its whimsical plot, "A  Predica­ ment" is a  penetrating study  of   Father Francis'  initiation into a world that  might  loosely be termed the world of experience. "Initiation"   is  used   advisedly,  in   that  Callaghan  emphasizes  the  priest's   eager "youthfulness"  throughout  the  first  half of the story. The opening sentence intro­ duces  the  reader to  Father Francis, "the youngest priest  at  the  cathedral," and  we are  later informed that  he "was  a young priest, very interested in confessions." The brief  mention of  his physical  demeanour connotes  a youthful-if  not childlike­ appearance: "he  rubbed his smooth  cheek with    his   hand,   thinking    hard."  The priest's  smug  indignity  with  a mass-miss­ ing woman,  his extreme nervousness  dur­ ing  his  ordeal,  and  his  momentary com­ promise, all suggest a state of practical "innocence."  His   subsequent  ruse,   fol­ lowed  by personal remorse, reflects a vir­ tual  loss of  that   innocence. And  indeed,

155

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



the story revolves  around the basic polar­ ities  of  innocence and  experience, ideal and   real,   spiritual   and   concrete.   Such polarities are  evident  in  Father  Francis' inward  reflections :

He  thought he could  hear  the man  moving. The   man   was   drunk-drunkenness,   the over-indulgence of an appetite, the drunken state.  Scholastic psychology. Cardinal  Mer­ cier's   book   on   psychology   had   got   him through the exam  at  the seminary.

What is significant is the  priest's  inability to apply  his spiritual and  abstract knowl­ edge   to   a   very   tangible   and   concrete problem. On  one  level  the  world  of  the seminary  can   be  seen  as   the  spiritual, ideal   realm   of   contemplative innocence  separate from the real, and  tawdry, world of experience.  Callaghan offers  no facile conciliation of  opposites,  but is concerned to show,  rather,  that  such  tensions  per se are   an  intrinsic  aspect   of  human  exis­ tence. His portrayal of the young priest is essentially a parable of modern Everyman moving  from  a cloistered  innocence to a more  worldly  experience of life-a life bewildering in  its  complexity, confusion and  combinaation of contrarieties.
In  his portrayal of Father Francis, Cal­ laghan is careful to stress the  priest's  in­ tensely  human  reaction  to  his situation. Father  Francis'  heart  begins "to  beat  un­ evenly"; he  breathes  deeply and   breaks into  a  sweat; he  cannot concentrate; he prays  nervously  to  regain  his composure, and    fidgets    continually,   "rubbing   his shoulder-blades uneasily  against  the  back of the confessional." Such emphasis  helps to develop  the  suspense  of the tale,  while drawing the  reader toward  a sympathetic feeling   for   the   priest's   dilemma. More important, however, is Callaghan's use of such  emphasis to  "humanize," as  far  as possible,   his  figure   of  the   priest-the man  of God.  For  it is in the figure  of the "human priest" that  Callaghan constructs a  potent image  of  contemporary  Every­ man.  Father Francis, like the majority of
 Callaghan's priests, is caught in the vise between    a   spiritual  and    an   empirical world. Through his priest's ambivalent relationship to  both  worlds,  Callaghan  is able   to  convey   the   position   of  modern man in his search for a viable logos or meaning. From  Father Francis' naive Catholicism  to  Father  Dowling's  flirta­ tions with  Marx, Callaghan's priests func­ tion as effective  instruments by which  the "isms"  and  "ologies" of the  day  undergo a diligent, and  penetrating, scrutiny.
It is a  mistake, however, to  view  Cal­
laghan's priests  merely  as  typological  fig­ ures. They  do, for the most part, function simultaneously on  realistic   and  symbolic levels,  existing   both   as  individuals  and  emblems  of a  larger  reality.  So it  is that  the "old, serious, unsentimental priest" of "Absolution"  ( 1936)   can   be  viewed   as both  an offensive  bully, a foil to the com­ passionate bartender, Jerry  Mallory, and as a symbol of a rigid  (but effective) Catholicism  lacking   in  personalistic  un­ derstanding. The priest's  speech  to Jennie Hughes, a  woman  known  for  her  drink­ ing, reeks of the traditional fire and brim­  stone  sermon:
Shaking   his  head  to  show  his  disgust  with her,   he  said  flatly:    'Mrs.   Hughes,   there's nothing more  degrading in  this  world  than a   tipsy   woman.    A   drunken   man,   Lord knows, is bad enough,  but a drunken woman is somehow  lower  than  a  beast  in  the  field.
... I want  to give  you a very solemn  warn­
ing.  If you  don't change  your  life  you'll  go
straight to hell.'

Admittedly individual priests vary throughout Callaghan's works  and  occa­ sionally  are   little   more  than  caricatures similar in  function  to  the  comic  alazon.  Father Gorman in "A Very Merry  Christ­ mas" (pub. 1959)   is of  this mould, exist­ ing  primarily as an  object  of  ridicule. A statue  of   the   Infant   Jesus,   apparently stolen   on  Christmas morning, sends  the priest  into  emotional  paroxysms:
The  priest  whispered  excitedly,  'It must  be the  work  of communists  or  atheists.' There

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



was a sudden rush of blood to his face. 'This isn't  the  first  time  they've  struck  at  us,' he said.

The fact  that   the  statue has  been  taken for  a Christmas-day sleigh-ride by an  in­ genuous, and  genuinely imaginative, child effectively   underlines  the   priest's   folly, thus defining  his role as comic buffoon.
In  the two stories,  "The Young Priest" (I930)   and  "A  Sick  Call" (I932),  Cal­ laghan provides   a  more  discerning  por­  trayal  of the  priest  figure.  Both  tales  are parables of  epiphany wherein   the  priest­ protagonists are  brought to a sudden realization  of  both   themselves  and   the world   around  them.  Like   "A   Predica­ ment," these  short   stories  are  based  on the   fundamental  tensions   of   innocence and   experience, spiritual and   concrete realities.  "The Young Priest"  deals  with the traumatic introduction of  Father Vin­  cent  Sullivan to  the  ugliness and  squalor  found   in  the  world  of  experience. The plot  revolves  around  his  encounter with Mrs.  Gibbons, a  woman   he  regards   as "one  of the  finest  women  in  the  parish." Called  one  night to minister  to her needs, Father Sullivan  is  shocked   to  find  that  she  is inebriated  and  "lying  on  a  divan,  a  purple kimono  thrown loosely  around her."  Dumbfounded, he  can  do  nothing but mutter apologetically. Asked  to leave by  the  woman's sister-in-law, he  returns to   the   Cathedral  "ashamed  and   [with  no]   joy  at   all   now   in   being   a  young priest."
To Brandon Conron, "The Young Priest" is a  "vignette in  its  sympathetic­ ally satirical treatment of a young  priest's  inexperience  and    the   fallibility  of   the Church's  instrument."   Such    comment neglects  the  full scope of  Callaghan's use of  the  priest   figure.  Admittedly  Father Sullivan's innocence is  the  focal  point  of the story. As in "A  Predicament" Callag­ han   stresses  the  priest's youthful eager­  ness and somewhat smug  solemnity.  Like Father  Francis, Father  Sullivan is  "the
 youngest  priest  at  the  Cathedral" and  is "fully  aware   of  his  own  particular  dig­ nity."  He  accepts  an  older  priest's ordin­ ation   homily  that   "a  very  young  priest was greater and  holier  and  more  worthy  of  respect   than   anyone  else  on  earth." His  failure   to  deal  adequately  with   his parishioner,  however,  ironically explodes  this  pompous  pride   and   forces   him   to accept  a more humble opinion of himself. The dissolution  of his great  expectations
-his seeing beyond  mere appearance­ constitutes an  epiphanic  moment which leads  to a  sadder but  wiser  approach to life.  In  this  sense  Callaghan's story  can be  read  as  a  parable which  teaches   the values   of   humility,  self-knowledge, and  the need for a worldly  wisdom.  More  sig­ nificant, though, is Callaghan's use of the priest  to explore  ironically the  shortcom­ ings  of  the  earthly Church, the  Church as a human institution. This is evident in the  rectory's  use of Father Sullivan as a religious solicitor: "Since he had so much zeal and  could  be so charming he  was  a good  man  to send  calling  upon  the  men and  women  of  the  parish, seeking  dona­ tions  for various  parish  activities."
Similarly,  the  priest's  own  initial  reac­ tion   to   Mrs.   Gibbons    ironically   chal­ lenges  the  Church's  priority   of   values: "Father  Sullivan had  a  sincere  admira­ tion   for   Mrs.   Gibbons. Her   donations were  frequent and   generous."  Such   ac­ tions  are  essentially  hypocritical, thereby  exposing  the division between  the Church sub specie  aeternitatis and  the  Church of this world. It is this ironic  tension  of the temporal and  eternal Church which  pro­  vides the framework for Callaghan's later  story,  "A  Sick Call."
Unlike   the   earlier   priest-figures,   Fa­ ther   Macdowell of  "A  Sick  Call"  is "a  huge  old  priest,  white-headed  except for a  shiny  baby-pink bald  spot  on  the  top of his head." As in the earlier stories,  the priest  remains  the  focal  point of the  tale, his  crisis of  conscience  forming the  cui-

157

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



mination  of   the   plot's   dialectic.   Sum­ moned   to  minister   to  a  dying  woman (who  is a lapsed  Catholic), the old  priest meets   with   fierce   opposition   from   the woman's   non-Catholic   husband,   John Williams.  By means  of  perseverance, and not   a   little    guile,   Father   Macdowell enters  the  sickroom  and  tries  to comfort  the  dying  wife. Williams  refuses  to leave thereby  denying  the  possibility for  sacra­  mental  penance. The priest,  feigning  fa­ tigue,   requests   some  water   and   in   the husband's absence  hears Elsa William's confession  and  quickly  ministers  absolu­ tion.   Leaving  the   home   the   priest   is stricken   with   conflicting   emotions,   ex­ periencing both  guilt  at  his own  trickery and   elation   in   having   "so   successfully ministered to one  who  had  strayed  from the  faith."
The significance  of "A  Sick  Call" lies in  Father  Macdowell's personal  sense of ambivalence following his success. In an intense  descriptive passage Callaghan carefully modulates his portrayal of the priest's reflective  vacillation; the  passage is worth  quoting at  length :

Walking along with  the  rolling motion as if his feet  hurt him,  he muttered, 'Of  course they   were   happy  as   they   were    . • . in   a worldly  way.  I  wonder if  I did   come  be­ tween them?'
He  shuffled  along, feeling very  tired, but he   couldn't  help    thinking,  'what  beauty there was  to his staunch love for  her!' Then he  added quickly, 'But  it was  just  a  pagan beauty, of course.'
As he  began   to  wonder about the  nature of  this  beauty, for  some  reason   he  felt  in­ expressibly sad.

Father  Macdowell is caught between  a profane and  sacred  love, between  the strictly  correct views of the  temporal Church and  a  wider,  more  comprehen­ sive  agape  divorced   from  dogmatic  re­ strictions. His  reveries  can  be  seen  as  a comment   on    institutional   Catholicism which,  by means of its dogmatic precepts, ironically  precludes a  catholicity of  ap-
 predation. Callaghan's double  use of "of course" suggests   the   priest's   uneasy  at­ tempts to convince himself  of the validity  of both  his own  and  his  Church's  ortho­ dox  views. His  confused  thoughts, more­  over,  constitute a  type  of epiphanic mo­ ment   through  which   the   priest   experi­ ences  a deeper  appreciation or "wonder" concerning   himself    and    his    external world.  Father Macdowell comes to recog­ nize the tensions involved  in his own  per­  son :  as both  man  and  priest  he partakes of  the  two  realms   of  spiritual and  con­ crete,  sacred   and   profane, eternal  and transient. Callaghan is too good  a writer to allow any simplistic resolution, but is content  to   leave   his   priest   pondering these  basic,  mysterious tensions  of life.
It  is  in  Such Is  My   Beloved   ( 1934) that   Callaghan  achieves   his  most  sensi­ tive  and  complex handling of the  priest­  figure.  Like  the  short  stories  the  novel  is essentially   parabolic:   deceptively  simple in  plot,  characterization, structure, and language. As in the  parable, however,  the use of symbol and  associative  imagery allows  the  author to  surpass  the  topical and  deal  with  matters of a more  univer­ sal  concern. So  it  is  that   in  his  tale  of Father Stephen Dowling "the most eager  young  priest  at   the  Cathedral,"  Callag­ han   constructs,  as   McPherson  puts   it, "his  first  coherent  parable of  the  nature of man's earthly  quest." His  portrayal of the   priest's  attempt  to  help   two  young prostitutes  is,  in  effect,   a  stringent  ex­ ploration of the place  and  role of modern man  trapped in  the  unyielding  chaos  of Time. As man  and  priest  Father Dowling can  be seen both  as a symbolic  Everyman seeking   human  meaning  in   his  world, and   as  a  symbol  - by  extension  - of Christ's eternal Church of Love, a love which  transcends time  and  space.  In  this sense  Father  Dowling is very  much   the questor, a  figure   singularly appropriate to  Callaghan's young  priest.  As  the  au­ thor  comments: "there have  been  young

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



priests  in  the  world  for  4000 years. They stand  on the  threshold of a spiritual voy­ age,  and  I  guess  I feel  touched,  wonder­ ing if they're going  to make it."4
As Malcolm Ross points  out,  the action of  Such  is  My   Beloved  is  rigidly  con­ trolled  by a master  irony -a  tension  be­ tween  the  eternal and  temporal aspects of   human  life.   Just    as    Callaghan's earlier  priests  were  faced  with  this  prob­  lematic  dualism   so   Father  Dowling   is trapped between  the  restrictive, material forces of the earthly world,  and  the more comprehensive, spiritual ethos  of  the eternal world.  His  endeavours to redeem Ronnie and  Midge  come  to  reflect  Cal­ laghan's exploration of  this  central  dia­  lectic    and    its   significance   in   human  affairs. It is on this point  that Callaghan's doctrinal   Catholicism  is  most   evident, for, despite  Father Dowling's attempts to find social solutions to the girls' situation, he  inevitably is led  to  discover  the  limi­ tations of  merely  social  panaceas, as  op­ posed  to the  triumphant powers  of a per­  sonalistic love  "so  intense  it  must  surely partake of the  nature of divine love."
In his search  for  an  effective  solution to  the  problems of  the  two  prostitutes, Father Dowling encounters a  number of potent "isms"  which  promise  both  a per­ sonal  and  a  social  liberation.  These  are Marxism,  the   bourgeois  world,  and   his own  temporal Church,  personified in  the character  of  Bishop   Foley.   The   young priest's   affinity  to  Marxist theory  is evi­ dent  in  his   diocesan  activities;  he preaches  social  sermons   on  "many con­ troversial  problems," he  visits  the  meet­  ings  of   "a league   for  social  reconstruc­ tion," and  he  espouses  the  commonsense idea that  "moral independence and  econ­ omic  security   [are] very closely  related." He  has as his best friend  Charlie Stewart, a young  medical student and  Communist sympathizer, and   can   recognize the  va­ lidity  of some  Marxist ideology:
 "What a  great pity  Marx was  not  a  Chris­ tian.    There's  no   reason  why   a   Christian should   not   thirst  after  social   justice.   The Church is  not  tied  up  to  any  one  economic system,  in  fact,  all  systems  tend to  degrade the   Church  by  using   it   to   pacify   discon­ tented people. They  would make  religion an opium for  the  people.... it is indeed a  dis­ ordered  world. God  help  us all."

To  Callaghan, however,  the  ultimate failure  of Marxism can be seen in its neg­ lect  of  the  personal self, in  its  reduction of  the  individual  to  a  faceless  extension of  an  economic phenomenon. This  idea forms  the  basis  of  Charlie  Stewart's ap­  proach   to the  prostitution  problem:

"In  the    perfectly   organized   state    there would  be  no  streetwalkers. If the  state   has a  proper control  of  the   means   of   produc­ tion  and  the  means of  livelihood,  it's  never  necessary  for  a  woman to  go  on  the  streets. No healthy woman of her  own accord  would ever  do such  work.  It's too damned degrad­ ing.  But  if in  the  ideal  state there  were  still women  who  were  streetwalkers out  of  lazi­  ness or  a  refusal  to  work  steadily then they would  be  kicked  out  or  interned  somewhere for    laziness,    or    as   non-producers.  Then they'd have  to work  or  starve. Your  mistake is  seeing   this   as   a  religious problem. It's really   an   economic  problem.  Do   you   see, Father?" Charlie said  like  a lecturer.

In  contrast to  Father  Dowling's intense love for Ronnie and  Midge,  Charlie, de­ spite  his humanistic beliefs,  fails  to  per­  ceive the totality of the individual human personality. His diatribe ignores the spiri­  tual  needs of the  individual; as  a  healer  of  bodies  Charlie  emblematizes the  sin­ cere,  but  one-sided, materialism  of  the doctrinaire Marxist. As Father Dowling retorts   to  his  friend: "in a way  you're right, but not entirely."
The  shortcomings of  the  bourgeois world  receive a satirical attack in Callag­ han's  presentation of Mr.  and Mrs. Robi­  son.  Wealthy,   upper-class,  "aristocratic" and   "devout,"  the   Robisons,   like  Mrs. Gibbons   of   "The   Young    Priests,"   are seen  as  two  of  the  finest  people  of  the parish.  But like the  former, the  Robisons

I 59

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



contain a corruption beneath  the  veneer of social  reputation. Callaghan's  descrip­ tion   of   their    "old,   vine-covered   stone house" intimates  their semblance  of vital life  which  disguises  their  internal hard­ ness of  heart. The Robi-sons' response  to Father Dowling's request  for help  ironic­  ally illustrates the priest's homiletic  theme  on   "the   inevitable  separation  between Christianity  and   the   bourgeois   world." For  despite  his generous  contributions to charity Mr.  Robison  is characterized   by a  total  lack  of Christian love. Ironically Robison   is  named   James-the  apostle known   as  the   "Lord's  brother"   (Gala­ tians, I:I g). His benevolent activities  are inspired   by little  more  than  an  ostenta­ tious  self-interest:   "if   he  gave  a  large amount to charity he expected  his  name to  be  put  at  the  head  of  the  list  in  the newspapers."
Mr.  Robison's initial   response  to  Fa­ ther  Dowling's invitation to visit the girls smacks  of  upper-class  condescension:

While  still  hesitating, Mr.  Robison amused himself   by  fancying  he  could    see  himself and  the  priest  walking into  some  poor  girl's home   like   two   benevolent  patrons  of   the whole   parish. There  would   be  an  old  wo­ man   who   would   dust   off  a  chair in  great  confusion. The man  of  the  house  would   be ashamed of  his  unshaven face  and  become  inarticulate.

Meeting Ronnie and  Midge, face-to-face, the  rich  lawyer  is aghast  at  the "implica­ tions"  of a  priest  frequenting  prostitutes' rooms.  He  can  view the girls only as "ob­  jects of charity," not human souls in need of  compassion. Mrs.  Robison,   like  her husband, is blind  to  the humanity of the two prostitutes. Callaghan's irony  is pun­  gent   in  his  presentation  of  the  female Robison: she was "so devout  in observing  all  the  feast  days and  holy days and  giv­ ing  splendid leadership to all her co­ religionists   in  the  nicest  social  matters: and  she was without ostentation, too, for she went  to the  very early masses by her-

I60
 self." The woman  sees Ronnie and  Midge purely  in  sociological   terms: "all  prosti­ tutes  are  feeble-minded." Unlike  Father Dowling (but  like Charlie Stewart), Mrs. Robison   responds   to  the  girls  as  proble­  matic   aspects  of  a  diseased  society.  Her  solution:  a   simple   matter  of   selective breeding. The degradation of such a reso­ lution  is  ironically evaluated in  Ronnie's bitter memory  of the "Bourbonistic" Mrs. Robison :  "We're whores  and   we  know we're  whores,  but she's a different kind of whore. See what  I mean?"
In   his  treament  of  Catholicism,  Cal­ laghan is careful to  distinguish  between  the   eternal  Church  of  Christ   and   the temporal church of man.  It is in  his con­  sideration of the  latter that  he  delivers  a most stringent attack on the inadequacies of the  Church as a  redemptive agent. As Malcolm  Ross  rightly   observes,  Callag­ han's   juxtaposition   of   the   Communist and  the worldly  Churchmen constitutes a masterful irony. Contrasted to Charlie Stewart's "practical  love"  for  the  poor, the  Church is portrayed as a sycophantic institution which  "grovels before  the  rich and   the  powerful." This  is  apparent  in Father   Anglin's  method     of   soliciting James Robison:
the  older priest  asked  for  contributions, with a splendid aplomb, a fine, gracious exchange of  compliments that  set   them  both   rolling with   hearty laughter.

The point  is powerfully reinforced by Callaghan's presentation of Bishop Foley. As in  his portrayal of the  Robison  home, Callaghan's image  of the  Bishop's  palace provides a graphic illustration of  the priest's corrupted  moral  condition: "the palace was  an  old,  dirty,  gray-stone building, not  far  away  from   the  Cathe­ dral." The Bishop  himself  can  be seen as something of a Dickensian  caricature, an exaggerated image  of stern authoritarian­ Ism:
The Bishop  was  nearly seven  feet  tall  with great  broad shoulders and   thick   dark hair.

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



. . . He   had    a   big,    round,  heavy,  dark, threatening face,  and   he  was  inclined to  be a bit of a bully,  although when it  was  neces­ sary,   as  it   was   now   when  he   put  out   his hand to Mr. Robison, he  had  a very charm­ ing  manner.

As the passage implies,  the Bishop is a hypocrite whose priorities include good public   relations. It  is  this   concern  for popular reputation which  motivates his cruel,  impersonal treatment of Father Dowling.   The latter's practical  applica­ tion  of  Christ's principal  commandment is  met   with   immediate   deprecation  of his  "scandalous"  behaviour. The   Bishop views such  actions  only  in  terms  of their financial  ramifications:

The Bishop  nodded his  big  head and  sighed deeply, as  if  the  sound of  the  priest's name had    made   him    very    sad,    but    what    he actually was   thinking of  as  he  looked   out the  window so gloomily, was not  of the  priest but  of  a  charity campaign he  was  about to launch throughout the  city,  and he was imagining the  result of a scandal that would follow  if a priest were  implicated with  two prostitutes.

Despite  his later pangs  of conscience  the Bishop  remains adamant  in  his  decision to discipline the ardent priest  and  to have the two girls sent  out  of town; he regards the  whole  episode  as a  trifling  "piece  of folly" -folly  which    could    disrupt   his charity campaign. It is this inflexible con­ cern  with  money  which  aligns  the Bishop (and   his institution)  with  Lou  Wilenski
-the common pimp.
In  his  interview with  the  Bishop,  Fa- ther  Dowling comments:

"If  I start hating prostitutes where am   I going   to  stop? ... These girls  have  prosti­ tuted  their  bodies. All  around  us  there   are all  kinds   of  people prostituting  their   souls and    their  principles  for   money.   I  know people  in  this  city  who  prostitute our  faith for  the  sake  of  expediency. I watch it  going  on  all  around  and wonder how  corrupt our  faith can  become before it  dies.  So if I can't have  charity for  those  girls, certainly I can  have   no   love   for   many  others  in   higher places."
 The   passage  has  a  twofold  significance. On  one level it  adumbrates the  world  of the novel wherein "prostitution" exists on all levels of society. More  important is the fact  that  it elucidates Callaghan's moral­ istic concept  of man's earthly role. For  in place of the limited resolutions offered  by social  correctives,  Callaghan  proposes  a personalistic,   transcendent  Love   which enables   individuals  "to   aspire   to   even greater   degrees   of   independence  until they achieve  that perfect  spiritual society which   no  human society  has  within   its gift."6  It  is precisely  this form  of Love or agape which  Father Dowling attempts to actualize in  his  relationship with  Ronnie and  Midge.  Such  a Love is based  not  on blind  romanticism, but on a sound realiz­ ation  of the  world's  turgid  realities:

There was a whole  economic background behind the wretched lives of these girls. They were   not   detached  from    the    life   around them. They  had   free   will  only   when   they were   free....  St.   Thomas Aquinas [had] said we have not free  will when  we are completely dominated  by  passion. . . . If he [Father Dowling] properly understood the lives  of  these  girls,   he   thought, he   might realize    they    were    not    free    but    strongly fettered.

Even  though Father Dowling fails in  his quest  by material standards, he does suc­ ceed,   unlike   Callaghan's  earlier  priests, in  applying his  theoretical  knowledge to concrete  problems.  His  advocation  and exercise  of a "more comprehensive love"  reflects   a  Christian   triumph  of  selfless sacrifice.
Although specifically   Catholic in  per­ spective,    the    tale    of   Father   Stephen Dowling's quest  transcends specificity and  can  be  read  as  a  parable  of  Everyman. His  final  conviction that  an  encompas­ sing   love   provides    personal   salvation points  to a universal  ideal.  As Hugo  Mc­  Pherson  remarks: "love-a transcendent love  such  as  Father Dowling's-is  the only response which  gives meaning to the inescapable facts  of human weakness  and

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



pain." Through the  employment of such a Love, Callaghan insists, one is able  to attain a personal, spiritual harmony with one's   personal,   spiritual  God.  Although the  irony  of madness tempers  the  tone  of his conclusion, Callaghan's portrayal of Father Dowling illustrates the  possibility of the achieved quest:

There was a peace within him as he watched the  calm, eternal waters swelling  darkly against the  one  faint streak  of light, the  cold night light   on  the  skyline.  High   in  the  sky three stars   were   out. His  love  seemed  sud­ denly   to  be  as  steadfast  as  those  stars, as wide  as  the  water, and   still  flowing  within him  like  the  cold  smooth  waves  still  rolling  on  the  shore.


NOTES

1 Hugo  McPherson,  "The  Two   Worlds  of Morley Callaghan,"  Queen's Quarterly, 64, no.  3  ( 1957), rpt. in Brandon Conron, ed., Morley Callaghan (Toronto:  McGraw-Hill Ryerson,  197 5), p.  61 ;  Brandon Conron, "Introduction" to  his  Morley Callaghan, p.
4; George Woodcock, "Lost Eurydice: The
Novels  of Callaghan", Canadian Literature,
21  (Summer 1964), rpt.  in  Morley  Callag­
han, p. 89.
2    Morley Callaghan,  "Speech  of  Acceptance on  Receiving the  Royal  Bank  Award, June
15,  1970," in  John Metcalf, ed.,  Sixteen by
Twelve  (Toronto:  Ryerson, 1970), p.  20.
3   Morley Callaghan, That  Summer in   Paris
(Toronto:  Macmillan, 1963; rpt.  1973), p.
22.
4   Morley  Callaghan,   in   an   interview  with June Callwood, "The  Many Coloured  Ca­ reer   of   Morley  Callaghan,"  Star   Weekly Dec.  17, 1960), p.  17;  rpt.  in Brandon Con­ ron,  Morley Callaghan (New York: Twayne,
1966)' p. 35·
5  "Introduction"  to    Such    Is   My    Beloved (1934; rpt. Toronto: McClelland &  Stew­ art, 1969), p. ix.
6   Jacques Maritain, Rights of Man and  Na­ tural   Law   ( 1945), quoted in  Victor  Hoar, Morley Callaghan  (Toronto:  Copp  Clark,
1969), p. 92.

GARY A. BOIRE
 ON
PATRICK ANDERSON

LIKE BRIAN  MOORE AND  MALCOLM LOWRY, Patrick Anderson was one of those splen­ did  visitors  whose  influence on Canadian literature   during   its    vital    formative period  was both  seminal  and decisive. He might actually be described  as a "Young Visiter,"  since   he   came   when   he   was twenty-five, wrote   his  best  story  by  the time  he was thirty, and departed in 1950, when  he was thirty-five. His recent  death, twenty-nine years after his return to Eng­ land,   reminds one  that-however  long he may  have  lived away  from  Canada­ the work Anderson did while he was here,  and   the  energizing power   he  projected, have  made him  an  enduring presence  in our  literary heritage.
Anderson's Canadian  period   involved a  mere  quarter of  his literary life.  From
1950  onward he  became  reabsorbed into the  English  literary world  as  an  essayist,
a  travel writer, an  occasional   poet.  Yet
the Canadian decade was as important in his personal life as in the history  of  Cana­ dian  poetry. It was the only  period when
-arriving with  the  impetus of  the  late English  Thirties   (Thomas  and   Barker superimposed on Auden  and  Spender) - he  played   more   than   a  minor   role.  His function  between    1940  and    1945  was cathartic. He himself  was at the top of his literary  form.   He   never  again   wrote  so well   as    he did   in   Canada  during  the
194o's,  and   it  is  significant  that   all  his books   of   verse - as  distinct  from   his prose   works -appeared   in  Canada.  A Tent  for April   ( 1945)   and   The   White Centre    ( 1946)    were   published  in   the middle of his Canadian decade, the  time when  he was  the  inspirer and  one  of the editors of the  historic  Montreal  verse magazine, Preview; they contain his best poems.  His third volume,  The  Colour is Naked,  appeared  in   Toronto  in   1953,

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



three  years after  he had  left for good, and then   there   was  a  long  gap   of   twenty­ three  years, during which  he brought out no   book   of   verse   anywhere.   Then,  in I976 and  1 977, his next volumes of poetry appeared - again   in   Canada,  though  Anderson no   longer   lived   here   or   in­ tended   to  return; they   were   the  signi­ ficantly titled  A Visiting  Distance ( 1976), and  Return  to Canada  (1977).
That  Anderson should   have   chosen Canada  as   the   place   to   publish   these books is an indication of his realization, towards the end of his life, that  only in Canada had  he ever been more than  a pleasing  minor writer.  This  realization made   him   anxious   during  the   middle
197o's to re-establish his position  in Can­
adian letters.
I remember a curious correspondence I had   with   him,   in  which   Anderson  ex­ pressed  deep  chagrin at  the  slowness  of Canadian publishers at this time to recog­ nize   his   Canadian   importance.   I re­ marked   to  him  that  Ihad  left  England about   the  same   time  he  left  Canada­ almost  thirty  years  ago -having  played there  a role as editor and  poet  not  unlike his   in   Canada,  but   that,   after    three  decades,  Iwould  hardly  be  annoyed   if publishers failed  to consider me an  Eng­ lish  writer.  Anderson  could   not  see  the parallel, and  this  made   me  realize  that  for him the Canadian decade had  become
in  retrospect  the  only   period   when   his writing  made  a meaningful impact on the world  around him,  the  only  period  when he had  really felt himself adequate as a writer.
His  instinct was correct. He  figures - and will always figure-in Canadian and never  in  British   anthologies, because   he wrote  a  handful of  poems,  like  his well­ known   "Poem  on  Canada," which   are among  the most  interesting and  stimulat­ ing  verse written here  in  the  194o's, and also   because   he   brought  in   the   right British  influences  when  they were  needed
 and  because  his  enthusiasm and  dedica­ tion made  Preview, during its three  years of  existence  from   1 942  to  1 945,  one  of those journals  that  -like Transition  and New Verse in their  own  times and  places
-form  the  channels  through  which   a
poetic  movement  defines  itself  and reaches  maturity.
I have  just talked  of Anderson's  poems during  the   194o's  as  among  the  "most  interesting and  stimulating  poems"  then written  in  Canada. Idid   not  say  they were among  the best, since, as I remarked in  Canadian  Literature  78, in  reviewing  his two most recent books, I find in read­ ing   them   that  I am   "impressed  by  a quality  of  intellectual virtuosity, of delib­ eration,  of  versatile   craftsmanship  that  can range among  formal  patterns, accom­ panied  by an  inability  to fuse feeling  and artifice  as a consummate poet  does." The brilliance  was always  there,  and  lingered even in his late  poems, but  it was increas­ ingly  detached  from   any  credible   emo­ tion,  any  valid   tradition,  and   this  was doubtless   why   he   wanted   to  be   taken back  during   his  last  years  into  the  only tribe,  the  tribe  of  Canadian  poets,  that  had   accorded   him   a  meaningful  rank.  Anderson   was  a  superb   mannerist,  but mannerism is by definition a constricting stance,  and  it  prevented him  developing in any new direction as a poet after  about
I 945,   the   mid-point  of   his   Canadian decade.
GEORGE  WOODCOCK


CANADIAN LIT. ABROAD

NoT   MUCH  MORE than a  decade ago,  Cana­ dian   writing-in  any   language -was  virtu­ ally  unknown on  the  European  continent. The only   Canadian  writer  widely   read   there  was Mazo   de  Ia  Roche,  whose  Jalna   novels   were published  in   the   popular   French  paperback series,  Livres   de   Poche;  most   of  her   readers

ON  THE VERGE



thought she  was  French  or,  if  they  knew  she was  Canadian, assumed  she  was  Quebecois; real Quebecois writers, in those comparatively recent  days, were virtually  unknown  in France.
The  scene  has  amazingly  changed, and  not
merely in France, where the University  of Toulouse  operates  a programme of studies of Canadian  writing   in   English.  Only   recently the  writer  of  this  item  was invited  to address fifty German  academics in Bonn on Canadian writers  and  writing.  But  Italy  is more  respon­
sive than Germany  or even France to English Canadian  writing.   Books  by  Northrop  Frye and   Marshall   McLuhan,   Margaret   Atwood and  Morley  Callaghan, Mordecai  Richler  and George  Woodcock,  Margaret Laurence and Leonard Cohen,  have  been or are  being  trans­ lated   and   published   in  Italy.  Professor  Gio­ vanna    Capone  has   established   a   course   of studies  at  the ancient  University  of Bologna in English     Canadian    writers     from     Susanna  Moodie  to  Joe  Rosenblatt, and  in  Rome  the first  number  has  just  appeared   of  Argomenti Canadesi:   Letteratura   Canadese  di   Lingua Inglese, edited  by Amleto  Lorenzini.
Argomenti  Canadesi  is,  to  begin  at   least, almost  entirely  Canadian in authorship as well
as  content. George  Woodcock,  Northrop Frye and  Claude Bissell provide  the  critical-histori­ cal   articles   that   open   the   issue.  There  are poems  by  Birney  and  Purdy,  Cohen   and  At­ wood, Newlove and  the Italian-Canadian poet, Pier   Giorgio   di   Cicco,   and   interviews   with Marshall   McLuhan  and   others.   The   poems appear in  English  and  Italian; the  prose,  en­ tirely   Italian, seems  far  more  sonorous   than  one  ever  thought it in  English  and  tempts  one to propose a solution  for our language  problem
-let us  all   speak   Italian!  The   only   non­
Canadian,   apart     from    the    translators,   is Lynette  Hunter  of   the   University   of   Edin­ burgh,  who  comments  on  Ondaatje's  Coming
Through Slaughter.
We are not told how often Argomenti Cana­
desi  will appear, nor  are  prices  given  for  sub­ scriptions   or  single  copies,  but  those  who  are interested  in   this   unique   venture,   the   first journal  of English-Canadian  writing  in  a  lan­
guage  other  than  English,  may write  to  Argo­ menti  Canadesi, Colli  della  Farnesina   68/s, ooi94 ROMA, Italy.
L.T.C.
 ON THE VERGE

**·•  PETER STEVENS,  comp. Modern  English­ Canadian  Poetry:  A    Guide  to   Information Sources.  Gale   Research,  $22.00.   This   book lists   the   work   of   major    and   some   minor twentieth-century poets,  together  with selected critidsm and  some annotations.  Bibliographies  are  by definition  dated, and  this  one is hamp­  ered   both   by  the   rigour   of   its  starting  date (I goo;  which  omits,  e.g.,  Roberts   and  D.  C. Scott  despite  their  twentieth-century writings)  and   the  inevitability  of  any  arbitrary closing date  (here I973). More  serious is the  unstated  but  apparent  limitation of  secondary   listings to  Canadian ones only. Useful international perspectives   (and   in  particular  the  enquiries, both  critical  and  bibliographic, that  have  been published under the label "Commenwealth Literature")  are  thereby  missed. The  annota­ tions  are  brief  and  introductory, but  thought­ ful;  and  the  listings  of  Canadian  little  maga­ zines are  thorough and  helpful, as  is the  book as a whole, despite  its  restrictions.
W.H.N.

***   ROBERT  BOTHWELL.   Pearson: His   Life and    World.  McGraw-Hill Ryerson.    $I4·95· Long  ago,  in  I 928,  when  Lester  Pearson  was being    considered   for    appointment   to    the Department   of    External   Affairs,    Vincent Massey   remarked    that    "there  is   something curiously   loose-jointed  and   sloppy  about   his mental  make-up  which,  as a  matter  of fact,  is reflected  in some measure  in his physical  bear­ ing."  In  his  biography, Pearson, His  Life  and World, Robert   Bothwell  is inclined  to  dismiss this  as  an  odd,  slightly   malicious  view.  And, indeed,    given    the    distinction   of    Pearson's  career, such  it  appears at  first  sight.  Yet  one is left,  after  reading  it  all,  with  a strange  dis­ satisfaction; how blurred  an  impression,  for  all his  amiability,  his  good   will,  his  skill  as  an honest   broker,   Pearson's   career   in   the   end leaves on one's  mind  in  comparison  with  those of less inoffensive  men,  like Sir  John  A. Mac­  donald   or  even   Mackenzie   King!   And   per­ haps  the  clue  lies  in  the  "World" as  well  as the  "Life" of  the  title.  For  it was a "curiously  loose-jointed"  time  in  Canadian  history   and the  Canadian  consciousness  over  which  Pear­  son  presided,  and  it  fitted  him-if  the  meta­ phor   works-like   a  glove.  One   can   hardly  blame the  biographer for  the sense of indefinit­ ness   with   which   one  emerges   from   reading Pearson: His  Life  and  World; it  was inherent in  the  subject.

o.w.
