$2.oo  per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE N°·60
Spring, 1974




CONTEMPO RY




Articles

BY DANIEL W. DOERKSEN, GLORIA ONLEY, MICHAEL USTICK, GARY  ROSS, E.  D. BLODGETT, LINDA ROGERS



Review Articles and Reviews

BY CLARA THOMAS, TOM WAYMAN, DONALD STEPHENS, GEORGE WOODCOCK, LAURENCE RICOU, PATRICIA MORLEY, STANLEY E. MCMULLIN, PAT  BARCLAY, DORIS  EVERARD, GEORGE BOWERING,  DOROTHY LIVESAY, DAVID WATMOUGH, DAVID HELWIG, FRASER SUTHERLAND, STEPHEN SCOBIE, DON  JEWISON, DIANE BESSAI, JIM CHRISTY, LAURENT MAILHOT





A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW








HOW  A LAND
GROWS OLD





N a-ONE   WHO   TRAVELLED over  Canada  in  recent  years  by ways  other  than   the  impersonal   Highway  could  fail  to  observe  with  uneasy sadness how quickly  the  land  grows old  where  man  touches  it.  Of  course,  the country  is so  large  that  it  remains  possible for  casual  visitors  to  escape  into pristine  landscapes,  wildernesses relatively unmarred; after  all,  the  image  of  a new land  is still fostered  assiduously by publicists and  politicians. But the  poets think differently, and  they speak for sensitive Canadians. When  AI Purdy  writes of the Ontario he knows as a land which history has worn down with glacial persistence, when a young poet like Dale Zieroth writes elegies on a dying prairie way  of life, we ignore  them  at  our  peril.  For  they  tell  us  how  a  century  of unthinking exploitation  has destroyed not only the original  quality  of the land, but also the human  culture  that  was grafted on to it. For those inclined to trace this pattern  of environmental disaster three  recent  books are  worth  reading.
Painters in a New  Land,  by Michael Bell (McClelland & Stewart,  $22.50)   is one of those lavishly produced  volumes of social history-cum-art  which  McClel­ land  &  Stewart   do  so  well.  Michael  Bell, formerly  a  curator   at  the   Public Archives of Canada, has gathered  a fascinating anthology of drawings and water­ colours  by pre-Victorian and  early  Victorian  artists  in  Canada;  almost  all  of them   have   been   preserved   unexhibited   and   previously   unpublished   in   the Archives, and  this has helped  to guarantee  their  freshness  of impact.
One thing Painters in a New  Land reveals convincingly is that  Canada in the early  nineteenth   century  fostered  a  flourishing  extension  of  the  great  English school of water-colour  painting.  There  is an extraordinary  gem-like vividness of tone about  many of these sketches, which vary in character  from  the engagingly

3

EDITORIAL



pnm1tive  to  the  highly  accomplished,  the  latter  usually  the  work  of  military topographers or of the  few professional artists  who in those distant  days found their  way into  the  wilderness  west of Lachine.  In  their  vigour  and  clarity  the best of these works recapture  in  a  way the  camera  has never  done,  and  prose only  rarely,  the  wild and  evanescent  beauty  of parts of Canada that  have  now been  long submerged  by settlement,  and  the  appeal  of  new  places  where  the buildings  may  have  been  rough  and  makeshift  but  the alienating  impersonality of modern  cities had  not  yet taken  root.  Michael  Bell has  kept  his own  com­ mentary  to what is barely necessary for sustaining the historical flow, but  he has very felicitously mingled  the  paintings  and  drawings  he selects with  well-chosen passages from  the  diaries  and   journals  of the  time. Thus,  Painters  in  a  New Land  really does give a  vivid sense of what  its title describes-a  land  barely changed  by man  the hunter  and  as yet hardly spoilt by man  the exploiter.
No-one who knows Canada well is likely to enjoy this fine book without experiencing  a pang of grief -and  of remorse on behalf of his people -at  the thought  of how much  of this sparkling  heritage  we have ruined.  Something  of the  change  that   human   settlement   wrought  in  the  prairies,  totally  changing
their  original  ecology, is charted  in  J. G.  Nelson's The  Last  Refuge   (Harvest
House,  $7.50). This  is a  geographer's account  of what  has  happened  to  the Cypress Hills and  the surrounding plains since the introduction   of the  horse - even  before  white  men  appeared   in  numbers -began  the  process that  on  the prairies  has  changed  the  relationship   between  man,  his environment,  and  the animal  and  vegetable species that  share it with him:  changed  it so radically  that it seems unlikely that-even  if one's occasional fantasies of man's  vanishing  as
a  species could  ever  come  true -anything  resembling the  original  pattern   of
existence would form itself again  in the vast southern  regions of Rupert's Land. The moral of Professor Nelson's carefully written and researched historical narra­ tive is summed up in his last paragraph with a simplicity that is its own eloquence.

In concluding this study, I would like to lay stress on the rapid pace of change since the appearance  of the white man, and  its implications for  the  future.  It took about 200 years between I 670 and  I 88o for man to emerge as an  ecological dominant  and  for the European  economic system to effect major  changes in an ecosystem that  apparently  had  been in a relatively steady state  for  thousands of years. In  the following eighty or ninety years this economic  system has grown to the point where remote areas such as the Cypress Hills are  being subjected to the cumulative effects of urban, agricultural, transport and  recreational developments as well as to proposals for mining in one sort or  another. In  about  ninety years we have moved from abortive efforts to save the bison to the point where the very


4

EDITORIAL



air of the Cypress Hills might be polluted by gas and oil production. What  will the Hills be like in fifty years if we do not seriously look at  present economic activities and living patterns, and plan for life as well as growth, goods and earnings?

The  real tragedy  of the prairies  goes beyond mere humanization, for  what  is happening now is the  destruction  of the  plains  not  merely  as an  environment, but  also  as  a  setting  for  human   communities.  During  the  past  two  decades exploitation   has  taken  on  even  more  naked  and  rapid  forms,  exemplified  in official encouragement of the ousting of the farmers  by large  corporations, with the  consequent  decay  of the  towns and  villages of the  prairie  provinces.
This  process -the  death  of a  regional culture  that  has  emerged,  flourished and  decayed  in no more  than  a long human  life -is splendidly  described  and chronicled  by Heather Robertson in Grassroots (James  Lewis & Samuel, $ IO.oo). Heather Robertson  takes five communities,  varied in character and  history, and shows how the process of regional decay is working through  all of them,  so that they can  be described only as moribund,  no matter  what  efforts at  rejuvenation their inhabitants may initiate. Their  death,  and  the death  of scores of  communi­ ties  like  them,  will  mean  that   within  another   generation   prairie  life  as  our novelists have described it will have come to an end. The combines will still move over the  vast fields, but  they  will move -so  far  as human  community  is con­ cerned -through  a near  vaet.lum.
Heather Robertson  has been accused by some reviewers of exaggeration, and here and  there she does indeed perform that  heightening of fact  which all writers know  is sometimes  necessary to  arrive  at  an  underlying  truth. But  those  who have  travelled  the  plains  during  the  last six or  seven years  will  recognize  the essential  rightness of  her  presentation.  These  are  in  stark  actuality   the  prairie towns and  villages of the  1970s, a generation  farther  into  decay  than  Sinclair Ross's Horizon.  No-one now would think of calling any of them  even ironically Horizon; they are  our  own destinations  on a Journey  to the  End  of the  Night. Perhaps  Heather   Robertson  is no  Canadian   Celine,  but  she  has  charted   the territory  in  which such  a  novelist might  operate,  and  has set  the  mood  of the next wave of prairie  novels, provided  there are enough people left in the prairies during  the later 1970s to make novels worth the effort. In the meantime Heather Robertson  has shown  herself in Grass Roots  to be something  more  than  a good journalist. She writes the kind of documentary  reportage  that  is likely to be read a long time ahead. Orwell  would not have resented a comparison  between  Grass Roots  and  The Road  to Wigan Pier.

5

EDITORIAL



THE AREA  of silence between those who write in French  and those who write  in  English  north  of the  49th  parallel  and  west of the  Atlantic has long  been  a  cause  for  regret.  From  the  beginning  in  Canadian  Literature we have tried to throw  out precarious bridges of lianas and telegraph  wire across the gap; our efforts have been largely frustrated by the manifest failure of the assumption  that  participants in either the francophone  or the anglophone  culture in Canada are willing to exercise bilingualism sufficiently to read  much  of each others' literatures  in their  original  languages.
Reluctantly,  we have  had  to  accept  the  need  for  the  copious  translation   of Canadian books from  French  into English and vice versa. A beginning  has been made  from  French  into  English,  and  it is now possible for  readers  in Thunder Bay and  Seven Persons to read  in their own language  a score or so of the  most interesting  novels written  recently in Quebec;  with due  respect, I doubt  if even ten  recent  interesting  English  Canadian novels are  available  in  French  transla­ tion to the inhabitants of Sorel or Riviere du Loup.
We welcome therefore  the Canada  Council's recent initiative  in this field. Not only is the Council offering  two annual  prizes for the best translations  of  Cana­ dian  books into  one  or  other  of the  major  languages.  More  important,  in  the long  run,  it is allocating  no less than  $225,000 to subsidize  the  publication  of translations  during  the  current  financial  year, and  translations  from  the  Cana­  dian  languages  other  than  French  and  English  are  not  ruled  out.  This  modest fund,  well spent,  can  do  more  to  promote  understanding between  the  various
cultures  than  any  number  of expensive Royal  Commissions.

G.W.




















6


SEARCH AND DISCOVERY

Margaret Avison's Poetry





Daniel W. Doerksen





L"Love  (III) ",  the poem which conclude< hi' "pictme of
many  spiritual Conflicts", George  Herbert portrays   the  culmination of  the  reli­
gious  quest  in  unexpected  discovery.  Unaware  that   she  herself   will  one   day describe  such  experience, the  Margaret Avison of Winter  Sun feels intrigued into envious  comment. Having  probed   about   in  a  world   of  Heraclitean  flux   and materialistic preoccupation, she marvels  that

George  Herbert-and  he makes it  plain­ Guest at this same transfiguring board
Did sit and eat.1

And  indeed  Miss Avison's  own  poetical  achievement in Winter  Sun  ( 1g6o)   and The  Dumbfounding ( 1966)   merits  consideration as spiritual quest  and  discovery. The  first of her  books is marked  by a continual seeking,  while  the second  speaks of  fulfilment   in  lyrics  which   have  been  hailed   as  "among the  finest  religious poems  of our  time".2   Aside  from  sheer  literary  excellence,  what  makes  the  two collections  remarkable is that, far  from  being  tacked  on  as  a  "Christian" after­ thought to  her  previous  verse,  Miss Avison's  later  poems  seem  to  grow  out  of her  earlier  searching ones  in  a  sequence  which  if not  that  of simple  cause and effect,  is yet  that   of  authentic experience. 3  Search   and   discovery  are  thus  like two sides of one  coin,  or like two main  parts  of that  one  thing  Claudel declares every  poet  is born  to say in  the  totality  of his works.  In  this  essay I propose  to examine   Margaret Avison's  poetry  of search  and  of  discovery, noting  the  way in which  search  leads  into  discovery.

7

SEARCH AND  DISCOVERY



If to be secular  means  to be fully engaged  in the  world of the "here and  now", then  all of Miss Avison's  poetry  is secular.  If to be religious means  to  care  about meaning, to  have   (in  Tillich's language)  an  "ultimate concern", little  of  her poetry  is not  religious.  The  search  for  the  ultimately significant  in life stands  out as a main  feature of Winter  Sun,  but  it is not  always obtrusive. "The  Apex  Ani­ mal" manifests a  leisurely,  playful  curiosity  as  to  the  nature of  "the  One  ... Who  sees, the  ultimate Recipient/of what  happens." Fancy  suggests  to  the  poet, as it surely  could  not  to a Christian, that  this  ultimate being  is none  other  than  a cloud  formation shaped like a horse's  head,  since after  all the latter  has a com­ manding view  of  things   in  its  "patch of  altitude/troubled  only   by  clarity   of weather" and  seems  free  of  matters in  "mortal memory". Under  the  fanciful surface of the  poem,  and  hidden  away  before  the  parenthetical conclusion, there  lurks  a note  of concern about the  human individual, in this case  the  clerk  whose "lustreless  life"  has been  touched by the  "ointment of  mortality".
"Dispersed Titles", both  more  serious and  more  profound, also displays  an ambivalence as to the  spiritual nature of its quest.  The  "titles" of the  title  form a  poem  of their  own,  which  aids  in  threading together  the  central metaphor of flight  in its various  transformations:

[FLIGHT] [HAS ROOTS] BUT  IS CUT OFF
EXCEPT FROM ALL ITS  SELVES
THE EARTH HAS  OTHER ROOTS AND  SELVES THE  NAMELESS ONE  DWELLS  IN  HIS  TENTS AND  "UP" IS A DIRECTION.

The   "flight",  beginning as  the  modern scientific  conquest   of  the   air,  is soon traced   back  to  that  other  flight  made  possible for  Kepler  by his "Orpheus", the Danish   astronomer Tycho  Brahe.   The   escape  from   the   old  cosmology   ("the defiant  break/with cycles")   has left a "weird hollow under  the solar  architrave", and  the  repeated invocation of Tycho Brahe   (suggesting  man's   Narcissistic self­ worship  during the  Renaissance and  later) is accompanied by a feeling  of  corres­ ponding emptiness within  man  himself:

Something  wrought  by itself out of itself must  bear  its own
ultimates  of heat  and  cold nakedly,  refusing
the sweet surrender.

8

SEARCH AND  DISCOVERY



For Tycho Brahe's sake I find myself, but lose myself again for
so few are salvaged in the sludge of the ancestral singular.

Miring   the  person  in  the  past  rather   than   freeing  him  for  flight,  the  new humanistic  religion has apparently reversed the old paradox,  "he  that  loseth his life for  my sake shall  find  it"  (Matt. I o:go). But such  awareness  of  modem man's  plight does not in itself set him free, and  while the  poet senses something beyond the known  ("Things I can't  know I smell/as plainly as if invisible camp­ fires/smoked"), the  conclusion  of the  poem reveals no  joy of  discovery,  but  at best the musing of one who wishes there were a Christian  reality, yet feels com­ pelled  to  conclude  that  "up", as the  post-medieval  cosmology  demonstrates,  is after  all  only  a  "direction". Thus,  in  the  final  twist  of  the  basic  metaphor,  Christianity  is seen as a "flight"  from reality. Still  the vividness with  which  the poet  depicts  man's  persistent  idea  that  the  world  is a  cosmic  "stage" betrays, despite  the  overt  rejection,  a quest for  a  reality  beyond  scientific  humanism.




MUCH POETRY  of religious search  reveals a  potentiality  for "finding". Paul  Claude! once said  that  the  past is "an  incantation of things  to come, ... the forever growing sum of future  conditions."4   A Christian  outcome may  be implied  but  not  necessitated  by these  poems. For  the  time  being,  the overt  religious references point  chiefly to frustration. The  "waste  land" quality of the  "gardenless  gardens"5   in  "Not  the Sweet Cicely of Gerardes  Herball" is aggravated, strengthened  by the allusions to myrrh and  to "rams-hom thickets", which like the gardens  themselves mock the very thing  they seem to  promise. It is the very bleakness that  is religious. Disheartening scenes are frequently encoun­ tered in Winter  Sun:  the "Fallen, Fallen World"  is a world of  "breathing murk and   apprehension   of/Slow   sure  estrangement   from   the   sun",  an   "enforced passage" through  "vacant corridors".  Life often seems like a  "choked  day, swol­ len to almost total swamp".  Just as the piled-up consonants in these phrases help convey the sense of obstruction,  the  prevailing complexity  of surface  and  struc­ ture  throughout   Miss Avison's  first  book  reflects  the  difficulties  of  an  as  yet unrewarded search.
The  quest proceeds under a variety of moods. The  gentle speculation  of "The


9

SEARCH  AND DISCOVERY



Apex  Animal"  yields to  a  more  despairing  note  in  the  descriptions  just given, and  even to something  like rebellion:  "Since  Lucifer",  the  poet says, "waiting is all/A   rebel  can."  Yet  since  there  is still the  search,  questions  are  raised  in "Atlantis and  the  Department Store"  as to whether  she really is a rebel, and  if so, what  she is rebelling  against.  She  proceeds to  describe  what  she  elsewhere calls "dull  repudiated   house"-the  earlier  religious ideas  which  she  "did  not hate" but nevertheless has rejected in favour of a secular world. The latter's "splendid/Echoing  stairways"   she  contrasts   with  the   "steady   escalators"   of organized  religion.
But while the religious emporium's "stunned" hierarchies ignore the life behind
"soiled concrete  walls",  the inquiring  poet is only too much  aware  of the  prob­ lems of modem society. "The World Still Needs", Miss Avison entitles one poem, and  the incompleted  transitive  verb suggests the endlessness of the need. She sees not only the "communal cramp  of understanding" which produces suburbia,  and the  masses, their  eyes "swimming  with sleep" at  a  concert,  but  the  lonely and confined  housewife suffering  literally  and  symbolically from  "Sore  throat   and dusty curtains" and  the engineer  "watchful  and  blank"  who  "had  no Christmas worries/Mainly because it was the  eve of April."  Colloquial  phrases here mark an  occasional movement  toward  simplified expression which  is  to be more fully exploited  in the  poetry  of discovery, and  is in this  poem  accompanied  by hints of coming harmony  in the allusions to "piano-tuners" and  "another spring".  But the  lucidity  and  lyric  power  of another  "social  problems"  poem  is both  witty and  grim:  the pun in the title of "Mordent for a  Melody" cleverly suggests just that  combination  of pungency  and  lilt that  perfectly describes the  poem  itself. Fully alert  to modem  developments  in  science and  society, Miss Avison adroitly mocks man's  unthinking enthusiasm about  them. However, it seems more typical of the searching  poet to express a tragic realization with sympathy, as in "Apoca­  lyptic?"  (the  question  mark  in  the  title is significant),  where  the  poet explores the  possibility that  a  "luminous"  doom may be what  frees us from  the  "tread­ mill" of life.
Facing  man's situation  is an indispensable necessity, but, as the poet of Winter
Sun  realizes, what matters  beyond that is how one responds to it. In these poems of search,  Miss Avison explores various alternatives,  but  does not advocate  any particular response-she  is not  ready  yet, and  the search  itself, together  with her  hopes or fears, is all that  she can share.  In  "Unfinished   After-Portrait", a poem of mourning,  the  poet expresses her own dissatisfaction  with  the repeated frustrations  of her quest:


IO

SEARCH AND  DISCOVERY



Start-and-stop despairs of that  royal moving
keeps trying other  sleights
as rockets roar  for  the interlunar only to piffie out in
the ocean's suds.

This  trip  and  gamble  cannot  be the  best, the looked-for.

The   continually  varying   line-lengths,   emphasized  by  indentation,  reflect   the erratic course  of the  searchings. Most  of the  remaining lines consist  of  just such "Start-and-stop", such  "trip and  gamble", and  if the  conclusion  does  not  "piffle out", it is only  because  the  poet  is willing  to settle  for a somewhat vague  feeling of a  "human  presence".
An  increasing sense  of  urgency  in  the  quest  seems to  develop  in  some  poems of  Winter   Sun.  "The  Mirrored Man" articulates this  increased  intensity   with artistic  power.  The   opening   rhymed  quatrains (I quote   the  second  and   third) state  the  paradox of man's search  which  is at  once  a refusal  to search:

So now we flee the Garden
Of  Eden,  steadfastly.
And still in our flight are ardent
For lost eternity.

We always turn  our heads  away When  Canaan  is at  hand, Knowing  it  mortal  to enjoy
The  Promise,  not  the  Land.

This   re-statement  of  the  gist  of  George  Herbert's  "Miserie" leads   through  a brief  Miltonic evocation of a  flaming  sword  and  curse  to  a  thoroughly modem yet, one feels, timeless  picture  of man's  existential  self-confrontation:

So each of us conceals within  himself
A cell where one man stares into the glass And sees, now featureless the meadow mists, And  now himself, a pistol at  his temple, Gray, separate,  wearily waiting.

In  the succeeding lines, alternative responses to the dilemma are  pictured: ignor­ ing  the  "burden" of  self  and  thus  turning the  quest  into  "trivial  ramblings"; despairing, and   choosing   actual or  virtual suicide; or  deliberately  inculcating

I I

SEARCH AND  DISCOVERY



illusion in  an  exploitation   of the  self. Realizing  the  futility  of each  possibility, the  poet sums up  the search  in  haunting,  poignant  lines:

All of us, flung in one
Murky parabola,
Seek out some pivot for significance,
Leery of comets' tails, mask-merry, Wondering at the centre
Who will gain access, search the citadel
To  its last, secret door?
And what  face will the violator find
When he confronts the glass?

The   passage  itself  mirrors  the  enigma  that  is life,  its  beginning  and  ending shrouded  in mystery (implying some unknown Other  in "flung" and "violator"), and even the relatively known element  partaking  teasingly of "murk" as well as of precise mathematical pattern   ("parabola") . The  central lines beautifully sum up the search itself, suggesting its purpose, hopes, fears, and  protective disguises. Such is man's  quest, seen from  the point  of view of one who has not found - not basically, though  sensitivity to everything observable makes possible moments of calm and  wonder  such  as that  recorded  in "Easter".6
A delightful  poem  which  strikes one  as being  earlier  than  the  more  serious
ones in Winter  Sun is "Meeting together of Poles and  Latitudes  (In  Prospect)". This  poem of search comments on the seeming unlikelihood that  active energetic seekers should  ultimately  "encounter at  the  Judgment Seat"  the  more  relaxed, ambivalent   explorers  of  life,  who  want  "for   death   that/Myth-clay, though/ Scratch-happy  in  these  (foreign)   brambly  wilds";  yet the  poem  implies  that such  a "curious  encounter", will take  place. One  feels that  the  poet  herself in Winter  Sun partakes  first in the leisurely playful search, then in the more earnest kind.  Of  the  latter  kind  are  her  poems on  death.  As the  quest  becomes more serious she begins to think  of ultimate  judgment  as a cataclysmic "singeing-day" or a "universal/Swallowing-up". The  poems "Jael's  Part"  and  "Span" both, in carefully  non-theological  language,  probe  into  divine  judgments  on  sin.



GRADUALLY  in  this  first  volume  of  Miss Avison's  there begins  to  emerge  a  realization  that  some  radical  renewal,  some  transforming rebirth  might  be possible, and  might,  if attained, turn  out  to  be the  true  goal of the search. In  one poem the struggle to "win  belief in a new burgeoning"  is,

12

SEARCH AND  DISCOVERY



as the  context  shows,  written off as idealistic,  and  impossible  for  the  learned or the  rebellious. The  conclusion of "Apocalyptics" is chiefly ironical and  yet some­ what  sympathetic to  the  idea  of actually  discovering  a  yet-not-evident  harmony
of the  worlds:

Bewildered
Each  broods in his own world
But  half  believes
Doctrines  that  promise to,
After some few suppressions here and  there, Orchestrate  for all worlds;

Don't  you suppose
Anything  could  start  it?
Music and  all?
Some  time?

In  "Voluptuaries and   Others", a  very  Auden-like   poem  in  its  long  lines  and blend  of clinical  precision  with  casual  tone,  Miss Avison speaks  of  two  kinds  of discovery,  one  being  like  that   which  occasioned  Archimedes' "Eureka":

The  kind of lighting  up of the terrain
That  leaves aside  the whole terrain,  really, But signalizes, and  compels, an advance  in it.

The   accumulation of  human experience   "makes   the  spontaneous jubilation at such  moments" of scientific  discovery  "less and  less likely though", since  genuine significance  is only  to  be found  in  that  "other kind  of  lighting up/That  shows the terrain comprehended, as also its containing space." This  latter illumination, then,  is the object  of the  poet's  search.
A  poem  of quest  pregnant with  hints  of  future  discovery  is "Intra-Political:
An  Exercise  in  Political   Astronomy". The   questions  at  its  outset -the  inter­ rogative  is appropriately frequent in these poems -concern  the  basic  order   (or disorder)  of life, and  man's right   (or  lack  of right)   to  make  judgments on  the matter. The  poet  decides  that  "nothing we know/who do  know  fearful  things", yet feels the  pressure  of a "precreation density":

our  darkness dreams  of this heavy mass, this moil, this self­
consuming  endless squirm and  squander,  this chaos, singling off
in a  new Genesis.

SEARCH AND  DISCOVERY



(Would it  perhaps set swinging the  little  horn-gates to new life's illumined labyrinths if, released from  stifling,
creatures like  us were  planet-bathed in  new-born Light?)
(Glee  dogs  our  glumness  so.)

Such  "Dreams, even doubted,  drive us," but the actual  experience  of being put to use by some power  beyond  us would  be enough  to break  the  pattern  of life as a series of purely materialist  transactions-to "change this circular exchange." Quite seriously, now, the poet, taking into account George Herbert's testimony, considers whether  man  by "daring to gambol"  (i.e., to take  himself less seriously as well as to risk)  might yet call forth "an  immense answering/of  human  skies?/ a new expectant  largeness?"
Actual experiences, some vicarious, tend to confirm the expectation  of  impend­ ing  transformation. In  the  half-allegorical  poem  "Our   Working  Day  may  be Menaced" an  acquaintance,  Madeleine,  is observed  to  undergo  a  remarkable
spiritual  experience :
It was As if a spoke  of the  final  sky Snagged her  suddenly.
For  what  seemed  only one Queer moment, she  was  swept In  some  sidereal  swerve,
Blotted  sheer  out  of time;  then  spumed
Back  to the  pebbles  of the  path.

(The   passage  suggests  one  of  the  "timeless"  moments  m  T.  S.  Eliot's  Four Quartets.) All who  know  Madeleine  are  sceptical,  but  the  speaker  muses:  "A calling  from  our  calling?  ... Can  they  have  appointed/A  locus  elsewhere for
us?" and  goes on to ponder  a possible



Swallowing-up
 
universal

(Proceedings against  Madeleine alone
Clearly  being  absurd).

Despite  the secular  language   (which  in fact  registers engagement)  the  increas­
ing impetus toward  a new and  perhaps Christian  outlook is evident.
An  experience  which  seems more  than  vicarious is described  in  one  passage of the long poem which  concludes Winter  Sun,  "The  Agnes Cleves Papers":

SEARCH  AND DISCOVERY



One  evening,  just a year or two ago, The simple penetrating force of love Redeemed  me, for  the last perhaps.  I've
seldom dared,  since,
To  approach  that; not  that  it would go out, But it might  prove as centre  of all Revolutions,  and,  defined,
Limn  with false human  clarity A solar system with its verge Lost, perhaps,  but  illumined  in A mathematical certainty
And for my secret  I would have a universe.  (p. 83)

The  experience seems  real  enough, but  there  is still  a  holding back -for  fear, apparently, that  this illumination or discovery  might  prove  to  be a "false  human clarity", as  ultimately disappointing as  that   of  Archimedes or  that   inspired   by Tycho  Brahe,  but  on  a more  sweeping  scale.  It  is only  much  later  in  the  poem, after   "Telling it  in  plain   words", that   she  realizes  that   she  had   "feared  the
wrong  thing":

The  other  centre,  the known enigma - All eyes I do not own, contours
That  force familiarity  where I would
Tumult and  spurn  like Pan-were  the  mountain passes
Pure out of thought  ...

God's   way,  though  demanding  self-renunciation, is  the  true   way  to  freedom. What  she  should fear  and  give up is the  world she  has loved  till now,  since  it is "scarfed  in dreadful mist"  where  "no  sun  comes".  In  the  remainder of the  poem there is a new recognition of the  world around as an  "arena", one in which  there is to be no "glancing back" but  instead  a forward movement to the  "other side" where  the  "wild  smell"  for  which   her  heart   yearns  will  replace   the   presently necessary "athlete's incense". The  landscape seems to be taking  on an  increasingly Christian configuration. Perhaps the  sway  of the  winter  sun  has  already ended and  been  superseded by  the  "Light that  blinded  Saul" (The Dumbfounding).1



E        contains  further poems  of inner  search and  debate, but  they  may  be retrospective, and  in any  case they  give the  impres­ sion that  the  period  of spiritual gestation  has come to a close. "The Two Selves"

15

SEARCH AND  DISCOVERY



pictures  two  opposing  aspects   of  the  poet  discussing  the   "birds  in  the  sky," which  somehow  stand for spiritual realities:

And  you wait for them here?

Oh  no. It is more
like knowing the sound of the sea when  you
live under  the sea.

The response   to  the  sceptical self  reveals  a  maturing  confidence. The   "Two Mayday  Selves"   (D.,   p.   I I)  are   more   mutually  in  harmony,  yet  the   more hesitating one  is urged  to respond  wholly to the  new  experience:

The  power of the blue and  gold breadth of day  is poured  out, flooding, all
over all.
Come  out.  Crawl  out  of it. Feel it. You
too.

It is the voice of a true  finder  speaking, one who can  call for  an  end  to talk  and self-centred questioning, and  in the simplest, most forthright language invite to participation in  a new  joy, a release. In  "Many As Two," reminiscent of  Chris­ tina  Rossetti's  "Uphill" or  of  Marvell's dialogue poems,  the  objections  are  now external to  the  new  Christian, serving  both  to  challenge and   to  define  his  life
of discovery:

"Where there  is the green thing life springs  clean."
Yes. There  is blessed life, in bywaters; and in pondslime but not  for your drinking.
"Where the heart's  room deepens, and  the  thrum
of  the  touched  heartstrings  reverberates-Vroom - there  I am home."
Yes.  And  the  flesh's doom
is -a  finally welcome  going out  on a limb?
(No thing abiding.)
No  sign, no magic, no roadmap, no
pre-tested  foothold. "Only  that  you know there  is the way, plain,
and  the  home-going."

I6

SEARCH AND  DISCOVERY



Outside the  heartbreak  home  I  know)  I  can  own no  other.
"The brokenness. I know.
Alone."
(Go with  us, then?)

This  is a  remarkably subtle  poem,  in  which  the  shifting indentation  marks  the development of the  attitude of each  speaker  as the  encounter  proceeds. For  our purposes  it  is significant  that   though   the  finder,  having   known   "brokenness", can  fully sympathize with  that  feeling, the  two viewpoints expressed  in  the  poem are  really worlds apart-giving us a measure  of the  radical nature of the  change that  has occurred. The  greennesss  of the  new  life means  to  the  one  the  stagna­ tion  of "pondslime", to  the  other  a fresh  and  pure  vitality.  The  "way,"  clearly involving  risk, may seem  either  a final madness  or a "plain" way  home,  depend­ ing  on  whether   one  is a  seeker  or  a  finder.  Since  one  viewpoint includes   and transcends the  other,  only  a finder  could  write  such  a  poem.
Having become  fully  taken  up  in the  new life,  Miss Avison  can  look  back  at
the first moment  of discovery,  and  attempt to picture the  miracle  of  transforma­ tion.  One  such  portrayal is given  in  "Ps.   rg",  a  personal  interpretation of  the statement, "The fear  of the  Lord  is clean,  enduring for  ever." That fear   (which  in Proverbs  r  is called  the  "beginning" of knowledge)  is  here  defined  as

to love high
and  know longing for clear sunlight,  to the last ribcorner and  capillary -and  wonder if, so known, a sighing­
over-the-marshlands  me
might  all evaporate,  wisp away.

This  is obviously the state  of the searcher.  The  hyphenated epithet gives this fresh non-theological definition a  personal  touch,  one which  clearly  recalls  the  seeking poet's fears that  an  encounter with  ultimate  reality  might  cramp the  imaginative self. But this "fear" paradoxically does include  seeking  as well as shrinking, and when  "sunward love"  conquers, discovery  comes:  the  love-fear   proves  to  be

-not boulderstone,
baldness, slowly in fire consuming-but green with  life, moss, cup-rock-water,  cliff riven
for  a springing  pine.

The  whole  poem  hinges  on the sun-metaphor for  God,  an  image  which  does not

17

SEARCH  AND DISCOVERY



change  but  is radically re-interpreted as the seeker becomes a finder,  as the "fire", being  "trusted", is revealed  to  be the  life-giving  "enduring sun". It is interesting to see that  the  now-understood seeking  is defined  in the  early  part  of the  poem with  lucid   precision,   but   that   the  language  and   syntax   must   be  strained to express  the  greater reality  of the  finding.
Other poems  describing the  first  discovery  are  "For  Tinkers Who  Travel on Foot" and  "The Earth That Falls  Away".  But an  important question must  now be  raised.  Having "found",  is  one  doomed   to  an  inhuman  fixity  of  position, perhaps a  continual looking  back  to  that  first great  experience, or,  even  worse, a pretence of sainthood in an  attempt to live up to one's  past  light?  The answer is that  "In the  mathematics of God/there are  percentages  beyond  one  hundred"
-the  new  creation is both  "whole" and  a  "beginning". In  a  poem  of  "Mar­
ginalia"  bringing out  commonly   unsuspected   implications in  Christ's  teachings about   the  child  and  the  kingdom of  heaven,   Miss Avison  vividly  describes  the rhythm of vigour  and  weariness,  the  round  of hopes, fears,  and  joys that  makes each  new  day  for  the  child   (and for  the  Christian)  a  "new   life  time". The exciting,   fresh   details   in  this   poem   and   in  more  than   a  score   of  others   on "secular" subjects   (objects,  people,  scenes)   show  that   the  first  "finding"  has made   possible  a  multiplicity of  further  explorations and  brought new  light  to their   aid.   As  Malcolm  Ross  puts   it,  for  the   Christian,  existence   becomes  a "drama" in which  no detail  is without its "wholly  unique  reality.  No thing  is insignificant."8
Appropriately, then,   in  his  review  of  The   Dumbfounding, Smith   comments
on  the  "purity" of  Miss  Avison's  "response to  experience    (all  experience)".9
Yet  for  him  it  is the  explicitly   Christian  poems  that  climax   her  achievement; and some of these, such  as "Person", are indeed  stunning in their  power. Authen­ ticity  is the  keynote  of these specifically  Christian poems. They  have  the  ring  of truth that   comes,  in  part,   from   the  genuine   search  experience  that   preceded  them,  which  in  Amos  Wilder's terms  might  be called  the  poet's "baptism in the secular", her  coming   "face to  face  with  the  reality  of  the  first  Adam".10    But there   is  also  a  "recurrent"  baptism, as  the   realism  of   the   opening  lines  of "Branches" indicates:

The  diseased elms are lashing in hollowing vaults of air.
In  movie-washroom-mirrors wan selves, echoing, stare.

18

SEARCH AND  DISCOVERY



0 Light  that  blinded Saul, blacked  out  Damascus  noon, Toronto's whistling sunset has a  pale, disheartened  shine.

And  the  concluding stanzas  of the  poem  deal  directly  with  the  problem of  com­ municating  a   momentous  "finding".  Concerned  to   avoid   the   "fly-by-night" approach  of  the  superficially   religious,   the   poet   comes   to  a   realization  that  genuine Christianity will  spread   when  "branches" of  the  Vine  "scatter to  tell what  the  root/and where  life is made." It  is only  the  human  in  touch   with  the divine  that  can  "show  him  [i.e.,  Christ] visible".  The  gospel,  as  Wilder puts  it, prevails  "by  revelation, by bodying  forth". 11
In  surveying the  contemporary scene, Kenneth Hamilton makes  some  relevant comments on  religious  search  and  discovery:

It is  not  surprising  that  concentration   upon  the  human   condition   should  lead some  artists  to find  religion  a  live option  as  they  explore  the  landscape   of  the human  self. The  religious vision is one answer  to the  riddle  of human  existence; and  it  is an  answer  that  declares  itself right  at  the  centre  of man's  descent  into himself, when the resources of self-analysis are exhausted. Then  comes the decision to accept -or  not  to accept -an  understanding of the self and  the  world  going beyond the  bounds of the available  and  the verifiable. The  religious believer says that  not  to believe would be a denial  of the  truth  that  has flashed  upon  his life, a  truth  establishing  itself  beyond  his experience,  yet confirming  all  other   truths that  he has discovered in his experience. The  sceptic, choosing the opposite  road, says that  to believe is to take the easy way out .... The  debate  continues,  and  no impartial arbitration is possible. Yet, on whichever side he happens  to stand,  and wherever he has found  his final loyalty, the artist helps us to see what  is involved in making a decision.12

This  able summary of an  important "religious" function of every serious  modern artist  also serves  as  a  valuable commentary on  the  poems  of  Margaret  Avison, who  has  seen  things  from  both  viewpoints,  that   of  the  seeker  and   that   of  the discoverer. Her  poems  trace  the  progression  from  one  to  the  other, and   make her  final  position  clear.
But  despite   that   conclusion,   Miss  Avison's  poems,  whether  of  search   or  of discovery,   cannot   be  dismissed  as  "propaganda". Their  rich  sensitivity   to  all aspects of life, amounting to a wholesome  "secularity", their  deep  and  incisive engagement  in  the  world   of  thought  and   meaning,  their   full  exploitation  of all the  modern resources  of language and  technique -all these  mark  them  with the  vitality  which  is the essence of true  poetry.  The  poems of Christian  discovery

SEARCH AND  DISCOVERY



are   fully   contemporary  and  dynamic, deeply rooted in   the   experiential. By  a union  in   the   truly  human,  they   manage  to  avoid   the   seeming  dichotomy  of Christianity and art that perturbed Auden.13 In and  through their  value as poetry they   have another  value, a  religious one  which  might  well  be  appreciated  by believers and  others alike: they  "body forth" an  answer to  man's searchings that one  may  accept or  reject, but  not  dismiss.


NOTES
1 Margaret Avison, Winter Sun  (London, 1g6o).
2   A. J. M.  Smith, "Margaret  Avison's  New  Book,"  Canadian  Forum,  46  ( 1966),
p.  133·
3  One  must  not,  of  course,  read  the  poems  as  pure  biography, but  rather as what Blackmur calls  "life  at  the  remove  of form" -form implying a  deliberate  selec­ tivity  as well as  the  inevitable discrepancy between  the  poet's  original  intent and  the finished  poem,  only  the latter of which  is available  for  inspection. Throughout my  paper  Itake  this  distinction for  granted, and  simply  refer  to  "the poet"  or "Miss  Avison"  for  the  sake  of convenience.
4    Paul  Claude!, Poetic Art, tr.  Renee  Spodheim (New  York,  1948), p. 27.
5   This type  of  verbal   paradox,  amounting to  virtual  self-contradiction, recurs   in both   Miss  Avison  and   the  later   T. S.  Eliot,  and   thus  appears to  be  one  of  a number of marks  of that  poet's  influence  on  her  work.  Other indications may  be found   in  her  allusiveness   and   use  of  symphonic "movement"  patterns   (in  the longer   poems) ,  and   in  her   line   rhythms   and   other   metrical  forms,   including lyrical  quatrains reminiscent, say, of those  in  the  Quartets.
6    It would  be of biographical and  perhaps of some  interpretive interest  to  discover the  relative  date  of composition of this poem. It might  be taken  as simply  a hymn to spring,  but  its concluding images  are  remarkable anticipations of those  in such poems  of  clearly   Christian discovery  as  "Ps.  19"   (D,  p.  24)   and   "For  Tinkers Who  Travel on Foot" (D., p. 36), the first of which  is discussed  later  in this paper.
7   Another poem  in  Winter   Sun  that   might   be  a  poem  of  Christian discovery   is
"Birth Day"   (p.  73), whose  title  could  be  taken  as an  allusion  to  rebirth.
8    Malcolm Ross, "The Writer as Christian," in  Nathan A. Scott,  Jr.,  ed., The  New
Orpheus:  Essays Toward  a Christian  Poetic  (New  York,  1964), p. 86.
9   Smith, p. 134·
10  Amos  N. Wilder, "Art and  Theological Meaning," in Scott, p. 410.
11 Wilder, p. 419.
12  Kenneth Hamilton, In  Search  of  Contemporary   Man    (Grand  Rapids,  1967),
p. 21.
13 W.  H.  Auden, "Postscript:  Christianity and  Art,"  in Scott,  pp.  74-77·





20


POWER POLITICS
IN BLUEBEARD'S CASTLE


Gloria Onley


Is it possible for men and women to stop mythologizing, manipulating, and attacking one another?
MARGARET ATWOOD,   1971
tTHE   "a<gument" of Sidney's A<twphel and Stella"Cruel
Chastity," the argument of Atwood's Power  Politics is cruel sexuality. The  cover
design1  pictures  a knight  in armour  from  whose extended  arm  and  gauntletted hand  depends,  like  a  game  trophy,  the  body  of  a  woman,   torso  swathed   in mummylike  bandages,  head  down,  hair  trailing  on  the  ground  at  the  knight's feet. This  inversion  of  the  traditional   posture  of  homo   erectus -a  deliberate echoing  of  The  Hanged   Man  of  the  Tarot   pack -is  repeated   in  the  novel Surfacing with  David's  sadistic  upending  of  his  wife,  " 'twatface' " Anna.  In Power  Politics, as in Atwood's  two novels, the  unrequited  love of courtly  myth gives way to its equally frustrating  modem  form, a hedonistic, yet somehow mechanical  union. The  woman in Power Politics feels that  her  being is lacerated and  her capacity  for vision destroyed by subjection  to a sadomasochistic  sexual
love:

you fit into me
like a hook into an eye a fish hook
a open eye

Atwood's ironic inversion of courtly love connects her art  with  the revelations of  MacLuhan,  Millett,   Roszak,  and  Chesler  about   the  social  mythology   of Western culture. Romantic obsession with lover or husband  is presumed  to  pro­ vide the woman with her most satisfying form of existence. "To a man, love and life are  things  apart.  To  a  woman,  love is life itself,"  preaches  The  Sensuous Woman, echoing Byron.2   The compulsively exact male/female polarity of  "doing" and  "being"  implied  by Atwood's  sardonic  conversion of garment  fastener  into


21

POWER POLITICS



deadly  weapon  expresses  the  conviction of the  female  prisoner  of the  machismo love structure that  romantic love, in its modem version, is a devastating mode  of existence.   "Have to  face   it  I'm/finally  an   addict," the   "hooked" woman   in Power  Politics concludes. In  "an  air stale with  aphorisms", a unique  relationship that is sustaining yet  liberating and   joyous  does  not  develop   and,   through  a painful succession  of claustrophobic encounters, Atwood  suggests  that  maybe  her female  persona  is looking  for  something that   just doesn't  exist.
Recent studies  of the situation of women  in our  patriarchal society  have estab­ lished  that  the  essential  female  traits  are  considered to  be  passivity,  masochism, and   narcissism.3    Atwood's "fish  hook  . . .  open  eye"  image  perfectly  condenses  this  cultural  definition of  "normal" female  personality   and  emotional capacity  and  hurls it at  the  complacent romantic sensibility.  Hence  the  poet  Robert Read  writes  of "Atwood as acupuncture"; her  manipulations anaesthetize his persona so that she  may  gulp  his heart   down  her  "icy  throat"  (The  Canadian Forum, Dec.,  1972,  g). But  Atwood  is also aware  of the  basic  victor/victim patterning she  explores  in  Survival  ( 1972), her  thematic guide4  to  Canadian literature, as a vicious  circle.  The  woman  in  Power  Politics can  proclaim with  an  ironic  self­ awareness that  verges on compassion: "Night seeps into us/through the  accidents  we have/inflicted on each  other/Next time we commit/love, we ought  to/choose in advance what  to kill."
To  Atwood,  the  love-aggression  complex   is  an  historical-personal fact.  The
cover of Power  Politics expresses the  predicament of women  in the sexist society:

My love for you is the love
of one statue  for another:  tensed

and  static. General,  you enlist my body in your heroic struggle  to become real:
though  you promise bronze rescues

you hold me by the left ankle
so that  my head  brushes the ground, my eyes are  blinded  ...

There  are hordes of me now, alike and  paralyzed  ...

The  theme  of Power  Politics is role-engulfment: "You  refuse  to own/yourself, you permit/others to do it for you ..." The  self is lost to the social role of  roman­ tic  lover,   warrior,  wife,  superman:  fulfilment   means   incarnation   within   the

22

POWER POLITICS



archetype: "...  through your  own  split  head/you rise  up  glowing;/the ceiling opens/a voice sings  Love  Is  A  Many/Splendoured Thing/  you  hang  suspended above  the  city/in blue  tights  and  a red cape,/your eyes flashing  in  unison". Self­ emergence is  as  difficult   as  pacifism  in  a  world  of  war: "If you  deny   these uniforms/and  choose   to  repossess/yourself,  your  future/will  be  less   dignified,  more  painful, death will  be sooner  ..." Beyond  the  mask  of social  role lies the paradox of Western  culture: a  postulated  uniqueness  of self that  may not  exist, or  perhaps cannot  be known,  if it does exist :

You drift  down  the street in the rain,  your face
dissolving, changing  shape, the colours running  together

My walls absorb
you, breathe  you forth again,  you resume
yourself, I do not recognize you

You rest on the bed watching  me  watching you, we will never know each other  any better than  we do now.

The  antithesis of  the  mask  is the  "face  corroded   by truth,/crippled,  persistent," asking  "like  the  wind,  again   and   again  and  wordlessly/for the  one  forbidden thing:/love  without mirrors and  not  for/my reasons  but  your  own." Poised  on the  brink  of  a  metaphysical negation   of  individuality,  the  disillusioned female lover  is possessed by a  harsh  nostalgia.  At  the same  time  there  is a  continuation of  a  previous  movement in  Atwood's poetry  towards  accepting the  visitation   of archetypal presences  as  a  substitute for  authentic  interknowledge of  the  selves, as  in  "your   jewelled  reptilian/eye in  darkness  next  to/mine" or  "you   descend on  me  like age/you descend  on  me  like earth." But  the  implicit quest  is always for some alternative to the sadistic  penetration and  destruction of the  "fish  hook­ open  eye" relationship, for some  "reality" behind  the engulfing  political  role, and for  some  communion with  that   "reality". Power  Politics  confronts  us  with  an entropic modern  world  in which  a formerly  solar  masculinity now  operates as a suction  pump  to exhaust  and  destroy  the  environment:5

POWER POLITICS



You are the sun
in reverse, all energy flows into you and is
abolished; you refuse houses, you smell of catastrophe,  I see you
blind and one-handed, flashing in the dark, trees breaking under your feet, you demand, you demand

I lie mutilated  beside
you; beneath us there are sirens, fires, the  people run squealing, the city
is crushed and  gutted,
the ends of your fingers bleed from  r ooo murders

The  imagery in Atwood's  novels also expresses mechanization  and  destruction, but  there  the  woman's  helpless suffering  or  retaliation  changes  into  an  urgent desire for liberation.6   In  The Edible  Woman, where social intercourse  proceeds by means of "finely adjusted  veneers," and  the dominant  aesthetic  is conformity to the consumer  ideal  ("I  love you especially in that  red dress")   images express role-engulfment  as an omnipresent  fate shared by everyone from  the protagonist, Marian,  a reluctant  market  researcher,  to the "office virgins".  To  Marian,  her fiance's  very clothes  "smugly  [assert]  so much  silent authority," she fears  they would be warm,  if touched.  Dickens' caricatures  and  Bergson's essay on mechanization  as a principle  of comedy seem to underlie Atwood's  satirical  des­ cription  of character  and  behaviour.  Despite the humour, sex role mechanization  is associated  with  death,  until  Marian  finally sees Peter  as  a  "dark   homicidal maniac  with  a lethal  weapon". A conditioned  product  of his  consumer  society, Peter  is preoccupied   with  establishing,  perpetuating, and  worshipping   himself within  the  glossy confines  of  the  urban  male  image:  a  Playboy   bachelorhood followed in due  time  by a  House  and  Garden  marriage.  The  "lethal  weapon" with  which  he tracks  and  attempts  to capture  Marian  is,  of course, a  camera;  escaping from its focussing eye, Marian  runs away from  aggressive consumption and  towards  selfhood,  rejecting  the  role of "soapwife"  in  a  never-ending  soap opera.
Deciding to remain  an individual  involved in a variety of human  relationships,

POWER POLITICS



Marian  defeats the shaping  power of the sexist consumer society. Making  a sur­ rogate self out of cake and then eating it in a comic parody of ritual cannibalism,  she both destroys a false image and  reabsorbs her culturally  split-off  female self. This  form  of magic,  a self-assertive process of encoding  and  eliminating what she is not, looks forward  to the ritual destruction of false images of the self at the end of Surfacing; it is a comic anticipation  of the magic more seriously practiced by the schizoid personality to restore its connection with the world.
Marian's fiance refuses to eat  her cake body;  unable  to liberate  himself from consumerhood   by  comic  communion,   he  rejects  even  the   possibility  of   self­ knowledge.  Peter's  social  world  is luxurious,  totally  artificial,  self-consciously sensual;  the  mirrored  spaces  of  his apartment  lobby  epitomize  the  glittering surfaces  of  urban   reality:   the  world  of  technological   hedonism   founded   on industrial  technology.  The  "high  electric vibration  of  this  glittering  space",  is the  concept  of the  ego as consumer-the grossly  inflated  ego  extending   itself in  voluptuous  narcissism through  its glittering  "made-up" surfaces:   images  of chrome and glass, arranged  interiors, iced cakes, elaborate  hairdos, face-makeup,  sequinned  dresses, ritualized,  mechanized  social  behaviour.  It  is in  reaction  to this world of surfaces that  Marian  slowly  becomes unable  to eat anything  at all. Psychoanalytically,  the  ego of  the  cultural personality  is shown  as  being  in  a state of fixation at the level of oral aggression, an infantile state  of consciousness in which "the good" is the consumable or edible, including other people. Marian's consumption  of the "edible woman"  is a transformation  ritual  to get her outside of this one-dimensional social nexus, in which the potential  self is condemned  to collective narcissism as an  alternative  to genuine interaction  with  others.
In  Power  Politics,  sexual  love is imaged  several times as a shattering of the ego that  seems to be epitomized in the collision between mirrors  of "They  travel by  air:"  "your/body with  head/attached  and   my  head   with/body  attached coincide  briefly/...  we hurtle  towards  each other/at the speed  of sound, every­ thing roars/we  collide sightlessly and/fall, the pieces of us/mixed  as disaster/and hit  the  pavement  of this room/in   a  blur  of silver fragments." In  the  semantic universe of technological  man,  what  ought  to  be separate   modes  of  existence somehow mirror  each  other  through  the shaping  effect of myth.  Hence  velocity and  violence enter  into personal relationships. The  woman  cries to  her  lover, "I lie mutilated  beside/you ... How  can I stop you?/Why  did I  create  you?" Men and women are political prisoners of the sexist society, trapped  as victors/victims in their own reflections of the world and of each other. Only in orgasm  ("a  kick

25

POWER POLITICS



in  the  head  ... sharp  jewels/hit and  my/hair splinters") or  in  fantasied death do  the  mirrors  shatter.7
A persistent  strain in  Atwood's imagery,  appearing in the  poetry  as well as in
Surfacing,  is the  head  as disconnected from,  or  floating  above,  the  body.

But face it, we have been improved,  our  heads float several  inches above our  necks moored  to us by
rubber  tubes and  filled with
clever bubbles, ...	(Power  Politics.)

Often the imagery  describes  the  body as a mechanism remotely  controlled by the head; sometimes   the   neck  is  sealed   over;   always  the  intellectual  part   of  the psyche  is  felt  to  be  a  fragment, dissociated   from   the  whole.  The   "head" of Atwood  schizoid  persona  is the "Head" described  in Michael  McClure's "Revolt" (reprinted in Roszak's Sources,)  the  Head  that  "quickly  ... fills with  preconcep­ tion  and  becomes  locked  in a vision of the outer  world  and  itself. ... The  Head [that]  finally  may  act  by  self-image  of  itself,  by  a  set  and  unchanging vision that  ignores  the  demands of its Body."8   We  think  of Anna  in  Surfacing,  locked into  her  Playboy centrefold stereotype, her soul  trapped in  a  gold  compact, her capacity for  love  locked  into  a  sadomasochistic pattern. The  narrator describes her:

Rump  on  a  packsack,  harem  cushion,  pink  on  the  cheeks and  black  discreetly around  the eyes, as red as blood as black as ebony, a seamed and  folded imitation of a magazine picture  that  is itself an imitation  of a woman who is also an  imita­ tion, the original  nowhere,  hairless lobed angel in the same heaven where  God is a circle, captive  princess in someone's head. She is locked in, she isn't  allowed  to eat or shit or cry or give birth,  nothing goes in, nothing  comes out. She  takes her clothes  off or  puts  them  on,  paper  doll  wardrobe,  she  copulates  under  strobe lights  with  the  man's  torso  while  his brain  watches  from  its  glassed-in  control cubicle at the other  end  of the room, her face twists into poses of exultation  and total  abandonment ...

Anna  conforms; therefore, she  is. The  narrator inhabits her  own  cartesian  hell. Locked  into  a sex role herself  by the  conspiracy  of her friends,  pursued  by  "geo­ metrical sex"  as  "an   abstract  principle", her  past  "marriage"  and   "baby" a fantasy   rationalization or  restructuring of  the  personal   history  she  cannot  live with,   she  is  clearly   intended  to  be  a  representative  schizoid   personality: "I realized  I  didn't feel  much  of  anything, I  hadn't for  a  long  time....  At  some

POWER POLITICS



point  my  neck  must  have  closed  over,  pond  freezing  or  a  wound, shutting  me into  my head; since  then  everything had  been  glancing off me, it was like being in a vase ..."
During the  course  of  her  search  for  her  father, a  biologist  living  in  isolation near  the  Quebec-Ontario border who has mysteriously  disappeared, she  becomes painfully  aware  of  "what circuits  are  closing"  in  her  friends' heads  and  in  her own.  Responsible  for  the  group's survival  in the  wilderness  setting,  she  finds  the mandatory sexual  "liberation" of her lover and  friends  depressing  and  alienating. For  her,  it  depersonalizes  them   into  cartoon   figures  or  rock  drawings, linear caricatures of humanity. "Shadowing" her  along  the  trail  to  where  she  is  prag­ matically   contemplating, not  the  "names," but  the  "forms" and   "uses"  of  the various  plants  and  fungii,  Anna's husband   David  imposes  his  one-dimensional, linear,  or "phallic" thrust  on  nature:

[The  Death's  Angel]  sprang  up from the earth,  pure  joy, pure  death,  burning, white like snow.
. . . "Hi,  watcha  doin'?" he said ...
. . . it  was like trying  to  listen  to two separate  conversations,  each  interrupting the  other.  "A  mushroom,"  I  said. That  wouldn't  be enough,  he  would  want  a specific term ... "Amanita."
"Neat," he  said,  but  he  wasn't  interested.  I  willed  him  to  go  away  but  he didn't; after a while he put his hand on my knee.... His smile was like a benevo- lent uncle's;  under  his forehead  there was a plan... .
"How  about  it?"  he said. "You wanted  me to follow you." ... He  reached  his arm  around  me, invading  ... I  twisted away and  stood  up  ... "You're  interfer- ing." I wiped at  my arm where  he had  touched it.
He  didn't   understand  what   I  meant,   he  smiled  even   harder.   "Don't   get uptight,"  he said,  "I won't  tell  Joe. It'll  be great,  it's  good  for  you,  keeps you healthy." Then  he went "Yuk,  yuk," like Goofy.

Through the  perceptions of her  narrator, Atwood  records  again  the  pathology of a  sexual  relationship in  which  the  male  asserts  his  masculinity  by  inflicting physical  or  psychological  pain :

... then  [Anna's]  voice began  ... a desperate  beggar's  whine,  please,  please ... She was praying  to herself, it  was as if David  wasn't  there  at  all. Jesus  jesus oh yes  please  jesus. Then  something  different,  not  a  word  but  pure  pain,  clear  as water, an animal's  at  the moment  the trap  closes.
It's like death,  I thought  ...

"He's got his little set of rules. If  I break one of them I get punished, except he keeps changing  them, so I'm  never sure. He's crazy, there's  something  missing in

POWER POLITICS



him,  you know  what  I  mean?  He  like  to make  me cry because  he  can't   do  it himself ... "

Echoing Laing's description of the depersonalized alienated personality-"Bodies half dead: genitals  dissociated from  genitals" -the narrator conceives  a  mental ideogram for  David's kind  of love:  "it  would  be enough  for  him  if our  genitals could   be  detached  like  two  kitchen   appliances and   copulate in  mid-air, that would  complete his equation." Her  sudden vision  of  David  as  "an  imposter, a pastiche", relates  him  to  the  "creeping Americanism"9  that  she  feels  is moving up  into  Canada,  destroying the  landscape, the  animals,   and   the  people.  "He didn't even  know  what  language to use, he's forgotten his own,  he  had  to copy. Second-hand American was spreading over  him in patches  . . . He  was infested, garbled ... it would  take such  time  to heal,  unearth him, scrape down  to where he  was  true." At  her  worst  moment of  alienation, she sees those  around her  as evolving,  "half-way to  machine, the  left-over  flesh atrophied and   diseased".
The  cultural link  between  depersonalized sex and  modem  technology is sug­
gested  by George  Steiner  in In  Bluebeard's  Castle:  Notes Towards a Redefinition of Culture. 10   Steiner comments on  the  significance  of the  "maniacal monotony" of de Sade:

... that  automatism,  that  crazed  repetitiveness, ... directs us to a novel and  parti­ cular  image, or rather  silhouette,  of the human  person. It  is in Sade  . . .  that  we find  the  first methodical  industrialization of  the  human  body . . . Each  part  of the  body is seen only as a part  and  replaceable  by "spares".  In  ... Sadian  sexual assaults,  we  have  a  brilliantly   exact   figura  of  the  division  of  labour   on   the factory  floor.

Throughout  Surfacing, as  m  Sadian fantasy,  sex is linked  with  mechanization, coercion,  and  death:

... I  didn't  want  him  in  me, sacrilege, he was one of  the  killers  ... he  hadn't seen, he didn't  know about  himself, his own capacity for death.
"Don't," I said, he was lowering  himself down on me, "I don't  want  you to." "What's wrong  with  you?"  he  said,  angry;  then  he  was  pinning   me,  hands manacles,  teeth  against  my  lips,  censoring  me,  he  was shoving  against  me,  his
body insistent as one side of an  argument.

Anna's compulsive need  to  conform to male  expectations makes  it  impossible for her,  despite  a degree  of self-knowledge, to view other  women  as friends ("she resented  me  because  I hadn't given  in  [to  David], it commented on  her," and fills her  with  unconscious self-loathing. As Anna's relationships with  others  seem

POWER POLITICS



to fall almost  totally  within  a general  sadomasochistic tendency, and  as her  love for  David  seems  to  be  a  kind  of  death,  so detective  stories  are  her  "theology".
To  repulse  David's attack, the  narrator is able  to use magically her  awareness of  his golem  quality:
His  wrist watch  glittered,  glass and  silver:  perhaps  it  was his dial,  the  key that wound  him,  the switch. There  must be a phrase, a vocabulary  that  would  work, "I'm sorry." I said, "but  you don't  turn  me on."
"You,"  he said, searching  for words, not controlled any more, "tight-ass bitch."

Obviously, David  is projecting. In  David,  and  to a lesser extent in Joe,  Atwood creates  a  parody  of the  mighty  hunter:

[They] appeared  ... one at either end of a thinnish log. They  were proud,  they'd caught  something. The  log was notched in many places as though  they'd  attacked it ... David  wanted  some footage  ... for  Random Samples ... In  the  end  they stuck  the  axe in  the  log, after  several  tries, and  took turns  shooting  each  other standing   beside  it,  arms  folded  and  one  foot  on  it  as  if  it  was  a  lion  or  a rhinoceros.

Their film, a development from  the camera imagery  of The  Edible Woman, is an aimless  stockpiling of  randomly chosen  images -a  linear,  mechanical imitation of natural flux that  is the  equivalent in art  of their  other  male  activities. Just  as ineffectual hacking  at  the  log is rationalized as male  strength, so a  total  lack  of vision  becomes  creative  spontaneity when  David  decides  that  the  film  "might  be even  better  if it was out  of focus or over-exposed,  it would  introduce the  element of  chance, it  would   be  organic." In   both   novels,  Atwood   satirizes   a  general tendency  to   rationalize -or   transcendentalize -conformity   to   unsatisfactory behaviour patterns.
In  connection with  their  posturing for  the  film,  the  narrator senses  again the vicious  yet pathetic narcissism  of David  and  of her  lover,  Joe: "He didn't love me, it was an  idea  of himself he loved and  he wanted  someone  to  join  him,  any­ one  would  do ..." Fear  and  hatred of the repressed  "female" element of  person­  ality  erupts  in  David's conversation:

"None  of that  Women's  Lib,"  David  said, his eyes lidding,  "or  you'll  be out  in the  street.  I  won't  have one  in  the  house, they're  preaching  random   castration, they get off on that,  they're  roving the streets in savage bands armed  with  garden shears."

To  Atwood's intuitively psychoanalytical consciousness of human nature, engulf­
ment  in the sexual  role, as she satirically  exposes it in Surfacing, means that  the


29

POWER POLITICS



ego  of  the  cultural  personality tends  to  become   fixated   at   the  stage   of   anal­ sadism,   condemned  to  the   hellish  circle  of  self-definition   through  violence,  in which  each  man  kills the  thing he loves, in one  way  or another.
The   end  of  Chapter  18  brings   the  sexual   politics  of  Surfacing  to  a  ritual
climax  of  judgment and  rejection by the  peer group:

"She  hates men," David  said lightly. "Either that  or she wants  to be one. Right?" A ring of eyes, tribunal; in a minute  they would  join hands  and  dance  around
me, and  after  the rope and  the pyre, cure for heresy ... "Aren't you going to answer,"  Anna, said, taunting. "No,"  I said.
Anna  said,  "God   she  really  is  inhuman,"  and   they  both   laughed   a  little,
sorrowfully.

Rejecting her  assigned  sex role,  Atwood's protagonist becomes  the  modern  equi­ valent   of  the   heretic   or   witch -the  mentally   ill  or  "inhuman"  person,  the deviant by  means  of  whose  existence  "normal" values  are  asserted  and   main­ tained. At  this  point,   the  expulsion/escape of  the  unfeminine  wilderness  guide begins.  Skulking   animal-like beyond   the  clearing   until  her  friends   have  aban­ doned  her  (as  she  wishes), she  approaches and  returns  from  the  verge  of total  madness.
Alone  in  the  house  her  father built,  she  reflects:  "Logic is a  wall,  I built  it,
on the  other  side is terror." Starting to groom  herself, she feels a "surge  of fear", knows the  brush  is "forbidden", knows why:

I must stop being in the mirror.  I look for the last time at my distorted  glass face:
... reflection intruding between my eyes and  vision. Not to see myself but  to see. I  reverse the  mirror  so it's  towards  the wall, it  no longer  traps  me, Anna's  soul closed in the gold compact,  that  and not the camera is what  I should have broken.

She  then  destroys  all  the  "artifacts" of her  past  life:  among other  symbols,  her childhood drawings, "the rabbits and  their  archaic eggs";  the  "confining  photo­ graphs" of  her  family  heritage; her  own  false  art,  the  "bungled  princesses,  the Golden  Phoenix  awkward and  dead  as a mummified parrot". Her  ritual  destruc­  tion  of all falsely defining  images  of her self and  others,  her  temporary rejection  of  all  linear  structures  (house,   fence,  even  garden),  her  reversion  to  primitive  survival  by eating  roots  and  mushrooms, leads  her  to an  hallucinatory identifica­ tion  with  the  matrix of nature, in which  the  artificial structures of language and culture dissolve for  a  moment, and  she  becomes  a  microcosm  of the  biosphere:

The  forest leaps upward,  enormous, the way it was before they cut it, columns of

POWER POLITICS



sunlight  frozen;  the  boulders  float, melt,  everything  is made  of  water,  even  the rocks. In  one of  the languages  there  are  no  nouns, only verbs held  for  a longer moment.
The  animals  have  no  need for speech, why talk  when  you are  a  word.
I lean against a tree, I am a tree leaning. I break out again  into  the bright  sun and  crumple,  head  against  the ground.
I am  not an  animal  or a tree, I am  the thing  in which  the  trees and  animals
move and  grow, I am a place.

As ATWOOD NOTES  in the  Introduction to Survival, North­
rop  Frye  suggests  that  in  Canada "Who am  I?"  at  least  partly  equals  "Where
is here?" Here,  in  Surfacing,  is  the  liberated   naked  consciousness,  its  doors  of perception symbolically  cleansed; the "place" is the  Canadian wilderness,  which becomes the new body or rediscovered  original  body of the psychosomatic human. The  radiant plurality of the  organismic realm  into  which  the  narrator  descends is epitomized in the  image  of the  frog:  "A  frog is there,  leopard  frog  with  green spots  and  gold-rimmed eyes, ancestor.   It includes  me,  it  shines,  nothing  moves but  its throat breathing." The  fairy-tale  theme  of metamorphosis is present:  the narrator transforms herself  from  a schizoid  personality  into  a  basic  human  crea­ ture   by  going  down   into   forest,  swamp,   and   water,   into   a  primitive   Edenic  reality  where  frogs,  no  longer  revolting  or  worthless,  become  fellow  creatures of the  biosphere -breathing, shining  kinfolk of the  human. The  basic  metaphor of descent  and  surfacing is itself  a  transformation of Atwood's  inherited  romantic image  of  death by  drowning. The  last  part  of the  novel  is  thus  a  paradigm of descent  into  and  ascent  from  the  fluid  ego  boundary state  of  schizophrenia.11
But  it  is  a  carefully   controlled,  artistically   simulated  descent,   of  therapeutic
purpose  and   value  within   the  psychoanalytic dimension   of  the  novel.  The  ego core  (or inner  self)  of the  narrator always retains  its integrity, except  for  a  fleet­ ing  moment during  the  peak  experience of  hallucinatory  oneness  with  nature where  Atwood  seems  to  be synthesizing  a  primitive state  of  mind  analogous to Uvy-Briihl's  "participation  mystique". Like  Laing,   Atwood   seems  to  believe that  schizophrenia is a  form  of  psychic anarchy: a  usually  involuntary attempt by the self to free itself from  a repressive social reality structure. John Ayre  quite  rightly  terms  her  a "psychic iconoclast",12
In  Surfacing and  The  Edible Woman, it is as if Atwood  had  inferred from  the
glittering surfaces  of our  social images the  Freudian theory  of personality as narcissistic,   accomplishing  self-definition   through  various   forms   of  aggression,

POWER POLITICS



ranging from   overt   coercion   to  the  subtle   forms   of  unconscious  "induction" revealed  by  Laing. At  the  end  of  Surfacing, when  the  wilderness  guide  returns to the  cabin  where  she had  at  the  beginning of her  descent  into  madness  turned the  mirror to the  wall,  symbolically rejecting the  feminine  image  represented  by Anna's gold  compact, she  turns  the  mirror  around again  and  regards  herself  as she has become:

... in  [the  mirror]   there's  a creature  neither  animal  nor  human,  furless, only a dirty  blanket,  shoulders  huddled  over into a crouch  eyes staring  blue as ice from the deep sockets;  the  lips move by themselves. This  was the stereotype, straws  in the hair,  talking  nonsense or not talking at  all. To  have someone to speak  to and words that  can  be understood: their definition of sanity.
That is the real danger  now, the hospital or the zoo, where we are  put, species
and  individual,  when  we can  no longer cope. They  would  never  believe it's only a natural  woman,  state of nature,  they think of that  as a tanned  body on a beach with washed  hair  waving like scarves; not this, face dirt-caked  and  streaked,  skin grimed  and  scabby,  hair  like a  frayed  bathmat   stuck  with  leaves and  twigs. A new kind of centrefold.

Beneath   this  ironic   transformation of  Narcissus'  mirror   lies  Szasz's  concept of the  "mentally ill" person  as political  prisoner  of the social reality  structure of his society,  as enforced by institutional  psychiatry, Laing's  "mind  police". A fusion of  many  literary forms,   Menippean satire,   diary,   wilderness  venture, even  the Canadian animal story,  Surfacing is the  classic human animal story:   the  wilder­ ness guide  as social  deviant becomes  a scapegoat, driven  out  of the  technological society for her sexist peers so that  they may define themselves by their rejection of her.
By the end  of the  psychological quest,  it is clear  why, as Atwood  stated  earlier in  The Circle  Game, "Talking is difficult"  and  why  in  Surfacing "language  is everything you do". The difficulty  in  human relations,  metaphored in  Surfacing as exile  from  the  biosphere, is metaphysically related  to  the  exploitative use of language to impose  psychological  power  structures. The  need  for  communion in Power  Politics  is  paralleled  by  the  realization that   language tends  to  warp   in the  hand  from  tool  to weapon: "The things  we say are/true; it is our  crooked/ aims,  our  choices/turn them  criminal," and  there  is a corresponding recognition of the  value  of silence: "Your body  is not  a word,lit does not  lie or speak  truth either./lt is only  here  or  not  here."
In "Hesitations outside  the  door", Bluebeard's castle  is the  place  where  "you twist  all  possible/dimensions into  your  own"; it  is the  house  "we  both  live  in/

POWER POLITICS



but  neither of us owns." As the  self defines  itself in  relation to  others,  so  Blue­ beard  cannot be himself without a victim/wife. Each  induces  the other to partici­ pate  in the  structuring of the  myth.  There is a surrealistic sense  in  which  langu­ age itself, because it is habitually and  unconsciously  used to erect and  impose  false structure, is Bluebeard's castle. The  "wife" cries to "Bluebeard" "Don't let me do this  to you,/you are  not  those  other  people,/you are yourself/Take off the  signa­  tures,  the  false/bodies,  this  love/which  does  not  fit  you/This  is  not   a  house, there   are  no  doors,/get out  while  it  is/open,  while you  still  can  ..."  To   use language at  all is to  risk  participation in  its  induction structure;  to  define  is to risk committing or  inciting violence  in the  name  of love.
Why  this  should   be so is suggested   by  George  Steiner   in  his  analysis  of  the current  barbarisms of Western  culture: there  is a sense in  which  the  grammars themselves  "condescend or enslave".

Indo-European syntax  is an  active  mirroring  of systems of  order,  of  hierarchic dependence,  of active and  passive stance ... The  sinews of Western  speech closely enacted  ... the  power  relations  of the  Western  social order.  Gender  differentia­ tions, temporal  cuts, the rules governing prefix and suffix formations,  the synapses and  anatomy  of a grammar-these  are  the  figura, at  once ostensive  and  deeply internalized  of the commerce  between  the sexes, between master  and  subject  ...

For  Atwood, the  basis  of  the  victor/victim patterning she  sees  in  human  rela­ tions  in  Survival and   reflects  in  the  male/female relations  of  her  own  literary  structures is also  psycholinguistic -that is, inherent in  the  monotheistic,  patri­ archial social  reality  structure of Western  culture, within  which  man   habitually defines  himself  by aggression  and  which  has  reached  a  pinnacle of alienation in sexist, technological society,  the  "America" of the alienated self. The narrator of Surfacing  remembers her  brother's  childhood  obsession  with  "wars,  aeroplanes and   tanks  and  the  helmeted   explorers," and  realizes  that   his sadistic   treatment of  his experimental animals and   his military  interests  are  intimately  related   to his adult   habit  of imposing  moral  categories  upon  nature:

Below me in the water there's a leech, the good kind with red dots on the back, undulating along  like a  streamer  held  at  one end  and  shaken.  The  bad  kind  is mottled  grey and  yellow. It was my brother  who made up these moral distinctions, at some point  he became obsessed with them, he must have picked  them  up from the war. There  had  to be a good kind and  a bad kind of everything.

In  Atwood's poem  "Hesitations outside  the  door," Bluebeard in  his  castle  is both  the  suffering  Christ,   the  emergent   masochistic  half  of  the  sadomasochistic

33

POWER POLITICS



Judea-Christian tradition, and  the  culturally defined  sadistic  male,  participating with  his wife in  the  melancholy inevitable fusion  of  Eros  and  Thanatos:

What  do you want  from me
you who  walk  towards  me over the  long floor

your arms  outstretched, your heart luminous  through  the  ribs

around  your head  a crown of shining  blood

This  is your castle, this is your metal  door, these are your stairs, your

bones, you twist all possible dimensions  into  your own.

The  myth  is a destructive one: it defines love as sacrifice  and  suffering, and con­ summation as death. As in Surfacing, the sadistic  male  uses women  mechanically as keys to self definition by aggression:

In your pockets the thin women hang  on  their  hooks, dismembered

Around  my neck I wear
the  head  of the  beloved, pressed
in the metal  retina  like a picked flower.

If men  possess and  use women  as keys, women  have  been conditioned to worship men  as icons  (the  Victorian locket,  the  religious medal). These  interlocking atti­ tudes  have  had  the  effect  of  fragmenting and  destroying  for  Atwood's  persona the  perhaps mythical but  longed-for natural order   ("women ... dismembered": "the head  of the  beloved  . . . like a  picked  flower") . The  concept  of ownership or romantic 'possession'  resulting in exploitation by the man and  idealization and  obedience  by  the  woman  is  found   throughout  Power   Politics  in  many   of  its versions  and  inversions  of the  basic  prisoner  or  victim  of love  theme.  In  "After the  agony  in  the  guest/bedroom", the  would-be  lover,  resting  in  the  woman's arms  in  a  parody  of the  pieta,  "wine  mist  rising/around him,  an  almost/visible halo", asks "do  you love me"  and  is answered  by cruciform manipulation:

I answer  you:
I stretch  your arms out


34

POWER POLITICS



one to either side,
your head slumps forward.
followed by a further  relocation  and  another  kind  of purgation : Later  I  take you home
in a taxi, and you
are sick in the bathtub.

Atwood's delineation  of the lovers' agonizingly compulsive tendency to relate primarily  through  suffering, brutally exposes the sadomasochistic  nexus of the monotheistic,  patriarchal society. The  woman  of  Power  Politics  brings  to  her love relationships the advantage  of intellectual enlightenment,  but her analytical approach serves only to invert  the  power structure:

I approach  this  love like a biologist pulling on my rubber
gloves & white labcoat

You flee from it
like an escaped political prisoner, and no wonder ...

Please die I said
so I can write about it

She is aware  of her own propensity toward  sadistic sublimation.
In  Atwood's  exploration  of sexual politics within  the  patriarchal value  struc­ ture,  orgasm  becomes "a  kick in  the head,  orange/and brutal,  sharp  jewels hit and my/hair splinters," a redemption  by death  of the self: "no/threads left hold­ ing/me, I flake apart/layer by/layer  down/quietly to the  bone." There  is great ambivalence.   The   desired  ego-transcendence,   with  its  suggestion  of  a   joyous return  to a mythic primitive state of consciousness where the "skull  unfolds to an astounded  flower," is also dangerous, for  "learning/speech again  takes/days  and longer/each time/too much of/this  is fatal."  In Atwood's poetry, the  psychologi­ cal basis and  the  value in  human  relationships  of the individualism  of Western man  is very much  in question:  partly  by reference to her sense of self-definition by violence explored  in the  transactional  social worlds of the two novels, where individualism   becomes a  potent  carrier  of death;   and  partly  by  reference  to  a presumed  primitive, non-linear,  and  pluralistic state of being which functions  as a mythic reference in  most of her poetry from the earliest work on, emerging  in

35

POWER POLITICS



Surfacing  as a  utopian  alternative to alienation.  In  the  love poems the  tension between  individuality and  isolation,  on the  one  hand,  and  loss of identity  and sexual fulfilment on the other, is extreme and  cannot  be resolved. Imagistically  it is  an  anguished   oscillation  within   the  eitherIor   psycholinguistic  structures   of Western   man,13   the  existentialist   trap   the  wilderness  guide  describes  as  the "walls"  of "logic".  An  oscillation  between  the  polarities of  civilized/primitive,
individual/generic, male/female (in terms of Atwood's camera imagery, focussed/ unfocussed), in which reciprocity of being, psychosomatic wholeness, and  a sense of genuine communion, as integrated  qualities of experience, remain mythic states forever  beyond  reach.  The   channels  of  communication   and  action  are  patri­ archal  almost beyond redemption. "... you rise above mejsmooth, chill, stone-/  white  ... you descend  on  me like age/you  descend  on  me like earth".  In  her earlier  poem, "Dream: Bluejay or Archeopteryx," there is an  attempt  to  invert the  hierarchic  structure: "in  the water/under my shadow/there was an  outline, man/surfacing, his body sheathed/in feathers,  his teeth/glinting like  nails, fierce god/head crested with  blue flame".  (Procedures  for Underground)
Atwood suggests that  the end of sexual politics might come only with  the end
of civilization,  as in  "The   accident  has occurred  . . . we are  alone  in  .. ./the frozen  snow",  when  problems  of  physical survival  would  replace  problems  of psychic survival.  Images of desert, ocean, and  tundra  are attractive  in that  they presume  a settler-like equality  of the sexes, working  together,  an  absolute  need for compassion;  but  repellent  in that  they are places of isolation from  humanity where  the  known  forms  of self-definition  and  of  personality,  however  unsatis­ factory,  are  absent.  The  isolation  and  limitation  of  romantic  love is  mirrored  everywhere  in  the  landscape  of Atwood's  poetry;  the  couple  marooned  on  the island,  stranded  in  the  car, or in  the house in a snowstorm, surviving  the  holo­ caust,  and,  finally,  buried  together.  The  couple-structure  of  love is opposed  by the  community  of the  dance,  "the  circle/forming,   breaking,  each/one of  them the whole/rhythm ... transformed/for this moment ..." (Procedures  for Under­ ground) ; by the  circle or  flux of playing children;  and  by the dissolving of the ego-structure  into sleep or into  landscape  as celebrated  in  "Fragments: Beach." "In   the  afternoon   the  sun/expands, we enter/its  hot  perimeter  ... light  is  a sound/it roars/   it  fills us/we  swell with  it/are  strenuous,  vast/rocks/hurl our voices/we/are abolished  ... the sleepers/lose their hold on shore, are drawn/out on a  gigantic  tide/we also make  the slow  deep/circle/until/the sea  returns  us/ leaves  us/absolved,   washed/shells   on   the   morning   beach."    (Procedures    for Underground.)

g6

POWER POLITICS




l:ROUGHOUT HER   WORK Atwood speaks of other languages: "multilingual water"  and  "the  jays, flowing from  tree to tree,  voices semaphor­ ing,  tribal" of Surfacing. In  Procedures   for Underground, she  tells  of learning  "that the  earliest language/was not our syntax  of chained  pebbles/but liquid". Surfacing abounds  with  examples  of oral  aggression or  the  sadistic  use of lan­ guage  for  self-definition.  Linguistic  channels  of  communication  are  felt  to  be analytic,  dissecting, futile,  impelling  the  narrator  to  break  out  of  her  received mental  categories by psychic anarchy. To the alienated self, linear, logical thought structures  operate  like knives on  the body of  love. The  narrator remembers  her abortion   in  imagery   that   is  a   paranoid   echoing   of  Sadian   mechanization: "Nobody  must find out or they will do that  to me again,  strap  me to the death machine,   emptiness   machine,   legs  in  the   metal   framework,   secret   knives." Imagining  her future  child, her "lost child surfacing within  her,"  by reference to her utopian  organismic  realm, as "covered  with shining fur, a god,"  she decides, "I will never teach it any words."
The  anguished lack of communion  between the lovers in Power  Politics  is, for
Atwood,  the inability  of the  alienated  self to break  through  the  thought  struc­ tures of Western culture. In Atwood's story "Polarities" (The Tamarack  Review, No. s8,  I97 I)' overt  demands  for what  the  American  poet  Gary  Snyder  calls "inter-birth"-self-fulfilment  through  participation in  a  web  of  inter-relation­ ships-are  regarded  as symptoms  of madness. The  protagonist  Louise, who  is isolated,  even  from  her  intellectual   peers,  by  her  deviance  from  the  typical feminine  role, tries to  create  a sense of wholeness by  manipulating her  friends into a literal acting-out  of the title of  Atwood's earlier book of poems, The Circle Game. Louise has a vision of the city as a  topographical  image  of human  rela­ tions:  "The city is polarized north  and south;  the river splits it in two;  the  poles are  the  gas plant  and  the  power  plant....  We  have  to  keep  the  poles in  our brains lined up with the poles of  the city, that's  what  Blake's poetry is all about." Her  disorientation  from  conventional  reality  causes  her  friends  to  take  her  to the hospital where she is  put  into a chemical straitjacket.
Later,  her colleague  Morrison  wants to rescue her, but  is finally disgusted  by his ability to achieve masculine self-definition only in response to drug-induced tellurian  femaleness:   "He  saw  that  it  was  only  the  hopeless,  mad   Louise  he wanted,  . . . the one  devoid  of any purpose or defence. . . . a  defeated  formless creature  on which  he  could  inflict  himself like shovel on  earth,  axe  on  forest, use  without  being  used,  know  without  being  known."   Morrison   realizes  that

37

POWER POLITICS



Louise's  description of  him  is  essentially  accurate:  "Morrison refuses  to  admit his  body  is part  of  his  mind." He  has  a  sudden perception of  human warmth as the  only  answer  to  "futile work  and  sterile  love,"  and  of the  impossibility of achieving it  through mechanical means,  either  technological ("the  grace  of  the power   plant   and   the  gas  plant")  or  magical   ("the circle  game" ) . The   eyes "yellowish-grey," "alert,  neutral"  of  the  wolves  in  the  pen  at  the  game  farm where he has gone after  leaving  the hospital, foreshadow the  wolf's eyes of the hallucinatory  image   of  the  father in  Surfacing.  Without  human  communion, Morrison  realizes,  leaning against the  wolf pen,  "dizzy  with  cold", there  is only "the barren tundra and  the  blank  solid rivers, and  beyond, so far  that  the  endless night  had  already  descended, the  frozen  sea."  Morrison's spatial co-ordinates accurately symbolize  his  psychic  predicament.
Louise  attempts to  create a  body  of  love  by  substituting  the   paleologic   of children and  primitive peoples14  for the unsatisfactory social syllogisms of the patriarchial reality  structure. Mapping the  repressive social  polarities  onto  the landscape, she  practices a  form   of  primitive   magic  to  overcome the  collective insanity  of  communal isolation   in  "apartments". To  read  Atwood's description of  insanity   by  social  definition  and   of  psychic  iconoclasm   in  "Polarities" and Surfacing in conjunction with  contemporary works which  analyze  the social construction of  reality  is to  realize  that   what  Atwood  calls  "mythologizing" is usually a conscious or unconscious enforcement of the sexual  "polarities" inherent in the myths  of romantic love, nuclear  marriage, the machismo male,  and  the "feminine" woman. As an  intelligent woman  and  a  poet,  Atwood  indicates that we  must  somehow  escape  from  this  alienating cultural  definition of  personality and  human relations.  In  Surfacing,  the schizoid  personality's magic  ritual accom­ plishes  her  mental escape  from  role-engulfment into  the  personal  eclecticism  or search  for  new  forms  spoken  of by Steiner.

I ... step into  the water  and  lie down. When every part  of me is wet  I  take off my clothes, peeling them away from my flesh like wallpaper  ...
My back is on the sand,  my head  rests against  the rock, innocent  as plankton; my hair  spreads  out,  moving  and  fluid in  the water. The  earth  rotates,  holding my body down  to it as it holds the moon;  the sun pounds in  the sky, red flames and  rays pulsing from  it, searing  away the wrong form  that  encases me, dry rain soaking through  me, warming  the blood egg I carry.  I dip  my head  beneath  the water, washing my eyel> ...
When  I am clean  I come  up out  of the lake, leaving my false body floated on
the surface ...

POWER POLITICS



In  Survival, Atwood  distinguishes between  Nature's order, "labyrinthine, com­ plex, curved", and  the  order  of Western  European Man,  "squares, straight  lines, oblongs". The  Canadian settlers  having  a strong  preconception of  order  as inher­ ent  in  the  universe,   build   their   "straight-line constructions,  but  kill  something vital  in  the  process  ... often   Nature in  the  form  of  a  woman." In   Atwood's poem  "Progressive Insanities of a  Pioneer", the settler  who fails to impose  order  on  nature has his head  invaded by "the  Nature which  he has identified as chaos, refusing  to  recognize  that  it  has  its own  kind  of  order." The interplay between  images  of fence/garden,  vegetable/weeds in  Surfacing, and  the  narrator's volun­  tary  exclusion  from   the  fenced-in garden  as  part  of  her  magic   ritual, are  an obvious  development from  this  earlier  exploration. Atwood   also  comments that  the  pioneer's final  state  of  insanity  may  be  a  progressive  development from  an implicit   earlier  state,  since  "suppression of  everything   'curved' may  itself  be  a form  of madness."
In Surfacing, the final hallucinatory vision is of the father, the scientist, the man who  has  both  imposed  intellectual order  on  nature and,  presumably, taught  his daughter the  skills of survival  in  the  wilderness.  At  first she  projects on  to  the father, whose  back  is to  her,  her  own  realization   of the  limitations imposed   by linear  structures :

He  has  realized  he  was an  intruder; the  cabin,  the  fences,  the  fires and  paths were violations;  now his own fence excludes him, as logic excludes love. He wants it ended,  the  borders  abolished,  he wants  the forest  to flow back  into  the  places his mind  cleared:  reparation.
But then she progresses through her "insanity" to a further stage of enlightenment: He  turns  towards  me and  it's  not my father. It is what  my father  saw, the  thing
you meet  when  you've stayed  here  too long alone ... it gazes at  me for  a  time
with its yellow eyes, wolf's eyes, depthless but lambent....  Reflectors. It does not approve  of me or disapprove  of me, it tells me it has nothing  to tell me, only the fact of itself.
Then  its head swings away with an awkward, almost crippled  motion: I do not interest it. I am part  of the landscape, I could be anything,  a tree, a deer skeleton, a rock.
I see now that  although  it isn't  my father  it is what  my father  has  become.

The dissolution  of  all  mental structures returns man  completely to  nature:  he becomes  it. By first experiencing a dissolving of the  ego into  landscape and  then objectifying in the  human figure  with  wolf's eyes the  consequences of  maintain­ ing this "participation" as a state  of consciousness, the narrator is able to visualize


39

POWER POLITICS



the furthest  limits  to which  the  dissolution of mental  structures  can  be  pushed without  the permanent merging  with the landscape that  occurs in insanity, when the ego appears  to dissolve into a totally schizophrenic state  from  which  there is no returning.
Thus   the  father   becomes  a  "protecting  spirit"   embodying   both   the  vital anarchic  impulse of the self, the husk-dissolving creative spirit,  and  the essential conservative  element.  As in  the suspended  animation  of the  final  hallucination, the fish jumping,  turning  into  a  primitive  artifact  or rock  drawing  in  mid-air, hanging  there  suspended,  "flesh  turned  to  icon",  then  softening  and  dropping back into  the  water,  an  "ordinary fish" again,  there  is a  sense of all  life as a temporary  configuration  of psychic energy, part  of a greater  flux of what  earlier poets like Pratt  thought  of as cosmic energy structuring  itself in personality and through  work.13   For Atwood,  despite the apparent oscillation between  ideal and real 13 implied by the image of the fish leaping, integrity of form resides primarily in the natural  structure, not in the imposed social form or myth;  thus  being has a biological rather  than  a transcendental authority.
The  narrator  of Surfacing  returns  to sanity with  the  realization  that  she can refuse  to  participate   in  the  destructive  "mythologizing"  of  her  society:   "This above all, to refuse to be a victim.... The  word games, the winning  and  losing games are  finished; at  the moment  there are no others but  they will have to be invented,  withdrawing is no longer possible and the alternative  is death." Arising renewed from  the  non-evaluative  plurality  of nature,  the  wilderness guide  com­ prehends that reality is, as William James said, a "multi-dimensional continuum." For the first time she understands and  has compassion for the subjective  dimen­ sions  of  others.  She  realizes  "the   effort  it  must  have   taken   [her   father]   to sustain  his  illusions of  reason  and  benevolent  order,"  and   how  her  mother's "meticulous   records"  of  the  weather  "allowed  her  to  omit  . . . the  pain  and isolation."  Her  perception  of her lover is altered.  "He  isn't  an  American,  I can see that  now ... he is only half-formed,  and  for that  reason  I  can  trust  him." She has escaped her former sense of total closure, thus achieving  a liberated  self and  a basis for action  within  the world.
Atwood's sense of "participation mystique" as an alternative  to alienation  plays
its numinous  part  in a personal dialectic of myths, restoring to sanity  the wilder­ ness guide  of Surfacing.  However  authentic  or  inauthentic her  concept  of  the primitive  may be outside  of the world of her alienated  women, it  manifests the search for new forms of reality spoken of by Steiner. The last chapter  of Surfacing makes essentially the same statement  as Birney's lines:  "No  one  bound  Prome-

POWER POLffiCS



theus/Himself  he  chained," but   makes   it  within the   new   context of  awareness supplied by such  fields  as cultural anthropology, the  sociology of knowledge, and environmental  studies. Interdisciplinary insights are  leading us  quickly towards what Atwood might term an  ecology  of human energy, a bioethic to replace what Steiner calls  "the blackmail of transcendence".16  Atwood's poems and stories are not   resigned and  "graceful" sublimations of  what is  usually referred  to  as  the human condition. Rather they  are  frighteningly precise image structures,  icono­ clastic  keys  to  getting  mentally outside of  Bluebeard's Castle.


NOTES

1 By William  Kimber for  the  Anansi  edition. Kimber's design  appears again  on  the jacket  of the  first American edition, Harper & Row,   I 973·
2    "J", The Sensuous  Woman (New  York,  Ig6g).
3  Phyllis  Chesler  documents Women and  Mad ness  (New  York,  I 972)  by reference to these studies.
4   In  my review article  "Surfacing in the  Interests of Survival" (West  Coast  Review, January, 1972),  I suggest  that  Survival  is really  an  ethical  treatise presented as a thematic guide  to Canadian literature. The  present  article, accepted for  publica­ tion   in   March,  I 973,  is  a  development  from   this   previous   consideration  of Atwood's work  in  relation to the  psychology of R.  D.  Laing.
6   Atwood's vampire story,  "The Grave  of  The   Famous Poet," 72  New  Canadian Stories,  ed.  David   Helwig   and   Joan   Harcourt  (Oberon  Press,  Canada,  I972), should  be read  in conjunction with  Power Politics. As in Power  Politics, the  lovers form  a closed system,  a deadly  dyadic  field characterized by violence  and  exhaus­ tion.  See  references   to  Atwood   in  my  review  article, "Breaking  Through  Patri­ archal   Nets  to  The   Peaceable Kingdom," West  Coast  Review, January,   I974·
6   The  movement from  bondage to liberation is not  a  chronological development of theme.  The Edible  Woman was  written  in  1965  (letter, Atwood   to  Onley,  Dec.
30, I972).
1 The   mirror is  one  of  Atwood's favorite   images.  See  "Tricks with   Mirrors,"  in Aphra, Fall   I972.  "Mirrors/are the  perfect   lovers,/. .. throw   me  on  the   bed/ reflecting  side  up,jfall into   me,jit will  be  your  own/mouth  you  hit,  firm  and glassy,/ ... You  are  suspended in  me/beautiful and  frozen,  !/preserve you,  in  me
you  are  safe. f ... I  wanted   to  stop  this,/...  this  life  of  vision  only,  splitjand
remote,  a lucid  impasse.jl confess:  this is not  a mirror,/it is a door/I am  trapped
behind/!wanted you  to see me  here,jsay the  releasing  word,  whatever/that  may
be,  open   the  walL/Instead you  stand  in  front   of  me/combing your  hair." Cf. Surfacing, I75 and   I90.
8  New York,  Harper Colophon Books, I972.
9  For  the  narrator of Surfacing, "American" signifies not  a national identity but  a mode  of existence.  See Chapter I 5·
10  New Haven, Yale  University Press,  I97L
11 Cf. R. D. Laing's description of Julie  in The Divided   Self,  Chapter I I.

POWER POLITICS



12  Saturday  Night  (November, I972), 26. "Atwood plays the  role of  psychic  icono­ clast,  pulling  the  categories of existence  apart and  presenting a  broken,  confused  reality  that  her  readers  must  often  back into  order  for themselves.... she demands uncomfortable mental confrontations that  most  people  would  obviously  prefer  to avoid."
13 According to  the  cultural  anthropologist Melville  J. Herskovitz,   the  tendency   to dichotomize experience by using  thought structures based  on  polarities is  charac­ teristic   of  Euroamerican  culture. Cultural   Relativism:   Perspectives  in  Cultural Pluralism  (New  York,  I972),  238-239·
14  Before  his death  Levy-Briihl   came  to  realize  that   there  is  in  fact   no  difference between   primitive mentality and   our  own.  As  Herskovitz  comments, all  human beings  think  "prelogically" at  times  ( op. cit., 28-29). Louise  is not  thinking and acting in  terms of objectively provable causation, hence to the Euroamerican mind she appears to have  regressed  to a childish  or "primitive" mode  of thought. Much of our  thinking and  behaviour is similarly  based  on  questionable premises,  but  if there  is a consensus  of opinion that  the  premises  are  valid,  then  the  behaviour  is held  to be reasonable or  "sane."
15   Sandra Djwa,  "E.  J. Pratt and  Evolutionary Thought: Towards an  Eschatology," Dalhousie Review   (Autumn, I972), 4I7.

16   Weyland Drew,  in  "Wilderness and  Limitation," (The  Canadian  Forum, Febru­ ary,  I 973), suggests  that   the  real  strength of the  ecological  movement  lies in its association with  the Romantic and  libertarian traditions-"traditions  which  have respected  the subconscious and  the primitive" (I 8). His observation  that "the only context  in which  Canadian  nationalism can  be acceptable is in  the  service  of the ecological   movement ... as  a  responsibility   to  the  land" seems  to  apply   to  the wilderness   guide's dread  of  "creeping  Americanism" in  Surfacing,  and   to  her pragmatic yet mystical  relationship to the  Canadian  wilderness.










CANADIAN  AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available at
the bookstore
UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
2075  WESBROOK PLACE
VANCOUVER, B.C. V6T 1W5  /228-4741


REPRESSION

The Poetry of Alden Nowlan


Michael Ustick





"I AM A  PRODUCT  of a culture  that  fears any display of emo-
tion and  attempts  to repress any  true communication."' In  this statement, Alden Nowlan  is pinpointing  the thematic  and emotional  centre  of a very considerable portion  of his poetic corpus. The  suffering born of repression  (of more than  one kind)   and  a divided  mind  characterizes  his voice, from the  poems of his  child­ hood,  through  the  love  poems,  to its final development  in  symbolic,  "imagist" poems on the human  condition  in general.  It  is my chief contention,  moreover, that  the  art  of  Nowlan  attains   its zenith  only  when  he  is  uncompromisingly faithful  to his feelings of spiritual  repression and  psychic  division, that  is, when his poetic delineation of these feelings is precise and piercing.
Such is the case with "Beginning",2   a minor tour de force which deserves and
repays close critical  attention. It  refers the  problems of the  poet's  persona  back to  their  first source -his  parents  and  their  relationship  with  each  other.  The poem   is  constructed   thematically   and   technically   around   their   ambivalent attitude toward  the act of love, or more accurately,  the act of sex, or "making" (the main verb of the first and last clauses) . Whether there is love here is certainly debatable.  The  puritanical  couple see intercourse as pleasurable  ("most  lovely" ) but  as shameful  too  ("most  abhorred"), and  the effect of this ruling  dichotomy upon their son is immediately stressed: he is conceived in a moment  of joy ("like sound/stroked from the fiddle")  only to become the inheritor  of a legacy of guilt, fear  and  oppression, which is the fate of a hunted  animal  ("the ward/ of tunes played on the bear-trap  and the hound").
The  poem continues to move in contrasts. Mter  the frenetic  activity of "seven entrances", there  is a  moment  of calm  following the  storm,  when  he lays her down "the  way the sun comes out." In broaching the disgraceful deed, they have had to be "brave", but, once underway, they are "like looters in a burning  town."

43

REPRESSION



Their mouths left bruises, starting with the  kiss/
and ending with  the  proverb, where they
stayed;
never in making was there brighter bliss,/
followed by darker  shame.    Thus I was made.

It is significant  that  they "stay"  with "the  proverb"  (no doubt  some pietistic or moralizing  maxim  of consolation)   and  the dark shame,  for  this is the  tradition that  shall  be handed  down  to  their  son. We note further  that  the  poem  is in closed form-certainly appropriate to the "stifling" nature of the subject  matter. The  iambic  pentameter is very nearly constant  throughout.  The  alternate rhyme in each  stanza  permits  the  poet  to emphasize the parallels  between  each set of two  lines in  the  quatrain, since each  set of two contains  a  pair  of contrasting elements. In every aspect, this poem is a most impressive and polished work of art.
Partly  on  the  basis  of  this  initial  discussion, I  would  now  like  to  propose tentatively  a pair  of word-association  lists for use as a working critical approach to Nowlan's peculiarly dichotomous poetic landscape. To energy, freedom, spontaneity,  fertility, sexual love, sensuous nature, laughter and life, let us oppose repression,  bondage,   regimentation, sterility,  virginity,  domestic-urban  desicca­ tion, tears and death.
And  let us consider  each  term  on either side of the "arena" to be the  meta­
phorical  equivalent  of any other  term on the same side (for example, freedom is natural  sensuousness and  repression is tears).  Then,  in a poem such as "Warren Pryor",3   after  noting  in the first three stanzas Nowlan's clever irony in using the third-person  singular   pronoun   as  a  not-too-opaque  mask  for  the  third-person plural  (since  Warren  does not  exist except in his parents'  eyes) , we can  easily appreciate the  significance  of the  contrasting  words and  images  in  the  fourth, where the poet focuses on the boy's futile desire to escape the trap  that  has been
set for him:

Hard and serious, like a young bear/  inside his teller's
cage,
his axe-hewn hands/  upon the paper bills
aching with empty/ strength  and throttled  j
rage.

Our  lists of word-association  stand  us in better stead yet when  we examine a more  subtle  poem, "When Like  the Tears  of Clowns", 4   one of a group  on the

44

REPRESSION



subject  of child-punishment. Mention  of "tears" and  "rain" in the  first line immediately  signals an  act  of repression. (What  the "clowns"  represent  is open to  conjecture,   though  in  Nowlan's  universe it  is very likely that  they  may  be mocking,  domineering   gods;  or  the  paradoxical   "tears  of  clowns"  might   be vaguely  hinting  at  a  comic-tragic  ambiguity  which verges upon  non-meaning.) Notice  the  words  which  suggest  regimented  monotony: "ordered", "chant", "repetitious". Significantly, the children's shrill is "sexless". The  fourth  line is rife with words connoting  physical subjugation: "My  heart crawls lean and  lewd [in its original  meaning: ignorant,  vile, base],  a shrinking  thing ... " At  this point the images change.
In  reaction  against  his punishment,  the child seeks alliance  with  the world of sensuous  nature: horses swear  fidelity and  drum  out  an  accompaniment to the "wolf-thoughts" that  "howl" within  his wrists; the odour of "the  seasoned  hay" is raw and  ripe;  his "fleshly pride"  unleashes a protesting cry. But there follows a startling  about-face  in the last two lines- bitter vision of the meek and "their deep and  narrow heritage of earth." From fantasies of freedom, the poet suddenly plummets   to  thoughts  of  the  ultimate  "repression",   the  grave.  All  the  major elements of this poem reappear  in miniature in "Refuge  at Eight": 5  the reaction­ ary  awareness  of sensuous nature   ("Darkness,  the smell of earth,  the  smell of apples"),  the  dream   of  death,   the  "wolf-thoughts" of  childish   revenge,  and tears-the final reality which here parallels the vision of the grave; the personal reality from which  Nowlan's  persona can never free himself for any considerable  length of time.
As  well  as  the  rather   insidious   (because   psychological)   repression  which
parents  inflict  upon  children,  there  is  the  repression  of  brutality   and  hatred, recorded in "Britain  Street"6   (which is less a poem than a social document) and the  repression  of  poverty,  recorded  in  "And   He  Wept  Aloud,  So  That  the Egyptians  Heard  It".7  Here  the poet skilfully develops the metaphorical  associa­ tion  between  the flies and  his youthful poverty in phrases like "playing ... foot­ ball",  "skim-milk-coloured  windows"  and  "leap-frogging", until  its significance becomes inescapable in the lines, "catching  the bread/ on its way to our mouths,/ mounting  one  another j on  the  rough  deal  table."  The  identification   is openly made  with the mention of "Baal-Zebub  [literally, 'lord of  flies'] j god of the poor and  outcast"  and  of the fact that  the flies did not appear  until the protagonist's arrival.  The  poem's  movement  follows the  pattern  we  have  thus  far  noticed: Nowlan's  persona  is being  tyrannized;  he strikes out  in  some  way  against  the "numbers and  persistence" of the  repressive force, for  which  act  he feels guilty

45

REPRESSION



("I ... wanted   to  beg ... forgiveness") ;  and  his  revolt  ultimately  fails  ("the flies rebuilding  their world" ) .
We have already  remarked  that,  for Nowlan, death  is the ultimate  repression. In  "Aunt  Jane",8   the  child  receives a lengthy  education  in  death.  The  surface humour  of the  diction,  the  playful  rhymes, and  the sing-song rhythm  all create an  uneasy  offsetting  to  the  macabre  subject.  In  "Two  Strangers",9   the  now­ grown  man  can  derive  no  thrill  from  the  hunter's   "climactic   kill";  the  only reality he knows is "the  child-like scream of death", "his tightened breath", and the voice which "had  died, had died."  Nowlan is also, however, quite capable of raising  his voice in  protest  against  the  forces of death  which  so often  hold his spirit  in bondage.  "God  Sour  the  Milk of the  Knacking  Wench"10  is a vividly vindictive  condemnation  of  all  life-destroyers. His  demand  that   the  knacking wench be sexually mutilated, even as she mutilates the bulls, is the furious outcry of a man  too long frustrated and  penned-in.  And  just as this poem is the man's  reaction  against  the  experience  portrayed  in  "Two Strangers", so "I,  Icarus",11 a  repressed  imagination's dream  of  escape  and  release, is the  child's  reaction against the experience portrayed in "Aunt Jane".



Now THAT  WE  ARE   acquainted with  the  basic elements of the  poet's  psychic  and  spiritual   make-up,  let  us  turn  to  his love poetry.  One reading  of "The  Grove  Beyond the Barley"12   is all that is required  to unmistak­ ably identify it as the work of Alden Nowlan. For the poem is, to a great extent, a  self-portrait,  since  the  girl  is little  more  than  the  female  counterpart of  the male protagonist. This is not properly a "love poem" at all.
In  the  terms  of  our  word-connotation lists, the  atmosphere  is immediately
established  as being  "repressive"  through  the use of the words "too  secret" and "murder" in  the  first line. The  speaker  comes upon  a girl's  "white  body"  and "naked  limbs",  but  he does not think of her in sexual terms;  he sees her breasts, but  his only comment  is that  they "move like the shadows of leaves/  stirred  by the  wind."  Her  nakedness  is her  purity;  like him, she is innocent  and  virginal under  the  crushing  hand  of  the  world.  In  harmony  with  both  the  particular setting  and  the repression  with which we have elsewhere seen Nowlan's  persona to be imbued,  he approaches her with timidity:  "I do not  know you, therefore have  no right/ to speak  of discovering/  you ... ". Her  limbs are in "disorder", "the  arms  outstretched/ like one crucified, the legs bent  like a runner's ... " - surely the poet is presenting  an icon of his own suffering. This would seem to be

REPRESSION



confirmed  by his "novel"; what else is the story of the husband  in black  ("worn at  his wedding")  and  the  hired  man  in  rooster-comb  red but  a  parable  of the poet's parents'  relationship  as it is depicted in "Beginning"? The  forces of death, puritanical   guilt  and  repression  interact  for  a  moment  with  the  forces of  life, sexual love and  energy, and  the result is "an  axed colt",  or "the  ward/ of tunes played  on  the  bear-trap and  the  hound",  or  a  stanchioned   and  maimed  bull. The  speaker's  fear  lest she awaken  or cry out is entirely  characteristic,  as is his cautious  retreat  with  idyllic wishes on  his lips. The  poem  derives its  power,  I think,  from  the  tension  between  the lyric beauty  of the state  of virginity -the pastoral  attractiveness  of being "a  gentle satyr" -and the implication  that  such a  state  is emotionally  unsatisfactory,  mainly  because  it  is linked  to  repressive impulses.
This  tension  is highlighted  and  depicted  in  masterful  style in  "A  Poem  for
Elizabeth Nancy",13 one of Alden Nowlan's very finest creations.
Here  the  protagonist  has managed  to escape his oppressive past  to the  point of physical consummation  of  his love for a woman,  but  the question  the  poem asks is, whether  he is as free as he thinks he is. The first three words are resonant with  meaning.  The  speaker  may be considered literally "emptied" by the act of love;  the word also has the sense of "discarded", "expelled", or  "( unceremoni­ ously)  dumped". The  important point is that  he sees Eden  as synonymous with Virginity  and  Innocence,  "the  fall" being occasioned by sexual  intercourse; and this automatically  implies a measure of guilt which lingers on from the puritanical ethic  which  has been  the inheritance  of the Nowlan  persona. Just  as we would expect from our knowledge  of this poet's word-associations, the  "post-lapsarian" world  is one  of extraordinary  fertility  and  natural  sensuousness:  the  beloved's eyes are  "like  caves behind  a torrent ... blue-green  valleys where  cattle/ fatten  on  clover and  grow  drunk  on  apples ... ". But  the words  "fatten" and  "grow drunk" make  us stop  for  a  moment;  is this excess to  be  approved  of?  In  the second  stanza,  the  protagonist returns  to  Eden,  the  House  of Innocence,  "this house of candles",  which  is  now, of course, empty.  It  is asleep,  with  "all  the curtains/  skittish  and  white  as  brides  (even  the  wind/   meeting  their  silence, whispers) ... "  (compare "The  Grove Beyond the Barley",  lines 16,  I 7) . He is an  intruder; his  hands  "stink from  milking"  (again,  sensuous nature), his feet on the stairs sound "like laughter" (as opposed to the "tears" of repression), and he does "not much"  care that  his lover is not there. The  point is, though,  that  he does  care  to  some  degree -perhaps  more  than  he realizes. Why  else does he state  twice  that  he knows there is no-one in  the  room? Why  does he return  to

47

REPRESSION



the house at all? Why does the poet devote only the first stanza  to "the  post-fall" and  the  last  two  to  "the  pre-fall"?  It  is clear  that  the  repression to  which  we have always seen Nowlan's  persona subjected  has now insinuated  itself so inextricably  into his spiritual  fibre that, even after "vanquishing" it, he must look back upon it with nostalgia and a sense of loss.
I  would  stress again  that   both  "The   Grove"  and  "Elizabeth  Nancy"  come alive because of the poet's faithful  attention  to the dialectical tension of opposing forces, a tension which, in  the former  poem, is implicit, and  in the latter,  overt. On  the  other  hand,  when  the  dialectic  is absent, the poetry suffers appreciably by  comparison.  "For   Claudine   Because I  Love Her", 14  like  the  last stanza  of "Elizabeth  Nancy",  expresses a laver's  feeling of abandonment as he stands  in an empty  house; but  because it stands alone as one isolated experience, it cannot achieve the exquisite poignancy  that  the last stanza of the earlier poem attains  in relation  to  its  first  stanza.  Thus  "For  Claudine" can be little  more than  one of the   world's   many   unremarkable  "sad   memory"   poems.  Another   defect  of Nowlan's  later  "more  personal,  confessional poetry"15 is that,  lacking the steady­ ing influence  of a taut  framework  of ideas  (which  more often  characterizes  his early  work),  his  poetic  language   sometimes  tends  to  become  rather   shabby. Hence  in  "Another   Parting"16   (one  of a group  of "lying sleepless" poems),  we find  such  unfortunate lines  as,  "[I) feel only my  pain/  flowing  into/ an  all­ encompassing sadness ... ". In short, to the degree that  Nowlan loses sight of his immediate  and  most effective poetic "irritant" or stimulus-namely, repression, and  its counterforces-his work correspondingly diminishes in quality.
Let us now tum  to what one might call Nowlan's poems of cosmic despair. In taking  an overview of all his work, I think that  we must inevitably  regard  these as the final fruits of his repressive germ, since they generally deal with such fami­ liar subjects as loneliness, purposelessness, misunderstanding, and  of course death. The  technique  of "July   15m7   is comparable  to that  of the last two love  poems discussed : brief poetic  analysis of one isolated feeling or experience. And,  even as  "nothing is  happening" metaphysically,  so  nothing  is happening  poetically either.
More  successful is "Dancer"/8  in which  Nowlan  reverts to a compact,  closed
form  and  restores  a  sense  of  dialectical  counteraction   through  light-dark  con­ trasts:  the girl "bolts in and out of darkness ... stumbling in the shadows, scalded blind/ each  time she whirls to face the sunlight ... ". Some very adept imagery makes the significance of her  plight  clear:  the spotlight-"sun" has her  "netted" and  "woven" into  a  "mesh"; she is literally  up against  the wall. She  hurls the

REPRESSION



ball  "against   the  darkness,  venomously"  and  it  is  hurled   back,  "all   human purpose stript/ from its wild passage ... ". "The  Execution"19 is a chilling vision of  doom   (admirable  especially  for  its  parable like                     in  a  murderous world in which all communication and understanding  have broken down. As one of the blackest of Nowlan's  "black" poems, it must be ranked  alongside "Fly on the  Blue Table",20   which  is in some respects even more  despondent. The  poet first draws  our attention  to the familiar  phenomenon  of the "dance" of the fly's legs, "quick  and  purposeful/ yet going nowhere."  It is "like walking  on water", which, as everyone knows, is possible only "in a movie" on "plastic  water/ under perpetual  static  lightning"    (i.e.,  the  lifeless, never changing
human  existence).  This  passage is a bitterly sarcastic mockery of man's  preten­ sions to godhood. The  hard  truth  about  his condition lies rather  in the picture of "the  blind actor/  testing the air with outstretched  tremulous  hands" -an image at least as old as Celine, but still powerfully evocative.

And all of this is nonsense
because  I cannot describe your world
in which  I only exist as a mountain or a rose exists in my world.

In  these shocking lines, Nowlan  appears  to be despairing of his very function  as a poet -to affirm the spiritual  bond between all men by "describing" all aspects of the reality which is common to all men.
As the poem concludes, it focuses upon an appropriate symbol of Evil or Death
(or  even  God) ;  the  spider  watches  the  manfly, which  the  poet  depicts  in  a manner   that   does  little   to  disguise  his  contempt   for  the  obscene  creature: " ... your striped ripe pimple of belly/ jerking over the blue table."
Since it would be unfortunate to have to close the essay on such a bleak note,
we might  find some consolation  in "The Mysterious Naked  Man", 21 a piece in which  Nowlan's colloquial style and wry humour are at their very best. Here for a moment  he manages to detach  himself from his obsessions and  rise above them. Thus  society  (the  voice  of  moral  authority)  is no  longer  repressive,  but  only laughable  and  ridiculous, is not  allowed the dignity  of being a  reactionary  life symbol. However, if one were morbid enough to look beyond the pleasant  satire, one might discover a vision of contemporary  life which is almost as pessimistic as the four preceding poems.




49

REPRESSION



NOTES

1 Gary Geddes & Phyllis Bruce, eds., 15 Canadian Poets (Toronto, I970), p. 285.
2   Under the Ice  (Toronto, Ig6I), p. 1.
3   Ibid.,  pp.  I 8- I g.
4    Ibid., p. 43·
5    Ibid., p. 2.
6    Bread, Wine  and Salt  (Toronto, Ig67),  p. I7.
7    Ibid., pp. 8-g.
8   Under the Ice, p. 2.
9    Ibid., p. 35·
10   Wind  in a Rocky Country  (Toronto, Ig6o),  p. I3.
11  Bread, Wine  and Salt, p. 3·
12  Poetry of Mid-Century, 1940/ 1!}6o, ed. Milton  Wilson (Toronto, Ig64), pp. 222-
223·
13  Under  the Ice, p. I.
14  the mysterious naked man  (Toronto, Ig6g),  p. I7.
15  Geddes & Bruce, op. cit., p. 287.
16  the mysterious naked man, p. g.
17  Bread, Wine  and Salt, p. 42.
18  The  Things  Which Are (Toronto, Ig62), p. 59·
19  Ibid.,  p. 44·
20    Poetry of Mid-Century, 1940/I96o, p. 22I.
21   the  mysterious naked  man,  p. I.





















50


THE CIRCLE GAME


Gary Ross



. . . landscapes  in  poems are  often  interior  landscapes; they  are maps of a state  of mind
w




SENSE  RIGHT  FROM THE  OPENmG   l'OEM  of   T h< Circle Game -"This is a Photograph of Me" -in  which  the  poet  is unable to place  herself in any sort of harmony with  the  landscape, that  the  haunting mood of isolation  in the  book is associated, in some  undefined   way,  with  geographical wilderness.   No  human  form   is  visible  in  the   photo;  we  get  the   feeling   that wilderness  somehow  precludes human existence.  If the setting   (the  geographical details  of the  print) is not  overtly  hostile, it is at  least mutely  obliterating: "the photograph  was  taken/the day  after   I  drowned". The   poet  impresses   us  as  a not-too-unwilling victim:  "I  am  in  the  lake,  in  the  centre/of  the  picture,  just under the  surface". The  idea  is startling, it  works,  but  the  closing  lines  appear deliberately puzzling,  and  so forced:

It is difficult to say where precisely, or  to say
how large or small I am:
the effect of water
on light  is a distortion

but  if you look long enough eventually
you will be able  to see me.

Mood, voice and  setting  in  this  poem  are  typical.  The  Circle Game  is full  of oceans,  lakes  and  rivers,  trees,  rocks,  islands  and  sand.  The   prevalent  moods, especially  in  the  opening poems,  are  those  of solitude,  isolation, and  sometimes outright despair. Owing in part  to the repeated conjunction of wilderness  setting with  moods  of fear  and  alienation, physical  landscape very soon  comes  to  imply

THE CIRCLE GAME



a good deal more than  neutral,  external  reality. The  voice is calm and  objective
-but wait:  we are  being  addressed  by the same  person who  claims to  be the invisible victim  in  the  photograph. This  schizophrenic  touch  is more  than  an eerie  flourish;  it  effectively  serves  to  compound   her  isolation.  She  is cut  off, blotted out, even from herself. There is no direct relation between the two people implied  by the poem,  the two selves.
Neither  is there  a connection  between herself and  others. The  atmosphere  of detachment  she  inhabits   is  not   diminished   by  the  introduction  of  another character. Her companion  in "After  the Flood, We" is irrelevant,  part of another world. He walks along, speaking  "of the beauty of the morning/not even  know­ ing/that there  has  been  a  flood".  And  here  again,  nature   is working  against people  ("We  must  be the only ones/left"). Not only is it an  obliterating force, it has now taken  on a sinister, almost human  quality;  and  when  the poet speaks
of "the  almost-human/brutal faces forming/ (slowly) Iout  of stone",  she achieves
the  reverse process as  well:  humanity  takes on  some of  the  blank,  oppressive character   of the  wilderness. The  equation  of the  internal  and  external  worlds, the  subjective,  personal  self  and  the  objective,  physical,  real  world,  is  made more  explicit  by this  transference.  Hence  the  unspecified conflict  between  poet and landscape  is internalized  within the poet herself to the extent that  the wilder­ ness world comes to stand  for  the outside correspondent  of some  internal  state. The  element  of schizophrenia  evident in several poems is, in this light,  not only explicable,  but indeed  quite  justified.
Atwood's  treatment of civilization-what we might  be tempted  to regard  as
the  opposite  of  wilderness-affords evidence,  if  any  be  needed,  that  her  use of landscape  is predominantly and  consistently figurative.  Modern  writers have, of course, long made  use of the ironical  truism  that  as more  people crowd  into an area,  the more superficial  becomes the contact  among  them.  In  other  words, the city (and  all it implies)  has long supplied  writers with contexts and symbols of human  alienation.  But Atwood  provides her own twist:  she portrays  the city as  nothing  more  than   a  variation   on  the  wilderness  theme.  Civilization  is  a glass and  steel and  asphalt  veneer,  not  a  change  so much  as a  disguise  ("the landscape  behind  or  under/the future  cracks in the  plaster"), and  a temporary one at that,  for the day will come

when the houses, capsized, will slide
obliquely into the clay seas, gradual as glaciers
that right now nobody notices.
("The  City Planners")

52

THE CIRCLE GAME



As she writes in "A  Place:  Fragments": The  cities are only outposts.
Watch  that  man
walking on cement as though on snowshoes:
senses the road
a muskeg, loose mats of roots and brown vegetable decay
or crust of ice that easily might break and slush or water under suck him down

Like  the  wilderness,  the  city  exists m  an  emotional   vacuum.   Civilization obliterates humanity  as surely as a flood or the plague. Although  "there  is always/ someone  in  the  next  room"   ("The  Circle  Game"),  personal  encounters   are random,  fruitless;  each  person  dwells in  a  private   bell-jar  of  isolation;  mes­ sengers  "come  from  nowhere",   "are   going  nowhere",   and   attempt  to   com­ municate  by shouting  "in a silent language"  ("A  Messenger"). In  effect,  urban  and  rural  landscapes  are  indistinguishable.  The  old  men  of "In   My  Ravines"  dream  of "impossible flight"-neither more nor  less possible than  the  flight  of
a corpse from  a lake bottom.  If technology is a constructive  impetus,  it is  none­
theless horrifying:  the man with a hook ("Look,  he says, glittering/like a fanatic, My hook/is  an  improvement")  is every bit as powerful  a symbol  of desolation as a desert or a burnt-out forest. In whatever setting,  people are  trapped, impo­ tent. The  poet can say "outside  there is a lake/or  this time is it a street"  ("Play­ ing Cards"), because it really makes no difference. The  outer world, in  whatever form, is wilderness.

BuT THE  WILDERNESS, we have said, symbolizes something within the poet. That something,  the barren  side, the gravitation toward  chaos,
the isolation, prevents any type of valuable human  relationship.  An  assimilation is never achieved,  never even a  happy alignment;  instead  there  is always actual or  potential   repulsion,  the  reaction  against,  a  jerky  attraction  reversed,  like
magnets.
These days we keep our weary distances:
sparring in the vacant spaces

53

THE  CIRCLE GAME



of peeling rooms
and  rented  minutes, climbing
all  the expected  stairs, our  voices abraded   with  fatigue,
our  bodies wary. Physical  touch  is useless, painful :
my face flinches
under  the sarcastic
tongues of your estranging fingers,
the caustic  remark  of your kiss.
("Eventual Proteus")

The  need  for love is real  and  strong,  but  it finds little sustenance and  no  parallel outside   itself.  Wilderness  is dominant;  human  desire,  the   hunger for  love,  is nothing more  than

a furtive  insect, sly and  primitive the necessary cockroach
in  the flesh
that  nests in dust

In  spite of our  famines it keeps itself alive

: how it gorges on a few unintentional
spilled crumbs  of love
("A  Meal")

The black  side  of the  self  rules  and  everywhere she looks, every  way  she  turns, she sees this wilderness  reflected. The  real  world  is brutal, hostile,  for she cannot reconcile  her inner  world.  She is, in short,  the  ultimate outcast, isolated  from  any sort  of community and  cut  off from  herself. She has no  place,  belongs  nowhere, can  find  no stasis. "I move," she writes,

and  live on the edges
(what  edges) I live
on all the edges there are
("Evening  Trainstation").

"The Circle  Game" is  the   pivotal   poem  in  the  volume.  It amplifies   notes


54

THE CIRCLE GAME



struck  previously: the city as wilderness ("these scuffed walls contain  their circl­ ing  trees,/that low clogged sink/their lake") ;  human  relationships  as  hopeless, destructive  ("all  your word-/plays, calculated  ploys/of  the  body, the  witticisms/ of touch,  are  now/attempts to keep me/at a certain  distance");  and  it crystal­ lizes the feeling of entrapment and impotence that  has been  building. The  image of the children's  "tranced moving"  captures  the endless,  empty,  pointless ritual of  existence  particularly   aptly,  I  think,  because the  emptiness  is  presupposed, regarded  as basic, an  unopposed  end in itself, even at the level of innocence:

... the whole point for them
of going round and round is  (faster
slower)
going round and round

The  circle becomes the symbol of constriction,  and  at  the same  time  makes  us realize that  because it is infinite, so final, the urge to refuse to resist its isolating power  is very strong;  and  to  realize as well that  it  is a  temptation into  which the  poet  has fallen.  One  of the  causes of her entrapment -perhaps  the  most important one-is her attitude toward her predicament, her unquestioning acceptance   of  it.  Hitherto,  she  has  been  passive,  helpless;  the   possibility  of change,  of escape, has not  been  raised. The  simple,  powerful  resolution  at  the close of the poem signals a shift from acquiescience to an  active  determination:

I want to break
these bones, your prisoning rhythms
(winter,
summer)
all the glass cases,

erase all maps,
crack the protecting eggshell of your turning singing children :

I want the circle broken.

Granted, this is only a stated  wish, a desire for change;  but  it  is the  first such evident  desire; the decision is the vital first step.
In  the  poem immediately  following,  the  intention  has  been  translated:  she


55

THE CIRCLE GAME



refuses to be passive, malleable,  to be composed and  fastened  within  the  frame­ work of a photo. We recall "This  is a Photograph  of Me" in which the opposite was true:  she was helpless, wilderness was in control, and  she was quite content that  this should  be so. Here,  she is not  yet free of the "glossy  square  of paper"  but she is getting there:
that small black speck travelling towards the horizon at almost the speed of light

IS  me
· ("Camera".)

So, too, has she begun  to struggle against  the dark side of her self. The  flaw of The  Circle Game  may well be that  there is no specific reason for her gradual about-face.  If the  poet  were  a  character  in  a novel,  we might  argue  that  her resolution  lacks convincing  motivation.  Whatever  the source  of her  determina­ tion, though,  we can observe its effects. In  "A Sibyl", she isolates  her  wilderness side, or a part  of it. This  enables her at least to identify  what  she  is fighting;  a scientist must isolate a virus before he can  hope to combat  it.  In  this poem, the disease is mortality:

... You must die later or sooner alas
you were born weren't you
the minutes thunder like guns coupling won't help you
To face the self honestly is to admit  that time runs out
in the ticking hips of the
man whose twitching skull jerks on loose
vertebrae in my kitchen

Yet the  admission  is a  sort  of liberation.  By accepting  the  fact  of mortality she robs it of its dread  and  is able to abstract  it from  her  consciousness:

I don't  care

I leave that to my necessary sibyl
(that's  what she's for)

THE CIRCLE GAME



with her safety bottled anguish and her glass despair

A direction is plainly emerging. The poet's perspective is changing,  the voice becoming  more  confident.  The  polarization  of the  inner  and  outer  worlds is a stride  toward  reconciliation.  The  wilderness is becoming less intimidating.
While the idea of abandoning the old self, of establishing a viable stasis, is attractive  and promising, the actual process turns out not to be so simple. As "Migration:  C.P.R."  demonstrates,  places of "absolute,   unformed   beginning" are scarce in the real world and  non-existent in the mind. The  attempt  to begin again, to find a new setting, is fruitless. During the journey from east to west the travellers notice that  the inner lakes are reminiscent of "ancient oceans". Though moving,  they are  going  nowhere.  The  west, once  reached,  turns  out  to  be not the anticipated place of absolute, unformed beginning:  "There are more second­ hand/stores here  than  we expected".  Even the  wilderness is not  new.

In the forest, even
apart  from the trodden
paths, we can tell (from the sawn firstumps)  that  many
have passed the same way sometime before
this

Nowhere  does Atwood  use the wilderness metaphor  more brilliantly  than  in The Circle  Game,  and  nowhere  does she employ  landscape  imagery  more  tellingly to  reflect the  condition  of the  mind  perceiving that  landscape.  There  is a  fine irony to the lines "though we brought  nothing  with us/ (we  thought) I we have begun to unpack", for they have brought, besides material  things, ways of feeling and  thinking  that  move along  well-trodden  and  ineradicable  paths.
Geographical  freedom,  or  at  least change,  is not freedom  at  all. How,  then, is any type of liberty  to be attained, any reconciliation to be won? We have said that  the  need for love, to share  with and  enter  into another  person,  has always been there.  But it has  been "furtive" and  outpulled  by the  gravitation   toward isolation.  Now, in  "Against   Still  Life",  the  need  resurfaces,  no  longer  furtive but open and acknowledged:

Your silence
isn't enough for me
now, no matter  with what

57

THE CIRCLE GAME



contentment  you fold
your hands together; I want anything you can say

At times, the need approaches an obsession:

. . . I'd  crack your skull
like a walnut, split it like a pumpkin to make you talk, or get
a look inside

She  wants  now  to  break  down  the  subject/object bifurcation,  perhaps  because to this point  the  distinction  has  been so acute.  She will not  settle for  the  mere fact  of an  "orange in the  middle  of a table"; rather,  "I want  to pick it  up/in my  hand/1 want  to  peel  the/skin off."  Neither,  it  appears,  will she  settle  for being a separate  object.
And in fact her relation  to others has been changed. The  resolution to escape
the  circle evidently  has allowed  her  to think  not exclusively in  terms  of "me"; she has begun to speak of "us",  of "two". In "Migration: C.P.R." and  in "Some Objects  of Wood  and  Stone"  the  first-person plural  voice is taken  for  granted. Even "Spring  in the Igloo" -in  which once again we witness helplessness in the face of nature,  the inability  to act with no less than  self-preservation  at stake­ even here the tone is calm  and  assured, a fact which derives,  perhaps, from  the "us"  in  the  poem.  Calamity,  though  unavoidable,  is somehow  less calamitous when shared.
The  problem, however,  refuses such a simple solution. Love itself turns  out to be a dubious blessing. As the need for an involved human relationship  approaches satisfaction, a counter-reaction grows proportionally stronger. Hence the poet, struggling  to escape isolation, suddenly finds herself saying "How  could you invade/me when/1 ordered  you not/to." Whenever  the existence of a love  rela­ tionship  is  assumed,  this  repellent  force  is very  powerful.  New  variables  are brought  into  the  equation  of self, and  these are  as difficult to  understand and solve as the old. The  emotions associated with the relationship demand  classifica­ tion and  become finite, and  because the feelings that  would  bind the two are so intense, the element of coercion is never far off:

Love is an awkward word

Not what I mean and
too much like magazine stories
in stilted dentists'

THE CIRCLE GAME



waiting  rooms.
How can anyone use it?

I'd  rather  say I like your lean spine
or your eyebrows
or your shoes

but  just by standing  there  and being awkward

you force me to speak


love.
 
("Letters,  Towards  and  Away")


In the  end,   the  release  accomplished through  the  merging   with  another  turns out  to  be a negative thing,  not  freedom  so much  as a new  mode  of entrapment, equally unsatisfying:

What  you invented what  you
destroyed
with  your transient  hands

you did so gently
I didn't  notice at  the time

but where is all that  wall­
paper?

Now
I'm  roofless:

the sky
you built for me is too open.

The invention of the  relationship, and  so of a new self, implies  a  destruction of the  old.  "Letters" affirms  the  need  for  separateness-to this  point   regarded more  as a curse than  a need -seemingly contradicting the requirement of human involvement. An  important question   thus  arises:   how  does  one   reconcile   the need  for  individual identity, for  separate wholeness,  with  the  simultaneous and

59

THE  CIRCLE GAME



equally  urgent  need  for  others,  an  escape from  total  isolation?  In  other  words, we have come full circle and  arrived  at the question that  has been implicit  from the outset:  how to reconcile the inner and  outer  worlds?


IT WOULD  BE   a gross oversimplification  to say that  physical wilderness is neutral,  incapable  of love, and  that  the inner,  private  world  of self resembles external  nature  only when the capacity for love goes unused;  but surely
the poetry is drawing  us in the direction  of such an  understanding. At the least we could say that  nature,  generally, is benign when the perception  of it is shared. Even a landscape  of threat  is less terrifying  through  a common  lens. We could say  also  that   those  poems  dealing  directly  with  the  two-person   relationship ("Eventual Proteus",   "A  Meal",  "'The Circle  Game",  "Letter, Towards and Away")   tend  to contain  very little wilderness imagery.
"The   Islands"  is irrefutable evidence  that  physical  landscape   reflects  quite
clearly  the  inner  state   of  the  perceiver.  Here  the  sight  of  the  geography   is actually  "pleasing". While  the  poem is about  islands, it  is no  coincidence  that there  are  "two  of  them". They  carry  considerable  symbolic  weight,  especially given the context  of the  poem in the book; so, when she writes "We  know  they are  alone/and always will be",  we can  hardly  help feeling  that  she is referring as much  to "the  two of us" as to "the  two of them".  We have, then, for the first time, an acceptance  of aloneness, of personal isolation, and  the very acceptance robs the fact  of its terrifying  connotation.  Again, a kind of freedom  is attained. The  most significant  point,  though,  is that  she can  accommodate  herself to the condition  of solitude  only in the  presence of someone else. What  enables  her  to accept  with such equanimity is the realization  that  her state  is shared;  everyone is cut  off.  Ironically,   when  things  are  shared-even  things  like  despair  and alienation -bonds  are  made,   invisible  bridges  formed   between  islands,  and insularity  overcome.
The  effect of landscape  is altered  by an alteration  in attitude towards  it. The
change has come about  through  the poet's recognition of her affinities with others, and,  by extension, with the outside world. It inot the conflicts between self and nature  that  she  dwells on  now,  but  the  likenesses; and  once  you start  seeking overlappings,  affinities, you find them:  everyone is mortal,  after  all, everyone is "part of this warm rotting/of  vegetable flesh/this quiet spawning of roots" ("Pre­ Amphibian"). Significantly, this realization takes place while she is merging  with another:

6o

THE CIRCLE  GAME



but  here I blur
into  you	our  breathing  sinking to green  millenniums
and 	sluggish	in our  blood all ancestors
are  warm  fish moving

The  natural, extemal world  has its own integrity  and  communicates in a manner as logical  and  real  as speech.  Speaking of pebbles  on  a  beach,  she  writes,

They  were sea-smoothed, sea-completed. They  enclosed what  they intended
to mean in shapes
as random  and  necessary as the shapes of words
("Some  Objects  of Wood  and  Stone")

A  carved  animal,  passed  from   hand   to  hand   around  a  circle,  communicates primitively, almost  magically,  so that  "the skin wonders/if stone  is human", and those  who  have  held  the animal "keep/the image  of that/inner shape" long after the  animal has gone.
Animal, vegetable and  mineral become  confused.  Ultimately, the  inner world of thought and  feeling  and  the  outer  world  of spruce  and  granite contain each other  in  much  the  same  way that  the  wildemess  in  "A  Place: Fragments" con­ tains  the  woman's house,  which  in  tum contains  its own  wildemess:

a cushion with a fringe;
glass animals  arranged
across the  mantelpiece  (a  swan, a horse, a  bull) ; a mirror;
a  teacup  sent from  Scotland;
several heraldic spoons;
a lamp;  and  in the centre
of the  table, a paperweight:
hollow glass globe filled with water,  and
a house, a man,  a snowstorm .

Where does it all end?  Where  is the  point  of reference?  "The centres/travel with us unseen/like our  shadows/on a  day  when  there  is  no  sun." There is a  point within  each  person  at which  the inner  and  outer  worlds,  the  two sides of the self, conjoin; in  the  metaphor of this  poem,  the  point  is the  doorway, "the  fulcrum where

61

THE CIRCLE GAME



this trivial  but stringent  inner  order held  its  delicate  balance
with  the random  scattering  or
clogged merging  of
things:  ditch  by the road;  dried reeds in the wind;  flat
wet bush, grey sky
sweeping away outside.

A  tentative balance has  been  struck,  a  reconciliation achieved. The  poles  of isolation   and   community  are  not  mutually exclusive.  The poet  is  on  her  way toward creating a viable  inner  order; it remains  now only  to extend  the integra­ tion  by  applying its  implications back  out  to  the  real,  physical  wilderness.  The connection is made through the  direct  juxtaposition of the  outer  landscape with the  personal  one,  its  human corerspondent.

Now, clutter  of twigs across our eyes, tatter
of birds at  the eye's edge;  the straggle of dead  treetrunks; patch
of lichen
and  in love, tangle
of limbs and fingers, the texture of pores and  lines on the skin.

Inner and  outer  worlds  do  not  differ  in  kind; the  two selves need  not  conflict. Each  is an  integral part  of something more, something
that informs, holds together this confusion, this largeness and  dissolving:

not above or behind or within  it, but  one with it: an

identity:
something  too huge and  simple for  us to see.

In  the  recognition of  this  identity, the  terror  of landscape disintegrates.
Death itself  becomes  relative  in  the  new  perspective; bones  grow  flesh  again, come  up  "trees  and  grass". We  recall  the  closing  lines  of  the  initial   poem,  the

THE  CffiCLE GAME



poet's assurance that if we looked long enough at the image of the landscape, "eventually/you will  be able  to see me."  And  sure  enough,  the  landscape  has become less a place of dread  than  a source of solace and  humanity:

Still
we are  the  salt
seas  that  uphold these lands.

Now  horses graze
inside  this fence  of  ribs, and

children run,  with  green smiles,  (not  knowing where)  across
the  fields of our  open  hands.
("The  Settlers") .


THE MASKS
OF D. G. JONES


E. D. Blodgett



"Pour  se reconnaztre, il  faut se traduire"




P.Lm SILENCE  munding the  wo<k of  D.  G.  Jones  in Canada  is  inexorable   but  not  inexplicable.  His  three  books  of  poetry   have emerged  and  disappeared apparently without  complaint  against  the  more  stri­ dent  and  ephemeral  appeals  of  the  poetry  of  the  past  decade  in  this  country. Beside the meteoric  flash of such writers as Leonard  Cohen and,  now,  Margaret  Atwood, Jones's subtle brilliance seems a pale fire indeed. This is because Jones is a poet who is penetrating with care and delicate concern many of  Canada's more troubling  resthetic preoccupations. He  is a  poet  of courage  whose surfacing  is always  deceptive  and  often  misleading  in  a  country  where  the  search  for  self and  heritage  can  be so exhausting  that  most poets would  prefer to settle for any mode of irony that  would both  expose the mysterious folly  of self-discovery and, also, prevent  whatever  fulfillment  of exploration  might  be possible.
This is the poetry of an imagination  that  was early formed,  and such  changes
as  occur  are  those  of  a  style  deepened  only  by  tragic  events.1    It  should   be remarked,  nevertheless,  how  the  centre  of Jones's  circles of radiation   is placed in his first book. As a poet who seems only minimally ready for statement, he enunciated  an almost consuming  passion in his first poem in Frost On  The  Sun2 entitled "John Marin". Jones's passion is for art, form and the artist's ambiguous relation  to the world present to the eye. Every volume of his poetry  has, in fact, begun  with  meditations  on this  problem.  The  Sun  Is Axeman 3    opens  reflecting upon  Anne  Hebert; Phrases From  Orpheus4   moves confidently  into  the  same kind of resthetic dimension.  By the  third  book, however, the self is no longer  a spectator  of a simple  other; there  the spatial  order  of his early  work  yields to an  interplay,  suggested in the course of the second book, of kinds of perceptual events where

MASKS OF  D. G.  JONES



The cries of children come on the wind And  are  gone.  The wild  bees come, And  the  clouds.

And  the  mind  is not
A  place  at  all,
But  a  harmony of  now,

The necessary  angel,  slapping
Flied  in  its own  sweat.

The  transmutation of "place", which was so much  a part  of design for the  poet to whom Jones here almost to his undoing boldly alludes, is where the ambiguity of speech and  its mode of visual revelation focus in his poetry. But Jones,  unlike Stevens, never teaches  explicity,  never tells  it "As it is, in  the  intricate  evasions of as." The Canadian poet's persona is every part, no part, a picture and  absence: as he remarked once, "In  order to recognize yourself, you have to be translated."5
He is Hamlet's  voice and  his father's  ghost. He would be present to disappear,  as he indicated  in his first book :

I would  eliminate this bombast,  this
Detail  of type, and  leave an  image,
And  a space -in  which  the  birds  or trees
Find  all  their  palpable relations  with  the  earth.
("A  Problem of Space")

Conjoined,  finally, to a love for art  and  the world seen as theatre,  is a need for masks, either  tragic  or  Edenic,  whose role is to  reflect  upon  how  the  place  of tragedy-a  disharmony  of then -is  at  once  present,  illusory  and  quick  with death.
If it is true  that  an  exceedingly  refined notion of art  resides at  the  centre  of
Jones's  consciousness, it is the  sense of the  visual  relations  of things  and  their deceptions that shades  both  the imagery and  form of the  poems. In  its  approxi­ mation  to visual art,  his poetry in fact illuminates imagery which is by  its nature  and  in its effect illusory and  deceptive. Similar to any image  cast upon  a screen, the "place"  where it reflects is a blank, a reminder  and  menace  of  absence. The mechanics of beaming light is complicated a fortiori by the poet's ability to blend images. Jones's arrival  at such resthetic positions does not seem to  be through  an interest  in film but  rather  via an  obsession with  photographs  and  painters,  not only  Marin,  but  also  Klee,  Chagall,  the  Hour  Books of   the  Duke  of  Berry, Cezanne,  Matisse, Hokusai  and  Chinese art  in general.  Such  an  interest  may be

MASKS OF D.  G.  JONES



attributed to the  fact  that  the  poet  is himself an  amateur artist,  and  that  he had once  considered  becoming  an   architect. These   interests   are   more   likely  only aspects  of an intensely  visual imagination, and  a peculiar  bent  for the  way things come  and  go before  the eye. The  eye, as he suggests in "Phrases From  Orpheus", is a kind  of cosmic organ of nutrition:

We are  fed in the eye of God
in solitary, albeit  blind
and  intimate
Eye, as he notes  elsewhere,  is the  reflector  of all things: The  universe spins in a golden eye
And summer  shrinks  in four  black claws.
("The  Osprey") As he exhorts  in "The River: North of Guelph":
0 thin stream
if you must be the image of my mind
let me be that  glass through  which  the light shines -0 mind,
be nothing,  be
that  translucent  glass:

A crow, grown  tired  of cawing, lights
on  a dead  branch;
he folds his wings; the sun gleams  black.
A fallen leaf
drifts  and  catches on a twig.

A tin funnel,
pitched  into  the middle of the stream, catches  the  light
and sends it back.

The  poem  stops  almost  thoughtlessly short  of the  Emersonian order  of identities, for the  final desire is dialectical and  like a game  of ball played  with  light  against the  modulating dark  of things.  Hence, while  he may  obsetve  that  "the general/ Identification/Leads us  to  love,"6   the  sense  of  the  phrase   seems  to  derive  its meaning from  the  following:

66

MASKS OF  D. G.  JONES



I  am  always  your  lover:  walls

and  the  fences  of time,
or  the  night,  but  discover the  world  has  been  joined

indivisible, everywhere,  ever.
("Nocturne: in  the  Way  of  a Love  Song")

While walls,  as  the  same poem   makes clear, are  "merely fa<_;ades," their face  is sufficient to  blur into ambiguity and  prevent all  things from being one; and like certain styles  of  painting, they   prevent finalities such   as  vanishing points. In  a stanza redolent of  epanaleptic elegy,  the  poet  suggests how  much is  possible:

I  am  the light  where  you find  shadows, I am  the  night  in  which you shine.
To  your  extension  I am  time.
("A  Place  for  'P' ")

Of   shorter  poems that  demonstrate succinctly what  I  have   been   saying,  I would choose  "Antibes:  Variations on  a  Theme" from   the  second  book,   from which I cite  the  concluding six stanzas:

"Night Fishing  at  Antibes" (Picasso: August,   1939) Introduces

The town  and  castle  of Antibes
In  violet  tones.
In  the  exhausted harbour, two

Grotesque youth,  spearing Fish  in the  lamplight, Register  a degeneration.

Even  the  girls, standing
On   the  antique quai,  one
Eating an  ice-cream cone suggest

Necrosis.  They  watch
Under fallen  stars,  while  the  town
Corrupts in  silence.

Antibes: there  are
Places  whose  very  emptiness
Mirrors our  betrayal.

MASKS OF  D. G. JONES



It has  been  remarked  that   this  is  a  kind  of  nineteenth-century  travel   poem. Among  its few faults,  this  need  not  be numbered. Its  faults  are  more  technical: an  occasional   failure of  cadence, an  unnecessary   use of  "very" in  the  next  to last  line.  Its  virtues,   emerging like  flotsam  in  many  of  the  stanza's final  lines, should  suggest  that  little  is being  described  in this  poem,  but  much  is thrust  deli­ cately  into  our  purview and  then  removed.  The  poem  has  no  background  other  than   the  repetition of  the  word  "Antibes". The  speaker  is a  demonstrator; his role is to  thin  out  the  three  or  four  dimensional world  to  a  screen  where  action  is  naught,  where,   "under  fallen  stars",   gods  are   aligned   with   "trivial  flesh",  creation  becomes  "reproduction", and  where  all  process  is  a  silent  corruption. The  strength of  the  poem  is  not  the  apparent idea,  but  the  skill  with   which  emptiness becomes  a mirror against the  reader's eye. The action  of the  poem  has nothing to  do  with  either   the  speaker   or  the  figures  he  indicates. The   action  depends upon  a random superimposition of  accidentally  related  images.  But  the modulation of imagery relentlessly  urges  upon  us the  fact  that  fantasy,  memory, noon,  night,   Nicolas  de  Stael's  suicide,  an  older  painting of  Picasso -that all these  show  us how  the  world  becomes  picture  steadily  emptying itself of centre  and  depth: time,  deceptions of  memory, fallen  gods,  necrosis  become  positions and  azimuths of the  visual  world.
As a  paradox working against the  persuasive  order  of the  poem's  stanzas,  we
are  urged  to  believe  in  the  momentary and  exclusive  validity   of every  point  of reference. In  an  article  on  D. B. Milne,  Northrop Frye speaks  of a similar  effect in  Oriental and  medieval painting:

... it is absurd  to say that  Oriental  or medieval  painting  is flat ... or that  it has no perspective.  The  perspective  is there  all  right,  but  it  is a  convex  perspective which  rolls  up  on  the  observer  instead  of  running  away  from  him.  In  some Oriental  pictures the observer's eye seems to be at the circumference  of the picture, so that  it opens inward  into  the mind.  Perspective in this kind of painting  is not
a  mechanical  handling of distance,  but  a  proportioning  of visual interest,  which makes a man look smaller when further away because he is then pictorially less important.7

To  proportion visual  interest   is precisely  Jones's   role  in  the  poem.  Against  the depth-creating properties of line, colour and  form,  the poet  juxtaposes  time,  plays with  the  irony  of  language,  remembers the  images  of  other   men  and,   without any  suggestion  of  continuity, allows  Antibes  to  die  at  noon,  at  evening  and   at night,   while  somebody  eats  ice-cream.   And   where   is  Cap   d'Antibes if  not  a projected fantasy?

68

MASKS OF  D. G. JONES



My reference to the work of Milne is neither casual nor fortuitous.  Jones him­ self wrote a poem on Milne with the evocative title "A  Garland  of Milne". Turn  after  turn  of the  poem summons  up images of the  painter's  haunting  canvases and  exhibits a brief and  allusive anthology. In  many  ways, Jones's  Milne  is an archetypal  Canadian, the  man  who made  a  garden  of the  bush,  for  whom

All space came out in flowers
miraculous, erupting from a void or mouth.

But what is admired  in Milne can also be admired  in Jones for whom the  form of  a  poem,  particularly   a  longer  one,  is a  spatial  composition   in  which  the tonalities of margins,  masks and  fragmentary  implosions create  an  interplay  of voices whose perspectives mix  "background" and  "foreground" which,  for  the unwary, seems inhuman.8  The  persona of these poems may indeed  have  no  pre­ cise outline,  but  the  effort to  project  a shape,  to cast a  "profile  in  the  birdless air",9  to shadow forth  the labyrinth  of the human  spirit  in the formal  design of the  poem is what  distinguishes Jones from  the  unexamined  romanticism of  his contemporaries.  The  persona,  finally, is a creation  of a  poem's  design.




AT   ALWAYS  CHARACTERIZES   Jones's  levelled  manner  of speech is its  reflective pitch.  It  is at once a meditation  and  an  argument; it surrounds  the  world  witnessed over the shoulders of both  Narcissus and  Li  Po, the  Chinese  and  the  classical  ("more  practical  and  more/Frequented" 10 )  pool of the  mind  playing  one  reply  against  another.  Sometimes  the  poet's  attitude emerges dry  and  pure,  as in  the  image chosen as the  title  for  his recent  study of themes and images in Canadian literature,  Butterfly  On  Rock.  But the larger poems brood almost bizarrely over the water illusions of Narcissus's pool, a place of   expected  dissolution  in  expansion,  and   unforeseen  restoration   into  depth:

So neither swim nor float. Relax. The void is not so bleak.

Conclude:  desire is but an ache, An absence. It  creates
A dream of limits

And it grows in gravity as that takes shape.
("I  Thought  There  Were Limits")

6g

MASKS OF D. G.  JONES



Thus  limit  as a screen  returns  as an  accepted  illusion turning  upon  the  grave. Such limits are  wall-fa  ades:
to divide.  While  the  butterfly  is not  rock,  he illuminates  inertia  and  is defined
by being there.
Of  fa ades,
asserts in the  form  of most of his poems, is their  totally amorphous capability: they droop from branches like Dali's dead time-pieces. So in a poem dedicated  to Michele  Lalonde :11

Here you know nothing.
You are a rag, blown by the wind,

A negligee of sunlight on some twigs. Here the Beast

Lifts you like a broken bush - Old nests

Tumbling from your hair. The Beast
Snuffs your flesh,

Your limbs, smelling of summer ... Like a dead child's

Broken to the wind ... like tears
Dried in his hands.

("Les Masques de l'ame")

Mask is modulation  -it is in the same order  of phenomena  as a visual  propor­ tion. Hence their  adoption  by Jones is neither  classical nor archetypal in  North­ rop Frye's sense. They  are less disturbing  than  the mask borne at  the conclusion of The Story  of 0, but  they  are  equally  attuned  to the  mortal  and  transitory. The  woman  is  often  Eve  and  often  Persephone;  and  the  speaker,  when  not Orpheus,  Orestes, Odysseus, Phosphor, can assume even the guise of  Michael  the archangel  in a curious  peripheral  allusion to the dissolution of his  first marriage ("To Eve In  Bitterness"). The  paradox  of Jones's use of the mask  is such that, while it evokes some of the  playfulness of Cocteau  and  Giraudoux  posing  past against  present  (the  foreground   and  background   of  time), he  seems  to  have abandoned the stability that  past can provide in the mask. The  past seems totally over in Jones,  a  blurred  background.  Yeats would  recreate  past;  Jones's  touch

MASKS OF D.  G.  JONES



seems  to  make  it  more   remote. To  that   extent   the  past   belongs  to  the  visual presence  of time :

The  osprey disappears,  dissolves, As suddenly  returns,  his wing
Banked  at another  angle on the wind. And so a11  things

Deliquesce, arrange,  and  rearrange  in field.
("Mr  Wilson, The  World")

As I have suggested,  to find  in  these poems,  even  when  no mask  is employed, a  unified  voice  similar   to  a  unified  vision,  is  not  necessary.  Jones's strategy is field  composition.  In   the   first  section   of  "Soliloquy  to   Absent   Friends" the speaker's voice  comes  only  from  the  vast solitudes  of  northern winters:

Micheline, the  winds dissolve our towns; the streets
where once we played, bound each  to each,  even
in solitude  to others yet unknown
twist like mirrors  in  the  twisting wind and  are  dissolved.
Micheline,
the world is a leafless wood; we stare abruptly  upon  tundra  and  the sky -
soul's frontiers  where we meet, knowing ourselves only
capacities  for loneliness,
solitudes wherein  the barrens sound.

The  second  section  addresses  Quixote and  cites  W.  C.  Williams' poem  on  the red  wheel  barrow. The   third   evokes  Quixote again,  now  announcing that

Quixote,  only your hands, their  unproductive gestures on  the air, welcome or goodbye,  root us in the vast
silence, the abyss where elsewise all things drift, a rain of fragments  falling into death.

As a kind  of gathering and  fourth act,  the  next  section  is a surprising and  intri­ cately  structured panel  description of the  month  of February in  the  Tres  riches heures of the  Duke  of Berry.  Everything is there,  the  magpies who  "drop sounds  like barley  in the  muted  yard," haystack,  wood,  axeman and  drover,  village  and

MASKS OF D. G.  JONES



cold that  "has cast a greenish glow/On the dissolving hills." Even in late mediae­ val  France,  dissolution stood  upon  the  margins,  but  within  the  frame  there  is "No  distance,  no  abyss".  Here  art  plays  the  role  of  the  monitory   mask  and screen,  reminding  us of that  we have lost. The  fact  that  it  is ancient  art  trans­ formed  to word only underscores  the elegaic character  of  the image. It is a poig­ nant  intrusion  of the  Ptolemaic  order  upon  a world  where  "abyss  is infinite." Its only consolation  is the scant  cheer of a pictorial  presence:

And so bound round is the abyss,
By winter void, by battle and by labour and  by love, By homely comfort that will warm the thighs,
That  in the Duke of Berry's Book  of Hours You and  I,  and  old Quixote, Micheline, And men and women whom we never knew, And others whom we shall never know,
May find one bed together against cold.

But no one can live in or by an  illuminated  book, and  the  poet's  advice is only sufficient for that  poem. We may, in fact, consider the didactic  hortations  of the last  section  ("Let   us be  bare,/Let us be  poor")   is simply  a  shift  of  mood  to suggest a variation  of proportion. It is for Jones a new resolution of the dilemma of "Antibes: Variations  on a Theme". Within the whole order  of shifts employed to seize and release evasions of as, a parainesis, a poised margin,  the appeal  to art and  Quixote  and  Williams,  all these are  aspects of an  attitude toward  life that Jones admires in Archibald  Lampman. He observes that "at  the centre of  [Lamp­ man's]   poetry  we find  a  celebration  of the  abundant   well of  universal energy and  of  its embodiment   or  epiphany   in  the  manifold  variety  of  life."12   Jones, with more technical  variety, aims at such successive epiphanies of  visual variation.

0F THE LONGER POEMS, the most achieved is the title poem from  Phrases From  Orpheus, whose stature  and  originality arise at once against
the kind of technical  tradition in which Jones participates  and  the modem treat­ ment of the Orpheus story as it has developed in Europe.13  In this poem the poet plays off in a disturbing  manner  Eliot's "voices" of soliloquy and  direct  address. It is disturbing  for he adopts,  among others, the mask and  mythological hints of Orpheus;  he  then  speaks  across  the  mask  in  another   voice,  more   modem, approaching probably  his own,  and  this  voice speaks to  its own,  and  not  the mate  of Orpheus,  Euridice.  Weaving  through  these voices is heard  the  voice of

72

MASKS OF  D. G. JONES



literary  allusion;  and  that  voice speaks contrapuntally against  a kind of voice of no time and no body, which can be considered a parody of what Eliot calls the impersonal  voice. This  final voice gives shape  to the  modem  drive  to  make  the world an  image  and  then  to seize it as image. It  is the voice of illusion, despair and loss made visual. Taken  together, the four dimensions of the  poem tum  with varied  response and  intensity  upon  the  several descents  that  the  ancient  myth evokes, and  as the poem proceeds, its profoundly self-reflective character  reminds us that  Orpheus's need as a singer was intimately  involved  with  the  loss of the substantive  world.  He  falls into  the  pool of  Narcissus. Jones  stamps  his  under­ standing  of the  fluid tangent  of word and  thing  by an almost  terrified  response to the visual dissolution of things in time, such as one observes-and  there  are a number  of poems that  contain  this mystery-in the punctuation of  the "pres­ ent"  through  an  old  photograph. Hence,  Jones  puts  on  the  mask  of  Orpheus not to return  the reader  to a mythic past where there will be "no distance  [and] no abyss", but rather  to open into the shared abyss because it is more courageous, as he suggests, to embrace  mortality  than  to embrace  the image which is beauti­ ful only. The  poem becomes Jones's most sustained effort to probe his consuming passion for art  and  the dark  it aims to lighten.
This  poem, to an extraordinary degree, employs margins to define masks, and the technique  exemplifies in verse the  proportioned  play of visual interest.  Part of the speaker's  loss (in  his first voice)  is his brother's  death,  and  the  visit to the  morgue  runs  through  a  remembered  sentence  from  de  Maupassant  while the speaker  broods on the  problem of language  at  death:

et Ia bete saignante, le sang sur  les plumes,
le sang  sur  mes mains,  me crispent  le coeur  a
le faire  defaillir

It

lS

silence

when  the  great trays
are

pulled  out speaks

73

MASKS OF  D. G. JONES



the cold
cadavre  gives up the word

as if

love

speech

were but  a hollow cup drinking  fills

Language, of course,  participates in the  normal  curve  of the  Orphic story: 1t IS  a katabasis of recessive backgrounds. It should  also be observed  that, going  beyond Eliot,  Jones  has split  his voice to play off the problem  of the gnomic  (and, hence, suggestively  Orphic)  against the  blankness  of death. It is a technique characteris­ tic of the whole.  Its function is to point  the central attitude that  the gnomic  must partake of an  awareness of death. To  seek the substance of gnomic  realities  dis­ sociated  from  mortality is to court  a kind  of total  dissolution. Such,  I  take  it,  is the  point  of one  reminiscence that  arrives  and  departs in the  poem  without echo except  for  its suggestion  of  desperate illusion:

I remember  a girl like a blonde wolf eyes
straight  from  the forest and  made  up  a lioness she wan ted
nothing  but  music and the elegant  sadness of

garde-moi  la derniere danse

there  by the  highway  (her mother  could  pitch  logs, drive
cattle  or deliver a calf)  the young men didn't  exist
a Tartar, in love
with  rumours  of the Byzantine Court wanting

74

MASKS OF  D. G. JONES



nothing
but  what  she could not have

Here  the  abyss is infinite : she  strikes  into  the  poem  like  a  vision  choked   with visions. Her  centre  is nowhere. As Antony  perceives himself dying,  she is a shape­ less apparition. The   necesary  centre  is grave; it  combines  gravity and  shadow. As the  first  voice  asks  later,   briefly  adopting the  mask  of  Orpheus  but  clearly suggesting  the  modem world  of  photography and  image-making:

Is that  flesh
hangs  in  the  darkness?

I have passed
those lovers withered, crucified

upon  the beam of sight

The distinction that  emerges,  assisted by the unusual word-play, is that  the  House of Hades  is not the  camera oscura  we would  imagine  it to be. To  win  the assur­ ance  of mortality, which  is the  assurance  of what  we are,  the  apparent  tricks  of the  visual  world  must   be  faced   and  endured, as  if  an  Antonioni  movie  were really  a  form  of  infernal  purgatory, "upon  the  beam   of  sight."  The   descent continues:

Without
death  honour  is

perilous

a bright plaque

and  beautiful

in  Plato's vision

Descend
in the dark  house

and  not  unlike the
promiscuity  of  gods embrace

75

MASKS OF  D. G. JONES



the cold clay, the dirty plaster

Disorder  after  death appals

My love is not among  them

My
love is in your  midst

bitten  by the snake she is not
there  in  Hell a shy
animal  in grass

nor yet
exposed and  like the glare
rock

but dark

her  captured flesh  (her  flowers are moonflowers

more  the  negative of that

posed photograph and  tan
girl in sunlight


The gradations of  descent,   measured  by  recessive  margins,   step   first  into   an allusion  to  John Crowe  Ransom's "The  Equilibrists" from  which  the  italicized words  are  displaced. The  allusion  fits:  Ransom's world  is the  pure  world  where lovers tease like ideal  photographs-

And  rigid as two painful  stars, and  twirled
About  the clustered  night  their prison world,
They  burned  with  fierce love always to come near, But honor  beat  them  back and  kept them clear.

MASKS OF  D. G. JONES



The  place that Jones evokes is equally prison but of several superimposed  dimen­ sions deliberately  unfocused,  as opposed to "clear". The  epigraph   to  the  Cana­  dian  poem-"each in  his prison/We think  of the  key" 14 -points  directly  to this  fact;  and  so also the  poem's  shape  and  central  metaphor  bear  upon  the closure of prison and  death.  But if our existence is a huis clos, some  prisons are better  for  us  than  others,  hence  the  dialectic  employed  between   illusion  and mortality.  At the core of death  the new life is possible. In  that  regard,  Jones  is paradoxically  Dantesque, despite his efforts in Butterfly to  persuade  us otherwise. The  dialogue  beginning "My/love is in ..." is emblematic  of the  central  argu­ ment:  love is only where  death  is, not  posed  and  tempting  as "a  shy animal" (which  refers to the  imaged  girl  at  the  beginning  of the  poem). Incapable of being  Platonic,  she does not  participate  in  "the  promiscuity  of  the  gods",  an image  strongly  suggestive  of  the  third  stanza  of  "Antibes".  The   necrosis  of Antibes, one might  add,  is made  to sustain precarious and  limited  existence.
Most modem  poetry runs the risk of becoming merely cosmopolitan.  This  poem runs  not  only  that  risk,  but  also that  of  being  rooted  in  a  sensibility  that  is normally  taken for granted  between the contending  views of British and  Ameri­ can  writing.  Canadians   have  made  a virtue  of remaining  parochial  within  the blown universe. This  poem's  particular  risk is that  it assumes that  the  Orpheus myth,  contrary  to the  usual  assumption,  is not  a  pattern  for  Gnostic  modes  of salvation.  It  is enough simply to hang on through  death's  winter  that  "descends like a  glacier  into  the  soul."15    By suggesting  that  literary  allusion  and  image­ making  are metaphors  for sterility, a kind of life without  the definition  of death, Jones is then able to persuade  us that  the  Orpheus  story, a major  monument  of our  literary  tradition,   participates  in illusion as well. Thus  the  myth  subserves the  poet's central  preoccupation   with  visual art  whose eye-play is the  place  of our awareness of mortality.  Pure  perception against a screen of non-death would be otherwise senseless. By so  envisioning the myth as a dramatization of illusion and  death,  he strips the myth of its general character  as a pattern  or order. The myth's  ambiguity  is  displayed  everywhere in  the  poem's  ambiguity. It  projects deception  as the only  place where the self can  be identified  as an  event  capable of death.  Along  with  other  major  modem  views of  the  pattern, "Phrases   For Orpheus" constitutes an  important revision. Jones's  burden  is not  that  there  is immortality in song, despite the ironies of language,  but that  survival is a visual craft.16  But such  a  burden  is fundamental to  his art,  apparent from  the  poem that  opens  Frost On  The  Sun,  and  traceable  through  all  the  kinds  of  trompe­ [' oeil that  his poems hit upon.

77

MASKS OF  D. G. JONES



A COMPLETE  APPRAISAL of the work of D. G. Jones cannot overlook  the  art  of  his short  poems. It  is these poems  that  distil  the  kinds  of
technique  I  have  pointed  to. They  are  not  simply  lyrical;  they  press carefully against  their  form  at  the  edge  of evanescence. These  poems,  to  modify slightly the subject of "On a Picture  of Your House", often seem to be

no place. And I confess what I protect is your capacity for loss,

your freedom to be no one, look so naked from that window
you are lost in light.

So to protect art,  by allowing it the freedom to disappear  and to return  as Jones's notion of the poet does, is, on a small scale, to suggest the amorphous  character of the artist in consonance  with his art. From the outset, from Frost On The  Sun, Jones  has sought  a  voice and  a  persona  that  without  becoming  cosmic would dramatize   the  problem   of  the  world's  conflicting  claims.  In   "Phrases   From Orpheus" a kind  of resolution  occurs in  which  the  persona  plays against  other voices. The  risk of the  persona  has less to  do  with  language  and  silence than with the visual and  non-visual  presence of background  and  foreground.  Absence in  Jones is not silence but  disappearance. Hence,  as he remarks  in  "For  Fran­ c;oise Adnet", "Time is space, it glows." The longer poems seek such a spatializa­ tion of event;  the  best of the shorter  poems employ such a  technique  by super­ imposing  imagery  in  a manner  suggestive of theatre.
Sometimes the movement  is syllogistic:

The grey hills, like whales,
Joumey in the winter sea;

I hardly know if I'm alive, Or shall ever love again - Unless I journey with the whales
To where the hills rise up: green.

("Winter Hills")

The  strength  of  the  poem  is probably  thematic:   the  arena  from  colourless to green can be called the landscape  of Jones's persona. In  "Phrases" it is a similar

MASKS OF  D. G. JONES



dialectic from  the  image  as illusion  to death  as substance that  draws  the speaker apart. A  more  exquisite  care  for  the  demand of form  is manifest   in  "Washed Up" from  his last  book:

The  rock
rising from water,

cedars
twisting from rock,

clouds
and  a single birch -

Nausicaa
playing in the wind.


The   technique is  painterly; and   Nausicaa,  a  kind  of  mask   for   the  speaker's Odysseus,  has  nothing of  a  Homeric past,  but  is a  psychological   dimension of the  Laurentian  Shield.   And   Nausicaa, "playing  in  the  wind," is  a  desire  as evanescent as the act of becoming green. The  figure is merely a mask;  she belongs to wind; her  role is to provide  visual ambiguity, for Odysseus  was  not  made for that  child.
Some  objects  lose substance by  being  seen  too  much.  Or,   to  put  it  another
way,  a  frequency of  modified   images  suggests  the  same  kind   of  ambiguity  as several   voices  emerging from   different   levels  of  awareness.  So  "Devil's  Paint Brush"-

After  the rain
They  are  rust upon  the field,

They  are suns
Burning  in a spider's space,

They  are
Nipples  by Matisse -One

White  daisy
Is a virgin or a saint,
A vestal in a host of flames.

Musk is their smell,
Like sunlight  on a girl's face.

79

MASKS OF  D. G. JONES



The  paradox  of the  poem  is that  all the  things  the  flower becomes are  "fiat", brilliantly coloured and totally non-tactile. They are not nipples but "Nipples by Matisse".  These  things  are  as painful  visually as a Nausicaa  of wind,  and  they are  things whose deceptiveness belong to the vision of mortality.
To seize mortality  in the form  of art-it can only fail as an endeavour. Had Orpheus  been a painter,  many  things would have been "lost in light"  and  dark. Jones  seems haunted   by this:  if art  cannot  possess anything  by  illusion,  what can? "Where do they go?" he asks of snow buntings. And he enjoins:

You must think of the birds

And make them as you will: Wood or stone or broken clay With a brown glaze.

You must lie down in the dark
In the naked fields.
You must think of the birds

And make them as you will.

In an unpublished  poem entitled  merely 13/3/72 he speaks of the effort to make art  mortal  so as to overcome death:

Je tourne vers toi
a travers l'effritement des ages
pour n'etre  que ta pierre fine

pour n'etre enfin que ta chair


Jones is rarely so spare: art is simply fine stone; mortality, thy flesh, with all the ambiguity  that  demands.  Loss is broadly  spatialized  into  a  crumbling  field. As
in "Phrases", the  action  of actualization  is dialectical for the speaker  moves "a
travers"  as if to foil absence  by becoming  its foreground,  by becoming  finally, the  act  of art,  and  so dramatizing an  illusion played against  the  eye of death, "pour  'naitre' enfin".
I would avoid  any conclusion that  would call Jones a romantic.  I would say
rather  that  I have been endeavoring  to sketch aspects of a Canadian, of a classi­
cal Canadian, poetry. James  Reaney  has remarked  that

So

MASKS OF  D. G. JONES



the  Canadian  poet  has to stay in  the country  and  at  the same  time  act  as if he weren't  in it. It looks as if I'm  saying that  the Canadian poet has to be some sort of poltergeistY

I see  Doug  Jones  so, shuffiing  in  his Northern  American attic,   brooding upon Anchises  and  another  Lavinia. But  it  is a  past  that   has  become   untimed and makes  the  present  difficult  to  perceive.  It is an  ambiguity peculiar to  Canada, and  Jones  has observed  it  as well  in  public  papers  in  which  the  American that explodes  from  Whitman to  Ginsberg   is welcomed   as  a  continental   possession, but the Pentagon is condemned as simply "European". Jones's response  to the predicament is natively  elusive,  but  it  is as  centrally   Canadian as  the  work  of Lampman to whom  I have  referred, and  to  Lampman's contemporary Charles G.  D.  Roberts, who  provides  an  image  that  captures the  harshly  beautiful  sense of  "butterfly on  rock".   While   Layton's  butterfly   is  precariously  near   its  own death, the  butterly  at  the  end  of "The Sentry  Of  The  Sedge  Flats" illuminates the  pitiless character of death. It is a brilliant  image  cast  upon  a mortal ground through which  illusion  endures:

... a splendid  butterfly, all glowing orange and  maroon,  came  and  settled  on  the back  of  the  dead  heron,  and   waved  its  radiant   wings  in  the  tranquil   light.18

From  such  situations, Jones's   poetry  and  the  best  of  Canadian  literature  arise, full  of sidelong  glances  forth  into  the  world  and  back  into  itself.


NOTES

1 See the long poem, "Sequence  of Night," Tamarack Review, 50  (I 969),   I 04-26 which endeavours  to illuminate  the familial aspects of such  tragedy.
2    Toronto: Contact  Press, I957·
3   Toronto: University of Toronto  Press, I961.
4   Toronto: Oxford,  I967.
5   Cp. Ann Hebert's  letter  to Frank  Scott in Dialogue  sur la  traduction  (Montreal, I970),  pp. 47-48. I am  grateful  to Barbara  Belyea for  drawing  my attention   to this and  other  kinds of similarities  that  exist between "Le  tombeau  des rois" and "Phrases  From Orpheus."
6   "De  Profundis Conjugii  Vox Et  Responsum" from Phrases From  Orpheus.
7    "David   Milne:   An  Appreciation," Here   and   Now   2,   (I948), rep.  The  Bush
Garden (Toronto: House of Anansi Press, I 97 I), p. 204.
8  See David Helwig "Poetry  East, West and Centre," Queen's Quarterly, 75 ( I968),
533·
9   "A Danger of Birds," The Canadian Forum, June  I972, p. 15.

81

MASKS OF D. G.  JONES



10  "Li  Revived" from  Frost On  The Sun.
11 A useful introduction for  the  English  reader  to her  work may  be found  in  Ellipse,
3,  (I970), 4-4I, ed. chiefly  by D. G. Jones.
12   Butterfly On   Rock, (Toronto:  University of  Toronto Press,  I970), p.  99·
13 See Walter A. Strauss, Descent  And  Return-The Orphic Theme In  Modern Literature (Cambridge:  Harvard University Press,  I97 I)  for  an  extended  discus­ sion of the  myth's European  development from  Novalis.
14  An  inversion  ofT. S. Eliot,  "The Wasteland," 4I3.
15  "Soliloquy to Absent  Friends."
16  Strauss   remarks, p.  249,  that   song  is  the  basis of  the  myth,  and   that   the  poet's role  is one  of  unifying the  cosmos,  but  nowhere  does  he  elaborate upon  the  fact that  Orpheus lost  Eurydice because  of looking.
17   "The Canadian Poet's  Predicament," University of Toronto Quarterly 26  (I956-
7), 284-95· rep.  in  Masks   of Poetry,  ed.  A.   J. M.  Smith   (Toronto,  McClelland
& Stewart, I 962) , p.  I 20.
18   Neighbours Unknown,  (London, Melbourne and  Toronto:  Ward, Lock  &  Co., I 9 I I ) , p. 63·


MARGARET
THE MAGICIAN


Linda Rogers


WENTHE  DART;,;"" ;c;cle a;med  right  between yom
eyes it is difficult to separate  the  magic from  the magician.  Reading  the  novels
and  poetry  of Margaret  Atwood  is an  intensely personal  experience  which  cul­ minates  in  a  confrontation  with  the  ubiquitous  image  of the  poet  on  the  back cover of the  book. It is always the same. The  eyes stare  out  hypnotic  from  the pale mask surrounded by her furry  camouflage.
The  photograph  is a  positive of the  negative  printed  on  every  page,  like an avenging  angel in the snow. The  used words subside like snowflakes as Atwood, the magician,  hypnotizes with the brilliant image which dazzles without illuminat­ ing. The  hypnotic subject  participates  involuntarily  in a grotesque,  dances  with­ out  knowing  the steps. There  is nothing  shared  in  the  experience  of manipula­ tion. The  puppet  learns nothing  of itself or of the puppeteer.
The  refusal to be known, except as female god or witch  doctor  is articulated
in  the motif  of invisibility  as the  Atwood  persona  struggles  to  extricate  herself from  personal  relationships.  Like  the  extraterrestrial cliche  of  popular  science fiction, she  cannot  feel, exists only to  comment.  In  Surfacing, the  protagonist "prayed  to be made  invisible, and  when in the morning  everyone could  still see me I knew they had the wrong god." She is always the outsider,  existing only to shatter  the illusions of her fellow beings.
When  the ice-woman  is touched  with fire, she simply melts away.  The  lovers
of the novels and  the poetry are left groping the air for a phantom  that  will not say "I love you," but will simply observe the lover under  the microscope. Power Politics,  the latest book of poems, is a liturgy for the funeral  of romantic  love:
Around my neck I wear
the head of the beloved, pressed
in the metal retina like a picked flower.

Physical love is cold and  unpleasant,  war orchestrated  by the sound  of finger-

MARGARET THE  MAGICIAN



nails on blackboards.  In  The  Edible Woman, Marion  copulates  in the  bathtub with her fiance and later runs away, an objective correlative for her emotional withdrawal. The  only successful encounter  occurs in Surfacing,  where  the lover is taken  outside  and  transformed   into  an  animal  so that  she  might  give  birth by herself to her own image:

The  baby will slip out easily as an egg, a kitten, and  I'll  lick it off and  bite the cord, the blood returning  to the ground where it belongs; the moon will be full, pulling. In  the morning  I  will be able to see it:  it will be covered with a shining fur, a god, I will never teach it any words.

Childbearing is usually a repulsive feminine  function.  Marion,  in The  Edible Woman, subscribes to a classic psychiatric  phenomenon.  Her  refusal to eat  is a rejection  of the  function  of motherhood. Atwood's  words reek of formaldehyde as images of pickled foetuses dangle like a gold watch from the hand  of the magi­ cian,  whose  power  struggle  with  men  is simply  a  foil  for  her  pervasive  mis­ anthropy. There  is no  compassion  for  the  women  who are  victims either.  The landladies,  the  pregnant   friends,  and  the  bleached  and  perfumed  fatalities  of feminine   conditioning  are   littered   like  lipstick  stained   kleenexes  about   her imaginary  landscape.
The  woman  at  the  centre  of her  universe is numb.  She cannot  feel and  she
cannot  give. The  value  of her  existence lies in  observation.  What  is lacking  is the  humanity  which  will tie the  brilliant  impressions together.  The  magician  is left with only the  tricks. Where  there is no feeling, there is no ultimate  reality;

Pleasure and  pain are side by side they said but most of the brain is neutral; nerveless, like fat.  I  rehearsed emotions, naming  them:  joy, guilt,  release, love and hate, react, relate; what to feel was like what to wear, you watched the others and memorized it.

Although  a  wearer  of masks herself, the  author   rejects words  as an  impedi­ ment to reality. The  world stripped  of emotions and words is left visual and tactile and this is where Margaret Atwood finds her real strength.  Her  poems are petro­ glyphs indelibly  printed  on  the  brain.  It is the  image  which  persists  when  the words, often cruel  and  bitter,  subside. Words are  a substitute for and  distortion of her world,  which  is silent  and  concerned  only with  survival  and  the  passing seasons. One of the reasons The  Edible Woman fails as a novel is the awkward­  ness of the dialogue.  Atwood  is self conscious in  the  urban  environment  which requires  language.  There  is little  dialogue in  Surfacing  to disturb  the sounds of the country and  this is one of the strengths of  the more mature  novel.

MARGARET THE  MAGICIAN



There  is no warmth  in the natural  world where she takes refuge, only a lack of hypocrisy. Atwood,  the observer, knows she has no control  over the  northern landscape  she describes as no one else does and  she admires  its proud  refusal to submit, except to death.  In spite of her identification  with animals,  the fur  coats, the leather  jackets and startled  grace, the Atwood persona is left to salvage what she can of the human  condition.  She knows a language  and  is burdened  with  a personal and  social history. She cannot  be animal.  In  Surfacing, she proves her dependance  upon society. She cannot  live alone in the wilderness.
The  magician, masked in theatrics, is still a part of history and  the interlocking mesh of human  membrane. The  detachment  is another  illusion. Even  the  rejec­ tion of the life-giving function  cannot  negate the reality of her own  parents. This is the problem of Surfacing, where the dead  parents  have  more  credibility  than the living friends,  and  of "An  Attempted  Solution  for  Chess  Problems"  in  The Circle Game;

The shadows of the chessmen stretch, fall across her: she
is obsessed by history; each wooden totem rises like the cairn of an event

The  cold eye of the  hypnotist  wavers when  "inherited   events  barnacle  on  the mind."
There  is a pervasive chill in her imagery. Death  is cold. Love is cold. Snow is cold. The  lack of a  warming  counterpoint  in  her  work  is the  failure  of  com­ passion in  the  characters   who  dance  in  an  involuntary  circle  around  her ice­ woman. No one is strong enough  to challenge her supremacy  at the centre  of the universe and  this is a weakness, as her voice becomes too strident, losing convic­ tion. There  is no dialogue  on any level.
There  is no life-giving warmth  in her  metaphorical  water  either.  The  ascent
from drowning  is no resurrection,  just a return  to conventional  reality. In  or out of the water,  the drowned  soul persists. Even life in  the  womb  is surreal,  gro­ tesque. There  is no state  of innocence and  there is no state  of grace. The  night­ mare overcomes the dream.  There  is no escape. The  fiction is a glassy  mirror  to cold realities.
The  poet is the agent  of beauty  and  the sharp  instrument  of death.  She is a knife cutting  through  onion.  Each  layer falls away  in  beautiful  symmetry.  But there is no relationship  between the layers and  the centre  is hollow.


review articles



COMPREHENSIVENESS UNATTAINED

Clara Thomas



The  Evolution of   Canadian   Literature    in  English   r867-1914,  ed.   Mary Jane Edwards; The Evolution of Canadian  Literature  in English,  r 914-45, ed. George Parker;  The  Evolution of Canadian   Literature   in  English,   1945-70,  ed.  Paul Denham. Holt Rinehart & Winston, $5.95  per  volume.


The  Evolution of Canadian Literature in  English, presently  available in three volumes, with a fourth due out covering  the  period  I 867-I914, is a large and  a brave venture. The volumes, almost goo pages each, are attractively produced, each   one   prefaced  by  an   introductory essay by its editor  and  followed  by a brief bibliography  of  materials on  its  writers and  period. In her  prefaces  to the present volumes,  Mary  Jane Edwards, General Editor of  the  project, has outlined many of  the  objectives   of  the  series  and   also some of its problems:

Criticisms, too, can  always  be leveled  at the anthologist  for   his   section  of  authors  and works.   We  have   tried   to  be  as  effective  as possible  in  our  choice of  both. But  personal preferences have  swayed  us ...
Other   decisions were    made  for   us.   One author refused   to  allow  his  work  to  be  pub­ lished  by a company with  American  connec­ tions.   Very   high   permission  fees   restricted our    choice  of   other  authors   and   works.  Limitations  of  space   had   us   jigging  occa­ sionally as  craftily  as  Layton's  "Tall Man".

It is all too commonplace for  both  critics and  general  readers to assume  that  print-

86
 ing  a selection  from  an  author's work  is as simple a matter as asking permission politely. This, as  Professor Edwards makes   clear,  is  far   from   the  case:   the process  is complex,   expensive,   laborious and frustrating; when it is all over the anthologist is still  vulnerable  to  charges of  creating an  arbitrary canon.  Further­ more,  in  this  case  the  title  of  the  series strongly  suggests a  complete  coverage  of our  literature, but  the editors' decision  to print  only complete  pieces has  inevitably  resulted  in a less-than-adequate  coverage of the development of our  fiction.
It is hardly  surprising then,  that  of the
present three volumes, the first one, where no copyright  permissions  or fees were involved, strikes one as being most truly representative  of  its  period   and   also  as filling our most serious present gap in teaching materials. We have  had  recently a  proliferation of  I gth  century  reprints, but   until   now   we  have   had   no  single volume,  covering  both  prose  and  poetry, that  could  be  prescribed   as  a  basic  text for Igth century Canadian literary studies.

REVIEW ARTICLES



The choice of authors and  selections in this first volume has been governed, as Professor  Edwards has  said,  both  by the editorial decision to print only complete pieces and  by her  own  preferences. Thus we   gain    The  Charivari, Levi   Adams' literary curiosity  "after the  manner of Beppo",  Rosanna Leprohon's long-story "Clive Weston's   \Vedding   Anniversary", and  D'Arcy  McGee's "The Mental Outfit of  the  New  Dominion" as  welcome bonuses of hitherto unanthologized mate­ rial. Volume I  does not, however, include  as much  prose  as one  would  have  hoped for   in   a  three-hundred   page  selection: neither  Richardson  nor  Kirby   is  repre­ sented   by  his  fiction,  neither Howe   nor Dunlop,  Traill  nor   Jameson,  is  repre­  sented  at all. Thus teaching from  this text would   still  mean  supplementing heavily from  other  texts. Ironically, too, our  I9th century  is  most  likely  to  be  studied  in depth by senior undergraduate and  grad­ uate  classes  where  no anthology is likely to   replace   individual  textual    research.  However,  this  first  volume  is a  valuable collection  and   Professor  Edwards' intro­  duction  seems  to be  a  model  of its  kind
-scholarly, informative and  eminently readable. Both  Volume  I  and  the  one  to follow-covering I 867- I 9 I 4,  not  yet available, will be useful companion pieces, not  only  for  the  study  of  English-Cana­ dian  literature, but  for use in a variety  of inter-disciplinary  studies as well.
Volumes III   (I914-45),  edited by George  Parker, and  IV  ( I 945-70) , edited by  Paul  Denham, are  less satisfying.  In one  form  or  another their  contents are readily   available  to  us  and   though  the poets who are  represented are well served, the  omissions  are  also crucial: it is  diffi­ cult,   for   instance,   to  consider   teaching Canadian literature from  I9I4-45 from  a
 text   that   does  not  include  Hugh   Mac­ Lennan.  MacLennan   is   included  in volume  IV,  but   there   he  is  represented only by his I969  Address  to the  Montreal Symposium on De-Canadianization, "The Struggle for Canadian Universities". Pro­ fessor Edwards defends this  choice  in her preface to this final  volume:

We  wish  to show  what significant Canadian writers have  been  thinking about important issues in contemporary society. MacLennan's essay about  the De-Canadianization  of Canadian  universities and   Richler's about Quebec in  the  '6os   are,   therefore, here  for the   positive  reason    that  each   considers a problem worrying many Canadians  today.

Fair  enough.   But  why,  then,  do  we  not have   two   selections   from   MacLennan, this one and one of the fine essays in Scotchman's Return,  or  Cross  Country, as in Volume  I we have two or more selections from Haliburton, Moody,  Kirby and  McGee?  Similarly, if the  editors  are really convinced of the value of Richler's "Quebec Oui,  Ottawa Non", first printed in Encounter  in  I 964 and  showing all the hallmarks of slick and  witty  topical  jour­ nalism,   why   not   supplement   this   with another  Richler   selection? There   have been  some short  stories.
It is  very  strange  for   the   editors   to have included  an article by George Grant, an  article   by  Earle   Birney   which  men­ tions   Marshall  McLuhan   as   "our   ac­ knowledged   philosopher  of   communica­ tions",  an  introductory  paragraph about  the  poets  who  have  been  influenced  by the  teaching and  the  criticism of  North­ rop    Frye-but     no    representation   of either  Frye  or  McLuhan. The Essays of B. K. Sandwell  and  Frank Underhill are certainly   valuable   assets   to   Canadian studies  in  general,   if  not  expressly  so  to the  teaching of  English-Canadian litera­ ture, but their inclusion  points  up another

REVIEW ARTICLES



major exclusion: why is biography not represented  at   all,   and    autobiography only by one passage  from  John Glasgow's Memoirs of Montparnasse? Joseph Schull's Laurier, Donald Creighton's MacDonald, and  William Kilbourn's The Firebrand   are   excellent  examples  of  a genre  which  should   not  be  neglected  by our  anthologists. And  of  course  amongst autobiographies, the works of Emily  Carr are  only  the  first of  those  which  come  to mind  immediately.
Here  it must  be said  that  Volumes III and IV show most clearly the deleterious effects  of  both  the  editors' and   the  pub­ lisher's  policy. For  the editors  to decide  to include   only  complete  pieces  throughout these   volumes   sounds   laudable;  in   the final  two volumes, however,  such  a policy inevitably   short-changes  our   prose   and  especially  our   fiction  representation.  There  are   many    serious   gaps   here­ volume IV contains no fiction  by Richler, Cohen  or   MacLennan;  Margaret  Lau­ rence  is  represented  by  "The  Drummer of All  the  World", ( rgs6), her  first pub­  lished  short  story  and,  while  excellent  in its  feeling  for  the  human  problems inex­ tricably bound  up  with  emergent Ghana, it  is far  from  representative of  her  later, Canadian  work; Ernest  Buckler and Robertson Davies  are perhaps preeminent among the  many  fiction  writers  who  are not  represented at  all. Volume III  would require heavy supplementation  from MacLennan, Ostenso and  Stead, at  least, to give anything like  fair  fictional  repre­ sentation  to  our   literature  between   the Wars.
To  consider  these  two final  volumes  is
to  become   very  suspicious   of  the  pub­ lishers'  policy  with  regard   to  their  entire  project.  In   the   midst   of   the   publicity  generated by the sale of  Ryerson  Press to

88
 McGraw Hill,  the   subsequent  Royal Commission on  Publishing, and  the  pro­ liferation of Canadian  literature  courses in  universities,   community  colleges  and high   schools   across   the   country,  Holt Rinehart  &  Winston's   interest   in   a  4- volume  Canadian  anthology would  seem to  have  been  both  economically feasible and  politically astute. Having undertaken the  project  in  all  the  odour  of  sanctity, did  the publishers  then  budget  too tightly to  allow  their  editors   to  pay  permissions for first-class representative selections from  many  of our  writers?  Professor  Ed­ wards'    "very   high   permission   fees   re­ stricted  our  choice  of other  authors and works"  echoes  its  alarm  as  one  looks at the  Table of  Contents  for  Volume III and  IV,  and  it  is easy to suspect  that  yet another  valiant   project   has  been  badly blemished  and  misshapen  by uninformed
-or cynical-publishing  policy.
George   Parker's  introduction  to  Vol­ ume  III is both learned and witty, though  somewhat over-simplified in its discussion of  liberalism  and  over-generalized in  its application to our writers.  In  some cases, notably  in  his  remarks on  E.  K.  Brown, he  perpetuates  the  orthodoxies of former  commentators  without seeming  to  recog­ nize  the  fine  irony  of  his  own  wording: " ... Brown  applied   the  best  rgth   Cen­  tury  standards  to  the  evaluation of  our poetry and  fiction ... " In many instances, however,  his introduction of little-known material -the  quotations from   Charles G.  D. Roberts  on  Morley  Callaghan, for example,  spins off fresh  and  valuable  in­ sights.
Paul  Denham has  written a competent essay on trends and  movements in our contemporary  poetry.   He  gives  the  im­ pression of a considerable range of  knowl­ edge about our  poets, and  about  the  his-

REVIEW ARTICLES



tory   of   critical  theory,   poetry   coteries, and   their   voices  in  the  various   journals and   little   magazines across  the  country. His  statement about  the  influence  of Northrop Frye on our  poets is ludicrously understated, however,   the  more  surpris­ ing since in his introduction all literature
 seems equally,  and  grimly,  fodder for literary-critical  schools and  theories. Unfortunately, his  introduction  lacks knowledgeable comment  about  our  fic­ tion  as  crucially   as  his  volume  lacks  its content.



COHEN'S  WOMEN
 


Tom Wayman


LEONARD COHEN,  The  Energy of Slaves. McClelland & Stewart.


WELL, FOLKS,  here's the news:  I. Leonard Cohen  is still getting screwed.  2. He  likes it. 3· He  doesn't like it.  That, plus  some  whimpering that   is either  for or against  the vague idea of a revolution, seems to make  up  the content of his newest collection  of poems, The Energy of Slaves.
Women in Cohen's poems in this book primarily  are   holes,   though  sometimes they can  be breasts or thighs  or asses.

I did  not know
 
some absolute morality in the world and Women's Lib  was  good  and   being  anti­ freedom   was  bad.  But  it  is the  effect  of Cohen's  attitude   on   the   writing   that  seems  unfortunate. By  reducing women in  this way to mere  bodies,  he  makes  the topic   that   he  spends  most   of  his  time considering appear one-dimensional, dull, predictable.  Seen  from  a  viewpoint that  allows  women   to  be  people -no  more, no  less-Cohen's poems celebrate  a Mystery  that  is not  mysterious,   recoil  in

until  you walked away you had  the perfect  ass
Forgive me
for not falling in love with your face or your conversation

As in Irving Layton's poems, women are discussed  in  terms  of  their  usefulness  to the  poet  for  sticking  something into  the the  holes  that   they   have   and   are.  But whereas   Layton    can   have   a   poem   in which  a hole reads Kafka, Cohen  gives us holes that  watch  television.

I loved to creep up behind  her
when she was engrossed in Star Trek and kiss her little ass-hole

Now  this is not  to castigate Cohen  for failing  to  take  a  certain position  on Women's Liberation, as though there  was
 bafflement  from  situations that  are  easily
explainable, and  in their  attempts to be sympathetic to  women   demonstrate an unlimited contempt for  their  subject. So the opinions on life that his poems try to explore  finally seem trivial.
When    Cohen   writes   a   poem   called
"Portrait of a Girl", he  imagines her entirely  concerned with  her  body  (as  he is) :

She is profoundly  worried that  her thighs are too big and  her ass fat and  ugly Also she is too hairy
The  lucky American  girls are  not  hairy

The  poet  hastens  to reassure  her  that  she really  has  "no   problem   whatsoever''  be­ cause  he finds  her  body  attractive.

8g

REVIEW ARTICLES



I wish  I could  show  her
what such  hair  and  haunches do for one  like me

Women in these poems cause the sorts of troubles  haunches and  holes generally  get poets   into.   They   tend   to  get   filled  by other  people,  giving  rise to all  the  whin­ ing   anguish   of  poems   of   jealousy.  Or,  conversely,  holes   can  get   possessive. Cohen  says that  his music is

. . . not  merely  naked
It is open-legged It is like a cunt and  like a cunt
must  needs  be houseproud

And  on and  on:  Cohen's many  poems about   his  ups  and   downs   with   various holes are usually pleas addressed to an ambiguous "you". He  pleads  throughout the  book, in  poem  after  poem,  to  a  par­ ticular woman  or woman personified.

Play  with  me forever
Mistress of the  Wor!d
Keep me  hard
Keep me in  the  kitchen
Keep me out  of politics

Twice   in   this  book   as  Cohen   does  his whine-act,  it  apparently dawns   on  him that   there  is more  to  women   than  their holes:

I act  like a fool
when  I speak  to  two girls  on yet another night
the  one cunt sunk  like an  imperial bathtub in  my slippery conversation
and  the  other an  endless  tribute to
Helen Keller

Helen    Keller-popularly    imagined as blind,   withered, intellectual-is  a  good symbol for Cohen's distance from  women as  human beings.  In   this  poem  he  pre­ dictably opts  for  his familiar hole. A girl must  "fall", he says, and  so he  pleads  to be there  when she does :

Choose me louder please

go
 if only in  the moment that  you fall
We could  be lovers  begging  together

The other poem in this collection which perhaps hints  that   there  might   be  more to women than their bodies is the poem beginning "There  are  no  traitors among women". This  poem  suggests that  women do not  always respond  favourably to men who see them  as bodies. In fact,  the body itself  can  be a  weapon   directed  back  at men.
There are  no traitors among women Even  the  mother does  not  tell  the  son they  do  not  wish  us well

She  cannot be tamed by conversation
Absence  is the only  weapon
against the  supreme arsenal of her  body

Cohen  concludes  this poem  by saying:

Forgive me,  partisans,
I only sing this for  the ones
who do  not care who  wins  the  war

"The war"  here  apparently refers  to the war between women and  men. So is this stanza  directed   to  the  "partisans" of this war,  men  and   women,  saying   that   this poem  (and/or Cohen's other  poems?)   is written for those people who don't care much  about  the outcome of the currently­ publicized  battle  of women  to obtain  full status  as human  beings, first-class citizens, equally-paid  employees,  etc.?  If in  fact this  is  Cohen's intention, this is an  inter­ esting statement. It seems then  that  he is aware   of  the  current  struggle,   and   al­ though  his  poem  above  addressed to  the "Mistress of the  World" hardly shows it, that   he  is  aware  that   there  is  plenty  of politics  in  the kitchen. If this  reading of the  poem  is accurate, then  it  also  shows Cohen   lining   up   with   those   who   feel themselves  outside  the  current  struggle: who  don't really  mind  if  women's  status  and  condition in society stays the same as at present.

REVIEW ARTICLES



To   put   this  more   charitably:  Cohen seems to be saying here that  his poem's categorizing of women  as bodies is not intended to be read by people concerned about  women.  Rather, he sings for  those who either like things the way they are or those who in any case don't intend   to do anything  about   women's  place   in   the world.
The   concentration  in  this   review  on what   Cohen    is  saying   arises   from   the poet's   style  in   The  Energy    of   Slaves. Poems  here are  mainly  untitled, and  in a simple manner spell out what  an "I", presumably  Cohen   himself,   has  to  say. (At  least,  there  is  never  any  indication that   a  persona,  rather than  Cohen  him­ self,  is speaking  in  these  poems.)   Occa­ sionally, Cohen's  thoughts can descend  to the sententiousness of a Rod  McKuen:

They locked  up a man
who wanted to rule  the  world
The fools
They locked  up  the wrong man

Often when Cohen  wants  to discuss politics,   however,   he  adopts  the   weary tone  of  the  supposedly-failed  revolution­ ary.  In   the  poem  "Crying,  Come   back, Hero", the  speaker   says  he  is  aware  of politics,   but   decides   to   give   it   up   to "speak   for  love  alone" in  order   to  reas­ sure   girls  who   are   upset   because   their holes  (once again)  aren't being filled:

... I
would  rather haunt cafes  on  both
sides of town  than break  my only heart for  your  millennium ... It's panic in the  eyes of girls
that  tells me I must  speak  for  love alone, panic at  their  empty beds,
at  sanitary rows of monsters born.

In  another poem,  Cohen  complains that foreign  governments are  anxious  to sub­ vert our government.
 The killers  that  run
the  other countries are  trying to get  us
to overthrow the  killers
that run  our  own

In this poem the speaker says he believes foreigners "will kill more of us" than any present  regime.  He adds:

Frankly I don't believe anyone out  there
really  wants us to solve our  social  problems

And as Cohen's solution  to us solving our social problems, he ends the poem with a lecture  on  the  evils of flag burning

... it excites
the  killers  on either side to unfortunate  excess which  goes on gaily
quite unchecked until everyone is dead

Nothing in the poem  gives any indication why  Cohen  feels foreign  governments are trying  to subvert  our  government, or why burning a flag leads  to the  death of "everyone". What  is  given   here   is  the poet's opinion, take it or leave it. As in another, self-abasing little  spurt   of  ego:

Each  man
has a way  to betray the  revolution
This is mine

But what  does "this" in the last line refer to? The  poem?  Does Cohen really believe a  poem can betray "the  revolution"? What   effect  does  a  poem  have  on  any­ thing?   Or   does  Cohen  mean   "this" to refer  to  the  act  of  writing  poems?  How does  writing  poems  "betray" the  revolu­ tion?  Is he involved  in some sort  of revo­ lution  that  is betrayed  by producing art?  This   poem,   like   many   of   Cohen's  in which  he  pretends to  be  discussing  poli­ tics,  seems  like  an   intricate puzzle  that

REVIEW ARTICLES



would  hardly repay  anyone's efforts  to puzzle out.
And   it  is  this   pretence   of  discussing politics that leads to the fuzziness of these poems, and  hence their  failure to give any pleasure   or  insight.  I  feel  certain that  if Cohen  actually were involved  with  any of the   social  movements  commonly  de­ scribed    as   revolutionary,  some   of    the vagueness  that  these  poems convey  might  vanish.  Once  outside  of one's  own  head,  where  you are  free  to be vaguely "revolu­ tionary",  any   thinker  moving   into   the real  world  of  people  and  their  problems  in  present-day North America  soon  finds he  or  she  has  to  tighten up  mentally in both  concepts  and  language.  The sort  of sloppy,  generally anti-establishment senti­  ments  Cohen's  poems  here  sag  into  reek of the world  of  radical chic.
Cohen's poems  in  this  collection often
mention  torture,  war,  revolution. These poems usually employ  the Distinctly Omi­ nous  Ending, such  as  "This is  war/You are  here  to  be  destroyed" or  "This ma­  chine  is rubber and  metal/it fits over your body  and  you die slowly" or "Any  system you  contrive without us/will  be  brought down".  But   as  with   Cohen's   poem   on betraying the  revolution discussed  above, exactly   who   is   threatening whom   with what   is  left  vague   and   unresolved.  For example, in  another poem  the  poet  says:

One of  these  days
You  will  be the  object
of the  contempt of slaves
Then you will not  talk  so easily
about our  freedom and our  love
Then you  will refrain
from  offering us your  solutions
You  have  many  things on  your  mind
We think only of revenge

But  who is the "we" and  the "you" here, specifically?  Is   Cohen    linking    himself with    the   poor,    the   downtrodden,  the
 wage-slave?   It  might   appear so,  except that  elsewhere he distinguishes clearly between    himself   and    the   majority  of people   who   have   to   work   hard   for   a living.

I am  punished when I do  not work  on  this poem
or when  I try to invent something
I am one  of the slaves
You  are  employees
That is why I hate your  work

Apparently Cohen's "slaves" are  people distinguishable from  the ordinary North Americans who  are  at  work  each  day  in order  to survive. So what is the "revenge", the  "contempt of slaves" that  Cohen mentions  in  his  poem  above? What sort of revolution  is Cohen involved  with?  In at least one poem, he suggests an incident that   seems  to  arrive   out   of  De  Sade's vision  of  revolution   in  Marat!Sade. He sees  himself   testifying   at   some   revolu­ tionary  tribunal, on behalf  of a girl:

I will remember if I can the  fragrance of your skin
perhaps you  can  get  away
with  five years People's Field  Whore

It is difficult, due to Cohen's lack of com­ ment  on  this  idea,   not  to  believe  he  is using this image to give himself  some sort of titillative  mental  thrill.
In  an interview in Maclean's last year, Cohen   was  quoted    as  saying   his  next book of poems would  be about  the  prob­ lems of fame.  Of course,  he is not respon­ sible for  what  the  press says he said,  but some  poems  here  do  seem  to  tackle  the question  of fame,  albeit  predictably:

the  15-year-old girls
I wanted when I was  15
Ihave them  now
it is very pleasant it is never  too Ia te I advise  you all
to become  rich and famous

REVffiW ARTICLES



Another  poem    discusses "the  poet" (Cohen?) and  his present  life. The  poem ends  with:

Three nights  at the  Hilton a girl  with  round  buttocks
suntanned and  cheerful, fourteen, Athens

Are we to believe that  what  Cohen  has to say  about  fame  is to suggest  the  delights of  having sexual   intercourse with   chil­ dren? Surely   this  is  some  sort  of   pose. Otherwise, it  seems to me that  a  kind  of basic immorality has   to  be  added to Cohen's poetic  faults  as  exhibited in  this collection  of   tedious   male   supremacy, vagueness, sententiousness and mental self-titillation brought on by talk  of  revo­ lution  and  violence. And what  I mean  by immorality here  is immorality in  Wilde's  sense of the term:  boredom. Does Cohen,  who  is  39,  really  have  nothing  more  to say  about   having   intercourse  with   chil­ dren   less than  half  his age  except  "very pleasant" and  "round  buttocks"? If this is  all  he  can  say,  pro  or  con  the  idea, surely  his  poverty  as  a  writer  is evident.
Most   of   these   criticisms   of   himself,
 however,  Cohen  has  anticipated. He  has a  poem  in  The   Energy  of Slaves  that really  serves as a  miniature review  of the book  (or at  least  the  first nine  lines do) :

I have  no talent left
I can't write  a poem anymore
You  can  call  me Len  or Lennie now like you always  wanted
I guess I should  pack  it  up but  habits persist
and  women  keep  driving me back  into  it
Before  you accuse  me of boring you (your ultimate triumph and  relief) remember that neither you  or me
is fucking right now
and  once again you  have  enjoyed the  company of my soul

Lennie   Cohen   seems  to  be  saying   here that  anything short  of fucking is likely to be  boring   and   without  talent.  I  don't think   that's   true.   And  certainly I  don't think   that   is  any   excuse  for   producing this  book. Nothing inside  that  I  can  find will  repay  anyone -female or  male­ for  the  time  necessary   to  read   through these poems, for the time necessarily spent in the company  of  Cohen's soul.




WORDS AND MUSIC
 


l)onald Stephens


DOROTHY  LIVESAY,  A Winnipeg Childhood. Peguis  Publishers, $6.oo.


I dreamed that I dwelt in  a  house
On  the  edge  of a  field With a  fire  for  warmth And  a  roof  for  shield.

But  when  I awoke  I saw
There was  nothing at a11
But  rain  for  my roof
And  rain  for  my  wall.

THis POEM  of Dorothy  Live­ say's,   though  written   over   thirty   years ago,  exemplifies  her  poetry  at  its  best:  it
 is a  direct  and  sharply   imagistic  presen­ tation  of a deeply  felt  perception  of life. But  now that  she is older,  Dorothy Live­ say has gone back to her childhood to dis­ cover   that    the   "fire   for   warmth/And a roof for shield" still exist and, that  con­ trary   to   what   she   once   felt,   there   is something there  after  all.  This  collection  of short stories-A Winnipeg Childhood
-is  most  rewarding to read.  Like  much


93

REVIEW ARTICLES



of   her    finest   work,    it   is   deceptively simple. The  story of a childhood is straightforwardly   presented,    unpreten­ tiously  and  succinctly. At  times  it  almost seems  too  simple.  Yet  countless   levels  of nuance   radiate   from    the    understated themes  of these stories. Dorothy Livesay's childhood becomes  a powerful symbol for the essence of life, as she realizes  that  her personal   myth   never  did   collapse,   that  the   realization   that   dreams  end   which is  so  much   a  part   of  her   poetry   is  not what  she  learns  as  she looks  back  to  the time when she was young. Livesay's  parti­ cular  genius  is  displayed  to  the  full  in this   book:   her  ability   to  sense  and   to capture  in  word   and   sound   the   depth and  subtlety  of human feeling.
Because  Northrop Frye  did  so, most of
Livesay's  critics  have  labelled  her  an imagist,  but  the  label  is, for me, too sweeping.   Certainly  Livesay   was   influ­ enced   by  the  imagists; her  affinities   to H.D.,  both   in   quality  and   method    of expression,   are  obvious,   and   have   been noted   by  the  critics.   But  there  is  much  more  to Livesay's  poetry  than  her  imag­ ism. For  me, she is  primarily a lyricist, a poet  who  is deeply  concerned and  com­ mitted  to  the  interaction  and   fusion  of sound,  rhythm,  and  expression  in  poetry. She  has  said   that   "song"  (sound)  and "dance"    (rhythm)   are    the    roots    of poetry,  that  she  is  "always hearing  this other   beat   behind   the   ordinary  spoken language and  I'm  always hearing the melody". This  is the ingredient which usually  distinguishes  poetry   from   prose, but  occasionally   there   are   prose  writers who  focus  in  on  the  sound   and   rhythm of  their  words;  Virginia Woolf  was  one who did  this. Margaret Laurence does it. And  so does  Dorothy  Livesay.
Most  short  story  writers   rely  on  their


94
 ideas for impact. The  details  are  import­ ant,  the careful  way in which  so much  is set up in such a short  space. Livesay,  the poet,  is tremendously aware  of the effect which   word  music  can   create; she  has transferred  this  aspect  of   her  poetry   to her  prose.  And  the  best  sections  of  this volume   are   those  in   which   sound   and idea  merge  with  image  into  a  wholeness of expression;  in  "Christmas", the family leave  the  church  service:

When   they  came  out  of the  flowing  light  of the  church, gentle with  greetings and  warm with   music,  the  new  snow  would   be  spread softly   along   the   boulevard,   sparkling  like glass;  in other places  dove  blue like the undersides of  angel's wings.  She  would   run and  slide,  run  and   slide,  all  the  way  home.

The  image  is commonplace, but  it sings! She sets her words and  phrases clearly, stacking   them  to  increase   expressive  in­ tensity.  At  times  the  language  becomes almost    chant-like. It   weaves   a   spell, becomes  an  incantation  which  recreates  an   atmosphere.  Words   work   to   create  senses of  urgency  as  in  "Matt",  feelings of fear  as in  "The  Two  Willies",  of  the inevitable  as  in   "The   Sparrows".  Her language conveys  the  basic  pulsing  sense of  the   movement  of   life,  as  the   child grows  older,  and  as  dreams fade.
Dorothy Livesay obviously has a deep feeling for, and  an empathy with,  people. Over  the  years,  she  has  committed  her­ self to  humanity, both  in  her  art  and  in her   work   (as  a  social   worker.)   These short   stories   are   remarkable   for   their capacity   to  express  the  anguish  and  the joy  which   flash   through   the   minds   of Elizabeth and  her  family.  Her  ability  to get  inside  other  people's   psyches is quite compelling, to  feel  how  they  feel,  as  in the  story  of  "Anna". This   strong   sense of  people  is intensified   by her  picture of Elizabeth, who is obviously Dorothy Live-

REVIEW ARTICLES



say herself,  the child  who grows  and  ma­ tures as the collection progresses. The fact that   the  third-person is used,  as  Livesay stands  back  and  looks  at  her  memory  of herself,  is  particularly  attractive. She  is not  the same  person  as she once  was, and  to use the first person  would  constrict the things  that  Dorothy  Livesay  now  sees in herself when  she was growing  up. To give herself  another  name,  Elizabeth, and   to stand   outside  and   look  in,  is a  difficult stance  for a writer; but  in so doing  Eliza­ beth  is  not  shown   as  a  painfully preco­ cious   child -as   often    is   the   case   as people  look  back-but  rather as  a very human  little  girl,  trying  to  find  answers in  her  small  life.
The  depth of feeling  expressed  in these stories  imparts complexities to the  theme which  its simplicity belies. Although most of  Elizabeth's  discoveries   could   scarcely be considered philosophically  earth-shat­ tering,   she   does   learn   about   her   own essence,   about   the   vague,    deep-rooted impulses  and   fears  which   motivate and clarify   individual   human  beings.  Eliza­ beth  learns  through what  happens to her that  she  will  always  be  alone,  that   there is always  the irremediable isolation  of the individual.  Livesay's   perceptions  of  the reality  of  existence-that is,  of  people trapped and  alone  in  their  own  minds­ is evident  in  many  of  her  poems,  and  is the   main    theme   to   these   stories,   pre­ sented  and  structured  like  the  processes of the mind.  A Winnipeg Childhood pro­ ceeds  in  flashes  of  vision  and   memory,
 the most obvious example of the mind working. And the stories express the frightening sense of  separateness, and  of the   ultimate  uselessness  of   communica­ tion.  As  the  family   leave  Winnipeg, in the  last  story,  "The  Uprooting", Eliza­  beth  senses her  own  separation, but  it  is not  altogether a  bad  thing,  for:

She  pressed  her  face  against the  car  window and  saw,  high  overhead, scudding along amongst  soft   spring  clouds,  the    deep   V­ wedge   of   the   geese.   She   could    not   hear  them, but  she  knew  their song.

There is a  need  for  separateness, a  long­ ing to keep  part  of the self private, invio­ late. That is what  Elizabeth, and Dorothy Livesay  on  reflection,   has  learned. And as  the  family   move  to  new  things   and  places,   so  has   Dorothy   Livesay   moved through  her   life,   looking  for   certainty, yet  recognizing  that it  is impossible.  She realized  in  her  poetry  that  the  process  of living  results  in  the   endless  creation  of new  myths;  many  of  her  poems  express an    awareness    that     the    humanitarian belief  in life, in its unconquerable onward rush   and   in  its  possibilities   for   better­ ment,  can  become, in fact  has become  the new myth.  Life for  Livesay has  been  ever new, a constant moment to moment pro­ cess  of  creation.  And   now,   in   repose, Livesay   has   looked   back   to  her   begin­ nings,·  and   has   presented   a   group  of stories  with  a  reality  rarely  equalled this year,   or   any   other  year,   in   Canadian writing.











95

TWILIGHT ZONES
 


George Woodcock


AUDREY THOMAS,  Songs   my  Mother Taught  Me. Talonbooks.  $8.50. TONY ASPLER,  One   of My   Marionettes. Seeker  &  Warburg. $8.50. ANTHONY BRENNAN, The Carbon Copy. McClelland & Stewart. $7-95· NIGELL  FOXELL,  Schoolboy Rising. Oberon   Press.


IBEGAN    THE  ORIGINAL   VER­ SION  of this  review  with  a  tirade  on  the subjects  of immature and  mature  nation­ alism.  Immature  nationalism I  classified as  simplistic and   xenophobic,  its  repre­  sentatives  concerned   with    those    arid questions  of  strict   citizenship  and   pure ancestry   that  give  every  country's Julius  Streichers their  sustenance. Mature  na­ tionalism   I  classified  as  that   which  saw in  the  richness   of  a  culture  the  effects of  interbreeding rather  than   inbreeding. The  Anglo-Saxons, absorbing and  trans­ forming a  superimposed French  culture, and  emerging with  the  English  tradition that    Chaucer  began    and   Shakespeare took   to  its  peak,   impressed   me  as  the models    for    this    kind    of    nationalism. (Significantly,  perhaps,   they   were   not conscious  nationalists.)  I  found  in a true love of nation  (interpreted  as a land  and  its   people)    the   urge    to   be   expansive rather than exclusive,  the desire  to absorb rather than  to  reject. And  I  saw  myself leading   up  to  the  conclusion that  Cana­ dian  literature and   the  other  Canadian arts,  in  so far  as  they  represent a  grow­ ing   and   maturing  tradition,  are   insep­ arable   from  the  fact   that   Canada,  even more   than   the  United  States,   has  been an  immigrant's land, and  for  every  con­ siderable  writer   or   painter  native  to  it we can  count   at  least  one  artist  equally  important  and   equally   Canadian   who was   born   beyond   the   great   oceans   or south  of  the  49th  parallel. It is this  uni-

g6
 
que   mingling   of  the   far-born  and   the near-born  that   up   to   the   present    has given the culture of Canada its special configuration.
I content myself with  mentioning these notions  in  a  casual  way,  mainly because their  development would  lead   to  a  full­ scale  article  rather than   the  opening of a review article.  The  fact  that is germane to the  present review is that this mingling continues  without  any   present    appear­ ance    of   diminishing.   Canada   is   still deeply  indebted to men  and  women  who have chosen  to adopt  it as their  land,  and  the   quartet  of  novels   I   am   reviewing,  one  by  an  American-born  and   three   by British-born   writers,   suggest   that   there are  certain   forms  of craftsmanly  compe­ tence   that   immigrant  writers  still   tend to  present  more  often  and  more  reliably than  their  native-born counterparts. Here  I  am  not  talking  of  the  highest   level  of Canadian writing,  the level of  the Three Margarets   (Atwood,  Avison,  Laurence) for  example,  though at  least  one  of  the writers   I  am  discussing   belongs   among them.  I  am  talking   rather of  that  com­ pany  of  sound   second-raters, the  work­ manlike  and  inventive rank  and  file who give  any   tradition  its  solidity  and   con­ tinuity, who  guarantee the  presence  of  a literary world  where  writers  can  develop  more  naturally than  in  the  artificial set­ ting  of  the  university campus,  and  who are  found  so  abundantly  in  places  like London  and  Paris  and  New  York.

REVIEW ARTICLES



All the four novels I am discussing are written with a sound  command of the literary   language  of   the   times   and   an equally  sound understanding of the mechanics  of   fiction.    In   both   respects their  authors have  surer  ears  and   hands than,   say,  most  of  the  school  of  experi­ mental  native   writers   who  a  few  years ago gathered around the House of Anansi and   were   published   in   the   Spiderline Editions. I  am  not  saying  that  there  is a difference  in   talent    between    the   two groups,  and  I  am  ready  to  grant  that  in terms    of   originative    imagination   the Anansi  writers  may  even  be  superior. I do   suggest   that   the   immigrants  show more  clearly  the skills that  such  imagina­ tion can  use. Every  tradition of living art is  based  on  a  parallel   and   usually  older tradition  of    good    craftsmanship.  The novels   I   am   discussing    are    all   well­ crafted  works,  with  in  each  case  a  little added  to  mere  workmanship, and  in one case  a  great  deal.
The    one    case    is   that    of	Audrey
Thomas's Songs My  Mother  Taught Me, very  handsomely   printed  and   produced by Talonbooks of Vancouver, which  has never  before  ventured  into   this  field  of well-made  hardbound books. Songs My Mother  Taught  Me is one of those delib­ erately   tantalizing  books   that   hover   in the borderland between  fiction  and  auto­  biography.   Like    her    heroine    Isobel, Audrey   Thomas   was   born   in   upstate  New  York  in  the   1930s  and   spent   her childhood and  adolescence there;  it  is, on  the  dustcover, the  actual  photograph of  Audrey  and  her  sister,  extracted from the family  album, that  sets our  minds  in tone  for  reading the  tale  of  Isobel's  pas­ sage  to maturity. Given  that  little  fiction is  without  some   element  derived   from the author's life, and  that  autobiography
 cannot even  be  written without a  shap­ ing of actual life that  gives it some of the character of fiction,  it is hardly  presump­ tuous  to suggest  that  at  least  the  central armature of  Songs  My  Mother   Taught  Me  was  provided by the  author's youth,  and   that   her  senses  experienced  the  im­ pressions  of   childhood  and   adolescence that   give  Songs  so  rich  a  textural  sur­  face.   But   beneath   this   appealing  im­ pasto   of   mood   and   detail,    there   is  a powerful  and  living structure in which Isobel's  inner  development  moves  some­ times   with   and   sometimes   against  the other  currents of the  novel,  which  at  one level  of  awareness  is  a   shadowy   land­ scape  of  the  human  condition. The in­ effectuality of  Isobel's  parents, the  shifts and  agonies of  shabby  gentility, the small tragedies  of  adolescent relationships, and the  grandly  macabre scenes  in  the  mad­  house where  Isobel finds summer employ­ ment: all  these  try and  temper the  hero­ ine's  character until  she emerges,  not  un­ hurt  indeed,  but  unspoilt, a  being as well as a becoming.  Songs My Mother  Taught  Me is written  in a marvellously controlled prose  which  confirms  beyond  any  doubt  that  in the last  few years, working  in her distant   home  among  the   Gulf   Islands,  Audrey  Thomas has  developed  into  one of our  first  novelists.
Two  of the other four  novels, Tony Aspler's  One of My  Marionettes   and Anthony  Brennan's  The   Carbon  Copy, are  concerned  with   problems   of  percep­ tion  and  reality  that   have  intermittently fascinated  novelists  ever  since   the  days of  the  Gothicists.  Aspler  deals  with   the truth  of  memory   and   the  truth  of  fic­ tion:  which  is the  deeper? A young  man living  in  one  of   those  Bohemian board­ ing  houses  which  have  been  a  feature of London's  artistic  fringe  for  at  least  three

97

REVIEW ARTICLES



generations falls in love with a model who is  the  daughter of  an  aircraft magnate; she in turn  is in love with  a married man who  happens also  to  be  a  swindler. She dies horribly  in a deliberate car  accident, and   Mark  tries  to  exorcize   his  grief  by writing  a  novel   in   which,   turning  the actual Diana into  a fictional  Jenny, he carefully reconstructs the reason for her death-an  obvious  suicide -as  all  the facts  he  can  find  suggest  it  to  him.  We get a double view of the past, partly in fragments  of   the   novel   and   partly   in Mark's recollections of Diana, but  a third dimension is added when  the publishers decide  the  novel  may  well  be  held  libel­ lous  and  insist  that  Mark clear  the  book with   Diana's  father,  Sir   Albert   Greer­ man,  who is actually  named  in it without any  effort  to  conceal  his identity.
Mark   runs    Sir   Albert    to   earth   in Ireland,  and   is  appalled  when   the   old man    tells   him   why   the   reasons   he­ Mark -has  given  for  Diana's   suicide are   erroneous. She   did   not   kill   herself because   her  lover  was  revealed  to  be  a heartless    scoundrel,  but   because   when she went  to tell her father of her  troubles,  Sir Albert  got her drunk and  incestuously seduced   her.  Mark  has  learnt an  appar­ ent   truth  he  finds  appalling; Sir  Albert has shared  a guilt. Yet  even  this emenda­ tion of the story  remains in question. For Sir   Albert,   we   realize,   is  living   in   the borderland    between    sanity    and    senile imbecility,   and   his   mind   is  constantly wavering  over  the  edge  from  one  to  the other.
The Carbon  Copy  is an  even  stranger exercise   in   the   nature  of   delusion. In constructing a world  of fantasy   to be  in­ habited  by  the  absent   mind,   there  is  no doubt  that   Anthony  Brennan  has   well learnt his lessons from  such  earlier  mast-

g8
 ers  of  the  ambiguities  as  Franz  Kafka and   Rex   Warner.  He   devises   a  skilful narrative filled with  points  where  doubt may  settle,  so  that   even  at   the  end  we never  know if what  the  narrator has told us is total  illusion,  or  partial illusion,  or actuality. A man  awakens  in a room  that will   recur   through  the   novel;    finding himself  without memories,   he  goes  to  a railway   station   and   takes   a   train   to  a country in revolution  where  he finds him­ self  identified   as  Harry Carbon, a  cele­ brated   terrorist  leader.  He  goes  through a  series  of fugitive   adventures  described with  a  repertorial  concreteness  that   en­ hances   their  strangeness, until  he  meets a  rebel  general  who  tells  him  that   he  is indeed  an  amnesiac  and  that  the  legend­  ary Harry Carbon is a fictional  figure  the general   has  constructed  around the  nar­  rator's   photograph.  The    general  takes Harry -now  Joe - back  to  the  clinic where  they  met,  but  when   the  narrator awakens  there   in   the  familiar  room,   a doctor  tells him that  even the general  did not  exist  and  that   he  has  never  left  the clinic.   All   the   adventures  have   taken place  in  his  mind.   They   belong   to  the world  of insanity.  And  yet, since we have nothing but  the  narrator's story,  we  are unable  to  judge  in  the  end  what  part  of it  is reality.  Might   not  the  clinic  and  its room  be themselves  the  recurrent  night­ mares  of a madman actually  involved  in a world  of action? And  what,  since each man   perceives   the   world   anew,   is  the true   perception  of  reality?  If what   the madman sees is his own  nightmare, may not  the  same  be  true  of  what  we regard  as  the  sane  man?   What,  ultimately,  is sanity?   Or  perception?  Adroitly, and  in the  kind  of  clear  prose  that  is  necessary to  reveal  the  ambiguities of  what  seems evident,  Mr.  Brennan guides  his story so

REVIEW ARTICLES



that  it keeps one's attention and its own tension   to  the  end.   It is  not   a  major novel,  but  it is a tour  de  force in its own strictly  limited  terms.
Nigel  Foxell,  like  Aspler  and  Brennan
an  English  immigrant, has  already  writ­ ten    a    very    sprightly    satirical    novel, Carnival. Schoolboy  Rising  is a return to a  genre   that  in  various   forms  has  been popular in  England for  well  over  a cen­ tury,   the  story  about  public  school  life. On   the   surface   there   would   seem  few types of fiction with less to say to a Cana­ dian    public,   since   the   private  schools which    are   their   Canadian   equivalents have  never  played  a part  in  the  national life  like  British  public  schools  with  their immense  influence   from   the  early   nine­ teenth  century  onwards in the forming of a ruling class and  the shaping of national attitudes. Yet situations in  real  life often acquire universality   outside   their  imme­ diate   functions. This   was  of   course  the case   with    the   cowboy   society  of   the American   west,   simple   enough    in   its values  and  restricted  enough  in  its scope to  be  treated   as a  microcosm   and  hence to   be  elevated   into   a   mythology.  The  public  school  is  really  very similar  to the "classic" west:  a  world  of simple  values and  of  restricted  scope  in which  one  can look  to  find  microsmically displayed the relationships  of   power   and   personality that     sway    the    great    world     beyond. Because  of this  the  public  schools  did  in fact  become  myths  as well as  realities.
It  seems  to me that  Foxell  has  treated the public school in precisely the way that draws  out  its microcosmic character  and
 thus   makes  it  of  interest  to  Canadians whose  traditions  after   all  largely   derive from the world it encapsulates. He has avoided    the    merely    snobbish    or    the merely scandalous approaches which have dominated a great  deal of public school fiction, and quite rightly, since the great controversial factor  in  the  public  school system has been neither rank  nor sodomy, but the false social  patterns which  its hierarchy and  its  cult   of  the  team  seek to impart, as opposed   to  the  real  human patterns  that   emerge   under  the  shadow of the system.  (As a result,  public  school men  have  often   possessed  the   worst  of public  and  the  best  of  private virtues  at the same time; they were inclined  to be inflexible  rulers  and   administrators and loyal  and   understanding  friends.)  It   is this  duality   of  the  system   that   emerges in  Schoolboy   Rising. Nobody  is titled  or buggered,  and  there  is only one  most dis­ creetly  rendered  passage  of   love-making when  the hero  is seduced  by  his mother's best  woman   friend,  but   the   pattern  of conflicting    loyalties    in    Robin    Thrale, scholar  at  Aldenham  School  but  also son of  the  worst  martinet  among the  house­ masters, is very sensitively drawn. Through enthusiastic conformity followed  by bitter  rebellion,  Robin  eventually finds  in com­ promise  a  solution   characteristic  of  his country  and  his class,  while  in  the  back­  ground   emerges    the    compelling   twilit picture   of    a   culture  which    once    so balanced  its oppositions that  it  produced the   world's   most   successful   imperialists and  the  world's  best  poets.









99

THE NAME
UNDER THE NAME
 





Laurence Ricou



DOUGLAS o. SPETTIGUE,  FPG:  The  European  Years. Oberon,  $8.gs.


THE   LURE of   the   detective story  lies in  mystery  and  intellectual  in­ trigue,   not   in  the   ultimate  explanation of the  puzzle. It was a  mystery that  com­ pelled  such  interest  in   Professor   Spetti­ gue's  Frederick  Philip  Grove   (I 969) : his questions  hinted  at  a  strange and  fascin­  ating   figure   obscured   in   the   hitherto accepted biography. Four  years  later   the solution  to the mystery-that Frederick Philip   Grove   is  a  pseudonym  for   Felix Paul    Greve,   born    I 879   in   Radomno, West Prussia-is provided by Spettigue's FPC:  The   European Years. Perhaps the sense  of  anticlimax  was  inevitable,  but the  relation of  the  facts  is  less satisfying than   the  original tumble  of  questions.
Much of the enticement of the earlier book is now lost in  the  meticulous detail­ ing  of Greve's  early  years.  The  accumu­ lation  of dates  and  place names, the com­ plexities  of  the  family  tree,  academically impressive    and   necessary    as   they   are, would   take  several   readings  to  embrace completely.  Consequently, the  subject   of the    biography (appropriately enough considering Grove's reputation)  seems remote   and   lacking   vitality. For   an  in­ formative contrast we need  to go  no  fur­  ther  than   Professor  Stobie's recent  Fred­ erick  Philip  Grove  in  the  Twayne  World Authors    Series.    Stobie's    account    of Grove's  Canadian  years,  more   detailed, more  personal,  enhanced  by an  effective use   of   taped    interviews   with    Grove's

100
 acquaintances, gives  the  man  a depth of personality  lacking  in  Spettigue's  story.
In  the  grip  of  the  Grove  story  Spetti­ gue  also  tends  to  build   a  romance, but one  which  distances   its  subject   before  it involves    the    reader.    In   a    Queen's Quarterly article  of  WinterI 97 I Spetti­ gue  confidently  claimed to know  Grove's  identity but  somewhat coyly  declined   to reveal  it.  In  the Spring I 9 72  issue of the same   journal  Spettigue briefly  summar­ ized  the  biography of  Felix  Paul  Greve without  explaining  how  he  was  certain that   Greve   and   Grove   were   the   same man.  That same absence  of the one piece of  incontrovertible  evidence   that   Felix Paul  Greve  is Frederick Philip  Grove­ a  comparison  of   handwriting,  a  photo­  graph, an   admission   in   the   correspon­ dence-is   noticeable  in   FPC   and   ex­ plains   in   part   why   Greve   remains   in shadow.  Nevertheless Spettigue's identifi­  cation    is    completely   persuasive:    the weight of circumstantial evidence  is mas­ sive,   the   parallels   between    Greve   and Grove varied  and  numerous. It still seems curious  that  if  there  was an  abrupt  mo­ ment   of  discovery,   as  Spettigue's  com­ ment  that  "while   working  in  the  British Museum,  I suddenly realized  who Grove really   was"   suggests,   it   is  still   buried  deeply.  The  element of  mystery  is  culti­  vated,   too,   in   Spettigue's   narrative,  a slow   and    tantalizing   revelation   which repeatedly  promises  "more of  that   pres-

REVIEW ARTICLES



ently". It is frustrating, for example, that such   key  documentation  as  the   corres­ pondence  between   Greve  and  the  biog­ rapher Franz   Briimmer is  alluded   to  in the  notes,  revealed  almost  incidentally in fragments through the  text, and  is never seen  whole.
Of  course  when  Spettigue ignores  the
process  of discovery  he is sensibly  assert­ ing  the  FPC  is biography, not  a scholar's  autobiography. The  theme  of   that   biog­ raphy  is that  Grove's Canadian years are so often  a  repetition  of  the  patterns and experiences  of  a  European youth.  Greve like   Grove    was   a   man    of   enormous  energy, constantly undertaking more  than he could accomplish, his life and imagina­ tion    increasingly    stifled    by   economic pressure,   which,   like  all  unpleasantness, he avoided  by moving  away and  by culti­ vating  a fertile  capacity for  bluff. Spetti­ gue  pictures  Greve,  again  like  the  Grove we know, shifting  between  the "romantic role  of  the   aloof   poet   scornful   of  the mob"  and  the  "equally  romantic role of the  suffering   poet  starving  in  a  garret  for  the  integrity of  his art."  Regrettably neither    role   has   much    substance  for Greve  was  repeatedly forced   to  sacrifice his  literary  ambitions  to  the  exhausting work  of a  translator, which  would  bring him   more   immediate  financial    returns.  ( Spettigue's  bibliography  lists  over  fifty translations from several languages.) The story  of Felix  Paul  Greve  is not  a  joyful one;    there    is,   however,    enough    early promise  of a literary  career  that  the  des­ pair  of  In  Search  of Myself  seems  justi­ fied.
Greve cultivated a mystery which  the intervening  years  have  deepened. Often Spettigue fills the gaps with  his own reasoned  speculations:  that   "Uncle" August  Hinrich Jacobsen   may  have  kept
 Felix  in pocket  money,  for  whatever  rea­ son;   that    Felix   "was   something   of   a mother's   boy";    that    much    of    Felix's money  may  have  disappeared in  gambl­ ing;   that   the  final  I o,ooo   M  of   which Felix  defrauded  his  closest  friend, Her­ man   Kilian,  went   to   support  his  wife during his  trial  and  imprisonment; that  in  his  first  interview   with   Andre  Gide Greve   plays   boldly   on   Gide's    known homosexual  sympathies. There  are  other occasions when large and fascinating questions  persist:  When  was Greve "mar­ ried"? Who was Elsa  (known only by her first name), his bride?  Why  did  he leave her?   And   largest   of  all  ...  where   was Creve/Grove and  what  did  he do during his  first  two  years,  I gog- I g I 2,  in  North  America?
Obviously  some of the enigma  in Spet­ tigue's   Frederick    Philip    Grove   carries  through to this volume; "perhaps," Spet­ tigue    cautions,    "we   shall    never    con­ fidently   separate  the   fiction   from    the fact." At  the  same   time   there   is  much invaluable  factual   material.  Spettigue's industry,  though   as   I  have   noted    the chronology   and  genealogy  is often   diffi­ cult  to follow, provides  details  of Greve's  work in the classical grammar school, lists of Greve's  university  courses  and  profes­ sors,  summaries  of   the   conflicting  cur­ rents   and    personalities   in   turn-of-the­ century  European literary life, a thorough outline  of  the  society,  culture and   land­ scape  in Greve's  ancestral home,  and  ex­ tensive  quotations  from   a  Greve   article published   in  I gog  titled   "Travelling  in Sweden."
This article merits particular mention because  it  is immediately informative about the images and themes of Grove's Canadian writing.  It fits admirably with Spettigue's second  major theme,  a  theme


IOI

REVIEW ARTICLES



which  he introduced in  his earlier book: that  the Greve biography is not only interesting in itself, but  essential  to under­ standing Grove's   writing:

Only   when  we  "stand back" from   the  total oeuvre,   reading   it    thematically   or    bio­ graphically, does  it  seem  to  become a whole.  Grove   was   a  strange  man, and   when   we read   the   autobiography  we  should   remem­ ber   that    in   a   sense   all   his   writings  are autobiographical, a    working   out    of    an image, and  a  rationale,  of  himself.

As the  life and  works  come  together the theme  is  more  specifically  defined,   until Spettigue  senses  "that  in  his  Canadian writings  Grove is projecting the characters and  memories  of  his European past  into his new  settings." This  argument is  con­ vincing  when one notes that  the austerity, solitude,   and   "poetry  of   greyness"   des­ cribed   in   the   article  on   Sweden   have their  later  echoes  in  Over  Prairie  Trails  and  The Turn of the  Year. That Greve lived  much  of  his  early  life  in  proximity  to the  nightclubs  and  prostitution of  the St. Pauli  district  of  Hamburg suggests an origin   for  the  more   exotic   moments  in his novels, especially  in The Yoke of Life.  And as Spettigue observes, it will increase our  understanding of  Grove's Canadian works  to  recognize   that   The  Master   of the  Mill  was written by the  translator of seven  of  H.  G.  Wells'   works,  Consider her  Ways   by  a  translator of  Swift.  On other occasions  Spettigue's thesis prompts him   to  read   the  novels  almost   as  alle­ gories  of  Greve's  early  years:   it  may  be that  Clara Vogel  resembles  the mysterious Elsa  and  that  Niels'  six and  a  half  years in prison  parallel  the six and  a half  years from  Greve's   imprisonment   to  his  flight to  North   America,  but   this   reading   of Settlers   of  the   Marsh    leaves   me   more bewildered	than     enlightened.    Greve's German novels, of which  two are extant,


I02
 show that  Grove  was much  the same novelist at the end of his career  as at the beginning.  But  Spettigue  provides   only plot  summaries  of these novels  with  very little direct quotation: most students of Grove will have to await the translations which  Professor Spettigue is preparing before the connections can be explored further.
For   the   moment,  contemplating  the
connections between  the mystery,  the life, and   Grove's   Canadian  writings  demon­ strates   that   FPC:  The  European  Years  might  have  been any  one  of three  books. It  might   have  been  a  detective story  to satisfy  the  surprising  popular interest   in Grove   (as  it  is one  Manitoba daily  that  seldom    reviews    books   ran    a   lengthy column  quoting most of William  French's review  of   FPC).  It might   have  been  a biography  of  Felix  Paul   Greve,  but  the present  information is too fragmented to present  any  comprehensive  picture   of  a life-and  Spettigue 1s fastidious m acknowledging  the  many   aspects  of Greve's   life   which   are   still   unknown. Finally  FPC  might  have  been  a book on the roots of a prominent and  important segment  of Canadian literature. Much  is accomplished  here;   much   remains   to  be said.  Certainly  there   has   been   nothing written  about  Grove  to  date   (except Stobie's book, which draws on Spettigue's findings)   which  could  not  be  enhanced and  improved   by  incorporating  the  dis­ covery   of  Felix   Paul   Greve.   What   we have   is  an  important  piece  of   literary  criticism  that  preserves  some  of  the  puz­ zle of  the  detective   story,  but  lacks  the pace and  the "romance of  reason"  in  the earlier  book, a book  that  portrays  a man of  rakish   confidence   and   great   unease whose  personality   is  yet  too  elusive  and distant to involve  us.

REVIEW ARTICLES



Thanks to Spettigue's enthusiastic per­ sistence   the  man   Robert  Kroetsch  calls "the   hobo   tragedian" is  a  still   greater challenge to future students. We  are  still
 looking, to borrow  another phrase  from Kroetsch's F.P. Grove: The  Finding, for "the   wirklichkeit  of  the   word   itself/the name  under   the  name".





THE STILL CENTRE
 


JDatricia orl


John  Sutherland: Essays,  Controversies and  Poems.  Edited by Miriam Waddington.
McClelland & Stewart. $2.95  paper.


MIRIAM  WADDINGTON says she has discharged a double  debt  to John Sutherland: one  personal,   to  Sutherland the man; and  one public,  a witness to Canadian literary   activity   in  the  forties. It is fitting  that  a double  debt  should  be paid   to  a  double   man.   For  one  of  the most  interesting aspects  of this  collection of  Sutherland's  articles,   poems   and sketches is the revelation of a shy and fascinating  personality, a  naive  sophisti­ cate,  a  tormented double  man.  Through art,  nationalism, and  religion  Sutherland sought   to  resolve  his  duality.  He  sought the  still  centre,  the  core  beneath change  and  motion.
The    story   of   Sutherland's   life,   as Waddington  notes,  is  also  the   story  of Canada's literary  magazines  of the forties and  fifties. It  was a  time  when  many  of the    now-legendary   writers    were    just beginning  to write  (Irving Layton, Louis Dudek)  or   just  getting  into   full   stride (Frank Scott, A.M. Klein). The  story has been  documented by Michael Gnarowski and   Louis   Dudek    in   The  Making of Modern Poetry  in Canada, and  partially described  by Wynne  Francis in Canadian Literature. This  new collection of  Suther­ land's  work   adds   several   pieces   to  the historical   jigsaw  puzzle.
 Sutherland (b. I9I9) edited a small literary   magazine called   First  Statement from     I943    to    I945;   and    Northern Review,  an   amalgamation  of   Preview and  First Statement, from   I945  until  his premature death in  I 956.  He  held   that literary    magazines    played    an   essential part in the development of a national literature: "We  shall  re-discover the fact that  literature in  Canada, for  rather obvious reasons, depends on the existence of  magazines; that   in  no  other way  can close. connection  be  drawn  between   the writers   and    the   people,    or   a   literary growth  be stimulated that  is rooted  in Canadian soil." And  in  no other  way, he insisted,  could  writers  find  adequate  out­ lets  for  their   writing.
In the forties, while Sutherland was stapling   together   the  half-dozen  mimeo­ graphed pages  which  made   up  the  early issues of  his  magazine ("We  are   going on a diet  of cheap  mimeographed paper, a kind  of literary  bread  and  water''), the number of  literary  magazines in  Canada could  be  counted on  one  hand.  Suther­ land's  Dec.  I949-Jan. I950  Appendix to the Brief of the First  Statement Press and Northern Review  to  the  Royal  Commis­ sion  on  the  Arts  stated: "We  have  only three  publications of this kind in Canada

REVIEW ARTICLES



at present,  two magazines of verse and Northern    Review."    Twenty-five   years later, there  are  about two  hundred  liter­ ary   journals   and   "little   magazines"  in Canada. What  Sutherland  would   think about  their quality is a matter for specula­ tion.
Sutherland's belief  in  the  importance of criticism  is a  tonic  for  critics  who  feel (as  most  do,  at  times)   unloved. He  had no hope for a healthy and  growing litera­ ture  save  in  the  context of an  intelligent and   informed  opinion,  and   no  expecta­ tion  of  the  latter  without  literary criti­  Cism.
He  held  that   literary criticism,  litera­ ture    and    society   were   interdependent. Prevailing  critical   values   and   fashions  would    inevitably   reflect   current  social realities,  and  times of social  chaos  would generate the  cry  for  social  consciousness in  art.   It falls  to  the  critic   to  make   a literature   reflective,    self-conscious,    and connected  with  its own  society.
In  his criticism, Sutherland  was  not  a man   to   pull   punches    when   he   felt   a piece  of  writing should   be  condemned. He   wrote:  "In  a   small    country   like Canada, where  literature is only in its beginnings, it seems  inevitable that  writ­ ers and  critics  should  form  a  ladies' and gentlemen's  club   of  literary   endeavour, whose  unwritten rule  is that  no member  should   tell   a   home-truth   to   another." Sutherland believed  in  home  truths, and found   nothing  more  deadly   than   unde­  served  kindness  in  literary opinion.
An example of Sutherland's pursuit of home  truths is  found   in  his  publishing, in I 947,   a  damning  review   of  Robert Finch's  Governor-General's   award-win­ ning    Poems.   The   awards    committee, Sutherland  suggested,  might   have   been moved   by  sanctimoniousness,  hypocrisy,
 snobbery,  credulity and/or  ignorance. Strong  words.  This   review  prompted P. K.  Page,  Frank   Scott   and   A.  M.  Klein to resign from  the editorial board  of Northern   Review.   Earlier,  First   State­ ment  had   been  threatened  with  a  libel suit   by   Patrick    Anderson    because    of Sutherland's  critique of   Anderson's poems.
Some two dozen of Sutherland's  poems are  included  in this collection. Wadding­ ton  notes  that,   by  the  end   of  his  life, Sutherland  saw  his  essential  self  in  his poetry.  She  considers  the  poems  to be of enduring value,  yet  pessimistically  antici­  pates   that   reviewers   will   ignore   them, since Canadian  magazines, now as in  the forties,  remain  dependent upon  political and  economic  factors   and  "seldom  con­ cern  themselves  in  anything but  a  super­  ficial way  with  Canadian  writers."
I'll  join Waddington in  a vote of  con­ fidence   in   the   poems.   Many  of   them make use of the sonnet  form  while ignor­  ing   rhyme.    A    fictional-autobiographic sketch   reveals   Sutherland's  passion   for Shakespeare's sonnets,  many  of which  he memorized   while   confined    to   a   sana­  torium.   Shakespeare's  sonnets,    Suther­ land   notes,   revolve   on   a   series  of  set themes and  are closely bound  together  in a pattern of ideas. Similarly, many of Sutherland's poems  revolve  about  the theme  of  "The Double   Man", the  title of one  sonnet  which  includes the follow­ ing lines:

Departing he would  learn  the  parlour  trick of living  like an  average  individual;
... and  parody
The  boring  hackneyed  art  of being  human.

Sonnets   like   "The  Double    Man"  and "With Expert  Tailoring" reveal  a  Prous­ tian   sensibility   to   the   environment.  In  "Choice" and   "Guide  to  the  Canadian

REVffiW ARTICLES



Poets"  one  finds  the  same  wit  and  in­ sight    which    characterize    Sutherland's critical  work.   "The   Shadow",  one   of three    prose   poems   which    follow    the poetry,  is  concerned  with   the  recurring doppelganger theme. "The Bee", another prose  poem,  describes  the  bee's  flight  as cutting  the  air  to  tatters,   "with a  fire's freedom   of    design. . . .  Summer had stuffed  his ears with  the cotton  batten of silence.... Summer  had   offered   him   a draught   of    ripeness    and    silence." In Sutherland's poetry,  pre-Raphaelite  lush­ ness cohabits  with  intellectual clarity and metaphysical conceits.
Sutherland died young from  cancer complicated by tuberculosis. A  weakness towards  TB  had  enforced   three  years  of semi-convalescence  in  his  teens,  a  con­ finement  during which  his solitary genius had  begun  to learn,  as he put  it, "the art of    hopping   crooked    straight."    This phrase   is  from   his   fictional   Allegorical  Sketch,  a  portrait  of  one  George  Jones. Obviously    autobiographical,   this    psy­ chological   portrait  is  one   of   the   most interesting   pieces   in   the   collection. It reveals  Sutherland's sensitivity,  his  driv­  ing  ambition, his  isolating   egotism.
Sutherland's  critical prose  indicates a
tough and incisive mind, whether he is making  a case against  obscurity  in  litera­ ture   ("Originality of expression  is  made  the  excuse  for  leaving   the  content  ob­ scure":   A   Note    on    Metaphor,   Feb.
1944), or  questioning A. J. M.  Smith's
 definitions of  "native" and  "cosmopoli­ tan" schools  in  Canadian  poetry. At  the same  time  Sutherland is  a  stylist  of  the first order  whose criticism  is informed by wit,    irony    and    metaphor.   Layton  is linked  with  Wordsworth through  "their joint  capacity for emotion recollected in tranquillity. The  difference is that, while Wordsworth recollected daffodils, abbeys, etc.,   this   poet   recollects    selling   news­ papers,  buying  bad  fish,  walking  innum­ erable    times   under   the   obscene   cross squatting  on   Montreal   Mountain,  and similar    emotions.   Moreover,  his   tran­ quillity  takes the form  of anger." Another example  of   Sutherland's  prose   style   is taken  from  the  preface to  Other  Cana­ dians:   "Mr.  Eliot   has   not   taken   more glances   at   the   classical   world   than  he could    manage   over    the    shoulder   of Dante;  but  Mr.  Smith   has  slipped   past the  colossal statue by night  and  come  to anchor in  the  bay  of  Virgil."
We are  indebted to  Miriam  Wadding­ ton   for   a   lively   Introduction   and   an interesting   selection   from    Sutherland's work.  It  is  regrettable, however,  that  she did  not  choose  to include more  criticism  from  the  last  few  years  of  Sutherland's life to illustrate his change from  a Marx­ ist   to   a  Christian  stance.  Perhaps  the double  man  found, at  the  end,   the  still centre  which  he sought. If so, the resolu­ tion  is denied   the  reader of  this  collec­ tion.













105







GROVE IN CANADA


MARGARET R.  STOBIE,  Frederick   Philip  Grove.
Twayne.

MARGARET STOBIE,  with  a   study   of Grove's    Canadian   years,   provides    the most  recent   insight   into   the  many  lives of   F.P.G.   By  working    with   correspon­ dence  to and  from  Grove,  and by track­ ing  down  people  who  remembered  him, Dr.   Stobie   has   provided   a   lucid   and objective  chronicle  of  Grove's   life  from I g I 3 until his death in  I g48.
There  is  little   information   available
concerning the years  between  I gog, when Felix Paul Greve arrived in  North America,   and   I g I 3,  when   Philip   Grove appears in Haskett, Manitoba, but Dr. Stobie  feels that  the  Haskett letters  prove that  Grove  was "beyond question a  pro­ fessional  and   professionally   trained  ele­ mentary school  teacher  before  he arrived in Manitoba".
Dr. Stobie is at  her  best when  she deals with  Grove's   relationships with  his  con­ temporaries. She has tracked  down people in small  towns like  Winkler, Virden, and  Gladstone  where  Grove  taught, and  we hear first-hand reports that he was a good teacher,   a  strong   disciplinarian,  and   a teller  of  tall   tales  about   himself   which the  students  enjoyed  even  if  they  knew them  to  be  fancy.  Grove  did  not  get  on well with authority and  inevitably he had conflicts   with    his   school   boards.    His longest tenure  as a teacher was two years.
 Particularly  useful   is  the   description she  provides   of  Grove's Canadian  Club tours of  I g28-2g. Exalted by the response of  his Ontario audiences in  I g28,  Grove was  moved   to  observe  in  a  letter   to  his wife that "they  all know that  the rest of Canadian  writers    are   pigmies    by   my side".
Dr.  Stobie's  chapters on  Grove's  rela­ tionships   with   his   publishers-he   had business dealings  with  most  of the  Cana­ dian  houses-and her  research  into  the fortunes of  Grove   at  Graphic  Press  are also illuminating. Grove  always  gave  the impression   that   the   failure   of   Graphic Press  was  one  more  slap  from  a  malig­  nant  fate  which  had  left  him  financially depressed.   Dr.  Stobie   notes  that   in  fact Grove was the only person to make money from   Graphic,   taking   seven   thousand dollars  away  from  Ottawa when   he  re­ signed his position.
Dr. Stobie has managed to penetrate Grove's  romantic smokescreen, and  she reveals   how   often    his   actual  state   of affairs was different from  the picture he wished  to  present.   It  is not  easy  to  deal with  this  undercover Grove,  since  he  is often  not a pleasant man.  Confrontations with   Lome  Pierce   of  Ryerson   Press  or with  Simcoe's  mayor,  Percy  Carter, leave one  with  the distinct impression that  few people could love F.P.G. Dr. Stobie main­ tains objectivity and  records biographical events with  tact  and  understanding.
Douglas  Spettigue has recently  brought out   his  biography  of  Grove's   European years,  and  Desmond Pacey  will  soon release  his edition of  Grove's  correspon­ dence.  Sooner  or  later, someone  will find the   missing  pieces   explaining  where Grove  went  in  I gog, and  what  happened to   him   between   then   and    Igi3.  The materials  for   a  definitive  biography  on

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Grove  are gradually coming  together, and Dr.  Stobie's  book  offers  valuable insights into  Grove's years in Canada.
No one can complain about a lack of interest  or poor scholarship in terms of solving   the    biographical   mystery   sur­ rounding Grove.  What is lacking  is sound critical evaluation of his work. It is in her critical  commentary  that    Dr.   Stobie's  book  is weak.  While  she  does  a  fine  job of   maintaining   objectivity  in   the   bio­ graphical  chapters,  it   quickly   becomes evident   from   her  critical  comments that  she has  little  use for Grove as a writer  of prose. With  the exception of A Search  for America, and  Consider   Her  Ways, none of  the  books  receives  balanced criticism.  The  remaining Grove  canon  is described in  negatives: Our  Daily  Bread  is written "on   the   level  of  a  not  very  good  soap opera  of  noncredible characters uttering nonhuman dialogue". It  Needs  to be Said is dismissed  as  "a  potboiler". Master   of the  Mill  is "a  voluminous notebook, out of   which    a   novel   could   be   formed". Search  for Myself is called   "thin and unrewarding" with  the  last  section  read­ ing  like "not much  more  than   an  anno­ tated  ledger". Over  Prairie Trails degene­  rates  as it  progresses:   Turn of  the  Year  is "pretentious". Dr.  Stobie  does  not  do justice  to  herself  by  substantiating these negative responses,  or  to Grove  in  evalu­  ating his strengths.
In  her  attempt to isolate  the  sources of
Grove's ideas,  it is suggested  that  "Rous­ seau's  two  Discourses  and  his  Emile   to­ gether   with  Thoreau's  Walden, provide  most  of the  ideas  to  be  found  in  Grove's  novels."  Such   a  claim  is  too  simplistic.  That  Rousseau   and   Thoreau  played   a role  in  the  formation  of  Grove's artistic sensibility  will not  be denied, but  to limit the  source  of  most  of  his  ideas  to Rous-

108
 seau  and  Thoreau  is  to  deny  clear  evi­ dence  in the correspondence with Richard Crouse  and   Watson   Kirconnell that Grove    was   continuously  reading   and absorbing   ideas   from   a   broad   span   of European  and  North American authors. In  later years, for instance, he read  D. H. Lawrence,  Oswald   Spengler,  and   T.  S. Eliot.  One  wishes that  critics  would  start examining how Canadian authors modify, adapt, and  change ideas  to shape their  own  philosophical perceptions. For example,   Rousseau   or   Thoreau  do   not explain  Grove's  frequent vision  of nature as  hostile,  nor do  they  explain the  cyclic patterns of cultural and  family  life. Both of these themes are  of rna jor significance.
An attempt is made  to deal  with  some of the themes in Grove's work, but  at best the result is to leave them  ill-defined. Her comments on  the  hermaphroditic  figures are intriguing but  left  undeveloped. That Grove's  perception of life in North Amer­ ica  follows  a  consistent   and  logical  pat­  tern  of  its own  was  demonstrated at  the Grove   Symposium  at   the   University of Ottawa in  May  of   1973.  If Dr.  Stobie had    not   confused   issues  by   expecting Grove's   views  to  parallel  Rousseau's or Thoreau's  and   had  looked   for   Grove's  own views instead,  a number of apparent inconsistencies   would   have   disappeared. For  example  she  says  that   in  Master   of the  Mill, "the  cycling  movement is, of course,  at  variance with  the  evolutionary theory  which  had  been  the  carefully con­ structed framework of the  whole  novel".  Had   she  looked  at  the  way  Grove used ideas  of evolution  and  historical pattern the  conflict  would  resolve  itself.  Perhaps such critical  brevity is the necessary  result of  working   within   the   Twayne  format which   seems  to  demand  extensive   plot summaries rather  than   extended  critical

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



evaluations. Ultimately, the excellence  of the biographical chapters dealing with Grove  and   his  contemporaries  over-ride the critical failings  and  make  this a book worth  owning.
STANLEY E. MCMULLIN


RATIONALITY IN MIND

SYLVIA FRASER,  Pandora. McClelland and
Stewart, $7·95·

Pandora  is deceptive. Although at  first glance  it  appears to  be  little  more  than a brilliantly-written description of a war­ time  Ontario childhood, in reality it  is as packed  with  abstractions as the  mythical  Pandora's Box. In  fact,  the  book  is really an allegory,  making it closer akin  to Lord of   the   Flies   than    to   Anne    of    Green Gables.
Unlike  William  Golding, however,  Ms. Fraser  does not explore  the concept of original  sin. The  evils of Pandora's world, while  equally  as brutalizing as those on Ralph's island,   are   present   simply  as  a fact of life, and coexist with that other abstraction which  the original  Pandora discovered   at   the   bottom   of  the   Box: Hope.
Virtually all of the young Pandora's immediate surroundings demonstrate a divided   reality.  She  has  twin  sisters  who do not  like her  but  will not "tell  on"  her, and  who are addicted to the exasperating practice of reading aloud,  "sentences turnabouts".  Her   mother  is  pious   and self-effacing; her father, a butcher, is a sadistic  brute  with  a steel hook for  a left hand. Grannie Cragg  is an  illiterate but likoo.ble witch  with  a  camomile lawn; Other Grandma, who makes lace and  lies
 in  wait  for  death amid   decaying  splen­ dour,  once danced with Neville Chamber­ lain.   Even   Pandora,  with   her   princess­ golden  curls, has a "double-crown, where the Devil  touched  her and  her  hair  won't  lie  flat."   And  Charlie,  her  adored  cat, came  from  a  garbage-can and   has  fleas.
In  the outside  world  it is the same. The nice  breadman lets  her  drive   his  horses and  then  molests her.  The unholy  trinity of  classroom   bad  boys  bears   the  names Jessie Christie, Howard Ghostie, and Godfrey  Trumps. Rosie,  Pandora's giddy glamour-girl aunt  who rides a red  bicycle and   works  in  the  munitions factory,  at­ tempts  suicide. And Ruth-Ann Baltimore, her  anxious-to-be-diplomatic  best  friend,  succeeds  in being "mean" to every girl in the  class, causing  Pandora  to  ponder the question,  "How come  the  NICE  people miss seeing so much?"
Mercilessly, Ms. Fraser  introduces the horrors  expected  of war  into  life in  Pan­ dora's small ken. When  the school  princi­ pal   (Col.  Burns)   makes  a  scapegoat of an   innocent  Jewish   child,   when   Jessie Christie tortures a  cat,  when  we squirm  at the mindless violence of Pandora's own father, we are  brought  to  the  realization that   life  can   be  evil   anywhere. "Open your eyes, nice people of the  world," says Ms.  Fraser  in  effect,  "you  have  nothing to lose but your scales."
Poor  Pandora, who  is imaginative and sensitive  as  well  as  brave,   independent, pretty  and  clever,  has  a  hard time  com­ prehending  it   all.   In   her   dreams   and  when,   as  a   punishment,   she  is  shoved into   the  basement winter  storage vault,  her  mind  teams  with  the grisly stories she has  heard  her  elders  repeat. The divided  reality  becomes one, and  the  wrong  one:

Pandora  smells mothballs. Blue  gas  rises in a cloud.... Her  green  eyes bleed,  then  pop,


109

BOOKS IN REVIEW



first  the  right,   then   the  left.  Her  lungs  sear, expand, explode. She  claws  the  gas chamber with  the  bloody  stumps of her  paws....

In the end, however, Pandora triumphs. She finds a way to defeat  Jessie Christie; now she is strong, too. As Ms. Fraser  puts it:

Look!    Up  in  the  sky!
'It's a bird!' says Ruth-Anne.
'It's a plane!' says Roger.
'No!' says  Miss  Macintosh. 'It's  Pandora!' ... And   God   put    on   his   sky-blue  spectacles.
'Bless  my  soul!   Roll  out   the  golden streets! Serve    up    the    tutti-frutti   icecream!  Here comes  PANDORA!!'

As  the  quotations illustrate, Pandora's prose  style is original and  impressiv. pages  sparkle   with  metaphor and  divert us with  carefully-researched I 94o's detail, from   Pandora's Sisman   scampers   to  the uncomfortable hickory  bench  at the bank. Dozens  of  quiet   jokes  reward  the  atten­ tive reader. (The  heroine's full name,  for example, is Pandora Gothic.)
Apart   from   an   occasional  lapse  into
sociological   jargon, only   the  final  pages of  the   novel  mar   Ms.  Fraser's  tour   de force:     Other  Grandma  leaves   a  small legacy,  and   Pandora's parents decide  to save  it  to  help   finance   their   daughter's future education. Pandora is to have "Another Sort of Life".
Presumably this device  is our  insurance that   Good,   or  at   least   Hope,   will  con­ tinue  to fight the forces of Evil. Although, allegorically speaking, it is sound  enough,  on  the  realistic  level  it  is  less successful. In  addition to  our  difficulty  in  believing in  the  generosity  of  either  Other Grand­ ma   or   Pandora's   father,  there    is  the matter of  Education  as  the  Answer.  Per­ haps Rationality is what  Ms. Fraser  really had in mind.

PAT BARCLAY IIO
 LANDSCAPE WITH ARSONIST

DAVID     HELWIG,   The    Best  Name   of  Silence.
Oberon, $2.95.

AN ARSONIST moves across the flaming landscape of  the  Helwig   country. He  is the   universal    spirit   of   everliving    Fire which   enkindles   all   things   to  their  in­ evitable  consummation, so ushering them into   the   next   phase   of  their   metamor­ phosis.  The  figure  variously  assumes  the mask   of   a   Bluebeard,  a   Heathcliff,  a Bolshevik, an  old  gander or often  that  of an  unidentified lover. The  role is seen  to involve great suffering  but reaches  beyond the  physical  into  dream  ecstasies  known only   to   lovers'   ghosts.   The   arsonist   is conscious   of   his   absurd   role -in   the words   of   the   old   gander  in   "Toward Winter", "I  am  an  arsonist  going  in  the disguise  of   foolish   alien  feathers." The idea  of  alienation suggests that  the arson­  ist  might  also  be  Helwig's   projection of the role of the artist.
The  element  of fire so central to Hel­
wig's   themes   is  but   one  feature of  his predilection for  the  metaphysics  of He a­ clitus. The  structural principle of  polanty and  paradox, the  inconclusiveness  inher­ ent  in  the  concept  of time  as flux -and all  the   rest  of  the  mystic  apparatus - reflect  the  Heraclitean  contempt for  the rational.  A   passage   from    "Hooker  at Christmas," is  representative:

Our soundest knowledge
is to know  that we know  him  not
as indeed he is, neither can  know  him and  our  safest  eloquence is silence.

This    seems   to   be   a   quotation  from Hooker   but,  were  it  not  for  the  italics, might   have   passed  for  one  of  Helwig's own  Heraclitean  aphorisms, the  best ex-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ample  of which is his title The Best Name of Silence. Enigmatic to the point of obscurity,   the   title   is  only  slightly  illu­ mined  by considering the line from which it  derives.  The  line  is to be found  in the title  poem,  "The Best Name  of  Silence",  and  it  reads: "The best  name  of silence is death."
There  are   many   introspective   poems
reminiscent of Helwig's  earlier  volumes, Figures In  a Landscape and  The Sign  of the  Gunman. In   these,   the  mind   looks inward at its own autonomy to find  with­ in   itself   a   microcosm    of   the   world's autonomy. They   affirm  the  authority of the  mind   to  know  what   it  knows  even although the sum of such  knowledge is to know  that  it  knows  nothing. Some  lines from  "Drunken  Poem" say it  better  than any paraphrase:

0 sentimental absurd man,  who can  you think  you are,  writing
this something, nothing, drunken words
that  solve nothing and  say nothing, only  that  I know nothing and  that  the  earth
is the  body of a god  and  you
and  I are  the  body of a god.

It is from such  roots that  a growing tendency  toward  a poetry of the grotesque can  be seen to be developing. In  particu­ lar,   such   poems   as   "Apparitions:  for George  and  Lenna", "This House", "Old  Man,    Young   Lady",   "The  evergreen  trees",   "Parmenides  Among   the   Lost", "Audubon", "Heathcliff as a Spaceman", "Heraldry'', "Groundhog Day", "Toward Winter", and  most  importantly, "The Best Name of Silence", are examples of Helwig's recent work which exploit the potentialities of the supra-natural with astonishing effect. The  subjects  provide externalized images  constituting a kind of correlative with  which  the poet is enabled to distance  himself-the result  being an
 increased  objectivity and  maturity.
These  grotesque poems  are  particularly mythic  in  origin,  although they  are  dis­ tortions   of  the  standard  versions.  They  are   often   a   conglomerate  of   disparate mythologies  such  as that  which  makes  of the   Persephone  myth,   the   story  of   a maiden  held  in  the arms  of  Bear  Brother throughout  the  winter  hibernation, only to  be  left  lonely  and  despairing in  the spring.    Another   is    "Toward   Winter" where   a  North   American Indian  myth about   a  Spider   King   is  strangely  con­ fused  with  the Parsifal  legend  of a Fisher King   and   a   wandering  gander  knight. The  technique  serves  to  point   back  to  a common mythology beyond the carefully manipulated plots and  characters of  chil­ dren's literature to  primordial  memories  of grotesque archetypal figures which  can be   seen  to   represent   universal   psycho­ logical  forces.
The most painfully shocking of Helwig's distortions is  the  title   poem,  "The Best Name  of Silence", a  dramatic version  of the Bluebeard legend. Unlike Perrault's version,  Bluebeard, not  the wife, seems to be the one rescued. In  tone, there is a resemblance   to   Bartok's   opera,   Blue­ beard's  Castle,  but   the  dialogue  of  the opera   is  lacking   between   Helwig's  hus­ band  and   wife.   The  wife   relates her  despair  in the closing scene :

On  the floor  the  head
of my husband lies on one ear eyes open  watching me

I lie beside it
and  the  lips reach out
to kiss me, fail and  slacken
and  the eyes close.

Something must  be said  of  the  attrac­ tiveness  of  the  book's  format.  The  spirit of Helwig's  themes  is arrestingly captured in   the   purity   of   light  and   line   in   the

III

BOOKS IN REVffiW



magic  realism  of Kim Ondaatje's panelled doors  opening outward to immaculate labyrinths of empty  space.  That it is duplicated on both covers is an effective device  by which  to convey  the  inconclu­ siveness of a  book  of  poems which  closes thus:
Somewhere  a story
is beginning  to happen.

There is one  mysteriously closed  door  in the  painting. That one  is for each  reader to   investigate  for   himself.    Like   Blue­ beard's  wife,  he  should   be  prepared  to find some skeletons.
DORIS EVERARD


A SINGULAR VOICE

TOM WAYMAN,  Waiting  for Wayman. McClel- land  &  Stewart, $4·95·
REVIEWERS   IN  the   eastern  press   have been warm in their welcome to Tom Wayman's   first   solo   book    of   poetry, partly,    I   conjecture,  because   they   are happy  to discover a strong voice from Vancouver that  appears to have  no con­ nection   with   the   "West   Coast"   move­ ment.  Wayman is  one  of  those  increas­  ingly  rare  birds,  singular, in  fact isolate from   the  literary scene  in  his  surround­ ings. He  writes  in  part  of  his experiences  in  the  U.S.,  but   the  poets  he  mentions are  not   the   usual  Creeleys   and   Olsons, but     the    stiffcollars,    Donald    Justice, Charles    Wright,   Robert   Bly.    (It  is curious that  here  I have stated that  Way­ man's is a singular voice, yet I think  that  this  notice  will be peppered with  names; there   is  no   paradox  there,   simply   the natural curiosity  that  seeks any  old  mea­ sure   by   which   to   account  for   such   a freak.)
Often the  persona  that  Wayman dons


112
 is  the  face  of  the  intelligent,  wry,  aca­ demic  outsider,   who  speaks  from  inside the    post-Kafka   buildings   of    western America.  A  kind  of  hip  Earle  Birney,  if you like, the land-loving socialist-there aren't many  of  those  around these  days, either.
The poetry  depends greatly  on  projec­ tion   of   a   personality,  as  does   that   of Purdy    or   Newlove    or   Atwood.   That means  a mode of control  (of you, reader, too)   by  the  artist,   the  artist   who  may often  speak  of madness  with  poetry  that  can   never   go  mad.,   Like   Purdy's,  the material is  narrative  anecdotal, and   the physical   properties  of   verse,  even   their  advantages  are  not  of  paramount  con­ cern.   It   is  not   rhetoric  we   find,   but drama.
The  personality we  learn   is  that  of  a man   bemused   by  the   commercial   ene­ mies  of  human  spirit   and   by  his  own efforts  to  thwart  them  or  escape  them.  We are  told slightly  bizarre  stories of the character  "Wayman"  occupying  a   col­ lege  building,   nervously   cashing  a  wel­ fare  cheque, getting a  job  cleaning  the walls  of  a  bank.  The  author's  favourite design  is  to  present  third-person  stories of  this  Wayman as  the  dumped-on  but right  Everyman of  our  time.
So his audience, unfortunately small because  that  is the  fact  for  poetry  audi­ ences,    will   be    assured    of    something unusual  and  likely  necessary, an  idiosyn­ cratic chronicle   of  the  passing   political  scene,    LBJ,    Cuba,    student   activism, supermarket boycott,  etc. All  these  have  been   areas   important   to   the    "under­ ground" press and  its readership, and  yet till  now   that   people   has  not   produced any decent poetry. Wayman is proof  that  you  can  combine  economics  and  love  in one poem,  that  the  political  poem  can  be

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



beautifully made,  and  not only in Latin America. He can  make  abstract words on a  homesteading young  couple  sound  like sure  music:

He  is  the  nation. She  is  the  nation.
When they  enter   the  field  of struggle against what defines   them
the   nation is  born

A two-page  poem  called  "Childermas Hymn:  December 28, 1970", is a  touch­ ing formal  hymn  to celebrate the birth  of a   baby  among   welfare   recipients   on  a cold  winter  day, something very  difficult to   bring   off   against    the   obvious   con­ straints, but  Wayman  does  it.  He   does just  as  well  with  the  subject  of  money and  its  misplacement, or  with  the  waste and  exploitation of  human labor.
He  usually does it with  images  that  are nutty; what  are  we  to  think   of  a  book that  tells us of our  immediate social  con­ cerns  with  such  oblique   language?

Then I  am  not  in,  but  with
the  family.  I want   to  walk  around and  look in  each  face.  Who  are  we?
The parts of an  automobile. Of  an  egg.

He  resembles  Atwood  in  his  determina­ tion  to astound  with  his  ability  to invent amazing imagery  of a  world  transmuted by his singularity of  vision.
I  feel  a  reservation about   that. There
are   lots  of  good   concrete  images,   but their   use -they  are  recognizable  pieces of  houses  showing  in  a  landslide. Often, part   way  down  a  poem  a  survivor  lets himself   drift   in   the   deluge,   no   longer strong   enough   to  reach   for   a  piece  of timber.  Sometimes  one  is led  to see  that either Wayman  or  the  poem  is trying  to go straight, but  usually one  of them  gives way  and  the  fantasies  start  coming   true, the   street   bums  form   a   union,   or   the shoes start  a fist fight  in  the  closet.
 Some  of the  poems  remain obscure  in the  unproductive way,  due  to  sequences of disparate wrenched-apart images; the effect is similar  to that  of the recent  non­ sequential  comic  strips  from   the  under­ ground. Often  it  is too hard to grasp  the poem,  it  becomes  a lizard  in  your  hand, you  read  it  again   and   again,  looking  at its red eyes and  saying: I  hear  what  you say  but  what's  your  point,  what  are  you trying  to get me  to  decide? I  am  "trying to  cheer   myself   and  perhaps another/ with  the anecdotes of history," the  lizard replies.
The  poems are generally worded  as collages of imagery, each  line or picture a piece  stuck   on   to   the   assemblage;  the result   is  often   static,  as  in   the   poem, "The King  of Colour'', a collage  of Mexican-militant-young California. Many of the  more  static  poems,  with  the  strips of  surprise,   are  better   heard   than   seen, read   aloud   by  Wayman,  aided   by  his comic  sense of timing.
The  lines are  usually  determined to get their ends as sentences, short sentences. Wayman's rhythms are  not  dance;  they get there  straight, like a train. Gwen MacEwen's verse is like that  too, with  the determination to end  the lines, but  Way­ man's   units   are   shorter,  more   nervous  bursts.  Not  a  train. A  machine  gun.
Yes,  many   of   the   poems   are   static,
revolutionaries'  postcards.   In    the   best ones there  is some amusing or frightful action,  or some decision  made, to occupy the  armouries, maybe,  some  striving  to­ ward   narrative,  Wayman's  forte.   This  happens   more  often   in  the  second   half of  the  book, when  the  locale  shifts  from the U.S. of Wayman's studies  and  teach­  ing  apprenticeship, to  the  Vancouver of his    unemployment,    where    he    learns


113

BOOKS IN REVIEW



"what it is to be a refugee  in your own country."
Wayman begins the Vancouver poems with  this fine  insight  at  the  end  of "For the American Deserters":

The people  of Vancouver want the  deserters to  be  birds,  sea-gulls.
To  fly high  as  an  eagle  and disappear. They  want  them
to  be  walking along  the  street
and  turn into  something delicious,
some   marvellous confection  Now   Available
in  Canada.

The  people of  Vancouver do  not   want anyone
to  be  lonely,  or  hurt, hungry or  frightened. But   there would   be  nothing they   could   do if anyone were.  Sometimes they  wonder why the  deserters are   becoming an  Army   again.

He continues sometimes  with nice actuali­
ties of sense about this  place:

I walk  in  the  City   through the  rain. Here are  row  on  row  of  wooden  houses each   with steps  going   up  to  the  porches. I have   known   dry   houses,   full  of  death. But   these   houses  are   soaked   with rain, alive  and  dripping like  old  cedars
deep   in  the  woods. Here is  one  to  enter.

In   poems   such   as  "Gastown",  he   pro­ vides concrete images  of  the  downfalling streets,    and    somebody's   guilt,    shared. That  is strong,   and   a  promise   that   yes, poems  can  look  the  "developers" in  the eye.  Wayman can  write  funny  political  poems    (Lionel   Kearns  being   the   only other   practitioner   I   know) .  That  is  a power   that    can    be   shifted    neatly    to attack  priority   targets; that   is,  to  make the  enemies,  Dow  Chemical, the  banks, etc.,  not  ridiculous but  comic,   to  let  us look   down   on   them    with    reserves   of pathos.
Always with  the  humanity that  entails. In   Wayman's  way  one  observes  a  con­ tention going on,  between  the causes that  indicate    enemies,     and     the     personal  glimpses   that    jostle   corporation-serving
 individuals into  the  light  of human sympathy.
GEORGE BOWERING



PAINTER INTO POET

JACK    SHADBOLT,   Mind's  I.   McClelland  &
Stewart, $12.95·

AT THE TORONTO  ART GALLERY in the late twenties  and  early   thirties there  was  an air of excitement which  drew  students of all   ages.   We   were   enthused  by   The Group of Seven,  by Lawren Harris, and later  by the West Coast  painter whom  he so helped,  Emily  Carr. As a "beginning" poet I remember well going to a lecture given  to the  Theosophical Society by Lawren  Harris,  during   the   course   of which  he  read  from  his  newly  published book of poems, Contrasts. It was a  fasci­ nating   experience, comparing  the  words with  the  paintings. I  remember  thinking that  Harris's free  verse  was very  close to Imagism, but  that   he  did  not  have  the feeling  for  the  rhythm and  music  which was a part  of that  movement. His  poems were,  it  seemed  to  me,  a  stage  removed from   poetry:    linguistic  guides   to   the painter's  vision.
Something  of   the    same    impression must have hit me when, after coming to Vancouver in the mid-Thirties I first met Jack  Shadbolt at  a writer's group. His painting had  exhilarated me  with  its daring, dash  and   originality. The  influ­ ences  were  strong: forest,  rock  and  sea, the   insignia   of   British   Columbia;  but undoubtedly there  was  also  the  painterly  influence  of Lawren  Harris's abstract im­ pressionism  and  of  Emily  Carr's vibrant  anthropomorphic  vision. To  these  paint­ ers   the   British   Columbian   landscape,

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



whether on  Pacific  shores  or  in  northern mountain country, became  a living organ­ ism  that   somehow  grew  roots  right   into the   painting-illustrating    Harris's  key theme-"the North  as a source  of bene­ ficent   informing  cosmic   powers   behind the  bleakness  and  barrenness and  auster­ ity  of   much   of   the   land."  The    same response was to be evoked in poetry  when, in   the   Forties,  Earle   Birney   and   Mal­ colm Lowry began  publishing. But at that  time   little   did   anyone   realize   that   the painter  Shadbolt was  also  attempting to translate the thing seen into the thing communicated through language. Today, when  I remember him  reading his poems aloud,   I  think   that   none  of  us  listening (Ethel  Wilson, Bill McConnell, myself) understood what  he  was  trying  for;  per­ haps   because   his   rhythms  were   rough and  his language too often  was searching for   "poetic"  effects   and   philosophical abstractions.
Now  that   all  of  Shadbolt's  poetry   is
available-some 6o  poems  interspersed between    35   black-and-white   drawings pulsing    with    life,   vibrant   with    trees, roots,  branches, rocks,  ocean  waves  and the  small  creatures that  inhabit  them­ it  is  possible  to  appreciate  what   evoca­ tions Shadbolt is capable of, in language.
First,  though, a  sour  note.  It seems  a pity  that  the  artist  saw fit  to include the early  efforts  at  confessional   love  poetry, for these have little relationship to the paintings or to the natural world  that  has inspired them.  Occasionally there  is a successful    poem    like    the    one    which begins:

I'm   told  a  man  new  blind shaving with   no  mirror cuts   himself
His  mirror fetched
habit controls
and he  continues  easily
 Since  you  are  gone habit and  I go on
but  sometimes when  by  thought you  are  not   here
who  mirrored me who  blind  as  I?

Here the metaphysical dialectic works, exemplifies   Shadbolt's  credo    that    "my form  always develops  from  a  dialogue of opposites." But unfortunately few of the poems from this early period achieve this effect:  rather there  is a sense of strain, as in  this stanza:

Whatever may  be  scanned
in  the  morning edition of  me
when  I am  proof-read for  the  truth by  the  unsparing day

with  its disastrous  last  line: "She  left  her print  on me."  This  is bad  verse.
Happily Shadbolt  gets  into   his  stride as a poet  when  he  is concerned not  with his human  relationships but  with  what  his outer  and  his inner  eye see in  the  objec­ tive world:
Down   I go  by
red  shed  on  bleak   rocks   to
Hidden  creviced beach
Heart  on  foam-flower  stalks   feeding dead  in  leaf
In  his  book,  Mind's   Eye,  we  reach   this stage    with    the    lovely    imagist    poem "Beech  Groves"  (version  II) dated I 934, where
Tonight again is starless Fall  has  bared   an  ice-fang gleamed with  light
The proud beeches  wear moon's agony
of  shining rain

until

Forest  veins
the  sweet  sap-hunger know  no  longer
but   remember axe  blades' gash and  sap-gush stain
Now  these  bronze  glades will  know the  solace  of  snow


115

BOOKS IN REVIEW



These    short    two   and    three-beat   lines really    work.    The    only   puzzle    is   the rationale behind  the  poet's  use of capital letters.  Why?
From   the  I 930s  also  come  poems  like "December Woods", in which  a favourite symbol,  the  scarlet   bird,  appears:

Near me on a limb perched tensile with the   held-breath  skill of  fragile things
this   scarlet jet-eyed
flick-winged mystery

The    drawings  are   charged  with    these birds,  these mysteries; as are  poems like "Strange Tale", "November Afternoon", "Quarry" and  the  beautiful reminiscence of  childhood, "Metchosin",  which   calls to mind Roberts' "Tantramar Re-visited". But   this  is  the  West  Coast,  Vancouver Island, and  the  time  is  I 938:

These were   the  gold-grained  fields whose  memory fretted
the  long  years  of  trying to  forget
this  land  of sweet  yield
with the  plow's  ridge  wheeling
clear to  the  sea
followed by gulls'  screaming the  white lips  of  foam
silently sighing ...

But  oh  that  aching roll downfield  and   over
to  the  slow  grey  crumpling of  the  bay threshing those  silvered logs
the  oak  groves  gyrating
out  to  meet   the  rocks
in  the  late   breeze-these
could be  a  start

Perhaps  Shadbolt's  happiest,  most lyrical  poems  are  those  which  evoke flowers,  such  as  "Spring Rain",  "Anni­ versary", "Looking Across".  In  the  last­ named   poem  the  artist-poet  looks  across the sea to the island  where he  was born:

Always   facing me the  brooding Island

II6
 with   its  sombre   conic evergreens its  dark  openings inward

. . . calling me  across   the  heads of  pink   opiate poppies
just  above   the  windowsill
and   blue  spurts of  larkspur thrusting  up

Beyond   them   he   sees  "along  the   very level/of  the riffled racing water" the "beckoning mysterious rim".  And  when he moves north he meets the power and mystery  of  "Agamemnon Channel" and "Princess   Louise  Inlet". Exciting poems!
Many  of  the  illustrations in  this  book are of birds: ravens, larks, gulls, "blue heron's frightful cry".  The  poems  too are peopled  with  birds,  but  it  is  the  homed owl  who   emerges   as  the  key  feathered figure   both   in   the   drawings  and    the poems.  The longish  dramatic poem  "To a  Young   Homed  Owl"    ( 197I)  should be forever anthologized. The  language  is clinical, that of a naturalist: "Rope-like muscles contract down/spine and/sword­ unsheathed wing  feathers",  but  it  is also charged with  metaphor, "fan bristlingly/
... in  panzer  grip   to/steel talon  clench­
ing."  Owl  becomes  "King of dreams  ... lord of near  field/mouse terror  ..." More poems such  as this could  transform the unforgettable painter  into   an   unforget­ table  poet.
DOROTHY  LIVESAY


TORTURED TWENTIETH CENTURY MAN

TONY KILGALLIN, Lowry.  Press  Porcepic. $8.gs.

SoME AUTHORS would  seem to attract commentators on  their  oeuvre  with  both the vigour  and  success of the Lorelei seek­ ing sailors down  the Rhine. And very often

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the result is as parlous. First  to mind, I suppose,   is  D.  H.   Lawrence  who   con­ tinues  to draw  critical  attention  through­ out   the   English-speaking   world,    from writers  with  widely  differing  viewpoints.  The   Lawrencian  wake  is  much   littered  with  critical  corpses.
One  could  hardly  claim  that  Malcolm
Lowry  has  yet  been  honoured  with  the vast   critical   industry  bequeathed   Law­ rence,  but given  the  relative sparseness of his output and  the  arcane  factors  within  Lowry's  literary  art,  it  can  surely  be said that   his  own  critical  industry flourishes. Not least, I feel sure, because  he sojourn­ ed awhile  upon  our Canadian shores and has  thus  enjoyed  the  attentions  of  that rapacious   critical    factory     which    has evolved  in  this  country to devour, digest, and    regurgitate    in    acceptable   mono­ graphic forms, each  and  every piece of creative   work   that   can   be  possibly  en­ capsulated under   the  heading of  "Can.­ Lit."
By far  the  prettiest package  from  this quarter   to   date,    is   Tony    Kilgallin's Lowry, published  (one is tempted to say "created")   by   the    Press   Porcepic  of Erin,  Ontario. In  padded maroon  bind­ ing, splendidly  illustrated with  designs of a  Cabbalistic  and   Rosicrucian   flavour, printed,   (we   are   informed)   on   echt Canadian  paper,  with   large   bold   type­ face   plus  the   rgth   Century  conceit   of tissue-paper before the photo  frontispiece, Lowry is  indeed  a  fine  example of  book production. But what  of the content? Indubitably gift-wrapped-what of the gift?  A short  book-it  runs  to  two hundred-odd pages,  with  that  large  type and  much  use of blank  space -there are two  natural  sections.   The  first   half   is really a potted  biography and  Mr. Kilgal­ lin  makes  ample   and   intelligent  use  of
 quotation from  those who knew Lowry, however   fleetingly,    including  such   un­ likely witnesses as Sir  Michael  Redgrave, the actor,  the  Vancouver author Norman Newton  and  the C.B.C. producer, George  Robertson. The  testimony of  these  com­ mentators  is  not  so  much   profound  as unusual and Tony  Kilgallin is to be con­ gratulated  on  including them.
Another positive  factor in this  first portion  of  Lowry  is the  plain  and  com­ monsensical  style employed  by the author who links his material deftly  and  enables someone  wholly  unfamiliar with  Lowry's  life,  as  opposed   to  his  work,  to  speedily grasp  its  significant contours.
In  no way  does  Mr.  Kilgallin attempt a  full-length opus,  in  the  fashion   of  the recent  Lowry  biography by Douglas  Day, but   this  work   under  review   could   cer­ tainly  lead  one  to  the  larger, biographic­ ally  more  important,  book.
The   second   part   of  Lowry,  however,
consists of exegetical  treatments of first, Ultramarine, and   then   Under  the  Vol­ cano, and  here  I find  the  precis-like  aura which   hangs   over   the   whole   work   a severe handicap. It will frustrate the  true  Lowry  scholar  and  do  little  for  the  com­ mon  reader  wishing for  some elucidation of   Lowry's   preoccupations   with    such esoteric matters as the Caballa, astrology,  and  kindred medieval  concerns. For  my circumscribed  taste  and   undoubted  pre­ judice  the author's ratiocinations in  these areas  is to sterile  purpose  as well as  bor­ ing.  My attention was only  riveted  when Mr.  Kilgallin explores  the  effect  of  clas­ sical cinema  on the  sensibilities  of  Lowry,  and  hence  as an  influence on  his  work.
The    impact  of   the   motion    picture upon  so much  of  this  century's fiction  is still  in  need  of  exhaustive analysis,   but given  Lowry's  fanatical  absorption  with

BOOKS IN REVIEW



films-we    are    told    here    that    Earle Birney  aptly  described him  as a  "cinem­ addict" -a study    of   Lowry    in    this respect  makes  fascinating  reading.
Given  the quantitative limitations of Lowry  it is not  surprising that  the  author starts  up  more  hares  than   space  permits him  to capture. But  the  influence  of Eisenstein   alone  on  Under the  Volcano, and  the tracing of this and  comparable influences,   is  worth   whole   volumes   on the  obscurantist complexities of  cabbalis­ tic  puzzle-solving. Unfortunately it is the latter that  takes  up  too much  of Mr.  Kil­  gallin's critical  attention.
The Selected  Bibliography seems to a layman  to  be  a  decent   piece   of   mini­ research. But  instead   of  the  two  appen­ dices,    (one   a   bibliography  of    Charles Stansfeld-Jones'   Magical    Library,   the other  a  list  of  one  hundred  writers   of interest    to   Malcolm   Lowry)     I   would have  preferred a  more  substantial treat­ ment   of  the  cinematic  influences   upon this   tortured,  so  very  twentieth-century man.
DAVID  WATMOUGH

OPACITIES

DAPHNE    MARLATT,   Vancouver  Poems. Coach
House Press,  1972.  $3.00.

SUSAN   MUSGRAVE,  Entrance of the  Celebrant.
Macmillan, 1972.   $6.gs.

I'VE NEVER SUBSCRIBED to the theory  that taste  in  poetry  is like  taste  in  cheese,  but there is an element of purely  personal response  to a poet's  language, rhythm, imagery.  Both    these   poets   start    what they're   doing  a  long  way  from   the  sur­ face  of  my  skin,  so that  reading  them  is a  process  of  reaching.
Recently in a pickup  game  of softball without an  umpire, I stood  beside a run-

II8
 ner   who'd   been   caught  between    bases and  who waited  on second  base for some­ body  else  to  decide   whether I'd  tagged him  or  not.  I  had   to  call  the  play  I'd  made   myself.  That  moment  came   back to  my mind  while  I  was  trying  to begin a review of Daphne  Marlatt's Vancouver Poems.  I  wish  there  was  an  umpire.
The  book is a series of middle length poems  that  clearly  intend   to define  Van­ couver  and  a  life  in  it,  the  presence  of the  past,  the  details   of  the  present,   the shape   of  the  emotional  life  of  some  of its  people.  I  can  see,  I  think,  what   the book intends,  and  I have a suspicion  that  there  are  poets  and  critics  (those  of  the West   Coast   or   those   associated    with Coach  House  who  publish  the  book)  for whom  the  poem  is effective.  But  not,  by and  large,  for  me.
The  rhythm  both  of lines and  of larger units is fragmentary, and  I think  the poet intends   a  cumulative  effect,   a  building up  of  impressions  from  moment to  mo­ ment.   Sometimes   I  find   the  individual sections  convincing:

'Old Bird', he
turned up  thin   this  time,  bones
held  together by yellow &  translucent  parch­ ment: rags & bags  &  papers. His  torn  collar, scarf  at  so craggy  &  knotted a  neck  declared itself  to be holding the  trachea, thin  rind  of muscle. When  he  opened  glass to admit me a skeleton  stood, in  the  broom  cupboard where  the  toilet  was.  I  sat.  Clotted broom   bristles  hugged   the   wall.   All   around,  coughs    & creepings of  old  men   trickled  in  under the door.

In  general,  the  most  convincing  sections of  the   poem   are   those   that    are   most clearly   focussed  on  a  single   personality or  a  single  moment.
At other  times I find  the  poem  centri­
fugal   to  the  point  of  incoherence.

Tripe.  or   cellular  white  tongue.  Bacon makes   eating  comfortable  (whose  shoe,  on

BOOKS IN REVIEW



the   right foot   can   she   bend    (an   ar) t e scot   in    stained  apron   knows,    k1pper    m string,  whatever, other  habits  pose)
The   poem   seems  to  take   place   in   the mind  of an  anonymous characterless per­ ceiver,  and  this, in combination  with the mannered style, often  makes  the  attempt to  enlarge   or  deepen   the  significance  of observed  details  merely  portentous.
I  can't build  up  any  continuing  emo­
tional   involvement  or  sense  of  form,  so that   I'm   left  with   a  collection   of   dis­ parate  fragments where   the   interest   in only  local,  one  line,  one  phrase,  a  verse paragraph.  As  I   started   out   to  say,  I have   the  feeling  that  maybe   this  is  my weakness,   that   I  don't   have   the  power of  concentration   necessary,   but   in   the absence  of an  umpire  I  have  to make  the call  myself.  And  feel  uneasy.
If it is possible to imagine a  substance both   opaque  and   translucent,  it  would make  a good  metaphor for  the  poetry  of Susan  Musgrave. Her  poems  are a dark landscape  populated  by  pronouns, and the  only  bearings  offered   to  the  reader are emotional. The  images are traditional, dark,  sea and sky, thorns,  forests, cold, mysterious  figures,  and  the  references outward  to  the  world   of  fact   are   few.
But   perhaps  it   is  true   that   after   a
while,  all scenery looks  the  same,  so that the  enlargement of  the  world   may  best take   place   by  travelling   through   such private  landscapes  as  these.   For   while the references are vague, the poems are emotionally precise. We don't quite  know where  we are,  but  we know  how  it is be­ ing  there

I remember the  beginning
like  the  first  day  of  the  world.
I floated like a scar  along  some  river listening for  an  answer
whenever I called.  This dream,
on  the  edge  of  things, troubled  me -
the  dream I was  lost  and  halfway there.
 There are  times  when   the  poetry  strikes me as devoted   to a  kind  of  secrecy,  and in  that,  its thrust  inward, its  precision,  it reminds me from time to time of both Margaret Atwood  and  Gwendolyn  Mac­ Ewen.  MacEwen  especially,   in  the  per­ sistent  symbolism,  the  creation  of drama­ tic landscapes of secret loving; but  Susan  Musgrave is more  pointed, less rhetorical or  magniloquent.  In   that   more  like  At­ wood,  careful,  tensed.
I   mention    these   other    poets,   not   to suggest  indebtedness, or  to  reduce  Susan Musgrave's  achievement,  but   to  suggest that  although she speaks  a language that is in  ways foreign  to  me,  she is within  a certain   tradition, and   I  get  my  bearings in  her   poetry   partly  with   reference  to that  tradition.
The  poems are intended, I think,  as celebrations of darkness, and  while  the darkness  she  celebrates is  not  mine,  she often   succeeds   in   drawing  me   into   it, making   it   happen   m   my  mind,   if  not quite  on  my skin.
DAVID  HELWIG


A LURKING DEVIL

ALDEN NOWLAN,  Various  Persons Named  Kevin
O'Brien.  Clarke, Irwin, $6.75.

THE MAIN TROUBLE with  Alden  Nowlan's new  book  is that  it  is  not  about   various persons  named  Kevin  O'Brien but  about one person who has a past  but no present. In returning  to Lockhartville,  the wretched   Nova  Scotian village  in  which he  was  born  and   raised,  the  25-year-old O'Brien is not the present-day newspaper­ man  who,  when  younger, escaped  to  the big city, but  is instead   the  miserably  un­  happy   boy  he  once  in  fact  was.  Boy or man' his  alienation   from  the   village  is
ll9

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



almost  complete, and   he  is  only  able  to gain  some  rapport with  it  when  he  goes to a dance and  knocks  out  a local  bully, thus  earning the  respect  of his two  tough cousins and  the right  to take  home  one of the village's  miniskirts.
Today's visit  and   the  triggered  mem­
ories   of   yesterday    are   conveyed    in   a variety  of tenses, a technique which  is no doubt  intended to point  up  the "various" persons  but  only achieves  a stilted  effect. We  do  not  really  care  about Kevin O'Brien, past  or  present, but  only  about his context, for  atmosphere is the  princi­ pal  strength of  this  fiction.  "Fiction" is the  word,  for  Nowlan  calls  the  book  not a   novel  or  collection  of   stories   but   "a fictional   memoir".  An   ambiguity  exists whether "memoir"  refers to the fragments of autobiography  O'Brien  carries  around in   a  briefcase,  or  in  his  mind  -or to Nowlan's own recollections.
What are the memories? Boyhood war­
games  while  his elder  brother goes to die a  soldier's  death overseas.  An  embittered father  who   works  in   the   woods for promises  and  the  rare  dollar, and  has  no sympathy for  a  "lazy  bugger" of  a  son. A  bewigged  old  grandmother -perhaps the  family's   only  life-affirming member,
-who fancies   Billy  Sunday and   randy folksongs,  and  a  sister  who  uses sex as a key to unlock  her  prison-environment. In place   of  motherlove  a  series  of  vicious stories about "the  bitch  your   father married", retailed   by  an  aunt. In  place of  ecstacy  some  petting with  a  girl  who later becomes  a  nun; an  aborted trip  to Boston  with  an  older  woman  who deserts him, taking  $100 of his money.
In   all,  there's   not  much   joy  in  these
memories, but  a curious kind  of intensity. It's this intensity which redeems the book despite   what   seems   to   me   a   laboured


120
 technique and the  presence  of an uninter­ esting  protagonist. My  background is not greatly  different from O'Brien's (or Now­ lan's)    and   my   own   father, in   his  less benign  moments,  can  commit a sentence  like  Judd O'Brien's, "He  had  hair  down over  his  ears,  and   he  was  wearin' them Christless  sandals." But  it is not  personal interest  alone  that   makes  me  find  much power in the book. There's sawdust, sweat and  rum  here,  and   the  quality of  night­ mare  that  one finds  in  the  early  Nowlan poems. A young O'Brien pursues his sister across the fields :

Then  she sees something running -or flying-toward  her.
A bear or an ape with wings. A bat half as big as a man.
An old man with arms outstretched under his cloak so that  it seems that  he possesses wings.
An old man in a black mask. An old man with  a staff. An old man  almost  flying.

Kevin  playing  a prank-or the Devil? A  Devil  lurks  somewhere  in   the  land­ scape,  that  much  is sure.  The  springs  of childhood  have   been   poisoned   and   for all  of Kevin's   years  ahead   there  will  be but  a bitter introspection, a going back to those cold woods, to the imprinted knowl­ edge that there is no possibility of change,  and  no will to make  it happen.

FRASER SUTHERLAND


BISSETT'S BEST
BILL  BISSETT,  Parnes  for Yoshi. Blew ointment
Press, $2.00.

IN HER SELECTION of Bill Bissett's  poetry for    the    volume    Nobody    Owns    Th Earth   (Anansi), Margaret Atwood  pro­ vided   Bissett   with   what    many   of   his readers  had  long  felt  he needed:  a  good editor.   While   Bissett   has   seldom   pub-

BOOKS IN  REVffiW



lished   anything  totally   without  interest, or  without flashes  of  his  own  very  indi­ vidual   brilliance,  far   too  many   of   the books  and  pamphlets which  pour  out  of the  Blew Ointment Press  have  been  ran­  dom  and  haphazard  collections of what­ ever   he   had   to   hand,  with   the   good poems  inextricably  mixed  up  among  the bad.
Indeed, it  might   be  argued   that   this
randomness, this  deliberate abdication of selectivity and  control, are so central to Bissett's   aesthetic  and   life-style   that   it would  seem  like a distortion of his vision for  him  to  present  a  tightly  edited,  care­ fully  chosen  selection.  Certainly  Bissett is best   when    read    at   some   length,  but Atwood's  selection  goes some way towards proving   that   the   better   poems   can   be successfully  separated  from the  mass.
Nor  is  it  absolutely   clear   that   Bissett at his best does depend on uncontrolled haphazardness.   On    the    contrary,   his chants depend on a very strict  manipula­ tion   of  rhythmical  effects,  and   anyone  who  has  heard   him  perform  can  testify to  the  extraordinary  control   he  has  over his voice. Moreover, in some of his longer satirical  poems-I'm  thinking especially of  "Th'  Emergency Ward"  and   "Killer Whale" -the pretence of the  poem's be­ ing  an  unadulterated  recital   of  facts  is surely  just a pretence. These  poems  prac­ tice a  kind  of reticence, an  ironic  under­ statement, a refusal  to comment which  is in  the  end  far  more  effective   than   any actual comment could  have  been   ( espe­ cially the rather frenzied  political rhetoric that    Bissett   often   indulges   in).   These poems, with  their  very studied  naivety  in accepting all the strange things  that  hap­  pen  to  him,  show  Bissett  as a  master  of narrative and  ironic  tone.
These   considerations  are   very  impor-
 tant  when  approaching Pomes  for Yoshi, which   I  think  is  Bissett's  best  collection to  date   (excluding  Atwood's  selection.) In  the first place,  it is a book with  a uni­ fied   theme:  in   effect,   it   is  one   long sequence  of  poems  in  which   every  piece bears   directly   on   the   central   concerns. The  major concern  is with  the poet's  love for  a girl  called  Yoshi,  who  has left  him (he hopes temporarily)  because she wants  to be alone  for a while. Juxtaposed to the poet's expressions  of  longing,  as a kind  of contrapuntal minor concern, are accounts of  Bissett's  attempts  to  move  out  of  the house   he's   living   in.   The    increasingly hectic   disorder   of   that    house   may   be taken  as  an  image  of the  disorder of the poet's  emotions,   and   his  final  escape   to a  saner,  more  human environment hints at  a  resolution   of  the   major  theme   as well.
In  the love poems,  Bissett  tackles  head on  the  oldest  poetic  theme  in  the  world, and he succeeds in giving it a remarkable freshness  by the  very  naivety,  directness, and openness with which he treats it. In simple,  colloquial   language he  speaks  of how he misses her, and  of how he accepts her   need   to  be  away   from   him   for   a while, even if she's with  some other man. Love is not possession, Bissett says, and seldom  has  this  ideal  been  realised  more fully  and  more  convincingly. The  poems take  the emotional warmth and  idealistic romanticism of Bissett's  earlier work  and manage to focus them on a particular situation, a  particular  relationship.
The   sub-theme,  the  housemoving, reaches  its climax  in  a long  poem  at  the end  of  the  book  which  fully  deserves  to stand  alongside  "Th'  Emergency Ward" and  "Killer Whale". As with  these poems, the  ostensible  form   is  that   of  a  purely factual narrative of  an  increasingly fan-

121

BOOKS IN REVIEW



tastic sequence  of events.  (Bissett  appears to be the  kind  of  person  that  the  wildest things   just   naturally  happen  to.)    But again,   the  tone  is  perfectly   judged,   and the  absence  of comment becomes  a  com­ ment  in  itself.  It also  produces   a  hilari­ ous  kind  of straight-faced  humour.
None  of  this,  I  think,  is accidental. It is a product of Bissett's  life-style and aesthetic (the  two are  almost  the  same) , an  openness  which  seems  naive  but  isn't, an innocence which  has gone through experience and  out  the other side, a purity of  outlook  which  brings  freshness  to  the most  outrageously cliched   situations and phrases.  Nothing but  this  consistency  of tone  could  account for  the  way in  which Bissett  is able  to  use such  terrible  cliches of  counter-culture  jargon   as  "Far out", "I can  dig it",  "Heavy", and  "Got  to get my shit  together" with  such complete honesty  that   the  reader accepts   them  as being  meaningful  (accurate  descriptions of a certain state  of mind) , amusing (in slyly  self-mocking, understated  asides), and   even  deeply   moving   (see  especially the  final  page  of  the  book) .
Such sophisticated manipulations of language  may  be  accidental, or  uncon­ scious,  but  I  rather doubt   it.  Pomes   for Yoshi  strikes   me   as   a   very   carefully  crafted  book, as well as a deeply  personal one.  It is surely  the  mark  of a good  poet that  very strong  personal emotions  inten­ sify rather than  decrease  his sensitivity  to language. Such  is certainly the  case with this  book.
STEPHEN   SCOBIE







!22
 PICTURESQUE
AND MORALISTIC
KEN    MITCHELL,     Wandering Rafferty.   Mac­
millan. $7·95·
BLANCH   HOWARD,  The   Manipulator.  McClel-
land  &  Stewart, $7·95·

THE MAXIM  GORKI  epigraph that  Ken Mitchell places at the beginning of Wandering Rafferty states  there are two types of romanticism: active  and  passive. Passive romanticism is a retreat from  life whereas  active  romanticism "attempts  to strengthen man's  will to live, to rouse him to rebellion against reality with all its tyrannies." Clearly,  Mitchell intends  his central  character,  Rafferty,  to   embody this principle of active romanticism. Rafferty's chief weapon  against  reality is illusion.
One   of  the   things   that   distinguishes the  romantic writer  from  the  classicist is his attitude to illusion.  Swift  provides  us with   the   model   of   the   classicist's   ap­ proach.   Gulliver,   encased   in  the  liberal illusions  of  his  day,  smashes  up  against reality   and   goes  into   shock.  Unable  to face  reality  he retreats into  an  unnatural world   where   horses   are   placed   above men;  his illusions have  led  to his destruc­ tion as a human being. Cervantes, on  the other   hand, provides  us  with   the  para­ digm   for   the   romantic.  Don   Quixote's illusions  are  a  constant source  of  trouble  to  him  but  when  the  illusions  are  gone and   the  Don  gets  rid  of  his  books  he dies;  life  unsupported  by  illusion  is im­ possible.   In   Wandering  Rafferty,  Ken Mitchell  has  created a  romantic  picaro.  He  lives  upon  dreams  and  when  what  is apparently the last dream  is destroyed  he symbolically  turns  his glass over.  But Rafferty is too vital  to die  for  long,  and so  his  glass  is soon  full  once  more.  AI-

BOOKS IN  REVffiW



though we do not  know  what  dream will now carry him on we have no doubt something   will    arise.    The   important thing  is  not  knowing  when  to  quit.
There are  basically  two  types  of  wan­ derers; those who are  on  the outside and want    to   get   in    (Moll   Flanders  and Dickens'  orphans,  for    example),  and those  who  are  in  but   want   to  get  out (the   modem alienated  figure). Rafferty  is  basically  of  the  second   type.  In   love with   losers  and  the  past,  he  carries   his symbolic  load  of  Indian bones  or  an  old cannon. And  when  he does  make  it  as a good  burgher  he finds he has  merely  run up  against  the  Pacific and  the end  of one dream. Significantly moving  east,  retreat­ ing from  the  Eldorado of  the  Pacific,  he sets  out  in  quest  of  the  past,  the  "shim­ mering girl"  he lost  and  still  loves.
Selling subscriptions to Mother Goose magazine, Rafferty  wanders over  western Canada  from   Vancouver   to   Thunder Bay.  The   sense  of  place,   despite   a few minor  inaccuracies, is excellent. The pubs and   hotels,  filled  with  men  who  are  the last faint  images of the exhausted dreams of  the  west, could  not  exist  in  the  older parts  of the country.
As  the  Gorki  epigraph suggests,  Raf­ ferty  is a creation of the  liberal  imagina­ tion.  He  is the  individual  who  pits  him­ self   against   the   group   and   its   deadly norms    (although  he   does   accept    the whoring   norms    of    frontier    culture). Rafferty is, of course,  a cliche,  the  roar­ ing  boy, if not  Irish  at  least  of  an  Irish father. However,  he is a successful  cliche. On  his personality  the  novel  must  stand or  fall,  and  it  stands   very  well  because Mitchell  has   made   his  main   character both  believable  and  engaging enough   to sweep   the   reader   up   in   the   seemingly erratic journey  of Rafferty's life.
 The   plot   of  Blanche Howard's The Manipulator develops  out  of  the  arrival of a devilish young architect named  Bill Wentworth in a small  western  city. The narrator,  John    Phillips,    is  an   ex-bank clerk, who, with the encouragement of Wentworth, becomes  an  architect  by serving an  apprenticeship with  the town's largest  architectural  firm.
The   plot,  not  totally   without  interest, is weakened  by improbability. But  in  this soap-opera that's  the  least  of  the  prob­ lems.  The  style  is as  close  to  rhythmless as is possible in English  and  the  dialogue is stilted. The  characters are drawn with­  out  insight  into  their  motivations. Moral  situations are   hackneyed  and   the   out­  comes   are   obvious.   In   fact,   the   worst aspect   of   this   book   is  its  moral   vision which  alternates between  indecision  and v1c10usness.
The   supposed   moral   is  presented  in
the  last  chapter by John  Phillips:

But  if I am,  as  I  think, a  good   man, and Wentworth is  an  evil  man, am  I not  justi­ fied  in  destroying  him?  This  is  dangerous thinking,  I   know;  the   philosophy  of   the  Inquisition,  of   the   witch   hunters  of   the world. For  who  can  say  where evil  is abso­  lute?  Wentworth   may   not   be   all   evil;  I cannot  judge.

However,  this stated  moral  is completely belied  by the  plot.  First,  John Phillips  is not  a  good  man.   He's   a  moral  marsh­ mallow  with  an  eye  always  for  number one,  although Howard isn't  aware of  it. He  does  nothing while  Wentworth mur­ ders  his own  in-laws,  causes  the  death of woman   by  bungling   an   abortion,  and psychologically    destroys   his   wife,   thus driving   her  to  suicide.  Finally,   however,  John   picks  up  a  lamp intending to  kill Wentworth,  but   only   after   finding   out Wentworth is  homosexual  (unforgiveable sin apparently). John thinks  he's "stamp-


123

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ing   out   the  evil,  slimy   thing." But   he isn't;  he's  having   a  heart   attack.  Now that's one  way  to  get   your   hero   off  a murder rap!
But  if  John   Phillips   can't  judge,  that doesn't stop Blanche  Howard and  her judgments   are   shocking.  Two    women have  affairs  in  the  novel.  The next  door neighbour,  bored   by  her   husband  and kids   (Howard  seems  afraid  to  go  into this)   has an  affair  with  a director of the local amateur theatre group. (Who else l) Of course she gets pregnant, so after  a bit of formulistic liberal  comment about abortion by Peg Phillips,  John's wife, the neighbour is settled  by letting her die because  of  Wentworth's attempt  to  per­ form   an   abortion.  The   director   leaves town.   The  other   woman    who   has  an affair   is  Wentworth's wife.  She's  set  up for  her  infidelity  with  John  by  her hus­ band, and  of  course  commits  suicide  in the  next  chapter. John   becomes   a  suc­ cessful    architect.    Wentworth,   who    is responsible  for  the  deaths of four  people is  allowed   to  set  up   a  branch office  in another city.  The  only  hope  that  he  will ever  be  brought  to  trial   resides  in  good old   wishy-washy   John's  pursuit  of   the case;  some hope! Moral: the only  people Howard seems  to  hate  more  than   homo­ sexuals  are  women.
DON JEWISON

SIMPLE COMPLEXITIES
FLORENCE MCNEIL,  The Rim  of the  Park. Sono
Nis. Walhachin. Fiddlehead.
DEBORAH EIBEL,  Kayak  Sickness.  Sono  Nis.
WHILE FLORENCE  MCNEIL  is  in  no  nar­ row sense a regionalist, often  in The  Rim  of   the   Park    (a   second    collection   of
poems)   her  personal   response  to  experi-


124
 ence  is  shaped   by  her  west  coast  back­ ground. In  "Homecoming," for example,  the summer  scenes of childhood are warm  memories of

the  sea where  we put out  clam  boats
and  soared  on our  backs feeling  the sky
was overgrown

The prairie makes an effective foil to the coastal vision. Returning from "the didactic  prairie   winter",  as  in  "After­ thought,"

the crystal  summer shapes extend themselves
into  a sufficiency
and  just looking  is a
moral  enough reason  for  being.

Not   surprisingly   it  is  the   bitter   prame winter  which brings on the full desolation of the personal  loss in "Storm Warning":

I see out  there  only slanted snow like blank  lines on writing paper
and  hear  the empty thunderous  noise of no applause    for my  remembering.

On   the  other   hand, in  the  same  poem, and in "Spring", the sense of the living presence of the dead  father is recoverable in  the  fondly  remembered setting   of  an ocean  bay.
But  even  in  this  sympathetically  con­
ceived  world  of beach,  ocean,  mountain, and  sky there are disturbances other  than the poignancy  of death in the family ("Elegy") or the inevitable unfamiliarity of  the  familiar  after   absence   ("Home­ coming"). Harshly intrusive is the tawdry ersatz of an  expensive  seaside  restaurant. The  peace of a beach  trail  is shattered by the collision of motorcycle and  cat,

and  when  the motorcycle apologized and  left
and  the fur  stopped moving
We walked  to the  Indian banks

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



and  spent the  day digging without luck
for evidence of another civilization.

This  irony  of terse, almost  flat,  under­ statement is also characteristic of  Florence  McNeil's handling of  the  more  intimate subjects   such   as  self-identity   ("Family Records," "g:30 A.M.") and  love.
While the same sensibility is clearly working  in W alhachin, this is a book of a different order, a sustained  study of the double   vision  of  a  first  generation  con­ sciousness.  Here  the  poet  projects  herself into   the   mind   of   a   sensitive   English­  woman   who  has  immigrated  to  the  dry belt  of  the  Thompson  River  area  at  the turn   of  the  century.  While  the  interior monologist   of  the  2 I   poems  is  fictitious (although with  her  own  brand  of Susan­  na  Moodie traits),  the  landscape is not. Once   more  an  inner  voice  expresses  re­ action   to  a  harsh,  unsympathetic  land­  scape.   This   time   it   is  against    "furred canyon," "jagged  spruce," and  "whirling sage,"  which  contrast so strongly   to  the order   and   certainty  of   "warm  rains,"  "carriages  and   lamps," "predictable bloom of  churches." Thus  "steeped in the solutions  of  other   days,"   at  first  she  is scarcely able  to preserve  her sense of self:

I am  light  enough to disappear if you dig  in too many  holes
you may  find  me
buried by a new desperation.

Although survival  is always an open question,  gradually  the   rows  of   young trees  growing   with  the  aid  of  irrigation flumes  cease  to  be  "cemetery crosses against  the sky." But despite the heroic dedication of  its settlers,  Walhachin  was doomed   not  to  survive,   (as  the  preface and opening poem relate). War  reasserted that  other loyalty:
 because  we have  nudged uneasy canyons into  compromise
because the  long  days  of killing sage
have  ended in this temporary outburst of trees
we are  no less British
the  small  grass  bayonets my shoes
there are  dreadnoughts at  anchor in  the
Thompson.

Reading the verse of Deborah Eibel is quite  a  different sort  of experience. The poetry  of her  first collection, Kayak  Sick­ ness,  is  a  curious   combination  of   com­ plexity    and    simplicity    for   which   she favours  traditional  verse  forms.  She  pos­ sesses   an   oblique   imagination,  often expressing   herself    in   either  symbol   or parable  rather    than   direct    statement. Clearly  she is  attracted to exotic  wisdom traditions, as for  example in "St. Jerome the  Translator", a  poem  which  seems  to hint at  the essential  directions of the  poet herself.  The   speaker   has  returned  from the desert  to Bethlehem:

I have  brought
All my books of knowledge
To  this  small  room -
At  times  it has four  comers, At times  it has  a hundred.

Kayak  Sickness  shows a penchant for cryptic  little  portraits in which  the figures play  a  variety  of wisdom-seeking or  wis­ dom-imparting  roles,   ranging   from   a mad  Kabbalist to Colvin  Kell  "the illite­ rate  charwoman". While   the  nature of the  wisdom  sought  or  imparted is some­ times elusive,  the  process  of quest  is per­  haps  the  greater  concern. This  seems  to be  the  case  in   the   rather  striking title poem, which begins:

The hours are  curvatures, the  days  are  rings Concentric with  the  hunter of the  seal; Within the  bounds of circles, he aligns Himself  with  mysteries that facts  conceal.
A storm  is promising on August seas:
The kayak  overturns; the  hunter drifts
Within it,  undertime, locating seals;

125

BOOKS IN REVIEW



The boat  turns upright, and  he claims  these gifts.

The   carefully   contrived  imagery  inven­ tively  sustains   "the  mysteries  that  facts conceal" motif   throughout  the  poem  in what   might   be  termed a  successful   at­  tempt  at home-grown exoticism.
Less  arresting,  however,   is  the  some­ what    arch   verbal    play   arising   of   the personal   associations she  places  on  such figures   as  clowns,   prophets,   hosts,  and guests. These reverberate  throughout several  poems. One  might suspect  playful mystification, as  in  the  cryptic "Kaspar Hauser in  Nuremberg,"  or  fear   preten­ tiousness,  as  in  "A  Clown   in   History." However,  at   her   best,  Deborah  Eibel's gift for formal control combines  effective­ ly  with   her  eye  for  the  quintessence  of situation,   that  of   the   "unmet  lady"   of sonnet  "Homecoming," for  example, or of  the  quietly   suffering child   of  "Work  and  Play."                                DIANE BESSAI


DOWN
FOR THE COUNT
IRVING    LAYTON,    Engagements, ed.    Seymour
Mayne. McClelland & Stewart.  $12.50.

THE  PREMISE behind  this book is simple: Irving Layton   is a  wild-eyed   brawler,   a gargantuan  lover,   a   bardic   soothsayer wielding  a pen that  slashes across the his­ tory  of  mealy-mouthed Canadian  litera­ ture  with  blood  and   burning  truth, and as  for  his  critics,   they  are  nothing but spineless ineffectuals, "juiceless librarians" and   "embittered   eunuchs". Not  only  is he,   as  he   declares   over   and   over,   ad nausem,  a  master  in  the  "cock  and  cunt  affair",  i.e.,  life;   but   he  can   toss  off  a brilliantly lucid  essay  or  an  original  in­ spiring  prophesy  any  damn time  he  con-
 descends  to do  so. In  other words,  he  is so  great   that   he  can  beat  the  reviewers and the idea men at their own game and without missing a stroke  in  life.
What a man!
What  a bore!
I  would  like  to  believe  this  book  rs a joke, and  if it wasn't  a collection  I might think   so,  but   this   stuff   dates   back   to
1943  and   the  man   takes  himself   much too seriously  to be putting us on.  One  of these  letters,  reviews,  prefaces,   or  intro­ ductions read  in  its  proper  place  might be considered  lively or  refreshing,  but  all together   they  are  more  than   a  little  op­ pressive.
There are, no doubt, some armchair brawlers   and   would-be  Casanovas  who will  quiver  all  over  in  back  of  this  raw macho,  as well as some intellectual light­ weights  who  will find  the  "ideas" stimu­  lating   but   many,   I'm   sure,  will  be  too bored  even  to finish  the  book  and  those who  do  will  probably   regret  it.  Layton's enemies  can  enjoy  a good  smirk.
It's  difficult  to remember after  reading Engagements  that    Irving  Layton  is  a good,  often   a  great,   poet.   His  prose  is definitely  not  poetic; in  fact,  it is usually pedestrian sprinkled   with   hyperbole.  To be   fair   there   are   exceptions,  two;   his article   "Cemetaries  Are   Where  I   Am Most  Dionysian" and   the  story  "Piety". The  first  is a lyrical  evocation of a  visit at  a  Tel   Aviv  cemetery   to  the   resting places of Max  Nordau, Zalman Schneur, Isaac Peretz, and Chernikovsky. The second   is  an   autobiographical   reminis­ cence of poverty and  life on the Montreal streets.  The   rest  of  the  book  covers  the field  from   ridiculous -letters  to  maga­ zines,  through  just  plain  boring -book reviews, to  workaday  mediocre-the short  stories.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Ridiculous, sums up the flood of sexual vituperation  directed   at   his  critics   who actually  gain   our   sympathy  by  associ­ ation.  Anyone  who  suggests  that  Layton is not  Rimbaud, Rabelais, and  Villon  all at  the same  time,  everytime, must  be one of the  following: "a bloodless  long-nosed Anglo-Saxon ... a  prissy  schoolmarm ... a   juiceless    librarian ... a   virgin ... an embittered  eunuch ... a   joyless  castrato
... a small-minded castrate" etc.  Layton
is such  a  virile  bard   that   critics  "make the  ritual  nose dive  for  [his]   groin" out of sheer  envy.  "There must  be"  he  con­ cludes  "something irresistably  fascinating about  my balls".  But,  of  course.
The  man  appears to  be completely ig­ norant of  the  times.  The   sexual  revolu­ tion  happened one day  while Irving Lay­ teon   was  off   jousting   with   joyless  cas­ tratos  in some desolate  Portage la  Prairie  of  his  own   imagining.   He   is  like   the fellow  at  the  orgy  who  gets  drunk and brags  into a mirror about  his sexual  con­ quests  while  everybody  else is copulating on  the  beds,  the chesterfield, the  carpets.
Superficially, Layton's fusilades are reminiscent of the cut and slash literary polemics  of Arthur Cravan who  wrote  in Paris  before  the  First   World   War.  The major difference is in their  opponents. Cravan spared   no  one.  He  took  on  the great  figures of his time  from  Apollinaire to Gide, as well as the whole  Parisian  art world. Layton's opponents? Padraic O'Broin, Barry Callaghan, Gerald  Taaffe, Walter   O'Hearn.  Wow!   Often  Cravan was challenged to duels by those he had offended  and  live ammunition was  used. By comparison, Layton fires blanks.
Another difference is discernible in the statements themselves; Cravan  cared little   for   libel  laws   while   Layton  is  a master  at  tip-toeing around  a  statement.
 Look  closely and  you'll  realize  that   with him  all  is inference. So,  he  doesn't  actu­ ally state  that   Gerald Taaffe is  an  "em­ bittered    eunuch"  but    that    any    hack journalist is, and  Taaffe he  insinuates is a hack  journalist. How  manly and  cour­ ageous is it  really  to  infer  that   Northrop Frye is a necrophile?
Layton's attacks on  reviewers  ring  hol­
low after  all. He's  rather like a would-be professional  boxer  who  thinks  he's  dyna­ mite because he slugs sportswriters. When  all   is  said   and   done   Layton  is  not   a brawler   but   a  shadow  boxer   with   bal­ loons for fists.
Despite  Layton's manly  posturing he doesn't  appear to like women  too much. "Modern  women" he  sees  "cast   in  the role of furies  striving to castrate the male
... this  is the  inglorious age  of  the  mass women." And he cries, "We're being fem­ inized."
He  doesn't spare  female poets.  On  the contribution of  women   to  the  poetry  of the  '6o's:  "Several female  poets  during this same  period  added a menstrual note to our national habit  of moaning and whimpering in genteel  verse."
Perhaps the sexual  loud  mouthing can be  laughed  off,  the  Howdy-Doody  per­ formances  shrugged  away   as  "just   old Irving". Perhaps. But  consider  that  Lay­ ton claims  to be a fighter  for the freedom of individuals and  nations,  for  body  and mind.   He  decries   the  totalitarianism  of Nazi  Germany and   modern  Russia   yet supports   wholeheartedly  the    United States  genocide   in  Vietnam. This   man  who  commands the  largest   audience of any  Canadian  poet  uses  his  position   to advance the  view that  the  United States, while simultaneously backing military dictatorships  and  bombing southeast Asia,  "is  the  most  powerful single  force


1';.7

BOOKS IN REVffiW



promoting  peace   and   social   democracy in  the  world   today".  Perhaps the  dead, the prisoners  of war, the starving, the oppressed, the  Indians, and  those  negroes Layton actually calls "sensuous" and "rhythmic" might  disagree.
And what  does he see as the alternative to totalitarianism? Government by big business!  As  he  states,  "The only  hope for   civic   and   world   peace    rests   with multi-national corporations."
To   borrow   a  phrase   of  the   author's
"What a sour  boring  joke!"
In  these  Engagements Layton the  bat­
tler  has gone down  for  the count.
JIM CHRISTY


RIDEAU ET ENTR'OUVERTS

ALAIN  PONTAUT,  Dictionnaire critique  du  the­
litre qw!becois. Lemeac.

CES  NOTES HATIVES,  inegaJes,   ne  con­ stituent en  rien  un  dictionnaire (l'ordre onomastique des  auteurs n'est  meme  pas tou jours respecte) , encoure moins  un dic­ tionnaire   critique    judicieux.   Sans   de­ mander a !'auteur d'etre exhaustif-il est impossible de l'etre  dans les circonstances, sur   un   tel   sujet-on    pouvait  esperer  quelques precisions  ( titres,  dates ...) , un debut  d'inventaire,  un  panorama  equil­ ibre.  Or,   peu  d'indications  bibliographi­ ques,	aucun	tableau 	chronologique, aucun  index    (des   pieces)    n'accompa­ gnent  ces brefs et vagues  comptes  rendus.
M.  Pontaut ne  defriche pas, quoi  qu'il dise;  il utilise  des  parcelles  de  terrain ( et
 des  souches)   pris  ailleurs,   c;a  et  Ia,  au hasard  de ses lectures  ou de ses soirees au theatre.  II  fait   une  analyse   interessante de  La  Charge   de  l'orignal   epormyable, mais  ne mentionne pas Ia premiere  piece de  Gauvreau  ( Bien-etre)  ni  meme   Les Oranges  sont  vertes.  Une  page  sur  Pam­ phile  Le  May,  dont  trois !ignes  concern­ ent  !'oeuvre dramatique   ("litteralement in jouable").   Pourquoi    ressusciter    une "moralite  dialoguee"  de   Laure  Conan (voir    ANGERS,    Felicite)	et    ignorer completement celles,  beaucoup  plus  sig­ nificatives, de Rina  Lasnier et de Gustave  Lamarche ? Pas un  mot  sur  Levac  (sauf a I'article LORANGER),  ni  sur  Andre  Caron, Raymond Cloutier  ( et  le  Grand  Cirque    Ordinaire),    Maurice   Demers,  Robert  Gauthier, Michel  Greco,  Marc-F. Gelinas,  Franc;ois  Hertel, Roger-B.   Hu­ ard,  Yvon  Lelievre,  Marcelle  McGibbon, Louvigny  de  Montigny,  Pierre   Moretti, Jean    O'Neil,    Jean-Paul   Pinsonneault, Alain  Pontaut  lui-meme, Andre   Ricard, Denys  Saint-Denis, Jean   Simard,  Roger Sinclair, Katy  Touchette, etc.,  tous  plus
importants  .a   mon   avis   que   1'Albanais
Luan  Asllani, "intelligent et prolifique auteur d'oeuvres radiophoniques et  tele­ visees  pour   Ia  jeunesse",   ou  !'abbe  Al­ phonse    Villeneuve,     auteur,    en    I 87 I,
d'une satire  anti-sulpicienne  "a !'interet
limite".
II est etonnant qu'un ecrivain de Ia valeur  d'Alain Pontaut, au  surplus direc­ teur  litteraire d'une maison  d'edition qui se  specialise  dans   le   theatre  quebecois, laisse  paraitre  un   livre  aussi   peu   rig­ oureux,   aussi  peu   fmi.
LAURENT  MAILHOT
