$2oOO per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE N°·64
Spring, 1975



ULTRJtMJtRINE-  HJtiL JIND FJtREWELL



Articles
BY RONALD  BINNS, GEOFFREY DURRANT, HALLVARD DAHLIE, DONALD  G. PRIESTMAN, CHRISTINA H. ROBERTS-VAN OORDT, FRANK BIRBALSINGH

Poems
BY P. K. PAGE,  AL PURDY, DOROTHY LIVESAY

Review Articles and Reviews
BY GERMAINE WARKENTIN, GEORGE WOODCOCK, SEYMOUR MAYNE, DONALD  STEPHENS, TOM  MARSHALL, ANTHONY APPENZELL,
FRED  COGSWELL, LINDA  SHOHET, HELENE ROSENTHAL, ALEX  GLOBE, PATRICIA  BARCLAY,  ANDREW POTTINGER

Opinions
BY  J o   FOLEY  AND  SANDOR  J o    KLEIN


A QUARTERLY OF
CRITICISM AND REVIEW









TASTING THE CASTALIAN WATERS






THE  DAY IS  LONG PAST  when  Desmond Pacey's pioneer Creative  Writing   in  Canada   was  virtually  our  only  readily  available  guide  to writing  in Canada,  past and  present. Now there is not only the Literary  History of Canada,  shortly  to  be  reprinted  in  revised and  expanded   form,  but  also a variety of less substantial  but  not always less ambitious books that seek to give us an  overview of the  Canadian Literary  scene. Sometimes the approach has been thematic,  and  this has usually involved a limitation  in the comprehensiveness  of the  survey,  since  the  books and  writers  discussed are  chosen  to  exemplify  the author's thesis about  the dominant trends of Canadian  writing and  the dominant preoccupations of Canadian writers. Thus books like Margaret  Atwood's Survival, D.  G. Jones'  Butterfly  on  Rock,  and  their  lesser imitators,  in spite  of brilliant insights into  individual  works and  writers, and  even groups  of writers,  provide highly distorted  views of Canadian literature if one takes them  as pictures of the whole. They  are maps that  show only certain roads, and  not all the main  towns.
The   other  kind  of  survey  is  inevitably  circumscribed   by  considerations   of
space;  even the Literary History, for all its bulk, is forced to deal summarily  with many  writers and can only sketchily fulfil the critical as distinct from  the histori­ cal function. When the Literary History was published, Northrop  Frye put in the plea for a critical  handbook  of the same dimensions, similarly  written  by many hands,  but so far as I  know this major survey never passed  beyond  the stage of suggestion, and  until it does we must rely on the second group of general  literary surveys that  have been appearing in recent years, small in size and  aimed largely

3

EDITORIAL



at  the increased  public for compendia  of potted information  and  evaluation  that has  been  created  by the  expansion  of Canadian  literature  classes in  universities and secondary schools.
Atwood's  Survival  started  off as such  a guide,  but,  perhaps  fortunately,  was led by its author's  obsessions into becoming something less practically  useful (not the  best of cribs,  certainly)   and  more  intellectually  exciting.  Among  the  books that  have  kept  to the  original  plan  of presenting the whole field in ready form have been Elizabeth  Waterston's Survey and Clara Thomas's Our Nature-Our Voices,  both  reviewed in  past issues of Canadian  Literature, and  Frank  Davey's newly published From There  to Here (Press Porcepic, $4.95), which is described as "A  Guide  to English-Canadian Literature  since  rg6o".  In  fact, Davey's book was planned  as a sequel to Clare  Thomas's  book (and  is announced  very  unob­ trusively  on  the  cover  as "Our Nature -Our  Voices II"), but  the  economic adventures  of  the  original  Publisher,  New  Press, and  the  pilgrimage  of  Dave Godfrey  from  publishing  house to publishing house, resulted in its eventual  issue by Press Porcepic in a quite different format from the original volume.
All these changes in imprint  and design are just as well, since Davey's approach
is  radically  different   from  Thomas's.   It  is -with no  thought   of  posing  any hierarchy   of  values-the difference  between  the  academic   and  the  literary. Both Clara  Tqomas  and  Elizabeth  Waterston are essentially teachers-who-write; they show an understanding of and often an intuitive sympathy  with the authors they  discuss, but  there  is still not  the same  kind  of involvement-negative  or positive-that one encounters  when the situation  is reversed and  a writer-who­ teaches does  the   job  of  introducing other   writers. Nobody has  reacted to thdr books in the way people react to Survival and are likely to react to Davey's From There  to Here.
When  one  considers  the  limitations  Davey seems happily  to  have  accepted,
From  There   to  Here  is something  of  a  tour  de  force. Other   poet-critics like Atwood and Jones,  by adopting  the thematic  approach,  have been able to group the  books they consider  into  large sweeping essays, each  dealing  with  an aspect of the main  theme.  Davey,  recognizing that  other aspects of their work  differen­ tiate  writers  more  than   themes  unite  them,  has  chosen  to  write  a  brief  but penetrating critical essay on each of sixty writers (with George Bowering stepping in  to discuss Davey  himself).  Davey is a poet with sharply  defined views of his craft,  but  his  attitude   towards  criticism  is remarkably  open;   he  refuses to  be governed  by fashion,  and  thus,  while his judgments may  at  times seem idiosyn­ cratic,  they can  rarely be dismissed as prejudices. He shows the weaknesses of a


4

EDITORIAL



writer  like Leonard  Cohen,  for example, without  diminishing  his true  value  (as against  his  inflated  public  status) ;  he devotes careful  attention   to  writers  like Daphne  Marlatt and  Gerry  Gilbert  who have  perhaps  not  received  their  meed of attention, and  if he does not  persuade us to accept  his valuation  of them,  at least he induces  us to read  them  more carefully;  he writes acerbically  where  (as in  the  case of Graeme  Gibson)   he detects a  reputation  that  has been  built  on scanty  real  performance; at  times, as in the case of Mordecai  Richler,  he omits with stark  justice a writer who has, after all, voluntarily absented  himself. There are some Davey criteria  I find hard  to accept -his  polarity of life and  anti-life for example -and  I  am  puzzled by some of the conclusions he has reached  on this basis:  e.g.  that  P. K. Page  is one of the  "anti-lifers".  Still, this is the  best short  survey  of a  comprehensive  kind we have  had  of contemporary Canadian writing, and  it is undoubtedly  so because Davey is involved  in the deep and  real sense of being a critic and  a poet, of being at once part of the world of which he writes and capable of standing outside it.

NEVERTHELESS,  poet-critic  though  he  is, Davey  is also an academic,  and  so, at  a  rough  count,  are or  have been more than  half the sixty writers he discusses. It  is a lower proportion,  I suspect, than  it might  have been ten  years ago,  but  it is still higher  than  one is likely to find  in countries  which have  developed  a  real  infrastructure of publishing  and  literary  journalism,  and it represents  a situation  that  gives writers at  least an  interim  interest  in  univer­ sities and  in what  happens  to them.  (After all, perhaps half the literary  journals of Canada, including  Canadian Literature, would not have existed unless univer­ sities had sponsored them and given them at least a modest financial  patronage.) It  is this  that  makes  us look with some interest  beyond  the strict  bounds  of literary  criticism to  books on  the  present state  of  universities,  particularly  when they  are  written   by  men  whose  academic  interests  are  primarily  directed  to literature,  like Claude  Bissell, or who obviously understand,  like Cyril S. Belshaw,
that the creative artist has special problems in an academic setting.
In   Halfway  Up   Parnassus   (University  of  Toronto   Press,  $12.50),  Bissell presents  an   autobiographically   tinged  history  of  his  involvement   as  student, teacher,  administrator, with the University of Toronto.  It begins in-and some­ times lapses back  into-that  peculiar  in-group  facetiousness of tone  which  so often  passes for wit in an  academic  setting and  which embarrasses the outsider as much  as the  boyish rituals  of service clubs. But soon-and for  most of his book -Bissell is quite  seriously concerned  with  the  kind  of  problems  that  in

5

EDITORIAL



recent decades  have  plagued  the administration of large modem  universities. In the  end  one  may  remain  convinced  that  the  only reasonable  solution  for  the problems of the multiversity is dismantling and decentralization,  but in the process of reading Halfway Up Parnassus one at least gains some sympathy for the predicament   of  a  sensible  and  sympathetic  man  caught  in  the  kind  of strait between  the  Scylla of an  antiquated authoritarian structure  and  the  Charybdis of a  sometimes totalitarian student  opposition  into  which the  times have led so many academics.
Cyril S. Belshaw, whose Towers Besieged (McClelland  & Stewart, $5.95)  is descriptively subtitled  "The  Dilemma  of the  Creative  University"), has had  his share   of  university  administration,  though   on  a  humbler  level  than   Claude Bissell's, but  in  his book he sheds his immediate  loyalties and  antagonisms  and attempts   to  stand   outside  and  sketch  the  picture  of a  university  that  will be creative in the sense that  it takes as primary aim the engendering in its members, "students  and  faculty  alike, an ability to ask and formulate  questions linked  with generalized   knowledge, and   to  use evidence,  logic and  intuitive   judgment   to provide answers."
To   use  "evidence,   logic  and  intuitive  judgment":  that  is not,  even  if  the questions  and  answers  may  be shaped  differently,  very far  from  the  processes which  writers  follow,  and  it  brings  one  back  to  the  recognition  that,  though pedantry   is  the  enemy  of  creation,   there  is-ideally  considered -much  in common  between  the  literary  world and  the academic  world. Who of us would not relish the opportunity to visit through time-travel some place like Plato's grove or  Epicurus'  garden,  where  the  discussion of knowledge was truly  disinterested and  concerned   neither  with  hopes  of  employment  nor  calculations  of  tenure? One may not accept  all Belshaw's propositions in his very personal vision of what a university should  be like (and  space prevents us from doing more than  suggest to  readers  that  they study  the  book themselves),  but there  is stimulation  in his insistence on creativity  as the  principal  criterion  for judging a university, and  in his admission that,  even so, there are kinds of creativity which the best academy constrains and which must therefore be developed outside its bounds.

THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY, like the travel narrative, is a genre rarely well  practiced  in  Canada. We  are  not  lacking -it  is true -in  memoirs, and especially in  the  memoirs of politicians, but  these rarely attain  the combination of ironic detachment and passionate involvement that characterizes the true autobiography,  as  it  characterizes   the  true  travel  book.  In  The   Siren   Years

6

EDITORIAL



(Macmillan, $I I ·95) -which bears  the  subtitle  of  "A   Canadian  Diplomat Abroad   I937-I945"-Charles  Ritchie  presents  not  a  formal   autobiography, but  a  journal  kept during  those years when  the second World  War  passed from inevitability  into actuality.  But keeping a journal suggests a willingness for what one  writes  to  be  read  by  others,  and-even  if  only  half-consciously-every diarist shapes his notes for those unknown but longed-for violators of his privacy. So  we  might  define  the  journal  as  an  autobiography   contemporary  with  the event, and the autobiography as a journal after the event.
But how many  journals ever reach us as they were written down in the heat of
the  moment's  feeling? Certainly  The  Siren Years, in which Charles  Ritchie  tells
-more as an  aesthete  than  as a diplomat-of  his experiences in  a long-past London,  gives the  feeling  that  it  has been long and  lovingly polished;  nothing changed  perhaps,  but  everything  burnished in preparation for the sun of public attention  to shine upon it. And worth burnishing  it all is. I knew intimately  and remember  nostalgically  that  war-threatened  and  war-battered London  of which Ritchie  writes;  I  experienced   it  on  a  socially  lower  level  perhaps-cheaper restaurants,   daughters   of  the  world  revolution  rather   than   ballet  girls,  and Charlotte  Street  rather  than  High  Bloomsbury-but it retains  in my mind  the very sense of a magical world threatened  by the forces of darkness, and every day presenting its jewels of experience in the midst of horror,  that  Ritchie  transmits. We shall  never look on  that  London  again -Ritchie or  I or thousands  like us
-but  one  is grateful  to  have  it  brought  back  with  such  love and  care,  such
polished prose and discreet embellishment.
In  certain  Foreign  Services, literary  excellence is a  tradition. It  has been so among  the  French  since  Stendhal  languished  as  Consul  in  Civita  Vecchia;   I remember  the pleasure of encountering  the poet Octavia  Paz as Mexican  Ambas­ sador  in Delhi;  Britain  had  its Harold  Nicholson. Canada has had  Douglas Le Pan  and  R.  A. D.  Ford,  and  Ritchie,  though  he has left  until  retirement  the pleasure  of releasing  The  Siren  Years, with  its sharp  and  piquant vignettes  of revered  Canadians   like  Vincent   Massey as  well as  of   English  mandarins like Elizabeth  Bowen, is of their company. It  might do a vast  amount  for Canadian foreign  relations,  and  much  for  the content  of  Canadian books, if we were  to extend  the  process  and  offer  poets  and  novelists semi-sinecures  in  Canadian missions abroad  rather  than sequestering them, as we too often do, in the concrete
towers of Canadian campuses.
GEORGE WOODCOCK



7


LOWRY'S ANATOMY OF MELANCHOLY


Ronald Binns




HALF-WAY
adolescent hero confesses that
 
THROUGH  Ultramarine   ( 1933)   the  novel's


the  desire  to  write  is a disease like any other  disease; and  what  one  writes, if one  is to be any  good, must  be rooted  firmly on some sort of autochthony. And there  I abdicate.  I can  no more  create  than  fly. What  I could achieve  would be that  usual self-conscious first novel, to be reviewed in the mortuary  of The  Times Literary Supplement,  a "crude  and  unpleasant  work," something  of that  nature, of which  the  principal  character would be no more and no less, whether  in liquor or in love, than the abominable author  himself.1

The  voice  speaking here  seems  to  be less Dana Hilliot's  than  Malcolm Lowry's, signalling with  defensive  irony  the  autobiographical quality  of this first novel and its author's acute  self-consciousness  of the  literary  weaknesses that  can  follow on from   such   transparently-personal  inspiration. If the  confession   was  meant   to neutralize  or  provoke   the   critical   response  from   that   particular organ   of  the English  literary  establishment it  failed,  and  the  paper's reviewer  merely  noted that  "Ultramarine reads  less as a  novel  than  as the  first expansion of shorthand notes  taken   with  a  view  to  making a  novel  out  of  a  new  experience," finding much  of the  dialogue boring  and  concluding that  "If the  art  of writing is imita­ tion  the  author has  mastered it; if reconstruction enters  into  it  he has  yet some way  to go, for he has not  attempted to fuse the objective  and  subjective elements of his narrative into a whole."2
From  this  angle  it  might  seem  that  Ultramarine  can  only engage  our  interest
as  a  document of  youthful autobiographical  jottings,  an  immature outpouring from  the  hand   that   later  wrote  Under  the Volcano.  Lowry's  widow  disagrees: "The most  important  thing   about  this  book,  to  me,  is  not  its  partially  auto­ biographical content, but  the  fact  that  at  this early  period  Malcolm was already  so  completely  the   self-conscious   artist,   in  control   of  his  material and  style."3
Examining this first novel in the  light  of Lowry's  later  career  allows us to under-

8

LOWRY'S  ANATOMY



stand  both  points of view and  to recognize that  what  rewards the work yields lie precisely within these dual areas of interest.
Clearly  Lowry's  three  early  sea-voyages provided  an  initial  resource  for  his romantic self-mythology, and Ultramarine furnishes us with the first full-length expression of this deeply-felt experience, already  partially drawn  on in four short stories and later to be re-deployed within Under  the Volcano  and "Elephant and Colosseum."4   Against this context of biographical reference, however, stand the distancing  techniques  of  Lowry's  style. His  baroque  foregrounding, verbal  wit, encyclopaedism   and   densely-literary  allusiveness  removes  the  novel  from   the realm of purely biographical  interest and  helps to place it within  the  context  of its time. In  this sense I  would  disagree with  Mrs.  Lowry's  opinion  that  Ultra­ marine is "highly  original and,  for its time, experimental,"5  since on the contrary  it seems to stand  very much  within the tradition  of the psychological  novel as it developed in the work of Joyce and Virginia Woolf and could be sensibly grouped with  similar  second  and  third  generation  modernist  novels  deriving  from  this tradition  such  as  Faulkner's  The  Sound  and  the  Fury  (I 93 I ) , Djuna  Barnes's Nightwood  ( I936)  and  Elizabeth Smart's  By Grand Central Station  I Sat Down and Wept  ( I945) .6
When  reading  Ultramarine  it is also worth  bearing  in mind  two other  tradi­
tions which Lowry distinctively draws on:  firstly, that  of the romantic  Bildungs­ roman  (ranging  from The  Prelude to A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man), which  characteristically   deals  with  the  self's  development  into  maturity,  and secondly  a  diverse  collection  of  largely  autobiographical sea-voyage  literature, including  R. H.  Dana's  Two  Years Before the Mast,  the novels of Melville and Conrad,  Eugene  O'Neill's play The  Hairy Ape, and  two novels with  the largest claims as influences on Lowry's novel, Conrad  Aiken's Blue Voyage  and  Nordahl Grieg's The  Ship  Sails On.7   It would be easy enough to single out other literary perspectives  against  which  to  interpret  the  action  of Ultramarine   since it  is a characteristic  of encyclopaedism to promote a sense of equality  between differing expositions of meaning;   I  would suggest, however, that  the  larger  meanings  of the  novel are  contained  in  the  three  areas  of the  psychological, the  romantic, and  the autobiographical to which I have pointed.8  The  stream  of fragmentary parodies  of T.  S.  Eliot's  poetry  which  run  through  Ultramarine   (never  more wryly grotesque  than  in  Billiot's  drunken  mutation  of the  last line from  "The Waste Land"  into "she shantih" (sea-shanty) ) serves to emphasize the radically disrespectful  and  comic  nature  of Lowry's  relationship  to  tradition.9    Although the novel takes us into the familiar territory of the Waste Land  ("Women squatted

9

LOWRY'S ANATOMY



on  the  steps  of  the  houses,  and,  as  we  passed,  hoisted  up  their  skirts,  as if mechanically.  A  gramophone was  going  somewhere,  playing  'My  Sweet  Hor­ tense.' ") there  is no sense of a  cultural  heritage  providing  a  yardstick  against which  to  measure  the  fallen  modem  world. For  Lowry a gramophone record is sufficient  to  register  the  irony  of  the  situation,   whereas  in  Eliot's  poem  the
incongruity  in the act of the typist who "smooths her hair with automatic hand, I
And  puts a record on the gramophone" relies for its irony on the hidden  literary allusion to The Vicar  of Wakefield. Lowry is not, of course, averse to using Eliot's poetic strategy when it suits him, but there isn't the simple one-way process going on in Lowry's novel as there is in "The  \Vaste Land".  The  total effect of literary allusion in Ultramarine is to contaminate rather than revere and preserve "the tradition". Lowry's use of romantic  poetry provides a case in point;  in his loneli­ ness and  misery Hilliot  quotes  from  Keats,  identifying with  the  narrator  of the "Ode to  a  Nightingale",  and  yet a  short  time  later  he  burlesques  an  equally melancholy  lyric of Shelley's to describe the workings of  the ship's engine  ("The desire of the link for the  pivot;  of the lever weight for the fulcrum ... ") . What is tonally appropriate in the first instance is, by the very nature  of the transforma­
tion from lyric fragility  ("The desire of the moth for the star,  I Of the night for
the morrow, I The devotion to something afar I From the sphere of our sorrow") into a mechanical  context,  entirely incongruous in the second. Consequently  one allusion cancels out the effect produced  by another.  The  way in which we inter­ pret  Billiot's  voyage is affected  by an enlargement  of this technique. Clusters of literary  allusion allow us to convert  Billiot's  journey either upwards into terms of
mythic  grandeur or  downwards  into  a context  of low-life realism, and  only by recognizing the contradictory implications of the encyclopaedic array of reference can  we realize that  the  meaning  of the  voyage falls somewhere  in  between  the two  extremes.  Although   the  past  matters  in  Ultramarine it is not  finally  the literary past which provides the index to Billiot's actions but, more simply, the impulses of feeling which stem from his personal past.



BEFORE GOING  on to consider what type of feeling is wrought on  Billiot's  consciousness by the  effect of the  past it is worth  taking  note of a different   kind   of  literary   self-consciousness  which  differentiates   Ultramarine from  a work like Two Years  Before  the  Mast. Lowry's novel is something  more than  simply thinly-veiled autobiography in the way that it self-consciously draws attention  to the process by which private experience is rendered into art. Through-


10

LOWRY'S ANATOMY



out  Chapter Four  one  of the  sailors sets up  a chorus  of references to a "Yankee fellow":

"This bird was a journalist or something of that on a paper in Australia. He's travelling  round  the  world  for  it and  singing songs at  the  piano.  He  says if you talk to me -"
"Lor  lumme  days. Talk  to him. Do you mean  he stood  you that  feed  just for talking to him?"
"Certainly   he  did.  He  kept  saying, now say that  again.  And  all  the  while he was writing in a little black notebook."

The  anonymous figure  of the  expatriate musician  writer  provides  a counterpoint to Hilliot,  himself a musician, an exile and  a writer  registering  the  bleak working­ class  experience of life aboard the  Nawab  for eventual literary ends. The  docu­  mentary  realist  side  of  Ultramarine  is  made   clear   by  Hilliot's  smattering of allusions to the Preface  to the Lyrical Ballads:
" -a  selection  of  the  real  language  of  men -"  " -the  language  of  these men -" "-I  propose myself to imitate  and  as far as possible to adopt  the very language  of  these  men-" " -but between  the  language  of prose  and  that  of metrical  composition  there  neither  is nor can be any essential difference-"

The novel  divides  up  fairly  evenly  between  blocks of  dialogue and   passages  of interior  monologue, a  structural  ordering which  serves to  realize  the  monotony and  imaginative poverty  of a sailor's  life and  the contrasting richness  and  depths of Hilliot's consciousness,  saturated as it is by an eclectic  reading in  an  immense variety  of literature. One  of the  crew  tells Hilliot  how  much   he en joys reading George  Bernard  Shaw:
"I don't  mean  from  a literature point of view. I mean from a reading  point of view. I dunno  how to explain -like. You see, he's always got a message for the proletariat  -like. You  see  us  working  men  ain't  the  sort  of  bastards  that  the moneyed  class think  us, lying in all morning  smoking cigarettes  and  then  telling the tale to the Labour Exchange in the afternoon."

Nowadays we  are  most  likely  to  read  Ultramarine "from  a  literature point  of view," recognizing  its  embryonic anticipations of the  themes  and  techniques of Under the  Volcano. Nevertheless, it is important to recognize  that  Lowry's  first novel uniquely  blends the two very different  contemporary genres of the modernist psychological  novel  and  the  proletarian realist  novel. 10 Lowry  escapes  the limita­ tions  of much  committed Thirties' literature by qualifying any  tendency  towards an  easy class-identification, observing  many  of the  petty  rivalries  which inhere  in the   N awab's   own   hierarchial  system  of  rank   and   finally  subsuming  Hilliot's


I I

LOWRY'S ANATOMY



quest  for brotherhood   within  a larger  metaphysical  integration. Lowry's  realism is, however, more than  just a gesture towards fashion and  a good instance of its functional   relationship   to  the  psychological theme  is provided  by  the  way  in which  the  humanizing  of Andy,  the ship's cook, from his original  role of  carica­ tured   bully,  emphasizes   the   meaningful   change  which  experience   works  on Billiot's perceptions of the world.
Lowry is not averse to subordinating his low-style realism to ironic fictional ends, however,  as an  apparently chance  reference  to "Three white  leopards"  makes clear. In the context  of the babble of conversation which composes Chapter  Four the  remark  seems to  be associated  with the ship's  recent intake  of zoo animals. At the same time these words duplicate  part of a well-known line in Eliot's "Ash Wednesday," and  Lowry's  contextual  placing of the allusion amidst  bawdy and brutal  dialogue  ironically  transforms  the  pre-Raphaelite  delicacy  of the original source with sardonically  grotesque  effect. The  most radical instance  of the falsifi­ cation  involved in the  process of mediating  experience into fiction is revealed in Billiot's admission that the figures which have haunted his imagination throughout  the novel are conjured  from a banal reality:

As for my father we shall exhume him from his imaginary madhouse, reinstat­ ing him to his normal position of tutor, to his liver trouble, his pipe, his dog and his games of  chess; my mother  may return  fearlessly to  her  eye-bath  and  her Sanatogen-she  may even learn to be proud of her wandering son and I foolish to deny my love for her;  my guardian  becomes miraculously what  he has always been -the family chauffeur ...

Ultramarine, then,  generates  a  self-scepticism which  warns  us not  to  take  the novel too directly as confession and which consequently points us towards a consideration of the techniques involved in such distancing.


IN LITERATURE the sea has often functioned  as a place of purgatorial suffering where, through  separation  and apparent loss, the individual moves toward  redemption  and  reconciliation,  and  Dana  Billiot's  voyage proves
no  exception  to  this  traditional  perspective.11   Although  he  frequently  denies a motive for abandoning the comfort  of his wealthy home background  to join the harsh  conditions  of life aboard  the  Nawab,  his voluntary  ordeal  quickly shapes itself into a romantic quest for authenticity  through suffering. The voyage becomes a prolonged initiation  ceremony with Dana, taunted  by the Furies  ("singing over their  victim, sending  him mad.  Janet,  enjoying it in a white sweater, gloating in


12

LOWRY'S ANATOMY



a  thin,   ululating treble."),  seeking  and  eventually   discovering an  identity with his social and  metaphysical environment.
The  epigraph from  Chaucer amplifies  the  meaning of Hilliot's rejection  of his home  life:  in a sense "wrecchedness" is where  he belongs, and  suffering becomes the only road  to freedom. He  recognizes this when, in the inferno of the stokehold, he perceives that  the firemen  "seemed  to get more fun out of life than  the seamen, and   seemed  somehow   to  be  better,  in  some  queer   way  to  be  nearer   God-." This  central   paradox  underlies the  novel  and  finds  enlargement in  the  warring tension  between  innocence and  experience  in Dana's consciousness.  Although he is contemptuous of his background and  of "those  who carried the  whole  horizon of their  lives in  his pocket" he finds himself  unable  to relinquish the  pressures  of the  past, obsessively returning to a mental  picture  of his virginal girlfriend, Janet, and  the  promise  she  has  extracted from  him  to remain  virgo  intacta. He experi­ ences  the  pain  of the  social  outcast, enduring the  bullying  of the  crew  and  their mockery  at  his sexual  timidity. His one attempt to pick up a whore  in one of the Asian   ports  ends  in  failure   and   drunkenness,  and   he  retreats into  narcissistic fantasy,   alcohol   ("I could  drink,  anyway; there  were  no  complications about  that")  and,   the  crew  bluntly   suggest,  masturbation.  Hilliot's feelings  of sexual neurosis  and  guilt  are  further compounded by an irrational terror  of syphilis,  the unwelcome   attentions of  a  homosexual  quartermaster, and  the  bragging of the crew   about   their   brothel  exploits.   He  longs  to  heal  his  fractured  perceptions within  a  vision of order  and  simplicity,  and  the ship's  engine  becomes  a central symbol of his metaphysical goal,

in the engine of the  Nawab, with whose disunion, as perceived  by him, he felt his sympathy to be perfect,  existed also that  revolution  from  complex  [sic]  he so desired:   and  it  was  precisely  this order,  more  particularly   regarding  Janet,  but also in  regard  to  Andy  and  Norman-and the  quartermaster!-that his con­ sciousness lacked-was  it  lacking  in  intensity  too?-and  would,  so far  as he could see, always lack. Order, do you hear? Listening, Janet?

Hilliot's  self-questioning about  the  intensity  of his consciousness  is purely  rheto­ rical,  since  there  is  no  denying   the  deeply-felt  dramatic power  of  his  imagina­ tion,  however  much   we  may  deprecate his tendency   to  wallow  in  self-pity.  His desire  for  "revolution from   [the?]  complex" calls  to  mind  Lowry's own  wish, expressed  in  a  letter  to  Conrad Aiken  around the  time  Ultramarine was  being finally  completed, "for  escaping  from  the subtle  and  sophisticated."12   In  describ­  ing Ultramarine as an anatomy of melancholy  I do not, however,  want  to indulge in  biographical  speculation  and   make  a  simple  equation  between   Hilliot   and

LOWRY'S ANATOMY



Lowry but  instead  propose a single focus of attention  which enables us to distin­ guish  the  central  characteristic of  Hilliot's  cerebral  journey  from  confusion  to equilibrium.
The  origins of Dana  Hilliot's  name are overtly literary. "Dana" clearly derives from  the  name  of  the  author   of Two Years  Before  the  Mast, while  "Hilliot" carries  a  distorted  echo  of "Hamlet." On  occasion he also refers to  himself as "Eugene  Dana  Hilliot,"  a  name  drawn  obviously enough  from  the  author  of The Hairy  Ape.  The  relationship  between Hilliot and Hamlet  is, however, more than   semantic,   since  Hilliot's   behaviour   on  board  the  N awab   seems  closely equivalent   to  that   malady   known  to  Renaissance  England   as  melancholy,  a malady  of which the  two outstanding studies were Hamlet  and  Robert  Burton's Anatomy  of  Melancholy.  Melancholy   was  regarded  as  a   psychopathological condition  stemming  from an excess of one of the four humours and characterized by morbidity,  passivity, wretchedness, grotesque hallucinations  and  a longing for death.  All of these symptoms are displayed by Dana  Hilliot up to the time when he breaks out of his brooding  Hamlet-like inactivity to verbally confront  his main persecutor,  Andy,  in  a  scene  which  provides  the  prelude  to  his  release  from isolation  and  mental  torment.  The  analysis of Hilliot as a sufferer  from  melan­ choly  proves  equally  viable  in  modern  psychological terms,  smce  according  to Freud's definition in "Mourning and Melancholia,"
The  distinguishing mental features of melancholia are a profoundly painful dejection, abrogation of interest in the outside world, loss of the capacity to love, inhibition of all activity, and a lowering of the self-regarding feelings to a degree that  finds  utterance  in  self-reproaches and  self-revilings, and  culminates  in  a delusional expectation of punishment.13

As a modernist  psychological novel, then, Ultramarine provides a dramatic analysis of melancholy, exhaustively dissecting Hilliot's nightmarish  interior  world and using a variety of encyclopaedic techniques to body out its wide-ranging exploration  of an  abnormal state  of mind.  By encyclopaedism  I  mean  not only the  use of  a  vast  array  of  literary  allusions and  echoes but  also the  narrative technique  of listing contingent  materials  like notices, names  and  numbers,  that particular   quality   of  stylized  exaggeration   which  for  example   makes  Hilliot typically bemoan  not simply the distance that  lies between him and  his beloved, but  "The Yellow Sea,  the  Black Sea,  the  Dead  Sea, the  Red  Sea,  and  all the seventy-seven seas, and more than seas, that lie between us."
It  is symptomatic  of melancholy  that  it seems to lack any external  causation,
and Hilliot confesses that his tormented  condition is congenital:

LOWRY'S ANATOMY



When  I was fourteen  I was under  the delusion for a year I was Thomas Chat­ terton ... mad?  No ... not even that. But a kind of semi-madman, pernicious and irritating and  apathetic in the extreme,  for whom in madness, as in death  to the impotent, exists the only dignified escape.

He  reveals  that  his father is in  a  mental  hospital  and  demonstrates an  obsession with  the  idea  of  heredity, brooding on  his dead  relatives  in  Oslo  cemetery and claiming himself  as  the  only  survivor  of  the  family  taint  of  madness. Later   he denies  an  etiology  in  heredity, admits  that  his father  is in fact  only  in  a nursing home with a kidney ailment, and confesses that

The  apparent facts are largely imaginary. I assume the guilt of a mother,  or of a  father,  or of a  heredity,  imagine  it completely, to be able on  the  one  hand  to give an  adequate  explanation  of my more inexplicable  actions, and  on  the other in order  to  be clothed  in a dark,  blood-stained dignity. Some of these points are raised,  and  you may have  read  for yourself, in my much  maligned  and  certainly dangerous and misleading work, Hamlet.

The   heredity   theme   recurs   when   Popplereuter,  Norman  and   Dana  visit  the anatomical  museum   on  their   evening   ashore,  a  museum   containing  grotesque exhibits  and  bible-thumping polemic  about  depravity and  heredity. The  museum guide   provides   an  ironic   miniature of  the  novel  itself  in  the  way  it  arranges encyclopaedic  perspectives   around  a  simple  theme,   piling  up  medical  rhetoric to  assert  "the awful   effects  of  MAN   leading   a  DEPRAVED life  visiting  the iniquity  of  the   FATHERS  upon   the   CHILDREN."  Although the   accretive method of  the  guide  points  up  the  structural techniques of the  novel  there  is of course  the  crucial   difference   that   its  naive  didacticism  ("if  any  man  defile  the temple   of  God,  him  will God  destroy,  for  the  temple  of God  is holy,  WHICH TEMPLE YOU ARE.... ") lacks any self-consciousness whatsoever and  is hence authoritarian, whereas  Ultramarine persistently  invites the  reader  to re-adjust his point  of  view  by undermining its  mythic  and  romantic dimensions with  parody.
Like  Joyce   and   Beckett,   Lowry   reveals  a  fascination  with   arcane  medical rhetoric, and  he  inserts  odd  medical  terms  into  the  narrative which  make  up  a ramifying network   of  associations  coming  together   under   the  theme of  melan­ choly.  Billiot, we remember, sees the  urge  to write  as a  disease and  asserts  that  he would  never  make  a novelist  because  he isn't  creative  and  because "what one writes ... must  be rooted  firmly  on some sort  of autochthony." The oblique joke here  is  the  transparency of  the  distinction   that   he is making   (so  far  as  Ultra­ marine  is concerned), since  to  be  autochthon is to  be a native  of  the  land  you inhabit, and  the term  lives on in the vocabulary of medicine  as the Oxford English

LOWRY'S ANATOMY



Dictionary  observes:   "An   autochthonous or  pnm1t1ve  thrombus is  one  which remains   confined   in  the   part   in  which  it  first  arose,  especially  in  the  heart." Likewise  Lowry's  fiction  remained largely  confined  to autobiographical material. Paradoxically the  two sides of the novel are brought together  here in the way that we are  shown  both  the  confinement of the fiction  to themes  close to the  heart  of the  writer,  while  at  the  same  time  we are reminded that  in expressing  his subjec­ tive  inspiration the  writer  is forced  to  use the  public  medium of  language. If a biography of Lowry  illuminates our  understanding of Ultramarine a comprehen­ sive dictionary proves equally  necessary.
The   heredity   theme   which   runs  through Ultramarine   connects   the  medical
vocabulary  with   Hilliot's  sexual   obsessions.  Reference  to  "the  metacarpi of Eugene   Dana  Hilliot" draws   attention  to  his  sense  of  guilt  about   his  hands, relating both  to the  motif  of masturbation and  to his inability  in school geometry lessons to  draw   a  regular  hexagon because  of  the  clumsy  bigness  of  his hands. The metaphysical quest  for order  symbolized  by the  geometry  motif  runs  parallel with  Hilliot's  dark   broodings on  sex and  inheritance; at  one  point  he imagines
that

The  centre  of the Charing Cross, ABCD, the Cambridge  Circle, the Cambridge
Circus,  is Hilliot ... shafts of wit, laced with blood, AB, CD are  the diameters.
Now with  his navel as centre  and  half CD as radius, describe a vicious circle! An  order  imperiously  given!  Hear  me, Janet,  maker  of  all  these  thoughts  and words,  these  finite  stupidities   and  speculations,  an  incantation for  yourself, our unborn son, and me.

As  has  been  pointed   out,   Hilliot   is  the  first  of  the  Lowry   heroes,  discovering himself  to be the  centre  of the  world  and  having  to find  an  identity  between  his imagination and  his environment.14  His obsession with  heredity, order  and  meta­ physical  speculation  coheres   within   a  fantasy  sequence   which  enlarges  on  the possibiliites of parenthood with the Janet he "abwhores":

Between  the  Tarot   and  the  cabbage,  the systole and  the diastole, between  the pleuritic  friction,  the  intercostal  spaces and  the wild west;  between  the paroxysm and  dyspnoea  our  child,  Janet-this  has occurred  to me;  to what extent  may it not  be subject  to the  pre-natal influences? Supposing we ever had one. Heredity. Tee-heel   Or  perhaps  the  humour  of the thing escapes you. That  in  the original unity of the first thing lies the secondary cause of all things with the germ of their inevitable annihilation?

The  immediate parody of Eliot's  "The Hollow  Men" quickly slides into surreal visionary  speculation staged  in medical  tenns  and  moving  at a breathtaking pace

LOWRY'S ANATOMY



with  an  oblique  wit  which  suggests Hilliot's  almost  incoherent  distaste  for  his prudish  and  anaemic  girlfriend. The tone is one of levelling irony and the idea of parenthood  is converted into something altogether grotesque, with the pun on "humour"  pointing   both  to  the  metaphysical  possibilities which  Hilliot  alone discerns and to his tragic insight into the decay and ultimate obliteration which conditions  existence.  The   "humour" is  both  comic -expressed  in  the  incon­ gruous   juxtaposition   of  superstition  and  informed   medical  knowledge -and bitterly  fatalistic;  the  history of the  world since the  Fall  is reduced  to  a  strip­  cartoon  with  Eve  (plucked  from  "the  intercostal  spaces")   at  one end  and  the wild  west  at  the  other.  This  duality  of tone  is maintained in  the  subsequent parody  of bourgeois  domesticity  which  follows, though  the  underlying  sense of doom  is finally  realized  by  Hilliot's  mournful  vision of  his  child  as  the  fated syphilitic victim of his father's vice:

a  twisted, witless mask, grinning sightlessly at  us, two holes in  the  bridgeless nose, the sightless eyes like leaden bullets sunk into the face.... Myself, also, the man without a soul. It died, suddenly, at the age of eight.

Unable  to account  for his melancholic disposition Hilliot takes a morbid delight in fabricating nightmarish  intimations of a tragic life and imminent  mortality. In one  notable  fantasy  he sees himself broken  by syphilis and  wandering  through Liverpool while a chorus  of newsboys shouts the news that  the Oxenstjerna  has gone aground  and  is polluting  the river Mersey. This ship,  which  keeps  coinci­ dentally  returning   throughout  Ultramarine   to  cross Hilliot's  path,  serves  as a visible reminder  of the  past, evoking memories of the times when  he  and  Janet  had  watched  it sailing  past and symbolizing the "iron  bond"  of his love for her. The  metaphor  suggests that  this  love is imprisoning,  something  to  be escaped from, and  the imagery  of pollution and death  which attends  the imaginary  ship­ wreck makes the  actual  final appearance of the Oxenstjerna  at  the close of the novel suggestively ambiguous in its meaning for him.



bE CENTRAL INCIDENT in the novel which proves the turning point of Hilliot's  search  for acceptance  and  order is the drowning  of the galley­ boy's pet pigeon. Much  to Hilliot's chagrin  he had earlier been rudely restrained from saving the bird when it was originally discovered resting from exhaustion  at the  top  of the  mainmast,  and  instead  Norman  had shinned  up  and  gained  the glory of capturing it.  Mid-way  on the voyage, however, the  bird-which  has

LOWRY'S ANATOMY



had  its  wings  clipped   and  been  caged-escapes to  quench its thirst,  flops into the  sea  and  begins  to  drown. While  the  crew  gather helplessly, certain   that  the sea is dangerous to swim in,

a  little  white  motor  boat  was skidding  along  the  water  coquettishly  and  then turning   almost  in  its  own  length  and  retracing  its course  looking  more  foolish than  ever.  The  crowd  yelled at  it,  all  hooting  and  trumpeting at  once,  but  its engine  was making  too much  noise, and  its only occupant  divided  his attention between  the  wheel  and  the  spurting  exhaust,  which  he seemed  to  be  admiring from time to time by looking over the side at it.

The   bird   drowns, and   the  tragic   futility   of  the  incident is  underlined  by  the arrival  of  the   agent   who   announces  that   the   harbour  is  perfectly   safe   for swimming.
The  scene  expresses  more  than  simply  a naturalistic situation. There is a clear association   between   the  Chaucer  epigraph and   the  pigeon's   fate,  focussed  by Hilliot's earlier  perception that  "The pigeon  might  be the very messenger  of love itself"  and  by the symbolic  role of the little white  motor  boat. Throughout Ultra­ marine the  colour  white  is overtly  linked  with  Janet, and  the implications of the coquettish,  narcissistic   activities   of  the  boat   accompanying  the   pigeon's   death seem  inescapable.15 "Drowned" in memories  and  immersed  in  the  dark  world  of experience Hilliot   can  no  longer  be  attracted by  the  sugary platonic love  that  Janet  has  to  offer.  At  last  he  has  found   an  equilibrium in  suffering   and   his willingness  to  risk  his own  life to save  the  pigeon  sets the  seal  on  the  initiation process.  Hilliot  and  Andy  become  staunch  friends,  the ship  turns  round  for  the homeward  journey,  the  "indifferent point"  of Hilliot's  voyage  is reached simul­  taneously in geometrical and  metaphysical  terms  and  the  ship's  engine-room no longer signifies muddle and  confusion:

The  tragedy  of the  afternoon,  the horrors  of the voyage were forgotten; all at once  he  had  a  perfectly  clear  vision of himself, as if a red leaf should  fall on a white  torrent.  Instantly  there  was no lack of order  in his life, no factors wrongly co-ordinated, no loose tangled ends.16

Similarly   Lowry  the  novelist  fashions  an  order  out  of the  complex  confusions  of Hilliot's consciousness,  and   the  final  chapter  provides  a  complete   resolution   of the  various  strands of the  novel. The  letter  that  Hilliot  receives from  Janet shows her  to  be  every  bit  as  girlishly  immature as the  impression  we  have  previously received  from  his  memories.  Her  remarks tend  to  be as incongruously ironic  as those  on  the  card   which   he  gets  from  the  weighing  machine after   his  riotous

18

LOWRY'S ANATOMY



night  ashore  when  he learns  that he is "of  a simple  disposition, quiet  and  home­
loving":

I loved our talk last Sunday evening before you went home, because you were so manly, and  you put  things so simply and without  making excuses for them, and  I understood  and felt proud  of you. Please always tell me things in that  way. I shall always understand  if you do! Oh, Dana,  the sun is shining ever so brightly and  the grass in the cricket field looks wonderfully fresh after  the rain -will  you tell me that  you love me always?

The   break  in  communication is comically  complete,  and  Hilliot  begins  to  com­ pose  a  reply  that   he  knows  he  will  never  send.  As  he  sardonically  points  out, highlighting the  difference  between   her  simple  brisk  cheerfulness  and   his  own complex  self-conscious melancholia, "If you were one with  Charcot and  Bernheim
-I  would  try  to tell you -if  I could  only tell you -if  it would  be worth  your while   to  understand."  Charcot  and   Bernheim   were  the   major  influences on Freud's early investigations into  hysteria, and  there is a passage in Freud's memoir of  Charcot which  seems  to  ironically reflect  on  Hilliot's  obsession  with  heredity and  syphilis:

As for  the  aetiological  theories  which Charcot  defended  in  his doctrine  of the
'famille  neuropathique' and   made  the  cornerstone  of  his  whole  conception   of nervous diseases, they too will probably soon need to be probed into and  corrected. So greatly did Charcot  over-estimate  heredity as a cause that  no loophole was left by which  nervous disease could  be acquired;  to syphilis he allotted  only a modest place amongst the 'agents provocaturs'  ... 17

In  the  end  Hilliot's  "perfectly clear  vision"  of himself  enables  him  to  dismiss his obsessions and  become  one with  the crew and  the ship. He frames  his explana­ tions in explicitly  psychoanalytical terms, telling Janet that  although she has acted "as  an  inhibiting factor" she  is now,  at  the same  time,  "a  sublimatory factor":

Although  Andy beat  me out  in  port, it ceases to bother  me because first, there is yourself; secondly, being in love with you I have the universal experience of sublimated  all-embracing  love for mankind. There  is no need to invent  a venereal lineage for myself; it is no longer amusing;  my innocent  aunts,  and  their  equally innocent  parents  may rest in peace in Oslo cemetry. Put  a flower on their  graves for me -rose instead of lobelia syphilitica.

Ultramarine  closes with  a note  of affirmation and  hope;  Hilliot  plans  to discover "something to  change   for  the  better,   to  transform from  wasting into  growth" and  he turns  his back on narcissistic  fantasy: "Dreaming, when  reading psychol­ ogy,  of  climbing   the  Jungfrau. Getting lost in  tunnels,   tube  stations,  caves ...

19

LOWRY'S  ANATOMY



Never again." In Jungian terms Billiot has achieved individuation, and he makes social use of his brilliant  imagination by delighting the crew with an hilarious and lurid  fantasy-which he spuriously  passes off as a genuine  dream -about  the escape of the  animals  in  the  Nawab. In  other  words it is a  fiction  which, after the  confrontation  with   Andy   and   the  subsequent  incident   of  the  drowning pigeon,  provides  the  final  proof  of Billiot's  acceptance  by the  crew  and  of his own coming to terms  with  the  harsh  realities of adult  experience.  Implicitly it is Ultramarine itself which  is, as Dana  Billiot's  autobiography, the final evidence in this process of self-recognition.
Billiot  vows "to  be outward   bound,  always outward  bound,  always onward, to  be  fighting  always  for  the  dreamed-of  harbour" and  at  that  exact  moment Nikolai, the fireman, comes to tell him that he is to be a replacement  coaltrimmer, "a  proper  limper." Initiation is complete, and  the immediate  coincidence of the re-appearing Oxenstjerna  provokes not fantasy and self-pity but  the cool admis­ sion  that   he's  seen  the  ship  before  "once  or  twice."  The  elegaic last  sentence ("But  oh,  Janet,   no sorrow  is so bad  as that  which  quite  goes by")  expresses Billiot's  wistful leavetaking  of  his past,  which  no longer  possesses its  power to inflict pain and neurosis.
Ultramarine is rather  more tightly constructed  than  critics have on the whole
been prepared  to concede, and  the novel resolves its patterns of theme and image with a complex aesthetic completeness. The ending contains some ambiguity, however, since the nature  of Billiot's  future  relationship  with Janet  seems poised on a fine balance.  Although  she provides a sublimating medium for his exuberant affirmations of social fraternity, the enormous distance in communication between her vapid sentimentality  and  his sharp sense of irony makes Billiot's  assertions of love seem equivocal,  and  this impression is magnified by his radical  admission: "My  writing? You or any woman can do that for me." In this sense Ultramarine anticipates  the structural pattern  of both Dark  as the Grave  Wherein My  Friend is  Laid   and  October  Ferry  to  Gabriola,  where  the  open-ended   plots similarly have  the  effect of converting  the closing rhetorical  expressions of optimism  and affirmation   into   tentative   gestures  rather   than   securely-grounded   certainties. Whatever  we may  feel about  the substantiality  of a future  relationship  between Dana   Billiot  and  Janet   there  is no doubt  that  he himself provides one of the rarer   examples  in  Lowry's  fiction  of  the  finally  integrated   personality,  saved rather than destroyed by suffering.18
Encyclopaedic  writers  tend  to  channel  their  creative  energy  into  one  major
book  (Rabelais,   Burton,  Sterne)   and  Lowry-not  altogether  intentionally-


20

LOWRY'S  ANATOMY



proves  no  exception, Under  the  Volcano itself  providing sufficient  motive   for further  reading into  the  brilliant  ruins  of  the  epic  scheme   which   he  planned around the  masterpiece. Of  all  Lowry's  novels  Ultramarine stands the  furthest outside  this  scheme,  elliptically  sounding-out some  of  the  later  creative themes. In  its  awareness of literary   process  Ultramarine evidences  a  conceptual interest which   remained in  suspension   during Lowry's  career  until  reinvigorated by  his reading of  Ortega y Gasset  two  decades  later  to become  the  major theme  of the Hear  Us  0 Lord  ... volume.  It is nevertheless Under the Volcano which,  finally, provides  the  closest  link  with  Ultramarine, owing  less to schematic or  thematic considerations than   to structural ones;  the  anatomy is more  important than the melancholy. Both  novels originated in short-story form,  and  the example of Joyce (who   of  course  conceived   Ulysses  as  a  short  story)   provides  an  index   to  the reasoning and   the  techniques involved  in  an  encyclopaedic enlargement  of  un­ promising short  stories  into  epic  portraits of sensibility.  Ultramarine is  Lowry's  apprentice-work and  though   perhaps  at  times  flawed  by self-pity  and  an  intoxi­ cation   with   words   we  can   quickly   discern   the  young  author  feeling  his  way towards the  technical mastery  of  the  major  novel.  Although the  themes  change  in the  later  fiction  as the  quest  for integration and  completeness becomes increas­ ingly  elusive,  Lowry's   heroes  never  quite   lose  the  sense  of   melancholy  which drenches Dana Hilliot's consciousness. Ultramarine encapsulates the embryo of an entire   creative   career   and   therefore   deserves  greater  recognition  that   it   has hitherto received.

NOTES

1 All quotations  from Ultramarine  are taken from the first edition  (London,  I933). Mrs. Lowry's "Introductory Note" to the Revised Edition  (London,  I963)  should be consulted for the valuable background information it provides concerning the original  publication  of the novel and Lowry's later decision to locate it as the first volume in the projected  epic novel sequence The  Voyage That  Never Ends. A comparison   of  the   two  versions  suggests  that   Lowry's  intentions   were  never realized, and the connections with Under the Volcano remain tenuous. Evidently sporadic  revisions include  the addition  of apparently  casual marginal  annotations (for example,  in  the Revised Edition  the conversation  between Popplereuter and Hilliot  in  Chapter  Three   is  abruptly   interrupted  by  the  remark,  "I forgot  to mention  there  was a war on about  half a mashie shot away, it being June,  I927, but  that  has no part  in  the story."). Other  revisions include  the addition  of the second epigraph from Richardson and the removal of the original dedication  to Elizabeth  Cheyne  and  Thomas  Forman.  In  the case of this particular extract  the Revised   Edition   changes-presumably corrects-"on"    to   "in"   in   the   first sentence.
2    Anon.,  Times  Literary  Supplement, July  I 3th,  I 933, p. 481. Three  decades  later the  paper   took  note  of  Lowry's  allusion  and  reviewed  the  Revised  Edition   in

21

LOWRY'S ANATOMY



considerably more  enthusiastic tones  as "an  astonishing tour  de  force ... A novel which  can  be  placed   confidently on  the  shelf  next  to Melville  himself." (Anon., Times  Literary Supplement, March 22nd, 1963, p. 197.)
3  Op.  cit.
4    The   four   short   stories   are   "Port  Swettenham,"  (February  1930), "Goya the Obscure"  (June   1930),  "Punctum  Indifferens Skibet   Gaar  Videre"  (Winter I 930-3 I ? )  and  "On Board  the  West  Hardaway"   (October  I 933) . For  places  of
publication see  J. Howard  Woolmer, A Malcolm  Lowry  Catalogue  (New  York,
I968). The   third of  these  stories  became  Chapter Four  of  Ultramarine  whereas
the others  were substantially rewritten before inclusion  in the novel.
Op.  cit.
6   See  Leon  Edel,  The  Psychological Novel 1900-1950  (London, I96I)  and  Melvin
Friedman, Stream  of Consciousness: A Study  in  Literary  Method   (New  Haven,
1955). Two   useful  essays  which   help  in  placing Ultramarine   against   the  back­
ground of  modernism are  Richard Hauer Costa,  "Ulysses,  Lowry's  Volcano  and the Voyage  Between: A Study  of an  Unacknowledged Literary Kinship," Univer­
sity of Toronto  Quarterly,  XXXVI, pp. 335-52, and  "Malcolm Lowry  as Modern­
ist"  in  Malcolm  Bradbury, Possibilities: Essays on the  State  of the  Novel  (Lon­
don/Oxford/New York,  I973).
7    For  the  influence of Aiken  see Costa,  Op.  Cit.  For  the influence  of Grieg  see the letter  by W. G. Simpson  in the Times  Literary Supplement, April  12, I963, p. 249· Lowry  also  confessed  in  a  letter  to Grieg  written in  I938  that  "Much of  Ultra­ marine  is  paraphrase,  plagiarism, or   pastiche   from   you."    (Harvey   Breit   and  Margerie Bonner  Lowry   (Eds.), The  Selected  Letters  of Malcolm  Lowry  (Lon­ don,  I967), p.  I6). Lowry  also worked  on a play  version of Grieg's novel, and  his short   story  "Punctum  Indifferens Skibet  Gaar   Videre" refers  in  the  last  three  words  of the  title  to Grieg's  book, published by Knopf  in  translation  as The  Ship Sails On in I927.
8    For  a  relevant analysis  of the  perplexing effects  of encyclopaedism on  critical  in­
terpretation of Joyce  see Arnold  Goldman, The  Joyce Paradox  (London, 1966).
9    The   joke is excised  in  the  Revised  Edition. For  a student at  Cambridge to make fun  of  T. S.  Eliot  at  this  time  was  a  very  subversive  thing  to  do.  According to James   Reeves   the   new  undergraduate was  handed Poems  1909-1925  and  The Sacred Wood  with  the  same  air  of hushed  reverence as "the  stranger who  enters an  Anglican Church  at  service  time  is handed two  books,  Hymns  Ancient  and Modern   and   The   Book  of Common   Prayer."  Quoted  by R.  C.  Townsend  in "Cambridge English: The  Idea of  an  English  School," Critical  Survey,  Vol.  3, No. 3  (Winter I967). In  his letter  to James  Stern  of May  7th,  I940 Lowry  refers to  Reeves  as  having "loathed me  at  Cambridge for  three  years."  For  further  in­ formation about Lowry's unhappy years at Cambridge see Conrad Knickerbocker, "Swinging the  Paradise Street  Blues:  Malcolm Lowry in England," Paris Review,
38    (Summer   I966)    and    Gerald  Noxon,    "Malcolm  Lowry:   I930,"    Prairie
Schooner, XXXVII, No.4 (Winter I963-64).
10  An  interesting comparison in  this  respect  is the  fiction  of  Edward  Upward,  six years  older  than   Lowry  and  also educated at  Cambridge. His  novella  Journey _to the   Border   ( 1938)  -reprinted  in  The   Railway  Accident   and  Other   Stones (Harmondsworth, I972)  -brilliantly blends  psychological  obsession with  political gesture.

22

LOWRY'S ANATOMY



11  See W. H. Auden, The  Enchafed  Flood (London, 1951).
12  Selected Letters, p. 8.
13  Sigmund  Freud,  Collected  Papers, Vol. 4  (London,  1925;  1957)  p. 152. For  a discussion of melancholy  in Renaissance literature  see Lawrence  Babb, The Eliza­ bethan Malady  (Lansing, Mich., 1951).
14  See William H. New, Malcolm  Lowry (Toronto, 1971), p. 24.
1   Lowry's use of colour symbolism was apparently  a good deal more complex in the lost novel In  Ballast to  the  White  Sea. See Lowry's letter  to David  Markson  of August 25th, 1951 (Selected Letters pp. 247-266).
16  New  (Op.  Cit.  p.  23)  draws  attention  to the connection  between  the geometric pun  in the  title of Lowry's story "Punctum Indifferens  Skibet Gaar  Videre"  and a remark in Coleridge's Aids to Reflection which illuminates the meaning of the "pointless (or indifferent) point" which the ship sails on.
17  Sigmund Freud, Collected Papers, Vol. 1 (London, 1924; 1957), p. 41.
18  For a different  interpretation of this last chapter,  which views the past as  trium­ phant  and  the  future   relationship   between  the  lovers as  positive, see  the  essay "Malcolm   Lowry  as  Novelist"  in  George  Woodcock, Odysseus  Ever  Returning  (Toronto,  1970).




ENEMY
 

P. K. Page


Tied  together to race and race. Three-legged.
Strides  unmatched
and  heights. Not liking each others' smell.

They  bind us together  in sport over and  over.

The  field is green. The  gun is fired.
The  astonishing heavens arch  over  us.
The  fleet matched runners  pass.

An obscene and  wounded  animal
we hobble
on darkening grass.


AIKEN AND LOWRY


Geoffrey Durrant


LAN   ARTICLE  m Canadian Lit,atu,e 44 I suggested  that
Malcolm  Lowry's story "Through the  Panama" made use not only of the story
of the Ancient  Mariner, but also of the voyage of Ulysses as this is interpreted  in the neo-Platonic  versions of the myth.1  In addition  I suggested that  the union of Martin   with  his Primrose,  the  threat  of their  separation,  and  their  love in  the dark  was an allusion to the story of Cupid  and  Psyche, in which the union of the lovers  represents  the  harmony  of  intellect  and  feelings, and  their  separation  a division in the human soul.
The  suggestion  relied  on  an  examination   of the story itself, and  not  on  the sources  from  which  Lowry  might  have  gained  a  knowledge of  these  pervasive myths. In  what  follows I hope to demonstrate  the use of the Psyche myth and of the Ulysses myth in much  the same way in Conrad  Aiken's Blue Voyage, a work by  which  Lowry  was strongly  influenced.2    I  shall show that  the  Ulysses myth plays an  important part  in  Lowry's  Ultramarine.3    I shall also indicate  the  part that  is played in both  Blue Voyage  and  Ultramarine  by the myth of Narcissus as a representation  of the descent of the soul into the sensual world of generation, in accordance   with  the  neo-Platonic  interpretation of this myth.  I  hope  that  this may  be interesting  as showing  how modem  writers may make use of an ancient tradition, and  also that  this may cast some light both on Lowry's debt  to Aiken and  on Lowry's originality  in the use that  he makes of the myths in question.



MALCOLM LOWRY's indebtedness to Aiken in general, and in particular to Blue Voyage, needs no demonstration. Lowry's Ultramarine  takes its title from the "ultramarine abyss" of Aiken's book, and similarly attempts  the use of a voyage as a representation  of human  life. There  is also, apart  from the relationships  that  I  shall  point  to in  this article, a general  resemblance of style. Both Aiken and Lowry draw on a wide range of reading-on the whole Western tradition -for   linguistic   and   mythical  elaboration.   Both  are  lavish  in  their

24

AIKEN AND  LOWRY



quotation  from   other   writers,   and   both   are  ingenious   in  their   use  of  double meanings, and  of  names  that   hint  at  a significance. In  Blue Voyage  Demarest, the hero, says:

I waste a lot of time in logolatry. I am a verbalist, Cynthia-a tinkling symbolist.
I am the founder  and leader of a new school of literature-The Emblemists.

This  is true  not  only  of Demarest, but  also of his creator. The pun  in  "tinkling symbolist", for  example, might  easily  be  missed  by a  hasty  reader  (and  would not  be a very serious loss).  At  times Aiken  calls attention to a verbal  parallel; he notes  for example that  "Agnes  Day  =  Agnus  Dei"  and  tells us that  "Faubion = Fleshpot." The whole scheme  of names in the book appears to be based on similar
ingenuities.
Blue Voyage  is  the  story  of  William   Demarest's journey  from   New  York  to London, in search  of  his  Cynthia, whom  he  has  met  on  a  previous  eastbound voyage.  What he hopes for from  this love is a Platonic  transcendence of the flesh:

What  I hoped was that  at last I had found  a love which somehow transcended the   flesh. Yes-Iactually  persuaded  myself that  I had  captured  the chimaera; and  that  in Cynthia  and  poor William the phoenix and the turtle had met.

Cynthia is  thought  to  be  in  London, at  the  eastward  goal  of  the   journey. However, she is, it soon  appears, on the same ship as William, though separated from  him  because  she  is in the  first  class, while  he is in  the  cabin  class.  (This theme   of  separation  is  recurrent in  the  story.)   The   intellectual nature  of  the relationship is signified  by  the  playing  of  chess on  the  previous  voyage,  and  by many  explicit  statements. Cynthia "whose  face was turned to the  east" is, as her name  suggests,  an  unattainable Diana, a  chaste  moon-goddess. The   journey  to the  east  is  a  journey   to  the  home  of  Cynthia; her  appearance on  the  voyage, separated  from   William,   and   indeed   rejecting  him,  suggests  the   unattainable nature, in this life, of the striving  for a purely intellectual state  of being.  William finally  succeeds  in  escaping   from   the  passion  for  Cynthia, dismissing  her  as  a "stained-glass  window".  However,  he  finds  consolation   in   the   arms   of  Mrs. Faubion, a  "savage" or  "fauve" who offers him  more  accessible  joys than  those of the pure intellect.
The   symbolism  of  the  William-Cynthia-Faubion  triangle is  obvious  enough; and  the  voyage  to the   east is presented without  disguise as an  equivalent to the journey  of life. There are  however  many  indications of a more  elaborate symbo­ lism, and  in particular of deliberate and  sustained  reference  to the  neo-Platonic myths.

AIKEN AND  LOWRY



In  particular, three  major  neo-Platonic  myths are introduced. The  first is that of the voyage of Ulysses, which is understood  as representing  the progress of the soul, in its ship of the body, over the dark sea of the material  world, towards its true  home or paternal  port  in Ithaca,  where it may hope to be re-united  with its Penelope,  who  represents  the  sophia or true  wisdom of the souV  The  second is the  myth  of  Cupid  and  Psyche,  in  which  Cupid  represents  man's  intelligence, and  Psyche his affective  or  emotional  nature.5   Their  separation  in  the  story­ brought  about  by  Psyche's  desire to know  too much-represents  the  unhappy  separation  of mind  and  feeling in man's  experience. Their  union, and  their love in the dark,  represents  a happy  and  harmonious balancing  of mind and feelings. The  third  of these myths, introduced  only at the end of the novel, and  touched on only briefly, is that  of Narcissus whose love of his own image, seen by reflec­ tion  in a mirror,  is understood  by the neo-Platonists as a symbol  of the soul, in love with its own generated  image, and in consequence of this infatuation falling into the sensuality of a lower order of existence.6
The  Ulysses theme is sounded  early in the novel, when Frank Smith, an ageing music-salesman  from   New  Orleans,   returning   to  his  "home" in  England,   is compared  with Ulysses:

"You're like Ulysses, setting out at last to find the rim of the world, the Pillars of Hercules."
"Not much! No exploring for me. I want to get back, that's all."

In other words, the comparison  made is the wrong one; this is not a Ulysses on his final  voyage  of  intellectual  exploration,  but  a  Ulysses who  wants  only to "get back"  to his home.  (This  is represented  in the novel as a death-wish,  as a final refusal of the westward  journey  of exploration.)   Demarest  in  jest pretends  that Smith  is his father,  so that  he himself becomes, on the voyage, a Telemachus,  or younger  version of Ulysses, seeking the east, not out of weariness, but  out of a longing  for fulfilment.  (Smith  is also jestingly represented  as "a  kleptomaniac", and thus as akin to the thieving Ulysses.)
The  significance of the voyage to the east is not deeply hidden, but it is made
explicit only in the later chapters of the book:

... Here he stands, on the deck of a dark ship, which is moving eastward at fifteen knots an hour. The steersman shifts the wheel, his eyes on the binnacle ... Who is this little, this pathetic Demarest? We laugh at him, and also we weep for him;  for he is humanity, he is God.... he struggles-why? to avoid the making of  mistakes, to  escape  the  tyrant  solipsism, and  to  know himself; like us, he endeavours to return to God.

AIKEN AND  LOWRY



(Here  it may  be noted  that  the aim  of the  neo-Platonic  wisdom is to return  to God  through  self-knowledge. It should  also be noted  that  the  name  Demarest may  be  resolved into  De- mar- est, or  "of  the  sea, eastward".)  The  opening chapter  of the  novel, however, offers other  evidence of the  neo-Platonic system, though  this is not likely to be obvious to the casual reader. Thus  the wharf  from which  the ship sails is described  as "an  enormous,  depressing  place, cavernous"
-a reference to the Platonic view of this life as a cavern. The  notion of imprison­ ment,  and  of birth  as an entry into a cave, a spider's web, a cage, in  which the soul is utterly alienated and alone, is here advanced:

What  disgusting animals ships  were;  always  fouling  their  sides  with  garbage.... He  crawled up  the  next  gangway, steep as a funicular, and  stepped on the resilient deck.  0 Thalassa! Thalassa! Unmerciful sea. He  was already fairly  launched into the infinite, the immense  solitude  which seemed  (to the steward who  took his bag) to  mean  so little.  Yes:  alone.  Alone  with  the  sea for  eight  days:  alone  in  a cage with a world of tigers roaring outside.
"Am  I alone in this cabin?" he asked.

(This   may   be  compared   with   Lowry's  use  of  the  cabin   in  "Through  the Panama": "The cramped  cabin our obvious place on earth.") The image of the web  (as  the  web of Persephone,  and  also as the spider's  web of Arachne,  with which  the  soul is entangled   in  the  world  of  nature)   is used  by Aiken  in  the longing of Demarest to escape:

... Ah,  that  incurable longing  for escape,  for  a spider's  cable  by which  he  might swing  himself  abruptly into  space  or oblivion!  But  this time,  was it an  escape  or a return?

In  the general  pattern  of significance, even the  buying of seasick pills, described in the first words of the novel, has its place, since the soul, in the neo-Platonic account,  is drugged  into  forgetfulness of its origins before it  begins its  journey into the world of the senses:

It had  suddenly occurred to him  that  he had  forgotten his seasick pills-the little pink   and   green   box  was  indispensable-oh, absolutely! A  charm against  sea­ serpents.

So Demarest stops at a drug-store to replenish his supply. Here his musings, as he stands waiting, are about  the coming voyage; they are filled with incipient  nausea at the prospect it offers:

0 God,  what  a  prospect! And  the ship-what  was  the ship?  A congregation of gigantic mushroom-like ventilators, red-throated,  all  belching  a  smell  of  hot  oil

AIKEN AND  LOWRY



and  degenerate  soup,  with  sounds of faint  submarine  clankings. Among  them,  a few pale  stewards,  faces like cauliflowers, carrying  gladstone  bags and  hot-water bottles ... He suddenly felt queasy.

This,  echoing  Hamlet's view of this world as a "pestilent congregation of vapours", establishes  the  ship  as an  image  of the  life of the senses, and  man's condition in this  life  as  an  inescapable nausea   and  alienation.  Demarest, like  all  men,  still hopes  for  a happy voyage,  with  "blue  sky, sunny  decks, and  a beautiful, mysteri­ ous young  lady  to talk  to."  There are indeed  young  ladies to talk  to on the ship,  but  there  is no  gracious Lady  of Generation to guarantee anything like  a happy voyage.
The young  ladies  Demarest meets  on  the  voyage  include  not  only  his inacces­
sible  Cynthia, but  also a  Welsh  girl,  an  Irish  girl  who is identified  with  Psyche, and   a  Daisy   Dacey,   who   may   be  Aiken's   side-glance   at   the   Daisy  of  Scott Fitzgerald's  The   Great  Gatsby,  which   was  published   two   years  before   Blue Voyage. The   Welsh  girl  is  described   as  a  "lamia", and   as  a  vampire; she  is studiously   avoided by Demarest, and  plays  no  important role in  his own  story:

A  vampire,  a  serpent,  a  lamia,  a carrion-flower, -yes, a  mouth  like a  carrion­ flower,  and  giving  out  poisonous  juices;  for,  as she laughed,  Demarest  noticed that her lower lip, which was undershot, was wet with saliva.

However, the ship's pianist  falls into  her  toils, so that  the suggestion  conveyed  is that  the artist is the natural prey of this fleur de mal:

She  drew  back  a  little,  narrowed  her  eyes at  the  pianist's  thick spectacles,  then directed suddenly at Demarest a serpentine smile, at the same time giving him a gleaming wink quick as the eye of a kodak.

The  Baudelairean evil  is no  great  threat to  Demarest   himself,  nor  is the  ideal represented  by  Daisy  Dacey,   who  is weak  and  silly, and   reminds Demarest of Ophelia:

There's  rosemary-that's for  remembrance.  Wan,  and oh so wistful. Weak, and oh  so helpless. But  no  pansies -ah  not:  for  never a thought  had  she. Straying with little white feet among the lilies. Oh,  pity me, a shop-worn Ophelia.

The  three  women  to  whom  Demarest is attracted are  Cynthia, who  torments him  with  her  unattainability; the  Irish  girl,  who  seems to  proffer  warmth and joy, but from  whom  he is separated by their  mutual shyness; and  finally Faubion, who gaily makes  her own  advances, and  into  whose arms he falls in the last pages of  the  novel.  Each   of these  women  represents  a  different  life-choice-Cynthia

AIKEN AND LOWRY



of a transformation of experience through the intellect,  the  Irish  girl of a kindling of the  emotional life, and  Faubion of a joyful celebration of the  life of the senses, of Nature itself. They  are  in other  words his Penelope,  his Psyche,  and  his Circe. Enough has  already  been  shown  of the  role of Cynthia; it  remains to show  how the Irish girl is associated  with Psyche, and  Faubion with Circe.
The Irish  girl,  who  has "innocent grey eyes and  a mouth just amiably weak",
appears early  in the  story  talking to "two solid prelates". She is in general  shown as inviting Demarest's approaches, but  as too shy to give him  the  encouragement without which he is afraid  to make the first move:

... She  eyed him  with  a  sort  of  tentative  candour,  a smile withheld ... He  felt shy and turned stiffly away ...

The opportunity lost  is more  than a shipboard flirtation; in  his restless  reveries Demarest identifies  the  Irish  girl  with  Psyche, who loved  Cupid in  the  dark,  but yielded  to temptation and  brought a lamp  to the bedside in order  to see the god:

Zring  went the Irish  girl's bed-curtains  again and tschunk  went the electric switch on  the wall, leaving  dark  the reticulated  grill over the upper  berth; and  then  the bunk  creaked,  and  creaked  seasawingly, as the Irish  girl got  into  it, and  creaked as she corkscrewed her Irish  body down the ship-folded bed-clothes;  and an elbow thumped   the  matchboard  partition   close to  Demarest's  ear,  and  then  grazingly bruised  it  again,  and  then  a  padded  round  knee bumped,  and  the  elbow again more softly knocked....



Is  it  you, darling??  In  the dark?  where? ... Don't  pause to knock,  but approach swiftly through  the  night  of sound and water, step serenely from  thrum  to thrum of the ship's engines, from heartbeat  to heartbeat  of the terraqueous god. Is it you, with  the  candle  in  your hand,  you in a nightgown?  Ah Psyche from  the  regions which! You with a pocket flashlight? ...

Here  the "thrum" of the ship's  engines is the "heart-beat of the terraqueous god". The  ship  itself, as in the  neo-Platonic version of the voyage of Ulysses, represents the  generated self, and  in  particular the  body, terraqueous because  immersed in the  natural elements.   (In the  same  way,  Martin Trumbaugh, in  "Through the Panama" asserts:   "I am  a ship".) Within  the structure of this  myth,  Demarest represents  the  human  mind,   Cynthia  his  strivings   to  pure   intellectuality, and Psyche,   his  affective   nature. The   separation, and   the  longing for  union   with Psyche,  is one aspect  of man's condition in the  realm  of nature-the disconnec­ tion   between    thought  and    feeling.   The   Irish   girl   however  cannot   replace

AIKEN AND  LOWRY



Demarest's longing  for  his Cynthia, and  even as he lies so near  to his Psyche  his thoughts turn  to his intellectual ideal, of whom he says later:

This  miraculous  communion  between  us, Cynthia-was  this perhaps  an  earnest of what  was to come?  I do  not  mean  simply for us, for you and  me, but  for all mankind! Was it possible to guess, from this beautiful  experience,  that  ultimately man  would  know  and  love  his  brother; that  the  barriers  of  idiosyncracy  and solipsism, the  dull  walls of sense, would  go down  before the  wand  of Prospera?

The  union  with Psyche is less attractive as an ideal because it offers only individual happiness; while  the  love of Cynthia is a part  of the transformation of all experi­ ence  by the intellect, and  opens  the door, or so it may be hoped,  to a general  love of mankind.
Pauline Faubion, on the  other  hand, is far from inaccessible.  She is a girl from the  West-a  point  that  is emphasized in contradistinction to Cynthia's  belong­ ing  to  the  East.  In  the  neo-Platonic scheme,  the  East  is the  abode  of  gods,  the West of demons,  and  indeed  there  is something demonic  about Faubion:

She  was  handsome,  saturnine, though  her  features  were  not  particularly  good. There   was something  dark  and  brooding  about  her  which,  combined  with  her extreme  youth  and  brilliant  vulgarity,  intrigued  him enormously. She was  extra­ ordinarily alive.

Faubion has "a burning simplicity and  candour"; there is nothing remote  or cold in  her  manner. She  is  a  creature of  this  world,  "sea-blown, wild,  impetuous." She  early  provokes  in  both   Smith-Ulysses and  Demarest-Ulysses emotions that combine  sexuality   with   cannibalism.  In   what   follows,  the   porpoises,   like  the dolphins in  Yeats's  poetry,  are  the  symbol  of the  life of immersion in  the  sea of existence:

Porpoises.  Flying  fish.  Icebergs.  Cobalt  and  snow.... A  slice of  porpoise,  Mr. Smith?  A  little  off  the  breast,  please, Mr.  Demarest. ... Faubion  gazed  at  him, morose  and  sombre,  reserved  but  yielding, implacable  but  affectionate.   Poising the  bread  knife,  with  waved  edge damascene,  he prepared   to make  Faubion  an Amazon. One  breasted. Tell  me when it hurts, Faubion.... This  was the moment
-this   was  always   the   moment;  that   delicious  moment   of   utter   anguished surrender  ...

Faubion is for  the  ageing  Smith, and  later  for Demarest,  when  he has shaken  off the spell of his moon-goddess, the very principle of life:

Are  you  warm   enough,   Mr.  Smith? ... Quite   warm  enough,   thank   you,  Mr. Demarest!... And   what   is  the  flavour  of  Faubion,  Mr.   Smith? ... Flamingo,

AIKEN AND LOWRY



hibiscus, and  guava,  Mr.  Demarest! ... Take  them-eat,  drink,  live ... and  lo! Smith lived ...

Faubion  at   the  same   time   represents   the  Circean sensuality   that   in the  nco­ Platonic account of the  story  turns  men  to swine  by charming them  into accep­  tance of the world of nature, the dark sea of material things:

"The fleshpots of Egypt,"  said Demarest swiftly. Why? Faubion  = Fleshpot.... For we, alas, the Fleshpots love ... Man cannot live by bread alone.

Obsessed   with   his  anguished  love  of  his  Cynthia-Penelope-Sophia,  Demarest yields  to  her  opposite,  the  Circean Faubion, only when  he has lost Cynthia and, in  a  long  struggle,  has  accepted this  loss. With  this acceptance it is possible  for him  to tum instead  to  Faubion, to the  active  principle  of life, impure though it may  be. The  last  pages of the  novel deal with  his liberation into  the  world  of the senses, and  the  transforming of that world.  In order  to enter  this new life he must accept his own  animal nature. He  need no longer  make  himself  unhappy for any female,  and  since both  Cynthia and  Psyche-both intellect  and  emotions-are "asleep", he may  at least  hope  that  the passionate  life of the senses is awake -as indeed  she is! Demarest, who has been described  as "Narcissus with  a handglass", looks in  his cabin  mirror  and  sees his own  animal  nature, which  he has not  been able  to acknowledge while  under the sway of Cynthia and  the  Irish  girl:

Nymphs  that  smell  of ambergris;  and  the  wholesome dew  called  ambergris.  He looked again, once again,  with  a profound amused wonderment, with blank black pupils, into  his mirrored  eyes. What  an extraordinary-looking object  he was, with pink ears, animal hairs in his nose, and a blue mole on his cheek!

The transformation into  a  swine  is paradoxically the  liberation into  a  new  life.
It is thus  Faubion-Circe who  triumphs; and  in accepting the  love of Faubion Demarest  recognizes  the  impossibility   of a  transformation of  life  through  intel­ lectual love,  and  chooses instead  a surrender to  physical  reality.  Just  as Yeats  in his later   poetry  inverts  the  symbolism  of the  neo-Platonic journey  of  the soul to assert  that  "things out  of perfection sail / And  all their  swelling canvas wear", so Aiken  makes  Demarest, instead  of fleeing his Circe  and  remaining faithful to his Penelope, fall willingly into the toils of the enchantress:

Eagerly,  softly, he withdrew  himself from  the shipfolded  bed-clothes.  And  as his feet  touched  the coarse carpet,  the knock was repeated,  the  turning knob gave a little creak, and the door began softly to open. Faubion.

These  are  the last words  of the  novel, and  they are subtly  contrived to suggest an

AIKEN AND LOWRY



emergence from  the  mummy-wrappings of a life of sleep,  the  making  of a  new contact with  "coarse" reality,  and   the  opening  of  the  door  to  a  new  existence. The  Platonic philosophy is inverted, and  Circe  appears as the life-giving  goddess.
The  ending comes  as something of a surprise,  as Aiken  no  doubt  intended. It
is however  prepared for  throughout the  novel,  by incidents some  of which  gain their   full   significance  only   on   a  second   reading.  The   chess-match  between Demarest and  Hay-Lawrence, early  in the story, is one such  incident. This  game ends  with  the  defeat  of  Hay-Lawrence, indeed  with  his being  "done to death", at  least symbolically. As the  game  proceeds,  thoughts of Faubion "coming out  of the  West" and  of Cynthia "sleeping in the  East"  fill the mind  of Demarest. They are identified in his mind  with  the black and  white  queens  respectively -"Queen Faubion, the black queen; Queen Cynthia,-white as the moon". Hay-Lawrence is playing  black,  and  Demarest white,  so that  the  game  is a contest  for  Cynthia against  the  black  Queen Faubion and  the sinister  Hay-Lawrence. Hay-Lawrence is a Mephistophelean character:

I ask  you,  was  there   ever  a  more  perfect  example  of  the  gentleman   ruffian? Monocle  and  all.  Raffles isn't  in  it,  nor Dracula,  nor  Heliogabalus.  That   bored Oxford  manner,  the hauteur ...
The   game  opens  with  a  further suggestion  of the  diabolical in  Hay-Lawrence: Hay-Lawrence   frowned   his  monacle  into  his left  eye-socket, stretching   the  left
corner of his refined cruel mouth.

Demarest finally  wins  the  game,  in  a  move  that  is described  as a  murdering of
Hay-Lawrence:

Hay-Lawrence  stared,  immobile, an expression of stupor, or perhaps  terror,  in the fixed unseeing eyes: loss of psychic distance. One could hear the blood hammering at  his temples-gush, throb,  thrum,  pound,  pulse, boom. Blood-blood- blood sang  the  furies.  Hay-Lawrence is being done  to  death.  Demarest  is murdering him ...

The   suggestion   of  blindness  ("fixed,  unseeing  eyes")   and   of  blood-agony and stupor,  taken   with   the   insistence   on  the  manacle screwed   into  "the left  eye­ socket",  and   the   presence   throughout  the  game   of  a  one-eyed   poker-player, indicate that  the  Mephistophelean Hay-Lawrence is also an  Odyssean  devil-a Polyphemus, whose  blinding by  Ulysses has a  particular  significance in the  nco­ Platonic  myth.   Aiken   has  attempted  to  prepare  for  this  by  associating  Hay­  Lawrence with  a tent-pole, and  by making  the move that  destroys  him a knight's move -and therefore a thrust  with a spear:

AIKEN AND  LOWRY



Hay-Lawrence with a tent-pole, walked sedately, haughtily.

The  putting  out  of the one eye of the Cyclops with his own huge staff is repre­ sented  by the  neo-Platonists  as the  blinding  by Ulysses of his natal  demon,  the "outward eye" of the senses, and as a liberating of the "inward eye" of the spirit. That  the murdering of Hay-Lawrence  is a triumph  for Cynthia  and the "white" cause is plain;  after the game Faubion accuses Demarest of an unnamed  offence:

'Oh, I know what you've done. And you know too.'
"Cross my heart and hope I die ... Not guilty. I appeal." She cut her meat savagely.

Demarest  does indeed  know  what  he has  done, since he  has  played  the  chess game as a battle  for his White  Queen against  the Black Queen  Faubion.  And he has murdered the  Cyclops who  threatened  to eat  his white "men" one  by one, and in so doing has defeated the forces of darkness and of this world.
However,   even  in  this  chess game  it enters  Demarest's  mind  that   there  is
perhaps  no  great  difference  between  Hay-Lawrence   and  Cynthia,  between  the theology  of  damnation and  the  theology of salvation.  Both  Cynthia  and  Hay­ Lawrence,   he  thinks,   though   she  is  "of  a  world  utterly   remote"  from   his, "belonged,   somehow,  to  the  same  constellation."   In  this  way  the  ground   is prepared  for the reversal at the end of the book, when Cynthia  is seen  as repre­ senting a kind of damnation, and Faubion as a door opening into life. The  choice of  Faubion s
warfare of good and evil.
Finally it may be interesting  to note that  the first of the two epigraphs  to the book is a quotation from Juvenal: "E coelo descendit gnothi seauton"  (From  the heaven  comes down:   "Know   thyself"),  and  that  the second,  from  Coleridge's "Self-knowledge",   is  a  question  about  what  man  can  know  of  himself.  The voyage to the  East, like Martin  Trumbaugh's voyage to the  East, is a quest for self-knowledge.


IN Ultramarine  the influence of Aiken's novel may be clearly seen, but Lowry draws on many writers, some of whom, like Melville and Conrad, themselves contributed  to the patterns of mythic significance employed by Aiken.
Lowry's knowledge of Blue Voyage, and  his familiarity with its author, may have been  the  starting-point of  his  interest  in  these  myths,  but  it  is clear  that  he recognized  them  elsewhere.  To  identify  all  these  influences  would  require  a


33

AIKEN AND LOWRY



major  work, and  I shall confine myself here to a brief account  of the myths that are  common  to  Blue  Voyage  and  Ultramarine, without  suggesting  that  where such similarities exist they are an indication of a simple dependence  of one author on the other.  Where  two writers share a common  tradition,  similarities need not imply any such dependence.  The identifying of the tradition  may however greatly help our  understanding.
The  central  theme  of Ultramarine, as of Blue Voyage, is the hero's search for his true self, for  the source of his being and  his identity. He is a "toff", and  his full  name  is  Eugene   (well-born)   Dana  Hilliot;  since  his  parentage  seems  to isolate  him  from  his common  humanity,  he  must  learn  to discover  this in  his shipmates.  He sees his ideal,  and  his own true self, at times in  Norman,  the all too  "moral" and   "heroic" galley  boy, and  at  times in  Andy  the  cook,  who appears  to be weak and  degenerate,  but who is later revealed as a hero of three torpedoings,  and  as a man  who can take sexual experience in his stride, without becoming  its victim.  The  weak  chin  indicates  not  cowardice,  but  courage  and endurance, since Andy  has "lost  his chin in the war".  Andy is related  to Dana as Smith-Ulysses is related  to Demarest in Blue Voyage:  "Andy is more a part of me than  the rest";  and  Dana  is told by the fortune-teller: " ... He is your father too". Dana,  Norman  and Andy are all Norwegians who have settled in Liverpool, in Port Sunlight  or in Great  Homer Street-they are Norse and Homeric heroes in  whom  the innocence  of the snowy north  and  the brightness  of the  Homeric world  have  been  dimmed  but  not  extinguished.  Dana  is nineteen,  Norman  is twenty-nine,  and   Andy  is  thirty-nine,  so  that  each  represents  a  stage  on  the journey of life. Andy is in this sense Dana's  future self, as well as his father,  and the  theme  of  the  book  is  Dana's   reconciliation  with  his own  nature   and  its development.  Dana's  resentment  of Andy-who treats him with contempt,  and appropriates the bar-girl  Olga  just when Dana  has summoned  up the courage  to sleep  with  her-leads  him  to  dream  of murdering  Andy.  The  discovery that Andy is a war-hero  makes possible a new respect for him, and  an acceptance  of the  process by  which  a  hero  may  come  to  terms  with  life, appear  outwardly shabby and  defeated,  and  yet retain  his integrity. At the end Dana,  in a letter to Janet  claims not only to identify  himself with Andy  ("I  have identification  with Andy. I am Andy") but also to have transcended  Andy through  his abiding  love for  Janet,   which  gives  him  an  "all-embracing   love for  mankind." This  has obvious similarities with Demarest's relationship with Cynthia, and like Demarest, Dana  does not actually send to his lady-love the letter in which this claim is made.
Aiken's hero describes himself as a "tinkling  symbolist", and  in his turn  Dana


34

AIKEN AND  LOWRY



Hilliot  recalls  that  he has been  described  as a "tinkling sciolist".  The significance attached to  names  is  part  of  the  "tinkling symbolism" that   Lowry  shares  with Aiken. The  name of Lowry's  hero,  Eugene  Dana Hilliot,  is misspelt in a crew  list as  "Heliot". This  indicates that  he is related  to the  sun  ( helios) , and  his home address   indeed   is  "Sea  Road, Port   Sunlight". He  is  Dana  because   he  serves "before the  mast", and  Eugene because he is preoccupied with  his genetic  history. He  is obsessed by the  idea  that  his father is insane,  that  his mother is going  blind, and  that  he has inherited syphilis. This  Ibsenesque view of Dana's past is in sharp contrast with  the symbolism  of Norway  as a place of light, of whiteness, of Vikings
-of  innocence and  heroism.  This  symbolism accumulates slowly throughout the story, but some of it may be seen in one short passage:

Norman   and   Andy-Norsemen 	(were  they?).  And  once  more  his  thoughts turned  tenderly  towards Janet.  She it was he apprehended in their voices, she and no other. And he thought  of that time when their families, for ten years neighbours in  Port Sunlight,  had  met in Christiania  when he was a boy, and  how their love for each other  had  never changed.  That  winter they had seen an elk in the street, driven  down  from  the mountains  by starvation-everyone was on skis-all  was white.

Dana is at  once  a  child  of  light,  and  blighted  by his birth. The journey  of the Oedipus  Tyrannus is a  further advance into  the  darkness  of  existence,  into  the Hades or Hell  of the life of the senses. The  ship is "outward bound  for hell",  and there  are  many  hints  that  the  "whole damned business" of the voyage is a descent into  a lower order  of existence.  In  this fallen state,  Dana's love of Janet, to whom he remains  faithful in spirit,  as Demarest does not remain  faithful to his Cynthia, provides  the  strongest  reminder of the original  innocence of the soul and  the transforming power  of love. The  symbolism of a journey  to the East, so prominent a  part  of Blue Voyage, is of minor  interest  in Ultramarine; instead, Lowry  uses the  traditional symbolism  of the  north  as heavenly  and  the south  as leading to the fallen  and  hellish world  of nature. This  is combined with  the  idea  of the ship  as representing human existence,  and  the idea of an  ultimate return to the  Penelope who  represents the  true  wisdom  of the  soul,  as Janet  represents Dana's highest moral  ideals.  Dana's shipmates, like those of Ulysses in the traditional interpreta­ tion  of the story,  are  different aspects of the human personality, "other selves" to Dana. Of the ship Dana reflects:

When you come to think of it-an ideal match. Both of us born of Viking blood, both  robbed  of our  countries  and  left to make out  as best we can;  both, finally,

35

AIKEN AND  LOWRY



with the same wandering,  harbourless, dispossessed characteristics.  Her very history is enough to fill me with a narcissistic compassion!

As has  been  shown,  the  myth  of Narcissus  and  the mirror, combined with  the Ulysses-Circe  myth,   plays  an  important part  in  the  resolution  of the  conflict  in Blue Voyage. In  Ultramarine  this  myth,  touched  on in  the  passage  just  quoted, is  more  strongly   suggested   in  later   passages.  In  Dana's conversation with  the German wireless operator the reflection  of Narcissus in the beer-glass  is associated, as  in  the  neo-Platonic interpretation  of  the  myth,  with   the  descent   from   the heavens,  and  with  the involvement of the soul with the corruptions of the  physical world:

One  bubble makes a grain  of sand. Sixty stars to each man.  I put  my glass down noisily then  picked it up again,  and  gazed mournfully at my reflection. Narcissus. Bollocky Bill the Sailor.  Bollocky Bill, aspiring  writer, drawn  magically  from  the groves of  the  Muses  by Poseidon.  But  had  it  been so much  Poseidon?  I looked more  deeply into  the  glass. Christ,  was this me?  What  was there?  Misery! Self­ disgust! Terror! No getting away from the unfortunate  Hilliot, this strong creature  with a head  of filthy, infected  hair,  and  a maggoty brain and  infected  conscious­ ness, who dreams  of archetypal  images; this sad dish, Eugene  Dana  Hilliot!  Thy hand,  great  Anarch,  evil ghost who must follow me wherever  I go! Hear,  chaos! Hear me, stinking cod fulfilled of donge and of corrupcion! ...

Later, contemplating his rendezvous with  Olga  the  bar-girl,  the  Circe  of  Ultra­ marine,  Hilliot   hears  the  siren's  call  "Hoo-ah-hooooo, wailed  a  siren  from  the river".  This   is  followed   by  an   acceptance  of  the   unavoidable   descent   into  sensuality:

Do  this  thing.  Laugh  about  it,  because it  is funny;  cry, because  it is beautiful; smile, because it is inevitable.... Well, it was for Janet,  wasn't  it?  But if I could only  be  purged  before  doing  it,  were I only cleaner, more  beautiful,  how much more  lovely it  would  be!  How  appealing  the simple sadness of  the  scene could only  the  soiled  Narcissus  that  was Hilliot  be washed  by rain  from  Heaven.... Hearts  that  should  be white  turned  red ... And  all the  sorrow of her  labouring hips.  North  wind  blow south  over my vineyards, north  wind  brings  the  snow;  I do not think that this is the north wind....

The significance  given  to  Narcissus  here  is not  that  of self-love,  but  of the self­ disgust  of the soul  that  has descended  into  the sensual  abyss of existence. This  is as distinctly  a neo-Platonic Narcissus  as is Demarest when  he sees his own animal shape  in the mirror before his Circe arrives.
The story  of  Oedipus is  evidently   important in  a  novel  in  which   the  hero

AIKEN AND  LOWRY



voyages in  the  Oedipus  Tyrannus and  dreams  of killing his "father" in a  fog. Lowry  however combines the  Oedipus  theme with  that  of Ulysses. A snatch  of Greek  poetry that  goes through  Dana's  mind early in the story suggests that  he may  be at once an  Oedipus  who is hostile to his father  and  a Telemachus who seeks for and loves his father. The  fragment of Homeric verse may be translated: "There are  many ships in sea-girt  Ithaca." This is part  of the speech in which Athene,  goddess of wisdom, urges Telemachus  to set sail in search  of his father Ulysses. The  words  occur  to  Dana  as he  remembers  his  humiliation   at  being excluded  from  the  school swimming  team,  and  there follows a  memory  of  the occasion  when, at Kowloon, Dana  has shown himself to be the best swimmer on the ship, while Norman  swims badly and Andy not at all. In  this respect at least Dana  is more  like Ulysses than  his shipmates, so that  he is encouraged  in  his hopes  of  achieving  manhood   and  of  finding  his  true  self.  There   follows  his ignominious  failure  to  rescue the  pigeon from  the mast-head.  This  first failure, as in  Lord  jim,  leads to a second defeat, when Dana  fails to rescue the  pigeon from  the  sea,  in  spite  of  his  prowess as  a  swimmer.  The   pigeon  is  rescued originally  by  Norman,  who  allows it to fly attached  to a  cord;  this  provides a link with  the contest of the heroes in the funeral  games in  the  Iliad,  where the target  in the archery contest is a pigeon flying at the end of a cord from the mast of  one  of  the  ships. That   Lowry  has the funeral  games  in  Homer  in  mind  is shown by his twice quoting  a line from the Iliad describing the collecting of wood for the funeral  pyre of Patroclus. A further link with Homer and with the story of Ulysses is the  quoting  of a  line  from  Book IX  of the  Odyssey,  where  Ulysses observes  the  futile  struggle  of Sisyphus with  the stone. The  recollection  of the funeral  games and  of Ulysses' visit to the dead comes as Dana,  who is about  to return  to Olga  the prostitute,  remembers and mourns the cold purity of the snow and  of  his early  love of Janet.   Just  as Demarest,  in  Blue Voyage, betrays  his Cynthia-Penelope by falling  into  the arms of Faubion-Circe, Dana  is preparing to betray  his Janet-Penelope by returning  to carry his relationship  with  Olga  to its consummation. Dana  is however only an apprentice  Ulysses, wet behind  the ears, and  when he returns  to the bar he finds that  Andy has appropriated Olga. Like Ulysses, Andy knows how to sleep with his Circe without  succumbing  to her magic;  and  the only way in which  Dana  can  hope to supplant the true  Ulysses (who  is also his "father") is to dream  of murdering  him by pushing  him over­ board.  Death  by drowning  is an appropriate fate for Ulysses, whose death  at sea is predicted by Tiresias in the Odyssey, and is recorded by Dante.
The  sustained  metaphor  of the ship as an  image of human  existence, and  of


37

AIKEN AND  LOWRY



the hero's shipmates  as aspects of his own being, is the chief common feature  of Blue Voyage  and  Ultramarine. This  metaphor,  fully developed  in the De Ulixis Erroribus, is the dominant feature  of the Ulysses myth as it is interpreted  in the nco-Platonic  version.7   The  Ulysses story itself is strongly implied  in both  novels, and  with  it  the symbolism  of Circe  and  the  turning  of men  to swine. In  both novels the  Narcissus myth  is used as an image of the descent of the soul into the inferior realm of the sensual.
Lowry however adds  an original  twist to the Circe myth. Where  Aiken shows only a  descent  by his Demarest  into  animal  sensuality,  Lowry  reminds  us that Circe turns  men not only into swine, but also into "mountain wolves and lions". Dana's  loss of Olga  to  Andy  makes him contemplate  murder,  so that  he must come to terms not  only  with  the sensual or swinish part  of his nature,  but also with  what  is tigerish and  cruel  in his heart. The  ship on its homeward  journey takes on  a cargo  of elephants,  tigers, and  leopards;  and  Dana,  in an  exchange of yarns  with  his  fellow-sailors, invents a fantasy  in  which  the  animals  escape, take  over  the ship,  and  eat  the  crew. This  vision of the  tiger  in  man  requires Dana  to  find  some  outlet  for  demonic  energy, and  this  he  achieves  by finally becoming a  fireman, working in the "little hell" of the stoke-hold, and taking up the task he has earlier seen performed  by Nikolai the Russian fireman:

Cloom-cloom-cloom-cloom. Looking down he could see through  the bulkhead doors where the red and  gold of the furnaces mottled the reeking deck, and the tremulous roar of the cages' fires dominated a sibilant, continual splutter of steam. The  Oedipus  Tyrannus'  firemen, among whom he once again recognized Nikolai, half naked, gritty and  black with coal, and  pasty with ashes, came and went in the blazing light, and in the gloom, flaming nightmares, firelit demons.

Nikolai  the  fireman,  and  not  Norman  or Andy, represents Dana's  true  destiny, which is not to hope for a return  to sunlight, snow, and  innocence,  but to work in  the  stoke-hold  and  sustain  the  fiery energies. The  imagery  of  fire, of  the furnace,  dominates  the  last  part  of the novel;  Dana  is a child  of the sun, from Port  Sunlight,  but in the actual  world the sun is manifested as heat, not as light, and  the  journey into existence leads to the burning heat of the tropics and finally to  the  polar  cold. After  observing  Nikolai, Dana  affirms his faith  in life:  "He loved  the  ship.  He  loved  life".  He  then  drinks  whisky with  his fellow-sailors, gulping  down its "throat-smarting fire", and symbolically celebrating  the heroism of Nikolai.
The  theme  of the voyage of life as a journey into fire, into the special destiny

AIKEN AND  LOWRY



of the  artist  as he  nourishes  life at  its centre,  is elaborated in  Dana's meditation of the future:

There  is, as it were, a storm  flood within,  as my heart  beats with  the  beating  of the  engine,  as  I  go out  with  the ship  towards  the  eternal  summers.  A storm  is thundering out there,  there is the glow of tropical fire! Bad or good, as it happens to  be,  that  it  is what  it  is to  exist! ... It is as  though  I  have  been  silent  and fuddled with sleep all my life.

Demarest's awakening is to  the  life of the  senses;  Dana's is to  the  necessity  of accepting the task as a  fireman, the condition of the  poete maudit, of a Baudelaire or an Ancient  Mariner:

In  spite  of  all,  I  know  now  that  at  least  it  is better  to  go  always  towards  the summer,  towards  those burning  seas of light;  to sit at  night  in the forecastle  lost in  an  unfamiliar   dream,  when  the  spirit  becomes  filled  with  stars,  instead  of wounds, and good and compassionate and  tender. To sail into an unknown  spring, to receive one's baptism  on storm's promontory,  where the solitary albatross  heels over in the gale, and to come at last to land.

The  hope  of a  return to the sunlit  innocence of the  north, to Port  Sunlight and Norway,  is replaced by an  acceptance of the  need  to voyage continually into  the south,  into  the  "noonday fire",  and  after  each  return to  human 'normality', to home,  to  set  out   again   until  finally  the  last  voyage  takes  the  sailor   into   the unknown:

Then  at  last again  to be outward  bound,  always outward,  always onward,  to be fighting always for the  dreamt-of  harbour,  when  the sea thunders  on board  in a cataract, and  the  ship  rolls and  wallows in  the  track  of the  frozen  sea's storm.

Dana  accepts  his job as a fireman, and  is urged  by Nikolai  to learn  the  meaning of the  words  "Blessed  are  the  poor in spirit". The  novel ends  with  the  passing  in the night  of the  Norwegian ship  Oxenstjerna, symbol of Dana's youthful dreams, and  representing, as does the  Sylvia  Lee in  Blue Voyage, the  journey  that  is not taken.  The  loss of  the  simple  heroic ideal  is painful: "But  oh,  Janet, no sorrow is so bad  as that  which  quite  goes by." In  these last words of the  novel the whole story  is summed  up;  Dana has  found  his true  nature in  the  acceptance of  the "little   hell"  of  an  existence  in  which  his manhood is attained  through painful and  humble  service  to the  human energies which  it is the artist's task to nourish.
What may  seem  at  a first reading to be a loosely organized novel appears on more  careful   reading  to  be  carefully   constructed, with  every  detail,   however much  it  may  at  first appear to  be merely casual  or anecdotal, taking  its place  in

39

AIKEN AND  LOWRY



an elaborate  pattern  of significance. The sailor's yarn about the hippopotamus Huberta, which  wanders  four  thousand  miles to find a tragic fate from the guns of farmers  is itself an  animal  Odyssey. The  attempt  Dana  makes to explain  his life  to  Popplereuter  (the  sound  of morse combined  with  the  name  of  a  news agency)  suggests the isolation of each existence, since the wireless operator  of the German  ship  speaks  in  bad  English,  while Dana  tries to speak  to  him in  bad German.  To identify  all these significances would be tedious, but  I hope enough has  been  shown  of one  part  of the  rich symbolism of the  book to indicate  the intelligence  and   the  care  that  Lowry  put  into  it.  Ultramarine  owes much  to Aiken, but it owes more to Lowry's own genius.


NOTES

1 Malcolm  Lowry, "Through the  Panama", in Hear us, 0 Lord,  from Heaven Thy
Dwelling Place, Philadelphia and New York, 1969.
2    Conrad  Aiken, Blue Voyage, New York, 1927.
8    Malcolm Lowry, Ultramarine, New York, 1962.
4    See  Thomas   Taylor,   The    Philosophical  and  Mathematical   Commentaries  of Proclus, II  vols., London,  1 792, II, pp. 294-309, in a lengthy note giving the views of Porphyry.
Thomas Taylor, The  Fable of Cupid and Psyche, London, I795·
6   Thomas  Taylor,  The   Eleusinian  and  Bacchic Mysteries,  (Amsterdam?), n.d. pp.
147-8.
7    De Ulixis Erroribus, tr. Johannes  Columbus, Stockholm, 1678.







CANADIAN AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available at
the bookstore
UNIVERSITY  OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
2075 WESBROOK PLACE
VANCOUVER, B.C. V6T  1WS /228-4741


LOWRY'S DEBT TO NORDAHL GRIEG


Hallvard Dahlie

"SANTOs,"   he said,  "this  day  shalt  thou  be with  me in paradise"  (The  Ship  Sails On) .1 Addressed to the ship's dog by Benjamin  Hall as he  was contemplating suicide,  this statement  is said  by Douglas  Day  in  his
recent  biography  of Lowry to  be "almost  the only lines that  he was able to lift directly  from  Grieg."2    It  is true  that  Lowry didn't  lift many  lines directly  and indeed,  the only exact  borrowing of a complete sentence that  I have been able to find is not the above, but the one which Tony Kilgallin correctly identifies in his recent  book on  Lowry:   "Outside was the  roar  of the sea  and  the  darkness."3
Grieg  had  used this sentence  to conclude the second chapter  of The  Ship  Sails On,  and  Lowry used it verbatim  on two occasions, to conclude  the fifth chapter of Ultramarine4   and  as the final sentence in his short story, "On  Board the West Hardaway." 5    In  addition,   he  used a slightly modified form,  "The Roar  of the Sea and the Darkness," as one of the subtitles in his projected collection of poems to be called The Lighthouse That  Invites the Storm.6
Nevertheless, what  Lowry confessed to Nordahl Grieg in his 1938 letter7  is essentially well-grounded in fact, more so than critics have to date acknowledged, for scattered throughout Ultramarine  are some two dozen or so examples of "paraphrase, plagiarism,  or  pastiche"  from  Grieg. Some of these, it is true,  are simple one-word  borrowings  in  the form of proper  and  geographical  names, or phrases  and  sentences  which  vary  only slightly from  Grieg's  usage,  but  others involve significant extensions or  modifications of the originals to the extent  that though  Grieg  is discernible,  the  craftsmanship  of  Lowry  is also very  much  in evidence. The  general effect is therefore one of a careful and  respectful  pastiche rather  than  mere  plagiarism,  for  Lowry uses Grieg's  material  to  transform  his own experiences and  perceptions  into a powerful private aesthetic,  thus demon­ strating  that  he was unwilling  even at  the  outset of his career  to settle  for  the straight-forward  realism  that   characterizes  Grieg's  novel.  Already  Lowry  was beginning  to reflect what  was to become a major component of his later fiction,

LOWRY AND  GRIEG



a  vision of the irrational, of the  chaotic, of the grotesque, of an internal  rather than  primarily  an  external  universe. Grieg's novel, a powerful  narrative though it is, remains basically a literal and static work, closely akin in tone and  purpose to the naturalistic  works of Zola or Hamsun,  while Lowry's  points unmistakably towards  the surrealism  of Conrad  Aiken or James  Joyce. He  wanted,  certainly, "the  power and  purity of Grieg,"8  but it is clear throughout  Ultramarine that he was striving for more levels of meaning than were provided by The Ship Sails On, and  even in the simplest of his borrowings this note of restlessness, of probing, of experimentation, comes through.
In  connection  with  his use of Grieg's material,  a related question  arises as to why  Lowry  gave  such  a  relatively strong  Norwegian  flavour  to  his first novel, and   how  he  could  bring  this  aspect  off  without  the  sense  of  artificiality  or awkwardness  that  one  might  expect from a non-Norwegian.  Indeed,  even when he resorts to the many examples of the Norwegian vernacular  throughout Ultra­ marine, the note of appropriateness is achieved, as well as an aesthetic integration between the experience of the moment and the vision evoked by the disparate and seemingly  disjointed   Norwegian   phrases.  It  is  clear  that  throughout  his  life Lowry  felt a strong  affinity for  Norway and  the  Norwegians;  he was fond, for example,  of romanticizing  his maternal  grandfather, Captain  Boden, and  trans­ forming  him  into  a  Norwegian  seaman  who  went  down  with  his ship.9   And aside  from  his  friendship   with  Grieg,  he  undoubtedly  met  many   Norwegians during  his sea voyages,  particularly  when he sailed to Norway as a coaltrimmer  on a  Norwegian ship. It seems, too, that  he must have undertaken at some time during  his early years a formal study of the Norwegian language,10  his command of  which  stayed  with  him  sufficiently to translate  in  1941  a  Norwegian  letter found  in a bottle in  the  North  Atlantic  and sent to the Canadian government.11
It  is  interesting   that   on  this  occasion  he  signed  his  name  "Malcolm  Boden Lowry,"  as  though   invoking  his  "Norwegian" grandfather to  properly  inspire him. The  continued  recurrence  of Norwegian names and phrases throughout his later  fiction  provides evidence of the lingering effect that  his early identification with  Norway  produced.  To  the  youthful  and  romantic  Lowry,  Nordahl  Grieg must have seemed a remarkable  man indeed, all the more so since he had already written  much  the  same  kind  of  novel that  he himself was attempting, so it is perhaps  little wonder  that  his idolizing took at times the form of plagiarism and paraphrase.
Set out in tabular and  abbreviated  form, the passages from The Ship Sails On
that  Lowry apparently availed himself of suggest at first glance a rather  alarming

LOWRY AND  GRIEG



degree  of plagiarism, but  a close examination of their  contexts  reveals  that  much more was involved  than outright borrowing.


The  Ship Sails On

She  is  a  warehouse   that   moves  about from  port   to  port.... a  community   of human  lives.... A  Moloch  that  crushes the lives of man ... and then calmly turns its face to the solitudes as though nothing had happened. ( 2)




... it was all so unreal, a beautiful  white dream.  (Io)


He folded  it carefully ... and  dropped  it into the chest. Is was as though he had buried a part of his life. ( I o)


You'd do better  playing at Child Jesus in the temple instead of going to sea. (I9)


For a second Benjamin  looked down into the abyss of his own contemptibleness.... ( I9)
Outside was the roar of the sea and the darkness. ( 26)


... the  town  roared,  the  siren  shrieked. (37)
... the town roared  around  them.  (I49)


You son of a  bitch,  you bastard  toad­
(52)

A  mystery was present.... From  out  of this hard  iron world ... had  come some- thing  alive,  something  tender  and  help­ less. ( I I I )
 Ultramarine

... that  permitted   him  only  vaguely  to be aware of the ship as a sort of Moloch, as a warehouse. ( 4 I )

... how  incredibly  swiftly  they  had  be­
come a community.... (2I)

... gliding calmly among  the solitudes as though  nothing  had  happened. (p.  22 of "On  Board the West  Hardaway.")

... as for Janet,  she seemed to him at this moment  to be a white  dream....  (p.  I 3 of "West  Hardaway.")

... folding them over and over and  then, with  such  remorse,  dropping them  into my sea box, a part  of my life gone. The end of a chapter.  (85)
It'll teach 'im that not every little Christ Jesus  in  the  temple  can  come  running round cargo steamers. ( I 3 I )
Hilliot  stared  for  a  moment  down  into the  depths  of his own  contemptibleness.
.. . (34)
Outside was the roar of the sea and the darkness. (I73; alsop. 22 of "West Hard­ away.")
. .. the   siren   roared ... and   the   town roared back.... ( 29)
Behind the numbered  sheds the town roared.  (36)
... that   was  the  way  to  treat   him,  the bastard toad - ( 2 2 )

Something   had   happened  ... a   tender voice from home ... a mystery had shown its face among the solitudes. (26)



43

LOWRY AND GRIEG




A white  motor-boat  carne skimming  out of the  harbour,  making  for  the  Mignon. ( 1 39-39)
Seamen's  letters  are  only  for ... Narvik, Sivert, Leif, and Risor. ( 142)

It's  the  dire  disease-you  know  what.
( 170)

It  would  not  take  much,  the  relaxing of a  muscle, and  then  he  would  be  in  the power of the sea and  the sharks. ( 2 r 9)
 A white motor boat came curtsying out of the  harbour,  rolling  nearer  and  nearer. (28)

Letters  for ... Seamen  Mcgoff  and  Bre­
dahl.  ( 74)

Look! How everyone he touches is smitten with the dire disease. ( 73)

How easy ... it would be to put an end to everything.... the  relaxing  of a  muscle, and it would all be over. ( 40)


In  addition to these extended passages, there  are a number of simple  literal borrowings,  chiefly   Norwegian  geographical  and   proper   names   from   Grieg's novel,  and  with  these  Lowry  does some interesting things.  The seaport of Tvedestrand, the  horne  of Grieg's character Sivert,  becomes for Lowry  the birth­ place  of both  Andy  and  Norman, as well as the  original  registration port of the Oedipus  Tyrannus. The  names  "Leif" and  "Pedro" appear in  both  novels,  as does "Nikolai," and  with  this  latter  name  Lowry  goes so far  as to emulate Grieg by adding a  rider,  though in  a  reverse  way  from  Grieg.  Grieg's character, "the white-haired lad,   whom   they  call  Sivert,   though  he  was  christened  Nikolai" (The   Ship  Sails On,  6), thus  rejects  his name,  while  his  counterpart in  Ultra­ marine accepts  it: "I am  the  one they call  Nikolai,  but  my real name  is Wallae" (Ultramarine, r 7). It is interesting, too, that  in each novel it is this Nikolai figure who  initially   befriends  the   respective   protagonists,  with   Lowry   making   his  a fireman  instead   of  a  seaman  as  in  Grieg.  Both  novelists,  finally,  exploit   the standard   Norwegian  joke/insult  concerning   Bergen   which,    incidentally,  was Grieg's  birthplace, so undoubtedly he understood the epithet's implications. " 'You Bergener !' shouted Oscar, though  he  knew  very  well  the  steward   carne  from Flekkefjord" (The  Ship  Sails  On,  52)   represents   an  insult   whose  magnitude Lowry   apparently  understood   when   he  used  it  to  reveal  a  kind   of  perverse integrity of Andy,  who had  been fired twelve years earlier  as second  mate  because "he  had  struck  the  new  captain,  a Stavanger man,  for calling  him  a Bergener"
( Utramarine, r6).
Even   in   these   elementary  borrowings  we  are   aware   of  Lowry's   ability   to manipulate fictional   material, and   to  extend   the  components of  Grieg's  literal realism  into  a  more  complex   structure and  aesthetic.  The  Ship  Sails On  lends itself  chiefly  to  a  narrative level  of  reading,  and  a  closely related  social  protest

44

LOWRY AND  GRIEG



level,  though   I don't find  this  element  as strong  as  one  critic  suggested  in  his brief  study  of  Grieg  in  1945.12   For  example,  when  the  mate  scolds  Sivert  and Benjamin  for  idling,   warning the  former  that   he  "will  never  see  Tvedestrand again"  (The  Ship   Sails   On, 6r ), the   name   simply   represents  a  seaport in Norway,   and  the  mate's belligerent   and  unfeeling  attitude towards the  seamen reflects  a  stock  situation found   in  scores of sea stories.  Lowry,  in  that   brilliant opening scene of Ultramarine, does a different  thing  entirely  when  he reveals the fact  that  both  Andy  and  Norman had  been  born  in Tvedestrand. Everything in this  terse, stichomythic scene  rapidly  establishes  the isolation  of Dana Billiot: he has  replied  first  to  the  anonymous Board  of Trade clerk  and  awaits, as it were, the  replies of Andy  and  Norman, which  tum  out  to be identical except  for names and  ages,  and  thus  a  double  opposition  to  Dana's identity is established at  the very  outset.  Andy  and   Norman have  in  common   their  Tvedestrand  birthplace and   their  current  Liverpool address,  while  Dana   is separated from  they  by all factors-age,   birthplace,  and   residence.   I am   not  suggesting  that   the   mere repetition of  "Tvedestrand" is sufficient  to  carry  this  burden by itself,  but  it is one   of  the  elements   of  this  remarkable scene  that   reflects  Lowry's   conscious manipulation of what  otherwise might simply  be regarded as borrowed material.
Throughout the  first  weeks of his voyage,  Billiot  has  many  occasions  to muse upon   his  isolation  and  expatriation, and  in  a  parenthetical interior  monologue addressed   to Janet he  links  all  this-through  a  description of  the  ship -with Tvedestrand again:

-the tramp   steamer   Oedipus   Tyrannus,  outward   bound  for  hell.  When  you come  to  think  of  it-an  ideal  match.  Both  of  us born  of  Viking  blood,  both robbed of our  countries  and  left  to make out  as best we can;  both,  finally, with the  same  wandering,  harbourless,  dispossessed characteristics.  Her  very history is enough to fill me with a narcissistic compassion! First she was registered in Tvedestrand, then   bought   by  an  English  firm.... She  sailed  out  an  exile,  an expatriate,   with   Seamen   scarcely  substituted   for   Matroser,   or   Firemen   for Fyreotere. (Ultramarine, 53)

Andy  and  Norman, born  in  Tvedestrand, clearly  belong  with  the  ship  from  the start,   while  Dana, in  spite  of  his  desperate wish  for  it  to  be  otherwise, is an outsider  on  that  score  as well,  as  he is constantly  reminded in the  course  of his ship-board duties.  And  of  course  one of  the  major   themes  of  this  novel  is the tracing of  how  he  ultimately effects a  community with  his shipmates, and  with Andy and  Norman in particular.

45

LOWRY AND  GRIEG



0N  THE WHOLE, the passages that I have listed above reveal a much  more subjective  and  introspective  character  in Hilliot than  in Benjamin
Hall,  who  frequently  emerges  primarily  as a spokesman  for  Grieg's  own social and  political views. Hall  "guesses," even before he boards the Mignon, that  "she is a warehouse ... , a community  of human  lives ... , a Moloch that  crushes the lives of men,"  but there is no urgency or threat  experienced by him at this point, though  he does feel "drawn to her and  afraid  of her"  (The Ship  Sails On,  2). Hilliot's  parallel  reflections  about  the  Oedipus  Tyrannus  occur  during  his first night  at Tsjang-Tsjang, while he is still in isolation from the shore-bound  crew, his mind in turmoil over his fleeting thoughts of suicide, the homosexual advances of the quartermaster, and in general the "roar  of the town" beyond the dock. He recalls that  at school he was unable  to grasp a sense of order even in a discipline like geometry,  and  now  in  his suffering  state  he is unable  to assign a  tangible shape  to the  causes or  nature  of his alienation.  "This  was it, this was always it, this lack of order  in  his life which  even now permitted  him only vaguely to be aware  of  the  ship  as  a  sort  of  Moloch,  as a  warehouse"  (Ultramarine, 4 I). Benjamin  Hall  becomes a part  of the "community  of human  lives" almost in his first  confrontation with  Aalesund  and  Oscar,  and  his  transformation from  "a new hand  who knows nothing" ( 2 )   to one "who suddenly understood  what the sea means to seamen"  ( 35)  occurs with virtually no inward  turmoil  and  only a brief bout  of sea-sickness and  vomiting to signify the purging  of his former self. When  Hilliot, on the other  hand,  thinks about  how swiftly the "fourteen  men in a  forecastle ... had   become  a  community,"  he  is  immediately   propelled  in thought  from "his  place there  on the poop" towards a chaotic eternity,  a "world within  world,  sea  within  sea,  void  within  void, the  ultimate,  the  inescapable"
( Ultramarine, 2 I ) •   Since he is not part of this community as yet, he takes refuge in the tangible  things around  him, "the  visible structure  of the ship",  and is soon momentarily  elated  by the  endless possibilities of what  the ship  represents. The restricted  "community of  human  lives" which  we see literally  being  decimated one  by one  in  Grieg's  novel, is being transformed  in Billiot's  imagination  into "another land  line,  another   climate,  another  people,  and  another   port  which would emerge, inevitably,  out  of such nothingness"  (Ultramarine, 22-3).
Grieg  clearly  is motivated  by a deterministic  impulse in  his concern  to show
us  the  devastating  effects of  "the  dire  disease";  his world,  represented  by the Mignon, is ordered,  predictable,  inflexible, and  ultimately  destructive,  and  the only way for one to survive is to leave the ship before it destroys him. Of all the

LOWRY AND  GRIEG



crew, only Narvik can do this, and it is significant that  he never goes ashore with the crew to partake  in their endless orgies, and  he is thus spared  the destruction which  inhabits  this  ship-seaport  ambience.  All others  who  leave  the  ship,  like Aalesund   and   Little  Bekhardt,   leave  as  doomed  men,  ravaged   by  "the   dire disease." The  threat  of venereal  disease runs through  Lowry's novel as well, but as far as the immediate  crew of the Oedipus Tyrannus is concerned,  it is present off stage rather  than  on stage, as it were:  only Norman  of the  present crew has been  infected  but,  along  with  everyone  else, he  passes "short-arm  inspection" and is ready for action again. But the accounts that Dana hears about  the ravages of  syphilis  on  former  crew  members,  and  the  vivid  specimens  he  sees in  the Tsjang-Tsjang anatomical  museum all provide dramatic reasons for Hilliot's obsessive fear  of infection.  The  projection  he  has of  what  he  will be once  he breaks  "all   the  shy,  abstemious  promises  with  which   []anet]   invested  him" reflects this paranoia:

... see him  if you will for  yourself,  Dana Hilliot,  the  syphilitic,  as he strolls aim­ fully  down  Great Homer Street. Look!  How  everyone  he  touches  is smitten  with the  dire  disease.  It is just that  one  little  word,  the word  that  kills. Now everything is wasted.... This  is he,  the  human husk,  the  leaf of ash, ashes  to ashes  and  dust to dust.  (Ultramarine, 73)
But  of course all this does not  come to pass in Lowry's book, while "the  word that  kills" performs  devastatingly  in The  Ship  Sails On.  When  Little  Bekhardt tells Benjamin  that  he is infected  by "the  dire  disease," its effects are  already apparent in his increasing blindness and growing madness. And Benjamin's subsequent  glimpse  of  the  Cape  Town  hospital  ward  full  of  inert,  bandaged victims reveals in tangible form that there is ultimately no escape from the consequences  of  his  transgression.  Lowry's  vision,  by  contrast,   though   more chaotic  than  Grieg's,  is optimistic  and  expansive, for  Hilliot  and  his mates  do receive second and  third  chances, as it were, whereas for Grieg's  characters  one slip spells out irrevocable doom.
Much  of the effect that  Lowry achieves in his use of Grieg's  material  derives
from  the  skill with  which  he expands  it  beyond its literal  limitations  and  inte­ grates it with  his shifting styles. Grieg's novel rarely transcends its literal dimen­ sions, although  in  a sense it  depends  on how one starts  the  novel : it  is  in one way as effective as a total  allegory as it is as a realistic social  document, but it has to be one or the other, and  can't  effectively change in midstream,  as it were. Ultramarine, on  the  other  hand,  repeatedly  moves back  and  forth  between  its literal  and  non-literal  levels, just as it  moves backwards  and  forwards  in  time,

47

LOWRY AND GRIEG



and  it is in these shifting contexts  that  Grieg's  words and situations are effectively transformed. When  Benjamin Hall  changes  from  his shore clothes to his seaman's attire and   puts  away  his  blue  suit,  he  feels "it  was  as though he  had  buried   a part  of his life"  (The Ship  Sails On,  10), but  his action  is merely a chronological and  mechanical step  in  his transformation. The  equivalent scene  in Ultramarine unfolds  in retrospect as Hilliot  after  weeks at sea prepares to go ashore in Tsjang­ Tsjang:

... I  reentered  the  forecastle  to dress. There  I  took my blue suit out  of my sea box.  While  dressing  I  remembered   how  the  first  night  aboard   the  ship  I  had creased  these self-same  trousers,  holding  them  under  my chin, folding them over and  over and  then,  with  such remorse, dropping  them into my sea box, a part  of my life gone. The  end  of a chapter.... But now it was the right time to wear my blue suit again. (Ultramarine, 85)

Grieg's  Benjamin Hall  does, of course,  bury  permanently a "part of his life," for there  will never  again  be for  him "the right  time"  to wear  his suit in any kind of innocent  reunion  with   Eva.  Hilliot   can  still  do  so  with  Janet, for  though  he becomes  insensibly  drunk every  time  he goes ashore,  his forays leave him sexually as  chaste  as  ever.  The "end of  a  chapter" is not  in  Billiot's case  the  end  of a book  as it  effectively  is for  Benjamin, for  whom  indeed  "everything is wasted" after  his seduction by the prostitute.
Basically  the  difference here  involves  Lowry's  comic  vision  of life as opposed to the  bleak determinism of Nordahl Grieg, outlooks which  are reflected in the consequences of  the  "letter" episodes  of the  two  novels.  Benjamin Hall  fails to receive  his  expected letter   from  Eva  during the  normal mail  delivery  in  Cape Town,  and   in  a  fit  of  disappointment  and   revenge  goes  ashore   where   he  is willingly  seduced   by  Rita   and,  as he later  discovers,  venereally infected  by her. The  next  day  Eva's  delayed  letter  arrives,  full of the innocent love which  would have  saved   Benjamin  the  day  before;   irrevocably  doomed,   he  decides  against suicide,  and  remains to  become  part  of the  corruption of the  ship  and  its crew. Dana Hilliot  also  fails  to  receive  his letter  from  Janet during the  regular  mail call  and,  like Benjamin, he  feels he  now  has sufficient  grounds for  breaking his vows of chastity. "Surely Janet wouldn't mind  that," he rationalizes; "she would want me  to be a man, a  hell of a fellow like Andy.... Tonight things  would  all be  changed, tonight I should   be  the  hero,  the  monster-" (Ultramarine, 79,
81 ) . Though Janet's letter  does arrive  before he goes ashore,  he is still determined
to  "become a  man," but  at  the  point  of succumbing to  the  prostitute Olga  he hesitates,  remembering the  letter: "Give  me half an  hour," he tells Olga,  "I want

LOWRY AND  GRIEG



to  cool  my  brain  a little  and  think" (Ultramarine, I I 6). Olga, however,  is  not in  a cooling  mood,  and  when  Dana returns, she has given  herself  over  to Andy, and Billiot's chastity is thus for the moment  preserved.
There is a strong  sense of the  comic in this scene as there  is, indeed, in  much of  Ultramarine, and  it  is in  this  respect  that   Lowry  most  sharply differs  from Grieg. In a relatively  minor  borrowing-the episode of the motor  boat approach­ ing  the  Mignon-this aspect  of  Lowry's  art  is subtly  illustrated.  Grieg's depic­  tion  of this scene  is precise  and  literal,  not  charged with  any hidden possibilities, and  when  we learn  that  the  boat  is bringing  the  pilot on  board, we recognize  the incident  simply  as another example of Grieg's  familiarity with  a common marine procedure. Lowry  makes  subtle   changes  in  Grieg's  wording:  "A  white   motor boat  came  curtsying out of the harbour, rolling nearer and  nearer" (Ultramarine,
28;   italics   mine),  changes we  begin  to  understand  upon   learning the  boat's mission:   "the order   came   for  all  hands  to  muster   for  a  short-arm  inspection while  a fat  doctor  hauled  himself  up the  Jacob's ladder" ( 28). When we realize that  during the  course  of his inspection, the  fat  M.O. is a homosexual (he  takes Norman inside  for  "an interview"), we grasp  the  appropriateness of the  words "curtsying" and  "rolling." There is no such comic relief in Grieg from  the spectre of  venereal  disease  and  indeed, the  sense of  the  comic  rarely  is present  in  any form  in  his  novel,  let  alone  in  connection with  "the dire  disease."  Grieg  may have   given   Lowry   the   vocabulary,  but   Lowry's   vision  and   aesthetic  powers enabled   him   on  most  occasions   to  achieve   a  satisfying   transformation  of  his borrowed material.
In   assessing  Lowry's   debt   to  Nordahl   Grieg,  it  is  impossible   to  determine infallibly  the  dividing line  between  borrowing and  originality, but  it seems  clear that   the  passages  I  have  indicated in  this  paper  derived  specifically  from  The Ship  Sails  On.   With   other   similarities   between   the   two  novels-the  young, romantic  hero,   the   existence   of  the  idealized,   innocent  girl   back   home,   the confrontation  between   innocence  and   experience,  and   so  on -attribution  is more  tenuous,  for  fictional  elements  like these are  as much  the  stock  in  trade of Bildungsroman  in  general  as they  are  borrowings from  any  specific  author. And of course  Lowry's  own  experiences aboard the  Pyrrhus and  other  ships  probably counted more  than  any  readings he may  have  done  when  he  began  the  writing of Ultramarine  in  I928. I  do  not  know exactly  when  Lowry  inserted   the  Grieg material into  the  body  of  his novel, but  the  evidence  I  have  examined  suggests that  it  was  some  time  between   the  fall  of I 930  and  the  fall  of I 932,  at  which time  he first submitted his manuscript to Chatto and  Windus. Though according


49

LOWRY  AND GRIEG



to  Earle  Birney,  Lowry  had  read  The  Ship  Sails On  in translation before  going to  Cambridge in  October of  I929/ 3  the  first explicit  reference  to  Grieg  in  any­ thing  Lowry  wrote  occurs  in  his short  story,  "Punctum  lndifferens Skibet  Gaar Videre", published after  his return from  his visit to Grieg  in  the  fall  of   I930.14
And  since  Conrad  Aiken   makes  no  mention   of  the  influence of  Grieg  in  his reminiscing about the  revision  of Ultramarine during the summer of  I929/ 5 it is likely that  it didn't occur  to Lowry  to use Grieg's  material until  after  he had  met him.  His  letter  to  Grieg  in  I938  indicates the  close identification he experienced with  Benjamin Hall,  and  of course  it is quite  possible that   Lowry's  attempts to write  a stage  version  of The Ship  Sails On  led him to make some fictional  use of this material.16
According to  Douglas  Day,  Lowry  was "literally terrified  that  some  reviewer might   check ... Ultramarine  out   of  a  library   and   discover   that   it  contained material stolen   from   Conrad  Aiken   and   Nordahl Grieg."17   It  does  of  course contain such  material, though Day states it doesn't, but it contains it in somewhat the same  way that, say, Eliot's  Waste  Land  contains material stolen  from  others: it  is  transformed  through  the   borrower's vision  and  art   into  something quite different from  the  original. Lowry  may  have  been  putting us on about his fears, but   I  think   he  did   protest   too  much   about   the  mediocrity  of  Ultramarine; George  Woodcock pointed  out some years ago that  "it is not an unworthy work,ms and  a not  insignificant part  of its strength derives,  I think,  from  the  effective  use that  Lowry made  of material from  Nordahl Grieg.



NOTES

1 Nordahl Grieg. The Ship Sails On. (New York, I927). Subsequent references are indicated  internally.
2    Douglas Day. Malcolm  Lowry.  (New York, I973),  p. I Ign. The sentence appears, slightly  modified,  in  Under  the  Volcano   (New  York,  I 947),  p.  229. ("Yet  this day, pichicho, shalt thou be with me in-")
3  Tony Kilgallin. Lowry. (Erin,  I973),  p. 108.
4    Malcolm   Lowry,   Ultramarine.  (Philadelphia  and   New  York,  Ig62),  p.   I73· Subsequent  references are indicated  internally.
5   Malcolm   Lowry.   "On   Board   the   West   Hardaway,"  Story,  Vol.  III, No.  15 (October  I933), 22.
6    Earle  Birney, ed. The  Collected  Poems of Malcolm  Lowry. (San Francisco,  Ig62), p. g.
1 Malcolm Lowry. Selected Letters, ed. Harvey Breit and Marjorie  Bonner Lowry. (Philadelphia and New York, I965), pp. 15-I6.

LOWRY AND GRIEG



8   Quoted in Day, op. cit., p. I I7.
9    Conrad  Knickerbocker states  flatly  that  Captain Boden  was  "a   Norwegian  sea­ man." Prairie  Schooner XXXVII   (Winter, I963-64), 303.  Day,  however,  states that  he was "a  well-known Liverpool shipowner and  mariner." op. cit.,  p. 58.
10  Day,  op.  cit., p.  I 2 In. Though Day  suggests that  Lowry  leamed only "a  drinker's vocabulary" in  Norwegian, his precise  use of Norwegian throughout  Ultramarine seems to contradict this.
11  The Atlantic Monthly, October I94I, p. 501.
12  Dik  Lehmkul, "Echo From   the  North: The  Voice  of Nordahl Grieg," Transfor­
mation, 3· London, I945, p. I65.
13  Earle  Bimey,  "A  Malcolm Lowry  Bibliography," Canadian Literature, 8  (Spring, I96I), 82. Grieg's  novel,  published in Norway in  I924, was translated into  English in  I927 by one of Lowry's Cambridge masters, A. G. Chater.
14  Lowry's  title  contains the  Norwegian title  of Grieg's  novel,  Skibet   Gaar  Videre.
This  story,  published  in the  winter of I 930-3 I, and  "Port Swettenham," published in February of I930, were both  incorporated into Ultramarine. "Port Swettenham"
contains no reference to Grieg, whom  Lowry  visited  between  July  and  September
of 1930.
15   Conrad Aiken,   "Malcolm  Lowry:  A  Note," Canadian  Literature,  8   (Spring, I96I),  29-30.
16    Ifind  it  puzzling  that   Grieg,   a  relatively  successful  dramatist, would  entrust a stage-adaptation of  his  novel  to  a  non-dramatist, but  this  is  perhaps another of the many unsolved details of the whole Grieg-Lowry relationship.
17  Day, op. cit., pp. 26-27.
18  George   Woodcock,   "Malcolm  Lowry   as  Novelist,"  British   Columbia   Library
Quarterly, Vol. 24, No.4 (April  Ig6I), 26.


MAN IN THE MAZE


Donald G. Priestman





TE RECENT reprinting of Douglas Le Pan''only novel, Th' Deserter, in  the  New Canadian Library  should serve to remind  readers  both of the author's  considerable  technical  ability and,  at the same time, of how slender a  body  of writing  his reputation rests upon.  In  what  follows, I  shall  trace  Le Pan's  central  theme  of the search for individual  dignity and  the meaning  of life as  he  develops  it  through   the  "maze"   and  "entrapment" imagery  of  his two volumes of poetry  and  his noveP At first glance,  he appears  to move  chrono­ logically from  pre-war  to demobilization  but, in the end,  he leads us full circle. We are  left with  the conclusion after  reading any one of his books, and  more so after  reading  them  all, that  such a quest is a continuous one. Circumstances  may alter  but man,  as Le Pan  sees him, is always a kind of  princely Theseus groping in the labyrinth  without the assurance of Ariadne's thread.
This  assurance,  once  believed in, never did exist Le Pan  tells us in "Image of
Silenus,"  the last poem of The  Wounded  Prince.2    Opening  with a picture of the great  blue heron rising from the reeds, the poem presents us with an image of our unfulfilled desires which would at first limp then soar to some better place which we can, at best, but dimly imagine. Sandwiched between the ascent and possible coming to rest of the bird is the Silenus figure, the image of faith, and those who do  it  homage.  Faith,  "not   so  bright  now j As when  it  left  the  hands  of  the makers," seldom shows its treasures, but when it does, they, Dionysius, St. Christopher,  St. Francis,  Apollo, and  the rest, seem toys, mere "shrunken  figures of desire" that  are "fashioned  out of desperation."  It provokes the tortured  song of  the  ill-assorted  choir  whose  home is the  labyrinthine  slum  described  in  the closing stanzas  of  the  poem  and  who  plead  to  know,  "where  is the  land  of promised  good."  Although  the  Silenus may  give brief glimpses of its treasures, they are  just enough  to keep them wondering if the bird does, after all, know of "the  misted land  where  time goes slow." Man  cannot  follow the  bird, however, and  he will never  know  whether  the heron ever achieves its destination  or not.
Because  they  lack  any  clearly  defined  purpose  or destination,  the  figures in

MAN IN  THE  MAZE



The  Wounded  Prince are  appropriately pictured  as lost, trapped, or  lonely. In "Twelve  of the Clock," for instance, the lonely individual  hearing  the clock strike at midnight  is likened to a ship in the icebound mid-Atlantic. His "harried heart" beats slow as the turbines;  he must pick his way through  the  "labyrinthine  city of the sea."  For some, in a situation  such as this, death,  the  poet suggests in the thirteenth  stanza,  is a  temptation. Others  escape into fantasy,  but  in each  case they behave as they do because they can't  stand being alone. This problem is also considered in the title poem, "The  Wounded  Prince",  which takes for its subject the sorry condition  of the sensitive personality humiliated  equally  by pity on the one  hand  and  disappointment on  the other.  Hurt  sensibilities, Le Pan  suggests, result in withdrawal  to one's inner  life and are betrayed by the wounded  expres­ sion in the eye which he compares  with a bird impaled within a thicket, presum­ ably the eyebrows.
A similar case obtains in "A Fallen Prophet" as we trace a first-hand  observer's brief faith  in Christ.  It began with the walking on the water and ended  with the crucifixion. Images of net and  maze are few, but the poem, as a whole, seems a prelude  to  "Image of Silenus"  which  was discussed earlier  because  I  believe it crucial to an  understanding of Le Pan's ideas and attitudes.  In this poem, Christ is the  heron  and  the  observer  is analogous  to the slum dweller  who dreams  of finding  a  way out  of his metropolitan  maze. He  was "baffled by lights,  humili­ ated  j By mad  machines,  by schedules,"  and  believed the man  who  walked  the waters could lead him to a better  place. This dream,  however, like the dream  of following the heron, was illusory. But Christ too is presented as a type of wounded prince;  He was trapped  by crucifixion, here presented as a kind of drowning,  yet His death  and  its nobility remain a potent legacy. As we shall see, the "wounded prince-fallen  prophet" motif  is transformed  in  later  works  to  comprehend   the plight of the sensitive and knightly modem soldier.
Isolation  of  a  different  sort  is the  problem  explored  in  "Coureurs de  Bois". Here, the "you"  of the poem is trapped  by time; he was born too late to channel his  need  for  a  sense of  purpose  into  anything  as obvious  and  physical  as  the search for the  North-west  Passage. His idealism is even more incongruous  in the contemporary  world than  were the  brocaded  coats the Coureurs  de Bois packed among  their  rations  of  pemmican  against  the  day  when  they  would  reach  the courts of China.  For the modem  man, new Easts are only to be found, "through the  desperate  wilderness behind  your eyes." In  his search  for  honour,  he must explore himself and  wander  the maze of his own personality. The  man  who can do this is a hero of a different stamp  but a hero nevertheless. To some extent, at

53

MAN IN THE  MAZE



least,  this  new  type  of search,  carried  on in  the  modern  wilderness of the self, foreshadows  Rusty's  desperate  hunt  for honour  and  perfection  in The  Deserter. "A  Country   Without   a  Mythology"  and  "Canoe   Trip" present  Canada  as another  type of labyrinth. Her  wilderness is real enough,  and  its very presence is responsible for  and  suggestive of the cultural  wilderness that  often  makes the sensitive Canadian feel trapped. The  former  offers a  completely  negative  view of the  country  while "Canoe Trip", using the same  journey  motif hints  that  if the  land  cannot   provide  direct  inspiration,  at  least its  vastness  and  unspoiled character  can impress one with a feeling of awe. In "Finale" Le Pan  repeats his challenge  to  make  something   worthwhile  out  of  the  world  we  must  live  in. Whereas  the  journey through  the maze in "Canoe Trip" was a healthful experi­ ence which prepared  one to face the task with renewed vigour, the maze in this poem leads only to escapism via the  paths of selfishness and  crime. People who
follow this route are like the "dropouts" in "Twelve of the Clock" who could not
stand  up  to loneliness but  succumbed  to suicide and  fantasy.  By repeating  the phrase,  "Always  the  path  leads back,"  Le Pan suggests that  escape is not really possible. Like a man lost in the bush who keeps coming back to where he started, the person who seeks to escape the normal world, whether through  crime or love, must always return  to it. Compared  to the fantasy world it may seem harsh and vulgar but it poses a challenge which must be met.

bus FAR what  we have seen in The  Wounded Prince is a brilliantly  played  set  of  variations  around  the  theme  of  the  personality  which
feels itself  trapped   in  a  world  uncongenial  to  its sensibilities. Instinctively  it shrinks  away  from  the  source  of irritation,  and  so experiences loneliness in  the conviction, sometimes only half  realized, that  it is living at  the wrong  time and in  the  wrong  place. Some  people are able  to face their  loneliness and  learn  to live with  it  proudly  and  defiantly.  Others  cannot,  and  a  number  of the  poems point out  how struggling  to escape one trap  can lead to another.  The  other trap is the dream  that  somewhere there is a better place, a happier  life to be led. Such an objective is but  dimly perceived and may be approached  through  a variety of paths  such  as  religion,  crime,  love,  abnormality,   idealism,  or  just  plain  day­ dreaming.  All  paths,  however,  tum  out  to  be  mazes which  lead  the  would-be travellers  back  to the  real  world  they came from. Some return  hopeless misfits; others  are  inspired  to  begin  the  difficult  job of making  over  this  world in  the image of their  hearts'  desires. With "Image of Silenus", I feel  Le Pan  draws all

54

MAN IN  THE MAZE



his variations  together  and,  to push the music analogy  a little farther,  closes on an elaborate and tragic chord.
Considering the quality  of Canadian poetry in 1948, one might have predicted a brilliant  future  for the author  of The  Wounded  Prince. Even te>-day the book stands  up well against  those of practitioners  with a similar temperament such as Jay  MacPherson,  James  Reaney,  and  P. K.  Page. We might  have been inclined to raise our eyebrows a little at C. Day Lewis' statement  in the introduction that, "there  is a certain  bluntness  and  dependability  about  the surface  of his poems," but  his enthusiasm  for  a  poet  "in  whom  the  New and  Old  World  have  met" would have seemed justified. Every poem was not loaded with Canadianisms but Le Pan's  achievement  seemed  to be that  when they did appear, and  it was not infrequently,  they  did  not  sound  awkward  or  provincial.  Herons  could share  a poem  with  a  Silenus  statue   and   coureurs  de  bois  could  be  utilized  without turning   the  poem  into  an  adventure  narrative.  Virtuosity,  not  slick technique but an ability to look at a subject  or treat a theme from a multiplicity  of angles, marks Le Pan's  first volume. Although  the common  denominator of much of his imagery may be regarded  as that  of the trap  or maze, the actual  variety of visual impression  he  achieves  is remarkable.  When  Lewis said  that  Le  Pan's  poetry conveys "the  feeling of assurance and satisfaction that  comes from the right word set  unobtrusively  in  the  right  place,"  he  came  close  to  describing  the  great promise that  this poet held in his first works. Whether  this promise was fulfilled as a  poet or  not  rests on  an  assessment of The  Net  and  the  Sword,  published five years later.
Two other  poems in The  Wounded  Prince deserve comment.  "One of the Regiment"  was reprinted  in  the second volume and  I shall  deal  briefly with it there. The  other,  "A  Vision",  will serve as an introduction  to The  Net  and the Sword.  Composed  in  seven  quatrains  of iambic  tetrameter, the  poem  has  the quality  of  hurrying  the  reader  relentlessly towards  its last  four  lines. Le  Pan's vision was of the coming  war  and  he concludes that  the gods care  nothing  for man's  suffering;  it  is a  pleasant  fiction  just as the  little  deities in  the  Silenus image were nothing  more than  "shrunken  figures of desire." This is the way man transmutes his brief:

Imagination grew the tree
To mock the way weak men have bled. Evasion turned to heraldry
The living, sweet, imperfect red.


55

MAN IN THE MAZE



Heraldry,  as we shall see, is one  means  Le Pan  employs to distance  his readers from the horrors of war in TheN et and the Sword.



WRTIME ITALY is the setting for The  Net  and the Sword but  even  a  first  reading   makes  it  abundantly clear  that   it  is  not  war  which primarily  concerns Le Pan. This is not to deny him the quality of pity but rather to remove  him from  the  ranks of those whose subject is blood, sweat,  tears, and the  hell of war.  His theme  remains  the struggle of the individual  caught  in the maze of life, and  he reworks the informing  ideas of The  Wounded Prince. Here, to  find  one's  way  successfully through  the  maze's  various  tensions,  attractions, and  dead-ends  is to achieve some kind of vision, while to get lost is to die in an elaborate  trap.  The  trap  is more obviously physical but its implications  are the same.  It  forces the individual  to face his crisis alone and  brings out in the truly noble personality, the wounded prince, a hitherto unsuspected dignity.
The  title poem makes the basic metaphor  of the collection clear and emphasizes the nature  of the first kind of trap,  which is the net-like paraphernalia of modem war:

In this sandy arena, littered
And looped  with  telephone wires, tank-traps, mine-fields, Twining about  the embittered
Debris of history,  the people whom he shields Would  quail  before a stranger if they could see His smooth  as silk ferocity.

Where billowing  skies suspend
Smoke-latticed rumours, enmeshed  hypotheses
And mad  transmitters send
Impossible orders  on crossed frequencies, His eyes thrust concentrated and austere. Behind  his lids, the skies are clear.

Against  such  odds  the  princely  personality  can  only pit  its  pride.  Most  of the poeins contain  some vocabulary  of the  "net" or "maze"  variety  but  some deal more  precisely with  the second  kind of trap: Italy, which seems to ensnare and, at  times, even digest the  invader.  In  "An  Incident", the soldier's body dissolves or melts right into the landscape  while in "Elegy in Romagna" we have imagery which  is shifting  and  murky, leading  the reader to see with the tired eyes of the writer  a cellar which  takes on the qualities of a dungeon or a spider's  web. The

MAN IN  THE MAZE



victims, in  reality soldiers resting  after  a day of battle,  occasionally  remind  one of flies stuck in jam:

One  of the sleepers moving in his sleep
Is tangled  in a mess of gear, and groans;
One shows his back as brown as a tobacco leaf; One sighs, one lies as though his neck were broken.

So much  for the net except to say that it has a beauty of its own, especially when it  is shorn  by Le Pan  of most of the real  horror  and  agony  of actual  warfare.
The  character  of the  gladiator  is also the  product  of Le  Pan's  poetics rather than  of reporting.  In  the toils of the net, he struggles to keep up the  belief that he  is fighting  for some  high  cause, like a  knight  of old. Preserving  this  belief, however, is not always easy. Fear and the mere havoc of war make it difficult to keep up one's illusions and, surveying a field after a battle, in "Meditation after an Engagement", he can find little solace even in having survived.
In  his review of The  Net  and the Sword,  Northrop  Frye pointed  out  that  in
gladiatorial   contests  "generally  the  netman  won."3   Such  is the  case  here  too, though  there  is no doubt  that  the  man with the sword is the  hero. The  method of portraying  him is frequently  as stylized as the battle scenes which  are deliber­ ately  heraldic  in their  effect. Le Pan's  hero is frequently  a strangely  impersonal youth,  tight-lipped,  bare-headed, possessed of a  "smooth  as silk  ferocity", who often  dissolves into  a  crusader  or  Florentine  gallant  as he does in  "One of the Regiment", but whose memories are of "Skating  at Scarborough, summer  at the island." This same motif of the young crusader intoxicated by battle  runs through several of the poems, but is the entire subject of  "Reconnaisance in Early Light".  Looking  more like a picture  on a Hitler Jugend  poster than  a kid from  cabbage town, he goes into battle with every hair in place:

His gaze alone is unperplexed.
He sips from  this thin air some sacred  word.

Through all his veins the sacrament of danger, Discovering secret fires, runs riot.  His hard
Eyes gleam with cunning pressed from some smouldering hunger; His coat bums sleek and lillied as a leopard's.

Again,  in  the  title poem, although  the hero succumbs, Le Pan  tries to convey a magnificence to him. The  imagery of the poem shifts nicely between  the combat of the ancient  and  that  of the modem  gladiator  but it invests the  action  with a kind of greatness reminiscent of the ritual struggle and death  of the  bullfight.

57

MAN  IN  THE  MAZE



This  distancing  of  the  reader  from  the  real  messiness of war  is at  once  an advantage  and  disadvantage. It  keeps the reader  aware  that  the struggle of the soldier caught  in the toils of war is representative of something greater than itself and  does not call forth  the  personal emotional expenditure,  genuine or maudlin, of conventional  war  poetry. It also makes it possible for Le Pan, eight years after the event, to make the struggle still seem relevant. The disadvantage is that  these poems with  their  almost  rococo use of language  often leave the  reader  with the feeling that  he has been looking at  a bejewelled reliquary  which,  however calm and  beautiful  it  may  be,  conceals something  whose story is one of cruelty  and pain.  A subdued  yet  typical  instance  of this may  be found  in  the  poem, "An Incident", where a boy who in peacetime might have been looking for an over­ grown  portage in his own province now scans a map and  waits in the face of the enemy for relief. His death  seems not only ill-timed and accidental  but, as Le Pan relates it, unreal.  A similar  feeling is created  in "An  Effect of an  Illumination". During   a  night  bombardment  men  are  frightened,  blinded,  and  killed. Here more than  in the other  poems Le Pan succeeds in making us feel for a time some of the genuine emotion which the occasion must have prompted:

The sphinctered sky seals off a livid bell-jar
On humiliated animals lost in holes....
0 mother!  mother! cord to the mothering earth! Our hearts run dry; our blood sucked downward Through a straight, stretched tube, dangerously thin And twanging breaks ... breaks ... how can it hold? Pluck close this nested bird with brittle bones
A little longer. Receive it. Give it suck. Exhausted vacuum below pulsating ribs,
Easy to crush as wrens' bones or a blown
Bird's egg, protect with vascular affection; Protect, great mother, your exhausted sons.
And slowly through parched veins blood creeps again.

Desmond  Pacey argues that,  "the  elaborate, ornate language  and imagery is very effective in just that sense of voluptuous luxury which affords the desired contrast for  the sudden  brutal  ferocity  of the  raid."4   I would agree  with  him about  the contrast  but feel it is weakened  because the horror is transmuted  by the language. Not  only is the  passage  here  quoted  preceded  but  also followed by lines whose imagery and  vocabulary  tend  to erase the shock from the reader's  mind.
None of this is bad  in  itself, but  it does raise the question  as to whether  all
subjects are equally appropriate to a lyric and elegiac talent. There  is no denying

MAN  IN  THE MAZE



a strong  continuity  of theme  exists between The  Wounded Prince and  The  Net and  the  Sword.  If his first volume offers a  wide  range  of "man  in  the  maze" situations,  it  is fair  to say that  his second is an examination  in detail  of one of them-man  in  the  maze  of  war. 5    The  youthful  Canadian soldier,  far  from home and caught  in the toils of death and danger, is indeed one type of wounded prince. But war  is only one of many traps  a man  can find himself in and so Le Pan is obliged to utilize its imagery while not letting it run away with his reader's attention.   To  avoid  this,  he  tries  to  tum  our  minds  away  from  the  pain  and horror  that  all  of  us know,  if  only vicariously, are  the  very stuff  of war.  His technique  has been to tum  raw life into art, or as he called it in the closing lines of "A Vision", "Evasion  turned  to heraldry".  As a solution to an artistic problem it is perfectly legitimate  and  commendable.  Whether  it works or  not  is another matter.   Layton's   "Archibald  Lampman    of  the   battlefield"   remark,   Pacey's repeating of the "Peacock Le Pan" nickname, and even Frye's rather defensive reminder  that,  "Besides, the  poems are  not battle  pieces but elegies, meditations on war recollected in tranquillity,"6  all suggest that  there is an unresolved tension between  the  technique  and  the  material.  Like it  or  not,  war  is a subject  with built-in  responses that  are  hard  to muffle.  For  Le  Pan,  the  problem  of utilizing war  imagery  while divesting it of the accustomed emotional  responses may have been too great.  In  any event, it is part of the artist's  task not to avoid challenges but  to seek solutions to them  and  Le Pan  should  not be faulted  for his daring.
In  the  last  paragraph, I intimated  that  the  poet  bit off more  than  he could chew.  One   wonders,  however,  how  he  might  have  fared  if  he  had  kept  his "heraldic" tendencies  under  tighter  rein.  Richness  of  technique   was  certainly called for if war  imagery  was to be abstracted  from  the emotions that  normally go with  it,  but  there  is a line between  art  and  artificiality over  which  Le  Pan trespasses in The  Net  and the Sword. His first volume is superior  in this respect. C. Day Lewis' statement  about the right word in the right place was no small compliment,  nor was it uneamed.7 The language of The  Wounded Prince is rich but  not  gaudy  and  some of the stanza  patterns  such  as that  of "Rider on  the Sands"  are  intricate,  but  functional  and  unobtrusive.  Unfortunately, the  same cannot  be said for much of The  Net and the Sword. Passages of great  beauty are there  too, but so are  phrases like "eyelids that  fleur-de-lis the dark," "the  white caesura  that  stripped  down  longing," and  "systole of sky" which  merely jar the reader.  Likewise, his use of "trumpet-tell" is common enough  to be classed as a mannerism.
Similarly,  the  elaborate  stanza  structures  generally  fail  in  The   Net  and  the


59

MAN IN  THE  MAZE



Sword   because  they  constantly  remind  the reader  of the anatomy  of the  poem. Up  to a point, Le Pan's  technique  does succeed in making the difficult look easy, but  his efforts  are  seldom  unobtrusive.  Tours  de force such  as:  "The Net and the  Sword"-ababcc;  "One of the  Regiment"-couplets; "The   Peacock"­ abca; "The Nimbus"-abcbbac;  "Meditation After  an  Engagement" - abbcaddc  and  "The Lost Crusader"-abcadcdbc, are just too dexterous to pass unnoticed.   Only   less  self-conscious  poems  like  "The   New  Vintage", "The Nimbus",  "Interval with  Halcyons",  or  "Idyll" could have led  him  to a wider range  of imagery  and  mythic  forms. Instead,  however, Le Pan  chose in  1g64 to explore again the "man  in the maze" theme -this time in prose.

DURING THE   SAME YEAR that  The  Deserter  was published, its author  wrote an article in which he undertook to outline some of the difficulties
confronting  a  Canadian  writer.8   Not  the  least of these is the simple matter  of being  a  Canadian. The  home  market  is pitifully small and  to write specifically for  a  wider  audience   involves  the  choice  of  whether  or  not  to  abandon any material  that  refers  directly  to  the  homeland.  After  considering  those who opt not to suppress Canadian references, he turns to those who do:
If the  risks  of such  an  undertaking are  obvious,  so are  the  advantages: it  can produce a  result  of  almost  universal  luminosity which  can  be  understood  every­ where.  A strategy of  this  kind  may  also  commend itself  to some  writers  because of seeming  to be congruent with  contemporary critical views of myth  and symbol.9
One  of the writers  to whom  this "strategy" appealed  was Le Pan,  himself. The scene  of The   Deserter's  action  is never  mentioned  by name,  though  it is most certainly  London,  particularly  Soho and  the dock area,  and  the hero, Rusty, is English.10   With  the  disguise as transparent as it is, the reader  can  only wonder whether  he failed in  his attempt  at anonymity  or simply had  his eye fixed on a wider audience  and  was prepared  to make the usual concessions to get it. A more charitable  way of looking at  the novel is to view it through  its use of myth and symbol. Seen from  this angle, The  Deserter  does possess universality. Its inform­ ing  myth  is the  Theseus  story  and  its dominant  image,  the  maze  or  labyrinth.
The  hero of the novel bears a marked  resemblance to some of the "wounded princes"  who  appeared   earlier  in  the  volumes of  poetry. He  is possessed of a dignity that sets him apart  from his comrades; he has had a glimpse of perfection which makes everyday reality almost an affront to his sensibilities. That perfection was symbolized by Althea,  a one-night  pick-up, who not only provided  physical

6o

MAN IN  THE MAZE



ecstasy but  awoke  in  him  the  dormant   yearnings  for  a  nobler,  more  idealized existence.  Sleeping  with  her  was  like being  able  to  follow  the  blue  heron  of "Image of Silenus"  to its home, but like the vision offered by the bird,  the bliss offered   by  Althea   was  only  transitory   and   tantalizing.11    In   a  different   but analogous  way the  precision, esprit de corps, and  discipline of the army  in  war­ time  also offered the seventeen  year-old who lied about  his age a kind of  ideal.
As the novel opens, the old ways of honour are rusting as surely as is the barbed
wire  around   the  camp;   the  old  life is crumbling  like the  unrepaired   air-raid shelter. It is disillusionment,  not cowardice, which drives him to desert. From the "atmosphere of  a  swamp"  in  the  camp,  he enters  the  labyrinth   of the  city in search of a renewed sense of honour and purpose. By the time that search is done, Rusty  will  have  learned  the  wisdom contained  in  "Finale" that,  "Always  the path leads back."
Once out of the camp,  Le Pan's  hero is not in one maze but two. There  is the
obvious one,  the  physical labyrinth  of London  in which  Rusty  wanders,  first in Soho  and  later  in  the  dockland,  in  hopes of evading  the  military  police and afterwards,  in  addition,  the  gang  he had  refused to  join. The  other  is an  intel­ lectual  one  through  which  he  twists and  turns  in  hopes  of finding  or  at  least defining  the  perfection  which  his night  with Althea  only hinted  at.  For  Rusty, the  two  mazes seem  connected.  As he would see it, it was  necessary  to desert, and  hence  be on  the  run,  in  order  to conduct  his search.  What  is apparent to the  reader  after  a  short  time,  however, is that  the  two  mazes lead  in  opposite directions. The  physical maze of escape leads to isolation, a narrowing  of horizons, and   ultimately  to  the  fantasy  world  of  anti-social  behaviour.   Again,  we  are seeing the ideas of "Finale" being worked out in narrative  form. Opposed  to this, the  intellectual  maze  leads Rusty,  reluctantly  at  first, towards  the  normal  world of love, responsibility, and  even the paying of  bills, the  very things,  in fact,  he balked  at even when  he thought  of Althea. His change  of attitude, which leads him simultaneously out of both mazes, is not brought  about  by any one climactic action.  Rather,  it is the  result of  his ability  to learn  from  what  he has seen of others caught in similar traps.
Not  much  time  elapses  before  Rusty  discovers that  the  physical  maze  into
which he projected  himself by the act of desertion is a crowded one indeed. He is only one of thousands  of deserters in London and, in Soho where he first settles, they are so numerous  that  he is scarcely noticed. Desertion  does not  trouble  his conscience, although  fear of detection forces him to adopt  the surreptitious  habits of his neighbours. It is not  long before the glamour  of the  place wears off and,

61

MAN IN THE  MAZE



especially  after   being  taken   by  a  barman as  the  type  who  would   welcome  an opportunity to  join a robbery, Rusy  begins to feel that  he is not  in a haven  but  a jungle-like  maze:
In  the silence he was reminded  of an explorer whom he had  read  about  as a boy who  had  travelled  thousands  of miles down a great  river only to find  himself at the  end  in the  middle  of endless swamps and  creeks and savannas  with  no outlet to  the  sea; ... The  foliage on  the  peeling wall-paper,  grey-green  and  faded,  was like  snake-infested   vines  or  creepers  and  sometimes  as  he  sat  in  the  stillness, smoking, they seemed to be hemming  him in. Before long they might close in and coil round and crush him.12

Shortly   after  this,  the  police  net  around Soho  tightens.  Although Rusty  slips through, many  others  don't and, particularly in the case of the  young  pickpocket who  falls to his death, he sees how  dangerous the  life of a fugitive can  be. Only by  turning himself  in  can  he  escape  feeling  like a  hunted  animal, but  he is not yet ready  for  this. As a result,  he moves to the  dock area  and  soon finds that  he has merely exchanged one labyrinth for another. After a brief spell of employment, Rusty  and  another deserter, Dragon, are forced  to run off in the face of a band  of irate  dock  workers  who  imagine their  jobs threatened. Their escape  through the yards  piled  high with  goods and  timber, their  retreat  to the warren which  Dragon calls home,  are  all replete  with  "maze" imagery.  Indeed,  almost  every  movement he  makes  seems  twisted   and   circular rather than   straightforward. Even  when Rusty  takes  stock  of  the  situation, Le  Pan  repeats  the  motif  to  emphasize the directionless and  lost quality of his hero's life:
He would  resume his calling  as a wanderer; threading  his way from one street to another; circling  a basin that  was choked with freighters, tugs, barges, and  going on  to one  that  was almost  empty,  with  a few boards floating  on the slightly oily swell; picking up the estuary  at one point, losing it, and then coming on it again.13

The friendship with  Dragon continues and  mainly  serves  to  introduce Rusty and  the  reader to  other  deserters who  have  adopted a way of life that  could  in time   become   Rusty's  too.   Brandy's  warped   and   perverse  sense  of  honour  is honour nevertheless  and,  after  all, not so very different  from  his own.  Yet, in the end,  Rusty  realizes  that  the  lives Brandy  and  Dragon  lead,  though in some ways attractive, are  not  for  him.  By clever  use of 'heraldic' imagery Le Pan  is able to present  this as a conclusion Rusty  arrived  at slowly, and  at  the same  time  thread the   various   incidents  of  his  novel  together. Early  in  the  book,  Rusty  says  to Mark, "Sometimes I think  I'm  an  animal  from  a coat of arms,  a bear  or a stag, who  wants  to  leave  his  post  and  go back  to  the  woods."  Much later,  during a

MAN IN  THE MAZE



marvellously described  drunken  orgy that  takes place at  Dragon's,  the  bear  and stag images are re-introduced. Some time afterwards  Mark  reminds  Rusty about his original  remark  about  wanting  to wander  off like a stag  or bear  and  asks if he still feels that  way. His friend  now replies, "Some  men  can  live happily  as animals.  I can't." But even at this point he is not prepared  to come back to the normal  world.  Before he does return,  he is forced through  another  maze  as he tries desperately  to escape the  gunmen  of the  gang  who think  he has informed on them.
Although  he is no criminal,  Rusty  becomes caught  in  a net  of circumstances which   brings   gangland   vengeance   upon   himself  and   the  totally   uninvolved Stefan. Their  flight through  the foggy streets of the London dock area is pictured by Le  Pan  in  the twisting, turning  imagery of the maze, of which  at  one point he is able to say, "They  were tracing out a labyrinth that seemed to serpentine endlessly." Even Stefan's death is mentioned in the newspapers as the "Cul-de-sac Murder". With  the  closing of  this incident  and  his subsequent  recovery  from his bullet wound, Rusty deliberately emerges from his maze by turning  himself in. He  might  have done  this at  any time, but  he was not prepared  to until  he had found the perfection which led him to desert in the first place. Only during his convalescence is he able to piece together the meaning and implications  of every­ thing that has happened  to him since he left the camp.
Modern   parlance   which  might  refer  to  Rusty  as  "a   crazy  mixed-up   kid" would aptly describe the way Le Pan has envisioned him. Being "mixed-up" puts him in  a kind  of intellectual  maze which the author  is at some pains  to outline and  also indicates  that  Rusty  has only a vague idea of the honour  or perfection he is looking for. From  the beginning,  Mark  insists that  whatever it is, it is only to be found as a productive member of society. Against this Rusty argues he must seek his goal as a "roving  picket".  He refuses to accept  Mark's  position that  the outcast  or self-exile becomes progressively divorced  from  reality  and  strays  ever further  into  the  half-world  of selfishness andjor crime. That Mark  was right  is shown  by  the  fact  that  only a series of incidents,  significant  in  themselves and cumulative in their effect, prevent Rusty from following this path.
Early  in the story he begins to learn that  everybody feels trapped  in one way or another.  The situation  with the fugitives he encounters is obvious enough,  but even  people  with  exciting  lives like Mark  are  caught.  Mark's  story  of the  man who dived into the blue grotto  at Capri  and came up with a piece of used toilet paper  stuck  to  his  head  is illustrative.  The  point  of  the  story,  reminiscent  of "Image of Silenus", is not wasted on his friend  but its effect is delayed. Only  a

MAN  IN  THE  MAZE



short  time afterwards  Rusty is confronted  by more fundamental problems which he  cannot  satisfactorily  answer.  After  being  questioned  about   his motives  for desertion, he can only ask himself, "Who  am I? ... What  am I looking for? One question succeeded another  like the streets turning  and flowing into one another." It  may seem to  Rusty  that  he is seeking honour,  but  he is affronted  several times  to discover  how  others  think  of him. Once  at a late  night  coffee stall he listens to two guardsmen-cum-male prostitutes and  two second-storey men swap­ ping stories about  the  night's  adventures.  What  was told  lightheartedly  by one burglar  turns  out  to be a vicious assault on an old woman  as the  papers tell it.
He  is upset when  he recalls, "they  had accepted  him as one of themselves" and even more distressed the next day when a barman  simply takes it for granted  that he  would  be  interested  in  joining  a  smash-and-grab  job. A similar  misunder­ standing  leads to his wounding  and Stefan's murder while he is living in the dock area.  Between these two events occurs the  party  at  Dragon's  with  the bear  and stag imagery mentioned  earlier. What  really sets Rusty apart  from them, in spite of  the  empathy   he  feels, is a  difference  in  attitude.   During  the  conversation, Brandy  and   Dragon   claim  they  have  never  experienced  guilt.  Rusty,  on  the contrary, tries to formulate it but falls asleep, drunk, first.
Finally, the influence of Stefan and Anne leads him back to the normal  world,
the world of responsibilities that  Mark  talked of. Each is weaker than  Rusty and each  has his or  her  own  maze to contend  with. Their  very weakness,  paradoxi­ cally,  is  their  strength,   because  they  instinctively  reach  out  to  others  whereas Rusty  is strong  enough   to  live  on  his own.  Now  feeling  emotionally  drained Rusty concludes his honour  has left him. Even the will to suicide is gone but from this  nadir  of  anguish,  he  rises to  the  almost  visionary  experience  described  in the  last  two  and  a  half  pages  of  the  book.  It  is the  "deep   ultimate  animal courage",   he  realizes,  that  is the  root  of  honour.  In  people  like  Brandy  and Dragon  it  was diverted  into  a dead-end,  but,  without  it, there  can  be "neither  love nor justice nor a city, without which there could be no meaning nor anything  but a spreading tundra and despair."
Reviews  of  The   Deserter  generally  centred  on  the  "poetic" qualities  of  the
novel  and  saw  them,  on  the  whole, as detrimental.14    In  particular, they  com­ plained  of the  inappropriate literary  quality  of speech  placed in the  mouths  of people who presumably had not been exposed to a great deal of formal education.  Such a charge is valid if one assumes that  Le Pan has attempted a realistic novel in  which  he merely failed to distinguish the voice of the narrator  from  those of the  characters.  By the  same token, the complaint  that  some of  the incidents in

MAN IN  THE  MAZE



the  plot  are  time-worn  is equally  valid. But all this assumes that  The  Deserter was intended  as a realistic novel, and there is an argument  to be made that  this was not Le Pan's aim at all. Certainly the episodic plot structure beginning in questioning  and ending  in revelation seems hardly designed for an "action" story. In  fact,  with its similar  emphasis  on maze imagery,  it is more  reminiscent  of a "quest" story like A Portrait  of the  Artist as a Young Man  than  of a psychological thriller  in the manner  of Graham Greene. Although  I have ignored  most of the symbolism not  related  to the subject of this paper, it should  be noted  that  there is a great  deal of it -too much, indeed, to do anything  but clog the works of a realistic novel. The Maze, the animals, the crystal sundial, the Plaza-Ministry opposition, etc. all give The Deserter the quality of a fable or a loosely constructed allegory. If the  novel has  faults,  I suggest they lie in  the  other  direction: that Le Pan  has not eliminated  enough  realism from his story to allow the  poetic to take over completely. His setting and  hero are not anonymous  enough  to achieve that  "universal  luminosity"  he spoke of in his article. What  was needed,  perhaps, was something  closer in  technique  to that  of Alain  Robbe-Grillet.  It  need only be  noted  in  conclusion  that  Le  Pan  has shown  a  remarkable  consistency, even tenacity,  in  his use of imagery  involving the  maze  and  the  personality  trapped in it. All works of a true artist, it has been said, only prepare  the way for the next one. Bearing this in mind,  it is only fair to say that  Le Pan's  works, though  not always individual  successes, have been artistic in the best sense of the word.

NOTES

1 Douglas  Le  Pan,  The  Wounded Prince and Other  Poems  (Chatto and  Windus: London, 1948) :  The   Net  and  the  Sword  (Clarke, Irwin, Toronto, 1953); The Deserter (McClelland and  Stewart: Toronto, 1964; rpt. 1973).
2    In  all  cases, titles  of  books will appear in italics  and  titles  of individual poems in quotation marks.
3    Northrop Frye,  "Letters in  Canada:   1953-Poetry," UTQ,  23  (1954),  256-58.
4    Desmond   Pacey,  Creative  Writing  in Canada  (Ryerson  Press:  Toronto, 2nd,  ed.
1961), p. r83.
5   The   precise  topic  of  war  appears in "One of the  Regiment" printed first in The
Wounded  Prince and Other Poems.
6    Frye, op. cit., p. 257·
7    cf.  E.  K.  Brown,  "Letters in  Canada:   1948-Poetry," UTQ,  r8  ( 1949),  257-58.
8   Douglas   Le  Pan,   "The  Dilemma of  the  Canadian  Author,"  Atlantic  Monthly
(November 1964),  r6o-64.
9    Ibid.,  p. r64.
10  The  review  in Canadian  Literature,  No. 24  (Spring, 1965)   70, 72-73, suggests he is Canadian but  this seems highly  improbable from  the details  of the  novel. Rusty

MAN IN   THE  MAZE



and   Mark  saw  service  in  the  same  unit  and  Mark  has returned to his old  job in the  Ministry in  London -which one  we are  not  told,  but  presumably a  British one.  Neither the  location of  Canada House,  nor  the duties  of the  High  Commis­ sioner  or  the  secretaries, fit  the  description of  the  Ministry  or  the  duties  which Mark   performs or  the  official  contacts Mark  possesses to  help  Stefan. Moreover, we  are  told  of  Rusty's   mother, "She  had  died  in  the  middle  of  the  war  when  in many  parts  of the  country the sky was boisterous  with  nightly raids." p.  IO.
11  cf. The Deserter,  p. 33·
12  Ibid.,  pp. go-g I.
13  Ibid.,  p. I I 7·
14  cf. Saturday Night, 7g  (November Ig64), Montrealer, 3g  (January Ig6s), Cana­ dian   Author  and   Bookman, 40   (Spring  Ig6s),   Canadian Literature,  No.  24 (Spring  Ig6s),   Canadian Forum,  45   (May    Ig6s),  UTQ, 34   (July   Ig6s), Queens Quarterly, 72  (Autumn Ig6s), Tamarack Review, 34  (Winter  Ig6s).



MJINIFESTO



Why  we drink. Why  we sleep. Why  we dream.

The constant gnawing undergrowth desire
to escape into the  irrational

Why  we murder.

Parents struggle
never to step  over
that line

Children try to see
how far  they  can  put  a foot in and out, fast
and not  be seen

Music exists
to take  us there without guilt.
 

Dorothy Livesay


66


CONSTELLATION TRAGIQUE


Christina H. Roberts-van Oordt






L'EcrosiON nu ROMAN QuEEEcors au  cou" de' annie' cinquante semble  coincider  avec  l'arrivee dans  ce  pays des idees  existentialistes. C'est  Andre Langevin qui, l'un  des premiers, les a introduites dans notre  litterature et Jean-Louis Major a souligne  en  rg64  (dans  Archives  des Lettres  canadiennes, III, 207-229)  les affinites entre  le romancier quebecois et des ecrivains comme Dostoievski, Sartre et Camus.
Dans   une   conversation  que   j'eus  avec   Langevin  a Montreal  en  septembre
1970,  celui-ci  confirma  que  Dostoievski  et  Camus avaient tous  deux  fait  grande impression  sur  lui,  bien  qu'il   ne s'agisse  pas,  a son avis, d'influences conscientes
sur ses propres  romans  ( v. Liberte  2, no.  I, p. 51). II precisa qu'il  avait  decouvert le romancier russe a l'age  de dix-sept  ans et qu'illisait Camus au moment d'ecrire ses romans  des annees cinquante.
En  plus  de !'apport  existentialiste, l'originalite des romans  de  Langevin vient evidemment de la  maniere  dont  ce dernier  exprime  sa revolte  contre  l'hypocrisie et l'etroitesse d'esprit du  milieu.  Or,  nous savons  tous que  Dostoievski  et  Camus ont  exteriorise  dans  leurs oeuvres  le meme type de revolte. Comme eux,  Langevin pose  des  questions   philosophiques profondes,  au  niveau  de  l'individu aussi  bien
que  sur  le plan  social et  universe!.  Comme  eux egalement, mais  contrairement a
un  Robert Elie  ou  a une  Gabrielle Roy,  par  exemple,  qui  dans  chaque roman
concentraient leur attention sur  une seule classe sociale, que  ce soit la bourgeoisie ou  le  proletariat, Langevin peint  toutes  les classes de la societe  a la fois, tout  en atteignant un niveau  esthetique et philosophique superieur a celui de ses predeces­
seurs.
Pour  ces raisons,  la connaissance des romans  de  Dostoievski  et  de  Camus fait ressortir  le serieux  et l'originalite de ceux de Langevin, car il s'agit, n'en  doutons pas,  d'une affinite  profonde et  non  d'une  imitation servile.  Une  comparaison, meme  breve et incomplete, entre  les trois premiers  romans  de Langevin et I'oeuvre

CONSTELLATION  TRAGIQUE



romanesque des deux grands  romanciers etrangers nous aidera,  je crois, a la mieux comprendre  et apprecier.
Les allusions a  Camus  et  les ressemblances partielles entre  les deux  ecrivains abondent  dans les romans de Langevin. On n'a qu'a  penser, par exemple, aux nombreuses  references  a Sisyphe  (v.,  par exemple, Poussiere  sur la ville,  Be ed., p. 139),  a l'emploi  constant  d'expressions comme "rna  revolte",  "mon  combat", "la  justice", etc.,  au  style sobre et au  monologue interieur  dans  Poussiere sur la ville, qui rappelle ainsi L' Etranger, au role important des pretres et des medecins, aux univers clos et aux symboles tels les prisons et les chaines. Par contre, les aspects dostoievskiens sont  plus subtils mais, il me semble, d'autant plus profonds. 11 y a certainement  les histoires d'ivrognes  et d'orphelins,  la neige fondue, etc. qui font penser au  Russe, mais les fortes ressemblances dans la tonalite et la structure  me paraissent les plus significatives.
Ce qui me semble frappant, c'est qu'au  point de vue du developpement  thema­
tique  et au  point  de vue de Ia structure  fondamentale,  les romans de Langevin, comme ceux de Dostoievski, sont plus dramatiques, moins stylises et plus tragiques (dans  tous les sens du mot)  que ceux de Camus. Grace a 1'emploi de perspectives et de voix multiples  a l'interieur  de chaque  roman-meme de ceux qui sont a la premiere  personne-et grace aussi a l'emploi de dialogues en discours direct, c'est-a-dire  de vraies confrontations et de conflits dechirants,  se deroulant  devant nous et exteriorises par les paroles et dans les actes des personnages, lesquels vivent tous une grande  crise dans  leur vie privee, l'art  romanesque  de Dostoievski et de Langevin me parait  plus explicitement "dramatique" ou, pour emprunter les mots de  Mikhail  Bakhtine   (La   Poetique   de  Dosto"ievski, Editions  du  Seuil,  1970), "polyphonique" et  "dialogique". En  outre, !'organisation  spatiale  et temporelle tres concentree,  et le role du scandale,  du crime et de la violence chez ces deux romanciers  sont  plus  proprement   tragiques.  L'usage  qu'ils  font  de ces elements leur  permet  non  seulement  de  critiquer  leur  milieu  et  de  poser des questions existentielles,  mais  aussi  d'apporter des  reponses a  ces  questions,  ce  qui  m'a toujours semble l'une  des fonctions importantes  de la litterature tragique.  Camus lui-meme  ecrit  en  1950:   "Toute mon oeuvre est ironique."   (Garnets  II,  317). L'Etranger et La Chute sont des monologues; le narrateur  de La Peste ne cherche pas a penetrer  la vie interieure  des autres  personnages ou a devoiler la sienne; ni Meursault, ni Rieux,  ni Clamence  ne confrontent  les autres aussi directement  que les  personnages  du  Russe  et  du  Quebecois,  qui  se revelent  toujours  dans  une interaction   constante   et  intime  avec  autrui.  Meursault  tue  un  Arabe  qu'il  ne connait   pas,  tandis  que  Madeleine  tue  celui qu'elle  croyait  aimer,  et  Ivan  et

68

CONSTELLATION TRAGIQUE



Smerdiakov tuent leur propre  pere. Rieux soigne des malades et observent ses concitoyens de pres, mais il ne communique  pas intimement  et directement  avec ses proches. Ainsi, par ses idees aussi bien que par Ia tonalite  et Ia technique romanesque  qui les refletent,  Langevin semble s'apparenter plutot  a Dostoievski.



LA RESSEMBLANCE  THEMATIQUE  entre  les trois  romanciers nous paraissant indiscutable,  nous examinerons surtout  les grands  themes a Ia fois dostoievskiens et camusiens que  Major  et  d'autres   (par  exemple  Andre  Renaud dans  Europe  47, nos. 478-479,  pp. g6-4o)  ont  deceles chez Langevin: Ia  com­ munication,  Ia  dualite  et  I'absurde.  L'on  pourrait  ajouter  les problemes  de  Ia liberte,  du  bien et  du  mal.  Mais quand  on examine  de  pres Ia mise en  oeuvre esthetique, Langevin parait  plus proche de Dostoievski que de Camus.
Par  exemple,  en  ce  qui  concerne  le "drame   de  Ia communication entre  les humains"   (Major, p.  209),  Langevin, comme Dostoievski, nous presente  d'une part des exemples d'un  manque  de communication; d'autre part, des personnages qui  reussissent a etablir  un contact  profond et authentique avec autrui. Camus, par  contre,  tend  a ne montrer  que des personnages isoles qui  ne sont pas encore capables  de  communiquer  directement   avec  les  autres.   Cela  fait  que   notre compatriote  se rapproche  egalement de Dostoievski en ce qui concerne Ia question de  l'absurde,  car  il  peint  des hommes qui s'affirment  en  refusant  de  blesser les autres  et  en  leur  offrant  !'amour,   depassant  ainsi le stade  d'une   revolte sterile contre Ia condition  humaine  pour atteindre  Ia vraie liberte et Ia vraie communi­ cation. A ce point de vue Dupas, le heros du Temps  des Hommes, nous rappelle non seulement le Prince  Mychkine  (v. Major,  p. 225),  mais aussi Sonia Marme­  ladova, Chatov  et Aliocha Karamazov; tandis que Micheline, !'heroine  d'Evade  de la nuit, fait penser a Lisa dans Le Sous-sol eta Dacha dans Les Possedh
Comme chez Dostoievski et Camus, Ia question de l'absurde  chez Langevin est
intimement liee a celle de Ia souffrance, car c'est Ia difficulte de Ia communication entre les humains, Ia solitude devant  Ia mort et !'impuissance devant  Ia souffrance des  autres  qui  causent  l'angoisse  morale  de  ses personnages.  Et  Ia souffrance physique -Ia  maladie  et Ia mort - aussi bien que Ia souffrance  morale, surtout chez les enfants, obsedent les trois romanciers.
Mais Ia souffrance  est,  paradoxalement, necessaire et  meme salutaire,  car  les personnages suffisants, trop surs d'eux-memes, a Ia carapace  dure-ceux qui, insensibles a  Ia souffrance  d'autrui, n'admettent pas qu'ils  sont  malheureux­ sont moralement  des morts vivants. Ace point de vue Zverkov dans  Le Sous-sol;

6g

CONSTELLATION  TRAGIQUE



le  Pere  Karamazov; les juges dans  L'Etranger; Jim,  le cure  et  le commerc;ant dans  Poussiere  sur  Ia ville;  et  les superieurs  ecclesiastiques dans  Le  Temps  des Hommes, sont  tous de  Ia meme  famille. Ce n'est  qu'en  souffrant  que  les heros deviennent  conscients -c'est  au  moment de reconnaitre  leur impuissance et leur denuement qu'ils  deviennent  lucides. Curieusement,  cette conscience de !'impuis­ sance  n'est  pas  un  echec,  puisqu'elle  precede  necessairement  Ie  moment  de  Ia revolte contre Ia solitude et Ia souffrance, en un mot-contre l'absurde. Et cette volonte  de Iutter  est Ia seule force de l'homme.  Comme  Camus l'a  prouve dans Le  Mythe  de  Sisyphe   et  montre  dans  La  Peste,  cette  lutte,  ce  refus  d'etre  le complice du mal, est Ia seule reponse admissible a toutes les questions existentielles.
Cependant, Dostoievski et Langevin vont plus loin que Camus, car chez eux ce
refus de blesser les autres ouvre quelquefois "les voies larges et droites de I'amour", permettant d'etablir  un contact  profond et direct. Cela arrive, par exemple, entre Micheline  et Jean  dans  Evade  de Ia nuit;  Alain et Madeleine dans  Poussiere sur Ia ville;  Dupas  et Laurier,  Gros-Louis et Yolande dans Le Temps des Hommes; Sonia et  Raskolnikov; Mychkine et Rogozhine; Grouchegnka et  Dmitri Karamazov.
On   remarquera que  dans  les exemples  cites il s'agit  le  plus souvent  d'une communication  etablie  entre   un  homme  et  une  femme.  Chez  le  Russe  et  le Quebecois Ia femme possede en effet un grand  pouvoir redempteur; c'est souvent elle qui, en stimulant  son amour,  apprend  l'humilite et la compassion a l'homme. Par  contre,  dans  les romans  de  Camus  le manque  de  contact  spirituel  semble correspondre  a !'absence  de la femme, ou dans le cas de Marie  Cardona, au role exclusivement  physique  qu'elle  joue dans  la  vie du  heros. A mon  sens, le seul roman  camusien ou l'on voie des personnages atteindre  un degre de communica­ tion  authentique bien qu'indirecte, est La  Peste, ou Rieux et son  ami Tarrou  se baignent  dans  la  mer  et  trouvent  Ia  paix,  reconnaissant  les  liens  de  fratemite qui  les unissent  en  tant  qu' "allies  contre  l'absurde  cruaute"  ( Poussiere  sur  Ia ville,   p. I 53).  Pour   Alain   Dubois  aussi,  le  lien  indestructible   qui  I'unit  a Madeleine   est  leur  alliance  contre  l'absurde,  mais  Langevin  va  plus  loin  que Camus  en ce que les relations entre  ces deux  personnages changent  radicalement  grace  a  Ia decouverte  de  leur  souffrance  et  de leur revolte communes.  C'est  Ia compassion d'Alain  envers sa femme qui lui ouvre les yeux et le coeur, l'amenant, a  deux  reprises, a  demander   pardon  a son  mari  ( p. I 52'  p. I 86) . Madeleine, femme  d'abord  si enfantine  et  en  meme  temps si lointaine,  murit  en  devenant lucide-c'est-a-dire  consciente  de  la  souffrance  dont   elle  est  Ia  cause.  En admettant ainsi une certaine  responsabilite morale envers Alain, elle fait preuve,

CONSTELLATION  TRAGIQUE



pour  Ia  premiere  fois, d'une  humilite sincere. Alain  ne peut  empecher  sa mort, mais  il  a  neanmoins  reussi a  atteindre  son  arne  avant  qu'elle  disparaisse.  De meme,  Grouchegnka   ne  peut  empecher  Ia mort  "trop   peu  digne"  de  Zossime, mais elle reussit a comprendre  et a consoler Aliocha, ce qui leur  pennet   (a tous deux)  de progresser encore sur le plan psychologique et spirituel.



EN ME LISANT on s'etonnera  peut-etre que je tienne tellement a souligner Ia :reussite plutot  que  l'echec des personnages de Langevin  dans leur tentative  d'etablir  le contact  avec autrui.  Je  le fais intentionellement, car il m'a toujours semble que plusieurs de nos critiques quebecois (par  exemple Major, Falardeau dans  le numero  d'Europe  deja  mentionne;  Denis Saint-Jacques dans Etudes  Litteraires  ( aout,   I g6g)   et  Tougas  dans  son  Histoire  de  la litthature canadienne-fran  aise
Tout  en reconnaissant  que I'oeuvre de Langevin est tragique,  c'est-a-dire  (ames yeux)   qu'elle  est  une  oeuvre  ou  l'on  s'attend   a  trouver  une  certaine   victoire morale,  ces  critiques  tendent   a  souligner  Ia  defaite  de  Jean   Cherteffe,   Alain Dubois  et  Pierre  Dupas  vis-a-vis de Micheline,  de  Madeleine  et  des bucherons respectivement.  En  accentuant trop  l'echec  materiel  de ces heros on  neglige le fait  que  tous ces personnages evoluent  radicalement  sur le plan  spirituel  et que leurs  relations  avec  autrui  s'approfondissent   sensiblement.  Cet  epanouissement, cette intensite  nouvelle de vie, cette conscience que les heros acquierent et qu'ils font  eclore chez ceux qui les entourent,  sont payes de plusieurs morts, il est vrai, mais il me semble que c'est  justement en cela que consiste le processus tragique. (Ainsi  l'angoisse  de  Marcel  Cherteffe,  que  son frere  considere a tort  comme Ia preuve  d'un  echec,  n'est  que  Ia premiere etape  dans  ce que  Quilliot-dans  sa P:reface a  Laurent  Mailhot,  Albert  Camus  ou !'imagination  du  desert, P.U.M., I973,  p. x-appelle  "le  triptyque  :revoltejdepassementjamour" et que  j'appel­ lerais plutot Ie processus "consciencejrevoltejamour-depassement".)
II  ne  faut  neanmoins  pas  oublier  que  dans  Evade  de la  nuit  (le  roman  de
Langevin qui fait le plus penser au Sous-sol eta La Chute) Jean  Cherteffe semble hante  par  Ia corruptibilite  de Ia chair  (p.  22 I). II parait  obsede par Ia peur de vieillir et par I'idee qu'il faudrait "briser le crane"  de Ia femme aimee pour communiquer vraiment  avec elle (pp.  I3I-I32). La mefiance de ce heros devant
!'amour, le bonheur,  en somme  devant  Ia vie, semble parvenir  en grande  partie de  cette  obsession qu'on  pourrait   peut-etre  qualifier  de "janseniste quebecoise". Et  cette obsession parait  liee a Ia notion cartesienne d'une  opposition  insunnon-

CONSTELLATION  TRAGIQUE



table  entre  le corps et l'ame.  Le pessimisme indeniable  de ce heros reftete-t-il un manque  de confiance  collectif chez les Quebecois de cette epoque?  II me semble que  l'on  pourrait  bien,  au  moins en  partie,  attribuer !'element  d'echec  dans  ce roman  a  un  obstacle  interieur,  psychologique, ayant  sa source  dans  des  circon­ stances historiques particulieres  a notre pays, puisque c'est, dans une large mesure, une  sorte  de  mefiance  congenitale   (en  plus de son enfance  malheureuse), qui empeche  Jean  Cherteffe  d'accueillir   joyeusement Ia vie.  Quoi  qu'il  en  soit, ce manque  de confiance  lie au spectre  de Ia destructibilite  de  Ia chair  ne se trouve pas chez  Dostoievski ou  Camus  et  parait  etre  un aspect  typiquement  quebecois des  romans  de  Langevin.   Comme   Falardeau   l'a  si  bien  montre:  "L'epoque pourtant   toute  recente  dont   temoigne  !'oeuvre  de  Langevin  etait  celle d'une  societe ... encore paralysee par des scleroses archaiques.  Cette oeuvre ... permet­ tait   et  permet   encore ... de  rejoindre ... certains  des  ecrasants   obstacles  qui retardaient l'arrivee du 'temps des hommes'."
Dans  Le  Temps des  hommes et  Poussiere  sur  la  ville,  en  effet, les heros ne souffrent  plus de cette  peur  de la chair.  Peut-etre  partiellement  a cause de cela, ces deux  romans  plus sobres, depouilles et serres qu'Evade de la nuit, sont aussi d'une   portee  plus  ostensiblement  universelle. Le desarroi  de  Dupas  vient, il est vrai, de !'interpretation trop  etroite, dogmatique  et "dualiste" (v. Major,  p. 225, p. 228)   de Ia doctrine  chretienne  qu'on  lui a enseigne au seminaire,  mais il n'a pas peur de Ia vie charnelle.  Son triomphe  me semble justement  de s'etre revolte contre !'esprit  cartesien  et d'avoir  decouvert  tout seul, a l'instar  d'Alain  Dubois, que Ia solution  unique  bien qu'imparfaite a tous les problemes, c'est d'agir  selon Ia vraie compassion et le veritable  amour,  en laissant aux autres  Ia pleine liberte de choisir leur  propre  voie. La ou l'Eglise traditionnelle,  representee  par le cure de  Macklin   et  par  les superieurs   de  Dupas,  voulait   forcer  les gens  a  suivre certaines  regles, Dubois  et  Dupas  decouvrent  qu'il  faut  inviter  leur  prochain  a suivre  de  son  propre   gre   le  chemin   chretien-celui   de  I'amour   et  de  Ia compassion.
Vu  dans  cette  optique,  l'echec  de Jean  Cherteffe  devant  l'ivrogne  Benoit est
naturel   et  meme  salutaire,   car  sa  defaite  est du  meme  ordre  que  l'echec  des autorites  ecclesiastiques  devant   Dupas.  Tout  comme  l'eveque  tente  de le faire avec Dupas,  ou comme  l'homme  du souterrain  le fait avec Lisa, Jean  Cherteffe essaie d'exercer  sa volonte de puissance en poussant Benoit de force dans Ia voie que  lui  trouve  bonne.  Mais  le naufrage  de ces tentatives  de dominer  un autre, aussi bien que Ia reussite relative de Micheline, d'Alain  Dubois et de Dupas, qui
ne  cherchent   pas  a  subjuguer   les autres,  sont  Ia  preuve  qu'on   n'arrive   pas a

CONSTELLATION TRAGIQUE



communiquer  de  fac,;on authentique  avec  les  autres   en  les  dominant. On   n'y reussit qu'en les laissant  libres de repondre a l'appel de l'amour, s'ils le veulent  et
le peuvent. En  tout  ceci  la  pensee  de Langevin, comme  celle de  Dostoievski, est profondement  et  explicitement  chretienne,  tandis   que  celle  de  Camus ne  l'est
qu'implicitement. ( Qu'il me soit  permis de renvoyer  ici  a mon  article "Camus et
Dostoievski: comparaison  structurale et  thematique de  La  Chute de  Camus et du S ous-sol de Dostoievski", dans  Albert Camus 4, 5I -70.)
11 n'est  pas  etonnant, alors,  de  constater  que  l'une  des  formes  principales de dualite dans  les romans de  Langevin est  analogue a la  dualite  dostoievskienne, qui   consiste   dans   une   division   interieure  entre   l'humilite  et   l'orgueil.  Reste

orgueilleux et tyrannique devant Benoit, Jean  Cherteffe echoue; devant Micheline il renonce  a l'orgueil, accepte  l'amour et en arrive  par  consequent a connaitre le
vrai bonheur:

II regarda  longtemps  tomber  la neige, fixement, empli d'une  extase qui  transcen­ dait  la  vie, la  nettoyait,  lui donnait  une  joie sereine qu'il  accueillait  sans !'inter­ roger, parce  que,  pour  la premiere  fois, elle comblait sa soif  exacerbee.  II ne lui demanderait  pas  si  elle  etait   durable.   Les  coups  du  sort   ne  pouvaient   plus l'atteindre. II marcherait parmi  les hommes, inconnu d'eux, souleve par le bonheur et nul ne pourrait le toucher.
De meme,  Alain  essaie a un  moment  donne  de subjuguer Madeleine physique­ ment  et  moralement, mais il reconnait tout  de suite son erreur.  (Major souligne  beaucoup cette  lutte  physique  ( pp.  2I 8-2I 9), mais sans mentionner la reconcilia­
tion.)   Ce  n'est  qu'en renonc.;ant a leur  orgueil  qu'ils  arrivent a etablir la  vraie
communication.
Dans  le  cas  de  Dupas on  voit  un  homme  qui,  comme  Aliocha   Karamazov, veut  imposer  sa volonte  a la nature en exigeant  un miracle  pour  sauver  la vie de quelqu'un. L'erreur de Dupas,  c'est son refus d'accepter l'absurde de la condition
humaine  sous  la   forme   d'une  mort   inevitable.  Mais   ce  heros  arrive   aussi  a
toucher  un  autre  homme  au fond  de l'ame,  une fois qu'il  a renonce  a son orgueil
en s'humiliant devant I'autre:

IIs etaient  arne contre  arne, lies l'un  a !'autre dans le dessein d'un  crime. Laurier n'avait  pas perdu  de temps a prendre  la main tendue, a se decharger  de son arne,
de sa haine, de sa faiblesse. Quand il se serait raye des hommes il y aurait  toujours le  cure  a ses cotes.  II  avait  aboli  la  pire  consequence  de  son  acte,  la  solitude
morale.

On  pourrait developper longuement encore  les affinites et les divergences entre
Langevin,  Camus  et  Dostoievski.   J'espere  seulement   que   ces  remarques  peu


73

CONSTELLATION  TRAGIQUE


detaillees servent  au  moins a indiquer  que, malgre la grande  affinite thematique entre les trois auteurs,  Langevin  se situe-aux  points de vue technique,  psycho­ logique,  philosophique   et  religieux-plus pres  encore  de  Dostoievski  que  de
Camus.







STOPPING HERE
 

Al Purdy


The little skeletons of rabbits
run with their fur still outside them
Animals don't sweat do they?
-but I was sweating and running from the orchard  after stealing apples I never won anything

Always envied the birds when I got caught being slow and terrified and hard
of hearing when someone yelled Stop
I kept on going

Was I running from or towards?
-rabbits haunt me with their breathing guns crack in icy fields beyond the town
on market days the farmers sold their bodies
-it must have been from something

Chickens with their heads cut off still run an axe leans softly in the backyard
the man said chickens don't know anything but they do
I fell down sometimes and panted
on the earth the sky leaned up to cover me with feathers
whatever touched me didn't  know my name



74


THE TENSION OF HIS TIME



Frank Birbalsingh



A PROPER UNDERSTANDING of Pmtt's poetry needs to take into account the social and intellectual background  which conditioned  his thought
and  writing.  This  background   was stabilized  by typical  late  nineteenth  century intellectual   preoccupations,   the   most  striking  characteristic   of  which   was  a tension between newly-emerging scientific theory on one hand,  and traditional Christian  belief on the other. It is this tension which, more than  any other single factor,  inspires the  poetry of Pratt,  and in an important  way, also confounds  it.
Most of Pratt's  poems, especially ,the long, narrative  ones, are concerned  with reconciling  man's  crowning,  scientific role as  potential  master  of  the  universe, with his religious role as simply another creature  who is subject to God's universal control.  But,  as  a  rule,  a  satisfactory  reconciliation  is not  fully  achieved.  The poems may be divided into three  convenient groups:  those describing a world in which  God's  primacy  is undisputed; those in  which  this  primacy  is challenged by  man;   and  those  in  which  the  challenge  of  God  by  man  is satisfactorily reconciled.
In  the first group  of poems Pratt  acknowledges the existence of a stable world order  ruled by an omnipotent  Being who firmly controls all natural phenomena. We see this in the admiration and  reverence that  are shown to natural  relation­ ships in  the  raw  world  of sea and  forest, man  and  beast. The  poet  betrays  an almost  childish  fascination  with  the  age, size and  power  of forces  in  Nature: ancient  seas, impregnable  icebergs and  gigantic  whales. He  is fascinated  by the sense of drama  generated  by the  clash of these forces either  with  each  other  or with human  beings. And always, essential to the drama  is the implicit  projection of an ageless, harmonious,  cosmic pattern;  elements within the pattern  may often erupt  into massive conflict with each other, but they invariably settle down again in rigid conformity.
Artistic success for Pratt  largely depends on his ability to demonstrate, through
the action  of his poetry, the stable, theocratic,  world order  in which he believes.


75

THE  TENSION OF HIS TIME



Success  is  achieved,  for  example,  m  "Newfoundland" which   describes   winds
blowing over the sea:

They call with the silver fifes of the sea, They breathe  with the lungs of men, They are one with the tides of the sea, They are one with the tides of the heart,
They blow with the rising octaves of dawn,
They die with the largo of dusk, Their  hands are full to the overflow, In their right is the bread of life,
In their left are the waters of death.

"Newfoundland"  celebrates the   cyclical,  cosmic  harmony  which,   according to
Pratt, is implicit  in the whole seascape of his native  province:

Here  the crags
Meet with winds and tides­ Not with that  blind interchange Of blow for blow
That spills the thunder of insentient seas; But with the mind that reads assault
In crouch and leap and the quick stealth,
Stiffening the muscles of the waves.

Harmony is  not  accidental, but  based  upon  the  almost  personal supervision  of natural elements  by a Power  that is self-evidently  the God of religious  belief. The implication  is  that   man   is  one  of  many  creatures,  playing  a  subordinate  role within  a God-controlled universe.
In  some  poems  there  is little  attempt to mask the specifically  Christian sources of  Pratt's  philosophical outlook. In   "From  Stone   to  Steel", for  example, he describes the long, evolutionary process of human development:

From stone to bronze, from bronze to steel
Along the road-dust of the sun, Two revolutions of the wheel From Java  to Geneva run.

While  the  poem  acknowledges this evolutionary (scientific)  description of human history, however, it ends with the following stanza:

The road goes up, the road goes down­ Let Java or Geneva be-

THE  TENSION OF  HIS TIME



But whether  to the cross or crown, The  path lies through Gethsemane.

Science  may  help  to explain  some of life's mysteries,  but  a full  explanation, it is suggested,  can only be gained  from  the path  through Gethsemane -the Christian religion.
If we regard "Newfoundland" and  "From Stone  to Steel"  as successful  poems, it is mainly  because  they  achieve  intellectual coherence by projecting a consistent philosophical  outlook.   Intellectual coherence   ensures  structural unity   and  ulti­ mately  artistic  success.  In  the same  way, if we regard  many  poems in the second group as  unsuccessful,  it is because  they  lack strict  structural unity  by  failing  to achieve   intellectual  coherence based  on  a  consistent   outlook  or  point  of  view. The   poems  do  attempt  to  portray a  world  of  Christian order; but  they  also acknowledge human  efforts  to  gain  mastery  of  the  world  by  growing  scientific progress.  In  many  cases the  poet's  religious point  of view is directly contradicted by  his  scientific   outlook,   and   the  result  is  ambivalence or  incohorence. Thus structural unity is impaired and artistic success diminished.
"The  Cachalot" illustrates the  harmful effect of an  ambivalent or inconsistent
point  of view  in  Pratt's art; it  relates  an  episode  in  which  a great  whale  battles furiously  against a  whaling crew  and  eventually, in  the  desperation of its death throes,  causes its human attackers to drown. The  contest  ends in stalemate, battle honours being  shared  equally  between  the  whale  and  the men. The  whale  is part of an  hierarchy in  which,  through his great  size, he is assigned  precedence over smaller   creatures.  By  challenging  the   whale's   claim   to  precedence,  the   men challenge the  hierarchy of which  it is part.  In  fact, they challenge the ruler  of the hierarchy, that  is, God Himself.
Pratt's attitude toward the  men  is sneering  and  disdainful. He  calls them  "a
puny  batch of men" and  "this  arrogant and  impious  crew". Their courage and skill arouse  his contempt:

For what was iron to that head
And oak to that hydraulic thunder?

In  contrast, his  admiration of  the  whale  may  be  seen  in  his  description of  its regal posture even in death:

Then,  like a royal retinue,
The slow processional of crew, Of inundated hull, of mast,
Halliard  and shroud and trestle-cheek,

77

THE  TENSION OF   HIS TIME



Of yard and topsail to the last
Dank flutter of the ensign as a wave Closed in upon the skysail peak, Followed the Monarch  to his grave.

Yet  this  attitude -of  contempt for the  men  and  admiration for the  whale -is not  followed   with   strict   consistency.  The   men  are  also  shown   as  courageous, skilful,  daring and  defiant  in  tackling  an  adversary of such  tremendous strength. Moreover, they  persist,  despite  the  dangers,  and   kill the  whale  even  if it  costs them  their  lives  to  do  it.  In  praising  the  whale  and  sneering  at  the  men  Pratt underlines  his  belief  in  an   hierarchical Christian order;  at  the  same   time  he admits  the  progress  of human skill and  science  which  enables  the  men  to kill the whale.  The  result  is vagueness  and  uncertainty; for  our  reaction  to the  poem  is necessarily  confused. If we  admire the  whale  and  lament  its death, our  sorrow will be neutralized at  the  end  by our  natural sympathy for  the  men.  Conversely, if  we admire the  men  and  grieve  for  their  death, our  admiration for  the  whale will be seriously affected.
"The Cachalot" is representative of poems in the second  group,  most of which weave  uncertainly between   asserting  and  denying man's  subordination to  God. These  poems  generally   extol  God's  supremacy by  praising  creatures such  as the cachalot  which   is  part   of  a  God-controlled hierarchy;  at  the  same  time  they suggest   that   this  hierarchy  is  overthrown  by  man's  acquisition of  dominance through scientific  progress.  The  resulting  ambivalence may harm  some poems less than  others; but  it  is always  harmful; and  nowhere is this  harmful effect  better illustrated  than   in  "The Truant" which   has  perhaps greater  artistic   potential than  all Pratt's other  works.
"The Truant" deals  with  a  man  who  is accused  of  refusing  to  behave  like other  creatures in  the  universe  which  accept  subordination to  a  power  referred to as the  "almighty Lord" and  "Imperial Majesty"; but  the  power is not God; it is "the  great  Panjandrum", the ruler of a universe of "mechanics":
A realm of flunkey decimals that run, Return; return  and run; again return, Each group around  its little sun,
And every sun a satellite.

In  his  defence  the  man  argues  that  it  was  he, who  through scientific  ingenuity, discovered  and   harnessed the  very  mechanical principles  by which  the  universe of  the  Pan jandrum operates:  he  therefore refuses  to  accept subordination. He proudly   recalls  his  feats  of scientific  advancement and  defies the  Panjandrum's

THE  TENSION  OF HIS TIME



authority  by  finally  saying   "No! by  the  Rood,   we  [men]  will  not   join  your ballet." Thus  the  poem  concludes with  a  Christian point  of view since  the  man swears defiance by the Christian Cross.
On   the  surface   the  poem  seems  an  eloquent   attack   on  the  presumption of mechanistic science  in  claiming to  have  explored  all  the  secrets  of  the  universe and  therefore to  have  given  scientists  full  control  over  it.  But  there  is a  radical flaw.  On  one  hand  the  man  boasts about  his scientific accomplishments, while on the  other  he condemns their  result-scientific supremacy. Moreover, the  man's concluding Christian  oath   suggests  that   his scientific  achievements were  either directed by or in conformity with  the tenets of Christian faith. Yet the  poem does not  demonstrate this alleged  conformity between  the man's scientific  achievement and  his Christian faith.  The  last line of the  poem is a wholly  unconvincing state­ ment  of  faith   (or  prejudice)  representing a  point  of  view  that  contradicts the man's  earlier   boasting about  his  scientific   progress.  Pratt  is  moved   to  praise scientific   progress   which,   in   the   neo-Darwinian tenns  of   his  late   nineteenth century intellectual background, directly  conflicts with  Christian belief.


IT IS  ONLY in the  third  and  smallest  group of his poems  that
Pratt offers  a  solution   to  the  underlying conflict  between   religion  and  science.
This  is evident,  for example, in "The Titanic", a long,  narrative work which  sets out  to  expose  the  inadequacy of science.  We  are  given  the  story  of  the  actual sinking  of the Titanic  as it occurred in  I g r 2. Scientific  achievement, in this case in  the  field of engineering, is presented  as an  act  of impiety  against a God-given natural order.  Pratt successfully reproduces the ironic shift from over-weening confidence at  the  beginning of the  voyage to chaotic  desperation at  the end.  The human suffering  involved  is secondary  to his exposure  of the  ultimate futility  of human scientific  endeavour. The  distress of  the  passengers  is reported factually without any  significant   appeal to  our  sympathy. Whatever sympathy  the  poet invokes   for   them   pales  completely  before   his  unbounded  fascination  for  the iceberg that is the cause of their doom:
And out there in the starlight, with no trace
Upon it of its deed but the last wave From the Titanic fretting at its base, Silent, composed, ringed by its icy broods, The grey shape with the palaeolithic face Was still the master of the longitudes.

79

THE  TENSION OF  HIS TIME



The  iceberg's  victory  reinforces the  permanence of an ageless cosmic order  which, although  challenged by  man's science,  reasserts  itself and   vindicates the  poet's belief in it.
Because  of its consistent, anti-scientific bias "The Titanic" remains an  artistic whole,  unlike  poems  such  as  "The Cachalot" and  "The Truant" which  waver and  equivocate in dealing  with  their  main  theme.  But even "The Titanic" should not  be regarded as a wholly successful  poem;  for it gives an incomplete treatment of  the  conflict  between   religion  and  science,  by ignoring or,  at  any  rate,  failing to  emphasize  the   real  advantages which  science  has  produced. A  satisfactory resolution  to the  conflict  would  have  to take  account of both  man's accomplish­ ments  and  his duty  to God.  Ideally, what  was required  was a situation in which man,   through his science  or  skill,  could  appear to  be serving  God.  In  this  way Pratt  could   demonstrate  that   scientific  advancement, far  from   challenging it, reinforced and  enhanced God's  supreme authority. This  was  precisely  the  situa­  tion   provided   by  the  story  of  Jean de  Brebeuf,   the   French  priest  who  lived between  I593 and  I649·
"Brebeuf   and   his  Brethren" tells the  story  of a  group  of  French Jesuits  who
endured incredible privation and  eventual martyrdom in their  efforts  to prosely­ tise  Huron  Indians in  seventeenth  century   Canada. As  in  "The  Titanic", the poem  is based  on  an  event  or  a series of events  that  is historically  authentic. So far   as  the   facts   are   concerned  then,   as  in  "The  Titanic",  the  poet  deserves praise  for  historical  scholarship. But  we  do  not  read  poetry  primarily to  learn history  any  more  than  we  read  novels chiefly to obtain  sociological  information. More  important is the  poet's  or novelist's  vision of life,  his philosophical outlook, which   is  implicit   in   the   way  that   he  presents   his  information. This   is  why "Brebeuf"  is  the   culmination  of  Pratt's  poetic   career;  for  it  gives  the   most complete expression  of his vision of life or  philosophical outlook,  elements  only of which appear in his other  poems.
Brebeuf  and  his fellow Jesuits  prepare themselves for their  missionary  activities with  scientific  thoroughness. They  exhibit  courage,  heroism  and  ingenuity-the same  qualities which  bring  doom  to  the  whaling crew  in  "The  Cachalot" and disaster   to  the  builders   and   passengers  of  the  Titanic. In  "Brebeuf",  however, these  qualities bring  triumph and  glory to the  priests. Whereas the  whaling  crew and  the Titanic's builders commit  acts of impiety  against  God,  the  French priests operate within  a divine  framework and,  by their  courage  and  ingenuity, reinforce it.  While  in "The Cachalot" and  "The Titanic" Pratt  feels warm  admiration for the  whale   and   iceberg-the agencies  which  frustrate human  aspiration -he

8o

THE  TENSION OF HIS TIME



expresses  no similar  feeling  for  the  Indians who torture  and  murder Brebeuf  and his fellow  priests.  The   Indians are  described  as crude  and  savage,  and  the  best that   Pratt  can   manage  is  to  see  them   as  rather   innocent, though  dangerous simpletons, in  need  of  humane  civilization. If this  attitude seems  inhumane or racist   it  serves,  nevertheless,  to  highlight   the  sacrifice  and   martyrdom  of  the priests and  to emphasize their admirable qualities.
The  martyrdom of  the   priests  is  fully  consistent   with  the   motives   of  their mission and  their own philosophy  of life:

On  the prayers, The meditations,  points and colloquies,
Was built the soldier and martyr programme. This is the end of man -Deum laudet,
To seek and find the will of God, to act
Upon it for the ordering of life, And for the soul's beatitude.

The  death of Brebeuf  and  his brethren is the logical climax  of both  their  human aspiration  and   religious   faith.   Nowhere   else  has  Pratt  been   able   to  fuse  so successfully  the  two  contradictory elements  of his thought-his  belief in special human  qualities which  appear to  give men  dominance in  the  universe,  and  his faith  in  God  as absolute  ruler  of the  universe.  In  "Brebeuf" alone  are  men  able to exhibit  dominant qualities while  remaining all the  time subject to the  absolute rule  of God.  It is this intellectual coherence  that  so richly enhances the  dramatic intensity   of  the   poem,   making   it  the   work  in  which   Pratt's  potentiality for dramatic narrative poetry is most fully realized.
"Brebeuf" confirms  Pratt's narrowly  orthodox, if nominally nonconformist Christianity. The  fortitude and  self-sacrifice of Brebeuf  and  his brethren are  not inspired   by  motives  such  as selfish advancement, diplomatic advantage,  military gain,  patriotic glory or  political  manoeuvring. No doubt  some of these  results did follow  the  priests'  activities  which,  after  all,  certainly   helped  to  extend   French colonial  ventures in  Canada. Some  secular  implications of Brebeuf's mission  are mentioned, for example,  in Pratt's description of Fort Sainte  Marie:

Strategic as a base for trade or war
The site received the approval of Quebec, Was ratified by Richelieu who saw Commerce and exploration pushing west, Fulfilling the long vision of Champlain -
'Greater  New France beyond those inland seas.'

81

THE  TENSION OF HIS TIME



But  these  results  were  adventitious.   The   motives  of  the  priests  were  wholly religious:

not in these [secular motives] the source - But in the sound of invisible trumpets blowing
Around two slabs of board, right-angled, hammered
By Roman nails and hung on a Jewish hill.

In  "Brebeuf" Pratt  finally succeeds in demonstrating,  in its entirety,  the view of life that  he held throughout his career. It is the view of a harmoniously  working, God-controlled  universe in which men have a superior rank in relation to their immediate environment, but an inferior one in relation to God.
It  would  be  foolish  to  deny  the  narrow  and  rigidly conventional  mould  in
which  Pratt's  basic outlook  is cast. He  was strongly given  to spacious scientific generalizations.  Like his partial  contemporary,  Grant  Allen, he too digested the basic  modes  and   preoccupations of  nco-Darwinian   science,  especially  as  they were popularized  by Herbert  Spencer and, to some extent, by Allen himself. This explains  Pratt's  apparently inhumane treatment of the Hurons  in "Brebeuf"; for he was a social Darwinist.  But he was neither a social snob nor a political auto­ crat.   His   profound   sympathy   for  the  socially  deprived   or   disadvantaged   is revealed in several  poems, for example, "The  Depression  Ends" and  "The Man and  the Machine". His attitude  to the Hurons suffers from the limitations of his neo-Darwinism.
Pratt's  simple or, at any rate, conventional view of life is wholly consistent not only with  his own  temperament and  upbringing  as the son of a clergyman,  but also  with  the  social  and  historical  circumstances  in  which  he  spent  his  most formative  years. Experiment and innovation  were alien to him. In his "Introduc­ tion"  to  Selected   Poems  of E.  ].  Pratt,  Peter  Buitenhuis  recognizes  the  poet's tradition-bound cast of mind  at least in his style:  "Stylistically Pratt  remained  a contemporary of Tennyson  and  Hardy." The  truth  is that  Pratt  grew  up in  a Dominion still within  the British Empire:  his work both in philosophical outlook and   technical   accomplishment  bears  the  stamp  of  the  colonial  conditions  in which  his basic  outlook  took  shape.  He  was imitative  rather  than  innovative. While  his contemporaries abroad,  Pound  and  Eliot, were blazing fresh trails in poetic theory and  technique,  he stuck  doggedly to safer, more well-beaten paths. No one can seriously praise Pratt  for his originality. His best work, "Brebeuf",  is a  thoroughly  conventional poem.  Yet  for all, it remains, as Northrop  Frye has said, "not  only the greatest but the most complete Canadian narrative."


review articles




CRITICISM  AND THE WHOLE MAN



Germaine Warkentin



A.     J. M.  SMITH,   Towards  a  View   of  Canadian  Letters:  Selected  Critical  Essays
I92B-197I. University of British  Columbia Press.  Cloth $g.oo, paper $5.50.


WE   HAVE TWO  DESCRIPTIONS of  A.  J. M.  Smith   in  his  mid-twenties. One  (implied, of course; we must  respect
the disguising  persona)  is in his own poem
"My  Lost Youth":

I remember it was April  that  year,  and afternoon.
There was a modish  odour of hyacinths, and you
Beside  me in the drawing room, and  twilight falling
A trifle  impressively, and a  bit  out  of  tune.


I thought of my  birthplace in  Westmount and  what  that  involved
-An ear  quick  to recoil  from  the faintest
'false  note'.
I spoke  therefore hurriedly of the distressing commonness of American letters,
Not daring to look at your  living  and
beautiful throat.
'She  seems  to be one  who  enthuses,' I
noted, excusing myself,
Who  strove that  year  to be only  a minor personage out  of James
Or  a sensitive indecisive guy from  Eliot's
elegant  shelf.
'What happens,' I pondered fleeing,  'to one whom  Reality claims.... ?

Leon   Edel,   on  the  other  hand, as  a
 
mere observer is uninhibited by the modernist  topos   of  ironic  self-depreca­ tion;  in a forthcoming memoir he remem­ bers Smith  with hearty generosity:

Smith,  when   I  first   met   him,   was   a  slim youth    of   medium  height,  with   fine   dark­ brown   hair   which   he  combed back;  usually  a  few  strands fell  over  his  forehead  and  his gold-rimmed  spectacles,  so   that   he   looked  like   the   young   Yeats.  He   carried   himself with  an  excess  of  politeness that  was  in  his English  breeding ... but   he  was  a  tempest of  poetry  and   revolt   against   establishment hypocrisies.... Arthur   started  to  study science; after a   while   he   moved   into  the English   Department  where we  would   sit  at the   back   of   a   classroom  and    pretend  to listen   to  Cyrus  Macmillan  expound  Shake­ speare  (remembered from   Kittredge)  while Smith  wrote  poems  and  gave  meT. S. Eliot  to  read.  I  remember the  shock   of  recogni­ tion   when   I first   read The  Love   Song   of
J. Alfred   Prufrock. Here was  my  language; this   was  "modern". I  had   been   reared  on Horatio  Alger   Jr.,  with    a   smattering  of Shaw  and  Wells,  Upton Sinclair and Louisa Alcott. Smith first   taught  me  the   meaning of   literature,  how   words    could  be   made expressive   and    shaped  into    a   poem.    He
made me  feel  the  modern idiom, the  use  of words  as this year's  language shorn of old accretions of meaning.1

REVIEW ARTICLES



Edel's  memoir  chronicles the beginning of the McGill Fortnightly Review, which published its first issue in November 1925. Fifty   years  thus   separates  the   Yeatsian youth   and   the   august   figure   who,   last year, presented us with  the selected  fruits of five decades' concern with  the ideals of modernism in  Canada. Towards a View of Canadian Letters: Selected  Critical Essays I 928-7 I is austerely but character­ istically  titled: the stubborn  hesitation of "towards", the  resolute  discrimination of "selected" all bespeak that old proud  king for whom  we must now author a parable.
Though Smith  will continue, we hope,
to   add    to   his   distinguished  record    in Canadian  literature,  the   shape   of  that parable can  now be discerned. Its outlines have  been  suggested  by Desmond  Pacey, who spoke of Smith  in a recent  address  as the "representative Canadian critic of the forties  and  fifties."2   Smith exemplifies  a period   in  Canadian  literature  beginning with the   modernist revolution of  the twenties,   and   continuing until   the  now very  apparent historical   change that  oc­ curred in the late  fifties. About  that time, Canadian Literature began  to appear, the Readers' Club   of  Canada  was  founded, and  Margaret Laurence began  to publish.  As a  result  of  these  three events,  lasting  connections among  the critics,  within  the audience, and  between   the  writers-all fundamental  elements of a  healthy liter­  ary  culture -began  to  develop   as  they never   had   before.   Presiding  as  he  did over  a  period  when  these  essentials  had yet  to  appear, Smith   thus  belongs  to  a time  of  expertness amidst  fragmentation. Indeed  to  the  extent   that   any  cohesion was   possible  for   the   literary  culture  of Canada  in   the   difficult   years   between
1925  and   1955,  Smith   was  its  architect, first of the  modernist revolution itself  (as
 Edel's  portrait makes  clear)  and  second of   the   great   historical  synthesis   repre­ sented  in  the  first edition of  the  Book  of Canadian  Poetry ( 1943), with  which Smith  began  a career as anthologist fully as important as his  others in  poetry  and criticism.
The  date  1955 is significant, because  it is a cruel fact of Canadian literary history that despite his  achievement, Arthur Smith's  critical   position   was  firmly   re­ jected  by his fellow  poets  at  the  historic  Kingston  Writers'   Conference   of    that  year.  In  his paper for  the  conference he had  contended that  the poet should  write for a "restricted, knowledgeable, exacting audience"   (other  poets,  in  fact)  rather than  for a  "large,  undiscriminating" one. Though  he  had  stated  with  great  feeling his  sense  of  the   poet's   responsibility  to mankind as well  as  to  his  art,   he  could only do so by presenting an aristocratic notion  of poetry  which  rejected what  he felt were  the crude responses  of the great mass of ordinary men. He was courteously repudiated  by  a  conference  heady   with the discovery that  a literary community might  at  last be possible  in  Canada, and that  it would  necessitate a very broad audience indeed.
It is the achievement of Smith's critical
career  that  he  sharpened-when  we needed  to have it sharpened-the dis­ tinction   between  pious  and   pure  poetry. It is  his  failure   that   he  was  unable   to build  in  criticism   a  bridge   between   the pious and the pure of the sort which was eventually to be supplied in poetry by Layton, Birney, Purdy,  Reaney, Newlove, and   Atwood,   and   would   result   in   the creation of a literary  community with a poetic voice both  civic and  exacting. In surveying Smith's  criticism,  then,  we have a dual  obligation: to see Smith as archi-

REVIEW ARTICLES



teet  of  the  contemporary, and   to  recog­ nize  that   most  of  us  have  moved  out  of the house he built.
The  collection of essays that  represents
that  house  seems at  first sight  impervious to   the   wrecker's  bar.   It  comprises   an anthology of himself,  by an anthologist of unchallenged merit,  and  to complete the effect,  it  contains in  its terminal pages  a self-review.  It  is irresistible  to  think  of it as  The  Book   of  Canadian Smith.  The essays  are  not  arranged  chronologically, but  in a kind  of topical  synthesis,  and  the "Author's Note" urges us to pay attention to the dates  when the pieces were written, though  chiefly  to  warn   us  that   we  will find in  them  "either a remarkable consis­ tency  or  a  remarkable lack  of   develop­  ment". The  first  part  presents  us  with  a history  of  Canadian poetry;  not  Smith's famous    1943   preface    to   the   Book   of Canadian  Poetry  but   the  more  evolved version  that  introduced  his Oxford anth­ ology  of   1960.  Attached   to  this  is  the related article "Eclectic Detachment: Aspects of Identity in  Canadian Poetry". The  volume   then   takes   up  a  historical  arrangement,  moving  from  Smith's work on Canadian  prose before  Confederation, through some writing  on Roberts and  his period,  to   a   variety   of   essays  on   the modern poets. Gathered at the conclusion  are "Some Polemics  Early  and  Late" and "A  Personal  Epilogue". The  book is thus an   act   of  self-definition,  in  which   the critic surveying his career  lays out  before us  synoptically  the  historical ground  of his critical method, illustrates its applica­ tion  in  two areas,  and  then  caps it all by re-stating the  terms  of  the  art   that   ties together his three   personae:  poet,  critic, and  anthologist.4
Smith's sensibility  is perhaps the  most
purely  critical of anyone  who has written
 about  Canadian literature. His most char­ acteristic mental   act   is  to   discriminate with   exquisite   caution   the   component effects  of  a  poem  so  as  to  establish   its quality  according to an absolute standard of  taste;   though   there  are  frequent his­ torical and  analytical  observations in Smith's  parentheses, his  central  preoccu­ pation  is with  judging and  ranking, and  he  has  defended   fiercely  the  critic's  re­ sponsibility   to   evaluate.  In   its   mature form, this impulse  to evaluate is rooted  in a  broad   humanism,  which   to  my  mind Smith   best  expressed   in  a  1954  article, "Refining  Fire"    (later   disassembled to serve  other   purposes,  it  does  not  appear in its original  form in this volume). There he wrote that  the arts are central to man's experience,  and   the   poet,   as  "prophet, medicine   man,   and   informer" is  at  the centre  of the  arts.  "The poet  is one  who tells  on  us. He  is our  secret  conscience. He   reveals   hidden    and    uncomfortable truths. He  lets  light   and   air  into   dark, closed  places.... He  exposes  suppressed evil, and  can make  us whole  again."5 The very act  of  creation, then,   is one  of  dis­ crimination, and it produces poetry which is "an  instrument of search  and research" and   as  "music   for   the   inner  ear" may never  appeal to  the  multitude. Criticism too is a "difficult, lonely music": " ... the reading of  imaginative  literature  is itself an  art -both  a fine art  and  a  useful  art
-an art  that  involves  perception, appre­ hension,  and  evaluation.... To neglect  it or  merely  pay  it  lip-service or  to substi­  tute   vague   appreciation  for   the   hard  work  and   discipline   that   is  involved   in the technique of accurate reading ... is to corrupt  the   spiritual   life   of   the   com­ munity."6
Though  the  poet   and   the  critic   may end  up speaking  only to a small  audience,

REVIEW ARTICLES



he must  nevertheless do so with all his faculties: " ... poetry  does not permit the rejection  of  every  aspect   of  the  person­ ality  except   by  intuition and  sensibility. It must  be written by the  whole  man.  It is an  intelligent activity,  and  it  ought  to compel   the  respect   of   the generality of intelligent  men.  If it  is  a  good,  it  is  a good  in  itself."  In  this  search  for  whole­ ness, Smith's standard  of  value  thus  be­ comes   metaphysical;   poetry  seeks   a "union  of  sensuous  richness   with  verbal exuberance", it  "fuses  thought and  feel­ ing",  in  an  act  done  "with all  one's wits about   one  and   purified   by   the  senses". Yet   the  ideal   poem   that  emerges   from this fusion  of all  the human  potentialities is  curiously   non-human;  it  floats   com­ pletely  free  of history  in  a realm  of pure poetry: "a poem exists as a thing  in itself. It is not a copy of anything or an  expres­ sion  of  anything, but  is an  individuality as  unique as a  flower,  an  elephant, or  a man  on  a flying  trapeze.... Such  poetry is objective, impersonal, and  in a sense timeless  and  absolute. It stands  by itself, unconcerned with  anything save  its own existence." Like the frozen  fountain in his own  Marvellesque poem,

... fragrance here has grown  to form, And Time is fooled, although he storm.7

Andrew  Marvell is of course the poet to whom  Smith  always returns as a standard of excellence, seeking everywhere the signs of a fusion  of thought and  sense like his, a  union  so perfect  that  through it "ideas
... [enter] so  deeply   into   the  blood  as never    to   be   questioned."  Which    puts them,  presumably, not merely  "beyond formalism", but  beyond  criticism entirely. It comes  as no surprise  that  one who is a seventeenth-century  poet   manque  envi­ Sions  (or  did  once  envision,  for  the pas-

86
 sage in question  was written in  1936)  an epiphanic end for art.  But as we shall see, this places in quite  another light  his claim that   his  criticism   is  "remarkably  consis­ tent", and  his view that  the best  poetry  is definitely  cool, controlled, and intelligent. But   "what  happens,"  then,   "to   one whom  Reality  claims?" The earliest  piece in this collection  is Smith's 1928 polemic,
"Wanted-Canadian Criticism," and  it represents  two historical conditions. One was  the  very  real  need  at  that   time  for Canadian criticism  to become  truly "criti­ cal,"  rather  than  continuing  to  serve  as an outlet  for what  Smith glumly referred to  as  "the  prevailing spirit   of   pep  and  optimism." The  other  was Smith's convic­  tion-which  he shared with  most of the serious  English-Canadian  writers of  the day-that  to   achieve  this,   Canadian criticism   and   poetry   would   have  to  de­ nationalize  themselves.  His   1936   "Re­ jected  Preface" for  New  Provinces makes the  point   clearly:  "We   do  not  pretend that  this  volume  contains any  verse that  might    not   have    been   written   in   the United   States  or  Great  Britain. There is certainly  nothing   specifically   Canadian about  more  than one or  two poems. Why should  there be?" This  statement belongs to an era  when  outside  the  boosterism  of the  C.A.A., it  was  impossible  to imagine  a self-sustaining literary culture in English Canada, to  say  nothing of  a  literature with its own aesthetic. In the 192o's young Americans who viewed  their  society with a scepticism  akin  to Smith's exiled  them­ selves physically,  to  London,  Berlin,  and above all to Paris. The Canadians, on the other  hand, exiled  themselves by becom­ ing   uncritically   dependent  on   literary  standards   created   abroad.  These   stan­ dards  were undoubtedly  more   polished, but   for   the   writer  living   outside   their

REVIEW ARTICLES



original   sphere   of  influence,  that   polish was  unearned. Few  of  them   seemed  to have  realized  that  a true  cosmopolitan is one who is only as much  at home  in other countries as he is in his own.
Smith's career reflects  the strain  on his critical position  caused  by conflicting obli­ gations   to  the   native   situation  and  the cosmopolitan mode.  Those  dates  he  asks us  to  pay  attention  to  in  his  "Author's Note" fall into  a neat  pattern: first there  is  an   early   modernist  period   from   the mid-twenties to the  beginning of  the war, then  the  brief  but  fruitful  period  in  the early forties when he prepared his ground­ breaking anthology  The Book  of Cana­ dian   Poetry.   These   were   followed   by fifteen   years  in  which   he  continued  to write  poems  himself,  and   published sev­ eral  anthologies of  English  poetry.  From the  late  fifties  on  he  has  been  giving  a great  deal  of  attention to  practical  criti­ cism   of   individual  Canadian   poets. Throughout all  these  phases  his  central  values  remained those with  which, in the early  forties,  he confronted the challenge of reorganizing the Canadian  anthology: "to   illustrate  in  the  light  of   a  contem­ porary   and    cosmopolitan   literary  con­ sciousness the  broad  development of English-Canadian   poetry."8   But   he  has had to apply  them to a poetic scene which has  changed in  ways  that   could   hardly  have been  predicted in 1943.
The legacy  of  definition  provided  by
the  Book   of  Canadian  Poetry  forms­ along   with   the  notion   of   the  "garrison mentality" --one of  the  historically im­ portant structuring  concepts  of  English­  Canadian literature. Its rna jor feature was of course the division  of Canadian poetry into "native" and  "cosmopolitan" schools. "The one  group," Smith   wrote  in  1943, "has  attempted to describe  and  interpret
 whatever is essentially  and  distinctively Canadian and   thus  come  to  terms  with an  environment that  is only  now  ceasing to  be  colonial.  The other, from  the  very beginning, has made  a heroic effort  to transcend colonialism  by entering into  the universal, civilizing  culture of ideas."9 In choosing  his  poems  Smith   thus  was  im­ posing  a  cosmopolitan  taste  on  a  litera­ ture   which   by  his  standards   had   been cosmopolitan  for   little   more   than  a decade, and  producing a historical synth­  esis through the  application of a  literary theory  that  was  avowedly  non-historical. Taking up the task, he wrote:

A  revision, a  weeding out, a  new  discovery
-this   is  the   task   that  is  waiting  for   an anthologist with  taste  and  courage. There  is an  immediate and  vital need  for  a  revalua­ tion   of  our   standard  poets,  based   upon  a careful examination of  every  poem, line   by line  and  stanza by stanza.  What it is  useful  to  know  is  not  the  historical significance of a   poem   in   the   development  of  Canadian literature but  its absolute poetic vitality. We want to  know  whether the  poem  is alive  or dead. Can it  speak   to  us  in  a  language we recognise as  that of  a  man, not  of  a  bird  or a book?  Can  we  accept it  without putting half   of    our    personality-the   mind-to sleep?   Has  it  ever   been   or  can   it  become again, a part  of life?

To  the  vast  range  of minor  poets  he had to represent, Smith  was always courteous. But essentially  he solved his critical prob­ lem   by  repeatedly  choosing  from   their  work  the  simple,   the  uncluttered  poem his modernist taste  permitted. The excel­  lences he discovers in G. F. Cameron and  D.  C.  Scott   are  those  an   heir  of  Eliot would admire:  clarity, impersonality, exactness. Though he tried  hard to repre­ sent the virtues of the "natives"-realism and  homely  originality-he clearly  pre­ ferred   the  cultivation of  the  cosmopoli­ tans.   That  the   two   might   mingle   and  create  some new possibility seems to have

REVIEW ARTICLES



dawned on  him  only  slowly;  in  1943  he failed  to  take  note  of  the  early  poetry  of Irving Layton, and   it  was  not  until   the revised  synthesis  that  appeared in his Oxford  anthology  of  I 960  that   he  was willing  to  admit that  for  the  cosmopoli­ tans  the  ever-present  "danger ... was  to be merely  literary." Nevertheless in 1g6o, as  in  1943,  Smith  idealized  the  timeless present    in   which   he   conceived    poetry  ought   to  exist,  and  then  isolated   in  the past  the  image  of  that idealized   present.  In   doing   so  he   replaced  the   romantic fiction  of  Canadian criticism as he found  it  in   the   early   twentieth  century  with another   one  more   austere,  but   just  as much  a creation.
The  result  was controversial, but of the first  importance. Smith's anthology (chiefly   as  a   result   of  its   omission   of Layton) led immediately to John Suther­ land's nativist   anti-anthology  Other Ca­ nadians. It  also  led  to  a  prompt  reap­  praisal   of   the   English-Canadian  poetic heritage which  has left  us, quite  literally,  without an  authoritative alternative per­  spective on its development. Every  Cana­ dian   reading  poetry   today   has  had   his taste shaped  by Smith just as thoroughly as   the  readers   of  the  twenties   and   the thirties  had theirs  (Smith quite  rightly complained of it  at  the  time)   shaped   by
Garvin and Campbell.1° Furthermore,
almost   all  that   is  known   of  our   poetry abroad is gathered from Smith's various prefaces; it  is assumed   that  what  he  de­ spises,  we  despise,  that   what   he  has  not found  is not  there  to be found. Though a revised  view of Canadian  poetry seems in the  making, it  has  not  yet  taken  shape, and  when it comes it will have  to have an authority as great   as  Smith's in  order  to challenge the master's own terms.
And  there  is little  doubt a revised  view

88
 is  needed. Smith's synthesis, brilliant though  it  was,  had   three   major  flaws. The first was that it emphasized as its chief critical  value   a   discrimination  without basis in a native history of style, and consequently  was  heedless  of  the  audi­ ence's  plain  need  for  organizing  conven­ tions  and   assumptions  close  to  its  own experience. The  result  was  to  exacerbate the  already pathologically destructive social  mythology  of a  community deeply  biassed against  itself. The  second flaw was that   in  presenting  us  with   the   timeless perfection of  his  cosmopolitan selection, Smith   shielded   us  for  thirty years  from  our  most interesting mistakes. It seems to me  very  clear  that  if one  is interested in formal   perfection  of  a  minor   sort,  one anthologizes Roberts' nature-sonnets. If one  is interested in  the growth of poetry in  his community, one struggles  with  the fascinating  muddle   of  his  attempts at philosophical verse. A third, and  major problem,  was  the   historical   unself-con­ sciousness  of  Smith   himself.  A  brilliant critic  may for a time persuade us that  his taste is absolute  and timeless, but in doing  so,  he  substitutes  one  kind  of  invulner­ ability    (which   history   will   surely   de­ molish)   for  the  more  lasting  kind  which  comes when  a fine mind  looks back  upon  the edifice it has built,  and  smiles.
If we turn  from  Smith's historical syn­ thesis  to  his  practical criticism,  we  find both  the critic's  familiar rigour, and  some interesting paradoxes. At  the  end  of  his review of the  Literary  History of Canada  (in  which  he  rightly  charges  the  writers  of  many  chapters with  a  failure  of  syn­ thesis), Smith  makes clear his puzzlement at  the  notion  of  analytical criticism: for him  it  can  signify  only  some  species  of classification  and   bibliography. His  own critical  method  is  modernist in  motiva-

REVIEW ARTICLES



tion, but  pleasantly old-fashioned in prac­ tice. Though he seeks to present  a full or close  reading of  a  poem,   he  habitually concentrates on  a  straightforward study of  imagery  and  theme; his  treatment of The  Roosevelt  and  the   Antinoe is  little more  than   a  narrative reading, and  the analysis of Frank  Scott's  "Lakeshore" does not  begin  to suggest the  resources  of that wonderful  poem.  Except for  "The Fred­  ericton   Poets",   which   is  an   ill-judged piece of encomium, Smith  is paradoxically a better guide to nineteenth-century writ­ ers than he is to the moderns. Though he persists  in  applying standards of  "taste" about which  I for one feel very sceptical, it is common  sense and  human sympathy that  tell him  these writers  are  more valu­ able than  we are yet prepared to acknowl­  edge.  He  is far in advance of  most Cana­ dian  critics in recognizing the importance of para-literary works like explorers' jour­ nals  and  settlers'  diaries.  He  has  single­ handedly kept before us the excellences of Duncan  Campbell  Scott,  and   has  even written about   Bliss  Carman with  a  per­ sonal  sympathy  which   may  in  time  find its audience too. The result  is to re-create for  us the  universe  of nineteenth-century literature  in  Canada in  a  way  we would never have expected  from  the young  poet of  New Provinces. "Everyone seems ready to  discard   the  colonial   pioneer   poets  to the   junk   pile,"   he  grumbles  in   a  late essay:

I myself  would   not  wish  to  discard and  do not   think   it   necessary  to  scorn   our   older poetry. It  is  worth  preserving because it shows  us what  our  ancestors were  able  to do when   they   tried   to  do   their   best.... They had    not   read    Hulme  or   Eliot    or   Dylan Thomas, but we must  not condemn them entirely for  having read   Wordsworth,  Shel­ ley, Keats, or  Matthew Arnold.

fhere is  a  fine  irony-quite unrecog-
 nized here-in Smith's defence of the nineteenth century against the  effects  of the very criticism  he had  been instrumen­ tal in creating.
In his study of modern poetry, however, a   fatal    selectivity   has   been   at   work. Smith's  bibliography presents  the paradox of  a   critic   who   has   so   carefully   pre­ evaluated his subjects  that  he writes only infrequently  about  poets   who   are   not amenable to his method. One  wishes that  the  sharp  edge  of  the  critic's discrimina­ tion  had  been  wielded  on  a  really  unco­ operative victim  instead of  on  poets  like F. R. Scott,  Anne  Wilkinson, and  P. K. Page.  (The  Queen's  Quarterly review  in which   he  reversed   his  stand   on   Irving  Layton  has  not,  alas,  been  included, nor is there  a  hint  of  his  copromachia with Layton   and    Dudek    in   the    Canadian Forum, 1956-7.)   Because  of this deliber­ ate  narrowness   Smith cannot  create   for





Modern Fiction Studies, a journal of literary  criticism  published at Purdue University, solicits articles for  publication in  a special  issue on Modern Canadian  Fiction, in French and  English,  to appear in Fall,  1976. Articles  may  be from
6000-8000 words in  length; "modem" is interpreted as "since
1945" or thereabouts. Deadline date  is  March  1976.  Manu­ scripts  should  be sent  to Modern Fiction  Studies,  Purdue Univer­ sity,   West  Lafayette, Indiana
47907.





8g

REVIEW ARTICLES



us the  universe of  twentieth-century English-Canadian verse as he does so un­ expectedly  for   the   nineteenth   century. He   withdraws  in  anger  and   hurt  from the "urbanized hitch-hiking social  realists or  the lung-born egoists of  instant experi­  ence"  without giving  us  a  chance to see him   challenge  them   as  he  implies   they should   be  challenged.  His  special  excel­ lence,  however,   is  well displayed  in  the fine essays on  Margaret Avison  and  Earle Birney.  The first  is a fluid  and  sparkling set of  "critical improvisations" in  which, stimulated by a  poet  of manifest quality, the   critic   steps   briefly  outside  his  own method and  indulges in a kind of  marvel­ lous and  illuminating play. The second  is a   review   of   Birney's   Selected    Poems,  where Smith's stuffy objections to Birney's typographical experimentation are the  framework  for  a  contrastingly  generous  recognition of  his "indigenous music  and imagery"  and   "northern  style",   poetic values  that  would  have  gravely   troubled  the  cosmopolitan of New  Provinces, who preferred  not   to  view   the   poem   in  its northern isolation.
Earlier, I suggested  that  Smith had been
set  apart from  recent  movements in  Ca­ nadian literature because  he had  refused to allow the literary culture which he had sustained  Atlas-like   in   the   thirties  and forties  to be democratized. It seems to me that   despite   the   pose  of   ironic   wisdom exemplified   in  "My  Lost  Youth", he has been  equally   isolated  from  himself.   Be­ neath the seamless fabric he would  like to think  his criticism presents,  there  are deep and  interesting  fissures. Chief  of  these  is his  failure to  see  and  appreciate histori­  city-both    ours   and    his.   Like   other  modernist   and  cosmopolitan  critics,   he has,  despite  his  absent-minded rescue  of the nineteenth-century, generally deprived

go
 us of  the  special  vitality  with  which  his­ toricity  endows  a  poem.  "The  historical  significance of a poem in the development of   Canadian  literature"  is   for   me   an essential  part  of its poetic vitality; if this is true  of the old poetry,  it is equally  true of the new, where  no amount of scorn for the merely  local ought to prevent us from recognizing   that  the  possibility  of  meta­  phor   is   literally   everywhere.  Smith struggles  with  his own  historicity in sev­ eral  places  in  this  volume,   most  impor­ tantly in the essay "Eclectic Detachment", which   appears near   the  beginning, and the section  "A Personal Epilogue", which is at  the end.  The argument of "Eclectic Detachment" is destroyed by Smith's  at­ tempt   to  shore  up   the  structure of   his cosmopolitanism  and   at   the   same  time reach   out   in  sympathy  to  a  Canadian poetry moving  in a direction he could not have  predicted. "A  Personal  Epilogue", on the other  hand, is mysterious  and  sug­ gestive,   for   it   explores   a   subterranean world  in  which  "everything beneath the surface  of  technique remains obscure". It holds out  the possibility  that  Smith  is yet another  of   our  "drowned  poets",   while confirming that  he is certainly our first drowned  critic.
In   the  epilogue   Smith claims  on  one hand   that   his  poems  "are not  autobio­ graphical, subjective, or  personal. ... None  of  them  is  reverie,  confession,  or direct   self-expression.  They   are   fiction, drama, art. ... The I  of  the  poem,  the protagonist of its tragedy  or  the clown of its  pantomime,  is  not  me.  As  Rimbaud said,  Je  est un  autre, I  is another." This control  and  impersonality is part  of  the "intelligence"  which   in  1928  he  argued was  essential   to  make   poetry   whole  in Canada. On  the  other hand, the  opera­ tions of the poetic  process as he describes

REVIEW ARTICLES



them   in  the  final  essay  are  deeply  per­ sonal,  and   disclose  huge  areas   of   sensi­ bility that  escape such control. For Smith,  it  is  out   of  the  wordless  womb  of  the unconscious that  the well-born, articulate poem   emerges.   To   this   birth,  the  con­ scious mind  is merely  the mid-wife. Smith  pictures  the moment:
Perforce the  poet  stops.  He  sits  bowed  over the   typewriter like  a  devotee at  the  shrine of   some   cruel   deity.  His   mind    is   blank:
,there  is  an  almost   trance-like concentration until, if he  is  lucky,   imagination  begins   to cloth  itself  in words  again.
In  these conditions, Smith  tells us in a beautiful  and   revealing image,   form   is born as
a crystallization in  the  mind, a  sort  of  irra­ diation  of  light   or  warmth that  surrounds the   'subject'  of   the   poem   and   begins   to delimit it.  This  is the  ultimate  source  of the poem's form. Where this  light  or  warmth is, there   is  the   poem.   The  place  where dark  and   cold   begin   marks   the  edge   or   formal  frontier of the  poem.
The beauty  of his statement does not disguise  the  fact  that  this poet  and  critic of the intelligence ultimately bows before the "change-born catalytic effect"  of a power   beyond   the   critical    intelligence, and   which   requires,  we  must   suppose, some further faculty  yet to make  the poet whole, and  his critic as well.
We  are  left,  then,  with  a final  picture of the  poet  awaiting his epiphany, listen­ ing   for   some   knowledge   yet   to   come. There  is  no  sense  anywhere  that  what  Smith    says  in   his   epilogue   about  the genesis  of  poetic  words  contradicts what is overtly  said everywhere else in the book about  how  we  go about  listening to  that  speech.  There is,  however, poignance (that   cruel   deity   is  not  much   like  the mischievous  and  unfaithful goddess  wor­ shipped   by the  poets  I  know)   and  great humility.  It  is  moments like  these  that
 save Arthur Smith  from  being  the "awful aristarch" of Canadian criticism, and  pro­ vide  a perspective from  which  we can - perhaps almost  despite  himself-see  the man  whole.
NOTES
1 Leon    Edel,    "When   McGill   Modernized Canadian Literature" in The  McGill  You Knew, forthcoming from  Longman Canada Limited.
2    In  an  address  to  the   Association  of  Cana­ dian and Quebec  Literatures, Learned Soci­ eties   Meetings, Toronto,  Wednesday,  May
29,  1974·
3   Smith's bibliography is extensive, but  almost everything  of   importance  he   has   written about  Canadian  literature  is  included  in this   collection.  Among  the   omissions   (be­ sides  those  officially  noted)  are  a  now  out­ dated  article on   A.  M.  Klein  from  Gants du  Ciel  (printemps, 1946),  and   the  splen­ did   essay   "Refining  Fire"   from   Queen's  Quarterly, 61,  1954-5. "Refining  Fire" has been  adapted  to  several purposes  over   the years; one  form  of it appears here  as "Poet" but  a  look  at  the  original  version  is worth­ while   because   it   shows   Smith   the  cosmo­  politan writing about  poetry in  the  specific  context of international modernism. I regret the  omission  of the  useful  article "Canadian Anthologies,  New    and    Old"   ( UTQ   11,
1941-2),  and    even    more     "The   Recent Poetry of Irving Layton: A Major Voice" (Queen's Quarterly 62,  1955-6), in  which Smith  tried    to   do    justice   to    the    most important  young    poet    omitted   from    his
1943   anthology  and   the   expanded  version of   1948.   The  essays   are   apparently   un­ revised: one  or two errors are  not corrected, there   are  several  typos,  footnote  references appear only  unpredictably, and, woe  to  the  inquiring reader, there is  neither  index nor  bibliography.
4   A.  J. M.  Smith, "Refining  Fire,"  Queen's
Quarterly  61  ( 1954-5), 362.
s  Ibid., 361.
a  A.  J. M.   Smith,  "The  Fountain",   Poems
New and Collected, 63.
7   A. J. M.  Smith, ed.,  The  Book of Canadian
Poetry   (Chicago:   University  of   Chicago
Press, 1943), 3·
a   Ibid., 5·
9   A.   J. M.   Smith,  "Canadian  Anthologies,
New    and    Old,"    University  of   Toronto
Quarterly, 11  (1941-2), 457·474·

91

PURDY'S  PRELUDE AND OTHER POEMS


George Woodcock


SEYMOUR  MAYNE, Face. Blackfish Press.
DOROTHY LIVESAY, Disasters  of the  Sun. Blackfish Press.
PAT LOWTHER,  The Age  of the  Bird. Blackfish Press.
AL  PURDY, On  the  Bearpaw Sea. Blackfish Press.
Blackfish, Nos. 1-5. Blackfish Press.
MIRIAM MANDEL, Lions  at her Face. White  Pelican.
AL  PURDY, In  Search of Owen  Roblin. McClelland & Stewart.
PETER STEVENS, And  the  Dying  Sky  like  Blood. Borealis Press.
EUGENE  MCNAMARA, Passages and other  Poems. Sono Nis Press.
EUGENE  MCNAMARA,  Diving for the  Body.  Borealis Press.


WHETHER  IT  is  intentions, good  or  otherwise, that  pave  the  road  to Hell  I have  not yet been able  to establish, but  I  know  that  they  form  the  flagstones of  every  editor's path. There are  always so many  interesting subjects to be covered that   neither space  nor  time  will  accom­ modate them  all, and so-at the moment with  total  sincerity-the editor promises to  note  this  journal, to get  that  book  re­ viewed,  and  the  months slip  by  on  these promises  until  in the end  it seems too late to redeem  them.  But  is it  ever  too late  to notice  a  good  book,  to  celebrate a  good idea?  Time can indeed sort out the worth­ less books about  which one is glad  in the end  that  a promise  was broken. Yet surely (unless one deifies topicality-a tempta­ tion   which   quarterly  publication fortu­ nately  removes)   it is the  books and  ideas still   in   one's   mind   after    unforgiveable procrastinations that   are  often  the  most worth  discussing. They have survived  time and   neglect   by  reason   of  some  special quality-and  it   need   not   be   a   good quality, for often  it is something negative about   a  book  that   has  stayed   in  one's

92
 
thought for  a  year  or  so and  still  insists on being said.
So  this  is an  essay in  redeemed  inten­ tions,  and,   to  begin,  let  me  say  what   I meant to say when  it was alive about  an excellent  small  press  that  seems  to  have quietly  expired  about  a  year  ago. This  is the Blackfish Press; it flourished  in Burn­  aby,  British  Columbia, from   the  spring of   1971  to   the  summer  of   1973,  after  which  I can find no trace  of further pub­  lications.   It  was  started  by  two   young poets,  Alan Safarik   and   B. T. Brett,  of whom Brett  appears to have  dropped out before the end. It published its own maga­  zine,   of   poetry   with   a   little   criticism, Blackfish,  of which  four  issues (the  last a thick  double  one)   appeared. It brought out  four sets of broadsheets by poets with at  least  some  West  Coast  links;   I  have three  of them,  Face  by Seymour  Mayne, Disasters of the  Sun  by Dorothy Livesay, and  The  Age of the  Bird by Pat Lowther. The  most ambitious Blackfish  production
-and  apparently its last  up  to the  pres­ ent-was a long poem, On the  Bear paw Sea,  by AI Purdy,  published in  a limited

REVIEW ARTICLES



edition, very  elegantly   printed and  illus­ trated; twenty-five copies were signed and bound  in calf-skin.
Blackfish itself struck  one  immediately
as  several  cuts  above  the  ordinary  little magazine brought  out   for  two  or  three issues  by  frustrated  poets   trying   to  get their   own  work  into   print. Safarik   and Brett  are  indeed   themselves  poets  worth publishing,  both-though  little   resem­ bling  each   other-with  a  sense  of  the poetic  magic  and  resonance of  the  West Coast  waterscape: Brett  inclined  to catch at   the  philosophic  lifelines,  as  in  "The Flow of Long Beach":

Dragonflies    the  sand eating itself     dissolving into  smooth  waves  of time  folding over  on timelessness  a  foaming mass of green-tiered  surf
I want to reach out
and  grab  this  tide
with  fingers  of thought and  drag  it back  in  to
see anything but  leaving ...

Safarik  inclined   towards  an  imagism  re­ fuelled   by a  return to  the  inspiration of classic  Chinese  poetry,   as  in  a  poem  on Siwash  Lake   in  the  Chilcotin country:

muskrats splashing into  the  water their  heads  and  a trailing V behind visible in the  reflecting waves
on shore  a dry  snag  pitch-fed
blazes orange against the  evergreen
& into  the  black sky.

But  Blackfish is interesting also for the way Safarik and Brett have chosen and combined  the work of other poets as well as  their  own.  Many  of  the  contributions are   by  established   poets -Birney,   At­ wood, Page,  Purdy,  Acorn,  Mayne, Live­ say -and   these  for   the   most   part  are good   examples   of   the   artists'   familiar  manners, offering  nothing  startlingly be­ yond   competence  except  for   Patrick
 Lane's fine  elegiac cycle, "Macchu Picchu", on the last days of the Incas,  and Pat   Page's metaphysical gem, "The Yellow People in Metamorphosis". It was in  fact  mainly  the  work  of lesser-known western  poets  that   made   Blackfish   most memorable, for  there  were  at  least  half­ a-dozen   unfamiliar  names   whose   work was  that   of  genuine  poets   with-one hoped-a widening future.  To  name  a few:   Jayne   Berland,   Christine  Hearn, Susan Landell, .Jim Green. Susan  Landell writes  still  and  patterned  poems  with  a kind of luminous gravity, like her elegy on the  Indian  past,  "The White   Buffalo":

They challenged Man's lightning armed with  the  curse
of a mad  shaman
They crumbled
as the  birch  tree  falls
in a fire of feathers
and   screaming ponies.
Jim   Green    is  a   less  reliable    poet:  a divided  man.  He can write straight evoca­ tive poems of the northern wilderness  like "Beyond   Here", sharp  facets  of  impres­  sion  that   lodge   in   the  mind   like  glass splinters,   but   he  is   just   as  capable  of presenting a  tedious  diary  in  verse,  and he has too frequent a predilection for the kind  of fake-tough  vernacular which  no­ body  actually  speaks,  even  in  the  bush, and  which  reads  as artificially as Tenny­ sonian  poeticisms.  Still  the spark  is there,  erratic,  perhaps capable of  burning in  a steady flame.
Two  more comments on Blackfish. The
last  issue, 4 &  5, includes   a  whole selec­ tion of translations from  the Chinese and Japanese,  the  former   by  Jan  W.  Walls and  Kenneth Rexroth, the latter by Alan Safarik.  All are good-i.e. rendered into evocative English verse-but the best, in my  view,  are   the   series  of  short   early

93

REVIEW ARTICLES



Chinese   poems    (8th   to   1 Ith   century) Englished by Jan  Walls,  on whom  no in­ formation is given. There is nothing new and    nothing  fatal    in   our   misfortunes, these  men  from  a  past  world  of troubles  seem to tell us, like Keng Wei in "Autumn Day".

Sunset rays shine  down  the  alley,
worries come,  but  no one  to tell  them to. Along  an old and  near-deserted road
the  autumn wind  stirs  the grain.

Of   all   the   less-known   poets   I   read in  Blackfish, I  was  most  pleased  by  Pat Lowther, whose Age of the Bird-a cycle suggested   by  the  guerilla campaign and death  of  Che   Guevara  (garnished, one suspects,   by  memories  of  Green   Man­ sions) -was easily the best of the Black­ fish   Press   cycle   of   broadsheets.   There were,   as  well,  nine   Lowther   poems   in issue 2  of  Blackfish,  and,  taken  with  The Age  of the  Bird,  they  present  a  poet  of versatility; of  an  impeccable  verbal   ap­  propriateness; of  the  ability  to  write  dis­ cursively   or   densely,   to   trace   a   tense narrative through a series of poems lead­  ing to a muted  climax,  or to catch  a com­ plex  binary   image  in  a  brief  poem  like "Vision":

The Woman looks out  of the  whale's bone her  eyes eroded
sinking
into  the  marrow
the  source of vision.
The whale cutting the  water
sings  like a huge     machine.
All  his  bones have  eyes.
 Governor-General's Award for  poetry written in  1973. This  is the second  of the points  I meant  to discuss long ago; in this case procrastination was caused  in part  by embarrassment, since  I  was  one  of  the jurors   for   awards   that   year,   though I dealt  with  non-fiction prose  and  had  no part in picking Lions at Her Face for the poetry  prize. I found  the  award inexplic­ able  then,  in view of the  better  books up for consideration, and  after reading Lions at Her  Face twice recently, I have found  my  comprehension  of  the  poetry   jury's action  diminishing rather  than growing.  These    are   indeed   poems   of   personal  agony, and  totally sincere in expressing  it, but  that  in itself is not enough; the voices of emotional convalescence have  too long created  a dominant tone in our  poetry.  In the  other  qualities   that   make   for  good poetry, Lions  at Her  Face seems to stand  on  the  fussy edge  of  the  amateurish, at times extraordinarily clumsy  in  phrasing, dull in imagery, conceptually banal. Read  this to any ear, inner  or outer:

What did  I hope  to gain? Integrity? A laugh!
I can't even  tie my shoes
without regret  for  that phony  relationship
which  was my life's  meaning. No, there was no intercourse, verbal  or  otherwise.
Yes, it was a sham  from  early  morning
till late  at  night.

Is  that  poetry  for  the  laurels? Honesty  is not  enough.  Indeed, a  touch  of  insincer­ ity often  makes the better  poet, because it means  a  poet  concerned with  something
more than  externalizing his emotions.

*  *  *
Pat  Lowther is writing verse on a level
with  poets who are much  better known  in Canada, and  better  verse than  some win­ ners  of awards, such  as Miriam  Mandel, whose  Lions  at  Her  Face  was  given  the


94
 
*  *  *
Back to Blackfish; the cessation of the Press's activities is, of course, what  usually happens   to  good  small   ventures of  this kind,  and  in any  case  there  are  rumours

REVIEW ARTICLES



that   it  "is  not  dead,   but  sleepeth", and may waken with some new and rather different publications very soon.
Meanwhile, there  is its most  ambitious production, Purdy's On  the  Bearpaw  Sea, which  I delayed  considering a page  ago because  I  wanted   to  relate  it  to  another recent   Purdy   book,  In  Search   of Owen Roblin. Between  them  they represent a notable  new  departure, for both  are  long poems, longer  than  anything Purdy  has attempted before,  and  both  are  used  for a  rather  intensive   elaboration  of   philo­ sophic  and  moral  and  historic  reflections on   the   nature  and   direction  of  human life, of all life. One  is tempted  to describe  them  as the  acts  of faith  of  an  agnostic,  acts  of belief in meaning in a world where no  meaning is to  be  discerned, of  belief in  continuity  where  the  verdict  of  mor­ tality is absolute.
On  the  Bearpaw  Sea is the shorter and
simpler  of the  two, and  vintage  Purdy, in the  sense that  the  clowning  and  the solemnity   flow  into  each   other,  leaving one  with  the  sense  that   though the  peg may  be  a  bit  of  kitsch  wrought-iron,  it has in its time supported the winged  cap of Hermes. On  one of his interminable peregrinations, Purdy visits a dinosaur museum  near   Brooks,  Alberta, and   sees the skeleton  of a duckbill  dinosaur with a kink  in  its  tail  where  it  was once  bitten, so many  millenia  of millenia  ago, by a carnivore bigger  than  a locomotive. This little   fact   sets  Purdy's   mind   going.  He invents  a living dinosaur, names  it, sets it in its steamy  world,  and  re-enacts the primitive drama of pursuit and  escape. Then, in the second  part  of the poem, switching himself  by  sleight  of  mind   to and   fro   across   the   glass  screen   in   the museum, he examines his own reasons for becoming fascinated by the suffering  of a
 beast  dead  longer  than  man  finds  it  easy to conceive:

And  what may  have  seemed  comic about the  great patient reptile
with wounded tail who once  lived  and moved in  the  exact  space  I move  in now
and  criss-crossed my life  track
has lost any  possible  humor for  me even a beast's pain  scarcely less real than a man's ingrown toennail but  less
important
except that I make  it important
In my mind  the  healed wound becomes  a kind  of bridge
the  scar  tissue  extending across  aeons  of  time
and  I a mammal witness
a bright thread connecting my brain
to savage  brains  in  the  Bearpaw Sea but  with  an  eerie  feeling
in  the  backbone of being
observed  myself
In  Search  of Owen Roblin was  ongi­ nally conceived  as a "poem for voices" to be broadcast over CBC  radio, and  it takes Purdy  back  to two crucial  passages  of his life -his relationship  in   boyhood   with the  grandfather who  had  been  born   in
I 840   and   lived   until  I 930,   trying  to
hold  on  to memories of that  remote  pio­ neer  past  when  most  of Ontario was still forest,   and   the  moment  of   failure  and deep  dejection years  later  when  he  him­  self  went  to  live  beside  Roblin   Lake  at Ameliasburg,  and   by   entering  into   the past  of  that  Loyalist  village  and   tracing the  life of its leading personage, the  Vic­ torian    miller   Owen   Roblin,  began    to recover   a   sense   of   himself.   It is  easy, looking  back  over  Purdy's poems,  to  be­ lieve   these   may   indeed   have   been   the two  symbolically  significant events  in  his mental  life,   the   keys   that    opened   his mind,   that   opened   a  way  for  the  many fine poems  he has written about the environs of Roblin  Lake  and  about the country of his grandfather's youth.
In  Search  of Owen  Roblin is a  poem


95

REVIEW ARTICLES



about  time and  death and  the beauty of transient things, and  yet it is also, like On the  Bearpaw Sea, a poem  about continu­ ity, about  the  strange sense of  being  part of   an   enduring  whole    (one   aspect   of which  Jung called   the  collective uncon­ scious), about  the way in which  the action of  our  minds  gives  life  again   to  what  is dead  and  recreates  links  where  the  links have all decayed.

In  search of Owen Roblin
I discovered a whole  era
that was really  a backward extension of myself
built  lines of communication across  two centuries
recovered my own  past  my own  people a long  misty  chain stretched thru time of which  I am  the  last  but  not  final  link
Perhaps this is Purdy's Prelude. Certainly it is a fascinating poetic  document on the way in which  the writer absorbs and processes his material into a form with meaning and  by his very actions  becomes one with that  material:

embedded in all  I've written about a fly speck  in  his tory
dust mote  cruising the  galaxies.

*  * 	*
A long  poem  of  a  very  different kind from   Purdy's   is  Peter   Stevens'   And  the Dying Sky like Blood, which  concerns  the career  of Norman Bethune. I confess that, while  I  can  see myself liking  and  admir­ ing  aspects  of Bethune the  man  if I  had known   him    (and    detesting   others) ,  I react  negatively  to  the  myth  of  Bethune,  because   I  believe  that   the  memories   of heroes   and   martyrs  have   always   been manipulated  by  leaders   for  the  ends  of power; I  am  consistent, for  I  reject  an­  archist  heroes like Durutti as well as com­ munist    heroes   like   Bethune.  Certainly Bethune's myth  was  used  threadbare by the  rulers  of China,  and  it  is interesting

g6
 to see how, now that we have found it politically expedient to seek  China's friendship, this formerly  almost  unknown Canadian  has  all  at  once  gained   heroic status  even at home.
So  I  opened   And  the  Dying  Sky  like Blood with  caution. Iwould have been surprised  to see Peter Stevens slip into hagiolatry,  but   still. ... When  I had finished   reading,  my   caution  was   dis­ solved.   If Stevens   did   not   ask   all   the awkward questions  Imight  have  offered (Where  was Dr. Beth when Orwell spilled the  Spanish beans?  for example) , he has given  us  not  the  picture of  a  hero,  but that   of  a  man,   fault   and   virtue   com­ pacted, a  man  enslaved  as  much  as libe­ rated,  within  the  history where  he has an undoubted place.
And  the  Dying  Sky  like  Blood is  de­
scribed   as  a  collage.   Poems   are  inter­ spersed  with  documentary material  relat­ ing to Bethune  and  his times. For me, this arrangement  seemed  the  major error  of planning  in   the   work.   The   documents certainly add  a little,  but  essentially  on a prosaic,  informational level,  and  if  any­ thing  they  detract  from   the   unity   and  clarity   of  the   poems,   which   are   often lyrically  very appealing as well as full  of close  insights   into   states   of  mind.   My second  reading was  of  the  poems  only, and  I found  them  such  a fortunate unity that  I  hope one day they will be published as  a  cycle on  their  own.  I  was,  inciden­ tally,  interested  to  see  Stevens  returning in  a  modest  way  to  traditional  forms:  a couple  of small ballads, a very well-turned sestina, some other poems in eccentrically rhymed  quatrains.
Peter  Stevens,  of course,  is one  of the poets who in recent  years have been work­ ing  in  Windsor  and  who  have  formed  a loose group  which  has  even  gone  in  for

REVIEW ARTICLES



publishing   poetry.  Another of  my  unful­ filled promises  was to write  an  article  on the   group,  which   appears  to   have   in­ cluded   Joyce  Carol   Oates,  Eugene   Mc­ Namara, Dorothy  Farmiloe, Len  Gaspa­ rini, as well as  Peter  Stevens.  This  was a case  where   I  could  not  find  the  linking thread. They  were  all  interesting poets, they  had  worked  together, and  it  is pos­ sible that, as happens often  in such group situations,  they  had   sparked   each  other off  in  their   writing. Yet  in  origin   they were  various,  and  looking  at  their  work, it was hard  to find the kind of links that existed  between,  say, the  McGill  poets or the  Preview  poets. The people  writing at Windsor had already formed their poetic personalities  before   they   arrived   there, and  so they did not experience that inter­ action   of   partly   formed    talents   which makes  a  real  school  of  poets,  and  which dooms schools to break  up as soon as their members  become mature.
But, if for nothing else, I am glad I conceived   this   finally   abandoned   plan, since   it   made   me   read   the   poetry   of Eugene  McNamara more attentively than I   might   otherwise    have   done.   McNa­ mara's career  up to now has had a quiet­  ness that  reflects the quietness  (not  neces­ sarily the serenity)   which  is the  prevalent tone of his poems.  He  has, between  1965 and  1974, brought out  some seven  books of verse, all of them  with  small  but  good presses. He  had  never  been  published  by one  of the  commercial houses,  and  he is unlikely ever  to make  the  poetic  big time in  the  way  Layton   and   Purdy,   Atwood and  Birney, have done.  For  there  is noth­  ing  flamboyant  about   his  poetry,  and   I suspect that in personality he lacks the theatrical quality that  would  make a good star on the reading circuit.
His  characteristic narrow column-
 sometimes  two narrow columns echoing each  other  on  one  page -suggests the austerity  of  his  poetic   temperament; it gives  even  visually  a  classic  (not  classi­ cist)   quality, while  the  short  lines slow down emotions,  delay  the effect of images. McNamara writes  like a man of  the  pre­ cinematographic camera  age,  his  scenes taken  on  long  exposures.  (He   is in  fact interested in old  photographs as emblems  of  a  past  between  the  twenties   and   the fifties that fascinates him.)  This continual urge  towards  a static, remembered vision gives  even  a  poem  about a  couple  prac­ ticing  soixante-neuf  a  curiously   elegiac tone  as if to be trapped in any  routine is a  kind  of death. One  catches  the  special quality  of time stopped  in  the image  in a poem like "Dillinger Leaping" from  his Passages and other  poems:
his face  floating in the  tall  dry  air above   his  collar
not  needing to brace
himself  on  the  bank counter vaulting slowly not  needing to hold  the rim  of the  straw hat
the  gun  held  loosely
his face  floating in
a mask  of unconcern
brute matter overcome by his high  sailing ...
or  in  the  ambiguous ironies  of  "Portrait by Sargent", with  its  evocation of a  lost Edwardian world  and  of the kind  of nostalgia   that   is  now  sweeping   Britain and  will  undoubtedly send  Margaret Thatcher to the seat of power:
gone
the  silver  headed cane the  good  school
the  proper regiment
a chair beside  the  row
only  the  luxury
of bitterness remains and  a fog of petty doom closing  down  all

97

REVIEW ARTICLES



the  common airports of  the  world

McNamara is-and  I  use  the  expres­ sion  to define  and  not  to  evaluate -one of  our  best  minor   poets,  in  form  and  in key. There are  bounds rather than  limita­ tions  to  his  sensibility,  his ambitions and his  use of  words  and  images,  which  sug-
 gest  that   he  will  never   attempt  poetry that  is major  in snatch and  scale, whereas Purdy,  of course,  has  made  that  attempt in  In  Search  of Owen Roblin, taking  the risks but also the promises. Yet there are satisfactions, and  perhaps the  surest  ones to poet and  reader  alike, which  the minor key only can offer.




OTHER MONTREALERS
 


Seymour Mayne


4 Montreal Poets,  selected by David Solway.  Fiddlehead Poetry Books.  $2.50. MARC   PLOURDE, The White Magnet. DC  Books. $2.50.
HARRY HOWITH,  The Stately Homes of Westmount. DC  Books.  $2.00.


WHAT HAS HAPPENED to Montreal as a centre for English-speaking poets?   David   Solway's   anthology  repre­ sents  the  work  of  four   Montreal  poets:  Peter   Van   Toorn,  Marc  Plourde,  Arty Gold,  and  Richard Sommer. In  a slightly polemical "Introduction" the  editor puts his finger  on  some  of the  reasons  for  the relative  quiet  that   has  attended the  lite­ rary  scene:
And   the  English-speaking poet  in  Montreal labours  under  the  greatest disadvantage of all  poets  in  Canada. His  position is a lonely and    untenable  one:  on   the   one   hand    he finds    himself    rejected   by   the    French   in Quebec, and  on  the  other, neglected by the English  in   the   rest   of   the   country. It  is perhaps not  unfair to  say  that over  the  last ten    years,    and  from    this   point  of   view, Montreal  has   been   a   kind    of   deadwater sump, the  literary  boondocks of  the  nation.
But the neglect  of Montreal poetry over the past decade reflects a shift that  has occurred since  the early  sixties.  Montreal is no longer  the poets' capital. And  to underline this shift, a number of the lead­ ing  English-speaking  poets  of   Montreal have  left  the  city  for  short, intermittent,

g8
 
or extended periods: Layton to Toronto, Grier  to  Vancouver, Cohen   on  his  wan­ derings,  and  a  number of lesser  lights  to places   in   between.   That   milieu   which nourished and  sustained  the First State­ ment, Preview, Northern Review, CIV /n, Delta,  Yes  and  Cataract  groups,  perhaps lost its cohesiveness  under the  impact of Quebec nationalism,  and   the  beginnings or continuation of  literary activity  in such other    centres   as   Vancouver,  Toronto, Kingston, and  Fredericton.
The  four  poets in this anthology do not represent   a  tremendous step  forward, a continuation with  new  energy  and  force of the Montreal movement. And it would have been more to the point  for the editor to   have   included  a   number  of  other Montreal  poets  so  that   a  less  eccentric choice  might   have  been  presented. The inclusion  of the  best poems of Avi Boxer, Bryan   McCarthy,  H.   Moscovitch,  the maritimer Raymond Fraser, a number of the newly published  poets, and  the editor himself  would  have  rounded out  the col­ lection  and  afforded  the  reader a  fuller

REVIEW ARTICLES



selection.  As  it  stands,   the   book  is  too partial  to  match  the  anthologies  which have emerged in the past few years from Vancouver, Toronto,  Windsor,  Edmon­ ton,  Fredericton, and  Ottawa.
It  is  difficult   to  agree   with  Solway's
judgment that  Richard  Sommer and Peter  Van   Toorn are  "among the  finest that    Canada  had    to   offer".    Solway's claims  fall into  the line adopted by many advocates-he overstates  and exaggerates his case. The oldest of the four  poets, Richard Sommer, emigrated to Canada from   Minnesota.  As  in  his  two   previ­ ous collections, his  poems,  on  the  whole, are  cerebral and  are  given  to  statement and  aphoristic expression. Compression is lacking   in  his  longer  poems,  and   more often  than  not   he   overdevelops  his imagery   and   relies   on   the   unnecessary and   rhetorical  repetition of  key  phrases and  clauses. And there  is a lack  of inten­ sity and  tension  so that  the emergence of an individual voice is found  wanting.
It  is also difficult  to go along  with  the rather extravagant claims  Solway  makes for  Van   Toorn's work.  There is a  defi­ nite  flair  for  language apparent  in  Van Toorn's  poems,   yet   there   is  a   curious  oblique  manner to his images and expres­ sion.  The long  poem,  "In  Guildenstern County", though  it  plays and delights in language finally does not shape  itself into a  coherent and  moving  poem.  Yet  Van Toorn is  more  inventive  and   individual than  Sommer. His  sounds  are  unmistak­ able,  but  one  asks  for  clarity   that   welds statement and image, language and mean­  ing  into  a  memorable whole.  The  eccen­ tric wit plays on private and  almost secre­ tive  associations   of  imagery,  syntax  and syllabic  patterns.
In  Arty  Gold's  poems  there  is greater
risk  and   involvement.  The   poet   places
 himself in his words and writes out of his moods  and   perceptions. There  is a  reti­ cence  to his voice, but  it is one of a genu­  ine voice coming  through. The hesitancies are somewhat  pronounced in this talented poet's  voice, and  they seem  to stem  from the  way  he  turns  his  back  on  Canadian poetics. Like many of his generation, Gold is too eager and  willing to assimilate U.S. language  and   poetic   practice,  and   his allusions   to  the  writings of  Jack   Spicer  and  Frank O'Hara are rather the pathetic affectations of someone  who wants  to belong  to  an  in-group. There  would  be more in common  for his fantastical and elusive   persona   in   the   lyrics   of   Louis Dudek  whom Gold purports to have  read. The careful  and  crafted rhythms and imagery which Dudek's work may have taught   him  suggest  modulated and  finer lines:
I want  to make  the  space  around the  poem real.   Solid as the  air  about kilos of cotton or  the air  things  fall  between.
My muse must  be a neighbour with
a street address. Others may  see enough
silhouette sexily bending by a drawn curtain. It is late  for them  though, I may  visit  her whenever I am able  I she  waits  for  me only.
("The Space Around the  Poem")
Marc  Plourde's poems are striking with their   concrete   immediacy, and   he  is  by far the strongest  poet represented in this anthology. Bilingual  and  bicultural in his sources,   his  range   is  the   commonplace and  the  ordinary. More   than   any  other poet who has emerged in Montreal in the past  decade,  he  writes  in  a  manner that is close to the social realism  of the early Layton  and  Dudek. His book, The  White Magnet, is an impressive  first collection comprising a selection of  twenty-one poems,  a  one-act   play  and   three  stories. The   tentativeness  in  some  of  Plourde's more  descriptive poems  finds  surer  forms

99

REVIEW ARTICLES



in  his portrait poems.  Here  his observant eye and  straightforward voice give a more moving  and  evocative expression:
Fitting, the earth turned a cake  of stone when you died -and how they drilled, picked, chopped through ice and  rock-
ground
to find  some small  black  opening and
drop your  bones  there through the  mouth
of winter, and  forget you....

A sixty watt  lamp's light  jets yellow
through the worn  shade.  Photos before  me, faces
your  face,  lies now  in  the  crust
of this winter sun.   The lamp, yours  once,

chipped sunflowers crowd its base; now is my heritage
it comes  of a time,  a past  I had  no part making
though I will believe and believe  the  white lace
collar that  trims  your  neck,  and  here  a hair-lock
falling near  to your  eye:  eighteen, unmarried, a girl
only,  here  you are  smiling that  way I never saw.
("Elizabeth Through Winter")

Harry Howith has  received  little  criti­ cal  attention in  the  past  decade.  Author  of  five  collections, he  tends   to  turn   his poems  to the satirical and  polemical. It is these  qualities, perhaps,  which   may  ac­ count  for  the  unjust  neglect  of his work. Wit,   verbal   play,  statement, public  and political  comment are features which seem to  go  against   the  grain   of  the  predomi­ nant  practitioners of minimalist and  pro­ jectivist  poetics  and  their  apologists. Yet the irony and polemics of Howith's latest poems   are   refreshing. The  persona   in these  poems  is a  satirist  and  ironist  who seems disappointed with  the charades and masquerades  of   the   colonially    minded rich  and  middle  class of central Canada. Public  cliches and  shibboleths, journalese and the expressions of English-Canadian gentility are  the  targets of his satire.  In  a

100
 poem  dedicated to F. R. Scott  he is  tren­ chant in  his  juxtaposition of   fancy  and  the  absurd:
The earth is flat.
The moon  is made out  of green cheese. And  another Great Depression is impossible.

Hair can  be grown on a billiard ball. The U.N.  prevented the  Six-Day War.
And  thanks to TV, kids are  smarter than
ever  before.

Smoking doesn't cause  cancer. Automobiles are  built  to last  twenty
years.
And  Quebec can  separate without economic disadvantage....

Hermann Goering was a gentleman. R.  B. Bennett really  repented.
And  the  Nobel  Prize is awarded for literary
merit.

The stork  brings   babies.
Santa Claus brings  Christmas presents. And  the  Prime  Minister is an
intellectual. ...

Every  day  in every  way, things are getting better.
God's in  his heaven, all's  right with the world.
Human nature is ultimately perfectible. The land  is strong.
And  there's never  justification for  being cynical.
And  the  earth is flat  and  the  moon  is made out  of green  cheese.
("Axioms")

The persona in these poems vacillates between   apparent cynicism  and  a  desire for  certainties, for  those  experiences   that would  be the impulse for urgent  lyricism. When  the  persona  tries  to resolve ironies and   contradictions,  the   verse  often   be­ comes less direct,  and  it is then diffuse  in its  attempt to  resolve  moods  articulated in  a  more  abstract or  allusive manner. Howith's satirical  persona is not as direct  and  successful,  as  yet, as the  personae  of the  two  poets  he  owes  much  to -Scott and   Layton.  But   this   is  a   transitional volume,   and   it   would   be  timely  for   a

REVIEW ARTICLES



judicious  selection of his poems to be published  in  the   near   future. But  con­ sidering  the   lack   of  responsible  editing and  publishing in the small presses today, his best work may still have to languish in
 out-of-print and  limited run  publications. Of these five poets, Howith with his public voice suggests that  we should  be listening to  him  with  more  attention than   he  has been accorded in the past.





INSISTENT FLUIDITY
 


Donald Stephens


W. D.  VALGARDSON,  Bloodflowers. $2.95.
BETH  HARVOR,  Women & Children. $3.50.
73  New  Canadian  Stories, edited  by David  Helwig  and  Joan  Harcourt. $2.95.
GEORGE BOWERING,  Flycatcher  and Other Stories. $3.50.
JEAN-GUY  CARRIER, My Father's House. $2.95.
GEORGE MCWHIRTER,  Bodyworks. $3.50.
74  New  Canadian Stories, edited  by David  Helwig and  Joan  Harcourt. $3.50.
All Oberon  Press publications.


THAT   MASTER of  the  English short   story,  H.  E.  Bates,  once  said  that "the  short   story   can   be   anything  the author  decides   it  shall   be ... it  has  an insistent  and  eternal fluidity  that  slips through the  hands". As I  read  these  col­ lections   of  short   stories,   I   recalled   the Bates   statement,  for   surely   in   Canada today   the   short   story   is   anything  the writer  decides  it  should  be;  for  the  most part,  what  the  writer  decides  is good,  for these  collections  represent  not  only  the range   of  short  story  writing   in  Canada over   the   past   two  years,  but   also  they reveal  again  that the  short  story  is alive and  well, living in Canada.
Let   me  begin   with   the  two  volumes
from  the autumn of 1973 written by indi­ vidual authors:  W.  D.  Valgardson's Blood flowers, and  Beth  Harvor's Women
& Children. Valgardson uses  Newfound­ land  as  the  locale  for  his  title  story  and moves to northern Manitoba for the land­  scape   of  the   rest   of  the   volume.   The  power  of  the  land,   its  influence  and  its
 
harshness,  are stressed in all the tales, and at  first I assumed  the  stories  were  geared to  Atwood's sense  of  survival   as  a  pre­ dominant theme  in Canadian fiction. But as  I  finished  the  first,  and  best,  story  of the   collection,  it   occurred   to  me   that  Valgardson  was  dealing  with  the  wider  implications  of  survival,  of  how   man's primitive instincts  are brought to the sur­  face  by the  land  in  which  he lives. These  characters were  not  merely  surviving; in­ stead,   their   impulses   made   them   grow and   discover   not   only   others   but   also themselves.  The  care  in  the  descriptions also  attracts the  reader, for  Valgardson has   a  keen   eye  when   he  looks  at   the world,  and  with deft  strokes  can fill in an entire  landscape in a few sentences.
Beth  Harvor is equally   adept in  por­ traying  character  in   a   few   sentences. Women  &  Children focuses  in  on  char­ acter,  and  Harvor carefully demonstrates how  members of a family  use each  other for  their  own  purposes,  but  in  ways that  are  socially acceptable. She examines the


101

REVIEW ARTICLES



means  by which  people  appear to work against  each  other but  indicates that frequently this  working  is for  the  mutual good.  With   this  examination of  the  un­ conscious  reasoning behind  states of every­ day    emotion,   Harvor   calls   upon   the reader   to  become   a  part   of   the  stories she is telling. It is not  that  the reader can identify with  something that  could  have happened  to  him,  but  that  he  identifies himself   with   the  character's  reaction  to what  is happening. Harvor  subtly  brings the  reader   into  the  action.  Hers  are  not stories dependent on entertainment value; rather they are emotional and  intellectual experiences for the  reader. There is some­ thing  in Harvor's craft  as a writer of short fiction  that  reminds me  of Alice  Monro; she  has  the  same  tenacious hold  on  the subtle  qualities of human nature and dis­ plays them  with similar  intensity. I expect  more   and   better  stories  from   her.  The  book  is  nicely  put   together,  and   has  a good cover design  by Alex Colville  that  is most  compelling; but  it  is  worth   much more  than  just its cover.
George   Bowering's  Flycatcher   collec­
tion  is  Bowering   at  his  prose  best.  The stories  are  bright   and  clean,  and  Bower­ ing  does  not  attempt in  any  way  to con­ fuse  the  reader   with  references to  a  pri­ vate  world  that  are  not  clear.  He  uses a kind  of  autobiographical  persona to  tell the  stories,  so that  the  reader  is not  only aware   of  what   is being  told  but  also  by whom; with  this device  a proper distance is acquired by the  reader  so that  he, too, can  "half  listen  and  half  compose" as he reads   the  stories.  Bowering   moves  from British  Columbia to  Calgary to  Mexico, recording random experiences as the nar­ rator, George  Delsing,  looks for his friend,  Ebbe  Coutts. But  Bowering  never  tries to make  the ordinary extraordinary; instead,

102
 he attempts to record  the awe in being ordinary and having  average relationships within  normal landscapes. In  his poetry Bowering senses the wonder  at being alive, and   this  sense infuses  his  latest   book  of short  stories  with  a strength that  is  miss­ ing in his other  attempts at fiction.
George  McWhirter, another poet work­ ing in short  fiction  this time,  tries for  the surreal  in his book Bodyworks. Though at times there  is some good descriptive writ­  ing here,  I found  the book too fragmented to be effective. McWhirter tries for a very private symbolic overlay  in his stories and rarely does he give any clues to where  the story is going. Consequently I am  puzzled by  what   is going  on. It is as  though  he were indulging himself in some private world.   For  me,  the  first  test  of  a  short story  is the  measure of how  vitally  com­ pelling  the writer  makes  his selected facts or  incidents; with  MeWhirter, I am  at  a loss as  to  why  he  felt  a  certain analysis was necessary in  the first place.  Elizabeth Bowen  said  that  the  story  "must spring  from an impression or perception pressing  enough,  acute  enough, to have  made  the writer  write". I  do not  feel this  has  hap­ pened  with  George  McWhirter in  Body­ works.
It has  happened, however,  with  Jean­ Guy   Carrier  in   My   Father's   House, a most  excellent   collection   of  short  stories that   covers  life  in  rural  Quebec and  in Ontario. Carrier has  given  a  new  life  to all the well-known cliches associated  with life in rural Quebec : the father who does not  understand and  who tries  to bully his family   by  asserting   his   authority   over them;  the   church  that   tries   vainly   to control  its flock;  the  hardworking and exhausted mother  who never complains about  her  role. Carrier adds  new  dimen­ sions  to  these  stock  types  by  showing  us

REVIEW ARTICLES



"how" they  work  rather than  "why"; by adding new types which  are  created with a deft  and  careful  touch,  Carrier's  char­ acters  shine  as  examples of  people  who refuse  to  be  burdened in  a  world  where most  people  are  drained  by  forces  over which  they  have  no  control. Carrier has given  a  new  cast  to  the  face  of  Quebec and  the country life  there; he writes  very well,  never  trying  to  fool  his readers but rather to  clear  their  minds   with  details that   compel   an   understanding  of  what has happened rather than making a judg­ ment  of it.
These  individual volumes,  for the  most
part,    show   promise,   not   only   for   the authors themselves  but   also  for  the  de­ velopment of  the  short  story  in  Canada. But  by far  the most  impressive and  com­ pelling   fact   about   the  life  of   the  short story  in  Canada are  the  two  anthologies edited   by  that  most  adventuresome and discriminating duo,  David   Helwig   and Joan    Harcourt,   in   73   New   Canadian Stories  and   74   New   Canadian   Stories. These  are  the  third   and  fourth volumes in this annual series, and  both  collections have   been   excellently   selected   and   ar­  ranged.   The  variety   of   the   collections  ranges not only in subject matter but  also in  the  attempt to give  the  reader recent work   of   established   writers   and   stories from new, and  promising, writers.
The  73   collection   displays   the   con­
sciousness of craft  that  has been  so essen­ tial  to the growth  of the story in Canada. Hugh   Garner at  his  best  is a  master  of technique and "Losers Weepers" is one of his finest. Though the stories  in  this  vol­ ume  appear not  to  be  connected in  any way,  there  is a  subtle  working  of  theme and  idea  fusing them  together; one  story finishes but leaves an  idea  in  the  reader's mind  that melts into  the  statement of the
 next  story,  so  that   when  one  is finished with  the  book  there  is a sense  of  whole­ ness left. Helwig  and  Harcourt should  be commended for  this,  though it  would  be interesting to know whether or not it was done   on   purpose.   73  New    Canadian Stories introduces Jean-Guy  Carrier and Beth   Harvor  whose   first   collections  of stories  are  mentioned  above. It  gives  a story  by  Hugh   Hood,  a  master   at   the craft,  and  reveals  the  experimentation of Matt Cohen,  who in my view may end up to be the best fiction  writer  in Canada of the  seventies.  In   fact,  in  each   of  these collections  he is  represented by an  excel­ lent  story:  "Amazing Grace" in  the  73 collection,  and   "The  Secret" in  the  74 one.
The  most recent  collection  has again  a
most effective arrangement of stories. It begins with an anecdotal story by Fred Euringer, whose very title, "The Rat  and the  Goose",   brings   to  mind   the   whole tradition of  the  short  story  beginning as an  idea  of fable  and  minstrel  song.  The next   two  stories -"Ada"  by  Margaret Gibson  Bilboord,  and  "Rapunzel"  by Audrey  Thomas-have an assured  qual­ ity  to  them; both  make  the  reader want more, especially  from  Audrey  Thomas whose interpretations of our  times become more  heady  and  pre-primitive the  more she writes. But by far the most enjoyable story in the collection  is John Sandman's "The Real  Mrs  Hunter"; I  say  "enjoy­ able"  because  it  is so funny; in  fact,  it is the  first  time  in  years  that   I  have  burst out  laughing when  reading a book.
The  rest of the book is also memorable,
especially as it ends with Alice Monro's "Home"; there  is no  doubt  in  my  mind that  Monro  is the  best  short  story  writer in  the  country and  this  story  is consum­ mate  Monro  as she deliberately and  care-


103

REVIEW ARTICLES



fully cuts deeper and deeper into man's behaviour, telling  us all  that   we are  not really very different from  each other after all.
Oberon  should   be   congratulated   on
bringing these books to the public,  and Michael  Macklem  particularly   for   his book design  and  cover  choice.  Reports of the   short   story   being   dead   in  Canada
 have been exaggerated by some reviewers, and  Oberon has proved  it. The  story is in fact developing  rapidly in Canada, chang­ ing from  a form  whose focus was once on plot  and   now  is  on  character  synthesis. This   is  a  time  of   introspection,  and   a space  of complete immediacy; the Cana­ dian   short   story   reflects   very   well  the problems  of its own society.




INFERNO, PARADISE AND SLAPSTICK
 




Tom Marshall


P. K. PAGE, Poems Selected  and New. Anansi. Paper $3.95, cloth $7-95·
PHYLLIS GOTLIEB, Dr. Umlaut's Earthly Kingdom. Calliope  Press.


... it is shot
from an acute  high angle.   In a pit
figures the size of pins are strangely  lit
and  might  be dancing but you know they're
not.
Like Dante's vision of the nether  hell
men struggle with  the bright cold fires of
salt,
locked in the black inferno  of the rock :
the filter here, not innocence  but guilt.
("Photos of a Salt Mine") Those  people in a circle on the sand
are dark  against  its gold
turn  like a wheel
revolving in a horizontal plane ...

I see them  there in three dimensions  yet their  height implies another space ...

... all their  movements  make a compass rose surging  and  altering ...

Nearer  I see them dark-skinned. They are dark.  And beautiful.
Great  human  sunflowers spinning  in a ring
cosmic as any bumble-top the vast
procession of the planets  in their  dance ...
("Another Space")

INFERNO  AND PARADISE: these quotations reveal something of the dimen-


104
 
sions of  Patricia Page's  imaginative  uni­ verse. At one pole a vision of hell shading into  social  concern; at  the  other  a man­ dala  expressing  harmony and  wholeness, like Dante's multifoliate rose. In  "Photos of  a  Salt  Mine" a  picture of  innocence and  beauty  gives way  to a  vision of evil. In  "Another Space" what  appears to be a "primitive" (and, because of a reference  to Chagall, brings  to  mind  a  Chassidic) ritual  dance expresses the ultimate whole­ ness and  harmony of  a  universe   that   is forever   "surging and   altering" and   yet forever  one.
"Most  of my poems," Miss Page has written, "have  been  doors  closing. A few were doors opening." In this smaller group she includes  "Another Space" along  with "Arras" and  "Stories  of  Snow". All  of these  particular  poems  involve   journeys into  inner   space -through  and   behind the  eye. I once  observed  of another poet of Miss Page's generation that  she was a survivor,  not an explorer. P. K. Page is an explorer  too.

REVIEW ARTICLES



This    latest    versiOn   of   her   Selected Poems  is arranged in  four  sections.  The first  contains mainly  poems  of social  ob­ servation, many  of  which   yoke  together an  obviously  genuine  compassion   ( espe­ cially  for girls and  women)   with  a some­ what  too-decorative metaphoric busyness and   much   alliteration:  it  is  to  a  large extent the  period  style of the  forties,  the kind of neo-Freudian neo-Marxist Auden­ Thomas rococo  that  drives  a  reviewer  in desperation to the sort of facile labels I've  just  applied. These  don't, of  course,  do any  justice  to the best of the  poems.  And the  style  becomes  sharper, cleaner, more refined  and  more  definitively Page's  own as the book proceeds.
The second section is made up  of poems  about   the  loss of childhood  inno­ cence  and  security   (like "The Bands  and the Beautiful Children"), case-histories of neurotic childhoods  (and,  in some  cases, neurotic lives), and  more  positive sugges­ tions  of  the  theme  of  illness  turned  to beauty. It  contains the  highly  successful "Adolescence" and  concludes with  "Im­ ages  of  Angels",  a witty  poem  about the loss of the visionary  faculty  in the modern world.  Here  Miss Page seems to be reach­  ing  beyond   the  depiction  of  social  flaws and  psychological  problems  to an  exami­  nation  of the deeper  roots of these in the atrophied  human imagination. In  so do­ ing she enters  her "other space", a larger dimension of  perception and  being.  This is  a  natural  tendency, it  seems,  of twentieth-century  thought  and   art.  Be­ hind  and  beyond  the  highly  useful  analy­  ses of  Marx and  Freud  is a  larger  realm of  understanding  whose  nature was  per­ haps  best    articulated   by   Carl  Jung (though he  does  not,  of  course,  have  a monopoly on  wisdom  and  insight).  Now
 that    psychology   and   physiology    (com­ bined   in   biofeedback), art,   meditation and   a  number  of  other   disciplines  are beginning to see themselves once  again  as parts  of one science,  the  much-longed-for re-discovery  of  the   psyche    (i.e.   of  the whole mind-body in its whole relationship to the  universe)   may  well  be at  hand   (I mean  the  full  consciousness  of it  may  be at  hand; in  another sense  it  was  and  is always present) ; Miss Page's  rather path­ etic angels would then  become like Rilke's angels, at home in all worlds.
Interior worlds make  themselves felt in the   third   section;  they   had,   of  course, been implicit in the earlier sections  too. Metaphors are now more  consistently and simply  symbolic  rather  than   gaudy   and self-serving.  We  are  presented  with  per­ sonal  landscapes and   with  landscapes of love  lost  or  very  difficult,  with   a  white "landscape without love", with contrasted white  and  green,  male  and female  land­ scapes. Lovers  turn one another to water,  to   stone   or   mineral. There  is  interest  again  in  the  sick  or  disabled   and  in  the prjvate  worlds  they  might   explore. The  final   poem   is  the   difficult   "Arras",  in which   the   speaker   apparently  feels  the stillness of death  in the cold  perfection of the world of art,  and  seeks to alter  it with vivid  life. A peacock  insinuates itself into the scene through the poet's  eye.
The book's final section  contains poems
of  travel,  poems  about animals and  gar­ dens,  poems  enlarging upon   the  themes  of  the  power  of  metaphor  to  transform reality   and   the   power    of   the   human imagination  to  extend  itself into  the  cosmos in a new direction, another space, in  spite  of   physical   decline  and   death. There is  here,  as  throughout  the  book, considerable emphasis  on "see-ing'':

REVIEW ARTICLES



... something  rare and  perfect, yet unknown,
stirs like a foetus  just behind  his eyes.
("Now  This  Cold  Man")

... a new direction opens like an eye.
("Another Space") A lung-born  land,  this,
a breath  spilling,
scanned  by the valvular  heart's
field glasses.
("Personal Landscape")

... through  to the area  behind  the eyes where  silent, unrefractive whitness  lies.
("Stories of Snow") I confess:
It was my eye.
("Arras")

The poet  is a seer. Miss Page  has written of  A.  M.  Klein   that   in I 944  she  was struck   that    "for   all   his   acceptance  of ideological   and   psychological  theory,  he seemed  to reach  beyond  both  to a larger reality.   And  this,  though  I  comprehend it only vaguely,  I recognized as real ... " She  too  became   what   I must  call-for lack  of  a  better   adjective -a  religious poet. I like to think  that  all poets operate at  the  interface between  inner  and  outer worlds,   but   some   seem   to  delve   more deeply  within  than  others.  One  can com­ pare  Page's  "see-ing" to that  of  Margaret Avison, who seems to me to effect  a more complete union  of inner  and outer  worlds (so that  neither threatens to be swallowed up  by the  other), or  to that of Margaret Atwood  or  Gwendolyn  MacEwen in  the next   generation;   Atwood  in   particular seems to have picked  up a great  deal both from   Avison  and   Page   (not   to  mention Jay  Macpherson, whose  visionary   world seems, however,  much more  self-enclosed and   literary) :  thus   are   traditions   de­ veloped.

ro6
 As I've suggested, Page's style has been refined  and  perfected   as her  insight  into the nature of her experience has clarified. She  has  learned   to deploy  rhyme,  image and  sound-effect, and  to move  lightly  in and   out   of  a   basic   iambic   pentameter line, with  unobtrusive skill. As poet and calligrapher she delights  in details  and images, but has learned (as Klein did)  to subordinate whimsy  to the microcosmic design  or  large  metaphor that  captures a sense  of   the   macrocosm.  This   requires that  one go beyond  "normal" seeing:
And choir me too to keep my heart  a size larger  than seeing, unseduced  by each
bright glimpse of beauty striking  like a bell,
so that  the whole may toll,
its meaning  shine
clear of the myriad  images that  still­
do what  I will -encumber its pure line.
("After Rain")
She is one of our best poets.
To  turn  to the  work  of Phyllis Gotlieb is to move  from  the  cool and contempla­ tive  to  a  world   of   whimsical  play  and  driving   nervous  energy.  Mrs.  Gotlieb   is more  a dramatic  than  a lyric or  medita­ tive poet; she revels in both  the  ordinary and  the  mythic  (which she  tends  to  re­ duce  to the ordinary, often  very humour­ ously). Everything becomes play;  in good Jewish   fashion,   Gotlieb   questions  God,  Death  and  the  other  large  and  frighten­ ing  realities as   to   their  competence, morals  and  intentions. A kind  of verbal slapstick  is often  her  strategy  for  dealing with  the terrible.
Dr. Umlaut's  Earthly Kingdom  is Mrs.
Gotlieb's    third   collection   of   poems;   it contains   three  poems  for  voices  commis­ sioned   by  the   CBC   and   a   number  of shorter  pieces. One  of these, called  "The thoughts and quotes  of Mao Tse Tung as seen   by  Master    Kung  Fu   Tze",  gives some  indication of  the  range  of  her  in-

REVIEW ARTICLES



terests.  But  the  poems  are  so lively  and action-packed  that   it  is  difficult   to  get much    sense  of  a   whole   vision   of  the world.  Perhaps this doesn't matter with a poet  so entertaining  (at  her  best) . It is apparent that   she  sees  life  as  a  show,  a more or less absurd  circus or carnival, the ultimate meaning of  which  is impossible to  fathom. One  lives as well as one  can, employing the  liberal decencies. Mrs. Gotlieb   would   apparently  like  to  be  a sybil, but is thoroughly conscious  of being an earthbound one:

I wonder if I'll ever get to touch a star and live victorious,  not  just vicarious
but I'm  stuck down here with things-as- they-are
while others  cross the border  into
Cloudcuckooland
I sit here in my tollbooth  and add  up the
cash-in-hand
in the sentry-box,  in the concierge's  closet
in the oracle's  cleft
in the twilight  band
 Both  Page  and  Gotlieb owe something to  A.  M.  Klein:  Gotlieb's work  reflects his zest for scholarship, Page's his religious sense of design.  Each  poet  will appeal to a different sensibility,  speak  to a different experience   (or,   as  in   my  own   case,  a different mood). P. K. Page seems to me to  have  the  larger   view.  But  those  who feel her sense of cosmic harmony disposes rather too  easily  of  the  problem of  evil may  well  find  Gotlieb's honest  bewilder­ ment  and  relative  bloody-mindedness re­ freshing:
Noah:    but-damn,
what  am  I gonna  do with  that
woman  of mine?
got no more sense than  a mule's
hind  end
hangs out with her cronies in a tavern  in the city
and  tanks up till she's blind
-Lord, she'd  sink the thing
God: 	that's  your problem
("Garden Varieties")




THE GEM-LIKE FLAME EXTINGUISHED
 





Anthony Appenzell


JOANNA   M.    GLASS,  Reflections   on  a  Mountain  Summer. McClelland &  Stewart.
$7·95·
JOHN  BRUCE, Breathing  Space. Anansi. Paper $3.25, cloth $6.50.
DON   BAILEY, In the Belly of the Whale. Oberon.
DAVID  ADAMS RICHARDS,  The  Coming  of Winter. Oberon.
ALAN   FRY, The  Burden  of Adrian Knowle. Doubleday. $5·95·


THERE wAS  a  time  when  it was  assumed   that   first  novels  would  be high   adventures  in   self-discovery;  e.g. Sons   and   Lovers,  Stephen  Hero,   and even,  in  its own  ironic  way,  Crome  Yel­ low. The  implication was always that  the discovering  process, even if its results were jarring and disconcerting, cleared the way
 
for growing  up, for enlightenment, for profiting  by the enrichment of experience. Wilde   and   Pater   cast   a  lambency over their  age  that  lasted  long; for  more  than one generation of writers in the English language experience, whether or not  they chose  to  admit   it,  had  always  to  be  dis­ tilled  into  the  "hard gem-like  flame"; to


107

RF.VIEW ARTICLF.S



bum with that  flame, "to  maintain this ecstacy", continued to be regarded as "success in life". Hemingway sought  the joyful and  destroying flame  as assiduously as  Lawrence; so in  their  different  ways, in  poetry  as in  prose,  did  the  wild  young men of the Thirties, whether in Spender's paeans  on human brotherhood or Dylan Thomas's  celebrations of  the   joys  of  a never-completed childhood.
Somewhere in  the  background, of course,   there   had   always   been   working the deeper, darker knowledge, the knowl­ edge of Hardy and  Yeats and Proust, that  the  ecstasy is intermittent,  that the flame is flickering rather than  crystalline, that  tragedy is sordid  more  often  than  splen­  did,  that   the  lives  of  most  men  most  of the  time  have  neither  flame  nor  ecstasy. The   realization  became  part  of  the  ugly and   tortured  prose  of  writers  like  Sartre and  Beckett; it became  the sardonic vision one  saw  through  Orwell's "prose like  a window  pane". And  by now  the  shadows  that  darken our  world  as  we  hasten   to­ wards  that  year of destiny,  r g84, have  so affected  our  attitudes that  a  writer  is no longer  taken  seriously  if he treats  in  any­ thing   else  than   a  burlesque or  at  least ironic  manner of the  ecstasy  of  aesthetic or other  experience. True, there are places still for  the ecstatics,  but  in the incidental writings    of   fashionably   mystical    cults rather than  in literature per se.
It is a sense of the  transient, insubstan­ tial,  almost  unreal   quality of  joy that  in one way or another pervades the four first novels  among  the  five  fictions I am  con­ sidering. They  all  reflect  on  the  ultimate meaninglessness outside  itself  that  experi­  ence seems to have  assumed  in this world of  the  Yeatsian Second   Coming. This  is not  to say that  joys are absent  on this our sorrowful  pilgrimage; indeed, the lack of

108
 a holy city at  the end  of the  progress  has left time to appreciate some of the beauty of  the  wayside  scenery,  and   in  all  these novels  there  are   passages   that   move  or delight   the  reader  as well  as  the  charac­ ters involved,  but without any feeling that  the enjoyment can be prolonged, that  the Slough   of   Despond   can   be   skirted   or even, ultimately, escaped  from.
Take  Joanna M. Glass's  Reflections on a  Mountain Summer. Somewhere, in  a context  the dust-cover does not reveal, Mordecai   Richler    has   described  Mrs. Glass  as  "an  enormously  talented  novel­ ist",  and  if that  vague  praise  is meant to convey that  she has a live and  penetrative imagination and  a  fine  way  with  words, it is justified.
Her  basic story is of a marriage of convenience  and   its   consequences. Jay Rutherford, the narrator, is the child  of a shy and  awkward  rich  girl  married off to a  clotheshorse   of  a  man   purchased  for the  purpose  by her  mother. One  summer the family, Jay and  his bought father and his mother Laura, go off  to a house  they have  had  built  in  the  Rockies,  and  there his mother is awakened to a passionate, joyful and  doomed  love for a half-literate wandering  man   called Winger. The clotheshorse  husband  is discarded; Laura seems  to  be  offered  a  prospect  of  emo­ tional   security   and   Jay   an  example  of natural manhood. But Winger, the natural man,  turns out to be elusive of  bonds, and  leaves Laura to a life of  deprived solitude  in   which   her   awakened  independence shades  off into  ageing  eccentricity, while Jay  settles into moneyed  futility, haunted by  the  thought  of  the  might-have-been which-given Winger's  character­ could  not have been:  haunted so relent­ lessly that  forty years later  he sits down  to write the account of  it which  is the novel.

REVIEW ARTICLES



In  the  end,  for  all  the  joy  that  fleet­ ingly   comes   to  Laura,  the   leitmotif   of Reflections on a Mountain Summer seems to   be   that   the   pleasures   incidental  to existence   bear  examination  only  in  the light  of irony;  they are,  one  is led finally to  feel,  the  illusions  with  which  pathetic human  beings fill their  memories.  All this Mrs.   Glass  conveys   with   a  remarkable virtuosity in the reminiscent chronicle wherein   the  telling  of the  past  alternates with   the  recording of  the  ageing  narra­ tor's  ineffectual present,  all  told  from  an entirely plausible  masculine point of view.
Though this  is Mrs.  Glass's  first  novel,
she  has  written a  number of  plays,  and her  prose  shows  in  its  assurance and  in the  tightness  of its verbal  texture the evi­ dence   of  a  practiced  hand   and   a  cool head. One's  sole misgiving  is stirred  by a bravura   quality  that    distinguishes   the book  from  beginning to end.  It is a  sus­ tained   performance of great  vitality  and high  polish,  but  one  wonders  if this  kind of  virtuosity  can  be  repeated, and  if  it can,  whether such a shining  surface qual­ ity may  not become eventually an integu­  ment   imprisoning  the  author   and   con­ stricting her  further development.
A much  less ambitious book, and  one consistently  darker in its shadings,  is John Bruce's  Breathing  Space,  a  sardonic and beautifully  written  novella   by  a  profes­ sional  philosopher which  poses  some dis­ turbing  moralists' questions.  A  group  of prosperous, intelligent,  unattached, middle-class, middle-aged  people-three men  and  a woman -gather  for a week­ end  party   at  the  house  to  which  one  of them  has  retreated  in  the  Ontario coun­  tryside. On  one  level -the  ground-floor level of  the house in which  they meet  and play   witty   and   sentimental games   with each  other-it  is a  comedy  of  manners
 about   shallow   and   selfish  people   who have  done  nothing with  their  minds  and have been frightened to commit their emotions.  But  on  another level-appro­ priately that of the basement where a frightened fugitive  killer  has taken  refuge
-it is a novel about the dark  forces that hem  in and  threaten our  attempts to live smooth  and  civilized  lives.  If the  joy of ecstasy   is  not   lasting,    the   pleasure  of security  is not sure, and  beneath the witty surface  there  is a sinister  relentlessness  in the  denouement  of  Breathing  Space, as the  self-satisfied  weekenders fail  to  deal with-even    to   understand -the   vio­ lence that  breaks  in upon  them  when  the police  finally  flush  out  the  criminal and kill him like a hunted animal.
Glass   and   Bruce,   born   between    the wars, retain  much  of the concern with an eloquent  and   dramatic  style   that   dis­ tinguished   writers   who  still   believed  in the  hard   gem-like  flame;  one  feels  they would  like such a flame, even  if it cannot exist in life, to burn  on  in art.  The other  two first novels, Don Bailey's  In  the  Belly of the Whale and David  Adams  Richards' The  Coming of  Winter, are  by  younger writers,  and  in them  the Paterian flame is not  even  present   as  an  artistic  conven­ tion;   it  has  been  replaced, at  best,  by a flashlight  with   a  flickering battery  that records  only life's inconsequential nature, its intermittencies.
Don  Bailey,  one   judges  from   various bits   of  evidence   he   presents,  must   be about  30;  David  Adams  Richards is only
23. Bailey's  In  the  Belly  of the  Whale is the   simpler,    more    tentative   book.    It records-first-person presentation -the few days after  a man  comes out of prison, as  he  lives  in   the   limbo   between  one world   and   another,  wondering how  he can re-establish  his place in a setting from

109

REVIEW ARTICLES



which he abruptly disconnected himself when  he accepted a friend's suggestion  to rob  a bank,  how he can  rebuild the links with  his family, and  in memory recapitu­ lating  his   life   of   a   discarded  child (whose name  was not his real name)   that  led  him  to  this  point. What he  discovers is  nothing  very  dramatic; it  is  a  small advance  in  self-knowledge,  a  resolution  to  be  braver  with  himself.  And  perhaps the fragmentary form,  as if the novel were a cut-off  section  of a longer  picaresque, is appropriate to the  tentativeness of the conclusion. Perhaps it represents a recog­ nition  that  self-discovery  is most often  an undramatic shift  in  understanding,  and rarely  a blinding illumination or  a bruis­ ing  shock,  as  earlier novelists  tended   to portray it.
In   The   Coming   of  Winter,  a   more
ambitious  and   more   closely   structured novel,  David  Adams  Richards deals  with the   bleak   process   of  growing  up   in  a dying Maritime society. The  novel records a  series of crucial events  that  cluster  to­ gether  in the life of the central character, Kevin;  they   are   either   brought  about  casually,  or sink down into the  monotony of an existence  that has neither social nor individual imperatives. Kevin  kills a cow in  mistake  for  a deer; the  scene  between  him and the farmer, full of the potentiali­ ties  of  violence,  peters  out  into  a  banal  money  arrangement. His  best  friend  kills himself   in  a  car   accident; Kevin   cele­ brates  the  fact  in  desultory boozing.  He has  been   carrying  on  an   affair   with  a nurse  of  slightly  higher social  standing, and  they decide abruptly and  without any obvious  reason  to get  married;  the  wed­ ding,  full  of the  possibility  of  clashes  be­ tween  the two mutually incomprehending families,  falls  away  into  an  exchange of boredoms.  Even  the threat of real poverty,

110
 which  in  some  ways  braced   individuals and  localities  within  a sick society during the Depression, has, one realizes, been removed   almost  everywhere in  Canada; The  Coming  of Winter  is a  novel  about inner,   not  outer,  impoverishment in  one of the  remoter backwaters of the  welfare society. It is carefully  done, with the good craftsmanship that  in our  age is reviving as  high  art  collapses;   there  are  shadings of characterization, and  there is a very credible  use of the background detail  of a world   which   has   lost  its  own   purpose without  ever   being   integrated  into   the wider world that  devitalized it. The  futile lives  of   Kevin   and   his  friends   merely mirror the moral and social waste lot on which they have grown  up.
Beside all these books, each of which attempts to give some kind of appropriate verbal  shape  to  the  malaise  of our  times, Alan Fry's The Burden of Adrian Knowles has an outdated air of contrived optimism.  Fry   began    his   career    as   a novelist  with  a somewhat didactic little book, How a People Die, which  drew attention  to   the   conditions  of   life   on Indian  reservations. Since  that   time  he has moved  into  the  role of the  entertain­ ing story-teller, something of  a latter-day Zane  Grey  on  a minor  scale, specializing  in  ranchers and   Indians  in   the  inland  parts   of  British  Columbia.  He  describes ranch   life  with   a  documentary authen­ ticity of detail,  he  can  evoke a landscape in a way which suggests that  he might  be a  good  travel-writer, and   he  has  learnt from  the  success of  his first book  always to  have  a problem  about  which  his read­ ers can  comfortably agonize.  In  The  Re­ venge of Annie Charlie it was sexual rela­  tions  between   Indians and  others,  satis­ factorily   solved  by  novel's  end.  In  The  Burden  of Adrian  Knowle  it  is  the  ana-

REVIEW ARTICLES



chronicity of  the  rancher's ruthless  ethic in a modern  setting,  worked  out  through the  conversion  of such  a  rancher by  the long-suffering of his sensitive  son  (not  of course   his  real  son)   Adrian ;  again   the problem  is satisfactorily solved  and  self­ knowledge   gained   by  all.  Perhaps  such automatically  happy   endings have  their appeal to people who turn  nervously from the world  as it is, but  in our age they can
 only  resonate  hollowly  in  the  mind. And that  is unfortunate, since Alan  Fry, when he  deals  with  something outside human relationships, often   writes   well.  He   has the  kind  of  talent for  descriptive  narra­ tive which  writers  like Heather Robertson have  put  to  good  non-fictional  use, and  he  might  well,  if  he chose  to  do  it,  pro­  duce  an  excellent  documentary book  on the  ranch  lands  of British  Columbia.








FOR THE NEW YEJIR

Dorothy Livesay


Stamped in the  throat bird  song
biologists say
is as inevitable
as that beak, that eye that red  wing:
It is not  learned
it is born  with  the bird

Perhaps then  there's another dimension behind our  learned
word patterns -
perhaps an  infinite song sways in our  throats
yet to be heard?







Ill





TEMPERAMENT VERSUS TECHNIQUE

RALPH GUSTAFSON, Fire on Stone. McClelland
& Stewart, $3.95.
Fire on Stone  continues the tradition of Ralph Gustafson's poetry,  a tradition that began  with  The Golden  Chalice  in  1935 and    that,    apart  from    Rivers   Among Rocks, 1g6o, and  Rocky Mountain Poems,
1g6o, has grown  deeper and stronger with the  nine other  volumes  he has  published. I  should  say, two  traditions, for  in  the work  of Ralph Gustafson, it seems to me, temperament is very  much   at  odds  with
technique.
In temperament, thought, outlook, Ralph  Gustafson is essentially  an  elitist, a  believer   in  a  continuous  tradition  of men  and  women  who by their  gentleness, their love of beauty and goodness have preserved   in  the  Western   World   music, art,  sculpture, poetry,  and   the  decencies of  life  which   go  with   these   things.   So much  is Western   Humanism an  integral part   of  Gustafson's  emotional  and  cul­ tural  inheritance that  when  an artifact in Rome   or  Greece   lives  up   in   reality   to what  in  his mind  it ought  to be, it elicits the  stock  response  from   him  that   tradi­ tion assigns to such an encounter between  poet  and  artifact.  At  the  same  time,  in­ congruity between object  and  symbol and his notion  of what  these  things  should  be easily  shocks  him.  His  reaction  seldom goes beyond  praise of  beauty  and  decency and  revulsion  against their  opposites.  He never  seems  to  understand the  interrela-

112
 tionship  comprised  in the Buddhist prayer, "Om Madi   Padme   Hum". His  is  essen­ tially a simple, incomplicated  response  to experience.  He  is  in  this  a  kind  of  less robust  Browning,  lacking  the latter poet's  insight   into   the   ironic   relationship  of innocence-guilt, beauty-ugliness, good-evil throughout the universe.
Although the  very antithesis of a revo­ lutionary  in  outlook   and   temperament, Ralph Gustafson  grew  up  during an  age of technical revolution in  English  poetry, and   adopted  that   aspect   of  revolution without  questioning  whether  or  not  he was  by  nature  fitted  for  it.  To  a  young man  at Oxford  in the 193o's, the rhythms  of   Hopkins,   Yeats,   Pound,  Eliot,   and Auden  spoke  with  a  music  more  in  tune with   the  rhythm   of  the  time  than   any­ thing  that  had  been  written in  the  past, and  Ralph  Gustafson   had  a good  ear  to listen  and  to adapt to his own  use. Long  practice has made  him a master,  and  Fire on  Stone  abounds in  happy   phrases  and rhythms  that are a delight  to the ear regardless  of whether or not they are conveying  anything other than  tonal nuances.  Take,  for  example, "The  Star­ Catcher":
Scintillant, sharp, A collapse  of stars
At his shoulders glorious, On  his earthsprung arch Diminutive ember Midstretch battered
By burden, he stands.
And  when  feeling  and   imagination are roused   by  real   experience,  Gustafson's skill  can  find  words  for  such   poems  as "Of  Answers and  Her  Asleep",  which is a truly  beautiful  and  noble love poem:
This  haggard heart attached to me, Conduit, valves, ligaments, I suppose
Not  knowing the  structured procedures of
This determinable physical   world  - I would  not want to know  the  slow

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Red-blood drippings of the  heart's thunder
Only  its presence, dear, since
I love  the  world  and  you.   I
Should find  inevitable wrongness. I Am afraid of hurt, the  presentable flaw Which demands compassion -I would  give
it,
But  0 how  better no compassion,
The wound not at all, or healed, the  child
Pickaback hoisted, the  unspoken love
Aware no less of shouting harm
And  the  silence  of irony-I would  leave  all Such  biopsy  of answers to the  physician Dependent on him only  if need  be, Knowing the  need  will be.  I have  only Requirement of indeterminable things
As fill the  hour  and  hour, the  way The shape of you lies asleep, beyond Discovery, your  head  under my touch My hand that does  not wake  you, you Only  moving  in that  knowledge
Slightly as if, as the  rain, as the  moment
Of  petals, that question were  all of need.

If every time he had  written -or even every other time-the urgency and depth of experience had forced  Ralph Gustafson  to  go  beneath or  beyond   the stock   response,   as  he  has   done   in   the poem  quoted   above,  he  might  well  have been   our  finest  poet.  As  it  is,  like  Bliss Carman he  responded   too easily, too de­ cently   perhaps,  and   found    the   words much   too  readily.  He  is, I feel,  a  victim of his very erudition and  facility. That is why when  I read  Fire on Stone, as when I  read  all  his  previous  books  except   the two  written in  1g6o,  I  do  so  with  mixed admiration and  exasperation.

FRED  COGSWELL

LARK ASCENDING
RONALD  SUTHERLAND,   Lark   des  Neiges.  new press.

RoNALD Sutherland's Lark des Neiges can best be judged within the framework of his own criticism  in Second  Image; although the  novel  stands  on  its own  merits,  as a one-day   journey  in  the  mental life  of a
 French Canadian  housewife, it  can  also be  read  as  a  symbolic  representation of the  French  Canadian consciousness com­ ing  to  terms  with  itself,  a  reconciliation between  an  outer  and  inner  reality.
In  Second  Image, Sutherland discusses
the  search  for  a  new  morality to  replace traditional  values   lost  in   the   twentieth century.   Most  post-war novels  offer  one of  two  possibilities-either  there   is  an existential  vacuum,  a  state   of   nothing­ ness, an  alternative which  is  clearly  ana­ thema  to Sutherland, or there is "realistic involvement",  a   "willingness  to  accept  life as it is and  to struggle for any possible improvement through sympathy and  love for  other  human beings."  At  present, the existential    vacuum   is   in    vogue,    but Sutherland  feels  that  earlier writers   like Simard, McDougall, or  MacLennan may have  hit  on  the  vital  truth with  the  idea of   realistic    involvement,   which    could serve as a cornerstone for a new morality. Lark  des  N eiges works  in  this  direction. Suzanne  Laflamme  is  a   twenty   nine year old housewife  in East  End  Montreal, wife  of  an   umlerpaid  college   classique professor,  mother  of  four   pre-schoolers, on   the   brink   of  mental  disintegration. Daughter  of  a  French  mother  and   an English  father, Suzanne was confused  by her  mixed  religious  and   linguistic  back­ ground  and   early  became aware  of  the animosity    that    separated   English   and  French, husband and   wife.  The conflict between  the  parents is one  between   two modes of facing  existence, the instinctive, spontaneous  response   of   Yvette   and French Canadians  against  the  reasoned, restrained   response   of   Andrew  and Anglo-Saxons.    Suzanne  embodies  both impulses  within  herself,  making her,  on a second level, a symbol of the entire nation attempting  to  reconcile  two   races,   two


113

BOOKS IN REVIEW



cultures,  two  languages. Sutherland  at­
tempts an  analysis of-and diagnosis  for
-the  moral  and   political schizophrenia that   has  split   the   country. As  Suzanne tries  to  order   and   find  meaning in  her past,  so that  she can  face  the  future, she offers  simultaneously what  Sutherland feels  is the  only  road  open   to  Canadian unity.
On  doctor's orders, Suzanne's husband
Georges  has  taken  the children out for the day.  Suzanne dozes  fitfully,  has  snatches of dreams about  the past  that  haunts her, talks  to her  cat  Minou, and  as the  hours pass, gradually comes to self-recognition. The book opens  with  a dream. A woman stands   alone   in  a  frozen,   desolate  land­ scape  of ice and  snow, "the branches of a large  maple   tree  extend  grotesquely up­  wards  like  the  legs of  a  dead  spider" - Canadian  emblem   as   ominous portent. "The  woman   is  alone.  Where  is  she?"  The  closing  dream  before  the  family  re­ turns    is   again    of   a   woman  trudging through  deep,  falling snow,  but  this time she  knows where  she  is going.  She  heads for  a  house  on  the  outskirts of  a  small town where  Georges  and  the children are silhouetted  in  a  window. She   rings  the bell of the house  just as Georges  rings the bell  of  their  apartment. Somewhere  be­ tween   these   two   dreams,  Suzanne   has found  the answer.
Suzanne  has   always   used   sex  as  an escape  from  the  world.  She  tells  Minou, "I've always abandoned myself  complete­ ly. It's  a marvellous, fantastic feeling, like a  bird  soaring  into  the  sky.  Like  a  lark.
'Lark   des  neiges'." The  problem   is that
when  she returns to earth, she is wracked by guilt.  Unlike  her  mother who  listened unquestioningly to the priest, Suzanne derives  no sense of  absolution from  con­ fession.  In  fact,  her  memories of  clergy-

I 14
 men, Catholic and  Protestant, are of  two­ faced  peacemakers who  preach brotherly love  while   encouraging and   exploiting the  chasm  between  the  two  faiths.
Georges  is the  voice  of sanity,  at  least in part  echoing  Sutherland's views. He counsels  Suzy,  "We   can't  just  wipe  out past experiences. But  we can  refuse  to be obsessed  by them." The  alternative is to "create a little world of peace and love around ourselves. Our own little sane world."
Suzanne remembers some of Georges' theories, in particular the one about  the myths.  "Georges  says that  when  one  race or  ethnic   group   or  whatever you  call  it wants   to   protect  what   it   thinks   is  its purity,   then  a  myth  develops  about   the others  being  sex crazy."  These  myths  are what   Sutherland  has  elsewhere   labelled "the  body-odour of race"; it goes beyond the   myth   of   "la   femme   fatale   Cana­ dienne"  to  embrace  the  one  about   the French Canadian  deficiency  of  business sense or  the  one  about   the  link  between  Catholicism  and   the   French  language. Although  the  author  admits  that   these ideas  are  rapidly  losing ground, and  that  the  myth   of  the   French  girl   has  been reversed   so  it   is   now   recommendation rather than condemnation, he is trying in Lark   des  neiges  to  administer  the  final blow to all such myths.
As the  day  wanes,  Suzanne has a final nightmare about  being  raped  by a priest and  awakes  screaming for  LOVE. Then leafing through an old photo album, she discovers   that   Georges'   Aunt   had   dark hair,  not fair as he had  told her whenever she mentioned the eldest child's light colouring; she realizes  that  Georges has known  about  the  child  all along  and  has been  making  things  easier  for  her.  Then there  is  a  coming   together. She  decides

BOOKS IN REVIEW



that   "they   should   promote  him   to  the top, that's what  they should  do. He'd  put a little  love into  the  system. He'd  get rid of all the hate  and  teach  the kids to love. He  wouldn't let people  put  stupid  preju­ dices and  twisted  ideas  into  kids' heads". And   Suzanne  hurriedly  straightens  the apartment  and    fixes   her    hair    before Georges returns home.
The   reader   pauses.  Today  it  is  love
and   reconciliation.  But   tomorrow  there is  still  the  stench   and   rotting  wood  of inner  city poverty,  and  four  kids cramped in  three   rooms,  and   rising   prices.  Can love and sympathy  triumph over all that? Psychiatric  statistics  say no.
Sutherland  has  a  sensitive  perception
of the  Quebec scene  and  draws  an  inci­ sive  portrait of  a  bilingual  character so comfortable  in  both  languages that   the switch  from  one  to  the  other   is  imper­  ceptible.   The   novel  weakens   when   the author feels  compelled   to  make  his mes­ sage explicit. The  final  judgment depends  on  how one  reacts  to Sutherland's socio­ political philosophy.  The  apocalyptic end­ ing has been  the fetish  in literary  circles; his  love-sympathy   formula   seems  to  be­ long  to  another  era,   as  he  himself  ac­ knowledges.  But  it  is not  the sense of its being outdated that  leads me to question  the  resolution-the old  masters  still  re­ veal   unchanging   truths   about    human nature. The  question  is rather whether a personal solution  can  be translated into a national   one.   Ethical  and   moral   cate­ gories are hazy in the realm  of politics. So Sutherland's conclusion becomes too facile on  the  symbolic  level  as  well  as  on  the level  of  plot,  yet  in  the  end,   Lark   des neiges  is an  important  novel  because  it aims  at  exposing   the  reality  of  Quebec society to English  speaking readers  in the rest of Canada, and  because  it contains  a
 subtle  study  of a young  French Canadian woman  who actually does find  love with­ out  contracting a fatal  illness or entering a   convent,  both    considerable   achieve­ ments  in a literary or social context.

LINDA SHOHET


COMEDY OF SURVIVAL

ADELE WISEMAN,  Crackpot. $ro.oo.

I'M   GOING all  out   against  my  carefully acquired academic caution to recommend Crackpot  as the most alive, daring and tempestuously human literary creation in Canadian storytelling. Hoda, its heroine, is largely  the reason,  but  there  are impor­ tant   other   ones:   a  level  on  which   this book is a marvellous kind of  mystery play, another  level  on  which   it  is  a  portrait, superbly  brought to life, of  a community in  all  its  foibles  of  human  comedy   and error.  Adele Wiseman  has proved  that  she is as adept  in  the  comic  mode  as, in  her first novel, she was in the tragic.
Yet one  must  be alert: in  turning to a comic mode-perhaps tragi-comic  is more  accurate -she  immerses  herself  in a way of being and  describing that  is new enough  in Canadian fiction  to risk  invit­ ing   inappropriate  responses.   I   have   to admit  that  I, for one, had  trouble on first reading. Though excited  by admiration, I was  confused   by   dismay;  the   book   at times seemed pushy, it strained credibility, it bordered  on  bad  taste.  As Hoda began taking   it  over   (rather like  a  too-activt> yeast   dough    overflowing    its   pot)    she sometimes  stuck  in  my  throat. Wiseman, I wanted   to say,  where  is your  aesthetic sense  of  decorum, your  restraint? I was remembering the dignity  of The Sacrifice,


II5

BOOKS IN REVIEW



its austerely  balanced design of hope and tragic  inevitability. I could only imagine Wiseman  had   become   so  obsessed  with her creation that, swept  up in Hoda's momentum,  she   has   lost  authorial   dis­ tance.  I  was deceived: a  second  reading proved  unalloyed  delight.  Reviewing Crackpot in  the  light  of  how  it  has  re­ vealed   itself  to  me,  I   recognize   it  as  a masterpiece  of   narrative  and   projected viewpoint.
Its   inspiration  is  Hoda,  conceived   as the larger-than-life epitome of an entire milieu,   with   ramifications  that   embrace all   humanity.  This    is  a   bold   enough scheme. What makes it even bolder is that Wiseman has drawn on a source of her Jewish-European-Canadian heritage which, in its essential spirit, almost defies cultural  translation. One   might   say  she has   written  a  Jewish   book  in   English. This  expresses itself in style as well as in viewpoint; in the form she has given to characteristics of her  milieu, moving familiarly from  moods  of  mystical  rever­ ence   to  tender   irony   to  biting  satire   to earthy  humour,  allowing her  heroine   to be intimately experienced in all her inner  riot of feeling and emotion.
Intrinsically, Crackpot is a story of the triumph of  the  human spirit  over  adver­ sity.  Hoda's  humble  immigrant   parents have  given  her  in childhood the strength and  wisdom  to see herself as a unique and valuable  person   worthy   of   respect.   Ac­ cordingly,  in  a  life  which   taxes  all  her resources-through  poverty  and  humili­ ation  suffered  at the hands  of institutions, and  against the sordid  aspects  of her call­ ing  with  its social  opprobrium and  guilts
-she  is  able   to  withstand  shocks  and
retain  a robustly  independent identity. The first  chapter  contains in  embryo
the  shape   of  all  that   is  to  grow  in  the

II6
 book. The setting  is Winnipeg's Jewish immigrant community near  the beginning of  the  century. Both  Hoda's parents are marked  with a physical disability which society  treats  as a social one,  Hoda's  bal­ looning  fatness  already marking  her  off for  a  similar   fate.   The   small  family   is blessed  in  its  harmony  of   loving   inter­ dependence. Her  mother works as a clean­  ing woman  to support them.  And through his  eloquent  storytelling, Danile, Hoda's blind  father,  instructs her  in  the  family history, recreating the drama of his extra­ ordinary marriage conducted in  a grave­ yard, which  had  the effect of  turning him and  his bride into saviours of  their village. A man  of gentle  purity,  he imbues  Hoda  with  his wonder  and  belief in their  mean­  ingful  destiny, so that  she grows up trust­ ing,   against   ever-increasing  doubt  and despair,   that  the  future will  make  clear and   justify  the shattering  events   which rock her life.
Hoda  lives for "the important things," indulging a childish fantasy obsession with the Prince  of Wales, her topical  image for the "one-and-only" who will come and choose her  as his Queen Esther, enabling her  to  command  the  respect  which  will lead those who at present scorn her to recognize her worth. Becoming sexually aware,  the  fat  unpopular schoolgirl  finds her  frank  eagerness  matched by the  boys who,   on   this  basis,  admit   her   to  their rough   comradeship. The  reward   of   ac­ ceptance  from   those   with    whom   she enjoys  her sexuality  makes viewing it as a business  a  logical  solution   when,  unable  to   find   other    reliable   work   after   her mother's  death,  she   is  faced   with   the problem   of  supporting   herself   and   her father. Danile  contributes  by  learning to make  baskets  which  Hoda  hustles  to her clients  while anxiously and guiltily  shield-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ing  him  from  the  facts  of  her  life.  She builds  her  clientele  from  the  boys she has grown  up among,  rejecting the "bigtime" of  the  downtown scene  after  an  instruc­ tive  brush  with  its degrading  brutalities. Because Hoda  has only the most confused notions  of  how  pregnancy  occurs,  she  is unaware  when   it  happens,  giving   birth alone  in the night  in a horror of pain  and disbelief,   thinking  that  like  her   mother she is dying of a tumour.
Though deep  symbolic  structure is far less obvious  in  this  novel  than   in  Wise­ man's  first, being  muted, it  now  becomes unmistakeable  in  the  advent of   a  child who  comes  sheathed in  mystery, growing  like  everyman to  ask:   From  whence  did I come?  To  what  end?  In  her first panic  of  fear  and  concern  for  the  child,  Hoda  deposits   him   at   the  Jewish   Orphanage door,   tagged   with   a   confused   message hinting  at   his   princely   origin   and   his future as a redeemer of the Jews. In hand­ ing  him  over  to the  community with  this note Hoda acts both astutely  and  naively, ensuring he  will be treated with  respect, and  projecting on to him  her dream wish that   he  might   be  the  son  of  that  actual Prince  around whom centred her childish fantasies  of an  ideal  love. Given  the  aus­ picious   name   of  David   ben   Zion   but known as Pipick  (or Bellybutton)  because of  his  crudely  tied  navel,  the  boy  grows up sensible of being set apart. His identity  remains  Hoda's guilty secret. For  a while she is able  to glean  news of  him  through Uncle  Nate,  one of the  novel's  most  bril­ liantly  and  satirically realized  characters. Shortly  after  his Bar  Mitzvah, Pipick  has
repeated occasions  to  impress  the  elders in  the  synagogue -an  obvious  reference to  Jesus   in   the   Temple-and  in   this period  Hoda, preoccupied with  her  inner conflicts, loses sight of him.
 From this time, a subtle shift begins in Hoda's relationship to life, though not becoming   evident   until   the   future  has tried  her  with  yet another set of  horren­ dous  shocks which  forms  the  novel's  dra­ matic   climax.  It is a  tour-de-force that  this  part   of  the  plot,  which,   abstracted from  its  context   might  be  seen  as  melo­ drama, in Wiseman  has an  impact I can only  leave  for  the  reader  to  experience directly.   Suffice  it  to say  that   Hoda, as always, rises to the challenge of the  crisis, turning it  to  best  advantage, refusing  to go under.
In  telling  its  story  the  novel  presents
some   interesting   perspectives   on   class structure and  mores. Early  in life, Hoda's fervour  for  justice and  freedom turns her into   a  minor   heroine   of  the   Winnipeg General Strike,  and  a  member-though she  never  sees eye-to-eye  with  her  com­ rades-of the Communist party. "If only they'd  lay  off  free  enterprise,"  she  com­ plains  at  a later  date. "I don't  mean  the big capitalist bloodsuckers, but small little businesses like mine, where  you give value for  money."  Though  hilarious,  the  pas­ sage underlines the  point  that  Hoda does not  see  herself  as  oppressed.  Hers   is  a straight   exchange.   Unlike    the   factory  worker  with  whom  she compares herself, moreover, she enjoys the freedom of work­ ing   when   and   where   she   pleases.  The  problem   is  only  in  how  society   regards  her.
The  shift from a life geared  to personal
hopes  to  a  more  selfless  instrumentality can  be seen when,  her  last  hope  of being able  to help  her  son ended  with  his final disappearance, she settles  into  a role that is pure  function. She has also given up all hope of being redeemed from  her  profes­ sion  through  the  appearance  of   a  pre­ destined  lover. She attends to her clients,

BOOKS IN REVIEW



sezvicing and solacing them in their needs, especially  the  younger  ones for whom  she has a tender concern that  their  first experience be a memorable one. When World  War  Two  breaks,  she  rallies  with zest  to  its "just   cause," using  herself  un­ sparingly. As  Mamma  Hoda, she  has  a peculiar  notion   that   the  men  who  have lain  in  her  arms  will  not  die  of the  war, nor  does  she  exclude "even   the  bastards who  made  fun  of her  afterwards." Wise­ man  depicts  the  transformation in Hoda, since the coming to responsible age of her son,   from   a   Magdalen  into   a   Mary,  Mother to  all  men.  And  soon  after   this Hoda receives her first marriage proposal,  which she rejects.
The war's  end  finds her in business partnership with a former client as hostess­ manager  of his restaurant-gambling enter­ prise,  having ended  her  former activities.  Becoming respectable, she loses integrity; she  engages two  younger  prostitutes on a commission  basis, unperturbedly turning into a capitalist exploiter. This willingness to  profit  off others is Hoda's real  loss of innocence and comes as one of the quieter shocks of the book. Here Wiseman is ironically realistic.
But  redemption is in  store,  though the sudden revelation that  would  bestow meaning on  the  crazy  pattern of Hoda's life as she has suffered  it has failed to materialize. Happiness she regards with sceptical  contempt. So when  she  receives a second  proposal of marriage from a "deepee" survivor  of the  Nazi concentra­ tion  camps,  she  is  unreceptive. However, Lazar, a  Lazarus  even  without his name to tell us, reaches her  through his need to blot  out  the memory  of the field of death  from  which  he  crawled over  the  corpses of his kin. Hoda cannot refuse this invita­ tion  to life, to renewal. Almost  in spite of

118
 herself, she accepts  him, new bourgeois dreams  and  hopes  reforming in a kind of madly  joyous dance on  the  graveyard of the old, idealistic  ones.
This,  then,  is Wiseman's second  testa­ ment  to  the immutable promise  of  God's  covenant with  Abraham. Crackpot  is her Jewish   reading  of  the   New  Testament, which  puts  it  back  in  context, with  the Old.   Thus  the   chosen   people   are   not merely  of  the  tribe,  but  embrace all  the lowly and despised  who, with  God's  help, celebrate   humanity  by  rising   above   its limitations. The  novel's  main  characters are  pointedly chosen: Hoda's parents, as an altar-gift to God, Uncle Nate as the unwitting instrument of the  family's  tak­ ing root  in the  New  World, Lazar as the manifest   bridegroom ascendant  over  the grave,   Hoda    as   the   female   generosity  of the  people  itself  out  of  whom a son is born  in  all  his mortal  vulnerability, and Pipick:   world    centre,    comically    and promisingly human, hope upon  which the future  rests. But  it  is with  the  mother­ Hoda-Judah in  her  primacy and  tough­ ness of endurance -that  the  novel rests, Hoda's dream   of  a  second  child  named  for her father  bringing us round  to where the story  begins, in a circle of continuity.

HELENE ROSENTHAL

SPIRES AND SNOW

Poets  of  the  Capital, ed.  Frank   M.  Tierney and Stephen  Gill. Borealis Press.
39  Below:  The   Anthology of Greater  Edmon­ ton  Poetry, ed. Allan  Shute  and  R. G. Fyfe. Tree  frog.

ON THE PAPER COVERS of these  antholo­ gies, the  spires  of  Parliament  stand  vigil over   46   poets   of   the   capital,   and   39
Edmontonians are  huddled  together  in­
side  snow  white   covers  with   a  thermo-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



meter   registering 39  below.  Despite   this way   of   introducing  the   books,   neither selection  is narrowly regional. The  editors have not collected  poems about  particular localities,  but  have assembled  useful over­ views of the work of poets  (mostly Cana­ dian,   many   of  them   admittedly  minor)  now living in the two cities. 39 Below has the  fresher,  more contemporary selection. Poets of the  Capital  includes  a fair  num­ ber  of   poems  indebted  to  what   is  least memorable in  nineteenth-century  Cana­ dian  verse.
The  poems  with  civic  or  regional  sub­ jects tend  to be vague,  wordy,  rhetorical and imitative (e.g., Capital73, 137, 145).  Often the   place  seems  a  mere  accident  (e.g., Dorothy Livesay's "The Pied  Piper of  Edmonton",  in  39   Below)    but   the poems  that  do evoke the spirit  of a place show  sharply  observed  details  ordered  in a fashion  that  creates its own poetic logic. A  few  examples  will  suffice.  In  "Cana­ diana"   (39   Below),   Dorothy   Livesay deftly balances two milieux-her school­ days in Winnipeg, present-day Edmonton youngsters-and two  types  of  prejudice
-the old   anti-semitism,  contemporary discrimination against  Indians and  Metis. With  sympathy and  humour, John  Pen­ ner  captures  something of  the  ordinari­ ness of  the  disappearing  Ontario village ("Blueberry Plains", Capital). The  place does not necessarily have to be Canadian. Joy  Kogawa   writes  of  an  uncomfortable "Night  in  a  Boat   between   Beppu   and Kobe"    (Capital) ;  squeezed   in  a  corner  below deck with three  hundred Japanese, she   watches   everything  through  "east­  west   eyes",   "Too  curious   to  sleep   too proper   to  be  comfortable", and   is  wise enough  to recognize  her masks and  admit  "Having dramatized my corner  all night." Other  poets treat  unnamed places. Doug-
 las Barbour (39  Below)   observes  "fog  at the drive-in" diffusing  and  refracting the light  from  the  projection booth. Finally, in the imagination of Christopher Leven­ son, a ride in a "Horse Sleigh"  (Capital) is  the   occasion   for   musing   about  ulti­  mates.   Apart from   the  literary  reminis­ cences,  it  has something  of the  haunting quality    of   Jean-Paul  Lemieux'  barren winter landscapes:
And  now our  horses, revenants
in mourning whiteness, move  soundlessly, charting the  waste  lands between huddles of trees, outgrowths of evergreen, leaving behind them
a wake, a permanent way
that  will  heal  over  soon, with  the next  snow.
Love and sex interest practically every poet,  and  it bears  repeating that  what  is pleasurable or  painful, hateful or  admir­ able, commonplace or unusual in real life does  not  necessarily   make   good   poetry.  John  Donne quipped that  he had written best  when  he  had  invented  most  freely. Here   there  are  many  pained  confessions and   strained  conceits,   much  raw   senti­  ment  and  too many  pieces  where  images are strung together  without  much thought. There are  more  striking lyrical lines  (e.g., Seymour Mayne's "Come back with  your eyesjof  desire and  foreboding", Capital)  than  completed  poems.  There are,  however, several  good  pieces in both collections,  like  Brenda Fleet's  crackling "Anger"   (Capital), which   is  nagging,  frustrated   and   submissive   by  turns,  or Nella  Kowalow's "Cheaper  than   getting drunk" (39  Below), whose one,  two  and three  word  lines show  a childish, adoles­ cent  infatuation turning to claustrophobic desperation. In  "Song 50:  the  visit"  (39
Below) ,   Douglas    Barbour   uses   crisp,

II9

BOOKS IN REVIEW



simple images  (snow-fire-ashes,  heat­ cold)   to heighten the  contrast  between  a couple  still  in  love  and   a  couple   falling  apart.  The  first   stanza   has   too   many tortuous metrical quirks  to wear well with me,  but   the  halting  rhythms of  the  last stanza   fill  what  could  have   been  bland  verse with choking anguish:

our love a fire still a part  of us
in the ashes of your marriage bed
in this cold & lonely house
full of friends 	held
apart
by the cold
silences.

A  full   range   of  other   themes   appear elsewhere.   Nature  is  still  accessible   be­ yond  the  urban  sprawl,   and   a  welcome change from   the  boredom  of  the  super highway in  Richard  Homsey's "The  De­ tour'' (39 Below) . The psychedelic  period is  represented,    for   example,  by   Wolf Kirchmeir's "The sea  son's  eyes are  blue and   green  ... " (39   Below)  -meretri­ cious,   like  much   serious   psychedelia - and  Tom   Farley's   more  successful  "The Lonesome  Game" (Capital) a humorous ballad   about   a  candy   stick  shootout  in Cinnamon  Town.  Moving  to   political issues,  Candas  Dorsey    (39   Below)    re­ minds   us  that   the  world   is  larger than Canada by  relocating the  Vietnam  war in  "New   Orleans, La."  ("be   quiet   now mrs   delaroy   it's   only   the   apocalypse", "napalm  blackens all   the skins") "heavy", as the current vernacular has it. The   age  of  the   jet,  international  media and   professional mobility   are   (whatever else  they  may  be)   the  greatest threat  to purely    national   or   regional    concerns. Robin     Matthews   successfully    satirizes some  of the  stereotypes in  a funny  poem entitled "And  When  the  Liberal Admiri-

120
 can  Couple" (Capital). It bears  reread­
ing, but  probably  not  much  imitation. Then  there   are   the   poems   that   are
consciously  literary -among  them  some of the weakest  in the collections. "Fable" by  David   Andrew   (Capital)  champions grasshopper  singing    (in   rhymed   quat­ rains)  above ant-like labour (in truncated blank   verse) .  The   shift   in   meters   is  a clever idea, but not very skilfully handled. Elizabeth   Brewster's   "The  Prince who married the Sleeping Beauty" (39 Below) tells   what   happened   after    the   happily ever  after   of  a  few  months of  wedlock.  The  prince   is  too  modern;  the   beauty finds  herself  more  comfortable with  the prince's grandfather. There are some wry touches,  but  too  much   stilted   scene-set­ ting. The wit works better  when  she dis­ cusses  the  reasons  for  her  "Disqualifica­ tion"  as a poet -I wish there  were space to quote  it. More successful literary poets are   Tim   Lander,   whose   "All   the   old words"  (39  Below)   deals  with  the  diffi­ culty   of   finding   the   right    word,    and Leona   Gom,   whose   "Persephone"   (39
Below)    draws   her  lover  into   the  earth
with a vegetative  passion.
A. P.  Campbell's "Eviction"  (from Eden-Capital) is indebted to Old  and Middle English  alliterative verse and Hopkins. Sometimes the effect is too mannered for my ear  ("Down the gray groove/That will not green  again/Till judgment day"), but  it is good  to read  a poet aware  enough  of prosody  to set him­ self working  in  the  tradition. His  talents carry  him beyond mere  imitation  to com­ pose some fine verse. The first  line,  "We  are fugitives from the land, all", resonates  with  intimations of disaster like the  King  James  Bible's descriptions  of  Cain  or  the messengers  who  tell Job  about  his losses. It is no mean feat,  as shown  by compari-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



son   with   Glenn   Clever's   Tennysonian­ Keatsian-Shakespearian   pastiche,  "The Escalator"   (Capital).   It   is  also   com­ forting to  see a  poem  showing that   reli­ gion  can  spring  from  genuine experience and  can still be written about. Campbell's "Holy   Week  Prayer  for  Exiles"  has  flesh and  sinews -hard, crisp diction  and  taut rhythm, a good antidote to pie in the sky cream  puffs. Elsewhere  religion  is treated  very    differently.  Glenn    Clever    has   a jaunty  bagatelle about  Joseph  as cuckold ("Occam's Razor", Capital). A prayer, satirically deflating  escapist  pietism,  is addressed  to  "my   immaculate  Piece  of Pie"  by  a  hermaphrodite  named   Man­ Woman  (39  Below). David   Bittle  (who deserved  to be  represented by  more  than  the  three  fine  poems  included)   writes  of the  "Visit" of the  Carpenter to an  aging  woman  (Capital). The poem is not unlike Lawrence's "The  Man   Who  Died", but is more sensitively handled.
ALEX  GLOBE


THE BUTTERFLY AND THE WHEEL

MICHAEL  JACOT,  The   Last  Butterfly.  McClel- land & Stewart,  $7·95·

WHEN  I WAS  a  child   somebody   taught me  to  sing  an  old  song  which   I  loved then  and  haven't heard  since,  although I still remember how part  of it goes:

Even though  you're only make-believing, Laugh, Clown, Laugh;
Even though something  inside is grieving, Laugh, Clown, Laugh;
Don't  let the world know your sorrow, Be a Pagliacci,
Laugh, Clown, Laugh!

The figure of the sad clown -like that of the  honest lawyer or the frog prince­ is a paradox whose attractions the human
 imagination finds  itself  hard-pressed to resist.  Few  people  must   understand  this better  than   Michael Jacot, whose  fourth novel  The  Last   Butterfly  describes   the final   engagement  of   Antonin Karas, a desperate and  dispirited man  whose  mis­ fortune is to  be  a  professional  clown  in Nazi-occupied Czechoslovakia.
"It's not only me, it's  the  whole  bloody country.... They   expect   you  to  go  out onto that stage and wipe out the whole depressing   world   from   their   minds ... and  make  them  laugh." Karas's wife  has been  dead   for  just  a  year; his  act   has grown  stale and  his stage  manager knows it; he  is half-Jewish.  (Already his  uncle has  been  taken  to  Terezin, a  concentra­ tion  camp   the  size  of  a  small  city  near Prague.)   Karas  is  desperate  with   good reason.
A mad  act  of  defiance alerts  the  Nazi
administration and  Karas, too, is shipped off to the camp.  Not  as a prisoner, Lager­ kommandant Burger  assures  him,  but  as an  entertainer. Terezin is soon to receive a visit from  the  International Red  Cross and  must  therefore be  prepared to  mas­ querade as a model  town  for a day.  And besides,  why  shouldn't  hungry  children awaiting extermination be encouraged to laugh?
The Last  Butterfly, its  dust  jacket  in­
forms  us,  is "based on  a  true  account." Of  all the  horrors  described in  the  book, this  one  is  by  far   the  worst.   As  we  all know,   the   systematic  brutality   of   the Nazis  plumbed sickening depths, depths that  perhaps only the Spanish Inquisitors could  match. It is entirely probable that reverberations from  a crime  of this mag­ nitude   will  be  felt  by sensitive  imagina­ tions for many  generations to come.
Which  is why,  despite the  fact  that  it deals  with  a  well-worn subject,  Michael


121

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Jacot's  novel  seems  as  timeless   as  The Red  Badge of Courage. Further strength­ ening  it  is  the  presence  of  Jacot's  tragi­ comic  hero,  the  vulnerable  clown  figure whom   we  recognize   as  both   archetype and   fellow  human  being.   It  must   have been  a great  moment for  Jacot when  he grasped  the  dramatic potential contained in that  "true account"!
He  writes  with  Spartan economy,  with a command of small  detail that  gives his work  both   colour   and   authority.  Occa­ sionally  a kind  of bitter  irony invades the story  ("Samuel ... wasn't  singing  to thank   God  he  was  still  alive.  He  was  a far   more  sophisticated  child   than  that.  He  sang  because   he  felt  like  singing"), but  for  the  most  part The Last  Butterfly  is remarkable for its controlled objectivity of tone. Its impact on the reader is all the greater for  the  simplicity  with  which  its miseries  are  described. ("On  the  snow­ covered  grass in  the  centre of the  square  sat an  old man.  He  had  been  given  some bread crumbs  to feed  the  pigeons.  But he had   been   hungry  and   had   eaten  them all.")
If ever  a story  demanded comic  relief, it  is  this  one;   fortunately Jacot's  hand­ ling of Karas's "turns" is convincing and effective.  "It's all  I've ever  known  about  life,"  says  the  clown  to  Vera,   a  young schoolteacher   whom   he   meets   in   the camp,  and   proves   it   by  being   able   to summon up an automatic  professionalism ("the  mask")   under  some  of  the   most adverse  circumstances imaginable. Con­  fronted  with  the  sufferings  of others,  he is at last empowered to forget  his own.
The  Last   Butterfly  is  the   story   of  a small  man  made  great  by trial.  The book takes  its  title  from  a  poem  written by a young  girl  prisoner   ( ... "That  butterfly was the  last  one,jButterflies don't live in

122
 here,  injthe ghetto"), in  which   the  de­ parting butterfly  suggests  the  loss of  pre­ cious freedom,  but as the novel progresses the  image  of the  butterfly  becomes  more closely linked  with  Karas himself. Vanity  and  bluster  tum to compassion and  love, and  a  genuine  hero  is  born -or  meta­ morphosed.
Michael Jacot  is also a film-maker, and is currently working  on  an  adaptation of The  Last   Butterfly  for   the   screen.  Al­ ready  the  novel  is heavily  visual  in  em­ phasis;  indeed,  my  only  real  criticism  of it is that  Jacot  is more successful  in mak­  ing  the  reader  see his story  than  in mak­ ing him feel it. But for that, perhaps, one should be grateful.
PAT BARCLAY


VOLCANIC VAGUENESS

M.    c.  BRADBROOK,  Malcolm  Lowry:  His   Art and   Early   Life- A  Study in  Transforma­ tion. Cambridge University  Press.

THERE  IS  so  MUCH  IN  Under   the  Vol­ cano,  and  in  Ultramarine, that  seems  to be successfully objectified personal experi­  ence,   and   so  much   in   the   later   work which  seems, at  first glance,  "subjective", that   the   question   of   the   way  a  writer  transforms   his   experience  as   he  draws  upon  it  for  image  and  structure is espe­ cially perplexing in Lowry's  case.
Professor  Bradbrook  was  born  in  the same  year  as Lowry,  grew  up  near  him, and  attended Cambridge during the same few  years  as  he  did.  Consequently, she says,   "without  attempting  to   compete with  the  labours  of  Douglas   Day  [Mal­ colm   Lowry,  A   Biography (I 973) ],  I may claim  that  fortune has given  me the advantage of  being  able  to  correct   and

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



supplement the  earlier parts  of the  biog­ raphy. This,   chiefly  in  order   to  present  an   alternative  view   of  the   late  works, since   my   aim   is  not   biographical   but critical." Her argument in this last respect is,   in   effect,    that   once   Volcano  was achieved-the    conventionally  great novel  sent  to  join  the  canon-Lowry's writing  became  a  semi-neurotic attempt to  make  sense  of  his own  life:  "He  was no  longer  possessed  by other writers,  or by  the  need  to write  a great  novel, since that  ordeal   had   been  surmounted. The new  ordeal   was  to struggle  with  the  self
... to  grapple with  himself  through  his
art."
These   general   claims  have  some  sub­ stance,  and  she  has  discovered  fresh in­ formation  that   bears  on  her  topic: new primary evidence  in  the  form  of a  letter  written by a shipmate of  Lowry's  on  the Yokohama voyage  (May-October, 1927); interviews  with    members   of   Lowry's immediate   family,   and   with   other  ac­ quaintances from  the early years. Instead, however,  of presenting this material with­ in  the  framework  of  some  well  formed and  clearly  explained argument  concern­ ing  Lowry's  creativity after Volcano was completed,    Professor    Bradbrook   sub­ merges  it in a series of  chapters spanning all  Lowry's  life and  published  prose, and offering,   in  most  cases,  little  more  than graceful,   sensitive,   and    allusive   para­ phrases  of   the  fiction.  These   are  inter­  spersed  frequently with  only  passing  and tangential references  to  the  personal  ex­ perience   upon   which   she  thinks  Lowry drew: "Floating submerged in this narra­ tive   [October   Ferry]   are   images  from Lowry's   early   days.... Perhaps  indeed the  carefree little  boy,  rather  indifferent to his parents, and  devoted  to his school­ mates,  the  ten-year-old son of Ethan and
 Jacqueline, serves as reincarnation of something  that   had   been  lost  from   the author's life."
Apart  from the general lack of overt argument, Professor Bradbrook has the irritatingly self-assured  habit of  "explain­ ing"    aspects   of   Lowry's   creativity  by reference   to  work  by  other  writers   that  simply strikes her as opposite:
The  difference between  that   novel    [Vol­ cano] and  the  later torsos  may  be  suggested by  comparing  Blake's   early  lyrics   and   his Prophetic Books ...

Parallel  narrative  and   comment  block   the way for the reader, to make the  meaning deliberately impenetrable, in  the  manner of certain  modern  French  poets    of   the   Tel Quel  group, such  as Denis Roche ...

Yet   a  free   spirit  also   blows   through  these later works,  a  pneuma,  a  wind  whose  echoes may   be   as   lovely   as   those   of   Coleridge's Aeolian    Harp.... (The   Ancient   Mariner was  perhaps  not   the   only   Coleridge  poem Lowry  read. ) ...
This  overall  vagueness   in  response   to the problem  of transformation in the later works is very disheartening, not only because  it  is such  an  interesting one  for Lowry   students,  but   also   because    the theme  of the man  who  regards his life as text, calling  for interpretation in precisely the   same   way   as  literature,  is  such   a crucial  one  for  postmodern literature  as a  whole.  What   is interesting in  Lowry's case is the  extent  to which  he appears to have  felt, concretely, the  pain  of not knowing  this unknowable -of  not  being able  to know  whether the  rules  for inter­ preting   one's    random    experience   are grounded  in   a   supernatural  reality,   or whether the  interpretive rules  that   pro­  vide order are rooted  only in our  need for that  order.
But Professor Bradbrook seems scarcely aware  of the implications of her  prelimi­ nary  recognitions regarding  this. The re-


123

BOOKS IN REVIEW



lationship to experience of interpretive codes,  conventions, and   especially   codes of perception derived from  literature, which   is  the  real  subject of  much   later work   (where  Lowry's  protagonists are often,  themselves,  writers)  remains almost completely unexamined. The  fundamen­ tal  distinction  she  fails  to  make   is  that  between  fiction  which  undertakes only  to make  sense of the  author's own  life  (and  this is the  way she  tends  to read  the later  work), and  fiction  whose  subject  is both the  need  to find, and  the  impossibility  of finding,   absolute  meaning in  one's  past.

ANDREW POTTINGER

THE RURALISTS
w. J.  KEITH,  The Rural Tradition: A Study of the   Non-Fiction  Prose  Writers of  the  Eng­ lish    Countryside.  University   of    Toronto Press.  $I 5.oo.
"RuRAL writing is a curiously neglected topic," says W.  J. Keith in  the  first  sen­ tence  of  The Rural  Tradition. He  is, of course,  correct; critics  have  for  the  most
part   failed  even  to  establish   the  kind  of criteria one should  apply  in discussing  the considerable body  of  non-fiction writing about  the countryside that  exists in Great Britain  and,  to a less extent, in the United States  and  Canada. It is doubtful if, with the single exception of Thoreau, any sig­ nificant    rural    writer  has   received   the attention he deserves.  Yet  the  rural  writ­ ers  have   not   only   provided   books  that  were  widely   read   and   that   represented an   important  facet   of  the  Anglo-Saxon sensibility.    They    have   also   influenced  both  fiction and  poetry  in their  respective  countries; the  novels  of  D.  H.  Lawrence and    the    poetry     of	Thomas   Hardy,




124
 Andrew Young, and Edwin Muir are examples   of  works   that    would   hardly have taken the forms with which we are familiar  if  a  considerable  tradition  of non-fiction  rural   writing  has   not   been there  to influence  the perceptions of their creators.
W. J. Keith  did  a great  deal  to break
down  this critical  barrier with  the  study, Richard   Jefferies,  which  he  published in Toronto some  years  ago.  Now  he  tackles the  genre  on  a  broader scale  in  his new book,  The  Rural   Tradition, which   will be  welcomed   by  all  aficionados  of  the English   school   of   country  writers;  he takes  eleven examples, from Isaak Walton and  Gilbert  White,  through Cobbett and Borrow,   through  Jefferies  and   Hudson and  Edward Thomas, down  to  relatively recent  writers  like Henry  Williamson and
H.  J. Massingham. It  is  a  long-needed
task, well done, and one hopes Professor Keith  will follow it with other studies comparable in length  to his Richard Jefferies,  on some of the other  writers  on his list, notably Massingham and George Sturt, both of whom  need closer critical study   than    they   have   received.
One also hopes that the appearance in Canada of this excellent  study  of the English   ruralists   will  lead   to  a  similar work   on   Canadian  writers   who   have dealt  with  man  and  nature in the wilder­ ness and  farmlands of our country. Writ­ ers  like  Roderick  Haig-Brown and  Fred Bodsworth  have  been  too  long  neglected  as significant  contributors to our  literary tradition, and  even  Grove's country nar­ ratives,  so  much  more  fully  realized  than  any  of his  fiction,  await  effective  critical  discussion.
G.W.









PORT COLBORNE'S
CANADA DAY



THE  succEss of Port  Colborne's  experi­ ment in broadening the literary conscious­ ness of Canadians  was  something no one could  have  foreseen.  Everything seemed against    it;  the   place   and    the   timing seemed   liabilities   rather  than   assets;  in the beginning no finances  were available; even those who conceived  and  executed  it were amateurs.
Port  Colborne, a small  Niagara  Penin­ sula city  touching  Lake  Erie  at  its  north­  eastern  extremity, depends  primarily for its livelihood  on  the  International Nickel Company and  the  St. Lawrence Seaway. Except  for the automobile and  a bus that jiggles  and  bumps  its  way  to  St.  Cath­ arines,  it is  isolated.  No passenger  trains, planes  or  cross-country  buses  stop  here. Unless  the non-driver is back in St. Cath­ arines  by  7: 05 p.m.,  he has  the choice of taking   a  taxi  or  staying   overnight  at  a hotel.  Margaret Atwood  referred to  Port Colborne as "the  ends  of the  earth"; the late  Toronto Telegram  called  it  "a city that  is not even on the map"; Time described  it  as  a  "lunch-pail  town" and the  Toronto Star  as a "one-horse town".
Whatever  it  may   be  in   the   present, Port  Colborne  had  gone  to great  lengths to preserve its links with  the past, and few other  cities can  rival  its acute awareness
 
of   its  own   history.   Tennessee  Avenue, with its imposing  gates, surrounding  walls and  buildings,  is much  the same  as it was when Jefferson  Davies,  President of the Southern Confederacy, used it as his sum­ mer estate; Mrs. Davis' legend, The Grass­ hopper  War, a  mythical  story  about   an Indian  battle   accounting  for   the   bones and   artifacts   uncovered   on   Tennessee Avenue   while   the   Davis   servants   were putting  up  a  pole  for   the  Confederacy flag, is now housed  in  the  public  library; a  century-old   building   has   been   trans­  formed   into  a  marine  museum   and   an even older mansion  has become  a favour­ ite   stopping  place    for   travellers;   the ghosts  of  the  past  still  walk  the  streets, kept   alive   by  word   of  mouth,  handed down  from  one  generation  to  the  next. Many  Port  Colbornites distrust   intrusion from   the  metropolis, and   in  some  ways they are still possessed by small  town puritanism.
In  1970,  when  the  Port  Colborne  ex­ periment  was  first  conceived,  Canadian literature-so  far   as  secondary  schools were concerned -was in a state of limbo. Colleges  of  Education  were  offering   no courses in Canadian  books and  writers; a high  school  teacher  was  refused   an  up­ grading of his teaching certificate because Canadian literature was one of the credits  he  offered  in  support. The   Ontario De­ partment of Education has issued Curric­  ulum  R.P. - S4,  containing  prescriptions for English  courses and  books to be intro­ duced  into secondary schools during 1964, and  in  1970  this  collection  of  guidelines was still in force. It named  approximately two  hundred and  eighty-five   books.  Ap­ proximately four  were Canadian.
Up to now I have deliberately avoided referring to the Port Colborne experiment as Canada Day,  the  name  by which  it  is


125

OPINIONS AND NOTES



generally   known,   since   Canada  Day   is only one late-developing aspect of a many­ sided  programme. In   the  beginning, in­ deed,   we  had   no  ambitious programme designed  to involve other  schools;  we saw no  Canada   Days   on   the   horizon.  Our programme  first evolved  as a  joint  effort by  the  principal of  Port  Colborne High School, the  students and myself-as Head   of English -to  meet  the  needs  of our  own  school,  and  it  was  our  research in developing our own course outline that led  us in the direction of Canada Day. A request  which  we circulated to one  hun­ dred   and   eighty   secondary   schools  for copies  of  their  Canadian  literature pro­ grammes resulted  in eighty-four responses, telling  us  they  had  no  such  programme. It then   became   evident    that   we  must abandon  the   academic  temple   and   go down into the streets.
With  the help of Eli Mandel, Jack Mc­
Clelland,  Hugh   Garner,  Miriam   Wad­ dington,  Hugh  MacLennan   and   Ron Marsh,  our   programme   began   to   take form.   Their help   led  us  to  reassess  our entire   classroom  approach  to  literature. It also led me into more trouble and  criti­  cism than  I had  ever encountered before. Phyllis   Grosskurth's  characterization  of the  typical  Canadian book  reviewer  in  a I970  issue  of  Canadian  Literature  gives an  accurate feeling  of the  climate of opinion in which  I found  myself:  "When confronted with a spanking new literature in his own country, he tends  to become timorous, hesitant or evasive;  or at the opposite extreme, he becomes  truculent, contemptuous and  vitriolic."
Perhaps the  two  most  formidable  ob­ stacles  were  academic traditionalism  and elitism.   By  I970,  most  secondary  school teachers were specialists  in one or another discipline.  An    English    and    a   history
 teacher may be the best of friends  socially, but  academically they  are  miles apart. It is  rare   indeed   to  find   voluntary  inter­ disciplinary co-operation  between  teach­ ers  at  the  secondary  school  level. Such specialization  and   the  elitist  attitudes it induces   have   notably   retarded  the   de­ velopment within   the  schools  systems  of a true  Canadian Studies programme.
It was  considered presumption on  my part  to break with  tradition and  to invade the  hallowed  sanctuaries of the  historian and  the  geographer, but  the  very  nature of Canadian literature demanded this. As a  teacher, I found   that  the  treatment of novels and  short stories had changed little from  the  time when  I myself was a high school student. Like teachers before me, I continued to dissect such works of art into plots, characters, settings  and  themes, leaving them at the end in much the same condition as Benet's  falcon  left its victim, the heron,  completely dismembered. I realized that if such an approach were sustained, I  would   be  training  students who  would  leave  high  school-as  I did
-with heads full of plots, themes, similes and synecdoches  but  with no appreciation of the works they had studied.
But  Canadian  literature  brought with
it  an  extra  dimension that  cannot gener­ ally be found -by Canadians at  least - in  other   literatures. This   dimension  was in  the  reader  rather than   in  the  literary work  itself. Most  Canadian students had
a  strong  awareness  of  their  country, through travelling in its various  regions, visiting   its   cities,   being   exposed   to   it through the media.  Few were unaware of events  like  the  October crisis in  Quebec, and  all had  parents or  relatives  who had described  to them  the Canada of the remembered  past  and   the  changes   that had  taken  place.  To  such  students Can-

OPINIONS AND NOTES



ada  was a real place,  not an abstract defi­ nition  in  time  and  place; it  was  not one of those  famous  lands  of world  literature which   they  had  never  seen,  but  a  place they knew and  with  which  they had  emo­ tional   ties.  Thus   history  and   geography could  breathe life into our  understanding of Canadian  books. Conversely,  Canadian literature  could  deepen   our  understand­ ing of the land and its history.
But   this  kind  of  interdisciplinary  ap­ proach could  only  be successful  in  terms of  invigorating Canadian  studies  in  our schools  if it  aroused  support and  interest  outside  the  educational  system  itself.  We had  to gain  the co-operation of  those who wrote  and  published  books,  and our  ex­ periment gained  a  new  dimension and  a new  impetus  on  our  first  Canada Day, February 28th,  1971. Hugh Garner, Max Braithwaite, Miriam  Waddington, John Newlove,   Jeann   Beattie   and   Elizabeth Kimball were present,  as well as Premier  William   Davis   and    representatives  of three  publishing  companies.  Between them  they opened  up what  to most of the teachers  and   students  who  participated was an  entirely  new  literary  world.  Even the  sceptics  were  converted, and,  among those who attended, the old negative atti­ tudes  to  Canadian literature  evaporated. Teachers and  students came  from  as far away    as   North    Bay   and    Manitoulin Island, and  they  were  to  return on  each succeeding Canada  Day.  A  strong  sense of  pride   in  our   Canadian   writers   and affection  for  them  was  created  on  that day,  and   in  many  minds  a  new  interest  was engendered.
During  the   following   three    Canada
Days  we added   historians and  geograph­ ers  to our  guest  list.  Directors  of Educa­ tion,   superintendents   and   principals  of schools,   politicians   and    business   men,
 students  and   parents  became   involved, and  the number of Canadian literature courses in schools increased with  a grow­ ing momentum.
But  the  very  success  of  Canada  Day made  all the more  urgent a problem that had  pre-dated our activities: the need  for gathering and  disseminating information. Few  teachers  in Canada, we found, knew who   our  Canadian  authors  were,   what they had written, what  they had  written about.  We attempted to cope with the situation by collecting a resource library that   included seven  thousand Canadian books, and  over forty-five  thousand pages of related  media material taken  from newspapers,  magazines  and   periodicals. We  hired   television  crews  to  tape  inter­ views  with  writers,   which   we  loaned   to schools free  of charge. And  we set  up  an information bank,  so that  we  could  refer educators  to   specific   books   or   media  material to suit their  needs or advise  what books  would  be  best  for  specific  courses. As a result, our mail  has now grown  from ten  to twenty  letters  a  month during our first year, to between fifteen  hundred and two  thousand phone  calls  and  letters  per month requesting information.
Canada Day 1974 showed  the spread  of interest  in our experiment by the fact  that educators from every province of Canada attended.  More   than    fifty   writers   and thirty-seven  publishing companies  volun­ teered  their  services. But,  ironically, such success sounded  the knell for Canada Day in Port Colborne. It had created too much  interest; it  had  grown  too  large  for  our small  city  to contain. Canada Day  1975, prepared  by preliminary conferences, dis­ cussions  and  study  groups,  which  we de­ signed to exchange ideas and  remove  illu­ sions   between   regions,   is  being   held   at Mohawk  College in Hamilton.


127

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



Of course, Canada Day could  not have happened  without  the  writers   and  pub­ lishers   who   have   not   only   shown   that Canada has  a  literature of  its own,  but have  also been  responsible  for  the  break­  down  of old traditions and  the crumbling of  elitism   through   new  ideas   and   new insights   into  Canadian lifestyles.  Litera­ ture  has  at  last  been  given  its  true  place in   Canadian  Studies curricula,  but   the Port Colborne experiment still continues, for much  remains  to be done  in heighten­ ing   general   standards  of   criticism   and broadening  recognition  of   the   achieve­  ments of Canadian writers.

J.FOLEY





A. M. KLEIN'S LETTERS

SOME OF YOUR READERS may have  known and  corresponded with  my father, A. M. Klein.    A   group    of    scholars    is   now engaged  in searching for copies of my father's letters,  so that  they  can  be made available to researchers. It is also possible that  a selection  of letters will one  day  be published. Anyone  who  has  letters  and  is willing to provide us with copies should contact me at 4205 Madison Avenue, Montreal. Iwould  also  be  interested in hearing from  people  who have other  sorts of memorabilia, especially  photographs or manuscripts.

SANDOR J. KLEIN
 ON THE VERGE

*****   Dictionary    of   Canadian    Biography. Volume III,  1741   to   1770.   General  Editor, Francess G.  Halpenny. University of  Toronto Press,  $2o.oo. It  is  often   harder  to  celebrate consistent excellence than  to  comment on  the falls  and  rises of an  uneven progress. Thus, the sustained quality of the  Dictionary  of Canadian Biography   tends    to   leave    its   commentators, who   have   already given   notice of  its  virtues, with   little  new  to  say  in  that   direction. The standard of editorship has  not  diminished  now that    Frances  Halpenny   has   replaced  David Hayne; the   entries  remain  apt   and   concisely sufficient; the  two  introductory essays  on  the French forces  and   the  British   forces  in  North America  during  the    Seven   Years'  War,    by
W.   J.  Eccles   and   C.   P.  Stacey  respectively,
give a  needed  setting for  a great number of the
biographies; the  Glossary   of  Indian  Names   is more   than its  title   suggests, being   in  fact   an
excellent short  guide to  the  peoples with  whom the  British   and  French were  in  contact in  the mid-eighteent!J century.  Some   550  Canadians and  men  and  women  closely associated with Canada who died  during the  thirty years  under review   find   their   places   in  the   volume. Most are  still  French, for  the  change in  rulers   was too   recent  in   1 770   for   many   of  the   British occupiers  to   have    joined    the   ranks  of   the eligible. But  Wolfe  and  Pepperel are  there and a  number of lesser  officers  and  officials  and  of fur  traders including Henday and  Isham, while there is  a  fair   company of  Indians who  had caught the attention of the  yet barely  dominant white  peoples,  including powerful chiefs like Pontiac and  others less formidable but  in  their own   way   equally  intriguing,   like   the   Cree hunter known   as  Robinson Crusoe who,  with his son  Friday, was  noted as  a  killer  of whales on   Hudson's  Bay.  Clearly,  it   is  no   patrician mode   of  selection that  the  editors have   used. Any  contribution to  history has  rightly invited their  attention.
Noticing  the  time   that has  passed   between
tliis   and   the   last   volume, one   welcomes the news that  in future, thanks to a generous grant from  the  Canada Council, the  work  on  the Dictionary will  be able  to  proceed more rapid­ ly,  and   the  volumes   will  follow  each  other at shorter intervals.
