$7.50   per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE
N°·95
Winter, 1982
C;liRIBBEJIN CONNECTIONS
Articles

BY  STANLEY S. ATHERTON, EARLE BIRNEY, AUSTIN CLARKE, CLEMENT H. WYKE, SAMUEL SELVON, ELIZABETH SABISTON, MICHAEL CRIPPS, GEORGE RYGA
Poems and Stories

BY  IRVING LAYTON,  RICARDO STERNBERG,  MARGARET ATWOOD, CYRIL DABYDEEN, MICHAEL THORPE, AL  PURDY, LINDA ROGERS, ALEXANDRE L. AMPRIMOZ, E. F. DYCK
Reviews

BY  CLARK BLAISE, LORRAINE WEIR, YVON   BELLEMARE, CONSTANCE ROOKE, SHIRLEY NEUMAN,  JERRY WASSERMAN, JOHN  LENNOX, DOUGLAS BARBOUR, HARRY  ROE, PAT BARCLAY, DAVID O'ROURKE, ANN MANDEL,
PETER KLOVAN, JOHN  RIPLEY, AVIVA RAVEL, SIMON  RUDDELL, RON   HATCH,
LOUIS K. MACKENDRICK, DONALD STEPHENS, RICHARD G.  HODGSON,
M.  TRAVIS LANE, RENATE USMIANI,  J· KIERAN KEALY, GERALD THOMAS, M.G. OSACHOFF,  DIANA BRYDON, MARY MCALPINE,  MICHAEL THORPE, EVA-MARIE KROLLER,  GEORGE WOODCOCK
Opinions and  Notes

BY GWENDOLYN  DAVIES, DIANA BRYDON, C.  J. ACKERLEY
A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW








ON VISIBILITY





"ETHNICITY"  IS  ONE    OF   those  words  that   has  sprung   into general usage with several meanings, making lucid communication sometimes dubious. As a neutral  word to describe any cultural  subgroup,  it has a nice socio­ logical  ring  to it, redolent  with  fairness. But  when  I  not  so long  ago  heard  a woman begin her comment on a radio phone-in  programme  by saying "I  have a friend  who's ethnic,"  I realized how quickly ordinary  speech  can  reassign mean­ ing. Clearly,  no society loses its prejudices  overnight,  nor  the  people in  it  their expectations  of cultural  subgroups  not  their  own.  That  phone-caller's   assump­ tions, moreover, are given a more solid base than  might seem logical in Canada by the  way in which  "ethnicity" is discussed, and  by  the  parallel  attitudes  that underlie   the   term   "multiculturalism."  Although   "multicultural"  in   Canada means  more  or less what  it says  (in  the  South  Pacific,  by  contrast,  it  at  least covertly  and  perhaps  even openly  means  "multi-racial"), by  focussing  on  the variety of ethnic  sub-groups  that  exist in  Canada besides the  two  main  groups established by convention and  constitution,  the  term  effectively excludes English and  French  elements  from  consideration-or, by extension,  from  "ethnicity." Social scientists have terms for such processes of classification. They talk of "visible culture," or  (as  in  the  Multiculturalism issue of  journal  of  Canadian  Studies,  Spring  1982)  of the  " 'invisible' ethnics,"  in  this  case meaning  the  British, the Scandinavians,  and   the  Germans,   who  have  disappeared   into   the  apparent "norm."
Whether  it is a norm and  whether  they have disappeared  are  other  questions. The  Scots  have  scarcely  been  faceless in  Canada, nor  the  Irish;  Kitchener­ Waterloo  claims that  Everyone is German  there  during  Oktoberfest, but some of this is merely the theatre of ceremony at work. The  "Vertical  Mosaic" still enacts its family  compacts,  both  in  anglophone  and  francophone  circumstances,  and civil and military power in Canada remains in remarkably few hands.  One  might reasonably  wonder  to what  degree  Ethnic  Studies  merely  record  the  majority's  views of the minorities in  what  they see as "their"  midst-or,  pushed  further,

2

EDITORIAL

wonder at what  point claims for ethnic difference become transformed  into lines of demarcation, boundaries  of power and  possibility.
Robert Kroetsch and others have noted (in Canadian Ethnic Studies' special "Ethnicity and  Canadian Literature" issue)  how, with  Marlyn  and  Wiebe and Laurence  and  many others, "ethnic  genealogy" has become an  interest  of many recent writers; but the subject  has almost always been probed with an enfranchis­ ing rather  than an enclosing purpose, intended  to explain enough  to close cultural divisions rather  than  to define the limits of an "acceptable" heritage and  so the boundaries  of prejudice.  "Explaining" to others is, of  course, often  tantamount to "discovery" for oneself. Sometimes the desire for a  past shows all the signs of the adopted  child's quest for natural  parents:  motivated  sometimes  by the  need to  know,  in  order  to corroborate  independence,  and  sometimes  by  the  fear  of being separate  or isolated,  different  or  alone. The  notion  of  having  roots in  a Civilization  Elsewhere,  and  therefore  of Being Civilized  because  (and  perhaps only because)  of the  historical connection,  confounds many  people's attitudes  to the past  (and  the society they identify, often sentimentally  and inaccurately,  with the past)  and  to the present as well (and  the culture  they could  be shaping  and sharing  with their compatriots in the present). Many  immigrants  to a new land take not only  their  heritage  with  them  but  also their  feuds, and  whatever  legal status  they  may acquire,  they remain  citizens of their  old society as long as the feuds  go  on:   they  do  disservice  to  the  new.  In  Margaret  Laurence's   world, Manawaka serves as a crucible  in  which  characters  discover  a  lot  about  who­ they-are-now  by learning  the limitations of defining themselves and  their  culture by who-they-were-then. It's a cautionary  message as well as an enquiry into moral history, and worth learning  from.
Bonnie J. Barthold's  interesting  book Black Time   (Yale)  shows another  side
to this question.  Concerned  with attitudes  to time in the works of black writers, Barthold  queries  the  very notions of  past and  present as black  writers  have  in­ herited them-or had imposed upon them when European  definitions of  "civiliz­ ation" came  to  be considered  a "majority  culture"  for  global  empires.  An  oral (and  within  a  European system a  «visible")   culture,  African  society  operated with a cyclic notion of time rather  than a linear  (or "historical")  one, not unlike that  which  is available  to  Western  writers  in  "myth." But,  Barthold  avers,  as European norms  began  to  define Africans  from outside  Africa, African  culture was classified as somehow primitive:  "freed" from its pagan  reliance on myth, it was to European eyes still not imbued  with "history,"  and so was cast adrift  as a continent or culture of "developing" or transitional status, by definition of less con­ sequence  than  their  own. The  polemical level to Barthold's book challenges the bias of this attitude; the critical  level considers how black writers  in  Africa, the Caribbean, and  the  United  States  have  challenged  this  version of  their  history and made their cultural  inheritance a literary virtue.


3

EDITORIAL

She  might  have  added  black  Canadian writers,  too,  though there  are  only  a few and  though   those few  (Austin  Clarke,  for  example)  have  largely  emigrated from  the West  Indies. She might  have  pointed  out,  too, how  non-black  writers  in the  Caribbean have  also had  to investigate the  implications of  their  rootedness, as does the  Montreal-born Jamaican writer  John Hearne in  The  Sure  Salvation (Oxford), an  account of the class distinctions as well as the  racialism  aboard the slaving  ships;  or  All  of  Papa's  Children (Cairi),  by  the  late  chief  minister   of Trinidad, Albert  Maria Gomes, about  the  Portuguese minority in an  Afro-Asian community. A kind  of personal  credo  in Gomes' book sounds  yet  another note: "I refuse,"  he writes,  " ... to  join the  new  diaspora of embittered nostalgics  in their  Canadian winters, Australian summers and  desolate  regressions to their  once mother-country. Madeira exported   Papa, and   the  way  I see it,  that's about   as much  exporting a family  can  take  in  a generation." It's  an  implicit   critique of the  kind  of  passage  one finds, for  example, in  Cyril  Dabydeen's story  collection Still Close to the  Island  (Commoner's Publishing) : in the  falsely eloquent  tropi­ cal tropes   ("in the  angle  of virulent  sun  I watched her  and  dwelt  on  the  vam­  pire") or in the socially-blasting understated realism  (" 'Where d'you come from?'  Max  was used to the question; used to being  told  no as well") . But  if  Gomes  (or Gomes'  character) might  have disputed the  emigration to Canada of writers  like Barbados-born Clarke,  Guyana-born Dabydeen, Tobago-born  Lorris  Elliott,  or Trinidad-born Samuel  Selvon,  for  him  to  prejudge their  tone  or their  subject  is once again  to miss the  point: to fail to see how  visible ethnicity within  a Western  culture remains a challenge  to social comprehension, and  how  the  literature that  enquires into  such  visibility will likely involve  both  nostalgia  and  confrontation.
These  terms  epitomize  much  about  Canada's long  relationship with  the  Carib­ bean  in  particular and  with  black  people  in  general. As John N.  Grant's  Black Nova  Scotians   (N.S. Museum) points out,  there  were  blacks  in  Canada as early as 16o6,  African slaves at  Fort  Louisbourg, and  slave  sales in  Halifax; but  atti­ tudes to black people were also honed  by the American Revolution and  Civil War,  for there  were "Black  Loyalists"  to praise  and  "fugitive slaves"  to aid -perhaps at least as much  for political reasons, at the time,  as for humanitarian ones.  Many of the  books that  have  taken  account of  the  presence  of black  people  in  Canada have  been  anecdotal as well as  documentary, from  Benjamin Drew's Narratives of the  Fugitive Slaves  in  Canada  (1856), through Robin   Winks'  The Blacks  in Canada ( 1971)  and Crawford Kilian's Go Do Some  Great  Thing: Black  Pioneers in  British  Columbia  ( 1978), to John   Grant's Black  Nova   Scotians. Two  other  recent  books  are  Michael   Bradley's  The Black  Discovery   of America  (Personal Library)  which  tries  to prove-with  what   it  calls  "amazing evidence," of the Chariots of the  Gods  sort-that  African   mariners crossed  the  Atlantic in  pre­ historic times, and  Daniel  G. Hill's The  Freedom-Seekers: Blacks in Early Canada (Book Society). Together these books tell of a border-crossing escapee  who arrived

4

EDITORIAL

disguised as a Quaker  woman, of the Niagara  Underground Railroad,  of  success­ ful boxers, singers, preachers,  and  teachers, of military  participation, and of the importance of the Baptist  Mission schools in educating  black  children;  they also tell of failures:  of famine  in the late I 8th century, which led  many freed slaves to seek greater  freedom  in  Sierra  Leone,  of  the  shipment   of   three  boatloads  of Maroons  to Canada to try to resolve a  ]amaican political  problem, and of failed economic experiments.  There  were also failed  political  experiments  involving a possible trade-off  (Canada for Guadeloupe)   between  England  and  France,  and the  possible union  between  Canada   and  various  British  Caribbean   colonies. It appears that  when race didn't  get in the way, economics did, as it has from early on.  An  article  in  the  Spring I g8 I issue of  the  Dalhousie  Review  records  how British attempts  in the post-Revolutionary years to contain  the new United  States by limiting its trade routes -by instituting an enclosing trade connection between Nova  Scotia  and  the  Caribbean-failed, on  the  one  hand,  because  of  a  lack of  Nova  Scotian  capital and  surplus  food,  and  on  the  other  because  it  was the illicit trade  between  the  United  States and  the British  West  Indies  between
I 783 and I 8o2  that  helped  the Caribbean  recover from  its economic  doldrums. A similar story is told, about  another era, in Jacques  Mathieu's academic  treatise Le Commerce  entre la Nouvelle-France  et les Antilles au  XVIIJe siecle (Fides); after a slow Start, trade was developing rapidly in the I 750's between Quebec  and the Caribbean   (mostly with Guadeloupe  and Santa Domingo), with fishoil, coal, animals,  peas, and  flour being exchanged  for sugar,  tobacco,  coffee, and  cotton. But there were legal problems, and political ones; after Bigot imposed an embargo on the export of wood, the trade  routes essentially became economic history.
Such  routes  have  perhaps  been  reopened  in  recent  years  not  by  fishoil and sugar  alone  but  also by cultural  discovery and  cultural  exchange.  Journals  like Ariel  (Calgary), WLWE  (Guelph), The   Toronto   South   Asian  Review,  and Ecriture  fran(aise dans le monde  ( Sherbrooke)  all provide a context for Canadian literature  that  is larger  than  Europe or North America;  Canadian publishers are publishing   West  Indian   writers   (Talonbooks,   for  example,   recently  released Lennox  Brown's The  Twilight   Dinner and Other  Plays, a set of ironic comedies and  private tragedies in a non-paradisal, NFL-and-supermarket-and-Diana-Ross­ dominated  culture);  Canadian writers  (Atwood,  Birney, Ryga,  Mandel,  Purdy, Pat Lane, Diane Giguere, and  D. G. Jones)  are imaginatively  visiting the Carib­  bean and  Latin  America  and  writing out  their observations  and  understandings of their acquired sense of Otherness;  Caribbean  writers are responding to Canada, both as a stereotype of opportunity and as a palpable  economic  presence in their own midst;  and  writers of Caribbean  origin, writing  in  Canada, are  making  an enormously  vital  literary  territory  out  of their  substantial  ethnic  heritage.  They are  writing  out  of  their  awareness,  too, of the  pressures that  sometimes  attend  social visibility.  We can  learn  from such enterprises more  about  how  Canadian

5

EDITORIAL


society  changes and about how it sometimes resists change, and  about how culture, politics,  and  economics intertwine. For  in  their continuing endeavour to  establish both  their international separateness and  their  international  visibility, Canadians have  still to remember these  interconnections, to  remember that separateness does not  have  to  mean the  severing of all  links  with other worlds and   other people's values, and   that acquiring an  international cultural  presence is  also  a  political
gesture and  an  economic act.

W.N.









fj(BRIZIO
 


Irving Layton


for William Goodwin

Fabrizio  is wise. The  stars tell him all
he needs to know:  that  foreplay  ends in boredom or despair,  that  greed and lust agitate
the treacherous ant  heaps till disaster comes
to smash them  with the conqueror's thicker heel.
He scans the heavens for sense and  there  finds none, nor in his wife's scrawny arms and  devotions;
sons can disappoint but see him rally
to advance a nephew's  human need for gold, a fair face;  recollection  and desire
stirring the embers in his slack loins till a scholar's  self-irony snuffs out the small flame licking at his groin
to leave him seedy before the noble's  choice
'twixt sex and death: knowing  the choice  is each  man's to the very end though the priests and  Father Pirrone rave and wave their superstitious crucifixes
to scare satyrs back to their  forbidden wolds
and  the diseased bourgeois deed  his estates to the cretinous  son, the spoilt daughters.

Cuba
December  31,1981

6


THREJID JIND NEEDLE
(Brazil)




Stern, starched, moustachioed, my great-uncle spent  the days policing  the  stones in his garden, the  mangoes on  his trees.
He  spoke  to me of the emperor.

Sinhazinha, my aunt,  the seamstress, purblind with cataracts at sixty-five, would  hand  me the needle  and  ask: child,  thread this for  me.

If I moved  my head  a certain way
Sinha was inside  the aquarium lost among the ferns,
sewing  and  muttering prayers
oblivious  to bright  fish
threading in and  out  of her  hair.

Silver  needle,  golden  thimble,
I will sew your bride  her  dress.

Sanctuary of boredom, that  house was a world,  a system complete, self-sufficient  as the aquarium.

So who was it that  interfered, introducing into  the  house
a device  that  could  thread needles?

I no longer  remember.
But soon after  I touched it
the contraption would  not  work or would  not  work as well
and  Sinha, suspecting
a demon  in  those gears, turned her  eyes towards  one lost  inside  the  aquarium
and  asks, again  and  again:
child,  thread this for me.
 




Ricardo Sternberg

















































7

TROPICAL TRAUMAS

Images of the Caribbean
in Recent Canadian Fiction


Stanley S. Atherton





l:VEL WRITERS  NEVER G<VE  US   the stmight  goods about the places they visit, according to Annette, the protagonist  of Margaret Atwood's short story, "A Travel  Piece."1  Persuaded  that  her own  readers,  "even  the  ones who would never go to the places she described  ... did  not  want  to hear  about danger or even unpleasantness," Annette filters out the reality of violent crime and the ever increasing examples of pollution-"small black beads of oil ... appear­ ing on the white sand  beaches" -and substitutes  cliched fantasy:   A  gem of an island almost undiscovered by tourists, with brilliant white sand beaches and blue­ green lagoons complemented  by the  friendliness  of the  people.
Writers of more serious fiction are expected to treat  their  readers differently, of course, and they usually do. Nonetheless, Canadian readers  nurtured on  popular northern  notions of paradisal islands in the snn are likely to find recent Canadian writing set in the  Caribbean  increasingly disconcerting,  for  with  few exceptions the  tone  of these works has  been  overwhelmingly  dark.   In  most  of  them  the idyllic dreamland of the travel  pages has been replaced  by a nightmare  world of tropical  traumas  in  which the lives of dislocated  protagonists  are  circumscribed and  defined  by elements of confusion, fear,  hatred, agonized  introspection  and physical and spiritual suffering. Almost always the central characters  are outsiders. In Diane Giguere's L'eau est Profonde (translated as Whirlpool) ( 1965), in Juan Butler's Canadian  Healing Oil  ( 1974), and  in the stories in  Harold  Horwood's Only the Gods Speak  ( 1979), for example, the protagonists  are mainly young or middle-aged Canadian tourists hoping to exchange  the rigours of northern  winters for adventure  under  the tropical  sun.2   In  Margaret Atwood's  Bodily  Harm  the central character  is a Canadian   journalist doing  a travel  article  on a Caribbean island called St. Antoine; and in Timothy Findley's Famous Last Words the narra­ tor is a writer and close associate of the Duke and Duchess of Windsor during  their wartime exile in the Bahamas.3
The literary possibilities of using an outsider as protagonist  are essentially ironic,
for there is an inevitable discrepancy  between the  point of view subscribed  to by

8

TROPICAL TRAUMAS


the visitor and  that  of the local residents,  an inconsistency  that  may  be recognized only occasionally  by the  visitor,  but  one  which  is clearly  evident   to  the  reader  if the writer  is any good at all. In Harold Horwood's Only the Gods Speak, a collec­ tion  of seventeen  stories  of which  ten  are set in unspecified  Caribbean  locations,  the  protagonists encounter various  local customs, attitudes, and  intentions; and  in their   individual  reactions  to  them   move  towards   their   personal   salvation   or damnation -usually the latter. Many  of Horwood's protagonists are  mis-shapen, emotionally and  spiritually, and  fail  to  find  possibilities  for  redemption  in  the situations in which  they find  themselves.  In one story, "The Sound  of Thunder," a group of life's failures drinking in the  garden  bar  of a  "hilltop resort"  dismiss the significance of a local  religious  celebration they  can  hear  going  on,  but  they have  nothing to substitute for  it,  and their  evening  ends  in  meaningless  orgiastic  revelry.  In  another  story,  "Through  Dreaming Towns,"  an   insensitive   young Canadian and  his girlfriend spend  Christmas Eve getting high  on marijuana and daiquiris. They  spend  the rest of the night and  part of Christmas morning wander­ ing  through the  town,  totally  divorced   from  its life,  unable   to  transcend  their chemically induced  sensual   responses  and  to  get  beyond   vulgar   metaphors and their  feeling  that everything was "freaky" and  "outside your  head  like."
The  visitors'  failure  to touch  local  reality  is echoed  in a number of Horwood's other  stories.  Deaths of  one  sort  or  another -physical, emotional, spiritual - take  place in most of them: in "Island of Innocents" the  North American owner of  a  tropical island  is  killed  when  he  flies his  private plane  into  a  hillside;  in "Coming to an  End" the  protagonist commits  suicide.  In  "Among the  Snarks" Helen,  the  wife  of an  enthusiastic Canadian  naturalist, en joys "the  continuous sunshine and  the  lush  vegetation" of  the  tropics  but   becomes  more  and   more paranoid about local  attitudes and  the  possible  dangers posed  by  local  fauna. "'Snarks' was her  name  for  all the  native  monsters," people  included. Watching one  of the  local  boys, "she  wondered about  the  mixture of Spanish and  Indian blood that  had  produced such  notable physical beauty  ... after  all Spaniards were addicted to  bullfights,   and   Indians of  central   America used  to  sacrifice  people by  the  thousands, throwing them  into  wells or  tearing out  their  hearts  . . . and they'd   punished their  own  children with  thorns  and  stinging nettles; she'd  seen pictures  of it  in  the  museums; the  Spaniards, too-they'd  been  even  worse,  if possible. Helen  was glad  her  ancestors  had  come from  northern Europe with  no taint  of such  darkness in  their  souls,  and  had  settled  in  Canada, where  people were  self-righteous, perhaps, but  neither  cruel  nor  violent." When her  husband picks  up  an  iguana, "Helen covered  her  mouth to  choke  back  a  scream. Some lizards  were  poisonous.  And  this one certainly  looked  dangerous-beautiful,  but dangerous, a deadly  work of art  by some heathen  god  who  enjoyed  black  jokes." Inevitably there  is a  point  at  which  Helen  can  no longer  handle the  pain  caused by her  failure to accept the  world  around her.  That point  comes  when  a  fellow

9

TROPICAL TRAUMAS

Canadian tells her  that  the innocuous  looking sea  snake  her  husband  has  just handled is one of the world's most deadly reptiles. The  resolution is tellingly understated  in the final sentences of the story:  "She  looked at  Ed....  then  she went inside and picked up the telephone. She had trouble making the operator understand  her,  but  at last she got through  to the  airport,  and  a friendly  voice speaking in perfect English."


bE PROTAGONIST  OF   DIANE  GIGUERE'S  short  novel, Whirl­
pool, a young Montreal  woman named  Nathalie, shares Helen's  ambivalent  reac­
tion to the Caribbean  milieu. Although  the novel takes place primarily  in  Mont­ real, and  concerns Nathalie's attempts  to extricate  herself from a rapidly souring affair with Yves, a married man several years her senior, the Montreal scenes are balanced  by Nathalie's  recollections of the beginning  of her  affair  with  Yves on the island of St. Croix the year before. "Down  in St. Croix [she muses], that's  the phrase that  touches off the song which has oppressed  me since  I returned." The reminiscence  is bittersweet-memories of the  "whispering  tropical  night"  and passionate  lovemaking  are  tempered  by  Nathalie's  continuing   concern  for  lost innocence  and the unforeseen consequences of her infatuation. At times she feels the island has cast a spell on her -the word  and  its variants  recur  a significant number of times in the novel-and that she acted  under  the influence of forces over which she had  no control; at other times the Caribbean experience is "noth­ ing but  an evil dream  in which I wept, cried  out,  and  shuddered  in  a hell that never existed." For the most part, however, the memories lead to negative feelings, of being bruised  and  soiled by her St.  Croix  experience,  and  to  the  depressing recognition that  "the  woman Yves made of  me [on the island]  grows like a weed in my body."  For  Nathalie,  the garden  has  been contaminated forever, and  the reader is left with the overwhelming image of  paradise  lost, of dream  turned  into nightmare.
Juan  Butler's Canadian  Healing Oil, a curious work about  a Montreal  book­ seller who sees himself as St. John,  the Apostle whom  Christ  loved the most, also deals with distorted  dreams. Early in the novel St. John  is suddenly  impelled  to travel the world in search of the meaning  of life. The  narrative  of  his  journey is surrealistic  and  disjointed, interspersed  with  photographs, labels,  advertisements,  sketches,  poems  in  various  languages,   and   epitaphs   from  statues   and   burial plaques, many of them of Caribbean  origin. His initial stop is  (appropriately or coincidentally)  the island of St. John,  and the first thing that draws his attention  is a 1733 proclamation listing penalties of maiming, dismemberment, torture,  and death for disobedient or rebellious slaves. This is followed by the history of a slave rebellion and its inevitable bloody suppression by the authorities. So begins a long

10

TROPICAL TRAUMAS

series of  anecdotes  and   commentaries  which  deliberately   negate   the  popular
North American  dream  of edenic islands in the sun.
To disabuse his readers of the idea that  the Caribbean  is a paradise  on earth, Butler  (like Atwood)  inserts mocking examples of tourist  brochure  prose:  "over thirty jewel-hued bays and inlets await your pleasure. Beachcomb. Daydream. Or adventure  your way along twisting trails, catching a glimpse now and then of abandoned eighteenth  century sugar  plantations." Against  this lyrical illusion he sets a  real  world  in  which  images of violence abound:  what  St.  John  notices about a Dominican carpenter  is his "tarantula fingers";  women in a Puerto Rican slum are "slovenly," their men "slouchy and drunky"  and  the children  tough and wild, "all  looking as if they'd  cut your throat  just to see the blood rush out."  In St. Thomas,  young blacks are "warriors all," and random  violence occurs without warning: "a car pulls up, machine gun poking out a rear window. Bullets spatter against  pink and  white masonry, whiz through  trees and  flowers";  it's "Chicago in the Caribbean."
Predictably  St. John's travels in the Caribbean  dystopia  bring him no answers and  no peace. Like many  of the characters  in Horwood's  stories, he fails to  con­ nect with the life around  him, and in the end he is murdered   (near  the grave  of Sir Thomas  Warner, colonizer of St. Kitts)  by a crazed black man with "a crown of thorns  rammed  into  a shaggy, bleeding Afro."  The  self-styled St.  John,  best loved disciple, dies at  the  hands  of a posturing  Christ  figure -a  fitting  end  to Butler's unremittingly  bleak Caribbean  vision.
Timothy  Findley's latest novel, Famous Last Words, is not  primarily  a  Carib­ bean  novel, though  some significant events which occupy  about  a  quarter of the novel's 400 pages are set in  Nassau.4   The  Bahamian  sequence  is  essentially self­ contained,  linked  to the  rest of the novel mainly through  the  personalities of its principal  fictional characters -the Duke and  Duchess of  Windsor  and  the  bril­ liantly  recreated   Hugh  Selwyn  Mauberley   (Ezra  Pound's  famous  persona)   as writer, bon vivant,  and  intimate  of the Windsors. But the sequence may also be read emblematically, encapsulating  the larger  world  the  novel represents, a  pic­ ture of hell on earth  of which Hieronymous Bosch might  be proud.
Almost all the  characters  in the novel are  warped  in some way, displaying  a series of moral imperfections  which range from the silly to the vicious. Elsa  Max­ well, who  takes  the  Windsors'  underclothes  to  New  York  once  a  fortnight   for laundering, rents  out  the  Duchess's lingerie, offering  her  friends  the  chance  to "dance in  the slip  that  danced  next  the shirt  that  was  worn  by  the  Prince  of Wales"! The  brittle  bitchiness of the Duchess, and  her  total  insensitivity to any­ one or anything that  does not further  her outrageous ambition,  alienates her from nearly  everyone  in  Nassau;  the  Duke,  whom  one  acquaintance calls  a  "hen­ pecked impotent  twit,"  spends much  of his time in  spiritual  self-abuse. Even  at official functions  "he  could barely look ... people in  the eye or hear  their  names


II

TROPICAL TRAUMAS

without a gun going off that  was loaded with accusations  against  himself." Hugh Selwyn Mauberley  is a calculating,  traitorous  viper.  Sir  Harry   Oakes,  the  im­ mensely wealthy Canadian who has settled in the Bahamas  to avoid death duties, is "a  walking summary  of all that is crude, contemptible and  mean."  His son-in­ law  Alfred  de  Marigny  is a  pederast.  And  Harry   Reinhardt,  an  associate  of Mauberley's, is a vicious murderer.
The  two  major  events  that  take  place  in  the  Bahamian   sequence  are  both horrific. The first is the deadly disruption of the garden  party the Windsors hold, ostensibly to aid the war effort but really to celebrate  and  display their  redecora­ tion of the Governor's  mansion. In the midst of the festivities a small plane drops a gasoline tank on the main lawn. As it descends it is shot at by a member  of the Duke's  bodyguard  and  it explodes in mid-air,  loosing a  holocaust  of flames on the assembled guests.

Everyone rose and  ran.  First  they went  one way. Then they  went  another. Then another. And  then  it struck  them  all at once. They were  trapped. There would  be no running anywhere. On every side they were  blocked  by marquees; by the  Man­ sion;  by the ambulance at  the  top of the drive  and  by the  press of  motorcars that  filled  every  gap  between  the  trees.  Five  hundred  people  and  more  were  entirely hemmed  in and  there  was not a hope of getting out.... By now  the marquees were going  up  one  by one  in  candy-stripe volcanoes  causing an  enormous, roaring up­  draught which  lifted  the remnants of the canvas  and  the  bright  green  papers  into  the air  like burning flags.
More   and   more   people  were  rising  from   the  ground. Fire   was  flooding   out around them  over  the stones and  shells and  through the grass. There was a second conclusive  movement, again   en  masse,  towards   the  canvas enclosures   that   only moments before  had  offered  shelter  from  the  sun.  Now,  there  was  nothing but  a wall  of flame  and  a  corps  of struggling human  torches  flailing  against the  holo­ caust,  drowning for  lack of air  in waves of fire and  smoke.

This hellish set-piece is followed by the grisly murder  of Sir Harry  Oakes, who is bludgeoned to death  in his own home at the instigation  of Mauberley  because he had discovered a German  plot to spirit the Windsors away from  the Bahamas  by submarine.


A CAREFUL  READING of these  hellish events,  the  paradisal setting in which they are ironically placed, and  the characters  who figure largely
in them,  suggests that  Findley's writing  is essentially  parabolic. That   is to say, what we are offered in the Bahamian  sequence of Famous  Last Words  is a cau­ tionary  moral  tale. In  this part  of the novel at  least, Findley  is being  as openly didactic as a serious novelist dare be these days, offering the reader  an  unambigu­  ous portrait  of evil in contemporary  life, and  a pointed  reminder  of  its ubiquity.

12

TROPICAL TRAUMAS

Margaret Atwood's most recent novel, Bodily Harm, is also about evil, and particularly  about  the  consequences  of failing  to  recognize  and  come  to  grips with it. Arguably Atwood's  most depressing work, the novel is an intense study of an  individual's exposure  to  a  set  of  conditions  and  actions  which  are  totally alien to anything  she has known before, and of her failure to profit in any signifi­ cant way from the experience. The protagonist in Bodily  Harm is Rennie Wilford, a Toronto  freelance  journalist  in  her  late  twenties who  concentrates  on  trendy trivia  called  "lifestyles" and  who is sent to the Caribbean  island of  St. Antoine (near  Grenada) to do a Fun in the Sun travel piece. Almost at once and  against her inclination,  she is caught  up in local politics -the  island  has  only recently obtained  its independence  from Britain and is about to hold its first "democratic" elections -and  very quickly she learns of the real island  world  that  lies behind the tourist brochure  illusion of sunny tranquility.  With a seventy  per cent  unem­ ployment  rate  and  sixty per cent of the population  under  twenty, a  predilection on the part  of the  police to use violence and  on the  part  of  everyone else to feel politically involved, the stage is set for dramatic confrontation. As Michael  Dixon pointed  out in a review of the novel, "given the opportunistic nature  of the  par­ ticipants,  the course of events is predictable:  subverted democratic  elections lead to assassination to abortive  revolution to the tyrannous exercise of brute  force in the name of order."5
As these events unfold, Rennie receives a series of shocks to her sense of what is "decent"-a term  that  echoes the  prim  respectability of her  upbringing  in the provincial  Ontario town of Griswold. She is, for example, disagreeably surprised to learn  that  a supply of Maple  Leaf tinned  ham sent by the  Canadian  govern­ ment to aid hurricane victims was used at the Independence Day banquet to feed "leading  citizens," and that  $5oo,ooo from the same source for  the same purpose was being used to bribe electors. She is appalled  to see the  police give a vicious beating  to a man in the street. Everywhere around  her there is violence, menace, and threat  of further  violence, yet she remains unconvinced  that  things are really dangerous   for her until  a  politician  with  whom she  has  become  acquainted is brutally  murdered. She makes immediate  plans to leave  on the  next  flight  out, but  it is too late. The  airport  has been shut  down.
Nothing  that  has happened so far,  however, is adequate preparation for  her arrest,  "on suspicion,"  and  her imprisonment  under  degrading  conditions  in  the old British fort  she  had  visited earlier  as a  tourist.  The  prison  sequence  which follows is clearly the heart of the novel, for it is here in her cell that  Rennie ought to reflect on the meaning  of her predicament  and, if we are to hope for any kind of salvation  for  her,  on  the  ways she  understands  and  copes  with  reality.  Un­ happily there  is little in her  background  to prepare  her for the  challenge.  When her cell-mate Lora is beaten senseless by two guards, "Rennie wants to tell  them to stop. She wants to be strong enough  to do that  but she isn't, she can't  make a

TROPICAL TRAUMAS

sound,  they'll  see her. She doesn't  want  to see, she  has  to see, why  isn't  someone covering  her  eyes?"  Instead  of acting,  Rennie fantasizes  about her  release;  and when the  beating is over she worries as much  about a burnt-out light  bulb  in the corridor ("I should  tell someone")  as about  Lora.  Rennie does  realize  a limited capacity to respond, to reach  out  and  hold the suffering Lora,  but  as a gesture  of compassion  and  understanding it  is too  little  and  too  late.  Survival for  Rennie Wilford  lies in clinging  to what  is reasonably and  "Canadianly" normal: even  at the  end  of the  novel she remains  unwilling  or  unable to  cope  when  confronted with  the  harsh  realities  that  have  invaded her  world  of  comfortable  illusions.
In  Bodily Harm and  in  other  novels and  stories  referred   to  in  this  essay, the
Caribbean is anything but  paradisal. One   after   another these  works  of  fiction inform  us that  beyond  our  dream  of the  tropical garden and  behind   the  tourist brochure illusion  of idyllic  islands  in  the  sun  lie  the  same  harsh  realities  of life we know  in a cold climate,  or anywhere else for  that  matter. In  recent  years  an increasing number  of  Canadian writers  have  established  new  perspectives   and found  fresh  images  and  metaphors by locating their  work  in  the  Caribbean and other  "exotic" places. In doing so, they are finding  innovative means of achieving the traditional ends of all good art: to shake  us up, to tell us more about ourselves, and  to force  us to exchange too-cherished myths  about   the  nature of things  for new insights  and  understanding into  the  dilemmas of existence  we  all share.


NOTES

1 Margaret   Atwood,  Dancing   Girls  and   Other  Stories    (Toronto:  McClelland   &
Stewart,  I 977),  pp. I45-6o.
2  Juan   Butler,  Canadian  Healing   Oil   (Toronto:  Peter  Martin   Associates,  I974); Diane Giguere, L'eau  est profonde  (Ottawa: Le Cercle du Livre de France,  I965), transl. by Charles  Fullman  as Whirlpool (Toronto: McClelland  & Stewart,  1966); Harold  Horwood, Only  the Gods Speak  (St. John's: Breakwater  Books, I979).
8  Margaret Atwood, Bodily Harm (Toronto: McClelland  & Stewart,  I98I); Timothy
Findley, Famous  Last Words  (Toronto: Clarke, Irwin,  I98I).
4 The dust  jacket of the original hardcover  edition, which features  a fiery explosion in a tranquil  tropical  setting, suggests the  importance of  the  Bahamian   sequence  of events in the novel.
6  Michael Dixon, untitled review, Fiddlehead, I 32 (April  I 982),  88.






THE BOOM

Margaret Atwood


It's  a  freak  accident. This  man,  a captain, was loading an  engine, and  for  some  reason  the  boom  swung  around or  came  down   (the stories  differ) and  killed him.

Here,   where  there  are  few  printed   pages  and   no  faces  on  screens and  the radio  flickers off and  on depending on the weather, this man was one  of the few who could  carry  words,  island  to island.  People knew  him,  they  trusted  what  he said.  Therefore he spoke  carefully.

The ship  is coming  into  the harbour now,  bringing the  body. Right now  there's no  moon.  The   people  gather by  the  wharf   to  receive him,  he is carried off, some cry, others  have  not  yet discovered  what they will do or say. A few bottles are passed  around but  tonight they don't drink  much,  you drink  at a celebration.

A man  from  the  outside,  a  man  from   the  company, explains  how valuable this  man  was;  he  points  to  the  excellence   of  the  coffin, which  the  company has  supplied.  The people   take  note  of  this.  If the  company had  supplied  an  inferior  coffin  it  would  have  been  a scandal.  Nevertheless, everyone  knows  that   the  company and   this man   were  enemies.  The   dead   man   carried  words  from  island   to island  and  they  were  not  words  the company wanted  said.

Now  the  man   himself  is a  word,  he  pronounces himself  into   the crowd, into   the  harbour, into  the  dimly  lit  houses  on  the  hillside and  the darkness beyond,  there's  a ripple, an echo.  The  people stand silently,  listening  to him.

MEETING GEORGE LAMMING IN JAMAICA


Earle Birney


IFIRST  BECAME AWARE of  Gemge  Lammillg   when  I 'ead
In the Castle of my Skin, which Michael Joseph  had  brought  out in London  in
1953. Naipaul  was not yet into print, and Lamming's was the first work of fiction by a "British  West Indian" writer that  I had  read, since C. L. R. James'  Minty Alley, to impress me both with its reality as a record  and  its artistry  as fiction. It was not  only the story of his own growing-up,  a  poor  black  boy on  a  British­ colonial  island;  it  was, as  Gerald  Moore  has  remarked,   the  "collective  auto­ biography  of a whole Barbadian  village." But Lamming's The Emigrants, which appeared  the  next  year, was too formless and  discursive  for  my  liking,  and  I came away from  it with the uneasy feeling that  its author,  like his boatload  of characters,  had  taken  flight to an  England  that  would  either  reject  him,  or  by accepting, turn  him into just another  permanent  expatriate. It wasn't  until  1962, when  I  began  my  "homework" on  Caribbean  literature, in  preparation  for  a reading  tour, that  I realized how wrong I was, and  that  Lamming  had  brought out  two more  novels, Of Age and  Innocence  and  Season  of  Adventure, whose emotional  power and maturity  proved him to be already  an established writer  in our common language.  From the press notices, however, I gathered  he still made his home in London,  and  I did not  expect to find  him in Jamaica when  I  took sea passage there  from Trinidad  that  November.
I remember  indeed, as I sat in the darkened  lounge  of the  Golfito  (while  an exotic dawn  wasted itself on the harbour,  and  I waited  for the usual  unpleasant­ ness of Customs and  Immigration), that  I was worrying  whether there  would be anyone on this island I'd ever known or any occasion at all to sound  out a single Canadian poem.
But the clang of the lowered gangway had scarcely died when the ship's purser
came padding  in, with an unusually deferential  manner, leading  three  strangers to my table. A reporter  from the island daily, armed  with smile and  camera,  was followed  by  a  handsome  light-brown   man   who  introduced    himself  as  John Hearne,  the English professor/novelist on the  Mona  campus  of the University  of the West Indies.  I had  written  him without  answer  but  he now  assured  me  he had scheduled  a week's list of things for me to do. Hearne  then introduced  me to

16

BIRNEY & LAMMING


a  tall  very  white  man,  the  Acting/High  Commissioner for  Canada. The  latter told  me  he  had  already secured  me  a room  and  even  cleared   my  bags  through Scylla  and  Charybdis -and  here  was a  packet  of  mail  from  home.  The  world was wonderful again, and  became  almost  unreal  when  I found  myself beside  the AjHC and  being  chauffered rapidly, red  ensign  flying, from  the  stinking  docks of Port  Royal  through a flowering  countryside to cozy quarters in  a tropical sort of Sussex inn  called  the  Maryfield.
There the  desk  clerk  handed  me  a  note  to  phone,   as  soon  as  possible,  an unknown Doctor Figueroa at  the  University. I rang  and  got  a  voice  deep  and jovial,  the  accent   good  London academic with  a  hint  of  Jamaican lilt.  When was it convenient for  him  to pick me up for something cool and  a spot  of lunch at  the  faculty club?  John Hearne would  be  joining  us there  and,  o  yes, an  old friend  is with  me who  wants  to meet  you -George  Lamming.
The  two arrived in a battered Morris.  "Fig," as he preferred  to be called,  was instantly memorable, a  huge  chuckling  fellow  in  his forties,  a  wide  multi-racial face  haloed  with  grey beard  and  alive with  warmth and  humour. His education, he told  me,  was as hodge-podge as his genes:  grade  school  on  the  island, secon­ dary   in  Massachusetts,  college  and   graduate  degrees   from   the   University  of London. He  had  only  recently  returned from  lecturing at  that  institution to  be Mona's Professor   of  Education. George   and   Fig  had   been   postgrad   students together   and   had  later   developed   programs for  the  BBC.  But  they  were  both quite  plainly  happy to be back  in Jamaica, and  at  this  moment   bent  on sharing their  euphoria with  me.
I was surprised to learn  they had read some of my verse, and  that  George  knew Down the Long Table. Fig  had  published  only a single  chapbook of verse at  this time,  but  had   another  in  a  local  press.  George  got  him   talking   half-seriously about  a  third  project:  translating Horace into  calypso  rhythms! I was  curious to  hear  a  sample, but   they  preferred   listening   to  whatever  literary   gossip  I'd brought from  Trinidad. There I'd  been  seeing something of  the  island's  leading young  playwright, Errol  Hill,  and  the  poet  Derek  Walcott, who  interviewed me on  radio.   Also,  my  hosts  had   been  David   Wyke,  the  sculptor-doctor,  and   his gifted  wife, Marguerite, first woman  senator of the  West  Indian Federation; the Wykes  had  lived  in Toronto and  been  contributors and  supporters of the  Cana­ dian Forum  in  the  thirties. Inevitably with  any  conversation about  Trinidadian personalities, our  talking came  to focus  on  "Nella'' (C.  L. R.)  James, Marxi t comrade of  mine   in  London  in  depression   years.  I was  happy  to  learn   that  Lamming and  James had,  more  recently,  become friends and  political  allies when both  backed  Premier Manley's shortlived Federation of  the  West  Indies.
This  union  of Jamaica, Trinidad, Barbados and  some  smaller  islands,  born  in I958,  had  dissolved  a  few  months  before  my  visit,  whereupon James,  never  a disciplined  politician,  had   quarrelled  publicly   with   Manley,  declared  he   was

17

BIRNEY & LAMMING

"through   with  the  West  Indies,"  and  returned   "for  good"  to  London.  There was a rumour he had even abjured  Marxism.




tERE WAS A  CERTAIN UNREALITY for me, sitting gnawing  at a  mango  under  a  grape-like  bougainvillea  that   cooled  the  verandah   of  this thatched  guest-lodge Tenniel  might  have  drawn  for  Alice in  her  Wonderland. For  I  was feeling immediate  kinship with  two  natives  to  these  isles whom  I'd met only minutes  before. A strange  variety of hummingbird zinged over  hedges of oleander  and  hibiscus beside me;  beyond  the  too-green  lawns  lignum   vitae flamed and royal palm trees towered. Yet however diverse our flora we three were cousin writers and  brothers political, united  in puzzling over the  peculiar  tangles that  empires leave for their ex-colonials to straighten. And  we were agreed  that, of all the "British"  West Indians  we had  known, C.  L. R.  James  was the  most eloquent in voice and in print, a many-talented, informed  and  courageous fighter for  the  freedom  of exploited  peoples, whether  in  Africa,  the  U.S.S.R.  or  the U.S.A. His apparent giving-up was a shock.
Lamming  now told me Nella had  been seriously hurt  in a car  accident  in the
U.S., and looked aged and bent from it. It was hard for me to accept that  image, for I remembered  him as a youth in Britain in the thirties, when he was a wildly energetic  orator   who  earned   his  living  reporting   cricket  for  the  Manchester Guardian, and who spent his nights either on platforms denouncing  the stupidities of both  the Social-Democrats  and  the Stalinists,  or  in  smoky  committee  rooms plotting Panafrican liberation and world revolution under the banner of a Fourth International. And  somehow between  night  and  day  he  had  written  and  pub­ lished, before that  decade  was out,  not only a  book-length  analysis of the  "rise and  fall of the communist  international," but  also his History  of Negro  Revolt, The  Case for West-Indian Self-Government, several short stories, a novel, a play, a lighthearted   memoir  of his days as a  cricketer,  and  the  definitive  biography of Toussaint  L'Ouverture, The  Black  facobins-a work  of  scholarship  today regarded as a classic in its field.
I  remember  asking if James  hadn't  burned  himself out  even  before the  war. No, George said, but  he was too bookish for us, a one-man  party,  a scholar  not an  executive.  Did  I  know he  had  been  lecturing  at  American   universities  on American  literature, and  had  privately  published  a  book  on  Melville in  New York? I didn't.
Fig, grown  restless, had  been wandering  about  my  genteel  inn  inspecting  its notices and  embroidered  cushions, my  huge  flaking  bathtub, the  framed  fox­ hunting  prints, as if he were in a museum. Indeed  that's what  Maryfield  Lodge was, the  last hotel in Jamaica   that  harboured   only  whites,  a  cheap  retreat  for

18

BIRNEY & LAMMING


Victorian ancients too  poor  or too  asthmatic to return "home." I  was here,  Fig explained, only because  this was near  the University   (where there  were no vacant rooms)   and  because  I would  feed at  his place or anyplace where  overboiled  veg and  suet  pudding were  not  de rigueur. This  reminded him  that  he  was hungry, and  they  bore me off to their  faculty  club. The  road  ran  east  between  lush  cane­ fields and  banana groves toward the tall wave of hills, their  ancient cones blurred  by dark  woods. I was startled when  George  told me the  highest  was almost  7,500 feet above  the  Caribbean. These  were the famed  Blue Mountains where  runaway slaves hid  out  in the  183o's. Some  of their  descendants were  still  there.  "If you like,"  George  said,  "we'll make  a  trip  up."   I  made   polite  protests  that   I was monopolizing his time  but  George  was firm. He and  Fig  had  visited Vancouver a while back, when  I wasn't  there,  and  had  been treated  royally, he said;  they were going to see that  I had  as high  a time  in Jamaica.
At the  Mona campus we joined John  Hearne, who  had  drinks  waiting  for  us. Our  conversation moved  quickly  from  the  mysteries  of  academia  to  our  varied origins  and  roots  and  favourite places:   Montreal, where  Hearne was  born  and I had  worked; and  to dear  dirty  all-comprehending London, where  all of us had one  time  or  another lived,  studied, and  loved.  But  it  was  questions about   my recent  travels  that, despite  the  comforting sub-tropical sunshine and  the  leisurely eating, bogged  us down  in  politics  and  the  ominous  present.  This  island,  only  a little  larger  than  Cape Breton,  with  a  population less than  Toronto's, had  been set loose by its own  voters  a few months  before and  was now  its own  democratic "nation." And  its nearest  neighbour, a  mere  hundred miles  away,  was  Castro's Cuba. I hadn't yet been there,  but  a few weeks earlier  I had  given  a poetry  read­ ing to students at  Peru's national university,  most of whom  went  from  my  class­ room  to  demonstrate with  makeshift   banners but  no  guns  in  a  Lima  square in support of  Castro's Cuba  against   Kennedy's America. Some  of   those  students certainly  died  that  bloody  afternoon, machine-gunned by the  junta's militia.  The  next  day,  when  everybody   thought  the  world  might   end,  with   Kennedy  and Krushchev in  eyeball  confrontation, I was  flying to  Santiago  de  Chile,  not  too sure there  would  be an earth to land  on. At the airport I was asked  what  Chilean writers  I wanted to meet. I said "Pablo Neruda," and  was nearly  arrested. Chile's  finest poet  had  been  publicly  cheering for Castro,  and  the  President of Chile  had sworn  out  a warrant for  his arrest.  A  few days later  in Buenos  Aires  I witnessed the  police of yet another junta  firing on another crowd  of unarmed demonstrators against  American imperialism. Could it all happen   here,  I  asked  my  table  com­ panions, and  got strangely  varied  answers.
For  the  moment the  U.S.  had  won  the  bluffing duel,  Hearne said,  and  made the Russians  ferry  their  missiles back home.  Kennedy  had  circled  Cuba  now with warships  and  Castro would  never  have  another chance to grab  Jamaica. "God," said George,  "who would  want  to? This  country's bankrupt! We've got a debt  of

BIRNEY & LAMMING

a  hundred   and  fifteen  million  bucks from  the  British,  and  Bustamente's   busy doubling it."
But  Alex B-, I  think  it  was,  pointed  out  that  U.S.  capital  investments  in
Jamaican   bauxite,  sugar,  and  luxury  hotels  had   increased  significantly  since Jamaica  got independence.  There  was dry  laughter  from  George  and  Fig. Our bauxite,  declared  the latter, is not owned  by Jamaicans, creates  almost  no work for them,  and  is destroying the soil of the island.  George  argued  that  although tourism was now a forty million dollar industry  "the  profit goes back to the U.S. and comes from hotels no Jamaican  can afford  to stay in. Most Jamaicans sleep in one-room shacks in the Kingston slums or on the sugar cane plantations,  where they  work  for  subsistence wages. One  in  five doesn't  work  at  all;  he's  unem­ ployed."
I said it sounded like Cuba  before Castro.  "Was  it better  here when  you were
a British colony?" There  was an unhesitating  "No" from  all of them.  "We  have a democracy, at least," Hearne  said. "A  bourgeois one,"  George added,  "and  we must  use it  to  vote  Bustamente  out.  That   egomaniac   has  already  sold  us  to Yankee imperialism.  We must get Manley  back  and  make  the  bugger  socialize this country  the way he promised." Somebody  who was a government  employee, on the table's fringe,  tut-tutted,  and somebody else accused  us all of talking  red expropriation-Castro   stuff.   "We   don't   want   a   bloody   revolution   here." "Agreed," said George, and  got up. As we walked to Hearne's car,  he muttered
-"But  we still need a revolution."
Hearne  left me at  my lodge for a welcome siesta  (I'd   been waked  at  five by the ship's steward)  but he was back in an hour to drive me for drinks at his home. Like most of the Kingston middle-class, he had bought  well up the mountainside, where the climate's  cooler. He drove us expertly  and  with considerable  speed  up a maze of narrow and dangerously twisting roads sunk in groves of fern and vine­ hung trees. We came out on his terrace in time to watch  a glorious sunset suffuse the sea  and  the  lights  twinkle on  in  the  Kingston  slums  "far  away  and  very far below."
Over  drinks I complimented  him sincerely on his driving,  and  learned  he had joined the RAF at seventeen in the middle of the war and served as an air gunner for the next three  years. He had married  and  gone to university afterwards  and had not begun writing his fiction until a few years ago. Yet he had  already  pub­ lished five novels with Faber  in London,  as well as several short stories  and two television plays. Since I had read far too little of Hearne's at this time we talked more  about  other  Caribbean   writers,  the  Haitians   friend  of   Macolm   Lowry, Philippe  Thoby-Marcelin, whom  I'd  visited in  his U.S.  exile  recently,  and  my favourite   Cuban   poet,  Nicolas  Guillen.  Hearne   impressed   me  as  a  sensitive, imaginative  man,  although  with still an  uncertain   image  of  himself. Jamaican born but  "white," versatile, intelligent, an  individualist  with  a social conscience,

20

BIRNEY  & LAMMING


he was a  bookish  man  who  was also an  adventurer. I would  have  liked  to  talk longer  but  soon  had  to rush  off in a taxi  to  join George  at  a  dinner  given  by  a lawyer friend  of his.




IT wAs A PARTY OF  HARD-DRINKING,  heavy-eating blacks  who, it seemed, were newly-rich on real estate, and owned  most of the immediate mountainside. The  talk  was of local cabarets, travels,  the  Wall  Street  market  and
-perhaps as a courtesy  to  this odd  Canadian pal of George's-Montreal's  St. James Street. About  midnight most of the guests left  for  their  homes  but  the  rest carried  George  and  me off to find a good night  club. Our driver  was wildly drunk and  sped  down  the  mountain at  about  8o  mph,  barely  missing  various   parked trucks,  tethered roadside goats and  farmers pushing  handcarts down  to the  King­ ston  market. He   paid   no  attention  to  our  cries  of  warning, and   I  remember feeling  much  the same  sort  of helplessness I'd  been  experiencing about  the  world situation. But  the driver  had  madman's luck, and  though we never found  a night  club,  we came  safely to a stop  at his own home.  There we played  calypso  records  and  ate  a four  a.m.  pre-breakfast before  George  got  a  cab  and  dropped me  at my guesthouse.
The  next  day  I took  time  to call dutifully  on the  Canadian High  Commission and  then  took a nostalgic  walk through dock and  market areas  where  I had  first set foot on  this island, in  1934,  when  I was a deckhand on  a limy  coaler  bound from  Port  Alberni to Grimsby on the  North  Sea. The changes  were  not  notable; the slums seemed  bigger  and  stinkier,  their  inhabitants less friendly, the  beggars and  the  whores  more  numerous, less glamorous. But  of  course  I was  no  longer go, and  I had  a hangover.
George  Lamming routed  me out from  the  Maryfield  at seven the next  morning and  into  a two-door jeep for  the mountain expedition he'd  promised  me  the  first day. He slid nimbly  into the  back seat where  a cuddlesome chocolate girl sat  and was introduced to me as "one of my Mona  students  escaped  from  Guyana." The driver  was none  other  than  the  Chief  Engineer  of Jamaica's most important agri­ cultural development, the  Yallahs  Valley  Land  Authority, one  of whose  projects  we were setting off to visit. Behind  us, in a big rickety  army  truck,  was  the  Han. A.  C.  Dogsbody, o.B.E., and  an  entourage of stenos,  reporters,  handymen, and political  henchmen, all of whom  had  joined  our  expedition, it  was soon obvious,  more  for fun  than  for  information about  Yallahs.
Engineer Martin  was  a  light-brown  man   with  a  rugged   face   and   a  bluff friendly  air.  I'm always  happy on mountains, especially  on  a tricky  route  with  a good  driver, which   Martin quickly  proved  to  be.  For  the  next  four  hours  our two-car  caravan climbed  and  dipped, roared  and  climbed  again, on slippery  dirt


2I

BIRNEY & LAMMING

roads  that  gradually  narrowed  to  nothing much   more  than   goat   tracks,   while Martin, a  great  talker,  filled  me  in  on  Yallahs. A  long  branching river  system with  fertile  slopes rising  up  thousands of feet  had  already in  the  eighteenth  cen­ tury been turned from  wilderness to coffee and  cocoa  estates  by the simple  process of burning down  the  forests. Slave-holding planters built  their  bungalows on  the crests, like feudal  barons.  But  the soil was quickly  exhausted, or  carried  away  by flooding  rains  that  eventually  destroyed  even  the  banana plantations in  the  river bottoms. The  owners  moved  to  other  mountains. Between   the  bared  rocks  the jungle  crept  back,  thick  enough  to hide escaped  slaves in  flight  from  the slavers' hounds. Through  the  nineteenth century   the  survivors   and  free  descendants of these "hill  negroes" developed  their  own  precarious farms and  backpacked their scrawny  root crops down  to the valley markets. With independence, in the  193o's,  came  the Authority. It turned  the  tracks  into  jeep  roads,  installed cement  bridges and   run-offs,   reforested   where  the  hillsides  were  bared, hired   the  farmers  to terrace  the slopes, and  taught them  the  rudiments of  mixed-crop farming.
Now, Martin told  me, there  were 15,ooo  farmers making a living  from  so,ooo acres  on  these  hillsides.  He  pointed   out,  as  we  came   to  a  viewpoint, rows  of fountaining banana "palms" far  below  and  the  dim  shadows of  coffee  bushes between  them. Up  where  we were,  mango  trees  were  spreading, and  occasional rows of oranges  and  other  citrus trees, shading lines of corn  and  root crops.  Above us,  where   the  soil  was  thinnest, some  goats  were  grazing. All  this  was  being "mothered," Martin said, from  the Kingston  offices of "Government" -a  magic word in Jamaica now-supervised by college-trained agriculturalists, and  his engineers.  Already   they  had  flooding  licked,  but  not  pests -fruit flies,  animal diseases, goat  abortion, and  so on.  Somebody   comes  up  once  a  month to  hold talks with  the farmers, inspect  crops and  livestock.  "But today  is special," Martin said, and  looked quizzical. "Guests  ... that's why I brought a jug."  He  brushed  a sack  by his feet  to  reveal  a gallon  jugful  of something. "Rum." George  gave  a cheer  from  the  back  seat.  "Not just for  you guys;  there's the  Honourable  Dogs­ body  behind   us, and  all his supporters, come  up  for  a  good  time.  Practically a national holiday. The great  man  has supplied  several  jugs and  they seem  to have lifted  a  cork  or  two  already." There were  fitful  snatches of  singing   from   the truck  now.
We stopped then  on a hilltop  at an ancient planter's house  which  the Authority was  reconstructing into  a  guest  lodge.  "We're in  luck," Martin said,  "the  old ballad   girl's  here." He  hailed   a  very  small   and   wizened   woman  mopping a verandah floor with  a witch's  broom.  George,  directed by Martin, filled a mickey from  our  jug and  the  four  of us walked  over.  The old  girl  swiftly  found   a  glass and  as promptly filled and  emptied  it. She  then  stood,  broom  in hand, and  in  a remarkably clear  and  strong  voice began  singing  a succession  of haunting Jamai­ can  ballads  and  folksongs,  comic  and  tragic. Was  it  possible,  I asked  George,

22

BIRNEY & LAMMING


that  some of them  had  been  passed  down  to  her from  a great-grandparent  who had  escaped  and  founded a family  up  here? "Quite possible. I heard  that  Lomax plans  to  record   her  on  his  next  trip  to  Jamaica." Perhaps more  than   even  her singing  moved  me. When  she had stopped  unexpectedly she made  a little speech, in a quaint Victorian style, wishing  us all brotherly  love and  loving-kindness.
Our ears were almost  at once,  however,  taken  over  by the spastic  rhythms of a hit  parade programme pulsing  in from  another verandah to which  the Honour­ able  Dogsbody   and   most  of  his  retinue   had  retreated  long  ago  to  listen  on  a stenographer's transistor to  the  selections  being  wafted  from  Puerto  Rico  by  an American disc  jockey.  It seemed  these  Jamaicans were  striving as  anxiously  to keep in tune  with  the  North American present  as I was to understand their  West Indian past.
We  drove  on  beside  steep  terraces  and  under  brilliant flowering  trees  to  the village splayed  against  the  hilltop  which  had  been chosen  for the  day's  festivities. These  were  held  in  the  open  on  muddy terraces.  The rum  went  round   and  the excited  Jamaican talk  that   seems  half-melody, half-quarrelling,  till  it  breaks  to laughter. At last, from  a great  cauldron, I was ladled  out  my own  bowl of  some­ thing  so pungent it almost  knocked  me  down  the slope.  "Rongone  so-ap," they seemed  to  shout, laughing hugely.  "Ram and  rum," Martin said,  and  slurped  his down.
Now  the   Honourable  Dogsbody   began   a  speech,   while   half-listening farm wives brought us green  boiled  plantains wallowing  in a stew of mackerel and cur­ ried goat. The rice tasted  of the  paraffin  that  fueled the  cook-fires but  the general  effect  was  marvellous, especially  when  combined   with   the  soup,   to  which   we kept returning.
The  Honourable D.  finished  his speech  to  much  applause and  began  moving unsteadily about,  apparently for  the  purpose   of  pinching  the  ladies'   bottoms. "More roam," the  males  called.  By now  I didn't   know  what  was  rum,  ram  or roam.  "A  whole  ram  in  the  soup?"  I asked  George.  "No," he  said,  "just   the balls. And  lots of rum  on top."
Later, Martin went  charging with us back down the  mountain through oncom­ ing  darkness  to get  George  and  me on  time  to an  evening  lecture/discussion on the West  Indian theatre. We  arrived  at  Mona late  and  too sodden  to  contribute much  to  what  appeared already a dull  affair,  and  soon  broke  away  for  blessed sleep.



kE NEXT DAY  I WANDERED ALONE, browsing  in a bookstore on  Kingston's main  street.  The  quiet  shop  made  me  feel I was back  in Victoria, B.C.: genteel  English  accents  from  the  clerks, the  poetry  shelves lined  with  Vic­ torian  English   classics  and   a  few  Americans  but  of  course   no  Canadians  or

23

BIRNEY & LAMMING

Jamaicans. There  were "seasonal"  cards, all holly and  Santas  in the snow, and white-faced angels decorating the windows.
I walked a block or two away from the town centre  and  was into  board-and­ cardboard slums. Rastafarians  in  eccentric  garbs  glowered  at  my  corpse  face. The  alleys were filled with  the  idling  workless. Eyes carefully  blank or  turned  away from  me. I  began  to feel a little in  danger  and  certainly  very guilty  for showing myself to these luckless ones. I took a bus to the other extreme, the beauti­ ful Hope Gardens. At least I was seeing flowers not on Victorian  Christmas cards. I  strolled  past  great  banks  of  poinsettias  under  tulip  and   ginger  trees,  flam­ boyantes, white petria, and sat beside a pool patterned by blue waterlilies. It  was easy to forget the  world of flesh -until  a  covey of motorcyclists  burst  roaring across the green lawn, splaying turf in all directions.
In the evening I went with Lamming  and  Fugueroa  to dinner  in the Students' Union  and  a poetry  reading. This  had  been elaborately  programmed  (before  it was known  I'd  be  on  the  island)   by some  colonially-minded   member   of  the English department. A few resident  poets, including  George  and  Fig, had  been allowed to begin the affair by reading one short poem of their own and  then one from the textbook anthology currently  in use at  Mona.  So we listened  to a  pot­ pourri of Marvell,  Ogden  Nash, Blake, Roy Campbell,  Frost, Auden, Dickinson, and  Hopkins.  We  would  have  had  a  Hardy,   too,  but  Fig  had  persuaded   the departmental committee  to drop  the old boy and  let the  Canadian recite some­ thing short of his own.
After this anti-climax came the star of the evening, Louise Bennett. A buxom Jamaican lady in her forties, she at once rescued us from our  academic  parlour games by launching  into an hour of lusty folksongs, dialect ballads, and  "mentos"
-a more melodic and satiric Jamaican cousin of the calypso. I could see why George  had  urged  me  not  to  leave  early.  Admittedly,   Louise  was  no  Emily Dickinson,  nor was she trying  to be. She was a Jamaican-born "woman  of the people" but  also a professional:  a lecturer  in  drama, folklorist, actress graduate of RADA, experienced radio performer on BBC-in short an entertainer  with international experience.  For the first time I listened  to an  artist's  use of "West Indian   English,"  its sharp  yet  good-humoured  wit  now  concentrated  and  its melodic  qualities  fully exploited.  When  George  told  me she  had  published  six books I felt ashamed  I'd never even heard of her. But then, as I discovered when I talked  with her, she had  just returned  from  a TV  gig with  CBC  in  Montreal and had  never heard  of me or my eight books. The  reasons were clear:  she was published  in  Kingston  and  I  in  Toronto. Three  years later  I  waved  at  her  in London  at  the  Commonwealth Arts  Festival.  I  don't  think  she  recognized  me, but that was the festival where nobody had heard of anybody.
My travel notes tell me that  George and  I lunched  next day  with Fig and  his
lively East Indian  wife, and that she made us an excellent curry. I think it was on

BIRNEY & LAMMING


that  occasion  we talked  about the  hoped-for   "United States  of  the  Caribbean" which  my  friends  felt  it  would  be logical  now  for  the  U.S.  to  back,  if only  to prevent  the spread  of Castroisrn. First revive the Federation, only recently expired, add  Bermuda and  the  Bahamas and  then  begin to forge  a  multilingual  English­ French-Spanish unity  of sovereign  states with Haiti  and  the  Dominican Republic. The   masses  throughout  the   Caribbean  wanted   peaceful   socialist  governments such  as the  Scandinavians had  achieved. They  cared  less about  island  identities  than  about building towards West Indian unity  through a customs and  immigra­ tion  union. I reminded them  that  U.S.  voters  always rejected socialist ideas,  and that   U.S.  governments had   repeatedly used  force  to  overthrow  even  peaceful  liberal  regimes  in  the  islands  and  the  mainland  states  bordering the  Caribbean. My  friends,  however, thought Kennedy  had  learned  a lesson and  might  have  to give the  Puerto Ricans independence rather  than  deal  with  a second  Castro.
Moreover,  George   pointed   out,   we  were  forgetting Mexico. That  country didn't want  Russians  all over  its Gulf,  or the  Americans either. I  told  George  I hoped  he was right  but  I  had  a feeling  that  every  day  more  of  Mexico  became the  property of the  U.S.A. and  might  soon  be so much   in  debt  to  Wall  Street it could  not  risk the  possibility of American marines  landing again  in Vera  Cruz. In  any  case,  I  believed  that  Bustamente was still in  the  saddle  in  Kingston  and riding   the  country  back  to  colonialism.   I  think   at  that   timely   moment   John Hearne arrived and  drove  me off for  an  interview  on  Kingston radio  and  then to tea with  the  English  department, before  I gave a reading.
I gave  my  usual  violin  piece of this tour -a talk,  with  readings, on  contem­ porary  Canadian literature. The  audience of about  forty,  staff  and  students, was attentive but,  as often  in  academic surroundings, most  of  the  students were  too shy to ask questions and  the  faculty  too eager  to get  horne for supper.
I was able  consequently to make  off myself by six to  a supper party  arranged
for  me  by  three  former U.B.C. students  of mine  now  hatching together   on  the Kingston slopes.  One  was  Wayne  Hubble, the  third  secretary at  the  Canadian High  Commission. The other two  were  with  Kingston  business  firms.  The   trio had  persuaded their  Jamaican girlfriends  to cook a  dinner in  their  residence  for us all.
Both the food and  the company are still memorable after  twenty  years, perhaps because they prompted a poem, "Saltfish  and Akee." My hostesses explained to me that  akee is the  pulp  of a ripe  pod which,  when cooked,  looks and  even tastes like highly spiced scrambled eggs, and  that  saltfish in Jamaica is cured  Newfoundland cod. Akee's  Linnaean name, Blighia sapida, perpetuates a story  with  perhaps an allegory.  Some  of Captain Bligh's crew,  just before  the  Bounty  was to sail out  of Port  Royal  for the  Pacific,  ate  their  akee from  unripe pods,  and  died.  Unless  the seeds are  black the  fruit  is poisonous.

BIRNEY & LAMMING

There  had  been rum  cocktails, followed by good  dry Beaune,  and  inhibitions were loosened enough for someone to remark that we seven were seeds of different colours. Eloise, who had come with Wayne, promptly  claimed  to be the blackest and therefore quite  harmless, and  that  Wayne, whose skin was parchment  white under fiery red  hair,  must be definitely not edible.  I  came  rather  weakly to  his defence by telling her  the last time I'd  seen him  he was brown-skinned,  decked in eagle feathers,  and  had  passed for  a B.C.  Indian   chief  in  a  U.B.C.  players club  presentation  of my "Damnation of Vancouver." There   was  then  a  more serious attempt  to compare origins. Tony, dusky-white, had been born in Victoria, B.C., of Welsh and  Italian  parents. Swarthy-brown Roger,  a failed  medical  stu­ dent but now an enterprising importer,  was half Greek, half Irish. I was  English and  perhaps  Norman  from my father,  Shetland-Norse from  my mother.  Tony's girl, the  journalist  daughter   of  a  successful  Kingston   publisher,  was  "velvet­ skinned and graceful  as a dark gladiolus." She thought  there were lbo slaves and a colonial Britisher in her family tree, and maybe others, but she didn't  know for sure and  plainly didn't  care. Roger's partner,  the truly beautiful  creature  present, was racially  the  most  complex. Chinese, South  Indian,  West  African,  Spanish.
They  seemed  happier  than  most of the other  groups  I had  been  with  in  the West Indies.  Was it only because they were a little  younger?  No, I thought,  it's because  they're  successful here  in  Jamaica   as  well  as  young.  They  are  in  no immediate fear of joblessness or exile; they have climbed to a special middle-class shelf where origins are unimportant and  politics a bore;  they can  joke with  their white boyfriends about  Black Power in a country  where  nine out  of ten  are  at least part-African. I thought  it a precarious  perch, yet silently hoped  they would never fall but  climb  to a "new  found land"  more  civilized and  sunny  than  any my own country  had created.
On the beach the next afternoon  by chance I came across another  U.B.C. stu­
dent, a Jamaican girl who had returned  a year earlier  with an  M.A. in sociology to take up a post in the Manley government -and  been dropped  from it when Bustamente's  party  came  to  power. She was not  in  economic  straits,  since  her father was a successful lawyer in Kingston, but she was not a happy  girl. She had been long enough in Canada  to appreciate  the wider opportunities there, but also to realize that  her negritude was a handicap  limiting  sharply  her opportunities to succeed as a teacher of anything. On impulse, and hoping to rally her from depres­ sion, I asked Lane  to be my partner  that  evening for a party  at  Figueroa's.  She accepted and offered to call for me with her father's car.
It was a huge affair, with George as joint host. Fig now owned what had  been
a plantation  house on the edge of town, with  ample  gardens  and  driveways. He also had an ample family, and had dressed eight of his offspring East Indian  style and  posted  them  with  flashlights  to  guide  cars  into  parking   areas  under   the magnolia  trees and  by the  night-blooming  cereus.  The  beautiful  children  were

BIRNEY & LAMMING

omnipresent  with trays of nuts, fruits, drinks, and other goodies. Apart  from those who crashed, there were  150 invited guests. I remember, of course, that  I at last met Manley,  by now only leader of the opposition in the Jamaica government­ a  lean-faced,  intense,  intelligent  man,  and  an  undoubted  idealist.  He  was  too beset by old friends and  well-wishers, however, for true conversation.  I had  more time with  his English  wife, Edna; since Mrs. Manley  was a sculptor,  we talked of David  Wyke, a friend  in common, and  about  her  hopes for an  intercultural West Indies.  I felt she rather  assumed  too easily  such  a  creation  would  follow quickly on her husband's return to power.
But  it  was  not  really  a  party  for  talking,  only  for  dancing,  for  hour  after dreamy hour of sambas and twists, tangos, rumbas, boleros, mambos, waltzes, and a dozen other sinuous prancings with a succession of lithe girls (most of whom, it seemed, were friends of George) . Later I learned they were part of the surplus of island maidens  which  large Jamaican   parties were always careful  to invite.  We danced on and  on to the music of marimbas  and  marimbolas,  guitars and  mara­ cas, congas  and  bongos.  My shy Lana,  however,  had  wilted  by  midnight  and insisted  on  driving  herself  home;  as  the  guest  responsible  for  the occasion,  I stayed, willingly enough,  till the party broke up at three.
I'm sure I'd  hoped  to sleep through  most of that  day, since it was Sunday,  but I see from my notes that Wayne Hubble  (who had not made Fig's party)  dug me out  of my ancient  guest lodge bed  at  noon for  a visit to  the  antiquities  in  the Spanish  Town  museum,  followed by a  tour  of the  fort  Captain Morgan   built when he was the island's  Pirate  Governor,  and  a cuba libre at  a sombre  white­ only country  club  back  in  Kingston.  Wayne  then  drove  me  to the  YWCA  for another  reading  of contemporary CanLit.
It was the hottest and  most humid  day I'd  encountered  in Jamaica  and  there wasn't even a hand  fan moving. Sweat rolled into my mouth  as I spoke, and  the audience  was sparse. However,  it did include  the AjHC of C and  his wife, the President of the Canadian Club, and a Kingston poetess, and though  I performed indifferently,  my listeners  were much  more attentive  than  I'd  have  been  had  I been listening to me. Afterwards  there was a brief reception  from  which  George and  his little Guyanese girl whisked me to the apartment of a girlfriend  of hers, Rosalie, for a small farewell  party-the four of us and  three  other  couples.
Rosalia was a treasure, a lively, witty, and curvaceous lady who possessed also a flat, superior  rum,  a good  playback  and  a great set of records,  including  the best bawdy calypsos I'd  ever heard and a wide range of dance bands. There  was a moment,  just before we broke up at one in the morning,  when  all of us linked hands  and  moved  in  a dancing  circle. I  caught  sight  of myself in a mirror,  an instant of heightened  happiness, and the title of George's first book flashed in my mind.

BIRNEY & LAMMING

My first act, when I got settled aboard  a ship in Port Royal the next afternoon, bound for Spain,  was to write a thank-you  letter  in verse for  George  Lamming, which ends:

more than  rum happy
I was giddy
from sudden  friendship wanted 	undeserved
Black tulip faces self swaying forgotten
laughter in dance
Suddenly on a wall mirror
my face assaulted  me stunned to see itself
like a white snail
in the supple dark  flowers
Always now I move grateful to all of you
who let me walk thoughtless and  unchallenged
in the gardens
in the castles
of your skins.







REHE:ziRS:ziL
 


Cyril Dabydeen


"Language the chameleon seeks to explain the chameleon reality."  A.I.

Old father tongue sticking out over the fenced  yard, scampering out from  the coop, this reptilean self
breaking out without a warning-

changeable again, across the barrier scattering feathers-
a life gone rampant
in dreams; the insane among  us presenting emblems  from  the scuttled  sea-

POEM

all talk, old words, dropping scales the dung  of reality,  moon-shape pitching stars from  the tips
of my fingers, blood oozing at the thighs
wetting the ground to form our roots








CHJILLENGED BY SPRING



His  tropical glands secrete  the  stuff,
his insides  churning:
come  spring, he  wants to be like trees
so arms  extended
he  welcomes  the  birds.

A rank  mango for a heart this  lyricism
does  not  get  him  far.
The birds  read  trouble in  his moist  eyes,
ignore  the  nests
erected at  the elbows and  fly to simpler  trees.

After  the  third  day  he desists. Humbled and  in  a sulk
he  writes:
surely  it is to rebuke  us that the  world  flares again when  winter  within us settles  as the only season.
 


Ricardo Sternberg






































29

IN THE SEMI-COLON OF THE NORTH


Austin Clarke





GOING STRAIGHT NORTH AS AN ARRow,had  I looked at a map  to shoot  my direction  and  progress, the  Ontario Northland   Railway  was taking  me to Timmins  where I  would  work on  the  Timmins Daily  News  as a reporter for thirty-five dollars a week. It was December,  nineteen  fifty-nine. One week before Christmas.
One  week before Christmas, six years ago, I  was sitting  in  the  warm  friend­
:-hips built from birth in Barbados, inhaling  the fumes of new polish and  varnish and paint that  was green and dark blue on the furniture that  surrounded me like the knowledge of those friendships.  And  six years later,  now,  I  am  sitting  in  a crowded coach of this CNR  train, surrounded by women and  by men who look like trappers  out of the adventure  books of the West I had read  in Barbados,  and out of the conversations I had heard from university students  who came from the West, and who said they hated the East. My closest friends at the university were
\Vesterners. But  where  are  these  Westerners  now  that   I  am  taking  this  long journey into  the semi-colon of the unpunctuated  North?
The  men sitting around  me on the slow-moving train  making  up  its mind  on a divorce from  Toronto  where I had  lived for five years, all looked like miners and  prospectors. Their  skin was rough-hewn  and  burned  and  tightened  as if by a different  kind  of climate  or sun-lamp  from  those  I had  seen  in  the  tanning bedrooms of Rosedale and Forest Hill in Toronto; and  they all looked half-asleep just as those women in the sun and under the lamp seemed to be. They  resembled the Indian   I  had  passed on Spadina  Avenue,  men  and  women  of tanned  skin, inheritors of abuse and scorn I had listened to in the streets of Toronto.
"Wauld you sell a Molson's to a goddam  Indian?"
I was myself like a prospector, travelling light and  lightened  by the uncertainty of expectation,  no bags and  baggage  to suggest  permanency, enough  clothes to ensure  personal  hygiene, no  notebooks  and  no  typewriter  for  I  was  not  yet  a writer of fiction, no writer at all, but a dreamer  of ambition  larger  than  the land over which the train  was taking me. I was equipped  with the music, the memory

(From  The  Colonial, second  book of  the  memoirs,  of  which  Growing   Up  Stupid   Under   The
Union  Jack is the first.)

CLARKE

of the music I had listened to in the jazz clubs and bars of Toronto, and in other places; and  the three  pieces I had selected to memorize and  bring along on this journey, were Milestones  by Miles Davis, Beethoven's Third  Symphony, and  the Russian Easter Overture  by a Russian composer whose name I could hardly pronounce.
Milestones  was the  metaphor  and  the  definition of this  horse of a train,  this horse of iron, with its slow pace, its excitement and strange smell of coffee weak­ ened  by the  touch  of cold  hands,  hardly  any steam  as it  touched  the  lips, and no recognizable  strength  of caffein to deaden  the disorientation  of the  journey; Canadian apples that  reminded  me of cider when they were crushed by the strong teeth  of these men,  only because  I  had  heard  that  you could  make  cider  from apples;  the smell of clothing,  heavy shirts that  were famous  for  their  plaids  in another  country,  and  for some reason, the smell of fish,  although  the  only sea was the waves of snow through  which we were travelling. The  music in my mind showed me a horse trotting  slowly and surely, aware of  its  pace  and  destination.  The snow outside the train  was like a large white  pasture  over which the hooves were travelling;  a "comforter" of pure  white which looked blue in the distance. The wheels on iron, and my speculation of the time they took to make one revolu­ tion, were the hooves of the horse in the music, and the tempo of the drummer  as he beat his measurement on skins and brass.
But  the  music  that  was in  my mind  belonged  to  a  different  drummer, to  a faster  means  of travelling,  to a land  in  which  I  was at  one  with  the  colour  of sweat  and  the  creed  of labour  and  exploitation:   Miles  Davis  was not a  "com­ forter"  on  the  brittle,  rasping  and  sometimes piercingly  clear  trumpet;  he  was defining  a  journey  of changing  destination,  of changing  intention,  of  changing  purpose. And it was making me nostalgic for Toronto.  The  journey on which my body was now being  carried  could not tolerate  that  excitement.  For  I  was sur­ rounded  by nothing  but  whiteness. Snow.
Not even  the  wind  outside,  and  I  imagined  that  there  would  have  to  be  a wind  no matter   how slight;  not  even the  wind  had  succeeded  in  altering  the patterns of mild undulations, careful hills of snow, without any purpose of rhythm and beat;  and the wind gave the snow no threat of ever being conquered.  Valleys and dales looked smooth, not treacherous, and exciting enough  for the cover of a galvanized  pail with a child in it, to slide down the disappearing sides from  the train.  It was all snow, and  the windless caress of white rectitude  and  order  and  a puritanness of the snow itself.


IBEGAN  TO  THINK OF  DIFFERENT MUSIC.  The  Russian Easter
Overture  composed  by  that  man  of Russian  origin  with  the  unpronounceable

3I

CLARKE

name, which I recognized on sight but could not put vowels to; this music which reminded  me of Barbados and its own colonial puritanism, where the only snow, at Easter and  at Christmas is the make-believe whiteness of the "marl" from  the rock quarries; and  which we spread  around  our  homes in  devout  obedience  to the purity of those two Christian  holidays, or eating  days. We ate  more than  we worshipped  the sacred  metaphors  of those days. And  in  Toronto, where  I  had first heard the Overture, one Christmas Eve night among  friends and  drinks who were "artistic," I gained a more focussed understanding of the  Russian  country­ side. It comes to me now, and with it comes that Group  of men, Seven in number,  who gave their  art  the same  name  as the  number  of  their  membership; and  I wondered  if they too had listened to this Russian  music and  had  seen the  fierce snow in its chords;  if they had captured  this part of the  northern  country  with its desolate  weather,  or  whether  they  had  drawn  the  reality  of this  North,  purely from the warm comfort of picture postcards and  Toronto beer parlours.
The sun must have been still high in the Russianed sky, and fierce as the music,
even at four;  or was it already seven o'clock?;  for I could feel light and  life and wonder  within  the wilderness outside the murmuring train.  The  life outside  was stronger  than  the life of the snoozing well-travelled  passengers. Inside  the train, these men and women had already arranged  their bodies in a resignation  of  com­ fortable   position  to  the  well-known  long  journey.  Although   the   journey   was beginning to be broken up by constant  interruptions of stops and  stations.  Miles Davis changed  the pace of his journey on the trumpet from  a gallop to a canter.  And my understanding of the riffs of his climb  was altered  and  heightened.  But these men and  women seemed to knov• when  the  train  would  stop,  when  their portion of the journey would end. They had become no longer so impatient  as the colonial from the South  about  the clattering  of miles. Their  sense of destiny and music and long living was stronger.
They  also ignored,  through  custom and  perhaps  with  love, the  coming  and going of the  "coloured" porter.  He  was a fact  of the  train,  and  a fact  of their lives; a metaphor of this kind of railroad  travel.  They  looked up, smiled, bought a cheese sandwich  from  him, or a red Canadian apple,  and  steaming  styrofoam cups of dark liquid  which made their faces redder,  and  then,  as quick as it takes to forget a stranger,  they closed their eyes, and  re-settled themselves among  heavy coats and blankets. The few children in the coach with me, were chewing gum to help  them  fight  their  restlessness. Two  strong,   handsome,   unwarlike   Indians stomached  their steaming black coffees just as gamblers try to stay awake, to cut the journey into gulps.
And the trees; for I was looking and  watching  and  hearing  the Overture, and not eating  nor drinking  as the others were; the trees, green  even at  this death  of time,  unaware  of the  inhuman  coldness that  was sharp  enough  to  kill a  man, manly as a trapper  and as noble as the two Indians, including  those in storybooks,

32

CLARKE

the trees were just a little similar to the genius in the  paint  boxes of two of the members of the Group  of Seven, I had seen in exhibitions.
I  could  have  been  crossing the  Steppes, or  the  Himalayas,  or  the  Canadian Shield, for the music was so international in the wideness, just as the land around me  was wide;  and  the  music  could  have  been invented  by a  Barbarian   to  be played in any small  Christian-Missioned  church  on  a green  hill, so  constricting was it to my far smaller context of origin.
A man can imagine any colour to give to the whiteness of the snow outside, or to the gold of a sunset. And  if he is fused to the electricity of genius, or if he is infused with enough of the natural  means of keeping the body warm, as it was becoming almost impossible to do inside this train, then in his drunkenness of originality  and  craftiness, brought  about  by his heavy drinking  and  by the inor­ dinateness of the  alcoholic and  surrounding  beauty,  then  what  he does  do  with the colours in the eyes of his art, is not so commonplace  a trick  as  bending  the normalness  of colour and  perception,  but is merely the adding  of  his  conviction to it.
I was now travelling  on the brass and  reeds of Russian movement,  no blanket to match  the white  and  green-bordered  regal robes of the  two Indians  who sat facing me to make  myself comfortable. They  did not  talk,  nor  blink,  nor smile. They were mysterious masks.
The  heat  in the train  was turned  off after  we pulled out  of North  Bay. This may not be a fact, but it is an artistic liberty of the fiction writer whose craftiness and  words can see the land  and  the  passengers becoming more  wedded  to their freezing surroundings; since  he has seen with  his artist's  eye that  there  are  no longer any politicians, nor reeves, nor managers of banks, nor cold-blooded south­ erners after  we have passed North Bay, and  that  the only residents of  this slow­ moving  cold-storage  train  are  Indians  and  "coloured" porters,  and  people  who are stupid enough  to live in the North.
I had  heard  of  North  Bay before.  Once.  But  I imagined  it  to  be  closer to Toronto. When  it  came,  and  when  the  train  changed  its  tempo  after  it  dis­ appeared  on the narrowing  lines, I sensed that  I had come to the end of the line, the end of all reasonable  expectations  and  of survival without  extreme  violence. I had  reached  a state of awareness of a time before men  became avaricious  and greedy and  adventurous, and  sought  to pan  for gold and  kill for  skins, and  kill everything  that  was not  gold or bears, everything  that  lay in the sights of their transits. I could imagine  men in the coach with me, as tho"e  men  who had  first prospected on the land  which they thought  was covered in gold, just as the streets of New York and Toronto  were glittering  with golden success for the immigrant. A colonial's dream, and a fool's fantasy. North Bay must have been crawling  with men like these, my companions on a train, before the time when those two Indians  and  their families were pushed  back even farther,  back  into  the reservation  and


33

CLARKE

into extinction, as the buffalo and  the trees that  impeded  progress and  develop­
ment were shot and axed.
Were  there  Italians  among  these first "Canadians"? Were  there  Jews  then, too? Some bears are like this "coloured" porter,  and  like me, only in colour.
It is too cold now, and too late, back in Toronto, for the  Italians,  the worker­ ants of the Fifties, to meddle in trenches and  on scaffolds from  which  they fall like flies, and die like martyrs in their new hyphenated  Canadian experience. "On  the street  cars, when you get too close to them,  all you can  smell is garlic ... " I can see a time before the Indian  was skull-capped  by versions of his resistance
to national  development, and  how from scalping and  raping  he was turned  from Hesh and  blood into symbols on coins, and  into  names  of insurance  companies and exclusive resort areas and  lakes; and  I tum  to the  Indians  sitting  before me and  try to compare  their silhouetted  forward  look to their  images on  American coins. My body is cold. And the coldness becomes the disposition of their fortunes and their  prospects.
This  train  bound  for my personal  glory, stops  nowhere.  It  has stopped,  it  is true, in a certain  ordinary  meaning  of time, because  I  can  see the  trees are  no longer evading the thrust of the train  through  the vagina  of this Indian  territory. But in the bigger meaning of time, this train stops nowhere. Little insects of specks of snow scurry  just above the surface of the sheet of milk. A man  gets off. There is a gust of steam like the overdue  passing of gas from  a tired  human  body.
I am scared. I am terrified that this man has pressed the wrong stop. And then I wonder how do you stop a train, except to lie in front  of it? But this man  gets c,ff  like a man  would get out  of a taxi.  He  must  be an  Indian. Or  a fool.  He seemed too much  in a hurry  to reach his destination,  unwilling  to remain  in the belly of the train, and had decided to get out, and  end the rhythm  of movement. And now, I see him through the mist of the window, wandering  through  a path in the uncut  wilderness. He seems more knowledgeable  than  the rest of us, who are too frightened, too unwilling to take up the heavy ploughs of chord in Beethoven's Third  Symphony, of which I am thinking now, and  become a part of that  tragic retreat  through  a different country, but in the same thickness of snow. So, we sit and  wait for another  destination  to come, one that  is more  habitable,  for some unpure station that offers a habitable  ordinariness.
The  man injures the snow as he moves in  a straight  line in  the lineless  land­ scape, and  he constructs his own highway,  just as the Italians  do on  virgin  land in a Toronto  suburb, or as the tentativeness of retreat  had  done in the Symphony. And  then,  before the train  abandons  him  altogether,  before  he  can  change  his mind, as I would have done, and  run back to the ordinary  safety of  the train,  he walks and walks in the shrouds of interminable  bandaging  snow, and  approaches  a hill on which there is a tall noble tree, the sentry for many more, and then, from the distance he is from me, all of a sudden  he finds his bearing  in the rubberless-

34

CLARKE

ness of the field. I envision drums  and  horses and  soldiers tired  as construction workers, and  silent defeated  cannon  and  artillery that  look like gigantic  cement m1xers.
The train is now at another  angle of his departure.  There  are houses now in my view. And I become disappointed  that  he is not lost, that  he is not going into a field of defeated  battle and  more snow, and  possible suicide.



IF I  WERE A  PAINTER,  I  would  paint  this snow  black. Last month,  or  last  year,  in  the  previous season, this  whiteness  was a  field of wild growing  grass, with  flowers which  we from  the city  could  have  picked or  cut and  put into a vase, or into a wine bottle of cheap Italian  wine that  we had for
dinner, to decorate  our crowded space.
The  man  who has left the train, is perhaps, now home.
But before that,  before  he enters  the  door,  I see him  as a  black  dot.  I  had ignored his progress before this diminution,  to think of the rails and  miles before me. The  train  takes me headlong  into  more towns in  this disregarded  North.  I count  the hours  and  I  count  the sheep in those hours, and  I  wonder  what  has driven me from the comfortable  house on Grace Street  near  Bloor, to enter  this landscape  which I could have been satisfied to have seen in the music of  Beetho­ ven's Third?
I think of the thirty-five dollars I am to be paid each week, perhaps at two in the afternoon  on each Friday, so that I might sled through  the streets of Timmins to the bank on time. I think of the size of immigrants'  wages, which is merely his means of buying necessities, which is the dignified alternative  to begging and unemployment  insurance,  and  which is not the important impetus  for the immi­ grant's contribution to this country's  weath. It is my dignity that  I can spend, and pay for things. Not my wage.
So, the wage may be a small wage. I cannot ask questions about  its size simply because I have the immigrant's surrealistic optimism  that  says that  larger  wages will come  with  larger  experience,  even if, for  the  moment,  that  experience  is called "Canadian experience."
I wonder if I can  get the larger  knowledge without  the larger  insults and  the larger unhappiness?
I will therefore  accept this pittanced  wage, and leave the North  when the time is golden. And  afterwards, with  this "Canadian" experience,  conspire  to  climb faster than  the newest immigrant, rapidly, and suffer the castigation for being "uppity," in the silence of my integration.
I  count  the  trees that  run  along the  wires, with  my  eyes, until  I  must  have
travelled around  the sea that  surrounds Barbados, one thousand  times. And if the


35

CLARKE

line does not end  where I am  heading,  if the line could  not  end,  and  the  train becomes a ghost train after the ghost towns we have passed, and  could go on and on, I can conceivably end up right where I have started  out, in the small village of Flagstaff, since too far North must be South.  I begin to put my mind into that deceiving discipline of informing it that  this is the best, most enjoyable  journey I have ever taken. I tell myself that the journey is really not simply the two parallel lines which refuse to end within my sight, but  that  they are  joined to each  other in the unseeable distance. The drums in the retreat  of the music are heavy, and  I can see mothers along the way, including my own;  discarded  lovers hot from  the shortened  exhilaration  of a climax of victory and  orgasm.
I  pretend  that  I have fallen out  of the  train.  The  train  does not  stop.  I am merely a dot left to blacken the snow in one spot.
The  "coloured" porter has just helped an old grey-bearded  man down the slab of iron of the stopped train, to the ground.
"Been South?"  the porter asks.
"Yeah, Joe."
He put his hand into his pocket and puts that same hand into the porter's hand. "Been visiting the kids. Last girl got married. Temagami, ya know. She  been
living south these two years."
The  music of retreat  rushes over the snow, like an  avalanche  of thick spoiled milk. And before this conversation is off my mind,  before I  can  fill in its spaces with faces and  bodies of snow-bitten,  beaten  soldiers, we are  at  Haileybury.  A little north of the South.
The  train  is warmer  now. I had  travelled  through  many  towns with  the  heat off and  my body was now acclimatized  by the  fresh  northern   Canadian  experi­ ence. The distance between these towns was now speeded up like a magic-lantern slide show, played at the wrong, faster speed.
New Liskeard, Englehart  and Swastika ...
Swastika?
Could  this train  have passed through  compass-points  while I had  been dozing between stations?  Perhaps,  this part  of the  wild  bush  had  been  an  iceberg  and had  been drifting  backwards through  a slower snow  that  did  not  melt;  perhaps this part of the bush was ignorant  while other  trains  criss-crossed Europe  bearing this  same  swastika,  and  filled  with  different   passengers  whose  namesakes  in Toronto  could not rent a cottage in the weekended lakes. Perhaps other men than I were dozing while other passengers were being gassed and  then buried.  Perhaps, iL was this cold that  drove us to this drowsiness.
Through the  breathing  glass window that  showed  the hissing steam:   rub  the palm of the hand on the ice that has formed there, and clear the two-temperatured air, and see if there is a swastika painted  on the station  door, if there  are  people goose-stepping on  the  platform. See, too, after  you  have  seen that,  if there  are

CLARKE

any persons who "looked  like Jews,"  who have not got summer  cottages to rent down South, and who are now come, or forced to come, to this destination.
I try to imagine how a namesake of those European  times, would feel entering this northern  Ontario town  with its brazen  name, for the  War  is still raging  in our painful memories.
Look and see if you can recognize anyone in the small crowd of thick coats and furs, and  women in mink's clothing, if there is a Pierre Berton investigating  here, as he has been investigating everywhere, including the pages of the Toronto  Star.
Kirkland  Lake was bellowed out, but it was too dark, and I was too sleepy and too numbed to see.
Ramore  I could see. I saw the second "coloured" man in the North at Ramore. And an American  army base was there, and many American  "coloured" boys, so the porter said, were living there.
"Don't bother  nobody  none,"  he said, "and  nobody don't  bother  them.  You won't think they were such nice boys. When you think of it ... "
I decided  I would spend  my weekends in Ramore.  It  is closer than  Toronto. Ramore  was also close to Rama,  and although  it had some similar sound  to that Biblical city, I still was not discouraged to invest in its brotherhood.
But what  were the Americans  doing in the  Canadian  North?  Had  they come
to gain "Canadian" experience, too?
After Ramore,  with the "American  coloured boys" changing the town no doubt, and  making  polka-dots  of the beer parlours,  dancing  to the  rhythm  of the  Ska and  rock-n-roll, Fats  Domino  and  Billy Eckstein and  Jimmy  Brown and  James Brown, wriggling their  black asses on the football fields of these northern  white corsetted climes and  times, like Friday  nights along Spadina  Avenue in Toronto, after Ramore,  came Matheson  and then North  Porcupine, South  Porcupine,  and then,  as God  would  have  it!  ... Timmins.  I  had  reached  the  end  of my line.




TWO CJIMERJI POEMS
 


Michael Thorpe


1.   Obsolete Images

Black-sleeved fathers Guide their new children In stilled old-brown streets
Of Dublin, Vienna, London - Any foxed city
Coffee-tables preserve.

37

POEM

We can hardly  foresee
Ourselves  so mutely  remembered, Strolling,  interpreting wonders
To white, uptilted faces:
Touching relations immune from  analysis.


2.   Moving  Lives

While we live, we possess the world Arms akimbo, beside some machine - Then death  sweeps the streets clean:
The  incredible substance of photographs,
Perpetual images -parade us now
As if we lived three lives ago;
We are only transparencies, moving Projections in an endless procession. This  vision makes even our present Nostalgic-fading as we move in it.





IN THE ]INOES
 


AlPurdy


Among the stone faces nothing is human
after  fifteen thousand feet air burns in your lungs like chemicals bubbling

there is only
an abstract geometry
of intersecting shadows a high singing sound
at the borders  of nothing

These  are the great  spaces the measure  of upness distance  from stars
made manifest
in the way a mountain's fraction calibrates infinity


HAROLD LADOO'S ALTERNATE WORLDS

Canada & Carib Island


Clement H. U)ke





JANE AUSTEN  CHOSR  TO  DEFINE  the  sphere  of  he< litemy world as that  of "three  or four families in a Country  Village."1 Two  years later, she modestly described  the  boundaries she set for herself as the  "little  bit  (two Inches  wide)   of Ivary."2    Harold   Ladoo,  too,  chose the  country  village  as  his world. In fact, he was forced to limit his territory after  he submitted  his first piece of work to Dennis Lee at the House of Anansi:  the key phrase in Lee's long letter of rejection  was "Write about  things you know."3   The  world  Ladoo  knew best was the  plantation area  near  McBean  village, Trinidad, where he grew up and where by a tragic  irony of fate he was murdered  in 1973.  But the world Ladoo produced,  unlike  that  Austen  created,  was certainly  not  a  "little  bit of Ivory." Instead  it was a  limiting  region  of bizarre  violence and  human   misery, whose crude, grotesque, yet strangely  comical depiction serves to emphasize  the author's own bleak vision of Caribbean life and  to allow, by extension,  an indictment  of the white man's world.
His  invented   "Carib  Island,"   evidently  a  portrait   of  Trinidad,   obliquely becomes the macrocosmic  mirror  in which the white Canadian must see his own dark  soul. In  No  Pain  Like  this Body  (1972), the  Hindu   inhabitant of Carib Island is the victim not only of his own dehumanizing existence, but also the voice of vengeance rising from the excremental world of Yesterdays  ( 1974)  to become the  nemesis of  his  white  Canadian  missionary  exploiters.  The   descendant   of exploited indentured labourers,  he must carry the scourge of vengeance;  he must turn  the tables on his oppressors and give a taste of their  own medicine to those who punished him in his childhood.
Ladoo had come to live in divided and distinguished worlds, one the necessary outcome of the other.  The  inhabitants were related  to each other  as proselytized and  proselytizer, as prey and  predator,  as victim and  source  of survival.  These alternate  worlds, where  Ladoo  lived as native and  as immigrant, became ironic mirror  images  which  confront  the  reader  of  his two  published  novels. In  the earlier novel, No Pain Like This Body,* the Trinidad East Indian  reader sees him-

39

LADOO

self trapped; in Y esterdays5   the Canadian reader  confronts  the ironic and menac­ ing consequences of his own misplaced mission of detribalization.  Ladoo's  larger vision was to compose a saga or a serie:'l of novels (he  had  written  approximately  seven  more   novels  in  sketch  form6  )    "about   the   Caribbean-Canadian  com­ munity.m-He was fascinated  by the  contiguity  between  the  two  worlds, the Caribbean   and  Canada. And  although  he  never  transformed   his vision into  a sustained  literary  world,  it  holds  its  own  fascination,   in  part  for  its  detailed portrait  of Island  life and in part for its revelation  of Ladoo  himself.
In  choosing to use the familiar  territory  of his native  land  as a  mythological
centre for later ethnocentric  themes Ladoo is not original. His focus on the small East Indian  village, for example, is more competently  handled  by fellow Trinida­ dians like  Naipaul  and  Selvon and  in  a  different  setting  by  the  noted  Indian  writer  Narayan. The  theme of pursuing  the ethnic  and  cultural  progress of the West  Indian  inhabitant through  a  cyclic pattern   of  history-by  appealing   to settlement  history, to the problems of identity, and  to the evolution  of racial con­ sciousness-has been more skillfully explored in  poetry  by Edward  Braithwaite.  The ironic clash between intruder  and inhabitant, and the strange ironic mingling of the status of victim and victimizer, have received more complete and  masterful treatment  by Wilson Harris.  It is against  this dazzling  firmament  of literary stars that   Ladoo's   tame   and   unfinished   creations  stand.   Clearly   Ladoo's   work  is dwarfed in this universe; but it is dwarfed for reasons other than  comparison with the works of more mature  artists. The  reason also lies in the character and  plight of the author.




LAnoo, AS  A  BLACK   ARTIST  in  the  Canadian milieu,  eking out  a living as dish-washer  and  short-order  cook  in  all-night  restaurants as  he attended  college,8  found  himself illustrating in  propria  persona a harsh  existence in the country  to which the characters  of Carib  Island  aspired  as an alternative to their own limited  world. As Basdai, in Yesterdays, says, "Young  people have no future  in  Karan  Settlement."  Rookmin  tells Choonilal,  in  the  same  novel: "Carib Island  have no future  for de boy";  and  Poonwa  asserts:  "I am  already
25 yrs. old. It is time I leave this island father." For  Poonwa,  Carib  Island  was destined to "become  a nation of rum drinkers." Against this future  and this native world, Canada provides the alternative  as it  eventually  did  for  Ladoo.  It  was, however,  a  sardonic  and  cynical  alternative,   where  he  had  to  cope  with  the menace of artistic  failure and  where he was traumatically overshadowed  by the burning  of all he had  previously written  because  he  received  editorial  criticism and  publishers'  rejection  slips. From  the  distance  of  Trinidad, Canada was  a world  where  educational   and   professional  advancement  existed  and   money

LADOO

seemed  to be available, but,  as Ladoo  discovered,  it did  not come easily to young men  who emigrated from  Carib Island. Ladoo  had  to struggle  not  only  with  the nightmares of the  unpublished writer  but  also with the  bitterness  and  rage  of the culturally disadvantaged immigrant.
Dennis  Lee captures Ladoo's predicament quite  accurately and  dramatically in
his long  poem,  "The Death of Harold Ladoo" ( Kanchen junga  Press, 1976). He portrays   Ladoo in  his  shifting   roles,  striking   various  stances,   wearing  several masks,  carrying in  himself  centuries  of social  injustices,  and  struggling both  to survive  and  to achieve.  He  is the soft voiced speaker.
catching fire -
a lifetime of intricate  fury, ... four
centuries of caste and death
come loose in [his]  life, the murdered
slaves come loose, great cycles of race and blood, come loose the wreckage of mothers and sons
in Trinidad....

But  this montage shifts  and  Lee also presents  the image  of Ladoo  the sycophant who needs favours  to survive,  and  who writes frantically to  publish:
guide change,
eyes brooding, hangdog, the
tricky apologies,
swagger of total humility-and then again quick change and
four days writing straight-no sleep tell it all,
and then the phone call -one more
bird book in draft: from the Caribbean  to Canada,
the saga piecing together.
As  Ladoo   tries  to  piece  together   the  saga  of  alternate  but  contiguous  worlds, Canada and  Carib Island, he  becomes  the  living  embodiment of  the  contradic­ tions and  conflicts  of his own  fictional  creation. His motivation to write  becomes wedded  to what  Lee describes as a "hot  holy rage."  Indeed, he was contemplating a novel called  Rage, in which, as Peter Such states, he was attempting to get at the sources of the awful  rage  and  violence  that  were the  dark  driving forces of much  of Trinidad's plantation society.9   This  work,  according  to Such,  was  "a terrible  piece about a character being  knifed  up  by his enemies and  managing to escape by hiding in the sharp razor  grass of a coulee.mo
In  the  process of dealing with the  forces of rage  and  the  years of cultural  con­ flicts and  evils, Ladoo  often  seems  to lose artistic  control over  his  material.  The  result is that his satirical intent  becomes unclear  at times, his images  (especially  in No Pain Like This Body), become  excessive and  incoherent, 11 and for one  Cana­ dian  reader he "manages to animate for  us a culture so unlike  our own  as to be barely  comprehensible."12

LADOO

What  Ladoo  had  written  had  become, in  Lee's words, "frenzied  drafts"  that were "brilliant  and  botched."  In  the  wake of this  kind  of  performance   Ladoo received some modified  praise from  a  reviewer:  "The Book  [Yesterdays]  is an almost total success.m3   Lee, however, is more excoriating: "Life  and  work [are] wrenched farther  apart"; in his poem he sums up Ladoo's efforts this way:  "Your final heritage -two  minor  early  novels, one  being merely first-rate."
Yet, for the reader  familiar  with Ladoo's ethnic  and  cultural  background,  No Pain Like This  Body evokes the mood, lingo, and  local colour  of Trinidad  East Indian  society. Ladoo offers such indigenous snatches  of dialogue  as:  "Sumaree saw Balraj coming like a jack spaniard," or "Now  Rama  and  Panday  behave, all you self!" or "Look  a skopian !" Or  again,  "Man, I  tell you, dat  priest start  to make a ruction,"  and  "Ma  ... handed  him a cocoyea broom, saying You sweep out de kitchen Panday." Ladoo catches Selvon's authenticity here and  entertains a familiar audience, but in Ladoo's attempt  to keep the focus so closely tied to the little world of Karan  Settlement,  he fails to allow the reader  the relief of seeing the rest of Carib  Island;  he does not even bother  to provide some point of  refer­ ence for the urban  Canadian reader.
In Yesterdays,  Ladoo maintains  the same narrow  focus of No  Pain Like This Body,  but  with  an  invitation  to Canadians  to  take  a look as well. Peter  Such believes that  Ladoo  wrote Yesterdays  "for  Canadian audiences.m4   But the novel remains out of emotional  control. Admittedly  it was published  posthumously, in an unrevised version, which explains and  excuses several shortcomings.  One  can, however,  hardly  deny  the  pervasive lack  of subtlety,  even  at  the  first stage  of writing,  in  dealing  with  the outworn  issue of detribalization by the  white  mis­ sionary and  the dominant  sense of revenge which the author  invests in one of his major characters.  Poonwa resolves to

go into the white country with the Hindu Bible and the whip. The white Christians came with their Bibles and whips and they succeeded just like that. I will take the Bhagavad Gita with me and open a school in Canada  and  employ East  Indian teachers. I will build a torture chamber in the school.

Every word  is italicized. The  same theme  is put  in different  words at  least six times again  before the novel ends. Basdai tells Choonilal:

"How dem white people who come on dat Canadian  Mission to Carib Island beat dem Indians and make dem learn English? How come dey make de Indians Christians? Well de same way Poonwa goin to make dem learn Hindi. I tink he could do it."

This crusading attitude continues throughout the novel as Poonwa writes in his notebook  in  large  capitals:   "CHRISTIANS ARE  CRIMINALS!" The  final straw is a sexual coup de grace, complete with sacrilegious  explicitness. Poonwa takes  "an   opportunity to  get  even  with  the  Christian   blonde   [the  Canadian

LADOO

woman who taught  him in a Mission School] and the blue-eyed Jew [Christ]" by performing  an act of sodomy with Sook, the village queer, in a Christian  church. This is not literary art but immature  protest literature.
Ladoo's sub-standard performance in the novel Yesterdays receives this wry comment from a reviewer from Edinburgh: "Presumably Anansi chose to publish it  as an  act  of  homage."15   To  the  Canadian reader  for  whom  the  novel  was composed,  however,  Ladoo  unquestionably  offers an  unflattering   national  por­ trait: ''for  once,"  wrote another  reviewer, "Canadians are seen as oppressors.m 6




Y.T WE MUST RESIST the temptation  to dismiss any work of the  imagination   without   a  reasonable  examination   of  it.  One  can  easily  put Ladoo's  work under  the bland social label, "Man  and  Society," as was done  in the supplement  to The Oxford  Companion  to Canadian  History and  Literature ( 1973). However,  No Pain Like This  Body is more than  a slice-of-life account  of East  Indian   life  in   rgos-with  family  fights, scorpions,  superstitious  grand­ parents,  and  immoral  "fakirs  masquerading   as Hindu   priests"   (Oxford  Com­ panion, p. 86). The  novel is a  not-too-successful attempt to  evoke a  world,  a milieu, a  Zeitgeist  which  is an  integral  part  of the  evolving  consciousness of  a nation.  Ladoo  tries to  provide a topography,  folklore, values,  heritage,  religion, psychology, language,  and  even a cosmology in this  novel.  The  reader  is made  aware of an atmosphere and a climate of thinking as well as a way of seeing, but unfortunately the  author lacks the skill to sustain  what  he  has initiated  and  to give some organic  unity and direction to his work. And Yesterdays  is less success­ ful than  No Pain Like This  Body particularly because of  its heavy-handedness  and the bludgeoning  mismanagement of its constituent  parts.  It  takes the Zeitgeist  of the first novel, tries to intensify its horror  while  broadening its social spectrum beyond  the  few  members  of a  family  to include  other  villagers  apparently for satirical  reasons;  but  it also shocks our sensibilities, offends our  taste and  disap­ points whatever  curiosities it may have aroused.
In brief, No Pain Like This  Body and Yesterdays portray  alternate  worlds that are also contiguous in terms of the Zeitgeist they try  to present. The  novels present the human world of Trinidad East Indian  existence, which is malevolently and whimsically influenced  by a metaphysical world of Hindu  or Christian  divinities. These divinities have their  earthly ministrants  in the forms of corrupt  pundits  or white missionaries who manipulate power for selfish ends. Both the characters of Ladoo's  world and  their  creator,  Ladoo himself, exist in these worlds as victims. The victimizers are despised but needed. The  distressed villagers need the  pundit during  the  great  crises of life and  the illiterates need  the  missionary  teacher   to

43

LADOO

educate them. This irony results in the haphazardness of the worlds and in Ladoo's unsteady attempt  to depict them.
A brief look at the world-view of Carib Island as depicted in No Pain Like This
Body  would  be pertinent  here. Ladoo  creates it  partly  through  his attention   to physical detail and partly through  his command  of dialect and  the implications of his style. One of the two planes of existence Ladoo  introduces,  for example, is the tough, physical world of Ma, Pa, and their children  Balraj, Sumaree,  Rama, and Panday,  who are introduced  in their domestic cultural  and  geographical  settings. Their  world is the product  of an era of indentured Indian labourers  brought  to Trinidad plantations betweenI 845 andI 9I 7. The  cultural  context shows a  his­ toric dependence  on the imitative Brahmic ethics and  ritual  which allowed lower­ caste Chamars to parade illicitly as village pundits.  Pa is initially  presented "quiet  like a snake" at  home, the children  and  Ma  are  in the  riceland.  And  as Ladoo explores these factors -home, riceland, and the surrounding atmosphere  of rain, lightning,  snakes and  tadpoles-through  the  rest of the  novel, even though  he does so somewhat  superficially, we are  made  to  see the  members  of  the  small family experiencing the bodily pain of human existence and  death.
Introduced against this world is the world of the gods and of God in particular. God is shown  to  be unfeeling, revengeful, tyrannical, and  sometimes motivated by an  uncanny  sense of humour.  During  Balraj's  and  Rama's illness, their  own father  Nanna  pleads with God:  "He  closed his eyes as he recited  the  Sanskrit verses. He was begging the great sky God and  also the minor Aryan  gods, he was begging them  to forsake their beds and their wives in heaven,  begging them  just to look down  from  the sky through  the  rain  clouds on  Balra j and  Rama.... " Nanna  prayed  and  prayed and  prayed, but "God  was too busy sending  the  rain to drown  the earth." Not only is God unresponsive,  he also becomes a  monster who causes the Devil to devour his subjects:  "Sunaree told Panday  that  God  was going to make the Devil eat him crips, crips." When Rama  dies, accusations begin to flow angrily;  God is seen as a killer as far as Pa is concerned : "God  kill Rama." Ma  cries in desperation,  "Which  part  in dat  sky you is God?"  Ladoo  thus  sets the  divine supernatural world against  the  human   world  with  an  awesome  and bitter hostility.
In  order  to heighten  the realism of the human  world  Ladoo  draws  a map  of Tola  District. But the geographical setting is also shown  to be the haunt  of  semi­ divine forces, popularized  in the folkloristic elements,  repeated  in  the  references to jumbies, lagahus,  duennes, and other  popular  creatures  from  Trinidad legend. In order, moreover,  to give a feeling of the eerie and  accentuate  the dramatic in this  world  that  is permeated  by the  supernatural,  Ladoo  heavily  employs  the technique  of onomatopoeia.  "The  choking sound  of  the  thunder  came from  the sky zip, zip zip crash doom doomm doomed." "Bahraj was afraid.  He  knew Pa

44

LADOO


was  going  to  beat  him  real  bad.  Crax, crax,  cratax   doom,  doomm, doomed." "Rama was going  "Kohok! Kohok! Kohok! like a dog."
Other stylistic  features are  also  noteworthy. Sometimes, for  example, Ladoo draws  on the linguistic  peculiarities found  in the  creole  forms  of the  language - occasionally   for  emphasis, but  mainly  for  atmosphere. One  such  feature is the way  he uses reduplication as a substitute for  a grammatical  intensifier, as  when he writes:  "The wind was blowing cold, cold"; "No. I is a little, little chile. Little, little"; the  Pandit recited  a few mantras over  Rama-"he spat  the  verses  fast, fast."  Ladoo also proves  himself  to be quite  competent in exploring the  cadences of dialogue : "Pa came  home.  He  didn't talk  to Ma.  He  came  home  just  like  a snake.  Quiet."
Though stylistically   Ladoo   generates the  atmosphere  he  wants   by  drawing heavily  on  simile,  he  loses control  in  doing  so and   the  device  becomes  stilted. Several  similes are  flat  (e.g.,  "Pa spoke like a stone") or commonplace ("cold as ice  cream"), and  some  are  unnecessarily  sacrilegious   ( "Pa stupid   like  God"). Ladoo  can,  however,  give an  edge of colour  and  brilliance to a simile  for  effect: "Then the lightning moved  as a gold cutlass and  swiped  an  immovable tree...."
A phrasal structure characteristic of Ladoo   (which incidentally, adds  a  touch of semi-epic  elegance) is his beginning  phrase  pattern: 'And' + name  (as  when
he  writes,  "And Ma:  'Where me  Panday  and  Sunaree is?' "). This   kind  of expression  is often  inserted   for  dramatic effect  between   verbal  interchanges-

"Rama dead! He dead and gone!" "0 God! 0 God! Me, chile God!!!"
And Nanna: "He's  get over de skopian bite, but he dead wid umonia fever."

-and the  dramatic interchange takes  on  greater  poignancy, coming  after   the staccato effect of the short  interjections. But Ladoo  fails to be authentic when  he has the local  Hindu priest speak  in standard English  to tell a folkloristic  tale  to a semi-literate audience, to whom  he later speaks in normal creole English.  Perhaps, though, this shift  in language underscores  the  parallel  lack  of authenticity in  the pandit's behaviour. He  is not  very  authentic when  he  has  Panday exclaim: "I was fraidin in dat  house."
A final device Ladoo  uses to create  the world-view  of Carib Island  is description
-particularly  when   he  wants  to  present  the  physical  cosmos  or  recount some incident which  is given  cosmic  and  metaphysical or religious  dimensions:

Nanna  got  up. He  took Rama  and  went  into  the water.  Nanny,  Ma,  Sunaree and Panday  stood as a heap of living mud:   just waiting for Nanna  to cross safely. Then  the time grew long:  long like a rope, and  tied  them  like a rope  too. Their bodies formed  one great  beast reaching  up to the sky. And the clouds opened  and out of the middle came water: water that  washed away the earth  into the mouth of the darkness. Then  the thunder  heated as the heart of rage in space, and  out of the space came the lightning  as a great spike and it stabbed the mouth of darkness.

45

LADOO

And  the winds  became  hot  and  carried death into  all the corners ... then  the  rope caught fire and  the great  beast  danced to the  tune  of death between  the  darkness and  the  void.  The beast  danced even  though it  knew  it  was  going  to  die  ... it danced and  danced, till the void and  the darkness strangled the beast....

or

The sky twisted  like a black snake and  the clouds  rolled  and  rolled  and  rolled as a big spider; the  wind  shook  Tola  in a rage  and  the  rain  pounded the  earth; the lightning came out of the mouth of the darkness  like a golden  tongue  and  licked  the trees  in  the  forest  and  the  drum ripped  through the  darkness like  a  knife.  They moved  deeper  and  deeper  into  the forest,  and  they felt  the  rain  falling  upon  their heads from  heaven.

The sense  of  religious devotion and  sympathetic concern is  poignantly  conveyed in  the  scene  where Nanna and   Nanny beat   the  drum while   they   are  searching for  Ma who  is lost outdoors:

About  an  hour  after  Nanna left  Nanny  started to beat  the  drum. The  rain  was falling  making  its own  music. Sunaree was playing  the  flute.  Nanny's fingers  were long and  bony. They  touched  the goat's  skin as if they  were  accustomed to it. She heated  the drum slow slow. Sunaree played  the flute  good; her  fingers  touched the holes in the bamboo  flute as if they were made  for them.  The music of the flute  was sweeter  than  sugar; than  life  even.  Ma  was  dancing, Balraj was  watching. The kitchen   was  full  of music  and  sadness:   music  from   the  sky  and   the  earth, but sadness from  the earth  alone. And  their  spirits  were growing and  floating  in the air like silk cotton  flowers.
Nanny  started a  song. Her  eyes were  dark  and  sad.  She  sang  a  part   and   Ma repeated it. Ma  sang  a line,  and  she repeated it. So it  went  on  and  on.  The song was in Hindi. The  sky God  was listening,  because  the  drum was  beating like cake over Tola: like honey. It was beating  and  beating and  beating; beating only to keep them  awake  like bats; it was beating only to keep  them  happy and  sad,  happy  and sad;  it was beating for  the  black  night  that  was choking Tola, and  the  rain  that was pounding the  earth; the  drum  was  beating in  the  sky and  it  was  beating on the earth; it was beating,  and  even  the great  sky God  could  not  stop  it from  beat­ ing, because  it was beating  and  beating  and  beating just  as the  heavens  roll.

In Ye·sterdays,  moreover, Ladoo elaborates the   religious element and  sets  that world  against the  human one  more starkly, and somewhat more humorously as well.  He  ridicules the  phoniness of  decadent forms of  Hinduism and the  pitiful forms of human behaviour this  religious belief  engenders. The gods  are  shown to be ungrateful to Choonilal, for  example, for  though Choonilal prayed to  the  gods for  his  wife  to  become pregnant, she  only  got  thinner. Then he  prayed to  have the  process   reversed. "But the  gods  hadn't the  time   to  change back   the   whole process." The priest  settles  this state of affairs by fathering Basdai's child  for  her. The gods  not  only  are  given  this  humorous depiction, but   they   are  depicted as instigators and exemplars of human conflict. They fight  to  establish righteousness,

LADOO

which  in turn  provides  a reason  for Choonilal to quarrel with  Tailor and  for  the tensions of the novel to ensue.




LAnoo HITS ouT MORE viGOROUSLY  at  the  religious  world  of Hinduism in creating the  Zeitgeist of Carib Island  in  the  rgso's. Many elements of Hindu religious  mythology become  absurdities in  the  transplanted context  of village  life in  Trinidad: the  monkey  god  Hanuman becomes  the  god  of  power for  Choonilal. In  other words,  monkey   business  is  the  means   of  power.  The Hindu priest is dressed in cowboy boots and  drives a Cadillac-a satirical  picture of his modern materialism and  westernized  manners. Choonilal and  Basdai show blind  devotion to the  Aryan  gods, which  leads  the  couple  to abandon the  use of their  indoor  toilet  for  the  cane  fields. For  religious  reasons  the  sex act  is seen  to be "ungodly in  the  house," but  when  performed  outside  it  becomes  a source  of village humour and  scandal. Views of Jesus and  God  are  deliberately satirized  as part   of  the  criticism   of  the  system  of  education  Poonwa  receives.  Repeatedly Ladoo  counterpoints Hinduism and  Christianity.
But Carib Island also has its social prestige, its pride in education and  language: "Man Choon  I tell you, dis island is something  else man. Dese young  Indian  boys and  dem, dey drink  rum  and  talkin  English too bad man. De more dey does drink rum  is de more  dey does talk  English." "Choonilal said,  'Just  now  you go see wot go happen in dis island,  Rag.  Everybody in dis island want  to go to school. Nobody want  to work in the cane or plant  tomatoes  and  ting, you know  boy."  Despite this bitter  pessimism  expressed  by Choonilal, the generation of his parents was not all committed to the land  as the only salvation  in Carib  Island. In  a short  story called "The Quiet   Peasant" ( 1972)  Ladoo  presents  a different, admirable image  of  a father who sees education as the  means  of gaining  independence from  the  white man. The  father, Gobinah, tells his son, Raju: "A few days every  week, try to go to school and  learn  something. Take  education beta, so wen you come a man,  you wouldn't have  to  kill yourself  for a  bread  like me.... Wen  you  have  education beta,  you wouldn't have  de cause to rent  land  from  dese white  people.m 7
Ladoo  reveals here the ironic  clash between  the rustic realities  of an agricultural existence  and   the  imported  ambitions of  a  modern   progressive  life  style.  Carib Island  is divided  in itself. It becomes a split land in the  Faulknerian sense:  placing the  young  ambitious youth  educated in the  white  man's system  against  the stub­ born  old-timers like Choonilal who must  be forced  to surrender their  security  for the new generation.
As the climate  of both  the  East  Indian and  white worlds is depicted, it becomes fairly clear that  Ladoo  finds himself in a veritable  culdesac. The city life of Carib Island  is characterized by  "stabbings in  alley  ways"  and  "whores at  street  cor-

47

LADOO

ners." Canada, on  the other  hand,  is described  in  terms  of its  wintry  climactic conditions and  the in justices and  cruelties of its settlement  history. Canada is no different from Carib  Island. Each of these two worlds is made to seem repugnant, then, one by juxtaposition with the other.
Clarity  of purpose  and control  are, however, lacking  in  Ladoo's  depiction  of sex, excretion,  and  profanity.  Peter  Such  speaks  too  kindly  when  he says that Ladoo's writing genius shows a facet of itself in the comic and scatological vein.18
Ladoo's  comedy  and  scatology are  not  always  linked  with  a  show  of  artistic genius. He chooses to emphasize sex mainly for its shameless self-indulgence;  for its perverse expression in the many  escapades  of the  village queer, Soak;  in  the crude humour  involving a man and woman stuck together  helplessly in a copula­ tive embrace  in the cane field; or in the snide  cuckoldry  which the  pundit  per­ petuates  against  Choonilal.  The  final episode of the  novel is the  stark  scene of Rookmin baring  her genitals before a gazing pundit  who reverently drools before her. The  whole gamut  of sex seems mindlessly unmotivated, even if  one wants to pretend  that  Ladoo  is commenting  on this misdirected  and  twisted  focus of the life force in society. The satirical  point is lost and  the  reader  seems to be merely given a heavy-handed  treatment  of sex for the sake of its own  perverseness. Even surpassing the over-attention  to perverted forms of sex are  the endless references to and accounts of the process of defecation. This approach has nothing of Swift's metaphorical satire  behind  it.  Ladoo  is totally  without  the  grace  of art  or  the control of the purposeful writer. He shows Choonilal  and  Basdai to be caught  in the religious restrictions placed  upon  their  normal  body  functions,  and  declares Poonwa to be modern because he can ad just to the idea of  eating and  defecating simultaneously in pleasant indoor surroundings.
Traditionally filth and the human  condition  have  been equated  as metaphors with moral and spiritual  implications, but Ladoo  hardly  bothers to construct  the links or even to allow subtle hints to fall in  his scatological  gallop  through  the novel. The Zeitgeist seems to be one within which we are to read Carib  Island  as a dung  heap or as a place where life is directed  no longer  toward  creative  ends but rather  toward  the sordid, ugly, and sterile. Better alternatives  are not offered, and we are not given hope when we shift to the depiction  of Canada, for Ladoo then speaks of "the  nakedness of the trees and  the havoc of regenerating  death." The Canada for which Poonwa sets out after  he leaves Carib  Island  is the  place where we see

the red Indians who had been living for thousands of years in North America; just living with nature and worshipping the land. Then  came the Whiteman with his Bible and guns and a paper that had been given to him by some blue-eyed King. The paper said that the King owned the land;  the Indians  were trespassers. Then there was war. There was death in the land.

LADOO

This area of darkness and death, like  Marlow's choice  of  nightmares in  Heart  of Darkness,  is the  milieu Ladoo chose  as his world, just  as  Poonwa did.  It was  his alternate world. Ironically Ladoo left it to die in the  one he knew  more  intimately. His  two  novels  are  the  ironical commentary on  the  tragic fate  he shared with his own  fictional characters.

NOTES

1 Jane Austen,   Letters  to  Her  Sister Cassandra, and  Others,  Vol.  II, 2nd  ed.,  ed. R.N. Chapman (London: Oxford, I952), p. 40I; letter  to Anna  Austen, Septem­ ber  I814, cited  in A. H.  Wright, Jane Austen's Novels  (Harmondsworth:  Penguin, I953),p. I3.
2   Austen,  Letters,  II, p. 46o;  letter  to Edward Austen,  I6  December I8I6, cited  in
Wright, p. I6.
3 Peter   Such,   "The Short Life  and   Sudden Death   of  Harold  Ladoo,"  Saturday
Night, 89  (May I974), 36.
4  Ladoo  in  Yesterdays  had  used  material drawn from  stories  written earlier   than No  Pain  Like  This  Body  (I972). As such  No  Pain  Like  This  Body may  not  be earlier  so far  as its composition is concerned. All references to  the  two  novels  are taken  from  Harold Ladoo, No Pain Like This  Body (Toronto: Anansi,  I972)   and Yesterdays  (Toronto: Anansi,  I974).
5  Ladoo had  planned to give  this  title  to his first published novel,  but  changed the name  after critical comment from  his editor.  See Such,  "The Short Life,"  p. 37·
6  Peter  Such,   "Harold Lowry  Ladoo-Yesterdays,"  Tamarack Review     (October
I974), p. 78.
7  Nancy  Naglin, "The Tale of  Poonwa,  the  unofficial  white," Saturday  Night,  89 (June I974), 37·
8    Ibid.
9  Ibid.
10 Bruce F. Bailey, "Yesterdays," Canadian  Forum  (May-June I974), I7.
11   Frank Birbalsingh, "No  Pain Like This  Body," 0 pen Letter,  2  (Summer  I 973),
106.
12   Mark  Sarner, "Yesterdays," Books in Canada  (Aug.-Sept. 1974), p.  I6.
13  Ibid.
14 Such, Tamarack Review, p. 79·
15  Ronald Hatch, "Yesterdays," Canadian  Fiction Magazine  (Summer I975), I IO.
16 H.  J. Rosengarten, "The  Walking Ghosts  of  Empire," Canadian   Literature,  63
(Winter 1975), 96.
17 H. Ladoo, "The Quiet Peasant," Canada in Us Now  (Toronto: N.C.  Press, 1976),
p. 93·
18 Such, Tamarack Review, p. 78.





49

THIS ISL)IND




1.    Genesis

On  this island  there  are many
Cats.
Some, dressed like eagles
In eagle feathers,
Sit on the top branches of cedar  trees
Watching traffic.
Their smiles are large, I would say they
Grin,
and  from  these fine pointed
Teeth a chittering
Song like eagle
Laughter, high and  bright, Carnivorous.

They jump, not so much  like birds  but more
Like the hang  gliders who celebrate
Every Sunday in summer,
Their arms held out in cruciform, on the summit of Mt. Somenos.

And, cat-like
Land, claws extended, on the roofs of little
Cars, moving like grey mice On the grey highways where  I Live.

One  bare-gummed creature, disguised
Eyes luminous, feral  iris
Crazy as headlights,
Peered  in my window.  When  I Looked  up, I saw that  grin arranged On  the moon's face like an obedient Cloud.
His wagging  tail arranged a half
Circle of rain on the glass.

"We  are all mad  here," he said.
 


Linda Rogers




so

POEM

2.   Shibboleth

When  I was visiting, I noticed
The  house smelled.
"It smells like death," I said. "Your  house
Smells bad."
It happened they'd  used foam
Insulation and  had  to take the walls apart. In  the wall between  his
Bedroom  and  hers because they slept
Apart,
There was the skeleton of a rat curled
Inside  a cat, Peacefully sleeping.

Later, an old man, who'd  been a carpenter, told them
They  often  did that  in the old days, To  keep away evil.

"Do you ever feel the tiny
Pea under  your mattress?" my friend  asked, Laughing.


3.   Eloise and  Abelard

On  this island,
There are places where women
Appear to sleep
Alone, the convent walls Patrolled by black castrati, Their soprano
Voices are all we hear  on the
Outside in our grey
Cars  on the grey highways.

Someone told me it was nuns
Who started putting
Bones in walls
To scare  the Devil, Tom  cats
And sometimes  babies with strange Vestigial  tails and  ecclesiastical Smiles.

The sign of the cross was not
Enough.

POEM

4.    Apocrypha.

On  the wild western sea,
A man sat watching, his hand Warming the valentine in his breast Pocket, both retinas
Frozen as usual on the white  mammalian
Froth.

The  cougar,  painted day-glo  yellow, Waited,
Not in the tree like my dark  hunter,
But crouched in the shadow  of a giant Crab  with legs, cancerous, seeking Refuge in human
Society.

The  cougar's  cubs were dead,  her breasts
Painful, she watched
His salt lips with hungry
Fascination.

In that  night,  there  were no smiles, No disembodied
Teeth, just four eyes glowing in the crab's black
Aura, and a human voice, Feminine,
That made him turn  at last.
Remember, this is still my island.


5.   Felix Domestica

Cat -carnivorous quadruped. Yes, I thought,
He has four feet and seems to want
Me.
I have been singled out,  because
My car is grey and  I
Drive  carefully  around the rolled
Fur,  catsup  coloured  road  signs signifying
Death.
Probably, he saw I had  mongolian Eyes and  didn't go in for Electrolysis.

POEM

Probably, he knew
There were mice in my freezer with turgid
Tails  and  teeth  that  needed
Orthodonture.
("Everyone knows a cat makes things
Vanish quite  slowly,
Beginning with  the end of the tail and ending
With  the grin,
Which remains for some time after
The rest is gone.")


6.    In the Lovely Garden

My garden has a fence, a gate, four
Hydrangeas and  a pool, Where he sat
Dreaming of orange  marmalade, Fishy tasting with no
Bones.

"Are  you hungry?" I asked, Offering my bare
Foot  for washing,  I was never
Frightened. His obedient
Grin  was the only
Cloud  in the blue sky.

"Once," he said, "I met an Indian.
She was standing in the wild grass. Her  skirts were wet.
She offered  me her fish,
Her  hands tasted of salt."

Later, he told me,
"You  are too much  in the sun. Your  garden is not perfect."









53

POEM

7.    Evensong

In  the west, we sleep
In  feather beds, the slow Accumulation of salt-water birds Caught drowsing in eat's  nocturnal Glare,
And sometimes feel the small
Heart still beating inside.

"When you smile," he said, Licking,  licking,
"Your teeth look like piano
Keys."

"I may be your pillar of salt,"  I told him, "But I am not insensitive to night
Music,  the smell of flowers,
Your tongue rasping and the west Wind  farting requiem  in dormant Nests."

Later, I heard  him walking  up and  down, Avoiding  the semi-tones, he was not
That subtle.


8.    Anorexic

"You're thin," they said, admiring. "Vegetarian?
Sex life picked up, the moon
Favourable?"

"No. Yes, yes." Moon,  I thought, Lunatic.
And  then I knew,
If the world was flat, I was definitely
On  the edge of it.
This must be my apotheosis.

I began  to read my dictionary, Cat-house, cat-gut, cat o'
Nine  tails.
"Did  you say, Pussy?"

54

POEM

9.    Suffering Catfiish

Did you hear,  there's  a lake
On  a mountain on my island, full
Of fish, their flesh
Licked  clean?
When  you look, you can see Luminous bones and small Cinnamon hearts  crying out, "This is my island."

We like it here.

10.    Te  Deum

Now,
I am hardly more
Than a skeleton  myself,
Bones and  teeth  and  a snow white
Heart.

My grey car sits in the garage, His marks,
Iridescent on the roof,
A sign, I think,  of some supernatural
Interest in my island, Licked almost  clean by cats
With  desecrated breath  and  receding
Finger  nails.

He is gone,
Hunting for souls, disguised, Waits on the same branch near The same highway.
There are other  grey cars, there is still
Madness,
And the sea is all around us.

11.    Valentine

I am not sad.
It is very peaceful here. Everyone in my family smiles.
Everyone in my family  has seen the orthodontist. I recently  received  a valentine, it was from  a
man  who lives by the sea
On  the west coast of my island.

55

SAM SELVON TALKING

A Conversation with Kenneth Ramchand




Samuel Selvon





K.R.  Samuel  Selvon, you are the first writer-in-residence  that  we have had  at St.
Augustine  and  this is an important breakthrough for  us, but  I'm  sure that many people will wonder why you are here for one month  only, and why you have come in June*  when our students  are  preoccupied  with examinations.

s.s. I had  hoped to come for the full student  term,  from  October  to December
1982, but I'm  working on a new book which I have started  and I have found that some research that I'd  hoped to put off till a later  period has to be done right  now. I can't  really move with  the  book until  the  research  is done.

K.R.  Are you doing a non-fiction work?

s.s. No, but in a way it is a departure for me. I hope to do a work of fiction, but it will be based loosely -very loosely -on  historical material.  Although  it will be in the main a fiction and invention, and  will related  more to human and social relationships than to events, I would like to adhere  to the history of the period-roughly the 192o's and 193o's-as closely as possible. At the same  time  if I find that  the  fiction and  the  creativity  are  working  to  my satisfaction,  I  might  forsake  historical  authenticity.  In  other  words,  if I feel the need to shift an historical event or circumstance  out  by a few years I might very well do so. I don't  know if this sort of thing  has been done by other  writers,  and  maybe  critics and  historians  would  find  fault  with  this unorthodox way of handling  the material,  but  I am going to try it anyway.

K.R.  You said earlier that you are locating the book in the South.

s.s.   Yes. It is set in and around  San Fernando, and  deals with the movement  of
East Indians  from the sugar cane areas into the town and,  in a way exactly

*This  conversation took  place  when  Samuel  Selvon  visited  the  St.  Augustine   Campus   of  the University  of the  West  Indies in June  1982.  He  was  in  Trinidad on  a  Canada Council  grant to  carry  out  research   about  life  among   Indians in  and   around  San   Fernando with  special reference  to the  192o's and  193o's, in preparation for writing a novel.

SELVON

like what  is happening now, forsaking the land,  being attracted by the life of the town -going into business, working as tradesmen,  etc.  just like the Negroes are supposed  to have done after Slavery was abolished. There  are two elements I would hope to involve. (a)  The Christianizing  and educating of the Indians  by the Canadian missionaries which to some extent influenced them  to forsake the land  and  move into the town.  (b)   The  slave  (Black) and  the indenture (Indian)  have always fascinated  me  because in spite of what  is happening in Trinidad today it is my belief-tinged as it is with more  and  more  disillusionment  as the  years  go  by -that  a  very strong human  bond existed between these two factions though  it has become more and more fragmentary.

K.R.  I am  reluctant  to press for more details at this stage  because  I  know your method  as a novelist has never involved analyzing  before writing  the  work itself. I  can  guess there  might  be something  like the  relationship  between Tiger  and  Joe in A Brighter Sun, but I don't  want  to draw  you out  if you feel you would like to stop there.

s.s. If I  did  that  I  would  have to treat  it as the  earlier  stages of that  kind  of relationship.  The   Tiger- Joe  relationship  had  already   been  there  in  the period I was writing about in A Brighter Sun, but I can't  have that approach with  two  races coming  into  contact  for the first time.  In  the  new book, I really don't  know if I would do it, or how I would handle it.

K.R.  But it seems that  you are  not as optimistic about  that  kind of relationship now as you were when you wrote A Brighter Sun.

s.s. I feel it is easy to keep the dream  alive because I spend  most or all of my time living abroad,  but whenever I come back to Trinidad and  I listen and hear about  what is happening  my disillusionment is fuelled. In  other words, if I had remained in the island experiencing the realities of what I hear is happening the dream  would turn  nightmare.  But whenever  I come, and  go to the market  and  see the races together, or whenever  I go in a taxi and sit beside a Negro and  an  Indian  I find that  elements of human  tolerance  still exist and  that  the  picture  is not as black as it  appears.  I  believe that  this strikes at the very root of the controversy and argument that  go on  concern­ ing the subject  matter  that  our writers choose.

K.R.  Very few writers of African  origin have had  the  courage  to deal  with  this sort  of issue. A  notable  exception  is Earl  Lovelace  who  writes  about  the attempt  of an Indian  to fit into a largely African community  in The  Dragon Can't  Dance.  But  I  agree  the subject  does attract   controversy.  Are  there other difficulties for a writer dealing with this subject?

57

SELVON

s.s.   Yes man, that  is a great thing about that  book. If I choose to keep the dream alive I  would  be tempted  to write about  aspects  that  enhance  the  dream. But while I am all for the ultimatest freedom for the writer, his work should encompass a broad unbiased picture.

K.R.  Did you feel any need to do research about  African-Indian relations  when you were writing A Brighter Sun?

s.s. No. I  was  living in Trinidad  at  the  time  and  I  wrote  about  something  I knew from  first-hand experience. In fact  I took the  Negro-Indian  relation­ ship so much for granted  that it still amazes me that  when some people talk about  that  novel they mention  the Tiger- Joe  relationship  as a  racial state­ ment. To me I was just portraying  the relationship  that  existed  between two human  beings and that was all.

K.R.  Looking at the design of the novel, the structure, the choice of characters and even some of the conversations one can't  help thinking  that  the impulse  to write  about  African-Indian relationships  was  present  although   it  was  not the main thrust of the book.

s.s.   Yeh, but you are asking a question there  to rip  open  the  guts of a  writer's creativity  to find out  what  processes go on  here. There  is a  saying  that  I like, "When  the  pot was cooking you wasn't  in the kitchen."  So now, Ken, you are suggesting that I contrived during  my creative  process to have Tiger and  Urmilla  living near Joe and Rita  but  that  wasn't  planned  in my mind when I was writing the book. The fact that  Joe happened  to be a Black man is quite incidental.  To many Trinidadians it would appear  that  I deliberately made  this set-up. I do not work this way. I  have  never worked this way. I start  a book and  I allow this creativity/charisma that  writers are supposed to  have  to  do its thing.  What  would  be  truthful   is to say  that  I  selected Barataria as the setting because I was living there  between 1945 and  1950, that was deliberate.

K.R.  Well, then, do you think that in the book you are now writing you are going against  your usual method of composition?

s.s.   Yes, and  it comes back  to that  first question,  where  I  told  you  I  made  a start,  and  needed to do some research.

K.R.  When  you first wrote to me about  coming  to do the  research,  I felt  intui­ tively that  you wanted to get the feel of the period, to immerse yourself, and this was more important than the facts you would nevertheless be wanting  to check on. When  you said on arrival  that  you were trying  your  best not  to look around  or to listen to what is happening now, I took it that  you did not

SELVON

want  any  interference  with  that  process of getting  the  feel  of the  earlier period.

s.s. Well I think the facts are important but the point is that  I would select what I want  to use, what  I feel would be helpful to me. Also it is not so much  to get the  feel of the  period for itself, as to get the  feel of the  people of the period,  because  I  would  be after  human  relationships,  lifestyle, social  be­ haviour and so on.

K.R.  Do you think that  the research you are doing will help you to discover things that  were not apparent to you about African-Indian relationships when you lived here in 1945-so?

s.s. Quite  so. Not only that.  I can't  say at this stage what  I may create or what I may not. I would certainly hope though  that  in this novel set in the early period  there would be a great deal that  would cast light in what  was likely to happen  in the future.

K.R.  Sam, I feel I am making you talk too much about  the new book which you are still writing.

s.s. I didn't  want  to do this but  I'm  doing it for you -like a kind of thinking aloud, so you must  take it like that.  I am sounding  a little more ambitious than  I might  accomplish.  I  realize  now  that  covering  a  period  of  20-30 years in this way is not easy. And I don't  want to make a statement  to make people say "That will be a great book," that in itself would create a hang-up in  my  approach. I know  that  I  would  only superficially  and  selfishly be taking  out certain  events to write a novel. I have no feeling at all that  this book will turn out to be an epic or saga covering the movement from country to town. There  is more  than  enough  history and  drama  here for others  to do  more  comprehensive  and  detailed  studies,  and   I earnestly  hope  it is being done.

K.R.  I hope we are not using up too much  time on the new book or on the issue it now looks as if you are going to deal with, even though  it is the most im­ portant  issue in the social and  political life of Trinidad today.  Besides, you are a novelist not  a politician or social commentator, and  I feel bad  about pushing you to talk in this way.

s.s. I  would  much  prefer  to  have  had  the  novel already  written  than  to  talk about  it in this way in truth,  because hitherto  I  have  never  discussed with anybody what I hope to accomplish in a future  project, because a man  could tell you a lot about  what  he's going  to do tomorrow,  but  when  the  time come he ain't  done one arse, and  I would feel much  happier  if the book had already  been \flitten and  we were talking about  it in restrospect. Also I do

59

SELVON

not feel that  I express my thoughts  and  views as well as I would like to in interviews and  public statements,  and  I  prefer  to be read  than  heard.  If I have  anything  significant  to say on  any  issue it  is to  be  found  inside  my novels and  stories.  I  would  say  that  my  interest  would  lie  more  in  my characters'  reactions to issues and situations than  in the issues themselves.

K.R.  What  is coming out of this conversation, Sam,  is how one writer takes  pos­ session of his material, or becomes possessed by it, so even if you never wrote the new novel what  you are  revealing now is of great  value to those  of us who feel a sense of awe about  the creative process.

s.s. When a writer is writing, it should be approached with a certain  amount  of innocence and  when a writer loses that  innocence  he ceases to be a  writer as far as I am concerned. Therefore  I deliberately cultivate  a certain measure of ignorance about everything in order to allow the innocence to feel its way into a situation or issue.

K.R.  Would you say that you cultivate this innocence in your use of language?

s.s. To the extent that it does not worry me if I invent a turn  of phrase or word, and interpolate  it into what is commonly accepted  as Trinidad dialect. Some people  accuse  me of  writing  a  kind  of  hybrid  dialect  which  is not  truly authentic. What  they fail to see is that  apart  from  Vic  Reid's  New  Day I was the  only other  West  Indian   novelist to  write  a  novel  in  which  both narrative and  dialogue were written  in dialect,  and  that  I  had  to consider being read by an audience outside of the Caribbean to whom a presentation of the  pure  dialect  would  have  been  obscure  and  difficult  to  understand.

K.R.  This sounds very much as if you are saying that  if you did not have to think of a non-Caribbean reading  public you would  have  written  differently. Do you mean that?

s.s. No, because I am a writer and language is a tool. I do not think I could have said what  I wanted  to say without  modifying  the dialect.  And  if I had  not done this modification the dialect would have been Greek to a lot of people.

K.R.  Yes. I go along with a view similar to this, held by the Martiniquan Edouard Glissant, that  for our society to make a transition  into full self-development and self-expression it is necessary for dialect to cease to be a secret language and  become an open language. It must come to terms with  writing and still retain its essence as the language of our community.

s.s. In spite of the modification  I consider what  I do to be dialect.  Furthermore I saw potential  in this modified dialect  to the extent  that  in my last  novel using this language  form,  Moses  Ascending,  I  experimented even  further

6o

SELVON

with it using both  this and  an archaic  form of English which is not spoken anywhere today. The point I want to make is that that archaic form is a kind of dialect. So I am combining  two kinds of dialect. Another  thing that  a lot of people forget is that Standard English or "proper English" is also used as part of our dialect in certain  phrases or words. For instance if I rudely inter­ rupt  a creolized Trinidadian and  he or she turns  to me, looks me  up  and down  and  says in the Queen's  English "I beg your pardon," I  would con­ sider that  to be part of the Trinidad dialect.

K.R.  The  terms  you are  using are straightforward, but  the  ideas  coincide  with those of a number  of modern  theorists who speak about  the  literariness of the text.

s.s. My language  is being taken  in as written  language  off the  page. I  am  not writing spoken dialect directly on to the page with phonetic spellings and apostrophes and  half-spoken words because to me those are handicaps  to the reader. People love to hear me read, but I am not very much  concerned with that.  My concern  is that  they read the book as a reader,  and  that  they use the senses of a reader rather  than those of a listener to interpret  the language and once they can interpret  it as readers that is the main  thing  to me.

K.R.  How do you respond to the assertion by a number  of critics that  A Brighter
Sun is a dialect novel?

s.s. To  tell you the  truth  I  did  not  even know the  full  meaning  of the  word dialect when I wrote that book. The dialogue and a few sections when Tiger is thinking  out  his thoughts  aloud  are  in  dialect,  but  a  great  deal  of it  is straight  basic English.  I  consider The  Lonely  Londoners  and  some of my later  books to be dialect novels.

K.R.  I can't  agree with  you about  A Brighter Sun.  What  you call straight  basic English is what  I call Trinidadian Standard  English.  To  the eye it doesn't seem very different  from  English Standard English, but if either of us were to read it aloud  it would declare itself to be closely related  to the dialect - it has  the same system of sounds as our  dialect.  If Trinidadian Standard English does not look different from English Standard English or American Standard English, that  is only because writing is an  unreliable  guide  to the phonology of a language, especially its tone and accent. This is not a difficulty for a native speaker  of the language  however. When  you or  I read aloud  a narrative  passage from  A Brighter Sun, and  pass from  there  into  the  char­ acter  thinking  aloud  or speaking, nobody notices the  changeover.  There  is continuity.  I  would say  A  Brighter Sun  is written  in  the Trinidadian lan­ guage  or  Trinidad Creole  which  includes both  Trinidadian standard and Trinidadian dialect. The Lonely Londoners is written in Trinidadian Creole

SELVON

too, but  it  prefers to locate  itself for  the  most  part  m  the  dialect  of  our language.

s.s. I have never really considered the language  in that  light  before, and  I find it very interesting.  We must look at A Brighter Sun  together  before I leave. But I still maintain  that there must be a distinction  between the written  and the oral.

K.R.  I don't  want to abolish that distinction either. While we are on the question of language,  have you thought about  how you would approach the language of the characters  in the new novel? Will some of your research  be related  to that  problem?

s.s. The  answer to the last part is no. The  answer  to the first is that  I am more concerned  with the translation  of the emotions, feelings and  situations  than with reproducing a historically accurate  language.  If I find a language  form that  works I will use it. If I could write French,  and  French  suited  my  pur­ pose, I would use it.

K.R.  Will that  be your attitude  to place as well?

s.s. I can't  afford to be too far wrong topographically so I want  to look at Cross Crossing, to envisage the land as it was then. I want  to talk to a few people who know what  it was like. I  have to get an  idea of the  physical layout.  I want  to know what  roads were asphalt,  which  ones had  gravel  and  which ones had mud, them kind of little things. I might  write about  a man coming in to San Fernando from Cross Crossing barefoot and gravel hurting  his foot, and people would say "No, that road had pitch not gravel." That is the kind of research I want to do.

K.R.  The  book you may end up writing  will not be exactly like the one you are talking about now, I don't think. And yet, as you talk about how a writer approaches his task one feels glad that you are being so generous, giving from what is private  and very personal. This is the sort of exchange  that  univer­ sities take on creative writers for.

s.s. I would be much happier discussing this face to face with a group of student writers. I have had some experience teaching  creative writing in Britain and in Canada, and  many times I have wished I was talking  with  people from my own country.  I feel that any contribution that  I have to make as a writer should  be directed towards our own culture,  and  most of the writers I know are  disappointed at the fact  that  while our  potential  has  been  appreciated and used abroad,  nothing has been done at home.

SELVON

K.R.  I  know how  you feel. We are only now making  a  start.  Sometimes  I  am sure that  this country  has got so materialistic, its soul is so dry, that  people are  ready  for  what  our  artists, thinkers and  creative  people in every other field have to offer. But then one can lose heart so easily.

s.s. In some countries  the very fact that  you are resident as a recognized writer is sufficient  for  that  country  to  encourage  and  support   you.  I  moved  to Canada in 1978, and in a very short time, even though  I was not well-known to the Canadian public, I was doing a paid-for writer's  tour, visiting certain provinces that  even published  Canadian writers themselves had  never had the opportunity to visit. If one were in Trindad one would visit schools all over the island and  talk to pupils and students about  the art of writing, and encourage  them  if they  were inclined  to that  art  form.  I  am  sure  that  in practically  every school in Trinidad teachers would  remember  our late  cul­ tural officer, M. P. Alladin, who managed to direct  his energies towards this kind of work as an artist, and was able as well to function  at an international level. M.P.  once approached me with  the idea  of having  a  literary  officer who would do the same kind of thing  that  he was doing  as  an  art  officer. This was an original  proposal of his but as far  as I  know  nothing  has been done about it.

K.R.  Another  possibility is that  you might do  paid-for  reading  tours to different parts of the country,  and  these would bring your  work to a general  public who might  not otherwise have come into contact  with it.

s.s. I enjoy reading  from my own work and  a listener or an audience  can catch some of the nuances  more quickly but my concern  is not with  public  rendi­ tion. I prefer  to talk with people after  they have  read  my work, after  they catch this nuance from  the written word. Mind  you, I am  not against read­ ing in public.  I don't  do readings every day but  I  am  reading  at  the  Nor­ mandie  next Sunday.  I am  here only for a month  and while I  am  here  I would like to reach as wide an audience  of my own  people as possible.

K.R.  And a public reading  can give the pleasure appropriate to a public reading.
Now what  about  people who won't  read  but would come out  to listen?

s.s. I'm  not  all  that  interested,  not  really.  I  would  be  catering  to  a  kind  of laziness. I would read  to them in the hope of showing them  what  they are missing, and  encouraging  them to read.

K.R.  Would you read more whole-heartedly to people in our society who are  not so educated  and  who can't  read and in any case don't  have access to books?

s.s. Yes I would read to them. But I don't  feel that  the ability to read is one of the criteria  human  beings should be judged by.

SELVON

K.R.  O.K.  then. How  about  the problem of the  higher  illiteracy?  Do you think that  reading your works to intellectuals, academics,  and  others who  usually read can help them to a better understanding?

s.s. I would find this very difficult to understand because I consider myself to be one of the few writers who expresses himself in the simplest  possible forms. Those readers who can't see what I mean need to be educated  like the com­ mon masses who understand  what I write about  very well.

K.R.  I think  you are  not all that  interested  in  reading  your  work partly  because you have a great  respect for writing as writing,  and  partly  because you are not interested  in power and do not feel that  you have a message which  has to be communicated to save people. It  is good to  know  a writer  who  does not wish to conscript us and  it is a relief to know that  if we close the  book he  will not  pursue  us with  his microphone.  But  still  I  must  ask,  would foreigners  benefit as readers from  hearing  you or a Trinidadian read  your work aloud?

s.s. Yes, but I would like to be the one to read it. (Laughter.) I think that  I am the best reader of my work and I have been told so very often.

K.R.  Isn't it generally true that a writer is usually the best reader of his own work?
I have an  idea  that if this is so, it is because in some  way what  the  writer writes is to a large extent determined  by his own  breathing patterns,  by his vocal chords, by the shape of his mouth  and lips. What  he writes is his word and he can speak it best.

s.s. I like that  because I have always felt that  I would like to be identified as an individual  writer. I hate comparisons. My work has been compared  to Stein­ beck for example, and  I have been called the Steinbeck  of the West  Indies, but that  means nothing to me. When a reader  says "I hear Selvon's voice," that  satisfies me-whether they think Selvon is right  or wrong. I  can take adverse criticism as well as the  praiseful. What  I find  in my  writing  is my identity and personality, and people's views that  what  I say is right or wrong becomes less important to me because in my writing I am being my own self.








]I SUN'S LIFE
 


Cyril Dabydeen


An alligator's mating cough  and  call. I am on a lookout
in dreams
surfacing once more.
I am livid for a while -

a somersault next,
more  things going down, water  and  mud slaking; then  the softnesses

reaching out,
a resounding call
in my life, from deep deep  below

water  spurting,
bits of weeds floating, grass, shells -
glass too

eyes looking  back
the creek in me, belching  out the sun's ancient

rust






SN]IKE'S BELLY TURNED OVER

Cyril Dabydeen

A yellow thing  in the sun tried  to brown  it
it resisted with  the energy of fangs it rolled over more than  once

POEM

but  the sun persisted with this strange
desire to make all things one -elemental again;
it tried to create  frenzy in the snake's  heart, lungs, entrails

Snake  refused to die despite  the wound
despite  being confounded: it remembered being able
to moult, how it could change  colour  like the rainbow;
how, too, it could try to hoodwink the sun

But sun knew everything from  the beginning sun surged with a new attack, thinking
of blending  with snakeskin, snakeanger -
a mouth  widened, fangs  jutting  out whipping tongue-like

At night  the sun called
upon  the moon; but the moon  was aloof as always - nothing much  happened
Snake waited  with a ceaseless energy,
breathing heavily

Sun  was ready to sing its swan song above
snake's head; but the lungs covered  with  the pulp of flesh and  blood, refused  to be tricked-
a hissing music surged  forth. Snake  knew its limit despite  the sun-

and  the shadows skirted  everywhere, the moon displayed  patterns in the dark, the leaves
hung  low, filigree scattered in air; water
coruscated ripples. Sun  remembered. Snake  crawled out
one last time, heaving  a body, bedraggled-how much  longer;
and it began  to swell after  a while

bloating  against  an angered sun











66


HEDI BOURAOUI'S QUEST

Poetry as Cultural Bridge



Elizabeth Sabiston





HEm nouRAom ''A TORONTO POET  born in Tuni,;.,;aised and educated  in France,  with a doctorate from Cornell University  in the United States. He is now Master  of Stong College, York University,  Toronto,  where  he
is a Professor of French  and  Comparative  Literature. From  the  very beginning of his poetic and academic  careers, he has perceived himself as being astride three cultures:   North  Mrican, French,  and  North  American.  This  cultural  mix  has proven fertile ground  for experiments in poetry, creative criticism, and the break­ ing of genres. It has also challenged his critics to illuminate  the reasons underlying his refusal to stay within the linguistic and generic conventions generally accepted by each culture.
Bouraoui's   ambition   to  build  bridges  between  and   among   his  native  and adopted  cultures  has generated  most of his scholarly publications,  as well as his poetry.  His  academic  interests  have  ranged  from  language  studies  to  cultural criticism, evidenced in his Creaculture texts (Philadelphia: CCD  and  Montreal: Marcel  Didier  Canada, 1971)   which  analyze  French  culture  against  a  North American  backdrop:  from  experimental   theatre   (French, Polish)   to  contem­ porary  trends  in  literary  criticism  (structuralism  and  post-structuralism,  pheno­ menology,  etc.) ,  from  American  literature   to  the  modern   French  novel  and Francophone North  Mrican and  Caribbean  literature. His 1976 book of literary  criticism, Structure  intentionnelle  du ccrand  M eaulnes':  vers le  poeme romance (Paris: Nizet)  melds several of these  concerns. Bouraoui  attempts  to infuse  the critical  act  with  a  strongly  creative  element  by  wedding  the  contours  of  the novelist's own process, showing that the intention of the novel in some ways trans­ cends the conscious intention  of  its  author.  He  has deliberately  chosen to  break genres and to stress the nature  of  the creative-critical  act. As Abdallah  Bensmain has written,  "Le  critique  ainsi  n'existe  pas:  il sera  produit   par  I'oeuvre.... m Bouraoui has published seven volumes of poetry: Musocktail (Chicago: Tower  Associates, 1966);  Tremble   (Paris:   Editions  Saint-Germain-des-Pres, 1969); Eclate Module  (Montreal:  Editions  Cosmos, 1972); Vesuviade   (Paris:   Saint-

BOURAOUI

Germain-des-Pres,  1976); Sans Frontieres (Saint  Louis:  Francite,  rg8o); Ha"itu­ vois, suivi de Antillades  (Quebec: Editions Nouvelle Optique, rg8o); and  Vers et L'Envers  (Toronto: ECW,  1982). For the most part,  the five earliest volumes have received more sensitive critical attention  in  North  America  than  in France or North Africa, probably because the poet refuses to stay on  well-beaten paths of national  pride  and  cultural  identity. His humanism  is both  local and  universal, and for that  reason the North American audience,  whether  part  of the American "melting  pot" or the Canadian  "mosaic,"  seems to seize  his intention  better.  As he suggests in Creaculture, he is firmly convinced  that  man  shapes his culture  as much  as it shapes him. As Bouraoui stated  in an  interview  with  Edouard  Mau­  nick, he is "un  homme de partout," who has only one mother  country, the "patrie  de l'homme."2
Even in his first volume of poetry, Musocktail, Bouraoui seems to shake a musi­ cal cocktail composed of diverse elements and influences -Michaux's surrealism, Ponge's concentration on the object, Mallarme's  stress on poetry as a game, Alfred Jarry's  literary  jokes. But these were all blended  to evoke a new  inebriation, the rainbow's end of the poet's quest for his "muse," "music," and poetry.
By the time of the second volume, Tremble, the  playfulness, still there  in  the
ironic distance he maintains, is yet muted in favour of an existential poetry of social commitment  in a world that  has "trembled," exploded,  about  him. In  a  review of Tremble, Marc Alyn, in Le Figaro litteraire, praises the "force de frappe  de ces textes bourres de calembours, de sonorites volontairement grin<;antes et d'elements populaires."3   He  admires  its denunciation  of our  modern  "pasteurized  society," but somehow fails to see that  homogeneity is not unique  to North  America  but  is an attribute of the "global village" we all inhabit. As early as "Crucifie," the first poem in Tremble, Bouraoui  refuses to play the game of nationalism  or to accept
cultural  labels of any sort. He wants to call himself "oui," but  "un  oui neutre,  I
Sans rime ni Maison," "Un  oui qui nie." It is this dream  of remaining  free, "un simple Martel  I qui passe sa vie I dans les Motels I du  Monde  I Sans identite," which will make the poet as much at home in Haiti  as he is in Ithaca,  New York,
Sofia, Bulgaria, and Warsaw, Poland. His "Soif de communication" in the earlier volume translates  into  the "Articulation" of Ha"ituvois, with  the  difference  that "Soif" builds on a metaphor  of love between man and woman, whereas "Articula­ tion" takes on an  almost cosmic consciousness. Many  poems in  Tremble- "In  God We Trust" and  "Au Secours," for example -denounce  the exploitation  of underdeveloped  countries by the superpowers  and  hence  predict  the  perceptions of Ha"ituvois, told from  within  the  point of view of the  exploited  land,  not as a detached observer.
Eclate Module, the third volume, separates itself even more drastically from any existing French literary tradition. The shock waves of Tremble become a veritable eclatement or explosion whose metaphor  is located in the "Lem" of the space age.

68

BOURAOUI


It should  be remarked that  the poet uses the French  language as a weapon  against itself and  accomplishes a linguistic  revolution  which is also political  in its repercus­ sions. AB I have said  elsewhere  about  this volume:
Eclate  Module, en faisant  appel  a la sensibilite actuelle,  traduit  l'egarement  et la desorientation  caracteristique de notre epoque et nous donne !'impression  de vivre dans le monde du "choc du futur" de 2001. Le recueil expose la vision d'un  monde en pleine  revolution, !'evolution  qui  se vevele jusque dans  la facture  des poemes, asyndetes, ellipses, brisures stylistiques, acrobaties verbales, rimes qui s'entrecroisent et s'entrechoquent par "l',etonnement  immense du desordre."  Cependant, un ordre esthetique et lethique parfait  surgit des negations didactiques,  des malentendus lin­ guistiques, des cacophonies semantiques....4

Among  contemporary writers,  one can  name  only one other, the  novelist Thomas Pynchon, who seems willing  to poetize  technology,  and  not  merely  to retreat  into romantic  nostalgia for  a  dead   past.   Bouraoui's  fusion   of  disparate  elements, science,  technology, and  poetry,  could  be seen  as a twentieth-century parallel  to the   Renaissance  metaphysical  poetry   of   John    Donne.  From    Musocktail   to Tremble to  Eclate Module  the  poet  seems to  undergo  a  kind  of  rite  of passage, moving  from self-exploration to a global  vision.
V esuviade moves beyond  the critical  view of the modern world  taken  in Eclate Module to  the  creation of the  poet's  own  universe.  No  longer   just  a  Columbus exploring new  worlds,  he  insists  on  creating a  poetic  cosmos  triggered   by  the metaphor of  a  volcanic   eruption or  explosion.  Hence   the  book  is divided   into seven  parts,  corresponding to the seven days of creation  in Genesis, starting with "Volcanigramme,"  passing   by  "Projectologos" -"In   the   beginning  was   the Word" -and  ending in  "Phenixode" as the  new  Phoenix  arises  from  the  vol­ canic  ash. There is a dialectic of creation-destruction, and  before  the explosion  of Mount Saint  Helens,  Bouraoui draws  on the  natural metaphor of  volcanic  erup­ tion  to suggest  the  paradoxical creation of a new world  out  of  the destruction of the old.



Y DESTRUCTION?  For  one  thing,   the  poem  "lntellec­ tuairement" is characteristic, for Bouraoui  has an acute  distaste  for  the abuses of arbitrary power  in any situation, including among  intellectuals who should  know
better:
La menagerie de !'intellect se pavane
Dans son couloir urinuversitaire
Une noirceur inegalee....

V esuviade sees destruction emanating from  many  of the  ikons  of  today.  In  a superfluity of means of communication-tape recorders,  video  cassettes-people stop listening  to people,  and  human contacts  are blocked:

6g

BOURAOUI

Hymne international du systeme abondant
En  bobines .a conditionner  le refus des ans
Le graffiti de mes combines prend la releve
Mais les ondes brouillees sillonnent seules
Mon singulier traque
Orchidee qui s'acheve.

("Sotto Voce")
The  "decodeur" is "atone," and communication never  passes over to communion: Tu refuses de parler toile  pretre
De la communion
Que fait ton telephone occupe.

( "Vidanges communicationnelles")

The  technology of the  global village  has  produced only  global  mediocrity, short­ circuited communication. As Nathaniel Hawthorne once  commented, he  would have  been  more  impressed  with  the  invention of the  telegraph if he  had  felt  its use would  not  be confined  to stock market  analysis  and  investment counsellors.  It would  perhaps require not  too  great  a  stretch   of  the  imagination  to  guess  that  Bouraoui has  turned  to  the  creative,   imaginative,  untechnologized,  rich-in-its­ poverty  culture of  Haiti   to  counteract the  opportunistic,  mechanistic  Western  world  depicted in V esuviade,  where  "l'ordinateur fait  le reste."  In  one  sense the transition is shocking; in another it is predicted in the  earlier  work.  Both  volumes are unified  by the  poet's  quest  for expression  as a means  of human contact: "Je
ne saurais jamais  dire  I Je n'aurai jamais  le mot" ("A Perdre Haleine").

Le monde entier ergotte ses £lots verbaux  un Vesuve
Irruption qui calcine l'etuve de !'inspiration.
By our  worship  of technology,  we have sold out  our  spontaneity to an  infernal machine:

L'invulnerable  machine courtcircuite
L'intuition et son eclair
Galvanise l'angoisse du livre-situation.

("Occupations BarbeMes")

Human beings  are  reduced  to expressing  their  anguish anonymously, on  walls: "Le  graffiti  sert  l'individu de son cri  pollue." There are  no  dialogues but  "dia­ logues de sourds," and  we witness "un  monde  sur le declin"; love itself is mechan­ ized and  reduced  to a science.
To  the  "technologic recidive  I Orgie  qui  cree  un  monde I Architruque de
signaux," Bouraoui opposes his "Force du  Desordre": "Ma revolte  se sacralise." His  sympathy for  the  "analphabete" is  already  evident. By  the  third   section,
"Acoustiquerie," he is already  predicting "Eruptions volcaniques I Su  ant

BOURAOUI


nuit  l'amere plenitude." He  tries to restore  the  power  of  the  Verb,  drowned  by computer programmers: "Je  n'ai  que  des  mots  / Pour   tout  dire"   ("Vocables engorges") .
"Lave Levrose," the fourth section, predicts  the vision of "Levres Femellees  de la Liberte" in Ha"ituvois. The emphasis  is always on human speech  as the  highest of the  art  forms,  because  issued by the  breath of life itself.  "Pessimistologie" and "Transfusion" use  a  metaphor of  circulation  to  convey  the  poet's   passion  for visceral  contact, an  image  that  will be  reprised  to  powerful effect  in  Ha"ituvois.
Part VI, "Generatuerie," is also close to  the  paradox of  Ha"ituvois. We  have
compressed  in one  word  both  the  theme  of the  generations (of fertility)  and  the threat of death -"Tuerie":  as in the  later  book we  have  love-hate,  perception­ destruction. "Balan oire
revolution:

Le verbe
Suit sans cesse des deviations
R!evolution constante
Au seuil de !'approbation.

This   whole  last  section   culminates with  the  exhilaration  and   effervescence   of "Tour de  Force" and   "Acrobaties artistiquees," seeking  the  "equilibre" of  the "Balant;oire." The poet seeks a new creation, the Word  made flesh, not  the  neon surrealism of our daily lives:
Ou est done la sombre image
D'une  naissance
De chair 	a morsures amidonnees
De caresses
Je les veux recreer.

Yet this ambition is what  renders  the  creation  vulnerable. As Bouraoui writes  in "Entre la Pierre et la Statue une Agonie,"  there  is a real  physical struggle  between inspiration and  execution, between  destruction of the  old  ikons and  creation  of a new order,  and  such  is the greatness  and  weakness of art:

Les mots venimeux  s'agglutinent et se dechainent.  Hurlement qui arrete  le  batte­ rnent  du  coeur.  Le  pays de  l'esprit  aride  se peuple  de  suppositions  bannissantes rnalgre  et  en  depit   du  corps-statue,  oeuvre  d'art   a  jarnais  condarnnee   a  etre
vulnerable.

Sans Frontieres, the very brief book of poetry immediately preceding Ha'ituvois, can  be viewed  as a transitional work.  Published bilingually with  translations  by Keith  Harrison, the  work  suggests by its very title the  author's insistence  on  free­ dom and  rupture. It is also an attempt to reach a wider  Anglophone audience. His dense,  clotted  style,  with  its  rapid   gear  shifts  and   juggling  of   protean images,  invites the reader to participate as an equal  in his modern odyssey.

71

BOURAOUI

Ha"ituvois is a taut,  muscular, controlled book of lyric poems, prose poems, and poetic essays that marks a new departure for Bouraoui. Somewhat  more accessible, less hermetic,  than  his earlier  work, it seeks to  build  bridges  of  understanding between the peoples of Francophone Haiti,  the poet's mother  land,  North Africa, and Canada, specifically. It has broader implications,  as well, for countries of the West and  of the Third  World  generally as the  latter  move  from  colonial status into the  modern,  technologized, industrialized  universe.
The  title, as usual in Bouraoui's works, is a new word  forged of disparate ele­ ments.  Never  a  mere  neologism, his titles invariably   explode  the  text  and  the reader's  perceptions of it. "Haiti," of course, is imbedded  in  the  title,  as is the theme of the reader's  reaction:  "tu vois." In her Preface, Jacqueline Leiner points out that  the "caiembour-titre, grin<;ant, populaire" also is a cry,  "aie,  tu  vois!" There is a possibly more crucial pun, however, in the "hai," literally the love-hate relationship   the  Haitian   artists  and   people  have  with   their   land   under   the Duvalier  dictatorship which rules it. By extension,  the  hatred  is extended  to all forms of cultural  colonization  and  domination  practiced  throughout the  world. In this context it is no accident that a Quebec publisher should have detected  the implications of an acerbic cultural criticism directed  at the remains of nineteenth­  century imperialism.
The  "tu  vois" becomes almost a command  to the  reader  to open  his mind  as well as his eyes and to sense fraternity  with the aspirations  of people both like and unlike himself. In fact, throughout  the work Bouraoui  plays with pronouns, shift­ ing, for instance, from  "I" to "we"  at crucial  moments  to indicate  his  empathy  with exploited  peoples. Finally, "tu  vois" is also a  pun  on  "tuer,"  to  kill, and "voix,"  or voices, a pun which we recollect later  in the  title of the  poem, "Vois les Voies eparpillees des Voix," in which the homonyms underline the connections between  perception    ( "Vois"),  the   blazing  of  new   paths   to   diverse  peoples ( "Voies") ,  and  articulation   ( "Voix") . The  entire  work,  in  fact,  becomes  an attempt   to articulate   that  refuses all linguistic,  as  well  as  social, geographical,  religious, and cultural barriers.
"Vois  les voies eparpillees  des Voix"  enriches  and  enhances  the  puns  in  the book title, addressing  itself to the "brain  drain" from  a "terre  inachevee"  which desperately needs native talent. There are cries of pain from the people; often they take the form of loud radio music which is not an intrusion  on privacy, but  "Un
moyen facile de  partager  I Le chant  et le reve."  Only  the  poet  can  articulate
these cries, but often  there is no constructive  response:  "Les  cris abondent  mais l'echo  s'absente." These  voices finally  burst  through   the  eternal   plaint  of  the guitar  and  throb  of  the  drums.  This  poem,  with  its  sketches  of  prisons  and soldiers, is more overtly political than  any of the others. "Souviens-toi  que  tu  es poussiere" is the constant Biblical refrain presented to Haitians. A perfectly lovely, but loaded, image caps the poem:

BOURAOUI

L''eplucheur d'oranges offre
Deux quartiers de solei!
A etancher Ia crainte du passant
Remonte par Ia mecanique
Du jugement dernier.

Thus  the tactile, erotic, sensual fruit  image encapsulates the tropical  sun, but  at the same  time  shades  over  to  the  "clockwork  orange"  of  modern  mechanism, which could  bring  us all a merciless last  judgment.  Instead,  the  poet  hopes for
"Un poeme d'esperance  ejacule I L'amour dans l'orgasme."




ALTHOUGH THE EMPHASIS OF  THIS  COLLECTION is new, as is the more evident social commitment  likely to engage a whole new audience,  it should  present  no startling  shift to followers of Bouraoui's  career.  In  Ha"ituvois, suivi  de  Antillades, Bouraoui  creates  a  poem-essay, a  new  form,  in  which  he dialogues  with  another  people, in particular  with their  "Voices,"  their  poets or artists. The  poet's "I" is somehow less evident than  in the other  volumes, as he seeks to work his way into the skin and  the heart of these people so like and  yet so unlike him. The  dominant motif is a fraternity  which weds Caribbean  culture but, at the same time, by cultural  comparisons and  contrasts,  transcends  it.
H a'ituvois,  the  first and  more  substantial  part  of  the  book,  establishes links between such  aspects of society in  North  Africa, Haiti,  and  Canada as the  role of women, superstition  and  religion, local dialect, and  the  arts.  The  poems are grouped  thematically  and  linguistically. The  first two,  "Vaccine   Tam-Tam  et Nada  Qu'a," and  "Les  Globules de ton Ile,"  provide hooks on which the  North American  reader can hang his perceptions. They set the tone and  provide culture shocks to initiate  us into a culture for which apparently  nothing in our background prepares  us. Immersed  in this tropical  bath, we are invited  to perceive with  our eyes, skins, and hearts, not with rational, sequential logic. For this reason, the "I" of the poem adopts  the persona of a naive North American,  probably  Canadian, tourist,  eventually  horrified  to discover that  he is himself implicated  in  all  this wealth, all this poverty.
The  title of "Vaccine  Tam-Tam et Nada  Qu'a" provides an  initial  linguistic, as well as cultural,  shock. It  could be chanted  to the  beat  of African  drums  or tomtoms. "Pas  d'poobleme  a Haiti" is the constant message they beat, condition­ ing the populace. The  noise of the drum  blocks instead of facilitates communica­  tion. The poet reminds us that Canada, so accustomed to see itself as the colonized and  not the colonizer  (Quebec by Anglophones, English Canada  by  the Ameri­ cans), is itself an instrument  of imperialism in the Third  World. "Nada Qu'a" is simply Canada pronounced  backwards,  with an additional  pun  on  the Spanish

73

BOURAOUI

"Nada," or "Nothing," a favourite philosophic stance of Ernest  Hemingway,  that old frequenter  of Caribbean  islands. The  harsh sound  of "Nada Qu'a" contrasts the  Western  world  of  the  "haves"   to  the  ex-colonial  "have-nots." The   new colonizers are the tourists housed in luxury hotels blinding  them  to the tar-paper shacks outside the gates:
On ne meurt pas de faim disent les imperialistes
On meurt d'abondance de nourriture ... de
sur-alimentation.
Bouraoui  denounces the tunnel  vision of tourists who refuse to look into  their own hearts. The  humour  of the Haitian,  the  philosophic  tolerance  and  stoicism of "Pas  de poobleme," is seen as a defence mechanism,  a kind of voodoo chant
"Servant  lieu de  religion I Tout  est  pris a la  Iegere:  I seul moyen  d'eviter  le
suicide."  Tropical  sunshine,  engendering   mindless  fertility  like  that   of  North
Africa, will not fill empty bellies, and  there is indeed  trouble  in  paradise,  which for all its lushness is not far from a Dantesque  inferno.
Paradoxically  it is all this poverty that  also helps engender  art; and  that  thesis is the centre  of gravity of this book:  "c'est  quand  les estomacs sont  vides que  I fleurissent les oeuvres d'art." There  is no art  without  tension and  conflict, as we
see in the English Renaissance, the Irish Renaissance,  American  black literature. Bouraoui could well be describing his own writing, as well as that  of the Haitian writers whom  he introduces  later.  African  himself in origin,  like them,  he is at home  with  "Des  couleurs I eclatantes  africaines."  Even  the  "marchandage" of
these Haitians  is implicitly compared  to that in a North  African souk, as a means of communication: "Le marchandage est le seul moyen I de s'entre-penetrer emotionnellement,  tactilement,  intellectuellement.... " It,  too,  becomes an  art, and  art  is smilingly for sale on every street comer.  Bouraoui  makes it clear  that
the new tourist industry is built upon a kind of slave trade-"L'esclavage  con­ tinue." There  is a subtle shading over, from the "Je" observing to the  "nous"  of identification  with the Haitians,  through  a shared  heritage  of  language, art,  and colonization: "ceux  qui  nous exploitent."  It  is through  poetry  that  he hopes  to achieve a "HIATUS" (the all-useful pun on HAITI), to hang  as a slave collar around  the  neck of the  tourist  industry.  The  vaccine  drum  provides  a  rolling, hypnotic overture and mood piece for the rest of  Haituvois.
"Les  Globules  de  ton  lle"  shows  the  metamorphosis  of  world  traveller   to
Haitian, prepared  by the pronoun  shift in  the  previous  poem:   "Je  t'ai  dans  la peau HAITI" -which translates into English as the old Cole Porter  lyric, "I've got you under my skin." That  the skin is another  colour makes the act of  penetra­ tion beneath  the surface essential:
Je t'ai dans la peau
Parce que je ne peux pas changer de couleur
Et rna colc re

74

BOURAOUI

The  almost-rhyme   of  "couleur" and  "colere"  exacerbates   the  poet's  sense  of frustration  at the barriers  dividing people. Like them, he is bursting  with hunger
and  love, and  he draws  a  parallel  with the  creative  volcanic  eruption  of   vesu­
viade:  "Eruption qui ne devide jamais le volcan I De mon estomac."  In particu­
lar,  his own memory  of colonization makes him identify  with  "La  haine  de tes poetes." The  metaphor shifts from the appearance,  the skin, to the circulation  of the blood; from "Je  t'ai dans Ia peau" we move to "Je  t'ai  dans les veines." Blood is the fitting emblem of equality  and democracy, the same colour in all men, the underlying reality and life force.
"Had'ra-Vaudou" is an amalgam  of North  African  superstitions  and  Haitian voodoo rites; it takes us back to the roots of both cultures  and  to their folkloristic expression which today continues  to serve as a weapon  against  the oppression of imperialism. The  uninitiated  could use some notes in the form of vocabulary helps, since the poem utilizes both local dialects and the names of local priests, gods, and presiding spirits. Its language  is dense, loaded, rich. The  word becomes a totem, an "open sesame," an incantation, permitting  transcendence,  through  the  poetic voice, for the fantasies of the  two popular  imaginations.  The  poem reverberates to the deep, rich sound of the voodoo drums  and  the African  tomtoms, and  we are reminded  that  Haitian religion represents a local variant  on a theme inherited from Africa. As Bouraoui has said, if he travels, "c'est  pour comprendre  les 'chocs culturels'  qui  en  derivent,  capter  Ia dimension  essentiellement  humaine  de  ces pays, bref, me tremper  dans de nouveaux  bains de valeurs, en esperant  projeter par Ia meme occasion Ia mienne."5  He underlines his cultural  nomadity  and plurivocity.
The  "demons  vivants  et visibles" exorcised in  this  poem  are  the  invaders  in
paradise,  colonized countries  being pre-industrial  but  a  kind  of playpen  for  the industrialized  nations.  Their  tropical  climate  and  lush  beauty  do  not  feed  the inhabitants, but are for sale to the exploiters. Superstition,  far from  being  primi­ tive, has its own logic, giving the individual  some sense of control  over  his own destiny. The magician,  the sorcerer walking on coals, sucking blood, eating broken glass, is escaping the reality of daily poverty and sublimating  pain itself into  "un  reve flamboyant" in  the  space  between life and  death;   between  yesterday  and today.  (Bouraoui's reference  to "le  bel Hier"  and  "L'Aujourd'hui" reminds  us of  an  engage  Mallarme.)  Destruction  and  love,  male  and  female,  Haiti   and
North Africa are fused in the prayers of two peoples to "Auguferai Dieu du feu  I
Erzulie  Deesse de !'amour." We seem to witness a  nightmare, an  oneiric  vision, in which the dreams of the poor are acted out, even to extracting  green bills from a  mouth  that   cannot   speak.  The  T'BAL,   talking  drum,   of  Kherkhennah  in Tunisia  answers to the sounds of the Haitian  Mama  drums.  By the end we have a  procession of spirits  and  gods from  the  Arabian   Nights,  Africa,  and  voodoo

75

BOURAOUI

joining hands  in a mad dance  of "aggressive  transcendence": "Des  Djinns Damb­ Allah  Marabout Papa Legba."
After  the first three  poems, which  serve as bridges  between   the  idees  forces of the  North  American, North  African, and   Haitian  peoples,  there  is  a  group   of poems  about, and  dedicated to,  individual brother  and   sister  artists  who  have helped  articulate the  aspirations of the  masses. "Levres Femellees  de  la  Liberte" joins the theme  of the artist  to that  of the role of women  in the Third World, and is dedicated to four  gifted Haitian literary  women. The  "levres," this time, articu­ late  clearly-they do  not swallow  swords  or  broken  glass as in  a  voodoo  cere­ mony. The  poet senses a double slavery in the women, political  on  the  one  hand,
sexual  on the other: "Toujours le Male-obstacle dresse  l'ecran  1 Ou tu  tisses les
mots  ecorches   de  l'etreinte." Nevertheless   the  poem  begins  with   the  liberating command: "Parle Femme  douee  du  verbe  rare  delie  1 Ta   Terre par  derriere l'esclavage  et la mort." The  entire  poem turns  on the metaphor and  reality  of the
woman's breath giving  voice to her concerns.  Imprisoned by the  "colossale  arro­ gance  du  sacre  passe,"  this  "Femme du  Tiers-Monde" is invited   to  join  hands  with  the  "I" of the  poem  and  establish  a liberating dialogue through the  fusion of woman  and  artist.  The  revolution  may be a "tranquil" one, but it will extirpate the  root  causes  of  this  double  exploitation. Caribbean  and   African  women   are sisters in their  past  and  present,  and  in  their  quest  for  liberation.  Thus each  is addressed  as "0 Femme  riche et pauvre  du Tiers-Monde"-poor in the material sense, but  rich  in  perception and  the  oracular gift  of words.  Her  smile  becomes the new, regenerating because intelligent, sun:

Sur  les levres-ailes du logos
De nos nations.

The   next  four  poems,  to  balance "Levres Femellees," are  addressed   to  four male  artists.  "Genie a Humaniser" is dedicated to  Franketienne, a  painter-poet and  the  author of Ultravocal.  For  Bouraoui, Franketienne  represents   a  human
and  literary contact with  a kindred  soul, between  the  "rue des esclaves"  and  the green  book  ( Ultravocal), between  submission  and  artistic revolt.  Ultra-vocality, it could be said, is at the end of both writers'  quests,  though Bouraoui's has a "modu­ lation  africaine" and  Franketienne is "le fils legitime  des Caraibes." The  bearlike  Franketienne, unlike  the women  poets, gives rein  to a "violence sanguine" (con­ fined to the  verbal  level, to be sure), pushing  vocality  to the ultra-extreme. He  is compared to a bull and a giant,  as well as a bear,  capable of  liberating the  "Perles d'Haiti." Bouraoui urges him to decolonize  Haitian  literature, which,  like  North  African and  to a certain  extent  Quebecois, exalts  classical  French at  the  expense
of a local tradition. Bouraoui  wishes that  "l'ivrogne du Tap-Tap me dise I Aimer
ton oeuvre  au  lieu de celle  I d'Hugo et de  Zola." He  recognizes  in  the  Haitian

BOURAOUI

poet  his own  syntactic  disruptions  and  those of the  fraternity  of Third  World poets.
"Projets  Fraternels," addressed to Rene Philoctete, again  underlines  the quest for fraternity  of a voice trying to make itself heard. Philoctete's  mode is to  myth­ ologize  and   demythologize,   to  create  symbols  "pour   exorciser  la   misere  du monde,"  as opposed to the violent imagery of Franketienne. Philcotete's "lles  qui marchent" are heading  towards liberation  and  may point  the way for the Third
World  generally.  They  become  "des  fleches liberatrices  I De  ta  terre,  de  nos
terres." Michaux's opium-induced hallucinations  are as nothing  compared  to the oneiric  visions of "NOUS, fils de Dahomey  des I Carai:bes, d'Afrique" in our "crises de  possession," a  pun  encompassing  both  the  poetic  divine  afHatus and
social status as ex-colonial possession. The  poet is also a houngan, or priest, in the voodoo tradition.
"Partage" is addressed to Rene Belance, like Bouraoui himself a poet at the time living in voluntary  exile from  the mother  country, and  who is tempted  to return like the prodigal son, living a kind of "delire bordant sur la folie."
"Articulation" (to Rassoul Labuchin) is in many ways a crucial  poem, at the end of the first section of the book. All of H a"ituvois is, after all, about articulation,
and  this one  about  communication "dans  rna  langue  sevree  I Violee  par  'nos
peres les Gaulois' " -in other  words, it is about  communication in the language of the colonizer. North  Africans and sub-Saharan  Africans also use the language of the colonizer imposed by force and now become second nature.  By implication, the  mother  country,  like the  mother  language,  has  been  raped.  It is a  further ironic  note  that  even in Black Africa  children  are taught  that  their  fathers  are the Gauls.  Labuchin  is viewed as a prophet  who returns  to Creole in his works, the language  of the  people and  of folk tales;  his first name,  "Rassoul," signifies prophet  in Arabic.  His proper  name, in fact, is Yves Medard, so even his artistic identity is a kind of fictional creation, or call to anns.  The  "chants  de la liberte"
include  then  "Chants creoles I Chants  Wolof I Chants  Arabcs  I Chants  Bcr­
bercs." A people returning  to its roots depends heavily on an  oral  tradition  and on minority  languages.  The  latter  also exercise an  influence  on  literary  French or classical Arabic as writers make daring  experiments in a mixture  of languages, as, for instance, Michel Tremblay docs with joual in Quebec,  Katcb  Yacinc with Berber and  local dialects in North  Africa, and  Medard-Labuchin with Creole in Haiti.  Bouraoui  and  Labuchin  speak for "Des  pcuplcs sur lc point  d'alphabap­ tiscr," so the language  of literacy  and  that  of folklore and  the oral  tradition  arc found  on  minarets  and  crosses, as well as in voodoo and  folklore,  "En  scrrant
Pierre  Loa  I Lcgba  ct  Baron  Samcdi."  Labuchin,  using ancestral  Creole  as a
literary language,  rebaptizes and immerses his people in a new-old tongue, in much the same manner  as Bouraoui  has spoken of "bathing" in  different  cultures  on his travels.

77

BOURAOUI



kE COLLECTION INCORPORATES ESSAYS  on two of the poets to whom Bouraoui has dedicated  his own poems:  "L'art de saturer  pour raturcr" on  Franketienne and  "Le  Chant  glorieux  de  l'homme  total"  on  Philoctetc.  It should be noted, however, that  Bouraoui's  poems dedicated  to Franketienne and Philoctete are also creative-critical  efforts and  quite  consistent  with the  essays in their insights.
In  the first of the two poem-essays, on Franketienne's Ultravocal, the  author is seen as the type of resistance to the emasculation  of colonized people. Bouraoui perceives Franketienne's "roman-poemc" as somewhat  didactic; its nightmarish vision virtually  abolishes characterization. The  protagonist  is mythic,  the  "medi­ eval shade"  of Mac  Abre, a devil figure, who reappears  from  time  to  time, and mystically makes his first entrance,  Bouraoui  notes, on  page   I 11,  three  unities, implying a new trinity. He is a sort of Mac  the Knife, who is dangerous  sexually as well as physically menacing.  There  is, according  to  Bouraoui,  a  "coherence interne"  in  Franketienne's  work in spite  of  hallucination. Franketicnne attacks the consumer society and technology, in the person of the President  of the United States. The  role of the poet is perceived  as  "eclatement," a  description  that  fits Bouraoui  at least as well as FrankCtienne. Animal  totems of an  ancient  African agrarian  or  hunting  tradition  arc  transformed  into  the  slum  rats  of  a  modern urban  one. But "plus il y a ... d'eclatcmcnt, plus il y a possibilite de creation." In a world overwhelmed  by things, communication is possible only in the "intermit­ tences,"  the  empty  spaces  between.  In  both   his  paintings   and   literary   work Franketiennc declares war against naked power based on authority and technology, and  war is the road to liberty. Because of its avant-gardc quality,  Franketicnnc's audience  is likely limited, but this is generally true  of literature rooted in revolu­ tionary  ideas, including  Bouraoui's  own. So closely does Bouraoui  identify  with Franketienne's vision that he at times, instead of analyzing  his work, assumes his character  and  weds the contours and  poetic rhythms  of his work. The  poetry  is cleverly interspersed  with the straightforward academic  essay, liberally  sprinkled with quotations  from Franketienne's text, and  it is the reader,  finally, who must fill up  the literary  space left to  him.  The  latter  is challenged  to assess his own role, whether as cultural  colonizer or colonized.
In  the  piece on Ces Iles qui  marchent,  Bouraoui  views Philoctete's  drama  of exile. This  essay should  be of interest to Quebecois  readers  as well, since  Philoc­ tetc's chosen place of temporary  exile was Quebec,  of which  he gives  the  reader his impressions. His preoccupation  with death  and  destruction  is  dramatized in Philoctete's  four  illustrations  as well as his poetry.  He  sees  history  as "un  per­ petuel  rccommenccmcnt" from  which,  unfortunately,  we  learn  little.  We  are reminded  of the Joycean  definition of history as a  nightmare from  which we are trying to awaken. The native land, on the other hand, is not susceptible to rational

BOURAOUI

thought; it  is imaged  as  a  mother  country  in  the  guise  of  a  Haitian   peasant woman, the whole bathed in an "atmosphere  de joie, de fete et de flottement." Philoctete  has  created  a  modern  epic in  which  he  plays the  role of a  Haitian Roland  who, unlike his predecessor, sounds the horn  of poetry to open the  eyes of the world to social injustice. We can see why Bouraoui is attracted by his work, for  he forges bonds  of sympathy  with  the  peoples  of  Africa,  from  which  the Haitians  originally came, and with the Vietnamese.
Philoctete  views Canada ambivalently  as the "terre  des exiles, ses freres, mais aussi terre industrialisee  effrayante  dans son isolement et son alienation."  He  de­ fines this ambivalence beautifully: he is "un  enfant  terrible  des traditions de  rna race."  A similar  ambivalence is highlighted  in Bouraoui's  attacks  on the  North American tourists (of whom he is one)  in "Vaccine  Tam-Tam," in favour of the formerly colonized  (of whom he is also one).
Antillades is a little book inside a longer book, but its purpose is to expand  the Haitian  vision to the Caribbean in general and,  by extension, to the entire Third World. If the first section seems to take the "microscopic"  (that  is personal)  view for  the  most  part-to  be  a  kind  of  "novel  as  history,"  to  borrow  Norman Mailer's  terms-the second is the telescopic, long, or bird's-eye view-"history as a  novel."  The  "je" seems distanced  here,  rather  than  absorbed  "under   the skins" of his subjects,  although  the  difference is merely  a  matter  of degree  or emphasis, not of kind.
"Ces Airs Qu'on  Chante Partout" is a tribute  to the  Martiniquais poet  Aime Cesaire  ( "Ces  Airs")   who, along with Senghor, pioneered  a national  conscious­ ness in the Third  World.  Like Bouraoui's native Tunisia,  Martinique is a  plaque tournante, a "carrefour" of different cultures:  "L'Afrique, I'Europe, I'Amerique s'ajustent  poliment." The  "exuberance  verbale" of Cesaire is compared to that  of the Breton. A political figure as well, Cesaire is compared  to Senghor and  Bour­ guiba  who have both moved from attitudes  of revolt to stasis as cultural  monu­ ments. Bouraoui's  view of Cesaire is somewhat sardonic: he is an artist  who has been co-opted, consciously or unconsciously, by  the establishment.  It is the same story on both  sides of the  Atlantic.  As  Bouraoui writes  of Cesaire,  "On   votera pour lui jusqu'a sa mort."
Parallels  are  drawn   between  France's  influence  over  North  Africa  and   its influence over Martinique; both lands are inscribed in a history of slave markets. Cesaire, frozen into Buddha-like  monumental  status, is no longer able to promote social  change.  There   is an  ambiguity  in  the  treatment  of  this  man   who  put Martinique on the artistic map and who was committed  to the betterment  of his people.  For  increasingly,  Gesaire suffered from  a  cleavage  between  his  role as artist and his political role as man-of-action. It is as if fame and  power almost inevitably separate  the leader from his people. Martiniquais children,  questioned about  him  today,  say, "Cesaire  connais pas."  It  is not  his fault,  but  when  the

79

BOURAOUI

artist or spokesman  becomes a monument  in his own lifetime, he cannot  feel the pulse of his people, because he is surrounded  by political aides and  buffers who keep the real world at bay.
Even the Martiniquais topography  is inscribed  in Bouraoui's  veins because of its resemblance to his native Maghreb.  But the tourist side of the  persona is also an exploiter.  The  "I" appears  as a guilt-ridden  tourist  aware  of his own  com­ plicity:   "Man  tourisme  me  fait  honte  moi. . . . Moi  le  transplante  sur   trois vagues." The  Frantel  and Meridien  Hotels stand  as visible manifestations  of cul­
tural  colonization,  "Ou   regnent  l'ennui  americain   I Et  le vertige  europeen  de
!'arrogance," where food is thrown out while the  people outside  the gates starve. Ironically, Bouraoui  notes, watching pigs rooting in the debris as they have to all eternity,  "Rien  ne change  meme chez les innocents." Great  men,  heroes of  the day, may change,  but  it is always the same for  the  poor man.  In  this  virtually stagnant society, any hope is deferred to an ever-receding future. As the taxi-driver says  (in  "Testament  de  Minuit"), "11 faut   des  siecles.... " Meanwhile,   the world belongs to the  "petro-nullards," since everything  is for sale in  the  Third World. Only the flora, which one cannot eat, is luxuriant, and  the political com­ ment  is more explicit in the  Antillades series. The  sole refuge for  the  masses, in the face of starvation  and death, is the imagination:

Et !'imagination se regale
En depit des fossoyeurs.

In  "Les  Devoreurs,"  the  metaphor  of  the  cannibalization of  the  turtle   (an image of the  people helpless on its back)  is aimed  at  both  the exploiting  tourists and the wealthy  Martiniquais who have forgotten  their  past. The  people cringe, fearful, and  only the "walls have words" of protest:

Parfois les graffiti crient:
"Halte au ch8mage et a !',emigration" Reprenant
Comme un refrain
le soutien moral d'une hantise.

The  torpor and helplessness of the Martiniquais are, by implication,  sharply con­ trasted to the militancy of the Haitians, even though  the latter  is translated harm­  lessly (for the moment)   into the violence of words and  voodoo.
"Execs  de  Silence,"  on  Martinique, is at  the  opposite  pole from  "Vois  les Voies," on Haiti. The victim here addressed is even unable  to "decouvrir  [sa] castration." His condition goes beyond alienation  to a kind of fugue state of  pas­ sive acceptance  and  rule by a reactionary  and  imitative  middle  class:  "On  im­
portera  toujours  son camembert  outre  Atlantique I Juste  pour  darer  son  can­
tique  I dans  les sourires  bourgeois." The  poet  also  exclaims  "Inch-Allah!" at

8o

BOURAOUI


one  point,  reminding us that  more  than  the  Caribbean has  been  lulled  into  pas­
sive receptivity and  victimization:

Inch-Allah! Espagnol ou mauresque On le dit .a qui veut !'entendre ... pvedire et redire Son paradoxe  de vouloir naitre
Dans le present labyrinthe des nuits.

In  "Yo  Pas  Ka  Tire  Boyau  I Pour  Mette  Paille"  ("Don't pull  out  your  vitals to  replace  them  with  straw"), the  mother country  sucks  the  blood  of its  colony like a  leech  or  vampire:  "La   France mere  patrie  s'incruste comme   une  limace
douloureuse I Dans  la chair  laiteuse  des noix I De Coco." Meanwhile, the library,
source  of literacy, is hidden   among  huts  while  the  police  proliferate in  luxury. And  the  blind  sky looks down  on  the  fertile  sugar  cane.  We  are  reminded that this  is an  economy  once  built  on  slavery,  and  that  the  slavery  continues under another name  and  other  exploiters.
Madame Rosette  is the type and symbol of the descendant of slaves now become herself a bourgeois colonizer.  From  her luxurious nest, Madame Rosette  explains "La  splendeur et la misere  des gouts"  in an  echo of Balzac's  novel,  Splendeurs  et miseres des courtisanes. Bouraoui suggests that  we are  witnessing  a form  of  prosti­ tution  on the  part  of the native  bourgeoisie,  and  that  perhaps Madame Rosette  is a  "madame" in   more   ways  than   one.   Black  herself,   she   calls   her   servants  "Negroes" and  treats  them  like slaves. Bouraoui  establishes  an  exact  parallel  with the  North  African bourgeois  who, an Arab  himself, scorns his servant as an Arab,
"1'Arbi":

Mais le frere bourgeois appelle f,eJix
Son negre comme le cheikh son l'Arbi.

White  exploiters of black slave labour  in the nineteenth century, such  as Napoleon and  Josephine, have  been  replaced by black  exploiters  like  Madame  Rosette­ who, ironically, lives in a museum  dedicated to the  colonial  past.
"Salut a Toi  Mere  Caraibe" is a reprise of country-as-woman which  dominates
the  book. As in  "Je  t'ai  dans  la peau  Haiti," the  poet  feels her  corals  circulating through his veins, such  is the  extent  to which  he  has  internalized this  alien  but similar   culture. The   people's   pockets  cannot   be  filled  with   tourists'   smiles.  If tourism  is the  only  industry, the  people  have  nothing to sell but  themselves  and their  services-no  material  productivity in  the   Marxist   sense-and  that   is another form  of slavery. They  are thus  prevented from  coming  to grips  with  their
own  problems. The poet  discovers  "Une foret  d'idees  I Sur  les murs  de tes villes
avilies" in creole.  Hope  resides in the future:

Planter et vecolter en toute saison
Dans le champ de !'entente.

8r

BOURAOUI

It is evident   that   Bouraoui  feels Third World   countries will  only  achieve   true independence by breaking  out  of their  isolation  and  comparing their  plights  with those of others  like themselves.  The ikons of French and  North  African high  and popular culture mingle readily  with the local in this last outpost  of the old French empire. North   African   couscous  supplements Caribbean  cooking,   and   even   a local  fishing  boat  bears  the  name  "Monastir,"  referring to  Bourguiba's palatial dwelling.  It  is, to be sure, difficult  to determine whether these  ikons derive  from a  French or  North  African  physical  presence,  or  whether they  indicate, as  one would  hope,  an empathy with other  cultures  in travail.
The  diptych  of Ha"ituvois, followed  by Antillades, invites  the  reader  to compare and  contrast the similar,  and  yet dissimilar,  plights  of the  Haitian and  Martini­ quais  peoples.  Bouraoui  offers  a  poetic  fusion,  through memory, of  their  condi­  tions  with  those  of  the  North  Africans   (indeed   of  Africans  generally)  and   the Quebecois, presenting at  least  four  facets  of  colonialism  and  its  aftermath. In Quebec, we have  a  people  of French origin  who  often  see  themselves  as  having  been  conquered by the  English,  but  who strongly  maintain their  own  culture. In North Africa  we have  a native  people  who  have  been  conquered and  colonized sur place, as it were, but who have a clearly defined culture of their  own on which the  culture of the  colonizer  has  been  superimposed to create a  new  and  original  blend.
In  Haiti and  Martinique, by contrast, we have  peoples  first  transplanted from Africa  under  slavery,  who  then  had  an  alien  French culture imposed   on  them. But  even  between   the  two  Caribbean  countries  there   are  striking  differences. Haiti has been  independent since the  slave  rebellion  of Toussaint l'Ouverture in r8o4,  during the  Napoleonic era.  The  Haitians are  a  historically rebellious  and independent people.  Under  slavery,  the  wildest  and  proudest slaves  destined   for the  American South   were  first  landed   and  seasoned   in  Haiti. These   were  the slaves  who  sparked the  l'Ouverture rebellion. Their  decendants have  had  a  lid kept  over  them  by the  Duvalier  dictatorship. Rebellion, which  can  be said  to be in their  blood, can now express itself primarily through the  poets and  artists,  while the  people  have  channelled  their  expression   into  local  colour   and   voodoo.   In Haiti, Canada (especially  Quebec because of its proximity and  shared  language) has also had  an important influence.
Martinique and  Guadeloupe have  been  longer  under   the  French  hegemony, since  r635, and  in 1946  became  a departement of France. In  a sense,  they  have remained too  French for any  form  of overt  rebellion. Aime  Cesaire,  who  was  a revolutionary at  the  beginning,   has  had  success  rebound against him,  since  his classic status  has tended  to discourage younger  artistic  voices.
Poetry  is the  nearly ideal  instrument by which  we can  move  from  "attente"  to
"entente." As Bouraoui  said in an  interview, "Le  poete  est toujours constructeur.

BOURAOUI


... La  poesie,  Ia litterature, les arts, bref,  les idees forces culturelles metamorpho­
sent subrepticement le monde."6
What he says  about Rene Philoctl'te's contribution defines  beautifully the  goal he is setting himself  to achieve, a "prise de conscience." When the  world  becomes poetic, we will  have a literature of silence,  or  "the Word made Flesh":

C'est  seulement ace moment que  le poete,  et l'homme en  general, sera ebloui  par taut  de beaute et de majeste que la poesie s'effacera  pour  laisser place .a une entente parfaite, a une fete  globale,  a une 11esurgence universelle qui  ancrera toutes  les iles
du monde  a la racine  fugace  de la pienitude.


NOTES

1 "Hedi  Bouraoui:  Le  Grand   M eaulnes;   autobiographie  romantique  ou   nouvelle forme  romanesque?" L'Opinion, lundi  2  mai  1977, p. 6.
2   Radio France, Emission  Bibliotheque, I 2  avril  I 977 a I 9 h.
3  Marc Alyn,  "Un Franc;ais  en  Amerique," Le  Figaro  litteraire, n°   1241  ( 2-8  mars
'970)' p. 27-
4  E. J. Sabiston, "Eclate Module," Presence  Francophone, 8  (Printemps 1974), '57·
5   "Hedi  Bouraoui, citoyen   du  'Village   Global'," Propos   recueillis   par  Ridha  Kefi,
Le Temps (Tunis), samedi  7 mars 1981, pp. 1-2.
6  Kefi interview, p. 3·














CANADIAN  AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available at
the bookstore
UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
2075  WESBROOK PLACE
VANCOUVER, B.C.  V6T 1W5  /228-4741

ER SMUS

Ricardo Sternberg


Who  is to know
if Erasmus,  alone, brewing  his tea, for once  considers the  steps taken that brought  him,
pell  mell and  wide­
eyed,  to where  he is.

Who  is to know
if he -still  alone - begins subtracting
the years and  steps
until  standing again at  the  blind  hour
of some  choice.

Who  I am  today this  bearded  man brewing  his tea alone  alone  alone can  be blamed  on the  man  I was then and  the poor devil knew  of no choice.

Travelled backwards the  road  reveals
its  hidden  fork;
a retroactive wound flares  briefly
at  the disclosure.

The kettle  whistles and  Erasmus,  alone, turns  to other  matters.


"UNDER THE VOLCANO"

The Politics of the Imperial Self



Michael Cripps




L CHAPTER TEN OF Unde, the Volcano, the""""" between
Hugh and  the  Consul  touches  off a bitter  political  argument. Feelings  of jealousy
and  humiliation may  underlie the  Consul's attack   on  his  brother, but  the  ex­ change  brings  into  clear  focus their  apparently antithetical attitudes to the  politi­  cal  struggles   of  the I 93o's,   and  to  the  question   of  political   action   in  general. Throughout the  novel, Geoffrey  Firmin  represents himself as a confirmed quietist, whose  indifference to  political   involvement  is  grounded  in  a  conviction  that  history, like a man's life, is ordered by "a  sort  of determinism." There is nothing to be done: the  people  of Spain  and  Mexico  cannot  be  relieved  of their  misery, any  more  than he can  escape  his suffering, since it is the lot of all men.  Charac­ teristically  placing  the  upheaval in Spain  sub specie  aeternitatis, he takes comfort in  the  assumption that  Spain's culture "will  survive  intact," whatever the  out­  come  of  the  civil  war  may  be.  For  the  Consul,   all  intervention is self-serving  interference, all  Samaritans likely  to  conceal  a  predatory purpose, and  he  asks only to be left  alone  to  pursue  his own  "little  fight  for freedom." But for  Hugh, history  is shaped by  man's  actions,  and  his failure  to  fight  against   Fascism,  al­ though he has visited  many  battlegrounds as a reporter, leaves him  feeling  guilty and  ashamed. Still,  he  continues to  style  himself  as  an  ardent  anti-fascist who believes in  historical  progress  and  the  brotherhood of man; and  he holds on  to a dream  of heroic action, which  he hopes to realize  by shipping out  on a freighter carrying  arms  for beseiged Spain.
But  we should  not  allow  ourselves  to be misled  by the  rhetoric of either  man.
However admirable Hugh's social  ideals  may  be,  his interest  in  political  action, like his sympathy for  the  Jews,  is of dubious  origin.  Laruelle's description of him as  a  "professional indoor   Marxman" is apt : Hugh's political  stance   is  largely posturing, part  of  a  purely  personal  battle  to escape  self-condemnation. Finally, the cause  he upholds is irrelevant, since the enemy  he opposes is himself.  It might be argued that  it is the Consul  who has a fixed commitment to a political  position, whereas  Hugh's leftism  is likely to be discarded along  with  his guitar, to become

'LOWRY

another episode in the romantic story of his life. Certainly the  Consul's opposition to  Hugh's socialism  goes beyond  his antagonism to  his  brother and  rests on  an ideological  base. Prompted by his own self-hatred, Firmin views all men in Hobbe­ sian  "physiological" terms/  and  so  he  is ready   to  accept any  regime  that   will subdue the individual's insatiable desire for power  over others.  The turmoil of the
193o's  has not  persuaded the  Consul  that  political  authority does not  remain an abstraction that  arbitrates between  competing interests, but  represents an  interest itself, and  if unchecked comes to serve only itself, provoking rather than  prevent­ ing "the war of all against  all."  But then,  as his dispute with  Hugh demonstrates, the  Consul's reactionary position,  like Hugh's socialism, has  not  been  reached by careful  political  reasoning. Although he objects  to  Hugh's confusion  of the  gen­ eral interest  with  his own compulsive need for action, the Consul's political  views also are  formed  by psychological  pressures,  and  serve  to  mystify  his own  narrow idea of self-interest, which  he confuses with  historical necessity.
And so, in their  politics, as in other  aspects of their  characters and  ideas,  Hugh and  the  Consul  present  different sides of the same  dilemma; or,  as Lowry  put  it in  his letter  to  Cape, different sides of  the  same  man.2    Political dialectics is to Hugh   what   his  "battle for  the  survival  of  the  human  consciousness" is to  the Consul: a  struggle  in  which  the  romantic will seeks  to  establish  its dominance. In their  attitudes to action  in the world of other  men,  Hugh and  the Consul  enact different  strategies by  which   the  "imperial self"   pursues   its  manifest   destiny. Neither  man  regards  himself as an  agent  defined  by  what  he does  "to  and  with others." For  both  men,  the "inward scene"  dominates the  external world  and  the "outward becomes  the mere acting  out of the inward."3   What Quentin Anderson has  described  as a characteristic development of the  American tradition, Lowry represents as a danger common to all men  in the  modern western  world.  Under the  Volcano  explores  a  central theme   of  Anderson's The   Imperial  Self- the transformation of  the  public  realm  by  men  for  whom   the  "associated life  has become  almost  unreal," for  whom  "the middle  ground is filled,  insofar  as  it  is filled, with  projections out of the self."  For  the  Consul, the  ordinary social  world of  men  and   events  is  devalued  by  the  absolute  primacy  he  assigns  his  own spiritual life. The imperium of the  "inner empire" of the  soul  reduces  the  world beyond  the self to the status  of colonial outposts, whose  resources  are drawn upon to  serve  the  interests   of  the  governing  power,   but   otherwise  ignored.  Appro­ priately,   the  Consul's "imperial  self"  finds  political  expression   in   the  British foreign  service.
Firmin's disdain  for  political  opinion  and  action makes  it easy  to overlook  the importance of Laruelle's recollection  that  the  Consul had  been  a British  patriot who "passionately believed" in the empire he served.4 That he is known  simply  as "the Consul" suggests how fully Geoffrey  Firmin identifies himself  with  imperial Britain. His  background perfectly  suits  him  for  service  to  king  and  empire. He

86

LOWRY


is, after  all, a true  son of the  Raj, born  in  India and  originally intended for  the Indian civil service.  But  there  is no reason  to believe that Firmin was caught  up by the British  imperial myth,  that  Britain  conquered and  colonized  less in its own interest  than  in  the  service  of humanity. Like  the  British  Empire he  represents, the  Consul's attention is always  directed  inward, and  what  lies beyond  is made instrumental to  his  own  purposes, illustrating V.  S.  Naipaul's  observation that "the Raj was  an  expression   of  the  English  involvement with  themselves  rather than  with  the  country they  ruled."5
Never  solely a political  entity, the  British  Empire depended upon  the  exercise of economic power  beyond  its borders  to achieve  its dominant position.  A  long­ time  representative of  His  Majesty's government, Firmin  seems  well  aware   of whose interests  he serves abroad. Even  in his obscure  post in  provincial  Mexico, there   are  British  financial concerns   to  be  protected   and   advanced.  The   local narrow-gauge railway, built  by an English  company  to follow a meandering route  because  it  was  paid  for  by  the  kilometre,  is a legacy  of  the  nineteenth-century exportation of British  railway  technology, and  a reminder of  whose interests  were served  by such  trade. Although never  a rna jor colonial  power  in  Latin  America, Britain  continued to have  significant business interests there,  such  as the oil hold­ ings in  Mexico  nationalized by the  Cardenas government in  March of I 938,  an action   which   occasioned  a  discontinuance  of  diplomatic  relations, and   leaves Firmin an  ex-consul  in  Quauhnahuac. In  a  sense, Senor  Bustamente is not  far wrong  in supposing that  the  Consul  has been a spy, for it was surely  an important part  of a British  consul's  duties  to keep a close watch  on domestic political  devel­ opments which  might  have  an  effect  on  British  business interests.



BUT FIRMIN  ALSO  FOLLOWS   political events  in  Mexico  be­ cause  he  has  his own  investments there  to  oversee.  However unworthy he  may feel, a large  part  of his reluctance to follow the other  members of the diplomatic
corps  home  to Britain is a fear  of the  loss of his property in  Mexico.  Although he  has  no  intention "of  going  to  live  among  the  Indians," the  Consul  is more serious when  he tells Yvonne that  he is "thinking of becoming a Mexican subject," undoubtedly to escape  the  confiscation of the holdings  of non-Mexican nationals. Critics of the Volcano seem to have disregarded how the  Consul  earns  the money to support himself  while  he conducts his "great battle." They  are  like Yvonne  in this  respect,  who  takes  for  granted, as the  Consul  sees it,  his  "habit of making money": "But for  one's  habit  of making  money,  don't you  know,  all  very  mys­ terious  to  you,  I suppose, outside   looking  in ... the   result  of  so  much  worry,  speculation, foresight, alimony, seigniorage-." As the  Consul  here  protests,  his investments require close superintendence, which  he gives,  however  oblivious  he

'LOWRY

may be to whatever else goes on in the  world  around him. The  mysterious phone call  he  receives  in  Chapter Three, and  drunkenly muddles through, is from  a fellow investor  in  resource-based  companies in  Mexico:

he started  to speak into the receiver, then, sweating,  into  the mouthpiece,  talking rapidly-for it  was a  trunk  call-not  knowing  what  he  was  saying,  hearing Tom's  muted  voice quite  plainly but  turning  his questions  into  his own  answers, apprehensive  lest at any moment boiling oil pour  into  his eardrums  or his mouth: "All right. Good-bye ... Oh, say, Tom,  what  was the origin of that  silver rumour that  appeared  in the papers yesterday denied  by Washington? I wonder  where  it came from ... What  started  it. Yes. All right. Good-bye.  Yes, I have, terrible. Oh they did!  Too  bad.  But  after  all  they  own  it.  Or  don't   they?  Good-bye.  They probably  will. Yes that's all right, that's all right. Good-bye;  good-bye!" ... Christ. What  does he want to ring me up at this hour of the morning  for. What  time is it in America.

When  he returns from  his search  for a restorative drink  after  this ordeal, and  his encounter with  the  man  with  the Trinity tie, Yvonne asks him,  apropos the tele­ phone  call:
"How's  the market?"
"Tom's a bit fed up because they've confiscated some property  of his in Tlaxcala,
or Puebla,  he thought  he'd  got away with. They  haven't my number  yet, I'm  not sure where I really do stand  in that  regard,  now I've  resigned the service-"

This supplies  a more  serious context  for the  Consul's jest about being  turned out of Eden.

"Or   perhaps," he  added,  in  more  cheerful  vein,  "perhaps Adam  was  the  first property  owner and God, the first agrarian,  a kind of Cardenas, in fact-tee hee!
-kicked him out. Eh? Yes," the Consul chuckled,  aware,  moreover,  that  all  this
was possibly not so amusing  under  the  existing  historical  circumstances,  "for  it's obvious to everyone these days-don't you think so, Quincey? -that  the original sin was to be an owner of property...."

Although the Consul  richly enjoys sending up his neighbour, the sober,  upright Quincey, "a  credit  to Soda Springs," their  economic interests are identical. Quin­ cey may turn  "the cold sardonic eye of the  material world" upon  the Consul, but Firmin  himself relies upon  his stake in the material world,  and  is also an exponent of "realpolitik" to maintain his economic  position. America has succeeded Britain in the  economic domination of Latin  America, but  this  makes little  difference to the  Mexicans. The American highway  which  turns into  a  goat  track  after  it  has passed through Quauhnahuac is a twentieth-century version of the narrow-gauge, meandering British  railway.  As if to underscore this identity of interests,  to many of the  Mexicans he meets, Firmin  is an  American, as far  as they  can  tell.6
The   oil  affair   is  mentioned  by  the  passing   English   motorist   who  finds  the Consul  face  down  in the Calle  Nicaragua. He  may  well be a travelling  business­ man,  but  his  phony  Trinity   tie  suggests  that   he  is one  of  the  many  con-men,

88

LOWRY


spongers or remittance men that  England set loose on the world  during the  height and  early  decline  of  her  imperial ascendancy. Perhaps this  is a  rather nice  dis­ tinction in any  case.  Economically, imperial expansion is achieved  by the  export  of superfluous capital. Imperial states  also expect  their  superfluous men  to  man­ age their  colonial affairs,  men like Quincey, the Consul,  and  perhaps this English­ man  with  the  "King's Parade voice."  The  economic interests  of  these  men  are inextricably bound up  with  the exploitation of the resources  of the countries they work  in, and  the  domination of the  indigenous people.  As Albert  Memmi main­ tains,  it  is impossible for  the  colonizer  "not  to  be aware of the  constant illegiti­ macy  of his status."

A foreigner,  having  come to a land  by the accidents of history, he has succeeded not  merely  in  creating  a  place  for  himself but  also in  taking  away  that  of  the inhabitant, granting  himself astounding  privileges to the detriment of those  right­ fully entitled  to them.  And  this is not by virtue  of local laws, which in a  certain way legitimize  this inequality  by tradition,  but  by upsetting  the  established  rules and substituting his own. He thus appears  doubly unjust.  He is a  privileged being and  an illegitimately  privileged one;  that  is, a usurper.7

Or,  in the context of the Volcano, a "pelado." Hugh  and  the  Consul  argue  about the  meaning of  this  word; but  if Geoffrey's  definition  is more  strictly  accurate, Hugh's gloss is essential  to an  understanding of the  role  the  Consul  plays in the country he  lives in,  and  the  effect  the  colonial  context has  on  Firmin   himself.S Hugh  has seen "pelado" defined  somewhere "as  a shoeless illiterate."

According  to the Consul, this was only one meaning;  pelados were indeed "peeled ones," the stripped,  but also those who did not have to be rich to prey on the really poor. For instance  those halfbreed  petty  politicians who will, in order  to get into office just for one year, in which year they hope to put by enough to forswear work the rest of their lives, do literally anything whatsoever, from shining shoes, to acting as one who was not an "aerial  pigeon." Hugh  understood  this word  finally to be pretty  ambiguous.  A Spaniard, say, could  interpret it  as  Indian,   the  Indian   he despised,  used, made  drunk.  The  Indian,  however,  might  mean  Spaniard by it. Either  might  mean  by it anyone who made a show of himself. It was perhaps  one of those words  that  had  actually  been distilled out  of conquest,  suggesting, as it did, on the one hand  thief, on the other  exploiter.  Interchangeable ever were  the terms of abuse with which  the aggressor discredits those about  to be ravaged!

The  drunken, unkempt pelado, with  his "rapacious" hands of the  conqueror, embodies for  Hugh "the confusion  that  tends  eventually to overtake  conquista­ dores." But  the  Consul  also lives in  a state  of confusion that  is, in  part,  a  con­ sequence   of  imperialism. The   Chief  of  Rostrums fits Geoffrey's  definition of  a pelado, but  just before  he shoots the Consul,  he calls Firmin a "pelado." Both  are right.  Although he  would  hardly rob  a dying  man  of a few  coins,  the  Consul  is also a confused  conquistadore, preying  upon  the  poor.  Like  the  pelado, he lives in  a fog  of  complacent fatalism which  mystifies his  readiness to  take  economic

8g

LOWRY

advantage of the  colonial  situation. As the  two  brothers stand helpless  over  the dying  man,  Hugh notices the  pelado, looking  on from  the  bus, who "made again that  gesture  of  hopelessness,  which  was  also  like  a  gesture   of  sympathy :  what could  they  do,  he appeared trying  to convey  to them  through the  window, how could  they  have  known,  when  they got  out,  that  they  could  do  nothing?" With the  same  bad  faith, the  Consul  profits  from  the  economic exploitation  of  the Mexican people,  while  brazenly  protesting against those  who  would  "interfere" with history's  "worthless stupid  course."





HANNAH ARENDT's VIEW OF  "the imperialist character" casts some light on the muddle that  finally overwhelms the  Consul. Arendt sees a fundamental immaturity in the political  consciousness  of the secret agents  and bureaucrats who created  and  managed the British  Empire : "Imperialism to them was nothing but  an  accidental opportunity to  escape  a  society  in  which  a  man had  to forget  his youth  if he wanted  to grow  up."9  Unconditioned by the  weight of a  recognized  social  context,  the  imperial will  was  able  to seek  its own  fulfil­ ment  without reference   to  the  interests  of  the  implicitly devalued  peoples and  cultures  of the  dominated nations.  Having left  behind the  reality  of  civilization in  Rritain, "the adventurers had  a  feeling  of  unreality and  irresponsibility, the feeling,  as in  a dream, that  everything is possible.mo  And,  because  imperial ex­ pansion  was conceived  in economic rather than  political terms,  there  was a sense that  colonization was a "pseudo-natural process"  and  "the imperial bureaucrats and  secret  agents  ... merely  the instruments of this expansive force.'m Imperial­ ism enfranchised Faustian dreams of power, while  at  the  same  time  seeming  to excuse the imperialist from  responsibility  for his actions.
But this extraordinary liberation from  constraint is an  allusion. As Memmi observes, "if  colonization destroys the colonized,  it also rots the  colonizer.'012   The imperialist cannot overcome  the  guilt  and  self-condemnation consequent upon the  exploitation of the  subject  peoples. However much  he  may  separate  himself from  the community in which  he operates, the "dehumanization of the oppressed
... becomes  the alienation of the oppressor," as Sartre argues in his Introduction to  Memmi's The  Colonizer  and the Colonized.13   Isolated  within  the  culture he lives in, he has no shared  world  to fix for him "what is real  and  what  is imagined, what  is real  and  what  absurd.''14  The  imperialist suffers  from  what  Arendt  de­ scribes as "loneliness," a condition "among the  most radical and  desperate experi­ ences of man." He  is not merely  isolated,  but  estranged from  the  people  around him,  and  ultimately set at  odds  with  himself. Quoting Epictetus, Arendt  charac­ terizes  the  "lonely" man  as one  who  "finds  himself  surrounded  by  others   with whom  he cannot establish  contact or to whose hostility  he is exposed."15  "Loneli-

go

LOWRY


ness" drives  the  Consul  to his death, and  it also ruins the  life of Yvonne's father, once  American consul  to  Iquique in  Chile,  and  identified in  many   ways  with Geoffrey  Firmin. Noting the  resemblance to her father in the  Consul's "brooding expression," she  thinks  of  those  "long  war  years in  Chile" and  wonders "what, precisely,  was  her  father brooding about  all  that  time,  more  spiritually isolated in the  land  of Bernardo O'Higgins than  was once Robinson Crusoe, only  a few hundred miles from  the same  shores?" The  alienation of the  confused  imperialist is that  of  the  "uprooted" and  "superfluous" man.  In  Hannah  Arendt's words, "To be uprooted means  to have  no place in the world, recognized and  guaranteed by  others; to  be  superfluous means  not  to  belong  to  the  world  at  all.'n6   The Consul's "world-alienation" embodies  in an  extreme  form  the  experience of  the modern age, "where man, wherever  he goes, encounters only himsel£."11 Such spiritual isolation   is  the   inevitable fate  of  the  imperial self,  whose  desire  for mastery  sets him  against the  world  in which  he must  live.
Those  critics  who  argue that   the  novel  presents  the  Consul's alienation as  a necessary consequence of the deep  penetration of his vision, a kind of spiritual breakthrough, disregard Lowry's  careful  association  of  Firmin's self-destructive­ ness with  the forces that  are leading  the world towards  war.18  Far from suggesting  any  heroic  Promethean struggle, his retreat to an  inner  world  is shown  to  arise from  the  debilitating effect  of the  misconceptions that  he  has  allowed  to govern his life.  Firmin  finally  submits himself  to the  forces  that destroy  him  because  of an enervation of the will by which  "Faustian man" has lived.  Following Spengler, Lowry  sees in  the  Consul's inability   to  live  in  the  world  he  has  inherited, the death-wish of  an  entire   civilization, even  though   America may  rise  as  Britain  declines.  Like  the  drunken rider  of the  rebellious,  runaway horse  who  reminds Laruelle of the  Consul, the  West  retains its dominant position  only  temporarily, slipping  from  the  saddle, regaining a  precarious hold,  but  still  plunging on  to meet  its inevitable end.
The   collapse   of  the  overextended  British  Empire   provides   Lowry   with   the perfect  vehicle  to explore  the  historical  and  political  fate  of the  imperial self. In the  Consul,  as Tony Kilgallin observes, Lowry depicts  a dying  John Bull/9   giving way to the ascendant American will, as Spain  had yielded  to Britain. Accordingly, Quincey, the  retired American walnut  grower,  displays  the  upright posture  and self-possession the  Consul  was wont  to show. Firmin  confuses  his "deceitful air  of infallibility" modelled   on  the  Taskersons' "erect   manly   carriage," maintained even  in  total  drunkenness, for  genuine imperial authority.  But  Quincey is fully in  control of  his  dealings with  his  neighbour, as  he  stands   watering his  trim garden, and  the  Consul  staggers  through his ruined, jungle-like  "estate." As an imperial  power, Britain  is  in  sharp decline,   or  asleep,   like  the   Consul   when Yvonne  and   Hugh leave  for  their  morning ride:   "A  snore,  ricochetting,  agon­ ized, embittered, but  controlled, single,  was wafted  to  his ears: the  muted  voice

91

LOWRY

of  England long  asleep."   It  may  be  "indefatigably  English" of  their   "ruddy monarch" to sleep on unconcerned, but  no bravado can  conceal  that  Britain and Geoffrey  Firmin have  lost their  imperial majesty, and   retain only  the  spoils  of conquest. But even the hold on the loot is insecure, as the  Consul's unsettling ride on  the  Ferris  wheel  suggests. Suspended upside  down  by the  "bewildering  con­ vulsions"  of the  "Maquina Infernal," the  Consul reflects  that  this  "was scarcely a dignified  position  for an  ex-representative of His  Majesty's government  to find himself  in,  though it  was symbolic,  of  what   he  could  not  conceive,   but  it  was undoubtedly symbolic." Overturned by the  wheel  of  history,  Firmin has  lost his identity-his  British   passport-and his  confusion  is  that   of  Britain  herself, divested  of the  external basis of her  power.  Having  fallen,  the  Consul  is at  the mercy  of those  who attend upon  his decline. Although his valuables are  returned by the  docile  and  friendly  children  he  has shaken off  when  they  begged  money of him,  the  loss of his passport  will have  disastrous consequences when  he  falls into  other hands.
However obscure  it  may  be to  the  Consul, the  political   parallel here  is both obvious  and  emphatic; and so is the author's intention in having  Firmin look into the  copybook  of one of these children, and  discover  the  following  exercise :

Escruch  is an  old  man.  He  lives in  London.  He  lives alone  in  a  large  house. Scrooge is a rich man but he never gives to the poor. He is a miser. No one loves Scrooge and Scrooge loves no one. He has no friends. He is alone in the world.... Who  is Scrooge?  Where does he live? Is Scrooge  rich  or  poor?  Has  he friends? How does he live? Alone. World. On.

Dickens' Scrooge  has  become  a  mythic  embodiment of  the  economic man  pro­ duced   by  English   mercantile capitalism, exploitative of  those  who  fall  into his power,  justifying  his accumulation of wealth  by pointing to  the  inexorable laws of political  economy. Although  Firmin's selfishness  certainly has  a  wider  signifi­ cance,  in one sense at least the Consul  is Scrooge's great-grandson, economic man  in  decline, who  has  merely  transferred the  focus  of  exploitation  overseas.   He lives "on" the world,  but not in it, and  his loneliness  is no longer  bearable. Unable to  believe  absolutely   in  the  ideology  he  lives  by,  still  he  excuses  himself  from responsibility for his own  choices by reference  to another kind  of determinism.
But  the  Consul  cannot  dodge  the  responsibility for  his  actions, which   return to haunt him,  as the legacy of colonialism  rebounds upon  Britain herself. Obsessed with  the  disloyalty  of Hugh, Yvonne  and  Laruelle, Firmin tries  to push  from  his mind  his own  betrayal of others.  Although he holds  them  accountable for failing him,  he attributes his own failures  to historical and  spiritual forces  too  powerful to resist. But Firmin has placed  himself upon  the  wheel of history.  He  has chosen an "historical" life as an agent  of British  imperial power,  as the  Tlaxcalans  chose to betray  Mexico.  In the same way, he has chosen  to betray  those who would  love him,  by enclosing  himself within  a religious  hermeticism which  excludes  even  his

92

LOWRY


own  wife.  His  muddled values  represent   a  betrayal of  the  religious  life,  as  his meditation on  spiritual treachery suggests:  "The soul ! Ah,  and  did  she  not  too have  her  savage   and   traitorous Tlaxcalans, her  Cortez   and  her  noches  tristes, and, sitting  within  her  innermost citadel  in  chains,  drinking chocolate, her  pale Moctezuma?" By rejecting human love, and  courting his own  death and damna­ tion,  Firmin perverts the spiritual quest  to which  he has sacrificed  so  much.  The  Consul  may  view  himself  self-pityingly  as "the Knight of the  Sorry Aspect," but the  dangerous spiritual journey  he  has  undertaken is treacherous,  not  quixotic. Lowry  makes  his self-deception clear  by the  telling  juxtapositions in  the  Consul's jumbled  thoughts as he is about to leave the Salon Ofelia  after  his argument with Hugh. Having rejected the  possibility of a new life with  Yvonne, the  Consul  tells her that  "'far from  wanting it, thank  you very much,  on the contrary, I choose­ Tlax -' Where was  he?  'Tlax-Tlax.'" He  sinks  off  into  a  stupor, but  is re­ called  "to  his senses,"  by the  little clock behind  Cervantes' bar,  "its  ticking  very loud: Tlax: tlax: tlax:   tlax:... ." As he  hurries off  to  meet  his  death   at  the Farolito, he  calls  back  to  those  he  has  left  behind: "'I  like  it ... I  love  hell.  I can't wait to get back there.  In fact  I'm running, I'm almost  back there already.'" In  his letter  to Cape, Lowry emphasizes the importance to his general  purpose
of his association of the  Consul  with  the Tlaxcalans :

but  the  whole  Tlaxcala business  does have  an  underlying deep  seriousness.  Tlax­
cala, of course,  just like Parian, is death: but  the Tlaxcalans were Mexico's  traitors
-here the  Consul  is giving  way to the  forces within  him  that  are  betraying  him­ self,  that   indeed have   now  finally  betrayed   him ... Dialogue here  brings  in  the theme  of war,  which  is of course  related  to the Consul's self-destruction.     (Letters, p. 82)

For  Lowry,  the  private life and  the  public  world  are  never  disjoined, and  he sees in the self-absorption of the  Consul  the same  inability  to engage  external realities and  the same failure of will that  led Chamberlain to Munich. The  Consul  believes that  he can  make  a separate peace  with  the  world  and  sidestep  the struggles  and sufferings  of others,  but  like Moctezuma and  Chamberlain seeking  appeasement, he brings disaster down  upon  himself and those who follow him.  Firmin  is willing to  countenance the  rise  of  Fascism,  hoping  to  be  left  alone  to  pursue  his  own course  inward, just  as  he  tries  to  avoid  involvement in  the  plight  of  the  dying Indian, although as Hugh observes,  the  Consul  "was  the  one  most  nearly  repre­ senting   authority"  among the   bystanders. That  Lowry   means   this  particular abandonment of responsibility to take on a general  significance is underscored by the  appearance of  the  speeding "querulous expensive  cars"  bearing   diplomatic plates  which  ignore   Hugh's shouts  to stop  and  give  aid.  In  Hugh's eyes, such evasions  typify  the  Consul's own  diplomatic career,  as well as the  attitude of the western  democracies to  Fascism.  Recalling his brother's  service  in  Spain, Hugh indicts  a  diplomatic corps  that   could  stand   idly  by,  "hoping Franco will  wm

93

i.OWRY

quickly  instead  of returning to  Madrid to tell  the  British  Government the  truth of what's really  going  on  in  Spain." In  this  instance, Hugh's  judgment on  the Consul  is upheld  by the  novel,  through a characteristic chain  of associations. As the  travel-folder read  by the  Consul  notes, the  city  of Tlaxcala is said  to be like Granada, the city where  he met and  married Yvonne, where  the  "shadows" that darken  their  future were first cast. These  shadows include his indifference to the threat of Fascism  rising  before  him,  the  "hieroglyphic of  the  times"  he  has  not deigned  to heed.  In  due  course, the  Consul's  own  plea for intervention is ignored by the  impassive  Chief  of Gardens when  he  is being  interrogated by the  brutal Chief  of Rostrums. Appropriately, the Chief  of Gardens bears  a striking physical resemblance  to  the  Consul.   Firmin   recognizes   that   he  "might have   been   the image  of himself  when,  lean,  bronzed,  serious, beardless, and  at  the  crossroads  of his  career, he  had   assumed   the  Vice  Consulship  in  Granada." The   Consul's hands,  like the  pelado's, are tainted by his part  in the exploitation of Mexico,  and Firmin's hands  are  also guilty,  like those of the  Chief  of Gardens, and  the  hero of Las Manos  de Orlac, although he commits  no  murders himself.  Munich only confirms  the  abandonment of  responsibility,  the  irrecoverable decline,  apparent in   England's  acquiescence in   Franco's  overthrow  of   the   Spanish  Republic. "Spain's the  grave  where  England's glory led," and  it  is fitting  that  the  map  of Spain  that  the  Consul  draws  in the spilled liquor on  the  Farolito bar  precipitates his murder by the  Fascists.
In  as  much   as  the  Consul  is a  representative of  British   imperial power,   his death  may  be seen  as confirming his own  observation, that  nations "all  seem  to get  what  they  deserve  in  the  long  run." Geoffrey   Firmin dies  by  an  order   of history  he  has endorsed, a degenerate imperial consul  murdered by a  barbarian Fascist.  In  his dispute with  Hugh, the  Consul  maintains that  small  nations must expect  to  be subjugated by great  nations,  since  the  lesson  of  history  is that  the powerful  impose  their  will on the  weak. Such  a belief is perfectly  consistent  with his political  first principles, and  a comfortable doctrine for a British  consul  of the time  to  advance. But  it  enfranchises without qualification  not  only  the  rule  of military   and  economic  power,  but  also  political   terrorism  and   totalitarianism. Hannah Arendt attributes the  rise of modem totalitarianism to  the  reintroduc­ tion  into  Europe of  political   ideologies  and   practices  developed  by  the  great  imperial powers  in  their  overseas  possessions.20    The feeling  of  mastery  and  the absence  of  restraint conferred   upon  the  imperialist by  his  colonial  privilege  re­ turned to  plague  Europe in  the  form  of Fascism  and  Stalinism. And  so despite the  Consul's scorn  for  Hugh's suggestion  that  there  is  "some  social  significance" in the  murder of the  Indian, his own  death, like that  of the  Indian before  him,  may  be seen as "a kind of latter-day repercussion of  the Conquest." And,  for that  matter, the  war  that  is about  to tear  Europe apart, a repercussion of its imperial heritage.

94

LOWRY


Hampered by his drunkenness, and  his brother's reluctance to understand, the Consul  doesn't entirely  succeed  in exposing  Hugh's dishonest  rationalization of his political  motives.  But  by mixing  his grievance against  Hugh with  their  political dispute, Firmin  shows  that   he  too  is trying  to evade  the  issue.  His  notion  that intervention in the  cause of "poor little defenceless"  nations actually represents  a "contemptible acceptance" of the  status quo, is rhetorically effective,  but  utterly disingenuous. After  all, intervention in the domestic  affairs  of weaker  nations has been  the order  of the  day for  the  British  Empire  Firmin has served.  Of  course, a British  consul is unlikely  to find  the  principle of political  self-determination  con­ genial,  but  Firmin's indifference to political freedom  goes deeper  still. Presumably, he would  uphold the individual's economic freedom, but  he scarcely acknowledges any other  rights  of man  whatsoever. For the Consul,  political freedom is no more than  the  right  to withdraw from  other  men's  concerns  into  a  private world.  But then,   he  has  never  been  subject   to  arbitrary power  himself,  until  the  political  thugs  he has tried  to ignore,  prove themselves  capable of  violating even  the sanc­ tuary of the  barroom.
After  he  has  been  shot  by  the  Fascists,  the  Consul  reflects  that  now  "he  was the  one  dying  by the  wayside  where  no good Samaritan would  halt." As Lowry pointed  out  in  his letter  to  Cape, Firmin's death  rounds out  the  f!.Ovel's "severe classical pattern"; but it is also intended to drive home  an urgent "political warn­ ing" (Letters, pp. 88,  66). In  the  modern world,  the  politics of the imperial self can  only be a politics of death.



1:E CONSUL's GENERAL OBSERVATIONS about political inter­ vention   may  be  discredited, but  he  has  good  cause  to  doubt Hugh's  political intentions, and  to fear  his brother's interference in his personal  life. Hugh's com­ mitment to the  cause  of  the  brotherhood of man  does  not  seem  to  embrace his half-brother Geoffrey.  The  moral  lassitude  that  allows him  to seduce  his sister-in­ law  under  the guise of helping to rehabilitate the Consul, is at the  root of Hugh's failure to act  upon  his political  convictions; and  despite  his  readiness  to express his views, his  political  objectives remain  unclear.  Hugh  is driven by an  "absurd necessity"  for  action, and  his political  ambitions, like  the  Consul's own  confused ideas,  are  dangerous to  himself,  and  others.  As  Hugh dimly  realizes,  his  own behaviour, despite  his efforts  to help save the world, has become  "part of its plan" of self-destruction. His  intervention in  his  brother's  problems only  brings  more misery,  and  finally  helps  bring  on  his death. He  may  "aspire to  the  light" with Juan Cerillo, but  unlike  his friend, Hugh  seems incapable of action  that  is at once meditated and   disinterested. In  searching his  past  to  find  evidence of  a  single unselfish act,  he can  do no better than  the  bathetic recollection of his advice  to a hot-dog vendor  to move  his cart to the  Fitzroy  Tavern.

95

'LOWRY


Nearly  thirty, Hugh  is still absorbed  in adolescent fantasies. Politics  now offers him  what  the sea once did -an opportunity to display  the  heroic  potential that he imagines  lies latent in  him,  untapped by  the  triviality of  everyday life.  The humdrum seaman's routine  stifled  his  earlier   hopes,  but  he  has  kept  his  new dream  safe  by  avoiding  any  political  effort  beyond  talk.  He  is no  more  than a political   raconteur, telling  stories  such  as  those  he  tells  Yvonne, featuring the romantically conceived   philosopher-soldier Juan  Cerillo, and   an  English  com­ munist-"approximately the  best man  I ever  knew"-who  reads  De  Quincey before  an  important battle,  and  has a dog  named Harpo. Hugh  projects  himself into  these starring roles, but  not  the  grim  round of fighting and  waiting that  lie behind  such  images.  He doesn't  seem even  to consider  involving  himself  in Ceril­  lo's work  in  Mexico,  probably  because  the  struggle  there  lacks la gloire, with  no International Brigade, and no worldwide press coverage. Cerillo returned home to work in his own  country, but  Hugh shows no concern for the  uninteresting poor and  unemployed in  England. He  prefers  to  wander the  world,  looking  for  the next troublespot, hoping  to find the kind of "real fun" he expects  will be "coming out  of Trinidad some day." Inevitably, the object  of  political  action  is demeaned by his fantasies of romantic adventure. Finally, only the  beau geste appeals  to his imagination, and  the  chance  it offers to prove  himself  against great  and  perhaps insuperable odds.
In   many   ways,  Hugh's moral   confusion   and   compulsive  need  for  political action  serve  to characterize the uncertainties of his generation. He  is Isherwood's "Truly Weak  Man," seeking to conceal  his fear  of inadequacy by frantic activity and  by imposing upon  himself  tests of bravery. For  the  "truly strong  man" there is no need  "to  try to prove to himself that  he is not  afraid, by joining  the  Foreign Legion,  seeking  out  the  most  dangerous wild  animals in  the  remotest   tropical jungles,  leaving   his  comfortable home  in  a  snowstorm to  climb  the  impossible glacier.  In  other words, the  Test  exists only  for  the  Truly Weak  Man." 21  Hugh is drawn to the  idea  of political  action  for  the  same  reason  he is drawn into  the corrida, and  hopes  to climb  El Popo.  To  allay  his doubts, he must  have  frequent trials  of  his  mettle-preferably before  an  audience. His  dangerous voyage  to Spain  is envisaged  as a test and  a spectacle, even though, as he is painfully aware, "none of his friends  knew he was going  to do  it."  He  regards this  venture as an act of atonement for  his "negative, absurd, selfish, dishonest" past.  And  because "the Loyalists  had  already  lost ... no  one  would  be  able  to  say  of  him  that   he had   been  carried  away  by  the  popular  wave  of  enthusiasm  for  Spain." The apparent  pleasure he takes in  the  futility  of  his gesture, because  of the  notional credit   it  would   reflect  upon   him,  overrides his  concern  for  the  cause   of  the Spanish people.  For  Hugh, political  action  has  lost  connection to  the  world  of real  people,  real  events  and  enduring values,  dwindling to  no  more   than   the stuff of daydreams.

g6

LOWRY

-The time  has come for you to join your comrades,  to aid  the workers, he told Christ, who agreed. It had been His idea all the while, only until Hugh had rescued Him those hypocrites had  kept Him shut up inside the burning  church  where  He couldn't  breathe. Hugh made a speech. Stalin gave him a medal and listened sympathetically while  he explained  what  was on his mind.  "True ... I wasn't  in time to save the Ebro, but I did strike my blow-" He went off, the star of Lenin on his lapel;  in his pocket a certificate; Hero of the Soviet Republic, and  the True Church,  pride and love in his heart -

The  nominal  beneficiaries of  Hugh's intervention never  figure  in  his dreams of action  because  he has  no interest  in taking  up  the  cause  of others  for  their  sake. His  reveries  are  dreams of power,  dreams  of Faustian mastery  sought  by a  man "just beyond  being  mediocre" (Letters, p. 75).
Hugh's need  to  dominate situations and  other  people  almost  invariably  sub­
verts  his best intentions. Certainly he delights  in the  reversal  of roles that  leaves his imperious older  brother dependent upon  him. The  form  of aversion  therapy he devises to reduce  Geoffrey's drinking is a particularly diabolical stroke,  which does no good,  and  only adds  to his brother's insupportable burden of humiliation. In  his reduced  state, Geoffrey  even dutifully confesses to  Hugh  that  he "cheated a little  on  the  strychnine" in  his absence.  Shaving the  incapable Consul, Hugh hovers over him,  "pleasantly menacing," waving  the razor  while  joking about  the "strength obtained by  decapitation." It is hardly  surprising that   Firmin  should feel  he  is  being  murdered slowly  by  Hugh's "salvage operations," as  he  half­ seriously remarks to Yvonne. The  new moral  order  Hugh tries to impose upon  his brother is charged with a deep-seated resentment of him,  which  he may hide from himself, but  not the Consul. Geoffrey recognizes the work of a "fine Italian hand" throughout Hugh's entire campaign to save him. But Hugh, confident of his own good  intentions, blunders on.  Having become  involved  with  Yvonne  once  before while  plotting with  her  to help  the  Consul,  Hugh  must  recognize  the  delicacy  of his position  when  she returns to Quauhnahuac. But though he realizes  he should  leave immediately, he stays on, in the face  of his brother's evident  hostility  to his presence.   He   occupies  himself   by  conceiving  fantasies of  the   couple's   future happiness together,  marshalling  the  sight-seeing excursion,  and   monopolizing Yvonne's attention throughout the day, effectively smothering any  possibility of a reconciliation between husband and wife. No doubt  Firmin again  pushes Yvonne at Hugh, and  makes little effort to re-establish  his relationship with  her;  but  Hugh can  hardly  be excused. Singularly insensitive  to the feelings  and  needs of those  he would  help,  Hugh contrives to increase  his brother's misery,  rather than  alleviat­ ing  it.  Preoccupied with   his  fantasies  of  action  in  the  service  of  suffering   hu­ manity, he is unable to understand the  dismal  tragedy  unfolding before  his eyes. As Douglas  Day notes, Hugh is contentedly "banging out songs of martial brother­ hood  on a cheap guitar as his half-brother and  Yvonne are  destroyed  only  yards  from  where  he stands.m2

97

1.0WRY

The  self-effacement the situation calls for is utterly beyond  Hugh. Fatuous in his self-importance, he fails to see that  in this  instance his intervention can  only make  matters worse. This need  to assert himself distorts even  his anti-colonialism, for  Hugh wants  to confer  freedom upon  others,  dominating even  in  the  process of liberation. As Mannoni and  Fanon have  argued, such  notions  of  intervention­ ism cannot  really  free  the  oppressed,  but  only  perpetuate the  colonial  mentality of dependence.23  Earlier generations of idealistic  Englishmen  found  an  outlet  for their  "immeasurable longings" in shaping the  destinies  of  colonial  peoples,  and  Hugh's kind of internationalism fulfils much  the same  need. A "passionate desire for  goodness"   is  not  enough   in  itself  (Letters,  p.  73) ; and   though action   is "absolutely necessary," it is essential  that  action be  conditioned by commitment and  self-knowledge. As it is, his rhetoric of activism is no less an  expression  of the exhausted  Faustian  will  than   the  Consul's  rhetoric of  quietism. Unlike Juan Cerillo's  socialism,  there  is "nothing  constructive" in  Hugh's politics,  "merely a passion  for  fatality." His  confused  political  impulses  exemplify Spengler's  view of the attraction of socialism for  Faustian man  in decline :

The  Northern  soul has exhausted  its inner  possibilities, and  of the dynamic  force and  insistence that  had expressed itself in world-historical visions of the future­ visions of millenia! scope-nothing remains but the mere pressure, the passionate desire to create, the form without  the content.  The  soul was Will and  nothing  but Will. It needed an aim for its Columbus-longing; it had to give its inherent  activity at  least the illusion of a meaning  and  an object ... For  deep  down beneath  it all is the gloomy feeling, not to be repressed, that  all this hectic zeal is the despairing self-deception of a soul that may not and cannot  rest.24

Even  Hugh's work  as a newspaperman feeds  a Faustian  power-urge. Spengler argues  that  the  role of the  press in modem society  is to shape the  "public truth" so as "to  shepherd the  masses."25   He  describes  the  press  in  military   metaphors, as  "an army   with  carefully   organized  arms   and   branches, with   journalists  as officers, and  readers as soldiers." He  sees the  journalists' "intellectual artillery" as an  expression  of  the  "will-to-power operating  under  a  pure  democratic  dis­ guise."  Although Hugh himself  is contemptuous of  the  modern press-he  tells Yvonne  that  he  agrees  with  Spengler that   journalism "equals  intellectual  male prostitution of speech  and  writing" -his  work  as a  crusading  journalist is  per­ fectly adapted to his emotional needs. As a reporter, Hugh is able  to  imprint his will upon  others  as he could  by no other  activity. As Spengler observes,  the  press is able  to decide  what  others  think  and  believe: "What  the  press wills, is true.  Its commanders evoke, transform, interchange truths. Three weeks of press-work,  and  the 'truth' is acknowledged by everybody."26  But to achieve  this power,  Hugh has made  his own  Faustian bargain. He suspects  that his exercise of power  is only self-serving  and  probably dangerous to the  welfare  of  the  people  and  causes  he supports. It is in his capacity as a journalist  that Hugh fears his "curious thoughts"

gB

LOWRY

may  be "merrily  brewing"  the next  war. And  as he tells Yvonne,  "Even  when there are no wars think of the damage [journalists] do." Walking by the barranca, Hugh imagines that  he sees a large party of "defunct  newspapermen," cast down into the ravine, "still spying through  keyholes and  persuading  themselves they're acting in the best interests of democracy." This, it seems, is the only punishment fit for  journalists, to be cast into the "Malebolge," Dante's  punishment  for those who betray their  responsibilities. Driven  by self-hatred,  Hugh  is no more able to heal his self-division than  is his brother.  Just as the Consul has sought  the death he finds under  the volcano, Hugh also is led by a self-destructive  urge to court  a violent death  atop  his ship's cargo of explosives.
The  absolutism of the self that  governs the lives of both brothers  not only impoverishes  the  life of society, it  also undermines  the  interdependence that  is equally the  basis of the  private life. Lowry recognizes, with Buber,  that  individ­ uality is only achieved  fully in the social life, that  "in  the beginning  is relation."  It is precisely because Lowry so intensely values the individual  spirit  that he fears the solipsistic drive in modem  individualism.  His own life offered him all too clear an insight into  the fate of the imperial self, and a presentiment  of the "creeping  apocalypse"  that  threatens  us all. 27   Like Lawrence,  Lowry was  particularly  well qualified  to offer a critique  of the radical  individualism  that  has sunk  so deep beneath  the  surface  of our  lives that  it is no longer  recognized  for  what  it  is. Surely he would endorse much of Lawrence's  analysis of the modern  individual's  inability  to love, suggestive as it is of the  plight of  Hugh  and  Geoffrey Firmin.

To  yield entirely  to love would be to be absorbed, which is the  death  of  the individual:  for the individual  must hold his own, or he ceases to be 'free'  and
'individual.'  So that  we see, what  our  age has proved  to its astonishment and
dismay, that the individual cannot love ... When the individual loves, he ceases to
be purely individual. And so he must  recover himself, and cease to love. 28

For both  writers, the consequence of such individualism  "is simply, suicide. Sui­
cide individual  and  en masse." 29
Unlike  Lawrence,  Lowry  makes no  real attempt  to go beyond  his searching self-criticism, to imagine  new ways of being for western man.  Juan  Cerillo is at once selfless and  fully  alive,  but  he is seen only from  afar,  and  is not  wholly dissociated from Hugh's  heroic fantasies. He remains a lay figure who serves, like Swift's  Portuguese  sea  captain  or  Dickens'  Amy Dorrit,  as a  testament  to  the author's good faith. If the Volcano overcomes despair  to offer "a  positive state­ ment in defense of basic human  values and  human  hopes," as Alfred  Kazin  has maintained Lowry  does,30   it is because  Lowry is unafraid  to  look  directly  into the  face of  the  imperial  self and  report  exactly  what  he  has  seen.  Lowry  the novelist is able to follow the path "right  through  hell" that is closed to the Consul, because unlike Geoffrey  Firmin,  he was able to see far  beyond  the self, and  see clearly.

99

LOWRY

NOTES

1 See C.  B. Macpherson's commentary on  Hobbes  in  The Political  Theory of  Pos­ sessive Individualism (Oxford: Clarendon Press,  I 962)   for  a suggestive discussion of the  ideological basis of  the  position  the  Consul  develops  in  his  argument with Hugh. See esp. "Human Nature and  the  State  of Nature," pp.  I7-46.
2  Selected  Letters  of Malcolm Lowry, ed. Harvey Breit  and  Margerie Bonner  Lowry
(Philadelphia: Lippincott, I965), p. 6o.
3  Quentin Anderson, The   Imperial Self  (I97I; rpt.   New  York:  Vintage, I972), pp.  22, 57·
4   Under the  Volcano (New  York: Reynal  and  Hitchcock, I947), p. 31.
5   An  Area  of Darkness  (London: Deutsch, I964), p. 2I2.  On  a number of occasions scattered through the novel, Mexico is associated  with  India.
6  The Consul  is taken  for an  American by Senor  Bustamente, and  by almost every­ one  he  meets  during his last  visit  to  the  Farolito-Diosdado, the  Chief  of  Ros­ trums  and   the  old  fiddler  who  attempts to  warn   the  Consul  of  the  danger he  is ignoring.
7   The  Colonizer and  the  Colonized, trans.  Howard Greenfeld (I965;  rpt.  Boston: Beacon  Press,  I 972) , pp. 8-9.
8 See  Ronald G.  Walker's discussion  of  the  meaning of  "pelado"  in  his  Infernal Paradise:  Mexico and  the  Modern English  Novel   (Berkeley:  Univ.  of California Press,  I978), pp. 26I-62,  279-80.
9  The Origins  of Totalitarianism (New  York: Harcourt, I973), p. 2I 1.
10  Margaret Canovan, The  Political Thought of Hannah Arendt   (I974; rpt.  London: Methuen, I977), p. 32.
11 Canovan, p. 37·
12  Memmi, p. xvii.
13 Memmi, pp. xxvii-xxviii.
14  Canovan, p. 25.
15  The Origins  of Totalitarianism, p. 476.
16 Origins, p. 475·
17  Hannah Arendt, Between Past and  Future   ( I954; rpt.  Harmondsworth:  Penguin, I977)' p. 89.
18 See, for  example, Chet  Taylor, "The Other Edge  of Existential Awareness:  Read­ ing  of  Malcolm  Lowry's  Under  the  Volcano,"  Literary   Half-Yearly,   q,  no.   I ( I973)'  I38-50.
19  Lowry   (Erin, Ont.: Press Poroepic,  I 977), p. I 93·
20   In  The Origins  of Totalitarianism, Arendt argues  that  many  of  the  rudiments of modern totalitarian rule  were  to  be  found   in  the  British  Empire itself-for  in­ stance, in  the  arbitrary  rule  of  colonial   administrators, which   violated  Britain's heritage of constitutional government.
21  Quoted by  Samuel Hynes  in  The  Auden Generation: Literature and  Politics  in
England in the  1930s (London: Bodley Head, I976), p.  I27.
22  Malcolm Lowry   (New  York:  Oxford Univ. Press,  I973), p. 324.

100

LOWRY

23   See  0. Mannoni's Prospera and  Caliban:  The   Psychology of Colonization,  and
Frantz Fanon's The  Wretched of the Earth.
24  The  Decline of the West, trans.  Charles Francis Atkinson,  2 vols. (I 926 and  I 928;
rpt.  New York: Knopf, I976), I, 363-64.
25   Decline, n, 462.
26   Decline, n, 46I.
27  Anderson, p. vii.
28   D.  H.  Lawrence, Apocalypse  ( I93I; rpt.  Harmondsworth:  Penguin, I974), pp.
I23-24·
29   Apocalypse,  p. I24.
3° Kazin's letter to  Albert  Erskine,   published   m  an  appendix  to  Lowry's  Selected
Letters, p. 438.









COLONDIL WJIRS
 


Alexandre L. Amprimoz


At first model soldiers:
toys breeding honest  desires of war.

And  then  the real game : flies against the screen died  like men
in my father's army.

Such  germs of death
I caught in the African landscape. There dragonflies would melt
their candied wings
in the sun,
there  leaders drew  with their  nails pale  plans  in the sand.








101

THE VILLAGE OF MELONS

Impressions of a Canadian Author in Mexico



GeorgeRyga






ASKED SOME YEARS AGO"" to my most memomble im­ pression of my months in Mexico, I involuntarily  and  with lingering fear recalled the village of melons.
It  was an arid  village, somewhere south of Tepic  along the  west coast of the country. We drove into it late in the afternoon.  We had  driven since dawn  with­ out food, and were looking forward to a family meal and a rest from the heat and highway stress of the day. Entry into the village was through  a narrow  lane sur­ rounded  by peeling  adobe walls enclosing shops and  houses. The lane  was cool and gloomy, sheltered overhead by palms and  banana fronds. Then suddenly  the lane ended, and  we entered the dazzling light of the village square,  crowded with stalls of melons. There  were all manner  of  melons-from  vegetable  squash  to sweet pumpkins,  gourds,  honeydew, musk  and  watermelons.  On  the  far  end  of the  square  beside  the  steps  to  the  church,  a  small  cluster  of  stalls  displayed vegetables. But these stalls were dwarfed  by the melon stalls in the square.  That  was my first impression on entering the square.
The second  was fearful. For the stalls were run  by women  and  children  with distended bellies and blank faces which revealed no animation whatsoever. Despite this cornucopia  of melons, the  people of this  village were starving  to death.
I drove quickly out of this village, over the  protests of my children,  for  I  was chilled by a spectre  I  was in no way prepared  to face -that  of  a  slow death within an illusion of wealth and abundance.
Over the days following, and over subsequent  years, this impression became  a disturbing  metaphor. It  troubled  me for a variety  of reasons, both  personal and sociological. No sooner would  I reconcile myself to one face of this image,  then another  visage, more gaunt and  distressing than  the first, would turn  to confront me with contradiction of the spirit.
Personally, I  was distressed by my initial  but  enduring horror  at  the seeming inevitability of things. And the dawning  realization  that  I on my own  could do nothing  to alter  events shaping  before my eyes. Coming  out  of a  culture  whose paramount  feature  is mobility -the ability to change  geographic  location  easily

102

RYGA

in  pursuit  of self-betterment -as  well as the  ability  to  flee horizontally  from disaster-what I had seen that afternoon  was unthinkable.  I could not reconcile myself to such fatalism. To the death of will, or so it seemed to me.
Yet  even  in  those  moments  in  the  village, serious  contradictions  began  to
bedevil  me.  I  was old  enough  and  travelled  enough  to  realize  that   a  purely mechanistic  approach to problems of cultures and  traditions  was immature and prone to miscalculations. Perhaps I had only half-seen the village and its calamity. Or  maybe  I  had  seen more  than  was really there -and  had  added  details  to observations singularly my own. How could I tell?
The fabric of commerce, culture, and spiritual values in an ancient  landscape is
dense and extremely complex. From the standpoint  of my own references, which are  historically so youthful  as to weigh lightly in such  matters,  the  problems  in the village of melons appeared  quickly evident  and easily resolvable.
Simply  this:   the  agricultural soil off  which  the  village  survived  was  either nutritionally  depleted, or seriously contaminated and therefore  no longer capable of providing nourishing food. Therefore  the village should, for reasons of survival, abandon   the  fields  and  village  and  migrate  elsewhere  to  re-establish  another village and  farmlands from  which  they  could  produce  health-giving  vegetables, cereals, and fruit. It was a simple and practical solution, evident to anyone coming from a nation of people to the north where each individual can change geographic and  provincial  residence  twice  in  one  year  in  pursuit  of  career,  education,   or satisfaction  of restless whims. Where  it is not unusual  to meet  people daily  who have bought and sold homes four or five times in their lifetimes-and who, when asked, would define "home" as a dimly remembered  address on a dimly  remem­ bered street of a city to which often as not they had only the vaguest  stirrings  of affection or belonging.
The  village of melons had likely existed on its present site for five hundred  or a  thousand  years.  In  all  probability  it  was built  on  the  ruins  of  one  or  more previous  ancient  villages of  which  there  is no  longer  memory  or  record.  The cobbled streets over which  I had driven so quickly would  hold some memory  of my passing, as they harboured the mute echoes and minute imprints of ten million footfalls of people and  animals  relentlessly coming and  going through  the  nights and days of a hundred  and a thousand years. And in antiquity  prior to that.  Here people had loved, laboured,  murdered, fled pestilence and returned, died and been reborn  in a baffling panorama of time  and  history which  I  could only guess at. The  stones and fields were hallowed by the endless procession of people, shaping and  reshaping  the earth  to survive. All this I could only guess at,  from evidence no more substantial  than  silent echoes of the walls.
So the simple  resolution  was meaningless. Even  measured  against  the  horror I had  seen, the death  of history would  be far  more  profound  than  the  possible extinction  of a hundred  villagers through  starvation.  It would  be an  outrage  to

RYGA

suggest these villagers had  arrived  at  this  decision through   considered  personal choice. Had  there  been a choice, the  village might  have  been  abandoned  when we came.



So r HURRIED ouT of the village of melons, while the villagers remained, numbed  and bloated, victims of vague and complicated  emotional and spiritual  interactions  of  which  I knew nothing.  I  parked  on the  outskirts  of the village, listening to complaints of my children  and  watching  a bent young woman approaching on the dusty road, leading  a burro  laden  with  dried  corn  husks.
And  as I watched  her approach  and  move past our  vehicle, the nature  of my visit to Mexico changed.  I was a writer,  but  this time  I  was not  researching  or writing. I had come for the sun and a rest, leaving behind all my notes on pending work. My family and  I had already swum in the warm  waters of Mazatlan, had seen our first shark, had tasted our first fresh coconut,  which had fallen overnight beside our  van in the campgrounds.  But actively writing  or  not,  I was still busy harvesting impressions. On the outskirts of the village of melons, I was confronted with a dilemma  which required  all the resources I had  honed  over the years as an author  before I could go anywhere ever again.
Confronting  me was a conditioned reaction rising out of my own culture, which is so ego-centred  with the  maintenance of physical  comforts.  Posed  against  my welling emotions was a different cast of mind and spirit -one which appeared  to willingly accommodate  frailty, aging, and eventual  death  of people and  things as inevitable  and  necessary. With  the village smoldering  behind  me in  the  heat  of late afternoon,  I struggled  against the deepening sensations of moral  helplessness and  pain.
In  my mind  I scrambled  into  my own  early  country  unbringing-knowing that a village must have a well for water and surrounding fields for an economical supply  of food.  That would  suffice in  Canada. Our   prairies  are  dotted   with such hamlets.
But in Mexico, the village square  and  the church  are equally essential, for this civilization is more gregarious than  mine. Man  and  God live in close proximity here, in a natural relationship which northerners  find disturbing,  but somehow reassuring. People walk in this hot desert country, covering distances slowly. They carry burdens on their heads and shoulders. The  aged and very young share much in common -know of each others' existence and  shortcomings.  The  old  person lifts the infant  to its feet for the first time. The  infant  in time leads the old person through  the streets by the  hand,  conscious of the  elder's  faltering  footsteps and declining days of life.
Despite this reduced  alienation  of people from  people, life is far  from  benign.
Only a fool or insensitive brute would fail to notice drudgery,  minimal  schooling,

RYGA

inadequate health care and other social shortcomings as highly visible components of the landscape.  I marvel  to this day at how a well-fed, indulged  northerner  in good health can sit in a cantina  and stare into the street through  an open archway and  see virtually  nothing  except  that  his money buys more  than  at  home. This indifference  and  detachment separating  us from them  has entered  all too easily into popular  myth.
It  is not  the  role of the  writer to deepen such divisions created  by ignorance and  calcified  personality  traits.  The  world  is better  served  through  facing  and carefully exploring  the  reasons for such differences, even  if such  an  exploration creates personal  cultural or moral  distress. Again, one does not  choose the  time or place for such decisions. One is thrust upon them willy-nilly, and seldom in the best of circumstances.  To  flee from such turmoil  and  confrontation of the spirit is not  admirable, unless one  has already  opted  for a  gloomy and  cynical  with­ drawal from faith in human  potential.
Responding  to my own cultural  conditioning, my first impulse was to flee from the  village of melons.  But  pausing  on  the  outskirts  of  the  village, I could  not escape  the  metaphor of  this  chance  encounter  with  devastation   and   what  it implied. It was not something  as isolated and alien to me as I would have wished it to be. There  were many  parts of the scenario I already  knew of, yet dared  not assemble, concentrating instead on better craftsmanship  in my work.
From my craftsmanship I had learned long ago that studying another  language strengthens  understanding of one's own language. Extending  that  truism further, it should  be possible to comprehend  ones' own culture  in a new way by entering another.  Particularly an  ancient  culture,  so close to  us geographically.  Yet  as  I write  these lines, I  am  deluged  by recollections of  acquaintances who  went  to Mexico over the  years, and  the surprisingly narrow  focus of their  observations, their tastes and  preferences. They spoke highly of the whore-houses in the  border towns, the spicy food,  the  beggars, the availability  and  low cost of textiles  and leather goods.
Even  Malcolm  Lowry  can  be faulted  for  a  consumer  fascination   with  this ancient  world,  even  though  his consumerism  was tortured   and  burdened   with heavy demons of the  heart  and  mind.  Unlike  Lowry, my friend  the  bee-keeper settled for one good  dinner  and  getting himself laid.  Hardly  a seasonal  accom­ plishment, yet complete  in its own dimension. So what  is left to do  then?  Turn  the  car  around   and  head  for  the  American  border  and  the  familiarity  of  the Western  Hotel  chain?  And  on  return  home, add  to  the  restless myth  dividing peoples by dwelling  in  conversations  on  the other's  poverty -making  that  the total  distinction  between  ourselves and  them  on  racial,  economic,  social -and eventually hwnan  worth values?
It is such a simple and  unfulfilling tack to take. Repeated  over the years and generations, it must invariably  lead to a deepening gulf between civilizations. An

RYGA

indifference and  a faltering of curiosity which enters  into  the very language  that we  use. The   designation  "banana republic"   is  not  so  much   derisive  as  it  is cynical. For it implies that some people are  capable  only of producing  bananas. Their  languages, songs, what they think and  feel, count  for nothing. Such  a  dis­ missal of human  worth  may have little effect on  the  peoples against  which  it is directed,  for  human   worth  matters  little  in  economic  exploitation -either  for its architects  or its victims. But it is a disastrous  reflection  on  the  cultures  from which it originates, for it tarnishes them with decadence  and  raises the spectre of another kind of eventual decline and death.
An artist in our time can tum and flee from all this-rush away to some patch of earth  reasonably  insulated  from  the drumbeats of ongoing  history. Here  you can, if you wish, select the birds you wish to sing in your trees by shooting down those whose songs you do not wish to hear. You can  build a house with irregular walls if you  wish, and  spray-paint  your  lawn  some  different   colour  from  the universal green. All it takes is money and an extra  burst of energy, both of which we have in abundance compared with the villagers in the tropics. You can create, with modem  technology and  some electrical  current, your  own  environment  of sound and  light to mirror  the growing madness festering  in your skull. Yes, you can tum  and flee. Flee from the village of dreadful  illusions....


8UT  THAT IS  NOT  THE ONLY choice. There is another  method of approaching this uncompromising dilemma. And that  is to continue  on into the desert, accepting  what is there as a distressing fact  of life, and  losing garments  of
personal culture  in the process-memories and  attitudes -all the real and  cos­ metic dressings of what  I and  you once were -approaching  nearer  and  nearer to the abyss of revelation about  what it is to be human  in a universal sense. It  is not a journey for the timorous. One must brace for anguish  and self-denial. One must  be free  to  receive-to allow  new language   and  metaphor  to  filter  into oneself through  osmosis of food, climate, pacing, humour, fear.  Even the theft or loss of personal  possessions and surface  trimmings  on  the  vehicle you drive  are inconsequential.  They  were only surplus acquisitions  to begin with. And they will be replaced by late night rituals and processions of worship as alien to the national catholic church  as they would be to any foreign influence  attempting to penetrate and redirect one of the world's oldest civilizations. You will hear folk songs whose language and  nuances reveal a new dimension of dramatic and emotional expres­ sion. You will discover explosive humour  and  profound  introspection.  You  will experience  legends such  as those incorporated by  the  folk  writer,  Azuela,  that transcend  death  in moving the human  personality into  a  nether-world  populated  by the spirits of those departed  and  those to  come  in  a  complex  and  dynamic

106

RYGA


relationship,  struggling  out  of the  morass  into something  more  just and  moral than  the life of streets and  fields in the endless procession of nights and  days.
You may, if you are  fortunate, stumble  into a  primordial  darkness  of spirit. And engage in spiritual  and  physical slavery wrestling with yearnings for fascism, socialism, a craving for vengeance against the oppressors who came with  Cortes. And left only yesterday morning in a Toyota  Celica, its trunk loaded with crafted Tasco silverware which they acquired for less than the market  value of the metal.
You will bear witness to the darkness and the light, the skies crackling and exploding as faceless horsemen and their women appear  racing from near shadows into distant gloom, the horses trailing sparks beneath  their  pounding  hooves. Celebrations  of simple food and  passionate discussions, laced with timeless hatred for the mendacity  of those who rise from  among the  people only to betray  their trust, race, and history.
And through  this fierce vortex will pass the men with rifles -the robbers, the corrupt  police and  militia -the warriors  cut  loose from  command  or  personal discipline, surviving on the fear they generate. Through  this fierce vortex will pass the revolutionaries,  bandoliers  across their shoulders and  guitars  in hand,  linked to the people more through emotion than political consensus. Brilliant, god-like, tragically foolish-all grouped  into a common body of fatal heroism from which the legends and folksongs of the future  will erupt.
Through it all I recall how the light pales and darkens.  In  the fields, the corn matures  and  is gathered  by  the  shawled,  black-clad  women.  In  a  small  town where I lived a while, the most beautiful  young woman  I had  ever seen is scan­ dalized by her husband,  her children taken from her, and is driven out to survive in the streets as a scavenger and a whore. It was all a brutal  joke. The entire town became smaller for it. While in the fields, the corn aged and  was  gathered.
And in the mountains, young boys wearing large sombreros-my sons among them -poach wood, returning  home under cover of darkness. I sit in a doorway with my friend  and  watch  them  pass by silently, their  slight shoulders burdened with bundles of twigs and  branches. They vanish in the darkness and  my friend and  I speak of Emilio Zapata,  who could not read or write -and  Hidalgo,  who could. And my friend  sings two fragments  of songs he remembers  of the time.


IHAVE NOT  RETURNED to the village of melons. But in a way,
I have never left it. My seasons in Mexico altered me, more profoundly  than  any
comparative  event of like duration  in my entire life. I abandoned my intent  at a holiday and began writing again, feverishly and late into the night. Around  me in the  darkness,  the  restless animals  in  the  hamlet  called  to each  other.  Children cried fitfully in their  sleep. Drunkards  sang  raucously and  off key and  rang  the


107

RYGA

churchbells  in the square.  I  heard  the cries of birth  and  the  low moans  of the dying as I completed final work on Paracelsus. Then  in a happier  state of mind, began writing  A  Portrait  of Angelica.
And  as I wrote and  listened in  my pauses to  the  sounds  of the  dusty streets around  me, the village of melons took its place in a deepening  mosaic of  observa­ tions which defied the sequences of time and  chronology. Pressing new  questions began to preoccupy me: since life and human  destiny were so uneven and full of surprises,  what  validity should  I  give to the  traditional demands  of  order  and progression in my work-particularly my dramatic writings?  Was  not  life itself
a revolutionary  process, with its own fluid and everchanging discipline? Did I not learn this from the folk procedures of Azuela, when he took my imagination  into impossible places with the authority  and ease of someone documenting a common­ place event?
On our return  to Canada,  I was startled  by the austere visions I had somehow acquired  during  my time away. And reminded  in a different  way of the village of melons. For here food was overabundant, housing sumptuous  and  airtight.  Our own  home  was suffocating  with  the  clutter  of needless accumulations  gathered as a family over the years. These illusions of plenty baffled even my children, and for days we wandered  through rooms and over grounds of our garden.  We missed adversity, and  the fine edge of despair which made  all the seconds and  minutes of life so precious and memorable. We had everything  we needed once again, and yet we collectively experienced the haunting  realization  that  we had  nothing.  All this surrounding us was transient, destructible and a purely material  and cosmetic assurance of security against a savage climate and the loneliness of a young culture barely  finding  its own feet.  We  had  yet  to  rediscover  the  medical  and  social security systems of our country-those great  and  reasoned  achievements  of our society that  commit us to help one another  in times of hardship.
Some days later,  I  was called  by Judy  LaMarsh to appear  on  her  radio  talk show in Vancouver,  to speak of my impressions from  my visit to the south. She was a  representative  of the  Canadian establishment-authoritative,  confident, glacial in spiritual inflexibility. I have my problems with establishment,  not unlike problems  I have  with  God:   namely-with such  credentials,  why  are  they  so prone to mistakes? She questioned me, and  I recalled  with rising animation  what I had seen and  confided my conviction  that  despite  all the  problems  of poverty, armaments and  the  oppression of  peoples, the  human   will to  live  and  perfect itself would  prevail.  Even as I spoke, I was aware  she had  become  distant  and dull eyed....
And in the parking  lot of the radio studio that  morning,  I again  remembered the village of melons and the vendors I had seen, starved  of will, staring  uncom­ prehending  at something distant  and visible only to themselves.


I08


GOOSE, IN LOVE
 


E.F.Dyck


He is entirely rhetorical:

plucking a brassy poppy from his garden to present to the woman  he is yet to meet, the woman who with a look or movement will capture his dying love
for an afternoon.

His way is the shorter  of two ways,
the way to take when  the rain threatens
(though it never actually  rains) , the way to take when  the sun in fits and  starts  shines brilliantly,
the way to take while the canker
sleeps in his black style.

The longer  way is not for him. That way lies a river which carries the tossed flower down to the sea where  it is lost in the flotsam.

His way is the quick red puff in a slender glass vase
filled with  tepid  water.


















109





TALE OF TWO COLONIES

MARGARET ATWOOD,  Bodily  Harm. McClelland
& Stewart, $16.g5.

IT IS THE BEST of  her  books,  it  is  the worst of her  books;  the funniest, the gris­ liest, the most  poignant, the vaguest;  the most  honest,   the   most   pretentious;  the most  profound, the  most  banal. . . . The good  news is that  Bodily  Harm  advances the  oeuvre, overcomes the  inertia of her last  two  novels,  and   should   spike  "At­ wood  Commentary" in  interesting  new ways.  Atwood   is  close  to  achieving the position in prose that  she has in poetry - namely,  that   the  individual additions to the  shelf  no  longer   matter as  much   as they  did.  Eccentric favourites, irrational dislikes,  will  all  be  a  part  of  the  public response.  It's   a  dynamic; that's  how  it should  be.
Insofar  as  the   bulk  of  Bodily   Harm takes  place  on  the  Caribbean island  of St.  Antoine    (and   its  Tobago-like  after­ birth,   Ste.  Agathe)   and  concerns  itself with  a  bloody   (and  bloody-awful)  little coup,  Bodily  Harm may be said  to be an ambitious  political   novel.   The    island­ writing  is low, mean, dispirited; Rennie's (Renata  Wilford   of  Griswold,  Ontario) travel-piece commission  from a Toronto glossy  called   Visor   has  taken   her   to  a dingy little  backwater about  to endure its first  free   elections.  We've   visited   these "free  states" before,  notably  in  Naipaul, and  Atwood  really doesn't add  to our un­ derstanding. (Naipaul probably  said it all in Guerrillas, as violence is about  to erupt  in shades  of tropical green: "You  didn't think  this island  was  that  kind  of  island. But every island  is that  kind  of  island.")


I IO
 St.  Antoine is  a kind  of  Grenada   one supposes,  with  the far  left  (Marsdoand Prince) competing against the liberal cen­ tre   (Minnow, a one-time Ontario  veter­  inarian, who is given some of the best lines in  the  book,  at  the  expense  of  "the  sweet Canadians"),  and   the   local   Papa   Doc pretender,   Ellis.   Fifteen   parliamentary seats are  up  for  grabs. The CIA  is inter­ ested.  The  Canadians  have  an  observer.  The  election is one  of  those  tiny  teapot tempests  that  barely  rate  a line or two in the  Glob,e & Mail, but  which  can  scald you  if you're  caught without a  passport, in   the   wrong    hotel,    with    the   wrong friends. It's  a  small  island  and  everyone has a theory  about Rennie, and  her stun­ ning naivete. (Can anyone  be so ignorant, so innocent? Her  blankness  is a provoca­ tion. She  is used.)
Rennie, steadfastly denying all  interest in  politics,  is of course  the  classic pigeon in such  a cross-fire.  The  lesson is an  ob­ vious  one: there  are  no  neutral  corners, even  in forgotten little  islands.  And  there  is  no  "life-style" that   doesn't  deal  with life  itself.  Otherwise, your  witty trust  in surfaces  makes  you merely superficial. In Toronto she was paid  for  her  coy brittle­ ness  (much of it  very  funny,  in  the  por­  tions  Atwood  includes) ;  here  she  learns  that  irony offers  no protection. The  point  is made by Dr.  Minnow:
'It's not  my  thing,' she  says.  'I just  don't do  that kind  of  thing. I do  lifestyles.'
'Lifestyles?' says  Dr.  Minnow. He's  puz­
zled.
'You  know,  what people wear,  what  they
eat, where they  go  for  their  vacations, what they've got  in  their  livingrooms, things like that,' says  Rennie, as  lightly as  she  can.
Dr.  Minnow considers this  for  a  moment. Then  he  gives   her   an   angelic smile.   'You
might  say   that I also   am  concerned  with
lifestyles,' he says.  'It is our  duty, to be concerned  with   lifestyles. What  the   people eat, what they  wear, this  is what I want you to write about.'

Dr.  Minnow, the  gentle,  ironical  mod­
erate, is doomed to die in the coup.  (Na-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



turally, one thinks.) Rennie meets the island's  other Canadian woman-Lora, Prince's mistress-tough   and   knowing where  Rennie is naive  and  disapproving. Lora  is pure  Queen Street East, basement apartments, drunken, rapist  step-fathers, to Rennie's Queen Street West of trendy used clothes,  and  chic  boutiques.
The  political lessons  of  Bodily  Harm
are familiar. They come from  Greene  and Naipaul and  Theroux and  Stone,  all  the way back to Conrad. They're not the reasons  I'm  attracted to Bodily  Harm.
The second  plot  (not  at  all a sub-plot,
since  the  two  are  developed in  counter­ point)  is  feminist. Rennie  is  a  familiar Atwood   creation-struggling  Southern Ontario Decent-from a  sterile,  hypo­ critical,  sexless  background.  Readers of Life   Before  Man  and   Lady   Oracle  al­ ready  know  it  too  well  (as  do  readers  of Munro  and   Gallant,  from   lower   and  higher on  the  same  social  scale) . In  both books, the  background tended  to swamp the foreground. This  time out,  the town's name  is Griswold, which  seems  to say it all.  Rennie  has  made   more   of  her  life than   either Joan Foster   or  LesjejEliza­ beth.  It  would  seem  to be a Toronto up­ date  of  the  old  "living  well  is  the  best revenge" strategy,  to  say  in  effect  that  knowing  who's  living  well and  how  they do  it, and  even  being  a little  superior  to it  all,  is  even  sweeter.  Atwood   catches  the beat  of the new, "tres  nouveau-wave" Toronto, with such  pitiless authority that  it  borders  on  grace.  Rennie is the classic doctor-in-need-of-a-cure;  her    antennae tell her who's  in,  who's  out; what  to eat, drink,  wear, smoke; she's up on therapies, pills,  lawyers,  remodellers, she  knows where  to be seen and  who to be seen with. Eventually, even  in Toronto, age  or self­ disgust  or  burn-out  would   set  in;  even ageing Rockers  become  absurd. In fiction, something more  drastic  is  required.
Rennie has recently  been invaded. She has lost a  breast  to  cancer. Her  reaction
 to one form of intense violation  has driven her  lover  away.  (A  good  character,  this Jake; an  ideal  man  for  the  woman  she was.)   At  the  novel's  opening, she is "in­ volved"  in  a  groveling infatuation  with her surgeon, a blank  young  man  of  stun­ ning rectitude and responsibility. The  trip  to St.  Antoine  is meant  to  restore health and   perspective. In  an  ironical   way,  it probably  succeeds.  After  the  self-pitying protectiveness brought on  by the surgery,  she needs something to "take her mind  off her  troubles"  (as  the  choric  "Griswold" would  say, adding  probably that  she  de­ serves  her   cancer  for   the  irresponsible, lascivious  life she leads). After  the  trou­ bles she sees in  St.  Antoine  she comes  to realize   a   universal    fragility,   everyone's reliance  on  luck  to survive.  She  left  To­ ronto  a "life-styles" columnist looking  for a  slick,  funny  article; she  returns, ready  to  be  a  journalist with  a  new  clientele, and  a  new  story  to  tell.
In  other  words, redemption is possible,
even   for   the   spiritually  smug   Ontario United Church drop-out. The  greatest success of this book, for me, is the render­ ing  of a  "modern woman"  from  such  a background; the  unconscious disapprov­ ing,  selfish  baggage  she  still  carries,   de­ spite  all  the  signs  to  the  contrary. And it is a portrait that fills me with sympathy.
Thus,  a simple recitation of plot and theme  does violence  to the  texture of  fic­ tion. If Bodily  Harm were  nothing  more than   the   professional resurrection   of  a trendy  Toronto journalist (and  if  consid­ erable  amounts of Caribbean  blood  had to  be spilled  in  order   to  effect  it), then we would  be correct in terming the novel a   kind    of   political    pornography.  (It doesn't entirely  escape  the  charge  any­  way.)   It  certainly would  not  be  one  of the "best" of her  works, which  I continue to think  it  is. I would  say rather that  the Caribbean   material  is  not   wholly   inte­ grated   to  the  text   (as  the  intrusive  re­ minders from  cancer terminology serve  to


II I

BOOKS IN REVIEW



make  clear), and  that  dangerous literary conceits  are  being  played  in  running the twin tales of despoilment together.
The plots are  joined in a scene that  has already   become  much-quoted. From  her cell,  where   her  private degradation  has not quite  run  its course, Rennie is boosted to the window  by Lora,  in order  to watch the  "proceedings" against   the   prisoners in  the  courtyard. Watching the  beatings, the  blood,  she  thinks   back  to  a  "safer" time in trendy Toronto when she'd  toured a police exhibit of torture and  pornogra­ phy  aids  (a  rat  peeking  out  of  a  vagina  had  done  it  for  her   then),  and   Rennie thinks: "She's afraid of men and  it's sim­ ple,  it's  rational, she's  afraid  of men  be­ cause  men  are  frightening." It's   a  neat quote,  and  the context frames it very pro­ fessionally.  Political   and   sexual   perver­  sion, power  politics  if you wish, are  tied together; it is also a forced  moment, a melodramatic leap from a character who's been  behaving more  like  Private  Benja­ min  than  Joan of Arc.
Never in Atwood's novels have  the two sexes seemed  more  like  beings  from  dif­ ferent   planets. We  are  dealing  with  At­ wood's   special,   chilly   gift:    a   vision  of threat  and  separateness so  carefully worked   out  in  prose  and  poetry   that   it becomes something over which  reasonable  people must  simply choose to disagree.
Sometimes, we catch  sight of a shadow
surrounding a  book,  a haze  that  doesn't quite   lift,   but   which   remains   stronger than  a suggestion, and  that's the feeling I have  about Bodily  Harm.  I'm   more  in­ terested  in  Rennie  the  product of  Gris­ wold turned lifestyles reporter, than I am in  Rennie the  reborn  activist.  The   fun­  niest writing in the book is Atwood's nail­ ing  of  the  lifestyles  "scene," the  frantic with-itness. Bright,  glib,  amusing,   hard­ edged,  impatient,  cold-all  the  watch­ words of that parasitic sub-world. Rennie presumably does it well;  the scraps  of her writing that  we're  given  all ring  true.


I I 2
 Perhaps because  I am  a recent  refugee from  Toronto myself,  I'm prone  to  pro­ jecting a few impure thoughts of my own. I think   of  Toronto as  the  "Miss  Teen  Canada" of cities-perky,  bright,  beau­  tiful, talented-and also silly, vain, shal­ low, even  cruel.  In ten  years, she may  be wonderful-or  a  slattern.  Rennie  em­ bodies  both  tendencies.  Just  as  I sympa­  thize and  feel I understand, Atwood  jerks the strings  and Rennie stumbles,  stupidly. She's a strange combination of sophistica­ tion and innocence -like Toronto-and her  struggle  toward  cosmopolitanism is tentative at   best.  There are   only  three cities  on  this  continent with  the  money and  the  talent  to support a book like this
-Toronto being  the third-but if  Ren­
nie were  portrayed as a life-styler  in Los Angeles or  New York,  we'd  know  how  to take  her.  All  brass,  brittle as fresh  celery stalks bought at  just the right  time of day from   your   trusted  Korean  greengrocer. There's a  quality to Rennie that  catches awkwardness, the looking-over-the-shoul­ der  gawkiness  that  makes  her  both  real, and   slightly   unsettling.  Long   after   the revolution and other melodramas, it's that  quality I'll  remember from  Bodily Harm.
But  at  least  Rennie is free of Griswold. In the  future, it won't take cancer  and  a revolution to show  the way.

CLARK BLAISE


TRUE DILEMMAS

MARGARET    ATWOOD,     True  Stories.    Oxford,
$5·95·
Two-Headed Poems  ( I978)  is a book  of elegies and  of poems about torture, politi­ cal  and  sexual,  rising  to a conclusion af­  firming   the  power  of  language to  trans­ form  the  world,  of  words  to create  com­ munity.  "Footnotes to  the  Amnesty  Re­ port  on Torture" is balanced against  "All Bread," and  "A  Red  Shirt" against "You

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Begin."  The poet's  contract with  her me­ dium   is  unbroken,  her   rhetoric   fluent,  balanced,  moving    through  the   careful gestures  of a  cycle  like  "Five  Poems  for Grandmothers." The  poet   dares   to  be graceful and  succeeds.
But True Stories  is indeed  a different story. Gone  are  two-headed debates, con­ clusions  left  for  readers to  resolve.  Here  it  is  too  dangerous to  leave  conclusions implied. Implicature  must   be  sewn  up, closing all spaces of uncertainty, revealing  not   stories   but   blood,    torture,  death. Boundaries are   blurred  or   denounced. "Prose" shifts  into  "poetry," the  reader's comfort  in  the  act   of  reading into   the pain  of  abrupt revelation:
The razor  across  the  eyeball is a detail from  an  old  film. It is also  a  truth.
Witness is what you  must  bear.

Just   as  the  opening frames   of  Bufiuel's "Un  chien  andalou" create  through  rup­ ture  the  aesthetic possibility  of  making  a critique of a corrupt society, so Atwood's  truth, equally  violent, abjures both silence and  myth  as guises of  story-telling, forms of entertainment  which fail  in their  duty to  bear  witness. Silence  contains implicit  reassurance,  and  myth,   diversion.  What  must  be written is "the poem  that  invents
/ nothing and  excuses nothing," the poem which   does   not   in   itself   constitute an excuse  by virtue  of its  display  of  rhetori­ cal  invention.
These are  poems  which  seek to go be­ yond  words,  to put  aside  elaboration and eloquence and   break   through  technique in order  to  render the  force  of  pain,  the denial  of the  freedom to speak  truth:
The woman lies  on  the  wet  cement floor under the  unending light,
needle marks on  her  arms  put  there
to  kill  the  brain
and  wonders why  she  is dying.
She  is dying because she said.
She  is dying for  the  sake  of  the  word.
It is her  body,  silent
and  fingerless, writing this  poem.
 Gone  beyond  the  luxury   of surface  into the attempt to speak  pain  without media­ tion,  this  section  of  "Notes for  a Poem that   Can   Never   be  Written"  dares   the reader -like much  in Klein and Lowther
-to  employ  aesthetic categories   in  the face of moral  injunction. To  recall  True Stories   to  the   perfect   structuring  of  a work like The Journals  of Susanna  A1oo­ die-as some readers may  be tempted to do-seems  an  act  of bad faith, a break­  ing of faith  with  a  text  which  in its pro­ fession  of  disillusionment  and   denial   of comfort,  in its painful confrontation with a demystified  world,  represents an  act  of both  lesser  aesthetic importance and greater emotional daring. It  is a dilemma appropriate  to  a  book  which   questions both  truths  and  stories  and  wrestles with its own creation.

LORRAINE WEIR


ART, AMOUR, POESIE

suzANNE   PARADis,  Les   Hauts   cris.  Lemeac,
$g.gs.
LAURENT    DUBE,    La    Mariakeche.  Lerneac,
$11.95·
ROBERT LALONDE, La  Belle epouvante. Quinze,
$8.oo.

L'ART,  L'AMOUR  et  la  poesie sont  des  ex­ pressions  de  l'fune  qui  se marient  agrea­ blement.  Cet  heureux trio, exploite  d'une fac;on originale, sous-tend  la toile de fond des romans  de Suzanne  Paradis, Laurent Dube  et Robert  Lalonde, ce qui  procure au lecteur  un plaisir  toujours renouvele.
Les Hauts  cris de Suzanne Paradis, que
public  Lemeac dans  une  nouvelle  edition definitive, consacre le talent  patient et continu  de l'auteur qui,  depuis  une  ving­
taine  d'annees, fournit  a l'amant de  la
litterature des  recueils  de  poemes  et  des
romans  ou le foisonnement des passions humaines, le desarroi face  a !'existence  et
les  interrogations  multiples  de   l'amour


113

BOOKS IN REVIEW



jaillissent  de chaque page  comme  un eclatement de lumiere.
Les  femmes   de  ce  roman,   splendides dans  leur  solitude, fortes  malgnleur fra­ gilite et amoureuses de leur art  comme de
leurs  amants, s'entetent a ciseler leur  ex­
istence   au  gre  de  la  fantaisie   et  de  la
jalousie. Doris,  "figure de  proue," regne sur  la  maisonnee et  !'atelier  de  son  fils Damien, qui  ne  peut  creer  de sculptures geniales   sans   l'autorite  ecrasante de  sa
mere.  Telle   une  sorciere  a la  parole  im­
perieuse  et aux  gestes  tranchants, Ia  "tu­
trice"  subjugue son  entourage et  Marie­ Andree, sa  bru.  La  beaute  de sa  femme,  dont  Damien ne pourrait etre prive, s'of­ fre comme  une porcelaine precieuse  resis­ tant  mal  aux  moindres  brusqueries de  Ia vie. Enfin,  Luce,  soeur cadette de Marie­ Andree, fascinee  par le theatre, subit, elle aussi,  les  mefaits  du  "mauvais oeil"  de Doris.  En  effet,  en  se suicidant, l'altiere Doris  culpabilise  outre  mesure  Luce  qui mourra  en   mettant  au   monde   un  fils, David. Ces trois femmes,  par leurs agisse­ ments   et  leur   perception de  !'existence,
s'amusent, pour  ainsi dire, a meier l'eche­
veau  des fils amoureux. Dechire entre  le
respect  possessif de sa mere adoptive et Ia fascination  du   culte   de   la   beaute  de Marie-Andree, Damien hesite entre  les avances  non equivoques de Luce et Ia plasticite  impressionnante  de  sa  femme
qui  s'attache a Camille, le poete,  comme
un  enchanteur  proposant un  intermede
au milieu de ces existences contraignantes. Ce  roman   de  Suzanne Paradis, ou  la poesie   brille   dans   une   gerbe   d'images bibliques, se compose d'intrigues multiples ou !'amour fait  naitre et mourir  illusions, desirs,  espoirs.  Les  nombreuses   allusions
au  futur donnent a l'ouvrage un  art  raf­
fine du  suspense,  un interet soutenu dans l'attente. La solitude des etres, le maitre a
penser  qu'affectionne !'auteur, s'incarne avec vigueur  et cruaute dans  tous les per­
sonnages  et  surtout en Damien  qui,  a Ia
fin, reclus  dans  sa cabane, repond  desor-


I 14
 mais  au  nom  du  "Sauvage." La  peur,  Ia fragilite et !'incomprehension ont quelque chose  d'epouvantable parce   qu'clles  im­ pregnent !'amour d'un gout de mort.
Amours d ues,
telles sont  aussi  les avenues  qu'emprunte
Laurent Dube  dans  son  premier roman, La  Mariakeche. L'argumentation  tourne autour d'une philosophic de !'existence ou le passe  est  considere comme  une  valeur sure  et remplie de sagesse. Meo,  le poete, se laisse envouter par  la poesie, Ia nature et  une espece  de nostalgic  qui  donnent le
ton  a !'ensemble. Entoure d'amis sympa­
thiques, Isidore, l'avocat, le pere  Eugene
qui  inspire  Ia douceur et  Ia tolerance, et
Ella  rencontree a un  mechoui, Meo,  tel
un Diogene, seme des mots et des phrases
qui  cherchent le  vrai,  Ia  poesie,  tout  ce
que  les hommes  ne peuvent souiller.
Le narrateur, comme affole par Ia bous­
culade du  temps  brisant  tout  sur son  pas­
sage,  se complait a relever  et  a faire  re­
vivre ce que le passe avait  de franchement
agreable  pour   les  habitues du  Carabin. Meo  et Isidore revent  aux  bans  moments de  leurs  etudes, Eugene, le solitaire, con­ sidere  le present comme  trap moderne et tapageur, alors  qu'Ella  s'emmitoufte, elle aussi, dans  tout  ce qui a odeur  d'hier. Le couple  amoureux   que   forment  Ella   et Meo  redecouvre, en visitant le "pays," la ferme   des  ancetres  qui   sent   bon   et  Ia Mariakeche avec  sa digue,  son moulin  et toute  son  histoire,  ce qui  permet  d'inter­ roger  son  interieur et  d'y  voir  plus  clair.  Et,  comme un  enfant,  Meo  invente   des
formes,   des  couleurs et  des  mots  a  son
reve  inalterable: s'approprier le  moulin.
Grace  aux   contacts  heureux  d'Isidore, Ella  et  Meo  prennent enfin  possession  du patelin de Ia Mariakeche revetu  d'une certaine  nostalgic.   Et   comme   pour  de­ montrer !'intolerance et  Ia folie  du  pre­  sent,   Ia  fin  du   roman  est   tissee,  entre  autres, par   Ia  mort   atroce  d'Eugene, le solitaire pacifique, et  par !'accident irre­  parable que  subit  Isidore.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



'En sornme, ce roman est un heureux voyage  dans  le passe par  des retours magiques aux  origines  terriennes, aux an­ nees du pensionnat, aux  etes dans le Pole­ Nord,   au   stage   au   sanatorium,  le   tout marque d'une note  de regret  que Tortue, la  vieille  Citroen de  Meo,  vient  comme  authentifier.
L'idylle amoureuse entre   Ella  et  Meo est  reprise   avec  plus  de  vigueur encore dans  la  Belle  epouvante   de  Robert  La­ londe, prix Robert-ClicheI g8 I, ou le M oi du  narrateur livre  son  histoire  d'amour virant a  l'epopee. Son  amour  fou  avec Elle detaille les multiples  contours d'une aventure  ou   fusent,   jaillissent   et   ecla­ boussent   des  emotions  debridees. Le  Je narrateur,  pour oublier les rigueurs  d'un  hiver  qui  n'en   finit  plus,  se  lance  dans l'autopsie de "la  mour, la maudite mour." Toute   !'intrigue  s'organise  autour   des liens  qui  attachent le  narrateur a  Elle, jamais nommee, mais  toujours  omnipre­ sente.  L'attrait  irresistible de !'amour est demontre  par   les   fremissements  et   les jouissances  du  couple, ou  l'un  est  "infu­ sion" et l'autre  "effusion."
La Belle epouvante  s'inspire du  journal intime: ]e s'interroge sur  plusieurs  sujets qui se resument, a la fin, a sa relation amoureuse avec  Elle, et  il  pratique !'art du  coq-a-l'ane en  ecorchant les  gyneco­ logues,  ces "zigs-la," en  jonglant avec  les coquerelles et  en  s'interessant a  Marie­
]eanne, fermiere et  comedienne. Mais  il revient  constamment a sa preoccupation,
son  aventure amoureuse. Intarissable et comme obsede,  Je echafaude parses "elu­
cubrations  socratiques"  une   morale   sur
!'amour et  erie  son  gout  d'etre heureux.
II compte meme sur la connivence sympa­ thique  du  lecteur pour  poursuivre la dis­ section  de  son  Moi  amoureux. Bref,  ce journal    intime   entretient  un   dialogue  avec  Je en amour, Elle et aussi le lecteur qui  se laisse prendre au  jeu.
Le  "ti-cul,"  ]e,  dans   la  trentaine, se classe  lui-meme parmi  les paranolaques,
 les schizophrenes, les lucides, les exageres, accouple a Elle qui  transforme tout en bonheur de  vivre  de  faire  l'amour,  tous deux  forment un  N ous "beaux et  lisses," unis  dans  des  "noces   breves  et  droles," celles de !'amour. Les chansons  de  la  ra­ dio,  qui  tombent  pile,  consacrent  d'une certaine fac;on le "My  heart  wants more" que  le narrateur emprunte a  Billie  Holi­  day.
Ces trois romans, dans chaque cas le premier de l'auteur-Les Hauts cris fut d'abord publie  en  Ig6o-presentent  une recherche etudiee de l'ecriture ou des  re­ flexions continuelles, celles de Camille, de Meo  ou  de  ]e, par  exemple,  consacrent leur  valeur.   L'introspection  de  Je de  la Belle  epouvante   d'une   part,   s'amusant avec  une  ecriture  composee   de  phrases  syncopees, courtes et comme desarticu!ees, expose  son  "drole  de  destin" et  ausculte son Moi, ses frissons et ses desirs dans  une projection   d'images qui  ressemble  .a un feu   d'artifice   eblouissant!  Comme   un souffle  de   vie,  de   jeunesse  et   d',eclate­ ment,  !a  belle  ·epouvante,  "c'est  finale­  ment    ce  qu'on  a   et   ce   qu'on  est   de
meilleur," soutient le  narrateur. D'autre part,  le verbe  feerique de Suzanne  Para­ dis  et  de  Laurent Dube,   cree  les  chocs qu'appellent les cris desesperants, ou bien enlumine  et   idealise   le   passe   que    !e charme de  la  Mariakeche symbolise.  La solitude du  pere  Eugene  comme  celle  de Damien, coloree  par  une espece d'atmos­ phere bucolique, suscite !a reflexion.
L'evolution du  sculpteur Damien, la jouissance   amoureuse  toujours  presente de  ]e en  Elle et !a  richesse  poetique  at­ tachee au  passe  de  la  Mariakeche  don­  nent   a  ces  trois  romans une  sorte  d'in­ teriorite et  de fascination qui  ne  peuvent laisser  indifferent le  lecteur.

YVON  BELLEMARE





I I 5

BOOKS IN REVIEW



SECOND LAUNCHING

MIRIAM  WADDINGTON,   The   Visitants. Oxford,
$5·95·
OCCASIONALLY THERE WILL BE   a posture, a  gesture -some  coincidence  of  action and  setting-which recurs  so frequently and  significantly  in a  poet's  work  that  it feels like home  base, a launching pad  for the whole of that poet's work. In Miriam Waddington's case that  place involves a child  cavorting, dancing, flying, hurling itself forward into  a natural sphere.  It is an act of assertion, of the child's  ego celebrating its arrival in a world of leaves and  air  and  stars. This  note was sounded clearly   in  Green   World    (1945),   Wad­ dington's first volume,  and  is echoing  still in The Visitants, her  tenth. The persona  is much   older  now,  appearing in  poems called  "Old  Age  Blues"  and  "Managing Death," but  she  remains   (for  all  her  in­ termittent   grumbling)  essentially   child­  like-an  "old  child,  infant lady."
The  opening and  closing poems  reveal that    Waddington  has   "managed"  the ideas of disappointment, aging, and death by holding on to that  quintessential image of  the  child   launched  upon   the  world. With  the placement of these poems she implies  a  renewal   at  the  end  of  life,  a second launching. In the first poem, "Playing," nothing is said of a world gone sour;   the  speaker invites  us  to  fly with her  and   to  rock  "baby continents ... in
their   blue   I sky  cradles   to  a   I gentle
laughing I sleep."  But  why  solicit  sleep in  the  morning of  the  world?  Partly  for
the  pleasure  of a  lullaby,  when  it  is not really   the   morning  of  the   world,   and partly for the reversal at book's end of a "Wake-up Song." In  that  last  poem,  the nursery  colours  have   darkened; yet  the "old  child,  infant lady"  is instructed to "cIose accounts," to "Iay asr'de" her anger and  grief,  "and wake  the sleepy  world." The world's yawn,  of "purest gold,"  an-


II6
 nounces  that Waddington's birthday cele­
bration has  come  round again.
The  image  of posture I have  been  dis­ cussing  appears with  an  interesting  dif­  ference   in  a  poem  called  "Running  Up  and  Down  Mountains   at  Changing Speeds." In her  youth,  the  speaker   was ecstatic,  expansive: "I  used  to  open  my
anns I to  the  wind,  be embraced," and
"I used  to shout I to  the  sky:  hey, look world-  I world, here  I  am!"   World
and  girl  were  joined,  as the  wind  would shout  back  at  her,  "look   who   just  blew in!"    But   time,   Waddington  says,  has made her more modest, more sedate. Nowadays   she  will,  admittedly, "give  a
little  secret  run   I when   no  one  is  look­
ing,"  but she doesn't "have the nerve anymore I to  shout   up  at  the  sky,"  and is pleased if the wind only whispers "hello
old   friend,  so  you're   I still  here!"   She
commends herself,  in  fact,  for  not  over­
reaching:
Whatever they  are  saying they  will  never get  the chance to  say  about me that it  is one  of  the  sins
of  my old  age  to pretend
I'm  still  running up  and  down mountains the  way  I used  to.
Something unpleasant intrudes at  this point,  as well as elsewhere  in the volume: a kind  of arrogant self-pity,  based  on  the failure  of   others  to   perceive   her   true worth. Still,  "Running Up  and  Down Mountains" is an attractive poem, one of the most successful in the book.
"The Green   Cabin" is another strong poem  in which  Waddington suggests that she   is  distinct  now   from   the   jubilant child:
I mourn the  death of the  lover in  me  who  ran  to meet
a world  full  of  love  and star-blessed miracles,
but  now  those  doors  are  shut,
and  the  miserly  world
has locked  all the  rainbows
in  earth.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



World  and  self are  equally  lost-and  it is hard  to say whose doors  shut  first. The poem  ends  in  the  beautiful, driving repe­ titions  at which  Waddington excels:

I hear  the  rain on  the  roof black  and  dark as the  heart
of  November, a  rain  dark  as the  heart of old  age,  dark
as  my  heart of stone that mourns the  dark stone of age,  itself  a  dark stone
in  a dark dark age.

By no  means  all  of  the  poems  on  old age  are  so  dejected. Indeed, the  assort­ ment  of moods  (the inconsistency, if you like)  is one  of the  attractions of the  vol­ ume.  Often  Waddington's tone  involves a  spirited,   tough   sort   of  irony-as  in "Old  Age  Blues"  or  "When the  Shoe  is on The Other Foot  for a Change." When she moves on to poems  about  death, par­ ticularly about the continuing presence  of the dead,  Waddington becomes more lyri­ cal.  The  little  poem  and  "In a  Summer Garden" are fine examples, both of which illustrate as  well  her   use  of  music   (the  singing  of the  dead) as a submerged link to that  original, celebratory child.
The age  in  which   the   poet   lives,  as well  as  her  own  aging,  may  account for the disruption of her easy intercourse with the gods of nature. As love fails her, some of  Waddington's  anger  takes   on   a  fa­ miliar,  feminist  colouring. Men  are  por­  trayed  as opportunists, abusers  of  the en­ vironment,  and   women    as   conserving, nurturing  creatures. The harm man  does to his world  merges  with  the  damage he does to woman, and  the ultimate crime  is that  in  his  betrayal of  each  he separates woman  from  her  world. Thus, nature is woman  and  is at the same  time her truest  lover; man-the-rival interferes with  their ecstatic  identification. Poems  which  ex­ plore  this  triangular relationship  include "Conserving," "The  Milk  of  the  Moth­ ers,"  "The Big  Tree,"  "Honouring He-
 


Four Contemporary Novelists
Angus Wilson, Brian Moore, John Fowles, V. S. Naipaul

Kerry McSweeney

An introduction to these distin­ guished novelists which provides a sympathetic but not uncritical account of each writer, charting his development and identifying dominant themes, controlling techniques, and informing sen­ sibility. McSweeney shows that they share not only a continued commitment to the traditional realistic, constructive, and com­ municative purposes of fiction, but also an inescapable self­ consciousness and an awareness of the problematic nature of contemporary fictional form.
$24·95



McGill-Queen's
University  Press

Marketing Division: University of Toronto Press
5201 Dufferin St., Downsview, Ontario M3H 5T8





117

BOOKS IN REVIEW



roes,"  "Warnings," and   "A  Good  Man and  a  Passionate Woman."
1There are  also poems about  place, sev­ eral  of  them   overtly   political,   in  which Waddington describes   the  manifold, in­ genious  violations of her green  world.  In "South American Nights," a woman  who sleeps  with  mercenaries and  guerrillas in
a "starved I river  bed"  has  lost her  own
name  and  is called  "Rose  Red" -so that
together with  women  and  nature, the world  of  fairy  tales  is sullied.  Wadding­ ton's sense of an alliance between  nature and  nursery   rhymes  or  fairy  tales  is ap­  parent again  and again in this collection. In  "Holiday  Postcards," for instance, she writes:

I meant to send  you a postcard but  the fanner came out  of his dell  and  went
commercial the  scene changed old  Mother Goose  was forced out of the  fairy-tale business nursery rhymes were  passe

Greece  now  has  "battered wives"  and  a "new  kind  of  I retirement condominium I that  was  just  being  I built  in Delphi." In  such  circumstances, Waddington  con­
siders  it  miraculous  that   the  ocean  still tastes of salt. Similarly, in "Lady in Blue: Homage to Montreal" she grieves over "a
thousand steel-  I armoured apartments,"
and  delights  in the natural magic which remains: "the   blue-sleeved   I avenues  of your still-  I flowing  rivery wonder."
The  Visitants  is an  uneven  collection, and  not finally a particularly distinguished one.  Some  of  the  poems  are  very  weak indeed-"Crazy  Times," for   example; and   even   the  best  are  not  in  the  same class with  recent  poems by Phyllis Webb, AI Purdy, or  P.  K.  Page.  Waddington's short   line   becomes   tiresome.  Often   her endings   are  sentimental or  too  obvious.
Several   poems   (such   as  "Real  Estate:
Poem  for  Voices,"  "The Secret-Keeper,"


118
 and  "Letter from  Egypt") are irritatingly opaque.  Still,   there   are   compensations and  sources  of interest-in  the  working out  of her  central image  and,  above  all, in  the  play  of rhythms, the  flowering  in small  patches of Miriam Waddington's undoubted lyrical  gift.
CONSTANCE ROOKE


REMEMBERING WAR

GRACE lfORRIS   CRAIG, But  This Is  Our  War.
Univ. of  Toronto Press,  $14.95·
ANITA  MAYER,  One  Who Came  Back. Oberon
Press,  $r5.95; pa.  $7·95·
CHARLES RITCHIE, Diplomatic Passport: More Undiplomatic  Diaries,  1946-1962.  Macmil­ lan, $12.95·

Two woRLD WARS AND  the  Cold   War are  the  three  occasions  of  these  autobio­ graphical volumes.  In   But  This  Is  Our War  (which belongs  to  the  "lest-we-for­ get"    sub-genre) ,  Grace   Morris  Craig  quotes  from   her  own  pre-World War   I diaries  and  from  letters written home  by her   brothers,  by  a classmate of  one  of them,  and  by the  man  who  will  become her  fiance; three of  the  four  would  give their  lives to  the  war  effort.  She  stitches these  documents  together by a  narrative written sixty-five years later  and  intended to  commemorate   the   personal  courage and the sacrifices of the men of her family during the Great War.
Early  and  late,  Grace Morris Craig's language is far  more  limited  than  the emotions it is intended to convey. Touring Canada in  I9I I,  she  rhapsodizes in  her diary about Banff's mountains, those "towering sentinels"; at   ninety,   she  re­ calls herself  dancing through the summer of   I9I4 as  "the  happy  days ... slipped  by" and  "no one  really  noticed  the  dark  clouds  that  had  appeared  on  the  hori­ zon."  War  is a  "great adventure"; when it is over,  marriage, too,  will be a "won­ derful  adventure." At  their   worst,  these

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



cliches  betray   their  author's  unquestion­ ing  acceptance of a simplistic patriotism, loyalty to the British Empire and  her own privileged  social   position.  Grace   Craig  writes,  she  says,  for  "her  grandchildren, the  first   generation  of  Canadians since I9I4 to know  a world  without war." No one  could be  ungrateful for  the  freedom Canada's peace has given  that  generation. But  neither would   the  many   among   us who  have  lived  with  the  disabled   from both  wars, or the far greater  number who have  been  ovezwhelmed  by  the  media's loving  attention to  just  those  specifics of war  (its physical  horrors, its political cor­ ruption)  from  which  Craig's  brothers so anxiously   protected  her,   share  her   as­ sumption that  war is a "great adventure." Where she  perceived  her  "good   fortune in being part  of the British Empire, shown coloured pink  in their  areas  on  the world map," and  felt  "we  would   be  safe  any­ where, protected by a navy  that  ruled  the seas,"  we  are  cognizant  that   navies  and  the  imperialism denoted  by  large   pink areas on  maps  play  their  part  in  causing wars. And  many  of us will feel  that  Mrs. Craig's  isolation   in  her   own   privileged social  class keeps  her war  from  being  the war   of   our   grandparents.   Our   grand­ fathers were  not  likely  to  have  had   the education   or   connections   which    pur­  chased  the  Morris brothers officers' com­ missions;   they   were   far   more   likely  to have   been   like   those   I 33   unemployed from   "rural  areas"  whom  Basil  Morris  persuaded  to  enlist  without  stopping to think    (in   his  sister's  account  at   least) that,   however  eager   their   patriotism, it could  not  have been  uncoloured by their economic  situation. Those  of our  grand­ mothers   who   spent    several   months  in I9I I  touring the West were likely looking for a homestead, not  vacationing; few of them  could  afford   a  trip   to  England  in
I 9 r 6  to  see  their  sons  and   brothers  on leave  from   France and   to  catch   up  on the  "shows"; many  felt  that   a  conscrip-
 tion  vote  the  passage  of  which  was  en­ sured  by giving  the  franchise to  women  for  the  first  time   (but   to  "a  very  select group-the mothers,  wives,  and  sisters of the  men  in  the  overseas  forces")   was a  vote  undemocratically  serving   the  in­ terests  of only  a  portion  of  the  country. Our  war  about  which  Mrs.  Craig  writes with  such  high-toned  patriotism was, in fact,  not  the  war  of  many  of our grand­ parents. The  courage  and   suffering   of those  whose  patriotism was  more  prag­ matic  or  even  more  cynical  or  more  un­ willing  than  that   Mrs.   Craig   describes and who nonetheless came  to the defence of   an  Empire  which   had   been  far   less kind  to  them  than   to  the  Morris  family deserve our  praise  and  remembrance too. Grace Morris Craig's unreflective lan­ guage  and   unquestioning  assumption of the values  of her  class in  her  time  have, however,   their  own  eloquence and  pro­ duce  their  own  narrative  restraint.  This  restraint becomes  most  moving  in the let­ ters from  the front  and  it is the unspoken messages of those letters  that finally partly  integrate Grace Craig's war with  the war of all  those she  never  considers.  The let­ ters initially  develop through all the con­ ventions  of  the  young  man  going  off  to the  "great  adventure": the  enemy  is an unreal  presence,  the  whole  trip  is a mas­ culine  romp,  and  it  is "all  in  the  game." Homesickness surfaces first  with  requests for any "trivial detail" of news. The lan­ guage   of  the   letters   gradually   becomes stripped of cliches, more  halting and  pre­  cise  (though never  graphic) ;  it  simulta­ neously gains  in sincerity,  in  dignity  and  in depth  of emotion. There are brief allu­  sions   to   nightmares, to   friends    being killed, to "being blue," and a more articu­ lated  rationale for Basil's desire  to escape the  mud  and  confinement  of  tunnelling operations for  the  greater risk  of  flying. The   restraint  is  eloquent of  young  men willing themselves  not to see, not to think,  not  to  feel  too  much   lest  the  ability   to


rrg

BOOKS IN REVIEW



carry  on  give  way,  of  young  men  con­ vinced   that   part   of  their  duty  to  those they love consists in protecting them from the  full  knowledge  of  what  war  is  like. The   courage and  dignity   that  permeate these  letters  may  rest  on  principles   that  our  hindsight sees as  insufficiently  medi­ tated, but  it  is  a  deeply  felt  and   lived courage  that  gains  in  thoughtfulness, in­ tensity,  and   restrained  suffering   as  But This  Is  Our  War  tells  its story.  In  this, Grace  Morris Craig's memorial speaks for what  all soldiers  (and  what all their fam­  ilies)    shared and  for  what  all  their "grandchildren" must  respect.
That war  is no "great adventure" and that  some wars must  be waged for reasons having nothing to do with Empires  are among   the  most  obvious  unstated  mes­ sages  of  One   Who   Came  Back.  Anita  Mayer's account opens in Tilburg on Au­ gust 2, I944, with  the arrest  of  the Mayer  family  at  the  home  of friends  who  have been   hiding  them.   Their   "processing" through  successive  concentration  camps  and  Anita's  separation from  the  rest  of her family who "disappear" are rigorously told   from   Anita's  point   of   view.   Her straightfonvard  and   self-controlled  nar­ rative  records  the ultimate horrors of gas ovens and  the smell  of burning flesh and  the  daily  horrors of forced  marches, roll calls,  sleeplessness,  near  nudity,   hunger, overwork,  and   continual   physical   and  spiritual  humiliation. Before  faces  "that seemed  beyond  any  kind  of human feel­ ing," in  which  "All  that  was left was the animal drive  to survive  and  lots of deep sorrow," she persists  in human feeling, in steadfast friendship with  her  fellow  pris­ oners,  in  hoping that   the  war  will  end before  will and  body succumb  to fatigue, illness,  cold,   and,   above  all,  starvation. Anita   Mayer was  young,  physically  and  emotionally strong; she was also arrested late  in  the  war.  She  outlasted it.
During the  last  twenty  years, we have read so many  journalistic accounts of con-


120
 centration camps,   seen  so  many   photos and so much film footage of bodies being bulldozed into  pits,  that  perhaps we have numbly accepted  the  historical   fact  and put it behind  us. One Who  Came Back militates against such  acceptance. Mayer makes  no futile  attempt to comprehend a reason for the camps; she uses no polemics to make  us all co-conspirators in the Nazi crime  or to expiate our  guilt  for what  we ignored. There is nothing rhetorical about this  autobiography  which   is  remarkable for  the  discipline and  chastity of its lan­ guage  (Nazis  are always  Nazis, guards, or Germans   without  rhetorical  modifiers). She simply  records  what happened to one young   woman    and   what  happened  is more  powerful than  any  rhetoric. This  is as true  of her  repatriation as of her  time in the camps. On  the train home, a neigh­  bour recognizes her and asks, "Why  didn't you  let  us know  you  were  coming  ... to­ day?  We  would  have  had  a  band  at  the station  to  welcome  you  back  home." "I really  didn't know  when   I'd   be  coming back,"  Mayer    tells   her.   At   the   house where  her family  has agreed  to meet  after the  War,   the  wife  greets  her  "just   as  if she  had   seen  me  the  day  before." The genocide over,  even  those close to it have begun   insulating themselves  by  pretend­ ing  that  it  never  happened, that Mayer's absence was like any  other. Unlike  Grace  Morris Craig,  Mayer  feels no need  to jus­ tify her  autobiography, but  her  gentle  re­ sponses  provide their  own  trenchant ra­  tionale:   hers   is   a   PERSONal account, which,  by the act of  its telling,  insists that  we  must   not  relegate  the  concentration camps  and  tl1eir victims  to "history."
Charles Ritchie was one of the advisors to the  Canadian Delegation at  the  Peace Conference in  Paris  in  1946.  Diplomatic Passp·ort covers  his  years  at  the  Confer­ ence,  as a staff  member of the  Canadian embassy   in  Paris,   as  a  "working diplo­ mat" in Ottawa, as  Ambassador to Bonn and  as  Permanent  Representative to  the

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



United Nations and  President of the  Se­ curity  Council. While  memories of  Ger­  many's   World   War   II and   fears  of  the Cold   War    hover    in   the   background, Ritchie leads,  he  insists,  a  "double life," and  is not  about to mix "diplomatic dis­ cretion" in  his  diaries  or   "the   diarist's indiscretion" in his diplomacy. His diaries will  be  personal  and  social,  an  obsessive altemative  to  diplomatic tact  motivated by  a  need   to  prove   himself   more/ other  than   a  career  diplomat  and   a  "stuffed shirt."
A pity. For  these Undiplomatic Diaries
would  benefit  from  being  more  undipl<r
matic  or  else  more  diplomatic. The  first chapters lack the verve of Ritchie's two earlier volumes  of selections  from  his diaries; while  his punning conclusion  to Ritchie Week, organized by Lady Diana Cooper   ("You don't think,  do  you,  that now  we have  an  embarras  de Ritchies") may  be worth  the  entire volume,  there  is little  here  so pungent. The fault  may  be
 the period  itself:  the Parisian "high soci­ ety" he observes  ran  out  of both  wit and  youth  in   the   r g2o's  and  German  Post­ War diplomatic society seems to have been the  quintessence of  careful, hypocritical courtesy   and   social   stodginess   (Ritchie doesn't  help  matters  by being  too  diplo­  matic   to  pursue  inquiry about  what   his dinner companions did  during the  war) . Ennui and  an  undefined spiritual malaise colour  Ritchie's life  during the  Ottawa and  Bonn  years and  become  pervasive  in the  diaries   as  he  spends   far   too  much  time  complaining about   a  clumsy  maid and an untrained dog who pees where  the stain  will be most  conspicuous.
There are  exceptions: his  wife's  "two
old   aunts"  are   keenly   and   wittily  ob­ served; the Windsors  are tellingly revealed  in a malicious  summary of their  tics and  conversation; St. Laurent's patience  when he  finds  himself  late  for  a  State  Dinner with  Nehru  because  his staff  have  left  his trousers   behind   is  told  with  fine  comic


I#Jer tothe'Past
AN AUTOBIOGRAPHY



)"''
...	.
·...•
 eorge
vodcock

Fitzhenry & Whiteside 	$21.95



121

BOOKS IN REVIEW



timing. Of more political interest are the observations of St.  Laurent's indifference to pomposity, his firm reticence and his openness   to  experience, or  Nehru's  mo­ bility  of  feature and   gesture  combined with  a  "Bloomsbury"  style. Granted his­ torical   hindsight,  we  applaud  Ritchie's perception of Indira Gandhi: "She  talked humanitarianism  and  social  reform   but in  a  bloodless  fashion, tinged   with  im­ mense  smugness  and   self-righteousness." Regretting as I did  that  Ritchie was not equally   undiplomatic  about   the   diplo­ matic  more  often,  I found  his final chap ter at the United Nations the most satisfy­ ing of the  Diaries. Like  his government, Ritchie  believed  intensely  in  the  promise of  the  United Nations: his  hopes  for  it, his  progressive  disillusionment, his  great  affection  for Hammarskjold, his real  dis­ tress as "all  these  dictators" come "strut­ ting  and  bullying" on  the  scene  replace  the   persiflage   of   the   earlier   chapters. Ritchie's account of this post engages  his reader   because   it  is  both   personal   and about   diplomacy. Out  of  this  combina­ tion,  a  real  and  deeper  Ritchie irony  fi­ nally emerges: "Of course, Canadians are different. There is  no  malice  in  us. We are  the  family  doctor whom  no  one  has called   in  for   consultation. We  are   the children of the midday who see all in the clear, shallow light." The distance  in tone between   this  and   But  This  Is Our  War not  only  marks  the  distance  between  the professional  civil servant and the naive consumer  of   patriotism;  more   signifi­ cantly,  it marks  the  distance of  1962 and the  Cold  War  from   I9I4.
SHIRLEY NEUMAN

HOBBLED

LEON   ROOKE,    The Magician   in   Love.   Aya
Press, $12.00; pa.  $6.oo.

THE TROUBLE WITH LEON ROOKE'S latest book,  The   Magician  in  Love,  is that   it


122
 has  too  many   tough  acts  to  follow.  The first is Rooke's own: the work he has pro­ duced  during the  past  two years has been consistently remarkable. The  two  short  story   collections,  Cry   Evil   and   Death Suite, and  his fine first novel Fat Woman set lofty  standards for  his subsequent fic­ tion. So  too does  the  recent  special  Leon  Rooke  issue of  Canadian  Fiction  Maga­ zine   ( 38),  where   in an   extraordinarily uncritical   essay   Geoff    Hancock   turns  Rooke  into  the  Gilles  Villeneuve of Ca­  nadian writing. "Leon's art  is one of high performance; he  travels  in  the  fast  lane of  short   fiction" amid   high-powered  in­ ternational  competition-"the  latest  in fabulation and   metafiction."  Leaving in his dust  "the sprawling  verbal  Cabbage­ towns of much  traditional short  fiction in Canada,"  Rooke "has   shifted   the  gears of  the   Canadian  short   story"   and   can only be appreciated, Hancock suggests, in the  context  of  contemporary  American fiction  and  theory.  Be all  that  as it  may, The  Magician  in  Love  does  not  present much  of a challenge to its American  pro­ totypes  nor  is  it  likely  to  herald   a  new look in Canadian fictional engineering.
The narrative is slight,  both  in  length (93  pp.)   and  substance, and  reads  more like a long prose-poem than  a short  novel. In an  unidentified setting   (the  west coast of Canada? the American Alps?)  at an unspecified time  (vaguely  nineteenth cen­ tury?) , a  magician carries  on  a  fiery ro­ mance with   his  mistress  Beabontha, al­ ternately   inspiring    and    disillusioning, scandalizing and  titillating the  provincial town  that  responds like a sensitive instru­ ment   to  every  slight   alteration in  their  affair.  The narrator, perhaps a little  too appropriately, is  the  town's  weatherman
-although the narrative is not consistent on  that  score since  at  times  the narrative voice  is  omniscient, and   later   the  first­ person   narrative  carries   on   even   after  the  weatherman appears to  commit  sui­ cide.   In any   case   the  magician's  story

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



exists  almost  entirely at  the  level  of  ru­ mour   and    gossip   filtered    through   the voyeurism   of  the  townspeople.  Inconsis­  tency  and  uncertainty are  built  into  the story as structural principles.
Like  a  number of the  recent  stories  in Death Suite, the overt  theme of Magician is the difficulty  of love. At first it appears no more  than  a harmless delusion: "The Magician is in love:  he sees only beauty." But  as the  relationship progresses  the magical is subsumed in the mundane; romance falls  victim  to  jealousy,  infidel­ ity, and  the  banalities of  everyday social existence. The magician in love is an art­ ist  reduced to  performing parlour tricks to   keep   his  demanding  mistress   enter­ tained. And  it  only  gets  worse.  Soon  the lovers  can   do  nothing  but   ravage   one another   ("Each would  like  to  drop   off into  a grave  and  be covered"), and  since their  love  is  paradigmatic its  failure   is especially   terrible. "If  such   misfortune can   happen  to   the   Magician,  to  Bea­ bontha, then  no one  is safe!" By  the end love is a kind  of plague.  "The Magician's home  is deserted.... The boardwalk rots.
... The village  is empty.... Such  is the power  of love."
The power  of Rooke's tale, however,  is hobbled  by  his  decision   not   to  give  us full  access  to  his  central characters. In his best stories and  in Fat Woman Rooke doesn't just  peddle fabulation and  meta­ fiction   and   a  zippy   verbal   texture;  he takes us right  inside his people and  makes us care  about them. But Beabontha and  the  magician are  litle  more  than  ciphers  whom   we  know  only  from   the  outside. Far  more  interesting is the  narrator who plays  Salieri   to  the  magician's  Mozart. When   his  initial  admiration  and   envy turn  desperately bitter  in  the  face  of  the lovers'  great  passion,  he  takes  upon  him­ self the magician's destruction. The stolid bourgeois  is revealed as an  underground man,   "sick  to  the  death,"  goaded, crip­ pled,  betrayed, and capable finally of ex-
 pressing  his depth of feeling  only as self­ loathing. Unfortunately,  his  story  never quite  gets  itself  told.
In  fact  nearly  all the  best things in this
book  are   either  incidental or   undevel­ oped.   Mlle   Capuchin's   speech   to   the Ladies'  Club  is a lovely set  piece,  telling of  her  seduction by  the  magician when she was thirteen, and  the satire on writing when the magician struggles  with the title and  first sentence  of his new  book, V en­ triloquism   for   Beginners,  is  delightful. There is also an interesting hint  of politi­  cal parable in one section  that  focusses on "our  country" (is the magician an Ameri­  can  big brother or  another northern ma­ gus?). But  nothing much   comes  of  any of  that.
In  its  use of  such  fragments, as in  its archaic language,  tone   and   setting,   its quasi-mythical overtones and  slightly sur­ real humour, The  Magician in Love feels a  lot like Donald Barthelme's The  Dead Father. But  it  lacks  the  coherence  and  sustained  wit  of that  book as it  lacks  the inspired   stylization and  characterization of  Rooke's   own  best  work.  "A  story  is anything I can  make  it be and  get away with," Rooke   has  said.  Uncharacteristi­ cally for him,  he doesn't get away  with it this time.
JERRY WASSERMAN


ROOKE'S STORIES

LEON   ROOKE,  Last  One   Home   Sleeps  in  the
Yellow  Bed. Louisiana State  Univ.,  n.p.
LEON ROOKE,  Death  Suite. Firefly Bks., n.p.

THESE TWO VOLUMES  of short  stories, published   thirteen  years  apart, are,  re­ spectively,  Rooke's first  and  fifth  collec­ tions.  They   differ   from   each   other  at least  in  the  Canadian setting  which  fig­ ures in some  stories  in  Death Suite,  pub­  lished  after   Rooke  came   to  live  in  this country.  The characteristics  of these  col-


123

BOOKS IN REVIEW



lections  are  consistent in kind though dif­ ferent  in  degree  through the  writer's  use of exaggeration, humour,  absurdity, and  the grotesque, and  through his great  skill in  the  creation  of   different   voices.  In­ variably, the  best  stories  are  recalled   in the  accents  of  their  telling.
Each  volume ends on a different note. "Brush  Fire," the final story in  Last One Home  Sleeps  in  the  Yellow  Bed,  is  an account of physical  and  spiritual destruc­ tion and  despair. It takes place in Alaska where   an   army   platoon, one  of  whose members tells  the  story,  is  sent  to  help fight a forest  fire. In  this setting  of devas­  tation, the values of the American  way of life are placed  in deliberate and  ridiculous juxtaposition with the suicide of a former  Hungarian  freedom-fighter who was also a  member  of   the  platoon. The  world  of the  consuming inferno is reflected  in  the description of the  two battling caribou whose  locked   horns   in  the  path   of  the fire doomed them  to death. The  final sentence - "... yes  sir,  Kuimets,  they gonna  give  you  a  military  funeral! ain't that    the   living   end?" -identifies   the irony  and   oblivion   of  death   in  life.  In contrast, the  last  story  in  Death  Suite, "The Problem Shop," is about  hope. The protagonist, just released  from  police cus­ tody,  experiences despair   in  his  convic­  tion  that  he has no  future and  is  beyond redemption. In  a  restorative  gesture,  he is led to water  and  to a schooner in whose crow's-nest  he  feels  "the fearless  future splashing him  beautifully in  the  face.  It was hope and love and  sweet mercy." The death in this story is the death  of despair.
The stories  in the first collection  are fundamentally realistic. The  characters inhabit worlds which,  though  exaggerated in particulars, are  plausible.  All these stories  are  told  in  the first person  and  all seem  to  be  obsessed  in  some  way  with the  contrast between   innocence and  ex­ perience or  between   dream   and  reality.  There is  in  them   a  child-like  yearning


124
 for stability  which  cannot be satisfied and which  is often  captured in the anxious, weary, or rueful tone of the narrator. Lassitude pervades these stories in the nostalgia of  memory, in  unresolved  mis­ understanding, or  in  aimless  wandering through corridors, streets,  and landscapes. For me, the most memorable story is "The Ice-House Gang" in which a man  remem­ bers the occasion  when  he first made  love to  his  wife  when   they  were  teen-agers. The  sensual  details  of  the setting are  pre­  cise,  the  language  conveys   the   delicate irony  and  humour of  a wider  and  mature understanding, and  the conclusion modu­ lates  the episode  effortlessly  into  the  pres­ ent.  The  other stories  in  the  collection, apart  from   the  last,  deal  with  the  rela­ tionships between  men  and  women, with varying degrees  of  irony  that sometimes  point  to hope  and sometimes  to an aware­ ness of futility.  Many of  them  contain a sense  of  fate,  of  a  drama that   is  being played  to a particular conclusion. Not  all are  successful.  "When Swimmers on  the Beach   Have All  Gone   Home" is  weak­ ened   by  the  classic  pathological  pattern of the  love between rescued  and  rescuer.  "The Alamo   Plaza" follows  a  narrative rhythm  that   tends   to  drag.   Consistent throughout  all   these   stories   is   Rooke's effective  use  of  pliable   and  convincing first-person narration.
:Death Suite  mixes fantasy  and  realism.
"Murder  Mystery" is a three-part absurd and  grotesque satire  on some  of the con­ ventions of  the  genre.  Sexual  pathology is central to  the  strange and  rather tedi­  ous   story   of   an   adolescent   murderess. Comic   satire   is  deftly  employed  in  two entertaining    stories  - "Lady   Godiva's Horse,"  which  plays  on  a  woman's  self­ deprecation, and  "Standing In  for  Nita," in  which   a  young   woman's  sexual  con­ quests  result  from  perpetuating a case of mistaken identity.  Underpinning   these, however, are implicit feelings  of  rage and  even  self-loathing. For  me,  three stories

BOOKS IN REVIEW



in Death Suite  stand  above  the others­ "Mama Tuddi Done  Over,"  "Winter Is Lovely,  Isn't  Summer Hell,"  and   "The Problem Shop." They are notable  for the way in which  the  narration is infused  by an  understanding of  the  characters. The  colloquial voices  of  the  first  two of these take  us directly  into  the  action  and  ten­ sions of  another  culture through the  im­ mediacy of  unique  learning. In  the  first, the story  progresses  unhurriedly to its cli­ max   and   resolution,  effectively  using  a traditional narrative  pattern  that  draws  a  dynamic and   rounded  portrait of  the shrewd  Mama Tuddi. In  the second,  the colloquial language of  the  narrator gives the young mother a dignity in the face of uncertainty. Rooke  also  uses the  unusual  or bizarre  to dramatize the  theme  of rec­ onciliation.   In    "The   Problem  Shop," hope and healing rise above  chaos, and in "Hanging  Out With   the  Magi," a  sur­ realistic  tale,  hatred between   a  husband and  wife is miraculously  effaced,  if only momentarily, in  the  presence of  a  mys­ terious  baby, brought  by a delivery  truck.  Like   the   Christ-child,  the   baby   makes love  possible.
Between  Last One  Home  Sleeps in the Yellow Bed and  Death Suite, Rooke has moved  toward a wider  range  of technique
and  tone  as his talent in  the  use of voice
has  remained distinctive and  strong.  His fascination with  the  grotesque and  with the  ways in which  many  of his characters find   themselves  at   almost   violent   odds with  their  society  reminds me of the  fic­ tion of the  American South  and  has been discussed by others. The affinities between  his  work  and   Alice  Munro's  suggest  an­  other  line  of comparison. Rooke's  fiction is  also   characterized  by   the   recurring theme  of grace,  of the  undeserved, heal­  ing  gift  that   ensures  on  occasion  a  pre­ carious  equilibrium.  He  has  shown  him­  self  to  be  obsessed  with   the  importance and  possibilities  of  voice  and  to  be will­ ing to experiment with different narrative
 structures. In  my estimation, the  experi­ mentation is not always effective. Invari­ ably,  however,  at  the  heart  of the  stories that   held  me  to  their  conclusion   is  the vitality  of his obsession.

JOHN LENNOX


MANDEL'S SELYES

ELI   MANDEL,  Dreaming   Backwards:   The   Se­
lected  Poetry.  General  Publishing, $9·95·
ELI   MANDEL,  Life   Sentence.  Press   Porcepic,
$s.gs.

IT's   tg8I, and  Eli  Mandel is gathering the  results of over  thirty  years of struggle with   the  muse,  that   other self  who  as often  mocks him as it brings him  the pos­ sibility of true  speech. Simultaneously, he is  gathering  poems   and   journals   from
1976 to tg8o for a new book. The two, Dreaming  Backwards: The  Selected  Po­ etry  of Eli  Mandel   and   Life  Sentence, propose  a Life  Work  which has been  full of challenges and  dangers,  of fighting to purify  the  language and  the life it speaks from in the face of corrupting and chaotic complexity. Not  to deny  the  corruption, the  chaos  or  the  complexity, but  to  say them  as  clearly  as  they  can  be  said,  to see them  that way.
Dreaming Backwards is the second  vol­
ume  of  General  Publishing's Spectrum Poetry Series, which  began  with the Mao­ del-prefaced  Field   Notes   of   Robert  Kroetsch. Kroetsch  repays   the   favour  here,  and   leaves  a  poor   reviewer  with very  little   to  say,  as  he  pinpoints  both formal  and  thematic aspects  of Mandel's changing poetic during the fifties, sixties, and  seventies. Listen  to him  begin:

Eli Mandel comes  from  the  Saskatchewan interior of  the  continent, from   the   literary wars of a generation that had  to turn against the  Moderns, from   the  memory   of  his  Jew­ ishness,   from  the   intimacies  of  his  uneasy  body.  But  he  is, always,  the  America seeker.


125

BOOKS IN REVIEW



It is the  paradox of Columbus' perceptual moment that it  cannot end.  The moment of the  discovery of  America continues.  Its  re­ enactment  becomes    our   terrifying   test   of greatness....  How   do  we  who  are  already here   in  America find  the  astounding  here?  And   the  first  answer, the  one  that must   be resisted, is  the   attraction  of  the   landscape itself .... The landscape of  Mandel's poems is a collage in which  the pictures are  placed, not   beside  each   other,  but  on  top  of  each other; each   picture  evokes,  announces, its own  violation....

Already,  perhaps, Kroetsch has said too much; but  no,  he simply  articulates  bet­ ter than  most  just how complex Mandel's response   to  the   world   is  and  therefore how  complex our  response  to  his  poems must   be.  Yet   Kroetsch  notes  Mandel's epigraph, from  Yeats's A Vision:

It is  from   the  Dreaming Back  of  the  dead, though not  from   that of  persons  associated with   our   past,   that we  get  the  imagery of ordinary sleep.   Much  of  the   dream's  con­ fusion   comes  from   the   fact   that  the  image  belongs   to   some   unknown  person ... "We  have  no  power," said  an  inhabitant  [of  the spirit   state],  "except  to  purify  our   inten­ tion," and   when   I  asked  of  what, replied: "Of  complexity."

What   the  selection   of  poems  which  fol­ lows demonstrates is that  there  is  purifi­ cation  and   purification.  As  Mandel has argued  in his essays as well  as his poems,
"doubled words  are  poetic  words  I this
is  the  true   meaning  of  duplicity," and
in  many  ways  the  complex   rhetoric and mythography of his early poetry is simpler than  the pared  language and  popular iconography of the later  work. Moreover, although Kroetsch is correct to identify Mandel's  descriptive  mode   as   collage, some of the later  poems appear to present pure  landscape in  a  stripped down,  im­ agistic-like,  form  (as in the "Wabumum" poems   of  Stony   Plain,   I973),   only   to double-up the stakes  of  what  is both  seen and  said.
One  of  Kroetsch's most  important  in­
sights  into   his  fellow   poet's   endeavour
 appears in his first sentence: it is that Mandel belongs  to that  generation of writers  (it  is Kroetsch's too)   which  had to slowly fight  its way  through retreating Modernism   to    something   newer    and rawer  and  more  specifically  of  this  place in  this  time   (the   ironies  and   duplicities of   Mandel's  two   I977   titles-Out   of Place and   Another  Time- would  fill a book) . Mandel first appeared as a mytho­ poeic  poet  under the  influence of  North­ rop  Frye, and  there's no denying that  the early poems are somewhat rococo and  full of heavily  laden allusions. Take "Estevan Saskatchewan,"   with    its   references   to Cain, Greek  tragedies, and  Hamlet.  Yet, as  Kroetsch  insists,  Mandel is a  prairie­ born  seeker  of authentic speech  of  place (a   word   which   certainly  proposes   "re­ gion" in  today's  Canada, but  which  also, in   Mandel's rich  tapestry of language, proposes  precisely  who we are  in relation to  others,   a  "place-ment" Mandel  con­ tinually confronts as a  twentieth-century Jewish   intellectual)   and  his  struggle to discover   such   speech   through  the   past three  decades  maps  the  main  movement of poetry in our time. Still, if much  of the recent   poetry  is  more   concerned  with social, cultural, or political  place, Estevan  is still where  everything began, and  where  he  returned in I 975 to write  less rhetori­ cally  allusive, more  colloquial, more  ap­ parently  realistic, and   starker  poems  of life in that  profoundly remembered place. In  "estevan, I934," he tells of "the family
we  I called   breeds" and  creates his own
myth  of frightening eros with no reference
to  Hamlet  or  Cain; yet  their  traces  are there,  if only in our  reading of the earlier
poem. That the later poems insist on their predecessors is one  of their  most  complex duplicities.
Lately, Mandel has  forced  a  confron­ tation  with  the major avatar of  duplicity, his own  double, the  doppelganger, in  his poems.   Prefigured   in  the   short   poem, "Autobiography,"   in   Stony   Plain,   the

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



doppelganger comes  into  his own in Out of  Place,  where he  takes  his  stand   be­ tween  the  poet  and  the  people  and  world he loves. Here, he "doubles" for  the poet in   his  life    (which  he   writes   into   his poems)   yet also "doubles" as "the  neces­ sary  angel," the  muse.  Who  is  speaking  here,  anyway, the  poet  asks, and  if there are   two  mirrored  worlds  with   the  poet writing   the  same   poem  in  each,  where indeed   is  "here"?   "Nothing  on   either  prairie  changes,"  he   tells  us  in  terror,
"though the  winds  blow I across immen­
sities your  heart would  shrivel  to imagine I knowing  they  pass  between  the  worlds and  can  be heard to do  I so on the road
to Wood  Mountain. That is what  was written   I in  the  rocks."  The Place  he  is
Out  of is both  those  places,  known  for  a fact in the  windswept landscapes of his childhood, fictions  of memory  now, traces of  being  there,   and,  since  you  can't  go home  again, some  place  else now he has returned.
This "double" turns  up  again,  in  new and  more  frightening guises, in Life Sen­ tence. Prefaced  by  a  quote   from  Clark  Blaise-"When  autobiography ceases to be,  then  I  shall  write  from  the  point  of view of a Brazilian General"-Life  Sen­  tence confronts the dangers of autobiogra­ phy  and  the  necessary  betrayals of other  people  art  appears to  demand. Doubles  are  more  complex here:  the  poems  and the journals reflect and  distort each other,  the   whole   book   a   third    thing  beyond either;  more   intriguingly,  political    life with  its power  madness and  personal  be­ trayals  doubles for  domestic life  and  its struggles  (Mandel has always confronted the political  realities  of our time, but since the  beginning of  the seventies-the key poem  is "On the  25th Anniversary of the Liberation of  Auschwitz: Memorial Ser­ vices, Toronto, January 25, 1970, YMHA Bloor  and  Spadina" -he  has recognized himself  in  the  mirror of  public  life) ; fi­ nally,  the  concept of  poet  and   poem  as
 doubles  continues to  thrive,  as in  "Poem Like a Stone,  Like a General," where  the poet  accuses  the  poem  of  showing   "no
tact,  no  discretion, I You  betray  decent
people,  I you  anger  and  hurt my  wife."
This  is surely  one  meaning of  the  title:
that   the  poet  is sentenced by the  life  he has chosen to betray  and  to be (or believe he  has  been)   betrayed;  and   Life   Sen­ tence,  as it traces  the  contours of  one  life over  four  years  of travel  and  encounter, unflinchingly digs up  the evidence in To­ ronto  and  South  America and   India, in private  and  in political  behaviour. It is a brave   book,  confronting  questions con­ cerning   the  writer's rights  to  use others' lives as his material and  the personal pain too  close  inquiry into  those  lives  might  bring.  Of   course,  it  is  duplicitous:  the poems propose  possibilities;  both  memory  and   imagination  are   fictional  -Shake­ speare  knew  that  when  he  created Iago, a  great  and  most  duplicitous storyteller, and  Mandel knows that  when  he says he
"can  no longer  believe  I my friends who
speak  in  new  words,  I or  my  wife  who won't  let me  touch  her,  I or the  sister  of the  Brahmin novelist  I who  tells  me  ill­ fated  stories  of domestic   I quarrels  in  a house   that   could   be  in   Downsview   I
though  in  fact  it  is in  suburban Delhi,"
and  then  goes on  to  tell  his own  version of  a  story  about a  king  driven   mad   by his wife's affair with his best friend: any story  can  double  for  another, can  reflect our own lives if we want  it to. Moreover, in today's  world  of political  violence,  "the
belaboured husband  as tyrant I [raging]
against   imagined  treachery  in  a  young
wife"  is  a  mirror-image  of  Somoza   or
Pinochet   as  they  battle to  preserve   their
"marriages" to  their  people.
It's in the poems that  Mandel raises the toughest  questions, and  like any  true art­ ist,  he  finds  no  one  answer, finds  only that  the questions must  be confronted, he can't pretend they don't exist. The world is  not  a  safe  place  for  the  imagination

BOOKS IN REVIEW



yet  the imagination absolutely  must  con­ tinue  to encounter it. In  the  journals, he says as much,  and  takes us on some inter­ esting   travels-the life  of   a  Canadian writer   as  lecturer in  other  countries or teacher here is full of  fascinating encoun­ ters. In  the  poems,  though, the  language opens  up,  the  connections are  more  pas­ sionate,  more  frightening and  more  ex­ citing.  If there   is  pain  there  is also  ec­ stasy. Life Sent.ence is thus a highly moral,  even didactic, work: for it seeks to make us confront the demons  in our  own souls which   have   brought  suffering   to  whole populations  when   unleashed  by  persons in power; to recognize  the dark possibili­ ties in  ourselves  is  (according  to  the  old humanist hope  which   Mandel  still  sub­ scribes  to  despite  himself  I  think)   to  be able  to control  them.  The various  "politi­ cal"  poems  of   Dreaming  Backwards   as well  as  of  Life  Sentence  testify  to  this faith   on  the  poet's   part,  and,  as  poems and   as   testaments   to   the   apocalyptic imagination in our  time,  they are  greatly superior to similar attempts over the years by Irving  Layton, if only because Mandel has continually sought  an authentic, con­ temporary poetic speech while Layton  has too often  gone for an easy and outmoded rhetoric.
Both  Dreaming Backwards and  Life S.entence reflect Eli Mandel's lifelong struggle   to  purify   the  language  of  the tribe  and  the  perceptual intent which  fi­ nally  emerges  as poetry.  Often  savage  in their   honesty,   his   poems   can   also   be hauntingly beautiful in  their  honest  rec­ ognition   of  what is  there,  before   us  in the here  we are  beginning to recognize  as Canada, its many  magic  places.  Mandel has earned our  attention and  these  books deserve  the most  careful  reading.

DOUGLAS BARBOUR
 JOHNSTON'S FAROESE

GEORGE  JOIINSTON, Rocky Shores: An  Anthol- ogy of Faroese  Poetry. Wilfion Books, $ro.oo.
THIS  VOLUME  PROVIDES a generous sam­ pling  of the works of present-day Faroese  poets, and  is, as George  Johnston says at the  end  of his  introduction,  "representa­ tive of a small, self-contained and unusual tradition   of   twentieth-century  poetry." Eighty-two   poems   by   nine   poets   have  been  translated here,  twenty-three of  the translators having appeared previously  in various  journals. Although all of the poets are  natives  of the Faroe  Islands, one, William  Heinesen, writes exclusively  in Danish, and  is primarily known  through­ out  Scandinavia as  a  novelist. All of the poems of Regin  Dahl  in this volume  were originally written and  published  by  the author in both  Danish and  Faroese. Since very few copies  of the original  poems  are available in  North  America,  it  is unfor­ tunate that  space could  not  be found  for them  here.
Literature in  the  Faroese  language  be­ gins in  the  last quarter of the  nineteenth century. The  native  antecedents of  this literature  are   folktales,    Danish    hymns and  the  many  ballads, both  Faroese  and  Danish,  preserved  orally   from   the  late  Middle  Ages.  Faroese  poetry,   however,  has  made little  use of  these  antecedents.
The earlier poets,  such  as J. H. 0. Djur­
huus    ( I881-1948),   originally  followed
Romantic forms and  conventions, and  the
later  poets,  such  as  those  translated here by George Johnston, have been influenced by  the  developments in  modern  Scandi­ navian   and   other  European  poetry.  In­ deed   the   only   characteristic   feature  of Faroese  poetry  may  be the awe of nature resulting from  childhoods spent  in  close contact with  the moods  of the  North At-
!antic.
Faroese, with  under fifty thousand speakers, is by far the smallest of the Germanic languages, and  yet probably the

BOOKS IN REVIEW



least at risk of the so-called  "minority languages" of Europe. The  population of the  Faroe  Islands  is well-educated,  liter­ ate  and  also bilingual, since  all advanced education   remains   in    Danish.   Before World   War  II  the  functions of  Faroese and  Danish were,  to  a  large  extent, dis­ tinct.  Faroese  was  the  language used  at home,  in  traditional occupations and  for most social purposes, whereas  Danish was the  language of education, the church, newspapers and modern technology. There was  considerable literary  activity in  Faroese, but  leading authors, such  as William Heinesen and J0rgen-Frantz Jacobsen, chose to write in Danish, largely for  economic reasons.  After  the  war  Fa­ roese  gradually began   to spread to  most areas  of modern life.  The closely  related Icelandic  language  provided  the  model for numerous additions to the vocabulary. Yet  many   of  the  older  speakers   of  Fa­ roese remain truly literate only in Danish and   frequently   find   the   neologisms   of Faroese   radio  broadcasters or  poets  in­ comprehensible.
One  result  of the  modernization of life and  language has  been   the  gradual  im­ poverishment of native  Faroese terminol­ ogy dealing not only with outmoded tech­ nologies  but  also  with  the  description of the  natural  environment. As  in  Iceland diligent   lexicographers  have    preserved many  of  these words  for later  generations of  writers. Foremost among Faroese schol­ ars   of  this  century  has   been   Christian Matras,  whose   poetry   encompasses the old and  the new language.
The   poems   in   this   collection  afford
George  Johnston little  opportunity to dis­ play  the skill at translating highly stylized verse  which  he  demonstrated in  his fine translation of Gisla saga. Aside from  nine rhyming poems,  which  he  mainly   trans­  lates   with   half-rhymes,   all   of   the   re­ mainder are  in  free  verse.  The   transla­ tions are,  for  the most  part, very close to the originals,  both in the choice  and order
 of words. Some variation is introduced by the  etymological translation  "eye-blink" for Danish  rJjeblik on p. 26; the rendering of uhyre  as "unheard-of" on p. 2 I  is per­ haps folk-etymological. The translation of two lines quoted by  William  Heinesen  in his  poem  Sommerdagen  (pp.   25-27)   is perhaps  a  bit  misleading. The   lines  are taken  from   the  first  verse  of  N.  F.  S. Grundtvig's poem  on old age, Alderdom­ men:

For  dig, vor  Herre, som Dage kun
Aartusender er at regne.
Et  0jeblik er  den  Iiden  Stund, Vi  aande i St0vets Egne.

(I.e.,   "For    thee,    our   Lord,   millennia count   only  as  days;   the   little   time   we breathe on earth, an  instant.")  George Johnston translates the  last  two lines  as, "An  eye-blink  and   the  time  is past  / of our  breath  in  this  place  of dust."
Aside from  "botanical" on p. go, I have noticed  no misprints in the text. The  very
useful bibliography on the Faroes, Faroese
literature and   English   translations  con­ tains a few errors.  On  p.  124 in  item  no. I o,  read  "pnindr"; in  no.  I I,   "}:>rands"
and   Afmaelisrit  ]6ns  Helgasonar,  Reyk­
javik;  and  in no.  12, Onomatology.
<It   is  clear   from   this   collection   that
Faroese  poets  are  not  writers  of  folk  or dialect  poetry,  but,  despite  language, are part    of   the   modern   European   main­ stream.  They  are  fortunate as well in the skilful and sympathetic treatment of their  verse by George Johnston.

HARRY ROE


IN AFRICA

KILDARE DOBBs,  Pride  and  Fall. Clarke, Irwin,
$12.95·
KILDARE  DOBBs'   new  book  contains   six short  stories  and  the  novella  which  gives the book its title. Set in British East Africa in   I95I,  "Pride  and   Fall" is  a  subtle


129

BOOKS IN REVIEW



and  complex story  about  decadence and treachery. The  protagonist is junior  Dis­ trict  Officer  St.  John Russell,  who  is in charge   of  the  township jail  and  not  cut out  for  the  job.
Russell  is a misfit  because  he has scru­ ples,  compassion,  and   sexual   curiosity, qualities    that     are    noticeably    lacking  among  his peers  in  the colonial  adminis­ tration.  When   a  scapegoat  is  required, therefore, Russell  is  the  obvious  choice. He is convicted of  stealing ivory and  sen­ tenced  to  I 8 months' hard  labour.
Later, living  in London, he finds he misses Africa,  for "it  was the place where he had  transformed his life, where he had freed himself of the illusion of power." Ironically, Russell's  lost pride  is restored by another example of bureaucratic treachery. He  accepts a luncheon  invita­ tion  in  good   faith   and   discovers  he  is being  recruited as  a  spy.  His  feelings  of revulsion  give  him  courage  to  reject  the offer.   ("There   is  nothing  dishonourable about   serving  your  country.   Nothing at all!"    says   the   tempter,   while   Russell thinks, "This is not  my country.")
The   theme  of  the  protagonist as  wit­ ness to the  end  of an  era is continued in "A  Wedding," a  story  set  in  Ireland in I933· Two  members of  "the gentry" are married, the bride  a popular "hard-riding master  of  foxhounds," the groom a Royal  Navy commander resplendent in full dress uniform. Dobbs  skilfully captures the  at­ mosphere of the period  through the mem­ ories  of  the  narrator, who  was  ro  years old  at   the   time.   He   also  balances   the innocence of  the  boy  with  the  foresight  of  an   often   "sozzled"  professor,   whose field is Irish  history  and  who astutely  de­ clines  to attend the  wedding.  When  vio­ lence shatters the gentry's "happy world," the  narrator  reflects  that  "Perhaps ... it was one  reason  why  we  did  not  stay  in our country after  we had  grown  up, why we  left  and  never  came  back."
With    one   exception,  the   remaining
 stories are set in Africa. "A Question of Motive" describes   a  murder among   the white  community, grown  mildly decadent through  boredom. "A  Memsahib's  Con­ fession"  is about   a  restless  wife  who  se­ duces  a Canadian  missionary and  discov­ ers  she  loves  him.  "Yusuf   and   Maria," about another bored  wife  and  her  black servant, continues the decadence-us-inno­ cence   theme.   A  newcomer  to  jail  copes with  shame  by  lying  to his fellow  prison­  ers and  is  found  out,  in "The Dreamer." And   in   "The  Happy Warrior," set   in Scotland  and   Italy,   a  young  sailor's  ad­  miration  for  an  experienced soldier  turns  to shame  when  he  realizes  that   the  man enjoys  killing  in  cold  blood.
·Though Dobbs  chooses  to write  of  du­ plicity,   violence,   guilt,   and   shame,   his style is cool, detached and even debonair. His  ear  for  dialogue is exceptional, mak­  ing   his  method  of   revealing character through    conversation   highly    effective. (The  exception is "A  Memsahib's Con­ fession,"   told  in  the  first  person   with  a studied  brainlessness that   seems  conde­ scending.)  Despite the  choice  of  subject, Pride  and   Fall  makes  pleasant  reading. Depicting the  twilight  of the British  Em­ pire  from  an  emotional  distance, Kildare Dobbs  knows his limits, and  works within  them  exceedingly well.
PAT BARCLAY


WORDS FOR NOW

BERYL  BAIGENT,   Ancestral Dreams. Third Eye
Publications,  $5·95·
GERTRUDE STORY, The Book  of Thirteen. This­
tledown  Press, $14.00; pa.  $6.95.
DAPHNE  MARLATT, Our  Lives. Oolichan Books,
$5·95·

BERYL BAIGENT's previous collections of verse  have  not  been  distinguished. The poems  in The Quiet  Village ( r 972)  and Pause    (I 974)    might    be   mistaken  for

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



C.A.A. prizewinners at a time when Smith and Scott  were trying  to get funding from the  McGill Daily.  Lines  are  contorted to rhyme;   anachronisms   such    as    "wan­ d'ring," '"neath," and  "fay" accompany thoughts  down   "tranquil   rustic   lanes"; and,  if one can  get through the "Mother­ hood,"  "Simple  Joys,"   "Be   Glad,"  "A Poem  A Day," and  "The  Doctor  Calls"
-unquestionably the worst poem I have ever  read -one is likely  to encounter something like "Farewell To  An Indian Prince (From a handmaiden)." In Counter Joint   ( I976)   showed  consider­ able  improvement; the  rhyme  is almost gone  and  at  least  "The  Chief"  is set  in the  twentieth century.  Ancestral   Dreams (Ig8I)  continues this evolution, and  Bai­ gent  is finally  beginning to  make  a  few strides. The vocabulary has improved, the lines  are  much   tighter, and   a  few  real poems  are  starting to surface. "Portrait" and  "Emma  I842-I863" are  fine charac­ ter studies,  and  this is "Threshold":

Kerith
born
beneath the  socialist banner behind  the  shutters
of  a  Welsh  grocery shop.
A  Trick of  heritage brought
Mane  and  Jesus into line  and  literature
represented  by
Dylan the  first  discerning  visitor
in  his proletarian green world.

"From My  Window" is  a  lovely  haiku, and    the   personal   lyric,   "Against  the Wind," escapes sentimentality by the very touching last  line:  "invisible	clinging always there."
Baigent  still has a way  to go, however. Her  tendency to employ repetition for dramatic effect,  as  in  the  past,  just  be­ comes   boring.   Without  the   harness   of rhyme, she frequently stumbles into word­  iness.  Perhaps if she  were  to  follow  her natural bent  for  portraits, injecting a lit­ tle  humour but  keeping  the  lines  tightly
 imagistic,  or if she were able  to admit to some uneasiness-at home  or in the gal­ axy -instead of offering  stale answers  to large questions,  her obvious dedication to poetry  might  begin  to  reward others.
The Book  of Thirteen is a very  good first book of poetry by Gertrude Story. Story's   broadcasting  and    short    fiction have  already  made  her  fairly  well known in Saskatchewan, and  in  Winter I g8 Ishe was profiled  in The Canadian Author & Bookman after having won the Okanagan Fiction  Award  for her story, "Car of  Ma­ roon."  The  Book   of Thirteen is  nicely produced   and   divided   into   six  sections with   thirteen   poems   apiece.   Unfortu­ nately,  the  individual  poems  are  neither titled   nor  marked   as  such,  so it  is  not always  clear   where   one   leaves  off  and another begins;   this  results in  some  oc­ casional confusion of  character and  hurts to some extent the symmetry  of the  book. On  the  plus  side,  however,   the  sections are composed  of  loose sequences, so there is good flow  from one  poem  to  the  next with  the  author's forceful   and  occasion­  ally  eerie  voice  lending a  solid  unity  to the whole.
Story's  work is thoroughly professional, somewhat  surprising for  a first book. She writes concisely, employs  puns subtly, and has a way of mounting interest, if not developing suspense,  in each sequence. "Night Lovers"  and  "Songs  of Pain" are easily the best sections; "Whiskey Poems," "Animals Dead," and  "Birds  of Prey" probably  the weakest.  There are  frequent references    to    the    prairies,    but    Story doesn't flog this, being more interested in relationships and  the  interior of a  wom­ an's   mind   than   in  where   her  house   is located.  Her  strength is in a colourful use of dialogue,  though her  dry wit is a close second:

Crows
are  so black
and  obvious
they  are  overdone.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Story's  effects with alliteration are always pleasing    ("Long  lean   love   leans   over me"), and  she has  a  nice feel for  where words  belong:

A ball  of blue sky/light/neon/light blue  ball.

This  is not  to say she's ready for the Gov­ ernor  General's Award.  Too  many of the poems say nothing, or say not enough, but it  is  clear   that   there   is  genuine  talent  here.
Oolichan  Books  has  done  a  valuable service  to  Canadian Letters  with  the  re­ printing of several important books within  the  last  few  years.  I'm   thinking  specifi­ cally of John Newlove's  Moving In Alone and  The  Green Plain, but  Daphne Mar­ latt  followers   will  be  delighted   with  the new Oolichan edition of Our Lives. First published    in   1975   by   Truck  Press   in North   Carolina-a  total  of  526  copies were printed-Our  Lives consists of five narratives, or sections, or stories, or chap­ ters-Marlatt has  always  been  hard   to pin down-each  written  in long-line  po­ etry,  or  prose   poems,  or  prose,  dealing with  a  year  spent  in  communal living  in Vancouver. The writing  itself dates  back to   1972-73,   with    the   exception  of   a "Postscript" which  nostalgically  attempts to place  the  year /book  into some kind  of context. It would  be tardy  to record  any first  reactions; one  might   be  better  di­ rected  to read  Jack  Silver's  "Moving into Winter:  A  Study   of  Daphne   Marlatt's Our Lives" in the Spring  1978 Op.en Let­ ter.  Nevertheless,  I  think   a  few  things about Marlatt have  to be said.
iThere   are   not   many   writers   in   this country  who  can   carve   with   such   pre­ cision  and   are   capable  of  such  acutely  sensuous   images.   And,  of   course,  Mar­ latt's  fascination with  language  asserts it­ self  in  nearly   every  line.  In  her  hands,  language flows in  and out of itself:  a sea in  a  box  of  mirrors called  a  book.  Mar-
 latt  is first and  foremost an experimenter. Because the narratives are so raw and  the perceptions so frequently phenomenologi­ cal  with  relatively  little, at  least  of inter­ est, reflective substance, Our Lives can  be tough-going  for   anyone  conditioned  by the more traditional narrative framework. The  question  is  then, is  Marlatt worth  the  work?  To  those  who  believe  the  text should   be  more  interesting than   the  re­ ality portrayed, the answer  is an emphatic yes. But  to those interested more in vision than  in snapshots, who find lab work with language little  more   than  clever,  if  not boring,  Daphne Marlatt  will appear as a new   breed    of    academic   surpassed    in theorizing only by those appreciative crit­  ics who stumble  over  each  other  trying  to sound scientific  in praising her work. Yes­ terday's revolutionaries have  become  the party  in power; poetry  isn't  made  out  of books  (Frye)   or experience (Layton) but out of chemicals called  words. For now, anyway.

DAVID  O'ROURKE


AQUISITIONS
JON   WHYTE,   Gallimaufry.  Longspoon  Press,
$g.5o.
STEPHEN   SCOBIE, A  Grand   Memory  for  For­
getting. Longspoon, $8.50.
MARY HOWES,  Lying in  Bed  (with drawings by
Jane Ross). Longspoon, $7.50.
BP   NICHOL,   Extreme   Positions.  Longspoon,
$7-5°·
FouR BOOKS TO   FIT into one review. Only natural (only academic)  to look for some common chain, link,  line,  rope  to  hang them   all  on,  not  that   I  want   to,  but  a review ( er)    abhors  dissimilarity,  discon­ nectedness. Let's see. Of four authors, one is female,  three  male; of  three males, two mention Scotland; of  these  two, one  was born   there.    Of   four   books,   three   are poetry  and  one says it's a novel, though  it looks like poetry. Of  three  (or four)  books

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



of  poetry,  three  use  wordplay and  puns, two  contain concrete and   visual  poetry, one contains somebody else's drawings. Of four,  two  use lists, two  mention cooking, two  use the  phrase  "lying  in  bed" -the same  two  in  fact.  Of  three   writers,  two mention  Paris,  two  mention  Edmonton, one  refers  to Saskatchewan, one  to  Cal­ gary;   none   were   born   in  any   of   these places.  Of   four,   two   mention   painters. Two  refer  to other writers,  but  one  only once  (and   Atwood  at  that) ,  three  men­ tion   movies,  but   one  only  once   (Berg­ man  at  that) . Two  use  lots of  brackets,  one   uses  lots  of   quotation  marks.   One  quotes  Gaelic, one quotes  Latin. Only  one mentions  Lord   of  the   Rings.   Only   one mentions Martin Gardner, Kenneth Burke (twice), Mishima, only one writes double dactyls, and  uses words  like acersecomic, aphelion,   anulates,   ranunculi,   ductile, quiddity,   paggling,  strabismal,   orthog­ naetheous, technopaegnia....
And   that    one   writer   is  Jon   Whyte, whose  Gallimaufry is indeed   a  stew,  ra­ gout,  goulash, a zarzuella of  lyrics,  lists, charms,  intellectual  flourishes,  rhetorical play.  I have  a friend   who objects  to my belief    that    almost   anything  can    and should  go  into  a  stew. He  thinks  such  a democratic, not  to  say  promiscuous, pot will at  best lack  taste,  at  worst  ruin  culi­ nary  standards  and   definitions. Whyte's  book  I offer  as  proof  that  an  improvisa­ tory  and  amphigoric approach -to  po­ etic  creation at  any  rate-can  produce not   just  an   eccentric, acephalic  hotch­ potch,  but  sophisticated, demanding, and rewarding fare.  Whyte, a galimatias Banff resident, publisher, and  curator, who  has written books on the  Rockies,  stories and poems  on  Peter  Pond  and  Henry  Kelsey, and  designed   and  executed print-poems, has   an   imagination  verbal   and   visual, linguistic and  lapidary (as  in  "concrete" poetry) .  The poems  here   range   from  a long  section,  "Fells  of Brightness" (from a   longer  autobiographical  anatomy,
 Sources), which  mixes mountains, Nashe, memory, Hopkins, history,  to reflexive circular graphics, looping  lexical lyrics, bicameral dialectics, and  lists based on sources  as varied  as  A Grammar of  Mo­ tives and  The Ducks  Geese and Swans  of North   America. All  this  comes  together on several grounds: the Rockies, the page, the  mind.  The initial impression  is of an accretive   process,  a  piling   up  or  on  of sedimentary  layers  of   knowledge,  sylla­ bles, details, repetitions, nonsense. A hotel room in Yokohama fills up like the Marx brothers'  stateroom. Lines  pile  up,  as in a Russian  hockey  game  where  the  puck
masses
dispelling crosstalk, crosseyes,  crosschecks,
body checks, high  checks,
coat  checks,  high tippers and  bipedal normalcy's cathartic  implosions....

Repetitions are,  of course,  incremental:
Next,  of course, to  lying  in  bed is lying  next  to  you  instead; instead of lying,  I'll lie in  bed
and  next  to  you, of course, instead ... , etc.

1Yet this  increase, multiplication, and exaggeration is a shoring  up against  the tendency  of matter and  mind  to dissolve into  shimmer and  silence.  The  phenom­ enal world is held in place, held still, only in the  temporary stasis of  language, itself an  unstable  system  of  sounds  and  signs. The   circus   rings   language  runs   round  things  are  circular,  the  mind's reflective ways  reflexive,  but  even  such  apparently endless  cycles  stop.   The  circular  poem made   of  EARTH can   "Hear the  Art," hold   "Hearth" and   "Heart," but   is  fi­ nally an "Epitaph." Mind has mountains, but also cliffs of fall,  "autumn is / leave­ taking," we  are  left  with  memory's   till: "unconducive," says  the  dictionary, "to  growth." Though  there  is  faith   here  in the sturdiness of things and  people, in the ambiguities, tyrannies,  and   anarchies of language, and  in the grace of the "found," the  final  sense  is  one  of  loss. The con­  cluding  poem  is a  SendakjEugene  Field-


133

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



like composition called "The Place Where the  Lost  Things Go":

Right hand mittens, tortoiseshell kittens,
the  minute hand from  the  broken  clock, the  second book  of Lord of the  Rings, Mother's copy  of  Captains  and  Kings, Daddy's diamond left  foot  sock....

Harsh winds  have  taken the  forgotten, forsaken
things to  the  place  where  the  lost  things  go;
and  they  will  never return, not  ever:
just  like  the  past  and  the snow....

And  the  poem  "More or Less" is a witty but to me wittily despairing account, counting, of memory's paralipomena:

Of  negative capability, I can  remember nothing
Of  the  two  pillars of Hercules I can
remember one
and  of the  two  eyes of Greece  I recall  one
one  of  the  two  moons  of Mars,  two  of  the three basic  chords, two of
the  three musketeers (and of  the  four
musketeers, three, and
of  them, of  course, only  two)  ...
six  of  the  seven  basic  plots,  six of  the  seven
deadly sins, six of the seven
cardinal virtues, six of the  Seven Types of Ambiguity, six of the
seven  days  of creation, six of the  seven
seas, six of  the  wonders
of  the  ancient world,  all  of  the  seven days  of the  week
ten of  the  members of the Group of Seven putting me  at least  one  over  the  eight
and  ... now  let me see, where  was I?

Whyte's  opening poem is "Magot Pie," a picturing of that  acquisitive, complain­ ing thief,  the motley  magpie. Almost  om­ niverous   in  diet,   this  "Madge,"  "Mar­ garet,"   "maggoty-pie,"   glossy   in   pied plumage, is "unpopular because of its fondness  for  the eggs and young of larger birds, though useful as a predator of mice and  rats." I thought of this bird, common in  Western   Canada and   Northern   Eu­ rope,  while  reading Stephen Scobie's lat­  est and  large collection, A Grand  Memory for Forgetting. The title might  suggest  a


134
 neat  connection with  Whyte's   "More or Less,"  but   more   interesting  to  me  is  a comparison of the  general  effect  of  their poems.  Though Whyte  takes  metres  and modes  from  anywhere, borrows  and  al­ ludes eclectically, his writing, certainly in­ tellectual, is  individual:   made-in- [the]­ person.  Scobie,   too,  has  a  wide  field  of reference-Marguerite    Duras,  Joni Mitchell,    hockey,    Hobbema,   Munich, Matisse,  Wayman, and  more. This collec­ tion,  described on  the  cover  as "personal and  reminiscent ... an  imaginative auto­ biography," does present  a variety  of im­ ages  and  experiences, political, private, purist,  and  pop,  through the  lenses  and  filters  of  memory. Yet  when  I'd  finished the  book,  several   readings  of  it,  I  had  less  the  sense of  reading the  poems  of a single  person  than  of hearing a collection of  voices,  some   recognizable, some   just echoes,  of other poets,  many  styles. I  be­ gan  to  wonder if it is possible  to acquire poetry,  its habits,  as opposed  to evolving, learning, poetic  skills. The  persona of  A Grand  Memory for Forgetting remains  to me as vague  and  mottled as a  tiny  news­ print  photo.  Indeed, the  first  two  poems, "The  Children of  Photographers  ( I )    &
( 2) ,"  and   a  number of  others,   suggest that  we acquire ourselves,  at  least  in  this century, like a collection of photographs,
as one collects ideas and  friends.  But such acquisitions, only images,  tell us little,  are finally hateful in their  capacity and  as reminders of our  commonality. Though

it  is what is forgotten that chooses  to be so:
forgetting is not  your  murder, it is
the  image's suicide,

forgetfulness comes  as a  relief: past  self forgotten. These  poems, recent acquisition from   myths,   movies,   memories,    lovers, and  friends, call  attention to  the  gather­ ing obliterations of time,  yet all but oblit­  erate for  the  reader   the  original   of  the images.  "Go,  go, go, said  the  bird...."

BOOKS IN REVIEW



The   best  of  Scobie's   poems,  such  as "You  remember me," have  an acute sense of past and  memory as both  powerful  and fragile,  as affecting others' lives quite  as much   as  one's  own.  The best  poems  in Mary   Howes'   Lying   in  Bed  are   tough, witty  takes  on  the  sexual   myths  women suffer, on the physical experience myths engender. Howes  is sharp with  the cliches attached to birth, menstruation, women's sufferance of men  and  sex, sharply  turn­ ing cliche back on itself. In fact, play with cliches,  puns,  and  colloquial  language is the source  of much  of the humour in this collection. "Looney  tunes" begins

I am  the  woman
who  lives  in  a  basket though my  heart's not  in  it

and  ends

ahhh   such  a  mystical thing at this  time     in  this  place
to finally   release a  basket case.

"zo  years  later" plays  on  bored  I board ("being board  I she  just cracked I ...ah well I she said I back  to  the old drawing board") .  "The ti tie  poem"  is  typical: "lying  I in  I bed  I is  I easier  I than I telling  I the  I truth I standing I up." Several  of the  poems  are  lists which  pro­
ceed  by  verbal  and   connotative  associa­ tion.  "What I'm good  at"  includes  "set­ ting  the  table  setting you  up  I macrame
plant   hangers I hanging on";  "Not too
much  to ask,"  a long  poem  probably bet­
ter  read  to an  audience than read  on the page,  works  the  same  way:

I want  you under my skin
I want  you out  on a limb
I want you treed
I want you floored
I want you swept under the  rug

and   so  on   for   14  pages.   Like   Whyte, Howes loves the way language can imply, deceive,  misdirect. A series of questions without  answers   can   suggest   situations that   the  answers   belie,  and   vice  versa: two  of  the  poems   juggle  such  linguistic
 expectation  and   trickiness.   It would   be easy  to dismiss  these  "games" as  "only" language  play. But the stories that rhyme women   together  from   nursery   to   bed, cradle   to divorce  court, are  made   up  of just such dialect  and  dialogue. Howes' poems are a kind of quipping dialectic, diagnosis of the symptoms of speech. (Symptom: from the Greek, a casualty, anything that  befalls one,  to fall  in with, to fall,  together.)
Howes'  poems  are  partnered by some
fine lying-in-bed drawings by Jane  Ross, views  of  the  feet,  lying  on  wonderfully suggestive   backgrounds,  as  seen   by  the opposite   extremity. bpNichol's Extreme Positions  uses  the  power  of language, in its  visual  and   aural  extremes, to  imply, confuse,  terrify. The book  tells a compli­ cated  tale with  minimal but sophisticated means.  Beginning with  successive  "s's," their    sinister   snake's   head    shape    and  sound   hissing   warning,   suspicion,    sus­ pense,  a  story  is woven  of  two  wives  in an involuted, at times painful and violent,
menage  a trois. The  "setting" and  "plot"
are  given  in  words  arranged visually  on
the  page. The "narrator" is less a  person than   a  camera eye,  more   voyeur   than participant. 	Emotions,	tension,     light, night,  silence,  shouts,  are   conveyed through   juxtapositions   and    repetitions that  discomfit,  disconcert, disorient, star­ tle,  lull.  The  technique is  Hitchcock's: the simplest  elements-moon, owl,  tree, road,  wave,  boat-turn  sinister  in  com­  position,    composed   and    angled    shots freeze  contained violence,  the  silent  con­ versation  shot  through a window  cannot be innocent. The book's six parts  progress in general  from  nouns  to verbs  to  adjec­ tives,   to  multiplications,   complications, and   questionings  of   language/relation­ ships. That wave, rock, cloud, head, hand, land,  can  be things and  motions,  that  one word can contain many  without changing shape,  that  words  can  weave  a  tissue  of lies, fabricate lives, are  mysteries  ponder-


135

BOOKS IN REVIEW



able and  profound as the impulses and murmurs of the chambered heart, which, in  extremis, wants   unlocking,   openness. This book, novel, "murmur mystery," simply,  sibilantly, dissolves  with  a  wave into  a  single  "s,"   a  still  sign  recalling,
1970, Still W a.ter 's run  deep.
!The obvious  connection between  these
books,  academically  avoided   at  the  be­ ginning as too blatant and easy, is simply that  all four  are  published by The Long­  spoon  Press,  a  mail  order   press  located  in  Edmonton and  drawing  financial as­ sistance  from  various  bodies such  as  the University  of Alberta  Endowment Fund, The Canada  Council,  and  Alberta   Cul­  ture.  Though  a  little   expensive  even  as paperbacks go now  (a discount of 30 percent accompanies an order  of any four titles), the books are handsomely  designed with  care   for  the   individuality  of  each one,  and   nicely  typeset  and  laid  out  by Marni Stanley.  All  four  have  pictures  of the  authors on  the   back.  None   of  the authors resembles  each  other.

ANN  MANDEL


REQUIRED: ENTHUSIASM

81:  Best  Canadian  Stories,  ed.  John   Metcalf and  Leon  Rooke.  Oberon,  $7·95·
Second  Impressions, ed. John  Metcalf.  Oberon,
$7·95·
TERENCE BYRNE's "Food  People," one of ten stories collected in 81: Best Canadian Stories, involves a minor artist who works persistently,  but  without hope,  until  he is suddenly  "discovered" by the local media. Bewildered  and  even alarmed by his sud­ den good fortune, he cannot quite believe that  his  years  of obscurity  are  over,  and his wife's reaction to his new success only increases  his  anxiety:   "When  he  finally told  her  about the  show  he  was  having,
 Lorraine had  acted  as if she didn't want to hear,  as if anyone's real success  fright­ ened  her." Strangely, the  editor  of  these two anthologies seems equally daunted by their   potential success,  for  his  introduc­ tions are  unlikely  to encourage a prospec­  tive  reader.  After  noting   that  Canadian short    stories    are   becoming   "generally more sophisticated," he continues: "Best Canadian Stories  still cannot stand  com­ parison   with   Best  American  Stories  but that  is not,  and  should  not be, surprising; what  is pleasing  is that the comparison is no longer  quite  so devastatingly painful." Actually, what   is  painful is that  Met­ calf  believes  such  a disclaimer to be nec­ essary. Any anthology including stories  by Clark  Blaise, Mavis  Gallant, W.  P. Kin­  sella,  Norman Levine,  and  Alice  Munro scarcely  requires an  apology.   Moreover, as three  of the stories  originally appeared in Harper's, The New  Yorker, and Atlan­ tic  Monthly, with  one  of  these-Linda Svendsen's "Who He  Slept  By" -win­ ning  Atlantic  Monthly's American Short Story  Contest in 1980, it would  seem that  Canadian short stories  are competitive on an  American scale.  But  that's beside  the
point.
The stories  by the  well-known   writers previously listed are  juxtaposed with stor­ ies by Terence Byrnes, Katherine Govier, John Riddell, Linda Svendsen, and  Kent  Thompson. The selections  by Govier  and  Svendsen clearly  establish  them  as excit­  ing  new voices.  Govier,  whose  first novel Random Dissent  was  published in  1979, dramatizes in  "The  Dragon" a  psychia­  trist's  slow decline  into  madness.  "I have done  what I  can  for  you,"  he  inevitably tells  his  weeping  patients, "You  know  I cannot go   out   and   slay   the   dragon." Govier's aloof  third-person narrator traces  his   deterioration with  both  irony  and compassion -the story's  violent  conclu­ sion  is brilliantly convincing.  Svendsen's "Who  He   Slept   By"  portrays  a  young girl's  changing perceptions of her  lethar-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



gic  older   brother. Until  he   blames   his failure  on  "a  dose  of mononucleosis that had  lasted  34  years,"  the  narrator  wor­ ships  him.  Then, she  explains,   "I  grad­ ually  came   to  believe   that   my   brother might  be an  asshole."
Linda Svendsen is easily  the  most  ac­ complished of the three young writers rep­  resented   in  S.econd  Impressions,  the  sec­ ond volume  in a series begun  in 1980 with First  Impressions and  intended  to intro­ duce   relatively   unknown  authors  to  a wider  reading  public.  Before  Svendsen's work can  be enjoyed, however,  the reader  must  endure  another  condescending in­ troduction by John Metcalf: "... Canada remains so very much  the land of Anne Murray, Anne of Green  Gables  and Tol­ ler  Cranston," he announces, and,  there­ fore,  "It is at  present   rather  difficult  to read   a  Canadian   book   without  feeling faintly  virtuous."
Unfortunately, it is probably true  that a feeling  of virtue is the  only  reward  for reading  the  selections by  Peter   Behrens and   Ernest   Hekkanen. Behrens  explains in his preface that  the "only" point  to writing  fiction  is "to  uplift  men's  hearts." In his stories he translates this assumption into  a series of miniature sermons,  with characters who address  the reader, rather than  each  other: "in  Florence I learned that   there   is  nothing else  to  do  except love, hold faith  in your love and damn  all the rest;  that  if you give yourself  up  to it the love will not weaken but sustain  you." Hekkanen's absurdist fictions offer a strik­ ing contrast to Behrens' obtrusive moral­ izing.  Apparently  more   concerned  with documenting a world  in decay,  than  with vivid   characters  and   intriguing  plots, Hekkanen  tends   to  focus  on  all  that   is most disagreeable in human life. In "The Rites" a  father  forces  his  miserable son to flagellate  him;  in  "Have a  Little  De­ cency"  four  tramps are   tossed  out  of  a mission:   "Andy kept  sniffing  back  snot.
 The others  looked  at  him and  he stopped sniffing."
Svendsen's four  stories  in  Second  Im­
pressions confirm   the  promise   of  "Who He  Slept  By." Her  preface   to  her  selec­ tions  reveals  a  lively  and  discriminating mind,  determined to  understand the  nu­  ances   of   the   short   story   as  a   literary genre: "A  story  that  does  not  try for  its characters, or  try  its  characters, cannot hold or move. And  that's what  I hope  my writing   will   do."  Svendsen's  stories  are indeed  both compelling and  moving.  Her  acute   ear  for  the  cadences of  everyday speech  brings   her   characters  vividly   to life; her reluctance to impose a particular theme  or form  gives her creations a space to breathe in. Eschewing direct  statement, she  relies  instead   on  delicately rendered scenes to evoke her meanings, as in "Ma­ rine Life,"  where she portrays the intense  relationship  between   an   ageing  mother and  her  pregnant daughter:
About   3  AM    she  fetches a  small   china  box and   places  it  in  front of  me.  She  opens it and  spreads tiny  molars and   bicuspids and incisors  on  the  table, beside  our  saucers and tells  me it's  my first  set  of teeth.
"You're kidding," I say.
"No," she whispers. "I'll always  keep  your teeth."

Linda Svendsen is a welcome  addition to the  literary  scene.  I hope  she  will find  a more  enthusiastic editor.

PETER KLOVAN


IN MELLOW MOOD
ANTONINE   MAILLET,  La   Contrebandiere.  Le­
meac,  $6.gs.
BERTRAND B. LEBLANC,  Fau  Divorcer! Lemeac,
$6.gs.
GEORGES DOR,  Du  Sang  Bleu  Dans  Les  Veines.
Lemeac, $6.gs.
A REFERENDUM, an  election, and  a  reces­ sion, almost  back-to-back, have left  Que­ becois audiences glutted with life's reality and  earnestness. What they itch  for  these

BOOKS IN REVIEW



days  is escape-a trend  which  has  the local entertainment industry  turning glee­ ful  handsprings. Vigneau!t and  Charle­ bois,  who  yesterday   cried  the  virtues   of political   militancy, now,  like  born-again flower-children, croon  the charms  of love and  peace.  Les Plouffe, that  quintessence of  habitant ham,  is  reborn   on  film  and television.   Even  Gratien  Gelinas'   hoary  Fridolin radio comedy  scripts  are  dusted  off and  published. Three new plays -an historical romance, a marital comedy, and a farce -discover the  theatre capering enthusiastically, if  somewhat awkwardly, to mellow  melodies  as well.
IAntonine  Maillet's La Contrebandiere, based upon her novel Mariaagela.s ( I973), premiered briefly and  unremarkably at Montreal's Theatre  du  Rideau Vert   in the spring  of  I974· Extensively  revised, it resurfaced  at   the  same   house   in  April Ig8I; and  the script for  the revival is now published.
Set  in  an  Acadian coastal  village  dur­ ing  the  Prohibition  era,   the  action  fea­ tures the picaresque efforts of  twenty-five­
year-old   Maria a Gelas  to  prove  to  her
bootlegger-grandfather  that,   although a
female  and  the fag end of the line, she is a worthy  heir  to  the  family's  outlaw  tra­ ditions.  Inspired by tales of her legendary Aunt   Clara, who   burned  down  an  ex­ ploitative lobster-shop  and  triumphantly sailed  for  foreign  parts,  Maria joins Old Ge!as  as  an  active  partner in  his  rum­ running operation. Forever  on  the  brink of arrest by Ferdinand, the dashing young Customs  and  Fisheries  officer, she ferries illicit   French  booze    ashore from  a schooner anchored  in  international  wa­ ters,  ingeniously   caches  it,  and  arranges for   its   eventual  transshipment   to   the United States.   Indefatigably  nipping at her  heels  is Calixte's Widow,  the  village scandalmonger and  Ferdinand's self-ap­  pointed  tipster. Whether the precious  jugs are  buried  under   the  feet  of  a  tethered bull, sunk full fathom five in lobster  pots,
 or enshrined in a convent chapel, the Widow   relentlessly   noses  them   out   and rallies   the   Law.   Her   pains   are   largely vitiated, however, by Maria's quick  wits: Ferdinand, deftly distracted by lurid emergencies,  consistently   arrives   either too late  or at  the  wrong  place  to exercise his function. In  the course of frequent encounters on land  and  sea, Maria and Ferdinand,  without  giving   up  a   jot  of their vocational antagonism, discover  a mutual respect  which  at  play's end prom­ ises to  ripen  into  love.
M ariaagela.s is by no means  the richest­ textured of Maillet's novels;  and  the dra­ matic   version  can  ill afford  the  deletion of the darker strands in  the prose source.  Particularly  regrettable  is  the  metamor­ phosis  of  Ferdinand, the  elderly  customs
official  murdered for  betraying his class,
into a youthful romantic daredevil. Nor was it well-advised to advance Sarah Bidoche,  the  community fortune-teller, from  her  relative obscurity   in  the  novel to an unjustified theatrical prominence. Now  a  participant in  the  action, now  an omniscient  chorus,   she  and   her   wicked pack of cards  are virtually a stage fixture: yet,  despite   her   ubiquity,  her   exertions prove all but irrelevant to the dramatic outcome. At best she is a picturesque appendage, and   at  worst,  a  clog  to  the play's  momentum. One  suspects  that  the part  was  deliberately written-or  over­ written-for  Viola   (La  Sagouine)    Le­ ger, who created the role and  whose gen­ ius might  tempt  any  dramatist to  rxcess. Most  of  the  novel's  other key characters retain   a  fair  measure of  integrity, if  not always their pristine subtlety. Maria struts  with   winsome  insouciance;  the   Widow  pries and  prays  with  her  wonted vigour; and  Bidoche,  the  village  idiot,  maunders on  valiantly in  a  world  where  ignorance turns  out  to  be something less than  bliss.
La  Contrebandiere, if hardly   the  tour de  force of La Sagouine, is nevertheless a fine  nostalgic   romp graced  with  memor-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



able folk characters, and  colourful, if somewhat episodic  action. Opportunities for picturesque visual effects are legion, particularly the  night  sequence during a fog at  sea when  Ferdinand searches  Ma­ ria's   boat  with  a  lantern.  And  Maillet's scrupulous  re-creation   of   the   Acadian  idiom  has  one  fairly  chewing  dulse  and sniffing  tar  throughout.  Underpinned by a  tuneful  down-East  score,   La  Contre­ bandiere  might  make  an  agreeable musi­ cal-just   the  thing,   perhaps,  to  tickle the  palates of  Charlottetown Festival  au­  diences.
Bertrand B. LeBlanc's Faut  Divorcer!
proclaims itself  a  belated  Quebecois  de­ rivative   of  the   problem   comedies  long flogged  by American  television  and  cin­ ema.   Premiered  29  September   rg8r   in Quebec City  by the Compagnie La Com­  mune  .a  Marie at  the  Theatre  du  Petit­  Champlain, LeBlanc's drama  chronicles  the  struggles  of  Oscar  Garneau, a  long­ time  railwayman, to come  to  terms  with retirement. After   a  year  at  home  he  is embittered, bored, unwashed, and  glutted with beer and  TV. His mortification vents itself in ceaseless  tirades  against the gov­ ernment, the  church,  Women's  Libera­ tion,   international   politics -in    short, against anything but  himself. His married children, alienated by his  negativism,  no longer  bring  their  offspring for visits. The primary victim  of Oscar's maladjustment, however,  is his  long-suffering  wife  Mar­ tha,  who finds her  routine  disrupted, her house  disordered, and  herself  denigrated.  Marital   stress   reaches  crisis  dimensions  when  Oscar,  infuriated  by  Martha's in­ terruption of  his  televised  sport,  cuts  the cord  on her vacuum cleaner, and,  in  the ensuing  dust-up, demands a  divorce.   A less-than-fortuitous  visit    from    his   old friend  and  notary, Octave,  persuades Os­ car  to  see  the  error of his  ways.  He  de­ cides to build himself a den and workshop  in  his  basement,  to  cultivate  a  garden, and  to construct an elaborate model  rail-
 road for his grandchildren. Meanwhile, however,  the  much-abused Martha  con­ cludes  that  a  separation, and  even  a  di­ vorce,  might  not  be the  unmitigated dis­ aster   she  had   long   imagined.  Deaf   to Oscar's  pleas and  promises  to reform,  she departs for a vacation which  threatens to become  permanent if  Oscar  fails  to  im­ plement   his   strategies.  But   the   tearful adieux of both parties at the play's climax leave little  fear  of that.  When  the  chast­ ened  Oscar  cries  at  curtain-fall,  "Qa  va changer! ... Tu  vas r'venir ben  plus vite que tu penses,"  the reunion champagne is as good as on ice.
Within  the  problem comedy  genre  the woes of the  senescent  threaten of late  to outstrip the  plight  of the single parent in cinema   and   television   appeal;  but   On Golden   Pond    or   Going    In   Style    this drama is not.  Nor,  despite  the superficial resemblance  of   Oscar  and   Martha  to Archie   and   Edith  Bunker,   willanyone mistake  Faut  Divorcer! for  an  All in  the Family  rerun. In  the  hands  of  Norman Lear,    LeBlanc's  material   might    have made  a  diverting half-hour TV  sit-com episode;  but  stretched to a two-hour for­ mat   by  a  tyro  dramatist, tedium  is  in­ evitable.  A  further, and   perhaps  worse, flaw is the dramatist's tendency to mistake  the stage for a lectern. His keen sympathy for  Golden   Agers  leads  him   again   and  again  to allow  his message to override  his medium. And   when  intellectual detach­ ment  bows to passionate preachment, the comic   flame   is   wellnigh   snuffed.   The play's  structure  amounts  to  little   more than  three  one-act debates.  In  Act I, Os­ car,  spiritedly countered  by Martha, de­ nounces  her  and  an  ill-ordered  universe. "J'te passe  un  maudit  papier," he  con­ cludes,  "si  j'serais  le bon  Dieu,  moe,  j'te mettrais d'l'ordre  la-dedans." Act  II sees Octave and   Oscar, in  a  lively  give-and­ take,  grapple  with   the  anxieties   of  the elderly  male,  particularly  his sexual  and  social   concerns.  Act   III, reversing   the


139

BOOKS IN REVIEW



pattern of Act I, allows Martha a lengthy tirade,  ineffectually interrupted by Oscar, in which she catalogues her husband's shortcomings from  their  nuptials  onward and   asserts  a  new-found independence. The   aging  female  gets  the final  and  tri­ umphant word.
Oscar's malady is not  new nor does the playwright limn it with any particular freshness. LeBlanc's prescription, too, is routine  -the self-help nostrum adminis­ tered  by every  retirement  counsellor,  so­ cial worker,  and psychologist  in the coun­  try. The characters of Oscar  and  Martha, although credibly  drawn, are stereotypes; and Octave is little more than  a faceless mouthpiece  for   the   author. The   play's major  redeeming feature is its topical hu­ mour. Oscar's Bunkeresque reflections  on Rene  L'evesque,  the  Parti  Quebecois, the vernacular mass, trade unionists, contem­ porary education, and inflation  will flatter  the prejudices of aging conservatives,  and  may even afford mildly sardonic  diversion to youthful  radicals as well.
Georges  Dor's  high  farce  Du sang bleu dans les veines,  first staged  25 June   rg8o at  Les  Ancetres, a  summer playhouse  at Saint-Germain de Grantham, attempts to extract a last comic  drop  or two from  an already oversqueezed theatrical lemon - incongruities in  language, customs,  and values  between   Quebec and   France. As usual, Quebec's rough-hewn, earthy  hon­ esty leaves decadent French sophistication at the starting-post.
'When  the  aristocratic Sorbonne  gene­ alogy  professor   Octave de  La  Tour La Garde addresses  the Literary Circle in the rural  village  of  Saint-Edmond, the  may­ or's  wife,  Agne-Aimee Boisson, discovers that she is descended from nobility. Elated  by her  new eminence, she invites  the pro­ fessor  home   for  dinner, along  with  her rich  spinster-neighbour Hortense. In  the course  of  the  soiree   Agne-Aimee's  hus­ band  Hector, a  prosperous  businessman and  local  politico,  finds  his  rustic  tastes
 running a slow second  in  his  wife's  eyes to the urbane charms of the French peda­ gogue.   He   fights  back  valiantly  if   mal­  adroitly. The  professor's   gift   to  Ange­ Aimee  of a  single  rose  is  countered by a heart-shaped  floral  monstrosity; and   the scholar's erudite sallies are answered with quotations from  a  crossword-puzzle dic­ tionary.   In   the   end,    however,    native  horsesense   triumphs over  foreign   guile, and  the suave  academic stands  unmasked as a patrician con-artist.
The characters are  well-wrought and neatly-localized   comic   types.   The   dia­ logue, as befits the work of an experienced radio writer, is deft  and sparkling, a treat  for  the  ear.   What  the  play  wants,   un­ fortunately, is  action;  in  the  absence  of which   Dors'   profusion   of   puns,   word­ play,  and  clever   allusions   probably  be­ comes  the  page  better  than  the  stage.

JOHN  RIPLEY


TO AMUSE, TO BITE

JUDITH   THOMPSON,   The  Crackwalker.  Play­
wrights, $3.50.
MARC   DIAMOND, The Ziggy  Effect. Playwrights,
$g.5o.
BETTY  JANE   WYLIE,   The  Horsburgh Scandal.
Black  Moss,  $3.50.
GEORGE SZANTO,  The Next   Move. Playwrights,
$3-50.
The  Crackwalker, a  remarkable,  heart­ wrenching  play,  explores the  psyche  of those  who  compose  the  sub-strata of our society.   Stripped  of   the  refinements  of our  culture-two  are mentally deficient,  two  struggle  constantly  with   the  morass that   confines  them   to  the  lower  depths, one leads a non-human existence  on drugs  and  alcohol -the characters are  utterly exposed   in   all   their   imperfections and weaknesses.  Judith Thompson's title  is a metaphor for the "bogeyman" that  haunts our sleepless nights,  the thin line we tread

BOOKS IN REVIEW



between  sanity  and  insanity, the fears  we elude  but  are  always  with  us.
1The central character, Theresa, a child­ like  innocent, earns  $5  a  shot  at  prosti­  tution   until   she  moves  in  with  Alan,  a loveable  schizophrenic. Alan unintention­ ally  strangles  their  retarded  baby  when he imagines it crying, an  unconscious  act of  aggression   turned  against  himself - he is constantly warring with  serpent  de­ mons inside  his head -and escapes  into total  madness. Sandy, the  barmaid, and Alan  her  macho partner, are  trapped in
a bad marriage; their  tough  exterior only masks  a  relentless  vulnerability.
In   one   of  the   many   moving   scenes, Theresa carries  her  dead  baby in a shop­ ping  bag  to  Sandy's place  where she  at­  tempts  to resuscitate it:

Danny? You  live?  You  breathin if I breathe into ya?  S'okay, I'm your  Mum! ... Danny? You   dead,  eh?   You   not   live.  You   never comin   back, eh.

The Crackwalker has  all  the  elements  of great  drama; it is painful and  funny,  sad and  joyous, pathetic and  uplifting; much of this is due  to  the  beautiful poetry  jux­ taposed  with  violent  images.  And  under­ neath   the  sordid   atmosphere  lies  much compassion  and  love.
The Ziggy  Effect  by Marc Diamond is a comic  satire  on  contemporary  civiliza­ tion and  like all good satire evokes laugh­ ter on the wrong side of  the  mouth.
A   former  hippie    couple    (they   fled north  to avoid  the draft)  spawned Ziggy, a freaky kid high on punk  rock, television, drugs,  colours,  sunglasses  and  the  sound of his own  voice.  His  psychiatrist mother makes  futile   attempts to  normalize her crazy young  patients but realizes that con­ ditions  in  her  own  home  are wilder  than  anything she  encounters in  her  practice. Her  husband grows vegetables and hoards  food  in  the  basement in  preparation for the  imminent nuclear catastrophe. Since she  cannot  cure   anyone's  neurosis,  she may  as  well   join   'em,   hands  over   the
 house  to Ziggy and  his pals and  donning the sunglasses of the new generation  goes off "to  explore" the  world  in a  commu­ nal  space  in  San  Francisco.  Having cast off  "our   power  relationships"  she  feels "free  at last." Though mother realizes she is a victim  of  Ziggy and  the  new  youth, she  is  responsible  for  his  condition; the sins of  the hippie  fathers have been visited upon  the next  generation:
He  was  an  outsider to  me ... I pretended I was   eager  to   have   a  baby ... I  resented him....
Neither  did  she  nurture Ziggy when  she had   grown  accustomed  to  his  presence, but  relegated him  to the care  of  commu­ nal members  who left him in front  of the TV   set  all  day  while  she   went  out   to work. Human relationships  between  par­  ents  and  offspring  are  absent-the  for­  mer's function is mainly to provide  money
-Ziggy  demands  $25   to  dye  his  hair next  week's colour.
The biggest villain, however, is the tele­ vision  and   its  deadly   rays   (the  glasses ostensibly  protect Ziggy's  vision)   which have  damaged his brain  and capacity for rational behaviour.
He   looks   like   a   robot  receiving  messages from   some   strange  planet ... there's  some­ thing wrong with   the   kid,  organically and  genetically....
Since television  programming is nonsensi­ cal and stupefying, one might as well turn  the set around and  "watch  the colors  on the  wall."  The viewers  are  so addicted, they establish  TV Anonymous:
Suppose  it's   the   middle  of  the   night  and they  need  a fix. There's nothing on  but  the test  pattern. They gotta have  someone they can  call,  right?
When  Ziggy, who might  just as well have been generated by the tube,  becomes mas­ ter of the house, he relegates  his father to the  basement where   he  is  metamorpho­ sized  into  an  animal-like  creature. The non-human Ziggys  have  taken  over  the world.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



The play's zany  plot   is its  theme; the characters reflect their own  empty  exis­ tence,  the  language and rhythm, carefully executed,  reproduce  the   beat   of   punk  rock.  Absurd  dance,  gross  music, crude poetry, inane characters inhabit the  play­  wright's surreal  nihilistic world. The six­ ties'  youth  attempted to  improve society but succeeded only in botching themselves up  along with  the  next  generation. Void  of  human values, we will self-destruct be­ fore  the  neutron bomb does  it  for  us.
By  exaggerating the  ludicrous aspects
of our  culture, the  author forces  us to take a  sharper look  at ourselves. It is fear  of the  future that promotes nihilism-"the alien  environment ... where  man   has nothing to grab on  to." The Ziggy  Effect is  both a  frightening and   comic  vision. And  a  warning. Ziggy  sings:  "This is the future. I hope you  like  it." Some future! The Talmud exhorts us not  only  to re­ frain from  doing evil,  but  from  giving the appearance of doing evil. Appearances, it seems,  accounted for  Russell  Horsburgh's demise; a Reverend of the United Church of Canada, he resigned his ministry when arrested  on   charges  of   contributing  to juvenile   delinquency   and    subsequently served   time in  prison. In  Betty  Jane  Wy­ lie's   excellent introduction  to  her   play,  The  Horsburgh Scandal, we  learn   that the  Minister loved  young people, devoted his energies to  provide the  restless youth of  the   rg6o's with   a  program  which in­  tended  to  serve   as  "an  antidote to  de­  linquency." To  keep the  kids  out  of  un­  desirable surroundings, he installed a pool table  in the  church gymnasium, organized basketball games even on Sundays, dances, and looked   the  other way  when  they  en­ gaged in  sexual activities. "If  they're  do­  ing  it in  the  park, they  might  as  well  do it  in  church. At  least  you   know   where they   are."   His   innovative  programs­ handshaking,  invitations to  a Rabbi and  Roman Catholic priest to address the con­ gregation, group therapy sessions, a series
 of  lectures on  sex  education, gained him notoriety and incensed the staid Christian community of  Chatham, Ontario. The "impulsive, headstrong" Minister was al­ ternately described as  "naive,"  "proud," "conscientious," "a  monster,"   "a  free­ loader,"   "publicity   hungry,"     "broad­ minded,"  "a  true   Christian."   Though Horsburgh pleaded  not  guilty  at his  trial, the  silver-tongued  Minister  remained si­ lent. Did  he  feel guilty? Was he so certain of his innocence he did  not  deem it neces­  sary  to speak? Or was he so pained by the  betrayal of   the  kids   he  had   supported? Acquitted   by   the   Supreme  Court  four years  after  his  conviction, and reinstated by  the  Church  several months prior  to his  death,  many questions, however, still remain unanswered. Wylie  concludes her moving introduction  with   these  lines:
There in  the  gravel of the  crawl  space  under the  centre aisle,   beside   a  support  pillar, is a  plain tin  box  containing his  ashes.  I said a  prayer and   backed out.

The Horsburgh saga is indeed powerful raw  material for  a drama. Wylie's play,  a collective creation with   Theatre  Passe Muraille, dramatizes the events leading to Horsburgh's trial and the  trial  itself,  but provides no  new   insights into   the   man's character. It is obvious that the  author's sympathies lie with the  "Rev," but  we wonder  why   she   refrains  from   delving into her  hero's personality; like all  heroes he  is a man ahead of  his  time  and  not without flaws.  Instead, we  are  presented with  a docudrama which urges  the  audi­ ence  to decide whether or  not  justice was misdirected. Horsburgh, the   person, in­  trigues us,  rather than the  witnesses and their conflicting  testimonies.  Why  did  he become a  Minister? Why  did  he  remain in  the  Church  despite his  flagrant defi­  ance  of  Church  convention? What were  his  own   sexual  experiences and  biases? Why did   he  permit the  kids  to  take  ad­ vantage of him? "He was a good man and we  ripped him  off." Why  the death wish

BOOKS IN REVIEW



as  illustrated  by  his  habitual  speeding and  silence  at  the  trial? In  his pride,  did he  consider  himself  a  Christ   figure?   In the absence  of available facts,  the drama­ tist must  employ  his creative imagination to bring a personal vision to the audience. AH our  questions need  not  be answered, but  the  character should  be  explored  as deeply  as  possible.
One   powerful  scene   between   Barby,
who assumes she is pregnant, and  her mother, recalls  the hysteria  Arthur Miller engendered in The Crucible; the girl ad­ mits to drinking in the church, claims the "Rev   made us  do  it"   (i.e.,  have  sexual intercourse)   and   even   asked   "how   we like  it."  Here, and   in  a  previous   scene, the    mother-daughter   relationship  is strongly  defined.  In  the final analysis, the play   reveals   more  about  the   people   of Chatham than about the man  himself.
The Next   Move by  George  Szanto   is
set  in  Montreal  in  1977  when   Bill  IOI makes   French  the   official   language  of Quebec. The play examines the effects of the   French  national  movement  on   the lives  of Quebec's anglophone citizens  in the  characters of  an  Anglican  establish­ ment   lawyer,  his  Jewish   wife,  their  two sons and  Jean, proprietor of  an  "eclectic left"   cabaret-and  the  prejudices  and  fears   that   political   upheaval  kindles   in one family.
Sara,  distraught throughout the play, having sustained many  traumatic experi­ ences  in  the  holocaust, professes  her  rea­ sons for  marrying out  of her faith:

that I and   my  children should never  again fear  any  sort  of  persecution ... your  ancient respectability would  always  outweigh my immigrant   improprieties ... the   wealth­ that Ishould  never again  be  offended  and  insulted.

She used  to speak  German, now that lan­ guage   has   been  "obliterated"  from  her mind,   just  as the  French are  obliterating English.    Though  it   is   suggested    they emigrate to the United States, Fred,  hav-
 ing lived and  worked  in  Montreal all  his life, feels the  family  belongs  here.
An important character who never  ap­
pears  in  the  play  but  whose  presence  is always felt,  is the  grandfather, Max.  His cabaret had  been  destroyed   by  the  Ger­ man   fascists;   now   his   grandson   keeps adapting  the  old  man's  songs,  recounts the horrors  of the  thirties, until  he finally begins to write  his own political pieces for Jean's cabaret, which  satirize French na­ tionalism,   the  language   bills,  American influence....   Unlike   Max  who   finally feigned  senility  to  avoid reality  and  fur­  ther  disillusion, the young  people,  Anglo­ phones  though  they  be,  will  build   their lives  here.  Set  in  the  cabaret, the  play ends  on  a   positive   note:   "Would  you write  us a couple  of songs?"
Though it  is unreasonable and  objec­ tionable   to  equate Nazism   with  French Canadian aspirations for cultural and  po litical independence, Sara's fears, her hus­ band's  anxieties, the young people's  strug­ gles for  survival  are  legitimate. The au­  thor  has  captured  a  particular  moment in Quebec's  history. Relief  from  the  gen­ eral  solemn  mood  of  the  play  comes  in the cabaret scenes where Jean  and  Mark sing Brechtian-style songs which  are  both amusing  and  biting.

AVIVA RAVEL


STREET  LIFE

BRITT    HAGARTY,   Sad    Paradise.  Ta!onbooks, n.p.
KEITH  HARRISON, Dead   Ends. Quadrant  Edi­
tions,  n.p.
SCOTT    WATSON,    Platonic Love.  New    Star
Books, $1 3·95;  pa.  $6.25.
Sad   Paradise   is  Britt   Hagarty's  second novel. Here  he presents  the sixties of  Van­ couver,  Seattle, and  San  Francisco from the  point  of view  of  teen-age Sean  Gal­ lagher,  the hero of  his first novel, Prisoner of Desire.


143

BOOKS IN REVIEW



This  is not  just another "sixties"  novel, however.  The difference  is that  it is con­ cerned  primarily with  the development of Gallagher, rather than  with  that  of  any social thesis. This gives it the force of nar­  rative  as  opposed   to  merely  a  wealth  of nostalgic, kaleidoscopic psychedelia  which characterizes so much  else written about this era.
There is a  wealth   of  detail   here,  but only that  which  bears  directly  upon Gal­
lagher's trying  "progress" from  mildly re­ bellious fourteen-year-old, through reform  school and  the drug  scene of  Vancouver's Fourth  Avenue,   to   jumping   bail  on   a charge of drug trafficking  and  the  death of many  of  those who had  made  up  that  scene.
It  is  a sad  story-not  because  Gal­
lagher   goes  wrong   so  much   as  because there  seems  no  way  for  him  to  go right, or  even  to  be  left  alone,  given  the  atti­ tudes   which   prevailed  then.   Gallagher finds no path by which  to be true  to him­  self that  does not involve the underworld.
For this reason it is also a compelling story,  this  search  for  a  mode  of life  im­ pervious   to  the  authorities,  this  attempt to build a paradise on terms unacceptable to society at large.
Dead  Ends is a clever, episodic mystery,
also set  mainly  in  Vancouver. The  mys­ tery  concerns who  is taking  over  whom,  whether it  be  in  terms  of  corporations, personalities, or  cultures. Harrison writes in   what    approaches   an   epigrammatic style  with  frequent  incomplete sentences  which  entirely suits  the  theme-though there  are  times when one tires of this for his prose becomes contrived. Nevertheless he captures many  of our  modern  troubles even  if he fails  to decipher them  clearly.
Platonic   Love  is nothing of  the  kind, but  rather three  tales of gratuitous sex­ which  are  of  no  particular  value  simply by virtue of their  devotion  to homosexual­ ity,  which  appears to  be  the  premise  of the  author. Gratuitous  sex  is  gratuitous


144
 sex. The only  thing  that  can  save a  book like  this  is masterful prose,  such  as  that of  Anais   Nin,   which   Watson  nowhere even  approaches. Platonic  Love  is sloppy in the manner of a confessional; worse, it is pretentious.
SIMON RUDDELL


SEPARATE  LENSES

ALASTAIR  MACDONALD, A  Different Lens. Harry
Cuff  Publications, n.p.
CANDACE  ADAMSON  BURSTOW,    The  Songs   of
Bathsheba. Fiddlehead, n.p.
TIM INKSTER,  Blue   Angel. Black  Moss,  $6.95·
ED  JEWINSKI,   The Cage   in   the   Open  Air.
Black  Moss,  $4-95·
ALEXANDRE  L.  AMPRIMOZ, Odes    for  Sterilized
Streets. Vesta, n.p.
THOMAS A. CLARK, Madder Lake. Coach House,
$6.5o.
JIM    STEWART,  So   the    Night   World  Spins.
Breakwater, $4-95·
WAYNE WRIGHT,  The Girl  in  the  Brook. Break­
water, $4-95·
DES   WALSH,    Seasonal  Bravery.  Breakwater,
$4-95·
ROBERT   RILLES,    Look     the    Lovely   Animal
Speaks. Turnstone, $6.oo.
JOHN  MCAULEY, What  Henry Hudson Found.
Vehicule, $3.oo.
GREGORY M. COOK, Love   from Backfields. Break­
water, $4-95·
MONTY  REID,  The Life   of Ryley. Thistledown, n.p.
c. H.  GERVAIS, Up   Country  Lines. Penumbra, n.p.

AT A POINT  WELL PAST the three-quarters mark  in this century of technology, poetry is supposedly having a difficult  time.  Yet the  striking feature of  these  14 books  of poems is that  the poet  can still succeed  in overturning conventional perception to make  us aware of hidden, even noumenal, dimensions.  In   the   Canadian  tradition, there has always been a strong component of idealism, and  the  best  of  these  poems show  it  to be far  from  dead.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



In  this regard, the most  striking collec­ tion  is undoubtedly Alastair  Macdonald's A Different Lens. A  member  of the  Eng­ lish Department at Memorial, Macdonald has  published  two  earlier collections, al­ though this  is his  first with  a Newfound­ land   publisher.  Divided   into   three   sec­ tions-"Spring," "Summer," "Fall   and Decline" -the   book   gives   a  powerful sense of a man  moving  surprised through time,  a feeling  that  Macdonald evokes as palpable  enough  either   to  enfold   or  to release him completely. The poems reveal a  human  being   not  entirely  in  control, and  yet not  altogether minding, for Mac­ donald  recognizes    that    the   individual, despite   conventions  to   the   contrary,  is always between  phases. To this end, Mac­  donald's most interesting metaphor is that  of the camera, able  to  catch  and  imprint moments, but  unable  to  go  beyond  such superficial  conjunctions with  time  to em­ brace  the ongoing scene.  For such an em­ brace  "a  different lens"  is needed, bring­  ing about a second  sense  of life in which each  particular nexus, action, is part  of a larger   pattern, a  pattern which  becomes apparent  as  the   collection  unfolds.   As
1-Aacdonald says:  "Poems may  be  signa­ tures  I in sand,  thread of feeling's drift,  I thought,  webbed   in   spun   rhythm   and
sound." While  the larger patterns are clearly  Macdonald's goal,  he  refuses  ob­ stinately to ignore  the sharp  particularity of  existential  experience.  In  fact,   Mac­  donald   speaks  movingly  of  the  death   of his  wife   and   of   his   own   approaching death, the final poem being a plea for still more   time  to  play.  Yet   throughout  the collection  the  pattern clarifies,  the reader  being  brought  to use the  other's lens, not just  to capture, but  to embrace illumina­ tion.
Coming from   the  quiet, reflective  po­
etry of Macdonald to Candace Adamson Burstow's  The Songs  of Bathsheba is to encounter a sunburst of emotion so strong as  to  be almost  overwhelming. Such  un-
 inhibited  love poetry  is rare,  very rare,  in these northern climes;  one is immediately led   to  comparisons  with   the  "Song of Solomon."  Burstow   paints  with   bright, primary  colours,   rendering  the   feeling that  flesh  itself  is conscious  without the meditation of spirit.  The  early poems  are particularly resplendent in  the  images  of flesh fulfilled, and  one is hardly  prepared, at first reading, for  the  second  section­ a  combination  of  children's  forms   and fairytales    which    inexorably    leads    the reader  into  a terrifying region of madness  and institutions where  the poet now seems to  be  virtually   helpless,   barely   able   to manipulate the  simplest  devices.  "Fairy­ tale" is particularly moving  in this regard, for Burstow  uses  the story  of the  princess and  the frog  to tell of her own unavailing attempts  to  make   the  frog  perceive  the prince  within.  Failing, she  realizes  that
she  is  herself   caught  in  "a fairytale    I
that  has no ending."
Yet as in  most  books with  a three-fold
form,  The  Songs  of Bathsheba  returns to the  source  in  the  final  section,  although in this case it proves  to be an  exploration of the situation of breakdown. In  a  num­ ber   of   rich,   sensuous   poems,   Burstow characterizes  the  plight   of  the  singer  of flesh who finds that  she is being burnt  "in the  holocaust" of   twentieth-century dis­ cretion,   an  attitude of  impartiality  that  allows   for   "nuclear  grins,"   where   the "fine  needle of the  mind" is employed  to create,   not  the  richness  of  tapestry, but the darker secrets of night. While  the final poem  manages  again  to sing and  fly, it is not  with  the full  release  of tongued  glory but   with    "naked  spines"    climbing    in "high  crazy  flight." Burstow's   dark   pen and ink line drawings throughout give the volume  a superb graphic design,  but  one feels  that   colour   was  needed   as  well  to give  the  full  impact of  poetry  which  is itself an  act  of sensuality.
The  irony of mentioning Tim  Inkster's
Blue  Angel  in  the  same  breath   as  Bur-


145

BOOKS IN REVIEW



stow's poetry of sensual  acceptance would probably  appeal to Inkster, for he delights in such paradoxes. As a printer, Inkster  is already   well  known,   particularly for  his founding of  "The  Porcupine's Quill," a printing/bookbinding shop that  turns  out books of impressive design. The  author of five previous  books. of poems, Inkster car­ ries over  the  printer's  meticulous  care  to the Blue  Angel- poems  that  are created  almost  entirely  by a process of  exclusion, by  statements  of  what   the  poet  is  not. The   result   is.   a  series  of   short,   highly worked   pieces  that  maintain  their  exis­ tence   on   the   slightest   of   all   possible grounds, the  poet's.  integrity   to  profess nothing.  Often   this  insistent   nay-saying has  an  edge  of  humour, as  if  the  poet knows.  that   the  thicker   the  etching   pen, the   bolder   will  be   the  resulting   white spaces. And  certainly this. humour is  nec­ essary,  for  at  times  one  can  detect  the schoolboy's. grin  when  the magician  som­ brely  waves  his cape  to  make  the  entire  world   vanish.   I  confess   to  being   more than   a  little   uneasy  about  Inkster's pre­ tense  of complete  mental control,  which easily becomes  an  affectation, but  in  the better  poems  the realized  success is great,  and   we  have  the  sense  of  an  embattled individual  distilling  a  heady  liquor  from the  last  of   the  lees.  In  the  final  poem there   is  the  fine  image   of  a  man   ap­ proaching down  railway  tracks  "without
leaving  J  footprints." These  poems  leave
small  footprints, but  the  sense of craft  in
the midst  of desolation is powerfully con­
veyed.
The  title  poem  of Ed Jewinski's collec­
tion The Cage in the  Open  Air has as its subject   Ezra   Pound. It is a  remarkable tour   de   force  in  being  both   an  act  of homage to the grand  master and also a demystification of  Pound's own  troubled psyche. Jewinski  traces Pound's drive to conquer new  poetic  lands  to his desire  to gain   his  mother'sjcountry's  love,  some­ thing  which  he never  had  as a child,  and
 which  in the end  led him  to his iron  cage in  Italy,  a  cage  that  Jewinski  suggests  is both  literal and  psychological-a cage in "plain air"  as  Pound, the  lover  of   Pro­ vence,  might have  said.  The   sense  of  a cage   which   is  virtually  invisible   to  the artist  and  yet which  forces  him  restlessly to pace,  to create, is powerfully rendered, for Jewinski has adapted  Pound's idea  of "direct  treatment  of   the   'thing',"  and has  applied it  as a  psychological  as  well as  a  poetic  technique. Yet  both   in  the Pound   poem   and   in   the  later,   shorter poems,  there   is  never  a  sense  of  reduc­ tivism,  partly   because  the  images  are  al­ ways  of  simple  everyday   things,   bathed  in a  new light.  For  example, in  the short poem,	"Recurrence   and 	the    Empty Chair," Jewinski  portrays the artist work­ ing  at  night   to  capture  something that  goes  beyond   the  everyday  recurrence of such  things  as  the  sun  rising;  yet in  the end,   when   it  is  the  sun  who  reads   the poems,  the reader  is forced  to re-examine the entire relation of the artist's imagina­ tion   to  the  world   that   surrounds  him. These  cool, detached poems  also contain a  good  deal  of  humour, as in  the  poem, "She   Discovers    Masculinity,"  about    a little boy on his tricycle, "his horns curved  like handlebars," charging a woman  in a red dress. The  noise of the woman's heels forms  an  antiphony to  the  mad   ringing of   the   tricycle   bell.   As  well,   Jewinski offers   a   number  of   tilts   at   the   "new woman," suggesting  the  force  of  biology is far  stronger  than   the  clenched fist of the  movement.
Among   these  poets  of  sensuality   and
force,  Alexandre Amprimoz stands  out  as a writer  who is both  witty  and  urbane, a poet  who  in "Odes for Sterilized  Streets" is able to use the long tradition of western art  and  architecture in statements about the contemporary situation. In "Words to a Young  Architect" Amprimoz warns  the young man  that,  while Corbusier cubes possess a hard  crust,  "the  rest softens  like

BOOKS IN REVIEW



easy friendship." There is also  much pleasure  to be derived from Amprimoz's sharp  eye  and   even   sharper  way  with words,  as  when   he  describes   the  young girls  from  Toronto who  come  to Winni­ peg as tourists,  especially  one  who  wears a  camera  as  a   pendulum   "against  the reinforced  background   I   of   a   CNE  T-shirt." And  yet for all its sophistication,
this  is a  difficult   book  to  warm   to  as  a
whole.  Cleverness  in   poetry   requires   a high eighteenth-century polish, and in poems such  as "Les  Philosophes" the fine
image  of time  as an  "old  butler  I dusting pride  I off the castle's  walls" is simply not sustained   to  the  end.  Still,  for  the  most part  the  book is a  pleasure  to read, espe­ cially  for  Amprimoz's ability   to  put  his
Mediterranean tradition and  sensibility to
good  use.
Madder Lake  is an  unusual departure
for  Oberon  Press,  being  a  collection   of haiku   by  the  Scottish   poet   Thomas  A. Clark.  Many of  these  are  exquisite,  and will stay long  in  the  memory.  For exam­
ple-"The light    I constraint  of  I the
horizon's rim.  I The small  I pressure  of I
a  wedding ring" -is  a  poem  whose  lu­
minous  pressure  on  the  mind  exactly  re­ peats  the  kind  of  pressure   the  poem  de­ scribes.  And  yet  it  was  perhaps  not  the wisest  choice   to  collect   all   these  haiku into  a single  volume.  Surely  the  poet  like the  novelist   needs   to  learn   to  pace  his reader. For  all  my  delight,  I  found  that  somewhere shortly  after  the  mid  point,  I could   no  longer   distinguish   profundity from   cuteness.  Certainly  the  delightful, small-scale drawings help,  but  one  needs a  larger  context in  which   to  fit  Clark's reworkings of Basho,  Gilbert White,  and the  Compleat Angler.
Like Clark, Jim  Stewart was born in Scotland, but  he has lived  most of his life in   New   Brunswick.  His   So   the   Night World  Spins comes  complete with  an  in­ troduction by Alden  Nowlan recommend­ ing  the  poems  in  part  because  Stewart is
 a poet who "possesses a sense of the past." And certainly this is true, especially in the first half  of the  collection  where  Stewart tells and  retells  stories  of  the  celtic  past in  a  narrative mode  that  captures much of  the mood  of  his own  Scotland. Many of  these  folk  tales  would   be  delightful when accompanied by an instrument. Yet it  is also  a  little   disturbing to  find  that Stewart does  not-as  did  the  writers  of the   nineteenth-century  celtic   revival - attempt to make  the stories  new. Indeed, this is the weakness  of the collection  as a whole,  for  in  the  second  section   where Stewart deals with  his present  day experi­ ence,  the  poems   often   seem  derivative, almost  as if Stewart had  settled  down  to write  in the  style of  Purdy, Cohen,  Now­ lan,  et a!. Too often, as well, Stewart in­ dulges    in   high    romantic   phraseology which falls into  bathos.  Yet when Stewart leaves behind  the  past, he can  write  mov­ ing poetry. "Love  Poem" speaks simply of
a love affair  that  is ending,  while "Clear­ ings:   For  Clifford" is an  eloquent testi­ mony  to a  pioneer  who created clearings  both  in  the  wilderness  and  in  the  spirit.  It  would seem  that Stewart himself  needs such  clearings for  his .own  voice  to  de­ velop.
Wayne   Wright is  clearly   a  poet   who loves language. In The Girl  in the  Brook he writes in a style that  is richly luxuriant of images, and  of images  that  do  not  al­ ways  connect  in  any  obvious  way.  The reader   is kept   often  on  the  far  edge  of understanding,   and    yet   the   surprising thing  is that  most  of the  time the  poems  succeed   in   holding  our   attention  and  drawing us on, as if by a subliminal force. One  is reminded a little of the early Andy Schroeder and  the  West  Coast  Surrealist School.  Perhaps there  is beginning a sim­ ilar  east  coast  school  among the  Break­  water  poets?  Wright also  has  a  puckish  sense of humour in such poems as "Never Mention  Isadora" as well as Dennis  Lee's


147

BOOKS IN REVIEW



ability  to  write  children's poetry  that  is both  amusing and  provocative.
Seasonal  Bravery, Des  Walsh's  second book of poetry, has one theme-stated boldly  but  rather repetitively-the  an­ guish  that   comes  from  a  lost  love.  En­ tirely  concerned  with   the  suffering  "I," these  poems  are  reminiscent of  Leonard Cohen's later  verse  of wounded  feelings, although Walsh  lacks  Cohen's sensuality. The  early  poems  in  the collection  are  by far  the  best, with  the later  pieces  having  a good deal  of the poseur  about  them,  as if Walsh  carne  to  take  self-conscious  de­ light  in  the  role  of  the  suffering  writer.  The  same format for each  poem, a dozen or  so short  lines  of  free  verse,  becomes wearying  after  a  time.  One  ends  by leav­ ing  Walsh  in  his  unreachable pain.
(To this point,  the poets considered  have
been  largely  personal  expressionists,  but the following  writers  place a much greater emphasis  on the documentation of  every­ day  Canadian rural life, a topic  that  has been  of increasing importance  ever  since AI Purdy  led  the  way  with  his  seemingly casual  narrative line.  In  this regard, Rob­ ert   Rilles's    Look    the   Lovely    Animal  Speaks  bridges  the  two  traditions in  the documentation  of  his  struggle   to  break free from  his inarticulate prairie environ­ ment   to  learn   to  speak.  He  tells of how he was brought up without any real struc­  ture  by a father who was forced  to leave his  farm  to  tend  the  government's "con­ crete  gardens." Most  of his friends  stayed
to mark  time, "to  rehearse  I their lives between  the  I job site and  the bars."  But Rilles  needed   to  go  beyond  the  armour of  convention  to  find  a  nexus  between
what  he calls his "garnished self" and  the buried  life,  and   thus  to speak  from  this crux.  The  point  for Rilles  is not  to make a "crystal clear  ending," but to speak  "as a  vowel"  which   "interprets its  own sound." The  attempt is by no means  an easy one,  and  at  the  end  there  is still  a good  deal  of surprise and  irony  in Rilles


q8
 when  he  sees himself  as "the   lovely  ani­ mal"   straight  off   the   ship,   who   has "climbed onto the  I dock"  to  speak.  Al­ though some of the autobiographical pas­ sages  are  a  bit  flat,  the  collection moves powerfully, for  one  can  feel  the  pressure  of  the  self  inching forward  the  mass  of inarticulate experience.
lfhe opening long  poem  of John  Mc­ Auley's  What Henry  Hudson  Found  is a superb  recreation  of  what  Hudson  and his  crew   might   have  experienced  when set  adrift to  die  in I 6 I I. The  characters of  the  men  are  all  highly  individualized, as  are   the  ways  they  meet  death  when winter  finally  overcomes  their  desperate attempts to survive.  It is yet another poem in the narrative tradition that  aims to put some   flesh   onto  rather  cold   historical bones.  McAuley's free  verse  does  a  fine job of  capturing the accents  of the seven­ teenth-century diary  form, and  in the end the sense of historical reconstruction is so vividly  achieved that  one  feels  McAuley must have  had access to secret documents. The quiet  understatement of the  Hudson poem,  however, leaves one  totally  unpre­ pared  for  the  verbal  pyrotechnics  of  the remainder of the  collection -a  series of shorter poems  in  which  McAuley reflects on  how  it  feels  to be alive  in  a scientific and  historical century where  theories  and  ideas  make  the mind  of the  individual a bomb  of  possibilities.  The   result  is stun­  ning  imagery, erudite  reference, all  cou­ pled  with  intentional banality. It is as if McAuley has  reversed   Purdy's   depiction of  the  average man  moving  towards  oc­ casional  moments of illumination to show that  the plethora of ideas and  verbal rich­  ness in  which   we  live  is almost,  but not quite, capable of  blowing  away  the  grey matter that  creates it all.
Greg Cook's Love   from  Backfields  is a collection  of  poems  about   rural  experi­ ence  which  create the  sense  of  a  person groping his way back through the disorder  of emotion to a centre that  no longer  ex-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



ists. The poems  have  the  uncanny ability to suggest the missing quality, while never being able to define it. As Cook says, "Re­
turning is  instinct  f  of  something lost."
He  approaches what  is missing  by using
his "knowledge of option," the  ability  to
play  one  thing  off  against the  other,  al­ ways  narrowing the  gap.  As the  alterna­ tive  would   be  deadly   stasis,   the   poems work   back   and   forth,   indicating  that  something is still  in  process.  As  he  says about  his  family,  "We always   lived   by making up as we went  along." And  so he does still. The  poems  have  an  honesty  to them   and   also   a   kind   of   bleakness - "the  purpose is  not  to deceive" -so that  when  we  come abruptly to a close, there is the  sense  of  a  task  completed for  the time  being,  of persistence itself as an  act of centring.
As  editor of  NeWest   Review  and  co­ founder of The  Camrose  Review, Monty  Reid  is becoming a well-known  figure  in prairie  literary  circles.   In   The   Life  of Ryley, his third  volume,  Reid writes about  the  everyday   life  of  the  small   town  of Ryley:   as he tells of  running jack rabbits
with  skidoos,  losing  fingers  to  machines, and  scarifying  roads,  it soon becomes evi­ dent   that  all  is not  so easy  as  the  title's pun  might  at  first  indicate. Reid  gives a strong sense of the town's occupations and  pleasures,   and   this  is  both   the  strength and  weakness  of the  volume.  Despite  the occasional fine  poem, such  as "Commut­ ers,"  there  is  little  in  the  collection   that  raises it above  the mediocrity of unreflec­  tive  small  town  life.  Here   we  have  lack of  intelligence and  sensitivity  presented as it  is,  and   one  wonders   if  it  was  worth recording. When  Reid  attempts a clinch­ ing  phrase,  it  tends  to sound overworked. The life of Ryley has little  to recommend it.
Of   all  these  poets,  C.  H.  Gervais   in
Up Country  Lines seems the least success­
ful in his attempt to describe  the country and   his  various   travels   through it.  The
 accumulation of detail  is rarely fused by imaginative rendering, and  one ends  by feeling  that   the  landscape needs  waking up,  that  it  must  be more  vital  than  Ger­ vais's quiet  stare  will permit.

RON HATCH


ARIGHT & AWRY

JACK HOWARD, Wry & Ginger. Borealis, $I 1.95. MARIE MITCHELL,  TallyHo! Borealis, $8.g5.
WHEN EVERY  MAN  is not  in his humour, the differences in achievement between wordplay, wit,  and  flaccid  irony  can  pro­ duce  a sudden erosion  of the  spirit.
Wry  & Ginger  is a  collection of  Jack Howard's columns from  the Ontario gov­ ernment journal Topical. In  a  dozen  di­ visions, under such  rubrics as "Wifie, and
Related Irritants" and  "Sour Notes  from an Anglosaxophone," the reader may dis­ cover such titles as "Old Whine  in a  New Battle" and  "Ammonia Burden  A Gilded  Cage." Howard's  humour  is   brisk,   un­ laboured, and  punning; in the main  these pieces  are  sketches   and   anecdotes,  and their  predominant tone  is that  of the wry closure:   "we  are   not  ready   to  go  from  the  sacred   to  the  propane." There  are many  ingenuous  lead-ons and  incidental stories  which  support  old-fashioned fun like  Sadistics  Canada,  "irrelevant never forgets," or a sausage-eating seagull  which is  "a   tern  for   the  wurst." A  character featured in several  pieces is John the Bar­ tender,  a  consummate malapropist  who "reeks haddock on the  English  language" when  egged on by the patronizing, self­ entertaining, and  droil  narrator.
Howard consistently uses the editorial we,  calling  himself  "a plurality of  one," though   the  effect  is never  entirely  com­ fortable; however, there are several clever and  outstanding items amid  the consider­ able   amount  of   indulgence.   "A   Non­  Negotiable Instrument"   amusingly   de-


149

BOOKS IN REVIEW



fends  the  clarinet, and  abuse  of the  lan­ guage   brings   out   Howard's   best   irony. "Sneezer's  Commentaries,"  with   appro­ priate inflections  according to gender  and syllabification,  is  a  sheer   delight.   And what  does one say of a reflection  on con­ temporary   replacements  of  earlier   con­ veniences   that   are   less  effective   which concludes,  Que   seran,  seran?  The   end­  piece,  "The  Offensive End,"  is a  mock­ horoscope   which   despite   its  brevity  has some   of   the   spirit   of  Samuel   March­ banks's  almanac. But  read  all of  a piece, Wry  & Ginger  loses some  of its  sparkle.
Tally Ho! is the story of a woman's attempt to accommodate her husband's initiation into  the  horsey set and  the  ac­
coutrements of  the  hunt,  counterpointed
by the  perils of domestica and  her resent­ ment  at  country living. She  tries  to exert reason   over   the   mentalities  which   sur­ round her,  chiefly  through  the  device  of irony,  her  sense of which  is questionable. Adele  sometimes flatters  her  own  clever­ ness,   though  a   compensating  tone   is an  out-of-character hyperbole.  Unfortu­ nately,  her language is often strained  and unnatural-"'Hi,' said I, in my most effulgent enthusiasm"-and occasionally confusing: her injured husband  "held  his arm  like a tourniquet at the wrist." Some­ times her  formal  language has little  con­ nection  with  the supposed heat of a scene, and  sometimes  she talks like an expository  textbook.
,This pales  beside  the grammatical and syntactical problems with this fiction.
But   the  impenetrability of  some  sen­ tences  and   mistakes  in  punctuation  and spelling   are  symptomatic  of  the  novel's unshakable awkwardness: the horse opera plot  finally  turns  to homicidal conspiracy and  psycho-sexual trauma, quite  at  vari­ ance with what  its intention seemed  to support.
Despite  the   scenes  of  comedy,   Tally H o!  has  no  light   touch  in  situation or narrative voice,  and   its  material  would
 very  much   like   to  have   both.   Readers may  be  offended   by  the  carelessness  in the  production of  this  book,  both  in  its form  and  in  its  content, and  might  turn to Jack  Howard's bartender on  Sir John A. Macdonald, who  was  "very  adapt at speaking on  varicose  subjects."

LOUIS K. MAC KENDRICK


A SENSE OF ALL

GARY GEDDES,   The   Acid  Test. Turnstone, n.p.
ROBERT FINCH,  Has  and  Is.  Porcupine's Quill,
$2o.oo; pa.  $7.95.
GARY GEDDES'S LATEST WORK is filled with signals   that   he  has  at  last  come   to  the surface of  his  maturity. The  Acid  Test resounds with  careful accuracy in the ex­ act  choice  of  language, the  precision  of the  rhythms,  the  respect   for  form.   Not always   had   I   taken   Geddes's   previous  work  as important in  the  mainstream of Canadian poetry; it  seemed  to be cliff use in  its  diction,  the  ideas  were  frequently unclear,  the  forms  reflecting  what,   for me,  were  a  kind  of  dilettante approach to poetry. Quite frankly,  I could  not  take him  seriously,  for  I  thought that  he  was pretending to be a poet, was wearing vari­ ous disguises and  none of them completely worked. At  times,  I did  see a glimpse  of something that   was  solid  and  hinted   at strength, but   the  next   time  I  would   be disappointed. But  always,  I cherished the hope  that  sometime he would  seck to be­ come   the  kind   of   writer   that   his  well­ known   narrative   poem,   "Letter  of  the Master of  Horse"  persuaded me  that  he could  be.
1This collection of poems  concludes, in
revised  form,  with  "Letter of the  Master of  Horse." It is a  fine  way  to  conclude what   is  a   very   fine   book.   This   poem which  will  become-if  it  is not  already
-a major and  significant poem  in  Ca­
nadian letters,   convincingly  reveals   that

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Geddes  can  establish  himself  with  a clear and  unified  poetic  voice. The delirium of his speaker  attaches itself  to  the  rhythm and  form  of the  poem  so that  for awhile the "I" is dismantled into  a state  of  con­ cern  for animals and  others that grips the sensibility of the reader. The death  which "the  Master" sees  around  him   horrifies but  it also soothes,  for  it  brings  him  into a paroxysm  of meaning which  he has not known   before.  He  says,  finally,  that   he "will  come  soon,"  knowing that   he  will achieve  another  state  of  being  and  with that,  he hopes, another kind  of wisdom.
With  "Letter of  the  Master of Horse" as   a   culmination  of   the   feelings   and thoughts of  this  volume   of  poetry,   the other  poems   in   the   book   extend   how Geddes  saw  the  world  in  his  last  book, War  & other  measures.  He  is concerned with   the   psychosis  that   pervades  twen­ tieth-century society,  no  matter  where  it is.  He   asserts   that   disturbances   of  the soul   and   of  humanity are   everywhere.  The  first  poem,  "Tower," shows  a com­ placent   (and    mad) 	killer   waiting    to shoot  his victims  in  the  courtyard below him;   he  feels  "like  a  cat  collecting kit­ tens," the final line of  the poem, presented with  a  casualness  that  leaves  the  reader  utterly  unprepared  for  the  way the scene seizes  the  imagination. This  kind  of un­ expected   jolting  occurs   in  many   of  the poems,  establishing refrains  that   echo  a mind  that  not only sees things  differently  but  also can  talk  about them  in a differ­  ent way. We have been told many of these stories  before,  about the  horror of  inter­ national politics,  Vietnam,  the  genocide  in  Cambodia,  the  arms   race,  ecological manoeuvres throughout the world.  Read­ ers are  often  so familiar  with  these  sub­ jects  that   they  are  dulled  about reading  them  again, not  only  because   they  have heard   it  all  too  often   but   also  because they realize  that perhaps there  is nothing that  can be done about them.  But Geddes will  not  let  that  happen; he  will not  ac-
 cept   the  universal  alibi.  He  reminds   us that   compassion  is  needed,  again   and again,  that  human loneliness  needs a hu­ man  comforter,  that   people  can  see  to­ gether,   think   together,  feel  together  - and stay together. "Sandra Lee Scheuer," a poem  about a girl killed  at  Kent  State University  in  I970  by the  Ohio  National Guard,  reflects   on   the   tragedy   of   the death  of one girl who enjoyed  being kind to  others   and   whose  life  was  relatively
humdrum-just like everyone else's. He reminds   us   that   we   all   approach   the world of the lowest common denominator by the whimsy  of circumstance. It  horri­ fies him;  it  attests  to our  horror.
Geddes  has  written an  extremely  good book here;  he seems  to be able  to do  just about  everything right:  about  people, places, problems. His attitude is deeply perceptive; if  there  is a weakness, it is in the  occasional  echoes  in  language of  the tradition  to  which   he  belongs,  that  ro­ mantic,  lyrical  capturing that  is  intrinsic to  Canadian  poetry,   that   tradition  ex­ tended  by Klein, Layton,  and  Cohen­ all  writers  who,  like  Geddes,  marvel   at the cruelties  of the human condition. The writing  takes  a  reader to the  edge of hu­ man  concerns  by arresting images,  fierce intelligence,  and   a  poetic   language that  forecasts  for  me  that  Geddes  is not  only a poet  to watch  but  also a poet  who  will continually surprise and  please.
One   of  the  poems  in  Robert  Finch's Has  and  Is,  entitled "Summation," con­ tains the lines "'He is modest,' you say, or
'average' or  proud, but  at  each  word  he
melts into  a crowd." The  poem addresses the  problems  of assessing characters, and how  it  is preferred to  "sum  them  up  in an embracing word" (a poem  directed to the critic,  perhaps). For  me, the word  to sum  up Finch's latest  volume-his sixth to date-is "modest" but  not, I think,  in the way the  word  is usually  defined.  The poems in this volume  reflect what  I feel is the important aspect  of Finch's  work and

BOOKS IN REVIEW



of his contribution to  the growth  of  Ca­ nadian  poetry  since 1936, when  he, along with   Klein,    Pratt,  Smith,   and   others, brought  out New  Provinces, the collection  that  heralded modern  Canadian poetry. Since  that   time,  Finch  has  been  "mod­ est": the  tone  of the  poetry  has reflected a man  who  has a  humble  estimate  of his own  merits; as a  matter of fact,  there  is often a self-deprecating wit that acknowl­  edges a speaker who  is both  retiring  and bashful.  The  forms  of the poems-often variations  on   the  fourteen  lines  of  the sonnet -are   decorous  in   manner  and conduct. There is nothing demanding in statement  or  excessive  in  thought. The poetry  is thoroughly unpretentious in ap­ pearance  and   amount.  It   is  solid   and clear,  careful and   coherent. Other  stars may  shine  more  brightly,  but  there  is to Finch's poetry  a  constant light  that  does not waver,  nor spit out,  and  will glimmer  much  longer  than  that  of  others.
The   man   is  a  craftsman chiefly  con­
cerned with form. I have mentioned the sonnet,   and   Finch   is  obviously  most  at home with it, for as a form it comprises approximately ninety  percent  of the  vol­ ume. What is appealing is the way he can use the strictures of the fourteen  line, yet create   unity   when   he  breaks   the  form into stanzas  of varying  lengths, using both the Elizabethan and  Petrarchan modes to improvise on  his  themes.  He  never  goes too far,  and  instead stretches  the form  as far  as it  will  go,  yet  holding  on  to  both the rhythm and  rhyme scheme  to indicate his  respect   and   care   for  the  craft.   His syntax,  also, is developed with  such  care that  at  times it appears almost  too simply moulded, as  though the  words  were chosen  at  random so that  they  would  fit the  mould   that   the   form   dictates;   re­ reading the  poems  reveals, however, that  what  appears as  casual   language   is  in­ stead  an  instinct for  the  right  detail  and the  telling  image.
1Many of Finch's interests  are implicitly
 affirmations  of  his  standards  as  a  poet and   as  a   human  being.   He   says  that "Poems are  tree  and  plant  of your grow­ ing"  in  a  poem,  "A  Certain  Country"; here,   not  only  is  he  talking  of  Canada, but also of the landscape of  the poet  who uses his pen  to create breath for  the pres­ ent and  for the past. He reminds his read­  ers  to look  again  at  the  everyday   things, to  participate in  the  average motions  of the  world,  to see  clearly  the  flowers  and the  sea,  to  glimpse  the  "flood-lit dark." Throughout his work, Finch  projects him­ self into  his subject; he views, he sees, he goes  into   the  world  around  him,  to  re­ create experience not only for himself  but also for  his readers. He sees renewal in  a snowstorm, he  takes  the Romantic credo  of optimism: he sees  in  the  falling  snow a moment when  merging takes  place,  for "Even when  in reverse  the flakes of flow­
ers  f  Whirl  upward to an  everywhere of
spring." His  is  a  poetry   of  ratification,
and  as  the  book  works  toward its  close, Finch's voice  becomes  steadily  more  in­ timate, his  concepts  more   inward.  The  metaphysical eye  sees  mix  in  all  things; he  sees  paradox  around  him,  for  he  is himself  one who  believes but  is full of un­ belief.  The last  poems  harbour spiritual strivings,  those of a man who accepts  the traditional  values  which  were  prominent when   he  was  a  struggling poet   in   the early  thirties and  who  feels it  imperative that  he exercise  his mandate to say it for all  of  us  again.  Finch's obvious   delight with  language   underlines  his   major theme: the continuity of all forms  of life.
These two books are at first studies in contrast, but  I found  that  when  I thought about them  together, there  was a peculiar kinship    between    them:   Geddes's The Acid  Test   reminds us  of  what   violence and  confrontation are doing  to our world, of  how   man   in  his  beginnings  has   the seeds of his own destruction, that compas­ sion  and   love  are  needed   in  our  world.  Finch's Has and Is affirms that if we look

BOOKS IN REVIEW



again  around us with  less jaded  eyes, we may  rediscover   that  which  has  lasted   is with  us, and   will  always  be. A  sense' of self becomes  a sense of all.
DONALD STEPHENS


IN THE GASPE

REAL-GABRIEL  BUJOLD,    Le   p'tit    ministre-[es­
pommes. Lemeac, n.p.
NOEL AUDET,  Quand la voile  faseille. Hurtubise
HMH, $11.95.
G.-ANDRE VAcHoN,    Esthetique pour   Patricia suivi  d'un ecrit  de  Patricia B. Les  Presses  de l'Universiue de  Montreal, $8.g5.

THE  FIRST TWO WORKS, both  novels set in  the  Gaspe,  have  a great  deal  in  com­ mon,  both  stylistically  and   thematically. Bujold's  Le   p'tit   ministre-les-pommes is an  ambitious  attempt  to  portray life  in the  parish  of  Saint-Gildas in  the fall and winter   of    1954-55.   Audet's  first  novel, Quand   la  voile  faseille, is an  even  more ambitious and,  in the final analysis, much more  successful   portrayal  of  life  in  the Gaspe  from   the  192o's  to  the  197o's,  as seen from  the perspective of three  genera­ tions  of   the   same   family.   Despite   the much  longer  time  span  covered  and  the greater  complexity of  its  structure,  Au­ det's  novel  is a  much   more  unified  and coherent  text   than   is  Bujold's  rambling and  sometimes   excessively  nostalgic  col­ lection   of   memories   about   life  in   the Gaspe.   The  third   work,   G.-Andre  Va­  chon's   Esthetique   pour  Patricia  belongs to the  very different and,  in  comparison, highly esoteric  world of literary theory, its very  formal  and  academic tone  contrast­ ing sharply  with  the  extremely colloquial nature of  the  language used  in  the  two novels.  In  an  unusual format for a study of this kind, Vachon presents his aesthetic theories  in the form  of a series of answers to questions ostensibly  raised  by a young student  named   Patricia  concerning the nature of literature (primarily of poetry).
 ;In  Le   p'tit   ministre-les-pommes, the Narrator relates,  in  an  episodic  and  dis­ jointed    manner,  a   number   of    minor  events  in  the  lives of  a  large  number of characters, none  of  whom  are  ever  fully developed. The   reader  of  Bujold's  novel is subjected to detailed accounts of events such  as the  funeral of  a cat  named  Fari­
nette,  the exemplary "demarches ,a !'hori­
zon tale"  of  Graziella  M?mik   (originally
McNichol), and   the  hardships  imposed on  the population by a major power fail­ ure  in  mid-January. The  main  plot  cen­ tres  around  the   local   cure's   dream  of building  a new  church, and  the  political  and  social repercussions of  such a project in  the  Gaspe   under  Duplessis.  In  many ways,  this  novel  is  reminiscent  of  Louis Hernon's  Maria Chapdelaine, particularly because  of  the  importance  accorded  to the changing seasons and  to the effect  of the harsh  climate on the lives of the fam­  ilies of  the  parish.  Like  many   novels  of its  kind,  Le  P''tit ministre-les-pommes is of  some interest because of the colourful language used  by the  characters (and   by the Narrator) but as a novel it is very disappointing, especially  in comparison with some of the other works which  have appeared  recently   in  the  "Roman  que­ becois" collection.
After  publishing two collections  of  po­ etry,  Noel  Audet has  now  tried  his  hand  at the novel.  His first novel is a powerful evocation  of   the   profound   sociological  and  cui tural   changes   which  have   taken place  in Quebec over  the  last forty  years. The  action,  most of which  takes  place  in the  village  of  Bonaventure, on  the  south coast  of  the  Gaspe  peninsula, is filtered  through the  consciousness   of  the   Nar­  rator, who is very much  a product of the Quiet  Revolution,  a  cultivated  man   of letters  who  has  completely rejected the political and  intellectual conservatism of the Duplessis era and the narrow-minded dogmatism of the Catholic Church but who,  paradoxically,  remains   faithful  in


153

BOOKS IN REVIEW



many  ways to the traditional values of his native  Quebec. The   narrative is divided into  four  "recits" which  at  first  do  not seem  to  bear  much   relationship to  each other,  but  which in fact  constitute a care­ fully constructed framework within which the  Narrator  combines anecdotes  about  the  lives of members  of his  parents'  and grandparents'  generation   with   his  own experiences, both  in  the  Gaspe  and  else­ where,   from   Montreal   to  France.  The  first "recit," entitled "Mon oncle Arsene,"  deals  with   the  adventures  of  the   Nar­  rator's uncle  in  the  forties  and  fifties  in­ cluding  such  exploits  as rum-running to Saint-Pierre,  opening a  clandestine  bar, and  chasing  two  sisters  named   Laurette and Graziella, one of whom he later  mar­ ries. A flashback   to  the  I gzo's  and  early
I 93o's,  to the  childhood and  adolescence of "Grazie et Laure" traces the formative years of the  two characters against  a background of Depression-era politics. In the  third  "recit," "!'Arche de  Noe  pele­ mele,"  the  Narrator relates  his  memories  of his father  Ernest-N., the  death of  his mother,  and   his  loss  of   religious   faith.  The  final  "recit," and  perhaps the  most interesting, is  entitled  "Une simple  his­ toire  d'arnour" and  deals  with  the  Nar­  rator's early  adulthood, and  the  transfor­ mations  which  take  place  as he  acquires  what  he  calls  "Ia  culture  livresque," as well  as  his  marriage  to  Heiene and   his subsequent affair  with Alexandra, the last stages of which  take  place  at  the  time  of the  October Crisis.  Throughout this  re­ markable novel,  there  is a sharp contrast between  the language used by most of the characters, particularly  "Oncle Arsene,"  and    the    Narrator's   sophisticated   and  often  very literary style. Many  descriptive passages  are  very  lyrical,  and  the  reader  is constantly  reminded that  the author is a poet. Quand la voile  faseille is above all an extremely readable work whose author displays  very  real  talents  as a  novelist.
In   his  Esthetique  pour  Patricia,  Va-


I 54
 chon  examines some  of the  fundamental questions of literary theory,  such  as what differentiates poetry  from  prose and  how the literary text reflects or "reproduces" reality.  His basic objective is to show how the   poem    creates  meaning-certainly not a new topic but one which he handles admirably well. Basing  some of his argu­ ments  on  analyses  of texts  as different as poems by Paul  Eluard and e.e. cummings and  the first two lines of  Racine's Phedre, the  author of  Rabelais  tel  quel   ( 1977) tries to show  that  poetry "n'est rien d'au­ tre  que  le langage  perpetuellernent, con­ tinilrnent  violente." Some  of  his  conclu­ sions  are  not  always  completely original but do show a high  degree  of understand­ ing of, and  sensitivity  to, the  functioning of  the  literary text.  Among  other  influ­ ences, Proust and  Nietzsche  seem  to have helped  to shape  Vachon's theory of litera­ ture,  particularly with  respect to the ideas that  "Ia  realite  n'a  rien  de cornrnun  avec ce que  nous  percevons habituellernent du rnonde" and  that  "l'ecriture est un  corn­ bat   contre   Dieu."  This   essay  contains many  such  provocative and  thought-pro­ voking  assertions which  will  make  inter­ esting  reading for  anyone  involved  in the writing or the  criticism of poetry.

RICHARD G.  HODGSON


SELF VOYAGES

LILIANE  WELCH,   Brush    and   Trunks.  Fiddle­
head,  $s.oo.
KRISTJANA   GUNNARS,   Wake-Pick  Poems.
Anansi,  $6.gs.
T.  D.  MACLULICH,  Voyages. Turnstone, n.p.

ALL THREE  OF  THESE EXCELLENT  books deal primarily with self-exploration through  confronting  nature,  but   their ideas  about   what   this  confrontation  in­ volves, especially  in  relation to sexuality, and   to  the  sexual  myths  of  our  culture, are  interestingly different.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



The  most   ambitious  of  the   three   is Liliane  Welch's  Brush   and   Trunks,  a book-length poem defining  the New Brunswick sensibility through  three voices:    "a   Hunter,"  "a   Lumberman," and   "an  Acadian." The central voice  is the  Hunter's, who  rarely   uses  any  pro­ noun    other  than    "I."  He   voices   the dream-consciousness, the  libidinous urge, the   violent    passions.   He   is  the   Male  Hunter of Western convention who com­ bines  his  urge  to  kill  and   his  sexual  in­ stincts  in  his  pursuit of Feminine Nature (the injured  cow  moose). He  is also  the male  teacher,  the husband, and  the  male artist for  whom   teaching, espousal,  and  creation    normally  combine  murderous and sexual impulses  toward  nature as well as an intermittent identification with  na­ ture's  pain.
The second  voice,  the  Lumberman's, usually  speaks less passionately at the anecdotal  level,  using  not  only  "I" but also  "we" and  frequently "he." Yet  this voice  also  uses the  dream-violence imag­ ery of the  Hunter, and  it  sometimes  rises to  the   more   generalized   and   historical  perspective of  the  third  voice,  the  Aca­ dian.   The   Acadian  voice less often  uses "I," most  often  uses "we" or "they." Yet this  third   voice,  the  collective  sensibility (as  opposed  to  the  group/ camp  voice  of the Lumberman or the individual voice of the  Hunter),  also  uses imagery  of sexual violence  against nature:
black  beards, burning  eyes, ruthless, reckless,  contemptuous, with   a  dark and fatal tongue
lay  siege  to  Fundy  bay.
In spite of its fierce imagery and mythic eloquence,  Brush   and   Trunks  has   two flaws. First,  its three  voices are  aspects  of a single  persona/myth and  cannot reflect the  whole   of  a  society's  experiences. A little   domestic  affection,  religion,  quilt­ making,  or  fiddling may  have  gone  into  the making of Acadia-even a little  poli­ tics-but  you  would   not  know  it  from
 Welch's  poem.  Nothing of the  French/ English/Indian conflicts is developed. Second,  the  idea   that   the  hunter /killer and   the  erotic   poet  and   the  Canadian spirit  historically  developing are  one  and male is a bias so endemic to Canadian literature that  I am  not sure Welch  is conscious of it as a bias.
What   keeps  Brush  and  Trunks  from
being  as good  as it  nearly  is can  also  be seen in Welch's essay "Mountain  Climb­ ing-Reading-Writing"  in  her  1980
Fiddlehead collection October  Winds.
There she retains  throughout the conven­ tion  of using  the  singular  masculine pro­ noun   to  represent the  human  spirit   as explorer,  thinker,  creator. In  Brush  and Trunks Welch  lets  a  woman speak  but once. Her  woman  calls  her  hunter "Sim­  pleton." I would  like to have  heard  more from  that  taciturn  femininity.
The  most original of the  three books is Kristjana Gunnars' Wake-Pick Poems.  I knew when I saw Gunnars' first two books that,  once she had  digested  her  material, she would  be a very good poet.  (Not  that her   earlier   books   were   immature,  but they relied a little too much on witchy paraphernalia.)  Little girls  who  are witches are  as common as little  girls who are   horsy.  Both   represent  the   feminine urge to mould  and  overpower the brute universe.  Both see Mind  as feminine, and Nature as muscular and  half-witted (the horse, the man). This gyno-mythic bias is thus  the  reverse  of  the  bias  Welch   uses. But  the  world  of  the  witch  is ultimately the same world  as Conan the  Barbarian's
-adolescent, and  I am  pleased  to report that  Gunnars is developing her folkloric material  towards    a   more   sophisticated use.
In Wake-Pick Poems Gunnars explores the effort-filled  development of human consciousness,  with  its feelings  of  "other­ ness," in its relationships to the perceived world  of nature, to social  and  family  de­ mands,  and  to perceived  sources  of dan-


155

:BOOKS IN REVIEW



ger,  power,   inhibition. The   book  is  ac­ tually  three  long  poetic  sequences:  "The Changeling  Poems,"    "Monkshood   Po­ ems,"   and   "Wake-Pick  Poems."   Over­ simplifying    (for   review   purposes)    one might  say  that  these three sequences  rep­ resent  first, birth, the child  as changeling and  changing, becoming human; second, the  adolescent concerned with  questions about  death and  with  perceptions of  sex­ ual  identity, becoming woman;  and, in the  last  sequence, matured  woman,   the knitter-weaver holding the world together with  her  ferocious,  creative wakefulness.  The first  sequence  moves  out  from   na­  ture,   out   from   the   cavejhousejwomb. The   second  is a  trip,  a  new  life-voyage into  the  external  world.  The  third  repre­ sents  the  speaker as  wholly  confined   to her  arduous work,  imprisoned by obliga­ tions  and  passions,  and  yet as a  tremen­ dous, centric power,  like water under  the earth. I  know  nothing else  quite  like  it. The confined  cloth-maker sings:

though i be put  to fulling eternity soak  me,  stiff  &  small
wring me  in  the  doorway
but  leave  me  with  hands to  tie love  for   my  people.

There is  a  good  deal   more  to  Gunnars than   I have  indicated, and  I plan  to  re­ study  these  poems  and  write about  them more  fully  in  the  future. Gunnars  is al­  ready  one  of  our  most  interesting  poets, and  if she can  avoid  quaintness and self­ parody, she  may  become one of  our  best.
'T. D. MacLulich's small collection Voyages  is  the   most   polished   of  these books, though the least ambitious. His are well-written and  well-thought-out poems in  which   emotion   sometimes   moves   to lyric expression  so lovely I can  only hope he will  be more  frequently overwhelmed in the future.
rThe  prevailing  theme   of   voyages  is that  of  the  European immigrant  discov­ ering/exploring  the   new   continent/ex­ periences. Of the two prevailing poetic  or
 symbolic images for the opening up and exploration of the Americas,  Welch  (and Gunnars, to a lesser degree,  in her earlier Settlement poems)   used  that  of  pioneer­ ing as sexual  violence  against nature. But MacLulich  uses  the   alternative  image,  that  of Adamic discovery,  of naming the unnamed, of  filling the  blank  page.  Mac­ Lulich's  immigrant's chores  are  seen  pri­ marily   as  related  to   perception rather than power. Sexual  love is a creative pat­  tern against  violence  (see "The Parents") rather than   a  pattern of  violence.  Mac­ Lulich's new-worlder is not  Welch's rap­ ist. And  his hunter, in  "The Forest," be­ comes  more  animal, more  cunning, more shy,   more   of   a   quarry  himself,    than  Welch's hunter,   whose  blood-thirstiness becomes  that  human sort  we call  bestial.
1The sexual   myths   with   which   Welch and  Gunnars work  represent our  primi­ tive  urges,  predating  ethical  values  and
what   Aldous  Huxley   called   "the  peren­ nial  philosophy" as  the  furies  of   child­ hood   predate  the  adult  mind.  But   the fear  of death and  the  cravings  for  power that   direct   the  energies   of  Welch's   and Gunnars'  protagonists do  not  direct   the voyages  of   MacLulich's poems.  For  his explorers  are  moved  by philosophic  pas­ sion,  which  delights in  the  tiny, domestic  details  of  natural life,  yet  moves  beyond the  organs  of  perception  toward   a Hux­ leyan  enlightenment.  Instead of discover­  ing the self defined  by battle against life's forces,  whether  the  hunter's rage  or  the knitter's  endurance,  MacLulich's  typical protagonist   voyages   beyond   battle.  In "The Vanished Explorer" the seeker:

has  found his  country his  eyes  focus  inward past all  known latitudes his  mind  is too  full  now
to hold  any  further terror.

These delicately complex poems  well  re­
pay  rereading.

M. TRAVIS LANE

BOOKS IN REVIEW



KITCHEN SINK TO TEATRUM MUNDI

LOUISE ROY, LOUIS SAIA, MICHEL  RIVARD,  Bach­
elor. Lemeac,  $6.gs.
LOUIS-MARIE     DANSEREAU,     Chez     Paul-Ette, biere, vin, liqueur  et   nouveautes.  Lemeac,
$6.gs.
DANIELLE  BISSONETTE,   LEO   MUNGER,   MANON VALLEE, Le  Fleuve au coeur. Lemeac, $6.gs.
JEAN-PIERRE  RONFARD, Vie et  mort  du  roi boi- teux. 2 vols. Lemeac,  $10.95 each.
THE  1981  SELECTION  of  plays  published by Lemeac in its "Theatre" series features a  number of plays  by young  playwrights who clearly  follow  patterns evolved  by Michel  Tremblay and  the collective crea­ tion  companies. Theirs is a  "poor"  thea­  tre on all levels. It leaves  the reader  with a  sense  of  disappointment  and  attrition, for  what   we  get  is  Tremblay's  kitchen­ sink realism without the added  dimension  that  gives his plays  their  multiple mean­  ings.   Throughout   the    sixties,   Quebec dramatists   had    made     demythification their  major concern. When  Tremblay formally   closed   his  Belles-Soeurs   cycle, and  the  poetic  drama of Sauvageau and Michel  Garneau made  its appearance, it gave cause  for hope  that  the  family com­ plex  had  finally  been  exorcised.  And  in­ deed   the   jeune  theatre   of  the  seventies veered   towards  a   concern   with   larger social  and  political issues, using collective creation techniques.
Looking at the rg8r Lemeac plays, however,  we must come  to the conclusion that   Quebec  playwrights  are   still-or once  again  -in  the  grip  of  a  "repli  sur soi-meme," with  the small,  everyday con­ cerns  of  the  individual, the  family  or  at best the neighbourhood their  main source of  inspiration. The  characters   may   be convincing, lovable,  usually  pathetic; but the plays definitely lack scope.
In  total contrast to the approach of the young generation, Pierre  Ronfard, one of the  deans  of  contemporary  theatre,  has
 produced   a  colossal  magnum opus,  Vie et  mort   du   roi  boiteux,  presented  here in two large  volumes.  Ronfard's work is comparable to  Goethe's Faust  in  its  all­ embracing sweep through time and space, a neo-romantic "epopee sanglante et gro­ tesque"   (the  subtitle)  in  six  plays,  pro­ logue,  and  epilogue. In  view  of the  cur­  rent  physical  and  financial  restriction   in theatre,  and   the   resulting  aesthetics   of restraint, Ronfard's  drama  represents   a bold  challenge indeed.
Young  playwrights, on  the other  hand, are  fully  aware of  these  restrictions and
have   built   them   into   their   plays.  The number  of characters is small. Monologue has  become  a  popular genre.   Where   a great  number of  characters are  needed, the  play is structured in such  a way that actors  can  take  several  parts  each. Stag­ ing  is simple,   with   emphasis   on   props, rather than  sets.
The  three  plays  under discussion  here
provide a good sample of the scope of contemporary Quebec drama:  Bachelor is a monologue, the self-revelations of a young  woman, a window-dresser at  Eat­ on's,   who  examines  her   life  and   loves while  shaving her   legs  and   performing other    equally    mundane   parts   of   her weekly  beauty routine;  Chez   Paul-Ette removes  the  fourth  wall  from  a  family grocery store,  giving  us a glimpse into  the lives of a  married  couple  who  live  with their  mother-in-law,  and  the  lives of as­ sorted  neighbours and   the  delivery  boy; and  Le Fleuve  au coeur is a feminist  play about rape in the strict collective creation tradition of political theatre. Of the three, the  last is by far  the  most engrossing.
Bachelor (the title refers both to the lifestyle and  the  type of accommodation) clearly follows  the  pattern of Tremblay's La Duehesse  de Langeais; but its heroine lacks the grandeur and  pathos  of the Duchesse. Like Tremblay's play, the mon­ ologue is made up  of two  parts, with  the heroine   keeping  her   illusions,   together

BOOKS IN REVIEW



with  a  stiff  upper lip,  in  the  first  part, and   breaking  down   to  face   the   truth about  herself in part  two. Like the Duch­ esse, Dolo11es excels at impersonations; her repertoire  even  includes   the  Lord   him­ self. The  character comes  through   con­ vincingly;  the   play   provides   a   perfect slice-of-life-but  nothing further.
Chez   Paul-Ette, biere,  vin,  liqueur   et nouveautes again  follows the two-part pattern. Part  one creates  a grotesque,  if compassionate, caricature  of an  impossi­ ble family  situation. Paulo  and  Rejeanne have  been  married for seven  years;  he is much  in love with her and theirs could be a happy  life, in spite  of  the  hardships of running a  grocery   store  which  must  be open  seven  days  a  week,  if it  wasn't  for the   presence    of   Mme.   Robidas,    Re­ jeanne's    formidable   mother.   Although she  is in  perfect  health, Mme.   Robidas  plays  the  invalid  so well  that  the  young couple  have  not  been  able  to  go out  by themselves once in seven years; more than  that,  the  mother's sense  of  enforced   to­ getherness  goes  so  far   as  to  insist  on sleeping in their  room. The author under­ lines the  caricature of  the  mother-in-law by  specifying   that   she  must   always   be played by a man.  Around the family grav­  itate  a number of  neighbours: Mme.  Be­ rube,  a  middle-aged drunk;  Vicky   Pa­ quette, an old maid  who lives in a fantasy  world  where  she  has  to continually fight off   over-ardent admirers; Fran oise,  a stubbornly loving wife who forgives her husband any  callousness  or cruelty.
ffhe second  part  of the play leads to the characters'  eventual  realization    of   the truth  about themselves; one by one,  they sink into  dark  despair, with the exception of  Mme.   Berube,   who  lies  dead   drunk, and   blissfully   asleep,   on   the   sidewalk. "C'est  elle   Ia  bienheureuse,"  concludes the author in a cynical postscript.  Like Bachelor,  the  play  is convincing and  po­ tentially   effective   on  stage;   but  it  lacks both  scope  and  originality.
 Le  Fleuve  au coeur  is definitely  one  of the  more   interesting specimens   of   mili­ tant   feminist theatre.  The   value  of  the book  itself  is greatly  enhanced  by  Claire Bonenfant's "Foreword," as  well  as  the inclusion  of  a  description  by  the  three authors of  the  genesis  of  the  play.  This  description, together with an excerpt  from their  "journal de bord," provides  interest­ ing  insights into  the  process  of collective  creation.
Le   Fleuve    au   coeur   deals   with   the
theme  of rape  as seen by women -which means   in  its  widest  sense.  The   play  ex­ amines  not   only   physical   violence,   but also  the  untold forms  of   degradation  to which  women  are subjected by men.  Part  one  remains  largely  realistic.   Two   close friends,   Francine  and   Lucie,   exchange confidences about   their  men  over  a bowl of salad.  Lucie  is deeply  hurt  over her boyfriend's callousness  and  the way he exploits   her   ruthlessly;  Francine  suffers from her man's total indifference: "Roger, c'est  un  gars  OFF." Eventually, the two women attack a bottle of wine, daydream, scheme  for independence.
Part  two introduces the  theme  proper: Lucie   has   been   raped. Discussing   what has   happened,  the   two   women    recall other    rape    incidents  they   had   known about, but  ignored. These memory  scenes are acted  out by the same two actresses, between   dialogues. They  include "La Sec11etaire mutiiee," the  story  of a young woman  who had her beautiful breasts surgically  removed    as   a   result   of   the trauma she suffered  after  being  raped; "Denis Beaudet"-a "respectable" young man  who expects  his date  to submit  to his advances after   he  has  taken   her  out   to several  expensive restaurants, and  cannot understand why this insistence  should constitute rape; "Johanne Mercier," a young  woman permanently traumatized since  she  was  raped by her  father at  the age  of ten; and  "Tante Rita," a  middle­ aged   wife  and   mother  who  consciously

BOOKS IN REVIEW



pushes the concept of "conjugal rape" out of her mind. These four episodes are underlined with  a "pantomine of fear," which  demonstrates the  constant state  of terror women  live in. The  memory  scenes are  definitely   the  best  part   of  the  play. The  ending which  follows displays all the heavy-handedness usually  associated  with political  theatre, as the  two friends  draw up an agenda for a women's  meeting  and, Nora-like, discuss  the advantages of  leav­ ing  their  men  to achieve self-fulfilment.
Ronfard's Vie et mort  d'un  roi boiteux
provides  a  strong  counterbalance to  the humble  scope and  slice-of-life  naturalism of  much   current  quebecois drama.  Un­ apologetic, the  author has  specified  that the  eight-part work  must  always  be  per­ formed   in  its entirety, either  on  six  con­ secutive  evenings,  or else in  the course of a   breathtaking   "journee   de   theatre," which  would  last  from  9: oo a.m. to mid­  night,  and  include meals  and  "divertisse­ ments   de   tous   genres."   This   approach brings  theatre squarely  back  to its origins as religious  celebration, an  attempt to re­ capture the  spirit  of  the City  Dionysia  in ancient Athens, the  Corpus Christi  pag­ eantry  of medieval  towns.  The  play  is a dizzying  mixture of   contemporary, que­ becois, classical, Biblical,  literary and  his­ torical themes-a densely woven tapestry  of   characters  and   situations  against   a background which  defies time  and  space. A  "genealogy"  provided  by  the  author gives us a clue  to the basic historical link­ ups of the  play;  le roi boiteux  (echoes of Oedipus), named Richard I   (echoes  of Shakespeare), is the  child  of  Franc;ois Ier (Renaissance France)  and Catherine Ra­ gone    (contemporary   Quebec).   Cathe­ rine's   parents,  Filippo  Ragone and   An­ gela Roberge, represent two warring fam­ ilies in a contemporary quebecois  setting.  Angela's   sister   Judith   Roberge  is   the mother   of   a  child   she  abandons  by  a riverside: Moses. Thus the play functions on  a  multitude of  levels  simultaneously.
 The  language reflects  the  eclectic  na­ ture  of the work. Like  Faust, it alternates between  verse  and  prose,  includes  poems and  folk songs, goes from  torrential flow to  pithy epigram. Latin, Greek,  Hebrew, nonsense   words   and   phrases   are   inter­ spersed among the French and  quebecois. Surrealistic  stage   imagery   adds   to   the powerful  effect. The birth  of Richard, for example,  is described as follows:
Catherine Ragone hurle, un  flot  de  sang se  deverse  sur  sa  robe  blanche, Ia  porte est enforoee.  Arrive  un   char  allegorique   por­ tant,  en   son   centre,  un   amas   de   viandes rouges,   et ... dessus,   le   jeune   roi   Richard en  bobette avec  une  chaussure orthopedique.
IThe six  plays  of  the  cycle  are  intro- duced  by a "Prologue" in  which  fifteen characters bring  on  stage  a  huge  wheel of  fortune, with   a  man   strapped  to  it. These  characters include  "a  blind  monk, a  Japanese  geisha,   a  medieval  lady,   a cosmonaut,  an   Arab,   an   elegant   lady, Golda  Meir,  Robespierre, a Roman  war­ rior,  the Ayatullah Khomeini, some chil­  dren,   some  domestic  animals ..."  (live animals   are   a  recurrent  feature  of  the play). Surrounding the  wheel of fortune, the  audience  finds   the  titles  of  the  six plays  of  the  cycle:   La  Naissance  du  roi boiteux;  L'Enfance  du  roi  boiteux; Le Printemps du roi boiteux; La  ]eunesse  du roi boiteux; Les Voyages du  roi boiteux; La Cite  du roi boiteux. With  a gesture  of his  hand  gloved  in  white,   the  tortured man on the wheel points  to the play about  to be  performed, and  the show begins.
Like Faust, Le Roi  boiteux  is an Every­
man  play;  it is also a play about contem­ porary   Quebec,  about    lust   for   power,  about  growing  up,  about  living  and   dy­ ing-but  most  of all, it  is a magnificent spectacle  which  one would like to see per­  formed   in  a  suitable  outdoor  setting­ the   courtyard  of   the   papal    palace    in Avignon,  say,  the  theatre at  Epidaurus, perhaps-the plains of Abraham outside Quebec City  most  definitely.
RENATE USMIANI


159

BOOKS IN REVIEW



TWO-UVA-KIND

K. H. WIRSIG,  Gleebs  of Wizagon. Illustrated by    Enrico    Renz.    Pilouale   Publications,
$13·95·
GARNET  HEWITT, Ytek and  the  Arctic Orchid. Illustrated  by  Heather  Woodall. Douglas & Mcintyre, $r 2-95·

FoRTY-NINE Tom cats, none  the  same  size, had  teardrops in each  of their ninety-eight
eyes.
Tied   to a plank in  an  orderly row,
they  twisted  and  moaned as their tails  hung below.

Thus begins K. H. Wirsig's enchanting Gleebs  of Wizagon, a  book  that  is a  sig­ nificant   step   forward  in  the  history  of Canadian children's fantasy.
Wirsig's moaning Tom  cats are screech­ ing  the  witch-anthem of   Snagratch  the Green,   awakening all  Gleebs  from  their dreams  to  face   a   nightmare  world   in which,  garbed   in  their   "itchy,   identical suits," they are forced  to labour like "little  machines gone  berserk." Snagratch,  the Foremost Advisor of Borumtum, King  of all   Gleebs,   has   obsessed   this   once   re­ spected leader  with visions of material splendour, arguing successfully  that "Re­ spect was alright, but  it couldn't be spent
/ or  gain  kingly  interest   at  ninety  per­
cent."
But   there   is  hope.   The   King's  aban­ doned   daughter,  the   diminutive  Sonya Wee,  has  vowed   to  rescue  her  deluded father.  Unfortunately,   however,   before she  can  begin  her  campaign, she  is kid­ napped by the Collector, a little man who defines  his  existence by placing  everyone and everything in tidy little rows. Though Sonya is ultimately able to escape her curious  captor, she  does so only  after  he has  swept  her  off  to  a  land   where  she finds  herself  totally  at  the  mercy  of  the "things in  the  darkness."  Enter  Whun­ uvakind,  a   thin,   asexual   minstrel   who carries   an   elfin-shaped   cello   which   he both   plays  upon   and   uses  as  a  bow  to


I6o
 shoot  arrows-a  musical  soldier  of  for­
tune  par excellence.
Whun, as he likes to be called,  quickly assures  Sonya  that  she  need  not  fear,  for the legends  tell of the  great  Taliban tree of Soldo  the  Great, the  pomme  of which destroys   Snagratchian  witches.   Though the  Taliban quest  which  the  two  imme­ diately  embark upon  is quite  predictable, the  creatures and  worlds  they  encounter on  their  journey  are  delightfully unique. They   must   confront   Gnarrs,   Loblots, worry-warts,  and   well-beaten  paths,   en­ counters  which  are  described with  a hu­  mour   that    truly   individualizes  Wirsig's approach to traditional fantasy.  Note, for example, the  description  of  Sonya,   just after  she  has  barely  escaped  from  Snag­ ratch's attempt to burn  her  alive:

Sonya  was  thankful the  curse  had  been shattered,
it sank  in  the  water, effectively scattered.
All  that  remained of  that devilish plan
was  a  tired  young Gleeb with  a  beautiful tan.

Finally,  the  two  adventurers do arrive at the  Edge  of  Night, where  they  meet  the Great Soldo.  But  even  in  this  most  pre­ dictable  of  scenes,   Wirsig  provides   the unexpected.  When    Sonya   is  asked   by Soldo  to answer  the traditional three  rid­  dles, she refuses:

"But no!" Sonya cried, "That's a  terrible sham,
three riddles can't show  you  the  Gleeb that
Iam.
Wizagon suffers and  Idon't  have  time
to fiddle with  riddles of  meter and  rhyme."

Nowhere, however, is Wirsig  more  in- novative than   in  his  ending,  for  the  in­ evitable defeat  of  Snagratch   is  actually more  a  beginning than   an  ending. The Edge  of Night is now  the Brink  of Morn­ ing, but  much  is left  to be accomplished. Snagratch's defeat is merely the first step:

Their questions were  many, their answers were  few,
still,  they  both  felt  they  were  starting anew.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Such  a  brief  plot  description can  only hint   at   the  breadth  of  Wirsig's   success. His subcreation is delightfully new and alive,   described   with   a  meticulous and loving  attention  to  language which  has so  long  been  missing  from   such   works. His  couplets   may  become  a  bit  burden­ some  to  casual   readers, but  when   read aloud,  as  this  book  truly  should   be,  the world  of   Sonya  and   Whunuvakind emerges   with   a  life  and   magic   seldom found   in   modem  fantasies.  Wirsig   de­ mands and  rewards careful attention.
The only  criticism  one  might  make  of the  book is that  the  pen  and  ink  illustra­ tions  by  Enrico Renz  are   a  bit  too  ab­  stract   and   busy  for   the   rather  simple story.  They  seem  a  bit  out  of  place,  ac­ tually,  drawing one  away  from  the  text rather than  reinforcing it.
Whereas  the   illustrations  in   Wirsig's book seriously restrict  its overall success, Heather  Woodall's magnificent full-page watercolours provide an  invaluable  con­ tribution to Garnet Hewitt's Ytek and the Arctic  Orchid. The tale  itself,  an  Inuit legend,  tells the traditional story of Ytek's initiation into  manhood, his quest  to dis­ cover  the  reason  for  the  mysterious  dis­ appearance  of  the  Tuktu,  the  caribou. The  answer ultimately is found  in a magi­  cal  land  beneath the  Arctic  ice, the land of  the  Arctic   Orchid.  Here   Ytek  finds Tukturak,  leader  of   the   Tuktu  spirits, who   tells  him   of  Akla,   the   evil   Bear­ demon  who  threatens the ecological  bal­ ance  of  this  world.   The  defeat   of  Akla provides   the  inevitable  final  moment   in Ytek's  maturation rite  as  the  young  boy proves   his   right   to  be   his  tribe's   next shaman.
Though Hewitt's story is well told, it is ultimately undistinguished. Woodall's  il­ lustrations, however,   are  not.  Her  vivid watercolours, orchids  in  their  own  right,  brilliantly illuminate  the  quiet  beauty  of the   Inuit  world.   They   are  among   the
 most   impressive   illustrations  ever   pre­
sented  in a Canadian  children's book. Ytek's   primary  lesson  in   the   orchid
world  is that  "the life of Tuktu and  the life of the Inuit are like one." So, too, are the  creative  instincts of  Hewitt and Woodall,  as  they  provide a  blend  of text and  illustration very seldom  found  in any children's book of any  culture.
The  words  of  Wirsig  and  the  illustra­ tions of Woodall provide  concrete exam­  ples of the  true  vitality of  Canadian chil­ dren's  literature.   And   yet,   their   books should  not  really  be  confined   to  such  a small  audience,  for  they   both  have   the power  to delight  and  enchant readers  of all  ages,  providing that   they  can  appre­ ciate that  which  is truly  magical. Perhaps Whunuvakind says it best when  he speaks of the wonderful age  before  Snagratch:

No one  used  curses  and   no  one  was  hexed for  no one  knew  who would be magical next. Everyone mattered  and   everyone cared
for  magical matters were  commonly shared.

J. KIERAN KEALY


STUDYING FOLKLORE

EDITH  FOWKE  &:  CAROLE  HENDERSON   CARPEN­ TER, A Bibliography of Canadian Folklore  in English. Univ. of  Toronto  Press,  $25.00.
CARMEN   ROY,   Litterature orale   en   Gaspesie.
Lemeac, $29·95·
ALTHOUGH MATERIAL OF INTEREST  to Ca­ nadian folklorists  was collected  and  pub­  lished  as  early  as  the  second  decade of the  seventeenth century, it  was  not  until the second half of the nineteenth century  that   the   first   scholarly  item   appeared, Emest Gagnon's Chansons populaires  du Canada (Quebec, r86s). And  while sci­ entific  collecting of  native   peoples'  tra­  ditions  began  at  the  end  of  the  century  under   the   leadership  of   anthropologist Franz   Boas  (followed   up  admirably  by the  father of  Canadian  folklore  studies,  the late Marius Barbeau), it was not until


161

BOOKS IN REVIEW



I9I I,  when   Barbeau  began  researching French-Canadian traditions, that the folk­ lore of European settlers began  to receive serious  and  on-going attention,  although W.  Roy  Mackenzie in  Nova  Scotia  and Cyrus  Macmillan in  Prince  Edward  Is­ land  had  collected  folksongs  at  the same period,  but  without much  immediate in­ fluence on other scholars.
Under  Barbeau's influence,  folklore studies  in Quebec began  to flourish, lead­
ing to the creation in I944 of the Archives de  Folklore  at  Laval   University.  There,
several  generations of fine folklorists  were taught and  trained by Luc Lacourciere. Although current French-Canadian  folk­ lore  scholarship  seems  to  be  more  and  more    historically  oriented,   opting  for straightforward ethnographic descriptions rather  than   theoretically  based  interpre­ tations  of data, Quebec folklore  remains  the  best documented of all French-speak­ ing  countries or   regions  in   the   world.  Folklore    scholars   are   eagerly   awaiting Lacourciere's  forthcoming  Bibliographie raisonnee   du   folklore   fran ais
rique du Nord, which  will be undoubtedly one of the major scholarly  productions of this century in folklore  studies.
As the  compilers of  A Bibliography of Canadian Folklore  in  English  point  out in their  very useful  Introduction, folklore studies  of groups  other than   native  peo­ ples  or  francophones  tended   to  be  spo­ radic   and   isolated   until   quite   recently.  Until the creation at Memorial University of  Newfoundland in  I968 of  a  Folklore  Department  offering  eventually   degrees in the subject  at the B.A., M.A. and  Ph.D.  levels,  the  discipline  had  no  formal  aca­  demic  recognition in  Canada outside  of Laval   University.  Although  folklore   is now studied  in a growing  number of post­ secondary institutions in Canada, "the discipline has yet to achieve the broad academic acceptance it enjoys  in the United States  and  other  countries."
 This bibliography, listing  almost  4,ooo entries,  will contribute significantly to the growth of folklore studies in Canada. The careful reader will see the breadth and depth   of  research already  achieved,  es­ pecially  in the  last  twenty  years, and  will recognize  that  while  folklore  studies  owe much   to  related  disciplines   such  as  an­  thropology,  linguistics, history   and   lan­ guage  studies,  with  which  there  is always some overlapping, the  discipline stands  as a viable  and  healthy academic subject.
Fowke and  Carpenter underline this conclusion  by  avoiding the  inclusion   of the  numerous popular works  which  pur­ port   to  be  folklore   but  which   are  often ill  digested, garbled and    badly   docu­  mented commercial  undertakings;  works which,  however,  lead  the  general   public into a sad and distorted perception of the subject.  Indeed,  similar  publications in France over  the  years have  led folklorists there to eschew the  use of the word, since it has become synonymous with  the spuri­  ous,  the  quaint, the  antiquated, the  do­ main of witless and hoary old academic codgers and  the  occasional revolutionary revivalist.
The  Bibliography is  divided   into   I4 chapters, essentially  generic.  Generic chapters include those  on  Folktales, Folk
Music    and    Dance,   Folk   Speech    and
Naming, Minor  Genres    (proverbs,  rid­ dles, games, children's lore), Superstitions and   Popular  Beliefs,  Folklife   and   Cus­  toms,   Folk   Art   and   Material  Culture (chapters  4-10).  Chapters-I -3  include Reference Materials, Periodicals and Gen­  eral    (historical,  descriptive,  overviews; works containing more  than one  genre)  ; chapters  I I-I4   include Biographies and Appreciations,   Records,   Films,    Theses and Dissertations, this last a particularly useful inclusion, for while they are  few in number  (I 28  entries), the  more   recent theses  and  dissertations suggest  the  theo­ retical   orientations  of   tomorrow's   folk­ lore  scholars.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Each  generic chapter, excluding the too short  sections  on  Folk  Speech  and  Nam­ ing  and   Minor Genres, are   subdivided into  five  sections:  General,  Anglophone and  Celtic,  Francophone, Indian and  In­  uit,  Other Cultural  Groups. While  some Celts might  balk at being lumped together  with    Anglophone    (i.e.,   English)   and  while  Other  Cultural  Groups might  sim­ ilarly  resent being cast into an anonymous pot,  these  sub-divisions fairly  reflect  the extent  of  collecting and  publication, and  the  overlapping which   has  occurred  in Canadian research. At least  the compilers have  avoided  the  term  "Anglo-Celtic" which  is only one step removed from "Anglo-Banglo." However, since they rec­ ognize   the   "decided  emphasis  on   local and   regional  studies   in  Canadian  folk­ lore,"  Fowke  and  Carpenter might  have considered a  regional or  even  provincial section  which,  without  repeating the bib­ liographic data   of   earlier entries,   could give  the  interested  reader  a guide  to the richness  (or  paucity)  of particular areas. But that  is a relatively minor point.  Given the  rapidly  growing  number of scholarly works  in  folklore   published  in  Canada since   their   I979   cut-off   date,   it  seems likely  a revised  and   enlarged  edition   of the  Bibliography will  be  required within  not too many  years.
iAn equally   minor   point   concerns  the compilers' attempt   to  evaluate  entries. Admitting that  "To annotate a bibliogra­ phy  of this  size would  have  required far more  time  than  we were  prepared to give it,"  they  have  devised   a  rather compli­  cated  code of letters both large  and  small which  attempt  to  give  the  reader "some basic information about the various  items. The  main  division  is  between authentic and   popular  folklore. By  authentic  we mean material stemming directly from the folk and  presented as nearly  as possible as collected. By popular we mean  re-written or  more  generalized material.  Authentic folklore  is indicated by capitals A, B, or
 C, and  popular by P,  plus  in some cases small a, b, or c where entries  include  some valuable  folklore.  Similarly, capital letters are added  to F to indicate the value of the Canadian material in  foreign  items,  and small  letters  are  added  to  G  to  indicate the value of the folklore  in general  items." My quibble  is not with  the minor chore
of  having  to memorize the  values  of  the letters,   rather  it   is  with    the   emphasis placed  on  the  lore,  authentic or  other­ wise.  In  other   words,   the  Bibliography gives no indication of any theoretical im­ port  an article  or book might  have. Thus entry 552 [Jolicoeur, Catherine. "Le Vais­  seau    fantome:	Legende   ·etiologique."  Archives  de Folklore,  II   (1970)] is given a rating  B, presumably because  the  (Eng­ lish language) data includes  "Good  items of  somewhat less  importance." I  would rate  the  English  data   no  higher   than  C, but  that  would  be to miss the  point com­ pletely.  First,   the  title  should   be  under­ lined -it  is a  solid  book  of  342  pages, only  23 pages  of  which  include   English  material-and secondly,  the  book  is  a major   study-indeed, the  major study  on   legend   to   have   appeared  in   Can­ ada.  The  notation is, to say the least, mis­ leading.  The  compilers do  admit, how­ ever,  that  their  "quality  judgements im­ plicit  in  the  A, B, C  notations are  neces­ sarily subjective and  tentative." Nonethe­ less, the system seems to me to be the least trustworthy element in  the  work.
·A final  point  of  criticism,   the  general utility of which  users will have to assess, concerns   the  accuracy of  individual  en­ tries. I give  two examples, both  of  which I  note  because   they  mention  my  name.
The compilers  state  quite  clearly  that  "by
'Canadian folklore' we mean  folklore  that is found  in Canada; we do  not  list titles dealing  with  non-Canadian folklore  even if written  by Canadians or published  in Canada." Yet  their  entry  I254,  an article I published in an English folklore journal dealing  with  a British  army  song sung  by

BOOKS IN REVIEW



a British soldier, has nothing  to do with Canada save  that  I collected  the  song in Newfoundland while its singer was on holiday  there.
The second  point  concerns  entry  334I, an appreciation of the late Madeleine Doyon-Ferland. I am  given as the author of the entry,  whereas  I was only the trans­ lator  of  the  original  (which  appeared in the same issue of the  Bulletin of the Folk­ lore  Studies Association   of  Canada)   by
Quebec folklorist  Jcan-Claude Dupont. These  may  be fortuitous observations on my part, but  it is essential  that  compilers of bibliographies, especially those who use student assistants,  make sure that  all arti­ cles  and   books  have   indeed   been  read,  and  that   (especially  in the  case of  bilin­ gual   journals)  the  proper   author  is ac­ knowledged.
Despite these  minor  criticisms,  Fowke and  Carpenter's Bibliography is the most valuable scholarly   tool  yet  to  have  ap­ peared   dealing with   folklore  in  English in  Canada. It will  provide  an  extremely  useful  source  of documentation  for  years to come,  and  marks  a further step in the consolidation of  folklore  studies  in  Can­  ada.

Carmen Roy  is the  doyenne  of  Cana­ dian   folklorists.  Together  with  Luc  La­ courciere of  Laval  and  Herbert Halpert of Memorial, she is one of only three  hon­  orary   presidents of   the  Folklore  Studies  Association  of  Canada, and  was recently honoured by  the Association  at its annual meeting in Ottawa. Following  in the foot­ steps  of   Marius  Barbeau, this  native  of Gaspesie has devoted her life to the study of  French-Canadian folklore and  to the organization and  development of folklore at  the  National Museum of Man  in  Ot­ tawa,  since  I948. It was in that  year that  Marius Barbeau retired from the National Museum of Canada, and in that year that  Carmen Roy  began  her field  research  for the  Museum on  the  Gaspe  peninsula. In
 I957 she assumed  responsibility for a sec­ tion  of  the  Ethnology  Division  devoted entirely  to  folklore. Her  systematic  or­ ganization of collections,  including work done  by Helen  Creighton,  Kenneth Pea­ cock,  Luc  Lacourciere and  others,  made  accessible a rich documentation, to which she added research  sponsored  by the  Mu­ seum and  her  initiative in  the folklore  of recent  immigrant  groups.   By I g66  her work was so well established that  it led to the  creation of a separate  Folklore Divi­ sion  (along with  Ethnology, History, Archaeology,  the   Canadian  War   Mu­ seum,   and    the   Communications   Divi­ sion). In  June I970, following a growing  interest in multicultural studies, the Folk­ lore  Division  was renamed the  Canadian Centre for Folk Culture Studies, with  Dr. Roy  as its chief.  After seven  years in  this role,  she  was  promoted  to  the   rank   of Senior Scientist at  the  Museum, allowing her  to  devote  more  time  to  her  own  re­ search interests.
The administrative duties  accepted  by Carmen Roy obliged  her to restrict  her collecting, and   her  last  published study, the much  underestimated Saint-Pierre et Miquelon:  une   mission   folklorique   aux iles  (Ottawa,I g62)   reflects  the  growing demands made  on  her  time  by other  du­ ties. For  Carmen Roy  is in  the great  tra­ dition   of  French-Canadian  folklore  col­ lectors,  and  nowhere is her  zeal  and  dy­ namism more  apparent  than in  this  new edition of  her  Litterature orale  en  Gas­ pesie.   First   published  by  the   National Museum of  Canada in  I955 in 3,200 cop­  ies,  reprinted  in   I962  in  another  2,ooo copies, it is remarkable that  a book so manifestly scholarly  should   sell  so  well. The new, enlarged edition comes at the demand of numerous young  scholars  and members of the  general public.
Apart from  some  refinements of a  lin­ guistic  nature, some  added  clarifications, the  new  edition differs  from  the  original by  the  addition of  an  analytic index  of

BOOKS IN REVIEW



folktale  motifs according to the system devised  by Stith Thompson in his Motif­ Index of Folk-Literature (6 vols., Bloom­ ington,  rgss-s8),  and   a  list   of   Roy's singer-informants. The  motif  index  is a particularly   useful    scholarly    addition, while  the  informant list  pays  homage  to many singers who have since died.
Litterature orale en Gaspesie includes chapters on the socio-historical milieu, es­ sential   to  understanding the  lore  of  the Gaspesiens,  on  place   names,  folk  medi­ cine,   traditional  beliefs  and   their  prac­  tice,   the  supernatural   world,  children's lore,  with   special   emphasis  on  rhymes, formulaic  sayings,  proverbs and   riddles, folktales   and  folksongs.   A  lengthy   final section   provides  the   airs   to  tunes   and various analytic and  classificatory tooJs.
The  book is rich  not only in hard  data, concrete  lore.   Although  it   is  the   lore which,  no doubt, made it so popular, and which  remains  both  readable, fascinating and  instructive, Carmen Roy was not sat­ isfied merely  to present the  raw  material only.  She  is aware of  problems  of inter­  pretation and  theoretical questions  which underline  her   familiarity   with   interna­ tional  scholarship -a  feature sometimes lacking in French-Canadian folklore scholarship, at least in works with popular appeal.
It is safe  to say  that  there  is no  other regional  survey in Canadian folklore, in either English  or  French, which  presents such  a  broad  and  substantial portrait of oral  traditions. Thirty years after  its orig­ inal edition, Litterature orale en Gaspesie remains a  work  of  solid  scholarship and will  remain   an  invaluable  research   tool in   comparative   folklore    studies.   More  studies  like  it  are  needed.

GERALD THOMAS
 INTOXICATION

EDNA  ALFORD,  A  Sleep Full  of  Dreams.  Doli­
chan, $8.95.
DOUGLAS  H.    GLOVER,  The Mad    River   and
Other Stories. Black  Moss,  $4·95·
TERENCE  BYRNES,  ed.,   Matinees Daily.  Qua­
drant, n.p.
PAUL BELSERENE,  ed.,  Canadian Short   Fiction
Anthology, vol.   II. Intermedia, $12.95; pa.
$6.95.

EDNA ALFORD's A Sl,eep Full of Dreams deserves its positive  reviews. It is the  best of the four books reviewed  here;  the char­ acters,  situations, and  language  resonate  in the mind  for  a long  time.  A collection of ten stories,  it  has  as its focus  a young geriatric worker, Aria Pederson, and  each story is about  one of  the old women in her care.  Five  of  the  stories  were  published in  various  journals,  and  each  of  the  ten could  stand  alone.  Therefore, the  unity that  we  expect   of  a  novel  is  not  found  here, and  because  Aria does not appear in all the stories, the book does not have  the unity found in short story collections by Laurence, Roy and  Munro, though  the quality of Alford's writing  is good enough to   compare  with   that    of   these   older writers.
1In our  youth-oriented  society,  Alford has taken  on the  difficult  task of showing us  that   there   is  beauty   and   dignity   in growing  old. Avoiding sentimentality, she gives us all the unsavory  details  about old age, and  yet makes  us care  about the  old women  who  are  Aria's  patients. Aria  is a sensuous yet sensitive young woman who values her youth  and  good  health, and  as she learns  to care  about  her  patients, we learn  to care  about her and  them. If there is any weakness in the stories, it is that  we don't get to know Aria better than  we do. But  perhaps only  in a  novel  could  such character development be possible.
The female  patients (nowhere in the collection   is  there   any  explanation  why there   are   no  old   men   in   this   nursing

BOOKS IN REVIEW



home)    are   in  various   stages  of  decay, and  it is Aria's  special  duty  to use a con­ traption  called   a  hoyer   to  bathe   non­ ambulatory  patients.  The   ugliness  and deformity of  old  Miss  Bole  in  the  first story, "The Hoyer," has made  it impossi­ ble for  anyone  to  love her.  The  way she repeats  stories  full  of  gore and  horror  is ritualistic;  just  as  her  ugliness  and   de­ formity  are  exposed  in  readiness  for  her weekly bath, she launches into  the details of endless mutilations and  unusual  deaths that  she has stored  in  her mind.  It is her oblique  way of distancing herself and  her nurse  from  the  ugliness at  hand. Just  as Arla  knows  that  she  will never  get  used to these  macabre stories and  puts  a  "dis­ tance   in  her   voice,"   so  Miss   Bole  has never  got used to her deformity and  must tell the stories to protect her inner  self.
What  Aria   learns   from   Miss  Bole  is
that  "everybody is full of secrets"  and  no one ever knows another human being completely. Miss Bole's  secret  is that  she is an  artist   able  to  create  beauty  out  of ugliness  and  pain.  From  Mrs.  Langland (in  "Tuesday,  Wednesday, Thursday"), an  old  woman  who  refuses  to communi­ cate  in  any  way,  Arla  gets  an  epiphany of  perfect horror:  the  embarrassing be­ trayal  by one's  body,  a  possibility  which is constantly there  for  the old  as it is for the  very  young.  From  Mrs.  Dawson   (in "Companionship")   she  learns   that   one day  in  the  future  she,  too,  will embrace death as her  last  "dancing partner."
Once Arla has learned  everything from these old women  that  they have  to offer, she is free to leave and  live the next stage of her life. These old women are pioneers, "the  first ones,"  and  they don't die easily because  they  are  "used   to  hanging on." Aria,  too, hangs  on. But once  Mrs. Daw­ son, the  one example of a happy old age, dies as the  new year  begins, Arla decides to quit  her  job, move  in with  her fiance, and  sell  her  engagement  ring  to  buy  a decent  bed.  She  knows,  even  if  her rna-


r66
 terialistic parents don't, that  a sparkle  in the eye is more  valuable than  the  sparkle in a diamond.
Douglas H.  Glover's The  Mad   River and Other Stories  will appeal to the kind of   reader   who    admires  Hemingway's heroes,  the  kind  of men  who make "dan­ ger  the  sole  source  of  significance" and the   women    who   despise   the   slightest weakness  in a man. Hunter and  his com­ panions  in   "The   Mad   River"  are   ob­ sessed with risk; the rush of adrenalin that  white  water kayaking gives them  is addic­ tive.  Fear  must  be exorcized  by repeated tests against nature because,  as a younger version  of  Hunter learns  in  "Horse,"  to admit fear   is  to  be  like  a  woman   and, thus, "dirty." A man  must be a hero or he is nothing. Hunter  has  the  awareness at least  to admit to himself  that  what  drives him  is "an  antique motivation" and  that this  kind  of  heroism  is "false  because  it involves  no  necessity  beyond  the  subjec­ tive  and  eccentric volition  of its  bearer." This  realization, however, does not change  his  behaviour or  his  values. Clearly, one who does not share  his values could  easily see that  Arla Pederson's life or Miss Bole's life or  the  life of any of Aria's patients is more heroic  than  that  of  Glover's Hunter. "Hail"  is  the  most  straightforward of
the  seven  stories  and   might   remind  the reader  of  Sinclair  Ross's   stories  except that  here  the knowledge that  the crop is tobacco rather than  wheat  can stretch  the reader's sympathy to  the  breaking point. Also,  the  wife's  decision  that   the  family go  on  a  month-long camping trip  after the hailstorm destroys  the crop  undercuts
the  farmer's misfortune. The  first  person narrative voice  is most  successful  in  "Be­ tween  the Kisses and  the Wine," which  is narrated by a woman  who makes her life into  a little  drama and  whose "amorality is the  parody of  innocence." In  terms  of metaphor  "Pender's Visions"  is the  most noteworthy  of  Glover's stories.  Here   we have  the  artist   (writer)  as outlaw   using

BOOKS IN REVIEW



the  tools of language as weapons  against a  complacent and   authoritarian   society. The metaphor of artist  as outlaw  can  be changed a little  to read  "artist as nigger" except   that   in  a  Canadian  story  "half­ breed"  is  the   more   appropriate   word. Glover's Pender  is  a  half-breed  with  a difference; he  is  "half   Ojibway  with  a weird  condition that  left his skin mottled, an unhomogenized breed." I look forward to more  visions of a resurrected  Pender.
1Visions and   fantasy   are   not   what   a
reader  should  look for in Matinees Daily, edited  by Terence Byrnes.  Neither is  ex­ perimentation  in  narrative   technique  a characteristic of these nine stories; all are fairly conventional, and  no unity of theme or style is evident in  this collection.
The  contributions  of   Edeet  Ross, "Shortly after  the  Incident on  the Haifa­ Tel  Aviv Road," and  Angela Monserrate, "The  New  Lords," are   more  anecdote than  story, and  I was puzzled  by the fact that   in  the  one  by  Ross  the  little  girl's nightmares last only  two weeks. The  mo­ tivation  of   the   wife   in   Sandy   Wing's "Casualties" for  waiting so  long  before escaping from  her  unsatisfactory sixteen­ year-old  marriage  is  not  clear.   On   the other   hand,  in   Miriam  Packer's    "The Helper" concrete details provided about Rustner's office, his clothes,  his wife and her  clothes,  his  preference in  food,  and his manner when  dealing with clients give the  reader an  insight  into  the  mind  and motivation of a social worker  who regards his life as a bitter disappointment. Instead of being  a real  helper  like Aria  Pederson, Rustner takes out  his disappointments on an  old  man  who  reminds him  of his  pa­ thetic father-and  perhaps puts  in  his mind   the   possibility   of  ending  his  own days at the bottom of the  heap  and at the mercy  of  other "helpers." Packer's  story shows   that   the   line   between    pity   and  hatred  is   almost  non-existent.   Her achievement is to make  us interested  in a fairly  unsympathetic person.  If we  judge
 Rustner by the definition  of heroism  (be­ ing a hero "means being stuck  with doing  what's  right")  in  Robert Harlow's  "He­ roes,"  he does  not  qualify.  Harlow's Da­  vid probably  does,  but  that  makes  him  a less interesting character.
Other  stories  are  less  successful,   and
none of the stories in the Byrnes collection are  as memorable as a few  in  the  Cana­ dian   Short    Fiction    Anthology   vol.   n, edited  by Paul  Belserene. But  nor are  any of  them  as slight  as  many  in  Belserene's  book.  Some  of  the  stories,  such as  Steve Wexler's  "Bool  Sheet  on  the Scissor  Ma­  niac  of Mexico City,"  are  merely  anec­  dotes.  A number of  stories  have  nothing in them that  lives up to an arresting open­  ing sentence: for example, "They planted Amanda with  the  usual  pomp  and  cere­ mony"  (in Frances Duncan's "Flowers for the Dead") . Since  most of the  stories  are very short,  there  is no room  for character development or psychological  insight. Whatever impact the stories  have  usually results from the unusual situation chosen: W. D. Valgardson's "Identities" tells in a couple of pages how the police shoot a completely innocent  man;  the  prepara­ tions  made   by  the  protagonist  in  Chris  Redmond's "Preparations"  are  fascinat­ ing  even  though we don't  know  the  mo­ tive  or  final  outcome of  all  his  activity; in  "Demeter's  Daughter,"  the  story  of  a mother-daughter  relationship  gone   ran­ cid, Brenda  Riches  turns  the  Persephone myth  inside out.
Although  a  number of  the  stories   in
this collection  use a first-person narrative technique, it is used  to best advantage in the   stories   by  Lois   Simmie  and   Leon Rooke.  The strength of  "Emily" is that the  action   is  seen   through  the   eyes  of Beth,  a  child   who  does  not   understand the events she observes. At sixteen,  Susan in   Rooke's    "Sixteen  Year    Old    Susan March Confesses to the Innocent Murder of  all  the  Devious  Strangers who  would Drag her  Down" is  not  much   older   in

1lOOKS IN REVIEW



years  than   Beth,  but  in  terms  of  sexual fantasy  and  vocabulary she is an  old pro. She   likes   to   imagine  herself   and   her mother as  seductresses  who  entice  num­ berless  naked  strangers to drown  in  their lake.  She    gushingly  speaks   to   her  "Daddy," who  might   be  one  in  a long line    of   men,    "father/husband/lover," whom  she  fancies and  who cannot resist her  charms  and   her  four-syllable words. The  only competitor she has in this last department is  the  wonderfully eccentric Adele Mauron who, in Ara Baliozian's "Organ Recital," is "obsessed with words" and  would  rather talk  than  make  love.
,In  the  introduction  to  his  anthology, Paul  Belserene  says, "I've invited  people who  I think  will engage  one another and
make for a lively time." He sees the stories
as guests  at a party  and  invites  us to join in  and   intoxicate ourselves.  We  can  ac­ cept    the    invitation   that    he,    Byrnes, Glover, and  Alford  extend  to us; and,  if we  do,   we  can   find   among   these  five dozen  a few stories  that  do intoxicate.

M. G. OSACHOFF


PICTURING OUR PAST

RICHARD  HARRINGTON,  The   Inuit: Life  As  It
Was.  Hurtig, $14.95.
ROGER HALL  &  GORDON DODDS, Canada:  A  His­
tory in Photographs. Hurtig, $24.95.
The  Icelanders, ed.  David Amason and  Mich­ ael   Olito,  with    a   commentary   by   David Arnason. Turnstone,  $14.95.

The  Islands  of Canada, text  by Marian  Engel, photographs   by    J.   A.    Kraulis.  Hurtig,
$29.50.
THE FOREWORD TO Canada: A History  in Photographs provides  the justification for each of these attractively produced collec-­ tions  of  photographs  which,  despite  ap­  pearances,  are   not  designed   simply  for the coffee table. Canada's authors, an his­ torian  and an archivist, explain  that  "The past is infinitely  more complex  and  multi-


r68
 dimensional than  we would expect from reading Canada's traditional written his­ tory,"  and   that   some  of  this  complexity can  be approached through archival pho­ tographs. They   insist  that   their  book  is "not  an   illustrated  history,   nor  is  it  a mock-antique bow  to  the  nostalgia  trade in  photographs.... It is  simply  a  photo­ graphic record  of Canada-from Confed­ eration  (I867)   to Constitution (I981)." In  compiling this record, Hall  and  Dodds  have   rejected   the   "great  figures"   and  "great moments" approaches, to show in­ stead  images  of ordinary people  at  work and  at  play.  The result  is fascinating. I found the pictures of women  at work par­ ticularly interesting, but  the  coverage  of Western   history  and  of the  participation of minority groups  in  building our  coun­  try  is also  excellent.  The publishers and  authors are  to be commended for making this  wide  range of  previously  inaccessible photographic    documentation   available, accompanied  by a lively and  knowledge­ able  text.
I  cannot praise   this  book  too  highly.
When   I  first  picked   it  up,  I  wondered what   audience it  might   be  expected to reach. Because  none  of  the  photographs are in colour  and  there is a fair amount of text, it is not  immediately engrossing; yet once  begun,  it is impossible  to put  down. Although I  would  recommend it  to any­ one interested in Canadian  social history, and   particularly  to  anyone tired  of  the standard Ontario-centred  "searching for roots," I think  it would  be especially  use­ ful  to  an  adolescent  beginning to  think about our  past.
The more  narrowly focussed The Inuit
and  The  Icelanders supplement the wide­ ranging revisionist  perspective and  archi­ val  research   of  Hall   and  Dodds.  Harri­ son's  book  offers  a selection  of some  150 photographs of the  thousands he took on six  lengthy trips  into the  Far  North be­ tween   1947  and  1953.  He  describes   the book   as  "a   tribute  to  the   indmnitable

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



spirit  of the  Inuit and  to the  harmony of their  vanishing way of life."  But it is also an  adventure story,  describing one  man's exploration of another culture and  the harsh  environment that  formed it. Living and  travelling with  the  Inuit, Harrison developed  a  sympathy for  their   way  of life  that  shows  in  his  photographs. Whether depicting good  health and   joy in times of plenty or the almost incredible deprivation  of  famine, these  images  re­ flect  the  dignity  and  vitality of an  alien way  of life, moving  beyond  documentary into  art.
The Icelanders records  a different kind of  journey,  "a journey  into  memory  and myth, a collage of photos, remembrances, poems,  statements and  fragments." It warns   us:    "This  is  not   a   history.... Think of  this  book  as a  poem  about  an­ cestors."  Despite  the disclaimer, this book also  contributes to  the  revisionist  enter­ prise  of  reimagining our  history  through relocating  archival  images   of   our   past that    have   previously    been   overlooked.  The  images  here  include not only photo­ graphs but  also interviews,  poetry,  docu­ ments   and   commentary  relating  to  the Icelanders  who  settled   in   Manitoba  in r875  on  the  shores  of   Lake   Winnipeg. Such  diversity  of  forms  makes  the  book idiosyncratic and discontinuous; it is self­ consciously  a  work  of art,  sharing many of  the  concerns of  contemporary Cana­ dian   literature,  not   only   with   collage structures, but  also with  catalogues, with naming, with the colloquial voice, with poetry  as  a  way  of life,  and   most  of all with  "the way stories get  rooted  in a new land." Nonetheless, it shares  the revision­ ist historian's emphasis on  the social and  working  lives of ordinary people,  an  em­ phasis  that  remains its  greatest strength.
In many  ways, The Islands  of Canada is the  odd  book  out  in  this  grouping. It alone   offers   glossy   colour   photographs and gushy prose, with an emphasis on geography. Yet even  this is somewhat bet-
 ter  than  your  standard coffee  table  dec­ oration, if you  can  get  beyond  full  page photos  of  cute   little   rabbits   and  state­ ments  like:  "Islands in  their  nothingness are everything to us, the heart of our  his­ tory  and  the  home  of  our  imagination." The   pretentiousness  and   conventionality of   this   book   irritated  me,   particularly after  the  real  sense of discovery  I  felt  in reading   the  other   three.  Yet  even  here, there  is an  interest in  recovering lost his­ tories and out-of-the-way places and  peo­ ples for  the  mainstream, and  in  making the inaccessible  available to a wider  range of  Canadians.

DIANA BRYDON


WEAVING

DOROTHY K. BURNHAM,  The Comfortable Arts: Spinning and  Weaving in  Canada. National Museums of  Canada, $19.95·

CANADIANS, OF  COURSE, are still trying  to find a common factor that  can bind  them together  and  now  they  have  at  least  one in this simple,  handsome book. Dorothy Burnham has  taken  and  presented the homely arts-as she points  out,  they are usually called crafts -of the people who have  created Canada:  Indians, Doukho­ bors,  Ursuline  nuns,  Highlanders,  Ger­  mans,  American  Loyalists,  etc.  She  has given  an   off-beat   history   lesson  in   the culture of  Canada.
She   tells  of  how   Indians spun   their
thread by rolling  fibres on their  thighs;  of how  habitants and  voyageurs  braided in a way peculiar to Quebec, not known anywhere else in the world; of how some mid-nineteenth-century census reports in­ cluded   the   number  of   bolts   of   hand­ woven cloth  with  the  number of  chickens and   pigs on  a  man's land;  and  of  how Nancy Carmichael paid  her weaver  John  Campbell an  extra  fifty  cents  to  weave her  name  into  her  coverlet in  Middlesex County,  Ontario.


r6g

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Burnham is  described   at  the  back  of her book as "one of Canada's greatest authorities on  textiles" and  this ignorant reviewer   has   no   reason   to   doubt    the claim. She  may  not  be skilled as a writer, and  she admits that  she isn't,  but she is a
writer   who  can  speaof  a  tapis     .a lan­
guette   and   a  rigid   heddle   or  a  niddy­
noddy  with  complete assurance.  She  can also slip into  this palaver some quite charming incidentals like the one accom­ panying   the   photograph   (all  are  black and  white)  of  the  Tabby with  boutonne coverlet   woven  in  Kamouraska  County, P.Q.:

Its  history is   that  about  1863,  at  Ste. Anne-de-la-Proctaiere, Alida  Thiboutat grew and    processed   the    flax,    spun  the    linen thread,  wove   the   coverlet,  and   won   first prize  with   it  at the  Quebec Provincial  Ex­ hibition.

Normally that   would   not  drive  you  out of your seat  in a burst  of excitement, but it  is a  diversion   from   the  rigid  heddles and   the  niddy-noddies. And,  mind  you, she  does  drop   the  diversion   right   there and  get on with  the "boutonne patterning on the ground weft," but that  is to be ex­ pected   and   we  are  grateful for  the  re­ freshing  incidental.
Not  long  ago   the   Metropolitan  Mu­ seum of Art in New York gave a stunning show  titled  5,000  Years  of  Korean  Art. What   stunned  was  not  just  the  beauty  and   sophistication,   gentle  humour  and grace  of the exhibit, but  the memory  that  only  too  recently  we  sent  our  bombers  and  soldiers  over  there  to ravage  a civili­ zation   far  more  sophisticated  than   our own. Oddly, this came  into  the reviewer's  mind  when  faced   with  the  outstanding, few   examples  of  Doukhobor  art,   par­ ticularly  a bed sheet  of hand-woven linen trimmed with  lace  as fine as gossamer. It is difficult  to see the  creator of  this  bed­ sheet  or  her   neighbours turning  up  on front  pages  of newspapers looking for  all
 the  world  to see like  nothing more  than arsonists  and  eccentric strippers.
Essentially, this is the surprise in The Comfortable Arts. It does what  history books  or,  in  fact,  intelligent propaganda should  do:  draws  a light  across  the land. This was  not  its intention, which  was  to bring  a  short  visual  history  of  a  wealthy
variety of  arts  into  one  comprehensible book.  It succeeds  well.

MARY MCALPINE


WAR & AFTER

MAGGIE HELWIG,  Walking Through Fire. Turn­
stone, n.p.
SEYMOUR  MAYNE,  The  Impossible  Promised Land: Poems  New  and  Selected. Mosaic Press/Valley  Editions, $•4-95i pa.  $7·95·
ANDY WAINWRIGHT,  After  the War: Poems and
Stories. Mosaic Press/Valley  Editions,
$12.95; pa.  $6.95.
R. H. RoBBINS  HAS WRITTEN, "Germany was  the  classic  land  for  witchcraft":  be­ side the  tortures of the witch-hunting In­ quisition in  Europe  during the  fifteenth to seventeenth  centuries, the  methods of the Nazi Holocaust seem almost  merciful. In   recreating  a   witch-hunt,  which   she places  in Trier in  I485,  the year after  the papal  bull of Innocent VIII that  licensed the  inquisitors, Maggie Helwig  convinc­ ingly keeps  the  perspective of  her  period. Walking   Through  Fire   is   a   narrative poem  for  voices -the  voices  of victims,  accusers,   judge   and   executioner caught up  in  the  superstitious  faith,   fears  and  delusions that  ruled  them all. Interspersed bleak  prose  passages  record  the "process" in its  black  absurdity, so heightening the pathos of the  individual voices affirming, denying,  agonizing.  This   is  history   re­ enacted, free of the contemporary colour­ ing  that  might have  tempted, and  which the  blurb   misleadingly  suggests,  with  its emphasis on  the  victimization of women.  The witches' worship of moon-goddess or

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



earth-mother  accords with  pagan  belief, no  more.   Maggie  Helwig's  restraint  of style  and  attitude  achieves the  more strongly   a  moving evocation of  an  epi­ sode  which,  as Auden   thought of  Ausch­ witz,  might  seem  an  evil  beyond  poetry. This  is an  assured  and  promising debut  by a twenty-one-year-old student.
Seymour Mayne  is  another poet  who
dares  still  (as  Auden   himself  did)   chal­ lenge with words "the perennial outrage." His "New  and  Selected Poems "are mostly selected,  from   volumes  published in  the rg7o's,  but   this  substantial volume  gives readers   only  passingly   familiar with  his work a chance to take stock of his achieve­ ment.  Mayne's free  verse  is tight,  reined in.  Though he  tends  to  eschew  conven­ tional  punctuation, his  line  and  stanzaic structure  are   usually   logical   and   clear. Occasionally,  where    speaking  anecdote gets  the  better of  expression, as in  "Da­ vid"  and   "Mick," or  where,  as  in  "He  who  hides," the  short   lines  seem   unre­  lated  to sense and  rhythm,  the free  form becomes  inert,  shuffled  prose or a stutter, but  there  are  few such failures. His spare style  is strongest  in  the  sequences  "City  of   the   Hidden"   and   "Strength  in   the Stone,"  celebrations of  love  and  Jerusa­ lem.   His  imagination  quickens   to  sun, rock, "springs of light," the  prophet's pas­ sion  and   purpose   that   can  still  animate
"the  petrified I mouth of history"-but
with  a  Jewish  and   modern fatalism,  re­
newed   by  the   Holocaust  whose  victims
he constantly remembers. There is a  sto­
ical sense of exacting destiny in the search for "the  impossible promised  land  I where all the  refugee  words  I are  gathered and
make  shelter" ("Abraham Sutkever") -
a  poet's  unending pilgrimage, in  a  land that  is both  Israel  and  all  lands  that  can "not be possessed as  yet  I by peace."
To  adapt words from  his remembrance of  Henry   Wentworth  Monk,   "the  Lau­ rentian wilderness I [is]  not  [his]  prom­
ised land": Canada, where  it is most felt
 in  over  a hundred poems,  by a  "fearful city imagination," is an  uneasy setting  for an ingrown  Montreal Jewish  community. We enter  this from many angles in the numerous poems  remembering,  portray­ ing,  honouring  family  members, valued  friends,   "characters"  and   fellow-artists. These,  almost  a  third  of  the  whole,  knit present  to past, link the dying generations the poet's  gift is  bound  to preserve-be­ yond  the "burning synagogue." Mayne is a  strong  elegist,  most  notably   in  the  in­ dignant  cry  against   death of  "For J-C. Robichaud, Student  ( 1952-76)" and   in "Zeydeh," with its affirmative close:
the  light  rose
with  the  loud  wail  of the  Laurentian
morning and  its  clamouring insects.
The  Jewishness  is never,  as in the Layton he  admires, strident  or  strutting:  there are  a  few  Laytonesque attempts  at  wry humour, but  these  are  strained and  un­ typical; rather, Mayne has  at  his  best  a restrained "etiquette" (to  borrow a  word from  his "Melech Ravitch"), a spare  de­ corum   upon   which   he  can,  as  his  own poet, stand  beside Layton and Klein.
After  the War  contains thirty-two short poems, two  short  stories,  and  opens  with a self-explanatory Preface which  leaves little  about  the stories  to the  reader's im­ agination. (The  cover  also  quotes  arch  praises  by Purdy  and  Layton,  embarrass­ ing  puffery.)   The poems are at  their  best in what  Wainwright calls "my  customary compaction and  paring down  of things," where in the conflict with fear, doubt, the muddle   of   "reality,"  the  answer   is  "ar­
range  it all  I there  is control I not  chaos
here." Notable are  the  elegaic  "Genesis,"
the  title  poem's  sharp probing of mental confusions,   the  tender strength of  a  fa­
therIson  poem,   "The  Other  Country,"
and  a handful of incisive  political  poems.
The closing piece, "The Other," is about the elusive self, never  quite  here,  or  any­ where  in  time -a  frequently  suggested  theme, so much  so that  this poet assumes

BOOKS IN REVIEW



no  strong   identity, and  this  may  be  his metier.  However,  the   reader's   engage­ ment  is often  needlessly confounded by a wilful  avoidance of  helpful   punctuation
-a common contemporary  practice, of course,  but  less controlled in Wainwright than   in  1vlayne,  often   obstructing  com­ munication of quite straightforward mat­ ter. The prefatory comments on  the stor­ ies   almost    disarm   criticism.    "Desire" works  modestly  as  a  memory  of "place/ time"  and   a  state   of  suspended   erotic  feeling  conveyed  in  avid  sensuous  recol­ lection, in which  narrator and subject merge   as  in  an   unfulfilled   dream.  "Is­ lomanes" has  more  pretensions  to ortho­ dox  story-telling, though   with  a  Fowles­ like technical twist:  Richard, the protag­ onist,  is again  a  seeker,  exploring in  an island   retreat  his   need   of   an   absent  friend, the  poet  Michael.  He  comes  to recognize  that  Michael uses him  and  de­ cides  that  he  will begin  to write  his own "legend."  The  style  is,  as  the   Preface  promises, carefully attuned to the  mind's movement, but  the  poet  is a contrivance of cliches whose absence  is a relief. Wain­ wright's  preoccupation with  the  teasing relation between  "reality" and "fiction" is often   a   private  pursuit,  excluding  the reader.
MICHAEL THORPE


IN REMEMBRANCE

SUZIE  MURRAY, La  Mere  morte. Nouvelle  op­
tique, n.p.
ANTONINE   MAILLET,   Cent    Ans   dans   [es  bois.
Lemeac, n.p.

IT  IS  PERHAPS UNFAIR  to  review  Suzie Murray's La Mere  morte and Antonine Maillet's Cent  Ans dans les bois together: one is a first novel, the  other  the  product of an established  writer  with eight novels, ten  plays,  several   short   stories  and   the Prix  Goncourt  to  her  credit.  My  com­ punctions are  the  greater as I  have  little
 positive to say about La Mere  morte. The book  appears to  be  a  pastiche of  Anne Hebert's Le Torrent, Marie-Claire Blais's La  Belle  Bete  and   Les  Nuits   d'Under­ ground, and   Jovette   Marchessault's  La Mere  des herbes, without any of the origi­ nality   and   forcefulness  of  these   novels. Murray's book deals  with  the spiritual re­ birth   of   a  young   woman, interweaving "en  pieces  detachees" moments from  her tormented childhood and  scenes from  her present    life   which    she   shares   with   a woman  about to give birth.  It is not quite clear  just  what it  was  that  poisoned   the protagonist's youth,  but  it seems that  she was dominated and  sexually abused  by an overpowering woman  (not   unlike  Clau­ dine  in  Le  Torrent) who  hated  all  men and   all   the   physical   vestiges  of   female  weakness,  who  forced  the  narrator  to de­  test  her  own  body.  Her  memories  of  the crimes    committed    "dans   la   chambre jaune" against  her  awakening sexuality  eat  away  at her  like a cancer; she speaks of  her  companion's child  as if  it  were  a malignant growth, a  succubus  much  like her own  remembrances. As the book pro­  ceeds,  hope  for  renewal announces itself in  the  shape of  a  mysterious  man   who offers food,  wine,  and  solace  to the  trou­ bled   women. The  child    is  born-at Christmas-time, needless  to say-into an atmosphere  of   renewal  and   peace   re­ gained.  La  Mere   morte   is  written  in  a heavily  symbolic,  hyperbolic  style border­ ing  at  times  on  the  ludicrous.  The  land­ scapes  in  the  novel  are,  for  instance, in­ variably brooding, wild, and  forbidding; the  beach,  as  the  startled reader   learns,
feels  "a la  fois  dur   et  tiede  comme   un
sexe d'homme tendu." There is a juvenile
wallowing in  images  of sickness and  de­
composition, "C'est un monde  de femmes pourries, nourries d'un  sang  semblable a
une   mare   d'eau  pleine   de  dechets,   de cadavres en  decomposition. Je  seme  la
corruption partout ou  je vais." Consider­
ing  the   intelligence  and   technical  bril-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



liance  of much  of Quebec's recent  wom­ en's   fiction,   La  Mere   morte   is  a  self­ indulgent exercise  that  should  have  been left  unpublished.
In Antonine Maillet's Cent   Ans  dans les  bois, we  are  dealing with  a  different kind of fiction  altogether. Her subject, instead  of personal confession,  is the col­ lective  memory  of an  entire  people;  her style, instead of using psychologizing sym­ bolism, draws  on a rich oral tradition; her point  of view, avoiding the  solipsism of a single  outlook, combines layers  of narra­ tive voices and  imaginary dialogues in an attempt at  evoking  the  complexity of Acadian history.  Cent   Ans  dans  les bois is a sequel  to Pelagie-la-Charrette ( I979), recently  translated into  English  by Philip Stratford as  Pelagie:  The Return to a Homeland. While   Pelagie  described   the
178o   odyssey   of  a   group   of  Acadians making their  way back from  the South  of the   United  States   to  Acadia,  after   "le Grand Derangement" (i.e., the Expulsion of  I 755) , Cent   A ns  dans  les bois speaks of the emergence, about I88o, of the Aca­ dians  who  had  been  hiding in  the  woods of  New  Brunswick  for  over  a  hundred years.   This   emergence   climaxes  in   the first   Acadian   convention,  in   I88r,  at Memramcook  where  a  college  had  been founded earlier in the century, helping  to revive and  preserve  the  Acadian cultural heritage. In  illustrating the  Acadian  ren­ aissance   during the   nineteenth  century, Cent   Ans  dans  les  bois  joins  two  plots, held  together by  the  overriding concern  of keeping history alive in a people's  stor­ ies.  One  narrative strand  of  the   novel deals  with  the  search  for  a  treasure. As soon   as  the   inhabitants  of  Fond-de-la­ Baie   have   emerged  from   their   hiding­ places  in  the  woods,  they  begin  to  look for  a  mysterious chest   but   find  only  a barrel  of liquor on the beach. So far  their search  has  been  guided   by  bits of  infor­ mation, orally  handed  down  from  their ancestors. Their  luck   improves  when   a
 Frenchman arrives,  a  "survenant" (and a positive  version  of the  arrogant  "Fran­
<;ais de la France" in such  novels as Car­ rier's  Le Deux-Millieme Etage)  from  the sea,  who  teaches  the  Acadians  to  write,  thus giving them  the means  to add, to the wealth  of their  imagination, the power  of precisely  recorded  knowledge  and   com­ munication.  The  Frenchman  helps   his Acadian   students  to  find   their   treasure although it  turns out  to be something of
a joke .a la Don  Quixote: it appears, from
a document found, that  the city of  Phila­
delphia   belongs   to  the   Acadians; as  a result,  they  ought   to  be  the  masters   of the English.
The  theme  of communication through
the written word  also dominates the sub­ plot  of the  novel,  a  love  story,  much  of which  centres   upon   a  letter  written  by p,elagie-la-Gribouille   to   her   daughter's suitor. Pelagie-la-Gribouille, a descendant of  Pelagie-la-Charrette,  tries  to  prevent marriage  between   her   daughter  Babee and  Pierre  Bernard because  he is a sailor; as such  he  represents an  element   of  in­ certitude and  unreliability that  P·elagie­ whose  name,  ironically, suggests  the  sea
-rejects instinctively: the trauma of the "Great Disruption" has  taught  Acadians the value of belonging  to a place, of  sink­ ing  roots  into   the  ground. In   previous novels, Maillet had  conceived   of  the  sea as a life-giving element; in Cent  Ans dans les bois, her  opposition of sea  and  earth  is an  important  variation  on  the  theme  of exile versus attachment to the soil that  pervades   so  much   of   French-Canadian writing    (in   her   I976   play   Evangeline Deusse,  Maillet  explored   the  Acadians' exile  in  comparison to that  of other Ca­ nadians, e.g., the Jews). The influence  of women in establishing a tradition by pro­ viding  a sense  of  continuance has  been significant   concern   all  through  Maillet's oeuvre,   the   most   popular  one   perhaps being La Sagouine, the charwoman. Aca­ dian  history,  as  Maillet has  explained in


173

BOOKS IN REVIEW



an  interview  with   Books  in  Canada, is that  of a  matriarchy, "Acadie  is female, its virtues  are  all on  the side of patience, a sense of time, some kind of interiority, more  viscerale  than  cerebrale."
When  Pierre  renounces  the sea in order to  be  able  to  marry  Babee,  he  finds  the treasure, as  it  were,  that  the  people  of Fond-de-la-Baie had  been  looking  for  in vain:  a   settled   home.   La   Gribouille's efforts  to  keep  her  family  together   are reflected, on a larger  scale, in the Acadian convention in  Memramcook where  Pela­ gie pleads  for "la culture de la terre, salut de son peuple." In  describing the gather­ ing,  Antonine Maillet  practises  the  pre­ cision of the recorded word that  her char­ acters   learn   to  appreciate  as  the  novel proceeds:  the  descriptions are  footnoted with  references  to authentic sources.  Yet Maillet does  not  relinquish  the  humour created by the fictive characters' supposed  comments on  the  sermons  preached and speeches  made at  the convention. In fact, their   reactions-questions,  puzzlement, laughter-serve  as  a  corrective  to  re­ corded   history.  A certain   P.  Poirier,  for instance, bewailing the endless miseries of Acadia, has difficulty  making  himself  un­ derstood over the arrival of the delegation from  "la  baie Sainte-Marie": under  their jackets,  they  hide  "veuzes  et  accordeons qui,  sous  !'agitation  de  la  foule  qui   se pressait  pour leur  crier  Ia bienvenue, lais­ serent  echapper quelques notes." The  dy­ namic  development of dialogue,  its need for expansion, correction, clarification, its use   of   persuasive  strategies,   determine much   of   Antonine  Maillet's  narrative style. Although her  characters are  illiter­ ate  peasants as the  novel opens, the  tales of Jerome le  Menteur are shaped by an instinctive knowledge of  rhetoric and  an anticipation  of  his   audience's  response whom  he  expects  to  be as  active  in  the weaving of his stories as he is himself, "lei le conteur de  Ia  lignee  des  Belonie  s'ar­
veta  pour   respirer   et  laisser  le  temps  a
 ses comperes radoteux de protester contre cette   monstruosite...."  Controlling  the many  voices  of  Cent   Ans  dans  les  bois, although  unobtrusively so,  is  that   of  a sophisticated implied  author who, for in­ stance,  comments on one of Jerome's per­  formances as  follows,  "II  melangeait les circonstanciels de  temps  et de  lieux,  pre­  nait  une  causale   pour  une  finale,  et  ac­
crochait des  propositions relatives   a des
completives a des subordonnees, en parse­
mant son  discours  d'imparfaits du  sub­
jonctif ... Des subjonctifs au  plein  coeur du  Fond-de-la-Baie de  r88o!"
It is  perhaps the  irony  and  self-con­ sciousness  of this  controlling voice,  more than  their  universal symbolism and theme,  that  saves Antonine Maillet's novels  (spe­ cifically   Pelagie-la-Charrette   and    Cent  Ans  dans les bois)  from  the reproach of parochialism.  Indeed,  Maillet  has   time and again  insisted that  she is not a region­ alist writer,  that  her literary Acadia is the world    in   nuce.    Maillet's   protestations point   toward   a  catch-22   typical   of  the post-colonial writer's  situation,  perhaps only  to be  overcome  by official  (i.e.,  po­ litical)  recognition  on  a large  scale such as the  Prix  Goncourt.

EVA-MARIE KROLLER


*****   Contexts  of Canada's   Past:  Selected Essays   by   W. L.   Morton,  ed.   A.   B.   Mc­ Killop.  Carleton  Library  No.    123;   Oxford,
$9-95·    This may survive, if not  as W. L.  Mor­ ton's greatest book,  certainly as his  most  char­ acteristic. The essays  it  contains  project more  subtly than his  large  volumes  the  outline of  a warm  personality  and    a   mind   exceptionally sensitive and  varied in  its  perceptions. They recollect  his   life,   they   show   his   feeling  for places   and  people,  but   they   also   reveal   the special characteristics  as  a  historian that  dis­ tinguished him  from  his major contemporaries, Donald Creighton   and   Frank  Underhill. Creighton and  Underhill, though one  of  them  was a Tory and  the  other a Radical, were  both  essentially  Ontarians with   centralist  views  of Canadian history. Morton, intensely loyal  to his western  links,  was  perhaps the  most  determin-

NOTES



edly   regional  in   outlook  of   all   the   notable Canadian  historians. And   in  these   essays  one sees  how  his  regionalism is  based, not  only  on the  long  history of  the  west's subordination to central Canadian  interests, but  also  on  a  life­ long  love  for  the  west  as  the  land of  his child­ hood,    the   land    to   which  his   loyalties   were lifelong.  Reading  these   essays,   I  knew   why Margaret Laurence's voice  was  so heavy  with sorrow   when she  rang me  up  to  tell  me  that this  great man, who  was  her  friend, had  died.

G.W.

****   DENNIS  REID,  Our   Own Country  Can­ ada.    National   Gallery   of   Canada,   $29.95· This is a  major study   of  the  classic  period   of Canadian  landscape painting  which  began   as the   catalogue  raisonne  of  an  exhibition  with the  same   ti tie  which the   National  Gallery of Canada opened in  November  1978   and   then  sent   touring the  country. The achievement of the   Group of   Seven   in  giving  Canadians  an easily   understandable   visual    codification   of their  country was  so  complete  that   for  many  years   the   great  surge   of   landscape  painting which  emerged  in  Ontario during the   186o's  and  reached its  peak  when the  landscape mas­ ters followed the  CPR into and  over  the  moun­ tains,  was almost forgotten. Perhaps one  of the reasons    for   this   near    oblivion  was   that,  as Dennis Reid  points out, the  landscape painting of Krieghoff, Legal'e, and  their contemporaries before   I86o   had   been   conceptual, which,  es­ sentially, that   of  the  Group of  Seven  became.  But  the  landscape painting between  r86o  and  r8go  was essentially perceptual, and  one  of the most  fascinating aspects of  Our  Country Can­ ada  is the  way  Reid   traces the  connection be­ tween the  fine  early   Canadian  photographers, notably William Notman, and  the  new  ways  in which    the   leading   landscapists  of   the   time,  many   of  whom   worked  in   the   photographic studios, saw  the  landscape of  their country as they  moved  westward with  the  advancing rail­ ways.
G.W.

***   ROBERT W.  PASSFIELD,  Building the  Ri­ deau  Canal:  A  Pictorial History.  Fitzhenry & Whiteside, $24.95.    If Ottawa  had  not  begun  with   the  strange name   of  Bytown, it  is  likely that   we  would   know  even  less  than the  little we do  about Colonel John  By. Almost  nothing has   been   written  about   him   personally,  and  even  the  history of  the  Rideau Canal and   its construction has  been  so  poorly   recorded that  we   are   left   with    the   image  of   the   elusive
 Colonel   as    an    incompetent   manager   who grossly  overspent his  estimates. In fact,  By was a first  rate  engineer who  did   much  better  un­ der   very  difficult conditions  than  most  of   his fellow canal  builders. He  had  to deal  with wild country hard  to  survey, with   the  difficult cli­ matic and   geological conditions  of  the  Shield country,  with    incompetent   contractors,  and  with  the  malaria that 150  years  ago  made   the land   between the  Ottawa  River and  Kingston almost   as  deadly  as   the   Maremma.  Yet   he completed a splendid  waterway (while it  may have   outlived  its  economic  and   military  im­  portance) that  remains as  a  handsome artifact which still-whether fluid  in summer or frozen  in  winter-gives  great  pleasure to  thousands of  people.  Building the  Rideau Canal: A  Pic­ torial  History   makes  up  for  a great  deal  of the neglect. It is  an   excellent  narrative  of   how the  Rideau was  conceived and  planned, and  it is  greatly  assisted    by   the   survival  of  a  fine series  of drawings and  watercolours, mainly by Thomas  Burrows  and   John  Burrows,   two   of By's   best   civilian  assistants.  This   has   made possible  a  pictorial account of  the  Canal that, after the introductory section, goes almost  lock by lock, calling on  the  engineering records for details of  the   actual  building techniques and the  conditions of work.  It is a fine contribution to  the  history  of Canadian transportation,  be­ sides   doing    justice   to   a   neglected    historic figure.
G.W.

****   JAMES w.  sT. G. WALKER,  A  History of Blacks  in  Canada. Ministry of State for  Multi­ culturism, $8.so.    Designed as  a  study  guide for  teachers and  students, this  is  much more: a mini-history; an extensive bibliographic guide to  books,  articles, and  other  resources; and   a set of reflections on prejudice, community, and  identity. Topics  range from  slavery  in  Canada (including an  account  of  the   Mohawk chief­ tain  Joseph  Brant's slaves), fugitives, Loyalists, and   immigrant  movements, through  accounts of  public  policy  and the  effect  of various Public School   Acts,   to   the   role   of  the  Church  and the   Canadian  impact  of  the   American  Civil Rights Movement. Walker is clear throughout, and  quietly persuasive.
W.N.

**  HELMUT BONHEIM, The Narrative Modes: Techniques of the   Short Story. D.  S.  Brewer,
£I 7.so.     Few  Canadian  readers of  the  short story   will  find   the   critical  techniques of  this book familiar, nor  the  book  itself  easy  to  read, though half  the  examples are  drawn from  Ca-


175

NOTES



nadian literature.  (The other half  are  English and  American.)  Unabashedly "Teutonic," the author  says,   his   method  is  formalistic,   ana­ lytic,  categorical, statistical.  Basing   his   work in  the   language  and   theory   of   linguistic  dis­ course,   he  isolates four  "modes" of  narration (description, report,  speech,  and   comment), examines various  attempts to  systemize   them, then   proceeds  to  a  set  of  examples that  illus­ trates  various   combinations  of   these   modal  elements-in  the   beginnings  and   endings of short   stories.  Statistical  tables,   based   on   300 stories  and  50  novels  from  each  of "Canadian" and  "Anglo-American" sources,  record the  in­ cidence of  particular  starting and  closing  de­ vices-which	Bonheim   calls    "anteriority," "habituality,"   "epanalepsis,"    "polysyndetic," etc.   Some   readers  might  wish   to  know   that while  74% of  the  Canadian stories   (and xo% of  Canadian novels  written  during the   Igoo­ I940   period)  start  with   habituality, 61%  of the   Anglo-American  stories  and   36%  of  the
 


COMING FOR TO CARRY

by Lorris Elliott


A  warm, sensitive and funny novel, about the trials and tribula­ tions  of  a  young  Caribbean man  who attends university in Canada.

ISBN   0-88795-019-1                   $8.95


Order direct  from:

novels  do.
 W.N.
 Williams-Wallace,
229 College St.

***   JEAN-PIERRE BONNEVILLE,  Marc-Aurele
Fortin en Gaspesie. Stanke, n.p.     Painters who
portray  the   character  of  a  region  will   have
much   to  say  to  people   beyond  it as  well.  This brief   account  of  Fortin's bicycle   trip   to  the
Gaspe   in   the   1940's is  beautifully illustrated with   thirteen of  the  oils  and   watercolours he did  at  that time.  Fascinated by boats  and  rocks, his  blue   houses   seem  at once  perched  by  the sea  and   sailing through  the  landscape. These are  vigorous drawings, bold  and  alive.
W.N.

**  LUO ZEWEN et  a!., The  Great Wall. Hur­ tig,  $29.95·   The  Great  Wall   is,  of    course, China's -a decorated defense scheme that has lasted   for   thousands of  generations  and   cap­ tured  the   imagination of  foreigners  and   Chi­ nese  alike. There were  walls  before  it,  as  this profusely illustrated   popular  history  acknowl­ edges; but  none  was so compelling a symbol  or so successful a barrier. Kilometre by  kilometre, the   text    takes   us   on   an   illustrated   tour­ which  makes  the  book  particularly useful  as  a school   library teaching  tool.  Its   diagrams are  clear,  its   variety  of    illustration  remarkable (paintings, photographs, statuary, manuscripts, maps,  silks-much drawn from  Chinese hold­ ings,  and presented under the  guidance of  the Cultural Relics   Publishing House in  Beijing); the  photographs and  prints are  least  helpful­ sometimes supernumerary, often  dark, the  col­ our   discrimination of  the  prints  not  as  sharp
 Toronto  M5T 1R4







Out-of-Print

CANADIANA BOOKS

and

PAMPHLETS





HURONIA-CANADIANA BOOKS
BOX 685

ALLISTON, ONTARIO LOM  lAO

Catalogues  free on request

or  as  true as  it ought to  be.
 w.N.






THE WEST INDIES & THE LITERATURE OF MARITIME CANADA

NEAR THE BEGINNING OF Hugh  MacLen­ nan's  Barometer Rising, it  is  made  clear that   the   Wain   family   fortunes  rest  on inherited privateering  money  and  on the profits  of  the  West  Indian  trade   devel­ oped  by the family after the War  of 1812. "Exchanging  dried   apples   and   fish  for rum,  tobacco, and  molasses,"1 generations of  Wains  have built   the  family  import­ export  business  into  a  solidly  prosperous venture.  "Not  rich   by  American   stan­ dards,"2   they  nonetheless enjoy  a  hand­ some  house   in  Halifax's  class-conscious south  end and  "for  five generations" have been considered "leading citizens"3 in the town.  It is fitting, therefore, that  over the living-room mantle there  hangs  a map  of Jamaica, a  visual  reminder of the  source of the family's  privilege  and  its pride.
1While little   detail   is  provided in  Ba­ rometer   Rising   about  the   Nova  Scotia­  West  Indian  connection, the  very  pres­ ence  of  the  islands   in  the  Wain  family background not only illustrates an  impor­  tant  side of  Maritime financial and  fam­  ily  history  but  also  provides  an  insight into   Hugh   MacLennan's  informed    un­ derstanding of the social and economic traditions of his native Nova Scotia.  From the beginning of seventeenth-century Brit­ ish settlement in the Caribbean and along the  Atlantic coast,  a  mutual  trade  and interdependence  had   grown  up as  fish, lumber, and  livestock  were exchanged for rum,   molasses,   and   sugar.4      While   the thirteen  colonies   dominated  the   North American  side   of   this   trade,   until   the
 American Revolution, settlements like Halifax   ( 1749),  Liverpool ( 1759), and Yarmouth ( q61) early  in  their  histories began to transact business with the West Indies.  The   Maritimes  were  never  able to outcompete the American states in producing goods and  vessels for  the Car­ ibbean   market,  but   in  periods  like   the American Revolution or the War of 1812, they  enjoyed  the  commercial  advantages offered  by Britain's  monopoly  on  the  is­ lands'  trade. Thus,  it  is consistent   with historical  events  in  Nova  Scotia  that  the Wain  family  in  Barometer Rising  should make  its  fortune  in  privateering during the War of 1812 and  that  the bulk of that  fortune should  be invested  in an  import­ export business with  the Caribbean.
It  is one of the ironies of the  West  In­ dian  trade  that  few  Maritimers  involved  in  it  in  the  eighteenth  and   nineteenth centuries   had  either   the  time  or  the  in­ clination  to  give  imaginative  expression  to  their  experiences in fiction,  poetry,  or drama. Merchants like Simeon Perkins  of Liverpool  kept  careful account  of Carib­ bean  transactions in  their  journals,5   and sailors  plying  between   the  provinces  and  the  islands  preserved a  body  of chanteys like "The 'Flying Cloud.'" However, few images of the islands or what  they meant  to Maritimers emerge  from  these conven­ tional  poems  and  prose  sketches  that  in­ form  the  modern reader of the impact of the  Caribbean trade on the lifestyle and imagination of the Atlantic region. Com­ ing to Prince  Edward Island  from Skye in
1803, Bard  Malcolm Ban  Buchanan con­ cluded  his  poem  "Emigration of  the  Is­ landers" with a tribute to the settlers' new "isle  of contentment" on  this  side  of  the ocean.  Not  only a land  where  "oats  grow
I and  wheat, in  full  bloom,"  it is also  a place  where  "There is fresh  red  rum  I in
every  dwelling  and  shop,  I abundant  as
the stream,  being imbibed  there." 6
Such   references  to   the   West   Indies' most  popular export   to  the  Atlantic re-

OPINIONS & NOTES



gion  are  frequent in  early  Maritime  lit­ erature, especially   in  Halifax  where  an eighteenth-century  wag  noted  that  "the  business  of  one  half   the  town  is  to  sell rum and  the other  half to drink it."7  Cer­ tainly, the ready availability and influence of  grog   impelled   Thomas   McCulloch's Mephiboseth  Stepsure  to  speak   out   in The   Acadian  Recorder   in   I82I   against the  many  visitations   made  by his neigh­ bours to Mr.  Tipple's  well-stocked  estab­ lishment.  Such "strolling about  and drink­ ing"8 leads many  of the  townsfolk of The  Stepsur,e   Letters    into   financial    depen­ dence   on   Calibogus,  the   West   Indian merchant  (whose   name   comes  from   a New England drink  of cold  rum  and  un­ sweetened  beer) . Calibogus  benefits from the  West  Indian trade in a double sense for he not only imports the rum that get the  townspeople  into  difficulties  in  the first place  but he also buys up their  mort­  gages when demon rum has done its work. As  Stepsure  ironically expresses  it  else­ where  in  the  sketches,  "an  invitation to drink" usually  ends  up  being  "an  invita­ tion  to  something else."9
Given   the   absence   of  a   large   body of eighteenth- and  nineteenth-century imaginative literature about  the West In­ dies-Maritime connection, it  is  fortunate that  the  letters  of  Mather  Byles  m  have survived  with  their  personal descriptions of one Nova Scotian's life in Grenada be­ tween  qgo and  I8o2. The  great-grandson of the Boston  theologian, Cotton  Mather, and  the grandson of  the satirist,  Mather Byles, Sr., young  Byles was a Loyalist liv­ ing in Halifax and  Fredericton  before he decided  to take a position  in the West In­ dies. A somewhat ironic  poet  in  the  tra­  dition  of  his father and  grandfather, he also  wrote  lively  letters  home  describing  every stage of his  journey from Halifax to the islands:

T o'
miles  was  not  one  of  the  pleasant things I
have   met   with   in   my   pilgrimage, I  con-


qB
 trived to  keep  my  body  &  mind  in  tolerable good   order. The  number of  bottles I  had stocked  myself   with   contributed  much  to the  one,  &  Blackstones commentaries to  the other-the  last   bottle of  the  liquor &  the last   page   of   the   author  were   thoro'ly   di­ gested before I had  finished my  wanderings
&  with   less  substantial  resources I  should certain! have  quarrelled both  with  my compamons &  myself.   Fortunately I did neither.1°

Byles's residence   in  Grenada ended  in I8o2  when  he  became   a  victim  of  con­ sumption.  However,  during  the   dozen years  he  lived  on  the  island,  he  kept  his family   in  Halifax and   Boston  regularly informed  of  his  daily  activities  and   of social  events  that  might  be of interest to their  circle.  His  life  was  the  comfortable one  of  a  colonial   civil  servant   and   his discretion as well as his desire to entertain undoubtedly  influenced  both  the  content and   the  tone  of  his  letters.   Nonetheless although  he  rarely  commented on  politi cal  events,  the  plantation system,  or  any other topics  which  undoubtedly  preoccu­ pied  him  in  a  professional  capacity,  he left in his personal communications to his family   an   interesting  insight   into   the architecture,  work  habits,  and  social  life of middle-class Maritimers who sought business and  government opportunities in the  islands  during the  economic  depres­ sions  which  afflicted  Nova  Scotia  in  the eighteenth and  nineteenth centuries:

As  for   descriptions  of   this   part  of   the world I take  it for  granted that an  old  mar­ ried   woman  with   two  children  cares   very little  how   it   looks   in   the   West-Indies­ However  in   the   towns   I   have   visited  the buildings are  of  brick  &  stone -the  houses  high, the   streets  narrow,  and   the   grounds as confined as  your  own; for  land  is so valu­ able   that   the   building  lots   are   cut   up   as small   as  possible  -This  does  very   well  in Halifax  where you  are  obliged to  employ a servant  during half   the   year   wheeling out  snow,  but it  adds greatly to  the  heat  of  this sultry  climate, and   strikes   a  stranger as  the  most    injudicious   mode  of   building  they  could  have   adopted. The house  I at present inhabit  fortunately  fronts  on   the   publick

OPINIONS  & NOTES



square which   gives  it  a  great advantage in point of coolness-it stands a hundred feet back  from   the   street; the   yard   in  front  is protected, and  shaded by a large & beautiful sand  box  tree-on  the  right hand and  left are  the  offices, &  rooms  for  our  nine  domes­ tick   servants  which    are   built   of    brick   & roofed   with    tiles-the   house   is   of   hewn  stone-you  ascend  by  sixteen  stone steps,
& a large folding door opens in  to the  galery which  is 40  feet  by sixteen &  lighted by six windows four of  which   fronting the  square are   without   sashes   and    secured  only   by shutters which are   never closed   but  at  bed time.  From the  galery a  door  opens  into the dining hall,  lighted by seven  large  windows, two  of  which   are  in  the   partition that  di­ vides  the  hall  from   the  galery and  are  with­ out   sashes   that the  air  may   have  free cur­ rent.-The  rooms  are   about  14  feet  high, without ceilings which  an  earthquake would  shake   about  our   ears,  and  in   most   houses paneling is preferred to plaister for  the sides. The upper story  is  divided into four  cham­ bers,  in  one  of  which   I lucubrate and  sleep
-tho precious little time  is allowed me for the   former,  as   our   hours  of   business   are from   Y2   past   six  in  the   morning to  sunset and   I  generally feel   myself   too   much   fa­ tigued by  the  time  they  are  over  to  do any thing but  roll  on  a sofa-a  luxurious  piece of furniture, &  calculated altogether  for the climate.11
While  Byles's sofa may  have  been  "cal­ culated ... for  the  climate," many  Mari­ timers  going  back  and  forth  between  the Atlantic region  and   the  West  Indies  on shipping, mercantile, or  military business found  themselves ill-suited  to  the sudden  changes  in climatic conditions which  they had  to experience. Logs, letters, and news­ papers  report how  frequently Maritimers fell  victim   to  "West   Indies   fever"  and popular imagination long  held  the' mem­ ory   of   Nova    Scotian    poetess   Griselda Tonge whose  "Lines Composed  At  Mid­  night,  On  My  Passage  To  The  West  In­ dies ..."  reached  Windsor in  1825 con­ current with  the report that she had  died from  fever in Demerara. Less is recorded, however,   of  what   must   have   been   the shock  and   misery  of  the  more  than  five hundred  Jamaican   Maroons  who   were settled  in  Nova Scotia by the British  gov-
 ernment in the summer of I 796. Viewing the resettlement of the Maroons as an ex­ pedient   way  of  dealing with  a  political  problem,  the Colonial Office little thought of  the  disastrous  psychological   effects  of uprooting  people  from   a  warm   climate  and  distinctive cultural environment and re-establishing   them    on   the   cold   and rocky  shores  of   Halifax. Settled   around "Maroon  Hall"  in  nearby   Preston,   the Jamaicans spent  several  bleak  years there  before  a  large  contingent of them  joined disillusioned  black  Loyalists  who  had  al­ ready  sailed  to Sierra  Leone.12  Neverthe­ less, a fragment of the Maroon population remained   in   Preston,   appearing  from time  to  time  in  early  prints   of  Halifax and  forming part  of  the black population mentioned  in   nineteenth-century  trave­  logues and  prose accounts of the  city.
Of all the regional writers who have referred   to the  West  Indies-Maritime re­ lationship in their  work, Thomas Raddall is the one  who has most  frequently made the  trading and  privateering connections between  the  two areas  part  of the  narra­ tive and  cultural fabric  of his fiction. The  snugness  of  pre-Revolutionary Liverpool in His Majesty's Yankees lies in the "West  India trade" where  "our  trading brigs ex­ changed   their  fish for  what   was  offered there,  salt  from   Turk's  Island, molasses from  Jamaica or  some  other   of  the  In­ dies,  with  a  few  seroons   of  indigo  and  some log wood now and  again.... On the way home,  too, our  vessels put  into New England ports  and  sold what  West  India stuff they could  in exchange for dry goods and   grain   and   cider   and   potatoes  and  apples   and    turnips  and   other    garden sauce."13 From  time  to  time,  the  pattern of  this  trade   is broken  by hostilities,   re­ sulting  in "prisoners  from  the  Caribbees, strange,  sad,  swarthy  men  in  outlandish garments"14   coming  into  towns  like  Liv­ erpool  as prisoners  of war during the Na­  poleonic  era.  As Raddall describes  them in  stories like "The Passing  Show," these


I79

OPINIONS & NOTES



refugees  from  wartime skirmishes  attract "the  bright curious glances of the healthy Bluenose  girls,"  while  in  the  taverns "bearded  and   ear-ringed  seamen   drank their ale and  spun  long yarns of hurricane and   the  yellow  jack,  of  sea  sharks  and land  sharks   and   the  busy ship-worm of the warm  seas that  broke men's  hearts  at the  pumps,   of  fights  ashore   and   float under  a burning sun, and  the lotus  bfe of the  islands  where  rum  flowed  like water and   every  night   was  Midsummer's  Eve and  none of the girls was shy."15
Of  all  Raddall's  descriptions of  the Caribbean connection, the  most  detailed lies in  Pride's Fancy where  the  relation­ ship  of  Lia  Dolainde and  Nathan Cain unfolds  against the  backdrop of a bloody slave  uprising in  Haiti at  the  end  of  the eighteenth century. While Raddall's novel draws  a  vivid  picture of the  breakup of the plantation system on the island du i g this time  and  of the violence and  politics surrounding Toussaint l'Ouverture's move for power,  its Foreword articulates the author's sense  of  historical  continuity  as he describes  the links between  Nova Sco­ tia and  the West Indies. Liverpool is typi­ cal of many  sea-faring communities in its relation to the islands, Raddall notes, and  after  the French Revolution its townsmen were  characteristically  active   in  sailing the waters  of the Caribbean under  letters of  marque granted by the governor  of the province:

During the  long  wars  which  followed the French  Revolution  a   good   many    seamen from    my   town   cruised  in   the   Caribbean under letters of  marque issued   by  the  gov­ ernor of  Nova  Scotia. A few  got  rich.  Most of  them  gained nothing but  a  romantic  ex­ perience,  the    risks   being   more    than  the rewards. Some   perished in  battle, some  of yellow  jack  in  the  islands, some  by the  com­  mon  hazards of  the  sea. Fortunate ones  sur­  vived   the   wars  and  lived  out   their   days  as seamen,  woodsmen,  farmers,  or   merchants in  the  long   peace  afterwards. One   of  them  struck up  a  friendship with  the  black  king Christophe,  after  the   passing  of  Toussaint


18o
 and Dessalines, and  for years enjoyed a semi­ monopoly of  the  coffee   trade out  of   Haiti. Another  (my   wife's   ancestor)    founded  a prosperous timber-and-shipbuilding firm  and  died   a  deacon of  his  church. At  least   two served  their  province in  after years  as mem­  bers  of  the  legislature. Another built  a  col­ lege  and a temperance hall,  and his widow bequeathed  the   land  on   which   our   town hall  stands. And  there was one  who founded a bank  and  died  the  richest man of his  time in  British   North  America.16

1The town  hall still stands,  as Raddall notes  here,  and  so possibly  does  the  col­ lege,  the  temperance  hall,  or  the  bank. The record  of history  does not  lie  wholly in  buildings,  however, and  Raddall's un­ derstanding of his town  therefore directs  him  to  the  everyman-figures  who  sailed from  their  home  province to  the  Carib­ bean  over  a hundred and  fifty  years  ago ("Most of  the Nova Scotia  privateersmen were  men  of  simple   trades   and  humble destinies") Y   Leaving an    unvarnished record  of  memories and  language in their logs,  letters,  and  diaries,  these  men  h ve  given  Raddall and  others  the foundatiOn  on  which   to  build  imaginative interpre­ tations of Maritime-West Indian  history. Their past illuminates Nova Scotia's pres­ ent.  Or,  as Thomas Raddall  expresses  it in  lyrical  as well as literal  terms: "More than  one garden" in Nova Scotia  "blooms actually  in   West   Indian   soil,  brought north  as ballast  in  the  days of the Carib­ bean  trade."18

NOTES

1 Hugh  MacLennan,  Barometer Rising    (To- ronto: McClelland & Stewart, 1969), p. 19.
2    Ibid.
a   Ibid.
4   C.  Bruce Fergusson, "The  West  Indies and the  Atlantic  Provinces: Background of  the Present Relationship," in  The  West Indies and  The Atlantic Provinces of  Canada (Halifax:  Institute of  Public Affairs,  Dal­ housie  University, 1966), p. 24.
5   Simeon Perkins, The  Diary  of Simeon  Per­ kins   (Toronto:  The Champlain  Society, 5 vols.,  1948-1978).

OPINIONS & NOTES



6   Margaret MacDonell, "Bards on  the  Polly," The Island   Magazine (Fall-Winter 1978), p. 37·
7    Thomas  H.   Raddall,  Halifax,  Warden  of the   North  (Toronto:  McClelland &  Stew­ art, 1971), p. 65.
8  Thomas McCulloch, The  Stepsure Letters
(Toronto:  McClelland &  Stewart, 1960).
9   Ibid.
10  Mather Byles  to  Rebecca  Almon, 6  April
1790,   Byles   Papers,  typescript,  MG1   Vol­ ume  163,  Folder 2,  54,  Public  Archives of Nova  Scotia, Halifax, Nova  Scotia.
11  Ibid., PP· 57-58.
1z   Raddall, pp.  121-23.
13   Thomas H.  Raddall, His  Majesty's Yankees (Toronto:   McClelland &  Stewart,  1977), pp.  37-38.
14   Thomas Raddall, At  The Tide's Turn  (To­
ronto: McClelland & Stewart, 1971 ), p. 54·
15   Ibid.
16 Thomas Raddall,  Pride's Fancy   (Toronto: McClelland &  Stewart, 1974),  p. xii.
17 Ibid.
18  Ibid., p. xi.
GWENDOLYN  DAVIES



CARIBBEAN REVOLU­ TION & LITERARY CONVENTION

"It took  place in a  foreign  country, as every­ thing  does."    Margaret  Atwood:    "Circle/ Mud Poems."

CONVENTIONAL  WAYS OF  LOOKING at ex­ colonial   cultures  mainly    just   reinforce colonialism,  or   are   unknowingly  neo­ colonial : this is the basic message in Mar­ garet  Atwood's  Bodily Harm and  Austin Clarke's The Prime  Minister. These  nov­ els not only decry  the  political naivete  of tourists  in  the  Caribbean, who  see only postcard  prettiness or its underside, racial violence; they also challenge the linguistic  naivete  of   those  who  would   ignore   the political volatility in the region  to write of it  in  an  inappropriate  language.
 Both novels are  by outsiders  about out­ siders.  Clarke,  an  expatriate  Barbadian living  in  Toronto,  writes  about   a  \Vest Indian expatriate   returning  to  his  un­  named   country   (unnamed-but  obvi­ ously   Barbados)    after    a   long   period abroad,   hoping  to  contribute  to  its  de­ velopment   through  his  new  position   as Minister  of  Culture. Atwood,  a Canadian who  has  visited  the  Caribbean and  read Austin  Clarke, writes  about   a  Canadian journalist  who visits a fictional  Caribbean island in search  of a rest and  material for a  travel  piece.  Both  these  fictional  inno­ cents   abroad  encounter   revolution,  be­ come  unwillingly  involved,   and  flee  the consequences.
1Both writers use these simple adventure
plots  to explore the  political   dimensions of language. In Bodily Harm, the pressure toward  a  crippling self-consciousness  ex­ erted  by journalism's need for instant and disposable   commentary   renders   Rennie Wilford   effectively   silent:  her   writing  holds  thought at  bay,  instead  of  inviting it.   In   part,  her   story   depicts  someone slowly  learning  to   write-to    think­ again.  She  learns that  her  skills  at  label­ ling, and  thus  dismissing, reality  are  illu­ sory.  It  will  not  go  away.  Jake's   career  as a  packaging  expert  (all  style, no con­ tent)   matches Rennie's as a  journalist­ no wonder together their  dialogue sounds like  Hollywood movie  repartee from  the rg4o's.  Their  brittle style,  however,  col­ lides against  the pious maxims of Rennie's Griswold  childhood, the  colourful  politi­ cal slogans of the Caribbean, the ambigu­ ous "please" screamed by Rennie's anony­  mous neighbour in either pain  or ecstasy, and   the  numerous   atrocities  for  which there   seem   to  be  no  words.   Atwood's search  for the words to make  her  readers  see  involves  exposing the  hollowness  of language misused.  Believing that  the "aim  of   all   suppression ... is  to   silence   the voice, abolish  the  words,  so that  the only voices and words left are those of the ones


181

OPINIONS & NOTES



in  power,"1  Atwood  depicts  this  process as it occurs simultaneously in Canada (through market and social pressures on Rennie) and  in the Caribbean, somewhat more crudely  (through overt  political op­ pression) . The  voice  of Bodily  Harm as­ sumes  many   disguises  in  its  attempt  to serve, as Atwood  believes the  novel must serve, as "the guardian of the moral  and ethical  sense of the community."2
For Atwood,  then,  the language of con­
temporary pop  culture poses the greatest threat  to Canadian writing. Clarke's poet­ politician  John  Moore   experiences   the neo-colonial  challenge  differently.  For him,  the  Miltonic  rhythms   and   Edenic myths of Paradise Lost and Paradise Re­ gained pose the greatest temptation, while the  indigenous strength of  the  local  ca­ lypso or  political speech  remains  beyond his  reach.   Unlike  Rennie's Canada,  his world heeds  the newspaper article.  Al­ though  famed  overseas as a serious writer, in his own land  he has no audience. When his  press   conference  is  suppressed,   his friend Shirley tells him: "You are just a witness   without  a   defense,   without a mouth."3  He  is further silenced  through silence:   when  a  fraudulent article  libel­ ling  him  is published in the  local  paper, the government destroys him by their  "no comment." This silencing,  this  refusal  to comment, involves  a  refusal  to recognize his existence. He  himself  becomes invis­ ible:   "He was  conspicuous   in  Toronto. But  here  he was  just another black  man, and  no one could  tell  the difference."
An  early  image  defines  the  pattern of his experience. Discovering a scrap  of newspaper with his photograph and a headline announcing his  return, he  sees that  "tires and  recent  footprints had  left their  mark  on  the  entire  story  that  went with the photograph; so he could not read what  they  had  said  about  his returning." This  incident mirrors his difficulties in "reading" the culture he is supposed  to be directing. His own country,  because of his
 Western education, now  appears to  him as a partially obliterated text.  In attempt­ ing  to  reconstruct it,  he  turns  to  exter­ nally  defined  images: the paradise of the Northern  Hemisphere's  dreams and   the net  of  intrigue of  Graham Greene's Co­ medians. What  is   locally  generated  re­ mains   obscure,  beyond   his  grasp.   He  is warned to watch what  he says, and  learns to  listen  for  a  hidden  meaning behind  the  words of others,  but  remains puzzled by what  he cannot understand. He  never hears   the   joke  that   condemns Juliet  to social oblivion,  never sees the photographs that   cost  Weekesie  his  life,  never  grasps the  intricacies of  the  revolutionary plots that   cost  him  his  job, and  he  never  sees the Prime  Minister face to face, except  on the  television   screen  when  everything  is over. His  own invisibility  is merely  an ex­ tension  of  the  significance   of  these  gaps in his experience, and  a sign of his power­  lessness in a world  he had  hoped, naively, to change.
Rennie's powerlessness  in Bodily  Harm is also linked to her invisibility, although ironically she  has  first assumed  it as  pro­ tective  camouflage.4  At first her very visi­ bility  as  a  tourist   tends  to  make  her  in­ visible  as a  person; later,  in  jail, she  be­ comes   literally  invisible,   in   that   she  is hidden from   the  outside  world  and   not important enough  for  the Canadian gov­ ernment to protest  her incarceration. Her  operation begins  her  disappearance; her imprisonment completes it. Yet even  as a child,  crucial  absences  characterized her experience. One  of her  first  memories  is of being  shut in  the  cellar  by herself  for doing something wrong,  but  she can't re­ member what. In  such  ways, Atwood  un­ derlines the connections between Rennie's Canadian and  her Caribbean experiences. Safety   is  an   illusion   anywhere  in   the world,  as silence is a weapon. The  silences in  Griswold  are   so   powerful  they   are almost    visible.   In   Toronto,  Rennie  is haunted by  a  faceless  stranger, the  man

OPINIONS  & NOTES



with  the rope,  who  symbolizes all the un­ voiced  threats to  women   which  are  im­ manent  in   our   culture.   Silencing  lan­ guage,  either  literally  through denying  it speech or more subtly through trivializing  its  use,  becomes   the  chief   form  of  vio­ lence  depicted in  both  novels.
1While Clarke uses the metaphor of the comedian, the  actor  who  can  imitate ac­ tion   but   cannot  initiate  it,  and   of  the witness,  who  can  watch  but  cannot bear witness,  Atwood   combines images  of the journalist who  reacts  but  never  acts with that  of the  tourist  who  sightsees but  can­ not  see.  Both  novels  show  how  tourism turns  foreign  cultures into  objects  of cul­ tural  consumption.  (The  Canadian  tour­ ists in  The Prime  Minister ask  unthink­ ingly  where  they  can  buy  some  "broads on this island"; Rennie regrets  her choice of St. Antoine when  she  learns  how little there  is  to  consume  there.)  Both  novels also equate tourism  with  irresponsibility, showing their  tourists as the new imperial­ ists, happily exploiting a country they can easily   leave   behind.  Atwood,  however, takes  her  analysis  one  step  further than  Clarke's,   to   argue  that   tourism   is  the twentieth-century way of life, not  just in the  Caribbean but  everywhere. Rennie is just as much  a tourist in Canada, writing lifestyle  pieces  about trends,  as she  is in the Caribbean, writing about resorts. She sees every  aspect  of life  as  something to be labelled  and  consumed, and  that  is the essence of tourism. Condemned to super­ ficiality,  tl1e tourist can  only see what  has been  selected  for  him  to see:   he sees in prescribed    and    circumscribed  patterns. Suggestively,  the  museum and  tourist  site in  Bodily  Harm  is also  the  jail.  Trained to see the other as object, the  tourist  car­ ries  the  jail  of his assumptions with  him wherever he goes.  After  the  failed  coup, Rennie's metaphorically jailed  conscious­ ness  is literally  jailed:  she  sees the  trap  her  tourism  has led her  to; but  ironically,  in  attempting to  imagine  an  escape,  she
 constructs yet another hackneyed  plot,  in which  jaded  journalist becomes  romantic reporter. Yet Atwood's only too realistic conclusion  does not deny the validity of responsible  reporting, as the achievement of Bodily Harm itself indicates. The novel bears  witness  to  the  ways  we  fool  our­ selves,  as  well  as  to  the   ways   we   fool others.
Atwood's "pern1anent tourists" (to bor­
row  a phrase  from  P. K.  Page)   are  also voyeurs:   tourism  is a kind  of  pornogra­ phy.  Both  activities  use  the  concept  of "aesthetic distance" as a respectable cover for  aggression.  Clarke,  too, links  the  vio­ lence  of  sex  to  the  violence  of  tourism. The    airplane   bringing  tourists   to   the island  in The  Prime  Minister punches it­ self "like  a  penis  into  the  valley."  John  Moore's  lyrical  evocations of his country as a beautiful black woman, however,  de­ tract from   his  analysis:   they  are  senti­ mental  and embarrassing. To define para­ dise as the possession of a beautiful black woman  is still  to be  caught in  the  tourist  trap   of  trying  voyeuristically  to  possess another,  instead  of  learning self-posses­ sion.   John    Moore's  failure    to   possess himself completely results  in false  visions of woman  as paradise regained, and  idle daydreams of  power,  both  of which  are undercut by the  physical  reflection  of his general    impotence -his   sexual   impo­ tence.  John Moore   cannot  see  what the reader  can-that  his  impotence  derives from   his  isolation  from his  community and  from  his ignorance of its contexts.
What had  been  implicit in The  Prime Minister is made  explicit  in Bodily  Harm. Tourists are  the  new  imperialists,  colon­ izing  themselves   as  much   as  others.   In some ways, a colony  is to a metropolis as a woman  is to a man. Atwood's epigraph from    John    Berger's    Ways  of   Seeing stresses the complicity of  the victim  in the act  of victimization  and  the  necessity for questioning   traditional  ways  of  seeing. Berger writes: "A man's  presence suggests

OPINIONS & NOTES



what  he is capable of doing  to you or for you. By contrast, a woman's presence ... defines  what  can  and  cannot  be done  to her." The  same might be said of a colony. The  authorities on  both  fictional  islands welcome tourism, despite its disruptive effects on their societies, because of the immediate  wealth   it  can   afford   them. Their complicity  also  reveals a failure  of imagination. They cannot imagine  ques­ tioning  the  basic  assumptions  underlying the societies they have inherited; their in­ novations  consist  solely of attempting to introduce  Western  efficiency into  the ex­ ploitation of their resources. Only Dr. Minnow in  Bodily Harm  dreams  of  sub­ stantial change  which would revolutionize thinking   instead   of  merely  power  struc­ tures, and  he is killed.
Although Rennie and  John  Moore  re­ main  trapped in their  basically American or British ways of seeing, the reader  learns to see the inadequacy of  these  languages  as ways to convey  a  Canadian or  Carib­ bean  reality.  Both  Bodily Harm  and  The Prime   Minister   parody  the   imperialist novel of an education through a confron­ tation  with  the  colonial  "heart of dark­ ness." The very structure of such a novel militates against  its protagonist  discover­ ing  anything that   can  be  useful  to  the development of the colony's point of view. Clarke's closeness to Moore in The  Prime Minister  creates some  doubt as  to  how clearly  he himself  perceives  Moore's  fail­ ure. Yet Clarke raises some important is­ sues  through  Moore. What   is the  poet's  role  in  an  ex-colony? Should   he  try  to provide  leadership through his poetry  or through  political action?  Or   should   he divorce his writing from  society entirely? The  Prime  Minister  remains   pessimistic about the ability  of literature to effect change, though it is ambivalent about  the power  of the  written word.  No one reads John  Moore's poetry, but  the  newspaper runs   the   country.  Is  Clarke   suggesting that   the  writer  who  genuinely   wishes  to
 contribute to  his  country's real  develop­ ment   (as opposed   to  the  development of underdevelopment)   should  turn  to  jour­ nalism or music, to the popular forms  that  are  reaching the people  because  they em­ ploy their language? But if he is, then  why does he continue to write  novels? Because he is trying  to change the  novel  form,  to make   it   more   accessible   as  a   popular genre, reflecting political  concerns and challenging "literary standards of the col­ onization period."5  The powerful  writing  in  The   Prime  Minister  records  the  lan­  guage  of the people,  particularly Kwame's speeches.  As John Moore  recognizes  in a rare  moment of insight :  "The speech  had ceased  to be a political harangue and  had become  a  work  of  art...."  Its  strength mocks   the   false  sentimentality  of  John  Moore's lyrical  evocations of "the blessed woman   with  her black   beauty." If one could  be sure that  Clarke meant  his read­  ers  to  see  John  Moore as  a  false  poet, then  all  would  be well, but Clarke carries ambiguity to the point  of confusion.
In   Bodily  Harm   there   is  less   uncer­ tainty. The disorienting fragmentation in narrative technique questions the conven­ tions  of  chronology, of  cause  and  effect and  of  aesthetic distance, and  exposes the language of  cliche.  By deliberately  using
an  unsympathetic central character,  At­
wood forces her readers to think as well as feel.   She   provides  no   more   answers - indeed, possibly  fewer  alternatives to  the language of  the  metropolis -than  does Clarke, but   her  questioning is more  in­ cisive.
Clarke's concern in The  Prime Minister
is to find  a creatively violent  language to challenge the  old  Miltonic rhythms that still hold  John Moore's imagination in sway, but  Clarke himself  seems moved  by some  nostalgia for  these  European forms and  by some fear  of where  violence in the language  may   lead   him,   so  that   The Prime  Minister   leaves  us  in  limbo.  At­ wood  writes  with  a  surer  sense of  moral

OPINIONS &  NOTES



purpose. She believes "that fiction writing is the  guardian of the  moral  and  ethical sense  of  the   community,"  and   that   to write is to bear witness. Bodily  Harm  itself bears  witness  to  how  power  operates in our society. Revolution is a messy, obvious way of quelling dissent.  What The  Prime Minister and  Bodily  Harm both  show  is how opposition may  be censored  before it has ever surfaced: in the writer's selection of literary form  and  language. What  they do  not  show  is whether ex-colonial  cul­ tures  can  develop   their  own  voices suffi­ ciently  to  circumvent  these  obstacles.

NOTES

1 Margaret Atwood, "An End to  Audience?"
Dalhousie  Review,   6o,   No.    3    (Autumn
198o), 427.
2   Ibid., p.  424.
a  Austin Clarke, The  Prime   Minister  (Don
Mills: General Publishing, 1977).
4   Margaret Atwood, Bodily Harm (Toronto: McClelland &  Stewart, 1981 ) .
5   Austin Clarke,  "Some Speculations as   to the  Absence of  Racialistic Vindictiveness in West    Indian   Literature,"  in    Lloyd    W. Brown,   ed.,    The  Black    Writer  in   Africa and  the  Americas  (Los  Angeles:  Hennessey
& Ingalls, 1973), p. 178.
DIANA  BRYDON


SOME NOTES TOWARDS  "UNDER THE VOLCANO"

As I  WAS RECENTLY working  through the Lowry manuscripts of Under the Volcano in the  Special  Collections Division  at  the University of British  Columbia, I had  in mind   a  number of  small   but  annoying questions about the  book  which  I  hoped might  be  clarified   by  the   drafts.  Some were, for  Lowry  in  his early  drafts some­ times  dropped a clue  as  to  the source  of an   allusion   or   the   intention   behind   a phrase; and   others,  such  as  the  identity
 of "Lee  Maitland," remain as big a mys­ tery as ever. I want  to comment on six of these points,  partly  because  each  touches upon a small  but significant aspect of the novel so far  overlooked  by commentators more interested in the dark wood than  the trees  that  comprise it,  but  also  because, collectively,  they  show  something about  the way that  Lowry worked  and  reworked his sources  and  early  drafts. I  shall  take each of these one by one, but  the growing  complexity  of  the answers  should  demon­ strate   that   Lowry's   art   has  at   times  a most  curiously   and   intricately  wrought structure.

1.    Why  does    Yvonne  get    upset,   p.
58/    when   the   Consul   says "Peegly
Weegly"?

This still  remains  a mystery. The Con­ sul points  with  his stick  through  the trees towards    the    "little   American    grocery store, catercorner to Cortez  Palace," and  Yvonne,  hurrying on  and  biting  her  lips, is determined not  to cry,  whereupon the Consul,  taking her  arm,  is suddenly con­ trite, saying, "I'm sorry, I never thought." Thought of what? The drafts here  are of little  help,  but  in  one  and  only  one  ver­ sion of  the  chapter ( UBC   I o-7,  p.  IO) 2 both   Yvonne's   grief    and   the   Consul's contrition were  heavily  accentuated, still without  an explanation. "Piggly  Wiggly," more correctly "Piggly Wiggly Southern," is a supermarket chain   based  in  Georgia and Florida, dealing in groceries  and  gen­ eral merchandise. There was a celebrated one  in  Mexico City,  on  Independencia, the  first  of  its  kind   in   Mexico,   and   a smaller  branch in  Cuernavaca, not  quite "catercorner  to  Cortez   Palace" but  not far  removed,   being  located on  the  Ave­ nida  Guerrero about one  block  up  from the  Z6calo.  One  is forced   to  speculate: perhaps Yvonne is reminded of  her  dead  child,   to   whom    she   might   have   said, "This little   piggy  goes   to  market...." Or  perhaps that  very  rhyme-"This lit-

OPINIONS &  NOTES



tie piggy stayed at home"-is somehow related    to   her   departure  and   return? What  seems   undeniable  is  that   Lowry has  deliberately created  a  mystery,  per­ haps  because  he  wished  to include  some­ thing   private between   himself   and  Jan, or  to hint  at  a  tension  between  the  Con­  sul  and  Yvonne  over  her  failure   to give him  children, or  simply  to  illustrate the fact   that   Geoffrey   and   Yvonne   are   a married couple,  who  possess shared  inti­  macies  that  those outside  cannot  possibly know about and never will know. As with the  Samaritan  incident, so too  with  this small exchange : the  truth  is unknowable, and  the  incident deliberately designed  to tease  us into  thought.

2.   Who  is   "another  William   Black­
stone,"  p. 139?

William Blackstone, "The  man  who went  to live among the  Indians" (p. 56), is such   an  attractive figure  that   one  is inclined  to forget  that  he is by no means the only one of that name. On p. 138 the Consul describes cats to Mr. Quincey as "Animals not  fit  for  food  and  kept  only for  pleasure, curiosity,  or whim,"  and at­ tributes  this  statement to William  Black­ stone,   then,   a  few  lines  later,  asks  the unresponsive Mr.  Quincey, "Or  was that  another  William   Blackstone?"  This "other"  seems   to   have   attracted  little critical curiosity.  The 1940 draft of Ch.  v  ( UBC  7-6, p. 8)  foregrounds the  com­ ment  about  cats being  animals  not fit for food    by    having   Mr.    Quincey   reply, "Right   here,   in   this   town,   during  the Revolution, they barbecued 'em in the market place," but  as Mr. Quincey in subsequent versions  became  more  morose and   taciturn  that   remark   was  deleted from  all  later  notes  and  drafts.  The  ref­ erence  is not  difficult  to track  down:  the other William Blackstone  is  Sir  William  Blackstone  (I 723-80),    English    jurist, King's   Counsel, and  M.P.,  best  known for   his   Commentaries   on  the   Laws   of


r86
 England  ( r 765-69), in  which   (II, 25, p.
393:  "On the Rights of Things") is con­
sidered   the  status   of  animals  ferae  na­
turae:
For  if the  pheasants escape from   the  mew, or  the  fishes from  the  trunk, and  are  seen wandering at large in  their proper element, they   become  ferae  naturae again; and   are free  and  open  to  the  first  occupant that has ability  to  seize  them.  But   while   they   thus continue  my  qualified  or   defeasible   prop­ erty, they  are  as  much under the  protection of  the  law,  as  if  they   were  absolutely  and  indefeasibly mine:  and  an   action  will   lie against  any   man that   detains  them   from  me,  or  unlawfully  destroys them. It  is  also as   much  felony   by   common  law   to   steal  such  of  them   as  are  fit  for  food,  as  it  is  to steal   tame  animals:  but   not  so,  if  they  are  only   kept  for   pleasure,  curiosity, or  whim, as  dogs,  bears, cats,  apes,  parrots, and  sing­  ing  birds; because their value is  not  intrin­ sic,  but   depending only   on   the   caprice  of the   owner.
A small  but  tidy clarification of an other­
wise obscure  point.

3. 	Why does the  Consul, p. 232, address the  three-legged dogs as "pichicho"?

While  the Consul  is in the cantina  El Bosque, a starving pariah dog enters  and looks  up  at  him.  The Consul  stands   up and  suddenly addresses the dog: "Yet  this day,  pichicho, shalt  thou  be with me-," at  which  the dog  hops  away  in  terror  on three  legs and  slinks under  the door. Un­ like  the  previous example  there  was,  I thought, no  unexplained  difficulty  here.  The reference to Luke  23:43 stands  out: Jesus  says to one  of  the  thieves  crucified beside  him,  "Verily,  I  say unto thee,  To­ day  shalt   thou  be  with  me  in  paradise." The  unfinishing  nature of  the  Consul's quotation leaves his presumed destination more ambiguous, and  the allusion  to Nor­  dahl   Grieg's The  Ship    Sails   On   was pointed out as early as 1965 by Tony Kilgallin;3  at  the end  of Grieg's novel, as Benjamin Hall   is contemplating  suicide, the ship's  dog Santos (also  diseased)  ap­ pears:

OPINIONS &  NOTES



Santos  jumped up  at him  and   licked  his hand.  He   lifted    the   dog   on   his  ann  and patted him  gently.
"Santos," he  said, "this day  shalt  thou  be with  me  in  paradise."
Then he slowly  climbed over  the  rail  with the   dog  in   his  arms....4
There is a possible parallel to this incident in Conrad's Lord  Jim,  when  Captain Brierly  farewells  his dog  before  jumping, but   that   reference  seems  unconvincing. The case  was  unaltered. That is, until  I read  Lowry's  additional notes  to Ch.  vn and  realized  that  although the  Grieg ref­ erence  had  been  present from  the  begin­ ning,  and  the  dog  had  always  had  three legs, the  word  "pichicho"  was  distinctly an afterthought, added to the manuscripts some  time  after the  rest  of  the  sentence  had   been  composed. With  Lowry,  such additions tend  to  be  literary  allusions  to "thicken" the   text,  but   this  one  meant  nothing   to   me.   A   Spanish  dictionary stated  simply   that   pichicho   was  a  com­ mon  term  of  affection, but  the feeling  re­ mained  that something else was going on. I  was  very  lucky  here.   Picking   up  Far Away  and  Long  Ago  to check out  Hugh's reference   to   the   armadillo  doing   his damnedest  to  pull  W.  H.  Hudson down its  hole,  my  eyes lit  on  p.  g  of  that  en­ chanting volume,  the description of a strange-looking lame  dog  that  suddenly appeared on  the  scene:
One  of  his  hind  legs  had   been  broken or otherwise injured,  so  that he  limped and shuffled  along in a peculiar lopsided fashion; he   had    no   tail,    and  his   ears   had    been cropped  close   to  his   head ...
No  name to fit  the  singular canine visitor could  be found, although he responded  read­ ily  enough  to  the   word   pichicho,  which   is
used  to call  any  unnamed pup  by, like  pussy for  cat.  So  it  came   to  pass  that this  word pichicho-equivalent to  "doggie" in  Eng­ lish -stuck  to  him  for  only  name  until  the end   of  the  chapter; and   the  end  was  that, after   spending some  years  with   us,  he  mys­ teriously disappeared.5
One  can  only imagine Lowry's  delight  in finding  this after  the rest of the paragraph
 had  been  written: not  only  is the  dog's appearance (in  both  senses of the word) , its lameness, and  its mysterious disappear­ ance  perfectly appropriate,  but  there   is the added  bonus  of the Biblical phrasing, "So  it  came  to  pass," and  the  irrelevant coincidence of "the  end  of the chapter."

4.  In what  sense is the timber-line of Popocatepetl, p. Bo, like a giant  sur­ facing whale?

Obviously   because   Popocatepetl  is  to the Consul what Moby Dick is to Captain Ahab.   Although  in  the  final  version   of Under  the  Volcano this  relationship  be­ tween   the   smoking   mountain  and   the white whale is never explicitly insisted on, throughout  the  drafts and  manuscripts the  equation is frequently  made,  and  in earlier  versions of this passage Moby Dick is mentioned  by  name. The precise  ref­ erence  here seems  to be Ch. I 33 of Mel­  ville's  novel:    when   the  white   whale   is finally spotted, the  cry rings  out,  "There she  blows!-there she  blows!  A  hump like  a  snow-hill! It is Moby  Dick!"  This  is  a   neat,   tidy   and   sane   reference,  to which nothing more need really be added. However,  a  note  in  Prescott's History  of the Conquest of Mexico suggests the very devious   route  by  which   this  terrestrial whale   (the   hint  of  Charles Fort  is also present)    was  grounded on  the  volcano. Discussing the appearance of Ixtaccihuatl from  a very  similar vantage point,  Pres­ cott  writes:

This mountain ... with  its  neighbour  Popo­ catepetl ... has  been  fancifully likened, from the   long   dorsal  swell,   to   the   back   of   a dromedary.6

Lowry knew his Prescott,7 and probably appreciated Prescott's tendency to use Latinate words  in  their  original  etymo­ logical  sense,  but  the  word  dorsal seems such an incongruously inappropriate word to use here : very like a whale, indeed !

5.   ·What  on earth  does the Consul  mean

OPINIONS & NOTES



by   "Codogenus  paca  Mexico,"   p.
188?

The Consul  is describing the deceptive camouflage of the S.S. Samaritan, stating that   the  galley  could   become  a  battery "before you could say Coclogenus  paca Mexico." Gladys  Andersen  is the only person,  to my knowledge, who has sensed the  very  mundane  meaning of  the  ap­ parent  mystical-magical grimoire:

Probably either a  punning or  erroneous  ref­ erence to  Coelgenus paca, a  tailless  rodent found in  South and Central  America  whose skin  is  used  for  leather.s

Originally  the  manuscript at  this  point read,  "before you could  say Jack  Robin­ son"  (UBC I0-25,  p.  I5), and  the refer­  ence to the Coclogenus paca Mexico (the  error  persists throughout all the notes and manuscripts)   came   a  few  pages  later: the  Consul,   looking   at   his   neighbour's Scotty dog, Angus,  who is in turn  looking adoringly at Yvonne, remarks, "We could go to  the  zoo and  see  the  tepezcuintle." Hugh  asks in return, "What's a tepezcuin­ tal?"   (Lowry   uses   both   spellings) ,  to which  the Consul  mutters, probably  hav­ ing confused  his cages at the Chapultepec Park,  "A  dog ... Coclogenus paca  Mex­ ico. Well, a sort of high  class scavenger,  a groomed    hyaena"   ( UBC   8-7,   p.   I6). And,  in  another version  ( UBC  I0-25,  p. I7), he adds,  "a pariah with  a university  education."  In   the   earliest   drafts    the Consul   is  more  bloody-minded  towards  Yvonne  and  Hugh, originally  his daugh­ ter  and  her  boyfriend, and   his  remarks  are  more obviously  directed at  them,  but as the relationship between  the characters changed the  tepezcuintle episode  became increasingly redundant. However,  at least three  traces  remain in the final version of the novel:
a.    !Yvonne  suggests,  p.  I90,  going  to the zoo (presumably the tiny one in Chapultepec Park,  the  only  possible  one that   could   be  closer   than   the  fictional


188
 Tomalin: there  is also a hint  here  of the original  destination  of  Chapultepec,  on the  outskirts of  Cuernavaca). The  sug­ gestion,    originally  the   Consul's,   is   de­ signed   to  lead   up   to  the  Diaz-Prescott reference to the infernal regions.
b.    lA scotch  terrier barks merrily  from the rear seat of one of the cars rushing "diplomatically" past   the  dying  Indian, p. 249:  with the help of the manuscripts identifying Angus as the neighbour's dog, and   the  reference to  the  Argentine  am­ bassador next  door,  p. 8o, we can deduce  who it is who  half-recognizes the Consul, p. 249·
c.    The Coclogenus paca Mexico itself,
p. I 88, whose unnecessary presence  in the text  has  made possible  the  elucidation of the other details: Lowry  was clearly  very attached to the phrase, and  thereby  hangs a  tail.

6. 	Why should   a  parrot  be  beside  the undertaker's sign, p. 235?

There isn't  even  a  problem here  until the  manuscripts, or rather the  additional notes,  are  consulted, but  what  then emerges   is  a  fascinating  instance  of   a writer refining one  of his best  passages almost  completely out of existence. This time, unlike  Coclogenus paca M.exico, Lowry  was  able  to  resist  the  temptation of leaving even the tiniest of clues for his private delectation, and  since  there  is no clarification of anything in  the  final  ver­ sion of the  novel,  nothing but  a curiosity  about  the  life  within   the  "depths" can justify this note.  However, in the first ex­ tant  version  of the  novel  that  we possess, the  I 940 version,  there was a long shaggy­  dog   story,   originally   placed   in   Ch.   v ( UBC  7-6, pp. 29-30), about  a parrot at sea  who  challenged the  magician at  the ship's  concert to do  his  tricks  and  make  things disappear. The parrot was invited  up front, a cloth  placed  over it ... and  at that moment the ship hit an iceberg, sank instantly without trace,  leaving  the parrot

OPINIONS & NOTES



all  by itself  on  a  little  spar  in  an  empty ocean:   "Marvellous,"  said   the   parrot. The story, a delight in itself though by no means original with Lowry, fitted rather awkwardly into  its original context, but it neatly  anticipated in Ch.  VIII of the same
I 940 version  the  Consul's reaction to the undertakers': "Marvellous," the Consul said.
When   Lowry   decided  to  submit   Ch. VIII  for  separate publication, he  used  es­ sentially  the I 940 version, but  with minor  changes,  so  that   there   is  no  sign  of  the anecdote at all. And so with  all tl1e major  versions of the drafts: the story disappears from  Ch.  v but  does not reappear in Ch. vm,   so  that    the   second   novel   version ( UBC  8-20), the Texas Manuscript, and  the  final  typescript and  galleys  are  each virtually   identical  with   the   short   story version and  the final printed one:  there  is no sign  of  the  anecdote at  all,  not  even the word "marvellous" -simply the sug­ gestion  of the Consul's rajah shakes lead­
ing  him  directly  to  the  inhumanciones.
However, Lowry's own  pencil  draft and the   typescript  Margerie  made    from   it ( U BC II -4) , as well  as other notes held by the  U.B.C. Library, show  Lowry  try­ ing out  different versions  of the anecdote before    abandoning it   altogether.  The  typescript   ( U BC  I I -4,  p.  2)  reads:

They   passed     the     undertakers:    lnhu­ maciones.  A   parrot,  head    cocked,   looked down   from  its   perch  above    the   entrance where a  notice asked   them :  Quo  Vadis?
'Marvellous,' Geoff  observed, hands deep in  pocket, feet  on  the  opposite seat.
Hugh chuckled:  it  was  the  ship's   parrot
of course, and  lone  survivor on  a lone  spar, according to  Geoffrey's  story,   that,  survey­ ing   the   empty sea   and   attributing  its  late  berth's disappearance to  the  wonderful ma­  gician at  the  ship's  concert,  had   remarked, superbly,  'Marvellous.'
He  was  still  chuckling-that parrot  was something else,  though, in  his  mind,  some­
thing  familiar  he   couldn't  quite   place­
when   they   stopped at the  market....9

In  this version  there  is no previous  men-
 tion  of the  story  in  Ch.  v, so once  again it sits a little awkwardly in context, which is  probably   why  in  later   rough   versions the anecdote is reduced simply to the Consul's observation, "Marvellous," some­ times with and sometimes  without Hugh's appreciative chuckle, until  even  that  dis­ appears.
:Why did  Lowry  work  so hard  on  the
anecdote, only  to  discard   it  in  the  end? And  what  is the  "something familiar" (ominous words)  that  Hugh cannot quite place?  The   answer   to  both  questions,   I believe, is to be found in Ch. xn, where, shortly before he is shot, the Consul strikes out  wildly  at  a  cock  flapping before  his eyes, and  tries to cut off its head  (p. 372). In some of the earlier  versions of the story this  cock  was  once  a  parrot, and  it  was only as Lowry accrued other symbolic meanings  about   the  word  cock   that   the parrot became  completely unnecessary. These additional  symbolic  meanings  in­ clude:
a.   "Half   past  sick  by  the  cock,"  p.
353,  and   the  encounter  with   Maria­ both   surprisingly late   additions  to   the manuscripts,   but   crucial   to   both    the Faustian theme and the various  meanings of the Consul's impotence.
b.    Cervantes's bruto,  which   at   one point   materialized  in   Ch.   xn.   In   the earliest drafts, a major  psychological  force driving   the  Consul   to  his  chosen  death was a rather crude notion  of atoning for the afflictions wrought by the Europeans upon   the  Tlahuicans of  the  valley;   this was replaced by a more complex and self­ centred notion  of  betrayal, in part  echo­ ing  Peter's   betrayal of  Christ,  but  asso­ ciated  above all in the Consul's mind  with the  "traitorous Tlaxcalans," p.  287, who had   "betrayed  Christ   into  being  in  the Western  Hemisphere," p.  288, of  whom Cervantes was one: betraying the number of his secret  drinks to Hugh  and  Yvonne, who,  like  Paris  and   Helen,   Cortes  and  Malinche, are  now  betraying him.


r8g

OPINIONS & NOTES



c.   Above all, there is the hint of M. Laruelle,  Gallic   cock  and   ultimate   be­ trayer,  whom  the Consul  sees and strikes at  in  the expression  of the  Chief  of  Ros­ trums; the word merded  adds force to this parallel.
None   of  these  highly  significant  the­ matic  links was part  of the original inten­ tion,  but  as the emblem  of the cock took on  such  thematic  significance,  the  anec­
dote about the parrot became increasingly irrelevant.  Even   so,  a  reference  to  the parrot was  retained in Ch.  xn  right  into the galleys before being finally struck  out: "The  cock-or    was   it   a   parrot?­ flapped    before   his   eyes"    ( UBC   g-24, n.p.). In  the  earlier drafts  Lowry  prob­  ably  intended Hugh   in  Ch. VIII  to have had  some  kind  of  premonition of Geof­ frey's coming death when he sees the par­  rot,  but  that  idea  too  was sacrificed  as it became  less compatible with the changing patterns of  symbolism.  And  so the  anec­  dote,  like the ship, sank  virtually without  trace from  Ch.  VIII, leaving  only  the par­  rot, but  this time without  even a "marvel­ lous"   to  mark   the   place  of  what   once superbly  had  been.
The increasing complexity of these ex­ amples   perhaps  raises   the   question   of where  legitimate  interpretation ends  and  speculation begins. Such  matters are  best left to people with ideas. With  Lowry it is often   impossible   to  separate  text   from context, for as the  book unfolds,  new vis­ tas of meaning are suddenly revealed, and  more  and   more  depths   of   meaning are seen  to  be  included. If  these  scattered notes  about  six of  Lowry's  animals have helped   to   make   a   few   things   a   little clearer  in  Under  the  Volcano, or,  alter­ natively,  to  have  suggested  complexities where  all  seemed  serene,  they  will  have achieved their end.

NOTES

1  References to Under the  Volcano are  to the
196!2 Penguin Edition.
 z This and  other like  references are  to the Malcolm Lowry   papers in  the  Special  Col­ lections Division of  the  library of  the  Uni­ versity  of  British   Columbia. The  first  num­ ber   refers  to   the   box,   the   second    to   the  folder  within  that  box,  and   the   third, if possible, to  the  page.  Thus: Box  10,  folder
7, page  1 o. Quotations from  the  papers are printed by  permission of  Literistic, Ltd., as agents for  the  Estate of  Malcolm Lowry.
a  Anthony Kilgallin, "The Use  of Literary Sources for  Theme and Style  in  Under the Volcano," Unpub. M.A.  thesis,  Univ. of Toronto, 1965,  p. 77.
4    Nordahl Grieg, The  Ship Sails   On, trans. A.  G.  Chater  (New   York:  Knopf,  19!27), p. 217.
5    W.  H.  Hudson, Far  Away   and  Long   Ago: A   History  of  My   Early   Life     (1918; rpt. London: Dent, 1951), p. g.
6   W.  H.  Prescott, History of the  Conquest of
Mexico   ( 1843;  2nd    ed.   London:  Dent,
1844), Bk. v, Ch. vii, p. 422.
7   Lowry may   have   known  his  Prescott, but not, I believe, his Diaz, since  every reference to  the  latter's True History of the Conquest of  Mexico  could  have   been   taken  equally from  Prescott.
B   Gladys Marie Andersen, "A  Guide to Under the   Volcano,"  Unpub.  Ph.D. Diss.,   Univ. of  the  Pacific (Stockton),  1970,  p. 94·
9   Lowry's syntax and   punctuation have   been maintained, but  lines  pencilled in and  bits shifted around in his original have  been regularized.
C. J. ACKERLEY



AMONG  RECENT PUBLICATIONS  are  several  ref­ erence works  and  several items,  reprints,  texts,  and   general  reflections on  culture and  litera­ ture. Of  key  use  for  researchers is  the  appear· ance of  the   microfiche edition  of   Canadiana r867-1 goo,  a  list  of  some  38,ooo  monographs of   Canadian  relevance    (National   Library). Among Gale's  publications, Contemporary Lit­ erary  Criticism, vol.  21   ($72.00)  includes 14 pages  of  excerpts from   Haig-Brown criticism, and  vol.  !22, a section on  F.  R.  Scott;  while Contemporary Authors, vol.  104   ($68.oo)   in­ cludes  interviews  with   David McFadden  and  Raymond  Massey,    and    vol.    105   includes   a sketch  by   Susan  Tresky  on   Hubert  Aquin. Twentieth  Century  Literary  Criticism, vol.   7 ( $7 2 .oo)   includes a  2 2-page  section  on  Car­ man;  Contemporary   Literary   Critics, with   a

NOTES



commentary  on   Frye,   has   gone   into its   2nd edition ($55.oo).
In the  Australian journal Westerly ( Septem­
ber   1981)  there appears Tom  Shapcott's   in­ terview  with   Michael Ondaatje, a  discussion that  seeks  in  part  to  distinguish   between so­ cially-grounded and  textually-grounded critical commentary. In  many ways  this  distinction in­  forms   a   number   of   recent  theoretical  works as  well. Jacob Korg, for  example,  writing  his­ torically  about novelty in  Language in  Modern Literature  (Harvester,  $16.50)  and   exploring the   nature  of   experiment  that  turns  up   as ambiguity, parataxis,  parody, and   surrealism, observes  that   literary  collage  presents  a   dis­ junction  between the   real   and   the  imagined, but   "by   combining  the   two   in  a  single   text,  it   shows   that  they   can   exchange   attributes, and   tempts  us  to  believe   that art  and   reality can  intersect and  co-ordinate with each  other." Because  "meaning and  being" can be "endlessly transformed  into  each   other,"  the  reader sus­ tains his  connection with   the  experiment; and  Korg goes  on  to  explore the  world   of  words  which  through experiment  writers as diverse  as Williams, Pound,  and   Joyce   could   contrive. The  importance of  the  reader in  establishing an   appropriate  connection with   a  text   is  the subject at  the  heart of The Question of Textu­  ality,  ed.   William  Spanos,  et   a!.    (Indiana,
$21.88) ; based  on  a  symposium  sponsored  by boundary 2, the   book   includes  the   sparks of critical  quarrel  among some   two  dozen  sub­ stantial  critics  (Said,  Krieger,  Fish,   Riddel, and  others) -largely to  do  with  the  limits of mimesis  and  the  nature of  the  process of read­ ing.   Behind  it  all,  as  the   editor   notes,   is  an implicit assumption about the  function of  lit­ erature and   the   nature of   literary  value. Re­  vealingly,  the   editor   celebrates  the   processes that  "postmodern   critics"  use   because  they "must   now    examine ... [their]  procedures theoretically    and    always    search ... for   new theoretical  insights and   modes of  praxis   in  a powerful  counter-tradition  to  the   humanistic.
... " But  too  much thereby  becomes linguistic
game-playing;  too   little  of   the   powerful   in­ tellect that so obviously goes  into theorizing is supplemented by  sensitivity to  language or  to the  human beings  who  use language in order to create art. The lack  of  sensitivity shows  up  in the  barbarous jargon of  the  new  categories; it implies an   odd   kind   of   amorality  about  the subjects and   effects  of   art   as  well:  justifying the  shape of  ideas  (however styptic)  over  the  nature of   judgments  and   actions. In such   an  arcane  world, literature  appears  to  have   no connection with   culture, to  be  born   of  minds trained  in  abstract  reasoning rather  than  of
 people   skilled   in  understanding  other  people around them. I do  not  believe  it.
One    reason   for    enjoying   the    Poems    &
Sketches of E. B. White  (Beaverbooks, $17.75) is  the  sheer   challenge  they   offer   to  the  con­ trivances of theory. White's forte is not opaque­ ness  but  simplicity, not  the  barricaded  life  of a  category but  the connected  life  of the  heart. His   world   is   unabashedly  American-as   is Wallace  Stegner's in  One   Way to  Spell   Man (Doubleday,  $19.50)   or   as   Julian  Symons's world, revealed in  his  essay  on  George  Wood­ cock  in  Critical Observations (Faber, $g6.75) is  inescapably  English-but   unlike   Stegner (curiously  blind   in   his   interpretation  of  the "provincial"  Canadian   literary   scene),   and  unlike    Symons    (whose  imperial   distaste  for America riddles  his  paragraphs),  White man­ ages  both   to  observe  his  culture  and   to  tran­ scend   it:  reaching for   a   common  humanity, reaching  to  express the  kinds   of  frailty  and  love  which  still  stir   at  the  centre of  those  lit­  erary works  we  are  moved   to  reread.
Recent reprints  include  revised   versions   of Ralph   Gustafson's  Gradations  of   Grandeur (Sono Nis,  $5.95)  and   J. G.  MacGregor's  A History   of  Alberta (Hurtig,  $15.95). An  ex­ cellent  new  anthology, with   an   historical  in­ troduction and   a  useful   appendix  correlating literary  and    political events in   Quebec,  is edited by Laurent Mailhot and Pierre Nepveu:
La  Poesie  quebecoise  des  origines   a nos   jours
(Les  Presses  de  l'Universire du  Quebec, n.p.).
One    final   note:   Quinze  has   published   At­ wood's   Life    Before    Man  as   La    Vie  Avant l'Homme  ($12.95)   "par   Marianne   Veron," we  are  advised, "traduit  de  l'americain."

w.N.


LAST PAGE

IT  IS  A   PLEASURE   to draw attention to  four publishers'  important   paperback  series-the African Writers Series, from  Heinemann  Edu­ cational (available in  Canada  from  The  Book Society); the  publications of Penguin Australia and  Penguin New  Zealand  (available by direct order only,  because Penguin Canada  does  not distribute them);  the  Portable  Australian Au­ thors   series   from   the   University  of  Queens­ land   Press,  which  with  John  Barnes's recent Joseph  Furphy, provides a splendidly thorough sampling  of   this  early   twentieth-century  na­  tionalist   writer's  novels,   minor  fiction, verse,  letters, and  journalism, all  with  an  able  intro­ duction and  helpful notes  -and hence a model

NOTES



that  Canadian  publishers might   usefully  con­ sider; and   the  Longman series  of  African  and  Caribbean  writers  (available  from   Academic Press).  Among  several  new  books  in  the   last of  these  are  three early  works  by Sam  Selvon, who  has  in  recent years emigrated from  Trini­ dad   to  Canada. The   Lonely   Londoners  and  A  Brighter Sun are  novels,  respectively about immigrant  experience  and  colonial corning-of­ age.   "One  grim  winter  evening," opens   the former,  "when  it   had   a  kind   of  unrealness about London" -and  we  are  at  once  in  the company of a talented wordsmith, a writer who can  orchestrate sound: not  only  to  reconstruct dialect origins but  also  to  capture in  print the tonal   modulations that convey  his  characters' uncertain  wandering  through their   lives.  Sel­ von's  delightful book  of  short  stories, Ways of Sunlight, also appears in  this series; in nineteen sketches of  characters named  Johnson,  Frank­ lin,  Enrique, Romesh, Mangohead, Teena, and  Razor Blade, Selvon  shapes  more  than merely  a   world   on   the   periphery  of  orderliness:  it teems   at  once  with   cosmic   vitality  and   with the  tensions  between desire   and   circumstance that  rake  the  lives  of the  Third World people  he  portrays.
Other  volumes in  the  Longman series-all African, like Isidore Okpewho's The Last  Duty, which  explores the  impact of the  Nigerian civil war-more directly (and conventionally)  por­ tray   the   violent  realities  of  racial   and   civil conflict.  jazz  and  Palm  Wine, edited by  Will­ fried   Feuser, is  a  representative  anthology  of French  African  short  stories   in   translation, varying from   folk  tale   to  science  fiction.   But none  reveals  the  civil  tensions  more clearly  than the   works   of   James  Ngugi   in   the   African Writer Series,   chief   of  which   are  the  English text  of a Kikuyu play  for  which  he  was impris­ oned-! Will   Marry  When  I   Want-and Detained, his account of his prison experiences. With  a  deliberate calm,  the  latter tells  a quite horrifying tale  of  deprivations both  petty   and  great,  and    of    the   cumulative  pressure  that mounts when  any  system  denies  an  individual access  to  information and  the  opportunity  to communicate. It reminds us, too, of the  tenuous hold   that most   people   have   on  peace,   order, and   liberty.
In  the   Penguin  volumes,   the   tensions   are
more   intemalized,  and    though  desperate  in other ways,  often more   open   to  comic   irony. The three separately published volumes  of  the late   Frank  Sargeson's autobiography are  col­ lected   as  Sargeson; the  volume   tells  not  only of the  literary life  of  New  Zealand's  most  cen­  tral  writer since  Katherine Mansfield,  but also of his  times.  We  are  given  a  narrative  portrait
 of  a  New   Zealand  that  Sargeson in   his  way created, for  he  did  alter the  map  of  New  Zea­ land   prose,   turning from   rural realism  to  the sort  of  solemn   bizarre comedy of  a  novel  like R.  H.   Morrieson's The  Scarecrow.  Lovers   of George Walker  will  understand  Morrieson at once:   he    uses   verbal   cliche   against  social  cliche, claiming the  freedom of  the imagination as  a  force  with  which   to  challenge the  failure of imagination in  a world  that equates security with   convention.
w.N.
