$5.oo  per copy



CANADIAN
l]TERATURE N°· 89
Summer,1981

FJICES OF RE LISM

Articles

BY  T. D. MACLULICH, ELEANOR JOH NSTON, ILDIKO DE  PAPP CARRINGTON, LORNA IRVINE, J. A. WAINWRIGHT, DONALD R. BARTLETT, E. L. BOBAK,
W. J·KEITH

Poems  .

BY  KIM M.i\LTMAN, JIM  JOYCE, ROO BORSON, CHRISTOPHER LEVENSON, ERIN MOURE, LYNDA REGNIER, RALPH GUSTAFSON
Reviews

BY  JANET GILTROW, TOM MARSHALL, CATHERINE ROSS, DAVID  L.  JEFFREY, DAVID CARPENTER, CLARK BLAISE, PAT BARCLAY, MICHAEL  DARLING, GEORGE WOODCOCK, PATRICIA MORLEY, LINDA ROGERS, ROBERT SWARD, JOHN  FRANKLIN MCLEAN, DAVID F. ROGERS, KIERAN K EALEY, SUSAN BECKMANN, SHERRILL GRACE, DONALD R. BARTLETT, AVIVA RAVEL,
LARRY SHOULDICE, MICHAEL HURLEY, GARY  A. BOIRE, DAVID  JACKEL

Opinions and Notes

BY DOUGLAS DAYMOND, S. E. READ, GEORGE WOODCOCK, T. D. MACLULICH, LORRAINE MCMULLEN, GERALDINE ANTHONY, APPOLONIA STEELE

A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW


e itarial 	




TAKE YOUR ORDER ... ?





FoRTUNATELY, even when  one  has  to  accept  them,  it is still not necessary to agree with all the decisions a committee  makes. With  this  bro­ mide, I swallowed the announcement of the Governor-General's English-language  fiction finalists for 1g8o; and I put the information  away in that corner one keeps for forgettable  facts. I miscalculated. The information stewed. And I kept return­  ing to that  stubborn  simple question: why  them?  One  never, of course,  knows exactly  why  any  committee  makes the  judgments  it  does.  But  inevitably,  in  a literary  contest, the  judgments are comparative; and  given the options the  com­ mittee  had  for 1g8o, the decision seems a curious skew of critical  attitude and (perhaps) public taste.
The three finalists were Susan Musgrave's The  Charcoal  Burners, George Bowering's Burning Water  (which went on to win the award), and Leon Rooke's Fat Woman. The first of these is a disjointed fantasy  about  social inequality  and sadism towards women. The second is another  fantasy -of the sort that has lately been called "narcissistic  fiction" -which  reinvents  one  George  Bowering,  who in turn  (as character and  author) reinvents the history of Captain George Van­ couver  and  his surgeon  Menzies:  all of which  constitutes  a clever idea in  tech­ nique,  all of which  ends in ahistorical  violence, all  of which  is marred  by the crude  anachronisms  and  deliberate  contrivance,  and  none  of which is  therefore transformed   beyond  cleverness into  literature. The  third   novel is a  moderately successful and  intelligent  rendering  of an unusual  domestic life. All three  writers have written  better  works. Musgrave is, by comparison,  a better  poet. Bowering's A Short  Sad Book, a 1977 account  of growing  up  with  Canadian archetypes,  is a witty satire that  he has not surpassed, though  it  received all too little  recogni­ tion when Talonbooks  published it. And  Rooke is  an  able  and  innovative  short story writer.  But the central  point is that  Rooke  published  some of these stories also in  1g8o -yet it is Fat Woman, rather  than Cry  Evil,  his best collection so far,  that  is singled out for celebration.  In  the collection are  to be found  a range of styles, from the pseudo-autobiographical to the mock-analytic,  and  a range of voices and  tonal  attitudes,  which show a  wide  command of language  and  cul-

2

EDITORIAL


minate  in  a fine satire  of literary  and  social pretension  called  "Adolpho's  Dis­ appeared  and  We Haven't a Clue Where  to Find Him." Perhaps  the  Ig8o com­ mittee held a bias against  the short story form-for  accomplished  volumes like Veronica  Ross's  Goodbye  Summer  or  W.  P.  Kinsella's  Shoeless   foe  jackson Comes to Iowa also went  unacknowledged.  But perhaps  there  was  a more dis­ turbing  reason why the selection went the way it did, which has little to do with conscious bias and a good deal to do with the tenor of the age. Perhaps  the public taste  for  titillation,   the  critical  taste  for  formal  experiment-and  a  general intolerance  in  society for satire,  which  is read  as  an  intellectual's   put-down  of ordinary   people-have grown  towards  each  other, to  the  point  where  they begin  to  represent  an  arrogance of  the  average.  Perhaps  the  taste  for  crude violence and the rejection of the intellectual subtleties of wit and  argument alike reject the principle  of difference and  celebrate the mediocre  and  the extremes of human  weakness as though  they  constituted  heights of  value.  To  follow these directions is to follow restriction  by another  name, to elevate reductive,  private systems into  "normal"  public  "order." From  this to  the  next  step-elevating "order" into mandatory  pattern, the loss of options, the restriction  of choices - takes  very little  time,  and  does not  necessarily require  the  machinations of an evil genius.  Bureaucracy can  make it  happen  all by itself;  all that  is needed  is passivity, which  by inertia  surrenders  to the purveyors of order  the validity and general authority  they invariably  claim.
By  chance,  three  substantial  I g8o  novels  which  did   not  reach   the   I g8o Finalists  List comment  directly  on  problems of such dimension,  and  they make an  instructive   trio  to  place  beside  the  other.  Irefer  to  Hugh   MacLennan's Voices in Time, Mordecai  Richter's   joshua Then  and  Now,  and  Jane  Rule's Contract with the World. They  are not without  their  weaknesses. MacLennan's novel begins slowly and  ends flaccidly; Richter's  chases too many  one-liners for their  own  sake  and  builds  too  ineffectively  on  the  parallels  and   contrasts  it invites  us to  see between  present  and  past;  Rule's,  the  most sustained  of  the three  and  her finest accomplishment to date,  explores the ordinariness  of several urban  lives,  but  runs  the  risk  that  any  ironist  of  the  ordinary   runs,  shaping sympathy  so that  it  looks like disengagement.  What  concern  me  here  are  not these problems in structure or  perspective, but  the  palpable  strengths  that  each of these works nonetheless possesses, strengths of vision and of imagined  character, which transform  what  could have been mere literary exercise into literary enter­ prise of an unusual  order. It is this quality  of literary vision, so elusive to critical methodologies  yet so necessary to art,  which gives a novel its sustaining  vitality, and for this we always forgive much awkwardness. Why does a work of  Margaret  Laurence's or  Ethel  Wilson's,  for example,  for all its lapses of style  or  the fre­ quent  strains  it  places  on  verisimilitude,  appeal  more-and  matter  more­ than  scores of purely  private  narratives  and  empty trial  forms?  The  answer has


3

EDITORIAL

to do with the core of public values in which it declares its faith,  its passion for moral  conscience  and  the  possibility of  individual   choice -even  when  tired systems impose constraints. Style matters, too, naturally, for it is the process that shapes the vision into meaning and  gives it concrete  form. All of which takes us back to the novels of Richler, MacLennan, and  Rule.
Many  who try to distinguish values in literature distort  values in the  process, for they do so simplistically, separating  works purely by vocabulary  and external subject,  locating  morality absolutely in specific words and  topics and  arbitrarily declaring it to be absent from others. Sexuality, violence, and  religious and politi­ cal partisanship  are usually the prime subjects for disagreement.  And it is there­ fore too easy either  to dismissI g8o's fiction as the aberrant product  of  a violent year or to claim violence, as Joyce Carol Oates  does in a recent issue of  the New York  Times  Book Review,  as the current  social denominator, the only  authentic  fictional metaphor for current  social reality. Unquestionably we live in a violent age. But  probably  everyone's "contemporary world"  (if  they  are  not  protected by class-rimmed  glasses or  Pollyanna  shades)   has seemed  violent.  A  work like Sheila Watson's black retellings of the Greek myths in modern  guise, Four Stories, reminds  us forcibly of the degree to which the  present  repeats  the  past.  Rather  than  make the idea of a Golden Age simply spurious,  however,  this  conundrum renders  a notion  of the Ideal  all the  more  relevant  to any  people  that  seeks to understand both its belief in shared  values and  its common  failure  to express or enact them. Violence may constitute an immorality,  a negation  of  human  values, but the fact of violence in a work of literature does not of itself  render  that  work of literature immoral.  The  challenge is to connect  the values  with the  perceived and  violent realities, and achieve some kind of adequate  balance.
Clearly  Musgrave's  work is laden  with violence, as are other I g8o works, like
Richard Wright's  Final Things, a novel about  juvenile prostitution, street  drugs, and  retribution  outside  the law. But it is not  violence itself which  distinguishes Musgrave,  Wright,  and Bowering from MacLennan and  Rule, for violent events occur  in their  works and  in Richler's  also;  the  difference  derives from  the  atti­ tudes  towards  it.  Many  Governor-General's Award-winning  books-including recent  ones  by  Davies,  Kroetsch,  Godfrey,  Findley,  and  Hodgins-acknowl­ edge the irrationality of much human  behaviour  and the violence of much  recent human  experience. And as with them, there is a kind of fateful inevitability  about the  violence that  occurs in the  novels by Richler,  MacLennan, and  Rule.  It  is functional rather   than  "ornamental" in  the  book.  When,  for  example,   public notoriety  claims  Richler's  character  Joshua  for  itself, and  reshapes  his identity till he is in danger  of losing his private life, he lashes out  to attempt  to solve in anger  what  he could not distance  (or  deny)  by his defensive  wit. Rule's  artist­ characters, working  out  their  various  private compatibilities  and  their  equally various  public  compromises, run  afoul  of a  middleclass  mob  which,  because it

4

EDITORIAL


fears  what  it perceives  as  the  idiosyncrasy  (or  "perversion")  of  artists,  and because it mistakes the  persons for the  process, goes about  destroying  works of art  as though  that  could  halt  change  or change  truth.  For  MacLennan's  char­ acters,  in  a  futuristic   history,  the  twentieth   century   has  drifted   inexorably towards  fascist order,  massive war, and  bureaucratic  reconstruction.  But always for  the  authors  the  violence  is the  enemy,  the  weakness, the  threat,  never  an entertainment or  a  diversion  in  which  to  luxuriate.  Holocaust  is  one  of  the obvious  forms  such  violence  takes.  More  deceptively,  uncontrollable order  is another.  And  the  characters in these novels  ultimately  try  to resist both.  Rule's artists  survive  the  attack  on  their  work  to  realize, somewhat  laconically,  that their "contract with the world" invites them to express themselves creatively, not in futile  anger.  Richler's  Joshua  survives  the  threats  of  ambition   and  envy  to experience  that  rarest  of discoveries in  Richler's  world:   a  gentle  reconciliation with another  generation. MacLennan's characters  provide  a more extended  case study still.
The  strengths  of MacLennan's Voices in Time  have  to do not  only with  his
faith in the persistence of human aspiration  (which overrides his despairing observations  of the  present  and  past and  even his most pessimistic prognosis for the immediate  future), but also with the intelligence of his commentary and  the degree to which he has flexibly shaped a literary form to his purpose. The  book is cast  in  the  futureworld of  A.D.  2030, when  the  megalopolis  "culture" of  the years of the  Great  Fear  is beginning  to  crumble.  Young  people  are  beginning to seek anew their history and  (distinguishing  dimly but accurately  between order and stability)  to reject the dictatorship that  controls them. The  conventions that mark this genre then  carry the book along. Timothy  Wellfleet, the one aged man who can recollect  the  past, goes on to retell history, recounting  the  rise of Nazi Germany,   the  reluctant  compromises   (for  safety,  power,  love)   that   marked Germany  during  the early  194o's, the  parallel rise of the technological  dictator­ ships of North  America  during  the 197o's and  1g8o's, and  the  parallel  and  per­ haps  unconscious  compromises  that  also characterized   the  later  decades.  This long section constitutes  the substance  of the novel; it is a conventional  realistic narrative, more inclined  to the verbal flourish than the spare sentence, with little in the way of either sprightly  direct conversation or experimental reflexivity. But it is the form  that  MacLennan has always handled  best -the  reflective narra­ tive essay -which he has here, most successfully in his entire career, adapted  to fiction.  The  novel  goes on  to  dissipate  its energies a  little  in  sentimentalities; striving  grandly  for  an  eloquent   phrase,  MacLennan  misses  at  the  close the simple eloquence  of the quiet  end. But up to this point, he has ably avoided  the direct  didacticism  to which  the novel secretly aspires. The  book is a warning - MacLennan clearly wants  his readers to look  around them  and  to worry about what  they see-but  he knows that  to warn  in  advance  of the  inevitable  con-

5

EDITORIAL

sequences of the  present is to utter  idle doomsdayisms  and  to act  the  role of a parental  Cassandra. Latching  loosely on  to  the  structures of science fiction,  he instead  casts the inevitable future  as the indubitable past. Bowering might  have tried  to  render   history  as  fantasy;   MacLennan  transforms   what  might  have otherwise  been  dismissed as fantasy  into  history.  His  novel  acquires  a  forceful reality this way, and  becomes both a grim and  a moving book.
But  after  recognizing  the  grim  realities,  what  then?  Rushing  in  circles did
not help Joshua; Rule's artists realize that  irrational anger will serve no purpose; and  the sadism and  vengeance of the worlds of Musgrave  and  Wright-which one is asked to read  as event  rather  than  as metaphor -instead  of countering violence, appear to embrace it. Censorship is no answer to such pressures, for in the name of good things, it takes choice away, and one needs to be free to choose. Curiously it is the choice itself which is the pressure feared  by many who espouse censorship.  Opening options  appears  to  raise  for  them  only  the  possibility of insecurity, failure,  uncertainty.  They can trust  only what  they are  told  to trust; they dismiss those who question their "certainties" largely  by hurling  pejorative adjectives  ("elitist," "escapist,"  "redneck," "red")  at  those  who  would  make distinctions  that  implicitly challenge them. Hence  the anti-intellectualism of our times  (to  which  Robertson  Davies makes  a  characteristic reply  in  "A  Defense of Snobbery" -which is  just as characteristically easy to  dismiss as  idiosync­ rasy).  For snobbery is not the issue; choice is. As MacLennan's young people of the future  discover, the challenge of making  choices and  distinctions, for all the uncertainties it opens into their lives, is more rewarding  than living in an ordered contract  with fear. They learn  to live to reject  passivity and  at the same time to reject violence. They learn to understand  what in another  context V. S. Naipaul  means when he writes:

All  these  literary rapes  and   tortures, this  emphasis on  the  flesh  alone:  We  do, deeply,  reject   this  assessment  of man.  The time  has  come  to  say so,  to deny  this version  of  the  mini-man's truth, or  the  truth which   accommodates him....  We can  do so by raising  that  cry of dissent: "I do  not  want   to be like  them."

They  learn,  I suppose,  to  understand   that   a  committee  has  to  make  its  own choices freely,  charting  its own  territory  calmly-and that  at  the  same  time, the  freedom  to disagree with  the  choices a  committee  makes, and  to  say so, is not  a bromide  after  all, but  a right to savour  and  to prize.
W.N.








6

COLLOQUIAL  STYLE AND THE TORY MODE


T. D. MacLulich



The modern mind  insists on having  the  process of standardization (in  'prestige  forms'  of speech) take   the   form  of a  democratic rather  than an aristocratic  process.- EDWARD SAPIR



IN cANADA, AS  IN  THE UNITED   STATES, writen<  have had to reconcile the claims of inherited  European  tradition  and  North  American experi­ ence. In  both countries the earliest attempts  at fiction imitated  modes popular  in the  parent  country,  and  either  totally  ignored  the  native  setting  or  unsatisfac­ torily  tried  to  fit  North  American  materials  within  existing  European   literary
conventions.  Gradually, through  successive stages  of  historical  romance,  local colour fiction, and  fiction with  a social purpose, the  North  American  scene was rendered  habitable for the literary  artist. In the process, one of the most striking accomplishments of American  fiction was the development  of a tone,  based on the  rhythms  of  vernacular   speech,  which  was  recognizably  different  from  the dominant tone of British fiction.
Until quite  recently, this tone has appeared  with relative infrequency  in Cana­
dian fiction. Instead  of wholeheartedly  following the American  example, Canada has developed a linguistic split personality, which Stephen  Leacock described in
I 944  by saying  that  Canadians "use  English  for literature, Scots for sermons, and  American  for conversation."1 Morley Callaghan, and  the few other  aggres­ sively  colloquial   Canadian writers-Hugh  Gamer, for  example,  and   more recently Mordecai Richter -have always been stylistic odd-men-out in Canadian letters.  The  stylistic  norm  in  Canadian fiction  has  been  closer to  the  manner  which  has been called  the  "Tory  mode."2   This  term  designates  a  style marked by a high incidence  of slightly old-fashioned syntactic  habits.  Its  tone is formal and dignified, touched  occasionally by pedantry  or stuffiness.
On strictly linguistic grounds,  the stylistic conservatism of Canadian fiction is somewhat  unexpected. A considerable  body of linguistic  research  confirms  the strong  resemblance   we  would  expect  to  find  between  the  English  spoken  in Canada and  that  spoken in the northern  United  States.  In  Speaking  Canadian English, Mark  M. Orkin  points out:

7

STYLE & MODE

the greater  part  of English-speaking Canada  east of the  Great  Lakes was not in the  first  instance  settled  by Englishmen  at  all,  but  by Americans.  The   United Empire   Loyalists  were  our   Founding   Fathers,   and   the   language   which   they brought  with  them  was that  of the inhabitants of eighteenth-century New York and  Pennsylvania,  many  of  whose distinctive  words  may  to  this  day  be  found embedded  in our  daily speech.3

Moreover, as  Orkin adds: "The  pronounced 'American' cast  of  much   of  the English  spoken  in  Western  Canada is attributable to  the  fact  that  the  English­ speaking West  was settled  almost  entirely  from  Eastern Canada and  the  United States."4
However, Canadian  literary style  has  not  simply  followed   the  country's  pre­ valent  speech  pattern. Although at  the  popular level  Canada is  dominated by American influences, Canada's  educated  culture  has  often  deliberately turned away  from  the  United States  and  instead  looked  towards  Britain. Through the deliberate policies of its educational institutions and  through the  example of the CBC,  Canada has  long  resisted  standardizing the  "prestige forms" of speech  in the  direction of the  language of the  masses. Orkin  is able  to  assert : "That part  of Canadian education which  concerns  itself with syntax, grammar, and  spelling has  for  a  hundred years  and  more  been  based  exclusively  on  British  models."" A story  told  by  Morley  Callaghan helps  to  illustrate the  antagonism of  the Canadian educational system  to  the  colloquial  style. The story  dates  from  Cal­  laghan's days as a student at the University of Toronto, when  he was  just starting
his career  as a  writer:

By this time I had  become aware that  the language  in which  I wanted  to write, a North  American  language  which I lived by, had  rhythms  and  nuances  and  twists and  turns  quite  alien  to English speech. When  I showed  some of my first stories to academic  men highly trained  in English literature, I could see them  turning  up their  noses. "A  failure  of  language,"  one  said  to  me;  and  feeling encouraged   I said, "No, a failure  on your part  to understand the language." I had  decided  that language  of  feeling  and  perception,  and  even  direct  observation  had  to  be  the language  of  the  people  I wrote  about,  who  did  not  belong  in  an  English  social structure  at all.6

The  professor  equates literary language with  a  cultivated and  genteel  style;  for him,  literature  proclaims its  superiority to  everyday life  through its  contrived style. On  the  other hand, in Callaghan's lexicon  "literature" is used as a  pejora­ tive term; he insists, "I wanted to set it down  so directly that  it wouldn't feel or look like literature."7  We might  say that  the  professor  has  an aristocratic concep­ tion of style;  whereas Callaghan sets himself  the  populist goal  of transcribing the life around him  in everyday  language.
The rise of the  colloquial style in American fiction  is sensitively  chronicled  by Richard Bridgman in The  Colloquial Style in  America.  Bridgman describes  how the style of modern American fiction  has  been  shaped by such  varied  influences

8

STYLE & MODE


as dialect humour, newspaper style, and the experiments of Gertrude Stein. Throughout most of the  nineteenth  century,  vernacular  speech  was confined  to the periphery  of literature, to the speech of lower class characters  and  juveniles. Starting from this limited power base, however, vernacular  speech gradually  took over the whole of the narrative, as it does in Huckleberry  Finn. In  the years im­ mediately  following World  War  One,  many  writers collaborated  in  the  process which  made  the  colloquial  style  a  supple  and  precise  instrument  for  literary expression. Bridgman  particularly singles out the work of Ernest  Hemingway  as the culmination  of this process:

If one  asks  once  more  how  Hemingway's prose  and   the  prose  of  the  twentieth century differs  from  that  of Hawthorne and  his century,  the  briefest  answer  would argue  the  greater verbal  simplicity  of the  modern style. Long  words are  eliminated or  infrequently used,  and  then  as  deliberate contrasts. The  sentences themselves are  shorter. What was  hinged   and   stapled   by semicolons  in  the  earlier prose  is broken   up  into  a  series  of  declarative sentences  in  the  later.   Fewer   details   are provided, and  those offered  are  precise  and  concrete.  References to a cultural and historical  past   are  stripped  away,  and   the  haze  of  emotive   words  is  dispelled. Primary colors  are  accented. The immediate material world  claims  all the  reader's attention. The result  is a sharp, hard  focus. Hemingway's prose is not  the  ultimate prose by any  means,  but  its lean,  artful sufficiency based  upon  a vernacular diction and  a colloquial manner had  to be achieved   before  it  could  effloresce into  more intricate structures.8

Bridgman's account  of American  fiction does not fit the development  of fiction in Canada, where the conservative  temperament has found an outlet even at the level of prose style. According  to Bridgman,  the three  main  factors shaping  the colloquial  style in  American  fiction  were "romantic individualism,  nationalistic pride, and  practical  necessity."9  None of these forces has been a dominant  influ­ ence in shaping  Canadian literature. For much of its history, Canada  was made up of very small settlements  surrounded by very large tracts  of  wilderness. This situation   encouraged   a  conservative,  inward-looking  attitude,  which  Northrop  Frye has dubbed  the "garrison  mentality."10  Moreover, the  Canadian West was opened  to settlement  much  later  than  the American  West, and  its development  was to a considerable  extent  managed  by the government. As a result, the mythic paradigm for Canadian westward expansion  is the  collective national  enterprise
celebrated  in E. J. Pratt's Towards  the  Last Spike, not a version of the frontier
individualism  in, say, Cooper's Leatherstocking novels. Canada's ambiguous politi­ cal status -although  conceiving of itself as a nation,  Canada  was technically  a colony  until  well into  the  twentieth  century -did  not  encourage  nationalistic  boasting.  Certainly  Canadians have  never  been noted  for the  "ring-tailed roar­ ing"  found  in so much  of the  American  folk humour  which  forms  one  of  the main  tributary streams  of  the  colloquial  style. And  American  pragmatism   has never  received  official  sanction   from   most   Canadian  arbiters   of  intellectual

9

STYLE & MODE

probity and  artistic taste. Inecd, from time to time  certain  Canadians have even thought  of themselves as custodians of a higher standard of political morality and cultural  purity than  that prevalent in the United  States: a Tory leavening in the democratic lump  of North  American  society.


1 ILLUSTRATE MY  ARGUMENT I can adduce  the work done by a group  of writers who came to maturity during  the  period  between  the two Great  Wars: Morley  Callaghan, Hugh   MacLennan,  Ernest  Buckler,  Sinclair
Ross,  Robertson   Davies,  and  W.  0. Mitchell.  This  generation   of  Canadian authors  grew up in a country that  was more and  more coming to be dominated by urban centres and their values. Increasing urbanization also meant greater Americanization,  for  the  urban   centres  to  which   Canadians  were  attracted resembled American rather than  European cities. We might well expect this generation  of writers  to be noticeably  influenced  by the  colloquial  style which was coming to dominate  American  writing. Actually, it is surprising  how seldom the American  influence took hold.
In  the  first place,  by the  time  it  became  the  dominant  mode  in  American
fiction, the  colloquial style was basically an  urban   rather  than  a  rural  style. It reflected  the  ragged,  speeded-up,  materialistic  life of the  city. Its  slang  was no longer  the  creation  of an  advancing  western  frontier, but  the  expression  of an urban  ethos. This urban  coloration may explain  why Buckler, Ross, and Mitchell
-who  locate  their  stories primarily  within  rural  settings -do  not  adopt   the
colloquial  style as their  primary  vehicle. Instead   they  employ  a controlled  and cultured   language,   which  conspicuously  marks  them  as  educated   men.  Thus, although  Buckler,  Ross, and  Mitchell  often  create  characters who speak  in  an uneducated manner,  none of these writers  habitually  commits  his own  entirely to  vernacular   rhythms.  Buckler's  prose  is  noted-if   not  notorious -for its highly wrought syntax and imagery. Ross's As  for Me  and  My  House  possesses a bleak  eloquence;  Mrs.  Bentley's diary  is filled  with  prose  counterparts to  the Wasteland  imagery  dominating  much  early Modernist  poetry.  In  the  humorous stories of Jake  and  the  Kid  W. 0. Mitchell  does give over  the  narration to  a colloquial  speaker.  But  Jake  and  the  Kid   falls  within  the  special  province  of humour, where vernacular  idiom has long been a recognized device. In his mani­ festly "serious"  novels Mitchell embeds the  informal  speech  of his  characters  in a matrix  of his own more conventionally  literary  prose:

Here was the least common denominator of nature, the skeleton requirements simply, of land  and  sky-Saskatchewan  prairie.  It  lay wide around  the  town, stretching  tan  to  the far  line of the sky, shimmering  under  the June  sun  and waiting  for  the  unfailing visitation of wind,  gentle  at  first, barely stroking the

10

STYLE & MODE

long grasses and  giving  them  life;  later,  a  long  hot  gusting  that  would  lift  the black topsoil and  pile it in barrow pits along the roads, or in deep  banks against the fences.
Over  the prairie,  cattle stood listless beside the dried-up slough beds which held no water  for  them. Where  the snow-white of alkali edged  the course of the river, a thin trickle of water  made its way toward the town low upon  the horizon. Silver willow, heavy  with  dust,  grew along  the  riverban  s,
honey smell.

Callaghan, MacLennan, and  Davies  are  best-known as  chroniclers of  life  in middle-sized or large  urban centres.  The  colloquial  style might  therefore  seem  to be their  natural medium. However, only in Callaghan's fiction  does the colloquial style pervade the  narration as well as the  dialogue.  In  discussions  of Callaghan's style, Ernest  Hemingway is traditionally a central  figure.  This  emphasis  is some­ what  misleading. Callaghan's debt  to  Hemingway has  been  stressed  to such  an extent  that  his indebtedness to other  American writers,  such  as Sherwood  Ander­ son,  has  never  been  adequately explored.   Nonetheless,  Hemingway is inevitably a  touchstone in  any  discussion  of  modern prose  style.  In  fact,  it  is  useful  to
.  examine MacLennan's and  Davies's  conceptions of style in relation to the famous Hemingway manner. The   key issue, however,  is not  the  extent   to  which  Mac­ Lennan and  Davies  have  been  influenced by  the  Hemingway style,  but  rather the  reasons  why they  have  both  rejected  Hemingway's idiom  as a suitable  model for  their  own  fiction.
The pronounced resistance to  the  vernacular evident in  the  fiction  of  Mac­ Lennan and  Davies  is entirely  consistent  with attitudes these  men  have expressed  elsewhere.   In   contrast to  Callaghan, who  has  acknowledged the  influence of American writers   and   American speech  on  his  style,  MacLennan  and   Davies have  repeatedly announced  their   preference for  British   rather  than  American literary  models.  Both  men  were strongly  marked  by sojourns in England pursuing post-graduate education. Davies,  especially,  has shown  himself  to be much  more  familiar with,  and  sympathetic to, British  writing  than  American writing.  Thus, adherence to the  Tory mode  is part  of a consistent  literary ideology,  a coherent set of ideas  concerning the  nature of the  novel and the  function of style in litera­ ture.  In  fact,  the  comments on style that  have  been  offered  by MacLennan and Davies  constitute the  most  complete apology  yet  written for  the  Tory  mode  in Canadian fiction.
MacLennan's attitude to  the  Hemingway style is expressed  in  an  essay titled
"Homage to  Hemingway."11  MacLennan's central argument is  that  Heming­ way's gifts were those  of a stylist rather than  a story-teller: "As  a prose writer  he is superb; as  a  novelist  he  must  be  regarded as little  better  than  second-rate." Hemingway's prose  has  the  "ability to  move  us and  expand  our  perceptions." Yet  the style also has severe  limitations.

I I

STYLE & MODE

[Hemingway] dare  not use characters  who are  thoughtful men, for if he did  they would ruin the bare perfection of his style by speaking in a dialogue full of abstract words and  by abstaining  from doing many of the  things  a Hemingway  character must do in order  to give the Hemingway style its full magical  effect.

Therefore, MacLennan argues,  Hemingway cannot create  self-consciously reflec­ tive  and   introspective characters:  he  cannot  cast   an   intellectual  as  a   maJor protagonist :
Rational   men  discuss  their  own  neuroses,  they  are  interested   in  science,  they become involved in a multitude  of activities for which  the  Hemingway  style lacks an adequate vocabulary.... In short, their minds, their ambitions,  their awareness of themselves as coherent,  complex personalities involved  in a mundane existence make them entirely  unsuitable as catalysts for Hemingway.

And  MacLennan adds,  clearly  intending to  identify a serious  omission  in Hem­ ingway's outlook: "Such men  are  even  apt  to  wonder at  times  how  they  can save their  souls."
This  is not the  place to discuss MacLennan's misreading of Hemingway, whose male  protagonists are, almost  to a man,  seeking  some form  of personal  salvation. For  my purposes, what  is important is MacLennan's attitude to the  Hemingway style. MacLennan draws  an  analogy  between  the  earlier overhauling of English prose  style  during the  Restoration and  Hemingway's stylistic  revolution.  Hem­ ingway
understood  that  between him and  his reality lay a mountain-range of hackneyed words and  phrases  which  had  crushed  the  evocative  powers  of the  English  lan­ guage. He sought  by trial  and  error  for a means of setting  down  with  truth  and vividness what his five senses told him, knowing that  what  they told him was much subtler  than  anything  his  predecessors had  been  able  to  communicate. And  he found  it.

However, Hemingway has applied  his purified  style to a  purpose of which  Mac­ Lennan cannot entirely  approve :
What  Hemingway  has done has been to restore order  and  clarity to our  use of the English language.  But unlike the followers of Dryden,  who insisted on clarity as a means to accurate  thinking, he has used this classic criterion  of style to represent accurate  feeling. The style of the eighteenth  century  produced  intellectualism: the style of Hemingway  has made sensationalism an  end  in itself.

MacLennan's objection to the  Hemingway style is, in the  last  analysis,  a  moral one. The  Hemingway style is exquisitely  crafted, but  socially  irresponsible.
As a contrasting example of the  responsible  use of style,  MacLennan cites the
eighteenth century's creation of "a  kind of universal prose style which  almost  any educated man  could  acquire." He explains:

It was the clarity and  order of this universal style that  made  possible the political documents of Locke and Jefferson, the literary ease with which Berkeley and Hume

12

STYLE & MODE

discussed metaphysics, the urbanity  brought  to journalism  by Steele and  Addison.
. . . This  rational  approach did more than  produce clear  writing;  it also changed the  history  of the  world,  because for a  time it eliminated  misunderstandings  be­ tween educated  men. It is no accident  that  the development  of stable government in England  coincided  with the period in which clarity of prose expression reached its apogee,  just as it is also no accident  that  Germans in our century,  whose prose is often  as formless and  confused as Milton's,  were unable  to protect  their  minds against  the incantations of Adolph  Hitler.

In  MacLennan's eyes, then,  prose style  and  politics are  inseparable. The  proper use of prose  is as a means  for  communicating rational and  responsible thought.
In  presenting his theory  of the  novel  MacLennan also stresses social  responsi­
bility. In  an  address  titled  "The Future of the  Novel as an  Art  Form," MacLen­ nan  proposes  psychological and  sociological  truth-to-life as  the  novel's primary virtues.12  And  he elsewhere  makes a statement which implies that  he puts  aesthe­ tic merit  a distant second  when it comes to judging the worth of a work of fiction:

John  Galsworthy  is no  longer  popular  with  the critics  and  I suppose  he  is  un­ familiar  to most  readers  under  forty. Yet I have never  been able  to  believe  that any Englishman  in the past twenty years has written a novel as true and important as The   Forsyte Saga.  It  may  be  old  hat  now, but  it  was good  in  its  ti e,
if it is not valuable  as a work of art,  it is indispensable for anyone  who wants  to know what  England  was like at  the end of the nineteenth  centuryY

MacLennan's praise  for  Galsworthy is very different  from  the  attitude  expressed by Callaghan :
Back in  r 929  [sicJ. just when  I was coming out of college, the  big name  writers in  English  letters  were  Wells, Galsworthy, Shaw and  Bennett.  For  Galsworthy  I had a complete  blind spot. He didn't  mean anything  to me.14




b:E ATTITUDE TOWARDS STYLE  held  by Robertson Davies  is similar  in  many   respects  to  MacLennan's outlook.   In   A  Voice   from the  Attic Davies  has  written at  length  on  books and  reading, and  it  is here  that   his  con­ ception  of style  can  most  readily  be studied.15  A Voice   from the  Attic  offers  a spirited apologia for  the  educated, genteel  style that  Davies  favours, and  himself employs.  This style is very much  a modern version of the eighteenth-century style MacLennan admires. It is a classical  "middle" style, the style of  the  gifted  per­ sonal  essayist-and Davies  and  MacLennan both  excel  in  this  genre.  In  other  words, stylistically both Davies and  MacLennan are committed to an old-fashioned picture of  the  author as  an  educated gentleman.  Both  men  want   to  lead  their readers to the  intellectual high  ground of rational argument and  timeless  values.
Davies  eschews  the  colloquial style  because  it is intrinsically modern,  aggres­
sively  up-to-date. Using  such  a  colloquial style  would  imply  a  commitment  to

13

STYLE & MODE

immediate experience in the ever-moving present.  But in  A Voice   from the  Attic
-a book  which  is specifically intended to offer  American readers an  alternative perspective on  the  world  of  books -Davies  imperiously warns  against  placing too  great  an  emphasis on  today's standards:

to  do  that  would  be to  commit  ourselves  to  what  is  merely  contemporaneous, which  is a pitiful slavery, unworthy  of anyone who pretends  to taste in literature, however humble, or understanding  of life, however  small.

As this attempt to browbeat his readers  shows,  Davies  is committed not  only  to traditional values  but  to explicitness  and  didacticism in  his prose.  He  believes in a  hierarchy of ideas,  which  it  is his duty  to  promulgate. And  there  is a  corres­ ponding hierarchy of styles, which  he likewise must  endorse through both  precept  and  practice.
Davies  nowhere in A Voice  from the Attic  comments directly  on  the  Heming­
way  style;  but  he  does refer  scathingly to  other  recent  American writers.  Para­ phrasing the  conclusions  reached   in  Edmund Fuller's Man  in  Modern  Fiction, Davies  disparages

a body of American  novelists of whom James  Jones  and  Norman  Mailer  are  but two, who have exalted what he [Fuller]  calls "the  Yahoo-hero" -a coarse-fibred vulgarian,  grotesque in his way of thinking, and  immature in his attitude towards life, who lives for the kicks he can get out of it.

Davies  decries  the  picture  of the  human condition which  these  writers  present; they  hold  "a notion   (concept is too  definite  a  word)  of man   as a  derelict  and irresponsible creature existing  in  a  world   where   no  moral values  apply." He comments with  asperity  on the sexual  activities of their  characters:

It is significant that  many of these books are war  books, or  books about  groups  of men under  stress, in which we find  that  there  is exaggerated  sexual activity  with women who are described in terms of the uttermost  contempt, whereas  true senti­ ment,  the real love, is reserved for the "buddy," and  is plainly  homosexual.

These  comments make  it  plain  that   the  writers about  whom  Davies  is  talking belong  in  the  Hemingway tradition.
With  few exceptions, modem American fiction  is not  to  Davies's taste.  How­ ever,  the  worst  sin  which  American writers  have  committed is not  their  treat­ ment  of sex but  their  anti-intellectualism:

Their  chief defect  seems to be that  they are  desperately  badly  educated;  poten­ tially powerful intelligences have been given nothing  to feed on, and  they operate  in  a  society where  most  people  are  as  deprived   as  themselves.  They  and  their readers  have intellectual and spiritual  rickets.

Where MacLennan  rebukes  Hemingway for  mere  sensualism, Davies   rebukes
Hemingway's followers for carrying  romantic attitudes to excess : "well-educated

STYLE & MODE


people  could not  think  or write so sentimentally. Sentimentalism is the  philosophy of  books."   Davies  is  much   more  approving  towards  modern  British   writing. Indeed, he draws the  explicit  comparison in  favour  of British  fiction.  In  British fiction,  he argues,
there is a tradition of classicism ... which has never been entirely submerged, and, perhaps   more  important  and  significant  for  the  writing   of  fiction,  a  classical restraint  in the expression  of romantic  feeling.

For  "classicism" in  this  passage  we  could  equally  well  read  "education"; and
Davies  would  have  that education worn  on  the  writer's sleeve.
The stylistic preferences I have  examined are not simply  theories  held in isola­ tion. These  ideas  find  their  most important expression  in the  fiction  produced by both  men.  A  close  look  at  a  few  passages  will illustrate the  correspondence of theory   and   practice.  For  instance, here  is  how  Robertson  Davies  opens  Fifth  Business:
My  lifelong involvement  with  Mrs  Dempster  began  at  5.58 o'clock  p.m.  on  27
December  rgo8, at which  time I was ten years and seven months  old.
I am able  to date  the occasion with complete certainty  because  that  afternoon
I had  been sledding  with  my lifelong friend and  enemy  Percy Boy Staunton, and we had  quarrelled, because  his fine new Christmas  sled  would  not  go as fast  as my old one. Snow was never  heavy in our  part  of the  world,  but  this Christmas it had  been  plentiful  enough  almost to cover the  tallest  spears  of dried  grass in the fields; in such snow his sled with its tall runners and  foolish steering apparatus was clumsy and  apt  to stick, whereas my low-slung old affair  would almost  have slid on grass without  snow.

Dunstan is a  precise  and  confident speaker.  His diction  and  syntax  mark  him  as educated, as does the  way  he generalizes  and  uses abstractions. For  example, he speaks  of his "complete certainty" and  talks about  being  "able to date  the occa­ sion," when  a colloquial speaker  would  say something like:  "I know  for  certain  when  it happened."
Just  a few pages into  the novel we find this account of Dunstan's home  village, which  is the  setting for  the  early  part  of the  story:
Village life has been so extensively explored by movies and  television during  recent years that  you may shrink from hearing more about it. I shall be as brief as I can, for it is not by piling  up detail  that  I hope to achieve my picture,  but by putting the emphasis where  I think  it belongs.
Once  it was the  fashion  to represent  villages as places inhabited   by laughable, lovable simpletons,  unspotted   by the  worldliness of city  life, though  occasionally shrewd  in  rural  concerns.  Later  it  was  the  popular   thing   to  show  villages  as rotten  with  vice,  and  especially  such  sexual  vice  as  Krafft-Ebing  might  have been surprised  to uncover  in Vienna;  incest, sodomy, bestiality, sadism, and  maso­ chism were supposed to rage behind the lace curtains and in haylofts, while a rigid piety was professed in the streets. Our  village never seemed to me to be like that.  It was more varied  in what it offered to the observer than  people from  bigger and

rs

STYLE & MODE

more sophisticated  places generally think, and  if it had sins and follies and  rough­
nesses, it also had  much to show of virtue, dignity,  and  even of nobility.

Dunstan's education is again  evident, both  through the  reference  to Krafft-Ebing and  in the  catalogue of abstractions which  concludes the  passage.  Dunstan  can­ not resist generalizing his opinions  into  universal truths. He  deliberately organizes the  passage  to highlight a thesis : his village offered  a wide  variety  of  experience. He is aware of writing  on what  traditional rhetoric terms  a topos, a conventional topic  previously  treated by many  other  writers. Dunstan is aware of  what  is new and  what  is old  in his account of village life. He  also is open  about  his intention to instruct his readers.  This  is not language impersonating lived  experience, but language as  the  medium for  an  informal lecture. Dunstan the  schoolmaster is clearly  evident.
A  didactic purpose   also  animates George  Stewart, as  he  introduces  himself
early  in  Hugh MacLennan's The  Watch  that  Ends  the  Night:

I have  never felt safe. Who of my age could,  unless he was stupid?  Quite  a few people thought  me successful, but in my own eyes I was no more successful than the old Greek  who pushed boulders up the hill knowing they would  tumble  down the  moment  they  reached  the  top. Some  people  thought  me  calm,  but  inside  I knew I was not. I have often heard  myself described  as a "mature" commentator, but I have never seemed mature  to myself. The  young seem more so because they know  nothing  of  the  1930s. The  young  have  the  necessary  self-confidence  and ignorance  to feel mature,  and  that  is why I like them  so much  better  than  I like my own generation.  Was there ever a crowd like ours? Was there ever a time when so many  tried, so pathetically,  to feel responsible for all mankind?  Was there  ever a generation  which  yearned to belong, so unsuccessfully, to something  larger  than themselves?

George  not  only  delivers  generalizations about society,  as Dunstan does;  he  also turns  himself  into  a generalization: he presents  himself  as the  embodiment of an entire   generation. The   diction   of  the  passage   stresses  abstractions; there   is  a classical  reference, which  awkwardly tries  to  appear  informal by  avoiding the direct  naming of Sisyphus.  The  passage  is organized by the  skillful  management of antithesis. The  first half of the paragraph contains three  consecutive statements of the  contrast between  George's  "mature" external appearance and  his internal insecurity. Thus, George  begins by giving us three  antitheses which  stress his own uncertainty; then   he  provides  the  antithesis to  himself,   when   he  contrasts  his insecurity  with   the   apparent  self-assurance of   the   younger   generation. The passage  concludes with  a  series  of  three   rhetorical questions; and   throughout there  is an  effective  use of parallel  constructions.
Plainly, the  colloquial style  would  be an  inappropriate vehicle  for  the  fiction of  moral   and  intellectual instruction which   Davies   and   MacLennan intend to write.  The  colloquial style is a no-nonsense, pragmatic manner, tending towards informality and  even chattiness. It is suited  to convey  transitory emotions, imme-

16

STYLE  & MODE

diate  physical  sensations, and  spontaneous thoughts. In  contrast, the  Tory  mode is a vehicle for considered reflections.  Its tone is formal, educated, and  precise. It specializes  in elaborated descriptions, rational synthesis, and  qualified  generaliza­ tions.  The   Tory   mode  does  not  capture the  mind  in  motion, but  presents  the carefully  arranged results  of prolonged cogitation.
Davies  does not  feel that  a writer  should  attempt to ingratiate himself  with  his
readers by aping the bumbling verbal  ineptitude of the  common or the less-than­ common man.  He   strongly   disapproves  of  the  efforts   made   by   many   well­ educated American writers to keep their  education from  showing  in  their  fiction. Users  of  the  colloquial style  frequently give  us the  mind  in  undress.  Even  pro­ tagonists with  pretensions to  the  title  "intellectual"-think  of  Bellow's  Moses Herzog and  Mailer's Stephen Rojack-present themselves  as erratic and  driven  men,  not  as careful, analytical  reasoners.  On  the other  hand, A Voice   from the Attic  is devoted to urging educated readers to cease hiding  their  intellects under  a  basket.  The intelligent  readers whom  Davies  likes to  call  the  "clerisy" should  assert their  right  to determine standards of good taste.  Davies surely  believes that  writers,  too, should  cease  being  ashamed of their  intellectual propensities. As he puts  it,  borrowing  a  phrasing usually  employed   in  quite   another context: "If you  are  an  intellectual, your  best  course  is to relax  and  enjoy  it."
For  a writer  to  hide  his intelligence and  education leads  to a style  which  is a needless  act  of linguistic desperation. Davies  laments that  "Virtuosity, so much admired in some  of the  other  arts,  is at  present  unfashionable in  literature." In his most  explicit  comment on  the  colloquial  style, he scornfully remarks:

Many authors,  on the North  American continent,  write as if they were apprentice blacksmiths making their first horseshoe; the clank of the anvil, the stench of the scorched leather  apron,  the sparks and  the cursing are  palpable,  and  this appeals to those who equate  sincerity with sweating ineptitude.

Davies  considers  such  deliberate bluntness a  "fake  sincerity  which  springs  from clumsy  craftsmanship and  a  shared  loutishness  between  writer  and  reader."




Y.T THE  COLLOQUIAL STYLE  is far  from  being  the  limited medium Davies  portrays. As a  counter-example, here  is the  opening paragraph of Morley  Callaghan's first  published story,  "A  Girl  with  Ambition":

After leaving public school when she was sixteen Mary Ross worked for two weeks with a cheap  chorus at  the old La Plaza, quitting  when  her stepmother  heard  the girls were a lot of toughs.  Mary  was a  neat  clean girl  with  short  fair  curls  and blue eyes, looking more than  her age because she had very good legs, and  knew it. She  got another   job as cashier  in the  shoe department of  Eaton's  store,  after  a row with her father  and  a slap on the ear from her stepmother.

STYLE & MODE

Certainly   the  passage  is  marked   by  colloquial  diction :  the  chorus  girls  are "cheap" and  are  "a  lot of toughs"; Mary  has  a "row" with  her  father  rather than  a quarrel; and  by way of discipline she receives a distinctly  unrefined  "slap on the ear."  But these phrases are crucial to the passage's effectiveness. In typical colloquial  fashion,  the  passage works by implication. Readers  are  assumed  to share  the  cultural  and  linguistic  norms of the  narrator and  his society, so that much  can be inferred from Mary's decision to leave school at the minimum  age and  from  her  dubious  choice of employment.  We  also draw  conclusions  from the vulgar  level on which family discussions are apparently conducted.
To  further  illustrate  the subtlety of Callaghan's method,  let  me consider  just one sentence :

Mary was a neat clean girl with short fair curls and blue eyes, looking more than her age because she had very good legs, and knew it.

The first half of the sentence is primarily a vehicle for applying  five monosyllabic adjectives  to  Mary.  These  words  present  Mary  as she  appears  to others.  Con­ sidered one at a time, the five adjectives simply describe Mary's  physical appear­ ance as conventionally pleasing. But collectively they carry a connotation of inno­ cence.  For  example,  the  double  adjective   "neat   clean"-either  word  alone might  have  carried   the  literal  meaning-suggests  an  appearance  of  careful grooming. Mary is "fair" and has "blue" eyes, both details suggesting innocence. Her  "short" hair implies practicality -not the sensual freedom  which would be implied  by long,  loosely-flowing hair.  "Girl" in  the  phrase  "neat  clean  girl"  is essentially  redundant, for  femininity  is  implicit  in  Mary's   name.  The  word's function  is not semantic  but  rhythmic; the  phrases "neat  clean girl"  and  "short fair  curls"  are  rhythmically  parallel,  in  deliberate  contrast  with  the  concluding member  of the series, the shorter  phrase "blue  eyes."
The first half of Callaghan's sentence, then, seems to describe a sensible, whole­ some, no-nonsense young lady. However,  the second  half of the sentence  creates quite  another  impression. Mary's  "very good legs" give her a sophistication  and even sensuality which alters the reader's assessment. Moreover, the sentence's last three words make it clear that  Mary  is well aware of the impression she creates; and in all likelihood she deliberately exploits her appearance. The sentence starts with  a  physical description,  dispassionately  offered;  but  it  concludes  with  the narrator quietly  reproving  Mary's  vulgarity  and  hypocrisy.  Mary  starts  as the girl next door, but she ends as a flirt or  worse-perhaps as someone willing to exploit her body to influence men in her  favour.  The  passage gives us a glimpse inside Mary's materialistic, calculating mind,  but without  describing her thoughts directly. As usual, the colloquial style does its work by indirection  and implication.
As  a further  example  of the  colloquial  style in  operation, here  is Mordecai
Richler's  narrator talking, early in The Apprenticeship of Duddy  Kravitz:

18

STYLE & MODE


To  a middle-class  stranger,  it's  true, one street  would  have seemed as squalid  as the next. On  each corner  a cigar store, a grocery, and  a fruit  man. Outside stair­ cases everywhere.  Winding  ones, wooden ones, rusty and  risky ones. Here a  prized plot of grass splendidly  barbered,  there a spitefully weedy patch.  An endless repe­ tition of precious peeling balconies and  waste lots making  the occasional gap  here and  there.  But,  as  the  boys knew, each  street  between  St  Dominique  and  Park Avenue  represented   subtle  differences  in  income.  No  two  cold-water  flats  were alike. Here  was the  house where  the fabulous Jerry  Dingleman  was born. A few doors away lived Duddy  Ash, who ran for alderman  each election on a one-plank platform:  provincial  speedcops  were anti-semites.  No  two stores  were  the  same, either.  Best Fruit  gypped  on the scales, but Smiley's didn't  give  credit.

Some  of the  most obvious  surface  characteristics of colloquial style are  prominent here : contractions and  sentence fragments. But  the  passage's  omissions  are  per­ haps as significant as what  is actually said. The  narrator catalogues physical details  of the  neighbourhood, but  offers a minimum of interpretive comment. The most important general statement is that  each  street  "represented subtle differences in income." However, the  narrator does not  give a sociological  explanation of  the gradations in social  status that  these differences  imply.  Instead, the  reader  is left to make  inferences for  himself. Actually,  the  thesis underlying the  passage is very similar   to  the  thesis  underlying Dunstan's  account  of  his  village: life  in  the Jewish  ghetto  offers  more  variety  than  a  casual  observer  would  expect.  But  this thesis is never  explicitly stated. As in Callaghan's writing, great  reliance  is placed  on the  reader's ability  to hear  the  proper  tone  and  make  the  correct  evaluations.
If the colloquial style can  be a rich and  subtle  literary  medium, why do Davies and  MacLennan reject  it? Part  of the  answer  is implicit in  the  Richler passage just  quoted. Strictly speaking, Richter's narrator is omniscient; but  in  practice he is not.  His  viewpoint is limited  to the  perspective  of a ghetto  resident. He  is an authority on the facts  he enumerates, but these facts fall within  a limited  range of  experience.  On   the   other   hand, the  Tory   mode  is  authoritative and  self­ confident; it  aspires  to omniscience. The  colloquial  style  implies  a limited  view­ point.  Often, the  colloquial voice  belongs  to  a  first  person   narrator,  speaking within  the  limitations imposed by human subjectivity. Even  when  the  colloquial style is used  in  third person  narration, the  language of everyday  life  encourages a limitation of thought and  experience to the  commonplace. But  Davies,  in  par­  ticular, does  not  agree  with  "the convention (so dear  to  one  school  of modern criticism) which  demands that  a  writer  should  conceal  himself,  should  pretend that   he  does  not  exist." The   pedagogue in  him  does  not  wish  to  be  misunder­ stood.  He  is unwilling to  allow  the  scope  for  private  interpretation which  char­ acterizes  the  colloquial style.
Davies  and   Callaghan are  not  the  whole  of  Canadian fiction,  as  the  very different practice of Callaghan and  Richler  demonstrates. But  until  recently  the Tory   mode   epitomized  by  Davies  and   MacLennan  has  dominated Canadian

STYLE & MODE

fiction.  In  consequence, modem Canadian fiction  has exhibited a dearth of those protagonists Walker  Gibson  aptly  terms  "tough talkers.m-6    Instead, at  least  until quite  recently,  the  most  memorable characters  have  been  cultivated,  reflective, and  polished  talkers  like George  Stewart and  Dunstan Ramsay.
Today, the state  of Canadian fiction  has greatly  altered from  what  it was only
twenty  years  ago.  A majority of younger  writers  have  adopted some  version  of the  colloquial  style.  In   addition  to  Richler, obvious   examples  are   Margaret Laurence, Robert  Kroetsch, Alice  Munro, and   Margaret  Atwood. Despite   the critical   industry  which   is  growing   up   around  Robertson  Davies's   Deptford trilogy,  the  Tory  mode  is on  the  wane.  Perhaps, then, it  is time  to  ask  whether adherence to the  Tory  mode  has helped  or  hindered the  development of  Cana­ dian  fiction.  Have   Canadian writers  harmed their   work  by  turning  away from  one  of the  primary sources of much  of the  best  imaginative  literature  produced in North America:  vernacular speech?
Certainly, to  cavil  at  the  specific  accomplishments of  the  Tory  mode  would
be churlish  and  illogical.  In  Fifth  Business and  The Watch that  Ends  the  Night the  Tory  mode  splendidly   justifies itself. Yet  a suspicion may  linger  that  figures such  as George  Stewart and  Dunstan Ramsay, however   entertaining they  may be, are  anachronisms in twentieth-century North American writing. A literature which  turns  its back  on the  present  is, in the  long  run,  doomed to become  overly introverted and  precious; eventually, it must  become  irrelevant. Have  Canadian writers  barricaded themselves  within  a  kind  of  garrison style, long  after  such  a course  of action  was necessary?
Actually, this  way  of posing  the  question is too  simple.  Novels  such  as  Fifth
Business  and  The Watch that  Ends  the  Night   do  not  simply  retreat from  the present; rather,  they  offer  critiques   of  the   materialism  prevailing in  modern society.  As used  by  MacLennan and  Davies,  the  Tory mode  is not  merely  an isolated  stylistic quirk, but  is a deliberately cultivated alternative to the  colloquial style. The  Tory  mode is the stylistic reflection  of a larger  ideological commitment to conservative values. The  persistence of the Tory  mode,  not only in MacLennan and  Davies  but  in  many  other  Canadian writers,  is part  of  a continuing effort, on the  part  of many  writers  and  thinkers,  to keep  alive  in  North America a way of life that  differs  from  that  pursued  by our  southern neighbours.


NOTES

1 Stephen  Leacock,  How  to  Write   (London:  Bodley  Head,   1951 ;  first  published
1944),  p. 108.
2  Robert Cluett, "Robertson  Davies: The Tory Mode,"  Journal of Canadian Studies,
12, no. 1 (February 1977),  41-46.
3 Mark  M. Orkin,  Speaking Canadian English: An Informal Account  of the English
Language in Canada  (Toronto: General,  1970),  p. 48.

20

STYLE & MODE


4  Orkin, p. 58.
5  Orkin, p. 42.
6  Morley  Callaghan, "An  Ocean Away,"  in Brandon Conron, ed., Morley Callaghan (Toronto:  McGraw-Hill Ryerson,   I976), p.  17. Reprinted from  Times  Literary Supplement, June 4, 1964, 493·
7  Morley  Callaghan, That Summer in Paris (London: MacGibbon and  Kee,  1963), p. 16.
8  Richard Bridgman, The  Colloquial Style  in  America   (New  York:  Oxford Univ. Press,  I966), pp.  I2-r3.
9  Bridgman, p. 41.
10 Northrop Frye,  "Conclusion" to Carl  F. Klinck,  ed.,  Literary  History  of Canada: Canadian Literature in  English  (Toronto: Univ.  of Toronto Press,  I965), p. 830.
11 Hugh MacLennan, "Homage to  Hemingway," in  Thirty and  Three  (Toronto: Macmillan, I954), pp. 85-96. All quotations by MacLennan not  otherwise  identi­ fied are  from  this source.
12  Hugh MacLennan, "The Future of  the  Novel  as an  Art  Form," in  Scotchman's
Return and  Other Essays  (Toronto:  Macmillan, I96o), pp.  I42-58.
13  Hugh MacLennan, "Youth and  the  Modern Literature," in  Scotchman's Return,
p. 244·
14  Callaghan, "An   Ocean Away,"  in  Conron, p.  19. The date   is  surely  an  error. Callaghan graduated from  St.  Michael's College,  University of  Toronto, in  I925·
15  Robertson Davies,   A   Voice  from  the   Attic   (Toronto:  McClelland &  Stewart, I 960) .  All  quotations  by  Davies   not  otherwise   identified  are  from   this  source, chapters I, 3, 6, and  8.
16 Walker   Gibson,  Tough, Sweet, and  Stuffy  (Bloomington: Indiana  Univ.   Press,
I96o).





PJISTORJILE
 


Kim Maltman


With  a lurch  as if from  long  disuse
the  huge  machinery of night  starts  up again.
Out of the  ground, between  the  thick  black  rows of shadow soil,  the shadow plants
crawl  and  beneath their  shade  the  shadow  animals, the shadow seige of ruts  and  holes
overflowing, swarming through the fields like great  soft  beetles.
What could  move  the  branches of that  willow so? The wind,
only the  wind.

21

POEM

A lantern on  a fencepost, falling.
Shadows.
Now  the owl is awake,
the grass a labyrinth of small sounds. The  shadow  moon  is high.
The owl flaps once  and  vanishes,
its feathers soft and  soundless
(Far off: 	farm  lights.) Small  shivering  sounds.
The blood-coloured wind  that  ripples  through the  shadow  rye.





POLTERGEIST
 


Jim Joyce


On  a humid summer night the  door  from  the  stairs
to  the  unused  second-floor room
opened, not
with  the  push  of visible hand.

A wash of cold  air swished  into  the  kitchen, sidled  along  her  arm,
as she sat talking  to friends.

The front  room
had  grown  refrigerated.
She  had  to  pull  on a sweater after  answering the  phone.

Fifty  years ago
an  old lonely woman
boarded in  the  upstairs  room. She  also paid  enough
to sit in  the front  room,
and  rock away  her  spinsterhood.

She  debates  all  this with  me.
I asked  her  why she did  not  like cats.    She  thinks  them  vampires of her warm  hands.

22


TELLING AND SELLING DIVERSIONS

The Novels of Richard B. Wright


Eleanor Johnston

A suBJECT  CENTRAL TO  Richaxd  B. Wdght's novels  is
man's need  for  the  diversions of  memories,  fantasies,   entertainment,  advertise­
ments  and, in  his most  recent  novel, drugs  and  news stories.  He  introduces this thematic concern rather  blatantly in  the  first  chapter  of  The   Weekend   Man ( 1970)  when  the  narrator, Wes Wakeham, both  describes  his need  for imagina­ tive escape  from  the  tedium of everyday  life and  analyzes  this  need  as one  char­ acteristic of modem man :

What  is a weekend man you ask? A weekend man is a person who has abandoned the present in favour of the past or the future.... If the truth  were known nothing much  happens  to most of us during  the course of our  daily passage.... we must cast  about  for  a  diversion.  A  diversion  is anything   that   removes  us  from  the ordinary  present.

Wes  tells  us  of  his  own   and   others'   daydreams,  memories,  and   imaginative involvement with  entertainment and  advertisements because  he enjoys  his vicari­ ous  participation in  the  diversions  as  he  describes  them.   He  also  assumes  that  "you," a  person  "like  most  of us,"  are  a "weekend man" as  well.  This  implica­ tion  of the  reader in  the  psychological  state  of  the  protagonist is  reinforced   by the  act  of  reading The   Weekend  Man:   Wes's  narrative of  the  diversions   he experiences is the  story  written by Wright for sale as a  novelty for  the  reader, as a diversion  in  other   words,  from  the  reader's own  "ordinary  present." Wright's perception of  the  appeal of  his art  is repeatedly suggested  by  his frequent and  explicit  analyses,  in  both  The  Weekend  Man  and  In  the  Middle  of  a Life,  of the  weekend  man's need  for diversions.  In  Farthing's Fortunes this subject  is not so readily  apparent. But  while  this  novel is less  theoretical than  the  earlier  two, in its protagonist's referring to the  need  for  imaginative escape  and  in its being itself  eminently entertaining,  Farthing's  Fortunes can  be seen  to  deal  with  the same  subject but  with  a greater degree of  integration of the  subject  matter with the  narrative of  the  fiction.  In  Final  Things, the  subject of  diversions  is given an  even  broader, and   more  artistically successful,  presentation.  Before  under-

WRIGHT

taking  an  interpretation of Farthing's  Fortunes  and  Final  Things  in  terms  of their  treatment of diversions, however, an  examination of  the  theory,  as  pre­ sented in The  Weekend  Man  and  In the Middle  of a Life, of the weekend  man's  need for diversions, provides a necessary groundwork.
Wes, the  weekend  man,  frequently   analyses  his  own  need  for  imaginative escape.  For  him,  "the  greatest  diversion  of  them   all"  is  his  memory  of  the Cuban  missile crisis. He recalls the end, on October  24, 1962, of his affair  with a silver blonde named  Karen.  He had immersed  himself in her fantasies of their future:

Karen was pleased that I was taking up astronomy. It  seemed to her like a fine hobby for an advertising man.
And so I would fill my allotted time on this planet  with a few harmless diver­ sions; plan me a little future with ... my platinum-helmeted  partner  by my side. With my Tudor  cottage on the leafy street and  my two small  well-behaved chil­ dren in the private school.

At the  height of the  Cuban  crisis Wes stayed  home  from  work, entranced  and exhilarated  by the events unfolding on his television. Karen  refused to  join him in this diversion and  her demand  that  he return  to  the  office to work for  their future  plans  led  him  to  end  their  relationship.  Bored  with  her  diversion,  her plans, as she was unimpressed by his, the Cuban  crisis, they parted; for both  the need for diversions is more compelling than  the  need for  relationships.
Like all the other  weekend people Wright  portrays,  Wes enjoys the essentially
passive pastime  of watching  television shows full  of action  and  excitement : "television,"  Wes explains, "is a  good diversion."  On  Wednesday  evening,  de­ pressed by the "famine" of his sexual life, he immerses himself in the activity  of a television show:  "I sat in my apartment watching  Matt  Dillon's peaceful horse­ face as he stepped  into a tense saloon and  cooled things  out."  Wes has  entered the fictional world : from his description he seems almost to be in the same room as Dillon.  This  diversion  commands  Wes's attention despite  the interruption of a "real" person. When  his father-in-law,  Bert Sinclair,  phones, Wes muses:  "In  the background  I could hear Bert's television; little explosions of  canned laughter. He wasn't  watching  Gunsmoke  for at that  moment  Matt  was drilling  two cow­ boys on  the  main  street  of Dodge."  Wes is involved  in  the  show  to the  extent that  he identifies with Dillon, and  imagines the lawman's thoughts: "I watched him as he walked over to where they lay, that  hang-dog  expression on his face. Oh  shoot,  why must  there  be all this senseless violence  in  my town."  The  pun in his exclamation, "Oh  shoot," suggests that  Wes laughs at  his own immersion in the  show. Certainly  he is aware  that  he is a  weekend  man.  But  even  as he defines and  gently mocks his need for diversions  he remains  unchanged, depen­ dent on television for escape from the problems of his family life and  career,  his "ordinary present."

WRIGHT

A reader  unfamiliar  with the Gunsmoke  series would be confused by sentences such as the one beginning, "I sat in my apartment watching  Matt  Dillon's peace­ ful horse-face." Wright expects his audience to be sufficiently familiar with televi­ sion programmes  to recognize Hollywood allusions. When he describes people for us in terms of their resemblance to movie stars, he again does so in the confidence that  these stars are known  to us. Wes's wife Molly looks like Joanne Woodward,  his boss "slightly  resembles"  Rod  Steiger  and  Bert is "a  dead  ringer  for  Jack Oakie." From our experience  of the diversions of television and  movies, we com­ plete the characterization of Wright's  diversion, The Weekend Man. And when we realize  that,  like Wes, we are  familiar  with the  escapist  world  of television programmes,  what  I take to be Wright's  point has been made: we, the readers, like all the characters  in the novel, are weekend people.
Wright's  second novel shares with The  Weekend  Man  many  elements of plot,
characterization and,  most obviously, subject  matter.  The  protagonist  of In  the Middle   of a  Life   ( 1973), Fred  Landon,  is  like  Wes  Wakeham, a  Toronto salesman   whose  company   has  been  bought   up  by  a  larger,   more  aggressive American  firm.  Because  they  are  not  successful, not  pushy  enough,  both  men have been deserted  by their  wives. And, like Wes, Fred  has the  weaknesses of a weekend  man.  Talking  to  his lover,  Margaret  Beauchamp,  he  says that  in  his early years "he  was a fat,  indolent  child, ... listening to the great  brown  Mar­ coni console ... to Edgar  Bergen and  Charlie  McCarthy; Duffy's Tavern; Jack Armstrong,  All-American  boy."  In  the  middle  of  his  life  he  still  uses, in  his imagination, "old  comic-book slang." "His  head was filled with old movies and songs" when he is half-heartedly trying to find a job. But while Wes accepts him­ self as a weekend man,  Fred  considers his need for diversions a weakness. He is unlike the detached  and somewhat  cynical Wes, moreover, in  his compassion for other  people  who share  his need for  imaginative  escape.  Fred's  generalizations about  the human  condition  represent  what seems to be the novel's theme:  "The  modern soul! How starved  for authentic experience!" Thus  while the two novels portray  and  analyze the same psychological state, A Weekend Man, like its nar­ rator,  is ironic  in tone  while In the Middle  of a  Life and  its protagonist  express compassion for  the  plight  of modern  man.
The  sympathetic  understanding Fred  has for  what  he  perceives to be man's
prevalent  weakness is most evident in his extended description  to Margaret of his mother's  susceptibility to the American  media. Joanna Landon's passion was Hollywood movies. She spoke "in the slightly fruity voice of a Barbara  Stanwyck. Or  whoever she had seen the night before at the Royale Theatre.... It was just that  unconsciously she  played  out  her life in other  guises." She  finally escaped her  prosaic  life in  the  small  town  with  Charley  Ames, an  American  who  had once had "some bit parts in a few [Hollywood]  pictures."  Fred tells Margaret of the  pity  he  felt for  these  "two  great  children"  when  he  visited  them  in  their

25

WRIGHT

mobile home in Anaheim,  California,  where  Charley  was the  projectionist  in  a drive-in  theatre.   The  urban  California   landscape   was  "fractured," an  "alien land"  with "artificial  trees" and air which "seemed electric." Charley and Joanna had  become  fat,  drunk,  and  bored,  sustained  only  by  the  fantasies  offered  by nearby  Disneyland,  afternoon  television, and  the evening films at  the Star-Burst Theatre. Fred "was utterly depressed by it all." As he tells Margaret of Joanna's pathetic  delusions, she too feels sadness and  sympathy.  "Margaret was listening closely, watching  his face." As he continues,  she interjects,  "How sad"  and  "I want  to hear."  Because the narrator consistently presents Margaret as kind  and intelligent,  her response to Fred's story can be taken  as that  of a good audience. We are  given no alternative  model of response to  the  need for  diversions  than that of compassion.
In  the  world of In the Middle  of a Life, everyone is involved  in diverting  or being diverted  and  the novel's thematic  concern  centres on  this consumer  situa­ tion. Fred had tried to find a place in the entertainment industry  as a Hollywood script  writer.  His  "glamorous  daydreams  of  riches  and  fame"   were  frustrated because he did  not promote his television scripts aggressively enough. Entertain­ ment, then, is a commodity as well as a diversion. Wright  examines a great range of consumer  diversions by making  his unsuccessful  entertainer an  unsuccessful salesman  as  well. Butcher  in  the  employment   agency  tells  Fred,  "You  don't  strike  me  as being  quite-well,  aggressive enough.  I  really  wonder if  you're sales-oriented." Fred  watches  with  disapproval   the  advertisements   he  finds  on billboards, in subway cars and on window posters. His response to them is rueful;  he knows that  they appeal  to people's need for a  more exciting, more glamorous life:

Landon's eyes scanned   the  advertising posters  above  the  windows. These   printed appeals for   your   dollar:  correspondence schools,   charcoal  burgers,  investment analysis  and   advice,  sanitary   napkins, tango lessons.  Something for  everyone; a democratic plentitude. His  gaze  settled  on  the  picture of  a  young  girl  modeling panty  hose....  Those  advertising types kinew what  they  were  doing.

Wright,  then, has his protagonist, a failure at both writing and selling diversions, comment  on their  pervasiveness in popular  culture.
A phrase  Wes uses repeatedly in his narrative to describe  modern  man's  pre­ dicament  is "the  thundering ironies."  Another  is "the  mystery and  the  wonder of it." The  element  of hyperbole  in  these phrases  ensures  that  the  reader  does not  take  too seriously the  ultimately  unresolved  problems  of the  human   condi­ tion. The  Weekend  Man ends with Wes going to sleep on Christmas  Eve; watch­ ing  the stars,  he sees no new meaning  in  his future.  In  contrast  to  the  highly ambiguous  and  desolate conclusion to Wes's story,  Fred's  ends with  an  answer, a  promise of a  better  way of life. His lover,  Margaret Beauchamp, is the  only major character  in either novel not described in terms of her Hollywood fantasies:

WRIGHT


her clothes, her car and  her mannerisms all retain an old-fashioned  Polish flavour. She  lives in  a  world  of "authentic experience"  which  Fred,  walking  with  her through  Toronto's European Kensington  Market,  realizes most North Americans have  lost:   "Here  he  felt  something  like  the  generating   pulse  of  life, felt  its rhythms  traveling  along  his blood."  And  Margaret   becomes  pregnant  by him, forcing  him  out  of his self-indulgent  fantasies  into  new  responsibilities;  In  the Middle  of a  Life  ends  with  the  protagonist  determining   to  take  definite  steps towards  control of this new life. There  is hope he can break  out of the passivity induced  by the diversions which so pervade modern consumer society.




IN  HIS  NEXT   WORK,  Farthing's  Fortunes   ( 1976),  Wright reverts from  his sentimental optimism  to the  ironic  and  cynical  perspective  of The  Weekend   Man. The  reader  is detached  and  amused  as  the  characters  of Farthing's  Fortunes  attempt  to realize their fantasies of love and  money. It is as if Wright  decided  that  he would  write a  best-seller for  his readers  by offering them an exciting  escape from  their "ordinary present."  Farthing's  Fortunes is a tall tale and, of Wright's novels, certainly the most diverting.  Whereas the events of  the  first  two  novels take  place  in  contemporary   Canadian  apartments and business offices and  the  characters'   actions  are  unremarkable,  the  next  novel ranges over several countries  and  many years and  is peopled  by wildly eccentric characters  whose speech  is flamboyant  and  whose behaviour  is improbable.  In the  two earlier  novels  Wright  inserts extensive and  barely  disguised  authorial theories  about   man's   need  for  diversions.  In  Farthing's  Fortunes  he  restricts blatant  commentary on the meaning  and structure  of the book to a "Foreword" and  an "Epilogue." But if handled  more subtly, the subject  of diversions is kept at  the  forefront   throughout  the  novel  by  the  thoughts  and  behaviour  of  the narrator, Bill Farthing, and his friend, the salesman Cass Findlater.
Bill Farthing, according   to  the  "Publisher's  Foreword," begins  his  writing career  with the confidence that  his memoirs are "interesting" : "I've been places and  seen things that  I'll  bet most people haven't.... If you want  a story, I can give you a good one." He is amazed  that  the "publisher" is putting  out the auto­ biography  of the  quiet  and  respectable  Hector  McCoy: "he  hasn't  been  any­ where to speak of. He  hasn't  done anything.  I doubt  if he's ever met  one inter­ esting person in his life."  Farthing  appeals to the "publisher," a seller of stories, confident  that  his memoirs  have the quality  which will make  them  attractive  to the  reading  audience : "I've got the first chapter  of my  memoirs  here and  you can  give  them  a  look.  It's  a  helluva  lot  more  interesting   than   that  stuff  by McCoy."  These chapters  appeal  to the "publisher's instinct" and  Farthing's story is completed  for subsequent  sale.

WRIGHT

The  other  claim,  this one ironic, that  Farthing makes for  his story is that  of realism. Referring  to the story's "note  of authenticity" and  "verisimilitude," the "publisher" pretends  to  take  seriously such  frequent  protestations,   during   the course of Farthing's narrative,  as "To  tell you the truth," "damn me for a liar if I didn't," and  "I'll tell you something  I remember  clearly."  But no story which includes  so many  wildly improbable  chance  meetings  can  claim  verisimilitude.
Farthing's claims are really rhetorical  gestures which function  primarily  to estab­
lish a sense of complicity with his readers. When  he says "damn me for a liar if I didn't  see Sally" as he watches the passenger car of a passing train,  we, having witnessed many  other  equally  improbable  chance  meetings,  recognize  the  irony in his protestations.  Farthing  is inviting us to mock the pieties and  the realism of the McCoy world. His story is "more  interesting"  because it is so improbable, so unlike our  "ordinary present."  Farthing  tells a tale  of exaggerated  incidents,  of an onion  roast in  Dawson, of the luxury  of an  enormous  English estate  and  of terrible  poverty  in  Toronto.   His friends  include  such  comic  exaggerations  as Martin  Rooney  the  braggart  poet, Mary  Jane  Fletcher  the lascivious wife of an undertaker, and  the irrepressible hustler Cass Findlater. The  people interested  in truth,  church-goers  such  as  Miss Boswell and  Merle  Pickett,  are  ridiculed  for their  small  and  tedious orthodoxy.  Farthing's tale  is anything  but  "the  truth." Whereas in The Weekend Man and  In  the  Middle of a Life  the need for diver­ sions is more or  less deplored,  here  Farthing and  Wright  gratify  their  worldly­ wise audience  with  an  "interesting," a diverting  story.  Not  bound  by  conven­ tional truths, we are able to recognize and enjoy a clever hoax. Farthing involves us in figuring  out,  with him, the identity  of a woman  he  meets outside  Craven Falls:  "Then it came to me in a flash. Maybe it's already come to you, if you're sharp." And he mocks the expectations generated  by his tall tale. After telling of their unexpected  encounter,  when he and  Findlater were destitute  vagrants,  with the  rich  and  kind  Esther  Easterbrook,  Farthing  admonishes  us:  "Now,  if  you think I went up and  introduced  myself and that out of all that  she offered Find­ later  and  me  a  job, then  you've  been  reading  too  many  fairy  tales."  But  we expect  just such  a change  in  Farthing's  hitherto  mercurial  fortunes.  Only  forty pages earlier in his story his chance collision with Percy Finchwhistle  had resulted in a vacation  of incredibly  luxurious  leisure.  Farthing invites  us to  laugh  with him at his claim of  verisimilitude and at our own tendency  to expect traditional conventions in his story.
Farthing  frequently  alludes  to the similarities  between  his story  and  escapist fiction such as the fairy tales he accuses his readers  of indulging  in. He  records his reaction  when,  as a young man,  he finds his former  lover,  Mrs. Fletcher,  in a whorehouse: "I  was aflame  with  desire, as they  used  to say in  those  trashy romances."  He  comments  on the suitability  of exaggerated  cliches in  the telling of his tale: "to  say that  the bottom fell out  of my world  at that  moment  would

WRIGHT


be  just  about   right." But  while  he  adopts  the  conventions   of  "those  trashy romances," he at  the same  time  mocks people who read  them.  On  a train  he meets a woman  who leaves her children  to his care : "what she did  was get out this trashy novel and start  to read the damn  thing."  He  tolerates  Mrs. Fletcher's passion for  "those  trashy  novels"  because  his reading  of them  aloud  to  her  is frequently  the prelude to their love-making. He also reads to Esther,  the crippled girl, from the more sophisticated  novels of Scott, Dickens, and  Hardy :

All this stuff seemed several degrees better than the trashy romances I'd  read to Mrs. Fletcher, but the funny thing was that  the effect was remarkably the same. As soon as I'd  get into one of these stories Esther would sit there  trapped  and dazed just like Mrs. Fletcher.

Thus  Farthing has a double standard; he criticizes "trashy" books but uses many of their conventions in the story he writes himself.
The career of another  writer offers further opportunity for Wright's  indirect treatment of man's  need for diversions. Martin  Rooney is an Irishman  convinced of the greatness of his poems which are inspired by his mother  and  the object of his infatuation, Alice Fry. Farthing recognizes Rooney's  delusions;  Alice is  any­ thing  but  a shy and loving maiden  and  as for Rooney's  poetry, "the  only  worse lines I've ever heard  were recited by a man  named Jake  Snipes on the night  his mother  died."  While  Farthing tries to avoid this misguided  fool, Cass  Findlater  has a more profitable  reaction :

"What  you need, Martin,"  says Findlater, "is somebody to promote your pomes." He turned  to me. "Have  you read this man's work, Bill? Listen here now.
Few  things  in life  are so precious and  fine
As the  thought of you dear  old Mother of mine.
I mean damn it, that's beauty pure and simple."

Rooney's  poems, like "trashy  romances,"  are good diversions in that  they create fantasies  of ideal  love and  use cliches to  which  readers  can  respond.  Findlater realizes  the  business  potential  of  the  poems:  "The   market   for  that  beautiful sentiment  is the kitchen wall of every home in America."  Together  this salesman and  writer make enormous  profits. Through his description  of the career of such a  terrible  poet  Farthing encourages  us to share  the scepticism  he  feels for  the readers and  writers of popular  diversions.




IF FARTHING  TEACHES  us,  by his scorn  of "trashy" wntmg, the nature  of our enjoyment  of his tall tale, his primary role in the novel is never­ theless not this one of ironic commentator. He is a story-teller, a creator of  diver­ sions. And his friend Cass Findlater  is his counterpart, the salesman of  diversions.

WRIGHT

Findlater has all the  qualities  Wes and  Fred  lack  as salesmen; aggressive, talka­ tive and  optimistic, he sells bootleg  whiskey in the  United States during  Prohibi­ tion,  onions  in  Dawson  during winter  shortages, and  rubber during  World  War  I to anyone  who can  pay for it. If Farthing somewhat ironically  uses the  cliches of popular entertainment, Findlater wholeheartedly speaks,  reads,  and  thinks  in such  terms  as "I thought it would  be a good  way  to break  the  ice at  parties  and  generally  win friends and  influence  people." Farthing  describes  his friend's daily reading habits :

Findlater paid  attention  to ... the stories and  theories  of successful men in busi­ ness. He  spent  a  lot of time painfully  working  his way through  twenty-five-cent books with titles like "Ten  Steps to Successful Living"  or "How  I  Made  My First Million."

For Wes whose father-in-law sends him a Reader's  Digest article about the  career of the  sales director of a  petroleum company, or  Fred  who  is instructed to  read "the reprint of a  Reader's  Digest article  which  described how  Wilbur P.  Wade had sold an  entire  subdivision  in one  week,"  self-improvement manuals represent unattainable  fantasies  of   business   success.   Findlater,   however,  follows   such examples seriously  and  successfully. His whole-hearted acceptance of the  Horatio
Alger  Jr. model  of social climbing  is exhilarating to Wright's readers because  he
actually acquires riches  most  people  only  dream of.  At  the  end  of  Farthing's story,  Findlater is  living  in  Castle   Eldorado, "a  reproduction of  an  old-time castle  such  as you  might  find  in  a  kid's  book  of  fairy  tales."  He  tells  Farthing about his memoirs :

I'm  riting  on the  benefits of positive thinkin  and  of how if you keep your sunny side up  and  believe in God, you'll come out  on  top of the  other  feller.  I  rote  a man in New York City and he told me his company  would put it out for ten thou­ sand dollars.

The  story  of Findlater as both  he and  Farthing tell it is a great  diversion; it  will be  a  best-seller   because   it  describes   the   kind   of  life  weekend   people   like  to imagine.
Wright, like his writers  Farthing and  Findlater, has created a "helluva ... interesting" diversion.  His  novel  contains one  adventurous, amusing, and  exag­ gerated incident after  another. He  removes  the  reader from  "the  ordinary  pres­ ent" by  humour, pathos,  sex and  violence.  Farthing's  Fortunes  is both  a story about weekend  men,  those escapists  who  hope  to  "find  later" a "far thing," and  a "trashy novel"  for weekend  men,  the  readers of  Wright's tall  tale.  This  para­ dox  is introduced by  the  elaborate and  obvious  fabrication of  the  pretence, in the  "Publisher's Foreword" and  the  "Epilogue," that   neither  Farthing nor  this story  is  fictional:  the  reader,  recognizing Farthing's  Fortunes  as  fiction,   thus  expects,  from  the  start,  narrative ironies  rather than  consistent   thematic state-

WRIGHT


ments.  These   ironic   comments tend,  in  the  main,   to  concern   the  telling  and selling of diversions. Again  in Farthing's Fortunes, as in The  Weekend  Man  and In  the  Middle   of a  Life,  Wright has  constructed  a  novel  around the  tension between   his form, the  diversion, and  his content, the  discussion  of  man's   need for diversion.
If Farthing's  Fortunes  contains fewer  and  less obvious   theoretical intrusions
than the  earlier   novels,  Final Things   ( rg8o)  continues this  movement to  step beyond  even  indirect discussion,  within  the  fiction,  of  the  nature of  diversions. This  most  recent   novel  portrays the  reactions of  a  man   to  his son's  rape  and murder. As the  police search  for  his son  begins,  Charlie Farris "felt  his own  life pulled  in  the  direction of  larger,  darker things," and  through his fear  and  loss "A  feeling  of  immense pity  arose  within  him.  Man  was  a suffering  animal. ... Farris felt  somehow united   with  his fellow  creatures in  a  terrible destiny." As Farris pursues  the  murderers to their  and  his own  deaths, he becomes  typical  of man  trapped, even  despite  his innate kindliness,  by his own  destructive  compul­ sions. But  instead  of  using  authorial intrusions or  narrative  ironies,  Wright pre­  sents  this  novel's  thematic content through Farris'  tendency to  generalize from  his own experience to comment, usually  pessimistically,  on the human condition; the  reader   is  drawn into  Farris' depression   as,  for  example,  "the idea  of  the impermanence of all things  filled him with a peculiar sense of  regret." As well as being  more  self-contained, Final  Things  is  distinguished  from  the  sentimental hope  and   cynical   humour of  the  earlier   novels.  Its   title,  which   refers  to  the destruction  by  a  wrathful God  of  sinful  man,  suggests  the  novel's  consistently  bleak  perspective as well as its universal  scope.
The  diversions  in Final Things, as well as the  characters, resemble  those of the
earlier   novels.  Charlie Farris is a  middle-aged Torontonian,  a  writer   painfully aware and  ashamed of his failed  career  and  broken  marriage. Farris and  a variety of minor  characters are  alcoholics; his beautiful, estranged wife is dependent on Valium; their  son, Jonathan, and  his murderers, use and  sell marijuana and pornographic pictures. The   apparently universal  need  for  consuming and, less importantly in this  book, selling  diversions,  is presented, without narrative intru­ sion,  as the  means  of  escape  from,  as well as the  cause  of,  violence.  Diversions, then,  are  not  discussed  but  rather they  function as the  symptoms  and  activators of the  underlying emotions which  are  the  raw  material of the  plot. The  murder of Jonathan and  the  final  massacre  are  not  planned;  elemental fears  and  rage,  unleashed by drugs,  determine behaviour. This  world is too grim  to face  without drugs  but  they  merely  accentuate the  "larger, darker  things," and  speed  up  the destruction, the  "final things."
Final Things   can  be  seen  from  another, wider  perspective to  deal  with  the subject  of diversions  to the  extent  that  the  novel  analyses  the  role in society  of a specific  kind  of  diversion, the  news  story.  Murchison, the   newsman pursuing

WRIGHT

Farris'  version of his son's disappearance, states  the  case bluntly: "Child  mur­ ders are headlines. People are definitely interested." If Murchison  wants the story for the sales it will give his newspaper,  it might  also be said  that  Wright  chose, for the sake of his novel's sale, his subject on the  basis of the  established  reader interest  in  the  famous  rape  and  murder  of  Emmanuel  Jacques   in  downtown  Toronto. That  this  charge  sorely misses the  point  of  the  novel  is seen in  the thoroughness  with which Wright  both explores the feeling of horror  and fascina­ tion that  Jacques's  story raised and analyses the kind of society in which such an outrage  could  happen.  He  explores the fantasy  most  of  the  newspaper  readers would have  had,  "What would  I have done  if  this had  happened to my son?" by taking the reader through  the emotions of a fictionalized father.  Final Things, then,  attracts  sales by its subject,  but  also  moves beyond  mere exploitation  of a diversion  to  examine  the  compulsions  surrounding such  an  event.  Wright  has successfully left behind  the comments, direct  in The  Weekend Man  and  In  the Middle  of a Life, and indirect  in  Farthing's  Fortunes, on the nature  and  effects of diversions and  has stepped, in Final Things, into the more comprehensive and artistically  coherent  framework  of  analysis  of  one  representative father   in  an escapist society.







THE WIND, GROWING UP
 


Roo Borson


The wind.    It comes at  night, trying  to claw  the  house  apart. It goes at  all  the  windows.
The windows  shudder in  their  frames.
The wind  wants  you  to come  out  and  be  blown forever  through a world  moving  too  fast
for  you  to see it.    The way  the  wind  sees it.
So what  if you lie under  the  covers  and  shiver?
That same  wind  goes through your  lungs,  through and  through, through and  through.


FROM "HUNKY" TO DON JUAN

The Changing Hungarian Identity in Canadian Fiction


Ildik6  de Papp Carrington





CANADA's MULTICULTURAUSM ffi vividly reflected in Can­ adian  immigrant novels, many  of which are about  the  characters'  difficulties in a new country.  These difficulties, according  to the sociologist John  Kosa, can be divided  into  two major  stages, adjustment and  assimilation.  The  first stage, ad­ justment,  is economic;  it includes all the necessary external  changes  involved in getting  a  job and  making  not only a living but a life. The second stage, though not always chronologically  distinct, is much  more difficult; assimilation demands internal,  psychological change  as the  immigrant  tries to  identify  with  the  new culture.1
Tracing  the twofold process of adjustment and assimilation in Under the  Ribs of Death, John  Marlyn's  novel about  pre-World  War  I  Hungarian  immigrants in  Winnipeg,   both  Margaret Atwood 2     and  Eli  Mandel   emphasize  the  hero's striving  for  economic  success and  his "yearning  for  identity  and  acceptance."3
They  disagree  on  how  completely  Sandor   Hunyadi,   the  hero,  fails  when  he rejects his Hungarian identity,  changes his name,  and  tries to tum  himself into "Alex Hunter," a ruthless Canadian businessman. The  novel ends with the Depression  and   Alex  Hunter's bankruptcy.   Whatever   his  degree  of  personal failure,  his economic failure  is part of the general disaster. But, although  they do not agree in their evaluation  of his fate, neither  Atwood  nor  Mandel  ever ques­ tions the basic premise that  this pattern  of painful change  is, by definition, what the immigrant novel must  always be about.
However,  if we look at later  fiction  by and  about  Hungarian immigrants  in Canada, we see that  this premise is not  applicable.  In  this later  fiction we find characters  radically  different  from  Hunyadi-Hunter, who do not feel inferior to native  Canadians and  unsure  of  their  own  cultural  values.  They  do  not  feel compelled  to  shed  their  Hungarian  identities.  They  adjust,   but   they  do  not assimilate,  and  they  criticize  fellow-Hungarians who  do.  Although  Under  the Ribs  of Death  came out  in  I 957, its story begins in I 9I 3 and  ends in the early Depression years; thus its hero's attitudes  mark him as characteristic of the Hun-

33

HUNGARIAN  IMAGES

garian  immigrants of that time. But fiction about  post-World  War  II  Hungarian immigrants  reflects quite  another  set of attitudes. Such  fiction  has been  written by both  immigrants  and native Canadians and  in both  English and  Hungarian. Marika  Robert's   A  Stranger   and  Afraid   ( I964) 4    and  Stephen  Vizinczey's  In Praise of Older  Women (I g65) 5  are two novels by recent Hungarian immigrants. Vizinczey and  his protagonist both fought in the Hungarian Revolution  of I 956. Robert  Fulford's  short story "The  Good Wife" satirizes another  "graduate of the class of  '56."6   The   Canadian   hero  of  Robert   Kroetsch's   novel  But   We  Are Exiles  ( I965)  is obsessed with  the  dead  Mike  Hornyak,  "that crazy  bohunk," who may or may not be a Hungarian.7   These  works are  all in English. An  An­ thology   of the  Canadian  Hungarian  Authors'  Association, published  in  Hun­  garian in Ig6g, contains short stories by and about  recent Hungarian immigrants.8
Comparing these works to Under the  Ribs  of Death  means  tracing  a road  from self-loathing  to self-confidence.
Setting  out on this road, let us consider three of the early scenes in Under the Ribs  of Death. Sandor,  a Winnipeg schoolboy, is "chased  ... home from school every day"  by "the  English gang,"  a group  of English-speaking  classmates. They chant,  "Ya,  Ya, Hunky,  Hunky,  Humpy  Ya  Ya."  But  their  mockery  does not mean  that  he can't  write English. When  he writes a prize-winning  essay on  the ironic topic of "Victoria  Day-What It Means  to Me,"  he is taken  on  a "tri­ umphal   tour  of  every  class-room in  the  school  to  recite  his  composition."   In reprisal the gang threatens  "him  with a beating  ... for daring  ... even to show his hunky face in their class-room."
But  the greatest  humiliation  of being  a  "Hunky," Sandor  feels, is the  result
of his difficulties with his Hungarian name. Describing his reaction  to a Canadian woman  who forgets his name,  he is surprised  that  she doesn't  "ask  him  to  pro­ nounce it;  people he met for the first time nearly always did. But to tell her  now was  suddenly  impossible. She  would  smile  and  there   would  begin  again  the feeling  that  he  was exposing something  naked  and  ugly  to  the  world's  gaze." Tormented by this physical, almost sexual, sense of self-loathing,  he tells her  his name  is Alex Humphrey, but  when he grows up,  he changes  it to Alex  Hunter, and  also persuades  his father  to change  his name,  although  the  elder  Hunyadi insists that  his son  is "ashamed  of  the  wrong  things...."  It  is  wrong  "to  be ashamed  of your  name  because  you are  Hungarian and  ...  poor!" But  Alex needs this name,  not  only because  it is easy to  pronounce,  but  also because  it seems "to  absolve him of all he had done in his previous existence." Reading  his new signature, he feels "as  though  he could see the  tattered   husk of his former self.  He  felt  he  had  left  behind  all  that   was  worthless  and   had   been  born anew...."
Quoting  this passage from the novel, Atwood  analyzes the connotations of the new name: Alex Hunter,  she says, suggests "Alexander the  Great,  conqueror  of

34

HUNGARIAN  IMAGES


the  world,  and  ... the  predatory hunting-and-killing stance Sandor feels success requires...."  "Alex," however,  is merely  a  translation of  "Sandor," the  Hun­ garian "Alexander." So  it  is  not  a  new  name.   But  giving   up  the  surname of Hunyadi is  deeply   ironic   because   Hunyadi was  the   name of  two  Hungarian heroes, father and  son. Janos Hunyadi was the leader  of the  Christian forces that  defeated the  Turks in  the  Battle  of Belgrade  in  1456.  His  younger son,  Matyas, was  elected   King   of  Hungary in  1458.  As  Matthias Corvinus  he  became   an embodiment of the  Renaissance ruler,  protecting learning and science  and  estab­  lishing  "the Corvina," one of the finest libraries  in Europe. So Sandor's own sur­ name  is rich  in  heroic  and  royal  connotations which  are  his by right.
But  of course  it isn't  the  legacy  of a distant and  glorious  past  that  matters to
Sandor. It is the  terrible pressure  of a daily struggle  to dissociate  his present  and especially  his future from  a  very  recent  past  he  rejects  as  shameful. When   he and  his father go  to  the  Winnipeg railroad station   to  welcome  his  uncle,   just arrived from   Hungary  with   a  large  group   of  pre-World  War   I  immigrants, Sandor is horrified by  the  possibility  of  being  identified with  them.

Sandor  turned  pale at  the sight of them.  They  stood  there,  awkward  and  be- grimed, the men in tight-fitting  wrinkled clothes ... unshaven  and foreign-looking, the women in kerchiefs and voluminous skirts ... exactly the way his grandmother looked in  that  picture  in  the  front  room. And  it  was  this  that  was frightening. They  were  so  close  to  him.  Only  a  few  months  or  years-a  few  words  and recently  acquired   habits-separated  his  parents  from   them.  The   kinship  was odious. He  knew how hard  it was for his parents  to change  their  ways. But  they were  changing.   They   used  tinned  goods sometimes  ... now,  and  store-bought bread  when  they had  enough  money. English food was appearing on  their  table, the English language  in their  home. Slowly, very slowly, they were changing,  ... becmning Canadians. And now here it stood. Here  was the nightmare survival  of themselves, mocking  and  dragging  them  backi to their  shameful  past.

The   costumes   of  the  women   described   in  this  passage,   the  kerchiefs  and   the layered  skirts,  clearly  identify   these  immigrants as  people  from  rural   Hungary, as  peasants.




IN VIVID CONTRAST  TO  THIS pre-World War  I arrival scene  is a scene  describing the  arrival of a group  of  1956 Hungarian  immigrants in  yet another railroad station, this time in Rome.  This  episode  is seen  through the  eyes of  the  first-person narrator  of  Stephen  Vizinczey's   novel,  In   Praise  of  Older Women. Three hundred Hungarian refugees  pour  off  the  train, then  fight  their way into  a hotel  lobby  filled with donations of expensive  clothes  from  fashionable Roman department  stores.  Andras Vajda, the  narrator, crams   a  suitcase   with shirts,  ties, shoes, suits,  "six  black  pullovers  and  a smart overcoat." So  when  he

35

HUNGARIAN IMAGES

arrives in Toronto  in 1957,  he looks so fashionably  attractive that  a  Canadian woman immediately  tries to pick him up.
But the difference is far more than  a matter  of international fashion. Vajda, a
23-year-old Freedom  Fighter, is the son of an assassinated  intellectual,  has "cum laude degrees from  the University  of Budapest," is multilingual, and  spends  his time in Italy writing a dissertation on Sartre.  Three  years later  he not only gets a Ph.D. from the University of Toronto  but also has his dissertation  published.  In short,  he is a professional intellectual,  not a  peasant.  As Kosa  points  out,  post­ World  War  II Hungarian immigrants  included  large  numbers  of  middle-class, educated, professional people who, in sharp  contrast  to  the  earlier  immigrants,  possessed intangible  assets that  soon helped them  to fit into "a status comparable to  the  Canadian middle  class." Large  groups  of students  and professors were especially prominent  among the refugees who fled Hungary after  the Hungarian Revolution  of I 956. As a member of this educated  class, Vajda has little trouble achieving success. Soon he is a philosophy professor at  the University  of Saskat­ chewan.
In  addition  to being a professional intellectual,  he is also a  professional Don
Juan,   a  "philandering  internationalist." His  autobiographical  novel,  subtitled "the  amorous  recollections of  Andras  Vajda," is dedicated   "To   Young  Men Without  Lovers." The  veteran  of many  exciting love affairs,  all fully described, he makes himself the sexual  mentor  of provincial  young  Canadians humiliated by their  inexperience  and frustration. His main  advice  to all such young men is to steer clear of hysterical young virgins and,  as Benjamin Franklin  urged  long ago, enrich  themselves instead with the experience  and  gratitude so amply  to be acquired  from  older  women.  Thus  Vajda   hopes to "stimulate a  broader  inter­ course between the generations." But such broadly  punning  philosophy  does not endear  him to stuffy provincial professors. When one of his students proclaims in the college paper  that  "he  couldn't  care less whether  a girl was a  virgin,"  Vajda  is suspected of corrupting  him, and  is indignantly denounced  at  "an  emergency faculty meeting" for wearing "Italian pullovers" to class and  flouting "morality" in an "atrocious accent."  To  keep his job, Vajda  fires off a letter  to the editor, sternly  condemning   the  seduction  of  virgins.  His  book  also  satirizes  sexually frustrated faculty  wives, whom he finds just as ridiculous as their  husbands.  But soon he is pleasantly surprised  by "the  North  American Sexual  Revolution" and has "several love affairs concurrently." At the end of the novel he enjoys himself in "a  newly opened  Hungarian coffee house" in Toronto and  takes "full  credit"  for  all  "the  changes  European immigrants   were  bringing" to  "stuffy  old  To­ ronto."  So instead  of shedding  his Hungarian  identity  and  trying  to  become  a Canadian, like Sandor  Hunyadi,  Andras  Vajda, whose economic  problems  are swiftly solved, amuses himself by  teaching  Canadians how  to be like him,  and makes lighthearted fun  of  them  when  they  finally  start  running   to  catch  up.

HUNGARIAN IMAGES

In  Praise of Older  Women, therefore,  is a funny,  picaresque,  erotic  novel with an immigrant hero.
But  perhaps  Vizinczey felt that  it was not taken seriously enough,  because in
1969 he added  a "Postscript to an  Erotic  Novel" in The  Rules  of Chaos. Here he  defines Vajda   the  philanderer as an  example  of the  absurd  and  alienated modern  hero, a Don Juan  because he is an immigrant.  "Migration" and "histori­ cal dislocations,"  he argues,  "have  made  millions lonelier  as well as  freer,"  be­ cause the uprooted  man  must make an "emotional  adaptation to the age of dis­ continuity," and  this  adaptation  takes  the  form  of   "multiplying  rather   than deepening  experience."  Labelling  such  multiplication  the  "episodic  sensibility," he concludes  that  "the  libertine  has become ... the  representative  hero  of our time."9
But this argument sounds spurious  as well as absurd.  Although  Vajda's  amo­ rous encounters  occur  in  a  variety  of settings-Austria, Hungary,  Italy,  and Canada-most  of  his love affairs  bloom in  Budapest  during   his  years  at  the university,  and  there,  far  from  being  alien  or  dislocated,  he  is  very  much  an integral  part of the social, cultural,  and intellectual life of the upper  middle class. Until  1956  the  Communist   regime  remains  only a  dark  shadow  in  the  back­ ground.  In  the foreground  Vajda  hops merrily from bed  to bed, and  it is these erotic adventures that  he contrasts so gleefully to the squareness and  stuffiness of life in Toronto  and Saskatoon.
A  Stranger  and  Afraid,  by  Marika   Robert,  is another   post-World   War  II novel in which the Hungarian protagonist is very different from Sandor  Hunyadi. Although  Kristina, the novel's heroine and first-person narrator, arrives in Canada six years before Vajda, she comes from  an  upper  middle  class background  very similar  to  his.  When  she  leaves  this  background   and  flees from  Communist Budapest  to Paris, she feels uprooted.  "I had lost my place in a familiar  society, because I had  become a stranger  who didn't  belong anywhere." The  18-year-old Kristina  goes to  work  for  Andre  Duval,  a  wealthy  blackmarketeer  who  soon becomes her sadistic lover:  he beats her and she adores it. Like Vajda, Kristina is erotically  experienced; she is not  promiscuous,  but  she understands her  own strange  sexuality. However,  when Andre  is accidentally  killed, she and  a friend, another  young  Hungarian woman,  begin to think  about  emigrating to Canada. At first they are both very dubious. "Whoever  heard of anyone going to Canada?" her  friend  asks. "I thought  only farmers  and  lumberjacks  went  there  and  men who got girls pregnant  and  wanted  to escape the responsibilities.  Where  is this Canada anyway,  are  you sure it exists?" Kristina  considers the idea  of Canada "rather repulsive"  because "the  mere word made me shiver. I could see endless snow-covered  mountains  and  ten  million  people skiing  up  and  down  on  wild slopes, summer  and  winter. It was a dreadful  thought."

37

HUNGARIAN  IMAGES

In  Toronto  she  finds that  it  is immigrants   who  are  considered  dreadful.  A woman  who  helps her find a room  tells her  that  "immigrants shouldn't be ... fussy, you  should  be  happy  to  be  allowed  in,  though   if  they  asked  me,  we wouldn't  let you. Who needs all these foreigners?  They're only taking  away  the jobs from  Canadians." When  Kristina  gets a  job, a female  superior  complains that  Toronto "is becoming a babel of languages;  wherever  I go I can hear  those dreadful  yappings.  Why  can't  they  learn  English?"  Even  worse are  "sidewalk cafes in Toronto, what will come next? Open  Sundays,  I bet. That's what  these foreigners would like to have, drinking  parties, Sunday  movies.... They're  trying to change our way of life instead of assimilating. Toronto will never be the same again.  Why didn't  they all stay at home?"
But  Kristina's male superior,  Neil Albright,  does not feel this way. The  first
time he kisses her, he is so excited by her expertise that  he proposes. Her marriage to  a  young  executive  takes  care  of  Kristina's   economic  problems  but  creates others. She feels culturally superior  to "a  Canadian husband  whose great-grand­ father  fought  Indians  and  slept  on  animal  skins  at  the  time  when  my  great­ grandfather fought  duels over  perfumed  ladies  and  arranged  lavish  soirees for them."  She is astonished that  Neil not only cooks well but shares all the chores, hands over his paycheck, always tells her where he is going, and  defers to her on every decision. He certainly is "aU-bright,"  but since neither Hungarian husbands nor  French  lovers behave like this, Kristina  finds him  slightly ludicrous.  In  bed he is worse than  that. Making love to him, his kinky wife feels, means "changing the  wavelength  from  pagan  rituals  to silent  calisthenics."  Because  he considers intercourse  merely  "a  natural   function,"  Neil  makes  love  "in  ... pitch-black silence." After  a frightening  affair  with  a  sadistic  lover and  a  whirl  at  psycho­ therapy,  Kristina  decides to accept  her  masochism  instead  of fighting  it.  This decision helps her  to feel, rather  improbably,  that  she is no longer  "a  stranger and  afraid" in Canada. Caustically funny  about  this novel, Atwood  dismisses it because of Kristina's masochism. But it is important to reiterate  that  here again the protagonist  does not try to change, because she does not feel inferior to Cana­  dians;  rather,  she is convinced  that  she is both  culturally  and  sexually superior to them.

SoIS  ALEX  HRADAS, the Hungarian husband  of Sylvia, "The
Good  Wife" in Robert  Fulford's  short story. But his name  is not  convincing: it
is not an echt  Hungarian name. Although  the Austro-Hungarian Empire  was an uneasy, polyglot mixture of many nationalities,  whose diversity continues to be reflected in Hungarian surnames,  art  is not life. So an  author  wishing to create an  unmistakably  Hungarian character  ought  to  give him  a  Magyar   name.  To clarify  by  analogy,  an  unmistakably  English  character  should  not  be  named

HUNGARIAN IMAGES

Emlyn  Lloyd-Thomas, for  the English reader  would  inevitably  think  of him  as Welsh. The  fact  that  Fulford  gives Hradas  a Czech  name  instead  of a Magyar name  points to the most important difference between this story and  the preced­ ing three  novels:  the author  is a Canadian, not a Hungarian. Therefore, we see the  immigrant  not  from  the  inside,  but  from  the  outside,  and  the  picture  is sharply critical.
Like Vajda, Hradas is a young Freedom  Fighter  who immigrates  to Canada
and  earns  a graduate degree  at a Toronto  university. Sylvia, a Canadian  coed, meets  him  when  he  delivers  a  lecture  "on  the  aesthetics  of  George  Lukacs." Impressed-she doesn't  even understand  Northrop  Frye-Sylvia surrenders her virginity to Hradas because he makes love in a "curt  way, ... the way a  Euro­ pean  intellectual  should  make  love." Although  not  charming like  Vajda,  since he  isn't  describing  himself,  he  is obviously  an  expert  seducer,  and  they  soon marry.  Kosa notes that  another  important difference between earlier  Hungarian immigrants and  post-World   War  II  immigrants  is  that   the  latter,  instead  of marrying   Hungarians, "show  a  tendency  to  marry  into  the  Anglo-Canadian stock." As the  Canadian half of a Canadian-Hungarian  couple, Sylvia becomes the female counterpart of the good husband,  Neil Albright, but also something of a masochist. She longs for children,  but for ten years she loyally supports  Hradas  while he dabbles at writing. Unlike Vajda,  he does not achieve success. Although he publishes "three slim volumes" of poetry, "sharing  the costs ... with his pub­ lishers," gradually  Sylvia begins to feel that the image she fell in love with, "that of a serious, arrogant and  confident  European intellectual," is a sham.  Hradas likes calling  himself "un homme  des  lettres,"  but  his enemies  consider  him  "a poseur and an egomaniac," patronizing and condescending to established authors  with  major  reputations.  One  of  these  authors  is Michael  Turner, an  English professor  who,  Sylvia  senses, treats  her  husband  as  "a  kind  of  pet,"  bt>cause "Alex  was, after  all,  an  immigrant, never  really  to  be  accepted  in  the  world Michael  was born to. Alex was part of multi-culturalism,  an idea Canadians like Michael  admired  without  exactly embracing." But in spite of Alex's lack of real acceptance  in the world, Sylvia feels that  both she and  Michael  are "intimidated by Alex's sense  of  European superiority,  his  unspoken  but  clear  belief that   a tragic accident of  history had  placed him in a community  of barbarians." If the story stopped  here, it would show a sympathetic  perception  of at least one reason why "pet" immigrants become  egomaniacs.  But  the  two  Canadian characters' ambivalence toward  Hradas is dramatically  resolved in a climactic scene demon­
strating  how  completely  wrong  they are  to feel intimidated: the  Hungarian  is
the  barbarian.
Turned down  three  times  by the  Canada Council,  to  which  he  applies  for grants,  Hradas rages, "My  God,  why did I ever come to this country?  I'd  have been better  off in Budapest." On  the evening of Hradas' third  rejection  by the

39

HUNGARIAN IMAGES

Council,  Michael  Turner and  his wife come  to  dinner.   Hradas makes  fun  of Michael's  "gentlemanly little essays ... deploring  censorship...." What  does he know  about   censorship?  When  Sylvia  tries  to  defend   Michael,   her  husband accuses her of considering  him "paranoid," of "secretly"  believing  he is  "noth­ ing,"  and  of being  barren.  Humiliated,  she  reminds  him  of  his  insistence  on contraception, but  he shouts, "We  would  have  had  children  if  you'd  been  the kind  of  woman  I deserved.  I could  have  had  sons!"  Then   he  shouts  at  their guests, "Remember what drove you away : an  honest man speaking  the truth  at la.st." The  Turners gone, Hradas  looks smug, like "a  man  who had  done a hard piece of work exceptionally  well."



FuLFORD's STORY OBVIOUSLY  expresses the native  Canadians' resentment  of the real-life counterparts of confident  characters like Vajda,  Kris­ tina, and  Hradas.  Another  Canadian writer  who  creates  a  Hungarian  husband married  to a Canadian wife also resents him -or  makes  his  protagonist resent him-but in a much more complicated way. Mike Hornyak, the dead man who dominates  Robert  Kroetsch's first novel, But We  Are Exiles, is a very mysterious and charismatic  figure. Fraser, Hornyak's  father-in-law, is not sure of Hornyak's nationality.  He  refers to him  as "that crazy  bohunk  or  Polack  or  whatever  he is...." "Bohunk" is another term for "Hunky," but includes people of Bohemian as well as  Magyar  extraction;   either  way,  Hornyak, like  Hradas, could  be  a Hungarian name. But there is a difference: here the uncertainty about  Hornyak's name adds to his aura  of mystery. Kettle  Fraser,  Hornyak's widow, has no idea where he comes from or even what his middle  name  is. His great  wealth  is also mysterious : he is "the  young baron"  of  the  frozen  fish trade.  In  addition, like Vajda,  he radiates  sexual charisma. Here the  Hunky  and  the Don  Juan  are  the same person, and  Hornyak's  name very obviously suggests the latter  role.10  Peter Guy, on his way west to see his girl, is picked  up  by Hornyak,  and  watches in admiration as Hornyak  gets out  of his Rolls Royce  and  strides into  small  town "beer-parlour" like  "some  great  bloody  redeemer...."  He  redeems  "lonely women  in  dry  prairie  towns,  dreaming  of  an  adventure with  a  stranger  who blazes like a comet  out  of the short  luminous  night...." But  Guy's  admiration for  this  Hunky  Don  Juan  quickly  turns  into  resentment   when  Hornyak   beds Guy's  girl,  Kettle  Fraser,  and  eight  days  later  marries  her.  His  resentment  is partially  responsible for the accidental  riverboat  explosion which  kills Hornyak: Guy, subconsciously desiring Hornyak's  death,  fails to  warn  him  in  time.
But his death  is only the beginning of the two men's  complicated  relationship. In  the opening  scene of the novel, which is narrated largely in flashbacks,  Guy is dragging  the  Mackenzie  River  for  Hornyak's corpse.  He  doesn't  find  it;  he sees only his own reflection in the water,  which  he studies "as if not sure whom

HUNGARIAN  IMAGES

he might  see...." The  reflection of his own face where he expected  Hornyak's face  to  float  up  to  him  links  the  two  characters  closely. And  the  reader  has already  been  alerted  to  the  symbolic significance of  this  scene  by  the  novel's epigraph, a quotation from  Ovid's  Metamorphoses  describing  Narcissus gazing at  his watery  reflection.  The  prophecy  uttered  at  Narcissus'  birth,  that  he will live a long life if he does not  know himself, equates seeing oneself with knowing oneself. But it is soon clear that  it is Hornyak  that  is not  destined  to live long: he is supremely  sure  of his own  identity.  He  tells Guy,  "My  trouble  is that  I know my own mind. And that's  a terrible thing...." It is Guy, the young Cana­ dian,  who does not know who he is, and  the novel he narrates is his  journey to the  realization  that  he  must  assume  Hornyak's  identity.  On  the  last  page  he recalls discovering  Hornyak  in  bed with  Kettle.  Just  as Guy  sees  his own  face reflected in the river in the opening scene, in this last scene he remembers seeing the lovers' bodies reflected in a mirror.  He sees himself where  he expects to see Hornyak; he sees Hornyak  where he expected  to see himself.  By  this time, how­ ever,  Guy  has  not  only  become  the  widowed  Kettle's  lover  but  has  also taken Hornyak's place in death.  After  recovering his corpse and  putting  it in a canoe, Guy  remembers  Hornyak's betrayal  of  their  friendship  and  throws  the  corpse overboard. Then  Guy  crawls  into  the tarp-covered  canoe,  his only shelter  in a storm, and figuratively dies, "slammed  ... into darkness" and "silence." W. F. H. Nicolaisen says that  Guy  "can  substitute  for ... Hornyak," but  Guy  does more than  that.11  He  must  assume  Hornyak's  identity;   he  becomes  Hornyak.  This switch is especially significant in ethnic terms. Poor Sandor  Hunyadi is so humili­ ated  by Canadians that  he feels compelled to shed his Hungarian identity,  to die, and  be "born  anew"  as the  Canadian Alex Hunter, ruthlessly determined  to be rich.  In  dramatic contrast, here it is Peter Guy, the young  Canadian, who feels so humiliated   by Hornyak,  the  rich  and  ruthless "bohunk" who casually steals his sweetheart,  that  he must  abet  Hornyak's  accidental  death,  lie down  and  die in  Hornyak's  canoe-coffin,  and  even  then  fear  that  he  will only  "be  playing puppet  to a dead  king" if he marries the woman who originally belonged to him.




TuRNING FROM FICTION by Canadian authors  writing about Hungarians to fiction by Hungarian-Canadians writing for and about  themselves in their  native language,  we find that  the Don Juan  doesn't  appear. But because the audience is clearly defined, the insistence upon retaining  a Hungarian identity becomes even  more  emphatic than  in Vizinczey's and  Marika  Robert's  novels. This insistence, the major  theme  in several short stories in the  Anthology  of the Canadian  Hungarian  Authors' Association, is obviously addressed to readers who, in the writers' opinion,  are assimilating too rapidly.

HUNGARIAN IMAGES

In  Laszlo Szilvissy's  story, "I Write  Letters," the  narrator, the  editor  of  a Hungarian literary  newspaper, satirizes a letter  from  a second-generation  Hun­ garian  girl.  In  an  atrocious  mixture  of stilted  business English  and  misspelled, unidiomatic Hungarian, she inquires  about  the  meaning  of her  father's  furious Hungarian curses. Where  does he  keep  telling  her  to  go?  The  editor  doesn't enlighten  her, but  wonders why her father  hasn't  cursed  the  wretched  girl even more. What  makes  her  a  wretch  to  the  editor  is her  inability  to  write  decent Hungarian. She also sounds ignorant  of English  grammar and  Canadian geog­ raphy,  but  he doesn't  care about  that.
A similar satiric story, "In  the Bookstore," is set in a Hungarian bookstore in
a Canadian resort.  Janos  Miska's  narrator, a  university  librarian, discusses the bookstore customers with the proprietor,  who admits  to not being very well read, but is all the more disgusted with the pretensions of the local Hungarians. Some­ what like the  poseur Hradas,  they assume aristocratic and  professional titles and sprinkle  their  conversation  with  highbrow  allusions, but  secretly  they  read  only trash. Even worse, they are rapidly turning  into Canadians: they have good jobs, so they spend  money  on  homes, furniture, cars,  and  motorboats,  but they  no longer buy Hungarian books. His raison d'etre,  to supply  them  with  Hungarian culture  in Canada, becomes ironic.
The  protagonist  of "Cleaner," another  story  by  Miska,  also acquires  a  good job, but  with different  results. Outwardly his life improves;  inwardly  it remains unchanged. The  personality of Bela Telegdi  has been "ineradicably marked" by four  years in  an  AVO  prison.  (AVO  is the  acronym  of the  Hungarian  Secret Police.)  Telegdi is presented in two brief scenes:  in  r 959 he is a cleaner scraping soil marks  off the  wall of an  Ontario hospital;  in  1969  he is lunching  in  the dining  room of "the  Soil Institute." His economic success seems assured:  he has just submitted  his doctoral  dissertation  on  permafrost  to  the  University  of  To­ ronto.  His superior  now addresses him  as "Bill,"  but  in spite  of his new  status and  new first name,  his psychological identity  has  not  been  altered.  Ironically, his life is still shaped by soil and seems "permanently frozen"; thus he is incapable  of assimilation.
The  most  explicitly  anti-assimilation  story  is  Istvan   Nagy's  "Meeting." Its narrator is not identified  aa  professional intellectual  but  only as a  Hungarian immigrant   in  Winnipeg,  Sandor   Hunyadi's town.  At  a  bus  stop  he  meets  a Canadian soldier  who, although  raised in  China  by a  Hungarian father  and  a Russian  mother,  considers himself a  Hungarian! He  can't  speak  the  language and  has a Canadian wife, but  he has not changed  his triple-barreled Hungarian name.  Neither  will he let  his wife work,  for  only  by staying  home  with  their children  can  she teach  them  the  meaning  of a  Hungarian home.  This  chance encounter  evokes the narrator's denunciation of Hungarians who have  changed their  names.  He  is angriest  with  the  ex-Freedom   Fighters  who  have  "denied"

HUNGARIAN  IMAGES

their  Hungarian  heritage   by  taking  more  easily  pronounced   names.  He  also criticizes Hungarian husbands  who allow their  wives to  work.  Unlike  the  ego­ centric, unemployed  Hradas, he feels such men have misled the  Canadians who welcomed  them,  but  it is not a question  of intellectual  pretensions.  The  Cana­ dians believe that  the Hungarians gave up their native homes with aching hearts. But the Hungarians cannot  maintain  the credibility  of  that  story if they do  not value their new homes enough  to make their wives stay there. The  narrator  con­ cludes with  a rhetorical  question: "What can we expect from  the world if even we ourselves forget  that  we are Hungarians?" The message of this hortatory  tale is clear but paradoxical: only by retaining their own language,  their own names, their own cultural values, in short, only  by  remaining  Hungarian can the immi­ grants  be  good  Canadians. By these  new,  intellectual,   intensely  self-conscious immigrant-writers,  Sandor   Hunyadi's   painful,   ironic   metamorphosis   is  con­ demned  and  rejected.
Waiting  for his son's birth, Sandor  dreads the child's  contamination by books and  music. The  namesake  of  the  king who  treasured  books is afraid  of  their power. "Books are even worse than  music," Sandor  thinks. "They'll fill his head with crazy ways of living and  make him wonder if things couldn't  be different. They'll  ask  questions  they  can't  answer  and  confuse  him  and  make  him  dis­ satisfied. But  he's  got  to  believe in himself and  in  the  way  things  are,  and  be happy in his work. It's not such a crime to be ignorant.  It's worse to be a failure."  But  failure  can  be  defined  in  many  ways. In  Sandor's  definition,  deliberately anti-intellectual, failure  is snyonymous with being a poor and despised "Hunky." Paul  Jonas,  a  1956  refugee  who is now a  professor at  the  University  of  New Mexico, defines the term another  way. He notes that  the economic positions that took earlier  immigrants two or  three  generations  to  achieve,  the  1956 refugees have arrived  at in twenty  years. But he argues  that  "history  will not  remember us as successful immigrants but as exiles, miserable,  unhappy, and  failed,"  with no "real  friends," no "strong  and  emotional  relationships,"  and  "children   who do  not know  what  the  revolution  was" and  who do  not speak  Hungarian.12  It is this  sense  of  exile  and  emotional  failure  among  Hungarian  immigrants   in America  that  these Hungarian writers in Canada  seem to be struggling to avert : they  will not sell their  birthright for a mess of pottage.

NOTES

1 Land  of Choice  (Toronto: Univ. of Toronto Press, 1957),  p. 93·
2  Survival  (Toronto: Anansi, 1972),  pp. 152-54.
3  "Introduction," Under   the  Ribs  of  Death   (Toronto:   McClelland  &  Stewart,
1964),  p. g.
4   (Garden City, New York:  Doubleday).
5   (New York:  Trident  Press, rg66).  A Canadian edition appeared  in 1965.

43

HUNGARIAN  IMAGES

6  Toronto Short   Stories,  ed.   Morris   Wolfe   and   Douglas Daymond (Toronto: Doubleday Canada, 1977), p. 204.
7    (New  York: St. Martin's Press, 1965), p. 44·
8 Janos Miska,  ed.,  No.  1   (Ottawa:  Canadian Hungarian Authors' Association).
'All translations are  my own.
9   (London:  Macmillan, 1 g6g), pp.  214-15·
10 W. F. H.  Nicolaisen, "Ordering  the Chaos: Name  Strategies in  Robert Kroetsch's
Novels,"  Essays on Canadian Writing, I I (Summer 1978)' ss-6s, discusses  many
of the characters' names in But We  Are Exiles, but  does not comment on Hornyak's
name.
11 Ibid., p. 61.
12  "Home Thoughts from  Abroad," Harpers, April  1977,  p.  21.










THIS IS THE LiiST NIGHT
 


Roo Borson


Night  drips  tar  into  the grass. Lamps  fall onto  the  pond,  making accordions of light,  but  no sound ever  comes of that.     Hills
are  like the  cool brows  of dead  soldiers;
they  don't look back.
Trees are  offered  up  out  of the  ground, helpless  bouquets. The light  of each  star  comes  hurtling,
but  the  earth never  breaks,  there's no  way to kill what  you most  want.     All around
the  small  towns  are  lighting up  or  going  dead, whatever they  do  best, and  the  frogs  begin  creaking. The soft flash of a fish
makes  pilgrims  of us. 	It takes  so little.
It is the last night,  the moon  hails  on  the  pond with  no sound,  the  canoe  navigates
through ruins  of trees.    How  am  I to  tell  you the  only  thing  I know?    On  the  bank
a wild  violet  opens.    A small  purple cavern that no one  walks out  of.

44


ASSEMBLY LINE STORIES

Pastiche in Sylvia Fraser)s
The Candy Factory


Lorna Irvine

LHIS   STUDY  OF   FORMULAIC HCTION,  Adventu,., My>tery
and Romance, John  Cawelti suggests that  "literary  formulas  assist in the process
of  assimilating  changes  in  value  to  traditional   imaginative   constructs."1   The peculiar, often repulsive stories that comprise Sylvia Fraser's novel, The  Candy Factory  ( 1975), illustrate  Cawelti's suggestion. A pastiche of traditional popular formulas,  these stories slightly alter established codes in order  to incorporate con­ temporary  fashions in sexual roles. In toto, the novel is a ghost story, replete with gothic overtones;  its chief ghost, Mary  Moone, is presented  as the author  of each story.  However,  this format  seems but  a  convenient  artifice  for  allowing  Mary Moone  freedom  to interfere  with the endings of the seven  central stories and  to elucidate,  in  the  two framing  stories, her  reasons for  changing  the  anticipated endings. Yet in spite of certain  alterations,  she assimilates change  without  revok­ ing the basic formulas she uses. The  novel does not cancel formulaic  myths, as it would if its aim  were chiefly parodic,  but  rather  reshapes  them.
What  reshaping occurs? The  novel offers as topos a contemporary urban  world,
commercial,  mass-producing, faceless. Like the candy produced  in the factory  of the  novel, the  characters   (all  in some  way connected  with  the  factory)   do  fit into  confined  moulds.  On  one  level, these moulds are  their  stories, on  another their representation as characters  within these stories. Essentially, the character moulds, or codes, divide into masculine and feminine;  thus, the sexual dynamics of each  story  are  crucial  to its development.  By no  means  is this focussing on sexual roles arbitrary but signifies a major  assumption in popular  fiction:  that  is, pornography, hard-boiled  detective  fiction, love story, melodrama (all of which are present in The  Candy  Factory)  commonly describe a sexually divided  world in which the  term  'masculine'  denotes activity, aggressiveness, sadism;  the  term
'feminine'  passivity, introversion, masochism. Because these antithetical terms frequently  function  as nouns instead of adjectives  (masculine=man; feminine= woman) , the  battle  between  the sexes becomes a rna jor ingredient  in formulaic plots. With  varying  degrees of success, Mary  Moone endeavours  to reshape  this


45

SYLVIA FRASER

battle  both  by  diminishing  the  gender  specificity  of  the  terms  masculine  and feminine,   and   by  minimizing  their  opposition.   Thus,   although   The  Candy Factory  uses and even exaggerates popular  fictional roles for its male and female characters,  it  does so in  order  to  dramatize   their  frequent   absurdities  and  to suggest their inadequacies  in reflecting today's  world.
Before they are altered, the seven central stories read like a compilation of contemporary popular  fiction. The  first, the story of the tramp, is pornography, a revelation of historical and individual  acts of sadism. The  tramp  emerges from the  bowels of the  candy  factory,  the  basement  of its hierarchical structure,   to comment  on  various struggles for  power.  But  in  this story,  the  power struggle becomes increasingly limited;  we are told of the tramp's attacking  a woman,  an attack  that  culminates  in  sexual  violation  and  possible murder. The  language directs our  reading: "He  sniggered, squiggling  his fingers inside the silky lining, thinking  of the silky little  woman  who owned  it,  thinking  of her  creamy-pink cunt"; "The tramp  fell panting,  voracious, upon  the shuddering woman, feeling his cock, swollen and  hot-headed  like a  boil pumping  to burst."  Here  is Henry Miller's world, the battleground  between cock and  cunt,  masculine sadism given absolute  physical expression. The  opposition  between  the  sexes is total.  As the female character  in this story, Mary  Moone  figuratively  presents herself without a face,  the  necessary prop  for  fantasized  seduction  and  rape;  she  waits, lights candles,  stares  into  a mirror,  is "swaddled  in  a  flimsy white  gown  of  antique lineage, slashed low to reveal milky white shoulders and a slender neck." Her masochism invites the tramp's  brutality.  Images  of female  helplessness and entrapment increase the sexual tension : "The woman,  her  hands  over her face, began  to  pray"; she is "like  a frightened  moth  caught  in  a storm."  Thus,  the codes of pornography reinforce the dichotomy between men and women that underlies those of the following stories.
The  tone  of the next story abruptly  changes.  Conscientiously  saccharine,  the love story  of  Danny  and  Daphne  depicts  the  age-old  struggle  between  man's yearning  for  independence  and  woman's  for  protection,  the  stuff  of  countless jokes. The  plot fulfills our expectations : boy and  girl meet, fall in love, quarrel, then  reunite.  The  characters  are  stereotyped,  advertisements  for  the  bourgeois myth  of courtship : Daphne  like "that goddess the suntan  people used to splash across two billboards"; Danny  "spreading a glossy smile over his sensibilities - the  beer  commercial  again."  Their  actions seem  unreal; Danny  performs  as if he were "in one of those schmaltzy slow-motion commercials." Significantly, their rigidity results from their efforts to comply with established sexual roles, Danny's that  of assertive masculinity, Daphne's  of affiliative femininity.  An essential con­ flict is thus  programmed  into their  roles. Represented   here  as elsewhere in  the novel  by  actual   battle  imagery,  this  conflict,  this  battle   between   the  sexes, dominates  the  plot. Daphne  describes the  tension:  "Without her  knowing  how,

SYLVIA FRASER

or  why, she had  become  the  enemy, someone  to be outfoxed  and  discredited." Controlled  by the omnipresent advertising of sexual codes, these characters  un­ wittingly  expend  their  energy  in protecting  themselves from  attack  rather  than in loving each other.
In the next story, Mary  Moone shifts to the world of the hard-boiled  detective,
Sam Ryan,  a loner "like Mike Hammer,  like Sam Spade." The  phallic connota­ tions of these last two names stress the sexual specificity in this genre.  For,  con­ fined in his behaviour  by a limited definition of masculinity  (aggressive, tough), the  Op  has  a  correspondingly   limited  understanding  of  femininity.   Like  the detectives  with  whom  he  associates  himself, Sam  fluctuates   between  defining women as sexually frigid or sexually promiscuous. His two ex-wives illustrate  this sexual  categorizing,  the  first a  woman  "ice  cream clear  through   . . . from  the frosted strawberry  smile to the frozen cherry at the bottom," the second a woman who would "screw anything that  came up  the front  walk."  His dehumanization of  women  is further   emphasized  in  his  use of  the  slang  characteristic of  this genre-"cool babes,"  "dames," "whores," "pussycats,"  "broads"-and in  the macho image he attempts to create by plastering his walls with Playboy cartoons  and  photographs. Because  his relationships with  women  are  struggles for  proof of his masculinity,  sexuality  again  becomes a  battle.2    To  exaggerate   the  con­ strictions of the plot of the hard-boiled detective story and to illustrate graphically the Op's fundamental fear  of women, Mary  introduces  into this story the sexu­ ally  suggestive image  of the  trap.  Sam  reads Agatha  Christie's  The  Mousetrap and,  at  the  end,  is himself  caught  in  a trap.  Thus  this story, too, threatens to end  in  a disaster  needlessly inculcated  by a rigid adherence  to sexual codes.
up TO  THIS POINT IN  The  Candy  Factory, Mary  Moone  has
used three fictional genres in which antagonism  between male and  female  char­
acters  is a  traditionally accepted  necessity of plot development. She  turns  now to two stories that  illustrate  more ambiguous  kinds of sexual  stereotyping.  The first, the story of Beau  and  Morgan,  although  less formulaic  than  the  previous stories, nonetheless makes use of popular cliches about  relationships  between men. Its major  cliches address  homosexuality. Beau is presented  as ethereal,  sensitive, masochistic;  Morgan  as  physical,  tough,  sadistic. Both  men  have  had  neurotic relationships  with  their  mothers.  On  one side of the  Freudian dilemma,  Beau's mother  attempts to compensate  for an  unhappy  marriage  by enslaving  her  son. The  result is that  Beau has spent  his adult  years attempting to escape from  "the sexual feelings"  that  his mother  has aroused  in  him.  In  his office, he  keeps  a replica of Michelangelo's Pieta, an image that  symbolizes both  his passivity and his attitude to women;  he can  empathize  only with  the  virgin/mother. On  the other side, Morgan's black Mama  actually commits incest with her son. And  this

47

SYLVIA FRASER

union  dominates  Morgan's  life:  "he  was going  to  jump  into  the  swamp  with her, and do for her as he used to after Pa died, as Paused to do, just letting  her flesh roll over him, sucking him up into the  pit he had sprung  from." From  this Faulknerian background,  his present violence erupts.  Apart  from  being actors in a suggested formula  for gay fiction, the white Beau and  the black Morgan  illus­ trate  from  a different  perspective the  preserved  dichotomy  between  masculinity and femininity that  inevitably results in struggle.
If the story of Beau and  Morgan  is based on the  codes of gay fiction, that  of
Eve and Brigitte is based on the popularized  codes of women's  liberation.  It  too is filled with cliches about  women's relationships with each  other. Eve, "surer  of her shorthand than  of her femininity,"  certainly  despises men:  "She  had  had quite  enough,  this last year,  of lovers with  burnt-out fuses crawling  to  her  in their  tattered   Superman   suits."  Masculine  and   tough,  she  is  presented   as  a threatening bitch.  But, if she cannot  form  close relationships  with  men,  neither can  she  with  women.  Thus,  her  struggle  with  the  feminine,   passive  Brigitte demonstrates  yet again a stereotyped sexual antagonism. Although  the story  pre­ sents other  hackneyed examples of women's liberation-the factory's misspelled and  illogical  weekly circulars  denouncing   the  suppressive  male  hierarchy;  the battle between the beauty contestants and  the Nellie McClungers-what it pre­ dominantly  illustrates is the inability of individual women to cooperate with each other.  When  Eve and  Brigitte come to blows, their physical struggle  makes con­ crete  the  often  abstract  tensions that  initiate  conflict  between  women  in  much popular  literature.
The sixth and seventh stories are melodramas, the first told from  the perspec­
tive of the wife, Celeste, the second from that  of her husband, Charles.  Celeste's character  is an  amalgam  of fantasy  (the  fairy-tale   princess)   and  middle-class ethics (the self-denying wife and mother). Like Ibsen's  Nora, she seems a puppet, manipulated originally by her father and now by her husband. Her doll-filled room with  its obsessively frilly decorations  stresses her  immaturity. In  this story,  too, jealousy  between  women seems a  necessary cliche  of  the  plot : "Celeste  deftly manipulated Brigitte  so that  both  were reflected  in  the  same  antique   mirror, and  Celeste could  enjoy,  along  with  her  guests,  Brigitte's  gaucherie  framed  in her own good taste."  Narcissistic and  masochistic,  Celeste suffers the fate  of the passive woman; she has no identity and therefore  cannot  maintain  a mature relationship  with her husband.  Furthermore, her  passivity forces her husband  to assume  a  dictatorial control  of the  family.  Once  again,  traditionally   feminine qualities are pitted against masculine ones so that the battle between the sexes necessarily becomes the major  conflict of the  plot.
Celeste's melodrama prepares us for Charles'. As the president of the candy factory, he has power and wealth. Both represent  his masculinity. But like Celeste, he too has been manipulated; the sexual mores of his ancestral  past hang  heavily

SYLVIA FRASER

over the present. In his office, a grandfather clock that  has belonged to his grand­ father,  his father,  and  now himself loudly reminds him of the  patriarchal family with its stress on masculine  dominance.  But from the  wall, his mother's  portrait  reminds him only of "how  she used to call him twenty  times a day  to see if she should  put  on  her  rubbers." Inevitably,  the  roles are  repeated  in his own  mar­ riage. As it does in each of the stories, the evocation of  the past therefore  empha­  sizes the  conservative  tradition that  dominates  definitions  of sexual  roles. The specifics may slightly change. In contemporary melodramas, as Charles does here, the  characters may  search  for  extra-marital  proof of their  sexual  potency.  But the  ideology of the  patriarchal  family  remains;  battleground that  it is, it  must nonetheless  be preserved. These  domestic stereotypes, Celeste and  Charles,  thus play out a drama  that  has been  written long before they were born,  a drama  of discordant  family life, a drama in which women and  men cannot  coexist.




-r:ESE ARE  THE  OBVIOUS FORMULAS of the central stories. If The  Candy  Factory  were merely a  compilation  of typical  popular  fictions, the sexual  roles of its various characters  would now be reasonably  clear. But, when we return  to  the  opening  story,  "The Legend  of  Mary  Moone," we discover directives  that  encourage  us to criticize and  reformulate  with  Mary  Moone  the conflicts of the characters. Here, she explains to us that  all the stories arise from "the  mistakes and  disappointments of her own life."  Moreover,  they  are  "in  a spooky  way  a  whole  book  of  characters   in  a  timeless dance   with  lost  possi­ bilities of her own life." Apparently she has written these stories to fulfil certain of her  wishes. But  how do  they  do so? As she observes the  lives of the  people around  her, she sees the  same sexual  conflicts that  have  dominated her  life­ formulaic  stories with formulaic  endings. The  material  in  her  Special  Accounts Book reveals only her own mistakes and  disappointments; the characters always fall short of what she can see to be their  potential.  Thus,  she interferes.  Instead of preserving  the impasse arrived  at in each story, an  impasse  that  results from role playing, Mary  Moone chooses to alter the endings. By forcing the characters  to confront  their  pasts, she offers to each  the  possibility of exorcising that  past. And  thus,  to the  hand  moulds  "dating from  the time old  Xavier  presided over the  Production Line,"  she attempts to give  new shapes. 3
Although  the  plots remain  formulaic,  her  proposed endings  alter  the conflict.
What  she  attempts to  make  manifest  is a  latent  content   not  dominated   by  a character's gender.  For, as she observes "the  small gestures that  indicate  what  a person  really thinks  and  feels apart  from  what  he says he thinks  and  feels," she realizes that  stock sexist responses and  gestures are only superficial signs of more profound  conflicts. The  genres  she uses certainly  require  struggle;  but  they do

49

SYLVIA FRASER

not require  that  struggle to be a sexist one. Thus,  she shows that  both  male and female characters  need to be released from the outmoded  battle between the sexes. Instead  of their measuring each character  against  a sexual opposite, she suggests that  writers should find alternative  ways of dramatizing destruction  and  growth. For that  struggle discussed by Beau between the Death  Wish and  the Life Wish is common  to  male  and  female  characters  alike  and  need  not  be  typified  by sex.4   By thus shifting her focus, Mary  undertakes  to assimilate changes  in value to popular  fictional  constructs. Contemporary social awareness  of sexism  neces­ sitates a changed  presentation of fictional characters.
Not surprisingly,  the endings that  Mary  offers extend  character  codes. Before
she  interferes,  her  stories  demonstrate   traditional  conflicts;   trapped   by  their fictional  roles, the  masculine characters  disavow  gentleness,  the  feminine  char­ acters aggression. Each story threatens  to end  with  a stalemate.  But  her  experi­ ences with the tramp  have shown Mary how to break the stalemates. The tramp's story is therefore  a catalyst for the following stories, and  for  this  reason, Mary herself is the female character  in it. Her  past has typed her as a  woman,  just as the  pasts of each  of her characters  have sexually  typed  them.  If she is to show that  characters   need  not  be  so  typed,  she  must  undergo   an  experience  that extends her own character.  Thus, she turns to that other artist, the tramp.  In this story, she seeks to combine the brutality  of the tramp's limited sight  (he  has only one eye)  with  her  own equally  limited  vision of  benevolence.  By allowing  the tramp  to pierce her anonymity, to give her a face, she accepts a changed  role in her own story. Furthermore, along  with  her  alter-ego,  the  tramp, she acknowl­ edges that  "nature seldom needs to be altered or interpreted ... except, of course, human  nature."  In  the following stories, the alterations  result from  her desire to cancel   the   sexual   division   between   activity   and   passivity,  masculinity   and femininity.
Thus  she is able to reformulate  the codes of the love story. As long as Danny experiences "his  vulnerability  ... as loss of power.  His tenderness  ... as loss of control," he remains  trapped-the  man  of steel. Until  Daphne  can  enact  her realization  that  "she should  have established  herself from  the start  as a  person with tastes and  needs of her own," she remains faceless. In  order  to make  them realize how arbitrary are the boundaries  within  which they believe they can act, Mary  creates  a situation  that  forces  both  of  them  to  change  their  typical  re­ sponses. Danny's  plunge into the  water  to save Daphne from  her  apparent  im­ minent  drowning  corrodes his steel-like armour. This  baptism,  a symbol  Mary uses in  various  ways in  each story, gives Danny  a  new  perspective  on  his  life. Because he can now acknowledge his need of affiliation, Daphne can  respond to the  change  in  his character  by acknowledging  hers  for  independence. Able  to concentrate on the sharing of gentleness and  assertiveness, they can  begin to use creatively the energy they have wasted in barricading themselves from each other.

50

SYLVIA FRASER

Read  in terms of its ending,  the portrait  of Sam Ryan  reveals the self-destruc­ tiveness of the hard-boiled  detective's  macho image. Throughout,  Mary  empha­  sizes his sexual conflicts;  plagued  by doubts about  his masculinity, he encounters repeated  situations  that  exacerbate  his anxiety.  Looking around the  boardroom of the candy factory, "heavy  with cigar smoke and male aggression," he watches a former  football  player, hired  for his macho image, now fat  and  out  of shape. He  remembers  the  rampant homosexuality  at  the  boy's camp  he had  attended  and  during  his life in the army.  When  he goes to his favourite  bar, The  Jungle,  transvestites and  homosexuals keep appearing, and  talk about  them  pervades the conversation.  His  response to  his memories  and  experiences  is both  comic and desperate:  "What  was  happening to  the  raunchy  old  world  Sam  the  Peeker knew and  loved?"  Unable  to fit human  beings into the sexual  moulds he thinks that  he understands, Sam  feels as if he were disappearing.  This feeling is astute;  the Op  traditionally defines himself in opposition to women. But why should he have  to  define  himself  in  this  way?  In  order  to  exaggerate   the  archaism  of restrictive  sexual  stereotyping  in  this  genre,  Mary  translates  Sam's  latent  fears into actual  situations.  At the end of  the story, she allows him to copulate  with a faceless dummy -surely a symbol of the woman's role in the hard-boiled  detec­ tive story-and  to be caught  "right  inside her goddam  twat." With  his sexual anxieties thus graphically  realized, Sam must passively listen as the ghostly voice constructs  for him a different  role:  "Why  do you think  you have  to steal love?
. . . Why  not  just  a  man  who's  sometimes  mean,  sometimes  meek  and  often
lonely?" If he can learn  to define himself by humane  values rather  than specifi­ cally sexist ones, he may also learn  how to solve the crimes he has so badly mis­ construed.


IN EACH  OF   THESE  STORIES, the  pervasive  images  of  face­ lessness seem to suggest not  only the absence of idiosyncratic  features  in  stereo­ typed  characters   but  also  the  dehumanizing   effects of  our  sexist  mythologies. Male  and  female  characters waste  their  energy  in  battling  against  each  other;  their  roles are  antagonistic. In  the story of Beau and  Morgan,  Mary illustrates
the  profound  psychic split  experienced  by the  individual  because  of  the  estab­ lished  dichotomy  between  masculine  and  feminine  characteristics.  Beau  recog­ nizes the problem: "I am becoming a man without a body, incapable of  rational  action,  while  you are  becoming  a  man  without  a mind,  incapable of  rational  thought." Here  is the disastrous splitting of what should be a unified  personality. At the conclusion of this story, Mary thus offers her vision of the male character: a blend of activity  and  passivity, of aggression and  gentleness. Beau must act  to save Morgan  from  dying while Morgan  must accept  his intervention : "Morgan lay his head against the edge of the chocolate vat, feeling the bite of steel into his

SYLVIA FRASER

forehead,  smelling the sweetness of the chocolate,  feeling its gentle  warmth  as it bubbled  up out  of the earth,  hearing  the  kind  voice telling  him  to be still.... Morgan  wept."  Morgan's  tears and  Beau's  physical  interference   unite  the  two men. Symbolically, their  union  verifies the feminine  and  masculine  polarities  of the  personality,  and  emphasizes bisexuality. Without   recognition  of both  poles, the human   personality  cannot  be complete.
The  complementary story of Eve and  Brigitte  dramatizes  a similar  splitting,
presented  here from the perspective of women. Eve's aggressiveness and Brigitte's passivity are  polarized. Furthemore,  stereotyped  role playing occurs throughout, underlined  by the frequent  use of game imagery.  But with  Mary  Moone's  help, both  women  are  forced  to  analyze  the  destructive   rules  by  which  they  have played  their  lives. Brigitte  recognizes that  Charles'  "game   had  been  to  break down  her  game  ... his defense was to destroy  her  defenses."  And  Eve  finally acknowledges  that,  while apparently  denying  her femininity,  she too has played by established  rules:  "There was little  doubt  that  it [her  position  as  Charles' secretary]  had served her as the type of low-key marriage  she despised, syphoning off her  masochistic  'housewifely' need  to  be slavishly loyal."  The  psychic split and  the  playing  of set roles are  further  dramatized in  the  Amazon-like  battle between  the Nellie McClungers and  the beauty  contestants: "blue  jeans" oppose "red-satin costumes";  "leather   boots"  oppose  "spike  heels."  Although,  "in  an orgasm of fantasies fulfilled," the crowd encourages  antagonism  between  women, Mary  Moone  makes it  clear that  such  antagonism defeats  all  women.  Rather, they must join in friendship. Mary thus alters the ending of this story by allowing Eve and  Brigitte  to become friends.  Removed  from  the  stultifying  sexist  com­ petition,  they can  now pursue their individual  growth.5
Nonetheless,  Mary  does not  imply  that  new  definitions  of  male  and  female
characters  will be easily developed, nor new roles easily assumed. Speaking suc­ cinctly to Celeste Hunter, the ghostly voice informs her that  "the  old games have broken down ... and  you don't  know what  the new ones are."  This observation applies not only to melodrama  but  to each of the stories in The  Candy  Factory. The  novel seems, then,  to make two major  assertions:  the  old  sexual  codes are now inadequate; new codes exist but have not yet been satisfactorily incorporated into  popular  fiction. Its focus is primarily  on the destruction  of the old-thus, the  various  representations  of death-although  it  tentatively  offers  directions for  the  new.  While suggesting that  popular  culture  is a  mirror,  it  implies  that the  present  mirror  is not spacious enough.6   Consequently,  Celeste's  melodrama emphasizes  the  necessary  breaking  of   conventional  characterizations:   Celeste "saw  her vanity mirror  and  plunged  through  it in a splatter  of splintered  quick­ silver."  Again,  references to  facelessness evoke stereotyping.  Mter   breaking  her doll's face, Celeste finds herself the defendant in an absurd  trial "to save face,"  a trial  that  concludes by  having  her own face replaced  with  that  of a donkey. In

SYLVIA FRASER

the  melodrama of her  life, her  role has established  and  limited  her  character : "You  were the longest, wettest soap-opera  in town. That was your theatre,  and how you gloried in it ... you always took your parts from  the scripts your  hus­ band  brought  home."  But Celeste's story, too, has a hopeful ending.  Mary shows her that the battle she has waged with Charles -the battle between the sexes - is in fact  a  sham  battle.  She  should  have  been fighting  for  her  "own  life and dignity." Thus,  although  a new script for her life has not yet been clearly printed,  it will be determined by her ability rather  than  her sex.
Faceless portraits, traps,  games,  mirrors-all  suggest  the  limitations  of  the
characters  and  imply sexual determinism. So too do the images of machines and robots  that  dominate Charles'  story.  In  an  earlier  description  of  Charles,  Sam Ryan imagines him "not  human! He was humanoid! a robot." Throughout  most of his story, Charles  does perform like a robot, spewing out memorized speeches, divorced  from  his emotions,  trapped   in  a  predetermined, masculine  role.  But Mary's  interference  with the ending of Celeste's story correspondingly  affects the ending of Charles'. When,  with her eyes open, Celeste leaves home in "that silly melodramatic way,"  Charles  no longer has a  rationale  for  his actions.  Now  he has to look at  the  "bloody  human  problems"  he has  always avoided.  Further­ more, because Celeste establishes a new role for herself by replacing  him as the chairperson  of the board  of directors of the candy factory, Charles need maintain no longer the equation between masculinity and  power. Mary presents his release positively. He escapes from the industrial  hierarchy that  he has always hated  and from the battle  with his wife that  has sapped  his energy. His epiphany  is perhaps  the  most  striking   of  all.  Catapulting  himself   through   his  window   (another example  of  breaking  glass),  Charles  at  last  takes  his feet  off the  ground   and becomes for a moment  a space traveller. He has been freed from  his "corporate identity" and from  his conventional masculine role. 7
In the final chapter  of the novel, Mary makes some effort to tie up loose ends; yet she fittingly  allows it  to  conclude  with  an  ellipsis. She  does not  attempt   to develop  her  altered  formulas  perhaps  because she cannot  rid  herself completely of the old ones. We recall the endless struggle of her  parents  who  relive "every mortification  of their  married  life" while they watch  the  wrestling  matches  on television. Parental images are not easy to erase. Nonetheless, Mary  understands that  elucidation  of the past must precede the assimilation of new values. In each story, the characters recall their parents and analyze their relationships with them. Mary thus encourages  them to exorcise the past so that  their futures  will be more various. Charles'  vision of the future seems also Mary's: "Soon,  with  the  blind­ fold of daylight  removed,  he  would  be  able  to see Infinite  Time  and  Infinite Space ... light  beamed  forth  billions of years ago; galaxies hurtling  through  the universe-the discus game  of the gods."  Here  is an  old/new topos,  borrowed from  science fiction  and  applicable  to all the stories she  has  written.  With  the

53

SYLVIA FRASER

removal  of sexist blindfolds, each  character's space  will be extended. Games will continue, but  the  battle  between  the sexes will not  be one  of them.
Near   the  end  of  Mythologies,  Roland Barthes writes:  "Man  is stopped  by
myths,  referred   by  them  to  this  motionless   prototype which   lives  in  his  place, stifles him  in  the  manner of a  huge  internal parasite and  assigns  to  his  activity the  narrow limits  within   which   he  is  allowed   to  suffer   without  upsetting the world."8  Up  to  a  point,  the  stories  of The  Candy  Factory  use static  formulaic structures. At the same time,  however,  they offer  wider  limits  and  suggest  certain upsettings of established  fictional  worlds. The novel  therefore seems kinetic; even without complex   character  development and   with   the  ghostly,  artificial  inter­ ferences  of their  creator, the stories attempt to reactivate prototypes.  Perhaps, as John Moss  suggests,  the  factory  of  the  novel  has  "no   higher  meaning-it  is simply  a representative family-run capitalist monolith, emblematic of our  society in general."9  But  if not  a  higher  meaning, the  workers  in  that  factory do  have an  alternative one.  Both  emblem   and  potential,  they   portray  the  dangers of preserving  the  dichotomy between  masculine and  feminine and  of  encouraging the  struggle   between   men  and  women.   Through her  narrator,  Mary  Moone, Sylvia Fraser  seems therefore to imply that  sexist stereotypes no longer  mirror our society. Popular culture must reflect the changes?0


NOTES

1 John  Cawelti,  Adventure, Mystery  and  Romance   (Chicago:  Univ.  of  Chicago
Press, I976),  p. 36.
2   "The intense  masculinity of the hard-boiled  detective  is in  part  a symbolic denial and protective coloration against complex sexual and status anxieties focusing on women." Cawelti,  p.I 54·
3 Such  altering  of stereotyped  characters  is of course  problematic. Robert  Warshaw suggests that  "one  goes to any individual  example  of the  type with  very definite expectations,  and originality is to be welcomed only in the degree that it intensifies the  expected  experience  without  fundamentally altering  it."  The   Immediate  Ex­ perience (New York:  Doubleday,  I962),  p. I30.
4  This  conflict is articulated  in the story of Beau and  Morgan  when Beau offers his theory of struggle. He begins: "It is my belief that  much  seemingly erratic,  bizarre and  'illogical'  human  behaviour  can  be attributed to  the  workings of  the  Death Wish in opposition  to the Life Wish."
5  In  an interview with Marjorie  Earl, Sylvia Fraser  comments: "When  I had  more time for my women friends  it came as a revelation  to me to see that  women  are capable  of  real  friendship....  They  are  not  rivals,  as  is  widely  and  popularly supposed. They  really like each other  and  enjoy  each other's  company."  The Tri­ bune, 21 March  I978, p. 24, col. 2.
6  David  Manning White  writes in  his essay, "Popular Culture:  The  Multifaceted Mirror'':  "Popular culture  is a  multifaceted, pervasive  process  by which  most people decide what they buy, what style of clothes they wear, how they spend their leisure hours  and  otherwise acculturate themselves in a mass society. It is a 'spa-

54

SYLVIA FRASER

cious mirror' which  we enter in some ineluctable way." Popular Culture,  ed. David
Manning White and  John Pendleton (California: Publisher's, I977), p. 8.
7  "The world  is full  of  great  ladies  who  can't find  their  mates.... This  is because women  have  changed so much, leaving  men  far  behind. Men  haven't caught   up yet. They  are  still super-achievers living for  their  work at  the  expense  of their per­ sonalities and  their  psyches. Women  have been through an orgy of  self-examination and  it's given  them  new energy  and  new directions.  This  has  to come  yet for  men.
1The light  of analysis  is now on them." Sylvia Fraser,  interview with  Marjorie Earl,
p. 24, col.  2.
8  Roland Barthes, Mythologies   (New  York: Hill  and  Wang, I972), p.  I 55·
9 John Moss,  Sex  and  Violence  in  the  Canadian  Novel  (Toronto:  McClelland &
Stewart, I 977) , p.  I 54·
10 "But   the  short   story  market is changing. . . . Popular  magazines cut  out  fiction some years ago but  now  they  are  moving  back and  buying  fiction  again.  But  today they  are  not  buying  the  old-fashioned formula  fiction.  Women   no  longer  want  to read  it.  They   are  interested in  themselves  and  in  their  own  situations and   they want  to read  the  truth. This opens  the door  of popular magazines." Sylvia  Fraser, interview with  Marjorie Earl,  p. 24, col.  1.







PIT PONIES, SYDNEY, N.S.

Christopher  Levenson

Born  underground and  grown used  to the  dark,
they  are  well-cared for,
have  all they  need  to survive and  haul  coal  ten  hours  a day.
It is ready  to  hand-warm straw, food,  a clean  bam.   Pit  ponies, oblivious  of season,
stay  there all  winter  long half  a  mile  out,
under the Atlantic.
One day each year they  are  brought to the surface,  stand sniffing  the  unpumped air,
discover  fresh  grass and  feel on  jaded  flanks
if the  day  is fine unmediated sun.

55

NEITHER  JEKYLL NOR HYDE

In Defence of Duddy Kravitz


J. A. Wainwright

lrg6g, A CANADIAN CRITIC WROTE  about Duddy Kravitz in his apprenticeship years, "His  decisions have  been  made  on  the  wrong  terms, have been based on nothing at all. He has destroyed himself and others for a piece
of land  that  means  nothing  to those who  have  loved  him."1  In  1979,  another Canadian critic  wrote of the  adolescent  Duddy,  "he  is a  grating  amoral  force who is all undirected  drive and  aggression."2   This  latter  critic, insisting that  we should  recognize  Duddy's  withered  humanity and  destructive  personality,  asks that  we consider  the inevitable  answer to Duddy's  own  question  of Jake  Hersh in St. Urbain's  Horseman:  "'How the hell could anyone love Duddy  Kravitz?'" It seems obvious that,  a decade  apart   (and  perhaps  for the last twenty  years since The  Apprenticeship of Duddy  Kravitz  was first published), there  are those who have shared  the same negative response to Duddy  and  who interpret  Rich­ ler's fourth  novel as a solicitation of that  response.3  However,  attention  must  be paid  to Richler's  vision of Duddy  in constant  relation  to those around  him.  In this relative vision, Richler  has much  sympathy  for his "Jew-boy  on the make."  Despite his ignorance  and  crassness, Duddy  is presented  as a character  it is pos­ sible to  care  about.  This  is so because  Duddy's   abilities  and  vulnerability   are given  unequivocal  consideration  while  his destruction  of self  and  others  is not so conclusive. If it is not possible to love young  Duddy Kravitz,  it is possible to
like, understand, and,  perhaps, even forgive him.
What  is very different  and,  therefore, somewhat  disturbing, is the  portrait  of the young and adult  Duddy in St. Urbain's  Horseman. It is obvious in this novel that  Richler  himself no longer likes Duddy;  in fact,  he views Duddy  as a  char­ acter  without  redeeming  qualities,  and  he  would  seem  to sympathize  with  the views of the critics I have referred to. But, for the careful  reader of The  Appren­  ticeship, the  Duddy  in Jake  Hersh's  life is a distortion.  It  is difficult, if  not im­ possible, for me to accept the apparent evolution of young Duddy  into the vulgar, sex-obsessed Kravitz   of  Horseman   (apparent   because  the  evolution  is  unex­ plained) . It can  be said  that  Richler  owes  us  no  apologies  or  explanations; Duddy,  after  all, is his creation  to do  with  as he  pleases. However,  despite  his freedom  in  this regard,  there  does seem to be a  missing novel about  Duddy  in

RICHLER


his twenties; without it an injustice has been  done  to a fictional  character. There is no  mysterious potion  that  Duddy drinks  to  be  transformed; it  is the  writer's ink  that   is his lifeblood. In  the  portrait of  Duddy   that lifeblood   is strong   but palatable in  The   Apprenticeship and  rather like  the  liquid   in  Irwin  Shubert's scotch  bottle  in  Horseman. If he was never  only Dr.  Jekyll,  neither  does Duddy deserve  to be so entirely  Mr.  Hyde.
Richler's relative  vision  in  The  Apprenticeship  begins  with  the  confrontation
between  fifteen-year-old Duddy and  his  high-school  teacher, Mr.  MacPherson. We  are  not  meant to  admire Mr.  MacPherson. He  is a  pathetic creature who evokes our  pity  because  of his failure  as a teacher and  as a man. Nowhere is this dual  failure better summarized than  in  the  following  passage  that  reveals  Mac­ Pherson's attitude towards strapping:

Long  ago  Mr.  MacPherson   had  vowed  never  to  strap  a  boy.  The  principle itself, like the  dream  of taking  Jenny  on a  trip  to  Europe,  keeping  up  with  the latest  educational books, or saving  to buy a house,  was dead.  But  his refusal  to strap  was  still  of  the  greatest  consequence. . . . That he  no  longer  believed  in strapping  was beside  the  point.  As long as he refused  to do  it  Mr.  MacPherson felt he would always land safely. There  would be no crack-up.  He would survive.

Duddy senses  Mr.  MacPherson's weakness  and  takes  advantage of it : " 'Mac'll be  a  breeze....  He  believes  in  per-suasion.' " However, Richler does  not  seem to want  the  reader to have  much  pity for  Mr.  MacPherson as far  as his attitude towards Duddy is concerned. When  MacPherson confronts Duddy in the school­ yard  and  orders him  to put  out  his cigarette, Duddy  replies that Max, his father, knows  that   he  smokes.  This  is, perhaps, a  lie,  but  what  matters  more is  Mac­ Pherson's parental slur: "'Then he's not fit to bring  up a boy.' " Richler presents the  ensuing  snowball scene  in  a  humorous light,   with  MacPherson, hit  in  the back  of the  neck  by  Duddy's snowball, "knitting his  eyebrows  in  an  attempt at ferocity." Similarly, Duddy is not  revealed  as a  malicious  boy intent on  hurting MacPherson. Duddy means  to  hit  Hersh,  as is  emphasized not  only  by Hersh's derogatory remark about Duddy's aim but  also by Samuel's " 'Mighty neat,  any­  way.'" Duddy's James Cagney-like boast  that  "'Nobody gets  away  with  insult­  ing  my  old  man'" is funny, and  Mr.  MacPherson, with  his subsequent "vile" response  and  "distaste," is  over-reacting.
Duddy, of  course,  is no  intellectual match for  Mr.  MacPherson. He  cannot spar  and  win with  words.  MacPherson defeats  him easily on this level, too easily, and  Duddy's insistence on  staying  in the  ring  and  on  his feet  can  be admired :

'Are you telling me what's  fair?'
'No, Sir. But why am  I different  from everybody else?'
'I don't  know, Kravitz.  You tell me.'
Mr.  MacPherson smiled  thinly. Everybody laughed.
'Aw, Sir.  Gee  whiz.'

57

RICHLER

'This class may do anything it likes for the next period. I absolutely refuse to
teach the likes of you.'
'Anything, Sir?'


'I'm  not afraid  to strap you, Kravitz. Idon't believe in corporal punishment.'
'Sure.'
'Sir.'
'Sure, Sir.'

Duddy,  no  doubt,  has chutzpa, but  his iconoclastic  role  against  authority   and convention that  hide bad teaching, social and cultural  poverty, and anti-Semitism, is emphasized.  Duddy  and  the  boys have  to  survive  not  only  MacPherson's limitations  but  "an  endless repetition  of  precious  peeling  balconies  and  waste lots," as well as Mr.  Feeney's crass comments  about  the Jews.  Without  Duddy, one feels, authority  and  convention  would  never  be  tested.  That Duddy  is not just a Jewish  boy against  a  goy world is evident  when  he leads  attacks  on  the Christian  mission and the rabbinical students.
Before he describes Duddy's  part  in the  death  of  Mrs.  MacPherson, Richler
provides some insight into Duddy's  emotional  condition.  His romantic  stories of his fictitious brother  Bradley disguise the inadequacies of his home life :

His father was out, but he found his brother Lennie in the bedroom.
'Hi.'
'Duddy,' Lennie said, 'how many times have I asked you not to barge in here
when I'm  studying?' Duddy's face flushed.

When  Lennie  refuses to  respond  to  Duddy's  obvious  need  for  communication, Duddy  can  only awkwardly  spill out  his feelings for  his brother: " 'You  don't have to worry about  your fees next year. I'm  going to get a  job as a waiter  up north for the summer  and you can have all my tips.'  Embarrassed, he fled.''  His father,  Max,  thinks of Duddy  as a dope like himself, and  offers him no support. When  Duddy  is proud  of his father  for  being a  pimp  all  Max  can  do is strike him. Unable  to get any emotional sustenance from  his immediate  family, Duddy is afraid  to be open with the rest of the world. The  inhabitants of that  world he sees, with  much  justification,  as "carp-artists." But  his insight  and  his  vulner­ ability are never equal;  as he cries to the teasing Jane  Cox, "'Oh, will you leave me alone? Will you please leave me alone?'"
This, then, is the boy, a survivor in a harsh world, who gives Mr. MacPherson
"the  treatment." Duddy  does make the  phone  call that  seems to  result in  Mrs. MacPherson's death,  seems  to  because Richler  does  not  ever explain  the  exact cause of  her  demise. Richler  does emphasize  two  things -Mr.  MacPherson's responsibility in the matter and Duddy's subsequent  guilt. MacPherson's drunken self-pity results  in  his  wife having  to  answer  the  phone; his inadequacy as  a

RICHLER


teacher  and  as a  man  result in  the  phone  call in  the  first place.  Duddy  is not blameless, certainly; perhaps  in a legal sense, were he not a minor,  he could  be considered  guilty  of manslaughter. But the point is that  Duddy  is a minor  and, therefore,  more of a victim than  a perpetrator of events. When  MacPherson, in the middle of his breakdown,  accuses Duddy of killing his wife, Duddy's  response to his buddies- "'We're all in this together,  you understand'"-includes, in Richler's  scheme,  MacPherson, the other  teachers, Max  and  Lennie, indeed  the whole St. Urbain Street milieu. We see Duddy as affected by what has happened and greatly in need of some emotional contact in the last meeting between Duddy and  his adversary:

Mr. MacPherson stopped short when he noticed Kravitz and  the others idling outside Felder's store. The boys seemed  subdued  and  unsure  of themselves. Duddy started  to  walk  towards him, but then  he apparently changed  his mind, for he turned around  to rejoin the boys.
'Kravitz.'
Duddy stopped.
'You'll go far, Kravitz. You're going to go very far.'
(Italics mine)

Duddy's  walk towards  Mr.  MacPherson  is an emotional  gesture. That he can't complete it is not  because he doesn't  want  to but because he is afraid  of rebuff. It is a small thing,  perhaps,  but to Duddy's  credit that  he does not reply to MacPherson's final taunt.
Soon  after  we  meet  Simcha  and  Uncle  Benjy.  Simcha  is  the  man  whom Duddy  will supposedly  betray  (at  the end  of the novel)  along  with  Virgil  and Yvette.   Richler   emphasizes   from   the   beginning   that   wise,  old  grandfather Kravitz  "was  not  loved"  even  though  he  is respected.  Simcha's   pride  is  also evident,  and  his inflexibility  when  his son  produces  no offspring.  Simcha  does show  Duddy  some  kindness,  but  it  is at  the  expense of Benjy  and  Max.  The advice Simcha  offers to his grandson -" 'A man without  land is a nobody' " - has its matrix  in the same narrow  perception  of life that  causes Duddy  to accept it as a truth.  Later,  when the Boy Wonder tells Duddy  that Simcha  never wanted any  land,  that  he  only  wanted  to  dream  about  having  it,  Dingleman's words hurt  Duddy  because, for a moment,  he sees his credo as the platitude  it really is. How much,  we might  well ask, does Simcha  betray Duddy?
Benjy, in his emotional  deprivation,  is like his nephew;  he is also an iconoclast
of sorts. Yet, in Richler's  world, these two with the greatest  potential  for a  rela­ tionship cannot  help each other.  As with MacPherson, and  with his grandfather, Duddy  cannot  really  be expected  to assist his uncle. He  tries to  make  contact  with the adult  world when he reports to Benjy about  the stealing in the cutting­ room. But  Benjy is incapable of explaining  anything; it is  Duddy,  even in  his aggressiveness and ignorance,  who taps the emotional  vein :

59

RICHLER

'You're some kid, Duddy, some kid, but this much you ought  to know. If you ever do anything  to hurt  your grandfather  I'll  break every bone in your body.'
'How come you care so much? You never even go to visit him anymore.'

Richler  allows Duddy  to judge those around  him, those who are eventually  hurt by Duddy. The  judgements count as much as the  pain. Meanwhile, Uncle Benjy protects himself through  business, and Duddy  will do the same.



CLEARLY, DUDDY  IS  SUPERIOR to Irwin  Shubert. The  leader of the St. Urbain Street  pack has moved, at  Rubin's hotel,  beyond  his familiar territory.  Duddy  is, as Mr.  MacPherson  was in the  classroom, an  outsider;  but our  sympathies  lie  with  Duddy  because  his crudities  are  preferable  to  Irwin's nastiness and  snobbery. Richler  emphasizes that  Duddy  is not consciously out  to hurt  anyone  when  Duddy  catches  Irwin  masturbating late  one  night:

Irwin  looked up, startled  and  pale. Duddy  grinned,  he  winked, and  gesturing enthusiastically he said, 'Atta boy, Irwin. Whew! Pull!'

Duddy is neither condemning  Irwin  nor laughing  at him;  rather  he is sharing  in Irwin's  pleasure "enthusiastically." Irwin's guilt and social shame at being caught by Kravitz  prompt  him to conscious retaliation. In  contrast  to Duddy,  Irwin  is malicious-the scotch  bottle  full  of  urine  and   the  dirty   talk   about   Yvette (" 'She's  got gonorrhea'  ") prove it.  While  Irwin  plots to cheat  Duddy  out  of his hard-earned money, Duddy  befriends another  outsider,  Cuckoo  Caplan. He helps Cuckoo out of his depressions, encourages him in his professional ambitions, and  does trust  Cuckoo;  it is a trust that  is later  betrayed.
Of course, despite his vulnerability and undeserved  rebuffs, Duddy is becoming an unattractive hustler and money-grubber.  He  wants the other  half of the one­ hundred  dollar bill that  Mr. Farber  offers him for good service. Also, "He  [has] his heroes," and they are firmly rooted in the American  success story, commercial wizards  all.  But  the  men  behind   Coca-Cola,   Toni   Home   Permanent,  and Reader's Digest are  Richler's  satirical  targets  as much  as is  Duddy's  attraction to  the  questionable   business ethic.  Despite  the  power  of   the  almighty  dollar, Duddy  cannot  entirely  reject  his own  roots. He  says that  "'Yvette's a  dime  a dozen,' " but he does seek her out at the back of the hotel because this run-down  area  reminds him of home.
In  Duddy's   relationship   with  Yvette,  Richler   is  primarily   concerned   with
Duddy's  need for the girl, a need that is abused  and  denied  yet, in Duddy's  own way, accepted.  Although  Duddy,  from  the  beginning,  does not seem to deserve Yvette, she obviously, like his Uncle Benjy later, sees something  worth saving and loving in this boy who never stands still. Duddy  does go out  with Linda  Rubin; he  is so oblivious  to the  set-up  that  his  preference  for  the  rich  hotel-owner's

6o

RICHLER


daughter is mitigated   by  the  reader's  detestation  of  the  Irwin-Linda  arrange­ ment. Duddy  is a fool to risk his summer's earnings at the roulette wheel, but  he is so much the underdog  that  it is difficult not to cheer him on. Duddy  may be a hustler,  but  Richler  makes it  plain that  he is operating  in a  hustling  world that deserves everything  it gets. To  reject  Duddy  when he doubles  his money at  the expense  of  the  generous  guests  is to  miss Richler's  relative  perception  of  the apprentice in  the  masters'  arena.   No  better  illustration  of  such  perception  is offered than  Duddy's  justified, inner speech to  Linda  Rubin  after  he has lost at roulette:
Look  at  me,  he  thought, take  a good  look  because  maybe  I'm  dirt   now.  Maybe I've  never  been  to  Paris  and  I  don't know  a  painter from  a  horse's  ass.  I can't play  tennis  like  the  other guys  here,  but  I don't   go  around spilling   ketchup in other guy's  beds either. I don't trick  guys into  crazy promises  when  they're drunk. I don't speak  dirty  like you  either. You  make  fun  of  your  father. You  don't  like him.  Tough shit.  But  he  sends  you  to  Europe and  Mexico....  You're sorry  for making a fool  out  of me.  Gee  whiz, my heart bleeds. Take a good  look  you dirty bitch.  Maybe I'm dirt  today.  That bastard of a black  marketeer Cohen can  give me  twenty  bucks  and  a lecture about  gambling and  feel  good  for  a  whole  week. But  you listen  here,  kiddo.  It's  not  always going  to be like this. If you want to bet on  something then  bet  on  me.
Later  on,  Richler  will allow Duddy  to articulate  similar  feelings to his dying Uncle  Benjy, and  there,  too, his accusations  and  perceptions  will stand  up.  The reader  should  realize  that  Richler's  arena  is filled with  blind  masters  and  that Duddy  is, in  contrast,  the one-eyed apprentice. This  does not  excuse his selfish use of Yvette  when she takes him  to the lake for the  first time. Again,  though, Richler  draws  an  important distinction  between the  conscious and  unconscious act  of deception.  Duddy  watches  the  lake over Yvette's  shoulder  as  he  makes love to her, but "He  had come to think he was alone."  While this may seem like blindness, especially considering Duddy's lack of awareness of the woman beneath him, Duddy  has one eye open  on other,  human matters: "On  the far side there was a farm  reserved  for  his grandfather." Duddy  may  not  love Yvette  at  this time, but  he does love Simcha.
Duddy  is always  presented,  along  with  his values, in  the  company  of others
whose values demand   judgment  as well. " 'You can't  run  before you learn  how to walk,' " an American  television man  tells him, so Duddy  learns  how to walk by looking about  him and from contacts like Mr. Cohen. Cohen, in their haggling about   Duddy's   first  bar-mitzvah  film,  teaches  Duddy  the  give-and-take (but mostly 'take') of hard  business bargaining.  Then  he advises Duddy  on  how  to con another  prospective customer: "'Tell him I'm paying you two thousand.... Don't   trust  him.  Get  five hundred   down  and  the  rest  in  writing... .' Duddy drove for fifteen  minutes  before he figured out  he had  no advance  and  nothing in writing from  Mr. Cohen." While Duddy  continues to underestimate Yvette in

6r

RICHLER

his life, his chutzpa  and  his success with  Dudley  Kane  Enterprises   cannot  be denied.  Richler  has  not  yet begun  to question  the  price  of  Duddy's  success in human   terms.  The  reader  should  be careful  when  the  questioning   does  begin since, like so much  else in this novel, it is not orthodox.
Duddy  also has the Boy Wonder  as an example.  Jerry  Dingleman should  not be anyone's  hero;  he is a spiritual  as well as a physical cripple,  and  the  reader certainly  does not  want  Duddy  to become like him.  But,  again,  Richler  points to the difference  between a moral innocent,  an  unconscious  hustler,  on  the one hand, and an immoral, if minor godfather-figure on the other.  Duddy  is cynically used by Dingleman  as a drug  carrier  and,  on  a lesser level, as an  entertaining diversion in New York City. The boy who risks jail unknowingly  for a fifty dollar fee and  a five hundred  dollar loan, who can see no connection  between  his own life and  that  portrayed  in  Death  of A  Salesman,  definitely  lacks  the  withered humanity of the Boy Wonder.



DuDDY MEETS  VIRGIL and  the events  begin  to  unfold  that lead  to  Duddy's  supposed self-destruction  and  the  destruction  of others.  While the  Duddy-Yvette-Virgil  triangle  can  be looked at  independently, Duddy's  two trips  on  behalf  of  his family  do  occur  while  he  seems  to  be  most  using  and
betraying  his lover and friend.
Although  Duddy  is at the height of his material  success, the  bar-mitzvah film propelling  him  forward  as an  "indie," he  does not  hesitate  when  it  comes to family  trouble.  Blood ties are  extremely  significant  to  Duddy; the  sacrifices he makes because of these ties, the  care and  unabashed  love he has for  his family emphasize once more that it is ignorance  rather  than  intent  that  rules in his rela­ tionship  with Yvette and his exchanges with others such as Virgil and  Mr. Friar.  Lennie,  a brother,  needs help, so Duddy  acts. As with the  Irwin-Linda  partner­ ship, Duddy takes on power and money when he invades Hugh Thomas Calder's  Westmount  home. His innocence  when he is out  of his depth is  not only funny but  appealing: "'Jeez,' Duddy  said aloud,  getting  out  of his  car.  He  had  been in Westmount  before ... but  never this high  up....  Duddy  thought  of slipping the butler a fin. That,  he thought,  is what  Falcon  would have done."  Of course, Irwin  is involved  in Lennie's  troubles,  and  Irwin's  nastiness  is  pernicious  as he uses Lennie's medical expertise to further  his own social standing. Nothing  Duddy does compares  with  Irwin's  conscious manipulation of  human  lives-Sandra's literally and  Lennie's  as far  as his career is concerned.  Duddy  as an outsider  in Westmount  comes off well compared  to  the  bored,  cynical  Mr.  Calder  who is also  an  experimenter with  the  lives of  others.  There is some  moral  force  in Duddy's  outburst  to Mr. Calder,  a moral force crudely expressed perhaps,  but  as

RICHLER


potent  as it was in the earlier,  inner speech to Linda  Rubin  and  as it will be in the later speech, spoken aloud,  to his Uncle Benjy:
'I'm trying  to  be fair.'
'Sure.  Sure   you  are.  Sandra's expelled   and   she  comes  home   to  this  Yankee Stadium here  and  for  all  I know she can sleep in a different bedroom every  night. That Andy  Simpson  goes home  and  sits on  his ass until  his father croaks  and  he inherits enough money  to choke  two horses. But what  about my brother ... ?'

Lennie  has received all the  breaks in the  Kravitz  family  because  he is Uncle Benjy's favourite,  and  it is plain  he gets another  break  by having  Duddy  as his brother.  Although  Lennie  has the college education,  Duddy  has another  educa­ tion-that  of the  streets.  He  is much  sharper  than  his older  brother,  getting Lennie  to tell him  what  he  wants  to  know and  advising  Lennie  as if  it  is he, Duddy,  who  has  the  extra  years:  " 'You're  twenty-four  years  old.  Don't   you know better  than  to go bareback?' " People are always accusing Duddy of some­ thing-of  aggressiveness, selfishness, dishonesty-and  Lennie, in Toronto, is no different. But his accusation  that  Duddy has "no code of  honour," however valid, rings hollow beside Duddy's  more insightful and  accurate remark,  " 'You're  the Number  I Sucker of All Time.'" Although  Lennie shouts about  Duddy's  greed, cannot  see Duddy's  own  need for  emotional  comfort  (with  his questions  about their mother), and laments his lost summer in Maine-in short, does not deserve Duddy-Duddy does, as he says  to his father,  " 'bring  'em  back  alive.' " The reader   cannot   like  Duddy's  treatment  of  Yvette  on  his  return   to  Montreal (" 'People  fall  in  love,'  Yvette  said....  'Planes  crash  too,'  Duddy  said") ;  but the reader  can  applaud, or should, Duddy's  justice for  Irwin  and  his loyalty to his family.
Duddy, in going to New York to fetch Aunt Ida  home for dying Uncle Benjy, travels  far  past  the  call of duty.  At this point  the  complexity  of Duddy's  own condition  is evident  as Friar  runs off and  as Duddy  continues  to  underestimate his need for Yvette, risking her loss as a result. He does reveal something  of his inner  fears and  turmoil  when  he says about  Benjy, '"He's going to die, Yvette. Isn't  that  terrible?' " Although  Duddy  abuses and  taunts  Yvette,  this statement about  death  demands   attention and,  significantly, Richler  offers  no  record  of Yvette or anyone else solacing Duddy.
Duddy  does show an  amazing  ability to get  to the  heart  of the  matter  in  a few words. First he urges his zeyda to "forgive  and forget"  his differences  with Benjy; then,  when Duddy  arrives in New York and finds the fragile Ida  balking at the thought  of return  to Montreal, he says to her, "'He's your  husband  and he's dying.' " His insight  into  himself and  others on an emotional  and  spiritual level is limited,  but someone  else might  not give the pathetic  Ida  the  treatment she deserves as a human  being;  Duddy  tries to talk to her  on the  train  and  he does offer solace.

6g

RICHLER

In  Duddy's final  meeting  with  his uncle,  Richler once  more  grants Duddy his simple  but  valid  perception of the  way  things  are.  It is a  perception that is, as usual,  bound up  with  an  emotional vulnerability:

'I'll  be generous. Max is not very bright.  I can't  change  that  with  my talk one way or another.
'You're  very bright  and  nobody likes you. I'm  sony,  Uncle  Benjy. I say things
I don't  mean.  It's  just you make me so sore sometimes... .'

Sadly,  Benjy  and  his nephew  continue to  joust  verbally  and  they  will  never  be able  to embrace, despite  their  extreme  and  mutual need,  in  Benjy's  lifetime. In the following  exchange, Richler  presents  a succinct view of Duddy held  by Benjy and  perhaps by the  majority of readers.  However. Duddy, in reply,  is allowed  to articulate his  world-view.  It is an  articulation that  expands the  dying  Benjy's vision  of the  boy  he  has  previously  rejected, and  it  should   expand the  reader's vision as well :
'Why  didn't  you ever have time for me?'
'Because you're  a pusherke.  A little Jew-boy  on the make. Guys like you make me sick and  ashamed.'
'You  lousy intelligent  people. You  lying sons of  bitches  with  your  books and your socialism and your sneers. You give me one long pain in the ass.... Pusherkes. What  a bunch  you are! What  a pack of crap-artists! Writing  and  reading  books that  make fun of people like me. Guys who want  to get somewhere. If you're  so concerned,  how come in real life you never had  time for me? It's  easy for you to sit here  and  ridicule and  make superior  little  jokes because you know  more  than me, but what  about a helping hand?  When did you ever put yourself out one inch for  me?  Never.  It's  the same with  all you intelligent  people....  You  never  take your hands out of your pockets to a guy like me except when it's got a knife in it. You think  I should be running after something  else besides money? Good. Tell me what. Tell  me you bastard. I want some land,  Uncle  Benjy. I'm  going to own my own place one day. King of the castle, that's  me. And there  won't  be any superior drecks  there  to laugh at me or run me off. That's just about  the size of it.

That is just  about the size of it. Duddy  is allowed  to speak  with  some  authority and  justification, to answer  back  a world  that  has formed and  cheated him,  that has given  him his crass values. The  amazing thing is that, as Uncle Benjy  realizes, there  are still some qualities in Duddy  that are  admirable :

'You're  such a nervy kid. My God, Duddel,  you're  even touchier  than  Lennie.... You don't  want  anything  from  me. Come  to  think  of it, you're  the  only one  in the family who never came here to ask for something.  My God, it never occurred to me before. You're  the only one, Duddel.  I've  been unfair  to you.'

If the  reader has  been  paying  attention, he  has  recognized Duddy's worth  for quite   a  while,  especially  in  comparison  to  others.   The   point  is  not,  as  Uncle Benjy emphasizes in his last letter  to Duddy, that Duddy has "to  choose"  between being "a scheming little bastard ... and  the  fine, intelligent boy underneath...."

RICHLER

The   point  is, surely,  that   "the   fine, intelligent  boy"  has  endured   while  the "scheming  little bastard" has struggled to survive. Duddy  is alone in this world, especially before death: " 'Don't let him die.... He's  my uncle.'  And then  em­ barrassed  he fled the house."  Uncle Benjy can ask for  morphine  when the  pain starts; there  is no  drug  for  Duddy's  pain.  The  "grating amoral  force"  is  not Duddy  but life itself.



DuDDY AND   VIRGIL  ARE   SIMILAR  in  some ways. Virgil  re­ sponds to Duddy's  cliche about  business, "'Necessity  is the  mother  of all  inven­ tion.' " Although  Duddy  never  tells Virgil that  "A  man  without  land  is  a  no­ body," it is obvious that  Virgil would accept such words as gospel; he is fond of his own platitudes: "'You  know, Mr.  Kravitz,  life is no bowl of  cherries for  a guy like me.' " Richler  does seem, however, to insist on Virgil's true moral inno­ cence and  to place  Duddy  in some opposition  to this. As they  prepare  to go to sleep  on  Virgil's  first  night  in  Ste.  Agathe,  Virgil  says,  " 'Look,  everything's covered with snow outside.... I want  to be the first person  to walk in it. The first in the world.' " There is a child-like ingenuousness about Virgil that  Duddy, for  all  his ignorance,  lacks.  Almost  immediately  after  Virgil's  response  to  the snow, Duddy  drives to the lake and  his land,  and the  winter  is his enemy:

It's lovely, he thought, and lots of those pine trees I can peddle at Christmas time.
. . . It's my land, he thought. But the wind began to cut quicker across the fields,
suddenly the sun went out like a light ... and Duddy began to shiver.... Duddy
was able to trace his footsteps until the snow began to fall again, and then he was
in bad trouble....  He ran and  ran to no purpose until  he collapsed panting in
the snow.

Despite  this  contrast  and  Duddy's  ability  to  manipulate Virgil  over  the  job and  truck,  Duddy  is innocent  of any  real  knowledge  of epilepsy and  certainly less informed  than  Virgil in this regard :

'Do you ... em ... have these fits in your sleep very often?'
'A couple of times a week. They're  not very severe.'

Virgil  tells Duddy  not  to  worry  about  his fits, and  Yvette,  when  she discovers Virgil is an epileptic,  protests the truck-driving  job but seems to want to pass off the responsibility:  " 'I'll  never forgive you if anything  happens  to him. I swear it.' " All of Yvette's  energy goes into making sure that  Virgil gets a fair deal for the truck;  the reader  is left to wonder why she doesn't  question  Virgil about  his attacks. Obviously  Virgil has driven before; he is also very sensitive about  his condition  and  never tries to deny it. Certainly  Duddy  takes advantage of Virgil in business terms,  but  Yvette seems to think  that  is settled  when  Duddy  returns the extra truck  money.

6s

RICHLER

When  Duddy asks Yvette,  at the  end of Part II of the  novel,  having  acquired half  the  land  in  six  months,  "'What's your  opinion of  Duddy Kravitz now?'" the  chutzpa  and   the  business  sense  are  still  worthy  of  applause. So,  too,  are Duddy's actions  on  behalf  of his family.  If his continued insensitivity to  Yvette and  his newer  callousness  about  Virgil  do grate, such  behaviour is only  part  of a complex  whole.
Virgil's  accident occurs on the heels of Duddy's final  words  to his dying  uncle. Ironically, Duddy's lashing  out  grants  Benjy  some  insight, a  new  perception in his last days. In  similar  terms,  although Virgil  is paralysed, his life is changed, as Virgil insists, for the better.  Duddy  is not insensitive to another's dying-we have seen  his  pain  and  confusion  with  Benjy;  but  perhaps he  has  to shut  down,  for self-protection, the  emotional response  to  what   has  happened to  Virgil.  In  the exchange at the hospital  between  Duddy  and  Yvette, her fixing the blame  entirely on Duddy is not  justified. He  cannot be blamed for  Virgil's accident, at least  not any more  than  Yvette  and,  really, Virgil  himself.  Yvette's martyr-like assumption of responsibility for the care of the paralysed  Virgil  suggests that  she does perceive the  blame  as shared. She  presumes  to  judge  Duddy;  however, Richler  under­ mines  the  validity  of her  righteous  vision.  Duddy's defense  is impersonal, but  it contains as much  truth as Yvette's  accusations:

'I want to know all the details. You're  not going  to get off easy.'


'He  was happy  on the  job. I didn't  force it on him.'
'You knew it was dangerous.  I warned  you.'
'Crossing the street is dangerous. You've got to live. A guy takes chances.'
'There's no getting around  it. You're to blame.'

Although Duddy is trying  to  avoid  responsibility, his  words  about 'crossing  the street' are  not  tossed off lightly.  The  street  is St.  Urbain, and  a  guy  must  take chances   to  cross  it  and  to  escape  it.  A  good  part of  Duddy's  philosophy and experience of life is contained in this seemingly  callous  series of statements. Can Duddy be  blamed for  Virgil's  emotional insecurity that  certainly played  a  part in the  accident?

Virgil's  fits had  begun  again  when  Duddy  asked  him  to  move  downstairs  into Yvette's apartment. He had  understood,  he said,  that  Duddy  and  Yvette  wanted to be  together.... but  the fits  began again.

That Duddy's tough-guy philosophy  about taking chances is not seamless,  that he  does suffer  from  his own  emotional and  spiritual  insecurities, for  which   he receives no succour, is emphasized by his breakdown. The accident and  Yvette's subsequent departure with  Virgil  are  the  direct  causes,  but  his terrible loneliness during the breakdown, his pathetic yet very funny attempts at self-mythologizing, his search  for the  past  through Hersh,  and  his admittance of guilt  over  Mr.  and

66

RICHLER

Mrs. MacPherson reveal an inner  void in Duddy  that  transcends  the immediate situation.  Duddy  is primarily  a victim  rather  than  a  manipulator of life. That he is sensitive enough  not only to remember MacPherson  but also to carry around within  him  his  part  in  MacPherson's downfall  indicates  that   Duddy  is much more than  "undirected drive and aggression." Indeed,  when one recognizes how much  emotional  energy  Duddy  expends in  his search  for  his mother,  his need for love from  Max  and  Benjy, and  his guilt about  the  past, Duddy's  distancing of Virgil  can  be  better  understood.  In  Duddy's  disturbed  and  dark  vision "A leering  Mr.  MacPherson waited  around  every  corner....  He  tried  to  run,  he wept  for trying  so hard,  but  his legs wouldn't  work."  It  is nonsense to suggest that  a leering Virgil isn't somewhere  just below the surface.  When  Duddy  meets Hersh  and  accepts  responsibility for Mrs. MacPherson's death,  he is doing what Yvette implies that  he is incapable  ever of doing-Duddy is saying mea culpa for it all: "Duddy began to cry.... He rested his head against the steering wheel and stared  at the clutch."
Duddy  is at  rock-bottom, dangerously  close to snapping  completely.  We  can­ not expect him to survive for long in this mea culpa position. Like Virgil, Duddy must start over. It is ironic but inevitable  that  he learns to walk again from  Mr. Cohen.  Cohen  understands the  rules of the  game  as Yvette  does  not.  "'Make yourself hard,'  " he advises Duddy  and insists that if he had  to he would cut the throat  of his nearest  and  dearest  customer. In order  to pick up  the  pieces of his dream,  Duddy  does make  himself hard,  but  not  easily.  Richler's main  question seems to be this:  In  a world of throat-cutters does  Duddy  Kravitz  pick up and use the knife?



DuDDY IS  ONLY $4500  AWAY from  having  all  the  land. Previously, Yvette has asked one or two questions about  his remarkable  ability to come up with necessary payments, but she has never queried  Duddy  very closely on this. In fact, she has been his ally in the acquisition  of the land,  lending  her name to the deeds and providing him with the vital information  about  the sellers. She is concerned  about  his health,  not  so much  about  his methods: " ' . . . I don't  want  you  to start  running  again.  I  couldn't  stand  it.' " When  Duddy  is slowing down  and  resting  with  Yvette and  Virgil at  Ste. Agathe,  when  he has virtually  given  up  his dream  of owning  the  entire  property,  it  is Yvette  who informs him the final parcel of land is up for sale. It is Yvette who tells him why Dingleman  has  not  yet bought  the last piece of property,  and  it is Yvette  who saves Duddy's  chances  by warning  him "'There's something  else ... we have to put  up three  hundred dollars  option  money tomorrow  morning.  Have  you got it?'" She  is encouraging Duddy  to  hope;  she  is telling  him  to  start  running again.

RICHLER

It is important to realize how Duddy goes about  acquiring the money he needs. A moral  distinction  exists between  those who help  him  and  those  who do  not. The corrupt  Boy Wonder reduces Duddy to begging but won't deliver, and Hugh Thomas  Calder, in his spiritual  malaise, cannot  see beyond  his ground  rules for a relationship  with  the slum-boy. Mr.  Cohen  does help  Duddy,  Mr.  Cohen  the throat-cutter, a man  who will lend money only if he can make money in return; but  he is also the man who saved Duddy  from  Irwin's plotting  at  Rubin's and, like his methods  or  not, he is the one who gave Duddy  the  necessary boost  up­ wards and out of his self-pity and  emotional  crisis. With  his Yiddish  expressions and ability to see something in Duddy  beyond his own need for him, Mr. Cohen ranks  higher  on the moral  scale than  either  Calder  or  Dingleman.  Meanwhile,  Duddy's  quality  is emphasized  in his exchange  with  Lennie.  Lennie  does right­ fully praise Duddy as "some brother," but it is Duddy's own comment that should cause us to consider how he is much  more than  a  pusherke:  "'It's hard  to be a gentleman-a Jew,  I mean-it's  hard  to be.  Period.'" Little  Jew-boys solely on the make don't  think such things, let alone say them.
Although  it is money that  finally brings  Duddy  and  his father  together,  the tentative   and  disguised emotional  give-and-take   between  father   and  son  out­ weighs the value of the dollar sign :

'Duddy would like to borrow some money, Daddy.'
'Who wouldn't?  Max  reached into the kitchen  drawer  for  his backscratcher.
'Money,' he said, 'is the root of all evil. In olden times they used the barter system.
I favour it.'
Duddy grinned in spite of himself. Standing behind his father he reached out to
touch him. Gently, however, almost surreptitiously, just in case he moved away.

Max  lends  Duddy  a  thousand   dollars  and  Duddy   is only  $2200  away  from achieving  his dream.  Time  is running  out,  however, especially as Dingleman  is after the remaining  parcel of land. It is the decision of Yvette that  pushes Duddy to his one consciously dishonest act.
Virgil  has  been  paralysed  for  life that  he  might  find  his life. He  has  never
been  happier  than  when  he is editing  his newspaper  for  epileptics,  something that  would  not  have  come about  without  the  accident.  Virgil  does not  blame Duddy  for  his paralysis, and  his continuing  love for  Duddy  is certain.  Further­ more, Virgil, on his own, would lend Duddy  the  $2200:

'Does Duddy need more money?' Virgil ask,ed.
'Don't  say a word,' Yvette said.
'But-'
'You heard me, Virgil.'

Yvette  does  control  Virgil  as is evident  when  Duddy   tries  to  cajole  him  into lending  the  money. Virgil  does not break  down  and  sob  just because  Duddy  is

68

RICHLER

pressuring him;  he does so because his loyalty is tom  between Duddy  and Yvette. It is at this point that  Yvette's position must be questioned.
Yvette  has worked  with  Duddy  a long time to get  the  land.  She  knows the
fanatical  devotion  he has to his dream; she has been privy to how hard  he has pushed himself and  others in his quest for the lake property.  Does she set Duddy up  for  a  test  by leaving  him  alone  in  the  house with  Virgil's  easily-accessible cheque-book?  Perhaps  it can be said quickly in her defense that she never expects Duddy  to stoop to forgery. Why? The  answer can be only that  Yvette, who does possess a moral integrity  of her own, senses the same thing somewhere in Duddy; she realizes that  for  all  his hustle  he has never  been overtly  dishonest.  On  the other  hand,  Yvette,  who still holds a grudge against  Duddy  for his treatment  of Virgil, should  recognize  that  Duddy  cannot  afford  to stop  so short  of his goal. She  should  recognize  that  she  has encouraged  him,  with  her  news about  the last section of land,  not to stop. She does not look at  Virgil's  cheque-book  when Duddy  announces  that  he has the money, but she is an accomplice in the forgery whether  she admits it or not.
Duddy  knows what  he does is wrong. He rationalizes and  delays, but  he does finally steal from Virgil. His guilt is obvious when Virgil, the forged cheque made known, has his worst fit; it is a guilt that  includes more than  Virgil :

Virgil lay twisted on the floor beside his overturned wheelchair.... Above him the telephone receiver dangled loosely.... Duddy ran, he ran, he ran.

The link with Mrs. MacPherson's death is obvious. Just as others, besides Duddy, played  a part  in her  demise, Duddy  is not alone as far  as the  responsibility for Virgil's decline is concerned.  The  forgery is the one act for which he will not be forgiven  by the  two  people  who  mean  the  most to him-Yvette  and  Simcha. Richler  has  already  caused  the  reader  to  question  Yvette's  righteous  stance; neither is the zeyda meant  to be the final moral  judge of his grandson.
The  price that  Duddy  pays for owning his land is high. He is allowed his sweet
victory over the Boy Wonder,  but  he loses his grandfather's love. Yet, if Duddy is guilty  of  various  misdeeds,  no  one  is innocent  in  Richler's   world.  If  what Simcha  says to Duddy  is true -" 'You'll settle your conscience and  go out and swindle others' "-then Duddy's  retort is also valid:

'You don't  twist either.  You don't  want  to farm.  You  never  have....  You couldn't even go to see Uncle Benjy before he died. Naw, not you. You're just too goddam proud to live.'

Duddy  is, as he says, "all  alone"; he has been isolated as well as having  isolated himself. In  the final exchange  between Duddy  and  Yvette, Duddy's  rationaliza­ tions and explanations don't  wash; but he is allowed one statement of conviction in  the  midst  of  his  defensive  ravings.  This  statement   is vital  in  our  ultimate assessment of Duddy :

6g

RICHLER

He gave her an anguished look, started  to say something,  swallowed, shook his fist and  said, his voice filled with wrath,  'I have  to do everything  alone. I can see that  now. I can  trust nobody.'
'We betrayed  you, I suppose.'
'Yes. You  did.'
He  had  spoken  with  such  quiet  conviction  and  certainty  that  she  began  to doubt  herself.                                                                                              (Italics  mine)

This  doubt should  affect the reader-judge as well. It is as important, if not  more so, as Duddy's subsequent glee at  being  able  to mark  his bill.
According to Max,  the Boy Wonder is dead, long live the Boy Wonder! Duddy is broke  and  alone,  the  legend  Max  builds  about him  is shoddy, and  Duddy's last  words  in  the  novel-" 'You  see' " -emphasize  his  limitations. But  he  is now,  as  he  has  always  been,  a survivor  whose  energy  and  vulnerability remain attractive and  whose  essential  lack  of  pessimism  and   malice  remains unsullied. Richler has  attempted to  make  the  reader care  about Duddy. Until  1966,   at least,  it is a good  bet  that  readers  of  Canadian fiction  wondered what  became of Duddy Kravitz more than  they did  about any other character.



Ounnv's ROLE IN  THE  FIRST THIRD of St.  Urbain's  Horse­ man  (1972) is as a contemporary of Jake  Hersh at  Fletcher's Field  High School.  He  is the  Duddy of the  Mr.  MacPherson era   (although MacPherson  is  never mentioned), the  kid with  chutzpa, the  iconoclast. This  is Jake's story,  but  Jake,  in  some  ways,  reminds us of the  appealing Duddy we once  knew.  His  need  to romanticize Cousin  Joey recalls Duddy's need  to create the  romance of his 'older  brother' Bradley.  Jake's  self-aggrandizement is hilarious, as  are  his  day-dreams about his death and  the  pain  it would  cause  others.  Duddy had  the same  kind  of fantasies. Jake's exchange with  a  Montreal waiter brings  Duddy  to  mind,   the ingenuous Duddy who asserted  himself  through platitude :
Back in Montreal  Jake made straight  for the  bar  in Central  Station,  ordered  a double  whiskey and  paid for it with American  money.
'Montreal is the Paris of North  America,' the waiter said. 'I trust you will enjoy your stay, sir.'
Jake  stared  at  his change. 'What's  this,' he asked, 'monopoly  money?'
'It's  Canadian.'
Jake  laughed,  pleased.
'Canada's no  joke. We're  the  world's  leading   producer   of  uramum.  Walter
Pidgeon  was born in this country.'

This  Duddy, however,  is no  more.  Seen  through the  eyes of  Jake, Duddy  is never  vulnerable, only crude.  Where  in his apprenticeship does Duddy sound  like this?  " 'Everybody's doin'   it,  doin'   it  . . . pickin'   their   nose  and   chewin' it, chewin' it.'" Jake's cousin  Herky  manufactures liquid soap  and  other  toiletries;

RICHLER

the young Duddy  once sold such articles to raise money for Dudley Kane Produc­ tions. Whatever  happened to Duddy  Kravitz?  Herky, in his interests and  ignor­ ance might sound  like Duddy,  but  his fervent speeches about  urinals and  toilets are a parody  of the St. Urbain Street  hustler:  "'It's from  the Stone  Ages here. You know what  they got in the urinals? Ice cubes.' The  roadhouse  was not one of Herky's clients. 'This isn't a toilet, it's a storage tank for last week's farts. Take a  deep  breath, kid.' " In  case this comparison  between  Herky  and  Duddy  be considered  too  tenuous,  the  other  brief  portraits  of  the  young  Kravitz  can  be seen to support  it. Let Duddy  speak for  himself:

'Hey, syphhead,'  he shouted up at  Joey, 'make you a deal. You burp  up  my ass and I'll fart in your mouth.'

* 	* 	*
When  the  boys whirled around,  Duddy, clutching his genitals, shouted, 'Votre soeur, combien?'   ... Duddy bent over, pulled down his trousers, and  wiggled his pale narrow white ass in the air. 'For Pope Pius,' he hollered.

The  kid  who  remained  so loyal to  his family despite  emotional  deprivation, the street-wise kid who learned  to survive and  who was easy to root for when in conflict with an  Irwin  Shubert, the boy who was allowed to articulate his vision against  those of Linda  Rubin  and  Uncle  Benjy-this Duddy  is gone forever. "The  fine, intelligent  boy"  that  Uncle  Benjy glimpsed  is dead;  he  has become more than  a "scheming  little bastard." Duddy  paid a price at the end of his apprenticeship, but  such  was Richler's  relative  vision that  there  still seemed  to be some hope  for  Duddy.  Not  any  more.  Richler,  in  St.  Urbain's   Horseman, seems to  be  determined to  destroy  Duddy  in  the  reader's  eyes. The  character Duddy  most resembles in this novel is the pathetic,  even despicable  Harry  Stein.
Jake  meets the adult  Duddy  in Toronto  at the apartment of his cousin Jenny; it is twenty  years  after  Yvette  and  Virgil.  There  is no  explanation   as to  why Jenny  is with  Duddy,  and  their sexual exchange  seems to be used by Richler  to portray the absence of any Kravitz sensitivity or feelings: "They  lunched  together once  a  week  and  then  retired  to  his apartment on  Avenue  Road,   where  he mounted her absently, eliciting an orgasm in time to shower before his next appointment." Duddy's  old  hustle is still good for a story or  two. He  puts  the touch  on Jake  for a few dollars and  he dreams  up the Canadian  Jewish Who's Who, a project  that  will launch  him on his millionaire  path.  The  mad  ground­ work of the "Jew's Who" and  its eventual success remind one of the bar-mitzvah  films, the first Dudley  Kane  efforts; however, there is no land  at  the end of the rainbow,  no loyalty to a grandfather's advice,  just the greedy  man's  pot of gold. The  relative  vision is absent  in this mini-portrait of Duddy; so when  he cheats his Wate-Loss  partner into  buying  out  his shares of  a  pill  that  contains  tape-

RICHLER

worm,  there  are  no excuses. Duddy  is empty  and  without attraction; the  reader cannot care  about a  pusherke without a soul.
Sometime later, Duddy, who is now married, finds Jake  in London and  Richler sets up  the  reader for a question that  was never  asked  during the  apprenticeship but  which  must,  apparently, be asked  now.

'Duddy,  what are you doing in London?'
'Launching a star. I've  got to speak to you.'
'All right, then. What are you doing right  now?'
'Masturbating. And you?'

* 	* 	*
'Oh  I've  had a hundred  and  ninety-two girls, not counting Marlene,  and  more than  one  has pleaded  for me  to stop. Big Dick  one of the  girls used to call  me. Nice, huh?  I liked that. Big Dick Kravitz.  The  girls tell me I'm  a very virile guy and  I don't  come quick as a sneeze, like a lot of shmecks today.'

Duddy is preoccupied with  sex and  money; he  can  talk  about little  else. He  is uninteresting and   does  little  to  advance the  story  of  Jake. This   treatment of Duddy is, of course, deliberate on Richler's part  and  far  removed  from  the comparatively complex   portrait of  the  younger   days.  When  Duddy asks  Jake, "'Who in  hell could  love Duddy Kravitz?'"  readers unite  in  chorus  and  shout, as they  are  supposed  to, "No one!" Not  this Duddy Kravitz, at  least.
Our last  glimpse  of Duddy   comes  right  at  the  end  of  the  novel,  though  his
presence  is gratuitous. Good  old  Duddy  lends  his  pal  Hersh $10,ooo, but  such a loan  is emotion-free. There is more  crude  Kravitz talk  about sex, so much  and in such  a way that  one can  only pity this limited perception of the  world.  It is as if the  Duddy of  the  apprenticeship days  has  had  a  lobotomy; that   part  of  his mind  that  once contained such  positive human qualities as loyalty, sensitivity, vulnerability, and   joy has  been  cut  away.  What is left  is a  slimy  piece  of gray matter that  perceives the  world  in terms  of dollar signs and  fucking.
Early  on  in St. Urbain's  Horseman,  Jake  reads  from  the  diary  of Reb  Shmul
Johnson. Jake  applies  the  following  words  to  himself; but  the  reader who  has discovered what  did happen to Duddy  Kravitz might well speak  these  words  on behalf  of Duddy, offering  them  as a  prayer, acting as a  Kaddish  for  a lost soul, lost after  the  apprenticeship, not  during:

'When  I survey my past life, I discover nothing  but  a barren  waste of time, with some disorders  of the body and  disturbances  of  the  mind  very near  to madness, which  I hope He  that made  me will suffer to extenuate many faults  and  exercise many deficiencies.'

Duddy is not  mentioned in  any  of Richler's subsequent fiction,  including the latest  novel,   joshua Then And  Now.  But,  from   Richler's point  of  view,  after St.  Urbain's  Horseman  what   remained to  be  said  about him?  Having  chosen

RICHLER


not to write a novel, between  1959 and  1966, that  would reveal Duddy  moving and changing  from adolescence to adulthood,  Richler leaves such movement  and change  up to the reader.  And this is where the conflict arises. If Dr. Jekyll never existed, Mr.  Hyde  emerges from  a vacuum.  The  reader  of The   Apprenticeship cannot,  based on the relative vision of that  novel, jump to the  repellant  portrait of Duddy  in Horseman. Duddy  is forced to drink a potion  (Richler's ink his life­ blood)   that  most  readers  would  never ask him  to swallow  and  on  which  they gag themselves.
The  final  view of  Duddy  Kravitz  is of  an  offensive and  foul-mouthed   mil­
lionaire.  The  lasting  vision is of  a  boy confused  and  unrefined,  but  certainly appealing  and  with a potential  for growth.  Duddy Kravitz  is alive and  well and living on St. Urbain Street  still.


NOTES

1 A. R.  Bevan,  "Introduction," The   Apprenticeship  of Duddy  Kravitz   (Toronto: McClelland & Stewart, r 969) .
2   Kerry McSweeney, "Revaluing Mordecai Richler," Studies in Canadian  Literature,
5, No. 4  (Summer 1979),  131.
a  Warren Tallman, on  the other hand, praises  Duddy's "direct intelligence and  col­
loquial   exuberance." In  "Wolf   in  the  Snow,"  Canadian  Literature, 6  (Autumn
1960), Tallman writes: "D. H.  Lawrence contended that   in  the  visions of  art  a
relatively finer  vision  is substituted for  the  relatively  cruder visions extant. But  in
North America ... finer  is relatively crude,  because  frequently untrue, and  crude
'Can be relatively fine. All too often,  in fiction as in life, those  pretensions which  we
seek  out  because   they  make   us  fine  provide the  false  furnishings for  the  actual
house  in which  we live. This fine is crude.  Duddy,  who would  not  know  a  preten­
sion  if he  met  one,  wanders for  this  reason  by accident and  mostly  unaware into
the  actual house.  His  crude is relatively  fine."






CANADIAN  AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available at
the bookstore
UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
2075 WESBROOK PLACE
VANCOUVER, B.C.  V6T 1W5  /228-4741



73

MAC LEN NAN AND YEATS


Donald R. Bartlett




HUGHMACLENNAN's  sPJDNX evokes images of bewilder­ ment, anarchy, and terror associated with its Classical archetype.  It's  more recent predecessor is, of course, the "rough  beast" of W. B Yeats's "The Second  Com­
ing." MacLennan criticism has explored the Oedipal  and ignored the Yeatsian overtones  in  Return   of  the  Sphinx, despite  the  fact  that   Gabriel   Fleury,  an
'oracular' character, quite  early in  the  novel compares  Alan  Ainslie,  MacLen­ nan's  protagonist,  to the great  Irish nationalist.  " 'Political nationalism is the last thing  he'd  ever  go out  for.  He  has  a  curious  mystique  about  the  country.  He really loves it. If this makes any sense to you, he  reminds  me of William  Butler Yeats.' "
The  values espoused by Alan  Ainslie, Gabriel  Fleury,  and  to  a lesser extent Marielle  Jeanotte, Joe Lacombe, and  a sadder  but  wiser Herbert  Tamley-all various  personae for the author  himself-arc in fact the very values upon which Yeats based his nationalism.  Not only is MacLennan's nationalism  very similar to Yeats's,  but  his articulation  of it depends  significantly  upon  his presentation of a socio-political milieu roughly similar to that  which Yeats knew, and  upon his manipulation of 'types' and  myths and  antitheses  that  are  remarkably  Yeatsian.
Despite his flirtation  with  political agitators  and  fanatics,  Yeats's  nationalism was a sane one. It derived from the pithy sayings of and  the courage and  dignity exemplified in the old Fenian leader, John  O'Leary.1 Its basis was the traditional values of leadership,  good breeding,  and  good sense -all  symbolized for Ycats in  the  aristocracy-and his convictions  were  intensified  by  the  tragic  events of Irish  politics over more than  half a century.  Return  of the  Sphinx   makes it quite  clear that  responsible leadership, good breeding,  and  good sense are central to MacLennan's nationalism,  too; and  that  he in our own time, as was Yeats in his, is fearful  of the anarchy  and  horror  which  result when,  in a direct  echo of Yeats, "the  centre  cannot  hold."  MacLennan's motives  and  methods  arc  like­ wise similar to Yeats's; a conversation between Tamley and Fleury illustrates this.

[ F:]   "If you want the real reason why Alan Ainslie's in politics, I can  tell you.
He's  terrified that  unless English Canada  wakes up  pretty soon, things in this country will drift into civil war."


74

MACLENNAN

[T:]   "Tell  me-am  I right  in believing that  he's trying to use French-Canadian nationalism  as a lever to make English Canada  do something  before it's too late?"
[F:]  "Yes, I think  that's  about  right."

MacLennan had,  of  course,  treated national unity   and   the  problem   of  two cultures before,  most  notably in Two  Solitudes, of which  he  was later  to  write:
Its  genesis came  in a  dream  in which  I  saw a  tall,  angular   blond  man  arguing noisily with a stocky, darker  man. They  were shouting  at  each  other  in fury and a voice in the dream said to me, "Don't you see it? They're both deaf."2

The  symbolism  in  a  Canadian context  is obvious.  And  so is the  problem: how to  make  both  sides  act  sensibly  to  effect  political  unity   without civil  war  and without sacrificing the  dignity  of  minority groups?  The  answer is that  national unity  is possible  only  when   two  peoples  put  aside  their   prejudices  (or  "race­ legends" as MacLennan calls them  in Two  Solitudes)  and  cherish  and  promote the  best  of each  culture; when,  symbolically,  they  are  distinct  individuals while at  the same  time  members of the same family  who "protect and  touch  and  greet each  other."3  This  is the  message  of Two  Solitudes, and  this is the  message that  MacLennan would  have  us hear  amidst  the darkness  of  his later  novels.
MacLennan attempts to objectify  this message in  various  debates in the  novel. For  example, Joe  Lacombe, R.C.M.P. officer and  a  representative of what  may well be the  majority of French Canadians-the "psychological" separatists who genuinely yearn  for  greater self-determination but  within  the  federation4 -puts the issue squarely before  his long-time friend, Alan  Ainslie :
"suppose we want  to work in our own milieu-what then?  ... Why can't  we be free and  clean  and  proud  of ourselves? Why  can't  we  succeed as French  Cana­ dians and  not as imitations  of the  English and  Americans?  Why should  they be the ones to judge whether  we're any good or not? Why can't  we judge  that  our­ selves?"

and,
"We  want  a  patrie, and  for most of us Canada  will do fine if the  rest of you will ever get  around  to  letting  it  become a  patrie for all  of  us and  not  just for  les Anglais.  What  have  we got  now?  Is  it  a  patrie when  we  can't  speak  our  own language  and  be understood  in it even by the boss?"
As Federal Minister of Cultural Affairs, Ainslie attempts to get  Moses Bulstrode, acting Prime Minister, to  take  remedial and  exemplary measures. "If we insist on  bilingualism on  the  recruitment level  of  the  federal civil  service,  it  will  be taken  as a touchstone in Quebec and  everywhere else that  we accept that  Canada is the  home  of two cultures and  that  the  rna jority wishes the  minority culture to survive  and  prosper. If this  happens, we will have  one  of the  happiest and  most stable  nations in the  world.  It's  that, or disintegration." Ainslie  reasserts  this con­ viction  in  a  Parliamentary debate: "[Canada]  is,  and   must   remain, a  single

75

MACLENNAN

country  ... it  can  remain  a single country  only on  this condition-that it be universally  accepted  that  this single country  is the  home  of  two  different  cul­ tures."  MacLennan may have had Yeats's Senate  speeches in mind,  or the simi­ larity might be a case of coincidental good sense. In any event, Yeats, speaking in the Irish Senate,  on October 17, I924, had stressed the necessity of  tolerance  and justice in the effecting of national  unity.
"I  have no hope of seeing Ireland united in my time, or of seeing Ulster won in my time; but I believe it will be won in the end, and not because we fight it, but because we govern this country well. We can do that ... by creating a system of culture which will represent the whole of this country and will draw the imagina­ tion of the young towards it."5
On June  I Iof  the next year, during a debate  on divorce, Yeats again cautioned:
"If you show that  this country, Southern  Ireland,  is going to  be governed by Catholic  ideas and  by Catholic ideas alone, you  will never  get  the  North.... You will not  get  the  North  if  you impose on  the  minority  what  the  minority considers to be oppressive legislation."6

And for both Yeats and  MacLennan the local is but a symptom  of the univer­ sal. Yeats wrote to John  Quin that  the Easter Rising "has  been a great grief. We have lost the ablest and  most fine-natured  of our  young men. A world seems to have been swept away.m And in I936  he confided  to Ethel  Mannin  that he had intended  "The Second Coming" to be a warning,  and that "every nerve trembles with  horror   at  what  is happening  in  Europe,   'the  ceremony  of  innocence  is drowned.' "8  In  Return of the  Sphinx, Ainslie regards  Canada  as "the  psychic centre  of the  world";  Fleury senses that  events  in  Quebec  are  a  result of "the  mysterious emotion" which is "sweeping  the  world"; and  the  riot  which young Daniel  Ainslie participated in is described  by Tarnley  as "an  explosion of mass emotion.'' Fleury's metaphor  is akin to Yeats's' more powerful images of anarchy: "the  blood-dimmed tide" of "The  Second  Coming" and  "the irrational streams of blood  [that] are staining earth" in "The Gyres.''  The hysteria  Tarnley  refers to appears  to  be the  mass mania  or collective  hysterica  passio9    which  Yeats so dreaded.  Both  the  images of violence and  the  frustrations behind  the  violence meet  in  Daniel  Ainslie, Alan's  son.  His  methods  are  not  condonable,   but  his desire to image  what  he sees in  the streets  of  Montreal at  night  comes closest perhaps  to  epitomizing  the  universal  oppression  and  political  injustice  behind the impending anarchy. "The people speaking in broken sentences. Their  expres­ sions when you catch them with the truth  on their  faces."
His AWARENESS OF  THE  NEED for good government, toler­ ance,  and   justice  notwithstanding,  Alan  Ainslie  seems  curiously  naive  in  his beliefs that   the  problem  in  Quebec  is  not  economic  but   psychological,  that

MACLENNAN


Quebec nationalism  can be explained as "a surrogate  religion," and "that all revolutions have neurotic  roots." These apparent over-simplications gain in merit if we keep in  mind  two  things : first, that  they refer  to spiritual  dissatisfaction and  unrest  of the  kind  that  Joe  Lacombe  had  mentioned  and  which engender what Ronald  Sutherland terms "psychological Separatism" or "the  fourth  Sepa­ ratism"; second,  that  by "revolutions" MacLennan  has in  mind  disruptions  in the  evolution  of the  human   psyche. "The  only revolutions  that  matter," Mac­  Lennan  has said,  "are  psychic, somewhere in  the  human  soul," and  that  what happened  in theI g6o's  was "a  fantastic  break in the human  psyche.mo
During  the  Parliamentary debate,  Ainslie claims  that  the  "world  crisis," of
which events in Quebec  are but local symptoms, "came  when humanity  lost faith in man's  ability  to improve  his own nature...." He  continues: "When  people no longer  can  believe in  personal immortality,  when society at  large  has  aban­ doned  philosophy,  many  grow mad  without  knowing why. They  crack  up...." He maintains  that  people crave recognition and immortality  and  that  when they no longer  believe in good  they seek these things in evil. "A  senseless  crime can be one way of passing into  the only kind of immortality  this sick  epoch  under­  stands, and so can the leadership of a senseless revolt-it can go into the records and into the archives."
Yeats likewise believed that  the problem of modern  times began with a retreat
of humanism.  "The mischief began at the end of the seventeenth  century  when man  became  passive before  a mechanized  nature...."11   MacLennan,  however, gives a later date: the modern  world, he has said, began "at  the end of 1914."12
In  Return  of the  Sphinx, Herbert  Tamley  claims "it  all started" with  World
War  I; and  Gabriel  Fleury,  reflecting upon the suffering of his wounded  father and the impact  which that  suffering had upon his own psyche, comments:  "That was when it all started." He  muses that  "What had started  then  was surely the rebirth  of a kind of man  who had perished two thousand  years ago, a man  who knew there was no escape from his own nature  into religion or politics or science or even into  his own  skill."  Fleury's  reference  to an  epoch  which  ended  "two thousand  years ago" points to the end of the Pre-Christian era which Yeats characterized  by coldness and objectivity and symbolized by the Sphinx. Fleury's musing about  an unfortunate "rebirth" is clearly reminiscent of Yeats's prophecy in "The Second  Coming" that  the "twenty  centuries of stony sleep" which had been "vex'd  to nightmare by a rocking cradle" were about  to come round  again.
MacLennan symbolizes this dehumanized, mechanized  world in various ways:
in Daniel's affectionate  patting  of the hood of his powerful car, and in his reckless driving;  and  in  the  senseless killing of Alan's  wife, Constance,   by a  runaway truck.  Events in his family,  his province, his country,  cause Alan  to despair:
The  time he was living in was too fantastic for anyone to look at squarely in the eye.... All the ideas that  had guided and inspired [his]  life-socialism, educa-

77

MACLENNAN

tion, the faith  that  science and prosperity would improve  man's  life, even the new psychology which everyone so glibly talked -the best he could say now of any of these hopes was that  they had  foundered  in  the  ancient  ocean  of human  nature.

In  another context MacLennan has  written: "For me  the  Sixties  were  exhaust­ ing,  because  every  cause  I  valued  seemed  in  retreat.m 3  Yeats,  too,  had  known  despair:
this much at any rate is certain -the dream  of my early manhood,  that  a modern nation  can  return  to Unity  of Culture,  is false;  though  it may be we can  achieve it for some small circle of men and women, and  there  leave it till the moon  bring round  its century.14

But total  and  permanent despair  is alien to Yeats's vision-and to MacLennan's. Like Yeats,  MacLennan puts  his trust  in  traditional institutions to  preserve  and nurture those humanistic instincts  which  will repel  the  Beast.  For Yeats  there  was Coole Park, the Swedish  court,  and  Urbina; Alan  Ainslie believes in good govern­ ment; and  a chastened Tarnley puts  his trust  in liberal  education.  Near  the  end of the novel  we learn  that  Tarnley's son has committed suicide.  In a letter  that  is distinctly  Yeatsian in its comments on modern education and political  democracy, Tamley attributes his son's  death to  the  youth's inability  to  cope  with  modern mechanized society.  He  offers  to  make  Alan   warden of   a  liberal   arts  college which  he hopes  to establish  as "a refuge  [for]   dedicated  men" who  will preserve  "at  least  the seeds of cultivation."



l:E SIMILARITIES ARE   NOT  exclusively  conceptual. Parallels with  Yeats's   mythology   are  evident   in  the  symbolic   patterns of  MacLennan's novel.  George  Woodcock has noted  that  "Return of the Sphinx  is almost  obses­ sively involved, not  merely  in  the  fathers-and-sons pattern  of  antagonisms, but also in  a  cross-generational pattern of sexual  conjunctions,"  and   has  suggested  that, in Daniel, these patterns symbolize  national and  generational revolt. 15 Alec Lucas,  speculating on  the  raison d'etre of  MacLennan's love-scenes,  states  that  the  Daniel-Marielle affair  "sums  up  on  a  psychological basis  a  plot  in  which  a son, measuring swords  with  his father  politically, asserts  his deeper  and  Oedipal antagonism towards him  through  what both   accept as  symbolically incestuous when  he, Daniel, sleeps with  Marielle, a mother surrogate, in  his father's bed.ms  Robert Cockburn notes  that  these  "romantic interludes . . . are  helpful   . . . in giving  weight  to the thematic context  of the  novel" even  though they  do impede the   narrative  flow.  He   continues,  following   vVoodcock's   lead,   to   point   out Gabriel's role in  bridging "with Chantal, through love, the  generation gap," and  symbolizing  "an  uprooted and  perishing  civilization of  culture and  manners.m7
Accurate as these  statements are  within  their  respective  contexts, they  do  not adequately account for the contrasts that  exist between  the  Daniel-Marielle affair

MACLENNAN

and  the love of Chantal and  Gabriel.  Yet it is precisely in the  contrasts  which attend  these relationships  that  MacLennan dramatizes  and  emphasizes a  myth which he has repeatedly  objectified through  the diversity in age, experience, and ethnic origins of his fictional families:  namely, that  youth  and vigour and  desire must be tempered  with wisdom and discipline and love. This  myth figures in all of MacLennan's novels, and a remark by Marcia, in The  Precipice-

"Father was crude,   but  ... I guess  his  energy  was  no  more  use  to  the  Massa­
chusetts blood  of Mother's family  than  a truck  running downhill with  no brakes"18

- is clearly seminal  to symbols of uncontrolled  power in Return of the Sphinx. In  yet another   instance  MacLennan has written:   "As  there  is power,  so must there be love. Unless civilization achieves this union, there will be no civilization. Unless art is able to record it, there will be no art.m 9  Yeats, too, knew that  power without  wisdom  is bound  to  be  destructive.  He  objectified  this  knowledge  in "Leda  and  the Swan," and issued an emphatic  warning in the poem's rhetorical conclusion:  "Did  she put  on his knowledge with his power?"
Contrasts  in age, ethnic  origin, experience, and emotional  response are signifi­
'
Marielle,  like Gabriel,  represents  Old  World  experience  and  knowledge. She
had  been '"a carefully-reared girl in a cultivated  family."' Her  wartime experi­ ences had  taught  her  that  there  are  no moral  absolutes.  In  her,  passion  is bal­ anced  by compassion;  and  her  abhorrence  of " 'self-willed  ignorance'" is akin to Yeats's abhorrence of "intellectual hatred" in "A  Prayer  for  My Daughter." Marielle's seduction  of Daniel is no facile escapism sanctioned by some make­ love-not-war  cliche. Rather, it is her earnest  attempt  to rid him of his Jansenist inhibitions  and  to direct  his youthful energy and  vitality into constructive  ways: " 'you  are  afraid  of loving  a  woman,  and  if a  man  fears  that,  then  it is very natural for him to talk and dream about bombs and war.' " She points out to him that in every century  there have been those who ruin their lives for political ideas; and,  through  the story of her father's  death  and the 'liberation' of her country­ men to "candy bars and  Coca-Cola," she cautions him of what Yeats knew only

79

MACLENNAN

too well : that  political  autonomy without culture is valueless,  and  often  vicious.
They  make  love,  and  she  seems temporarily to  have  checked   his violent  im­ pulses. But  in  a few  paragraphs, made  the  more  effective  by their  juxtaposition with  Chantal's tender after-thoughts, Daniel  reflects  with  guilt  and  horror upon  his affair   with  Marielle. He  soon  reverts  to  his  "self-willed  ignorance," to  his belief that  revolution is a modern phenomenon and  that  problems can  be solved by  violent  methods. He  had  not  "put on  [her]  knowledge with  [her]  power." The  lessons  which   Marielle had  hoped  to  teach  Daniel  confront him  again  when  he searches  through old  newspapers for  information about  middle-weight boxer  Archie   MacNeil, his  real  grandfather.  So  fascinated  is Daniel with   the glimpses of an  earlier  age which  these papers provide that he forgets  his original
purpose.

There  were stories about strikes and  lockouts, about  Irish  Home  Rule,  about  an­ archists' bombs, about gun-running into Ulster, and the impact  of all this gave him a very strange sensation. It was all dead  news and  the people looked  ridiculous in the clothes they wore, but what  was going on then  seemed  just the same as what was going on now. They all seemed crazy and  most of them  seemed  wicked, and he  thought  of  French  Canada   during  those  years  when  his  father  was  a  child, French  Canada  living quiet  and  eternal  with  her  faith  and  her land  exiled from all this insanity  that had led to the war....

At last  he turns  to the sports  pages. He sees a close resemblance of himself  in the photographs of his grandfather, and  reads  of the  tragic failure of that  man  who had  tried  to overcome socio-economic disadvantages  by  physical  violence.
The  tragedy  of his grandfather's life together with  the  political  fanaticism and
foolish  martyrdom-"all  [the] insanity"-of  half  a century ago fills him  with a sense of deja vu. Daniel  is shaken. Marielle might  have  been  his salvation:

Marielle-suddenly he craved  her. More, he needed  to  be with  her  because she would understand how he felt now. She understood  how everyone felt. She knew what  he needed and incredulously he said aloud,  "I think  I've  fallen in love with her. I don't  think I can live without  her. She will love me and  that  will save me."

But  before  he can  go to her,  the  telephone rings: he lifts  the  receiver  and  hears his father's voice  rebuking him  for  his association with  Latendresse, a  fanatical separatist. The  old  antagonism flares again : desperate fear  gives  place  to anger, and  tenderness towards Marielle gives place  to Daniel's need  for  'conquest': "I want  a woman. I've  got to have  a woman" -Marielle, Sandra, any  woman. It is in this mood  of guilt  and  violence  and  self-indulgence that  he accuses  Chantal of indecency with  Gabriel. Not  even  Joe  Lacombe's faith in  Daniel, whom  he arrests,  can  lessen  the  antithesis which  MacLennan has  created and  symbolized in  Alan  Ainslie's  children. It is a dramatization of  the  human  condition which parallels,  consciously  or  unconsciously,  Yeats's  comment on  the  brood  of Leda: "from one of her eggs came  Love and  from  the  other  War."21

So

MACLENNAN



ANOTHER MYTH WHICH Yeats and  MacLennan seem to share is the belief in cyclical history. Yeats believed, or pretended  to believe, that history comes round  in two-thousand-year cycles, and  that  each  historical  rever­ sal is accompanied by violence. In "The Second Coming"  he anticipates a  rever­ sal of the  "gyres"  and  records  his horror  at  the  prospect.  "While  Yeats is not fond of Christianity,  and  regards its suppression of individual personality as hav­ ing led to the present anarchy, yet at the end of the poem he envisions something far worse."22
In the first two pages of Return  of the Sphinx, Gabriel  Fleury alludes to "an­
other  cold cycle," and  to "violent  changes." It may well be that  MacLennan is merely establishing  meteorological  conditions  as symbolic of the  political  unrest and  explosiveness of  Montreal   in  the  Sixties. But  references  elsewhere  in  the novel, and  indeed  in other  MacLennan novels, suggest that  he does subscribe to the largely deterministic view of cyclical history. Gabriel's  references to "a rebirth of a kind  of  man  who  had  perished  two  thousand  years  ago"  has  been  men­ tioned  above;  and,  at another  point, Alan Ainslie reflects that  "some, like  him­ self, had  been  driven  to  do  irrevocable  things  not  out  of  any  fate  created  by their  characters  ... but  because such  things  had  come  with  the  rations  of the epoch into  which  they  had  been born."  However,  against  such  apparent deter­ minism, each author  has his own peculiar faith: Yeats in the Irish  peasantry,  the aristocracy,   art,   and,  ostensibly,  in  the  Mask   and  the  enigmatic   Thirteenth Cone;  MacLennan, in "the  evolution  of the  human  soul," in  the  land  and  its people. "The country  existed didn't  it? The  rain of  contributions made  to it by millions of people  for so long  a  time  were  infinitely  more  important than  the gossamer ideas the clever ones invented to understand  the meanings of countries."  But dreams  or myths, or "shadows," as Gabriel  calls them,  sometimes  betray
us, and  near  the end of the  novel Alan's dejection seems complete : his political
career has been ruined,  his son is in prison, and Canada is still on the brink. The cause of this collapse is implicit  in a repudiation  MacLennan had  earlier  made of political "isms" :

Nationalism, Fascism  and  Communism ... are  aberrations because   their  dogmas are  founded on  hatred not  on  love, and  it  is this quality of  hatred which  makes their  hideous creations so destructive and   dangerous that   they  will  bring  about the extermination of the  human race  unless their  growth  is stopped.23

Yeats,  despairing   of  his  "fool-driven   land," and  of  the  inability   of  political systems  to  cope  with  events  in  Europe,   had   written : "Communist,  Fascist, nationalist,  clerical,  anti-clerical, are  all responsible according  to the  number  of their  victims."24
But man,  thoughtful and  sensitive man  especially, needs the dream  if only to

MACLENNAN

make  bearable the  reality. So it is that  Yeats  advises  metaphorically, "When the rivers  are  poisoned, take  to  the  mountain  well." 25    Similarly, in  the  Epilogue, MacLennan has  his protagonist journey  across  this  vast  land-"Too  vast  even for  fools  to  ruin  all  of it" -observe  unspoiled nature, and   meet  with  simple, ordinary people  "who  knew all about  one  another and  liked  each  other  in spite of  this." Gradually Alan's  faith  is restored: "One step  more  would  have  freed
'
to the  world  before,  after  all."
Such  a  faith  in  Canadian unity  may  not  be  consistent   with  the  tone  of  the novel  or  with  those  actions   which   take   place  in  its  urban  environs, but  it  is thematically consistent  with  other  MacLennan novels. And  it is quite  character­ istic of a man  who admits  that  his feelings in this respect  are more important than  his  deliberations.27   It  is all  a  part  of  the  MacLennan  mythology. His  belief  in cyclical  history,  and  his myth  of the  land  combine in  the  Epilogue as he  asserts once  again   his  cautious  faith   that   Canadian  unity-and  civilization  itself­ though threatened, will endure. This  faith  is  implicit in  the  final  paragraph of Two Solitudes:
even  as  the  two  race-legends  woke  again  remembering ancient   enmities,  there woke this time also the  felt knowledge that  together  [Canadians] had  fought and survived  one  great  war  they  had  never  made  and  that   now  they  had  entered another  . . . that  even if the legends were like oil and  alcohol  in  the same  bottle the bottle had  not been broken yet. (Italics  mine.)

and  in the  special  interpretation which  the  Rev.  Martell used  to give to  his text in The  Watch That  Ends the Night: "It comes-to pass."
Through his choice of title, MacLennan clearly  alludes  to ancient anarchy and to Oedipus's answer  to the riddle  of the Sphinx. But the  real immediacy of  Mac­ Lennan's message comes from  his concept  of nationalism, and  from  a horror that the  prophecy of "The Second  Coming" might indeed  become  the reality.  Return  of  the  Sphinx  is a  political  and  social  novel  where,  despite  its  occasional lapses from  psychological realism  and  some impediments to  the  narrative flow,  "life  is greater than  the  cause"28 ; or, as both  Yeats  and  MacLennan might  rephrase it, "life  is the  cause." Fiction,  MacLennan maintains, depends in no small  way "on its power  to use the symbols of its trade to mediate between men  and  the  corro­  sive forces of their  undefined emotions."29 Through his symbols, in both  title  and text,  MacLennan  is desperately cautioning mankind against impending tragedy. It is in  no  way  reductive  of  his genius  that   he  reshapes Classical  and  Yeatsian mythic  structures  to  articulate the  nature of  these  "forces" and  the  dimensions of the  tragedy.

NOTES

1 Yeats  quotes  O'Leary  as saying "There are  things a man  must  not  do  to save a nation," and "There was never cause so bad that  it has not been defended  by good

MACLENNAN


men  for  what  seemed  to them  good  reasons"  ("Poetry and  Tradition," Essays and
Introductions, London: Macmillan, I96I, p. 247).
2   "Two Solitudes that   Meet  and  Greet  in  Hope  and  Hate," Maclean's, 84,  no.  8 (August I97I),  20.
3 The lines  from   Rainer Maria Rillre,  which  MacLennan used  as  an  epigram   to Two Solitudes, he  later  described as "Surely   the  best  practical  definition of love ever  uttered, whether applied  to  individuals or  to  two  nations sharing a  single state" (ibid.) .
4  Ronald Sutherland, "The Fourth Separatism," Canadian Literature, no. 45  (Sum­
mer  I970). See especially  pp.  7-9 and  I5-22.
5  The Senate  Spaches of W. B. Yeats, ed. Donald R. Pearse  (Bloomington: Indiana
Univ.  Press,  I 960), p. 87.
6   Ibid.,  p. 92.
7   The Letters of W. B. Yeats, ed. Allan  Wade  (London: Rupert Hart-Davis, I954),
p. 6f4.
s Ibid.,  p. 85 r.
0  Letters on  Poetry   from  W. B. Yeats to  Dorothy  Wellesley, ed.  Dorothy  Wellesley
(London: Oxford Univ.  Press,  I94o), p. 94·
10    "Hugh  MacLennan: The  Tennis Racket Is  an   Antelope  Bone,"  in   Donald Cameron, Conversations with   Canadian Novelists   (Toronto:  Macmillan, I973), Part One,  pp.  I35,  I32.
11  The Oxford Book  of Modern Verse, ed.  W. B. Yeats  (New  York:  Oxford Univ. Press,  I936), Intro., p. xxvii.
12 Conversations, p.  I34·
13   Maclean's, 84, August   I97I, 50.
14  Autobiographies (London: Macmillan, I955), p. 295·
15  Hugh MacLennan (Toronto: Copp Clark,  I969), p.  I I5.
16 Hugh MacLennan  (Toronto:  McClelland & Stewart, I97o), p. 24.
17  The Novels  of Hugh MacLennan (Montreal: Harvest House,  I969), pp.  I28,  I30.
18 The Precipice  (Toronto: Collins,  I948), p. 2I4.
19  "The Present  World  as Seen  in  Its  Literature," Founders' Day  Address,  Univ.  of
New Brunswick, February  I8,  I952,  p.  I2.
20   Impulsiveness, intensity, and   accomplishment  are  epitomized  in   the   recurring airman-figure in MacLennan's fiction.  They  seem to represent a twentieth-century counterpart of  the  Renaissance  man.    (Cf.  Yeats's  poems   about  Major  Robert Gregory, also an  airman.)
21 A Vision (I925; London: Macmillan, 2nd  ed.,  I937), p. 268.
22  Richard Ellman, The Identity of Yeats   (New  York:  Oxford Univ.  Press,  I964), p. 26o.
23  "Help Thou Mine  Unbelief," Cross-Country (Edmonton:  Hurtig,  I972), p.  I4I.
This  article  was first published as "Are  We a Godless  People?", Maclean's, March
I5,  I949·
24   Letters, p. 85o.
25   Ibid.,  p. 88r.
"

MACLENNAN


"When Expo  '67  was such  a  success, I  almost  thought we  had  won  through and that  Canada's future was safe." Maclean's, 84, no. 8 (August 1971), 50.
27   Ibid., p. 19.
28   W. B. Yeats,  "Poetry and  Tradition," Essays and  Introductions, p.  260.
29   "The Present World  ... ," p. 5·





LJlMENT
 


Kim Maltman


I  turn  the  corner.   Under the  blue  sky, under the  white  glare of light  caught  in  the oaks,  under the  buildings
suddenly  awkward at  the  sight  of such  trees,
under  the  clouds  which  are  like huge  stars  in  the  day  s.k,y, I see the  girl, who  has  come  early  (the girl
who comes at  night  to sit by the  well).
Why so early,  girl? 	I  want  to say,
the  sun is still high,  the  wind  is asleep, sometimes  it stretches out  in  the  leaves,
but  it is asleep  nonetheless,  what  do  you  want  here? But  instead  I  duck  into  a  doorway.
From  my hiding  place  I watch and  try to  think. The light  turns  away  and  in  the  shadows
she is dark  and  beautiful, the oaks stand  guard, they  keep  the  light  away,
but  it stays nearby,  like a fragrance you  might  come  across and  recognize
but  not identify.   Such  sadness  in  her  face.
She  leans against  the stone,  the  water of the  well is cool and  sweet, but  she  will have  none  of it,
the  bucket  is drowning there.
Why  is she sad? 	I want  to  know. 	I  touch  the  door and  it is soft as wax.
Nothing holds together, nothing,
there  are  two parts  of me and  I  want  to  krnow
Which  can  I give her? Which  might  she take?
I want  to  go to  the  well,  to sit  beside  her,  drink  from  it, but  how, when  the centre is nowhere,
or  comfort, and  what  is left  to say?
If I love her.
If her eyes will not see.


SEEKING "DIRECT, HONEST REALISM"

The Canadian Novel of the 1920's


E. L. Bobak


T.PERIOD  BETWEEN the do"' of Wodd  War  I and  the crash of the stock market  in  1929 was a time of far-reaching political and social
change in Canadian life. The  government  was forced to respond to the problems of the  returned  soldiers, and  many  believed its response inadequate. Rural  dis­ enchantment with post-war  political leadership caused a major  shift in the tradi­  tional centres of power from east to west and from industry  to agriculture.  None­ theless, industries  and  cities continued  to grow, fed by cheap  immigrant  labour, and  the industrial  labour  force demanded  higher wages and  better  working con­ ditions.  Nineteenth-century reform  movements  reached  a  height  in  the  "social passion" of the twenties, and  a Communist  party was formed  in  Canada. More­ over, Canadian political  autonomy  was established firmly during the decade and British control over Canadian legislation effectively ended in  I 93I.  Despite these dramatic social changes  the  dominant  form  of fiction  during  the  twenties  con­ tinued  to  be the  rural  romance,  escapist literature  which  ignored  the  contem­ porary social situation. Realism,  an ideal medium for  the objective  reporting  of social phenomena, had  still not made its way into Canadian fiction in the early decades of the twentieth  century.
Continental literary  realists had rebelled in the nineteenth  century  against  the notion  that  the  essence of experience  was unknowable  because  it  existed  in  a reality  closed to sense perception.  They  had  chosen to  make  the  commonplace and the ordinary respectable subject matter for the novel. Describing a universe governed  by material  cause-and-effect  required  a technique  which involved close observation  of the details of everyday life, and  the resulting  record  had  not only to give the impression  of mass social behaviour  but also to explain  the interplay between society and the individual. Flaubert, Zola, the Russian realists and others evoked middle-class settings and objectively revealed the folly of romantic  passion, and  naturalism  explained  the "lower depths"  of life by a negative  determinism. Grove's  The  Master  Mason's  House  (published  in 1906 as Mauermeister  lhles Haus)  indicates  an  awareness  of naturalistic  developments  in the  French  novel.

ss

SEEKING REALISM

In  the  United States,   William   Dean   Howells   was  championing the   cause  of realism  in the  pages of Harper's Magazine  in  the  last  decades  of the  nineteenth century, but   American  realists  did  not  gain   public   acceptance  until   the  first quarter of this  century. Though Sister Carrie  appeared initially  in  1goo,  it  had to be  withdrawn. Ironically, only  two  years  later  Zola  died  and   French  realism did collapse.  By the  time  the  Canadian novel  turned to  realism  in  response  to the dramatic changes  in the social life of the  twenties, Proust's Remembrance of Things   Past  (1913-I927)  was  more  characteristic  of  the   French  novel   and American realism  finally  had  been  accepted. Even  today  in  Canada, the  nine­ teenth-century realists  are exerting  fresh  influences. The  New  Brunswick  novelist David  Adams Richards is heavily indebted to writers like Turgenev, Tolstoy,  and  Dostoevsky.
As a latecomer on the  literary  scene, Canadian realism  managed to avoid  the excesses of Zola's  naturalism, to retain  some sense of the  unknowable, and  to use concrete  physical  detail  to suggest mental states.  For  example, Callaghan's urban realism  included a religious dimension  which  ruled  out  determinism. Though his technique was  based  on  the  objective   description  of  concrete  reality,   he  had absorbed the  lessons of  his  predecessors  and   his  exterior world  also  depicts  the interior world  of his characters. Moreover, Callaghan's concentration on the  city forced  a re-examination of the  romantic nationalism which  connected the  "real" Canada with  the  wilderness  and  the land.  His  "realism" is Canadian, as is  Mac­ Lennan's, and   Canadian realism   has  developed independently  to  the  present  time.
However, the  first steps of the shift from  the  rural romance of the  twenties  to the  realistic  novel  were  awkward and  difficult,  often  only  imperfectly achieved by writers  and  imperfectly understood by readers and  critics.  For  example, Nellie McClung's Painted  Fires (I 925)   shows  a  recognition that  the  turmoil of  the post-war  decade required expression.  A Communist maid  is included in the  plot, but  she  is a  ftutterbrain  mouthing slogans  she  does  not  understand. McClung shows little  comprehension of the genuine  social  issues behind the  slogans.
Opposition to  realism  often  was extreme. Watson Griffin,  an  economist who wrote  Canada:  the  Country  of the Twentieth Century ( 19I5) for  the  Depart­ ment  of Trade and  Commerce, also wrote a novel called  The  Gulf Years  (I 92 7). Griffin's  heroine, Nancy,  receives a contemporary realistic  novel  from  her  suitor  Jack,  whose  character is questionable. Her  opinion of it  follows:

"A rank  weed is real, Jack, but no more real than  a violet or a rose, and  when  I am  decorating  my room I prefer  to fill my vases with  lovely flowers rather  than with noxious weeds.... I am not denying that  there  are such people as that  book describes, Jack,  but  I don't  want  to know them  any  more  intimately  than  neces­ sary.... As I know myself, my character  is full of weeds-thoughts, feelings, im­ pulses that  I frequently  have to suppress. Suppose  that  instead  of  trying  to  root

86

SEEKING REALISM


out  these weeds as fast  as  they spring  up,  I  cultivated  them,  dwelt  upon  them morbidly, studied  them with a microscope, magnifying them so that  they appeared to  be the  dominating influence  in  all  human  nature,  and  then  wrote  an  auto­ biography  or a novel describing  them;  that  would be psychoanalysis according  to the  latest  fashions,  and  many  reviewers  would  praise  me  for  my  realism;  but would anyone  in all the  world  be better  for the reading  of such a  book? I  think not, and  I am sure many would be worse."1

There is a reference in the  conversation to Zola and  "the modem novels of  Eng­ land  and  America," and  likely it  was one  of these  that  Jack  had  given  Nancy,  not a Canadian realistic  novel  (by this time Settlers of the Marsh and Wild Geese had  appeared).  However, the  point  of view is clear.  Nancy, acting  as a  mouth­ piece  for  Griffin,  does  not  believe  that  social  discontent and  human distress  arc suitable subject matter for  the  novel.  The  passage is a clear  defence  of sunshine  novels of any  nationality.
The situation in Canada at the beginning of the decade may be understood by glancing at  a  McClelland & Stewart advertisement for  its current list,  placed  in the January I920 issue of the Canadian  Bookman. The  list included Lucy  Maud Montgomery's Rainbow  Valley;  Marshall Saunders' Golden  Dickey, described  as "the story  of a valiant little  canary";  Grace McLeod Rogers' ]oan at Halfway, "a charming romance of a sunshine girl"; W. A. Fraser's Bulldog Carney, whose title speaks for itself;  and  Ralph Connor's version of muscular Christianity on the battlefield, The  Sky  Pilot in No Man's  Land. The  McClelland & Stewart  adver­ tisement  described Robert  Watson's The  Girl of  O.K. Valley  in  some  detail:

Here  is a simon-pure  romance  of charm  of atmosphere  and  vigor of action,  by an author  whose stories of Canadian life are distinguished  by refinement  of style and sentiment  and touched  by warm humanity.2

"Refinement of style  and  sentiment" and  "warm humanity" were  traits  that characterized most Canadian fiction of the decade,  but  in accord  with  nationalist sentiments of the  time,  some  critics looked  chiefly for  books  that would  establish
that  elusive concept-the Canadian identity. Donald  G. French who, with   J. D.
Logan, published Highways  of Canadian  Literature:  a synoptic  introduction  to the literary  history of  Canada  (I 924), addressed  the  Canadian Literature Club of Toronto  (which he  had  founded in I 9I 5)  the  year  after  his book  appeared. His topic  was "A  Discussion  of the Significance of Canadian Fiction  as a Factor in the  Evolution of Canadian Nationality." French  suggested  that  the "founda­ tions"  of "a real Canadian literature" could  be built  only by the writing  of books promoting  knowledge and   understanding between  "the  various  racial  elements  of Canada" :

Here is a great  work for our Canadian novelists. Whether  or not the novels which help  to accomplish  this are  acclaimed  great  by the critics of Great  Britain  or  the United   States  does  not  much  concern  us....  What  they  must  do  is vivify  the

SEEKING REALISM

struggles and  the  achievements, the  aspirations  and  the  attainments  of  many diverse factors in the making of Canada. They must build up an adequate Cana­ dian background and overlay it with a feeling of historical atmosphere  that  will suffuse all Canadians with a sense of reciprocal ownership, without which we can have no true realization of our Canadian  citizenship -Canada  is  ours:  we are Canada's....3

French  was prepared  to throw  over literary  standards in  the service of what  he saw as a greater  goal. Out  of thirty  works of fiction  published  in  1924,  French chose as the most "significant"  Chez  Nous, which showed  French  Canada in its "persevering  endurance  and  patient  toil";  Hansen,  which presented  a picture  of an immigrant "who  becomes a truer  Canadian citizen than  many of the native­ born"; The  Trail  of  the Conestoga,  another  record  of "high  courage  and  per­ severance, of endurance  and toil";  and The  Gentleman Adventurer, based on an account  of the Hudson's  Bay Company  acquired  "from  the lips of  an old gentle­ man  who worked his way from a clerkship to the position of a high officer of the great   company." Refinement  of  style  and  sentiment,   not   to  mention   warm humanity, appear  to be at least as important as nationalism  in  French's  short list.



l:E FOLLOWING YEARN. de Bertrand  Lugrin  argued  directly against the new realism in current  English novels.4  He regretted  the "general weakening of faith throughout  the whole of Christendom" and the disappearance of the "fine ideals" of novels of the past. He pleaded  with Canada to "take  upon herself the responsibility" of being the "new  Peter  Pan" of world literature. He visualized Canada as "young, beautiful,  uncontaminated by the evils of effete civilizations,"  with a literature  and  art still in "swaddling clothes,"  but  about  to take her place in the "front  rank of nations."  Therefore, he thought  the attention of a "jaded  world" would be brought  to bear on her. Thus,  he argued,  the future of Canadian writing and the future of the country  lay in standing  apart  from the new realism, and  he saw no need to delineate  in literature what  he called "ultra modem  twentieth  century men and  women."
A characteristically orthodox  view of the literature of the period  was also held by Louis  Arthur  Cunningham. In  the same  year  that  he  published  a  romance about  the Acadians called Yvon  Tremblay (I 927), Cunningham wrote an article called "Traits of Canadian Literature" for the Canadian  Bookman   (November
1927). He listed strength,  beauty,  people, and  romance  as the  main  features  of the  country's  literature. "Strength" is linked  exclusively with  a  romantic  view of the wilderness, that is, literature  that  dealt with the "steel and iron of Nature's ruggedness" and the "weird Aeolian music of pine forests." The "romance" Cunningham had  in mind referred  to "the  days of the French  regime when  the blue and  white uniforms of Gascon troopers  were seen on the  high-flung  battle-

88

SEEKING REALISM


ments  of  Quebec...."  Cunningham's views  left  little   room   for  new  types  of fiction.  Only  a few  rural dwellers  were  pioneering  in the  bush  in the  twenties,  a situation implied  by Cunningham's use of "strength," and  Canada was far  from the  days of the  French regime.  Jessie G. Sime's  Our  Little   Life  ( 1921), a  bleak picture of  Canadian slum   dwellers  in   Montreal,  probably  presented  a  more accurate picture of  a large  part  of the  population, that is, the  urban poor.  But Cunningham does not mention the city in his list, and  though he refers to "indus­ try," he sees it  in  terms  of  the  "boundless resources"  of "rocks,"  "forests" and  "rivers." Though the  realistic  novel is emerging during the  period, neither critics nor  readers betray much  sympathy for  it.
However, the literary-critical milieu represented by French, de Bertrand Lugrin, and   Cunningham had  some  intelligent opposition. Three  years  before  Watson Griffin  had  published The Gulf of Years, Archibald MacMechan had  published one  of  the  most  important early  studies  of Canadian literature,  Headwaters of Canadian Literature. In  it  he had  sent  out  the  following  cri de  coeur:
Regarded  as a whole, Canadian fiction is tame. It  bears everywhere  the stamp of the amateur. Nowhere  can  be traced  that  fiery conviction  which  alone  brings forth   a  masterpiece.   Modern   problems  are  as  yet  untouched,  unapproached. Direct,  honest  realism is also sadly to seek, though  subjects  are  crying aloud  for treatment on every side.... So far Canadian fiction is conventional,  decent,  un­ ambitious,  bourgeois. It  has nowhere  risen to the heights  or  plumbed  the  depths of life in Canada.5

Unlike  other  critics,  MacMechan was not  deceived  by  "refinement of style and sentiment"  into   believing   that  masterpieces of  fiction   had   been   written   in Canada. One  can  imagine what  he  would  have  thought of  The Gulf  of Years with  its "stamp of the  amateur" on  every  page.  One   wonders also  whether he had   noticed   Sime's   Our   Little   Life, which  does  plumb "the  depths of  life  in Canada."
In  1928 A. J. M.  Smith joined  the  battle  with  "Wanted-Canadian  Criti­
cism," the  essay  where   he  deplored the  lack  of intelligent  reviewing of  books, which   he  saw   as  particularly  unfortunate  as  the   country  was   becoming   so "Canada-conscious." However, he  saw  Canada-consciousness as  "a mixture of blind  optimism and  materialistic patriotism, a kind of my-mother-drunk-or-sober complex," in  which  a writer  was forced  to write  "in  the  prevailing spirit  of pep and  optimism" or lose his readers:
Of  realism  we  are  afraid-apparently because  there  is an  impression  that   it wishes to discredit  the  picture  of our  great  dominion  as a country  where  all the women  are  chaste  and  the  men  too pure  to touch them  if they weren't.  Irony  is not understood.  Cynicism  is felt  to be disrespectful, unmanly.  The  idea  that  any subject  whatever  is susceptible of artistic  treatment  and  that  praise or blame is to be conferred  after  a consideration, not of its moral,  but  of its aesthetic  harmony is a proposition  that  will take years to knock into the  heads of our  people.6

Bg

SEEKING REALISM

By Ig28  Smith was in a position  to praise  Morley  Callaghan, Raymond Knister, and  Mazo  de la Roche  as writers  of fiction  on  the  right  side of the struggle with commerce.
Smith rightly  sensed  that  opposition to  the  realistic  novel  was linked  to  some extent  with  a puritan fear of frank  discussions  of sex. Mrs.  Hilda Glynn-Ward, a British  Columbia writer  who published  a lurid  novel about Oriental immigration to the  province called  The  Writing  on the Wall   (I 92 I ) , wrote  an  angry  "Plea for Purity" in the Canadian Bookman in March, I924. Her  views were represen­ tative  of much  thinking that  saw literary  realism  solely in  terms  of  sex:

There has  come  over  the  literature of  the  day  the  foetid  breath   of  decadence. They  call it Realism. They  call it Truth. They  call  it anything  but  what  it is:  a pandering  to  the  morbidly  unwholesome  in  human   nature....  Just  that   same section of the  public who will tip the police to gain  them  entrance  into  an  over­ crowded  divorce court will buy the dopish ravings of the  modern  sex-writers who describe  the  scenes in  a  brothel,  who  describe  with  horrible  detail  some  exag­ gerated  aspect of human  perversion and wrap  it all up in the cover of a novel, or, still more subtly, under the cover of "lessons in sex-hygiene."

Mrs.  Glynn-Ward  ends  her  article   by  chortling at  the  four   months in  prison spent  by a London editor  who published  Sherwood Anderson's Many  Marriages.
In  reaction to  Mrs.  Glynn-Ward's "Plea for  Purity," a  "Plea for  Tolerance" written by Francis Dickie appeared in the May  I 924 issue of the Canadian Book­ man.  Dickie  chided  the  Bookman  for  encouraging intolerance by  printing  Mrs. Glynn-Ward's "Plea for  Purity," though the   Bookman   appears  to  have  been practising the  very  tolerance  Dickie  was  arguing for.  Dickie  pleaded   for  the new realism :

As for realism:  If there arises in Canada  now or in the near future,  a writer  who can  picture  the  sordidness, the  emptiness  of  the  life of some Barnardo  or  other orphan home  boy on  the  farm  of some mean,  unsentimental Canadian farmer; if there arises a writer who can picture  the life of brothels  in Calgary  in the wide open  days, show  the women's  sadness, their  tragedy,  and  too  their  humour  ... then I for one will gladly read his book, and  give him praise for a work well done.

For the good of Canadian  literature,  I say, let us be tolerant,  let us strive sincerely to  curb  that   bitter,  proselytizing urge  so deeply  imbedded   in  the  hearts  of  all men....

There was little  use in asking for a novel about Calgary brothels  in the  Canada of the  twenties. The following  year  ( I925)   Grove's oblique  treatment of sex in Settlers  of the  Marsh  created  enough   disturbance so that  the  book  was  banned from  some  public  libraries.7   Grove  himself  could  not  be described as excessively tolerant. He  dismissed Wild  Geese in the  following offhand way:

The  petty  'sexiness' of many passages makes a mature person  smile. One  cannot avoid  the suspicion that  that  sort of thing  was sprinkled  in as a spice or with  an

go

SEEKING  REALISM

eye on the  'movies.'  In  fact,  how could a young girl know anything  of the fierce antagonisms  that  discharge  themselves in sex? Nobody will accuse me of  prudish­ ness. What  I object  to is the  incompetence,  psychologic and  artistic,  in  dealing with these things....8

Elsewhere,  Grove   describes   the   book  as  "trash."9   Over   fifty  years  later, the "young girl's" direct  treatment of sex in Wild  Geese seems  more  "artistic" than the  prudish  smokescreen Grove  generates about  Clara in  Settlers  of the Marsh. Grove  makes  clear  in  his  essay "Realism in  Literature"  (published 1929)  that he believes it is erroneous to define realism  as "frankness in matters of sex.mo He states  clearly  that realism  is a matter of "literary procedure," not  of "choice of subject," and  makes  a distinction between  what  he calls Zola's  "pseudo-realism" and  Flaubert's genuine realism.  Eventually he concludes that  the  greatest  realists in  all  literature are  "Homer,  Shakespeare, Goethe." In   a  letter   to  Raymond Knister,11  Grove  offers  a substantive criticism  of White Narcissus  ( 1929)   using the  criteria set out  in his essay. However, "Realism in  Literature" never  refers  to Canadian literature (one  reference to the  view held  of Zola  in  "America" sug­ gests he means  both  Canada and  the United States) , an  odd  omission  in view of his audience. Grove  as writer seems to have found  realism  about sex in literature as awkward a subject as other   Canadian writers  did.  Grove  was  not  the  writer  who might  have  responded to Francis  Dickie's "Plea for Tolerance." The  "bitter, proselytizing urge" that  Dickie  disliked  is  more  characteristic  of   Grove   than  tolerance and  humour are.



kE SHRILLNESS OF   Mrs.  Glynn-Ward's "Plea for  Purity" may  offend  the  modem reader, but  others  were  proffering identical sentiments. In  1927  the  English   Club   at  Queen's University   was  addressed  by  P.  G.  C. Campbell on  the  subject of  "Sex  in  Fiction.m2   Campbell  argued   that  "Fiction to-day  is overwhelmingly about sex,"  and  that  "it  is  not  love,  but  lust  that   is portrayed." He  suggested   that   young  people  were  being  corrupted by exposure to this type of literature. Unlike Mrs. Glynn-Ward, Campbell is balanced in tone and  supports his argument by references  to Plato,  who  argued for  censorship  on the grounds that  art  was an instrument of education. In  the  absence  of an  official Canadian  censorship for  works  of fiction,  Campbell advised  the  English  Club  to
practise self-censorship. The  desperate tone  of  A.  J. M.  Smith's  "Wanted­
Canadian Criticism" appears totally  logical  in  such  a  literary climate.
Smith and  MacMechan were  not  alone  in  deploring the  fear  of  realism  evi­ denced by  writers  and  readers of Canadian literature. Lionel  Stevenson's  "The Outlook for  Canadian Fiction," published  in  1924/ 3  divided   fiction  into  three  categories:  historical romance,  the  "Ralph  Connor" school,   and   the  "L.  M. Montgomery" school.  He  characterized the last  two  as follows:

91

SEEKING REALISM

From  H. A. Cody in the east to Robert  Allison Hood  in the west, the Connorites have  peopled  the  land  with  handsome  youths  absorbed  in  their  chivalrous  con­ cerns. Nor  is there  absolute uniformity  among  the  writers  whom  I am  grouping  for  convenience  around  L.  M.  Montgomery....  But  in  this  category,  as  in  the other,  there  is a  basic similarity in the scope of the  books-a  whimsical, sympa­ thetic  portrayal  of naive characters  in everyday surroundings.

Stevenson's essay concludes  that  "The novel,  civilisation's most  complex  literary expression, is not  yet fully  acclimatized in  Canada," though he  held  out  hope for the  future. Stevenson  felt able  to identify  a number of books  as realistic  and thought he  could  give  the  term  "realism" a  definite meaning in  terms  of  the Canadian novel: "In revulsion  from  egregious  heroes  and  insipid  heroines there is  a  distinct   cult  of  unpleasant characters and   an  assumption of  the  harshness that  is loosely termed realism."14  Stevenson   traced the  beginnings of  realism  to Louis   Hernon's  Maria  Chapdelaine, Merrill  Denison's  "unsparingly   realistic plays,"  and  Marjorie Pickthall's The  Bridge.
Though many  of  Stevenson's   judgments hold  today, his  tracing of  the  "be­
ginnings" of realism  to The  Bridge strikes  the  modern reader as a misinterpreta­ tion.  Even  sympathetic critics were not always  able  to distinguish clearly  between  the  old  and  the  new  techniques :
It  is admitted that  [Pickthall's]   handling  of the  plot suffered  by comparison  with her haunting pictures of natural  phenomena; but for several reasons-as an effort to depict  deep and  terrible spiritual experience, as a representation of the supreme importance which  nature  assumes in this country-"The Bridge"  is a landmark in Canadian fiction.

Though the  hero  of The  Bridge is not  "egregious" and  the  heroine  is not  "in­ sipid," neither are  they  realistically   presented. In  this  passage  from   the  book, Sombra (heroine)  renounces  Maclear (hero)  because  Salvator (brother  of  the heroine) has  killed  a man :
She uncovered  her face; it was colourless, her eyes were sunken in dark  rings, but they looked at him with steadiness; her whole being was keyed to this passion of suffering  and  sacrifice;  having  seen this agony, she  embraced  it....  She-pure child,  pure  wife, pure mother  that  was to be-called  herself a murderer's sister; she  was  resolute  to  keep  Maclear  aloof  from  that  stain.  Looking  forward,  she thought  it  would  be well  if she died  and  released  him  from  an  inconceivable wrong.
If she could have ceased to be his wife she would  have:  if she could have blotted from  his mind  every memory of her she would  have;  if she could  have charmed him so that  he  would  have  passed her and  thought  her  a stranger,  it  had  been done. The  height  of her love alone could  now plumb  the  depths  of her  abnega­ tion. She had shut a door between them. She would  not defile him to admit  him.15

Is  this  the   rhetoric of  "terrible spiritual experience" or  of  melodrama? The parallel  structures which  are  intended to  raise  the  narrative to  a  high  level  of

SEEKING  REALISM

intensity  only succeed  in  creating  bathos.  One  must  continue  to  bear  in  mind that Stevenson was comparing  Pickthall to Montgomery-Connor, and that  the seriousness of  intent  that  Pickthall  exhibited  would  have  been  deceptive  to  a critic sympathetic  to the  new realism. Here is Pickthall's  dialogue  (the speakers are Maclear  and  Sombra):

"Speak to me,  dear love."
"Dear love,"  she echoed  him  out  of her  passing  dream.
"Give  me your  hands, your  poor cold hands,  Sombra. Let me warm them  for you this way, against  my heart." "My  heart," she  said.
"I've found  you,  my  poor  girl."
"Poor girl,"  sighed  the  little  wandering voice.16

The  dialogue  has the same lyric quality found  in the librettos of Puccini  operas, and  confirms  Pickthall  more  as a lyric  poet.  MacMechan pointed  out  that  in spite  of "excellent   passages,"  The  Bridge could  not  be considered  a  successful novel:  "The Canadian setting seemed to make the tale unreal;  and  it is doubtful if she would have ever succeeded as a novelist."17  It is clear, too, that  she cannot be categorized  as a realist.
In  estimating  Stevenson's  judgments, one should also look at  Maria Chapde­
laine, which appeared in English translation  in Canada in  1921, though  it had been published  in French  in  I 9 I 6 in Canada  and in Paris in  I 9 I 4· In a curious review of the  book in the December  1921 issue of The  Canadian Bookman, the anonymous  reviewer  (possibly B. K. Sandwell)   praises Hernon  for  being totally unaware  "that there  was in Canada any such thing  as a 'clash,'  or a bi-lingual question,  or  Imperialism, or immigrants,  or rich and  noisy cities, or the  British North   America   Act."   The   reviewer  argues  that   this  ignorance   has  enabled Hernon to write about  "the  hard  life of the northern  frontier  parishes as in itself a  poem  of beauty  and  heroism."  He  states  that  a  Quebec  habitant  equipped with the power of self-expression would not have been able to write the book in the same way, because  his mind  would  have been filled "with  many  other  pre­ occupations,  the  preoccupations of politics, of religion, of wealth,  of  social  ad­ vancement,  of  power-to  say  nothing  of  the  preoccupation   of  self-defence." The  reviewer  understands that  the  book  is a  romance,  but  sees  the  romantic version of the  life of the  habitant as realistic because  politics,  religion,  wealth, social advancement and  self-defence do not figure in  the  narrative.  Presumably,  a concern with such topics would turn  the novel into an  unrealistic  one, whereas now it is realistic because it is a romance. The reviewer's description  of the  con­ tents of the book includes the phrase, "the mystery and  the tragedy  of youth and love and  death  under  the brief but  burning northern  sun and  the long and  ter­ rible northern  snow."


93

SEEKING REALISM

This  review should  be weighed against  Stevenson's  assessment of the  book as one  containing   the  "beginnings" of  realism,  and  there  are  indeed  "realistic" elements  which  are  not  concerned  with  politics  or  social  advancement. These include  the death  of Fran<;ois Paradis  in the snow,  the  painful  death  of Mme. Chapdelaine, the numerous  references to the country  being  rough  and  the work hard,  and  the descriptions of the bitter  cold.  Nonetheless,  the last  word is with the  "voice  of Quebec" which  comes to  Maria   in  the  night  as she  makes  her decision to remain  in the wilderness :

Then  it was that  a third  voice, mightier than  the others, lifted itself up in  the silence:  the voice of Quebec-now  the song of a woman, now the exhortation of a great priest. It came to her with the sound of a church bell, with the majesty of an organ's tones, like a plaintive love-song, like the long high call of  woods­ men in the forest. For verily there was in it all that makes the soul of the province: the loved solemnities of the ancestral faith;  the lilt of that  old speech  guarded with jealous care; the grandeur and the barbaric strength of this new land where an ancient race has again found its youth.18

The  voice brings the message that "In  this land  of Quebec  naught  shall die and naught  shall suffer change...." And it is indeed  a romantic, timeless world that is contained  in the novel. The  atmosphere  of Maria  Chapdelaine  is close to that of a  fairytale.  Maria  is noble  in  her  purity  and  beauty,  and  the  dark  forest, though  menacing,  can be conquered  through  strength  and  love. The  anonymous reviewer thinks the book realistic because it is a romance,  and Stevenson includes the book in his list because of a few passages, but by no modern  standards would the book be considered  realistic.
A third  contemporary  view of the book argued  for its realism on the grounds that  setting,  characterization and  plot  were  authentic. Professor  Frank  Oliver Call  published  "The Country  of  Maria  Chapdelaine," in  the  December  1924 issue of  The   Canadian   Magazine.   He  had  spent  a  day  travelling  along  the northern  and eastern shores of Lake St. John  in Quebec,  the setting for the book, and he had photographed the area and located a man,  Louis Gagnon,  who could have been the model for Samuel  Chapdelaine. The  editor's  introduction to the article  closed with  the following statement: "... no one  now can challenge  the authenticity of 'Maria Chapdelaine,' which is a most remarkable study of frontier life." Hernon's intent may have been to write a realistic novel (he was a journalist who had already  written  a novel of manners  about  English society called  Lizzie Blakeston), but  Hernon  was French,  not  French  Canadian, and  was therefore looking at this pocket of French culture in the new world with a certain  romantic curiosity. Hernon may have got his facts about  the life right,  but  he looked at its spirit  with  romantic  eyes, and  on this disparity  hinges the  problem  of assessing the book.

94

SEEKING  REALISM



REALISM IS A sLIPPERY coNCEPT at best, and in the context of the  Canadian novel of the  twenties, it is especially hard  to define. A look at another  contemporary critic might be useful. Francis Dickie, whose "Plea  for Tolerance" I have  already  discussed, published  an  article  called  "Realism  in Canadian Fiction"  in  the  October  1925  issue of The  Canadian  Bookman. He stated  that  as he  understood  the  term  "realism,"  it  did  not  exist  in  Canadian fiction. He divided  realism into two categories. In the first he placed  Zola, Flau­ bert, the brothers  Goncourt, George Moore, Dreiser, Anderson,  and  Upton Sin­ clair.  In  the second  category,  "kindlier  realism,"  Dickie  placed  Daudet, Frank Norris,  and  Walpole,  and  four  Canadian  writers  who  had  "something   of  an
approach  towards   realism" :  Frederick   Niven,  J. Murray   Gibbon,   Bertrand
Sinclair, and  Arthur  Stringer.  All four candidates fall short for him, and  he con­ cludes  that  "Canadian fiction  as yet has  not  enough  artistic  balance,  without which  no great  literature is possible. That  artistic  balance  will come  with  the
advent  of realism."  However,  a look at  J. Murray  Gibbon's  Pagan  Love  helps
explain  why  confusion  existed about  realism  in a Canadian  context.
Pagan  Love  ( 1922)   had  been described  by an  anonymous  reviewer  in  The Canadian  Bookman19  as "written throughout with that extraordinary and realistic wealth  of  detail  that   has  always  distinguished  Mr.  Gibbon's   novels, and  that makes him look like a sociological investigator when he has least desire to be one" (italics  mine) . It  is precisely this wealth  of detail  that  gives the  appearance of realism,  but  the  novel is total  fantasy.  It deals with  the  business methods  of a self-made  American  millionaire  named  Frank  Neruda  who  turns  out  to  be  a woman  in disguise. She is saved from accidental  death  by an  impoverished  Scot named  Walter  Oliphant whom she grooms to be her lover while maintaining her male disguise. The surprise revelation of her sex is designed to titillate  the reader as he reviews all the encounters  between the couple. Most of the book takes place in New York City, but  as a concession to Canadian readers,  Gibbon  introduces a group of Canadian expatriates living there, one of whom remarks  that she was "born  for the open  air,  for the  woods and  for the mountains...." She  empha­ sizes that  she is not a "New  Yorker,"  but a "Canadian" and  "shall live and die" as one.20   The  "sociological  detail,"  especially about  Neruda's business  methods, must  have been  confusing  to some critics, including  Dickie, who  otherwise  had shown  himself  fairly  astute.  Donald   French,  in  his  address  to  the  Canadian Literature Club  of Toronto in 1923, had  called Pagan Love a  "novel  of current problems." 21
However, one can identify a number  of novels that  are not as dubious  in their
realism as The  Bridge, Maria Chapdelaine, and Pagan Love. If we take a second look at  Lionel  Stevenson's  1924  list of realistic  novels, we find  that  he  cites a

95

SEEKING REALISM

number  of books that followed through on the "beginnings" of the realistic novel: for  example,  Beaumont  Cornell's  Lantern  Marsh  and  Douglas  Durkin's The Magpie, both  published  in  I923.  The  former  book  depicts  Ontario farm  life negatively, is cynical about  the power structure of the history department of the University  of Toronto,  and  attacks  the snobbery  that  characterizes  upper-class social life in  Kingston.  The  Magpie,  set in  Winnipeg,  presents  an  unromantic picture of the grain exchange and the I 9 I 9 strike. The  book describes the collapse of the idealism that  had kept patriotism high during  the war. Mazo de la Roche's Possession (I 923)  also is included  on Stevenson's list, probably  because of what was for the period a certain frankness about sex. However,  the book romanticizes its heroine, an Indian  girl, and its landscape,  southern  Ontario, to a point where they are  barely  identifiable.  Stevenson  also mentions  The  Viking   Heart,  which includes precise descriptions of the everyday life of Icelanders settled in Manitoba. We are confronted  with a problem similar  to that  in  judging  Possession. In  the context of the period, the realistic sections of The  Viking  Heart set it apart  from the bulk of the literature  being published,  but  at this distance  in time, the book clearly is a romance. In fact, Edward  McCourt has compared  it with Maria Chapdelaine. Stevenson  also  mentions  Arthur   Stringer's  Prairie  trilogy   (The Prairie Wife, I9I5; The  Prairie Mother, I92o;  The  Prairie Child,  I922). These books offer even less in the way of realism than  The  Viking Heart, whose overall tone is more consistent and  more honest  (Stringer's "inconsistency" is calculated to create a flashy effect) .
Bertrand  Sinclair  appeared  on the lists of both Dickie and Stevenson,  who specifically referred to The  Inverted  Pyramid  ( I924). Though Sinclair  had  been writing  since  I 908  (Raw  Gold), it  was not  until  Burned  Bridges  (I 9 I 9)  and Poor Man's  Rock  ( I920)  that  his narratives  began  to contain  realistic elements. In  the  former  book he takes a critical  attitude towards  the  Great  War,  and  in the  latter   book  he  exposes injustices  in  the  salmon  fishing  industry  in  British Columbia.  As was the case with Douglas  Durkin, the  war  pushed  Sinclair  into confronting  the problems of everyday life in his writing. Sinclair's  The  Inverted Pyramid  is based  on  the  collapse of the  Dominion  Trust   Company  in  British Columbia   in  I9I4. Sinclair's  purpose  in  the  book  is to  make  clear  the  link between  the  building  of shaky financial  empires  and  the  war, so he adjusts  the facts and has the Dominion Trust  (the  Norquay  Trust  in the novel)  fail in I9I9. As one character states, "Armies  are the  policemen of trade."
Stevenson's  reference to Robert  Stead  must  be to The  Smoking  Flax  (I924). (Stead's  Grain,  perhaps the major  novel of rural  realism of the decade,  did not appear  until  I 926.)  Stevenson  probably  noted  Stead's  inclusion  of a  character named  Cal Beach, a sociologist who is gathering  material  for a series of articles and a book on a subject connected with his thesis: "The Reaction of Industrialism Upon  Rural  Social  Atmosphere."  However,  Cal's  theorizing  about  agrarian  life

96

SEEKING REALISM


is less realistic than  Stead's  direct  presentation  of, for example,  the  physical dis­ order  of the Stake farm.  Gander  Stake, who appears  in The  Smoking  Flax  as a comic figure, is transformed in Grain into  a pragmatist  as efficient at  tilling  the soil as he is at  handling  machinery.  The  "romance" of the soil is less evident in Grain  than  it is in Settlers of the Marsh, frequently  held  up as a  model of early realism.
Like  MacMechan, Stevenson  did  not  seem to be  aware  of Jessie G.  Sime's Our  Little  Life   (I 921), set  in  the  Montreal  slums in  I 917- I 8.22   Sime's  book probably is the only genuinely  realistic novel written between  the end of the war and  the  date  of Stevenson's  article,  July  1924.  Her  book  was reviewed  in  the Canadian  Bookman  by B. K. Sandwell  in September,  192 I  under  the title "A Good  Novel About  Your  Dressmaker,"  and  was available   in  Canadian  book­ stores.  Of  course,  Stevenson's  list  was  intended  to  be  suggestive  rather  than exhaustive,  but  because Sime's  novel was so extreme for its time, its omission is puzzling  in  a  list  which  was so specific. Our  Little  Life  depicts  the  life of  a middle-aged  seamstress who  works by the day. Miss McGee  is a second genera­ tion Canadian who survives poverty and failure through  her courage  and endur­ ance.  She  is contrasted   with  Robert  Fulton,  an  Englishman   who  has lost  his money through  bad  investments.  Fulton's  frailty  makes it impossible for him to survive the harshness of his life in the slums, and his death  in the influenza epi­ demic  of 1918  is inevitable.  The  relationship  between  the  two  people, love on her  side, friendship  on  his, is delicately  delineated,  and  the  inevitability  of its development  under  the  conditions  of  their  lives is what  makes  the  novel "real­  istic."  The  "sociological  detail," and  there  is a great  deal  of it,  is an  essential part of the relationship.  For example, the two view Christmas  differently. Robert always had found it boring  and tiresome in England  and  had  not thought  much more about  it. In  Canada he is required  to work at his  job at the dairy  counter of Arundel's  Market  until  ten  at  night  during  Christmas  week. He  receives no extra  compensation   for  this  work  and  his boredom  with  the  holiday  becomes outrage  at  his exploitation.  Miss McGee  regards Christmas  as the  "poor  man's treat," as a  breathing space  in  the  toil of the  year, though  her  income  usually falls off and  she is short  of  money at  a crucial  time. On  the  Christmas  Eve in question, Robert  leaves work at eleven at night and, despite his exhaustion,  thinks of Miss McGee's  pleasure in  the holiday and spends what  is for him an extrava­  gant  amount  of money on  roses for her. Thus,  we are offered a picture of a busy food store on Christmas Eve in I9l7, the social attitudes of one of the store clerks, and  a scene in a flower shop,  but the precision of the  detail  is working towards the moment  when Robert lays his offering of flowers across the threshold of Miss McGee's  door.  It  is not  until  the  publication  of  Morley  Callaghan's Strange Fugitive  ( 1928)  seven years later  that  we have such  a smooth  combination  of realistic detail  and  realistic inner  conflict.

97

SEEKING REALISM

Jessie Sime  was born  in Scotland  in  I88o,  brought up  in  London,  and  she lived in Canada from  I907 until World War  II. She was the niece of Sir Daniel Wilson, Principal  of Toronto  University.  The  bulk  of her  writing  was done  in Canada, though  after  her  return  to Great  Britain, she  published  several  books in collaboration  with Frank Carr  Nicholson, Librarian of the University of  Edin­ burgh from  I9IO to I939· Sime was an early feminist  (The Mistress of All Work,
I 9 I 6;  Sister Woman, I 9 I 9), but  her principal  importance for Canadian  litera­ ture is as a pioneer realist in Our  Little  Life. In  I 953 she published, with  Frank Nicholson, A Tale  of Two  Worlds, a long realistic  novel that  traces the fortunes of a  Viennese  family, some of whose members  move  to  Canada.  Sime  herself appears  in the novel under the thin disguise of a family friend  who, because she is free to travel  back and forth  from Canada to Austria,  is able to  keep the two branches  of the family in touch with each other.  This  plot device gives Sime the opportunity to comment  extensively on the  immigrant  experience in  Canada, a theme which makes up a significant section of Our  Little Life. Sime even presents Robert  in Our  Little  Life as the author  of a volume of impressions of his experi­ ences in Canada.
The   bulk  of  the  important  realistic  writing   of  the  twenties  appears   after
Stevenson's  article,  in the second  half of the  decade.  Settlers  of the  Marsh  and Wild  Geese are both published in I925. Grove's novel inventories pioneer farming in northern  Manitoba, but its characterization is melodramatic (for example,  the polarization  of his female characters  into virgin  and  harlot) , and  its dialogue  is stilted and  unnatural. The  value of Our  Daily  Bread  (I 928)  and  The  Yoke  of Life  ( I 930)  as realistic novels also is vitiated  by their  unintentional melodrama, though  both  books offer careful observation  of the day-to-day  drudgery  of  farm­ ing. As a realist, Grove is most successful in  Over  Prairie Trails  (I 922),  whose accumulation of data  helps persuade  the reader  of the strength  of the  narrator's emotions. Indeed, this volume probably contains  his finest writing. There  are also strong  realistic passages in A Search  for America  (I 927), such  as the scenes in the cheap Toronto restaurant.
Wild   Geese  also offers  a  combination   of  clearly  observed  detail  about   the struggles of farming  and some suspect characterization. Though Judith's internal life is believable,  Caleb  Gare  seems better  suited  to  a  Gothic  novel.  Peter  E. Rider,  who wrote the introduction  to the  I974  reprint  of Douglas Durkin's  The Magpie   ( I 923), points out  that  Wild  Geese  was the  result  of a  collaboration between Durkin  and Ostenso who had "compatible talents."23  The  contest which Ostenso  won  with  Wild  Geese was open  only to first novels, and  Durkin's  col­ laboration could not be acknowledged. If this is true,  Durkin  simply was follow­ ing through  on realistic techniques he had developed in The  Magpie. Like Settlers of the Marsh,  Wild  Geese was thought  to be sexually  frank,  and  that  certainly contributed to any assessment of it as realistic. But the accuracy of Ostenso's  (and

98

SEEKING REALISM

Durkin's)   presentation of prairie  life, more than  the  ostensible sexual frankness of the book, is more significant  to the modern  reader  looking for the  beginnings of realism.
A few other  novels written  from the middle of the decade  on deserve mention
as pioneer attempts at realism. Madge Macbeth's The  Land  of Afternoon  ( I924) depicts  social and  political  life in  Ottawa   with some  fidelity  to fact.  Macbeth wrote this book under  the pseudonym "Gilbert  Knox,"  and  in collaboration  with another   writer  who  may  have  provided  the  details  about   parliamentary and cabinet  activity.  In  a personal letter to me, Wilfred Eggleston, a friend of  Mac­ beth's,  speculated  that  the  collaborator  may  have  been  A.  B. Conway,  a  pen name  for Major  General  E. L. M. Burns, who served in both  World  Wars  and has published a number  of books on military strategy and  history.
The  drama  critic, Fred Jacob,  wrote two novels, Day Before Yesterday  (I 925) and  Peevee  (  92 8), the  former  set before the  turn  of  the  century  in southern Ontario and  the latter  set before the  war,  partly in Toronto and  partly  in  two Ontario towns. Jacob's stated  purpose in writing  the books was to "preserve  an impression of the  Canadian scene" by picturing  "several  phases in the develop­ ment of Anglo-Canada...."24   Thus Jacob carefully recorded social customs such as the provision of fine French  merino to the mourners  at a funeral in order  that the  dead  man  be  honoured  appropriately. Jacob  had  planned  a  group  of four novels but  died  before the third  and fourth  could be written.
Hubert  Evans'  The  New  Front  Line  ( I927)  contrasts  busy Vancouver  with the peace and silence of the British Columbia  wilderness. Though  its close is senti­ mental,  the book offers precise details of pioneering in the north  of the province and  depicts  Indian life in an  unromantic way for its time.  Evans  recently  pub­ lished 0 Time  in Your  Flight (I 979), an autobiographical fiction about his youth in Ontario at  the  turn  of the century.  The  book depends  so heavily on realistic detail for its effect that  it is sure to be consulted in future  by social historians for information  about  the  period.
Thus,  the significance  of the  publication  of Strange  Fugitive  in  I928  cannot
be over-estimated. When  the  book is viewed against the  background  of the sun­ shine  novels, the  romances,  and  the  imperfectly  realized  realistic  works  of  the period, Callaghan's innovativeness is startling.  Despite flaws (for example, clum­ sily introduced  Freudianism and  Marxism), Callaghan's book is consistent, clear, and direct in its use of what was for the Canadian novel a new literary  technique.  (One  wonders  how Sime's  Our  Little  Life  would  have  been  received if it  had appeared  at the end  of the decade  rather  than  at the  beginning.)  In  I929  Cal­ laghan  went on to publish an excellent collection of  short stories called A Native Argosy,  confirming   his  position  as  the  major  realist  in  Canadian fiction  and establishing  himself as an  important figure in  Canadian letters generally.
Raymond  Knister  emerges at the end of the decade  as well. Though  Knister


99

SEEKING REALISM

had  been  publishing good  realistic short  stories  with  rural settings  from  I 922 on, White Narcissus  does not  appear until  I929- The novel  is a curious  combination of fairy  tale  and   rural  realism.  Though the  southern Ontario farm   scenes  are undeniably accurate, an  improbable and  romantic superstructure is awkwardly imposed  on them. The  short  form  was better  suited  to Knister's talents, and  that probably is the  case with Callaghan as well. Thus, two of the  best practitioners of the  realistic  short  story  in  Canada came  on  the  literary scene  at  approximately the same  time.
Nonetheless, the  realistic novel had  established its legitimacy by the  end  of the decade, and  in  the  thirties  Callaghan consolidated his  position  with  It's  Never Over   (1930), No  Man's Meat   (I93I), A  Broken   journey (I932), Such Is My Beloved   (1934), They Shall  Inherit  the  Earth   (I935), Now  That April's  Here (1936), and  More   joy  in  Heaven (1937). Grove  also  published Fruits  of the Earth  in  I 933·  In  response  to  the  Depression, the  novel  of  social  propaganda appeared and   helped  to  move  the  vital  centre of  Canadian fiction  away  from the  Montgomery-Connor school  of writing  and  away  from  what  McClelland & Stewart had  called  "refinement of style and  sentiment" and  "warm humanity." Ralph  Connor's last  Glengarry  novel,  Torches  through  the  Bush:   A  Tale   of Glengarry  appeared in 1934, and  with its publication the  type of fiction  that  had dominated the  early  part  of the  century   passed  out  of  the  literary picture.

NOTES

1 Watson  Griffin, The  Gulf of Years  (Toronto: The  Point  Publishers,  1927),  pp.
167-70.
2  Advertisement  headed "Famous  Canadian  Novels by Famous Canadian  Novelists,"
Canadian  Bookman,  2 (January 1920),  78.
3 Canadian  Bookman,  7 (February  1925),  26. An anonymous  reviewer is summariz- ing and  quoting  from French's  address.
4  "A Peter  Pan of Literature," Canadian  Bookman, 8  (April  I926), 1 I6-J7.
5   (1924; rpt. Toronto: McClelland  & Stewart,  1974),  p. 215.
6  Rpt.  in Towards a View  of Canadian  Letters:  Selected  Critical  Essays 192B-I971
(Vancouver: Univ. of British Columbia  Press, 1973),  p. 169.
7   It is not clear  how many Canadian  public libraries  actually  banned  Settlers of the Marsh. Thomas Saunders in his introduction to the New Canadian Library  edition of 8ettlers makes the following remark:  "Reviewers  attacked  its alleged indecency; it was  banned  from  most  public  libraries;  a  university  professor  branded   it  as
'filthy.'" Saunders  gives no source for his comments.  In  Desmond  Pacey's edition of Grove's  Letters, Pacey includes the following remark  in a note  (p. 29) : "About
the  banning  of the  book by public libraries,  J. F. B. Livesay, father  of the  poet
Dorothy  Livesay, wrote to Grove, 'I am glad  to note that  "Settlers  in the Marsh"
[sic] has  been  banned  from  the  Winnipeg   Public  Library-the best  kind  of
advertisement for  a  young  author.  Toronto Public  Library   lets  it  out  only  to
mature  people  of good character.'" What  is clear  is that  access to  the book was not total.

100

SEEKING REALISM


8  "To Austin  M. Bothwell," in The  Letters of Frederick Philip Grove, ed. Desmond
'Pacey  (Toronto: Univ. of Toronto Press,  I976), p. 26.
9 "Letter to H.  C.  Miller," Letters, p. 41.
'
n Grove,  Letters, pp.  275-76.
u "Sex  in Fiction," Queen's  Quarterly,  35  (August I927), 92.
'
Literature  (Toronto: Macmillan, I926), pp.  I24-37·
14  Stevenson, Bookman, p.  I58.
15 M.  L. C.  Pickthall, The  Bridge:  A Story  of the  Great  Lakes  (London: Hodder and  Stoughton, I 92 2),  pp. 204-05.
'
17  MacMechan, Headwaters, p. 229.
' 8 Louis  Hernon, Maria Chapdelaine, tr.  W. H. Blak:e (Toronto: Macmillan, I 92 I), PP· 258-59·
19 "A  Surprising Swprise," Canadian  Bookman,  4  (December I922), 329. See  also another contemporary review  which  describes  Pagan Love as "realistic":  Florence Deacon  Black,  "The Literary Table," The  Canadian Magazine, 6o  (March I923),
484.
:ro John Murray Gibbon, Pagan Love  (Toronto:  McClelland & Stewart, I922), pp.
'2I7-I8.
21  Anonymous report of an  address  given  by Donald G. French before  the  Canadian Literature Club  of  Toronto on  January 25th,  I923,  "Canadian Novels  of  I922," Canadian  Bookman,  5  (February I923), 29-30.
22   Jessie Georgina Sime,  Our  Little  Life  (New  York: Frederick A. Stokes,  I92I).
23   "An  Introduction" to  The   Magpie  by Douglas  Durkin (Toronto:  Univ.  of  To­
ronto Press,  I974), p. xvii.
24   "Foreword," Peevee  (Toronto:  Macmillan, I928), p. vii.






C]IRDI]IC GRIZZLIES
 


Erin Moure


At  Banff  this summer, the  river  lunged  steeply  at  us, ungainly beings  picking  our  bodies across  the  rocks, balanced incredibly on  the cliff above.
Or  alone
the  three of  us hulked  over  coffee  in  the  Praha working our  way  thru  the  mood
of each  other, the speeches.

101

POEM

Sooner  or later  the  rain  falls out  of its cupboards
& cries.
Ratty wet  sparrows in  their  sununer clothes pick  the earth up in their  beaks;
when  they shake  it out
their  heads  tremble  wildly among the  cards.
We  sit on  the  furniture in  the  rented   rooms,  three cardiac grizzlies with  our  huge  heads,
the  hair  painstakingly combed, the  human    well-learned, tho
our  talk sounds  like leaves  that  talk
to leaves, on  the  dark  side of the  tree.

Our own  wildness  by the  river,  outpouring our  own  banks  too, the  feeling  of  this  tangled  getting-together
twice  a  year,  not  enough
by a long shot  but
better than  staying  alone,  in  the  rough  den  of our  cardiac  lives on  two sides of the  Rockies.
It's  us,    the  crazy silent  pawing  ones,  the  ones
that  crash  thru  underbrush to keep  myths  alive,     capable of finding  each  other  when  we need  to,
in incertain territory
Capable of sustenance & love








]IPOC]ILYPSE, FOR SPENCER
for Stanley Spencer, R.A.
 



Erin Moure


There is no memory  but what  has fled,
scaling  the  fences.
The angels  of the  apocalypse are    housewives after  all, well-printed, dusting chairs

There are  forms  that  begin  &
begin 	again,  houses  that  lift  their  curtains skyward
Heads  that  pull  up slowly into  apples

102

POEM


Muscles  gripping arms
Cowls  that  call  to Christ 	out  of the silent  beam  of sky mended with  wood,  his sighs

An ordinary fact  of the street,  like
the saint  in  his dressing  gown,  head  tipping the  roof-tiles between   houses,    preaching to hensJ

White  as the  garments they wear, a wall  against not-existing,
the  Resurrected climb  out  of thin  graves  in  Cookham onto  grass so green,    kissing between  their  hands
The astonished stigmata
that  the  artist gave  them,  a shy passion  touching their  anns & washed  bodies:
Their embrace coloured gently  & made
Entire,   a family





HOW  WE P]IRTED
 


Lynda Regnier


not  by severance, sharp lines  defining, all  sparkle and  crackle.
in sputters of annoyance; not us.

distance drifted in,
too easily  we came  and  went, never  quite aligning. the elastic  of  return  just
wore  down, never  breaking,
but  weakening, like  the  way  we said
"i love you."

how  we parted
means nothing to the final form. like quick  flickering of
belly-up  undersides of leaves we came  alive  in  the  wind,
cooled  down  and  just faded  with  the  dusk.

103

GROVE'S "MAGNIFICENT FAILURE"

The Yoke of Life Reconsidered

W. ]. Keith



A,_THOUGH The  Yoke  of Life I= had  its champions­ W. A. Deacon  hailed it on its first publication  as "a  great  novel  which, beyond any question,  will stand  the test of time,"  and  W.  J. Alexander  is reported  by
Grove as saying that  only the great Shakespearean tragedies  could compare  with it1 - the  novel  has  not  received  the  kind  of  critical  attention  that   has  been accorded  Settlers  of the Marsh  or Fruits of the  Earth or The Master  of the  Mill. In general,  commentators have praised individual  scenes but  have shown  them­ selves reluctant  to respond very positively to the novel as a whole. As enthusiastic  a Grovian  as Desmond Pacey was content to call it "a magnificent failure," while Margaret   Stobie,  complaining  that  its  main  weakness  lay  in  "the plethora  of themes," implied that  it lacked artistic unity. 2   Moreover, because it has not been reprinted  since  the  early  193o's,  the  book  is  comparatively  unfamiliar   to  the Canadian reading  public.
A careful study  of the novel suggests that  this neglect is closely related  to its unique  fictional qualities.  Few novels, I suggest, are  more difficult to appreciate on a single reading. Only when we become accustomed  to the curious shift in the narrative from  a  basically "realistic" to  an  unabashedly   "symbolic"  level  will the novel yield up its more satisfying effects. I remember  carrying  away from  my first reading  of The Yoke  of Life  a sense of irritatingly  uneven  quality,  of a con­ fusingly inconsistent  literary  tone. Subsequent  readings  have  not  only  made  me more aware of the novel's strengths and less disturbed  by its weaknesses, but have convinced  me that  Grove has taken  pains to prepare  the  reader  for the  unusual direction  that  the  book eventually takes. In  the  following  pages an  attempt  will be made  to justify this claim.
The  all-important first chapter  may be considered  representative  in containing within  itself intimations  of both  the strengths  and  the  weaknesses. Superficially realistic, it is in fact  so constructed  as to communicate to  the  careful  reader  a symbolic digest of the  book's major  emphases.  Len  Sterner,  a small thinly-built boy dwarfed  by "an  enormous plow-horse" on  which  he is sitting,  waits  by the door  of a  cottage  (itself "diminutive" in  comparison  with  the  vastness of  the

GROVE

bush)   from  which  is to  be heard  "a strangely  melodious  and  cultivated voice."3
This  voice  belongs  to  Mr.  Crawford, schoolteacher, but  he  is representative of what,  for  Len,  is a mysterious and  attractive world  (beyond the  prairie  horizon) in  which  the  boy  dreams of  one  day  finding  a  place.  Their  conversation arises from  Len's  report that  he  has seen a strange bird,  which  Crawford identifies  as an  American magpie sixty  miles outside  the  boundaries of  its normal territory. Palpably but  inconspicuously, the  bird serves two functions within  the scene. To Len  it is, like Crawford, an  interesting visitor from  the  beckoning world  outside, but  to the  reader, who is more  likely to notice  the fact  that  it is strangely  out  of place  on  the  Manitoba  prairie, it  can  serve  as  a  suggestive   analogue for  Len himself.
This  is an  impressive opening, but  the  effect is dissipated as soon  as Len  and Crawford begin  to talk  of other  things.  Their conversation is stiff,  unconvincing, and  somewhat pretentious :
"What is a great  man?"
"One  who has thought  and  known more and  more deeply than  others."
"So that  he can  make inventions?"
"That, too. Though the  greatest  hardly  do that." "What do they do?"
"They explore the human heart and mind and help other men to understand themselves."

A  Socratic dialogue seems  incongruous  in  this  setting.  Even   if  we  take   into account the  farm-boy's  awkwardness and  embarrassment in  the  presence  of  an educated teacher whom  he  admires but  does  not  understand, the  falsity  of  this
-its  notable  lack   of  colloquial  rhythms,  for  example -is disturbing.  Even
when  we realize  that  it connects with  Len's  determined but  inevitably frustrated efforts  to become  "a great man," it still fails to convince.
Yet  the  rest  of  the  chapter, in which  Len  tracks  down  the  strayed  cattle  and brings  them  back  to the  homestead, is masterly  in its presentation not only of the external scene  but  of Len  Sterner as a carefully-realized figure  within  it.  Grove achieves  this by means  of a shrewd  balance  between  his own  narrator's stance  and Len's  response  as a dreamy imaginative child.  It so happens that  Len's  journey takes  him  into  the  countryside of  Settlers  of the  Marsh, and   it  is  worthwhile juxtaposing Grove's account of Niels Lindstedt's arrival at  Lund's place  and  the equivalent description here. The  passage in Settlers of the  Marsh  reads as follows:
After  four  miles or  so they emerged  from  the  bush  on  to a  vast, low slough which, from  the character of the tops of weeds and sedges rising above the snow, must be a swamp  in summer.  It was a mile or so wide;  in the north  it seemed to stretch  to  the  very  horizon.  To  the  east, in  the  rising margin  of the  enveloping bush, Niels espied a single, solitary giant spruce tree, outtopping the poplar  forest and  heralding the  straggling  cluster  of  low  buildings  which  go  to  make  up  a pioneer homestead.

105

GROVE

That  was Lund's place.
Slowly they approached  it across the frozen slough. Taller  and  taller  the spruce tree loomed, dwarfing  the poplars about  the  place....
They  drove up on a dam;  and  the view to the yard  opened  up.
There  were  a  number  of low buildings, stable,  smokehouse,  smithy -none  of
them  more  than  eight  feet high  in  the  front,  and  all  sloping  down  in  the  rear. The  dwelling at  the southern  end of the yard  was a huge, shack-like affair,  built of lumber,  twelve feet high in front  and  also sloping down  behind.4

Grove is content here  to reproduce the viewpoint of his hero,  new to the  country, who  notices  what   most observant visitors  would  notice.  Niels  Lindstedt's  vision is domestic  rather than  imaginative, and  attention is therefore focussed on external features. The  whole  passage is spare,  objective-good, solid  description without frills.
When  we turn to the complementary scene  in The  Yoke  of Life, however, we
encounter a different, more complex  effect:

At last Len  saw a huge spruce  tree ahead,  outtopping the  poplars  all around. It stood close to the road, guarding  like a sentinel  a homestead  in the  margin  of the  forest where  once a  family of Swedes had  tried  to  wrest  a  home  from  the bush. Mr.  Lund,  half  lame  and  half  blind,  had  one  day,  many  years  ago, gone into  the  bush or swamp and  never  been seen again.  The  rest of the  family  had moved away. Now, a Ukrainian  settler lived  there, doing  well because he profited from  the labour  the Lunds  had wasted on  the place.
The landscape  which, a few minutes ago, had still been a sombre green began to be redrawn  by the  rising dusk in grey and  black. Len  hurried  his mount  on:  in him was the dread  of the dark which is common  to all such children  as people the landscape  with  the creatures of their brain.
When  he  reached  the  clearing  of  the  yard,  however,  just  beyond  the  great spruce tree, he pulled the horse in. His heart  was in his throat: the scene looked so bewitched  in  its  utter  stillness. Over  the  whole  of  the  open  space  which  lay like a niche in  the woods, and  reaching out  into  the swampy slough  to his right, there  was spread,  like a  ceiling, a  thin  layer  of  smoke,  snow-white,  but  quite opaque  and  marvellously level. It arose from a smudge in the cow-lot over which a straight  pillar  of smoke stood in the air, motionless like a pillar  of stone;  it was only  two or  three  inches in  diameter  and  reached  up  to  a  height  of  twenty  or thirty  feet  above  the ground,  eight  or  ten  above  the  dam,  and  from  that  point spread  out  in a level sheet which floated like a lid over all the landscape.
The  boy on  the horse was sorely tempted  to turn  back and  to flee. This  was a
witch's habitation in an enchanted  forest!

An increased richness  of language is immediately evident here,  but I do not com­ pare  the  passages  in order  to  claim  one  as stylistically  superior to  the  other; the point  is, rather, that both  are  thoroughly appropriate  to  their  respective  novels. Grove's own  narrative stance  in this passage contains within  it the  bald  details  of landscape, but  in addition we find  an eye more  sensitive  to  the natural effects of light  and  weather and  a cogent  awareness of  the  economic  realities  implied  by

106

GROVE

natural conditions. These can be introduced  aptly enough, since Len has lived all his life in this area,  and  the narrator is therefore  at liberty  to present  a broader perspective;  he gives us more details because Len would  notice more than  Niels. A basic theme  in the novel is the contrast between Len's dreams  and the realities of his situation,  and  in  this  passage the  two  are  clearly  juxtaposed.  Far  from being an  unnecessary  digression, the history of Lund's  place comes to be  recog­ nized as the  narrator's carefully-pointed  account  of the  nature  of the  world  in which  Len  must  struggle.  Later,  we learn  that  Len's  father  had  succumbed  to the harsh pioneering  conditions, and in the course of the novel his stepfather  will be forced  out.  Against  all  this, we have Len's  imaginative  response. The  huge tree "like a sentinel"  is, we may be sure, his simile as distinct from the narrator's, and  the scene "bewitched in its utter solitude" also conveys the viewpoint of the dreaming  boy. His conversion of the prosaic burning  of  waste in  the cow-lot to "a  witch's habitation in an enchanted  forest" may at first seem rather  too "cute" for our taste (more characteristic of one aspect of W. 0. Mitchell than of Grove), but it admirably communicates not only Len's imaginative  naivete but his vulner­ ability  in  the  world  in  which  he finds  himself. It is evident  that  in  these  two passages, with  their  differing  versions  of  the  same landscape,  Grove  is reaping the harvest of his experiment  with varied descriptions and  differing conditions in Over  Prairie Trails.
At the end  of the chapter  we see Len in the immediate  context  of his home;
and  the tension  between  mother  and  stepfather,  and  the  unending  routine  and hard  work of the homesteading  life (how impressive Grove always is when work is being described -not  eloquently  but absorbingly !) , all help to set Len in  an environment with which, sooner or later, he must inevitably clash. Even the apparently arbitrary  game  of  "tag" played  by  Len  and  his  younger  brother Charlie  ultimately  falls  into  place  as  an  active,  make-believe  revolt  from  the humdrum. The  whole chapter  forms a skilfully-created microcosm of the tensions and struggles which dominate  the whole book.

IHOPE TO  HAVE DEMONSTRATED that the opening of The Yoke of Life is both  very ambitious  and  a distinct artistic success. It  would be impos­ sible, for reasons of space, to continue  an  elaborate  literary  analysis chapter  by
chapter; in any case, one has to admit  that  the promise is not consistently  main­ tained.  Although the  first chapter  was obviously planned  with  great  care,  there is elsewhere room for the suspicion that  Grove's effects are to some extent  hit-or­ miss. One would like to be able to show, for instance, that  the carefully-controlled relationship   between  narrator and  sensitive  hero  was  carried   on  through   the novel, but  unfortunately this isn't so. The  narrative  is  not, as one might  expect, limited to Len's viewpoint;  Grove inserts several scenes in which he is not present.

GROVE

There  is, too, a basic difficulty in the presentation  of Len.  When  we are shown his thought-processes  "from the inside," he just does not convince us of the intel­ lectual  promise which Crawford  sees in him. We are  asked to believe that, after only two months' intensive study, Len passes first in the province in his examina­  tions, but  we are sceptical  because Grove has  never shown  us the  prodigy  who could perform  this remarkable  feat. Len the "genius" rubs shoulders awkwardly with  Len  the  confused  and  immature  youthful  lover.  The  terms  in  which  his intellectual  ambitions  are expressed hardly  change :  "One day  he was going  to master all human  knowledge in all its branches. Whatever any great  thinker  or poet or scientist  had  thought  and  discovered,  he  was going  to  make  his own."  This  is the  dreaming schoolboy, and  the  naivete  is endearing. But some  years later, immediately  after he hears of his examination success, we get this:  "When he took leave of Mr.  Crawford, he said  exultantly,  'I shall  be a university  pro­ fessor yet!' " The  remark  fits the  youth  who  is incapable of  recognizing  the incompatibility between his own  attitudes  and  Lydia's,  but it hardly  bodes well for his intellectual  future.  And  I  find it difficult to  believe that  this is the  con­ clusion Grove expects us to draw.
Len's  initiation  into  the  world  of love and  sex also invites  comparison  with
Grove's  treatment of the subject  in  Settlers  of the  Marsh; the  rather  crudely­ presented scene between Kolm and  the mother,  together  with  Len's  reaction  on overhearing  it, virtually repeats that involving Ellen and  her parents in the earlier novel. The  common  theme is easily recognizable,  but it is the difference in treat­  ment  that  is important. It is typical of Grove's  practice  (since  he is continually repeating situations from novel to novel with subtle changes of circumstance  and significance)  that  this time the incident should  be experienced  by the hero rather  than  the  heroine,  and  that  its effect upon  his  hero's  actions  should  be different in detail  but equally far-reaching.  In this novel, however, the implications  of the scene are more complex. While we know that  Len is profoundly  shocked, we are not told exactly what he is shocked by. It may be the very idea of sex, but it may also be Kolm's  blundering  vulgarity,  the  embarrassment of overhearing  what  is intimate  and  private, or the presumption  that  his mother  is being forced against her will. To assume the first (and  to  judge from  the assumption)   is over-simple. On  the other  hand,  Grove's vagueness here may be said  to blur  as well as com­ plicate the effect.
Since Len's relations with Lydia are so central to the novel, this seems an appropriate place  to  consider Grove's  attitude to  love  and  sex in  some  detail. There  was, I believe, a basic tension in Grove caused by two conflicting responses to human  sexuality. One  was the  realization  that  sexuality  is central  to  human experience,  and  that  no novelist who attempts  anything   aproaching a  compre­ hensive view of human  behaviour  can  honorably  ignore  or  avoid  it;  the  other was a deep-set  belief, sometimes  but  not  always  recognized  by the  intellect  as

108

GROVE

false, that  sexuality is invariably shameful. It is to Grove's credit  that  he did  not shirk  the  subject, but,  given  the  conflict  within  himself   (to  say  nothing of  the touchiness of  the  contemporary reading public  on  the  issue, especially  in  Can­ ada) , the  reader is not surprised to discover  that  his treatments of sexual  themes  vary  radically in  quality. Particularly noticeable is  a  distinct  self-consciousness that  can  be felt  within  the  prose.  A crucial  example occurs  in  Book  I,  Chapter IV,  entitled  (somewhat gauchely)  "New  Stirrings":
A longing was in [Len], unrecognized  as such: a first adumbration that  a human being is, in  mind  and  soul, imperfect  by itself;  that  somewhere  in  this world  it must find its complement. A half is seeking the other  half which will complete  it into  a  self-contained   whole.  The  first  wing-reaches  of  this  awaking  are  always painful:  they are  never  understood  by the  one  who  suffers from  them.  If  they were,  the  purpose  of life would  be  thwarted.  They  are  the  most  delicate  thing there  is in  human  growth: more delicate  in a  boy than  in a girl;  and  the  most disastrous  thing   that   can  happen   to  the  young,  emerging  soul  is  to  have  its mysterious stirrings coarsely explained.

The subject   is faced  doggedly, but  adequate words  are  not  found   in  which  to discuss it. The  image  of half seeking  complement, a solemn  version  of the not-so­ solemn  fable  in Plato's Symposium/ avoids a direct  confrontation of the problem, and  is itself  confusing since  the  complementary half  can  imply  either  flesh  (as against spirit)  or  the  opposite sex. More  significantly, while  the  process is seen as "awaking" and  "emerging" (we  are  imagistically  close here  to  Len's  speech about the  pupa and  the  butterfly, to  be discussed  below), the  phrase  "one  who suffers  from  them" suggests  a  disease. The  closing  remarks  are  cogent,  but  the fact  that  the  author has  to step  forward to lecture  his  readers is a  token  of  his failure to integrate the  material into  his novel.
By comparison with  Settlers  of the  Marsh,  however,  I  think   we  can  discern
here  a  more  deliberate attempt  to  dissociate  the  narrator from  Len's  fumbling attitude in  sexual  matters. When   we are  told  that  "he  seemed  half  aware that he had  obeyed  a shameful impulse" or that  "he  must  redeem  himself  from  what he  now  called  the  curse  of sex,"  we feel  that  the  sentiments are  Len's,  though the  words  "aware" in  the  first quotation and  "redeem" in  the  second  teeter  on the  very  edge  of  implicating the  narrator.6    Unfortunately, Grove's  embarrass­ ment  in the  matter of physical  attraction becomes only  too evident  in  the  decline  in  quality of  his  prose  at  intimate  moments. None  the  less,  when   a  scene  is realized  in  sufficient  depth, this  proves  to  be  only  a  temporary  blemish  on  the over-all  effect.


bE MAIN   SECTION  IN   BOOK  u,  Chapter III  ("Return and Decision") is, I believe,  one of the  finest  passages Grove  ever  wrote.  It has cer­ tainly  not  received  the  attention it deserves. Here  he succeeds  in  communicating

109

GROVE

a crucial scene  in  all its underlying complexity -psychological,  political, social and  sexual.  It is also  remarkable for  its  drastic yet  curiously   discreet  shifts  of tone.  Len  has  just returned from  his winter  at  the  lumber-camp. Thinking  him­ self  older  and   knowledgeable in  the  ways  of  the   world,   he  plans  to  propose  formally to Lydia.  We see him  buying  his first Sunday suit  for  the  purpose, and  Grove  views him  externally, humorously, and  with  detachment:

To  town or  city people he would  have looked  grotesque.  His suit,  of a  heather grey mixture  of cotton and  wool, ill-fitting and  stiff with  newness, was too osten­ sibly worR as a symbol of budding  prosperity;  his striped  shirt  and  the  stiff  cellu­ loid  collar  about  his neck, with  a  plaid-pattern and  sateen  tie, were  too urunis­ takably causing  him acute  discomfort.... He  was self-conscious and  appeared   to advantage to no eye except his mother's.

On  arrival at  the  Hausman homestead, he is received  with  formal courtesy  by Lydia's parents, who  clearly  recognize  the  significance of  the  occasion.  We  are then  given  a  detailed account of  Len's  circumstances-a potted   history,  as  it were, of his prospective  ownership of half  of the  Sterner farm-and  as a result see the social  implication of the  expected  engagement from  the  parents' point  of view.  It would   be  quite  easy  to  read   this  as  a  clumsy  digression   (one  of  the problems with  Grove's frequent artistic  awkwardness is that readers can  under­ estimate and  misinterpret a subtle  effect), but  in locating Len's romantic aspira­ tions  in  a  bluntly  realistic  context, Grove  is in  fact  adding a  complicating and "placing" dimension to the  whole  Len-Lydia story.
Lydia   herself  is  not  deceived   by  Len's   appearance:  "He  divined   that,  in
Lydia's eyes,  he  played  a  slightly  ridiculous part. The village  boys  at  Odensee could  outdo him  in  this  business  of  'dressing-up.' " But  ironically Lydia  is also specially  dressed -she has, indeed, carefully  prepared her  parents for the visit - and  the  description of her,  through Len's  eyes, indicates not  merely  the  quality of his attraction to  her  but,  only  too  clearly,  the  fact  that she  does  not  deserve his devotion. The  genuineness  of Len's  feelings is contrasted, in a situation which is both  moving  and  pathetic, with  the  artificiality of the  circumstances in which he tries  to reveal  them.
In  a deftly  humorous scene of a kind  relatively  uncommon in  Grove  (though not,  I believe, as rare as is sometimes  assumed), the  parents leave  Len  and  Lydia alone  in so pointed  a fashion  as to increase  Len's  self-consciousness to the maxi­ mum. At last  he begins his proposal  speech  about the  pupa and  the  butterfly:

"Under the  eaves of our  sheep shed,"  he said, "there hangs  a  pupa,  attached to the boards by a fine, thin stalk. It is greyish brown and  quite  plain.  It looks like the  wood and  has  been  there  since last  fall.  Inside  of it  something  is growing; and  soon it will burst its shell. It will be a butterfly, checkered  in gold and  black.



I 10

GROVE


"That  is you," he said. "While you were at home, you were the pupa. You have burst your shell and become a butterfly."

The passage has often been cited as an extreme instance of Grove's conversational awkwardness/ but this, I am convinced, is a misreading. There  can be no doubt that  Len's metaphoric parable  is painfully laborious, but it is clearly an earnestly rehearsed  speech,  and  desperately  true  to character.  We  properly  experience  a sense of embarrassment, but  it is (or should be)  embarrassment for Len, not for Grove. We are intended  to realize the inadequacy  of the speech, recognizing that Len  does not  know  what  to say in the  circumstances,  that  this is pathetic,  but also  that  in a strange  way his inarticulateness  is in some respects in his favour. Lydia's  response  is both  comprehensible  and  revealing:   "Had she felt  critical, she would  probably  have  laughed.  This  was so ponderous,  far-fetched,  round­ about." Recognizing  it at once as a sign of Len's emotional  immaturity, she feels "frightened" both  for  Len  and  for  herself-for  Len  because  it  indicates  the pathetic  vulnerability  of  his idealism, for  herself because  it  reveals,  behind  its clumsiness, a sincerity  and  loyalty which she has already  exchanged  for  a  pro­ miscuous sophistication  and  which she no longer has the  right  to claim.
Len blunders  on, his reference to "the  beast in man"  revealing in its simplistic
moralism, while Lydia's desire for "lots of money" betrays an equally simplistic materialism.  Her "cool  and  ironical"  insistence is as characteristic as Len's look­ ing  "into  a  dreamy  distance." As Lydia  begins to  assert  her  purely  physical attraction over him, the language  begins to relapse into  cliche  ("Her  eyes were swimming"; "prickling currents  were sweeping through  him";  as  usual, Grove can  only assert, not  convey, "a  paroxysm of passion," and  the  relation  between narrator and  protagonist  is again  blurred.  But  because  the  earlier  part  of the scene has built  up a masterly effect of assumed awkwardness, the real awkward­  ness here only weakens and  does not wholly dissipate the artistic  and  emotional tension. It leads, indeed,  to a momentary  revelation that  is  crucial  to their  rela­ tionship  (and  to the whole novel) -a realization which, because it is an analysis of the experience  of passion rather  than  a  presentation  of passion itself, Grove can bring off crisply and  successfully:

Len was conscious of a feeling of shame and guilt. Yes, his feelings suffered almost a revulsion as he looked at her and saw her half triumphant,  half terrified smile. In  that smile there was something which called him. It  was not discovery; it was recognition. Had  there not been that shade of superiority and  knowledge in her smile, he would have spoken and claimed her as his very own; but, though he could not  have expressed what  had dawned upon him, he was dimly aware that she who stood before him was Eve indeed, but after  the fall.

At this point  narrator and  protagonist  are properly distinct  once more. The dis­
criminations  are clear and  just. Grove displays here a remarkable understanding
-a major  novelist's understanding-of  human  motive, behaviour  and reaction.


III

GROVE

That  Len  can  experience  this revelation  and  yet still hold  to the  dream  which bears no relation  to Lydia's reality is a prime factor  in his make-up  and  leads on to  the  catastrophic outcome  of his story.  This  is a  moment  only surpassed  by Grove's masterly conclusion to the chapter  by which, with dry humour  and  con­ trolled  verbal  economy,  he forces Len  back  once  more  into  a  shabby,  prosaic reality:  "A  few minutes later,  the clattering  of things  on  the stove  having been agreed upon  as a signal, Lydia's mother  burst  into the room, followed shortly by the  yawning  father." And  so a scene verging  upon  tragedy  ends  on  a  note  of human  comedy that  paradoxically accentuates  the underlying poignancy  in Len's whole relation  with Lydia-a  poignancy  that  contains  within  it the hints of an oppressively bleak future.




GROVE's CHOSEN  METHOD  in  The  Yoke of  Life  involves continuing  studies in contrast-scenes of harsh  reality  juxtaposed  with  those of dream  and  aspiration.  The idea behind the method  is sound enough; in practice, however,  it tends  to be blurred  by the  fact  that  Grove's  "touch" is invariably sure in the former scenes but decidedly erratic  in the latter.  In  Book I, Chapter IV,  for example,  the account  of the  hail-storm  is in  Grove's  best manner.  The one-sentence  paragraph after  the  storm-"Man ventured   out  to  look  at  his losses"-is supreme in its economy and impersonality.  But the scene is followed closely by Len's embarrassingly  unconvincing  vision of the  unicorn  with its pon­ derous  and  insistent  symbolism  (and,   in  our  post-Freudian  world,  its  crassly obvious sexual  vocabulary)   seriously interfering  with  the  narrative tone.
A similar  contrast  is to be found  at  the  opening  of  Book III, and  here  we notice  in  particular how a  breakdown  in  style  coincides  with -and  therefore draws  attention to-a  breakdown  in  artistic  rigour.  The  first  chapter, "The Slough," is one of Grove's obvious triumphs,  an unforgettable vignette of farming disaster.  Although  in a sense self-sufficient  (with  a  minimum  of  adaptation  it would fit as a short story into Tales   from the  Margin) it none the less performs an imagistic function  within  the novel. As Desmond  Pacey  remarks,  "the  efTec­ tiveness of the scene is enhanced  by its symbolic overtones : to Grove  the  world is a kind of slough from which we vainly struggle  to escape, often at the expense of another's agony."8  This  is followed by the  bitter  dialogue,  "To  Farm  or  Not to  Farm," which  is one of Grove's  more  successful examples  of  extended con­ versation. But when one turns  the page, and  the focus is once  more upon  Len's thoughts  concerning  Lydia, we can actually  see the  prose  collapsing:

Lydia! Whenever the name emerged, it coupled itself with fragments of visions. These caused a  tightening of the heart  or a  releasing of its valves so that  the blood, in a sudden burst, rushed more freely and fully through  the sluices of his

112

GROVE

veins, according  as they showed him the heaving edge of a simple dress which heaved with her bosom ... -or, in her later phases, the bold, challenging look of her violet eyes, . . . the sensuous yet cool abandonment  to his caresses in the kitchen of her parental  home.

How to present immaturity without seeming immature, how to capture  the earnestness of young love without sounding either pompous or ridiculous -these are challenges requiring, unfortunately, a particular  kind of literary tact in which Grove was notoriously  deficient.
Contrasts,  as we have seen, are integral  to The  Yoke of Life, and  the contrast
in settings-homestead, lumber-camp, city, lake-plays  a central  part  in  the total effect. The  homestead  is the microcosm, a world of limited  but  comprehen­ sible horizons:  "This was a self-contained world, closed off from  the rest of the universe."  Len's  horizons  expand  somewhat  when  he spends  the  winter  in  the lumber-camp, but  he realizes later  that  it was an incomplete  world:  "A  camp in the  bush is as truly  an  epitome  of the whole as anything  else. Is it? Woman was omitted  from  it."  The  city, for Len  a "plunge  into  the  abyss," is an  alien world  in  which  the  conditions,  norms  and  values of  the  pioneering  life  have been  discounted.   The   moving  scene  in  which  Kolm  seems  almost  physically diminished  by the  hostile atmosphere  of McDougall  ("He was out  of place in town: he needed  the  bush and  the fields for his background")  is repeated  on a larger scale when Len  finds himself dwarfed  and  out of his depth  in Winnipeg,  while  Lydia's  descent  into  prostitution   is  an  example  of  narrative likelihood having to take second place to symbolic aptness. And finally, the  journey up the Lake is a break  with all previous communities and  associations towards  a world more  primitive  and  elemental  than  that  of the  Big Marsh.  As a  boy Len  had considered the Lake "as distant and wonderful as fairyland," and the same point is made when he regretfully turns in the opposite direction  on his first journey to the  city. But the  Lake is  reserved for the final chapters  of the  novel where the Gordian  knot of Len's entangled  destiny is to be either unravelled  or cut through.



IN THESE  CHAPTERS Grove is concerned  to isolate Len  and Lydia from  the complicating distractions  not only of city life but  of communal life of any description.  Len's  is a personal  problem  and  a personal  destiny, and must be worked out in the company  of no one but Lydia.  At the same time, the Lake  is no  escapist  retreat. Len  and  Lydia  here  evade  the  normal  categories, whether  geographical  (the  direction  is towards  "absolute   wilderness"),  moral (the  judgments  of human  societies no longer  matter,  though  Len's  effort  is to evolve his own moral criteria as a basis for living)  or philosophical  (Grove himself
tells us that  the  novel is "beyond  pessimism and  optimism"9 ). They  have  only

GROVE

themselves, and  must come to terms with each other.  Similarly,  the literary con­
ventions that  have governed the novel up to this point have to be transcended.
It  is surely  clear  to anyone  reading  the  novel  with  attention that  a  sort  of stylistic gear-change  takes place as soon as Len  and  Lydia  move out  on  to the Lake. Grove's writing has been flexible enough  before -it  had  to be to encom­ pass the varieties of tone that  I have already  discussed -but  here we encounter  a more drastic  change.  In  the following paragraph we catch  the  transformation in process:

The   evening   was  the  typical,  quiet   summer evening of  the  northern  prairie. Through the day  a sharp  south  wind  had  been  blowing.  Now  it stood  with   folded wings  of haze  above  the  landscape, poised. The sun,  in  the  west,  was  a  crimson ball,  heatless,  rayless,  scarcely  distinguished  in  incandescence, though  in  colour, from  the  surrounding wall  of glowing  vapour. The  forest  which,   from  a  slight ridge  a  few  miles  inland, swept  right  down  to  the  water's edge,  stood  breathless in  an intoxication of  rest, after  the  feverish swaying  and  tossing  of  the  day.  Here and   there,   a  swampy   meadow   stretched   lazily   between   the   higher   reaches   of the  bush.

The  paragraph opens straightforwardly enough,  but  the phrases I have italicized guarantee that  by its end the "typical" northern  evening has changed  into some­ thing  very different.  This  is a  prose that  we have  not  met  in  Grove  since  the central  chapters  of Over  Prairie Trails, one in which  pathetic  fallacy  is  deliber­ ately-and ironically -employed  to communicate a heightened  response to an awesome but essentially alien environment.  As omniscient narrator, Grove injects a surrealistic  intensity  into  his description.  Though  generous  and  precise in  his detail concerning  geological formations and  weather effects, he reduces the land­  scape to its basic constituents of rock and water. Specific geographical details are sloughed  off:  "They  seemed  to  be sitting  on  the  shores  of  the  sea of life and looking out over its dimly gleaming waters." As they go further  north,  "the  land­  scape had the grandeur  of death," and  although  Grove  assured  Desmond  Pacey that  "the  end  was suggested by the actual  sight of the  chattering rocks on Lake Winnepegosis,1110  the effect seems remote from actuality-a setting of dream  or, rather,  nightmare.
The  whole landscape  seems transformed  into  a  world  of art  and  myth.  The pointed  references to Eden have strong thematic but no topographical relevance, but the allusions to the poets, particularly  Shelley, are suggestive. Shelley's influ­ ence, indeed, explains the preoccupation  with boats, water  and  islands, nourishes the high-flown idealism overlying Len's strongly passionate  nature,  and summons up the imposing spectre of Death. This is the world of "Alastor," the alluring  but ultimately  destructive  spirit  of solitude.  We  even  recognize  an  unspecified  but none the less definite sense of Wagnerism  behind  the elemental  vastness of these closing scenes as they work up to a ponderous but overpowering crescendo.

I 14

GROVE


Yet although, stylistically, the final scenes represent a dramatic departure from the  tone  of  the  rest  of the  novel,  there  are  connecting  factors  that   prevent  a complete  split.  Len  and  Lydia  may  be  moving  towards  untouched   wilderness where there is "no  one to give help or to interfere,"  but even here the temporary camp  they set up on the shore "had  built a smaller, narrower  world into the im­ mensity."  Grove  is quite  specific about  its being an  "artificial  microcosm"-a "small  world  . . . surrounded by another   huge  world  of  unknown   or  at  least unseen things."  In one sense this is but another  version of  Len's  "self-contained  world, closed off from the rest of the universe" of the first  chapter. Throughout the  novel-and, indeed,  throughout Grove-the individual is dwarfed  by his landscape.  The  "fairyland" Lake  provides a suitably impressive background  for Len  and  Lydia  to consummate their  love,  but  it cannot  blot  out  their  past  or alter  their destiny. Ironically,  Lydia's explanation  that  her last attempt at street­ walking  was undertaken for  Len's  sake  ("You  were ill.  There   was no  money. I ...")  makes their  union  possible, yet by the same token Len's image of her as sometime  prostitute  is fatal  to any  permanency  in their  love, and  leads directly to their suicide-pact. And the final image of their two bodies lashed  together  in death  is itself, as Margaret Stobie has noted, a symbolic and  material  equivalent of Len's  earlier  meditation  on  the  separated  halves seeking  union.11  The  novel that  began  within  the  realist-naturalist tradition  draws  to its close in  a  fictive world of myth  and emblem.  Grove allows Len to move into  a landscape  which is itself the  psychologically  appropriate emblem  of  his thinking.  Len's  original imaginative  vision,  which  converted  the  environs  of  the  Lund   place  into  an enchanted  forest, finds a context  which is also a nemesis.
Grove  has attempted a rna jar effect here, and  there  can  be no doubt  that  it
was wholly deliberate.  He tried, clearly, to extend the boundaries  and enlarge the scope of the  traditional novel, to probe  levels of intensity  and  trace  patterns  of psychological experience  not previously attempted  in Canadian fiction and  rarely achieved elsewhere. It  recalls, in some respects, the Stonehenge  scene at the end of Hardy's Tess of the d'Urbervilles,  though  Grove claims  (for  what  it's worth) that  he had  read  no Hardy  before writing  the novel.12  But the effect is closer to the shift at the end of some of D. H. Lawrence's novellas, notably St. Mawr  and The  Woman Who Rode  Away,  which were being written  at  approximately the same  time.  More  to  the  point,  perhaps,  it suggests the  progression  in  the  later plays of Ibsen- john  Gabriel  Barkman  is a convenient  instance-from  con­ ventional  realism in the first act to symbolic action in the last.
I make these analogies not to detract  from Grove's particular achievement  but to demonstrate how, in coming to terms with it, we need to consider it within  a broad literary context. We must, of course, learn to read each serious and original work of art  in its own terms,  but the experience of reading  other  literature can often  help  us. In  the  present  context,  Hardy  again  comes to mind.  In  jude  the

GROVE

Obscure- a novel  frequently alluded to in  a discussion  of The  Yoke  of  Life­ the section  involving Little  Father Time  is experienced at  first reading as a shock to  our  sensibilities,  and  this  shock  takes  precedence over  any  detached artistic  response.  On  later  readings,  however,  the episode  can  never have the same  effect, and  we can  the more  easily ad just to it and  appreciate its implications. The  same  is true,   I believe,  of The  Yoke  of  Life. We  are  at  first  caught off-balance by what  I have  called  the stylistic  gear-change in  the  final  chapters, but,  once  we are  prepared for  it,  it  proves  less startling and   we  recognize earlier   references which   anticipate it  and   render   it  more  acceptable.  No  longer   distracted  by wondering what  is going to happen, we can  concentrate on  the  more  important issue,  why  (within the  established logic  of the  novel)   there  should  be  no  other  possible way out.
But  Grove  has one further surprise, one last gear-change, in reserve. The novel does  not  end  in  the  symbolic  wilderness,  "the gorge  of  the  Narrows," but  at  a homestead in the  bush.  The  last  page,  I would  argue, is more  than  a loose-end­ tying  epilogue. News of the  deaths of Len  and  Lydia  coincides with  the  birth  of a  step-brother, duly  christened Leonard. A  "happy ending"? Not,  certainly, in the  conventional sense. The  child  receives  its  name  "in  commemoration of one who  was dead  and  as a promise,  perhaps, that  he should  have  the  opportunities which  his older  namesake had  lacked." A careful reader will not  miss that  "per­ haps." The   new  Leonard may  or  may  not  achieve   the  success  which,   Grove  would  have  us believe,  the  older  Leonard  deserved, but  if  he  does  it  will  be  a success gained  not in a heightened symbolic landscape -Len's world  of enchant­ ment-but  in  the  real  world  of life  and  labour. Thematically and  stylistically the  novel  at  last  comes full  circle.

NOTES

1 W. A. Deacon in Desmond Pacey, ed., Frederick  Philip  Grove   (Toronto:  Ryerson,
1970),  p. 145;  Desmond Pacey, ed., The  Letters of Frederick   Philip  Grove   (To­
ronto: Univ. of Toronto  Press, 1976),  p. 247·
2  Desmond  Pacey, Frederick  Philip  Grove   (Toronto: Ryerson,  1945),  p. 63; Mar­
garet  R. Stobie, Frederick  Philip  Grove  (New York:  Twayne,  1973),  p. 87.
3 Frederick  Philip  Grove, The Yoke of Life  (Toronto:  Macmillan, 1930).
4 Frederick   Philip  Grove,  Settlers   of  the   Marsh   (1925;  Toronto: McClelland   &
Stewart,  1965),  pp. 27-28.
5 For a detailed  discussion of Grove's debt  to Plato in this novel, see Henry  Makow, "Grove's   Treatment of  Sex:   Platonic  Love  in  The  Yoke  of  Life,"   Dalhousie Review, 58  (Autumn  1978),  528-40.
6 For  a  discussion of this problem  in  Settlers   of the  Marsh, see my  "The Art  of
'Frederick  Philip  Grove:  Settlers  of the  Marsh  as an  Example," Journal  of  Cana­
dian Studies, 9  (August 1974), 32.
7  See, for  instance,  E. A.  McCourt, quoted  in  Pacey, ed.,  Frederick   Philip  Grove
(I 970) , p. 71.

II6

GROVE

8  Pacey,  Fr.ederick Philip Grove  (I 945), p. 6 I.
9  Frederick Philip   Grove,  In  Search  of Myself  (Ig46;  Toronto: 	McClelland & Stewart, I974), p. 357·
10 Letters, p. 433·
11 Stobie,  p. 88.
n See  Deacon in  Pacey,  ed.,  Frederick  Philip Grove  (I 970), p.  I 45  and  compare
Letters, p. 3 I6.










POSTSCRIPT
 


Ralph Gustafson


Buffy and  Art,
I don't know,  I don't  know  if
They  will come  again,
Art  with  his glass of martini
Wandering, getting the  news,
His poems  chiselled  till they shone, Like  Brancusi,
And  Buffy we stayed  off to meet, Art  driving the car  two-wheels
To  somewhere else but  we had  to meet  Buffy
Horseman among the  farmers, Polished, his verse, too, formal  as a Four-in-hand, a glass of Beaujolais, Whips  and  something odd,
The bathroom done  in black,
Grace, and  the  silent  chuckle -
Chewing gum  stuck  on  the  Parthenon - Moccasins on Montparnasse-mortality And  news of  the  phoenix,
The outboard tearing up  off Drummond Point­
I don't now
Or  when  or  how,
Classic  shade and  a  point  of sky Over  Memphramagog,  Brome, Both  hating death.

I I 7





FAST-FORWARD MAN
GEORGE    DOWERING,  Burning  Water.  Musson,
$I4·95·
IN THIS  BOOK ABOUT George  Vancouver in  the  Pacific  Northwest, George Bower­ ing asks his readers to take an interest  not only in the travels of the great eighteenth­ century navigator and  surveyor,  but  also in how the twentieth-century novelist and  poet came up with the story. Casting him­  self  in  the  third person,  Bowering   tells about his own creative venture: imagina­ tion,  he  says, implies  "a  travelling, or  a trip," and  Vancouver's itinerary is punc­ tuated with  reports of the author's physi­ cal and  imaginative comings  and  goings. Bowering uses this  auxiliary  narrative to explain the  relations between subject  and  author, or  "art and  life....  Or  at  least life and  literature."
The explanation hinges  on  certain  co­
incidences connecting these  Georges  and
their journeys. Some of the connections precede the text, and  become in effect pretexts for  the  novel:   Bowering  shares a  first  name  with  the  navigator; and  he Jives in Vancouver, the other George's name-place. Another class of connection is more  complicated. To  begin  his work on  this  man   who  travelled  west,  the  au­ thor  goes  east,  to  Europe. During  later  parts  of the book, when Vancouver presses north, Bowering goes south, in an inverse mimicry of his hero. With these European and  southern  journeys,  Bowering   makes more  connections. In the main  narrative, for  example, we  learn  that  the  fourteen­ year-old   Vancouver, sailing   with   Cook towards the  south pole, ran  to the bow of the  H.M.S.  Resolution   just  before   the ship turned back, north; for that moment, facing   the  Antarctic extreme,  he  held  a

II8
 position    further  south   than    any   man. Some  chapters later,  the  twentieth-cen­ tury  traveller imitates the  boy-sailor: "A few days later he went to Venice  and  rode a  vaporetto from  one  end  of  the  line  to the  other. He  sat  in the  bow exposed  to the  cold  sea  wind."  Passages  like  these minimize  the  modem  traveller,  making him   only  a  tourist   with   a  theme,   and, rather than  bring  Vancouver closer,  they put him farther out of reach. Fortunately, some  of  these  connections which  Bower­ ing would  fetch  from  faraway places  fail to  materialize, even   under pressure: at Limon, he  strains "for  a  comparison, or even   a  connection with   Nootka,"  but nothing turns  up.
Conveying some  very  ordinary  details of the writer's life, the interpolated narra tive  embarrasses  the  text,  lingering  like an unnecessary excuse. The interpolations are   formally unmarked,  and   this,  com­ bined   with   the  author's  presence  in  the third person,  creates pronominal  confu­ sion. Chapters beginning "He ..."are no doubt  deliberately   ambiguous in refer­  ence; but   when  the  antecedent George  turns   out   to  be  Bowering   rather  than  Vancouver, the  reader  is  disappointed, for  this version of  the life of Vancouver is interesting, and  the  delays  in  advancing the  story  are  exasperating. Happily, the interpolations   diminish  in   conspicuous­ ness if not  in  frequency even  as the story gets   under   way.  This fancy   part   of  a plain  narrative  withers and   falls  like  a superfluous ornament.
Much more  convincing is Bowering's fundamental sympathy with  his hero,  and his pride in Vancouver's accomplishment and even in his high-minded devotion to Empire. Nothing shows  this  pride more than  Bowering's contemptuous  view  of the Americans who pass in and  out of the scene.  With   their  obtuse  mercantile  atti­ tude,  the  Yankee traders offend and  bru­  talize   the   natives,   and   show   their   own meagre spirit: "They crawled all over the

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



trading post  like  flies  on  pastry,  trading in liquor  and  arms,  gathering in furs and gold coin, and  looking  for an opportunity to scoop up some real estate."
Bowering respects Vancouver's office as surveyor  of  the  coast,  and   in  describing the navigator's honourable work he sticks closest  to plain  truth-the kind  of hard facts  his sceptical hero  revered. For  three seasons,   Vancouver  sailed   methodically up and  down  the intricate shore, measur­ ing  and   plotting its  devious  design.  So complex was  the  coast  that  it  seemed  to promise    somewhere   a   concealed,  fog­ cloaked  corridor to a  Northwest Passage. But  Vancouver  penetrated every  sound and  inlet, discovering the finitude of each.  In  doing so, he repudiated the longstand­ ing notion  of easy passage  through a mar­ vellous  strait.
When   he  comes  to  reconstructing  his protagonist's  character,  Bowering   must depart from  this  plain   truth. The more obvious   tasks  in  exploring  Vancouver's uncharted   personality -accounting   for his strict  attitude of command and  for his devotion  to  accuracy  and   exactitude - are    accomplished   rather    superficially. Vancouver, Bowering tells us, felt himself "special," even  as a boy.  Fanatically de­ voted  to  Cook,  loyal  to  his sovereign,  he embraced his duty  wherever it fell. More daring, and  more  interesting, are Bower­ ing's  speculations on  Vancouver's  love­ life, here  unexpectedly explained in terms of  Vancouver's   relations  with   Quadra, the Spanish commander who  relinquished Nootka to  the  British  in  1792.  Bowering postulates  that, with  Quadra, the  nearly virginal  Vancouver  found  love  at   last. Urbane and  attractive, Quadra is a token of  the  south,   introducing into   Vancou­ ver's  life  exotic   news  of  sensual   indul­ gence and  voluptuous sympathy. Quadra adores   the   younger  man,    the   Norfolk sailor   who  has  come   to  administer the expansion of the  British  Empire and  the retraction of  Spanish  influence. On   the
 way home, Vancouver learns  of Quadra's death and   retires   to  his  bed.  When   he emerges on deck, days and miles later, he behaves in a harsh and  skewed way. After nearly  four years at  sea, aboard a gg-foot ship,   and   burdened  with   his  inflexible sense of responsibility, Vancouver is wear­ ing out.
1Archibald Menzies,  surgeon  and natur­
alist on the  Discovery  and  delegate of the
Royal Society, had seen this coming. Menzies, as Bowering portrays him, was a paragon of competence: a brilliant scien­ tist,  a  skilled  sailor,  an  exquisite  marks­ man,   a  judicious   and   virile  man. Van­ couver   hated  him,   and   obsessively  ha­  rassed him. Bowering explains  this antip­ athy:  temperate  and   responsible   nearly  to  the  end,  Menzies   could   make   Van­ couver  feel  like  a  fool;  and   Vancouver could  not suffer  Menzies'  competence, so nearly  parallel   to  his own,  at  such  close quarters. Menzies, for his part,  admired Vancouver and  would  have  been  his friend. But Menzies knew too much about Vancouver. He possessed an intimate scientific  knowledge about  his  captain's mind   and   failing   body  that   Vancouver found  intolerable. Finally, Vancouver's behaviour towards him  outrages the  bot­ anist  beyond  forbearance and  Bowering's version of the  journey  comes  to a violent  conclusion.
There are  weaknesses in this book. The interpolated narrative is a nuisance. Some of the anachronisms in the main  narrative are too trivial: a local chief answers Van­ couver's   inquiries a:bout  the  climate  by remarking that,  in  winter,  "it   rains  all the  time,  but  we always  say  that  at  least
you  don't have   to  shovel  it."  But  these
weaknesses  are  attributable to  the  ambi­ tiousness   of   Bowering's   intentions.  He wants  to  write  in  his  own, modern way about  something that  has  all  along  com­ manded its own prose form: voyage nar­ rative  is conventionally linear  and  forth­ right.   It   sets  one   thing  after   another,

119

BOOKS IN REVIEW



locating events  consecutively  in time and space. Bowering overthrows this linear orientation to  make  room  for  his  record of the imaginative origins of the text, and to make  plausible characters out of the eighteenth-century  travellers   who  came all  this way.  Certainly, Vancouver, Quadra, and Menzies are substantial crea­ tions, and  worth the  trouble.  Yet an  old subject  can  get the  better  of a new form, and some of the best parts of  the book are the accounts of where  the  Discovery goes and  why.  The structural  commotion  of flashbacks  and  fast-forward  leaps  pesters this  plain-speaking with  stops  and  starts  and  recursiveness, making  the narrative spasmodic just where the logic of travel demands that  the story be advanced. Bowering   may  see  this  as  a  contest  be­ tween  traditional and  modem fiction  (he envies the simpler  task of the old-fashioned "realist   novelist"), but  this  is  not  really the   issue.  Voyage   narrative   is  neither realistic  nor  novelistic: it is documentary and compellingly linear.  Against  this seri­ ous  straightforwardness Bowering works, interrupting itinerary with  his  interpola­ tions  and   fictional   inferences.  Some   of these  interruptions  are   unwelcome,   but others  are worthwhile.
JANET GILTROW


SOCIAL MARGINS

LEON ROOKE, Fat Woman. Oberon, $6.95.
KENT THOMPsoN, Shacking Up. Oberon, $6.95.

BoTH LEON  ROOKE  AND Kent  Thompson are  accomplished short  story writers.  It is perhaps not surprising then  that  Fat Wo­ man   and   Shacking   Up  are  essentially short  stories  blown  up  into short  novels. Each  is an enjoyable and absorbing read,  and  each  has as a central aim an explora­ tion  of  the  dignity and  even  complexity  of  the  lives of  quite  ordinary or  socially marginal people. Shacking Up makes this explicit  in its epigraph:


120
 The  Count  was off on  one  of his  hobby­ horses.  "There is  no  such  thing  as  a  plain and  simple  person,"  he said.  "Even  the  girl who delivers  bread" -here  he  glanced  out the  window-"is as complicated  as the his­ tory of one  of your  papal  states.  And  if you would   understand  her  you  must  apply  the analogies   of   political   science  to  her;   you must  apply  your  theology,  and  see wherein  she wrestles with free  will."
But  the  papal  nuncio  was not impressed. "No   more   complicated  than   a  cow,"  said the  nuncio-and thereby  revealed  that   he
'did not  know much  about  cows either-T. E.  Wallace,  An  English  Valet's Account   of His    Travels  With  a   Foreign    Nobleman
(1888).

Unfortunately, this is more  amusing than anything  that   follows,   though  Thomp­ son's   blow-by-blow  account-from the woman's  point   of   view-of   a  couple  shackling  up  in  a  motel  room  for  several days  is  interesting  enough   to  keep  one reading  to  the  last  page.  But  there  is no larger  resonance  to  the  tale   that   is  re­ counted, nor  is there  the  excitement and intensity found  in  Thompson's  finest stories  {e.g., "Because   I Am Drunk"). It is Fat Woman that  is rather more success­ ful  in  demonstrating the  Count's insight into   women    and   cows,   partly    because  Rooke's characters are more eccentric and  vivid  than Thompson's rather bland  pair  of  adulterous  lovers.
Both  Ella  Mae,  the melancholy fat wo­ man,  and   her  thin  and   jocular  husband Edward  are   vividly  present  in  all  their  individual  qUirkiness   and   idiosyncrasy. Ella  Mae's compulsive  eating has  made her  more  and  more  obese  until  her  man feels obliged  to resort to drastic measures. In  the  events  of  one  day  her  fears,  her joys  and   her  sadness   are   movingly   re­ vealed. One  comes  to know  these  people  in a way one doesn't get to know Thomp­ son's  characters-a    bored   young   wife with  a  good  figure  and  a laid-back local baseball-hero.
Fat  Woman  is  a   tour   de  force   that
could  not  be sustained at  greater length.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



And  though Ella  Mae  and  Edward are utterly  convincing  as   well   as  likeable, Rooke  has   (I feel)   written around  Ella Mae's relationship with  her exceedingly bratty  sons;   he   manages   this   evasive action  skilfully,  but something is felt to be lacking.   Still,  this  is  a  minor   flaw  in a piece  of  writing that   presents   with  con­ siderable style and  sensitivity  a vulnerable and  valuable human being trapped in the flesh  and   in  a  marginal  rural   existence. Fat Woman is a  highly  successful  novel or novella of character; such plot as there is is best  not  revealed  ahead of  time  to the reader.
Shacking Up has its virtues  too. Thomp­ son  is  skilful   in   depicting  each   of  the stages  of  a  casual   affair  that never  had anywhere  to  go,   despite   the   fact   that  Ellen  is able  for a day or  two to persuade herself  that  she  "loves" her  "hero," Den­
nis.  Each   is  trapped  by  outside  obliga­ tions, and  their  fling, though  unashamed­ ly physical,  is curiously without emotional intensity   (such  as that  found   in  the  film Last  Tango   in  Paris)   in  spite  of  their avowals  of love. On returning to her hus­ band  Ellen  decides  that she  will get  him to beat her up so that they will be "even." She  seems  to crave  pain  as  much  as she did  pleasure as an  escape from  her  hum­  drum  life.
Both   Fat  Woman  and   Shacking   Up offer  slices of life;  each  is interesting and insightful, but  the  life in Fat Woman is a good deal  more  intense and  colourful.

TOM  MARSHALL


ANGRY MOURNER

JANE   RULE,   Contract With  the  World.  Aca- demic Press, $16.95·

CoNTRACT WITH THE WORLD, Jane  Rule's fifth  novel,  begins  where   the  education novel  usually   leaves  off,  with   its  char­ acters  newly  launched into   their  various
 careers  and  relationships. It is tempting to think  of the six main  characters in this novel,  like  the  six characters in  Virginia Woolf's  The   Waves,  as  complementary parts  of a composite human figure.  They are all  the same  age. They  are  all, in one way or another, artists.  And  they  are  all intimately bound  up  in each  other's lives as  doubles,  opposites,   rivals,  and   lovers, both heterosexual and  homosexual. The events  of  the  novel,  which   extend   over ten years and  bring  the characters to the age  of  thirty-five,  involve   them   all   in death  and  some  at  least  in  birth  and  re­ birth.
The  narrative of these ten years unfolds in  a  straightforward  chronological way. But  each  of the  book's  six parts,  as  their titles  indicate, puts  a  different character at  the centre  of that  portion of the events that it narrates: "Joseph Walking," "Mike Hanging," "Alma Writing," "Roxanne Recording," "Allen Mourning," and "Carlotta  Painting."  Joseph's walking is the device that  initially  brings together the book's rather disparate characters, just as Ruth Wheeler's house  is the  common meeting   ground  for   the   mixed   bag   of human  types   in   Jane  Rule's    previous novel, The  Young  in One Another's  Arms (I 977) . Advised  by a doctor to "walk  ten miles a day to prevent manic breakdown," Joseph  Rabinowitz travels  the Vancouver streets.  On   a  chilly  fall  walk  along the beach,  he  nearly  trips  over  a  tripod  be­ longing   to   "a  man   of  about  his   age, dressed  in a  London fog  raincoat, stand­ ing   beside   a   car   entirely   wrapped m plastic."

"Is  it for  an  ad?" Joseph  asked. "Heavens,  no!"   the   man   replied.   "It's
Art."

"The  only  problem  is ... I  need  a swim­
mer."
"A  swimmer?"
"Just off in the background, in his trunks, at  the  edge  of the  sea."
"On  a day like this?"

I2I

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



"Yes  ... I wonder,  would  you mind  ... that  is, if you've  got  on  decent  shorts?"
It seemed far  too outrageous a request  to
be anything but  innocent.

This  is how  Joseph both  makes  a friend of photographer Allen Dent and gets his own shivering image on the cover of Arts Canada.
Subsequently, characters  are   brought
into  the  novel  with  skill, in a manner  re­ sembling  additions in a cumulative rhyme such  as "The Farmer in the  Dell." Allen introduces Joseph  to  his "boy  wife,"  the French Canadian  Pierre.  The  Arts Can­ ada cover  photograph  brings  about   the renewal  of friendship between Joseph  and a  school   acquaintance  Mike  Trasco,  a Polish  night  club  bouncer,  who seems to be patteming himself  on  Stanley  Kowal­ ski from   A Streetcar  Named  Desire but is also an  aspiring sculptor in wood  who says things  like "Form has  to be rescued from usefulness" and  "Soft  sculpture is a pile of crap." Joseph  meets Mike's Nordic wife, "tall  ample-bodied" Alma,  whose serenity   and   calm   superiority  have   the effect  of tuming Mike  into  a male chau­ vinist bully.  We are  told, "Alma watched her  husband as if she might  be attending an ethnic movie."  In  the course of things, Alma   introduces  Joseph    to   her  friend  Carlotta, a  painter who  lives  resolutely alone, often  fasts, keeps her apartment so cold that  she needs to refrigerate her food only in the summer, and paints  pictures of her  own  broken skeleton.  The final addi­ tion  to  this  complement of characters is Roxanne, whom  Allen finds work!ing in a record  store  and   brings  home  to  amuse  Pierre.   Roxanne  is   flat-chested,  small, and "frail-bodied as Pierre," and  she and Pierre entertain themselves  by trying  on each  other's shirts.
On  his walks, Joseph  continues to drop in on these friends who are his "craziness under control." But  he  doesn't let  them know about his wife Ann and  her two daughters, his family representing for him

122
 a  sanctuary of  cherished ordinariness which  he  must  "protect from  the  extra­ ordinary as  long  as  he  could."  Ann  re­ sembles  those  calm, serene,  infinitely  re­ sourceful  women   who  appear  in  other Rule  novels. But in this book she remains a  background figure,  while  yet  perform­ ing  an  important  function as a source  of stability   and  calm  in   the  Inidst  of  the agitation in  the  lives  of  the  other char­ acters.
Within the first  thirty  pages Jane Rule
succeeds   in   establishing  these   agitated eccentrics as  characters that   the  reader cares about. Each  one is given a signature characteristic -Joseph, a one-note laugh of   desperation;  Allen,    a   self-mockiing ironic  tone; Alma,  a deference to  money and  convention, and  so on. Between  them these  friends represent a range  of ethnic backgrounds	(Jewish,   Polish,    French Canadian,  Scandinavian),  a   range    of political parties ("Alma was a Liberal to maintain  social   superiority  and    annoy Mike.... Allen voted Conservative out of affected  cynicism  to serve his own vices"), and  a  range of conversational specialties (Carlotta specializes  in  suicide,  Mike  in Art,   Pierre in   homosexuality, etc.).  As the  narrator puts  it, "All  Joseph's friends seemed  to  wear  attitudes like name  tags, means  of identity rather than  principle."
1The  characters form  symmetrical  rela­ tionships of attraction and repulsion: like sometimes attracting, sometimes  repelling like.  Pierre,  the   abandoned  child   and  street   orphan,  and  Roxanne,  the  foster child   with   a   police   record,   are   gentle  people   who  know   that   "everyone is dy­ ing of  cancer" and  that  there  is "a point  to  being  careful and  loving."  Allen  and Alma-again the  names  suggest  affinity
-are independent and   doininant,  with a strength of personality based on not knowing. In  a pairing of  another  kind, the stormy  marriage of Mike  and  Alma contrasts with  the  homosexual menage of Allen  and   Pierre. The  polarities repre-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



sented  by  the  characters include  the "ample-bodied" and   the   "frail-bodied," the crude and refined, violent and gentle, selfish and  self-sacrificing, dependent and independent, and  ordinary and  bizarre.
In  each  section  there  is a crisis, usually of an  exotic  and  sensational kind,  which provides  the energy  for the  regrouping of characters that  occurs  in the next section. In  section  one,  for  example, on  the  thir­ tieth   birthdays of  Mike  and  Joseph, re­ spectively,  Mike  (actually, as it turns out, a soft sculpture replica  of  Mike)   is found hung, and  Joseph  is  committed to hospi­ tal,  raving  literary  quotations: " 'Where the  bee  sucks,  there  suck  I' . . . 'I am  a part  of all that  I have  met.' " A lot hap­ pens  in  this book  and  happens at  a brisk pace,  both  in  the  external action  and  in the   inner  lives  of  the   characters:  new pairings   occur,    attitudes   change,  and characters  make  exhilarating and  alarm­ ing  recognitions. For  example,  Alma  dis­ covers herself as a lesbian  and  writes with frankness  of  her   love   for   Roxanne  in "Alma  Writing,"  the   only   part   of  the book  narrated  in  the  first  person; Rox­ anne  makes a documentary sound  map of Vancouver;  the   Vancouver  Sun,  under  the   headline   "Pederasts'  Party   Over," names  Allen  Dent   as  one  of  the  guests arrested  by  the Vice  Squad; Pierre  com­ mits suicide; Alma becomes  pregnant; the opening of  Carlotta's show  of  paintings of her  friends  is disrupted  by red  paint­ throwers in  Surrey, "British  Columbia's Orange County, without the  money." A lot for one novel to contain, but all is held successfully  in  place  within  a very  firm design.
Within  this elaborately worked  out pat­ tern,  the  author  explores different  styles of   accommodation  to   the   world    and different ways of loving.  Readers familiar with  Jane  Rule's other work  will  antici­ pate   correctly  that   one  concern will  be lesbianism,   the    private    dimensions  of which  are  represented in  the  relation be-
 tween   Alma  and   Roxanne. The   public and  political  context  of homosexuality in Canada is also suggested  by references  to actual events  such  as  the  police  raid  on The   Body  Politic  as  well  as  to  the  fic­ tional   incident    of   violence    in   Surrey. When  in the  final  scene  the Surrey com­  munity  attacks  Carlotta's show, the  book takes on the tone of the "angry mourner" that  Jane  Rules describes herself as being in  Lesbian I mages  ( 1975) . "They came.  They   always   will,"   says   Roxanne,  to which Ann responds,  "No,  that's unjust.''

CATHERINE ROSS

ARTIST AS
MIDDLE-AGED MAN

MORDECAI RICHLER,   Joshua  Then   and  Now.
McClelland &  Stewart, $16.95·
MORDECAI RICHLER SEEMS  to have a taste for epigraphs. His long awaited novel, Joshua Then  and Now, nine years in the gestation, takes its epigraph from  W. H. Auden.  So also does  St.  Urbain's  Horse­ man.  The   earlier   epigraph  comes  from Auden's poem  "September  1,  I939,'' and sums  up  Auden's  terse  reflection   on  the  unpreparedness of his  generation for  the spiritual crisis forced  upon them  by World  War   II. The   impending  crisis,  as   the poem,  serves  to  galvanize   in   Auden    a sense  of  his  own  duty,   his  artist's hope  for  a  creditable vocation. Richler quotes  only  the last stanza  as epigraph, but the penultimate verse as context may help  to illuminate the  affirmation:
All I have is a voice
To  undo  the folded  lie,
The  romantic  lie in the  brain
On  the sensual  man-in-the-street
And  the  lie of Authority
Whose buildings  grope  the sky; There is no such  thing  as the  State
And  no one  exists alone; Hunger  allows  no  choice
To  the citizen  or  the  police;
We must love one  another or die.


123

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Defenceless under the  night Our world  in  stupor lies; Yet,  dotted everywhere, Ironic points of light
Flash  out  wherever  the  Just
Exchange their   messages: May  I, composed like  them Of  Eros  and   of  dust, Beleaguered by  the  same Negation and   despair,
Show  an  affirming flame.

St. Urbain's Horseman, despite  this slight­ ly presumptuous and  melodramatic cita­ tion,  deserves  to  be  regarded   as  one  of Canada's finest novels. And it proves con­ sistent  with  its  epigraph  to  this  degree: its   own   prophetic  voice   is  a   warning against  the "romantic lie in the brain" as much   as   against    the   inevitable  falling bombs, and  its concluding vision is hope­ ful, despite  "frailty" and  "dust."
The  epigraph to Joshua Then and Now, by contrast, comes from  the first stanza of an   earlier   poem   by  Auden,   "Lullaby"
( 1936).

Lay  your  sleeping head, my love, Human on my faithless arm; Time and  fevers   burn  away Individual  beauty from
Thoughtful children, and  the  grave
Proves  the  child  ephemeral:
But  in  my  arms   till  break  of  day
Let  the  living  creature lie, Mortal, guilty, but  to  me The entirely beautiful.

Subsequent  verses  go  on  to  make   of  a night's  illusion life's only light,  its "ordin­ ary swoon" anaesthetic against the fear of a darker daylight. For Auden, the "Lulla­ by" came  early;  his wartime call to vision heralded   a   later,    stronger   mood    and voice. But for the Richler  of  Joshua Then and   Now   these  same  two  "resolutions" seem   to   have   evolved   the   other   way round.
All the hallmark moods of Mordecai Richler, to be sure,  are found  in Joshua: alienation,  expressed   with  poignancy­ or as paranoia;  cynicism, ranging from  a jaded  self-sufficiency  to  unbridled bitter-


124
 ness;   cultural   disaffection,  illuminated with  topical  ironies or shadowed with topical  farce.  But  his readers  would  want to  believe   that   the   centre   of  Richler's artistry, then  and   now,  has  always  been more  than  the  projection of mood.
Richler's capacity to portray character
has always been one of his chief strengths. In this book, Reuben, Joshua's father, is reminiscent of the  strength. A hard-time boxer-cum-enforcer authority figure, street-wise and  toughened by defeat  as much  as by victory,  Reuben might  tempt a  comparison with  Isaac  Babel's  "Benya Krik  from   Odessa." But  Richler's  char­ acter  is kinder, his novel's chief expression of  humane  wisdom,   a  gentle  standard against   which   other  characters  are  im­ plicitly   measured.   If   Reuben  becomes Joshua's  most   convincing  psychological  authority, it is  partly  because  his wisdom (garnered from pulp  novels, racing  forms, and  a dog-eared  copy of the  King  James  Bible)  seems to  juggle together  past iden­  tity  and  present  life  more  convincingly than   any  other   counsel   his  life  affords.  And  this is important to the  novel, for in it son  Joshua's life as a writer  unfolds  as a  continuous but   unfulfilled   quest  for  a higher  wisdom,  cause  or  authority.
Much    other    characterization  in   the book  is less well  delineated ; even  where some of the shading is colourful, the effect is curiously  pastiche. Richler's general cynicism  too often  overcomes his sense of control and  proportion; in  character cliches or general denigrations he shows here  less of  the  fine  tuning that  we  had come  to  expect from  him  after   St.  Ur­ bain's  Horseman. Surely  negative  defini­ tion is not without its peculiar advantage. Richler's  best   characters  are   often   de­ fined  negatively,  and   they  usually  serve his  satiric   and  ironic  purpose  very  well. But  in  this  novel  even  Joshua's most  in­  tensive  declamations against  critics,  pub­ lishers  and   other  writers   are   far   less  a satire  than they  purport to  be-where

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the Jake of St. Urbain's  Horseman could (with   economy)  strike   to   the   heart   of foible  with  a  laser  beam,   Joshua's  rhe­ toric,  like his rage,  seems lightless.
His  readers  know  that  Richler's social satire  can  be wonderfully entertaining. In the present  book!, the William Lyon Mac­ Kenzie  Society  (of which Joshua is Secre­ tary and  charter member) is in fact a fair index   to   Richler's  reach.   For   Richler, King  is the  apotheosis of a  mindless  and formless   spirituality. He   is  an   operator like   Reuben,  but    without   any   earthy  authenticity wherewith to salvage his con­ tribution to the human comedy. (Or  per­  haps    Richler   would    say,   the    human farce.)  When  Joshua's  friends decide  to open   their  annual  William Lyon   Mac­ Kenzie  King  Award   to  an  NHL hockey player,   it   occasions   a   bitter  attack  on Canadian  institutional identity,  symbol­ ized  for  the  group not  so  much  by  the hockey   player   as  by  King  himself.   To wit:

Obviously,  the    player  we   have    in   mind would not  be  a  high   scorer, a  natural star, but   rather a  plodder who   overcomes with effort  and   cunning  a  conspicuous  lack   of talent, intelligence, or  grace. In the  nature of  things, he would  have  to  be a player who has  been  in  the  league for  at least  ten  years, unnoticed, unheralded, but  persevering. The fellow   we  have   in   mind    spears  when   the referee has  his  back  turned, trips an  oppos­ ing   player   if he  can   get   away   with  it,  but unfailingly  backs   down   from   a  fight.   Pre­ ferably, he  would  be a man who respects his mother even  more than the  coach, and  has  a  firm  faith in  the  world-to-come. If he  is on  the  ice  when a goal  is scored  for  his side,  he  argues for  an  assist  on  the  play.  If he  is on   the   ice   when   a  goal   is  scored  by  the opposition, he   promptly  disowns  responsi­ bility.  Above all, he is a vengeful winner and  sore   loser.   He  has   no   close   relationships with   any  of   his  teammates. Loyalty is  un­ known to him.  Forced into a quick decision on  ice,  in  the  heat of  play,  he  neither opts  for  the  possibly  inspired but  risky  choice  nor stands  tall  and  resolute on  the  blue  line.  He avoids   making   any    decision   whatsoever, heading for  the  safety  of  the  bench. All  the same,  when many a more  talented player has
 retired,  legs   gone,  or   has   been   removed from   the  fray  in  his  prime through injury, our MacKenzie King Memorial Trophy  win­ ner  will  still   be  out   there skating.  Skating away  from  trouble. Persevering.

If all the dead-pan social satire  in Joshua were thus evenly controlled, even as farce, the  book would  be better   than  it  is. But because the overall  quality is too variable (and  the tone  and  the  focus  too diffuse) the protagonist's protested contempt for Canadian cultural establishmentarianism, and  the novel's  trendy incorporation of current events   (such  as Rene  Levesque's notorious motor  accident) seem finally facile  or flat-footed.
Part  of this loss of novelistic  definition, or  forgetfulness of  the  necessary  subser­ vience  of a  joke  en  passant   to  the  tenor  and   structure of  the  whole  story,  arises from  Richler's refusal  to maintain a suffi­ cient  distance between himself  as novelist and   his  protagonist-also, of  course,  a novelist.  Joshua is made   to  be  so expli­ citly  analogous to  his  immediate author that  we  are   scarcely   able   to  determine where  it  is one  voice  leaves  off and   the other  begins. Finally, the  presumably  in­ tended  fusion  is actual confusion, acquir­ ing  in  Joshua  the  character  of   a  basic weak!lless rather than  any central strength. It gets harder and  harder to make  much  of Narcissus.
Perhaps it is not accidental that  the sharpest  characterization in  this book  de­ rives from the "Then" and  not the "Now" of  the  persona's self-perception.  The re­ membered  dialogue   between   young Joshua    and    his   father-in-law  Senator Hornby-biting,   zesty,    perceptive  and precise -is  perhaps the  best  single  pas­ sage in the novel.  In  it we watch  percep­ tion  change-initial  prejudice yield  to insight,  then  to respect  and  delineation of character,  as  father-in-law  Hornby   ac­ quires  a stature sufficient  that,  when  he is slipped  in at  the  "end" of the book, he can  'second'  father Reuben as a palpable


125

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



'authority' in Joshua's ambiguous cosmos. Joshua  is  presented  to  us  as  a  man who clearly  needs authority-or at  least covets   the  assurance  it  might  afford­ yet who, of course, incessantly rejects  any authority other   than   his own  wilfulness, whether in family,   marriage,  culture or politics.    Authority-less,  he   is   identity­ obsessed, charged with  the urge  to define and  redefine  his own character in almost purely    negative   terms.  Like   so   many writers of  the  "period" just  before  him, he  idolizes  the  opportunity for  identity and    the   authority  of   righteous  cause seemingly  afforded by the  Spanish Civil War; yet  born  too late  to participate, he finds  himself,  as  a  pilgrim  to  Ibiza  and Cordoba, even more  clearly  than  his pre­ decessors   searching  for  identity   in   the wrong    place.    For    the   real   object    of Joshua's quest  is a shared identity such as Inight   transcend the  soiled  and   tawdry  cultural  language he  knows,  something which  could  take  him out from under the weight  of his own fragmented life with its ambiguous  patrimony of  Canadian  na­ tionality  and  Jewish  heritage.  He  yearns "for    an   inheritance,  any   inheritance, weightier than  the construction of a trans­ continental railway,  a reputation for hon­
est  trading, good  skiing conditions." Joshua is a  man   bitterly  disappointed
by secular history,  yet frightened of his spiritual history.  The tribal  history  which fills his memory  is not a history  with  any hope  for  the  future:  Joshua's is not  the history  of  his  people's   Covenant, but  of their  exile  and  diaspora. And  this  more acute memory  is what  drives his quest  for a comfort which  allows that only in faded
recollections will any light for his cultural imagination still  flicker.  The tutelage at Reuben's  hands  shadows   a   reality   not quite grasped; the  synagogue   is  always just beyond  the  reach  of pride  and  habit. In Ibiza   Joshua  tells  us  plainly   by  his actions that he longs for a home,  a com­ mitment,  a   promised   land-yet   he  is
 unable  by  language  to   apprehend  the cause  of his own  "unbidden tears"  when a sephardic Jew  he does not even  wish to meet  proclaims his  own  secret,  his  iden­ tity:    "Shema  Yisrael    ... "   ('Hear  0
Israel,  the  Lord  Thy  God  is One  God').
It is the drive for identity and  authority in  Joshua  which   most  clearly   bids  the reader to accept the  invitation in  Rich­ ler's  epigraphs: to search  for  the illmnin­ ation  of texts  behind  his text, for  the sub­ texts  which  condition his  understanding. Auden's poems,  I have  suggested,   serve to  undergird our  perception that  Joshua Then  and  Now   describes   a  movement away   from   hope -even that   hope   in­ tuited  merely  in  'ironic points  of light'­ toward  negation and  a despair  which  can be  mitigated only by the transient nego­ tiations of dark  hours.
But  lest  we  make   too  much   of  small matters: it  is clear  that   the  Auden  epi­ graphs  are   merely   sub-textual   beacons, and  not  by any  means  either novel's  most important textual signal.  For  that,  from the   title   to  the  conclusion, Richler  re­ quires  us to conjure with no less imposing  an   authority   than    Reuben's  dog-eared King James  Bible.
In  Reuben's  catechesis, in  his  exegesis of Biblical  story  and  the  prudential ethic he garners from  it, the reader discovers several  remarkable ironies.  One  of these involves   Joshua  encountering  (but   not quite  discovering) Reuben's teaching as a kind  of proleptic exegesis of his own  life dilemma concerning authority and  iden­ tity.  The God  of  Reuben's  reading  is "a  gambler born"; he takes his chances  with free  will in a cosmos where  human voice is crucial to  any  story's  ending or  mean­  ing.  Reuben sees the  Bible as a series  of "deals" between   God  and   en,
such a repository of "wisdom" (in the Hebrew sense,  hokma), spiritual wisdom for  the  physical  world,  and  perhaps espe­ cially wisdom  for  interpretation:

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



"Let me tell you something," his father said, brandishing his  Bible  with enthusiasm, "this thing here  is  just  filled  with  book  titles  and savvy  sayings.  I mean, I used   to  think,  you
.were   a  writer you  had   to  make  things   up out   of  your   own   head,  but   you'd  be  sur­ prised   how  many of  their titles  and  sayings  were  swiped  out  of this  one  here, and  there's plenty left,  so you  could  do  worse than -"

Coming from  an  enforcer for  gambling debts,  Reuben's exegesis  is only  partially eccentric: "A  covenant is a contract," he says, launching into  a  circuitous explica­ tion  of  the  ten  commandments,  rivalled for attractive originality and  utter hetero­ doxy  only  by  his  preference of  Esau  for Jacob  in   the   Covenant  story.   Though " ... the  Hebes  are  only  signed  up  until page eleven hundred and eighty," Reuben extends his lecture series to the New Test­ ament, to "the guy on  the  stick." Part  of his  rationale  is  pre-emptive:  the  goyim usually  sweet-quote from  the  New Testa­ ment  just before  they do something nasty;  part  also  creates a foil:  Reuben admires  the  Jesus  who  "didn't  like  the  way  the temple   was  being  run,"  and   he  admires  the continuing authority and  shared iden­ tity   of  his   "bunch"  which    "didn't  fly apart like they did  here after Galento was shot  down." In  this way Reuben, as wis­ dom  figure,  comes  to  stand   (ironically) for a broadly-based Judaic logos, the sub­ text  of an  old  and  virtually timeless  cul­ ture  from   which   pinpoints of  light  still flicker  onto  the  darker surface of present and  local  fictions.  One  senses  that  Reu­ ben's mock-exegesis  is not a simple parody  of explication, but  in  fact  a  story-teller's mock-disclaimer,  part   of  a  web  of  self­ negating  ironies   which   are   not   always specific to this book, or its protagonist, as distinct from  the  author's own  extended self-reflection.
The  Purim   exegesis  Reuben  gives  to
the  booki of  Esther may  be, in  this  con­ text,  only  reflexively  intended as  one  of_ the  novel's  central ironies.  The  Biblical book  is not  really  so much  about Esther
 as it is about  Mordechai. Mordechai, as Reuben sees him, is par excellence  a trick­ ster-gambler, an  'operator' who manipu­ lates his protege  and  the King's lust  into a contract (of marriage)  for his own ad­  vantage. In   the  biblical  story,  of course, Mordechai's hustling  canny  is ultimately redeemed  -in that the Jews at  last get a hearing. It is less  evident, Richler inad­  vertently suggests, that  this same redemp­ tion  will  extend   to  his  Montreal  name­ sake.
The  feast of Purim, for  which  Reuben
reads  the story,  was  originally known  as the  "Feast  of  Mordechai," and  it echoes Richler's own  typology:   it  is called   the "feast  of lots."  Joshua's has  been  a  gam­ bler's   world,    a   world    in   which   God gambles  too,  in  which  Father  Reuben's authority-not only  as  Rabbi,  but  also as an  enforcer   of  gambling  debts-is  a simulacrum of higher authority. Reuben's mulilation of  loser  Orbach's right   hand  may prefigure Joshua's own apprehension of  his  writer's  exhausted  luck   and   im­ pending nemesis,  or  climacteric. Yet Purim,  Richler knows, is also supposed  to be a "feast  of  joy and  gladness," a "sym­ bol of the victory  of light  over darkness." In   this  book  the  feast  is  thus,  with  de­ liberate  irony, inversely celebrated-it is finally the ambiguous "beauty" of a faith­ less darkness  which  is clung   to,  with  no risk so bravely  taken  as to face  the  light of   day   with   a   clear   and   self-defining choice.  Even  the  wisdom  of Moses  Mai­ monides superimposed upon  the  Spanish pilgrimage, cannot  counter  the   tide  of self-pity  which  sweeps  over  the  persona's self -consciousness.
·That  such a general and  unsettled am­ biguity  could   prove   a  serious  novelistic problem   (outside  as  well  as  inside   the book)  is suggested  in Joshua's perception of  his  alter-ego, his  loved/hated corres­ pondent-friend, fellow  novelist Murdoch. There  is  a  scene   in  which   the  discon­  certed  Murdoch  tells  Joshua  about   his


127

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



own son coming  to him for advice. Mur­ doch  reveals  himself  as having  had  thus to confront the  question  of his own  iden­  tity   and    "authority,"  not   merely   as  a novelist,  but  also  as  a man. His  inability  to imagine the  encounter is a  measure  of his failure  to have  chosen, to have in fact achieved   an   identity.  Whether  Richler  intends to  use  Murdoch  to  critique his fellow   Canadian    writers,    or   whether Murdoch constitutes for  Richler   a  kind of   ironic    confession,   his   words   could easily  enough serve  as another epigraph to Joshua:
"God Lord, I'm still  a  child   myself.  I like nothing better than  to  suck  a  girl's   titties and   have   her   read   Winnie the   Pooh  aloud to  me  before I go  tuckybyes. Do  you  give your  children advice? I expect you  do.  The years  have  made you  pompous, my dear. Ah well,  I suppose nothing compensates for  the loss  of  talent. Both   our   brains  have   been addled  by  alcohol  and   the  young   have   no mercy."
The life aide,  Joshua sees clearly  enough in Murdoch's work that  personal  inability to deal with authority and choose identity can  be most  unhappily betrayed  in a writer's public proclamations:  "Mur­ doch's seventh novel, its contents sour, its jacket  elegant, sat before him on his desk. It was a mechanical  book, shallow,  writ­ ten   with    a   fine   writer's   remembered skills."
In the  tradition of  Fellini's  film  8 , Joshua  Then and  Now  is a  book  about an   artist's  failure-but   it   remains    in most  artistic respects  enough  less  conclu­
sive than  the film that each of Joshua's reflections  on Murdoch's waning achieve­ ment  comes  perilously  close to providing another epigraph. Thus   the  loss of  dis­ tance between  creator and  creature por­  tends, it seems to me, an almost  tragically  self-indulgent  self-destructiveness  in  the actual, not  just  the  fictive  novelist.
·All of  this,  after St.  Urbain's  Horse­
man,  is a  real  loss. An inescapable  diffi­
culty  with  Richler is'that he continuously


128
 invites  remembrance of and  comparison with  his earlier novels in  each  work  that he pens-setting, character, "history," point  of view  and  even  incident all  con­ tribute to  this.  What one  comes  to  feel in  joshua  is that  he  has  been  looking  at an  extended series of vanity  mirrors held far too close to a man's most intimate self­ doubt, and  that  the accrued result  is less the  'honesty' it  might seem  to be  than  a kind of  protracted self-indulgence (or  ex­ hibitionistic  narcissism)  in  which,   after nine  years of getting ready  for  it, Richler has placed in our  hands at  last not  much more    than    a   tawdry    'Portrait  of   the Artist  as  a  Middle-Aged Man.'
How much  less is Joshua than  the char­ acterization Richler is capable  of-how much  less is Richler, now,  than  his own imagination of Joshua,  then? At  the  end of  the  novel  one  still  wants   to  ask  the novelist:   "Who  was   joshua  anyway?" And   in  the  answering  we  could   come, perhaps, to the  most  difficult  irony  of all, irony  which  rises from  that   which  is de­ liberately left  unsaid. Joshua, the  volun­ teer who fearlessly reconnoitered a land of strangers;  Joshua,  the  imaginative  sur­  vivor  who  took  refuge in a house  of har­ lots,  but  even  there kept  fast  to  his pur­ pose;   Joshua-at   the  sound   of  whose trumpets the  walls of the  city shook  and  crumbled;  here  presumably  is  a  figure  from Judaic history  who is best known  for drawing a   line   between    two   options, firmly,  for  the  sake  of defining  both  au­
thority and  identity. It was  Joshua who said

... choose you  this  day  whom  ye will  serve; whether the  gods  your  fathers served  ... or the  gods  of  the  Amorites, in  whose  land   ye dwell: but  as  for me  and  my  house, we will serve  the  Lord.    (Joshua 24: 15)

Here, surely,  are  accessible  footnotes for readers of Canadian fiction. Yet  in this novel  the  invocation exists not,  as in Sin­ clair   Ross,  to  herald a  negative  choice, but   by  the   irony  of  opposites  indicates

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



that  there  has been  really no choice taken at  all.  If the  truth of  the  citation of the William   Lyon   MacKenzie King   Society is intended to  mirror the  imagination of Richler's Canadian  readers, in  this  book the  image  actually reflected  is the artist's own.  It is a split  image,  finally  unable  to be faithful to either species  of ironic dis­ course-those celebrated points  of  light, or  his  own  too-much-protested  wish for the  soul's  dark night.
In  the  last  analysis  Joshua  Then   and Now  is a  book  about the  character of a novelist.  As  portrayed it  remains an  un­ defined  character, double minded, pulled between  two  poles,  neither of  which  can command sufficient  allegiance  for  a full identity to emerge. To  say, however,  that  these two poles are secular Canadian cul­
ture  and  Jewish  heritage would  be to beg the  real  question -which  has  far  less to do with cultural than  with  personal moti­ vation-with love  and  hatred.  The one side  of  this  novelist's  impulse is complex  vengeance, a compulsive urge  to  define, characterize and   dismiss  false  "authori­ ties"   according  to  what   he   hates;  the other impulse  is simple  grace, an  irresist­  able desire  to know  and  receive  a father's love.  It is  this  last  irony for  which   the reader  must  retain  any  abiding apprecia­ tion, and  wish, perhaps, that  Joshua Now had   been  able  more   freely  to  make  his choice.
DAVID  L. JEFFREY

PRIMITIVE  PRESENT

RUDY  WIEBE,   The Mad   Trapper. McClelland
& Stewart, $14.95·
IN The  Temptations of Big Bear Wiebe's white  men  were  almost  all  obsessed with their  moment in history; indeed  several thought and   explained  so  much   history and geography that some of the "white" sections  of his novel  read  disconcertingly like  history   lessons.  His  Indians in  that
 novel  were,  fortunately, innocent of  his­ tory.   They   inhabited  a   different   time scheme. The  Indian sections  were written in  a  richly  sensual  and  rhythmic  prose. The  sometimes   boring   prolixity   of  his white    sections   contrasted   dramatically with the poetic prolixity  of his Indian sec­ tions.  Out  of  this  contrast came  an  elo­ quent argument for Big Bear's superiority and  for his people's plight.
In  The  Mad  Trapper  Albert  Johnson (or whatever his name was) is like Wiebe's Indians and  Metis  rebels  in  one  impor­
tant  sense:  he has  broken  from  the detri­
tus of Canadian history, from his own memories  of people,  indeed  from  any civilized  laws  or  the  words  that  describe these laws. He  inhabits an  eternal  primi­ tive  present.   His   concerns are   lighting fires, feeding  himself,  getting to his cabin  site  before  freeze-up, building  a cabin,  escaping men  who  pursue  him with  guns and  words. Like Wiebe's primitives in Big Bear, he  occupies   the  centre of  interest. In fact,  he is skilfully drawn. Some  of his actions seem unmotivated (springing Ner­  syoo's trap,  for  instance), but  such  enig­ mas  come  with   the  territory. Wiebe  is, after  all, attempting to give shape  to an historical    enigma,   a   murderer   whose name   and  identity we  still  don't know. One   is   reminded  of   the   maxim   from  Howard  O'Hagan's Tay  John:

. .. to  tell  a  story  is  to  leave  most  of it  un­ told. You  mine  it as  you  take  ore  from  the  mountain. You  carry the  compass  around  it. You   dig  down  -and   when  you   have   fin­  ished, the  story   remains,  something  beyond your    touch,  resistant  to   your    siege;  un­ fathomable, like  the  heart  of  the  mountain. You   have   the   feeling   that  you   have   not  reached the   heart  of  the   story   itself,   but  have  merely  assaulted the  surrounding soli­ tude.

The more  Wiebe's  characters attempt to pin  down  the  mad   trapper with  words, the  more  elusive   he  becomes.  And   the more elusive Wiebe allows him  to remain, the more  powerful he emerges  as a fictive


129

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



structure. As long as Wiebe's mad  trapper remains  wordless,  his  tenacity,  rage, ani­ mal    courage   and    strength,   fastidious camping habits,  fierce brooding presence,  remain powerful and convincing, as in the following  passage:

Albert   Johnson  crouched   under   the   river bank. His frostravaged  face looked like a stripped, blackened  skull. He  held  a chunk of caribou  calf  meat  in  his  bloodied  hands and  he  was chewing  on  it.  He  warmed  his hands   by  placing   them   alternately  in  the torn-open body of the calf beside him while he gnawed at the raw, tough meat, hacking chunks  off  with  his  skinning  knife  close  to his  teeth  and  chewing  voraciously.  He  did not  stop  chewing,  or  even  hesitate   as  the roar  of the  plane  thundered over  him. Only his  eyes  followed   the  circle   of  its   sound above  him, the  terrified  snorting  of the cari­ bou  as they fled  before  this  impossible  hor­ ror hammering out of the sky. And the click­ ing  of their  numberless hooves continued as steadily  as ever  long  after  the  sound  of the plane  faded  into silence.

But  when  Wiebe  permits  his character to become even slightly accommodated to civilized ways, his mythic  wendigo  stature recedes. Here,  for instance, he turns  away from  the scene of a savage  battle  between a sow grizzly and  the old bull caribou  she has  just  illed.
man,' Johnson half sang under  his breath.
'Call   no  man   your  friend.   If you  trust anybody,  you'll   be  sorry   . . . you'll   be sorry ... you'll  be sorry, in the  end.' "
When we ask the question, where does Wiebe   stand   in   this   confrontation   be­ tween   the  civilized   community  of   men and   the  lawless  primitive, we  come  up against a  kind  of  moral  neutrality. We have a narrator that  hops like Wop May's Bellanca  from  character to character, and  though the characters judge, Wiebe's  nar­  rator   does  not.   In  spite  of  this  sort  of unjudging  omniscience, however,   Wiebe has loaded  his deck  rather heavily  in fa­ vour  of   his so-called   mad   trapper. His policemen, reporters, Wop  May,  Indians and   Metis  are  foolishly  human by com-
 parison. They often  speak  in lifeless dia­ logue,   explaining  their   jobs,  their  loca­ tions,  their  lives,  their  place  at  that mo­ ment  in history.
Johnson makes  them  all  seem  foolish. Wop   May    (contrary  to  accounts I've come  across)   is obsessed  with  his  image as a  failed  hero.  Corporal Millen  suffers from  a  self-inflicted Ahab  complex over the  pursuit  of  Johnson.  Reporters  Cal­ laghan and  Snarden are  fops. Constable King  is a disapproving prig; we are  glad he  leaves  the  book  as  early  as  he  does. Most  of the Indians are circumscribed by their limited vision and their superstitions.
In  fact,  there isn't  a  single  articulate
defence for social  order  or community in this  entire   adventure story.  Millen   does his  best,  preferring words  to  bullets,  but he is no wordsmith. Challenged by John­ son to explain why Millen  is interrogating him,   Millen   seizes  up:   "'Well,' Millen  tried   to  keep  his  voice  easy,  as  if con­ sidering a challenging philosophical ques­ tion,  'there's order. Community order  de­ pends  on  . . . a  certain knowledge, a  ... certain  common  acceptance of  . . . per­  sonal  information.' "
Perhaps we  are  accustomed to getting from  Wiebe's  fictions a highly moral  sense of cause,  but  this time  he seems to be sid­ ing with a wendigo who shrugs off human
society, denies community, would sooner avoid  (and  ultimately shoot)   people  than relate  to them  in  any  way. In fact,  much like  the  writer   of  the  Grettir saga  does, Wiebe   makes   his  wendigo  into   a  com­ pelling  character, a kind  of  argument for taciturnity. And  the rest of  the characters become  a group statement about the  fol­ lies   of   human   co-operation  and    com­ munication.  With  their  radios,  airplanes, dynamite and newspapers, they're  a pretty  foolish  lot.
In  spite  of some  heavy-handed exposi­ tion,  the  same  strong  narrative hand  is at work  here.  The  northern  terrain comes alive  in  some   chillingly  drawn  descrip-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



tions. The same  fascination with  the  pro­
cess of converting history into mythic nar­

different. This is not  the  usual  gripping saga  (in  the  sense of a  folk  epic)   which pleads  the  cause  of  minority Canadians,

alternately compelling in the Johnson sec­ tions and  wooden  in places  where people  must  talk to one another.

DAVID CARPENTER

RELEARNING FREEDOM

KEITH    MAILLARD,  Alex   Driving   South.  Dial
Press,  $I I .50.

KEITH    MAILLARD is  one   of   the   young Americans who came  to Canada in the Vietnam era,  stayed,  and  became  a  part of  the  West  Coast   writing scene.  Give

to address an interesting and  undeveloped aspect  of recent  Canadian cultural life - the   whole   uneasy   relationship  that   has always  existed  between   the  two cultures,

to stir in the  bosom of the  twice-born im­ migrant. If he  can't go home again, can he still be at ease in the  New Zion?  Com­

dian  adjustment, in which  Canada nearly always suffers, Americans have been less grudging in  their  appreciation of  Cana­ dian  achievements; at  least  they have  not

There is evidence, given  Edgar Z.  Frie­ denberg and  now Keith Maillard, that  the era  of unexamined gratitude is coming  to a close.

Canadian  residence of  Evan   Carlyle,   is the  cold  rim  around the  molten   core  of Evan's and  Alex  Warner's West  Virginia adolescence. Eventually we come to understand   the   meaning  of   events   in Evan's senior   year   of  high   school;   we learn   why  he  left  "Raysburg" and  went
 


The Arts
in Canada THE LAST FIFTY YEARS Edited  by:
W. J. Keith  and B.-Z. Shek

Thirteen Creative Canadians make personal  responses to
the state of the arts in Canada
including  Northrop Frye and Guy Rocher  writing  on gen­ eral cultural trends, Hugh MacLennan and Gerard Bessette on fiction, Ralph Gustafson and  Michele Lalonde on poetry, George Woodcock and Jacques Allard on non-fiction prose, and Robertson  Davies and
Gratien  Gelinas on drama. Assembled to mark  the fiftieth anniversary of the University  of Toronto Quar­
terly this collection  provides a stimulating view of the cul­ tural development of Canada during the past half century.
$20.00 cloth, $6.95 paper

University  of Toronto Press

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



to college and  eventually told Uncle  Sam to  "kiss  [his]   ass"-and  we  learn  why Alex stayed.  Implicitly, we must  judge Evan's Vancouver "success"  (as a CBC morning show  producer), and  his hip, know-it-all girlfriend and his English suits and   access  to  a  Doctor  Feelgood,   with Alex's stay-at-home  "failure"-sixty pounds  over   his   championship   track­ form,   incipient  alcoholism,   a  wife  who nips at  his heels, a  son who  disappoints, a  garage that   is failing.
It's   clear   by  the  end  that   Evan   is  a moral  failure; Alex,  for  his conventional decay, is a man  of loyalties, strength, and moral   decency.   Alex  conforms   to  most "Deer Hunter" notions  of the  steel-town redneck  (I passed those same high  school years  near  Pittsburgh, in  the  town  men­ tioned   here   as   "Little   Washington"­ it's  a  jolt,  of sorts,  to  encounter the  first fictional  reference to  that  town,  in  read­  ing  for  a review  in  Canadian Literature. On   the   other   hand,  is  there   anyplace more  likely to yield such a coincidence?)
-violent,  hard-drinking, inarticulate - but  he's  also the  man  most likely to pick up   hitch-hikers,  pull   your   car   from   a ditch,  and  buy a round of drinks  for old time's  sake. Evan  is shamed  by such  gen­ erosities.  He   has  corrected all  of  Alex's flaws, but  retained none  of his virtues.
This strikes me as the subterranean, bi­ national allegory  of the book. Alex is still potent  (gone  disastrously  soft);  Evan is the grown-up track-team  manager (grown   undeservedly  prosperous). Evan must  learn  there is more  to life than  "be­  ing noticed  by Toronto" and  perhaps go­ ing full-time "on  staff"  and  moving  East. It's  a lesson he couldn't learn  in Vancou­ ver.  Alex  is Evan's  teacher,   using  beer and   reminiscence  and   a   fearsome   all­ night  ride  through a  blizzard  to return him  to a kind  of existential openness  and a truth he never  suspected.  He  arrives  in town  thin ing
trayed  him  with  Alex;  he leaves learning
 that   she  had  been  carrying his  baby.  In other words, whatever freedom he's man­ aged  to preserve  for himself is rooted  in a lie.
This  being  said,  the  book's  virtues  are quickly  exhausted. Maillard has  a  good ear  for  Alex's speech  (an  essentially one­ note,  profane monologue). He's  created a  few  memorable  set-pieces  around  the luscious girl-friend, Elly  (who seems to be moulded  from   heroic   clay),  and   that's just about all. He has not solved the essen­ tially  static  quality of  the book, in which all  the  significant  action happened after Evan's stay in Raysburg. The  mature Elly, now a local nurse, is not introduced. Evan himself-most disastrously-has no real role  in  his  own  book  except  to  ask  Alex "then what?"  questions. In  one  two-page sequence, Evan  is mercilessly  reduced to the  essence  of his  role:   asking  ten  ques­ tions   about  Elly.  Alex  swings  into  his familiar response   ("Shit,  she  can't be  a pound heavier . . . Oh,  fuck,  I  don't re- member ... Oh,  shit, Carlyle, he was an
asshole  ... ") -it all  sounds  believable, but  it's  nothing more   than   elicited  dia­ logue; it  fuels  the  plot  and  destroys  the characters.
The fault  is not in Maillard's intention, but in his craft. As a novel about high school  seniors  in  1g6o,  "American  Graf­ fiti"  style -in which   adult  divergences are only hinted at-Evan, Elly, and  Alex would    all   have   vital   roles.   Elly,   who
models herself on Marilyn Monroe, might get away with lines from the young Judy Garland such  as,  "I'm just  a  dumb   kid from  Carreysburg ... Who  the  hell am  I to think  I'm  going to be an actress?  But wouldn't it be  incredible if I turned out to  be  rich  and   famous?" Alex,  then  an all-State track  star,  caught between  low­ life car-boosting friends and  college  pos­ sibilities, is, frankly, more interesting than the    grease-pit  sage   he   becomes.    And Evan,    as   the    familiar   portrait-of-the­ artist-as-callow-youth,  is  never   closer  to

BOOKS IN REVIEW



commanding a bit of respect  than  he is in planning  to   leave   West   Virginia   (for Ohio   State)  and   never  coming   back.  I don't think   anyone   can   care   about   the drip  he's  become.
The "other" story   that   Maillard  has tried  to tell is a much  bigger one, and one that  has thus far eluded  all the New Can­ adians from the American class of c. 1966. It is nothing less than an  account of the transformations wrought  by Canada, the hostilities   and   regrets   and   attachments still  felt  towards the  States. To  tell  that  story,   we  will  all  need   characters with more  substance  than Evan   Carlyle,   and less   sentimental   slobbiness    than    Alex Warner. And  we  will  need   a  plot  that  justifies  its  length, not   just  a  couple  of short   stories   inflated    to   fill   a   novel's covers.
CLARK BLAISE

FAMILIAR WORTHIES

SILVER  DONALD  CAMERON,  Dragon  Lady.  Mc­ Clelland &  Stewart, $I3·95·
HUBERT  EVANs,  0 Time In  Your  Flight. Har­
bour  Publishing, $7-95·
HELEN  LEVI, Honour  Your  Partner.  Queenston
House, $I 2.95.
ROY   MACGREGOR,  Shore   Lines.  McClelland &
Stewart, $I3·95·
JAMES  HOUSTON,  Spirit  Wrestler. McClelland
&  Stewart, $I 4·95·

THIS  IS A  MIXED   BAG of novels indeed. Dragon  Lady  is  a  lively  thriller with  a U.S.  draft dodger hero  and  a locale  that shifts between  downtown Manhattan and the   coast  of  Nova   Scotia. 0 Time   In Your   Flight  is  a  meticulous account  of "one  crucial  year from  [a] small town childhood in 19th  century Ontario," and was  completed during author Hubert Evans' 87th  year.  Honour  Your  Partner describes  a  few  months in  the  lives of a retired Anglican bishop  and  his wife and owes   a   sizeable   debt   to   Jane  Austen. Share  Lines  is a  fictionalized  version  of
 the   mystery   surrounding  the   death  of Tom  Thomson in Algonquin Park. Spirit Wrestler  is  a  lyrical   tale  of  magic   and survival among the  Inuit of Baffin Island. Obviously  there  is much variety  here. Yet reading all five novels in sequence  one  is struck by their  united  allegiance to one common theme: the virtues of small community life.
Silver  Donald Cameron expresses  this
view most openly.  "I think  that's what human beings are  naturally like," says his hero  Peter  Landry, commenting on  the neighbourliness  of   some   new   acquain­ tances. "But  when  they get  jammed  up in cities. . . . something  happens to  people. They   don't   help  each  other, they  don't know   each   other,   They   get   arrogant. They  forget  they're animals that  have  to share  the world  with  other animals. They  get to be like a cancer."
Cameron suits  the  action   to  the  word by having  Peter's brother Wally, who's remained in  business  in  New  York,  "sell out" to an  international thug  and  die horribly  following  a deep  dive  to salvage uranium from  a sunken  ship. Clean-living Peter,  on the other hand, who fled to the quiet   life  in   Nova   Scotia,  manages   to solve the mystery, stay alive and win first prize   (his  brother's wife)   into  the  bar­ gain.   The   moral   is  somewhat   diluted, however,   by   the   plain   fact   that  it   is Peter's street  wisdom  and  army training which  save  his  life  on  two  accasions.
Dragon Lady is distinguished by some fine  descriptive writing when  Peter  sails his small schooner in search  of Wally and finds  a  storm,   and   Cameron's  wit  and
controversial  opinions   are   a   welcome
bonus  in a novel  of  this sort.  His ear  for Maritime speech  also enriches the  novel, which   is  a  better than  average   thriller with  one  main   flaw:   the  action   is  not fast  enough  to keep  the  reader from  ask­ ing   awkward   questions about  the  me­ chanics   of   the   plot.   As  a   first   novel, though, it's  a  promising debut.


133

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Hubert Evans'  0 Time  In Your Flight is  an   extraordinary  story  by  an  extra­ ordinary  man   who  is  gifted  with  what appears  to  be  total   recall.  Evans'   pro­ tagonist   is  nine-year-old   Gilbert   Egan,  who sees all, knows some, and  tells all in a  relentless,  no-details-spared, faintly pouting style.
Gilbert's chief  trial  is his school-teacher father, who's  strict,  undemonstrative, ab­ sorbed  in his studies  and  waxes his mous­ tache  like a  "dude." Gilbert's portrait of his father is one of the attractions of this novel,   for   its   depth   of   understanding grows  with  Gilbert. And  who  could  for­ get  Gilbert's  mother  in  rubbers   and   a bathing cap,  huddled on  his bed  during a  thunderstorm  because   her  own  brass bed "attracted electricity"?
0 Time In   Your   Flight  contains  a
wealth   of  historic   household   and  com­ munity detail surrounding life  in  small­ town  Ontario at   the  time  of   the  Boer War.  Gilbert's world  is ordered, self-suffi­ cient,  close to God  and  nature and  some­ times  confining. Though  he  longs to  run away  from  home  to join the Indians, Gil­ bert's  place  in  his  community is already  established  at  the age of nine.  No wonder  one  of  his  favourite Bible  stories  is  the story  of   the  Prodigal Son:   "His   father spotted  him  coming  over  the  hill, ran  to meet  him,  fell  on  his neck, got  right  up and  kissed him."
Honour  Your  Partner is the  third  vol­ ume  in  the  Plum  Bluff  trilogy  by  Helen Levi   of   Glenboro,  Manitoba.   Slightly
darker in  tone  than   either   A  Small  In­ formal Dance or Tangle  Your  Web  and Dosey-Do (the first two volumes), Honour Your  Partner centres on the relationships of  retired  Anglican bishop  William  Giss and   his   wife   Marion   with   their   two daughters, Catherine and Shirley.
Author Levi  follows the Jane Austen pattern by  reuniting one  daughter  with her  husband and  marrying off the  other, all   the   while   viewing   the   proceedings


134
 through the  filtering lens of  irony.  (" 'I don't think  you heard a word  I was say­ ing'," complains Catherine. "Marion  felt ashamed of  herself.  She  had  no  right  to concentrate her  attention  upon   her  ab­  sent  daughter  while  her  present  one  was also trying  to drive  her  crazy.")
Marion Giss's situation bears a fleeting
resemblance to that of the long-suffering heroine of Sinclair Ross's As For Me  and My House, for "she  knew  that  while Wil­ liam  Giss would  always be loyal and  lov­ ing,  he would  never  be exciting or amus­ ing, and  she was condenmed  to boredom and  annoyance for  the  rest  of  her  life."  However, there   is  none  of   the  grinding poverty that  imprisoned the Bentleys and  Marion is too busy to brood  for  long.  In Helen Levi's  prairie  community of  Plum  Bluff,   as  in   Hubert   Evans'   small-town Ontario,  there   is  a  place  for  everyone.  "Country people  are the  last democrats," observes  1arion.
ther  or  not  you  have  money;  what  mat­ ters  is  whether or  not  you  are  a  good person."
Helen   Levi   is  quick   to   balance  this rose-coloured  view  with  the  observation that   "what  does  matter is  what   family you belong  to,"  but  there's no doubt  that her   own   sympathies,  like  Austen's, are solidly  middle-class. Because  of  this, and because    her    style   is  charming,  Levi's novels  are  in  danger of  being  dismissed as  trivial. Rather, they should  be  classed with   the  Salterton  novels  of  Robertson Davies  as  the  entertaining products of a keen  mind,  a  sharp eye and  a  ready  wit. Shore  Lines, a first  novel  by magazine journalist  Roy   MacGregor,  is  that   fa­ miliar   worthy, a  good  try  that   tries  too hard. MacGregor's research  for  the novel began   in  1973.  His  attempts to  unravel the  mystery  of Tom Thomson's death are mirrored in the actions of his protagonist, Eleanor Philpott. Eleanor is a 43-year-old divorcee who  works  at  Eaton's. She  goes to  a  psychiatrist,  cries  a  lot  and  regards

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Marilyn   Monroe as a  kindred spirit.  On learning that  she was an adopted baby, Eleanor traces enough of her origins to suspect   that   her  father may   have   been Tom  Thomson. She   drives   to  Vernon, the  small   town   where   the  woman   who was Thomson's fiancee  at the  time  of his death (and  is, presumably, Eleanor's mo­ ther)   still resides. She  asks questions and  burrows    through   newspaper  files  until enough evidence is accumulated to satisfy her.  Freed  at  last, she  drops the  psychia­ trist,  renounces  Eaton's and   presumably finds  a  happier   actress   to  regard   as  a kindred spirit.
The central question, however, remains unanswered, which  may  explain why  the author chose to write  this awkward novel instead    of   a   documentary  work   more suited  to his talents. MacGregor is most successful  in  his characterization of  Rus­ sell  Pemberton, an  elderly  bachelor  who resents   Eleanor's  intrusions  and   typical city   ways:    "Russell  had    come   to   the opinion  over  the  last  ten  years  that  city people were empty  inside." So, ultimately, is this novel.
James Houston's Spirit Wrestler is a decided   change of  pace,  though it,  too, seeks   to   explain   a   mystery    that   ap­ proaches myth.  "The  unresolved  seed  of
this  story  has  haunted me  for  almost  30
years"  writes  Houston  in  an  afterword,
adding cryptically, "The  true  meaning ... I  leave   to  my  readers,  and   wish  them God's good  help  in  their  solution."
Spirit  Wrestler  is an  autobiographical
narrative as  told  by  Shoona, a  shaman who becomes an outcast when  too many disasters  are  imputed to his presence.  His path crosses  that   of  Kayaker, a  strange and   obsessed  white   man   whose  actions spring  from  Houston's contemplation of that  "unresolved seed."
The  strength of this  novel  lies in  Hou­ ston's  intimate  knowledge of  the  people of  Baffin  Island and   their  environment. Spirit  Wrestler   contains  descriptions  of
 a  caribou   hunt,  of  kayak   construction and  lore, of shamanism and  of the north that are worthy in themselves, and he has peopled  his story with an engaging collec­ lection  of characters. Like  Silver  Donald  Cameron,  he   is  so   enamoured   of   his story's  setting  that  he  occasionally allows the drama to idle  in  neutral while he in­ vestigates  some  cultural  cul  de  sac on foot, but overall Spirit Wrestler leaves the impression  of a well-oiled  machine that  is destined  to arrive. Even  the  inconclusive ending does  not  remove   this impression,  for  Houston has  created such  a convinc­ ing  milieu  that   the  reader should   have little   difficulty   in  imagining  an   appro­ priate  solution.
Nowhere   is  the   sense  of  community more evident than in this last of the five novels,  for  the  closer  men   are   to  their land  the more  they  appear to appreciate the  kind  of sustenance which  only  mem­ bership  in a human community can  pro­ vide. Shoona   the  outcast  knows full  well what   he  has  lost,  just  as  Peter   Landry the draft  dodger  understands what,  in his new  home  in  a  Nova  Scotia  backwater, he has found.
PAT  BARCLAY

POETIC GIFTS

FRANCIS  SPARSHOTT,   The  Rainy Hills:   verses after  a  Japanese fashion. Privately printed,
$5·95·
DOUGLAS LOCHHEAD,  High Marsh Road. Anson- Cartwright  Editions,  $8.gs.

I  DOUBT THAT  THE  HAIKU  was ever  in­ tended   to  be  the   vehicle   for  an  entire  book  of  poems,  and   yet  that   is  more  or less what  Francis Sparshott offers in The  Rainy  Hills:  verses after  a  Japanese  fa­ shion. A clever  haiku   (and  here I'm  talk­  ing about  haiku  originally written in Eng­  lish)   stands   out   in   a  crowd   of  longer poems  like  the   petals  on   a  wet,   black bough. But a proliferation of haiku  strikes me  as  sheer   laziness:    the   poet   doesn't


135

BOOKS IN REVIEW



want to be bothered developing an idea beyond I 7 syllables.
Sparshott's six-page  preface offers a ra­
tionale  for  his writing of haiku   (3  lines of 5, 7 and  5 syllables), tanka ( 5 lines of
5, 7, 5, 7 and  7 syllables), and  renga  ("a
chain  of haiku alternating with  heptasyl­
labic couplets such as complete a tanka") . Ideally, says Sparshott, the  haiku  should be  "almost a  syllogism  of  feeling." The first line  presents a  situation, the  second line  modifies  that  situation by the  intro­ duction of a new  character or event,  and the  third line  expresses  the consequences of this modification. What results may be a particularly vivid image, a striking  met­  aphor, or even a highly-compressed world­  view.  My  favourite in  this  regard   is  a haiku  by  Ryota, translated by Harold G. Henderson:

Oh,  the  wide  world's   ways! Cherry blossoms left  unwatched
even  for  three  days!

It is this  kind  of metaphoric impact that haiku   strives  for,  and   despite   the  great detail  that  Sparshott goes into  in  distin­ guishing  between   English   and  Japanese metrics,   it  is  unli  ely
reader  will be more concerned with metri­
cal regularity than with  the overall mean­ ing or experience of the  poem. Sparshott seems  to  be  aware that   his  poems  lack vitality,   but  he  tries  to  blame  this  fault  on  his  audience and  his  religion   rather than   on  his  poetic  debility: "Lacking a community of  like-minded persons  and  a relevant  religious   tradition to  steady  my mind,  I  have  let my verses sometimes  de­ viate from the right path into generality, unanchored reflection, obiter  dicta  and jests." Or,  put  plainly,  the weak:

Seven  syllables
takes five syllables  to write five syllables  four

the  trivial:

Unlike  men  elsewhere
 Canadians  remember
John A. Macdonald

and  the  banal:

Trains run  in  tunnels standing or  seated  we wait all look straight ahead

On  the  whole,  the  tanka are  better  than the  haiku, and  occasionally approach,  if they  don't actually cross,  the  borders   of wit:

Fragrance you  tell  me resides not  in  the  blossom but  in  the  nostril
Well  then 	I  will smell flowers
you are  free  to smell  noses

As might be expected, there  are  many poems  here that  explore the beauty  of  na­ ture,   but   the  contrast  between  nature's spontaneity  and   man's  repressive  influ­  ence  is not  handled  with  any  insight  or originality:
The  Falls carve  their  track
backward through  crumbling limestone
men  shut  off the  flow

At  one  point, Sparshott avers  that the strength of haiku  is demonstrated by the fact  that  "a  driver  can  write  one  down  / while  waiting for  a stoplight." No  doubt many  people  compose poems at equally mundane  moments, but   they   have   the good  sense  not  to  publish   them.
By contrast, Douglas Lochhead's High
Marsh  Road  is a book that  I read-and
re-read-with pleasure.  In  diary   form, the  work  records   Lochhead's  experience of New Brunswicki's Tantramar Marshes from    September   I to   December   31. Though  he  does  not  shrink   from  cele­ brating the beauty  of the landscape made  famous  by  Sir  Charles  G.  D.  Roberts, Lochhead's real  concern is with  the  am­  bivalent relationship of man  and nature, and  the  poet's  role in  mediating between  them:

I move with  the  harrier. the  mole is my nestling  lover.  roo,ts I trace and  cover  myself with  the  green

BOOKS IN REVIEW



and brown rot.  what face  to  see, to  write   down? each   feature a mockery. a saint unfolds. there
is a  wild  marriage of  detail. who
will  arrange it? it  is my  doing

The world  offers ciphers, and  the poet strives  to decode  them  as best he can:

the  real  round of the  saying never  forms,
but  the  poet  is constantly working, moulding it closer  and  closer  to the  truth

The order and  pattern of life on the marsh  is so pervasively felt  that  the more personal   parts   of  the   diary   seem  oddly out   of  place.   Many  of   the   entries   are weighed   down   by  the   burden  of  fears, doubts and  frustrations in the author's relationships with other people, and  the reader   has  no  little  difficulty  in  making sense of what's going on:

the  continual measuring. wishing for otherwise.   the  great game of  'if'.  no,
it  could  not  be me  but  Harry.   the  hands
.of  the  world  close  on  all  of  us  into
fists  and  we  are  nut  shells

Much more  precise  is Lochhead's  grasp of the  continuity of experience-histori­ cal   and   geographical -that   he  shares with  other writers and  artists  inspired  by the  marsh:

the  total glimpse of  it  as  Roberts
took  to  Tantramar. using  his  telescope
his  eye  revisited. now  I search the same  dykes  for  details of  shore-birds. the  weirs  hold  straggler ducks. it  is good  to  have   such  footsteps

Lochhead  has   two   poetic   gifts:    the ability  to describe nature with  great  pre­ cision  and  the  insight  to  discern  the  hu­ man  meaning in  that  description. When  he attempts to explore psychological prob­  lems,   he   becomes   wordy    and   diffuse, wasting   words    to   explain  silence,   but when  he gives us  the vehicle of the poem without its emotional training-wheels, we travel   the  High   Marsh  Road   with   the best  of  guides.

MICHAEL  DARLING
 TWICE AS NATURAL

MATT COHEN,  Flowers of Darkness. McClelland
& Stewart, $14.95·
THERE ARE  TIMES IN THE HISTORY of the arts  when  the  preoccupations of  writers and  painters seem far apart and it is diffi­ cult  to  make   any  comparisons  between  them.  But  at  other  times  one  can  find analogies  and   resemblances  which  point  to  a  unity  of  consciousness  among   arts  that,  in tenns of the senses through which they   wor ,   are   entirely   different.  For literature, though the  eyes read  it on  the page,  is really  codified  sound,  and  visual only in so far as it sets out to evoke images in the mind's  eye.
Yet  the matter of the mind's  eye is im­ portant,  for,  to  go  a  little  further,  the times when  one senses a unity embracing the  pictorial  and   the  literary arts   of  a period  are  those  when  literature is espe­ cially visual in its creation of images  and therefore little  inclined   to  resort   to  ab­  stract  verbalization, while  the  visual  arts  have  also  turned away  from  abstraction and  extreme formalism to  assume  a  role of  quasi-poetic suggestiveness  linked  to a high  degree  of  figurative representation.
:Such  times  are   often   interesting and vital culturally: consider  the great  period in France, between the revolution of I848 and the Commune of I 870, when  the poet Baudelaire  wrote  so  understandingly on the melodramatic paintings of Delacroix. His  understanding mirrored a pattern of correspondences- to  use  his  own  word
-that  linked  the  more  exotic  poems  of Les Fleurs du Mal  with the multichroma­ tic orientalist visions of  Delacroix's paint­ ings and,  one  step  removed,  with  the  il­ luminated realism of Flaubert's rendering of a half-known past, Salammbo. Tonally, these  works  echo one  to  the  other; the harmony is  rarely  false.
It seems  to  me  that  in  Canada  today we  are  going   through  a  similar   period. Many  of our  most  interesting painters-

I37

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Alex Colville,  Christopher Pratt, Ivan Eyre, Tom Forrestal, the late Jack Cham­ bers-have  been  working  through vari­ ous forms  of  high  realism,  in  which  the technique   is   mimetic-a   quasi-photo­ graphic representation of actuality-but the  tone  is heightened to  that  of  magic illumination and  the images are arranged in  combinations  impossible   in  real  life. Since  few -if  any -of  these artists de­ pend  on  dreams to provide  their subject  matter,  one  cannot  identify   their  work with   Surrealism,  which   was   a  historic  movement  with   limited   aims.  But  cer­ tainly  Herbert Read's  wider  term  of su­ perrealism, suggesting a magnified  aware­  ness of reality,  could  be used  to describe them.
At the same time, many of our novelists have  been  combining a heightened  veri­ similitude in  description,  which  presents the   physical   world    with   preternatural clarity,  with  a  tendency  to create  larger­  than-life figures  caught in  situations that  resemble   those  of  myth  rather  than   of real  life.  One  finds  such  larger-than-life figures   appearing   as   early   as  Howard
O'Hagan's Tay  John   in  1939,  and   re­ peated   later   in  the  characters of  Sheila Watson's The  Double   Hook,  in  the  gro­ tesques  of  Mordecai  Richler's  Cocksure, in the synthetic beings of Beautiful Losers, in  the  exuberant  hollow  men  of  Robert  Kroetsch's novels. But  the placing  of this kind  of figure  in a setting  of high  realism has   perhaps  best   been   done   by  Matt Cohen in  his  novels and   stories  of  the rural   hinterland  of   Kingston,  centred  largely on  the  little  stone  town  of Salem,  which is the scene of his latest fiction, now reviewed,  Flowers  of Darkness.  (Flowers of Darkness:  Les  Fleurs  du  Mal; the in­ heritance is surely  not  accidental.)
Salem  first appeared, a place down  the road, in early Cohen stories about  the drunken Frank brothers that  are included in  Cohen's collection, Nightflights. As a stone  town  built   by  Spaniards  distantly
 linked with Columbus (and thus laterally linked   with  Cohen's Columbus and  the Fat  Lady) it was the  destination  andre­ fuge  for  Theodore Beam  at  the  end   of his  alarming journey  in  Cohen's futurist novel    of   civil   strife   in   Canada,  The Colours   of War. It  was  the  background to  the  Bacchic idyll  of  Upper Canadian rural life, The  Sweet  Second  Summer of Kitty Malone.
Now,  in  Flowers  of  Darkness, Salem moves  into   full  centre, with   its  perfect stone  fac;ades providing the theatrical backdrop for  the  characters to move around, large  as life and  twice as natural. Essentially what   is acted  out  is a  drama of  sin  and   retribution,  with  destiny  ar­ ranged as inexorably as it ever  was in the plays of Aeschlylus  or Sophocles.
Flowers  of Darkness  picks up from  The Colours  of War in  the  sense that  the  old stone  church outside  Salem  where Theo­ dore Beam took refuge in the earlier novel is  the   place   where   the   fatal  action   of Flowers  begins,  where  the grocer  George  Mandowski  looks   through  the   window  and   witnesses   the  seduction  of   jailbait Nellie  Tillson   by  the  Reverend  Gordon Finch   of  the  Church of  the  New  Age. From  this incident both  the  dark  comedy and   the  eventual Gothic tragedy of  the novel,  which  are  almost  interchangeable, take their  courses.
This is  not  really  the  disorderly  war­ shadowed  Salem   of  the  Beams,  though Theodore's  father  Jacob   appears   as  a walkon  character, as does Pat Frank from  The Sweet  Second  Summer of Kitty Ma­ lone. A new  cast is dominant: the  amor­ ous  Reverend   Finch   and   his  beautiful arthritis-crippled wife Maureen; George Mandowski; and  Annabelle and  Allen Jamieson, a young  lawyer  and  his ceram­ icist wife who have gone to earth in Salem until  the  memory of his legal  improprie­ ties can  fade  in  Ottawa.
The  images   of  Salem   in   Flowers   of
Darkness are  dual,   and   reflect  the  divi-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



sion in the hearts of the  people. The Jamiesons see it as a place  of order  where one  can  slow into  a surer  rhythm of life. But behind  its neat stone fac;ades Salem seethes with hatred and  intrigue. It seems to be divided  between  God's  realm, repre­ sented  by Finch's church, and  the devil's realm,   represented  by  the  raffish  hotel, but  the  appearance  is  deceptive, for  the same  forces  of desire  impel  both  realms, and  from  such  roots  the  flowers  of dark­ ness spring.
Similarly  the  orders   which   the  char­ acters   try  to  create   are  undermined  by their  own  natures. Annabelle, thinking of God   who   "made   Adam    out   of  clay," starts   to  create a  great   ceramic  mosaic filled   with   figures   representing  Salem people, and claims  that it will depict  "the  human   condition,  the   agony   and    the ecstacy  . . . of  mankind," while   Finch's  wife Maureen muses that  her husband "in his own twisted way" has "taken the world around it and  squeezed  it until it fitted the shape  of his soul."
But in each  case the attempt to domin­
ate  leads  to  an  enslavement. Finch   sees his  amorous life  as something he is  con­ demned  to,  and   Annabelle,  for  all  her urban  self-assurance, seems  to  be  serving a   sentence  when   she   becomes   Finch's  lover.  Yet  the  real  tragedy   of   the  novel evades   this   central  passionate   relation­ ship,  which  in  the  end  is  revealed  as al­ most  an  irrelevance, an  intrusion of  the city  world  into  Salem's own  turbid  exist­ ence.
Made    pregnant  in   the   old   church,
meek  Nellie  Tillson becomes   the  centre of	the    catastrophe.   Mandowski  and Finch's other enemies seek to destroy him by  persuading her   to  bring   a  paternity suit   against   him.   Finch    thinks   he   has turned   the   tables    on   them    when   he preaches a  passionate sermon   confessing his sins and  the  congregation  hysterically shouts   forgiveness.   But   Maureen-the white-skinned,  red-haired   beauty    who
 once loved horses-has a pride  which cannot endure  such   public   humiliation. She borrows a revolver from Mandowski, kills  Finch,   then   Mandowski,  then  her­ self. Annabelle, the survivor, is left to dis­ cover   that   the  only  refuges   are  private ones, deep in the individual consciousness.
In  one way all  this is very melodrama­ tic,  and  doubtless meant  to  be  so.  The characters, and   the  chiaroscuro of  high lights   and   deep   shadows,   remind    one often   of   Faulkner,  Caldwell  and   other  Southern  novelists,  but  Cohen  is indulg­ ing in high  parody rather than  imitation. And  of   the   two  things   that   strike   one most about  Flowers of Darkness, the first is the luminous clarity of description; one sees Salem  and  its people with  the  vivid and  detailed  sharpness of pre-Raphaelite art.  But  just  as  in  pre-Raphaelite paint­ ing one gets the sense that  the  people represented are entranced in some strange vision  world,  so  in  Flowers  of Darkness the   characters  seem   to   move,   like   the figures  in  an   Aeschylus   tragedy,   along some  dark  road   of  the  inevitable. They are not really free beings. They are shaped to  their  fates  like  Annabelle's clay  pup­ pets.   And   they   destroy   themselves   be­ cause they remain the same. As characters they  do not  grow; at  most  they  are  pro­ gressively revealed to us as the novel  pro­ ceeds.  And  so  they  are  larger   than   life yet in some pathetic way less than  human.
GEORGE WOODCOCK

A SEEKING VOICE

MICHAEL  CARIN,  Five  Hundred   Keys.  Deneau and  Greenberg.
ROGER MITTON,  Master  and  Son.  Robert Hale.
IN  LIFE AS  IN FICTION,  the  sea  exerts  a powerful spell over our imaginations. It offers, perennially, the  opportunity to combine  adventure yarns  with  reflective and  philosophic statements about  the human   condition.  Roger    Mitton  and

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Michael Carin, at  the  beginning  of their writing  careers, are fully aware of the pos­ sibilities  in  an  ocean  setting.  Both  novels are   better  than   "promising."  Carin's is the  better of the  two.
Michael Carin,  age  twenty-two,  is  a
graduate of  McGill University,  a  Mont­ realer  now  working  on his second  novel. His  age  has  exercised  a  major  influence  on  his  material.  His  generation's char­ acter    and    style   becomes   the    "second  cargo" of the Newfoundland fishing boat  which  three  young  men  attempt to  take from  Casablanca to Happy  Adventure, Newfoundland, loaded  with five hundred pounds  of  Moroccan  hashish.
Set primarily in the summer  of 1972, in
Montreal  and   the   Atlantic  ocean,   the novel spans  1968 to 1972, years when  the protagonists were  undergraduates at Mc­ Gill.  Its  early  chapters depict  the radical Left  of  the  late  sixties,  the  retrenchment and  political  apathy of the early seventies, and  the  drug  scene  of the times. The  sea chapters place  personalities  and  philoso­ phies  in  a vise  of fate,  under  a relentless searchlight. Carin attempts more  than  he is yet  capable of  fulfilling.  His  vision  is still  immature, but his craftsmanship is extremely competent  and   his  narrative flow admirable.
Part of the fascination of Five Hundred Keys lies in the triumvirate of central characters, an   Irishman  and   two  Jews. Most flamboyant of the three  is Abraham David, captain of the illegal venture and acknowledged political  leader  of the  stu­ dent  radicals. The thirty-year-old Ameri­  can  draft-dodger plays Ahab  to the  nar­  rator's Ishmael. Abraham David has flam­ ing  red  hair,   a  hawk  nose,  and two  re­ ligions:   politics   and  Orthodox Judaism. He  believes  that  life is ultimately a men­  tal  experience;  that  everything happens for  the  best; and  that  "the  endurance of certain kinds of hardship and struggle  are conducive to the  highest  and  richest  and  most  joyful  consciousness."
 The  sceptical, relatively conservative voice   of  Richard Kaplyn provides a framework of normalcy. Richard is a  re­ luctant conscript to the scheme to smuggle  several   million  dollars' worth of  hashish into   Canada. Carin's tale   is  fast-paced and  well structured. Half-page,  italicized  inserts between the regular chapters effect a  double time  scheme.  In  the inserts,  the boat  is out  of control, drifting helplessly. In   the  main  narrative,  Richard  pursues his  life  in  Montreal and   receives  letters  from  the adventurers with  whom  he  has invested  his  money   but   not  yet  his  life. The  two  time  schemes  slowly  converge, while  the italicized portions become  more philosophic : "Three stranded souls getting lower  on  internal fuel....  Let  me  now, while  my  strength  is flowing,  look  back and   try   to  understand  the   events   that brought me here." He  writes  to a  Mont­ real  friend  to fill time  and  "bequeath" it meaning.
That meaning remains evasive. Clearly,
David's  personal and   political faiths  are rejected as obsessions. Clearly, endurance is  valuable,  as  is  normalcy.  The   para­ meters of  the  latter are  vague,  even  he­ donistic. Yet  Carin writes  with  suspense, and  superb command of  detail.  His char­ acters in  their  thirty-eight-foot "floating coffin"  (a  phrase  Carin takes  from  Mel­  ville)   are  believable, and  evocative.
Master and  Son, Roger   Mitton's  sec­ ond   novel,  is a more  commercial  work. Born  in  Cumbria and  educated in Liver­  pool, Mitton has travelled extensively  and  now  lives in  Vancouver.
Set   on  a  Norwegian  freighter  sailing
from   Ecuador through Jakarta  and   the Suez Canal to the Mediterranean, Master and  Son  is an  adventure story  with  psy­ chological  underpinnings.  The  narrator, messman   Joey  Paulsen, is a  man   afraid  of standing out,  of breaking the  pattern: "it's no  fun   being  different." His  voca­ tion  as artist  and  his distaste  for  brothels set   him   apart.  Interest  centres on   the

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



narrator and  the  captain, who  befriends him.  Hostilities  between   different  crew­ men  build  to a  dramatic climax, a fight between   the  captain and   the  repairman, in which  the captain is accidentally killed with  his own  knife.
Most of the characters harbour bitter memories: the  captain, of a  beloved  first wife who committed suicide; Joey, of his wife's  adultery, glimpsed   through a win­ dow;  and  Ralf,  son  of  the  captain's  first wife, of his father's neglect. Various mys­ terious   happenings  include  the  defacing of Joey's  portrait of  the captain, the lock­ ing of Ralf  in  the cold-storage room,  and ambiguous references to trouble on Joey's last  ship.
A homosexual affair between  Joey  and Ralf  precipitates the  tragic  fight. Joey perceives  the  novel's  theme, that  "people who  are  close, who  love  each  other,  can also  be distant, can  be  ignorant of each other's soul  thoughts...." After  this epi­ phany, Joey  lapses  back  into  a narcissism which    Mitton  shapes   ironically:  hang  onto yourself   and   your  freedom,  "give only  what  you  needed   to  give  and  what  you know  you could  get  back."
The  larger    irony,    and    the    book's
strength, lies in  the  title  and  is revealed in the final scene  between  Joey  and  Ralf. Like   father like  son:  in  stage-managing his father's death, Ralf  is obeying  one of his father's rules,  to follow  through on a decision  once  it  has  been  made. He  is as
 vengeful  as his father (who sought  to kill his  wife's  lover) ,  and   as  manipulative. Joey  resents  being   used  by  Ralf,   yet  is equally  capable of  manipulating his lov­ ers:   master   and   disciple   play  out   the vicious  chain.
The  current  publishing crisis calls  for an emphasis on action, adventure and sex. These   novels  pass  muster.  Both   depict male  worlds,  and   machismo patterns of
sex. Yet  both  are  also more  than adven­
ture  tales.
Michael  Carin and  Roger  Mitton are serious writers who probe contemporary values  and  mores  with  a healthy sceptic­ ism and  at  least  a  modicum of  idealism.  Theirs is  (in  Carin's phrase)   "a  seeking voice."  But  Canada's Moby  Dick has yet to be written.
PATRICIA MORLEY


GOODY FLAT FOOT

LEO SIMPSON,  Kowalski's Last  Chance. Clarke
IIWin, $12.95·
A FRIEND OF  OURS who is a bookseller says she   recently   received   a   warning  letter from   a  group of  leprechauns  living   in New  York.  Mini-People Incorporated  is very upset about Leo Simpson's new novel Kowalski's  Last  Chance,  which   exposes the  infiltration of  Bradfarmw, Ontario, by legions  of  little   people  blown  almost life size by their  North American diet  of



The  Commonwealth Nouel  in  English, a  new  biannual appearing in January 1982, invites  formal,  sociological, and  psychoanalytical criticism; ckecklists  and   bibliographies; book  reviews  on  the  works of Commonwealth novelists;  and  interviews.  Manuscripts, in  dupli­ cate   and   prepared  according to  the  MLA  Handbook, should   be addressed to  the  editor, Sudhakar R. Jamkhandi,  Department of English,  University of Texas,  Arlington 76019. Annual subscription rates  are  $4  (students), $6  (faculty), and  $8  (institutions). Adver­  tising inquiries should  be directed to the editor.



141

BOOKS IN REVIEW



KFC and  Hostess  Twinkies.  Soon  after, she said, Clarke Irwin sent a rebuttal claiming   the   book   is  just   fiction,   no names  changed, and  a real  belly masher to boot.
A cartoon it is, with  the real  Irish  ma­
fia translating the last frontier to bog, but hardly   the  stuff  of  abdominal  disorder. There is too much  to satirize here: police, politics,  megabusiness, bigotry  and  social disorder, and  there  is no time  to sharpen or savour the sting. In Kowalski's Last Chance, to  stretch Simpson's  own  area­ dian  metaphor, the author has chewed off too  much  cud.  He  has  made  Bradfarrow the   microcosm  of   North   American   so­ ciety  and   the   human  potpourri in   fla­ grante   representative  of  every  deviance  from  the neo-nazism of  the sixties to junk food-ism. This fast morality works on the television   soaps  but  not  on  the  printed page. For one thing,  the soaps are free, at least  on  the  surface. The  shocking  price we  pay  for  the  printed  page  these  days makes   anything  short   of   perfection a downright rip-off.
Good  satire   needs  flesh. If there  had been  time  to  make  Kowalsi
horts  real,  the  appropriate emotional  re­ sponses  would   have   been   evoked.  The  idiom comes right off Kowalski's favourite medium, TV,  and  good  lines  sometimes  materialize   like   Kojak's   lollipops,   but they  merely  tease,  leaving the  real  moral  hunger  unsatisfied. We  learn   very  little about Kowalski, except that  he is the per­  fect gentle  knight. It might have been fun to  learn   that   this  sentimental  fool  got sodding  drunk watching his favourite pro­ grams,  littering the  floor  with  beer  cans his  ancient aunties might  have  cut  their feet  on  while   trudging  barefoot   to  the biffy.
Kowalski, the  good cop, has stuffed  his holster  with  kleenex,  giving us an  attrac­ tive alternative to TV violence. Unarmed, he makes  his way  to  the  chapel  perilous, survives  his trial  and  is rewarded with  his
 long  desired   sheep   farm   by  a  multina­
tional  of leprechauns and  fairies.
The leprechauns control everything and they  are  a  benign  force  on  the  tiny  uni­ verse,  where   politics  and  sex  and  police corruption are  getting out  of  hand.  Ko­  walski has intuition. He can tell the differ­  ence  between good  and  evil,  thus  he  is rewarded. The novel  is a cheerful synop­ sis of rath  turned  fruitful  bog, a  realiza­  tion  of  the impulse to green  America  in the  sixties:  paradise is resurrected out  of the  ashes  of  a corrupt urban  suburb, the rath of fairy lore.  (A rath, by the  way, is a  pre-historic  hill-fort.) It is a very  Irish tale.  What Simpson has  failed  to give  us is  the   measure  of  Irish   pain,   which   is essential  to effective  comedy.
Where I went  to school,  a bog was the
place  you  went  when  you  had  to. Simp­ son's  bog is an  anachronism, the  restora­ tion   of  pastoral  innocence,  replacement of  social  disorder with  a  gentler feudal  order. It is the  leprechauns  who  master­ mind   the  return of  plutocratic gardens, managed   and    manicured  by   non-pro­ testants,   to  pastureland  in   the   care   of Kowalski   and   the   reformed  Constable Ryan.   Sheep  farming  is  a   noble   and  gentle art,  a jolly dream, and  some of the realities   are    arcadian,   too.    However, Ryan,  the amoral aryan  youth, is dropped in  to  remind us  that   the  jungle  can  in­ sinuate itself anywhere, even in bogs, even in communes, if there  are  any  left.
The novel  is a  romance, real  cowboy stuff  with  good  guys  and   bad  guys  and the  proper element of magic  provided by the fairy  folk. In a small town  cesspool of racism  and  opportunism, Kowalski is the dark   knight, the   polack   you  know   has what  it  takes  in addition to knightly  vir­ tues,  to  remove  the  sting  from  the  wasps who   control  everything  in   Bradfarrow before   the   arrival  of  the  smallish   fifth column.
The stuff of art  is the disparity between

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



idea  and   reality.  The  leprechauns have the right  vision :

The thought of  building heaven on  earth isn't in  our  minds, but  take   the   auto away and  the  world   breaks  down  into the  ancient pattern again, it  was  a  terrific pattern, agri­ cultural and  artisan communities. I see  your objection, somebody would have to milk  the cows,  but  darn it think of  the fresh  air.  Or how   about  seeing hills   again,  under  those concrete snail   tracks  we  have  all  over   the  landscape,   drinking   from    clear   streams. Detroit  won  it  all,   no  question about that
... Still,  we  can   turn the  game around.

But  we are  quickly  reminded that  we are being  manipulated and   that   idealism   is the  acne  of the  soul,  the  endemic condi­ tion  of  youth.   Perhaps the  little  people are  children after  all, glorious and  tyran­  nical  in  their  optimism,  lacking   the  ex­ perience to turn  joy into art.
This is the weakness  of Kowalski's Last
Chance- no  bitter   ashes  of  experience,
 the leaven  in those  terrible novels of that strange kind  of Irishman J. P. Donleavy.
While reading Simpson's novel, I must admit I was picking  through a biography of  Wallis  and   David.  I   turned  to  the novel in relief;  but  I  think  Kowalski  is a bit  too good  to be true.
LINDA ROGERS


TWO POETS

DIANA HAYES,  Moving Inland. Fiddlehead.
R.  w. FULFORD, Powerland  Minds. Fiddlehead.

LIKE MOST Fiddlehead Books, Diana extremely  valuable outlet for poets, Diana Hayes' Moving  Inland is reasonably well­ designed,   with   a  readable,  competently printed  text.   However,   the   black   and white cover design for this volume  is visu­ ally  drab  and  unappealing and  my  copy




JUST RELEASED
Short Stories of Thomas  Murtha Edited and  with  an  Introduction by William Murtha The Canadian Short  Story Library #   11
Murtha's characters-never outlandish or  shocking-were  drawn with   sensi­ tivity  and   understanding of  the  common human lot.  He  saw  them as  they  were, busy  trying to  see  themselves, to  figure  out  their trivial problems, conquer their fears,  please  those  they  loved  or hoped to love.

15·5 x 23.5  em     280  pages     Price: $7.50


University of Ottawa  Press
65 Hastey Avenue, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada KIN 6N5
Kindly send  me  ................................ copies  of Short  Stories  of Thomas Murtha. NAME ............................................................................................................................ ADDRESS ......................................................................................................................


Cheque or  money  order included.
Kindly make cheque or  money  order payable to  the
UNIVERSITY OF  OTTAWA PRESS



I43

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



of Moving Inland was poorly glued and required a rubber band  to keep  the loose pages  from  falling  out.
The poems deserve  better. There is a brave, delicate, sometimes  tentative, earn­ est,  careful-too  careful? -quality  to
Diana Hayes'  mostly lyrical poems. Mov­
ing  Inland   is  a  collection   of  28  poems
most   of   which,    as   the   titles   suggest ("Three Days:   Saltspring Island," "Pig­ eon on East Pender Street," "Chant of the Cedar Tree," "Deciding On Ross Bay­ Vancouver Island")   are   rooted   in  the author's West  Coast  experience.
"Three  Days:   Salt   Spring    Island"
evokes  Fulford Harbour,  the  quality   of place and even successfully conveys a particular mood.  However,  the  relation­ ship described, one involving  a barely de­ fined  "you" and  a  more  defined  "I," is central to  the  full  success  of  the  poem. Moving, gentle  and tender  as the poem is, it falters  because  of  Ms. Hayes'  reluctance or   inability    to   develop   her   characters more  fully.
"Sestina  For   Superior,  after   the   Ed­ mund   Fitzgerald," is interesting  for  the form   and   tightly   controlled  music.  But "Sestina For  Superior" has a dry, lifeless quality. It reads and sounds-when read aloud -like a classroom exercise.

Is it  that we must  be alone?
Is  it  that the  winds  must  writhe today? I know  I have  forgotten the  path   home Many times  ...

For a sestina,  it is surprisingly unrhythmi­ cal  and   this  is especially  startling given the lyricism and  delicacy one feels in other  poems  by Diana Hayes.
There is a  certain mystery  and  elusive beauty   to   the   opening  of  "Cormorant With  Wings  on  Fire":

I walked out  in  the  early  light along St.  Mary's edge,
the  mist  rising
across  the  dawn-still water.
 or   lines   like   these   from   Diana  Hayes' "The Return":

you  sank  beneath
the  gulf's angry current.
I resurrect you - my  hands
sifting sand
become an   hourglass for  your  return

On  the  whole,  this is a moving,  deeply felt  and  varied   (in  terms  of forms,  voice and   style)   first  collection.  At  her   best, Diana Hayes  has a fine lyrical  talent and what  is most striking in Moving  Inland  is her ongoing search for her own true centre and   the  attempt-and the  ability,   too, in  some  of  these  poems-to write  and sing from  that  centre.

* 	*
Fulford's "Capone Poems," which make up  one  half  of  Power/and  Minds, open:

Saluto
to  death
the  feast
for  death. Friends, dinner's done and   bullets sink  like  a harpoon.

Bastards!

There is  a  certain  driving  energy   here that  leads  the reader on. The "Capone Poems" have  a  quality of  pop  violence. They exaggerate and  evoke,  as does  the movie   "Some Like  It Hot," the  larger and, in some cases, zanier-than-life images of that  not precisely innocent period  in American history.  The Capone poems, as the title suggests, are about Prohibition, gangsters, revenge,  sex, pimps,  murderers and  American history.
This  27-page free-form poem  is loosely organized and  has a number of prose pas­ sages.  Here and   there   Fulford  makes  a certain wry observation:

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Generally speaking, gangsters are  very  gen­
erous people about things that  don't count.

Born and  raised  in Chicago, I have  my own  impressions of AI Capone -part of that City's proud mythology-and am naturally intrigued with  Fulford's mostly sombre,  documentary treatment and  ac­ count  of the reign of AI Capone. Unusual material for  the  Fiddlehead  series.
The poet's   treatment involves  a  com­ bination of somewhat impressionistic nar­  rative,

The meat hand  pulls trigger in  the  Adonis Social  Club basement. Again again again bottles explode in
a blood  glass.
Perfect, the  aim leaves  the  stench
for  cool  harlot night.

plus  first-person biography:

I was bartender and  bouncer when  Frank Galluccio got   me.   Three  scars, all  on   the left:  four   inches, two  and   a  half,   another the   same.   See? I  powder my   face   like   a puffball. Frank's sister  was  the  cause.  Bitch!
... Frank works  for  me  now.

Fulford advances his action sometimes with a briskly paced  series of stark  images as in a newsreel.

I 9 I 9 -Chicago welcomes  Capone. New  vice  for  new  time.
Big  Jim   gone  soft  ...

The  presentation is  stark   and   func­ tional.   The   "Capone  Poems"  are  pop­  newsreel-documentary with  a  mean,  sar­ donic   cartoon  flavour.  Chicago-born,  I say this as one  who  has  written for  years out  of the conviction  that there is poetry  in material of the kind  Powerland Minds deals  with.  But  Fulford is missing  some­ thing.    His   tonal  range    is  limited.  He writes out  of  a kind  of tunnel-vision. The  "Capone   Poems"  are   not   placed   in  a larger   context,  though  there   are   refer­  ences for example to Viet  Nam:
 But  even  then those  young were  practising for  VietNam

But  it  seems  to me  that  a  poem  dealing with history and  a subject as rich and "charged" as this, a pop-epic in a sense, a meditation  on  violence   and   power   and greed,  on  insane  and  random killing,  on the ultimate business ethic and  survival  of the  meanest   and  greediest   and  most  or­ ganized-survival that  depends for gang­  sters too on good bookkeeping and reliable  accountants-that Fulford, for all his skill and   daring, might   have  gone  further. I admire the poem, am fascinated by it, but curious,  too, why it isn't  funnier. Fulford, it  strikes  me,  hasn't  picked   up  on  that  sense  of  the  absurd, the  delight   in  con­ tradiction  that   underlies -fellow  Cana­ dians, you may  not  like this -an  Ameri­  can  discussion  of  the  same  material. If there  is  zany  poetry  in  that   old  classic, "Some   Like  It Hot," why  so  limited   a tonal  range  here?
Yet  Fulford  is amazing. What  a  crazy poem!
Fulford's "South Pole Poems" are open, accessible and  eminently readable -and far  more  musical  than  the  "Capone Poems."

The water is copper and  saffron for
ice that pushes
men  below the  sea.

All  day  we  lay  in the  pack  like
seals  ...

Certainly an   odd   combination  (AI  Ca­ pone  and  Beardmore Glacier) to put be­ tween  the  covers  of  one  book.

ROBERT SWARD





145

BOOKS IN  REVIEW


MOWAT AT WAR

FARLEY MOWAT,  And  No  Birds Sang.  McClel- land  & Stewart.
READERS   OF    And   No  Birds  Sang  who were  active   participants in  the  1939-45 war  cannot fail  to  be  impressed  by Mowat's brief account of his own experi­ ences  in  it.  At  the  same  time  they  may feel  that   many   of  the  events  which   he portrays so graphically might  better  have been forgotten. They bring backi too many unpleasant memories. Those  who had  no association  with  the conflict  may think  of the book only as a further example  of the futility  of war, but they will be fascinated by its story  and  even  excited  by it, for  it is one  of the  best accounts of part  of the war  in  Italy  by  one  who  has  personally  felt the  fears and  terrors  of conflict.
As a very young man  the author joined the  Hastings and   Prince   Edward  Regi­ ment   when  he  found   that   he  could  not get  into   the   Air  Force.  This   regiment,
affectionately known  as  the  Plough  Joc­ keys, came  to have a very fine reputation. Mowat himself wrote a very commendable historical  account  of  the   Regiment  in
1955. He  was encouraged in  the  first  in­ stance  to  join this branch  of the army by his father who  gloried  in  the  Infantry as the  "Queen of Battle." The  author's ex­ periences  and  feelings  up  to and  after  he gained  the  King's Commission and  up to the end of 1943 are portrayed in the story in  much  detail but  not  without grim  hu­ mour. "I  believed," he says, "that every healthy  young   man   was  duty-bound  to take  up arms  against the Fascist  plague." This same opinion was likely the thought which prompted some thousands of others to enlist  in  His Majesty's Service.
And  so he set out,  the  modern knight, to fight  the  battle against  oppression  and to  make   the  world  safe  for  democracy. "Dulce et Decorum est, Pro Patria Mori." In  the  early  years  of the  war  he became
 


a reinforcement officer to the Canadian Army  and  eventually joined  his regiment as  a   lieutenant.   Reinforcement  officers were  there to  take  the  place  of those  in­ valided  out   or  lcilled  and   their   tenure was  usually  short  once  action  began.
In  his story  he traces  the  long series of events  leading up  to  the  landing on  the beach  of Sicily on July  10, 1943. He  tells about the  training camps,  the  battle  drill schools,  and  the  long  forced  training marches. He  talks about his senior officers with  little  admiration, about the  loss of his  virginity to  a  land  Army  girl  by  the name of Phillipa, about the  preparations in  England for  the  battle yet to come - but  always  he  romantically clings  to  his vision  of  the  great  cause.  He  writes  to  a girl  in  Canada:  "we  are  about   to  quit the  play  acting and  begin  living  the  role worked   and  prepared for  so long."  It is only  when  he  gets  on  board  ship  on  the way  to  the  landing in Sicily that  he feels "a jagged shiver of self-doubt ... between my  ribs."  And  a  little  later,  "although I had  just seen the first of my comrades die
I had  not  yet seen the fact  of death: and so was fearless  still."
'A few days later,  after  the stormy land­ ing  and   the  long  marches in  the  brutal heat  without water,  some disillusionment begins :  "A  sudden  flaming rage  against my  father for  having inveigled   me  into the clutches of  the  Infantry-the Queen of	Battle."    And	Montgomery's   unit prompts him  to  write: "It was  not  God who    came,    it   was   his   self-appointed deputy-General Bernard Montgomery."
And  so he goes on  through the  tortur­ ous   days   and   nights   up   the   hills   and  mountains of  Italy.  More  and  more  the conflict   dismays   him.   "The   desire   for action  which  had  been  my ruling  passion since   enlistment  had   collapsed    like   a pricked   balloon  -to  be  replaced  by  a swelling  sense of  dread."
At Assoro "that  unforgettable fortress"
the author plays a conspicuous part  in the

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



battle   but  the  moaning minnies  (Nebel­ werfers) bombardment shakes him greatly and  his previous exhilaration  disappears. And  yet  he  comments that  "it  was only one more step  towards spiritual exile and  again   the  regiment  grew  strong  because of it: becoming more and  more  the living home." He  now  finds  himself  in  a  new job in  command of the  Intelligence Sec­ tion. Here he no longer  leads a platoon  in action but  has continually to make  recess and  to liaise with  adjoining units. Indeed the   tasks  which   he  was  apparently  re­ quired  to do  would  seem  to  be  well  be­ yond  the  normal duties   of  an  1.0.  His commander,   Tweedsmuir,   is   wounded, and  is succeeded by Lt.-Col. Kennedy. (In  spite  of this  officer's  many  brave  exploits the author thinks  little  of  him.  It is note­ worthy   that   in  his  historical account of the  Regiment he extols  his colleagues  but in   this   personal   history   he   continually downgrades them.)  He himself  frequently gets  lost   and   at   one   time   succeeds   in getting the  whole  battalion lost. At times his superior officers must have been almost driven out of their minds by the erratic behaviour of Squib (the  author) and  his intelligence platoon. His  gradual  disillu­ sionment with  the  whole  undertaking is accompanied by an ever increasing hatred of the "brass" and  of the army  and  of the war   itself.  He   writes   a  letter   home   in which  he  says,  "I  was  alone   . . .  relent­ lessly alone   in  a  world   I never  knew."  Christmas Eve on  the outskirts of Ortona was the  ultimate:  "Black  nauseous  dread  was  the  burden of  that  livid  night."
The story  is  remarkable in  a  number of ways. First  of all  it  is astonishing that thirty-three years  later he  can  remember and describe  so vividly  those events. He speaks of his journal and  his letters  home to Canada. As censorship was normally quite  severe  it  is a  little   difficult   to  see how  these were managed but  then  maybe the  regulations were  not  followed  so seriously  by  the  Plough Jockeys.  In  any
 event those who know can vouch for the accuracy  of the  events  and  conditions.
Secondly  it is almost  incredible that  the
author was able  to survive  unscathed for so long.  Reinforcement officers,  particu­ larly  junior  officers, did  not last very long as a rule. The fact  that  he  was  not  in a rifle company for  much  of  the  time  later  on may have helped somewhat, but as the
1.0. he was  under constant fire  and  his survival   seems   almost    incredible -no wounds,  no  jaundice, no  malaria, only  a touch  of dysentery.
:Yhirdly it  is remarkable that  a  young man  who  was apparently widely  read - he  quotes  some  of  the  First  World  War poets:    Wilfred    Owen,  Robert  Graves, Rupert  Brooke -could   have   had   such naive   notions   about  what   war   was  all about. The  title of his book is most appro­ priate-but an  even  more  appropriate one might  have  been  "A  Romantic Goes to  War."  For   many   months  he   seems astonished  to find that  people are actually maimed  and  killed  in conflict.
Fourthly, he  still  appears in  1979  to think that the officers of his particular regiment and  indeed  almost  all whom  he served   under   were  somewhat  less  than what  they should  have  been. His idealism today continues in spite of the fact that  he must  now have  surely  learned  that  this is an imperfect world and  that  war is always chaos  and  destruction. Perhaps this same idealism   appears  in  some   of  his  other books.  In  Never  Cry  Wolf  his superiors and   his  organization  are   criticized   se­ verely. In The  Dog Who  Wouldn't  Be all humans seem to be of an  inferior  nature. Only  in  his  serious  History  of  the  Regi­ ment   does  he   allow   himself   somewhat grudgingly to praise  others.
And No Birds Sang is a powerful  stozy, even  though the  narrative ends  abruptly and  without explanation after  the  battle of Ortona, almost  six months  after  the landing on  the  Beach,  but  some  months before  the  end  of  the  Italian campaign.

147

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Some  readers have   suggested  that  Mo­ wat's   book  reads   more  like  fiction  than fact.  But  those  who  were  there  can  bear witness  that   the  events,   the  conditions, and  the  extreme difficulties  are  real.

JOHN FRANKLIN  MCLEAN

,
LA R, E,ALITE
QUEBECOISE

JEAN-MARIE  POUPART,  Le  Champion  de  cinq heures moins  dix. Lemeac,  n.p.
JEAN-PAUL  FILION,  Cap  Tourmente.  Lemeac, n.p.

JEAN-MARIE  POUPART nous offre son jour­ nal de bord,  veritable "scrapbook"  (com­  me disait  Barthes) qui suit le fil des jours et  des ·ev•enements, la  plupart  apparem­ ment  futiles.  Il y consigne 11eflexions et in­ formations variees   sans  ordre   de  p11efe­ rence ni de valeur semble-t-il  tout d'abord et la disposition  de ce recueil  serait  done uniquement  dicree  par  les circonstances. Ce  livre  puise  au  quotidien et  au  banal  son materiau brut  que l'auteur nous rend dans un  humeur ala fois grave  et  leger, d'ou  le sous-titre "traduit du goguenard." Poupart sait  jouer  avec et sur les mots
et tirer les effets de ses goguenardises. Une telle entreprise constitue bien  a elle seule une gageure car  qui  peut  pretendre pren­ dre la vie comme une  partie  de tennis ou de  squash,   quel  ·ecrivain  peut  p11etendre qu'il   pourra  'renvoyer la  balle'  sans  de­
faillir et sortir  "champion," c'est-a-dire indemne de la lutte  avec le banal  comme nous l'indiquent le titre  et la couverture?
Bien  sur,  on  l'a  vite  compris,  aucune
partie, quel  que  soit  le  jeu, ne se gagne sans  etre  calculee et  pensee  et  tout  dans
ce  texte  obeit  .a  !'organisation du  carnet
intime. Rien  de gratuit en somme, l'ecri­
vain est au  travail. Des remarques les plus triviales  et les plus insipides aux reflexions sur les artistes, les ecrivains,  les critiques,
 Poupart n'en   joue  pas  seulement il  s'en joue,  rien  n'echappe .a sa  plume.   D'ail­ leurs  s'il  juge  ce  n'est   jamais  mecham­ ment  mais  bien  plutot sainement; subtile  il  l'est  avec  fraicheur,  jamais  de  faiSon mesquine et  de  sa  plume  il s'en  sert  en effet comme d'une raquette, avec vigueur. De plus, s'il  juge c'est  aussi pour  se juger lui-meme d'une maniere continuelle et ce journal  intime n'est  au  fond  qu'un p11e­ texte  qui lui  permet de  reflechir   sur  sa fonction d'ecrivain et sur son •ecriture. Vepigraphe  en   est  temoin   et   plusieurs fois l'auteur revient  sur  ce sujet.  Ce qu'il aimerait c'est  "ecrire comme  le chien secoue  ses  puces," "pouvoir  ne  pas  [s] e retenir," en  fait  ·ecrire  sur  tout   et  sans etre  arrete par  les restrictions conscientes et  inconscientes, par  les limites  de la lan­ gue.  Il  souhaite, croyons-nous, une  ecri­ ture   qui   ferait  une  grande part  au  lu­ dique, c'est-a-dire a la libre association et c'est  cela  sans  doute   que  tente  son  livre Le Champion. ...
Son  ecriture se  veut  flot  continu,  de­
ferlement,  plus   de   barrieres  ni   linguis­ tiques   ni  psychologiques, et   si   l'auteur s'est  rendu compte que  la  libre  associa­ tion   n'est   pas   plus  libre  que  n'importe queUe  autre forme   d'ecriture,  le  trivial  neanmoins, "ces  dechets du  quotidien," passe  en  effet  le  plus  souvent  la  rampe, car  un  tel  ouvrage  reserve  a  son  lecteur  de nombreuses surprises; il croyait s'amu­ ser, il rira mais il se surprendra aussi bien souvent  en  train  de  penser.
Les preoccupations de l'auteur sont des pl'eoccupations d'•ecrivain plutot que de Quebecois et si la realite quebecoise reap­ parait c'est parce  que l'auteur vit au Que­ bec  et  deambule dans  les  rues  en  regar­ dant les gens, rien de moins, rien de plus. Rien   non  plus  de  specifiquement quebe­ cois au  niveau  de la langue  si ce ne sont les 11eflexions et les  jeux de mots que !'au­
teur  fait  lui-meme a partir de  certaines
expressions quebecoises.
Le troisieme  roman de Jean-Paul Filion

BOOKS IN REVIEW


est une belle lettre  d'amour a Yo sa com­ pagne  qui depuis plus de dix  ans partage sa vie, ses joies, ses reussites mais aussi ses tristesses,  ses  deceptions et  ses  angoisses celles  de   la   creation  avec   la   solitude,  l'isolement  qu'elle  exige,  les  contraintes qu'elle  fait  peser sur l'ecrivain et ceux qui l'entourent. Se  roman-lettre,  cette  chan­ son d'amour  (puisqu'il  ne  datera aucune de  ses lettres)   avec  ses  refrains et ses re­
dites,  pourquoi l'.ecrit-il?-Yo est   a ses
d%es, leur  amour n'a  rien  de platonique,
ils ont  un  fils Mann qui  fait  leur  joie. II dit preferer le langage ecrit, s'y sentir  plus libre  mais surtout apres  s'etre  libeve dans Saint-Andre Avellin.  Le  premier cote du monde  du  trop  plein  des emotions de son enfance, apres  avoir ecrit les Murs de Montreal  ce livre  de  delivrance, ce livre aussi qui effraya  sa compagne, il est neces­ saire  qu'il  fasse le point  en  se  definissant
par  rapport a celle  qui  a  assiste  a cette delivrance tout  en restant a l'ecart et qu'il rassure,  qu'il  s'explique, a propos  par ex­
emple  de cette  mauvaise conscience  qui s'eveille  en lui  des qu'il  ne noircit  pas de papier et  qui  l'empeche de  s'abandonner
au  plaisir  de  vivre  et  le conduit a l'hopi­
tal.  Mais  surtout ce  livre  lui  permet de
vivre  intens•ement  le  present, d'entrer en lui, d'elargir sa vision du monde, d'agran­ dir  sa maison.  D'ailleurs immediatement, par  !'·evocation  de  son  quotidien, il par­
vient  a nous faire  partager son amour  des
etres  et  des  choses,  a faire   renaltre  en
nous  notre  amour des etres  et des choses.
En effet si J.-P. Filion  n'innove pas il sait se faire  suivre  dans  cette   digression   par sa sincerite,  par  sa simplicire, par  tout  ce qu'il  sait evoquer d'amour, de chaleur humaine,  parce   qu'il   la  situe   aussi  sur fond  tragique, le Cap Tourmente, parce qu'il  sait etre  realiste,  l'amour charnel est evoque avec  son  juste  poids, sa plenitude et  sa  tendresse,  aucune ombre, les corps sont   beaux  de  leur  age  et  les  gestes  de leur  jeunesse  eternelle; mais  la  vie  y est presente   aussi  avec  sa  fatigue  plein  les
 
reins, le bois est rugueux, la pierre  blesse, avec son ennui, la routine d'un  travail mercenaire, pour  boucler  les fins de mois, les seances  extenuantes du  lancement de ses ouvrages.  J.-P. Filion  sait  encore  lier
son bonheur familial et  intime  a d'autres bonheurs,  .a celui de F·elix Leclerc, comme
au   Cap   Tourmente  l'amour  et  la   sin­ oerite s'y amarrent. Ce qui  n'etait qu'une digression,  sans  doute   Filion  etait-il   oc­
cupe  a d'autres grandes choses, d'ou l'ho­
pital,  la maladie, est devenu  l'essentiel,  le
banal,  le personnel est devenu  l'universel.
Par ce roman  sans doute  J.-P.  Filion a­ t-il aussi tenu  cette  promesse,  cette  lettre qu'il   veut   "longue,  interminable,"  l'est, toute  poesie echappe au  temps. Et si Cap T ourmente lui avait  permis  de differer  le moment de  la  solitude, car  Cap  Tour­  mente  est  aussi  un  carnet  intime,   il  lui avait    permis    aussi   de   faire    le   plein d'amour et  de  tendresse.

DAVID   F. ROGERS


PRIMER vs. PRINCE

SELWYN  DEWDNEY,  The  Hungry Time. James
Lorimer,  $6.gs.
BRUCE   KIDD,   Who's  a  Soccer   Player?   James
Lorimer,  $6.gs.
RUSSELL  HAZZARD, It  Scares   Me   but   I  Like It:   Creating Poetry    with    Children.   Fitz­ henry  &  Whiteside, $6.gs.
CHRISTIE HARRis,  The Trouble with  Princesses.
McClelland & Stewart, $g.gs.
MARIUS  BARBEAU  and  MICHAEL  HORNYANSKY, The Golden Phoenix and  Other Fairy  Tales from  Quebec. Oxford,  $4.50.
BoTH SELWYN DEWDNEY's The Hungry Time  and  Bruce  Kidd's Who's  a Soccer Player? are  texts  in  the  James   Lorimer "Kids   in  Canada" series.  They   are,  the publisher  announces, specifically designed "for children five and  up." Though one certainly  applauds any publisher  who recognizes   the  uniqueness  of  this  audi­ ence, even a cursory  examination of  these

149

BOOKS IN REVIEW



two  texts  suggests  that   the  actual  result is not  so laudable. Rather than  respond­ ing imaginatively to  the specific  needs  of the   young   reader,  the  publishers   have chosen  to reduce the children's book to a formulaic  exercise -totally   predictable in   language,   style   and,   unfortunately, even content. The texts  offer extraordin­ arily limited vocabularies and  virtually no variety  in syntactical structures, thus pro­ viding   no  challenge  whatsoever  to  the child  confronting, for  the  first  time,  the wonders  of language. Note, for example, this  description in  the  Kidd   text:   "She was a  big woman  with  big shoulders and a  big  face.  She  had  a  big  head  of  hair. She   had   big  feet.   The   only  thing   she didn't have  was a big smile." Surely there must   be  some  synonym  for  "big," even in the world  of the five-year-old.
Canadian  children's literature has  al­
ways been  somewhat dwarfed by the mammoth number of children's texts pro­ duced  yearly  in  the  United  States.  Des­ pite this, Canadian texts have always pos­ sessed  a  certain  dignity;   in   particular, they  have  been  well  written, challenging the child  with  new linguistic worlds rather than    simply   catering  to  existing   ones. Thus   the   decision   of  major   Canadian publishing  firms  to  print   texts  like  those in the "Kids in Canada" series is particu­ larly  disturbing because  it  is so clearly  a step backward.
Predictably,  perhaps,  the   two   books from  this series under review also respond to  the  need  for  more  varied  heroines  in
children's literature in an  equally formu­ laic  manner. Rather  than  creating truly realistic  modern heroines, they simply re­ tell  a  boy's  adventure  story,  inserting a young  girl  into  a  traditionally masculine  role.  In  this form,  the  heroines are  diffi­ cult to accept as believable  human beings. They do  not become  valid arguments for a more expansive view of the role of wo­ men  in  society.  Instead they  are  simply boys  dressed   up  as  girls -they  remind
 me, in fact, of those dolls which toy manufacturers   produced   in   the    early
1g6o's  to answer  the growing  demand for Negro dolls. In all their wisdom, the manufacturers simply dyed  white  dolls black.
In  The  Hungry  Time, the  heroine is a
Mississauga   Indian girl  named   Morning Sky who saves her  brother from  an itiner­ ant  bear,  thus  winning the grudging pro­  mise from  her  father that he  might  some day  take  her  on  a real  hunt. Despite the cultural  improbability   of   a   girl   being taken  on such  a hunt, the story does pro­  vide  the child  with  a reasonably good  in­ sight   into   Mississaugan  society,   largely through    the    excellent  illustrations   of Olena Kassian.
The answer   to  the  question asked  by Bruce  Kidd's Who's  a Soccer Player? is: anyone, but   particularly little   girls  who don't think! they  are  very good  at  sports. To   be  fair   to  Kidd, an   internationally known  athlete himself,  this is not  just a formulaic "little-girl-makes-good" sports story.   Rather,  it  argues   tl1at  one   must realize, in sports,  that  winning isn't every­ thing,    a   point    Kidd  has   emphasized throughout  his  literary  career. The  real protagonist in his tale  is not  little  Louise,
the  girl  who   makes   the   team,   but   her coach,  June Kennedy, a monstrous  wo­ man  frighteningly portrayed by illustrator Jerrard Smith as a modern Medusa. Ulti­ mately  June does  learn  true   sportsman­ ship,  of  course,  but  only after   her  team teaches her a great deal about what should be important in children's sports: playing, not  winning. It  is most  unfortunate that  Kidd  was  forced  to  tell  his  tale  within  the constrictions of the "Kids in Canada" format.
Unlike the "Kids in Canada" books, Russell Hazzard's It Scares Me but I Like It seeks to expand rather than  restrict  the child's love of language, by providing an impressive exploration  of  the  real  value
of  poetry  for  and  by the  child.  The sub-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



title of the bok clearly  announces its over­ all  purpose: Creating  Poetry  with  Chil­ dren.   In   his   text,   Hazzard    chronicles twenty-four   actual  poetry   classes  with young children at Counterpoint School in Ottawa, the sole purpose of which  was to make  the  students aware of the  joy that  is  inherent  in  all  poetry -to  fulfill,  as Dennis  Lee suggests in his excellent Fore­ word,  "the impulse  to tell the truth about  being  alive."
And  it  is difficult  to  argue  with  Haz­ zard's  results.  The children seem  to learn  to  appreciate  poetry   and,   more  impor­ tantly,   to  compose  poems  that  truly  de­ serve   examination  in   their   own   right.  One  should  note, however, that Hazzard's definition of  poetry  may  be a  bit  broad. He feels that  the essence of poetry  is "the evocative immediacy  of   the   individual imagination, the  sudden  involvement of the  internal  imaginative  landscape with the  external world."  Some might   argue  that  such "evocative immediacy" may also be   present    in   the   best   of   imaginative prose,  and  some  of  the   poems  included do  appear to  be  more  imaginative than  poetic.    But   such   distinctions  may   be rather  trivial,  for  not  only  is  Hazzard's defense  of  children's poetry  eloquent, it also provides a proven method for teach­ ing  it  successfully.
The two  final  boos
both welcome  additions to the varied collections of Canadian legends  that  have recently    been   published.  The   Trouble with Princesses is yet another collection  of Indian legends  from  Canada's most proli­ fic story-teller, Christie Harris,  and it  is clearly   one   of  her   finest  achievements. The  seven   tales   she   recreates  consider various  problems faced by old-world prin­ cesses in various  Northwest Coast  Indian legends.   Fittingly,  Mrs.   Harris  includes  a brief introduction to each  legend,  point­ ing  out  its clear  similarity to more  tradi­ tional  legends and, by association, its obvi­ ous  universality.
 Those    familiar   with    Mrs.    Harris's earlier  collection will recognize  many characters; even  the  omnipresent  Mouse Woman  makes  a few  token  appearances. And the collection does, as Mrs. Harris hopes, remind the audience of a proud people  and   their   stories,   tales   that   not only entertained, but  which  promulgated sacred  rules of life that  constantly remind man  "what happened to a proud, wealthy people when it forgot to be worthy of its wealth  and  importance." Douglas Tait's illustrations  for   this   text   are   brilliant, some of the best work of this truly gifted illustrator. A wonderful marriage of text and  illustrations.
Marius Barbeau   and   Michael  Horny­ ansky's  The  Golden  Phoenix  and  Other Fairy Tales  from Quebec  is  not  really  a new  book,  but   a   paperback  edition  of their  well-received   I 958   text,  which should  ensure   a  wider   dissemination  of
these legends.
The collection  includes, as Barbeau  tells us in  his brief  Afterword, six fairy  tales, one episodic story, and  one  fabliau. Orig­ inally collected  firsthand by Barbeau from Quebec raconteurs, the  tales are  joyfully retold  by Hornyansky with  a humour and vitality   that  distinguish  them   from   the comparatively   bland   collection  of  fairy tales so popular today. What immediately attracts one  to  the  tales  is their  irrever­ ence, their  refusal  to accept the solemnity and    predictability   normally    associated  with   the  fairy   tale   tradition.  Here   be­ headed   lions  pick  up  severed  heads  and  comment wearily  on the sorry lot of mon­  sters.  Here  princesses  are  not  always  re­ deemed  or  even  rescued. The Princess  of Tomboso, for  example,  as  a  reward  for her   constant  thwarting   of   her   hero's  plans, is left  not only  unrescued but  with a twelve-inch  nose. Here,  when  you need a  prince  to  marry  one  of  the  hordes  of princesses  traditionally remaining at  the end  of  tales,  you simply  appropriate one

BOOKS IN REVIEW



-one who  at  least looks like a prince  in disguise  even  if he  isn't  one.
'The most delightful tale of the series is
a  marvelous  retelling of  the  traditional fabliau, "Jacques the  Woodcutter." In  it, Jacques discovers  his  wife  Finette's  infi­ delity  by hiding in  an  old  wicker  basket while she cooks an elaborate meal for his rival,   Prince  Bellay.  Ostensibly   the   in­ truder is only interested in Finette's culin­ ary expertise, but  one  suspects  some  se­ vere editing here. Note, for example, the prince's little  verse  on  his paramour:
There is a good  woman lives  in  a  wood
(Savoury dumplings and  pigeon  pie)
Who bakes  and  fries  as a good  wife should: Savoury dumplings and   pigeon   pie -
If Jacques won't eat   them,  why  can't I?

In a sense, these last three texts directly respond  to the formulaic approach of the "Kids in  Canada" series.  Hazzard's  ex­ ploration of the  linguistic  wonders  of  the child's  world  and  Harris's and  Hornyan­ sky's carefully etched  recreations of chil­ dren's legends suggest how alive and  how truly  exciting  a  children's book  can  be. We  need  not  retreat to  Dick  and  Jane primers. Surely the children deserve more.

KIERAN  KEALY

THE PLACE
OF EXPERIMENT

GEOFF   HANCOCK,   ed.,   Magic   Realism.   Aya
Press,  $g.oo.
DOUGLAS DAYMOND and  LESLIE  MONKMAN, eds.,
Stories  of Quebec. Oberon, $15; pa.  $6.gs.
No STORY IN EITHER Magic Realism or Stories of Quebec  was written  more  than forty  years  ago,  yet  the  two  anthologies could scarcely  be less alike. Their only similarities reside in their exclusively Can­ adian content and   the  fact  that  neither collection  is what  its title suggests it might  be.
 Magic  Realism purportedly offers are­ presentative selection  of stories written in a  single  narrative mode,   but  is  in  fact better  characterized  as  a   collection   of accomplished contemporary short  fiction, written by both  anglophone  and  franca­ phone  Canadians, largely drawn from  the pages  of  editor  Geoff   Hancock's Cana­ dian  Fiction  Magazine, and   typified  by an  experimental spirit  evident  in  any  or all of theme, style, structure, or mode. The book  is apparently designed  both  for  the general reader with  an  interest in current trends in Canadian fiction, and for the academic market  (hence the  erudite  in­ troduction that  bears regrettably little re­ lation  to well over  half  the stories  in  the anthology) .
Stories of Quebec  deceives  in so far  as its  title  leads  readers to  expect  that   this will be an addition to the profusion  of authentic regionalist anthologies issued of late,  for  the  'region' it  attempts to  cap­ ture  is artificially defined  by the exclusion of  all  francophone  writing.  The editors  attempt to  justify this decision by making  what  seems to me an unconvincing appeal to  a  "tradition of  anglophone fiction  set in Quebec." The stories are characteristic­ ally  conservative, some  even  predictable, in  theme,  mode,  structure, and  style, des­ pite  the editors' claim  of "great diversity" in  the  latter two  aspects.  Realism  is  un­ questionably dominant in both  the choice of subject matter and  mode  of  presenta­ tion,  though Hugh Hood  may  claim  the special  modifier "moral" for  his  realism,
and  Mavis  Gallant may  deserve  to  have "psychological" attached  to  hers.  The variation in structures is unremarkable, with  the  exceptions of  Gallant's  "Satur­ day"  and  Clark Blaise's "Extractions and  Contractions." Stories of Quebec  is likely to   have   little   interest   for   the   general  reader, and  small  enough appeal to  the academic community.
Magic Realism provides the more stim­
ulating experience, though  the  reader  is

BOOKS IN REVIEW



apt  to  be  puzzled   by  the  host  of  defini­ tions  of, and  statements about,  the  term "magic realism" which   the  introduction provides.  After  stating that it is "a  blend of  fantasy   and   everyday   reality"  Han­ cock  then   goes  on  to  obscure   the  basic difference between the  term  as it is used in art criticism and  as it is used by a group  of  Latin  American  practitioners  of  the narrative art.  The one takes commonplace objects  and  looks  at  them  in such  inten­ sity or detail  or in such  relationships that  the objects assume  a fantastic reality; the other  achieves   a  vision  of  reality   which includes  the  fantastic by placing mysteri­ ous  characters and   strange  events  in  an entirely   commonplace  setting.   The   one begins with  the ordinary and  seeks to dis­ cover  elements  of the  fantastic in it; the other  takes  the  apparently fantastic as a primary constituent of the  reality  it seeks to represent.
Jack  Hodgins's delightfully comic and mildly   satiric   story   "The  Plague   Chil­ dren" makes   a  fine  opening   piece  for the  collection, for  if the  anthology has  a truly   magic   realist   story   in   the   Latin  American tradition it is this one. Further­ more,   the  importance of  voice  and   the primacy   of   story   that   Hancock  rightly  maintains are significant  features of magic realism as a narrative art  are  readily illus­ trated  by  this  story.  The  setting is reso­ lutely ordinary, the narrated events comic­ ally fantastic, though violence  breaks  the comic  surface at  intervals in  a  manner characteristic of the  tradition. Hodgins's marathon  jogger,  whose  tip-to-tip  island run  signals  the onslaught of the plague  of magic   mushroom  pickers,   turns   out   to have magic  powers  himself,  powers which are described in a tone of such equilibrium there  can  be  no doubting the  occurrence of the  events  narrated  however fantastic in  nature. The  people-hating bull  that Angel  Hopper sets on  the  trespassing pickers   is  miraculously  halted  in   mid­ charge and   offers  obeisance  to  a  rusty-
 bearded, sweatbanded figure, apparently the marathoner: "This fellow has only  to life his arm  and  the bull nearly  breaks  his neck  trying  to  put  on  the  brakes.  When he comes to a halt  his front  legs give out and  he thuds  to his knees. For  a moment it  appears to  Hopper  as  if  the   bull  is bowing,  perhaps to kiss that  outstretched hand." This  same  youth   will  later   turn up  inexplicably in Dennis Macken's bed, so  completely   at   home   there    that   his clothes  all  hang  in  Macken's closet,  and he will single-handedly stop Macken's mock-epic  tractor charge against  the pickers.
Other stories  in  the  anthology, albeit well  written, fit  the  title  description less well. Lawrence Mathews's "The Death of Arthur Rimbaud" at  first  appears to  be in a magic realist mode, for the twentieth­ century  narrator begins  by informing the reader  "It came  as quite  a surprise  to us, to learn  that  it was Arthur Rimbaud, the famous  poet,  who'd  rented  the  old farm­ house on the south  side of  the river," and  some of the story's  details are,  as he says, "hard to swallow"; but  the  whole  story works  to undermine the  narrator's relia­  bility  because  the  Rimbaud of  this  story bears  no  similarity  beyond  name   to  the poet,  and  because  the  narrator is one  of the  xenophobes  who  participate  in  the murder  of   the   twentieth-century   Rim­ baud.     Peter     Crowell's   "When    Your  Mother Comes  to Visit" seems to me out­ side  the  magic   realist   tradition   because of the condition of psychological  disturb­ ance that is suggested  in the narrator. The anthology contains several  futuristic fan­ tasies,  but   Esther  Rochon's "The  Star­ fish" and  Andreas Schroeder's "One Tide Over" have  more  in common with  John Wyndham's brand  of  serious  science  fic­ tion  than  with  the magic  realist  tradition,
while   J. Michael  Yates's   "Mysteries  of
the  Man  Who  Walks  and  the  Man  Who
Watches the  Walker" is a  cleverly  con­
ceived  exploration of  artistic perception


153

BOOKS IN REVIEW



and  the  nature of art  that  uses the  pho­ tographer and  a  traffic dodger  in  an  un­ specified city of the future as types of the perceiver  and  performer.  There are  also several  tales  that   evoke  a  gothic  atmos­  phere  or  might  more  properly  be  called horror   stories.   Jean-Guy  Carrier's   "A Premonition," Rikki's "Spanish Oranges," Ken  Ledbetter's "Idiots," Erika  Ritter's "What are  Neighbours For?" and  Mar­ ilyn  Miller  Trinkaus's "Loving  Cousins" use very  different forms  and  methods to achieve   their   senses  of   horror,  though  physical    and   psychological    violence    is abundant.  Fraser   Sutherland's  "Wilder­ ness Wild" is an  amusing  sexual  and  cul­ tural parody  and  Sue Ericsson's  "The Murder That Saved  a Marriage" plays a clever  trick  on  the  reader  while  success­ fully  evoking  the  consequences  of  a  stif­ ling  marital relationship, but  neither is properly described  as magic  realism.
Most, if not all, of the writers  reprinted in Magic Realism deserve  the notice such an  anthology  potentially  gives  them (though  I  must   admit  that   the  signifi­ cance  of Leon  Rooke's "Dinner  with  the Swardians" and  Madeleine Ferron's "The Tamed Coffin"  escape  me)   but  the  col­
lection  would  have  been far  better  served by a  title  such  as "Contemporary  Cana­ dian  Experiments in Short Fiction." Such a  title   would   have  avoided   giving   the impression    that   these   are   a   group   of writers,   remote  from   important cultural centres, claiming to be a part  of an inter­ national literary movement whose basic nature they  have  failed  to understand.
The stories  in Daymond and  Monk" man's anthology, which  were  reportedly selected   on   the   basis   of   their   literary merit   and   their   effectiveness   in   repre­ senting    "the    settings,   the   texture   and diversity  of  the  non-francophone experi­  ence in Quebec," present  characters from a  designedly  wide  variety  of ethnic and economic backgrounds. The  success with which  individual characters are  made  to
 represent distinctive types, specific genera­ tions or eras, is the  chief  strength of Jack  Ludwig's "A  Woman of  Her  Age,"  Nor­  man   Levine's  "By   the  Richelieu,"  and  Peter  Behrens's "Anarchy." Working class canadiennes and a destitute Canadian mix without  matching in  the  frequently an­ thologized   "Vacation in  La  Voiselle" which  has considerable success in captur­ ing    the    bilingual   nature   of    Quebec speech.  Witness  the  literal  translation of the  verb  's'amuser'  in Mme  Tipue's re­ proach to Hugo Pheffer, "Oui.'  Oui.' You have become-how shall I say-a fright­ ful  bore.  Eh bien, if you are  not  amusing yourself. ..."  Joyce  Marshall bring  rela­ tively privileged anglophone children into  a Quebecois village  in "The Little White  Girl," and  creates an  effective  symbol  of the   elusive   but   still   possible   beauty   of communication  between  the  two cultural groups  in the anglophone narrator's mem­ ory of the irrepressible laughter of an  in­ valid  village girl, a memory which meta­ morphoses into  a dream image  of a  deli­ cate-sounding  waterfall  concealed   in   a darkening wood.  Clark   Blaise's  autobio­ graphically based  "Extractions and  Con­ tractions" evokes  the cosmopolitan air  of Montreal,  particularly   that   of  the   uni­  versity  sphere, with   its  mixture of  East Indians, Americans, Quebecois, and Can­ adians, though, in this story as in the  rest of  the  collection, Montreal's increasingly large  black  community is not represented. The editors  single out  the structure of this story   as  "suggesting the   most   complex resonances among separate events through a collage-like arrangement of details  and  incidents,"   thereby   totally   ignoring the chronological sequence of the rather mun­ danely  titled  sections.
Mordecai Richler's "The Other Beach" derives   what    power    it   has   from    the reader's  awareness that   while   the   mis­ chievous   Jewish   boys  are   invading   the preserve    of   bigoted   Quebec  goys  and  carrying off the  sign  that  proclaims anti-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Jewish  prejudice on  a  Laurentian  resort beach, the cruellest implications of that prejudice  are   being   played   out   on  the other beaches of Europe. In "The Quebec Prison" Raymond Fraser  exhibits  an  un­ satisfactory sense  of  story  and  structure, creating two  engaging  anglophone radi­  cals  and  the  beginnings of  a  plot  before his  piece  degenerates into  a  kind  of fic­ tionalized  journalism about prison life for an anglophone in a francophone jail, leav­ ing  the  plot   without  an   adequate  con­ clusion.
"Lookling   Down    From    Above"   is  a
sketch  rather than  a story, in which Hugh Hood  freights his characters with an enormous significance in a manner and vocabulary reminiscent of Conrad. Hood makes  each  of his  main  characters an exemplum to  justify  his philosophic  con­ clusion  that   "human  purpose is  inscrut­  able,   but   undeniable."  An   old   woman  that   the  narrator passes  on  a  Montreal street  is described as "somebody who  has had  to renounce all human pretensions to health, beauty, sexuality, earning and  ap­  parently even  companionship."  Examin­ ing  her  he  finds  that   "the   details  of her appearance  were  extraordinarily sharply  outlined  and  seemed   pregnant with  un­ stated  meaning." Yet  he  is struck  by the "fury  in her  eyes and  extraordinary pur­ pose." Then  in  an   inverted  syntax  de­ signed   to  emphasize  the  significance  of the   perception,  he   pronounces, "That woman  am  I. To  her  state  must  I come in time. I stood on the squalid  street look­ ing  at  her  and  wondering if  she  would speak   to  me,  labouring under   a  drastic  perception of  the  human soul  in her  im­ penetrable, and  indissoluble."
Mavis   Gallant  is  able   to  create   this sense of significance in her characters without editorializing in this fashion. "Saturday" is  a  powerful portrait of  a family  that  lives only in the mind  because of the mother's decision  to withhold from her children their  heritage of French Ian-
 guage  and  culture in  order  to free  them from  the  pernicious influence  of  the Church. A shifting of focus from  the troubled  eldest son to the middle-aged mother and  finally  to  the  elderly  father and  youngest son, combined with a narra­ tive  technique that  refuses  to distinguish for  the  reader   that   which  has  objective reality  from  that  which  has only  psycho­ logical reality,  results in a style that  is per­  fectly  suited  to  the  themes  of alienation, disillusionment, and  disorientation.
There are,  then,  individual pieces in Stories  of Quebec that   command  atten­ tion  and  respect,  and   that  would  satisfy most literary tastes,  but  the  need  for  and  ultimate value  of  the  anthology remain in question.
SUSAN BECKMANN


SMALL MIRACLE

BERNARD EPPS, Pilgarlic  the  Death. Quadrant
Editions, by subscription.

THE EPIGRAPH TO  BERNARD EPPs's novel, Pilgarlic  the  Death, is from  the  parable of the  unjust  steward, Luke  r6:  "Verily, the  children  of  this  world   are   in  their generation  wiser   than    the   children  of light." Not only are the children of Epps's fictional  world  wiser,  they  are  entertain­ ing,  moving,   and   fabulously   real.   And what    is  more,    Christ's   ironic   parable points  to the  thoughtful  ironies  of Epps's text.  I missed  reading,  or  even  hearing about, Pilgarlic  the   Death   when  it  was first published  by Macmillan in  rg67, and  am  therefore  pleased   that   Gary  Geddes  chose   to   reprint  this   novel   as   one   of Quadrant Editions' first publications-it was a  wise  choice,  for  Pilgarlic  is a  very fine novel.
There are many wonderful things about this novel-and I use terms  like "wonder­ ful" and "fabulously real" deliberately­ from   its  characters to  its  language  and  structure to  its subject.  It is the  story  of

155

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Stormaway, a  little  town  supposedly nestled in the Eastern Townships of  Que­ bec, and  of the  town's inhabitants,  Dou­ gal the School,  Hugh  the Hero,  John  the Law,   Milly  of  the  Hill  and,   of  course, Pilgarlic  the  Death. But as the  town and  characters'  Scots  names  suggest  this  setting   and   story   is   and   is  not   about  the  townsfolk   of   Stormaway. From   the opening  paragraphs of  the  Prologue,  in which   a   "black,  bearded"  honey   man  carries  his coffin/house into  town  on  his back!,   through  the   sequence   of  human events of love, story-telling, and  death, we understand that  this  place  and  its people are  part  of a  truly  mythic  reality  which is rooted  in  the  human imagination and expressed   in  the   parables   of  the  story­ teller.  What Epps  has  done  is to surprise  us with  a fresh  perspective on  real life in any  small  town  by drawing his people  so sharply, vividly, that  they  become  dream  figures  who  are  larger  than life.
Dougal  the School  is the key character
because,  as teacher, poet,  philosopher, he is the  most  articulate man  in  town.  It is Dougal  who speaks for man's  intellect  and spirit   in  sharp contrast with  the  cheer­ fully  Priapic force  of  Stormaway,  Long George.  It is Dougal  who, in a final  ges­ ture    against   twentieth-century   vacuity and   consumerism, brings his artificial, commodity-stuffed, loveless  home  crash­ ing  down  around  him,  and  in  doing  so symbolizes  a  radical,  riotous  rebirth. As his  house   burns,   Dougal  dances   in  the street   wearing "an   expression   of  sheer idiot  ecstasy  and  nothing else -he  was as naked  and  new as a babe."
What Dougal  cannot purge  is his need and   love  of  words,  although  he  knows that  the  children he  teaches  are  closer  to the  truth of "one  little  grassblade":

Ask   any   five-year-old.  That's  a   blade  of grass.   We  would  do  better  to  approach it directly without words or symbols  and there­ by  avoid  the   all-too-common error  of  mis­ taking the  symbol   for   the   thing  itself.  We
 would  do  better to  touch it,  to  feel  it    to look  at it, to  taste it, to  smell  it. At  l ast we'd  avoid  lies.
Here  Dougal speaks  not  only  for  us and the many  ways in which  we separate our­ selves from  reality, but  for  the  writer  as well. The beauty and  excitement of  this novel   spring  from   the   fact   that   Epps  accepts  the  limits  of   language  yet  suc­ ceeds  in  evoking  the  eternal  realities  of life-the  feel,   taste  and   smell  of  love, joy, grief and death-through his words.
Pilgarlic  the  Death  is a  relatively new
occurrence  on  the  contemporary  Cana­ dian   literary scene,  but   it  is  not  alone.  Whether I call  it  "magic  realism" or  use Ray  Smith's term "speculative fiction" to describe   it,   Epps's   novel   has   much   in common with Kroetsch's What the  Crow Said  and  Hodgins's The  Resurrection of Joseph   Bourne. All  three   novels   blend fabulous  occurrence with  vividly  realized details  of  speech   and   place  in  order   to celebrate  the  wondrous comedy   of  life. Like   Sheila  Watson's earlier,  more   re­ served   comic   masterpiece,  The   Double  H oak,  all  three   novels  explore  the  small town  as mythic  place  and  the  oral  tradi­ tions of storytelling as mythology.  Behind this   type   of   fiction,   of   course,   stands  Gabriel Marquez, an  influence  acknowl­ edged   by   Kroetsch   and   Hodgins,  but Thomas's Under Milk Wood and  the rhe­  torical  strategy of parable are equally  felt presences in  Epps's fictional  world.
Does Epps  belong in the company of Kroetsch and  Hodgins? On  the  strength of this first novel,  I would say, very likely.
We leave Dougal in the Epilogue wander­ ing the hills around Stormaway and  writ­  ing   in   his   notebook: "The   best   thing  about  miracles is  that   no  matter  how often  they occur,  they never become  com­ monplace." Ordinary  life  is  the  miracle  Epps    celebrates,  and    in   Pilgarlic    the Death  he has  given  us that small  miracle  in words,  a novel  far  above  the common­ place.                               SHERRILL  E. GRACE

BOOKS IN REVIEW



INDIAN PLIGHT

NAN    F.  SALERNO and   ROSAMOND  M.   VANDER­ BURGH,   Shaman's Daughter.  Prentice-Hall
$15·95·	'
SHAMAN'S DAUGHTER  is  another  serious attempt in  recent Canadian  literature to emphasize the plight of the Indians in this ce tury.
Epilogue (both of which  describe  the last
ay
tiVe traces  the  life of an  exceptional  per­
son from age twelve when she was "blessed with  a vision"  to her  death seventy  years later.
Tension is created early,  when  Supaya Cedar is obliged  to marry Eli Red  Sky in return for  a  favour done  her  family  by his father, Wenonga, a shaman from Red Bluffs Reservation. Her  love for her cou­ sin Kineu   Bruley  (by  whom  she is  preg­ nant), Eli's  decadence, and   Wenonga's sexual  designs  upon  her combine to make Supaya's first marriage a troubled one. It ends when Eli, finally attempting to prove himself a man,  is killed in a confrontation with  a huge_ black bear  that  is terrorizing the reservatiOn.  After  a year of mourning Supaya marries Kineu. However  his  re­ curring dream of eagle  and  whitdog in mortal  combat  unnerves him   and  con­ vinces Supaya that  Wenonga  using
shaman's powers  to destroy  her  husband.
 outlives   him,   too,  and   spends   her   last days treating the sick and  trying  to coun­ sel her  children and  grandchildren.
Shaman's  Daughter  is  the  story  of  a strong,  intelligent, and  independent  wo
man  who learned to live by learning that love is not  synonymous with  exploitation or surrender. But it is more than the chronicle of an  exceptional woman. The wea th
thec
their subJect, and  the motifs of alienation adaptation, the changing and  the change
less-dramatized  by the clash of  genera­ tions  and  cultures-elevate  the  novel  to symbolic level:  the tragic  story of  a whole race.
There are  no  technical innovations in
this novel. The plot  is linear; and  the narrative has  the simplicity  of a  bedtime story.  (In  the earlier sections  it often  has the  compelling quality  of  that   genre  as well.)  The  symbols  are  adequate even  if sometimes rather too obvious: a necklace, a small birchbark box, a black bear  (in its various  mani estations
water,   especially   spring   water,   the  sea­
sons, the  cawing  of a  lone  crow,  a  huge black dog. Then there  is the recurring metaphor of the  Four  Hills.
. The major  characters are deftly drawn; mdeed,  the  juxtaposition of contrasting characters is  an  organizing principle in
s
o

She  confronts Wenonga and  scares  him
 paya'
 father, stands   in  contrast  t,
 
the

off  with  a  suggestion   of  her  own  super­
natural powers. Later, Kineu  serves over­ seas  during  World   War   I  and   returns from   that   conflict   a  physical  and  emo­ tional cripple. He withdraws from society, and  even from  intimate relationship with Supaya. Finally, he takes Taw, his young­ est  child,  to  live  with  him  according to the old Indian  ways. Both  father and  son drown when their  canoe  is overturned in a  sudden   storm.   After   another  appro­ priate  period  of  mourning, Supaya mar­  ries  Jess  Fallon, a  white   man.  But  she
 evil  genius  of  Wenonga; Rhea,   who  re­ formed, contrasts with  Eli who, unable to reform,  could  only  repent;  then  there  is Miss Harris, the  kindly  teacher, and  her clergyman  brother who for years had  not "smiled    spontaneously   or   lookied  with affection on any living creature." The list goes  on.   Unfortunately,  there   are   too many characters for even  a three-genera­ tional novel with  such  pronounced  socio­ logical emphasis.
And there  is a more fundamental struc­
tural   weakness  still.  After   the  death  of

157

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Wenonga at  the  end  of Part  Three, and the  death of  Jules   at   the  beginning  of Part  Four,  no character even  approaches Supaya in stature. As a result  of this im­ balance,   tension    essentially    disappears from  the  novel.  All  too  often  thereafter, episodes  are  linked  together  as  a  pretext for  giving  more  sociological  information and  for  thinly  veiled  authorial commen­ tary   on   deracination  and   identity.   For these   reasons,   Shaman's   Daughter   re­ mains a seriously  flawed  novel.

DONALD R. BARTLETT


FROM PLAYWRIGHTS

STEVE    PETCH,     Sight     Unseen.    Playwrights
Canada.
GWENDOLYN  MACEWEN,   The  Trojan Women.
Playwrights  Canada.
BETTY  LAMBERT,  Clouds  of  Glory.  Playwrights
Canada.
BRYAN  WADE,  Blitzkrieg.  Playwrights  Press.

OuT OF   THE  INTRICATE PROBLEMS of  hu­ man  relationship and  the  inner  conflicts of  man's  mind   and   his  feelings,  Steve Petch   weaves  an  exotic  drama entitled  Sight   Unseen.  Five   characters  interact like a fugue  in which  the dramatic voices develop   contrapuntally  recreating  rela­ tionships over and over again. The  people are  interchangeable; they  assume  identi­ ties in their  associations  with one another. The  place  is a small  pension  on  a Greek island; the time, summer  1928. Life, love, and  friendship are  ephemeral. The  char­  acters  flit in and  out  of each  other's lives leaving  impressions  which conjure up the past  or predict the future, while  the pres­ ent  is intangible. The  dream-like figure, Marie-Claude, an  exotic  Swiss  woman,  tangles   with   each  of  the  characters  in turn; she  would  make   love  to   any  of them,  for  that's  what  keeps  us  human:

If we meet  and  I  like you, then  we sit and talk.   Is   it   wrong?   No.  If we  are   happy
 talking,  then  I will  touch  you  on  the  arm, hold  your  hand   ...  It is  nice,  good.  And then  if I touch  your  face, isn't  it the  same?
... It is  just  like  talking: something  I do with  someone  I like.

Yet  we can't love  honestly,  openly, with­ out deception or feeling  shame. Our asso­ ciations turn   ugly  and  sordid.  Alan   de­ ceives   his   wife,   Richard   deceives   his friend.  The  wife,   longing   for   security,  clings to marriage even if her husband no longer  loves her. She  assures  him:

This  isn't  a  match  of convenience  you  can cast off. I'm  with  you for life, and  you can't alter  that.  If you humiliate me, you'll  make me old  and  mean; you won't  lose me.

On   the  surface,  the   play  is  about  infi­ delity,  but  it  is much  more  than  that. It touches    on   our    basic   conceptions  of morality.
The play is compelling for its exquisite style. The dialogue is clean,  uncluttered, the  images  pure  and sensual,  the  rhythm of  the  language recalls  the  rise  and  fall of an  eternal wave. Each  character, from the prosaic,  retired  Mr. Davies, to the omnipresent, mysterious Marie-Claude, has a vital  role to play. They  are  revealed in  pairs-the  couples   may  be  strangers or estranged; friends or  married. One leaves   his  marl\!  on   the   other  and   the cycle is interminable. Steve  Petch  has created an  original and   evocative   work of  art.  It is  vacation time  when  people attempt to  flee  reality,   but   they  cannot escape   their   own   personalities  and   the fact  that  vacation, like life itself, eventu­ ally must  come  to an  end.
Gwendolyn MacEwen offers a modern rendition of  Euripides' The  Trojan  Wo­ men whose motifs are  relevant to our own time.  While  death in  battle  brings  their husbands' suffering to an end, women  are doomed   to  bear   the  aftermath of  war.  The most  moving  moments in  both  ver­ sions describe  the murder of Astynax,  An­ dromache's  child, so  that   "the son  of  a glorious  and  therefore highly  dangerous

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



enemy  should   not  ... grow  up."  A  pru­ dent  move  from  the  enemy's  standpoint, since Andromache has predicted that  her son  will  be  "the  rebuilder of  Troy." In Euripides, she  hands over  her  child  with bitterness:  "Take him  away,  hurl  him  to his  death."  In  the  MacEwen  rendition, she  comforts him:

You're going on  a  journey,
You   funny little thing:  And   where   you're
going
Is somewhere you've never  been!
... It's where lightning falls
From the  hollows of  the  sky! ...
And  when you  go
you'll  meet  your  father
with  his  great flashing spear
and  his deep booming laughter! ...
You  funny thing ... you  smell  so nice! Here, let's   pull  your   cloak   up,
up   around  your   . . . neck.
Give  me a kiss ... come  on!

One   recalls   words   spoken   by  mothers who dispatched their  children to the con­ centration camps' gas chambers, the most difficult  of all,  a lie  to brighten a  child's  last moments.
Helen   delivers   an  eloquent speech  in her own defence: Hecuba had given birth to Paris  "in  the first place  ... despite  the prophecies ... that  he was fated  to bring disaster"; Paris  had  chosen  a beautiful woman   rather than  the  goddesses'  offers of wealth  or  military conquests: she  her­ self lives "beneath the  shadows  of  men," an   instrument  of  "History";  moreover, she tried  to escape,  but  the guards caught her.  Her  arguments  recall  the  appeal of war   criminals -circumstances   are   re­ sponsible. Likewise,  Talthybius, who exe­ cuted  the  murder of  Astynax,  albeit  un­ willingly,  will not  stand  trial -he only followed  orders.
MacEwen  emphasizes the  role  of  wo­ men  in society. They are  "perfect" wives, they   know   their   places,   they   have   no "existence" apart from men and when the men are gone, they are "nothing." History  books are  rewritten by the ruling  powers:
 "History ... tells untruths I It tells them beautifully." People's   deeds   are  obliter­ ated,  even  misconstrued, figures falsified. Hecuba  accurately  predicts   that   Helen  will be "famous in years  to come.  People like you never get punished for what  they do."   Helen   revelled   in   her   glory  with
"the  men  of Troy  I kissing  [her] feet";
but war is "blood  and  blood and blood ...
the final nightmare." Hecuba demands "meaning" but there is none. In the space of a relatively short  work, the author suc­ ceeds  in  bringing  to  life  several  strong  characters, the most effective  being Hecu­ ba,  whose  greatest tragedy  is the  knowl­ edge that  her own son initiated the blood­  shed  and  destruction of  Troy.
Satire  attempts to  present   a  true  pic­ ture  of reality  by ridiculing the  forces  it exposes.  A  good  satire   arouses  laughter while  challenging the  audience  to  con­ sider  the  author's premise.  It  deals  with a current political  or sociological  issue or may  attack   the  manners and  mores  of  a given  society. Betty  Lambert's Clouds  of Glory  falls  into both  categories. By far,  the   target   of  her   most   successful   and  scathing attack is academia.
The problem with the play, however, is three-fold: the  author's ambiguous stand on political  issues which  prevents the audience from  drawing the author's thesis to  its  logical  conclusion; secondly,  aca­ demic unrest cannot justifiably be equated with   actual    terrorism    and   revolution; finally,  Lambert's  endeavour   to  satirize  multifarious societal  problems in a single play  does  not  allow  her  to examine one or  two  problems  in  sufficient depth.
The scene  is a  West  Coast  university. The crisis in  the  Philosophy Department coincides   with   Quebec's  1970   October crisis  when  kidnapping and   violence  in­ voked the War  Measures Act. Each char­ acter   represents   a  type:   Max,  the  New York  draft-dodger  who  supposedly adu­ lates  the  working-class,  here  represented by  Mrs.  Wilson,   the  char, who   has  to

I 59

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



"clean up the mess" after  demonstrations; sexually frustrated Sophie  Love, the "rich and  high class" student radical  who brings her  dog  in  a cage  to burn  as a symbolic sacrifice   of   the   Vietnamese War;  Dr. Korda, Head   of  Philosophy,   the  Estab­ lishment, a native  German; his opponent, ambitious  and   affected   Dr.  Green,   the American-Freudian-Marxist,  and  organ­ izer of the  Revolutionary  Caucus; Jessie, an indecisive  teacher of Logic, who would rather  abstain than   vote;   Charlie,  an Establishment  French-Canadian who  hasn't   completed   his   dissertation,  but thanks  to a  past  romance with  Korda, is given  a  lectureship in  Moral  Philosophy; and   r8-year-old  Bubba,   Mrs.   Wilson's daughter, who  has  replaced   her  interest in sex with  violence.  While an attempt  is made   by Green   to  oust  Korda from  his position,   the  faculty  and   student  body participate in a hilarious "Revolutionary Caucus" replete  with  heckling, sexual  in­ ferences,    phony    revolutionary    slogans summed  up  as  "pretentious  faggot   aca­  demic  bullshit." In the process, the Amer­  icans   and    Korda   delight    in   insulting Canadians:  "You  have  no sense of iden­  tity. No sense of  history. No awareness  of Realpoliti...  you   can't  say  anything without quoting."
Korda, though claiming   he  has  given his staff "uninhibited academic freedom," is marched into  the  Common Room,  his head    in    a   noose -a    mere    "college prank." Demands are  made  explicit: an end   to  the  "feudal"  exploitation of  the
Philosophy Department  with   strict  stu­ dent  parity on  all  committees.  However, events  in  Quebec intrude on  the  libera­ tion   movement.  It's   just   that   "Eastern Canada  shit"   and   "if   you   people   had done  what  we did in Louisiana ... passed a law saying everyone had to talk English, you wouldn't be in this fix now" sums up the general  attitude. Once  the War  Mea­ sures Act is in operation, and  "political demonstration ... illegal,"  Korda, echo-


160
 ing  Trudeau:  "...  there   are  always  the bleeding hearts ... who  refuse  to see that a  society,  a  university, has  to  take  every measure to protect itself from  the bandits, the  criminal terrorists ... ," threatens to dispatch his  opponents to  jail,  and  sus­ pends Charlie. But Charlie, a "beer Beau­ fort," is reinstated by the Board  of Gover­  nors,  Korda is deposed, and  Green   ap­ pointed   liaison   officer   with   the   Board.  Sophie, now protesting the War Measures Act,  pours   gasoline   over  herself-"no­ body listens, nobody  cares, until  we will." During a scuffle in which Charlie tries to seize  her   lighter,  a   shot   is  fired,   and Charlie is killed accidentally. Mrs.  Wilson ends  the  play  with   a  reference to  "this  War  Measures thing" and  assures  us that  "Mr. Lacrosse and  the other  one" will be "home safe and sound."
Whether or not  the  War  Measures Act was valid,  kidnapping, inserting bombs in mailboxes  ... are  acts of violence. Though the  authorities over-reacted and  in  some instances took  advantage of political  un­ rest  to  promote their  own  interests,  the author,  protesting  the   Act   ("the small freedoms go, and  then  the  bigger  ones")  exposes   the   dangers  of   college   pranks  rather  than    overt   terrorism.  Charlie's death is not convincing-it comes almost as  an  afterthought. Korda, that   stodgy, pompous conservative, who  is  presented as an  unlikeable character in whom  "one may  recognize   aspects   of  . . . Trudeau" (author's note)   winds  up  the wisest of all precisely because of Charlie's death. Thus, inadvertently, the satire  turns  on itself. Finally,   the   FLQ  cannot be  compared with  naive, sexually frustrated students or phony  radicals like Max  and  Green.  The FLQ did  not  play  games.  As one  of  the men  involved  in the  idnapping
Richard Cross  said  (Gazette, January  g, rg8r):

If I joined  the  Front of Liberation du  Que­ bec  in   1970, it  was  because  I  believed,  at that   time,  that   terrorist  action-what we

BOOKS IN REVIEW



called armed propaganda-constituted   a valid    method   to   change  society.  I   was wrong. The FLQ was  wrong.

While  the  explosive  situation in  Que­ bec  provides the  author with   the  play's climax,  and  many  funny lines, it is a pity she  did  not  confine   her  satire to  "your  basic liberated" university. Mrs. Wilson's  unforgettable remarks on  cleaning toilets are  but  one  example:  of  Lambert's sharp sense of humour:

Business Administration,  now,  they're very good   on  aim.   Physics   is  not  quite so  good as  Business  Admin., but   the  worst  ones  for aim   is  your   philosophers. They  never   hit the    mark.  It's  terrible  cleaning  up   after your  philosophers.

Bryan  Wade's collection of five plays under  the title Blitzkrieg is fraught with violence,   sado-masochism,  nihilism   and
:r.ornography (without the  redeeming qualities  of   titillation). This  is  experi­ mental theatre  that   is  neither  profound nor   funny,   though the  introduction  by Bob  White  considers the  author "one  of our  major theatrical voices."
In  his  desire  to  affect   people  on  sub­ conscious levels, Wade juxtaposes the per­  verse  sexual  games  of  Adolf  Hitler and  Eva   Braun    with    Hollywood   romantic movies.   But   the   characters   of    Grand Hotel  (John Barrymore and  Greta Gar­ bo)   are  fictitious, while  Hitler and   the Nazi  regime   constituted   powers   of  evil that  perpetrated the unspeakable horrors of  World  War  II. To ascribe  fantasy  to this  reality  is as abhorrent as saying  that  Yorkshire's  "Jack the  Ripper" is only  a concept of  sadism,  and   the  thirteen wo­ men   he  mutilated  are   figments  of  the imagination.
Adolf's ugly rat-dream; Eva's  paper airplane bombing games; her  seductive manoeuvres; her  assurance  that   women will be sexually fulfilled  merely  by looking at  the  Fuhrer's photograph and  the  word "orgasm," repeated no less than thirty times;  her  description of  the  new  era -
 "everything  will  be  destroyed  in  flames and  out of the ashes will grow a new race
. . . equal  to  the  vision  of  the  Messiah" (the   intention  is  to   rouse   Adolf   sexu­ ally) : these are  some  of the  components of this unpalatable piece.
Wade   avoids   explicit   descriptions  of
Nazi  destruction,  but   unless   it  is   ren­ dered   graphically,  Eva's   perusal  of   the photograph  album-"there's    Goebbels and  his wife  . . . and   their  children ... aren't they adorable?" ... and  Bormann's so-called  concentration  camp  joke,  will not   be  interpreted   as   ironic.   For   the younger generation, W.W. II is as ancient as the  Boer  War.
There is, indeed, a  need  for  literature about  the forces of evil, for man must endeavour to  understand them.  But  this play has the effect of a sick joke. The introduction states  that  since "we are watching Adolf  and  Eva  fucking on  the ashes  of  six  million   Jews  . . . the  sheer obscenity  of  this  image   rivets  us  to  the action  of the  play."  On  the  contrary. It is repugnant.
Underground is a meaningless exchange of pseudo-Becket-von Itallie-Shepherd dialogue between   three   featureless,  bor­
ing  non-people, one  of whom,  prompted by  his   girlfriend's  voice   on   the   tape­ recorder, mercifully finds salvation in sui­ cide.  The   author describes   the  "under­ ground" people,  the metaphoric moles of society  who  burrow   aimlessly  in  tunnels,  never  see the  light  of  day,  who  pay  lip­ service  to causes  they  neither  understand nor  care  about. The  tape-recorder is the only measure  of  reality,  but since it is pos­ sible  to  "edit,  mix  it,  transform it,  fuck with  it  any  way you  want  to,"  reality  is constantly distorted. It is a harsh,  alienat­ ing environment that  breeds  violence  and confusion.
This   nihilistic   play   is  not   devoid   of truths,  but   the   vehicle   for   portraying them  is dull  and  derivative.
Alias  attempts to  debunk  the  mythic

BOOKS IN REVIEW



hero,   in  this  instance the  Lone  Ranger and  Tonto, who  are  travelling across  the desert  to Wasteland in order  to replenish their  supply  of  silver  bullets.  Then  they will continue rescuing  women from  "no good, swearing, drinking, spitting,  fucking outlaws."  A  prostitute  wearing   a   con­ stricting penis costume  intended to excite her    clients,    and    the   proprietor   of   a brothel-saloon who is plagued  by a rattle­ snake,  join the  pair.  After  the women  are rescued,    Tonto  and    the   Ranger  will accept  their  invitation to  work  as  studs at  the  Golden Triangle  Saloon,  thus  re­ linquishing their  heroic roles. While some of the  dialogue  is  amusing,  much  of the play  recalls  a  tasteless  sophomoric  bur­  lesque.   Bryan  Wade should   employ   his considerable  dramatic  talents   and   ima­ gination to better advantage.

AVIVA  RAVEL


ECLECTIC, CLASSIC

GEORGE  WOODCOCK,   The World of  Canadian Writing. Douglas  & Mcintyre, and  Univ.  of Washington  Press.
JEAN-ETHIER  BLAis,  Autour  de  Borduas.  Les
Presses de l'universite de Montreal.

IF ONLY BECAUSE IT SUGGESTS broader dimensions than  the  book  actually  pos­ sesses, Woodcock's title is unfortunate. A subtitle,  "Critiques  and   Recollections," helps,   as  does   the  author's  "Introduc­ tion,"  but   still   the  ambiguity  remains,  particularly since only the first two essays attempt  any  sort  of  comprehensive  ap­  proach  to  "the world  of Canadian writ­  ing."
What the  book does offer-and it is a substantial offering-is a series of re­ views,  articles  and  reminiscences  dealing with  a wide range  of Canadian literature. Woodcock's interests are  eclectic; so  too is his choice  of subjects,  primarily writers for  whom  he  feels "a  degree  of empathy
 or,  more  rarely,  an  obvious  opposition of viewpoint." His approach is personal and usually   relaxed,  marked  by  a  bias   for prose and  by a consistent concern for  the social,  moral   and   political  -as  well  as the  aesthetic-values in  literature. The perspective adopted  is obviously  that   of British  Columbia, and   while  it  may  not quite  reveal  a "regional cast  of mind" - the author being far  too cosmopolitan for that -it  does  convey  the  impact of  his immediate surroundings. For  many  jaded Easterners, this  view  from  the  West  will be welcome  and  refreshing.
One  senses Woodcock's sheer delight  in
reading and   his  eagerness   to  engage   his mind with those of the various writers he discusses. His initial  talent is for  pointing out  affinities  and  antecedents, for  order­ ing, for placing the writing  within the in­ credible range  of literature he is familiar with.  Equally impressive  are  his  powers of  synthesis  and   extrapolation;  his  com­  mentary  moves  easily  from  general  ob­ servations  to  specific  insights,  and   back again. Curious facts emerge: "the average number  of   novels   published  yearly   by Canadians has not changed in any marked way over  the past forty years."  New cate­ gories  are  established: "Canadian  twen­ tieth-century romanticism," for  instance, is identified almost  as a genre. Unusual perceptions  are  presented,  sometimes simply  in  passing: "the kind  of  sublimin­ ally directed information that, at its most sensitive,  literature can  project  over  the centuries." The  discussion,  even  when  it rambles, is lucid, informative and -with the exception of  a rather tedious  study  of Hugh Hood-lively.
Woodcock, who  must  be the most  pro­
lific  critic   in  Canada, if  not   the  world, writes with an ease that  is apparent in the flow and fluidity  of his prose. Such facility cuts  both  ways,  of  course; the  piece  on John Glassco  shows  signs  of  hasty  com­ position,   many   of  the   articles  come   to rather flat  endings, there   are  occasional

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



repetitions and  even rare  touches  of  pom­ posity-"(and I am not entirely inclined to deny it)." Usually,  though, the writing  is  direct, dynamic and   expressive.  Few Canadian critics  share  Woodcock's sure­ ness of  language and  none  except   Frye has his way with  a phrase: "the capillary links between  her  poetry,  her  fiction,  her criticism"; "one  of  those dynamically bor­ ing  European  literary men"; "a  kind  of psychic  membrane in  which  recollection is   replaced  by  telepathy";  "the   slutter fringe  of  life  on  the  Cote  d'Azur." One of the distinct pleasures  of the book is the achievement of its style.
As was  evident in  Odysseus  Ever  Re­ turning,  Woodcock's analysis can  be bril­ liant   and   penetrating.  The  present  vol­ ume,  perhaps because  of  its  diversity  of subject  and  the occasional nature of some of the  articles, seems  to lack  the  kind  of imaginative  focus   that   characterizes
Woodcock at  his best. Still,  there  is much to be learned here, particularly from the appraisals of lesser-known writers  like Roderick Haig-Brown and  Mavis Gallant, or   from   the   discussion   of  lesser-known works such as Margaret Laurence's travel writings.   (An  earlier attempt  to  discern an earth-fire-water-air pattern in her Can­ adian   novels  seems, for  all  its  cleverness, forced  and  unconvincing.)  Only the piece on  McLuhan, uncharacteristic in its tone of high  moral outrage, is really  unworthy. As a  general  rule,  however,  the  author seems more  effective  in  praise  and  bene­ volent   interpretation  than   in  argument and opposition.
Perhaps  it   is  unfair  to  criticize   The World  of Canadian Writing  for what  it is not  in  its  nature to  be.  Lacking a  con­ trolling focus and  a sustained vision, it is, as a book, considerably less than  the sum of  its  parts.  But  as  a  collection of  indi­  vidual    articles   revealing  much    of   the scope  of  Canadian literature, it  is good, solid  and  informed criticism.
* 	* 	*
 As a critic, Jean Ethier-Blais has always promoted the traditional values of classic­ ism:  clarity  of  expression,  discipline,  ra­  tionalism  and  a deep respect  for the  past. His  weekly columns  in  Le  Devoir  regu­  larly condemn the present  state  of culture in  Quebec,  expressing  strong  and  rather unfashionable disapproval of many of the reforms   brought  about  by   the   "Quiet Revolution." It is curious,  therefore, that he has chosen  to write  about  Paul-Emile Borduas: painter, polemicist, cultural  re­ volutionary, and  probably the  most influ­ ential   figure  in  setting   into  motion   the very  changes   that  Ethier-Blais  deplores.  Autour de  Borduas, we are  told  in the author's  foreword, is a  personal attempt to come  to terms  with  Borduas' immense  prestige in Quebec intellectual circles,  to explain  who  the  man   was  and   why  his work has had  so much  impact in the  past three decades.  Much  of  the  explanation, we  soon see, results  from  an  exploration of   Borduas'   surroundings :   his  teachers and friends,  his domestic and  intellectual milieux,  the  vagaries  of  his  existence  in St.    Hilaire,  Montreal  and  abroad. Through a  combination of  personal  fa­ miliarity,  solid  documentation and  con­ siderable  evocative skill,  a  clear  picture emerges  of the  people,  places  and  events experienced by Borduas in  the formative
periods of his life.
We see, in the first section  entitled "Le fils et le pere," Borduas' childhood ex­ posure  to the strange  charms of the land­ scape  around Mont  St-Hilaire,  his  early apprenticeship to  Ozias  Leduc  and  sub­ sequent initiation into  the techniques and conventions of Quebec religious art  in the early  years of this century, and  his depar­ ture in 1928 for a year of study  and  prac­ tical  training in France. Upon his return to  Montreal,  his  life  is increasingly cen­ tred  around  the  twin   poles  of  painting and  teaching. In  the midst  of artistic and intellectual circles almost completely dom­  inated   by  the  clergy,  he  slowly  becomes

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



aware of the relevance of abstraction and surrealism to his own research form, and much  of his production in these years is destroyed   as  unsatisfactory. Meanwhile, his  increasing success  as  a  teacher -a teacher bent on liberating the full creative potential of his students-gradually at­ tracts  to him a following  of rather radical students.  Tensions  and    confrontations with  the  authorities keep  pace  with  Bor­ duas'   growing  sense  of  mission   and in I948,  soon  after   the  publication  of  the fiery  "automatiste"  manifesto  Refus glo­ bal,  he  is summarily  dismissed  from  his job at the  Ecole du meuble. The publica­ tion   of  a  second  manifesto,  Projections  liberantes, in  I949,  marks  the  beginning of a  four-year  period  of sickness and  an­  guish.  His  entire world  having  collapsed  around him, he retreats to St. Hilaire and  for  the  first  time  is forced  to  make  his living  by  painting. As Ethier-Blais com­ ments, "c'est  la le debut  de sa veritable carriere." Only  in  the final eight  years of his  life,  largely  spent   abroad, does  Bor­ duas finally fulfill his potential as an artist.  InI 960, at a time  when  the Quiet Revo­  lution   is  about  to  unfurl   over  Quebec, Paul-Emile Borduas dies  alone  in  Paris.
As a  biographer, Ethier-Blais  concen­ trates   not  only  on  facts  but  on  circum­ stances.  His  approach is interpretive and  idiosyncratic,  leaving   no   doubt  as   to where  his own sympathies lie with  regard  to any  number of events  or personalities. His   respect   for   Borduas'   talent    as   a painter,  for   his  integrity,   his   "instinct c!'eateur"   and   his  emerging "certitude devant la vie" is readily  apparent, but  he speaks too of the  artist's "autoritarisme," identifying it as nothing less than "stalin­ isme." He mixes anecdote with axe-grind­ ing,  devoting more  pages  than necessary to  his  old  favourite  Franc;ois Hertel, for example, and   to  predictable defence   of the  clergy.  Ethier-Blais is  obviously  un­ able  to sanction Borduas'  anti-clericalism, and  he is mystified  by his lack of nation-
 alistic   fervour, wary  of  his  ego,  and   in fact somewhat sceptical about  his entire enterprise. And yet in these pages Borduas lives-a paradox both  author and  sub­ ject would  no doubt appreciate.
Having situated  "le  fils"  in  his  time
and  place, Ethier-Blais proceeds  to do the same  for "le  pere," Ozias Leduc, a figure for whom  he seems to have  a deeper per­ sonal  sympathy. In   this  study,  the  con­ nections between   the  society,  its  values, and   its  art forms,  are  particularly  well established:  Leduc,  in   his   progression  from Italianate academicism through Pre­  Raphaelitism  to  symbolism,  is portrayed both  as an individual and  as a representa­ tive  Quebec artist   of  the  period. Noting the   distance  between  Leduc's  religious painting, with   its  realism   reflecting the social  and   religious  context in  which   it was  produced, and   his  private painting, with  its  transcendental mystery  and  nas­ cent  surrealism, Ethier-Blais describes  the artist   as  a  sort  of  repressed  Aesthete   or Idealist-thus   drawing   him,   one   sus­ pects,  rather too  much in  his own  direc­  tion.  Whatever the  bias,  however,  Ozias Leduc is given  a  masterly  presentation as the one  who first  set Borduas on his own path, a  path the  author sees  as  leading ultimately to  the  explosive  expression   of Leduc's hidden  universe: de  pere en  fils.
The  book's   second   division,   entitled
"Trajectoires   esthetiques,"    investigates the   lives  and   works   of   several   of  the French artists   and   intellectuals who  in­ fluenced Borduas. Through the figures of Maurice Denis,  Georges Desvallieres and  Marie-Alain Couturier, we are introduced into  the curious  and little-known world of French religious art-a world  which  may well  hold   more  interest  for   the  author than   it  did  for  his  subject. A  following chapter on Andre Breton  offers a fascinat­ ing   comparative  study   of   Breton    and Borduas as "chefs  de  file,"  "animateurs" and   "provocateurs." The  discussion   of the  Surrealists' influence   on  Borduas   is

BOOKS IN REVIEW



particularly  intelligent, especially   in   re­ ference   to  their   utilization  of   aesthetic theories  for socio-political ends. One  may wonder  why Ethier-Blais chose to concen­ trate   on   the   French   instead   of   such Americans as  Pollock,  de  Kooning and Motherwell, all  of  whom met  and  influ­ enced  Borduas  during his  most  produc­ tive years as a painter. Here the explana­ tion is probably not  so much  the  author's notorious francophilia as  the  fact  that  it was   Breton    and    the    Surrealists  who pointed Borduas in the direction of the Refus global,  whose  impact on  the  Que­ bec imagination was so much greater than  that  of any  of his  paintings.
Refus global is a passionate and incen­ diary   polemic   that   calls   for   collective liberation through a total  rejection of the past.   The  very   things   that    were   most typical  of  traditional  Quebec -Church and   state   control,  respect   for   the   past, docility    and   resignation-were   to   be swept   away,  absolutely. These  are   not, one suspects, sentiments to which  Ethier­ Blais  can  subscribe,  and  yet  the  reading he gives of  Refus global is often  very con­ vincing.   Many  of   his  observations  are highly  perceptive and  pertinent, as when he  begins  by  stating that   the  manifesto "procede d'une vision  negative du  passe. Deux  idees  force  l'aminent; le choix  his­ torique  et   la   mediation   prophetique." Several  pages  later he  characterizes it as "un  cri   passionne,   d'origine  religieuse, dirige  contre  un  'systeme  d'education' au sens  le  plus  large."  Borduas, he  notes, "balaie le  passe du  Canada franc;:ais pour ne regarder en face de lui, vers un avenir qu'il  mystifie dans  !'instant meme  qu'il  le
cree."
To  be sure,  Ethier-Blais also  expresses
disapproval, using his abundant irony and rationalism to chip away at the text by pointing up  its inconsistencies and  para­ doxes-arguments to which  the  text,  by its   very  nature,  remains  largely  imper­ vious.  Here again   the  critic  has  greater
 success in  dealing with  context,  examin­ ing for instance the  surrealistic and  exis­ tential  origins  of Borduas'  attitudes, and  admitting, however reluctantly, their later  repercussions  throughout the  Quebec in­ telligentsia.  One   senses  a  curious   ambi­  valence in this entire  discussion, as though the  author,  while  conceding the  impor­ tance  and  achievement of  the  Refus  glo­ bal, is nevertheless  sorry  it was ever  writ­ ten.
Projections  liberantes  is given  a  some­ what   lighter   treatment,   apparently  be­ cause   Ethier-Blais   sees   it   more   as  the "apology" of an exceedingly gifted teacher
than  as a socio-political document. Here
the  tone  is warmer and  the  commentary more  lyrical,  focusing   on  Borduas'  per­ sonality   to  the  detriment of  the  mani­ festo's wider  implications. Borduas' ideal­  ism is admired, but  it is admired as ideal­  ism; his attempt to move  from  the "moi" to  the  "milieu,"  to  translate  individual experience into collective  action  is inter­ preted  as  being  hopelessly  utopian.
In   his  conclusion  to  Autour  de   Bor­ duas,  Ethier-Blais returns  again   to  the myth of Borduas, again  carefully places it in  its  context, again   casts  doubt  on  his role  as a  collective  hero,  and  then,  in  a final  and  elegaic  assessment,  proceeds  to present   him   as  a  kind   of  mythic   indi­
vidual, the artist as hero.  It is a study­ and   an  interpretation-that  makes   no claim  to being  definitive, and it is a book from  which  Borduas emerges with  all his simplicities  and  complexities  enhanced.

LARRY   SHOULDICE

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ELUSIVE SURFACES

M.     TRAVIS    LANE,    Divinations    and   Shorter
Poems  1973-1978.  Fiddlehead.
CYRIL DABYDEEN, This Planet Earth. Borealis.
JOHN  LANE, I  Want   to Tell  You   Lies. Turn­
stone.
TED    COLSON,   The  Beauty   of  It:   Poems   for
Tuesday Night. Fiddlehead.

I'M VERY  EXCITED by what  you might  call the  surface  of  life,"  states  Alice  Munro. "It seems  to  me  very  important  to  be able  to  get  at  the  exact  tone  or  texture of how  things  are." M. Travis  Lane  does just that  in her  remarkable collection  of poetry Divinations, the most ambitious undertaking of these four works. The eye is repeatedly given  more  than  it  usually takes  in.  Here  is a  sensuous appreciation of  minor   changes, of  subtle  nuances,   a quality she herself has celebrated in tl1e work of D. G. Jones. "The seasoned mind sees neither fall  nor  spring  nor  darkness
in  the  late  winds  turning I nor  in  ceru­
lean  chords  the  all: I but each  a tone,  a changing shade   I within   a  mobile  edi­ fice,  I no one  condition strained."
With  its echoes of Wallace  Stevens and William Carlos Williams, "Three Fathers" (from  which  these  lines are  taken)  con­ cerns  itself with  Lane's ongoing quest  for that   which   constitutes "the   real." The  elusive   essence   of   "its  shifting,   watery  notes" is further explored in "The Weight  of the  Real" (the  title  taken  from  Spen­  der  on  Rimbaud) ,  "On   Responding to the  Real," and  the intriguing "A  Night's Lodging in the Actual." What  is so pleas­ ing is the  Avisonian  stress on the eye, on a  perception quietly  yet intensely  attend­ ing  to  the  myriad  "trivial" details  of the here  and   now,  and   this  in  a  poetry  so richly  appealing to  the ear.
On  the strength solely of the title poem
"Divinations," Lane's status  as  a  strong and  gifted   poet  should  rest  secure.  The piece  comprises   three  distinctly   realized

166
 yet thematically linked sections, each of which  is tightly  unified  and  elegantly crafted around  the  vicissitudes  of  a  dif­ ferent narrator. The  poet   takes  advan­ tage  of the  difference and similarities be­ tween speakers  to pursue a movement out of   a   tortuous   wasteland    existence    in "Nothing," through an  ambiguous, some­ times  macabre purgatory in Malecite In­ dian graveyards in "Red Earth," right  to the  "thrones of  God"  (as  art  embodies them) in an  unusual celebration of "The Green   Earth" in  "The Book  of  the Thrones." In their  own  unique   way,  all three   women   speakers-"a high-school girl  who lives in Sundown;" a nurse  who leads  a troubled existence   with   her  an­ thropologist  husband  in  the   Red  Earth Reserve  "on  the  Separation River  in  the northern   reaches  of   New   Brunswick's never-never lands" among the  "Abenaki, people  of the  dawn"; and "Pearl," whose dwarf-like   sister    creates    the    winged thrones of God  out  of  cardboard, broken furniture,  aluminum   and   gold   foil   so "that nothing that  was human or  human shaped could  ever  sit in  those  things  and  if  you  look  at   them  for  a  while  it  gets spooky"-"want  the  real."
The whole  piece is beautifully crafted, the imagery  unerringly accurate, the verse generally incisive and  evocative. This  is particularly   evident   in    "Red  Earth," which   initiates  itself   with   an   epigraph from   the   Purgatorio,   deftly   suggesting that "what our speaker is able  to perceive there  is necessarily  and  variously  unreal."

In dreams I saw  them  dancing I with­ out sound. My  John  danced skull  dance I with  them.  Masking  Face,  passing   among them, I turned each one  to white head, rag bone,  whirling  dust.  It   came    to   me   and  grabbed  me,  held   my  head inside its  mask as in  a fist, I squeezed  me skew-eyed, glared from   my  face  I with  red  eyes  like  a stran­ gled  hare....

Lane has  a  sense  of  language, rhythm, and   precise,  dramatic detail   that   I find

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



missing in the other three  poets under review.  Despite its  length, "Divinations" continues evenly  without losing control  of mood or quality of expression, bravely ex­ perimenting  with  the  limitations of   the form  in  variant uses  of  type  size,  lineal spaces   and   other  typographical   inven­  tions,   successfully   incorporating   poems within    poems,   letters   and   prose   frag­  ments.
It is harder to  recommend the  collec­ tions of poetry  by Colson, John Lane  and Dabydeen, although certain poems  in the latter's This Planet  Earth reveal  a nascent  poetic  maturity. While  Ms.  Lane's verse is richer  metaphorically, linguistically and allusively,  Dabydeen's  book  is  neverthe­ less  a   worthwhile   publication. Though less versatile  and  sure  in its treatment, it shares   with   Divinations  recurrent  dual­ isms, especially  light/dark image  patterns, a  concern with  the  "ephemeral, trivial," with   people   who,  monstrously  closed  in upon   themselves,   seek  escape   or   trans­ cendence.
"Seeking Light,"  the   first  poem,  an­ nounces  the  volume's persistent  focus on imagery    of   burrowing,   of   a   tentative emergence  out   of   a   restrictive   "cave­ world,   underground,"   "digging  out   for sun." This  governing concept serves  as a means  of providing coherence to this col­ lection.  In  Dabydeen's world, this release is both  feared  and  welcomed. More  often than not, it is a male who is so "grounded," buried  alive in his shadow refuge,  bracing himself   against  the  flight   into   "space," "the  claustrophobia/ of light." In "Death of a Coniferous Man," we again  find  the speaker "burrowing  into   the   pith   /  of wood," seeking  "the deep,  deep  inside  / where   I  see  nothing else  /  but   the  ab­ sence   /  like  a  cave."   In   "Charlatan," likewise characterized by the proliferating imagery  of entrapment, "the ground held him  fast as its own  ... until he  was com­ pletely  smothered."
Unlike   the   "muttering,"  "grimacing"
 males in This Planet  Earth, those who achieve, or embody,  communion with na­ ture,  with  the cosmos, are predominantly female.  Not  surprisingly,  they  are  asso­ ciated  with  imagery  of  open  spaces,  sky, ascension,  sun,  stars:   "The stars  gyrate with  her-/  she  touches them  with  fin­ ger  tips"  ("She  Prefers   Not  To  Pine") ; "she  bled  sun"  ("Sacrament"); "leaves  grow  from  her  hair   / her  body  is green all over"  ("Jamie"). It is in such  poems, rather than  the "travel" ones, that  Daby­  deen is strongest  and  most  convincing. In the longest poem of the group, "They Call This Planet  Earth," both  of  these  image clusters coalesce, giving us an unusually optimistic assertion:  like Tom  Wolfe's "right stuff"  astronauts testing  the  outer limits  of  the  envelope, pushing further into  Edge City, "We  will continue to rise higher   / As we  test  the  outer  reaches   / of the sky."
Colloquially told anecdotes and  local colour  sketches  form  the  strongest  poems in  John   Lane's short   collection of  nine­ teen poems. "Pat and  I, Chinatown, Ver­  non, Circa  July,  I946" shares  with  other Canadian literature an  emphasis on  the inviolable  reality  of childhood experience, of  memories  of   the  little   town  and   the pleasant   mysteries  of   long   ago   which resist, in  this case,  the  fiery world  of the present.  The voice  in  "Fragments" and "Richland Flats," with  its colloquialisms, slang  and  wall-to-wall obscenities recalls the  more  sustained  and   successful   per­ formance   of   Stan    Dragland's   Peeker­ tracks.   Like   Ms.   Lane   in   Divinations, Colson   suggests  in   his   title   poem   and others  that  "Fragility is the beauty  of it."  Yet, for the most part, he fails to approxi­ mate  her gentle evocation of the delicate, elusive surface of things.  His experiments in  repetition  ("Theory of  Maps," "Near Quoddy  Head," "To A  Lady," "Wind, wind,"  in  particular) seem  to me  to con­  tribute to a needless stockpiling of images that impede  the force of the verse, leaving

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



it at times deflated  and unmusical. "My father  is  dead,   and   partakes   with   the sods"  ("The Field  Where  He  Mowed") and  other unfortunate lines mar  this col­ lection which,  like John Lane's, strikes me as somewhat self-indulgent  and  obscure.  Seldom  do they compel  our attention and admiration as much  as  that  work  which strives to rouse us from a long ontological sleep, Divinations.
MICHAEL HURLEY


BETWEEN NIGHTMARE AND DREAM

DAVID    DONNELL,    Dangerous Crossings.   Black
Moss, $6.g5.
ROBERT CURRIE, Yarrow. Oberon, $I2.95, $5.95 pa.
GAIL   Fox, In Search of Living Things. Oberon,
$I 2.95,  $5.95   pa.
WITH DAVID DONNELL's Dangerous Cross­ ings one  can,  regrettably, judge  the  book by its cover.  We  have  here  a  quasi-Ror­ schachian  blot,   a  cute   visual   pun:  a Charon-like  figure   punts  across  a   blue expanse  in  a  red  boat  which,  in  turn,  is shaped  like  a  pair  of   rather large  lips. Presumably the "poet" is offering to share  with  us his "quest" after  an  understand­ ing  of  life's   (and  love's)   wondrous am­  biguities. Unfortunately the  book, like its cover,  just  doesn't deliver  and   provides  little real  excitement, remaining simply a curious example  of  self-conscious  intel­ lectualism.
!Most   remarkable  throughout  these forty-two poems-dedicated    to   "Billy, Neil, Hiram, Bhudda & George"-is the singular lack  of  irony  in  Mr.  Donnell's self-indulgent pose  as  the  chic  aesthete, the  strangely anachronistic hipster  intel­ lectual; consider  an excerpt  from "Atlan­ tan  Confusions":  "Why  don't  I  run  for
office as  a  dadaist mayor  I or  traffic  in gold   and   buy   an   enormous   beach?  I

I68
 Every day  the  dictionary falls open  at different pages."
"The Cock  Poem," "Position" (where making love  is, you  guessed  it,  "one   of the most beautiful positions of prayer"), "How To  Become  a Fashionable Writer" and  so on are all of the same ilk:  hardly offensive in themselves, they are merely indifferent, pedestrian. George  Bowering's early   response   to  Donnell-"We  have not,  it seems, heard   the  last of the  Mau­ berleys"     ( C L,    I3)  -is    unnecessarily harsh.   For    despite    these   reservations, Donnell  can   be  successful   when   he   is least  introverted and  least solemn.  Poems like  "Satie at  the  Disco,"  "Rustic," and "Making it  in  the  City"  are  all  highly crafted,  witty,   intelligent   and   compas­ sionate; they  manage to be  unique  with­  out   becoming  idiosyncratic or  eccentric. They are,  however, as  Bowering   would hasten to  add,  only  isolated  examples in this short collection. I hope  they indicate not a freak lapse, but  a new, future direc­ tion  for  Donnell.
Robert Currie's Yarrow, on  the  other hand, is  a  thoroughly  satisfying  collec­ tion  which   charts the  growth,  develop­ ment,  and   changing  perceptions of  the title-named   child   protagonist.   Divided
into six general  sections, these interrelated
poems  are  grounded in  the  particular  lo­ cale of the Canadian prairies.  Oberon has put  together yet another sumptuous book, its laid  paper, cover  illustration  by  Bruce St.  Clair, and  design  by Michael  Mack­ lem  make  it  unquestionably a  collector's item.
Like   Kurelek's  illustrations  for   Mit­ chell's Who  Has  Seen  the  Wind,  Cur­ rie's  stark  verse conveys  the  essential  feel of   prairie  vastness.   His   characters  are contemporary  Crusoes who  must  survive an overwhelming landscape which  is both inert and  belligerent, benevolent and  de­ structive. Yarrow's world  is at  once  sub­ lime  and   beautiful, poignant and  horri­ fic;  his  experiences involve  the  contrari-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



eties of still deer and  savage  badgers, pris­ tine   mornings  and   howling   midnights. This  sense  of an  ambiguous  physical  en­ vironment,  moreover,  is  matched  by  an equally    uncertain    metaphysical   realm where,  as Yarrow's father (and  Northrop Frye in another context)  remarks, we en­  dure  as best we can:

I was  never much for  religion though God  knows 	there's  times I think I've been  in  Hell
Huh 	and it's   your   mother  says the  devil's greatest triumph
is  that he's got  everybody today thinking he  don't exist

Oh  I believe  in  Hell  all  right Still I don't know  about heaven I just 	don't  know
The way I always  see it
we  have  to  do  our  living   here
I mean   this  is all  we know  for  sure
It's kind   of  like  we're stuck   somewhere between a nightmare and  a dream

Currie is at his best dealing with young Yarrow's  altering  perceptions  of  adult life. Not  once  does  he dwindle into  tired innocence-to-experience formulae; he pro­ vides,  rather, incomparable and  uncom­ promising portrayals of one  mind's  grad­ ual  accommodation to  the  outer world.  Yarrow  moves   from   solipsism   to  com­ munity, from  self to world; in the process he  grows  from  fragmentation to integra­ tion,  from   a  childish   perception of  life and   morality   towards  a   more   flexible understanding  of experience. Yarrow,  in other words, delineates a "process  of iden­  tity" -a process by which  character and reader alike are  led toward a comprehen­ sion  of   that   middle-earth, that   peculiar
area  lying "somewhere f between  a night­
mare  and  a  dream."
It is precisely  this need  to form  a viable personality, to  create a  self  able  to con­ front   the  otherness of  the  world,  which underlies Gail Fox's remarkable new book, In Search of Living  Things. This  admir­ able  collection represents a  definite ma­  turation since  her  previous  two  produc-
 tions,  Flight  of  the  Pterodactyl    ( I973) and God's Odd Look ( I976). Stylistically, Fox has strengthened the evocative powers of  her  crisp,  haiku-like verse; intellectu­ ally, she has  infused  this  "elemental" or minimal  form  of  lyrical  expression   with a more mature, more contoured response to  the  intricacies of  everyday  life.  Rich,  compassionate,  prophetic, this  is  one  of the  finest, most  exciting collections to  be published  in  recent  years.
Ms. Fox  divides  her  book  into  six  dis­ crete  sections,  each  dealing with  specific aspects  of  her   own  life.  We  encounter Gail  Fox the  poet,  the lover, the harassed  mother, the  estranged  woman; Gail  Fox the clumsy tourist,  the bereaved sister, the inspired   vates. In  each  case  the  poetry  addresses  the  complexities of  survival  in a contemporary society, the  difficulties  of achieving sanity,  stability  and  coherence in the face of ever-changing moral,  social and  psychological  contexts. Admittedly Fox's poetic experiments do not always succeed -some  of  these  poems,  for  ex­ ample,  are   enigmatic,  bordering  on  in­ comprehensible; they reflect shards rather than synthesized  perceptions of individual experiences.
Such  failures,   however,   are   rare   and for  the  most  part  Ms.  Fox  writes  superb poetry   which  continues to  resonate,  re­ vealing   subtle   implications,  long   after  one's  initial   reading. One   thinks  imme­ diately  of Sappho, Catullus, and  Blake;  of  Whitman, Plath,  and   oddly  enough, Allen Ginsberg.  Here is a "religious" poet who  celebrates  exuberantly, who  praises the  angelic  flesh  and   the  heavenly  ima­  gination, a  prophet who  teaches  the  pos­ sibilities of  love, health  and  regeneration:

Nothing lacking me,  perfect I am, created of You,  bright Sun, pale  Moon, small  stars   and   straight  trees
Joy  extends everywhere

And  everyone's body  is like  lace,  so delicate the  cool  eye  warms   and   touches there and
there

I6g

BOOKS IN REVIEW



While black  leaves  at night  sing  and  extend and reach for  light, red  light  of  peace  and
meaning
between the  dying  elms

I am  forced beyond my  death to see
the  Night, black  light  and  blacker leaves

Nothing lacking in me, my children, anyone, the  perfect Beings,  I see this  way, and  then
the
moment  passes

Above  all else I want  to see

Throughout  this   collection   Fox   con­ tinually verbalizes  the  most intense  ener­  gies  and   experiences. Bone-hard,  oracu­ lar,  In Search of Living Things confirms  Gail Fox as one of our most accomplished younger  writers,  deserving of  the  utmost  critical attention.

GARY A.  BOIRE


INNIS'S BIAS

WILLIAM   CHRISTIAN,   ed.,   The   Idea   File  of Harold    Adams    Innis.    Univ.  of   Toronto Press.

HAROLD INNIS'S "idea file" consists of  al­ most  1500  notes   taken   by  Innis   in  the period    1945-1952,   now   arranged   in  a "tentative"  chronological order   by  Wil­ liam   Christian.  Christian  has   also   at­  tempted to trace  the sources for many  of the notes in Innis's reading  of  the period; his  annotations in  this  area  are  impres­  sively  wide-ranging  (like  the reading of Innis  himself), but  they are not complete
-leaving  the  student of Innis's intellec­ tual  development with  some  difficult  in­ vestigation yet to do.
Innis's "idea file"  belongs to that  later part of his career in which  he had  taken up  what   Carl  Berger  has  rightly  termed his "almost obsessive" investigation of how technologies of communication biased the cultures that  generated them.  The   notes here  collected show Innis seeking out evi­ dence   that   will  support  his  thesis,  evi-

qo
 dence   that   at   times   reveals   a   brilliant ability  to draw  inferences and  make con­ nections,  that  at  other times  shows  Innis  forcing  conclusions that  his  reading  will not   bear,   and   that   on   some   occasions shows  him  producing a  magpie's nest  of theoretical statement out of unassimilated materials. Innis's notes are  also  revealing as an  indicator of  the  further  weakening of a  writing style  that  had  never  been  a model  of lucidity and  logic. The  aphoris­ tic,   apothegmatic  character of  these jottings  may  be  directly   linked  with  the styles  of   Empire   and   Communications and  The Bias of Communication. (There are  connections, as  well,  in  subject mat­ ter; the  editor   does  not  trace   these,  but a  cursory  comparison of  the  "idea  file" with   the   books  suggests  that   such  con­ nections would  be worth  pursuing.)
By the  time  of  the  period  covered   by this book, Innis's characteristic unit of thought had  become  the sentence, or even the  sentence fragment. Thinking of  this kind   is  characteristically  productive  of the  detached "insight" but  is totally  un­ suitable  for  sustained  logical  argument, argument of the  kind  necessary  to  make Innis's expansive  investigation of human cultures through  time  wholly  persuasive. As S. D. Clark: observed, Innis's style was "cryptic"; and the  notes in the "idea file" show   the   basis  for   this   tantalizing  ob­ scurity.
Publication  of   this   book   raises   two other important questions. Why,  despite his growing anti-Americanism of these years, did  Innis  rely so heavily  on Ameri­ can  studies   of  communications  and   the corruption  of  culture? There  are,   pro­  portionately,  surprisingly  few  references to the substantial amount of  British  work in  this  area  during the  post-1945  period. And,   of   greater   importance,  does   this collection  provide  further evidence   that  Innis  is, as several  reviewers  of  the  book have  claimed, one  of  Canada's foremost  intellectuals? It  is  possible  to  argue,   on

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the  basis of these  notes,  that  Innis  is the very model  of a social  scientist's intellec­ tual,  cut  off  (by his rural  and Baptist  up­ bringing)   from   any   acquaintance  with literary  culture  and   the   subtleties  and complexities of  language. His  few  refer­ ences to literature show neither sensitivity nor  inwardness,  merely   a  penchant  for ransacking it (through secondary sources) in  search   of  "evidence." So  Dickens   is described  as an  author of "novels  of  sen­ sationalism" ("proof"  of  the  decline of standards) and  Tolstoy's [sic] The  Broth­ ers Karamazov is vaguely referred to as an example of  how  the  background  of  the Russian   novel  can  be  found   in  the  ten­ sion between  the Orthodox Church (with  its  Greek   traditions)   and   the   Russian state.  More disturbing still is the  number of   books  from   the   years   1945-52  that  Innis   seems  to   have   ignored   or   over­ looked: writers  such  as T.  S. Eliot,  Karl Popper,  Gilbert  Ryle,   George    Orwell, F. R. Leavis,  Lionel  Trilling, and  Julian and  Aldous  Huxley, among many  others, make  no appearance in Innis's notes. Al­ though  he may have  wanted to avoid  the biases  of  the  contemporary  world,  Innis  demonstrates the  narrowness of his intel­  lectual   position  in  avoiding at  the  same time   those   who   might   have  helped   to shape  his ideas  more coherently. Perhaps the  time  has  come  for students of Innis's  thought to take  a  harder look  at  his own bias in favour of  the oral  tradition-not as an  insight,  but as a handicap.

DAVID JACKEL


*   Canadian   Newspapers:  The   Inside   Story,
edited by Walter Stewart.    Hurtig  Publishers,
$14-95·    This  is   a   disappointing  book.    At present, when the  Canadian  newspapers are  in a   state  of   major  transition  and    crisis,   one
could have  done  with  a close study, by involved people, of  the  industry, what is wrong with  it and   what could   be  done   to  give  us  a  respon­ sible  and  intelligent daily   press.  But  the  jour­ nalists  who    have    contributed   to    Canadian
 Newspapers   have    taken  the    subtitle  of   the book,  "The  Inside Story" much too  literally; what   they  produce is  anecdote rather than analysis,   and   the   sad   old   stereotype  of   the drunken newsman occupies too  large  a  part  of the  stage.  Yet  even  on  this  level  the  majority of   the   contributions  are   weak    and    boring. Alden  Nowlan, Heather Robertson and  Michael Enright  present lively  and   interesting  bits  of what   is essentially autobiography,  but  most  of the others write  so wretchedly that they demon­ strate one  at least  of the  reasons for  the failure of our  newspapers: the  quality of  their writers who  almost   invariably write  journalese rather than  journalism.
G.W.

**  TED     FERGUSoN,   Desperate    Siege:    The Battle   of   Hong    Kong.   Doubleday,   $13.95· There is  a  way  of  writing history   that  trans­ forms    it   into    stage    melodrama.   Crisis   and  rhetoric  loom   larger-than-life,  and   historical personages are  made to  have  flamboyant con­  versations,  as   though  the   historian  had    at­ tended with  a romanticizing  tape  recorder. Yet it is true  that in moments of crisis  people  often  do  utter  the  cliches of  melodrama. And   Fer­ guson  is to  be  praised for  interviewing the  sur­  vivors   of   the    18-day  battle  for   Hong  Kong, and  for reconstructing the  events of I 941.  The battle   between  ill-equipped   but    determined Canadian troops  and  the  equally determined Japanese desezves  to be a better known episode in  Canadian  history, because it   tells  both   of courage and  inefficiency, of spirit and  of a fail­ ure  to  communicate openly, of  a  capacity  for endurance and, perhaps least  attractive, of  an  apparent  wiilingness to  undezvalue  the   com­  mitments and  achievements of  the  past.  There is  a  reforming  impulse  to  the   story   Ferguson tells. His evangelical style  may  well  be a means to  that  end.
W.N.

*  MARGARET LAURENCE, The  Christmas Birth­ day  Story.  McClelland  &  Stewart, $9-95· Any  story   Laurence  tells   takes   on   her  voice.  We  become  aware of  the  teller, as  here, where (in   a  form   designed  to   engage   children  as listeners  and   to  allow   them    to  visualize   the scenes   they  are   told   about)  she  recounts  the story   of   the   birth  of   Christ.   Unfortunately Helen  Lucas's   illustrations   negate  the   book.  They are  static, and   they  are  riddled with   a brand of  cuteness that  does  not  serve  the  dy­ namic   symbolism   of   the   Christian  narrative.

w.N.


171





IILARK ASCENDING"

IN 1927 MAZO DE LA ROCHE's jalna was awarded a first prize of ten thousand dol­ lars in  the  Atlantic  Monthly  fiction com­ petition. The  award  brought  her   con­ siderable attention, a dramatic change  in lifestyle  and  "longed-for  independence."1
During the autumn of that  year she vaca­ tioned  at Rockport, Massachusetts, where she  began   work  on  the  first  chapter of Whiteoaks, a  sequel  to  Jalna. Despite a six  month period  during  which  she  was unable to write, Whiteoaks was completed the   following  year.  Then, with   Jalna's sales soaring and  her fear of a permanent block   to   her   writing  overcome,    de   la Roche  and  her  cousin  Caroline Clement made plans  that  reflected  their  new sense of  freedom: "We  felt  that  a chapter in our lives was closed. A new world was opening up."2   The "new  world"  was  to be  the   Old   World,   the  world   she  had dreamed of  visiting  since her  childhood, the   world   which    was   to   provide    the setting  and  inspiration for several short stories,  plays and  novels.
De la Roche embarked from  New York
for  her  first trans-Atlantic crossing in the winter  of 1929 and  celebrated her fiftieth birthday in  Taormina, Sicily,  where  she remained until  May.  During this  period she wrote several short stories including "Quartet"; this  story,  in  its general  out­ lines   so  reminiscent  of  Henry   James's studies  of American and  European man­ ners,  portrays an  escape  from   drabness  and  confinement  to an  exhilarating new life  in  the  Old  World  and  the  discovery of  an  unexpected  and   unpleasant  com­ plexity in  that  world. It anticipates  Lark Ascending  ( 1932) ,3 a  novel  which  offers de  la  Roche's most  detailed exploration
 of the clash between  North American and European cultures and  suggests  her  own complicated  responses   to   her   new   life abroad.
1The settings  of Lark  Ascending-Salt­
port,  Massachusetts, and  Tramontana, Sicily -are  fictional  counterparts  of Rockport, where  de la Roche vacationed late  in  the  summer of  1927, and  Taor­ mina,   the  seaside  village  which  she  first visited in the winter of 1929 and again  in
1930. Her  autobiography and  her  letters reveal  the  extent of  her  sense  of  excite­
ment  and  independence during these months and  are  filled  with  detailed  des­ criptions of events,  places and individuals that  were eventually integrated into  Lark Ascending.4 When  she  returned to  Eng­  land   in  November  of  1931, she  was  al­ ready  deeply  engrossed   in  the  idea  of  a new  novel:

During those  months  of absence  from  Eng­ land  I had  written some short  stories  and  I had  it in  mind  to begin  a new novel, some­ thing   quite   different  from   the  Whiteoaks  novels-for   I   thought I  had   done   with them   when   Finch's   Fortune   was  finished. The  scene of this  new  novel  was to open  in New England, then move on to Sicily. When I told  Ellery  Sedgwick  of  this  he implored  me   to   stick   to   the   country I  knew -to write  of Canada,  not  of New  England. But I persisted  and  when  he read  the completed  manuscript he  said  he  very  much  liked  it.5

Work  on  the  novel  continued after   she settled   at   the   home   she  had   rented   in Devon   with   two  recently   adopted  chil­ dren:

Now  with   my  enlarged  family  about   me, I  worked    somewhat    erratically  on   Lark
'Ascending. Ellery  Sedgwick's  disapproval of
the  setting   of  the   story   had   affected   me.
Sometimes I could  not  write  for depression.
. . . Sometimes   I wrote   with   exhilaration, feeling  I was back once  more  in Sicily.(;

The novel,  the  first  since  1926 in  which she turned away from  the Whiteoaks, was completed in 1932.
Despite   the    reservations  concerning

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



Lark  Ascending  expressed  by some of de la  Roche's friends and  literary advisors,7 the  novel  was  generally well  received  as the  following  remarks from  a review  by V. S. Pritchett suggest:

The book  is  a  trick, but   how  expertly the trick  is concealed! How  convincing it  is that her  people should have  decided to leave  the deadness  of  Cape  Cod   for   a   hair-brained voyage to  Sicily,  how  unexpected, rich, yet not  improbable their sea-change. She  is exuberant without running to nerves  and wordy excitement; she  gives  her  cramped characters a change of air in order that they may   have   a full   release and   development, and   one  has  a  growing confidence that  she is the  right person to imagine it generously.8

Several   similarly   positive  reviews  of  the novel  appeared in Canadian and  Ameri­ can  journals and  de la Roche felt that  her confidence in the  book was vindicated.9
Lark   Ascending   is   typical   of   de   la
Roche's writing  in its strengths and weak­ nesses and   reveals  many  of  the  essential features of  her  work: humour,  irony,  a blend  of realism  with  romance, sentimen­ talism  and  melodrama, the  translation of private experience into fiction,  a preoccu­ pation with characters in search of greater
independence and  self fulfillment, and  a balancing  awareness of  the  negative effects of aggressive individualism. Like many  of de la Roche's works representing a  departure from   the  Whiteoak  Chron­ icles, Lark  Ascending  has  been  virtually  ignored or forgotten. Yet, despite its flaws and  limitations, it  remains an  interesting and  suggestive  novel which contributes to a   more   complete and   accurate  under­ standing of one  of  the  most  prolific  and popular Canadian writers  of the first half of this  century  and  allows  a clearer   per­ ception  of the extent, variety  and  signifi­ cance   of  her  contribution  to  Canadian literature.
The novel  is  related  not  only  to  the many fictional  studies of  Americans
abroad  by  such   well  known   authors  as
Mark  Twain, Henry James,  Edith Whar-
 ton  and  Ernest   Hemingway  but  also  to the  long tradition of Canadian novels by writers such as James  de Mille, Sara Jean­ nette   Duncan,  Mordecai   Richler,  Nor­  man  Levine,  and  Robertson Davies  con­ cerned  with delineating cultures distinctly  different from  or strangely similar  to our own. It also adds  a further dimension to the image  of Americans in de  la Roche's writing10 and suggests both her view of Europe and  perhaps some  of the  reasons for  her  decision  to spend  a large  portion of her own life overseas.
Lark  Ascending  reveals  de  la  Roche's
sympathy  for  the  dream of freedom and self fulfillment  and  her  view that  Europe offered the context in which  that  dream might   be best  achieved. There  is,  how­ ever,  a  strong   sense  of  dialectic  in  this novel and  European  civilization is identi­ fied not  only with  colour,  vitality, refine­ ment  and  historical richness  but also with empty  gestures,  indifference, deceit,  and moral corruption. Similarly, the romantic dream of independence is linked  not only with  a free exploration of life's  possibili­ ties  but also  with  a life  of self  gratifica­ tion which  is itself narrow and  confining. Although these tensions  remain essentially unresolved,  they  provide the  framework for the  novel's dramatization of  contrast­ ing cultural characteristics and its examin­ ation  of individualism and independence. Ultimately,  Lark   Ascending   transcends national or cultural boundaries and moves to  an  affirmation  of   freedom and   love, appropriate  alternatives to  the  ominous
implications of  the   novel's  sparse  refer­ ences  to  the  Depression and  Mussolini's growing power.
Many  nationalities are  represented in
Lark Ascending, but the major figures are the  "quartet" of restless Americans seek­ ing an alternative to the monotonous and repressive    conditions   of    puritan  New England. The central figure,  Fay  Palmas,
owns  a  well  worn  copy  of  Huckleberry
Finn and dreams of escaping from  cramp-

173

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



ing confinement to a freer, more resonant life. The territory she lights out for, how­ ever,  is not  beyond  the limits  of  civiliza­ tion   in   the   American  west  but   in   the highly   civilized   and   sophisticated  Old  World. With  her  once fine singing  voice and  her  intense longing to rise out  of the narrow and  stifling  conditions  of the sus­ picious,  reserved   and   inbred   village   of Saltport, Massachusetts, Fay is, of course, the  lark of  the  novel's  title. A typical  ro­ mance  heroine, she  is a  "passionate pil­ grim"  in  search   of  a  new  identity. Her travelling  companions  include   her   de­ voted  admirer, Purley  Bond,  her  cousin, Josie  Froward, and  her  son  Diego.
Like  Finch  Whiteoak  (Whiteoak
Chronicles), Lindley   (A Boy  in  the House), Joan  Elliot   (The  Thunder of New  Wings)  and   numerous other  ima­ ginative artists  in  de  la  Roche's  fiction, Diego   resents   the  alien  environment  in which   he  finds  himself  and  aspires  to  a new  life.  Proud,  aloof  and  self  centred, his  closest  attachment  is  to  his  mother with  whom  he  shares  a  deep-seated fear of entrapment and  a  reckless determina­ tion  to achieve  self  fulfillment. In a brief
synopsis  of  the  novel,  de  la  Roche  des­ cribes  Diego  and  Fay  as Yankee idealists, "self-sufficient,  self-centred-responding to an inward urge rather than  to outward circumstances.''11
During the  transatlantic voyage,  Fay's feelings often seem to mirror  de la Roche's reactions to her own new-found freedom; she experiences a "wild  joy in her escape from   . . .  years  of  hateful  bondage" and eagerly  anticipates "the  Old  World  with the  rapturous hope  that  spurred early ex­ plorers on  toward  the  New." 12    She  as­ sumes a variety  of poses in a frantic effort "to  absorb  in  haste  what life had  so long denied her" and,  since  "truth was  con­ genitally distasteful to her," she fabricates a glamorous past.  At Tenerife, she meets Gian Montleone, an  impoverished count  from   an   ancient  Sicilian  family.  Mont-
 leone  urges  her  to visit  his home  in Tra­ montana and,  driven  by "a  primitive de­ termination not  to  allow  conventions to deprive her  of this romantic escape  from the  tameness   of  ordinary  relations," she agrees  and compels  the other members of the  group  to  join  her.
Fay's involvement with Montleone
parallels Diego's affair  with Varvara Wol­ konsky. Varvara is typical of de la Roche's passionate and  instinctive earth  mothers. Born   in  Russia,   raised   in  Paris  and   at home  almost  anywhere, she describes  her­  self as a " 'worshipper of  life' " and  repre­ sents  a  degree  of  independence and  ex­ perience and  a  lack  of constraint which  sharply contrast   with   that   of  the   four Americans. Her  exotic   background, her slanting eyes,  the  sensuousness   and  sim­ plicity   of   her   movements,  her   laconic  acceptance  of  life,  her  husky  voice  and  unrepressed  sexuality  recall  similar  char­ acteristics of Delight Mainprize (Delight), Fawnie  Sharroe  (Possession), and   a  va­ riety  of  figures  in  the  Jalna novels:  "All that  she  did   was  so  right   and   natural. She  lived  her  life  as  naturally and  with no more  ostentation and  pretence than  a deer in a forest."
Varvara fosters an increased individual­ ism and  spontaneity in  Diego's  paintings including one in which she appears as "a
goatgirl squatting nude  among her ... horned, strange-eyed goats." The painting reinforces  an   earlier implication that Diego's  fascination with  his new environ­ ment  is partly the  result  of his awareness of   the   Old   World's   willingness  to   ac­ knowledge and  even  celebrate its  primi­ tive and  vital  roots in  the past.
Diego's involvement with  Varvara and
the  Nariskins,  expatriate  Russian artists, alters   his  art and   his  relationship  with Josie   who  has  previously   shared   in  his painting by shaping the chaotic energy  of his  work  into  a more   serene  and  disci­ plined  form.  The  Europeans urge Diego to complete his  works  without  Josie's  in-

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



terference and  warn   that   her  tampering with  his paintings removes their  emotion, vitality  and  unique vision. Ironically, the independence which  Varvara defends  as a  necessary  adjunct to  a  satisfying   and vital artistic vision is the cause  of the fail­ ure of her  relationship with  Diego. He  is attracted by  her  beauty,  inspired  by  her vitality   and  independence  yet  fearful   of her  strength. Her  efforts  at seduction fail because   he  associates  sexual  experience with  a crippling loss of  power  and  inde­  pendence.
Diego  shares  this obsession  with  power and  self-sufficiency  with  Fay,  who,  soon after   her   arrival  in   Sicily,  attempts  to make  Montleone "subservient to her in will."   In  this   relationship  as  in   many others  in her  writing, de la Roche reveals a  fascination with  power  and  powerless­ ness and   the  manner in  which power  is gained, manipulated and  lost  in  human relationships. In Lark  Ascending power is associated with  individual  freedom and self-assurance which are identified through Diego and  Fay  with  an  egocen­ tric  and  often  thoroughly selfish appetite for self-fulfillment and  independence. Fay and  Diego  share  "their concentration on their  own  needs"  and  draw  energy  from their  separate yet similar  commitments to independent  and   vital   lives.  Fay's  con­ tinuing need  for  Diego  reflects  her  des­ perate  need   for   an   objective  image   of independence  and   self   sufficiency.   She perceives  her new role in life as an oppor­ tunity  to fashion  a  unique dramatic per­  formance without  the interference or self sacrifice  which have previously  stifled her existence.
Yet here, as elsewhere in her fiction,  de
la Roche acknowledges that  the romantic pursuit  of  independence can   lead   to  a form of self-regarding individualism which may   result   in   uninhibited  exploitation, alienation  and    confinement.  Fay   and Diego    attempt  to   separate   themselves from  their  conventional pasts, pasts which
 involved  self sacrifice  and  a  sense of  re­ striction. The  energy, creativity and spon­  taneity  displayed  in  their  quests for free­ dom are  attractive; nevertheless, they be­ come  increasingly isolated  and  unrelated. Moreover,  attention is repeatedly drawn to  the  relationship between their  dream of  independence and   their  childlike  self­ ishness. Fay "never [forgets] herself"; her thoughts are "egotistically childlike." Like an  "exuberant child" she  carelessly  ab­ sorbs the solicitude of others  and greedily seeks new experiences and  greater self ful­ fillment.  Although Diego's  selfish  search  for  independence appears  as  partly   the counterpart to  the  commitment  to  and  development of  his  artistic vision,  Fay's  increasing  lack of relatedness is not identi­ fied with any similar  goal  and  appears at times  as  a  pathetic  consequence of  the fears  associated   with   her   enclosed   and life-denying  past  and  her  romantic  long­ ing for a life fully  lived.  In  contrast, the loyalty,  honesty,  restraint  and selflessness of Josie Froward and,  in  particular, Pur­ ley  Bond  appear  increasingly attractive. Their failure  to adapt to  the  Old  World  appears less the result  of a lack of wisdom or  maturity  than a  conscious  unwilling­ ness to  accept  deceit  and   moral  conup­ tion as inevitable components of a sophis­ ticated    and    historically   rich    culture. Josie's  loss of her  amber tinted glasses in one  of the  final  scenes  of  the  novel sug­ gests  her  new-found  willingness  to  con­ front  life more  directly and  her  growing appreciation for  Bond's  "sturdy  power  of taking   life  as  it  came,   without  fear,  or irritation, or self-assertion."
The  complexity of the  Old  World  and the failure  to recognize its proud and an­ cient  heritage are  the  focus  of  attention following  Fay's  marriage to  Monteleone. When  Fay converts a portion of his ances­ tral  home,  the  Villa  Benedittini, into  an antique shop,  Montleone's resentment of her aggressive acquisitiveness and the pro­ cess by which he is gradually dispossessed

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



of his  past  results  in  his adulterous  rela­ tionship  with   Varvara. The   choice   of Montleone's garden for Fay's discovery of this "dark sea of knowledge" is carefully  prepared for  throughout the  novel.  Fay initially  regards the garden  as "a dream"; however,   the  descriptive  details  hint   at her  innocence and  emphasize   the  com­ plex reality  of the world she has entered:
Neglected  flower-beds pressed   between and ran  over  in  urgent foliage.  Cyclamen showed blue  and   violet   and  narcissi starry white. Oranges  and   lemons   glinted. Urns   placed on  the  walls  overflowed  in  hanging  flowers and   tendrils. From a  gargoyle face,  set  in  a stone niche, a  jet of water fell  bubbling into a  basin.  A  flock   of  doves   that   had   been fe ding
wmgs,  and   found perches for  themselves on a  wall  and   tree.  One settled  on  the  head  of
a  marble figure of  a  man,  weather-stained and  clothed in  moss.

In  the   later   scene,   the   garden,   trans­ formed by  moonlight,  is  associated  with Fay's  painful  disillusionment as she con­ fronts  the sordid  destruction of her dream.
Fay's  decision  to separate from  Mont­ leone  is less the  result  of  his  affair  with Varvara than  a response  to the  restraint she   feels   in   his   presence,   a   restraint closely  related  to  the  clearly  delineated contrasts between  Americans and   Euro­  peans.  With  Montleone, Fay  experiences  a  loss  of   power   she  associates  with   his familiarity with  "the secret  of an  old civilization." In  his  presence  she  often feels  "young and  inexperienced," robbed of  her  strength  and   self-assurance.   She fails to understand the complexities of Montleone's nature  and   refuses  to  see "that her  inexperience often  struck  a jarring note on his sensitive nerves." Var­ vara   provides a  further  insight  into  the essential    difference   between    Fay   and Montleone:

"Yes, you. look  very  wonderful, but -you are.   a  child.  You    know    nothing   really. either
httle-yes -since  Gian   and   I have   had you  in  hand, but  you are still-very  boring.

q6
 You  are  many  centuries behind us. It is only for   us   to   tolerate  you   while   we   must­ while  there  is  nothing  better.  No-no­ do  not  be angry! -you  have much to make  up  to  you  for  what you  lack. Your  strength
-your newness-your  aggressiveness.... See,  you  have taken all  that Montleone had
-his   house-his    garden -his   name­
even, as  well  as you  can,  you  have  imitated his way  of speaking. He  has  nothing left  but his spirit, his  knowledge, come  down  to  him from  Romans and  Greeks  and  Saracens and Moors. You   cannot take   that. You   cannot understand that.... That is left  for  me."

Her  comments reflect  resentment for  the American  intruders   who   thoughtlessly seek  enrichment  at   the   expense   of  the rightful heirs  of the  culture.
.Despite  the   destruction  of  Fay's   life with   Montleone  and   Varvara's   hostile
image   of  the   Europeanized  Americans, Fay  and  Diego  manage to  achieve their dreams of  free  and   regenerated  lives  in the  Old  World. Shortly  after  the  disclo­ ure
mg  that  Fay  may attempt suicide,  follows
her  to the top of the Teatro Greco. There she recognizes  that  Fay  is rehearsing "her new   part   in  life"; she  watches   as  Fay draws   forth    "a   reed-pipe  of   the   kind played    by   the   Sicilian    pipers    in   the street": "A  high  note,  shrill  and  tremu­ lous,  issued  from   the   pipe.   It   was  fol­ lo:-ved by one  of  the  wild  tunes,  charged With passion  and  vitality,  that  had  been played   among  these   mountains  in   the pagan days."
These "wild   tunes" are  distinctly  dif­
ferent from  the melancholy expressions  of entrapment and  the  longing  for  freedom identified with  the negro spirituals Fay's broken voice  has  attempted in  the  past. The scene confirms Fay's  commitment to her new role and,  despite  Varvara's warn­ ing that  Americans inevitably fail to grasp e
mcreasing awareness of the complex rela­
tionship between the  formal  tradition as­ sociated with   the  richness  of  the  Euro­ pean  cultural heritage and  the  primitive

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



vitality  and  freedom associated with its pagan  past.   Fay  separates  from   Mont­ leone  but  remains a Sicilian Contessa  liv­ ing   in   Montleone's   ancient  villa   and  ironically delighting  in  the  attention  of American tourists. Like  de la Roche,  who had  returned to England in  1932 intend­ ing  to  make  her  home  there,  she  is ex­ hilarated  by  her  new  life and, like de  la Roche who continued to expand the saga of the Whiteoak family,  she maintains her lifestyle by selling  symbols of a dying tra­ dition  with  which  she herself  now identi­ fies.
Like Fay, Diego continues to find value
in the  Old  World. His  adaptation is con­ firmed  by his vision  of Silenus,  the Chief of  the   older   Satyrs   and   companion  to Dionysius:

he  made  out   a  figure  with    rounded  back and  elbows  crooked as  though  a  pipe  were held  to  the  lips.  He  saw  horns, and  brighter eyes   beneath   the    horns-a     figure    that moved with   animal  grace and  careless strength. It moved to  the  rhythm of  an  air
.that  was like  the  breathing of  the  earth, the turn of the  leaves  in sleep.... He  was  made one   with   the   past   of   those   mountains.... His  present and  his  future he  would  give  to them.

Diego's vision of Silenus, like Fay's trance­ like  performance  at   the  Teatro  Greco,  confirms  his  adjustment  to a  new  life in a world  rich  in pagan and mythical asso­ ciations. Unlike  Purley   Bond  and   Josie Froward,  who  feel  strangely unreal   and  out  of  place  in  Sicily,  Diego  achieves  a sense  of  identity and  harmony that  pro­ vides new imaginative energy  and  a fresh spirit of artistic dedication. For Diego and  Fay Palmas,  the artist  and  the actress, the Old  World  offers  a richer milieu,  a new freedom and  an  opportunity to  translate dreams into  reality,  a  strange reversal  of the American myth,  yet one which  is per­ haps  inevitable in  the  work  of an author whose  own  country has  shown  such  am­  bivalent   attitudes  towards its  American neighbours and  its European ancestors.
 Lark Ascending provides a sympathetic view  of  the  romantic longing   to  escape the oppressive  limitations of conventional order  and  the  quest  for  greater  indepen­ dence,  creativity and   self  fulfillment. It also acknowledges that  not everyone  can participate in  this transformation. Purley Bond  and   Josie  Froward  find   the  Old  World   too  ambiguous and   too  sophisti­ cated; often they  seem  awkard and  con­ fused in their confrontation with the more experienced Europeans. Too innocent and bound  by "an  eradicable vein of  Puritan­ ism," they cannot exchange the simplicity  of their  past lives for the richer yet flawed culture of  Europe. Their  decision  to  re­ turn  to America  reflects a clear awareness of the  distinctions between sophistication and  culture, and  in some  ways their  fail­ ure  to adapt, and their  newly  discovered  love  for  one  another, appear  more   im­ portant than  the  new  identities of  their fellow  Americans.  Fay   and   Diego   find that  the  Old   World   offers  new  oppor­ tunities  for self fulfillment and  a promise of more  freedom. Their choices  are understandable, yet  Lark  Ascending  sug­ gests  that   the   pursuit  of   independence can   have  ironic   and   unpleasant  conse­ quences  because  the  world  of the self, of fidelity  only to tl1e self is lonely and  con­ fining.  For  Diego,  the  artist,   the  accep­ tance  of  the loneliness  and  isolation  that accompany his  search   for  freedom   may be necessary, but for Fay the lack of relatedness  arising  from  her  need for self­ gratification and  her  yearning to  be  free lead  only to new  forms  of  imprisonment. Her  dream  of freedom  ends  in a  narrow and   enclosed   life   ironically  unlike   her original  vision of a life of possibilities but perhaps more  acceptable to  her  because it  is self  imposed. The final  scene  of  the novel sharpens the  ironies  as Fay appears years  later   in   her   role   as   a  Contessa. Dressed  in black,  she successfully  conveys an atmosphere of mystery  and  an impres­ sion  of  wide  ranging  experience  in  her

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



encounter with  tourists  from  Massachu­ setts.  After  a  brief  exchange,  she  leaves them, and  passing through a gate into the enclosed  garden of  her villa, she elicits an ironically  appropriate response  from  the outsiders: "What a tragic  figure."
Lark  Ascending  acknowledges  the  sig­
nificance  of  the  pursuit of freedom   and self-fulfillment. At the same time it dramatizes  the   forms   of   imprisonment that  a lack  of  responsibility and  related­ ness can create. Similarly,  the sense of the cultural and  imaginative  richness  of  life in Europe is balanced  by an awareness  of weariness,    decay,   boredom    and    deca­  dence;  and   American  narrowness    and materialism  are  weighed  against   Ameri­  can enthusiasm and  idealism. These  mul­ tiple contrasts are  not resolved, and  Lark Ascending,   like   other  novels   by  de   la Roche, suggests that neither America nor Europe  represents  an   ideal,   and    that neither self-regarding independence nor a narrow and  life-denying repression is an acceptable mode  of existence.  Ultimately the  central  emphasis of  Lark  Ascending lies neither in its portrayal of the clash of cultures nor  in  its  presentation of   indi­ vidual  quests  for  freedom  but  in its ques­ tioning of the  limits  of  individualism and its affirmation of  individual freedom  and creativity based  on  a respect  for honesty, charity and  love.

NOTES

1 Mazo de   Ia  Roche,  Ringing  the   Changes
(London: Macmillan, 1957), p. 197.
z  Ringing the  Changes, p.  202.
3  The de  Ia  Roche  papers at  the  University of Toronto include the manuscript of a four act  play  adapted from  Lark  Ascending.
4  Ringing the  Changes, p. 208.
5  Ringing the  Changes, pp.  223-24.
6  Ringing the  Changes, p. 225.
7   St. John Ervine was particularly  worried by what he  regarded as  the  novel's  diffuse  and episodic structure:   "Your  sense   of   char­ acter is remarkably keen,  and  you  write  dia­ logue  that begs  to  be spoken. I  found these

q8
 qualities in  Lark   Ascending, where I found also  the   faults that are  in  your  play:  that is  to  say,  you  can   create  people,  but   you cannot  make   them   do  anything. The  first half   of   Lark   Ascending   had   me   hopping with   joy;   the  second   half   sent   me  flat   on my  back  with  boredom.... The character­ drawing is superb, but  you leave  your  people lying  about  in   heaps."  (University of  To­ ronto, de  Ia Roche Papers; St. John Ervine, letter to  Mazo   de  Ia  Roche, November 25,
1932.)
s  V.  S.  Pritchett,  Review of  Lark   Ascending, New Statesman and  Nation (September 3,
1932)' p.  262.
9   University of Toronto, de  Ia Roche Papers; Mazo de  Ia Roche, letter to Katherine Hale, October 12,  1932.
1o  See   J. G.   Snell, "The  United States at
Ja!na,"  Canadian Literature, 66   (Autumn
1975), pp.  31-40.
11 University of Toronto, de  Ia Roche Papers.
12   This  and  subsequent quotations are  from Mazo de   Ia  Roche, Lark   Ascending    (To­ ronto: Macmillan, 1932).

DOUGLAS DAYMOND

THREE VIEWS
OF HAIG-BROWN

I.	The  Intellectual  Fisherman
WHEN RODERICK  HAIG·BROWN   died  sud­ denly  in  the  late  fall  of  1976, he  left  be­ hind   him   a   great   legacy   of   published works-some twenty-five  books  in  all: books for  the  young,  two successful  adult novels,  some  richly  personal essays,  and  a host  of works  on fish and  fishing,  most of which  have become  classics in the vast world  of  angling literature. In spite of his many   other  activities,  he   always   con­ sidered himself  primarily as a writer.
Perhaps this was inevitable, for  he was born   into   a  strong   intellectual  environ­ ment.  His   grandfather,   William   Haig­
Brown    (d.   1907), a  fine  writer  and   a good  scholar, had  been  head  of  Charter­ house,    one   of   England's   great  public  schools;  his father, Allen Roderick, killed

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



in  action  on  the  Western Front in  I9I8, was   a   master  at   Lancing  College   in Sussex, a noted  athlete, an ardent angler, and  a frequent writer; and  his maternal grandfather,  Alfred   Pope,   a   brewer   of good  ale and  twice  mayor  of Dorchester, was a well known  antiquarian and  a close friend  of Thomas Hardy.
Rod    had    his   first   article    published when  he  was sixteen   (a  delightful  piece of  juvenilia   about fishing  on  the  River Frome   in  Dorset) ;  and   at   the  age  of twenty-three  his  first   book,  Silver,  the Life  Story  of an  Atlantic Salmon, came off the presses in London. Dedicated to a very   young   nephew,  it  still   remains   a little   classic.  But   the   rest  of  his  works were   written  in   this   country  and   he always looked upon  himself as a Canadian author. And  justly so, for  his entire  adult life  unfolded   in  British  Columbia where from  I 926  on   (with   the  exception of  a brief  period  back  in England) he worked as logger, trapper, fisherman, hunter, and guide  before  settling down  as a most respected citizen  in  Campbell River.
Today in the archives of the University of British  Columbia there  is a rich collec­ tion   of   Haig-Brown   manuscripts:   the originals  of his published works, hundreds of letters  to  innumerable friends  and  as­ sociates,  drafts of  works  done  for  radio  and  television,  and  many  drafts, too,  of works  that   were  never  published during his lifetime-principally essays and  short stories. And  it is from  these archival ma­ terials   that   Valerie  Haig-Brown,  Rod's  eldest  daughter, has  drawn the  nineteen  selections that constitute  Woods and River  Tales. With  the exception of three or four,  these  are  tales never  before  pub­  lished.  Some  perhaps  had   been  rejected  by  editors; and   some  undoubtedly  had been  withheld by the author himself.
'The chosen works have been arranged chronologically. The first eight  were writ­ ten  in  the  years   I930  and    I93I   when Haig-Brown was in his early twenties (he
 was born  in I 9o8) ; the next five between I 935  and   I 939; and   the  last  six  in  the immediate post-war period,   up  to  about I 950.   They   were   called   "tales"  in   tl1e title,  but   this  I find   misleading. True, some  might   be  called   short   stories,  but basically  they  are  character  studies,  ex­ aminations of  the  reactions of  men  and women, young and  old, as they encounter the  stresses inherent in  a  frontier  society
-a society of west coast lumberjacks, hunters,  trappers,  prospectors,  farmers and  fishermen,  for  this  book  fundament­ ally  reveals  Haig-Brown's  own  working  world  and  the  world  of  his  early  friends  and  acquaintances.
Though some of the  earliest  works are
somewhat tentative,  corning   as  they  do from  the pen of a young and still develop­ ing  writer,  the  book  as a  whole  is highly readable. The style generally  is firm  and  condensed, and the characters that emerge  are,  for the  most  part,  memorable. Some of the  dialogue is undoubtedly the  prod­ uct  of  the  author's imagination but  it  is so  convincingly handled  that   we  do  not stop  to question  its authenticity.
With little question, the best of the tales come   from   the   post-war period. "The Wharf"  (published in  The New  Yorker in  I 950)   is the  somewhat sad  story  of a young English boy who, on the eve of his return to England, caught his first  great salmon,  then suddenly lost it as he was weighing it in at the Tyee  Club in Camp­ bell  River.  "The Sweep" looks at  a local chimney  sweep  who  was  overly  fond  of gin.  And  "Black  Fisherman" is a  loving  account of  the  author's  Labrador dog, Souse, that became an expert  retriever of cutthroat   and   steelhead  from   the   fast waters of  the Campbell River. The whole volume ends  with  "Uncle Reg,"  a warm tribute   to   Reg    Pidcock,    the   author's neighbour  and    deep   friend    for   many years.
Al  Purdy's preface, entitled "Cougar
Hunter," was originally published shortly

I79

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



before  Haig-Brown's death. The  caption is misleading, for Haig-Brown was a cou­ gar hunter for but a short  period, and  the work itself is little  more  than a quick look at  his career  as writer  and  magistrate. It has but  slight  critical  worth  and,  because of  the  date  of  its  composition, has  little relationship with Woods and River Tales. This  is regrettable.
'Though  this   volume    adds   little    to Haig-Brown's established reputation, it does  reveal  the  emergence of  his  talents and  will also stand  as a valuable record  of west coast  frontier life in what  is already becoming the distant past.
S.E.READ

II.    The  Naturalist
J HAVE ALWAYS ESTEEMED Roderick Haig-Brown as a man  and  admired him as  a  writer-perhaps  Canada's best  es­ sayist  and   a  late  master   in  the  kind  of descriptive narrative  of  outdoors  adven­ tures at which  the great  natural historians of the  Victorian era  excelled.  I  have seen him  as a  worthy  companion  not  only  of Isaak  Walton  (though  his  interests  were less bounded by  the  angler's needs  than  Walton's) -but   also  of  H.   W.  Bates, Thomas  Waterton,  W.  H.  Hudson, and the Darwin who wrote The Voyage of the Beagle. And  there,  landlocked in  a  past that  ended   almost  twenty  years  ago,  are the books that prove the claim: A River Never  Sleeps, The  Measure  of the  Year (which  perhaps contains his most evoca­ tive  essays) , and   that   splendid  seasonal tetralogy,  Fisherman's Spring, Fisher­  man's   Summer,  Fisherman's   Fall,  and Fisherman's Winter.
Remembering  those   fine   and   some­ times great  books, I cannot do other than  voice   my   disappointment   with   Bright Waters, Bright Fish. It is being  presented as  a  "testament,"  as  Haig-Brown's "last book."   In   fact   it  is  a  text   that   Haig­ Brown   wrote,   in  the  months   before   he died, for  Fisheries and  Ocean Canada; its


180
 subject is sports  fishing as a social and economic resource. Its  size hardly makes it a book;  prelims and  illustrations (often rather poor  ones)   take  up  67 of  its  I40 pages,  so that  there  are  only 73  pages  of actual text,  which   hardly   makes  a  book
- and  at  $Ig.g5  ($75.00 for  the presen­ tation edition!) is expensive reading even in    an    inflationary   decade.   Moreover, Bright Waters, Bright  Fish is not a "testa­ ment" so much  as a combination of pole­ mic  and   report,   arguing  the   merits   of various official approaches to sports  fish­ ing and presenting its moral  and  financial advantages  to   the   community.  Almost any  of Haig-Brown's earlier  books would have  had   a better claim   to  be  called   a testament in  the  sense of evoking  his  joy in life and  in  the  world  of nature.
Obviously the  booki has  an  interest   to anyone  concerned with  Haig-Brown as writer  and  public  personality, but  it can­ not   be  regarded  as  more   than   a  small and  belated pendant to  his  career.  And its lack  of real  inspiration and  originality leads  one  into   a  reconsideration of  the conformation of  Haig-Brown's career.
He began  to publish  when  he was quite young.  When  Silver: the life of an Atlan­ tic Salmon  appeared in  I 93 I, he was  2 3, and   he  was  24  when   Pool  and   Rapid came  out  in  I932.  From that  point   his books  appeared in  quite  rapid  succession
-books on  fishing  and   natural  history, novels  and   juvenile  fiction,  until  the  ap­ pearance of Fisherman's  Fall in I g64.
Then began  the long silence. Year after
year passed.  Haig-Brown wrote  a few articles, became involved   in  some  films, but  no longer  wrote books. Those  who admired  his   writing  were   reluctant  to admit that   this  lapse  in  creativity would last,  and   tried   to  regard   it  as  a  passing phase, due  to his immersion in public activities, as  a magistrate, as  Chancellor of the  University of  Victoria, as a  mem­ ber  of  the  International  Pacific  Salmon Fisheries  Commission.

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



But now, with  this final  Bright Waters, Bright Fish reading like a faint  reflection of what  Haig-Brown once  wrote,  one  be­ gins to speculate whether the  relation be­ tween   the  writing and   the  public  work might   not    be   interpreted   differently. Many  writers who  start publishing when they  are  young,  and   who   have   a  com­ paratively simple  message  to  offer,  come to  the  point  when  the  permutations and combinations  are   worked   out   and   the writing loses  its  urgency.   It is  not  that they  are   mentally or  emotionally burnt out.  It is merely  that   all  has  been  said, and  to write  more  would  be a repetition, using one's  old ideas and  one's old way of writing once  too often.  This,  I am  sad  to admit, is  what   has  happened  in  Bright Waters,  Bright  Fish;  the  sparkle of  the title rarely  glitters in the text. It will com­ plete   the  canon, indeed, for  those  who have    treasured   Haig-Brown's  writings, but it will do little more  than  add  another volume    to   the   shelf.   Virtually,   Haig­ Brown  fell  silent  in  1964, and  I  think - though he  never  said  it-this  happened because   he  felt  he  had  written  enough  and   there  were  other  activities to which his  energy   might-at  that   stage  in  his life-be  more  productively devoted. It was  not   the  life  of  public   service   that  sapped Haig-Brown's energies  as a writer. It was  the  slowing  of those  energies  that  made  him  retreat into  his public  self.

GEORGE WOODCOCK


III.    The Story-teller
WooDs AND RIVER TALES  is announced as the first of three books of previously uncol­ lected  writing "from the  world  of  Rode­ rick  Haig-Brown." Actually,  the book re­ veals  that  there  are  several "worlds" por­ trayed  in  Haig-Brown's  work: the  world of the west coast  logger, the  world  of the woodsman and  trapper,  the  world  of the sport  fisherman, and  the world  of Camp-
 bell River  itself-the community where Haig-Brown spent  most  of his adult  life. The  stories date  from three distinct  phases of Haig-Brown's career, but  their  order­ ing in the  book is not  strictly chronologi­ cal.  Rather, the  stories  are  arranged  to modulate  from   simple   tales  of  outdoor adventure, apparently intended for popu­  lar magazines, to more loosely constructed personal  reminiscences. Arranged  in  this way, they make  a significant comment on Haig-Brown's strengths  as  a  writer,   for they  demonstrate how  much  better  he  is at the informal essay than  he is at fiction.
The   earliest   stories   were   written  in
1930  and   1931,  when   Haig-Brown had briefly retumed to England after  his first youthful  venture into  the  logging  camps and   woods  of  the   Pacific   coast.   These stories  take  place  in  the  predominantly male  world   that   forms   the  background for  most of Haig-Brown's fiction.  In  this world,  life is lived  by a simple,  elemental code.  Whether a  man  confronts the  wil­ derness  or  confronts his  fellow  man, he must  assert  his  manhood -usually  by a decisive  physical  feat,  or  by standing up to  older,   more  experienced  loggers.   In other   stories   older   men   reaffirm    their manhood -both  in  their  own  eyes and in the eyes of others -by decisively meet­  ing   difficult   situations.  They    take   the action  that  shows them  to be "men," even if this choice works against their  own happiness.
'In the most striking of these stories, the
primitive  logger's world  is shown  to be breaking down  under the  pressure  of "progress." The powerful but  slow-witted Johnny, "last   and   mightiest of  the  old­ time  loggers,"  dimly  realizes  that  mech­  anization  has   made  his  brute   strength obsolete.  Once   he  was  the  foreman of a camp; now  he  is merely  a  hook-tender. Rather than  face  the eclipse of his man­ hood, Johnny chooses to die by pitting his two hundred pound body against  an eight ton  log.  The  movement of  the  story  is

r8r

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



tragic,  but  the characterization, as in so much  of Haig-Brown's fiction,  is shallow. Haig-Brown's materials might  have led to the creation of Paul  Bunyan-like  legends. Instead, the logging stories often  read like bad  Jack  London. Haig-Brown's  presen­ tation   of  this  world  does  not  match   the deftness   of  Martin  Allerdale  Grainger's Woodsmen of the  West   ( 1908)   or  the near-mythic resonance of  Jack  Hodgins's recent  evocation of the same  world.
The second  group  of stories dates  from
I935 to  I939, the  years immediately  fol­ lowing Haig-Brown's marriage and settle­ ment   in  Campbell River.  Two  of   these pieces simply shift  the themes of  the early stories  to a more  populated  rural  setting.  The  need  to prove  yourself  a man  is the theme   of  a  brief  sketch  about   a  youth walking   at   night   on  a  dark   woodland road; he  is frightened  by  an  animal but will  not  confess  his  fright  to  the  father who  sent   him  out  into   the  night.   The bravery of an animal (rather than  a  hu­  man)   is the basis of a story about  a roos­ ter  who,  with  the  connivance of  an  ad­  miring  farmhand, wins  a  reprieve   from execution. Another story embellishes  a fishing  tale  which  later,  in  a less fiction­ alized   form,   became   part   of   A   River Never   Sleeps   (I 946).  The   two  other stories from  this period  show Haig-Brown moving  towards the  anecdotal form  and sporting subjects  with which  he  is most closely   identified.   One   piece   relates   a series of hunting and  fishing stories  con­ cerning a   remarkable  dog   that    Haig­ Brown  once  owned; the  other   tells  of  a winter  trek  on  snowshoes  during which Haig-Brown displayed his qualities as an outdoorsman.
The third  group  of stories  dates  from aboutI 950, after Haig-Brown's duties  as magistrate had  made  him  intimately  ac­ quainted with  his  Campbell River  com­ munity. Two relatively weak stories return to the logging and  trapping worlds of the early  fiction,  but four  stronger pieces deal
 with  the  same  local  subjects   that  Haig­ Brown  was concurrently using  to express the  essentially  pastoral vision  of  his book about life in Campbell River, Measure of the  Year  (I 950) . "The  Wharf" is a sen­ timental vignette  about  a young  English boy's  quest  for  a  trophy salmon.   It was first  published in  The   New  Yorker, and  has  the  evanescent plot  and  bitter-sweet sadness of much  writing from  that  maga­ zine. Three other  stories  each  focus  on a particular "character" from   the  Camp­ bell River area. They do not try to achieve  a  well-plotted climax,   but  dwell lovingly on  the  eccentric  personalities of the  cen­ tral  figures.
The  stories  in Woods  and  River Tales demonstrate Haig-Brown's versatility, but they  will not significantly affect  his repu­ tation. This is a  book  primarily  for  the confirmed admirer. Readers who are  new to  Haig-Brown's several  "worlds"  would still do  best  to  turn to one  of his collec­ tions  of angling  essays  or  to  Measure  of the  Year.
T. D.  MACLULICH


ETHEL WILSON
x888-198o

To THINK  OF Ethel  Wilson  is, for me,  to think  of wry humour, of graceful, elegant prose,  of delight in  nature, of strong  and solitary  women  characters, and, most  of all,  of  Donne's phrase "No  man   is  an Iland," which   she  used  as  the  epigraph to Hetty  Dorval and  in other places, and which  is central to  her  view  of  the  uni­ verse and  man's place  in it. Ethel  Wilson is a humanist whose humanism is existen­  tial and  transcendental. All people, in her view, while  necessarily  asserting the free­  dom  to be and  to express  themselves,  are bound   up   with  others.   Swamp  Angel's Mrs.  Severance,  quoting Donne's words, even  goes beyond his Christian metaphor to embrace all creation.

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



Often  it  is  through  interaction  with the   natural  world   that  her   characters acquire an  awareness of self, and  of that self's  relationship with  other human  be­ ings,  with   God,   and   with   the   cosmos. Specifically,   the   mountains,   trees,   and lakes  of British  Columbia  form  an  integ­  ral  part  of "the miraculous interweaving of  creation" in  the  experience of  many of  Mrs.  Wilson's   characters.  What  the narrator  of  Swamp Angel  calls  "the es­ sence  of  place" has  complex significance  in  Mrs.  Wilson's  fiction.  For  Ethel  Wil­ son continually reminds her  reader  of the paradox  which   everyone  must   contend with.  While  acknowledging our  responsi­ bility  as  "a  part of  the  maine,"  each  of us is  essentially  alone.  "I  am  . . . like  a swimmer,"  says  her   character  Maggie Lloyd. "Swimming is like living, it is done alone." But  this  essential  aloneness  must be   balanced   by   an   involvement  with others.
Reflecting  on   Ethel  Wilson's   fiction, and  her humanism, brings  me to consider her  gallery  of women characters-Mag­ gie  Lloyd  and  Hetty  Dorval, Lilly  and Topaz,   Mrs.   Forrester  and    Mrs.   Go­ lightly.  Most  of  them  demonstrate Mag­  gie's   sentiment-that   living    is   done alone.  Often,  they   are   shown   rejecting an  untenable life  to  forge  a  new  one,  or facing  new experiences with  courage and determination. And   Maggie,  for  me,  is the most memorable of them  all.
:The concern of these women  for others may  be seen  as  a  form  of  mothering, a taking  on  of the  maternal role,  which  is social  and  psychological as well as physi­ cal.  Thus do  Mrs.  Wilson's women  work out  their  need  to  balance  independence with  commitment-a  paradoxical com­ bination which  later women  writers  have also  discovered a  need  to  come  to  terms with.  Like  Eva  of  Constance Beresford­ Howe's  Book  of Eve (whose  first reaction to freedom is  "I  opened my  eyes into  a perfect  self-centred bliss without past  or
 future,  and    rejoiced    in   everything   I saw"),  today's   women   protagonists are discovering  that   they  cannot opt  out  of life for  "self-centred bliss,"  but  must  be­ come,  or  remain, involved   with  others.  Like  Rachel of Margaret Laurence's Jest of God,  their  mothering  may differ  from that  implied  by the traditional concept of the role. To return to Maggie's swimming  analogy,  "one  does  not  stay,  ever,  in  a lagoon." Thus Swamp  Angel in particular can  be seen  as an  early  feminist   novel, for  while  the  concern for  independence and  self-expression is one  aspect  of Mrs. Wilson's   fundamental humanism, it  re­ mains  true  today,  as it  was in  1954,  that  to achieve  these goals is more difficult and more  complex  for  women  than  for  men.
Mrs.  Wilson's  stylistic  skill  is  best  re­ vealed  in her  adroit handling of the nar­  rative   voice.  Her   third-person   narrator often  takies on  individuality and  person­  ality.  At  the  same  time,  the  tone  of her essays leads to the conviction that  aspects of her own personality are inherent in the sophisticated, ironic,  narrative  voice  of much  of her fiction. Yet, while wit, gentle  irony and  whimsical humour characterize her writing,  it possesses at times a broader humour.  Witness   the  "comic-strip" vig­ nettes which  reveal  without comment the ludicrous   Eddie Vardoe  and   his  Ireen. But   amusement  at   the   foibles   of   the frailer   members  of  the   human  race   is always  tinged   with   compassion.   This   is equally   true   of  the  short   stories  which, of all :Mrs. Wilson's  works, have  received the   least   attention.  With   their   polish, grace,  deceptive simplicity, and  unobtru­
sive use of symbols,  they  recall  A. J. M.
Smith's  words   about  poetry,    "... the worth  of a hard thing  done   f  Perfectly, as though  without care."
Of international stature, Ethel  Wilson's fiction remains quintessentially Canadian. The regionalism of  much   of her  writing and  the sense of commitment of her char­ acters to the community, to others, situate

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



her in the  mainstream of Canadian  writ­ ing, as does  her  skill with  the short story, the  genre   in  which   much   of  our  most exciting  writing is being done  today. Her creation of strong women characters links her  with   Margaret  Laurence, her  irony and  paradox with  Alice Munro,  the  ele­ gant  polish of her short stories with Mavis Gallant,  her   superb  craft   with   Audrey Thomas, and  her  humour  with  most wo­ men  writing in  Canada  today.  She  was part  of a generation  which brought Can­ adian fiction  into  a new and  exciting  age.

LORRAINE MCMULLEN


JOHN COULTER
1888-1g8o

WITH THE DEATH OF John  Coulter, Can­ ada's  oldest  living  dramatist and  "Dean of Canadian  playwrights," an  important epoch  in the  history  of  Canadian theatre has come  to an  end. Coulter  belonged  to that  group of  dramatists, either   born  or educated in  the British  Isles, who  wrote polished,  sophisticated plays  about  Can­ ada and Great Britain, influenced  by their  English,  Welsh,   Scottish,   or  Irish   fore­ bears in the art of playwriting. It was this group who  prepared the  groundwork for later  indigenous Canadian  plays.
The last  of  the  "old  guard," Coulter was  a  leader. With  others  he  attempted in  the  1930's  to  initiate a  transition in English  Canadian theatre from  its  devo­ tion  to the  plays of other countries  to  its first  tentative  steps  towards  the  creation and  production of a national drama. Such authentically Canadian drama as is being produced   today   is  the   result   of  much dogged persistence in demanding of young Canadian writers  a body of work  true  to the  spirit  and   nuances  of Canadian life. John Coulter's long  and  distinguished career,  though marked by many  failures and  few real  triumphs, was, in retrospect,
 much   more  successful  than   he  was  able to admit. When Nathan Cohen, in a CBC radio interview "Tuesday Night" on December 3, 1g68, asked  Coulter why he continued to  write  for  a  theatre in  Can­ ada  "that rejects  you ... which treats you so shabbily," Coulter replied:  "Because I have  something to say and  I  want  to say it here. But it is a grinding and intolerable thing." Cohen went on to say that if Coul­ ter  had  lived  in London, Dublin, or  New York,   his  works  would   have   been   pro­ duced.  Coulter's  problem was  the  same for   all   playwrights  in   Canada  in   the decades  of  the  forties   and   fifties,  when directors  were  afraid  to  produce  Cana­ dian  plays which  Canadian audiences re­ jected.  Coulter had   had  his  Irish   plays produced in  Belfast  and  Dublin. He  was unfamiliar with  an audience that  rejected its  own  native  plays.  Born  in Belfast  in
I 888, he lived and  worked  successively in Belfast,  Dublin, and   London. He  wrote for   The    Ulster   Review   and   produced radio plays  with  Tyrone Guthrie on BBC in Belfast; he learned to write  stage  plays from  contact with  theatre folk at  the Abbey Theatre in Dublin; he was manag­
ing editor of John Middleton Murry's journal The  New  Adelphi  in London. In
1936 Coulter followed  the girl with whom he had  fallen  in love to Canada. He mar­ ried   her  in  Toronto a  few  weeks  later,  intending to  bring  her  back  with  him  to England, but  to his own amazement, they remained  permanently  in  Toronto. His wife, Olive  Clare  Primrose, a writer,  was the  daughter of  Dr. Alexander Primrose, Dean   of  the  Faculty of  Medicine at  the University of  Toronto.
Plunging into  a writing career  in  To­ ronto in  1936,  Coulter created  plays  for CBC   radio,   and   the   Arts   and   Letters Club.  Modelling his  own  plays  on   the work  of  such  great  dramatists as  Synge, Yeats,   and   Lady   Gregory,    he  attained recognition in Canada with  his Irish  play, The   House  in  the  Quiet  Glen   ( 1937),

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



which won first prize that year in the Dominion Drama Festival in Toronto for an  original play  by a Canadian. He early recognized   the  need  of  government  sup­ port  for  the  arts,  and  became co-founder of  the  Canadian Arts  Council  (now  the Canadian  Conference   of   the   Arts),  a member of  the delegation that  presented the  Artists'  Brief   to  the  Turgeon Com­  mittee  in  the  House  of Commons in Ot­ tawa  (Coulter read   the  Brief  to  Parlia­ ment), which  resulted in the formation of the  Canada Council, and  an  active  sup­ porter of the  foundation of the Stratford Shakespeare Festival in Ontario.
Coulter's work  can   be  reasonably  di­ vided   into   three   groups:   ( I )     realistic  satires  on the  dilemma confronting artists with   an   unappreciative  audience;  ( 2) romantic   history   plays  depicting Cana­ dian pioneers  and  leaders; ( 3)  humorous Irish folk  plays on  the  plight  of the indi­ vidual who  prizes  art  as opposed   to ma­ terialism.  His  Ulster play  Family Portrait
( 1935), influenced by the plays of Ruther­ ford   Mayne  and   Sean   O'Casey,  high­  lighted   the   theme   of   the   need   for  the liberation of  the  artistic sensibility  in  a cold  northern  country where   the  appre­ ciation  of art has either been  suppressed  or  never  realized. He  sustains   a  satiric  realism throughout as he portrays a lower middle-class family  who  attempt to  sup­ press any  active  participation in  the  arts. Nor  is the  family   redeemed in  the  end; the  future looks  bleak.  Produced  first  as a radio  play in 1935 on BBC in Belfast, it was, three  years later, presented as a stage play  in  Hart  House   Theatre,  Toronto. Because  he  used  it  as  a  statement of the insensibility   of  a   people   to  the   arts,   it worlred as well in Canada as in  northern Ireland.
Coulter approached the problem  of Canadian identity in drama from  an his­ torical-romantic rather  than   a  popular­ realistic  point of view, as in the trilogy­ Riel   ( 1950), The   Crime   of  Louis  Riel
 (196o), The  Trial  of Louis Riel  (1960); the  three  Quebec plays-A Tale  of Old Quebec  ( I 930), Quebec in 1670  (I 940), Francois Bigot and the Fall of Quebec (1970); and  the  Nova  Scotian  play  The Trial  of  Joseph  Howe  (1942). Of  them all,  Riel  ( 1950)   was his most  successful, earning from  Nathan Cohen  the appella­ tion:  "this   brave   and   mythic   drama" (Toronto Daily  Star, March 29,I 962). In the same radio interview with Coulter, Cohen   said   that   Riel   is  "the  play   in which,  in my opinion as a critic,  you have  done   your  most  significant   work.  As  a result,  Riel has become  part  of the Cana­ dian conscience." With  Riel, Coulter was responsible  for a Canadian renaissance in the study of the history of Riel and  the rebellion  which  made him a martyr. Riel was revived at the National Arts Centre, Ottawa, in  a triumphant  performance in
1975 which  truly confirmed Cohen's judg­
ment.
Of all Coulter's plays the type in which he   truly   excelled   was   the   Ulster   folk comedy  or  farce   based  on  actual  tales. The  nature of  colonial   Canada in   the
1930's and  1940's with its first and second generation immigrant families kept such tales alive, but  the popularity of such "imported" material prevented  indigen­ ous  Canadian  drama  from  making   the headway  it  deserved.  One  of  Coulter's most successful folk plays was The  House in the Quiet  Glen  ( 1937). The  theme is liberation -the freedom to marry  whom one pleases. The short, droll sentences and  comic loquacity of his characters show the influence  of  Lady  Gregory's farces.  This play  is both a folk comedy  and  a picture of  Ulster  life  and  character.
John Coulter's total  body  of work  in­ cludes  twenty-eight stage  plays, several  of which   he  adapted into   radio  and   tele­ vision  drama; two  opera  librettos  with composer   Healey   Willan,  of  which   one was a Canadian opera, Transit  Through Fire   ( 1942);  a   novel; a   biography,

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



Churchill; essays, literary  criticism, short stories and  radio  feature programs. In  his plays, Coulter has introduced characters with  whom  contemporary Canadian  so­ ciety  can  have  easy  rapport:  the  leader,  outcast   and   rebel   in   Riel   ( 1950) ; the homosexual  artist    in   "Portrait  of   the Painter" ( 1979) ; the I.R.A. nationalist in The  Drums  Are Out  ( 1948); the femin­  ists  in  The   House   in  the  Quiet   Glen ( 1937)   and  Green  Lawns  and  Peacocks
( 1951) ; the emotionally disturbed woman in Sleep, My Pretty One  ( 1954).
There was  rarely  a  hiatus  in Coulter's
busy writing career of seventy  or more years, but  the  last  three  years  of  his  life were extraordinarily prolific when one considers  that  he was writing  in his nine­ ties. He edited  and  had  published his play, Franfois   Bigot   ( 1 978),  and   his   wife's journals  and  diaries,   Prelude  to  a Mar­ riage ( 1979) ; and  he completed four one­ act plays, of which Portrait of the Painter
( 1 979)  is a serious  effort  to recapture an emotional  relationship of  seventy   years ago with James  Sleator, the  Irish  painter. Of  it  he  said  in  a  letter   to  me,  dated November  16,  1979,  "I am  recording a reality  I knew-the clarki and  saddening truth of a lived experience. Doing  this imposes   hazards  not   there   to  endanger other   imaginative  work."   In   1980,  the year of his death, his 370-page  book of memoirs,  In My  Day, was published. Of it he says:

There is so much of importance to the  social history of  Canada as  manifested in  the  arts throughout the  'forties and  'fifties, so much information about the  struggle that went  on behind  the  scenes,   and which   is  not   likely to  be  available elsewhere, that  I  think   it  a duty  to  see  that the  memoirs get  into  print. (Letter to  me,  February 16,  1976.)

The reality  of death was always with  him during those  last  years and  prodded him to complete his work before the end came. In a letter  dated November 28, 1977, he had  said:  "We  shall assuredly  meet  when

186
 you  come  to  live  your  year  in  Toronto
-assuming I am  here  to be met.  If not, as Eliot  says, 'And  all shall be well  / And all  manner of  things  shall  be well.' " His last letter  to me,  dated October 23, 1980, refers to his career and that of his two daughters, Mrs.  Primrose  Pemberton, writer, and  Clare Coulter, actress. Typic­ ally he says of them  and  the career of the artist:  "Our daughters, in  spite  of every warning  signal,   have  chosen   to  follow Babs  [his  wife]   and  me  along  this  path  so beset with what Eliot calls 'grimpens.' " We  are  grateful  that John  Coulter, des­ pite the "grimpens," continued to the end to   pursue  his   vocation  of   playwright. Canada is the  richer for  it.

GERALDINE ANTHONY, S.C.



ON E. K. BROWN

In  the    "Opinions  &   Notes"  section  of   the Autumn 1980  issue  (No.  86)  of Canadian Literature, your  editor's note  (p.  143)  on E. K. Brown  quotes David Staines as saying  that "Calgary is about to  receive some  ... [papers and   notes]."
This speculation I believe  arises  out  of some
correspondence which   I had  with   Mrs.  E.  K. Brown  and  I would like  to clarify this  question in  order to  save  some  frustration on  the   part of  scholars.
Our Special Collections Division had  in 1979 received from Mrs. Brown an  offer  to purchase some  books  and   a  few  letters out   of  her   late husband's collection. As  is  our   usual   practice when collections are  already housed elsewhere I   suggested that  she    approach  the    Public Archives of Canada, Victoria College, Toronto, and   two  other appropriate repositories  regard­ ing  the  archival materials.
We   were   very   pleased  to  learn from   Mrs. Brown   that both the  Public Archives and  Vic­ toria responded positively to her  and  as  a  con­ sequence Calgary  does   not   have   any   "new" E.  K.  Brown material  other  than  that  which  was  present in  collections  previously acquired by   the   University  of   Calgary,  most   particu­ larly  the  Malcolm  Ross  Papers....
The problem of fragmentation of an  author's
work   is  shared  by   all   repositories  and   does

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



make  research more  difficult. The  University of Calgary in  this  particular case  does  have  a fragment of  E.  K.  Brown   material -not  out of a deliberate decision to purchase a fragment offered  to  us-but  as  an  integral part of  an­ other collection.
To alleviate some  of  the  frustration on  the part of scholars, we are  preparing our  in-house inventories for  publication as  soon  as  possible and  we welcome inquiries from  scholars regard­ ing  any  of  the   collections.

APOLLONIA STEELE


ON THE VERGE

****   LOUIS  ALEXANDRE BELISLE,  comp., Dic­ tionnaire  nord-americain  de   la   langue    fran­ faise.     Beauchemin, n.p.     This is not  just an­  other  dictionary, but   a  very  fine  one, which  without putting in  every  new  word  which   has found  some   currency, manages to  reflect   the developments that  have   taken  place  in  North American French. I say  "North  American" be­ cause  the  book  draws, as many other guides do not,  on  Acadian French as  well  as  Quebecois, and  therefore becomes a  helpful prop  for  non­ Acadians wanting to read Maillet in  the  origi­ nal,  for  example. But it is less helpful on  joual
-deliberately  so,  as  the   preface by  Maurice
Lebel   makes   clear:  "II etablit une   nette  dis­ crimination entre les canadianismes de bon aloi  et  les  autres; il  proscrit sans  pitie  les  expres­ sions  fautives." Considering such  scholarly ob­ jectivity, it  is distressing to  find  it  undercut in another section of  the  work,  however; the  de­  tailed glossary  of  historical  names and   the  ex­ tensive  gazetteer  betray   a   bias   the   compiler may   not   even   know   it  has:  in   practice, he seems   to  assume the   book   will   be   consulted only  in  Eastern  Canada. "Vancouver'' is listed  as an  island  and  a city,  but  not  as the  captain; Cook  appears  as  a  South  Pacific explorer, but not  as  West  Coast  navigator or   (oddly)  as  a St.  Lawrence  surveyor; there is no Thompson, no   Hearne,   no  Emily    Carr.  Western  myth­ makers  are   missing  entirely,  and   with    their disappearance goes  a  whole   sensitivity  to  one side   of  Canadian  cultural  development. The result is to reassert implicitly a regional  bound­ ary  that current history in  other ways  denies.

W.N.

***   JOY  E.   ESBEREY,  Knight  of   the   Holy Spirit: A Study of William Lyon Mackenzie King.   Univ. of Toronto Press, $2o.oo.  Knight
 of the  Holy  Spirit is an  interesting supplement to  the   already considerable  biographical   ma­ terial  on  William Lyon  Mackenzie King.  It is a personality study rather on  the  lines  of  those  prepared  by  Erik   H.  Erikson on  figures   like
Luther and  Gandhi. Joy Esberey's thesis  is that
Mackenzie King did  not  in  fact  live  a  divided
life,  as  some  writers-notably  C.    P.   Stacey
-have insisted. Weighing  carefully  the  evi­ dence of diaries and  other personal  documents, as  well  as observing King's public  actions, she shows  rather convincingly how  the  traumas of King's  family    relationships  set   the   neurotic pattern which  was  later followed  in  his  politi­ cal  career. His  Tennysonian  ideal of  spiritual heroism was constantly  frustrated by his obses­ sive   defence   mechanisms,  yet   it   was   strong enough to make  him follow  consistently a policy of  consensus-the Round Table ideal-rather than of compromise. So King emerges not  as a man  in  a condition of  perpetual inner  contra­ diction, and   hence   perpetual guilt,  but as  an integrated personality whose  ideals, despite his moral  weakness, tended  to  shape  his  actions. It  is  a  useful  counterpart to  Stacey's  A  Very Double    Life, and   on   the   evidence  seems   to offer  a more  defensible  analysis of King's char­ acter and  his career.
G.W.


***   TIMOTHY  J.  COLTON, Big  Daddy:  Frede­ rick  G.  Gardiner  and  the   Building of  Metro­ politan    Toronto.      Univ.  of   Toronto   Press,
$rs.oo.   Municipal politics, and   particularly municipal politicians, have  been  far  less studied in Canada than their federal or  provincial counterparts. Yet,  though  the  BNA  Act  takes no notice of them, local  governments are  the indispensable third level  of any  true confedera­ tion.  If Canada eventually makes  the  choice to become a true  confederacy rather  than an  old­  style nation-state, municipal politics will assume  steadily  more   importance,  particularly  as  the  realities of  urban living  produce metropolitan governments which   are  in  fact confederations in   miniature.  This  is  why   Timothy  Colton's Big  Daddy-the life of  Frederick G. Gardiner
-is important; more  than any  other individual Gardiner was  the  begetter of Metropolitan  To­ ronto,  the   first   metropolitan   government   in North  America. Anyone  interested in   the   fu­  ture   of  a  federal  Canada, and   the   role  which the  metropolitan areas will inevitably play,  will find  a great deal  of  value   and   interest in  this biography which  is also  a contribution to local  history.
G.W.

ON THE VERGE


***  w.  L. MORTON, Henry  Youle Hind, 1823-
1908.    Univ. of Toronto Press, $7.50.     Henry
Youle  Hind is the  seventh and  last, we are  told,
of the excellent series, Canadian Biographical Studies-short  lives   of   interesting  but    not major Canadians-which  began as a  subsidi­ ary venture to the  Dictionary of Canadian Biography. It  contained Bishop  Strachan  but not  Bishop  Laval; Jolm Sand.field  Macdonald but  not  John Alexander Macdonald. In other words, it concentrated on  figures  not likely ever to earn major biographies but  too important to be  ignored. The  speeding-up of  the  prepara­ tion  of  the  DCB has  rendered the  publication of  such  brief  lives  less  urgent, and  this  is why Henry Youle  Hind, which   is  perhaps  W.  L. Morton's last  book  as  well  as  the  last  book  in the  series,  has  a  special  interest  outside its  in­  trinsic merit. Hind  was  one  of  the  lesser  ex­ plorers  of   the   West,   filling   in   what  David Thompson and  the  other great fur  traders had  already sketched out, and  he was  perhaps more significant as a  publicist for  the  views  of  those Upper  Canadians  who   longed    to   seize   and settle Rupert's  Land.  W.   L.   Morton's  little book  is a sound work  within its limitations, but he   was   constantly  hampered  by   the   lack   of letters and   other  papers relating to  Hind and also  by   the  essential  dullness of  this   pushing man. One is constantly tantalized by references to  Henry  Youle's brother, the  highly   talented artist William G.  R.  Hind, and  led  to  wonder in  the  end   whether a  biography of  the  way­ ward  but  very  appealing William might  not  in the  end  have  been  a  more  worthwhile  task.

G.W.

***  THERESE  TARDIEU DUBE, Une  Fois, deux fois, trois   fois ... initiation aux  mathematiques. Lemeac, $6.95.   This is a  brilliant little book for  youngsters learning the  simple  language of arithmetic and  geometry. Rhymes and  riddles make   the    learning fun;  the   author's  clarity makes  it  effective as well.
w.N.













!88
