$j.OO per copy



CANADIAN

l TERATURE N°·68-69
Spring-Summer, 1976


SPECI]IL ISSUE ON THE M]IRITIMES


Articles

BY ALDEN NOWLAN,  MALCOLM ROSS, ANDREW THOMPSON SEAMAN, DESMOND PACEY, FRANCES M.  FRAZER, GEORGE L.  PARKER, FRASER SUTHERLAND, MARILYN BAXTER, DONALD CAMERON, DOUG  FETHERLING, THOMAS B. VINCENT, TOM   MARSHALL, MARJORY WHITELAW

Interview

WITH HUGH MCLENNAN BY  RONALD SUTHERLAND

Translations

OF  ACADIAN POEMS  BY  FRED COGSWELL

Poems

BY ALDEN NOWLAN, PETER STEVENS, CHRISTOPHER LEVENSON

Reviews

BY GARY  WERDEN, BARRY  CAMERON


A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW










MARITIME CADENCES







NEw BRUNSWICK, Nova Scotia, and  Prince Edward  Island  do not form a single society, except in the minds of outsiders. There  is variety  here, and  personality,  and  idiosyncrasy. And  when  Alden  Nowlan  observes that  it is only selective truth-telling  that  will produce such a generalization  as "a  Maritime school of writers",  we are warned  forthrightly  not to make regional universalities out of superficial likenesses. Newfoundland,  moreover,  though  mentioned  in this survey of Maritime  literature,  appears only briefly. However linked their traditions may be, Maritime  and  Newfoundland  societies differ from each other;  their  roots go off in different  directions,  and  the Atlantic  geography  they have in common has not contrived  to equate  their cultural  horizons.
"The Maritimes" has its image in the rest of Canada: dour,  demanding, rural
without being pastoral, industrious without being profitable, the exporter  of brains and  the importer  of money, everyone's half-forgotten  past  and  no-one's  future. When Fraser Sutherland writes of a provincial patriarchal  world, easily sentimen­ talized and easily transformed  into grotesquerie, he treads a careful line between this cheerfully inaccurate  image, communicated  in part  by expatriate Maritimers  themselves, and  a  glimpse  of a  different  society-Canaan  rather  than   Cain's land, perhaps, but still dour-where "the religion of work, the cult of success, the fear of retribution" constitute a system of  values that  binds the native not unwill­ ingly to his home. For  Donald  Cameron, the  transplanted outsider,  the  task of trying to comprehend  this tie, of  discovering the mystery of the "Mysterious  East", is one of "trying  to deduce a system of values from the gridwork of assumptions" in which  Maritimers  tell,  and  for  three  hundred  years have  been  telling,  their myths, stories, and  superstitions.  The  region is rich  in  folklore and  the  spoken word, as Helen Creighton's  collections have admirably shown;  the voices of Law­ rence Doyle and  Larry Gorman  have helped to shape a popular  literature there.

3

EDITORIAL

Even  Thomas  Chandler Haliburton's Sam  Slick was conscious, in  Wise  Saws, that  "if you read  a book to a man,  you set him to sleep ... because ... the lan­ guage  ain't  common  ... [But]  if you talk  to  him,  he will sit up  all  night  ... because it's talk, the language  of natur'." And Haliburton produced  written  talk. But to what end? Donald  Cameron  and  Fraser  Sutherland  both speak of a "sys­ tem of values" underlying  the voices. Both are also conscious of  the complexity of those values and  of the  problems that  face the  authors  who  engage  themselves with them.
In  Nova  Scotia,  Fraser  Sutherland  writes,  Hugh  MacLennan "would   have been a Dalhousie  professor. In  Quebec  he is a writer." This  neat  distinction  not only points toward  the sense of exile-whether from Scotland or New England, from a mythical  Acadia  or a time of moral order-which  recurs so strongly  as a Maritime  motif;  it also reiterates the cultural  rivalries which have characterized Maritimes  history. MacLennan himself, in conversation with Ronald  Sutherland, disclaims the label "Maritimer", choosing "Nova  Scotian" instead,  only to fasten more  closely upon  Cape  Breton  Island  with  the  laconic  observation  that  Hali­ gonians are a different  people. Marjory  Whitelaw's discussion of Thomas McCul­ loch further  underlines  the distinction  between the Presbyterian  Pictou Scots and Lord  Dalhousie's  Halifax  Anglicans. And  when  Thomas  Vincent  examines  the poetry  of the  two  Massachusetts  clerics, Henry  Alline and  Jacob  Bailey, who emigrated  to Nova Scotia after the American  Revolution, he discovers more than  just a contrast  between two religious codes. For Bailey, Alline's pietistic, personal "New  Light"  movement  represented  an  anarchic  assault upon  the  authority  of civilized institutions  and  universal  (not  to mention  Tory)   truths.  What  emerges from the contrast  is a sense of the way in which loyalties divided:  urban  conserva­ tism,  whatever  reforms  it  entertained,  espoused  the  established  order,  whereas rural conservatism espoused an individual  responsibility. The causes of minorities gave the rural  writers the sensitivities of minorities;  faithful  to their  own locale, they were just possibly politically more radical as well.
People's situations were not, however, as clearcut as this division implies. There is often a conflict between belief and social structure  here, and the moral sensibili­ ties that Andrew Thompson  Seaman notes even in contemporary Maritime  fiction are shaped in part  by the reception that the society accords its artists. The  Prince Edward   Island  that   Lucy  Maud   Montgomery's  Anne  inhabits  is scarcely  the idyllic universe it has sometimes been made out to be; Frances  Frazer  points out that  the  Green  Gables  garden  is constantly  qualified  by intrusive  realities,  and "Minegoo", the Micmac  paradise, is a world of the past. Tom  Marshall's  discus­ sion of Haliburton leads to his observation of "a pragmatic rather than reactionary conservatism, an  ability  to live with  uncertainties  and  antagonistic  philosophies, an awareness of shifting  perspectives." Desmond Pacey, in one of his last essays, notes the ambiguities that  attach  themselves to the spiritual  quests in the  poetry


4

EDITORIAL

of Alfred Bailey. Fred Cogswell observes the shift that  has taken  place in Acadian poetry:  simple faith in the Roman  Catholic vision giving way to a more complex balance  between personal and political aspirations. Malcolm Ross notes how, even among the Anglican Loyalists, the order of nature and the order of grace were separated. Finding  a role was, for the artists facing such conditions,  perhaps more of a challenge than  finding a subject. It affected the literary forms they chose, the literary  taste that  would govern  their language,  the literary  purpose  which  they framed.  For  literature was  not  divorced  from  society, and  to  be an  artist  was implicitly to have a social function.
The  American  satires of the  Loyalist poets, and  the  journalistic  sketches and essays which George Parker  sees as more of a source of an  indigenous  tradition than either fiction or poetry, provide ready examples of certain responses to this situation. The contrast  between Alline and Bailey provides another,  and the work of Cape  Breton's  MacLennan and  Minago's  Milton  Acorn  amply  demonstrates that  the twentieth  century  has not put an end to literary social engagement. The engagement   has  not  always  proved  artistic.  Doug  Fetherling   shows  how  the younger  Oliver  Goldsmith's  "The Rising Village",  for  all its historical  pride  of place,  is hampered   by its  high  style. George  Parker  points  to  Andrew  Shiels' search  for  an  appropriate poetic  language.  Frances  Frazer  notes  the  inconsis­ tencies of the work of Basil King. Yet the literary endeavours  of  Maritime  writers have had an effect beyond the Maritimes. They helped declare for Canada what every new society comes to recognize as the birthright  it must learn  to claim, the need -as  Chinua  Achebe  writes of Nigeria -for  its  literature to "speak  of a particular  place, evolve out of the necessities of its history, past and  current,  and the aspirations and  destinies of its people."
What  helped Maritime  writers shape their literary endeavours  was the sense of community  they enjoyed, a community  to which Cameron,  Cogswell, Pacey and Alfred Bailey have variously contributed; a community represented  by the Howe­ Haliburton relationship,   by the  journals, and  by the  taut  connection  between Halifax  and Pictou;  a community,  as Malcolm Ross points out, like Roberts'  and Carman's Fredericton,  in which the interaction  between Emerson's Massachusetts and Bishop Medley's Oxford  allowed writers to discover the "congeniality" of the New Brunswick woods. The  Church  and  the university  both  participated in the world of literature,  and so, through  the journals and the rhetoric of political com­ mitment, did government.  The institutions helped mould the independence of the place; through  this came the independence  of the people.
There  may  be  no  single  Maritime  school linking  Goldsmith,  Odell,  Alline, Roberts, Carman, Acorn, and  Nowlan, but crosscurrents there are in plenty. The influence of their communities on Canadian development,  moreover, has far exceeded what  their  numbers  might suggest. To  study  Maritime  writing  is not just to discover the myths and fears and philosophies and  expectations  of a parti-

5

EDITORIAL

cular  locale,  but  also to find  sources  for  much  that  modern Canadian literature celebrates and  rejects.  Listening closely to  Maritime voices is like  walking  with ancestors; one hears  so many  echoes, so much  of home.

W.  H.  NEW












THE BOIL

Alden Nowlan



Am I alone
 
I wonder

in finding  pleasure in this,
the  thumb
and forefinger rolling tight
a corner of
the  handkerchief,


forcing the spear of twisted cloth
 then


the ripe core of the boil
 under

in my own flesh,

free,
burning
 
prying it

the wound clean with alcohol-
now

at last
 
master

rather  than

of the pain.
 
servant


6

SOMETHING
TO WRITE ABOUT



Alden Nowlan


IWROTE MY  FIRST POEM when I was eleven years old. I don't know why. Why is an apple? I could give you its first stanza,  but I won't.  I wrote detective  stories. One  of them  was entitled  The  Case  of the  Howling  Dog  and
when  a little later  Erle Stanley  Gardner  published a book of the same  name,  I felt  cheated.  I wrote  romances  about  knighthood  that  developed  over  the  next few  years into  erotic  fantasies.  But  the  poem came  first. A  ballad  in  doggerel rhyme. Any eleven-year-old  could have written  it if he had  wanted  to. Why did I  want  to? I suppose for  the same reason that  I  wanted  to  draw,  cut  out  and colour armies of paper soldiers, and for the same reason that  I wanted  to learn to play the mouth  organ.  It was something to do.
When  he  was  drunk,   my  father  sometimes  recited  "The Shooting   of  Dan
McGrew" and "The Cremation  of Sam McGee". I suspect my earliest verses were unconscious imitations  of Robert  W. Service. When  I was thirteen  or fourteen  I read The Pocketbook of Popular Verse,  discovering Edgar  Allan Poe and delight­ ing in things like "How  We Brought  the Good News From  Ghent  to Aix"  and "Sheridan's Ride". We were poor, ignorant,  isolated  (but  isolated from  what?). Our  house contained  no plumbing  except a makeshift kitchen sink  that  drained onto  the ground  outside,  no electricity, no heat except from  a  couple  of wood­ stoves, no telephone  ( I was nineteen years old before I used a telephone) , and of course we possessed no refrigerator,  no washing machine,  no  car.  However,  we did have a radio that  worked so long as my father could afford batteries.  I all but worshipped  that  radio.
I didn't   feel particularly  poor, ignorant  and  isolated until  I was about  fifteen and  the  outside  world,  that  until  then  had  seemed half-mythical,   began  to  be wholly real to me. Hundreds of thousands, perhaps even the majority,  of  Cana­ dians lived much  as we did in those days. (I  was born in the worst  year  of the Depression when  my father  worked in the woods for $30  a  month.)   It  wasn't unusual for a working class boy to leave school, as I did, without  finishing Grade V. The  only extraordinary thing is that  I became a writer.
Periodically, middle-class sociologists (and  what other kind is there?)  go down

7

SOMETHING TO  WRITE ABOUT

into the lower class and  come up with books that  read like studies of the  Papua­ New Guinea  highlanders.  It would  be fun  to write about  the  curious  habits  of the bourgeoisie as obseiVed by a spy from the lumpenproletariat. There's an old joke to the effect that  God segregates the  Baptists in Heaven  because He  can't  bring Himself to dispel them of the illusion that they're the only people there. The middle classes suffer from much the same delusion. To take one example, they say there's  been a Sexual  Revolution  when  the middle  classes start doing  what  the lower classes have been doing all along.
There  was a time when  I wanted  to be a Prophet  ("the words that  the Lord God of Abraham  and  of Isaac  and  of Jacob  spake  unto  His seiVant, Alden"), and  there was a time when I wanted  to be a King or an Emperor,  but there was never a time when  I "wanted to be a writer."  Subjectively, it was always some­ thing  I was, rather  than something  I aspired to become. During  my adolescence, I kept diaries, I wrote pompous letters to the editor, I wrote essays, short  stories, novelettes, filled exercise books with verses. All of this no better  and  (aside from its pretentiousness)  no different from what any other kid in the village could have done.  I wrote  in  the  way  that   other  lonely  and  imaginative  children   invent imaginary  playmates.
I wrote  (as I read)  in secret. My father would as soon have seen me wear lip­ stick. Books belong to The  Big Man,  he would have said if words had  not come so painfully to him, and  not to poor folk like us. It was not so much  that  he was humble  as that  he was pathetically  proud of his capacity  to endure. Aping The  Big Man was absurd and could be dangerous. The sight of his son reading a book frightened  him. So I hid from him, as I hid from the men (many of  them actually were children,  like me, between fourteen  and eighteen)  with  whom  I worked in the sawmills, the hayfields, the gravel pits and the pulpwoods.
Even today, if someone came into the room while I was working  on a poem,
I'd  probably  put  my hand  over the  paper.  As an  adolescent,  I was as secretive about  writing as about  masturbation, and  I sometimes suspect that  the  two acts are still linked in my subconscious.
When  I was sixteen  I discovered  the  Regional  Library  in  the  nearest  town, separated  from our village by eighteen miles according to the geographers  but at least a thousand  miles away if distances were measured by their  effects upon  our lives. On Saturday  nights, we kids paid fifty cents each to ride into town in a box on the back of a half-ton  truck.  I'd  come home with a knapsack  crammed  with books: Whitman, Rupert  Brooke, Jack London, H. G. Wells, Shaw, even Darwin and,  God help us, Herbert  Spencer.  Often  there would be as many  as twenty of us packed into that  box, swaying in the darkness as we rumbled and lurched  along the dirt  road, the girls on the boys' laps. The memory of those books, waiting  to be read, pressing hard against my body, is as sensuous as the memory of a sleepy young girl's head against a young boy's shoulder,  his lips in her hair.

8

SOMETHING TO  WRITE ABOUT

:be  old Family Herald  published a classified advertisement  offering  a sample
•Y  of a short-lived  publication  called The  Canadian  Writer  and  Editor,  from ich  I  learned  that  there  existed  magazines  that  published  poems.  My  first
.eptance came when I was seventeen;  when I read that letter,  I almost fainted literally,  the darkness rose in clouds around  my feet. In gratitude for that mo­
:nt, I must mention  the name of the magazine, The  Bridge, and  of its editor, en Coffield, who published it on a mimeograph  machine  out  of Eagle  Creek,
·egan. Its being printed  on the other side of the continent in a village probably larger  than  mine strikes me as being both appropriate and  mysterious, as does
e fact that  my second acceptance  came, that same year, from a little magazine tblished in Lake Como, Florida.
Indirectly,  I've  been making  a living from  poetry since I  was nineteen.  If I
tdn't  been a poet I'd  not have become a newspaper reporter,  as I did in 1952. [y self-education  was a product  of my desire to write. For instance,  I'd  bought second-hand typewriter  through  the mail and  taught  myself to type  (without rer having seen anyone use a typewriter)  because I'd  read somewhere that editors
•auld not even attempt  to read longhand  manuscripts.
In  the early 195o's  I was an American  little magazine poet. There  were prac­ lcally no outlets for poetry in Canada. then. I came along too late for  Northern leview  and  Contemporary Verse. So I  published  all over the  United  States  in nagazines with names like Curled  Wire  Chronicle.
It was fun. Most of us have to write badly before we can write well. And very
)ften it's important that  some of the bad work be published. Once  someone else
11as accepted it, the writer himself is freer to reject it. For a very young writer, the publication  of a  poem  or story  may  be of great  importance simply  because  it means that,  emotionally, he's got rid of it. The  size and  quality  of the magazine are almost irrelevant.




Two CRUCIAL  EVENTS  in  my life as a  writer  took  place  in
1957. I went back to spend a month in my native village and I met Fred Cogswell.
Fred  and  I were living only seventy miles apart; I was working  for a weekly newspaper  in  northwestern   New  Brunswick and  he  was teaching  English  and editing The  Fiddlehead at the University of New Brunswick in Fredericton. But (and  both  of us have been telling the story with delight for eighteen  years)  we first became aware of one another's existence through  the contributors' biographi­ cal notes in a little magazine,  Miscellaneous Man,  published in San  Francisco.
Fred Cogswell was more than the first poet I'd ever met; he was the first person I'd  ever met who read poetry. He gave me magazines, and  books by people like Louis Dudek, Irving Layton and Raymond Souster, through  whose work I found


9

SOMETHING TO  WRITE ABOUT

my way to people ranging  from  Catullus  to William  Carlos  Williams. He  gave me postage stamps, sent me the names of new magazines; we drank  beer together and,  most importantly, he listened. My mental  film clips of those early meetings show me getting  drunker  and  drunker,  talking more and  more, while Fred  sips from  his glass, puffs on his pipe, and listens. I was twenty-four  years old and,  in one sense, I had  never before had anyone to talk with.
During  my month  in Nova Scotia a surprising  thing  happened   (surprising  to me, then) : for the first time I saw the people and  landscape  of my native  place as entities separate  from  myself. Before that  I'd  written  mostly what  I've  since come to call palpitating eternity  poems, like most kid-writers  attempting cosmic pole vaults when  I was hardly capable of jumping a mud  puddle. Now I looked around  me and tried to write down what I sensed, intuited  and thought  about  it. Aside from one or, perhaps,  two even earlier verses, the best poems I wrote that fall are the oldest that  I still take seriously. Fred published some of them in 1958 in a Fiddlehead  Chapbook, The  Rose and the Puritan.
So far I've talked  mostly about  myself. I suppose I'll be expected to say some­ thing about  the Maritimes.  People keep asking me, in effect, why did I choose to be born in the Maritimes  and why am I a Canadian writer when I could as easily have chosen to be born,  grow  up and  become a writer  in  England,  the  United States or even Hungary. Because I don't  wish to appear stupid  I keep trying  to think of a plausible reply.
Because they must treat  it as a Subject  to be taught,  critics and  professors are
more or less obliged to make believe that literature,  like hockey, can be organized geographically  (or  otherwise)   into leagues and  teams.  Perhaps  there's  no other practical  way to teach  it, especially to those students to whom the academic  pro­ cess is largely an exercise in unresisting boredom. It harms nobody to pretend that there is a Maritime  school of writers and spares both teacher  and student  a good deal of possibly painful  and  probably wasteful effort. If I were a critic or a pro­ fessor I more than  likely would  have devoted this article to an  imaginary  Mari­ time school, listing its outstanding practitioners  and  distinctive characteristics.  It wouldn't  be necessary for me to lie, merely to be highly selective in handling  the truth.  And  I'd  have  had  great  fun  doing  it, since  like  most  bookish  people  I enjoy such intellectual  games-enjoy them so much, in fact, that  if I'd  gone on to acquire  a Ph.D.  instead  of dropping  out  of  elementary  school  I  might  have ended  up as the most egregious pedant  in  Canada. (Sometimes I suspect that  if Al Purdy,  Milton  Acorn,  John  Newlove and  I had  completed  our schooling, as the saying goes, we might  now all four  be competing with  the present holder of that  title.)
There  is no Maritime  school, no Fredericton school and  no Fiddlehead  school,
although it happens  that  more good poems are being written in Fredericton  than anywhere  else in Atlantic  Canada, and  that  certain  writers living in Fredericton


IO

SOMETHING TO WRITE ABOUT

gather  once a week in a funny  little white  doll's house called  McCord  Hall  on the U.N.B. campus  to read and  discuss each other's  latest work and  that  certain of those same writers,  together  with certain  other  writers,  periodically  assemble, often at my house, to sing, drink, shoot the bull and found  organizations  such as the International Flat  Earth  Society, the Stewart  Monarchy  in  Canadian  Exile and  the Loggerhead  Shrike  Preservation Society. Myself, I spend  so much  time writing  or thinking  about  writing  that  when  I'm  not writing  or thinking  about writing  I  want  to  talk  about  almost  anything  else. It  seems to  me  sometimes that the writer compares with the critic the way the lover compares with the gynaecologist.
Possibly, we writers who happen  to live in the Maritimes ought  to manufacture a literary  movement,  complete  with an enemies' list and  a series of unreadable manifestos. I'm  being reasonably serious when I say this. The TISH group,  whose official pronouncements were,  as one of its leaders  cheerfully  admitted   to  me, "mostly bullshit," succeeded  in attracting attention  to some important  principles and  some admirable poetry.  I've  no doubt  that  the  work  of  Maritime   writers would receive wider publicity and inspire greater  respect if we organized  a politi­ cal-literary party. Since there actually are hardly two of us who work in the same way toward  the same objectives, this would involve an enormous amount of flim­ flam and  gooblygook;  but  I'm  confident we could carry it off,  if only we could keep from laughing.
The  best thing  about  living and  writing  in the  Maritimes,  as far  as I'm  con­ cerned, is that  there's  no place on the continent  where so broad  a range of  social and  human  relationships  is so readily accessible. When  I meet  writers  in  Mont­ real, Toronto and Vancouver,  writers I admire,  I'm  continually  reminded  of the narrowness of their experience. Most of them have lived all their lives in one sub­ caste of the  bourgeoisie. The  jobs they list on their  dust  jackets were in  reality only roles that  they  played  briefly during  the summers  on  their  way from  high school through  graduate school. They were students  and  now, for the most part, they are teachers and  their  friends are teachers who write or writers who teach. There  are writers like that  in the Maritimes, too  (and  writers unlike that  outside the  Maritimes), but  it's  more  difficult to segregate  one's self here  because our provinces are so small that  it requires considerable determination to maintain  an impersonal  relationship  with  anyone.  I  have  friends  who  can't   read  or  write, friends  who  can  read  and  write  in  six languages,  friends  who  are  fishermen, farmers,  bikers, waiters,  professional  soldiers, professional  athletes,  semi-profes­ sional thieves, cabinet ministers, priests, nurses, actors, painters, whores, musicians, friends who are  doctors, lawyers and  Indian  chiefs, friends  ranging  in age from seven to eighty-seven.  Living in the  Maritimes,  one  not  only meets and  gets to know other people who live here; one meets and gets to know an astonishing per­ centage of the  people who  visit here. At 4 o'clock one morning  I  was walking


I I

SOMETHING TO  WRITE ABOUT

along King  Street  in Fredericton, pleasantly disoriented  by Moosehead  ale, and in the company  of the  Premier,  the  Mayor  and  Stompin'  Tom  Connors,  whom moments before I had introduced  to other remarkable friends of mine, known as Rat Bat Blue and The  Bear. Except as a surrealistic fancy, I can't  conceive of something similar happening on Yonge Street with Bill Davis and David Crombie as participants.
You don't  have to tip a Fredericton  cabbie, unless you feel like it, but if you're a Frederictonian you don't  leave him out of the conversation while you're a passen­ ger in his cab, any more than you'd leave him out of the conversation if you were a guest in his house. Not because we're inherently more sociable than Torontonians, but  because he's not  merely an  automaton who controls the steering  wheel, gas pedal and  brake, but   Bud, who likes Navy rum, or Terry, who's mad  about  the Black Hawks, or Dick, who raises dogs, or Jim, who just got out of the  hospital, or shy, gentle Claude,  who has the same first name as my father-in-law.
It's true that  most of the fiction I've  published to date has dealt with  the lives of poor,  rural  people,  but  that's  partly  because my early life was spent  among poor, rural  people and  I'm  the kind of writer who has to let his experience fer­ ment  before he can  bottle it in fiction, and  partly  because almost  everyone  else writes  about  the  urban,   middle  classes.  (I  can't   resist  mentioning   that   three reviewers of my novel Various Persons Named Kevin O'Brien obviously hadn't read  the  book. I  don't  object  to that,  as I've  done the same  thing  myself. But while one of the  three  was ecstatic,  another  was  only so-so and  the  third  was savage. I believe that  a reviewer who writes his review without  reading  the book is morally bound  to praise it.)
Being a Maritimer doesn't make it any more likely that you'll write well, but it sure as hell improves the chances of your having something  to write about.






CANADIAN AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available at
the bookstore
UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
2075  WESBROOK PLACE
VANCOUVER, B.C. V6T 1WS /228-4741



12

"A STRANGE AESTHETIC FERMENT"


Malcolm Ross




WNONE LOOKS DOWN ove< Fredericton from the hilffi where Charles Roberts and  Bliss Carman  once took their long hikes with George Parkin,  one still sees the spire of Bishop Medley's Cathedral rising above  a city
hidden in elms. Old Frederictonians, whether they be Anglican or Roman,  Baptist or Marxist,  think first of their  Cathedral whenever they think  of home.
George  Goodridge  Roberts,  the  father  of Charles  and  Theodore  (and   Bliss Carman's uncle)  was Canon  of the Cathedral  and Rector of the parish church  of St. Anne's.  George Parkin,  headmaster  of the  Collegiate School in  Fredericton, was an active Cathedral layman. Something should be said about  the coincidence at  just the right  time of the Tractarian Bishop, his Gothic  Cathedral, the great teacher whose classroom had no walls, "the  new music, the new colours, the new raptures  of Pre-Raphaelite poetry"/  and  the  young and  eager  spirits  ready  to respond to the peculiar genius of this place and this time.
"The Fredericton  of those days", Charles G. D. Roberts  recalls, "was  a good place for a poet to be." It was "stirring  with a strange  aesthetic  ferment." Tiny as it was, with no more than six thousand inhabitants,  Fredericton  was nonetheless a capital city, a university city, a cathedral  city:

She  had  little  of the  commercial spirit,  and  I fear  was hardly as democratic as is nowaday considered  the proper thing  to be. But she was not stagnant, and  she was not smug. Instead of expecting all the people  to be cut  of one  pattern, she seemed to prefer  them  to be  just  a little  queer.... Conformity, that   tyrant god  of small town  life, got scant  tribute from  her. There was much  good  reading done,  up-to­ date  reading, and  if people  wrote  verse, they had  no need  to be  apologetic  about  it.  To  Fredericton it  did  not  seem  impossible  that  some  of  them  might turn  out to be good verses.

Good verses, Roberts avers, were indeed being written not only in "the  big red rectory" on George Street, and  in the Carman  house, but also in a house not fat from  the  Cathedral where  "a  slim, dark-eyed  and  black-browed  youth  by the name  of Francis Sherman  ... was dreaming  with William  Morris  and  Rossetti over old romances of Camelot  and  Lyonesse."
There  is no easy explanation of this "strange  aesthetic ferment" in the little city

"A STRANGE AESTHETIC FERMENT"


of the  Loyalists  in  the  last  quarter of the  ninteenth century. Both  A. G.  Bailey 2 and  the  late  Desmond Pacey3  have  drawn attention to the  civilizing  presence  of the university.  Bailey also points  to "societal" influences,  particularly the  "lawless and  speculative spirit  of the  lumber trade" which  had  made of  Fredericton an island  unto  itself:
The   expansion  of  the  trade   brought   hordes  of  poverty-stricken   Irish  to  New Brunswick, decimated  the forests and bled the province of its wealth, but provided a modicum  of revenue  for the support  of the little body of civil servants, lawyers, judges, clergymen and  professors who made up the governing class of the capital. Those Anglicans and  Tories survived the loss of their political  dominance  because the establishment  of responsible government  was delayed in New Brunswick, and did not, in any case, mean a sharp  break when it did come.... Moreover, it was a closely knit   company  of  experts  and  adepts  in  administration, education,   and religion, and  the  Province  continued  to depend  upon it for some of these services long after  confederation. To  this  circle of professional  people  the  Carman   and Roberts families belonged.4

Bailey argues  convincingly that  whereas  in  Nova  Scotia  "Howe and  Haliburton had  met a political  challenge",5  in New Brunswick  "Carman and  Roberts experi­ enced  a crisis of the spirit  after  the  political  battle  was lost, and something of the world along with it." Howe and  Haliburton had  Man  for their argument; Roberts and  Carman, perforce, turned to the landscape.
I think  this is so. Certainly "the little society of professional  people" in Frederic­ ton could  not for ever  nourish  its brood  of poets, and  they were soon  to be off to Toronto and  Boston,  New  York  and  London, Cuba and  Montreal,  taking  their landscape with  them.  However, the actual  advent  of the "creative moment" itself (and   Bailey, of course,  agrees)   has its own  inner  urgency  not  to  be  understood solely in  terms  of the shape and  stress of a society as such. Something happened that  might  not  have  happened. It happened in the  context  of a cultural pheno­  menon   that could  not  have  been  predicted   of  a  society  of  professional   people already  outliving their  usefulness.
Roberts6  attributes the advent of "the creative  moment" to "the vitalizing influ­ ence of George  R.  Parkin, falling  upon  soil peculiarly  fitted  to receive  it."  Much  has  been  made  of Parkin's influence-and who  can  doubt it?  But  nothing  has been  made of Parkin's Anglicanism, his devotion  to  Bishop  Medley,  his friend­ ship  with  Canon Roberts-a friendship which  had  much  to do  with  those long hikes over the hills with  Charles Roberts and  Bliss Carman, and  those rapt  recita­ tions of "The Blessed Damozel", a poem which  Parkin "loved  so passionately  that  Bliss sometimes  suspected him  of saying instead  of his prayers."7
One  wonders  what  would  have  happened in this "little  society  of professional people" if an evangelical had  been sent as first Bishop of Fredericton, if there  had been  no Gothic  Cathedral on the  river, if between  the teacher and  his "favourite two"  there  had  been  no  band  of friendship in the faith?

"A STRANGE AESTHETIC FERMENT"


What was the soil "peculiarly fitted" to receive Parkin's influence? In  part, at least, it was New England soil. A. G. Bailey puts it thus:

The  poetry of Fredericton  represented  the flowering of a tradition  that  had  been four  generations  in  the  making  on the  banks of the  St. John; and  behind  that, across the divide of the Revolution,  lay the colonial centuries.8

This  is not  to say  that  Roberts and  the  others  were  conscious  of belonging to and  fulfilling  a native tradition in  poetry.  Bailey makes  this clear:

Charles G. D. Roberts, who perhaps more than any other fathered  the national movement in Canadian poetry, considered that  he was writing  on a tablet  that  no one had written on before. He showed little awareness of the work of Sangster  and Heavysege, nor that  of Jonathan Odell, the Tory  poet of the Revolution,  who had been among  the founders  of his own city of Fredericton.9

Nevertheless,   the  influence on  taste  and   manners of  men  like  Odell-and other  founding fathers like Ward  Chipman and  Edward Winslow-made Fred­ ericton, from  the start,  heir  to the  culture  of colonial  America. The  well-stocked private libraries,  the  university  itself, the  urbane and  cultivated air  of  this  remote  frontier town,  owed  as much  to the American tradition as it did  to college  pro­  fessors from  Oxford and  transplanted British  officials.
The place  took something of its actual  look from  the older  colonies. Just  across
the  way  from   Medley's Gothic   Cathedral stands   Jonathan  Odell's handsome colonial  house.  In  the shadow of the  Cathedral spire  was the  house  where  Bene­ dict  Arnold   once  lived.  The   mark  of  New  England  craftsmen was  evident on houses throughout the city, on the white  pine churches  and  farmhouses along  the river,  on  the  chairs  and   tables,  dressers,  and   clocks  and  highboys  of  even  the simplest  Fredericton homes.
Roberts and  Carman grew  up in mind  of their  ancestor, the  Reverend Daniel Bliss, pastor  of Concord at  the  time  of the  Revolution. A. G.  Bailey,  in  a  tape recording of his literary  reminicences prepared for the  Harriet Irving Library of the  University of New  Brunswick,  shows how vividly  the  New  England memory lived  on  in  Fredericton. He  traces  the  ancestry  of Carman and  Roberts to  one Peter  Bulkeley, "The founder of Concord  in the  Massachusettes Bay Colony":

It was Peter's  granddaughter, Elizabeth  Bulkley, who  married   Joseph  Emerson, and  two  descendants,  thus  necessarily cousins, Hannah  Emerson  and  the  Rev. Daniel  Emerson,  became  espoused in  the  year 1744. Both  were ancestors  of  the Baileys of  the  University  of  New Brunswick  and  Hannah was  a  great  aunt   of Ralph  Waldo Emerson, and  sister-in-law of Phoebe Bliss, who was, in turn,  sister of  Daniel  Bliss, forbearer  of  Bliss Carman   and  Charles  G.  D.  Roberts.  These families, Baileys and  Bliss's, so early connected,  were to meet again  and  mingle in ways that  had,  in  the  fulness of  time, a  significance  for  the  development   of  a Fredericton  literary  tradition.10

In  x861, Loring  Woart  Bailey, the grandfather of A. G. Bailey, came from  the

15

"A STRANGE AESTHETIC FERMENT"


United States  as Professor  of Chemistry at the University  of New Brunswick. "His friendship with  the  Carman and  Roberts families in Fredericton brought together once again  two families  that  had  been connected away back in Revolutionary days in Concord."
Then, too,  there  was something "native to  the  blood"  of  these  Loyalist  New Englanders in  the  Maritime terrain itself. Roberts, writing  of  canoe  trips  with Carman, captures the  feeling  they  both  had  of being  three  hundred years in  the wilderness:

I have  never  seen Carman so happy,  so utterly  at  home, as in  those wilderness expeditions.  He was essentially native  to the woods and  the lovely inland  waters. He  paddled  and  handled  his canoe like an  Indian. He trod  the  forest  trails  like an  Indian, noiseless, watchful,   taciturn,   moving  with  long,  loose-kneed  slouch, flat-footed,  with  toes almost  turned  in  rather  than  out-an  Indian's gait,  not  a white  man's!  That love of  the  sea that  was later  to show  itself in  so much  of Carman's poetry  was perhaps  atavistic-an inheritance  from  some of our  New England  and  approximately "Mayflower"  ancestry.U


0NE NEED NOT SUBSCRIBE  to notions of "atavism" to recog­
nize a congeniality of place that  wells out of time  past but still present.  The politi­
cal  break  with  the  American past  was only  in  part  a  cultural break.  Even  the Anglican parsons  who  fled to New  Brunswick  from  the  Revolution brought with them  ways that  smacked of American congregationalism. Until quite  recently  in New  Brunswick  the  rector  answered a  "call", the  Bishop  appointing only  after the   congregation  had   chosen   their   "minister". And,   in   the   main,   Anglican churches were built  in the style of the New England meeting-house. Bishop Med­ ley, in horror  at  what  he saw of New  Brunswick  church  architecture, said  to one of his laymen: "Mr. R.-, when  you build  a church, build  a  church but  when you build  a barn, build  a bam !"12 And  Ketchum tells us that  in  the  days before Medley

the  Church  buildings  and  church  services were alike of a  dull  and  dreary  sort. New churches  were  built  but  more  after  the  plan  of the  meeting  house. In  the public serviCes there were no responses-that all-important part  of divine service fell to the lot of the clerk. The  parish church  of Fredericton-the pro-Cathedral
-had its galleries  and  square  pews. The  altar  stood in a  narrow  space  between the reading desk and  the pulpit.... church  music was little understood  or attended to.ls

The Loyalists had  brought with  them  their  books and  their  crafts  and  a deep­ down  instinct  for  forest,  river  and  sea. But  they  had  also brought a  Puritan dis­ trust  of the senses. For  even among the Anglican Loyalists there was evident  and  active  what  A.S.P.  Woodhouse once called the  Puritan "principle of segregation"

r6

"A STRANGE AESTHETIC  FERMENT"

which  put  apart, and  far apart, the order of nature  and the order  of grace. The austerity  of the sacred  was to be preserved from  any taint  of the  profane.  Skills that  went  to the shaping  of fan-windows  and  Chippendale chairs were not to be employed  on  altar-pieces  and  lecterns. To stain  a window  was perhaps  to stain a soul.
This  is not  to say that  learning  was not  valued,  and  for  its own sake.  (The
college on  the  hill could  not  be hid.)  There  was pride,  too, in  the  houses and public buildings of mid-century  Fredericton. The  red-coated garrison gave sparkle to the streets  and  the convivialities of Government  House. There was a love of fine horses, and  parades,  there was canoeing or iceboating on the Saint  John,  the hunting party  deep in the forest. But there was also the prim  white  church  with square pews, galleries and  blank windows-a place apart  from  the life of town and  river.
In  I845, into  this mixed society of Loyalist New Englanders,  British  bureau­
crats  and  soldiers, lumber  kings and  small  merchants  came  John   Medley,  first Bishop of Fredericton. It was the year of Newman's secession to Rome -not an auspicious   moment   to   proclaim   Tractarian  doctrine   and   to   build   Gothic churches !14
Medley,  an  Oxford  man,  was not only a friend of Pusey, and  Keble.  He  was
also an  ecclesiologist, the author  of an influential  book Elementary  Remarks  on Church  Architecture  ( I84I ). He was a musician, the composer of choral settings for the T e Deum  and  the Benedictus  as well as a number  of hymns.  It  was his great  (if not his greatest)  achievement to give to Fredericton,  to the diocese and, in  no small measure  the whole ecclesiastical province of Canada, a sense of the kinship of beauty and  holiness. His strenuous effort to reclaim for the sacred all of the  outcast  glory of the  profane  was begun in Fredericton  almost  a  generation before the birth of Charles G. D. Roberts and Bliss Carman, who were to come of age in Medley's  city, reared  and  taught  by men who were Medley's  friends,  his allies, his disciples. The  Bishop in what he built, in what  he said, in what  he did, altered  a climate of the mind.
One  need  not  here  say much  about  the  pastoral  and  doctrinal   concerns  of Bishop Medley. One  must note, however, his Catholic insistence on the apostolic sanction  for his high office, his Catholic sacramentalism, and his affirmation  of the classical Anglican  doctrine  of the  via media,  an  affirmation  made  persuasively enough  to win him, in the end, the support of both High Churchmen and  Evan­ gelicals. Then,  too, there was his solicitous care for the poor  (he abolished  pew­ rents  on  arrival  in  Fredericton), and  his astonishing travel  by  ship,  canoe  and horse to the farthest  outposts of his diocese. No Yankee circuit rider  rode farther  than  this intrepid  Englishman who was to become the most ardent  of New Bruns­ wickers and,  after I 867, without  forsaking his Englishness, became  a committed Canadian  pleading   for  full  self-government  in  the  Canadian  Church,  while

"A STRANGE AESTHETIC FERMENT"

advancing  the spiritual  claims of the universal Church  beyond any possible reach of the secular arm.
With generous financial  aid from England, the practical  help of Frank  Wills, a young English architect, and  the advice and collaboration  of William Butterfield, the noted  English Gothicist,  the Bishop, on arrival,  began to build his Cathedral. The spire soon rose above the town, giving high point and focus to what had been a jumbled prospect of Georgian  houses, British barracks and lumbermen's palaces. At the other  end of town  he built  his Chapel  of Ease-St.  Anne's,  consecrated in 1846, six years before the Cathedral. Also designed by Frank  Wills, it is, says Phoebe  Stanton,  "the  finest small  North  American  parish  church  of its date  in the English Gothic style."15
Even before the completion  of his Cathedral,  Medley was on the move about the diocese, exhorting  his people to build churches, not barns. Soon new churches, of wood, but  built  under  the guidance  of the Gothic ecclesiologists, were  conse­ crated  at  Newcastle, Burton  and  Maugerville.  Later,  the  Bishop's son  Edward, who had studied  with Butterfield,  designed several wooden Gothic churches,  the most notable of which are at St. Stephen and Sussex.
In  making  possible  through   architecture   a  renewal  of  Catholic  practice  in Anglican  worship,  the  Bishop  had  also effected  a  revolution  in sensibility  and taste. After the blank meeting house with the pulpit rising like a mountainous idol above the speck of a "communion table", St. Anne's, with its rood-screen, stained glass, and tiled reredos, and Christ Church  Cathedral,  cruciform, in dim religious light, pulsing with the music of the Bishop's own T e Deum, struck the mind  and imagination  of the Loyalist town like an apocalypse.
It is not surprising  that  the  Bishop's sermon  in stone and  painted  glass and lighted  altar  was not at first, and  by everyone, happily  heard.  There  were those among the meeting-house men of Fredericton who saw idolatry as well as extrava­ gance in these "Romish" structures. The  Bishop met the charge of  extravagance by paying for St. Anne's out of his own pocket and by raising large sums in Eng­ land  for the construction  of the  Cathedral.  Rebutting  the  charge  of idolatry,  in sermons, in addresses to lay audiences, in admonitions to his clergy, he argued with Ruskinian  fervour  and  Tractarian point against that  inherited  Loyalist, Puritan  bias which would allow splendid dwellings for governor, merchant and soldier, but which refused to the church  all delight of eye and ear.
"Are  they who despise the  Church  of God, and  lay out  all their substance  in the  decoration  of their  houses, of necessity the  most holy?"  He  was fully  con­ scious of that "principle of segregation" which had kept the order of grace wholly aloof from the order  of nature: "... if  there be no necessary connexion  between external   beauty  and  spiritual   religion,  is  there  any  close  connexion   between spiritual  and external  deformity?"16
From  this sermon,  preached  at the consecration of St. Anne's in 1847, to the

"A STRANGE AESTHETIC FERMENT"


very end  of his days  (in I 8g2), it was among  the  Bishop's  chief  tasks  to baptize beauty, to give beauty  back to the Giver of it. In so doing  he proclaimed not only the  beauty and, for  the  Christian, the  congeniality  of the  natural order. He  was to affirm,  as well, the integrity of the natural order  and  the full and  proper dignity of the life of the senses.
The consecration sermon  in itself was intended as a defense  of beauty  in  wor­
ship.  Alarmed at  the  puritanical bigotry  of the  evangelicals  and  the  "high and dry" Churchmen alike,  Medley  was at great  pains to protect  the  imagery  of  tradi­ tional  Christian worship from  the  rigours  of these  latter-day  iconoclasts.  But  he does  not  stop  with  a  defense  of beauty  in worship.  He  calls  upon   his  people  to venerate and  to enjoy  as Christians the sensuous  beauty  of all creation:

For let us consider  to what did God vouchsafe us  form, colour,  number  and  har­ mony?  ... why does the Book of God answer  to the  work of God,  and  dwell so often  and  so vividly on external  nature?  . . . Did  God  make  all  these  works for nought?  Or  are  we intended  to suppose them  only for  sensual  enjoyment,  that the animal  man may be gratified,  while the spiritual  man is neglected? 17

It follows that, in worship,  "if  the  tongue  praise him,  why not  the  heart, the  feet and  the  hands?  What difference  is there  in  principle between  reading or singing the  praises  of God  with  the  lips, and  engraving those  praises  on  wood,  or stone, or glass?"'8
The senses  which  respond  to  the  beauty  of creation   are  validly  employed   in
praise  of the Creator. But if art  is indeed  a suitable  handmaiden of religion,  it has its own  province  too.  The  lecture  on  "Good  Taste," delivered  in  1857  to  a  lay audience of churchmen in Saint  John, is a nice distillation   of  Medley's thought on the secular implications of his aesthetic  principles.  Here,  in little,  a doctrine of beauty, art  and  nature which  the  Bishop propounded almost  daily  in  private dis­ course  as well as public, with  consequences  not  only for  the  life and  look  of  the church  and   the   city,  but  also  for  that   "strange aesthetic   ferment" of   which Roberts speaks.




EEDERICTON AS  IT  Is TODAY  owes much  to the man  who  had talked  like this about city streets  and  houses:

In  laying out a town, it is common in North  America to avoid  the crooked lanes and  devious ways of our  ancestors, and  to provide  wide and  spacious  streets. So far  so good, but  it is not breadth  or length only which gives a street  a fine  com­ manding appearance. The  houses, if not of uniform  height,  should  certainly  not present an astonishing difference, one mansion towering to the skies, and  the next a shanty  of eight  feet  from  the  ground.  The  colouring  and  ornamentation of a house require great  consideration.  It is a safe as well as an ancient  rule that  noth­ ing should  form part  of the decoration of a building, which is also not part  of its

19

"A STRANGE AESTHETIC FERMENT"

construction.... Then  as to colour. It is either  as if  men had  no eyes, or lived in a  colourless  world. Their   houses  glare  with  white  paint,  and  the  same  idea  is repeated  again  and  again,  without  variation,  while there  is not a hill, nor a lake, nor a flower which is not without  its variety.19

Even  now, the Cathedral with  its varied  and  lovely architectural brood,  defies the government "planner" who  so often  proposes,  but  still in  vain,  to  erect  around this  priceless place  his ugly monotones of steel and  glass.
While  I am  not  sure  that   the  Bishop  had  read  the  Second  Book  of  Modern
Painters  (although I suspect  he had) he seems, like Ruskin,  to discern  in nature's teeming variety  what  Ruskin  called  "divine attributes", the mark  of the  Maker on things.  The order  of nature is given  its own governance, its own  integrity. It lives by laws unto itself, is lovable  in itself and  by itself, even as it gives witness to Other than itself.
Medley  lifts the imagination to the restless, kaleidescopic  configuration of clouds
in language that  suggests the  art  of Constable.

What exquisite beauty lies in water and light, and in their mutual  relation  to each other.  The  clouds  present  an  endless variety  of  form  and  colour,  sometimes  in streaks like the  finest pencilling  of the  artist  ... sometimes like balls of snow or crystals, sometimes piled up like the everlasting hills, disclosing huge  cavernous recesses, lighted up with a bronze colour, like the interior  of a volcano, sometimes resembling  cities  whose  top  reached  up  to  heaven,  then  melting  into  spacious plains, sometimes so transparent that  we would seem to pierce them through  with the  hand,  then  gathering suddenly  into  a  thick, fierce and  angry  mass, bursting into forked flames and  threatening destruction.20

But in this "wide awe" of cloud  and  storm  there  is hidden wisdom  to  be  pon­ dered.  For  this  infinitely  unpredictable conduct of the  natural order  is still  law­ ful  conduct, and  wonder  at  it is the  beginning  of human wisdom  and  the  foun­  tain-source of art.  One must  also observe that  Medley  takes  no terror  from  those angry  masses of clouds  "bursting into forked  flames and  threatening destruction." There is in him, it must  be insisted, "no  terror  of the soul at something these things manifest."21  Quite the  contrary. The  Bishop "accepts the  universe." He  was,  of course,  not  unaware of the  "wrath of God". He  never forgot  that  men  were  too often  prone  to bask  under  the  sun  of Satan. In  his sermons  he had  much  to say of original  sin, of the  Fall,  and  of the deep  wound left by the  Fall in the  heart  of things.  But he had  much  more  to say about  the redemptive sacrifice  of the  Cross. It was Medley's  Tractarian  orthodoxy which  protected  him from  all dark  notions  of the  "total depravity" of the  natural order  and  the  natural man.  Freed  from fear  by faith,  he opened   his church  door  and  let  beauty  in -and  nature.
Little  wonder  that  there  can  be found  in the  Bishop's  flock  no trace of what Frye calls the "garrison mentality". Nor is there evident,  in young  churchmen like Roberts and  Carman and   the  others  who  gathered at  the  parish   Rectory  on George  Street,  anything like the  working  of that  old puritan "principle of segre-

20

"A STRANGE AESTHETIC FERMENT"

gation" which had isolated the sacred from the profane. Through Medley's Gothic door  there  entered,  as it had  not  entered  the door  of the old  Loyalist  meeting­ house, all of the  New Englander's active love of woods and sea and  river.
The Rector of the parish, George Goodridge Roberts  (a Bliss of Loyalist lineage on his mother's side), had come to Fredericton in 187 4 to serve close to his Bishop. He was a man  after  Medley's own heart and had, before coming to Fredericton, rearranged his little church  at  Westcock in accordance  with  Medley's  liturgical principles. In his new charge at St. Anne's he was equally faithful  to Medley and had  to contend  manfully  with  nervous parishioners  who saw  in  lighted  candles on the altar  the dire threat  of "popery".
It was in Canon  Roberts'  rectory that  Charles and  Bliss Carman, the Stratons and, later, Francis Sherman,  gathered after the canoe trip and after family prayers or evensong to read  their verses to each other and to talk of Rossetti and Tenny­ son and  Swinburne. Parkin  was often among them, and Canon  Roberts  himself. The  young  poets  were,  in  those  days, active  churchmen.   Charles  sang  in  his father's choir  at  St.  Anne's.  Carman   served  at  Medley's  cathedral  altar   and assisted Parkin  in the Cathedral Sunday School. Francis Sherman  was to become the  fast  friend   of  Tully   Kingdon,   the  coadjutor   Bishop  and   his   next-door neighbour.
It might  be said, then,  that  "the  soil" which Roberts  tells us was "peculiarly
fitted" to receive "the vitalizing influence of Parkin",  was New England  soil which had  been "Gothicized". It was from  this soil that  Parkin  himself drew  his own first strength.  Born in Salisbury, New Brunswick, of Anglican parents,  he received his early religious training from the Baptist Church because there was no Anglican Church  within  miles. According  to his biographer,  Sir John  Willison/ 2    Parkin, when he came to Fredericton,  was soon drawn  to the Cathedral, and  "his family tradition, his instinctive love of seemliness and  dignity in worship, and  above all the  character   and  influence of the  Bishop brought  him  back  to the  Church  of England." When he went to Oxford  on leave from the Collegiate school, he bore from the Bishop "letters of introduction  to several prominent  men in the church". Parkin  went to Oxford  ready for Ruskin  (whose first Slade  Lecture  he heard), ready for  Pusey  (whom  he visited as well as heard), ready for Gothic  England and for a past made present in the bright colours of Pre-Raphaelite poetry. It was as though  he had come upon the very source of what he had already  loved most. When  he returned  to his own country as a prophet  he was a prophet  honoured. For his country  had  been made ready for his prophecy.




E	Here  was "the  fair beginning  of a time". But the "strange  aesthetic ferment" that  began in Rectory


21

"A STRANGE AESTHETIC FERMENT"

and  Cathedral with  Parkin's  return  from Oxford  to this Gothicized  colonial soil was to have unpredictable issue. Carman  and  Roberts soon went their  own  and very different ways. There  are traces of Pre-Raphaelite colours and images in some of their earlier work but other  influences were soon to gain ascendancy.  Neither, of course, was to be a "Christian" poet. Carman's early "Easter  Hymn" was never published and, by the time he wrote "Low Tide on the Grand  Pre",  he was closer to  New England  transcendentalism than  to any force or fashion  coming  out  of England. The mark of the Gothic and the Christian  was to be stronger and  more enduring  on the work of the younger  poets of the group,  Francis  Sherman  and Theodore Goodridge  Roberts.
The  directions  eventually  taken  in  the  poetry  of Charles  Roberts  and  Bliss Carman can be explained  in part,  at least, by the loss of that  faith  in which  the ferment  of the first creative  moment  had  begun. The  actual  drift  away from  the faith -Parkin's faith,  Medley's faith-is another story and  not to be attempted here. Even in his college days Charles Roberts had admitted  religious doubts and reservations to his father  (who was disturbed but tolerant). Dorothy Roberts once told me that  her uncle, for all his scepticism, had clung for years to a faint  hope, at least, in "the  permanence of human  identity",  and  he seems always to have been nagged by "the  religious question". In at least one remarkable  poem, "When Mary the Mother  Kissed the Child",  he seems magically for a moment  to be back at Christmas  time in his father's  choir at St. Anne's.
I remember  having  dinner  with  him once in Fredericton  in the late Thirties.
Rather  mischievously, I  asked him if  he intended  to go to the  Cathedral in  the morning-or  perhaps  to St. Anne's. "No",  he said, "No,  I'm  afraid not." There was a twinkle in his eye and,  I fancied,  a rather  wistful smile on his lips as he added, "Nowadays,  I carry my church within me." I remembered that  I had once seen him in the  cathedral, not  many  years before, at  the state  funeral  for  Bliss Carman.
Theodore  Goodridge  Roberts,  younger than  Charles by almost eighteen  years,
was no church-goer either, but, much more than his brother or his cousin Carman, he retained a fascination  for the chivalric Christian  tradition,  for Saint  Joan  and her "banner of snow",23  and for the Love who tells the Young Knight24
I am the spirit of Christ
High and white as a star.
I am the crown of Mary
Outlasting the helmet and war.

It was not so much  to the pageantry  of Pre-Raphaelitism  that Theodore Roberts was drawn. His daughter, Dorothy, has spoken to me of his veneration  of the suffering Christ and of his symbolic use of the sacrificial Indian  hero Gluskap  as a kind of Christ-figure  in some of the tales and  poems.


22

"A STRANGE AESTHETIC FERMENT"

Francis  Sherman, eleven  years  younger  than  Charles  Roberts,  wrote  poetry which  is often  thoroughly  Pre-Raphaelite in style and  specifically  Christian  in theme. The  titles of not a few of the poems in his volume Matins  are quite liturgi­ cal-"Nunc Dimitis",  "Te  Deum  Laudamus". (He  had first thought  of  calling his book Lauds and Orisons and  then The  Book of the  Little  Hours. 23 )     His best work seeks to reveal a Christian  dimension in the order of nature  and  in  the love of man for woman.
Carman himself, after his Fredericton years, was to be close for awhile in Boston to Phillips Brooks, the eminent Rector of Trinity  Church. Among his other Boston friends  were Ralph  Adams  Cram  and  Bertram  Goodhue,  the  Gothic  architects, and  Louise Guiney,  the  devout  Roman  Catholic  poet. But the  drift  which  had begun in his college days with an enthusiasm for Emerson and Thoreau   (and  soon for Josiah  Royce)  carried  him irreversibly towards  transcendentalism in its late New England  twilight, and very far from the Tractarian teaching  of his boyhood. By 1903 he could write like this:
Surely the soul of man is the only tabernacle of the veritable God. The  sense of living humanity as to what is true, what is good, what is beautiful  to see, is the only sanction for  belief. You and  I, standing outside the  reach  of an  obsolete authority, believe and cherish the words of the Sermon on the Mount not because Christ uttered  them but because we cannot  help assenting to their lofty truth.26

The  truths  of Christianity,  he goes on, need "only to be separated  from super- stition to appeal  to us in all their charm and  power."  (Emerson  might well have written  this!).
But if Carman was to leave the church  through  Medley's open door  and  find his way back to New England  (the  New England  not of his puritan  ancestor, the Reverend  Daniel  Bliss, but of Ralph  Waldo  Emerson)  he was never to become one of Frye's "garrison" men. If he was one day, as Frye puts it (unfairly,  I think) to utter "prayers  of a stentorian  vagueness to some kind of scholar-gypsy God",27 the prayers were not to be uttered  "in stark terror".  D. G. Jones is one of the few critics since the Thirties to be perceptive enough to recognize in Carman's poetry a loving acceptance  and a celebration of the natural  world:

More than any other Canadian  writer he has the kind of faith in the goodness or justice of life that  is implied in Christ's parable of the lilies of the field which neither toil nor spire, and  yet are clothed in a glory greater than  Solomon's.... Throughout  his career  he  was  able to  write  poems in  which  we glimpse an authentic sense of the joy and poignancy of being alive-of  what it means to love
a woman or the world.28

If Mary Perry King was to replace Medley as Carman's mentor, and if Carman was to put aside Christian  dogma in favour of a kind of transcendentalism, he was never to lose the slouching  Indian  gait, or the sense of kinship with  all created things that  Medley's  door  had  opened  to him.  He  had  known  early  the  awful

"A STRANGE AESTHETIC FERMENT"

presence "swift and  huge  j of One  who strode and  looked not back."  When  his cousin,  and  close friend  of  Cathedral days,  Andy  Straton,  died  suddenly  and young, Carman turned  for solace, however, not to the hopes of Christianity  but
to Josiah  Royce's Religious Aspects  of Philosophy. In Royce's thoughts,  as  J. R.
Sorfleet so aptly summarizes  it, "evil is no more than  a momentary  dissonance in
the organic unity of God's good act, and is soon resolved into God's goodness." 29
From  Royce,  from   Mary   Perry  King  and  from  George  Santayana,  Carman sought  to build a system of ideas which could sustain and  justify his faith,  early and everlasting, in the holiness of beauty and the integrity of nature,  a faith which he had  first come  to  hold,  with  such  different  Christian  sanction,  in  Medley's Cathedral city.
Fredericton,  for awhile, had  been "a good place for a poet to be",  but  not for ever a good place for a poet to stay. Charles  Roberts soon found  that  not  even Toronto could support  a writer. Carman  could not resist the New England  of his forbears  (after  a few months in Boston, like many a Maritimer since, he could not imagine  himself living anywhere  else). Only Theodore  Roberts  returned  later  in life and  after  much  wandering,  to live in Fredericton  and  the  Maritimes.
John  Medley  would  have  been grieved to know of the  "unchurching" of his
young churchmen. He would at least have been perplexed  by Carman's curious New England  heterodoxies. But in Theodore's Young Knight,  and  "The Maid", and in all that  he had loved and known "on  that  far river" of the early years, in Charles'  uncommon  songs of the common day as well as in "Mary the Mother", in much of Sherman's Matins he Inight have recognized something of gifts which he had  himself once given. With  Carman's proclamation,  early and  late,  of the holiness of beauty and the sense that his poetry imparts "of the joy and poignancy of being alive",  the first Bishop of Fredericton  would have  had  no quarrel. He would, one is sure, have been gratified rather  than dismayed.


NOTES

1 This  quotation and  the  quoted passages  which  follow immediately are  from  "Bliss
Carman". By Charles G. D. Roberts, Dalhousie Review, Vol.  IX,  March 1930. Pp.
409-4I7.
2  "Sir  Charles G. D. Roberts", in  Essays in Canadian  Criticism. Toronto, I969. Pp.
I80-I87.
8  "Creative Moments in  the  Culture of  the  Maritime Provinces", in  Culture   and
Nationality. Toronto, 1972. Pp. 54-55·
4  Ibid., p. 54·
l'i  Ibid., p. 56.
6  Roberts, p. 4I7.
7  Roberts, p. 4 I 3·
8 Bailey, p. 56.

"A STRANGE AESTHETIC FERMENT"

9  "Evidences of Culture Considered as Colonial", in Culture  and Nationality, p. I84.
10 This  and  the  brief passage  which  follows quoted  with  permission of the author and the library  from  a manuscript revised from  typescript  "Literary Memories of Alfred Godsworthy Bailey:  Part  I, pp. 2-3, and  p. 5·
11 Roberts, p. 4I5.
12 "John  Medley". By W.  0. Raymond, in  Leaders of the  Canadian  Church. First series. Ed. W. B. Heeney.  Toronto, I9I8. p. I2I.
13 W. Q. Ketchum, The  Life  and Work  of the Most  Reverend  John  Medley.  Saint John, I893· Pp.  26 and  64. Still  the only full  account of  Medley's career. A fine chapter on Medley  is included in Christopher Headon's unpublished doctoral thesis The  Influence  of the  Oxford  Movement  Upon  the Church  of England  in Eastern and Central Canada,  1840-1900. (McGill  University, I974).
14 The point  was made  by Eugene  Fairweather in "A Tractarian Patriot: John  Med­ ley of Fredericton", Canadian  Journal of Theology,  Vol. VI   (I96o), No.  I, p.  I7. This  is the best approach to Medley  in print.
15 The  Gothic  Revival  and American  Church  Architecture.  Baltimore, I968,  p.  I30.
Professor Stanton devotes  a full chapter to Christ  Church Cathedral and  St. Anne's
and  I am indebted to her for information about  Medley's  Gothic churches in wood.
The most  thorough architectural study of the Cathedral is to be found  in Douglas
Richardson's unpublished  master's  thesis  Christ  Church  Cathedral, Fredericton,
New Brunswick  (Yale  University, I966).
16 The  Staff of Beauty and the Staff of  Bands. Saint  John, I847· P.  I4.
17 Ibid., p.  I 2.
18  Ibid.,  p.  I 3·
19 A Lecture ... Subject  ((Good Taste". Saint  John, I857· P. 21.
20   Ibid.,  pp.  I8-I9.
21  Northrop Frfe, Conclusion to The  Literary History of Canada.  Toronto, I965.  P.
830.
22 Sir George Parkin. London, I929.  Pp. 26-27.
23  "The Maid", The   Leather   Bottle,  Toronto,  I934·  P.  71.  Theodore  Goodridge Roberts was lost for a while in the shadow of his brother's fame  and  in the reaction against  the romantic tradition which began  with "McGill Movement". He  is a fine poet  with  his own very distinctive voice.
24  "Love and  the Young  Knight", The  Leather Bottle, p. 65.
25   See The  Complete  Poems of Francis Sherman,  ed.  Lome Pierce.  Toronto,  I935· Information about   Shem1an's search  for  the  title  of  his  volume   of  poems   was derived  from  his letters  in  the  Hathaway Collection  of the  Harriet Irving Library, the  University  of New  Brunswick.
26   The  Friendship of Art. Boston,  I903. P. 265.
27   "Canada and  its Poetry", The  Bush Garden. Toronto, I97I. P.  I34·
28   Butterfly on Rock. Toronto, I970. Pp. 95-96.
29   "Transcendentalist,  Mystic,   Evolutionary  Idealist:   Bliss  Carman,   I886-I894," Colony  and  Confederation: Canadian  Poets and Their   Background. Vancouver, I974· P. 205. The most  persuasive study  we have  yet  had  of  Carman as a serious and  consistent  thinker. The discussion of "evolutionary idealism" and  the comment on Santayana's influence  I found particularly helpful.

FICTION IN ATLANTIC  CANADA




Andrew Thompson Seaman






IN HIS INTRODU<mON to The Po,tmit of a Lady, Henry Jame! analyses the problem of objective value in the subject of a novel. He describes how Turgenev  helped him to see that  it is valid to work from character, particularly
as crystallized in some stray  figure, into structure  in the story,  rather  than  from plot into character. He then  perceives that  if character,  or human  experience,  is at the centre of the work, a very simple test of the worth of a subject  emerges; "is it the result of some direct impression or perception of life?" And this leads to an assertion of "the  perfect dependence  of the 'moral'  sense of a work of art  on the amount  of felt life concerned  in producing  it."
It  is a  phrase  casually  dropped-"felt life"-and  yet a  useful one,  which helps to get at a quality  in much  of the fiction of Atlantic  Canada which holds the secret of its value and  importance. No group of authors  in Canada has been more singly concerned  with the sense of place and the value of heritage  than  our Maritime  fiction writers,  and  those values can  often be perceived  through  the intensified quality of "felt life" in their writings. This has been largely true of our best writers for the last two decades, from Charles Bruce's The  Channel Shore of
1954, to David Richards'  The  Coming of Winter of 1974.
Ever since R. E. Watters  announced in 1954 that  Ernest Buckler's new novel, The  Mountain  and the Valley, was the most excellent first novel ever written  in Canada,1 the book has grown in reputation, until it is now thought  of as a Mari­ time classic. However,  Buckler's themes go far  beyond merely regional concerns. David  Canaan, whose life the novel traces from early boyhood, is an  embryonic artist,  a sensitive soul searching  for  a means of uncovering  and  expressing the meaningful  patterns  in life, and  failing  to find  it in the  essentially inarticulate society around him. David sees the farm folk of the Annapolis Valley with wonder­ ful  insight  and  compassion,  never  with  contempt  of any  kind,  and  he  finally grasps a vision of personal salvation, of what he might do with his life, ironically at

FICTION IN ATLANTIC CANADA

the point of death on the mountain  top. " I know how it is with everything.  I will put  it down,  and  they will see that  I know ... It  would make him the greatest writer in the whole world."
David  had spoken, or thought, something very similar at an earlier stage, when he acted  in a school play. It  was the first of many  traumatic experiences  which gradually robbed  him  of the  confidence  to  direct  his own  destiny  as  he  grew older. At the climax of the play, in a moment of grand  inspiration,  David  thinks "I will be the greatest  actor  in the whole world",  and  adds  a touch  of personal interpretation. He strides onto the stage and  kisses the Princess, as he   imagines it should  be in real life. The  result is instant  disaster, and  he stumbles  from  the stage and out into the snow, bitterly disillusioned and  cursing the side of himself which has betrayed him into this acute embarrassment.  One  could conclude  that he learns nothing  in twenty years. As any rate, we have no reason to suppose that David  could carry out the intention  of his moment  of vision on the mountain. It is Ernest  Buckler who writes the novel. He  knows "how  it is with  everything", and we see that  he knows the people and the place. That  is what makes the book regional, and  moral in the Jamesian  sense. If The  Mountain and the Valley  has a weakness, it lies in Buckler and  not having  trusted  enough  in  this  quality  for the shape of his novel.
But before we examine the quality of felt life in The  Mountain and the Valley, let us look at its rival where that  quality is concerned, the lesser known  novel by Charles Bruce, The  Channel Shore. The structure of this novel is quite simple. We are  taken  through  three significant  periods in the history of a family,  one  after World  War  I, one  in the thirties,  and  the  third  just after  World  War  II. The plot is not really a plot at all, but a set of conditions which create  human  prob­ lems demanding resolutions. In the process of working out these resolutions, Bruce brings into realization  the pattern  of a culture.
Anse Gordon  has left the  Channel  Shore,  apparently  for  good  not  realizing that  the lover he leaves behind  is pregnant.  Hazel  is sent  away  to Toronto, the open shame  to be avoided. Grant  Marshall  is in love with Anse's younger  sister Anna,  but Grant's uncle, and father  by adoption,  is a Protestant patriarch, while Anna's  family is Catholic.  Grant  bows to James  Marshall's  will. A short  time later, Anna  is killed on a trip to Halifax,  which she has undertaken in part  as a gesture of independence from Grant.  Haunted by a sense of guilt, and struck  by the need to emancipate himself from his uncle's stem and prejudiced,  though lov­ ing presence, Grant  goes to live with the  now-childless Gordons.  Shortly  there­ after, he comes to feel that it is right that he should rescue Hazel from her banish­ ment  and  bring the Gordon's  grandchild  by Anse back to the Channel Shore, so he goes to Toronto, marries Hazel, and brings her back. The  child is Alan. Hazel does not survive, but Grant  keeps Alan. This is the post World  War  I phase. In the thirties we find Grant  re-married to the school teacher, Renie, with a daughter

FICTION IN  ATLANTIC  CANADA

Margaret  to go with his son, Alan. That  Alan is not his blood son is a secret kept, out of respect for Grant,  by those of the Shore who know the truth.  Father  and son are close. But Alan begins to catch hints, and finally learns the truth,  realizing simultaneously  that  he cannot  bring  himself to shatter  Grant's illusion, so care­ fully cultivated  over  the  years. In  the third  section of the  novel, Alan  has  just returned  from five years in the war. Margaret  is twenty. Both know that they are not blood relatives. Grant  discovers, unknown to Alan, that Alan knows the truth,  but  in tum  cannot  bring  himself to shatter  openly the cultivated  illusion. Anse, however, returns to the Shore, discovers he has a son, and subtly tries to lay claim to him. This results in a violent public confrontation  which finally shatters  all the illusions of a generation.
If anything  in this bald description  of the conditions that  form the framework upon which The  Channel  Shore is woven appears improbable,  all doubts are laid to rest by the main  substance  of the novel. Its value, its moral force, is entirely dependent  upon the amount  of felt life which goes into fleshing it out. One essen­ tial  ingredient   which  defies second-hand   exposition,  is  the  constant  presence throughout the novel of sun on skin, wind on face, sound of the channel mutter­  ing on gravel beaches, smells of the kitchens, all the minute paraphernalia of rural life which Bruce reproduces  with unselfconscious skill. But  the insight into char­ acter and human  values deserves analysis.
After Alan's return  from the war, the Shore seems a little dull by times, so one evening he and Margaret, with some friends, go down to Forester's Pond, a neighbouring  community,  to a dance. Margaret,  without really meaning to, snubs a  Pond  boy. Bad  language  follows, and  Alan's  friend,  Buff Katon,  steps  into Alan's moment of hesitation  and starts a fight. This is no more incident for Alan. Grant  had  not approved  of them  going, because the Pond  is known as a rough place. For all his independence, Grant is in thrall to uncle James' austere morality. Violence is unthinkable. People who fight are Those  people, not his people. And Alan  has absorbed  Grant's notions of propriety. "This  was the sort of thing  the women of The  Head  (part  of the Shore)  had  meant,  years ago",  reflects Alan, "when  they said with loathing  in their voices, 'a downshore dance'." Bill Graham, a visitor at the shore that summer,  whose father  had left a generation  before, was among Alan's friends  that  evening. Bruce uses Bill as a foil throughout the novel. Grant  goes to him later  to get the story from an objective observer. Bill tells of Buff's defence of Margaret's honour. Grant's  reply is: "I don't  like that  kind of thing.  I  don't  like  the  Katons.  They're  violent  people . . . But  you  can't   give orders!  He  thought: . . . What  good  are  orders  when  the  qualities  that  make behaviour  are born into  you, brewed in the blood." Bill remarks that  he doesn't see what else was to be done-sees it as "a  kind of natural  courtesy".
We realize that  it is fortunate for Grant  that  it was not Alan who threw  the punch. With his philosophy, Grant  would have been tom  by seeing it as evidence

FICTION IN ATLANTIC CANADA

of that  other sonship -the  blood of the reckless Anse Gordon.  Grant  is wrong here;  he is suffering from one of the negative aspects of his particular, long, and upright  heritage, symbolized in James Marshall.  He is guilty of an inbred,  totally unrealized sense of pious moral superiority. And this is very much  tied  up  with the more central theme of the novel, his sense of parenthood. Grant  goes through half a lifetime, fearful of Alan's discovery of something  he already  knows, almost wrecking both of their lives in the process, because his false sense of the importance of public appearances leads him away from the truth  he knows deep in his heart. Only at the end of the novel, at the moment  of public disclosure, does the look on Grant's face  reveal  his discovery of what  old  Richard   MacKee  thinks  later on-that the thing between him and Alan was "a thing deeper and  more telling than  the  accident  of  blood".  Only  then  does he  understand  the  force  of  Bill Graham's earlier assertion that  you can't  figure inheritance on a slide rule. Then the Channel  Shore  relaxes, finding for the first time in a generation  no need to whisper, no need to guard  against impropriety.
That is the secret of Bruce's insight:  the ability to perceive the intricacy of the interweaving   of  impression,  rumour,   motive,  regret,  hope,  misunderstanding, religion, loyalty, fear-over generations of time, which goes into making an individual  what  he is. He  has the confidence to let  that  be  his plot.  For  Bruce, that  process is symbolized by the ever-present sound and movement of the eternal sea:  by the constant  influence of the channel on the channel shore.
This insight of Bruce's is valuable partly because, as Alan puts it in a moment
of vision after he discovers the truth  of his parenthood:

The Channel Shore -it was not a little world, now, from which people went and to which they sometimes returned, but a living part of a larger world ... He saw the Shore now not as the one place loved and friendly and known, but as his own particular  part  of something larger, embracing all, the  bright and  the ugly, the familiar and the strange.

It is valuable  also because it is an  eminently particular  book, capturing in fine detail the essence of a disappearing way of life and system of values. For Grant, as well as for Alan, a major  problem is to find a way of expanding  and liberaliz­ ing that  way of life, without  losing the richness of that  heritage-without leav­ ing the Shore. They cannot  live the austere and pious life of Uncle James:  "Duty  was another  word for life to James, a straight  road, uphill, between the fences of labour  and religion. It worried  him to find his eyes drawn  by the grassy by-ways of affection." They are deeply moral people, but must find a way to accommodate the various and  peculiar  demands  of love as well. What  they find is that  when the concept of duty is replaced  by frankness, when the trusted  guide is love, not propriety, many of the burdens of a lifetime melt away. Grant  discovers that  "in the face of his faith in Alan's stature as a man,  he could find in nothing  else, not even in fatherhood  itself, a sense of  urgency."

FICTION IN  ATLANTIC CANADA



l:E CHIEF  POINT of contrast  between  Bruce  and  Buckler  is that  we find in Buckler  no such sense of unity and salvation  rooted  in an  on-going process of living. For  Buckler,  salvation is possible only through transcendence by imagination. That is Buckler's  particular kind of insight, and  it shapes every aspect of The  Mountain  and the Valley from  David's mountain-top experience to  the fine details  of his literary technique. Where  Bruce  has the  trick  of telling  philo­ sophically  what  is in  the  mind  of his  character, Buckler  has  the  poet's  trick  of transposing what  is in the mind  into figures of speech. One  effect is the occasional  achievement of  an  intensity  of emotional experience which  exceeds  anything in Bruce.  Another effect,  not  always  desirable,  is that   whole  sections  of  Buckler's  prose become  extended prose  poems. This  is perfectly  appropriate in his pastoral idyl,  Oxbells and  Fireflies, but  slows  the  pace  of  the  already  ruminative The Mountain and the Valley to a near  standstill at times.
The Mountain and the Valley is full of passages which  use a technique of mov­
ing back  and  forth  from  drama to poetry  with  great  effect:

Sometimes  it  would  take  no  more  than  that: the  sight  of Joseph  completely taken up in conversation with another man; forgetting that she was waiting or, remembering,  making no account  of it.
She caught  her  breath  and  started  back to the baskets. But it was faster  than movement. Movement  couldn't  lose or shake the wind of exile. It sprang  up from nowhere, and she was helpless, once she had felt it, not to feed it. It  was like the blue dusk light of August exiling the mountains; or the cold horizon light of winter exiling the skeletons of the prayer-fingered  apple  trees; or the retreating October light draining  the fields.

Buckler's  study  of reality  is a study  in patterns of isolation.  Martha and  Joseph, David's parents, have  a fine relationship, but  one  which  is plagued   by moments of misunderstanding and  intense  separateness. Finally  their  relationship is severed permanently by Joseph's accidental death, not in the normal  course of events,  but under   the  peculiarly unfortunate  conditions of one  of  their  misunderstandings. The whole  novel  moves from  warmth and  unity,  brought to a high  point  in  the description of Christmas in Chapter VIII,  to the loneliness and  isolation  of David's standing in the  field while  the  train  carries Toby  away.

But Toby didn't  glance once, not once, toward the house or the field. The  train went  by.
David  stood rooted  in the  row. He leaned on the hack he'd  brought  with him to dig out  the  stubborn  parsnips. He  followed the  train  with  his eyes. The  train wound  quickly through  the cut.  The  grey cloud of its smoke thinned  and  settled over  the  trees. The  clucking  of its  rails became a  far-off  clatter.  And  then  the whistle of the train  blew ever so distantly for the next station, and  the whole train had disappeared  from the day.
A hollowness sucked  suddenly  against  his breath.  Toby's  knife  still  lay there,

30

FICTION IN ATLANTIC CANADA

abandoned  beside the carelessly topped turnips ... and Toby had  gone away in the train. All the thinking came back in a rush.
But the panic wasn't only that  the one friend he'd ever had  had  gone away. It was more than that. It  was always someone else that things happened  to, that was the panic of it....
This scene is a recurring  pattern  in Buckler. In  "Another  Man" from  Oxbells and  Fireflies, we find a direct  parallel,  though  in  this case the  character is an older man who has lived alone for years. Syd Wright, about  to attend  the funeral of a neighbourhood kid, whose death  was known to everyone  else in  the  com­ munity before it was known to him, sees a cabbage which had been tossed aside on Halloween  night, perhaps  by Lennie himself. "It  was the trifle that  can suddenly daze a man with the news of his whole life.... I am never in on anything  at the time. The afterwards  is all I ever know."
There  is something basic to Ernest Buckler here, something that  necessitates his reliance on salvation  through  memory and  imagination.  Thus  the  quality  of felt life in Buckler is essentially tragic,  unlike that  in Bruce, which  is joyous, though there  is a kind of high seriousness about  both which  renders  them  very similar. Bruce's The  Channel  Shore moves from the isolations caused by James'  austerity and  Anse's irresponsibility, to the order and optimism of Grant's and  Alan's new pattern. In the end, Buckler's David must leave the Valley, climb the  Mountain, and  transcend  the loneliness and  pain of reality through  imaginative  vision and death.  Alan will not leave the Channel  Shore, but settles in to "begin  the change in the pattern-in the memory and imagination and knowledge of the Shore.... A beginning, not an end." David must work his miracle through  imaginative translation  if at all, by giving "an  absolving voice to all the hurts they gave them­ selves or to each other-hurts that  were caused only by the misreading of  what they couldn't  express." Grant  and Alan act out that absolution;  Grant  by bringing Hazel back from the exile of shame;  Alan by learning the value of openness, even at the cost of violence, and living this by taking the name of his blood father  and preparing to marry Grant's  daughter  before the startled,  but  relieved eyes of the Channel  Shore.
These  are our foremost writers  of fiction;  both are  men  with  a vision which
aspires to the  highest purposes  of literature.  But literature  has  many  purposes. Two  other  names  spring  immediately  to  mind  when  one  thinks  of  Maritime fiction:  Hugh  MacLennan and  Thomas  Raddall.  They  are more  prolific writers than  Buckler and Bruce, perhaps  because they are less artistic. That is not to say that  they are less competent,  but  that  their  novels are of a different  kind.



l:oMAS RADDALL  is thought  of as an  historical novelist pri­
marily.  Hangman's  Beach provides  a  typical example. This  is one  of  his  more

FICTION IN  ATLANTIC CANADA

recent books, first published  in  rg66, and  reflects an impressive knowledge of nineteenth  century Halifax  and its role in the politics of the age. From the histori­ cal point of view, the central  character  in the novel is Peter  MacNab, son of the original MacNab  of MacNab's Island and a prominent Halifax merchant. Around this figure Raddall  builds a picture of Halifax in the early eighteen-hundreds, and of a business intrigue  involving him in the transfer of  American  goods to Britain during the American embargo. This is very interesting material, and as a character  MacNab seems to  have  lots of potential.  However,  after  eight  chapters,  a  new section is begun, centring in a French officer, Cascamond,  captured  by the British and  held at  Halifax.  Cascamond   takes over  the  book, forcing  MacNab into  a supporting  role, and the chief interest in the remaining three sections of the novel is provided  by his dangerous  affairs and  miraculous escapes. The  romantic  plot built around  him is capable  of providing the framework for the historical content of the novel by itself. Cascamond  is linked to MacNab  by being paroled into  his custody as French  tutor  for the MacNab boys. While living on MacNab's Island he falls in love with a niece of  Peter's, Ellen Dewar. After many intrigues and mor­ tal dangers, all turns out well through  the intervention of MacNab, who through­ out the novel is seen as a champion  of  justice and  common sense in the face of the excesses of the British  Admiralty. The  two lovers are sent off to live in peace in Acadia, or "Arcadie, the land of simple plenty, of innocent  pleasures, of peace without end", as Father  Sigogne puts it. Perhaps  we could say that  Cascamond and  Ellen, elemental  man  and  woman,  find their way to a garden  of peace and love  through  the intervention  of the  Promethean  MacNab against  the  Joves of the Admiralty,  but that  would  be stretching a point. In fact,  the romance which dominates  two-thirds  of  the  novel is largely for  popular  appeal,  and  remains crudely spliced  into  the  more  serious historical themes of the  novel by  circum­ stance alone. One  is left with a sense of disappointment  that  more was not done with MacNab in answer to the promise of Part I. The  romance  detracts not only from the excitement which attaches to MacNab  as a potential Canadian "man  for all seasons",  but  also from  the  realism. It does not  bear  the  imprint  of "some direct impression or perception  of life".
Raddall's most serious novel is The  Nymph  and The  Lamp  first published  in
1950. This  is set in  the  twentieth  century  and  draws  upon  Raddall's   personal experience as a wireless operator  on Sable Island  just after the First World War. Here the inevitable  Raddall romance is the serious centre of the novel, and  there is no division of purposes. Sable  Island, or Marina  as it is called in the novel, is more  than  just a setting;  it imposes conditions of isolation upon  the characters which  make  the  normal  directives of society irrelevant,  and  force  them  to rely upon  their  inner  resources. This  is a novel of self-discovery, urging  that  it is the responsibility of the individual to discover his own principle of integrity. And the basis of direct experience  upon  which Raddall  builds much  of the novel lends a

32

FICTION IN ATLANTIC CANADA

serious quality of felt life often  lacking  in his other  works. Isabel  learns  to operate the equipment, for  "something to do" during the  long empty  days,  and  is finally allowed  by Matthew to sit a watch  by herself.

Stentor  in  the  engine  room  awakened  at  her  touch  and  snarled  obediently.  She smiled, and  wondered  why she had ever feared  the thing ... The  spark screamed through  the station  and  over  the dunes ... the dots crackling  out  like musketry, the  dashes blaring,  an  immense,  all-powerful  sound. She exulted  in it now. The sensation was marvelous.

Even  this kind  of experience is directly  related  to the  central theme  of the  novel, for Isabel  is also learning to seize control  of her own destiny.  When  she returns to Carney, too,  it is essential  that  she  be a competent operator. The novel  possesses a  nice  artistic   unity,   with  no  sense  of  a  split  between   academic  research   and romantic tale-telling to reduce  the artistic stature of the work.
Hugh  MacLennan is a similar  writer  in some ways. Like Raddall, he writes  an eminently readable book  but  when  we look for more,  difficulties  arise.  Barometer Rising is a specifically  maritime novel, published  in  I 941.  It is built  around  the Halifax explosion  of I 9I 7 -a subject  with  tremendous possibilities.  But  some­ how the story goes astray  amid  confused  purposes.  One  theme  suggests that some­  how,  Canada came  of age  at  that  time, ceasing  to  be a  colony,  and  rising  from the  ashes  of Halifax, a  new  nation. This  is neither convincing nor  true,   but  of course MacLennan's conception of Canada has changed  considerably since  I941. Nevertheless,  there is too much  architecture and  not enough  life here. The descrip­  tion  of the  explosion  itself is entirely  successful  in  a  documentary  way.  But  the most convincing theme  seems to be associated  with  Dr.  Murray,  who  rediscovers  his purpose  in life and  regains  his self-confidence  in the midst  of  the chaotic after­ math   of  the  explosion.  Doctors  seem  to  inspire   Hugh  MacLennan,  no  doubt  because of his own father.
A doctor  is at the  centre  of Each Man's Son, published   just a year  before  The
Mountain   and  the  Valley.  Daniel   Ainsley  is a  general   practitioner in  a  Cape Breton  coal  town.  The central theme  of  this  novel  is summed up  by  an  older medical  friend  of Ainsley's,  Dougal  MacKenzie:

Dan you haven't  forgotten a single word you've ever heard from the pulpit or from your own  Presbyterian  father.  You may think  you've rejected  religion  with  your mind,  but  your  personality  has  no  more  rejected  it  than  dyed  cloth  rejects  its original color.

Ainsley's life is tom  by guilt,  instilled  by his Presbyterian past  and  focussed  upon his wife,  his work,  and  his  purpose  in  life.  He  cannot   enjoy  a  full  and   happy relationship with  his wife because  he cannot  believe that  he should  take  the  time from  his labours to do so, and  because  he feels guilty  about  an  operation  which he had  to perform on her, rendering her sterile.  He scourges  his soul  by translat-

33

FICTION IN  ATLANTIC CANADA

ing Greek when he should be enjoying life. In an attempt  to recover his lost immortality,  he tries to take over the son of a local girl whose husband  has been away for four years pursuing  an unsuccessful career in the ring. Molly, the boy's mother,  is thereby  pushed  into  accepting  the  proposal of a shipwrecked  French sailor that she and the boy, Alan, run off to France with him. Ainsley discovers the plan and  realizes what  he has done. He collapses under an awful sense of  empti­ ness and futility, feeling that  he has been cheated  by the criminals who inflicted a false and  cursed  religion upon  him, but feeling that  he has nothing  to  put  in its place.
He felt as though  his spirit had hurled itself against the window of his life and broken the glass. It had been caught in a prison and now it was free. But its free­ dom was the freedom of not caring, and the things it witnessed now were different from those it had seen before. Now his spirit flickered like a bat over a dark and sinister landscape as lifeless as the mountains of the moon.

And then Alan's father  returns, suffering from brain damage. He discovers Molly and the Frenchman together,  kills them both, and dies himself shortly thereafter. Alan is Ainsley's to bring up.
Obviously,  the  plot  is resolved by some rather  startling  coincidences,  but  in dealing with Ainsley's latent guilt and his loathing of his Presbyterian  heritage, MacLennan writes with  energy  and  conviction. Ainsley's descent into  the  "bat­ black night"  of his personal hell is entirely convincing. But though  a resolution is claimed  for  him -"He got  to his feet and  looked down  at  the  brook.  In  that moment  he made  the discovery that  he was ready to go on with  life"-we are not led to understand why he is ready; and though a salvation is arranged  for him in Archie's  homicidal  rampage,  it is not found  credible or satisfying. We  know that  Ainsley will leave Cape  Breton, and  go on to become  a  great  surgeon  else­ where,  perhaps  finding  in  his new sense of family life  and  his new  professional horizons a sufficient purpose  for  his life. The  problem  addressed  here,  in  what MacLennan refers to specifically as the curse of the Calvinist faith, is an intensi­ fied version of one Charles Bruce grapples with in The  Channel  Shore, but  Mac­ Lennan's characters  leave it largely unresolved, and take the alternative  of leaving Cape  Breton in the hope of leaving the curse behind. We realize, in reading  the rest of MacLennan's novels, that  he also is one who left. Other  problems of war­ time and of Canadian politics occupy them -particularly the problem of Quebec and  the federal system, featured  in Two Solitudes and Return  of the Sphinx. In fact, in the latter,  Alan Ainsley turns up in federal politics and  his son is involved with the separatists.
The  religious problem  in  Each  Man's  Son  brings MacLennan close to some­ thing  at the  heart  of Maritime  life, and  apparently  something  close to  his own experience of it. The  novel scratches the surface, but hardly gets beyond  polemic,

34

FICTION IN  ATLANTIC CANADA

and  MacLennan does not return  to the theme, or to the  Maritimes,  in his later fiction.
Except for Raddall's more recent historical novels, these books are all from an
earlier  decade  of Maritime  literature.  Another  from  that  era  deserves mention. Will R. Bird's Here Stands  Good  Yorkshire,  which  provides an  insight  into  the lives of the  Yorkshire immigrants to the  upper  Fundy  in  the  177o's,  is highly valued among the descendants  of those people, though  as a novel, it is a bit thin in characterization, a fault common to Bird's historical novels. Though one of his best, it is no longer  available  in  print,  but  a movement  is afoot  in  Canada  to republish such books, and may catch up with this one. The  University of Toronto Press has  recently  published  in  paperback,  with  an  introduction  by  Dr.  Alan Bevan of Dalhousie University, C. P. Day's Rockbound, set on Ironbound  Island and  among  the  Tancooks.  This   particularly  interesting  little  novel  originally appeared  in the twenties. It has a somewhat sentimental  plot, but sketches vividly the way of life in the little  Nova Scotia fishing empires of the last  days of sail.


bESE WRITERS  speak  largely  of  the  Maritime   past,  but there is a group  of younger writers speaking through  fiction of Atlantic  Canada today. Many write short stories. Kent Thompson of the University of New Bruns­
wick has recently collected some of the  best in  an  anthology  for  Macmillan  of Canada, Stories from Atlantic  Canada. Most of the women in Atlantic  Literature are poets, but there are samples here of Elizabeth Brewster's ventures  into  prose, and  of the work of Beth Harvor  and  Helen  Porter. Alden  Nowlan,  Ray  Smith, Harold  Horwood, Gordon  Pinsent, and David Richards have all published novels. Alden  Nowlan  is best known  as a  poet, short  story writer,  and  journalist.  His recent novel, Various  Persons Named  Kevin O'Brien, is not really a novel at all, any  more  than  is Buckler's  Oxbells  and  Fireflies. They  are  collections of short stories, tied loosely together  by a  thread  of theme-in  Buckler's,  memories  of Norstead  (a fictionalized place where he grew up, "No  More  Place"); in  Now­ lan's memories stimulated  by a trip  back home. One gets a little tired of  all this reminiscing, and hopes it is not a trend.
Ray Smith  has been causing some confusion with  his "compiled  fiction",  but there is something exciting in the idea-a way of getting at  the complexity and infinite variety of life on the street.  Gordon  Pinsent, who turns  a hand  to many of the arts, has been entertaining Canadians  and  upsetting some with  his acting and writing about Newfoundland characters. But Pinsent never intended  to create stereotypes. The  Rowdyman  is a unique character,  and  if something  of his zest, his language, his gift of the gab, his flights from giddiness to the depths of despair, is identifiably Newfoundland  there is no shame in that.

35

FICTION IN  ATLANTIC CANADA

Harold  Horwood  has met with some criticism at  home too,  but  his fiction is not  dishonest, any  more than  Farley  Mowat's  A Whale  For The   Killing  is  dis­ honest. Tomorrow Will  Be Sunday  is a  particularly  good novel, though  it  may offend some readers.  Perhaps  the theme of emancipation  from  religious  zealotry and  pious ignorance  is a little  heavy-handed,  but  it is not  unrealistic. Horwood draws a line down the centre of his fictional Newfoundland outport.  On the side of the zealous fall  the  minister,  Brother  John,  who believes the  world  is  about  to come to an end, his wife, Sister Leah, and various elders of the church and mem­ bers of the community.  On the side of the emancipated  stand  the Markadys  and the Simms; Joshua  Markady  is a retired merchant  and ship-owner who has made his fortune  and seen the world:  Peter Simms is a retired  magistrate. "Mr. Simms and  Mr. Markady  were deeply entrenched  institutions in Captain Bight, beyond the touch even of religious fanaticism, far too eminently respectable to be purged."  Allied  with  them  are  Simms'  son  Christopher,  who  goes away  to  college and returns  to teach  school;  Virginia  Marks,  daughter  of  the storekeeper  and  "not only an outstanding beauty but a woman who took no trouble to hide her brains";  Eli, a  boy of the  village who  is really the  central  character  of the  novel, and Johnny,  a much  younger  boy who is rescued from  the Pious Ignorant by Chris, Virginia,  and  Eli.
During   the  novel,  Eli  becomes  involved  homosexually  with  Brother  John,
which finally brings about  John's  destruction  after  he has been temporarily suc­ cessful in laying the same  charge  against  Chris, and  Chris  and  Eli  both  fall in love with  Virginia,  to  Eli's ultimate  heartbreak.  The  characterizations  are skil­ fully drawn, with just the right touch of caricature in the more extreme types, and most important, all aspects of experience in this religion-tom,  love-tom  outport are treated  with a genuine touch of felt life. Chris is thrown into direct confronta­ tion with Brother John  and  triumphs,  Eli and Johnny  are rescued from  psycho­ logical damage  at the hands of the self-righteous, Virginia is led into fidelity and happiness-all through  Christopher's absolute faith  in  the  triumph   of know­ ledge,  common  sense, and  love,  over  ignorance  and  superstition.  That   theme, unalloyed,  would  run  the  risk of a new piety, but  the  conflict  between  Eli and Chris  over Virginia  saves the  novel. Eli must learn  to  accept  the  sight  of the woman  he desires in the anns  of the man  he loves,  and  in doing so, achieves a worthwhile self-realization.
The theme of religious emancipation  is siinilar to MacLennan's in Each Man's Son,  but goes farther. Whereas  the  Presbyterian faithful  are  only distantly  con­ demned  in Each  Man's  Son, Tomorrow  Will  Be Sunday  examines even  Brother John  in  depth  and  with  considerable  understanding.  Horwood's  personal  phil­ osophy allows him to place a fully emancipated  figure at the opposite end of the spectrum,  one for  whom  inherited  guilt  has no meaning.  The  result  is a  more relaxed,  wide-ranging,  and  humorous  view of  the  whole  problem,  allowing  a

FICTION IN  ATLANTIC  CANADA

genuine  resolution as opposed to the contrived  one of MacLennan's  conclusion.
Christopher  Simms'  character  represents an  ideal,  a  man  liberated  from  the guilt and superstition of the past, not only intellectually, but in personality as well, and there are few enough such people in real life. Horwood is yet another Roman­ tic, and  we have yet to look at the chief exponents of a new and  different  sensi­ bility, Alden  Nowlan  and  David  Richards.  They  focus with an  unflinching  gaze on the hard realities of another  kind of life in rural Atlantic Canada. With a mix­ ture of understanding and concern, but little hope, Nowlan sees the impoverished Maritimers,  robbed of the ability to help themselves by despair. "They  built that shack right in the middle of a bog hole. Could  have built it anywhere.  But they built it in a bog hole. What you gonna do with that kind of people?" 2   Little hope, unless there  is hope in the very act of  publicly facing the hardest  realities. That  heritage  of values rooted in the land, baptised in the sea, which some of us have been drawing  about  us for warmth  against  the  coming of winter,  must  be pre­ served, but it is not enough to ward off the evil drafts of unemployment, poverty, foreign ownership, ecological destruction,  and  quiet  despair. Our  literature must tell us the whole truth  about the society around  us. It is for this reason that  David Richards'  first novel, The Coming of Winter, published in 1974, is an important novel, perhaps  the most  important first novel published in Canada.
Richards  treads carefully a path  between traditional  novel structures  and  the de-structured experiments  of other  contemporaries.  He intentionally  underscores no themes and comes to no general conclusions, in sharp  contrast  to Hugh  Mac­ Lennan,  but  relies on the  book to  make its own statement.  He  draws  for  us a picture in which the quality of felt life is so intense that  no "architecture" at all is required.  It is a picture of several weeks in the life of  Kevin  Dulse, leading  up to his marriage. Kevin does not live in the tradition  of  religious, educated, pioneer farmers of The Channel Shore. His folks are mill workers and  poor farmers  with­ out much  vision. When  we first meet Kevin he is occupied  in his favourite  pas­ time, hunting  with his  .22 rifle. He loves the woods and  being outdoors-it is his one escape from a dreary  life -but  he is inept, and  before long he has shot a cow by mistake. It's  a messy business,  finishing it off with a  .22, and  he is in serious trouble. As the days go by, he moves from one minor disaster to another.  His hands  and feet are burned shovelling lime at  the mill. A friend,  Andy,  gets drunk and  kills himself in a car. He gets drunk,  and smashes up his truck,  which was  his  grandfather's '48  International. His  fiance  discovers  just  before  their marriage  that he owes $300 for the cow. His father leaves it too late to buy a new suit for the wedding, but buys a bottle of champagne  in a last-minute  moment  of inspiration. There  are no champagne glasses in the house, however, and  his wife won't serve it. Very dreary,  the whole business, but one can't  put  the  book aside because it is so real, so compassionate.
Kevin  and  his friend  John  are  deeply disturbed  by Andy's sudden  death.  He

37

FICTION IN  ATLANTIC CANADA

has left behind a pregnant  girl, Julie, whom he intended  to marry. John  is really in love with her, but he thinks he doesn't  believe in love. Neither  knows what  to do. There is no possibility of John's  taking the kind of action Grant  Marshall did, because he hasn't  the same sense of purpose -has no reason for any faith in the "rightness" of certain  things. Kevin had gone up to see Julie:

"Did Julie say much when you were there?"
"Nothin' no-I can't talk to her. I want to but I can't so I didn't stay long up
there. I'd  just like to know what she's going to do."

They would all like to know what they are going to do.

Work. The sound of the mill coming down across the water. It  would wake him
again. But yes, they couldn't  remain here long-not long. A year or so.

And so, in November,  he gets married.  Everything is sliding inexorably down­ hill into winter. The  relationship which leads to his marriage is based upon unde­ fined needs and  unrealized  hopes. We see almost no evidence of love between the two-only habit  and inevitability. Entirely absent from Kevin's mind is the kind of conscious choice of a way of life which we see in the young Alan of the Channel  Shore.  This  is true,  not  because  Kevin  is dumb,  but  because  he  is numb­ numbed  by an environment which has none of the sense of destiny and  heritage celebrated  by Charles  Bruce. The  coming of  winter  is not  merely symbolic of entering into a marriage  without  hope, without a shared sense of where one came from and where one is going; it is also symbolic of the descent of a way of life into the  cultural  void  of  endless shiftwork,  bickering,  drunkenness,  inevitable  acci­ dents, and stunted  sensibilities.
This is a world  that  very much  concerns Alden Nowlan. His best short story, "The  Glass Roses", sets up a contrast between a mind nurtured in a rich culture, and a mind about  to be quenched  by back-woods ignorance and prejudice. Now­ lan describes a Ukrainian second world war refugee, come to New Brunswick to work in the pulp  woods. He is teamed with a boy, the son of the foreman.  The woodsmen think  he is from  Poland  and  call him a Polack. He is a man  whose heart  is constantly  warmed  by  the  memory  of the  culture  he  once  beheld - cathedrals,  castles, cavalrymen -and whose dreams are racked by the spectre of its destruction. The boy is enchanted  by the tales he tells while they work, attracted by the stranger's  open  friendliness and  warmth,  yet confused because he knows that  "men  do  not  tell  one  another  fairy  tales  about  cathedrals." One  of  the "Polack's" stories is about  a bunch of glass roses, exquisitely crafted,  which stood on  the  windowsill at  home  and  refracted  the sun's  rays. They  had  fallen  and smashed when  the first bombs fell, and  this is the substance of one of his night­ mares. "There is not much room in this world for glass roses", the Polack reflects. Certainly not here in the woods, where the men sit and play cards in silence when

FICTION IN  ATLANTIC CANADA

it is too dark to slave. The foreman notices the arm around  the shoulders, the cuff on the cheek, and  is alarmed.  "Them  Wops and  Bohunks and  Polacks got a lot of funny ideas", he tells his son. "They  ain't our kinda  people ... Just  make that polack keep his hands  off you."3  The seeds of shame and  suspicion  are  planted. Glass roses teeter precariously on the edge of destruction.
Perhaps  we look too much  to the past, or are like the psychiatrist  of Anthony
Brennan's  new fantasy novel, Carbon  Copy, insisting that  the world around  us is "peaceful, democratic, stable",  that "there is no poverty and injustice",  and being told by someone  we consider  to be mad  that  it is not so. But if our  Maritime writers continue,  as seems likely, to be regional in character, if their  themes are contemporary,  and if they are moral in Henry James' sense of the word, we will come to understand ourselves better.


NOTES

1 R. E. Watters, "Three  Canadian  N'welists", as printed in G. M. Cook  (ed.)  Criti­ cal Views  on Canadian  Writers:  Ernest Buckler. Toronto: McGraw-Hill  Ryerson  Ltd.,  p. 41.
2  Alden  Nowlan,  "A Call  in December." Stories From Atlantic  Canada,  p. 70.
3 Alden  Nowlan,  "The Glass Roses." Stories From Atlantic Canada, p. 82.






SUBSCRIPTIONS

UNJIVOIDJIBLE INCREJISE!

Costs of producing and  mailing  Canadian Literature have increased phenonmenally in  the  18  months  since  we  last  ad­ justed  our  subscription rate.  Printing costs alone  have gone up
38%  in  that  period; there  have  also been  increases  in  postage and  other  expenses,  and  we are  forced  to further increase  our rates at least partly  to offset the growing costs.

From the 1st July the annual  subscription  will be

$8.00 in Canada
$9.00 in all other countries

Single  copies, from the same  date,  will cost $2.50, except  for double  numbers priced at $4.00.



39

HUGH MACLENNAN



Interviewed by
Ronald Sutherland




R.S.  How long have you been here in Quebec, Hugh?
H.M. I came to Quebec  the fall of 1935 to teach for Lower Canada College and live in at $25.00  a week. I came late in the term, because they simply had to get somebody  else, I suppose.  And  I've  been  permanently  based in  Montreal  ever since then.
R.S.  Did you come directly from the Maritimes?
H.M. Directly from  Halifax.  I  did  not  have a  job. I got my Doctor's  degree at Princeton  during  the depths of the depression, and it was difficult to get any kind of job at that  time. I was in Roman  History and  a Rhodes Scholar.  Terry  Mc­ Dermott,  who ended up as Ambassador  and Commissioner at various places, was the secretary of the committee  that gave me a Rhodes' Scholarship, because I was defeated in Nova Scotia. But there was a special one loose at the time, and  I was actually  a Rhodes Scholar for Canada  at large.
R.S.  Where were you going to university? Dalhousie? H.M. I went to Dalhousie. I did Honours  Classics there. R.S.  When did you leave Dalhousie?
H.M. I graduated in  1928 and  went  to Oxford  the next fall, then  Princeton.  I would sooner  have gotten  a  job then,  but  there  just weren't  any  jobs in  1932. Only about five per cent of Rhodes Scholars got any jobs at all.
R.S.  Did you want  to go back to the Maritimes, or did the economic  conditions force you to leave?
H.M. I very much wanted to go back, but I couldn't  get a job there, and that was
the thing, I think, which was very damaging  in the Maritimes then.  Less so now. The  casualties in the first world war  had  been abnormally  heavy, and  once the war  was over there  was a depression all over the  Maritimes. They  never had  a
1920's  boom  down  there.  The  old  establishment  didn't   particularly   encourage people who really weren't  members of it to remain, but at any rate I couldn't  get a job. Indeed,  a post was vacant  in my field at Dalhousie, and the chairman  was a Yale man. A very small department, of course-they all were then.  He simply told me that an Englishman  was applying, and that was it, although  he didn't  like the  English. The  same  thing  happened  with  a vacancy  in  Saskatchewan.  The

HUGH MACLENNAN

Chairman called me and said, "I am afraid  you haven't  got a chance  because an Englishman  is applying."  The  Englishman  hadn't  any higher  qualifications  than I had and  was only coming here in order to get into the States, which was where he eventually went.
R.s. Do you still consider yourself a Maritimer?
H.M. I never did. I'm  a Nova Scotian.
R.s. A Nova Scotian?
H.M. Anybody who says he comes from the Maritimes, ninety-nine  times out of a hundred   he is from  New  Brunswick. They  never  call  themselves  New  Bruns­ wickans. Perhaps they don't  like the word. Otherwise, you are a Nova Scotian, or from the Island, or Newfoundlander, or from the Atlantic  Provinces, in my case Cape Breton.
R.s. Do  you think  there  is a  particular  mystique shared  by people  from  Nova
Scotia or any part of the Maritimes?
H.M. I do. I think it's because there is a sense of community.  It's  very beautiful country  where people know each  other.  I'm  not saying that  in  the  old  colonial days of Newfoundland  the government  was honest, because it wasn't,  but I would say the governments in the  Island,  Nova Scotia and  New Brunswick,  have been universally  pretty  honest for  the  reason that  politicians know  they  couldn't  get away  with  anything  else. People know too much  about  each  other  down  there. They  are  democratic  countries.  Montreal,  the  rest of Canada, Toronto-they aren't  democratic,  they're simply controlled by corporations.
R.s. Are the Maritimes still democratic?
H.M. They're  democratic  in the sense that  they do manage  a good many of their local affairs. For example,  the  developers began  to do damage  in  Halifax,  but they've  been, to some extent,  stopped. An  attempt  was made  to develop  Point Pleasant Park. They got nowhere. No, the people down there are much more straightforward and outspoken than  they are here.
R.s. Can  you see your upbringing in the Maritimes having an  influence on your writing?  You've  not  written  a  great  deal  about  the  Maritimes   comparatively speaking.
H.M. I was influenced  by Nova Scotia, and  also by the kind of education I had. Years ago  I came to the  conclusion that  urban-dwellers-people like Norman Mailer,  Mordecai  Richler or John  Dos Passos, who grew up in cities-don't see details. But they have a wonderful sense of surge of movement.  Now when Hem­ ingway was growing up he spent a great deal of time in the country,  and Heming­ way will describe a situation  or landscape  by the minutest  intuitive selection of detail, and he will use the mot  juste again and again and again. That's why he is such a vivid kind of writer. City living is having its effect on  me. My next  book will be in a far  more surging  kind  of prose than  I  have ever  written  before­ there's a slight element of this in some of the writing in certain sections of Rivers

HUGH MACLENNAN

of Canada. The kind of writing or style that  I used before is more reflective than what I feel now, living in Montreal.
R.s. Are you saying that  the  Maritimes  have an essentially rural  effect?
H.M. Don't  forget the sea. Five thousand miles of coastline in Nova Scotia. When I was reading Homer  as a kid, particularly  The  Odyssey, he was describing what I had all around  me. Many of the poems in the Greek Anthology could have been written  of Nova Scotia, and  when I went to Greece the first time and again even more the second time, because the second time I was able to get out to sea a bit, it was very like the  coast  of  Nova  Scotia. If you stand  out  on  Cape  Sounian, remove the Temple  of Neptune,  and look inland, it's  just like looking in beyond Peggy's Cove up St. Margaret's Bay. The  ground  cover is slightly different,  but the same granite  outcropping, the same formations.  Now my  neighbour,  Tasso Sikiris, who is a Greek,  went  down  with his wife to Nova Scotia  last year,  just about this time in September-they went around the Cabot Trail in Cape Breton, went through  the  valley and  around  the  North  Shore. Tasso  called me up  and said, "My  God, you're absolutely right!" Once I saw a picture that  my old friend, Ewing Irwin,  had in his house here in North  Hatley, and  I said,  "Ewing,  that's somewhere up in Cape  Breton isn't it?" "God,  no," he replied, "That's Delphi." R.S.  So there's no accident  about  the affinity you've had with Greek legend?
H.M. No, not at all.
R.s. Do you think  that  growing  up in Nova Scotia has influenced  the themes of your books?
H.M. Actually, classical education,  particularly  Roman  History,  is the most  per­ fect preparation for living today, especially the later Roman  Empire in the period of disintegration.  I wasn't studying  that at Halifax,  I was reading  the elementary basic classics of the  Golden  Ages, but  my  research  at  Princeton  involved  that period. Boiled down  in the long  run,  it was the decline and  fall of the  Roman Empire through  the wrong end of the telescope. The Roman tax system was about the same as ours, and  therefore  doomed. The  bureaucracy  was  doomed.  We're going much faster than they were. We're much more efficient at ruining ourselves, but ultimately money, you see, became worthless. It took a long time, but once it passed a certain  point-we're just on the verge of passing it now -it  just went off to practically nothing-which meant agrarian feudalism. In our age it would mean, of course, some sort of urban feudalism, which would be far more explosive. R.s. Far more explosive?
H.M. Oh, yes, it will probably destroy us.
R.s. Feudalism in what way?
H.M. Well, I mean,  the working man  today may be making a lot of money, but the government's taking  half of it. There's  no government,  just bureaucracy.  It doesn't seem to me to matter  who's Prime Minister any more.
R.s. And this you regard  as a new kind of feudalism? Man  becomes a serf again?

HUGH  MACLENNAN

H.M. He's becoming  just that.  He always tended  to be. But a dictatorship of the Proletariat means  a  dictatorship   of the  leaders  of  the  Proletariat. They  drive around  in Cadillacs and everything else, with hoods to keep the boys in order. R.S.  Of  course, some of the labour  leaders  have  a tendency  to disappear  these days, like James Hoffa.
H.M. That happens. It all reminds me of the Roman  barrack  room Emperors, the gangster  Emperors.  If you ever go to Florence,  don't  miss looking through  the Portrait  Gallery of the Roman  Emperors. It tells you more than  you get in books. R.S.  Let me ask you another  question. You are  considered  one of the  foremost interpreters of Quebec and the solitudes of Quebec. Do you think that  your Mari­ time background  has had some influence or has helped you to interpret  Quebec? H.M. I think so because I had absolutely no trouble at all, not even being able to speak French  at the time and  knowing very few French  Canadians, interpreting how French  Canadians felt. They regard everybody who is non-French  as A nglais. But, of course, that's  not so. The  Scotch, as you know, had in many ways a worse history than the French Canadians ever had. The chiefs sold them and transported them some way or other  with them as soldiers for the English  and so forth.  Leo Rowse, the great  historian  of All Souls, was a  Cornishman.  He  read  one of my essays in Scotchman's Return  and said only a Celt could have written  it. He was saying that  a Celt has a dog-whistle sound  that  an Anglo-Saxon  simply doesn't get and which an Anglo-Saxon finds very irritating.  Of course, the Anglo-Saxons on the whole are much  abler administrators and  much  more reliable  people. At any rate, I knew what it was like to be in a minority, because the  Celts were. R.S.  How were they in a minority in Cape Breton?
H.M. They  were a minority  in  Nova Scotia, and  while they  were proud  people and never felt a sense of inferiority, there was something underneath. The Anna­ polis Valley was pro-Loyalist  Yankee. A lot of them  came  from  Massachusetts. The Loyalists, of course, were not the way the Americans said-all coming from the upper  classes. If you look at  the shipping  lists of  boats that  went  into  Saint John,  you will find that  every trade  right  down  to  tinkers, all classes of people were there.  Some  of them  were  upper  class. For  instance,  the  Bishop  of  New York, the Anglican  Bishop became the Archbishop of Nova Scotia as a Loyalist. Many  of them  came  from  West Chester  Country,  some from  Connecticut   and some of them  even  came  from  North  Carolina.  As  Loyalists they  were  more British than  the King  in some ways, as they tended  to be in Ontario. But there was another  thing about  Nova Scotia in the  rgth  century. It was a tremendous  sea power -the little town of Yarmouth  with a population  of about six thousand people built,  sailed  and  manned  one sixty-fourth  of the  entire  shipping  of the world from about  1850 to the end of  the century. In sailing ships of wood, which they built  themselves, Nova  Scotian  or  Maritime  ships-mostly Nova  Scotian but there were some from  New Brunswick-were about  the fourth  largest  fleet

43

HUGH MACLENNAN

in the world. The  British were first, I suppose the  Americans might  have  been second, who was third  I  don't  know, but  they were fourth.  Anyway,  fourth  or fifth. The  Cunard Line  was founded  in Halifax  and  the  White  Star  Line  was founded  in St. John.  Those  provinces in the I gth  century  were not  provincial. Quebec  and  Ontario were  much  more  provincial.  A  man   who  became  the Admiral  of the  Fleet, Provost  Wallace, was born  and  went to school in Halifax county.
R.s. You  think  then,  that  the  fact  that  the  people  of Scottish  descent  were  a minority in Nova Scotia  has given you a lever to interpret  Quebec?
H.M. I think  it probably  has, although  I never thought  of it at  the time. Yes, I think it probably  did,  because I  always felt in a minority.  My family left Cape Breton when I was seven, coming to Halifax.  I thought  Haligonians  were differ­ ent  people. I liked them  very much.  I loved Halifax,  but people had  names like Smith  and  Brown and  Robinson  and  so forth.  Halifax  seemed to me  a terribly exciting place. It still does.
R.s. Have you found  any other sort of spiritual  affinity with Quebec  that  helped
you to develop your novels and your writing about  Quebec?
H.M. Well, I think  it's true  that  the Scotch and  the French  people have had  an intuitive  understanding of each other. God knows where the Highlanders  would have been if their  Chiefs hadn't made an alliance with France.  I spent  a winter in Grenoble about ten years ago. I remember I was very amused by this old retired French  colonel who said to me, "Monsieur, est-il possible de visiter l'Ecosse sans visiter l'Angleterre?"  I found  out  that  he hated  the  English, but  being  Ecossais made  a difference,  being  Ecossais and  un  ecrivain.  Everybody  knows  that  the French  seldom invite  foreigners into their  homes, but somehow or other  people began inviting us out and we were in about fourteen different homes in Grenoble, which is very unusual.
R.s. Of course, in Quebec  there are a lot of Scotch.
H.M. I'll bet that  one third of them have Scottish blood. The  Fraser Highlanders were disbanded  here. If Rocket Richard  doesn't have Highland  blood in him, I'd be very surprised.
R.s. It would be interesting  to find out. But when you came up to Montreal,  did you like the place?
H.M. Immediately. I loved it. I don't like it now. It was the finest city in America seven years ago. Look at it now. It's a concrete jungle.
R.s. In  your  writing  have  you  never  had  the  desire to  write  more  about  the
Maritimes? How do you pick your themes?
H.M. They  pick me. The  first book I  wrote was unsuccessful. It was mixed  up with Nova Scotia. I had some bootleggers in it, and it was set more or less in the States-people, the sea and so forth. The  next one I tried to set in Europe with some Americans  in it,  but  I  wasn't  close enough  to it. Then  Barometer  Rising

44

HUGH MACLENNAN

occured to me. I have to write about what  I absolutely know, and  I had  almost to make a map  to write about  Canada  then. I had  to because early perceptions are the  things that  count,  and  this all came about  when  my second  novel  had been reviewed by the twenty-first New York publisher, and  the agent  had simply put my name  on it and  sent it in. The  review said, "We  don't  know  who  your writer is. He doesn't write like an American and he doesn't  write like an English­ man.  Who  is he? There's something  missing." So, I  thought  O.K.,  I  can't  get away from it. Then  I thought  of Aristotle's idea of  recognitions-nobody could recognise within a social novel where the conflict  would lie if they didn't  know anything  about  the  country.  Even  Canadians knew nothing  about  the  country. So I made  the city the  hero of Barometer  Rising and  thought  it might  last for nine months, and  I'm  amazed  that  it's still published.
R.s.  Have you consciously tried to map the country in that  way?
H.M. It's  hard  to say that  specifically. After Barometer Rising  came out,  an  old friend of mine, an Englishman,  was killed in an accident in the war. He had been in the publishing business, had been with Constable in New York, but he had lost his job in the depression as did everybody else. When he read Barometer  he sent me a letter saying, "This  is not Canadian literature,  it's Nova Scotian." He asked me why I didn't  consider setting a novel in Quebec. It's  the centre of Canada, if anything  is. Well, I'd  already  started  it,  because Two  Solitudes  came  out  of a dream  in which I saw some tall blond man, a total stranger,  and  a short stocky dark man shouting at each other at the tops of their voices, both of them quite like­ able people who just simply couldn't  understand  each other  at all, and some boy said, "Don't you see they're  both deaf." How the book was structured  as it was, don't  ask me. I have no idea how it formed itself. I felt the material was so rich I could have gone on forever.
R.s.  Where did you get the material?  How did you find out about  the attitudes? H.M. I got absorbed in them, and in Quebec. I should say this because it's very definitely true,  and  I  want  to  acknowledge it  though  I  didn't   realize it  at  the time. I had a French-Canadian colleague who was a Protestant,  Monsieur Peron, a man of enormous integrity  and  intelligence, a delightful  personality  and  tough as all hell. The  French-Canadian Protestants  were sort  of  an  underground in those days. He could call an election within a decimal point. He was very strong as a French Canadian. He disliked the Catholic Church  intensely, blamed  it for practically everything that was wrong here. When I finally finished Two  Solitudes, I still had the job at Lower Canada. Mr. Peron was a very tough critic of things, and the highest praise that  book ever got was when I gave him a copy on a Friday afternoon  and  he read  it over the  weekend. He came  back  and  said  there  was nothing the matter with it.
R.S.  Did you use him as a model for Tallard?
H.M. Absolutely. But  unconsciously. Monsieur Peron  was a very poor  man.  He


45

HUGH MACLENNAN

had  two sons and  a daughter. How  in the name of God he educated  the whole lot of them, I do not know. He never got more than  $2,400  a year, and  he had his own house, at least part  of it, and  he rented the other  part  of it. Both of his sons have succeeded tremendously. Fernand,  the younger son, is now Professor of, I think  Bio-Chemistry, down  in M.I.T., and Rene, the elder, has been very suc­ cessful in business.
R.s. You mentioned  before that  Barometer Rising was a Nova Scotian novel and not a Canadian novel. Is it possible for this contradiction  to exist? Can  you see any pan-Canadian attitudes  or are the writers here strictly regional and  must they be regional?
H.M. Well, I think that  in so far as the novel has got to have a physical basis, all
novels are  regional  in some  way. War  and  Peace isn't,  because  it's  the  whole world.  Two   Solitudes  isn't  truly  regional. The   Watch   That   Ends  The   Night isn't regional. The  reception  Barometer got in Canada  was so remarkable  that  it must have stirred up echoes from one end of the country to the other. I got letters from all over the place. It seemed to echo so many of our attitudes.  It was a book with something of a contrived  plot, though the plot turned  out to be almost dead accurate  as I found out later. But I didn't  know that when I wrote it.
R.s. In what way?
H.M. Larry  MacKenzie,  who  had  been  overseas with  the  85th  Nova  Scotians, asked me if I got into any trouble  about  the book. I said no. A lot of people in Halifax said it was obscene and  that  sort of thing. Actually there was a case, and strangely enough  I knew the people involved or at least some of them,  of a man from an old Halifax family who had been with the 25th Regiment, which was decimated  on, I think, the  rgth  of July,  rgr6,  in the Somme battles. The  colonel was a very ruthless man who was actually an Englishman, a ranker,  who accused one of the soldiers of cowardice. The  man might possibly have been shot, I don't know.
R.s. You didn't  know this story before?
H.M. I didn't  know it then,  but  how can  I be sure? You get things through  the pores.
R.S.  Do you find then that  it's quite possible to be completely regional and at the same time to embrace a kind of pan-Canadian attitude?
H.M.  I think so. I have always seen Canada as a part of the history of the world and  there  has never  been any  universal literature  that  started  on  a local  basis, except maybe the  Greek, and  even it probably  didn't.  But that  was the original Western civilization. The  Romans  had to learn from Greek models, how to adapt them to Latin, and in the final Ode of the third book of Horace-I have built a monument   more  enduring   than  bronze  and  higher  than  the  royal  seat  of the Pyramids  and  so on-he  ends  up  by saying, I  was the  first man  to  tune  the Roman  lyre to Grecian measures. Take the Renaissance. It was first of all Italian.

HUGH MACLENNAN

Just  think  back to the time that  Queen  Elizabeth  came to the  throne.  The  only thing scholars could read really was Latin. Then  Greek was coming in. They were learning some Greek, because Erasmus had come there to teach Greek. What  was there  of the  European?  Rabelais,  Montaigne  had  just published  around   1580. There was Chaucer  and  Malory and that was about it, before the great  flowering came.
R.s. Are you saying there's no question of isolation of a culture?
H.M. Yes. It just means  tuning  the lyre to Grecian  measures  you may say, but I have no  use for regionalism  in  itself although  some of it  can  be charming.  I always used to be irritated  at  being called a Canadian  writer-I was a writer who was a Canadian.
R.s.  Let me ask you another  thing, what do you consider to be the major influ­
ence on your writing career?
H.M. This may sound stuffy, but in a practical way one sentence of Aristotle that the drama  depends on the ability of an audience to recognize what  the drama  is about.  I had  to build  a stage for the earlier  books. Nearly all the  academics  at the time were criticizing me for doing this. Back in the 195o's,  people who later became violent literary nationalists-who shall now be nameless-were bawling me out  for not  joining the  English angry young men and  so forth.  I'd  been to Cambridge for  a  year. That, and  I suppose  living in  North  Hatley,  made  an enormous  difference to my understanding of how people live. I knew practically everybody in this village and I used to work in the garden with some French Can­ adians.  I recall the lovely story of what would  happen  if the  Germans  won  the war.  My French-Canadian friend  said that  he would still be on one end  of the saw, but the man on the other end would be an Englishman.
R.s. All of these influences together  then  have resulted in your writing  the  way you do?
H.M. I suppose so, but truly it's not profitable for a writer to analyse how he does things  while he's still working, except  in a technical  way. The  thing  that  must have had an enormous influence on how I looked at things was that  I was some­ thing of an athlete when I was young, and I would sooner have been a Wimble­ don  champion  than  to  be well known  as  a  writer.  When  I  was  in  my  early twenties, I'd  never thought  of being a novelist; it just happened.
R.s.  You say that  when you wrote Barometer Rising you had  to consciously set the stage for your writing. Has that stage now been set, do you think?
H.M. It's  been set. By the time I finished The  Precipice I decided  that  I  didn't have to do that  any more. With Each Man's  Son, when I sent it to Boston, I just opened  right  up, didn't  tell them  anything  about  the situation.  And  I  was told that  I would have to write some kind of a preface, because nobody  in America, not even in Boston, could  believe in a kind of Calvinism as rigid  as I  had  des­ cribed. But I don't  think such prefaces are necessary any longer.

47

HUGH MACLENNAN


R.S.  Young  writers  today  no longer  have  the same  task. Good.
H.M.  I think  it  might  be relevant to say  too  that  Gabrielle Roy  had  to  do  the same  thing.  Her  book  came  out,  Bonheur  d'occasion, six  weeks  after  Two  Soli­ tudes did. Neither of us knew of each  other's  existence. Roger  Lemelin  had to do it to some extent  too. But  Lemelin's work was of much  more  popular  nature. La Famille Plouffe practically put  the  rural,  small-town film business out of commis­  sion,  because  that  long  series  of "La  Famille  Plouffe" not  only  trained a lot  of French-Canadian actors  and  showed   how  to  move  people  around the  stage  in television,  but  it  brought up  all  manner of  contemporary  problems  in  French­ Canadian life. Its influence was prodigious.
R.S.  Do you often  go back  to The Maritimes?
H.M.  I do like to get  back  to The  Maritimes, to Nova Scotia,  any  part  of it, but especially  Cape  Breton.



CJIRP
 


Peter Stevens


Flotilla of fat fish swims
with  the hectic dash and swerve of birds 	erratic 	sleekness
in the clear shallows. Sensing canoe slant in heavy black
slide over the rocks 	they veer sharply  together 	then smooth
through  the darkened  stretch  these thick shadows in sunned  water  to keep
a meticulous  distance
in their  fleet 	from  the canoe:

darts  over the rocks 	under
the keel's black 	to swing across and  back 	they are keeping near these carp  together  to weave
fishy awareness 	slippery round  the long fat underside of the canoe.

Waves rolling
our shadow 	flowing over rocks 	is a carp 		though swiftly they streak  towards other rocks.

A. G. BAILEY



Desmond  Pacey




A.c. EMLEY's poetry  hos  been  published  in  four  vol­ umes/  in many  leading  periodicals, and in most major  anthologies  of Canadian poetry since A. J. M. Smith's  Book  of Canadian Poetry  ( r 943), yet his reputa­
tion is restricted  to a relatively small group,  the cognoscenti. Northrop Frye  has declared  him in the first rank of Canadian poets; A. J. M. Smith  has put him in
the forefront of the intellectual  tradition in our poetry. But he has no large popular following, and a literary  historian might easily omit his name. Yet Bailey's poetry is difficult and at first glance almost forbidding,  yet it is among  the most  distinc­ tive verse published in this country  in the last forty years.
This  is not  the  occasion  for  a  detailed  account  of  Dr.  Bailey's life,  but  we
notice the biographical  influences that  have had the most effect on his verse. The first such influence  was his heredity, of which he is obviously proud  and  makes considerable  use in his later  verse. He came of a family with strong  intellectual and  literary  leanings.  His father's  maternal  grandfather was  Marshall  d'Avray, first principal of the Provincial Normal School in Fredericton  and for many years Professor of Modern  Languages  in  the  University of New  Brunswick.  D'Avray was a man  of broad  culture; among  his pupils in  Fredericton   were  George  R. Parkin and Canon George Roberts. His paternal grandfather was Loring Woart Bailey, for fifty years Professor of Natural  Sciences at  U.N.B.  and  a  teacher  of Bliss Carman   and  Charles  G.  D.  Roberts.  The  Bailey family  had  connections with the New England  family of Ralph  Waldo  Emerson, and  numbered  among its members  poets  and  men  of letters as well as scientists and  divines.  Bailey's father  was a pupil  of Bliss Carman  at the Fredericton  Collegiate  School and  of Professor W. F. Stockley 2   at  U.N.B. and  developed a love of literature and  the arts that  persisted throughout  his life. Bailey says that  he often  heard  his father quote Marmion, The Lady  of the  Lake  and other poems by Walter  Scott, as well as Byron, and  contemporary  Canadian poets like Carman  and  Theodore  Good­ ridge Roberts.
The  second  major  influence  was  that  of  the  environment   in  which  Bailey
grew up. His boyhood and  youth were divided between Fredericton  and  Quebec


49

A. 0.BAILEY

City, to which he moved with his father  and mother  inI 9I 3 ; he was then  nine. The  Fredericton  of his early boyhood was a small university city which had main­ tained  a continuous  tradition of literary and  intellectual activity since its founda­  tion in the late eighteenth  century  by United  Empire  Loyalists. Its  chief  literary luminaries  in Bailey's boyhood were Blis
Francis Sherman: none of them was still permanently  resident in the city, but they all returned  as visitors and their accomplishments were eagerly followed by the citizens of their  native  town. Still a small college, the University  of New  Bruns­ wick had  a succession of distinguished  young scholars of literature,  philosophy, and the natural sciences, and for its size, Fredericton  provided a lively intellectual milieu;  it also had  a superbly  beautiful  setting  and  a graceful  achitectural heri­ tage which made  it an ideal home for a potential  poet.
In  Quebec  City,  Bailey attended  the  private  High  School of Quebec,  where
F. R. Scott was his contemporary  and there he came to love the poetry of Keats and Coleridge, Tennyson  and  Browning. His English teacher,  the Oxford  gradu­ ate Claude Thompson, strongly encouraged  Bailey to develop his literary inclina­ tions, and  Bailey's first poems were published  in  the High  School  magazine,  of which he became editor-in-chief  in  I922-23. The  first published  poem was "Out of the Fog",  a Coleridgean  narrative  of forty lines which  begins:

A great  junk's  stern  post rose and  fell
On  an  oily eastern sea;
The water  dripped from  off her sides, Her  sails flapped noiselessly.

Bailey now describes "Out of the Fog" as a "juvenile  amalgam  of gleanings from
'The  Ancient  Mariner', a Kipling  ballad,  and  memories of pirate  stories in  the
Boy's Own  Annual, Chums  and Chatter  Box." 3
In September  I923  Bailey returned  to Fredericton  and  entered  the  University as a freshman.  At the same time, his first commercially published poem, "Mogo­ dore",  appeared  in The  Canadian  Magazine:  it was a product  of his reading  of a  book on  Morocco  and  filled with  vivid images  of the  North  African  desert. Bailey soon became a frequent  contributor  to the student  magazine,  The  Bruns­ wickan, yet he found  that  the once proud literary tradition of the University had sunk to a low ebb. He was determined  to revive the days of Carman, Roberts and Sherman,  and  dreamed  of founding  a literary magazine  to be the instrument  of revival. Already  he had  The  Fiddlehead  in  mind  as the  probable  name  of such a magazine,  but the scheme did not come to reality until twenty years later. The nearest approximation Bailey could achieve in undergraduate days was to estab­ lish a poetry department in The Brunswickan, in which his own poems and those of Dorothy  Roberts,  among others, appeared.  In  his fourth  year, in  I927,  Bailey published  his first book,  Songs of the Saguenay.  He was still under  the spell of

A. G. BAILEY

the British and  Canadian Romantics: the poems are descriptive, atmospheric, melancholy in mood,  conventional in prosody. Significantly, Bailey chose none  of them  for inclusion  in his selected  poems, Thanks   for a Drowned  Island.
After  graduating from  U.N.B. in  1927,  Bailey became  a graduate student in history at the University of Toronto. Little happened in his first two or three  years there  to change the romantic bent  of his poetry. The  new  poets he read  were  late Romantics like Edna St.  Vincent Millay,  Marjorie Pickthall and   Wilson  Mac­ donald, and  his literary acquaintances were  mainly  traditionalists-Charles G. D. Roberts, Constance Davies  Woodrow, Nathaniel  Benson,  Virna Sheard and
Lome Pierce  (the  last of whom  published  Bailey's second little  book of verse, Tao,
as a Ryerson  Poetry  Chap-Book in  1930). In  these early  Toronto years,  his only link  with  something less traditional and  romantic came  through his membership in  E. J. Pratt's graduate seminar in Modem Poetry.




kE FUNDAMENTAL  CHANGE in  Bailey's  poetic  outlook   and practice occurred between  1930  and  1934  as a result  of three  major influences. The first was his experience as a reporter  for the Toronto Mail  and  Empire:   he witnessed  poverty,  violence,  police  brutality, drunkenness, and   corruption,  and came  to recognize  the world  as no perfumed garden. The  second  was his member­ ship in a literary  club which  included such lively, modem-minded figures as E. K. Brown,  Dorothy Livesay, Stanley  Ryerson,  and  Henry  Noyes. The third  climactic  influence was  his  encounter, in  1931,  with  the  poetry  of  T.  S.  Eliot.  I  quote  Bailey's own description of the  event,  in his yet unpublished  memoirs:

One  evening Roy Daniells  called on me and  my fiancee Jean  Craig  Hamilton  at her place and said, "Listen  to this!" He read "The  Hollow Man", "Prufrock" and The  Waste Land. I experienced  the greatest excitement such as I had never experi­ enced  before  and  have  never  since experienced.  All sorts  of  inchoate  and  pre­ viously ill-defined  feelings  and  experiences  suddenly  came  into  focus.  One  felt transfigured,  and  one could only think that  the old symbols and  intonations and meanings  had  become  completely  dead,  that  a  great  spiritual  void  had  been created  by a sense of the bankruptcy  of nineteenth  century  beliefs  and  standards,  that  the economic system under  which we lived was in a state  of  distintegration, that  the  great  urban  wilderness  of the  modern  world  marked  the  sterility  and death of our society. Eliot supplied  the catharsis. He had  pronounced  the epitaph  on  the past. We felt that  there  was nothing  more to be  said,  that  nothing  more truly meaningful  could be said in prose or rhyme. We came  to know all his work by heart,  and  soon  we  could  think  and  speak  and  write  only  in  terms  of  his images, cadences and  meanings.

As a result of this encounter with  Eliot's  verse, Bailey began  to write  in a new way. Soon appeared in The  Canadian  Forum his modernist poems: "Best Seller,"

A. G. BAILEY

"Hochelaga", "FrOlll Day to Day", "Guide", "Seed",  and "Rapprochment". Borrowing from Eliot colloquial diction and rhythms and the allusive and ironic method,  Bailey gradually  developed  his own distinctive style by using Canadian idioms and alluding to his own spheres of knowledge and experience. With Robert Finch and  Roy Daniells he established a small group that  met weekly over lunch to read their poems and engage in mutual  criticism and emulation.  Shortly after­ wards, he formed a friendship  with Malcolm Ross, another student  from  U.N.B. who  had  come  to  Toronto for  graduate   work:   Ross too  was  writing  poems, although  he was subsequently  to  establish his reputation  as scholar,  critic  and editor of the New Canadian Library. Another friend of this period was Earle Bir­ ney, like Daniells a graduate of U.B.C., who had come to Toronto to do graduate  work in English.
In 1934-5, Bailey and  Birney were both in London as holders of Royal Society
overseas fellowships. Birney was deeply engaged in Trotskyite politics and through him,  Bailey came  into  contact   with  leftist  groups,  and  confirmed  a  political outlook  which  he  had  begun  to  develop  in  Toronto.   But  he  never  became deeply immersed in politics and  the most enduring  influences of this period were intellectual  ones. He was a student  of the sociologist, Morris  Ginsberg,  by whom he was introduced  to Arnold  Toynbee.  With Toynbee, the first volume of whose monumental   Study  of History  has  just been published,  Bailey had  long  discus­ sions on the philosophy of history. Looking forward to a career in the New Bruns­ wick Provincial  Museum in Saint John,  Bailey also studied the Chinese and other collections in the Victoria  and  Albert  and  the British  Museums.  For  his poetry the chief significance of this year was to augment  his erudition.  He is perhaps the most learned  of Canadian poets, and in his poetry draws freely on his knowledge of history, sociology, anthropology, art, archaeology, and  political science.
The  only purely literary  discovery that  Bailey recalls from  his London  period was his reading,  in a copy of New  Verse, of a poem by Dylan  Thomas.  In  the unpublished  memoirs, he says of this experience:

The   poem  was  so unlike  anything I  had  read  before,  that   I  undoubtedly  recog­ nized,  as  anyone  would   have  recognized,   that   here  was  a  new  turning  point  in English  literature, the  first  since  Eliot.  While  it did  not  have  the  profound effect on  me  that  Eliot's work  had  had,  it stimulated me  to write  in  a  way  that  I  had not  done  before.  I  did  not  imitate his style, but  it touched  a  spring which  led me
... to invent  a new verse form  in inchoate images, syncopated, galloping, and  off­ beat,  as exemplified in my poems "The Winter Mill, and  "The Feat  Flame" which I wrote  during that  winter in London. On  returning to Canada I found  that  none of my literary friends  knew  anything of Dylan  Thomas, and  as a matter  of fact  it was only after  several  years  had  gone  by that  I heard  of him  again,  and  by then  he was famous  everywhere.

Dylan Thomas  did not become a major influence upon Bailey's own work, but a

A. G. BAILEY

diffused influence is sometimes apparent in the piled-up explosive rhythms and  in the rapidly shifting, frequent  and  audacious metaphors.
The  London  year was followed by three years as an official of the  Provincial Museum  in Saint  John,  years so filled with  onerous duties  that  Bailey's literary activities came  to a virtual  standstill. It was only after  he  became  Professor of History  at  U.N.B.  in  Fredericton   in  Igg8   that  another  influential   experience occurred.  Bailey revived his dream  of establishing a literary  magazine,  and  the first step was the founding  of the Bliss Carman  Society in I940. This  was a group of young persons, mainly students, who met once a week or so to read their  poems and criticize each other's efforts. It was in this connection that  I first knew Bailey, since soon after  my arrival  at  the  University in I 944 he invited  me  to  join the group. Other  early members of the group were Elizabeth Brewster, Fred Cogswell and Robert  Gibbs. We launched  The  Fiddlehead in I945;  it is still alive and  well thirty years later.
His association with The  Fiddlehead  had  a strong  influence  on  Bailey's own
career as a poet: it stimulated  him to write more and better work than  he had previously accomplished, and  many of his finest poems appeared  in its pages. The late Forties and  early Fifties was a period of intense productivity,  culminating in the publication  of Border River in I 952.
As the years passed, Bailey took on so many  chores at  the  University  that  his
poetic  production  slowed  almost  to a  halt.  Teaching  a  full  load  of courses  in history, Bailey was Head of the Department  of History, Dean of Arts, and Honor­ ary Librarian, all at  the same time. Later,  shedding  the other  posts,  he  became Vice-President   (Academic) . It was only in  his late  Sixties,  when  he gave  up administrative duties, that  Bailey was able to resume systematically the writing of verse. At the age of seventy, he is still at work; and since he comes of a long-lived family he may continue for a good many years. It would certainly  be premature to essay a definitive assessment of his verse, but  in the  pages that  follow a  pre­ liminary appraisal  is attempted.


To ALL   INTENTS  AND   PURPOSES,  Bailey's poems  worthy  of appraisal  are those found in Border River and Thanks  for a Drowned  Island. The
poems contained  in Songs of the Saguenay and Tao  are undergraduate verse typi­ cal of nature descriptions, especially descriptions of the sea, melancholy love songs, vague  evocations of romantic  scenes and  exotic  places. The  chief  influences  at work are those of English Romantics and Victorians, particularly Keats, Coleridge and Tennyson,  and of the Canadian poet Bliss Carman,  whose effect can be seen in lines such as these :

53

A. G. BAILEY

There was a smile you gave me
That was native  to the land
Of  wide and  tossing oceans
And  of silver sifted  sand....

("Micheline on  the Saguenay")

Tao reprinted  in unrevised form a number of poems from the previous volume, but in the new poems the chief fresh influence discernible is that  of Swinburne:

Give  me, Kathleen, one glance  of langour and  longing
That I may sleep  at  peace  with  the golden  dawning. ("Fredericton Revisited  in the Autumn")

In this second volume the only real hint of new directions is contained  in the final poem, "Astromathematic", which has a kind of imagist sparseness and clarity:

Some  god  took compasses;
With  centre moon,  and  radius  infinite,
Described an arc of mist upon  the sky. Near  by
Three points  of light
Burned bright,
A triangle isosceles and  tall. They all
Patterned upon  the  night­
The moon,  the mist, the stars - Gold  bars
And  silver schemes  of light.

Anyone who had failed to read Bailey's poems in periodicals of the Thirties and Forties and  knew  only his first two volumes, must  have  been  flabbergasted  by Border River. The  vague  melancholy and  regular  verse forms of the early books had  been replaced  by powerful emotions and a creative use of free verse. What  a contrast there was between, say, "Micheline  on the Saguenay" and this new poem of another  river, "Miramichi Lightning":

The sachem  voices cloven  out  of the  hills spat  teeth  in the sea like nails
before  the  spruce  were combed  to soughing  peace.

They said  a goliath alphabet at once
and  stopped to listen  to their  drumming ears repeat the  chorus  round  a funeral mountain.

Hurdling a hump of whales they  juddered east,
and  there  were horse-faced  leaders  whipped  the breath from  bodies panting on the intervales.

54

A. G. BAILEY

The lights were planets going out for good as the rancour of a cloud broke off and fell into the back of town and foundered there.

The regular rocking-horse rhythms of the early verse have given way to irregular rhythms which match  and  augment  the meaning, as in the third  line of the first stanza where the idea of the temporary subsidence of the wind is enhanced  by the extended length and retarded  pace. Stock romantic epithets have gone, and  either old  words  have  been  used  in  a  new way  or  new  words  have  been  invented. "Voices"  when "cloven  out of the  hills" become tongues and  lips and  can spit; wind  passing over spruce  trees combs them,  so that  they  not  merely  sigh  but sough, an unusual but precise word meaning to make a soft murmuring sound;  to shout is not merely to speak loudly but rather  to say "a goliath alphabet", so that one sees giant-sized  letters  being  hurled  into  the  air;  voices "judder", a  word which I assume Bailey to have invented to suggest both the forward  thrust  of jut and  the lateral  shaking suggested by the word shudder;4  "rancour", an  abstract noun,  is transfigured  into  a  concrete  one, into  something  sulphurous  and  solid which can break off and fall, presumably by thinking of the similar word "rancid" with all its connotations  of unpleasant  taste, smell and  texture,  and  of "anchor" with its connotations of solidity, weight and the sea ("foundered").
The creative technique of this poem is matched  by its freshness and  originality of content.  Without  thrusting  it  upon  us, Bailey has obviously drawn  upon  his extensive knowledge of the Indians  of the eastern sea-board  so that  his   imagina­ tion is able to transmogrify  a violent thunderstorm in some such  town  as New­ castle or Chatham, N.B., into an angry lament of Algonquin chiefs for the destruc­ tion of their culture.  The  force of their anger is conveyed to us  not  by abstract descriptions nor by vague laments but by the active verbs which serve as the strain­  ing sinews of the poem -verbs such as cloven, spat, combed, drumming, hurdl­ ing,  juddered,  whipped,  panting,  going out, broke off, fell and  foundered.
"The Winter Mill" may be chosen as another example of the new freedom and originality of both style and content found in Border River. The opening lines will perhaps be sufficient to indicate  the quality:

The winter mill will not return this often
a granary for months of ill at ease
Nor will the thaw engage to round and soften
the burden of its coffin; from the knee
to thigh and upwards cold as any fish
hook

55

A. G. BAILEY


will it look to sweep a mist from sunken eyes,
nor gather to its heart its cherished april.

That echoes of Bliss Cannan still linger in Bailey's imagination   is clear  from the final phrase,  but  what  a differance  is here from  the unassimilated  Carman­ esque influences of Songs  of the Saguenay! Instead of the lingering, self-indulgent Cannan rhythm,  the lines have been deliberately decapitated  and bent back upon themselves to suggest the destructive force which the poet sees in the natural world. The  meaning  is conveyed almost  in a subliminal  fashion:  one grasps it without being quite  aware  of what  and  how. That  one is being  warned that  the warm spring  weather  which  has  intervened   to  break  the  grip  of  winter  cannot  be expected to last or often to return  is clear, but there is no firm progression of logic nor  any  easily discernible  pattern  of images The  images  in  particular seem  to follow one another  arbitrarily, and it is almost impossible to see their connection. The  image of the winter  mill works in itself, suggesting by its imagined  turning  sails the cycle of the seasons, but one associates a windmill with water rather  than with grain, so that  when one comes to "this granary" one has to assume that  the mill was not a windmill  after  all  but  rather  a fanning  mill, used in  granaries  in winter and therefore, on this second guess, acceptable as a "winter  mill". Similar ambiguities surround  the images of the corpse and  coffin, the fish-hook and  the sunken  eyes: one is  being  tortured  to follow the sudden  twists and  turns  of the poet's  imagination,  but  since the  poem  is about  the agonies of  living  the  very difficulties are a positive feature of the poem's success.
As this poem would suggest, the predominant mood of Border River  is a sad
one. The title poem alludes to the Saint Croix River, which flows along the border between  New Brunswick and  Maine.  Bailey sees it as a symbol of man's  failure to band  together in brotherhood :

Yet if a cairn were put upon his bosom's sward
it could teach  the mummers something for a day of international
mourning,
marking the count of time, to point a finger at the sign-manual of the common dream,
lost by men whose counsels failed, who wrecked the common structure of their Father's house.

The  mourning  for man's  failure  to realize his human  potentialities, together  with a  wistful,  almost  forlorn  quest  for  a  tranquility  glimpsed  or  dreamed   of  but apparently  never  to  be re-found  or found,  is the dominant  then1e of the  book.
To suggest this increasing but apparently  never-ending quest for peace or vision, Bailey frequently  uses the image  of a sea voyage-see, for example,  "The  Un­ returning", "Regression  of the  Pelasgians", "North  West Passage" and  "Thanks

A. 0.BAILEY

for a Drowned  Island". This in itself, of course, is not particularly  original;  what is striking  is the detailed  knowledge of seamanship  and  navigation  which  Bailey displays. His ships and  voyages are  not  merely symbols:  they  are  actual  crafts and  journeys, described  in  the  technical  vocabulary  of the  sailor's  trade.  This further  illustrates the surprising reach of Bailey's erudition, and results from family tradition and  personal experience.  His family had  extensive marine  connections and  Bailey says that  he "more  conscious of ships and  the sea than  anything  else in my early life". As a youth he spent his summers at Tadoussac, on the Saguenay, which  he describes as "a  place of lightships, lighthouses, fog horns, shoals,  wild tides and  currents in which we rowed, sailed, swam ... " All this background  of knowledge and experience explains the easy authority of such lines as these, from the opening  of "North West Passage":

He clambered aboard the rocking boat while the waves like the bright fins of fabulous fish kept slapping
the planks of the dock.
The rich water rewarded him as he climbed in the sail,
and away in the cloak of the gale he wrapped his thanks
as trim as a clock
geared, and unhampered as halyards, by the trim hand
held and felt.

But if  the voyages are, or are cleverly made to seem, actual  journeys, they are also symbolic quests. So also are  the  journeys over mountains  or  through  woods and  wilderness which occur  in such  poems as "The  Frank  and  Gentle  Hand", "Shrouds  and  Away",  "His  Age  was On"  and  "Megalopolis". What  is being sought for, and what hope is there of its being found? At certain  times it appears that  what  is being sought is human  brotherhood  and  concord,  and  that  there  is indeed some hope, however remote, of achieving it. At other times the phraseology
-for example,  in "The Unreturning", "the  lone hand I at  the  wheel I whose
face is caught  in a tanned  and  wrinkled dream" -suggests a Christian  pilgrim­ age, a search  for the divine, and  here the hope, although  not  entirely  absent,  is very muted  indeed  and,  as Northrop Frye has noted, it is certainly  hope  rather than  faith.
One comes away from reading Bailey's poems, however, convinced  that  he is a deeply religious man, and not merely a humanist, though  his religion is not ortho­ dox nor institutional.  Bailey confirms this in a personal note to me, in  which  he describes his early orthodoxy as a member of the Church of England but says that in later  years "it was as though  God became a beneficent force, a  Platonic  idea, real but almost impersonal and perhaps unreachable.  I continued  to feel religious and to have reverence, but I had no precise dogma any longer."
Serious poems of spiritual questing dominate  Border River, but there are lighter

57

A; G. BAILEY

poems, chiefly satires, to act as leaven -poems such as "Rococo  Game", "From Day to Day", "Best Seller",  "Isobel"  and "The Fruit  of Now".  It is a significant mark  of Bailey's versatility that  he can bring off playful poems as successfully as serious ones. These  lines from  "Isobel"  will serve to illustrate  this aspect of his talent:

She grew more love than he could bear.
She went to trim his morning
heart.
She quickened all his little leaves.
His railings fell and left him bare.




ERE     a twenty-one year interval  between the publica­ tion  of Border  River  and  Thanks  for a Drowned  Island,  and  the  latest  book reprints thirty poems from its predecessor and offers only forty-seven  new poems. The  new poems, however, were very much  worth waiting for. Some of them are variants on Bailey's old major theme of quest, but others break new ground. There  are several very moving poems which explore or re-create the history of his family
-"Angel  Gabriel", for  example,  and  "A  Chronicle  of Other  English" -and
others in which Bailey goes back to memories of his own childhood.
"A Chronicle of Other  English" commemorates some of Bailey's colonial ances­ tors, the Slaughters, and describes most powerfully the death  of his grandfather in Fredericton in 1925. The  bulk of the poem is almost too drily factual,  packed with names and  dates  although  rescued from tedium  by striking images and  turns of phrase,  but it culminates  in a magnificent  line which by its very eloquence and power lifts the whole poem to a plane of universality:

When times grow small may men take heart from these.

Perhaps the best of the poems which recollect Bailey's childhood  is "Mr. McGinty's  Claw",  which manages  to combine a sense of childish innocence with a sense of the macabre:

Mr. McGinty's claw
was the only one I ever saw.
The hand on which it was affixed
was holding an apple tart,
I was holding a five-cent piece
with which to buy a bun
at the age of six

A.G.BAILEY

beneath  the elms of Charlotte  Street. It was scary
to one so young.
But as no choice presented itself
I handed  Mr. McGinty  the money and  remember  to this day
the point of his claw catching it up
and a bit of skin from the palm of my hand along with it.

This  poem further illustrates Bailey's versatility,  for it has few of his usual charac­ teristics such  as distorted or strained syntax  and  erudite allusions: it has an  almost imagist  directness,  clarity,  and  simplicity,  and  achieves  its effects  by  understate­ ment  and  severe emotional restraint.
Another group of new  poems  are  social,  political  or  historical  commentaries, such  as "Canadian Flag  Debate", "Here in the  East", "Confederation Debate", "La  Route Jackman", "The Shadow of Mr.  McGee", and  "Seventeen  Seventy­ six". Generally speaking, this group is less successful, for the  complex allusiveness and  metaphorical elaboration which  Bailey employs in most of them seem alien  to the genre. One  of them,  however,  "Here in the  East", is one of the best poems in the  book.  Simply  and  straightforwardly, by  choosing  and  starkly  presenting a series of images of the contemporary Maritime scene Bailey evokes a deeply  tragic  sense of the decay  of a once-proud culture:

Here in the east the barns are empty of grass and  commerce  has moved to the focal canals
and  freight yards
of the smoking west.
From the muddy rims of the tidal estuaries
the wrecks of tugs stick out, a tourist's emblem, graphs of decay and a kind of awakening. Framed  through  the posts of a once-fenced field our glaucous vision rests on rusted trash
thrown long ago.
The  tons of timber buoyed on the bend of the teeming river
are nothing  now but a yellowed notation in an archivist's scrapbook.
Last week a class of grade-eight  pupils
were told by their teacher
of Champlain, La Tour, Chandler  and Mitchell, and the tribe of the Glasiers.
When they grow up they will forget all that and
go to live in Toronto.

Perhaps the most interesting new note sounded in the more  recent  poems is that of ironic  acceptance of the  poet's  own  limitations, found  in  at  least  two  of  the

59

A. G. BAILEY

finest poems in the book, "I Could  Not Reach the Star"  and  "The  Muskrat  and the Whale".  The  final lines of the latter  poem,  with their  air of ease and  assur­ ance combined with due modesty, may be quoted  to illustrate Bailey's work in its most recent phase:

Let  whales  wake and  sleep in their own water,
the muskrat in his.
His bliss, like an emulsion,  injects his veins and  arteries, a whale's capillaries accommodate a liquor immense  and  sedate.
Dignity and  industry lend  size to the  muskrat. His size is his own, and  mete.
The whale  may  think  his dignity  is greater.
The muskrat would  be able, if the thought struck  him,
to  prove  his own  title  to this  quality sooner  or later.

In this poem the bof Bailey's qualities come together:  colloquial ease of diction and  rhythm,  the  functional   use of line  divisions, playfulness overlying  a  deep seriousness of purpose, empathy,  and a kind of humane  dignity and  tolerance of outlook.
In  the  opening  paragraph of this paper  I  suggested that  Alfred  G. Bailey's poetry is difficult, distinctive and distinguished. It is a difficult poetry not because Bailey seeks deliberately  to obscure his meaning,  but  rather  because he is trying to convey to us the products of a complex sensibility and of an erudite  and sensi­ tive mind. And he is trying to convey those things to us not in stereotyped  phrases and rhythms, but in original and organic words, images, and music. His own mind hesitates, pounces, gallops off after  a glimpsed  target,  leaps to its  goal,  or falls back to prepare  a new start -and  in his poetry  he tries to  re-create  the actual sense of these movements of his mind. This  necessarily poses  problems for those with slower, more orthodox,  or less erudite minds, but the effort to follow him is a rewarding  one. Again,  his  poetry is distinctive  because he has a uniquely  rich mind which he freely opens up to us. The early poetry was not distinctive, because it made use of conventional  material  and  displayed it in  traditional  forms. In his later  poetry we witness an  independent   wrestle with  language  to make  it com­ municate  that  which is peculiar and indeed unique to his sensibility. Finally, it is a distinguished  poetry because that  wrestle with language is ultimately successful, so that  in his best poems we hear  the  assured  accents of a man  who  is saying exactly what  he wishes to say as only he can  say it:  "His  size is his own,  and mete."

6o

A. G. BAILEY


NOTES

1 Songs of the Saguenay (1927), Tao  (1930),  Border River  (1952),  and  Thanks for a Drowned  Island  ( 1973).
2  A friend  of  the  leader  of  the  Irish  literary   Renaissance, Douglas  Hyde   (who  re­
placed  him for one year at  U.N.B.)
3 This,  and  most of the other quotations attributed to Dr.  Bailey, are  from  a  trans­ cript  of his tape  recorded memoirs  which  he made  available to me.  In  a  few cases, so identified, the quotations come  from  notes written directly  to me.
• Dr.  Bailey modestly  disclaims  the  invention  of "judder". He  believes  that   he  en­
countered it in an  early  poem  by W. H. Auden.






it STRECTCHiiBLE WORLD

Alden Nowlan


Put  your  thoughts on the grocer's scale, apply  the  tailor's  tape
to your emotions, you who depend on maps
to measure the  distances
between  people.

Sylvia's  voice
so close to my ear that  no one  else
in this room  could  hear  it
-that was on the  telephone and  I was drunk.

When  I send  her  a letter there  are  the  spaces
that  divide
my mind  from  my fingers, my fingers from  the page,
the page  from  what  I wish it
to be, and  that  is only the start-
it is a very long way
from  here  to Connecticut.

MODERN ACADIAN POETRY



Introduced and Translated
by Fred Cogswell





SCHOLARS INTERESTED m obtahlhlg  a detailed  knowledge of modern  Acadian  literature may  do so by reference to  a  remarkably  limited number  of sources.
The first serious representation  and treatment  of Acadian  poetry in a Canadian magazine occurred  in Volume  II, number  5, of liberte, published in Montreal  in the Fall of 1969. Poets represented  in this issue are:  Leonard  Forest,  Raymond LeBlanc, Roger Savoie, Marie-Josee Marcil, Hermenegilde Chiasson, and Romeo Savoie. Other  Acadian  material  included a French translation  by Leonard  Forest of extracts from Longfellow's Evangeline accompanied  by an article entitled "Evangeline  qui es-tu";  an extract  from Placide Gaudet's  "Le  Grand  Derange­ ment"; "Survol  historique  de 1'Acadie" by Michel Roy;  "La  Recuperation d'un Passe Ambigu"  by Camille  Richard; "Notes sur l'Acadie"  by  Dorval  Brunelle; "La  Repression en Acadie"  by Roger Savoie; "La Violence" by Monique Gauvin;  "Interview avec  Michel  Blanchard" by Dorvel Brunelle; "L'Art en Acadie"  by Pierre Villon;  and "Journal deBord" by Jean-Guy  Pilon.
In January 1972, La Revue  de l'Universite de Moncton  presented  a 1 18-page
anthology devoted to Acadian  poetry. Not only did it present a large collection of verse in which almost every modem Acadian poet was represented,  but it included two excellent articles on modem  Acadian poetry, "Bilan des 20 Demieres Annees" by Pierre Roy and Gerard  LeBlanc, and "Sur le Production Poetique au Nouveau­ Brunswick"  by Alain  Masson. Featured  as well by extensive extracts from their work, interviews, articles and  bibliography  are two of the leading Acadian  poets, Ronald  Despres and  Raymond  LeBlanc.
ellipse, No. 16, brought  out in 1974, in Sherbrooke, Quebec,  an issue devoted to Maritime  poetry in  both  French  and  English. In  it Acadian  poetry  is  repre­ sented  in  translation.  The  poets selected are  Raymond  LeBlanc,  Hermenegilde Chiasson,  Andre   Arsenault,   Ulysse  Landry,   Guy  Arsenault,   Leonard   Forest, Calixte  Duguay,  and  Guy  Letendre.  There  is, moreover, an  excellent article by Pierre-Andre  Arcand,  translated  into  English and  entitled  "Poets  from  the  End of the Earth".

MODERN  ACADIAN POETRY

Also  published  in  1974  was  Ecrits  du  Canada   Francais   No.  38,  in  which Pierre-Andre Arcand  presented  selections from  the work of Raymond   LeBlanc, Hermenegilde  Chiasson, Ulysse Landry, Guy Letendre, Andre Arsenault,  Guy Arsenault,   Calixte   Duguay,   Raynald   Robichaud,  Rino   Morin,   and   Melvin Gallant.
Readers  whose curiosity about  Acadian  poetry is whetted  by a reading  of these periodicals are referred  to Les Editions d'Acadie,  P.O.  2006, Moncton,  which is issuing attractive,  paperback  volumes of the leading Acadian  poets in series. The series to date  comprises the following books: Acadie  Rock   ( 1973)  by Guy  Arse­
nault;  Mourir  a  Scoudouc  ( 1974)   by  Hermenegilde   Chiasson;   Paysages   en
Contrabande ( 1974)  by Ronald Despres; Saisons Anterieures ( 1973)  by Leonard
Forest;  and Cri de Terre ( 1974)  by Raymond  LeBlanc.
In  order  to give readers some idea of the nature  and  extent  of the  revolution that  has occurred in Acadian  poetry over the past two and a half decades, I have included   in  the  representative   anthology  which  accompanies   this  article   two poems from a book, Poemes  de mon  Pays, privately printed  in Moncton  in 1949 by the Reverend  Napoleon  P. Landry. Father  Landry's  work is representative  of the Acadian  poetry which preceded it. Written in quatrains  of alternately  rhyming alexandrine and using language that is formal and stilted, this work illustrates the insidious partnership that  can  exist between a conventionally  accepted  art-form and a conventionally accepted idea of a society, both of which bear little or no relationship to the reality that  they are supposed to represent.
It is well realized that  words, particularly symbols, can on occasion be revolu­ tionary.  What  is not so well recognized is that  words, particularly  symbols, can weigh like a dead  weight upon  creativity in any real sense. Symbols may crystal­ lize out of the warm  and  volatile broth of experience, but  by the time they have taken shape the broth has cooled considerably and the ferment has died down;  in fact the very solidity of symbols makes them the ice that  keeps future  ferment  to a minimum. So it was in Acadia. The remnant  of a people, for the most part  poor and  engaged  in  primary  industries,  a  Francophone  enclave  in  an  Anglophone  world, eked out, through  hard  work and self-denial, an  underprivileged  temporal existence for approximately  two centuries. In their symbolic and  eternal  vision of themselves, however, they were,  reinforced  by the sacraments  of their  Church,  God's chosen people, expelled like the ancient  Hebrews from  the promised  land, and on their return,  compelled to live in the nooks and crannies that the Canaanites had not filled up in the interim. At the same time, in their religion, in their  lan­ guage,  in  their  family solidarity,  and  in  their  primary  pursuits,  they  enjoyed  a moral superiority  over the English, a superiority  which, if they remained  patient and obeyed their God, would be translated  miraculously into a temporal  Acadia that  was, somehow or other, one with their spiritual  vision. And  their  poets, like Father  Landry and the Abbe F. M. Lanteigne, celebrated in their poems not the

MODERN ACADIAN POETRY

matter  of every day -there  was really very little  to celebrate  there -but  the eternal  myths that  were embodied  in the words:  Church,  home, and  language, and for that  purpose,  the alexandrines  devised at the French  court for myths as far from  reality as their  own were as good a form  as any  to use -particularly since their rhythms had both the formal stiffness and sonority that  were associated with the religious service that stood at the core of their mythical structure.
This mythical structure collapsed after World  War II,  when for the first time in  their  history,  the  Acadians  were  presented  with  a  genuine  opportunity   to develop in other  directions  than  the symbolic. World  War  II had  broken  down considerably the relative isolation in which so many Acadians  had lived and  had led, particularly  in Moncton,  Fredericton,  and St. John, to an increased urbaniza­ tion of the Acadian  population. These  trends  were enhanced  by the  expansion, then inaugurated and still continuing,  of both the Provincial and Federal govern­ ment  services-an expansion  in  which  all  Francophones  enjoyed  a  built-in advantage-and by the equality  of opportunity  programme  introduced  by the Louis B. Robichaud  government, which by a reorganization  of  the tax structure  and  the administrative base of the school system, and by the establishment of the University  of  Moncton   provided  the  Acadians  with  educational  opportunities comparable  to those which  their  English-speaking  counterparts in the  Maritime  provinces had long enjoyed. As a result, large numbers of Acadians were not slow in exchanging the myths of their fathers for the very pragmatic  advantages  of liv­ ing in the present and  accepting  the values of the present, whatever  those values may be. Among these were the new  poets.
It seems to me that  the current  crop of Acadian  poets, Hermenegilde  Chiasson, Ronald  Depres, Leonard  Forest,  Raymond  LeBlanc, and  Guy Arsenault,  repre­ sented here, have been able, in a way that few poets of any culture or generation have been able to do, to "put  first things first, and  second things second, and so on". What strikes one about  their work, in both form, sensibility, and content,  is the way in which it expresses primarily a personal reaction, and only secondarily, incidentally,  or at a distance,  a doctrinaire  or dogmatic  conviction. These  poets have been incredibly  lucky in their appearance in Acadia at this particular time. Emancipated at one and  the same time from both the alexandrine  and from  the Acadian  myth  in which  it had  been enshrined,  they  can  be their  non-rhetorical  and non-traditional selves in poetry to a degree and extent impossible to any other poets writing  currently  in Canada's cultural  milieu.
There  are signs, however, that they are not content with such freedom-which is a heavy responsibility for any one to bear-but  are turning  for direction  in both  an ideological and  formal sense to their contemporaries  in the  province of Quebec. Here again they are fortunate. Had their renaissance coincided with the heyday  of  the  existentialism  of  which  Saint-Denys-Gameau  and  Anne  Hebert were the  chief representatives,  it is doubtful  whether  they  would  have  accom-

MODERN ACADIAN POETRY

plished more than  exchange  one high-sounding  vacuity for another.  Fortunately, they discovered the new Quebec  poetry under the aegis of Gaston  Miron  and  his successors, a poetry often  doctrinaire and  rhetorical  but  committed  to an  essen­ tially personal and  honest response by the individual  to the  circumstances of his immediate  surroundings.  Since the struggle between  the  Francophones and  the Anglophones  in  the  Maritime   provinces has  been  much  less acute  than  it  has been in Quebec, the mixture of personal experience and doctrinaire opinion which characterized  poetry in French in Canada  today is better balanced  in the work of Acadian  poets than  it is in that  of their Quebec contemporaries. I am  reminded in this connection of a joint reading  I once gave at Edmundston, New Brunswick, a few years back. On  this occasion, I read translations from various Quebec  poets while a member of the staff of the  College de St. Louis read  the originals. After the reading I was talking to an Acadian woman about  the readings and she said:  "When  you read those poems, they sounded like Canadian poems, but  when  he read them they were separatiste poems."
In the current Anglophile milieu of conflicting styles and poetic theories, where almost every review is a manifesto for one school of bardolatory  against all others, I envy these Acadian  poets, who are able still to speak for  themselves in  their own way and at the same time speak in tune to most of their peers without violat­ ing the reality of their  time  and  their  place. I hope they may  continue  to keep their separate  voices and  adjure  the inevitable  unifying  myth-making  tendency to which art is prone for yet a little while longer-at least long enough  to lay a sufficiently complex literary  groundwork  to build on as to ensure  that  no myths as simplistic as those of "Evangeline" and  "the  Lord's  chosen people" will ever arise again  in Acadia  to support  the inherent  laziness of the  human  spirit.  Al­ though they can normally bear to look at unshrouded  reality about  as long as the naked eye can  bear  to look at  the sun,  poets should  be encouraged,  as long  as possible, to remain "eagles of the spirit".

MODERN ACADIAN  POETRY

W. P. Landry


THE VOICE OF THE JICJIDIJIN SOIL
following the great expulsion

I saw, as in a mist,  them  leaving  on that  day,
All my proud  peasants, the ones I loved so much; Broken-hearted toward  the shore  they went  away:
And in the sea the great  sails swelled to the wind's touch.

The wind  bore  them  off on a limitless sea
To  the globe's  four  corners  at the tempest's  will ... And  all alone  in my mortal anxiety,
In my unending dream, I remained sad and  still.

For  one  hundred and  fifty years my nutritious land Gave  them  without number great  sheaves of wheat; And  all my billows brought them  fish to hand
From  silvery depths in beams of love and  light.

I still can see them  land  upon  my banks once more  ...
In previous  times  the sunshine  made  the young  corn  swell; Their arms  deprived the  ocean  of its very shore,
And  everywhere their  songs rang  out  a waking  bell.

My fields from  their  labours  bore  their  abundant best. My valleys were  filled with  a low-pitched moaning. And  my orchards reblooming in a dancing mist Embalmed with  their  odours  the light airs of Spring.

I still remember hearing their  laughter crack That  rang  out  so loud  and  mocking,  yet so true! Under their  feet,  they felt signs of an  Empire's track  And  a forest  of their  songs twittered in the  blue.

In my ardent breast  I felt life's vital sprout,
I felt  the  pain  of labour  in my splitting  thighs.
And  a mighty  clamour that  nothing could  put  out
Rose  from  Grand-Pre hills in evening's  blazing  skies.

In their  cottages the hearth-logs flamed so high
Both  day and  night  their  doors stood wide open  still; So quick  their  table  was to greet  the passers-by
That good-luck  was flowing like a noiseless rill.



66

MODERN  ACADIAN POETRY

How  oft at night  I have seen, by a flash of flame,
A group  of children with gold ribbons  in their  hair Singing  before  the  altar  hymns  to the Virgin's name ... Like a stained-glass window  I still can  see them  there.

I have seen my ripe  ears at the Divine  Sacrifice Becoming  the  "Body  of Christ" amid  incense  rife, And  the  juice of my grape  to my chalice-voice Becoming,  as God  wills, "A  draught of Life".

There flowed from  out those souls an infinite  love
At the breath of the Spirit  which came  down  from  the  skies,
The  goodness of the  Most-High seared  them  from  above, And  the  truth of the saint  shone  out  in  their  eyes.

And  I still see once  more,  as I bend  the  bough, To  the  holy place  on a sabbath holy day
The gold  monstrance passing  in  procession  slow :
A whole  people  worship  God  the  Lord  in  this way.

Then like a Shroud the Stillness came  down  over me ... The  priest,  alas! never  returned to me to bless;
Full  before  the light  I could  no longer  see, And  I saw myself dying  in my own distress.

On my evening  shores the sea no longer sang, Alone, I died  in my great  sorrow  and  pain.
Was there  ever so great  a grief in course of time? Death, with  his black flag, covered  my coffin again.

* 	* 	*
While  seeing  them  leave, however,  as you recall
In  one last look the supreme comfort  for  my grief, They  spoke to me softly, "We  shall  be faithful". Love is more  powerful  in his ways than  death.

Already  I foresee under  a flaming  sky
Their bands  return from  what  lies beyond  human days!
0 miracle  of heaven! Inconceivable joy!
Lord,  may Your  name  be blessed forever  and  always.

MODERN ACADIAN  POETRY

Leonard Forest (1928-	)


JIND I DREJIMED
OF Jl GREJIT BL:21CK SUN

III

the  pope  is dead the  king is dead
the  school  master has swallowed  poison. i have  no more  king
nor  master
nor  holy father to rule over me. the queen  is dead  with  her king
the  pope  is dead  his dogma  as well and  the little  school mistress no longer teaches  anything but  love.
i have  no more  law nor  fear  nor  restraint
i am  punished no more,
ireign


IV

You  know  what  they  have  done. You  know,
Pale, at  the end  of the garden, the bust of Homer. They  have  killed  Homer.

Do you remember at Chartres the  blue  fire of stained-glass, inviolate.
They  have  put  Chartres out

Chartres, Homer,
Phedre

Phedre, you recall,  wept his dainty  grief aloud In evening discussions,  and  his historic  plight Stirred up the  passions of that  infatuated crowd For  his tearful mistress. Phedre is killed tonight.

They  have  killed  Phedre



68

MODERN ACADIAN  POETRY





HYMN TO SPRING
 Ronald Despres (1935-	)


After  deliberating in long whiteness
The  fields decided  not to wait  for Easter
In  order to come alive

The  whip  of fever  lashes the forces of life
The  thickets hurry to burst  their  fallow
The  streams,  to sacrifice  their  sharks  of ice
On  the  greedy  altar of the sun.

That levelling  dirtiness  in the streets
Soils equally  with  muddy  streams
A poodle's  fastidious paws
And  the already filthy slums!


I HJIVE LOVED YOU

I have  loved  you
For  your  simple  manner of nibbling  small  clouds
Of those small drops  of sunshine  at the nape  of your neck, Those  ripples  of sap, from  you
Or  from  maples  aflame

I have  loved  you
Because of my hut  you bartered for  a castle
And  furnished with  joy
Decorating our  bare  walls and  marrow

I have  loved you
As bones  cling  to flesh
As oceans  to a seaman
And  like the gentle  sails of vanished  ones,
Replete with  the velvet of the waves.


I THOUGHT OF YOU JILL DJIY

I thought of you all day

You  were  there,  hiding  behind  every moment's dune
You were behind  every door
And  all doors  stood  wide open
To  the  theatre of the four  winds

6g

MODERN ACADIAN   POETRY

I saw your brow, your lips, your hair, Adorning  the face of every passer-by That I noticed;
I saw your footsteps in every crowd
Your hands in every prayer
And your voice in the flow of words.

I cried out for you to give an answer, to smile at me
To  tap me on the shoulder
But every time
You vanished  from the reach of my voice
To  be reborn elsewhere.

My day has taken root in you
Like a tree springing  from nowhere
And see how its strange sap
Dulls the memory
That twilight  brings to life in me.





SILENT  SJIP

I am going to show you horrible sepulchres
in the crannies  of your laugh

I am going to make you tread on ferns of hate
in your heart's  flower-bed

By the fingers of our childhood
I shall lead you to our middle ages
And to our  patient  sand-castles
that  have no panic of dungeons and towers.

I shall lead you to a tree
which we shall clasp as high as hope
until our bony stems crack out their wedding song.

And we shall be as one
as long as this long hunt for sap shall last.

MODERN ACADIAN  POETRY

Raymond Leblanc (1945-	)


WINTER

I knocked  on your  door with  my hurt  hand
Winter having come in the human dark

I knocked on your  door with  my two hands
One  already frozen  and  red from  the  white  crystal
On  which  the  moon  had  lain  down

I knocked on your door with  the wind of my mouth
But  the  wind  got caught  on a cloud  of ice

I knocked on  your  door  with  the  beams  of my eyes
But  these were glued  to the cold wood

I knocked  on your  door with  the silence of my body
Straight as a tree
But  the  leaves at  the end  of the  branches were  slain

I knocked  on your door and  I understood too late
That there  was  no one at  home

And  the door  nailed  me to death with  its frozen  stillness






LJIND-CRY

I live in a land-cry with roots of fire
Buried  beneath the stones of loneliness

I have  slowly plowed  the dreadful kelp
In  a bitter  season of rain
As if to slake  the  thirst  in a crab's  heart

A phantom ship  I have  risen to the  river's  surface
Toward the  fulness  of human tides
And  I have  thrown the crowd  to the  promises  of the  future

Tomorrow
We shall  live as secret  planets
With  slow anger and  the  upright wisdom  of dreams

MODERN ACADIAN  POETRY

I live in  a land-cry above  hopes
Loosened on every lip
Already moored  to the  sunlight on  glowing  trawlers

And  every  word  abolishes  the  hard  lie
The shameful caverns  of our  silence


JICJIDIJI

If it is hard  for me to live in you with  my shifting sky-line People  of my land  unreal  through lack of frontiers and  futures It is because  I am  too small  to have  you reborn  in me
Faceless  men  breastless  women
Tongueless children

If it is sad for  me to reach  out  my two hands  to you
To  rejoin  you to touch  you wherever  you may be
It is because  you are  too distant and  scattered everywhere
People  of my land  who lack  your true  identities

If it is impossible  for  me at  this time  to dance  with  you
To  the  jigging rhythm of your folk-songs
People  of my land  do not  be angry
I dream of your  illusions and  your stifling dreams

If it is agony  for  me to look you straight  in the  eye
While  the  dial  of a misplaced  sun  divides  the  day
It is because  Acadia cradles  you in her memories
In  her  ghosts in her  night  an  unreal  symphony

People  of my land Without identity And  without life.





Hermenegilde Chiasson (r946-	)

Between the Season of Extravagant  Love and the Season of Raspberries


You  went  away  opening cracks  in  the April  ice that  melted  so fast, without noticing the  spring  as it hastened to come  that year  with  a moist  March wind  sticking  the leaves to their  trees.

72

MODERN ACADIAN   POETRY

And  you went  away  so fast  that  a part  of me  was exiled  with  you; went   away   by  roads   among   water   puddles,  mud-holes,  gaping wounds  in asphalt bleeding  dirty  water  over  our  white  clothes.

And  I asked  myself whether I would  end  by crossing  the  pale  grass of burnt-over clearings  and  the  fresh  water  of  thaws  in  the  voyage I took  without a  return ticket  to  go  see  a  garden  of  untroubled flowers.

There were  cabbages  growing  nearby,  and  they sent  me a  bunch  of salad.  Dusk  fell  and   cars  plunged   into  the  darkness  with  all  the racket  of refugees  gaining  a frontier.

I closed the garden-door again.  A bouquet of Everlastings had  been put  on  the  table.  I reopened  the  door  of the  house  and  outside  the raspberries had  begun  to get  ripe.




JILL THE KINGS HORSES

All the  king's  horses are  dead  together, my love
All the  king's  horses  are  dead  in  the  blue  stream
But  from  the  bottom  of my stream,  crushed   beneath  the horses  bodies  I got  up and  marched, carrying the  harness
of my dead  horse.

All the  king's  horses are  dead  together  my love  in  the  big blue  stream. But  there  was no longer  a king  to own  the streams.  Kings  had  forgotten that  they were kings,  they had forgotten that  they were alone, and  that  without love they  were going  to die with  their  horses that  had  fallen asleep  to wake again  no more. That, I believe,  was yesterday.

All the king's  horses are dead  and  we are  dead  too. We have slipped  in  the water  on the cold soft hair  of stretched and  gutted black  horses bleeding  red  in  the blue  of the stream.











73

MODERN ACADIAN POETRY

Guy Arsenault (1954:-	)


TO CELEBRJITE SEPTEMBER

A garden  ripened
from a summer  without spring
and  without  autumn

I see again  and again
the fishermen  return  from the sea
I drink  again  and  again
from  their  toil-wearied  hands
of earth-solitude
I drink  again and again out of their faint
and faded  eyes
of a peace reflected from the sea
I drink  again  and again their poetry

A summer  ripened
from  a garden  without flowers a summer  ripened
from a garden  without fruit

I have hurried
I display
my colour changes
I gather  in my fruits
from  my summer  garden
I put  a damper  on time
I shorten  my days
I have hurried

And  the colour and  the freshness and  the frost
of September  weather give us a warning:
it's there  in the air
it's there in the weather
it's  there  in the earth it's there  in the sea Red!!
... the  wild Summer
of an October  revolution!



74



THE WHJIRF

wooden planks nailed tarred
salted
worn by the age of the sea

sunshine
spangled  rippling crinkling movement
of calm water in Buctouche bay

and the cold sea wind got to him
and made him feel deeply

the shadow on the ground of a sea-gull in the sun
the cry of a poet sitting
on the planks of the harbour
in Buctouche  bay

salt of soil sea-wind
sea-gull sunlight
i embrace  you

and  the grass-blades growing out of the tarred planks of the wharf
let  themselves be caressed by the sea-breeze
 MODERN ACADIAN  POETRY


and  the blue sky has only
a few traces of clouds on the horizon

the sea is content  with it and  shows it
and  the poet
sitting on the tarred
planks of the wharf embodies everything






75

ISLAND WRITERS



Frances M. Frazer




No ONE, to my knowledge, talks of the lit..,ature of  Burn­ aby or the literature of Mississauga, and if population alone were considered, "the  literature  of Prince  Edward  Island" would  be an equally  improbable  topic. But
in the Island's case, history and geography also have a bearing. By Canadian standards P.E.I.  has a lot of eventful history. And its natural isolation has given its people a strong feeling of communal  identity and a desire, if not the means, for independence.  When storms shut down air and ferry services, these late and reluc­ tant  converts to Confederation say, "The mainland  is cut off again," with  only half a smile.
History and geography have combined to encourage literary endeavours  on the Island  throughout the past one hundred  and twenty-five years. Most of these en­ deavours  probably deserved the obscurity they swiftly found everywhere except in fond family circles, but a few merited more attention  than they have ever received from "the mainland". And in addition to giving pleasure in themselves, they might have modified and  thus helped to reconcile the heterogeneous impressions made by P.E.I.'s strange  trio of fictional successes-the three legendary  Island  figures known  off as well as on their  native soil-Bud  the Spud,  Glooscap  the  demi­ god,  and  Anne  of  Green  Gables.  Viewed  without  a  common  backdrop,   these three look as incongruous as shoes and ships and sealing-wax. But in fact each of them  is a valid  development  of one of the three dominant  strains  co-existing in Island literature: rowdy parochialism,  folklore, and romance.
Of  the  three,  romance  has fared  best beyond  P.E.I.'s shores simply  because Lucy Maud  Montgomery  was and  continues to be the most solidly-talented  pro­ lific writer  the  Island  has  produced.  Her  books are  virtually  synonymous  with the  province's literature to non-Islanders,  and  the impression she tends to leave, despite all the realistic qualifications  a rereading  of her books must reveal, is of a romantic  garden  province peopled chiefly by the conservative descendants of old­ country  clans,  steeped  in  caste,  class,  and   family  traditions   and   proprieties. Stompin'  Tom  Connors  of Skinner's  Pond,  with  his rake-cum-rustic  air  and  his raucous,  rhythmic  ballads, is an egregious figure against her gentle orchard  and garden  landscapes,  though  he is an  authentic  and  popular  son of  the  country-

ISLAND WRITERS

music-loving  Island,   as  was  his  predecessor,  the  composer  folk-singer  Larry Gorman.  Nor does Avonlea seem a likely evolutionary development  from Minegoo (the Island), the primeval  paradise of Micmac folklore, the last and best creation of the Great  Spirit and  a favourite  haunt  of Glooscap even after  its decline from Eden-like  tranquillity.   Historically,  the  Micmacs  got  their   tales  told  first,  of course, but they were little known  to white men, except missionaries and  anthro­ pologists, until the Islander  Cyrus MacMillan  made them accessible in Canadian Wonder   Tales  (1918)   and  Canadian  Fairy Tales  (1922). By that  time,  the Prince Edward  Island of Montgomery's first Anne books was firmly entrenched  in the popular  imagination.
This is not to say that any one of the three disparate legends seriously misrepre­ sents  P.E.I.  The  northeastern parts  of North  America,  where  Algonquin  tribes like the Micmacs once roamed  and struggled to survive, still include some rugged terrain -inhospitable  woodlands  and  harsh,  rocky shores  where  it  is easy  to picture forlorn Indians squatting around  capricious fires and dreaming of a semi­ divine  chieftain  who  would  do  unequal  battle  for  them  with  the  invading  ice giant,  King  Winter.  On  the  wilder shores of Prince  Edward   Island  and  in  its thornier  thickets, it is more  natural to imagine Glooscap's  moccasin  prints  than the traces of Montgomery's dreamy super-civilized lovers out for an evening stroll. A country walker in the Island's November or April gales is more likely to envision the coldly mischievous Micmac  Badger than  pensive, beautiful  Kilmeny  of the Orchard as he fights a  north  wind over treacherous  red  mud.  Jacques  Cartier  waxed poetic when he came upon the Island coast in July 1534:  "Al the said land is lowe and  plaine and  the fairest  that  may possibly be seene, full of goodly me­ dowes and trees" (Hakluyt's translation). But he did not linger, and  the gifts he left for a shy Micmac he saw pelting away from the beach were perceptively prac­ tical-a woollen scarf and a knife.
For  all their  comparative  sophistication,  the  Island's  folk songs  and  country songs are perhaps closer to the Micmac tradition  than  they are to Montgomery's novel-chronicles, because they too reflect hard lives sustained  by brute  effort in a physically and  morally  demanding clime. Bud the Spud's  "good  red mud" can produce superior potatoes, but it takes its toll of potato-growers,  as do the middle­ men of "Upper Canada". Until  very recently, the  Island's  population  was pre­ eminently a population  of fishermen and farmers. Wresting a living from soil and sea was not conducive of delicate niceties, literary or otherwise. Before the advent of cars and TV,  foot-stomping  bam  dances and  marathon  drinking  sprees were the  favoured  relaxations  from  drudgery  of hard-working  men.  They  also liked pungent stories-"true" stories about  their neighbours, other  communities'  cele­ brities, and  the more  colourful  figures and  episodes of  the  Island's  past-and tales of sheer fantasy boldly asserted, about spectrally guarded  pirate  treasures and vengeful ghosts of the murdered.  Many of these tales are  extant  in the  battered

77

ISLAND WRITERS

remnants  of limited editions -editions of memoirs and reminiscences, collections of reprinted  newspaper  features,  community histories of particular locales. A few are  allusively treated  in  Milton  Acorn's  most recent  book of verse, The  Island Means Minago: Poems  from Prince  Edward  Island  ( 1975). And a large number are gaining new currency in Square Deal Publications paperbacks published by an indefatigable  writer,  publisher,  and  professor of political science, Reshard  Gool, assisted by his artist wife, Hilda  Woolnough. Square  Deal books such as Christo­ pher Gledhill's Folk Songs of Prince Edward  Island  ( 1973; revised edition 1975), Sterling Ramsay's  Folklore  Prince  Edward  Island  ( 1973), and ex-Premier  Walter Shaw's Tell  Me  the  Tales   ( 1975)  are among the new  repositories of Island  his­ tory, folklore, and folk humour. None of the current crop is likely to make waves beyond the Northumberland Straits,  but their  popularity  at  home indicates  that they make palpable  hits on Island  memories and sensibilities.


BuT LUCY MAUD  MONTGOMERY's vision of the Island also has validity. The  huge  handsome  old frame  houses of Charlottetown,  Summerside, Georgetown,  and  Montague are  imposing  memorials  to  the  large  middle-class
families of the nineteenth  century  that she depicts so effectively in scenes of ritual clan gatherings. The  wildfire rumours  whose paths she traces through  the gossip­ filled air are still credible while P.E.I.'s population  remains sufficiently small and stable for everyone to know, if not everyone else, at least everyone else's brother or aunt.  Despite the recently fashionable  complaints about  anonymity  in P.E.I.'s  large new district schools, modem  replacements of the old  one-room  schools that Montgomery's  characters  attended, there are still grounds for  the saying that  if you sneeze in Tignish someone in Souris will send you a  handkerchief.
Moreover, Montgomery's novels are studded  with vignettes and anecdotes from actual  domestic histories of the Island. Though  her publishing  years began with this century, her typical ambience  is the late nineteenth  century,  and  many of the tales within her tales evoke earlier, more rigorous Island  times. In  Emily  of New Moon, for instance, a novel that  probably reflects more of young Lucy Maud than any  of the  A nne  books, Emily  is bequeathed  with  two  of  Montgomery's  own ancestresses. The "Mary Murray" of the book is Montgomery's great-great-grand­ mother,  Mrs. Hugh  Montgomery. En route to Quebec with her husband  in 1769, Mrs. Montgomery  was acutely seasick and gratefully accepted the opportunity  to visit dry land  when  the ship  paused  at  P.E.I.  for  fresh water.  According  to the Montgomery family,

... when she felt that  blessed dry land  under her feet once more, she told her husband that she meant to stay there. Never again would she set foot in any vessel. Expostulation, entreaty, argument, all availed nothing. There  the poor lady was

ISLAND WRITERS

resolved to stay, and  there, perforce, her husband had to stay with  her. So the
Montgomerys came to Prince Edward Island.

(L. M. Montgomery, The  Alpine  Path)

The  only fictional embellishment  upon  this story in  Emily  of New  Moon is the captive  husband's wry revenge. When,  after  a long and  useful life, his stubborn lady died, he had her tombstone inscribed "Here  I Stay", thus innocently  rousing neighbourhood doubts  about  his belief in  the Resurrection  or  his wife's state  of grace.
On  her  mother's  side of the family,  L. M.  Montgomery  had  another  strong­
willed antecedent   (also given to Emily) , Eliza Townshend,  who came  to P.E.I. as a bride in  I 775 to settle on land granted  her husband's  family by George III. Mrs.  Townshend   took  one  horrified  look  at  colonial  life  on  the  Island   and demanded  to be taken home. Her demand  was repeated for weeks before she con­ ceded defeat and at last deigned to take off her hat.
While  Eliza Townshend  was pacing the floor of her despised new home  with her bonnet on, the oldest piece of Island writing now extant was being composed. Benjamin  Chappell,  a  close friend  and  disciple of John  Wesley, emigrated   to Prince  Edward  Island  in  I 774· Soon after  his arrival  he began  to keep a  diary which, though  it has no literary pretensions, has proved very valuable  as a reliable day-to-day account  of pioneer life and a topical record of events during  an excit­ ing period of Island history. (A dramatized  version written  by Harry Baglole and Ron  Irving  for the Charlottetown Confederation  Centre  Theatre  Company  was produced successfully in Charlottetown and on a provincial tour in  I974,  but has not yet been printed.)
When  Chappell  began  to keep his journal,  the  population  of the  Island  wa<> ahnost entirely new, all but a handful of the original Acadian settlers having been deported  by the British after the fall of Louisbourg in July 1758. In  1763 George III  demonstrated his control  over  Ile St. Jean   (thence  the  island  of  St.  John until  I 799, when its present name was assigned)  by annexing  it to Nova Scotia. Soon thereafter  the Island was surveyed by Captain  Samuel Holland  and  divided into sixty-seven townships of 2o,ooo acres each. In  I 767 these townships or "lots" (a term still current  on the Island)   were distributed  by lottery  among  the King and his approved  petitioners for land grants. Grantees undertook  to pay quitrents on their lots for the Island's  administrative  needs, to encourage the establishment of fisheries, and  to settle their land  within  ten years with at least one  European Protestant  to every two hundred  acres. These commitments  were more honoured in the breach  than  in the observance. A few proprietors actively promoted  Island settlement,  but  most were content  to do nothing  but  collect trans-Atlantic  rents. By May  of  I774,  there  were still only  I,2I5 residents, according  to  Governor Walter  Patterson's  estimate. And  this tiny population  was soon to face a serious

79

ISLAND  WRITERS

menace from the south  as the American Revolution  gathered  momentum. In  the event, apart from occasional shore raids by privateers, the only serious incident occurred on November I 7, I 775, when two American schooners, flouting General Washington's  explicit orders not to molest Canadians  uninvolved  in the war, in­ vaded  Charlottetown Harbour. Led by the two captains,  a landing  party  looted storehouses,  offices, and  private  residences and  carried  off  the  Island's  acting Governor  and  the Surveyor-General.  In the chronicles of war it  was a small epi­ sode, but it added  real terror of foreign invasion to the Islanders' substantial  con­ cern about  economics, concern  augmented  by the arrival  of needy Loyalist fugi­ tives from the American  states.
All things  considered,  in  the  late eighteenth  century  the  Island  had  too few people, and  those people had  too much  on their  hands, for artistic  composition with any staying power to be likdy. And in fact, except for newspaper  ephemera (some thirty newspapers were published on the Island for varying periods between
I 787 and  I867), there does not seem to have been much writing for publication until the mid-nineteenth century, when the major influxes of Loyalist and Old Country immigrants  were settled and the population  had stabilized.




l:E FIRST ISLAND AUTHORS, most of them immigrants, whose works survive  tended  to  be  rather  self-conscious about  celebrating  their  indis­ putably beautiful  but-certainly by European standards-raw new home. They were inclined to use its natural attractions  chiefly as springboards  for  expressions of religious or philosophical truisins. The  Reverend  Louis C. Jenkins, for instance (like Mrs. Hugh  Montgomery  an inadvertent  settler), describes the Indian  sum­ mer scenes along  "Fair Hillsborough's  flood" -the  Hillsborough  is actually  a modestly proportioned arm  of the sea-to introduce  the reflection-

But ah! how fleeting is the scene I view, How like the  sum of man's  existence,  too! Soon  will the dark  and  rolling  clouds  arise, And  howling  storms  obscure  the sunny  skies. The short-lived honours  of these faded  trees Must soon  be scatter'd by the wintry  breeze, The placid  flood bv tempests  wildly  tost,
Wail  o'er  its transient beauties  marr'd and  lost!
'Tis thus  with  Man,  his glories pass away Like  the  short  triumph of a summer's day; The autumn of his life, serene  yet brief, Recals  the  image  of the fading leaf,
The wintry  clouds  involve  him  in the  gloom
That shrouds his entrance to the  lonely tomb:-

8o

ISLAND WRITERS

Yet faith in Christ  shall triumph  o'er decay, And radiant  Hope point out a brighter day....

("An  Indian  Summer's Day in Abegweet"-publi hed

Elizabeth Newell  Lockerby, a  first-generation Islander,  uses  dramatic  events from  local  history  in a similar way. In  "George and  Amanda", a long  narrative poem  in her first published book, The  Wild  Brier; or Lays of an Untaught  Min­ strel ( I 866), she gives a powerful description  of the "Yankee Gale" of  October 3 and  4,  I85I, an  abrupt, catastrophic storm  that  struck  the  north shore of P.E.I. destroying  more than  seventy  vessels of a New England fishing fleet and  taking  an estimated  I50  lives. The  poet's  heart  is obviously  in  her  detailed, evocative des­ cription of the  storm  and  the  ghastly  shoreline  scenes it  left,  so that  it comes  as something of a shock  when  she  trundles out  her  trite,  pious  conclusion:

But as the day advanced,  the storm decreased, The  wind lulled down, the sea abated,  for
Its awful work of retribution  was Completed; vengeance was appeased, and Sabbath  profanity  fearfully
Chastised;  for that  proud fleet no Sabbath  knew,
But, on the day of sacred rest, pursued Their  daily round  of toil, and  hasted to Be rich:  and  thus temptation  and a snare
Beset, and swift destruction  smote them down.

Of  the  Island's universalizing nineteenth-century poets  whose  work  is extant, John Hunter-Duvar was the most gifted. After an active  public  career  in the army and  as P.E.I.'s Dominion Inspector of Fisheries, he settled  into  comparative retire­ ment  at "Hemewood", his Mill River  estate on the Island. An erudite, witty,  ele­ gantly  whimsical  writer,  Hunter-Duvar long  had  the  distinction of  being  one  of the few Canadian writers  frequently included  in American school anthologies and about   the  only  Prince   Edward  Island   poet  known   to  Canadian   anthologists. Among  his works are the  novel Meluoran  ( I893); a collection  of satirical essays, Annals of the Court of Oberon  ( I8gs); an  historical drama in verse,  De Rober­ val  (I 888)  ; and  a  mock-epic   fantasy,  The  Emigration  of the  Fairies ( I 888)  ; about   a  supposed   emigration  of  fairies  from   Britain   to  Epaygooyat  (Prince Edward Island  under  its Indian name,  which  is usually spelled  Abegweit). The  fairies'  voyage is an arduous one:

Not knowing contrary,  they feared that ever Their  raft might wallow on the restless breast Of cruel ocean, and  that never, never
With life remaining  could they be at rest
Despair came, as to tourists in the Channel,
Who call for death,  and brandy and  hot flannel.

8I

ISLAND WRITERS

But at last they sight land:

A long low line of beach, with crest of trees, With  openings of rich verdure, emerald  hued,
And as the string o' the tide and landward  breeze
Wafted  them  nearer in a thankful  mood
They blessed the land and beach of ruddy brown, And off the shore lay bobbing up and  down.
Now this fair land was EPAYGOOYAT called, An isle of golden grain  and healthful  clime, With  vast fish-teeming waters, ocean-walled , The smallest Province of the Martime.
Up on the beach the Fairies' Raft was cast, And on Canadian land stuck hard and fast.

The fairies  have  reached Hemewood and  an  unselfconsciously  Canadian  poet­
landlord who "charges them  no  rent".
Then there  was the  Reverend Maurice Swabey,  a poet  of smaller,  less flexible talent  than  Hunter-Duvar, but  one  who  could  also  proclaim  the  Island's  attrac­ tions  without apparent  diffidence   in  such  outpourings as  "A   Silver  Thaw  in
Abegweet":

... Look forth  to-day! and in your ravish'd breast, Bee all her claims to loveliness confess'd!
Look forth  to-day! the "silver age", again, Hath surely dawned  upon the haunts  of  men. Or, we have pass'd since evening's shadows fell To  fabled isles where fairies only dwell!
(Voices from Abegweet, or The  Home  on the  Wave, 1878)

In  the  same  period, Charles W.  Hall,  son  of  a  Charlottetown-Roston trader, was writing lively, uninhibited prose and  verse about  dramatic episodes  of  Mari­ times  history.  His  works  include Legends of  the  Gulf ( 1970), narrative  poems illustrated by Robert Harris (an   Island  artist  now  best  known  for  his  painting "The Fathers of Confederation"); Twice  Taken: An  Historical  Romance of the Maritime  Provinces ( 1867), a story  about  the fortress of  Louisbourg; and  Adrift in the Ice Fields ( 1877), a fantasy about  a group  of  people floating  around P.E.I. on an  iceberg.
But  on  the  whole,  the  more  serious  Island  poets of the  time  tended to  be coy and  shamefast about their  small  rustic  island  home-or  to ignore  it altogether. Among the  successful  ignorers  was  the  Reverend Cornelius O'Brien, a native  of New  Glasgow,  P.E.I., who  became  the  fourth   Roman Catholic Archbishop of Halifax. His  Aminta  -A Modern   Life  Drama  (  8go), a  pathetic tale  of  "a
soul I Proud, passionless,  with  self-control,  I But  cankered   by  Agnostic  blight"
expresses new-world conservative pieties in old-world  settings.  Except  for the Holy
City,  Archbishop O'Brien has small  use for  Europe, birthplace of  the  scientific

ISLAND WRITER::.

spmt, where  his wretched   male  protagonist Coroman searches  for  a  creed.  For example-
With Hegel, Fichte, and all that crew
Next sought he truth  that should be clear; But German  lore, like German  beer,
Is stomached  only by the few;
It bears the froth of pompous phrase, No ray of reason clews its ways,
To mind and sense a dreary view.

O'Brien's contemporary the  Methodist Reverend Archibald Ross  was similarly non-parochial in his poetry,  though perhaps something of the  Island's atmosphere crept  into  his celebrations of the  virtues  of fresh  air  in  Duty  and  Other  Poems ( 1901). Once, the Reverend Ross assures his slightly incredulous reader, a doctor declared him almost  dead,  whereupon he  jumped  from  his bed and  ran  for miles in the  cold night  air,  achieving a complete  cure. Thereafter-
When  chill or asthma  came in sight, And threatened  to renew the fight, Deep breathing  in the cold, clear air And vigorous travel soon would stare Then  out of countenance  in a time Far speedier than  this sullen rhyme.
("Fifty-four")

Generally speaking, then,  there  was some  reason  for  John  Lepage, the  nine­ teenth-century "Poet Laureate of P.E.I.", to complain   that  he found  the  instru­ ment  of Island  poesy hanging dusty from  disuse. And  Lepage  himself was most at ease in light-verse  accounts of comic local episodes, though  he also tried  to do the Island  serious poetic  justice:
My native Isle! fit subject for the lays
Of sweeter minstrel, still the prompting  power Which led me simply to attempt  thy praise Shall sweetly prompt  me to my latest hour;
For bound to thee by nature's  tender ties,
To thee I feel my warmest wish must flow. Thy verdant  fields, thy placid summer skies, Thy loaded autumns,  and thy winter's snow­
All nearest to my thought,  if reason reigns,
Must ever prompt  the song, while love of song remains.
(The  Island Minstrel,  I86o)

Lucy  Maud Montgomery also felt  the  "prompting power" and  succumbed to it in the contents of The  Watchman and Other Poems ( 1916), a volume  that  proves how right she was to specialize in prose.
Few of the early  Island  writers  attempted substantial prose fiction.  Apart from

ISLAND WRITERS

Montgomery's,  the only Island  novel now easily accessible is Elizabeth  Stuart MacLeod's  loose collection of barely motivated  melodramatic unlikelihoods  mis­ leadingly entitled  Donalda, a Scottish-Canadian Story  ( 1905). The  heroine, pur­ suing  her  riches-to-rags-to-riches  career  in Scotland  and,  fleetingly, in  Canada, barely  pauses in  Prince  Edward   Island  to  try simple  bucolic  pleasures  before plunging into the more congenial  delights of Ottawa's high life. Her  happy end­ ing is in Scotland. There  she is last seen reading a letter from her mother,  once a beautiful  irresponsible  adulteress,  then  the  unrecognized  nurse of her  wounded son, and  finally a  penitent  and  saintly ministrant  to  ailing  Micmacs.  Since  the entire production  is almost completely arbitrary,  there is a perverse consistency in the peroration  to P.E.I. near  its conclusion:
... from that speck upon the ocean, that smallest of all the provinces of Canada, some have gone forth to sacrifice young life in upholding the Empire's glory; while such as the sublime philosopher and soulful poet-archbishop O'Brien; the scholarly university president,  Schurman;   the  gifted  statesman,  Sir  L.  H.  Davies:   the upright-minded ex-Governor Laird, and others, have made their mark, amid the world's ablest competitors, afar beyond the island of their birth.

L. M.  MONTGOMERY  has perhaps one rival for top honours as P.E.I.'s most successful writer  of fiction in an expatriate  novelist, the  Reverend Basil King  (it  used to be said  that  the Island's  principal  exports  were potatoes,
professors, and  politicians -to which list might  be added  preachers) . A native of Charlottetown, King left the Maritimes in early manhood  to become rector of Christ  Church,   Cambridge,  Massachusetts.  Except  for  a  ten-year  interlude  in Europe,  he spent  the  rest of his life in Massachusetts, and  the  numerous  novels among  his thirty-two  books are Dreiser-like portrayals of American  urban  life in the  early  twentieth  century.  They  include  Let  Not  Man   Put  Asunder   (1901), The Inner   Shrine   (1908), The   Side  of the  Angels   (1916), The  Lifted   Veil (1917), The   City   of Comrades (1919), The  Empty Sack   (1921),  The  Dust Flower  (1922), The Happy Isles  (1923), and  The  High  Forfeit  (1925).
Whether  or not  P.E.I. could legitimately claim him as an "Island  author", or
would want to, King  was an interesting and  not inconsiderable  novelist. A strict yet subtle and compassionate  moralist, he was both attracted and  repelled by glamorous, sophisticated  sinners of wealth sufficient to preclude economic excuses for their  departures from grace.  His typical hero is a kind  but  uncompromising Puritan, cast among socialites gone luxuriantly  astray, and  tempted  to a point at which his moral  victories over himself are hard-won  and  uncomplacent.  But for all his three-dimensional  credibility and his often strong, compelling plots, King's work has dated  as pervasively as Gerald  DuMaurier's and  Warwick  Deeping's, both  of which it resembles-dated as Montgomery's  less pretentious  fiction has

ISLAND WRITERS

not. Canadian or American,  he is largely forgotten,  though  he enjoyed  notable popularity  in his day.
In the early twentieth  century  three multiply-talented  Islanders,  Robert  Harris (born  in Wales but  an  Islander  from the age of seven),  Sir Andrew  MacPhail, and  Edgar  W. Mcinnis,  made some noteworthy  contributions  to literature. The artist Harris  wrote slight but  engaging occasional verse which was collected  and published by his family under the title Verses by the Way  in  I920,  the year after his death. His prose anecdote "A Surveying Experience in Prince Edward  Island", relating an uncomfortable encounter  with squatters  armed  to stop  a landowner's survey, is a lively bit of storytelling as well as a vivid record of a typical nineteenth­ century  Island episode.  ("A  Surveying Experience",  first told to members  of the Montreal  Pen and  Pencil Club, is reprinted  in Allan Graham's Island  Prose and Poetry:  An  Anthology   ( I973)   and  in  Moncrieff   Williamson's  Robert   Harris
1849-1919:   An  Unconventional  Biography   ( I970) .)   Sir  Andrew   MacPhail, o.B.E., physician, surgeon,  and teacher as well as writer, received the  I930  Lome Pierce  medal  for service  to  Canadian literature.  His  non-fiction  works  include Essays in Puritanism  ( 1905), Essays in Politics ( I909), Essays in Fallacy ( I9 I 2), and The Bible in Scotland  ( I93I). In  Igi6 he published The  Book of Sorrow, a collection of his own hymns and  poems on death, and in I 92 Ihe completed  an English  translation   of  Maria  Chapdelaine.  But  he  is probably  best  known  to readers for The  Masters Wife  ( I939), a realistic portrayal  of rural  life in P.E.I. in the late nineteenth  century,  based on the experiences of his mother,  Catherine Moore Smith  MacPhail.  Edgar  Mcinnis,  Rhodes Scholar,  professor of history at the  University  of Toronto and  later  at  York University  (where  he  received  a D.Lit. in I972), began his writing career with two volumes of poetry, Poems  from the Front ( I9I8) and The  Road to Arras ( I920). Subsequently  he was awarded two Governor General's Awards for academic non-fiction for his The  Unguarded Frontier ( I942)  and The  War  ( I940-46), a six-volume history of World War  II.
Apart  from  L. M. Montgomery's  continuing  stream  of fiction  (the  last of her
books published in her lifetime appeared  in  I939), little creative  literature seems to have been written by Islanders from  I920 until very recent times. Cyrus Mac­ Millan did his adaptations of Micmac tales at the beginning of the period. They have  since  been  collected  and   reprinted   in  a  handsome   volume,  Glooskap's Country  and Other  Indian  Tales  ( I967)   by Oxford  University  Press. Another expatriate Island ecclesiastic, the Roman Catholic Bishop Francis Clement Kelley, wrote some fourteen  books of religious  philosophy,  autobiography, and  fiction (for example the novel Pack Rat:  A Metaphoric  Fantasy ( I 942) ) , but like Basil King's, his fiction is set in his adopted homeland. His younger sister, Lucy Gert­ rude  (Kelley)  Clarkin, wrote conventional but lucid and  touching  verse, some of which is extant in her privately published Way  of Dreams ( I920)  and in Reshard Gool's Three  Women Poets of P.E.I.  (I973)·

Bs

ISLAND WRITERS

What  poetry  there  was tended  toward  sombreness and  even  gloom.  Mcinnis wrote of war, MacPhail wrote of mortality, and  Mrs. Clarkin was understandably preoccupied  by the early deaths  of three of her children. But P.E.I.  also had  its own Edgar  Guest in the person of John  Lamont-Campbell, the self-styled "John of the Lilacs", author  of Golden  Moments  Coined in the Mint  of Time   ( 1947). A relentlessly rhythmic  celebrant  of such safe ideals as beauty,  duty,  home  and country,  and  mother  love,  he  does  not  provide  much  deliberate  humour.  His closest approach to  the  uncelestial  is his prose dictum,  "Very  few,  if  any,  will suffer from housemaid's  knee through  praying to the Almighty God."  But he can be inadvertently funny:
Crowned by that God above, With glory in her hair
Genetic wonder of His choice -
0 woman! wondrous fair.
And  for  all  his lyrical  unction,  Lamont-Campbell had  a  worldly streak  that  is evident  in one of his "Gems  of Thought": "There are many  ways of acquiring wealth: the most beautiful is by turning an inkwell into a gold mine."  He did not achieve the metamorphosis, but he did make his name in P.E.I.  by the simple but arduous  method  of hawking  his book at almost every Island  door.
More  recently,  two  centenaries-of  the  Confederation   Convention  in  I 864
and  P.E.I.'s entry  into  Confederation  in  I873 -sparked a  new  explosion  of
Island writing. Histories of the Island appeared  in rapid succession: Lome C. Callbeck's The  Cradle of Confederation  (I 964),  J. Henri  Blanchard's The  Aca­
dians of Prince Edward  Island  ( I964), Francis  W. P.  Bolger's Prince Edward Island and Confederation, 1863-1873  ( I964)  and  his historical anthology Cana­ da's Smallest  Province  ( I973). (Dr.  Bolger has also written  a  well-documented edition of L. M. Montgomery's girlhood letters, The Years Before ((Anne"  [ I974L  published  by  the  P.E.I.   Heritage   Foundation.)   Moncrief! Williamson's  highly readable  biography  of Robert  Harris  (McClelland and  Stewart,  I 970)   was a timely addition  to this historical group.
Besides Canada's  Smallest  Province, the Prince  Edward  Island  I973  Centen­
nial Committee  has sponsored some publications of creative writing, including Variations  on a Gulf Breeze  (I973), a collection of contemporary  P.E.I.  verse and short prose pieces, and Allan Graham's Island Prose and Poetry, an anthology in which many  of the writers mentioned  here are represented, as well as a hand­ ful of Island  writers in Gaelic and  French  who are not dealt with in this article.
In  the  meantime,  the  Island-born   poet  Milton  Acorn  has  been  winning  na­
tional recognition  with his gift for a telling phrase and his bent toward  truculent political  punditry.   I've  Tasted   My   Blood  ( I969), his  sixth  book,  made  him known across the country, and The  Island Means Minago has now securely identi­ fied his Island  roots.

86

ISLAND WRITERS

And  then  there  are  the  continuous  activities  of  Square   Deal   Publications, already mentioned. Almost from  his arrival on the Island  in  rg6g,  Reshard  Gool has been encouraging,  bullying, and cajoling books out of people for his imprint. Ironically,  in  view of  the  number  of  Islanders  who  have  found  their  literary voices abroad,  his best contemporary  authors  to date tend to be "from  away",  in the  vernacular.  He  himself belongs to this group  by virtue  of a  promising  first novel, The  Price of Admission  ( 1973)  and  a collection of vivid, sensuous, emo­ tional poems, In Medusa's  Eye  ( 197 2). So does ex-Ontarian John  Smith,  whose poetry  in Winter  in Paradise (Square  Deal, 1972)  testifies to the  high standard that  talent  honed  during  a  hard  self-imposed apprenticeship can  achieve.  And so does Tom  Gallant,  a  native  of New Brunswick, who  touched  down  on  the Island  for  a few years and  there  wrote  a stark,  strained  but  powerful  drama, Amadee  Doucette & Son  (Square Deal, 1972).
To be fair, a few of Professor Gool's Islander proteges wield persuasive pens­
for instance, such poets as Frank  Ledwell and  Jim  Hornby.  But  a fair  number appear  to have rushed into print, given a kindly and optimistic publisher.  Whether or not  any of them  will mature  and  blossom after such early  hot-house  forcing remains to be seen. For the moment,  Lucy Maud  Montgomery,  veteran  of  rigor­ ous self-training and  a barrage  of rejection slips, continues to dominate the field among Island  authors  past and  present.





IN THE IDEJIL WORLD
 


Christopher Levenson


of architects
we are surrounded by
corners and corridors, spaces that  'lead the eye'
astray, where wood creates
'intimacy' and under ceilings
whose every stress is plotted
'students and faculty naturally converge' on a human scale
or saunter, informal, scarved, under the blueprint trees
at the edge of vistas that extend, landscaped, into infinities
where we must learn to live in all our humane chaos.

LITERARY JOURNALISM BEFORE CONFEDERATION




George L. Parker





I once asked a Nova Scotian why his country  was destitute  of poets. "Poets!" he  exclaimed,  laughingly, "don't   talk  of  them  here,  they are exotics that our country does not produce;  the 'almighty dollar' is our  'immortal bard;' he is the Apollo of our  mountains,  lakes, and rivers, 'the  wandering minstrel with the golden harp.' "

Reported  by Andrew Spedon  in his
Rambles  Among  the Blue-Noses  ( 1863), p. 2?_7·





Ls Bluenosds  ironic answcr reveals the P"'adoxes  that confront anyone  who examines the Maritime literary  milieu before Confederation. For instance, much  literary  publishing consisted of sermons on infant baptism, and political  pamphlets on  boundaries and  federations, as well as some  histories and textbooks.  Were poetry,  fiction,  and  belles lettres neglected,  then?  If we remember that  literary  landmarks such  as Haliburton's Clockmaker  ( I836) first appeared in the  newspapers, we shall  discover  that  the  periodicals  are  the  proper  starting point  for discussing  what  is in fact  an  abundant quantity of imaginative writing. The  story  of the  literary  newspapers and  magazines  is now  relatively  unknown/ yet the genres,  the  preoccupations, and  the cultural trends  we find in them  reflect a far more  complex  intellectual climate  than  we have hitherto acknowledged.
The  first magazine in  this country was The  Nova-Scotia  Magazine  and Com­
prehensive Review  of Literature, Politics, and News  (July    I 789- March I 792), a monthly printed and  published in Halifax  by John  Howe.  It was edited first by the  Rev.  William   Cochran, who  left  to  become  the  first  President  of   King's  College,  Windsor, and  then  by Howe  himself. While  it had  a warm  reception  in its first year  ( 267  subscribers, many  of them  Loyalist  emigrants),  the  magazine was probably discontinued for lack of support. Apart  from several essays, speeches, and  a group  of poems,  its contents were composed  of reprinted  "selections".

88

LITERARY JOURNALISM

Several  attempts  to  begin  magazines  before the  I 82o's  came  to  nothing.  By that  decade,  however, some communities  had  been settled for over three genera­ tions, and there had been a brief, heady taste of prosperity during  the Napoleonic Wars.  Local schools and  private  subscription-libraries  had  sprung  up,  and  the first Mechanics'  Institute  opened  in Halifax  in  I 83 I. Two  other  factors  explain the flow of magazines, literary and denominational, after  I826.
For one thing, a group of influential British magazines, among them The  Edin­
burgh Review  ( I 802), The  Quarterly Review  ( I Bog), and  Blackwood's M aga­ zine ( I 8 I 7),  had each helped alter literary and  political journalism at  home and in the colonies. These magazines were devoured in the  Maritimes,  and selections from  them  constantly  appeared  in colonial  newspapers  and  magazines.  Within the  Maritimes,  too, a new style of newspaper  journalism  had  evolved under  the guidance  of Anthony  Henry  Holland.  His reform Acadian  Recorder (est.  I 8 I 3) publicized  political and  social issues, and  encouraged  readers  to discuss them  in his columns. Between  I 8 I g and  I 82 3, for example,  John  Young  ("Agricola"), Thomas  McCulloch,  and  [Mr.]   Irving  set  standards  for  Maritime  prose rarely surpassed by subsequent  journals.
The  Acadian Magazine; or Literary Mirror (July  I826- January I828)   was a monthly  printed  and  published  by J. S. Cunabell,  Halifax's  leading  publisher
until the  I 8so's.  Among  their  intentions,  the Proprietors  (not  identified)   hoped to improve the Provincial image in British eyes by advancing  "the  literary stand­ ing of the Country".2  At first, this magazine was successful in attracting original poetry and  prose, and  in his January I827  "Address",  the editor  spoke of gains in subscriptions and  contributions  from all three provinces, and  pointed  out  that this number contained  no selections at all. Yet, by 20 September  I827, "Observa­ tor" in The  Acadian Recorder criticized the magazine for its lack  of  local con­ tributions. Some regular  contributors  were John  Templedon, "Henry" [Clinch?]  of King's College; the literary critics "Peter" and "Paul" and I[rvin]G of Truro; and a group of poets known only by their pen names, "Cecil", "Mandeville", and "E.O."
The  unexplained  demise of The  Acadian Magazine coincided  with the  begin­
ning  of  Joseph   Howe's  fourteen-year   proprietorship   of  The   Novascotian.  It became  the  leading  political  and  literary  journal  of the  I 83o's,  a  reflection  of Howe's wide-ranging  interests. Besides the selections, he printed  book and  theatre reviews, poetry,  fiction,  sketches,  and  essays. Another  newspaper   of  distinctly literary  bias was The  Colonial Bee (I835), edited  and  published  by the  Pictou bookseller, James  Dawson.  The  clergy, teachers,  and  students  of  McCulloch's Academy who contributed  to The  Bee displayed strong scientific and speculative interests. Dawson's son, the geologist and educator John William Dawson, received his early training  in this milieu.
The  Acadian Magazine's successor was The  Halifax Monthly Magazine  (June

Bg

LITERARY JOURNALISM

I 830 -January I 833), also printed  and  published  by Cunabell.  Its  editor  was John  Sparrow  Thompson ( 1795-1867), a literary  jack-of-all-trades and father of a future  Prime  Minister.3  The  magazine's  policy was to offer both selected and original articles, but Thompson  (who became proprietor in October  1832)  several times had to plead for both patronage  and for regular correspondents. While there were fewer  fictions  and  poetry  than  in  The   Acadian   Magazine, there  was­ significantly-a broader  range of essays. This shift may well reflect Thompson's own interests, for  he enthusiastically  printed  the lectures on science  and  history given at  the  new  Mechanics'  Institute.  Very little is known  about  Thompson's competitor, The British  North  American Magazine, and Colonial Journal  (Febru­ ary 1831-?), published  by Edmund  Ward;  it was discontinued  by April 1831.
Unlike  most contemporary Halifax  newspapers, The  Pearl  (3 June  1837- 15
August  I 840)  announced that  it was "Devoted  to Polite Literature,  Science and Religion".  On   28  June   1839,  John   Sparrow  Thompson   succeeded  the  Rev. Thomas  Taylor  as editor,  and  about  the same time Howe purchased  The  Pearl from William Cunnabell "to  help" Thompson.4  Howe paid him a salary of  £45 and  hoped for a profit by 1843;  however, Thompson  reluctantly  had  to discon­ tinue it after one year. An ambitious  paper which carried on Thompson's policies from  The  Halifax Monthly, its  many  original  contributions  are  evidence  that Thompson  could attract  writers but couldn't make the paper  pay. Joseph  Kirk's Nova  Scotia  New  Monthly  Magazine  (February- April  1842)   published  some interesting  original  pieces, but  it  quickly  disappeared.  Thus  concludes  the  most active generation  of  pre-Confederation Nova-Scotian  literary  magazines.
In  New  Brunswick,  similarly,  there  were  many  attempts  in  the  182o's  and
183o's  to  produce  literary  magazines.  Henry  Chubb's   New   Brunswick   Courier (est.  I8II)  and  John   Hooper's  British  Colonist   (est.  1827)   included  literary items. The  Rev.  Alexander   McLeod's  New   Brunswick   Religious   and   Literary Journal  (January 1829- February  1830)  was more religious than  literary  in its contributions. Of the first literary magazine, Patrick Bennett's Saint  fohn Monthly Magazine  (July-December 1836), only one number seems to have survived. Like­ wise, only a few  numbers  survive  of H.  B. Sancton's  New  Brunswick  Literary  Journal  (January-December? 1840), modelled on The  Pearl.
The Amaranth (January 1841 -December  1843), a Saint John  monthly edited and  published  by Robert  Shives, was New Brunswick's first literary  magazine  of both quality  and  duration. Born in Scotland, Shives (c.I815-1879)  was appren­ ticed to Henry  Chubb,  and  remained  in the printing  trade  until  I 866,  when  he was appointed  Emigration  Agent  for  New  Brunswick.5   Though   not  an  author  himself, he gathered  around   him  a  respectable  group  of  Maritime  writers.  In May  I 84 I  he  commented  that  he had  more  than  enough  original  articles;  in April  1842  he  boasted  that  his most  popular  writers  were  being  reprinted   in colonial  and  American   papers.  Shives'  intention   was  to  provide  high-quality

go

LITERARY JOURNALISM

articles in order to raise the cultural  taste of the Province. Furthermore, he hoped The  Amaranth  would counteract  the "levelling" and "anti-British" sentiments  of American magazines now flooding the country. However, there were the usual problems:  whereas I 84 I and  I 842 had a high ratio of original to selected articles, I843  reversed the  proportions,  and  The  Amaranth, unlike  its namesake,  faded away.  Shives attributed its failure  to lack of patronage,  but  James  Hogg  later revealed that several promised articles were lost in the mails and Shives was forced to quit.6 The chief contributors  were Moses Perley, Douglas Huyghue,  William R. M. Burtis, Mrs. F. Beaven, the  poets John  McPherson  and  James  Redfern,  and the lecturer George Blatch.



IN THE EARLY I Bso's two Halifax women attempted to revive the literary magazine.  Mary  E. Herbert  (I832-I872), herself a poet and  fiction writer,  edited  The   Mayflower, or  Ladies'  Acadian   Newspaper    (May   I8SI­ February  I 852), which was printed at The Athenaeum  Office, the home of  many temperance  publications. A spirited and determined young woman,  Mary Herbert  probably wrote much of her magazine's original material.  The  Mayflower  exhib­
ited a new trend in its emphasis on women's interests such as the latest Paris and London  fashions and domestic hints. Phyllis Blakely suggests that  The  Mayflower was discontinued for "lack of financial support and competition  from other periodicals".7    Interestingly  enough,  The  Literary Garland  had  just gone  under because of competition from Harper's.
Mary Jane Katzmann ( I828-I8go) 8  had already started  her magazine,  hoping it would compete with the American  journals. The  Provincial: or Halifax  Monthly Magazine  (January I852-December I853)  was the last and  best-edited literary magazine in Nova Scotia before Confederation.  Its handsome  typography  and  its lively literature  and general articles are a reflection of Miss Katzmann's consider­ able editorial intelligence and  the changed nature of Provincial interests since the I8go's. The  Provincial's contributors  included  Mary  Herbert,  Clotilda  Jennings, Andrew  Shiels, J. E. Hoskins, and  the editor herself. Although she scolded Hali­ burton for not contributing, the magazine's problem was not writers, but a lack of subscribers. James  Bowes, its publisher, paid contributors with  a year's free sub­ scription,  but promised that  when the subscription list reached  I ,ooo, they would be  paid  cash. We  are  still speculating  why  Halifax,  prosperous  and  otherwise cultured,  had  no literary  magazines  between  I853  and  I873.  The  intensive and exhausting political controversies of the day, as evidenced by the vindictiveness of the newspapers, may be part of the explanation.
After The  Amaranth  expired,  a number of Saint John  and  Fredericton  news­
papers carried literary material.  The  most interesting of these is the  New  Bruns-

LITERARY JOURNALISM

wick  Reporter  and  Fredericton  Advertiser  (est. 1844),  edited  and  published  by James  Hogg  ( r8oo-r866). He too was trained  under Chubb,  whose office issued Hogg's  Poems ( 1825), the first such book written  by a native  New Brunswicker. He also made much of his connection  with his cousin and namesake,  the "Ettrick Shepherd". In its early years, the  Reporter was almost entirely devoted  to litera­ ture,  and  deserves further  consideration  in any survey of provincial  literary  life before Confederation.
The   Guardian,  A  Monthly Magazine  of  Education  and  General  Literature
(January-September r86o)  was edited by two young teachers, Edward  Manning and Robert Aiken. While deliberately modelled on The  Amaranth, The  Guardian kept turning  into an educational monthly, although it presented a wider spectrum of scientific and  educational articles. It also succumbed for lack of subscriptions, and  neither free postage nor  the carrot-promise  of increasing the  pages from 24 to 36 when the subscription  list reached 6oo helped save The  Guardian.  Its chief contributors  were William R. M. Burtis, R. Peniston Star, and Dr. Sinclair;  many of the unsigned articles were by the editors themselves.
The  first literary activity in Prince Edward  Island  began with  the appearance
of James Douglas Haszard's Prince Edward Island Register in 1823, when poems and  sketches poured  into  the  paper.  Other  newspapers, particularly  The  Prince Edward  Island Times  (est. 1837), and Edward  Whalen's  Palladium  (est. 1843) and  his Examiner   (est.  1847), included  original  writings,  news  about  literary societies and  the  Mechanics'  Institute   ( 1838), and  carried serialized  fiction and selections from foreign  journals. The  first literary weekly was the very successful Ross's Weekly, A Literary  journal  (est. 1859),  edited and published by John Ross, of whom we know little. Circulation  rose from nearly 500 on 28 September  1859 to  1400  subscribers  by  1o  December   r86o -now  "the   largest  paper  on  the Island". For two years, Ross's Weekly  was almost exclusively devoted  to cultural
and scientific news, and attracted the essayists J. H. Fletcher and  Harry  Lee, and
the poet John  LePage. However, in the middle of r86r, Ross began to devote more space to political news, particularly  the American Civil War;  then in 1863 he reorganized the paper  as the Semi-Weekly Advertiser, now "Devoted to Commer­ cial and General News".
The  only Island  magazine  until well after Confederation  was the short-lived Progress Magazine   (January-February r867), edited  by Thomas  Kirwin  from the office of his Summerside Progress, and Prince County  Register, a pro annex:a­ tion  newspaper.  An  Islander  who spent  much  of his journalistic  career  in  the United  States,  Kirwin  ( r829-1911)  reprinted  both  British and  American  selec­ tions, one poem by Elizabeth  Lockerby, and sketches of his own experiences in the Civil War.
The first national  magazine  of Confederation  was Stewart's  Literary Quarterly
Magazine   (April  1867- October   1872),   edited  by George  Stewart,  Jr.   ( 1848-

92

LITERARY  JOURNALISM

1go6). He  later  edited  Rose-Belford's  Canadian  Monthly and  The   Chronicle
(Quebec), and  was a charter  member  of the Royal  Society of Canada. About
18g2 Stewart  rerniillsced about  his youthful  undertaking, and  praised  his Saint John  publisher, George James Chubb, for not taking any profit out of the venture from first to last. Stewart  believed that

the  time  had  come  for  literary development in  Canada, and   especially   in  New Brunswick. Our  best  writers  then,  as now, were sending their  work  to  the  British and  American magazines,* and  I was convinced that  the country could  and  would afford  a decent support to a monthly  or quarterly publication.9

His "Introductory" editorial was more explicit:  the danger was the great quantity of "cheap Yankee literature", which on  the one  hand  was often  violently  anti­ British, and  on the other lulled Canadians into a dependence  on foreign  matter  with no development of their own talents.
Stewart  attracted  Maritime   writers  such  as  James  Hannay, Moses  Harvey, Allan Jack, John Bourinot, T. C. Garvie, and William Lyall. Moreover, taking advantage of the new patriotism itself and the temporary  lack of magazines in the upper  provinces, he got contributions  from  D'Arcy  McGee  (briefly), J.  M. Le­ Moine, Daniel Clark, Charles Sangster, Alexander  McLachlan, and Evan McColl.




ALMOST  ALL    THE   JOURNALS  carried   "selections".   The Nova-Scotia  Magazine offered Collins' new "Ode  on the Popular  Superstitions of the  Highlands". The   Acadian  Recorder  carried  reviews of  Byron's  plays. The Acadian  Magazine  included  poems by  Moore  and  Southey.  The   Novascotian printed  Shelley's "Stanzas  Written  in Dejection, Near Naples" in 1828. A review of Tennyson's  Poems in The  Halifax Monthly  Magazine  quoted  "Mariana". The Pearl reprinted  William Ellery Channing,  Daniel Webster, and  Hawthorne. The Novascotian offered portions of Dickens' American  Notes. The  Amaranth carried Seba Smith  and  Harriet  Beecher Stowe. The  Palladium  abridged   A  Christmas Carol. The  Mayflower  included  a portion from Confessions of an Opium Eater. Haszard's Gazette serialized Uncle Tom's  Cabin, and Ross's Weekly, Ten  Nights in a Bar-Room.10
Since this  practice  was common  in nineteenth-century  journals,  it  cannot  be
explained  merely as colonial inability to produce original  material.  Rather, these selections represent  the educated  Maritimer's  awareness of the larger  world,  and if they are a curious blend of literary peaks and bogs, they are actually representa­ tive of international tastes. Significantly, too, literary  magazines  made  room  for religious, geological, and technological subjects.

* Among  them: James  De  Mille,  May  Agnes  Fleming, and  Louisa  Murray.

93

LITERARY JOURNALISM

At the same time,  Maritime  contributors  themselves discussed literary and philosophical  currents.  Thus  The Acadian   Recorder's  "Letters   on  the  Living Poets"  ( I820-23), by Irving,  provoked favourable  and  hostile comments  about contemporary  poetry. "Cecil"  wrote of the erosion of freedom in "Greece" for The Acadian   Magazine. The  Halifax Monthly Magazine carried  discussions of the principal plants of Nova Scotia and the building of the Shubenacadie Canal. From the 183o's onward  there are dozens of temperance tales and poems. Douglas Huyghue's  ("Eugene") "Essay on the Foresight of Nature,  in Providing  for the Reproduction  of the Insect  Tribes"  (The  Amaranth, April  1842)  is a  pre-Dar­ winian statement  which combines scientific curiosity and  religious idealism in its assumptions that  all knowledge is a manifestation  of the Creator's great  universal pattern. The  Provincial  carried  articles on Samuel Cunard  and steam navigation, electric telegraphs, the role of women, international copyright  (from the Maritime writer's viewpoint), and travel sketches of Europe. The Progress published sketches by Islanders  about  their  American  Civil War  experiences. Stewart's Quarterly's articles covered the North-West,  geological discoveries in Newfoundland, Ameri­ can democracy, contemporary British poetry, and the cultural rift between literary humanism  and  modem  science.
When  we tum  to imaginative  writing,  we find colonial authors  adopting  the
genres and  subjects  of  London  and  Edinburgh.   Lyrics, ballads,  sonnets,  hymn forms, odes, and free translations  from Greek and Latin predominate. Among the longer  poetic forms, the narrative and  the satire, complete with  heroic couplets, survived  into  the  I 84o's.  Reflective and  topographical  verses also retained  their popularity,  easily adaptable to the needs of nineteenth-century poetry. The  poems show considerable awareness of British poetic traditions. from Shakespeare, Milton, and  Dryden,  through  Pope,  Thomson,  Gray,  Goldsmith,  Campbell,  and  Bums, down to Scott, Moore, Southey, and Byron.
The  two major  poems in The   Acadian  Magazine display the lingering  eight­ eenth-century  tradition. "The Accepted Sigh. A Tale"  (January I 82 7)  begins as a graveyard poem, develops into a consolation piece, and concludes with the asser­ tion of God's redemptive  grace over man's sinfulness. In itself, R-y's "Accepted Sigh"  is  in  the  Evangelical   tradition   of  Maritime   poetry.  "Western  Scenes" (February I 82 7), which the anonymous author  claims was partly written  before The  Rising  Village ( 1825)  and  Howe's "Melville Island"  (I826) appeared,  is a topographical  poem set in the Annapolis Valley. Its patriotic and progressive senti­ ments reflect a secular strain  in  Maritime writing. Of Annapolis  Royal the poet
says:

Who would not sigh at thy neglected state, (Destined by Nature for a better fate;) Without improvement lies thy fertile soil, In vain the marshes beg the farmer' toil.

94

LITERARY JOURNALISM

The  river  source  of boundless  wealth  would  prove,
If aught from  apathy thy swains could  move.
If Labor's sons by fortune  here should  roam,
Soon  would  fair  Commerce bless th' adopted home, And  thro'  the land  luxuriant harvests  spread,
The  gifts of plenty,  where  there  lacks now bread. So thought Agricola  and  would  impart
To our  rude  hinds  the nicer rules of art. Divine  the  art! yet Industry we need,
If I my country's character can read;
For  knowledge cannot  the ungrateful serve, And labour's arm  must gen'rous feeling nerve.

By the  r8sos, however, poems such  as Clotilda Jennings' ("Maude") series  "vVild Flowers of  Nova Scotia",  in  The   Provincial, show   the   mid-century  romantic emphasis on the  detailed and the  unique in the  commonplace:

Where  graceful, leafy boughs crown ancient stems, And  cast  their  quivering shadows  far  below,
Making cool, lovely paths  through the green  world -
The  wanderer finds  thee,  Lily;  shelt'ring 'mid  tall,  grassy blades, Thy  pale, serene  and  fragrant beauty,  or far  away
In  some secluded  winding,  where  pearly  violets
With  deep,  golden  heart,  (thick  as the stars
In  a clear,  summer heaven)   carpet  sweet nooks of shade. Thy  tender stem,  rears up its delicate  bells,
Shielded by broad, green,  glossy leaves, that  seem  to guard
Lovingly,  a thing  so odorous  and  pure.

(No. II, The  Lily of the  Valley,  April  1852)

In the  search for  an  appropriate  language, Andrew Shiels   ( "Albyn")  in  his
Preface to The Witch of the Westcot  ( r8gr)  observed:

instead  of "mountains high" and  "hills of green," the beautiful vale, breathing with imagery,  including mouldering abbey,  delapidated tower,  ruin'd camps  of  Dane and  Roman  ... let  the  traveller to Nova  Scotia  ask what  is  the  name  of  yonder dwelling?   the  answer  is almost   universally   Mr.  Such  or  such-a-ones' farm,   and that  contains  all the  variations of its History; or enquire the  name  of the  dull  half forgotten, or perhaps unknown stream,  in any quarter of the  Province, and  ten  to one but it is either  Nine  Mile or Salmon  River.

In general, great  chunks of pre-Confederation poetry are  characterized by religious idealism and   sentimentality, and   many   of  its. rhetorical stances irritate modem readers.
There are  examples of  almost every  kind  of  contemporary fiction: the  exotic­ oriental tale,  the  gothic,_ the  local-colour dialect  (usually Irish), the  silver-spoon high-society, the  temperance tale,  the  historical romance, and the fictional sketch.

95

LITERARY JOURNALISM

Few  of the  stories  are  in  the  realistic  mode,  although dialogue sometimes  has  a contemporary ring. There are very few book-length  fictions.
While  poetry -no  matter how  bad,  it seeins -was  accepted as a legitimate literary pursuit, fiction  writers  had  to overcome  the suspicion  that  novels were  a "sinful  waste  of time".11   Thus, John Sparrow Thompson sets  out  the  platonic­ puritan-evangelical hostility  towards fiction  in his I 832 lecture on  "History":

The writers of the [romance and novel] endeavour  to excite the fancy, by building interesting  and  picturesque  combinations, of persons and action  and  scenery, on a very slender foundation of assumed facts. The  Historian,  on the contrary,  has an immense mass of facts of real life under his pen, and he endeavours  to record them in a most brief and lucid manner; having simple and severe Truth for his instruc­ tress, instead of enthusiastic  and  credulous  Imagination. In studying  the works of the first, amusement  is the end sought;  the facts are unimportant.12

Possibly such  views  help  explain why  McCulloch and  Haliburton  turned  more readily  to  the  sketch  than   to  other  fictional  for1ns. Still,  there  were  answers  to Thompson's position.  Mary  Herbert defended  fiction on both  ethical  and  psycho­ logical  grounds in The  Mayflower   (August   I85I). In  I859  Ross's  Weekly  per­ mitted  two  correspondents to answer  the  Charlottetown  Protestant's disapproval of the  Weekly's  fiction.  "Old Times" opined  that  "novel  readers metamorphose themselves into sickly sentimentalists ... while the real miseries of humanity, excite little  or no attention." J. H.  Fletcher agreed,  but observed  that  Dickens,  Bulwer Lytton, and  Scott  provided social  experiences  and  a knowledge of character not found  elsewhere  in literature.13
Yet, three  kinds of fiction -the emigrant tale, the historical  romance, and  the regional  sketch -still deserve some attention, for they mirrored common psychic and  social experiences. For  example, Douglas  Huyghue's ("Eugene")  "Argimou. A  Legend  of the  Micmac" (May-September I842)  was  The   Amaranth's most ambitious contribution to  Maritime historical  romance.  "Argimou" has  many  of the flaws of such  popular fictions;  it is "stereotyped in character, rhetorical in style, and  melodramatic in  plot",14  but  it  is through these conventions that   Huyghue reveals  his intentions. Set  between   I 755 and   I 76 I,  the  tale  announces that  the white  man  must  bear  the guilt  for the debasement of the Indian, and  it illustrates this thesis in the friendship between  a good white man and  a good  Indian. Despite (or  because of?)  the  Micmacs' Scottian language and  the Victorian sentiments of the eighteenth-century English  gentlefolk,  "Argimou" stands  as one of the earliest fictional  attempts to mythologize the  Maritime past  and  to invest  its events  with ethical  meaning. In  a climactic passage,  the  Englishman Edward recognizes  that his quest for the captured Emily will only succeed after his initiation into the wood­ craft  of his Micmac friend  Argimou:

[Edward's] belief in the  progressive improvement  of the human  race was shaken, as the lamentable truth  forced itself upon his understanding,  that  mankind  seemed

g6

LITERARY JOURNALISM

to have journeyed further  from the right, as they deviated from the plain habits and principles of the primitive ages.... Here in the rude forests he beheld plenty, cheerfulness, and frames untainted  by the enervating maladies of the Old World. Here, among men unrestrained by penal codes, or chains, or strong dungeons, were to be found the most unflinching virtue; the elements of a beautiful philosophy....

In its time, "Argimou" was respected enough to be published as a book (Halifax: Courier,  1847), andre-serialized in The  Saint  fohn Albion  ( 1859-6o).




MARITIME WRITERS were at their liveliest, however, in non­ fictional  prose, especially the sketch and  the essay, which are  both  flexible,  per­ sonal forms. The sketch could  be either fictional or  autobiographical. The  essay could  be either  formal  (for science, speculation,  or  criticism)  or  informal-at which point it almost merges with the autobiographical sketch. These  prose tradi­  tions descended from Addison and Steele, and many nineteenth-century textbooks kept these models before generations of children. In addition,  the travel  pieces of Cobbett  and  the essays of  Lamb  provided  models for the  proliferation  of travel sketches  and  familiar  essays-chatty,   antiquarian, self-consciously  literary­ which appeared in the 182o's. But the more immediate influences on much British North  American  humour  were the  convivial and  sometimes coarse  Blackwood's sketches of  Lockhart,  Wilson ("Christopher North"), and James Hogg, known as "Noctes Ambrosianae"-Nights at Ambrose's Tavern.
McCulloch's  Stepsure "Letters" (The  Acadian Recorder, 182 1-2 3)  and  Hali­
burton's  "Recollections  of Nova  Scotia"  [The  Clockmaker]   (The N ovascotian,
1835)  are the best known works in the humorous tradition. There  is also "Samuel
Slyboot's" analysis of fashionable Carlottetown  at "A Tea Party" (P.E.l. Register,
23 August 1823).  Among "The Club"  Papers in The  N ovascotian is the famous punning  sketch on the Assembly's proceedings (22 June  1831 ), possibly by Hali­ burton. No. IV of "The Recess" Papers in The  Halifax Monthly Magazine sends up the interminable verses produced  by the Halifax garrison (August  1831). Mary Jane  Katzmann's "Editor" in The  Provincial holds dialogues with  "Snaffle"  on the  magazine's  prospects. George  Stewart  considers the  possibility  of  a  special issue of Stewart's Quarterly to be composed of rejected pieces (April 187o). One of the more charming  personae is Dr. Sinclair's "Recluse"  in The Guardian;  his ambiguous rejection of any political aspirations  (March 186o, p. 6o) is not merely Leacockian  but implies much  about  contemporary  New  Brunswick  politics.
Practically every editorial and speech by Howe has its literary  virtues, and  the recently  published  Travel  Sketches  in  Nova  Scotia  ( 1973), reprinted  from  his "Western" and  "Eastern Rambles"  in  The   Nova-Scotian   ( 1828-31)   reveal  a literary  direction  he unfortunately did  not follow. A forgotten  but  imaginative

97

LITERARY JOURNALISM

series is Moses Perley's five "Sporting Sketches of New Brunswick" in The  Ama­ ranth  ( 1841). His  vivid,  first-hand,  sympathetic  accounts  of hunting  with  the Indians  emphasize that  English sportsmen do not understand  the pleasures of axe, paddle, and spear. Like Huyghue,  Perley (with a more felicitous style) sees forest life as a humanizing and educative experience.
The  many  essays devoted  to  the  probleins  of developing  a  native  literature alternated, almost randomly,  between optimism and despair. The  Acadian Maga­ zine's "Preface" (July  1826)  admitted  the problem of subject matter:  "A young country  presents  no field for  the  researches of the  Antiquarian,  it  contains  no vestiges of the  glorious  deeds  of the  days of Yore ..." (p.  i). By  May  1827, "Peter'' and "Paul's" "Characteristics of Nova Scotia" pointed  with pride to the numerous  and  respectable  periodical  publications,  and  to the  evidence of intel­ lectual development  in the work of Grizelda Tonge, Goldsmith,  and  Howe. Yet, in his 7 August 1828 "Ramble", Howe tartly observed that  The  Acadian  Maga­ zine's Editor

asserted the depraved  taste of this illiterate  Province suffered  [it]   to perish; a charge which would have made greatly against our literary character, if it had not been proved that such a thing could not die that never had any life in it.15

The  Halifax  Monthly Magazine  happily reviewed "Publications in Nova Scotia" (June-September 1832),  yet saw  fit to echo  the  plaintive  cry in The   Gazette (Montreal)  of 26 June  1832,  are  we the only ones in  the  world  not  to make books? The  continual   editorial  entreaties  for  articles  also suggest  that  supplies could dry up without warning. By 23 January 1840, however, The  Nova Scotian's "Glance  at the Past"  could report favourably on the literary  accomplishments  of the colony, and  The  Nova  Scotia New  Monthly  Magazine  noted  the developing sense of "locality" in writing. Paradoxically, 1842 is a year in which Nova Scotians and  New Brunswickers had  high hopes for literary flowerings. When The Guard­ ian closed in  186o,  Aiken and  Manning  no longer mentioned  literary  progress:

Nor do we feel much abashed at failure in this case; having several examples before us of a similar result, under far more favorable auspices. The  fact  seems to be forced upon us, that the Provinces are not ripe for an indigenous literature.16

Both The  Provincial  and  Stewart's  Quarterly  examined  at  length  the  native literary  tradition  and  were equally confident about  placing colonial writers in the international republic of letters. Thus The  Provincial discusses Haliburton's virtues and  flaws as respectfully  as those of Dickens and  Thackeray, and  its five "Half Hours with Our  Poets" selected Mrs. Cotnam, Grizelda Tonge, John  McPherson, Sarah  Herbert,  Charles  Desbrisay, Dr. Byles, and  the Rev. Samuel  Elder as the notable  versifiers, none of whom have survived as well as have the prose writers
-Haliburton, Howe,   McCulloch,   Dawson,  even  Perley.  Stewart's   Quarterly
reviews, as with  Mair's  Dreamland  and Other  Poems  (January 186g), empha- g8

LITERARY JOURNALISM

sized the  national  literary  climate.  Stewart's  "Canadian  Literature"  (January
1870)  was a new approach, for "Canadian" no longer meant  only Quebec  and Ontario,  and he had an impressive group of professional writers-poets, novelists, scientists, and  historians, in two languages-who had international reputations. Furthermore, Stewart  related  the development  of professional authorship to the native  publishing  industry,  for  both of which  he expressed modest  prospects­ and  which the depressions and  other national  setbacks of the  187o's  and  188o's virtually destroyed.
Maritime  literary  magazines  all set out to develop local writing,  to avoid  sec­ tarian  politics and religion, and some, to offset the reading of American trash. Most of the high hopes ended  in financial shambles due to lack of contributors or sub­ scriptions or both. They had life spans similar to other nineteenth-century literary magazines, The  Literary  Garland  excepted. Yet long periods without  magazin did not mean lack of literary activity, for the newspapers had literary comers until well into the twentieth  century. As it turned  out, the newspapers, rather  than  the magazines, were the springboards to fame.
From  the  182o's  on,  colonial  achievements  and  identity  were  the  subject  of many analyses, both  adulatory  and  critical. This complex  of dualities  and  senti­ ments was formed  by the shared  Loyalist and  emigrant  experiences, the sense of colonial unity among the three British peoples, and a growing love for the familiar trees, valleys, and  coves. There  was an  (unfulfilled)   urgent  hope  that  industrial development  and  literary  progress would go hand  in  hand.  Measurement   was made  by reference to restless, dramatic  society to the south  and  to the  powerful Empire  whose heart  was  just across the ocean. Such  perspectives encouraged  a double vision and ironic attitudes  among the many writers who contributed to the nationalism  which  pervaded  the  Maritimes  in the I 86o's:  a nationalism  which, sadly, evolved into a complacent  nostalgia in the next eight lean decades.
Editors and  writers alike responded to an emulated  British poetry and  fiction, while after  1850 there  was admiration  for the  best American  writing.  Maritime poetry, especially, retained  many elements of eighteenth-century  culture;  we may attribute  these in part  to the American traditions of the educated  Loyalists.
Thus,  we can observe the demotion  of the heroic couplet  between  1820  and
1840 as new cadences slowly permeated  poetic consciousness. There  were other smooth transitions from the previous century:  concepts of progress and  scientific development, the humanistic  emphasis on literary culture,  the role of evangelical piety and  sentimentalism   in  literature; all are  apparent in  nineteenth-century Maritime  journalism. Finally, the best prose has vitality, uniqueness, and  a sense of shape-qualities which are often missing from otherwise competent  but deriv­ ative and technically-cautious  fiction and poetry. And now we know why Spedon didn't find any poets in Nova Scotia:  he couldn't see that the metaphoric prose of his Bluenoser held the answer.

99

LITERARY JOURNALISM

NOTES

1 The  few articles  on literary journalism are  useful but often  inaccurate: D. R. Jack, "Acadian  Magazines," Proceedings  and  Transactions   of  the   Royal  Society   of Canada,  2nd Series,  IX,  Section  2 ( I903), I 73-203. D. R. Jack,  "Early Journalism in  New  Brunswick," Acadiensis, VIII  (October I908), 250-265.  David   Amason, "Canadian Literary Periodicals of the  Nineteenth Century," Journal  of Canadian Fiction,  II  (Summer I973), I25·I28. My  thanks  to  the  Canada Council and  the RMC Arts Research Fund for research  grants,  and  thanks  to the  staffs of Douglas Library, Queen's; Saint   John  Regional Library; the  New  Brunswick   Museum; Killam Library, Dalhousie; Public  Archives  of  Nova  Scotia; and  Public  Archives of Prince Edward Island.
2  "Preface," The  Acadian Magazine,  I  (July  I 826) , i.
8  Joseph   Chisholm, "John  Sparrow Thompson," Collections  of the   Nova  Scotia
Historical Society, XXVI  (1945), I-31.
6 Public  Archives  of Canada, Joseph Howe Papers, Vol. 33·
G   "Death of Robert Shives,"  The   Daily Telegraph   (Saint  John), 8  January  I879,
p. 2.
8  "To the  Patrons of  the  Amaranth," The   Amaranth,  III  December I843),  393· [Editorial Note], The  New  Brunswick Reporter,  I5 August  I845,  p. I58.
7 Phyllis  Blakeley, "Mary Eliza  Herbert," Dictionary of Canadian  Biography, X I87I·I88o), 348.
8 I am  indebted to Mrs.  Lois  Kernaghan, Research Assistant,  PANS,  for  permitting me to examine her  notes on Mary Jane  Katzmann for a forthcoming DCB article.
9  George  Stewart, "The History  of a  Magazine," Typescript copy.  New  Brunswick
Museum.
10 As far  as I know,  the  journals  did  not  pay  for  reprinting the  selections,  but  they were  usually  scrupulous about identifying sources;  hence,  there  is copyright  abuse here.
11 "Editorial," The  Mayflower, I (August   I85I), p.  I25.
12  John Sparrow Thompson, "History," The  Halifax  Monthly  Magazine,  III  (Sep­
tember I832), p. I 56.
18 'Old  Times,' "Letter," Ross's Weekly, 10 August  I859;  J. W. Fletcher, "Correspon­
dence," Ross's Weekly, 24 August  I859,  p. 2.
14 Fred  Cogswell,  "Literary Activity  in  the  Martime Provinces   I8I5·I88o," Literary History of Canada, ed. Carl  Klinck  (Toronto:  University of Toronto Press,  I965), p. I IO.
15 Howe's  comments on The  Acadian Magazine were brought to my attention in Mal­ colm  Parks's  edition of Howe's  Travel  Sketches of Nova Scotia  (Toronto:  Univer­ sity of Toronto Press,  I973), pp.  64-65.
18 "Close  of the  Volume," The  Guardian,  I  (September I 86o) , p.  2 I 8.








IOO




Literary History of  Canada
CANADIAN  LITERATURE IN  ENGLISH SECOND  EDITION
General Editor: CARL F. KLINCK

The   Literary  History  of Canada has been an  excellent  source  of  informa­ tion  on  Canadian authors, genres, and  literary  trends  and  influences ever since  it  appeared in  1965.  The completely   revised  and  enlarged  three­ volume   second   edition  is  now  available,  with   new   material  covering developments since 1960.

Volume I covers the years up to 1920. $25.00 cloth
Volume II  treats  the years 1920 to 1960. $25.00 cloth
Volume III,  newly  written, deals  with   the  period   from   1960  to  1974.
$20.00 cloth
Boxed Set of the three  volumes $35.00 paper
'Brilliant.' Saturday Night
' ... a  remarkable contribution  to  our  cultural and  intellectual  history.'
Canadian Historical  Review


The  Haunted Wilderness
GOTHIC AND GROTESQUE IN  CANADIAN  FICTION MARGOT NORTHEY

Margot Northey  demonstrates that  gothicism,  in  varying  degrees  and  of various  kinds, has  been  a continuing feature of Canadian literature. Four
19th-century  novels- Wascousta, The  Golden   Dog,   Le   Chercheur   de tresors, and  Pour  la  patrie,  and  eight  20th-century novels- Kamouraska, Wild   Geese,  Surfacing, La  Belle  Bete,  La  Guerre, Yes  Sir!, The  Double
Hook, Cocksure, and  Beautiful Losers, are  analysed  in detail  in  this fasci­ nating and  original contribution to Canadian comparative studies and  to genre-oriented criticism.  $4.95 paper,  $12.50 cloth

prices  are  those  suggested at time  of publication


UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO PRESS




101

HOME TRUTHS

Fraser Sutherland



Is ONE's BIRTHPLACE  CANAAN, or  the  land  that  God  gave  Cain?  Every writer  born in the Maritimes must answer that  question; how he answers  it will determine whether he remains home to work,  or goes away.
We  have  a  variety   of  solutions. Poets
like  Charles  Bruce   and   Kenneth  Leslie spent   most  of  their   lives  outside  Nova Scotia  and   produced  poetry   that   was  a sort  of superior nostalgia. One  returns to their  poems  as one  might  to a  place. In­ deed,  if there  is one  quality which  unites Maritimes writers, at home  or  away, it is the  ability  to  render the  mood,  the  per­ sonality   of  a   place.   This   evocation  of place,   especially   when   produced  by  a Scot,    can    easily    become    sentimental. (Scots' sentimentality is the  worst  in  the world,  an   ugly,  joyless,  maudlin  thing,  almost obscene: whisky tears.)   Bruce and Leslie  are  limited   poets  but  it's  to  their credit  that   in  this  respect   they  did  not succumb. A somewhat similar  strategy has been adopted by the novelist Thomas Raddall, even  if he did  choose, unlike  his contemporaries, to stay home. Raddall's nostalgia takes the  form  of an  immersion in  the  distant past,  from  which  he  con­ trives  his historical  romances.
The  best  poet  the  Maritimes has  pro­ duced, Alden  Nowlan, has also chosen  to remain there  and  so has  Ernest  Buckler, an  excellent   writer   if  a  very  unprolific one. The  sense of  place  that  informs the short  stories  and  early  poems  of  Nowlan as  well  as  Buckler's  lovely  memoir  Ox Bells and  Fireflies  (not to  mention The Mountain and the Valley) is neither sen­ timental nor does it imply long excursions  into  a romantic past.


102
 There are  other  strategies. Prince  Ed­ ward  Island's Milton Acorn  has  left  the Maritimes   to   become    "The    Peoples' Poet".1  Sadly  there  is a  sag  in  perform­ ance between  the charged lyricism of I've Tasted  My  Blood   ("Charlottetown Har­ bour", "Rooming  House")  and  the  later  More Poems for  People-Acorn has set­ tled  for  the  rhetoric, as  opposed   to  the poetry,  of  socialism,  and   in  the  process has   relinquished  some    of   his   local strengths. A different route  has been taken by Ray Smith,  originally of Mabou, Cape Breton,   but  now  of  Montreal, who  ap­ parently couldn't care less about ideology, nor for that  matter about the particulari­ ties of  place.  Despite  the  locally  allusive titles of Cape Breton is the Thought Con­ trol Centre of Canada and The  Lord Nel­ son Tavern, locales  in  Smith's stories are only  departure  points  for   his  elegantly  grotesque  characters. Perhaps the middle  ground  is covered  by  another short  story writer,  Ray  Fraser, who after  living some years in Montreal is presently  back  home in New Brunswick. Fraser  shares an inter­ est in grotesques but  roots them  in a very specific setting.
There are other gifted  Maritimes writ­
ers  but  these  are  the  ones  who  come  to mind   as  must,   inevitably, Hugh   Mac­ Lennan.lv.facLennan's Nova Scotian  roots go deep,  as he  reminds  us  in  his essays; he  has set  his novel  Each  Man's  Son  in Cape   Breton,   and   Barometer  Rising  in Halifax, and has drawn on Maritimes ex­ perience  for portions of The  Watch  That  Ends the  Night  and  Two  Solitudes. Yet one does not think  of him as a "regional" writer.  After   schooling  at   Oxford  and Princeton, he  came  to  feel  that   Canada

HOME TRUTHS



was  home,  and  to  be  deeply  involved  in its divisions  and  destiny.  Just  as a  reluc­ tant    Nova   Scotia   joined    the   national cause   at   Confederation,  so  a   perhaps­ reluctant MacLennan  became a  con­ vinced  federalist. In  doing  so he did  not cut  his Maritimes connections, but  incor­  porated them  into a larger  whole: place became  an agent  in the  construction of a political and historical unity that  was also a  novelistic  one.
When  Nova  Scotia  entered Confedera­
tion,  it dedicated its best brains  to Cana­ dian  commerce, religion  and  law. Having made  its decision,  that  province has been impatient at  Quebec  discontent. An  un­ successful Nova Scotian  was busy with his own  sense  of  injustice; a  successful  one was inclined to say something like, "Look,  Quebec, we  do our  bit  for Canada. Why don't  you  stop  grousing and  get  on  with learning   English   and   making  money?" MacLennan cannot be accused  of so crass an  attitude, but  to  some  extent   a  more liberal  and  sophisticated  form of  it colours  his  view  of  Quebec. One  some­ times  gets  the  impression,  reading  Two  Solitudes,  that  he  believes  the  Canadian wound  would  be healed  if  only our  Ath­  anase Tallard married our Kathleen Con­  nors,  and   their  son  Paul  protect, touch  and  greet  Heather  Methuen in  a perfect commingling  of   English,    Irish,   Scotch  and    French.    (This   probably  explains  MacLennan's    loyalty    to   the    French­ Scotch  Pierre Elliot Trudeau which  judg­ ing from  his Maclean's  articles,  verges on the idolatrous: it is the  clansman's fealty to  his  chieftain or,  even  more  likely, an author's admiration for  one  of  his  own characters.)  That   matters  are   not   as simple as this MacLennan himself demon­ strates   in  his  last  novel,  Return  of the Sphinx.  Landscape has  always  been  the strongest  character in a MacLennan novel
-no disparagement  intended-but  in this book the land  becomes  the only abid­ ing   reality,   literally  above   and   beyond
 human f national feuds   and   reconcilia­
tions.
What  interests   me  more,   for   present purposes,  is the  role  that  French Canada has  played  in  the  progress  of  MacLen­ nan's   novelistic   vocation.   Undoubtedly living  in  Montreal  has  been  immensely valuable to  him,  not  simply  because  the subject at  hand  suited  his evolving style but    because    alienation,   in    the    right amounts, is better for  a writer than con­ fraternity. He  was in  Quebec, but  not  of it,  and  I  would  hazard the  idea  that he would  not  be  nearly  so good  a  novelist,  nor probably even a novelist at all,if he had lived in English  Canada or, worse  yet, in England or  the  United States. He  might have become a lucid historian like Donald Creighton or A. R. M. Lower  but  the hu­ man   tensions  so  evident in  Quebec  de­ manded artistic,  not  scholarly  form. Ani­ mated   by  the  dynamic present  but  de­  tached   enough   that   he  could  cope  with it, he was able to encompass his ancestral and   provincial  pasts.  He  is  inordinately proud  that  he is three-quarters Highlands Scots  (since  my  own  ancestry is entirely Highlands I  regard  MacLennan as some­ thing  of  a  half-breed, but  such  are   the ways of  genetic  vanity), and  of his Nova Scotian  heritage. Yet  in  Nova  Scotia  he would  have  been  a  Dalhousie professor.  In  Quebec he is a writer.
It is perhaps time to look at the culture that    sent   a   young   Dalhousie  student named  Hugh MacLennan off  to  Oxford on  a  Rhodes  Scholarship. A century  be­ fore, colonial  Nova  Scotia  was the centre of learned and  artistic culture in  British North  America.    In  Thomas   Chandler Haliburton it had  a writer  who was to be vital in the development of  North Ameri­  can   prose.  If, as   Hemingway  said,   all modern American  literature begins  with a  book  by  Mark  Twain called   Huckle­  berry Finn, so all the style of Huckleberry  Finn is implied  in  a book by T. C. Hali­ burton called  The  Clockmaker; or, The


103

HOME TRUTHS



Sayings  and Doings of Sam  Slick  of Slick­ ville  (I 836) . It is amazing in  an  age  of specialists  to look  back  on  men  like him or  Dr.   Thomas McCulloch (a   Presby­ terian da  Vinci)   of  Pictou,  who,  if they did  not  quite   accumulate  and   digest  all knowledge, certainly made a sporting at­  tempt to do so.
Whatever the  economic benefits  of Confederation to the three  Maritimes colonies,  generally  judged   to  be  few,  it was  a  cultural disaster, only  temporarily abated by  the  rise  of  poets -Bliss  Car­ man,  Charles G. D. Roberts -associated with   the  University of   New  Brunswick.  Yet   it  was  as  if  these  men   were  only agents  in the inexorable western  swing of culture. The Maritimes would  henceforth act  only  as a nursery  for  talent that  was quick   to   catch    a   train  for   Boston   or Ontario.
In   speaking  of  culture,  though,  one must    examine -to    employ    a   phrase Robert Frost  used  in  another connection
-"the   whole    damn  machinery,"  the
bedrock/seedbed  below   universities and literary magazines and  poetry  readings. I think   MacLennan  would   agree   that   a large  part of  the  Maritimes cultural matrix is made  up  of rural  Scots  Presby­ terianism.
Much nonsense  has been  written about the baleful  effects of the Calvinistic creed. Our  preachers are  believed  to be obsessed with Original Sin, and  insatiable prophets of sulphurous damnation, warping every­ one in their  charge with  the sour winds of an  inflexible  Puritanism and  moulderous gloom.   But   the   ministers I   remember from  boyhood  were singularly gentle souls who  scrupulously avoided  hellfire  in  the pulpit. Our   Sunday  School Superinten­ dant,  known   to  inveigh   against wicked­  ness, was  plainly  a  crank whom  no one, least of  all his pupils,  took seriously. The best  teacher of English  I ever  had,  Viola Fraser, was  a minister's wife. Then, too, for  what  is supposed to be a dour-faced,


104
 life-denying creed  there  is something wonderfully ambiguous about  the  first question-and-answer of the Primary Cate­ chism:
Q: What  is the chief end of man?
A:  Man's  chief  end  is  to  glorify  God  and
enjoy Him forever.
(my  emphasis)
At other  times  I wonder  whether the in­ junction   doesn't   suggest  that   we  should  emulate the practice of Tantric Yoga and  conduct sex as a holy ritual!
When    these   reservations  are   made, however,  it  must  be  allowed   that  hard­ ships faced  by the  early  Presbyterian set­ tlers  profoundly  affected them.  The  En­  closures  had  driven  them  off  their  hold­  ings in Scotland, conveyed  them  in rotting tubs  across  the   Atlantic,  and   set  them  down  roughly  in  a country of only  rudi­ mentary promise. The  iron-shod elements of the old faith  were reinforced by  physi­ cal  obstacles-the Rock  of  Ages  might  be  something you  had  to  clear  off  your back  field. Gradually a pattern of ethics,  a system of values, emerge  and  these any Maritimer-be he Presbyterian, Baptist, Roman Catholic or  Anglican -is bound  to carry  as psychic  baggage  wherever he goes.
In    delineating  this    Scots-dominated
character I cannot improve on  MacLen­
nan's  essays or on J. K. Galbraith's charm­
ing memoir  The Scotch, though the latter
is of course set in a different locality. Both
authors are  right  to stress the  hospitable, humorous and  fanciful elements in the Scotch  character but  there  are,  naturally, other  aspects. A phrase that  occurs  in George   Woodcock's   study   of   MacLen­ nan  perhaps offers  a valuable  hint: "the diffused   malevolence  of  the  universe."2
After  a century  of wrestling with intract­ able  land  and  treacherous sea  the  Mari­ timer,  especially  if he is  Scotch,  not  only doesn't expect  anything  good  but  is  un­  happy  when  it appears. This  is not chur­ lish  ingratitude but  only  the  expectation

HOME TRUTHS



that  the good is the harbinger of the out­ rightly   catastrophic. This   sounds  funny,  but  it does rather put  a pall on one's  life. The lull after ecstacy is not so much  post­ coitus  tristesse as it is a grave watch, and no  matter how  hard  you  try,  no  matter how far  you climb the success-ladder, you can  never  please  your  father. To  put  it coarsely, one's duty in life is to keep one's head   down  and   one's   ass  close  to  the ground. The religion  of work,  the cult  of success, the fear of retribution.
To   understand  this   Maritimes  mood one   cannot  do  better   than   read   those early  clenched  poems  of Alden  Nowlan's like  "Summer" and   "Warren  Pryor" - the   rage   at   having   the   feminine   Eros, the   dark   fluid   dream    that   feeds   crea­ tion,  pent  up  hopelessly in a society  both patriarchal   and    philistine.   Patriarchal (the   many    father-figures in   MacLen­ nan's   novels!),  because    the   manly virtues  of the  kind  mentioned  above  are emphasized;  common  sense  is  the  god. Philistine,  because  like  provincial  society everywhere, it  prizes  its  own  dormancy, both  grumbles   about   and  is complacent with  its own  poverty. For  many  years the spirit   of  the   Maritimes  was  not   to  be found  in  its middle  class, or  the  few  in­ tellectuals at the universities,  but was cen­ tred   in   the   rural    poor,   a   culture   of patched  highways,   reliable   bootleggers, and  bad  dental care.  It was migrant trips to Toronto's Cabbagetown or the tobacco fields  of  Tilsonburg or  the  nickel  mines of Thompson, Man.; it was coming  home for  Christmas and  getting boozed  up­ a   world   accurately  described    by   Ray Fraser's   stories   in    The    Black   Horse Tavern  and  elsewhere; it  was  the   time when  Nova Scotia  led  the country in  the rates of alcoholism and illegitimate births.  It was ignorance and  fear.
The   philistine   above   all  fears   to  be
mocked, and the artist  is always the mock­ ingbird. How  can  such  a  rare  species  as the  artist  survive  in  the  Maritimes, save
 by becoming  a hermit or, at the other extreme, pretending to be one of the boys in  such  traditional pursuits as  collecting unemployment insurance and  swilling Moosehead  ale in  the  corner tavern?
Some   of  the   homebound  writers   al­
ready  mentioned  are   taking   one  or  the other  of  these  routes,   but  I cannot. Yet truly the question  of going  back for good has been settled  by conditions outside the Maritimes. Any  bucolic   dreams I  may have  harboured about living  there  have been shattered by the fact  that  the whole world,   and   the   Maritimes  with   it,   is rapidly  turning into a  facsimile  of  New­ ark,  New  Jersey.  I have  a  vision  of  the modern  writer  soon  being  driven  by the force of technology, the loss of his own and exterior  nature, into  one  of a billion  illu­ minated  cubes-a  Hilton   Hotel    any­  where-and there   trying  frantically  to write in honour of the  past, since there  is no engageable present and  he  falls  back on  racial   and   private  memory   for   the seedbed  of  his work,  knowing there  can be no  future except  the  Apocalypse and no past but that which lies buried  beneath a  Petrifond  Foundation.
I would  hope,  in  such  a  situation,  to draw   on  a  few  good   memories  of  my father though  I know  that  he  has  never understood, nor  can  he ever  understand, why or even  how I am  a writer.
My  father with  his  team  of  horses,  in
his slow shambling was personifying what Hemingway called  grace  under   pressure, sheer   intelligent strength,  a  small   man controlling two very large  horses. Or,  the victim  of  a  practical  joke,  he   pursues, pitchfork  in hand, the impish  youth  from Pictou  he'd  hired  to help  with  the haying. Or I see him in the corner chair, rumbling in  the  deepest  of basses a  hymn -"The Old   Rugged    Cross"? -this   man   who considered ministers  some  lower  form  of insect  and  devoutly avoided, except   for the rare  funeral, attending church. Or  in that    same   chair,    Sir   Walter   Raleigh

HOME·TRUTHS



smouldering in his pipe, he stares  out  into the   diffused   malevolence  of  the   night, the very picture of the Great Stone  Face. Although he is very much  alive I imagine him as somehow  historical, embodying the verities   of   a   rockbound  province,  the home  truths.
But I know, or I think  I know,  that  the home  truths are  only  accessible  to  those with  the  power  to understand them, and that  the practice of art  is not solely the attempt  to  make  money  or  to  create a masterpiece (will I ever?)   but  is for me a liberating way  of life. In The  Mountain and  the  Valley  David  Canaan walks  up the  mountain: "And some  unquenchable
 leaven  in the mind's thirst  kept sending  it back for the taste  of complete realization it  just missed."3   I would  not  want  to be David  Canaan as  moments later  he  lies on the ground, his thirst  unquenched, snowflakes  melting on  his face,  as only  a partridge rises to make  it over  the moun­ tain.

NOTES

1 Milton  Acorn, More  Poems  for People, (To­
ronto,  1972), jacket  cover.
2  George  Woodcock,  Hugh  MacLennan,  (To­
ronto,  1969), p. 7·
3 Ernest  Buckler, The  Mountain and  the  Val­
ley,  (New York,  1952), p. 360.




WHOLLY DRUNK
OR WHOLLY SOBER?
 




Marilyn Baxter



IN  ALDEN NOWLAN's early poetry  (before  I g6g)  the self is essentially a single, homogeneous entity. Although it is never  "wholly  removed from  [its  own] echo  and  reflection",1  there  is no  hint  of any actual dichotomy; and  when  the self inadvertently comes  upon  its own  reflec­ tion  in  a  pool,  it  does  not  think  of  that  reflection  as a  separate being   (as for  in­ stance    Eve   does   in   Jay   Macpherson's "Eve  in  Reflection"), but  is  only  con­ cerned    with   avoiding   any   further  en­ counters:

Christ,  but  I wish
I knew the direction
a man  had  to take
to keep from  meeting
himself.2
With  the  publication of The  Mysterious
 in  the  collection  that  explicitly mentions the  "mysterious naked  man", the  title  is appropriate  because   the   whole   volume can  be seen as an  exploration of the  hu­ man  soul stripped bare.  And  the  human soul  Nowlan  is most  interested  in  is, of course, his own. Intensely aware of "how
mysterious  it  is I that   I am  looking  out through the eyes I of a certain body and this  body  is alive  I here  and  now",3  the
poet is also beginning to see that  this mystery is heightened by the fact  that  the "I" or self is no longer single but multiple:

You keep  peeling  off hollow dolls and  finding another
inside:  I divide  into  men, fat and thin, half a dozen boys, children  and  babies
of various sizes.


Naked  Man  in  xg6g, however,  it became obvious   that   Nowlan's apprehension  of the  self had  undergone a number of changes. Although there  is only one poem

106
 I could  have said it
a year ago in a Russian  boutique
but  it didn't   happen
until  tonight.

(MNM, 41)

WHOLLY DRUNK OR  WHOLLY  SOBER



Whenever "tonight" was,  this  is the  first explicit  mention of the  multiple self that Nowlan  makes ;4    an  image  which  he  ex­ plores  at  greater lengths  in  his next  two volumes:  Between  Tears  and   Laughter (I 97 I)   and  I'm  a Stranger  Here Myself (I974)·
There are  times  when  Nowlan's  divi­
sion  of  the  self  into  two  or  more  parts
seems  to  be  little   more   than   a   happy device that enables him to present two different  voices  within  his  own  psyche. In "Argument",5 for  instance, the  father
in him argues,  "I'll be as sentimental I as
I  want  and  if you don't like it I then  to
hell with you." To which the poet in him replies, "Not in my book you won't." The
division  of the  self in  this  poem  is essen­ itally  an   artificial  one,  and   the  reader  comes away  not so much  with  the feeling that  he has encountered two distinct  per­ sonalities,   but  one  personality with   two voices; although one part  of the self is in direct  opposition  to  the  other part, the dichotomy is not complete. In "The broadcaster's poem"  (SHM,  78),  how­ ever, it is: the one self apparently inhabit­ ing  an  essentially  different  reality   from the  other   one.  Deciding  that  his  failure  as  a  broadcaster was  due  largely  to  the fact that  he spent most of his time broad­ casting   from   an   empty   room,   Nowlan says that   he  was  never  able  to  convince  himself  that  "there was somebody  listen­ ing."   The   more   time   he  spent   at   the microphone  alone,   the  more  an  unpre­ dictable,  destructive  part   of  his  psyche seemed  to  assume  control, and   he  was afraid  that  some  night  it

might  blurt  out  something about  myself so terrible
that  even I had  never until
that  moment  suspected  it.

The  fear  that  torments him  as  a  broad­ caster  reminds  him of the fear  he used to experience as a child  when  he was walk­
ing  alone  on  "bridges and  other  I high
 places",   the   fear   that   a   part   of  "me" would   "sneak   up   behind  I  myself  and
push."
But the other  self is not  always  as sini­ ster as this poem suggests. In "The dream  of  the  old  man  who  became a  boy  yet remained himself,''6 for instance, the man  and  the  boy,  believing  themselves to  be separate  entities,   plot   to   destroy   each other.   When   the  old  man   has  a  heart  attack  because   he   sees   the   boy   doing  things   that   he  thinks  are   "unspeakably evil",  the  boy  begins  to  think  of  himself as the  victor, but  then  realizes  that  he is "shrinking smaller  and  smaller  and  smal­ ler". Although the poet concludes, "I will be the first man  in all of history  Ito leave two corpses behind  him,''  the  tone  is one of mild surprise,  not  horror. At times  the other  self may assume  the  role  of a fool. In "He  finds himself  alone  in  the  house" (BTL, I9), a slightly  mad,  barbaric self gleefully takes advantage of the situation:

When a slice of beef happens to fall to the floor
I snatch  it up and  eat  it,
dust and  all, my eyes rolling.
I purr  like a lion.
Not because I'm  drunk  or drugged
but  because I'm  happy  and  there's  nobody
else  here,  nobody  not  even  myself  to  deny
me
the  pleasure  of going crazy.

The  tone is more serious in "He addresses himself to one of the young  men  he once was"  (SHM, 38)  as the  poet  expresses  a feeling of compassion  for this earlier self.
Even  though  he was "such  I a clown" the
poet    is   now   eager    to   welcome    him
"home":

You were a fool and  I am
too often  tempted to play the comedian.
I give you only
a home for your ghost,
and  one
fraternal voice
joined  in the  general  laughter.

Keenly  aware  of the  fact  that  he is, in


107

WHOLLY DRUNK OR WHOLLY  SOBER



some  ways, a  new  person  every  day,  the poet  ponders the  possible effects  that  the passage  of  time  might   have  on  his  rela­ tionship with  other people:

Here  I am promising  to love you for ever
when
I  was somebody  else only yesterday
 of selves that  each  of us contains because it is a part  of that  greater mystery-just being  alive.
One  of the most  fascinating aspects  of Nowlan's interest   in  the  multiple self  is his use of it as  the  controlling metaphor in  "The encounter, the  recognition" (BTL, 6g):

and  don't know who
I'll  be tomorrow.

(BTL, 53)

Nor   is   time   the   only   dimension that proves uncertain: space  too, he finds, is equally  unreliable. Addressing a loved one in  "Walking toward the  bus  station" (BTL, 52)   he  says  that   although  there
are  "witnesses  I who  would  swear  I they
saw   us  now"   saying   goodbye   to   each
other, in reality  "we  are  each  of use else­ where  I  and   alone,"  or   perhaps   "we" have "boarded a plane I together" and are
now in "Spain". No one knows in what spatial   or  temporal reality the  true  self exists. The more  he thinks  about  the fact that   each   of  us  "contains  multitudes, /
every one of whose  I personalities is split"
(SHM, 46), the   more   he  realizes  how
difficult it is to be certain that  you ever "know" another human being.  In  "Dear Leo"  (SHM, 21)  he confesses  to his old friend,

If I were honest
I'd  hesitate
when  asked if I  know you, meaning  do  I  know  the one you usually  let
represent  you in  public,

hesitate  and  grope through  the  past

before answering.

But  I do  not  wish  to give the  impression that  Nowlan  is describing a nightmare world in which  new selves keep popping unexpectedly  out   of  the  woodwork.  In most   of   the   poems    (including  "Dear Leo")  he  is celebrating the  multiplicity

108
 There's a  path  through   the  woods, or  a
corridor
in an empty building.  I enter  it
at  both ends and  walk slowly toward  myself.
I am  wholly drunk.
I am  wholly sober. We meet midway
and recognize one another. "Hello, Alden,"  I say.

That's how my best poems are  created.

The path and  the  corridor are  passages through some kind of experience that  the poet  wishes to  explore.  Whether the  ex­ perience   occurs   in   the   external   world ("the woods")  or in the internal world of his own  psyche  ("a  corridor"),  the  poet begins  by  exploring  it  from   both   ends simultaneously.   One     self	is	"wholly  drunk":  relaxed,  receptive,  subjectively involved   (as  he  says  elsewhere,   "drunk­
eness I is  a  kind I of  dreaming"7 ) ;  the
other  self is "wholly  sober": alert, critical,
objective. Meeting in  the  centre of  the wood I building, the  two selves recognize
and  greet  one another. Although conver­
sation   is  minimal    ("Hello, Alden"),  it would   appear  that   each   of  the   poet's selves  learns   something important  from the  other, something that   contributes to the  poet's   total  appreciation of  the  ex­ perience.    Whatever  the   nature  of   the experience might  be it  is important  that  the  "wholly  drunk" self and  the  "wholly  sober"  self each  have  an  opportunity to explore  it  independently,  and  even  then  the  moment of their  encounter will only prove   fruitful  if   each   recognizes   (note  title)    the  unique  contribution  that   the  other  has  to  offer. There is no  question of   superiority-each   self   has   its  own

WHOLLY DRUNK OR  WHOLLY SOBER



essential    function   without   which    the other self is diminished. It is tempting to try  and  measure  the  success of  Nowlan's other   poems  on  the  basis  of  whether or not  the  "wholly  drunk" self and  the "wholly  sober"  self have  each  been  given an   equal   voice,   but   such   an   analysis would   be   arbitrary  and    self-indulgent (one  cannot forget  Nowlan's indictment of the critic  at  Knox  College  who  kept a
"chamber mug  beneath his bed I lest the
floors  of  the  long  dark  hallway chill  his
feet"8 ). But   the  terms   "wholly drunk" and  "wholly  sober"  do  seem  to suggest a new   terminology  that   may   be  used  to define  certain  aspects  of the  human  con­ dition   that   appear  to  haunt  the  poet's imagination and  to  be  related   to  his in­ terest  in the divided  self. Although Now­ lan  does  not  use  these  terms   again, he does  seem  to feel  that  many  experiences in  life  (not  simply  those  that   find  their way into  a poem)  are  more  fully  experi­ enced  when  they  are  simultaneously ap­ prehended    by   a   self   that    is   "wholly drunk" and  a self that  is "wholly  sober". In  "The  beggars  of Dublin" (BTL, 16), for   instance,  the   "wholly  drunk"  self
would  "like  to wonder I if  this  little  lad
blowing  I a  tin   whistle   could   be  Pan,
testing  me,"  but  the  "wholly sober" self condemns  his  "bleeding  American I  ar­
rogance" and  the  pride  he feels when  he notices  his shilling  lying  there  among all the other  pennies. His drunken self would like to feel sorry for  the  boy and  also for the  woman   with   the   crying   child   who runs  up  to him  after  the  first encounter, but  the  sober  self  knows  that   "she's  the
mother of the lad  I with  the  whistle  who
is  only  a  kind   of  signalman, I  and   of
course  she sticks  pins  in  the  baby". And
yet  he  can  not  refrain from  giving  her
"two shillings and  six pence" and  feeling "more of  an  ass  than   ever''. While   the poet's   responses  obviously   cause   him  a certain    amount  of   consternation,   they are  at  least  more  fully  human than   the
 other alternatives: pure  cyruc1sm or pure naivety.   When    the   poet   encounters a wounded   gull  in  "On the  nature of  hu­ man     compassion" (MNM,  62),    his "wholly drunk" self is again  rather naively compassionate:

Bird, I am sad for you.
If I could  make you  trust  me
I'd  take you in  my hands,
carry  you back  to the city
and  hire  a  veterinarian to heal  you.

His   "wholly   sober"  self,  on   the   other hand,  is unncessarily harsh:

what  you  call  your  compassion  the  conceit that  all  living  things  are  Alden  Nowlan  in
disguise.

Only   by  keeping  these   two  selves  in some kind  of balance or  equilibrium  will the  poet  be able  to  respond   to  the situa­ tion  in  a  way   that   is  fully  human. In "Exile" (BTL, 67), the  "wholly drunk" self is the "little child dreaming" and  the "wholly  sober"  self is  the  God  who  finds
himself  in  a  world   "other I than   that  I
which  he remembers 1 creating". Finding
it difficult  to keep  the  two selves in equi­
librium, the  persona  concludes  that   his true  self is the  "little child  I dreaming".
It is always  easier  to  deny  the  reality  of
one's objective, critical self  (even  when  it has assumed God-like proportions) by confining  it  to  a  dream  than   to  accept its  existence   and   the   concomitant  fact that  one has created, or is responsible for, the  world  in  which  one  finds  oneself.
But the self that  is "wholly drunk" and
the self that  is "wholly sober"  do not necessarily  appear together in a poem: sometimes  only one self is present and  the reader  is aware of the other self primarily because of its conspicuous absence.  In "Marian at  the  pentecostal meeting" (P]G, 2o),  for   instance,  Nowlan   des­ cribes    a   girl,    "neither   admired    nor clever", who  lives  in  a  dream  world  of
"cotton candy  ... faith I spun  on a silver
rod". The  poet  cannot condemn her  but

109

WHOLLY DRUNK OR  WHOLLY  SOBER



only  wishes  that   she  may  "ride I God's carousel  forever". Perhaps he also wishes that   Napoleon, "A  tiger  in the  Dublin zoo"  (BTL, 17), may  be allowed  to live in his fantasy  world forever  too. When he is "wholly  drunk", Napoleon asserts  that
he "imposes  his own order  I on the space
around  him"   and   grandly  declares, "I
stop  and  tum where  I choose". It is only his "wholly  sober" self that  reminds him
that  this "is  three  feet  short  I of the  end
of   the    cage".    Nowlan's  treatment   of
"Mister Name  Witheld" in  "After  read­ ing   the    correspondence  in   Penthouse magazine" (SHM, 6g)   is  somewhat less sympathetic. Completely  suppressing  his sober self, Mr. N. W. divides  his time  be­ tween   watching   fantasy   worlds   on   the television  and creating them  in the letters  he writes  to the  magazine:

It's  time  to sit down with pencil  and  paper to write  about  lapping anchovy  butter  from
the navel of of [my]  wife's
nymphomaniac adolescent  sister.

But although the "wholly  drunk" self can be extremely dangerous, particularly when it  is  allowed   to  have  full  vein,  Nowlan rarely castigates those who are under its influence.
His  most  serious  attacks are  reserved for those who willfully  deny the visionary ("wholly  drunk")  part  of themselves.  To do  this,  he suggests  in  "The great  rejec­ tion"    (BTL, 56)    is  the   first,   perhaps
"even   the   only I  sin,   and   the   guilt  I
therefrom I a kind  of worship". In  "The
men  in  Antonio's barber shop"   (MNM,
58)  Nowlan  defines a world  in which  all the  members  (with  the  exception of  the poet)  have denied the existence of the visionary  self and  live in  a  bleak,  joyless world  of mundane certainty:

And  their  laughter  is  never  accidental, or too loud.


IIO
 
And  each  of them  knows  who  would  have won
if Joe  Louis in  his prime  had  fought
Cassius Clay in his;
knows whether  or not  the  World  Series is fixed;
knows which team  in  the  National Hockey
League
will finish  first,  and  if  the  same  team  will win the Stanley  Cup.

The hecklers in "The bull  moose"  (P ]G,
45), like  the   men   in  Antonio's barber shop, also live in a world  devoid  of vision and  joy, and  their  idea  of "fun" is  ram­ pant  with cliche and self-aggrandizement.

The  oldest  man  in  the  parish  remembered seeing a gelded moose yoked with an ox for plowing. The young men snickered  and  tried to  pour   beer  down  his  throat, while  their girl friends  took their  pictures.

At  sunset   when   the   bull   moose  finally gathers   his  strength  "like   a  scaffolded king"  and  is shot  by the  wardens, all  the young  men  assert  their   triumphant  ap­ proval  in the only way they know how­ by leaning "on  their automobile horns  as he toppled".
In  "Survival" the  poet  seems to be focusing on a situation that  is almost archetypal: what  happens when  a  man who  is governed   by  his  "wholly   sober" self (Og)  and  his friend, who is governed by his "wholly  drunk" self, encounter the same experience?

The  first  man  who  ever  stepped   on  a  lion and  survived
was Og
who afterwards  attributed
his good fortune  to  his poor  eyesight, he having  been unable
to see anything  but claws, teeth  and  a monstrous  body while  his companion
stood  transfixed  by the  indescribably beautiful
visions that  he saw with  his third  good eye.

While  this is unquestionably one of  Now­ lan's  finest  poems,  it  is not  immediately clear  what   the  poet  is  saying about   the visionary experience. Is he suggesting  that

WHOLLY DRUNK OR  WHOLLY SOBER



it is better  not  to have  it  and  survive,  as Og  does, or  to have  the  vision and  cease to exist  like his companion? Without ex­ plicitly  taking  sides,  the  poet's  tone  and diction seem  to  suggest  that   his  sympa­  thies  (as we would  expect)   lie with  Og's companion  (who  does,  after  all,  see  the vision   with   his  third   "good"  eye)    but surely  a poet who has such an innate love of creaturely  comforts, and  is so quick  to admit that  it  is "very  good  / to be alive"  (SHM, 81)   would  not  advocate a  phil­ osophy  that had as its main  tenet  the idea that  the  body  is easily  expendable. Or  is the  poem  simply  an  allegory  on  the  hu­ man  condition:  the   poet   arguing  that man  only has two choices-either he has the  vision  and  is  destroyed   by  it  or  he does  not  have   the  vision  and   survives? Perhaps the full implications of the  poem can  only  be understood by considering it in  terms  of the  divided  self. Like  the  self
 selves are separated and  housed  in two distinct   psyches, and   the  results  are  dis­ astrous: Og's  spiritual death is as  tragic,  if not more so, than  his companion's phy­ sical  death. But  the  two  selves  need  not necessarily  be divided  in  real  life. And  if they  had  been  unified  in  one  personality in  this  poem,  there  would  have  been  no tragedy: part  of  the  individual's psyche would    see   the   lion   as   "indescribably beautiful" and  the  other part would  see the  impending danger  and   get  the  hell out of there. Whether this imaginary hero would  subsequently go home  and  write  a poem  or  return to  his  hut  and  sharpen his hunting knife  does  not  really  matter. What does matter is the  poet's  implicit suggestion,   in  this   as  well  as  in   other poems, that  man  can  never  realize  his full potential  as  a  human  being   if  he  con­ sciously or  unconsciously denies  any  one of the multiplicity of selves that his psyche

that   is "wholly   sober", Og  is  alert   and      contains.
practical, and   when  he  suddenly  comes upon  the claws, teeth and  monstrous body he comes  to a conclusion that  sends  him
 


NOTES

smoking across  the  grasslands   for  home. He  survives  (hence  the  poem's  title)   but he merely survives. Og's companion, when confronted  with   the   same   claws,   teeth and  monstrous body comes to very differ­ ent  conclusions and  sees only  an  "indes­ cribably  beautiful vision"  that leaves  him "transfixed"  and   subsequently,   one   as­ sumes, dead.  But "Survival" is not simply an  allegorical  exploration of  two  differ­  ent  approaches to  life,  each  of  which  is potentially ruinous; rather it is an analysis of  what happens to  a  man   when   he  is dominated either  by his "wholly   drunk" self or his "wholly  sober"  self. Each  man, as the poet says, contains multitudes: con­ tains, among others, Og  (a "wholly sober"  self)   and   Og's   companion (a   "wholly  drunk" self) . In   "Survival"  these   two
 1 Nowlan, Alden, Bread, Wine and  Salt.
2  ---,Playing the  Jesus Game, p. 36. Here­
after referred to simply  as  P]G.
3 ---, The  Mysterious Naked  Man, p.  32. Hereafter referred to simply  as MNM.
4   Some  suggestion of a divided or  multiple self seems  to be emerging in such  poems  as "Con­ fession"  (P]G, 86)    and  "Disguise"   (P]G,
42), but  the  poet  does  not  seem  to  think of his  lascivious thoughts  or  his  "third eye"  as
something truly  "other" in  these   poems,   but rather facets   of  a  single   personality  which, for   various  reasons,  he   has   to   keep   under control.
5  Nowlan, Alden, I'm  a Stranger  Here  Myself,
p. 43· Hereafter referred to  simply  as  SHM.
a---, Between  Tears  and  Laughter, p. 64.
Hereafter referred to simply  as  BTL.
1 MNM, 6g.
8  P]G, 79·





III

CANADIAN ETHNIC  STUDIES/ETUDES  ETHNIQUES  DU  CANADA Vol. VII,  No. 2, 1975



SPECIAL ISSUE
 

Ethnic Folklore in Canada



INTRODUCTION

ARTICLES
The  Ethnicity  Factor  in Anglo-Canadian
Folkloristics
Oral  Tradition and  Ethnic  Boundaries: West Icelandic  Verses and Anecdotes
"I Won't Tell These Stories to My Kids"
The  Martenitsa: An Old World Custom with
New World Significance
Speaking atfaboutjwith the Dead: Funerary
Rhetoric among Ukrainians in Western Canada
A Contribution to the Ethnohistory  of Saskatchewan's
Patagonian  Welsh Settlement

ARCHIVAL SOURCES
A Descriptive List of Selected Manuscript  Collections at the Canadian Centre  for Folk Culture Studies, National Museum of Man, Ottawa

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ethnic Folklore in Canada: A Preliminary Survey

FILM  REVIEWS Review of Three  Films

REPORT ON  A  NATIONAL CONFERENCE: Multiculturalism and Third  World Immigrants
BOOK   REVIEWS CONTRIBUTORS
 ROBERT KLYMASZ


CAROLE HENDERSON MAGNUS EINARSSON
KAY  STONE PHILIP TILNEY ROBERT  KLYMASZ GORDON  MACLENNAN



RENEE   LANDRY RUTH  DYCK SHIRLEY  ZAPORZAN JAMES   FRIDERES


Subscription rates:
Individuals $15.00; Students $10.00; Institutions  $20.50
Individual  issues $5.00
Above  rates include a quarterly newsletter and membership to
Canadian  Ethnic Studies Association.

Order  from:
Canadian Ethnic Studies, The University of Calgary
2920- 24th Avenue N.W., Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2N 1N4

112

THE MARITIME WRITER AND THE FOLKS DOWN HOME


Donald Cameron



HE WAS  DRUNK,  leaning up against  an ornate doorpost in one of Fredericton's elegant old houses, his tie askew, a half-full glass in his hand.
"Shay," he muttered, "you know shame­
thin'  I  always  wondered? How  come  all you  guys  come  from   away?   How  come none  of yous is from  N'Brunswick?"
"All you guys" were  the people  putting out   the    noisy   leftwing    monthly, The Mysterious East  ( 1g68-72)  -and on  the whole   the   man   was  right.   The   editors hailed    from   Vancouver,  Toronto  and Detroit; the layout  was done  by a refugee from   Lethbridge  and   her   husband, a native  of  Prince   Albert; only  the  office manager was a  native  New Brunswicker. "You  guys  come  in,"  declared my  in­ ebriated friend, "an' fin' fault  with every­ thing.  You  don'   like  the  gov'ment, you don'  like  the  water  authority, you  don'  like  the  roads,  you  don' like  anything'. But  what  t'hell  do  you  know?  You  don'  come  from   here.  You  know?   you  don'  come   from   here.  Whyn't  you  go  back
where  you come  from?"
"I'll make  you  a  deal," I  said,  "You get  W.  A. C.  Bennett   to go  back  where he comes from, which is Hampton, New Brunswick.  Then I'll  be interested in  go­ ing back  to B.C."
Harry Bruce  calls  it  "birthplace big­
otry",   and   any  writer   in  the  Maritimes
with any commitment to truth must eventually face  it. You  don't come  from here:   you  have  no  right   to speak.  Even being born in the Maritimes doesn't necessarily help. Alden  Nowlan  hails from Nova  Scotia's  Annapolis Valley;  should
 he  cnt1c1ze the  genteel   culture of  Fred­ ericton  in which  he is now a fixture, peo­ ple  will mutter that  of  course  he  doesn't quite  belong,  he's  only  shanty  Irish  from Windsor, blood  will  out, you know.  Back in  Nova  Scotia,  Alden   is  someone   who left,  and  anything he  writes  is suspect: he  no  longer  knows  the  situation at  first hand.   Birthplace  bigotry   is  the   native Maritimer's first, automatic response  to criticism.  It's  the gut reaction of a slighted people who feel shut off from the more glittering  rewards   of  Canadian   citizen­ ship. It's  the tavern  crouch of  people  who for  generations have  been  put  down  for their   accents,   their   values,   their   tradi­ tions.
The  relationship between  the Maritime writer   and   his  culture seems  to  me  re­ markably  complex,    and   its   complexity has  been  intensified   in  recent  years  be­ cause  the  Maritimes  have  lately  been  at­  tracting a whole new kind of immigrant: the  talented,  successful  people   who  are traditionally  drawn to  the  great  capitals of learning and  enterprise, but  who  now­ adays  seek  in  the  Maritimes the  personal and cultural values  which  they  feel  have been neglected  elsewhere. The newcomers find  a  great  deal  which   is admirable­ and   more   than   a   trifle   which   is   out­ rageous.  Especially  if  he  is a  Canadian, the  newcomer   assumes  his  citizenship is not  in  question.   But  when  he  criticizes, he finds himself  at  odds  with  what  must surely be the toughest, most deeply  rooted regional  culture in  English  Canada. Be­ coming  a part  of  that  culture is no simple matter.


113

THE MARITIME WRITER



Maritime culture, after  all, has long forgotten the  process  of expansion which still  dominates  the   mores   of  the   West. British  Columbia and  Alberta are  full  of immigrants, from  the  Maritimes as  well as from  every  other corner  of  the  globe, and  drawing the  immigrant into  the  life of his new community is a well-developed art.  For  the Westerner, broadly speaking, change  is likely to be progress,  things  are opening up,  and   the  immigrant is  wel­ come   as  part   of  that   growth.  For   the Maritimer,  change  is  likely   to   be  loss, things  are  closing  down,  and  the  immi­  grant is rocking  what  is already a rather unsteady boat. Besides, the Maritimer has learned over  the  years  that  in  the  rest of Caanda his  home  is  regarded as  a  kind of Wales or Appalachia: a land  of closed coal mines and  wasted  forests, a stagnant and  depressing society,  a  community of hillbillies  who  abuse   the  local  blacks,  a place  where  the spirit  withers  and  the in­ tellect  flags,  a  place  from  which  people escape.   Indeed,  the   Maritimes   used  to boast that  their  main  expo;:-t was brains­ and  in fact  the  list of tycoons, statesmen, artists,    and    academics  who   graduated from   Maritime  society   is  a   long   one. Cyrus Eaton, Samuel Cunard, Bonar Law, Lord  Beaverbrook, Izaak Walton Killam, Hugh MacLennan, N. A.M. MacKenzie, Nathan Cohen, W.  A. C.  Bennett, Allan Blakeney,  D.  0. Hebb,  Louis  B. Mayer,  Walter Pidgeon  and  Donald Sutherland, Amor  de Cosmos, Dalton Camp, Charles Bruce -if  such  people  leave,  the  melan­  choly  conclusion  must  be  that  those  who remain are  the inferiors, content to splash in  the  small  pond  east  of Quebec.
Recently, however, things have changed. Jutting into  the  Atlantic with  the only deepwater  ports   on   the   east   coast   of North   America,  the   Maritimes  are  in­ creasingly   interesting  to   oil   companies looking  for supertanker terminals. Ameri­ cans choking  to death in the cities of New England  and    the   megalopolis  around


114
 New York have discovered that only a thousand miles north  lies a  lovely region of lakes and harbours where  the people mostly   speak   English,   act   quaint,  and don't shout  Yankee  Go Home. Newsprint and  fish are  still  in  demand, despite  the serious problems  of those industries. Even coal   is  staging   a  comeback. I  am   not denying  the  realities  of  poverty  and regional   disparity; I  am   simply   saying that  life goes on at a level today  which  is a very different matter from  the absolute privation of  thirty   years  ago.
And what yesterday  appeared to be backwardness today looks remarkably like conservation. This   is  a  region   of  small towns and  villages;  even Halifax, the premier   city,  is no  more  than   a  modest town  by Ontario standards. All the same, it   has   the  facilities   of   a   much   larger capital city:  a well-heeled  civil service,  a large  CBC operation, a symphony, a per­ manent theatre, four  universities,  a  col­ lege  of  technology   and   another  of  art,  bookstores  and  galleries,  restaurants and  nightclubs. It offers  many of the  rewards  of  a  city  without  the  cancerous sprawl  which   makes,  say,  Toronto such  an  of­ fence  to the eye and  the spirit.
Halifax is typical  of  the  region  in  its
provision  of  a  remarkably  human  envi­ ronment, with  all  the  irritations  and  de­ lights  that   phrase  implies.  Maritime life is intimate and  abrasive,  comradely and  gossipy.  History   and   politics   are   worn close  to  the  skin.  Maritimers know  one another very well, which  is not to say that  they   invariably   like   one   another  very much.
It  is possible, in short,  to live an  inter­ esting  and   rewarding life  in  the  Mari­ times, and  to do it without being trapped by  the  whole  Rube   Goldberg  apparatus of modern life. One can still actually hope to own  a home  here,  as  opposed  to rent­ ing one  in  perpetuity  from  the  mortgage companies. It  is  possible  to  eat  well,  as rural  Maritimers do, by planting a garden

THE MARITIME WRITER



and  ralSlng some animals, or by buying directly  from  the farmers and  fishermen. The Saturday farmer's market in  Fred­ ericton   seems  to  bring  out  virtually  the entire   faculty   of  the  University of  New Brunswick.   A  writer   here   can   know   a community's  inner   life   in   remarkable detail,  and  can understand concretely the lines of force through which history affects the  present.
I speak,  perhaps, with  the  romantic passion   of  the  convert-but  to  me  it
really seems that  the rest of Canada offers nothing quite   comparable  to  the  Mari­ times. I have lived, for varying periods, in London and  New York, in California and in  France, and  though I  recognize  their attractions, I  cannot  think  any  of  them compares with  D'Escousse,   Nova  Scotia, as a place  to live and  work, as a place  to grow  old  and  decline  and  die.  It  would not  be so for everyone,  but  it is so for an increasing number of refugees from  the absurdities of the  modern city.  To  para­ phrase  Stephen Leacock's remark  about  my  native   Vancouver,  if  I  had   known what  it was like, I wouldn't have waited till  I was  thirty  to  come;   I  would  have been  born  here.
But  I wasn't.
Neither was Harry Bruce, Kent Thomp­ son,   Reshard  Gool,   Robert   Campbell, Russell    Hunt,  David   Walker,   Robert  Cockburn,  William   Bauer,   or   Anthony Brennan. And their work represents a fair proportion of the  writing  coming  out  of the  Maritimes at the  moment.
Not only that, but Hugh MacLennan, Bernell  Macdonald, Louis  Cormier, Tom Gallant, Ray  Smith  and  Elizabeth  Brew­ ster  aren't  living  here.  And  they  are  all born  Maritimers.
I don't  want  to construct any vast theories; the facts are too various  and recalcitrant, and for virtually every notion I might  propose  there  are  numerous  ex­ ceptions.   Some  of  the  explanations  are perfectly   obvious:   for   instance, all   the
 newcomers I mentioned, aside from Harry Bruce and  David  Walker, have some con­ nection   with   universities,  specifically­ Reshard Gool  excepted-with the  Uni­  versity of New Brunswick and  its affiliates. Under the leadership of such  men as Fred Cogswell  and   the  late   Desmond  Pacey, UNB  has always been  remarkably hospit­  able  both  to  imaginative writing and  to Canadian literature, and  the consequence is that   Fredericton  is  positively   infested with  poets. Fredericton has a tradition of breeding poets as well as attracting them, and   the  lines  of  intellectual  and   even familial  descent  can  be traced  from,  say, A. G. Bailey through Carman and Roberts to Jonathan Odell,  the Loyalist  eminence who  was  perhaps the  leading Tory   poet of the American Revolution, and  beyond, to   the   Emersons    of   pre-Revolutionary New England. I remember once calculat­ ing  that  if you  defined  "nationally pub­  lished   poet"   to   mean   any   poet   whose work  had   been   published  outside   New Brunswick,  then  Fredericton had  one  na­  tionally  published   poet  per  thousand  of population.  Even   allowing  for   copious amounts of  foul  verse,  that   remains an astonishing statistic.
The   whole  matter  is  further  compli­ cated  by the  fact  that  while  New Bruns­ wick harbours poets, Nova Scotia  is tradi­ tionally  a province  of  journalists, satirists  and   novelists.  From   Howe,   Haliburton and   McCulloch  through  Will  Bird  and Hugh   MacLennan  to   Ray   Smith   and  Harry  Bruce,  Nova  Scotia's  writers   are more  like  marginal men  of  affairs   than  men  of  letters.  Even   that   generalization needs  to  be  qualified, however, since  it refers only to writing  in English; in Gaelic,  Nova  Scotia  has  had  its  share   of  poets, and in New Brunswick  the most visible of current  Acadian   works  is La  Sagouin, a monodrama which has had  remarkable success throughout French Canada from Montreal to the  villages  of Cape Breton.
Nevertheless,  I will venture a very ten-

I 15

THE  MARITIME WRITER



tative  observation. I  suspect  that  literary people  are attracted to the  Maritimes be­ cause they sense the region's extraordinary literary resources,  but  that  their  associa­ tion   with   universities   largely    prevents  them   from   realizing  those   resources   in their   work.   Native   Maritimers  have   a vast   advantage -but rarely    have   the comparative sense of culture, the shrewd­ ness and  breadth of  judgment, to  mine those  resources   without  exposing   them­ selves  to  a  wider  experience.  They  leave
-and in the cities to the west they write about  the east  coast.
What I mean  by resources  is that  vast,
apparently endless supply  of stories and myths, of superstitions and  symbolism, which  the  east  coast  has  developed over three  hundred years  of  European  settle­ ment.   A   glance    at   Helen   Creighton's work reveals its range  and variety: a vital oral  tradition  which  exhales  the  stuff  of poetry   and   drama   as   naturally  as  the shoreline  of   Guysborough County  pro­ duces  fog.  Down   here,  the  news  is still other  people,  and   one's   neighbours are perpetually cast as characters in  the con­ tinuing play  which  is the  life  of  the  vil­ lage.  In  fact  the  process  almost  becomes ruinous, at a certain point: once the cast­ ing  directors  in  our   minds  have   estab­ lished  that, say, Rene  is a drunk, he finds it  extremely difficult  to  convince anyone  that  he  is ever  sober, sensible  or  serious;  such behaviour would be out of character. What's  the   news?   Nothing  to  do  with Henry  Kissinger and  Indira Gandhi; the news is that  Pierre's pig  went  down  the well, that  Frank's wife ran off with that Newfoundlander  who  was  staying   with them,  that  Henry  bought  a new car. And that, rather than  Kissinger  and  Gandhi, seems to me the stuff  out  of which litera­ ture  can  come.
Add  to  that   the  depth of  history  and
legend:  the   understanding  that   Louis­ bourg   has  been  foggy  ever  since  it  was captured by  the  English   in  I 7s8,  while

II6
 the  villages  of Main-au-Dieu and  Gaba­ rus,  on  either   side,  remained   Catholic, French and  fog-free.  Listen  to  the  plain­ tive  melodies  of  a  Cape  Breton  fiddler,  melodies  whose  titles  are  in  Gaelic  and which  came  to  Canada a  century and  a half  ago when  the fiddler's ancestors  set­ tled  on  the  farm  he  still  occupies.  Look at the Music Room on the Bedford  High­ way outside Halifax, built  for his French­ Canadian   mistress   by   Prince    Edward, Duke  of  Kent,  the  father of Queen Vic­ toria. Watch the  fog roll in over  Mader's Cove  and  wait  to  see  whether you  will glimpse   the  T eazer,  the   ghost   ship   of Mahone  Bay.
Such  things  are  dissolved  in  the  blood of  Maritimers,  and   lucky   is  the   new­ comer  who develops  an understanding of them. Indeed, one wonders  if a newcomer  can  ever have  the instinctive grasp of the Nova Scotia  farm communities which  in­ forms  the work  of  Ernest  Buckler,  or  the command of  the  human bearings  of his­ tory which underlies  the novels of Thomas Raddall.  Yet  Buckler  spent   ten  years  in Toronto   before   returning  to  farm   and write  in  Bridgetown, and  Raddall lived his first  ten  years in  England and  put  in his  young manhood at sea. Hugh  Mac­ Lennan's chilling  account of the young Jerome Martell's midnight journey  down the Miramichi, dodging his mother's mur­ derer,  is  one  of  the  most  brilliant  pas­ sages of Maritime literature, an  occasion which  enters  into  one's   personal   rather than  one's  literary memory-and yet by the   time   he   described  that   experience from  the  viewpoint  of a  New  Brunswick boy so isolated  he had  never seen a train, MacLennan himself was a Rhodes scholar long resident  in  Montreal.
I have heard  analogous stories from  the people who experienced their  events, and just once, in a story called  Snapshot: The Third  Drunk,  I  think  I  did  literary  jus­ tice  to  such   material.   (The  story   was published  in The   Atlantic  Monthly, ap-

THE MARITIME WRITER



propriately;  Malcolm Ross  declares   that the  common  denominator  of  Maritime life  has  been  the  similar   way  all  Man­ timers  bounce  off Boston.)   But  that  one story  came  from  years of  listening to the sorts  of  yarns  Maritimers  grow  up  with, listening  to  the  phrasing  and  rhythm of the various  Maritime accents-and there are   dozens   of   accents-and  trying   to deduce a system of values  from  the  grid­  work  of  assumptions in which  the  stories were  told. For  me  to  hear   and   under­ stand  these  stories  was  a  matter of  con­ scious  choice  and  effort,  and  at  the  end I knew only a part  of what  any bright  kid in a fishing  village  simply  absorbs  in  the process  of  growing   up.  Never  mind, for the  moment, the  sheer  pleasure of hear­  ing  good  stories,  of   learning  from   mo­ ment    to   moment    the    dramatic   and homely details  of lives very different from my own.  The  point  is that   to make  my­ self capable of  writing the  story  required something resembling a reconstruction of
my  personal history-and even  then,  I used a narrator in the  story  who was not a native  of the  village in which  the  story took place.
Such  a  reconstruction of  personal  his­ tory means,  I think,  almost becoming one with people  whose roots reach  deeply into their  locale  and  its history,  and  that  pro­ cess is almost  inaccessible  to someone  in the university. The  automatic assumption of the working man  is that  the  university  person   is  his  superior, has  manners no working  man can share,  has a distaste  for colloquial   speech   and    rough    humour, speaks  in  a  way  he  cannot imitate. The  professor  may take  a summer home  in a village,  but  he  remains  a  professor,  and nobody  in  the  village  is likely  to assume that    his   interests    and    preoccupations match  their  own. At the end  of the sum­ mer  the  professor  goes back  to his  lucra­ tive  chair  in  town,  and  the  village  goes back to doing  without the light  and  curs­ ing the  bread, goes back  to pestering the
 MLA   to  do  something about  the   pot­ holes and  the  snowploughs, goes  back  to the card  games  and  bingoes  in  the parish hall.  A receptive professor  will  absorb  an amazing  amount  from   his   few   balmy weeks,  but   he  will   not   have   the   same understanding he would  have  if he actu­ ally   had   to  cope   with   the   year-round conditions his neighbours face.
The  result is evident in the work. Take,
for  instance, the  novels of Kent  Thomp­ son. Thompson is fortyish,  a sophisticated and  well-travelled man, despite his strenu­ ous  proclamations of  his  proletarian ori­  gins  in  the  backwoods   of  the  American Midwest.  He  is a  graduate of  the  Iowa  writing programme, and  a Ph.D.  from  the University of Wales.  He  has  been  a  pro­ fessor at the University of New Brunswick  since 1967, and  is now a Canadian citizen and   a  New  Brunswick  patriot. He  is  a respected  teacher of  writing, and  a good writer  himself.
His difficulty,  it seems to me, is that  he moves  in  a  rather  uninformative round of  activities, a  problem  he  has  resolved in  ways  I consider   revealing.  His   first novel,  The  Tenants were Corrie and Tennie, (1973)   is the  story  of an Ameri­ can   schoolteacher,  William   Boyd,   who falls  in  love  with  Federicton  while  on  a bus  tour  of  the  Maritimes.  Boyd  resigns by  mail,  buys  a  duplex,  and  retires,   in­ tending to live on the rent from  the other side. A young American professor  and  his wife become his tenants, and  Boyd gradu­ ally  becomes obsessed  with  his desire  for the professor's  young wife, Corrie. Gradu­ ally he slips over the edge into madness, imagining that  Corrie has left Tennie and the  children for  him.
The action  takes  place  in  Fredericton, and   various   aspects   of  the   setting,  the climate  and  so forth, are  captured with admirable precision. Yet all the important characters are American; the New Bruns­ wickers  make   only  cameo  appearances. The  reader  senses, I  think,  that  Thomp-

THE MARITIME WRITER



son simply  doesn't know  the  natives  well enough  to risk a novel  about them.  That is  not  to  say  the  novel  doesn't work;  it does  work  but  in  a  very  particular  way which  has  very little  to do with  the liter­ ary  resources  of New  Brunswick.
With  his second  novel,  Across  from the Floral  Park   ( I974), Thompson  retreats even  farther from  the  realities  in  which he lives. A wealthy man  buys a city man­ sion across from  the Floral  Park, and finds two   women    apparently   in   permanent residence. One  woman is old  and  decre­  pit  but  maintains a suite  of  rooms  in one wing  of  the  house ;  she  has  some  legal claim   on  the  house,  which   will  not  be fully  his  until  her  death. The other wo­ man  is young, beautiful and  gracious, ap­  parently of  servant origins,  and  the  hero marries  her.  They have  a  series  of  ven­ tures  and  adventures together-she  be­ comes a patron of the  arts,  he has  a suc­ cessful fling at  politics,  they  have  a child together -and  then   he  comes  home to find  all  the  locks  changed on  the doors. He is expelled  from  his sumptuous Eden; as  the  novel  ends  he  is  telling  the  story from  his hotel  room.
I  suggested   to  Thompson  that   Floral Park "read like a  novel  by someone  who had been an invalid  all his life and had watched the human comedy  taking  place on  the  other   side  of  a  pane   of  glass." Exactly,   he  replied, "that's  what  I  in­ tended. I wanted something timeless and  placeless.    Thus,   a   very    philosophical novel."
In  that  respect, Thompson's  novels greatly  resemble  those  of Anthony  Bren­ nan,  who  teaches  English  a  quarter of a mile   away   at   St.   Thomas   University, UNB's  Catholic affiliate.  A Yorkshireman by  origin,  Brennan  has  travelled widely and   studied   at   various    universities  in Canada and  England; he once spent  two years on  a  75,000 mile  trek  from  Alaska to  Colombia to  Newfoundland. He  has been  in Fredericton since  I97I.

II8
 Like its predecessor,  The Carbon  Copy (I 972),   Brennan's  second   novel,   The Crazy  House   ( I975)  owes  something to Kafka and  Sartre and  the  theatre of the absurd.  The   works   become   less  novels than    philosophical  parables,  excursions into the theory and  practice of revolution, the problems  of identity and  the need  for self-assertion. Both are set in imaginary countries, in  times  of great  political  tur­ moil;  both  invoke  imagery  of  terror  and  flight, and  both  feature protagonists who become enmeshed in events largely against their  wills  and   for  reasons  they  do  not fully  understand. I  found  them  both  ex­ tremely   interesting,  extremely pertinent to  Canadian politics,  and  quite   unusual in  the context  of Canadian writing. Can­ ada  has  remained largely  untouched   by the violence and  confusion  of modern politics,    and    in   one   sense   Brennan's novels are like a message from  that turbu­ lent  world.
Yet   once  again   I  am   struck   by  the utter   absence  of  the  kind  of  experience which  actually  surrounds Brennan on  all sides. Like Thompson, Brennan deals in generalities; like  Thompson,  he  reflects not  the  context   he  inhabits, but  a  con­ text  his  experience permits him  to  ima­  gine. And  though   I  do  not  want  to  ride a hobbyhorse  about it,  I suspect  the  rea­  son  is  the  oddly  insulated  world of  the universities. Gossip  and  meetings,  term papers   and   fluttery  infidelities,   parking privileges  and  pecking orders:  universi­  ties really  do  not  provide  very  rich  ma­  terial,  and  what  there  is has been  picked over very thoroughly. What is a writer  to do? The answer seems clear: drop  realism altogether, and   rely  entirely   on  the  re­ sources of one's intelligence and imagina­ tion.
I am not, of course, suggesting that Brennan or Thompson should  necessarily write  about New  Brunswick's  inner  life; I am simply pointing out  that  in fact  they don't. Their  novels  describe   a  rootless,

THE MARITIME WRITER



mobile,  violent   and   existential world,  a world  quite  unlike  the  Maritimes. Real­ ism, the  dominant mode  of  Western fic­ tion  for  three  centuries,  perhaps assumes a reasonably stable society, in which  link­ ages such  as  family,  politics,  money  and class  have  some  meaning. Brennan and Thompson actually live in one of the few places  where  such  a  society  persists,  but their   imaginations  are   not   at   horne  in that  context,  and   despite   their   obvious talents  the literary resources  of New Brunswick  go untapped.
The  modern novel, as Defoe  should re­ mind   us,  was  actually an  outgrowth  of journalism, and  I suspect  that  even  now fiction  is most vital  when  it relies heavily on  the  values  of   journalism: on  imme­ diacy, concreteness, the shrewdly  observed details of behaviour from  which  an astute  reader may deduce  the  involutions of the spirit.  Reality,   I  suggest,  is richer, more surprising  and   more   authoritative  than anyone's   imagination,  and   the   novelist who does not ask observation to help  him deprives  himself  of  his greatest  resource. I argue  my case from  a special  vantage point: I have been a professor,  I am  now a  journalist,  and  writers  are  notorious for their  insistence  that   the  only  reasonable course for a good writer  is the  course  the particular writer  has  chosen  for  himself. But  I  call  once  again  on  Kent  Thomp­ son, reflecting  on my route and  his own:

It's  just a choice,  I suppose,  between  doing articles as a job and  marking  first-year essays I don't   think  there's   a  great  deal  between them-do  you?  Except  that,  dammit, you get to learn  something, and  I hear, and  read, the same damn  thing over and over and over again.  The   curse  of  teaching  is  its   god­ damned  repetition. The  18-year-old  mind  is always  just  that-and  so, for  that  matter, is the  40-year-old  academic mind.  Nothing bloody well happens!

Be that  as it may, Kent  Thompson has published  two novels, and  I have  not. If the  professor is remote from  the  concrete concerns  of ordinary people,  the  journal-
 ist is if anything too  deeply  enmeshed in them.
Consider, for  instance, Harry Bruce,  a native   of  Toronto  who   has  lived  since
1971  in   Halifax.  Harry  is  the   son   of Charles  Bruce, the Nova Scotia-born poet and  novelist, and  like his father he is one of  the  finest  journalists  in  the  country. He is an accomplished prose stylist, an unusually   knowledgeable observer,  and his  sense  of  the  absurd   is  never  asleep. The   best  of  his  articles   and   essays  un­ questionably rank  as literature.
Yet Harry, too,  is forty  and  essentially bookless.   The    curse    of   the    freelance journalist's life  is  money: punching out articles for the national magazines, whisk­ ing   off   commentaries  for   CBC   radio,  hammering out  a  TV  script   here  and  a think-piece  there,   the   journalist  is  per­  petually  tied to the events of the moment, perpetually haunted by the inexorable ap­  proach of the mortgage payment and  the knowledge  that  if he  dares  to  be ill  this month,  he  will  have  trouble  with   that  payment next month. A book-length pro­ ject  will  consume  not  one   month,  but several,   and   how   is   the   journalist   to secure  such  a  stretch  of  free  time?  And how,  for  that  matter, is he  to  free  him­  self from  the  habit  of superficial bright­ ness,   from   the   easy   and    entertaining phrase  which nevertheless glosses over  the complexities of the  situation before  him? The  journalist has  always  been  a  some­ what  raffish and  disreputable figure,  and the rich variety  of human life is easier for him  to  find  than   it  is for  the  professor. But  the  long  view of things,  the  practice of the art  as an  art,  the  fine indifference to  the  marketplace  which   the  professor can take for granted-these are virtually unattainable luxuries for  the  drudges of Grub Street.
I am struck  by the  change in the  liter­
ary  marketplace  since   the   young   man­ hood   of  writers   like   Buckler,  Raddall, Will  Bird.  In  their   day,  the  short  story

119

THE MARITIME WRITER



was still a viable  commercial form; Rad­ dall  could  sit  in  Liverpool and  write  for Blackwood's,    Buckler    could    farm    in Bridgetown  and   write   for  Esquire,  and  each  of them  could  utilize an  established literary  form.   But   today's   market  for imaginative   literature   as   distinct  from essays and  reportage is sadly  diminished. Aside  from  Saturday   Night,  Chatelaine and  the CBC,  Canada offers  virtually no outlets  for fiction  except  at  purely  nomi­ nal  rates  of pay.  Fiction thus  becomes  a hobby  for  journalists as much as for  pro­ fessors -and  journalists have less time to pursue  any  hobby.
The result  is  that   the  most  successful Maritime fiction is often written in Mont­ real, where Hugh MacLennan soldiers on, where   Ray   Smith   occasionally  emits   a polished   and  entertaining  volume. And yet   it   sometimes    seems   that    everyone  down  home  is writing, too.  A couple  of years  ago,  I  edited  a literary supplement for the Halifax weekly The  Fourth Estate. We   advertised  for   contributions-and drew about 350 writers out  of the wood­ work,   a   surprisingly  large   number  of whom  were at least competent. The Nova Scotia  Department of Recreation (which  for  reasons  best  known  to the  Liberals is the  department  responsible for  culture) ran   a  writing  contest   last  year  and   at­  tracted over six hundred entrants. Prince  Edward  Island   boasts  Milton Acorn  and  a clutch of young hopefuls; in Saint John, Dan Ross has published literally hundreds of   popular  novels   under  half   a  dozen pseudonyms. After  a  stint  writing fiction for Montreal's Midnight, Raymond Fraser is said to be back in Chatham, New Bruns­ wick, and  every season seems to introduce another new Maritime writer from  a ma­ jor   Ontario  publisher:   David    Richard Adams  last year, Don Domanski this year with  a  book  of  poems  provocatively en­ titled The Cape Breton Book of the Dead.
The writers   I  most  admire are   those who give voice to the fantasies and  values,


120
 the fears and  assumptions, of an entire society. The  achievement of such  writers as Ernest  Buckler and  Alden  Nowlan  is precisely that kind of articulation, and  the excitement and  despair of being  a writer in  the  Maritimes arises  from  the  knowl­ edge  that  this  part   of  Canada  cries  out for such  articulation, the knowledge that  the  material with   which  life  here  rou­  tinely   presents   one   implies   a   constant, strenuous test  of  one's  talents and  one's character.
In  the end, the question is not where  a writer   comes  from   or  how  he  develops the  mixture of love and  judgment which the  Maritime community -and  perhaps any   community-demands. The  ques­ tion  is whether he  does  develop  it,  and  how  he uses it  to elucidate and  evaluate the  life around him.  My  drunken friend  was fumbling  for something real,  for The  Mysterious East was strident in judgment and  reticent about love, and  what  he was really saying, I think  now, was that  judg­ ment  without  love  can  hardly fail  to  be harsh and  merciless. In  the  course of jus­ tice  none  of us should  see salvation.
I  don't   accept   his  view:   I  think  our
judgments were based on love, on the per­ ception  that  Maritime political and econ­ omic  structures are  unrepentantly  brutal to  people-and it  is  people,   not  struc­  tures,  that  deserve  our  love.  The  writer  who  could  really  capture the  quality   of Maritime people  in all their  raucousness, their  pragmatism, their  desperation, no­ bility, comedy and  mystery,  could  give us works to compare with  those of Chekhov  and   Faulkner.   Perhaps  the   parallel    is really with Ireland, that  other small, poor, haunted  and  talkative country. A Yeats or  a  Joyce  would   rub  his  hands at  the speech  and  sensibility  of  Lunenburg or the  Miramichi; I  think,   somehow,   they would  throw  up their  hands  at  Pickering.
Sometimes, when I give myself over to dreaming, I think  of John Millington Synge, capturing forever  the  melody  and

THE  CANADIAN GOLDSMITH



anguish of the Aran  Islands.  I reflect that I too live on an  island  off an  island.  And I remember that  Synge was not raised on the islands  that  called  forth  his greatness.
 The  blend  of what  he  brought and  what he  found   gave  the  world   Riders  to  the Sea, and that  same sea washes at my doorstep.





THE CANADIAN GOLDSMITH

Doug Fetherling


OLIVER GOLDSMITH, the Cana­ dian  Oliver Goldsmith who  wrote "The Rising  Village" in emulation of his great­ uncle's  "The Deserted  Village", occupies a place  in  Canadian  writing  unusual for being a compound of several small claims to fame.  He  was, as Lome Pierce  pointed  out, "our first native-born, English-speak­ ing poet". He was also the first Canadian poet   to  be  published  abroad    (and   the first  to  have  his work  panned overseas). Similarly,  his  brief   Autobiography   was one of the first literary memoirs  by a Canadian. It  can   also  be  said   without much   exaggeration  that   Goldsmith  was the father of a Maritimes poetic tradition, although this accomplishment, like the others,  was rather involuntary and  taken note  of only in retrospect.
But  if  all  these  firsts  were  put   aside,
there  would  remain about  Goldsmith's career  one  fact  sufficient  to  immortalize him  in  the  footnotes, if  not  actually in the  anthologies he  now  occupies  so  curi­ ously.  This is  the  fact   that   he  was our first,   and   one   of  our   worst,   great-bad poets,  in  the  sense  that  William Arthur Deacon's four Jameses1 are great-bad. He was the first to publish verse of such  una­  bashed  unsatisfactoriness as to make  him stand   out   even   among  the   poetasters, dabblers and  crackpots who routinely in­ habit  the  slums of verse. It is in this way that  we should  think  of him  and  that he should  appeal. It is also in this light  that
 he has been insufficiently  recognized, just as  in   the  others   he   has   been,   if   any­ thing, overpraised. Poor Oliver Goldsmith ( I 795- I 86 I ) was not  very important as a literary figure.  He  was  and is important only  as a curiosity  of  literature-in  the pathologist's or  carnival barker's  use  of the phrase rather than  Disraeli's.
"The Rising  Village" has several char­ acteristics   in  common  with  other  great­ bad poems, just as Goldsmith's personality resembles  those of other  writers who  fol­ lowed in his eccentric footsteps. Generally speaking,  the   truly,  monumental  great­ bad  poems can  be divided  into  two types. First  there  are  the  occasional poems,  in which   the   poet   acknowledges  or   cele­ brates  with  lopsided   rhetoric,  topics   of excruciating insignificance. An example is James  Mcintyre's ode to the  mammoth Ontario cheese, made  famous  by Deacon. The  second  type  is the  kind  intended as an  epic, in which  the  poet  brings  to bear what  he believes are  the big guns of High Style on a poem-idea completely unsuited to such  treatment. "The Rising  Village" falls within  this classification. It  is  prob­ ably one of the finest examples.
Goldsmith's aim  was to depict  the trib­ ulations  of the  early  Nova  Scotia  Loyal­  ists, a  group  from   which   he  considered himself  to  have  descended,  even  though his father was an  Irishman  directly em­ ployed  by  the  Crown and   not   what   is ordinarily thought of as a  Loyalist. Still,


I21

THE  CANADIAN GOLDSMITH



Goldsmith claimed  sympathy with  the Loyalists. He set about in his poem to describe  their  life in the  wilds so different from the southern colonies  they had left behind  a generation earlier.
This  was his intent. As to his motive,  it seems   that   Goldsmith  like   most   other first-generation Canadians was not so con­ cerned   with  the  family  roots  as  perhaps his children would  have been had he mar­ ried.  Nor  does  Goldsmith  seem  to  have been  concerned  with  the  politics  of  the Loyalist  era.  Indeed he  appears remark­ ably apolitical despite  (or possibly because of)  the fact  that  he was a civil servant for most  of his days. It seems  rather that  he took  to verse in  order to show  others  the ties to his famous ancestor, in the shadow  of whose renown  the family  lived.
Goldsmith was  less interested in  what the  Loyalists did  in Canada than  in what they  had  been  in  the  American  colonies and,  by extension, in the mother country. As Fred Cogswell  noted  astutely in the Literary  History  of Canada, Goldsmith "describes  the   pioneer  homes   of  Nova Scotia  as if they really were the neat Eng­ lish cottages  which  the author would have liked  them  to be." Goldsmith was a Tory  by nature as well as by choice. He envied the  prosperity and  respect  his people  had known  before  the  Revolution, which  he might  well have blamed  for what  he him­  self became: a minor  Crown servant  who kept  hoping   to  be  sent  abroad but  who most often  was shuffled around the  Mari­ times.  He  was  a  man  of  no  great  ambi­  tion.   Once   "The  Rising   Village"  was poorly received,  he stopped writing verse, except  for  a  few  occasional  poems.  He was partly descended (and  partly liked to believe that he was descended) from the Establishment, who  lived   among others of  their   kind.   (The first  wave  of  Nova Scotia   Loyalists  included  200  graduates of  Harvard and  an  equal   number from other  colleges. These  included four  of the five  judges of the  Massachusetts superior


122
 court,   including  the  chief   justice.)    His aim  in  life  was  to  be  comfortable and secure.
He was also a man  proud  of his educa­ tion.  This  pride  shows  itself  in  his  pen­  chant for quotation. In  his autobiography (which  wasn't   published  until  1943)   he is given to promiscuously extracting from the works of his relative, "The Traveler" in particular. But he was conversant with  everything  from   the   classics  to   James  Fenimore Cooper,  and  one  at  least  sus­ pects  that   he  was  at  ease  with   Scott's  novels. The influence  of the older  writers  over  the  newer  is central to "The Rising Village". The  poem  is written in  heroic  couplets,  one  fancies,  because,  first,  this was the  form  of "The Deserted Village" and, second, because  (as Cogswell  states)  this  form  was "already out  of date  even in  England" and  thus  pleasing  to Gold­ smith's  sensibilities.
Such  couplets,  of course,  reached their
peak of usefulness as vehicles for the burnished wit  of  Pope.  Goldsmith's  suc­ cess with  them  was  commensurate  with  his  own  lack  of  wit  and  sophistication. He  should  have  been  better off with  the freer forms used by, say, Thomson, whom he rivalled  in emotional equipment. As it is,   Goldsmith's poem  resembles  "The Seasons"  only  to  the  extent   that   it  con­ cludes with  an embarrassing panegyric to Britannia, ending  with  the lines
And bliss and  peace encircle  all thy shore
Till empires rise and sink, on earth, no more

which,   for   the   second    ( 1834)    edition, Goldsmith changed to:
And bliss and  peace encircle  all thy shore
Till  sun, and  moon, and  stars shall  be no
more.

This  change, which  can  be noted  in Michael Gnarowski's excellent  compara­ tive text, published in 1968, points  up the way in which  Goldsmith  revised  the  text to suit  the climate  of a later  day. For  in­ stance,  he struck  from the second  edition

THE  CANADIAN GOLDSMITH



the  dedication to  Dalhousie. Apparently it  had   been   included  originally  in  the hope  of  securing patronage. Once  Dal­ housie was dead,  it bore no value or truth for  the author.
The poem  begins  by  describing the original Loyalists  and  their  hardships and thanksgiving. There is a catalogue of the local professional  class, such as the teacher and  the physician. The  growth of the community from  settlement to village is indicated by "The wandering Pedlar ... ,
I Established here, his settled  home main­
tains, 1 And   soon   a  merchant's  higher
title gains." There follows an inventory of
the   merchant's  goods,   which   Cogswell cites as one of the lyrical  high spots of the poem   but   which   could   also   be  looked upon  as one of the more  absurd  passages.

Around  his store, on spacious shelves arrayed,
Behold his great  and  various  stock  in  trade.
Here,  nails and  blankets,  side by side, are
seen,
There, horses' collars, and  a large  tureen;
Buttons  and  tumblers,  fish-hooks, spoons
and  knives,
Shawls for  young  damsels, flannel  for old
wives;
Woolcards  and  stockings,  hats  for  men  and
boys,
Mill-saw  and  fenders,  silks, and  children's
toys;
All useful  things,  and  joined  with  many
more,
Compose  the  well-assorted  country store.

It is the rhythm of the  two final lines, contrasted with  the  rest  of  this  chamber of commerce puff,  that  makes one realize that  no, this is no ordinary early  poet, but a pretender of such  sure  hamfistedness as to stand  apart on other than  historical and literary  grounds.
Following   this  section   is  the  story  of
Flora,  a local maiden left standing at  the altar by her  beau, Albert. This  bit of soap opera  was  apparently meant to  animate the local oral history that went before it. Coming as  it  does  more   than   300 lines into  the poem,  or a little  more  than  half-
 way, it  makes  one  think   that  at  last  the real point  of the exercise has been arrived at.  But it quickly  passes into  the  penulti­ mate  section,  which  is an  idyllic  descrip­  tion of the countryside. Goldsmith's hymn to Mother England forms  the conclusion. It is a  poem  remarkable not  only  for  its incoherence of structure but  for  its club­  footed  metre and  use of  rhyme,  at  once both  vapid   and   original.  For   example, Goldsmith  describes   thus   a   proxy   who bears  a  note  to  Flora   informing  her  of her  betrothed's decision  to break  the  en­ gagement:

But hark!  a hurried step  advances  near,
'Tis  Albert's  breaks  upon  her  listening  ear;
Albert's,  ah,  no! a ruder  footstep, bore
With eager  haste, a letter  to the door; Flora  receives it,  and  could  dare  conceal
Her  rapture, as she  kissed her  lover's  seal. Yet, anxious  tears were gathered in her eye, As on  the note  it rested  wistfully.

The last word -"wistfully" -for which there is little  rhyme,  rings on through a further 550 lines like the sound  of a horse­ shoe coming  to rest around an iron  pole.
In  comparison with  other  poets  whom he resembles, Goldsmith comes  off badly indeed,  or well, depending upon  how one chooses to see him. His autobiography reveals a man  of some compassion, of a highly selective  sort. He  recalls  that, as a boy  apprenticed  to  a  naval  surgeon, he felt   no  emotion   at   seeing   men   having their   limbs  amputated. But  he  was  re­ duced  to tears  by the  sight  of a flogging. Whatever the  precise  emotional state  this implies, it is practically non-existent in his long poem, which seems predicated on no true  feeling  or  attachment to  its  subject but  rather on  a  desire  to  write  a  poem, period.  Compared  with   his  great-uncle whose form  he copied   (one  could  almost  say  parodied)  he  lacked  a great  deal  in motivation and  talent. Compared with lesser  poets  of  his  own  time,  he  lacked simple powers of description, although he certainly strove  to  create the  illusion  of


123

ALLINE AND BAILEY



such gifts. If he had  been  very much bet­ ter  at  simple  verse-craft, he  would  come closest to resembling a latter-day Pryor  to the extent that  he shared what Dr. John­ son described  as Pryor's narrow "compass of comprehension or  activity  of fancy."
Yet  bad  as he was, Goldsmith was  in­ strumental in  the  founding of  a  conser­  vative  tradition in  Canada. The  link  be­ tween  him   and,   for  instance,  Howe,   is quite   clear;  and   by  risking   a   bit,  one could  even  use  him  to  point  the  way  to Pratt. It was a tradition that wished itself epic   but   instead   was   merely  historical.
 Cogswell,  the best commentator on Gold­ smith  and  his descendents, maintains that  "The Rising  Village" is  at  times  worth­ while in the usual sense but  that  it suffers mainly  from  inconsistency. However,  to lovers of  great-bad verse, the  poem's  un­ evenness  only contributes to  the  medioc­ rity,  and   thus  to  its  claim   of   inspired  status  among  the dreadful.


NOTE

1 William Arthur  Deacon, The  Four  Jameses.
Ottawa:  Graphic Publishers. 1927.





ALLINE AND BAILEY
 


Thomas B. Vincent



IN CURRENT ANTHOLOGIES sur­ veying   the   development   of    Canadian literature, the two most commonly recog­ nized  poets  from  the  18th-century period of  Maritime  verse  are Joseph   Stansbury and   Jonathan  Odell.  Ironically, only  a single   short   lyric   from    the   Stansbury canon  is know to have been written in the Maritimes during Stansbury's rather brief stay  in  Nova  Scotia; the  rest  of his work was  produced in  New  York  and  Phila­ delphia.  Similarly, the   bulk   of   Odell's poetry  was written and  published in New York  several   years  before  his  arrival in New  Brunswick  and  is quite  different in tone  and  spirit  from  the  verses he  wrote after  settling in  Fredericton. One  might  argue,  of  course,  that   the  "loyal   verses" of  Stansbury and  Odell  essentially  reflect the nature of  18th-century Maritime poetry in spite of having been written elsewhere.   But  surely   it  would   be  pre­ ferable   to  anchor our  understanding of early  Maritime verse first in  the works of poets  who  were  in  more  immediate con­ tact  during their most productive periods


124
 with   the   cultural  milieu   of   the   Mari­ times. To  this end,  I wish to focus atten­ tion on the poetry of Henry Alline  ( I 748-
1784) and Jacob Bailey (1731-I8o8); to describe something of the literary achieve­ ments   of  these   poets;   and   to   indicate through their work something of  the com­ plexity  and  diversity  of poetic  activity  in late  I 8th-century Maritime  Canada.
Henry  Alline was born in 1748 at New­ port,  Rhode Island, of an old  Massachu­ setts  family.1  He  started  school  in  New­ port,   but   his   formal   education  ended  early  when   his  family  moved   to  Nova Scotia  in  I 760  to  settle  at  Falmouth at the  head  of the  Annapolis Valley.  They  were  part  of  the  wave  of  New  England settlers  who came  to Nova  Scotia  to take up  the lands vacated by the  expulsion  of the Acadian  French. Though portions  of the land  had  been worked  previously,  life was  extremely   difficult  for  the  new  set­ tlers. For some years, they were faced constantly with  the problems  of basic physical  survival as they struggled to establish   themselves  on  their   farms.  All

ALLINE AND  BAILEY



the  arnemtres   of  a  more   settled   society were  lacking,  including  formal  schooling and  organized religious  worship. It is re­ markable,  therefore,  that   Henry   Alline should  emerge  from such an environment to establish  a religious  movement of ma­ jor  historical  significance   in   the   Mari­ times,2   and   to   write   and   publish   two books of  theology, three  sermons, an auto­ biographical journal, and  a  book  of 488 hymns.   It   is  all   the   more   remarkable when  one realizes that  all this was accom­ plished   in   a  nine-year  period   between I775  and  Alline's  death (at  36)  in 1784.
The   major  turning  point   in  Alline's
life was his conversion  to Christ in March of I 775· At this time  he became intensely aware of the greatness  of God's grace  and of Christ's redeeming love, recognized  the enormity of his own  sinfulness,  and  saw the  need  to proclaim  the  gospel  truth to all men.  In  effect,  he was reborn and  his life given new meaning, shape,  and  direc­ tion.  In  a  few short  years,  his efforts  to awaken   those   around  him   sparked a widespread religious  revival  in  the  Mari­ times  which  at  the  time of his death was on  the  verge  of  spreading  into  the  new United States.
Alline's   religious  beliefs  provided  the framework within  which  his poetic activi­
ties  took  place.  As  with   his  life,  these beliefs gave both purpose  and  direction to his verse. But  while  his poetry  was made to  serve  his  religious  views,  it  also  em­ bodies and  displays  the nature and depth of his Christian faith  and commitment in the   emotive   terms   in   which   he   knew them.  In  poetry,  he was able  not  only to describe  the character and pattern of reli­ gious  life,  but  also  to communicate the emotional reality  of  religious  experience by  establishing a  personal   and   intimate relationship   between    himself    and    the reader. Alline seems to have  been acutely aware of this special communicative func­  tion  which  poetry  could  perform. Bits of poetry,   usually   his   own,   are   sprinkled
 throughout his prose  works. But  nowhere is  his  awareness   of  the  affectiveness  of poetry   more  evident  than   in  his  book, Hymns and Spiritual  Songs, published in Boston in I 786.3  Alline prepared the book for publication during a lengthy illness in the  spring  and  summer of  I 783,4   and  it was mainly  for the  purpose of publishing it  that  he was travelling to  Boston  when he died in February I 784.
Hymns  and  Spiritual  Songs  is  in  five parts,  more or less thematically arranged,
incorporating 488 separate pieces  and thereby   making   Alline  one  of  the  most prolific hymnists of his day. It had a prac­ tical  purpose: it  was intended as a  hym­  nal  for  the  use of  his  followers  in  Nova Scotia  and  designed  to articulate in  rela­  tively simple  verse  the  central aspects  of Christian  life  and   belief  as  Alline   saw them.  Viewed  simply  as a  hymn  book  it tends   to  overwhelm  the   reader  by  the sheer number of its items, and  to bore him by  the  apparently  endless   repetition  of certain   thematic  motifs.  But  it  is  more than  a hymnal.  At  the  heart of the  book lies Alline's  own,  intensely  personal,  reli­ gious   experience,  and   when   it   is   ap­  proached as an expression  of that experi­  ence  and  understanding of  the  meaning and  purpose  of  human  life -at  a  time when  he probably  knew  he was fatally  ill
-its utilitarian function begins  to  take
second place to its poetry. In this context Hymns and Spiritual Songs emerges as Alline's  vision  of  human reality,  simpli­ fied  and   personalized  so  that   ordinary men may relate  to it fully and take it into  their  lives.
It  is beyond  the  scope  of this  essay to
analyse  Alline's vision  of reality  in detail, but  some of its more  prominent features should  be noted.  First,  as a deeply  com­ mitted  Christian, Alline  places the person of Christ  at  the  centre  of reality  and  the desire  for Christ  at  the  centre of  human experience:


125

ALLINE AND  BAILEY



0 for  the  spirit of  the  Dove, To bow  this  heart of  mine!
Lord let  my soul  enjoy  thy  love, And  find  a  peace  divine.

0 for  the  meekness of  the  Lamb, To  walk  with  thee,  my  God!
Then should I feel  thy  lovely  name,
And  feed  upon thy  word.

Jesus,  I long  to  love  thee  more, And  life divine pursue;
I love  thy  worship, name adore, In  songs  forever new.
(Hymn II,  lxxxviii)

What is interesting here is not  that  Alline should  approach the question of reality  in terms   of  the   relationship  between   God and   man,   or  even   that   he  should   give Christ   such  prominence  in  his  view  of things.  Rather, it is the simple,  direct, personal  relationship between  the speaker and  Christ   which  characterizes his  posi­ tion and  which  at  the  same  time controls  the  tone  of the  poetry.  We find  the  same effect    in   one   of   Alline's    Crucifixion poems:

As near  to  Calvary I pass
Methinks I see a  bloody  cross, Where a  poor   victim hangs;
His  flesh  with  ragged irons  tore,
His  limbs  all  dress'd with  purple gore, Gasping in  dying  pangs.

Surpriz'd the  spectacle to see,
I ask'd  who  can  this  victim be, In  such  exquisite pain?
Why  thus  consign'd to  woes  I cry'd?
"Tis I, the  bleeding God  reply'd,
"To save a world  from sin."

A  God  for  rebel  mortals dies! How  can  it  be, my soul  replies!
What! Jesus  die  for  me!
"Yes, saith the suff'ring  Son  of God,
"I give my life,  I spill my  blood,
"For   thee,  pour  soul,  for thee."

Lord since  thy  life  thou'st freely  giv'n, To  bring   my  wretched soul  to  heav'n,
And  bless me  with  thy  love; Then to  thy feet, 0 God,  I'll fall, Give  thee  my  life,  my  soul,  my  all,
To  reign  with   thee  above.
(Hymn V, lix, 1-4)
 Concomitant with  recognizing that  the meaning and  value  of human life rest in the redeeming love of Christ  is the realiza­ tion  of  the  profound  sinfulness  of  man.  The    despondency  resulting    from    this realization  is  also  depicted   in  intensely personal  terms :

Lord, what a  wretched soul  I am; In  midnight shades  I dwell;
Laden with  guilt, and  born  to die, And  rushing down  to hell.

Hell  yawns  for  my  unhappy soul, And  threatens ev'ry   breath;
While  swift as fleeting moments roll, I'm  hurri'd down  to death.

No  hand but  thine, 0 God  of Love, My  wretched soul  can  save;
0 come,  dear  Jesus,  and  remove
This load  of  guilt   I have.


Thy  blood  can  wash  my  guilt  away; Thy  love  my  heart can  cheer:
0 turn my midnight into day
And  banish  all  my fear.

(Hymn I, ix, I-3; s)

Finally,  in  Alline's  view,  awareness  of sin and  of Christ's love,  while it must  in­ evitably  lead  to  the  birth   of  one's  own faith,  also  creates  a  strong  desire  to  see the gospel truth spread to all men:

Jesus  thy gospel  armour gird,
To  spread abroad  thy  gracious fame, Ride  in  the  chariot of  thy  word,
And  teach   the  dying  world   thy  name.
(Hymn II, xxiv, 1)

Theologically, these basic religious views are quite  typical of 18th-century evangeli­ cal Christianity. What makes Alline stand out,  however,  is  his  ability  as a  poet  to communicate  the    special   quality  and character of his religious  experience and  to convince  the reader  of  its verity. From this point of view, the most striking effect of Alline's  religious poetry  is the  sense of immediacy and  intimacy it  brings  to the relationship   between    Christ    and   man.

ALLINE AND  BAILEY



The poems  not only assert but  radiate an intense  awareness of the  benevolent  pres­ ence of Christ  in human reality.  By creat­  ing in his verse this vivid sense of  Christ's closeness  and   approachability,  Alline  is able   to  articulate a  vision  of   reality  in which  mundane life  is  infused  with  the light and spirit of divine grace as the faith of the individual brings  him into intimate contact with  the love of Christ. In  creat­  ing this effect,  the spirit  of Alline's  hymns approaches   that    of    Charles   Wesley's hymns.5    B.  L.  Manning, in  comparing Wesley  and  Isaac Watts,  points  out  that Wesley was concerned:

... with   God   and   the   soul  of  man:  their manifold relations, their estrangement, their ll'econciliation, their  union. Watts, too,  con­ cerns  himself  with  this  drama; but  he  gives it  a cosmic background. Not  less  than  Wes­ ley,  he  finds  the  Cross  at  the  centre  of  his thought:  all   things look   forward  or   back­ ward   to  the   Incarnation and   the   Passion.  But   Watts  sees  the   Cross,   as   Milton  had seen  it,  planted on  a  globe  hung in  space,  surrounded by the  vast  distances of  the  uni­ verse. . . . There is  a  sense  of  the  spacious­ ness  of  nature, of   the  vastness   of  time, of the  dreadfulness of  eternity, in  Watts which  is missing  or  less  felt in  Wesley.a

Much the same could be said of Alline's poetical  perspective in  Hymns  and  Spiri­ tual Songs. His is not  a cosmic view. His poetry  does not try to rationalize the rela­ tionship  between God and  man; it tries to realize it in terms of simple, human, emo­ tional awareness.
Before leaving Alline, there is one other aspect   of   his  poetry   which   should   be noted.   In  addition to  working  in  hymn forms,  he  wrote  in  heroic  couplets   and blank  verse. For  the  most  part,  this  type of verse is in the form  of scraps  scattered through  his  prose  works  and   is  thema­ tically   and   tonally   consistent   with   the poetry  of the hymns. There are, however, several pieces of some length which  reveal a   rather  dramatic   element   in   Alline's poetic voice. One of  these, an unpublished
 poem entitled  "An  Evening Walk  among the Tombs,"7  begins:

Thick   Cypress    gloom,   this    Eve    that
Spreads her  Veil
O'er all  the Slumbering world;  but  far  more dark
The gloom  that Spreads this  Solitary Vault
Where Earth's  rapacious jaws  her   Millions drink.
0 gloomy  aspect of  Eternal Night,
As Sailors trembling o'er  the  Watery Grave
When bellowing Thunders  with  the  rattling hail
Threaten immediate Exit  unprepar'd: So stands my Soul  to  view  the  Gulf
profound.
My   throbbing  breast,  my  trembling  knees, and  all
The Active  powers  of  tho't start back
Aghast: Is  this  dark Vault my  gloomy
home?
Is  this  the  End  of  all  our  Mortal race
And   Period   to  all  Earth's  Exaulted  joys?
Ah,  no  Escape  from   her  rapacious  jaws?

The theme,  tone,  and  style appear to be heavily influenced  by Edward Young's Night  Thoughts, but  the  theatrical  char­ acter   of  the  imagination here  seems  to come naturally to Alline. The same effect can  be  found   in  his  prose  when   he  is greatly  "moved  by the Spirit."

THE   POETRY AND    RELIGIOUS views of Jacob  Bailey are radically differ­ ent  from  those  of  Alline,  yet  both   men were  part  of the  same  general social  and cultural milieu.  Bailey was born at  Row­  ley,  Massachusetts, in  I 73 1.  Unlike Al­ line,  he  completed a  formal  education, graduating from  Harvard inI 755· For  a short  time  he  taught in  schools,  but  in
I 760   he   entered    Church  of    England orders  and  became  a  frontier  missionary
in  the  Kennebec area  of  Maine. During
the  American   Rebellion, he  became the object  of anti-British sentiment in the Kennebec  area,   and   he  and   his  family were  viciously  persecuted  until   in I 779 they were allowed  to emigrate to Nova Scotia.  After  a  brief  residence at  Corn­ wallis  (not far from  Alline's  home at Fal-

ALLINE AND  BAILEY



mouth) ,  Bailey  became  the  Church of England missionary  at Annapolis Royal where  he served until  his death (at  77)  in r8o8.
Throughout  his   life,   Bailey   was   an
extremely prolific  writer. He  carried on an  extensive  correspondence, and  wrote over 150 sermons,  a number of moral  and religious prose works, several historical pieces, and  two lengthy  descriptive geog­ raphies of  Maine and   Nova  Scotia. In addition, among   his  papers8    are   found  fragments of several   plays,  three  incom­  plete   epistolary   novels,   and   an   extra­ ordinary amount of  poetry. Yet  little  of Bailey's  work  was  ever  published; it  cir­ culated among  his friends  and  acquain­ tances  in manuscript form.
Bailey's  early  poetry   consisted   mainly of light love-lyrics; then,  with  the coming of  the  Rebellion, his  subject   matter  be­ came  more  serious.  While  still  in  Maine, he  attacked  the  Rebellion, but  only  in­ directly, through  sentimental   verses  on the  suffering   and   injustices  perpetrated against  innocents in time of  civil strife. It was  not  until   he  reached  Nova  Scotia, following   severe   persecution   from   the Rebels  in Maine, that  he turned to satire  as his principal  poetic  vehicle.  In  Hudi­ brastic  verse,  he  found an  energetic way of  venting  his  resentment of  the  Rebels while   at   the  same   time   satisfying   his poetic  inclinations. The result  was some of the best satire  written in North Ameri­ ca in  the late  18th  century.
Bailey  wrote  a  good  number of short,
anti-Rebel satires  (under goo lines each); a selection  of their  titles alone  gives some idea  of his political attitude: "The  Fac­ tious Demagogue" ( 1 779) , "Character of a  Trimmer" ( 1781),  "Confin'd to  these Malignant Times" (c. 1782), "Speech of an   American   Philosopher  of   Immortal Memory"  (c.   1782) ,  "Genius of  Hudi­ brastic  Verse"  ( 1783). His  main  efforts, however, were concentrated on a long narrative-verse-satire entitled "America."
 The   poem  was  begun  in  1 780  and  pat­ terned  on  Samuel  Butler's  Hudibras. To  judge  from   Bailey's  correspondence, he intended to write  a satirical-historical ex­ planation of the  causes  of the  American Rebellion from  a  Loyalist  point  of view, including descriptions of leading person­  alities   and  events.    Unfortunately,  he never finished  the  poem,  which  nonethe­ less runs to over 4, roo lines in nine Books.
Although his poem is concerned with North America, Bailey begins in England with  Hudibras, Butler's hero.  He  delib­ erately   links  his  poem   narratively   and thematically with  Butler's because  he be­ lieved  that  the  same  nonconformist reli­ gious sentiments which  Butler  blamed  for civil war  in England were at  work  in the American Rebellion. Thus, Bailey's  hero, Convert, is presented as the great-grand­ son of Hudibras and  heir to a long  tradi­ tion  of  religious  enthusiasm  and   secret immorality. However, in Convert's gener­  ation,   enthusiasm   and    non-conformity turn from  religious matters to intellectual and  political   concerns. He   becomes  an atheist and free  thinker, an  enemy  to authority in both  Church and  State, and dreams  of attaining political  power for himself. To further his efforts, he allies himself  with one Doctor  Faustus  (Benja­ min  Franklin) , and   together  they  meet secretly   in  Boston  with   Tony   Clincum (Samuel   Adams?)    and   lawyer   Bumbo (John Adams?)   to plot rebellion. Among Bailey's  descriptions of   the  plotters, his portrait of Bumbo  is  the  most  delightful and  gives a good idea of the nature of his satire:

No lawyer, vers'd  in craft  profound Could  better  puzzle and  confound, Or  blend  together  right  and  wrong By lasting  clatter  of his tongue,
Or  with  a graver,  brazen  face Daub  o'er  a knavish  dirty  case Either  with softness or with fury
To  bother  both  the  judge and  jury,
So he could gild and  beautify
A lump of coarse defonnity;

ALLINE AND  BAILEY



Make roughest pebble stones  appear
As polish'd diamonds smooth and  clear; Nay,  tis  affirmed, that artful Tony Could make  a  T- as  sweet  as  honey; Or  cause  a dung heap to  excel
The pink  or  rose  in  fragrant  smell.
But  may  it,  sir,  your  worship please, He  did  far  greater things than these: Made Boston   people  we  are  told Believe his arse  was  made of gold, And on  the  credit of his Bum Borrow'd a  most  enormous sum,
And  he  employed this  numerous score
To  cozen  and   to  cheat them  more.
(Book  VIII, 1!6o-1185)
Bailey never  completed "America". Following the Peace of I784 between Bri­ tain  and  the  United States  and  the sub­ sequent deportation of  the  Loyalists, the poem  was no longer  relevant, either poli­ tically   and  poetically. Bailey's  interests,  like  those  of  his fellow  Loyalists,  became  focused  on  establishing a  new  society  in Nova   Scotia   and   New   Brunswick. He therefore turned his attention to an  issue of more immediate concern, one which  he believed  to be fundamental in shaping the post-Rebellion society of the Maritime Provinces.
The issue  was  the  nature of  religion
and   the   role  of  the  Church  in  society. The question was a particularly pertinent one  for  Bailey  because,  in  the  late   I 78os and   early   I 790s,  the  influence   and  au­ thority  of the established Church of  Eng­  land  in  the  Maritimes came  under  con­ siderable pressure  owing to the popularity of  itinerant  preachers. In  Bailey's  view, nonconformism led  inevitably to anarchy and  rebellion. Thus,  the  rising  influence  of  such   sects   as  Alline's   "New    Light" movement, the  Methodists, and  the  Pres­ byterians  was  not  only  a  threat  to  the authority of  the  established Church, but also  a  danger  to  political  and  social  sta­ bility.  With   this  in  mind,   Bailey  began work  about   I 785 on  his  most  ambitious poem,  a satire  entitled "The  Adventures of Jack Ramble, the Methodist Preacher". The   poem  is  incomplete but   it  runs  to
 thirty-one Books  (six are  missing; others are  fragmented) . In  all,  probably more than  I2,ooo lines were written; over g,200 of them  survived!
While  "The Adventures" ridicules  and lampoons evangelical  religious   practices in   a   general   way,   its   main    attack  is directed through a portrayal of the char­ acter  of Jack  Ramble, itinerant  preacher. By nature Jack  is undisciplined, immoral, viciously selfish, and hypocritical-traits nurtured and  matured  through  his  in­ volvement  with  the  American Rebellion. Following  the  Rebellion, Jack  is at  loose ends until a chance acquaintance (Parson  Og)   suggests  that   a  man  of  his  natural talents is ideally  suited  to  the  preaching trade. Jack  himself  is doubtful, but  Og explains  how simple  it is:
"I have  no learning, and  beside
"The bible  I have  laid  aside
"As  wholly  useless  and  unmeet,
"For I had  other tunes to beat; "A  stranger to divine affairs,
"I seldom  hear  or  say  my  prayers,
"Again I've  run  to great excess
"In many  kinds  of  wickedness."
The reverend sire  made this  reply:
"Tis mine,  your  doubts to satisfy; "Supply with  daring impudence
"The want  of  learning and   of  sense;
"Assume a doleful hollow  tone "Between a  counter and   a  groan; "Then sink away  to gentle sighing,
"To sadd'ning sobs  and  piteous crying;
"Now stretch your  lungs  with  all your  power
"And like  a  bull  of Bashan roar, "When he with  fury  paws  the  ground
"And  shakes  the  nodding hills  around. "0 Noise!  What mortal can  recite "The wonders of thy  sovereign might; "Oft hast  thou thunder'd in  our  ears
"And smote  our  souls  with  chilling fears; "Subdu'd the  sacred voice  of  reason
"And rais'd   up  men  to  blood  and   treason."
Jack's  subsequent career as an itinerant preacher takes him to Nova Scotia.  There his escapades  reveal  that  his real  interests are not religious; they involve exploiting female  converts  for the sake of sexual en­ joyment   or  monetary  gain,   maliciously creating religious  and  emotional  dissen-

ALLINE AND  BAILEY



sion  within families  and  within the com­ munity at  large,  and  deliberately  under­ mining  the   beneficial   influence   of  the established Church.  Jack   finds  in   non­ conformism a perfect  vehicle for  his self­ interest, malice  and immorality, and  thus (in  Bailey's  view)   he  becomes  a  living testament to  the  fundamental insidious­  ness of  nonconformism.
While   Bailey's   political   and   religious views  were  not  embraced  by  all  Marl­ timers   (nor   in  their   extreme   form,   by many) ,  they  represent in  their  implica­ tions a body of assumptions about human reality  which  was recognized  and  seemed to be viable within  the intellectual milieu of  r8th-century  Maritime Canada. This body  of   assumptions  was  derived  from English  Augustan Toryism; it  posited  a vision  of   human   reality  quite   different from  that  reflected  in  Alline's   verse.  In place of Alline's  pietistic  approach to hu­ man   life,   Bailey's   approach   implicitly emphasized  the   ideal   of   civilized   hu­ manity.  For   Bailey,  human  reality  was not   so  exclusively   other-worldly; it  in­  volved  the  acceptance of  natural  reality and  of man's  responsibility to  pattern his mortal life  according to  the  divine,   ra­  tional   principles   of  order  discernible in the   natural  universe.   The   controlling principle  of   hierarchical   structure-a view  inherited  from  the  traditional  hu­ manistic  vision  of universal   being.  Thus, in society, Church, and  State, individuals were  related  to one another in an  hierar­ chical  pattern of varying degrees of social, political,  moral,   and   religious  responsi­  bilities.  Authority was  invested  in  those with  the  greatest  degree  of  responsibility and  was institutionalized in  Church and State; it was the duty  of  those less respon­  sible  to respect  and  obey  such  authority. Disregard for  authority meant disregard for  the  principle of order  upon  which  it rested,  and  this  in  turn  implied   destruc­ tion  of   the  social,  political, moral,  and religious coherence  of human civilization.
 In  short,  it  meant rebellion -the  over­ throw  of Reason  and  the  return of  chaos into  the world  of man. It is this vision of a rational and  orderly human civilization that  informs and gives meaning to Bailey's vigorous attacks  on American Rebels  and  dissenting  preachers.  In   his  view,  both were   part   of   a   wave   of   irrationality sweeping  North  America and  destroying all  the  elements  of  civilization  that   rea­ sonable men  sought to  sustain   and  nur­ ture.

IN LIGHT OF   THESE  VIEWS, it is not  surprising that  Bailey  should   find Alline's  views  and   his  mode   of  religion anathema. What bothered him  most  was that  Alline's  style of religion  fostered  an emotional  or  "enthusiastic" response   to religious  truths; it  placed  its  trust  in  the least  reliable  element  of  human  under­ standing, and   depicted  religious  aware­ ness   as   a   relatively  simple,   emotional phenomenon. For  Bailey,  in  the  Church of England tradition,  religion  involved  a rational response  to  the  complex nature of divinity.  His understanding of the rela­  tionship between  God  and  man  rested  on the  belief  that  man  sought   the  grace  of God  by humbly  exercising his  reason   to comprehend  and   appreciate  the   nature and  purpose of Divine  Will as revealed  in scripture and  the teachings of the Church. It  was man's  duty  to submit to and  obey the  established   dictates  of  religion   and virtue.  His  obedience was  a  rational act based  on  recognition of  the  rectitude of moral  and  religious  truths. Concomitant with  this was the  hope  of  salvation. But salvation  was God's to grant or withhold; man's   role  was  to  obey  and   he  did  so because  it  was  sensible  and   right.  "En­ thusiastic"   religion,   in    Bailey's   view, placed  too much  emphasis on  the expec­  tation  of salvation, and  ignored the neces­ sity  of  obedience. As  a  result,  emotion  overrode   reason,  and  zeal  obscured the

ALLINE AND  BAILEY



importance of  moral   discipline and  reli­
gious  duty.
While  Bailey's  attitude to  Alline's  reli­ gious principles may be unfair, the differ­  ence  between   their  concepts of  religious response   points   toward a   fundamental difference between  the ways the  two men approached  the   writing  of   poetry.  For Alline,  the  purpose of his poetry   (as part  of  his  Christian  mission)   was  "that the heart  may  be alarmed, and  stirred up  to action" so  as  to  "engage that   spirit   or kingdom  of God in the creature, until  the kingdom  is got full  possession of the crea­ ture."9  To this end,  he uses affective lan­  guage  and  imagery, and  employs  a  very intimate poetic voice which  seeks the con­ fidence  and  sympathy of  his  reader. He never    tries   to   rationalize   his   subject. Rather,  he  seeks  an  emotional  compre­ hension  from his reader, one in which  the poet's  personal experience as embodied in his  poetry  becomes   the  reader's experi­  ence,  and   thereby   a  shared   experience. But   at   the  same   time,   the   perceptions with  which  he deals  all relate  to the uni­ versal  truths of Christianity. They  are special  perceptions and  intensely  personal, but  they  are  not  exclusive.  Alline  simply uses   poetry   to   bring    religious   insights within the  range  of  the  sentiments and affections of ordinary men.
Bailey, on the other hand, distrusts emotion  as  a  primary  vehicle   of   com­ munication. While  he intends to evoke in­ dignation with   his  satire,   he  does  so by implicitly appealing to  his  reader's good sense.  To   be  indignant   at   the   wrongs satirized, the  reader must  know  what  all reasonable  men   accept   as   being   right.  Bailey's  poetry  implies  a  body  of  recog­ nized  and   accepted  principles  to  which all  sensible  people  consciously  and   pub­  licly  assent.  In  effect,  his  poetry   is con­ cerned  with  the objective reality  of  uni­  versal   truths -social,   political,  moral,  and  religious-and with  clarifying and
 confirming  those   truths  by  denigrating their  antitheses.
This  fundamental difference between Bailey's  approach to  poetry  and   that  of Alline reveals an  inherent dichotomy in aesthetic assumptions which  was  part  of the general  cultural context of the second half of the 18th  century. Alline's  verse, insofar  as  it  personalizes human  experi­ ence  and   is designed   to  elicit  an  emo­ tional  response,  reflects  the  active   pres­ ence and influence  of Sentimental poetics. Bailey's verse, which  presents  us with  the poetry  of  public  purpose and  statement, poetry  designed  to engage  men's  reason, clearly  reflects  the  tenets  of  Neoclassical poetics.  Thus,  between them,  Alline  and Bailey appear  to  represent the  two  basic and  most  important modes  of  poetry  to emerge  in  the  evolution of  18th-century English  verse.
However, although the models for their poetry  and  the influences on their aesthe­ tic  assumptions lay  in  British  literature, Alline  and   Bailey  were  not  part   of  the cultural milieu of England. In British cul­ ture,  Neo-classicism  and  Sentimentalism had developed  as mutually exclusive com­ plexes  of   aesthetic thought;  the  rise  of Sentimentalism had been  inextricably linked  to  the  decline   of  Neo-classicism. But  this  pattern of cultural development and  poetic  fashion  had  little  bearing on the   structure  of   the   cultural   complex which  Alline and  Bailey occupied, and  in no way reflected  their  aesthetic and artis­ tic  needs.  They  were  part   of  a  cultural milieu  marked  not  by uniformity  but  by diversity   of   assumptions,   expectations, and  attitudes. Thus, in  spite  of  the  pro­ found  difference  between  Alline's  poetry and  Bailey's,  their  verses  co-existed  and were equally viable  within the  poetic  mi­ lieu  of   18th-century Maritime  Canada. Indeed, when  their  poetry  is placed  in its proper   context    alongside  other    poetry written   in   the   Maritimes  during  this period/ 0  their  achievements may  be seen

ALLINE AND  BAILEY



as part  of a very broad  spectrum of poetic stances,  which  characterized Maritime verse  at least  until   the  end  of  the  Na­ poleonic  Wars.  Within this spectrum, the general  influence   of   18th-century  Eng­ lish   Neo-classicism   and   Sentimentalism formed   a  loose  bi-polar relationship, al­ lowing  Maritime poets  to explore  a con­ siderable variety  of 18th-century  verse forms. In addition, this co-existence of apparently opposing  18-century aesthetic assumptions  not  only  permitted  a  wide range  of poetic  modes  of expression,  but also provided  a unique  opportunity for cross-fertilization   between     Sentimental and    Neo-classical     moods,    tones,    and views. In short, it allowed  Maritime poets to  adopt  and   adapt  a  variety   of   18th­ century forms  so  as  to  reflect  fully  the complexity of  their   perceptions  and  the diversity  of their  attitudes  toward  Mari­ time life.
Ultimately,  it   meant  that    Maritime
poetry  entered the 19th century on a very different footing  than   the  poetry  of  Bri­ tain    or   the   United   States.   Maritime poetry   held   more   strongly   to  its   18th­  century roots;  whatever it absorbed  from British Romanticism and American Trans­  cendentalism  was modified  in the light of an  established  tradition of  verse-writing suited  to  Maritime attitudes. It is in  this context  that  the  poetry  of Thomas Cow­ dell,   Oliver    Goldsmith,  James    Hogg, Gertrude Tongue, Maria Morris,  Joseph Howe,  John  McPherson, and   the  other Maritime poets  of the early  19th  century must be viewed. In  this regard, the poetic achievements of Henry Alline  and  Jacob Bailey  reflect  more  accurately the  diver­ sity  and   richness  of  18th-century  Mari­ time  poetry  than  do  the  poems  of  Odell and  Stansbury. At  the very least, Bailey's verse demonstrates that  Tory  poetry  was interested in more  than  partisan politics, and   Alline's   verse  shows  that   the  Tory
 view  was  not  the  only  poetic   stance  in
18th-century Maritime Canada.  Taken
together, their poetry  helps refute some of the over-simplified  attitudes commonly taken  toward  early  Canadian  verse.

NOTES

1 For  more  detailed   bibliographical  informa­ tion,  see Alline's  autobiographical  journal, The    Life   and    journal   of   the   Rev.   Mr.
Henry   Alline   (Boston,   1806), and  J.  M.
Bumstead's  Henry  Alline  (Toronto, 1971).
2  Two  studies  of Alline's  "New  Light" move­ ment  and  its significance  are  M.  W.  Arm­ strong's   The   Great   Awakening   in   Nova Scotia   (Hartford,  Conn.,   1949),  and   G. Stewart  and  G. Rawlyk's  A  People  Highly Favoured  of God   (Toronto,  1972).
a  Hymns   and  Spiritual   Songs  went  through four  editions: Boston,  1786; Dover,  N.H.,
1795   and    1797;  Storington-Port,  Conn.,
1802.  For a brief discussion of these, see T.
B.  Vincent's   "Some   Bibliographical  Notes
on   Henry   Alline's   Hymns    and   Spiritual
Songs,"  Canadian   Notes  and  Queries, No.
12  (November  1973), 12-13.
4   Probably  some of the  hymns had  been  writ­ ten  earlier,  but  the  book  as  such  was  as­ sembled and shaped  at  this time.
5   I can  find  no  evidence  of  direct   influence from Wesley, but Alline undoubtedly knew Watt's  Hymns and Spiritual Songs. His language and possibly his versification  were influenced  by Watts.
s  B. L. Manning, The  Hymns of Wesley  and
Watts (London,  1942), p. 83.
7   Found  in  a  manuscript copy  of  "The  Life and  Journal ..." (p.  114)   at  Acadia  Uni­ versity.
s  At   the   Public   Archives   of   Nova   Scotia, Halifax.
9   Hymns  and Spiritual  Songs,  p. i.
1o During  this period, local poetry was either published in newspapers or circulated in manuscript form.  There were only  a  hand­ ful  of separate  imprints  before  !815. As a result, early  Maritime poetry  is  not  readily accessible. Searching for and  collecting  this verse is the  subject  of  the  author's current research.




133

HALIBURTON'S CANADA


Tom Marshall



The explorers, those  who  walk in a  waste  place
unceasingly.
These we celebrate.

The squire, a cultivated
Sancho Panza, itinerant in  judgement.
Sam  Slick,  his  alter ego (we  also  are  Americans) pushing clocks  on  the  timeless.l

THE  FIRST VERY   MEMORABLE character  in   Canadian  literature  is  a stage-American,  his   creator  an   ardent Tory  imperialist who went  "home" to die in  the  British   House   of  Commons. He wrote  of the "white nigger" more  than  a hundred years before  Norman Mailer  and Pierre  Vallieres.
Thomas Chandler Haliburton was of both loyalist and  pre-loyalist stock. He belonged  from  birth  to the  Family Com­ pact,   and  he  opposed   the  efforts  of  his friend  Joseph  Howe  to obtain responsible government for  Nova  Scotia, but  he had a  sense of social  justice  as  well.  He  was for  the  removal   of  the  disabilities  pre­ venting   Roman  Catholics from   holding  office,  for  common  school  education at state  expense,  and  against the  cruelty  of the    farming   out    of   paupers    (whom Samuel  Slick  aptly   termed   "white  nig­ gers").
With Howe, he desired a railway from Halifax to Windsor as one means of stimulating industry among the Bluenoses. He  was a local  patriot as well as an  im­ perialist, exhibiting the  "dual allegiance" that, in  one  form  or  another,  has  char­  acterized most Canadian writers.  In I 829 he left the Legislative Assembly, and  that  same   year  published  his  Historical  and Statistical    Account     of    Nova    Scotia.

134
 Thereafter he became  a judge of the colony's Supreme Court.2
The  first Sam Slick sketch  appeared in
Howe's   newspaper  The   Novascotian  in
1835. Sam  was designed  to reach  a larger audience than  Haliburton's history had done. The  purpose  was propaganda:

It occurred to  me  that it  would  be advis­ able  to  resort  to  a  more  popular  style,  and, under the  garb of amusement, to call  atten­ tion  to  our  noble   harbours, our  great min­ eral  wealth, our  healthy  climate, our  abun­ dant fisheries,  and our  natural resources and  advantages, arising  from   our   relative posi­ tion  to  the  St.  Lawrence, the  West  Indies, and   the  United  States, and   resulting from  the  circumstances of  this  country being   the nearest point  of  the  American continent  to Europe. I was  also  anxious to  stimulate  my countrymen to exertion, to direct their atten­ tion  to  the  development of  these  resources, and  to works of internal  improvement, espe­ cially   to  that   great  work   which   I  hope   I shall   live   to  see  completed,  the   rail   road  from  Halifax to  Windsor, to  awaken ambi­ tion and substitute it for  that  stimulus which is  furnished  in  other  but   poorer  countries than our  own  by necessity. For  this  purpose I called  in  the  aid  of  the  Clockmaker.a

Sam  was  intended  to  demonstrate both the undesirable and  the desirable  qualities of the Yankee  in order  to make  the Nova Scotians  rouse themselves from  their leth­ argy for  long enough  to institute  certain material reforms. The  result  is a series of sketches,  each  with  moral  appended, an approximation of  picaresque. As in  Don Quixote, and in Tom Sawyer and  Huckle­ berry Finn later on, a  pair  of contrasted heroes   is  presented  for  our   inspection. Each  embodies  an  aspect  of  his  creator and makes an appeal to something in the intended audience.
The  squire,  tolerant, relaxed  and  rea-

HALIBURTON'S  CANADA



sonable,  is akin  to Haliburton himself. He epitomizes  British  virtues.  Sam  Slick,  as many   have   observed,   is  a  type  of  the Yankee  pedlar, braggart and  con-man. Nai:ve and  cunning at  the  same  time,  he has  the  exaggerated self-confidence and childlike chauvinism that   the  British  at­ tributed to the Americans:

'I allot you  had  ought to  visit  our  great country, Squire,' said  the  Clockmaker, 'afore you  quit for  good  and   all.  I calculate you don't understand us.  The most  splendid location  atween  the    poles   is   the   United States, and  the first  man alive  is Gineral Jackson,  the   hero   of   the   age,   him   that's skeered  the  British  out  of their seven  senses. Then  there's the  great Daniel Webster; its generally allowed  he's  the  greatest orator on the  face  of  the  airth, by  a  long  chalk; and Mr.  Van   Buren, and   Mr. Clay,  and   Amos Kindle, and  Judge White, and a  whole  raft of statesmen, up  to  everything and  all  man­ ner  of  politics; there ain't  the  beat  of  'em to  be  found anywhere. If you  was  to  hear
'em  I consait you'd  hear  genuine pure  Eng­ lish   for   once,   anyhow;  for   it's   generally allowed  we  speak   English better   than  the British. They   all  know  me  to  be  an  Ameri­  can  citizen   here,   by  my  talk,  for  we  speak it  complete in  New  England.

Sam  is as  charming or  as  obnoxious  as
Muhammed  Ali.
He  has, as one would  expect,  a firm be­
lief in  manifest destiny:

The  Nova   Scotians  must   recede  before our  free  and  enlightened citizens, like  the Indians; our   folks  will  buy  them   out, and they  must   give  place   to  a  more   intelligent and   ac-tive  people. They  must   go   to  the lands   of  Labrador, or   be  located  back   of Canada; they  can  hold  on  there a few years, until   the  wave  of  civilization reaches them, and    then    they   must    move   again  as   the savages   do.  It is decreed; I hear the  bugle of   destiny    a-soundin'  of   their  retreat,  as plain  as anything. Congress will give  them  a concession of land, if  they  petition, away  to Alleghany's  backside  territory,   and    grant them   relief  for  a  few  years; for  we  are  out of debt, and  don't know  what to do with  our surplus revenue.

Here  is the  American attitude to other cultures   and   peoples   (and,  by  implica-
 tion,  to  the  natural environment)   per­ ceived and  expressed  as plainly  as by any Canadian nationalist of  the  197o's.  And yet,  paradoxically, Sam   is  assigned   the task of telling  the  Nova Scotians what  is wrong  with  them.  His own deficiencies  of moral  and  spiritual  insight  do not  invali­  date  his criticisms.
Slick  combines   the  dialect and  char­ acteristics   of  the   New  Englander   with those of the western  American folk-hero: the   rustic   superman;  Davy    Crockett; Daniel  Boone. He  is a  Canadian parody of  the  American folk-hero, the  teller  of "tall-tales"   about     Paul    Bunyan     and others.  As John Matthews has  observed, the  invention of  Sam   involves  the  har­ nessing of the Yankee love of the "smart" con-man to a moral  purpose.4
If Sam  is intended, as  he is, to  repre­
sent  a  social  barbarism, then  why  is  he made  so attractive, so charming? How  is it  he  can  be so acute in  his criticism  of the Bluenoses?  What is Haliburton's atti­ tude  to him?
The  answer  to such  questions is known
instinctively    to  sensitive   Canadians,  so much  so that  we do not  normally bother to ask them.  We live quite  naturally with a kind of doublethink about  America and Americans. It  is  a  truism   that   we  are appalled at  many  things  American, and yet cannot help  but  admire American in­ ventiveness and energy. Envy, admiration,
amusement, disapproval, even  horror - these  are  the  mixed  feelings  aroused  by the  antics   of  our   close  kinsfolk   to  the south.  To  deny  our  cultural kinship  with them, and our necessarily  very ambivalent feelings  about  the   United  States,  how­ ever, is to distort  the  essential  (and  con­ tinuing)  task  of  defining our  very  real differences.  It is hypocrisy   not  to  admit that  there is an "American" within  us all.
The learned and  respectable judge Haliburton was  also  a  man  of  the  new world.  A  questioner once  received   from him  this reply: "I am  Sam  Slick, says I,


135

HALIBURTON's  CANADA



at le.t                            5  He  had  roots in  New  England as well as old  England. He is reported to have had a strong  streak of coarseness  in  his nature, loving  bawdy jokes and  the  company of  "hostlers and fishermen  rank  with  the obscenities of the stable  and  the  dory."6  He  loved  the  tap­ room  and   excelled  in  the  art  of   telling unprintable  stories.   He   seems   to   have been  (not  altogether unlike  Al Purdy) an interesting mixture of  roistering good fel­ low,  on  the  one  hand, and  scholar   and gentleman on  the  other, i.e.  the  squire and   pedlar  combined. The  two   heroes reflect  two  aspects  of  his character, and The    Clockmaker   itself    expresses    the "Canadian tension" between  the  ways of old world  and  new.
Haliburton   deplores  American  social
disorder, and  predicts the  civil  war.  But he  also  supplies  Sam  with  a  speech  at­ tacking the  conceit  and  condescension of
 the Englishman visiting  North America: "He   swells out  as  big  as  a  balloon;  his skin is ready to burst with wind-a regu­ lar  walking  bag  of  gas  ..."  As  for  the Nova  Scotians,  they  are  described as  "a cross of English  and  Yankee,  and  there­ fore first cousins to us both." Their coun­  try  is "like  this  night;  beautiful to  look at, but silent as the grave-still as death, asleep, becalmed." The unrealized nature of  the  place  and  people   (here  confused, as if they  had  achieved  a union)  is seen in  terms  of "a  long  heavy  swell, like  the breathin' of the chist of some great  mon­  ster  asleep".  The image  of  the  sleeping  giant,  who  embodies  our  sense  of space, of which  more  later,  was  always  appro­ priate. In  their  refusal  to confront or en­ gage this myserious space, the people con­ demn  themselves  to a species of paralysis that mirrors the land's apparent emptiness.
The   Americans,   of  course,  have  con-






A fine retrospective collection by one of Canada's most distinguished men of letters. NOTES ON VISITATIONS spans forty years, from poems written in the England
of the 1930's to more recent work, most
of it previously unpublished.

This collection reveals the Woodcock that his prose has kept hidden. It takes us in­ side his mind and heart, within the circle of his own thoughts and emotions ... I find it splendid, vivid and convincing.
John Richmond, Montreal Star

... in these pages Woodcock allows him­ self the extravagance of gesture he else­ where avoids.... His poems touch on great apocalyptic events and refer to personal traumas. They confess to strange feelings of kinship.

Robert Fulford, Toronto Star
GEORGE \1\/00DCOCK 	ANANSI / $9.95

HALIBURTON'S  CANADA



fronted the  wilderness,  but  in  a  fashion so aggressive  and  destructive that  we should  be reluctant to emulate it. Slick is moved  to  observe  that   Nova  Scotia  is a happy  backwater-in fact, "one of the happiest sections of all America"-but he feels that  it could  be one of the richest  as well if the Bluenoses would  abandon poli­ tical   agitation  between   reformers   and Tories in order  to concentrate on the  de­ velopment of  natural resources. It would, I suppose,  be smug of us  (with  our  jaun­  diced  hindsight) to ask whether Halibur­ ton   mightn't  have   been   aware  of   the eventual problems  and excesses of growth, of pushing clocks on the  timeless. That is asking   too  much   of  a  man   of  his  time (unless  he be Malthus) . Sam's  job was to teach  the  Bluenoses  "the value  of time." They   were  not  supposed   to  acquire any of the  less desirable  American  character­ istics in the  process.
Haliburton's  politics    are    pragmatic. The reformers are  characterized as  mis­ informed and  overcome  with passion, and Haliburton's own  Tories are  not  spared, since Sam  warns  them  of  "the prejudices of   birth    and   education"   and   remarks  shrewdly  that  "power  has  a  natural ten­ dency  to  corpulency".
In  all of this one can  see the ability  to see two or more sides to every question, a pragmatic rather than  a reactionary con­ servatism, an  ability  to  live  with  uncer­ tainties  and  antagonistic philosophies, an awareness of shifting perspectives. This  is "Canadian". On  the subject  of systems of government Haliburton's mouthpiece Mr.  Hopewell  opines:

'When   I look  at   the  English   House  of Lords  . . . and  see so  much  larning,  piety, talent, honour, vartue,  and  refinement  col­ lected  together, I ax  myself this  here  ques­ tion:  Can  a system which  produces and  sus­ tains such a body of men as the world  never saw before and  never will see ag'in,  be defec­ tive?  Well,  I  answer  myself,  perhaps  it is, for all human institutions are so, but I guess it's e'en  about  the best arter  all. It wouldn't
 do here now, Sam, nor perhaps for a century to  come;   but  it  will  come  sooner  or  later with some variations. Now the Newtown pippin,    when    transplanted   to    England, don't  produce  such  fruit  as it  does in  Long Island,   and   English   fruits   don't   preserve their  flavour  here  neither; allowance   must be made  for  difference  of  soil  and  climate
... So it is ... with constitutions; our'n will gradually  approximate to their'n, and  their'n
to our'n. As they lose their  strength of executive,  they will varge  to republicanism, and  as  we  invigorate  the  form  of   govern­ ment  (as we must do, or go to the old  boy), we shall  tend  towards  a  monarchy. If this comes on  gradually, like  the  changes  in  the human   body,  by  the  slow  approach of  old age, so much  the  better; but  I fear  we shall have  fevers and  convulsion-fits, and   colics, and  an  everlastin'  gripin' of  the  intestines  first;  you  and  I won't   live  to  see  it,  Sam, but our  posteriors  will, you may depend'.

Hopewell  is an  American clergyman, but surely he suggests here what Haliburton wants for Nova Scotia, i.e. a British system of government well adapted to North American conditions. This is the practical Canadian via  media. Ironically, here  is also an  accurate prophecy of the  Ameri­ can  monarchical presidency.
Few  (if any)   of my  observations here are very original, but  my purpose is to suggest a situation and  a pattern that per­ sists in later  Canadian writing. I  am  not aware  that  this pattern has ever been very fully  examined  as  it  emerges  from   the styles,  textures   and   formal  structures of our  major  works of  literature. One  finds in  Haliburton's  comedy   a  certain ambi­ valence; the  things  Canadian, American and   British  that   he  criticizes   are  inside him  as  well  as  outside him; one  senses divided loyalties, ironic  undertones. Simi­ lar   but   more   complex  and   subtly   de­ veloped  ambivalences may be observed  in the best humorous or satirical work of Leacock,  Klein, Purdy, Mordecai Richler, Robertson Davies  and  Leonard Cohen.
Personally,  I find The Clockmaker just a  bit  tedious  as reading-matter, but  it  is the   first   notable    attempt  to   articulate

137

THOMAS MCCULLOCH



Canada, and   therefore a  good  place  to begin.


NOTES

1 Tom    Marshall,  "Macdonald  Park",  The
Silences  of Fire  (Toronto, 1969).
2   Greater  detail   about   Haliburton's  life  and career   up  to  his  departure  for  England   in
1856  may   be   found   in   Desmond    Pacey's
Creative  Writing in Canada  (Toronto, 1952) and   Carl   F.  Klinck's  Literary    History   of Canada  (Toronto, 1965), which  contains  an excellent  essay by Fred  Cogswell.
 3 V.  L.  0. Chittick, Thomas  Chandler  Hali­ burton  ("Sam Slick"), A Study  in  Provincial Toryism (New York, 1924), p.  179.
4  John  Matthews, Tradition in Exile  (Toronto,
1962). For more about  Sam and  his place in an American  tradition, see Chittick's "The Hybrid   Comic"    (Canadian  Literature    no.
14).
5  Chittick, Thomas  Chandler   Haliburton, p.
342.
6 Ray  Palmer  Baker,  "Introduction to The Clockmaker"  (New  York,  1927). I am  in­ debted  to Mr. Baker for his expression of  the idea  that  Sam  and  the  Squire  represent  two aspects of Judge  Haliburton.




THOMAS McCULLOCH
 


Marjorie f1Vhitelaw



IN A  BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE   ap­ pended  to  the   New   Canadian   Library edition of The Stepsure Letters  (the  only item   of   Thomas  McCulloch's   writings  easily available today  and  now  generally  held   to  be  the   first  work   of   Canadian satirical humour) , there  is a comment by John A. Irving that McCulloch is one of the  least  known  of  the  great  nineteenth­ century   Canadians.   This  is    still   true,  though  since  that  I g6o  issue of Stepsure there  seems  to  have  been  a  growing  ap­ preciation of McCulloch and  his achieve­ ments and  an apparent wish to have more understanding  of   the   man   behind   the work.
A copy  of the  one  portrait of  McCul­ loch known  to exist hangs  in the old high school   of  Pictou,  his  former   home.   It shows  a  very Scottish face -large  nose, long    upper   lip,    straight    determined mouth, steady eyes. In  many  a minister  of the day such features would  add  up to an expression  of  stem spiritual purpose, but McCulloch's gaze is steadfast rather than  stern.    The   expression    is   open,    fully­ developed,  as  indeed  many   Scots  faces
 are, with  nothing closed-in  or  parsimoni­ ous  to  its  emotional range.  The   mouth quivers  on  the  edge  of  laughter. Under­ neath   the  portrait  is  his  name,  and  the words:    "Child  of   Scottish   Heart  and  Mind."
When   I  first  looked  at   the  face  and read  that  brief and  perhaps romantic phrase,  I had a sudden impression  of a powerfully  attractive and interesting char­ acter.    That  early   impression   has   not altered  -in   spite   of  the   revelation  of strong  and  not  always sympathetic Pres­ byterian  overtones to McCulloch's career
-and for me he continues to project the essence of the true Scots intellectual, in whom  the  heart  is partner to the  mind.
McCulloch's writings, which were volu­ minous,  grew  almost  entirely  out  of  the circumstances of  his  life  and   his  work. Except  for  Stepsure, the  writings  are  al­ most  unknown  today,   but   the  life  and  work are  well known  enough.
He  arrived in  Pictou  from  Scotland in x8o3, en  route  for Prince  Edward Island
-a married man  of twenty-seven with  a wife  and  small  family.  He  had  been,  as

THOMAS MCCULLOCH



the   phrase    then   went,   "missioned"  to Prince   Edward  Island  by  the   General Associate  Synod   in  Glasgow,   a   Presby­ terian  group  which  had  seceded from  the main  body of the Church of  Scotland for what  appear to have  been  radical politi­ cal  reasons.  It was  late  in  the  year  and travel  across  the  Strait  of  Northumber­ land  was dangerous; McCulloch was per­ suaded   to  remain  in  Pictou  with  his fa­ mily for the winter, and  in the event  they stayed  there  for  almost   thirty-five years, until   they   moved   in   1838  to   Halifax where  McCulloch became  first  principal of  the  newly-opened  Dalhousie  College.
When    McCulloch   arrived   in   Nova
Scotia, there was one college only in the province:   King's  College   at   Windsor. The  buildings  were ramshackle, the teach­ ing was uncertain, but  this colonial  insti­ tution  was pure  in heart. Modelling itself on  Oxford and  Cambridge, it  accepted only  those  students who  adhered to  the Thirty-Nine Articles  of the Church of England.
This single fact was responsible for the direction which  McCulloch's life took in Nova  Scotia.  Fairly  soon after  his arrival he began  to work for the establishment of a college in Pictou  which  would  not only train  Presbyterian ministers  but  also  pro­ vide a liberal education for non-Anglicans desiring   to  enter  the  professions.   Four­  fifths  of  Nova  Scotians were  not  Angli­ can;   the   fifth   who   were   included,  of course,   the   authorities  and   the   official class in  Halifax. McCulloch's long  years of   battling  on   behalf   of  the   Academy caused Pictou to become known to this establishment group  as a centre of radical anti-government  opinion,  and   the  Aca­ demy's  right  to  exist  became  one  of  the most contentious and  cantankerous politi­ cal issues of the day.
The  Governor, the  Earl  of Dalhousie,
played  a major role in  the affair. He  was a  Scot  and, though no  admirer of  Mc­ Culloch's  brand   of    evangelical-radical
 Presbyterianism, he could  see very clearly that   the  College  at  Windsor was  incap­ able   of  meeting  the   colony's   needs.   A couple  of years  after  his arrival  in  1816, Dalhousie  was   proposing the  establish­ ment  of a non-sectarian college, based on the  principles of   Edinburgh  University, and  in  the  end  this  is what  happened in Pictou,   with   McCulloch  becoming  the first  principal.
McCulloch's agitation was to have results far wider  than  the mere  launching of a colonial  college. The  battle for the Academy  was  fought most  frequently in the  field  of  public  finance. The   elected House  of  Assembly  would  vote  a  grant; the  appointed  Legislative Council would veto it.

McCulloch [says John A. Irving in the afterword of the  New Canadian Library edi­ tion   of  The  Stepsure  Letters]  was  appar­ ently  among the  first  to  realize that  the  will of  the  people meant nothing when  it  was in conflict   with   the  views  of  the  irresponsible Council. Once he  was  convinced  that  edu­ cational  progress was  impossible under that kind  of government,  he  began   to  speak  and  write   against  the   whole   system   . . . Long  before   Joseph   Howe  began   his   work    [for  responsible   government],   McCulloch  was teaching the  people of  Nova  Scotia the  new ideas  which  were  ultimately to  change their whole system  of government.

Very  few  facts  are  known  about  Mc­ Culloch's early  years in Scotland. He was born  in  a  tiny  hamlet  in  Renfrewshire, near   to  the  growing  industrial  town  of Paisley.  His  father  was  a  master  block printer  in   the   textile trade.  His   eldest brother was  in  business  in  London and  Lyons, the French textile  centre. Another brother  became   a  surgeon. Thomas  at­  tended    Glasgow    University,  taking   a medical course as well as subjects more closely related  to life as a minister. After Glasgow,  he went  to Whitburn, the  theo­ logical  college  of  the  Secession  Church, and,  on being  licensed  as a minister, was called  to  the  little  church  at Stewarton,

139

THOMAS MCCULLOCH



near   Glasgow,   where   he   continued  to study  literature, Oriental languages and British  constitutional law,  all  to  the sub­ sequent  benefit   of   Nova   Scotia.   From Stewarton he went  in  I 8o3  to  Pictou. In I799   he  had   married   Isabella   Walker,  daughter of another-and well-connected
-Secessionist  minister; it seems  to have been   a  happy   marriage  with   a  loving family  life. Some  letters  from  Isabella to her grandchildren have  survived; they show  her   to  have   been   an  affectionate and  well-read grandmother, for she recommended  books,  discussed  her  hus­ band's work  in  natural history  and  ex­ pressed  an  enlightened concern  over  the prejudice  against    the   Micmac   Indians that  was developing in  Pictou. One  may assume   that   she   was   in  full  sympathy with  her husband when  he battled for the Academy.
The   times  through which   McCulloch grew  up  were  eventful: he  was  born  in the  year  of the  American Declaration of Independence, and   the  French  Revolu­ tion  had  its influence  on  political opinion in Scotland during the years when  he was at   university. The   works   of  Rousseau, Voltaire and  other savants  of the  French Enlightenment were widely read  by Scots, while  Scottish  universities were  enjoying a   prolonged   period   of  intellectual  en­ quiry  and  literary flowering.
All  this  influenced McCulloch's later
work  at  the  Pictou   Academy, where   he taught classes in Greek,  Latin, Moral and Natural  Philosophy, Chemistry and,  I think,  Hebrew. As a Glasgow  graduate he was much  interested in the  developments of modern science,  and  in  order  to  raise money for the Academy he would  travel through the  Maritimes giving  public lec­ tures on these wonders -the first of  their  kind  to be heard  in the  region.  In  Pictou  he  also  established  the  first  scientific  la­ boratory east of Montreal.
Many linear  feet  of McCulloch papers lie on  the  shelves of  the  Public  Archives
 of Nova Scotia; his pen was prodigiously, tirelessly, incessantly  busy.  He  wrote  ser­ mons,   articles   and   editorials for   news­ papers; he  produced an  exhausting con­ tinuum  of  letters,   memorials,  petitions and  pleas on behalf  of the  Academy. He wrote  a  treatise  against   Popery,  another in favour  of a liberal  education. He  pub­ lished   The  Stepsure   Letters  serially   in The  Acadian  Recorder during I 82 I  and  I822, and  wrote a pair of cautionary tales of the moral and  spiritual hazards of emi­ gration to Nova Scotia, William and Mel­ ville. There is as well a much longer and  unpublished work, "Auld  Eppie's Tales", which  seems  to  me  both  more  revealing of  McCulloch  the  man  and   more   sug­ gestive of genuine  talent than  most of the other  work.
It is not  in fact  easy to get a clear pic­ ture of McCulloch the man  in that moun­ tain  of manuscript. It is true  that  a very dull   biography   (The    Life   of   Thomas  McCulloch,  D.D.,   Truro,    Ig2o)    does exist,  written  by  his  son,  the  Reverend William  McCulloch, who  based  it on  his father's papers.  But  William's idea  of the proper way for  a clergyman son  to write about a  clergyman father  merely  cloaks McCulloch in  respectful Victorian piety. Only  in  the  excerpts   from  McCulloch's letters  are  there  occasional  tantalising flashes  of  a  pawky   wit  and   a  vigorous mind.  I like, for  example, this  little  vig­ nette   of  Nova   Scotian   high   society   as McCulloch saw it when  he came  to Hali­ fax   in   I 830  to  give   his   first  series  of scientific  lectures.  He seems to have  gone from  Pictou  to  Halifax by ship.

It was not so bad as going to be hanged,  but I found  it  by no means  comfortable. I  was going  to  the  very  focus  of  power,  and  en­ mity,  and  my  unsubdued  spirit   felt  that   I was going because I could  not stay at  home. In  Halifax  there  had  never  been any  public exhibitions  but of players and  showmen  and I really  felt  as  if  I  belonged  to  the  vaga­ bond  race.  A bear  and  a  few  dancing  dogs would have been suitable companions  to the

THOMAS MCCULLOCH



mood  in  which  I entered  into  our  gay and dissipated   metropolis.  To  mend  the  matter, when my apparatus on two carriages was moving   along   the  street,   some  wag   gave notice  to our Collector  of Customs  ... that a great  cargo of smuggled  tea had  just come into  town,  and  instantly I had  a  Custom­ house officer at  my heels ... At  the solicita­ tion  of  Councillors,  the  Admiral, Commis­ sary-General, and  other  grandees  who  dine after   six,  I lectured  three   days  a  week  at eight   in   the  evening.   In   the   compass   of twenty-one  lectures   I managed   to  squeeze together  a  mass of the finest experiments in philosophy and  left my audience as eager  as at  the  commencement of the  course.

William   McCulloch prepared  the  bio­ graphy in his later  years and  left  it  to his daughters to  publish   it  after   a  suitable  delay,  when  there  would  be  no-one  alive "whose   feelings  might   be  painfully  ex­ cited"  thereby.   The   Misses   McCulloch accordingly had the book privately printed in  rg2o,  some  77  years  after  its subject's death. But  I  have  been  told  that  before publication a worthy  person  at  Pine  Hill Theological   College    in   Halifax  went through  the  manuscript  and   blue-pen­ cilled anything that  might  make  McCul­ loch  appear less than  saintly.  I  can  give one   example  of  what   may   then   have happened.  William    McCulloch   quotes from   the  interesting account  which   the naturalist  Audubon gives  of  his  visit  to Pictou   in  r833,  when  he  called  on  Mc­ Culloch. "Professor McCulloch,"  Audu­ bon  actually wrote  in  his   journal, "re­ ceived  us very kindly, giving us a glass of wine." And,  later,  "I  was  handed three  pinches   of  snuff  by  the  Professor,   who loves it." These damaging details  of wine and  snuff  are omitted from  the  fragment of  Audubon   in   the   published  Life   of Thomas  McCulloch, D.D.
McCulloch's own  style when  he wrote for publication often  adds  to our  sense of having  to search  for  the  real  person  be­ hind  the minister.  One  wonders whether, consciously   or   unconsciously,   he   wrote what  he thought might  be expected of a
 Presbyterian minister. This  is particularly true of the two moralistic tales,  published in   r 826  in   Edinburgh  under  the   title Colonial  Gleanings:   William  and   Mel­ ville, where  a high  religious  note is struck  on almost  every  page.  For example, Wil­ liam,  a  young  man  whose  Scottish par­ ents are of modest means  has determined to emigrate to  Nova  Scotia.

To  the  parents of William, whose sole  am­ bition  was  to  exemplify   that   religious  and peaceful  life  whose  brighter   prospects  are beyond  the grave  ... his determination  was a  dreadful   stroke   ... With   the   fire   and ambition  of youth,  he was  about to  launch  into  a  world  of  snares,  where   the  warning  voice  of  religions  might   not   be  heard   ... The  grief  of  his  parents, and  the  prospect  of separation, had  wounded  him deeply;  but the fairy dreams of ambition bewildered and perverted   his  mind.  He  felt  firmly  assured that  he would  never  forget  his parents nor their   worthy   example;   abroad,  he  would retain  his integrity; and  when  he  returned to  cheer   their   declining   days,   he   would return  both  a wealthy  and  a  religious  man.

The  same sort of note  is often  struck  in The Stepsure Letters, for in creating his character, Mephibosheth Stepsure, to sa­ tirize the life of Pictou, McCulloch makes him  the  ideal  settler:  unfailingly  thrifty, prudent, hard-working, moderate  in  his pleasures  and  strong  in his piety. And,  of course,  he  prospers   accordingly.  But  his neighbours  are    frequently    spendthrift, slovenly  and  in  trouble with  the  sheriff. Stepsure is  more   than  a  bit  of  a  prig, which  McCulloch was  not.
It is also possible that  McCulloch wrote
what   he  hoped   would   sell,  for   he  was usually  writing   from  an  urgent  need  of cash,  and  at  too much  speed.  Writing to his friend  James  Mitchell in  Glasgow  on the  24th  June,   r828,  he  remarks:
In  the  first place  providence has  placed  me in circumstances in  which  I shall  be forced almost  alone  to fight  with  the  powers  that be and if I cannot  contrive  something in the way of authorship to  help  me  along  in  the mean  time  I must  either   starve  or  run  off long before the  battle  is fought.

THOMAS MCCULLOCH



Secondly  Tom   [his  son]  still  has  a  wish to turn  to trade  and  I have no way of  assist­ ing  him  but  by my pen.

And  later  in the same  year  (29th Decem­ ber)   he wrote  also to James  Mitchell re­ ferring  presumably  to   his   unpublished collection, "Auld   Eppie's  Tales."

My story  is not  as  well  polished  as  I  wish. The   cause   of   this   you   can   easily   guess. Three volumes were written  in a yearinaddi­ tion  to my daily  tasks. I have  endeavoured to  make  them  as amusing  as  the  little  time which I  had  for  thinking would  admit  ... I mentioned   to  you  formerly  that  one  object which  I  had  in  view  was  to  do  a  little  to help  my  son  Thomas  into  business.  About that  I  am  now  more anxious  than  ever  and must  therefore  earnestly  entreat you  to lose no  time.

There is in fact  no record  that McCul­ loch  was  actually  paid   for  the  original  newspaper publication  of  The  Stepsure Letters.    However,   in    1822    he    tried through the  Mitchells in  Glasgow  to sell Stepsure  to booksellers  in Scotland, with­ out  being  successful.  It  was only  in  1862 that  The  Stepsure  Letters  were  issued as a volume,  and  then  in Halifax.
Of  "Auld  Eppie's Tales", of which  he appears to have  been  speaking in  his let­ ter   to  James   Mitchell,  McCulloch  had written earlier   to  Mitchell's father,  the Rev. John  Mitchell:

I have  begun  with  the  days  of  popery  and intend  to carry on through three volumes without  meddling  with  anything but  popery and  the  progress  of  Lollardism in  the  west of  Scotland,   not  forgetting a  due  quantity of witches, kelpies and  other  gods whom our fathers  worshipped.  I want  Crawford's  His­ tory  of  Renfrew  most  sadly.  Indeed   I  can­ not  do  without  it. I have  laid  my  scene ... where  I was  born  and  need  to  know every place  and  person.  I expect  also  to  have  a great  deal  to do with  the Abbey and  Abbots of Paisley.

He   followed   this   letter    up   by   asking James Mitchell in  the  letter  of  the  24th June already  quoted to observe  discretion regarding his plans  for  the  book.
 I have  undertaken  a  business  for  which  I have strong suspicion  that  Sir  W. Scott  go­ ing before  me  I  am  ill qualified  and  which were  it  not  a  sort   of  vindication   of   our ancestors and  their  support  of civil and  reli­ gious  truth  I  would  account   not  very cleri­ cal ... The  present  is the commencement of a  series of stories  which  will extend  to  the revolution  of 1788.

McCulloch first  considered Blackwood in Edinburgh as a possible publisher  for "Auld   Eppie's Tales",  saying  that  Wil­ liam  Blackwood   had   been  kind  to  him (Blackwood  had  sent a donation of  books for  the  Academy), but  some sort  of dif­ ference   must   have   developed    between  them,  for early in  1828 McCulloch wrote crossly to Mitchell.

About  writing  for  his magazine  I  have only to say that  I  regard   it  as a  very  bad  book and except in the expectation of helping to render  its  texture  more  moral  I  do  not  do it. I think  I  could  give him for a few years a  series  of  essays  that   would  be  generally read, but not being yet a hungry author ten guineas  a sheet  is no temptation.

So Blackwood  does not  appear to have been very interested in "Auld  Eppie's Tales", but seems to have offered McCul­ loch   other    work    in    connection   with Blackwood's Magazine, which  he  turned down.    However,    Blackwood    evidently kept  the  manuscript of  the  tales,  for  in December  1833 McCulloch was still ask­ ing James  Mitchell to  retrieve  it. At  the same time he enclosed  a story for submis­ sion to William  Oliphant, who had  pub­  lished William  and Melville  in 1826. Oli­  phant seems to  have  paid  thirty  guineas for  William  and  Melville,  and   McCul­ loch suggests that  for  the  new work fifty guineas  would  be a  proper  price.  He  ob­ viously hoped Oliphant would  accept  the manuscript, for once  again  he planned to give the money to his son for his business.
I mention these  details  of  literary  fin­ ances  because  they go some way  towards demonstrating that  Stepsure and  McCul­ loch were  in fact  two  very  different per-

THOMAS MCCULLOCH



sons. Over  and  over  again   in  his  letters McCulloch states  that   he  has  chosen  his path in  life  quite  deliberately, that   had he  not  stuck  to  his principles and  to the Secession   Church  he   could   have   been much  more prosperous. He has done what he  believes  to  be the  Lord's will, he  has worked  very hard, and  it has not brought him material success. If Stepsure is a per­ fect illustration of the  Protestant ethic  in successful practice, McCulloch represents something else entirely,  and  it is possible that   in  The   Stepsure   Letters  he  is  not only satirizing the improvident and spend­ thrift, but  also  the  unduly  prudent and thrifty,  those   whom   the  Scots  call   the "unco' guid". Pictou   had  a good  supply of  these  godly  ones,  and  very  irritating they  may  have   been  to  a  man   with  as deep  a  perception of  life  as  McCulloch. When  The  Stepsure  Letters  appeared
in  r822, McCulloch wrote  to Mitchell in Glasgow  that  "No  writing in  these  prov­ inces ever occasioned so much talk." Cer­ tainly  many  people  in  Pictou  must  have been  angry   when  they  perceived  them­ selves,  at  least  in  part, in  some  of  the caricatures. Even I, knowing  only a little of the Pictou of those days, can  speculate  on  possible likenesses. Saunders Scanto­ creech, the Scotsman who is always damp­ ing down  the  fun  and confidently calling on  the  Lord  to  approve his actions,  con­ tains elements of the shrewd, grasping and pious  James  Dawson,   father of Sir  Wil­ liam,   later   principal  of  McGill.  Then there   is   Mr.   Solomon   Gosling,   whose father  had  left  him  very  well-to-do, and whose  daughters, having learnt to  paint  flowers and  play the piano,  left the house­ work  to  the  black  servant wench.  When  things  went  badly  for  Mr.  Gosling   (not content   with   farming  he  had   tried   his hand  at  trade) and  he  had  to go to live with   the  sheriff   (who   ran   the  debtors' prison), he was wont  to remark that  the country did  not  deserve  to be lived in;  it was  fit  only  for  Indians and   emigrants
 from  Scotland. Could   Mr. Gosling  have been derived  from some member of the Harris family,  who  kept  a  negro  servant, who  had   come   not   from   Scotland  but from  Pennsylvania, and  who were among the founding families  of Pictou?
To a modem reader, The  Stepsure Let­
ters decline  in  effectiveness as  they  pro­
ceed.  In  the  earlier chapters, McCulloch
had  both  fresh  material for  satire  and  a valid general  situation to base it on. Take, for  example, the  character Jack  Scorem, chasing  after  quick  and  illusory  profits  in the lumber trade. During thNapoleonic wars,  Pictonians could   hardly bother to look  after   their   household  animals,  so eager  were  they  to  cut  timber and   ( ap­ parently)  to  drink   up  the  profits,  while their  newly cleared  land  reverted to bush. But  the lumber trade was subject to  very erratic fluctuations, and  McCulloch  was not  the  only  one  to  believe  that   the  set­ tlers  would  do far  better  in  the  long run to work towards  establishing a productive agriculture. Pictou  itself  was a small  and  unimpressive  place   which   lacked   most amenities and   McCulloch  could   see  all too clearly the effect on the community of those citizens who were not content to put in the years of pioneer hard work and  build up a strong basic economy, but who instead  dreamed of  getting rich  quick,   nor  did he spare  his derision  of  those  among the newly prosperous who  desired  to  be gen­ teel  as  well and  no  longer   to  dirty  their  hands.  In his strictures on negligent farm­ ers, McCulloch was supporting the  work of   John  Young,   who   wrote   under  the pseudonym of  "Agricola" and   who  was anxious   to  promote in  Nova  Scotia   the improvements in  farm  methods then  be­ ing  put  into  general use in  Scotland.
One  cannot question the  effectiveness of The  Stepsure Letters in their  own  day, especially  since  they  originally appeared in weekly parts. Where the present-day reader  finds them  tedious  is in their mon­ otony  of  treatment. The same  situations

143

THOMAS MCCULLOCH



are  repeated  over  and   over  again. The unhappy weaklings  end  with  deadening inevitability in the  debtors' prison,  and  as Stepsure prospers,  he  becomes  more  irri­ tatingly  sure  of  his  own  virtue.  Yet,  if Stepsure's  viewpoint  is  self-satisfied  and hyper-critical, it  is   never  sour,   and   on every  page  there  are lively observed  com­ ments  and  observations often  blossoming into  good  humour, earthy and  devoid  of primness. The  letters  contain an immense  amount of  information about  how  people lived  in   those  interesting  times   and   in terms of  their  period  they are written in a style  pared  down  almost  to the  skeletal.
McCulloch's standard plot  turns  up again    in   William  and   Melville.  Both young    men    are    immigrants   to   Nova Scotia,   basing  "their hope  of  happiness upon  the  acquisition of wealth in foreign lands", and  both  come to sticky ends through ignoring those  principles of  reli­
gious and  moral  behaviour which  should protect a man from  the dangers of strange lands.  But   there   are   interesting  indica­ tions  that  in these  stories McCulloch was trying  out  a larger  idea, and  moving  into the  areas  of Scottish  history  which  were of great  importance  to him.
Though the  tales  of William  and  Mel­ ville  are  separate, there   had   been  early connections  between  the   two   families. Melville's   great-grandfather   possessed  a large   estate   "at a  time  when  Scotland groaned   under    Prelacy    and    arbitrary power." He was an easy-going gentleman, and  indulgent  landlord, who  hoped   for favours   from   the   Duke   of  York   if  he aided  the  king. Which  king?  We  are  not told,  but  it  may  have   been  Charles II, whose   brother  was   Duke    of   York,   a Catholic and  later, as James II, the  last of the Stuart kings.
To prove his zeal for the government, Melville's    great-grandfather  takes   Wil­ liam's  great-grandfather captive and car­  ries  him   to  Edinburgh,  where  "for   the testimony  of Jesus" he  is  put  to  the  tor-
 ture  "till  the blood spouted from  the legs of  the   prisoner   and   the  marrow  oozed from  his bones" and  is then  consigned  to the  Grassmarket prison,  where  his  horri­ fied betrayer  visits him  and  humbly  begs his pardon.
Against this background of a cruel past, McCulloch follows the two young men to their  various  dooms.  The paths  they  take are  somewhat different. William's family inherit the civil and  religious truths repre­ sented  by the  Presbyterian faith  and  the democratic  principles  it  embodied  and  encouraged in  government, and  William  sins in forgetting the  religious  and  ethical principles his father has  taught him.
When  he reaches  Halifax after  leaving Scotland, William  finds work easily, since he  is  a  skilled  tradesman. He  earns  far more  than  in Scotland, and,  after  being made  foreman, he marries his master's daughter. He  inherits the   business,  but finds  it  not  so  profitable as  he  had  ex­ pected, since his master  has  neglected it. In  his turn,  becoming absorbed in public affairs,  William  also neglects  the business, and   his  downward   path  begins  at   this point.  He  forgets  to write  to his parents; he  conducts his  business  in  taverns. He becomes slovenly in appearance and  soon loses trade to competitors. Despair  brings him   low,  and   when   a   letter   from   his father arrives  and  it is being  read  to him, he  cries  out  in  mental agony  and   dies. But he dies repentent.
Melville   is  a  little   more   political   in
tone. We are, for example, introduced to one  Andrew  Welwood,  a weaver  with  "a rooted   abhorence of  the   whole   race  of the Stuarts, as the enemies  of the Church of God,  and  the  authors of those innum­ erable   evils  under   which  Scotland  had groaned"; among  the  evils is the  martyr­ dom of William's great-grandfather, here fully described. After  that  occasion,  Mel­  ville's  great-grandfather  takes   to  drink  and  we are  not surprised to read  that  he dies from  falling  off his horse.  His estate

THOMAS MCCULLOCH



is  gradually  impaired,  and   in   the   end there   is  nothing for  Melville   to  inherit but  the family  name.
Melville  has  graduated from   the  uni­ versity!  he  has  a  cultivated  mind,  pre­ possessmg appearance, pleasing manners. He  decides  there  is no way to retrieve his fortunes except  by  emigration.  Arriving in Halifax, he soon finds employment and after  various  trials he is successful in busi­ ness. But  his life seems  to  lack  direction and  purpose. One  day,  wandering in  the countryside, he comes on a rustic  cottage  inhabited by  a father and  daughter who have  retired  from  the  world   to  live  the Christian life. Melville  falls deeply  in love with Elizabeth, the daughter, but  though  se
h1m;  there  1s  no  community of  religious
sentiment between  them.
Melville goes to the West Indies on business, where he suffers not only from indulging in well-known West Indian dis­ sipations but  also  from   a  tropical  fever that  affects  his health  and  abilities  lead­ ing  to  business  losses. He  retums  low  in orale
mg  of  consumpt10n;  Melville   also   de­
clines and  dies, a repentent Christian.
It all  now  seems,  I  suppose, mawkish sentimentality, but  in  their  time  William and Melville were apparently regarded as expressions of religious truth and excellent
llust.rations?f the  perils  awaiting young
1mm1grants  m  the  worldly   ambiance of
that  notorious seaport, Halifax. At  least, they are  written in good, straightforward English, and  they include  some interesting comments on Nova  Scotia  as it appeared to the emigrant in the early  nineteenth century.

Though  a  passenger  from  Britain   be aware that   he  will  see  a  great   deal  of  wood  in Nova Scotia, the continuous succession of forest which almost everywhere exists  rarely fails to give his mind  an  unexpected' shock. He  had  pictured   to  himself  a  diversity  of lawn   and   grove   which   would   cheer   and delight: his eye meets  tree  towering  above
 tree,   II           terminates,  not   the succession  but  the  view  ... From   the  im­ mense solitudes  of  the  forest,  therefore   his mind  shrinks  within   itself   and   feels if
t
IS  a  nearer  approach to the  coast  at  all  cal­ c.ulated  to  remove  these  saddening  impres­ sions. Rock  appears piled  upon  rock;   and where  a  tree  is interspersed, it  is  the  hem­ lock  or  spruce,  upon  which  the  occasional visitations  of  the  spray  have  conferred the aspect  of old age ...

It is interesting and  curious that  in William and  Melville  there   is  no  men­ tion  of  Catholicism, for  McCulloch felt strongly  about   what  he  regarded as  the fallacies  of  that  religious  attitude. It  is true  that   his  two  works  on  Catholicism (Popery   Condemned  by   Scripture  and the !'athers, Edinburgh, 18o8, and  Popery agazn Condemned by Scripture and the Fathers,  Edinburgh, 1810)   seem oddities today.  But  one  must  remember that  this was  still  the  period   of  the  long  struggle for Catholic emancipation-a battle that seems almost  forgotten now.  In  Scotland (and at least in theory in Nova Scotia), Catholics still lacked  the  right  to conduct schools, to celebrate marriages or funerals in public  (such  a religious  service  had  to be performed privately in the house.)  A Catholic could  be  a  barrister but   not  a judge  of the  High  Court.
In  England such  laws were  an  expres­
sion of the national determination to give no opportunity to the Catholic Stuarts or their  supporters to  have  another fling  at seizing  power.  But  in  Scotland the  Pres­ byterian  feeling was older  than the Refor­ mation. When   John  Knox  brought  the Protestant Reformation to  Scotland,  he
had  a situation in serious  need  of reform·
the mediaeval Scots  Catholic church had'
fallen  into a most ignoble  state  of  corrup­ tion. To  Presbyterians in Scotland in  the early    nineteenth    century,    Catholicism meant   not  only  the  temporal and   alien power of the Catholic church, which  they feared, but also a kind of irrational, illogi-

145

THOMAS MCCULLOCH



cal philosophic fallacy,  indeed a heresy, adherence to which  could  be as damning to  a man's soul as any  other sin.
Catholic emancipation was a liberal cause,  the retention of the penal laws a conservative one.  Blackwood's  Magazine in    Edinburgh   published   article   after article  stating the  case against emancipa­ tion,  and  these  arguments revealed deep­  burning fires  of  bigotry  and   prejudice. But  in  Popery  Condemned  and   Popery again  Condemned, McCulloch  does  not argue for retention; he restricts  himself in­ stead  to a half-amused,  any-fool-can-see­ this discussion of  various points  of Catho­ lic superstition and  dogma; one  can  hear  far greater and uglier  prejudice expressed by  Edinburgh  street  orators even  today.  He   discussed   such   matters  as   the   su­ premacy of  the  Apostle   Peter,   the  tem­ poral   authority  exercised   by  the   Pope, papal  infallibility, and  so on.  And  it was this level of criticism  of Catholicism that formed   the   basis  of  the   major  part   of "Auld Eppie's Tales", which  he wrote  in the  late  182o's,  after  a trip  to Scotland.
There is a problem about this work. Dr. D.  D.  Harvey, former  Provincial  Archi­ vist  of  Nova  Scotia, has  written  that   in "Auld  Eppie's  Tales"   McCulloch   "at­ tempted ... to counteract Scott's unsym­ pathetic treatment of the  Covenanters in Old  Mortality." And  there  is in  fact  an unfinished   manuscript    by    McCulloch which  deals  with  the  Covenanters. Over the   years   this   manuscript  has   become somewhat   disarranged,   and     when 	I searched through it  I  could  find  no  evi­ dence   that   the  tale  of  the  Covenanters had  ever  been  completed. The one  com­ plete  story  in "Auld  Eppie's Tales" -as long  as  a  medium  length  novel,   hand­ written and  fairly difficult  to read-is in fact  the work on  the Abbots  of Paisley  to which  McCulloch  referred in  his already  quoted  letter   to  the  Rev.  John  Mitchell in January  1828.
It is  a  curious   tale,  and   the  opening
 structure is very  awkward; the  first  nar­ rator,  returning to the district after many years,  encounters an  old  friend  who  in turn  narrates one of the  tales Auld  Eppie  used  to  tell  the  children.  Yet  once  Mc­ Culloch  gets into  the  story  itself,  it  con­ tains  some of his best  writing.
Perhaps this  is because,  in  "Auld  Ep­ pie",  McCulloch is going  home, home  to the  countryside he  knew  as  a  boy. This,  however,  does not  prevent  him  from  be­ ing realistic  about  what  has  happened to that   countryside; he  tells  how  the  river has   become   industrialized,   the    water kelpies have gone from  the stream, as has the  grist  mill,  and   a  "huge  unclassical cotton work monopolised its waters." But he retains  his feel of the country, as when he writes of Jock Slater, one of the char­ acters,  that  "no  boy  in  the  school  knew so many  birds' nests, or when  paddling in the   river   could   put   his  hand   under   a stone and pull out a trout  with equal dexterity. At  snaring a  hare   too  he  was a perfect  adept."
The  story  deals  with  the  Abbey,  with the  machinations of a  rather wicked  ad­ herent  of   that    establishment   curiously known  as Sir Hughie, with  the imagined  bewitchment of the  Lady  of  the  Manor, perhaps by  her  servant  Mansie. In  this story   the   gentry    speak   standard  Eng­  land,  but  the  country  folk  speal(  Scots. A  good  example is  the  scene  in  which Killoch,   a  local  farmer, warns   Mansie  against   consorting   with    the   Devil,   of which she has been  accused; Mansie  sug­ gests  that  he come  with  her  to discuss it with   the   Devil,   who   resides-Killoch supposes -in  a  pocket  of the  river  glen called  the Spout.

"Dei!  though  he  be,"  says Killoch,  " 'I'll gie him ae mouthfu' that  he'll  no get ower. We'll  tak the evangel  wi' us, and  lang  afore we had  read  it through, if he  be na'  off to the  Red  Sea,  as  Sir  Hughie   says,  he'll  be off to a place  that's ill to  bide  in. Nae deil e'er  stood  before Jesus  Christ; and  he'll  be

THOMAS MCCULLOCH



a  stout  ane,  that  ventures  to face  his  evan­
gel."
Never  was there  day  less in  unison  with
deeds  of  darkness.  The   sun,  diffusing   his glories in a cloudless sky, looked down  upon the  Glen,  which  smiled  in all  the  loveliness of  nature.  The   hawthorn  and   birch   per­ fumed   the  air   with   their   fragrance;  little birds   carolled   upon   every  spray,   and   the mellow  notes  of  the  blackbird   and  thrush,  re-echoed  through  the  Glen. Killoch,  as he ascended  after  Mansie,  felt  the  harmony  of nature, but  he  was  ill  at  ease  within; he thought  that,   but   for   the   devil   and   the church, the  whole world  would  be a habita­ tion  of peace.
. . . Before  him,  Mansie   moved  onward
without apparent reluctance, but  this, so far from  affording him  relief,  proved  rather a matter of uneasiness. As an  evidence  of the obduracy   and   hardihood  of  witches  under the power of the devil, it showed him that he was about  to engage in a contest in which, judging  by appearances, the  probabilities  of victory were on the side of the enemy. Had Mansie discovered symptoms of terror and contrition, he would have  been much  better satisfied ...

They  approach  the  glen;  Killoch's knees shake when he finds that  it is  per­ vaded  by a strong and  disagreeable smell of burning.  Then  he hears the sounds of sawing  and  hammering  and,  to  his sur­ prise, the Devil seems to be amusing him­ self  with  a  song. He  advances  bravely, saying to Mansie:

"Stand back. Ye'll  meet wi' nae skaith,  if
I can help  it. It's  no for  the  like of you, to
 daur  the devil:  but  I hae  a call  to meet  wi' him,  and,  wi'  the  help  o'  God's  word,  I'll let him ken that  Jesus  Christ  cam  to destroy the  works o'  the  deil."
Killoch,  therefore, with  the  scriptures in
his  hands,   placed   himself   before   Mansie; and,  pushing  aside the bushes, ventured into the  Glen  . . . What  he  wanted   in  courage, he  endeavoured to  supply  by haste.  Saying to himself, it is God's  work,  he  hurried  on­ ward; and,  at  last,  found   himself  amidst  a goodly  company   of  gypsies,  or  tinklers,  as they  are  commonly  called;  some  employed in   the   manufacture  of   horsespoons,    and others  in  the fabrication of  brotches,  crosses and  several other  trinkets.
"Gibbie  Graham, Rabbie  Marshall, and  the hail  o'  you,"  said  Killoch,   "what  brought
you here?  Dinna' ye ken,  that  for  your ne'erdoweel  gates    [ways],  the   king   long syne commandit you  out  o'  the  kintra?"
"We  ken that  wee!," replied  Gibbie,  "but we  hae  nae  other   hame,  and   canna   gang awa'.  We  like  the  Glen  and  a' that  belang till't.   Ye're   a  gude   landlord, Killoch; ad we've  no iii tenants: ye mauh  say naething about  us:  we may do you a gude  turn  yet." "Wee!,  wee!,"   said   Kiiioch.   "I'm   glad that  Mansie  has nae  waur  deils than  you to
deal  wi'."

And  McCulloch   tackles  the  absurdi­ ties  (as  he  sees them)   of  the  Catholic position with the same blend of  sardonic humour  and  deep  seriousness,  which  it seems to me goes far  beyond anything  in The  Stepsure  Letters. Perhaps indeed  an undiscovered  treasure  is there  in  "Auld Eppie's Tales".

















147





POLITICAL ASYLUMS


ANTHONY BRENNAN, The  Crazy House. McClel­
land  & Stewart. $8.gs.
RAYMOND FRASER,  The   Struggle   Outside. Mc- Graw-Hill Ryerson  Ltd.  $7·95·
BoTH The Crazy House by Anthony Brennan and The  Struggle Outside by Raymond Fraser  are  satirical, oftentimes funny, non-"realistic" novels concerned with   political   extremes. The  two  books examine opposite ends  of the  political spectrum; The  Crazy  House  attacks the repressiveness  of established governments, while   The   Struggle  Outside   assails  the follies of  revolutionaries. And  each  book finds  the  political  extreme examined  un­ tenable,  absurd,  and   ultimately   not  so difficult  to conquer.
The  Struggle Outside  by Raymond Fraser  is a farce  describing the  antics  of an  inept   group  of  revolutionaries,  fight­ ing  a  "war" in  the  unlikeliest of  places, New  Brunswick,   and   struggling  against  governmental oppression which  is appar­ ently  felt  only  by them.  The  catalyst  for the  action   is  the  escape  from  a  mental institution   (where,    according   to    the escapee   narrator,  political  prisoners   are often  confined)  by the  eventual members  of  the  "Popular  Liberation Army". The "Army"  consists   of  several   two-dimen­ sional   misfits,  who  voice  no  ideological basis for  their  actions, and each  of whom envisions   himself    as   leader  or   future leader   of  "the  revolution". Moses  is  an army  veteran, an  uncouth brute,  virtually
 an animal (even down to his thick black apelike  body  hair), whose  only  real  in­ terest is crime, and  who bullies  the others  to such  a degree  that  he  is in  effect  the leader; Liz  is  a  childish,  bossy  woman, neurotic about   her   body  and   her  sexu­ ality,   and   always   trying   to   assert   her imagined   superiority;  Cavanaugh  is   a pitifully near-sighted, almost  blind,  prac­ tically  inept,   archetypal  weakling,   who maintains delusions  of a sexual  relation­ ship with  Liz, and  of himself  as the  phil­  osophical   leader   of  the  revolution; Le­ Blanc is a French Canadian out to avenge  the  treatment of  his  people  by the  Eng­ lish, but who falls victim  to it instead; the Chief  is an  Indian who  is the  supposed, but  presumed captured,  leader,   but   he betrays  the  group,  thinking he  is pitting two  White   political   forces  against   each other,  and  thus aiding the cause of the Indians; and  the  narrator is a  relatively rational, objective, and  ordinary man  in most  matters, while  retaining naive  illu­ sions of  the  value  of  the  revolution  and of  his  future leadership  of  it.
Their plan   is  to  kidnap  the  Minister of  Justice   of  New  Brunswick, announce their   revolutionary  manifesto,  and   de­ mand    a   million    dollars    ransom   with which   to  finance   the   revolution.  They  begin  well enough  by stealing a  car  and  abducting its driver, who  turns out  to be a  well known  Evangelical  preacher. But they fall victim  to their lack of organiza­ tion  and   planning,  and  return  to  their "HQ" without the  Justice Minister and  pursued   by  an   intensive  police   search. They    finally   attempt   to   ransom    the Evangelist, Brother Bell, but  in telephon­ ing  the  ransom  demand Moses  omits  all ideological discussion, gives away their location, and  inadvertently though effec­ tively seals their  doom.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



The   subtitle  describes   the  book  as "a funny   serious   novel";  it   is  lively,   fre­ quently  extremely  funny, and  always en­ tertaining. Brother Bell, with  his Biblical quotations  and   misquotations,   and   his varied  attempts to persuade one  member  of the  "army" after  another to aid  in an escape attempt, is a brilliant comic  crea­ tion; the slapstick comedy  between  Moses, the  bully,  and   Cavanaugh and   Brother  Bell,  his victims,  is quite  effective; the combination  of  Moses'   mental  dullness with  his bullying  tactics  produces a num­ ber  of  humorous situations; and  Cava­ naugh's self-delusions   are  simply  hilari­  ous.  But  as  a  "serious" novel  it  is  not nearly  so successful. Judging by his intro­ ductions of the characters in  the first few pages,  Fraser  appears to  begin  with  the simplistic  premise  that revolutionaries are demented, self-centred, and  without poli­ tical  ideology  or  social  concern. Unfor­ tunately  this   idea   is  never   really   de­ veloped  or  expanded; the  characters  are merely  caricatures and   do  not  develop; the  plot  is a  simple,  almost  mechanical, working   out   of  the   inevitabilities  that  result from  the formation of "The Popu­  lar  Liberation  Army," and  does  not  tell us  much  about   revolutions,  revolution­ aries, or society; and  the first person  point of  view's inherent possibilities for a psy­ chological  portrait of a deluded mind  are only partially explored and exploited. Overall   the  book is an  amusing piece of light entertainment, lacking  the subtleties and   intricacies  of  fine   art,   and   giving little  insight  into  the  politics  of   revolu­ tion or the  psychology  of  revolutionaries.
Anthony   Brennan's The  Crazy  House grows out of the Kafkan and  Orwellian tradition  of  political   nightmare   novels, but distinguishes itself in two important ways. By letting a  pair  of  con-men sur-
 vive and  indeed, use for  their  own  ends, the repressive political system, Brennan emphasizes the individual's psychological outlook  in triumphing over or falling vic­ tim  to  repression, and   makes  repressive governments butts  of  satire  and  comedy rather than  something to  fear.
The novel opens with a short scene depicting the  functioning of an  office in which  the  file cards  of  political   enemies are  separated from   those  of  the  rest  of the  population; but   behind   the  appar­ ently   care-free  working  atmosphere  lie the  pervasive  fears  of  each of  the  clerks that  some  day  his  card  will  be  selected.  One  of the  cards  selected  is that  of  Ned Flask,  a  fear-dominated  journalist. Two  very  clever  attempts to  entrap Ned  are made, but  his newspaper experience has made  him aware  of government methods, and  he  avoids  capture. In  the  midst  of these  dangers Ned's   uncle,  Dan, an  art thief by profession, elicits Ned's aid in authenticating, stealing, and  transporting across the country a very conspicuous, famous  sculpture. Ned  is at  first alarmed by his  uncle's  foolhardiness, but  as  they work  together   Ned  begins  to  understand that Dan has discovered how to outwit government officials and avoid  their harassment. Ned  realizes  that   his  prob­ lems have  largely  resulted  from  his timid, negative,  victim  mentality, and  he gradu­ ally  learns   the  skills  of  a  con-man and  thus   insures   his   survival,   success,   and happiness  in  spite   of  his  repressive  en­ vironment.
Brennan very  neatly  contrasts Ned  the victim  with  Ned  the  con-man in terms  of being "dead" or "alive." In  the beginning of the novel and  in the  flashbacks  to epi­ sodes with  his girlfriend, Carol, Ned  pre­  fers  to  withdraw from  life,  to  be  unob­ trusive   to  the   point  of   invisibility and


149

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



non-existence, to live in fear  rather than confront his oppressors, and  to  be a  vic­ tim  of political absurdity rather  than an exploiter  of   it.   When    he   is   reported "dead"  in   the   newspaper    (part   of   a government  scheme   to  capture  him   by tricking  him   into   coming   to   them   to clarify  the "error"), ironically, he is quite  accurately described. It is his uncle,  Dan,  and  later  Ned  himself,  with  their  enjoy­  ment  of  gourmet cuisine,  or  art,  or  thea­ tre,  their  exploitation  of  the   stupidity, fears, and  private interests of government employees, and  their  conception of  outra­ geous  plans  and  succesful  completions of them,  who are  really  vital and  "alive."
The novel  is extremely well-crafted as Brennan neatly  interweaves several  minor themes with the story of Ned's change in attitude and  triumph over his oppressors. From   worried   clerks   in   the   first  scene through police officials Murdoch and Zentner, Brennan skilfully portrays government officials who live in as much or  more  fear  than   do  ordinary  citizens. The   scheme   in  which   Ned   is  reported "dead"  displays   the   insidious    way   in which  communication media  can be manipulated by the  powerful. This night­ marish  picture of oppression is taken  far­  ther   as  the  government  tries  to  destroy all works of art  (hence, they want  to find the  sculpture  Ned  and  Dan  steal) , at­  tempting  to   crush   the   possibilities   for sensitivity  and  beauty, and  replace them  with  universal brutality and  ugliness. But the  various  parts  of the  amusement park Crazy  House  in  which  Ned  finally  teases and  ridicules  his pursuer, Murdoch, pro­ vide the titles for the book's three sections, as  Brennan  creates   an  ironic   metaphor for the frequently inept  and  inefficient political   structure which   is  finally  out­ witted  by Ned  and  Dan.
 It is certainly possible to question  or downright disbelieve Brennan's unique view that  oppression  is largely  a result  of the mental attitudes of the oppressed,  but it is made  quite convincing between  the covers of Brennan's fine  novel.

GARY  WERDEN



ARTISTIC SCHIZOPHRENIA

TOM FORRESTALL and ALDEN NOWLAN,  Shaped by This Land. University  Press of New Brunswick, $27.50.

As  A BIBLIOPHILE, one  who  derives  plea­ sure   from   books   solely   as   beautifully made  objects  in  the  phenomenal world,  I find Shaped  by This Land  an aesthetic­ ally  pleasing  artifact. I  admire the  gen­ eral  layout and  design  of the  book-the printing  and   arrangement  of  Nowlan's fifty-four  poems  on  the  page   (gathered mostly   from   his  early   books)   and   the seventy-six splendid reproductions of  For­ restall's    paintings    and    sketches   nicely juxtaposed   spatially   with    the    poems throughout   the   book.    As   a   habitual reader  of poems  and  voyeur  of  paintings as structures of meaning, however,  my re­ action   to  the  book  is  schizoid,  critically  somewhere   between  tears   and   laughter, for  the  aesthetic or  emotional  responses called  for  by Nowlan's poems  are  almost always in  conflict  with  the  responses  de­ manded   by  Forrestall's  paintings. As  a result, the full artistic potentiality of both the  poems  and  the  paintings-at least in    terms    of	affectivity-is	severely diluted.
More   often   than   not   a  coffee   table
volume  with a prohibitive price,  this sort

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



of  book,  which  brings  verbal  and   visual artifacts   together,  consistently  disturbs me.    I   am   all   the   more    troubled   by Shaped  by  This   Land  because   Nowlan and   Forrestall, each  a  brilliant artist  in his own  right,  have  not  been fair  to their own  respective arts  in having  consciously created  this  condition of  artistic  schizo­ phrenia. Each   artist   must  have  selected his work  with  some sort  of eye towards  a correspondence with  the  work  of his fel­ low  artist,   but  even  if  there  were  to  be any   sort   of  correspondence   between   a poem  and  a  painting-of  subject mat­  ter,  theme,  or technique-it could  never be  more  than  a tenuous  analogical one. Detail  in   a   painting,  for   example,  its method of  execution and  its  perceptual effects, is simply  not the same as detail  in a  poem.
There is in  Shaped  by  This  Land  an
over-all   analogical  relationship  between the  accumulative effect of the  poems and that   of  the  paintings, and   perhaps it  is only   this   general    correspondence that Nowlan  and    Forerstall  had    in   mind. Taken together, all the  poems and  paint­ ings  exemplify   the  sullen  anguish  of  a Maritime   environment-moral,   social, economic,  and  physical: "in  my country even/where the land was first/broken  two hundred/ years  ago or  more,  the  wilder­ ness/  is   waiting/ to   reclaim   everything if/ we turn  our backs." And all the poems and  paintings easily  transcend  region  to become  metaphors for  the human condi­  tion in general, for both poet and  painter know  that  the  only  effective  road  to  the universal  is   the   particular.  But   indi­  vidual  poems seldom,  if ever,  correspond in  any  way,  let  alone  in  terms  of  parti­ cularized  subject matter and   particular­ ized   theme,   with   their   visual   counter­ parts. The entire  book demonstrates what
 I mean,  but  let me give a few examples. The  portrait poem,  "Carl", for  instance, conflicts with  Forrestall's corresponding portrait, "Wally". They   are  simply  two quite  different men.  "Psalm" deals  with several  children dancing in  the  summer, whereas  Forrestall's juxtaposed painting, "Upper Clements", is a winter scene with two  isolated   children,  and   the   shift  in mood  is strikingly  abrupt. "Dancer", a poem  that  works  brilliantly both  as  pre­ cise, detailed description and  as a  meta­  phor  for  the  human condition,  contrasts violently  with  the  subject  matter, theme,  and   mood   of    Forrestall's   "Day  Off", which  is, however,  like  all  of  Forrestall's paintings, a beautiful visual  statement in itself.
There are, of course,  very good  reasons why  Nowlan  and   Forrestall might   have come   up   with   the   idea   of   this   book, among  them  a shared  aesthetic: both  are "magic realists". Both  poet  and   painter are  concerned  with  rendering a  precise, detailed depiction of the  reality  they per­ ceive -"the  things  which  are".  Nowlan  says that  he  "would be  the  greatest poet that  the world  has ever  known/ if only  I could  make  you see/ here  on  the  page/ sunlight/ a sparrow j three  kernels  of pop­  corn/ spilled on the snow," and  Forrestall is a  painter,  according to  Nowlan, who "makes/ a separate portrait of each  blade  of  grass."   For   both   poet   and   painter, there  are  "no  ideas  but  in  things", and  both  attempt to  record   and   to  preserve through the  ordering processes  of  art - form-the  life of  the  moment, arrested in  time  by  the  formal   austerity of  their craft.  The moral  and  formal "acuity" of Nowlan's    poems    parallels   the    visual acuity   of  Forrestall's  paintings,  usually achieved  by the  use of an  "egg-tempera" pigment  and  the "cross-hatching" strokes

BOOKS IN REVIEW



of darker over lighter  to shade  and  shape particular forms.  Each   blade  of  grass  in a  painting  like  "Above  the   Lake",  for instance,  is  painted  separately.  In   the resulting  visual   acuity,  a   simultaneous perception  of  details   in  both   their  dis­ tinctiveness  and    mass,   lies   the   visual magic  that  corresponds to  Nowlan's  ver­ bal  magic.  We see more  details  than  we are  customarily capable  of  perceiving in life;  the  ordinary and  seemingly   trivial are  magnified, raised  to  the  status of the "wonder-full".   Finally,    through   their poems  and   paintings,  Nowlan   and  For­  restall  attempt  to dignify  the  inhumanity of  man's  existence, to  give  it  order   and meaning,  even  though they  know -and this makes their  art  fundamentally ironic
-the enormous distance between  life ex­ perienced and  life depicted in art:  "The worst  art  possesses/ a  perfection  beyond anything/ life has  to offer,  is so rational/ it   becomes    ridiculous."    Although   the work   of   Nowlan    and   Forrestall  share these  philosophical  premises  of art,  their objectives  are,   in   my   opinion,  better  realized  separately than  in this gratuitous yoking together of  their  poems and  paint­ ings.
BARRY CAMERON



ON THE VERGE

****   EDGAR   Z.  FRIEDENBERG, The  Disposal of Liberty  and  Other  Industrial Wastes. Double­ day,  $8.g5. Edgar Friedenberg is that  necessary thinker  of  our   times,   the  pessimistic  seer.  His latest book  is a salutary account of  the way  in which   our  false  democracy has  produced  joy­ lessness  and   rancour and   has  closed  off  rather
 than opening for  humanity the  vistas  of  experi­ ence.  He  issues  a  timely   call  to  those  who­ fearing the  label   of  elitist -have  abandoned the  defence of every  kind  of  excellence in mod­  ern  life,  but   he  also  realizes that  it  may  well be   too   late   for   the   call   to   be   heard,  that democracy in  its  populist form   has  destroyed rather  than   strengthening  our   liberties,  and  that  we may  have  to seek  what vestiges of free­  dom  and  culture we  can  find  in  the  interstices of  an  immovable power   structure, perhaps to be  dominated  by   the   multinational  corpora­ tions  rather than the  nation-state. The flowers vanish  from  the  earth; the  time  of  the  singing of  birds  is gone,  and   the  voice  of  the  raven  is heard  in   our   land.  And   ravens   (pessimists) have  more   to  say  of  value to  our   times   than turtle doves  (optimists). Only  by starkly know­ ing  the  worst  can  we begin,  with  resolution but wasting  no  time  on  hope, to  resume our   hu­  man   dignity  and   re-enter  that  austere world  of  true   freedom  from   which    the   pursuit  of affluence  has  enticed us.

***   DUDLEY WITNEY,   The   Lighthouse, with foreword  by Thomas H.  Raddall. McClelland
& Stewart, $27.50. Dudley Witney has followed that   splendid  book,  The   Barn,  which   he  pre­ pared in  collaboration with  Eric  Arthur,  by  a second   nostalgic  record  in   prose   and   photo­ graphs, entitled The  Lighthouse. Like the  bam, the  lighthouse has  been  an  image  laden with poetic  meaning for  mankind ever since  the  day of  the   Pharos (where Mr.  Witney  makes   his beginning), and   so  finely   illustrated  a   book cannot  fail   to  appeal.  Yet   there  is  not   the same   tautness between  prose  and   photograph that  existed  in the former book,  perhaps simply because Mr.  Witney's  photographs  are   more  evocative than his prose.  As in  the  earlier book, he   ignores   national  boundaries,  taking  the North American continent from  Newfoundland to Florida as his province and  completely neglecting Pacific coasts  and  waters, which  will disappoint his potential readers in British Columbia. On  the  whole,   the  historical  back­ ground is  well-researched, but  there  are  weak points; for   example,  is  not   the   tale -which Mr.  Witney repeats -of the  British  chaining American  patriots  to   drown  in   the   tide   on Execution  Rocks   an   unproved  piece  of  early  atrocity propaganda? I have  always  suspected its authenticity.                                                  G.W.
