$2 .oo per copy




CANADIAN l TERATURE N°·54
Autumn, 1972




POETIC OCC](SJONS





Articles

BY  DAVID  STOUCK, GARY  GEDDES, STEPHEN SCOBIE, GEORGE BOWERING, MIKE  DOYLE



Review  Articles and Reviews

BY  DONALD STEPHENS, AL  PURDY, WILLIAM H. NEW, RUSSELL M.  BROWN, GEORGE WOODCOCK, JAMES POLK, ANTHONY APPENZELL, DENNIS DUFFY, HERBERT ROSENGARTEN, JOHN  REID





A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW








LIMITS  OF TASTE AND TOLERANCE









SINCE  THE   BEGINNINGS of  Canadian  Literature  we  have been  concerned about the  censorship  of books. In  our  second  issue, in  Autumn I95·9, I  devoted   an  editorial-"Areopagitica re-written"-to the  laws  relating to obscenity  which  in  that   year  were  passed in both  Britain  and   Canada. The conclusion  of that  editorial was that  while  the  British  legislation  was an  obvious advance on anything in the  past, the Canadian legislation  was at best ambiguous and   at  worst  oppressive. While  praising  the  British  legislation   for  its  provision for  a  consideration  of  the  literary, scholarly  or  artistic   merits  of  any  work  in­ volved in a prosecution, I also remarked:

It  is this  writer's  personal  opinion  that  censorship of any  kind  is morally  un­ justified and  practically  self-defeating. It  places a premium  on obscurantism  and intolerance,  it lowers the climate of social relations by encouraging the sneak  and the informer,  and  it places works of literature  at the mercy of policemen, customs officers, magistrates  and  judges whose training  does not often include  the inculca­ tion of artistic discrimination.

But,   admitting  a  situation  such   as  existed  in  1959,   when   large   numbers of people  obviously   still  supported "some  degree  of  governmental interference in the  freedom  of  publication", I took  the  position  that to  be  realistic   we  must accept   a  compromise that  would  protect  works of genuine literary merit; what I objected to  in  the  legislation  as it then  stood  was that it assured  no such  pro­ tection.

3

EDITORIAL



Events have led me to the conclusion that  the argument on grounds of literary merit  in  fact  provides a  false position from  which  to  criticize censorship  laws; only the  absolutist  libertarian  view, as  Milton  stated  it, stands  up  to  examina­ tion and is effective in practice.
Let me narrate the incident that led me to this conclusion. Recently  I received
a  letter  from  a  lawyer  in  eastern  Canada who  was  preparing the  appeal  of a group  of  book store  clerks who  had  been convicted  on  obscenity  charges.  The defence  would  involve three  types of expert  testimony-testimony on changing community  standards of tolerance,  medical-psychiatric testimony  on  the  effects of  pornography  on  behaviour,  and  testimony  on  the  literary   nature   of  "the paperback  novels which are the subject matter of this appeal."
I  was invited,  with  just over two weeks' notice,  to provide  the testimony "on literary  merits"  regarding  some "dozens of novels".  I was not given the titles of these novels, though  I was given a single sheet of summaries  prepared  by a  pro­ fessor of  English  in  a  Maritime  university which  left  no doubt  of the  kind  of books they were. I was expected to decide in a couple of days, before I had seen a  page  of the  books concerned,  whether  I  would  deliver  the  appropriate opin­ ions. It  would of course have been impossible to give  conscientious testimony in such  circumstances,  and  I  declined the  invitation.  But  I  remained  interested  in two sentences  from  the lawyer's  letter,  which  revealed  to  me as nothing  before had done the weakness of the defence of any work merely on aesthetic merits. He told  me that  the  professor who read  the  books "feels that  this material  appeals to  a segment  in  the  community,  of  lower  intellect  and  education.  The  point  is that  this material  says something  to them-it  is their  choice of literature."
Obviously   the  critic  cannot   defend  on  aesthetic   grounds  books  which  are
someone else's "choice of literature" but which he considers rubbish, as I suspect I would  have found  the  books I  was asked to defend.  True,  in this case a  par­ ticularly  gross form  of relativism was applied  by the  lawyer  and  his  consultant professor, but  it  had  the  effect of making  me  more  aware  than  before of the element  of relativism  that  enters any defence of the literary  merits of a work in a non-literary  environment  like a court of law. Does not the very setting tend to distort  our view on such matters? Does it not often  become a we-and-they situa­ tion  in  which  we tend  to  make  a false  judgment  of a  work  just because  it  is threatened?
When  one remembers some of the works that  have in the past aroused  impas­
sioned  defences  on  the  part  of men of letters,  it is obvious  that  many  of them were  not  works of high  literature  at  all. Madame Bovary,  Les Fleurs du  Mal,

4

EDITORIAL



Ulysses:   no  doubt  exists in  those cases, to  be sure.  But  does it not  now seem absurd  that  in  the  excitement  of the moment  good critics found  aesthetic  merit in a  bad  banned  book like The Well  of Loneliness  and  regarded  Frank  Harris's shoddy and senile My  Life  and  Loves as a persecuted literary masterpiece? Have not  Henry  Miller's  books steadily  and  rightly faded  in  prestige ever since  they ceased  to  be  contraband? And  could  not  one even say that  Lady  Chatterley's Lover  gained  prominence  at  the expense of Lawrence's  better  books because he was the centre  of a cause  celebre  which brought the critics flocking to defend it?
No defence of books against  censorship that  is based on aesthetic grounds  can fail to produce  such  distortions, and lead critics by the emotions of the situation into  untenably   relativistic  judgments.  I  am  therefore  now  convinced  that  the only effective and  logical argument  against censorship is the absolute libertarian one. We have to return  to Milton. We have to say-but this time without quali­ fication-what I  said  in  these pages in  1959,  that  "censorship  of any  kind  is morally  unjustified  and   practically  self-defeating."  If we  demand   freedom  of publication  for  Beautiful Losers and  Cocksure  we must allow freedom  of  publi­ cation  for  bookstall  pornography (which,  like cesspools, may have its own social value), but this does not mean that  we must accept both as literature or that  we can defend any "choice of literature" but our own.

* 	* 	*


IN RECENT  YEARS the  range  of scholarly  tools for  Canadian writers has been  immensely extended,  largely through  the enterprise  of the Uni­ versity  of  Toronto  Press.  The   Dictionary   of  Canadian  Biography,  to  whose monumental merits we have repeatedly drawn  attention,  is only the most notable of these achievements; other  compilations  which have  been of more specialized use to students  and  critics of writing  in  Canada   also deserve  attention.   Apart  from  the  Literary History   of Canada, a  work of massive scope  and  disturbing  unevenness, the  most ambitious  has undoubtedly  been the Check   List  of Cana­ dian   Literature  and   Background  Materials,  compiled  by  R.  E.  Watters.  The  great  merit  of this work, whose original version -published  in  1959 -covered the  period from  1628 to 1950, was that,  while limiting himself to works in Eng­ lish, Watters  took Canadian literature  to  mean writing  by Canadians wherever it was printed,  and  thus, by diligently pursuing the Check  List's various divisions of subject  and  genre,  one  is likely  to  find  all  a  writer's  works listed  and  not merely  those  which  have  found  publication  in  Canada. A  new  edition  of the

5

EDITORIAL



Check  List of Canadian  Literature, bringing its coverage up to  Ig6o and  repair­ ing  the rare  omissions in the earlier version, is due for  publication  this autumn. Unfortunately it has not arrived in time for detailed  consideration; it will be fully noticed in our next issue.
,The comprehensiveness of the Watters  Check  List makes one regret  the limi­ tations  of two other  important bibliographical  works recently issued by  the  Uni­ versity of Toronto  Press, limitations  which  are  deliberate  in the  case  of Harald  Bohne's Canadian  Books in Print  ($25.00)   and  evidently  accidental  in the case of Douglas Lochhead's  Bibliography of Canadian  Bibliographies  ( $2o.oo). Both of  these  books-which  have  the  advantage   of  dealing   with   publications  in French  as well as in  English-are immensely useful so far as they go, but they are not the completely reliable tools their titles might lead one to expect.
The
title.  What  are  we to expect from  Canadian  Books in  Print? Surely  with  most reason  a  list of books by Canadian authors  which  are  now  in  print  no matter where  they  were  published.  Books by Canadian authors  are  my idea  of  Cana­ dian   books,  but   not,  quite  evidently,  Harald   Bohne's  idea;   he  is  concerned strictly  with  books  published in Canada,  even if this merely  means  a  Canadian distributor  putting  his imprint  on a book actually  brought  out by a foreign pub­ lisher and  which  has no other  link with Canada. So we have  the extraordinary anomaly   that,   while  works  by  non-Canadians  as  varied  as  William  Godwin, George  Orwell,  Arthur  Koestler and  Iris  Murdoch   appear  as "Canadian books in  print", books by Canadian authors  that  were  published  abroad  and  are still in print  are  rigorously excluded. To give a very personal example, out of twenty of  my  books which  were in  print  in  I 9 7 I,  only  the  nine actually  brought  out with  Canadian publishers' imprints  are included, although  the  rest were in fact available  in Canada in that  year. Does that  make half my books Canadian and half non-Canadian? To be an effective scholarly tool rather  than a mere showcase for  local  publishers,  a  handbook  entitled  Canadian   Books  in  Print  should  be devoted  to books by Canadians  wherever  they are in print  and  should leave out books by  non-Canadians even  though  by  some accident  they  bear  a  Canadian imprint.  This  book has a considerable usefulness, but  it will only become as use­ ful  as it  should  be  when  one  can  open  it and  see at  a glance  what,  among  a Canadian writer's  book-length  works, can be bought  in the year of compilation.
The  criticism  that  this is something  useful which  might  be improved  applies also-though in  a  different  way-to  Lochhead's Bibliography  of Canadian Bibliographies. Here  there is no fault  in defining the field, but  there is-in  this

6

EDITORIAL



second  (  972)   edition -a  failure  of thoroughness  in  bringing  information  up to date.  In  judging  reference  books I  have always followed  the  rule of turning first to the  items of which  I  have some close knowledge;  the encyclopaedia  one finds making mistakes in one's own field is to be used with circumspection, though not necessarily to be rejected.
In  the  case of the  Bibliography  of  Canadian  Bibliographies I looked up four
references which concerned  features  that  had appeared  in Canadian  Literature. Only one was complete  and  even then there was an  uncorrected  spelling change ("Theater" for "Theatre", as if the American hordes were already  among us!) . Our  annual   Checklist  of  Canadian Literature  was entered  as if Inglis  F.  Bell had edited it consistently from  1960 to its demise last year;  no note was made of the fact  that  Rita  Butterfield  was editor from 1964 onwards  or that  the French section was edited during the same period by Susan Port and then by Pamela Piddington. There  is an  entry  for our  Index,  but only the section  up to No.  I 2 is noted,  despite  the  fact  that  by the  time  this edition  of  the  Bibliography  of Canadian   Bibliographies   was   prepared   two  further   indexes   had   appeared, together  reaching  No.  g6.  And,  while  Earle Birney's Bibliography  of Malcolm Lowry  in  No.  8  and  the  supplement   in  No. g  are  included,  Birney's second supplement  in  No. 19 is ignored.  Now, if I find failings in three-quarters of the entries  of  whose subjects  I  have  close knowledge, how  am  I  to  proceed  with confidence as I look up Mr.  Lochhead's  references in areas where my knowledge is notably  less? Perhaps,  as he stresses, one  cannot  include  in such  a  book an entry  for every bibliography  of every kind, but at least those which are included should  give full  and  correct  information.  Yet, for all its flaws, this is the  only reference  book  of its kind,  and  it brings together  a  mass of useful information not  collected  anywhere  else. One  can  only  hope  that,  when  the  third  edition appears, flaws of the kind I have mentioned will be eliminated.
A different  kind  of  reference  book, frank  about  its omissions and  somewhat
unashamedly  didactic  in  its intent,  is Read  Canadian  (James  Lewis & Samuel.
$1.95), a  compilation   of  essays and  booklists edited  by Robert   Fulford,  Dave Godfrey and Abraham Rotstein, three avowed nationalists of various viewpoints anxious  to  provide  Canadians with some starting  point  for  an  appreciation   of their  country's  literature. Scholars of uneven  capabilities  write  essays of uneven quality  on  29 categories of literature   (some of them very restricted  in a modish way, like Drugs  and  Women), and  on the whole the coverage is fair. Hundreds of useful or important books are discussed, and  a few of the authors,  like Walter Young,  Richard Simeon,  W. H.  New and  Dennis Lee manage  in these difficult

7

EDITORIAL



circumstances  to write essays of literary quality.  Dave  Godfrey  and  James Lori­ mer discuss the problems of publication in Canada and there is a list of  Canadian publishers untainted  by foreign initiation or control.
Every  review  I  have seen of Read  Canadian  has  noted  the  omissions in  its coverage,  and  certainly  they  exist, in  terms  of  books and  authors  missed and whole fields of study  left out,  but  I  do not  propose at  this stage to add  to the list, since this does not pretend  to be a comprehensive  book and  the editors have promised  to  fill out  the  pattern  and  be  more  comprehensive  in  later  editions. Also, it is, after  all, an introduction  for the  uninitiated. Those  who are already modestly  versed  in  the imaginative,  historical  and  sociological literature  of our country  will find little that  is unfamiliar,  but  the  book is not aimed  at them.  It is aimed  at  people  like Robert  Fulford's  young  writer  who  went  through  high school and  university in western Canada and  never in the process even heard  of Sinclair  Ross's prairie  classic As for Me and my House. As such a venture-the first of its kind -it is to be welcomed and  its editors are to be congratulated.

G.W.






























8



NOTES  ON  THE

CANADIAN IMAGINATION




David Stouck








w..LE IT IS THE SPECIAL FUNCTION of the imagination to  make  us more  fully aware  of life's potentialities,  the  Canadian  imagination has  traditionally been  obsessed with  the limitations  rather  than  the  possibilities of human  experience. The imagination  allows us momentarily  to see the world differently, shaped  not  by economics and  politics, but in accordance  with man's deepest  anxieties  and  wishes. Most  positively it gives us a  glimpse of life lived with  a sense of greater  freedom  and  a fully expressed individuality,  for  at  the centre of every imaginative  response, buried however deeply, is a vision of human existence liberated  erotically. Canadian art, however, seldom directs us to the fulfilment   of  this  vision;  rather   it  accepts  life's  limitations   and   finds  ascetic pleasure within their circumference.
Part  of the  reason  for  this,  we must  assume, is climate  and  geography,  for these have historically made survival rather  than freedom the great fact of  Cana­ dian  life. The  contrast  to  the  American  experience  is suggestive. Men  went  to the  United  States seeking freedom  and  the opportunity  for  unlimited  individual  power;  they  sought  to  re-capture  that  Renaissance  condition  where  each  man was potentially  able to realize his broadest ambitions. This  vision was reinforced by the  unlimited   physical frontier.  Though much  of the  United  States  is geo­ graphically  and  climatically  as forbidding  as Canada, the American  imagination has  always responded  to  the  idea of America  as a  geographical  whole and  has not been limited  to the intemperate conditions of one region. With its Mississippi winding  into  the  warm  South,  and  the  Western  plains sweeping  across to the mountains   and  the  promise  of California,  the  American  landscape  has  always provided an escape route from the specific limitations of "home"; and  American


9

THE  CANADIAN IMAGINATION



art  has received its special character  from this dynamic  urge to growth  and  un­ ceasing condition  of movement.  In  Canada there  is little comparable movement possible;  Canadians may  journey  thousands  of miles  within  their  country  but they remain physically in the north.
Men  came to Canada for very different  reasons. Where  they had  gone to the
United   States  to  escape  tradition  and  build  individual   empires,  they  came  to Canada seeking a place in which to preserve those traditions threatened  at home. The  United   Empire  Loyalists who settled  in  the  Maritimes  were  largely  edu­ cated,  conservative  men  who  had  not  joined  in  the  Revolutionary  cause  and who  sought  a  haven  in Canada for  their  way  of life and  their  values. In  less obvious fashion  the same was true  of many  of the settlers who came from  Eng­ land  in the  nineteenth-century seeking an economic  and social  preserve. Rather than  suffer  the  eroding  effects of increasing  poverty  in  England,  large numbers  of middle-class English and  Scots  (the  "genteel" poor)  came  to Canada where through  better  economic  opportunities  their  station  in  life might  be saved. The  Strickland  family is a typical as well as significant example.  Imaginatively  Cana­ da  has not been conceived of as a land of  opportunity so much as a refuge from aggressive or  debilitating  forces elsewhere. The  French  response to Canada has been similar to the English, symbolized dramatically  in the fortress city of Quebec
-the refuge  on  the  rock.  Much   less even  than   the   English  have  French­
Canadians had  the  desire to explore and  expand  over the continent.  The Cana­
dian winter is a fact formidable to French and English alike.
A sense of limitations,  then,  both  physical and  emotional,  has determined  the character  of  the  Canadian  imagination   from  the  outset.  Northrop   Frye  has designated this our "garrison mentality", referring specifically to the Canadian preference  for staying  at  home  rather  than  "lighting  out for the territory". This response  to  the  Canadian landscape-the reluctance  to set forth,  the  holding fast to what is known and safe -makes it possible to define a tradition  in Cana­ dian  art.  It  is a quality of response which on its outer limits suggests fear, but at its core  makes  us  cherish  what  is  domestic  and  secure,  however  humble  and small.  It  finds its essential expression in such varied  works of the imagination  as Susanna  Moodie's  journals, the sonnets of Archibald  Lampman, the painting  of Ozias Leduc, F. P. Grove's Over Prairie Trails, the music of  Claude Champagne, Ross's As For Me  and  My  House or the  Manitoba  novels of Gabrielle  Roy. In Mrs. Moodie's  journals it is an emotion not yet transformed into art;  in the work of subsequent  artists it not only defines the content  of their  art  but also the very style by which expression is achieved.


10

THE  CANADIAN IMAGINATION




Two IMAGES dominate  Canadian art.  Not surprisingly one of these is nature  in both its foreboding and its bleak aspects. A sense of nature's turbulence and  destructive  power  is visually striking  in such  paintings  as Tom Thomson's "Approaching Storm"  and F. H. Varley's "The Elements", and is dramatically   central  to  such  fiction  as  Maria  Chapdelaine, Martha  Ostenso's Wild   Geese, Sinclair  Ross's "The Lamp  at  Noon";  its latent  hostility is a felt presence in the grim winter lyrics of Wilfred Campbell and Margaret Avison. Similarly the unrelieved bleakness of the northern  landscape-the snow-covered expanses,  the  grey  wintry  sky -is  an  integral  part  of Canadian art.  A  heavy melancholy  broods over  the landscapes  of A.  Y. Jackson; it assumes a delicate,
refined form of sadness in the canvases of J. W. Morrice  (see for example "The
Woodpile"), and  wears a grim,  stoical mask in the Arctic landscapes  of Lawren Harris.  The  latter  have  been  interpreted   musically by Harry  Freedman  in  his Images  with  a  similar  feeling of oppressive gloom. The  imprisoning  monotony of the landscape  weighs heavily on Mrs. Moodie and  on the characters  in Ross's As  For  Me  and  My   House,  and  is part  of that  sadness  felt  by  the  poets  of Tantramar and  Grand   Pre.  It  would  seem then  that  the  landscape,  harsh  or bleak, is the  cause of the  artist's  isolation and  loneliness; Northrop Frye implies this  in  all  his writing  about  Canadian art.  Yet surely this is to  belie the  most fundamental observation   we  can  make  about  the  nature   of  the  imagination: namely,  that  its very existence derives in a profound  way from  the artist's  sense of alienation  from  his fellow man.  From  the troubadour onwards  the artist  has been  traditionally   identified  as an  outsider. The  artist's  struggle  is never  really with nature,  but  with  his own divided self and  with the society from  which he is separate.   In  the  tradition  of  Romantic art  the  physical  landscape  in  Canada becomes a  projection  of the  artist's  isolation, an objective  correlative  for his ex­ perience of fear, sadness and the challenge to endure.
The  other  recurrent  image  is that  of the humble dwelling, the human  refuge
from the austere  landscape  and  the elements. The simple cottage hearth  redolent of warmth  and  domestic security  is at  the emotional  centre  of much  Canadian art.  The  cottage  with  wife and  child assures McCulloch's  Stepsure  that his con­ servative  way  of life is best;  it  awaits  Grove  at  the  end  of each  journey  over "prairie trails". The  little dwelling huddled  on the landscape  is almost a conven­ tion in the  painting  of the  Group  of Seven. Again a  dialectic  would appear  to exist between  the  human  presence and  the desolate  indifference  of nature   ( cer­ tainly  these  two  forces  do  define each  other), but  it is not  so simple,  for  that


II

THE CANADIAN IMAGINATION



image  of the  humble  cottage  is essentially a  pastoral  and  escapist one.  It  does not  represent  the true  arena  of the artist's  endeavour, for he is neither  explorer nor pioneer. His struggle is not with a stubborn  wilderness, but with the complex tangles of human  emotions.
No genuine imaginative  conflict exists then between  man and  nature  in Cana­
dian  art;   rather  the  conflict is between  the  artist  and  a force  which  most  fre­ quently  lies outside the circumference  of his art.  Those two images which would appear   in  conflict -the  austere  landscape   and   the  small  abode -are  both projections  of  the  artist's  sense of  isolation  and  his  desire  to  retreat  from  the larger  world. This is evident in the style of A. Y. Jackson's paintings  where the wavy  lines of structure   enclose both  buildings  and  landscape  in  soft,  unifying folds. Similarly  the  imaginative  tension  in Over  Prairie Trails  derives not from a conflict between the narrator  and  the forces of  nature  on his rides (indeed  his delight in the weather and his keen observations of  the landscape  and the seasons are  one  with  his delight  in seeing wife and  child  again), but  from  a source of anxiety  seldom  referred to by the  narrator-his ambition  and  his frustration  in society. Much  of his pleasure on  the  trails seems to lie in  his escaping  the  un­ satisfactory  world  of  his school  and  teaching,  perhaps  in  retreating from  the world as a whole which rejected  the once hopeful  young artist. Like the English Romantic writers   (particularly  Wordsworth,  who  greatly  influenced  the  Con­ federation  poets)  many  Canadian artists have sought  to escape the fretful  wodd of the  city and  "the sneer of vain and  selfish men".  Tom  Thomson  and  several of  the  Group   of  Seven went  on  long  expeditions  into  the  northern   woods to work;  Emily  Carr  journeyed  hundreds  of miles up  the  British  Columbia  coast and  found  companionship with the Indians  whose villages she painted.  They  all sought  a  simpler,  more  primitive  world  in  which  to  work,  a  pastoral  retreat from  the  painful  complexities of contemporary society. The  growth  of a  Cana­  dian  musical  identity  was similarly fostered  in  theI g2o's  by the  rediscovery of the folk song;  it is an integral  part  of the music of Canada's most accomplished composers  including   Hector   Gatton,   Sir  Ernest   MacMillan  and   particularly Claude  Champagne.
The  quest  for  pastoral  retreat,  however,  renders  Canadian art  non-dramatic,
for  the  source  of conflict  remains  outside  the  canvas  or  just off the  page. The wooded  landscape  with  its cottage,  the  Indian   village or the  folk song, do  not describe  the  artist's struggle but his retreat; the imaginative drama  is often only implied  by the  nature  or mood of his withdrawal. In  a country  where  physical survival  has  been  the  foremost  reality,  men  of necessity have  controlled  rather


12

THE  CANADIAN IMAGINATION



than   expanded their  emotions and  the  highly  dramatic has always struck  a false note   in   Canadian  art    (e.g.   Grove's   prairie   farmers  assuming Shakespearian gestures). Perhaps this  is  why  there   has  traditionally been  so  little  Canadian theatre. The expenditure of  human energy  in emotional conflict  has never  been conducive to the survival of the garrison.
In   this  light  Susanna  Moodie's pioneer   journals  can  be seen  as  embodying the  raw  materials out  of which  the Canadian imagination has taken shape. When Mrs.  Moodie and   her  family  came  to  Canada in  the I 83o's   (to  salvage   their dwindling fortunes and  social  dignity), Ontario was crude  bush  country and sur­ vival foremost  in the  minds  of even its most educated English settlers. The image of  nature as  a  hostile  force  recurs  frequently throughout the  journals;  wild ani­ mals,  fire, bitter  cold,  destructive rains  take  up  much  of the  day  to day  concerns of  the   journals. The  log  house-the  humble   dwelling  in  the  backwoods - evolves  accordingly as  an  emblem   of  refuge  from  these  threatening forces.  But physical  survival does not  comprehend the full drama of  Mrs.  Moodie's journals. Her   first  emotion  on  reaching Canada  is  homesickness  for  England,  but  that  emotion   is soon  qualified  by  a  sense  of  having   been  rejected  by  the  "mother country", and  she  views  Canada with  gratitude for  giving  her  family  a second chance. The scene  along  the  St. Lawrence suggests to her  "a second  Eden", and  her  first steps  ashore lead  to  a quiet  copse by a little  river,  sheltered away  from  the  crowds.  But  Canada with  its rough,  commonplace  inhabitants is socially  no more   of  a solace   than   England.  Mrs.  Moodie's   pride   alienates  her  from   her crude  neighbours, and   only  in  the  isolation   of  the   backwoods, despite   all  its physical  hardships, can  she  find  respite.  Mrs.  Moodie ultimately sings  praise  of her  home  in Canada, but  her  eulogy  begins significantly  after  she has discovered the  wilderness  to  be  not  her  antagonist, but  the  harsh  companion of her  loneli­ ness.  Mrs.  Moodie's  personal drama of rejection  and  exile, and  her search for  an emotional refuge  from  an  uncaring world  is very central to what  is imaginative in the Canadian experience.



NORTHROP FRYE  points  to a  distinctively Canadian  poetry developing in  the  long  narrative poem  rather than  in  the  brief  lyric. The poets in  this  tradition  trace   their   descent  down   through Heavysege, Mair, Isabella Crawford, D.  C.  Scott,   Pratt and  Birney.  For  Frye  the  experience which   these poets  share   and   which   welds  them  into  a  continuous and  distinctly   Canadian tradition is that sense  of  God's disappearance and  of man's being  left  alone to

THE CANADIAN IMAGINATION



face  an  indifferent,  if not  hostile, nature  in  a  primitive  country.  This  vision is central  to  the  narrative   conflict  from  Heavysege's  wolf,  howling  in  answer  to Jephthah's prayer,  to the "sun  and  incurious  clouds"  which  alone mark  the de­ struction  of  Birney's  David.  But the  question  here  is  whether  these  poems  in which  man  does battle  with  nature  are  genuinely  dramatic. If we  understand "dramatic" to mean  conflict whose ultimate  goal is erotic  liberation  (Frye him­ self assumes this definition in his classic study  of Blake),  then  the struggle  with nature  as an external  force is no more dramatic than  the escape into nature  for refuge from man.
Of  the  early  narrative   poets only  Isabella  Valancy  Crawford   realizes some­
thing  uniquely  imaginative  in her verse. The  matrix  of her poems is the rhetoric of  nineteenth-century  romanticism  with  its  sentimental  philosophical  assump­ tions, and  yet there is a vigour and a virile incisiveness in her style  (most striking in individual  images and phrases such as "the  small ponds pouted  up their silver lips"  or  "to  the  feast / They  flocked with  the  beaks of unclean  crows")   which renders  that  rhetoric  the perfect vehicle for her imagination. For  Miss Crawford  clearly did not seek in her verse to devalue the romantic  myths of  the nineteenth­ century;  rather  she sought  within  their framework  to release  into expression an essentially masculine  energy and  temperament. In  almost  all  of her  poems Miss Crawford's narrator is a lonely male figure (in suitable accordance with literary convention)  whose love can  never be fulfilled. However, it is difficult to describe Miss Crawford's narrative  poems as fully dramatic;  "Malcolm's Katie" is essen­ tially  an  idyll-a  kind  of fairy  tale  poem-in  which  against  great  odds  the much   beleaguered   hero  wins  his  true  love,  while  "Old Spookses'  Pass"  is a dialect  cowboy  poem  describing a stampede  of  cattle  in  the  Rocky  Mountains.
Duncan  Campbell  Scott, whose imagination  is almost solely preoccupied  with death,   dramatizes   his  obsession entirely  in  terms  of  an  external  struggle  with nature.  Scott's  narratives  are technically among  the most sophisticated  of  Cana­ dian  poems;  in  the  juxtaposition  of  brief,  simple  scenes  the  narratives  move swiftly  and   relentlessly  to  their  inevitable  conclusions,  the  ruthlessly  selective style being a consummate  expression of the implacable emotion  in the poems. In "At  the  Cedars", the log  jam  which  breaks  free  takes  with  it, in  a  few short stanzas,  the lives of  the young man  and  of the  girl  who  rushes after  him in  a canoe.  In  "The Forsaken",  Scott  juxtaposes the  young  Indian mother,  sacrific­ ing her  own flesh to obtain  food for her child,  with  the scene many  years later in which her grandchildren leave her an old  woman  to die in the snow. There  is a  precision  in  the  delineating  of emotion  and  a  foreboding  sense of inevitable

THE  CANADIAN IMAGINATION



doom in Scott's  poetry,  and  yet Scott evades a genuine  dramatic conflict in his narratives.  The   protagonists  in  his  poems are  always primitives-whether  In­ dians  or simple  French-Canadian habitants-whose grim fates, while embody­ ing Scott's fatalistic  vision, belong essentially to the world of folk literature rather  than imaginative  drama.
The  narrative poems  of  E. J. Pratt  similarly evade  dramatic conflict.  Pratt
adopts  what  is essentially the  existentialist  viewpoint so fashionable  in  the  first half of the  twentieth  century  (focussing on the desertion of man  by God), and whether  he is describing  the  missionaries among  the  Indians  or  modem  trans­ Atlantic  travel,  man  is seen  pitted  against  the indifferent  and  destructive force of nature.  Pratt's  imagination is most fully engaged with those stark,  primordial forms  of  nature   which  threaten   to  overwhelm  man -the  paleolithic  iceberg, the  pitiless savages, the shark,  the granite  cliffs of the bleak  landscape  on which man  continues  to endure.  This  stoical imagination  finds its fullest expression not in  dramatic narrative but  in  descriptive  verse  (particularly  the  Newfoundland poems)   which  renders  in  a  slow, sculptural  style the  felt  experience  of  life's intractable  hardness.  Even  the  long  narrative  poems are  essentially a  kind  of plastic art,  like monumental  friezes whose epic gestures engage our attention not by means of action but through  a kind of carved verbal strength.
In  Earle  Birney's "David", the narrative  tradition  takes a different  tum; the
youth  in Birney's poem is crippled  by his fall in the  mountains,  but  the  drama lies not  in  a  betrayal  of David  by nature,  but  in his appeal  to the  narrator to push him over the cliff's edge to his death.  True,  we are told that  only "the  sun and  incurious  clouds"  mark  the place where David's  body is found,  but  our in­ volvement  does not  come to rest on that  image of an indifferent  landscape,  but on the  narrator's reflection  that  it was "the  last of my youth".  Birney, however, has not given us another  narrative poem as fine as "David", so that  the narrative tradition  in  Canadian poetry  has not yet blossomed into a fully dramatic art.



LYRIC POETRY can be as dramatic  as narrative verse, for the imaginative  conflict which  makes art dramatic  is never a matter  of content  but of style. Wordsworth's "Immortality  Ode"  for example  is a  "dramatic" poem, for  it  is woven  out  of images of longed-for  childish innocence  in  conflict  with the conceptualized  arguments  of a rational and sobered adult. Similarly the rich sensuous vein of Keats's  style is heightened  dramatically  by the  logic of  aware­ ness upon  which  his  poems  are  structured.   The  reference  here  to  the  English

THE CANADIAN IMAGINATION



poets  is  not  entirely  arbitrary,  for  it  is the  rhetoric  of  the  great  "Romantic" writers  that  we hear  once again  when  we tum   to  the  Canadian poets of  Con­ federation. I use the term rhetoric  because English Romanticism  assumed a way of  viewing  and  talking  about  nature  that  became  a  kind  of convention  of re­ sponse. Generally  speaking, Romanticism,  after  the failure  of  eighteenth-century rationalism,  relocated  man's  hopes for  a  more  humane and  satisfying existence in a benevolent,  organic view of nature  and  the individual's correspondent  emo­ tion  thereto.  This  shift in popular  philosophical  assumptions was to provide the conventions  for  a  non-dramatic   mode  of  art-the  retreat  into  a  pastoral  and wholly narcissistic world from  which all  conflict  is excluded.  Only  those artists who could  never entirely escape society,  whose retreats  turned  into self-confron­ tation rather than self-love, continue to engage our interest today.
The  degree  of interest in Canada's "Confederation" poets will be determined
by the extent  to which the Romantic  conventions  have been transformed  by the poet's  individual  style. In  the  poetry  of  Charles  G.  D.  Roberts,  Bliss Carman and  Archibald  Lampman  the conventions of Romanticism are all too obviously in  evidence -the retreat  into  nature,  the sense of irreparable loss in  time, the confusing  sadness in response to nature's beauty,  the  world  of dreams  as some­ how preferable  to reality. This is the world of Roberts'  Tantramar and Carman's Grand  Pre, and  of almost all of Lampman's verse. Each  of these three  poets has his own  distinctive  way of looking at  nature: for Roberts  nature  is an  image of the maternal, but  an image bereft of comfort and  pervaded  rather  with the sad­ ness  of  something  lost  and  irretrievable; Carman's  poetry  is  similarly  elegiac except  that  each  poem  is structured   around   a  peak  moment  of erotic  ecstasy which can never be recaptured; in Lampman's poems nature  is the bridge which leads the  poet away from social reality into the more secure and satisfying world of dreams.  But in each case these are distinctions  in subject  matter  rather  than in style. If the  work of any of these poets has genuine stylistic distinction  it is the sonnet  of Archibald  Lampman. Within  this  compact  and  highly structured  poetic form,  Lampman   was able  to distil the  emotion  attendant on  his retreat into  nature  and  his surrender  to dreams.  By  means  of exclusively visual descrip­ tion each sonnet  moves to a desired point of  complete stasis in the dream  image. There  is a  painterly  quality  in these sonnets not  only in the  visual imagery  but also in the constant  use of colour; the details of a landscape  are sketched in as if with a painter's brush, giving the sense of an achieved stillness in place and time. "In  November", "A  Sunset  at  Les  Eboulements" and  "Winter Evening"  are particularly  fine examples of  Lampman's sonnet  in which  the style renders  per-

x6

THE  CANADIAN IMAGINATION



fectly that  state of total  passivity desired by the poet. Yet it is not possible to call Lampman's poetry  dramatic in the sense I am applying  the term  here. Conflict has been eliminated  from the poems; a persistent sense of melancholy and failure underlie  the  urge  to  withdraw into  the  dreamy  pastoral  setting,  but  it  is only there  by implication,  never  as an actual  fact  with which  to  contend.  Society is seen as a hostile and  threatening force  (to a devastating  degree in "The  City of the  End  of Things" ) and  nature  correspondingly is a place of refuge, an image of what  is tranquil  and  secure;  but  both images constitute  an evasion of an  in­ ternal  struggle  such  that   Lampman's poetry is not  truly  dramatic. One  might describe the  lyrics of Canada's Confederation  poets as songs of  innocence.
The  other significant  lyricist among Canada's early poets is the youthful genius from  Quebec,  Emile  Nelligan,  who went  mad  before he was twenty. Curiously Nelligan too might  be said to sing songs of innocence:  songs of a soul "candide", of the  garden  of childhood,  of a mother  gone to be with  the saints. But rather than  finding  consolation  in a view of nature  as correspondingly  innocent,  Nelli­ gan  despairs of ever re-achieving  that  blessed, primal state  and  his lament  for a lost childhood  swiftly  becomes either  a narcotic drug  or an  exhortation  to self­ destruction.  In  "Le  Vaisseau  d'Or" the  poet likens himself  in  his innocence  to a golden ship which is wracked  by the storms of experience and  broken open to reveal  a  cargo  of  disgust,  hate  and  neurosis;  the  devastated  ship  sinks into  a coffin of dreams  in the abyss. In  "La  Romance  du  Vin"  the simulated  gaiety of a  May song  rises in  a  reckless kind of crescendo to  conclude  in an  outburst  of sobbing.  The  style  of  Nelligan's  poetry  is a  vivid  embodying  of  his desperate emotions : there  are  all  the  delicate  verbal  nuances  of the symbolist poet as he describes the attenuated state  of the pure and innocent soul;  there is the rush of hypnotic  rhythms  as the  poem  plunges  headlong  through  despair  into  oblivion. A kind of dramatic rhythm  exists to Nelligan's poetry as a whole and  yet it is an essentially limited  drama, for  despair is not really the contrary  of innocence.



kE FICTIONAL  COUNTERPART  of the lyric poem is the novel of childhood  memories.  The  recapturing  of childhood  in  an  aesthetic  form  be­ longs  to  the  pastoral  mode  wherein  the  creative  imagination,  finding  present existence unsatisfactory,  goes back into the past in quest of a more perfect world
-something once experienced  but  now lost. In recovering  lost time the imagi­ nation  may  seek to  relive vicariously those earliest experiences  in  order  to dis­ cover what  has made  the  present so meaningless, or it may  romanticize  the  past

I7

THE  CANADIAN IMAGINATION



so that  childhood  remains the perfectly ordered  world, a happy  refuge from  the chaos of the present. Such great American  pastoral  novelists as Sherwood Ander­ son,  Thomas   Wolfe  and  William  Faulkner  ultimately  expose the  past  for  the outrage  it has committed  on the present and  attempt  to free themselves from the bond  of memory;  beneath  the golden  haze of nostalgia  is revealed  the  painful experience  of rejection  and  failure.  The  Canadian artist,  however, in a land  so fraught   with  limitations,  appears  to  despair  of freedom  in  the  present  and  in order  to  guarantee a  safe,  protected  place  idealizes  the  past  in  a  consistently nostalgic art.
Ernest  Buckler's  The  Mountain   and  the  Valley  and  W.  0. Mitchell's  Who Has Seen  the  Wind   are two of the most evocative  novels written  in this mode. In  Buckler's  novel  the  central  figure, David  Canaan, is plagued  by a sense of family guilt and  by his being different from other  men;  but  unlike his American fictional counterparts he does not leave the family  home,  but  remains  there  the rest of his life. His death  in the blanketing snowfall culminates  a series of images throughout  the  book  wherein  the  protagonist's  emotional  preference  is for  the safe, protected  place at  home  rather  than  the  movement  forward  of experience in time. The emotional  quest in Mitchell's novel of childhood  memories is to understand   a  "feeling"  that  overwhelmed  him  as a  boy. To  the  fictional  pro­ tagonist,  Brian  O'Connal, it comes variously in  the form  of ecstatic  wonder  at the  contemplation of a dewdrop  on a spirre leaf or  in  the form  of revulsion at the sight of a dead,  two headed
thing  incomplete,  something  not achieved. The  crucial  experience  of failure  for
Brian is in  his not being able to feel anything  when his father  dies; significantly his father's  illness and  death  follow immediately  upon  the  boy's initiation  into sexual knowledge which he violently refuses to accept. After this point the feeling never  comes  again  for, as the sympathetic  school-master  suggests, in  reflecting on Wordsworth's "Immortality Ode", that feeling was innocence.
Aesthetically  nostalgia  effects a  compromise  between  the  emotional  longing
to  go  back  to  the  past and  the  conscious recognition  that  it is neither  possible nor ultimately  desirable to do so. Through the various strategies of style the artist is able to indulge  in his fantasy of recapturing the  past, while at the same time, through  the very conventions of art, he tacitly concedes that in actuality it is impossible. Buckler  and  Mitchell  heighten  the sense of loss integral  to nostalgia by making  us keenly aware  of the  passing of  time;  but  in  her  memory  book, Street  of Riches,  Gabrielle  Roy eliminates  perspectives to such an  extent  that  a sense of  joy in  recapturing  childhood  pervades  the  book  throughout. Although

18

THE  CANADIAN IMAGINATION



passage of time  does underlie the structural  arrangement  of the stories (the nar­ rator  is a small  child  at the  beginning and  a teacher  with her first school at the close),  it plays no casual  role within the stories themselves or in  their  relation­ ship  to  each  other.  It  is the  timeless world  of childhood-an  eternal  summer
-that the author  has captured  in these lyrical and beautifully-wrought vignettes
of the past. Street  of Riches closes with a very moving image of innocent  refuge
-that  of  the little schoolroom with its happy children and  the narrator-teacher snugly protected  against the snowstorm sweeping down over the prairie. Through­ out  the  book  the  narrator remembers  her  attic  bedroom  which  is  significantly both  a retreat  from  the  world  (for her self dramatized  as "Petite  Misere")   and a place where  her imagination  comes fully alive. (It  is from the attic  room that she hears  the  "voices of the  pools" and  dedicates herself to  becoming a writer.)  In  the  final  chapter, "To  Earn  My  Living ...",  the  narrator must  go out  into the world  to work,  but  as a teacher she happily finds herself "as though  cut off from  the  rest of the world in  [the]  warm  little schoolhouse". She reflects at  the book's close:  "I was living through  one of the rarest happinesses of my life. Was not all the world a child? Were we not at the day's morning? ... "
Gabrielle Roy, however, did not sing only the songs of innocence from her past;
the four  stories in The  Road  past Altamont, her songs of experience,  are  bound together  by their  obsession with  the  passage of time,  with  life's mutability  and with the failure of human  relationships. This darker dimension to the past, imaged successively in the dying grandmother, the kindly old neighbour,  Monsieur Saint­ Hilaire,  and  the "move" of the poor family, has its final focus in the anxiety  the narrator feels in relation  to her mother, a muted  though  nonetheless urgent  pre­ occupation  in Street of Riches as well. In the concluding section, titled "The Road Past Altamont", the narrator examines her guilty feelings about leaving her mother and  in so doing  discovers the motives of her art in her desire to compensate  her mother  for all of life's failures and disappointments.  There  is a profound  sadness, however,  at  the  end  of  this  book, for  the  understanding and  the  tribute  have come  too  late-art  can  never  replenish life. Though  the  final  section  of The  Road   past Altamont   is  essentially non-dramatic,  reflective  writing,  it  neverthe­  less embodies  a fully dramatic awareness that  is rare in  the course of Canadian art.

l:E IMPACT OF  STYLE in the aesthetic response is most obvi­ ous in the  visual arts.  Because the  "subject" from life is so readily  available  to our direct  perception  and  not obfuscated in any way by the medium of language,

19

THE CANADIAN IMAGINATION



we automatically demand  certain  transformations of the life subject  in the work of art.  Our  expectations  are  those of style. From  the  outset  Canadian painting, as a visual record of the exploring and settling of a vast, northern  wilderness, has had  its own unique subject matter  in a convention  of nature  images -brooding mountains, stormy lakes, unrelieved snowscapes and  the log cabin  or tiny village huddled  upon  this overwhelming landscape.  But in what  way, we must ask, has this  setting  been  transformed   by the  imagination  of  Canada's artists so that  a unique  way of looking at the familiar scene emerges? In other  words, what in the visual arts constitutes a unique Canadian style?
In  the very earliest paintings, as in the earliest Canadian literature, style and subject  matter  are  very much  at  odds  with  each  other.  The  early  artists  were working  in  a  cultural  tradition  that  was English  and  European. They  painted the  new country  but  their  style does not  reflect an  indigenous  response to that landscape; rather  it was an  application  of a style evolved in the "old  country." The  one possible exception is the votive painting  from colonial Quebec.  Ex-votos were  done  to  fulfil  religious vows;  their  execution   was  usually  motivated   by thankfulness  for a miraculous rescue from danger.  The  miraculous  event was the subject  of the painting; in the lower half of the  plaque  was pictured  the threat­ ened  disaster  (a shipwreck at sea, a man  pinned  under  a fallen tree)  and  in the upper  part  the  guarantee of imminent  rescue in the  form  of a  saint.  Ex-votos were a folk art  and  part of a European  tradition,  but the style of  these paintings in  no  way distorted  the Canadian scene-it  was very adaptable  to the  rugged landscape.   Indeed   the  simultaneous  depiction  of  both  the  threatened   disaster and   the  guardian   saint  presiding  over  the  scene  creates  a  perspective  which heightens  both  the  sense of  danger  and  the  providential  refuge.  It  may  be  a simplistic  juxtaposition and  yet it is one which is continuous as long as Canadian art  is  representational. For  much  Canadian  painting,  like  literature, evokes a love for  what  is known and  secure, and  transforms  the  humble  details of every­ day life so that  they radiate something of the warmth  and  affection  with which they are viewed.
The  only major  artist  before the tum  of this century  to develop a distinctive
style was Cornelius  Krieghoff. Krieghoff painted  different  phases of life in rural Quebec  and  his inn scenes such as "J. B. Jolifou,  Aubergiste"  and  "Merrymak­ ing"  are  among  the  most famous pieces of Canadian art.  But  Krieghoff  himself
was not from Quebec; like Grove, Krieghoff was European-born and  his life was similarly  peripatetic.  Krieghoff was not  painting  Quebec  from  the details of his own life, but from  the perspective of an outside observer, a man of the world at

20

THE  CANADIAN IMAGINATION



large,  who  saw  Quebec  in  exclusively happy,  idyllic  terms.  The  VISion  of life which pervades his most famous  pieces is one of simple, rustic unity in which any social conflict is purely comic and enlivens the sense of merrymaking  and  revelry. The  rich brown  tones, the minute,  myriad  detail give the  paintings  the warmth and  enchantment of children's book illustrations. They  present a world similar to Leacock's  Mariposa,   "the   little  town  in  the  sunshine  that  once  we  knew,"  a visual rendering of the emotion of nostalgia.
The  Canadian love of the small and the humble finds its quintessential  expres­
sion in the canvases of the tum-of-the-century recluse, Ozias Leduc. Leduc chose the  most  humble  subjects   possible -apples  on  a  plate,  onions,  a  habitant's simple  meal  lit  by candlelight-but with  a delicate  (almost  caressing)  brush­ stroke  he  lavished  an  affection  on his crude  subjects  which  imparts  to them  a universal  beauty.  In  the  sombre  little canvas,  "Les  Trois  Pommes",  the  apples glow with a mellow light which suggests a mythical transformation of the subject through  the style. In literature  only Grove's intimate  love of nature  on his prairie rides approaches the sensitivity and  humility expressed in Leduc's  art.  The small subject  lovingly  represented   appears  again  in  some  of  the  canvases  by  L.  L. Fitzgerald  where the  discipline of an essentially ascetic style  (a  rigorous  pointil­ lism) can render a little plant with the heightened quality of affection.
In  the work of A. Y. Jackson  one finds a visual counterpart to the Confedera­ tion  poets' view of nature  as maternal  and  all-abiding.  Jackson's  paintings  are more  literally  pictorial  than   the  work  of  the  rest  of the  Group,  yet  that  one principle  of structure,  the soft, wavy line, transforms all of  Jackson's scenes into a unique  aesthetic  vision, whether  he is painting  Quebec, the Prairies or British Columbia.   Jackson's   style,  however,  is  not  dramatic;  while  man  and  nature  frequently   appear   together   in  Jackson's  paintings-the  small  house  or  little village huddled  against  the mountains  and  the snow -the landscape  swells and subsides in such a way as to enfold and protect the human  settlement  rather  than threaten   destruction.   "Winter,  Charlevoix  County",  "Grey  Day,  Laurentians", "Valley  of  the  Gouffre  River",  "Houses,  St.  Urbain", are  particularly  striking examples  of  this  aspect  of  Jackson's  art.  There  is  no  conflict  between  the  ex­ panse  of  nature and  the  fragile  human  dwelling;  rather   they  both  reflect  the artist's  sense of  isolation,  and  his search for solace in the maternal  embrace  of a landscape and its lonely inhabitants.
The  most  dramatic of the  non-abstract  artists is Emily Carr-a  remarkable fact in that she was working in the tradition  of Post-Impressionism,  a movement which  had  long spent  itself. The  style of her  paintings, like Jackson's,  embodies


21

THE CANADIAN IMAGINATION



a quest for  unity;  the wavy structural  lines weave together  the lush contours  of earth,  stumps, evergreens and sky in a vigorous declaration  of harmony. The consummate  expression of this pastoral vision is in those dark, womb-like interiors of the  British Columbia  rain  forest. But Emily  Carr  also painted  the  grotesque figures of the Indian  totems-realistically at first  (for  historical  purposes)  then expressionistically, as correlatives of her own fierce and  indomitable energies. In much  of her best work (pieces like "Big Raven," "Zunoqua of the Cat Village," "Nirvana") these two forces come together in a dynamic  conflict of styles-the Indian  carvings asserting their phallic identity against the unified contours of vegetation  and  sky. The  dialectic  of sexual  energies,  however,  never  suggests final  union  or  achievement;   the  fierce insistence  on  identity  creates  an  art  of cruel pastoral.
If one quality, however, is continuous throughout Canadian painting,  it is that affection  expressed for what  is small and  plain  but rich in detail.  It  is a quality of style in the intimate,  weightless paintings  of David  Milne, in the fragile land­ scapes of Jacques  de Tonnancour. And  in  the  abstracts  of Paul-Emile  Borduas it  emerges  again  reminding  us of the  gentle  ruggedness  of a  Gagnon  and  the humility of a Leduc.


l:EINSTINCTIVE   QUEST  of  the  Canadian imagination   for pastoral   innocence   runs  directly  counter   to  the   critical,  self-conscious  inten­
tions of much  Canadian art.  Living in the shadow  of two strongly-defined  cul­ tures,  English and  American  (not  to mention  the  effect of France  on  Quebec), Canadian artists  have always been highly self-conscious of their  cultural  limita­ tions  and  their  relative  insignificance in  the  international  context.  On  the  one hand   this  has  reinforced  the  escapist  element  in  Canadian art  (the  sense of Canada as a refuge from the larger  competitive  world), but  on the other  hand it  has  made  Canadian artists  very self-critical,  anxious  to  be aware,  to  under­  stand,  to criticize. This  is the tradition  in  Canadian art  that  we are  most likely to point to with pride-a tradition  that includes the "naturalist" novels of F. P. Grove,  the ironic  parables of Morley  Callaghan, the abstracts  of Lawren  Harris,  Gabrielle   Roy's  social  novels  (The  Tin   Flute, The  Cashier),  Birney's  topical poems, the "great  Canadian novels" of Hugh  MacLennan.
This  critical  self-consciousness has  of  course  produced  the  highest  flower  of
Canadian culture,  namely the imaginative  critical  visions of Northrop Frye and
Marshall   McLuhan, two  writers  and  thinkers  whose  reputation and  influence


22

THE  CANADIAN IMAGINATION



are truly international. Moreover, it has also engendered  a widely praised hybrid art  form  one  might  call the  fictional documentary  which  bears a definite mark of aesthetic  conviction  and  validity  (examples:  the  descriptive  pioneer treatises of Catharine Parr  Traill,  Grove's Over Prairie Trails, the historical Indian paint­ ings  of  Paul   Kane,  such  Canadian  films as Allan  King's  Warrendale  and  A Married   Couple, Scott  Symon's  autobiographical  Place  d'Armes).  However, this element  of self-consciousness is in many  ways inimical  to the  process of the imagination   in  creating   art.  If the  function  of  the  imagination,  as suggested above,  is to  explore  those  potential  areas  of our  experience  which  must be  re­ pressed  in  the  interest  of social  and  physical  survival,  then  this self-conscious urge  will restrain  the imagination, for it insists on the compromise of communal understanding  and   acceptance. The  individual  experience   of  loneliness  and frustration  is assuaged by shared philosophical assumptions about  life. The  result, in its extreme  form,  has been a  great  deal of what  one refers to as "academic" art  in  Canada. A  number   of  gifted  poets would  seem  to  have  been  hindered rather  than  enriched  by their  intellectual  pursuits;  one thinks  here of university
professors such as A. J. M. Smith  or Robert  Finch,  and  especially of Jay  Mac­
Pherson,  whose talent  has been wholly absorbed in the myth criticism of  North­ rop  Frye.  The  sustained   imaginative  energy  of an  Irving  Layton  appears  the more  remarkable in  this  light.  Earle  Birney's very  rich  and  lively  instinct  for verbal sound  patterns  and  rhythms,  however, is frequently  betrayed  in its clever application   to  a   popular   philosophical  preoccupation   or   fashionable   artistic
stance. Similarly  E. J. Pratt's  imaginative  response to the  primordial  instincts of
life is diluted  by  the  lengthy  deliberations  in  his  poetry  as to  the  existence of
God and man's  place in the cosmos.
'The most notorious  example  of the Canadian imagination  betrayed  by critical
>elf-consciousness  is  Hugh   MacLennan's  attempt   to  forge  in  his  fiction  our national  identity.  The  two dominant  preoccupations  in his novels-his personal struggle for selfhood on the one hand and his public attempt  to define the Cana­ dian  consciousness  on  the  other-do  not  relate  to  each  other  in  a  genuine dialectic;   rather   the  public  ambition  provides an  escape  from  the  irresolvable complexities  of  the  personal  dilemma.  This  pattern  is constant  in  all of  Mac­ Lennan's  books. The  imaginative  core of his writing  lies in the father-son  rela­ tionship  which  in his first  book, Barometer  Rising,  is set  forth  in  the struggle between the  young war  victim, Neil MacRae,  and  his tyrannical  uncle, Geoffrey Wain.  But the drama in the novel is ultimately a false one, for this oedipal con­ flict is evaded  by means of the Halifax  harbour explosion;  indeed  there is never

THE CANADIAN IMAGINATION



a  confrontation  between  the  antagonists,  for  the  explosion  conveniently  kills Wain  and  leaves MacRae  free to depart  with  Wain's  daughter. In  the last half of  the  book  the  Halifax  disaster  becomes the  novel's  authentic subject   (again the  documentary instinct in  Canadian  art) , the  external  drama  in the  harbour and,   finally,  the  question  of  Canada's  international  identity   supplanting the novel's imaginative theme. This preoccupation  with national identity reaches embarrassing   proportions   in  Two   Solitudes  and  The   Watch That   Ends  the Night.  Each A1an's Son is potentially MacLennan's most effective novel for here he returns  to the actual  landscape of his Cape  Breton childhood  and  the conflict is more  genuinely  painful  because it is confused  with feelings of nostalgia;  but again  the plot is resolved in deus ex machina fashion  (MacLennan's classicism?) and the novel again has a hollow centre.
Only  in  Canadian humour  is there  any effective merging  of the critical self­ consciousness and  the artist's deepest imaginative  instinct.  In  part  this is because the  comic  imagination   by its very nature  seeks to criticize  and  provoke  aware­ ness through  exposure  and  ridicule.  But  more  important is the fact  that satire demands  a social norm, a rational  point of view against  which human folly may be measured,  and  this automatically   precludes  a  highly  personal  and  eccentric imagination. What  is notable  in Canadian humour  is the  unspoken  agreement that  the viewpoint  of the group  rather  than  of the rational  individual  is best - another   manifestation   of  the  "garrison  mentality." It is the  foolish  individual  who  elicits scorn  and  ridicule;  it  is never  the  whole  community  that  is con­ demned.  Though  it  may seem  that  all the  individuals  in Stepsure's  village are subject   to  ridicule   for  their  self-indulgent   behaviour   ("my   cousin  Harrow,  Saunders  Scantocreesh  and  a few others excepted"), it is the communal  Puritan  values of  hard  work  and  piety which  prevail.  Similarly  in  Leacock's  Mariposa or  Robertson   Davies's Salterton,  while the  small  town  is being laughed  at,  the satirist  never  questions  the values upon  which  that  town's  life is based. And  in The  Clockmaker  Haliburton  very carefully balances Sam Slick's shrewd observa­ tions on the Bluenoses with our emotional  reaction  to Slick as an outsider and  a comic figure. Because Canadian humour  is thus essentially conservative it is also finally pastoral: the  agrarian  values by which Stepsure  lives are for  McCulloch clearly  threatened   and  on  the  wane;  for  Leacock  the  town  of  Mariposa  lies somewhere  in  the  past in  our  dreams, and  for  Davies that  childish certainty  of being at  the  centre  of the  world only exists in the Salterton  of his memory and imagination  and no longer in the small city he left behind years ago.
Surely  it is also significant that  writers from  outside  Canada have responded

THE CANADIAN IMAGINATION



to the landscape  and  its inhabitants not as a frontier  for growth,  but as a place of lonely refuge. Maria  Chapdelaine, a kind of archetype  of the Canadian  novel with  its seasonal  time  structure  and  steadfast  heroine,  is essentially a folk tale and   for  its  author,  Louis  Hernon,  a  sophisticated   Parisian,  it  represented   a retreat  into  the simple world of the habitant. For Willa Cather  the world of late seventeenth-century Quebec,  which she recreated in Shadows on the Rock, repre­ sented a retreat  from  the cynically indifferent  and  ever-changing  world at large;  both  the  author  and  her  characters  take  pleasure in "a  feeling of  being cut off from everything  and  living in a world of twilight and miracles." And in Malcolm Lowry's Under  the Volcano, probably  the greatest work of  fiction to employ the Canadian landscape  in its imagery, pastoral retreat is again the image of Canada which  emerges.  Geoffrey  Firmin,  the  drunken  protagonist  of  Lowry's  master fiction, thinks  of the cool, wooded inlets on the British Columbia  coast as a kind of green,  paradisial  retreat  from the hell of his guilt under the hot Mexican sun. The  references  are  few,  but  always crucial,  the structural  antithesis  to Firmin's  volcano of self-destruction.  In  this same light it is interesting that  the Canadian writers who have found  the largest  reading  public outside Canada are those who have  fashioned   the  innocent,  self-contained  world  of  pastoral  in  their  art­ writers like Lucy  Maude Montgomery, Stephen  Leacock and  Mazo de la Roche.



E	about  Ross's As For Me  and My  House is that  it is a fully dramatized  work of art. The  emotional  frustration that  gave rise to the novel is not evaded in the details of an escapist pursuit  (like Grove's  drives or Scott's  primitives), nor externalized  in a struggle with nature; rather  the  deeply-felt  experiences of rejection, failure and  renewed  hope are re­ lentlessly  focussed  on  and   dramatized   in  the  passionate  triangles   that  form around  the  narrator and  her  husband.  This  is not to suggest that  Ross's  novel lies outside the tradition I have described;  rather it puts it at the very centre, for what  is dramatized is that  overwhelming sense of life's limitations, of  the repres­ sion and  the evasions that  are necessary to survive in the physical and  emotional wilderness  of  the  Canadian landscape.  This  novel's style-the  claustrophobic  narration of  Mrs.  Bentley presumably  writing in her daybook -is the  aesthetic consummation of  that  sense of frustration   and  limitation.  In  Ross's novel  the details  of the setting  and  of nature  are  never  described for  their  own sake  but are always subsumed  within  the emotional  penumbra  of the characters; the false fronts  of  the  town,  the  leaky  roof,  the  drought  and  heat,  the  dust storms,  the

THE CANADIAN IMAGINATION



snow and tedium  of an endless winter are all metaphors for the emotional drama.
The  other  Canadian novelist whose fiction is a fully dramatized art is  Marie­ Claire  Blais. Unlike the other  novels of Ross which are considerably less effective than  As For Me  and My  House, all of Miss Blais's novels form a significant part of her art,  though  A Season in the  Life of  Emmanuel stands  out  as her master­ piece to date. The  essential drama  around  which her  writing turns is set forth in her first published novel, Mad  Shadows  (La  Belle Bete). Scarcely a novel, Mad Shadows  is a  kind  of grotesque  fairy-tale  whose plot  focusses ultimately  on the failure of maternal  love. The  central  figure in the story is the ugly daughter who is rejected  by her  beautiful  mother  for her  loathsome  physical appearance. Out of desperate  envy of his beauty, she scars her  idiot brother's face and  both chil­ dren,  now unloved by the mother, end  their lives in madness and suicide. Mater­  nal  rejection is an obsessive theme in  Miss Blais's writing and in A Season in the Life  of  Emmanuel  its effect is  central  to a  whole complex  of miseries. In  this story  about  a  family  of sixteen  children  the  mother  is an  exhausted,  shadowy figure,  almost  totally absent  from  the  book. On  the  day of his birth  Emmanuel  cries for  his mother,  but he  is told by the old grandmother that  his mother  has already  gone back to the fields to work. The void created  by the mother's absence defines the family drama of misery and  despair;  that  void is brooded over by the formidable,  larger-than-life figure  of  Grand-Mere  Antoinette whose  harshness and  compassion  are both idealized. From the viewpoint of the central  conscious­ ness, Jean-Le  Maigre, A Season in the Life of Emmanuel might be seen as a kind of aborted  Bildungsroman; but the book is never a memory novel, for the plight of the  unhappy  family, though  narrated  episodically, is relentlessly exposed as a continuous action in the present.
A Season in the  Life of Emmanuel  is a particularly  Canadian work of art for the sense of winter  and  of life's limitations  (especially defined  by poverty)  are nowhere  felt  more  strongly.  Yet  as  in  Ross's  novel,  these  physical  limitations serve to define the emotional deprivation  that  is being dramatized. That  eroding sense of poverty is never externalized  as a social issue, nor is the harshness of the Quebec  landscape  seen as an  existentialist  "condition." Rather, in  the  oblique and  relentless manner  of her  writing  Miss Blais remains  faithful  stylistically to the  painful  vision of her  imagination  and  in so doing  has  created  both  a fully dramatic and genuinely Canadian work of art.



A CURSED

AND SINGULAR BLESSING



Gary Geddes


SouSTER ;, one of those me poets who,  like a good wiDe,
improve  with age. I'm  not sure whose age, Souster's or mine. My first encounter
with Souster's  work was in  1966 in Frank  Watt's  poetry seminar,  somewhere in the  catacombs  of  University  College in  Toronto.  Ihad  just  returned  from  a year in England,  where it was assumed that  poets did exist in Canada, and from ten  years  of school  and  college in  B.C. where, whatever  the  truth  of rumours about  home-grown  talent,  none of it ever seeped down into the classes. We were a motley crew, an  actor,  a  religious, a radical  (before that  stance  became fash­ ionable), a schoolmarm  from  Ottawa, a couple of tired  instructors  from  Ryer­ son.  And  myself, hot  out  of a  Diploma  in  Education  course  at  Reading  Uni­ versity.
Ihad  met Souster  briefly through  a friend of Victor  Coleman  and  had spent a  curious  evening  with  him  and  friends  putting  together  the  pages of the  first number   of  Island. Ican  remember   nothing  of  what  was  said  that  evening. Souster  was typically  quiet  with  new  people. He  and  Victor  seemed  very close and  I felt like a  distinctly  alien spirit  in the group  because of my general igno­ rance  and   my  academic   ambitions.  But  I  do  remember  Souster's  poem,  "A Death  in Rutherford  (in  memoriam  W.C.W.)" on the back cover of  the maga­ zine, which he signed for me:

We can't argue the right
of your body to be lowered
into  peace:
but  nothing else can be allowed to rot,
mix with dust.
You belong
to so many  of us.

A CURSED AND  SINGULAR BLESSING



And   I  remember being  impressed  by  the  letter   to  Souster  from   Williams  that was included in  that  issue. Souster  was my first contact with  an  established poet, not  to mention a Canadian one, and  here he was receiving  a personal  letter  from a more  famous American poet. After expressing  his inability to read  and  to appre­ ciate  Layton, Williams says:

But somehow when I read you I am moved.  I am moved by your subject matter and  I am  moved  by the way that  has induced  you to conform  to it as the  very fountain head of your art.
It is the way that  the man speaks that  we wait for. A poet does not talk about
what  is in him;  he talks a double language,  it is the  presence in him that  speaks. It is his possession by that  presence that speaks. For the moment  he is lost in that identity.  And  each  age is marked  by the presences that  possess it so its poets are seized by them also, in the flesh, and strut  about  among  us unknown.  Poor power­ less ghosts, their  only life is that  which they gain from  the poets who lend  them a life now and then.
We identify ourselves today (by our technique,  unaffected) with those presences which  live defeated  about  us. For  do what  we may, it  is a technique  which  we have  to understand and  to master. Try  to broaden  the treatment of the line. You have  to  know  what  a line is, what  it  has  to include,  when  to expand,  when  to move  rapidly,  trippingly  and  when  to plod  heavily along. I was happy  to see you refer  to Olson.  But never forget  that  you are  definitely you. You have a chance. Light  and  Shadow  was the first thing  that  caught  my eye. The  Lilac Poem is also good. To  an Antisemite  has it also. There  are others. Have confidence in yourself. You've got it.

The matter of subjects  and  presentation in  Watt's seminar was decided early in  the  term  by  a  cursory  glance  through the  prescribed texts, one of which  was Milton    Wilson's   Poetry   at   Mid-Century,  then   the   only  serious   sampling  of "moderns" in  Canada. The   more   pushy  students, myself  included, wanted  to try their  hands at  heavies like Smith  and  Klein  and  Avison and  Jay  Macpherson, while  the  slackers  among  us  (usually  the  teachers) made grabs  for  Layton  and Cohen  and  Souster.  We staggered  through a Toronto winter  and  through inter­ minable term   papers on  Anglo-Saxon influences in  Birney's   poetry,  on  Pratt's leviathans, on  the  maple   leaf  poets,  and   one  bizarre coupling of   Pratt's  The Titanic and   Charles G.  D.  Roberts' "The  Iceberg" with   the  unintentionally symbolic  title  of "Imagination on the  Rocks". Finally, the  first  paper  on Souster  was  presented; it was on Souster  and  jazz, and  was delivered  by  a good-natured layabout from  McGill  named  Joe. Joe  was first of all a film enthusiast and  there­ fore  not  taken  seriously  by the  careerists  in  the  class. As expected, his paper was

A CURSED AND  SINGULAR BLESSING



somewhat inconsequential; it was non-literary, lacked polish, quoted almost no critics, and  did  not  use the  magic-formula  word of  the  graduate school,  "syn­ thesis". However,  it was important as the first piece to draw  north-south lines of influence  between  Canada and  the  U.S., rather  than  the strictly  east-west lines between  Canada and   England   that  dominated  our  study  of   literature  in  the English language. Here  was a Toronto  poet-banker, not quite a Wallace Stevens, but  a figure of some reputation, who read  the American  poets, who had corres­ pondence  with  W. C. Williams and,  most amazing  of all, listened to jazz, wrote about  it in  poems, and  identified  in some mysterious way  with the forces of re­ sistance  and  anarchy   that  thrive  (or  throve  then)   in  the  subsoil of American culture.
I remember some stir being created by that paper and  by the one that followed, on Souster  as a social critic. Souster's colloquial manner  and  his shocking eight­ line mini-parables provided  a welcome break from the control, the metaphorical
complexity, and  the mythical  allusion in A. J. M. Smith's  verses. And yet some
of  us still  felt  uneasy;  we felt,  first, that  imagist  poems  at  best were well-laid paving-stones  on  a  dead-end   street,  that  they  gave  little  and  asked little  of  a reader.  All that  one  could  say of them  was, so what?  Secondly,  we suspected poets with ideas, especially those who expressed their ideas directly rather than indirectly  through  sound  and  image. Souster, after  all,  was a  bit  too raw,  too common; perhaps,  in retrospect,  we thought  he was just a bit too Canadian. His muse was flat-footed from pounding a beat in downtown Toronto.

W WERE   NOT  entirely to  blame for  our  blindness to
Souster.  I  discovered  two  years  ago  while  making  selections for  15  Canadian
Poets that  Souster's  didactic  verses, his slices of seedy city life with embarrassing moral  and  philosophical  tags, constitute  only a small  part  of his work. We had been  reacting   in  part   to  Wilson's  selections in  Poetry  at  Mid-Century. The Souster  who emerges from  those pages is quite different from  my Souster:  mine is far  more  lyrical, his imagination  stirred  more by the mysteries of change  and loss and  death  than  by signs of social and  political in justice. Wilson's selection was one-sided,  as if to  balance  the  other  very academic  offerings in  his book. Souster's  new selection, The  Years,  however, makes it  possible to see the range and  scope  of  his  abilities  as  a  lyric poet and,  also, to  understand the  relation between his lyricism and  his didacticism. It contains 6g pages of poems from the sixties, 58 from the fifties, and 29 from the forties.

A CURSED  AND SINGULAR  BLESSING



The  Sixties  poems  are  interesting  because  they  reveal  the  play  of Souster's moral  imagination   upon  the fabric  of public  events,  most  of which  have  been popular   with   the   media:    Vietnam,   Biafra,   pollution,   drug-trafficking,   and militarism  generally.  What  emerges from  almost  all of Souster's social commen­ tary  is the  question  of personal responsibility. Souster  is no Marxist  or Socialist with a political or philosophical programme  against  which to measure the events of his time. His position is that of the beleaguered  humanist, troubled,  as he sug­ gests in "The Problem", with the matter of empathy, or sharing:

How to share the aching feet of the already limping deliverer of handbills.

Souster feels guilt for his insensitivity to, and  unwillingness to be involved in, the conviction  of  a fellow-poet for  trafficking in  drugs;  and  he laments  the  inertia that  works against  his anti-war  convictions, that  leaves the responsibility of pro· test to the young ("Peace Demonstration,I g67'') :

So it is left for these, our restless, unfulfilled youths of the sit-ins, peace marches, to carry the burden of guilt
for all of us, spelling it out
on their crude signs, hammering it home
as the police move in to drag them night-stick them into
waiting paddy wagons.

In  this new selection a certain irony and self-consciousness emerges, which saves many  of the  poems from  either  banality  or sentimentality. In  "Confrontation", for  example,  Souster's  poetic  persona  struggles  with  his  inclination   to  shout "Bloody  Butcher" at  the  president  during  a  visit to  Expo;  when  he is escorted away  by  the  Montreal  police, he cannot  help  making  his point  again  but  this time  modified to "Bloody Butcher, sir!"  "Report to the  Military  Governor" is a fine  piece  of  controlled   irony  which  makes   its  statement  humourously   and
economically:

In the City of Toronto itself
only one incident, and even that hardly worthy of record -

so

A CURSED  AND SINGULAR BLESSING



One of our tanks
in circling their City Hall Square, brushed against a large piece of sculpture (purchased, they tell me,
from an Englishman named Moore) ;

at which their mayor,
who had witnessed the accident, stormed from his council chamber shaking both fists at our troops, who, not sharing his concern, seized him and strung him up
(by the golden chain of office he happened  to be wearing)
on that same oddshaped casting, where I'm  told he swung
like a pendulum  keeping not very accurate  time -

whose body, however,
I'm  very proud to report, wasn't hung up by the heels like that sad man 11 Duce,

which shows if nothing else
the good sense the moderation of Our Glorious Revolution
of November 31st.

Souster's sense  of  his own  guilt  does  not  make  good  poetry  when  it expresses itself in the form  of complacent moralizing or righteous  indignation. The  posture of  complacency is mostly  absent  from  The  Years,  but  the  indignation is not.  I heard  Souster  read  "Death Chant for  Mr. Johnson's America" several  years ago at  the  Central Library in Toronto and   I don't   think  I'll  ever  forget  the  air of quiet  embarrassment that   hung  over  the  audience when  Souster  finished -not at  the  catalogue of  atrocities and   inhumanities but  at  the  patent  phoniness of the  tone.  It was  a self-indulgence, but  one  that  took ten  minutes. Warmed-over rage  is as  unpalatable as  warmed-over porridge. Even  the  Ginsbergian rhetoric did  not  help.  We  know  all  about   "addicts  readying fixes in  dirty  washrooms" and  "mountains of used cars in East  River". And  there  was Souster,  who always avoided  name-dropping   and   literary  allusion,   making  references  to   Jeffers, Crane, Ginsberg, and   Pound. He  even  felt  obliged  to  flog  the  dead   horse  of

A CURSED AND  SINGULAR BLESSING



Pound's  imprisonment  in the States. Seeing the  poem in print,  I still feel that  it is  unworthy   of  Souster,  an  aberration   he  allowed  himself  in  the  pressure  of events. He  is not  capable  of such  a large statement, such sweeping  generaliza­ tions, without  descending to posturing  and  self-caricature.  I can't  help  thinking of  Williams'  remark  in  his letter  to  Souster  about  the  presences  haunting the age; none of them would be given a new lease on life in this poem.
Auden  once argued, in this connection, that  "The characteristic style of  'Mod­ em'  poetry is an  intimate  tone of voice, the speech of one person addressing one person, not a large audience;  whenever a modem  poet raises his voice he sounds phony."  There's  sufficient truth  in this observation  to make it worth  considering. In  an  age  of  unprecedented   change  and  information  accumulation, when  our ears are full of cries from the marketplace,  the music hall, and the political arena,  finding  a  convincing  voice is not  easy. Souster's  response to these pressures has been, for  the  most  part,  to cultivate  his own  garden,  to  remain  faithful  to his early  inspirations.  He  remains,  in  his own  words,  an  unrepentant regionalist, content  to chronicle  and  celebrate  the  emotions,  the  things, events, and  people, of his immediate  experience. One of  his most convincing  voices is the still, small voice of the imagist, of which there are several fine examples in The Years, such
as July  Noon":

Barricade of clouds anchored down
a few flickering butterflies.

Any moment now
the really bugged cicada will open all the stops
on their crazed calliope.

In this moment's zone of silence a poem writes itself.
and "Morning Lake": Ghost-like
unreal
mist holding its fog veil far over the lake.

Overhead
sun beats down
skies ride high and blue at mid-morning.

A CURSED AND  SINGULAR BLESSING



But look!
A dark finger shows
at the edge of the veil, becomes as we watch some part of shore
tied to a pendant
of green-blue water.

These  poems,  like  the  earlier  "Study: The  Bath"  and  "Six  Quart Basket",  are free of what  Olson  calls the  "lyrical  interference of the  individual ego": eye and mind  are  concentrated on the  image  and  what  it gives off in isolation.  Too  many
poets,  as Souster  argues, in  "The Cobra", "can't seem  to get  beyond  I the won­
der  of themselves, I it  holds  them,  I fascinates  them,  like the  swaying  death  I of the cobra."
There are  in Souster's best lyrics a simplicity  and  an  unpretentiousness that  are disarming. "There's  No  Way  Out   of  It", the  first  poem  in  The  Years,  has  a beautiful falling   movement that  is almost  unbroken by  asides,  non-sequiturs, or personal  allusions; nor  does the  form  of the  poem call attention to itself:

There's no way out of it­ each leaf will sift down slowly, grudgingly
to the cold, bared ground,
grass will push out another  blade of grass, skies will do their best
to hide the sun, clouds will put
their darkest faces on.

It will be all squirrels
and acorns  (acorns, anyway) along the street, maples red and proud for a week, then
humbled  by the wind. 	It will be so unlike death that only
pure fools and ageing poets won't be taken in.

And it's happening
outside my window at the very moment of a long September day.

With one thing that's sure, there's  no way out of it.


33

A CURSED AND  SINGULAR BLESSING



Souster  has little  interest  in logical discontinuity  and  metaphorical  complexity; he sees the  poem as an  utterance  that  moves as quickly  and  directly as possible to  its  inevitable  conclusion.  If there  is a  problem  with  this  poem,  and  with several  other  fine lyrics in The  Years, it is that  Souster  feels moved  to tidy  up after  himself, by  tying  together  apparently   ragged  ends,  by summarizing what has  already  been  adequately  rendered  through  the  imagery.  The  last two lines seem unnecessary here, even considering their  usefulness in terms of structuring; so also does the  last line of "This  Heat  Crazed  Day",  where  the  'situation' of the  poem,  clearly  presented  through  juxtaposition  of images  of youth and  age, life and  death,  is sadly spelled out  for the  reader.  What  Lawrence  said of free verse is worth  repeating: "free  verse has its own nature ... it is neither star  nor pearl  but  instantaneous   plasm.  It  has  no  finish.  It  has  no  satisfying stability, satisfying for  those  who like the immutable. None  of this. It is the instant; the quick."  Writing  good free verse, like riding  bareback,  is beyond the capacity  of most  poets;  either  their  poem sits dully in  the  yard  swishing  its tail  or careens wildly all over creation,  endangering  both  rider  and  bystanders.  In  the face of these difficulties, a poet may be tempted  to harness his imagination unnecessarily, to use in practice shaping devices that he would reject in theory.




SousTER's LYRICS also contain  his best social criticism. This criticism seems most convincing when it comes indirectly,  when, in the course of talking  about   what  he  knows intimately,  Souster  reveals  his awareness  of  the texture  and  quality  of life around  him. In  "Forecast", the  persona of the poem contemplates  his own death,  not a glamorous, violent highway  death  but a slow withering death from life in the sunless, polluted city:

Although my best nightmare is a violent highway death, me crowding the dotted-line to pass the slow-poke ahead, not seeing the car coming up at express speed until the last
stabbing thrust of his headlights-

and although I sense my luck has almost run out by now
at cross-walks, most street corners,


34

A CURSED AND  SINGULAR BLESSING



I now forecast my certain death on a warm day like this, the haze iron-heavy in the streets,
no real sun shining through,

both lungs refusing at last
to breathe  in another choking breath of blue-coated, lifeless exhaust smoke.

Here  is Souster  at  his best: determination to use the  imagery  of the  city, with  its highways,  dotted-lines, and  street  comers; the colloquial  manner that  can accom­ modate to good  advantage everyday  expressions like "slow-poke" and "run out"; the  capacity  to  render weak  common   nouns -like light,  smoke,  haze -more concrete  through subtle  adjectival constructions. The  success of  this  poem  lies in voice  and   image:  where   an  ecological  diatribe would   have  failed,  a  powerful  comment is made  indirectly through the  images  in  this very  measured variation on  the  traditional lament for  the  passing of time. The violence of death by colli­ sion  is carried over  into  the  description of  death   by  pollution  in  the  images  of "irony-heavy" haze  and   "blue-coated, lifeless exhaust  smoke"; if  anything, the latter   death  appears not  only  unglamourous and  pedestrian, but  also  intensely  horrifying. The poem  has  a strong  rhythmic push, a  relentless  headlong quality, that   is achieved by  the  naturalness of  the  diction,  the  subtle  manipulation of syntax  and  absence  of full-stops; the  rush  of  the initial  image  of the speeding car merges  with  the  slower  but  equally  deadly instruments of death, like iceberg  and  Titanic.
There is much  to say  about Souster's verse, about  his concern  for  craft,  espe­
cially  his untiring preoccupation with  the  line as something more  than  an  arbi­ trary   way  of  breaking up  prose  poems.  I  am  reminded of  Williams'  advice  to Souster   to  "Try  to  broaden  the  treatment of  the  line"  and  of   Souster's own statement in  "In the  Same  Joyful  Way", where  he  compares the  poet  with  the steam-shovel and  other  wrecking equipment at work in the city:

if, say, we could rebuild the poem with such fire, such abandon,
all trickery, cross-purposes forgotten, if it only dance and sing!-

who knows how many
of the old walls might crack, aye, even fall,
under the smashing force of the line reborn!


35

A CURSED AND  SINGULAR BLESSING



Anyone  interested  in Souster's verse would do well to consider  his many  poems about  the  poetic  process. Souster  has  never  been  a  tub-thumper or  played the personality game that  the  public and  the media  encourage; his real concern, as he says in "Invocation to the Muse", has been to write good poems:

Nevertheless,  desiring  nothing
And expecting little, living only
For your secret inner  praise, I give thanks
That you should  have chosen me for your cursed
And singular  blessing.

A  cursed  and  singular blessing. Souster's  range  is not  large  but  his concern  for technique   is, as  Pound   would  say,  a  test  of  his sincerity.  In  The   Years,  he describes one of his Jazz favourites,  Ed Hall, as "a  man  at one with his art,  not fighting  it, /not trying  to prove a damn  thing."  The  less Souster tries to prove, the more at ease he seems with his craft.



TWO 	AUTHORS IN  SEARCH OF A CHARACTER


Stephen Scobie






IT WAS  SURELY  COINCIDENCE ENOUGH that  two of Canada's finest young poets should  both, in one year, produce books on the notably  non­
Canadian  legend  of  Billy the  Kid,  without  the  further   coincidence  that  both should  win  Governor-General's Awards. Of  course, bp  Nichol's  award  was for four  books, of which  The  True   Eventual  Story of  Billy the  Kid  is the shortest, and  perhaps   the  slightest;  this  point  has  had  to  be  made  in  response  to  the controversy  over  giving  such  an  award  to "fifteen  paragraphs of  bad  pornog­ raphy".  If Nichol's  book  is "bad  pornography", that  is only  because it  is good art;   and  although   it  is,  at  least  superficially, a  very  much  slighter  book than Michael Ondaatje's The  Collected Works of Billy the Kid, it is not wholly absurd to examine  them  in the same light. The  reasons why these authors should choose this  subject-rather than  some  roughly  equivalent  Canadian  figure,  such  as Louis Riel, or even Paul  Rose-are  to a great degree personal. It is quite  pos­ sible that  bp wrote his book just for fun, because Michael  was writing his. More relevantly,  Ondaatje's book is a  natural  outgrowth  from  his love of Hollywood (and   Italian)  Westerns:   among  his favourite  films are  Sergio  Leone's  mythic Once  Upon  a Time in the  West, and  Arthur  Penn's contribution to the legend of Billy the  Kid,  The   Left  Handed  Gun.  ( Ondaatje's book  is subtitled  "Left Handed   Poems".)   But  in  addition  to these  personal reasons, the  figure of Billy the  Kid  is particularly  relevant  to certain  central  concerns in the  work of these poets, and,  especially in Ondaatje's case, their treatment  of him becomes a major contribution to the development  of their work. The  purpose of this article, then, is to examine  the  two books and  their widely different approaches to the legend of Billy the  Kid,  and  to see how these  approaches  illuminate  the characteristic  concerns and obsessions of the two poets.

37

IN  SEARCH OF  A CHARACTER



It  should  perhaps  be stressed at  the  outset  that  this kind of approach  is in a way a  distortion  of Nichol's book. The  True  Eventual  Story  of  Billy the  Kid  is primarily  a  joke, a  clever and  light-hearted  skit, as opposed to the intense seri­ ousness  of  Ondaatje's  approach. Nichol's   jokes  are,  however,  on   potentially serious  subjects.  To  work  out  all  the  thematic   implications   which  his  fifteen paragraphs barely  suggest may seem like building  mountains  out  of  molehills; and, though  I believe the foundations  are there for such an enterprise, the elabo­ ration should  not obscure the fact that  the most characteristic virtues of Nichol's book are its wit, its economy, and  its refusal to take itself too seriously.
Nichol's  title stands  in a long tradition  of books claiming  to tell the  "truth"
about   Billy:  The   True   Life  of  Billy the  Kid,  by  Don  Jenardo  ( 1881); The Authentic Life  of  Billy, the  Kid,  by Pat  Garrett   (ghost-written  by Ash Upson) (1882); Billy the  Kid,  the  True  Story  of  a Western  'Bad  Man', by Emerson Hough   ( 1901); The   Saga  of  Billy the  Kid,  by  Walter  Noble  Bums  ( 1926); The   Real  Billy  the  Kid,  by  Miguel  Otero   ( 1936); The   Authentic  Death  of Hendry   jones, by Charles  Neider  (1956); The  True  Story  of  Billy the  Kid,  by William  Lee Hamlin   ( 1959) ; etc. The  point  about  all these "true" and  "auth­ entic"  biographies  is that  very few of them  are.  The  historical facts  about  Billy have been buried under a vast accretion of legend.
The   legend  itself  has  changed  and  developed  over  the  years.  For  the  first twenty years or so after Billy's death,  writers strove to outdo  each other in creat­ ing ever more extravagant  pictures of his villainy;  he became  a devil incarnate, a paragon  of evil. Then,  about  the beginning of this century,  the trend  reversed; Billy became  sentimentalised  into a  poor, misunderstood  kid,  excuses and  justi­ fications were found  for his killings, he was transformed  into  a folk-hero  of the Robin  Hood  variety.  In  1930, the first of Hollywood's film versions of Billy the Kid starred  the former  All-American football star,  Johnny  Mack  Brown;  thirty years later, Penn's film starred Paul Newman.
The  major   work  in  this  posthumous  "rehabilitation" of Billy's reputation   is Walter  Noble  Bums' The  Saga of  Billy the  Kid, which  Ondaatje  acknowledges as his  major  source.  Burns'  book is of  highly  questionable   historical  accuracy, and is filled with writing in the style of the following:

Fate  set  a  stage. Out  of  nowhere into  the  drama  stepped  this unknown  boy. Opposite him played Death. It was a drama of Death and the Boy. Death dogged his trail  relentlessly. It was for ever clutching at  him with skeleton hands. It  lay in ambush for him. It edged him to the gallows' stairs. By bullets, conflagration,

IN  SEARCH OF  A CHARACTER



stratagems,  every  lethal  trick,  it  sought  to  compass his destruction.  But  the  boy was not to be trapped. He escaped by apparent  miracles; he was saved as if by necromancy.  He  laughed  at Death.  Death  was a joke. He waved Death  a  jaunty good-bye and  was off to  new adventures.  But again  the inexorable  circle  closed. New life seemed sweet. It beckoned to love and happiness. A golden vista opened before him.  He  set his foot upon  the sunlit  road.  Perhaps  for  a moment  the boy dreamed   this  drama   was  destined  to  a  happy  ending.  But  no.  Fate   prompted from  the  wings. The  moment  of climax was at  hand.  The  boy had  had  his hour. It was Death's tum. And so the curtain.
Although Ondaatje's  literary   abilities  are  far  above   Bums's, several   of  the legendary accretions which  Bums  perpetuated show up again  in Ondaatje's book. For  instance, Ondaatje follows Burns  in setting  the  shooting of Tom  O'Folliard by  Pat  Garrett on  Christmas night.  This  was  one  of  many  emotional touches added   by  Burns   to  reflect   against   Garrett's  character  (for,   as  Billy  changed from  villain  to  hero,  Garrett necessarily swung  in the  opposite  direction)  and  to develop  the  theme of Billy's betrayal. In  actual fact,  the  shooting took  place  on December I 8th.  Further, Ondaatje's account of Azariah F.  Wild's participation in  this  event   is pure   invention; both  Burns  and  Garret himself  mention  Wild only once in passing, and  not in connection with this incident.
This  kind   of  consideration is important, of  course,  only  to  the  very  limited
extent  to  which  Ondaatje's book is concerned with  giving  an  accurate historical view  of  the  Kid.  Clearly,   this  is not  his intention, though some  passages   (such as the  death of Charlie Bowdre) do appear to be quite  accurate, and  the  general tone  of  many   of  the  descriptions, the  wealth  of detail  and  the  intensity of  the images'   realization,  must   appear  very  convincing  to  the  unwary reader.  Like many   writers,   Ondaatje alters  the  facts  of  Billy's  death    (as,  hilariously,  does Nichol)  ;  one  of  the  standard tricks of writers  sentimentalising Billy was  to  pre­ tend  that  someone else  (in  one  version,  his own father! )  had  been  shot  by  mis­ take  and  that Billy, complete with  Mexican  sweetheart, rode  off into  the sunset. Penn's film  has  Billy committing virtual  suicide  by pretending to go for  his gun  when  he  is in  fact  unarmed; after  Garrett's shot  Billy staggers forward holding out his empty  hand  to the killer.
But  Ondaatje's and   Nichol's  alterations and  manipulations of  historical fact are  not due,  as is the  case with  many  previous  writers  of "true" and  "authentic" histories,  to  ignorance or  to  the  desire  to "justify" Billy;  rather, they  fit in  with the  most  recent  developments of the  legend  of Billy the  Kid,  which  move  away from  the  simple  pendulum of  what  Kent  Ladd  Steckmesser  calls "The Satanic Billy"  and   "The Saintly   Billy"  towards   much   more  complex   uses of  the  total

39

IN  SEARCH OF  A CHARACTER



idea of Billy the  Kid,  fact  and  fiction,  as a mythological character. This exami­ nation   of the  mythology  of  Billy the  Kid  is apparent in  such  works  as  Samuel  R.  Delany's splendid SF  novel The  Einstein Intersection, in which  he appears as "Bonny William" or  "Kid   Death", and  Michael McClure's play The  Beard, in which,   somewhere in eternity, he  conducts a  brilliant,  repetitive,  and   obscene dialogue with Jean Harlow.
This, incidentally, may  be one  reason  why  both  Ondaatje and  Nichol  treated a  "non-Canadian" subject: few  Canadian  outlaw-heroes have   been  as  widely and  as  thoroughly mythologised  as Billy the  Kid,  though the  process is perhaps taking place  with  Riel.  Anyway,  "non-Canadian" is a  red  herring:  mythology may  be  national in  origin,  but  the  significance  of a  figure  as  completely  meta­ morphosed as Billy the Kid is totally international.
To   return, then,  to  Nichol's  title:   "this" he  assures  us  "is  the  true  eventual
story  of billy the  kid."  The  first page  of Nichol's  book is a demonstration of the absolute relativity  of any definition  of "truth" in a case like this.

It is not  the story  as he told it for he did  not  tell it  to me. he told it to others who wrote it down, but not correctly. there is no true eventual  story but  this one. had  he told it  to me i would  have written  a different  one. i could  not write  the true one had he told it to me.

Compare  this   with   Pat   Garrett's  "Authentic  Life"  which   opens   with   the claim   that   "I have  listened,  at  camp-fires,  on  the  trail,  on  the  prairies  and  at many   different  plazas,  to  his  disconnected relations of  events  of  his early  and more  recent  life."  Garrett  continues to list a  number of  people  who  knew  Billy and  whom he has personally interviewed or written to;  he can therefore "safely guarantee that  the  reader  will find  in my little  book  a true  and  concise  relation of  the  principal interesting events  therein, without exaggeration or  excusation." The whole   is  intended  "to   correct   the  thousand  false  statements which   have appeared in  the  public  newspapers and  in yellow-covered, cheap novels."  Bums at one point disingenuously admits:

The  foregoing  tales may be regarded,  as you please, as the  apocryphal  cantos of the saga of Billy the Kid. They are not thoroughly  authenticated, though  possibly they  are, in  the  main,  true.  Most of them  are  perhaps  too ugly to have  been  in­ ventions. If you are skeptical, your doubt  may be tempered  by the fact  that  they have  at  least  always  gone  with  the  legend  and   have  such  authority   as  long­ established currency  may confer.

IN  SEARCH OF  A CHARACTER



Nichol's  paragraph may  be  read  as a  commentary  on  these and  all similar claims. The  "true" and  "eventual" story cannot  be told by any eye-witness; the more  "reliable" their  claims are, the less they are to be trusted.  If Billy himseH had  told  the story to Nichol, "i  would have written  a different  one."  The  para­ graph  is a dismissal of any possibility of objective truth  in reporting; it insists that any observer changes what  he sees as soon as he attempts  to express it. Language does  not  report   reality:   it  creates  reality.  From  this,  two  conclusions  might emerge:  first, that  even if Billy himself were to tell his own story, he could  not tell it  truly;  and  second, that  the only "true" story is the one  which  rejects any attempt  at historicity and aims instead at the "truth" of a work of art;  "eventually all other stories will appear  untrue  beside this one." Of  course there is a tongue­  in-cheek  element  here:   Nichol  is fully  en joying his  outrageous  claim  that   his fifteen  paragraph joke is going to replace  all other  versions of the story, includ­  ing, presumably,  that  being written  by his friend Michael Ondaatje. But beneath  the  joke is the  deadly  seriousness of the  artist  who can  dismiss everything  out­ side his own  creation,  claiming  it alone as an  absolute. And  these views of lan­ guage and  art  are surely at the very centre of  Nichol's aesthetic, his proclamation of  "the  language   revolution".   What  matters,  then,  is not  so much  the  factual  record -how  many  men  Billy  actually  killed or in  what  year  he was actually born-as  the legendary  image  that  he lived  2 I  years and  killed 2 I   men.  (For  what  it's  worth,  it  appears  more  probable  that  he  lived  about  24  and  killed about  7.) The "eventual" story of Billy the Kid is beyond history.
The   "historical"  view  is  even  more  explicitly  rejected  in  Nichol's  second
Chapter. The first paragraph reads:

history  says  that   billy  the  kid  was a  coward. the  true  eventual story  is that   billy the  kid  is dead   or  he'd   probably shoot  history  in  the  balls.  history  always  stands back calling people cowards or failures.

It  should  be  remembered   that  the  mythical  image of Billy as outlaw-hero is a Romantic idea,  as the  figure of the  Outsider  is, from  Goethe's  Werner  on,  the central  Romantic image;  and  that  Nichol  himself  (as  Ondaatje  acknowledged in a  recent  interview)   is  a  Romantic.  This  condemnation   of  history-as  an impersonal  process which coldly "stands  back" from its subjects  and  thus  judges rather  than  sympathises-is  also a  Romantic  view. History  may  even  be seen as the  "official" view of an  Establishment  which has to reject all rebels and out­ laws as "cowards  or failures".  It  is only at a safe distance  in time  that  a figure like Louis Riel can  be "officially" viewed as a hero. The  task  of the rebel, then,

IN  SEARCH OF  A CHARACTER



is not  to stand  back,  but  to get  in  there  and  "shoot  history in the  balls." But Nichol's  Billy, being  dead,  can't  do  this.  In  fact,  as  becomes  clearer,  Nichol's Billy is the ultimate loser.



WAT, THEN, IS   BEYOND HISTORY?  It  is legend, or myth. This  is the  level at  which Ondaatje's book operates,  but  not  Nichol's:  and  this is one  of  the  fundamental   differences  between  them.  For  Nichol,  legend  is as much a liar as history:

legend says that  billy the kid was a hero who liked to screw. the true eventual story is that  were billy the kid alive he'd  probably take legend out for a drink, match  off in  the  bathroom, then  blow him full of  holes. legend always has a bigger dick than history and history has a bigger dick than billy had.

This  view sees legend as more  potent  (literally  as well as metaphorically) than history,  but  equally  dangerous.  And  the  danger  lies precisely in  its power,  its stability,  its vividness, its energy-all  the qualities, in fact, of Ondaatje's  book. But  Nichol's  Billy is at  the  bottom  of the  power  structure, he always  has  the shortest  dick. His status is that  of the ulimate loser, and  he is always ephemeral:

rumour has it that  billy the kid never died. rumour is billy the kid. he never gets anywhere, being too short-lived.

This  underlies the difference in length between  the two books. It is not simply that  Nichol's  is a small  joke tossed off in fifteen  paragraphs: the shortness, the casualness of the  book are intrinsic  to its view of Billy. The  difference  between Ondaatje's 100 pages and  Nichol's 5  is the  difference  between  legend  and  ru­ mour.  Ondaatje's  book  fixes a  certain  view  of  the  Kid  into  an  intense,  fully realized  image;  but  for  Nichol, the  "eventual" truth  is beyond  even  this,  and his image  of Billy is insubstantial,  flickering, changing,  dying. Ondaatje  creates a myth;  Nichol tells a joke.
Ondaatje's mythmaking  is a careful  process, built  up by various means, and he indicates  in several ways the degree to which he is presenting  a legendary  or poetic  image  of the  Kid. There  is, for instance,  the  concern  with  photographs. The  book opens with an account  of photography at the time of Billy's life, indi­ cating  the  difficulty  (which  is also Ondaatje's)  of taking  a  sharp  image  of a moving  object.  Huffman,  the  photographer, claims to  have succeeded: "spokes well defined-some blur on top of wheel but sharp  in the main." In  the same

IN SEARCH OF A CHARACTER



way, Ondaatje has fixed an  image of Nichol's evanescent rumour.  The  very fine cover, by Roger Silvester, uses an image by the early experimental  photographer Muybridge,   who  made  studies  of  the  motions of  people  and  animals  through multiple  exposures:   again,  there  are  possible analogies to Ondaatje's  methods. But what  the  photograph shows is not always accurate: Paulita  Maxwell claims that  a  photograph  of  Billy doesn't  do  him  justice -surely an  ironic  phrase. Indeed,  it was the reversed  image of one famous  photograph of Billy which led to the  mistaken  idea  that  he was left-handed.  All contemporary authorities, in­ cluding  Garrett, remember  Billy as right-handed; but  his left-handedness  fits in better  with  the  legendary  image  of the  outsider.  Bums  mentions  Billy's  being left-handed, but  doesn't  make  anything  of it;  Ondaatje gives to Garrett  a  bril­ liantly  sinister  account   of  watching   Billy subconsciously  doing  finger-exercises with  his  left  hand.   As already   remarked,  Ondaatje's  subtitle,  "Left  Handed  Poems" derives from Penn's film The  Left Handed Gun.
The  film image  is a further  way in which Ondaatje transforms  the historical Billy into  a legendary  image. The  sub-title casts the image of Penn's  film across the  whole book, and  also recalls Penn's later  masterpiece,  Bonnie and Clyde,  in which  the  outlaw  figures  are  subjected  to  a  mythologising  process within  the film itself. (As when, on their first meeting, Clyde asks Bonnie, "Are you a movie star?")  Penn  also is fascinated  by photography: in both The  Left  Handed  Gun and  Bonnie and  Clyde  important scenes are devoted to the outlaws getting  their pictures  taken,  and  the  image  recurs in all Penn's  films. Ondaatje uses comedy in much the same way as Penn:  grotesque images of violence become almost simultaneously  comic  and  horrible.  Compare  the  poem  about  Gregory's  death and  the chicken  with  the scene in The  Left  Handed  Gun  where Billy's shotgun blast lifts Ollinger  right  out of his boots and leaves them standing,  empty, on the street;  a little girl starts laughing  at the empty boots, until her mother's  horrified slap stops her.  In  these scenes the  humour  works to intensify the image  of  vio­ lence;  Ondaatje even succeeds in introducing  a note of humour  at the absolute climax  of his story,  as Garret  is about  to shoot Billy. A similar  combination  of violence and  humour  may be found  in other of Ondaatje's favourite  films, such as the  Italian  Westerns  of Sergio Leone, or John  Boorman's Point Blank. Point Blank also uses a fragmented time-scheme, with the same repeated,  slow-motion, dreamlike  exposures  of  violence as in  Ondaatje's book. Further, Point  Blank's female  lead  is  Angie  Dickinson,  and  who should  appear as  Billy's sweetheart but  "Miss  Angela  Dickinson  of  Tucson" -a  name  entirely  of Ondaatje's own invention,  not present in Bums nor in any "authentic" biography?  The  historical


43

IN SEARCH OF A CHARACTER



reality of the  Old  West and  its Hollywood myth  representation meet each other in the brief story Ondaatje inserts of Frank James tearing  tickets at a Los Angeles movie theatre.  Finally, closely akin to the movie image is the comic-book legend which  forms  Billy's  apotheosis.  (Ondaatje's own  film  on  bp  Nichol,  Sons  of Captain  Poetry, celebrates Nichol's fascination  with old comics.)  This is the final transformation of Billy in pop culture into the  upright  clean-living  hero, as in a delightfully absurd  film, which I saw several years ago and  which Ondaatje told me he had also seen, Billy the Kid vs. Dracula.
But  although   Ondaatje's image  of  Billy the  Kid  may  be  influenced  by  the
images  of comic-books and  the  movies, these  references  are  merely the  context in which Ondaatje sets his own central image of Billy: and, as with Nichol, it is the book's title which points to the nature of that image.
Immediately after  the quotation  from  Huffman, Ondaatje gives a list of "the killed". To  Billy he ascribes 20 victims (curiously, for the  usual legendary  num­ ber is 2 r ) , most of whom, including the "blacksmith when I was twelve, with a knife",  are  totally  unsubstantiated  historically. Then  he gives Garrett's  victims, ending

... and Pat Garret sliced off my head.
Blood a necklace on me all my life.

The strange,  violent beauty of the image, together  with the use of the first person, point towards  the concept behind the title The  Collected  Works  of Billy the Kid. Ondaatje's  legendary   context  for  Billy is  poetry;   the  transformation  will  be carried  out mainly  through  the poetic image;  the book will present Billy himself as an artist. Of course, "works" is ambiguous: it can also refer to Billy's actions, the  killings. But  Ondaatje is clearly working  within  the  Romantic tradition of the artist  as outsider,  just as Samuel R. Delany  in his novels is obsessed with the identity  of the  artist  and  the outlaw.  Nichol's  Billy "was  not fast with words so he  became  fast  with  a  gun",  but  for  Ondaatje Billy's status  as outlaw  is inti­ mately  connected  with the nature  of his perception.  He is placed outside society not only by what  he does, but by the very way in which he sees the world:

The  others, I  know, did  not see the  wounds appearing  in  the sky, in  the air. Sometimes a normal forehead in front of me leaked brain gasses. Once a nose clogged right before me, a lock of skin formed over the nostrils, and the shocked face  had  to  start  breathing through  the  mouth,  but  then  the  mustache  bound itself in  the lower teeth and  he began to gasp loud  the hah!  hah! going strong

44

IN  SEARCH OF  A CHARACTER



-churned onto the floor, collapsed out, seeming in the end to be breathing out of his eye -tiny  needle  jets of air  reaching into the throat.  I  told  no one. If Angela D.  had  been with me then, not even her;  not Sallie, John,  Charlie, or Pat. In  the end the only thing that never changed, never became deformed, were animals.

Of   course,  Billy's  poetic  personality  is  not  entirely  distinct  from   Michael Ondaatje's. The   concern   with  animals-apparent  throughout  the  book-is familiar  to  any  reader  of Ondaatje's poetry.  What  results from  the  title "The Collected   Works of Billy  the  Kid  by Michael  Ondaatje" is in fact  a composite figure:  Billy the  Kid,  outlaw  as artist,  and  Michael  Ondaatje, artist  as outlaw, meeting  in one  persona,  which is part  history, part legend, part aesthetic image, part  creator  of images. It is in terms of this complex persona that  the book  ap­ proaches its material.
That  material  may be seen as a narrative  with two main strands: the conflict between  Billy and  Pat  Garrett, culminating  in  the  manhunt and  the  deaths  of Tom  O'Folliard, Charlie  Bowdre, and Billy himself; and the opposite of conflict, the  scenes of  peace  and  companionship,  centring  on  Miss Angela  D.  and  the Chisum  ranch.   Underlying these two  narrative strands  is the  central  theme  of violence, as it erupts in both outlaw and artist.

BuT FULLY AS   IMPORTANT as what is in the book is what is missed out.  Ondaatje has exercised great  selectivity in his presentation  of Billy,
and  what  he deliberately  omits or suppresses from his sources is of great interest. One  thing  that  should  be noted  about  the narrative  structure  outlined  above is that it ignores, almost completely, what is for all the biographers,  however "true" or "authentic", the most important event of Billy's life: the Lincoln County  War. (Bums  devotes over half of his book to it.)  Ondaatje's one reference to it is in connection with the question of motivation :

A motive? some reasoning we can give to  explain all this violence. Was there a source for all this? yup-

There  follows Bums'  account  of Tunstall's murder,  which he says Billy witnessed "from  a  distant   hillside"  having  luckily  been  off "hunting wild  turkeys."  (In fact,  it  appears   more  probable  that  Billy was with  Tunstall,  and  ran  away.) Most apologists for  Billy make  this the  central  point of their  exposition:  Billy's career begins as an understandable search for vengeance on the murderers  of his

45

IN  SEARCH OF  A CHARACTER



idealistic and  honest friend.  "Others fought  for  hire,"  Bums  claims;  "Billy the Kid's  inspiration  was the loyalty of friendship." (Again,  in fact it is certain  that Tunstall  was neither  idealistic nor honest, and  highly doubtful  that  he was espe­ cially friendly  with Billy.) But the casual tone of Ondaatje's "yup" suggests that he does not  take this idea too seriously, and  there  is no further  mention  of this stage of Billy's career. It is possible that  this passage is introduced  only to make fun  of simplistic  psychological "explanations" of the sources  of Billy's violence. Ondaatje has more serious things to say on that subject.
Similarly,  Nichol introduces an "explanation" of Billy's violence as a joke, but
a  joke with  more  serious implications.  The  central  conceit  of  Nichol's  book is the reversal of "Kid" to "Dick". Indeed,  reversal of the normal  image is Nichol's central  tactic. So Nichol presents the extended  joke that  all Billy's activities were due to his having a small penis. At one level, this is a light-hearted version of the too  easily oversimplified  theory  that  guns  are  used  as  compensation   by  males with  fears  of sexual  inadequacy.   Nichol  recognizes  that  this  can  be  used  too simplistically,  and  also makes fun  of  psychological determinist   attitudes  by  re­ vealing that  "the  sherrif  had  a short  dick too, which  was why he was sherrif & not  out  robbing  banks. these things affect  people differently." But  behind  these jokes is a serious awareness, present also in Ondaatje's book, of the tremendous  force of the connection between violence and sexuality, and  the centrality of these two  aspects in  contemporary  American  life. Make  love not  war-if you can. And it is surely no accident  that  Nichol twice points out that Billy's short dick is "short  for richard.'' Richard,  that  is, as in Nixon. The Lincoln County  War  has been  represented  as a clash  between  the  "good  guys", Tunstall and  McSween, idealistic  supporters  of the  small  farmers,  and  the  "bad guys",  the  oppressive monopoly of Murphy,  Dolan, and  Riley; in fact, it appears  to have been a fairly cynical  gang  war  for  economic  control  of  the  territory,  in  which  neither  side shows to advantage. Most of the victims in the  "war" were shot in the back or from  ambush.  Parallels  to  the  VietNam   war  may  be  drawn  at  each  reader's personal  political discretion;  but it does seem  clear that  Nichol is fully conscious of political  applications,  in his use of  "richard", and  again,  later, in his cynical comment on one of Nixon's favourite slogans:


billy ran  around  shooting his mouth  off, &  the  clicks off everybody else, &  the sherrif stood on the sidelines cheering. this is how law &  order came to the old west.

IN  SEARCH OF  A CHARACTER



Nichol's   jokes  on  Billy's  motivation also  touch  lightly  on  a  subject which  is absolutely  central to his own  poetry: the  power  of language, the  almost  magical efficacy of words.

could  they  have  called  him  instead  billy the  man  or  bloody  bonney?  would  he have bothered  having a faster gun? who can tell.

Again,  the   joke  can  be  taken   absolutely  seriously.  Names  make  you  what   you are; you  become  what  you  are  called.  The  historical  Billy went  through several changes  of  name. He  started life  as  William  H.  Bonney;  when  his father died, his  mother reverted   to  her  maiden name  and  he  became  Henry   McCarty; she remarried, he became Henry  Antrim; when  he first began  to run  foul  of the law he  acquired the  name The   Kid; by  his own  choice  he  reverted   to  William  H. Bonney; but  to  history  and  legend  he  is only  Billy the  Kid.  The naming is  all­ important:  it  fixes  the  image,   it  creates  the  personality.  In   Nichol's  study  of Billy's  motivation, that  noncommittal "who  can  tell"  is the  most  loaded  phrase  of all.
Having rejected any  "historical" explanation in terms  of the  Lincoln County War,   and  omitting also such  legendary accretions  as Billy's youthful murder of a loafer  who  had  insulted  his mother, Ondaatje presents  Billy's violence  in terms of  the  poetic  image  of  energy: the  energy  necessary  to  both  outlaw   and  artist. The  central text for this is the poem on page 41:

I have seen pictures of great stars,
drawings which show them straining to the centre that would explode their white
if temperature and the speed they moved at shifted one degree.

Or in the East have seen
the dark grey yards where trains are fitted and the clean speed of machines
that make machines, their
red golden pouring which when cooled mists out to rust or grey.

The beautiful  machines pivoting on themselves sealing and fusing to others
and men throwing levers like coins at them. And there is the same stress as with stars,
the one altered move that will make them maniac.

47

IN  SEARCH OF  A CHARACTER



Energy  tightly  controlled  by form  is one  definition of a work  of art;  and  in  art the  "one  altered   move"  will result  in the  dissipation of energy,  a bad  poem.  Or, when  the  energy  of the  work  of art  is directly  expressive  of  violence,  and  when it  is transmitted in a context  where  such  artistic   controls  as  irony  are  severely compromised, then  the  "one  altered  move"  can  be physically  destructive beyond the  aesthetic bounds,  as in  the  case  of  the  murder by  the  Hell's  Angels  during the  Rolling  Stones  concert  at  Altamont. Ondaatje's  book  depicts  the  shattering of the  precarious control  over  the  energy  of Billy's violence,  and  the  violence  he evokes in those  around him;  the  events  then  drive  inexorably towards his death. There is  a  close  relationship here  to  the  previously  mentioned two  strands of narrative: the scenes of control  are  (mainly, but  not exclusively)   associated  with the  Chisums and   Angela  D.;  the  "one   altered   move" is  (mainly, but  not  ex­ clusively)   Pat  Garrett. And,  despite  Billy's statement that  "the only  thing  that  never  changed, never  became  deformed, were  animals", both  the  harmony  and the  maniac destruction are  most clearly seen  in the  animal references.
The first of Ondaatje's images of harmony, of what  might  be called  the "pas­ toral  interludes" in the book, comes in the  description of Billy's weeklong stay  in a deserted  barn. Here,  attracted by "the  colour  and  the light", he stays to get rid of a fever.  "It became  a calm  week"  in which  Billy and  the  animals are able  to live together in harmony.

There  were  animals  who did  not  move out  and  accepted  me as a larger  breed. I ate  the old grain with them, drank  from  a constant  puddle  about  twenty yards away, ate  his disease and  kept it in him.  When  I walked  I  avoided  the cobwebs squat   the   best  way  when  shitting,  used  leaves  for  wiping,  never  ate  flesh  or touched  another   animal's  flesh, never entered  his  boundary.  We  were all aware and  allowed  each  other. The  fly who sat on  my arm,  after  his inquiry,  just went away,  ate  his disease and  kept it in him. When  I walked I avoided  the cobwebs, who  had  places to grow  to, who  had  stories  to finish. The  flies caught  in  those acrobat  nets were the only murder I saw.

But  if this  image  of harmony is presented in terms  of animals, it is also in terms of  animals that   the  "one  altered  move" breaks  in  and  destroys  this  scene: rats eat  grain  fermented by rain  and  become  maniac, killing a chipmunk, eating each other, until  Billy, with  "the   noise  breaking out  the  seal  of silence  in  my  ears", exhausts his  bullet supply  in shooting them. At the  end  "no  other  animal of any kind  remained in  that  room", except  the  human with  his gun.  This  brief scene is a paradigm for what is to come later, at the Chisum ranch.

IN  SEARCH OF  A CHARACTER




WRITER's  INTENTIONS can  be  most  clearly  seen  in  the places where  he most  drastically alters his source  material, then  Ondaatje's metamorphosis of the  Chisums must  be the  very centre  of his work. The impres­ sion  that  Ondaatje's book  gives is that  the  Chisum  ranch is a fairly small  place, out  in  the  desert  miles  from  anywhere, inhabited only  by Sallie  and  John, who is seen as a gentle,  peace-loving man  with  little interest  or influence  in the  world beyond  his ranch. In  fact,  John Chisum  was one of the  largest  and  most influ­ ential  landowners and  cattlemen in the  territory; and  Bums  describes  the  ranch thus:

Chisum   abandoned  Bosque  Grande   as  his  headquarters in I 873,  and  moving down  the  Pecos forty  miles, established South  Spring  Ranch,  which remained  his home  to the end  of his life. Where the South Spring  River gushes from the earth in  a  never-failing  giant  spring  of crystal water, he  built  a home fit for a  cattle­ king  and  made  it  one  of  the  show  places of  the  Southwest.  Cottonwood  trees brought  from  Las  Vegas  by mule  pack-train  he planted  about  his dwelling and in two winding  rows that  formed  a noble avenue a quarter of a mile long leading from  road  to  residence.  He  sowed eight  hundred   acres  to  alfalfa.  He  brought fruit  trees from  Arkansas  and  set out  a vast acreage  in  orchards  of apple,  pear, peach,  and   plum.  He  imported   roses from  Texas  to  make  a  hedge  about  the house, and scarlet  tanagers  and  bob-white quail from Tennessee-birds unknown to  New  Mexico-and set them  at  liberty in the oasis of beauty  he had  created.
Here,  with  royal hand,  Chisum  dispensed frontier  hospitality.  His great, ramb­ ling, one-story  adobe  house, with verandas  at  front  and  rear,  stood on  the high­ way between  Texas  and  New Mexico, and the stranger  was as free as  the invited guest to  bed and  board  for as long as he wanted  to stay, and  no money or ques­ tions asked.  Every  day  at  breakfast,  dinner,  and  supper,  the  table  in  the  dining hall  was set  for  twenty-six  guests, twelve on each side and  one at  each end, and hardly  a meal was served in ten years at which every chair  was not occupied.

Ondaatje has not merely  "edited, rephrased, and slightly reworked the originals"; he  has  made   a  complete, vivid,  and  detailed   creation in  absolute  opposition   to his original.
Ondaatje's  suppression of the  Lincoln  County  War  also involves  his omitting
the  facts  that   Chisum was  the  chief  (though silent)   force  behind  the  Tunstall­ McSween  faction, and  that  after  the war  there  was considerable conflict  between  Chisum and   Billy,  who  claimed   that  Chisum  owed  him  money  for  his  part  in the  fighting.  Bums quotes  Sallie  Chisum  as attempting to  discount this conflict,  but   there   are   persistent stories  of  Billy  rustling  Chisum's  cattle,  and,  in  some

49

IN  SEARCH OF  A CHARACTER



more  imaginative  versions,  killing  Chisum's cowboys.   In  a  letter   to  Governor Lew  Wallace, December  12th,  188o,  Billy blamed  accusations against   him  on "the impression   put  out  by  Chisum  and  his  tools".  Steckmesser  speculates that Joe   Grant, one  of  Billy's  victims,  "may   well  have  been   hired   by  Chisum   or another cattleman  to  remove  the  troublesome Kid".  Even  Burns,   who  down­ plays  the  whole  conflict,  admits  that  Chisum was  responsible, along  with  other  local  cattle  barons,  for  hiring  Pat  Garrett to get  rid  of Billy, and  that  their  mo­  tives for  this  were  primarily commercial. All this is totally  changed or omitted in Ondaatje's version.  It  may  also be noted  that  Garrett's own  account never  men­  tions his meeting Billy at  the Chisum  ranch, either  for the  first or any other  time.  (Garrett is,  of  course,  understandably reticent   about  his  early  friendship with Billy.)
The   image  presented in  Ondaatje's book  is, then,  largely  his own  invention; and  the  pains  he  has  taken  to alter  his source  material indicate the  importance he attaches to it.  The  Chisum  ranch  is the  "still  centre" of Billy's world.  It is a place  of peace,  of affection,  of  comradeship. None  of the  apologists  for  Billy as a poor  misunderstood child  driven  against  his will to violence  have  ever  provided him  with  such  a  beautiful and  fully  realized  context  for  his "true naturr":  but Ondaatje succeeds  in doing  this  without  in  the  least  sentimentalising  Billy.
The  first presentation occurs  in Billy's mind  as he and  Angela  D. ride towards the  house  "Forty miles  ahead of  us".  As they  approach Billy  remembers in  a wealth  of loving  details  the small,  everyday  details  of the  life of John and  Sallie Chisum: the  remains of  breakfast, their  wordless  "dialogue of noise",  the shut­ ters  which  made the  house "silent  and  dark  blue  with  sunless  quiet", and  Sallie herself, in her bare feet,

like a ghost across the room moving in white  dresses, her  hair  knotted  as always at  the  neck and  continuing  down until it splayed and  withered  like eternal  smoke half way between the shoulder blades and the base of cobble spine.
Yes. In  white long dresses in the dark  house, the large  bones somehow taking  on
the quietness of the house. Yes I remember.

These  ethereal images  of  peace  and  beauty   are  reinforced by  the  solid  human friendship, the  recollections of long evenings  on  the  porch  when  "we  have  talked slowly  through nights  expecting the  long  silences  and   we  have  taken  our  time thinking the  replies." Even  throwing up  after  a long  night's drinking becomes  a kind  of  act  of  community; and  it  is significant that   Garrett is specifically  ex­ cluded   from   it,  just  as  he  falls  asleep  during the  conversation  on  the  porch.

50

IN  SEARCH OF  A CHARACTER



Again, this is a detail  specifically altered from Burns' book, where Sallie Chisum describes Garrett as often  being "the  life of the company that  used to sit on the porch of an evening."
Angela  D.  fits into  this world:  Billy brings her to it.  (Garrett arrives on his
own,  by  accident,   and  is "deaf" when  he  arrives.)  The  most  graphic  of  the sexual scenes between  Billy and  Angela D. takes place at the Chisum ranch,  and Billy  wakes  there   to  the  vision  of  "Beautiful   ladies  in  white  rooms  in  the morning".
But, as in the  Pastoral  tradition,  et in Arcadia ego, elements of disruption  are
present  even  in  this  perfectly  achieved  harmony,  balance,  control  of  energy. Indeed,  the  indications  of the  "one  altered  move" are  introduced, typically, at the very centre of the harmony,  Sallie Chisum's love of animals. The  first descrip­ tion  of the  Chisum  ranch  ends with an account  of Sallie's strange collection of pet  animals: "the  tame,  the  half born,  the  wild, the  wounded." John  Chisum takes  Billy out  to the  cages in  darkness:  "You  could  peer  into a  cage and  see nothing  till a rattle  of claws hit the grid an inch from your face and their churn­  ing  feathers  seemed  to  hiss." There  is the  bizarre  image  of  the  one-eyed  owls, the intense realization  of the animals' presence and awareness, which "continued like that  all night  while we slept."  Despite the love which Sallie obviously bears for  these animals,  the  atmosphere  of the scene is sinister, filled with  impending  violence. Billy feels himself to  be standing  on  "the edge of the dark" and  con­ cludes  "The night,  the  dark  air,  made  it all  mad."  The  madness  and  violence break out  immediately  in a poem in which  mad rats fight in Billy's head,  horses foam white  with  madness, and a deadly barracuda floats in his brain.
Another  extended  episode at  the  Chisum  ranch  is John's  horrifying  story of the man  who systematically  breeds a group  of dogs into madness until they tum on him and  rip him  to pieces. The story is shatteringly  out of place in the calm and  beautiful  atmosphere  of the ranch;  Sallie comments, to her dog, "Aint  that a  nasty story  Henry,  aint  it? Aint it nasty."  Henry,  like Ondaatje's own dog, is a bassett;  Henry  is also what  the H. stands for in William H. Bonney.
Garrett's presence  at  the  Chismns'  is another  signal  of disruption,  and  it is Garrett   who  narrates  the  story  of  Billy killing  Sallie's  snake-bitten   cat.  The imagery  is  closely tied  together: it  is this  event  which,  according  to  Garrett, terrifies Angela D.; the account of Angela's shot arm immediately precedes the narrative   of  the  night  of slow  talking  and  drinking  from  which  Garrett   is so pointedly  excluded; and  the  beauty  of the  morning  after  is brought  to an  end when  Billy sees that  "On   the  nail  above  the  bed  the  black  holster  and  gun  is

IN SEARCH OF A CHARACTER



coiled  like a snake." Another  careful   juxtaposition is that  between  Billy's shoot­ ing the  cat  and  the  first flashforward to the  final shooting; and  this flashforward begins:

Down the street was a dog. Some mut spaniel, black and  white. One dog, Garrett and  two friends, stud looking, came down the street to the house, to me.

As a  final  touch  to  this continual association  of animals and  violence,  Ondaatje tells us, right  at the end of the  book,  just before  the climactic description of Billy's death, that  Garrett also liked  animals: but  not  live ones, like Sallie  Chisum. Pat Garrett stuffed  dead  birds.



BuT GARRETT  is an  essential  part  of Billy's legend.  Many  rea­ sons can  be given for the longevity  of that  legend-Billy's youth; the attractive­ ness, admitted even  by  his  enemies,  of  his  personality; the  possibility  of seeing him  as  fighting  on  the  "right" side  of  the  Lincoln   County  War; the  fact  that  most  of  his  victims  in one  sense or  another deserved  what  they  got;  the  exotic Mexican background -but  one of the strongest  motifs  is that  of Betrayal. Kent  Ladd  Steckmesser says of this point:

The  theme  of "betrayal" has  been carefully  pointed  up  by Bonney's  biographers and  has gripped  the folk imagination.  Time  and  again  we are  told that  the Kid would  have  settled  down  and   become  a  law-abiding   citizen  if  only  the  man hunters  had  given  him  half  a  chance.  But  Governor   Wallace  "double-crossed" the  Kid   by  reneging  on  a  promise  of  an  amnesty.  Garrett  was  a  Judas   who tracked  down his friend for a few silver dollars.  The  story unfolds like a classical Greek drama,  with  the tragic  hero moving inexorably  toward  death  by treachery.

Just  as Robin  Hood  had  his Sheriff  of Nottingham and  Jesse James had  Robert Ford, Billy the  Kid  had  Pat  Garrett. As has  already been  remarked, their  fates are  linked  in legend  as in life. So long as Billy was regarded as an  extravagantly evil  villain,  Garrett was a  hero,  saviour  of law  and  order, etc.; but  as the  view of Billy changes, Garrett becomes  the  betrayer, the  manhunter, the  assassin.  (In
I goB, Garrett was  himself assassinated, in circumstances which  have  never  been
fully  explained.)  This  is,  essentially,  the  approach which   Ondaatje takes;  but
Nichol,  characteristically, takes  the  whole  idea  and  stands it on its head.
Nichol's  version of Pat Garrett is "the sherrif" (sic), and

the  true  eventual  story is billy & the sherrif  were friends.  if they had  been more aware they would have been lovers. they were not more aware.

IN  SEARCH OF A CHARACTER



Nichol's sherrif does not  betray  Billy:  Billy is betrayed by history, by legend, by god, and  ultimately  by himself, but not by the sherrif. Indeed,  the sherrif  occu­ pies in  Nichol's  book  much  the  place  that  Angela  D. occupies  in  Ondaatje's. Nichol  takes  the  idea  of  the  symbiosis which  binds together  hero  and  villain, hunter  and  hunted,  assassin and  victim, and  turns it into an identity of interests directed  against  the  outside  world.  The  sherrif shares  Billy's  predicament, but, as  already   noted,   "these  things  affect  people  differently."  The  sherrif  simply "stood  on the sidelines cheering."  This  can of course be  read  as a cynical com­ ment  on the collusion between lawmen and  criminals;  but it seems more impor­ tant   as  Nichol's  only  expression  of  community,  of  a  harmonious relationship between  two  people.  The   two  outsiders,  losers of  society,  join  together; their friendship  is beautiful,  the  fact  that  they  "were  not  more aware" is tragic,  the farewell  they  take  of  each  other  is touching  in  its simplicity.  Again,  Nichol's surface  tone  is one  of light-hearted   joking, but  the words he puts down  can be taken  perfectly seriously. And  the sherrif does not destroy Billy: Billy in the end destroys  himself, as  his own  violence catches  up  with  him  in  a  furiously self­ destructive  joke :

the  true  eventual story  is that  billy the  kid shot it out  with  himself.  there  was no­
one  faster.  he  snuck  up  on  himself  & shot  himself from  behind  the  grocery  store.

Nichol's  Billy is in fact  a much  more violent character  than  Ondaatje's: but he is not  betrayed.  Whatever  God,  history, or  legend say, rumour  and  the sherrif remain  true  to him. They  deny the impositions of history and  legend,  presenting instead,   clearly  and   strongly,  a  reversed  image.  The   subtitle   "Left   Handed Poems"  could  well  be  applied  more  accurately  to  Nichol's  book  than  to  On­ daatje's.   In  the  reversed  photo  image,  William  H.  Bonney  becomes  The  Left Handed   Gun;   and  Pat  Garrett, strangely  but  not  without  beauty,  becomes a sherrif not quite aware enough to be a lover.
Ondaatje's view of Garrett  is more conventional;  and  here it should  be noted
that   Ondaatje's highly  selective  presentation  of Billy's history  involves  a  very strong  bias  against  Garrett. As  already  noted,  Ondaatje omits  any  account  of Billy's early  activities,  such  as  his  murders  in  the  Lincoln  County   War,  and presents him mainly in two contexts:  the peace and beauty of the Chisum ranch, and  the final chase and  manhunt. In other words, Billy is seen almost entirely as victim.  There are  three  extended  accounts  of  killings in  the  book -those  of Tom   O'Folliard, Charlie   Bowdre,  and  Billy himself-and in  every  case  the killer is Garrett. We never get any similar account of a killing by Billy. Even in

53

IN  SEARCH OF  A CHARACTER



the  strange  and  bizarre  account  of the  killing of Gregory  (whoever  he is  sup­
posed to be) Ondaatje is careful to have Billy say that:

I'd shot him well and careful made it explode under his heart so it wouldn't last long

In  other  words, Billy is a humane  murderer; the gruesome images which follow can  be  blamed  on  the  chicken,  not  Billy. There is a detailed  narrative of the chase and  of the tortures Billy suffers in captivity,  but only the sketchiest idea is given of Billy's escape from  jail, and  his murder  of Bell and  Ollinger.  Ondaatje concentrates  instead  on the depiction  of Ollinger  as a sadistic  villain:  a device, largely  invented   by  Bums,  which  has  no  historical  basis  whatever.   In  short, Ondaatje stacks his deck. If the reader  reacts in horror  or disgust from  the vio­ lence  in  the  book,  he is reacting  mainly  against  Garrett. Although  Ondaatje's Billy is far  from  a  blameless character, there  is a  definite  implication  that  the violence exists around  him rather  than  in him;  Nichol's farcical  conclusion gives a  far  greater  sense of a  character  destroyed  from  within  by his own  violence. The  interconnectedness of Garrett  and  Billy works  inexorably : if Nichol makes Garrett   a  friend,  then  the  violence has  to shift  back  to  Billy, while  the  more Ondaatje  presents  Pat  Garrett   as  the  assassin,  the  man-hunter, the  more  he whitewashes his Billy.
Garrett is presented as "that  rare thing-a sane assassin". Ondaatje's account of  his  early  life  gives a  plausible  background   of  psychological  motivation  for Garrett's suppression of emotion;  but  it stresses that  even before Juanita's death Garrett  was capable  of efforts of will such as his learning  French  and  learning to drink.  Garrett  "comes to chaos neutral": but  his neutrality  cuts him off from any  contact  with  humanity,  so  that   his  violence  becomes  cold  and  inhuman. Twice  we have the picture of his victims (Tom O'Folliard and  Charlie Bowdre) staggering  towards  him in  death;  in  each  case he stands  unmoved,  waiting for them  to die. Even his reaction to Billy's death  is reported  in a totally unemotional manner. Garrett, more  than  any  other  single  factor  in  the  book, is that  "one altered  move"  that  makes everything  around  him  "maniac." The  word itself is echoed  in  the  description  of Billy's arm  breaking  through  the window after  the shooting:

Guitterrez  goes to  hold the arm  but  it is manic,  breaks her second finger. His veins that controlled triggers -now tearing all they touch.

Nichol's  Billy destroys himself; but Ondaatje's is destroyed  by something outside


54

IN  SEARCH OF  A CHARACTER



himself, something  that  itself remains calm and indestructible: and  therefore,  all the  more terrifying.  Garrett's character  thus presents an  interesting  parado:x:  he is himself an embodiment of order, control;  yet in contact  with Billy he becomes the "altered  move" which produces chaos.
Or  is it chaos? It is violence, certainly, and death;  but there is a kind of  direc­ tion to it. Within the terms of the legend, it is an ine:xorable progress, and what it ends in is not  Billy's death  but  Billy's apotheosis into  legend:  the  creation,  that is, of an aesthetic  image. If Billy is one image of the artist,  then surely Pat Gar­  rett, even if his material  is dead  bodies, like his birds, is another? The  Collected Works  of Billy the  Kid  is, after  all,  a tightly  controlled  book:  Ondaatje is a careful artist,  and  the images of violence are never allowed to get out of hand  in the book. The  book is not  chaos, the book is not manic.  It is an attempt  to com­ prehend  the legend  of Billy the Kid, to see  him as one of the e:xemplary figures of modem  consciousness, outlaw  as artist,  artist  as outlaw.  He  is involved with violence, but  the  violence results from the conflict between  himself and  his soci­ ety,  it  is a  product  of  his symbiotic  relationship  with  Pat  Garrett. Ondaatje's final image  of Billy sees him  waking  up after  a bad  night: the smell of smoke, the  stain  of  violence,  is still  with  him -but  only in  his shirt,  which  can  be changed.  We tum  the  page and  find a photograph  of a small  boy smiling in a cowboy  outfit:   Billy's costume  of  violence turned  into  an  image,  a  toy. That small boy is Michael Ondaatje, poet.
Ondaatje's  Billy  does  not  have  the  substantiality   of  history;  his  history  is
changed  and  fashioned  into something else: legend, the aesthetic  image in all its depth  and  detail,  its  vividness and  force. Nichol's  Billy is, in  its way, a much more  radical  image  of the  outsider's  consciousness, for  it  rejects  any  notion  of substance   whatever.   His  Billy is  rumour,  and  essentially  short-lived,  like  the smoke which  Ondaatje's Billy sees on his ceiling, ready  to blow away whenever a  window  is opened.  His  energy  dissipates itself, sneaks  up  behind  and  shoots itself. Yet Nichol's  is also a carefully crafted  and  constructed  book. The  surface seems superficial  and  whimsical, yet the words will aways yield a serious mean­ ing  if you give them  a  chance.  Perhaps  rumour  is that  way too. The  truth  lies only in what  the words can say, and  what  they say is never fi:xed. It is a process, an event, a becoming;  the truth is always eventual.
Such  as, for e:xample, the "truth" that  on July 14th,  r881, in Pete Maxwell's dark  bedroom,  Pat  Garrett shot Billy the Kid  just above the heart,  and the ne:xt day, "neatly  and  properly  dressed"  (according  to Garrett), he was buried in the military cemetery at Old Fort Sumner, in the state of New Me:xico.

55


AVISON'S IMITATION

OF CHRIST THE	ARTIST




George Bowering








LA REVIEW ARTICLE  about  The  DumbfoundinR (in Cana­ dian  Literature  38), Lawrence  M.  Jones  makes  reference  to  an  unpublished  essay that  Margaret Avison composed about  her  relationship  with  Christ and  its effect  upon  her  work.  Looking back on  her  early  poetry, she  announces  "how grievously  I cut  off  his way  by honouring  the  artist"  during  her  "long  wilful detour  into darkness".  Readers of Miss Avison's work will know that such a con­ fession does  not  lead  to  her  abandoning poetic  care  and  plunging  into  artless canticles  of  devotional  verse. She  is  not  compulsively  looking  for  security,  as Germaine  Greer  would put it. Of all our poets, Margaret Avison is the most art­ fully daring.  In  the same article she speaks of  the  progress of her personal belief from  the  "will  to be good",  to "getting  to be where  Christ's suffering goes, ter­ ribly on."
Like the  "metaphysical" poets, Miss Avison plays on paradox,  and  theirs, her belief,  religious  or  artistic,  depends  on  the  paradox   not  being  that  at  all. She does not abandon the artist -she just does not any longer honour  him. Honour­ ing an artist is for non-reading  people or poetry-commissars to do; or if  the artist is Christ  himself, for  church  ministers to  do.  Honouring a  prophet  in  his own country is to kill prophecy. There is no honour in that.
Miss Avison says that  her  personal vision of Christ,  which  has been till now
often  enough  referred  to,  made  the  New  Testament story  unclear.  The  New Testament  story  is fine, for  people interested  in stories. But its reading  tends to set  the  main  character  in time  and  place, even  if the  place is imagined  in  the mind  of the  child  who  is suffered  to  read  it. It becomes  a  part  of the  world stuffed  in  at  your  eyes. In  her  later  poems written   about  and  to  Christ,  Miss

AVISON'S IMITATION



Avison insists on  an  active  reader.  She  makes lines that  snap  off all  over  the page and  off it, threatening to destroy the poem in favour of something else. She wants  no  passive reader,  for  the  poetry or for  the  worlds of the  God  she lives with. She knows the  paradox  known by John  Donne and G. M. Hopkins:  if the poem  would  lead  your  heart  to God,  it must  evaporate  on the trail  to  his lan­ guage. That is impossible, but it is the ideal that  the most serious poet  must try to  make  real.  Success must  be foregone from  the outset,  but  success  would  be the reward and source of pride.
In  a poem called  "First" (The  Dumbfounding, 51) , Miss Avison advises that
"In   the mathematics of God/ there are  percentages  beyond one hundred". It is left for  the  human, calculator  or artist, to strive for a hundred  per cent. Given that  no one  less than  a saint  can hope to achieve that,  Hopkins  tried to imitate the more-than-perfect by spilling over the normal  low-percentage  confines of the sonnet, an obviously earthly form. Margaret  Avison is led to a similar striving.
Always swim in  water  that  is over your head. Ski a slope that  is frighteningly steep. Keep  trying for excellence you think you do not have in you, and  pay the most  intense  attention to  all  your  movements.  You  will know  that  your limits (or  the  poem's)   are  expanding, and  all the  time you will be reminded  of your mortality.  There  is no  time  for  pride  there,  but  what  you will have  done  will speak of, hint  of, perceptions  not totally available  to human  knowledge. A short poem that  shows this kind of striving is "In  Eporphyrial  Harness"  (TD,  77) :

Hill-hoe
till the liberal varnish, the
daze-sun go
down and the pin­
flare­
finish star-bright
become alltoday, furnish us sun (eyes) (ice).

Here every moment  o£ the poem, including those moments between words, is supercharged, made  to do more  work than  the normal  speaker  or writer  would ever demand.  With  all the simultaneities  of pun, rime,  juncture,  and  so on,  we feel the poet  trying  to do more than  words can accomplish, to tell of more than the  perceptors  can  fix. The  process is the  opposite  and  enemy  of explanation, which means taking  a knowledgeable  position to lay it out flat. Margaret Avison never settles for that dimension:

57

AVISON'S IMITATION



Excessive gladness can drag
the 3-dimensional uncircumferenced  circle out of its sublime true
unless contrition also past all bound
extend it.
(TD, 51)

So  Christ,  and  his works, cannot  be explained. The dogma of 2000 years ago and   that   of  today  are  futile  attempts to  get  control of  history.  Something like that   futility   is  applicable  in  the  consideration  of  poetry. Conventional minds always  want  to speak  of the  poet's  "success"  or  "failure" in  terms  of how  much control   he  has  over  his  material.  Margaret  Avison  says  that   the  poet,  reader, poem,  should   participate, not  dominate, should   be  used  by  things  even  as  we use them. In  a  poem  called  "Hot June" she shows  how  the  acts  of composition lead  in  a sharing way toward eternity,  from  where  everything comes together in
its own place :

People are pink-cheekt only long enough to
ferret out what if we were man and wiser we would let
be.

Give us the word and we worry it out of its soil and run
off with it
(IN-FORM) between our teeth and have at it and set up a
branch office to
do it for people.

And o the zeal of thy cheek, the tired plumes trailing horne!

Dust composes its late sunlight petals, ribbands, metals, shorelessness.

(TD, 82)

When  Christ  composes  himself  before  her  eyes she  does not  ask him  how  he got there,  as  many  people  do  when  someone  shows  up  unexpectedly. She  is  dumb­ founded.

AVISON'S IMITATION



The  silence of the dust  motes landing,  the silence of the dumbfounded -the place to begin  composition,  and  the state of perfection for which  to strive. The process begins when  the  discursive and  orderly mind  learns  to shut  up and  the optic heart  looks and feels. Ernest Redekop, in his book on Margaret Avison, has it  right:   "She  makes it clear  that  perception  forms and  determines  conception; that  how we see determines  what we are." The  poems urge the eye to zoom back and  forth,  refusing  to employ  perspective  (see "Perspective," in Poetry of  Mid­ Century   1940-1960,  edited  by  Milton  Wilson)  because  perspective  places  the self up  close, in  the  centre,  and  everything  growing smaller  and  less distinct  in the  distance.  That is why her favourite  word or combining  word  is "all," as in "alltoday" or  "allgathering", or as it is suggested in such a word  as  "shoreless­ ness". She  holds a similar  view of time, not seeing a distance  of  the  past or of literature,  especially  regarding   the  presence  of  Christ.  In   "Dispersed   Titles"  (Winter Sun,  3), for  instance,  the  sixteenth  and  twentieth  centuries  are  sewn together.  The  poet wants to welcome and  hopes to produce epiphanies,  less-than­ moments  when  there  is light  from  eternity shining  through a rent  in the fabric of time.



MEN FABRICATE the perspectives of time and space in order to  place themselves at  the  centre  of phenomena.  What  is needed  is a lesson in humility. The  greatest  lesson in humility  is the sacrifice of Christ,  who is either God  or his son or both.  His becoming the Christ depends on his epiphanic con­ version from  immortal  visitor to pain-taking  man, the  prime  moment  when  he suffers doubt  and  utters  faith  on the  cross. That  moment  when  he  doubted  his divinity  opened  his divine  heart  to a sharing  of all men's condition. It  was the moment  when  he was the farthest  from being honoured, and  in Margaret Avi­ son's  eyes the  moment  of greatest  artistic  inspiration. Christ  gave  himself up to Keats'  negative  capability,  and  thus lost all  perspective, being  no further  from any one person than another,  through all time and space.
There   is the  Christ  that  the  artist  should  try to  imitate.  In  a  letter  to  Cid
Corman   (published  in  Origin,  January 1962)   Miss Avison said  that  her  unre­ lenting  care for the exactitudes  of composition would have its value in  reaching the optic heart of the amateur reader, not the priests of poetry:

Poetry over against the world-if  such could exist, I'd  stay on the world's side. This is too vague a statement. Aaron Copland says: "When I speak of the gifted listener I  am thinking of the nonmusician primarily, of the listener who intends


59

AVISON'S IMITATION



to  retain his amateur status. It is the  thought  of  just such a listener that  excites the composer in me.... "

[The  italicized words are Miss A'vison's.]

The  poet is that  way about her Christianity,  too. Her life has embraced  the work she  does in  the  academic  community,  and  social  work,  which  has incidentally included  writing for journals on the subject,  and  working among  the down-and­ out  in  Toronto. Both her  life and  her  poetry  are  highly  conscious  responses to various  figures of  Christ,  who  was a  scholar  who  worked  among  the  outcast. Consider  the place where Christ, after  a search,  is found,  in the poem, "Search­ ing and Sounding" (TD, 6o-62):
in the sour air
of a morning-after rooming-house hall-bedroom; not in Gethsemane's grass, perfumed with prayer, but here,
seeking to cool the gray-stubbled cheek and the filth-choked throat
and the scalding self-loathing heart ...

That poem is, among other things, Miss Avison's greatest statement about  the artist  and  his  making  of art.  She has written  about  the  artist  often  during  her more than  three decades of poetry. "The  Artist"  ( WS, 40; TD, 91)  is a compli­ cated story of a person pursuing a white cat around  an indifferent  city, becoming Hansel  and  Gretel,  entering  the  deep  forest  of  the  imagination,  but  escaping from  it undevoured  and  well-fed, and  probably  in possession of  the cat. He had fallen in love with the witch, but he burned  her to ashes and ate her house. One gets the  impression that  Miss Avison is far from  honouring  the artist  here.
The  image  of the  artist  choosing self-interested success over  being  consumed by the  dark  witch in the forest of imagination  is echoed  in "The Agnes Cleves Papers".  Garnet,  the failed artist, failed because he accepted  commercial  reward and  family  praise  and  the  urging  to  work  for  a  living.  He  failed  because  he stayed  with the familiar  tangible world of himself rather  than  allowing his self to disappear  into  the  care  of the  unknown.  He  was afraid  of negative  capability; it might  steal his car if he didn't  leave it locked under  a street lamp.  Miss Avi­ son's poetry is filled with the message to let it go.
That is not a call for the artist-poet  to give up craft in his making.  In a letter
to bp Nichol  (tipped  into Nichol's  journeying and the Returns) Miss Avison commends  him for giving so much  without  giving it away.  It is rather  a call for

6o

AVISON'S IMITATION



the artist  to give up selfishness, or even to give up self. It is really no paradox  to say that  when the poet goes to the full extent of what  his individual  skill can accomplish,  he  will see  his art  become  not  his but  not-his.  The  concerns  are meta-physical.  The  artist,  it is suggested, may become aware  of all his (limited) faculties,  and  then  do what  the  blind man  does in section XIV  of "The  Earth that  Falls Away":

Then I could move out among the trees and traffic, a march in Nomansland to risk it, a dive
into invisible interdependence, no crutch
needed, for all the dread.
(TD, 44)

In  "The Swimmer's  Moment" (WS, 36)  the few  people  who  acknowledge the  whirlpool  they are caught  in give up the individual  contest with  nature  and go beyond  it  (the  meaning  of the meta-physical)  to "the  mysterious, and  more ample, further  waters",  to "the  silver reaches of the estuary".  But remember  that if their skill, their  art,  be not practiced,  they will simply drown. The  metaphor  is at once religious and artistic.
· But  why step  into  the  water  in the first place?  (In  one instance  Miss Avison says that  it is Heraclitus' stream  without  banks.)  In  a short  poem  called  "Un­ speakable" (beautiful title,  as simple as a  rose)  it is heard  that  the  reason for making  art  is to share  in the  beauty of creation, to make its less-seen  parts seen. The artist is in a way an assistant to creation or Creation.
All men  and  women,  all creatures,  are  joined because  they  have  their  rising from  the  same  earth,  the  same  sea.  Hence  order  is a  given,  it is a  beginning, there is a received order  to be discovered and carried out, and  creation  keeps on going on. In  people, who wonder most about that order, the discoverer is the imagination. Hence  the  act  of making  poetry is to find out  where  people may join  in  recognition,   by  means  of  the  imagination.   Thus   poetry   (or  spiritual praise)  cannot  properly  be served by the notion that  the mind  or the spirit may be  liberated  and  separated   from  matter.  Form  is simply  how  the  body of the matter  is perceived.  Reason  cannot  be removed except by sham  from  the seem­ ing  unreason  it  is  born  in.  Like  a  blind  man  in a  city, or  a swimmer  in  fast water,  the  artist  will participate, not  dominate.  He will be used by  things even as he uses them. He will be of some use, and so will his art.

AVISON'S IMITATION


Music IS PART of the received order  the poet participates m. Music, as Carlyle said, is at the heart  of all things and  does not have to be
applied  to them.  The  depth  of the artist's  vision reveals music. It exposes form, never  imposes it. Like Hopkins, and  for similar  reasons, Margaret  Avison sings whenever  she sees something  of surpassing  beauty.  In  fact  the singing  aids the eye. "Nobody  stuffs the world in at  your eyes./ The  optic  heart  must venture." (WS,   I7)· Thus  the  title  of a  great  poem,  "Searching and  Sounding" (TD,
6o-62). The  title  rimes with "The  Dumbfounding,'' and  each  title's multiplicity
of meanings is augmented  by the association with the other.
Searching  and  sounding  involve the eye and  the ear by way of the voice. But they are  involved  not passively -the  poet is not  a witness merely. She believes with  another   great   woman  poet,  H.D.,  that   one's  poetry  should  be  involved with  discovering  the "other-half  of the  tree".  The  optic  heart  searches  among the  forest and  sounds the depth  of the sea, especially where  Christ  is nailed  or where he walked.
So the  poem begins by making the reader's  eye do its share of work, involving the reader physically, as something like an artist if not that :

In July this early sky is a slope-field, a tangled shining-blue-green, moist, in
heaped up pea-vines, in milk-hidden tendrils ...

Visual things are made to happen  as the eye is moved back and forth  (destroy­ ing evaluative  perspective),  a scene that  another  poet might  leave to  the  inter­ preting mind, in what is called description.
Immediately the  eye's work is seen  to  lead  the  observer  to  the  edge  of the
margin between his theoretical  100% and heaven's uttermore:

in light so strong it seems a shadow of
further light, were the heart
large enough to find its succulence
and feed and not be glutted there.

The  truly  worshipful  person or artist  desires more  than  that  intimation  of  im­
mortality,   and  sets  about  seeking a  way  (at  least)   to  make  the  intimation   a

AVISON'S IMITATION



brighter   aperture in  heaven's  cloak.  For  the  Christian,  the  searching  finds  its source and objective:

I look for you
who only know the
melding and the forming of such heart

-and  so Christ  appears  as the meta-human  artist, the  maker  who can observe or perhaps  perform  the creation  of life, the model for the human  artist.
But  where  does the  poet  find that  artist?  In  the last stanza  of "The  Dumb­ founding" (TD, 59), Miss Avison makes ingenious use of syntax simultaneously to ask that Christ

lead through the garden to trash, rubble, hill

and  to observe that  he  does. Here  he is found  (where  part  of Copland's  audi­
ence might be found) :

in the sour air
of a morning-after rooming-house hall-bedroom;
not in Gethsemane's grass, perfumed with prayer,

that  is, not locked in church,  not locked in the safety of history or the approved literature,  not locked in anywhere,  not placed captive in niche or on pedestal, on mantel  or  in shrine.  In  an  earlier  poem decrying  the  fixity of sonnet  or crypt ("Butterfly   Bones;  or  Sonnet  Against  Sonnets,"  WS, Ig), Miss Avison asks at last:  "Might sheened  and  rigid  trophies  strike men blind/like Adam's  lexicon locked in the mind?"
Christ,  or  the  image  of Christ so far seen, is seen here  doing  his own "seek­
ing", as in his recorded time,

to cool the gray-stubbled cheek and the filth-choked throat
and the scalding self-loathing heart, and failing ...

Failing?  How  can  the  perfect  artist fail? I feel that  it must  be because nobody stuffs the world in at  your eyes, because art, even perfect art, is impossible with­ out  its connections.  (Though I  have a nagging feeling that  the  problem  here is in the hint of the earlier syntax:

AVISON's IMITATION



I look for you
who only know the
melding and the forming of such heart

-i.e., that  the search  was for one who has the  "only"  there  to modify the fol­ lowing predicate.)  But if the question is difficult, the solution to it is likely to be found in the succeeding syntax:

failing, for he is
sick,
for I ...

Attending  the  ambiguities  discovered by a  mind  caught  in its own lyric snags, we may  receive the sense that  we are  to find our  way through  a Blakean sym­ pathy  or synthesis of persons, in this case of Christ-poet-other. Certainly the next section of the  poem  would suggest that.  (When   one says, for  instance,  "he  is/ sick,/ for 1,"  that  "I" may equally refer in this case, to a  number  of versions of the self-awareness of persons.)
In long lush rhythms now the poet tells how she runs away from Christ  to be captured by his presence everywhere, including  her own space. She finds that she cannot  wholly distinguish  herself from  the slumped  man  in the boarding  house, or from  a "mentally  distracted"  youth who needs the  hand  of nearby  Christ  to save him from  slumping. His hand  may be taught  the use of axe or throttle-bar or grease gun,  "any  craft  or art".  What  saves a  person from  loss is the artist  in him, then,  Christ  as the artist in people. The  poet hopes to know her craft or art as useful and  connected with the divine as those others. We are somewhere short
of God's  1oo + %, but  because of his grace  we are  not  at or  below zero, even
though  we may  try to run  in that  direction.  Run  the speaker  of the poem does, away from  Christ  (always "him"  with a small  "h"), she thinks, toward  "some­ thing  human,/ somebody  now,  here, with me."  But as  Miss Avison  says in  the poem  called  "The Christian's  Year in  Miniature," (TD, 65),  "From  the time­ less verge/  you moved, to our now." The searching and sounding  of the title are the attributes  of an  artist in his action, but  (as  mentioned  earlier)  that  action  is shared,  even when the artist is that  perfect one. The  mortal  human  being can try to be as elusive as the right word for a poem :
So now we flee the Garden
Of Eden, steadfastly.
And still in our flight are ardent
For lost eternity.
("The Mirrored Man," WS, 7 r)

AVISON'S IMITATION



"Steadfastly" means  standing still,  and  we  are  standing   "still  in  our  flight". What  kind  of running  is this? It is our  moving in time,  "till  time  be full",  as seen from eternity,  where all time can be caught  in less than an instant,  and  you cannot  run away from it, nor would.
The   Christ  of  grace,  though,  makes  gentle  pursuit,  appearing this  time  as musical artist :

But you have come and sounded a music around me, newly ...

The  ambiguity  here is the quickest and  most sure figure of speech, drawing to­ gether  as it does so much  of what has been said by Miss Avison, and so much  to come. For  instance,  the first line of the above quotation  produces an  image of a Christ  far deeper, for an adult,  than that  in the biblical "story"  of  the Jesus who walks on the water.
Furthermore, that  ambiguity  intensifies the synthesis of Christ-artist-other, in the succeeding stanza:

as though you can clear
all tears from our eyes only
if we sound the wells of weeping with another's heart, and hear
another's music only.

Here,  as usual, Miss Avison sees that  compassion for another,  getting  out of the wanting self, are the attributes  of the Christian,  the human  resemblance to Jesus, a  Jesus  not  "sacrificed"   but  become  the  Christ.  Further   again,   Miss Avison works the grammar as far as possible, so that the "we"  of the stanza  can include the addressed Christ.
So the light  deepens, as dark is supposed to do, as the summer  day, what  Miss
Avison calls the  "daze-sun" elsewhere, goes down. The  speaker  of the  poem is then  as far  from  the  garden  as possible, led by Jesus to the mournful  desert of bones and  famine  and  "howling  among  the tombs",  to his version of hangover rooming  house,  where  he is needed  and  must go on  his way back  to paradise. They  go, as Miss Avison's poeins often do, to the shoreline,  where the gravel is ground  by the  apocalypse  horses, to where the artist  must begin  his work, from nothing;  they proceed

To what strange fruits in the ocean's orchards?

AVISON'S IMITATION



The   imagination wonders  about  them.  The  perfect  imagination creates  all new, so that  there  is needed

no further  making -all newness -
all being ...

Yet, says the  devout  poet, if all possible to see is seen, it is seen as only a fragment of the fullness Christ  put off to be with mortal  creatures.
Seeing  the  perfect  artist  in action,  the  poet  becomes  part  of the  action  in imi­ tating him  to  her  limits. The  picture  is far  different from  Eliot's shoring himself up  with  the  fragments left  of a  broken  past  European  civilization. Miss Avison wants  with the help of Jesus to

GATHER my fragments towards the radium, the
all-swallowing moment once more.

Here  is an  artist  who  believes  that  the  universe  expands and  contracts, not  that it is wearing down.  Jesus the  artist  is still doing  his life studies; he is not  locked inside the museum  or nave of art history.

A FEW YEARS AGo, in hip  circles,  there  was an  invocation going  around: May  the  baby  Jesus  shut  your  mouth and  open  your  mind.  In
Margaret Avison's experience it is an artist  Christ  who does that  job. ''The Dumbfounding" is  the  central   Christian  poem  in  her  work,  and  as usual  her work  there  is saturated with  meanings at  all  points.  In  the  sense  that  the  poem tells a story,  it tells the  usual story of the innovative artist  from  whom  in his own country is

withheld all honor:  "His house is clay, how can he tell us of his far country?"

So  he  goes the  normal route  of  ridicule,  distrust, attempts by  the  critics  to nail him  down  to their  established  dimensions, accusations of outlandishness and blasphemy,  neglect   and   abandonment so  that   he  must   do  his  greatest   work alone,  and  finally  a gathering to  the  bosom   (in  this  case,  often  in  the  form  of gold)   of the  culture only after  he is gone so that  he may  be spoken  of as immor­ tal and  "ours".

66

AVISON'S IMITATION



As usual,  the  title  of  the  poem  combines  several senses of  the  word  found there.  Often  in  her  poems  Miss Avison has mentioned  the  desperate  failure  of human  chattering, and  speaking  of her own visitation by Jesus, she said that  the telling of stories about  him became  nonsense for her afterwards.  She was dumb­ founded,  made speechless by surprise. In this poem the reader  is moved from an apostle's story of the life into an awareness that  the framing  of such story makes no sense if the main  character is still among us, experiencing all stages of his life and  our  own  at  all moments.  The  present participle of the title is not  lost in a noun. The  founding  has to continue  while the eternal  heat  of  the forge remains, while there are still those who remain lost, those prodigals.
To  begin  the  poem the  voice speaks for the  people who were around  during the specific four-gospels time:

When you walked here, took skin, muscle, hair, eyes, larynx, we withheld all honor ...

One  notices that  at  first Christ is seen to take on the  attributes  of mortal  man, and  then   (eyes, larynx)   of  the  active social person, or  the  artist.  We  keep in mind  my earlier  remarks  on  the  poet's synaptic  relationship  between  sight and
VOICe.
We  are  then  reminded  that  God  was the  perfect  artist,  the  perfect  sculptor who gave body to all the arts;  and  we need that  reminding,  for "we" said of his son or self:  "His  house is clay,/  how can  he tell us of his far  country?" Then when  he showed some of his extraordinary art,  dancing  on water,  for instance, or  riming  the  original  creation  by healing  with  clay, "we"  tried  to  make  him give  up  his bohemian  ways, finally allowing  him to be fastened  to the  planks, where artists would show him for centuries, inspiration.
Gradually  a strategy  of the  poem becomes clear, as we are  led to know that the  real denial  of Christ  is to place him in time, to hang  him up like a finished portrait.   We  see  exactly  half  way  through  the  poem  that  the  "we"  includes people of "our  time",  including  ourselves. The  first hint is in the stanza concern­ ing  the  crucifixion.  "All  legions massed,"  we are  told.  We  come  to  learn  that they are not only the Roman  legions in biblical Palestine, that  the masses include those held in our churches  wherein  people again and  again  face  up to the figure on the cross, and that the "all" is the familiar Avison all.
But for  another  two stanzas  we hear  the  past-tense story of denial  going on.

AVISON'S IMITATION



When  reports  come that  the "dead" Jesus had  been seen alive, goes the tale, the eye witnesses had  their  windpipes closed. "Eyes,  larynx"  are  punished,  and  the artist Jesus in men is presumably to be found dumb.
The  poet  then  uses her grammar  fully again,  to tell us Where  we are, at.  In the  last  line  of the  sixth stanza  and  the  first two  lines of the  seventh,  we are quickly moved from "past  perfect" tense, through  "past  imperfect," to "present". Jesus is seen searching  and sounding  in the human  world, now. He tries to hear our  music,  and  we make a din  (passim  dumbfounding), trying  to  deny  art  as we deny  him,  closing the flaps of our  tents as we tried  to close the larynxes of the  tellers.  "And  dying",  the  poet  adds  (to  rime  with  the  other  poem's  "and failing"), in  no  way attaching  the  phrase  to  either  the  spoken-to  Jesus  or  the spoken-for us.
"Yet  you are," says the next line, and  then  "Yet  you are/  constant  and sure," as the old master  painter  God was said to be, offering grace, in Hopkins'  "God's Grandeur". And in the following stanza  Miss Avison uses her notation  to present Christ  as God,  as the artist  who continues  to create,  who  begins his work over and  over, the story never sealed in the Book. Hear  how the ends of the lines tell us of God's continuous art, work:

Winning one, you again all ways would begin life: to make new
flesh, to empower ...

and  how the accented  words, after those pauses, beginning lines, tell us what the perfect  "art  objects"  are.  (Those  readers who attend  especially to Miss Avison's great  usage of the  word "all",  and  especially "all  ways" in  her  religious verse, will  be  especially  interested  in  the  phrase  "to  make  new".  Ezra  Pound  took Confucius'  advice,  "make  it  new",  to  bring  together  the  highest  aspirations  of art and social behaviour.)
In  the last stanza, earlier referred to, Christ is said to  (and  asked to) :

lead through the garden to trash, rubble, hill,

where  the garden  is Gethsemane, but  also Eden, so that  the rubble  beyond it is Golgotha,   but  also this  world,  where  the  follower  would  be  taken,  back  from the  flight,  to the  grubby  rooming  house, to try all arts,  not to sanctify  them  in a  gallery,  caught  in unnecessary  limitations.  Christ,  the  "outcast's outcast", is

68

AVISON'S  IMITATION



once again  said  to "sound", that  which rimes, "dark's uttermost", which shines with  the  Avison  metaphysic,  as Hopkins'  plummeting  falcon  shines, till in  the final collapse of the ticking second, "time be full".
That   would  be  the  perfect  artist's  masterwork,  to lay his hands  on the most
trashed  of temporal  stuff and  immortalize it, the impossible dream  of every less­ than-perfect creator.  Imitating such an accomplishment  as well as she does here proves Margaret  Avison a more-than-merely  human artist.
But always with Christian  humility and humanness. A model for the poet may
be found  in  "Psalm I g"  (applied  to Jesus in the Christmas  Liturgy). Therein, David  the  poet  addresses  The  Chief  Musician,  asking  that  "the  words  of  my mouth/ and  the  meditation  of my heart/ be acceptable  in thy sight." The  psalm announces  that  all of earth,  rubble as well as sky, will show God's "handywork". In  her poem called "Ps.I g"  (T D, 24), Miss Avison declares her desire to "love high"  and  says that  that  calls for a searching  and sounding  of all that  is to be found inward "to the last ribcomer/ and capillary," and around one:

Yet to love high
is with this very fear
to shrink and seek to be made plain, openly to own
both the mists smoking from pure
stone-cold lake-still sun-sweetened places and the dank mist that rises
from the long-unsunned, sour
pools, hid even from the storm's sluices.

That is  so  far  from   honouring   the  artist-that any  weekend  gallery-goer may  do. Look for  his work and  hers too, reader, on your way there, in the odd light  that  pulses from  the  unilluminated  doorway where  that  pile of old clothes might  contain  the  earth  of a  wretched  man's  body. There  is no story there  to which you can  affix the words "The  End"  as you reach  the end of the block.













6g


THE OCCASIONS

OF IRVING  LAYTON



Mike Doyle





ELL EXPOSURE to  Irving Layton', work  and  character
(through the work)  is for me very recent. What  is distinctive about  Layton is ills
energy, sometimes  zestful, sometimes fierce, and  his thoroughgoing  commitment to his own views of humankind  and  human  experience.  A confident egotist, he is yet "faced  toward  the stars";  believing in himself, he has had to struggle mightily for  that  belief -first  against  years of neglect,  then  against  years of  misunder­ standing.   Capable   of  generosity,  tenderness,  it  is well-known  that  he  has  not survived  without  bitterness. He  has written  often of the spontaneity of his emo­ tions,  but  has sustained  himself by means  of  a  pervasive  Nietzscheanism,  con­ vinced that  the battle is to the strong. The world of human happenings  fascinates him.  He  may not love people much, or many  of them, but  he is not indifferent to  them.  His  poems  are  populated.  For  most  of  his  career  his misanthropy  is Swiftian,  affection  for  individuals  on  the  one  hand   (even  though  he  is often harsh  towards  them), hatred  of the mass and  its abstractions  on the other.
As is often  pointed  out, Layton is a traditionalist in technique.  His career  has
coincided  with  the  cult of "the  new",  but  that  is ultimately  irrelevant.  His own claim  that  he is a fine craftsman  with a near-faultless  sense of rhythm  is not too extravagant, but  (to  use a phrase of Eli Mandel's)  his early poems are a "pell­ mell scattering  of images".  While many have  moments of penetrating beauty­ a  quality   achieved   by  image,  intensity,  tone-often  they  are  not   coherent wholes, being too clotted, over-detailed,  combining  clumsy syntax  with  an over­ plus  of  material.   Too  much  happens  in  too  confined  a  space;  but  this  is a squandering of riches, disclosing eagerness to  proffer  the  largesse available  to a true  poet. Later,  of course, he manages a range of  traditional forms impressively, sometimes magnificently.

OCCASIONS OF IRVING LAYTON



With  fair  frequency  Layton  is a convincing  poet, "for  real"  as they say, but, despite the  fact  that  his work is characteristically  clear and  clean-limned,  there is something  elusive about  the exact nature  of his talent.  One  critic  has claimed that  Layton  is a didact,  another  that  he is precisely not that.  One sees him as a "performer", whose content  is undemanding while his language  is "daring" and "fresh".  Another  says he pays too little attention  to rhythm  and  sound,  that  he is a rather  boring  purveyor of anecdotes, that  he has no sense of the order of the universe. To some extent at least, it depends on where you start from!
Throughout his work there is much  evidence that  Layton  can put on a style: pastiche of Auden,  Eliot, Yeats, Williams, Stevens. Obviously, he is interested  in all the  means  available  to  the  poem. True,  he has not  explored  much  into  the rhythm  and  sound  of colloquial speech, for he is a literary  poet, but  he is not at all rhetorical  in  the  bad sense, for he does have a good ear and,  after  the  very early period, an ease of line which allows him to bring all his senses into his work with  a  high  degree  of  naturalness.  While  one  of  his subsidiary  notes  is  anti­ cultural,  anti-academic, he is steeped in European  culture  and  he uses it to good purpose,  just as he uses a wide range of the forms of English poetry -from song and  ballad  to sonnet  and  octosyllabic couplet, epigram, nursery  rhyme, dramatic monologue.
Layton's  undeniable anecdotage  derives from his close interest in  people, but the approach clearly demonstrates  his typical relationship to them. A curiously pervasive effect in  his work is of the poet  at once committed  and  apart. Where he is a participant it is most commonly in sexual encounters,  and  even then  one very often  has  the sense that  he is clinically observing the  woman,  if not  using her.  In  human  encounter  he can  be involved to the  point  of anger  or  compas­ sion, but  apart  nevertheless.  He weeps to see an example  of human  decrepitude or  the  death  of  a  bull-calf, but  it is also he who, godlike in  "The  Mosquito"  (26),* notes  his  insect,  his  "Franciscan   monk",  "in  the  exact  centre/ of  the white  writing  table-a  bullseye!",  which  he smashes with  a fist  and  a "philo­  sophical"  observation.  In  other  poems he is sickened by the aesthete  who kills a frog  by  dropping a  rock  on  it  from  above -for the  effect   (I 38), or  by  the "Neanderthal"  ( 497)   who,  instead  of simply  swatting  a  fly, seals it off, con­ demning  it to a slow death  by insecticide. Highly characteristic anecdotes,  these accounts  of the slaughter  of insects and small animals seem, in his consciousness, to represent  a paradigm or analogy for  man's fate, the fate of Job  in the hands

*Bracketed numbers are  page  references  to  The Collected   Poems  of Irving   Layton
(McClelland & Stewart,I 97 I ) ,which is the occasion for this essay.

OCCASIONS OF  IRVING  LAYTON



of  a  God  for  whom   justice  equals  power.  Paradoxically, man   within   his  own sphere  is dominant.
Elsewhere   Layton   reveals  himself  to  be  infected  by  the  cynical  aestheticism
which  repels him in another:

Whenever
I see bugs manoeuvring on the kitchen floor
with bits of food or paper sticking to their bodies

I have a resistless desire to crush them
under my foot

Only if they have bright colours
will I spare them 	(536)

Finding a sinkful  of brown  insects, he  (the  poem  is in  the  third  person,  but  we may  assume  that  "he" is the  poet)   feels the  insects  to  be "philistine matter":

His daily ontological lesson. Nothingness hell-bent for nowhere. 	Godlike he observes for a few moments this ridiculous parody
on human existence, sponge in hand. 	No angel parts
the ceiling to shout, "Hold!"	And with one rough sweep he wipes away this living smear of fig-jam (including one or two artists and philosophers
who have separated themselves from the frothing
brown mass). 	(531)

The tone  is, of  course,  ironical, but  the  particular posture  occurs  often  enough in  Layton's work  for  the  irony  to double  back  on  itself.  While  man  is the domi­ nant   creature in  his  world,  the  most  sensitive  and  best  of  men  need  to  isolate themselves to  play  their  appointed roles. Such  isolation  has its dark  side. Layton  is as far  as can  be from  a sense of possible community or from  the attitudes of, say, a Schweitzer. As far  as Layton  is concerned, bill bissett's  chant, "we are  here to  take  care  of  the  earth" is very  likely  the  reverse  of  the  truth,  for  he  asks: "How to dominate reality?  Love  is one  way;/ imagination  another"  (28). Rich  and   ranging as  are  his attempts at  domination, they  are  ultimately  piecemeal.
Layton  appears to  be a  prime  example of one  ruled  by his own  "ego-system"
(as  Charles Olson  might  have  put  it)   but  what   does  this  imply,  and  need  we

72

OCCASIONS OF  ffiVING LAYTON



assume that  Layton's  universe has no other  ordering principle?  It is well to keep in  mind  Leo Spitzer's  dictum  that  any  author  should  be criticized  only after  a full  and   detailed   attempt   has  been  made  to  understand  his  purposes.  First, generally  speaking   Layton   presents  himself  as a  personality   rather   than  as  a voice,  but  this is not  absolutely so, as is shown by a handful  of his apocalyptic poems  (even  such  an  early  piece as "Halos  at  Lac Marie  Louise" -33). The distinction  in question  is between  man  as part  of the process, continuous  in the whole of phenomenal reality  (and  therefore a voice of it)  or man sensing himself as discontinuous,  as a personality.  Participation in reality or "How  to dominate reality?"-the question is a crux.




R.T, COCKSMAN, TEACHER  and  misanthrope-these are the prominent  facets of Layton's  personality as presented through  his writing.  What does each  role  mean  to  him?  Early  he admitted  to  himself that  "there  isn't  a ghost/  of  a  chance/ people  will be changed  by poems"  ( 68), while somewhat later, writing of "Suzanne" ( 209),  he acknowledges:

I owe to her
beside simple thanks
my notion of poetry as visceral sanity.

Poetry,  then,  is a  condition  of his own existence, something  which  happens  to him  ("I wait/  for  the  good  lines/ to come" -9), he  receiving it as Sebastian received the  arrows;  but  is it anything  more?  An attempted answer  in "Whom I Write  For"  (78)   conveys a markedly  ambivalent  sense of where  Layton is as poet and  human  being. In  summary,  he suggests that  he writes for all suffering humanity    (including   "Adolph   Eichmann,   compliant   clerk"), famous  or  un­ known, powerful or weak:

I do not write to improve your soul;
or to make you feel better, or more humane;
Nor do I write to give you any new emotions;

but rather

When reading me, I want you to feel as if I had ripped your skin off.


73

OCCASIONS OF IRVING LAYTON



Why,  he does not  reveal, but  the clearest impression .is  that  he writes for others in order  to feel and  demonstrate  his power over them. Yet he is at the mercy of that  power, sometimes happily  as in "At  the Alhambra" ( 29 I), or disturbingly as in  "Haruspex" ( 4),  but  always in  danger  of feeling "a  seedless Joseph, cas­ trate,  storing  grain"  ( 64)  or sensing himself one of a "congregation of sick  ego­ tists"  (I 74) . He is at the mercy of that  power in another  sense, remarking in his "Foreword" to  this  volume that  "the  poet is someone  whom  life knocks on the head  and  makes  ring like a tuning  fork".  "Lies?/  No:  Language", he answers his own  question  in "The  Poetic  Process"  (I 56), but  it  is not  usually language that  he .is tuning to.
Eli Mandel/ basing his view to some extent  on the  preface to  A Red  Carpet
for the  Sun, sees Layton's  poetic personality  as a fusion,  as the  double-god Dionysius/Apollo,   a  neat  way  of  overcoming   many  apparently  contradictory attitudes in Layton's  work. Mandel's  condensed  exegesis is very convincing,  but another   remark  in  Layton's  "Foreword" may  be  helpful  here:  "I see life as a Dionysian  cock-and-cunt   affair  with  time  off,  though   precious  little  of it,  for meditation  and  good works". Sometimes one lives, sometimes one stops to think about   that  and  about  other  people's  lives. The  "good  works",  then,  are  in  a context of:

One  miserable  human more or less hardly  matters but the loss of a good poem does,
being irreplaceable.

Why are poems so important?

the poet transfigures Reality, but the traffic cop Transcribes it into  his notebook.

The  poetic  process is one of transmogrification. Behind these expressions (where they are  not stock responses) is a Shelleyan sense of the poet's role. Yet William Carlos  Williams  (to  take a  one-time  mentor  and  influence  of Layton's)   would have  thought  the  cop's notes vastly more relevant  and  "real" and  therefore  the true stuff of "the  poem".
Layton  runs  a whole gamut  of attitudes  about  poetry, from  the Shelleyan, to
the Byronic (i.e., sardonic)   ( 61 ) , to a sense of the modem  poet as eunuch  (I 88, posed  against  a background  of looking to earlier,  Byronic models). The funda­ mental   "doubleness" in  Layton's  attitude   to  poetry  may  be seen  as a  balance (thus,  with great sympathy,  Eli Mandel  sees it), as tension, or as confusion. The

74

OCCASIONS OF  IRVING LAYTON



"trick  of  lying/  All poets  pick  up  sooner  or later"   ( 3I 6)   can  come  perilously close to an  illusion  that  one  "transfigures/ Reality".  In  effect here  Layton  mo­ mentarily   recommends  attention   to  the  cop's  notebook,  but  he  is  immediately off in his crown  of mist playing beggar-buffoon  on the stilts which allow him to "see"  at  a  higher  level  (and  how appropriate the  image  is!)  These  flourishes seem necessary to his "freedom", to the kind of poet he is, to his sense of his poet­ self. In  a later  poem,  "The Skull",  is a moment, a word, which synthesizes all:

I want to write poems as clean and dry
and as impertinent
as this skull	(491)

Observable  everywhere  in  his poems, Layton  has a gift  (a very literary  gift, let's accept  it)  for the word  which is "fine excess". Here "impertinent"  reverberates. The  skull "grins", but  it is also impertinent  because in the end  everything  is as pertinent  as anything,  or nothing,  part of the "poem/ that  has written  me since time  began"  ( 389). One  has the feeling that his securest sense of poetry is when he is nearest to voice:

In me, nature's divided things­ tree, mould on tree - have their fruition;
I am their core.	Let them swap, bandy, like a flame swerve
I am their mouth; 	as a mouth I serve.	(I 21)

But the early image of "The Swimmer"  ( 2), "Opening the spray corollas by his act of war",  may be the nearest he has come to concentrating his various notions about the poet and his function.  Immersing in "the cold green element" by an aggressive, functional  plunge,  the  swimmer  is at  once  transformed   into  some­ thing  much  closer akin  to  the  water,  "A  brown  weed  with  marvellous  bulbs". He "goes under like a thief"  as if headed for "home", but soon, "Stunned by the memory  of  lost  gills",  is forced  to  the surface  again.   Almost  at  one  with  the water  element  he is, simultaneously,  participant, observer and self-absorbed. The  poem speaks of integration at  many  levels, sexual, spiritual, and  in  poetry. Just so the poet, or Layton's  deepest sense of the poet, plunging for his poem.






75

OCCASIONS OF  IRVING LAYTON


0F THE  MANY OTHER  ELEMENTS  in  Layton's  work,  pre­
dominant are:   hatred  of man's  raging  but  all-too-rational cruelty  in an  apoca­
lyptic  universe, and  an erotic sense of woman,  a chief means of whatever solace he may achieve.
One  of  his  most scarifying  poems, "The Cage"   ( 42)   is a  terrible  vision of man's   "altruism". Blinded  "without   charge"   by  the  "selfless blacksmith", the poem's  protagonist  is kept in a cage made  of iron  and  stone donated  by masons and  ironmongers.   Each  of  these  worthies  competes  in  disinterested  goodliness, clumsily colliding  with  his fellows in eagerness to attend  the  "Blinded  and  rag­ ing"  prisoner. A similar view of the human  universe is conveyed with still sharper  irony  in "The Improved  Binoculars": city in flames, firemen first to save  them­ selves, real estate  men already gazing speculatively  at  the land  being cleared  by ruin, lovers deserting each other in mid-coition:

And the rest of the populace, their mouths distorted by an unusual gladness, bawled thanks to this comely and ravaging ally, asking

Only for more light with which to see their neighbour's destruction.

All this I saw through my improved binoculars.	( 139)

Both poems lay bare the demonic aspect of man,  and  Layton's  Faustian  view of the  world  is further   strikingly  evoked  in  "In   the  Midst  of  My  Fever"   (g8), which  absorbs  an  attitude  from  his Auden  period   ("large/ as Europe's   pain" catches  the tone here),  going beyond it, to portray,  in technicolor irony, a world in  which  it  is miraculous  that  "someone/  quietly  performed  a  good  deed",  in which cruelty is expected and the ways to freedom  are labyrinthine  and fugitive:

Nudes, nodes, nodules, became all one, existence seamless and I
Crawling solitary upon the globe of marble waited for the footfall which never came.
And I thought of Time's wretches and of some dear ones not yet dead
And of Coleridge taking laudanum. 	(gg)

This  vision  of  human  depravity,  in  a  world  "Like  a  backdrop   held  by  an enormous  claw"   ( 142),  is held  in suspension in  one  of Layton's  finest poems, "Seven  O'Clock   Lecture"   ( II o). Speaking  simultaneously  of  his roles as  poet

OCCASIONS OF  IRVING LAYTON



and  teacher,  and  of the  "permanent bloom on all time-infected  things",  he sees the appalling  contrast  between spilt blood and  the beauty of "the  Arts", despair­ ing of their  being  brought  into  any  kind of life-giving balance  in this  world of well-aired  sheets and  "chromium gods"  ("chromium" being his term for  mind­ less contemporary barbarism, the  abstractionism  of  modem  life).  He  sees the poet  as  suffering  clown   ("God! God!  Shall  I jiggle  my  gored  haunches/ to make  these  faces  laugh?"), yet as controller,  (teacher?)  even  inventor,  of the scene; so that  "the  immortal  claptrap  of poetry" fits ambiguously into the whole ambiguity  of  man's  "will  to falsehood"  among  the  "immortal coal of the  uni­ verse".
Ambiguity  is deepened  by Layton's sense of an over-riding  power, the "enor­
mous claw" of a wrathful God (in an "atheist's" world!)  :

God, when you speak, out of your mouth drop the great hungry cities
whose firetrucks menace my dreams

Whatever   coherence  may  be discerned  in  his view of human  experience,  it is through  this nightmare of holocaust, of the apocalyse. With it goes a bitter sense of betrayal,  for  it is this same  teeming God  of whom  the  whale,  in  its  joyous "being-at-oneness/ with the universe", thinks:

"Surely the Maker of Whales made me for a purpose".

Just then the harpoon slammed into his side tearing a hole in it
as wide as the sky.

Layton  is not  a poet of the single vision, but a man  of varied  (often inconsis­ tent)   moods  and  passions, whose intensity is frequently  a  fusing  power  in  his work. While here and  there  (especially in his portraits  of women or responses to the  plight  of  animals)   are  moments  of tenderness  and  generosity, he is mostly an  energetic  hater.  Perceiving  that  love is essential for survival,  his own contri­ bution  to that  end tends paradoxically  to be negative and  destructive. He detests mass-man  and   conformist   hypocrisies,  persistently  attacking   the  abstract, the academic, the theoretical  which drives out flesh-and-blood responses:

Frantic love of the Divine
Burns out common affection:

77

OCCASIONS OF  IRVING LAYTON



So it was that Augustine Thinking  concubinage sin Abandoned child and wife
To essay the holy life	(272)

or

The  Leninists are marching on us.
Their  eyes are inflamed with social justice.
Their mouths are contorted with the brotherhood  of man. Their  fists are heavy with universal love.	( 222)

He  despises "the world's  acquired acumen: j To  sin  privately and  speak  well of Good" ( 277). One  of his greatest  strengths is forthrightness or,  at  least,  a  will­ ingness  to  admit   his own  positions  and  to  realize  without apology  that  they  are partial. What does  he  mean  by  "Good", though? A  good  lay,  an  honest  mer­  chant, a dead  Nazi  or Arab?  If, in one mood,  his stance towards reality  is Faulk­ nerian-romantic  (for   Faulkner too  professed  to  think   a  good  poem  worth   the lives  of  any  number of  old  ladies), so, in  terms  of  human  behaviour, Layton  tends  to  be Hemingway-existentialist. An action  is good  if  you  "feel  good" after it, and

All the motions of living are equally absurd
But one might as well have clean linen.

It depends on  you,  positively,  being  yourself,  as  opposed   to  "Homo  Oecono­
micus":

From everywhere comes up the stench
Of  technology's massenmensch, Not a man really, but a tool. Frightened, alienated, dull;
A machine part, replaceable ...

None  of this is new,  it need  not  be, and  it shows  Layton very  much  as a man  of his  period.  Tinged with  sentimentalism, it  can  carry  him  as far  as a curious in­ version of the pathetic fallacy:

Philosophies religions:
so many fearful excuses for not letting the sun

OCCASIONS OF IRVING LAYTON



nourish one
and burn him to a cinder

Look at the skeletons of those oaks:
the proud flame of life
passed through  them
without their once having heard
of Jesus or Marx 	(goB)

Disgust  with  human beings  leads  him  to despair  that  the  end  of our  universe is still "more than  a billion  years away". Observing human depravity through his "improved binoculars" he adopts a tone  of scathing irony, forgetting that  in  an­ other  mood  a human fate seems to him akin  to that  of a roach  drowned in a glass of wine. He sees "Everywhere,/ the stink of human  evil",  yet regards  the average man  as "a repressed  nine-to-five  slave,"  encountering whom  in a restaurant,

I had a sudden vision of mashed  potatoes.
But these had their coats on.

Finding the  so-called  "good  life" deplorable, yet he seems to feel that  its material sleaziness  is all  there  is, the  "truth" (he  advises  the  rabbi)  being sensible invest­ ment  in  real  estate  by men  "bored by whisky and  wifeswapping" (49). Slave  or not,  man   is  predatory, but  his  predatoriness is without  grace,  freedom  or  self­ enjoyment. Self-hating, "tamed and  tainted" man sets traps  for  wild free natural creatures, but  "even/ more  terrible  traps  for  his own kind" ( 67). Without lustre,  man   (Layton's elevator man)  spends  his life  pointlessly  "going  up  and  down", fulminating against   anyone who  threatens his world  with  the least  change. The poet says "almost aloud":

"Civilization  could not endure
A single hour without your trapped  soul"

Layton  loathes civilization, or  professes  to,  but  his  rage  here  echoes  curiously that  of the  "affable tool"  he is addressing, and  he himself is subject  to "the insult of  birth,/ the  long  adultery with  illusion"   ( 75) . On  the  one  hand  are  the  "un­ lived  lives"  of the  ladies  at  Traymore's, on the other  the  repeated view that  man  is more  venomous (evil)   than  a snake,  a venom  which  takes the form of  abstrac­ tion,  alienation, dehumanization, lack  of  ability  to  empathize  (theme of  many

79

OCCASIONS OF  IRVING  LAYTON



poems, such as "Life in the  2oth Century" -247). But what  does human  Mr. Layton say to all this?

Idiot!
The one human I'd trust
is a deaf-mute paraplegic­
behind bars!	(260)

The  realm  in which  he feels at  ease is one where  he is conscious of the sun, of delicate  flowers, of children,  of grassy fields, of trees and  "Waiting patiently  for their  gift  of  leaves"  ( 326)  "in  this world  of mournful   beasts/  that  are  almost human" ( 455) ; but  at  the  heart  of this same  nature-loving, peace-loving  Lay­ ton  is a Heraclitean restlessness, the rejector of "dreary  Absurdist  plays", craver for  the  "sweet  smell of  lechery,  of steamy  scrotum/ and  crotch", one  who  is finally a lover of the abyss:

I'm tired of seeing the world go by on its well-oiled joints, of all this repetitive, ignoble, useless pother.
It's the sameness that finally disappoints	(426)

At  the same time, as in "Epiphany" (459)   he is disgusted by human sensation­
seeking.


LIKE WHITMAN, Layton "contradicts" himself, but it may be questioned  that  the contradictions  partake  in a larger  harmony.  His personalism is no heresy, merely a limitation  of range. He once wrote that  a "poet  is someone
who  has a strong sense of self", but  his sense is of the occasions of his own ego. Without  belittlement  we may say that  he is an  occasional  poet, one who stands as a critic of our society (from "this arsehole of a country" to the whole Western way  of life),  but  whose criticisms are  not  especially fresh insights and  not  but­ tressed by an alternative  vision or a suggestion for new ways of living. Apparent­ ly  he  sees  himself  as a  being  profoundly  different  from  his  fellow-citizens, as looking deeper  than  they, and  suffering more, but  it may be simply that  he is a more  articulate  victim of the same psychological and  moral  confusions.
Erotic  love would  be a  chief component  of any  Layton  vision of  utopia  or
paradise.  In  quest of "love"  he bares his back to sun and  moon, and  one version of  Layton  the  lover, going  up  and  down  like a  bicycle pump   (or  an  elevator man?), is comical, if sometimes savagely so. But many of the love poems are true celebrations,  such  as  the  early  "Song  for  a  Late  Hour"  ( 30), "For   Musia's

So

OCCASIONS OF  IRVING LAYTON



Grandchildren" ( 455)  and  the tenderly  beautiful and  deservedly much-antholo­
gized "Berry Picking"  ( 345).
In  some  of  his  less likeable  and  more  perfunctory  erotic  poems  woman  is viewed as if she were a side of  meat;  but  often his eroticism is evinced  with a respect  and  tenderness  akin  to love. Sometimes, too,  he generates  a feeling of human  excitement  in the occasion, conveying a sense of propinquity and mutual complicity  (as in the epigrammatic sequence "Five  Women"-332). Women's Libbers must find Layton  appalling  and  would certainly argue that  he is chained by old-fashioned sexual attitudes.  He is in that, as in so much else, a traditionalist.

It is sad to be an atheist,
sadder yet to be one with a limp phallus

he observes in "Mahogany Red", in one of many references to his supposed "atheism", which  read  mostly as if he  means  "relativism"  or  lack  of ultimate purpose  (compare "Cote  Des Neiges Cemetery",  "Gratitude", "Elegy for Strul", "One Last Try  at a Final  Solution",  and  many other  poems).  The  limp phallus confirms the  "atheism" as also does the lady's garish red hair.  A genuine feeling for the woman,  present  in the poem, is overburdened  by Layton's  contemplation of carpe diem.  Similarly,  poems such  as "The  Way of the  World", "Undine", "Dionysus"  and  "Diversion" (the  tones of which suggest that  he has also learnt from the Roman  poets)  have a curious, silvery air of detachment. Yet "A Strange Tum", also concerned  with  passing time  and  missed opportunity, an  occasion on  which  the  sexual  roles are  in a  way  reversed, comes through   as fully  and poignantly real:

Ah, if my flesh were but firm, not loose,
And  I were  young,  how she'd  ride and  ride! 	( rgo)

Another  poem, nearly  as moving, in which the woman is dominant, is "For  My Green  Old  Age"  ( 297). In  both  pieces, behind  the  poignancy,  held in balance with  it  and  thus  allowing  the  poem  to  reverberate,  is Layton's  other  sense of woman,  as man-devourer, emasculator,  of whom a full-scale portrait  is given in "Woman in  the  Square"  (  44). Yet  another  poem  on  time  and  sexual  love, "Dans  Le  Jardin" ( 2 r 6), in  which  the  lovers together  are  "uncoupled by the coming  night"   contains  its  sensuality  in  a  cool formalism  which  orders  great depths  of feeling.  Where  these poems work it is because of the sense of emotion recollected, of a measuring  of experience, a somewhat  different  manifestation  of which is the fusion of feeling and  calculation in "The  Seduction" ( 288).

81

OCCASIONS OF  IRVING LAYTON



Among  the later  poems we range from  the  Yeatsian  "I pray my last days on earth   be  mad/ with  sexual  desire"   (530), to  the  deepening   pessimism of the image  of  time  as  a  wolf who  claws to  death  the  lover's  lady  (576), and  the bitter  declaration   that  "women  are  repulsive  mammals/ without  souls"  ( 518), whereas  earlier  they  had  been  imagined   as  "the   waters  where  ends  all  sin" ( 351). Towards woman  as towards all experience  Layton  displays the full spec­ trum  of attitudes.  His devourers, they are also his earthly  salve;  all  beneficence, yet  they  are  soulless. Desirable  beyond  measure,  they  are  to  be  cast  off con­ temptuously  after  use. Truly  Protean  (as George Woodcock observed), has Lay­ ton  integrated   the  many  elements  of  himself,  as  poet  and  man?  Rather   than unacknowledged   law-giver,  he  is the  poet  in  search  of  his  wholeness;  but  his sense of selfhood seems to be of a reactive self, contingent  upon circumstance.
Nowadays  we are  largely indifferent  to our  poets, and  those few of us who are  not  tend  to demand  that,  to expect serious attention, a poet must offer us a new-imagined  world, fruit of a large vision and  a large commitment. At the very least we look for a distinctive voice, a "determining personality".  In these terms, Layton  cannot  be said to have a large vision, for his poems are the occasions of a  somewhat   chameleon  personality,  which  has  obvious  enough  limitations.  No single work of his is on a large or profound  scale;  but what  of his commitment? Obviously, his life has been devoted to poetry, and  in no small way. His efforts and  his personality  have broken through  thick  barriers  of social convention  and inhibition.  Both  his work and  his belief in it have  been salutary  in establishing and  developing  the  poetry of his own  country,  and  to that  poetry  he  has  con­ tributed  a fair  number  of beautifully  made,  memorable poems. A prose volume would  be a  useful  companion  to  the  poems,  for  the  various  lively  prefaces  to Layton's books are  themselves an important document  in Canadian  poetry.
Many  facets of his work have not been dealt  with here:  his poems about,  and
to, other  poets;  his Jewishness, and  the  way it has developed  since the six-day war  and  his extensive travels in  Europe;  his feelings about  the  "sunless  Presby­ terians"  of Canada and the fact  (usually overlooked)   that  Europe doesn't  come off any  better; influences on him of other  writers  and  thinkers,  particularly  the often-noticed  influence of Nietzsche; his use of symbols (by no means systematic, but  nonetheless  present) ; his many  moving  animal  poems  (written  about  per­ ceptively by a number of critics) ; his liking for a mandarin  use of language; his wit  and  his skill at  epigram  (and  his misfires at  it) ; his  religious sense-pro­ personal  and  anti-institutional; his exploitation, or  perhaps  exploration,  of sur­ realism;   the  specific successes of  his  wide-ranging  employment   of  traditional

OCCASIONS OF  IRVING LAYTON



forms, and  inventiveness in both pastiche and parody;  his use of myth and classi­ cal allusion;  the sensitive lyricism of his recollections of boyhood;  his penetrating satire  and  pervasive irony, and  the increasingly overt political poetry of his later period;   his  feeling  of  the  inertia  of  our  society, and  its  protective  device  of rationality; his elegies, which  include some of the most moving  moments in his whole  oeuvre. No  attempt  has  been  made  to  comment  on  his  "best"  poems separately  and  as such,  but  these would include  "Boys Bathing", "Halos  at Lac Marie   Louise'',   "For   Aviva,  Because  I  Love  Her",  "The  Predator", "Seven O'clock  Lecture", "The Cold Green Element",  and  probably a dozen others.
That  solid paragraph listing what I have not dealt with, suggests that I could
have  written  a completely  different  essay on Layton's  work and,  oddly enough, I expected  to. Iwould  like not to have been so negatively critical,  for he is the kind of poet for whom  one has a great deal of sympathy  and  fellow-feeling. My list of omissions suggests a richness I have not captured,  in both  man  and  poet. Confident  as he is, this is not  to say he is never daunted by Nobodaddy  or  the grave.  Perhaps  the  most  engaging  thing  about  him  is that  he  will  come  right back  and  cock a  snook  (or  snook a  cock!)   at  both.  He  is a  man  for  whom poetry  has been the  manner   (and  maybe it is all in the  manner) of  his living. Wakening  into  the  poem, as in "Early  Morning in Cote St. Luc",  his senses are immediately  engaged  by "the  white/  table under the willow tree/   a fragment  of edge"  (as  in  a  Vlaminck   painting), by the  mantis,  the  professor  ("his  collec­ tion/  of  tomes,  slowly  yellowing/ into  favour"), by  the  sweetly-dreaming  chil­ dren,  but  finally by the question of his own place in the scheme of things, and  a place for those like him :

How to make room in my mind for these
and the black bitter men - my kin-
the inconsolable, the far-seeing?	( 109)

For  all his misanthropy  and  inconsolableness, his characteristic posture is, as he said  of  the  idealized   Roman   woman,  "kicking ... epitaphs   out  of  the  way" ( 375), though with his features increasingly a darkened frown.


NOTE

1 Eli Mandel. Irving  Layton.  (Toronto:  Forum House).




review articles


THE BRIGHT NEW DAY

Donald Stephens


AUSTIN   CLARKE,   When He  Was  Free  and  Young  and  He  Used  To  Wear  Silks,
Anansi, $2.75  paper.
HUGH GARNER,  Violation Of The  Virgins, McGraw-Hill Ryerson, $7.95.
HUGH   HOOD,  The   Fruit  Man, The  Meat  Man   And  The   Manager, Oberon,  $2.95 paper.
NORMAN LEVINE, I Don't Want  To  Know  Anyone  Too  Well, Macmillan, $6.95.
Fourteen  Stories  High:  Best Canadian  Stories  of 1971, edited  by David  Helwig  and
Tom  Marshall. Oberon,  $2.95 paper.
Stories  From Western  Canada, edited  by Rudy  Wiebe, Macmillan.


IN APRIL's Maclean's, Donald Cameron says that   "hardly anyone  pub­ lishes Canadian  stories  these  days", though the   above   list -and   there  are other   books  not  included-would tend to  refute his  assertion. He  does go on  to say that  the short  story form  is the one in which   Canadian  fiction   first   achieved "international  quality". If he  means "reputation"   rather   than    "quality" - what  is "international quality" any  way?
-then  he  is  very  right.  The  Canadian short  story  did,  through writers  like Wil­ son, Callaghan, and  Gallant, achieve  for Canadian literature an international rep­ utation,  before  very  many  of  our  poets and    novelists   became   known    abroad. Quite   recently   in    Canada   wonderful things  have  been  happening to  the  short story  to  secure  even  a  stronger   position for  the  form   on  the  international scene. Not  only  are  the  stories  widely  read,  but also criticism  of them  is receiving  an  im­ portant position,  as  can  be  witnessed  by
 the  recent  issue of World  Literature W Tit­
ten in English  (Group I2, M.L.A., April, I 972)   which  is devoted  entirely  to short fiction  in Canada.
The least successful  of these  recent col­ lections  is Austin  Clarke's When  He Was Free and  Young   and  He  Used  to  Wear Silks,  the  ponderousness of the  title,  un­ happily,  being   reflected   in  some  of  the stories.  The plots  are  weak  and  tenuous; the  characters are  often one-dimensional, the  settings too  stereotyped. The  fluidity  of the genre permits a writer  to overcome obstacles  to completeness of characteriza­ tion  and  subtlety of  plot  that  arise  from  the   brevity   of  the   short   story;   Clarke, however, seems to meander more than construct so  that   his  stories  lack  depth. But occasionally, when  he increases  the complexity of the problems  facing  his characters,  they, too, become  multi­ layered,  and   special   moments  that   dis­ solve into  one   another   heighten  his  achievement. Clarke is a writer  to watch,

REVIEW ARTICLES



for   the   book   gives  signs  of  genuine, if only incipient, craftsmanship; he often writes   extremely  well,   revealing   a  fine sense  of  language  and   nuance,  but   his work  contains a fault  that  can  be seen in Margaret Atwood's early work, where the consciousness  of the  craft  outweighs the art; Atwood  has  not  overcome this  prob­ lem  because  of her  didactic stance, but  I hope  that   Clarke can  do  so  in  his  next book.
Hugh Gamer has a special facility at writing in the 'twenties tradition that  first brought  Canada  international   recogni­ tion   for   its  literary  pursuits.   There  is something very hard, almost brittle, about  Garner's approach to the underprivileged in  his Violation of the Virgins, tempered when  he  examines  those  who  have  been humiliated  because  of  their   unfortunate state.  Drawing on  a  past  that   hints  at  a long  and  varied  experience, Garner, sup­ ported   by  his  astringent style,  slips  back in  time   easily,  with   a  sense  of  shifting mood  which  makes  his collection of short stories  seem  very much  shorter than  it is. Garner  is  easy  to  read,   mainly   because enough   happens  to  advance  the   action but  never  so  much   as  to  induce tedium
-often  a  problem in  short  story  collec­
tions by his contemporaries.
Readers of Canadian short  fiction  will be delighted with  the  new work of Hugh Hood,  The Fruit  Man, The Meat  Man and  The  Manager. Awakening to  reali­ ties other  than one's  own  is Hood's focus, the core beneath the book's surface. Hood is too cool a hand   (or  so it seems  to me, who  have  never  met  him) , and  has  too much  special  knowledge about  people  to impart, to  become   the  controlling con­ sciousness in his work. Events  and charac­ ters  evolve   outside  his  range,   while   he preserves   a   rewarding  detachment.  His
 stylistic  experiments are  well  done,  par­ ticularly in "Who's Paying for This Call", the last story in the collection. Hood con­ tinues  to grow,  to  reflect  his  time,  in  his technique and   in  his  themes;  he  knows the space he is in.
But it is Norman Levine  who especially
seems  to  know  who  he  is  and  the  stage he  has  reached; he  has  caught the  mea­ sure  of  his time  with  great  subtlety. Be­ cause some of the stories in I  Don't  Want To Know Anyone  Too Well are  reprints of  One  Way Ticket,  published  in  196I, some  readers   may  feel  that   Levine   has stopped  growing  as  an  artist. It seems  to me  rather, that   the  combination of  new stories  and  old  produces a  blend  of atti­ tudes  to life  that   captures more  success­ fully  than  anything else  the  fragmented quality of  our  time,  and  its  yearning for a  not-too-distant past.  The camp  of  this decade,   to  which   Art   reverts,   has  been the  'thirties; Levine,  however,  goes back to  the  'forties,  and  tells stories  of his  ex­ periences during the war; the same people emerge  in his vision as are  present  in his earlier   books,  but   they  are  more  firmly drawn, more  carefully recreated.  Levine follows  Voltaire's dictum that  some people  of today  who  have  passed  the age of   forty   use  to   express   their   feelings: "Nostalgia isn't  what  it  used  to be." It is Levine's  use of  the  past  that  makes  him a fully contemporary voice.
The  range  of subject matter and  the variety of technical experimentation  pres­ ent  in  contemporary, and  often  younger,  writers   are   best  displayed   by   Fourteen Stories  High:  Best  Canadian  Stories   of
1971, edited  by David   Helwig  and  Tom Marshall. Alden  Nowlan  proves here  that he is as good  a short  story  writer  as he is a  poet,  something his  critics  have   been wondering about  for some  time.  Realism

ss

REVIEW ARTICLES



is  still   the   penchant  of  the   Canadian short   story  writer,   but  mixed  with  it  is some   interesting  fantasy,   and   humour, and  some  rearrangement and  new  use of Indian legend.  The editors  should  be commended, not  only for  their  choice  of some  very  good  stories,  but  also for  giv­ ing  the  public  a  very  keen  sense  of   the short  story in Canada in 197 1 ; altogether a most useful book.
Different in concept, but giving a most
admirable range,  is Stories From Western Canada,  selected   by  Rudy  Wiebe,  him­ self  a  masterly  short  story  writer.  Wiebe has selected  his stories from  a  wide  time span  and   has  grouped  them  under   the­  matic   headings:  "Such  People"   dealing  with  a variety  of human  beings; "Land", describing the  landscape and  its meaning to  those  who  work  on  it; "Dream and Live",  about those who work and  dream, and    wait;   "Strange   Love",    a   section which  captures the compelling mood  that  the   prairie  exerts   upon   its  inhabitants; and  "Families", a section  that  more  than  any  other  fulfils  Wiebe's  intention, "To provide  the   varieties   of   pleasure    that
 stories still give those  who care  to listen". One  story particularly is outstanding: Margaret Laurence's "Horses of the Night".
The reader who wants  to find out  what is happening to short  fiction  in Canada is fortunate to have  these two anthologies available.  Where  the   latter    presents   a broad  range  in time, not for historical coverage but  as an  ideal  way to show the story's growth in Western  Canada, the former    carefully  brings   us  up   to   date about what  happened last  year, a year of experimenting in form  and  reasserting elemental human values.  The  short  story in   Canada  best  portrays  the  Canadian urge  toward  a satisfying  creative life that can embrace the limitless sensibilities of average  people   who   trust   the   human spirit, who steer away particularly from revenge  as a guiding principle in life. As Alec  Lucas  has  recently  said:  "Antholo­ gies in  their  bright  new day ... now  play a   bigger   part  in   fostering   humanistic values and  imaginative living."  And  that, after   all,  is  what  Canadian literature­ all literature-is about.




THE WOMAN  OF BARRIE
 


A! Purdy


GEORGE   BOWERING,   Touch: Selected   Poems   rg6o-rg7o.  McClelland  &   Stewart,
$4-95·
BILL BISSETT, Nobody  Owns th Earth. Anansi, $2.50.
DOUG FETHERLING,  Our Man in Utopia. Macmillan, $6.50.
BILL HOWELL,  The  Red Fox. McClelland & Stewart, $4-95·


FouR BOOKs OF  POEMS. The only  connection I can  see between  them is a  remark   by George  Bowering  in  the Intro to his Selected  Poems about  reading poems  aloud.   "A  woman  in  Barrie  told me  that  she  didn't like my poetry  before

86
 
she  came   to  my  reading  and   then   she liked   it-that   was  because   she  hadn't really  read  it,  not  all  of  what  she  had." And  I wonder  how  many  more  "Women of Barrie" there  are,  who  need  to  hear  a writer  aloud  before  they think he is good?

REVIEW ARTICLES



Bill Bissett also  reads  before  audiences a great  deal; Bill Howell  does sometimes; I've  never  heard  Doug  Fetherling read  at all.  And  interjecting myself  into  the  dis­ cussion:   I read   at   universities   too,  and can   remember  the  "Woman of   Barrie"  saying  much  the  same  thing  to me. Well, I've  always felt  that  one of  these people's senses  was   badly   impaired,   because   I read  poems  on  the  page  and  hear  their sound  simultaneously  in  my  head.  How­ ever,  it's  apparent that   some  people  do not,  and  these  must  depend   on  the  per­ forming  poet   declaiming from   the  pat­ form.   But   despite   the   number of   poets doing   this,   most   people   will  only  read verse from  the  printed page.  Which  I've  always  thought was a good  thing.
Why?   Because   many   fine   poets   are lousy  readers   of  their   own  work.  But  a bad   poet   may   be   partly   redeemed  by having  an  excellent  voice,  with  a  drama­ tic personality adding things  to his poems that   are   not  really  there   at  all.  In  fact I've   seen   people   nearly   hypnotized  by some  of  the   worst  poetry  ever   written, simply  because  the reader was a cross be­ tween  Alec  Guiness and  Dylan  Thomas. I'm  inclined to think  most  people listened to   Thomas   principally  for   his   ocean­ tidal-melodious  voice,   only   secondarily for  his poems.
The  above   is  prelude  to  saying   that Bill   Bissett  is   probably  the  premier "performer-reader"  in   the   country.  A record   I have  of  his,  called   "Awake   in th  Red  Desert", is the  most caterwauling cacophonous   vowel-crazy    collection    of dissonance I've  ever  experienced. There­ fore,  look at  Bissett's  poems  on  the  page. Notice   the  almost  endless  repetitions of line and  phrase,  the more or less phonetic spelling, the childlike obviousness  of many
 things  he says. In short,  they  are  verbal spells and incantations.
Bissett  is  a   poet-prophet,  or  at   least
believes he  is. Legalized   marijuana,  uni­ versal  love, and  the  undeniable fact  that  "nobody  owns   th   earth"  are   three   of Bissett's  urgent   requirements for  Utopia or   Heaven   on   Earth.  And   the   very naivete  of his  language and  themes,  the earnestness  and  complete  personal  belief he  brings  to   poems -these  make   him oddly  touching and,  I  think,  worthwhile. Bissett's screaming crying  moaning cater­ wauling  on lecture platforms I dismiss - and  isn't  that   condescending of me?  Of course,   but   isn't    discrimination,  selec­ tivity,  catholicism   (what you  like)   inte­ gral  in  all of us, whether in the choice of beer or friends?
But  there  is a  core  of  integrity about poet-prophet-bissett one can't ignore. The reasons  why one  can't ignore  him  would be difficult to explain  to  (say)  a panel  of fifty middle-aged English  profs  never entirely  weaned  from  Chaucer, Eliot  and alcohol.  In  many   ways, and  in  my  own way, I agree with  the  things Bissett says in his  poems and  life.  Universal love is the best contraceptive I can think of. It's  also agreeable  to me  that  nobody  should  own the  earth,  or  even  65  per  cent  of  Cana­ dian  industry. But  Bissett  isn't  trying  to convince me,  just the world.
I  have   a   strong   feeling   that   Doug
Fetherling may  soon  be a very good  poet
-if  he  doesn't lose  the  neuroses  forced out  into  poems -instead  of lapsing  into agonized  moans.  That seems melodrama­ tic,  but  is the  reverse  side  of  many  calm and  urbane  love  poems.  The book's  dust jacket shows "Our Man" about  to preach  a  sermon   at   the   church   in   Utopia (I presume   there    is   a   Utopia,  Ont.,  and Fetherling   couldn't   resist   the   opportu-

REVIEW ARTICLES



nity) ,  peering  coyly  insecure   from   the church door.
But  Fetherling is not my man  nor, ap­ parently, that  girl's  to whom he addresses a  suitable suite  of  poems. These  involve descriptions of  physical  feelings  and  the hard   circumstances  of   being  in  love - hotel  rooms,  beds,  the female  body, and being left  in the lurch in Utopia. But the actual  doomed-glorified  feeling  of  being in  love  and   hence  immortally miserable  doesn't come  across, except  once:

Your absence  has not  taught  me how to be alone, it merely has shown that  when  together  we cast a single shadow on this wall.
The  wall I suppose is as a wall
should  be : plain and  bare and final as a cliff. And when I
stretch, my hands  find it instead of you and  I invent  truths  men thought of years ago without telling  me.

Much of  Fetherling's work  is written   in a deliberate analytical-cum-vivisectionist method and  tone  of voice.  (Incidentally, a  complete change of style from  his first book.)  And perhaps this method  increases the  cold  heat  when  such a genuine  poem as "Your Absence" is discovered.  And others  are  almost  as good.   But  many  of his poems  repel  me as device, rather than whatever a poem actually  is. For instance, one  mentioning "the effect   (after the poet's suicide)   his brains are to have upon the   wallpaper design."   (Who cares,  ex­ cept   him?)  Others are  blank  cartridges of the imagination.
However  these  adverse  comments should    prevent  no   one   from    reading Utopia. Poets  may  arrive  like  a  world's possible  ending: "not with  a  bang  but  a whimper". Fetherling's whimper holds  a certain grandeur.
Bill  Howell   is  25,  with  many   of  the

88
 faults  and  virtues  some poets  have  at that age. For  instance, I'm  sure Howell  would defend "I  can't  wait   to  get  home   for Christmas  and    be   hugged    by   Mom," which   sentiments  cause   me   to  wriggle with extreme nausea.  But then,  "After Reading Camus" ends:

For  the record  I'll  tell you how
I'm  going to end:
I'm  ninety-seven
in my Ferrari on an Alpine roadway  (or
equivalents)
when I miss a hairpin
turn  with my sixth or seventh wife (or equivalents)
when a ball of living fire
crowns my charisma.

At  which   point   I  chuckle, thinking he has   a   "good   idea"  for   a   poem   there. Howell  has a lot of good  ideas,  and sometimes   he  makes  use of  them. Some­ times.
Ten years ago, when Bowering, Frank Davey,  Frederic Wah  and  others  were schoolboys   of  the   Vancouver  Group­ these   being  embryonic  Black   Mountain adults-I noticed   phrases  and  passages in  Bowering   which   I  thought  indicated a developing poet  in  his early  stages.  It's  a pleasure to see that development carried much   farther in  his  selected  poems, and become   solid  achievement. But  I retain  the   same   reservations  I've   always   had (somewhat  differing from  his own  reser­ vations about me)  re Bowering's methods and  loyalties  to  the  in-group whose  far­ out   gods  are   still  Olson,   Williams   and Greeley.  However, it's  rather picayune to mention such ideologies in the face of Bowering's undeniable merit.  I  don't really  give  a  damn how  he  manages to write  his  poems,  although I'm  sure  he'll tell  me  if  I don't ask.  The best  way  to illustrate this  merit  is to quote  a poem in full.

REVIEW ARTICLES



POEM  WRITTEN FOR  GEORGE
Poetry  with politics in it
is small men answering back to volcanoes.

Volcanoes  are upside  down grails knights  look for
walking on their  hands.

I never met a poet yet who was a knight.
Knights  are ignorant men with strong arms. I never met a soldier yet
who was a poet.
Poets don't  look for grails. They  want  to drink  from
the cups at hand.

Sometimes  they climb mountains to look down  the middle
where mangled  kings lie in a heap.

But  come   to  think of  it,  I've   met  one Black  Mountain climber  who was a poet. For  my money,  Bowering has not written a   better   poem   than   that-straightfor­ ward,  clear,  no waste  wordage, and  with implications for  undeparted captains and kings. The  poem  also says:  how  wonder­ ful  to  write  poems!  Or  does  it say:  how wonderful to be  a  poet?  I hope  the first. Bowering's methods  are  fairly  easy  to
analyze-unless   you're the   Woman   of
Barrie.   He  uses  good  grammatical  Eng­ lish, rarely  any  slang  or  throwaway lines. In  fact  this  correct  English  seems to me too   correct   at   times,  not   quite   real  or natural  as  Bowering  believes speech should  be; and  he gives his poems a dead­ pan  seriousness,  broken  only occasionally,  as  in  a  poem  called   "Cold Spell"   (not included  here) .  And   given   that   word­ picture, one   might  think  of  him  as  an Eliotish   sort  of  bloke,  feeding  cats  and watering roses in his old age.
Despite writing poems like "Baseball", Bowering's colloquialisms   occasionally seem  contrived to  me.  "Lugging" means
 carrying,  and  "rooting" mea.ns cheering, which is about as close as he comes. If anything he  tends  to  understatement, as m:

THE SILENCE
The  silence
that  some days
brings itself between us

fools my heart,
it thinks there is
a loud constant  noise.

But   method apart, I  call   that   a  little masterpiece.
Well, having  praised  Bowering so high­
ly   (and   I  have), another side  of  him should be mentioned: triviality (again occasionally). I think  it's  trivial  to  write an eleven-page poem about  baseball  (and life too, of course)  : unless the  poem  isn't trivial.  Bowering can  immediately retort that  I myself wrote  a poem  about  hockey


new fiction
NOMAN
by Gwendolyn MacEwen
5.95/2.95
THE  LAND OF  IS
by John  Mills
6.95/3.50

YOU  CANT  GET THERE FROM  HERE
by Hugh  Hood
7.95j3.95

72:  NEW CANADIAN STORIES
5.95/2.95
oberon


8g

REVIEW ARTICLES



players,  and  he  may  very  possibly  judge that  to be trivial.  Obviously,  a good poem can  be written  about anything, including the  politics  he says is "small  men answer­ ing back to volcanoes."
But  a good  poem  about  baseball  seems
to me  very difficult  to write,  perhaps be­ cause   of   the   superficial   nature  of   the game. Superficial because such games are the  froth  and  entertainment of  daily life, and   because   one   game   is   really   inter­  changeable for   another.  And   there   are dozens of others, including chess and  par­  cheesi.  The  integral  things   of  life  are, life,  death  and   sex  (which   last  includes  love  among  its  other   implications), and possibly taxes. Therefore, even a good baseball  poem is bound  to be trivial  froth
-unless its umbilical cord connects  with
something much  more  important. (To digress:    Bernard  Malamud  wrote   the only  good  novel  I know  of  about  base­ ball:    "The  Natural" -which is  never­ theless a badly flawed  novel.)
Bowering   has  three  other   long  poems
in  his Selected: "Windigo", which  is de­ scriptive  with  symbolism   engrafted: "Hamatsa", about  Kwakiutl Indian "can­ nibal"  societies, with  its repeated delight­ ful   use  of  "the  poet   among   us";   and "Touch",  philosophic,  trying   to  enclose all  Bowering   thinks   and   feels  about  - about  everything, I  suppose.  All of these,
 while  entertaining m  part,  are  never wholly successful. Other long poems Bowering has omitted; and  I think  that's just  as  well.  I make  the  dangerous  judg­ ment   here   that   he  is  most  effective   in comparatively short  pieces,  which  by his "natural" method and  prosody  he might  think  alien  to him.
Employing throwaway lines and phrases for  their  "natural" effect  as a break,  as a voice-chuckle in  a  written tone  of voice, supplies   the   human  verbal   quality  cold print   ordinarily  prohibits. Speech   is  ex­ tempore,  a  quality  that   poetry  seldom possesses-but should   try  to  possess, at least sometimes. Bowering's continual lack of  such   ingredients   sometimes   give  his poems a rhetoric and solemnity  I am sure he   would    deny   having,  even   a  faintly  Biblical  sound  for  me.  This  being  an  in­ gredient of  his "method," which  he might  also deny  having. But  to make  an end: I think   Bowering  is  an  "important" poet who  should   be  read -even  listened   to as he  demands. (Even  the  disagreements I  have  with  him  do  not  seem  dead  end for  me,   but   reasons   to  re-examine  my own  reasons  for  writing as I do.)   He  has written some  half-dozen quite  marvellous poems in  this  book-which seems to me
a very high  lifetime batting average. And I join  with  the  Woman of Barrie  in  my own kind of homage.



POET AND PERSON
 


William H. New


GEORGE BOWERING, Al  Purdy. Copp Clark,  $2.15. ERNEST REDEKOP, Margaret Auison. Copp  Clark, $1!.15.

Two OF  THE  LATEST in Copp Clark's biocritical Studies in  Canadian Literature maintain that  series' high stan-

go
 dard   and   personal approach.  The  "per­ sonality" of  each   book,  in  fact,  is  what  makes  George Bowering's Al  Purdy  and

REVIEW ARTICLES



Ernest   Redekop's Margaret  Avison such distinctive pieces of criticism. Each  writer
-compelled perhaps by his own obvious enthusiasm  for   his  subject-has  found himself  caught  up  in  the  tonal   milieux and   technical  responses  of  the   poet   he writes about. Thus Redekop is formal  and intellectually allusive,  while  Bowering  is laconic   and   gregariously engaging. To read  the  two  books  together is to  take  a lesson  in  the  breadth of critical method. But  it is also to be directed towards  some of the  central concerns of modern Cana­ dian  poetry.
When   I say  "formal" I do  not  mean Redekop is aloof; his criticism  not only expresses the  individual engagement with images  and  ideas  that  Avison's  poetry en­ courages,  but   also  exactly   parallels  the relationship  that   Avison   herself   probes with  the  world  she  perceives.  The "optic heart"  venturing into   the  world  in  her poetry  epitomizes her  own  rigorous intel­  lectual   battle to  understand  the  nature of reality,  and  the manner of apprehend­ ing it, and  the difficulty of knowing  whe­ ther  one  has  found   reality  or  merely  an­ other    layer   of   appearance.  The   optic
heart   venturing  into   the   world   of  her
poetry,   comparably,  must   grapple  with these  same  ideas  in  order to  experience with  the  author the  real  emotional  satis­ faction she finds  in  the  mind's insight,  in the   sudden  illuminating   cross   between rational  reflection   and   precise   observa­ tion.
As Redekop observes, perceiving  and perceiver  blend  together in Avison's cryp­ tic style, but  then  he goes on with  admir­ able  lucidity  to  decipher  puzzles,  expli­ cate dense passages, link images  to images and  poems  to  poems  in  order   to suggest a  thematic unity   (by  no means  the  only one possible in such complex poetry) and
 a course of intellectual progress. From examining the  poems about  the  nature of perception, he moves to consider the interaction between  perceiver/vision and metaphysical obscurity. The  next   stage returns to the  physical  world  only to pose its metaphoric identity with an interior landscape:

At every point, landscape, like an  optical illusion,    flips   from   outside  to   inside  and back;   perspectives  shift    rapidly,  and    the mind   of  the  reader is stretched and   turned inside  out.

As her  reality  becomes  increasingly spiri­ tual,  the word  and  the  Word  conjoin; in an  explicitly  Christian  discovery  she  lo­ cates  a  Person  in  whom  creative power and  manifest identity are one, and  know­ ing, now, she can  affirm  a language that  does not  lock itself in historical, concrete event,  but rather flowers  into  transfigur­ ing truth.
Her   provocative  juxtaposition  of   im­ ages and  her  deliberately spare  but  allu­  sive and  assonantal style help  to substan­ tiate  the  judgment that  George Bowering  in  the  midst  of  his study  of   Purdy   pro­ nounces on her work:

Purdy's rhymes  ... were  beginning to  reflect that   [postwar] change-they were  not  now so  forced   nor   so  attentive  to   the   hapless notion  of  'full' rhyme, though they  were  not so  liberated as  those  of Dudek and  Souster, or  the  person who  was  emerging as our  best chance to  attain  excellence on  the  interna­ tional scene,  Margaret Avison.

The   implications  of  such  an  assessment are significant, for if Redekop never really directly  says what  is good  about  Avison's work,  nor  does  Bowering   about  Purdy. Bowering says a lot  about  what  is bad­ largely   the   early,   imitative,   unrelaxed work-but what  ultimately appears most attractive is the  personality of  Purdy him­ self. Redekop offered  an  intense explica-

91

REVffiW ARTICLES



tion of method  and  meaning,  attempting a  "kind of  lighting   up  of  the  terrain  / That  leaves   aside    the   whole    terrain really",   but  "signalizes  and  compels,  an advance in it." Bowering offers the Purdy Story-the working  poet's  journey  from obscure  romanticizing to nationally recog­ nized   ironic   iconoclasm,    from    private winery  to public  anthology,  from  Roblin Lake   to  the  extremities of  Canada.  In­ deed, while Avison's concern for "civility" at  large  scarcely  takes her  geographically further  than  the  Toronto lakefront, Pur­  dy  has  consciously   attempted  to  define the  boundaries of  Canadianism, locating  identity  not  in  the  Person  of  the  Word but    (by   no  means   ungodlessly)   in  the personal  lives of ordinary countrymen - cowboys,   CNR  porters,   Eskimo   fisher­ men,  union   bargainers-whose  charac­ teristic   stances    and    uncompromisingly colloquial voices he has increasingly  tried to echo.
Yet  both  poets  accept  their  immediate
world    as   Heraclitean.  Thus   Bowering observes Purdy  suggesting

that old-fashioned accumulative western cos­ mology  should at least  be  replaced  by  first­ hand "transcendental" observations:
"For multiple identity confuses anyway, there must  be a single  total,
allwater-torrents of god-stuff."
"God-stuff" is a  word  made  from   the  natu­ ral  attempt to suggest   the  nameless holiness  of  the  basic   fluid,  without trying  hopelessly  to   tie   something  so  manifestly   changeable to  a  mind-chosen figure  from  traditions of history or  myth.... But  then  in  parentheses Purdy comments on  the  "absurd  delight" in such   intellectual  speculation,  deriding him­  self  as  always,   but   also  warning the  reader about  the   mind's   playing a  "shell   game". Never  let  the  self  become  pretentious, even in  discovery....
Purdy ... realizes   that   no  matter how  hard the  mind  strives  for  permanence, everything is moving and  changing, and  "the form  is HERE".
 Purdy's  "HERE", like Avison's "NOW", proves  a takeoff  point fortran­ scendental celebration. The temporal proving more  abstract, less  immediately accessible,    than    the   geomorphological, Avison  at first appears the  less "realistic" of the  two.  Place,  at least, seems familiar. Rooted  in  language,  however-and in Purdy's case in  the  tension  between  con­ temporary speech  and  conscious  Classical Learning-both	poets    are   bound    by their  poetry  as much  as freed  by it, con­ strained   by  their   role  as  mouthpiece of the  moving spirit-medium, eye-into identifying  with   their   landscape. More­  over,  because  that  landscape is speech  as much   as  position,   their   identity  lies  in sound  as much  as in sight. Avison's meta­ physically  serious  punning of word/Word announces  her   open   acceptance  of  the fact,   her   acknowledgment  of   language as  object and  subject, method   and  mat­ ter,   in   her   response   to  living.   Purdy's  commitment  to   the   abstract   power   of poetry,  equally  strong, is often masked  by his ironic  self-deprecation, his satiric  put­  downs,   his  direct   social  attacks and  de­  fences,    which    possess   the   subtlety    of stumps  and   sometimes  simply   the   easy flippancy  of   crackerbarrel  wisdom.   In aural  intricacy,  however,   he  reveals  an­  other   voice  in  his  work,  a  concern   for voice  itself,  for  the  quality and  power  of utterance and   for   the  individual   mani­ festations of life that perceptive utterance affirms.  Insistently, there  is a  centre.  M­ firmation and  celebration -those tradi­ tional  poetic  tasks-thus lie at  the  core of  their   literary /spiritual/intellectual/vi­ tal   experience.   To   probe   towards   that  centre  without   insensitively   excoriating the  fragments of  the  whole  is the  critical task  that their  poetry  has  demanded, in­  vited, and won.

REVIEW ARTICLES


EXPATRIATE VARIATIONS

Russell M. Brown


LEO SIMPSON,  Arkwright. Macmillan. $9.95.
ALEXANDER KNOx, Night  of the White Bear. Macmillan. $6.gs.
KELLY COVIN, Many  Broken Hammers.  Fitzhenry  & Whiteside. $8.75.


ON  THE  sURFACE these  three books  are  as  diverse  in  setting and  sub­ ject matter as conceivably possible, but at heart   each   deals   with   the   same  topic:  social  change and  its  effect  on  the  indi­  vidual. Significant to their choice of topic, the  authors  share   one  common  experi­  ence,  that  of  expatriation. Simpson  is an Irishman  who  came  to  Canada in  1962;  Knox  grew  up  in  northern Canada but now   spends   most   of   his   time   abroad working  as a film  actor; Covin  has lived here  fifteen  years  but  spent  the  first part of his life in  the  Southwestern and  West­ ern   U.S.   Potentially  this  provides  them with  an  outsider's objectivity about their theme,  the  ability  to consider and  evalu­  ate  which  is  never  really  available to the individual  who  remains in  the  midst  of things. Two of these  books do attain this kind  of  distance from  their  material and are  powerful   novels in consequence. The third,  Many   Broken   Hammers,    never finds  the   perspective it  needs  and   as  a result   remains  as  lifeless  as  last  week's news-or,  worse  yet,  as  unintentionally amusing as the TV  rerun  of a World War II  movie   full   of   undigested  platitudes about  freedom,  democracy, and  the American way.
In fact,  Covin's  problems in  dealing
with  his  material stem  in  part from  his failure to distinguish literature which  has a moral  purpose from  propaganda. Set in an  "imaginary" Southwestern state   (and
 the  coyness with  which  Covin  refuses  to give   specific   geographical   location    to what  is clearly  meant to be Texas  is typi­ cal of the  way  he handles all of  his sub­ ject  matter, undercutting  thereby much  of  the   potential  impact  of   such  highly topical   material),  the  novel  deals  with a  confrontation  between government forces   and   a   group    of   radical-activist "Spanish-Americans"  (Covin   seems  not to know that  "Chicanos" is the more con­ temporary term).  Its  approach  calls  to mind  the weaknesses of recent Hollywood attempts  to  exploit   youthful  interest   in dissent-suggesting    perhaps   that    the author has not entirely  moved  beyond his sometime  occupation as film  writer.  The  characters, studies  in  blacks,  whites,  and  carefully   modulated  greys,  are  made   to move through a series of  events contrived to produce a feeling  of  inevitability about the  tragedy   to  come.  The novel  all  but provides  its own  parody when  its central character stops to reflect:

Everybody's   gone  mad,  choosing  up  sides, like  players   on   a   baseball   field,  or  white and  black hats  in  a  Western  movie. Stereo­ types, heroes  and  villains  and  comic relief, and  on  the  sidelines,  grumbling and  carp­  ing philosophers ...

Many  Broken  Hammers   has  all  of  this, not  the  least  of  which   are  its  "philoso­ phers", an occupation pursued by each of the  characters in  his  turn, as  well  as  by an excessively intrusive author:

93

REVIEW ARTICLES



Even  a casual study of history  and  literature establishes categorically  that   human  beings are   all   subject  to  an  enduring and  omni­ present affinity,  an   unbreakable  chain  that  links  men,  one  to  the  other, an indestructible umbilical cord   that connects  action to  reac­  tion,   cause   to   effect.  Yet   in   spite   of   the pervasive and   unprecedented   diffusion  of such   literature,  there are  men  who  live  all the  days  of  their  lives  without the  slightest knowledge of  this  causality.

There  is  an   adolescent   quality   to  this writing, as to most in the book.
When  the  novel finally reaches  its con­
clusion,  with  scores of bodies littering the landscape in  a  scene  which  tries  unsuc­ cessfully  to  evoke  a  sense of  outrage like that    one   feels   about  Kent   State,   few readers  will retain  the endurance to con­ tinue  to care about what  was, after  all, an interesting  enough   plot-line.   And  when the  novel's  hero  walks  among  the  bodies of the fallen, providing appropriately sen­ timental eulogies  for each,  we are indeed not far from  the  sensibilities  that  created  or applauded those World War II movies. The  only difference-that in one case it is propaganda in service of the establish­ ment,  in  the  other, in opposition  to it­ is not ultimately important.
Simpson  is at least as concerned with man's   contemporary condition; he  is no less  a   moralist  and   no  less  willing   to utilize  the  didactic possibilities  of  litera­ ture.    But   though  Arkwright at   times comes   perilously   close  to  being  toppled  by its heavy load of anti-pollution preach­ ments,  Simpson  -like the  aesthetic jug­ gler that  he is-has the knack of putting yet  another ball  into  the  air  at  just  the right  moment, distracting the  reader  and allowing  both   reader  and   novelist   to maintain the pretense  that all this is, after all, only  entertainment.
Arkwright reflects  the Canadian  novel­
ist's fondness  for  the  use of myth  to  pro-


94
 vide  structural coherence, though the relevance of the  Noah  myth  suggested  by the title  is not at first apparent. The book ostensibly  focuses  not  on  the  destruction of a civilization that  allows another to be born,  but  rather on the  need  for an analogous death and  rebirth in one  man, a drunken, brawling, wenching, social misfit  who  is  in  fact   reborn   as  early  as page  r o of the  novel,  in a passage  which accurately reflects Simpson's tight  control of a sometimes broadly  comic  style:

My  last  careless deed   completed, therefore. The  brash    Corsair  fittingly  becomes the scene of  change, and sees  the  sudden death of  that  averaged adolescent Addison   Ark­ wright.  The  man    who   now   rises,   gravely dignified,  to  visit   the   washroom, is  no  un­  disciplined  romper.  He   stumbles,  true enough, but  he can't, can  he,  be  blamed for the  intemperate drinking  of  somebody else, a  distasteful stranger  recently deceased.

This rebirth is followed  by an  almost im­ mediate relapse-and the  thematic pat­  tern   of   the   novel   is  established,   man  struggling to free himself from  the weight  of the  old  Adam  and  finding himself  un­ equal  to the task.
Against  its hero's  search  for rebirth the book juxtaposes a vision of a fallen society based   on   a   distorted  system  of  values. Simpson   elaborates his  mythic world  by moving freely  into  the  realm  of  fantasy in order  to create modern parables about the  capitalistic technocracy gone  awry: a TV station which  achieves  record  ratings while  attempting to alienate all segments of its  audience; a  computer leasing  firm whose   thinking  machines  contain  real people,  the  employees  they  are  intended to replace; a company whose only product is  not   only   pollution,  but   pollution at great   profit.  Simpson handles this  para­ bolic   method   well,   creating at   times nightmare  visions  of  the  modern  dehu-

REVIEW ARTICLES



manization of man  that  can  be compared only  to the  factory scenes in Fritz  Lang's Metropolis.    The   recognition  that    this kind   of  fantasy  and   mythicizing  is  the surest   and   most   telling   way  of  dealing with  a  disturbing reality  is contained  in one of Addison's own musings:

The silence of  gods  always   poses  plain   and fancy   riddles,  and   the   literature  of   inter­ pretation is,  I feel,  most   interesting  where  unaccommodating  facts,  which   inhibit  theory, are  kept  to a minimum.

Addison  moves  through this  unreal world  in  his search  for  lost innocence as observer,  chronicler, and  occasional  par­ ticipant.  The  novel's   focus   shifts   fre­ quently, from  Addison's relationship with his uncle,  the arch-capitalist Casper  Ark­ wright,  through  his  discovery   of  a  reli­ gion  based  on  an  ethic  of  failure, Elm­ treeism, to the story of his friend  Master McGrath, a quasi-saint of a man  whose mission  in  life  is to  teach   people  how  to block out  the  unpleasantness of TV commercials. Sometimes the  book seems threatened by the  very  quantity of mate rial  with  which  it  deals,  by its deliberate lack  of a single  focus,  and  by the  way it takes all the problems  of contemporary society as its theme, but Simpson manages to  hold  his  several  strands together, and to provide enough rewards for the reader in the form  of narrative (in  what  is never truly   a  narrative  novel),  wit,  and   fine writing to keep  one  threading his way through the  labyrinthine complexity of Addison's world  vision.
At  times  one  may   become   frustrated
with   Addison  as  hero,   for   initially   he seems to belong  to that  multitude of  anti­ heroes we have  seen so often  of  late, men who  can  do  nothing but   turn  potential success into  failure in  careers of  destruc­ tion, inflicting pain on  those around them.
 Simpson, however, modifies this pattern significantly, first by allowing Addison some final measure of the  redemption he so unendingly strives  for,  and,  secondly, by suggesting  that  success and  failure  are shifty terms in a world where the most successful businessman may  also be doing most harm  to the environment. Ultimate­ ly,  Addison's   gaining  of   innocence  in­  volves  an   important   realization  on   his part: that  the  mythic pattern of fall and regeneration he has been involved  in act­  ing  out  is  not  the  only  way  of ordering reality.  This  insight  grows  out  of Master McGrath's encounter with  "K. E. Charl­ ton,  the  poet", an  incident which  makes McGrath  realize  that   to  attempt to  ex­ clude  television  commercials  is misguided because  based  on an  unworkable ethic  of self -denial.:



new poetry
FOUR  PARTS SAND
by Earle  Birney, bill bissett, Judith
Copithorne and  Andrew Suknaski
5.95
CANNIBALS
by Stanley  Cooperman
5.95/2.95

THE  BEST  NAME  OF SILENCE
by David  Helwig
5.95/2.95
SELECTED POEMS
by Raymond Souster
5.95/2.95
oberon



95

REVIEW ARTICLES



He  is  a  soul  that   has  broken  free  of  the meat.   Nothing else  is  given  room  in  him. He  saw  the  Squeasy   commercial  while  we waited  for  the  news.  We were  at  the  time anxious   to   hear   news  of  the   war.   Well, there  it  was, Addison,  the Squeasy  message and   K.   E.   Charlton's  face   undisturbed. The  sensitive  cheekbones  thin  and  sharp  as paper.  No  disturbance there,  watching   the Squeasy  pitchman and  waiting for the news. A  perfect   shield,  would  you  guess, by  the poet?   In   fact,   no.  No,  he  was  letting   it through.  Not   a   shield,   an   acceptance  of preposterousness. An acceptance of its right to  invade  his  mind ... I came  to  the  con­ clusion  that  the  yellow floor  debate  should continue  to  upset   the  poets.   It's   a  poet's duty,  as I decided  afterward, to put  a  new­ minted  shine on all our  worn-out currencies.

Thus Addison's final epiphany-one which  allows him to regain his lost daugh­ ter  and   escape  from   the  urban  insanity which   threatens him -is  his  realization  that   the  duality on  which  he  has  based his  actions  has   no   basis.  He   no  more needs  to  kill  off  the  old  Addison   than  Charlton needed  to  tum  off  the  Squeasy ad; instead   he  must  harness   the   undi­  rected  energies  which  he had  incorrectly assumed   were  undesirable, thereby  find­ ing  salvation  in  the  fallen  state  itself. As a chronicler of his society Addison's  theme  has  always  been  "the  destructiveness of energy without sanity". When  he realizes that  energy  and  sanity  need  not  be  op­ posed, he achieves a union of the two, attaining the possibility of peace for him­ self  and   becoming  a  pattern for  all  men and  for society.  In  this conclusion  he be­ comes  an  arkwright  indeed, fashioning a metaphorical raft   that   offers  man   the opportunity  to  ride  out   his  self-created  deluge.   Simpson  has   written  a  fine, thoughtful novel  here,  one  which  makes him a writer to watch.
Night  of the  White Bear offers an  in­
formative contrast with  Arkwright. Simp­
son's novel is very contemporary in its use

g6
 of a  highly  subjective !-narrator  unfold­ ing a ratl1er  disordered tale, in its ingeni­ ous  playing   with   myth,   and  in  its  self­ conscious  parodying of the novel as form.  Knox's book is of an old-fashioned cut  by comparison.  It   employs   an   omniscient author   telling   a   straight-forward   tale without a hint  of irony. Its mythic quality (for   this   it   shares  with   Arkwright)  is present   not  at  the  level  of explicit  state­ ment,   but   is  inherent  in   the   action   it describes-as  mythic themes  are  inevit­ ably invoked by simple actions and large scope. And the novel takes its literal, informational level very seriously, provid­ ing  the   reader with   a  short  glossary  of Eskimo  terms  at the onset, trying  in every incident  it  describes   to  give  the  reader  some feeling of what  it means  to be lnuk, one of the  people.
But  the   book  does  more   than   simply attempt to  recreate an  exotic  way of life for  a curious reader. It focuses on Uglik, an  Eskimo youth  who  has  lost  not  only his parents but,  by going  to live with  the soldiers   of  The Station, his  entire  heri­ tage.  The novel  follows him  on his quest to  fill   that   void   in   a  pilgrimage  away from    modern  civilization and   toward what  he  pictures as  a  true  horne  among the  people  of the North. Uglik finds him­  self a man caught between  two  cultures; however, a member of  neither. The chaos and   the  fear   that  await a  man   without the protection of a social unit are personi­  fied  by the  bear  that  stalks  him  through the  novel,  a  grim  reminder of  the  bear tllat  took his father from  him. Knox  care­  fully  guides  tile  development of  his  nar­  rative   so  tllat  witllout our  being  aware, its  archetype  has   changed from the Ulysses myth,  man  in quest of his spiritual horne, to the  Inferno myth, man  descend­ ing  into the  depths of  the  unknown  so

REVffiW ARTICLES



that   he  may   meet   whatever lies  at  the deepest   riches   of   the   pit.   Thus   Uglik moves  despite  himself  in  ever  narrowing circles  around the  bear,  finally  confront­ ing him in the depths of the white  waste­ land.   The  confrontation  frees   him  and allows him to complete his journey  north­ ward, even as it is Dante's encounter with Satan at  the  bottom  of  the Inferno that  lets him  escape  upward again. Appropri­ ately  enough when  Uglik  reaches  Tinta­ gel,  his  goal  throughout his  journey,  he discovers  not  the  paradise he  envisioned
-instead he finds there  a purgatory that serves  only  to  prepare him  for  the  con­ tinuance of  his  quest.   For   he  discovers
 that  he  can  be a  member neither of the old culture nor of the new. Like Addison, his final  insight  is one  which  allows  him to cease seeing the world  as a duality; he can  accept  the  best of  both  alternatives, he can  affirm  what  is good  in either cul­ ture  while  celebrating his  freedom  from both.
Night of the White Bear and  Arkwright
both   stand   as  solid   novelistic   achieve­ ments.  Each  comments in its own way on man's  need  to escape  the sterility  of con­ temporary  society,  each  suggesting   that  the alternatives are not as easily identified as one might  believe.



THE MODERNISTS

AND THEIR PRECURSORS

George Woodcock


WILLIAM c. WEES, Vorticism and the English Avant-Garde. Toronto, $15.00.
HUGH KENNER, The  Pound Era. University  of California Press, $14.95· LEON EDEL, Henry  James:  rgor-rgr6. McClelland  & Stewart, $14.95. ELLIOTT B.  GOSE, JR.,  Imagination indulged. MeGill-Queen's, $8.50.


THE  MODERN   MOVEMENT,   in its  historical sense,  has  ceased  to be con­ temporary.  Already,    before   he  died   in rg68,  one  of its  leading spokesmen,  Her­  bert  Read, was declaring that  movements in  the  visual arts  during the  rg6o's  were counter-evolutionary if one  accepted the movement that   began  with  Cezanne and ended  with  Abstract Impressionism as revolutionary. Thirty  years  earlier   Read had  already voiced his view that in poetry the   Modern  Movement,  as   it   derived from   the  Symbolists   and   culminated in Eliot  and  Pound, was drawing to an end;
 this,   I  believe,  was  a  premature   judg­ ment,  traceable to Read's own  failure to develop  as a  poet  very much  beyond  his Imagist  origins.  But  I would  support any argument  made   today   that,   whatever current may now be running in literature, it  is something  different from   the  great  spring  tide  which during the  first decade of the nineteenth century took all the arts  in its flow from  country to country across the  western  world,  and   produced, when one  views the  vast sweep  from  Proust  to Pound, from  Joyce  to Kafka, from  Eliot to Neruda, from  Gide  to Lawrence, from

97

REVIEW ARTICLES



Valery   to  Auden,  from  Faulkner to  Ca­ mus,  from   Hemingway  to  Silone,  from Pirandello to Brecht,  perhaps  the greatest  quantity and  certainly the  greatest   vari­ ety of major literature written  in any half century since man began  to translate into  marks  on  paper  the creations of his ima­  gination.
The sense that  the  Modern  Movement has  passed  into  history  is one reason  why so many  critical and  historical  works  are now  being  devoted  to aspects  of the movement and  to its leading  figures. One to  whom  much  attention has  been  given in  the  past  three  or  four  years is  Wynd­ ham  Lewis, long-neglected  contemporary and   associate  of   better-known  men  like Pound   and  Eliot  and -- one  now  begins to   perceive-a    key   figure   for   under­ standing his  times.  Lewis's  writings  have been   subjected  to  a  number  of   recent studies, some  printed in Canadian  Liter­ ature, and   recently  Walter  Michel  pub­  lished  the  first  thorough  examination of his   paintings  and   drawings.    Now,   in Vorticism and  the  English  Avant-Garde, William   C.  Wees,  an  American  scholar  migrated to  Canada, tells  the  brief  but dramatic  history  of  the  movement  with which   Lewis's   name   is  peculiarly  asso­ ciated.
Not, of course,  that  Lewis was the only
Vorticist. As  Wees  shows,  Pound   had  a good   hand   in   formulating  the   guiding principles of the movement, and that god­ father  of   the   pre-war    English   avant­ garde, Ford   Madox Ford,  was  more  in­ volved   than    his   own   kind   of   writing might  lead  one  to  expect.  Vorticism  in fact  was  the  extreme  expression  of Eng­  lish  efforts  during  the years immediately before  the  first  World  War  to  assimilate  the  revolutionary influence  of Modernist ideas and   artifacts emanating from   the

g8
 continent  of  Europe. It was  a  reaction against  the shallow  machinism of the Futurists, and   it  had   the  distinction  of being  the   only  clearly   defined   and  self­ conscious  movement in  modern  art  that  actually emanated from  Britain.
Vorticism and the English Avant-Garde is  by  no  means  all  about the  actions  of Lewis   and   his  associates,   which   culmi­ nated  in  the  publication of the first issue of   Blast   in   the   summer  of  I 9  4   and  petered out-at least as far as Vorticism itself   was   concerned -a   month  or   so afterwards when  a shot  in  Sarajevo trig­  gered  off an explosion  far louder  than  the artistic  bombshell    which   the   rebels   in London  had   thought  to  detonate. The aim  of Dr.  Wees is really to set Vorticism in  its period  context, and  to display  it as the  purest   and  most  extreme manifesta­ tion  of  a  condition  of  social  unease  and  intellectual rebellion which  gave the years from   I9IO  to   I9I4   their   especially   fre­ netic  character,  so  that   when  one  looks back  over  them   it  is difficult  to  believe they  could  have  ended  in  any  other  way than  a conflict  of  unprecedented dimen­ sions. War  or Revolution-there seemed no  other  alternatives for  the  future, and in  the  perspective of  history-refracted by  hindsight-it often   appears a  mere accident that  War  was, by less than  three years, the first to arrive.
Dr.  Wees sketches  out  with  vivid  brev­
ity  the  parts   played   by  suffragettes and syndicalists  in   these   crucial   years,   the effect of the pre-war Post-Impressionist Exhibitions on  English   tastes  and  sensi­ bilities,  and   the  way  in  which  Futurism seized   the   imagination  of  the  decadent post-Edwardian social  world  and  became  a  vulgarized  fashion   in  very  much   the same   way  as  Pop  Art  became   a  vulga­  rized fashion in our own  day.  Indeed, the

REVIEW ARTICLES



parallels between  those  years and  the last years  of  the  Sixties  are  often  extraordi­ nary,  and   one  sometimes  feels  that   it  is not   only   historical   distance  but   also  a feeling    that    we   ourselves    have    gone through   very  similar   experiences  which makes   these  vital   years  of  the  Modern Movement  so  interesting and-it  seems
-so comprehensible to  us today.  V orti­
cism and the English Avant-Garde  is one of  the  best  recent   works  on  that  move­ ment,  and  not least for its shrewd sketches of  some  of  the  leading figures  who  clus­ tered  around the  Vorticists,  such  as  the sculptor  Gaudier,   whose   extraordinary promise  was lost when  he returned to die on a French battlefield.
Hugh  Kenner,  a  Canadian  lost-it seems-to the  New  Rome,  deals  some­ what  differently with  the  background to the   Modern  Movement  by  means   of  a curious  book  entitled The   Pound  Era. It is hard   to  trap  this  Protean work  in any simple  category. It  is not-in  a  recog­ nized way-biography or literary history or  literary criticism, but  it  is  something of all of them,  and  perhaps most  of all it is an  attempt to distil  the  spirit  of  Mod­ ernism  in a belated  Modernist  work. Dis­ continuity, fragmentation,  indirection, flow without logic, logic without flow, all these  attributes of   Modernist writing   at its  most  recondite  characterize this  vast volume  of more  than five hundred pages which  seeks to set Pound  in  his time -a time  that  lasts more  than  sixty years.
This  is not an easy book to read-im­ possible indeed  to take in at all thorough­ ly on  one's  first  way  through its labyrin­  thine  paths -and  I suspect  that  Kenner has  taken   some  delight in  complicating the  entrances to  the  sanctuary where  he preserves   his  personal  vision  of  Pound. He  is writing with  Stendhalian  obstinacy
 for  the Happy Few, and  it takes patience to  qualify  as one  of them  by establishing in  one's  mind   the   relationship  between the insights which,  retaining Pound's and Eliot's   youthful   delight in  "fragments", he  presents  to  us in  sequences  for  which we must often  create our  own  mental  re­ orderings.   He  is attempting to  portray a career  in which -as  in  the  career  of all real artists-all the important events are in  a sense  coterminous because  all  works of poetry  that  survive  are  equally  imme­  diate  in their  impact. He  is waging again  the classic Modernist battle against  dura­ tiona!conceptions of time,  and  the result is a  book which  seems  less like a  history than   a  charting of  some  archaeological
site  like  Byblos  where   one  can  see  the
relics  of  many   ages  surviving  together and   therefore-whatever   their   age - equal  in time.  Which, after  all, is a valid way  to  present   the   achievement  of  an artist,  since  to  the  aesthetic eye or  ear  it does  not  matter in  the  least  how  many years  Hamlet  was written before  A Win­ ter's Tale;  they  belong  to  the same  con­ tinuum of experience. By its  very nature, The   Pound  Era  cannot-would  not­ claim  to  be  a  conclusive   book.  It is less the work of a scholar  than  of an  enthusi­ ast,  but  for  that  very reason  worth  read­  ing  by  those  who  can   afford   to  give  it discontinuous time.
Kenner tells once again,  among his fragments, the story of the crucial  revela­ tion at Giessen in  I g I I  when  Pound  took a  handful of  romanticist  poems  to  Ford Madox   Ford,  and   Ford   rolled   on   the floor  in  mirth  when   he  read   them,   an exercise  that  salutorily  convinced   Pound  that   he  must  abandon  outworn conven­ tions  and  find  his  own  speech.  This  tale which,  like  much  in  V orticism  and  the English  Avant-Garde, emphasizes Ford's

99

REVffiW ARTICLES



extraordinary  position    as   a   mediating figure between pre-Raphaelitism and Symbolism  on  one  hand  and  Modernism on  the  other, brings  me to  the fault  that perhaps stuck  most  roughly  in my mind's craw   when   I  read   the  final   and   fifth volume  of Leon  Edel's  marathon  biogra­ phy  of Henry James,  The  Master:  I90I­
I9I6.
In   a  review  of  the  preceding volume of Edel's  massive task, I talked of the sleekness  and   imperviousness  which  im­ pressed  me  as  the  dominant  qualities of the  portions of  the  Life  that  had  so far appeared, and  my view  is not  essentially changed  by   this   culminating   volume. Much of  the  material is absorbingly   in­ teresting; after all, it concerns  James  and would  be so in any context.  But the man­  darin  dulness  that   pervades  the  prose of The  Master  when   it  is  not  quotation  is linked with an obviousness of conception which  is no more  clearly exemplified  than in the  title  of the  volume  itself. Surely  to talk of James as The Master has now be­ come  such  a  cliche  that  it  can  be  done only  in  irony,  yet  I am  sure  Edel  is  not being   ironic,   and   that   his   use  of   the fatally   obvious   title  is  an  aspect  of  the heavy   relentlessness   with   which   he  has piled his critical Pelions on his biographi­ cal  Ossas  to  produce a  quivering moun­ tain of academic prowess.
Except indeed  for  the  biographical de­ tails  so patiently sifted  and  assembled - and   a  debt  of  respect  is  owed  for  such labours -there   is  really   not   much   in The   Master   that   reveals   originality   of critical  insight,  though Dr. Edel  has been so  much   in  the  company  of  James  that  he  could   not  fail  to  emerge  with  some very   plausible   biogmphical   conjectures. But  his  general  critical   unsureness,  par­  ticularly when he turns  away from James,

100
 is shown   up  clearly  when  he  deals  with the  novelist's  literary   associates.  There is a curious  disproportion in a view of  writ­ ing  in  our  age  that  can  treat  Hugh  Wal­  pole as  more important  than  Ford Madox Ford. I am   not  convinced  that  James thought as  little  of  Ford  as  Edel claims   he   did,   but   in  any   case  Edel's  treatment of  Ford   as  merely  an  impor­ tunate  nuisance and   a  lying  memorist, and  his failure to  recognize  his historical importance as  editor   of  the  English  Re­ view  and  his achievement in  writing the tetralogy   now   known   as   Parade's  End (which   surely   showed   a  thorough and intelligent grasp  of  whatever James had to  teach   in  the   art   of  the   novel) , can only  lead   one  to  doubt  his  right   to  be taken    seriously   as  a   critic,   though  of course   they   do  not   negate   his   journey­ man's  mastery of  the  basic  skills  of  the  biographer.
The absurdities of amateur  psychoana­ lysts posing  as critics  have led one  to ap­  proach gingerly  any  book  that  avowedly  uses the  insights  of  Freud or  Jung to in­ terpret  works   of   literature. Yet   it   has always depended on whether critical sen­ sibility   or   psychoanalytical  dogma    has been   in  control, and   there   is  no  doubt that-to  repeat  a  name   mentioned at the   beginning of  this  article -Herbert Read  owed  his success as an  exponent of the  visual  arts  and  as a critic  of the Ro­ mantic poets  to  a  sensitive  and  cautious use   of   Jungian  ideas.   Elliot   B.  Gose, author of Imagination Indulged, the  last of  this  group of  excursions by Canadian scholars   into  other  literatures, is  frank  about  his  debt  to  Jung, but  his  general  approach  is  very  much   his  own,  as  he traces,    from   the    early    Gothic   novels through  a  series of selected  1gth  century masterpieces, the  development of a  kind

REVIEW ARTICLES



of  novel  which  depends for  its effect  on the  tension  between  the  rationality of the external  world   and   the   irrationality  of the  inner.
I  must   say  that   I   felt   apprehensive when  I  read  the  opinion Gose expressed in  his  preface,  that  the  novels of writers like Dickens  and  Hardy and Conrad were "called   into  being  in  an  attempt to cope with acute psychic distress." There seemed  a  threat of  yet  another study  of art  as the  product of a  pathological con­ dition, but  in fact  Gose is as conscious  as the   novelists  of  whom   he  writes  of  the extent  to which  their  works were  deliber­  ate  artifacts, and  I find  a later  statement truer  to his actual practice:

I can  say  only  that it  seems  farfetched to assume   that a  story   will  not  contain  some­ thing of  the   psychic  life  of  its  author. By using  his imagination he  is, after  all,  calling on  what   he  has  deeply felt,  what  animates his  nature, what has  to come  out  of  him.

In treating with special attention Wuthering  Heights, Bleak   House, The Return of the  Native and  Lord  Jim, Gose carefully avoids  presenting us with four dissociated  case  studies,   which   is  what the  psychoanalyst dealing with  literature would  be tempted to do. He  is conscious of the  importance of tradition, and  ana­ lyses carefully the  psychological  and  liter­ ary  significance of  the  fairy  tale and  the romance,  and    their   incorporation  into the  tradition  of   the   novel  as  it de­  veloped   during  the   nineteenth  century. One  realizes in following this process how carefully Gose has kept  to his own dictum  that  "The psychological and  the formalist  coalesce when  one focuses on the working  of  the  imagination", and  one  cannot ac­ cuse him  of neglecting the formal  aspects of  the works  he studies.  In  fact,  far  more
 than    showing   us   authors  coping   with "acute psychic distress", he shows them subordinating myth  and  romance, dream and  fantasy,  to  their  formal  purposes  by means  of artifice,  while  he  remains  pro­ foundly conscious of the origins  in collec­ tive movements of  thought   (e.g. the reactions  of  Darwinism),  as  much   as  in personal  unconscious  conflicts,  of  the psychological  elements  within  the  novels he discusses.
Good  books  set   thoughts  moving
around them. Imagination Indulged made  me more  sharply  aware than  I had been before of a gap in our study of the psychology  of  literature. We  often  con­ sider  the  psychology  of   creativity-the elements  of  an  author's  mind  that  enter into  his books. But we rarely  consider  the psychological  aspects of  an  author's rela­  tionship  with  his audience-how far  his work is in fact shaped  by his insights  into  the  inner  needs  of  his  readers.  The evi­ dence which  Gose presents  regarding the creative methods of Dickens  leaves  little doubt in my mind  that  some  of the irra­ tional   elements   in  his  novels -perhaps most   of   them -were   introduced   not from  inner  compulsion,  not  by command of the imagination, but quite deliberately because  Dickens  calculated that  this  was what   the  public  wanted   and   cultivated the  fanciful   side  of  his  intelligence  ac­ cordingly.  In  doing  so he  was  being  the  psychoanalyst  rather than  the  subject   of psychoanalysis,   and   there    is  room   for much  more study of how far  writers  hold up  mirrors  consciously  to  their  ages and  their  readers as well as unconsciously to themselves.
But  that  is another task than  what  Dr. Gose has accomplished with  so much  in­ telligence  and  restraint.



IOI





DEEP CAVES  AND KITCHEN LINOLEUM

ALICE   MUNRO,   Lives    of   Girls   and    Women.
McGraw-Hill Ryerson,  $6.gs.

ALICE MuNRo's   first   novel   is  about   a sensitive young girl growing  up in a small Ontario  town  in  the   194o's.  To  say  as much    is  to   summon  up   the   arthritic ghosts  of  a  thousand  other   first  novels from  library  vault  and  desk drawer, and to suggest the kind of risk an author takes writing a  conventional  village  bildungs­ roman   in  this  age  of  pop,  camp,   funk,  porno,  and  junk.  The  basic movement of Lives   of  Girls   and   Women   is  conven­  tional   to  a  fault:   the   protagonist  dis­ covers sex, comes into  contact  with  death  and   madness,   learns   sympathy  for   her parents, casts a cold eye on zany relations  and  friends,  finds  there  is good  and  evil in  her  backwater  microcosm   of  society, and,  at  the  end,  contemplates a horizon­ expanding flight  to  the  metropolis  (To­ ronto) . This  is the  universal  pattern for a  first  novel,  although the  British  might require more  misery  at  public  school, the French more  adultery,  the  Americans more  violence.  But  not only does  Munro dare   to  use  the  pattern  again,  she  also tempts the fate of repeating her own early work, since the  town  of Jubilee and  some of  the  characters in  the   novel  first  ap­ peared  in  her  fine  short-story collection, Dance    of   the   Happy  Shades    (rg68). Considered in  the  abstract, Lives  of Girls and  Women shouldn't amount to  much, but  reading the  book  proves  that   novels


102
 
should  never  be considered in the abstract and   that   a  good   writer   can   do  almost anything and  make it work.
It  works  largely  because  l\1unro  hasn't forgotten  a   thing  about   lower-middle­ class  life  in  the  drab and  frugal Forties. Her  class  bias  is  unusual  when  one  con­ siders  how  often  Ontario small  towns are shaped   into  those  safe,  bourgeois  organ­ isms  sustaining   clergymen,  lawyers   and young  lovers,  just  right  for  slightly  aca­  demic   comedy   of  manners   (Robertson Davies,    Stephen   Leacock)   or   lyrical­  gothic allegory  (James Reaney) . In Mun­ ro's  work   we  see  Ontario social   myths from the bottom up;  the poverty  line runs smack  through her  part  of town  and  her characters seem  curiously  estranged from their   environment:  the  men  struggle   in silence  to  earn   a  living,  the  women­ Munro's particular  concern-are shown to be troubled by isolation  and  unfulfilled  dreams. Abused  girls slip into  insanity  or leap into  the river; pregnant girls stumble grimly    on   into    marriage;  the   female  high-school  graduate searches  out  a  sec­ retarial   job,  layaway   plans,  a  Saturday date   for  the  Gay-la   Dance Hall,   and   a husband   who    is   neither   goof-off    nor drunk   nor   religious   fanatic.  Unmarried ladies sing "0 Promise  Me" in the church  choir   and   study   pornographic verse  in private;  married women   sell  encyclope­ dias  door  to door  to make ends meet  and  to get out  of the  house. Mariposa it isn't.
Del Jordan, the  novel's  narrator and quasi-heroine, goes from Grade Four  to defloration  critically    observing   the   ex­ amples  around her but finding  few guide­  lines  for  her  own  conduct. Her  mother says that  keeping one's  self-respect  is the only   way   "woman's   burden"  may   be tolerated, but  Del  resists the  advice,  be­ cause   her   mother   gives  it  and   because

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



she  hopes  to  live  as  men  seem  to:   free and  undamaged  by experience. Keeping one's  self-respect is  not  Del's  forte  any­ way;   her  encounters  with   men  are  less dramas of  liberation than   farces  of  des­ peration  and   inadvertence.   A   middle­ aged   radio   announcer,  given   to   jovial crotch-thumps and  nipple-squeezes, takes Del  into  the  woods  to  prove  that  he can masturbate, causing  her  to  lose a  child­  like faith  in  the fascination of depravity. Later she strips for a  boyfriend, a sneery, math-minded  high  school  sort  of genius, but   is  shoved   into   the   cellar   when   his mother comes home,  her  clothes  dropped after   her  through the  laundry chute.  At last  she  loses  her   virginity   propped  up over  the  peony  border at  the  side  of the house,  but  when  her  lover-who picked her  up at a revival  meeting and  has mar­ riage  on  his  mind  -tries  baptizing her in  the  river,  she  fights  back,  literally, for her   independence:  "I  thought  that   he might drown  me ... I thought that  I was fighting  for   my  life."   By  resisting,   Del loses  the  chance to  become  another  for­ lorn  Jubilee housewife, but  salvages  her soul, and  in the novel's epilogue the dawn of  her  ambition  to  be  a  writer suggests another, better   way  she  can  "have" her hometown  without   being   trapped  in  it forever.
A woman  told  me that  Del's  baptismal fight  in  the  river  was  a  gutsy  metaphor for  "the  whole modern male-female thing", and  I can see that  the  novel could be interpreted as one  of  the  new  Condi­ tion-of-Women tracts, although the  usual features of the  genre -gloom,  paranoia, gritted  teeth,   maxims   about  survival­ are   sabotaged  or  enriched   by  Munro's sense  of  humour. However,  Del's  sexual progress  is mostly confined  to the  last two chapters; much   of  the  time  she  is there
 to comment  on  the  lives of everyone  else in Jubilee,  which  seems to be the author's real  subject.   In   the  epilogue,   the  novel Del is planning to write  will turn  Jubilee into  a hybrid  of Faulkner's Jefferson  and Wuthering Heights, with decaying  manses and  crazed  maidens and  gibbering idiots and   a  demon   photographer  whose  pic­ tures reveal the hideous truth about every­ body.  The   narrative  voice  reflects  that  some  day  Del  will  want  the  town  as  it actually  was, without the gothic  frosting; she  will struggle   to  remember the  accu­  rate,  meaningful  detail   and   realize  that  "people's   lives,  in   Jubilee  as  elsewhere, were  dull,  simple,  amazing and  unfath­ omable-deep caves paved  with  kitchen linoleum." The epilogue is subtitled "The Photographer"   and    is   undoubtedly a statement  of   the   author's  own   artistic purposes,   with   the   fictional    realist   de­ fined  as  a  not-quite-demonic  photogra­ pher   who   strives   to   reveal   important truths    through  pictures  of    "ordinary" surfaces.
The epilogue  made me slightly uncom­ fortable, as  if  it  were  an  advertisement for  the  writer's  abilities  rather than   an afterword  organically   connected  to  the novel  itself. Certainly  there's no question  about  Munro's talent as a photographer: she  reminds  us that  old  ladies  patrol  the streets  of small  towns  from  wicker  chairs  on   the  veranda;  that    United   Church windows  depict   "Christ  performing use­ ful miracles"; that  families  used to watch  the sunset from  concrete slabs at the back of  the  house.  She  is precise  about  those mixed  feelings  we  used  to  have  towards self-styled Best Friends and  the sweaty intrigues set afloat by the Grade Seven operetta. Yet  the  novel  is not  merely  an exercise in regional  nostalgia; there  is reference  to the  larger  rhythms of life, as


103

BOOKS IN REVIEW



is indicated by the  chapter titles-"Age of  Faith", "Changes and  Ceremonies", "Baptizing" -and  Del  repeatedly  won­ ders  at  the  bizarre  twists in people's lives, at  the  destinies  that  shape  our  ends.  But somehow  it's  not enough; the book, good as  it  is,  never  quite   jells  into  the  major  piece   of   serious   fiction   I   suspect   the author intended it to be.
A reason  for  this may lie in the novel's loosely-woven, anecdotal structure,  in which   the  chapters, basically  unpruned short  stories,  are  casually  linked  together by  Del's   consciousness,  an  arrangement rather like  the  one   Margaret Laurence used for  A Bird  in  the  House. Then  too, Del  herself,  so often  the observer  or  vic­ tim,  is not  strong  enough  as a  character in her own right  to galvanize the reader's concern, and  getting it all from  her  point  of view seems to limit  the scope of Mun­ ro's   own   vision.    At    least,   re-reading Dance   of  the   Happy  Shades   after   the novel, I was surprised at the wallop  these brief   and  apparently  "conventional" stories  are able  to pack.  In  the one about  the  small-town  pickup,   for  example,   or the  live-in  maid   among  the  rich,  or  the girl who burns  her  baby brother to death,  or   the   woman   who   lets  her   grotesque mother die, or  the  Italian immigrant girl who  is a social  outcast  until  she is safely in the hospital  dying of leukemia, charac­ ters   whose  lives  aren't  going  anywhere take  on  a  tragic   dimension,  like  Melvil­ lean anti-heroes, through the very strength of  their   hopelessness.  It's  dirty   pool  to compare  novels  with  stories  and   down­  right   peevish   to  pick  nits  about   such  a pleasurable  read   as  Lives  of  Girls  and Women,  but  where  both  the  novel  and the  stories  are  funny,   well-written,  and evocative,  it  seems  the  novel  misses out on  that  black,   brutal cutting edge  that
 gives the stories  their  idiosyncratic power.
If the  novel  falls  short  of its own  am­ bitions,  it is a  remarkable  book  nonethe­ less  and   should   be  purchased   (not   bor­ rowed  from  the  library,  but  paid  for)   by those  who  want  something  good  to  read for  a change, and  by those who are inter­ ested in  the development of one of Cana­ da's foremost  prose writers. Reading Alice Munro's work  is  one  of  the  joys of liter­  acy;    for    the    numerous   typographical errors  and  the shabby  design  of the  book itself,  her  publishers should,  possibly,  be forgiven.
JAMES POLK

GASTRONOMIC CANADA

SONDRA GOTLIEB,  The Gourmet's Canada. new press,  $7·95·
GEORGE  BAIN,  Champagne is  for Breakfast. new press,  $6.95.
Where to  Eat  in  Canada, 1972-73, edited  by
Anne Hardy. Oberon Press,  $2.95.

THE  BEST  BOOKS  on  food   have  always been  something more   than   mere   guides to  experience in  good  eating. They  have said  in  a  concrete  but  often   very  vivid and   enlivening way  a  great   deal  about the  societies  whose  culinary  habits   they describe,  and    not   merely   in   terms   of actual  dishes   and   of  their   ingredients: not  even  merely  in  terms  of the  complex individual physical and mental experience of eating, but  also in  terms  of social  and even   aesthetic  attitudes.  Painting  in   a different  media   from   other writers,   the gourmet can  present   his own  interesting and  individual picture of  a society.  One can   hardly   imagine  Brillat-Savarin, for example, emerging from   any  world   but that  of the First  Empire and  the Restora-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



tion   in   France,  which    also   produced Balzac   and   Stendhal.  And   one   of  the most   enlightening  books   I  possess  on England  in   the   age   of   Waterloo  is  a foxed   and   battered  volume   entitled    A New  System of Domestic Cookery  formed upon  Principles  of Economy and adapted to the  use of Private  Families,  written by "A  Lady" and   issued   by  John  Murray, Byron's   publisher,  in   r8o7.   As I   read through  the   hundreds of  pages  of  rich and  highly-flavoured recipes   (those lash­ ings  of  cream   and   brandy!), as  I  stare with awe on the stupendous family menus ("Nine  Dishes, Two   Removes,   and  Eleven", for  example -the eleven  being pretty   substantial   side-dishes),  when   I look  through the  hints   on   running the dairy  and   the  poultry   yard,  the  "Direc­ tions  to  Servants" and  the  "Cookery for the  Poor",  a  whole  lost layer  of the  past appears -the  layer   that   gives  material solidity  and  depth to  the  world  of Pride and Prejudice  and  The Prelude.
I am convinced that  an interest in food and wine-or the best possible local substitute  for   wine-is    a  symptom   of vigour  rather than  of decadence in a society.  The   fact   that   France  is  still­ though perhaps every  year  a  little  less so
-a country of  dedicated  gourmets is a
facet  of the obstinacy with  which  the French have-despite  appearances­ resisted   the  spread   of   the   universalized  Americanoid culture, which is least strong precisely  in  the  great  gastronomist areas of the  country like  Burgundy, Bresse and the  Franche-Comte.  The  survival of splendid cooking  in  Peking  is a  manifes­ tation  of the silent  and enduring rebellion of the  true  China  against the  barbarities of the Cultural Revolution, a rebellion  of the  most  basic of  the  arts  which  suggests that    the   higher  arts   of   painting  and
 poetry   may   not   wholly  be  lost  and   at some  time,  perhaps  not  very  far  ahead, will surface with all their  peculiar  Chinese combination of delicacy and  sinewy vigour. And  in Canada it is surely an auspicious sign that  recently  our books on food  and  where  to get it have-like our fiction -become  pronouncedly more so­ phisticated and  more  worth  reading  not merely as guides  to eating  but as books in the full sense.
A measure  of the speed  with  which  we
are  diversifying  and  deepening our inter­ est in food, and  relating it to other aspects of our country's culture can be seen if we compare  a   good   book   on   feeding   in Canada  which   appeared   first   in   1971 (Where to  Eat  in  Canada)  with  a much  better  book-The Gourmet's Canada  by· Sondra  Gotlieb-which  has   just  come off the press.
Where  to Eat in Canada  1972-73 is the updated  revision  of  a  useful  handbook, edited   by  Anne   Hardy,  which   Oberon Press  issued  last   year  for  the  first  time and  presumably intends to  make  a  bien­ nial event.  There is a small,  bright  intro­  duction  on  regional  Canadian  foods, and this  is followed  by  a  series of  entries  on three  hundred or  so eating  places  rang­  ing   across   the   country   from   Victoria, B.C.,  to Cornerbrook,  Newfoundland, with  sorties  into Yellowknife  and  White­ horse.  The  approach is critical  so far  as service  and  food  are  concerned, but  the reporters -or   inspectors  as   they   omi­ nously call themselves-tend to be over­ interested   in  decor,   which   always  raises prices,  and  though some  good  and  inex­ pensive   restaurants   are   included,   the recommendations   tend    to   favour    the pockets  of  better-off   travellers; mainly,  they  are  the  kind  of  places  I find  myself


105

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



patronizing once  or twice only on a cross­
country journey.
There are  some  odd  entries:  e.g.

HEDLEY, B.C.         THE  GAS STAT ION You  can't  eat in  Kelowna, so watch  for the gas station  at Hedley. It's  said to have good homecooked   and  homemade   food. Not  yet tested.

This    is   erroneous  on   three   counts­ which  should   be  a  lesson  to  the  editors  not  to  rely on  hearsay.  First, there  is one very   reasonable  restaurant   in   Kelowna which serves good home-cooked food, but it  is  in  a  back   street   and   the  clientele  consists almost  entirely of knowledgeable local  people. Secondly, anyone  travelling on  from  Kelowna at  lunchtime will  get pretty   hungry  by  the   time   he  reaches Hedley,  which   is  an   hour   and   a   half away, and  Penticton, where  the Chalet is justly  recommended, is much  nearer. Thirdly, it is not  a gas station  in  Hedley that   has  made   its  name  for  good  food, but  the  Colonial, an  old  house in a large garden with excellent country cooking; however,  there is a gas station  cafe at Princeton,  up   the   valley  from   Hedley, which serves something better  than  the average  trunk  road meals.
For those on holiday with well-stuffed wallets, Where  to Eat in Canada is a use­ ful  guide  to  have  in  the  glove  compart­ ment; its  main  defect  is that,  being  pre­ pared   by  a  committee  of  writers   rather than   an  individual  enthusiast, its entries differ  a great  deal in  sharpness  of palatal perception.  Inevitably,  also,  there   have been  shifts  in quality, and  I would   not now recommend (and in some cases never would have recommended) all the places listed  here  in  my  home  town.  However, we  are   promised   perennial  revision,  in which  the  reader's assistance is invited.
At  best, Where  to  Eat in Canada is a

106
 good    practical   guide.    The    Gourmet's Canada  is something quite   different, in character and  scope,  and  if I read  Where to Eat to be informed, and  gained  merely information from  it, I found  myself, when I  opened The   Gourmet's   Canada,  im­ mersed    in   a   real   book,  written   by   an individual who  projects a  richly  enthusi­ astic   and   idiosyncratic   personality,  and dedicated  not   merely   to   talking   about what  food  can  be got in Canada, but also to  a  full-scale  interpretation of our  land and   our   culture  seen  from   the   gastro­  nomic   viewpoint-a   viewpoint  deter­ mined   not  merely   by  the  tastebuds and the  intestinal muscles,  but  equally  by the aesthetic eye and  the  lyrical  imagination.
The   Gourmet's Canada  begins-and
this  first  cluster   of  chapters should   win over  any  patriot with  the least interest  in the  pleasures  of cup  and  trencher-with a brief vivid autobiography of the author as gastronomer, followed  by a great food­ searching journey  across  Canada,  a veri­
table   Odyssey   of  exploration,  in  which
the  author seeks  out  regional   foods  and dishes,  talks  of  their   natural and   social history,   relates   them   to  local  life  styles, garnishes  the   narrative  with   evocative portraits of  mute inglorious Parmentiers lost in our villages and  towns, brings  alive places   where   people   eat,  grow  and   sell food,  discusses with  vigour  such questions of   gastronomic  politics   as   the   fate   of Canadian  caviar    and   Atlantic  salmon, and  gives  us  the  sense of  a  land   rich  in possibilities   that   may  well  be  lost  if  we do  not   quickly   come   to  the   realization that   not  everything good  can   be  either mass produced or indiscriminately squan­ dered. Sondra Gotlieb has  been  an  inde­  fatigable explorer, and  her  cross-Canada narrative   is   packed    with    information about precisely  what, with  a  little  care,

BOOKS IN REVIEW



one can find in terms of regional food products and   traditional dishes.  A  reas­ suringly  rich  and  inviting harvest it is.
At the  same  time,  Mrs.  Gotlieb  is fully aware   that   gastronomy, if  it  must  have its roots solidly in soil of local cultivation, cannot bear fruit  without international pollination,  and   another  useful  chapter of  her   book   is  a   listing,   selective   but astute,  of the shops in Canada where  one can  find  those ingredients of good  eating
-home-produced  and imported-in which  the  supermarkets always  fail.  Just as   useful   are   the   chapters  on   eating places,  for  the  author realizes  that   few people  can  always  eat  in  the  expensive once-in-a-season haunts where  the  decor is  more   reliable   than   the   food;   so  she begins her  survey  with  a list of the places where  one  is well  dined  for  under  $3 a meal,  and  only  then  discusses with  rigor­ ous  selectivity   those   high-priced   places where,  irrespective of setting,  the food  is worth   the   money.   All   Canadians   who have gastronomic ambitions-and  the quality  of  our   civilization    depends  on their   increase -should   read   this  book, and  so,  for   that   matter, should   anyone who   aims   at   a   full   understanding  of Canadian  society.
The  Gourmet's Canada   ends   with   a
chapter on  wines,  but,  while  useful,  this is the  least  exciting part  of the  book;  the author's first  and  enduring love  is food, with  wine  a  congenial  but  not  essential attendant.   Fortunately  new   press   has published  at the same time a complemen­ tary   book-George  Bain's  Champagne is  for  Breakfast  -on wines  in  Canada It  is a  sound   collection  of   information, full  of historical and  topographical facts about   wine  growing,  knowledgeable dis­ cussion   of  the   qualities  of  wines,   and
hints  of how  one  may  wine  well in vari-
 ous parts  of Canada in spite  of the diffi­ culties  imposed  by liquor commissions.  It is a good  guide  to  what  can  be  bought,  and   it  even   contains   recipes   for   local dishes   that   go  with   the  wines  of  their regions. The fault  of  the  book, especially after  the natural  humour and  zest of The Gourmet's Canada, is a frequent and  em­ barrassingly  self-conscious facetiousness of tone. The  jokes are bad, the puns are execrable, but the advice they garnish is excellent.  If only  Mr.  Bain  had  remem­ bered   the   proverbial  wisdom:   A  good wine needs no bush!
ANTHONY APPENZELL



MOD MODEL

MARTIN  MYERS,   The  Assignment. Toronto:
Fitzhenry  & Whiteside,  $g.gs.

THIS  IS A BRILLIANT   NOVEL  about  ... all those  other   brilliant novels  you've  read. Here   the   reader   may   satisfy   his  every taste  for  the  Modern. A gentle,  compas­ sionate,   ironic   Jew   of   mythological  di­ mensions   for   a  hero,  the   use  of  filmic terms for chapter headings, black humour and   outrageous-deadpan  dialogue,  a treatment of the perpetual tussle between good  and  evil:   remind   you  of any  other works you've read?
What  a  useful  work  for  anyone  teach­
ing Twentieth Century fiction!  Simply wind  up  the  student, place  a  scissors in his hands,  and  tell  him  to  clip  the  rele­ vant  phenomena as  he  zips  through  this lively satire,  the  sort  of  satire that  stems from  an  admiration for  the  conventions parodied. That's  very  important: loving one's  target. The Rape  of the  Lock  came  from   the   pen   of  one  of  Homer's  most passionate  students.


I07

BOOKS IN  REVffiW



Myers'  work  reminds   me  of  so  many others,   a  mark   of  effective   parody,   but most  of  all  of  a  favourite, Thomas  Pyn­ chan's V. In   high   paranoid   style,   the novel  accumulates   details-seeming markers  of   the   movements  of   sinister forces-that   turn   out   to   be  leitmotifs rather than  revelations. Then an  initially indecipherable plot turns  out  to be, not a linear  narrative sequence,  but  a series of still  shots  of  a  larger   process  the  writer doesn't depict  in detail.  And so the reader relaxes, content to  let the symbolism  sort itself  out,  leaving  the  detective  work  for later  or never, depending upon  the degree of coherence he values in a book.
Spiegel,  the  hero,  is  a  junk  collector. "But  is he really only a junk collector?" booms  a  portentous  voice  that   nags  at every   reader   of  Contemp.  Lit.   And  of course  Spiegel  is  more  than   that. "The seeker of things used", to adopt Myers' Homeric epithet for his creation, is on Assignment;  he  is  the   Wandering  Jew who  has gone  about  his business for cen­ turies  at the orders  of the Chief  Assigning Officer,  a heavenly  personage who at one point  brings  Spiegel  back from  the  dead.  On  a  technicality. The hero's  errand ap­  pears  to be the avoidance of the traps  set by  Jonas, the  one-eyed,  multimillionaire president of  Leviathan Corp.  ( nuff said), and   the  preservation of  a  child   he  has found   not   quite   by  accident.  Do   you really want  me to continue?
In   one   way  or   another,  the   plot   is
worked  out.  It isn't very gripping anyway. Did   you  read  Candide  to  find  out  how the  story  came  out?  The  fun  is found  in the   situations  encountered  and   the  ob­ servations  gained.  Some   of   the   games people  play  that  come  under  wry  obser­ vation   are:   mental  health,  parenthood, the  law,  religion,  sex,  technology,  novel

108
 writing. Martin Myers finds each  of these activities a lot  of  laughs,  depicting them as so intermixed with  joy and  guilt, wis­ dom   and   folly   as   to   make   irony   and  laughter the  sole fitting  response to them.
Wit   abounds  in  the   dialogue;  Myers
has a way with names  (Dr. Plassibeau, Mickey  Culpa, Desiree  Poodendim), and while   he  is  obliged   to  make   Spiegel   a Christ figure,   he  has  the   junkman face his  successive   interrogators  with   come­ backs, one-liners and  the brutal nonsenses Jesus enjoyed  laying on heavy questioners. There are good sentences  in the  book:

So  they  [agreed to  call  homosexuality an idiosyncrasy], and  that was why, when the elevator came to  a  stop   at  the  street  floor, a crowded lobbyful of short, plump, middle­ aged   women with  frizzy   hair,  crooked  lip­  stick,   and   sensible oxfords,  each   carrying a paper  cup   of   coffee   and   a   pack   of  ciga­  rettes  and   trying  to  get   into   the   elevator, almost  crushed  two  grown  men   who   were busily  calling homosexuality an  idiosyncrasy.

Of  course  Spiegel   bungles  his  assign­ ment,  accepting "reality" when  he elects to   return  to   a   home   and   identity  the shrinks   assure   him   is  his   own.   In   the meantime, the  reader  has  been treated to an  amusing,  two-dimensional panorama of   life  in   the   present.  The   trick   with satire  is to  keep  it  trim.  There are  times, especially in the  second  section,  when  the book  goes  on  too  long  at  too  forced   a pace.  But  my  boredom then  was  a small price  to  pay  for  the  verve  and  slyness of the   opening. To  capture  the   deadpan flatness of Vonnegut and sustain  it along­ side  what   is at  least  the  apparatus of  a metaphysical  fable  denotes  considerable writing   skill.  To  interleave this  with  an examination of  the problems  of storytell­ ing   indicates   that   the   writer-a   first­ time   novelist   in   his  forties   whom   the Canada  Council wouldn't support-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



doesn't  fear   to  take   a  chance. He   has written a  novel  that   cannot coast  along on  passionately written  autobiographical material when  invention flags.  Gutsy  for a beginner.
Maybe   I missed   the  message.  Maybe
The   Assignment   is  a  profound,  Kafka­ esque  treatment of the  human  condition. I prefer  to  hope  it's  not.  For  me,  it is a heavy-hearted burlesque on   themes   too profound  always   to  be   taken   seriously, the   creation  of  a  subtle  and   inventive  mind.  Sometimes,  I  found   myself laugh­ ing as I read  it. Sometimes, not.

DENNIS DUFFY

NOVEL NO STORY

GEORGE   PAYERLE,    The   Afterpeople.   Anansi,
$2.50.
"Oh  dear   yes!"   wrote   E.   M.   Forster, "the novel  tells  a  story."   The   reader  of George  Payerle's  The   Afterpeople  might be forgiven for  wondering if Forster  was perhaps mistaken, for  "story" in  the  tra­ ditional sense is hard  to find  in this short novel.  It  is evidently  part  of the author's intention to cast  aside such  an  outmoded convention, in  favour  of a  more impres­  sionistic   rendering  of   reality.   There  is certainly the  basis of a  plot,  which  turns upon  a  bank  robbery  in  which  two  men shoot  and  carry  off a  female  bank  teller;  the event ]s recounted from  several  differ­  ent  angles,  and  various  characters make their   appearance   who    are   associated,  often  rather obscurely,   with   the  central action. Figures w1th  blackly comical names  like Chief  lronstem, Shamble and Groin   wander on  and   off  a  surrealistic set  vaguely   recognizable  as  Vancouver; their identity is never clearly  defined,  and their   relationship  to  one  another is left
 unexplained. The  narrative  develops through  a series of episodes which move freely  backwards and   forwards in  time; one  section  takes  the  form  of a  will, in which   the   novel  and   its  characters are made  the subject  of a  bequest; and  from time  to  time  the  author appears in  edi­ torial   brackets    to   claim,    or   disclaim, responsibility.
The   confusion   created  by  such   tech­
niques   is  of   course   deliberate;  clearly, Mr.  Payerle wants  us to think again about the   nature   of  experiential  reality,   and the  impossibility   of  a  final   division  be­ tween inner  and  outer  worlds.  He rejects conventional narrative methods in favour  of an approach which  might  be described as  a  mixture  of  James  Joyce  and   Mad Magazine,  in  order   to  create  an  atmo­ sphere  of  nightmare in  which  "normal" standards of conduct are quite  irrelevant. The  dislocation   of  ordinary logic  allows for  some  extraordinary  effects,  such   as the  pretended suicide  by someone  called B.  who dismembers himself  and  puts  the various   pieces   into   individual   brooch­ boxes marked  with  the  Birks monogram. The  book is at  its  best  in  such  moments  as  this;  Mr.  Payerle's  sense  of  the  gro­ tesque  gives  his  comedy   a  savage  bite, and  helps  him  to  convey  his  sense  of  a world   where   sane   and   insane   are   no longer  distinguishable.
The  surrealistic method  has  its  draw­
backs, however.  It does not  permit  much development of characters-usually  one of   the   strengths  of   the   novel  form - because to give them  attributes approach­ ing  full  humanity  would   interfere with their symbolic functions and  their dream­ like freedom. Consequently, structure and language  become  much  more  prominent, themselves   forming  the   action    of   the novel rather than  remaining its vehicles;

BOOKS IN REVffiW



and  on this  level it soon becomes evident that, although he  has  plenty  of tricks  at his disposal,  Mr.  Payerle's  verbal  ingenu­ ity  cannot supply   the  deficiencies  of  his material, or  conceal   the  fact  that   these sketches  are   often   simply   jeux  d'esprit, through  which   the   author  can  exercise his  interest in  language and  artifice.   In his  various   narrative identities   he  is  al­ ways conscious  of his own role as creator, and   so  his  novel,   in   the   best   modern  manner, becomes an  account  of  the writ­  ing of the  novel. This  in itself  would  not be  accounted  a  failing;  but  the  notion of literary artifice is introduced so crudely  that  the  reader  is made  to feel  that  he is the victim  of some obscure word-game in which   the   object   is  to  confuse  him  by sudden  changes   in   the   rules.   "I'm  at home   now.  I   just  re-read  what   I  have been  writing.  Now  it  is clear.  I am  the one  responsible. I  am  writing  the  novel. I cannot find  my other  trousers. The girl tells me I have only one pair.... " Some­ what  smug-ly, the narrator informs  us that  he is considered "an  incompetent realist"; and  it  is  plain  that   narrative realism  of the  usual   kind  would   be  inadequate to convey  his  view  of  things.  But  the  self­ conscious   virtuosity  of  The   Afterpeople blunts  the impact of that view, and  inter­ feres with  the development of potentially fruitful ideas  about society, art  and  indi­  vidual    consciousness.    Even   apparently direct  statements suffer  from  an  evident  desire  to  be  antithetical or  cryptic:  "an  open  door  is very like a locked one"; "I have been told that  to understand a book, one must  close it."  Such  pronouncements are  perhaps intended as parodies  of con­ ventional  wisdom;  but  in  any  case,  the book is often  more  concerned  with verbal effects than  with meanings.
Despite   such  weaknesses,  it  would   be


110
 unjust    to   withhold   some   measure    of praise,   for  The  Afterpeople is  in  parts both  funny  and  provocative, and  a not inconsiderable achievement for  a first novel. Mr. Payerle shows a commendable sense of adventure, the  kind  of readiness to  experiment  with   form   and   language that,   as  Michael  Yates  suggests  on  the cover,  is much  needed  in Canadian  writ­ ing.  His  exuberance may  have  led  him into  excess;  but  in  this  case  too  much  is better  than  none at all.

HERBERT ROSENGARTEN



LIGHT ON
A DARK WOOD

MICHAEL    BULLOCK,    green    beginning,   black ending. Sono  Nis  Press, $6.gs.

PosiT  A   MAN, as Dante did,  lost  in "una selva oscura". When  Dante wrote  he was looking  back, after  the  ultimate paradisial vision.  But  for  Michael Bullock  there   is only  the  dark  wood  and  all one can  be is lost   in   it.   His   guide   whispers,    "Stay. What you  see exists,  as  does  everything, to  be  made into  art." It is, historically, the  voice  of Mallarme, who  was his own illusion.
This   does  not  explain   away   a  single sentence, much   less any  of  the  "fables", that  make  up  Mr.  Bullock's  volume: the work  is his, and  he has wrought well, not vomited forth. Talent  and   labour  have produced  these   polished   gnostic  visions. During  a   resurgence   of   gnosticism, many  will  fail  to see this element in  Mr. Bullock's   work; it  is  so  long  now  since Wordsworth  declared  that   to  look  into the  Mind of  Man  would  be the  "haunt, and  main  region" of his song. Poe  (whose

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



voice and attitude I hear in Mr. Bullock's prose)   has  come  and   gone;   Mallarme and the Symbolists inverted Aquinas's Nomina  sunt  consequentia  rerum;  real­ ities  (of a  Platonistic  sort)   have  become the by-product  of language,  and  we live, as we read, within  our  own or  the auth­ or's  mind.
Words  become  things,  things  in  turn
menace writer and reader, since for the gnostic, reality is always a malefic vision: these simulacra  called  fables  both  mime and  are  the  world  beyond  the  trapped self.  Here   things   are   enemies;   behind them  are  greater  and  unknown  enemies set on destroying  the  narrator.
He  is  nearly  always  alone:   a  writer upon  whom  the subject  is imposed, most adroitly,  in  the  first  paragraph of  each fable  when  he  is, often,  sitting  down  to write a story. In  the beginning, he admits into  his home  a green  girl  who says her name  is Selva-Italian for  forest.  For the  author,   a  sex-object   that   conquers him through  a series of metamorphoses. Murdered, she brings an invasion of magnolia trees, and in burning them the author   burns  his own  home, which  will soon  be  reclaimed   by  vegetation:    the forest, or "nature", has won.
And,  throughout  the  book,  "nature"
 continues   to   conquer.   It  is  the   same reality which Coleridge found indifferent to man;  the  one  to which we, he wrote in an ode called "Dejection", give life. Again and  again,  the  plot is the Eternal Return: one is in an impasse from which there is no escape; the door out of prison leads  to  another   cell. We are  prisoners, with  the  author,   of  a  precise  and  self­ bound  logic divorced  from  the  existent.
We should  expect to be. In The  Field of Nonsense Elizabeth  Sewell, writing  of Lewis Carroll, explicates Mr. Bullock's position. As with Carroll, his "is not a universe of things but of words and ways of  using  them ... one  need  not  discuss the co-called unreality or reality of the Nonsense world.  The  scope of enquiry  is limited to what goes on inside a mind ..." Dante  encountered  it:   those  who  have lost il  ben  del intelletto -the ability  to know and  love what  is not  themselves; they  can  only  conquer  it  or  replace  it. Their   works, "like  games, have  nothing to  do  with   such  a  notion   as  'truth'." They  prefer  to  deal  with  things  rather than  people, words  rather  than  content, the verbal  rather  than  the real.
Treated  as a game, Mr. Bullock's book is perfectly  played. He is the witty spec­ tator  of his feigned  illusions. The  black



CANADIAN  AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available at

the bookstore
UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA VANCOUVER 8, B.C.	228-4741
 









1.1 I

BOOKS IN REVIEW



ending?  Her   name   is  Noire-though that   is  not   the  only  meaning, for   am­ biguity  is, as it  must  be, the essence. We are  in  the  world   of   Renaissance magic and  the  Hermetic Tradition-as Borges, a more  learned  man,  well knows.  Pins in one's hands lead to a Tibetan monk, who announces,  "Reality  is...."  and  finally, "Reality  is."  Not  what  one expects  from such  an  unsubstantial  personage,  or  ap­  posite  in  a  vision  that seals  everything into itself. Yet  Mr.  Bullock's achievement is  that  one  reads  his fables  as what  they are: his urbane poise makes sure of that. His is the  best of the Sono  Nis books that I have  seen;  and  he may well fault,  as a teacher of translation, my anglicizing  that press's name  as "There is no person".  To see where  that  can  lead,  follow  the  man who  in  mid-life  came  to to  himself-in
a  vision  sustained   by  a  reality   not,   to him,  ultimately dependent on  the  mind, but on which  the  mind  depends  if it is to know and  be other  than  its sealed-in  self.

JOHN REID



CRYSTALS TO SEE THE PAST


THE  UNIVERSITY  OF TORONTO  Press  has expanded its  reprint  programme in  two notable  directions. Shortly  it will issue the first  in  a series  of  reprints of  nineteenth century  works of Canadian literature that appeal   to  a  somewhat  narrower  public than   is  reached   by  the  New  Canadian Library; it  will  in  fact  complement that collection  by providing in the end a virtu­ ally  complete  availability of  the  kind  of texts  which  are  constantly  mentioned in


112
 literary histories  and  in critical  essays on the  Colonial and  Confederation  periods, but  which  are  difficult  at  present  to find outside  libraries.  As  the   works   in   this series begin  to appear, we shall  devote  to them  a  series  of  review  articles  that  will be, in effect, reassessments of these books which,   whatever  their   merits   in  global terms -and this  aspect  will  not  be  neg­ lected -are  the  only  literary  classics we possess from   the  days  before  the  tide  of modern Canadian  writing  began  to flow in  the  192o's  and  brought with  it a sense of  local   identity  we  had   not   possessed before.
The  other Toronto series,  which   has
already    begun    to   appear,  is  curiously entitled "The Social  History  of Canada". In  fact  it is not a "history" in any but  the most  diffuse  sense, but  rather a "library" or  series  of  reprinted works  which  have a  mainly   social  interest. Literary  merits are   incidental  in  the   selection   of  these books,  and  it  seems,  from  the  titles  that have   so  far   appeared,  that   even   in   a wider  sense their  associations rather than their  intrinsic merits  have  been  the  main reasons  for  selecting   them.  For  example,
J. S.  Woodsworth is  represented by My
Neighbour  ( $3.50)   and  Strangers within
our Gates  ($3.95)  ; if anyone  other than Woodsworth  had  written them,  it  is  un­ likely  that   these   long  outdated   pioneer  works on  urban  and  immigrant  problems  would  have  been resurrected, for they are badly  planned and  hastily  assembled  col­ lections   of  facts   and   quotations  culled from  other  authors and  cobbled  together with   homiletic   references  to   the   social implications of  Christian beliefs. Yet  here we  have   relics  not   merely   of  the  early years of a great Canadian, but  also of the beginnings of  our  native  form  of  social­ ism, a "chapel socialism"  like the English,

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



largely  springing from  Methodist  origins and  to be embodied in the CCF and  later in  the  NDP.  Nellie  McClung's In Times like These  ($2.95)   now seems an  incred­ ibly  clumsy   piece   of   tractarianship, yet it  not  only  reminds  one  of  a  tough  old temperance fighter,  but  even more  of the beginnings of  Canadian feminism  and  of the long trail to Women's Lib.
Such  minor works of social polemic  are passing  things,  precisely  because  they  do not  make  effective  contact with  the  uni­ versal or the  lasting,  yet in them  one does perhaps catch  with  a peculiar immediacy and   intimacy  the  ways  of   thought  and expression    of   educated   and   concerned people  in  the  early  years of  this century. And if we find what  they have  to say trite  or  naive,  it  is  often   because   they  have made   it  unnecessary  to  say  such  things again.
There is none of this combination of perception and  innocence in Goldwin Smith's Canada  and the Canadian Ques­ tion  ( $3.50), which  is not only a piece of self-consciously   mandarin   prose  written by a friend   of Matthew Arnold, but  also a  document of  some  intrinsic  historical significance   in  view  of  its  place  in  the controversy between imperialists and  con­ tinentalists towards  the  end  of  the  nine­ teenth century.  That subject also  makes it  the only one among the  Social  History  reprints so far published to have a topical flavour,  for the argument in which  Smith  played  such  an  eloquent part   has  come among us again  with  the  nationalists tak­ ing   the   place   of  the   imperialists -the enemy  unchanged. The   main   difference is that no writer  will be found  in Canada today  to say, as boldly  as Smith  did,  that Canada has no future.
Last  among the   present   batch   of  the
"Social History   of  Canada" is the  most
 curious  of  all,  a  work  of  fiction   which its editor  frankly  classes as "a  bad  novel". Alan   Sullivan's  The   Rapids   ($3.95)   is one  of  the  rare   Canadian  examples of
that  interesting genre,  the  roman  a clef;
it  is the  story  of  a  daring business  man
whose rise and  fall are  modelled  on  those of  F.  H.  Clergue, the  strange and  dedi­ cated  priest  of  private enterprise  who  at the  turn   of  the  century   started  the  ex­ ploitation  of  the  forest  and  mineral  re­ sources around Lake Superior, and  whose monument survives -or did  when  I was there five years ago -in the curious neo­ Gothic   outlines   of   the  mills  he  built   at Sault  Ste-Marie.  Perhaps one  cannot es­ cape   Michael   Bliss's  verdict    that  The  Rapids   is  bad   as  a   novel-though  I found  some passages of landscape descrip­ tion  very evocative  of the region-but it does,  as Bliss remarks, take  us back  into  a  different mental climate, to  a  Canada where  the  heroes  were  neither politicians nor sportsmen  nor  environmentalists, but tough  and  visionary  business  men  whose burning  passion   to  transform  the   land blinded   them   and  their  followers   to  the kind  of  destruction  that   transformation makes inevitable.
We shall  look forward to more  titles  in the "Social  History  of Canada" which, if it  does  not  seem  destined   to  unearth for us  lost  diamonds of  the  literary art, at least  gives  us  crystals  in  which   we  can see our  past  curiously  and  often  discon­ certingly   reflected.   But  no  more  discon­ certingly,    I   am   sure,   than    what   our descendants may  read  in  a  similar series fifty  years  hence,  whose volumes  will set them  wondering about  the strange minds that  reacted  to the tracts  and  essays of­ say -Mel  Watkins, Cy  Gonick  and   Ian  Adams.
The   Canadiana Reprint Series  of  M.

113

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



G.  Hurtig continues to  produce its  revi­ vals  from  an  even  remoter past.  Recent titles  include  Ballantyne's  Hudson's  Bay (introduced  by  George  Woodcock­
$8.95), Alexander Ross's important  pre­ Riel  account of  Fort  Garry  and  its  en­ virons, The  Red River Settlement  (intro­ duced   by  W.  L.  Morton-$8.95), and,  best   of  all,   Francis  M'Clintock's  vivid voyage   diary,   A  Narrative  of  the   Dis­ covery  of the  Fate of  Sir  John  Franklin and  his  Companions   (introduced by W. C.  Wonders-$8.95). Also from  Hurtig comes   a  timely   reprint  of  Hugh  Mac­ Lennan's Cross-Country ($5.95), his book of essays on Canada and Canadians which first  appeared in  1949 and  has long  been out   of   print.   MacLennan  has   accom­  panied   the  re-issue  with  a  long  new  in­ troduction   which   takes   the   form   of  a self-criticism   of  his  earlier   writing  per­ sona; it  is  an  invaluable  document,  not only   of   MacLennan's  own  mental  de­ velopment over a quarter of a century but also  of  the  surprising series  of  changes  that   have  re-shaped   Canadian attitudes during that period.
G.W.



TRANSLATION

ROCH  CARRIER'S  NOVEL, Jl est  par la, le soleil, which  was reviewed  in  its original French version  by Ronald Sutherland in Canadian   Literature   No.  50,  has   now been translated  by Sheila Fischman, under  the  title of Is It the Sun, Philibert? (Anansi, $2.50  paper, $6.50  cloth).
G.W.





I 14
 ON  THE  VERGE

*****   Dictionary    of   Canadian   Biography, Volume X, 1871 to  r88o.  University  of  Toron­ to  Press, $2o.oo.  Volume  X of the  Dictionary  of Canadian  Biography   is  actually   the  third  volume  to  come  into   print,   and  with  its  ap­ pearance the  strategy   of  the  editors   becomes evident; an  excellent  one  it  is.  They  are  pro­ ceeding   from   two  fronts,  forward   from   the beginnings  of Canadian  history  (approximately
I ooo AD)  and  at  the same  time in both  direc­ tions from  a nodal  point  round  about  the date  of Confederation, when  Canada  began  to look like  a  nation.  The first  parts  to  appear, Vol­ umes  I and   II, covered   the  period   between IOoo and   I740,  and   Volume  III, from   I74I to   I770,   is  in   preparation.  Volume   X,  now appearing,  covers   the  decade   from   I 87 I    to I88o,  and  it  will  be  followed  by Volume  IX, from   I 86 I   to  I 87o.  This  means  that  there  is a  steady  advance  from   the  first  pre-national beginnings,  and  at  the same time a solid estab­ lishment  of the foundations (and  founders) of modern  Canada,  while  the  editors  are  clearly allowing  time   to  take  care  of  the  twentieth century  by  not  rushing   precipitately into  the decades  that  are  within   approximately  living memory; indeed,  they announce that  they  will not  proceed  beyond  188o until  the intervening decades   have   been  filled  in.  At  the  present
rate  of  a  volume  every  two  years  (Volume I
appeared  in   I g66),  this  means   that   a  good many  who  read  this  note  will have  passed on
and  be eligible for inclusion  by the  time a new generation of editors  reaches our decade. Meanwhile the volumes that  have appeared already  seem such indispensable tools on one's shelves that  one  can  only  hope  the  publication of the  rest  will be accelerated as far  as is com­ patible  with  the  maintenance of  their  present excellence.
****   J.   A.     s.  EVANS.  Procopius.  Twayne,
$5.50.  Somewhat  astonishingly, this is the first
book written in  English  on  the  Byzantine  his­
torian  Procopius,  to whom  Gibbon  and  subse­
quent  historians of the late ancient world  were
so  much   indebted.  Given   the  limitations  of
Twayne's  World  Authors Series -limitations
of  size  and   aim -Professor  Evans  has  done astonishingly  well by his subject, providing the
kind  of general  introduction to  Procopius  and his times that has long been needed, but still conserving  enough  space  in  the  1 6o  pages  al­ lotted  to consider  critically  Procopius's  various works,  to  weigh  the  evidence  for  his  having

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



written  the    libellous  Secret   History    of   the reign  of Justinian  (Evans accepts this  as auth­ entic  Procopius)  and  to speculate  interestingly on   the  religious views  of  Procopius in  a  time of  bitter theological  controversy. It is a  model  of  the  concise  guide  to  a  hitherto uncharted territory.
****  LESLIE  H.  NEATBY. The  Search  for Franklin.    Hurtig,    $7.95.   The    Search    for Franklin   is  a  great  deal   more   than  its   title suggests, for  in  his  admirably concise  narrative Dr.   Neatby has  gone   far   outside the  story  of the    many    expeditions that   sought  the   lost Franklin and his  over-equipped flotilla. He begins    with     accounts   of    Elizabethan   and Jacobean attempts to discover the  Northwest Passage, and  then  leads through Franklin's various  Polar  journeys   to   the   fatal   voyage itself.  It is only  a  third of  the  way  through the book  that  we  come   to  the   mystery   of  Frank­ lin's disappearance; the   remainder is  devoted to  the   great  search,  the   men   who  undertook it,  and   the   extensions of  geographical  knowl­ edge    which    were    the   oblique  dividends  of their    efforts  to   trace   either  Franklin or   the relics    that  would    help   determine  his   fate.  There  are  limitations  to   Dr.   Neatby's  treat­ ment. We  have   no  thorough  reconstruction of what  may   have  happened  to   Franklin,  and  little  attention is  paid   to  the  actual  evidence that   was   discovered.  Moreover,   those   with differing views  from   his  about the  most  effec­ tive  forms  of Arctic travel will  be disappointed with   Neatby's  tendency  to   follow   Victorian tradition   by    concentrating    on    those    who searched  by  sea  and   giving  too  little credit to that  great  pioneer of  later  Arctic  travel, Dr.  John  Rae,   who   after  all  found  the   first   evi­ dence that  confirmed the  tragic fate of  Frank­ lin  and   his  men; Rae's  accounts of  his  travels do  not  even  feature in  the  bibliography.
****   ROBIN   W.    WINKS.     The    Blacks    in
Canada:   A   History.    Yale    University   Press,
$15.00. Little  is   known  even   by   Canadians
about  the   black   community  in   this   country. Negroes make  up  about half   of  one  per  cent of  our   population;  they   are   divided  among themselves between  those   who  came   from   the United  States and   those   who  came from   the West    Indies,  and    even   among  the   "Ameri­ cans"  between the   "aristocrats"  whose  ances­ tors  came   with   the  Loyalists  and  those  whose ancestors  came    later  during   the   abolitionist campaigns. They  have   been   little  persecuted in  Canada; in  our  anti-assimilationist  society they  have  rather  been ignored, living as  small urban   minorities   or   in   rural  slums   of   the
 Maritimes.  Only  during   the   last   few   years have   we  become   acutely aware of  them   as  a group who,  with  few individual exceptions, belong   to  the  poorest stratum  of  our  popula­ tion.    Yet   the   history  of   blacks   in   Canada (never told  thoroughly before the  volume  here  noticed)   is   a   long    one -dating   from    the beginning  of   French   colonization-and   an extremely interesting   one,   and   Robin    Winks  has  ably  informed  both  Americans and  Cana­ dians  on  the subject in  this  exhaustive history, whose  subject  has  enough interest and  variety to  carry on  its  impetus a  halting style  and  an inordinate preoccupation with  dull and petty detail.
***   G.   P.  DE   T.  GLAZEBROOK. The   Story  of Toronto. University of  Toronto Press,  $13.75· Sound histories of Canadian towns are  rare, perhaps because  one  has  to  be something of a local  patriot even  to conceive such  a  task,  and love of a place, like  love  of  a  person, can  very easily   blur   the   gaze  of  the   writer and   soften his  prose.  Glazebrook's The Story  of Toronto is   that  exception,  a   good    city   history,   re­ searched long  and   thoroughly, presented  with just   the   right  degree of   understatement  and  written in  a  good  workmanlike manner  which  makes  it  as consistently readable as it  is abun­ dantly informative. As a  history, but  also  as  a study   of  the   personality  of  Toronto  and   the collective identity of its  inhabitants, it  is likely to be unrivalled for  long  ahead.
***   DUNCAN  PRYDE.  Nunaga: My  Land, My Country. M.   G.   Hurtig,   $8.g5.  By  rigorous literary standards, Duncan Pryde  is not  a good writer. The  men  and  women who  populate  his Arctic landscape talk  like  dictaphones, and  he plants his  information with   relentless obvious­ ness.  Yet  for  all   its  irritating  clumsiness and contrivance,   his   narrative  of   life   as   a   fur trader at  the   very  end   of  the   Old   North, in the   late    195o's  and   the    196o's,  is  intensely interesting, if  for  no  other  reason, because as we   read   it  we  know   that  it  is  very   unlikely that any  other man   will  again live  that  kind of  life  and   write   it  down. Pryde is one  of  the last  of  his  kind,   and   his  consciousness of  this fact   becomes   one   of  the   main  virtues of  his book,   which   deliberately  sets   out   to  record, before  it  has all  passed  into  unreliable memory, the  last   phases   of  the   dying Eskimo   culture. True, that   culture is  now  ·dazzling  us  with  a magnificent  swan-song  of  art -the   splendid sculptures  which   as   these   words   are   written are   being  shown   in  the  great  Hermitage  Mu­ seum  of  Leningrad-but to  understand  even these    works,    we   need    the    observer's   close

BOOKS IN  REVffiW



record  of true  Eskimo life in its final years. In fulfilling  that  role,  Nunaga,  though  it  is a far more  personal  narrative, undoubtedly  takes its place  beside Fred  Bruemmer's  splendidly  thre­ nodic Seasons of the  Eskimo.
**   Creative   Canada:  A  Biographical   Dic­ tionary   of   Twentieth-century   Creative   and Performing   Artists,  Vol.  I,  compiled   by   the Reference Division,  McPherson   Library,  Uni­  versity   of   Victoria.   University   of    Toronto Press, $15.00.  This  is a potentially  very  useful work  of  reference,  hamstrung by  an  inexplic­  ably eccentric method  of  selection. It is meant  to  be  an  "objective and  factual" record,  and yet  the  artists   have   been  chosen -so  far  as one  can  see-in  deference  only to the  deities of  chance   and  caprice.  Granted   that  the  first volume  of this handbook  could not adequately cover  all  twentieth-century Canadian creative artists,   a   logical   division   might   have   been alphabetical,  or   by   particular   arts,   or   by decade  of death, or  birth,  or even  geographi­ cal   locality.   The   selectors   have   ignored   all these possible logical methods and  have chosen a   pattern  of   their   own   that   bewilders   the reader   with  a  volume  that  informs  him  fully on  P. K.  Page and  Bert Binning and  not at  all on  Irving Layton  and  Jack  Shadbolt; that  in­ cludes  more  than  a column on the little-known  painter, John  Christopher Pratt,  and  nothing  on  E. J. Pratt.  Doubtless  in  later  volumes  the omissions  will  vanish   as  inexplicably   as  they have appeared, but  the  reader will be left with a   series   of   disordered  parts   through   which he  will only  be able  to  find his way by means of a  cumulative index.  One  must  assume  that  the  compilers  have  a  strong  moral  conv1ct10n that   information  should   not   be   too   easily come   by;    they   may   indeed   be   right.

**   JOHN    MALCOLM BRINNIN.  The   Sway  of the   Grand   Saloon:   A  Social  History   of  the North  Atlantic. Fitzhenry  & Whiteside, $18.95· John  Malcolm  Brinnin,  a lost Canadian and author of a book-Dylan Thomas in  America
-which  many   people   who   knew   Thomas
found    distasteful   and    unreliable,    has   now turned  to  a  "popular" form  of  social  history which  should  make  some appeal  to  those who remember  the  vanished   pleasures  of  Atlantic crossings  in  ships  like  the  Ile   de  France  and her  precursors. Curiously,  for a Canadian  who comes from  the  Nova Scotian  heartland of the Cunards, Brinnin  concentrates   almost  entirely on  the  liners  that  sailed  from  American  ports. His  book  could  have  been  half  as  long  again and  twice as interesting if he had  remembered his own  country  and  written  of the  boats  that

116
 came  into  Montreal and  Halifax,  of  the  Fur­ ness   passenger-cargo  boats   that   crossed   the North   Atlantic  to  Newfoundland,  and  of  the whole complex  history of the  immigrant traffic to  Canada, not  forgetting  the  appearance of liners   from   behind   the   Iron   Curtain  as  the final act in the romantic drama.
**   Archives:   Mirror  of Canada   Past.  Pub­ lished  for  the  Archives  of Canada by the  Uni­ versity of Toronto Press, $7.50. This  is a  curi­  ous volume,  originally  prepared as a catalogue of an exhibition  held  to celebrate  the centenary of  the  foundation  of  the  Public  Archives  of Canada, and  now made available  to the public. For   this  reason  it  is  not  so  comprehensive a guide   as  one   could   have   wished.   Its   main usefulness  is  that   it  will  alert   many  scholars to the  extraordinary  richness of the  collections and  to the  patent  eagerness  on the  part  of the archivists  for   these  collections   to  be  used  to the  fullest  possible extent.  Surely  there  can  be no   other   institution  in   which   the   Reading  Room  stays  open  for the  benefit of insomaniac students for every one  of the day's  twenty-four hours!
**  P. B.  WAITE,  Canada  r874-1896: Arduous Destiny.    McClelland   &   Stewart.  Over    the years  since  Centennial, the  Canadian  Cente­ nary  History  has  been slowly filling out  its list of  publications. This  is  the  twelfth  volume  to appear, and  it almost  completes  the  account  to  the   end  of  the   nineteenth  century. Apart  from  a  missing  volume  on  New  France  from
1702-43,   the   five  volumes   which   now  must appear for  the  series  to  be ended  will all deal with   aspects   or   periods   of  Canadian  history from  1897  onwards.  There are  obvious  disad­ vantages  to the  method  that  has  been adopted of  chopping  the   history   of  the  country   into chronological chunks,  each  discussed  by a dif­ ferent   historian; tone  and  standard vary  and writers   are  often   hard  put   to  it  to  begin  or end   gracefully   at   an   arbitrary date.  In   the case  of  Canada  rB74-1B96,  for  example,  it  is unsatisfactory  to  pick  up  with  the  history  of the formation of  the CPR  at mid-point, though a   clearer    logic   attends  the   closing   of   the volume  with  the  election  of Laurier to  power in   18g6.   Professor  Waite   captures  well  the gamy   flavour   of  Canadian  politics   in   these decades so shortly  after  Confederation, but  his story  has  no  very  clear  structure, which  may indeed   reflect  the  confused   directions  of  the times,  but  which   hardly   makes  for  sustained interest  in  reading.
G.W.
