$5.00  per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE N°·86
Autumn, 1980

THE STRUCTURE OF FICTION

Articles

BY  LINDA HUTCHEON, \VALTER PACHE, LORRAINE MCMULLEN,  DIANA BRYDON, JOY  KUROPATWA,  ROBERT DIOTTE, SUSAN  STONE-BLACKBURN

Poems

BY  J.D. CARPENTER, ALDEN NOWLAN, PIER GIORGIO DICICCO, DALE ZIEROTH, DERK WYNAND,  LA\VRENCE HUTCHMAN,  CHRISTOPHER  \VISEMAN

Reviews

BY  JERRY WASSERMAN, ANN MESSENGER, GILLES MARCOTTE, DIANA BRYDON, ANNALIESE  KRAMER, ROBERT LECKER, MALCOLM ROSS,  RICHARD GIGUERE,  DIANA COOPER-CLARK,  DONALD R.   BARTLETT, ANTHONY BUKOSKI,  MARY JANE  EDWARDS, DAVID   HEADON, LORRAINE WEIR, KATHY MEZEI, MARGOT NORTHEY,  JULIAN  REID, GEORGE WOODCOCK, LAURIE RICOU, ANDREvV SUKNASKI,  MURIEL \VHITAKER, ROD   WILLMOT

Opinions and Notes

BY   MARGERY  FEE, MURIEL WHITAKER, HELEN  SONTHOFF,  PAUL SOCKEN

A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW







MAKING REPRESENTATIONS



I HAVE   BELATEDLY  BEEN  READING a 1977  book from  Indiana University Press, Towards  a Poetics of Fiction, edited  by Mark  Spilka. The  book collects a  number  of essays from  the  journal  Novel:   essays on  fictional  theory, literary  history, and  language  and  style, among  which  are  three  by  Canadian
critics Graham Good, R. P. Bilan, and  Jerry Wasserman,  on Lukacs, Leavis, and
Rabelais respectively. Despite their quality, it was not these essays that  caught  my
attention, but  rather  the seven opening  papers  which gave the book its title and which explore the possibility that it might be possible to chart a poetics of the novel by means of structure,  language, history, narrative, genre, or time. The word "or" is the most important here. For the essays take such exclusive stances as to end  up being  positively irritating,  and  it is refreshing  to  get  to the  seventh,  by Walter Reed, on the  problems raised by the assumption  that  a single methodology  will open all novels to a reader. Indeed, the problem  with a lot of writing  (and  a lot of reviewing)  is that  it seems to stem from a single preconception  about  method or value. How  to write a book is a much  more  complex  challenge  than  such  a stance  implies;  how to read one is equally complex,  dependent   upon experience and sensitivity and intelligence and talent for associative understanding and scores of other  attributes,  in unequal  measure.  Neither  process can  be reduced  to a set of exercises without  producing  a mechanical  literary  work.  Repetition  does not constitute  ritual,  and  criticism is not just an  act  of rhetorical  ceremony.
Hence it is frustrating  to encounter simplistic dogma shaped  as criticism, as in this  passage from  Eleanor  Hutchens'  contribution   to  Novel's  "poetics  debate":

The assumption of poetry is that we can beat our way to truth: that by setting up rhythms of sound and imagery we can conjure up the archetypes of meaning. The assumption of drama  is that we can mime our way to truth: that  by acting out our beliefs we can make the god appear. The assumption of the short story is that we can see eternity in a grain of sand:  that  a single human  situation,  properly contemplated, will crystallize into a replica of an ultimate  truth. The  assumption of the novel is that truth is the daughter of time.

At once the passage seems to assume a unitary truth  and a variety of universals, a generic restriction on sound, a visceral restriction on space, and a linear restriction

2

EDITORIAL


on time. How  does one respond?  Even if one objects to the  minimalizing,  there remains the rhetoric: an implicit declaration  of faith in the shaping  of meaning, in the human  capacity to use language to give shape to ideas. And language  does code, enact,  re-present. Given that,  how does one enfranchise  it from system?
The  other  essayists in  the  debate  follow their  own  rhetorical   paths.  Robert
Scholes,  celebrating   "the   precise  discriminations  of  genre  study,"   asserts  that "generic  theory provides a rigorous intellectual discipline, which can hold its head high as an area of academic study, without compromising the essentially personal and  imaginative  qualities of individual  response to literary texts." It is significant that the principal clause celebrates discipline; the imagination  gets hidden in a subordinate phrase. Frank Kermode claiins that the novel ought to be seen in connection  with sociology and  "even"  mathematics,  in  part  because  "The fact remains that  a degree of 'historical'  fidelity is something  most people still ask of novels" -a  phrase  that  is worth  balancing  with  Barbara   Hardy's "The  best fantasists, as we know from introspection or from Emma, work in starkly realistic terms."  Hardy   herself  holds  that  "narrative, like lyric  or  dance,  is  not  to  be regarded as an aesthetic invention used by artists to control, manipulate, and order experience, but  as a primary  act of mind transferred  to art  from life." Which  in turn  assumes a universality  of human  "consciousness," whereas  this  is precisely what twentieth  century fiction -particularly that from the Third World, perhaps including  Canada -has been at pains to reject.
But in the primary dispute, David Lodge objects to the notion of a single poetics of fiction, sensibly observing that writers use language and readers must read what they have actually  written, while Malcolm Bradbury  rejects the critical  approach that  presumes language  is more important than  structure.  Bradbury's distinction is more basic than  this implies; discovering image patterns,  he finally says, is not intrinsically more important-or  a clearer demonstration  of the "real  being" of
a book  - than  demonstrating its connections with society, with moral  attitudes,
responses, characters,  and social relationships. "My case is," he says of the novel, that "its main structural characteristic  lies in a developing action about  characters and  events conducted  in a closed-that is to say, an authorially  conditioned­ world containing  principles, values and attitudes  by which we may evaluate  those events." Readers  must ask "questions  about  cause and effect" and  "answer  them from  cruxes within  the work,"  by elevating "into  prominence those conscious or intuitive  choices which  every writer  must  perpetually  make,  and  to  regard  not only the discourse but  the structure  ... as part  of the matter  to be persuaded." Lodge's reply is down-to-earth: "whatever  novelists 'feel,' it is axiomatic  that  it is only  through  language  that  they  are  communicating,  since  there  are  no  other means of communication at their disposal." Those who celebrate space and silence might quarrel  with his last clause, but it is a nonetheless telling assertion. A literary structure is a linguistic structure. The  ideas that literature  shares, the ideas with

3

EDITORIAL

which  we associate  values, the ideas that  embody  relationships between  characters are  all shaped by words.  It is to the words that  we respond.
And  of course  there  is great  joy in  language; it  has  an  enormous capacity to
play,  a  quality  Wasserman delights  in  as  he  writes  about  Rabelais. And  it  is capable of intense  lyric expression-even, as Graham Good  makes  clear,  from  a critic  as politically  committed  as Lukacs.  As Bradbury reminds us, if all that  we respond  to in fiction are words -that is, if we reduce human experience to words
-then this constitutes  at the same time a reduction in our  capacity to appreciate the world  and  a reduction to the kind of world  that we allow art  to represent. But responding to words need not be reductive. Failing to take  account of their flexi­ bility  and  richness  can  be far  more  debilitating, for  it robs  us of the subtleties  of argument and  wit,  it  permits  distinctions between   fashion  and  style  to  fade,  it exchanges articulateness (however laconic)  for  rhetorical  monotone, mistaking utterance for speech. Seeking the structures by which literature communicates, by contrast, can  be to elucidate  more  than  just patterns of words;  for through them,  one can meet the patterns of mind  that  shape  events as well as art,  and engage  in a genuine process of literary  discovery.                                                                    w.H.N.

* 	* 	*
CORRECTION: An error  that  accidentally crept  into  the editorial of Canadian
Literature  No. 85 may have  caused  both  disquiet and  some confusion, for  which we apologize. We  want  to assure  our  readers  that  the  critical   journal  Canadian Children's  Literature is alive and  well, flourishing under  Mary  Rubio's guidance, and  that  it is available from  Box 335, Guelph, Ontario, NIH 6K5.
What the  editorial intended  to  say  was  that   Evelyn  Samuel's Victoria-based
children's journal, Canadian Children's Magazine, had  to fold some months ago; it  was  a  spirited   enterprise, and  its  disappearance is something which  we,  and other  members of the literary  community, deeply  regret.                                  w.H.N.



WJILLY



In among the frozen elms in parkland
below the schoolhouse hill
Wally sat in the shed
fed wood to the potbelly stove

In  blue tobacco air skaters laced their skates rubbed cold toes
 

]. D. Carpenter


4

POEM

Among  woodsmoke, raw pine wet reek of wool
Wally  showed  his biceps ivory  in stoveglow
let us stare  at  the blue girl on his ann
But the older  boys would laugh as he knelt  to loosen a knot
or bent  to feed the fire

Wally  turned out  the lights  at eleven the skaters  drifted home
Then he stood  with  the moon and  an indolent hose
feeding  the oval of ice
stood in the night  like an old star man at watch  on a ship on the sea






THE WEEKEND GOD
 


Alden Nowlan


There ought to be a name  for  the  Weekend God of the  working  class; call it an angel
or a saint  if you prefer,  still it ought  to have  a name.
A face  would  follow in no time;  it would  be a smiling  face,
of course,  but  since this is a real god that  men  and  women  worship, there  would  be times when  its smile was enough
to make  one weep:  the gods are like that.

I've  worshipped him, climbed  each  week  like a ladder, thinking how  every rung  was bringing me closer;
and  if, when  I got there,  it was never so good
as I  had  hoped, it always seemed  to have  been  better
-like home  in the memory  of the homeless.

Yes, there  ought to be a name  for  the  Weekend God. There ought to be shrines  raised  to him
in places  like Sudbury, in cities where at dusk the sun  dissolves in acid, creating a sky
of purple, scarlet  and  brass, like a blind  man's
last remembered thunderous moment of sight.


5


THE POET AS NOVELIST


Linda Hutcheon


L 1g65 NORTHROP FRYE WROTE ' "A striking fact about  Can­ adian  poetry is the number of poets who have turned  to narrative  forms (including closet drama) rather  than lyrical ones.m It is indeed  true  that  we possess a rather
rich  tradition  of narrative  poetry in this country,  and,  as Frye has also pointed out,2  much of our poetry that is lyrical in form is not at all lyrical in spirit. Yet it is also a fact that at least two of our decidedly lyric poets have turned  to narrative, but  narrative  in prose:  Leonard  Cohen and  Margaret Atwood.  They  have  not totally rejected what Frye calls "the more manipulated comic and romantic formu­ las of prose fiction" but they do seem to have used narrative for its natural affinities with  ironic  tones  and  themes.3    Unlike  Pratt's tragic  and  impersonal  narrative  poems, the novels of Cohen  and  Atwood in  particular are  both  ironic  and  per­ sonal -that is, lyrical and not autobiographical.
These novels are lyrical or poetic in yet another  way, one that seems to set them apart  from  the  creations  of  Canadian  novelists  proper.  This  difference  would seem to lie in the particular  structural use made of imagery and symbolism within the novels. It is not that the poet/novelists use more of these devices, but that  they use them in a different manner: they appear  to be willing to trust the reader with the image. Poets, after all, have no choice; in their poetry, they have to. Novelists, on  the  other  hand,  have  a  different  set of  rhetorical  tools at  their  command: among  these, plot and character  exposition and  narrative explanation.
Margaret  Laurence-through her  heroine-tells  the  reader  quite  explicitly that  Hagar  is the stone angel of the title of her  novel. Robertson  Davies thrice explains what the "fifth business" means. On the other hand, despite the title, The Edible Woman, Atwood refrains from explicating  the  theme  of her  novel-the threatened  consuming  of Marion -to  the  reader.  Instead  she implicitly  struc­ tures  her novel around  the title image:  most scene locations,  jobs, and  personal problems are oriented around  food. Here the narrative structure seems to be hung on the scaffolding of imagery, rather than vice versa. In Cohen's Beautiful  Losers, this structure   hangs  there  tenuously,  actually  slipping  off  completely  at  times, leaving  the reader  with only the scaffold. He  is then  asked  to  relate  directly  to the image -without  the explanatory  intervention  of  character or narrator. The question  is:  does this matter  of trust  arise at  all  from  the  fact  that  Cohen  and Atwood are poets as well?

6

COHEN & DAVIES

It is not at all surprising that  they would manifest similar themes in their verse and  in their  fiction. This  has always been the case: one thinks  of Emily Bronte, Meredith, D. H. Lawrence. It is also not odd that there  are similar poetic images or even similar  poetic structures  in their  prose as in their  verse. Very few writers seem to switch definitively from one form to another, as did Hardy,  and certainly Cohen and  Atwood seem to be continuing  to write both  poetry and  prose fiction. But poets who write novels do perhaps  have a different "hermeneutic" relation­ ship  to both  their  readers  and  their  narrative  structures  than  do  novelists. This phenomenon  would  not be peculiarly  Canadian -witness  Dickey and  Plath - although  the irony that dominates the narrative  of the two Canadians' works (but not that  of the two Americans)   might tend to support  a version of Frye's notion that there is something in our cultural  heritage that is attracted to the ironic mode within the narrative  genre -be it in verse or in "poetically" patterned  prose.



Two CANADIAN NOVELS SUGGEST THEMSELVES for considera­ tion in this light, since they share, not one, but two thematic  patterns:  a tracing of the relationship  between  the mysteries of magic and  those of religion, and  an attempt  to convince  the  reader  of the need to reconcile the  human  dualities,  to unite  the opposites of flesh and  spirit  in order  to achieve  some human  ideal of wholeness  and  identity.  These  two  novels are  Beautiful   Losers,  by  the  poet, Leonard  Cohen,  and  Fifth  Business, by the satirist-dramatist, Robertson  Davies. On  the surface,  despite thematic similarities, two novels could  not  appear  more diverse. The  bizarre  experimental  form  of the one is juxtaposed  with  the  more traditionally  realistic form  (fictional  autobiography)  of the other.  Cohen's  often wildly obscene,  rhapsodic  prose  ("I paddle  versions of  Word"), whose verbal structures  often  tend  toward disintegration,  contrasts sharply  with  the  elegantly controlled  style of  Davies'  narrative.  Yet, though  in  different  fashions,  the  nar­ rators of each are equally articulate  and it is what they choose to tell rather  than show the reader, that should  prove interesting from our point of view.
Although  the two novels indeed do share the dual  thematic  structure  outlined
above, the variants  within  the form  are  potentially revealing.  In  Fifth  Business, Dunstan  Ramsay comes to realize that  religion and magic share the same appeal: they both present mysterious worlds of wonders which all men find a psychological necessity. The  hero's sense of satisfaction in the magic of Magnus  Eisengrim fol­ lows -in  plot chronology -his realization  of the psychological reality of  faith, through  those worshipping  at  the shrine of the Virgin  of Guadaloupe.  He  asks himself:  "Why  do people all over the world, and at all times, want marvels that defy all verifiable fact?"  Of  course, he himself had  always intuitively sensed the inter-relationships between  magic  and  religion; as a  boy  his two  favourite  dis­ coveries amid  the library's  rejected volumes were a book of magic  tricks and  one

7

COHEN & DAVIES

of the lives of the saints. He reads both to Paul  (later  the magician), son of Mary
(later Dunstan's fool-saint).
Cohen,  too,  perceives the similarities in  these  wonder-working  identities,  but rejects that of the magician, the controller  of wonders. His character F. writes: "I believed that  I had  conceived the vastest dream  of my generation: I wanted  to be a magician.  That was my idea of glory. Here  is a  plea  based  on  my whole experience:  do not be a magician,  be magic."  One  must not  try to control as a magician,  but rather  one must seek "balance in the chaos of existence," and  one who does so fulfils Cohen's definition of the real, if unorthodox,  saint. The  other wonder-working  magicians and orthodox saints-F. and  Catherine Tekakwitha
-are revealed as defeated victims of their particular beliefs. Cohen does not spell this out  for  his reader,  but  rather  leaves him, as we shall see, to connect  image clusters, to make meaning on his own, if he so chooses.
This same difference is seen in the treatment of the second shared  theme in the two novels:  the need to unite flesh and spirit,  body and  soul. 4   These are  two of the elements that  the narrator  seeks to balance in Beautiful Losers.  Either,  on its own, develops into a tyrannical and victimizing system. In Fifth  Business, Dunstan, too, learns to balance the devil of the flesh and the saint of the spirit in his own life. Alone, the devil and  the saint are equally self destructive. Davies, however, seems to employ a Jungian  foundation on which to build his imagery:  in particular, the dualism of ego and anima  (the  bisexual Liesl is, we recall, the devil figure) . This psychological core suggests that  Dunstan's  balancing  is a  private  one, albeit  one for which all men might strive. In  Beautiful Losers, on the other  hand,  the  nar­ rator's  every utterance  turns out to be doubly resonant: he is condemned  to speak on a private  and  public level at once, much  to his chagrin: "0 Tongue  of the Nation! Why don't  you speak for yourself?"
One might argue that the title metaphor of Davies' novel points to a public role Dunstan  is to play in the lives of others. Yet the  weight  of the  novel is on the hero's  personal and  private development  and  not at all on the public dimension which presumably  Davies intends to have  (but,  as we shall see, does not succeed in having)  dovetail with the private one at the end of the novel. The  key to this difference in resonance in the treatment of the same  themes in these two novels may well stem from the different  uses of imagery  and  from  the differing  degrees of trust in the reader  displayed by the two writers.
In lieu of traditional narrative structures,  Cohen  relies on mythic and  imagistic patterns  to balance  out the chaos of Beautiful Losers.  Frye 5   pointed  out  twenty years ago that  Cohen's  interests have been mythopoeic  from  the start.  His  usual Jewish,  Christian,  and  Hellenic  paradigms  are  supplemented here,  by  the  folk­ lorist narrator, with Amerindian  and  Egyptian  ones, and  with  a modem  mythos gleaned  from  movies, radio, and  comics. The  narrator addresses the  pop singer, Gavin  Gate: "You  are the king of some slum block and  you have handed  down

8

COHEN & DAVIES


Laws." Cohen's  reasons for this wide mythic range are  mainly structural, for his novel is both  private and  public in its scope.
In this double dimension, it is most like one particular work-the Bible. Both
are epics of a man  and a people, but Cohen's demonic parody replaces the moral framework of good and evil with an existential one of identity and alienation. Faith is in tum  replaced  by magic. Both works have a recognizable historical skeleton, yet their unity is an organic  and  not a linear one:  instead of the biblical story of the growth of Israel's freedom from bondage, we have an ironic tale of increasing bondage  and  victimization  at  the hands  of public and  private  conquerors.  The Top  Ten  are elevated to the "Lost Tribes."
In the Bible, both the public hero, Moses, and the private one, Jesus, are saved from slaughter in their early years. Similarly, Catherine  Tekakwitha is saved from the Jesuits by the narrator's lust and  love, and  the old man of the epilogue is in tum   rescued  from  the  "Catholic  posse" by  the  half-naked,   moccasin-wearing blonde. Just as Moses crossed the Red Sea, and Jesus was baptized  in the Jordan, Catherine  (and later F. and Edith, too)  is refreshed by the waters of Tekakwitha's spring, and the narrator is baptized by "fire, shit, history, love and loss." As Moses strives for  the  Promised  Land,  and  Jesus enters  Heaven  after  death,  so in  our novel, Catherine enters  "the  eternal  machinery  of  the  sky,"  and  the  old  man becomes a Ray Charles  movie projected against the sky.
In  the Bible, we find certain  spiritual  textual  authorities-Moses' Ten  Com­ mandments and  Jesus'  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  In  Cohen's  ironic  version,  the reader might note that we find Jesuit sermons and reports, and F.'s cryptic sayings that  are handed  down  through  time, across the barrier  of death.  The  Serpent  of Brass is visually  echoed  by  Christ  on  the  cross, just  as  the  image  of  Brebeuf at  the stake  is structurally repeated  in  that  of Cohen's  old  man  tormented   in the  treehouse.  Edith  puts  semen, rainwater,  tears,  and  urine  in  her  navel  in  a parody, perhaps, of the Song of Songs: "Your  navel is a rounded  bowl that  never lacks mixed wine." There  are also extended  image patterns  throughout Beautiful Losers of the biblical symbols connected with the eucharist,  the leviathan,  and the apocalypse,6  but  at  no time does Cohen explain, underline,  or explicate.  It  is up to the reader to make order -or balance.
Perhaps with Isaiah 59: 15 in Inind ("He that departeth from evil maketh him­ self a prey" ) , Cohen  has partly based both the historical and  personal plot struc­ tures on the pattern  of victimizer turning victim. Just as F. tormented  the narrator, he too is tormented, a victim of an English plot -and of his own system of belief. Each successive conquering  race of Canada's history has become the prey both of its own victims and  of the  next historical conqueror.  Brebeuf is  tortured  by the Indians,  just as the Indians' culture fell to that  of the French explorers and  mis­ sionaries, who in tum  faced defeat at the hands of the English. Today, Cohen sug­ gests, these same  English  are  threatened   by  both  French  terrorist  bombs  and

9

COHEN & DAVIES

America's overwhelming  technology and culture.  No character or narrator expli­ citly states this in the novel; the reader must look for patterns  to find  meaning­ as he does in reading a poem, of course.
The other related structure that Cohen seems to employ centres on two opposite
systems of unity,  both  "arrogant and  warlike"  because  they  pretend  to  put  the world in order: the system of the flesh, with its victim and magician controller, F.; and  the system of the spirit, with its victim and  saint,  Catherine. To  unify is to control and to do so is to exert the power "to  change"  and  "to  hurt," and, as the hero of Cohen's  first novel (The  Favorite Game) suggests, to leave one's  brand. Both unifying systems demand  a loss of personal identity,  in favour  of a symbolic sainthood  that  the  mechanical  imagery  attached   to it in  the  novel  suggests is destructive.
The  narrator loves the victims of both systems and  in  merging  their  identities
(Edith's and Catherine's; F.'s and the uncle's), he becomes a "balancing monster of love." Or  so the  reader  might  choose to interpret   that  constantly  confusing blurring of edges that  are usually so carefully delineated  in fiction:  those of  char­ acters' personalities and identities. Cohen is never even as explicit in the novel as he is in, for instance,  the  poem "The  priest says goodbye,"  in  which  "Abelard  proved  how  bright  could  be  j  the  bed  between  the  hermitage   and  nunnery." Abelard,  too, is a beautiful  loser, precariously balancing  the flesh and spirit.  The true  balancing  saint  does not control like the magician; he himself is the act  of magic:  "mind itself is Magic coursing through  flesh" (italics mine).
In the light of the ambiguity of the final image of a Ray Charles movie and  the
failure of the revolution of the second chancers, the possibility arises that  balance is merely another  word for ambivalence. The  reader  is not allowed  to order,  to create his own victimizing system of interpretation; instead, like the other beautiful losers, he must find and  then  balance the dualities  which  the imagery and  sym­ bolism of the novel suggest on both the private and  public levels of the narrative
-which is, after all, about a set of very Canadian orphans,  Indian, French, and
English.



IN CONTRAST TO  COHEN's  STRUCTURING METHOD of patterns of allusion, symbolism, and  image  that-as  in  verse -leaves the  actual  her­ meneutic work up to the reader  (the lazy one will not bother finishing the novel), Robertson  Davies uses more traditional  novelistic techniques  both  to structure his
novel and to expose its themes. The  plot consists of an impressively balanced series of events and  set  of  characters.  Each  of the  six sections  is carefully  linked  by parallel incident  with its neighbours and with its counterpart ( I  and 4;  2  and  5;
3  and  6).7   Each  character   has  his opposite  number:  Leala/Denyse, Blazon/


IO

COHEN & DAVIES


Leadbeater, Mrs. Ramsay/Mrs. Dempster, and so on. Perhaps  there is not a little of the satirist's  classical order  in Davies' formal balance.
Often  characters  are asked to be carriers of specific thematic  weight, in the way
that  images are  in  Cohen's  novel. For  Boy Staunton  "the  reality  of life lay in external  things," while Mary  Dempster explicitly lives "by a light that  arose from within."  Of  course,  the  reader's  perceptions of these characters  and  what  they stand  for is conditioned  by the roles they play in the  private life of the narrator, Dunstan  Ramsay, whose autobiographical narrative he is reading. This is not completely true, of course, since it is the author,  not the narrator, who chooses to give  his  three   "twice-born"  their  symbolic  names:    Magnus   Eisengrim,  Boy Staunton, and Dunstan  Ramsay. One is made to choose a superlative  and a wolf's name;  another  is revealingly left a boy forever;  the third  is made  to reject Dun­ stable, his mother's  maiden  name, and take on that of a saint who is described as having  been  "mad   about  learning,  terribly stiff and  stern  and  scowly, and  an absolute wizard at withstanding temptation."
Yet it is Dunstan,  the narrator, to whom the various thematic  messages of unity are  directly  addressed  by other  characters.  Father  Blazon  preaches  to him  that when  Christ  comes again,  "it  will be to declare the unity of the life of the flesh and the life of the spirit. And then perhaps we shall make some sense of this life of marvels, cruel circumstances, obscenities, and commonplaces."  He warns Dunstan to forgive himself for  being  human  and  to accept  that  the  wisdom of the spirit must be linked to that  of the body. Enter  Magnus Eisengrim with his sacred and profane  "Vision  of Dr.  Faustus,"  and  more importantly,  Liesl, the  devil herself, who  accuses  him -explicitly  and  at  length-of   trying  to  be  a  saint  at  the expense of the repressed devil in himself. These overt statements  of theme are, of course, directed at the reader as well, since it is to him  (and  the Headmaster) that Davies (and  Dunstan) choose to relate the tale. Declaration  replaces the allusion of Cohen's text.
This  is not to say that  Davies does not use imagery to structure his narrative. As mentioned  earlier, the Jungian ego-anima  duality appears  in an  image chain that  begins in Dunstan's academic  interest in Wilgefortis, a hermaphroditic saint, whose legend  grew  from  the  image  at  Lucca  of a  long-haired,  bearded  figure hanging  from  a  cross. This  saviour  symbolism is recalled  in  the  saving  role in Dunstan's life played by the bisexual, very masculine woman,  Liesl, who Dunstan meets through  Paul.  Not surprisingly,  he had  previously met  Paul  once  before while indulging  his academic  interests in viewing a bearded  lady in a small Euro­ pean circus. This hermaphroditic union of male and female does suggest the ego­ anima  division of "that fantastical  duke  of dark  comers,"  as Dunstan  explicitly calls Jung.  Indeed  the novel's plot seems structured  on Dunstan's private, psycho­ logical, personal  coming  to  terms  with  himself. If this is so,  the novel's title­ which might  be pointing  the reader to its major image -is problematic.


II

COHEN & DAVIES

The  idea of the fifth business, carefully defined by Davies in the epigraph,  and by Liesl within the novel, relates to a public role which Dunstan  is to play in the lives of Paul and, especially, Boy. While this novel does not have the historical or national  scope of Cohen's, it would appear  to lay claim to a more public dimen­ sion; it is presumably  meant  to be more than  a chronicle  of Dunstan's  personal maturation. But, is it? It has been suggested that  the public role of the fifth busi­ ness corresponds to that of the Jungian  shadow,8  and  that  when  Dunstan  has his coronary at the words of Liesl's Brazen Head,  he is accepting  his public responsi­ bility, in an  analogous act to his earlier  acceptance  of his  private  one, again  at Liesl's hands. But is it not true that  Dunstan's  narrative has used Paul,  Boy, and Mrs.  Dempster  (those directly and  indirectly  involved  in  his public  role as the fifth)  as functions and  indices of the hero's  personal  development,  and  not vice versa? It is a novel about the private growth of  Dunstan,  not about  the peripheral  role he plays in the lives of public figures such as Boy and  Paul.
More  recently David  Monaghan  has suggested that,  although  Davies seems to want  the  public and  private themes to intertwine, they do not do so.9  The  fifth business then becomes a misused metaphor, a subsidiary and  not controlling image in the novel. He offers an alternative  controlling  metaphor -that of the concept of the "boy"  (as literal youth; as false adult;  and as authentic man), and his argu­ ment is convincing,  although  this is mainly so because, once again,  the  narrator  is so very explicit about it himself. Early in the novel, he tells us that  a boy "is a man in miniature, and though he may sometimes exhibit  notable virtue ... he is also schemer,  self-seeker, traitor,  Judas,  crook,  and  villain-in  short,  a  man."  Later,  as a schoolteacher,  he tells his reader: "I have been a boy  myself, and  I know what  a boy is, which is to say, either a fool or an imprisoned  man striving to get out."  Dunstan,  as a young man, rejects being anyone's "wee laddie"  and in doing  so  rejects,  too,  all  involving  human   relations,  remaining  the  cold  and detached  intellectual,  until Liesl confronts him  with the knowledge  that  in emo­ tional terms, he is still a boy. As a result of his battle  with his devil and  with the truth,  Dunstan  is able to break down his protective  walls and  grows emotionally and humanly.  Boy Staunton, as his name suggests, reaches no such  maturity  and dies a boy, punished for a boy's crime. Dunstan  himself makes this very clear:  "As a boy he had  been something of a bully, a boaster, and  certainly  a bad  loser. ... But now Boy Staunton  had  reached  a  point in life  where  he no longer  tried  to conceal  his naked  wish to dominate  everybody  and  was angry  and  ugly when things  went  against  him."  Boy later  tries to  absolve  himself of responsibility  in Mrs. Dempster's fate:  "you know what boys are. Brutes, because they don't  know any better." His next words are ironic:  "But they grow up to be men."  Boy dies a boy, but at the hands-in moral if not physical terms-of  a man  who is sup­ posed to have  advanced  beyond the  machinations of a detached  and  moralistic saint.

12

COHEN & DAVIES


Is Dunstan's role as fifth business as false to the primary  theme of the novel as this would suggest? In  his attempt  to use imagery as a structuring device, Davies appears  to have been working at cross purposes:  the plot and character develop­ ment  present a private  theme, but the central  images-the fifth and  the boy­ would seem to cancel each other out, were not the latter more frequent and no less explicitly explained  by the narrator, so as in effect to dominate the imagery of the work. There  is none of the broad scope (Biblical, Canadian, as well as personal) or deeper thematic  resonance of Cohen's structural use of metaphor  here. Davies uses traditional novelistic devices of plot and character, as well as overt declaration to expose his themes. The  reader can note the satisfying parallel structures-but rarely before the narrator points them out to him. It is, of course, central to Davies' theme as well as form, that  the reader  perceive the balancing  and  reconciling  (of flesh and spirit, of magic and faith) . Perhaps  for this reason he leads him by the hand.
Cohen  allows his reader  considerably  more freedom -including  that  of  mis­ reading, or rather  of interpreting the novel in his own manner,  or even of  refusing interpretation  completely.  The  responsibility is always  the  reader's.  Davies,  as controller magician,  takes this upon himself and, not unlike the satirical writers of the eighteenth  century,  guides his reader  step by step  to his, the  author's,  inter­ pretation  of the text. This is, of course, probably why Davies' novel is both easier to read and  more of a popular success than  Cohen's could ever be. It is also why the second reading  of each is such a very different experience.
In  Beautiful Losers  the  narrative's  irony is a function  as much  of the  act  of
reading as that  of writing. While this cannot  really be claimed for Fifth  Business, Davies' novel also combines irony with the narrative  mode in what  is, if Frye is right, a particularly Canadian fashion. Perhaps it is in the different structural uses of imagery, however, that lie the distinguishing formal characteristics of the (lyric) poet and the  (satiric)  novelist within this national tradition. The  poet does appear to have a  greater  degree of hermeneutic  trust  in  his reader-even  when  he is writing prose fiction.


NOTES

1 "Conclusion," Literary History  of Canada, ed. Carl  F. Klinck   (Toronto: Univ. of
Toronto Press,  rg65), pp. 842-43.
2   "The  Narrative Tradition in  English-Canadian  Poetry," in  The  Bush   Garden
(Toronto: Anansi,  1971), p.  I49·
3 See Frye's  "Conclusion," p. 843.
4  Perhaps this duality is, as Davies  suggests, a typically  Canadian one. He  claimed in a Maclean's interview in 1972 that  his novels actually said a lot about  Canada: "I see Canada as a country torn  between  a very northern, rather extraordinary, mysti­ cal  spirit  which  it  fears  and  its desire  to  present  itself  to  the  world   as  a  Scotch  banker." (Quoted by William H.  New in Chapter 14, "Fiction" in Carl  F. Klinck,

I3

COHEN & DAVIES

ed., Literary History of Canada, 2nd ed., vol. III [Toronto: Univ.  of Toronto Press, I976], p. 255·)
5  I956 "Letters in Canada," reprinted in The  Bush Garden, p. 67.
6 See, for a full  discussion,  the author's "Beautiful Losers: All the  Polarities," Cana­
dian Literature,  No. 59 (Winter I974), especially  pp. 43-44·
7   See  Ellen  D.  Warwick, "The  Transformation of  Robertson  Davies," Journal  of
Canadian  Fiction, 3, No.3 ( I974), 46-51.
8 Gordon Roper, "Robertson Davies'  Fifth  Business and   'that  fantastical duke  of dark  corners,  C. G. Jung,'" Journal of Canadian  Fiction,  I, No.  I  (Winter I972),
33-39·
9   "Metaphors and  Confusions," Canadian  Literature, No. 67  (Winter I976), 64-73.


THE INCREDIBLE BLUE JIND LOVELY SUICIDES
Pier Giorgio Di Cicco

The  incredible blue and  lovely suicides
are  coming  to visit me. The  friend, he was such  a friend,
tied  his neck to the ceiling,  and  swung  for  a couple of hours, and  care, something like a crutch of bones,  discovered him.

How  shall I name  the toothpicks around the heart, and  the improbable sunlight trying  out  gloves. He  was  nothing like his face, hanging there,  and  his eyes blackened beyond  the light  that  had  been leaving  them  for  ten  years.

The bed, in the night, did not turn  me over; and  there  were no voices. And  my 28 years did  not  run  around the  room looking for articles  of clothing.

He  went, snugly, he went  like a poke  in the  eye, he went  mildly, he went  like a cloth  tearing, like my insides.

And  he  remembered mamma? No.  He  heard nothing, and  nothing will I
forgive him.

Isee  my fingers  running across  the  far  side  of  the  room; as  they might  go
through hair.  When  it grows dark  they  will go mad  and  white,
and  from  the other  corner  of the  room  I will laugh  to myself, and  remember the idiot flowers.


ENGLISH-CANADIAN FICTION
& THE PASTORAL TRADITION

Walter  Pache




W-N DAN1EL WILSON REVIEWF.D the cu\tma] situation of Canada in  1858,  the  country seemed  to  hover  halfway  between   wilderness  and civilization:
We are  past  the first poetic  birth-time,  which pertains  to the  vigorous infancy of races; we have  yet to attain the era of refinement from  which  a high civilization educes new phases of poetic inspiration.

This  peculiar state, Wilson  then  argues,  calls for  practical efforts  rather than for pastoral poetry.  Referring to  Longfellow's popular   epic  poem  Hiawatha  which had  recently  been  published, he continues:
We cannot  yet respond  amid  these charred  stumps and  straggling  snake-fences of our rough clearings, to Hiawatha's appeal to those
Who love the haunts  of nature, Love the sunshine of the meadow, Love the shadow of the forest,
Love the wind among  the branches,
And the rain-shower and  the snow-storm, And the rushings of great rivers,
Through their palisades of pine-trees.
We want  our  pine-trees  for  lumber,  and  so long as they  spare  us a  surplus  for kindling wood, we ask no kindling inspiration from them. The  rushing of our great rivers  we estimate  rejoicingly-for their  water-privileges.  The  sunshine  of  the meadow  is very welcome to us-in  the hay-harvest;  and  the poetry of the snow­ storm full of the music-of  our sleigh-bells. As to our love for the shadow of the forest,  that  pertains  to  the  romantic  simplicity of our  squatter  stage  of infancy, from  whence  we emerge  as fast  as possible into  the  clearing  we  hew  out  of it, rejoicing at  the crash of falling pines, and  keeping time with  the music of the axe to the crackling of the logging-pile.1

Wilson's  essay represents a  remarkable early  example of the  Canadian search for  identity. Wilson's contemporaries, however,  were  far  from  taking his advice about the  poetical  beauty of the  pioneer's life. Instead, they  set out  to write  the very  kind  of  pastoral poetry  which  Wilson  had  considered premature. Pastoral forms  and  pastoral topoi  were  drawn primarily from  English  sources,  and  super­ ficially adapted to  the  new  surroundings. Until  well into  the  second  half  of the nineteenth century, Canadian writers  modelled  their  often  melancholy idylls after

PASTORAL  TRADITION


examples taken  from  the  English  romantic poets  or  from  those  of the  Victorian period.  Charles Sangster's "Sonnets written in  the  Orillia Woods" ( 186o) could be quoted as an example:

I've almost grown a portion of this place; I seem familiar with each mossy stone; Even the nimble chipmunk  passes on,
And looks, but never scolds me. Birds have flown And almost touched my hand; and  I can trace The wild bees to their hives. I've never known
So sweet a pause from labour.

The  pastoral mood  is not only a pervading element of Canadian poetry,  it also shapes  prose fiction. It is the "regional idyll" that, in Creative Writing  in Canada, Desmond Pacey  identified  as the most important pattern of the  novel  at  the  tum of the century. The regional idyll, like the "historical romance" which  preceded it, tried  to recreate values  and  lifestyles of an  idealized rural eighteenth  century­ at a time  when  the  modem  novel elsewhere  attempted to come  to terms  with  the  perplexities of contemporary life. But  though the  pastoral was originally a set of conventions about rural  setting,  characters, and  diction, it soon developed into  an anti-realistic way of looking at life.
To explain this dichotomy, Northrop Frye suggested that  there  might  be a specifically  Canadian affinity  to  a  pastoral myth   manifesting itself  either   in  a nostalgic  look  back  to an  idyllic  past  or  in  the  imaginative vision  of a  mythical unity.2   But  Frye's  categories  are  not  always  easy  to apply. If we take  a  passage from  Leacock's Sunshine  Sketches  of  a Little  Town it  would  seem  to  illustrate Frye's  first nostalgic  type of pastoral. In  "Ministrations," the  narrator introduces the  reader to  the  Rev.  Dean  Drone  as  he  sits  at  his  rural table  enjoying "the chequered light of the plum tree that  is neither sun  nor shadow." Dean  Drone, we subsequently learn, is reading:

and  when  I  tell you that  at  the end of the  grass plot where  the  hedge  is highest there  is a  yellow beehive with  seven bees that  belong  to  Dean  Drone,  you  will realize that it is only fitting that the Dean is reading  in the Greek. For what  better could  a man  be reading  beneath  the  blossom of the  plum  trees, within  the  very sound  of the  bees, than  the  Pastorals of Theocritus? The  light  trash  of  modern romance  might  put a man to sleep in such a spot, but with such food for reflection as Theocritus, a man may safely close his eyes and  muse on what he reads without fear of dropping into slumber.

The  passage testifies both to Leacock's learning and his sense of irony. In a modern world,  he seems to imply, the status of the  pastoral tradition is doubtful. The  tone and  the themes  of the passage are reminiscent of eighteenth-century novelists such as Fielding or  Goldsmith. The  classical  pastoral is not  only  explicitly  referred to but  also provides  the  topoi of the locus amoenus:   trees and  bees are  the standard

16

PASTORAL TRADITION

attributes  of the shady grove where time seems to stand  still and  the conflicts of real life lose their relevance.
But even if Dean  Drone  seems to personify the innocent  country  parson -a
late successor to Goldsmith's Dr. Primrose-his idyllic peace is threatened. Not only does Drone  eventually  tum  out  to  be involved in  dubious  business  trans­ actions which are beyond his control, but the narrator  also exposes the limitations of the idyllic sphere.
There is, in other words, a contradiction  between the closed world of the garden
and the lofty literary tradition which it claims to represent:  Dean Drone, nodding off over his Theocritus, really  prefers not to translate  the  original  Greek -for reasons the narrator tactfully  hints at when he remarks  that  "when  Dean  Drone said that  he simply couldn't translate  it, I believe he was perfectly sincere." The ironic commentary  uncovers the Dean's comic inadequacy  but  at the same time reveals the unrealistic  character of the pastoral convention.
Leacock's works contains  a number  of similar scenes. It  can be said to mark  a new stage  in  what  Empson  called the  pastoral  process of  putting  the  complex into  the simple:   pastoral  motifs and  themes are  no  longer  used "literally"  but quoted  as conventions.  Leacock and  his followers consciously recapitulate  typical features of an historical genre. Below the seemingly unruffled surface of the idyllic scene there emerges a tension between reality and ideal.
From a comparative point of view, Leacock's ironic idyll is a fairly late example
of the re-interpretation of the  pastoral observable everywhere  during  the second half  of the  nineteenth   century.  The  realistic  novel, in  particular, employs the idyllic scene as an emblem of a pastoral ideal of harmony  and  bliss which cannot last in reality. Thus,  the  conflict between an  idyllic world-picture  and  the  non­ idyllic "real" world  (which  remains  outside the scope  of Theocritus'  pastorals, Virgil's eclogues, Sidney's  Arcadia, or Mazo de la Roche's  ]alna  novels, for that matter) becomes a central  theme of fiction.3
An early form of the problematical  attempt to recapture the innocence of Acadia
is the pastoral tableau  at the end of the narrative, a favourite  device of eighteenth­ century writers which survived until well into the nineteenth  century, as a number  of Dickens' novels demonstrate: idyllic elements intensify and  confirm the happy ending. The  interpolated idyllic scene is a different  matter:  it  no longer antici­ pates a happy  ending  but  usually stands for a temporary  vision of harmony,  for an  idyllic  moment   overshadowed   by  an  approaching   catastrophe.  Victorian novelists such as Robert  Louis Stevenson and Thomas Hardy,  Joseph Conrad  and Henry  James  use  the  idyllic  episode to  explore  fundamental tensions  between town and  country,  individual  and society, utopian  hope and  melancholy resigna­ tion. The locus amoenus is no longer autonomous but  now vulnerable. It appears idyllic only from  a certain  point of view, for certain  people, for a limited span of time. It may be no more than a dream or a fleeting glimpse of the past. The pastoral

PASTORAL TRADITION

may become a criticism of real life, but  may  also be shown  as an escape into a simpler world of illusions. It seems essential, in discussing the form and  function of the "pastoral  relief" in modern Canadian fiction, to keep these developments in mind before forming  theories about  an indigenous  "pastoral myth."



THE RISE OF THE CANADIAN NOVEL in the  I 950s can be des­ cribed as a quantitative and  a qualitative  phenomenon: more and  better  novels were published.  Two  of the most influential  novels which  appeared  in  I 959, in their  different  ways, take  up  the  pastoral  tradition:  Hugh  MacLennan's The Watch  That  Ends  the  Night  and  Mordecai   Richler's  The  Apprenticeship· of Duddy Kravitz.
MacLennan's contribution  to a definition and  interpretation of the "Canadian experience" is obvious: the precarious co-existence of two languages and cultures, the  country's  difficult choice between  political  neutrality   and  commitment, but also the perennial  struggle with hostile nature  are among  the recurrent  themes of his novels. While  these themes are  undoubtedly   relevant  for  a study  of Watch, which is set in Montreal  during  the uneasy peace of the late  I93o's,  the role of pastoral conventions  has frequently gone unnoticed.
Both  male  protagonists  are  associated  with  nature.  Nature,   however,  is  a thoroughly  ambiguous  concept. Jerome  Martell  throughout the  novel represents the tough and primitive wilderness-relationship, which is most dramatically under­ lined in his escape from the logging camp.  Martell's unio mystica with  nature  as a school for survival is carefully set against  the  much  more  conventional  nature  imagery which the narrator  George Stewart uses when he characterizes his relation­ ship with Catherine Carey. The beginning, climax and imminent  end of this rela­ tionship is indicated  in a series of idyllic scenes conjuring up a deceptive world of private happiness.
George's account  of the  past sets in at  the  very moment  when  this  privacy is about  to collapse with Jerome's  unexpected return.  The  pastoral  tradition  clearly informs George's first encounter  with Catherine which takes place in the Careys' garden:

Under our lone apple tree Catherine Carey stood with a basket of phlox and late delphiniums on her arm.... The actual colour of Catherine's  dress that morning I do not know-it  might have been white or red or blue-but  with the sunlit green of the garden around  her, with the dappled  green of the shadowed grass under her feet, green was her colour at that supreme moment of my youth.... So that summer I entered Arcadia and  the pipes played and  the glory of the Lord shone round about....

Catherine appears  static and isolated like a statue, transferred into an ideal sphere outside reality. The  prototype of this kind of picturesque  idyll-regarding both

PASTORAL TRADITION

the imagery  and  the  position in the plot -may  be found  in nineteenth-century novels. In  Thomas  Hardy's Tess of the d'Urbervilles, for example, Tess and  her lover Angel Clare meet initially in the "vale of the dairies" which has a function similar to the sheltered  bourgeois garden. Here and there, pastoral nature  reflects an optimistic hope for a life free from external pressures. The  tragic failure of the utopian  pastoral  and  the corresponding  idyllic scene which precedes it appear  in both novels.
In  Hardy's Tess,  the  lovers spend  a few days together  in  the  lonely country house, before Tess  (having  murdered  her husband)  gives herself up to the police. The second idyll in MacLennan's novel coincides with Martell's  return,  and  con­ cludes the narrator's chronicle of past events. George Stewart's  memories  of the country  retreat  in the  Laurentians which he shared with  Catherine culminate  in the following reflections:

Happiness is one  of the  hardest things  to write  about, and  the  difficulty  of doing so makes  me long  to be a musician  or a painter, for  painters and  musicians  are  at ease with  the supreme emotion, which is not grief but  joy abounding. To  be able  to make  a  joyful noise to the Lord  or a praise of colours  and  forms  would  seem to me to  equate any  man  with  gods  or  little  children. Happiness annihilates  time.  We measure history  by its  catastrophes, we recall  the  weather by its  storms,  but  the periods  of peace  and  joy-who can  describe  them?
"Many a green  isle needs  must  be...." But is it not  also true  that  years later  it is the  green  isles of happiness that  we remember best, even  if we cannot tell about them?

The  didactic tone of this direct address to the reader shows that  not only the nar­ rator  but  also the  author  himself is fully conscious of the  pastoral  traditions  he draws upon. The  vision of a classical Arcadia and of an earthly paradise serves to intensify the effect of the melancholy idyll, as does the  allusion  to the  romantic  topos. "Many a  green  isle" is a line from  Shelley's  "Lines  written  among  the Eugenean  hills"  ( 18 r 8). In  looking back to and  reflecting  on the  past, George Stewart  nostalgically  refers to an island of  pastoral  bliss whose timeless harmony  is encroached  upon by the gathering tragedy. Nature-which may prove a source of  mystical  strength   for  the  strong-provides the  scenery  where  the  conflict between the individual  desire for privacy and  the forces of a destructive  fate  are most poignantly felt.
The  rationale  of  the  pastoral-"Happiness annihilates  time" -is  explicitly stated rather  than  metaphorically  suggested. This directness jeopardizes the evoca­ tive force of the imagery. By making explicit the contrast  between ever-changing  history and the utopian  ideal of timelessness and harmonious balance, the narrator appears to waver between a politico-historical parable of love and a well-motivated plot.  The  characters are  partly  individuals,  partly  personifications  of  abstract concepts. It  is this ambiguity  that  has often been  called one of the  most serious

PASTORAL TRADITION

flaws in MacLennan's fiction. It becomes apparent in the idyllic scenes as a clash of melodramatic  tone, poetic atmosphere and intended  "meaning."




b:E WATCH  THAT  ENDS  THE NIGHT,  in  the  author's  own view, marks  a  point  of transition  from  an  optimistic  to  a  pessimistic view  of history. "Requiem" was the title MacLennan had originally chosen for the book, because he saw the novel as a "requiem  for these idealists of the Thirties  who had meant  so well, tried so hard  and  gone so wrong."4   The  threatened  idyll and  its eventual  collapse symbolize not  just the lost paradise  of youth,  but  at  the same time Canada's loss of national  innocence and  its failure  to stay free from history, even though it tried to remain static in times of violent change.
Mordecai  Richler's  The  Apprenticeship  of  Duddy  Kravitz, also published  in
1959, is obviously the work of a younger author  who is much  less concerned  with the problems of national identity and the pastoral tradition. But still Richler, in his own  way, apart  from sharing  to a certain  extent  MacLennan's pessimism, uses similar conventions of the tragic pastoral.
The  fact that  the title of the novel parodies Goethe's  Wilhelm M eisters Lehr­
jahre should  not  prevent  us from  realizing  that  in  plot  and  structure   Richler's Entwicklungsroman primarily draws on the novels of the "angry  young men"  in Britain during  the  I950s. It is known that  Richler  wrote the film script for John Braine's  Life at the Top, which appeared  in  I962.  Here,  as in other  novels such as John  Wain's  Hurry on Down  ( 1953), Kingsley Amis's Lucky   jim  ( 1954), or Braine's  Room  at the Top  (I 957),  the protagonist  is a social climber seeking to shake off the obsessive limitations of his class and  milieu. He usually succeeds but subsequently  finds himself in a social and  moral  vacuum.  Sometimes this loss of traditional standards becomes evident in a focal scene where the hero experiences a conflict in choosing between personal loyalty and  professional career. Joe Lamp­ ton, for instance,  in Braine's Room  at the Top, spends  his last sentimental  days with  his mistress Alice Aisgill in a solitary  cottage  in  Wales  before he callously sacrifices her to his far-reaching  ambitions.
Lampton's younger brother, Duddy  Kravitz,  follows this example, although  he is rather  more indifferent  to the temptations  of pastoral  love. He  wants  to turn Lac St. Pierre into a holiday colony. To raise the necessary money, he systematically betrays his family and  his friends, in particular the  pastoral  ideal  epitomized  in his grandfather's dictum  "A  man  without  land  is nobody."  In  the  plot  of the novel, the corruption  of Duddy's  integrity is narrated in terms of the vanishing of a locus amoenus.
When Yvette for the first time takes Duddy  to the lake, the couple crosses from the real into a pastoral world:

20

PASTORAL TRADITION

They carne down on the other  side of the mountain  and walked through  a field of corn and a wide, hilly cow pasture. They crossed some disused tracks, hopped from rock to rock over a swirling creek, and entered  a wood.

Nature is shown   as  untouched by  man.   A sense of  loneliness  and   timelessness prevails:

Before them  spread  a still blue lake and  on the other  side a forest of pine trees. There was not one house on the lake. Some cows grazed on the meadow  near the shore and over the next hill there was a cornfield and a silo. There  was no other sign of life or ownership or construction.

The  ironic  twist of the  plot is foreshadowed in the last sentence. True, the ideal place of idyllic fulfillment actually exists but  neither  Yvette  nor  Duddy is capable or  willing  to  play  the  archetypal pastoral   role  assigned  to  them.   Yvette  merely wants  to have  Duddy for  herself;  Duddy in his tum  is instantly fascinated by the prospects  of  a  commercial venture. This  discrepancy   becomes  obvious  when  he casts off his clothes and  dives into the crystal dear water: not, as we might  be led to expect,  to experience a mystical  union  with  nature, but  to  test  the  quality of the  rock.
In  his ironic  approach, Richler rejects  the  emotional potential of the  pastoral scene, eliminating almost  all traces  of sentimental romance. It is part  of this  per­ vading irony  that  only the  reader  is fully aware  of Duddy's business transactions as a gradual destruction not simply  of the  idyllic landscape but  at  the same  time of the  pastoral way of life. In  each  of the  novel's four  parts, Duddy secretly  visits the lake to make sure that  his grand  scheme has remained undetected. He succeeds, but  not quite: for while  the seasons change,  nature turns more  and  more  hostile. When  Duddy inspects  his lake  in  winter   (Pt.  2,  Ch.  13), he  almost  freezes  to death before  reaching his car.  At his next visit in autumn (Pt. 3, Ch.  7), Duddy sees the  site  already through the  eyes of the  entrepreneur. When   he  finally  and  proudly presents  his  newly  acquired  property  to  his family   (Pt. 4,  Ch.  2), the pastoral scenery  has  disappeared  with  a vengeance : Duddy is a  man  with  land now -but his grandfather turns away  in disgust.
The  disappearance of the locus amoenus, like the gradual decay of the beautiful
portrait in Wilde's Picture of Dorian Gray, symbolizes the loss of innocence as the price of experience and  success. Although Richler  interprets this loss by no means as entirely  negative, the  victory  of human activity  over  pastoral contemplation, the  delight  in  hearing the  "crash of  falling  pines" -to use  Wilson's  image - appears as a thoroughly ambiguous achievement.
Richler's ironic  allusions  to  the  pastoral  tradition  distinguish Duddy  Kravitz
from   MacLennan's novel.  It is  perhaps not  by  chance that   Duddy's  epileptic friend  who becomes  a paraplegic after  a car accident  indirectly caused  by Duddy, is called  Virgil  Roseboro. The pastoral  ideal,  first unfolded in Virgil's  eclogues, is

21

PASTORAL  TRADITION

severely damaged.  Richler's novel no longer aims at setting the scene for a bucolic dream  world but analyzes the reason behind  its diminished  value.
The lonely Lac St. Pierre and the transformation it has to undergo are complex symbols. Their  connotations are carefully controlled by a narrator who makes sure that the fundamental gap between ideal and real is never bridged. Under  the prevailing  circumstances, he suggests, the  price man  has to  pay for  making  his vision come true is the distortion of the vision itself.



FoRMULA WRITING,"  which  in  Northrop   Frye's  view formed the  bulk  of  nineteenth-century   literature  in  Canada, was characterized   by  the imitation  or adaptation of existing narrative  patterns,  and  by their application  to domestic  characters, domestic themes  and  domestic  scenery.  The  formal  inde­ pendence which Canadian writers have been gaining since the 195o's, by contrast, is quite  often accompanied  by a greater freedom  in the choice of setting. This, in turn, means a wider scope in the handling of pastoral themes.
The  work of Margaret  Laurence  offers numerous  examples of both the "local
colour" pastoral and the pastoral as a narrative  device for exploring the "fantastic" aspects of reality. A well known example of the first kind is the cannery episode in The  Stone  Angel  ( 1964), in  which  the  biblical  meeting  between  Hagar   and Joseph  (one of the archetypal  pastoral encounters  in world literature) serves as background  for Hagar  Shipley's Arcadian  vision in a starkly  realistic setting.
The  second type emerges most strikingly in Margaret Laurence's  collection of
short stories, The  Tomorrow-Tamer, published  in 1963.  In  "The  Perfume  Sea" the threatened  idyll is located halfway between reality and fantasy, between public life and  private sphere, between geographical  points and  political factions. Set in West Africa  during  the turbulent  period of transition  from  colonialism to  inde­ pendence,  the story centres on two European  expatriates of dubious extraction: the hair-dresser  Mr.  Archipelago -a  sadder  but  a  wiser man  than  his famous colleague  Jefferson  Thorpe  in  Leacock's  story-and  the  girl  Doree,  his shop assistant. In the rapidly changing situation  where power is shifting from white to black, both are outsiders and are forced to manoeuvre rather  carefully.
Both seek refuge in Archipelago's house and garden. Within the house, the inhabi­ tants are sheltered from the real world and  from the confusing problems which a change  of clientele poses for a fashionable  ladies'  hairdresser.  The  house  and  its exuberantly  growing garden are shown as a secular  Eden, as a spatial equivalent of man's desire for peace in the face of dangerous  upheavals which he cannot  hope to prevent.  Although  Archipelago's  very name  suggests green  isles in  the sea of misery, he is far from acting as an isolated hero in the romantic tradition.  Instead,  Archipelago represents the classical tradition of retirement  to the country. Probably without  being aware of it, he follows Horace's  advice, and reviews the world from

22

PASTORAL TRADITION

a safe distance  without  getting involved. The  rural ideal of the quiet  country  life had been revived by eighteenth-century novelists such as Henry Fielding. In what might well be an allusion to Mr. Wilson's "little garden," where Joseph  Andrews and  Parson  Adams  are  invited  to  rest, Archipelago's  garden  is described  as a hortus conelusus:

A large green house by the shore sheltered Mr. Archipelago.... It was off by itself, on a  jut of land overlooking a small bay. The  sprawling overgrown garden was surrounded by a high green wall which enabled Mr. Archipelago in the late after­ noons to work outside clad only in his underwear and  a round white  linen hat.

The  pastoral sphere is limited in more than  one way. While in the eighteenth­ century  novel the locus amoenus was allowed to exist side by side with reality, in modern  narrative the fantastical  and  allegorical overtones must  be carefully con­ trolled so as not to interfere  with the reader's  demand  for a  plausibly motivated plot. Thus,  Archipelago's  escapist private world, even if it is credible enough, is a comic pastoral.  The  hairdresser  in his hat  and  underwear, who lets a fascinated Doree sniff at his countless scent bottles, which carry  her  away to the "perfume sea" of exotic smells and illusions, is a grotesque figure with tragic elements.
The  tragic  undertone   derives from  the  vulnerability  of  the  precarious  idyll. Both protagonists are aware  that  their happiness is poised at the edge of  destruc­ tion  because they  want  to keep it stable  but  "outside  the  green  wall  ... events occurred." Eventually  they will have to give up the garden,  not only  because the world outside might find out about it but also because their  privacy lacks vitality:  it is sterile, if dignified;  just like the sensitive flower in the garden which closes at the slightest touch,  "it  was not to be bribed or cajoled;  it had  dignity."
Margaret Laurence's version of the threatened  idyll is by no means restricted to
the description of the secluded garden, and to the characterization of the central figures  who  cultivate   it.  The   dominant   theme-a fundamental  antagonism between the real and the ideal, between the world as it is and as it should be -is borne out by the structure of the plot. The  idyllic garden  scene is placed exactly in the middle between "events": the introductory  episode dealing with the end of the colonial era, and the closing one describing the beginning of the new age, and Archipelago's  brilliant  survival under  the new sign "African  Ladies a Specialty." Just  as his house occupies a central  position, being situated  halfway  between  the African and the European quarters, the realm of imagination is wedged in between stretches of inexorable  historical developments.
In  "The Perfume  Sea," the paradox  of pastoral conventions in a modern  nar­ rative context  is deliberately  faced rather  than  explained  away. Unlike  Leacock, Margaret   Laurence  doesn't  camouflage  the  utopian  element  of the  idyll by  an anachronistic, if subtly ironic adherence  to the style and  values of  the eighteenth  century,  or  by  using  traditional topoi  to  intensify  an  emotional  impression,  as

23

PASTORAL TRADITION

MacLennan does in his novels. Instead,  she keeps the  pastoral  scene in full view of the  reader  as a middle  ground  between  the  extremes.  At  the same  time, she marks it as a possible way of experiencing reality. Archipelago's  pastoral world pic­ ture  is rendered  with  sympathy,  but  held  at  a  critical  distance:   while  it  may triumph  for a moment or two over "progress," it cannot  stop it.




IN RECENT YEARS, THE INFLUENCE of the pastoral tradition  on Canadian fiction in English seems to have increased rather  than  dwindled. A new generation of writers employs the tension between the harmony  and self-sufficiency of the idyllic scene, and its utopian quality, in order to explore new areas of reality. Margaret Laurence's  technique  of using the  pastoral  as a metaphor of  psycho­ logical states is further  developed in the work of Hugh  Hood.  In his short stories, the protagonists are frequently confronted with idyllic "epiphanies": for a fleeting moment  all the  problems of their  non-descript  or solitary  existence  apear  to be solved (e.g., in "A Solitary Ewe" and "The Tolstoy Pitch").
Pastoral  patterns  are particularly  obvious in "Getting to Williamstown" where
a dying narrator reviews his past life.5  Various stages of his career drift by, evoked in a stream-of-consciousness technique,  while he lies in  a hospital  bed. What  at first appears  as an  extremely successful business career  is gradually revealed  as the failure  to put  into practice  the essentially pastoral  dream  of a  retired  life in the country.
Again  the  idyll is located  exactly:  in  retrospect,  a  peaceful  country  town  in southern  Ontario emerges as the  quintessential  place  of an  earthly  paradise - paradoxically  within easy reach all his life but yet strangely inaccessible; the banal events of life intervene, his wife objects to a dull life outside Montreal, the children quarrel,  his own career demands priority.
Hood  manages to turn  this fairly conventional  dilemma  into a complex image
of man's inescapable but forever unsatisfactory task of balancing ideal and reality. On the face of it, the locus amoenus is presented in full detail:  the family leaving the motorway  and crossing the river, with a sunny sky over the peaceful country­ side, the desirable  white house next to the church  just visible through  the  trees, the old-fashioned  village itself. The  narrator remembers  all that,  but it belongs to a past which can never be recovered.
The  elusive idyll, apart  from  contributing to  the  nostalgic  atmosphere,  is an emblem of the  narrator's mind.  It  is recreated  in a sequence  of disjointed  frag­ ments by the dying man who confuses past and  present. The  rapid shift of  narra­  tive tenses reflects the frequent  transition  from  factual  account  to dream  vision. About the house he says at one point:

We made up stories about it; it was a little house or an enchanted  castle ... Now

24

PASTORAL TRADITION

we are coming  to Williamstown;  the trees are growing plentiful  and  the children need, they say, a stop. Deep, deep in the countryside.

The  stream-of-consciousness emphasizes  the unreal  yet intense quality of the pastoral vision, while  the  continuous form  adds  a sense of timelessness.  The  des­ perate  look  back  to an  idealized  past  which  is extinct  merges  with  a  vision  of a promised  land  of hope  just  coming  into  view. The  full significance of the idyllic village  as  "heavenly place"  (as  it  is once  called)   is  never  explicitly  stated, but metaphorically suggested. The sequence  of memoirs  stops  abruptly  with  the  nar­ rator's arrival at  the  longed-for place-which at  the  realistic level indicates his death:

Being carried  along the top of the hill and  we swoop downwards  as trees thicken, a green island, around  us, and  here at  the edge of town  I see the white building [i.e., the church] gleaming in the sun under the soft sheen of the tower, one narrow field from town.

This  closing image  remains ambiguous: is it the crowning illusion  or does it point to eventual redemption? No rational explanation is offered; reality  and  fantasy  are balanced. Although the  pastoral topos is fully unfolded  it is left to speak  for itself.
Hood's "Getting to  Williamstown" is remarkable for  the  skillful  handling of
point  of view  as well as for  the subtle  references  to romantic motifs.  The  phrase "a green  island" which  had  slipped  into  the  passage  just quoted takes  the  reader back to the story's  Shelleyan motto:

Many a green isle needs must be
In  the deep blue sea of misery.

In  MacLennan's Watch, Shelley's lines were merely part  of the sentimental mood. Here,  the reference  is less obvious  but more to the point.  The author actually  takes up   Shelley's   central  idea   that   man's   muddled  and   guilty   existence   may   be redeemed  by  occasional glimpses  of  innocence and   happiness. It  is  this  hope, Shelley argues, which  beyond  any reasonable  expectations gives man  the strength
to carry  on:

Or the mariner, worn and wan, Never thus could voyage on.

As in Shelley's  elegy, the sea and  island  symbolism  has  very specific  connotations in Hood's narrative: it might be called a prose elegy on the meaning of the pastoral dream in  a  tragic  world. From  the  way  this vision is presented in  the  text,  the green  island  of idyllic  bliss is a fleeting  moment, equivalent to the  uncertainty of any  personal  belief,  but  still existing.
The author himself has this impact in mind  when he says, about his protagonists in general,

I am interested  in the hero as a model of virtue because he is like a redeemer-not

25

PASTORAL  TRADITION

necessarily a Christian  redeemer, but  a  person who unites the  godlike and  the human and acts perfectly as a God, of course, and also acts perfectly as a man.'6
The  pastoral  thus functions at yet another,  allegorical  level. The  pastoral  hero is an emblem  of moral  perfection for the very reason  that  he sticks to  his absurd dream-although (or even because)  this dream  seems to have failed during  his lifetime.
Hood's  fiction  is sometimes  praised  as  descriptive,  and  classified as  "tradi­
tional."7  Such  assessments overlook the  pervasive  importance of the  allegorical level. About  it, Hood says with characteristic  exaggeration:
Everything I write is an allegory, there's no question about that. I figure that I've been teaching more and more the last few years that  The  Fairie Queen  is in  the centre of literature in English, I think that literature in English is all dream vision, allegory, pastoral, romantic epic.8
In "Getting to Williamstown," the tension between  reality and  pastoral  dream works at three superimposed levels: those of actual  events, of psychological back­ ground,  and  of moral  parable.  Hood's  idyllic episode links scepticism  and  hope. The  pastoral  mode functions as a criticism of reality,  just as reality  modifies the pastoral  dimension.



IN CONSIDERING A  FEW VARIATIONS of the use of pastoral con­ ventions in modern  Canadian  fiction, we have moved far away from the Reverend Drone reading Theocritus  in the pleasant shadow of his plum tree-away indeed from the pastoral as a separate genre but also away from an analysis of Canadian fiction predominantly in terms of the "Canadian experience."
Judging from  the  examples, it appears  that  Canadian fiction, over  the  past
twenty years, has both adopted  but added  to the pastoral  tradition  at large;  a set of conventional  themes has gradually  become a non-realistic  narrative  mode suit­ able for exploring  mythical,  psychological, even ideological layers below the em­ pirical surface. This  creative process of re-interpretation involves thematic  modi­ fications  but  also structural innovations.  It  is difficult  to  explain  these changes solely in  terms of a national  tradition  without  taking  into  account  comparative  aspects.
From this point of view, Frye's attractive  hypothesis assuming an a priori affinity
between Canadian literary experience and the pastoral  "myth" would have to be modified -all the more so since Frye's authority  has paved  the way for the the­ matic approach which today is favoured  in Canadian literature studies. The neg­ lect of formal, structural and comparative  aspects has to be seen against the back­ ground  of  literary  nationalism  and  the  dawning of  a  new  "Elizabethan  age" where works of art  are mainly assessed on the  basis of what  they  contribute   to the national  or cultural  "identity."

PASTORAL TRADITION

From  a purely  literary  perspective, however, thematic  critcism suffers from  a severe drawback  in that  it seeks, in Frank  Davey's words, "above  all to define a national  culture  but chooses to work with materials -literary themes -that are, because of their  limited  number,  international in nature."9   Davey further  points out  that  in their  efforts to single out  "typical" themes-man as victim,  hostile nature,  the  reluctant immigrant  -critics  have  occasionally tended  to  overlook the fact that such themes frequently originate in an experience common to emerg­ ing national literatures in general rather than  to one particular  national tradition.
In trying to show how the pastoral episode in modem Canadian fiction develops older  patterns,  we have  approached the  problem of independence   and  interde­ pendence from a different angle. In a dialectic process of reproduction and innova­ tion, Canadian authors  "reconstruct" literary developments:  the reduction  of the pastoral genre to the pastoral scene, the integration  of pastoral topoi into realistic narrative  in a more and  more complex fashion.
The  time lag involved in this process of assimilation is continually  decreasing. This  becomes  evident  if one tentatively  applies the  "telescoping"  hypothesis  to the periodization  of modem  Canadian fiction as suggested in the Literary History of Canada. 10   Here,  William  New characterizes  the 195o's as the decade  of  Mac­ Lennan,  concentrating on  the  "mimetic  representation  of  ordinary  lives." The  doomed  idyll in The  Watch that  Ends the  Night  and,  to a certain  extent,  the rejection  of pastoral  perfection  in The  Apprenticeship  of Duddy  Kravitz  would seem to fit this formula.  On an international scale, it refers to a type of the novel which emerged in the second half of the nineteenth  century.  In the  196o's,  New continues, Canadian fiction shifts to a novel concept of individual experience most powerfully reflected in the  psychological realism of  Margaret  Laurence   (and, of course, the increasing influence of Malcolm  Lowry's work). We might  relate this to the rise of the psychological novel in the 192o's, with the stream-of-consciousness techniques in the novels of James Joyce and Virginia Woolf as the most prominent  examples.
As one approaches the  197o's, relationships become less palpable.  New claims
that  in contemporary Canadian fiction "linear  narrative  [is]  giving way to com­ plex artifice; realism [is]losing ground to improvisational modes, to science fiction, to the surreal,  the  absurd,  and  the  consciously contrived  mythic  and  fabular." Even though  the tendency towards "fabulation" is perhaps less marked in Cana­ dian literature  than  in the literature  of the United States, Hugh  Hood's short story shows a renewed interest in myth and allegory; it returns also to a straightforward plot and  a simple psychology-characteristics of "post-modem" fiction at large.

NOTES
1 Daniel Wilson, "Canadian  Poetry" ( 1858);  rpt. in The  Search  for  English-Cana­
dian  Literature, ed. C. Ballstadt  (Toronto:  Univ. of Toronto  Press, 1975),  pp.
!6 ff.

27

PASTORAL TRADITION

2   "Conclusion" to the  Literary  History  of Canada, ed. C. F. Klinck   (Toronto: Univ. of Toronto Press, I976),  p. 239·
3 A  useful  introduction to  the  history  of  pastoral is  Renate  Boeschenstein's I dylle
(Stuttgart:  Metzler, I967).
4   "Reflections on Two Decades," Canadian Literature, No. 4I  (Summer I969), p. 31.
5  In  The Fruitman, the Meatman, and  the  Manager (Ottawa: Oberon, I97I).
6  Victoria C. Hale,  "An  Interview with Hugh  Hood," WLWE, I I, No.  I   ( I972),  37·
7  See Dennis  Duffy,  "Grace: The  Novels of Hugh Hood," Canadian Literature, No.
47 (Winter I97I), I0-25.
8 Hale, "Interview," p. 37·
9  Frank Davey,  "Surviving the  Paraphrase," Canadian Literature, No. 70 (Autumn
I976)' 8.
10  William H. New, "Fiction," Literary  History  of Canada, Vol.  3, pp.  233 ff.



TWO POEMS



FEJIR OF FJIILURE
 


Dale :(ieroth


Her  first time on skis,
and  the first real snow this winter,
she is unhappy with  the spotlight, the snow,  the  very air in her lungs: can't bend  her  knees
perfectly
right  away-this is Five Years  Old  and  I try to help but  the snow seems to be too much  for  us:
she whacks me on the knee
ski pole on cold  bone
and  I grab  her  and  she cries
and  I'm  mad  now cause  I've  done  that  wrong
and  my record  for being  the kind  of father I want  to be is still too few days.
And later  I try to
explain but I must hold too tightly  cause she spins away and  it's finished  for her  anyway,  she decides  to take  up skating  while  I
go over the words again: Look
Nobody's Good  Right  Away
At Anything
printing or putting on clothes  or even breathing: it's gotta  be shaken  out  of you.

POEM

And  I can't believe a man  can  stumble  so much with  his child  and  just because  she's alive
sure  I believe in miracles
but  what  about when  my blood goes numb when  the  world  rumbles  and  pains in  the  press or the everyday lives make  no headlines and  die choked  on the  pain  all the way
or the endless  complaints of money and  sweat  and
kids spitting at each other  on the way to school the  taste  of gas like death in the air.
I sit and  listen  to the future. Do you know  who it feels yet?
Do you sometimes  feel it, little kid, little  kid, red coat  against the snow, a
toboggan full  of smiles, shake  me
shake  me loose, join me to the day: I lack  the  drive
I slide down  past the handholds of home
and  I manage and  scarcely care  today
where  the  melting snow goes or takes me or ends.





WOODING

We found the larches  changing coats, turning gold, we found them  burning on their
high  September hillsides ten miles from  the  town that  turned toward  more  sleep on its
Sunday morning bed, we were
past  the clearing where  the portable mill had  stood  and left the hump of old sawdust  full of
the  only  young  lodgepole  around, the truck going  slow, lugging  and  looking  for
the  perfect tree, one in
twenty  acres  while  the  nutcrackers bobbed  in  their  flight past  the meadow where  the elk had  grazed  and  eaten
and  already bedded  down.

And  we found  it on the last skid trail
that  went  up  through the trees like a rollercoaster ride, we found it standing,
dead  and  clean  and  dry as a dollar  bill.

POEM

So Gordon undercut and  planned the  pivot, he looked  to the top and  he knew  in his eye which  way it would go.
There were instructions, the last
uncertain laugh  before  the chainsaw came  on, coughing coughing, catching at  last,
consuming us all while Gordon cut  and  looked
wedged  it over centre
and  dropped it down  on the ground with  a bounce.

Coming back from  the fall, thirty rounds of firewood  stacked  around the  saw, sometimes the clouds circled  in like  birds. We talked  about  fuel bills and  devastation, we covered  the future and
we dwelt  like hungry  dogs in the  promises we found.  We noticed  where  we were at  last
when  we saw the  lake and  white  banks  of Windermere. There was snow on Chisel again.
And  we knew then something about coming down, coming  back into  town  where  the  people
stopped and  watched  our  load  of wood  look easy going  by:
we knew we had  carried off a giant  and  this winter our  sleep would  be warm  with  the  forest.


FRANCES BROOKE'S
EARLY FICTION

Lorraine McMullen



EDINGHERSELF  AT  QUEBEC in 1763, Fmncee Bmoke  (1723- I 789)  made the most of the opportunity  to transmute some of her experiences and observations into fiction. The  result, The  History of Emily  Montague ( I 769),  is well known in Canada. Yet criticism of this work has rarely, and  then only briefly,
alluded  to Brooke's earlier writing which prepared  her to make such effective use of her Canadian experiences.1 Her earlier novel, The  History of Lady  julia Man­ deville  ( I 763)  was, in fact,  more popular  in its day than  Emily  Montague and deserves consideration  in its own right.2  Also ignored has been a consideration  of influences on Mrs. Brooke's writing, with the one exception of Samuel Richardson,  father of all eighteenth-century epistolary novelists. A study of Mrs. Brooke's trans­
lation of Madame Marie Jeanne  Riccoboni's Lettres de Milady  juliette Catesby a
Milady  Henriette  Campley, son Amie  (1759)   provides us with  an  indication  of
another  influence  at  least as important as that  of Richardson, that  of Madame Riccoboni  and  the French  novel of sensibility. Emily Montague then can be seen as  a  natural development   in  style,  attitude,   tone,  and   characterization,  from Frances Brooke's earlier work, her own novel, and her translation from the French.
Sensibility was not  English in origin. The  main  stream  of sensibility novelists who influenced  writers  throughout Europe  were French.  As Maurice  Levy  has noted, "France before England  devoted itself to the problems of the heart and the passions." 3  Madame de la Fayette's  La Prineesse de Cleves  (I 678), with its por­ trayal of love as an overwhelming  passion which brings suffering and  joy, despair and ecstasy, had provided the early impetus, and Pierre Marivaux with La Vie  de Marianne   ( I73I-I736) is considered  the founder  of the French  school of  sensi­ bility. Abbe  Prevost's  Memoires  et  aventures  d'un  homme  de  qualite  qui  s'est retire du monde  ( q28-I733), especially the last volume, Manon  Lescaut  ( I733), which appeared in many editions in both French and  English, influenced  writers of both countries. E. A. Baker quotes from  Manon  Leseaut:  "If tears and  sighs are  not to be described as pleasures, it is true  nevertheless that  they have infinite sweetness for  a  person in mortal  affliction. The  moments  that  I devoted  to  my grief were so dear to me that  to prolong them I abstained from sleep."4  These lines could  have appeared in any  one of a  number  of  subsequent  eighteenth-century novels of sensibility, English or French.

BROOKE

At the time of Mrs. Brooke's translation  of her novels, Madame Marie  Jeanne Riccoboni  ( I 7 I 4- I 792)  was becoming  well known in both  France  and  England for  her  novels of sensibility. Appearing  only one  year  after  the  original  French novel, with a second edition the same year and six editions by I 780, Mrs. Brooke's translation  furthered  Madame  Riccoboni's popularity  and  was an impetus to the developing cult of sensibility in England.  Madame Riccoboni  explored  especially the intense feelings evoked by love. Sorrow  was always a necessary element, and her plots were constructed around  heroines either betrayed  or believing themselves betrayed. Although  the way of life she described was generally realistic she tended to avoid  reference to the  more mundane  aspects of reality,  and  to  unhappiness and tragedy except for that  "sweet melancholy,"  in which the sentimental  reader took pleasure  and  which demonstrated  the  excessive sensibility of her  hero  and heroine.  As Francis  Wright  remarks, "In  constructing  a  plot to develop sorrow, either  transient  or permanent, she sketched  the prototype  of the sentimental  love story."5



WEN FRANCES   BROOKE  TRANSLATED   Madame  Ricco­
boni's  Lettres  de  Milady   juliette  Catesby  a  Milady   Henriette   Campley, son
Amie  in  I76o,  she selected one of the  best novels 6   of a  woman  already  widely
known, and  presumably a novel which she, herself, found  congenial. The  Letters of   juliet  Lady  Catesby  to  her  Friend,  Lady  Henrietta   Campley  7    is typical  of Madame Riccoboni's works. The tone of the novel is highly emotional, voicing the increasingly distraught  state of mind of the central character, Juliet  Catesby, and her  lover, Lord  Ossory. As is usual  with  Madame Riccoboni,  the  plot  revolves around  the various  complications  which must  be resolved before the  two lovers are finally united. The novel is composed of thirty-nine  letters from Juliet  Catesby to her friend,  Henrietta. At the onset the reader  learns of Lady  Catesby's  hasty departure from the house she had been visiting to avoid encountering her former lover,  Lord  Ossory. She gives a  lengthy  and  highly  emotional  account   of  her meeting  several  years earlier  with  Ossory, their  love and  decision to  marry,  his abrupt departure after  a highly emotional  but  inexplicable  scene, and  his hasty marriage  to another.  His wife has died and  now he is besieging Juliet  with letters. After much emotional wavering, she finally consents to read Ossory's lengthy explanation  of his earlier  conduct.  He  confesses that,  in  a state  of drunkenness following a party, he had seduced the young sister of a close friend and, learning later  of her  pregnancy  and  threatened  suicide, felt  obliged  to  marry  her.  Now, two years later, she is dead and he is free to reveal the story to Juliet. Satisfied with Ossory's explanation Juliet agrees to marry him.
From  this novel Mrs. Brooke learned  how to construct  a tightly  knit  novel of
sensibility. Her  History of  Lady  julia  Mandeville,8   which  appeared  three  years

32

BROOKE


after  this translation, is composed of seventy-seven letters,  the  great  majority  of which  are  written  by  two  central  characters: Harry   Mandeville,  the  lover  of Julia,  and  Lady Anne  Wilmot, a spritely, coquettish young widow, friend of the two lovers. Anne's  letters  to her own lover Colonel Bellville recount  activities on the  country  estate  of  Julia  Mandeville's  father,  Lord  Belmont,  where  she  and Harry  are guests. Harry's letter to a friend, George Mordaunt, are occupied  pri­ marily  with  his description  of his growing love for Julia.  When  he  realizes  the intensity of his love, Harry  resolves to leave the  Belmont  estate  in  the  hope  of increasing his fortune  sufficiently to marry her. Before he leaves, Harry and Julia vow to remain  true  to their  love, but  they acquaint  neither  Julia's  parents  nor Harry's  father  with  the  situation.  Not long after,  through  a  complicated  set of circumstances,  Harry  is led to believe that  Julia  will marry  Lord  Melvin, son of a wealthy  aristocratic  friend  of her  family. He  rushes  to  Belmont  where  he  is critically  injured  by Melvin  whom  he has forced into  a  duel.  Harry  lives long enough  to learn that  the wedding  plans of which he heard were intended  for his own marriage  to Julia  and  that  he was to inherit  the  Belmont  title  and  estate. Through chance  Harry  had  never received the letter  acquainting him  with  this happy  resolution. Shortly  after his death Julia dies of a broken  heart.
The  theme  of noble  and  sentimental  lovers exhibiting  the  utmost  sensibility
as they seek to resolve their  difficulties is common  to both  novels and  given full expression in both. Madame Riccoboni's lovers are finally happily united, although this is not the case in all of her novels.9  Mrs. Brooke's Julia  and Harry  Mandeville die for love;  however,  there  are two central  pairs or lovers whose situations  are happily  resolved  after  various  impediments  are  overcome:   Anne  Wilmot  and Bellville; Anne's niece, Bell Hastings, and Lord Melvin. Bell's dilemma  resembles that  of Juliet  Catesby;  it is the result of an apparent betrayal,  but  as with  Lady Catesby all is eventually  explained satisfactorily.
In  both  novels the  sensibility of the lovers is frequently  demonstrated  and  as
frequently  referred  to. Juliet  Catesby gives an indication  of the  acute sensibility of herself and  her  lover as she recounts the  moment  when  she and  Ossory first revealed their  love to each  other:   "One  day, reading  an  affective Story of two tender  Lovers who had  been cruelly torn from each other,  the Book fell from our Hands,  our Tears  began to flow ... " (Letter  XV). This scene not only  demon­ strates their  tenderness  in weeping for fictional lovers, but  also foreshadows their own separation  and provides an indication of the intensity of  their emotions when such would occur. The  emotional stress resulting from leaving Juliet  to marry  the woman  he seduced  does,  in  fact,  cause  Ossory  to  become  seriously ill.  Juliet Catesby's present suitor, Lord Harry,  also shows his sensibility by collapsing when rejected. This in turn  leads Juliet  to exclaim, despite her dislike for him, that  her heart  is "too  full of sensibility not to compassionate his Love, though  too much prepossessed to return  it" (Letter XXIII). In Mrs. Brooke's novel, Harry  Mande-

33

BROOKE

ville, too,  is beseiged  by  an  unwanted suitor, a  Miss  Westbrook, daughter  of  a nouveau  riche neighbour, and  as he  journeys  forth  to inform  her  that  he cannot respond  to her  overtures  his reaction  to the situation is much  like that  of Juliet: "These trials  are  too great  for  a  heart  like  mine,  tender, sympathetic,  compas­ sionate, and  softened  by the sense of its own sufferings; I shall  expire with  regret and  confusion  at  her  sight." Harry's excessive sensibility   is the  major  theme   of his letters.  He  is the  male  counterpart of Riccoboni's Juliet  Catesby. It is Harry who writes of the ennobling quality  of love:  "Why do closeted moralists,  strangers to  the  human heart, rail  indiscriminately at  love?  When inspired   by  a  worthy  object,  it  leads  to  everything that  is great  and  noble; warmed by  the  desire  of being  approved by her,  there  is nothing I  would  not  attempt"; and  later,  "The love of such  a  woman  is the  love of  virtue  itself:  it  raises,  it  refines, it  ennobles  every sentiment of the heart." Julia, too, in the  Brooke  novel, writes  to her friend  Emily Howard of her own sensibility, "Born  with  a too tender  heart, which  never before  found   an  object  worthy  of its  attachment, the  excess  of  my  affection   is unspeakable. Delicate in my choice, even in friends, it was not easy to find a lover equal  to that  idea  of  perfection  my imagination had  formed."
Throughout  Madame  Riccoboni's novel  we  are  immersed in  the  sufferings, the "exquisite pangs," of the separated lovers. It is only in the last section  of Mrs. Brooke's  novel,  however,  that  we are  plunged   into  the  grief  of  the  dying  lovers and  the  anguish of their  afflicted parents and  friends. After  the  death of the  two young lovers, Anne Wilmot writes: "Pleased with the tender sorrow which  possessed my soul,  I determined to indulge  it to the  utmost," words  reminiscent of those  of Prevost's Man of Quality quoted  earlier: "If tears and  sighs are not to be described as pleasures,  it is true  nevertheless that  they have sweetness  for a person  in mortal affliction.  The moments that  I devoted  to  my  grief  were  so  dear  to  me  that   to prolong  them  I abstained from  sleep."  There is a genuine pleasure  in sorrow  for the individual of sensibility. The  previously  Edenic setting  of the  Belmont  garden takes on gothic  overtones as Anne  writes:

Pleased  with  the  tender  sorrow which  possessed all  my soul, Idetermined  to indulge  it  to  the  utmost;  and,  revolving  in  my imagination the  happy  hours  of chearful  friendship  to which  that  smiling scene had  been  witness, prolonged  my walk  till evening  had,  almost  unperceived,  spread  its gloomy horrors  round;   till the varied tints of the flowers were lost in the deepening  shades of night.
Awaking at once from the reverie in which I had  been plunged,  I found myself at a distance from the house, just entering  the little wood so loved by my charming friend;  the every moment increasing darkness gave an awful gloom to the trees; I stopped,  I looked round, not a human  form was in sight;  I listened, and  heard  not a sound but  the trembling of some poplars in the wood;  I called, but  the echo of my own voice was the only answer I received; a dreary  silence reigned  around; a terror  I never felt  before seized me; my heart  panted  with  timid  apprehension; I breathed  short,  I started  at every leaf that  moved;  my limbs were covered with a

34

BROOKE


cold dew; I fancied I saw a thousand airy forms flit around me; I seemed to  hear the shrieks of the dead and dying; there is no describing my horrors.

It is worth noting that  Horace  Walpole's The  Castle of Otranto  was published the same  year  as The   History  of Lady  Julia Mandeville,  1763.  The  melodramatic climax, the sudden  violence, and the overtones of the final pages of Mrs. Brooke's novel differentiate  her from  Madame Riccoboni  and  indicate  her  awareness  of the trend of the novel of sensibility toward  the gothic.



EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY READERS apparently  objected to the disastrous ending  of Mrs. Brooke's novel. According to one  report,  "It has been often, however, wished that  the catastrophe  had been less melancholy;  and of the propriety  of this opinion  the Authoress herself is said to have been satisfied, but did  not choose to make the alteration."10  Mrs. Brooke was living in the age that preferred  Nahum  Tate's King  Lear (in which the ending had been altered  to suit the tender sensibilities of the audience)  to Shakespeare's tragedy. Having  criticized the influential  David  Garrick  in The  Old  Maid  for  preferring  the  "adulterated cup  of Tate [Nahum Tate's Lear]  to the  pure genuine draught offered  him  by the master  he avows to serve with such fervency of devotion,''11   Mrs.  Brooke is not the writer to alter the unhappy ending of her novel to placate her readers.12
Although  the catastrophe has come about abruptly, for the reader a brief refer­
ence to Romeo and juliet foreshadows the tragedy. Writing of this play Anne says:

We have seen them enact Romeo and Juliet. Lady Julia seemed to sympathize with the heroine:
I'll not wed Paris; Romeo is my husband.

Indeed  the similarity  to Romeo  and  juliet is not to be overlooked. At  nineteen Julia  is as innocent  and  naive a heroine as Juliet. She  remains  true  to her lover from  whom she is separated  because of anticipated,  rather  than  actual,  parental opposition  to their  marriage. Harry  rushes back because of a supposed  plan  of her father  to marry  her to another  suitor. Like Romeo he dies because he fails to receive the  letter  which  would  clarify the situation.  The  parents  who  failed  to explain their plans to their children ultimately must bear a large share of the responsibility for the tragedy. As in Romeo  and  juliet each has lost an only child, and, as the novel ends, each  plans to erect a memorial monument.
Although  a duel  provides the climax to the novel, duelling  is only one of the aspects of society on which Mrs. Brooke is commenting. It is not intended  to have the  prominence  which  Mrs.  Laetitia  Barbauld  in  1810 ascribes  to it when  she speaks of The  History of Lady  Julia Mandeville  as "a forcible appeal  to the feel­ ings against  the  savage  practice  of duelling."13   Duelling  also appears  in  Mme. Riccoboni's novel as an aspect of life which contributes to both Juliet's anguish and

35

BROOKE

Ossory's dilemma. Juliet learns of the death  of her only brother  in a duel at the moment   when  she  is most  distressed  by  her  apparent  betrayal,  and   Ossory's unhappy  situation  is increased  when  he realizes that,  were he  not to marry  the woman  he seduced, her brother must surely challenge him to a duel;  in all likeli­ hood he would then add his friend's  death  to the woman's  disgrace in  the list of his culpabilities.
Didacticism  and sentimentality characteristic  of the novel of sensibility are very
much in evidence in both of these novels. Yet the wit and  humour  which provide much  of the attractiveness of the later  History of Emily  Montague are equally a part of Mrs. Brooke's first novel. In this respect she runs counter  to the traditional novel of sensibility in which the excessively sentimental  characters  dominated  by their  emotions  are  more prone  to tears than  to laughter,  and  to emotional  out­ bursts than  to wit. Here certainly she differs radically from  Madame  Riccoboni, with  whose  heroine  we are  inclined  to  agree  when  she  says about  two-thirds through  the novel:

A Reflexion  strikes  me, my Dear; it is that  I certainly must  weary  you.  I  tell  you my  Thoughts as  they  rise, and  Heaven knows  they  contain nothing amusing-. (Letter XV)

Yet Lady Juliet  Catesby, who never oversteps the bounds of propriety  but remains a conventional  heroine in outward  behavior, makes a  number  of remarks  which indicate  her antipathy  to the restrictions on women at the time and  to the double standard governing the conduct of men and  women. When her friend Henrietta's fiance suggests that  she should forgive Ossory since he is now  repentant, Juliet seizes the opportunity to express her indignation  at this male attitude:

My  Lord  Castle-Cary pretends, that  all  Resentment ought to yield  to a sincere Repentance. With  my Inferiors, I will govern  myself by this Maxim; but  never  with my Friends. But, my Dear,  it will not be useless to make  a little  Remark here.  It is, that  Man  only establish  this Principle, in Hopes  to take  Advantage of it; Accustom yourself  to  think,  with  my  Lord  Castle-Cary, that  Repentance effaces  all  Faults, and  depend on  it, he will provide himself  of sufficient  Occasions to repent. -His Letter displeases  me, I confess:  I renounce his Approbation: It would  cost me  too dear,  if I  must  buy it  by a  Weakness,  which  would  degrade me  in my  own  Eyes. (Letter VII )

Later she writes:
0 my dear  Henrietta, the Men  regard  us merely  as Beings placed  in the Universe for  their  Amusement; to trifle  with,  in  that  Species  of  Infancy, to which  they  are reduced by those impetuous Passions, which  they reserve to themselves  the infamous Liberty of arousing with  Confidence, and  submitting to  with  Shame. They have left  to that  Sex they presume  to typify as weak and  irresolute, the difficult  Task  of resisting  the  softer  Impulses  of the  Heart, of conquering Nature herself.  Slaves  to their  Senses alone,  when  they  appear to be so to our  Charms; it is for  themselves they  pursue, for  themselves  they  address  us:  They consider only  the  Pleasures we

BROOKE

are capable of bestowing: They withhold their Esteem from the object of their pretended  Adorations;  and  if they find in us Strength  of Mind, and  Dignity of Sentiments, we are inhuman Creatures:  We pass the  Limits their  Tyranny  has prescribed to us, and become unjust without knowing it.     (Letter XXII)

Possibly such feminist comments  made the novel more congenial to Mrs. Brooke to translate; certainly  they would reinforce her own feminist stance.



IN MRS. BROOKE's NOVEL, Julia  Mandeville  is, like Juliet Catesby, the conventional eighteenth-century  heroine, but she plays a minor  role in  the  novel which  bears  her  name. The  more  prominent  Anne  Wilmot  is the Brooke spokesman.  While  Riccoboni's  Juliet  Catesby  rails against  the  injustices of the woman's  situation  in society, Brooke's Anne has learned  to cope with the
situation  in which she finds herself in the eighteenth-century battle of the sexes, as these words suggest:

I am too good a politician in love matters ever to put a man out of doubt till half an  hour  before  the  ceremony. The  moment a  woman is weak enough  to promise, she sets the heart of her lover at rest; the chace, and of consequence the pleasure, is at an end;  and  he has nothing to do but to seek a new object; and begin the pursuit over again.

The feminism which is evident in The  History of Emily Montague  is evident in the earlier Brooke novel through  the persona of Anne  who provides the humour as well as adding  an air of realism to The  History of Lady  Julia Mandeville. One would expect such  a lively character  as Anne from  the  pen of Frances  Brooke, whose highly successful Old Maid  was the first periodical initiated  by a woman/4 and who was not afraid  to cross swords with the powerful David Garrick, criticiz­ ing him in The  Old  Maid  and  later satirizing  him in her  novel The  Excursion (I 777) .15  Anne enjoys the new-found freedom of widowhood and, as almost half the  letters of the  novel  are  written  by her,  considerably  livens up  proceedings, providing an effective contrast  to the emotional outpourings  of Harry Mandeville.  She is both of her age and  outside of it. More  than  anyone else she is guided  by right reason as well as elegant manners. As a friend of the young lovers whose own romance remains for the most part in the background she is in role and personality the forerunner of Emily Montague's young friend, Arabella Fermor.  Anne is not a sentimentalist  to the extent  that  Harry  and  Julia  are,  but  rather  practical  and realistic.  At  one  point,  for  example,  she suggests  that  Harry   should  seriously consider marrying  Miss Westbrook solely for her money. It is she who realizes the impracticality   of  Harry's plan  to  increase  his fortune  sufficiently in  a  year  to marry  Julia.  Aware  of the  world she lives in, she  assumes that  Belmont  would never  consider  the  relatively  fortuneless Harry  for  Julia  despite  his aristocratic

37

BROOKE

name, elegant manners and excessive sensibility. In  this assumption,  however, she is wrong;  benevolence wins over practicality  with Belmont.
Anne  is adroit  at  manipulating  people  and  situations,  a  talent  charmingly evinced when seemingly chance  events at  a ball produce  happy  results for Julia and Harry  and  unhappy  for Miss Westbrook. We learn later  that  Anne has care­ fully plotted the whole incident, making full use of her understanding of  human  nature  and  her skills as a coquette.16  Her practical  nature  is demonstrated  by the solution she works out to evade the clause in her husband's will whereby the entire estate passes immediately to his niece, Bell Hastings, if she marries. She wins Bell's agreement  to return  half the  estate  to her on  her  marriage, for if  Bell did  not agree to this Anne would not marry and the young woman would receive no share of the estate. As Anne points out, the half she herself will receive is in fact the sum of her  dowry  which, once  passed to  her  husband, is lost  to  her  completely­ another  comment  on woman's  status  in eighteenth-century  society. Perhaps  the best example of Anne's flouting of eighteenth-century convention,  when it cannot be manipulated or avoided, is her admission to Lady  Belmont, after  some witty and elusive repartee,  that she does, in fact, love Bellville and  that, since marriage  appears impossible for them, she intends to continue enjoying his company, despite the impropriety  of such a relationship in the eyes of society.
Similarities  between  The   History  of Lady   julia  Mandeville  and  the  better
known History of Emily Montague  are immediately  evident.  Both are epistolary novels structured  about  three sets of lovers. In  both,  the  majority  of letters  are written  by the man  involved in the central  romance,  a conventional  eighteenth­ century lover  (Harry Mandeville and Ed Rivers)  and  by the woman  participant in a secondary romance  (Anne Wilmot and Arabella Fermor). In both novels the woman is the astute observer and commentator on  the affairs of the other lovers. In  both, this woman spokesman provides the more realistic, perceptive and  witty attitude,  and  through  her independent  spirit  reflects  the feminism of the author. The  disparity  between  temperament  and  outlook  of the  two central  viewpoints, that of the conventional, rather  prosaic male and that  of the perceptive, articulate  female, contributes  to the tension of  the novels and  provides variety of tone and pace, an  asset  lacking  in  Riccoboni's  novel  with  its single  correspondent.  The­ matically both of  Brooke's novels are concerned  with courtship  and  its complexi­ ties, employing  the sentimental  romantic  plot to which  Madame Riccoboni  had made such a signal contribution.  In both novels Mrs. Brooke questions social con­ ventions, arranged  marriages,  and  materialistic  values in general.  In  both, sensi­ bility is the overriding  virtue of hero and  heroine.
Today  we direct our attention  more to the Canadian novel with its interpreta­ tion of eighteenth-century Canadian setting and  its view of life in  Quebec imme­ diately after the conquest. Yet a return to the earlier and more popular  novel adds to our  understanding of Frances Brooke, of her  craftsmanship and  her thematic

BROOKE

concerns, and helps us to see her in the context of her times. She learned from the French  novel of sensibility and  especially from  Madame   Riccoboni  whom  she translated: and there is no doubt  that she took the overall structure  and handling of narrative from her own first successful novel and adapted  them to her new sub­ ject and  new setting in The  History of Emily  Montague. Mrs. Brooke's  popular translation  of Lady  Catesby  and  her own first novel contributed to the develop­ ment of the English novel of sensibility. But Mrs. Brooke is also one of  the earliest novelists to attempt   a  more  realistic  account  of everyday  events  rather  than  a focussing on  melodramatic incidents.  This  concern  is evident  in  her  portrayal of life on the Belmont estate with its outings, balls, and  rural festivities, and later, in Emily  Montague, of day-to-day events in Quebec, in  which regional setting is incorporated more  fully into  the  narrative.  Thus  she  contributed  to the  newer movement  toward  realism as well as to the more currently  popular  cult of sensi­ bility. A stylistic blending of the two modes is achieved largely through  the voices of the  two  dissimilar  correspondents  in  each  novel, one  a  creature  of extreme sensibility and  the other  an  ironic  observer. The  contrasting  images of women, the  traditional eighteenth-century woman  of  feeling and  the  witty,  astute  com­ mentator, also contribute   to  the  tension  between  the  sensible and  the  realistic, the  romantic  and  the  ironic.  Indeed,  not  the least of Mrs.  Brooke's  concerns is the role of women in eighteenth-century society; and  a major  attraction of both novels, one  which  differentiates  her  fiction from  that  of  her  mentor  Madame Riccoboni and others of her time, is her creation of an intelligent and lively spokes­ man for women.


NOTES

1 There is one  exception. W.  H.  New's  excellent  article  "The Old   Maid: Frances Brooke's  Apprentice Feminism," Journal  of Canadian Fiction, 2,  No.  3  (Summer I973), 9-I2, shows the significance of Mrs. Brooke's periodical in her  thematic and stylistic development.
2   Three editions were  published the first year,  I 763, a fourth in  I 765, and  later edi­ tions in 1769,  I773, Dublin 1775, 1782. Also, reference  to Mrs. Brooke  usually iden­ tified her  by describing her  as the author of The History  of Lady  Julia  Mandeville. Fanny  Burney,  when  taken  by her mother to meet her, spoke of Mrs. Brooke as "the  celebrated authoress of  'Lady   Julia  Mandeville'"  (The  Early  Diary   of  Fanny Burney, ed. A. R. Ellis, I, 283).
3  Maurice Levy,  Le  Roman "Gothique" Anglais  1764-1824   (Toulouse:  Universite de Toulouse, Ig68), p. 179·
4  E.  A.  Baker,  The History   of the  English  Novel   (New  York:  Barnes  and   Noble, I929)' v, I26.
5  Francis Wright, Sensibility in English  Prose Fiction  1760-1814: A  Reinterpretation
(New  York: Russell  and  Russell,  1937), 21.
6  George  Saintsbury says that "Milady Catesby  is well worth comparing with  [Fanny
Burney's] Evelina, which  is some twenty  years its junior,  and  the  sentimental parts

39

BROOKE

of which  are  quite  in the same tone with it."  A History of the French Novel,  2  vols. (New  York: Russell and  Russell,  I9I7,  rpt.  I964), I, 435·
7   All quotations from The  Letters of Juliet Lady  Catesby to her Friend, Lady Hen­
rietta Campley  are  from  the  fourth edition (London:  R.  and  J. Dodsley,   I764).

8  All quotations from  The  History  of Lady  Julia Mandeville are  from  the  seventh edition (London: J. Dodsley,  I782,  2 volumes). In  volume  2 of this edition pages
I93  to 240 do  not  exist. Signatures indicate that  there  are  no  leaves  missing,  but rather that  pages have been incorrectly numbered. This fact  has been  confirmed  by
comparison with  the  I763 edition.
9 In  her  Histoire du Marquis de Cressy ( 1758),  for example, the  young girl  rejected by the marquis for a more advantageous marriage enters  the  convent.
10 John Nichols,   Literary  Anecdotes  of the  Eighteenth  Century;  comprising  bio­ graphical  memoirs  of  William  Bowyer . . .   (London:  Nichols,  Son  and  Bentley, I8I2-I5), II,  346-47.
11 Mary  Singleton (pseud.), The  Old Maid,  A New Edition revised and  corrected by the  Editor (London: A. Millar, I764), No.  I8, p.  I49·
12 It is worth  noting, however,  that  much  later  Mrs.  Brooke  wrote  a sequel  to  Julia Mandeville, The  History of Charles Mandeville  ( 1790),  in  which  she  provides  a happier ending. Charles,  the supposedly  long dead  brother of Harry, returns to Eng­ land  a wealthy  man  and marries  Emily Howard, Julia's confidante and  her equal  in sensibility.  Since  Emily  has  become  a  surrogate daughter  to  Julia's  parents, the marriage provides a happy  resolution for the  families  of both  Harry and  Julia.
13 Laetitia Barbauld, ed.,  The  British Novelists  (London: Rivington, I8IO), XXVII,
p. i.
14 As the  title  of his article  indicates, W. H.  New  looks at  the  feminism in  Brooke's
Old  Maid  in his article "The Old Maid:  Frances Brooke's  Apprentice Feminism."
15 See John Nichols'  Literary Anecdotes re Mrs. Brooke's  reference to Garrick in The Old Maid.  Mrs. Brooke was criticized  severely for this satire  by the reviewer  of The Excursion  in  The  Monthly   Review,  LVII  ( 1777), pp.  141-45,  who  devotes  more space  to praise of Mr. Garrick  than  to criticism  of the novel. Garrick's own indigna­ tion is noted  in the following letter:
I hope  you have seen how much  I am  abus'd in yr. Friend Mrs.  Brooke's  new Novel?-she  is pleased  to  insinuate that  [I  am]  an  excellent Actor,   a  so so author, and  Execrable Manager and  a Worse  Man-Thank you good  Madame Brookes -If my heart  was not  better  than  my head,  I would  not give a farthing for  the Carcass, but let it dangle, as it would  deserve  with  It's  brethren at  ye End of Oxford Road-She has invented a Tale about a Tragedy, which  is all a Lie, from   beginning to  ye End-she  Even  says,  that   I  should   reject  a  Play,  if  it should  be a  woman's-there's brutal Malignity for  You-have  not  ye Ladies Mesdames Griffith, Cowley & Cilesia spoke of me before  their  Plays with an Over­ Enthusiastic Econium?-
[Letter I 109, To  Frances  Cadogan, in The  Letters of David Garrick, ed. G. Little and  G. M. Kahrl (London: Oxford  Univ.  Press, 1963),  111, IJ72.]
16  See volume  I, pp. I 26-2g.


THE COLONIAL HEROINE

The Novels of Sara Jeannette Duncan
& Mrs. Campbell Praed

Diana Brydon




ALTHOUGH THE AMERICAN  cmL in Jam"' and Howell" has attracted extensive critical  attention,  the portrayal  of the colonial heroine in the fiction of Australia  and  Canada  has been relatively neglected. This neglect is understandable -most  of  the  writing  at  the  turn   of  the  century   in  which Australian  and Canadian heroines play prominent roles is of little inherent literary merit-yet  the fiction of this period is of great interest  to the literary  historian. It reveals a society in transition,  cautiously seeking self-definition and a distinctive mode of expression, and  it provides an oblique commentary  on colonial-imperial relations through  the romantic  interplay between the native-born  heroine and the British gentleman.  Because the colonial heroine embodies all the complexities of the new nation's  developing  point of view, her type continues beyond the colonial period  into  the  national   period  which  follows Confederation  in  Canada  and Federation  in Australia.  The  colonial equivalent  of the American  "heiress of all the  ages"  is the  "cousin  Cinderella" of Duncan  or  the  "disguised  princess" of Praed.1  An examination  of the novels of Duncan  and  Praed,  two fairly popular writers  of  the  late  nineteenth   and  early  twentieth  centuries,  suggests that  the colonial habit  of mind  is less a "cringe"2   than  a habit  of high expectations  and stern  judgment.  In  Cousin  Cinderella, Duncan's  Canadians come to England  to worship and stay to judge. Praed's colonials, dissatisfied with themselves and their Australian  environment, find to their surprise that the mother  country itself is less than  ideal. They  are  compelled  to learn  that  aspirations  toward  a  higher  good must be realised through  a spiritual and not a geographical  questing.  In the work of each novelist, colonial values as well as ambiguities of allegiance are embodied in the figure of the colonial heroine;  and  the values are always affirmed.
Claude Bissell, R. E. Watters,  and R. T. Robertson have made  a good case for the  comparative study  of  Canadian  and  Australian   literatures,   arguing   that although  their solutions to the colonial dilemma were often "startlingly  different," Canada and Australia share "a common ancestry."3  Watters  suggests that  the all­ embracing  frame  of reference  of the  English class structure, so essential  to  the form of the English novel,

COLONIAL HEROINE

simply did not exist [in the colonies], and its absence posed insuperable obstacles to our early novelists who themselves had been culturally conditioned to observe and interpret social environments through the same frame of reference.

It is this absence, and the freedom it allows as well as the disadvantages  it causes, with which Duncan  and Praed concern themselves.
They were both expatriate writers who published all their books abroad and who wrote for an  international audience. Each seems to have felt the need to escape the  confines of a  provincial society, each  married   an  Englishman  and  left  her native land,  yet each returned  to that  land in at least some of her fiction. In  the course of her long career, Praed  ( 1851-1935)   wrote  almost forty  novels, about twenty  of  them  Anglo-Australian   romances.  Duncan    ( I861-1922),  ten  years younger than  Praed,  wrote several international comedies centring  on the many distinctions she perceived among Canadians, Americans, and the English, but only two of her novels focus on Canadian  issues, The Imperialist  ( 1904)  and  Cousin Cinderella  ( 1goB).




DuNCAN AND  PRAED RESPONDED  to the deficiencies of their own societies by describing and analysing them  from  the  perspective of distance. Praed, the earlier novelist, met the difficulties of setting a novel in a country devoid of English class structures  (although  Australia  was certainly  developing  its own class system, in which Praed's family represented landed  gentry), by adapting the Anglo-Australian  romances of Henry Kingsley to suit her own needs. Praed  con­ verted Kingsley's legacy of an Anglo-Australian  romance  which demonstrated the disappointed   immigrant's capacity  for  wish-fulfillment  in  its  reinforcement   of British complacency and self-congratulation, into a type of  romance which showed British values in conflict with the developing values of the new nation of Australia, and the ideal in opposition to the actual. Within  the context of the romance form, she created  a distinctively Australian  heroine who came to embody  the strengths and weaknesses of Australian society on the newly-settled continent.
Duncan's response to the absence in Canadian life of the all-embracing  frame of reference  of  the  English  class structure  was  to  compose  social  comedy  which depends  for its effect on the meetings and  misunderstandings of representatives from these two different  worlds. Although  Praed  has written  in this vein -Miss Jacobsen's Chance  is an excellent example of her ability  to evoke the humour  in such a situation -her characteristic  tone is intense and  passionate. The  humour becomes painful,  self-lacerating. Praed's  central  subject  is the  provincial  heroine who longs for the release and stimulation of the wider life promised by the centres of cosmopolitan  culture: she is blind to the value of her native land. The omnis­ cient  narrator sympathetically  records  and  judges  the  moral  dilemmas  of  her

COLONIAL HEROINE

heroines as they are initiated  into self-knowledge and an awareness of the vanities of the social world beyond Australia's shores. The action is psychological and much emphasis is placed  on the value of dream  and  the supernatural. Praed's  natural inclinations  and  possibly her experience led her toward  the  portrayal  of pathos, tragedy, and  an inner  life of fantasy and dream,  whereas Duncan's very different temperament favoured  the development of irony and a comedy of manners.
Duncan's early work is often superficial and  loosely organized,  but in her two
Canadian novels her characteristic  qualities of witty observation and ironic detachment are  no longer indulged  for their own sakes but  utilized as part  of a larger  design and  a deeper  purpose. She moves beyond derivative social comedy to explore the  psychological roots of Canadian social and  political life. Although her stories are usually related in the voice of her heroine, the tone is always coolly dispassionate and amused. Her heroines are observers, even of themselves. Duncan seems to be the  polar opposite of Praed.  Together  they present a composite  por­ trait of the colonial heroine in Australian  and Canadian fiction at the turn of the century.




DESPITE THEIR  OBVIous DIFFERENCES  in  narrative  tech­ nique, style and  form,  the  Anglo-Australian  romances  of  Praed  and  the  social comedies of Duncan  share certain important  themes. Both writers are acutely con­ scious of the distinctions between their own land and the motherland, and they are anxious to give their  nationality  a literary  definition,  by  "placing" it against  an Old World background  and  perspective. Each employs the romantic  involvement of her New World  heroine  with an English gentleman  to comment,  not only on differences in manners,  custom  and sincerity between  Old  World  and  New, but also (perhaps more importantly) on the colonial relationship itself and its psycho­ logical effects on both colonial and imperial participants.  Duncan  and Praed com­ ment obliquely, through  the presentation of character  and  incident,  on this rela­ tionship, and their stories leave little doubt as to where their sympathies lie. Finally, for each  novelist, the  question  of  moral  values underlies  all social commentary. Praed and Duncan portray  their colonial characters  as representing  most strongly the  claims of the spiritual  life,  while the  English function  as slaves to material  necessity. This  contrast  is not simply the  juxtaposition  of Old  World  corruption and  New World  innocence  or  of Europe  in decline and  the younger  nations  on the rise: it is also an affirmation of colonial independence  of mind.
Praed  makes  her literary  objectives explicit in her introductory  note to Policy and Passion (I 88I  ) , undoubtedly  her best novel. Mter  deploring  the "onesided­  ness of the  intellectual  intercourse  which at  present connects  Great  Britain  with the Antipodes," she goes on to predict a brilliant future  for Australian society and

43

COLONIAL HEROINE

culture  but notes as well that  "the  time for this is hardly  yet ripe."  In the  mean­ time,  the  Australian  experience  must  not  pass  undocumented  and  the  British public must be brought  gently to the realization  that  Australia  might  have some­ thing  to say to them. She concludes:  "it  is to the British  public  that  I, an Aus­ tralian,  address  myself, with  the  hope that  I may  in some  slight  degree  aid  in bridging over the gulf which divides the Old  World  from the Young."
The  heroine of Policy and Passion is a strong-willed  impetuous  young woman. Honoria  Longleat  is the daughter  of the  Premier  of Leichardt's Land,  a thinly disguised Queensland,  in the government  of which  Praed's own father  had  held a Cabinet  post. (It  is fascinating  to observe how accurate social observation  and romantic  fantasy  intertwine  in  Praed's  books.)  Honoria   never  learns  that   her father  was sent from  England  as a convict, a victim of the  unjust  English social system. She has been brought up a lady and is ashamed  of her father's  crude ways, which she associates with the limited scope of colonial existence. She expresses her dissatisfaction  to  her  English  visitor and  suitor,  Barrington, in  a  much  quoted passage:

'Do not call me a colonial. . .  When you have lived longer in Australia you will know you could not pay a lady a worse compliment.... To  be colonial  is to talk Australian slang; to be badly dressed, vulgar, everything that is abominable ... at least that is the general opinion.... You will see that it is the fashion out here to be as British as possible.'

She is conscious of the falsity of her position in mimicking the fashions of a country thousands  of miles away and  controlled  by interests different  from  her own, but she realizes too that  the vacuum in Australian life must be filled from somewhere. Just as she believes that novels are "false and unnatural" even as she relies on them to supply the deficiencies of her emotional life, so it is in desperation  that she turns to an emulation  of English ways to satisfy her own indefinable  longings for a wider sphere of experience.
She continues her complaint:

'I am always fancying that we Australians are like children playing at being grown­ up. It is in Europe that people live ... But, do you not see?-everything with us is borrowed. We cannot be original-we cannot even set up an independent govern­ ment. We must copy old-world forms, and  we have  nothing of what makes the charm of the old world. Our range of view is so limited. We are so ignorant of life, and ignorant people cannot put out feelers, either deeply or widely.'

The  Englishman  Barrington   makes  the  mistake  of  assuming  that  the  malaise Honoria  expresses can be satisfied by a simple change  in material  circumstances. He tells her:  "'You were not meant to lead a cramped  existence in Australia.... Your gifts are wasted here.... You should live in England.'" She herself is wiser. She understands  intuitively that  her longings are partly the result of her sheltered life as a woman and  partly an expression of a deeper spiritual  need which cannot

44

COLONIAL HEROINE


be satisfied by the things of this world. She senses, too, that  despite her impatience with Australia  it is her  homeland  and she could never be truly  happy  abandon­ ing it.
Honoria's discontent  is placed  in  its  proper  perspective  by  her  father's  un­
bounded  faith in the future  of the new country he has adopted  for his own. Praed clearly endorses Longleat's  vision of a "young land where the forest is free to all, and the rich and poor are equal in the sight of God and man"  and she intends  her readers to feel the full strength  of his dream of "founding  a new order of things, of being the ancestor  of great  men -patriots-soldiers -legislators." The  reader is told that  Honoria's children  will fulfil his ambition  and  that  she herself comes to a greater appreciation of Australian  values.
After Barrington  has betrayed  her trust and her honour  has been saved by her faithful  Australian  suitor, Dyson Maddox,  Honoria  explains to Maddox:

'I trusted him to be loyal as you-as Australian men are loyal -it is the English who are false, who have bad thoughts ... I did not think that there was any more harm in meeting him in the Gardens at  night, than in walking with him by the lake at Kooralbyn.'

Just as Henry James's Winterbourne does not know what to make of the behaviour of the young American  Daisy Miller, so Barrington  is puzzled by the  behaviour of Honoria.  Praed  comments:

Her frank abandon bewildered Barrington's judgment, while it intoxicated his senses. He could not determine whether the absence of that maidenly reserve which he had been accustomed to associate with young ladies of the higher classes was the result of boldness or ignorance.

Barrington's error  in  misjudging  Honoria  reflects a  failure  of sensitivity  on  his part. He has relied so long on convention and social norms that  he is incapable of assessing spontaneity. He cannot see that, in the words of an Australian  observer, Honoria  is "essentially a New-World  product.  No European young woman  could combine  so much  boldness  with  an  innocence  which one is obliged  to  take  for granted." She herself has come to recognize the truth  of this remark by the story's end. When she meets Barrington  years later at a London dinner  party she is able to assure him  that  she has "never  regretted  having  married  an  Australian; and [she wishes] for no better  fate  than  to cast in  [her]  lot with that  of Leichardt's Land."


RAEn's COLONIAL HEROINE rejects her false British suitor,  and chooses the simple but  trustworthy  values of life in a new land,  as embodied  in Dyson Maddox. She  has been shaken  by her encounter  with  Old  World  deceit, but she is strong  enough  to survive. In  Cousin Cinderella, Duncan's emphasis  is


45

COLONIAL HEROINE

less on virtue  in distress than  on the element  of disguise and, as Clara Thomas has pointed  out,  on  gamesmanship.4  Like  Honoria, Mary Trent is heiress  to an  im­ mense  New  World  fortune, but  Mary's vulnerable appearance conceals  a  more  formidable reality. She writes of Mrs. Jerome Jarvis's attempts to pair  her off  with her foolish son Billy Milliken:

I felt like a mouse in the paws of Mrs. Jarvis, her own small Colonial trophy, which she would  presently drop  at  the feet of Society,  like rather  a fraudulent  mouse, perhaps, that really felt no great alarm, and listened with fascination  to the purrings of conquest.

In  this  novel,  Mary and  her  brother   Graham have  been  sent  from  Canada to England as samples  of what  the colonies can  produce. They  are more  than  willing to fall in love with  London-they are  fully  prepared to  be  carried  away-yet throughout their  adventure they stubbornly affirm  that  they  have  their  own  point of view, which  emphatically defies the insular  prejudices of the  English.
Duncan shares  Praed's dual  awareness  of the appalling absences  in colonial  life
and  their  immense   possibilities. Like  Praed, she  is fascinated by the  paradox of the colonial,  "free" of social restrictions  yet bound by ties of loyalty to an ungrate­ ful  mother country, and  of the  British,  "bound" yet somehow made  free  of  the world  through the  close inter-relationships of  their  social  circles.  In  Policy and Passion, Honoria is a prisoner of her own whims; Barrington of social expectations. Honoria's freedom makes  her far  too trusting, but  she  remains a  lovely woman; Barrington's social  rigidity  makes  him  a  monster.  In  Cousin  Cinderella,  Mary observes the  advantages of the  British social frame of  reference:

Then  I began to wonder whether, for all its appearance of whirl and scramble and superficiality,  the whole great organism wasn't  very much  knit together  indeed,  by ties of mutual  loyalty and obligation-wasn't one fabric, down below, that  was thoroughly  warranted  to wear.

In  contrast, she and  her brother  are single individuals, with  nothing behind them but  their  father's money  and  their  own sense of themselves as Canadians. Some­ times they feel this freedom  to be a drawback, but  more  often  they are aware of it as a strength. They  may  admire the  English,  but  they  value  their  independence, and  pity the English  who are so hemmed  in by restrictions that their personal lives are  sacrificed  or  distorted. Mary  remarks  of the  man  she  loves, Lord  Doleford:

His case seemed another  illustration,  amazing  and  a little  absurd,  of that  curious authority  by which  the simple social structure and  scheme  of  things in  England could interfere  with a person born in it....

She  agrees  with  Lord  Doleford  when  he says:  " 'I call it great  luck  to belong  to a place like Canada ... no bother  in seeing your way, out there. No impediments.'" Mary is at  once  impressed  by the  elaborate social structures of London  society and  disdainful of them.  When she discovers that  the  English  see her only in terms

COLONIAL HEROINE


of her  father's money  and  the  social  potential it ensures  her,  she  is delighted to feel herself  "realized," but  contemptuous of such  a "low" way of looking  at  life. She explains:

what  I drew from it immediately, besides the joy itself, was a point of view. It was a  point  of view from  which  one could  feel, looking out  at  the  endless luxurious whirl of it, a kind of divine disdain of London, as if one had suddenly got behind the scenes with  her, and  no longer felt so prodigiously impressed.

Her  brother Graham carries  this point of view one step further, to argue that  only Canadians can  perceive  the  true  value  of the  British  moral  inheritance, because as involved  outsiders they can view it from  the necessary sympathetic distance. He says, "'Now we with  our empty  country and  our simple  record,  we've  got a point of view, if you like. It's  inestimable.'"
These  two Canadians in London refuse to become  totally  involved  in the social whirl of London society or the ostentation of their American friend  Evelyn  Dicey. They  choose,  instead, to install  themselves  in  a  modest,  unassuming flat,  which Mary says "meant the identity we clung to.... This is just the size and  importance we choose to connect  ourselves  with,  at  all events, for  the  present." This  sense of untapped reserves of strength behind  a modest  exterior  is a central aspect  of this Canadian heroine's consciousness.  Mary  stands  quietly  back from  events, allowing the  English  to think  they  are successfully manipulating her,  but  all the  while  she is secretly  judging, quietly  laughing at the follies of others,  puncturing their preten­ sions with  an  irony  so subtle  it  often  goes unnoticed by  its  victims,  and  finally obtaining her desired  end -marriage with the  English  Lord  Doleford.
When  Evelyn  complains to Mary  that  she is "dead sick of the  American myths
they  keep  over  here  [in  England] to take  the  place  of wit  and  humour," Mary replies:

'Let  them  laugh  at  us as much  as they can. We can  laugh  at  them  a great  deal more, because we're made that way, and they aren't,  are they?'

"I used 'we'  continentally," she adds. The English  are  too insular, too self-impor­ tant, too set  in  their  ways,  to see the  humour in incongruities. But  displacement and  disparities are  the  essence of life in a new land  and  the  most effective  way of dealing  with  them  is through humour. Canada and  the  United  States  share  this heritage  of exile from  the centre  to the  periphery of their  civilization in the  nine­  teenth century, but  the  points of view they assume from their  respective  distances are, of course,  quite different. In  Cousin Cinderella, Evelyn  is already beginning to exhibit  those  traits which  later  in the  century  will make  the  United States the new centre  of English  civilization.
Canada chose to remain a colony, working  its way gradually to the  full stature of a nation, while  the  United States  chose rebellion  and  the  immediate assertion of its independence from  outside  interference. Duncan's Cousin Cinderella shows

47

COLONIAL HEROINE

the effects of those decisions. In  this novel, Canadians feel they belong to Britain in a way that  Americans  do not, yet Americans  are  treated  with  more  respect, precisely because they are foreign and  not colonial cousins.
Duncan  treats  this situation  with self-aware  irony.  Her  Canadians are  more
conscious of  and  conscientious  about  the  Empire   than   her  Britons.  They  are idealistic, self-effacing and  tenacious. She presents Canada's colonial status  as a virtue-she sees it as a symbol of Canadian generosity-but she is also aware that  others see this idealism as foolishness. This  double  awareness  constitutes  the central irony of her work.
I agree with Thomas Tausky that "there is a feeling of melancholy about Cousin Cinderella despite the happy ending." He says: "Its  root seems to be the eagerness with  which  the Trents  are  willing to sacrifice themselves for  England,  and  the coldness and  crudity  with which their sacrifices are  received."5  A similar feeling emerges from  a  number  of Praed's  novels, particularly   An  Australian  Heroine (I 88o), her first. This undertone of melancholy seems an unavoidable accompani­ ment to literary explorations of the colonial situation.  Yet I would argue that  this underlying  sadness has its positive counterpart in that  colonial  independence  of mind  which is part of the complex characterization of the colonial heroine in all her  roles. The  heroines of Praed  and  Duncan  reserve to  themselves the right  to judge; they triumph morally, though  at a cost.


NOTES

1 Mrs.  Everard  Cotes   (Sara Jeannette Duncan) ,  Cousin   Cinderella   (New  York: Macmillan, I9o8;  rpt.  Univ.  of Toronto Press,  I973); Mrs.  Campbell Praed, An Australian Heroine   (I88o; rpt.  London: Chapman & Hall,   I883), p. 25.
2  A. A. Phillips,  "The Cultural Cringe," The  Australian Tradition  (I 958;  2nd  rev. ed.,  Melbourne: Cheshire-Lansdowne, I966), p.  I I3.
3  Claude Bissell, "A  Common Ancestry: Literature in  Australia and  Canada," Uni­ versity  of Toronto  Quarterly, 25, no.  2  (January  I956), p.  I42.  See  also  R.  E. Watters, "English Social  Patterns in  Early  Australian and  Canadian  Fiction," in National Identity, ed. K. L. Goodwin  (London: Heinemann, I97o), pp. 66-75, and  R. T. Robertson, "Another Preface  to an  Uncollected Anthology:  Canadian Critic­ ism in a Commonwealth Context," Ariel, 4, No. 3  (July   I973), pp.  70-8I.
4  Clara Thomas, "Cousin Cinderella and  the  Empire Game," Studies in  Canadian
Literature, I, no. 2 (Summer I976), pp.  I83-93·
5  "The American Girls of William  Dean  Howells  and  Sara  Jeanette Duncan," Jour­
nal of Canadian Fiction,  4, no.  I  ( I975), p. 156.


DANTE & liTHE GOLDEN DOG"

Joy Kuropatwa




Dscussrnc The Golden Dog in undeTined terms will not work;  one  needs  a  working definition  of "romance." Frye  provides  one  in  The Secular Scripture  when  he  notes  that  "the two  chief  elements  of romance [are] love and  adventure":  otherwise expressed,  "sexuality and  violence  are  central  to romance."1  Frye  also states  that  "The central element  of romance is a love story, and  the exciting  adventures are normally  a foreplay leading up to a sexual union." While  The  Golden  Dog  is romantic in  the  sense that   it  is "a tale  of  love  and adventure," the  adventures recounted are certainly  not  a "foreplay leading  up to a sexual  union"; if the  six  main  characters form  relationships that   make  three couples,  the three  relationships paid most attention to over  the course of the novel are  terminated by  treachery, death,  or  both.  These  relationships end,  in degrees of agony that  range  from the exquisite to the soul-wracking, before the novel closes; the  adventures described are  a prelude  to dissolution.
But  there  is an  even  more  essential  way in which  The Golden  Dog eludes the
label  "romance." Frye  notes

the curious polarized  characterization of romance, its tendency  to split into heroes and villains. Romance  avoids the ambiguities of ordinary life, where everything is a mixture of good and bad, and where it is difficult to take sides or believe that people are consistent patterns  of virtue or vice.

Kirby  is careful to  create characters that  are  neither  exclusively  good  nor  bad. Apart from  characterization, ambiguity is present in the form of undermining wit; jabs at  underlying assumptions give the  first hint  that  the  world  of The  Golden Dog is not a world  in which  "the curious  polarized  characterization of romance," and  the type of moral  vision which this implies, may be found. For example, when bickering  between  the  rival  factions  of the  Grand Company and  the  Golden  Dog threatens to disrupt the  proceedings of a meeting  intended to clarify  New France's military strategy, the Governor of the colony intercedes with  the "Dr. Strangelove" line "This is a Council of War, and  not a place for recriminations."2  Another  such instance concerns Pierre Philibert and  Amelie de Repentigny. As Amelie, who has retreated to an Ursuline convent, quickly slides into the final stage of her romantic decline,
A feeling of pity and sympathy for these two affianced and  unfortunate lovers stole into the hearts of the coldest nuns, while the novices and  the romantic  convent girls were absolutely wild over the melancholy fate of Pierre and Amelie.


49

DANTE & KIRBY

Kirby, apart from  undermining the seriousness  of Amelie's romantic decline,  here associates  the  romantic sensibility with  the young  "convent girls,"  rather than  the elder  novices or  the  nuns.  The  point  is this:   romantic as The  Golden  Dog is, in the sense  that  it is a tale  of love and  adventure, there  are  all sorts  of clues  that point  to a moral vision more complex  than  the  polarity of romance might  admit. The  sources  of The  Golden Dog help to confirm  the  presence  of and  explain  the nature of this moral vision. Kirby  explains

To beguile a leisure hour, it so happened  I had  purchased  a volume styled "Maple
Leaves-a budget of historical, legendary and sporting  lover, by  J. M. Le Moine."
I was so captivated by the dramatic  interest infused into two out of several sketches
it contained,  Chateau  Bigot and  the Golden  Dog  [sic], that  I vowed to a friend, I would  make  them  the  groundwork  of a  Canadian novel. Thus  originated  my Chien d'Or romance.3

Looking  at  the  sketches  Kirby  refers  to enables  one  to  distinguish what  in  The Golden Dog is purely attributable to Kirby  and  what  is derived  from  the accounts he thought of as his kernel. One  of the sketches  referred to was reprinted in 1873, under  the  title  "Le  Chien  D'Or: The  History  of an  Old  House."• While  much of the sketch  deals with general  historical  detail, the  events that  were to appear in Kirby's novel are rather briefly recounted:

As appears  by the corner stone recently found  at  the Chien  d'Or,  it was Nicholas
Jacquin  Philibert  who caused  this house to be erected,  the  20th August,  I 735·
... the  21st January, 1748, Nicholas Jacquin  dit  Philibert  quarrelled  with  Pierre Legardeur, Sieur de Repentigny, respecting a military  order  billeting him on Phili­ bert. From words came blows, and de Repentigny  wounded  his adversary mortally.
In those fighting days of adventures and duels ... the blood of a fellow creature  was easily atoned  for, especially if the transgressor bore a noble name and stood well at Court.
De  Repentigny  received the  year following a  pardon  from  King  Louis  XV,  and returned  from Acadia, whither he had retired.  Philibert  before dying had forgiven his murderer.5

What Le  Moine  relates  is a tale of violence:   this  is made obvious  in the  sorts of questions the story  raises for him:

If, on one hand,  Philibert is a victim which moves us to pity; on the other, it seems incomprehensible that de Repentigny  should have drawn  his sword about  such an insignificant  quarrel.  Was it merely an ordinary  instance  of soldierlike  brutality? Was it a deed of personal revenge, or else, was de  Repentigny  merely  the  instru­ ment, the sycophant of a mightier man? Whatever we choose to suppose, that  drop of blood, lights up with sinister glare, the gloom of years which overshadows the old structure.  So much for romance.6

This  emphasis, to  the  exclusion  of virtually all  else, on  blood  and  vengeance is alien  to  the  world  of The  Golden  Dog. The   transition from  the  account to  the

so

DANTE & KIRBY

novel involves much  more  than  the simple diffusion of this single  focus. What appears to be at least as germane to Kirby's novel as the actual story of the Golden Dog is a French  romance  Le Moine mentions, written  by Auguste Soulard  and based on  the  same  story.  Pierre  Philibert,  one of the  major  characters  in  The Golden Dog, first appears  in Soulard's  romance. Presumably Kirby borrowed  not only the idea of giving Nicholas Philibert a son called Pierre from Soulard, but as well the ideas of having the East Indies as the locale of de Repentigny's  death, and the news of his death  to be communicated  by letter.
What  looking at  Le Moine's  account  reveals is that  Kirby made  an enormous
addition  to the tale of the Golden Dog-female characters.  Kirby's  novel has six main  characters,  three  of whom  are female. In  neither  the  English account  nor the French  romance  Kirby  used as sources do any women appear,  with the single exception of a woman  (Madame Philibert)  who plays a minor  role in Soulard's romance;  and  certainly  neither  source  presents a  women,  as  Kirby  does, who quotes  Dante  in  times  of  crisis. The  addition  of significant  female  characters obviously raises the  question  of the thematic  function  of their  presence, and  the question is complicated  by the fact that all three have qualitatively  different  rela­ tionships with the three main male characters in The  Golden  Dog.




HowEVER The  Golden  Dog HAS NOT BEEN  READ in light of LeMoine's account.  Sorfleet reads the conclusion to The  Golden  Dog as a  recog­ nition of the tragic "mutability of life,"7  while Northey considers the ending to be a coup, possibly a coup de grace:

And, seemingly to ensure  that  the reader suffers a  concluding stroke of  terror, Kirby draws attention  to life's incomprehensibility, stating  that  'there  is neither human nor poetic justice' in it.8

In  The  Golden  Dog there  is "neither  human  nor poetic  justice" for  the simple reason that  there  is, finally, divine  justice. Sorfleet and  Northey  fail to consider Kirby's  novel in relation  to its sources:  between this omission and  the failure  to acknowledge  the structural and  thematic  use of Dante's  Divine  Comedy  in The Golden  Dog, a key to the moral vision that  informs the novel is missed.
Explicit reference to The  Divine Comedy gives the first indication  of the impor­ tance of Dante's  poem in The Golden Dog. In what is arguably the central passage of the novel, thematically  and  certainly  geometrically, there  is explicit  reference made to The  Divine Comedy, and lest the point be missed, Dante's words appear  both in English translation  and  Italian:

Amelie clung to Philibert. She thought of Francesca da Rimini  clinging to Paolo amidst the tempest of wind and the moving darkness, and uttered tremblingly the

DANTE & KIRBY

words, "Oh,  Pierre!  what an omen. Shall it be said of us as of them, 'Amor  con­
dusse noi ad una  morte?'"   ("Love  has conducted  us into  death.")

Other explicit  references  to Dante are made  in the  chapter that  climaxes  with  the passage  quoted  above: the  "touching tale of Paolo  and  Francesca da  Rimini" is read,  and  it is remarked "how  truly  the Commedia, which  is justly called  Divine, unlocks  the secret  chambers of the  human soul." Elsewhere in The  Golden  Dog a character finds herself in
A world of guilty  thoughts and unresisted temptations,  a chaotic world where black, unscalable  rocks, like a circle of the  Inferno  hemmed  her in on every side, while devils whispered  in her  ears  the  words which  gave  shape  and  substance  to  her secret wishes....
Apart from  explicit  references to Dante, there  are  a number of implicit  references to The  Comedy  in The  Golden Dog. Some  of these  are  simply  isolated  allusions, while others  form  significant  patterns.
Isolated  allusions  are frequent and  varied.  Kirby applies  Dante's vision of Hell, at least in the physiographic sense, to the faction that rivals the Golden  Dog: "The rings of corruption in the  Grand Company descended, narrower and  more  black and  precipitous, down  to the bottom  where Bigot sat  the Demiurgos of all."  Dante refers  to  Minos,  "the judge  of Hell,"9   as "that  connoisseur of  all  transgression" (lnf. v. g): Kirby  describes Intendant Bigot as "a connoisseur in female  temper; he liked to see the storm  of jealous rage ... followed  by the  rain  of angry  tears." And  Cerberus, the  mythical three-headed dog, is found  both  in The  Golden  Dog and  the  Third Circle  of Dante's Hell.
But apart from  these occasional  allusions, there  are  patterns of imagery, at least strongly  reminiscent of The  Comedy, that  thread through the novel. That imagery drawn from  The  Comedy  and  references  to the  poem  are  profuse  in The  Golden Dog might  be attributable to a  desire,  on  Kirby's part, to  evoke  Dante for  the sake  of  heightening mood  at  given  junctures; but  the  fact  that   the  patterns of images  Kirby  uses are images that  figure significantly in The  Comedy  leads one to suspect  that  Dante is more  than  a matter of casual  allusion.
In  The  Comedy  Dante is guided  through Hell,  Purgatory and  Heaven; in The Golden  Dog more  than  one  character refers  to  a  similar  series  of  ports  of  call. Another pattern of imagery  in  The  Golden  Dog involves  the  stars;  there  is, for example, speculation about  "the demon  star  Algol." But  perhaps the most  reveal­ ing instance of this  pattern is the  title of chapter 2 1, "Sic itur  ad astra,"  for  in a sense Dante's journey  is a following  of the  path  to the  stars,  as the  final lines  of Il Paradiso indicate: "My  \\-ill and  desire  were  turned by love,  j The  love  that  moves  the sun  and  the other  stars." Finally  the  crowning image of The  Comedy  is the  celestial  rose, and  not only is The  Golden  Dog filled with  rose imagery, but there  is repeated suggestion  that  there  is some  sort  of association, as  with  Dante, to be made with  the rose. In The  Comedy heaven, purgatory, and hell are literally

52

DANTE & KIRBY

found  beneath  the celestial rose; in The  Golden Dog it is stated  "we are all com­ panions under the rose." But the direct and oblique allusions to The Comedy that fill The  Golden  Dog only hint  at  the  assimilation of Dante's  cosmic vision into Kirby's novel.
Of Kirby's six main characters, three are male and three are female; the six are, for  most of the  novel, grouped  as three  couples, or  would-be  couples. Textual analysis suggests that  for each  pair there is involved at least one Beatrice andlor what might be called an anti-Beatrice  figure. (If  a Beatrice figure leads a lover to redemption, perhaps it does not do too much violence to Dante's  vision to claim that  an  "anti-Beatrice" figure is one who leads a lover to damnation.)  In  The Golden  Dog, the respective histories of the relationships of the three  couples form three subplots. As in King  Lear, where there is more than  one exploration  of the relationship  between the parental  and  filial generations, a certain  degree of serial repetition is involved. In The  Golden Dog, as in Lear, serial repetition  enables the exploration of variations  upon a common theme. In The Golden Dog this theme is corrupted  or  perverted  love, and  the  concept  involved  is one  discussed in The Comedy.



E                          as the  anti­ thesis to rightful or proper love is presented by Dante  as a vital recognition: it is not until he has ascended to a sphere but one from Empyrean that he declares that he has been "dredged  ... from the sea of wrongful love" (Para. xxvi. 62). Virgil, in the course of guiding  Dante  through  purgatory, adjures
Bethink thee then how love must be the seed
In you, not only of each virtuous action,
But also of each punishable deed.	(Purg.  xvii. 103-5)
It  is in response to Dante's  request-"please, I Define me love, to which  thou dost reduce  I All virtuous  actions and  their  contraries"  (Purg.  xviii. 13-15)  - that Virgil gives his Second Discourse on Love ; Virgil proceeds to explain

how wholly those are blind
To truth, who think all love is laudable
Just in itself, no matter of what kind.	(Purg.  xviii. 34-36)

Dante's  Virgil adds that  one ought  to be "strict  to purge  right loves from  repro­ bate"  (Purg.  xviii. 66). As Sayers summarizes  Virgil's  argument,  "Man  has a natural  impulse to love that  which pleases him. This impulse, which is the root of all virtue,  can  be perverted,  weakened  or misdirected to become  the  root of all sin"  (II, p. 66).
This is precisely why a crucial line from Dante's account  of the story of Paolo and Francesca  da Rimini  appears  in the central passage of The  Golden Dog; the

53

DANTE & KIRBY

concept of sin  as conupted love is the  heart of the  matter. In  The  Golden  Dog those  who inhabit the sublunary or sub-celestial  rose world,  by virtue of their  very distance from  the  celestial rose, are  bound  to corrupt love to some  degree,  which is, as  Kirby  expresses it,  why  "we  are  all  companions under the  rose."  All  six major characters of  The  Golden  Dog  therefore duly  engage in  the  terrestrial, "under the  rose" activity  of perverting or corrupting love.
If the relationship between Intendant Bigot and  Caroline de St. Castin  is clearly
a case of improper love, and  that  between  Le Gardeur de Repentigny and  Ange­ lique  des Meloises overtly  one  of perverted love,  the  relationship  between  Pierre  Philibert and  Amelie  de  Repentigny is less obviously  one  of  corrupt love.  The  Pierre and  Amelie  that  the  reader  meets  are  impossibly  virtuous. Pierre  is intro­ duced  to the  reader through Amelie's  memory  of him  as the  alert  and  agile  boy who  saved   her  brother's life.  Apparently Pierre   has  only  improved  with  age:  "Those who caught sight of him saw a man  worth seeing-tall, deep-chested, and erect.  His  Norman features  without being  perfect  were  handsome and  manly." Amelie,  who is "in  the bloom of youth,  and of surpassing loveliness,"  is as loyal as she is lovely:  let it suffice to say that  she has been nicknamed "Ste. Amelie."
Initially Pierre and  Amelie appear to be the  ideal  pair.  Pierre  "mingled as the fairy  prince in the day dreams and  bright  imaginings of the young poetic girl," and he has "a thousand pictures of her hung  up in his mind  and  secretly  worshipped." While  Pierre  and  Amelie appear to be a perfect  match, a series of notes are struck that   belie  this  appearance. There is, for  example, the  suggestion  that  they  both indulge in narcissism:

"what you do is ever wisest and  best in my eyes, except one thing, which I confess now that  you are my own, I cannot  account for-"
"I had hoped, Pierre, there was no exception  to your admiration, you are taking
off my angel's wings already, and leaving me a mere woman!"  replied she merrily.

Presumably there  are  more than  physiographic reasons  for  having  Amelie,  as the pair  walk  and  have  the  above  talk,  see Pierre  "reflected" in  a  "still  pool."  But narcissism  is associated  with Pierre  as much  as it is with  Amelie,  as is made  clear when  Pierre  gazes at

the  portrait of Amelie painted  by himself during  his last visit to Tilly. The  young artist, full of enthusiasm, had put his whole soul into the work until he was himself startled  at the vivid likeness which almost unconsciously flowed from his pencil. He had  caught  the divine upward  expression of her  eyes, as she  turned  her  head  to listen to him, and  left upon the canvas the  very smile he had  seen upon  her lips. Those dark eyes of hers had haunted  his memory forever after. To his imagination that  picture  had  become almost a living thing. It was as a  voice  of his own  that returned to  his ear as the  voice  of Amelie. In  the  painting  of that  portrait  Pierre had the first revelation of a consciousness of his deep love, which became in the end the master passion of his life. [emphasis mine]

54

DANTE &  KIRBY


Interestingly enough, possibly the most apt  gloss upon  this passage one can find is a statement made in  a commentary upon  Dante's ll Purgatorio:  " 'If you exalt the  objects  of your  love  until  your  picture  is a false one;  if you idealize  them; if you project upon  them  your own ideal self; then  you are loving  not a real person but  a dream' " (Sayers,  II, p. 22 1).
However  where  Kirby  makes most clear that  Pierre  and  Amelie do not have an ideal  relationship is in the chapter that  describes their  engagement. At first the auspicious is implied, for the setting is idyllic and the season summer. But the voice that  affects the lovers issues from  hell:

Philibert let fall upon his knee the book which he had been reading. His voice faltered,  he could  not  continue  without  emotion  the  touching  tale  of Paolo and Francesca  da Rimini.  Amelie's eyes were suffused with  tears of pity, for her heart had  beat  time to the music of Dante's  immortal  verse as it dropped  in measured cadence from the lips of Philibert.

The  "touching tale  of Paolo  and  Francesca da  Rimini" is found  in  L'/nferno­ not  Il Paradiso. When one  looks at  Dante's account  beside  Kirby's description of the  reading of that  account, a very odd  similarity  of  situation becomes  apparent. In  Canto V of L'lnferno, in the course of telling  her  tale  to Dante, Francesca da Rimini describes  the scenario of the beginning of her affair  with  Paolo:
One day we read for pastime how in thrall
Lord  Lancelot  lay to love, who loved the Queen;
We were alone-we thought no harm  at all.

As we read on, our eyes met now and then,
And to our cheeks the changing colour started, But just one moment overcame us-when

We read of the smile, desired of lips long-thwarted, Such smile, by such a lover kissed away,
He that  may never more from me be parted

Trembling all over, kissed my mouth.  I say
The  book was Galleot, Galleot the complying
Ribald  who wrote; we read no more that  day.
(lnf. v. 127-138)

According to Francesca, she and  Paolo  first acknowledge their  love upon  reading "the romance of Lancelot duLac," a tale of illicit love;  according to Kirby,  Pierre and  Amelie  first  acknowledge their  love  upon  reading Dante's account of Paolo and  Francesca da Rimini, another tale of illicit love. Kirby hits upon not an obscure episode but this celebrated tale of adultery which has been called "the most famous episode in the whole Comedy." The  point is driven further by Amelie's  consequent "tears of pity," for  Dante is chastised  for  precisely such  behaviour in  the  course of his journey  through hell:

55

DANTE &  KIRBY

Truly  I wept, leaned on the pinnacles
Of the hard rock; until my guide said, "Why! And art thou too like all the other  fools?"

Here pity, or here piety, must die
If the other lives; who's wickeder than  one
That's  agonized by God's high equity? 	(lnf. xx. 25-30)

When  Dante weeps for pity in hell, he is told that  he must choose between  pity and piety;   when  Amelie  listens to  Dante's account of  his  journey   through  hell,  she weeps "tears of pity." The implication is that  Pierre and  Amelie are far from  being ideal lovers. This  impression  is strengthened by the  nature of Amelie's  response  to the storm  that  begins after  her acceptance of Pierre's proposal:

The rising wind almost overpowered with its roaring  the thunder  that pealed momentarily   nearer  and  nearer.  The  rain  came  down  in  broad,  heavy splashes, followed by a fierce, pitiless hail, as if Heaven's  anger  were pursuing  them.
Amelie clung to Philibert. She thought of Francesca  da Rimini clinging to Paolo amidst  the tempest of wind and  the moving darkness, and  uttered  tremblingly  the words, "Oh,  Pierre!  what an omen. Shall it  be said of us as of them, 'Amor  con­ dusse  noi ad  una  morte?'" ("Love  has conducted  us into death.")

Kirby's  translation of Dante's line is not quite  accurate: variant modern  transla­ tions  have  it  "Love to a single  death   brought him  and  me"   (lnf. i.  ro6)   and  "Love  led  us to one  death." By phrasing his translation "Love  has  conducted us into  death," Kirby  shifts  nuances: the  phrase  "conducted us into" is suggestive not of the sort  of love that  leads to Beatrice  and  heaven, but  rather the  type  that  paves the way to Francesca and  hell. And,  as it is the  virtuous Amelie who quotes  Dante's line,  the  type  of love in question  bears  some  scrutiny.  Pierre  and  Amelie are  portrayed as being  as good as mortals  possibly  can  be;  yet  the  answer  to the crucial  question  Amelie poses ("Shall it be said of us as of them  [Paolo and  Fran­ cesca] 'Amor condusse noi ad una morte?' ")is, in the context of The  Golden Dog, yes. After  the  engagement, Amelie's   brother is  duped  into  murdering Pierre's father; as a  result,  Amelie  retreats  to  an  Ursuline convent  and  has  a  romantic decline,  following  which  the  desolated  Pierre  eventually  finds  the  death he seeks in  battle. In  a sense, Amelie literally  dies of shame; the  element  of narcissism  is not to be forgotten, and  Azn,elie's brother has  murdered  her  future father-in-law.
Pierre   is described as  after  his  death   meeting Amelie  "joyfully in  that   land where  love is real": in The  Comedy, it is in  heaven that  Dante conceives  of the
"love  whereto I Each  thing  becomes  that  which  it  really  is"  (Para.  XX.   n-B).
Even  for  a  Pierre  and  an  Amelie,  uncorrupted love  can  only  be  realized  in  the spheres  crowned by-not upon  the earth  beneath -the celestial  rose.
So it is that  each  of the  three  relationships explored in  depth in  The  Golden
Dog is described  in terms of idolatry. Pierre  worships "the idol of his heart,  Amelie de Repentigny," and  the heart  of Le Gardeur de  Repentigny is "wedded to the

s6

DANTE & KIRBY


idol of his fancy." Finally  Caroline de St. Castin  sins in loving  Bigot "better than she loved God"-Bigot is the god of her idolatry.
Dante provides the concept of sin as corrupted love, and  Kirby  uses this notion
in order  to present  a vision in which  the world is a sinful  place.  The  primary way in  which  Kirby  demonstrates this  vision  is the  serial  repetition of  relationships which  are  associated  with  corrupted or  perverted love. But  if the  ideas  of sin as corrupted love and  the unavoidability of sin on earth  are central to the moral vision found in The  Golden  Dog, these ideas ought  to inform  other  aspects  of the  novel. Possibly the  ripple-effect of these central  notions  is most  clearly seen in the depic­ tion of the  relation  between  Old  and  New  France.
In New France it is said that "matters of love ... are matters of state  in France!" because
the  Marquise  de Pompadour governed the King and the  kingdom. But Louis XV was capricious  and  unfaithful in his fancies; he had changed  his mistresses and  his policy with  them  many  times, and  might change once more, to the  ruin  of Bigot and all the dependents of La  Pompadour.

Unless one is of Bigot's party,  when it is asked in New France" 'Has  France come to be governed  by courtesans like imperial Rome?'" the succinct  reply is" 'Yes!'" As one officer,  when  informed that  the  defence  budget  of New  France has  been frozen,  exclaims,
"They  may as well sell New France at once to the enemy, if we are not to defend Quebec!  The  treasury wants  [ie. lacks] money for the war in Europe  forsooth! No doubt  it  wants  money  for  the  war,  when  so much  is lavished  upon  the  pimps, panders  and  harlots  of the Court!"

Thus sin, or corrupt love, is seen as not only the condition of earthly relationships but  as  well  the  bane  of  earthly government. As  Dame Rochelle, the  wise  old woman   of  the  novel  remarks, people  ought   to  place  "trust in  Heaven, not  on earth, where  all is transitory and  uncertain." It is well to remember Dame Roch­ elle's words when  one reads  the conclusion  of the novel, where  it is said "Our tale is now done.... There is in it neither  poetic  nor  human justice":  what  there  is, in  terms  of the  moral vision  presented in the  novel, is divine  justice.
Certainly The  Golden  Dog has romantic aspects, but  scrutiny  of the  novel sug­
gests  that   at  most  it  is  romantic in  framework. The   inherent  polarization of romance is finally  foreign  to The  Golden  Dog for  the  simple  reason  that   Kirby explores  not  a world  of  definite  distinctions but  a morally  complex   universe.  It might  be argued that Kirby's answer  to complex  moral  questions is finally  quite straightforward if not simple,  but  this is another matter. Whatever the  degree  of simplicity  to the  answer  or  answers  that  Kirby  does provide,  there  is ample  evi­ dence  that   he  presents  moral   problems  as  complex  issues. What  Kirby's  vision finally  distils to is a celebration of the sacred  accompanied by an  underlying con­ tempt  for  the  profane. For  the  manner in which  this  view is  conveyed,  Kirby  is


57

DANTE & KIRBY

considerably indebted  to Dante's  Comedy. As for the view in itself:  perhaps con­ cerning celestial roses there ought to be dispute. Kirby, after  all, leaves one earth­ bound with the reminder that "we are all companions under  the rose"; it is Dante that  intrigues one to discover the way to ascend from  the dark  wood of  his first canto to the "love that moves the sun and the other stars." To be Kirby's Beatrice is to corrupt  even love; to be Dante's  Beatrice is to love even the corrupt.


NOTES

1 Northrop Frye,  The  Secular  Scripture:   A  Study   of the  Structure   of Romance
(Cambridge, Mass.:  Harvard Univ.  Press,  I 976),  p. 26.
2  William Kirby,  The  Golden  Dog ( Le Chien  d'Or): A  Romance  of Old  Quebec
( I877; rpt.  Toronto: The Musson  Book Company, I925), p.  I25.
8  William Kirby,  "A  Biographical Sketch  of the Author of 'Maple Leaves,'" in  J. M. LeMoine, Maple  Leaves (Quebec: J. M. Demers and  Frere, I894), p. 7·
4  J. M.  LeMoine, "'Le  Chien   D'Or': The History   of  an  Old   House," in  Maple Leaves: Canadian  History-Literature-Sport, New  Series  (I863; rpt.  Quebec: Augustin Core and  Company, I873),  p. 89. The  unavailability of the second  sketch that  Kirby  refers  to, Chateau  Bigot, presents  a  problem. In  its absence  a lot  must remain matter for speculation.
5  Le Moine,  pp. 92-94.
6  Le Moine,  p. 94·
7  John Robert Sorfleet,  "Fiction and  the  Fall  of  New  France:  William Kirby  vs. Gilbert Parker," Journal of Canadian  Fiction, 2, No. 3 (Summer I973), p.  I45·
8  Margot  Northey, The  Haunted  Wilderness:  The  Gothic  and Grotesque  in  Cana­
dian Fiction (Toronto: Univ.  of Toronto Press,  I976), p. 29.
9 Dorothy L. Sayers,  trans., The  Comedy  of Dante Alighieri the Florentine, I  (I949;
rpt.  Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1974) , p. 97.






CANADIAN  AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available at
the bookstore
UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
2075  WESBROOK PLACE
VANCOUVER, B.C. V6T 1W5 /228-4741



POSSESSION
 


Derk UJ'nand


Now  that  you appear to have  it, what  it is you seem to have.

Your  denial  to yourself,
among others,  of the symptoms long after  they have  developed.

The others' contention that  you have  it:
If you don't, who does?

Your  futile  protest  that, appearance notwithstanding, it really  has you.

The seven or eleven  ways
in which  you seem to have it,
each  with  its own  number  of ways in which  it seems to have you.

Its finite  denotations,
its surely infinite connotations, and  how  deeply  these affect  you.
What this means to the others. What it means  to itself,
assuming it is conscious.

Your  completely artless  insistence that  you do not  profit  by it,
which  the  others accept
as further proof of your affliction.

The very specific,  but artful ways in which  you try to describe  it, only to protest that  it, not you,
is what  is making the effort.

How  the others  want  to read  this
and  how it denies  them  that  satisfaction.

59


THE ROMANCE OF PENELOPE

Audrey Thomas's !sobel Carpenter Trilogy



Robert Diotte




TE PROBLEM  AND   THE PANGER  of "ading an  avowedly autobiographical novelist is the tendency to ignore the art, the transformation pro­ cess mediating  between  the life of the  writer  and  what  we read,  the  life  in  the novels. Perhaps  there  is an assumption  that  the  text  can  be best  understood  by
documenting the actual biography and then studying  the ways the fictional world differs or conforms. The structural  relationships integral to the text may be seen as inherently  unimportant in themselves.
Audrey Thomas  has repeatedly called herself an autobiographical novelist. Yet
the fictional world in her lsobel Carpenter trilogy, Mrs. Blood, Songs My  Mother Taught Me, and Blown Figures, has more substance  to it than  the correspondence of the writer's life to the novels would suggest. There  is in the narrative  progression through  the three books a consistency of theme  and  focus. They  tell the story of one woman's  attempt  to harmonize  her dreams  and  the fascination  romance  has for her with her actual reality, her life as it has to be lived. We are given a woman character  who embodies the romance of adventure but  in a context  of emotions more familiarly associated with horror than  romance.
In the narrative  process the trilogy whittles away at contemporary values in the form of the family, love and sexuality, to reveal an emotional and rational  vacuum at  their  core. The  values, the  thinking,  the  behaviour  of the  central  character, lsobel Carpenter, a woman whose years span the pre-second world war, war time and post war years continuing into the present, are the focal centre of the fictional world in the books. The  meaningful  part  of the character, though,  is her travels because it is her  travels which lift her  out  of the  main  stream  of the  fiction  of domestic romance and enable Thomas to make other kinds of statements about  her romantic  heroine.
An examination  of the books begins with the strong  centre of consciousness or perspective which is characteristic of them. This centre is either lsobel's own voice, the "I" of personal communication  and  dream-thought intelligence, or the more limited narration used in Blown Figures where the narration moves away from the

6o

THOMAS'S TRILOGY


character infrequently while  remaining in the  third  person.  What happens is an erosion  of the  perimeters; contrary or other  points  of view simply  fade  or  make their  appearance in  curt, fragmented tangents to the story.  Other characters are reduced to shadows in  what  becomes a neuro-viscerallandscape.
In the character of Isabel  Carpenter, Thomas has given us a woman who is both
the mother figure  (for she has borne children, and  the event  which  brings  her into fictional  consciousness is a miscarriage) and  the wanderer, the  questor  involved  in a  journey  which   carries  with  it  a  promise  of  revelation. Penelope, then,  incor­ porates aspects of Odysseus. She isn't  really Odysseus since Isabel Carpenter can't claim  directly  the  kind  of involvement with  her  environment  comparable to  the warrior-king. She  borrows  attributes by inference  from  the  heroic  tradition and  she holds them  only in the  context  of archetypal situations.
But  the kinds of technical arrangements Thomas has made  deliberately subvert the historical, temporal context of the character. The  books are episodic  internally. The events, particularly in Mrs. Blood, continually move  backwards and  forwards in  time.  Hence the  dominant structural techniques throughout  the  trilogy  are juxtaposition  and   discontinuous narrative. The   flashback, the  dream, the  sub­ stance  of  memory predominate in  the  trilogy,  and  Thomas' style,  allusive  and  adaptable, tends  towards the  anecdotal. The  character's past  thus endures in the form of memory and  achieves  fantastic proportions from  time to time  in the  mind  of the central character. Time, in the trilogy as whole, has neither a narrative nor a logical basis, and  the  ruling  fortune is a fatalism  of  purpose  and  event.
Both  the  character's anecdotal, digressing  mind  and  the  types of structural  in­ novations within  each  of the books operate, moreover,  to set up a distance between  the reader  and  the narrative. The  mind-talk, the "I" voice, usurps the action.  This  is particularly true  in  Mrs.  Blood. There the  Mrs.  Blood-Mrs.  Thing exchange in the titles draws  attention to the psychological split in the character. The  distance isolates the character, holding her away from  the simple emotions  of sympathy or empathy in the  reader. In  Mrs. Blood and  Blown Figures, for instance, the  tech­  nical  innovations are  pronounced and  foregrounded on  the  characterization to remove the reader even more from the narrative action.  Songs My  Mothe·r Taught Me  is in that sense a very different  book with  the  clean  line of its narrative. But even in Songs the linear narrative is divided  into two parts  and shows the interface between  the  parts. And  Songs needs Mrs. Blood to define  the  main  character.
It is significant that none  of the  novels is identical in structure, unusual in  an
autobiographical writer. Important as well is the realization that  the books support each other, fill each  other out,  refer to one another, each  one necessary to complete the others.  Mrs.  Blood is a  preface  to Blown Figures; Songs My  Mother  Taught Me is an interlude between  the two dramatically more intense  books. In fact,  only Mrs. Blood, the  first of  the  trilogy  to be published/ is even  remotely  capable of standing alone.

6r

THOMAS'S  TRILOGY



THE MOST SELF-CONTAINED OF  THE NOVELS in the trilogy, Mrs. Blood is a tragedy and its structure  is literary  in those terms. While it isn't mechanical in any way, the tragedy is rigorously structured. Isabel's choices are clearly marked: Jason, her domestic harness, a teacher of art and her provider as well as the man  who can't supply the depth  of emotion she demands  now that she is in labour; and  Richard, the  poet, the  dreamer,  a man  whose possibilities Isabel never came close to although  now she recalls him and  wants him. The one represents a substantive  reality, a husband  and  father  of her  children,  while the other is the dramatic tension of the dream world, the source of true romance.  We have here, then, the circumstances of the popular  romance  with the love triangle and the emotionally self-indulgent heroine.
But the narrative  action already has the character  in the flow of events that will
make her a tragic figure. Her fatal flaw can be seen as the inability to control her dreams  in  the face  of the  reality around  her.  They  eventually  possess her.  The dream  tension of the Mrs. Blood-Mrs. Thing  neural  dialogue distorts the relation­ ship Isabel has with Jason and mars the role she plays as mother.
Eating,  blood, and sacrifice are important motifs in Mrs.  Blood as they are in
Songs My  Mother  Taught  Me.  Eating  suggests a  kind  of misplaced  sensuality. The  blood, female and sacrificial, the blood of the woman  having  problems with her  pregnancy,  is associated with  the  blood of the  Christ  on  the  cross through direct reference to Christianity. It is used in some richly exotic imagery involving flowers and  cloth. The  visual power in the  colours which  link disparate  objects projects the beauty of the grotesque.
The  book is set in Africa. What the African landscape  contributes  is its colours,
its heat, feverish to the character  who is having problems with her labour,  and its cultural  exaggerations  to the western mind,  exaggerations  which simultaneously baffle and haunt  the character's socialization. The  landscape  has its peculiar array of characters.  The  nurses who giggle among  themselves and  gossip in their  own language, shutting  out the curious Mrs. Blood, the man-servant  Joseph  (Isabel wondering  if he has killed the family cat to serve it to them), the doctors  with their  eccentricities:   these characters  with their  skin  colour  differences and  their cultural  differences parade in front of Mrs. Blood with the sense of her strangeness obvious in their manner.
The  other  whites, especially the wives of the other  teachers  living in the  com­ pound, alternately  repulse and attract  Isabel with her wonderful sense of  propriety operating  out  of the  physically defined apartness  of her  pregnancy. She  doesn't want  to be an object  of  their  pity. She worries what  the other  women might  be saying about  her:  if her children are properly dressed for school, for instance. She fantasizes the other  women tending her grave, setting up committees  and  having Isabel become an object of ritualized devotion passed on from hand to hand  until

THOMAS'S TRILOGY


the people looking after  her grave no longer even know anything  about  her. The mind  talk, never shut off, characterizes  the inactivity of the patient  and  marks a degree of self-indulgence  as unhealthy  to the mind as her  physical state is to the baby she carries.
Africa,  then,  a  locale  Isabel  experiences as an  exaggeration  in  terms  of  the
physical environment, the  heat  and  the colours, as well as the  behaviour  of the people living there, is the background  for the kind of mental  exaggerations  of relationships  and  emotions  that  she herself creates. At times turning  things gro­ tesque, at times making rationalized  trains of thought  with a missing premise, her mind  isolates Mrs.  Blood-Mrs. Thing  and  creates a "wonderland" composed of memories and  the extravagance around  her.
The Isabel character  comes to stand for self-indulgence, emotionally and physically:  the  romance  of the ego feeding on itself. Sexually concupiscent,  she wonders  what  has happened   to the  early  relationship  she  had  with  Jason.  She tries to talk about  her emotions and tries to explain what happens to passions in a marriage.  She  relives relationships,  always in triangles.  The  love Isabel  has  for Jason  is frustrated early when they live with Jason's mother.  Jason  and  Richard are two points in the triangle  upsetting  Isabel. And Thomas  has set up a family of three children,  a boy and a girl and an unborn third.
Sexuality, a physical dimension which defines being in relation to another  being, has associations of interpersonal  intimacies, the kind of basic frankness Isabel is looking for.  It  is her metaphor for the essential innocence in human  behaviour. The  child she carries was created  out  of such an innocence  as was her love for Richard. Ironically,  it  was  this same  Richard,   the  hero  in  her  romance,  who questioned  her own sexual innocence when he told her "lots of women wouldn't do what  you did. You're  very shy about  everything but sex."
When  we come to look at  the natliTe of the tragedy  in Mrs. Blood, then,  we
must consider the dynamics of sexuality and the changes to Isabel's own sexuality in the interval.  Lying  next  to Jason  she wants  him but  feels guilty  because she is pregnant. Sexuality  has become associated with guilt feelings in her mind. She remembers  earlier relationships.  But they are clouded with sentiment.
We can't  say that  the tragedy  in the book is the miscarriage, although  the sad­ ness and  the  sympathy   belonging  to  that  event  climax  the  novel.  The  tragic moment occurs after the miscarriage, with Isabel, high on medication, calling out for Richard  and then  asking Jason's forgiveness. The  intense emotionalism  of the character, her  capacity  to  conjure  up  and  project  romantic  involvements,  has taken  over  the  character. The  medication  she is under  is the  metaphor for  the pathetic  rationality  which has lost the decisiveness in action.
With  Songs My  Mother  Taught  Me, Thomas  retreats  from  the  form  of the tragic, even from the implications of Isabel's tragedy, to examine Isabel Carpenter growing  up  in  New  York  state.  The  form  is the  Bildungsroman.  Thomas   has

6g

THOMAS's  TRILOGY

nothing  new to offer the form in this particular  work. Songs  has the quality  of being a  narrative bridge  between  Mrs.  Blood  and  Blown  Figures. Songs is the Bildungsroman  that  Isobel Carpenter, the aspiring  writer,  would  want  to write.
But Isobel wouldn't  divide her novel into two parts, "Songs of Innocence" and "Songs of Experience,"  a direct association with Blakean romanticism.  The  child forced  to  come  to  terms  with  the  adult  world  of  contradiction  and  repressed anxieties has Blakean overtones. As does the sexuality which was so strong a motif in Mrs. Blood and  which emerges in the second part of Songs in two forms:  one perverse, the incident  in the  asylum with  the  nurse  bringing  one of the  female patients to orgasm manually;  the second, lyric and  ribald,  occurring  when Isabel has her first sexual experience with one of the male nurses. Nor would Isabel likely have the self-distance to include the passage from  the Alice-in-Wonderland story as a postscript. The Alice story, the fairytale link to sophisticated  innocence cloaked in sexual innuendo  and rationalized violence, chews on the limbs of emotionalism in Isabel's  "wonderland" where she is trying  to rationalize  the  violence and  the sensuality around  her.
The  characters  in Songs behave in ways that  suggest a kind of madness or dis­
order  in  their  emotions. There  is the  mother  with  her  rages inspired  by trivial incidents,  and  the father,  member  of the  Masonic  league, a teacher,  who sleeps in the  back bedroom,  an enigmatic  person sexually to  Isabel. The  sexless dog is the symbol of atrophic  sexuality between the mother  and  father.
Isabel,  herself, is continually  spurned   by  her  classmates  for  reasons  we  are
never told. She is embarrassed  by her mother's  intervention  in her social life and attentive  to the family's money instabilities. Eating  is a clan fetish, a celebration of self-indulgence, misplaced sensuality and a reminder  of the simple lack of  com­ munion  in the family. Quarrels  are expiated  with offerings of food. Both  mother and father cook. Food is the foundation  of the domestic and social interaction  for the individuals in the family setting. It is a symbol of their  apartness.
Against  the  domestic characters,  Thomas   juxtaposes  the  mad  figures of  the asylum where Isabel goes to work:  characters such as Eleanor  La Duce, Beatrice, the male nurses, and  Mrs. Reynolds. Isabel feeds the  patients.  Beatrice, the mad girl who could  have  been "seventeen  or thirty," eats the  roses Isabel  brings her from  the family garden  as a gesture of "unselfish love" and  an attempt  to leap the inestimable distance between herself and  the girl.
The sanity-madness  juxtaposition isn't laboured.  We have the domestic eccen­ tricities of the family environment  and  the behavioural  exaggerations  of  the mad people and  their  keepers in  the  asylum. One  is as real  fictionally  as  the  other. Insanity is pictured as the state of ultimate isolation, the metaphor being the com­ partmentalization in the wards and  the system of keys which is a vital part of the asylum structure.
Beatrice, the mad  woman of no determined  age, is not only incapable  of com-

THOMAS'S TRILOGY

munication  with  Isabel, she is also hostile to the overtures  lsobel  makes. Isabel's parents,  whatever  their  psychological quirks, at  least haven't   reached  that  level of impossibility. Yet the  issue isn't  that  the  parents  aren't  mad  and  Beatrice is. Thomas suggests that  the parents are merely less mad than  Beatrice.
What  is missing in the book, absent by reason of an incompleteness, is a fixed
centre  of some  health,  the  boundary  between  sanity  and  insanity.  Isabel  as a character  is simply not capable  of giving us the norm or locus to measure the rest of the character's and  the writer's  intention.  Intention,  then, is what is lacking.
Presumably   the  grandfather,  Harry   Goodenough,  was  meant   to  carry  the writer's intentions. Extroverted, healthy, and vigorous, he has a catalogue of house­ keepers to account for his sexuality. The father, obese, eats more than Harry  even though  Harry  has more  physical dynamism. With his sense of  humour,  his virile and fatherly affection for the two girls, "his girls," Isabel and her sister, his manual  competence  with  the  real world,  his implied sexuality,  Harry  is the  burgeoning father  archetype.
But Isabel's mother  sees his sexual behaviour as wrong. And, in the end, Isabel dismisses him when he sells his cottage, leaving him a much  reduced  figure in the shadow  world of the  book. He  is simply not around  in  the  climax  to carry  the values he might have embodied.
Moreover, Songs, for all its interest as a character study of Isabel as a girl, lacks
any  dramatic frame.  The  novel relies on  the  trilogy to fill it  out.  Thomas  has sketched a character  whose centre of balance is lodged deeply in a family she resents despite  the  fact  she  has internalized  its values, thinking,  and  way  of life. The asylum confuses the character's own grasp of reality. It is significant that she has her first sexual experience  with John,  one of the male nurses at the asylum.
Songs leaves us with the excerpt from the Alice story which synthesizes the Alice
parallels  and  that  sense of  "wonderland" which  Thomas   has  woven  into  the trilogy through  the child-naive  lsobel Carpenter.
"But I don't want to go among mad people," Alice remarked.
"Oh, you can't help that," said the Cat:  "we're all mad here. I'm  mad. You're
mad."
"How do you know I'm  mad?" said Alice.
"You must be," said the Cat, "or you wouldn't have come here."

The  Alice-figure is the archetypal  child-adult faced with contradictions  and spuri­ ous choices, expressed here  in a false premise; if you  are  here, you are  already mad.  Alice is an extension of a romantic  possibility: to step through  the looking glass and  live inside the world of dreams, a world always tensed against  the one that  must be lived in its place.  Isabel's  relationship  to Alice is one of  emotional kinship.
In Mrs. Blood Isabel emanated  in her behaviour and her thinking  a good sense comparable  to Alice's. As mother  she satisfied our expectations  of what a mother

THOMAS's  TRILOGY

should  be  and  think.  She  worried  about   her  children.  She  worried  what  the other  women  in  the  compound  were  thinking   about   her.  She  was  concerned with her  public image. These things, a part  of her socialization,  were important to her, culturally determined and fuel for her mind. In the end it is this good sense and education  which makes her mad in the colourful wonderland  of sensuality and violence she  has  created  inside  the  socially  conditioned   rationality   of  her  up­ bringing.



IN Blown  Figures THAT  RATIONALITY, which  we as  readers share, disintegrates in the person who embodies it: lsobel Carpenter. She isn't the carrier  of meaning  and  value we were looking for.  She  has  been  an  unreliable narrator. In fact, she isn't even allowed to narrate the final chapter  in the trilogy.
The  book is technically  the  most ambitious  of  the  trilogy. The  devices  that Thomas  experimented  with in Mrs. Blood and to a lesser extent in Songs-things like parodies of newspaper articles, a Dear Dolly column, cartoons, dramatic frag­ ments-assume a  major  role in  Blown  Figures. They  operate  thematically   to enhance  lsobel's  journey into Africa and  provide a multiplicity of  points of view behind  the character.
We have as well the voice of an "I" character taunting  or berating  Miss Miller
from  time  to  time.2    The  character  may  or  may  not  be the  narrator. The  "I" seems to have a deeper relationship to the story than  the surface connections sug­ gest. But, in the  end,  the "I" voice becomes merely another  unreliable  voice in the novel.
The  novel centres on the character's  ultimate   journey.  lsobel  is  returning   to
Africa, the scene of her miscarriage. Harry  Goodenough  has died and  the money she inherited  from  him is  the  means  for  her  to  go back.  At stake  is the  char­ acter's  obsession to return  to the place where the circumstances  of her life  began to weigh her down. There  are overtones of guilt over the child she has lost.
There  is also the ominous note sounded by Jason  when he said:  "Isobel  doesn't
live ... she exits." The pun is on exists. The  phrase echoes throughout the journey. Isobel has left her children and  her husband,  abandoned her family, to travel  by herself. Penelope,  in a sense, has given up  her  archetypal  role. She is travelling instead  of  remaining  at  home.  While  the  form  remains  constant,  a  narrative involving the quest-agent and a journey into meaning,  the archetype  presents new associations.
Sexuality  is introduced  into the  journey in the form  of a Dutch  boy and  later a Delilah  character. The  Dutch  boy, physically "sin,"  because  he lisps the  th­ sound, naive, a boy-lover for Isobel, is a vehicle to heighten her own sensual aware­ ness. His plans for making his fortune suggest a misguided spirit in  terms of the

66

THOMAS'S TRILOGY


archetypal  adventurer. He  recedes in  Isabel's  consciousness after  she leaves the boat until the sexual intimacy becomes a kind of onanistic reverie.
Delilah,  the  woman  Isabel  meets in Mrica  and  travels with  there, is the  tail
side of the coin. Unlike lsobel, Delilah will bed any man she fancies. Isabel rejects the advances of the African  man who has helped her out of a money problem on the train. Delilah  is trying to abort a pregnancy;  Isabel has returned  to Mrica  to do something  about  the guilt she has over a pregnancy  that  aborted  itself.
The  antithetical elements aren't  life and death. They are life and life. Thomas
gives us nothing  to choose between Delilah's attitude  to life and  Isabel's. In fact, in the background  to the basic conflict in attitudes  between Isabel and  Delilah is the slow moving, infinitely patient  way of life of the Africans. Isabel helps Delilah when the conflict between them climaxes. And, finally, it is Isabel who undergoes the primitive  ceremony of expiation  in a manner  that  reveals some planning  and some awareness of what is going on.
We have a situation  very much similar to the one in Songs. There  is no single
voice or character to establish a stable  centre  from  which  the  behaviour  of the characters  can  be  judged.  Thomas  is actively erasing  the  boundaries  between health and sickness, sanity and insanity. But she is erasing them without giving us any indication  why.
Blown  Figures doesn't  measure  up  to the epic vastness it promises in the first
few pages. It  misses the mark  in several ways. The  actual  story is short  to begin with.  Inflating   the  text  with  the  number  of inserted  pieces and  self-contained pieces that  Thomas  has  used is entertaining  and  thematically   appropriate, but these pieces don't  fill out the story at all in terms of the basic relationships between the  characters.  Moreover,  they don't  carry any of the  values necessary to weigh the antitheses.
The  problem is one of scope. The epic conventions set up in the early pages are satisfied only in the context of the rest of the trilogy. The  narrative  action is over too quickly. The  climax is too brief. These things add up to a basic incompleteness in the book's conceptual  realization.
Yet, as the ending for the trilogy, the novel does bring a conclusion to the story. It  climaxes the consciousness that  was working in the  first two books. This  isn't class consciousness in the strictest sense. What it is is a consciousness of a particular class characterized in the figure of Isabel Carpenter,  who carries its values of  indi­ vidual consciousness alive in the social context, working out its own  problems and basically capable  of creating  viable solutions.
A housewife who exemplifies the thinking and behaviour patterns of middle-class consciousness, the  character finishes the saga  of her  romance  with  Africa  in  a ceremony surrounded with superstition  and rites of belief rejected by the class she represents. There  is a terror  crystallized in  the  action. The  events  are  charged with a horror  because they are related to the negation of individual  consciousness

THOMAS'S  TRILOGY

and  the freedom  of that  consciousness. The  events are  terrible  in  that  they can come true. The ceremony Isabel undergoes to get rid of her guilt anxieties reminds us that  we still have a capacity for participation in primitive  rites.
Isabel Carpenter has travelled away from the sources of the class consciousness
she embodies. She has left the family group;  she is a woman  travelling alone. She is calling on her  resources as an  individual  and  her  capacity  for  decisiveness in action. These are admirable  qualities to the culture  she represents. She makes her way to Africa and  there she gives herself up to the village priests and  their  rites.
The  ending has to be a shock to the reader. Thomas has scraped  away the key
values of individual  consciousness and  responsibility of action.  She  hasn't substi­ tuted  any values of her own. There  is a slight admiration for the  patience of the African.  But the  writer  doesn't  make much  of this  point.  The shock derives its relevance from  its roots in  the  emotional  soil of terror.  It  becomes  a  qualified threat  to consciousness, qualified  by the context  of the trilogy and  the character  of the heroine.
The  terror has to be incorporated  in the awareness of the reader. We are made
aware  of the irrational  and  the primitive as living elements in the minds of  con­ temporary  man.  But something  more  important emerges  in  the  overview.  The romance of Penelope is a romance of the mind. It doesn't  have its roots in action. It is a saga of personal emotions confronted  by a reality of  insensitive actions. In this context, value simply doesn't exist as an objective entity.
Showing  an  awareness of archetypal  forms  and  the  tradition   of these forms,
Thomas  has given us a trilogy with a relatively unique  strategy. The inter-depen­ dence  of the three  novels ultimately  defines a new approach to  the  epic with  a heroine who neither has the stature  of an epic hero nor participates in events that are commonly associated with epic consciousness.
Nonetheless, Isabel Carpenter's story becomes epic in proportion. The  conven­
tions are all there. It goes without saying that  biography  has only secondary inter­ est in terms of the work Thomas  has given us. The  trilogy's  relevance lies in its archetypal  examination  of the author's  culture.


NOTES

1 In a conversation I had with her, Thomas said she had actually written Songs My Mother  Taught Me  prior to Mrs. Blood. Songs was later rewritten. The scenes in the asylum date from the rewrite.
2 According to Thomas, the key to the identity of Miss Miller is in the work of C.
G. Jung.







68


YOU SHOULD  JILWJIYS CJIRRY Jl PEN

Lawrence Hutchman


Looking out  of the  library window  into  the  blue city my reflection sails over silver  buildings
up on  the billows of smoke past  radiant rooms
where  workers  cover machines.

And  the  words  come  easily
in the interior of this building; luminous are  the  rooms of your mind. In this library take a book,
any book.

Beside me the woman  operates
the amazing xerox, amazing x-ray machine and  turns  the  sky phosphorescent.
She  is the  temptress in green transforming the  evening
into  the  myth  of a blue ocean.

You should  always carry  a pen especially  at  twilight
if we are  to believe
the chronicles of Coleridge,
his nightly  walks  by misty lakes. And  the woman  is making  a book, slips it into an envelope
and  disappears.

And  I am  framed by evening; the eyes of students are globes suspended above  their  books. Where is the pen?
There on the table, a yellow pencil
and  I take the Eagle Mirado
ride  the lines of flight
over the darkening city.

6g


CHRISTMJIS

]. D. Carpenter


The rain  fell
and  fell    The snow withdrew The flattened lawn  appeared green, defeated
Rainwater breached
the  new side door made the carpet bleed

The sky cleared,  the sun threw  off its winter  wrap
Galoshes  were lobbed  to the  celJar
a mosquito  was seen on the stair
In  the flowerbed
beside a sodden  flyer, a crocus broke  through, bloomed
in  blue air 	Sunlight hung  brilliant

Children pulled  bikes from  backs of garages
found  beachballs  in cedar  hedges Women  washed  their  windows men  made  home  repair

Out we went in work shirts
to raise the doorsill with cement
Aubrey  looked in, decreed our  mixture  thin,  Leo
dropped by, pronounced the door awry,  completely
out  of plumb

We laid aside our  trowel

Looking up through the legs of standing men we saw the sky turn  bone
saw the naked  trees in the garden


THE NOVELIST AS DRAMATIST
Davies'  Adaptation  of "Leaven of Malice"



Susan Stone-Blackburn






TOUGH ROBERTSON DAVIES' FIRST  LOVE  WAS THEATRE,  and he was a playwright  first, he has achieved greater recognition  as a novelist.1 The reasons for this may have little to do with the relative merit of his plays and novels; the literary  climate  of Canada in the 1950's and  196o's  was more  favorable  to fiction than  to drama. Davies made his novelistic mark with his first three novels, particularly  Leaven of Malice, in the 195o's, and firmly secured his position as a Canadian novelist of the  first rank with the next three  in the 197o's. The  result is that  he is now all too frequently  considered a novelist who is somehow willfully straying from his proper calling by writing plays. The  plays are often vaguely dismissed as "too  novelistic,"  though  nobody  dismisses the  novels as "too  dra­ matic." Davies' experience  as a playwright  undoubtedly  enhances  his writing  of fiction;  that   his  experience  as  a  novelist would  adversely  affect  his  drama   is unlikely, because dramatic expression was so much a part of him before he began writing novels.
Asked how he can  tell whether  an idea should be developed  in the form of a
play or a novel, Davies replies,

If you have a playwright's instinct  you know without stopping to think.  As a general rule  a play  has  a plot  that  is more  simply dealt  with  than  the  plot  of a novel. The content of a play is not simple,  but it should,  in its unfolding, follow a simpler  line than  the  plot  of most  novels, which  may  have  ramifications and  by-concerns  that would  muddle the  action of a  play. This  is why dramatizations of  novels such  as Don Quixote  or  David Copperfield deal  only with  a few incidents from  the whole work,  and  often leave  us unsatisfied.  The  totality  of  a  play  and  the  totality of  a novel are different in kind.2

However,  Davies did  adapt  one of his novels for the stage. Leaven of Malice, the most successful of his first trilogy of novels, published in 1954, was rewritten as a play which arrived  on Broadway in December of 1g6o. In  adapting it, Davies departed  from  his usual  practice  and  contradicted  his statement  about  the clear distinction  between  an  idea  which is the foundation  for a novel and  one which

LEAVEN OF  MALICE

will lend  itself to  dramatic  form.  Davies  says  the  adaptation  was  done  "only because I  was asked to do it by a  New York  directing  company,  and  I would have been a fool to turn down the chance."3  In  part,  I think,  he hoped  that  the recognition  his novels had earned him might  help to direct  attention  to his work as a playwright.  Leaven  of Malice is not Davies'  best play, but it is particularly interesting  as a  means  for  considering  the  relation  between  Davies'  work  as  a novelist and his work as a playwright. Moreover, though  a close study of the story in both its forms reinforces some of our commonly  held suspicions about  the limi tations on the adaptation of novelistic material  for the stage, it also provides some interesting  insights into the means of getting such  material  onto  the stage, occa sionally even in a way which is an improvement  on the original.
Davies adapted the novel for New York's Theatre Guild.  The  result was called "Love and Libel" so as not to puzzle a New York audience  with the Biblical refer ence of the original  title. Tyrone  Guthrie  directed,  taking it on tour for a month, beginning  at  Toronto's Royal  Alexandra  Theatre on  November  2,  rg6o,  and ending in New York, where it opened on December  7 and ran for only a few days. Reviews  were  mixed;  Theatre   Arts  reported   "two   tolerably  cheerful  notices" among  the seven daily New York papers.4   Tyrone  Guthrie  and  Dennis King,  the star attraction, got more notice than  Davies did.  Individual players, particularly King as the madcap organist Humphrey  Cobbler,  and  individual  scenes, particu larly the one in which Humphrey,  his wife Molly, and  their  friend  Solly Bridge tower all climb  into  bed to keep warm  as they  converse  about  Solly's troubles, won praise. But as a whole, the play was not a success. Toronto reviews reflected an awareness that  Toronto  was the first stop on the tour  and  there was yet time for repairs. Herbert  Whittaker's  review ends, "It's all a dazzlement  of good and familiar  things that needs sorting out a bit more at the moment." Nathan  Cohen's concludes:  "There are enough good things in it to make me believe that  with the right changes, it can  be made to work. And the first and  most important change is to give the play a more disciplined and less elaborate  shape." A Detroit  reviewer also found the play "hodge podge
ludicrous  scenes, many  laughable  bits of  business."5   Davies  calls the  play  "an extravaganza"; the elaborate  and episodical shape  was part  of his design, and  he made no attempt  to achieve a streamlined  structure. Much  rewriting  he did dur ing  the  tour,  however, mostly to meet  the  demands  of  the  show's star,  Dennis King, who wanted his part expanded. New bits were generated  furiously and tried out  during  the  tour,  which  no  doubt  contributed  considerably  to  the  "hodge podge" effect. Davies  recalls one night  when  King  walked  on stage,  forgot  the lines for a new scene, and turned around  and walked off again, leaving Tony Van Bridge on stage to ad lib his way through  the gap  in the  play.6   The  tour,  theo retically an opportunity to improve the play and  set the  production  before it got to New York, seems only to have widened the rift between Davies' perception  of

LEAVEN OF  MALICE

the play and the New York Theatre Guild's notions of what would make a Broad­ way hit. Davies thinks of it as an ensemble play and believes that  trying to put a star into it was the first big mistake.
In  the end,  Davies was unhappy  with the version of his play which  was per­
formed in New York, and all the changes which had been insisted upon by man­ agement,  director,  and star did not create a hit. Tyrone  Guthrie's  official biogra­ pher James Forsythe gives him more blame than credit for the production, though he meant  well by Davies, who had  been a close friend  for  many  years. He  was caught  in the  middle  between  Davies and  the  New York  management, and  he was not strong enough  to steer his way through  the conflicts successfully. He had suffered  a heart  attack  early in the  year.  Recovering,  he  produced  Gilbert  and Sullivan's  H.M.S. Pinafore, after which, Forsyth says,

this distinguished heart patient went straight on to produce the new play of his old friend of Old Vic and Canada, Robertson Davies' Love and Libel. That  he made a proper botch of it, all agreed. It was an unwise undertaking, to do a new play when the prognostication had been that he would not be fit enough to do one old one. Rob Davies had  been of great assistance in all the Stratford  ventures and Tony Guthrie  probably felt he owed it to him. But the play and  the playwright suffered.7

While "Love  and  Libel" fared  no worse than  a number  of other  plays which hit Broadway  at  about  the  same  time, its reception  did  nothing  to  ensure  Davies' fame as a playwright.




E                       until it was pro­ duced  as  Leaven  of  Malice  at  Hart  House  Theatre in I 97 3 and  again  at  the Niagara-on-the-Lake Shaw Festival in I 975· For these productions Davies' original script was used. The  director of the Shaw Festival production,  Tony Van  Bridge, had acted in Tyrone  Guthrie's  production,  and his decision to revive the play was testimony that  Davies' play was better than  Guthrie's  production suggested. Van Bridge says of the  Guthrie  show, "All  I  can  remember  about  it  is that  it  was chaos." Nonetheless, he decided to do the play in I975, because he thought  it was "one of the best Canadian comedies around," "a first-class Canadian play."8  Still, Leaven of Malice· in both his production and Martin Hunter's at Hart  House, got mixed reviews, with high praise for various scenes and characters,  but not for the play as a whole. The reason, I believe, lies at least partly in the difficulty of adapta­ tion from  novel to play. The  most obvious challenge in adapting a novel for the stage is to condense  the material  to what  can  be played  in little more than  two hours. It is clear that  unless a novel is dreadfully diffuse, something of value, such as minor characters, episodes which are not essential for the development  of plot

73

LEAVEN OF   MALICE

or character, and authorial  musings on the inner lives of characters  or the abstract implications of speeches or events must be cut out in the process of adaptation.
Davies may have felt equal to the challenge of adapting his novel simply because its plot is not essentially complex. "As a general rule a play has a plot that is more simply dealt with than the plot of a novel," Davies observed. What could be simpler than  the plot of Leaven of Malice? Someone put a false engagement  notice in the local newspaper.  Its effects on all concerned  are explored;  in particular, the two young people linked in the announcement find each other and the strength to stand up  to their  parents.  Finally, the culprit  is found  and  his motives  discovered. It would seem that the only necessity for dealing with this plot in the scope of a play would be to limit the implications of the "effects on all concerned." Reduce  the number  of characters  affected by the engagement  notice, and  the plot is instantly simplified. Those  most essentially concerned  are  few. Gloster  Ridley,  editor  of The  Bellman, in which the engagement  notice appears,  is technically  responsible for the  notice;  he is not only embarrassed  by the fact  that  somehow  the  notice managed  to slip by his staff without the signature  of the person who submitted  it, but he is afraid  that  the ensuing fuss, including  a threatened libel suit, may cost him  the  honorary  doctorate  from  the  local  university  he  has  hoped  for.  Pearl Vambrace  and Solly Bridgetower are the two young people named in the engage­ ment  notice. In  fact, they are only slightly acquainted, and  Pearl  is quite  aware that  Solly has long  been the  unsuccessful suitor  of another   young  lady.  Solly's mother,   Mrs.  Bridgetower,  and  Pearl's  father,   Professor  Vambrace,  are  both eccentric  and  demanding parents.  The  Professor, nursing  an  old grudge  against Solly's father,  now deceased, is outraged  to have Solly named  as Pearl's  fianoe­ in fact, he would probably  be outraged  at the idea of losing his daughter  to any young man, and  having no idea who has perpetrated the hoax or why-except to annoy  and  embarrass  him-he  vents  his wrath  on  Ridley,  Pearl  and  Solly. Mrs.  Bridgetower  is concerned  primarily  with  keeping  a  stranglehold  on  Solly, ridden with anxiety that some young lady may win him away from her. Humphrey Cobbler, a Bohemian musician, is involved as the prime suspect in the minds of a few meddlers who believe him capable  of anything  because he is unconventional in behaviour,  appearance and outlook on life. First thoughts  about  the novel sug­ gest that  only one other  character  is essential; Bevill Riggin,  an  Irish  newcomer to the  town  who is  attempting  to establish himself as a  teacher  of singing  and elocution, proves to be responsible for the engagement  notice, motivated  by malice because he had  been snubbed  at  one time or  another   by Gloster  Ridley,  Solly Bridgetower  and  someone he mistakenly took for  Pearl  Vambrace. This  is only seven characters, a manageable  number  for a stage production. At first, then, it is a surprise to find that  the play retains a number  of minor  characters  from the novel who do not seem to be central to the plot. George and  Kitten  Morphew  are still scuffling  and  nuzzling  on  stage,  Norm  and  Dutchy  Yarrow  still  inflicting

74

LEAVEN OF  MALICE


awful  party games on their  guests and  congratulating  themselves on how normal they are. Altogether,  the play includes sixteen characters  plus a number  of  super­ numeraries.  This  is a larger  cast than  in any of Davies' earlier  plays  except for A Masque  of Aesop,  written  for Upper  Canada  College and  designed  to include as many boys as possible.
There  are at least three reasons for this large number of characters  and the con­
sequent  complexity of the play. The first is that  the real subject of the novel and the play is not the couple named  in the engagement  notice but rather  small town mentality.  Because this involves ancient  disputes, gossip, social  pride,  and  petty malice, the subject  could  hardly  be effectively treated  through   just a few  char­ acters. The  Yarrows, for instance, epitomize the well-meaning  meddlers who are motivated  by good intentions  but  limited  by insensitivity and  overconfidence  in their own perceptions and values. They appear in three scenes. In the first, Dutchy Yarrow  is inspired by the engagement  announcement  in the  paper  to force Pearl and  Solly into  embarrassing  intimacy  in a party  game,  and  they  are  unable  to explain  their  predicament  in  the  face of the effusive  congratulations and  senti­ mental  speeches of their  hosts. The second scene expands  the characterization of Norm and Dutchy  as tiresomely conscious of how well-adjusted  and  determinedly normal they are;  this scene prepares for the third, in which Norm, in his capacity as a  guidance  counsellor,  carries  out  his  campaign  to  smooth  Pearl's  path  to wedded bliss by having a heart-to-heart talk with her father, a professor of classics, about  the Oedipus  Complex,  which he takes to be at the root of Professor Vam­ brace's  agitation   about  the  engagement  announcement. This  scene  is a  comic triumph. In  addition,  it brings the background  of the townspeople's  gossip about the  Vambraces'  affairs  into  the  foreground;   Norm  exposes  the  ugly  face  of Rumour  with his reference to the episode in which Vambrace broke his stick over Solly's car:  "Now  about  Pearlie.... They  say you  were walloping  her  with  a pretty  big stick...."9   Yarrow's  interview  with Vambrace  is also the  best oppor­ tunity  in  the  play for  providing  depth  to Vambrace's character;  his emotional intensity, intellect and  eccentricity  are shown to good advantage in contrast  with ultra-normal Norm's fatuous  professionalism. The  Yarrows are  well-meaning on­ lookers who add  greatly  to the discomfiture of the central  characters;  they  may not contribute  much  to the plot, but without such people, the "leaven  of  malice" on which the play comments could not work as effectively.
A second reason for the large number  of characters  becomes evident in a  con­ sideration  of Davies'  purpose for including  George and  Kitten  Morphew  in  the play. They  and  Kitten's sister, Edith  Little, contribute  to the depth  of the char­ acterization  of the town as a whole. But, more important, they provide a context in which to develop the character  of Bevill Riggin, the outsider  who struggles to market  his limited  talents  under  the  pretense  that  he  is bringing  "culture" to Canada. Part  of the play's point is that  such a small thing as a false engagement

75

LEAVEN OF  MALICE

notice affects a variety of otherwise unrelated  people in the town. Pearl and Solly hardly know each other; Gloster Ridley, the newspaper editor, is unconnected  with either the Vambraces or the Bridgetowers; Humphrey Cobbler, though he happens to be a friend  of Solly's, is affected  primarily  because  his natural  prankishness makes  those  who  fail to  distinguish  between  highjinks  and  malicious  mischief suspect  him  of authoring  the engagement  notice.  All can  be given life only  by being given a context to operate in, which means the introduction of additional characters. Higgin,  the true  culprit  in  the  case, has only very brief scenes with Ridley and Solly and one in the library with Tessie Forgie, whom he mistakes for Pearl Vambrace. He is hardly given a second thought  by those chiefly affected by the false notice; it is important  that  he have little connection  with them.  For  us to understand who and what he is, then, he must be given life in another  context: the home shared  by the Morphews and Edith  Little, where he is a boarder.  There his seductive charm,  his ambitions, and  his mediocrity  are shown. There  we see the irony  of his crowning  triumph  in  bringing  culture  to Salterton:  the  ribald songs in which he has coached George Morphew  are a hit at George's club.


IBELIEVE THAT IN  ADDITION to bringing small-town mentality to life and  providing  a context for important characters  to function  in, there  is a third  reason for the inclusion of so many characters in the play. One  of Davies'
greatest strengths  in writing both novels and  plays lies in his talent  for character­ ization. The  real interest of Leaven  of Malice  is not in the  plot but in the char­ acters. Having  peopled his novel with so many  successful creations, Davies must have wanted  to include as many as possible in the play. Unfortunately, there is a limit to the  number  of characters  which can  be fully  realized  in the scope of a play. Since there are so many in Leaven  of Malice, one might  assume that  they would  be quite  insubstantially  characterized  in  comparison  with  their  novelistic counterpart. Indeed,  old Swithin Shillito, whose immense  pride in his nineteenth  century  journalistic  style and  whose determination to stay on as resident  pest at The  Bellman until he "drops in harness" makes him the bane of Ridley's existence, suffers greatly in the  transition from  novel to play, and  Ridley too is regrettably reduced.  Dean  Knapp, of the church  where Humphrey Cobbler  is organist,  is a less significant  but  unmistakeable  victim of condensation.  The  surprise is that  all the others come to life as completely in the  play as they do in the novel, and  at least one, Professor Vambrace,  is a marked improvement on his original.
Characterization, accomplished in  the  novel in part  by omniscient  narration,
must  in  dramatic presentation  rely wholly on  action  and  dialogue.  Or  almost wholly; Davies introduces  a dream scene in which a montage  of five characters' dreams accomplishes very economically characterization which in the novel can be

LEAVEN OF  MALICE

lingered over and  gradually  introduced  through  authorial  commentary.  Enacted when Solly and  Molly and  Humphrey  Cobbler fall asleep after huddling  together in bed to keep warm  during  their late  night conversation,  the scene spotlights a series of five characters talking in their sleep. Mrs. Bridgetower's  dream  accounts for the iron grip  in which she attempts  to hold her son Solly. She dreams of his wedding to Louisa Hanson  (her maiden  name), sighing happily, "What a lovely
bride!  1 ... I A mysterious girl, I seem to know her face I Yet I  do not know
her I ... I But I can trust her I With my dear son's peace." Gloster Ridley dreams of the distinction  he will attain  with an  honorary  doctorate,  the  cherished  hope which is threatened by the repercussions of the false engagement  notice published in his paper.  Riggin's  dream  of himself in his youth  as a choirboy shows us the peak of his lifetime's  accomplishment  and  conveys the fact  that  all his life since has been a futile struggle  to regain  the  bliss of his childhood  success. Professor Vambrace's dream  about  Pearl  in part  parallels Mrs. Bridgetower's  about  Solly, but it also shows his yearning  to be above and  beyond and secure from the mob
of humanity  which mocks him while he attempts  to keep aloof and  maintain  his dignity. The  final dream  is Molly Cobbler's, extolling the love she and  her  hus­ band  share,  establishing  her  real happiness, despite the  oddities  of life  with  an eccentric  musician.  The  farcical  effect of Molly reaching  for  Humphrey  in her sleep is that  Solly is pushed  out of bed, which  wakens them  all and  provides a natural  ending  to the dream  sequence.
The dream  scene is one of three scenes especially designed to convey economic­
ally on stage information  which was provided at greater leisure in the novel. An­ other scene, which contains  a rapid succession of six telephone  calls, encompasses a number  of scenes from  the  novel; it moves the plot along efficiently and  con­ veys a sense of waves of interaction  among the people of  Salterton  peaking as the climax approaches. The  third  is a comic choral scene in  which  Ridley, Shillito, Dean  Knapp, and  Tessie Forgie provide many of the novel's reflections on small town mentality,  focusing on the newspaper and what it means to the townspeople.
Ridley by himself is a choral figure in the play, opening the first and second acts
and  closing the third  with  direct  addresses to the audience.  In  the  novel Ridley and  his newspaper,  The  Bellman, are central, and many  pages are devoted to the work of the newspaper staff and the role of the newspaper in the life of Salterton. Ridley's viewpoint comes naturally  from Davies' long experience as editor of the Peterborough  Examiner. Little of this newspaper motif is found  in the play, but The  Bellman  is still the  medium  through  which Higgin  works his mischief, and Ridley, as its editor, is still one of the victims of Riggin's  malice. The general func­ tion of the newspaper  in the lives of the townspeople and  the particular  effect of the  engagement  notice  which  appears  in its pages are  developed  in  the  choral scene, with Dean  Knapp and Tessie Forgie, a minor character  even in the novel, together  with Swithin  Shillito and  Gloster Ridley acting  as voices of  the towns-

77

LEAVEN OF  MALICE

people and  the  newspapermen.  "They  speak,"  Davies  directs,  "in  the  stricken tones of a  verse-speaking choir."  The  solemn  rhythm   and  tone  of  the  others' speeches are punctuated by Tessie's lyrical refrain:

0 nosey, nosey under the wood
0 nosey, nosey over the lea;
But nosey, nosey to nobody's good: That's what news means
To Nosey Me.

The  gist of the choral statement,  comically couched  in poetic lines and  elevated diction, is that newspapermen's daily concern is to pry into other people's business, and newspaper readers are more interested in the business of their next-door neighbours than  in the news of the Great  World.  Moreover,  who put  the notice in the paper is of less interest than  the ensuing fuss and  the embarrassment of the victims. All conclude together:

Perhaps it may sometimes be true that the world loves a lover; And in moments of crisis mankind may achieve magnanimity; But most of the time, beneath our external good-fellowship Flows a quiet, deep stream of irony, mingled with malice.

Higgin  may be the  chief culprit,  but  the nosiness of others,  their great  concern about  personal embarrassment, and their eagerness to discomfit one another exacerbate  what  was initially simply an  erroneous  announcement in  the  news­ paper.  Higgin  could  rely on these aspects of human   nature;  without  them,  his "joke"  would  have  had  little effect. These  ideas  are  dramatized  in  characters'  speeches and  actions,  but  the  choral  scene emphasizes  them,  ensuring that  the point will not escape the audience.
This  choral scene, the dream sequence, and  the telephoning  scene, are vanous
inventive  means  of condensing and  dramatizing many  pages of the  novel. The other scenes are all taken more or less directly from  the novel with some changes of locale for convenience, some occasional collapsing of two scenes into  one for efficiency, and some transferring  of function  when characters in the novel do not appear  in the play. Mrs. Bridgetower, for instance, absorbs the role of the novel's Miss Pottinger, and Molly Cobbler speaks some lines which originally belonged to Mrs. Fielding. A close comparative  examination  of parallel scenes from novel and play helps to show how Davies met the challenge of adaptation, and it also points up the  highly dramatic quality  of the  novel. With  the  exception  of a  very few passages, such as the opening about the appearance of the engagement announce­ ment and a discussion of the quirks of newspaper readers, the novel is constructed entirely of distinct scenes in specific locales. Of  course there  are far  too many of these to allow a simple transition  to the stage,  but  the  difficulty for  Davies was primarily the need to condense rather than  to dramatize what was not dramatic in

LEAVEN OF  MALICE

conception.  Ideas  come to him, he has said, primarily  in terms of character  and dialogue, rather  than  as abstractions;10  this appears to be true of his novels as well as his plays. Large segments of a scene in the novel consist of dialogue, often direct exchanges unbroken  by so much as "he said" or "she replied."
The  bulk of the scene between  Norm Yarrow and  Professor Vambrace in the
novel, for instance, consists of five pages of dialogue in which are imbedded  only six and  a half sentences of description. The scene is adapted for the stage almost without  alteration. Some of the looks, actions, and feelings reported  in the novel would be conveyed directly by the actions and expressions of characters  on stage. Some are incorporated into dialogue:  the novel's "Norm  beamed.  As he always said to Dutchie,  they were easier to deal with  when they had  some brains,  and didn't  weep, or shout at you"n  in the play becomes Norm's line, "I'm glad you're going to take it like that, Professor. It's always easier in these problems of  Relation­ ship Engineering when we have to deal with a man of intelligence." A few changes in  the  dialogue  are  introduced   in  the  play to  make  the  presumptuousness  and superficiality of Norm's assault on Professor Vambrace more apparent, an impres­ sion which is conveyed in the novel in part by a narrative  description  of the intel­ lectual  poverty of Norm's  professional training. Another change  is the addition  of eight speeches to do the work of the next scene in the novel, omitted from the play, in which Professor Vambrace asks Pearl why she talked to Yarrow  about  family, and she replies, "I must talk to someone occasionally." The  Professor's grief at his alienation  from  his daughter  is established in this separate  scene in the novel; in the  play, Vambrace asks Norm why Pearl discussed her family affairs  with him. Norm's "Pearlie couldn't  talk very frankly to you, I don't  suppose" hits home, and the  Professor admits  that  he and  Pearl  have not spoken to each  other  at all for three  days. Mter   Norm  leaves, the  scene closes on  Vambrace, with  the  stage directions:  "His  rage is spent,  and  now a terrible unhappiness  sweeps over him, and we are conscious of  the sudden ebb and flow of emotion that  makes him what he is. Before we take leave of him, tears are running down his face, and  perhaps, under  his breath,  we  hear  him say, 'Pearl.'" With  minimal  alteration from  the novel then, this scene transferred  easily to the stage and was noted by reviewers as a particularly successful part of the play.




ANOTHER SCENE  REVIEWERS  PICKED ouT for its success is the bedroom scene between Solly and Mrs. Bridgetower, in which the comic focus is her  change  into nightclothes  with Solly's assistance. The  stage directions  read "Under cover of a vast bedgown Mrs. Bridgetower removes various intimate garments  which she hands  to Solly, who hangs them up or puts them  away;  it is all extremely decent, but achieved only with much bulging, rucking up, accordion-

79

LEAVEN OF MALICE

like expansion  and  contraction,  and  modest fuss." Again,  the seven pages of the corresponding  scene in the novel consist primarily  of dialogue,  though  there  are four  paragraphs of description. This scene is more extensively condensed and reordered  than  the Yarrow-Vambrace  scene. One  long argument over Riggin  is replaced by a brief statement by Solly: "You know, Mother,  I'd  think a long time, if I were you, before I tried to push Riggin  into the Cathedral. He strikes me as rather  second-rate." Another  long exchange  focusing  on  Puss Pottinger,  who is omitted  from the play, is eliminated. The  central  point of that  passage and of the entire preceding scene in the novel depicting  Mrs. Bridgetower's "At-Home," also omitted  from the play, is summarized in one line:  "Several  people this afternoon thought  it was that fool Humphrey  Cobbler  [who was responsible for the engage­ ment notice]." Other  passages are rearranged  and  bits of dialogue added to effect natural transitions.  The only substantial  addition  to this scene of the  play is the concluding set of seven speeches. In response to unexpected  resistance from Solly when she brings Pearl into the discussion, Mrs. Bridgetower lapses grotesquely into baby  talk:   "Has   Mummy  been  a  baddy  Mummy?   Does  Tolly  want  to  pank Mummums 'tuz she wants to keep the howwid dirls away and  have her Tolly all for her own self?" This revealing speech tells a great deal about Mrs. Bridgetower's desire to keep Solly entirely devoted to her as he was in his childhood;  the babytalk is partly  to cover  her embarrassment  at  such  a  direct  revelation  of herself and partly to recreate  that eminently satisfactory  past. When Solly announces  that  he is going out, she tries, none too subtly, and  unsuccessfully, to get him to report  his destination and then makes one more attempt  to keep him tied to her:  "You won't be late? You know Mother  worries when you are out in your car."  This  addition firmly establishes the nature  of  Solly's relationship  with  his mother.  In  fact,  this scene, together  with Mrs. Bridgetower's dream  in the dream  sequence and  a dis­ cussion of filial loyalty  between Pearl  and  Solly which  is expanded  in  the  play, combine  to establish Solly and  Mrs. Bridgetower's  relationship  even more clearly in the play than in the novel.
A type of scene which is rewritten  entirely  for  the stage is the  memory scene
which  is simply interior  monologue in the  novel but  is dramatized in  the  play. Some scenes are presented directly, in sequence, in the novel but occur in the play as "flashbacks":  the  Yarrow  party,  for  instance.  Others,  such  as  Riggin's  en­ counters with Ridley and Solly, are introduced  in the novel simply as memories of Ridley and Solly. In the play, these two episodes are introduced  as memories but then  acted  out  directly, like the scenes in Arthur Miller's  Death  of  a Salesman which are projections of Willy Loman's  thoughts.  In  the novel, Ridley's recollec­ tion of his interview  with Riggin  is immersed in his ruminations on the  problem of dealing  with  Shillito. In  a long  paragraph, the  primary  subject  of  which  is Shillito, Ridley's refusal to publish a series of  articles that  Riggin  has designed to advertise his services is presented in eight sentences. Davies deliberately obscures its

8o

LEAVEN OF  MALICE

significance by presenting  it from the point of view of Ridley, who attaches  little importance to it. In  the  play, however, Shillito presents himself to the audience and explains his relationship  with Ridley. During this speech, Ridley's office is set onstage, and then Higgin, Shillito and Ridley act out the interview. The  dialogue is new, and  the scene, witnessed directly and occupying  two full pages of script, makes  a  much  greater  impression  on  the  play's audience  than  its  counterpart makes on the reader  of the novel. In  particular,  Riggin's  closing line directs our attention  to the  significance of the scene:  "I wonder,"  he says to Shillito after Ridley leaves, "if that man has ever been humiliated as he's humiliated  me today!" The other two scenes in which Higgin is snubbed-by Solly in his office and  by Tessie Forgie sitting at a desk with Pearl Vambrace's name on it-are also acted out  in the  play  and  thus  have  greater  impact  on the  audience  than  do  corres­ ponding  passages in the  novel. In fact, in the novel Riggin's  motive for  making Pearl as well as Solly and  Ridley a victim of his malicious joke is revealed only at the very end of the story. The  necessity to dramatize the incidents which motivate Higgin  to  retaliate  with  the  engagement  notice meant  that  Davies  would  have been hard  put  to make a success of retaining  the "whodunnit" approach  of the novel. It is clear that  he recognized this and decided to take a different approach  in the play, making  use of dramatic  irony instead of suspense. In the play Davies emphasizes the importance of the snubs to Higgin instead  of  glossing over them. The first act ends after the scene in which Higgin is curtly refused university library privileges by Tessie Forgie and some concluding dialogue between Higgin and the Morphews in which Kitten  comments on Riggin's malice: "We  don't  want to get on the wrong side of this £ella." The second act opens with Ridley's direct address to the audience: "Who did it? You know, I'm sure, but it is still a mystery to us." The  play is memorable  for individual characters  and  individual  scenes. Char­  acterization,  more than  function, accounts for the prominence  of such characters  as  Mrs.  Bridgetower  and  Professor  Vambrace   and,   in  particular,  Humphrey  Cobbler.  Cobbler  is an  extraordinary character  in both  novel and  play, raffish, capricious,  warm  and  exuberant, a sort of eccentric Tom  Jones  whose rumpled appearance and harmless pranks earn him the disapproval  of such upright  citizens as Mrs. Bridgetower, who considers him an unsatisfactory church organist, despite his musical distinction, because of his levity. In Tyrone Guthrie's 1g6o production, Cobbler's  part was played by the star attraction, who expanded the part and won praise for his performance, as any competent  actor would,  because it is a glorious role. Part  of the drawback to allowing Cobbler to steal the show, however, is that he has little to do with the plot; he functions primarily as a red herring in the effort to identify the author  of the engagement notice, and inflating  his part  throws the play out of balance.  Davies' intention,  surely, was to contrast  Cobbler's  harmless Halloween escapade in the Cathedral with Riggin's spiteful action,  using Cobbler as foil to  Higgin  to show  the  difference  between spur-of-the-moment  highjinks

81

LEAVEN OF MALICE

and  maliciousness  and  the  mistake  other  characters make  in  equating the  two. Cobbler's musical  virtuosity  contrasts  with  Riggin's "second   rate" pretensions to culture, and   his  cheerful  disregard   of  propriety  contrasts with  Riggin's  pitiful struggle  to break  into Salterton society. The  size of Cobbler's part  exactly  balances the  size of Riggin's in the  1973  version of the  play,  which  indicates that  Davies intended the  two  to be parallel  characters.




ALTHOUGH PLAY AND  NOVEL HAVE SOME SIMILAR strengths, the  different genres  dictate  differences.  Davies  has  commented on  the  difference between  the  part  dialogue  plays in a novel and  its function in a play:

In a novel a whole important scene can be confined  to a few lines of dialogue  by some descriptive writing;  in a play the dialogue  must do it all. Dialogue in a play should be economical; audiences quickly tire of talk that  moves too slowly. On  the other  hand,  too  much  economy  may  be  a  mistake,  because  your  dialogue  may become telegraphic,  and  the audience will miss something  important. A great  part of the playwright's  art lies in establishing the right  tone and  pace in his dialogue. It is at the farthest  extreme from reporting  ordinary  speech.12

Davies'  ability  to make  dialogue  in the  play do the  work  of some descriptive  pas­ sages  in  the  novel  is evident, but  of  course  the  dialogue does  not  "do  it  all,"  because  a play  can  convey directly  information which  a novel  can  only  describe.  Davies'  witty  commentary on  characters and  mores  is a  very  great  asset of  the novel  version  of  Leaven  of  Malice,  and  it can  be  transferred to stage  dialogue only when  such  a comment  can  appropriately be made  by a character, though  in the  choral  scene  and  the  dream  scene Davies  incorporates a  sort  of commentary which   passes  the  limitations of  verisimilitude. The  play  version  of  Leaven  of Malice,  though it lacks  the authorial commentary, makes  good  use of the  visual element: sets,  props,  costumes,  lighting  and  action. In  addition, music  and  the vocal inflections  of the actors  do some of the  work  of  the  novel's  descriptive pas­ sages. Davies does not employ stage directions as extensively  as many  modern play­ wrights  do,  but  those  he does include,  together  with  cues  in  the  dialogue, show that  he has a firm  grasp  of the importance of the  visual  and  aural  ingredients of drama. His experience as actor and  director has given  him  a command of theatre which  is quite  distinct  from  his abilities as a novelist.
The engagement announcement which  launches the  action   would  have  rela­ tively little  effect if it were simply  read  aloud. To ensure  maximum impact, it is presented   visually,  not  once  but  twice.  In  the  second  scene,  as  Pearl reads  the notice  in the  paper aloud  to her father, a large  sign  bearing the notice  is carried  on  by  masked   stagehands. At  the  end  of  Act   I, as  Higgin   reads  the  notice, retrieved  from  the  bottom  of the  Morphews' birdcage, it  is  projected, complete

LEAVEN OF  MALICE

with bird droppings, on a screen. We are reminded again of the engagement announcement when, in the dream scene at the end of Act II, Mrs. Bridgetower's dream  is accented  by a large engraved  wedding invitation  announcing the  mar­ riage of herself and  her son Solly, again carried on by masked stagehands. Action which departs  completely from verisimilitude is used to convey abstract  concepts. Rumour  is depicted  by a dumbshow in the first scene. Curiosity and the contribu­  tion made to it by the local newspaper are indicated by the choral scene in which each  of the  four  characters  carries a copy of The  Bellman. Many pages of the novel are devoted to characterizing  Shillito as a bore and  a nuisance;  in the  play this is deftly accomplished  by a brief bit of action  during  which  Shillito settles himself for a rambling  address to the audience, though other characters  are clearly ready to begin the next scene. Finally, the masked stagehands pick Shillito up and carry him offstage in mid-speech.
Costume is a visual ingredient of the play which contributes to characterization. Ridley opens the play in his doctoral gown, but because the "real" Ridley is not an academic,  but  a newspaperman, he steps forward  out of the gown to address the audience,  and  the gown, supported  by masked stagehands, stands  independently. In the dream scene the gown, worn by a stagehand,  resumes its separate  existence to convey that  for Ridley it is a trapping  which cannot  make him a better  man though it can make him seem so. Thus, much of the novel's exploration of Ridley's aspirations to an honorary  doctorate is concentrated  in a visual device in the play.
A combination  of sight and sound gives some scenes more impact on stage than they have in the novel. The  early scene of Cobbler's  Halloween  escapade  in the Cathedral uses costume, dancing  and  music to give us at once Cobbler's  joie de vivre, his irrepressible spirit and  musical panache. In a later scene between Solly, Pearl  and  Vambrace, Solly actually  drives  his little  car  onstage.  The  crash  of Vambrace's stick on Solly's car is accompanied  by the tinkle of broken glass and the sounding of the horn, both to maximize the effect of Vambrace's rage and  to show us clearly the truth  of the episode so that  we recognize as rumour  the later allegation that  Vambrace has broken his stick on Pearl.
All the visual and  aural  possibilities of theatre  cannot  entirely accomplish  the necessary condensation  in adapting a novel to the stage, however. Davies calls his play "an  extravaganza"; it is a structurally  complex collage of sixteen scenes in three acts, and  one scene may contain  many discrete parts. The  last scene of the first  act  is the  most  complex,  opening  with  Ridley's  address  to  the  audience followed by a short  exchange  between Ridley and  Edith  Little,  then  moving  to Solly and Pearl in his car after the Yarrows' party. There  is then a "flashback" to the  party,  followed  by  the  altercations  between  Vambrace, Solly,  and  Pearl. Shillito enters to give his version of that  episode, which leads into the dramatiza­ tion of the encounter between Ridley, Shillito and Riggin  in  Ridley's office. The  comic bit of action in which Shillito is removed from the stage effects a transition

LEAVEN OF MALICE

to the Morphews' living room, where a conversation among  the Morphews,  Edith and Riggin, with the insertion of the exchange between Riggin  and Tessie Forgie in the library, concludes the scene. The extravaganza incorporates  fantasy and memory scenes into present action, at times moving rapidly  through  a succession of short  scenes, at  other  times lingering  over  a  fuller  portrayal   of  interaction between two or three characters. The rapid succession of scenes requires much ingenuity  in staging, and  Davies' script shows that  he has given careful attention to the physical problems involved, though reviewers seem inclined to give to direc­ tors and designers the entire credit for the fluidity of productions.
Condensation of the Leaven  of Malice  story for the stage results in some diminu­ tion of character  development,  which is unfortunate but  perhaps inevitable.  All Ridley's plans to give "the  Old Mess," Shillito, "the silken sack" are omitted from the play, as is almost all exploration of that large part of  Ridley's character which is absorbed in overcoming his guilt about his insane wife. The  result is that in the play Shillito seems to be an  extraneous  character,  useful only  mechanically  for starting  the rumour  that Vambrace  broke his stick over Pearl and for discovering the incriminating receipt for  the  engagement  announcement in  Riggin's  scrap­ book. The  two  references to  Ridley's  wife  in  the  play  are  simply  puzzling.  In Ridley's dream scene, his statement  that "we must never mention  the title 'Doctor'  to  Mrs.  Ridley.  It  would alarm  her  to  think  of  me  as  any  sort  of  Doctor"  is bewildering. The only other reference to her in the play illuminates  the first state­ ment, but introduces further difficulties. Riggin  explains to Edith  that  Ridley has a wife who is confined to an insane asylum, but how he, a newcomer  to the town, should have stumbled onto this information  is not explained,  and because its rela­ tionship to Ridley's yen for the honorary doctorate  is never clarified, the opening scene with Ridley in his doctoral gown becomes nothing more than a rather  clumsy device for introducing  the  main  action  of the  play as an  incident  which  "very nearly kept [Ridley]  from getting what  [he]  so much  wanted." Why he wanted it so much, the play's audience is unlikely to discern without  reading  the novel.
Pearl  is another  character  whose development  is curtailed  in the  play, but  in this case the play's characterization is perfectly adequate. In the novel, we witness a change  in Pearl from a helpless, mousy girl, wallowing  in self-pity, to a more independent, determined, self-assured young lady. The  play does not show us this marked change in Pearl. In this respect the characterization of the novel is richer, but the play considered on its own merits does not suffer, for Pearl is a consistent and  credible character  whose role is well defined.
The  condensation  necessary for the play does not necessarily impoverish its characters,  however. While the characters of Shillito and Ridley suffer in the play, Pearl emerges whole, Solly's character  is actually enriched, and Vambrace becomes more credible.  In  a  new bit of dialogue in the  play, Cobbler  tells Solly that  his trouble lies in his own self-image, that "for everybody who privately  regards him-

LEAVEN OF  MALICE

self as a prince, there is somebody who thinks he is a frog.... You think of  your­ self as a toad  under  the harrow." Solly picks up this observation  in a later scene with Pearl.  After their first kiss, he announces, "I don't  think  I'm  quite ready to be  a  failure;  it's  always  attractive, mind  you-a  nice,  tear-sodden  tunnel  of failure -but suddenly  I don't   feel like a failure. I'm  sick of being a toad  under the  harrow  ... I'm  going  to  have  a try at  being the  Frog  Prince.  Not  really wretched  you  know.  Just   rather   unfortunately   enchanted." The  metaphor   of transformation, linked  with  Solly and  Pearl's  discovery of each  other,  marks  a clear  and  quite  credible  change  in  Solly's outlook.  In  the  novel  the  change  is manifested  in Solly's decision to become a creator of literature  rather  than  "an  embalmer" -a critic-but  the  play's metaphor   (of  a toad  under  the  harrow becoming a Frog Prince)  simply, economically, and  convincingly encompasses a change in Solly which affects his whole character. The same scene between Pearl and Solly introduces  dialogue which does a good deal to explain and soften Yam­ brace's character. Solly admits that Vambrace seems a monster to him, as he does, perhaps, to the audience,  judging him by his frenzied actions and raging speeches. Pearl  replies. "He  isn't like that  all the time. That's so unjust.  He's  a great  man, really; a wonderful scholar and ... , well, never mind. But his standards and ideals are so different  from  those of most  people. There  isn't  a drop  of compromising blood in him. And it sometimes makes him seem so odd that-it's terribly unjust
... When I was younger it was embarrassing that Father was always in rows about things-things that  other  people didn't  understand  or care  about.  But I  know him better  now, and  the  more I know him, the better  I  understand his worth." Pearl's  understanding of  her  father,  which  the  original  character of  the  novel lacks, assists the  audience  in  understanding the eccentric Vambrace as well and makes  him  a  more  credible  and  sympathetic  character. While  the  necessity to condense  sometimes  has adverse  effects on characters,  at  other  times  it inspires Davies to extremely  effective dialogue, economical yet packed  with  information and emotion which contribute to character  portrayal.
Leaven of Malice is a play in which most of the individual scenes and characters
are delightful, but the parts are more memorable than the whole. The  play is long, requiring  close to  three  hours  of  playing  time,  and  complex  in  structure   and dramatic technique,  but  it is still less successful than  the novel in conveying the mentality  of Salterton,  representative  of small-town Canada. Since this was really Davies' larger objective, not just exploring the effects of Riggin's  particular mali­ cious act,  his material  really was better  suited  to novelistic development,  as he recognized in the first place. Asked whether he would attempt  another adaptation of one of his novels for the stage, Davies replied without  hesitation:  "No,  I don't think  adaptations make any sense at  all.... I wouldn't  want  to  try  it again."13
Still, the challenge of adapting stretched his ingenuity, resulting in a greater com­
mand  of staging techniques  and effective, economical dialogue. It also resulted in

ss

LEAVEN OF  MALICE

a freer  form  than  the form  of most  of his earlier  plays, and  this  is a direction in which   Davies  has  continued   to  move  in  his  latest   plays,  Question  Time  and Pontiac and the Green Man, both  of which  also contain large  casts of characters. One  might  expect  Davies' recent  plays to show  the same  advance on earlier  ones in terms  of complexity  and sophistication as his novels of the  197o's  show in com­ parison   with  those  of  the  so's; the  experience of  adapting Leaven  of  Malice, though it may  not  have resulted  in a totally  successful  play, did  contribute signi­ ficantly  to his command of the dramatic medium.


NOTES

1 Research  for this article was aided by a grant  from The  Canada  Council.
2  Preface to Question Time  (Toronto: Macmillan, 1975),  p. vii.
3 Interview  with Robertson Davies (February 1976).
4  Theatre Arts (February  1961), p. 71.
5  Reviews obtained  from The  Metropolitan Toronto Library.
6 Interview  with Robertson Davies (August 1977).
7  James  Forsyth, Tyrone  Guthrie  (London: Hamish  Hamilton, 1976),  p. 270.
8 Interview  with Tony Van Bridge (August 1977).
9  Manuscript of Leaven of Malice in the possession of Robertson  Davies. All quota- tions from the play are taken from this manuscript.
lQ  Interview  with Robertson Davies (February 1976).
11 Leaven  of Malice  (Toronto: Clarke, Irwin,  1954).
12 Preface to Question Time, pp. xi-xii.
13 Interview  with Robertson Davies (February 1976).









ELVIS DE]ID
 


Christopher  J'fliseman


In a rented Dodge, driving down Gorge Road in Victoria, I heard it on the radio.
Elvis is dead.
I though  I had forgotten you but I was shaken.

86

POEM

You  reached me.
Back more  than  twenty  years
you reached me, when the sudden cruel  drive  of voice and  guitar scattered the  sweetness of violins, stirred rebellion in the blood.
We  had  thought it would all last for ever,  I suppose -
Doris  Day  in long party  dresses,
all smile and  sweetness, all innocence; Guy  Mitchell and  Dinah Shore
telling  us over and  over
that we were fine, that  things would  always stay that  way.

You  ripped it apart.  Ripped it in a way we couldn't believe. Ripped it suddenly.  Exploded it. What you stood for
threatened more  than  comfort. I imitated your  records
with  three  chords  on an old classical  guitar.

Now  I find  and  play your records worn  almost  to bits
and  feel again  the power
of being  young, feel the room expanding, marvel  at it.
I still know  the words.

Scruffy  punk  kid.
Fat  rich  boy.
You changed our rhythms, shook  the walls of the world.




b::ks  in review



PLAY-ACTING

CHRISTIAN BRUYERE, Walls. Ta!onbooks, $4·95·
REX   DEVERELL,   Boiler   Room   Suite.    Talon- books, $4·95·
JOE  WIESENFELD, Spratt. Talonbooks,  $4.95.

WHAT DO  A  COUPLE  of old  winos,  a  trio of desperate convicts,  and  a flower sales­ man   have   in  common?  In   these   three plays out  of the  West  they are  all human failures,  all  people  in  varying degrees  of pain  engaged  in fantasies of  escape. They all find a physical !space secure-tempor­ arily-against  the  unsympathetic world outside; and  in it  they achieve  their  only moments of  genuine human contact. All three  plays feature imaginative theatrical effects  and  excellent dialogue, yet  suffer from  some awkward writing  as well. And they all illustrate the principle that a good subplot is harder to construct than  a good main plot.
Of the three, only Rex Deverell's Boiler
Room  Suite  could   be  called  a  comedy. Deverell,   playwright-in-residence at  Re­
gina's  Globe  Theatre, gives  us a  gentle, sympathetic look  at   two  elderly   tramps who  have  maintained  their  dignity  and humanity-and especially  their  sense of humour. In the shelter  of their hotel boiler room  "suite," Aggie  and  Sprugg deflate the pompous and  powerful  who have dis­ carded them,  acting   out  with  rich  irony the roles of haughty lady, welfare officer, Prime  Minister, and  even  God. Deverell  skillfully  milks  the  theatrical  potential of these  scenes,  with   the  paraphernalia of the  boiler  room  providing special  effects. There is some  fine  comic  writing   here:  Aggie  as  God   commanding  Hawaii  to descend  into  the  middle  of  the  prairies; Aggie   as   the   smug   dowager    ordering

88
 "baked peasant under  glass." In the trans­ formations  effected   by  wine   and   their imaginations, as Sprugg  says, "there's not only  truth, but  truth as it  ought  to  be." Unfortunately Deverell,  like  his  char­ acters,  is better at  handling the  fantastic than  the  real; the play's  dramatic energy and  the  quality of  its writing wane  when the  outside  world  intrudes in  the  person of  Peter,  the  hotel  janitor. His ostensible  function is to force  Aggie and  Sprugg to salvage   some   kernels   of  genuine truth from  the  wreckage of  their  lives. But  he in turn merely  becomes caught up in their new  fantasy, and  the  play  ends  not  with an  image  of conflict  but  of communion: the   two   men   breaking  bread    together while Aggie sleeps. "The world has turned kind," Sprugg concludes, as Deverell  lets us settle  for  an  easy, sentimental exit,  the uncomfortable real  held at  bay for a little
while  longer.
The  convicts in  Walls  have   no  such luck.   Christian  Bruyere   has   chosen   to
remain true  to the actual events  of the hostage-taking at  the B.C. Pen in 1975, which  resulted in  the  death of  classifica­ tion  officer  Mary Steinhauser. It is clear  from  the  start that  the  prisoners have  no real  hope   of  attaining  their  fantasy, es­ cape   to  freedom in   Argentina.  In   the interim, they,  too, get to play-act  some of the  roles  of   authority;  and   in  the  little  world  which they rule for forty-one hours,  tenderness   and   fellowship   are   at   least conceivable. Although Bruyere  has some trouble  deciding  whether  to   focus   on Mary or the prisoners or the repressive conditions  of  the   prison   system,  and   a few of his expositional scenes are glaringly weak,  he has given  effective  dramatic life to his documentary material. And  the powerful realism  of much  of the play's dialogue and  action makes  Bruyere's theatrical debut a good  one.
More    impressive  is  Joe   Wiesenfeld's first  stage   play,  Spratt   (like  Walls,  pol­ ished  prior   to  first  performance in  pro-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



fessional  workshops at  Vancouver's New Play  Centre).  Wiesenfeld brings   to  the theatre his strengths as a  screenwriter­ crisp colloquial dialogue, the rapid  juxta­  position  of  complementary scenes-and cleverly   integrates  them   with   an   anti­ naturalistic   staging  technique   befitting the  nightmarish quality of his  protagon­ ist's experience.
The triumph of  the  play,  however,  is the  character of  Spratt himself.  He  is a man so riddled with sexual  insecurity  that he alienates everyone  he meets with  his obnoxious  attempts to overcompensate. Wiesenfeld  beautifully balances sympathy with   antipathy as  he  shows  us  Spratt's life  crumbling around  him.  He  loses his job selling  artificial flowers and  pathetic­ ally  tries  to  cope  with   his  wife's  illness ("What's  she   gotta    have   cancer    for? She's   good.   She's   good!   She   shouldn't have  no cancer"). The  central dramatic action   involves  his  afternoon in  a  hotel room   with   a   retarded  young   woman,  resulting   in  the  charge of  "sexual   inter­ course  with  the  feebleminded." Proving  that  he is not in fact  guilty  is of less con­ cern  to  him  than   the  chance to  boast  of being  the  stud  he  has  always  claimed  to be. And more important, for the first time in  his life he has felt  needed  and  trusted. If  he  can't  live  his  fantasy,   he  will  at least  protect it.  At  the  end  his alienation is so complete that  he actually looks  for­ ward  to prison: "I wouldn't be alone. I'd  be one of the  guys...." For this sad little man    the   final    escape   must   be   from himself.
In   spite   of   a   sometimes   corny   and perhaps superfluous subplot  involving Spratt's best  friend, and  one  or  two  psy­ chological   details   that   are   not  entirely  convincing, Spratt  is clearly   the  best  of this crop  of new  plays from Talonbooks; and   Wiesenfeld   is  the  playwright  to  be watched  most  closely.

JERRY WASSERMAN
 CANAJUN,  EH?

RUDY  WIEBE   and   THEATRE  PASSE   MURAILLE,
Far  as  the   Eye   Can   See.  NeWest   Press,
$4-95·
SAM   SHEPARD,   Angel   City   & Other   Plays.
Talonbooks,  $6.gs.
GEORGE F. WALKER, Zastrozzi.  Playwrights Co- op,  n.p.

WHAT MAKES  A PLAY Canadian? Author, subject,  and   publisher,  in   the   case   of Rudy   Wiebe's  Far  as the  Eye  Can  See. Better  known  as  a  novelist   (and   rightly so) , Wiebe  was  inspired   by  his first  col­ laboration with Theatre Passe Muraille to try  again,  this  time  choosing as his topic the  controversy  over   the  Dodds-Round Hill  Power  Development  Project   which flared  up  near  Edmonton  between   1973 and  I976. The  result  is a  curious  hybrid,  begotten  collectively   by   Art   on   Docu­  ment,   hence-perhaps    inevitably­ dreary  and  shapeless.  Packed  with  genu­ ine issues, most centrally the unresolvable conflict between  the growing population's need   for  more  power   and   the  need   to preserve agricultural land, the play ought  to  be  gripping. But  it  isn't.  The issues, however  real,  become  cliches;   the  char­ acters,   however   passionate,  are   boring  stereotypes; the   language,  despite   odd outcroppings of   imagery,  is  as  flat  as  a cornfield.  NeWest  of  Edmonton, believ­ ing in the value of "regional perspectives" plan  a  "series  of  plays  to  be  devoted   to Canadian  drama  of  the   prairies." One hopes  they  will  reach   higher   elevations than  this.
The only thing  Canadian about  Sam Shepard's Angel  City  & Other   Plays  is the  publisher, Talonbooks of Vancouver. When    Talonbooks   began     to    publish drama  in  I g6g,   they   printed  not   only current plays but also a number of  impor­ tant   texts  that,  though  successfully  pro­ duced,  had   languished   in   manuscript, sometimes  for  years.  Now  that   backlog  has  been  cleared   away  and,  though  still

8g

BOOKS IN REVIEW



committed  primarily to  Canadian  play­ wrights,  Talonbooks has  been  expanding its list of dramatists. The choice of Shep­ ard,   an   American,   was   determined  by three  facts   (besides  Talonbooks' regular  policy  of publishing only plays  that  have been   professionally   produced) :  an   ad­  vantageous  arrangement  with   the   New York publisher of the collection,  the sale­ ability  of Shepard, and  the attractiveness (to Talonbooks) of Shepard's political ideas.
Shepard is widely recognized  as an im­ portant dramatist, important in  terms  of the  quantity and  modernity of  his work. The quality is variable-and  debatable. His plays range  from semi-autobiographi­ cal  near-realism  (Curse  of the  Starving Class)    through    Beckettish    monologue (Killer's Head)  to pop culture trips  (An­ gel City, Cowboy Mouth, The  Mad  Dog Blues). Professing to prefer  rock music to plays,    loudly    anti-intellectual	("Ideas emerge  from  plays-not  the  other   way around"; "I never  liked  books"), he  is almost  never satisfied  with productions of his work, nor  are  the  directors who  work with  him.  Yet  somehow  he  seems  to  be important. I find him "political" only  in that   he  reflects  the  world  around him: the  simultaneous  attractiveness and   de­ structive banality of  the  movies,  the  at­  tempts    to   find   in   Mick   Jagger   what  people  used  to find  in God.  Perhaps it is not   simply   Shepard's   work   that   is  of questionable quality;  perhaps  it  is  the time of which  he is the abstract and  brief chronicle. If so,  it  is  good  to  have  this cultural  phenomenon  available in  Can­ ada.
George F. Walker  is Canadian, but  his is the country of the mind, Canadian only insofar  as we all  live in that  country.  Al­ though  his  plays   are  set,  ostensibly,  in exotic landscapes -Bagdad, Hong  Kong, Mozambique,  "probably Italy"  for   Za­ strozzi- the  places  matter only  in  that  they  are  exotic.  For  the  landscape of the

go
 mind  is a strange place.  It is peopled  with oneself and with others, with one's own erudition and  stupidities-and obsessions of others,  or  rather of others  as one  per­ ceives them.  It is a country where  reality and    fantasy    meet    and    mingle,   where identities shift and  change. It is a country where  time  may  move  fmward  in  linear  fashion   but  more  often   does  not.  Small  wonder     that     reviewers    have     found  Walker's  plays   "difficult"   and    "meta­ physical" and  that  only a fraction of them  have  achieved success on stage.
Zastrozzi,  which   Ken   Gass  calls  rela­
tively "popular," is part of that  fraction; it  was well received  in Toronto, London (Ontario  and    England),   Seattle,  and Carlton (Australia). It is impossible  to say in a few words  what  it is "about." It is a melodramatic image  of evil, as Zastrozzi, borrowed from  Shelley's juvenile  novel of that  name,  pursues not  the simple Gothic revenge  of  the  source  story  but  the  ful­ fillment of  his own  bizarre  and  complex nature. As is often   the  case  in  Walker's plays,   that    fulfillment  brings   about    a variety   of    fatal    violences  - stabbing, strangling, a  sabre   through the  heart­ committed and  commented  on  in a ludi­  crously  matter-of-fact  style.  At  the  end,  for instance, Zastrozzi looks around at  the various  corpses  and  says with  a smile,  "I like it  here." The  tone  is faintly  reminis­ cent  of  Monty  Python's send-up of Sam  Peckinpah's  movies,  a  wild skit  in  which cheerful  young  people,  very well dressed, play  croquet, quite   oblivious  to  the  fre­ quent wrenching off of limbs  and  spout­ ing   of   blood.   But   the   casual   gore   of Zastrozzi  makes  more  of a  point, especi­ ally  in  the  final  duel   between  Zastrozzi and  Victor, the servant/tutor of  Verezzi, who  is  the  object   of  Zastrozzi's  revenge.  The duel  with  sabre  accompanies a  duel with   words  in  which   Victor   challenges Zastrozzi's claim  that  all  humanity must be  answerable  to  him.  Victor   exclaims, "Your time  is over," and  predicts an  im-





Begin  a  new  tradition this  Christmas ... give  a  gift  of CANADIAN LITERATURE-the oldest established jour­ nal devoted  to Canadian writers  and writing.

Read   about   the  latest  works  from  your  old  favourites - Birney, Roy, and Laurence. Discover new authors, new poets, new trends  in Canadian writing  and criticism.

Subscriptions  $18.00 in Canada
$21.00 abroad


Address your requests to

Circulation   Manager

CANADIAN  LITERATURE
University of British Columbia
213-2021 West Mall, University Campus
Vancouver,  B.C. V6T 1W.5



NAME------------·-·--·---------------------·---------------------------·--·---·--··---··-···--------- ADDRESS•.----- ....    ·-----------------------------.-------------------·-------  	_




NAME--------------------------------------------------------------···········------·············-········ ADDRESS----------------------------------------------------------·········-------------······-···------



A distinctive  GIFT CARD  will be sent with subscriptions  received before December 1.5th.





Inaugurez  une  nouvelle   tradition  pour   Noel   ... Offrez

Litterature  canadienne, la revue canadienne la plus ancienne consacree  aux ecrivains et a la litterature du Canada.  Lisez
des comptes  rendus sur les demiers ouvrages  de vos auteurs preferes: Roy, MacLennan et  Martin. Decouvrez  des  nou­ veaux auteurs tels que Beaulieu et Major, les nouveaux poetes et  les tendances  actuelles  de la  litterature et  de  la  critique
canadiennes.

Abonnements $18.00 au Canada
$21.00 a l'etranger

Adressez vos demandes  a

Directrice commerciale

CANADIAN  LITERATURE
University of British  Columbia
21.3-2021 West Mall,  University  Campus
Vancouver, B.C. V6T 1W5



NOM-----------------···---------·----------------------------------------------------------·--·---·-------


ADRESSE----------·------·------------------------------·-------·------------·----------·---------------





NOM  	 ---------·--·-------····------------------------------------------·--·-·-----------·--·-·----·---


ADRESSE.-----·----------------·--------------------   ·-·-------. 	-------------·.  	..·----    _




Une  carte  e1egante accompagnera les abonnements r us
15 decembre 80

BOOKS IN REVIEW



proved  future for mankind; "You  are neutralized. I am  the  emissary  of  good­ ness in the battle between  good and evil." Victor's final cry, "I am alive," comes out of his mouth while  Zastrozzi's sabre  is in his  heart. Then  Verezzi  appears,  quite defenceless,  relying on God's  love for pro­ tection,   and  Zastrozzi   lets  him   go -in order  to continue to hunt him. The fuzzy­ minded, artistic, religious  nut  and  "the master  criminal of all  Europe" are,  after all, brothers, as Shelley  says. However difficult  and   metaphysical  Walker's  play may  be,  it  creates a  vivid  image  of  the power   of  evil  and   the   paradoxical  sur­ vival  of good,  while  suggesting that  good (which  tends  to be stupid) must  be made intellectually aware of evil as a condition of  survival.   And,  oddly,  it  insists  on  the ordinariness   and    extraordinariness   of both.    The  country   which    is  Walker's mind  is a witty  one,  in  the  fullest  mean­ ing  of  that   word,  morally   sensitive,  and  profoundly ironic.
ANN MESSENGER


HISTOIRE DU TEMPS
MICHEL  TREMBLAY, La  grosse   femme  d'a  Cote
est  enceinte. Lemeac,  n.p.
BERTRAND  B.   LEBLANC,  Les  Trottoirs de  bois.
Lemeac,  n.p.
JEAN-MARIE  POUPART,  Ruches. Lemeac,  n.p.

LES NOTICES-REDIGEES par  J'editeur OU
!'auteur, peu  importe-qui apparaissent a l'endos  de ces trois  romans nous  feront entrer dans  le vif du sujet,  puisqu'elles parlent du  temps.
Sur  Les Trottoirs de  bois, de  Bertrand B. Leblanc: "L'histoire se passe a Lac-au­ Saumon, dans  Ia vallee  de Ia  Matapedia, a Ia fin  des  annees 30.  Mais  depuis  que cette   folie  aventure  est  arrivee, il  en  a coule  de  l'eau  dans  Ia riviere  Matapedia, et  les trottoirs de  ciment ont,  il y a bien longtemps deja,  remplace les trottoirs de bois." Nous apprenons ainsi que le roman
 de Leblanc raconte une histoire du  passe; mais  egalement, que  le  temps  de  l'ecri­ ture  doit etre  dissocie  nettement  de celui de !'action. Dans  un  assez long Prologue,
le  narrateur veillera   d'ailleurs .a  nourrir
cette  distance  pour  ainsi dire, .a Ia rendre
opaque, de  fac;on que  le  passe  auquel il
se refere  ne  puisse etre  contamine par  le
present   de  l'ecriture, qui  est  tout   aussi bien celui du lecteur. Confortablement installes dans !'ere  des trottoirs de ciment, nous   !irons   un   roman  historique -ou plutot, dit  Ia notice,  une  "chronique" - dont  les evenements n'ont  aucune chance de devenir  les notres. Nous entrerons dans un passe qui ne cessera pas de porter les marques du  passe.  Les  trottoirs de  bois, c'est  fini, pass·e, classe;  on  va les admirer au  musee des arts  decoratifs.
Dans   Ia   p11esentation  du   roman    de
Michel  Tremblay, La  grosse  femme   d'a cote est enceinte, cette  distance est au contraire abolie,  bien que !'action soit encore   plus  precisement datee:  "2  mai
1942, premiere belle  journee  qui annonce l'ete.   La   rue   Fabre,  entre    Gilford    et Mont-Royal, sort  tranquillement de son engourdissement. Les balcons se peuplent de chaises berc;antes et de voix, le quartier s'emplit de  promeneurs et  de  cris  d'en­ fants,  les bourgeons gonflent  le  bout  des branches. Et  le  pare  Lafontaine  qui  est
tout  pres."  Ce  "2  mai  1942"  est  un  au­
jourd'hui; le  lecteur est  invite   a oublier
qu'il  lit le  roman   de  Tremblay en  rg8o,
et a faire que  cette  journee  soit Ia sienne,
que  le temps  des personnages soit le sien. Michel    Tremblay  emploie    les   memes temps  verbaux que  Bertrand B. Leblanc, l'imparfait et le passe simple-avec des chutes  frequentes dans  le present  de  nar­ ration  -mais   de   toute   evidence   il les
emploie   differemment,  a d'autres   fins.
Aussitot creee,  suggeree,  par  Ia date  du  2
mai  1942 et les nombreux traits  d\ poque dont  !'auteur orne  son n!cit, et que le lec­ teur  averti  note  au  passage  avec  un  sou­ rire de connivence, Ia distance temporelle

93

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



est supprimee par cette connivence meme, par  la  magie  d'un memoire qui  soude  le present   au   passe  et   fait  de  l'un   et  de
!'autre les figures  equivalentes d'un  pas­ sage du  temps.  Parce  que les personnages de  Tremblay vivent   le  temps, ils debar­ dent  le cadre tempore!dans lequel ils sont situes et ils rejoignent le notre.
Enfin,   dans   le  roman   de  Jean-Marie
Poupart, Ruches, le  temps  se reduit  tout entier  au present. "En  ce debut  d'octobre, dit la notice, dans  un college de province, un professeur, Jerome Cayer, a ete trouve sans  vie,  assassine.  Les  conjectures vont bon train,  chacun mene sa petite  enquete, les soup  ons
tot sur !'autre. Et  le recit se batit  autour
d'un narrateur ..." Ce "debut d'octobre" n'est  pas une  notation temporelle; il n'est pas  precede d'un  septembre qui  le  pre­ parerait, suivi d'un  novembre qui  le con­ tinuerait; il annonce, tout simplement, le debut d'un texte,  peut..etre  d'une action.  N'importe  quel   autre  mois  ferait   aussi bien !'affaire. Seul compte ici le present,  un  pr·esent en  quelque sorte  intemporel, dans lequel coincident l'ecriture et l'evene­ ment. Peut-on meme  parler  d'ev·enements, dans Ruches, au  sens ou l'on  en parlerait pour  Les  Trottoirs de  bois et  La  grosse femme  d'a  cote  est  enceinte?  Les evene­ ments,  ici, n'existent que  d'etre racontes; ou mieux, ils ne servent, simples pretextes, qu'a   provoquer les evenements de  l'ecri­ ture.  La  notice  le dit  bien:  "R·ecit? Sans doute,  mais  aussi  pretexte a  autre chose. A quai? Au  jeu de miroirs, par  exemple.  Dans  Ruches, l'ecriture  s'observe,  se de­ finit,  se critique a  mesure  qu'elle se fait. Pretexte au  jeu  des  mots  surtout, ou  le langage  regne  en  roi  et maitre, ou l'outil  sert  a  fabriquer  de nouveaux outils."  Et non, comme chez Leblanc et Tremblay, a fabriquer des chaises, des personnages, des tables,  des  ev·enements  ... Lire  Ruches, c'est l'ecrire, puisque les seuls •evenements
auxquels le lecteur est appele a participer
sont  ceux  de  l'ecriture meme.  On  recon-

94
 nalt   la  le  programme, fidele  aux  theo­ remes   parisiens  les  plus   recents,   d'une lecture..ecriture qui  deporte tout !'interet du  roman vers  les secrets -parfois  trop  rapidement eventes-de sa propre fabri­ cation. Plus  moderne  que  Ruches, on  ne fait  pas.
Et  pourtant, il  me  faut  bien  l'avouer, des  trois  romans qui  font  !'objet de cette chronique, c'est   de  Jean-Marie Poupart qui  me donne la plus forte  impression de ressassement, d'usure,  de  repetition. Le present vieillit mal. Le premier des six romans de  Poupart, Angoisse  Play, avait rev·ele en  I g68  un  ecrivain   brillant,  vif, Ieger, expert en contrepeteries, faisant des ronds  de  jambe  sur  une  musique  dont  la tristesse  contenue sonnait  toujours  juste. C'etait un  livre  bref;  depuis  lors  ses ro­ mans  ont  pris  du  poids,  et  dans  les trois
cent  cinquante pages  de  Ruches c'est  a
peine  si  l'on   peut   entendre  autre  chose
que le cliquetis de la machine a fabriquer des phrases. Je parle  raide,  et  j'ai presque envie  de  m'en   excuser,   ne  serait-ce que pour  ne pas etre  range  parmi ces critiques desagreables,   peu    comprehensifs, dont Poupart fait  le  proces  dans  sa  postface; mais tout ce que  je puis dire pour attenuer la s·everite de ce qui  precede, c'est  qu'un livre  aussi  insupportable que  Ruches ne peut  avoir ete ecrit  que par  un ecrivain  de
talent. II n'est  pas donne a toutle monde
de   noircir    un   aussi   grand    nombre de pages a partir de rien, en detruisant syste­
matiquement,  a  mesure   qu'elles se  pre­ sentent, toutes  les amorces  d'action, toutes  les  idees   un   peu   vives  qui   viennent a
!'esprit!  Les   personnages,  n'en   parlons pas,  puisque Poupart ne leur  accorde qu'une attention distraite: Vital  le  Cou­ railleux, professeur au  meme  Cegep  que le  narrateur,  Irene  la   voisine  du   haut,
l'ecrivain a succes  P.-H.  Normandin,  in­
vite a donner une  conference au College,
sont des ombres  chinoises que le narrateur s'amuse a faire  danser sur le mur.  Quant a ce dernier, "stakhanoviste du bavardage

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



delaye,"  c'est  par !'indifference qu'il  se definit: "Ca ne me deprime pas. Ca ne m'attire ni  me  m'aimante. Je  ne suis pas jaloux.  Ca  m'indiffere, voila tout.  Ca m'alanguit." On   pensera au  Libraire de Bessette;  ou  encore, en  lisant  les  calem­ bours  souvent deplorables qui  parsement
le livre, a Rejean Ducharme. Mais  Herve
Jodoin a du  ton,  du  caractere, et les jeux
de  mots  de  Ducharme  trahissent une  vie
passionnee   du  langage. Rien   de  tel,  ici; rien que le delayage, a l'infini,  d'une prose uniquement occupee  d'elle-meme, de ses volutes, de ses graces,  de ses moindres caprices, Le roman de Poupart est un malentendu. Il confond le travail de l'ecri­ ture, appele, par son projet  meme avec un abandon  aux   "tics,   tics  et   tics"   ( Lau­  treamont)  de   l'ecriture.   On   veut   bien croire  l'auteur quand, se dissociant de son narrateur qui  semble  •ecrire avec  la  plus grande facilite, il doit avoir  redige  "pour la plupart des chapitres plusieurs  versions successives   avec   des   variantes  appreci­ ables." Mais quoi, c'est  l'effet qui importe, non  )'effort  qu'un ecrivain a fourni  pour le  produire. Et  l'effet,  dans  Ruches, c'est une ecriture  Iache,  incontinente, qui  as­ somme  d'ennui le  lecteur le  mieux  dis­ pose.
Il  me  reste  a  m'interroger sur  les  rai­
sons de  ce  malentendu, qui  n'exerce pas ses ravages  dans  )'oeuvre de Poupart seulement,  mais   aussi  dans   un   nombre assez eleve de romans parus au Quebec depuis   une   dizaine   d'annees. "De   plus, dit  )'auteur de  Ruches, la  fiction  ne  m'a jamais  tellement passionne et tant  que createur." La  fiction,  c'est-a-dire le recit continu, avec  un  commencement, un milieu  et une  fin; le vraisemblable; la construction d'un univers  de personnages, d'evenements, de sentiments, qui entre  en concurrence avec  le  reel.  Ce  ne sont  pas
la, on  le sait,  les ingredients qui  font l'originalite  du   roman  quebecois   d'au­ jourd'hui.   Chez    Aquin    comme    chez
Marie-Claire  Blais,  Ducharme,  Jacques
 Poulin,  Victor-Levy  Beaulieu, la  fiction ne cesse de se deregler, de s'abimer dans une ecriture qui  revendique, par  rapport
a cela  meme   qu'elle  raconte, dont   elle
rend  compte  en quelque sorte  malgre elle,
une  tres  large  mesure  d'autonomie. Elle ne  disparalt pas,  toutefois,   pour  autant; elle  joue, dans  le texte,  le role de l'oppo­ sant  auquell'ecriture doit toujours se me­ surer  pour  ne pas  tomber  dans  l'in-signi­ fiance  et devenir  le simple  compte rendu  de    ses   propres    operations.   Or,    dans  Ruches, cette  tension  disparait, l'ecriture gagne  trop vite son combat contre  un ad­ versaire qui disparait sans laisser de traces. L'ecriture seule, maintenant, sans  motifs, sans resistance,  sans feu ni lieu;  le present de la solitude  absolue. Ce qu'il  y a de vrai, ce  qu'il   y  a  d'effrayant,  dans   Ruches, c'est la rire de la fin:  "Sans  blague!! Sans blague,  Rein!! Mon  rire  s'enfle.  Il ·eclate enfin dans  rna poitrine comme  une super­ nova  de  nuit  sans lune.  Et  je ne suis pas fou  ... Sans   blague?"  Ce  rire  violent, sans  joie, est  la  conclusion  logique   d'un roman  ou  l'ecriture a  soigneusement de­  troit   tout  ce  qui  pouvait lui  porter om­ brage; le monde, en  particulier, le temps du  monde.
11 ne suffit evidemment pas  de  retour­ ncr   au   passe,  de   multiplier  les   evene­ ments,   les  personnages,   comme   le  fait  Bertrand B.  Leblanc  dans  Les Trottoirs de bois, pour  que  le  temps  du  monde re­ trouve ses droits,  et la fiction sa legitimite. Le  temps  n'agit  pas  plus  dans  ce  roman que  dans  Ruches:  il ne  fait  qu'encadrer un  tableau de genre  dont  il garantit l'an­ ciennete. Et l'effet  d'ancien est encore accentue par la forme  romanesque utilisee par l'auteur. Le Prologue ·evoque irresisti­ blement ces longues introductions, lourde­ ment    descriptives,    explicatives,  qu'on trouve  dans  plusieurs tomes  de la Come­  die  humaine, et il n'est  pas  jusqu'au style lui-meme qui  ne tombe  dans  ce charabia d'images  que   le  genie   balzacien   trans­ forme  en evidences. On  y voit "les bles et

95

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



les paturages attaque(r)   audacieusement les flancs  de  la  montagne qu'ils  grugent avec  obstination"; on  est seduit,  au  pas­ sage,  par  "la  blancheur affriolante  d'une cuisse fugitive"; on souffre  d'un "ete tor­ ride,  insidieux, exacerbant"  . . . Balzac, done,  au  genie  pres;  ou,  plus  justement, tel  roman canadien-fran«_;ais  du  dix-neu­ vieme  siecle  ou  du  vingtieme   commen­
«_;ant, Charles Guerin plus La Terre  pater­ neUe plus Marie  Calumet. Ainsi Bertrand B. Leblanc -son  nom l'y predisposait - reussit un etonnant double: au village an­ cien, il ajoute une forme  de recit plus an­ cienne encore.  II y aura  des lapsus, assure­ ment,  et l'on s'etonnera d'entendre un vil­ lageois du  Lac-au-Saumon utiliser  le tres parisien   "degueulasse,"  mais   quoi,   per­ sonne  n'est  parfait, et  le  pari  etait   trop audacieux pour  etre  tenu sans faillir pen­ dant deux  cent  cinquante  pages.
II    est    done    possible, 	aujourd'hui,
d'ecrire et de faire  publier  au  Quebec un roman  du dix-neuvieme siecle?  Mais  oui, bien sur, et plus que jamais, puisque les editeurs, aiguillonnes par  les chercheurs universitaires,  nous   redonnent  les  vrais,
fussent-ils  ennuyeux a perir! On  ne les lit
pas,  ce  qui  s'appelle lire;  on  les etudie,
pieusement,   par    fidelite    nationale  et culturelle.  Le   roman  de   Bertrand   B. Leblanc est  imbu  de  cette  piete,  mais  il compte  aussi   des  ingredients  plus   mo­ dernes,   don t  nos  anciens   romanciers - sauf  le Rodolphe Girard  de  Marie  Calu­  met-se  gardaient  comme  de  la  peste:
le comique, et le sexe. On  fornique, dans Les  Trottoirs  de  bois,  avec   un  enthou­ siasme  digne  des  plus  grandes  causes,  et les scenes  les plus  percutantes  du  roman  sont assu:rement celles ou la fornication, et ses  consequences  heureuses  ou  malheu­ reuses,  eclatent  au   grand   jour:  quand, par  exemple,   le  grand Johny, affole  par la chaleur, se  lance  tout  nu  sur  la grand  route,   vetu  de  ses  seules  bottines,   pour
aller  declarer sa passion a une vieille fille
qui  travaille au  magasin  Deschamps; ou

g6
 lorsque  la voiture dans laquelle  le meme Deschamps fait  l'amour avec la femme Iegere  du  village,  Marie, est tiree  par  des enfants sur  la place  publique; cette  scene etant suivie  d'une autre, plus  emoustil­ lante  encore, ou l'on  voit  Marie affronter
-et   deshabiller -la   commere   bigote Justine Comeau. C'est  encore  une affaire de sexe qui  provoquera l'evenement  dra­ matique du  roman: un  pauvre gars  cha­
tre  .a demi  par  l'ami  qui  vient  de  le sur­
prendre dans  le  lit  de  sa  femme.  II s'en
passe,  direz-vous, des  chases,  dans  ce  ro­ man   traditionnel,  et   vous  aurez   raison plus que vous ne pensez, car  je ne vous ai pas  encore   tout  raconte. II  faudrait en­ core parler de la partie de baseball  contre  l'equipe de  Cabano,  des  elections muni­ cipales,  des  mauvais et  bons  tours  qu'on se joue les uns aux autres, des inventions perverses   de  la  commere Justine,  de  la procession  de la  Fete-Dieu, des  beuveries d'importance  diverse   . . . Convenons-en,
a la  fin:   Bertrand B. Leblanc a  plus  de
tours  dans  son  sac,  plus  d'invention, que
n'en  avaient Rodolphe Girard et  Patrice
Lacombe. II ecrit  de  fa«;on plus  vivante, plus  rapide; et  sou vent   le  pas >e simple fait   place   au   present   de   narration  qui fait  se bousculer les evenements dans  un assez joyeux tohu-bohu. Ce present, toute­ fois, ne reussit  pas-qu'on me  pardonne
le mauvais jeu  de  mots- .a  rendre  pre­
sents  ses  personnages, et  les  evenements
dans  lesquels  ils sont  impliques. Ce  sont
des  marionnettes  qui  s'agitent  sous  nos yeux;   des  marionnettes  d'epoque,  assez bien dessinees,  mais  peut-etre moins inte­ ressantes,  au  fond,  que  les pales  person­  nages de Marie  Calumet ou de  La Terre paternelle,   auxquels   leur    ·eloignement  meme   nous  permet  de  preter  une   plus sympathique humanite.
On  trouve  de  tout,  dans  Les Trottoirs de bois, sauf  du  style;  et  j'entends par  la, non pas le mouvement plus ou mains gracieux de  la phrase, car  Bertrand  B. Leblanc ecrit   aussi  convenablement que

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



de wes estimables romanciers, mais la creation d'une problematique culturelle g·enerale ou les personnages prennent sens et  vie.  Il  suffira,  pour  ·etablir  cette  ca­ rence,   de  comparer  la  Justine  Comeau des  Trottoirs  de  bois,  incarnation   d'un personnage-type de la comedie villageoise, ala Veuve  a Calixte d'Antonine Maillet, autre incarnation du  meme  personnage. La   Veuve    a   Calixte   est   convaincante parce   qu'elle  appartient a  une  tradition vivante qui  fait de chacune de ses mani­ gances  des  actions   profondement signifi­ catives,  necessaires,  ambivalentes comme  la  vie; elle  n'est  jamais  simplement ridi­ cule, ou mechante; elle est engagee, avec Mariaagelas, dans  un  grand combat qui est la realite meme  du village. Justine Comeau, par contre, n'est qu'une vieille sotte aigrie, et il suffira, a la fin du roman, que  son mari  lui  botte  les fesses pour  que tout   rentre  dans   l'ordre.  Dans   l'ordre, c'est-a-dire dans  le  neant, dans  l'insigni­ fiance  du  quotidien. En  fait, Bertrand B. Leblanc,  romancier   passeiste,   n'est   re­ monte  assez loin  dans le passe  pour  rein­  venter  les sources  d'une tradition. Il s'est arrete  aux  peres  et  aux  meres; il fallait  aller   jusqu'aux  grands-peres  et   aux grands-meres, et  au  dela,   jusqu'au  com­ mencement des  temps,  comme  l'ont fait, entre   autres, Antonine  Maillet,  Jacques Ferron,  Marie-Claire   Blais   et   Victor­ Levy  Beaulieu. Car,  aujourd-hui, c'est  le plus ancien  qui  est le  plus  actuel.
Comment  done   Michel  Tremblay  s'y
prend-il pour  animer, dans  La  grosse femme   d'a  cote  est  enceinte, ce  qui  est encore si pres de nous, cette prehistoire immediate de notre temps,  ce 2 mai  1942 ou  l'on   voit  un  chat  nomme  Duplessis livrer  le grand combat a un chien  appele Godbout?  Il  donne   Ia  parole   au  temps, au  temps   qui  passe:  "Rose,   Violette et Mauve tricotaient." Elles tricotaient, comme  elles avaient tricote, comme  elles tricoteront. Tous   les  temps   leur  appar­ tiennent, mais  c'est  l'imparfait  qui  leur
 convient   particulierement,  temps   d'une action   qui  n'est   jamais  terminee, qui  se repete  en  n'etant  jamais   tout   a  fait   la meme.   Pour   Rose,   Violette  et   Mauve, variations sur  une  meme  couleur, la cou­ leur  du  temps,  il  n'y  a  pas  de  premiere fois. "Ouan ... J'pense que  c'est la  pre­  miere  fois." "Voyons done, faut  pas exa­ gerer! Depuis  le  temps  ..."  "C'est vrai, t'as  raison  ... j'me  rappelle, l'annee que Victoire   a  eu  Gabriel  ..." "C'tait  pas l'annee de Gabriel, c'tait l'annee d'Edou­ ard,    son   deuxieme   ..."   "Comme  tu veux." "C'est pas comme  j'veux,  c'est  de meme." Le  temps  appartient a  la  neces­ site,  c'est  pourquoi d'une  certaine  fac;on il est toujours le meme,  il  se repete,  c'est pourquoi Rose et Violette et Mauve, sous la  haute surveillance de  leur  mere  Flo­ rence,   ne  cesseront   jamais   de   tricoter; mais  aussi,  parce  qu'il est  vecu  par  des enfants,  des   femmes,    des   hommes,    il scande  une avancee, une progression. "On  est la pour que  tout  aille  vers !'avant, dit Florence.  Ce  qui   est  tricote  est  tricote meme si c'est  mal tricote." Ainsi, le  2  mai
I 942 du chat  Duplessis  et du  chien God­ bout  nous  montre-t-il d'ou   nous  venons, ce  temps  qui  est  notre  passe;  et  que  ce temps  reste actuel, puisque  nous sommes soumis  a la  meme  necessite, maille  apres  maille.
Si  Rose,  Violette et  Mauve  tricotent
avec  une  telle  assiduite,   c'est   egalement parce   que   beaucoup  d'enfants  se   pre­
parent  a   naitre,  ce   printemps-la,  rue
Fabre,  entre  Gilford et  Mont-Royal. Le
roman   de   Michel  Tremblay  est   l'apo­ theose   des   ventres   gonfles.   Et   d'abord celui,   enorme, scandaleux a   cause   de l'age  de celle qui  le porte,  et l'obligeant a rester   assise  toute   la   joumee  dans   son fauteuil, de  la  "grosse  femme  d'a  cote." Cette   grossesse,  dirons-nous,  comme  on
parlait de la folie de Menaud a la fin du
roman  de Felix-Antoine Savard, n'est  pas
une grossesse comme les autres. Celles qui se produisent dans  les autres maisons  de

97

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Ia  rue   Fabre   sont   justifiees  en  quelque sorte  par  une  necessite qui  coi:ncide avec
!'age   des  femmes: on  est  mariee  depuis peu  de  temps,  il est  normal  qu'on ait  un enfant, il serait  anormal qu'on  n'en  eut pas.  La  grossesse de  Ia "grosse  femme,"
par  contre, procede  d'une  decision  tout  a
fait  Iibre, audacieuse, qui  met  en danger
sa vie meme.  Elle veut !'enfant pour !'en­ fant; elle est la maternite artiste, par  op­ position  a Ia maternite industrieuse-on n'oserait  dire   industrielle-qui   est   de regie  dans  la  societe  qui  l'entoure. Aussi bien    Ia    matemite,   pour    elle,   est-elle associee  au reve impossible  qu'elle  entre­ tient  de  voir  un  jour  Acapulco,  et  a  Ia litterature qui  en  est  I'accompagnement oblige.  "Tu lirais  Notre-Dame  de  Paris
ou  ben  done  Eugenie  Grandette,  a voix
haute, pis quand les vagues  seraient  pas
dans  mes  oreilles  j'.ecouterais  ...  J'reste­ rais Ia, clouee  par  le soleil pis caressee par l'ocean. Pis  j'pourrais  mettre  au  monde  tous les enfants que  j'voudrais!" On  voit comment, ici,  Michel  Tremblay magnifie  Ia   traditionnelle fecondite canadienne­ fran<;aise, et  du  meme  coup  Ia pervertit. Plus   question d'une  revanche  des   ber­ ceaux;   Ia   "grosse   dame"  procree   par plaisir,    pour    s'accomplir  dans   l'abon­ dance. Elle  tr8ne,  dans l'appartement en­  combre par  trois  generations, comme   Ia deesse ou mieux comme !'idee  pure  de  Ia fecondite.
Get  etonnant  renversement du  mythe traditionnel fait du roman de Michel Tremblay tout  autre chose qu'un tableau de  moeurs,  malgre   Ia  precision  natura­ Iiste  du  detail,   le  soin  infini  qu'apporte le romancier a reconstituer le decor  et les habitudes de  J'.epoque. Oui,  certes,  c'est bien  le  Montreal d'hier que  nous  donne  ce roman, avec  les ballades  en  tramway, les  chaises   ber<;antes  sur  les  balcons,   le pique-nique des  enfants  au  pare  Lafon­ taine,   Ia  glorieuse  equipee   de  Ia  grand­ mere  Victoire et de son fils Edouard dans  les  magasins de  Ia  rue  Mont-Royal,  les

g8
 putains Mercedes, Betty et Ti-Iou; et c'est aussi, aux  antipodes de  Ia representation obligee,   traditionnelle, ce  qui  aurait  pu etre, ce qui  existait  peut-i!tre  sous les ap­ parences,  a   l'ecart  du   discours   ideolo­ gique,  dans  le secret  des ames et des corps appeles a autre chose  qu'a la simple  con­  servation. Tremblay decouvre, isole, dans Ia   grossesse   une   postulation  creatrice;
postulation qu'il   reconnait egalement, a
!'autre extreme, paradoxalement, dans  Ia
sterilite  du   frere   Edouard,  homosexuel qui va passer des nuits dans des boltes speciales   et   en   rapporte  des  recits   qui
nourrissent   la    vie    imaginaire   de    Ia
"grosse  femme"; et dans  Ia mere  Victoire qui,   apres   avoir   engendre  toute    cette smala,   echappe  a  la  necessite   familiale pour   ne  vivre,  scandaleusement, que  sa vie  ( et sa mort)  propre. Entre la "grosse femme,"  Edouard,  Victoire  et   les   en­ fants,   s'etablit  une   complicite  profonde qui  tient  a ce que,  tous, ils  placent Ia vie personnelle, !'invention   de   la   vie,   au­ dessus  des  impositions  du  clan,  au  con­  traire  d'Albertine qui demeure figee dans le r8le  de  Ia  mere-poule. Ils  ne s'abstrai­ ent  pas  de  Ia famille; c'est  de  l'interieur qu'ils   Ia   font   ·eclater,  en   changeant  Ie signe des  forces  vives  qu'elle produit et reproduit.  Seule  Ti-lou, la  glorieuse   pu­  tain  d'Ottawa qui  vit ses derniers jours a Montveal, demeure a  l'ecart. Comme Ia "grosse   femme"  est   !'idee  pure    de   Ia t:econdite,  Ti-Iou  represente  l'absolu   de l'aventure,  de   Ia  fete,   du   desordre, de
!'amour flamboyant de sa propre sterilite. On   imagine  que,  bien  qu'ignorant  mu­ tuellement leur  existence,  elles entretien­ nent  dans le roman un dialogue secret, ou elles se racontent que, dans  les formes ap­  paremment les plus  opposees,  Ia vie vaut  d'etre V'ecue et  d'etre poussee  a  bout.
Est-ce  assez dire  que  La  grosse femme d'a cote est enceinte  est une  oeuvre erni­
nemment  singuliere,  puissante,  une   des plus riches  qui aient  ete publiees  au Que­ bec ces demieres annees? Elle  brise avec

BOOKS IN REVIEW



le canon generalement re<;u du  roman quebecois  depuis  le debut des annees soi­ xante, en  ce que  les pouvoirs du  langage  n'y  rec;oivent  pas  un  privilege  demesure par   rapport au  vraisemblable  temporel. Michel   Tremblay possede  un  solide  me­ tier de raconteur, dont  il use ici avec une
ma.ltrise  superieure a celle  qui  s'exen;ait
dans ses livres precedents, peut-etre meme dans  son  theatre. Si  j'hesite  a parler   de
grandeur, a propos  de  son  roman, c'est, en  premier lieu,  a cause  de  quelques fa­
cilites,  de quelques broutilles, comme  par exemple les passages ou l'auteur deblatere
contre certains aspects  de la mentalite de
l'·epoque,  detruisant  ainsi,   durant   quel­ ques   minutes,  les  riches   ambiguites  du vecit; mais c'est,  surtout, parce  que, en le
lisant,  je n'ai  pu  m'empecher de  rever  a
ce  que  La  grosse  femme  d'a cote est  en­
ceinte  serait  devenu si Michel Tremblay, a la  fac;on  de  certains  romanciers  sud­ americains, avait   donne libre  cours  a la
grande folie  de !'imagination. Cette  saga des  ventres   gonfles  serait   devenue,  alors
. . . Mais  assez  reve.  A  son  niveau,   plus modeste-dirons-nous   plus   provincial?
-le roman de Tremblay accomplit  par­
faitement son dessein.
GILLES  MARCOTTE



MAKJNG THE PRESENT CONTJNUOUS

MICHAEL   ONDAATJE,    ed.,    The    Long    Poem
Anthology. Coach  House  Press, $7-95·
THE  LONG  POEM  ANTHOLOGY  brings  to­ gether   some  of  the  most  challenging  of what   its editor, Michael  Ondaatje, calls the "unofficial" voices of the 197o's. Eight  long  poems   are  reprinted  in  full  along with Book IV of  bp Nichol's Martyrology. The   poems   are   accompanied  by  brief statements  on   their   work   by  the   poets themselves,  biographical details,  a  selec-
 tive list of criticism  about their  work and suggestions  for  further reading. It  is clearly  designed  with  a student audience in mind.  The  price  is reasonable and  it is an   attractively  produced  volume,   with wide margins, good paper  and  clear  print. It makes  work  which  was previously difficult to obtain or inaccessible  available to a much  wider  audience, extending the range  of what  may  be  taught in  courses on  Canadian literature.
Indeed, its  very  existence  may  change how we see and  talk about  Canadian writing.   The   most  interesting aspect   of this  anthology  is  the   way  it   has  been shaped  by its editor, himself  a major Canadian poet of the 1970s who has writ­ ten  his own  long  poems.  In  his excellent  introduction, Ondaatje  explains  that  his choice  of poems  was  determined,  not  by chronology  or history, but by curiosity: "I wanted  to explore the poets who  surprise  me  with  their   step,  their   process."   For this  reason,  one  poem  from   the   rg6o's, Robin   Blaser's  Moth  Poem, is included, but the primary emphasis is on the experi­  mental long  poems  of  the  later   decade. The   better   known   long   poems   of  the period   seem   deliberately  to  have   been excluded. They require no further recog­ nition,  and  perhaps they  surprise us less with  their  step; they  are  already part  of our   consciousness.    Certainly   Atwood's success seems  due  to  her  ability  to  cap­ ture  in words  what  has  already  been felt but  not  articulated. She  doesn't  change our  ways of seeing; she  clarifies.
The   key   word    throughout  this   an­ thology is process. When  Ondaatje argues that  "the   most  interesting  writing  being done   today   can   be   found   within    the structure of  the  long  poem" and  that  it is time to re-examine what we mean  when we  speak  of  the  "documentary poem  in Canada," he is really  advocating his own preference for   what  Jack    Spicer    (in­ voked  often  in  this  volume)  called   the serial  poem, a long  poem  in which  narra-

99

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



tive  and   a formal didactic voice  are  re­ placed  by  "the  movement of  the  mind and   language."  Each  of   the   nine   long  poems reprinted  here  shares this  fascina­ tion   with    process  and    this   distrust  of what Stuart  McKinnon  calls  "the  tem­ poral  narrative   of   simple   cause-effect logic." Of   the   nine   poets,  six  were  con­ nected  in   some   way   with   Tish,  which suggests  that   the    impetus   from    that movement is still  being  felt.  Its  emphasis on  the  immediate  and   the  discontinuous in  order  to  make the  present continuous, and its  rejection of  what  it  felt  to  be  the narrowly national, are  all  reflected in this volume.  Lee's   Civil   Elegies,  Atwood's Journals  of  Susanna  Moodie  or  any   of Don   Gutteridge's   historical  narratives would  be   out   of   place   here. Ondaatje doesn't even  mention Gutteridge's  tradi­ tional documentaries in  his  long  list  of what  might  have  been   included.   One suspects they   represent a  view  of  poetry too far  removed from that dominant here.
This  decision to   build   the   anthology about a fairly unified aesthetics instead of trying to  make it representatively  Cana­ dian gives  the  collection a  coherence few Canadian  anthologies  possess.  The read­ ing  of  one   poem  illuminates our   under­ standing of  the  others, as  preoccupations recur  in   different  configurations. Simi­ larly,  the  poets' commentaries reflect   on one another. They are  all concerned with  the ways in which the  long  poem  occupies both  space  and  time  and    the   ways  in which it may  enable us to  understand or at least  experience these  two  dimensions. Marlatt speaks of  the  long  poem  "taking on  time" while McKay stresses  its  role  as imaginative  space.  Davey writes   of   dis­ covery,   Bowering   of   meditation,    and  Nichol of  trust in  the  durational  aspect of  being alive.  But   while   the  emphasis may   vary   from poet   to  poet,  their con­ cerns are remarkably similar. Each is self­ consciously exploratory, seeking openness rather than closure, and fascinated by the

IOO
 possibilities and  limitations  of  language itself.
Given  the   premises outlined   in   On­ daatje's Introduction, the   selection  can­ not  be  faulted. This is a  fascinating  and  valuable  anthology.   Although  my   con­ cern here has  been  to  draw attention to the  continuity  of  aesthetic concerns, each  poem does  indeed surprise with  the  origi­ nality of its  own step, and the  differences in  practice, in  realization, are far  greater than the similarities in  theory might sug­ gest. Ondaatje's  decision to include Book
IV of   Nichol's  Martyrology   seems  sen­
sible.  All  four books  would have been  too much for  an  anthology, yet  Nichol could not   have been   omitted from  this  collec­ tion.  Book  IV suffers least by  separation from the   rest.  But   why  didn't  Ondaatje include the  epigraphs  translated  by  W. S. Merwin which preceded the  poem as orig­ inally published? Nichol refers to  them in his  commentary; they   have inexplicably been    omitted,   as    have   some    of    the graphics. I wonder whether the  reference in  the  section on  Further Reading to Galway and Cinnell, The  Book of  Night­
mares, is some  kind  of  joke  or  a  mistake.
But  these are minor quibbles about an anthology which is  as  much a  contribu­ tion   to  the   writing of  Canadian  literary history as  to  the  textbook market.

DIANA  BRYDON



ILLUSORY UNITY
MARIO  J.  VALDES  and   OWEN  J.  MILLER,  eds., Interpretation  of  Narrative. Univ.   of  To­ ronto Press,  $rs.oo.

IF CONTEMPORARY PHILOSOPHERS of the human  sciences, such   as   Paul  Ricoeur, Kurt Lewin, and Clifford Geertz, are  in­ deed right in  assuming that the abandon­ ing  of mutually exclusive  theories and the  favouring   of    complementary,  partially valid    approaches   instead  are    sympto-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



matic of a maturing and  increasingly knowledgeable  discipline,  and   if  the papers  read   at   and    selected   from   the
1976 Toronto Colloquium on the "Inter­ pretation of Narrative" are  in  fact repre­  sentative of current trends, then  we may optimistically conclude that  literary  criti­  cism is on a path  to maturity and  knowl­ edge.    For    the    underlying  mode    that  emerges  from  the collection of essays, or, more accurately, of  assertions of positions, however  much  it directly reflects the con­ troversy between formalist and hermeneu­ tic  stances,   nevertheless  tries   to  under­ stand  and at the same time go beyond this schism.  In  order  to  initiate and   pursue  such   a  provocative step   as  Valdes   and Miller  dare  to  undertake, they  have  had to  develop what  Ricoeur so vividly  calls "second   naivet,e": literary  theories   must be   able   to   handle   uncertainties,  since there   is  no   ultimate,  "successful"  out­ come  to be expected from  them.  In short, neither idealism   nor  despair  is  allowed.
They  are  not  allowed  to  the  reader  of this  volume  either, and  so a fair  amount of second  naivete is indispensable for him as well. There are  times and  places in the collection  where   he   may   feel   that   he knows exactly  where  it is moving and understands what precisely  relates  and separates  formalism  and   hermeneutics; yet there  are always other instances where he  may  see  himself   drifting through a "non-book" incoherently assembled  and where the two clearly distinctive positions merge  into  a  single  amorphous  mass.
Only  to a small extent does the reader's
confusion  arise  from  shortcomings on the part  of the  editors. Indeed, the  only seri­ ous  problem in  this  respect   stems  from their  attempt to  group each   paper  into one  of  three   clearly   separable  sections, headed "formalist  analysis,"  "hermeneu­ tic  criticism," and  "metacriticism" -an endeavour which creates the false impres­  sion  that   the  various positions  taken  are readily  and  discretely identifiable. How-
 ever, most of what  appears as incoherent and  fuzzy arises directly  from  the  subject of the  volume -the two theories  of  nar­ rative -and the   various    levels   which they  study  and  from  which  they  can  be studied. Miller,  in  his epilogue, attempts to summarize the  array  of  levels touched upon  in the collection:

Some  papers challenge certain aspects or certain  premises of  established  theories  by confronting them  with  their own  critical discourse on  theory; others attempt to estab­ lish  a  particular  theoretical  or  critical dis· course that  works   within the   assumptions of that literary theory or  operates on literary texts: yet  others use  a  combination of  these  approaches....  Finally,   there  are   the   dis· courses  attempted  in  the   introduction and conclusion, themselves establishing a dialec· tical   relationship  with   those   presented   by the   participants  of  this   volume. To  these must  be added the  comments of  the  preface and  epilogue seeking not  to  achieve an  ulti­ mate and  final  level  but  opening the volume to  the  reader and  attempting to engage him  in  a dialectical  response.

It is by accepting this invitation to a dia­ lectical  response  and  by following  Ralph Cohen's  introductory  suggestion   to  ap­  proach  the   papers   themselves  as  forms (each  one engaged in an  act  of  interpre­ tation  and   itself   needing    to   be   inter­ preted)  that   the   reader   will  make   the activity   of   reading  most   valuable  and  satisfying.  For  he  will  discover   that   the very language of each  paper, although it may  claim   to  be  strictly   formalistic  or strictly  hermeneutic, inevitably contains features of both,  just as it is unavoidable for  each  of  the  two  theories,  given  their  nature  and   the   nature  of  the   material they deal  with,  to  include  elements from  the  other.  Read  in  this  manner, the  col­ lection  achieves  more  than  its simple  title leads  one  to  expect. It reveals  as  much, if not  more,  about narrative theories and the interpretation of narrative theories  as it  does  about   the  interpretation of   nar­ rative.


101

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



,What  sort  of  language do  the  papers then  use, and  what  does it  reveal  about the  character of the  formalist  versus her­ meneutic controversy? First of all, we will realize  that  only  if they are  seen  as ideal types,   can   formalist  analyses   be   con­ trasted  with  hermeneutic  interpretations. Of    course,    formalism   is   much    more limited   and  fixed  in  its  method of  pro­ cedure and  its  vocabulary and  thus  con­ strains  those who use it and severely limits the  insights  they  can  make; yet  at   the same  time,  it  provides  a  kind  of  precise­ ness and  intelligibility, and  suggests  that  the critic can capture significant  generali­ zations   that   hermeneutics,  focusing   on the  singularity of  the  literary work  and stressing  the reader's unique experience with the irreversible time of the narrative, has  been  unable   to  develop.   Moreover, since narrative itself has a dual nature­ its purely  formal  potential  deriving  from inherently   linguistic   structures,  but   its presentation having  to  take  place  as  an act   of  living   speech -the   papers   that  attempt  to  interpret  it  adequately  will show signs of this  duality  as well.
In  the light of these considerations, one will quickly abandon the search  for direct correlations  between   the   kinds   of   lan­ guage  and   the  kinds  of  theory  that  they represent and  move  to a  more  moderate position  which,  at  the same  time, is more phenomenologically true  to  the  material it deals with. This  volume shows, through its contributions, that  formalist and  her­  meneutic   approaches   to   narrative  are really ends  of a continuum, never  realiz­ able and  realized  in their  extremes. How­ ever  much   the  elements   of  one  of  the two  may  be  dominant in  an  interpreta­ tion  and   in  the  language it  uses,  there will  inevitably be  elements  of  the  other  present  to some  degree.  The  dynainic of the operation of this continuum is seen in some of the  papers as taking  the form  of stylistic  shifts  among  different  levels  of analysis  (e.g., Michael Riffaterre's paper,


102
 which   cntlCizes   a   formalist  search   for rules  that  would  regulate narrative struc­ tures,  and  which  looks for  formulization on  the  level  of  their  actualization in  the text   instead) .  Another  approach  traces  how narrative structures of different times may  ask  for  different mixtures of  form­  alist  and   hermeneutic  features in   their interpretation (e.g.,  Eugene  Vance's look at  medieval narrative and  the  particular insights a formalist and  a hermeneutic approach to  its  strategies may  provide) .
A  brief  sketch   of  the  content  of  the
papers will give  a sense of the  variety  of this collection. Christie V.  McDonald examines Rousseau's Dialogues as a work which   intends to  make  language  reflect the  process of its own shaping. By analyz­ ing  the  schematic movements  within  the text, she shows how Rousseau consciously exploited   the    dialogue   form,    thereby  making explicit certain assumptions about the nature of writing and  reading as com­
municative  processes.   0. J.  Miller  ex­
amines  two   texts   by  Todorov  and   at­
tempts to  reconstruct and   compare the view  of  the  relationship between   poetics and  interpretation they  express.  Michael Riffaterre, referring to  Balzac's   Paix  du menage,  suggests  that  an  abstract  narra­ tive  typology  cannot adequately  describe  the  decoding of  a  narrative as  a  unit  of significance, because it considers  the  sur­ face   features   that    narrative    takes   as merely exterior, decorative devices. There­ by it ignores  that  it is these same  features that  the  reader reacts  to and  that  deter­ mine  the  temporality  and  successivity  of
the  narrative. Timothy J. Reiss, similarly
critical, questions the  traditional assump­
tion   that   literary  language, and   there­ fore   literary criticism, are   unique,  and  rather suggests  that  scientific discourses, particularly in the philosophy of quantum mechanics, be  taken   as  ideal   references, as they  can give answers  to problems  like the opposition between  text-oriented and reader-oriented analysis.  In  the final con-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



tribution to the  Formalism section,  Brian T. Fitch   demonstrates  the  shortcomings of Barthes' critique of Bataille's Histoire de l'oeil, especially  as far as it fails to deal with  the  integration of  the  work's  onto­ logical  message  with  its  formalistic  mes­ sage.  These limitations  can  be  remedied, Fitch   argues,   by  the  application of  two crucial concepts the  Geneva School   has developed, that  of  "the generator of  the text" and   that   of  "auto-representation." In the collection's second section, Cyrus Hamlin  discusses   reversal    strategies  in narrative as  these  are  treated in  modern hermeneutics  and   in   German  idealist theory.   In  a   more   general  vein,   Felix Martinez  Bonati puts  forward the  thesis that   in  literary studies   the  hermeneutic method  has,  by  necessity,   to  become   a certain   kind   of  formal  description,  be­ cause  it  intends  to  handle literature  as structured  knowledge, not   merely   as  a manifestation  of  a  more  or  less  uncon­ scious  life.  Wolfgang Iser,  approaching narrative from  a functionalist angle,  pro­ poses that  it encapsulates elements drawn from  outside  systems,  most  notably   his· torical and  social norms; with  this propo­ sition in mind,  he then  studies  the specific strategies which   particular   texts  use  for the  selection  and  rearrangement  of such elements.  Concluding  the   hermeneutic section  of the book, Eugene Vance's essay attempts to  shed  some  light  on  current issues  in   contemporary   poetics   from   a comparative look at the intellectual scene
of  the  Middle Ages, when  the  nature of narrative form  and  the theory  of inter· pretation were as actively  debated as they are  at  the  present time.
The title  of  the  third section,  "Meta. criticism," promises  papers with  a  more
holistic  outlook. Hans Robert Jauss sug­
gests how to cope with  the difficulties that
the  transition from  literary theories which treat the literary text as an autonomous whole, to those which aim at including instances of intertextuality, typically poses.
 In an investigation of one area  of literary terminology, the  narrative line,  J. Hillis
Miller   uncovers  a  universal dilemma  of
the  field:  all  narrative  terminology is a labyrinth whose centre can  never  be fully reached   because   it   takes   a   term   from another realm  to name  something which has  no  proper   name, and  because,  as  a result,  all  terms  overlap. The third   and last  contributor to  this  section,  Paul Hernadi, suggests that  just as in literature, form is unthinkable without function, and vice  versa, so in  literary criticism,  form­ alism  and  hermeneutics have  to  be seen as  mutually  presupposing,   rather   than  opposing,  each  other.
Preceding Owen   J. Miller's  Epilogue,
Uri  Margolin gives some concluding and
unifying  remarks, showing how  the  posi­ tions  taken  in  the  various  papers support his   thesis   that    structuralism   has   been moving  steadily  toward a  rapprochement with  hermeneutics. By  loosening  its grip, structuralism has encouraged a new inter· est in defining  the  structure of narrative in ways that are free  of both  the excesses of classical  hermeneutics and  the  limita­ tions  of  traditional structuralism.
This  short   review  of  the  papers con· tained   in  the  collection may  have  illus· trated  the   problems  concerning  coher­ ence  within  and  between   the  sections - problems  that  wishful  thoughts of a  uni· fication   soon   to   be   reached  can   only superficially  solve. But  given  our  limited understanding of science,  one  can  hardly blame  any editor or  literary critic  for  his attempt to make  the discipline of literary criticism   appear  organized and   rational and  to use every  opportunity to lead  the reader   to  believe  that the  apparent  dis­ unity   and    contradictions  he   sees   will vanish if seen safely and  analytically from without. It is this attempt on  the  part  of the  editors  and  some  of  the  contributors to convince  the  reader of a future unity, however,  which  prevents useful  question­ ing  and  healthy  confusion from  arising.

103

BOOKS IN REVIEW



For what  occurs instead is illusory answer­
ing and  seeming  clarity.
If these criticisms  appear  unnecessarily
harsh,   they  are   called  for  precisely  be­ cause  of  the  importance of  the  book.  It represents a moment of taking stock  in a rapidly    developing,    diversifying,     and  questioning field.
ANNALIESE  KRAMER


STUFF WITHOUT LIFE
D.   J. DOOLEY, Moral  Vision  in  the  Canadian
Novel.  Clarke, Irwin,  $9·95·
THERE  ARE    FIVE   MAJOR   FLAWS which make   Moral   Vision   in   the   Canadian Novel a failed  work of criticism: Dooley's concept of morality is limited  and  poorly defined; the analysis is clotted  with potted plots  and  empty  phrases; the scholarship is not  thorough; the chapters produce no syntheses  or connections; and  the exegesis reveals  nothing that  we don't  already know.
Proceeding from   the  assumption that "There are  no special  criteria for  Cana­ dian  fiction," Dooley  tries to examine the special moral  criteria which he sees under­ lying  the  fiction  of  eleven  novelists  who are treated in this order: Leacock,  Grove,  Duncan, Ross, Buckler, Callaghan, Mac­  Lennan, Richler, Davies,  Laurence, and Atwood.   A   brief    introduction,  which skirts  any  penetrating discussion  of mor­  ality,  hints at  Dooley's  understanding of his  book's  title. If the  Canadian  novelist "wins  our  respect," he  tells us, "it  must be  because  his  characters have  the  stuff of  life  about  them   and   because  he  has created a convincing social and  moral context for  them." In  order  for  morality to exist,  he  continues, "The world  must be shown  as a place  in which  the choices made  do perceptibly affect reality." What Dooley  means  by "the stuff of life"  is as blurred as his vision of what constitutes convincing social-moral contexts  or  "re-
 ality"; and  his notion  of "a self-sustaining coherency" of  "life   view"  does  little   to clarify  the  matter.
The chapters which   follow  the  intro­ duction garble  things  more.  Take the first chapter: "Stephen Leacock  and the Mask of Humour." Dooley  writes  that  in  Sun­  shine Sketches  Leacock  "makes   us won­ der  about  the  moral  perspective  of  the community and  the  narrator." But  won­ dering is futile  because  "The book  pre­ tends to be something other than  what  it actually is." Dooley doesn't say what  it is, but  then  maybe  it isn't,  because  "We  are  simply  not sure  what   moral   perspective we  are   being   asked   to  adopt." Unlike  Dooley, the  narrator of Arcadian  Adven­ tures "has  a clear  and  consistent  attitude to his material.... The author has  taken the  moral  measure of his world." In the Mariposa story, on the other hand, the narrator's  point   of  view   is  ambiguous, hence  the  author's  perspective remains uncertain.   Dooley's    unconvincing    dis­ tinctions  between    author  and   narrator (obvious  here  and  throughout  the book) make  us doubt his  ability  to  handle the relation between   voice  and  vision  which is so central to his moral  "theory."
Fruits of the Earth, we learn  in an em­
barrassingly cliched  series of  phrases, de­ picts    "the  exercise   of   heroic   virtues" which   marks   Abe  Spalding's  Quest  for the West. Abe is "larger than life," and he uses "brains as well as brawn" to win "his epic  battle against  the  forces  of nature." His  victory  in  a  "titanic struggle" shows him  to be "the  hero  triumphant" who  is nevertheless "in  the grip of forces he can­  not  understand  or  control." Dooley  can­ not deal  with  the moral  paradox implied by  Abe's  two-sided ness;  so  he  takes  the easy  way out  and  claims  that "the novel ends  in equivocation." It is "a classic ex­ ample    of   intellectual  and   moral   con­ fusion." The  final   pronouncement  says more  about  Dooley's  book  than   it  does about  Grove's.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Again and  again  Dooley  refuses to take a stand. Morley  Callaghan (rightly iden­ tified   as   an   eminently  moral   writer) leaves   Dooley    "reflecting  on   questions rather than answers." The   chapter  on Duddy  Kravitz  (subtitled "A  Moral  Ap­ prenticeship?")    poses   another  question  which is never resolved: "Is  his [Duddy's] the authentic human response  to the con­ ditions  of our  times?" Characteristically, Dooley  maintains that  "Richler invites  a double  response, one  which  requires us to see  Duddy   as  both   victor   and   victim." Fifth Business is "a parable illustrating right    and    wrong    approaches  to   life" which   once  more   raises   (but  never  be­ comes  engaged   with)   "questions"  about  Jung, religion, and  the morality of psychic life.   Dooley:     "Such   questions   Davies raises, but  ultimately leaves  unanswered" in what  is somehow "his most  interesting and  provocative novel."
On  to The  Stone Angel, which, through
Hagar, presents  "two different bases  for
moral  choice": "the heart's truth" as opposed  to  "a complex of qualities  asso­ ciated   with   proper  appearances."  After commenting on  how  "We   see  in  Hagar the  persistence of  a  Presbyterian  moral  outlook  in   the  absence   of   Presbyterian theology,"  Dooley   moves   to  a  deflated conclusion: "The  Stone  Angel  is a  tour de  force."   "[T] he   clear   moral    lesson which  it  apparently  sets  out   to  teach  is not really clear  at all, but full of ambigui­ ties."
Say  no  more.   But  Dooley   does,  in  a chapter on The  Edible Woman in which "we  are  left  wondering whether Marian McAlpin can  find  self-definition through the adjustment which  she has made." We might  not   have   been   left   that   way  if Dooley   had   consulted  the   considerable range   of  criticism  on   Atwood's fiction; the  three  footnotes to  the  chapter  (one to  the  edition, two   to  Evelyn   Waugh) suggest  that   he  did  not.  Perhaps  Dooley felt  that   in  Atwood's case  there   was  no
 commentary worth  mentioning. But  how to explain  the absence  of any reference  to Douglas Barbour's article  on morality and form  in The  Mountain and  the Valley? Omissions  of this kind  make  the author's attempt to  synthesize  major critical  per­ spectives  on  each  novel  (a  shabby  tactic  employed  at  the  start  of  most  chapters) seem  both  superficial and  suspect.  Lack of  synthesis,   however,    is   a   feature  of Moral  Vision   in   the   Canadian   Novel. Even the conclusion does nothing to draw the  chapters  together, or  to  explain   the puzzling  organization  of  Dooley's   study
-a bland  collection  of  unsophisticated critiques which  will quickly  be forgotten.

ROBERT LECKER


PERSISTING VALUES

LOUIS DUDEK, Technology and  Culture. Golden
Dog, $2.95.
LOUIS DUDEK  IS THINKING  of  poets  like Frank  Scott,  A. J. M. Smith, Layton  and himself  when,  in  a sardonic aside,  he  re­ fers  to  "that  mangy   lot  from   I925   to I g6o"  who  never  deserved  "the  name  of modernist. It took  us three quarters of a century  to  get   to  poets  who  would   go beyond the Boundary, who would go over the  edge  into Concrete, smudges,  moan­ ing    and    screeching,   measuring   their  breath,  and  even  silence  ... as  the  ulti­ mate poetry."
Like Frank  Davey, Dudek  observes that we  have   indeed  come   from   There   to Here.  But  unlike  Davey,  he  implies  that Here  is no place  for  living  men -or  not for long.
While   the  new  radical  modernists of our  "high  art" are  bewitched by  (in Davey's  words)   "process, discontinuity, non-linearity and  unpredictability,"  pop­ ular  mass culture has been captured  (Du­ dek's   words)    "by   the   barbarians   as  a means  of  spreading  frenzy  and   hysteria


105

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



among  teenagers." Dudek  describes  "the tide  of  popular mass  degradation" as "a great   boiling  cauldron  of  variety,   noise and  orgiastic   screaming . . .  a  regression to a form of primitivism." While high art proceeds along "its own esoteric line of ingrown   development"  (leaving   its  au­ dience   behind) ,  "the general  culture of society regresses and deteriorates." At one pole, Stockhausen and  Cage. At the other
-the Rolling Stones!
Yet  Louis  Dudek   is in  no  degree  the victim -or   the  exponent -of   a  "Dies Irae Complex." He knows that in the long track  of  time  man  has, again  and  again, gone  from   There  to  Here   to  There  to Here.  Dudek  knows  (and  insists)  that  in the rhythm and  stretch  of human culture no spot  of time can  be taken  as terminal.
In  these  six lectures   (written  between
1969 and  1975)  Dudek  is, as the title sug­ gests, very much  concerned with the effect on  the  arts  and  on  the  human  condition of successive technologies. He  is far  from denying  that  the  invention of  the wheel, the   telescope,   print   and   the   electronic media   have  had  no  bearing  on  the  way we are or on how we make images of our­  selves and  of our  world.  Nevertheless he recoils from  any  notion  that  the  medium  is the  message  ("the  platter is the  pie")  and  he repudiates  what he believes to be an  unrelieved  determinism at  the  root  of Marshall   McLuhan's   technological im­ peratives. The new tribalism  to which,  in McLuhan's view,  we  are  being  carried willy-nilly  by  the  electronic  revolutions, a tribalism in which "points  of view" and "the  individuals who  hold  them  will not be   suppressed  because   they   no   longer exist,"  is an  inhuman ant-hill  which  hu­ manity  will resist and  reject with an Ever­ lasting  No.
Similarly,   it  is faith  in  the  continuity of  the  intrinsically human  which  allows Dudek  to envisage  a  return of the  "high art" of radical modernism to the  pursuit of purpose  and  meaning. In his view, hav-

106
 ing exhausted all the technical possibilities of the  tradition, writers,  painters and composers had  turned to "the analysis  of the medium and  its deliberate dislocation in  novel  and   experimental  forms." Out with  perspective. Out  with  tonality. Out with  "cosmic poetry" and  "the larger formal unities." Out  with  the great  prim­ ary  feelings  and  values  of  the  dead  pre­  modern past.
But it is Dudek's contention that prim­ ary  human needs  and  values  persist,  will assert  themselves now as before,  and  that  the  gates  of  hell  will  not  prevail  against them.   Whether he  is  talking  about pop art,  the  present  state of  education, or  the solipsism  of  the  avant-garde, Dudek   in­ variably   proclaims  the   virtues   of  right  reason, order, decency,  charity and  hope.  These virtues and  man's  inherent need of them   will  once   more,   despite   TV,  the Rolling Stones, John Cage and  Charles Olson,  subdue, chasten and  consecrate to human ends  all  the  tricks  and   trash   of our  latest  ingenuities.
The last lecture in this volume  was delivered  in   1975.  One   can   only  hope against hope  that  Louis  Dudek's own ground of hope  can  hold  us up under the monstrous tread  of the marching morrows.

MALCOLM ROSS


EN ECOUTANT
PIERRE NEPVEU,  Les mots  a l'ecoute. Poesie et sUence  chez  Fernand   Ouellette,  Gaston Miron  et Paul-Marie  Lapointe. Universite Laval,  $IO.oo.

"LEs  MOTS  A L'EcouTE," comme  Pierre Nepveu le laisse entendre dans !'introduc­ tion  de  son  livre  (these  de  doctorat sou­
tenue    a l'Universite  de   Montreal   en
1978)' cela  veut  dire  les mots  a l'ecoute
du  silence.  La  dialectique fondamentale
de  la  poesie  s'etablit selon  lui  entre   le langage et le silence,  entre  parler et ecou-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ter, entre  !'autre et le moi, entre l'ailleurs et l'ici. S'appuyant sur  un bon nombre d'ecrivains et de critiques prestigieux (Rimbaud, Mallarme, Proust,  Joyce, Blanchot,  Paz  et  Barthes entre autres), Nepveu  definit  le  texte  poetique d'abord par sa relation specifique et concrete avec le  silence.  Le  silence   entendu  bien  sur comme  interaction entre les mots et les blancs,  entre  l'enonce et  le decoupage du vers  libre,  mais  aussi  le silence  represen­ tant   l'indetermine,  l'illimite  qui  conduit au   pouvoir   erotique du   texte,   au   sens conc;u comme  exds
Dans  les trois chapitres principaux por­
tant   sur   les  poetes   quebecois Femand Ouellette, Gaston Miron et Paul-Marie Lapointe, c'est  done  Ia "relation  privile­ giee avec le silence" qui interesse Nepveu. Relation depistee et etudiee aussi bien au niveau     du    fonctionnement    du    texte poetique  (dans son deroulement concret, syntaxique et  prosodique) que dans son contenu (le poeme  et ses manques, ses espaces, ce qu'il  comporte de non-dit). Ce
rapport fondamental avec le silence, Nep­ veu  n'eprouve aucune difficulte   a le sai­ sir  a travers   les  pages  du  Soleil  sous la
mort    ( I g65)   ou   de   Dans   le   sombre ( I g67) :  "Chez Ouellette, c'est  dans   Ia tension,   non   desesperee  mais  angoissee, entre vie  et  mort que  se  deroule l'ecri­
ture." Que  ce soit  Ia tension  qui  s'etablit
entre  l'interiorite et le social,  le politique ou  entre  Ia sexualite et  Ia spiritualite  ou entre  l'erotisme et Ia metaphysique, Ia poetique de  Ouellette l'amene a  une  ex­
perience  de Ia limite, a l'utopie du silence,
un apres-langage qui se veut une tentative
de resoudre Ia tension  poetique. Pour Nepveu, Ia modernite de Ouellette reside tout  entiere dans  ce dechirement et cette ambigllite: le desir d'une presence absolue du langage, de  l'achevement de Ia parole d'une  part  et   Ia   destruction  de   cette parole  d'autre part, en  somme  le conflit irreconciliable  entre    !'Eros  et   Ia   Con­ science.
 Mais  cette  dialectique qui  marque  Ia poesie   de   Ouellette  ne   s'applique   pas
necessairement a Paul-Marie Lapointe ou
a Gaston  Miron. Pour  mener  a  bien  son
entreprise en ce qui conceme L'Homme rapailte  ( 1970),  Nepveu  doit  se livrer  a
une  lecture  fort  "depaysante" de  Miron. II   renouvelle  !'interpretation   rec;ue  de
!'oeuvre et nous donne  une  des etudes  les
plus stimulantes de son ouvrage. Certaines pages sur le travail  de Ia phrase,  Ia liaison syntaxique, Ia  rhetorique du  poeme  mi­ ronien, d'autres sur "le regard, Ia marche,
!'amour" sont  brillantes. Mais  Ia ou  Ia majorite des  critiques et  tel  parti  polit­ ique   ont   toujours  tente    de   recuperer ideologiquement  "Les   monologues  de
!'alienation delirante" ou  "L'amour et  le militant," Nepveu   se  lance   dans   l'exces
contraire. II  faut  a tout  prix  "depayser"
Miron, mettre !'accent sur  le pluriel, sur
l'illimite, sur  les  possibilites  foisonnantes de  son  oeuvre.  Le  "pays" dont   parle   le poete  doit  etre   transcende, son  discours depolitise   et  de-radicalise  au  nom   d'un humanisme large et vague.  Nul doute que Ia  poesie  de  Miron   est  consciente de  sa propre impossibilite, du  manque et  de  Ia depossession  qui  Ia travaillent. Mais  trop insister   sur   "l'immateriel"  et   "!'intern­ pore!"   de   cette   aventure   poetique,  Ia placer  "au  commencement,  avant que  le monde  ne soit,"  c'est  finalement Ia situer  partout et  nulle  part, dans  une espece  de "no  man's  land"  utopique. C'est  surtout oublier  que  toute  oeuvre  humaine, toute  poesie-y compris celle de Miron -s'in­ scrit dans l'Histoire, dans  telle histoire.
L'etude  sur   Paul-Marie  Lapointe
("L'evidence de Ia poesie")   reunit les qualires  et les faiblesses des chapitres pre­ oedants.  Lorsqu'il est question de  Ia  part du   jazz  et   de  !'improvisation   chez   La­  pointe,  de  Ia  parataxe et  de  !'utilisation de  Ia 3eme  personne, de  l'instantane des images, les commentaires de Nepveu  sont toujours  pertinents. L'analyse est particu­ lierement reussie dans les passages portant


107

BOOKS IN REVIEW



sur la "gravitation" et la "fragmentation," la figuration, la description, le rythme  et
!'incantation dans  Tableaux  de  l'amour­ euse ( I974). Mais les pages sur Le vierge incendie  ( 1948)  donnent la nette impres­  sion  que  Nepveu   tente  d'evacuer la  di­ mension  ironique et sarcastique des textes au  seul  profit  de !'humour, d'occulter ou de  minimiser la  revolte  presente  dans  ce premier recueil. "Arbres" (I 960)  devient  un  poeme   qui  "abolit  l'avenir, passe  ,a travers le  visible,  a  travers   un  territoire pour  y  saisir  l'illimite." L'accent est  mis dans Choix  de poemes ( I96o)  sur la fete, le   jeu,  la  sensualite,  sur  la  constitution
d'un monde  ideal en dehors  de toute vefe­
rence  a l'histoire et a l'ideologie  ( et pour­ tant, il faut  relire attentivement la section "Quel  amour"  pour   se   convaincre  du contraire). Au  sujet   de  Pour  les  ames (I 964), Nepveu  parle d"'historicite neu­ tre'" qui  existerait  "a  l'ecart  de  l'ideo­  logie."  II  se  degage  de  tout  le  chapitre une  mefiance  extreme du  critique envers l'ideologie et l'histoire, alors que Lapointe affirme  dans  ses  textes  theoriques  ("Foi  en l'homme," "Poesie  sociale et morale") que le poete  doit  etre  "l'ame de son epoque," c'est-a-dire sa conscience,  qu'il doit   "vivre   son   epoque,   participer au monde."
Qu'on  soit  d'accord  ou  non   avec  la conception de  la  poesie et  les  interpreta­
tions  de  Nepveu, Les mots a l'ecoute  est
un livre important qui  nous offre de nou­
velles lectures de trois poetes quehecois majeurs. Les  etudes  sont  denses,  ordon­ nees,  ficelees  avec  methode; il  s'agit  en somme   d'un  ouvrage bien  fait,  "tricote serre." Nepveu  a choisi de lire "la  poesie dans  ses marges" comme  il le dit  en con­ clusion,  et c'est  la son droit  le plus strict.
Ouvrage important done  et  qui  arrive a
point.   Dans  sa  bibliographie, pour  cha­
cun   des  poetes  etudies, Nepveu   ne  cite que  quatre ou  cinq  textes  critiques. Depuis, deux  etudes  sont  parues  sur  La­ pointe   (de  Jean  Fisette  et de  Jean-Louis

108
 Major)   et   un   recent  colloque    devrait fournir de  nouvelles  orientations a la  re­
cherche sur les poetes de l'Hexagone. A quand une  lecture de Ouellette, Miron  et Lapointe dans  le texte  et dans  l'histoire?

RICHARD GIGUERE



THIN POEMS

GWEN  HAUSER,   The Ordinary   Invisible  Wo­
man.  Fiddlehead,  $5.00.
MARY HUMPHREY   BALDRIDGE,  the  loneliness  of the  poet/housewife. Fiddlehead, n.p.
KATHY  TYLER,  The Ultimate Contact. Fiddle­
head,  $4.00.
KAY SMITH,  When A Girl Looks Down. Fiddle- head,  n.p.

THE  FOUR WRITERS  reviewed  here  differ in   skill  and   scope.   But   they   share   an inability to mesh their  inner  universe  with the  outside   world.   This   inability  is  not an  aesthetic and  psychological stance. It is a  failure of craftsmanship. Their  con­ flicts  and   emotions  are,   in   varying  de­ grees,  vague,  confusing, or  cliched. Im­  ages,  shadows,  echoes,  flicker  and  wane; they occasionally  illustrate the   inner world  of these poets but  fail to illuminate it. Somehow, their  feelings  and  problems  have  all  been  met  before.  There are  no fresh  insights  nor  new  ways of seeing.
The   rage    in    Gwen    Hauser's  The
Ordinary  Invisible Woman is the emotion that   binds  her   poems.  Radical  feminist
lesbianism  is her  major theme.  She waves her shibboleths from  poem  to poem: "the revolution  /   is   ultimately  gay."    Her hatred, her  oppression, her  anger  are cliches.  Newness  is not  a  virtue  in  itself, but  Hauser gives  little  beyond  the  brain­ damaged psychology  of "pop" feminism; "Big Brother does not allow women  space or  privacy." The women's movement has gone  far   beyond   the  beating of  breasts and  a rehash  of male oppression.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Nevertheless, she is not  that  easily  dis­ missed.   Her   emotion  is  not   contrived. Words   spit  from   the  page  with  an  au­  thority of feeling  that demands attention. Throughout  the   volume   of   poetry   she experiments with  style and  rhythm. The form   is  trying   to  be  content with  some success.  She  does  not  sneak   up  to  lan­  guage; she grabs words,  molding them  to her  own  poetic  needs. She  is at  her  worst in a "poem for  a liberal." We  move into  the  old  hackneyed  world  of  potshotting a  group  that  is by  now  a  cheap gesture.  She  is at her  best in a "poem for  Erica." In  this  poem  we feel  the  deep  quality  of her  emotion and   not  simply  the  endless smart-ass lines that  Hauser is so fond  of: "this is a  poem  for  Erica   / who  perhaps one day  heard the star  sing so loud  / she began   to  feel  lonely  & went  to  join  the crowd    /  of  stars   singing   &  singing   / between  the  moon  & the cloud." We feel the   jagged   edge  of  pain,   fingered, and touched over  and  over  again.
Mary  Humphrey Baldridge in "the loneliness   of  the   poet   /  housewife"  ex­ plores  the  themes  of death, solitude  and  danger. The  images   are   of  wolves,  de­ vouring cats, wet skeletons,  birds that are freedom and  flight  but death as well. The  poems should  grip  us with  their stark and  naked   terror   but  they  don't.  There is a falsification of feeling  that emerges  more often   than   not  in  the  form  of  contrived metaphor,  exercises  in  compression  that  are at once agile and empty  of resonance: "A  White  Moon  lies in my bed  / Promis­ ing escape  from  /  That row of victimized  brownstones  /   Each   an   obscene   hill  of exposed  interiors  /  (Each drop  of rain  a braggard's tear  ...) ."
There is a great  dissatisfaction here for the   reader.  Where  is  the   pain   coming from? Why?  That it exists is believable enough and  perhaps for some this is suffi­ cient.  But the poet's  cry is crippled  by her inability   to  create a  world   that  inspires either  compassion or  admiration  for  her
 survival.  There is an  emotional  distance that  is the  result  not  of intention but  of poor writing. Even  if poetry  is impression, not argument, she does not create a world that  is vivid  and  gripping. She  is at  her best  in  the   poem   "against  the   wall": "these   poems   slip   out    /   through  the cracks  / while  the  monster / moves for­ ward   /  grinding and   hissing   /   spastic jerks / the monster stops  / and  the poems fall out  / of my body."
Kathy   Tyler's The  Ultimate  Contact
is  the   least   worthy   of   these   books  of poetry.  North  American letters  have been conspicuously   hospitable  to  the  idea   of the  madman as  artist,  and   the  madman as  hero,  all  under   the  rubric of   break­ down-is-breakthrough.  Breakdown  is idealized and  madness becomes  a form  of cultural defiance. Her  themes   and   lan­  guage   are   of   prison,   fragments,  dust, funeral  dirge,   breakdown,  despair,  sui­ cide,   solitude,   choking,  drowning  and  death.
She   hits   all   the   bases  of  fashion­
Plath,  the brutalization of women,  Patty Hearst, old  age,  mother /daughter  con­ flict, religion,  psychiatry, soap  opera, im­ perialistic    Americans.    None    of   these themes   are   explored   with   any   depth. Postures  abound in  this  volume: "heart­ ache  / is just as / lethal  / as cancer." The obligatory    poem    "To   Sylvia    Plath" squirms and  whines  in a way Plath  never would:  "I HURT I  HURT I HURT." Tyler  advises  the  reader that   her  "con­ vulsions"    will   either   "resonate  /   or wither. / It all depends on  you." She im­ plies  that   once  having placed   her  pain "under the  microscope," the  onus  is  on the reader  to be sensitive and understand­ ing, or  be unperceptive  and  boorish.  All this is fine but  I'm  afraid  it  is the  poet's  job to create  a  body  of experience worth  responding to.
Smith   is at  her  worst  in  a  poem  like "Winter Storm": "When winter  descends like a whirlwind of prophets/ and the city

rog

BOOKS IN REVIEW



seems a match in its grasp / then worlds within  walls  become  holy."  She  strains for images; she is obscure. It is pencil and pen,  or shovel  and  trowel  poetry.  This  is to  say  it  is  like  an   academic  exercise. There is no resonance at  all sustained  by image  and  vision. She  is at  her  best in a poem   like  "Portrait  of  a  Husband," a sudden portrait with  an ironic  twist, "No trinket, plaything, sedative  / for  a  fitful pleasure  or comfort, / no symbolic figure on  the  printed page  / but  a natural  ad­ versary  in  the deadliest  of games."
Women are no longer silent about themselves,  like Karl  Shapiro's poets, "no belly and  no bowels, only consonants and vowels."  But  the  "reach" of  these  poets is beyond  their  "grasp." They  have  writ­ ten  thin  poems  trying  to be fat ones.

DIANA COOPER-CLARK


DEXTROUS

GERALD  LAMPERT,   Chestnut/Flower/ Eye   of
Venus. Coach House, $4.50.

IN  CHESTNUT /FLOWER/EYE   OF  VENUS, the late  Gerald  Lampert has his non-hero, Steven   Martin,  expose  and   analyse   his own  disintegrating marriage. Mood  and tone  are  established in  the  brilliant and ironic  second   paragraph -only  part   of which  need  be quoted  here.

I  remember Julie and   me  looking through these doors  at the  bright yellow and  red snapdragons  in   the    brick   flowerbox that extends the  full  frontage of  the  house  and saying we  just  had  to  live here  even  though it  was  five,  six  thousand  dollars more   than we  could   really  afford. What's money  when you're  preparing  for   a   lifetime  of   bliss? Eden without the apple tree and  no snakes visible.  You  don't ask  for  a 5%   discount on heaven....

Now,  ten  years later  Steven  and  Julie­ aged   forty-five   and   thirty-four   respec­ tively-are  sitting  "at  opposite  ends  of the  sofa."


IIO
 The roots  of  their  malaise  go  back  at least a generation: his mother had  been committed  to  an   asylum   when   he  was just six; and  Julie's mother was evidently deserving of similar  treatment by the time her  daughter had   reached puberty. The plot  thickens  when  Babe  and  Arthur Gottman move into the house across the street. Through the Gottmans the Martins meet Kelly, a failed artist whose obscene cliches  indicate his  imaginative  barren­ ness.  Julie, it  appears,  begins  an   illicit relationship  with   Kelly   who,   in   turn, offers himself  to Steven. Meanwhile, both Steven  and  Julie  have engaged  Gottman as their  psychoanalyst. Steven,  distrustful of  the  group   therapy  practised by Gott­ man,  does, however,  accept   briefly Gott­ man's   remedy   for  all psychic  disorders: extreme  self-indulgence -though   Gott­ man  calls  it  self-assertion. One   Wednes­ day  Steven   copulates with  three  women in  the  space  of eight  hours!
Monday's horoscope, by Atropho (one of Lampert's many  puns), stresses seeing clearly  and  avoiding excesses. Shortly afterwards Steven  admits to himself  that his  "silly  Wednesday  proved   nothing to [his]   soul,"   but   that   it  may  have  con­ tributed to  his  no  longer  seeing  Julie  as a  Venus  image.  His  subsequent  defacing of  the  painting of  Julie  leaning  towards Kelly's   bed  symbolizes  his  self-assertion. Julie   then   rejects  Kelly   (who  has  com­ mitted himself  to an asylum)  : she is "sick of  losers,"  including  herself.  Self-knowl­ edge  and  courage  to  be have  come  from "small  epiphanies"  rather than   "apoca­ lyptic disclosures."
There are  relatively  few  characters in
Lampert's novel,  and   perhaps only  two
-Steven  Martin  and   Arthur  Gottman
-are truly   interesting. Steven   literally wallows in masochism. "My  escutcheon is a naked  man  in a field of maddened  por­ cupines.  Undignified  pain   waddles   to­ wards  me from  all sides. With  a fly swat­  ter  ensconced." Then  comes  the  under-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



cutting pun: "And I'm using  the swatter to attack my own  fly." It is precisely  the combination of self-pity  and  spinelessness on  the  one  hand, and   incisiveness   and self-mockery  on the other, which  makes Steven  an enigma and  gives the  novel an ambiguity which  strengthens what  might otherwise  have  been  a  hopelessly  hack­ neyed  plot.
Gottman,  his   very   name    a   pun - "Must you always  play  God?" Babe asks
-is the stereotyped psychoanalyst, finan­ cially  and  sexually  exploiting  his  clients. His quackery and  sexual ambivalence are symbolized  by "the lady's dimple in  [his]  brutal cheek." His  bullying  attitude, his egotism,  and  evasiveness -"a  metaphor man,"  Steven  calls  him-arouse  sparks of defiance in  Steven, and  for  that,  per­ haps,  and  for providing some of the more lively   dialogue   in   the   novel,   Gottman deserves  his move  to a  more  affluent  life in  Mexico.
The world  of Lampert's novel  is char­ acterized   by   failing    finances,   overdue  mortgage payments, "sedatives and stimu­  lants," booze  and   junk  foods, exploita­ tion,  masochism, and  madness. The  title images  come  from  a  poem  by bill bissett, with  perhaps some distant ancestry  in T.  S. Eliot's  "Gerontion." The sense  of  un­ reality  being  the  reality  is intensified   by frequent references to  squirrels and  nuts and   a  cuckoo   clock.  Steven's  disjointed phrases   presumably  bear   witness   to  his sexual  and  other frustrations in this crazy world.  On  the  other  hand, his  punning jabs at  Gottman and  Gottman's form  of psychoanalysis-"Don't talk fruit salad to me,"  and  "Us  analyse,  up  analyse,  down analyse,  you me" -and  his clever mani­ pulation  of  literary  and   other  allusions add  to  his  ambiguity of  character men­ tioned  earlier. Lampert, in the manner of a  black-humorist,  is  keeping   his  readers  off-balance.
Chestnut/Flower/Eye  of   Venus  is  a
tour  de  force. But  no  amount of  verbal
 dexterity   can  ultimately compensate for a  lack  of  emotional  intensity.   Lampert may have been his own worst enemy here. After  a  while  his  phrases  seem  too  glib; his comedy,  too  facile.  And  as satire,  his novel lacks real  bite and  evokes no indig­ nation.
DONALD R. BARTLETT



AN EAR FOR MUSIC

JOHN   PETER,   Vallor. York  Publishing,  $9.75;
pa. $4.50.
WHAT  STRIKES ONE as  remarkable  in V allor is the form  John Peter  chooses. In "A  Programme Note" he  admits  that  in writing  out of appreciation for composers such  as William  Walton he  was working "in  a direction so unstudied as to  be  al­ most  outside   my  control." The   result,  nevertheless,  is an  engaging  collection  of stories  accommodated  "to  some  of  the rules  of  music." In   this  "fictional equi­  valent   of  a   sonata,"  the   initial   piece, "Make a  Joyful  Noise,"  in  its  energetic liveliness  is   meant   to  approximate  the rondo  of  classical sonata. The next  story, on the other hand, is slower, more ponder­ ous. Seven shorter stories, variations on a theme  of knowledge and  experience, and a  longer,    denser    one,   a   "two-subject sonata  form," follow  the slow movement. Furthermore, because  a "sonata's normal sequence,  slavishly  followed  in fiction, would   feel  unbalanced," Mr.   Peter   re­ verses the usual  first and  last movements, the  more  sombre  acting as  the  finale.
But why music?  Why  not fiction  for its own  sake?  Apart from  their  novelty,  one may wonder, what do such arrangements accomplish? The  answer,   I think,   is  a good deal, especially  in  the  way of mood and  tone.  Perhaps the  answer  also lies in this from  Michael Frayn, whose epigraph introduces V allor:  "If the  physical world ceased  to exist,  painting and  poetry  and


I I I

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



prose   would   become   meaningless.   But you  can't help  feeling  wistfully  . . . that the possibilities  of harmony and counter­ point  would  linger  on in  the silence."  In the  form  of John Peter's stories,  there  is something carefully shaped and  planned, a   harmony.   Credit   the   effect   to   Mr.  Peter's ear for music.
V allor builds  to  the  title story, the last in  the   collection,  a  middle-aged   head­ master's recollection of student  days and  his  enigmatic  schoolmate  Vallor, whose dive  one  morning from  a  waterfall  (out  of some misguided code of  honour?) ends in  death. A  half-century  later,   the  an­  tagonists  about whom  the  narrator remi­ nisces -Winkelman, Craig  and  Crouch, the Human Crabs, Beppy  Hethcote from the    neighbouring    girls'    school -have long  since  departed,  one  to  the  war  and  death at   Sidi   Rezegh,   another  to   the Rhodesian  civil  service,  still  another  to marry    "a    Johannesburg   stockbroker." But  thoughts  of  Vallor   persist.  At  times like  this, when Mr. Peter appears most comfortable with his subject, his prose is lyrical. "Vallor was a gambler," he writes, "we  all  are.   But  death comes  prowling and  sweeps  up  the  stakes ... Some  have the  last  gesture   of  defiance   unwillingly thrust  on them,  like Crouch, but Vallor's way  is best.  To  lose  when  the  odds  are still  with  you, and  in a flare  of audacity that  lights  up  the  dark."
"Vallor" is  the   most   pensive  of  the stories, four  of them,  incidentally, set in South  Africa,  the  remaining six in  Cana­ da.  The  rondo,  a  Canadian  story,  works as a  sort  of  counterpoint  to  it.  "Vallor" and  "Make a Joyful  Noise" are,  I  think,  probably  the  most  fully developed  in  the collection.    Far    lighter    in    tone    than  "Vallor," "Make a Joyful  Noise,"  which takes  place  in  one  day,  recounts  Nesta Firkeld's wedding, an occasion  on  which the eccentric Firkeld family rises in splen­ dour  from their  Vancouver Island  strong­ holds, among them,  great-uncle Nicholas,

II2
 "a senile Bacchus"; Watson,  who saves correspondence for the pleasure  of  "alter­ ing  and  improving letters  . . .  long  since acknowledged or  ignored";  and  Jack  in "immaculate   morning    clothes"   sitting  atop an  inflated rubber  ring.  If at  times during the  ceremony and  wedding recep­  tion,  the  multiple points  of view are  con­ fusing,  one  suspects  that   it  is a  planned confusion,  Nesta's  own,  perhaps, at  leav­ ing  her  family  for  a  husband. After  the day's  improbable events -her  having to hitch  a  ride  to  the  wedding,  for  instance
-Nesta finds  herself  alone,   if  only  for the  moment. Vulnerable to the  past,  and to her  emotions, she seeks the comfort of
her  husband in  the  next  room,  together to "make a  joyful noise."
The second  "movement" of Mr. Peter's prose sonata, "From a Death to a View," deals  with  a hospital patient and  his frightening encounter with  the masked figure  outside the  window.  Aside from  its ending, which  I think  too abrupt, and  an occasional annoying metaphor,  "the   sky now mellowing to a tint  that  recalled  the innocence of ginger  ale," it is an effective, and  nightmarish, vision. The stories  that follow,  the  "Seven Variations on  a Theme," though some  of  them  are  little more  than  sketches,  provide a necessary change of  tempo. They,   too,  are  stories of reckoning and  discovery, for in the uni­ verse of John Peter  one  comes  to knowl­ edge  either by  re-examining the  past  as Humphrey does  in  the  splendid  "Lots  of Room  in  Hell" or  by shaping  the  future through the  present  as Brent  and  Nettie  do  in  "Japonica"-both  means of  self­ discovery.
In  the "programme note," finally, John Peter  writes  that  a  burgeoning literature such as Canada's needs readers who are vigilant enough to keep  their  authors "at the  stretch" and  "making the  proper effort" in  their  work.  Mr.  Peter,  I  think, makes  the  proper effort  in  Vallor.
ANTHONY BUKOSKI

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



FALLING

EARLE BIRNEY, Fall By Fury & Other  Makings.
McClelland & Stewart, $5.95.
IRVING   LAYTON,    The  Tightrope Dancer.
McClelland & Stewart, $5·95·
IN THE TITLE POEM OF  The  Tightrope Dancer, Irving Layton introduces a selec­ tion of his key images,  his main themes of death and  sex,  and   his  concepts of  the poet  as dancer, acrobat, and-inevitably
-showman:

Awareness of death's pull into  nothingness
begets  tyrant and  sadist
but  the  prod,  the  harsh  shove of love
makes  the  defiant  artist dance  on  his tightrope

These  notes play throughout the other eighty-nine poems  in  what,  according to the  list of Layton's works included in the volume,  is his thirty-eighth publication.
Layton's "tightrope" crosses many places.  He   thanks  the  Canada  Council for a Senior  Arts Grant that  allowed  him "to   visit  different parts  of  the  world  to look   over   a   new   stock   of   metaphors, images, and  symbols."  He dates  his poems in such  diverse  locations as Myconos, To­ ronto,  and  St. Lucia. He  describes "petri­ fied putrefaction" in "England 1977" and  "Smoke" in  Paris'   Pere  Lachaise  ceme­  tery.
In   time  Layton's rope   crosses  mostly
the  twentieth  century. He   continues to write  about the Holocaust; the first poem in  The   Tightrope  Dancer  is "For  751-
0329,"   "a  distinguished graduate  from Auschwitz." He   addresses   "Watch Out for  His Left" to Leonid Brezhnev.  He conjures up  "Yeats in St.  Lucia." Refer­
ences  to people  like  "John Donne, an Englishman, / hoping [death]  might  be a   Christian" ("Sir"),  and   a   series  of poems which  present death as "Sir Morti­ mer," however, give  the  volume  an  his­ torical  dimension.
The  conceit  of   death  as   a   knight
 allows Layton  to distance  and  render ob­ jective  both   the  end   of  life  and   those sadists,   torturers,   terrorists,  thugs,   and  despots   he  discusses  in  his  "Foreword" who end  life in  this "age  of  atrocity." As a  result,   his  "Sir   Mortimer"  poems­ they  include  "Memo to  Sir  Mortimer," "Flowers He'll Never  Smell," "Sir  Morti­ mer," "The  Professional," "Checkmate," and  "The Final   Memo" -are generally short, sharp,   witty,   and   wise. To   make these   poems,   the   poet   has   danced   de­ fiantly  and  successfully  on  his  tightrope.
Other poems in The  Tightrope Dancer
lack the "concision and intensity'' which Layton  at  his  best achieves.  "The  Male­ diction" is, to use more of Layton's terms, "rhetoric or  journalism." In  "The  Papal Election," the satire  on the people  who in The  Covenant   (1977)   were  more  accur­ ately  called  "Xians"  rather than   Chris-


NEED A LITTLE
DRAMA
IN YOUR LIFE?
Playwrights Canada is the centre
for Canadian plays and Canadian
playwrights. We represent 120 professional playwrights from coast
to coast. We publish their plays, sponsor reading tours, seminars and workshops, and handle perfonning
rights.
Drama is a fast-growing part of Canadian literature. If you want to learn more about it, call or write to us. We'll send a catalogue of plays, details of all our services and add your name to our mailing list.
How's that for a scenario?
PlAYWRIGHTS CANADA
•'I'DIIIK &l'"'•n. liTH FLOOR, TOAOto TO, CANADA  M&..l  1R2  ("18) 3&3-1581



113

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



tians is neither am using nor enlightening;
it simply  offends.
In   the  first  paragraph  of  his  "Fore­
word," Layton  defines his image  of  poet­ on-tightrope: "The poet,  either  through genes   or   genius,   is  poised   on   a   rope stretched tautly   between  sex  and  death. The major poet  dances  on  the  tightrope; the minor  poet walks warily across it. The  non-poet  or   poetaster  . . .  doesn't  even make  a try at either." There  is, however,  another aspect  to  this  image.  Sometimes even  the  "major  poet" misses a step  and falls.  There are  several  such   "failings" among    the   poems   of   The    Tightrope Dancer.
Falling, as the title suggests, is a central image in Earle  Birney's Fall By Fury & Other Makings, a collection of forty-four poems divided into four sections. Some, notably   the  visual   poems  which   Birney calls  ''alphabeings," have  been  published in earlier volumes  of his work.  Others of the  more   orthodox  word  poems  Birney now  names  "makings" have  their  origins in experiences drawn from an earlier  time in the  poet's  life. "Prolog without Tales," for   example,  rather   lumpish    couplets about  the  group  who  gathered  around Sir Charles G. D. Roberts  in the old King Cole   Room   at   the   Park   Plaza,   comes from  "prose   notes" Birney  made  in  To­ ronto  in the early  194o's. Still others such as  "a day  with   the  toronto  day-lies   (a daycollage of  the  real  news  back  in  our centennial  year) "  are   "found  poems"  made from  newspapers  and  other publi­  cations.
Most  of the  "makings," however,  date from and are dated in the 1970's. These display Birney's  fascination with language and  form  and  his flexibility and  fecundity as  a  poet.  "TRAWNA TUH  BELVUL BY KNAYJIN PSIFIK" is a  wonderful excursion into  Canadian/Ontario life  as it is seen and  experienced, and  Canadian/ Ontario  language  as   it   is  heard    and spoken   on   a   train   between   "Trawna"

I 14
 and  "BELLL and   / BELLVUL." "dear biographer" is a witty  letter  to future researchers about  the  limitations of  the

great snow-bank-job in the university's MS  collection kept  below  melting
all  the  pleas  boasts  i love yous snaps clips  pix  posters  IOUs sincerely  XXXes
everything insoluble  in air
the  world  blew up around me.

"the Wind  through St.  John's," the  title poem  of the  fourth section,  is a whirling meditation on  time,  place,  and  wind

saying  only  that  air  and  earth  and  sea  will be one
and  whirl  in the  Sun
within  the  reeling  Circle.

Many of  the  recent  "makings" in  Fall By Fury are  love  poems  for  Wai-lan, to whom  the  book  is dedicated. They  range from  the  delicate, short  lyric "my  love is young"  to longer  and  less successful "bull­ frog"  poems   featuring "Mr   Toad  our Totem" ( "halfperson's day").
Two   poems  for   Wai-lan  also  include the most important images of falling. "fall in  spring" describes   the  fall  "after three days"  of  "the blossoms"  from   a  potted Easter   rosebush. "fall  by Fury," the  title poem  and  first  "making" in  the  volume, describes  the poet's  actual fall from a tree he  had   been   pruning one   "cloven   hip and  thigh  / ... a world  and  two summers ago."
With  his references to Hubris and  "the Furies,"  his   memories  of  other  climbs over the "mountains of youth  ... Temple
. .. Edith," and  his fall, Birney  creates  a
poem  which  recalls "David." In "David," however,    the    chief    character  falls   to death;  the    first-person narrator,  into youth-less,  mountain-less life.  In  "fall  by Fury," the  first-person narrator  falls  to live  and  recreate his  climb,  his fall,  and his dream of  running again  in  the  finest poem  in both  The  Tightrope Dancer and Fall By Fury. 	MARY   JANE  EDWARDS

BOOKS IN REVIEW



POET, PILGRIM, PAMPHLETEER

CRAIG POWELL,   Rehearsal   for  Dancers.  Tum­
stone  Press, n.p.
BARRY   CALLAGHAN,     The    Hogg   Poems   and
Drawings.  General Publishing, n.p.
MARYA   FIAMENGO,    North   of  the    Cold   Star.
Mosruc  Press, n.p.

CRAIG  POWELL,  an  expatriate  Australian currently working as psychiatrist in  Lon­ don,  Ontario  (arrived in  1972), has  had five volumes  of poetry  published, the last two in  Canada. Rehearsal   for  Dancers  is not  only  the  most  elegantly  produced of his volumes  to date-a  striking contrast to  the  low  budget  Killaly  Press  Selected Poems   (1978)-it  contains  by  far   his best work.
The opening stanza   of  the  first  poem alerts  the  reader immediately to  the change  in   his   work    from    traditional modes  to organic ones:

Poems:  a child  ritual  of iambics 	I lisped  in numbers  for  the  numbers made me forget  I was lying 	U nbeing

It is surely no coincidence that  in shaking off the  resilient  shibboleths of Australian formalism in  one  breath, he  invokes  the spirit  of Cummings in  the  next.  A  little later in the poem, dedicated to fellow Australian poet Bruce Beaver,  he says:  "I read   your   poems   again       which   are." Powell, effortlessly,  lets the  poem discover its own  form.  A long  way from  the  pre­ occupation  with   externals evident   in  I Learn  By Going   ( 1968), when  he  strove to  have   his  song  "precise," the   "fury" beneath his thumb firmly controlled.
The themes  of his earlier books are still
there: water, the  silences,  childhood, mental illness,  the  tenuous hold  humans have   on   life   and   language  itself.   But Powell comes at them  rejuvenated. A self confessed  "cheerful and  / curious  exile," he conveys the impact of his new physical
 
Within the barbed wire fence










t
i




TAKEO UJO  NAKANO WITH LEATRICE  NAKANO

After Pearl Harbor, many thousands of Japanese Canadians were evacuated from  the  West Coast. Takeo Nakano, a man  of peace and an accomplished poet, rebelled  against the  injustice of forced separation from wife and family. For th1s, he was  interned with several hundred die-hard gambariya -Japanese fiercely loyal to their homeland - in a camp in Northern Ontario. This moving account of his experiences reflects a vision which allowed him to respond to the  natural splendour of his remote sur­ roundings and  to surmount all indignities. $10.00
University of
Toronto Press

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



(and  poetic) landscape skilfully. Internal and  external world  are  seen  anew.
Earlier predictability gives way to sur­
prise and  a moving  deference  to the deli­ cate  changes of  mind  and  physical  sur­ rounds.  Powell's   imagination  soaks   up both   the   Canadian  landscape and   the nature of   his  isolation   from  home  and  family   circle.   Too   many   good   poems result  to mention them  all, but  give time to the richness of "Toward Riding Moun­ tain,"  where   "the   slow  flakes  /  fumble like wishes to my lips," and the subtle cadences of  "Writing Before  Spring," "After Midnight," and  "Canada  Geese" where

the  fields
of barley lie with  their palms  upward

the  cool  furrows attend 	so the
body     summoning the  body    dances
to  its  husks.

Most successful are  the haunting incanta­ tory  title  poem, "Rehearsal for Dancers," "The  Water Carrier,"  "Spoken  to  Wo­ men," and   "Sekunka  Valley."  The last stanza  of the last -

I grew  with  him  in  the  city
a  world  leaps  under my thighs my  father tells  me  my  name the hills  lean  down to  be silent
my  son  and daughter are  dancing late snow  and   early   light

- works wonderfully, gathering  the threads of the  poem,  as past  and  present mesh.  The poet  here  is not  shaper-as he was in his early books-but, in Robert Duncan's sense, conveyor  of news. Powell finally gives vent  to what  he perceived  in one  of his earliest  poems as his "daemon­ self"  ("After Great Silence")  who

comes  at  his own  bidding, never mine.
That crackle of words  is all  he has  to bring.

With  Barry  Callaghan, words  don't so much  crackle, they sear, as we accompany him on a journey, at once exciting and frightening. Certainly well worth  the trip.

II6
 There is no doubt  that  for contemporary Canadian  poetry   this   is  an   important book.  Presentation, I  know,  is becoming an increasingly deceptive guide  to quality, but  The  Hogg Poems, visually,  is a most handsome book,  and  it  delivers.  It  con­ sists of  three  books,  the  second  of  which contains  sixteen  elegantly   produced colour    plates;   we    witness    the    poet/ mariner's long journey,  "on  the loose," we are   told   at   the   book's   beginning,  "in Jerusalem and  Hog  town, his home  town, Toronto." The  scope   of   the   work,   in­ tended as a synthesis,  is large.  Equally so the poet's energy  in reenacting the drama.
Timothy   Findley's  comment  on   the dust   jacket   serves   as  a   useful   starting point.  For  him  "poets ... survive  extra­ ordinary visions  to  escape  'alone'  to  tell us  what   they've   seen. . . .  Callaghan has locked  our  own  chaotic  present into  the wheel of universal myth." That Jerusalem and   Toronto are  the   two  cities  in  the vision  alerts   the  reader   to  the  poet's  in­ tention to utilize both  local and  universal  myth.  The  Hogg  of the  title,  believed  to have  died  in I 839,  built  a  place  of wor­ ship  in  early  Toronto-and as  such  is first  substance of local  myth,  progenitor. His  spiritual pilgrimage is the poet's, a pilgrimage to locate himself. Past and present, and  locations, intertwine.
With  the essential  question of the  Pro­
logue -"how  does  a  man  live  through an  endless   winter  of  endless  nights"­ fresh   throughout  Book  I,  Hogg   travels  through Palestine  searching for  the

one  place  where the  last  words on  the  dice  were

Holy  Holy  Holy.
("Inside His  Wooden Suit")

As in  Book  III, past  and  present  fuse  in a concatenation of biblical and sexual images.  The poet's  ploys of speech  reflect the   spirit   of  the  enterprise,  combining both  oracular language and  the  patter of the  contemporary salesman:

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



"see  the  blind  stair,  that's where
Christ  leapt  upon  his cross;
and  close by, Mr.  Hogg,  the  best coffee  in  Jemsalem." 	("Skull   Hill")

Hogg's  realization that  he is
not  of this  place,  where  the sun strafes  everything in sight"
("The Silver  Hook")

prepares us for  his  eventual rejection of
Jerusalem.
Book II, the interim part  of the journey and  a  "place beyond  words," introduces
the bizarre drawings-metamorphosing figures  made  all  the  more  horrifying  be­ cause  of their  warped, narcotic passivity.
This is  not  the  "silence   beyond  words" Hogg  has in mind.  He noiselessly feels his way  back  home   through  this  region  of evils  and  distortions. But  what  he  finds, though initially   heartened by  the  words
"the God  you seek f  lives at home,"  is a
Toronto saturated with   technology,  ad­
vertising,  and  the worst features of North
American pop  culture: dope,  sex, jargon and   violence.  As  Hogg  struggles   in  the "black  hole"  of his soul, Callaghan treats us to a dazzling  collage  of Kulchur char­ acters-Dorado, the  dwarf   disc  jockey, Sweet-Meat Manzone, the  piano  player, Doctor  Ded   and   his  woman,  Walking,  and  Bad Blood Jeremiah Stuck. Firmly in the  vein  of Ed  Dom's Slinger, the  poem at  this  point   must   be  read  aloud.  Book III  is  the   high   point,   images   of   the counter  culture  sizzling  off  the  page  in poems   like  "Hell's  Belle"  and   "Doctor Ded."
Callaghan's Hogg,  a  brave  enterprise,
grapples with  what  Frye  has called Can­ ada's   "famous   problem   of    identity." Hogg,  wanderer, searcher for singularity, is a  true  pioneer, and   his  quest  locates, and  ultimately illuminates, the  Canadian here and  now. The  book will no doubt  be discussed  for  years  to  come.
Fiamengo deals  with  essentially  the same problem, but with an entirely differ­ ent  orientation. For  Callaghan,  Canada
 entails  a challenging state  of mind.  For Fiamengo,  it's a physical identity asserted through a  confused   muddle of  jingoism and  nationalistic bombast. And this is sad
-for some of the poems in North  of the
Cold  Star  reflect  a  true  poet's  lyric gift: for example,  British  Columbia stills such as "Autumn in  Osoyoos,"  "Lake Light," as well as delicate poems like "Spring Sketch," "Nature Notes,"  the  last section of "Lake Margin" and  the final stanza  of "Last  Walk."
But the sour political  poems overwhelm these achievements. Fiamengo is against:
Germans, Turks,  hippies   and   America. Not necessarily in that order. Ezra Pound, confronted with  similar  ferocity  of  senti­
ment   (against usury)   was able  to  indict in  his Canto 45  through a  certain  man­ nered  oracular rhetoric.  Fiamengo often  slips into  sheer  diatribe.

DAVID  HEADON




RJ The CRNLE
Reviews  Journal


WHAT'S NEW?

(in  literary  publishing in  English  from  and about  the
Commonwealth Countries and beyond?)

The  AewleWI Journal proVIdes a umque ready reterence for readers
•n the form of short cnt1cal assessments of creatrve writ•ng and scholarly stud1es. Established writers  such as Patrrck  Wh1te, Janet Frame, Mar9aret Ah ood,
Ache e.
of rev1ews, along with many others, new and old, from all corners
of  the  English speakmg  globe   Rev1ews are  by  scholars  with
racogmsed expertise m the field  Some contributors to date have been  Alastair IVen,	w  H  New, M  K
Naik, Uma Parameswaran, Albert Gerard and Douglas Killam

The Review• Joumal  IS  published twice-yearly  by the Centre for
Research  1n   the    ew Literatures  in  Enghsh  for  the  pnce  of
$A6.00 p.a. (Individuals) and $9 p.a  (institut•ons) A three-year subscript!on at a reduced rate IS  available ($A15.00/$25 00).  All subscriptions include sea postage. Surface-air postage is ava11able for an extra SA2 00 per issue. When subscribing please make out cheques to 'CRNLE Reviews Joumal' and pddress correspondence
to   The Editors,
CRNLE Revlawa Joumdl, School of Human1t1es,
Fl1nders UniVersity of South Australia
Bedford Park, 	'
South Australia, 5042

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ECHO POEMS

MARGARET  ATWOOD,    Two-headed    Poems  and
Others. Oxford  Univ.  Press, $3-95·

THOUGH NOT THE  PERFECTLY BALANCED whole  that  is The  Journals of Susanna Moodie, Two-headed Poems and Others represents a significant  development in Atwood's use (both  stylistic and thematic) of  her  characteristic  material. Typically, the  "other" poems  are  not  additions but rather  constitute  the  core  of  the   book with the centred sequence of "two-headed poems"  pointing outward in opposite directions toward them.  The title  poems
-an exploration  of   political    violence
and duplicity associated  with male leaders and   executors,  focussing   on   Canadian­ American relations  (Surfacing's  "Ameri­ cans"   are   no  longer  symbolic   here)  - presents   a  rationale for  the  rest.  "Sons
branch   out,  but   I one  woman   leads  to
another": the  branching out of territorial
expropriation, political  oppression,  the in­ stitutionalization  of  love  and   sexuality. Within this frame, woman  must  operate, but  she  is-as  Atwood  stresses, echoing  Simone   de   Beauvoir-always  "other." In  her language, her  experience, the  top­ ography  of   her   world:  always   Other. Living  in a world  not  of her  own design, she creates  her  own oral  history  in bonds with other  women, with her children, and becomes perforce bilingual and  bicultural in movement between  worlds.
In  "Marrying the   Hangman"   these themes  are  fused  as  two  kinds  of history are  invoked:  the  official,  written  history of  a  woman   who   escaped   sentence   of death  by convincing a condemned man to accept   the  position   of  hangman and   to marry her,  and  the  oral  history  of a  vio­ lent  encounter, shared   among  other  wo­ men:  "These things  happen  and  we  sit at  a  table  and  tell  stories  about  them  so we can  finally  believe." Only  through the constant    interpretation    of    destructive

IIB
 bloodshed, of war and  violence verbal  and military, can  sense be made  of the  world. Similarly, two suites  of "Daybooks" con­ trast  the everydayish  experiences of  unre­  lenting farm tasks and  the  frequent ban­  ality   of  rural  life   with   the   growth  of understanding  that   comes   through  the anastomosis of  woman's flesh and  blood. This   interpretation  is  one   which   takes place  within  the context  of woman's age­ old tasks-the making of food and cloth­ ing,  the  transmission of  the  mythic   lore of birth  and  death, the holding of the past in  jars of apple jelly, not simply  food  but "the taste  of the  act,  taste  / of this day." This   process  anticipates the  transforma­ tion  of  landscape  itself,  enfolded  in  its "January world,"  through  the  words  of acceptance   and    celebration   m    "All bread":

Lift  these  ashes
into  your  mouth, your  blood;
to  know  what  you  devour is to consecrate it,
almost.  All  bread  must  be broken so it can  be shared. Together
we eat  this earth.

Beyond  language there  is "the disappear­
ance  I of the skin,"  the recognition of the
"Black  Stone  Mother God," the consecra­
tion and  sharing of bread,  and  finally the transmission of words from  mother to daughter:

The  word  hand  anchors your  hand  to  this  table, your  hand  is a  warm  stone I hold  between  two words.

This  is your  hand, these are  my hands,  this is the  world,
which  is  round   but  not  flat  and  has  more
colours
than  we can  see.

This   book  records   a  woman's  adapta­ tions,    her    struggles,    her    failures    and finally,  evolving   across  a  series  of  echo  poems,  her  triumphs. Fear of the  "dupli­ citous" heart becomes  a  wry  acceptance
of its quirks: "you've shoved me this far,  I

BOOKS IN REVIEW



old  pump, and  we're  hooked   I together like conspirators." Fear  of  the  emptiness of words (as, at the end of the fine "Five Poems  for  Grandmothers," "I  make  this
chann I from  nothing but  paper; which is good  I for  exactly  nothing")  becomes
the  assertion  of the  claim  of words  upon the world  in "You  Begin."  And  the meta­ phor  of twins, doubling, duplicity, finally becomes  the  metonymy of   woman's ex­ perience   transmitted    from   mother   to daughter  ("a   long  thread of  red  blood, not yet broken"), and  of her kinship  with the  land.
LORRAINE WEIR



FROM DRAGONS TO DESERTS

JEAN-GUY  CARRIER, A  Cage  of Bone.  Oberon,
$rs.oo; pa.  $6.gs.
JACQUES    GODBOUT,   Dragon    Isle,   trans.   by
David  Ellis.     Musson, $8.gs.
PAULINE  MICHEL,  Mirage. L'arbre HMH, n.p.
JEANNE vomv,  Les contes  de Ia source  perdue.
L'arbre HMH, n.p.

THIS  IS A   POTPOURRI  of  fictional   works about  Quebec.  Strangely  enough,  the finest of the four,  A Cage of Bone, is writ­ ten  in English.  Jean-Guy Carrier, caught by the dilemma of being a native French speaker   but  wishing  to  write  in  English,  has  published  a  book  that  reads  like  a good  translation of a good Quebec novel. A Cage of Bone is the third  in a series of four   novels   about   the   village   of   St.­ Camille. It begins, as does Roch  Carrier's La Guerre, Yes Sir, with  a walk  down  a village street; setting and  tone are quickly established:

There would  be  a  fight.  Anytime  someone tried  to change  a comma  in  a motion  there was  a  fight.
Joseph  was in a  hurry,  but  as always, he was careful  not  to let it show....
 Carrier's style is lyrical yet restrained and the narrative technique which  varies from third  person narrator to the interior monologue of several different voices highlights the  structure of the novel. Spanning  the   years   Ig66   to   Ig6g,   the novel is composed  of many  short  chapters and  three main  clusters of characters who are  intricately though   unconsciously  en­ tangled: the  family  of  Joseph  Moreau, the ambitious mayor; the family of Marie Vallaire, who  clings  to the  old  rural  tra­  ditions; and  the  troubled, untamed Mac­ kamos, an  Indian  family.
Throughout, there   is  a  persistent  ro­ mantic and  sentimental colouring to  the style,  particularly in  encounters  between  characters,  which,   nevertheless,   has   a pleasantly  cathartic effect:
Marie collected herself silently. Joseph lay beside her with  his face  buried  in the  grass. She   could   hear   him  sobbing.   She  looked down at  her fields, her house  and  buildings. Her  body felt  infused  with  power  and  not a  trace  of  shame,  repentance or  regret.  It was  as if,  for  the  first  time,  she  was  truly the  possessor of her  body, as she had  earlier come to possess her own mind  and  spirit.
The title,  A  Cage  of Bone,  from  Saint­ Denys-Gameau's famous  poem describing the inner  presence  of absence and  death, reflects  the  slow,  sometimes   passionate, and   haunting  disintegration   of  a  rural  way  of  life.  However, my  enjoyment of this  novel  was  marred  by  what  must  be a  printer's error   in  my  paperback copy;  the  chapter "Marie  Vallaire" was  inter­ rupted by fourteen pages from  some other novel and,  as a consequence, several  cru­ cial pages are missing.
Jacques Godbout's Dragon Isle, on  the other   hand,   is  a  disappointment.  God­
bout,   a   cineaste    and   prolific   novelist, tends  to keep  a pulse on current Quebec moods    and    movements;   his    terrorist novel,   Knife    on   The    Table    (rg65), caught  the   troubled  and   revolutionary tenor of the sixties, both stylistically and thematically,   while  Hail    Galarneau

II9

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



( Ig6g)   mimicked   Quebec's desire  for  a language and  sense of self, in a burlesque mode.   In   the  same   vein,  Dragon   Isle, with its fast-paced patter, is a diatribe against the American multinationals. But its  key images-extravagant and  eccen­ tric  American capitalists and  Quebeckers as   subjected   Pepsis -read   more    like tired  cliches.  Roch  Carrier  ran into  the same  problem  in  his  Garden  of Delights, which   also  describes  the  invasion   of  a naive Quebec village by a ruthless  Ameri­  can  entrepreneur. In  both  books  there  is an   implicit condemnation of ignorant Quebeckers  who   welcome   the   invasion and  do  not  want   to  realize  its  dire  con­ sequences  for   their    culture  and   self­ determination.
The  narrator of Dragon Isle is a writer, naturally, and  a  dragon-hunter. Trained in a special, secret school in Paris, he dedicates his  life  to  defeating the  vora­ cious   William   T.  Shaheen, Jr.  and   to saving Isle Verte  from becoming a deposi­ tory   for   nuclear  wastes.  The   island   is lucky  enough to  have  a  resident  dragon  but unfortunately we meet him only once;  too  much  of  the  novel  is taken  up  with predictable   polemics    by   the   youthful, idealistic  narrator. And  I'm   afraid  that  the  symbolism  of  dragon-hunters eludes me;  are   dragon-hunters  terrorists?  But then  why  are   the  dragons   portrayed  as rather  reasonable and  loveable?  The  re­ ference  to H. de Heutz (the  double agent  in Hubert  Aquin's Prochain  Episode) as one  of  the  dragon-hunters  adds   to  the confusion. Who  are the good guys?
The translation, while snappy  and  col­
loquial   and   a  smooth   read   in  English, adds  to this problem  of the deja-lu novel. In   French  Dragon   Isle   has   a   certain fluidity   and   lyricism   deriving   from   the interior  monologue by  the  narrator who occasionally  reaches   poetic  heights.   But this tone is difficult  to recreate  in English, a more cumbersome and down-to-earth language. Moreover, the  narrator  speaks

120
 in   the   present    tense   in   French  which creates  a sense  of  immediacy,  breathless­ ness  and   anticipation.  David   Ellis   has chosen  to put  the  novel in the  past  which is the  more  common  narratorial tense  in English,   and  while  undoubtedly a  novel purely   in  the  present in  English   would have  an  artificial quality, this translation does  give the reader a different kind of experience. Many contemporary Quebec novels are  written in the first person  pres­ ent  (a  literature and  a people  still  in  the process of becoming?) while few English­ Canadian   novels   are,   thus   creating  a recurring problem for  translators.
Both   Les  Contes de  la  source  perdue and  Mirage  are  from  the  L'arbre  collec­ tion of HMH, a collection begun in 1963 with    Anne    Hebert's   Le    Torrent  and which   publishes new  novelists.  I confess my reaction to Mirage mirrored that  of a reviewer in  Le  Devoir  who  found   him­  self  unable for  weeks  to  proceed   beyond the  first  seventy  pages.  Fortunately  the novel only hasI 68 pages.
Mirage  is an  indulgent portrait of  the
artist as  a  young   woman,   written,  once again, in the first person  present: "Je m'appelle  Mirage. Je   suis  nee  dans   le desert  de la vie." For  narrative movement and   psychological  depth   it   relies  upon the  Bachelardian  correspondence of  ele­ ments  to imagination; here,  desert, water  and  fire. The narrator, who has two faces
- Marie-Ange and  Mirage-is a painter obsessed  by  the  source  of  light  which  is the   source   of   life   and   creativity.  She works out  her  destiny  in short,  breathless and  portentous sentences:
C'est   ici  le  source.   Le  debut   de   Ia   con­ science  et  de !'instinct. L'origine est  dans  Ia lumiere.  Pas  dans  le  sang  qui  coule.  L'ori­  gine  est dans  Ia transparence.
The   artist  is  torn   by  her   two  selves: Marie-Ange who almost succumbs to a normal, non-creative, socially acceptable life with  Julien, an  art  critic,  in Old Montreal, the land  of snow and  shadows,

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



and   Mirage, who  is  initiated  into  mys­ tery   by  Issam   Desert   in   the   Tunisian desert -a  wonderful world  of  extremes  of light,  heat,  sun,  hunger,  hallucination and  savage  sex.
Although  the   situations  and   perhaps
even  the  images  are  as  cliche-ridden  as the ones Godbout uses, the pain  of artistic creation is a crucial  if well-worn subject. Similarly, the heroine's struggle to harness the   destructive  elements  of  art   into   a creative   and    translatable  power    is   a serious  one.  In  her  quest  for  the  source of  light  she  unleashes   the  contagion of fire -out  of  which   rises, once  again, a troubled consciousness.  While  the  theme of a woman  asserting her  artistic freedom and  integrity is significant and   relevant, why must  the  author portray her  as revelling  in masochistic sex  (with  Issam) and  cold  dismissive  intellectualism  (with
.Julien) ?
Les Contes  de la source  perdue  is quite another  story.   These  vignettes about   a farm   at   "la   source   perdue"  are   pure rural  nostalgia. Light,  tender, humorous, they  depict an  almost  idyllic  world, generally  through the anthropomorphized point  of view of an  animal, for  example, a mischievous cow or melancholy skunk. However, the  cruel  reality  of  nature red in  tooth  and  claw  in  the  tradition of C. G.   D.   Roberts  and    Ernest    Thompson Seton  is never  absent. Occasionally, too, a tinge of Lafontaine moralizing gently interrupts the  narrative:
Mais  c'etait  Ia  loi:   a vouloir   s'emanciper trop   tot,  on  se  trouve   toujours  dans   une cage, quelle  qu'elle  soit.

In the style of Gabrielle Roy's  Enchanted Summer, but  less finely etched and  less reflective,   these   tales   are   suitable  for young  readers. As for  the  older  readers, they have  the next installment of Carrier's tetralogy  to look forward to.

KATHY  MEZEI
 


The Achievements of F. R. Scott

Friday  and Saturday
February 20-21, 1981

The Theatre
Robson Square  Courthouse
Complex
800 Robson Street
Vancouver,  British Columbia

Sponsored  by  the  Canadian  Studies
Program,  Simon  Fraser  University

Speakers include:

Literature
Louis Dudek Douglas  Jones F.  W. Watt

Law
Gerald  Le Dain
Walter  Tarnopolsky

Politics
Michie! Hom  David Lewis Kenneth  McNaught Michael  Oliver
and
Therese  <Jasgrain
Leon  Edel
J. King  Gordon
who will speak  about  Scott
from a personal  viewpoint

For further  information, please  write  to
F. R. Scott  <Jonference
<Jontinuing Studies Simon  Fraser  University Burnaby,  B.<J. VSA 1S6
orcall (604)   291-4565/3393




121

BOOKS IN REVIEW



A QUESTION OF CHARACTER

MATT coHEN,  The   Sweet  Second  Summer   of
Kitty    Malone.   McClelland   &    Stewart,
$12.95·

THE SWEET SECOND SUMMER OF KITTY Malone is one  of those  frustrating  books which  is often  finely  written   but  not  al­ ways compelling reading. Individual  pas­ sages  can  be  read  and  re-read  and  each time appreciated for  their craftsmanship, but  somehow   the  book  as  a  whole  loses momentum. I  found  myself  pushing  my way through it, and at the end  there  was a feeling  less of  completion than  of mis­ sing  pieces.
Matt Cohen's return to the rural land­
scape of Eastern Ontario-to the rocky small farm  country near Kingston-picks up the story of characters and  families mentioned  briefly  in  his  earlier  master­ work,   The   Disinherited.   Kitty   Malone and   Pat   Frank  have   loved  and  fought  each   other for   twenty  years,  and   have been  able  neither to  bring  themselves  to marry   nor  to  give  each  other   up.  The  awareness that   they  are  growing  old,  in Kitty's case an awareness thrust  upon  her by  an  operation  to  remove  an  ovarian cyst she fears  is cancerous, causes them  to reassess their  loves and  their lives. Their attempts to come  to  terms  with  both  are intertwined  with   memories   of  the  past. Kitty  recalls  the  beginning of  her  affair with  Pat,  his rejection of her, her brief marriage in Toronto to Randy  Blair and return home  with  her  young son, Randy; Pat  returns to the dreams  of his boyhood, before  his vigour  was sapped  by age  and alcohol. It is a story  which  combines  hu­ mour   and   pathos,   violence  and   tender­ ness, and  a  number of  memorable minor  characters, especially Crazy  Ellen, Kitty's cantankerous and  strong-willed  mother, whom  Kitty  loves despite  her dotty  ways,

122
 but  whose  death at  last  allows daughter­
in-law  Sadie  to rule  her own  house.
Cohen's prose is both  taut  and  smooth, and  more  conventional than  in  some  of his  earlier  work.   In   his  descriptions  of nature and   its  changing seasons,  he  is amazingly adept at  producing a sensuous quality and  imagistic  brilliance which  are nevertheless  in   keeping   with   the   char­ acters'  groping  perceptions.  Few  Cana­ dian   writers can  equal   his  evocation of the  subtle   interplay   between  inner   and  outer nature, a  relationship often  under­ lined  by the recurrent motif  of breathing. With such skilful  writing, why is it that  the  novel  falls short?  Part  of  the  reason,  I  think,  is  the  failure to  provide  a  con­ vincing character at the centre. As in The Disinherited, Cohen deliberately shifts his focus  from  character to  character,  while keeping the narrative in the  third  person; as  he  moves   the   story   back   and   forth through the years, he also moves the focus among  Kitty,    Pat,    Pat's    twin   brother Mark, Ellen   Malone,  and   even   Kitty's young   daughter  Lynn.   Although Kitty and  Pat  receive  the major share  of  atten­ tion,  they  do  not  dominate the  story  the way  that   Richard  Thomas  did  in  The  Disinherited, where   the  other  characters seemed  merely  to refract from  his central vision  or  provide  another  perspective on it. In The  Sweet Second Summer  of Kitty  Malone, despite   the   title,   Kitty   is  not really  well  enough  developed as  a  char­ acter. Often there  are  gaps between  moti­ vation and   action; often   we  are  left  in the  dark   about details  important to  our understanding of  her.  For  example,  we are  told  early  in  the  book  that  her  chil­ dren  did  not  live  with  her  and  that her brother Charlie and  his wife looked  after  them.  Was she a  bad  mother?  Could  she not  afford   to  keep  them?   How  did  she keep  herself   all   those  years?   We  never know.  When  Pat comes  to visit her in the hospital after  his vengeful  trip  to Toronto
-a trip   which   could   have   caused   the

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



murder of her  son and  nearly  caused  the murder  of   her   lover - she   merely   re­ sponds  with  a matter-of-fact "What hap­  pened?" Neither then  nor later  do we dis­ cover  any  profound response  to  the  inci­ dent. On   the  other  hand,  for  a  thirty­  nine-year-old woman  who has been preg­ nant  three   times,   who   never   considers herself an earth-mother type and  who lets others  raise  her  children, for  such  a wo­ man  to suddenly despair that  she cannot have   more   children  seems   an   unlikely sentimental contrivance.
A well-developed character  would  ob­ viously  not   be  necessary   if  this  were  a romantic tale of action rather  than reflec­ tion,  or  if  Kitty  were  simply   one  of  a number  of   characterizations  circling   a central event or particular moment, as we find   in  some  of  Faulkner's  novels.  But Kitty  is intended to keep our  attention as a  woman attempting to gain  a  new per­ spective  on  herself  and  her  future as she faces the transition from  youth  to middle­ age.  Although she is an individual rather than  a  type,  with  a specific  environment and   background,  we  expect   certain   fa­ miliar  human responses from  her that  will produce the pleasure of recognition if not a  bond  of  sympathy.
Cohen    is  more    successful   with   Pat
Frank. Even  so, that  such  a man  could suddenly forswear alcohol  and drive to Toronto the  first  time  in  his  life  with  a knife  in  his  pocket   and   murder on  his mind,  stretches credibility. He seems so essentially   passive   and    perpetually   fa­ tigued; despite   an   apparent   history  of fisticuffs,   he    repeatedly    retreats   from Kitty  to alcohol  and  back  again. Yet  this is  a  minor   point,  beside  the  frequently moving account of his struggle to live and  love more fully despite old habits  and  en­ croaching old age.
It is unfair  to  claim,  as  some  women have  recently  suggested, that  a  male  au­ thor   cannot  fully   portray  the  feminine  mind.  Sinclair Ross and  Brian  Moore -
 to use the closest  examples-put the lie to that  notion.  But it is obviously  difficult to  cross  the  gender   barrier, and   in  this book  Matt Cohen does  not  quite   do  it. The  insufficiency  of the  portrait of Kitty Malone, our  inability  to  really  grasp  her as  a  person,  leads  us  to  lose  interest   in her.  As a consequence the  story  lags.

MARGOT  NORTHEY



SELF-CONSCIOUS PROSE

TOM    MARSHALL,     Rosemary     Goal.   Oberon,
$15.oo; pa.  $6.95.
DAVID   WATMOUGH, No More  into  the  Garden: The   Chronicles   of  Davey  Bryant.  Double­ day, $8.95.
w. D.  VALGARDSON, Red  Dust. Oberon, $12.95;
p.a. $5·95·
THERE ARE   THREE KINDS of  writing, some cynic once observed: good writing, bad  writing,  and  Creative Writing. And what  distinguishes the  two  latter is that they alone  can  be taught.
However   unfair  this  quip   may  seem, the  fact  remains that  much  of  the  work fostered  in Creative Writing programmes and   their   various   less  formal   offshoots unquestionably does fall into  a distinctive category  of its own. It is generally deriva­ tive,   and   typically   characterized   by   a painfully	self-conscious	preoccupation with  literary   technique, often  of  a  sup­ posedly  avant  garde  variety. It is  usually compulsively   subjective,  marked   by  an ingrown  and  stylish  self-dramatizing sen­ sibility  which   is  continually striving for ever more calculated effects. And it tends  to be  incestuously  self-serving,  sometimes to   the   point   of  coming   entirely   adrift from  the solid  shores  of ordinary reality. Rosemary Goal,  a  first  novel  by  poet Tom  Marshall, pushes  this dubious genre


123

BOOKS  IN REVIEW



well  out  into  the  perilous  shoals  of  self­ parody. "I  want  to  write  a  novel  within  a novel," the narrator, Harold Brunt, an­ nounces   in  the  first  chapter.  "Not   the kind  that's been  done  often  enough, but two  separate  novels  that   interpenetrate one  another,  fucking  each   other,   so  to speak.  I'm   also  toying  with  the  idea  of making the  hero of one novel  the author of  the  other." And  on  the  last  page  but one we find Brunt  speculating on the ulti­ mate destiny  of John Holden, the youth­  ful  protagonist of Journey  on the Under­ ground, his own  self-confessedly "preten­ tious"  novel-within-this-novel.  "Probably John becomes  a  university  professor," he decides,   "grows   older,  grows  somewhat wry in his disillusionment with  the world, and  eventually writes  a comic  novel  that reflects  the  absurdity of his early  experi­ ence-a    deliberately   grotesque,   some­ what    surreal   cartoon-show  of   a   book called...."  At   this   point   the   sentence  trails   coyly   off,   leaving   the   reader    to supply   the  inevitable punchline: "Rose­ mary Goal."  What else?
It is  impossible   to  tell  just  how  seri­ ously  Marshall  intends  these  involutions to  be  taken.   In   all  likelihood,  one  sus­ pects, his attitude towards  them  is just as grimacingly  ambiguous as  his  protagon­ ist's.    ("I'm   writing  a   self-destructing novel!" Brunt  exclaims  midway  down  the final  page.)   They   do,  in  any  case,  indi­ cate the sort of book he has produced: an agonizingly self-conscious comedy  of self­ consciousness,  a reductio ad absurdum of
the  kind  of ingrown trivia  that  is all  too often  the  staple  diet  in Creative Writing seminars. Every  scene,  every sentence al­ most,  seems  calculated  to  achieve  some
effect-an  effect,   however,    which   in­ variably   turns  out   to  be  hedged  around with    evasions.    For    every   conceivable criticism    someone    might   advance,  an answer  is ready  at  hand: of  course, don't you see, it  was  intended  all  along  to  be humorous....

I24
 Marshall's   protagonist,  a   no-longer­ youthful English  professor, teaches  a class in Canadian Literature  (what else?)  at  a nameless    university    within    screaming­ distance of  Toronto.   (Marshall himself, for  the  record, teaches  at  Queen's.)  He writes  in   that   most   excruciatingly   self­ conscious  of  all  literary modes,  the  first­ person  present-tense, and  is given to solip­ sistic philosophizings like "Everything is a simile,  nothing is  real  in  itself."  At  one point,   in  a  moment of  characteristically indwelling  auto-analysis,  he  reflects  des­ pairingly  that   "I'm always  interpreting. It's possible, I've  sometimes thought, that  I  live  in  a  wholly  fictional   world  of  my own devising. But I don't  suppose  I'll ever know." All  in  all,  it  is difficult   to  avoid the impression that, despite  its apparently satirical  intentions,  this  latter-day   Por­ trait  of the  Artist  as a Middle-aged  Aca­ demic is  rather less a  wry  reflection  on that   endemic disease  of  academe, intel­ lectual alienation, than  a  terminal mani­ festation of it. And  a decidedly self-indul­ gent  manifestation, at that.
David    Watmough's  new    book,    No More into  the  Garden, is symptomatic of much   the  same  complaint. The tone  of this   intensely  self-absorbed  exercise   in what  might be described as literary  mas­ turbation is set  in  the  author's  opening apostrophe  to  the   "younger  alter  ego" who   serves   him   as   protagonist:  "Oh, Davey  Bryant, if the artist  in me had  not created  you,  the  coward  in  me   would have  had  to  invent  you.  How  grateful I am  for  the fictional fact  of you and  your world,  for only you allow  me to return to that  Cornish  garden  by  the  sea  where innocence lived  and   where,  in  the  ano­ dyne  of  my  recounting your  living  and  growing, I can   also  face   the  future. It was  there,  Davey,  in  your  Celtic  womb, where  you  learned to  love  and  play  the waiting game,  that  you acquired the iden­ tity   which   still   holds  the  exiled   me  in good  stead...."  In  subsequent apostro-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



phes   (there is  one  at  the   beginning of each   episodic   chapter) ,  Davey   is  vari­ ously addressed as "my  beloved scapegoat
... my shadow  self-love  ... my own  be­ loved wound  of the imagination and final defence  ... oh, infinitely  more vulnerable Davey ... you who surface from the murk  of my misunderstanding and fear  in order  to  make   things   clear,  who  suffer   more than  I do...." Et cetera. As for the inter­ vening   narrative,  cast  once  again  in  the temptingly   solipsistic   first   person,   it   is equally self-centred, and  only  marginally less cloying.
This   incessant   narcissism  represents a
rather  different brand  of   self-conscious­ ness than  the compulsive intellectualizing which  afflicts poor Harold Brunt. But the two   are   by  no   means   as  disparate  as might   superficially appear.   For   Davey Bryant,  Watmough's  oh-so-sensitive sur­ rogate  self   ("Me  romantic? You  could just  as  easily  call  it  emotional heart-dis­ ease!"), is  cut  from   precisely   the  same cloth  as  Brunt's alter  ego,  John   Holden ("my  romantic  self-image   . . .  the   boy poet  passionately in love with  life") . And Brunt's  description  of   his  pretentiously self-dramatizing Journey   on  the  Under­ ground-"It's a  novel  about  the danger  that   seeks out  dreamers who  bump  into
'reality'"-applies  equally   aptly   to  No
More  into  the  Garden.
Watmough's theme,  as his title implies,
is loss of innocence -of  the sexual  ( spe­ cifically   homosexual)   variety.   But   the lingering  impression left  by  Davey  Bry­ ant's  feyly   self-serving   "chronicles"  of love  and  betrayal  is  above all  one  of in­ tensive self-absorption, to  the  virtual  ex­ clusion  of  anything apart  from   himself. And  so, in  the  final  analysis,  both  Mar­ shall's  book and  Watmough's are equally  given  over  to  solipsistic  self-indulgence; the  chief  distinction  between  them  is the form   it  happens  to  take.   Indeed, both narrators fetch  up in  an  identical self-en­ closed  purgatory.  For in  the  end  Davey
 Bryant,  from  his self-imposed Vancouver "exile,"  is driven  to cry out,  almost  as if he  were  deliberately echoing  Harold Brunt: "How  do you explain  the realities of the  unreality which  is so much  of my west coast life?"
How, indeed?
From   these  sufferingly claustrophobic confines, it is a distinct  relief to turn  one's attentions to  Red  Dust,  the  third  collec­ tion of short stories  by W. D. Valgardson, who teaches Creative Writing at the Uni­  versity  of  Victoria.  Valgardson's  prose, unlike    Marshall's   or    Watmough's,   is marked  by a conscientiously selfless objec­ tivity;  few  of  his  characters, if any,  are alter-egotistical projections.  Indeed,  the solitary    first-person   narrative   in    this volume,    "December   Bargaining,"   fails precisely because  the  author is unable  to handle  the  intricate technical dictates of the   quintessentially  self-conscious   first­ person-retrospective   point-of-view-a mode  that  seems to come  as naturally to David  Watmough as  breathing.





Out-of-Print

CANADIANA BOOKS
and
PAMPHLETS



HURONIA-CANADIANA BOOKS
BOX  685
ALLISTON, ONTARIO  LOM lAO

Catalogues free on request



125

BOOKS IN REVIEW



The remammg stories  here,  despite occasional  minor  lapses of technique, are for  the  most  part  finely crafted and  me­ ticulously  polished.  Best of all is the  title story,  a  starkly   powerful   study  in  rural  squalor   and  self-righteously  mid-western small-mindedness, which has everything it takes  to  become  a  standard  anthology­ piece.   Yet    for   all  its   considerable strengths, this  story   never   rises  to   the heights   of   enduring literature-partly because,  in  its  single-minded determina­ tion  to  harrow the  reader  to the  utmost,  it is somewhat over-calculatingly wrought; but  mostly   because   the  author,  though possessed  of  a  certain  dispassionate  in­ sight into  his characters and their motives, seems entirely lacking  in real compassion  towards them.
The  same  failings,  alas, are  character­ istic of all seven stories in  Red  Dust. For despite    their    superficial   preoccupation with   minutely  rendered   externals,  each of  them  is every  bit  as  much  a  self-con­  sciously calculated exercise in dramatized subjectivity as No  More  into  the  Garden  and   Rosemary   Goal.   Here   too,   as   in Harold Brunt's "wholly  fictional  world  of my own devising," we find ourselves in a place where  "everything is simile, nothing is  real  in  itself."  Here   too,  as  in  Davey Bryant's interminably self-justifying  epi­ sodic   monodramas,  there   are   no  free­  standing characters who are permitted to emerge   as   self-sufficient   individuals  in their  own  inalienable  right. Instead, we are confronted only with schematized lay­ figures, mere  personified  twitches  of auc­  torial sensibility, who are less actors  in the imaginative scene  than  self-effacing  ele­ ments  of it. Instead of actively generating situations, they  merely embody  them.
Each  of these books strives for style and sensibility  at  the  expense  of essential  hu­ manity. Each, in  its own  way, is  lacking  in  that  intransigent  substantiality  that  is the hallmark of all true creation-in art,  m  life,  and   in   the   world   of  objective
 reality. And it is precisely this overriding concern with self-consciously articulated subjectivity, instead  of real substance and authentic emotional commitment, which distinguishes mere  Creative Writing from the  higher varieties of literature.

JULIAN   REID


THE SPLENDID SECOND-RATER

PHYLLIS GROSSKURTH, Havelock  Ellis: A Biog- raphy.  McClelland &  Stewart, $22.50.

HAVELOCK ELLIS COULD EASILY be dis­ missed  as a  pretentious charlatan, differ­  ent   from   the  more   orthodox  Victorian humbugs because   his  particular  kind  of sanctimony hallowed  liberty  rather than  restriction, and because he fastened  on sex as  his  special  field  of  enquiry at  a  time when  it was a forbidden subject. One  can imagine what Lytton Strachey might  have made  of  this  saintly  sexologist  who  was almost   certainly  impotent   (though  he boasted  occasionally of  producing his sperm for  women  friends to examine un­ der  a  microscope)  and  who  reached the height of the emotional tension  that char­ acterized his relations with  women  when he  watched  the  golden  stream  of  their  urination.
Yet  in  a  way  Ellis  and  Strachey were alike  in  more  than   their  squeaky   voices. In  different guises  their  ideas  and   their writings   were  part   of  a  general   shifting of  values  towards a  greater honesty  and objectivity in assessing the nature of man, his actions and  his motivations. To  any­ one  young-as  I  was-in   the   I g2o's, they   were   both   among  the   liberators, members of  that  army  of  enlightenment whose  generals  (it  seemed   to  us  then)  were   Wells  and   Shaw. They  were   the products of a  peculiarly English  kind  of intellectual   rebellion,  resistant    to   aca-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



demic  domination, and  projecting on a secular  level an exalted conception of the power    of   human  reason    that    derived largely from  the dissenting tradition, with its  emphasis   on  the  individual  illumina­ tion, the light  within.
Almost  without exception, these men were resolute  autodidacts, valuing knowl­ edge  all  the  more  if  they  gathered it  by their   own   efforts,   and   Havelock  Ellis, whatever the  weaknesses  his  conclusions regarding human  sexuality  may  eventu­ ally  have  revealed, was  one  of  the  most industrious  and   painstaking enquirers of the lot. He was, like Shaw  and  Wells, and like the great  nineteenth-century natural­ ists whom  he admired, an  eloquent prose writer. He was, like the others of his intel­  lectual  generation, a  pioneer  who  helped make it possible to speak  intelligently and openly   on   subjects   the   Victorians  had veiled.   It   would   perhaps  be  wrong   to say  that  Freud  built  on  what   Ellis  had wrought   but   Ellis   preceded   Freud    in many   ways,  and   his   Sexual    Inversion, published in I 897, was the first intelligent, unprejudiced and  well-documented study of homosexuality to be published in  Eng­ lish. Not  surprisingly, appearing  as it did in the  year of Oscar Wilde's release from prison,  it  was  suppressed, and  Ellis  ac­ quired the repute of a martyr, which  was a  strange  thing,   since  it  was  the  book­ seller George  Bedborough who was put on trial,  and  Ellis throughout his life showed a  reluctance to become  involved  in  con­ frontations that amounted almost  to cow­ ardice.
A  pretentious  man,   fond   of  his  self­ image; a "silly old man" in many ways in his  later  years,  as  Phyllis  Grosskurth ex­ asperatedly remarks at  one  point  in  her fine Life of him. Yet a man  who somehow gained   insight   through  his   weaknesses, and  used this insight  to produce the kind of   books-especially  the   massive   and compassionate series,  Studies in  the  Psy­ chology   of  Sex -which   no-one  before
 him had either dared to write or even thought  of   writing;  a   man   also   who proved  by a  series  of extraordinary  rela­ tionships with  women  that  there are more ways  of  being  a  great   lover  than  Casa­  nova's. As Grosskurth tells us in  the final paragraph which  can  be  read  as  almost  the justification of her book: "The people still  living  who   knew   him   continue  to speak  of him  as a radiance who  touched  their  lives in  a  way  they  will  never  for­ get."
To trap  that radiance is the task Phyllis
Grosskurth seems  to  have  set  herself:   to trap it without being dazzled. And she has succeeded  amazingly well  in a work  that combines  a  massive  scholarly  effort   (in­ cluding  the  locating and  reading  of  20,­ ooo  unpublished letters  as well as  a  vast amount of literature directly  and  periph­ erally concerning Ellis and his times)  with an  understanding that  never ceased to be critical   and   at the   same   time  compas­ sionate.  "I have  tried," she says, "to  show Ellis in  his approach  to  his work, his re­ action  to the world around him, how and why he loved certain people and why they loved him, and, most  difficult  of all, how he  viewed  himself.  My .attitude towards  him has changed many times in the course of  writing  this  book.  I  hope  I have  suc­ ceeded  in being fair."
She  has  indeed  been  fair.  She   never tries   to   make    Ellis   appear   ridiculous; though  of course  he  was ridiculous  often



Un  Colloque International sur  la
Parodie dans  la  Litterature et  les
Arts  se  tiendra  a  Queen's  Uni­
versity  (Kingston, Ontario)  les 8-
10  Octobre 1981.  Pour   tout  ren­
seignement,   s'adresser   a   Clive
Thomson,   French	Department,
Queen's University, Kingston, On­
tario  K7L 3N6.



127

BOOKS IN REVIEW



enough, which  she  does  not  attempt to conceal.  She  patiently discusses his books, none of which  has really stood  the test of time. She  lets us perceive  for ourselves - rather  than   explicitly stating-how  his weaknesses merged  into his strengths, how his  cowardice was  another aspect  of  his gentleness, how his poor reasoning  was re­ lated  to his considerable intuitive percep­ tiveness,   how   his  failure   to  develop   a scientific  outlook  that  went  beyond  pain­  fully accumulating facts and instances was related   to  his constant  inclination to im­ merse himself  compassionately in the pre­  dicaments of  individuals.
Somerset   Maugham once  classed  him­ self  as  belonging  in  "the   first   rank   of the  second-raters," and  that  is  doubtless where   Havelock  Ellis  also  belongs.  His great flaw was that  he lacked the imagina­ tive vision which  inspired contemporaries like  Shaw   and   Wells.  Once,   to  Freud's chagrin, he  described  the  great   psycho­ analyst  disparagingly as "an  artist" rather than  a  scientist,  yet  it  was  precisely  art­ istry that  Ellis could  have done  with.  His books -or the best of them -were inno­  vatory without being creative, and  that  is why we no longer  read  him and  continue to read  so many  of his contemporaries.
But-as  Wilde  once  remarked-it is
not the first-rate writers who are really interesting biographically; all   that  is meaningful in  them  goes into  their  crea­ tions,  and  so people  like Joyce  and  Eliot and  even  Freud were  pretty  dull  dogs to meet  and  to write  about  as  personalities. But the second-raters are  the  people  who have  never  really  been  able  to sublimate their  selves  in  their  works,  and  so  their natures find  expression  in  idiosyncracies,  in lived-out  fantasies, in  the sheer  colour  of  personality their  works do  not  reflect. Such people can and often do become the subjects  of fascinating biographies, and  in this respect  Phyllis Grosskurth has chosen as  wisely  in  picking   Ellis  as  she  did  in picking  John  Addington Symonds  for her
 first Life, The Woeful Victorian, in which she raised  biography in Canada to a level of perception and  writing rarely  before encountered here.
In  Havelock Ellis she shows with splen­ did  insight  how-contrary to the  theory  that  the  artist  thrives  from  his wounds­ Ellis's  was  of  a  nature  whose  scars  pro­  duced   more  eccentricity  than  vision  and  turned him  into  a figure  of great   transi­ tional   but   little   lasting   importance.  It would  have  been easy to make  us despise him, and  yet, at  the  end  of it all,  we are left  with  at  least  a  sense of  the  personal luminosity he  clearly  projected. But  that is the  most  ephemeral of all the  qualities of greatness, and,  as Phyllis Grosskurth remarks at  the  very  end,  those  who  ex­ perienced it will soon "all  be gone."

GEORGE WOODCOCK



WORDS & WINE

PIER   GIORGIO  DI    CICCO,  ed.,  Roman   Candles.
Hounslow Press, $4.95.
ANDREW   SUKNASKI,    The    Ghosts   Call   You
Poor. Macmillan,  $5·95·
IN PIER  GIORGIO DI  crcco's "The Poem Becomes  Canadian," a very human poem feels uneasy, amid the Christmas snows, about its  Italian origins:

The  poem  is lazy. it was brought up under  tuscan  cypress, it has a heart deep  as the  reach  of an  olive  tree.

The poem  becomes  Canadian by being  a gift  which  demands to be given in friend­ ship   to  an   indisputably Canadian  poet (in  this case, Tom Wayman;. The  poem ambles   along   pleasantly,  poking   fun   at cultural  stereotypes, but  at  its  centre  is the  serious  subject-becoming a  Cana­ dian,  and   becoming a  Canadian poet - which    is   a   preoccupation  throughout these  poems.  Di Cicco  discusses the  prob­ lem   more   sternly   in   his   Preface: "In

BOOKS  IN  REVIEW



searching for  contributors, I  found  iso­ lated  gestures   by  isolated   poets,  isolated mainly   by  the  condition  of   nationalism prevalent in Canada in the last ten years. However pluralistic the landscape seemed to  be  to  sociologists,  the sheer  force  of Canadianism had  been enough to intimi­ date  all but the older  'unofficial language' writers."
The seventeen Italo-Canadian poets in this anthology, then,  are  not  members  of a cohesive  group; several  of the  poets, because  they  are  represented by only one or two poems, will appear to be making isolated gestures. Despite the ludicrously clever title, there are few fireworks in this anthology. Many  of  the   poets   are   too didactic about their  cultural themes: "Be patient, don't rage,   /  Canadese, in  time we'll  belong." The  theme  of  adjustment leads   repeatedly  to   prosey   pronounce­ ments  and  flabby  diction:

the  Eldorado
I was searching I didn't discover.
I discovered  instead  scornful  glances,  a  hostile environment, an  overwhelming emptiness  in my soul.

(Filippo  Salvatore,  "Three  Poems for  Giovanni Caboto")

Salvatore speaks  in  another poem  of  his father  "tasting  his  words   /  like  sips  of good  wine."  Such  savouring of  words  is exactly  what's missing from  most of this anthology. Only  a few of these  poets will admire the colour  of a word,  absorb its bouquet,  roll  it  around  on   the   tongue before  swallowing. Len  Gasparini's  por­ traits  of his  uncle  and  grandfather  have the  tartness of  a  good  homemade  wine; his  "Grapes," a vignette of  love  in  the vineyards,    leaves   a   pleasant   aftertaste. Mary   di  Michele's  "Enigmatico," about  divided  loyalties and her role as a woman,  is astringent and  full-bodied. Alexandre Amprimoz'  "The   Impact  of   Repeated Things," a six-part, heavily allusive poem, is a rich blend, well-balanced.
 But   (to  return  to  the  editor's  meta­ phor)   most   of   these   Roman   candles  flicker faintly, don't explode or illuminate, don't  light   up  a  world.   As  a  group   I found   the  poems  more  valuable as  cul­ tural  statement, than  as  poetry: there  is a  group  of  l-ean  (as  they're more  pun­ ningly   called)   poets  spread  across   the country; national  background is an enor­ mous  concern  among second-generation immigrants;  there   are  essential   connec­ tions  between  the  dual   homelessness  so often  encountered  in  these  poems,  and  the immigrant/tourist  perspective so per­ vasive in the mainstream of Canadian literature; and,  especially,  that  recent Canadian nationalism has been an oppres­ sive force  squashing the  development of our  minority  cultures.
Andrew    Suknaski's  question   is   not
whether the  poem  could  become  Cana­ dian,  but  whether the  poet  could  be  at home.   The   cultures  behind   him-In­ dian,   Metis,  Ukrainian,  Chinese, home­  steader,  farmer,    labourer - move    as spirits    through    his   landscape,  usually prairie. All  the  people   who  have   died, who are dying, in his place are the ghosts, each  with  a story  to  tell. Suknaski listens to  the  ghosts,  guiltily: the  ghosts  of  the people   of  the  plains  make   our   present  lives  seem  spiritually,  morally,  poor   by comparison.
A poem titled  "Augusta nee Hoffman" gives   some   clues   to   the   characteristic
Suknaski poem. Suknaski has discovered Augusta  Hoffman's "family story" written up   "for   some   local   history   book."   He quotes  her  introduction:

"This won't  be easy for me to write
and  should  anyone  try  to read  it later  on
that  won't  be easy either
as what  reading and  writing  i do
i had  to figure  it  out  all  for  myself."

Suknaski   cherishes  this   unpolished,  un­ easy, open,  self-taught approach to story­ telling.  His poetry  is often  written in such a self-deprecating tone,  echoing the voice


129

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



of  one  of  his  most  obvious  models,  AI Purdy.  As he tells us in another poem, he sometimes  feels "uncomfortable in this silent language / of the prairies."
Suknaski lets Augusta  Hoffman tell her
own   story.   Two-thirds  of  the   poem   is direct  quotation from  her  family  history, the  rest  is close paraphrase. The  focus is as  much   upon  the  unique  storyteller, as upon   the   representative  story   (of   two girls  lost  and   killed  in  a  sleet  storm) . Many   of  Suknaski's  poems   follow   the same  approach: the  title  names  a  speci­ fic person,  the poem records hisjher voice. This  form  of narrative monologue is one Andy  Suknaski   has  mastered   as  well  as any  Canadian poet.
The effect  is documentary: we sense a character recorded, rather than  a persona shaped and  created. The  result  is not,  as Augusta    Hoffman   feared,    difficult    to read,  but  fluent  and  relaxed.  More  diffi­ cult  to read  are  the  poems in  which Suk­ naski  stops  listening and  starts  comment­ ing, as he does  when  reacting to a news­ paper article   about  a  three-year-old boy killed  by a pack  of  stray  dogs:

ghost  of small  prairie  child isadly imagine  your  playmates grown  men  and  women someday
haunted by the  futility  of your  death
when they discover the story of almighty  voice.

I don't doubt  the  sincerity  of this,  but  I do  doubt it  as  poetry:  it's   far   too  en­ gineered  an  attempt  to  be  meaningful. Similarly, Suknaski  is not impressive  with tighter lyrics  and  compressed   images.  I was  disappointed   to  find  the  collection  ending  with   such   a   lyric,   weak   and cliched :  "the  vague  meaning of home  / you carry within  you  / moving  back and forth   /  across  this  vast country." Sukna­ ski  is  not,  yet,  a  poet   who  savours   his words like wine.
But  he tells a story compactly  and sen­ sitively, with touches of humour and acres of affection. He  builds  the legends of the


130
 labourer's history  of this  country, he bubbles   with   the  hyperbole of  the  bar­ room  extravaganza, he moves us with  the stories  of  inarticulate love.  In  one  sum­ ming-up  poem    Suknaski   suggests   that
"our stories  grow  fewer  f as the  need  to
retell   them   lessens."   At   least   the   way
Suknaski tells  these stories  in The Ghosts Call  You   Poor,  they  have   become  part of  us,  certain  to  be  repeated,  but   not needing to be re-told.
LAURIE  RICOU


A SAVING GRACE

PATRICK  LANE,  Poems:  New  & Selected. Ox­
ford,  $4·95·
DON  coLEs,  Anniversaries. Macmillan, $4-95·

·Why  are the  McLean Boys in  my  mind? Why are they  always  vicious  punks
who  murdered   out  of  fear? Why  not heroic like Bill the  Kid?  Why
was I  always  them? The  dying  gods?
Peter's  journey  to  Rome?   Fish on  stone?

CoMPREHEND THE   NAGGING    questions from   Lane's "The  Trace Of   Being"­ the   troubling  answers   the  asking   seems to imply -and you possibly arrive  at  the essence   to  western   Canadian   myth.   In Lane's words elsewhere, it all begins with "the  poet   as   outlaw."  To   understand that poet/outlawfanti-Christ metaphor of those   who  go  against  the   given   order, you  have  to  begin  with  a clear  image  of America's  Outlaw  Trail.   It   extended from  Harlem, Montana all the way to El Paso,  Texas. The  most  haunting of  all images  at  the  end  of  a  vast  chronicle of tragic   gunmen-who sought   refuge   in the  Trail's mountains, canyons,  and  des­ erts -is the story of Butch  Cassidy  (side­ kick  to The Sundance Kid)  who  clearly perceived the final  folly. Cassidy returned one  last  time  to his father's  cabin on  the homestead  and   confessed   to  his  greying  sister,  Lula  Parker Bentenson (now  95): "My  life has  been  wasted."

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



The bedrock  truth of the fabled  heroic gunslinger is that  he became tragic  in his isolato way of life. There was simply  en­ durance in  a  web  of  total  victimization. The  mask  of  rancher   failed  as  a  final refuge.  Witness  Shane. The mythic  power behind    men   like   Billy   the   Kid,   Jesse James, and   their  acolytes  was  that   they were  the  final  poignant submission   to  a lethal   energy/ entropy   dynamic   eman­ ating  from  the  malady  of  a  twentieth­ century technology making its last assault  on   the   wilderness.  America  loved   this profoundly. And  buried  us with  her  pulp and  cinematic myth.  The simple  truth is the  gunslinger myth  failed   to  take  root here.  What did  take  root  was  the  myth of  the  stranger who  personifies   the  un­ known.  And embodies fears. The myth of the cowboy  (the  best rider) in the Rodeo  with  all  its groupies took  root.  For  us in the Canadian west it was the last chance. And   then,    of   course,   there   came   the pseudo-urban   cowboys - the   midnight cowboys  (John  Berryman  and   Delmore Schwartz were  art  casualties of  another vintage-the  academy's ozone  cowboys spending themselves with broadway /times  square fillies) . The McLean boys were the cowboys,  despite   their   murders "out  of fear"; but,  they  never  stood  a  chance­ they  gunned  for   something  that   didn't exist.  To   understand how  the  American outlaw  myth  impinged on  our  own  fears here,   it's   best   to  turn  to  Lane's  "The Witnesses," a   graphic   portrayal  of   his father:

To  know  these  things
to  climb  into  the  confusions
which  are  only  words,  to  climb  into  desire
to ride in the  sun, to ride  against  time

The  McLeod Kid  raking  his spurs on the mare
the  cheers  from the  wagon-backs
where the  people sit to  watch  the  local
boy  ride  against  the  riders  from Calgary

In the  cult   of  the   stranger, the  un­
known,  I don't think  it was ever  a matter
 of  The   McLeod Kid   riding   against   the guys from  Calgary. They, and   the  rest, were  riding   against  him   (the   local  un­ known  and  needing  fear  ... will he  out­ ride us all this  year?).  I think  that  fear became   rooted    here -the   fear   of   all fears  harboured by the  Trail's gunslinger  coming  to  town   (he  fearing  that  young local  who  might just  be  the  fastest  gun this  time) . Remember,  Caesar  learned a reverence  for  that mythic cat  from  Naza­ reth  who  made  possible  the  anti-Christ. The   Outlaw   Trail  in   the   New  World  Eden  betrayed  by Bethlehem Steel would have   been   quite  different  without  the man   from   Nazareth.  Lane's  poetry   an­  chored   in   "word,"  "sun,"  "bone," "blood," "knife," and  "stone" would have been   poorer   without  that   man.   Lane's "My Father's Face" would  not have  con­ tained  the  same  mythic  magnitude:
My   father's  face
with  sunshine  cracked  and  razed hangs above
a  fallen twisted   pine he carried
down   from the  distant  hills

... my  father
with  his axe riding  the  sky
opens wounds
and  pinewood  falls away in mounds  of bleeding yellow at my  feet
where the scent  of pitch mixes with the  sun

The poem is an awesome  icon of a father who  doubles  for  Christ. In  this  surreal portrayal   he    mirrors   something   half­ Godly and  half-monstrous (the quality of the enigma  that  lurks  at  the centre of the labyrinth). Father  and  son  mirror  one another; father  is  the  stone   where   the son's  life  takes  root.  "Yellow" standing for  intellect,  transcendence, spirituality, and  life force  monitored by  the  sun  be­ comes  a  personal emblem for  Lane. But of  course  Lane   loves  irony  and  the  flux of  living things where  the  entropic often takes rule. There is the "Prospector" pan-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ning  for  gold.  He  shares  "with  the  sun / a  babble   of  flowers  ..." till  finally  sub­ mitting to the succubi  of the bushed  who are  finally  taken   by  the  yellow  entropy of decay:

... the  wasps
had  planted their eggs in  you
and   flowers  were  growing out  of  your  sleeping  eyes.

At  the  end  of  all  yellow  things-dry grass, sun,  bees, wasps, sunflowers,  decay
-there is  Lane's subtle  allusion  to  the
ancient poet  Li  Po in  "Teachers":

Better to  buy  a  bottle of Teachers Highland Cream
and  get  drunk with the  moon
as it  drowns in the  sea.

It  is  Lane   sometimes   weary   of   the writer's solitude and  retreats into  high mountain places. Lane  taking a raincheck of  the   outlaw's  deathwish. Lane  be­ deviled   by  the  succubi   (mythic  winged female   forms   that   come   to  haunt  the male   in  nightmares)  of   "Albino  Phea­  sants" "where  no  man  walks  except   in wasted  time." It is Lane haunted beneath it all by Li Po-fabled wine guzzler who, going  by a  drunken  blissful  whim,  dove into  the  reflected  image  of a  full  yellow moon, and drowned. A man  who thought he could  live by dying.
What fascinates me  about   Lane  is he didn't need  the  imported myths  of men like Billy the Kid.  Lane  never fooled him­ self for  a  moment. He  knew  damn  well his  father, or   any   other   person,   could stand   taller   than  any  myth.  All  the  vic­ tims    are    honoured:    "For  Rita-In Asylum," "Grey John," "For  Riel In That Gawdam  Prison," "Gerald" -to name  a few.  These poems  are  just  a  few  of  the finest   honed    diamonds  Lane   chose   to place  in this book spanning a decade  and a  half  of  hard work  giving  him  a  well­ earned   Governor General Award.
In  the South American cycle of poems
Lane  expands the  mythic  mainsprings of
 his Paleo-Indian dreamtime which  has been one of his deepest  sources for growth as a  poet.  With  that  journey  he was fur­ ther  able  to articulate with  Goya's  night­ mare  graphic clarity  man's inhumanity to man  and  survival  in a harsh landscape of bitter realities. There is "Unborn Things" where   the  whole  following   sequence   of poems  reads  like  one  long  objective cor­ relative moving  through a  subtle  web  of an   ancient  civilization  where   Christian and  Inca  myths  flourish  side  by side:

.•. the  child  draws  circles  in  the  dust for bits  of glass to  occupy
like  eyes  staring   out  of earth
and  the  woman lies on  her  hammock dreaming of the  lover  who  will  save  her
from  the  need  to  make  bread  again
I  will  go into  the   field
and  be  buried   with  the  corn.

As Kazantzakis pointed out, it is highly probable Mary  Magdalene shared  a simi­ lar  dream  (but   that   cat  from  Nazareth was drunk on his own strange visions, and failed  as earthly lover -leaving a single casualty which  leaves  his whole  myth  in doubt).  It's   been   the  same   story   ever since:  Poet/ dreamer versus working  muz­ hik;   the  poet's   (artist's)  dream at  odds with  the  Protestant work ethic.  It buried Schwartz; it  took  Cooperman, and  John Thompson.
Lane's  "Macchu  Picchu,"  his   finest
long poem,  proved  the local western Can­ adian poet  could  stand   next  to  Neruda and  become  an  Inca   ghost  speaking for the  vanished:

Standing on the  highest   rung  of the  city We place  our  hand   on  polished   stone That was  a  hitching-post  for the   sun. Now  there is nothing but  silence.
We watch the  sun   fall into  the  Andes.

The first cold  shafts  of night Reach into the  river   far below. Jn  a  gathering mist  I  feel
We are  growing out  of
The body  of something dead.

The  poem   owes   as  much   to   Eliot   as
Neruda:   Lane,    as   Inca    ghost,   moves

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



among strangers who "walk  through ruins
. . . talk   of   where    they   came   from,   / Where    they   are   going."  He   is   ghost "cursed by dreams." Ghost  basked in "Yellow  bruise  of light"; ghost  where
The Virgins have  left  their tombs With hands   like   brown  roots, With their  unborn child.
Let  the  city  grow  back  to  jungle.
Let  the  graves  like  wounds be  closed  again.

Unlike   Lane,  Coles   is  an   academic whose energy in poetry emanates from the European modernists. What he does share with  Lane  is transience and  a keen desire to  arrest   entropy with  art. He  is also  a master   iconographer  who  sees  into   the heart  of the human condition. Both Lane and  Coles  have  lived  in  the  mountains. Lane still lives in them most of the time; Coles'  are  now  the  luminous mountains of memory.  Both  possess the  gift  to con­ struct an  expanding metaphysics regard­ ing  survival   in  that   geography  of  mind and  external phenomena. In "Always  the Effort   to  Gather It  All"   Coles   quotes Rilke:

Also  in  the   mountains
Time  glitters

but  time  is synonymous with  entropy in that   complex  web   of  living   and   dying things  that   forever   yield  to  transforma­ tions  beneath the  life force. Elsewhere  in the  same  poem  Coles  states:
... you  begin  to  require, and  so to  adduce, As  the  mountains  fade,
Substitutes  for them, improvements upon
them, Closer, newer

The mountains permitting you  to  do  this
Only because by  now
They are  fading

And   he  knows   the   price   of  transience making  one  a  victim:

They are   fading  because of  your  childhood
Because   you  have   been   in  love, because   of nights
With a woman, or  many nights, Many women
 Because   you  have   not  stayed   put  in  one place

The   passage  haunts me.  Takes   my  me­ mory  back  to  the  Outlaw Trail.  Crowds  my mind  with  haunting images from  my recent  stay  on  West  42nd   just  up  from Times   Square  while   I  read   about  the American   west  in  the  New  York  Public  Library's microfilm  annex  near  the  East River.  Remember  now  being  unable   to resist  finding   that  Times, July  14,  rg66 photograph of  Delmore Schwartz -that frightening icon of a tormented man  who ingested  all  (books,  ideas,  places, women
-the whole  image  of America) and  fell forever  in the Columbia Hotel. One  block from  where  I formed  the sign of the cross and said one Hail Mary for a man  I never knew.  And  still  don't know  why  I  did that.  The  Coles  photograph on  the  back of Anniversaries is awesome. He could double  for Delmore's twin.  The signature of the times. Icon  as portent. What is reassuring   and   redemptive about  Coles is his courage in writing about  those mothers who gently  tyrannized their  sons with  hopeless  dreams. He  does what  few Canadian  poets  have  scarcely  begun   to do. Makes  his peace  in "For a Mother at
75":
We  would  like  to explain our  need  to  gather you
Back  with   us into   places & years that
We  will  live  this  time   more  clearly

Unlike Lane and Coles whose time goes unwasted  in poetic  refuge,  there  is Butch Cassidy   who   only  lived   and   spoke   his words -the    possible    poem    becoming lead  lodged  in  flesh and  marrow. At  the end of the mountain road in Deer Hunter, that  disturbing classic film, there  are  the bitter  words exchanged -till the leader's right  hand  raises a bullet. "You're on your own.  This,   is  this!  This,   is  this!"   Lane and   Coles  still  believe  in  metaphor. A saving grace.

ANDREW SUKNASKI

133

BOOKS IN REVIEW



FICTIONAL INDIANS

CAM   HUBERT, Dreamspeaker  and Tem  Eyos Ki and   the   Land    Claims   Question.    Clarke Irwin,  $1o.g5.

FoR THOSE OF us who  are  middle-aged, our first fictional  Indians were probably blood-thirsty scalp-hunters   (usually  Iro­ quois)     and    romantic   culture    heroes dwelling   in  wigwams "By  the  shores  of Gitchi   Gwnee,  by  the  shining  Big-Sea­ Water." Indians were  also  the  bad  guys in the American cowboy movies shown at Saturday matinees. Little  effort was made to suggest  that  the  tribes  might  differ  in such  fundamentals as  language, culture and  environment. During the past twenty years,  however,  an  interest  in  tribal  cul­ ture  as  expressed   in  art  and  oral  litera­ ture has led to a more informed  apprecia­ tion. Folklorists  and  anthropologists with their   tape   recorders  arrived   just  in  the nick  of  time,  for,  thanks   to  the  disap­ proval    of   Christian    missionaries    and government  agents   in  the  past  and   the counter-attractions  of   movies  and   tele­ vision  in   the   present,   story-telling  had become  almost a lost art.  When  the Brit­ ish  Columbia  Indian Arts  and   Welfare  Society  decided  fifteen  years ago  to con­ duct  a story-telling contest  among Indian school-children on Vancouver Island,  the first  results  were  disappointing:

The   Indians  the   children   wrote   of  were those  that  they  had  seen on television or in the  movies.  There was  scarcely  a  mention made  of longhouses, dug-out  canoes, the sea or  whales, seals or  salmon,  all of which  are an integral part  of the life of the West Coast Indians.

It was  only  after  the  children had  been persuaded to consult  their elders that  they were able  to record  the traditional stories, customs,   and   beliefs  included   in  Tales from the  Longhouse.
Another recent  development has  been the  recognition of the  Indian as an  indi-

134
 vidual  with  a system  of values  not  neces­ sarily  inferior to  that  of  the  white man.  Rudy  Wiebe  has  rewritten  Western  Can­ adian history  in a fictional form  from  the Indian's point  of  view;  Margaret Craven has shown  that Indians can actually teach whites  something of  merit   beyond  mePe survival  skills.
The  two    streams -mythology   and social   "relevance" -come   together  in Cam   Hubert's  Dreamspeaker  and   Tem Eyos Ki and the Land Claims Question. Dreamspeaker provided the script for a prize-winning  CBC   film  directed  by Claude Jutra. It appears here as a novella (but  deprived of  the  splendid backdrop of mountains and  sea that  brings  a surge of  nostalgia  and   envy  to  the  breasts  of those who do not live in Lotusland). The central character  is  an  eleven   year  old white   child   called   Peter.  The son  of  a teen-age drug addict  and   prostitute,  he has been shunted from  one foster home  to another before  coming to  roost  in  what is termed  a facility.  His response  to insti­ tutional life  is robot-like  movement, ex­ treme  withdrawal, bed-wetting, and  peri­  odic   seizures   brought  on   by   dancing lights,  the  twittering of crickets,  and  the sight  of  "something long  and  snake-like, leaving a wet trail  on the floor, raising  its horned  heads,  searching, looking  both  in front and  behind." One  night  he escapes from  the  facility   and, after   making his way through the  bush, arrives on a beach near Campbell River.  Here  he encounters an  ancient Nootka Indian, the Dream­ speaker,  with   his  mute   companion, He Who  Would  Sing.
The  old   man's   ancestor  would   have been  one  of  those  great   potlatch-giving chiefs described in  the  "Song of a Speaker"  that    the    famous    ethnologist Franz  Boas recorded some sixty years ago:

Now,  you,  great   one,  busy  yourself  again, and  invite   the  tribes  all  around  the  world to come  to a potlatch.... You give presents to  them.   You  give  again,   double   amount,

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the  same  amount of property on  top of the first  amount, to  those  invited  from  time  to time by our  chief.

Though he lacks the  power,  prestige,  and possessions of  his  ancestors, the  old  man is neither inhospitable nor  pathetic. He is still "Dreamspeaker," the repository of tribal  myth  and  ritual, the  owner  of the great   dance  capes,   the   drum,  and   the rattles; the shamanistic healer.  He defines himself in the chanted accompaniment to the dance:

"One  Dreamspeaker is Truth, two  Dream­ speakers   are   Justice,   three  Drearnspeakers are   Eternity  and   four   Dreamspeakers  are Rebirth. No  evil  can  overcome   the  power of  a  Dreamspeaker,  and  if  the  initiation is painful, the rewards are great."

The old man  offers  the boy food, lodg­ ing,  clothing, and   gifts  from   the  store­  house  of  tradition. Human guilt  may  be assuaged  by making the spirits responsible for  evil. The fearful images  which  white people   dismiss  as  being  "just your  ima­ gination" have  a real  existence  in Indian mythology- the   dancing  lights and noises  are  Stlalacum, the  double-headed snake  Sisiutl-and  because   they  exist, they  can be  defeated. Peter  prepares for battle by learning Nootka legends and dances.   At  the  same  time,   he  learns   to grow vegetables, to smile, to control his temper, to practise serenity. And  thus  the family of so-called  underprivileged people
-"Grandpa,"  "uncle," and   the  boy­
becomes  a successful  social  unit.
The opening quarter of Dreamspeaker is   grindingly  monotonous   with   its   no doubt  deliberate  use  of  colourless   lan­
guage,   social  science   jargon,   and   para­ tactic structure. In  contrast, the  account of Peter's regeneration is credible, moving  and   constructive; an  ancient  knowledge is used to cure modern psychosis. It would have  been   nice  if  the  story  could   have ended   with   Peter's  dance.  Instead,  we have   the   RCMP's  apprehension  of  the boy, a judge's decision  that  he be returned
 to   the   facility,    Dreamspeaker's  death from  old  age,  and   the  suicides  of  Peter and  He  Who  Would  Sing.
In  his introduction to  Son  of Raven,
Son  of Deer,  fables of the   Tse-shaht people, George  Clutesi  appeals to  white
society  to meet  the  Indian half-way  and
to acknowledge the  validity  of traditions that  produced "a  happy, singing  people" with   respect   for   "all   living   things,   no matter how small  and  insignificant." It is evident  that Cam  Hubert shares this view. But  surely   the   point   would   have   been more effectively made if Peter had been allowed  to remain with  his "family." And is the white man's system really so stupid, inefficient,  and  perverse? The  Victorian­ style "happy ending in a heavenly  horne"  that  Ms. Hubert  provides is a sentimental cop-out that   jars,  coming  in,  as  it  does, on  the  heels of  the  suicides :

rfhe  old  man  moved  swiftly  on  strong  legs, racing  with  the  boy  toward  the  hilltop.... And  He  Who  Would  Sing,  did  ... Singing to celebrate  something he had  heard  for  the first time after  death, the sound of a healthy child,  laughing happily.

In  T em Eyos Ki and the  Land Claims Question, Ms. Hubert again  suggests that adherence to Indian ways can solve prob­ lems that bafHe white  authorities. Set near  Tahsis   on  Vancouver Island,  this  story, too, gets off to an infelicitous start,  partly because  the  reader is  confused as  to  the identity of  the  narrator and   partly   be­ cause  of a  long drawn out  description of canine  sex  life.  The  narrator  eventually is revealed  to be a garrulous twenty-two­ year-old  orphan who  has  been  raised  by her    grandmother,   the    Nootkas'   Old Woman,  and   who  will  one  day  become Old  Woman  herself. Old  Woman is the female  equivalent of Drearnspeaker, a storehouse   of  tribal   wisdom   often   con­ veyed  by story  telling  and   of   ritual  ob­ servances  still  applicable to  physical  and  social problems.

135

BOOKS IN REVIEW



In   the   allusive   style  of  small   town gossip, Tern  Eyos Ki introduces the pieces of a  jig-saw that  eventually are  fitted  to­ gether   to  form  a  complete   picture.  The  characters include  Alice, a chronic aborter until  Old  Woman takes her  in  hand; her son  Peter  whose green  eyes  and  fair  hair mark  him not as a bastard but as a sacred person; Suzy  who  becomes  a  paramedic after  "being grabbed" to purge  her of her delinquent   ways;   P.A.,   a   gone-to-seed remittance  man  who  farms  haphazardly on the edge of the reserve;  and  Pete's  pet, a  rabbit  with ear  mites.  It is the  govern­  ment's   intention  of   moving   P.A.   that precipitates the land claims question. This is an  entertaining story  if you can  stand the  style of  the  monologuist   whose voice is not  always  convincingly native,  though the Indian's gift  for parody  and  deflation is effectively  conveyed.
Cam  Hubert is on  to a  good  thing  in suggesting  that  the experience of the West Coast  past,  embodied in myth  and  ritual, may provide solutions for contemporary problems; but  if  she  wants  her  work  to be regarded as literature rather than sociology   or   folklore,    she   must    learn artistic  control.  At  present,   she  lacks  a sense of propriety and  a sense of  propor­ tion.   There  is  a  danger  in  setting   the worst  aspects  of white  society  (drinking, drugs, disease, and bureaucratic stupidity) against   the  most  idealistic  aspects  of  na­ tive  culture  in  order   to  preach   the  uni­  form  superiority of  the  latter. After  all, natives  have   accepted technology and used  it  not  only  for  earning a  living  but also for entertainment. (I recall  with de­ light  that   the  Inuit of  Tuktoyaktuk  and  Polytuk   think   nothing  of   chartering  a plane  so that  they  can  attend the  Friday  night  bingo  games  in  Inuvik.)
According to  Tern  Eyos Ki,  "Old Woman  teaches   us  that   nothing that   is truly good is ever lost." There is consider­ able goodness  in Cam  Hubert's first book. Her   ability   to  create  sympathetic char-
 acters  and  her skill in weaving  West Coast legends into  the fabric of her story are commendable. If she  can  get  rid  of  the "ear  mites" of partisanship, emotionalism, and   reverse  prejudice, she  may  produce first-rate fiction.
MURIEL WHITAKER



VICTOR- OR VICTIM

MARGARET ATWOOD,  Life  Before  Man. McClel- land & Stewart, $12.95·

MARGARET ATWOOD, that expert on victors and  victims, has become  the victim  of her own  fame.  No  longer   is  a  book  by  her allowed  to slip quietly  into  the shops and find its own level of acceptance by readers and  critics.   Like  one  of  those  vast  and brilliant balloons  which  are  now  return­ ing to our  skies, anything she  writes  must be elevated immediately on  the heat  pro­  duced  by publishers' manoeuvres, like that  which   has   just   introduced  her   newest novel, Life  Before Man: a special edition, signed  by the  publisher (!) as well as the author, and sent to five hundred "opinion­ makers"  before   the  regular  edition  was put on sale. Perhaps such ploys sell books; they do not win critics or affect  the book's eventual  standing.  And   sometimes   they disturb one's  thoughts-as in the case of Life   Before   Man- by  the  contrast  be­ tween    the    flamboyance   of    marketing methods and   the  deliberate  modesty   of what  is being  marketed.
I finished reading Life Before Man with a half-remembered sentence from  Oscar Wilde  hovering in  my consciousness,  and I leafed   through  Intentions  to  find   it. There it  was,  in  "The Critic  as  Artist," and  it fitted  like a glove my first impres­ sions   of   Atwood's  book.   "Mr.   Henry  James writes fiction  as if it were a painful  duty,  and  wastes  upon mean motives  and  imperceptible 'points  of  view'  his  neat literary  style,  his  felicitous   phrases,   his

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



swift  and  caustic  satire." I am  not  sug­ gesting  that  Atwood  is a  disciple  of  The  Master, or of any master, but  I do find in Life Before  Man a kind  of dutiful asceti­ cism,  a  leanness   in  the  presentation  of natures  and   motives,   an   inclination  to dwell on the dull, the inept, the tedious in human existence,  on  storms  in  tepid  tea­ cups and  mental fogs in basements. I also find   such   inclinations  existing   parallel  with  the  simple  excellence   of  the  prose, the  frequent  felicitousness of  image   as well  as phrase,  and  a satire  which-if  it is never  here as bold as in earlier  Atwood novels  and  certainly not  as  comic  as  in Lady Oracle -gains in bittersweet irony.
Atwood,   of  course,   has  been  increas­
ingly reductive in her writing as time and
her career  have gone on. The  finest of her poems  are  the  most  gnarled and  concise, and  her  fiction  is often  best  when  it  at­ tempts  least, which  is why the more obvi­ ously risible incidents in Lady Oracle and the  more  outlandish  delusions  in Surfac­ ing form  the least  telling passages in their respective   novels.  And  Life Before   Man carries   us farther in  the  same  direction, for the action  has been so diminished that  the  elements  of  fantasy important in  the earlier  novels are no longer  present  except in  vague  and  portentous daydreams, and there  are  only  three  characters of major importance, through whose  minds  the action  is seen  unwinding in  and  around the  Royal  Ontario Museum and  its  cre­ puscular dinosaur galleries. The smallness of  the  cast,  the  tight  unity  of  place,  the comparatively short  time span of  less than  two  years  in  which  the  main  action   un­ folds, give a sense of classic  restraint and proportion, which  is enhanced by the fact that   the   one  disaster,   the   suicide   of  a lover  whose  memory   haunts the  rest  of the  book,  occurs  offstage,  as  it  were,  in time and  place  alike.
Moving  against  the bizarre backdrop of the museum are Elizabeth, her husband Nate,  and  Lesje,  who eventually becomes
 Nate's  unpassionate and  only half-willing lover.  Elizabeth  and   Lesje  work  in  the museum,  as  did  Chris,   Elizabeth's  part­ Indian lover  who  blew off his  head  with a shotgun.  Nate is a lawyer who has given up  his profession  because  he likes to stay at home and make wooden toys. Elizabeth  is the  dominant  personality, a  solid  and  outwardly  cultured  female   spider   of  a woman, toughened in  the  hard  school of genteel  poverty.  One  senses that  her love forced   Chris   into   self-destruction, and certainly she  plays  a  malignly  manipula­ tive  role  in  shaping and  impoverishing the relationship between  Nate  and  Lesje. Thus, the  "mean  motives" that  Wilde found  in James are abundantly present  in Life    Before    Man,   and   the   "points  of view,"  if  not  quite  "imperceptible," are those  of  mental  confusion. There  is  no character in the novel who thinks without sentimentality    or    feels    without   fore­ thought,  yet  all  on  a curiously  low level, near  the  instinctual; the  drives  of  terri­  torial imperative and  of passionless sexu­ ality seem to compel  the  actions  of Eliza­ beth and Nate and  Lesje much  more than the aims and  ideas that  each  of them  tries
to live by.
Here, of course,  one comes to the point


Inspector Therrien
by Andre  Major
translated by  Mark Czarnecki
240  pp.  (paper)  9.95
A novel of small-town Quebec which combines violence and   sensuality with a  deep   insight  into  contemporary society.
Andre  Major,  winner  of  the   1976
Governor General's  Award, is  one  of
Quebec's  best-known  popular  writers.
His  work  has  been  described as "some­ where  between the  bleak  violent world  of Marie-Claire Blais and the grotesque humour  of  Roch  Carrier."-Quill & Quire.
Publirhed   by  Press  Porclpic and  distributed  by Beaverbook!.>. 150  Lesmill  Rd .•  Don   Mills. Ont. M3B  ;,:T5



137

BOOKS IN REVIEW



of  the   title.   Life   before   man -in   the sense that  she finds the bones of dinosaurs far  more  compelling than  the  bodies  of men-is  the  central concern   of  Lesje's mental  existence,   and   at  least  her  fan­ tasies  of  the  Cretaceous have  more  life than  Elizabeth's conflict-ridden memories  and   Nate's   basement  filled  with   idiotic  toys.

Greenland was barren, icy, devoid  of life, whereas   the   place   Lesje  intended  to  dis­ cover  would  be tropical,  rich  and  crawling with  wondrous  life forms, all of  them  either  archaic and  thought extinct,  or  totally  un­ known  even  in fossil records.

The   pathetic circumstance that   Atwood sets out  to record  is that  the ferocities,  the hungers, the imperatives by which  we live may  not  be  far  apart from  those  of  the dinosaurs, of  Life  Before  Man. Perhaps she  is suggesting   what  many  people  re­ cently  feel they  have  discovered,  that  the evils of terrestrial existence  are cyclical in their  occurrence, and irredeemable. One  senses it when  jogging Nate,  near  the end of the novel, "aims again  for it, that  non­  existent  spot  where he longs  to be. Mid­  air"; when,  in  the  final  sentence,   Eliza­ beth  looks  at   the  exhibition  of  modern Chinese  art  she  has  assembled,  with  its naive  messages  and   its  lovingly  painted vegetables,  and  reflects:  "China does not exist. Nevertheless she longs to be there." The  paradises are  always impossible; the possible is always,  in its drab  way, hell.
Life   Before  Man, with  all  its  writing virtues -which are exactly those Wilde once  attributed to  Henry  James-is  in­ teresting but essentially anti-novelistic fic­ tion, for it negates  the presuppositions on which   the   novel   has  been  traditionally based,  that  the  lives of  men  and  women necessarily   have   a   value  that   is  worth  cherishing. All  such   presuppositions are thrown in doubt in a book that  rejects the illusions   of   hope   with   as  much   quiet  rigour as Camus did. I suspect Life Before Man does not  reject  compassion,  but  At-
 wood  is  as  reticent about   this  as  she  is about other matters of her  art.  And  this merely  emphasizes again  the  contrast  be­ tween  Atwood  as public  persona and  At­ wood  as  private poet; as  overt  histrionic and  as covert  ascetic.
GEORGE WOODCOCK

POETICITIES
BILL   BISSETT,   pomes   for  yoshi.   Talonbooks,
$4·95·
PIER GIORGIO DI  CICCO, Dancing in the  House of
Cards.     Three Trees  Press, $3.95.
LORNE    DANIEL,    Towards a   New    Compass.
Thistledown Press, $9.50; pa. $4.50.
CATHY   FORD,   Tall   Trees.  Blewointmentpress, n.p.
MICHAEL ONDAATJE, Elimination Dance. Nairn
Publishing, n.p.
IN THEIR  FRACTIOUS diversity, these  five poets  illustrate the  condition of  contem­ porary  poetry.  The  literary   illness  en­  demic   to  our  time  is  to  regard  conven­ tions,  no  matter  how  multiplicitous and  contradictory, as loci where  poetry is im­ manent. I mean  that the signals  of poeti­  city, the  clues that invite  us to consider a page  of words as poetry,  are  entirely con­ ventional;  but  we  are  writing as  though they  were  not.  We are  writing as though the  signals  were  the  poetry.
Because   conventions  are   only  agreed
upon  they must  be employed persuasively, to  maintain agreement:  to  persuade   us that  when  a convention is deployed, when poetry   is signalled, there   will  indeed   be a  poem   before   us.  Our  ways  of   aban­ doning  persuasion are  now  as  numerous as our    conventions  of   poeticity.    Poets whose  immanence-laden  signals  are   the formal  manipulations  of   language  risk abandoning   meaning,    and    often    do. Others abandon-or treat with  abandon
-language and   form, for   to  them   the poem    is  immanent  in   the   subjects   of which   they   treat, or   in  experience, or things    (conventions  all) .   Still   others abandon everything but friends and  repu-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



tation; they know  that  their  works will be agreed   to  be  poems  because  they,  them­ selves, are agreed  to be poets.
Michael Ondaatje's Elimination  Dance is poetry  by reputation. In  the  dance  of humanity we are  "eliminated," group  by
group, for our  human weaknesses-such
as not  having  been  born  in Canada. Ap­ parently the  winner of  this  game  would be Canadian, very  cool,  feeling  no  pain.  Ondaatje lists only the cuter eliminations: "Those  who   don't  know   how   to  spell zuckini  zookeeney  zeucckini  zuchini."
In  Pier  Giorgio Di Cicco's Dancing in the  House of Cards, poeticity is attached firmly  to the  page.  Without knowing  the
author's  name    or   nationality,  without
sharing his  poetic   ideology  or  even  per­ ceiving  what  he is writing about, one can read   his  lines  and   know   that   they  are poetry:
The  light closes its tiny fist.
The  trees put  up their  old ladders.
Spring  is coming  with  both  its  eyes closed,
stumbling  against   brick.   Suddenly   its  left hand
is found  on my living  room floor.

("Mternoons in  May")

Di Cicco's forte is the bizarre image, the striking juxtaposition, and  in a first  read­ ing  these  are  effective   textual  signals  of poeticity.   At  their   best,  moreover,  they result  in the "sudden  rightnesses" Stevens result  of:   twangs of  correspondence be­ tween  the  real  world  and  the  oneiric  fic­ tion  on the page.  Too often,  however,  Di Cicco's metaphors are  all invention with­  out semantic necessity: clever but mean­ ingless phrases  following hard  on each other's heels  without sense  or  direction, like  the  blind  leading the  blind  in  Breu­ ghel's  allegory.   "Golf   balls  of   nothing," "hallways of a tear." Di Cicco merits  our attention, though he  requires  us  to  for­ give  perhaps half  of  his  production.
Cathy Ford's poetic   is  founded  upon
things,  in  particular upon   things  in  the
Canadian Rockies. Her  mountains, rivers,
 tall trees, and  hikes among  them,  are pre­ sented  sensitively  and  with  a  visible  at­  tempt  at  objectivity, though  not  without romanticism. In  fact  she does not adhere to  W.C.W.'s dictum,  "No  ideas  but   in things." The  jotted,  fragmentary quality of her  poetry  arises  not  from  the  multi­ plicity  of objects  in  the  world,  but  from the  fact  that   she  is  alluding to  the  un­  written   poem    of    her    responses:     the thoughts and   emotions   things   call   up. When  that  poem  drifts  onto the  page­ and  it does, now and  then-her elliptical manner is effective:
she went  back  once
and  kicked it off the  trail
then  went back and  burnt  it
and  went  back again
and  buried  it with  twelve stones
("Lonesome Lake")
Lome Daniel is not so much  a western as an Albertan poet.  The  "new  compass" of his title  would  specifically  point  away from  the  "insidious approaches" of  east­ ern  Canada, the  U.S.,  and  transmontane west.   For    this   poet,   poeticity    resides neither  in  words   nor  in   things,   but   in attitudes:  poetic  stances,  ways of  seeing things  that  make them  the merest adjunct of a poem. What we are shown  is not "the object   slightly  turned"  (Stevens   again) but  the object sacrificed  to wishful  think­ mg.
Daniel's   Albertan   nationalism-his
ruling  attitude-leads  him  to  compare the erosion of southern Alberta's drylands
to  "vietnamese slaying  I vietnamese." It
also leads him  to seek an image  for  those
less pure  and  patriotic than  he, to find  it
in  the figure  of "beef  cows,"  and  to con­ clude  of these  "fat and  complacent I na­  tionless I immigrants":
these cows deserve  their  dining-table fate and  the wind  carries  their  death  to me
as I attempt to define directions
seek a new boundary
a new North
("Killing Floor  Resolutions")

139

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



What  troubles  here  is not  so  much   the ethical  and political  wrongness of Daniel's discriminations, nor  even  the  silliness of his trumpeted promise  to "go  North" (to Edmonton?  Tuktoyaktuk?  The   Pole?), but  the  absence  of aesthetic distance  be­ tween  the  attitude and  its  expression. A subtler   song  might  convince  us  of  any­ thing:  perhaps  even  of  the  poeticity  of slaughter.
bill bissett is especially  germane to  the present  grouping, because of the sheer variety    of   conventional   devices    with which   he  signals   poeticity.   In   his  oral poetry  this function is served in large  part by the voice of the  performer; in his con­
crete  poetry,  by graphic design; wherever
his words are  printed, by his idiosyncratic spelling; and  throughout his work,  by a semantic substrate of counter-cultural ideals  and  experiences. All four  of these devices  are  present   or  implied  in  pomes for  yoshi;  yet  this  is not  one  of  bissett's more effective  collections.  Forlorn in con­ tent,   banal   in  expression:  "yu   know   i
love  I yu    that  shud  I b enuff  for  whn
its I happening I with  I us." It is enough
for  lovers, certainly! But  not  for  readers.
The most  fruitful overview  of bissett's
production would focus, I think, on his poeticities more than  on his poems. Might not  that   also  be  the  case  with  contem­ porary  poetry as a whole? Our enthusiasm for  declaring, "This is  poetry!" far  out­  runs  our  craft  for  making  poems.

ROD  WILLMOT



REFERENCES

SING PRAISES TO  EDITIONS FIDES! Over  the last  few  years,  this  company has  almost  single­ handedly provided critical access  to  writing in Quebec, through a series  of  substantial indexes and  biblographies that  no library can  afford  to be  without and   no  scholar  can  now  afford   to ignore. In  particular  I want   to  single  out  the Dictionnaire des oeuvres litteraires du  Quebec,
 edited by Maurice Lemire and  others, the  sec­ ond   volume  of   which  (covering  the   period I900-1939)  has  just  appeared. A  massive  and  illustrated guide to  titles, authors, and general cultural  movements and    events,   this   second volume is good  value even  at  $48.oo for   I363  pages; the   short critical  entries  provide solid information, and  each   volume    ( vol.   I:  "des
origines a rgoo" costs  $35.00) contains a  use­
ful  chronology-which is instructive in  point­
of-view, even   if  unappreciative of  alternative
perspectives, in  its  classification of "English" Canada with  the  U.S.A. as "I'Amerique  anglo­ saxonne." Fides  has   also   published   Reginald Hamel's  excellent  Dictionnaire   pratique   des auteurs  quebecois  ($19-95),  a   critical  and  bibliographic   guide   to    some    6oo    French­ language   writers   in    Canada    (not   Quebec alone);  "un  compagnon," the  editor calls   it,  for    "chercheurs."  Biocritical,   it   lists   major studies of  these   writers  as  well  as  reports on them, and   if  it  ignores rather  too freely  most English-language    commentaries    on    French­ language  works,  it   will  serve   as  a   guide    to essayists   in   both   languages  who   need   to  do their  homework  before  they   themselves  begin  to  write. Michel  Houle &  Alain Julien's  Dic­  tionnaire   du     cznema     quebecois    ($14.95) serves  a  more  limited subject, but  it,  too,  sees itself  as a companion or  guide: with  entries on some   2000   films    (three  quarters  of   which appeared  between  Ig6o  and   I978), on  film­ makers, and  film   boards, with  appendices on chronology   and     terminology.    Odette   Con­ demine's Octave  Cremazie   (n.p.)  is  more   re­ stricted  still,  and more   of   a  celebration than a   reference work;  it   marks   the  centenary of Cremazie's death  with  a  selection of 457  illus­  trations  (prints  and   photos)  to  illustrate  his life  and  the  recurrent  themes of his  work.  The result, rather like  Lena  Newman's Macdonald, is a  scrapbook of  a high  order. Unfortunately there is  something  of  the  feel  of  a  scrapbook about  Fides's Archives des  lettres canadiennes as  well,  three  volumes of  which    (II:  L'ecole littbaire  de  Montreal, $15.oo; III: Roman,
$2o.oo;  and   V:   Thefitre, $35.00)  are   cur­ rently available. There  are   to  be  found  here  general  essays   on   themes, including   French­ language drama in  Manitoba,  women  in  Que­ bec  fiction,  and    the   Quiet   Revolution;  and  there are   survey articles  on  major authors­ Conan  to   Hebert  and   Maillet;   Gelinas  to Ferron   and    Tremblay;   together  with    brief biographies, comments on  specific   works,  and  excellent bibliographies,  mostly  primary. Some fine  historical research  has  gone  into   the  pre­  paration  of   these   volumes;  but   they   remain fragmentary, for  occasional consultation,  most

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



interesting perhaps  for  the   methodology  they bring  to bear  upon  literature.
Beside  these  practical dictionaries, the first volume  of  the  Bibliographie du  Quebec I 821-
1967, from  the  Bibliotheque nationale du  Que­
bec,   seems   unclear.  A   descriptive  catalogue
138 pp. long,  it constitutes the  beginning of a catalogue  of   15o,ooo  items,    in   all   fields­ valuable, no  doubt, and  ambitious,  yet  its con­  nection  with   future volumes   is  not apparent. The  preface does  assert   that  the  project is  a rebuttal  to   Lord  Durham's   declaration  that this  was a people without  history or  literature; but  one  feels  it  needs  a  practical as  well as  an emotional function.
Several other  kinds   of  reference work  have also  recently become available. Two University of  Manitoba  manuscript  indexes, for  example
-registers of  the  Frederick Philip Grove  Col­
lection and   the  John Wesley  Dafoe Collection
-will   prove    useful    to   researchers,  as   will
Gertrude E.  N.  Tratt's A  Survey and   Listing of  Nova   Scotia  Newspapers 1752-1957    (Dal­ housie   University  School  of  Library  Service,
$10.00}. Tratt's work  supplies several kinds  of information (dating, size, names,  changes) and attempts  to   describe  policies    and    attitudes; yet   a   descriptive  comment  like   "radical  in tone" is  a  phrase  susceptible  to  much  inter­ pretation.  If the    book   supplies  no   specific guide  to   individual  contents,  it   thus   draws  attention  to   the   kind   of   work   still   in   need of  doing. Thomas  B.  Vincent's  usual  meticu­ lous  scholarship is  revealed in  another of  his Loyal    Colonies   Press    pamphlets,   Jonathan Odell: An  Annotated  Chronology of the  Poems
1759-1818  ($4.75),   which     in    addition   to describing   both     published   and     manuscript poems,  adds  notes  on  subject, metre, etc.  More familiar in  format is  Gale's Something  About the   Author, a  guide to  children's writers and to  the   publishing  histories of  popular  works; vol.   18   ($34.00)  includes a  lively   illustrated section on  the  life  and   publications of  Ernest Thompson  Seton.  Fides'  seven   Jackdaw-like summaries  of  various  aspects of  the   work   of Jasmin, Choquette, Saint-Denys-Garneau, Rin­ guet,   Savard,   Nelligan,   and    Leclerc    (two  others are  promised, on  Roy  and  Guevremont) are  perhaps most  useful  at  the secondary school level; at  $s.oo each, they  are  part of  a  series entitled Dossiers   de  documentation sur  Ia lit­  terature  canadienne-fran(aise. Also  for  schools is  Virginia  Robeson and   Christine   Sylvester's Teaching Canadian Studies: An  Evaluation of Print   Materials Grades 1-13   (OISE, $18.g5); yet  the  short  reviews  of classroom usability that the   work   contains  cannot  substitute  for   the innovations of  the  sensible teacher.  Referring
 only  to works in social  studies and  social  issues, the  book  also  causes  one  to  wonder about the compilers' sense  of  "culture"; literature is left
out.   J.  R.   Colombo's  Other   Canadas   (Mc­
Graw-Hill  Ryerson, $15.95)   is  an   anthology
of science  fiction   and  fantasy, but  is so  broad­
based   in  its  definition of  these   terms,   and   so catholic in taste, as not  to  help  very  much; nor does    his   bibliography,   Canadian  SF    & F (Hounslow, n.p.) guide one  beyond book  titles. It tantalizes with   titles  like  Spider Robinson's Callahan's Crosstime Saloon, reclaims Gordon Dickson    and   A.   E.   van   Vogt    as   Canadian writers,  but   leaves    Phyllis    Gotlieb's  science fiction  short   stories   still   unindexed. R.  Reg­ inald's Science Fiction and  Fantasy  Literature: A  Checklist, 1700-1974 (Gale, 2  vols. $64.00) also  ignores  individual stories,  and  the  second  volume, a guide to authors, provides such  brief notes  that  it can  only  be a  place  to begin  look­ ing  for  information.
By contrast, the  latest   volume (IV:  1771  to
1800}   of  the   Dictionary  of  Canadian   Biog­
raphy (Univ. of Toronto Press,  $gs.oo)  offers good  value.  It begins  with  three excellent  com­ mentaries on  Acadians, Quebec to  1774,  and  Native  Peoples,   which   serve  as  a  background to   the   period    being    covered,   and    warrant reading in  their own  right by all  interested in the  cultural attitudes of  the  time.  Studies of individual people  follow:  Bigot,  Vaudreuil, Le Gardeur de  Repentigny   (the volume   is  there­ fore    almost    a   guide   to   Kirby!) ;   excellent essays   by   Lorraine    McMullen   on    Frances Brooke   and   by   Douglas  Lochhead  on   Alex­ ander  Henry.  The figures   in  this  volume   pro­  vide   a   guide   to   the   country's   placenames: Levis,    Belcher,   Ramezay,   Vancouver;    and  factual,  neutral accounts. But  sometimes these  lose sight of the  individuals in  question. About Samuel Hearne, for  example, C.  S. Mackinnon justly  writes:  "As  an  explorer and   writer,  he represents an  interesting combination of  physi­ cal  endurance and   intellectual  curiosity." But one  longs  for  some  sense  of  the  myth   Hearne has  become  in  the  culture at  large. In  the  new (i.e.,  grd)   edition of the  Oxford  Dictionary of Quotations  (Oxford,  $gg.oo),  complete with phrases  from   Nell   Gwyn   and    Mandy  Rice­ Davies, one   also   longs   for   more   substantial Canadian  allusions.  McCrae is  there, for  "In Flanders  Fields," McLuhan for  "The  medium is the  message"; and  Leacock is "riding off  in all  directions." But   Haliburton is  represented by this inimitable quotation from  The Attache: "I   want   you   to   see   Peel,   Stanley, Graham, Shiel,  Russell,  Macaulay, Old   Joe, and   so on. These men  are  all  upper  crust  here."  It's  not the  phrase   that leaps to  mind.	w.H.N.







ON E. K. BROWN

I  FOUND THAT  DAVID   STAINES'   bibliogra­ phy  of  E.  K.  Brown,  published   in  your Number  83   (Winter   I979),   contained several  items  I had  not picked  up myself. I would like, however,  to add seven items:

1927:  "Henry James." Rev.  of  Henry   James: Man and  Author by  Pelham Edgar. CanF, 7  (March 1927), 181-82.
1929:  "A  Life  of Bierce." Rev. of Bitter  Bierce
by C.  Hartley Grattan. CanF, 10  (Dec.
1929),  102.
1930: Rev.  of American Short  Stories of the Nineteenth Century ed. John Cournos. CanF, 10  (July 1930), 382.
Rev.  of  The Golden Grove: Selected Passages   from   the   Sermons  and   Writ­ ings  of Jeremy Taylor ed.  Logan  Pear­ sall   Smith.  CanF,  10   (Sept.    1930),
462.
"Dean  Swift." Rev.  of  Swift  by  Carl van  Doren. CanF, 11  (Dec. 1930), 1 Io-
11.
1936:  "Canadian   Poetry  Repudiated."  Rev. of  New  Provinces ed.  F.  R.  Scott. New Frontier, 1  (July 1936), 31-32.
1951:  Matthew  Arnold: Selected Poems.  Ed. with   an   Intro.  by  E.  K.  Brown.   New York:   Appleton-Century-Crofts,   1951.
xxviii   + 101  pp.
Papers:  Many of Brown's  papers, including lecture  notes,   are   held   at   the   University  of Toronto Archives.

I would  also like to remedy  two errors. Brown's review of Lavinia Davis'  A Bibli­ ography  of the  Writings of Edith  Whar­ ton   appeared  in   American   Literature, volume 5, pp. 288-90, for November  I 933, not   March  I934·  The  title  of  Brown's review  of  Pound's  Polite  Essays,  I940, is "Mr. Pound's Conservatism."
Brown's  review of New  Provinces, con­
taining poems  by Robert  Finch,  Leo Ken­
nedy,  A. M.  Klein,  A.  J. M. Smith, and

142
 E. J. Pratt, is an  interesting entry  in  the long series of skirmishes between  the modernists, led  by Smith  and  Scott,  and the  writers  and  critics  who,  like  Brown, were  essentially   Romantic  in  their  out­ look. The  left-wing New  Frontier  had,  at one  time  or  another, three   of   the  New Provinces   poets   on   its   editorial   board  (Kennedy, Pratt,  and   Klein),  but   this did not daunt Brown. Although he praises the  poems,  which generally  reflect  the in­ fluence  of T. S.  Eliot,  the  Metaphysical poets,  and   the  French Symbolists,  he  is very hard  on  the  brief  preface, which,  as he   notes,   almost   repudiates  the   poems which  follow.  The preface   explains   that  the  poets, since  writing the  poems  in  the anthology (which  waited  a long  time for a publisher)  had  turned to writing more socially relevant poetry.  Brown  quotes al­ most  the  whole  preface in his  review, re­ ferring to  it  as an  "amazing  document" and  wonders  why the poets have bothered to publish  something no longer  in accord  with   their   "new   social   enthusiasm." If this   preface,   impatiently   described    by Smith  as "vague aimless  jargon," aroused  Brown's  sarcasm,  Smith's  rejected   pre­  face   undoubtedly  would   have   enraged him.  (Smith's comment, and  his preface, are found in Michael Gnarowski's edition of  New  Provinces, Toronto:  University of Toronto Press,  I976.)  That poetry  of  so­ cial comment has absolutely no appeal to him,  Brown  makes  absolutely clear.  He  is most  scathing about  Scott's  "verses   on social  themes" which  in  his  opinion are "mere doggerel." He continues, to "utter a vehement warning against  the  supposi­  tion  that  such  verses are  really  excellent" and   to  wonder, more  in  anger   than   in sorrow,  "how  can  so  true  a  poet  as  Mr.  Scott sink to so low a level?"  None of this emotion appears in  his "Letters in  Can­ ada" review  for  I936  in  The  University of Toronto Quarterly, and Gnarowski, in his consideration of this  response  to New Provinces, presents Brown's  comments as

OPINIONS & NOTES



extremely   pos1t1ve, which,  apart from  a reference   to  the  preface   as  "disconcert­ ing,"  they  are.  This  should  not  mislead the   reader    into    thinking   that    Brown espoused   the   new  style  and  content  of these  poets,  however.  Perhaps  his  com­ ment  on Pratt in the New  Frontier  review makes  his position  clear.  Pratt, of course, did  not  really  fit  into  this  group, either  philosophically or  poetically, and  Brown praises   his   humanitarianism,  which   is "that  which  appears in  the   nineteenth­ century  poets and  those  who  in  this cen­ tury continue to enrich  the  romantic tra­ dition." Brown,  a  humanist in  this  "ro­ mantic  tradition,"  saw   no   need   to   be socially relevant.
MARGERY FEE

ED. NOTE:  David  Staines writes  to correct the title of one  I 930 entry: "The Critic  as Xenophobe." He  also  adds  that  Brown's "papers and  notes are in many  places, the majority not  being  in  Toronto. Much  of his  material  remains in  Chicago,  where he  last  taught. Other  notes  and  corres­ pondence  have   found   their  way  to  the National Archives  in Ottawa and  to Vic­ toria  College  Toronto;  Calgary is about  to  receive  some,  and  much  still  remains  in  private hands."


ETHEL WILSON AT LAC LEJEUNE
WHEN  MAGGIE   VARDOE  DRIVES   up  "the winding ascent  into the hills behind Kam­ loops,  past  the  Iron  Mask  mine" and  on to  Three Loon   Lake,   she  is  enacting a journey   that   Wallace and  Ethel   Wilson made   many   times  during  the  forty-five years of their  married life. The identifica­ tion   of  "Three  Loon   Lake,"  "Nimpish Lake,"  and   "Blue   Lake" with   Lac   Le Jeune  does   not   seem   to   be  known   to scholars    of    Canadian   literature.  Des­ mond  Pacey speaks  only  of "the  isolation
 of  this  remote  lake  country" and  "a  re­ mote  but beautiful part of the interior of British  Columbia."1 Yet  Lac  Le Jeune is as  important to  Ethel  Wilson  as  Orillia  was  to Stephen  Leacock, Prince  Edward Island   to L.  M.  Montgomery and   Nee­ pawa   to   Margaret  Laurence.  Located twenty-two miles from  Kamloops at an altitude  of  forty-two hundred  feet,  the lake was so famous for  its fly-fishing  that it  attracted  fishermen from  all  over  the world,  including two  Governors-General of Canada, John Buchan and  the Earl  of Athlone. In "Beware the Jabberwock, my son ..." Mrs. Wilson  describes  the lake through the  recollections of  Mr.  Olsen:
I got   a  fellow   to  drive  me   up   to  Lac   le
Jeune  and  when   I got  there, I tell  you  my
heart rose  up  the  way  it  does  when  you  see
your  favourite lake  away   up  in  the  hills  all
shining and  saying Come on,  Come  on,  and the  sky  all   blue   and   the   reflections  of  the forest  upside  down   in  the  water and  every­ thing as innocent as  a  kitten. That  lake  is nearly  forty-five hundred  feet   up  and  even in  summer after hot  days  it  can  be cold  and  you  can  have  storms like  winter  but  there's a  smell   of   the   pines   there  and   especially when  the  sun's  on  them  and  even  when   the rain's   been   on   them, and   all   the   way   up there's the  smell  of  the  sage  too.  And  right away   when   you   see   the  fish   jumping  and  hear   the   loons  crying  on   the   big  lake   or Little Lac  le  Jeune Lake  you  know-well, it's  heart's  desire, that's what it is.
As well as describing the lake in propria persona, Mrs.  Wilson  designates it  Nim­ pish Lake,  "far to find"  at  the  end  of "a narrow winding road   through  the  sage brush  along  wagon  tracks,  over the cattle  ranges  up into  the hills through the forest of crowded  little  pines."2  But its most im­ portant   evocation   occurs    m    Swamp Angel.
The first lodge at Lac Le Jeune (then called  Fish Lake) was built  in 1885 by an American   cowboy,  Dave  Lusk.  It was  a one-room  log building with a lean-to cookhouse  (complete with  Chinese  cook) and  sleeping  accommodation   (ham­ mocks)    for   four   guests.   The   overflow

143

OPINIONS & NOTES



slept  in  the  barn. Dave  Lusk's  Hotel  still stands,  serving  as a boathouse  where oars, cushions  and  fishing  gear are stored.  The next lodge was a two-storey frame building put  up by an English  couple,  the Cowans. It was  here  that   Ethel  Wilson  stayed  in the  early  192o's,  not  long after  her  mar­ riage,  and  it  was  the  Cowans'  establish­ ment   that   contributed  several  details  to her   conception  of  Haldar   Gunnarsen's resort-the  large  log cabin  with  eating  place  for  guests,  the  plank  verandah on the front, the cedar shake roof, supported by  lodge   poles  over   the  verandah, and the  two  privies  at  the  back.  Mrs.  Wilson has  told  me  of an  evening  when,  leaving  her   husband   reading in  bed,  she  made her way in the dark  to one of these privies. While   she   was   attending  to  duty,   the wooden  latch  moved   from   the  vertical  position  to the horizontal position  locking her inside.  Being a modest  newlywed,  in­ hibited by the mores of a "Victorian" up­ bringing, she  was  reluctant to  shout  for help.   Wallace  would   be  sure   to  notice her absence  and  come  to look  for her. As time dragged  on, her fear of  the darkness, the  confinement, and   the  strange  night sounds   turned  to  fury  at  her   negligent  husband. When,  released  by Mrs. Cowan, she  finally  returned to  the  bedroom, she found   her   husband   still   reading,  quite  oblivious   to  the  fact   of   his  bride's   dis­ appearance.
In   1926  the  resort  was  purchased  by my   grandfather, T.  D.   Costley,   who, assisted first by my grandmother and  then by my  aunt, operated the  resort  and  an adjoining cattle ranch  for more  than twenty  years.  A  new  lodge  was  built  to­ gether  with  additional log cabins  and the Wilsons  continued  to  enjoy   the  fishing. After   my  grandfather's death,  my  hus­ band  and   I  exchanged  dairy-farming in the Okanagan for resort operating at Lac LeJeune. So my friendship with  the Wil­ sons began about rgso.
They   generally  came   in   June,   the
 month  when   fly-fishing  was  at  its  peak. Daily limits of twelve fish per person  were common. The  boathouse lockers   would be filled  with  three  or  four  hundred fish at a time,  the smokehouse would  be going day after day, and  departing guests would carry away cardboard boxes filled with Kamloops trout packed  in freshly  picked moss. June was  the  month of  the  "regu­ lar"  guests  who came  every year unto  the third   and   fourth generation,  Vancouver people,  mostly,  who knew  one another in worlds   other than   the  piscatory. Some­  times  the  Wilsons came in  August,  when the  weather  was  warmer  than   in  June, or in September when  the alders  and  wil­ lows along the lake  had  turned to bronze and  the poplars to gold. Then they would hear  the  wild  geese  and   sandhill cranes  and  see  the  morning mists  and  northern lights -"the    great     folding,     playing, flapping  of  these   draperies  of  light   in heaven, transient, unrepeated, sliding  up and  down  the sky."
The   Wilsons  always  stayed   in  a  two­ room  log cabin  with  a built-on  bathroom and  a  wide  screened   porch.  In  front   of the  cabin   was  a  rocky  hill  covered  with wild  rose  bushes,  a  strip  of  lawn  where my  children played   (closely  observed   by Ethel), a  flower  border  of  Iceland pop­  pies  and   pansies,   the  driveways   to  the lodge  and  boat  landing, and  beyond  that,  the lake. Sitting on their porch,  observing but  not  observed, they viewed  the passing scene.  The ritual of  each  day  was varied only  by  changes in  the  weather. Break­ fast  from  7:go  to 9:oo in  the  lodge  din­  ing-room.  Fishing  from   ro:oo  to  4:oo, with  a  picnic  lunch   consumed   either in the  boat  (if there  was a "rise" on)   or on shore  at the  far  end  of  the  lake.  Drinks on   the   porch    or   beside   the   air-tight heater. Dinner at   the  lodge  and   an  ex­ change of  fish-stories   with  other  guests. Evening spent  reading and  writing. Early to bed  (the  power  plant was turned off at eleven).  Their   luggage   included  quite

OPINIONS  & NOTES



literally   a   trunkful  of   books-classics such as Phineas  Finn,  recent  novels, books of history, biography, travel  and  stacks of Spectators,  New   Statesmans, and   John
0'Londons  that  they  passed  on  to me.
On  the last  fishing  trip  before  Wallace died,  Ethel  was so badly crippled by arth­ ritis   that   she   had   to  be  driven   to  the lodge and  the  boat  landing. It  took  three men  to get her into  the clinker-built row­ boat.   Yet  so  great  was  her   passion  for fishing and  her desire to experience again that   peculiar   intimacy  enjoyed   by  two people confined in a twelve-foot boat that  she  would  sit  for  hours  on  the  wooden seat in all weathers. Her  view of the ideal marital relationship is expressed  by her alter  ego Mrs.  Forrester:

truth is never distorted between your  Uncle
Mark and   me,  whether we  talk  or  whether
-I  assure  you -we stay  whole  days  silent like    male    and    female  happy   Trappists. There is  nothing that intervenes.3

This  kind of silent  intimacy, difficult  to achieve  in Vancouver where  the demands of  professional   and   social  life  intruded, was  quite   possible  in  a  log  cabin   or  a small  boat.  Certainly, there  is something about  the   art   of  fly-fishing   that   strips away  pretension, anxiety, ambition,  pee­ vishness,  and   all  such   corrupting  influ­ ences.   The  Wilsons   must   have   shared  the opinion of angling attributed by Izaak Walton to  Sir  Henry Wotten,  who  said that  it was

a  rest  to  his  mind, a cheerer of  his  spirits, a diverter  of   sadness, a  calmer  of   unquiet thoughts,  a   moderator  of   passions,  a   pro­ curer  of  contentedness;  and   that  it   begat  habbits of  peace and   patience in  those  that  professed and  practised  it.4

Wallace   Wilson   gave   the  impression   of being  a patient man!
The Lac  Le Jeune experience was par­ ticularly  relevant to two short stories and  one  novel.  Fidelity of detail  Mrs.  Wilson achieved   by  making  notes  about   every­ thing  that  she saw and heard, human and
 non-human. She asked countless questions about   the  flora  and   fauna, the  calls  of birds, the methods of building log cabins, the  varieties  of  ducks,  the  places  where the loons nested, the reason why the fish jumped  two or three  feet in the air. What she  felt  and  observed  and   learned went into  her  writing.
"On  Nimpish   Lake"  illustrates  Mrs. Wilson's  ability  to combine  a description of observed  phenomena with  speculation that  begins as personification and  ends  as symbol. The  migrating birds-geese and sandhill   cranes-fly  south,   their   voices

raised   in  harsh and   musical clamour.  Why do  they  cry,  cry,  cry,  as they  fly. Is it  jubila­ tion  or  argument or  part   of  the  business  of flying.

They   are   an  element  of  the  particular scene, along  with  the  honey  gold  aspens, the  squirrel  and  chipmunk, the  whiskey­ jacks, magpies,  osprey,  eagles  and  loons, the   leaping    trout,    the   tule   reeds,   the beaver  house, the companionable brothers and   the  inept  American stirring  up  the water   and   expectorating  into   the   lake. But  like  Yeats'  wild  swans  at  Coole  or the  geese  observed   by  Frankie  Burnaby and  Hetty  Dorval, they  are  also weighty symbols  of  timelessness,  exaltation,  free­ dom,  cooperation, and   escape.  The ap­ parently simple   story   is  far  from   sim­ plistic.
"Beware   the  .Jabberwock,  my  son  ...
beware  the Jubjub Bird" is more complex
in structure and  characterization though
no  more   numinous  in  its  evocation  of scene.  I  think   that   it  must   have   been written in  1957  because  that   summer  I lent   Mrs.   Wilson   Sybille   Bedford's   A Legacy,   the   book   that   silly  chattering Dolly insists on describing to her husband,
Thomas Krispin:

It's an  awfully hard book  to  tell  the  story  of because first   the  story  is  here and   first   it's there and  sometimes in  a  room  but  you  can just  hear  them  talking it's  so real  and  some­ times   in   a   castle  or   fields. . . .  ( Oh  God,

145

OPINIONS & NOTES



said  Thomas and  he  tightened his lips  until they  could   not  be  seen.)
Driven  to the breaking point  by his wife's incessant   chattering,  Tom   takes   refuge with   a  blind   stranger  who   tells  him  a didactic tale  of escape  to  the  wilderness. Mrs.  Wilson frequently uses a character's response  to nature as an  indicator of his or her  moral  state.  In  this story, response to nature is also an indicator of a physical condition:
So I headed for  the  top end  of  the  lake  and as  I passed   the   aspens   I  saw   they   looked queer but  very  good.  First  they  were  shiver­ ing  green the  way  they  really  are,  and  then  they   were   all  colours and   then   they   were shivering black.
Mrs.  Wilson  could  not  resist providing the onset of blindness with the dramatic accompaniment of a thunderstorm. Again her  own experience at  Lac  Le Jeune  was undoubtedly the sources for storms of this kind  are  rather common  in  June.
An   unusual   element   in  "Beware  the
Jabberwock, my son  ..."  is the  long di­ gression   (part III)  which  I shall  quote in full:
(We   should   all  be  happy and   hardly  ever bored, like  that family of five beautiful  chil­ dren  who   live  at   Blue  Lake   Mountain  in the  heart and   heights of  British Columbia. They  are  so  happy that  they  do  not  know they  are  happy. They  say,  "Oh do  we  have to  go  away? Do  we  hafto?" They are  busy all   the   year   round,  and   are   never   bored, these   beautiful   Renoir   children  and   their  young   parents.   What  enviable bliss.  Their voices  and  laughter trill  like  birds  and  bells beside   the  capricious  mountain  lake.  They  run   hand  in  hand in  the  open   spaces   be­ tween   the  ponderosa pines.  They walk  en­ twined  and  their  happiness is unmarred and beautiful to look  at.  Nothing is planned or arranged for  them   any  more  than for  birds except when  their mother rings a bell for lessons  or  supper. They run  after  each  other calling and  laughing and  silent. They do not cry.  Was  it like  this  in  Arcady? Their child­ hood  should never  end  but  it  must -look, it  is ending even  now!  Yet  perhaps they  will carry it with   them; perhaps the  green   and  gold   happiness among  the   pines   with   the loons   uttering  their   mournful laughter  in

q6
 the  silence   on  the  lake  will  stay  with   them when   they   are   grown-up  people,  and   the city  will  not  quite quench as cities  often  do. Among    the   advantages  of  cities   there  lie lurking  massive   areas  of  boredom  waiting for  inexpert dodgers. In  cities  there are  no ponderosa pines  with  the children running calling between and   the  place  so quiet that the  loons'   laughing and   crying ejaculations sound  clearly  even   from   far   up   the   lake. There are  no  dangers of  any  kind  for  these children on  that mountain except bears  and the   occasional  cougar  which   cannot   com­ pare with   the  dangers of  cities.  There are  no  traffic   jams,   no  tall   or  squat   buildings staring  with   nothing  but   right   angles   not even   an   inferred  curve, no  mass  meetings, no  mass  appeals, no  mass  advertisement, no mass  uglification, perhaps  no  mass  destruc­ tion, no mass  anything, no .•. )

The passage  has  personal  significance be­ cause  those five children are  my five chil­ dren   who,  now   grown   up,  realize   that  they  did,  indeed, inhabit  paradise. It  is equally  significant for  the  general reader  since  it  explains as  explicitly  as  possible the   author's   Wordsworthian  view  of  a nature that  "never did  betray   the  heart  that  loved  her," of childhood innocence, of   transient   joy,  and   of  cities'  din.  An occasional tendency to sentimentalism  is this  author's only  fault  in  the  treatment of setting.
In  Swamp  Angel,  as in  Hetty  Dorval,
the "essence  of place" colours  the associa­
tion of characters. Maggie,  Haldar, Alan, and  Joey are  united  by their  appreciation of  Three Loon   Lake,   "sparkling,  shim­ mering, melting, silent." Vera  assimilates  her   dislike  of  Maggie into  her   "strong dislike  for  Three Loon  Lake," and  when she  decides  to  do  away  with  herself  she chooses  not  gun  or  knife  or  poison  but the  water. Again,  the  author has  a  par­  ticular part  of  Lac LeJeune in mind  for there  is along the lakeshore a path  where  "trees met overhead, and  branches, cross­ ing  the  unfrequented  path,   struck" and there  is, only  a few  hundred yards  from the  lodge, a  small  beach  of muddy  sand where  the shore  shelves  rapidly.

OPINIONS & NOTES



The lake   that for  Vera is  a  trap, for Maggie  is   a   consolation  and  a   relief. Whether on  it-casting a  line,  watching the  cruising osprey-or  in  it-a  god,  a seal,  "forgetting past   and   future" -she is calmed and  exhilarated. Appropriately, however,  the   ultimate  statement  of  the fisherman's  mystique  is  associated with Mr. Cunningham, for   men   greatly  out­ number women among the  initiates:

All  fly-fishermen are  bound closely  together by   the   strong  desire   to   be  apart,  solitary upon the  lake,  the  stream. A  fisherman has not   proceeded far   up   the   lake,   not  out   of sight   of  the   lodge, before   he  becomes   one with  the  aqueous world  of  the  lake,  of a sky remarkable for  change, of  wind  which  (de­ riving from  the  changeful sky)   rises or  falls, disturbing the  water, dictating the direction of his  cast, and  doing something  favourable or  unfavourable to  the  fish....  There is  no past,  no future, only  the  now. Mr. Cunning­ ham   has  neither  wife,  mistress, child, rival,  profit   nor   loss.  He   is   casting  into   his  fa­  vourite place  by  the  reeds....

It is unnecessary to prove at length that in    details   of    setting-scenery, 	flora, fauna, weather-Three Loon Lake   is a mirror image of  Lac  Le  Jeune. Once the geographical identification  has   been made, the  source of  the  imagery is  obvi­ ous.  Less  obvious  is  the   relationship  of fictional incident  to   actual  experience. The struggle between  the  osprey and the  eagle   for   possession   of   a  fish   did   take  place,  observed  by  several  of   the   June "regulars,"   including   the    Wilsons.  An elderly  fisherman-Scottish, not  Ameri­ can-did    get   into  difficulties and    the Wilsons had  a  part in  his  rescue. Finally, the  Excalibur-like disposal of  the  Swamp Angel   may   have   been   suggested  by  an event that  occurred in  the  I g2o's-one of  those  unique events that becomes part of  the  local  folklore. A rich  American let his  movie  camera fall  from the  boat  into the  water. So valuable was it that he hired divers  to   look   for   it   but   it   was   never found. So  the  Swamp Angel  disappeared
 hitting  the   surface  of   the   lake,   sparkling down  into  the  clear  water, vanishing amidst breaking bubbles in  the  water, sinking  down among   the   affrighted  fish,   settling  in   the ooze.

In   the  late  sixties,  after we  had   both lost our  husbands, though by different means, and   I had   moved with   my  chil­ dren   to  Vancouver, I  would  sometimes have   tea  with   Mrs. Wilson in  the  Point Grey  apartment with   the  seascape view. Crippled  and  deaf,  she   had    given   up writing but   her   mind   was  still   alert.  I think  that  she  liked  to see me  because we shared a  passion for  a  place and  a  set  of recollections. We  would  talk  about books (her  own and other people's), about com­ mon acquaintances, but  most  of all  about Lac LeJeune. I wish  I  had  written it all down but  it didn't occur to  me  to record conversations  with   a  friend. A  few  re­ marks  stay  in  my  mind.
About Topaz in The Innocent  Travel­
ler, she  told  me,  "My aunt was vivacious, sparkling  but    not    brittle.  I  wanted a name that would catch her  glowing qual­ ity.  So  in  the  book  I  called her  Topaz." On  one occasion, I had  just finished read­ ing  Desmond Pacey's  book  about her.   I asked, "Was he right about your  patterns of  imagery? Did  you  tell  him  what you intended?"
"Oh, no!" she  replied with   a note  of
indignation. "He made all  that up!" "But, perhaps," I  suggested, "the  pat­
terns  existed in  your  subconscious mind." She  brightened as  if  struck by  a  new
idea. "Yes,  perhaps they  did."
In   Vancouver,  she   was   very   grande
dame,  elegantly dressed, her  hair  beauti­ fully   coifed,  sitting  erect   in   her   wheel chair before her  silver  tea service. As she dispensed a genteel repast of china tea  or Twinings Earl  Grey   with   lemon, paper thin   cucumber  sandwiches,  pound  cake, or  fruit cake  or other delicacies prepared by  her  excellent  housekeeper, she  was  a world away  from the  tweedy fisherwoman

OPINIONS &  NOTES



with   her  workman's lunch   bucket  con­ taining a package of egg sandwiches and a thermos. Whatever role she was playing,  there  was  always  an  element  of  the  un­ expected. One unseasonably hot June  day, my  youngest  daughter, coming   to  drive me home, appeared at the Wilson door  in the  briefest  of  bathing suits.  I was  em­ barrassed, feeling sure that  Ethel  would disapprove. To  my  surprise,  she  was  de­ lighted.
"How   sensible  modern   bathing   costumes are! So  much better  than   those  awful  out­ fits  we  wore!"

Then I remembered Topaz and  the naked swimmers: "Nothing  on!  Very  pleasant I'm  sure!"
On  March 8, Ig6g, Ethel  Wilson wrote to  thank   me   for   a  copy  of  my  oldest
daughter's wedding picture. "It is one of
the  most   charming  wedding   pictures I ever saw, and  I hope  their happiness will be   continuous."  The  letter    concluded with  these  words :

"My memory is very  bad,  but  I recall  many days  and   hours   in  that lovely  country with my  dear husband, at Lac  Le  Jeune."

NOTES

1 Desmond  Pacey,   Ethel  Wilson   (New   York: Twayne, 1967), pp.  35 and  31.
2   "On  Nimpish  Lake,"  Mrs.   Golightly   and Other  Stories   (Toronto:  Macmillan, 1961), p. 2g.
a  "Truth and Mrs.  Forrester," Mrs. Golightly,
p.   113·
4  Walton's The   Compleat   Angler,  ed.   A.  B. Gough and  T. Balston (Oxford: Clarendon,
1915), p. s6.
MURIEL WHITAKER


THE STORIES OF WILSON & ENGEL
IN A  WAY   I  CAN'T  QUICKLY characterize, I  get   similar    pleasure   from   the   short stories  of  Ethel   Wilson  and  Marian En-
 gel.  The  similarity struck   me,   in   fact, when  I was rereading Willa  Cather. It's a  pleasure   that  is, at  first,  like  one's   joy when  one sees any feat of skill and  delight occurring together. What Willa Cather does with event, Ethel Wilson with tone, Marian Engel with sentence structure and sequence  startles   me.   Something   unex­ pected   is  accomplished  with   such   skill that  I am  called  to attend. And  then  the reverberating pleasure is  slow and  quiet,  like  profound relief.  A  shape  of  experi­  ence  has been  made which  seems to me a true  one,  and  the  truth of it  opens  door after  door  in my own  imagination.
There is a connection between  my sur­ prise    and    my   relief:   the    experience shaped for  me is not  one  I  have  thought much  about, perhaps  because  it seems so ordinary, or  petty,  a  minor   weakness  or nuisance. Given  place,  located   in  a  cer­ tain   way  by  a  story  or  novel,  a  trivial experience   grows   in   my   consciousness until  my own life and  the lives of those I see and  remember are  differently cast.
What I was watching in  Willa  Cather was her  absolutely quiet,  firm-handed  in­ sertion  into  the  narrative flow of an  epi­ sode  that  had  nothing to do  with  "plot" or  "characterization." It  seems  arbitrary, willful,    and    delights   me    as    Georgia  O'Keeffe does, writing of her  I943 canvas  "Pelvis  with  Moon": "A  pelvis bone  has always  been  useful to any animal that  has it-quite as useful  as a  head,  I suppose.  For  years in  the country  the  pelvis bones lay about the house indoors  and  out  seen and  not seen as such things  can  be -seen in many different ways." O'Keeffe did see, and    painted   what   she   saw.   So   Willa Cather  sees and  makes  a shape  that  says, "This episode  is part of  the  fabric whe­ ther or  not  you can  explain its relevance in  conventional  ways."  And   because   of her  shaping, my  own  life expands to in­ clude   those  curiously   vivid  recollections that  have  no significance except  that something  lodged,   something  was  at  a

OPINIONS & NOTES



moment registered with  freshness and staying  power.
The  catching delight of Ethel  Wilson's work  is always,  for  me,  instantly there  in the  opalescent tone.  Mild  as  milk  it  can look, and  then  a sudden shift,  like a glint of  colour,   appears, vanishes   in  the  con­ stant   turning, turning of  the  surface.   It has  the  movement of  shifting  awareness  within   oneself-whether   one   is  with others or alone.

Mrs.  Forrester spoke  to  her  husband who did  not  answer. He  looked  morose. His  dark brows  were  concentrated in  a  frown and   it was obvious that he  did  not  want to  talk  to her    or    to    anybody   else.    Oh    dear,   she thought. It's  the    tomb-he's    never    like that unless  it's  really  something. They sat  in silence,  waiting  for   whatever  should    turn up.  The  two  soldiers  smoked  at  some  dis­ tance.
This  is   very   uncomfortable,  this   heat, thought Mrs.   Forrester,  and   the   tomb   has affected  us  unpleasantly.  She   reflected on Lord Carnarvon who  had   sought with  dili­ gence, worked  ardently,  superintended   ex­ cavation, urged on  discovery, was  bitten by an  insect  -or so they  said -and  had  died. She  thought of  a  co-worker of  his  who  lay ill with   some  fever  in   the   small   clay-built house    past    which    they    had    driven  that morning.   Why  do   they    do   those    things, these  men?  Why  do  they  do  it? They do  it because they  have  to; they  come  here  to  be uncomfortable   and    unlucky   and    for   the greatest fulfilment of  their lives;  just  as men climb   mountains;  just   as  Arctic  and  Ant­ arctic explorers go  to the  polar regions to be uncomfortable  and    unlucky   and    for   the greatest fulfilment of  their lives.  They  have  to.  The  thought of  the   Arctic  gave  her   a pleasant feeling and  she  determined  to  lift the  pressure that seemed to  have  settled on all  three of them  which   was partly tomb,  no doubt, but   chiefly   the  airlessness  to  which  their  lungs   were   not   accustomed, and,  of course, this  heat.
She  said  with  a  sort  of  imbecile cheerful­
ness,  "How about an  ice-cream cone?"

Even  when  the  point  of view  moves out­ side a character, the  tone  is idiosyncratic rather   than    omniscient.   The  author's musing  on her characters has a resonance that  speaks of some other range  of experi-
 ence,   as   of   one   who-though	com­ panionable with  her  characters-is  ha­ bitually  in touch with her own continuing concerns.

Captain Crabbe was  small.  He  had  come as an undersized boy to the west coast of Vancouver Island and   there he  had  stayed. He  had  been  fairish and  was  now  bald.  His eyes  were  sad  like  a  little bloodhound's eyes and  pink  under, but  he was  not  sad.  He  was a  contented man and   rejoiced always  to  be joined  again with  his  wife  and  his gangling son  and  daughter. Mrs.  Crabbe's name  was Effie   but   she   was   called  Mrs.   Crabbe or Mom   and   her   name had   come   to  be  used only  for  Effie  Gee  which   was  by  this   time more  Effie   than  Mrs.    Crabbe  was.   "I'm taking home  an  Indian basket  for  Mrs. Crabbe,"   the    skipper   might   say.    "Mrs. Crabbe sure  is  an  authority on  Indian baskets." Fin  Crabbe was  his  name  up  and down   the   coast    but   at  home   he   was   the Captain or  Pop,  and  so Mrs.  Crabbe would say, "The Captain plans  to  be home   or Christmas. The  Captain's  a   great  family man. I said  to him,  'Pop, if you're not  home for  Christmas, I'll . . . !' " Thus they  daily elevated  each   other  in   esteem   and   loved each  other with  simple  mutual gratification. In  bed   no   names  were    needed  by   Mrs. Crabbe and   the  Captain.  (When they  shall be dead, as they  will  be, what will avail  this happy  self-satisfaction.  But   now   they   are not  dead, and   the  Captain's wife  as  often before  awaits the  Captain who  is on  his way down   the  coast   from   Flores   Island, coming home  for  Christmas.)

The   narrator's  movement  into   private reflection,   like  Mrs.   Forrester's  contem­ plation   of  explorers, mountain  climbers,  archaeologists, is  quick,  quiet,  as  if  ha­  bitual,  suggestive-in  fact-of  a  habit  of solitude.
As I  reread  Mrs.  Golightly and  Other
Stories,   I   notice   how   many   are   about women,    and    how    many    women    are mainly  alone.  There are  loving  husbands, but  they  go off, to work,  to war,  to  con­ fer  with  other  men,  to  bed  with  a  fever. There are  a couple  of driven, angry hus­ bands.  They   go  off,  too.  Mr. Willy,  in "The Window," retired  "all of a sudden  from  business  and  his  country," and  his

14·9

OPINIONS & NOTES



wife.  "He   did  not  know,  nor  would  he have cared, that  much  discussion went on in her world, chiefly in the afternoons, and that  he was there  alleged  to have deserted her.  So  he  had,  after providing well  for her   physical   needs   which   were  all   the needs  of  which   she  was  capable.  Mrs. Willy  went  on  saying  '... and  he  would come  home  my  dear  and  never  speak  a word  I can't tell you my dear  how  fright­ ful  it  was  night  after   night  I  might  say for  years I  simply  can't tell  you  .. .' No, she could  not tell but she did, by day and night." The  women  of  these stories, whe­ ther  they  are  old  and lame  like Mrs. By­ low  or  Mrs.  Gonnley, young  like  Dolly Krispin   or  Miriam  in  "Hurry,  Hurry," middle-aged  like  Mrs.  Forrester or  Mrs. Golightly,  all  of  them  are  left-for  the day,  for  the  duration, for life.
But not simply to their own devices. Though they must  live much  in their own heads,  their  own  private observations and memories,    their   concern    for   the   com­ munal well-being keeps them  alert  to the conditions and  attitudes of  husband, rela­ tive,  neighbour. Theirs  is  not  a  line  of thought  but   an   interweaving,  and   its movement is  caught so accurately in  the parenthetical  talk   (and   style),   the  con­ stantly   interrupted  attention,  that    the effect  is  often  comic.  But  there's  an  odd thing   in   this  collection  of  stories.  The  moments  of  strain,  and   even  of  terror,  stand  out  more  clearly  than   they  do  in Ethel  Wilson's  novels. They  come,  as do the  daily   tensions,   from   threats   to  the social fabric -or from  such  violent  rup­ tures    as   murder   (in    "Fog,"   "Hurry, Hurry," "The Window"), drunken beat­  ings  (in "Till Death Do Us Part"), hang­  overs from  or intrusions of another order  of  living    (in   "Haply  the   Soul   of  my Grandmother" or  "Mr. Sleepwalker"), fatal  accidents  (in  "From Flores"). The cumulative  sense  is  of  a  world   one   is required to  attend but  cannot control.
The  awareness that  their  essential  job,
 the maintaining of the social fabric, is impossible gives these women a kind of detachment.  Sanity resides,  not  only  in them    but    in   the    writer's  manner   of telling,  in a habit  of standing back as well as moving toward. They  cannot  concen­ trate on  one  idea  or  attitude  or  job  (to "be  uncomfortable and  unlucky  and  for the greatest fulfilment of  their  lives")   but live  in  their  own  ludicrousness, in  a  hu­  man  condition  both  more  droll  and  more  real  than   that  shown  by the  men.
Marian Engel's   humour, in  the  short story  collection, Inside  the  Easter  Egg, is deadpan rather than  decorous. In  her work,  as  in  Ethel   Wilson's,  it's  the  sen­ tences,  and  the  rhythms they set  up in  a paragraph,  that   make   the   surface  de­ light.  But  Marian Engel's are simply  dec­ larative or overwhelmingly compounded, not  parenthetical.
Parentheses  contain.  They   let   some­ thing  into  sentences or  paragraphs  with­  out  allowing it  to take  over.  They  estab­  lish a  rhythm of  co-existence-of  terror and   boredom,   amusement  and   grief­ and   so  a  view  of  experience  that   says "These things  fit this way."
In  Marian Engel's   stories,  there's  no such  view.  There is, rather, an  observer, a recorder, who  shows  not  how  things  fit but  how  they  happen. The unseemly,  the accidental,   the    inexplicable   occur    as simply  as  the  ordinary, the  expected.

I was  driving down Cobden Street at  two o'clock in  the  afternoon. The daffodils were pushing out  of  their sheaths, the  birds  were making a racket in  the  sky, and  I was  think­ ing,  was  it  Cobden's  Rural  Rides  I  always  meant to  read  or  Cobbett's? That is what I have   thought on  Cobden Street for  at least  twenty years; and  Marshallene came  on  the  CBC   to   talk   about  a   new   novel   she  had  written about us all.  "Childhood  is not  what you  think it  is,"  she  was  saying,  and   things fell  together for  me,  the  way  they   perhaps did    for    Saul  on   the    way   to   Damascus. Proust  on   a   Paris   curb.   And   my   mother came  shooting  out   of  an  alleyway  on   her bicycle, and I ran  over  her.

OPINIONS  & NOTES



That use of and  ("and Marshallene came on  CBC"; "and  things  fell  together for me"; "and my mother came  shooting out of an  alleyway"; "and  I  ran  over  her") like   the   laying   down,   side   by  side,  of simple  statements, reports experiences as accumulation. People  in these stories may want  things,  make  decisions,  try to under­ stand, but  their  lives are  not  determined by interests  or purposes. Their lives are an accumulation,   often   accidental,  some­ times hilarious, sometimes  so tedious  as to threaten sanity.
In  a short,  terrible story, "I See Some­
thing,   It Sees  Me," a  detailed recall  of the  kind  of unimportant shopping trip thousands of women  must  have made thousands of times,  the  speaker  observes, equably, whoever her eyes light  on, in the bus, in the street.

I see  a  woman  with   a  wide,  kind   face, high   rosy  cheekbones, short   salt-and-pepper hair, camel hair coat, and, at  second  glance, rather beautiful golden eyes.  Her  little  boy, plainly   dressed   in   navy    blue    nylon,    sits quietly  beside her   clutching a  new  Match­ box  toy.
The  other  woman with   the   camel   hair coat  and  the  little boy  got  off at  Inglewood
Drive. She  was  taller and  thinner,  less matronly but  not  younger, and   wore  brown vinyl  boots  smeared with  metallic patterns: bronze, copper,  gilt,  silver,   like   the  uphol­ stery  in  a  night club of  the  sort  she  would not  go to. They were  new boots, light  weight for   spring.  Some   impulse to  cheer  herself,  perhaps, after the  long  winter.

The  first  person,   the  "I" is used  only in phrases  like "I see,"  "I notice," except for  one  "I  think" when  she  notices,  on her  return home,  a  painter's  and  decor­ ator's  truck  parked outside  her  house.  It reminds  her  of an  article "in  a  weekend gossip  column" about private  detectives.  "By  the  time  I take  off  my  boots  and
go to the front window the  truck  is gone.
I  think   of  the  spy  world   we  live  in - social   security    numbers   identical   with medicare ones,  everything from  your  in­ come  to your  liver  on  file."  And  so, as if
 spying   on  her   own   shopping  trip,   she makes  a  report. "I" becomes  "subject," an  anonymous creature  with  no  known purpose  who moves into and  out of stores like a  rat  in  a maze,  speaking to  no one except,  briefly, to clerks. The report, like the   instinct   to   make   it,   has   the   very rhythm of boredom, of isolation.  After it's made,  there's  a final  paragraph.
Now the  '64  Medoc is in  the  kitchen cup­
board,  the   Knackers  and    Mortadella  and
«apers are  in  the  fridge, the  marzipan  eggs
are  sitting in  an  attempt at wit  on  the  table waiting for   the  children.  I  notice that  we are  out  of  instant coffee.  I notice   that  the sewing   machine  and    the   vacuum  cleaner need  to be  put  away. I notice   that the cas­ trated male   domestic short-hair  is   hungry. I notice  that the  house  is as  usual  untidy. I notice, because now   that  the   painter  and  decorator ReAnning is  gone,  who  else  will notice?

The story,  "Marshallene on  Rape," is less stark  because  it uses material conven­ tionally   more   dramatic and   because   it suggests "sufficient  motive" for reflections  on rape in the linked episodes of a conver­ sation  at lunch, a relieving burst of sexual pleasure   in   the   afternoon,   a   troubling glimpse  of   possible  rape   later.   But  it  is not   "about"   those   linked   episodes.   Its structure is neither dramatic nor  conclu­ sive. It is a collection of  statements, me­ mories,  questions,  experiences, each  sec­ tion   numbered   as  if  Marshallene  were trying   to  order   her   impressions,   clarify  what  information  she  has. Some  sections are   also  given   headings,  like  a  school girl's  report:  "Rapees  I  have   known," "How to avoid  rape," "the  greatest  rape scene in literature," and  there  are  entries devoted   entirely to  definitions,  etymolo­ gies. But the analytical attempt gives way, over  and  over,  to a flow or  tug  which  is associative.
'5· The  only   rapist I  have   ever   known was  my  brother Byron  . . . [whose   only  de­ fender was  their sister  Mona.]
My father repaid her  loyalty with  many strokes  of  his  belt. Later, she  ran  away  with

OPINIONS & NOTES



a  rather giggly  Indian boy  named Charlie. She  now  leads  a  sensible  life  on  the  reserve where sex  is not  so often  a cause  of  murder as it is among us. I picture her  waking early among  reedy   islands  to  the   call   of  water birds.

An attempt to consider  "Causes  of Rape" turns   into  a  musing   on  the  baffiements and  accidents of her  parents' lives.
Nothing is finally clarified.  All that Marshallene has observed  or can  imagine leaves  her  simply  with  an  ironic  clutch of cliches.  "I don't think  people  who haven't  been   raped   should   write   about rape; on  the  other hand,  who  will?  We must  make  out  with  what  we  can  find, we must  make do, make ends  meet, com­ promise  and  do  unto  others  as we would have  them  do  unto  us."
There's a different handling of the cumulative in  the  title  story.  We  get  the experiences  of  Mary   Abbot   both   when she's  in  the  hospital   and  when  she  gets home  again.   We  get  the  experiences of her mother who has come to tend  the children. We get Emma's sense of her grandmother and  her mother, Mary  as mother and  daughter, as wife to Osborne. Mary's  and   Mrs.   Beatty's   thoughts  go round    and    round,   into   remembering, called   back   to  the   moment. The  clear plain   sentences   and   clicking   juxtaposi­ tions show all of them  rolling around like marbles in  a  box, touching,  glancing off, knowing  there's nothing to say.
Inside  the  Easter  Egg is divided   into three  sections: "The Married Life," "Ziggy   and   Company,"  and   "Children
and   Ancestors."  No   main   character   is much   over   forty.   Most   are   dealing  as they can  with  their  thirties,  with  children and  houses,  parents and  lovers  and  hus­ bands. The stories show, with a good deal of humour and  affection, the  inexorable pile-up,  the  frequent collisions  (and  dis­ junctions) of this living. They report too the  urgency   of  the  main  characters' at­  tempts  to understand where they are, how
 they  got  there.   For   most  of  them,  cer­ tainly  for  the  women,  doing  what  is ex­ pected  of them  has  prevented  them from knowing themselves.  It  blanks  them  out.
I am  reminded of Ethel  Wilson's  Mrs.
Forrester talking with  her  niece,  musing with  her  on  the  distortions, the  maskings of  oneself   required  by  most  social   en­ counters. But  the difference in attitude is enormous. The women  in  Ethel Wilson's  stories assume  their  share of responsibility for  the social  fabric, assume  its value.  In Marian  Engel's  stories,  society  is  not  a fabric,  woven,  tearable,  repairable,  use­ ful-but  something more  rigid,  heavier
-a weight  on the spirit,  a negative force.
The  differences between  these  two writers  are  many-so many  that  I was surprised, at first, to find them coming together in my head.  But they do both redefine   importance:   experience is  im­ portantly made   up  of  the  trivial.  They redefine   purpose:  both  show  life's  char­ acteristic  movement  as   circular,   inter­ rupted,   shifting,   drifting.   Like    Willa Cather, they  change my view of  the  mo­ ment,  the  bulk of our  days.

HELEN SONTHOFF


THE NARRATIVE STRUCTURE OF Trente Arpents

THE   INVASION   OF  QUEBEC   culture   by North American culture, and  the destruc­ tion  of  a  rural society  by an  urban  one, are  issues  very  much   alive  today   just  as they   were   in   the   1930s  when   Ringuet was  writing Trente  arpents.  That novel captures the  drama  and  tension  of issues that  continue to haunt contemporary life, and  a close reading of the text  will reveal Ringuet's deft  handling of those concerns within  the  novelistic  framework.

OPINIONS & NOTES



A  number  of  cnt1cs  have   alluded to the structure of Ringuet's Trente arpents, all  making the  point   that   there  is some shaping  principle  at   work  in  the  novel but  none  are  specific about the  nature of that   principle.  Jacques  Viens,1   for   ex­ ample, states   that   "Ringuet . . . se  con­ tente   d'une  vague   progression,  d'abord vers la  prosperite de  son  heros, puis  vers sa decheance." He sees certain contradic­ tions and  inconsistencies  within this gen­ eral  framework as Part Two,  which  deals with  Euchariste's  growing prosperity, in­ cludes  chapters not related to that  theme.  (Chapter  One,  for  example, deals  with Oguinase's arrival at school.)   In addition, Viens charges  that  there  is no real  transi­  tion  between   the  first  and  second  parts,  and  between   the  second  and   third   parts  of  the novel.
It is the  purpose of this  paper  to demonstrate  that,  although  there   does not  appear to be a  rigid  structure to the novel, there is indeed  more than  a vague progression,  and   that   what   Viens   per­ ceives  to  be  structural  lacunae  may  in fact  not  be so when  the  dynamics  of the novel  are  probed.2
The direction in which  the  novel leads us is quite  evident-the small social unit, represented by the individual and  the family,  is  swept  along   by  an  irresistible tide   of   social,   political    and    historical forces.  This  is demonstrated by  the  shift in  focus  as we are  drawn from  one  part of  the   novel   to  the   next;   at   first,  the reader's attention is held  exclusively  by a small  geographic and  social  unit  but,  as the novel progresses,  the characters in the novel   become   increasingly  subjected  to the pressures and influences of the world beyond  their  own  borders. In Part  One, for example, the city is only alluded to through the  presence  of Willie  Daviau in Chapter Eight. In each  of Parts  Two  and Three, there  is  a  single  chapter devoted to  the  city.  (The city  takes  on  increas­ ingly  menacing and   ominous  overtones.
 In  Part  Two,  Euchariste takes  Oguinase to the city so that  the  latter can  enroll  in the  seminary.  In  Part  Three, Euchariste goes  there  to  see  his  dying  son  and  the lawyer who will later abscond with all his money.)    Part   Four   is  the   inversion   of Part  One  in that  its setting is entirely  the city except  for  references to  the country. The setting itself therefore reflects the attraction and  growing  domination of the city in the lives of the  people.
Within   this  overall  shape,   each   Part can be seen to further the dismemberment or  disintegration  of  one  aspect   of   indi­ vidual  or  traditional societal  life.
Part  One deals  with  the Moisan  family and  its  restricted   rural  area. The  reader follows Euchariste's decision  to marry Alphonsine  (Chapter One) , the marriage itself  (Chapter Four), the  births  of their children (Chapters Six, Seven and  Nine), and a short history of the region  (Chapter Five).  However, the  appearance  in Chapter Eight  of  Willie  Daviau, who  is in  politics  and   happily  working   in  the city,  and  the  affair  concerning the  "clo­ ture dubois" discussed  in Chapters Seven and   Nine,  point   the  way  to  a  troubled future. In  addition,  the  characterization of  Euchariste, and  explicit  and  frequent narrative   intervention,  serve   to   under­ mine   further  the   stability    and    future prospects of the traditional way of life. Euchariste's  decision   to  marry  Alphon­ sine is devoid  of thoughts of  love and  the more  we see of him,  the  more  he  shows himself  to be a plodding,  colourless  man who is avaricious and  petty.  A society  of such men will surely offer  little  resistance  to  the  onslaught  of   modernity which  is soon  to  be  upon  them.  The narrator is very explicit  in  reinforcing this  idea.  He points  out   the  peasant's  weaknesses  di­ rectly   ( "ils   ne   possedaient  point   cette
richesse parfois  si lourde a porter qui  est
la precision  de  l'esprit"3 ), their  stubborn
prejudices when  dislike  for  doctors  is  ex­
pressed, and  their  limitations when  their

153

OPINIONS & NOTES



total  reliance on the soil is stressed. By the end  of Part One,  the  reader  has  the  dis­ tinct   impression  that   the  family,  which was at the centre of this part  of the novel, will  be  very  much  subject  to challenges. The seeds of its demise have been planted.
In the second part of the novel, the traditional way of life is seriously eroded as several  characters associated  with  the established   values    die    (for    example, Melie in Chapter One,  and  Alphonsine  in Chapter Four)  and  the exodus  from  the farm   begins.  Oguinase leaves  to  become a priest  (Chapter Two)  and  then  it is Malvina who  decides  to seek her  fortune elsewhere   (Chapter Five). In Chapter Three, there  is reference  to the  fact  that many  neighbours' children  are leaving  for the  United States.  In  addition, Ephrem, Euchariste's son, shows signs of rejecting conventional values when he establishes himself as a bully in the area and resists pressure  from  his father to return to  the fold  (Chapter Four). The  visit of the Lariviere family  in  Chapter Five  serves two   purposes :   first,   it   underlines  the critical   nature and   the  true  meaning of the  exodus   to  the  city  as  the  Lariviere family  shows  itself  to  be  completely  as­ similated   to the  American  culture,  there­ by    surrendering   its    French-Canadian identity; secondly,  it  intensifies  Ephrem's revolt  as he finds himself attracted to one member of  the  Lariviere family  and   to the  life  they  represent.
The historical backdrop to this part  of the  novel  is the  First  World  War  which is mentioned in  Chapters Six and  Seven. The   War   precipitates the  abandonment of  the  farm  as, for  example,  Albert,  the hired  helper   from   France, returns there to fight  (he  arrives  in Chapter Three and leaves in Chapter Seven) .
Part Two brings  increasing  financial prosperity to Euchariste because  the War proves  good  for business, but  the founda­ tion  is being  cut  from  under  him  as  the family   unit   crumbles. This  view  of  the

154
 second   segment  as  complex  and   para­ doxical   is  a  response   to  Viens'  charge, stated earlier, that   Part  Two  deals  with Euchariste's growing  wealth  but  includes  unrelated material.
Part   Three deals   primarily  with  loss. The loss operates on various  levels. There is a  continuation of  the  departure  from the farm  that  we saw in Part  Two as Lu­ cinda,   Ephrem   and    Napoleon    leave (Chapters One, Two  and  Seven  respec­ tively). There is financial loss as  Eucha­ riste  loses  his  law  case   (Chapter  Four), fire  consumes   the  farm  (Chapter Five), and   the   lawyer   absconds  with   Eucha­ riste's  savings  (Chapter Seven). There is profound  human loss with  the  death of Oguinase   (Chapters Three  and   Four) . Chapter  Four,  very concentrated, signals the  end  of  Euchariste's "reign," for  it  is in that chapter that  Euchariste loses both his  lawsuit  and  his son.
There is also a loss of cultural identity
and   cohesion  as  conscription is  imposed on  French Canada. The failure  of the French Canadians  to  resist  conscription and the effects of the War symbolizes the outside  world's  ascendancy over  their  re­ stricted way of life. The conscription issue is raised  in  the  first  chapter and  by  the end  of  the  last  chapter, the  seventh, the loss of cultural separateness is reinforced as  we  learn   that   Ephrem  will  marry  an Irish  girl in  the  United States and  as the world   of  baseball   and  cars  invades   the sedate   rural  setting. The sense  of  loss is therefore magnified. Euchariste's personal  loss  and   that   of   the  French-Canadian community as  a  whole  overlap. We  are witnessing the  last  agony  of a man's way of life  and  that  of his  people.  The story of   Euchariste and   his  family   is  that   of French-Canadian  society.
It is in  this  third  segment  of the  novel that  a familiar passage  appears. The nar­ rator intervenes here  in the sixth chapter, after the death of Oguinase and  the ruin­ ous fire and  before  the finality of the last

OPINIONS & NOTES



chapter. It is at  this  point   that  Ringuet feels called  upon  to explain in some mea­ sure the reason  for the events  he has been chronicling :

A  qui   leur   eut   demande s'ils   aimaient   Ia terre, c'est-a-dire !'ensemble des  champs planes ou  betes  et  gens  sont  semes  de  f on eparse par  un semeur au  geste  large, s'ils aimaient ce ciel  libre  au-dessus de  leur  rete; et  les vents,  et  Ia  neige,  et Ia  pluie  qui  fais­ saient leur  richesse; et  cet  horizon  distant et plat; a  celui-la, ils  n'eussent   repondu  que par    un   regard etonne.  Car   ce   qu'aimait Euchariste,  c'etait   non    la   terre,   mais   sa terre;   ce   qu'aimait   Etienne,   c'etait  cette
meme  terre qui  s'en  venait a lui,  a laquelle
il   avait  un   droit  evident,  irrecusable. lis
etaient les  hommes non  de  Ia  terre, mais  de leur   terre.

The narrator is never  as  lyrical  as he  is here:  note  the  rhythm of  the  first  sen­ tence  and  its parallelism. His capacity  to appreciate  the   beauty   before   him  con­ trasts   sharply   with   the   myopia   of  the greedy    and   possessive   Euchariste  and  Etienne. Ringuet here  seems  to be saying that their  world  is tottering because  there  are  no values  which  they  can  apprehend beyond  their own self-serving  needs. They are  losing  what   was  never   in  any  pro­ found  sense theirs,  for  they  did  not know how  to appreciate it.
In Part   Four   Euchariste, the  epitome of  all  that   is  rural   and   agrarian,  finds himself  totally  and  irrevocably alienated in an  American city.  He  is disoriented in Montreal   and    White   Falls    (Chapter One) and receives a cold reception by Ephrem's family  in  White Falls where  he plans  to visit  (Chapter Two). Moral decadence is suggested  when Euchariste discovers  the  infidelity of  Ephrem's  wife in Chapter Four.  Financial ruin soon follows  as  the  Depression  hits  with  full force  in Chapter Five.  Euchariste is reduced to  communing with  nature in  a tiny  grove  "qui  cache  maisons  et  usines"
-a  pathetic irony   when   one  considers the clear sky and  open  spaces which  were
 his once and which he was not able to appreciate. The novel  ends  with  another irony as Euchariste who had opposed "progress" and  "modernity" becomes a nightwatchman  in   a   garage   in   White Falls  where  he  is condemned to live  out his years protecting the very symbol of contemporaneity.
In  addition to  the  fact  that   there  is a theme  developed in each  Part  which con­ tributes   to  the   unity  of  the  whole,  the particular theme grows in intensity  within  each  division.  Part  Three  is a  good  ex­ ample.  The   reader  witnesses  at  first  the failure  of the  French-Canadians to resist conscription, symbolic  of the  loss of their self-contained   way  of  life  and   of  their being drawn  into the affairs of the world. What follows are the various  kinds of loss discussed above -financial and  personal, cultural  and   individual.  By  the  end   of the  third   Part, not  only  is  the  idea   of profound  and   total   loss  amply  demon­ strated, but  the  threads of  the  first  two Parts  are  pulled   together. The  potential threat to the  traditional  agrarian  life ex­ plored  in the first Part and  heightened in the   second,   is   rendered  concrete.  The  only  possible  outcome is  the  one  which we  witness  in  the  fourth and  final  Part, the  death-blow  to  an  entire   lifestyle.  To illustrate clearly  the  progression  outlined, one    might     subtitle   Part    One    "The Family," since  the  establishment of   Eu­ chariste's  home   is  its  focal   point.   Part  Two  might  be subtitled  "Departure," for it  is in  that   segment  that people  die  or leave   the   home   and   thereby   begin   to undermine its  stability.  Part   Three is a period    of    "Loss" -financial,   personal and  cultural. It is at  this  point  that   the fate of Euchariste and  the  way of life he symbolizes-the  traditional rural  society of  Quebec -is  sealed.  The last  part   of the book is the logical outcome of all that has preceded. It is a time of "Alienation." Euchariste is cut  off  from   the  past  and adrift in a future he cannot comprehend.

155

OPINIONS & NOTES



Each  Part of the novel reflects a major theme  or central issue. As the focus shifts from  the cohesiveness  and  strength of the family  to the  loneliness  and  alienation of the  individual, from   the  countryside  to the  city,  from   a  past  which  can   be  no longer  to a present that  is formidable, the story  of an  individual and  of the culture he represents is played  out.
 of information or  of insight. But  we  have  long needed   a   good    account  of   William  Henry Draper, and   George  Metcalf  provides it.  The other three leaders, Robert Baldwin, Francis Hincks and   John  Sandfield Macdonald, have been   sufficiently little  discussed to  make  any­ thing new  about them   worth seeking  out,  and their present biographers, Careless, William G. Ormsby, and   Bruce   W.  Hodgins  respectively, have   given   them  rounded  and   sensitive  por­  traits that place   them   firmly  in  the  stream of Canadian  history.


NOTES

1 Jacques Viens,   La  Terre   de  Zola  et  Trente arpents  de Ringuet (Editions Cosmos,  1970), p.  122.
2   An  unpublished  M.A.   thesis,  "La Structure du  roman du  terroir queJ:,ecois," by Jacques David (University of Montreal, 1975), treats some of the  same  topics.

3  Montreal: Fides,  1973,  p. 37·

PAUL SOCKEN


ON THE VERGE

*****   The  Pre-Confederation Premiers: On­ tario  Government  Leaders,  1841-1867, edited by J. M.  S. Careless.    Univ.  of Toronto Press,
$15.00.   This   is  one   of  the   most   interesting volumes to date of a  very  important  project in regional history, the  Ontario Historical Studies Series.  It will eventually include an array of volumes on  the  economic, social,  political and cultural  development of  the  province, but  the core  of  the  project is a  series  of  political  biog­ raphies, lives of the  Ontario premiers, of  which  Peter Oliver's account of G. Howard  Ferguson, recently  published,  was   the   first.  Nine   indi­ vidual  biographies of  premiers  from   1867  are  planned;  the   incumbent   premier  is  tactfully left  for   later.  The  present  volume   is  a  com­ pendium of   biographies of  the  Canada  West premiers   between  Union  in   184I   and   Con­
federation  in   1867.   It is  edited  by  J. M.  S.
Careless, who  has  written an  excellent  biogra­
phical  introduction,  and   it   includes  concise
accounts (part  biography and  part  political history)  of  the   five  early   government  leaders who  filled  the  role  of  premiers in  collaboration with   Lower  Canadian  counterparts.  One   of them, John A.  Macdonald, is familiar enough, and  J. K.  Johnston's account of  him  does  not add   a  great deal   that is  new,  either in  terms
 G.W.

****   JIM    CHRISTY,   Rough    Road    to   the North: Travels Along the Alaska Highway. Doubleday, $1 1.95·     Jim   Christy  has   written an  unusual, romantic travel book,  the  story  of
a  search not  only  for  a  changing country but also   for   a   vanishing  vision   of   liberty. The country he  sought was  the  northland along the Alaska   Highway, from   Grande Prairie  north­ west  into Yukon and  Alaska. He  tells  the  story  of  the  road's construction, but  he  also  tells  of the    marvellous   community   of    individualists who  were  drawn to  the  ultimate  Northwest as the   last   frontier  of  freedom,  and   having got there blossomed   under the  hot  sun  of  the  brief summers into  eccentrics  with   curious  ageless  ambitions that  seemed to  make  almost every­  one    Christy  met    into   a   personality   worth recording.  Everyone,   that   is,  but   those   who went  in for  the  quick  money  and  were  destroy­ ing  the  fragile  fabric  of  a frontier world. It is Christy's  recognition that  the  free  life  he  des­ cribes is  doomed, that this  "awesome country" will  soon  be  conquered, which   gives  his  book its   special  threnodic   quality  as   a   romantic tribute to  a  joyous  conjunction of  time, place and  people that,  once   lost,  can   never   be  re­ created.
G.W.

****   DAVID WYATT,   Prodigal  Sons:  A  Study in  Authorship and  Authority.   Johns  Hopkins Univ.  Press,   $12.95.   This   admirably   stylish critical  study  asserts   that we  have  underesti­ mated  writers'  lives   in   our   concern  for   the independence  of   texts.    In   seven    essays   on writers as  diverse as  James,  Agee,  and   Faulk­ ner,  Wyatt explores  attitudes  to  authority and  the  growth of  the  powers  of creation. The per­  ceptive chapter   on   Robertson  Davies'  Dept­ ford   Trilogy   merits  close   attention  by   those interested in  the  fictional blend  of  psychology, magic,  memory and   hope. The critical flavour can  be  appreciated in  such  brief  quotations as these:    "In   playing  Jung  . . .  against  Freud
. , . ,  Davies suggests that  the   shape  of  any



career  may   be  a function of  the   interpretive strategies we bring to bear  upon  it"; "Davies' genius  is to  deny  the  claims of  neither half  of life  in  his  effort  to  liberate  the   middle. Even his  most  prodigal son  learns to  speak   for  how he came  to  be."  Out of magic  and  middle age, there  develops in   Davies  an   articulate  hope.

W.N.

****   FREEMAN  PATTERSON,  Photography  &
The Art  of Seeing.    Van   Nostrand Reinhold,
$24.95; pa. $I 2-95·    The title  of this unassum­ ing  work  tells  it  all,  but  the  point  about seeing  (and  the   art   of  photography)   is   to  show   it. Patterson's  photographs  are   splendid.  They encourage anyone  (not   just  photographers)  to see   "laterally" as  it   were -to  break   out   of habits and  rules  of  procedure that govern how we  ordinarily   look   at   the   world, and   to  ani­  mate    our   imaginations  instead.  The   accom­ panying  text  encourages us  to  do  so,  provides exercises  to  follow  and  explanations of Patter­ son's  own  camera work.  But  in  a  more  general way-as  "Zen and  the   Art  of  Visual   Main­ tenance," perhaps-the  book  is  also  an  illu­ mination  of  the   exacting  arts   of   perspective and  metaphor.
 tombs   and   towns,   but   his  account of  it  is  as padded with  irrelevancies as a Chinese quilted jacket.    In   terms   of   real   information  about China and  the  Chinese people  there is perhaps enough to fill a  Saturday Night-length article. The  rest   consists   of   associated  memories  of other   journeys,  anecdotes  about   Ryga's   in­ effably    dull   travelling  companions,  and   ac­ counts of conversations with  well-trained Chin­ ese  guides  that   the  circumstances under  which  they  took  place  render stilted and  artificial and  which   remind  one  disconcertingly  of  the   en­  comiums of  proletarian achievement and  virtue in  official  publications like  Chinese Literature.

G.W.

W.N.

***   RICHARD K.  CROss,   Malcolm Lowry: A Preface  to  His  Fiction. Univ. of Chicago  Press,
$I2.50.   The fact   that  Professor Cross  writes very   well  makes   this   short  book   one   of   the more  approachable of  introductions to  Lowry,
but  an  introduction it  remains: an  account of theme, character  and   plot,   with   some  nod  in the  direction of  imagery and  style.  Yet  so im­ patient is the  author with  symbolic readings of Lowry   that   he  often   fails  to  give  due  measure to  Lowry's own  fascination with  symbolic  sys­ tems.   For   Cross,   Lowry   is  a   modernist,  and  revealingly  he  declares that  his  "own  lines  of interpretation were  firmly  drawn ... before  ... I969." He  acknowledges later critical comment (indeed, he is widely  read  in Lowry  criticism); if much  of  this  other work  is  more  stimulating and   original,  Professor  Cross's   book   contents itself  with  critical  description and  a  refreshing readability.
W.N.

*  GEORGE  RYGA,  Beyond   the   Crimson  Morn­ ing:  Reflections on   a  Journey   through   Con­ temporary  China.  Doubleday,   $I 1.50.     This  book  frustrates one  from  the  beginning. George Ryga   went   to  China  on   what   was  obviously the   routine tour  of   communes  and   factories,
