Sr .25   per copy


CANADIAN

l TERATURE N° 26






THE	SLEEPING	GIJINT


Articles

BY D. G. JONES, JOSEPH GOLD,  H. W.  SONTHOFF, ANTHONY R. KILGALLIN

Chronicle

BY NAIM  KATTAN

Reviews

BY MIRIAM  WADDINGTON, ALBERT TUCKER, GEORGE  WOODCOCK, E. W.  MANDEL, WILLIAM TOYE, GEORGE  ROBERTSON,
JOHN ROBERT  COLOMBO, JOHN  HULCOOP, HELGA HARDER

Opinion

BY PHYLLIS GOTLIEB



A QUARTERLY  OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW



THE SLEEPING GIANT

Or the Uncreated Conscience of the Race


D. G. Jones


Neither capons nor pullets nor hens
Can wake the sun and the world;
Only the prophets of the Old Testament, Huge old cocks, all speckled and barred,
Their  wings like the ragged pages of sermons, Only they from their roosts in the henhouse Can rouse the bread from its oven sleep,
Raise the smoke from the haunted  chimneys.
James Reaney, "The Horn".









MANYVOICES  now agree that om chimney• are haunted. Mr.  Brian  Stock,  writing in  the  Atlantic  Monthly   (Nov. 1964), argues that  he
cannot be  accused  of  betraying Canada by leaving  it; on  the  contrary, Canada has  betrayed him  by failing   to  provide  him  with  a sense  of identity, a sense of patria. "The trouble with  you Canadians," says M. Pierre Bourgault, President of the  R.I.N., "is you have  no identification with your country." Earle Birney begins a poem, "Once upon  a colony j there  was a land that  was/ almost  a real/ country called  Canada." Elsewhere he tells us, "It is by our lack of ghosts we're  haunted." Leonard Cohen   in  The   Favourite Game  brings  us full  circle  back  to  Mr.  Stock when  he  writes,  "Some say  that  no one  ever  leaves  Montreal, for  that  city,  like Canada itself, is designed  to  preserve  the  past,  a past  that happened somewhere else." In  the  latest  issue of Cite Libre (Mai-Juin 1965) Andre Rossinger presents

3

THE  SLEEPING GIANT



a very similar  analysis of the Canadian mentality  as it has developed historically, and  he  concludes  his discussion of  Canada's present  situation  by saying  cate­ gorically, "Le  Canada n'a que deux choix:  ou grandir  ou mourir." It must either grow up or die.
A small but growing line of criticism is concerned  to comment on the haunted character of the life reflected in  Canadian literature. It is represented  by W. P. Wilgar's  "Poetry  and the Divided Mind in Canada" ( 1944), Warren  Tallman's "Wolf  in  the Snow"  ( 1g6o), and  most recently T.  E.  Farley's  thesis submitted at  Carleton  University,  Love  and  Death in Canadian  Poetry.
Whether they look at the poetry or the novel they uncover a picture of irresolu­ tion,  of  isolation and  frustration, of  exile.  All suggest  that  Canadians have developed  a  kind  of cultural  schizophrenia,  a  division  between  their  conscious aspirations  and  their  unconscious convictions  which  undermines  their  lives and leads  to  the development  of a profoundly  negative outlook.
For example,  Mr. Farley's reading of English-Canadian poetry presents us with a world in which the past is to be preserved while the future  is to be resisted; in which  intellect  and  will must rule over all passion and  spontaneous  impulse;  in which,  even  so,  human  ideals,  human  loyalties,  and  love itself are  constantly betrayed; in which man is burdened  by a sense of guilt, and  God, if he appears, becomes  a  God  of  Vengeance  rather  than  a  God  of  Love;  in  which  frequent symbols  of  vitality  and  abundance, such  as the sun  and  the sea, become  more often symbols of paralysis and death, the Medusa sun, the capacious tombs of the sea.  Death   alone  is  both  triumphant and  final.  English-Canadian  poetry  is a poetry  of exile, increasingly negative to the point  of being neurotic.
This  view  has  been "suppressed,  officially denied."  So far  I  have  not  heard
that  Mr.  Farley  has been shot, "as a precautionary measure."  Still, whatever the weaknesses of Mr.  Farley's  thesis, the point  of view which  he presents is not to be easily dismissed. It is an extreme development of Mr. Wilgar's earlier essay. It comprehends or  confirms in  the poetry  what  Mr.  Tallman has observed in the novel. And  it  is supported  by the  comments  of  Mr.  Stock,  Mr.  Rossinger, and others quite outside the literary universe.
At  any  rate, it is clear that  a number  of critics have been able to characterize Canadian literature as essentially negative, even neurotic, and that  they have suggested  that  this  negative character  reflects the  absence of a positive national myth or sense of identity. As Mr. Wilgar would put it, it reflects "the  inability of the Canadian to decide what he is or, more dangerous,  what he wants to be."
My  point  is not  that  this view is wrong, but  that  it is a partial  view. A closer


4

THE SLEEPING GIANT



study  of  Canadian literature   reveals both  positive and  negative  characteristics; more especially it reveals not only the anxiety which results from the lack of any clearly defined identity,  but also, and sometimes simultaneously, a confidence that such an identity exists and is to be realized. In a moment I would like to illustrate how this duality  reveals itself in a number of recurring images in Canadian litera­ ture. But first I would like to suggest a general way of looking at Canadian litera­ ture which would allow us to acknowledge the many negative characteristics and yet maintain  that  the literature  has a basically positive character.
If we were looking for  a single large or archetypal  pattern  in terms of which Canadian literature could be placed in perspective, the pattern  of the Old Testa­ ment  might suit  us best. It  is a pattern  that  would comprehend  the critical view so far  presented  but  that  would  also allow  us to modify  that  view.  For  if  the world of Canadian literature  is a kind of Old Testament  world, if  the literature  to date  is a kind  of Old  Testament  of Canadian literature, we can say that  it is finally no  more  negative  and  no more neurotic  than  the Old  Testament  of the Bible. And  we can  suggest that  the poets and  novelists who  produced  this litera­ ture  are  not  simply  the  advanced  victims of  a  national  neurosis, but  also the prophets  of  the  Old  Testament who  can  raise  the  smoke  from  our  haunted  chimneys.
If the world  of Canadian literature  is an Old  Testament world, it is a world of  Adam  separated   from  his  Creator  and  cast  out  of  Eden  to  wander  in  the wilderness. It  is a  world  of the scattered  tribes of Israel,  in exile from  the Old Kingdom  and  not yet restored to the New, in bondage to foreign powers, aliens in their own land,  tied to the law of the fathers from which their hearts tend  none­ theless continually  to turn  away. It is a world of angry patriarchs  and  rebellious children,  and  of the prophets  of the wrath  of God. It is a world in which life in all its fullness remains  distinctly a promise rather  than  an actuality. Its prophets go into the desert to listen to the still small voice, to wrestle with the angel, or to discover the mountain of God,  the Sinai, Ararat,  or Eden  from  which a Moses, Noah, or New Adam  shall bring down the word and  reveal the new order of the world.  It is an  Old  Testament world  which  implies,  sometimes  without  much hope, sometimes with great confidence, its completion in the New.
That Canadian history  bears some resemblance to this Old  Testament  arche­ type  is, I think,  self-evident.  Were  there  time, a few specific  illustrations  could be given to show that  the world of Canadian literature  is often a world of scat­ tered tribes and of prophets  of the wrath of God. Both  Mr. Farley and  Mr. Tall­  man make clear that it is often a world of exile and isolation, of guilt and conflict,

5

THE SLEEPING GIANT



a world in which  the  jealous God of the Old  Testament is very much  at home.
For  the present,  however, I would like to examine  a number  of images which are quite clearly related to this Old Testament archetype  and  which illustrate the point  that  Canadian literature  exhibits not  only  a sense of  exile, of alienation from  a vital community,  but also a sense of expectation,  of restoration  to a vital community.  Here  we find the exiled Old  Adam.  Here  we also find the sleeping Adam or dreaming  Adam, who is a somewhat different figure. He is the sleeping giant,  the major  man, or, if you like, the personification  of a world order, lost or as yet undiscovered. If there is a Canadian identity  as yet unrealized, he is it. He embodies  what  James  Joyce called  the uncreated  conscience of the  race.  Asso­ ciated  with  this figure  are  the  images  of  the  Ark  and  of  the  Mountain, also potential symbols of a world order. Basically, then, the images which I propose to examine  are  these three, the images of Adam,  Ark and  Mountain. They  appear  in  a  variety  of forms  throughout   Canadian literature,  with  varying  degrees of positive and  negative feeling, and reveal in a purely formal or archetypal  manner something  of the drama  of the uncreated  conscience of the race.


IWOULD  LIKE TO  begin with  an  example  from  a fairly  con­
temporary  poem  and  then,  with the poetry of Jay  Macpherson  as a guide, look
at a number  of variations as they appear  throughout the poetry. Finally, I would like to look at two examples of this imagery as it appears  in the novel.
The  images of Adam, Ark, and  Mountain  are practically  all announced, if we
include  the  title, in  Margaret  Avison's poem  "The One  Ship  Beached on  One
Far  Distant  Shore."

We sprawl abandoned into disbelief And feel the pivot-picture of old Adam On the first hill that ever was, alone,
And see the hard earth seeded with sharp snow
And dream that history is done.

Here  we are  placed in exile. Our  pivot-picture  is that  of Adam,  once the major man  at home in Eden but now cast out in the wilderness. In moments of despair (or  perhaps  of  rational  clarity)   we dream  that  history  is done,  that  our  exile from  a  unified  world,  from  a  universal spiritual  community  in  any  traditional sense, is permanent. The one ship, the ark of life, is beached on some other shore,

6

THE SLEEPING GIANT



and  the first hill that  ever was, the World Mountain  and seat of Eden, is seeded with barren  snow.
This is the  negative form  of the image. The  same general  image reappears  in
other contexts and,  as we shall see, with only slight modification, takes on a much more positive character.
Jay  Macpherson's book The  Boatman  provides us with a kind of skeleton key to the equations  and permutations into which these images may enter. With "Eve in Reflection"  we begin, as in Miss Avison's poem, with an image of exile. Adam and Eve have been cast out of the garden,  which is here symbolized by Eve's own reflection, "the  lost girl under  the sea." And while Eve, "the  mother of all living," lies contemplating her image  locked behind  the mirror of ocean, Adam  wanders
alone.

The adored face is lost from sight, Marred in the whelming tide of blood, And Adam walks in the cold night, Wilderness, waste wood.

The  image of the garden,  nature  unified and  restored to community  with God and  man,  becomes in  the  fallen  world  a mirror  image,  a  world locked  behind glass, frozen in ice, or drowned  in the sea. Interestingly, Eve, in some sense, tends to be locked in, Adam out. The garden is either unattainable or becomes a travesty of itself as the garden  of the isolated ego, the garden of the little king as opposed to  the garden  of  God,  or  the  big king. This  is Miss Macpherson's  "Garden of the  Fall."

The garden where the little king Contemplates his loves in stone, Breathless, branching in a ring, All for his delight alone....


These negative  images of exile appear  elsewhere in more or less obvious form. James  Reaney's  "The Katzenjammer Kids" and  "The  School Globe" both  pre­ sent  us with  Edens  from  which the speaker  has been locked out.  Instead  of the happy  paper  world  of  the  school globe, he  has inherited  "The  great  sad real one/  That's filled/  Not with  a child's remembered  and  pleasant  skies/  But with blood, pus, horror,  death,  stepmothers  and  lies."
In  the  strange  poem  "Arras" by P. K. Page  and  in  Phyllis   Webb's poem
"Marvell's Garden", we are presented with gardens of the fall where the speakers


7

THE SLEEPING GIANT



have  been locked  in. As Miss Page says, "No  one  joins those figures on the arras." And  of her  version  of Marvell's Garden Miss Webb  concludes:
And I have gone walking slowly in his garden of necessity
leaving brothers, lovers, Christ
outside my walls
where they have wept without and I within.

More  distant in  time  and  in  their  connection with  the  Old  Testament  arche­ types  are  certain  images in the  poetry  of Roberts and  Lampman. Roberts' poetry reveals  a  progressive  withdrawal or  deepening sense  of  exile,  and  though such poems  as "The Brook in  February" or  "Ice" are  ostensibly  no  more  than  occa­  sional  descriptive  pieces, I would  suggest  that   they  are  also  symbolic  and   that  here  again   we  find  the  image  of  the  frozen  garden from  which  man  has  been expelled.  For  example,  the  poem "Ice":
When Winter scourged the meadow and the hill
And in the withered leafage worked his will,
The waters shrank, and shuddered,  and stood still, - Then built himself a magic house of glass,
Wherein to sit and watch the fury pass.

In  a  like  manner I suggest  that  the  image  of Adam and  the  lost garden  lies behind  several  of the  poems of Archibald Lampman. In the  longer  of his poems "In  November" the  speaker  wanders  through a waste  wood  and  comes  upon  a circle  of dead  mulleins  looking  like hermits  who  have  died  at  their  prayers.  In  a brief  moment of sunshine  they  revive  within   him  a  kind  of spectral happiness. He  is  the  exiled  Adam   who  here  finds  intimations of  the  lost  paradise. Other poems,  such  as "In October", "Winter Solitude", or the  sonnet  "In November", present  us with  related  images. At the end of the sonnet  the speaker  says:
Fast drives the snow, and no man comes this way; The hills grow wintry white, and bleak winds moan About the naked uplands. I alone
Am neither sad, nor shelterless, nor grey,
Wrapped  round in thought, content  to watch and dream.

We  may  be reminded here  of the  man  on  the  hill, alone,  while  the  hard  earth  is seeded  with  sharp snow. Yet  there  is a difference. There is a sense of optimism here  that  was lacking  before. I believe that  we can illuminate this image  by going back  to Miss Macpherson.

8

THE SLEEPING GIANT



The  lost  Eden  becomes  a  memory,  an  ideal,  a dream  in the  fallen  mind.  It is the  "lost  traveller's dream  under the  hill",  as  Blake  describes  Satan. Thus   the garden becomes  identified with  the  dreaming Adam  or,  in  pastoral terms,  with the  sleeping  shepherd, which  is the  title  of Miss Macpherson's poem.

The gold day gone, now Lucifer
Lights shepherds from the eastern hill. The air grows sharp, the grasses stir. One lies in slumber sunken still.

Oh, wake him not until he please, Lest he should rise to weep:
For flocks and birds and streams and trees
Are golden in his silver sleep.

A  related   poem,  "The  Faithful Shepherd", identifies  the  sleeping  figure  with the ark, also a symbol of the totality  of life unified and  preserved  from  destruction.

Cold pastoral: the shepherd under the snow
Sleeps circled with his sheep.
Above them though successive winters heap
Rigours, and wailing weathers go
Like beasts about,  time only rocks their sleep, An ark upon a deep.
And drowsy care, to keep a world from death, Maintains his steady heartbeat  and warm breath.

The  speaker  in  Lampman's poems  frequently becomes  just such  a faithful shep­ herd  in  whose  dream, as in  an  ark,  a  world  is kept  from  death. In  Miss  Mac­  pherson's "The Anagogic Man" the same  figure is identified as  Noah.

Angel declare:  what sways where Noah nods? The sun, the stars, the figures of the Gods.

We  can  now  turn to  a  series of  images  which  have  been  related   already   by Milton  Wilson  in  his article  "Klein's Drowned Poet". For  as Eden  becomes Ark, Adam in the snow  becomes  the  Poet in the sea.
A vivid transition is provided  by Duncan Campbell Scott's  "The Piper  of Arll". The   piper  in  the  little  cove  of  Arll  is a  lonely shepherd. With  the  arrival of  a mysterious  ship,  he  hears  the  music of a larger  life  (associated in the  poem  with the  more  dynamic elements  in his own little world). He strives to learn  the music, but  when   the  ship  sails  away  without him  he  is  heartbroken and   accordingly

9

THE SLEEPING GIANT



breaks  his pipe.  Yet  he mends it  again,  and  as the  mysterious ship  returns  he sings his soul  out  and  expires. The  crew  take  his body  to the ship,  whereupon piper, crew, and  all sink beneath  the sea. Thanatos overcomes Eros. Negative as it may be, the conclusion remains haunting,  rich and  beautiful.
The  ship  is another  ark, and  the sunken  ark and  the  piper are one, just as in the case of the dreaming  shepherd  in whose faithful  sleep the plenitude of Eden is preserved. Here too, the ship, the shepherd,  and the crew become jewelled and "golden  in their silver sleep."

Tendrils of or and azur  creep,
And globes of amber light are rolled, And in the gloaming of the deep
Their eyes are starry pits of gold.

And sometimes in the liquid night The hull is changed, a solid gem, That glows with a soft stony light, The lost prince of a diadem.

And at the keel a vine is quick,
That spreads its hines and works and weaves
O'er all the timbers veining thick
A plenitude of silver leaves.


The  struggle  between Eros and  Thanatos, which is here so decisively won by Thanatos,  becomes  more  open  and  violent  as  Scott's  poetry  develops. If  the sleeping shepherd  may be said to wake, he often  does so only to rise and  weep. Nevertheless, there is a deliberate attempt  to recover the dynamic life which here lies sunk  and  to  affirm what  Scott  calls "the  beauty  of terror" as well as "the beauty of peace".
A similar  affirmation  characterizes  the  poetry  of  E.  J. Pratt, where  the  arks
become more  realistic, more mixed or ironic, but  always struggle fiercely to stay afloat,  as in The  Titanic or The  Cachalot. The  Titanic is, of course, an  actual ship;  but it is also the symbol of a world, an ark, and in part  at least a false ark. The  cachalot  is very like a  whale,  but  he too is an  ark,  capable  of containing rivers, islands, and  the little boats of men, sounding  the heights and  depths, gold and  beryl in the sun and brushed by the sea gulls with their silver wings.
The  whale  is capable  of being  related  very closely to our  initial image of the dreaming  Adam,  as the beast tells us himself in one of Miss Macpherson's poems.

10

THE  SLEEPING GIANT



I am an ark to swim the perilous flood.
With gold and spices, with candles burning sweet
In wakeful silence at his head and feet, Vaulted  in my sepulchre lies the first man.

As in  the  case of the  garden, the  whale  may  also appear in  a negative or  de­ monic  guise. In  Earle  Birney's  poem  "Mappemounde" he becomes "Cetegrande, that  sly beast  who  sucks in / with  the whirlwind also the wanderer's pledges."  In Phyllis  Webb's poem  "A  Tall  Tale, or a  Moral  Song", it is a fantastic fish story that  brings  us back  to the garden of the fall or "Eve  in  Reflection."

The whale, improbable  as lust, carved out a cave
for the seagirl's rest;
with rest the seagirl, sweet as dust, devised
a manner for the whale to lie between her thighs.

Lying  for  ages  under the  sea,  "this  strangest whale  aslant  the  seagirl's thighs", they've turned to stone.  The  story  makes sense if we see here  Eve,  "the lost girl under  the sea", embracing the  lost order, Eden,  which  is equally  her major man, the  dreaming Adam.
The attempt to catch  the  world  by the  tail in all its manifold variety  is an  un­
likely business. A. J. M. Smith  offers a few directions in his "Plot Against Proteus", where  the imagery is drawn from  a different mythology  and  old  Proteus takes the place  of the  whale.
There are  echoes  of  this  theme  in  other  poems  on  swimmers which   Milton Wilson  notes  in  F. R. Scott,  Klein,  and  Layton. However, it is Klein's "Portrait of the  Poet  as Landscape" which  brings us back most directly  to the image  of the sleeping  Adam. The  shepherd or  piper  is now the poet.  He  too  remains as effec­ tively  sunk  beneath the  sea  of  modern life  as Scott's  piper  of  Arll.  Yet  he  too carries  the secret  within  him  and  is, with  the  piper, "the lost prince  of a diadem."

meanwhile he makes of his status as zero a rich garland,
a halo of his anonymity,
and lives alone, and in his secret shines like phosphorus. At the bottom of the sea.

His  Old  Testament connections are  established  a little  earlier  in the  poem  where we are  told:


II

THE  SLEEPING GIANT



Look, he is the nth Adam taking a green inventory
in a world but scarcely uttered,  naming, praising

The  poet  in his formal  guise is Adam, who  gives names  to the  creation. Though he  may  be sunk  in  anonymity, he holds  the  key to the  new  Eden  or  "world but scarcely  uttered".
Irving Layton has  adopted the  formal  role  of  the  nth  Adam  in  a  number of his poems,  notably  "The Birth  of Tragedy", in which  the speaker  proclaims:

In me, nature's divided things­
tree, mould on tree - have their fruition;
I am their core. Let them swap, bandy, like a flame swerve
I am their mouth;  as a mouth  I serve.

Not  quite  drowned under  the sea, in this poem  the speaker  says, "I lie like a slain thing/  under   the  green  air  the  trees/ inhabit." And   the  note  of  expectancy is heard   at  the  end  of  the  poem,  where  we  are  told  that   all  the  while  "someone from  afar  off/ blows birthday candles for the world."
In  "The Cold  Green  Element" the drowned poet is hauled  from  the water  and in  a new  incarnation returns  to it as an  active  swimmer. At  the  beginning of the poem  the speaker  sets out from  the end of his garden walk toward a mystery  and finds  the  undertaker going in the same  direction.

Hi, I tell him,
a great storm in the Pacific has blown a dead poet out of the water,
who now hangs from the city gates.

Crowds depart  daily to see it, and return with grimaces and incomprehension;
if its limbs twitched in the air
they would sit at its feet peeling their oranges.

The last image  may suggest the crowd  in the  pit at a Shakespearean play, or any old-fashioned  hanging.  In   the  context   of  the  biblical  archetype, however,   the hanged man  is a Christ-figure; he is not really or finally dead, though that is incomprehensible to  the  crowd.   He  has,  in  fact,  found   his  resurrection in  the speaker. Though  the  undertaker has seen  his  heart  in  the  grass,  though he  has

12

THE SLEEPING GIANT



seen  himself  in  the  eyes of old  women,  "spent  streams  mourning his manhood," he is not  dead; what  they  have  seen or  mourned  was  but  one of his "murdered selves"  which,  like the  poet  hanging from  the city gates,  can  be seen everywhere "hanging from  ancient twigs".  At the end of the poem  he tells us, "I am again/ a breathless  swimmer in  that cold  green  element."




bE IMAGE of the mountain appears more  fleetingly  in both  its positive  and  negative guises. It appears explicitly as Ararat in F. R. Scott's  poem "Lakeshore", where   the  speaker   becomes  a  kind  of  pessimistic  Noah  watching the  modern rationalistic world -indeed,  all exiles from  the  primal  ocean -go down  before  the flood.  Yet we tend  to adopt  the point  of view of the speaker  who stands  safe on  the  world  mountain and  who has already allied  himself as a swim­ mer  with  the  underwater world.
The appearance, I suspect,  of this image in two poems, one by Birney and  one by Layton, would  seem  to confirm  Birney's  pessimism and  Layton's optimism. In Birney's  poem  "Bushed" the  isolated  man  is finally destroyed  by an  increasingly alien  and  hostile  nature, which  at  the  end  of the  poem  takes on the  form  of the mountain in  its  darkest  guise.

Then  he knew though the mountain slept, the winds were shaping its peak to an arrowhead
poised
But now he could only bar himself in and wait
for the great flint to come singing into his heart.

Layton's "Mount  Rolland" presents  a  more  positive  version  by far.  Here  the mountain is opposed  to a commercial and  industrial society which  tries to tame it. But  the  speaker  is not  an  alien.  Filled  with  pity for  the  trees  which  like monks climb  the  exhausted hillside,  he is one of the chosen, a kind of Moses.
While all around  me, as for a favoured intruder, There's  an immense silence made for primeval birds Or a thought  to rise like a great cloud out of a crater, A silence contained  by valleys,
Gardes Civiles in green capes.

Frequently enough Layton is an  angry  prophet crying  for destruction: he tells us of his kin when  he says that from  time to time he will take his hot heart to Ezekial

THE SLEEPING GIANT



and  Jeremiah, to stand  awhile "in  aching  confraternity." Yet in the context  of this discussion, he is the most confident prophet  of a new life.
The  Mountain  and the Valley is a realistic novel which  nonetheless brings us
back to Miss Avison's image of Adam on the first hill that  ever was, alone, while the hard  earth  is seeded with sharp snow, or perhaps  more exactly to Miss Mac­ pherson's cold pastoral: the shepherd under the snow.
Buckler  tells the  story of David  Canaan   from  his childhood  to his death  in early  middle  age. As he grows up  and  the  members  of his family get married, move to the city, or die, we see him increasingly isolated on his Nova Scotia farm. His isolation is not  just an individual  or family matter.  It reflects the disintegra­ tion of the old  rural  way of life and  the final failure  of the cultural community of the  previous generations.  David is aware  also that  a new cultural community has not developed simultaneously with the development  of the cities. There  is no point in simply following his sister or his brother-in-law  into the towns. The people there are only superficially better off.
The  town people seemed to have only a thin personal topsoil. Nothing grew on it except a sparse crop of self-assurance. They were absolutely unresponsive to any­ thing outside their own narrow communion.

More  or less intuitively  he has come to write.  He  keeps an old copy-book in which  he chronically  attempts  to come to terms  with  his experience  and  give it significance within an order of words. At such moments he escapes from his isola­ tion. When not trying to formulate  his world anew in this way, he finds that even his most immediate  life becomes unreal and his alienation  is total.

Even the sensations of his own flesh had become outside. The inside was nothing but one great naked eye of self-consciousness, with only its own looking to look at. The frozen landscape made no echo inside him.

If he is to escape from  this growing sense of unreality,  he must do no less than remake  the  world in  his own image -in  his own  words. His realization of this fact  is associated with the realization of another  ambition.
Ever since he was a boy, David has wanted to go up the nearby mountain,  but something has always prevented his going, the death  of a neighbour, some division in the family. Several times he has hoped to go with his father  to cut a particular tree, one that  his father  has marked out for a ship's keel. Interestingly, his father is killed on the  mountain  cutting  the keel-tree. Having  set off abruptly  in anger against  his wife, he fails to concentrate  adequately  on the  job of felling the tree and  he is struck  down  as it falls. What  was to have  been a kind  of ceremonial

THE SLEEPING GIANT



affair  becomes  no  more  than  a tragic  accident. The  ark  with  that  particular  keel is never  launched.
At  the  end  of  the  book  David  finally  makes  it to  the  top  of the  mountain  by
himself. There he looks out  over  the whole valley, and  there  the  urge  to describe every  minute thing,   to  express  its  unique  intensity  and  find  precisely  the  right word  for its individual character, sweeps over  him again. To  do this, to be at  all, he must be these things.

He must  be  a tree and  a stone and  a shadow and a crystal of snow and  a thread of moss and  the veining of a leaf. He must be exactly as each of them was, every­ where and  in  all  times;  or the  guilt, the exquisite parching  for the  taste of com­ pletion, would  never be allayed at all.

So he resolves to take  a green  inventory of this world  but scarcely  uttered. It will be like the day in his youth  when he composed  a petition  for some of the villagers: "When he read  it back  to them  they heard  the voice of their own reason  speaking exactly in his." This  time it will be the voice of their world, of their lives, speaking exactly  in  his.
Up  to  this  point  he has  been  intimidated by the overwhelming task of finding words for every  minute detail  in every light and in every season. Suddenly he sees that  he need  find  only  the core or central  word.
It wouldn't  be necessary to take them one by one. That's where he'd  been wrong. All he'd  have  to do ... oh, it was so gloriously simple ... was to find  their single core of meaning.

The  single  core  of  meaning would  be  nothing less than   a  complete cultural identity, a  central myth  or  fundamental conception of  the  world.  That is what will restore  him  to the community of his fellow men. That is what  will allow them to find  their  real  community with  each  other,  with  the  land, and  with  the dead as well. For  the word  redeems  not only the present  but  the  past.

He  caught  his  breath.  He  felt  like the  warm  crying of acquittal  again.  Even my mother  and  father  and  all the others who have gone will know somehow, some­ where, that  I have  given an absolving voice to all the hurts  they gave  themselves and  each  other-hurts  that  were caused  only by  the  misreading  of  what  they couldn't  express.

One  of the  things  Mr.  Farley  noted  in his study  of Canadian poetry  was precisely the lack of such  a communion with the past, which is here to be restored  only with the  complete reformulation of the  world  in  new terms.
Unfortunately,  the  effort   of  climbing   the  mountain  has  overstrained  David

THE SLEEPING GIANT



Canaan's already  weak  heart. Like  Moses, he shall  not  enter  the  promised  land. He  dies of  heart  failure,  and  he  and  his vision  lie like  the  faithful shepherd on the  top  of the  mountain under  the falling snow.
One  more  example should  make  clear  the  persistence  with  which  this imagery recurs  in  Canadian literature. Gabrielle  Roy's  The  Hidden  Mountain is a more deliberately symbolic  novel about  the artist's  role in the  recreation or rediscovery of his world.  The  central  character is an  artist  named  simply  Pierre.  He  too sets out  to  take  a  green  inventory of  the  world.  His  isolation and  solitude  are  con­ cretely  rendered by the setting.  He  journeys across  the  Canadian  sub-arctic from the  Mackenzie River  to Ungava, where  he too finds his mountain. It  rises in the wilderness  unknown to all  but  himself  and  a  few  Esquimaux. Fascinated  by its shifting lights  and  iridescent  beauty,  he sets to  work  to  paint  it, not  all at  once, but  aspect  by  aspect,  for  like  David   Canaan he  cannot at  first  comprehend it as a whole.  In  his preoccupation, he paints  through the short summer season and  is caught in  the  first  snows.  It is then  that  he  sees the  mountain change into  a demonic power.  It is then  also that  he encounters a great  buck  caribou  whom  he must  hunt   down   to  survive.  It leads  him  an  exhausting chase  through a stony landscape of  hell,  until  he  brings  it  down,  finally,  face  to  face,  with  an  axe.  In the  night,  nearly  dead  himself,  he  becomes  as it  were  the  blood  brother of the great  animal lying beside him.  He survives.
Later  a priest  arranges for  Pierre  to go to Paris  to learn  to paint  the mountain
as it needs to be painted: so that  it may speak  to all men.  He  lives meagrely; his painting goes badly; he becomes seriously ill. Yet he paints  a final self-portrait in which   a  friend   discovers  a  strange and  haunting power   which  he  had  caught glimpses  of in  Pierre's earlier  work.  The  head,  in  a  tangled thicket  of shadows, seems  to be sprouting horns,  antlers.  Like the great  buck  caribou, or like  Michel­ angelo's Moses,  he  wears  the  horns  of primitive divinity, the  symbol  of  godhead or  power.  For  Pierre  is also a kind of Moses who has come  down  from the moun­ tain  bearing  a vision of the godhead or universal  power.
At  the  very end,  having  been  given a drug  to stimulate his heart,  he feels  pre­ pared   at  last  to capture the  whole  mountain on  canvas. He  sets to work, but  in the  midst  of laying  in  the  background colours,  he too suffers  a heart  attack and dies.

Forms,  beloved  images, dreams,  the witchery,  and  the  colours-all  spun  about, snowflakes in the storm, snow seen in a kaleidoscope.
The lofty mountain faded away.
Who, in the mists, would ever find it again?

16

THE SLEEPING GIANT




CANADIAN LITERATURE has no priority  on the imagery of the Old  Testament, nor on  the themes  of exile and  alienation, the loss of identity and the  search   for  a  new  community. Nevertheless,  our  discussion  of  the  images  of Adam, Ark,  and  Mountain, or of related  images,  reveals  a certain  persistence of such  imagery through a variety  of authors over a fairly long stretch  of time, from Confederation to the  present. And  the fact  that  these images often  recur  with  the same  peculiar   constellation of  details  or  with  the  same  peculiar  ambivalence of feeling suggests  that  they  do reflect a peculiarly  Canadian concern  with  the ques­ tion  of our  cultural identity. That this should  be so is not  altogether  surprising.
It was  inevitable that  for  Canadians, as  for  Americans, "The land  was  ours before  we  were  the  land's". But,  unlike  the  Americans, Canadians have  had  no intention  of  giving  the  gift  outright, of  finding'  "salvation through surrender". They  have  been  colonials  not  simply  from  necessity but  from  choice.  The  early Canadians, says  William   Toye  in  his  Collins'  Book  of Canada, "were not,  and did  not want  to be, wholly independent. The  cultural standards and  interests  they developed   had   little  to  do  with  Canada." He  goes  on,  quoting from   Edward Hartley Dewart in  an  early  collection  of Canadian poetry :

"Not  only  are  our  mental  wants  supplied  by the  brains  of the  Mother  Country, under  circumstances  that  utterly preclude competition,  but the majority  of persons of  taste  and  education   in  Canada   are  emigrants  from  the  Old  Country   whose tenderest  affections  cling around  the land  they have left." Thus  the colonial state of mind was succinctly explained in I864. It was probably the most potent single enfeebling  influence  on  the  native  voice and  character; it  prevailed  long  after Canada   ceased  to  be a collection  of colonies, well into  the  present  century,  and can even be detected  today.

As Mr.   Rossinger   puts  it  in  his  article  in  Cite  Libre,  for  the  English-speaking colonists,  whether they  were  frustrated Loyalists,  frustrated Scots,  or  frustrated Irish,  Canada was only a place in which  to establish  a new residence,  not a place in  which  to  develop   a  new  way of  life or  build  a  new  nation. Des Canadiens? Non, des Europeens desenchantes.
The  intention on  the  part  of each  separate group  of colonists  to  preserve  an inherited culture rather than  create  a new, even if the inherited culture had  little to  do  with  Canada, Mr.  Farley  has  labelled  generally  "the Loyalist  response", and  he argues  that  it is this response  which  lies behind  the cultural schizophrenia he  detects  in  the  poetry.  Canadians, he contends, have  ignored  the  implications of their  actual experience to the  point  where  their  authentic identity lies stillborn

THE  SLEEPING GIANT



in  the  unconscious, at  any  rate  in  the  realm  of  the  inarticulate, so that  they  re­ main   divided   within   and  against  themselves.  Precisely  such  a  state  of  affairs is symbolized   by  the  images  we  have  been  looking  at,  the  images  of the  drowned poet,  the  sleeping  shepherd, the  dreaming Adam  under   the  snow.  One of  our  examples clearly  implies  that  we shall  continue to be plagued by feelings of guilt,  by  "an exquisite  parching for  the  taste  of  completion", until  we  are  willing  to surrender ourselves  to  our  authentic  experience, until  we  are  willing  to  be  the tree  and  the stone  and  the  thread  of moss and  the crystal  of  snow.
What  Mr.  Tallman said  of  Maclennan's novel  Each  Man's  Son  represents
what  he said of all the novels he examined: at the heart  of the novel lies a conflict between  the  cultural facade  and  the  naive  violence  of place.  Again,  these  novels imply  that  the conflict  is to be resolved only by rejecting the facade and  accepting the  authentic reality  of the  characters' everyday  experience. For  this reason  Mr. Tallman is led, not simply to condone, but to recommend the behaviour of Duddy Kravitz in  Mordecai Richler's novel.  He  explains:

Duddy  has ceased to care for appearances  and  this insouciance  releases him from the nightmare.  All the other  people in the novel cannot  possess themselves because their  vital energies are devoted  full-time  to maintaining the  false appearances  in terms of which they identify themselves. These appearances -the cultural, ethical, communal  pretensions to which they cling-mask over but scarcely conceal the distinctly  uncultured,  unethical,  isolated actuality  in which  they participate.

Duddy Kravitz's cry of "I don't care"  is the  cruder, North American version of Stephen Daedalus' "Non  serviam." "I will  not  serve  that  in  which  I no  longer believe,  whether it  calls itself my  home,  my  fatherland, or  my church." It is on the  basis of  this apparently negative  resolution  that  Joyce's character sets out  to encounter "the reality  of experience and  to forge  in  the  smithy  of  [his]  soul the uncreated conscience  of  [his]  race."
Our  predicament is not  unique. Ortega y Gasset  in  an  essay on  Goethe  says even  more  generally:

However  much  a  man  searches heaven  and  earth,  the  past  and  the  future,  for his higher  destiny, he remains the victim of a perennial  vacillation,  of an external influence  which  perpetually  troubles  him until, once and  for all, he makes up his mind  to declare  that  right is that  which is in accord  with him.

It is not  unique; but  it may  have  a uniquely  Canadian application.
The trouble is that  even  though   Mr.  Dewart's brand of colonialism  may  well retire  with  Mr.  Diefenbaker, the  colonial  state  of  mind   may  not.  Whereas our

THE SLEEPING GIANT



mental wants  were  long  supplied   by  Great  Britain,  since  the  second  world  war they  have  been  increasingly supplied, along  with  our  investment capital, by the United   States.  So  argues  Mr.  Rossinger,  who  fears  that  Canadians may  become
confirmed   in  the  mentality of  a satellite  country,  the  mentality of a "satellite  a
bequilles,"  to quote his almost  untranslatable phrase,  the  word  bequilles  meaning
"crutches." Canada's leaders,  he writes, "being  conditioned to the  mentality of a
satellite  a  bequilles, a  mentality which  had  always sustained them  on  a national
level  throughout  the  periods  of  childhood   and  adolescence, the  transition  was effected   without  regrets,  and   with  the  blessing of  Great   Britain." That is, we have  simply   exchanged  one  external influence   for  another. With   the  possible exception   of  the  French-Canadians, who  may  have  decided  once  and  for  all to declare   that   that   is right  which  is in  accord  with  them,  we  remain   the  victims of a  perennial vacillation.
Margaret Avison   protests   against   the  world  of  "someone not  at  home.  Ex­ porters. Glutting  us/   with  Danish  spoons."  In  "The Local  and  the  Lakefront" we  hear  the  voice  of  the  prophet raised against  the  false gods  of  Sumer  and
Babylon.
I, stevedore of the spirit,
slog day and night, picketing
those barges and brazen freighters with their
Subud, Sumerian  ramsgate, entrails and altars.

She  frames   her  grievance ironically, in  an  image  that  is at  once  technical and symbolic.
Who that  must die but man
can burn a bush to make a bar of soap?

She  directs   us  to  our  salvation, if only  by  asking  us to  recognize  that   we have created   nothing that  is authentically ours.

Committeeman:
there are no ships or cargoes there.
Believe me. Look. Admit it. Then  we start  clean:
nothing earned; a nowhere to exchange among us few
carefully.

However  negative the situation, this is not a negative poem. To discover an illusion and  to recommend the acceptance of a reality, however  bleak, is a perennial theme and  a  positive  achievement, in  literature or in life.

rg

THE SLEEPING GIANT



Some  of  the  images  we looked  at  earlier  are  even  more  bleak;  a few  may  be brighter; the  majority are  ambivalent. They   too  tell  us of a  world  that  has  not been  realized; they  also tell us that  it exists, inchoate. It is just this  ambivalence which  AI  Purdy   exhibits  in  a  poem  explicitly  entitled   "On Canadian Identity: A  Sentimental  Monograph for  the  Daughters of  the  Empire." The  paradoxical conclusion  suggests  very nicely  the  Old  Testament mood  of one  whose  kingdom has not come but  who is sure that  it is there  waiting for him to possess it. He says:

The worth of life not being necessarily noise we kept unusual silence, and then cried out one word which has never yet been said.

We  have kept  unusual  silence. And  we have  no doubt cried  out  in our  hearts the  word  which  we have  never  said  with  our  mouths. We  may  even  have  cried out  in  our  literature the  word  which  has  not  yet been  read.  In  fact,  I suspect  it may  be possible to trace  in the literature certain elements  of a Canadian view of life,  a  view  of  man  and  his relationship to  the  universe  of a fundamental kind, which  is surely  what  we must  mean  by a Canadian identity if it is to be anything more  than   a  parochial difference  in  accent   or  in  the  details  of  economic and political  organization. But that  is another matter.
The  images  of Adam  wandering in the waste wood are patently images of exile. And  one  could  emphasize   the  persistently  negative conclusion to  which  all  but one of our  examples lead. Yet I think such  an  emphasis would  be perverse.  There is a  good  deal  of  difference  between  the  exiled  Adam   in  some  of  these  images and  the  sleeping  Adam  in others-or  the  figures  of David  and  Pierre  pregnant with  vision  at  the  moment  of death. Despite  the  heart-failures, despite  the  frag­ mentary success of a David  or a Pierre,  there  is a conviction that  the major  man  is alive, that  he is, or can become, "again a breathless swimmer  in that cold green element."
Just  at this point,  then,  when many  are concerned to express their doubts  about the  existence  of  a  Canadian identity,  when   Mr.  Stock  and  others  have  in  fact given  it  up  as  a lost cause,  it seems to  me  possible  to detect  its  presence,  in  the conviction of certain voices if in nothing else.
Ou  grandir ou mourir? In  answer  to this question, let me quote  what  I should
hope  is the  voice of a prophet. She often  speaks  with  an  Old  Testament accent. It is from  the  final  poem  in Gwen  MacEwen's book  The  Rising  Fire, the  poem entitled  "Generation Cometh."



20

THE SLEEPING GIANT



the  boy
a coy root or
bright among cities is growing you cannot stop  him you cannot stop  him growing.

try to
pull him out by the roots
from  your  loins he
is green  like a tree planted there  ...


(This  paper was originally presented at ACUTE  in Vancouver, june 1965)


















21



THE PRECIOUS  SPECK
OF LIFE



Joseph Gold








It  is the   function of art  to  illuminate the human  form    of   nature,  to  present    the ferocity  of the  weasel,  the  docility  of the sheep, the  drooping  delicacy  of the  willow, the   grim   barrenness   of  the   precipice, so that   we   can   see  the    character  of  the weasel,   the   sheep,  the   willow   and   the precipice.
NORTHROP FRYE

1:ArM  ot· THIS  ESSAY is to sugge<t that the  animal  stories of  Sir  Charles G.  D.  Roberts are  literature worthy  of  our  attention; that   they
constitute an  important body  of  Canadian writing; and   that   they  have  so far been  disposed  of with  barely  a wave of the  debonair critical  hand. The  last  part of this  contention is more  easily demonstrated than   the  first.
Between   1891  and   1933,  Roberts  wrote   and   published  approximately  230
stories.  Since  1933,  when  Macmillan  published  Eyes  of the  Wilderness,  there has  been  a gradual disappearance of books in print until  now  there  remains only The   Last  Barrier, a  collection  published   by  McClelland & Stewart in  the  New Canadian  Library, with  a  copyright  date  of  1958.  Occasionally a  story  or  two has  been  added  to  an  anthology   of  stories  for  schoolboys,   not,  one  presumes, because  of their  literary  excellence  but  because  they contain no obvious  reference to sex, politics  or religion.  As for criticism,  Alec  Lucas' brief introduction to The Last  Barrier seems  to be the  first serious  attention ever  given  to  these stories.  A

22

THE PRECIOUS SPECK



line  here  or  there  is  all  that   I  can  find  by  anyone  else. Desmond  Pacey's  few lines in  his  recent  book  on  Canadian literature are  typical:

Roberts'  stories are good as long as he confines himself to portraying  the  lives of animals  and  the environment in which they move, but once he introduces  human characters  his touch falters and  the wildest melodrama  results.'

Whatever Professor  Pacey  means  by  "good", obviously  he finds  them  not  good enough  to merit  any serious critical  examination or detailed  illustration. Such generalized value   judgments are  all  that  one  can  find.
In  fact,  Roberts' animal stories  constitute, as far  as I  can  ascertain, the  only sustained  attempt to use the materials of the Canadian Wilderness for the  purpose of expressing  a coherent view of the world  that  man  inhabits. Roberts has created a Canadian  mythology, in which  animals, rather  than  gods, play out  a systematic drama of conflict  and  resolution. This  is all  done,  of course,  within  the  frame­ work  of an  accurate survey  of natural history,  and  it is a brave  man  who would casually  question Roberts' knowledge  of the  wilderness.  Nevertheless it  would  be as  pointless  to  apply  standards of  "realism" to  these  stories  as  it  would   be  to question  the  size and  character of William  Faulkner's bear,  in  any  discussion  of its ultimate significance. Roberts' bear,  fox, moose and  porcupine are distillations of  certain   instincts  and   concretizations  of  certain   abstractions.  There  are   no oentaurs nr  griffins  but   there  are  many  other  creatures  who  emerge  from   the author's  poetic   imagination  with  equal   meaning and  consistency   and   with   a similarly  forceful  effect.  This  mythology  is, at its best, a  carefully  designed  meta­ phor  for  the  order  and  structure of nature, as in  the story  "In the  Deep  of  the Silences". The  title  itself suggests  not  just a location  but  a dynamic force  at  the heart  of  things.   In  the  story  the  elements,  land,  air  and  water  are  represented by  a  bear,  an  eagle  and  a lake  trout.  Each  is king,  or  god  of his domain. This  almost  Classic  arrangement, far  from  being  vague  or  accidental, is  clearly  in­ tended. Not  only is the story  divided  into  four  parts, one to each  of the elements, and  the  last  to the  conflict  between  their  "gods", but  the  descriptions themselves  indicate Roberts' attitude:

His fierce  yellow eyes, unwavering,  brilliant,  and  clear  like crystal,  deep  set  be­ neath  straight,  overhanging  brows, searched  the far  panorama with an incredibly piercing  gaze. At such a distance  that  the most penetrating human eye-the eye of  a  sailor,  a  plains'  ranger,  a  backwoods'  huntsman,  or  an  enumerator of  the stars-could not  discern  him  in  his soundless altitude,  he  could  mark  the  fall of a leaf or the scurry of a mouse in the sedge-grass.2

23

THE PRECIOUS SPECK



What could  be more  suggestive  of an  invisible sky-god,  who  unseen  himself, sees all  beneath him?  And  when  he does descend  he comes like a  thunderbolt:
There was a  harsh, strong  hissing in the  air,  and  a dark  body fell out  of the sky. Fell?  Rather   it seemed  to  have  been shot  downward   from  a  catapult.  No mere falling could  be so swift as that  sheer yet governed  descent.3

This  aura  of design,  pattern, structure, in a world  peopled  by creatures pursu­ ing a highly dramatic and  meaningful action  pervades all the best Roberts' stories, and  there  are  many  of them.  We  will  return to  the  question of  meaning later,  but  for  the  moment let  us  pursue  the  question of  the  purposeful  design  in  the stories  and  exactly  what  attitude Roberts brings  to nature and  why  he writes  of animals at  all. In  an  interesting essay, "The Animal Story",4  Roberts states  with admirable candour that  the  animal story  of  his  time,  and   as  he  writes  it,  is a "culmination". He surveys the history of this mode of writing from  its "fabulous" origins  up  to  Kipling and  Seton  and  he  asserts  that  the  "psychological" animal story, in which  the "personality, individuality, mentality" of an animal is pursued, has  evolved  fully and  can  go  no  further. Roberts clearly  does  not  see himself  as writing this  kind  of story  at  all. He  believes rather that  through the  animal the writer  can  approach  some  larger  vision of basic  human drives  and  some  under­ standing of the  transcendent universal  design  to which  all  things  contribute. He says of the  animal story :
It leads  us  back  to  the  old  kinship  of earth,  without  asking  us to  relinquish by way of toll any part of the wisdom of the ages, any fine essential of the 'large result of time' ,5

By this Roberts means  that  the  artist  can  use animals to make  sense of the  world of which  man  is part  and  from  which  he grew,  that  we are  given  a detachment and  perspective from  which  to examine the fundamental base  on which  we rest. Roberts' aim in his stories is to present  his own vision of truth, a vision that,  value judgments aside,  reminds  one  first of William  Wordsworth's and  William  Faulk­ ner's.   What could  be  more  Faulknerian than   "the old  kinship of  earth?" And Faulkner's "verities of the  heart" are  anticipated in  Roberts'  mythology  as story after  story  presents  the struggle  of honour, dignity, courage,  love, and  hate  sym­ bolized  in elemental struggle.  Roberts ends  his essay with  this curious  statement:
It  [the  animal  story]  has ever the more significance, it has ever the richer gift of refreshment  and  renewal, the more humane  the  heart  and  spiritual  the under­ standing  which we bring to the intimacy of it.6

It is not  unfitting that  the  quotation which   heads   this  paper should  be  taken

THE PRECIOUS SPECK



from  a study  of William  Blake. Roberts,  too, speaks here  of the  need  for  the human  mind  to "bring" meaning  to nature.  The  world  man  sees need  not  be a collection of disparate facts, but a world of potential significance realized and ordered  by the artist's imagination. Its significance is more or less, depending  on our degree of humanity.  The word "humane" suggests human  in a compassionate and  accepting  role. It  is  possible, says Roberts,  to see in  the  world  he  presents "clear  and  candid  life".






ROBERTS' ANIMAL WORLD amounts  then  to an  affirmative vision in which  the conditions  of a wilderness struggle for survival  are  accepted and confirmed. It remains to show the precise terms on which such an acceptance is possible and  to illustrate  this affirmation  from  the  fiction itself. Roberts  was born  in  I86o  and  inherited  the full force of nineteenth-century disillusion. The period  which saw a search for answers to a godless world culminate  in  Existen­ tialism  made  it  necessary for  Roberts  also to seek some  positive  confrontation with  the  problem  of man's  apparent lonely helplessness. Being  an  artist,  not  a philosopher,  Roberts  sought  the  kind  of imaginative  understanding that  Blake and  Shelley and  Wordsworth   had  sought  before him. The  terms of his clerical background  were not  acceptable,  the raw materials of  a  New Brunswick wilder­ ness were to hand,  and so Roberts brought  his imagination  to bear on nature  and animals  and  produced  his own  Canadian  mythology. The  principal  feature  of this myth  is that,  while individual  creatures constantly lose the struggle  for sur­ vival, life itself persists. In  the long run death  itself has no sting and  is ironically defeated  by the uses nature  makes of  its  processes. All things conspire  to sustain life and  the stories create  a very  strong sense of rhythmic  pattern  and  cycle, of the  seasons, of  birth  and  death,  of mating  and  separating, and  these  patterns  persist no  matter  what  the  creatures,  what  the setting or what  huminterfer­ ence  is attempted. This  may  not  seem like a  great  deal  by which  to celebrate some meaning  to existence, but after  all has man ever been honoured  for doing more than  living,  to the best of his ability?
Roberts is, to my knowledge, the only writer who has used animals  to illustrate
such a vision. But the effect of his writing is frequently and strongly like that experienced   with  Becket's  Godot,  or  Faulkner's  Dilsey, or  Brecht's  Mother Courage.  It  may sound  ludicrous  to  put,  say, Red  Fox  in such  company,  but

THE PRECIOUS SPECK



when  one has actually  read  about  him  the comparison is not nearly  so laughable. Certainly it is true  to say that  Roberts' animals are  mol'e dignified  and  lead  more meaningful lives than   the  characters in  the  writings  of  Zola  and   Dreiser,  who were contemporaries of Roberts and  whose creatures are infinitely  more "animal". "Human" and  "animal" are  labels  earned   by  the  quality of  behaviour so  that a writer   may  humanize an  animal world  or  animalize a  human one.  Roberts is after  all a  poet,  which  is to say that  his imagination makes  definition and  his human version  of  the  animal world  dignifies  and  enobles  that   world.  Roberts celebrates courage and  endurance and  for  this  reason  his  stories  of  defeat   and death  produce not  despair  but  a  sense  of  elevation, and   often  something akin to catharsis. His animals and  birds  and  fishes confront overwhelming odds.  Every second  is a challenge to life itself. The  combatants in  man's conflict,  when  not hunger and  cold,  are  accident and  disease.  For  the  animal, in  exactly  the same way,  they  are  the  innumerable enemies  who  see him  as food  and  wait  for  him in silence. The animal  who guards his life best survives longest,  but  there  is never any  guarantee that  the  next  moment will not  be the  last. It is precisely  because the  contest  is always finally lost that  the struggle is meaningful. Roberts' animal world,  like  ours,  is a fallen  world  and  the  best  that   can  be  achieved   in  it  is a persistent  denial of death,  hunger and  fear.  Every  moment wrenched from  time is  a  major   victory  and  every  meal  is  a  conquest over  an  indifferent  universe. Roberts would  agree  with  Blake that  "everything that  lives is holy" but  he would add,  I suspect,  "And holy because  it lives."
The techniques Roberts  employs are simple  and  it is the  retention of simplicity that  is his greatest  strength. There is no commentary, no moralizing, but  a stark presentation of  animal   impulses  and  success  or  defeat. The   Last  Barrier is  by no  means  a collection  of the  best of Roberts' stories,  but  since  it is readily  avail­ able  we must  confine ourselves  to it. The  title story  illustrates the  Roberts' theme  and  technique most  clearly. The  salmon  is born,  miraculously grows  up and  dies in  the  paws  of a  bear  after  a  hopeless struggle to  climb  a  waterfall. This  is the archetypal pattern of the  birth-death cycle for  all  living  creatures.  But  Roberts conveys  to  the  reader  a  clear  sense of  his own  awe  at  the  fact  that  the  process takes  place  at  all. Survival  itself is a miracle  and  even  before this, gestation  and birth. The   tiny  egg,  resting  at  the  bottom   of  a  fast  stream  with  "thousands of its  fellows,"  is unaware of the  vast  outside  that   Roberts  paints  for  the  reader:

When  the  savage  northern   winter  closed  down  upon  the  high  valley  of  the Quahdavic it found  difficulty in freezing the  swift current  that  ran  rippling  over the  bar;  and  when,  at  last, the  frost conquered  gripping  and  clutching  through

THE PRECIOUS SPECK



the long, windless nights, it was to form only a thin armour  of transparent, steel­ strong  ice, through  which,  as through  the mantle  of snow which  made  haste to cover it, the light still filtered softly but radiantly at noon, with an ethereal  cobalt tinge.7





E      of the infinite scale of size in the universe, from  the  minute forces  of energy  to the  unconquerable seasons,  is characteristic of  Roberts' awareness. The salmon  is  not  only  born   but  turns  into  something animate, complete, perfect  and  volatile  and  for the  humanizing, poetic imagina­ tion  of Roberts, this  is a supreme and  even divine  achievement:

The  deep  hollow in  the gravel  sheltered  the moving atoms,  so that  they were not  swept  away  by  the  current  streaming  over them.  But  minute  as they were, they  speedily  gathered  a  strength  altogether  miraculous  for  their  size, as  they absorbed  the clinging  sacs of egg-substance and assumed the forms of fish, almost microscopic,  but  perfect.

The protagonist salmon   of this  story  follows an  almost  classic  pattern of  de­ velopment and  is presented as a case history. Thus a sentence like the  following is not  indicative of loss of control  but  mastery  of his material:

The  egg from  which  he came  having  been one of the  first to hatch,  the  tiny salmon  mentioned   in  the  opening  paragraph  was one  of the  first of the  host to find his strength  and  to start  the migration  shoreward  from  the nest of the noisy bar.

One  has the sense of reading the commentary of a man  peering  through a micro­ scope  at  the  astonishing activities  of a  new  world.  Certainly, if this writer  may judge  from  his own  and  from  his students' responses, a  reading of  Roberts  pro­ duces  a  different, a  more  sensitive  and  a  more  aware encounter  with  a  world that  was originally taken  much  more for granted. It is unnecessary here to record  the  progress  of  the  salmon through all  its stages,  from  Parr to  Smelt  to  Grilse to Salmon, or  to summarize its ocean  voyages and  its change  from  a new  born "speck  of life"  to parenthood in its tum. Roberts  writes  a  history  of one sample  of myriad  life  that  inevitably ends  in  defeat,  and  yet he  writes  it in such  a way as to indicate, not  a despairing or cynical view of the natural process,  but  a cele­ bration  of  the  struggle itself,  as  a  careful  look  at  his  wording  indicates, "the

THE PRECIOUS SPECK



pioneer  of the shoal found all his ability taxed  to guard the speck of life which he had so lately achieved."
The  ending  to  the The   Last  Barrier is full  of  meaning.  During  one  of  the
salmon's  annual  absences the falls of his stream  have greatly  changed  by virtue of a shift in formation  that  makes them  now insurmountable. The  salmon  ends itself in vain leaps and is finally in jured and  exhausted:

When, at last, the salmon came blindly into the eddy and turned upon his side, the  bear was but  a few feet distant. She crept  forward  like a cat, crouched - and a great black paw shot around with a clutching sweep. Gasping and quiver­ ing, the sahnon  was thrown up upon  the  rocks. Then  white  teeth,  savage but merciful, bit through the back of his neck; and unstruggling he was carried to a thicket above the Falls.

The  use of the word "unstruggling" is curious  here. More  than  a mechanical description  is intended  and  the word in this context  suggests acceptance,  resolu­ tion,  completion.  When  the  fish can  struggle  no  longer  it  is ready  to  give up its life, for life and  struggle  have become synonymous.8   Nature  fulfills  itself in many  ways and  the  writer provides a curiously ironic  ending  in which  the fish, unable  to  master  the falls alive is carried  to  their  summit  in death,  as  food  in the mouth of the bear. A greater harmony, accessible only to the human imagina­  tion, is thus illustrated  by the writer. The final victory is paradoxically that of life itself, and  many deaths go to its making. In spite of the reiterated patterns  of the stronger eating  the weaker and cunning or speed eluding the dull or slow, Roberts is not  interested  in labouring  a cliche. He  goes to some  pains  to indicate  that not even the fittest survive. The  mole-shrew is a "Little  Tyrant of the Burrows" and  kills grubs,  a  mole and  finally even a snake  with  equal  efficiency, but  his sleep of contentment ends in death  after  the  chance  passage  of a fox discovers his retreat.  Other  stories show  that  the  fox is subject  to  other  powers,  and  if the strongest and bravest, the eagle, bear, moose and panther should miraculously elude  their  animal  neighbours  man  himself is  ready  to  demonstrate   his fitness. Finally  hunger  and  cold overcome  everything  else and  these in  tum  die  with the coming  of spring. All these are carefully  and systematically  presented in the stories so that  what we see is the survival of  life and  the process of cycle, of forces struggling  against  matter  and  matter  itself  altered  by the  operation  of natural laws. All things are fit for some time and  place. The  waterfalls will be mastered one  way, if not  another.
It  is interesting  at  this point  to consider more  precisely the  basis for  the in-

THE PRECIOUS SPECK



evitable  discussion  of Wordsworth's influence  on Roberts.9  To  suggest  the  areas of similarity would  require a discussion of Wordsworth beyond  the  scope  of this paper. However the  Mutability Sonnet  is at  the centre  of Wordsworth's outlook, and  it  is curious  that  it  reflects  so accurately the  themes  illustrated everywhere in  Roberts' prose,

From  low to high  doth  dissolution climb, And sink from high to low, along a scale
Of  awful  notes, whose concord shall not fail ...

"Concord shall  not  fail," Wordsworth says, and  later  he writes "Truth fails not." Concord is Truth and  Truth is Concord; that  is all you know  on earth  and  per­ haps  all you need  to know,  and  this hypothetical dictum might  stand  as well for Roberts as for  Wordsworth. The  animal stories also  amount to  a  hymn  to  con­ cord  and  harmony, and  this  "scale  of awful  notes"  along  which  life  and  death and  change harmoniously run  is to be perceived  by the imagination of  a detached artist,  a man  possessed of heightened sensibility,  who  is not  confused  by spiritual myopia.  When this  "scale" is heard  it  produces  not  despair  but  a  transcendent understanding.

A musical  but  melancholy chime,
Which  they can hear who meddle not with crime
Nor avarice,  nor over-anxious care.

Roberts says of  the  animal story  that  it  might,  if used  as  he tries  to  use it,  aid us in attaining such  an  awareness, "It frees us for a little from  the  world  of  shop­ worn  utilities,  and  from  the  mean  tenement of self of which  we do well to grow weary." 10    Roberts quite   deliberately seeks to  produce a  detached  awareness in his  reader   by creating metaphor free  from  discourse  or  commentary. The  effect is to hold  the  reader at  a kind  of intellectual distance whence  he may  apprehend the  vast  process  of  dissolution   and  regeneration,  even  unconsciously.
A comparison of the  octet  of the sonnet  and  a passage  from  The  Last Barrier
will  perhaps suggest  that  Wordsworth understands with  a  penetrating  conscious intellect  what   Roberts incorporates as an  integral part  of his metaphor.

Truth fails not;  but  her outward  forms  that  bear
The  longest  date  do melt  like frosty rime, That in  the  morning  whitened  hill and  plain And  is no more;  drop  like the  tower sublime Of  yesterday, which royally did wear

THE PRECIOUS SPECK



His crown of weeds, but could not even sustain
Some casual shouts that  broke the silent air
Or  the unimaginable  touch of Time.

Roberts, writing about   a  change   in  the  natural  landscape that   proves  fatal  to the salmon, writes  this:
At  the  very   first of spring  there  had  been  a  land-slide.  The  great,  partly  over­ hanging  rock, seamed and  split by the wedges of countless frosts, had  all at once crumbled  down  beneath  the  tireless pressure of the cataract. The  lower fall, thus retreating,  had  become one with  the upper.  The  straight  descent  was  now nearly five feet higher  than  before -a  barrier  which no voyager those waters ever knew could  hope to overcome.

The   whole  scene  has  changed and  what  was once  suitable for salmon  is now  a new  world  demanding a  new  breed  to  master  it.  I am  not  suggesting  that  the Roberts' image  is a  deliberate echo  of  Wordsworth's sonnet, though this  is  en­ tirely  possible. Rather it seems that  everywhere Roberts is illustrating an  attitude or  better  still a  vision  which  is central  to Wordsworth and  is most  perfectly  dis­ tilled  in  the  Mutability Sonnet.




To WRITE  ABOUT Roberts' animal stories  when  only one small volume   of  some  sixteen  stories   (out   of  possible  hundreds)  is  available to  the
reader  is at  best  a difficult task. The  writer  can  count  on no familiarity and  can make  no  meaningful appeal   to  the  best  work.  I have  confined   myself,  mostly, to  a  single story  but  other  stories  persistently  present  the same  vision of struggle and  cycle. The wild  goose who cannot  fly sets out  to walk  half  a continent after its  fellows  and   quickly  ends  up  in  the  mouth of  a  fox,

The  struggle  lasted  scarcely more than  two heartbeats. The  wide wings pounded twice or  thrice  upon  the ground,  in fierce convulsion.  Then   the  red fox, with  a sidewise jerk of his head,  flung the  heavy,  trailing  carcass into  a position for  its easy carrying, and  trotted off with it into the darkness of the woods.

The  snake  that  changed its mind  and  went  quickly  underground to seek for food turns  into  food  for  insects,

The  body of the dead snake was soon a centre  of teeming,  hungry,  busy life, toil­
ing  to  remove  all  traces of what  had  happened. For  Nature,   though  she works

THE PRECIOUS SPECK



out almost all her ends by tragedy, is ceaselessly attentive  to conceal the red marks of her violence.


The   very  process  of  death is a  process of life too, contributing to  the  "scale  of awful  notes." Only  life  is constant and  the  endless,  indomitable striving for  it. "Truth fails not" and  that  truth  for Roberts is the endless cycle, the supremacy
of life, the  drama of a struggle  in which  all things  participate, each  atom  playing some  meaningful role in  a series of events  that  conspire  to a harmony which  the poet  perceives  and  makes  into  art.  I have  not  found  time  here  to do  more  than outline   the   archetypal  patterns of  Roberts'  vision.  It is  perhaps not  possible, until  his  work  is part  of an  available  Canadian literary  heritage and  education, to  make   detailed  analyses   of  individual  stories.  Certain  techniques should   be part   of  any  thorough discussion  of  these  stories.  One of  the   surest marks  of Roberts'  genius   and   an   indication  of  the  degree  of  conscious  control  usually employed, is  his  complete freedom   from  sentiment. Roberts' animals never  be­ come  pets,  the  reader   is never  allowed  to  lose his detachment and  there  is  no compromise in the  recorded events  with  the bloody  processes of universal natural law.  There is  too,  the  ma.<>tery  of  perspective, the  ability,  almost  Swiftian, to construct  whole  worlds  scaled  to  the  size  of  ants  as  in  "The  Prisoners  of  the Pitcher-Plant" or  to  the  world  of giant  moose and  bear  aB  in  "The King  of the Mamozekel". Nor  is  there  space  to  pursue  the  brilliance of  poetic  description, always  used  for  specific  and   often  symbolic  purposes,  or  to  comment on  the division  of  the  whole  work  into  groups  or  types that  follow  definable patterns. For  instance, Roberts varies  his stories  so  as  to  produce a  strong sense  of  the individual  animal  personality, as  with  the  King   moose  or  with   Kehonka the wild  goose,  or  he  carefully avoids  any  suggestion  of  personality and  constructs the type, where  this seems appropriate, as with the salmon  or the ant.  The former is achieved   by  introducing some  peculiar  circumstance into  the  individual life, the  capture and   clipping of  Kehonka or  the  bear's  attack   on  the  King  of  the Mamozekel. These  and  other  matters remain  to be pursued  elsewhere.
I know  of  no  other   Canadian writer   who  has  left  a  body  of  work  so  con­ sistently  arranged about a  clear  idea  of  the  order  of  life  itself,  or  a  writer   of animal stories  who  has  been  at  one  and  the  same  time  so true  to  the  character­ istics of his actors  and  able  to produce a genuine, unsentimentalized  or dynamic fiction.  It remains to  give  elsewhere   the  detailed   workings  of  this  outlook   in other   Roberts' stories  and   in  the  sustained   narratives like  Red   Fox  and  The  Heart  of the  Ancient  Wood. It also  remains  to  bring  Roberts'  work  back  into

THE PRECIOUS SPECK



print  and  restore him, or rather  place him, in the forefront  of Canadian letters, where  he rightfully  belongs.


•   Desmond  Pacey,  Creative  Writing   zn Canada.  Revised   edition.  Toronto,  1961, p. 74·
"  Charles G. D. Roberts, The  Haunters  of the Silences. Boston,  1907, p.  204.
3  Haunters,  p. 213.
4   Charles G. D. Roberts, "Introductory" to The  Kindred  of the Wild.  London, n.d.
5  Kindred, p.  19.
6  Kindred, p. rg.
7  Charles G. D. Roberts, The  Last Barrier and Other  Stories. Toronto, 1958, p. 83.
8  Roberts' continual use of  words  like "struggle" and  "elemental" is worthy  of the reader's attention and  would  well repay  some critical examination.
9   That Roberts himself  knew  the  work  of Wordsworth in  detail  is indicated by his critical introduction to Poems of Wordsworth, edited  by J. E. Wetherell, Toronto,
r8g2.
1° Kindred, p. 19.








32




THE NOVELS OF
ETHEL WILSON




H. W. Sonthoff





1:UISTINCTIVE  ELEMENT ffi Ethd WiJ.on', fiction is its tone.
It seems as if the centre  of each  book were not a main character, or a theme, or a
plot,  but  an  attitude toward the  life of the  tale. The  subject  matter with  which Ethel  Wilson  deals  varies  considerably in  event,  character, setting. So  does  the form. But the tone, though  not the same in each work, has certain recognizable characteristics.
It is, for  one  thing,  quiet.  It is persistently  undramatic, allowing  no sustained
plot  interest, no  profound involvement with  any  character. Moments of wonder or  sharp delight   are  followed  by  ordinary distractions; moments of  concern or intense  sympathy are  commented on  with  wry humour. The  tone  is ften urbane, curious, inclusive.  And  what  it  primarily   does  is  to  render any  subject matter in such  a way  that  the  reader's journey  through it is very like his journey through any  natural landscape, any ordinary day of his living.  Meaning, in these novels  as in  living,  comes  upon  him  and  fades.  He  encounters these  characters as he might  people  in his own  life, watching their surface, their  manner and  acts, knowing  them,  drifting away,  doubting, hearing again,  sometimes  losing sight  of them  entirely. Should   he  for  a  moment lose himself  in  a scene  or  a  gesture  or mood,  he will be brought back to his role as observer;  he will have  restored  to him a  perspective that  persuades him  to regard  this fiction  with  a kind  of equanimity.
Gertrude Stein  says, "A long complicated sentence should  force itself upon  you, make  you  know  yourself  knowing  it...." These  short  complicated books make  a similar  requirement. The  reader meets people, discovers places, knows things,  and he knows  himself  knowing them,  is kept  aware of the  process. The sense of living given  is that  the  way  is the  truth; it is the  journey  that  matters, not  the  arrival

33

NOVELS OF ETHEL WILSON



points.  When  one  looks back,  he doesn't  say,  "Oh, so that  scene  was being  used to  this  end." He  looks back  over  the  natural landscape of the  journey.
To  create  this tone,  this meaning, Ethel  Wilson  does extraordinary things with point  of view and  with narrative line. Not so much  in her first novel, Hetty Dorval. Yet  even  here  there  is a pushing  at the edges of the controlling voice. There is, in fact,  nothing in the book, no reflection,  no view that the narrator, Frankie Burnaby, might not  have  thought or said.  But she does seem  to shift  her  point  of view in time. Sometimes she speaks as if she were, in imagination, very close to the experi­ ence  she  is recalling; sometimes  it  is as if she  were  taking  a  much  more distant view  of a scene  wider  and  richer  than  the  one  actually being  presented to us. In one  passage  the boundaries of the tale are described  very clearly,  precisely because the  narrator's untold   life is to  her  a  more  important  one  than Hetty Dorval's. The   things  that  are  not  told  are  not  important to  the story;  but  the  knowledge  that  there  are  untold, unknown things  and  that  other  things  are  only guessed  at informs Hetty Dorval.

I should like to describe Molly and Richard  ... because they are very important to me and  have meant  a great deal in my life, and  now they always will. But this is not a story of me, nor of them, in a way, but of the places and  ways known to me in which Hetty Dorval has appeared.  It is not even Hetty Dorval's whole story because to this day I do not know Hetty's  whole story and she does not tell. I only knew the story of Hetty by inference and  by strange chance.  Circumstances  some­ times  make  it  possible to  know  people  with  sureness and  therefore  with  joy or some  other   emotion,   because  continuous  association  with  them  make  them  as known  and  predictable  as the familiar beloved contours of home, or else the place where  one  merely  waits for  the  street  car,  or  else the  dentist's  drill.  Take  your choice. But one cannot invade and discover the closed or hidden  places of a person like Hetty  Dorval  with whom  one's  associations, though  significant,  are fragmen­  tary,  and  for  the  added  reason  that  Hetty  does  not  speak-of  herself. ... Any positive efforts that  one could discern on the  part  of Hetty  were directed  towards isolating  herself  from  responsibilities to other  people.... But ... [she]  could  not island  herself, because we impinge  on each  other,  we touch,  we glance, we press, we touch  again,  we cannot  escape. "No  man  is an  island."  Who touched  me? ... And so I will  write down something about  Richard  and  Molly....

There are  also,  in  Hetty   Dorval, scenes  or  events  whose  value  seems  not  to depend on  their  relevance  to  this  particular tale.  Descriptions of the  Fraser  and the Thompson River,  of the desolate  hills around Lytton, of the  English sky, com­ ments  on  the genius  of place,  the story  Marcella Martin told: such passages seem to  have  an  absolute  value,  a  vivid  life outside  the  main  line  of  the story.  Each

34

NOVELS OF  ETHEL WILSON



one  could  have  seemed,  to the  narrator, relevant; she  could  have  justified  them, as in the  passage  quoted above.  But there is in them some force  barely  contained by the  narrative.






bAT FORCE Is RELAXED in The  Innocent  Traveller, an episodic book  about  a life which  "... inscribes  no sweeping  curves  upon  the  moving cur­ tain  of time ... no  significant design.  Just  small  bright  dots  of colour, sparkling  dabs  of life."  Here  scenes  occur  or recur  as if by chance, as if this event or that  landscape had  simply  snagged   the  attention or  the  memory. They  are  arranged in  a roughly  chronological order  from  the  time in the  184o's  when Topaz Edge­ worth  was  a very little  girl  to the  time in  the  194o's  when  she died.  But even so simple  an order  is interrupted almost  at once.

If Father  had  ever faltered  in his faith,  how deep would  have been the crack, the  fissure, the  ultimate  chasm into which he would have fallen.  You and  I, who pick our  way unsurely amongst  the appalling  wreckage of our  time, patching  the crack  here,  avoiding  the  split  there,  anticipating  the  unsure  footing,  rejoicing in a bit of solid ground  and  going ahead again until we trip and fall on our noses­ we  can  take  our  troubles  much  more  easily than  Father   could  have  done.  But Father   never  tumbled   down.


The  reader's attention is drawn away  from  then  into  now, from  there  to here, from  small  chaos  to large,  increasingly  often  as the book goes on.
There is a similar  shifting round  of point  of view from  one generation to  an­ other, from  one  member of this large family  to another. The  reader  stays with  no one  view  long  enough  to  become   ultimately   acquainted  with  it.  The  effect  is kaleidoscopic. There  are   relationships and   patterns, but   they  seem  temporary, transitory, as if made  by chance.
In  the early  part  of the book, the actual  physical point  of view is near,  although it is not really in,  the  young  Topaz. Much  of what  we see and  hear  is determined by what  she saw and  heard. We know little if anything of her unspoken thoughts. She is given as a person  who had  none, who said everything and  "was  congenitally lacking  in any  private or  inner  life and  did  not seem to miss or need  it." She is a woman of great  gusto,  determined and  able to take  pleasure  in small  things,  and "quite unaware of  the  realities  of the  lives of the  people  whom  she  met  day  by

35

NOVELS OF ETHEL WILSON



day." Any  tale  she  tells, therefore, is fairly  superficial, no matter how  lively and amusing the surface. But as the  book progresses, as Topaz the  youngest  daughter, the  youngest  sister,  becomes  aunt, great  aunt and  great  great  aunt, the  point  of view moves  further from  her.  Comments on  her  life and  the  life of the  family  in Vancouver  have   a  growing   distance. The  point   of  view  which   is  established finally  as the view of the book comes from  no character in it. It is an author voice, whose  tone,  not  at  all omniscient, is tentative, detached, reflective.  It arises out of the  minor  and  major events, the  tangential and  direct  relationships of these hun­ dred  years.
Two   chapters of  The  Innocent  Traveller  were  published separately. Others
could  be, having  a kind  of enclosed  life. But  the  tone  of wonder, of mingled  ad­ miration and  despair, grows only gradually through the  whole  book, through one episode simply  "coming in beside" another in a grouping as accidental, a sequence as  casual   as  any  natural order.  Topaz, who  delights  in  coincidence and  is in­ terested  in  accident, asks for  no  meaning or  purpose. She  takes each  event  as it comes,  with  relish;  she  makes  nothing  happen. "... if  the  book  of  her  life had been  shut  up  bang  at  an  early  age,  history  would  have  gone  on  just the same." One  young  relative,  half  listening  to her  ancient  great  aunt, wonders  if there  is a  connection between  her  "unquenched vitality" and  her  lack  of human aware­ ness. In chapters that  shorten  and  shift  to the  present  tense  as Topaz gets  to be ninety  years old  and  then  a hundred, the author  voice muses on time  and  history of which  Topaz has had  both  much  and little.

In  the evening  while the seagulls fly westward  with lazy, purposeful  flight, and great  and  terrible  events are  massed  by Time  and  Plan  upon  the  slow-moving curtain,   Aunt  Topaz  gathers  the  rattling  newspaper  together  and  with  her  em­ broidery  scissors cuts out  a picture of the King  and  Queen,  an account  of a wed­ ding,  or  an  advertisement  for  garlic  pearls  because  they sound  so odd.  She  may send for  these pearls some day. She puts the  newspaper  cuttings into a large over­ full  box with  a red  plush cover on which some seashells still  remain. She is very old. She will soon be a hundred.


The   tone  Ethel   Wilson  has  created  in  The  Innocent  Traveller seems  natural for  a  family  tale.  The  combination of  apparently exact  and   detailed   accounts with  frankly   fanciful  reconstructions implies   a  point  of  view  like  that  of some younger  member or  friend  of the  family.  The quiet,  companionable voice which shares  amusement, raises questions,  and  occasionally makes  a fragmentary  judg­ ment  precludes any  final  judgment. No pattern, no ultimate meaning in  the  life

NOVELS OF ETHEL WILSON



of Topaz Edgeworth could  emerge  from  an  author view which  encompasses the many  points  of  view of  the  family.
Tuesday  and  Wednesday, a  novella  published  three  years after  The  Innocent Traveller, is entirely  concerned with  the  number of meanings that do not  add  up to  one,  the  number of  impulses  and  motives  which  are  not  links  in  a  chain  of purpose.  Will and  intention play some part  in the lives of these characters, but not so  much  as  accident and  coincidence. The  arrangement of episodes  is loose, so that   one  becomes  aware only  gradually of  a  pairing   which  holds  all  things  in balance:  the  intention acted  upon  and  the  intention deflected; the  coincidence that  alters  a mood  and  the  coincidence that  doesn't; the accident that  ends a life and  the  accident that  is scarcely  noticed.
The  tone  of this  book,  both  more  detached and  more  comic  than  that  of The
Innocent  Traveller, is  also  more  controlling. Each  event  and  each  character is made  to seem as ordinary as can  be. On  Tuesday and  again  on Wednesday, Mort and  Myrt  Johnson get  up  in  the  morning, dress, eat,  go off to  work-or  not. The   course  of  each  day  is determined partly  by habit, partly  by character, and partly  by so casual  a circumstance as the  fact  that  the  woman  across  the  aisle in the bus is wearing alligator shoes. Even when the apparently irrelevant assumes relevance,   affecting  mood   and  action,   the  tone  of  the  passage  makes  the  shift seem  perfectly  ordinary.

Of  all  people,  Myrtle  loved  herself in  whatever  guise she saw  herself. If  her parents  had  been alive, she might  have loved them, too. If she had  had  children she might  have loved them  too, since they would have been her children.  She had Mort, and ... she really loved him in her own way. She reserved the license to dis­ like him, to hate him even. For very irrational  reasons she would end the day dislik­ ing Mort,  even  when  she hadn't  seen him all day;  because, perhaps,  the  butcher had said that  so upstanding a man as Mort  deserved the best steak in the shop, or because Aunty  Emblem  in her luscious fashion  had  said that  there  was a man, if you like! Or  even  because his socks had  gone at the  toe, or because he was darn  lazy, which  he was, or for  no reason at all. Then  she knew herself  wasted on this louse. But let her friend  Irma  Flask who lived three blocks away ask how many jobs it was Mort  had  had  since Christmas,  and say she pitied Myrtle she certainly  did, and whether  that  was that  souse Hansen she seen him with on Thursday, and what a wonderful  provider  her sister Ruby's husband was-then Myrtle displayed Mort as the perfect  husband,  hers and none other, and let them that couldn't keep their own  husbands  lay  off of hers, whatever  she had  said  about  him  fifteen  minutes before.




37

NOVELS OF  ETHEL WILSON



Mood  and  motive shift about, on these ordinary days, not only for the Johnsons but  also for "Aunty Emblem  in her luscious fashion" and  Vicky Tritt in her spare fashion, for  the  top-rigger   Eddie,   "that souse  Hansen", and   for  the  journalist Wolfenden whose  "troubles [were]   the wrong  women  and  the  wrong  drinks  and himself." Like  the  balance   of  episodes,  the  balance of  characters  (not  at  first noticeable) makes it seem the oddest  chance  that  two very different people should find  themselves  in similar  or echoing  circumstances. The effect one character has on  another seems also accidental. One  encounter may  be a direct  hit;  another, a glancing blow;  a  third,  abortive, so that  neither character is really  aware of the other  at all. A missed connection is made  to seem as fortuitous as a meeting  which alters  the  course of a life. It is by a chance  encounter that  Mort is drowned early Wednesday evening. For  good  reason,  but,  as  it  happens, wrongly,  the  police believe  and   tell  Myrt  that   her  husband  was  drunk. By  chance, Myrt's  cousin Vicky  has  seen  Mort   just  before  his death  and  is able  to  tell  Myrt  that  he  was cold sober. All this, and  the fact that  Myrt is not at all pleased  by Vicky's informa­ tion,  the  reader  takes  with  amused  detachment. But  something is  building  up  to the  moment of  Vicky's  lie.

As she hurried  along the dark  wet pavements,  life and  time continued  as usual everywhere  under  heaven  with  practised  ease their  ceaseless fluid  manipulations and  arrangements of circumstance  and  influence  and  spiked chance  and  decision among members of the human family-such arrangements as had caused Victoria May  to  be what  she was; and  had  caused  her  that  night  to see Mort  sober and Eddie  drunk; and  had  caused  her  to force her small will upon  Myrtle Johnson; and  had caused her in one instant  by means of a lie to turn  Myrtle aside from her fury, and  had  thus enabled  Myrtle to become the widow of a hero, not of a louse, and  so had enabled  Myrtle to remember  Mort  with half grudging  tenderness and with  her best and  sleazy love; and  had caused  her  (Victoria  May)  to do Mort  a great  service by so establishing  him  in  general  reputation and  in  memory;  and had  caused  Myrtle  to  esteem   herself   a  woman  not  preferred-for one  fatal moment-to that  souse Eddie Hansen, thereby adding  to the power of her eyelids by being a wife widowed and deeply injured  by this non-preference; and  thus had caused  Myrtle  to continue  to dominate  Mrs. H.  X.  Lemoyne  and  Victoria  May and  even  Irma  Flask-more than  ever before -and  sometimes  by virtue  of her cruel loss to dominate  Mrs. Emblem;  and still to be very lonely.

In  its  quiet  way,  this  novella  is technically brilliant. The author voice,  estab­ lished  in  the  opening paragraph, is sometimes  omniscient, to show  both  the  irra­ tional  connections and  the many  missed connections. It is sometimes  an observing  and   commenting "I" who  addresses  the  reader as  "you". This  device, moving

NOVELS OF  ETHEL WILSON



toward  conversation, makes  observations seem  natural, and   thereby   opens  the small  particular experiences of a few  people  into  the daily  life of anyone.

So  the  two  friends  got  up,  and  took  their time  and   walked  together  along Hastings  Street  and  took  the street  car and  changed  twice and  got off at a very chic  building  which  was large  and  spreading  and  of white  stucco  with  window boxes, and  a grass plot all around; the kind of building that  caused tourists driving in  from  Bellingham  to say "Oh  let's stop here,  Momma.  This  looks a nice kind of  place!"  You  cannot   blame  these  tourists  because it  does  indeed  look like a nice kind of place to stay, but it is not, it is not, it finally and inescapably is not. It is a mortician's place, it is a funeral  parlour, it is a funeral  home, it is the  under­ taker's and people who approach meditatively and a bit early for the funeral wonder how  on  earth  did  we manage  in  the  old  days! Back east when  Grampa  died  it doesn't seem to me we had  anything  swell like this. We just had  the funeral right in the house and  old Miss Foster came in to help.

The  conversational author voice also allows the point  of view to flow smoothly into  one or  another of the  characters, whose experiences  and  responses  are given largely  through characteristic speech  patterns. These  speech  rhythms, with  their repetitions and  formulas, their  emotional connections  and  distractions, are like the rhythms of  the  narrative itself.  The   rolling  under   rhythm is  established   when Tuesday morning, noon  and   night  are  followed  by  Wednesday morning,  noon and  night.  Within this on-going, comic movement, there  are  all the extraordinary transitions, juxtapositions, repetitions, variations and  irrelevance of ordinary daily life.
This  novella is one of two published  together, in a volume  called The  Equations
of Love. The love  Myrt  and  Mort  have  for each  other  is an  extension  of a self­ love  that  is strong  and  inaccurate. What they  and  other  characters in  the  story really love are  the many  images  of themselves. In  the second  novella,  Lilly's Story, Lilly's  motivating love  is  also-in  a  way-self-love,  but  it  turns  very  quickly from self-protection to the  protection of her child. Her  refrain, "A girl's gotta  right to live,"  becomes  "My kid's  gotta  right  to have  a chance."





l:E SHARPEST  CONTRAST BETWEEN Lilly's Story and  Tuesday and  Wednesday, is that   Lilly's  is a story  of single-minded purpose and  ruthless perseverance. The story angles in by way of Yow, Lilly's lover for a time who was


39

NOVELS OF ETHEL WILSON



caught  stealing, and then by a second chapter  about  Lilly's childhood,  the period when she "took  things as they came, living where she could, on whom she could, and  with  whom she could, working only when she had  to, protecting  herself by lies or by truth...." But it settles into the mould of Lilly's purpose from the time she found  herself pregnant.  As months and  years came, Lilly discovers more and more what  to lie about, how to make a lie make a world, how to use gesture or silence to build  and  maintain  a new identity.  To teach  herself and  to guard  her child, she must be always alert, always aware. To give herself time and  the safe­ guard  of space, she must be distant,  reserved. In  this story, therefore, no event is unused;  nothing is unrelated  to Lilly's life plan. Each  episode and each sentence, economical  and scrupulously attentive to detail, moves steadily, as if in single file: this and  that,  this so that, this but that. The choice is restricted. The point of view shifts less than  in any other of Ethel Wilson's novels. The  reader either sees what Lilly sees or,  more often, watches her, a determined, shrewd  and  terribly lonely figure in a vague landscape.
There  is something  unnatural in this rigidly purposeful life. It is not that  Lilly is presented  as overcautious.  "... about  and  behind  her  spread  always her  in­ tangible  and  invisible Then,  solid as steel, inescapable  as past  birth  or  death  to come, making her Now always insecure and always scrupulous-for Eleanor.... (But a girl's gotta  right to live, hasn't she? Sure she's got a right. No, said Lilly's austerity,  she had  no rights at all. None.)" The  unnaturalness  comes about  be­ cause  Lilly's single-mindedness has  made  her so cautious, so  isolated that  she is not much  affected by chance. She can't  risk it. "... You see, there's always some­ body  sees everything.  There's  never  any  freedom ... not  for  me. Things  don't stop, either. They go on and on and on."
Lilly's  Story, like many of Ethel Wilson's tales, is about a triumph of the human spirit.  This  triumph   comes  not  only  through   Lilly's  long  endeavour   but  also through  her final release, because of the coincidence of Yow's reappearance, from her prison-haven into the ridiculous world of chance meetings and frivolous adaptations.
In  Swamp  Angel  there is also a working out of a plan, but  in a manner  that is much  more flexible. The  narrative  of this novel spreads  out,  flowing one way for a while, then  bending  round  to follow another  path,  another  character. The woman  who  carries  out her  plan,  Maggie  Lloyd, is as determined  as Lilly, but where Lilly is slight, narrow, rigid with purpose, Maggie is ample, easy in her movements, intuitive. She too is reserved, not from fear but because she "did  not require  to  talk,  to  divulge, to  compare,  to  elicit.... Maggie,  brought  up  from

NOVELS OF ETHEL WILSON



childhood by a  man,  with  men,  had  never  learned  the  peculiarly but  not wholly feminine joys of communication, the  deshabille  of conversation, of the  midnight confidence, the  revelation...."  What she  does, she  does  "serenely   and  alone". She  is, however,   not  merely  self-reliant. She  relies on  the  land  itself,  the  life of woods  and  lakes  and  rivers  to  which  she  has  returned. Here  she  can  relax, en­ counter and  move with  the  unexpected.
Maggie's   are  not  the  only  meaningful experiences  in  Swamp   Angel. Another
character almost  as important is old  Mrs. Severance,  as strong  and  self-sufficient as Maggie,  more  curious  and  articulate, less active. The lives of these  two friends diverge. The lives of Maggie and  a Chinese  boy from Vancouver converge. There is a  working  out  in  the  narrative of what  Mrs.  Severance calls "the miraculous interweaving of  creation.... We  are  all  in  it  together," she  says.  Even  Eddie Vardoe, the  husband  Maggie left,  is "in   it".  Between  chapters that   flow  like Maggie's rivers  or  Mrs.  Severance's memories  are  comic  two-  or  three-sentence chapters which  give the  mean, wiry life of Eddie  and  his blondes.  But  there  is no real  plot  or  theme  connection between  these  characters. ·when   they  meet,  they meet  by coincidence or  by some sort of accident.
The   accidental or  arbitrary  encounter or  event  or  vision  in  Swamp   Angel  is
different  from   the  accidental  encounters of  Tuesday   and  Wednesday. Maggie and  Mrs.  Severance have  an  awareness,  a deliberateness that  indicates some rela­ tionship  between   caprice and  will, between  the  passive and  the  active.  None  of them  is given  as  controlling his fate; each  of  them  is in  some  way  aware  of it and  consents  to  it.

"Coincidence," said Mrs. Severance, "seems to me to be what a Japanese  friend of mine  used  to call  'a  series of combination  of events'  which  meet at  a certain point  of time  or  perhaps  place. It  is not as uncommon  as people think,  and  the older  I grew  the  more  I believed in the  fantastic  likelihood-whether  relevant or irrelevant-of  coincidence ..."

The fantastic likelihood  of coincidence does not function as strongly  in Swamp Angel  as in  Tuesday  and  Wednesday. Swamp  Angel is a more  fluid  work  alto­ gether, covering  more  ground. The  movement of point of view and  narrative line establishes  an  attitude or  consciousness  hard  to  define  but  pervasive  enough  so that   no  combination of  motives  and  acts  turns  into  an  imposed  pattern, a  plot.  Casual   or  symbolic  connections do  appear but  are  made to  shift  and  finally dissolve.
In  Love  and  Salt  Water, the  reader's attitude toward the  life of  the  story  is

NOVELS OF ETHEL WILSON



less clearly  controlled. There is, on the one  hand, some  real  power  of plot in this novel.  Whereas in  Swamp  Angel,  Maggie's key  decision  has  been  made  before the  book  opens  so  that  her  movements   were  those  of  relaxation and  a  natural return to  her  strongest  self, in  Love  and  Salt  Water  young  Ellen  Cuppy moves toward important  decision.  Her  growth, over  a  period  of  fifteen  years,  gives a sense of motion  toward  some act, some knowledge or understanding. She is given a  natural urgency   and  restless drive.  On  the  other  hand, there  are  the  counter motions  of such  a passage as this:

She  did  not  at  that  moment  think  that  there  was somewhere some parallel  of light  and  darkness, of illumination  and  blotting-out,  and  perhaps  our  whole exis­ tence,  one  with  another,  is a  trick  of  light.  That may  be somewhere  near the truth,  which  is often  hard  to determine  because of the presence of the lights and shadows of look, word, thought which touch, glide, pass or remain.

In Love and Salt Water, there  are not only comments in the distinctive author's voice but  also divisions in the narrative, and several points of view. However, Ellen Cuppy's hesitations and  actions,  blunders  and  discoveries  pull so strongly  toward plot  and  character  development that  the  counter weights  cannot balance them. As soon  as the  balance tips, as soon as one hears  the questions "Why does she do this?"  "What does  that  mean?" one realizes how strongly  Ethel  Wilson  has held, in  many  books,  a  difficult  view. To  see life  as accidental, "a trick  of light", "a series of combination of events", and  to  present  it so with  humour implies  some balancing source   of  strength, some  framework.  In   Love  and  Salt  Water, the framework doesn't seem to hold. But in other  works, especially in Tuesday  and Wednesday, the  balance is so fine that  one  gets  the  kind  of impression  one  gets from  a mobile: it  moves of itself, by accident, by design.








42



FAUST AND
UNDER THE VOLCANO




Anthony R. Kilgallin





1:BEST INrRODUCTION   to  any  critical  study  of  Und" the
Volcano  is  Lowry's   "Preface to  a  Novel",  as  presented  in  Canadian  Literature
No.  g,  in  which   he  analyzes  "... that  long  first  chapter which  establishes   the themes  and  counter-themes of  the  book,  which  sets the  tone,  which  harmonizes the  symbolism." The   uppermost of these  themes  is that  of  Faust: "It is as if I heard  a clock sounding midnight for Faust," writes Lowry in  justifying  his use of twelve  chapters. The  Consul   Geoffrey  Firmin, God-free   and  infirm,  is  a  man fallen  from  Grace, in  the  Christian or  Catholic sense,  and  a  black  magician on another plane.  The  entire  novel is built  upon  the ramifications of his fall:

This  novel, to use a phrase  of Edmund  Wilson, has for its subject  the forces that dwell  within  man  and  lead  him  to look upon  himself with  terror.  Its  subject  is also the  fall  of man,  his  remorse, his incessant struggle  towards  the  light  under the  weight  of  the  past,  which  is his destiny ... Throughout the  twelve chapters, the  destiny  of  my  hero  can  be considered  in  its  relationship to  the  destiny  of humanity.

The  third  epigraph to the  novel is a quotation from  Goethe's Faust:  "Whoso­ ever  unceasingly strives  upward ... him  can  we save." Goethe  himself  set  these lines in inverted commas in  his masterpiece to emphasize them as a fundamental pronouncement. In   his  eighty-second   year  he  spoke  vital  words  to  Eckermann about  this  passage:

In  these lines the  key to  Faust's  salvation  is contained: in Faust  himself there  is an  activity  mounting ever  higher  and  purer  to the  end,  and  from  above eternal love  which  helps  him  in  his  need.  All  this is completely  in  harmony  with  our

43

FAUST AND UNDER THE  VOLCANO



religious conceptions, according to which we enter into bliss not by our own strength alone, but by the divine grace vouchsafed to us.

In  terms  of the  Consul  these lines are to be profoundly ironic.
The narrative of Under  the Volcano  opens  on  a "gigantic red evening,  whose reflection bled  away  in the deserted  swimming pools scattered everywhere like so many   mirages". The metaphor is reminiscent of  the  famous   line  of  Marlowe's Faustus: "See,  see, where  Christ's  blood streams in  the  firmament!", as Faustus pleads  for  one  drop   of  blood  to  save  his soul.  Geoffrey  is first  identified   with Faustus through a related  simile:
What  had  happened  just a year ago today seemed already  to belong in a different age.  One  would  have  thought  the  horrors  of  the  present  would  have swallowed it  up  like a drop  of water.  It  was not so. Though tragedy  was in the  process of becoming  unreal  and  meaningless, it seemed one was still permitted  to remember the  days when an individual  life held some value and  was not a mere misprint in a communique.

Almost  the last of Faustus' pleas was, "0 soul, be changed into  little waterdrops,/ And  fall  into  the  ocean,  ne'er  be found!" In  vain  does  Faustus seek an  escape through anonymity. His tragedy,  in fact, still serves as the  best known  archetype of its kind; likewise, the  tragedy  of the  Consul's death is unforgettable.
Chapter One  of  the  novel  is presented  through the  consciousness  of  Jacques Laruelle, acquaintance since childhood of Geoffrey, and sometime movie-producer who has been considering "making in France a modern film version of the Faustus story  with  some such  character as Trotsky  for  its protagonist".  Unrecognized by Laruelle, Geoffrey's  life has  been  this very story;  it is purposefully ironic  that  ten months later  Trotsky is murdered in  Mexico  City,  an  exile with  a short  pointed beard  like the Consul  who, on the night of his death, is to be called  "Trotsky". To prepare for his movie, Laruelle  has borrowed a volume  of Elizabethan plays from Geoffrey  himself,  among  which  is Marlowe's Doctor Faustus. Opening the  book at  random he reads, "then will I headlong fly into  the earth: j Earth, gape! it will not  harbour me".  He sits "oblivious  of his surroundings, gazing  at the words  that seemed  to have  the  power  of carrying  his own  mind  downward into a gulf, as in fulfilment on  his own  spirit  of the  threat Marlowe's Faustus had  cast at  his  des­ pair". Looking  closer at the passage, he realizes he has misread  the word "fly" for the  actual word  "run". This  simple slip is intensified  when, several  pages later, we hear   the  line,  "where I  come  from  they  don't run". The speaker  is  Weber,   a witness to Geoffrey's  murder, which, in Geoffrey's own way, was a literally physical attempt to  enact  Marlowe's quotation on  his last  night  of life.  The  word  "fly"

44

FAUST AND UNDER THE  VOLCANO



calls to mind  the inscription on Faustus' arm, "Homo fuge:  whither should  I fly".
Playing   the   game   of  "sortes   Shakespeareanae" Laruelle turns   again  coinci­
dentally   to  a  quotation from  Doctor  Faustus:

Cut is the branch  that might have grown full straight, And burned is Apollo's laurel bough,
That sometimes grew within this learned man, Faustus is gone; regard his hellish fall -

Geoffrey  had  "gone" exactly  one  year  ago;  the  play's  next  line, "Whose fiendful fortune may  exhort  the  wise", is a potential warning  to Laruelle and  to the reader to observe,  and  profit  from,  the  example  of Geoffrey  the  damned soul  who sup­ posedly  had   once  considered  writing   an  occult  volume   to  be  entitled  "Secret Knowledge".
Inside  the  book  of plays Laruelle  finds an  unsent  letter  of Geoffrey  to Yvonne, his divorced wife, imploring her  to return to him  "if  only  for  a day". That the Consul  could  not  bring  himself  to send  the  letter,  a  plea  for salvation, indicates partially   his inability   to communicate this  desire.  He  writes,  "But  this is what  it is to live in hell. I could  not, cannot  ask you. I could not, cannot send a telegram". Despite  the  Good  Angel,  Faustus is also unable  to communicate his desire for deliverance. To  confirm  this parallel  situation Lowry subtly  compares another reference   to  Faustus' predicament with  the  Consul's  former   plight.   Faustus  ex­ claims,  "How! bell,  book,  and   candle -candle,  book,  and   bell, -/  Forward and  backward, to curse  Faustus to hell".  Bell, book,  and  candle  is the  old cere­ mony  of major excommunication. The  bell announced this to all;  the book repre­  sented  authority; while  the  candle  was  believed  to symbolize  the  possibility  that  the  ban  might  be lifted  by the  repentance and  amendment of its victim  for,  just as the  candle  was used and  extinguished, so the excommunication itself might  be. Twelve priests and  a bishop  all held lighted  candles; the bishop recited  the formula which  ended :

We  separate  him,  together  with  his accomplices and  abettors,  from  the  precious body and  blood  of  the  Lord  and  from  the  society of all  Christians; we exclude him from  our  holy mother,  the  Church  in heaven and  on earth; we declare  him excommunicate  and  anathema; we  judge  him  damned,  with  the  Devil  and  his angels and  all the  reprobate,  to eternal fire until he shall recover himself from the toils of the  Devil and  return  to amendment  and to penitence.

Those   present   answered, "So  be  it!" The   candles  were  extinguished  by  being dashed   on  the  ground. The ceremony   ended. Laruelle's misquotation of  "fly"

45

FAUST AND UNDER THE  VOLCANO



for "run" is due to the "elusive flickering candlelight"; finishing the letter he holds it  into  the  candle  flame  until  it is extinguished. Then, "suddenly from  outside,  a bell  spoke  out,  then  ceased  abruptly: dolente ... dolore !" Again  the  ceremony has  ended.
Geoffrey's   affliction  is  drunkenness in  its  most  compulsive  and  irremediable state. In  the  "Preface to a  Novel"  Lowry  wrote,  "on  one  level, the  drunkenness of the  Consul  may  be regarded as symbolizing  the  universal  drunkenness of war, of  the  period  that  precedes  war,  no  matter when." In  his letter  Geoffrey  writes, "this  is how  I drink  too, as if I were  taking  an  eternal sacrament". It is essential to recall  Faustus celebrating the sacrament of the Black Mass.  Lowry certifies this intended analogy  in  the  "Preface":  "William James ... might  be in  agreement with  me when  I affirm that  the agonies of the drunkard find  a very close parallel in the agonies of the mystic who has abused  his powers." Indeed, in The Varieties of Religious Experience, James  concludes  a passage  on this very subject  with  the statement that   "The  drunken consciousness  is one  bit  of  the  mystic  conscious­ ness...." Since Lowry also conceived  of the drunken Consul as a universal symbol, the   Faust   theme   expands   to  wide-ranging  socio-political  implications. In  The  Decline of the West  Oswald  Spengler  characterized the spirit  of modern Europe and  America as Faustian, a condition which  pictured  man  as ageing  and  wasted,  but  still hoping to comprehend and  achieve everything, including the impossible.  Nevertheless, western  man,  having  become civilized, is effete, infirm, and  defence­ less, and  therefore  must  perish.  Visible  then  in  the  fall  of Geoffrey  is the  fall of our   Faustian  civilization.   Spengler,  quoted   by  Hugh  Firmin, Geoffrey's   half­  brother, is an  important functional reference  throughout Under  the Volcano.
The  symbolic  importance of the frequent cinema  advertisements for Las Manos
de Orlac is due  partially  to the Faustian allusions in Maurice Renard's book, The Hands  of Orlac, from  which  the film was adapted. Resine,  the  blonde  wife of the pianist  Stephen Orlac who, in an operation to save his hands, is given  the hands of a supposed  murderer, is haunted by a devil's head-a Mephisto-a Fantomo. Indeed, Yvonne  refers to Geoffrey  as a "phantom". For  the  Yvonne-like  Rosine "... it was a partial and chance resemblance, inspired  by the character in Faust." Stephen's studio,  where  he retrains his hands  for the piano, becomes "the Temple of  Hands. Here  were  installed  the  two  electric  machines, the  practise  keyboard, and   all  the  physical  and  chemical  apparatus with  which  he  had  provided  him­ self. And  there  were  also some special  books in a pile. The  place soon looked like Dr.  Faust's den." Like Faustus,  who "surfeits  upon  cursed  necromancy", Stephen also becomes interested in the subject: he observes that"... necromants or necro-

FAUST AND  UNDER  THE  VOLCANO



maticians make  it  a  practice to evoke the  dead  so as to obtain by their  aid some light  upon  the  future." Lowry's  entire  technique of literary allusion  has  particu­ larly  this  same   purpose. Apart from  common   references to  Baudelaire  and  to secret  and  occult   books,  two  motifs  of  The   Hands  of Orlac  also  run  through Under the  V oleano:   "... from  day  to day  he was slipping down  into  an abyss", and  "The dead  are  coming back  to life."
Into  the third  chapter Lowry introduces a pair of Faustian familiars who battle to  direct  Geoffrey's conscience. By definition,  a familiar is a  spirit  supposed  to attend and  obey a sorcerer; also, in naming them "guardian angels"  Lowry makes his allusion  to  Faustus' Good  and  Evil Angels obvious.  The opening paragraph of this chapter includes  a Faustus paraphrase: "Look  up at  that  niche in the wall over  there  on  the  house  where  Christ  is still, suffering, who  would  help  you if you asked him: you cannot ask him". Faustus  observes and  does ask momentarily, "Ay,  Christ,  my Saviour,/ Seek to save distressed Faustus' soul!" The  latter  lines significantly  follow  the  last  pleas  of both  angels in  the  play.  Likewise,  Geoffrey's familiars  do  not  finally  abandon him  until  an  hour   before  his  end.  The   Evil Angel  strikes  first,  urging  the  Consul   to  drink  rather  than   think  of  Yvonne: "... the  voice  he  recognized  of  a  pleasant   and  impertinent  familiar,  perhaps horned, prodigal of  disguise,  a specialist  in  casuistry." The Good  Angel  angrily retorts: "Neither do  I  believe  in  the  strychnine, you'll  make  me  cry  again,  you bloody  fool Geoffrey  Firmin, I'll  kick your face in, 0 idiot!" The  "first familiar" wins this round  as Geoffrey  downs  half the strychnine. The Good  Angel threatens Geoffrey  again,  unsuccessfully. Both reappear before temporarily leaving  the Con­ sul,  their   battleground. The  final  reference   to  Doctor   Faustus  in  this  chapter comes  when  Geoffrey  interjects, "please  remind  me  to get  back  my  Elizabethan plays".
Faust, as distinct  from  Dr. Faustus,  is alluded  to in this third  chapter as Geoffrey thinks  uneasily  of  "Goethe's famous  church   bell  in  pursuit of  the  child  truant from  church". Lowry   has  cleverly  summarized Faust's soliloquy  in  which  bells and  voices in  the  Eastern Dawn  prevent  him  from  taking  his life. Geoffrey  and Faust   are  ironically  juxtaposed;  the  former   poisons  his  soul  with  each  drink, while the latter is persuaded by a choir of angels, all Good,  against  self-destruction by poison.  As a boy,  Faust  strayed  in fields and forests but  was always  entranced by the sabbath bells. Their sounds  now help prevent  him from  committing suicide. Geoffrey,  however, is hardened against  such  precautions: "Goethe's church  bell was looking  him  straight between  the  eyes; fortunately, he  was  prepared for it". Before  conquering his  despair   Faust  had  cried,  "I hear,  but  lack  the  faith,  am

47

FAUST AND UNDER THE  VOLCANO



dispossessed."  Similarly,  Geoffrey has  been  referred  to  as a  "poor,  lonely  dis­ possessed trembling  soul".  Both men  recognize the  soul's life-giving source,  but only Faust  aspires to seek it. Both men thirst after knowledge, but Geoffrey's un­ quenchable   alcoholic  thirst  takes  precedence  in  his  case. At  one  time  he  had hoped to write a book on Atlantis, the main part of which was to be "the chapters  on  the  alchemists".  On  this topic he refers to "the  old alchemists of  Prague ... living among  the cohabitations of Faust himself".
In  chapter  four,  Bernal Diaz,  William Blackstone,  Geoffrey  and  Faustus  are all employed to illustrate precisely a viewpoint noted by Spengler in The Decline of the  West:  "Dramas like that  of the emigration  to America -man  by man, each  on  his  own  account,  driven  by  deep  promptings   to  loneliness, -or  the Spanish Conquest, or the Californian gold-rush, dramas of uncontrollable  longings for  freedom,  solitude, immense independence ... these dramas  are Faustian  and only Faustian." Limitless space is the  prime symbol of the  Faustian  soul. Thus, Geoffrey's  paraphrase of  Diaz,  the  author  of The Discovery   and  Conquest of Mexico 1517-1521, and  his wish to escape like Blackstone are  understandable. To  quote  Spengler  again:  "To  fly, to free one's self from earth,  to lose one's self in  the  expanse  of  the  universe -is  not  this  ambition   Faustian  in  the  highest degree?"  Unfortunately, Mexico has been plagued  by exploiters ever since Cortez and Diaz. Hugh  remembers once hearing the potential  solution: "For  man, every man,  Juan  seemed  to be telling him, even as  Mexico, must  ceaselessly struggle upward", a paraphrase of the novel's epigraph  from Faust. This quotation  is part of the song of the angels who bear the immortal  remains of Faust to heaven. Man and  the  world  must  follow Juan's  advice to achieve  a final salvation  similar  to Faust's. Geoffrey, however, sleeps throughout  the chapter, but retains his Faustian identity in the minds of Hugh and Yvonne. Hugh  asks, "How  much does he really know  about  all this alchemy and  cabbala  business? How  much  does it mean  to him?",  and  even  jokes, "Maybe  he's a black magician!"
The  Faustian  familiars reappear in Chapter  Five as Geoffrey awakens from his lndic  dream  with  "demons  gnattering  in his ears".  The  evil one advises him  to "... just take one  drink,  just the necessary, the  therapeutic drink:  perhaps  two drinks",   but  before he  does  so  another  voice  retorts,  "Put that  bottle  down, Geoffrey  Firmin,  what  are  you doing  to  yourself?"  "The emptiness  in  the  air after filled with whispers:  alas, alas. Wings it really meant." Geoffrey's last hours are  literally  flying away  as, at  the  chapter's  end  the  good  familiar  cries out  in desperation,  "Stop  it, for God's sake, you fool. Watch  your step.  We can't  help you any more."

FAUST AND  UNDER THE  VOLCANO



The   role  of  Geoffrey   as  a  Faustian magician  is strengthened by  a  quotation from  Shelley's  Alast or:   "Twelve o'clock,  and  the Consul  said to the doctor: 'Ah, that  the  dream of the  dark  magician in his visioned cave, even  while his hand­ that's the  bit  I like-shakes in its last decay,  were the  true  end  of  this so lovely world." Lines 68 r -6 of Alastor read as follows:

0, that  the dream
Of dark  magician in his visioned cave, Raking the cinders  of a crucible
For life and  power, even when his feeble hand
Shakes  in its last decay, were the true law
Of this so lovely world!


The  misquotation of "end" for "law" is a noteworthy Freudian slip since Geoffrey is inadvertently comparing the magician's last stages with his own and  the world's, whereas  Shelley  does not  imply  that  the death  of the  magician causes the world's end.  He  puns on the  word  "Katabasis" but  the application of the term  underlines the  present  predicament. This  is a descent  into  the  nether  world,  into  an  inferno. Indeed, the  attempt to insert  a katabasis  into  the second  part  of Faust, first as a descent  to the  Mothers, and  then  as the Classical Walpurgis Night, was evidently one of the  most  baffling structural problems  of that  work,  as well as being  one of the most crucial  sections  of the play.
The  familiars are  mentioned by Geoffrey  next  in  Chapter Seven: "As  for  the demons,  they  were  inside  him  as well as outside; quiet  at  the  moment-taking their  siesta  perhaps-he  was  none  the  less surrounded by them  and  occupied; they  were in  possession."  In  Doctor  Faustus the evil demons  appear as the Seven Deadly  Sins. Faustus' line,  "0, I'll  leap  up to my God! -Who pulls me down?" seems to be applicable to a momentarily penitent  Geoffrey  when  "the weight  of a great  hand  seemed  to be pressing his head down." Jacques disparagingly compares Marlowe's sense of perspective to Geoffrey's: "Christopher  Marlowe, your  Faust man,  saw  the  Carthaginians fighting  on  his big toe-nail. That's the  kind  of clear seeing  you indulge in.  Everything seems perfectly  clear,  in terms  of the toe-nail." Ironically, the  analogy  gives great  compliment to Geoffrey's  powers  of vision. He remarks,  "It was already the longest day in his entire experience, a lifetime" when a few lines earlier  the  pun  Dies  Faustus had  appeared. Marlowe's Faustus loved knowledge  and  power  more  than  he did Christ,  while Goethe's Faust  would  have reached  the same  tragic  end  were it not for the love of Margareta who brings him salvation. Geoffrey's fate  fluctuates between  these two poles. His potential saviour,

49

FAUST AND  UNDER THE VOLCANO



Yvonne, first dreamed  of making a new start  with  Geoffrey in British Columbia on  Lake  Pineaus  where he owned an island. Coincidental or not, in Faust: Part Two  the lower Peneus is a similar lotusland Eden.
In Chapter  Ten  the personal and the political are two main frames of reference. Spengler's  observation  on this point is helpful:  "There are  two sorts of Destiny, two sorts of war, two sorts of tragedy-public and private. Nothing can eliminate this duality  from  the world." As a private individual  and  as a public representa­ tive,  the  Consul  symbolically portrays  an  ambivalent   character; a  Faust  figure and  an Everyman  figure simultaneously. He  uses one of Marlowe's most famous lines as a  point of departure.  Looking at Cervantes'  prize-fighting  cock he asks, "Was  this the face that launched five hundred ships, and betrayed Christ into being in the Western Hemisphere?"  In Conrad Aiken's Blue Voyage, an important liter­ ary source for parts of Under the Volcano, the main character, Demarest, had used this same line for his own comic points of departure: "Is this the face that scuttled a thousand  ships?" Chapter  Ten  concludes with  Geoffrey  voicing a Faustus-like frustration. Into  the  oncoming storm  he cries out,  "I  love  hell.  I can't  wait  to get back there. In fact I'm running. I'm  almost back there already."  Faustus' soul was divided  between  a desire for mastery and  a  sense of guilt. Geoffrey despair­ ingly envisions a comparable  dichotomy:  "What is man  but a little soul holding up  a  corpse?"  Like Faustus,  he is tragic  because  he  recognizes this dilemma  as real. As Faustus  boasts that  his soul is his own  to dispose of as he will, he hears the fearful echoes thundering  in his ears. Similarly, as Geoffrey proclaims his love of  hell  there  is also a contradictory  emendation, for,  "the  queer  thing  was, he wasn't  quite serious."  Nature forewarns Geoffrey, just as it did Faustus:  "Before him  the  volcanoes,  precipitous, seemed to have  drawn  nearer.  They  towered  up over the  jungle, into the lowering sky-massive interests moving up in the back­ ground."
A  letter  from  Lowry  to  his American  editor,  Albert  Erskine,  July  15,  1946 shows Lowry's concern with Faust in Chapter  Eleven. Remembering Julian Green's note in his Diary to end a book with the image of the heroine  rising to heaven, Lowry added  to this idea one contained in the opera  Faust when Margareta  rises to heaven  while Faust descends to hell. Thus,  the simultaneous  actions of Yvonne and  Geoffrey in Chapters  Eleven and Twelve parallel  the splitting of the path  as two roads diverge into the Mexican wood to two opposing destinies.
Geoffrey's last  hour  commences  when he sees "a  clock pointing  to six". The
Faustian  parallel of the last hour permits an ironic contrast.  After the clock strikes eleven, Faustus,  aware  of impending  damnation, exclaims, "Now  hast  thou  but

50

FAUST AND  UNDER THE  VOLCANO



one bare hour to live./  And then thou must be damn'd  perpetually!" Through an almost fatalistic determinism,  Geoffrey's approaching  death is similarly inevitable. He,  however, apathetically accepts the end, totally lacking Faustus'  frantic long­ ing for life. Yet Geoffrey's death  is fully in accord  with Spengler's  theory of the determinism  of inevitable  decline for the Faustian  spirit  of Western  man  in the twentieth  century,  the death  of modern man, as Jung  put it, in search of  his soul. Asking "What is a lost soul?" Geoffrey, in answering  himself, describes  himself: "It is one  that  has  turned  from its true  path  and  is groping  in the darkness of remembered  ways."
Time ticks on : "the  ticking of his watch, his heart, his conscience, a clock some­ where." In vain Faustus ordered, "Stand  still, you ever-moving spheres of heaven,/ That  time may cease, and  midnight  never come." Geoffrey makes no such plea, but  only  notes  and  recalls while his familiars  make  their  last  supplications.  He hears  them  argue,  and  then  "the  voices ceased".  They  return  as "daemonic  or­ chestras" and  "insolent  archfiends",  and lastly come to him as he lies with Maria,  the prostitute, "hissing and shrieking and yammering at him: 'Now you've done it, Geoffrey Firmin!' Even  we can help you no longer ... Just  the same you might as  well make  the  most  of it  now, the  night's  still young." Young it is, but  for Geoffrey it is almost  over. Even  Maria  is part   of the  Faustian  tradition,  for in ancient  Coptic  manuscripts  the magician and  the prostitute  played an equal role to that of the magician  and the virgin, Yvonne in this case. Now, at six-thirty, "A bell clanged  frantically  in  the distance"  just as  for Faustus  the clock strikes the half-hour.  Spengler  wrote  that,  "Besides the  clock, the  bell itself is a  Western
'symbol'."  As such it is a Faustian  symbol as well.
The crag of the Malebolge reminds Geoffrey of Shelley's The Cenci, Coleridge's Kubla  Klan,  and  Calderon. The  last  reference is probably  to  Calderon  de  la Barca's play The  Wonder-Working Magician,  to whose Faust theme Goethe was indebted.  The  play opens in a  wood where Cyprian  and  a Demon  argue  about the unity of God. Cyprian  later sells his soul for Justina,  his beloved. The  two die on  the scaffold  and  ascend  to heaven. The  following lines from  Calderon's  play depict  imagery  visible also in the Malebodge:   "Though from that  proud  height you fall/  Headlong down  a dark  abyss";  "Abyss of hell, prepare,/ Yourself the region of your own despair!" and especially the following lines:

This  mountain's brow is bound
With  curling mist, like streaming hair Spread out below, and all the horizon  round Is one volcanic pyre!

FAUST AND UNDER THE  VOLCANO



Geoffrey  describes  the  sunset  as  "A  mercurochrome agony   down  the  west". The   suggestion  of  a  blood-red   crucifixion   is  comparable to  the  description  by Faustus:  "See,  see, where  Christ's  blood  streams in  the  firmament!/ One  drop would  save  my soul,  half  a drop," a parallel  that  occurs  elsewhere  as I have al­ ready  indicated, one  year  later,  as a "gigantic red  evening, whose reflection  bled away  in  the  deserted  swimming pools".  Faustus' futile  plea  for  even half  a  drop  is paralleled in  Geoffrey's  thirst: "the  thirst  that  was  not  thirst,  but  itself  heart­ break,  and  lust, was death, death, and  death  again". He  remembers once carrying a carafe of water  in the hotel  El Infierno  but  unable to put  it to his lips he hears a  voice saying  "you  cannot drink  of it",  and  believes  "it  must  have  been  Jesus who  sent  me  this".  The  comparable line in  Doctor  Faustus  is "Ah,  rend  not  my heart  for  naming of my Christ!" Meanwhile we hear  "the clock ticking forward" with   Geoffrey  abandoning "The  hope  of  any  new  life  together, even  were  it miraculously offered  again".
Reflecting on "that extraordinary picture  on Laruelle's wall,  Los Borrachones,"
Geoffrey  applies  the book's epigraph from  Faust to himself:

When  he  had  striven  upwards  as  at  the  beginning  with  Yvonne,  had  not  the "features" of life seemed to grow more clear, more animated, friends and enemies more  identifiable,  special  problems, scenes, and  with  them  the  sense of his own reality,  more  separate from  himself? And  had  it  not  turned  out  that  the  farther down he sank, the more those features had tended  to dissemble, to cloy and clutter, to  become finally little  better  than  ghastly caricatures of  his dissimulating  inner and  outer self, or of his struggle, if struggle there were still?


In  his descent,  his katabasis, Geoffrey becomes a corporate and  composite charac­ ter,  incorporating all damned souls,  just as with  successive  masks he has  been  all of the  literary  models  alluded  to, a timeless Everyman. He  joins the "downward flight" of souls beyond  salvation, just as Yvonne has already  joined  the ascending
flight,  a Ia Margareta, although her death  follows Geoffrey's.
Time moves  on,  "One, two,  three,  four,  five,  twelve,  six, seven". Geoffrey's last  twelve  hours  conclude in  this  twelfth  chapter at  seven  o'clock.  "The  clock outside   quickly  chimed   seven  times."  As  the  clock  for  Faustus strikes  twelve, thunder and  lightning ensue. Similarly,  "Thunderclaps crashed on the mountains and  then  at  hand," and  "Lightning flashed  like  an  inch-worm going  down  the sky".  "A  bell spoke out: dolente ... dolore !"  Faust and  Dante are  again  echoed in this tolling,  just as they are combined  one year later  for Jacques. It is Geoffrey's passing  bell, his funeral bell, but  it also tolls for  everyman.

52

FAUST AND  UNDER THE VOLCANO



Even the  horse  who, escaping  from the clutching hands  of Geoffrey, gallops uncontrollably through the  forest  to  kill  Yvonne,  is ironically anticipated  by Faustus' line, itself a quotation from  Ovid's  Amores, "0 lente, lente currite, noctis equi," but  time  and  the  horse  wait for no man. Just  as Faustus cries "0, I'll leap up  to my  God! -Who pulls me down?" Geoffrey  experiences  a similar preven­ tion of his attempt upward: "He raised his head  again; no, he was where he was, there  was nowhere to  fly to. And  it was as if a black dog had settled on his back,  pressing  him  to  his  seat." Similarly,  Faustus   has  nowhere to  fly  to.  He  pleads, "Mountains and  hills, come, come, and  fall on me,/  And  hide me from  the heavy wrath  of God!" Likewise,  Geoffrey  deliriously  deludes  himself  that  in  the  Hima­ layas, imaged  by Popocatepetl, is a final resting place. Carrying "the Hotel Fausto's information" in  his  pocket,  he  mentally   attempts to  climb  the  volcano, as  his father had  climbed   the  Himalayas. Faustus had  also hoped  to be borne  aloft  to heaven  in  the  volcano's breath:
Now draw up Faustus, like a foggy mist, Into  the entrails of yon labouring cloud , That, when you vomit forth into the air,
My limbs may issue from your smoky mouths,
So that my soul may but ascend to heaven! Goethe presents  a similar  hell intended for  Faust:
out from the arching  jaw
A raging swill of fiery flood is spewed;
See, in the seething fume of that dread maw, The  town of flames eternally renewed.
Up to the teeth, the molten red comes rushing, The damned  swim wildly, hoping to be saved, Then,  where the huge hyena's jaws are crushing, Renew their path with burning brimstone paved.

"Somebody threw  a dead  dog after  him down  the ravine." Bunyan  and  Faustus come instantaneously to mind.  In  the Bunyan  epigraph to Under  the Volcano  the dog's  soul  is not  doomed  to  perish in  Hell  as is man's,  yet man  must  die like an animal. The pariah dog,  a symbol of guilt,  has followed  Geoffrey  throughout the book,  and  even  earlier  in  this last  chapter is still associated  with  his fate: "And it was as if a black  dog had  settled  on his back,  pressing him to his seat" as I have quoted above.  As an  outcast of society  Geoffrey  is a  pariah.
Suggestions  of a cyclical reincarnation are latent  in Chapter One. Vigil talks of sunset  when  begin  "all  the dogs to shark". When  Laruelle  is in the cinema  "Dark

53

FAUST AND UNDER THE  VOLCANO



shapes of pariah  dogs prowled in and out of the stalls". Lastly, talking to Laruelle, Sr.  Bustamente,  the cinema  manager,  refers to Geoffrey as "the  bicho, the one with  the  blue  eyes".  Certainly,  Laruelle  is haunted   by  the  spiritual  ghosts  of Yvonne  and  Geoffrey, if  not  also by a  physical embodiment  of each.  Faustus wished to be reincarnated  to escape damnation. Finally, in lines that Bunyan might well have known and  paraphrased, Faustus cries:

Why wert thou not a creature wanting soul? Or why is this immortal that thou hast?
Ah, Pythagoras' metempsychosis, were that true,
This soul should fly from me and I be chang'd Unto some brutish beast! all beasts are happy, For, when they die,
Their souls are soon dissolv'd in elements; But mine must live still to be plag'd in hell.

Employing  the  Faust  archetype,  Lowry has  achieved  the  sense of ironic  dis­ similarity and yet of profound  human  continuity  between the modern protagonist and his long dead exemplars; he has also locked past and present together spatially in a timeless unity by transmuting  the time-world of history into the timeless world of myth,  the common content  of modern literature.






54









LETTRE DE MONTREAL

NaimKattan



S,LES  poh'Es CANADIENS-FRANQAIS chantent le pa)" et"" font  les porte-parole des aspirations de toute  la collectivite,  les romanciers, si l'on
excepte  ceux  du  groupe Parti Pris, s'attachent aux  grandes passions et aux  petits problemes  de l'individu. Deux themes  qui, pendant longtemps, n'avaient pas droit de cite en litterature  canadienne-franc;aise reviennent avec constance: le sexe et la religion,  et surtout les rapports, plus ou  moins  equivoques, entre  les deux.  Et  ce sont  les romancieres qui  parlent avec  le  plus  d'audace, le  plus  de  franchise et,
assurement, le plus de lucidite. C'est  a elles qu'on  doit  les a:uvres  de fiction,  non
seulement les  plus  nombreuses mais  les plus  marquantes de  l'an  dernier. S'il  est vrai  que  les mouvements de liberation sont davantage le resultat de la conscience qu'on prend  de sa misere et de son etouffement que de la misere et de 1'etouffement eux-memes, on doit  conclure que les Canadiennes franc;aises prennent conscience, et  avec  quel  fracas,  de  leur  condition. Certaines dressent  non  un  bilan  du  passe mais  une  liste de  revendications.
C'est  le cas surtout de  Michele  Mailhot dont  le roman Dis-moi que  je vis est la longue  confidence d'une petite  bourgeoise.  Mariee  a un  brave  homme d'affaires,
tous  ses besoins  materiels sont  satisfaits,  et  pourtant elle a !'impression de  vivre dans  une  cage  doree.  Elle  a des aspirations culturelles  et artistiques vagues.  Elle veut  s'exprimer. Une  fade  liaison  ne  peut  pas etre  la  reponse.  Michele  Mailhot nous plonge  dans  la vie des banlieues de 1'Amerique du  Nord.  Sans  avoir  lu Betty Friedan, elle fournit aux  theses de celle-ci une illustration concrete.
C'est   une   longue   confidence  aussi  que  nous  offre  Diane  Giguere dans  son
deu:xieme roman L'eau  est profonde. Mais ici l'aveu  est indirect, les personnages complexes,  le ton  a la fois timide  et ose. C'est  l'histoire  d'une adolescente amou-


55

LETTRE DE  MONTREAL



reuse d'un  homme  plus age. La femme de ce dernier  complete  le trio et ce sont les  rapports   ambigus  entre  ces  personnages que   nous  decrit  Diane  Giguere. L'heroine,  la plus jeune et la plus innocente  des trois, est aussi la plus exigeante. Sa voix est en retrait  contenu  par  une paralysante  peur de se livrer. Les descrip­
tions de la nature  ne s'integrent  pas a !'action  mais ouvrent  la voie de !'evasion.
Le livre se termine sur une rencontre  avec un etranger,  une sorte de sauveteur  a
la fois mystique et erotique.
Ambigus sont aussi les rapports entre les personnages de Louise Maheu-Forcier. L'amour de son  heroine se deroule  dans  une  atmosphere  etheree  et sordide  en meme temps. La musique sert de decor mais on y trouve aussi la violence, puisque la  jeune fille est violee; le mensonge, car son amant  la trompe  avec une autre;  et
!'equivoque, puisque sa rivale exerce sur  elle une emprise  trouble.  L'ile  joyeuse,
c'est l'enfance,  c'est la purete et c'est !'innocence  qu'ebranle l'age adulte.
La  sexualite  et  la  religion  ressortent  tres clairement  dans  le  premier  roman d'Helene Ouvrard, La  fleur de  peau. Destinee  par  ses institutrices  religieuses a
une  vie monacale,  !'heroine  se n volte
les meandres  des milieux pseudoartistiques.  Elle est prete  a se donner  au premier
homme  qui  saura  la  prendre  dans ses bras. Elle a la  malchance  de tomber sur Stephane  qui  est plus attire  par les hommes que  par  les femmes.  La decouverte des attraits  erotiques de la femme est une sorte d'ascese. La sexualite ouvre pour lui les partes  de la maturite  et lui permet  de triompher  de ses cauchemars  et de ses obsessions.
Dans  son  dernier  roman,  Une  saison dans le  vie d'Emmanuel,  Marie-Claire
Blais pousse le realisme a un point  tel qu'on  a !'impression  de naviguer  entre le
cauchemar et la fantaisie. Ses personnages sont des enfants qui traduisent  leur degradation sociale  et  morale  par  leur  acharnement  a  vilifier leur  corps.  II  y entre  une  grande  part  de  masochisme  dans  ces scenes d'auto-punition. lei,  les
jeux erotiques sont sordides; ils se melent  a la maladie physique et au denuement le plus abject.  La  propension de Marie-Claire  Blais a decrire les malefices et les
obsessions marque  le veritable objet de sa quete.  Cette  plongee dans la noirceur est en realite une recherche de !'innocence perdue. Les enfants humilies s'enfoncent dans le peche car rien ne peut les sauver. Quels detours le puritanisme  ne prend-il pas? Mais il y a, dans ce livre, une telle poesie que ses personnages maudits  nous semblent  rachetes.
L'heroine d'Andree   Maillet  dans  son  roman  Les  ramparts  de  Quebec  a elle aussi bien du  mal a se degager  d'une  enfance  protegee et des interdits  religieux.
Pour confirmer son independance,  elle exhibe, avec brutalite, son affranchissement.

LETTRE DE  MONTREAL



Elle se promene  nue sur les Plaines d'Abraham, repond aux avances des hommes au cours de ses peregrinations  en Europe,  mais ce qu'elle  cherche  en verite c'est d'etre  adulte  et  d'etre  acceptee  comme  un etre autonome.  Malgre  ses exces, ce personnage illustre le meme appel a la liberation que ne cesse de lancer la femme canadienne-fran<;aise.
Dans La dormeuse eveillee, Yvette Naubert  nous presente une femme aux prises avec elle-meme. Son heroine ne finit pas de revivre son passe. Enfance douloureuse ou elle se sentait  victime. Sa rencontre  avec un Europeen  qui a connu  les affres de la guerre  et des camps  n'allege  pas ce poids oppressif. Un  passe ne chasse pas l'autre.  Elle est jalouse de sa soeur qui repn sente
victorieuse puisqu'elle a un mari et un enfant. Le roman se termine par une scene d'une  rare  violence ou l'inceste se double de lesbianisme-scene qui  releve plus de la psychologie clinique que de la litterature.
Dans le roman de Yolande Chene, Peur et amour, la revasserie de l'adolescente se mele ala confession. On a presque !'impression qu'il s'agit d'une analyse psychia­ trique et meme si ce recit peut avoir des effets therapeutiques, nous nous trouvons en marge  de la litterature. Cette  femme canadienne-fran<;aise qui  eleve la voix, qui  refuse  une existence diminuee,  qui  lance  un appel  a  la  plenitude-est-elle presente  dans  l'univers  des hommes,  du  mains dans  celui  des  romanciers?  Oui, mais elle revet un autre  visage.
Dans  le roman  de  Marcel  Godin, Ce maudit  soleil, la femme  est si pres de la nature  qu'elle est reduite  a un etat  bestial. L'histoire se deroule dans  un camp de bucherons  ou le sexe est exutoire du  desir comprime  et reve d'une  vie normale. La  femme,  partenaire erotique  et  image   d'une  purete  detruite,   est violentee.
Subordonnee ainsi au  male,  elle ne  peut  aspirer a aucune  autonomie.  Elle doit
meme  payer  le prix de sa participation au delire erotique,  ultime  refuge dans la desolation d'une  nature  inhumaine.
L'heroi:ne de Retour  a Coolbrook, de Gilles Marcotte, s'identifie a une ville. Le
personnage  masculin  du  roman  est un  journaliste qui  retourne  a sa ville natale. Ses amours  malheureuses symbolisent son inadaptation. Mais on se demande  si le mal  qui  range  son  arne  n'est  pas ne de sa propre  timidite,  qui  frise la lachete, plutot  que de l'affrontement avec une ville et une femme.
Chez  Jacques  Godbout-Le  couteau  sur la table -la femme  emprunte un double  visage:  celui  de 1'etrangere  que  le  jeune Canadien fran<;ais, parti  a  la recherche de lui-meme, tente de conquerir, et celui de la Canadienne fran<;aise qui satisferait  chez lui la soif de paix et d'harmonie si elle n'etait  pas condamnee  ala mort  par  un destin aveugle.

57

LETTRE DE  MONTREAL



Dans  Le  poisson peehe, Georges Cartier accumule les femmes sur Ia route de son heros.  Elles appartiennent a toutes les classes de Ia societe et a diverses nationalites. Le  male  canadien se definit  par  rapport a cette  mosaique. II n'en  apparait pas
ni mains  insignifiant ni mains  inconsistant.

Ainsi, les heros males de ces romans  qui ont  pour  auteurs des hommes  ne recon­ naissent  pas  a Ia femme son  autonomic. Objet de desir, sujet  de reve, instrument de  recherche de  soi-meme,  elle  n'atteint pas  a Ia  plenitude de  Ia  realite. II est
heureux que  les romancieres retablissent  un  peu 1'equilibre.


BIBLIOGRAPHY
MICHELE MAILHOT, Dis-moi que je vis, Le Cercle du Livre de France. DIANE GIGUERE, L'eau est profonde, Le Cercle du Livre de France. LOUISE MAHEUX-FORCIER, L'Ue joyeuse, Le Cercle du Livre de France.
HELENE OUVRARD, La {leur de peau, Les Editions du Jour,  Collection:  les romanciers
du  jour.
YVETTE  NAUBERT,  La  dormeuse eveiltee, Le Cercle  du  Livre de France,  Collection: Nouvelle-France.
YOLANDE CHENE, Peur et amour, Le Cercle du Livre de France, Collection:  Nouvelle- France.
MARIE-CLAIRE BLAIS,  Une  saison dans La  vie d'Emmanuel, Les Editions  du Jour.
GILLES MARCOTTE, Retour a Coolbrook, Editions Flammarion. GEORGES CARTIER, Le poisson peche, Cercle du Livre de France. JACQUES GODBOUT, Le couteau sur La table, Aux Editions du Seuil.
MARCEL GODIN, Ce maudit solei!, Editions Robert  Laffont.








review articles



VOICES  FROM  EXILE
 


Miriam Waddington


FRANK  PREWETT,  The Collected  Poems  of Frank  Prewett. Introduction by Robert
Graves.  $4·75·
DAVID WEVILL,   Birth  of a Shark.  Macmillan. $3.75.


E. K.  BROWN  once  suggested that  by viewing  Canadian  literary works as Canadian, we often  obtain insights which  are  not  otherwise obtainable. But how are  we to decide  who  is a Canadian writer? Brown  designated as Canadian those  writers born  in  Canada, who  had spent   most   of  their   productive  literary years in this country. Within this original group, Brown  made a further distinction between  the  writers  who wrote  about  life in Canada for native  readers, and  those whose work  was shaped by, and addressed to  "an  alien  audience", either British  or American.
Both   Wevill   and   Prewett  are  Cana­ dian   in  the   sense  of  having  been  born here   (or,  in  the  case  of  Wevill,  of  hav­ ing  come   here   as  a  young   child), and  both   are   writers  who  voluntarily exiled themselves   to  England.  Frank  Prewett, who  died  three  years  ago  at  the  age  of
6g,  left  Toronto for  Oxford  just  before
the  First  World War,  and  David Wevill, who  is  barely  thirty, departed for  Cam­ bridge  in  1954.
In these  days  of  simultaneous  transla­
tion,   air   and   space   travel,  not   all  ex­ patriate  writers are  exiles;  some   are merely   mobile,   nor   do   they   necessarily feel  identified  with   the  mother  country
 in  a  way  which   is  significant  for  their art. David  Wevill is a poet who is not conflicted  about his exile,  and  whose themes,  landscapes and   poetic   attitudes seem to have  been  shaped by an  English life for an  English  audience. On  the occasions  when  he  does  refer  to a  Cana­ dian  landscape-as in "At Rideau Falls"
-the  country has  a  remote  pas encore vu  air  about   it.  Under his  pen,  the  Ot­ tawa   river  becomes  a  kind  of  Cam,  an ancient, complex river,  meditatively eroded.   Loggers   there  may  be,  but   no menacing Iroquois  shadows hover.
So  Wevill,  interesting  as  he  is,  does
not seem to be writing out  of a Canadian experience. I'm   not  sure  by  what  tradi­ tion   David  W evill  is   influenced,  but French symbolism  seems  the  most  likely. Yet  it  is  a  symbolism   fettered,  in   the English  fashion,  by  T.  S.  Eliot's   intro­ spective  and  guilt-ridden Christianity. To  me  this  is  an   utterly  alien   and   uncon­ genial  tradition, so I cannot say I enjoy Wevill's   poetry; only  that   I  appreciate its merits.
Whether one enjoys it or not, the impressive   thing  about  Wevill's   poetry is the  contemporary flavour of its scope, and   the  ambitiousness of  its  range,  for Wevill is trying  to  reconcile science  with

59

REVIEW ARTICLES



religion, and   his  understanding of  what is at  issue for a man  living in the modern world   is fine  and   intellectual.
His  poems  employ   a  nervous   kind  of beast  imagery   to  get  his message  across. There are  spiders,  bats,  snakes,  donkeys, cockroaches, dead   birds  and  groundhogs in  his einwelt,  umwelt, and  mitwelt:   the hunter and  the  hunted. Wevill has a wonderful  eye  for  small  details,   and   a golden  touch  in  embroidering his animal portraits, down  to the last gruesome claw and  hair.  But  these  beasts are  only meta­ phors  for  his real  concerns,  which centre around  the  matter of  process.  Wevill  is trying,   in   these   poems,   to   convey   his sense  of  the   process   of  life  and   death for  man  and  animal in a world  which  is larger   than   cities,  oceans,  or  individual planets. Man  and  beast  are  enmeshed  in a universe  which does not distinguish be­ tween   beginnings   and   endings,   and   in which  birth   and   death are  one  and  the same.
Now  it  is  one  thing   for  the  universe
not  to  know  the  difference between  life and  death, but  it  is quite  another when the   poet  claims   not  to know  it.  If the poet really doesn't know the difference between killing and being killed, between corning   and   going,  we  can  only  ascribe this  lack  of knowledge to  a lack  in  feel­ ing.  In  the  absence  of an emotional con­ text,  pushpin is as good as poetry -why not? -and  death is as good  as life, and  killing  is no  worse  than  being  killed.
And   maybe,   for   Wevill,   killing   is  a little   more   enjoyable. Like  Webster,   he is much  possessed by death,  and Eliot's "daffodil  bulbs   instead   of   balls"   have been cleverly  transplanted to Wevill's "eyesockets double as flowerpots" ("Bone-Patch"). The poet  seems to be saying   two   things    about    death:   first,

6o
 when  killing  does  take  place, who dies - the  groundhog or  the  hunter?  Although no   metaphysics  will   ever   convince  me that  it's  the  hunter who dies, I recognize the   question  as  being   a  legitimate one poetically. It is closely related  to Wevill's other   preoccupation -that  of  the  shift­ ing   and  interchangeable   identity  of people  and  objects.
The individual in  Wevill's  world  can't
really know his identity because he's so suspended, so sensitive, so perceptive, so able   to  move  into   the  beings  of  others, both  animal and  human, and  he  does  it with   such   ease.  Sometimes  this  shift  in the   location  of  the   poet's   self  leads   to valuable insights,  as in his fine and  pain­ ful  "My  Father Sleeps",   or  in  his  very characteristic "Cockroach and  Star":

The  whole  night  becomes that  star.
In  dreams  the cockroach  winds its milk­
White  wound  around my open  mouth­
I roar,  and  darkness  chokes the sound.
Or,   as  in   "Have  Patience", when   the poet's  eye becomes  "... a lake/Tilting its level  through me".  And,  whether it  ap­ plies  to  us  or  not,  we  can  certainly  see the   sense  of" .... We're  each   his  own/ Night  and  nightmare  toiling  around one vine"   ("Cockroach  and Star") .
However,  just   as  often, this   free­ floating identity leads merely to a pleasur­ able,   and    in   my   opinion -a   morally  culpable -recapitulation  of   the  violent  incident, whether it  is in  sex  ("Body  of a Rook"), or in hunting  ("The Ground­ hog") . In each  case the poet  recounts his violent  deed,  describes in detail  his mur­ der,   admits  his   guilt,  and   goes  on   to commit more  violent  acts,  but  with  full awareness.  "I   know   my   own   violence  too"   ("Body  of   a  Rook"), says  Wevill.
My  argument is that  it  is not  enough for   a   poet   to   perceive   and   record   his

REVIEW ARTICLES



violence.  Having   perceived   it  he  must act  on it  poetically,  and  he can  only do so  through  his  use of  language.  Yet, at the imaginative  level of language, Wevill falters, and is often confused. His images, though  personal,  educated, and  in tragic accord   with  the  times,  "Mouth  jagged as smashed  plastic",  don't   always stand up  to analysis. For  example:

Like a strip
Of dangerous cat  my frozen  eyes
Hunt, dilated.
("Bone-Patch")
just won't  do, and  "Something dextrous in  the  smile's wrist"  ("Have Patience") just doesn't  make enough  sense to justify itself. And in most poems, after having played on the reader's  consciousness with a series of supersensitive and exquisitely irritating images, as in "Pisces", he leaves him,  not  as  we  might  expect,  with  the
 reward  of  a  hard-earned epiphany,  but with  just another  fragmented image:
They are broken  by this double  gift,
To  break and  keep, as the sea's struggle
and  fall
Fumbles back  to marble; the flux continues.
("Pisces")
The   message,  for  all  its  elaborate  dis­ guises, when it is decoded,  just  turns out to be not  there.  To  paraphrase Tolstoy: how much  death  does a man  need?
Frank  Prewett  is a very cliff erent  kind
of writer:  all his poems are  acts:
All that  I have  I delighted  bestow
I lay it down;  I spread  it with care
At your feet:  approve my show
It is the all of all love that  lies there.
( "The Pack")
And all his poems have been hammered through   the   language  in  a  way  that makes him  a  poet's  poet, and  more spe­ cifically, a  Canadian  poet's  poet.  Who




FRANCIS  SPARSHOTT
a divided voice
9 qJAJqGq  J\O!C6

Francis Sparshott's first collection  of verse is given  distinction and  a unique flavour  by combining a philosopher's perceptiveness and de­ tachment with  the  gusto  and  romanticism of a man  who is devoted  to  the  ordinary, homely  experiences  of life. The  whole collection  is pervaded by  his  wit,  which  is distilled  in some  excellent light  and comic  verse, and  by poetic ingenuity  and arresting images. His com­ mand of formal thinking is reflected  in  his elegance of poetic  form and  in  the  profound ideas  expressed  in  some  metaphysical poems.

$4.00

OXFORD

REVIEW ARTICLES



else would  recognize  in  Prewett's echoes of Hopkins and  Langland the mimetic, loving,   re-creation  of   these   two   great figures   in   our   isolated   landscape?  For all we know,  Prewett put  their  voices in­ to  his  poems  for  the  sake  of   company. Lacking  an   audience -for  only  half  a dozen  poems  from   this  whole collection  were  ever   published   before  Robert Graves  saw to it in 1964-Prewett simply built   one  into   his  work  by  summoning up  his favourite dead.
The fact  that   Hopkins and  Langland were both preachers, and  passionate ones,  is no  accident either.  If the  lonely don't  make   converts  they  have   to  talk to   themselves.    So   Prewett    preached a little.  Against  the  failure  of love between men  and  women,  their  joinings and  part­ ings,  against   the  northness of  north and  the  darkness  of  dark,  against  the  inevit­ ability   of  death,  Prewett  set  the  inviol­ ability   of   the   human   individual.  And against   death he  set  the  sensuous  imme­  diacy   of   experience,   both   in   joy  and suffering,  on   the  farm,  in  the   war,   in the  marriage  bed,  as  well as in  his own tough,  unsentimental "artistic durance" ("Naked Overlong").  In   return for  all this he asked from  nature and society something  that    few   ever   get -a   safe passage:
The  blue stars  dance  before me and  behind, Beneath   them  I know  the  east  wind  is not
cold.
Do not freeze and  fear  me on this height,
I seek only  to  pass from  vale to vale of the wold.
("The Cloud  Snake")
But  he was aware of all the dangers, and sensitive   to  external  threat, whether it came   from   nature  or   from   man.   The poem,  "Hated  by  Stars" is  a  metaphor for  the  whole  problem  of difference and the  enmity it  arouses:
 Now a field of grass is cold
In  the first of March when daisies shine
Like the stars, but  those sky stars are  bold
And  they  hate  me for the heat  that  is mine.

Prewett's attitude  to  language  is  ex­ ploratory;  he   is  not   interested in   dis­ covering novelty  or in  technically invent­ ing. For  a poet  who presents  us with old­ fashioned  looking,  innocent-seeming lyr­ ics,  he   is  pretty   sharp  about   how   far multiple   meanings,   phonological  dis­ placements, surrogate  rhymes,  and  con­ notations will  take  him,  and  us. His con­  notations  invariably  point,   not   to   the conjunction  of  objects,   but  to  the  con­ junction of feelings  with  as yet unnamed experiences. His   language  is  so  general  that   it  allows  us, as  Winifred Nowottny puts   it,   "to   supply   an   uncontaminated image   from   our  own  experience of  the physical  world",  as is clearly  true  of  the following:

Hear  with  me  the  breeze  suffuse  the  leaves
Behind,   below  the  reedy  bird  in  her  green
light.
A  day   and   a  night   the   bared   heart   joys
and  grieves.
Cling  to  me  openheart a  day  and  a  night.
("Plea for a Day and  a Night")

Underneath  the   words   is  a   rich,   pro­ found   and   unified   life  whose  direction and   meaning one  feels  in  every  phrase.
And   it  is  a  poetic   life,  which   unlike
that   of  Wevill,  never  disappoints; it  al­ ways  has  some  place  to go to, some des­ tination  yet   to   discover.   Almost   every poem  ends  with  a  discovery  which  con­ tains  everything in  the  poem  and  some­ thing  new  besides.  But  here  is the irony: what  is  new  in  Prewett  is never  topical,  and  in  our  age,  which  consumes  novelty as it  consumes  everything else, his is the kind  of poetry  which  is neglected.
Well,  no  poet  has  any  business  living out of his time.  Prewett should  have been

REVIEW ARTICLES



a  monk   in   an   Anglo-Saxon  monastery twelve  hundred  years  ago.  There, after long  exile on  the  ice  cold  seas, he  coul<;I have returned and  written his strange, islanded, homiletic "clear  fluting" songs for us to discover  on  some "... brief cold fiery  dusk". Perhaps he  did  do  that. He never  returned to Canada because, in the
 real  sense, he  had   never   departed; and for  all exiles  he  left  this  to  read:

Like  reedy  bird  in  treetop tuft  unseen They parting fade who  never shall  away. The song in  the  recess and  thicket-screen Enters the  heart elusive.  Go, yet elusive
stay.
("Plea for  a Day  and a  Night")





THE AMBIGUOUS MIDDLE
 


Albert Tucker


DONALD CREIGHTON, The  Road to Confederation, Macmillan, $7.50.
J. K. CHAPMAN,   The   Career  of  Arthur   Hamilton  Gordon, First  Lord   Stanmore
18!)9-1912. University of Toronto Press,  $8.50.


C.   P.  SNow's PHRASE,  "the two  cultures," is now  a  commonplace of academic  discussion.   Scientists   and  hu­ manists  have  agreed  to coexist  with  little genuine effort   at  understanding.  Almost equally  serious,  though  less obvious,  may be  the  growing  divisions  within   the  hu­  manities themselves.  Anyone  attending a mixed  conference of   historians, philoso­ phers,   and   students   of   literature  will realize that the language and  conceptions of each  discipline are  not  easily compre­ hended  by those  of another. Of  them  all, history may  provide the  most  satisfactory bridge.   It  remains ambiguously in   the middle, based  fundamentally on the study of  political  institutions, social groups, and public  men,  yet  at  its  best  coming  close to a literary discipline.
Donald Creighton's biography of  Mac­ donald  and   now   his   latest   book,   The Road  to  Confederation,  provide  proof that history  and  literature can  be woven into  a   texture. The   examination  of character has  for  him  involved   the  imi-
 tation   of  a  life;  language and  form  are far more than  a means  of communicating research.   He  has  never  hesitated to  im­ pose a style so intensely and carefully lucid as to be inseparable from the quality of his interpretation. Creighton is the nearest we have ever produced to writers like Veron­ ica  Wedgwood in  England.  Like  her,  he has come  to dominate our  understanding of a period,  and  if the English  Civil  War  was   more   complex   in   its  issues,  more  dramatic in  its  clash  of  personalities, yet it  may  be  doubted  if   the  telling  of  the  story  is any  more significant  for  a Cana­ dian   than   that  of  how  his  nation   took constitutional  form.  Certainly Creighton has  been  convinced, since  the  writing of his section for  the Rowell-Sirois Commis­ sion  in  1939,  that   the  story   deserves  a grand  manner.
Perhaps that   is also  the  trouble. The
manner may  not  be  all  but  it  pervades the narrative, giving to the book a quality which  leaves the  impression of a forceful mind,  able  to grasp  and  to express  a tale

REVIEW ARTICLES



in comprehensive form, yet also ralSlng doubts.   They   are   not  easily  articulated since   they   are   paradoxically  bound   up both  with  the  intensity and  power  of the writing, and  with the  nature of the subject.
First  of all, Creighton is telling a story, a  story  with  a  plot.  "It was  the  enthus­ iasm  of  Gordon of  New  Brunswick  that  gave the  movement its real start." So the books opens,  in  1863. And  it ends  with  a magnificent  prose  description of  what Canadian rural society may have felt and thought on that morning of July  1, 1867, when  Le  Journal  des Trois  Rivieres  said "que  nous  pouvions   maintenant prendre place  parmi les nations  de Ia terre." The beginning and  the  end  were  a mere four years  apart, and  because  the  conclusion was so lasting,  so worthy  of every  effort, in itself it lends to the subject a certain neatness  of  construction. Creighton's  in­ clination towards  organization and clarity  leads   him   to  turn   this  apparent  order  into  a  tightly  knit  composition.  But the student  of   history   may   wonder   if  the whole  was  always  that  evident, whether the  parts  ran  so  continuously together at the  time.
If he  finds, as he is likely to,  that Creighton is not imposing  an artificial synthesis, that  his construction only makes the events  more  vivid and  intelligible,  yet an   impression   of  finality   emerges   from the  book. One's  curiosity  is led from stage to   stage,   satiated  rather  than    roused. Where  Frank Underhill might  prod the imagination with  a  few  sentences,  as he did in his Massey Lectures two years ago, Creighton's disciplined  and  sustained prose  tends  to  leave  the  mind  with  little of   that   questioning,  wondering,  stimu­ lated   dissatisfaction  which   is   the   seed­ ground  of  historical   curiosity.  This   im-
 pression  of  completeness is reinforced   by the  research  on  which  the  book is based. Wherever private and  official papers  are to  be  found  bearing on   those   political leaders   who  made Confederation-in England, the  Maritimes, Quebec or  Ot­ tawa,  Professor  Creighton has seen  them.  They   are   complemented  by  his   use  of newspapers  and   of  official  publications. One   could   hardly ask,  in  the  nature of evidence, for  more  authentic or  exhaus­
tive  references than  appear in  his  thirty  ·
pages  of footnotes.
They add,  however, little  that  is vitally new   to  the   subject.  The   book  fills  out and  substantiates; it does not enlarge our understanding, or  turn it  in  new  direc­ tions.  Most  of Creighton's story is already well known,  partly through his own writ­  ing. The unique strength of  this book lies in  the  balance that   is  achieved   between the  forces  and  the  men working  for Con­  federation,  and   the   obstacles   which   so often  in  those  four  years  made  it  appear a distant goal.  Creighton is at  his best in giving  this   balance  dramatic   form, whether he is  analysing the  partisan mo­ tives   of   George  Brown,   exploring  the difference between  legislative  union and federation, or  explaining the  opposition of the  Maritime region  as a whole. Since the   winning  over   of  Nova   Scotia   and New  Brunswick  finally  made  Confedera­ tion   possible,   their   political  leaders   are studied   in  detail.   Those   of  New  Bruns­  wick  emerge   with  an  exaggerated prom­ inence,   for   their  province  was  the  key­ stone   of   the   arch;  "... without New  Brunswick  confederation would  not  be." Its   politics   are   therefore analysed   min­  utely, so much  so that  one becomes aware of a  distortion between  the  high  purpose of   the  goal  and   the  parochial local  in­ terests  which  so often  stood  in  its way.





BOOKS OF  QUALITY AND  DISTINCTION

from
CJLARKE 	IRWIN

THE  SHAPE  OF   SCANDAL
A Study  of a Government  in Crisis
BY  RICHARD J. GWYN
A member of the  Parliamentary Press Gallery  and  Time Magazine  correspondent  analyses  with   brilliant  clarity the events  that  led up to the Dorion  Inquiry and  Report. Photographs, cartoons.     $5.00

CANADA'S   NUCLEAR STORY
BY  WILFRID EGGLESTON
The drama and  romance of Canada's part  in the growth and  development of nuclear  science is told  with  skill and fluency  by  a  well-known   journalist   and   author.  Photo­ graphs, line  drawings.     $6.75

A   HI STORY  OF    CANADA
Volume Ill:  From the Treaty  of Utrecht  to the  Treaty of Paris, 1713-1763
BY  GUSTAVE LANCTOT
All  three   volumes   of  Dr.   Lanctot's  definitive   study   of New France are  now available in excellent English  trans­ lations.  Volume III  follows  the high  standard set  by the earlier  books.     each, $6.75

THE  CRIPPLED   TREE
BY  HAN SUYIN
The author of  A Many-Splendoured Thing  tells  the  re­ markable story  of  her  childhood in  China, and   of  her beautiful, stormy  Belgian  mother  and  her quiet, studious Chinese  father. Photographs.    $6.95

THE  RED   AND  THE  GREEN
BY  IRIS MURDOCH
A  selection   of  the  Literary Guild  of  America, this  new novel by the author of The  Italian Girl explores  the con­ flicts  engendered  within   one  family  by  the  division   of Ireland.     $6.oo

TORONTO     VANCOUVER

REVIEW ARTICLES



This   contrast was  never  forgotten  by Sir Arthur Gordon, Lieutenant-Governor of  New  Brunswick   from   r861   to   x866. He   was  only  thirty-two when   he  came out  to his first post in the colonial  service, possessed  of  a  genuine  confidence   and sense  of  authority which  one  might  ex­ pect  of  the  son  of  a  peer  who  believed that   his  most  suitable and  useful  career  would    be  found   in   rule   over   colonial  people.  Inevitably, he  very  soon  decided that  the  tinkers,  tailors, grocers, and  lum­  ber merchants of New Brunswick  politics needed   educating  upward, and  that   the most   effective   method    was   to   involve them    in   a   larger   legislative   union,   of British  North  America if possible,  but  if not,  then  of the  Maritime regions  alone. In  the context  of the  confederation that was eventually achieved, Gordon's efforts were   seldom   constructive  and   this,  to­ gether  with   his  frustrated  egotism,  has led  Professor  Creighton to  adopt an  im­ patient and  ironic  attitude towards  him. "... the  main  result  of his  widening  ac­ quaintanceship among the public  men  of British   North   America  was  the  progres­ sive  enlargement of the scope of  his dis­ approval."
In some  measure  this  attitude is  justi­
fied  by the tone of Gordon's letters  to the Colonial  Office,   but   to   judge    a   man wholly  in  a  particular  situation may  dis­ tort   his  character. Gordon   receives  a more   sympathetic and   judicious   under­ standing in the study  by Professor  Chap­ man.   He   takes  the  man  far   beyond  his experience  in  New  Brunswick-to  the governorships  of  Trinidad, Mauritius, Fiji,   New  Zealand   and   Ceylon.  It is  a remarkably  sensitive  and  scholarly  book, ranging  over  fundamental  problems   in the government of the nineteenth-century Empire. Gordon's conceit  remained with

66
 him. He had one of those unfortunate personalities which  did not draw  people congenially to his side, depending instead on  authority and  formality. In  the  exer­ cise of power  he sometimes revealed more  energy   than    discretion.   But   Chapman makes  clear  that  it is a narrow   judgment to  dismiss  Gordon  because  he  may  have  been  frustrated  within the  restrictions of responsible government. It was more than  authority  that   he  wa,nted.
He  wished  also to exercise a deep sense
of  justice.  In  Trinidad and  Mauritius he stood   firmly   for   the   rights   of  Roman Catholics against  the  educational  privi­ leges  of  the  Anglican  establishment; he worked   for   more  equitable  land   distri­  bution and the  rights of  indentured labour  against   planter  monopolies; but above  all  he expressed  a consistently far­ sighted  sympathy with  native  peoples.  In Fiji  he  urged  the  preservation of village communities  and   greater  trust   in   the capacity  of   natives   to  govern   by  their own  institutions. "The  moral  sense  of  a semicivilized   race   is  often   very   unlike our  own,"  he  wrote, "but is not  on  that

REVIEW ARTICLES



account the  less real; and  ... it is  there­ fore of the  utmost  importance to seize ... the   spirit   in   which   native   institutions have  been  framed, and  endeavour so  to work   them   as  to  develop  ... the  latent capacities of  the  people  for  the  manage­ ment  of their  own  affairs,  without excit­ ing   their   suspicion   or   destroying  their self-respect." His  understanding, indeed, was sensitive  and  remarkably intelligent. When   the   police inspector  in  Ceylon banned  those   native   processions   so  lov­ ingly  described  by  E.  M.  Forster  in   A Passage  to   India,  Gordon   reversed   the
 order,  saying:  "I think  a very large toler­ ance  should  be given  to the amusements, habits, and  familiar   customs  of  the  people ... It is no part of the  duty  of the Government or of the  Police, to interfere with  harmless  usages,  simply  because  to Western  ideas  they seem foolish."
Whatever  the   grandiloquence  and
power   of  analysis   in  Creighton's  book, with Chapman's study  we are taken into a wider world, where the understanding is made  more  humane; and  that, after  all, should  be the  end  of all writing, whether it is classed as history  or  as literature.







OUT OF THE SHELL
 


George Woodcock



MARGARET WADE LABARGE,  A  Baronial  Household  of the  Thirteenth  Century. Mac­
millan.  $s.so.
D. J. GOODSPEED, Bayonets  at St. Cloud.  Macmillan. $5.75·
PHYLLIS GROSSKURTH, John  Addington Symonds. Longmans. $ro.oo.


CANADIAN HISTORIANS and bi­ ographers  are   shifting  their   view  from North America to  the  wider  world. The  spate   of  Canadiana  has  not  yet  appre­ ciably  diminished, but  one  suspects  that  at  present  it is kept  going somewhat arti­  ficially by the  activities of  the  Centennial Commission. On   the  other  hand, there  is  nothing  artificial   about    the   interest  which  some  of our  best  younger  scholars are   taking   in   English   and   Continental history,  and  if  the  power  to  move  out  of one's own microcosm is a sign of advanc­ ing  maturity, their   works  are  perhaps a better  earnest of Canada's cultural  com­ ing  of  age  than the  literary  phenomena
 to  be associated  with  what  are,  after  all, the  mainly  political  celebrations of  1g67.
Margaret Ward   Labarge, whose  book is  in   terms   of  period   the   first  of  the group   of  extra-Canadian  historical  stu­ dies  I am  now  discussing,  is  already  the  author of a workmanlike study of Simon de   Montfort.  As  a   by-product  of  her research  into   de  Montfort's period,  she has  now written  a  work  of domestic  his­ tory,  A Baronial  Household in  the  Thir­ teenth  Century,  using  the  household   of Simon's Countess Eleanour as the central  point   of   her  study,   but   bringing in,  to round  the  picture of  aristocratic life  in her   period,   much   information  glea,ned

REVIEW ARTICLES



from  other  sources.  Mrs. Labarge makes free  use of surviving household  rolls and other   similar   documents, and   for  those who  are  fascinated by the  details  of  un­ familiar ways of  life,  she produces  some very   interesting  facts   about    such   far­  reaching  subjects   as  media:va,l  ways  of wine-making,  and   the   undergarments worn   by   thirteenth-century  knights   on going  into battle. Her  style is less original  than   her  research,   and  her  presentation generally  rather dull,  so that  the  reader has  to  work  quite   hard  for  the  pleasure  of  adding to his store  of curious  informa­ tion  about   media:val  life, but  I, for  one, found   the  labour worth  while.
Major  D.   J. Goodspeed,  who  wrote,
among other  earlier  books, an  interesting study-The Conspirators-of  the  tech­ nique   of   coups   d'etat, dealing   with   a series of attempted and successful seizures of power  by minority groups during the twentieth century, has  now produced, in Bayonets  at St. Cloud, an account of one of the  most celebrated of earlier  coups, Napoleon's seizure  of  power  on  the  18th Brumaire. It  is a  well-written narrative, derived   mainly   from   published   but  not easily accessible sources, many of them contemporary to the event;  Major Good­ speed  has   made  his  story   brisk  and dramatic.
Each  of these  books has its virtues,  but neither is spectacular. In a quite different category, as  a  work  of  scholarship and an  example of  finely  written   biography, is Phyllis Grosskurth's John  Addington Symonds, a  life  of  one  of  those  literary second-raters whose careers are often so fascinating in  themselves   and   so  symp­ tomatic of their  ages.  "He  is a  far  better  and   more  interesting  thing  than any  of his  books,"  said  Robert  Louis Stevenson  of  Symonds, and  Dr.  Grosskurth admir-

68
 ably  develops  this  theme.
There is,  indeed,  little   reason   to  re­ read    or   revive   the   actual   writings   of Symonds.   He   was  a   Victorian  man   of letters   of  the  best  kind, intelligent, con­ scientious,  broadminded  a,nd  concerned with  literary  style,  but  in  the  long  view his  poems seem tepid  and  his major prose works,  on  Michelangelo and  the  Renais­ sance,  while still eminently readable, have been  superseded by other  works  of more  careful learning. Symonds lacked  the fire of  creative  originality   that   might   have overleapt  his  defective  scholarship  and  made   him   permanently  interesting as  a writer.
As a man,  on  the  other  hand, he  pre­
sents all the features that  make  a good biographical subject.  Physically,   his  life was a constant struggle  against  the tuber­ culosis  that   killed  him  in  his  early  so's.  Philosophically  he   was   plagued  since young  manhood  by  the  doubts   concern­ ing   the   nature  of  the  universe   and   of religious   truths  that  assaulted   the  mid­  Victorian  mind,   until  in   the end    he reached the  relative calm  of  a  resigned rationalism. Morally he was tortured from his  school   days  by  the   knowledge  that  he  was  sexually  abnormal, and  his mar­ riage,  if   not   destroyed,  was  certainly warped  by this  knowledge. Like  Gide  he developed, as  the  years  went  on,  an  al­ most  obsessive desire  to justify the  homo­ sexual  to a world  which  turned  him  into  an  outcaste, and  in  his last  years, in  col­ laboration  with   Havelock   Ellis,  he  did contribute to bringing this profound social problem  to   the  attention of  a   by-no­ means  appreciative public.
In these  respects  Symonds  was the  tor­
tured  Victorian in his most extreme form. He  was also an engaging personality whose  letters   are  a  great   deal  more  at-

REVIEW ARTICLES



tractive than  his formal, mannered  prose, and  he lived on terms  of personal friend­ ship  with  many  of the intellectual leaders of the closely knit Victorian upper  middle  class.  Above  all,  until   recently   large  re­ gions  of  his  life  have   been   deliberately shadowed  by   a  mystery   created  by  his relatives   and  friends.  Symonds   wrote   a self-revealing  autobiography  which   he considered  his most important work, since it   discussed,   as   frankly  as   his  feelings would   allow,  the  struggle   of  the  homo­ sexual  to live  honestly  and  completely in a Victorian setting.  His  literary executor, Horatio Brown,  a fellow  homosexual, de­ cided, with  the  approval of the  Symonds family,  not  to destroy  the  autobiography, but  to  leave  it  unpublished, and  eventu­ ally  he  lodged  it  in  the  London Library  with   the   proviso   that   it  should   not  be released   to  the  world   until   1976;  given
 the Victorian inclination to burn  any documents that  might  throw  a shadow  on family   honour, his  action   was  about   as liberal  as one  might   expect.  In  place  of the autobiography he published his own misleading two-volume biography of Symonds  which   used  only  the  less  com­ promising  passages  of  the  original.
Dr.   Grosskurth  has   been   allowed   to
read  the  Symonds  autobiography and  to make  use of  it  without direct  quotation; she  had  also  spent   a  great   deal  of  time tracing  all   the   available  letters from Symonds   and   his  friends.  The   result  is a book which  not only gives us an entirely new view of Symonds  himself,  but  in the process  reveals   a   great   deal   about   the manners and  morals  of the upper-middle­ class  world   in   which   he   moved.   One  learns  for the first time how Dr. Vaughan, the   disciple   of   Thomas  Arnold,  was




The Return of Eden

FIVE  ESS.AYS ON MILTON'S EPICS Northrop Frye
A  stimulating treatment  of  the   language and
ideas of Milton's epics, presented informally, yet filled with  the vast learning of this distinguished critic.   His  own  pleasure   in  the  subject   is  evi­ dent  throughout, and  his enthusiasm is conveyed to  the  reader.

Based  on  the   Centennial  Lectures marking the   IOoth  anniversary of
Huron College,  University of Western  Ontario.   $4.95

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO PRESS



6g

REVIEW ARTICLES



forced  to resign  the headmastership of Harrow;  ironically, a morally  tortured young  Symonds   was  the  instrument  of his downfall. One  finds prim  and respect­ able  literary figures  like  Edmund Gosse drawn  into   the   tortured   circle   of   the abnormal, and   witnesses  the  rather  as­ tonishing  connivance of  Symonds's  very Victorian wife in his homosexual  relation­ ships.  It  is  an   extraordinary  picture   of an   agony-ridden   and    highly    complex social-moral situation  which   came  to  a head  only  shortly  after  the  death  of Symonds   in   the   great   scandal   and   the equally   great   tragedy of  Oscar   Wilde's trial.
If Dr.   Grosskurth  sketches  her  back­
ground with  skilful,  revealing  strokes, she never  forgets  that, from  her  perspective, Symonds   is   the   central  figure   of   the group, and   her  portrait of  this  sensitive and  extremely unhappy man  of taste and talent   is  both   penetrating  and   sympa­ thetic.  Her  approach,  indeed,  has minor  flaws. At  times  a  little  of the  condescen-
 swn  which  is  the  temptation of  the  un­ adulatory biographer enters  her  tone. She is also  too  willing  to condemn  Symond's biographically-based Victorian   criticism  from  the  viewpoint of the passing critical  fashions of  today;  conversely,  she herself uses  her  subject's  writings-as distinct  from   his  letters-too  sparingly as  clues to  the  nature of the  man.  On  a very few points  of  fact  she  appears to  be inaccu­ rate.  Lord  Ronald Gower  was surely  the original of Basil Hallward in The  Picture of Dorian  Gray,  and  not  of Lord  Henry as Dr.  Grosskurth suggests. And  the book­ seller  George  Bedborough could  not have been  arrested, as she states,  "on  a charge of  suspected anarchy",  since  "anarchy", suspected or  otherwise, has  never  been in itself  an  offense  in  English  law.
But    these   imperfections  are   a   very
small  price  to  pay  for  a  book  which  has the  double  virtue  of being one of the  best of  recent literary biographies and  also  a fine study  of Victorian manners.









A SPECIAL ADEQUACY

JOHN GLAssco,  A  Point  of Sky. Oxford. $4.00.

SOMETHING  ABOUT the  very look of John Glassco's  second   collection of  poetry,  A Point  of Sky, whether its chaste  print  or its modest  title  plates   (hinting at  themes and   images   with  an  almost  Victorian delicacy) ,  suggests   a  deliberate,  though not  insistent, claim   to  our   attention  on grounds  quite   different  from   those   on which  we turn   to, say, Cohen, Purdy,  or Layton. More  often  than  not, in its formal perfection, its decorous language, and  its stately   control  of  tonal   movements,  his verse demands, however  politely,  that  we reconsider  our  notion  of what  is relevant or  significant   in  our   poetry   at  this  mo­ ment.  And once,  at least, Glassco declares himself  openly   against  "a  dozen  young Canadian poets" :

And  all  these  poetics about poetics about poetics
And  the  fearsome insults and  fulsome accolades
And  your  girl-friends vulva
And  your  trip  to  Mexico

Not  to mention "mementoes ... of forni- cations" and  "vignettes  of ... sensitive childhood". Well, we've  heard those com­ plaints  before.  Either way, whether  he is pursuing his own  interests or scolding  his contemporaries, there  is  nothing startling about  Glassco,  except  perhaps that  there is no one quite  like him on the immediate scene.  For   this  reason   alone,   his  recep­ tion  is likely  to  be mixed  and  uncertain,
 as it  was  for  his  first  book,  The  Deficit
Made   Flesh.
Obviously, Glassco cannot be dismissed because he scorns the merely fashionable: the  slap-dash   diction,   disorganized  syn­ tax, stanzaic sprawl, and psychological posturing  coming   out   of   Montreal,  or the  Mailer-like egotism  and  demonic  ur­ banism  of certain  West-Side-Story-poems growled  out  in  Toronto oratories. Nor  is he  to  be  explained away  as an  establish­  ment  man,  one  of  those  older  gentlemen cultivating odes, epigrams, and  conscious elevation  in the courtyards of Massey College.  Glassco  is of  a  different  breed. The   terms   of  his   accomplishment, it seems  to  me,  are  of  the  kind  that   have to be looked at closely today because he succeeds  in  achieving what   the  contem­ porary  poet,  at  least  in  this  country, has long since ceased even to consider  worth­ while   attempting,   something  which Arnold  once  described  as  adequacy and which,  curiously   enough, he  took  to  be the  mark  of  a  genuinely   modern  sensi­ bility.
It's  difficult  to suppress  the  sneer  in  a word  like "adequate": "You  mean  he's a Canadian Philip Larkin murmuring about  church-going?" Nothing of the sort. But  what  the  difficulty  really  points  to is the  baffiement   and   frenzy  characteristic of so much  contemporary poetry  and  ex­ perience.  Reading Glassco, then, one must  be prepared to encounter a poetic experi­  ence  different from  the  mad  dimensions of  writers   like  Lowell  or  Roethke,  and to  keep in  mind,  as  Arnold  did,  the  dis­ tinction between excitement and  compre­ hension.   It's   a  distinction,  by  the  way, which  Glassco  himself  is not  always  able to keep steadily  in view.
Before we get  to the adequate Glassco, in  fact,  there  are  a couple  of inadequate

BOOKS IN REVIEW



ones to clear away. There's the rather obviously   "modern"  poet,   who   is  not really modern at all, the bookish writer indulging in  a garish  display  of  classical­ roman tic-ironic-pessimistic Eliotesqueries, complete with  Italian and  German tags, the   occasional    straining   after   a   semi­ mystic "clear  flame of  longing",  and  brisk incongruity:

Squeers and  the  Brothers Cheeryble
Merged in  a mystic  pot-pourri,
The dog-whelk counted as the  whale, And  equally near, My  God,  to Thee?

There's the  Satanic Glassco and  the Wordsworthian one ("And  be once more/ As I have  been before/ In another dream of infancy")_  There's the dandy  one and the  sour   one.   Somewhat  better,   there's the  Robert Frost  of  the  Eastern  Town­ ships,   bucolically   metaphysical.   Best  of all, somewhere in the middle, there's  that other   poet,  engaging,  coherent, harmon­ ious, intelligible, and  adequate. We  hear him  in  the  voice  of  his Quixote waking  to  the  death  which   is  ordinary  reality, even  in  the  somewhat  obtrusive  emotion  recollected  in  tranquillity in  "Luce's Notch", or  talking  quietly  of final  things in  "The  Day" :

So on  that day That final  day  Removed  from time Dependent  on  nothing
When nothing will  matter, You  will escape
Like  a mouse  in  the  darkness
The dream be ended
The city  forgotten
The shadow will  touch you
Engross you  wholly
Softly,  securely And  soon,  soon The day  of others
Freed of your  sickness, Their own  little day
Serene, new  born
The day  of their freedom
Dawn quietly without you.
 There  is  much  of  Glassco  I for   one could   do   without,  but   not  if  it  meant that  I could  not have  the peculiar delight of  hearing in  his  best  poems  a  language I  had    almost   forgotten  could   still   be spoken  so well.
E. W. MANDEL



VISION OF TORONTO

ERIC  ARTH:UR,  Toronto: No  Mean   City.  Uni­
versity   of  Toronto Press.  $15.00.

THE  TITLE  AROUSES a dissenting interior monologue  before   the   book  is  opened. Surely   this   promising-looking   volume does  not  set  out   to  show  that   Toronto has ever  had  any claims  to magnificence! "Mean" is  a  word   that   comes  easily  to mind   whenever  the   city  is  thought  of. The grid  pattern, laid  down  in  I 793 and adhered to ever since except  in Rosedale; the   narrow,  infinitely  stretching  main streets  lined   for  as  long  as  one  can  re­ member  with   shabby   shop   fronts   and leading  into   networks  of  more  narrow streets  with   tight   facing rows  of  veran­ dahed houses;  the  wasted  possibilities  of the  two  broad   avenues  there   are   (Uni­ versity  and  Spadina);  the  ruination of a potentially beautiful  waterfront; the lack of  spaciousness,  of  vistas-in  the  bitter  mood  of  a  native,  meanness of  concep­ tion  and  execution in  both  planning and architecture seems to be everywhere. The title   phrase -coined   by  the  translators of  the   Acts   ( 2 I :39)  in  a  reference  to Paul's Tarsus-suggests a prolonged ro­ mantic exaggeration.
But  the  book  is  not  pretentious. Pro­
fessor Arthur's history  of Toronto's archi­ tecture  to   around  I goo,   the   result   of years  of  study,   reflects  on  every  page  a

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



great   fondness for  the  city  and  its  past that  only occasionally leads to romantic overstatement. The urbane text smoothly combines architectural  comments with information and  anecdotes of irresistible interest. Even   the  captions that  accom­ pany  nearly  400 photographs  and  draw­ ings   are   absorbing-so    much   so  that  irritation  sets  in  as  the  eyes  dart   back and   forth   between   them  and   the  text. (Incidentally, the  book  would  have  said a  good   deal   more   than   it   does  about  changing  attitudes and  tastes  if  the  year could  have  been  given   in  the  captions beside the  word  "demolished", which  ap­ pears  beside  so  many   of  the   buildings illustrated.) Though the  book is a little wanting in  detailed  historical  discussion and  detached evaluations, this seems  un­ important in  the  face  of  its  charm, its spirit,  and  the  information  and observa-
 tions  it  does  contain. It should   be  used and  enjoyed  for  many  years.
The  most  interesting revelation of  the
book for me was the appealing character of Toronto in  the early  187o's,  suggested in  part  by the  photograph on  the  jacket. Though common sense protests,  it is hard not   to  regret   the  almost   complete  dis­ appearance  of   a   city   with    tree-lined squares,   harmoniously  designed  terraces of Georgian houses, a  few  mansions that  handsomely   proclaimed   the   attainment of  wealth  from   humble  beginnings, im­ posing   office   buildings    and    attractive store   fronts,    and    prominently   soaring churches in  spacious  green  settings.  This soothing  Georgian atmosphere gave  way to   a   rage   of   eclectic   High    Victorian building   that   created  much   of  the  un­ interesting downtown district  familiar to us, and  it  in  turn  led  to  what  Professor




announcing a new series:


popular Canadian titles now available at lower prices from all bookstores



THE FIRST  FIVE  VOLUMES TO  BE PUBLISHED  ARE:

The  Oxford   Book of  Canadian Verse, edited
by  A.  J. M. Smith
$2.95
 Haida
by  William Sclater,
illustrated  by
Grant  Macdonald
$r.95
Canada in  World  Affairs
 Sainte-Marie among the  Hurons,   by Wilfrid & Elsie McLeod  Jury
$r.5o

Volume   VIII:  1953-1955 	Volume  IX: Oct.  1955-June  1957
by  D.  C. Masters	by  James   Eayrs
$r.95 	$1.95

OXFORD  UNIVERSITY  PRESS



73

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Arthur  calls   •·a  new   and   virile   archi­ tecture" whose  strivings  for  picturesque­ ness culminated in the City Hall  ( 18go), a  building much   admired  by  architects.
The  photographs in   the   book  show
that  few  truly  impressive  buildings  arose from  this activity  (among the expected banks  and churches are some very good houses  and  factories) ,  but  there  were  a number of interesting failures,  and  some curiosities, now  gone,  that  command the attention  simply   because   they   existed. The   nineteenth-century city  that  can  be pieced  together from  many  of these illus­ trations  does  convey,   I  have   to  admit, a glimmer of the  sub-title's claim.
In   the   cri  du   cceur  of  the  Epilogue,
after   Professor  Arthur writes  feelingly  of the   "blatant  ugliness"  of  large  parts   of the city  today,  of Toronto's unworthiness of  University  Avenue   ("a   Valhalla  for the  human chief  executive  of  Hydro"),



Prioatt olltttors
The Library of the  University of British  Columbia, Vancouver, B.C.,  wishes to purchase private collections of good  library materials such  as books,  manuscripts, maps in
many general fields of knowledge.
In Canadiana, exceptional collections only  are  wanted. Please send  full  particulars to Robert M.  Hamilton, Assistant Librarian.



74
 of  the  gradual passage  from  the  human to  the  inhuman in  architectural scale, he dwells  on  one  event   that   brightens the future. That is the  construction of a "landmark  in   the   architecture of  the city", the new City Hall, whose design Professor  Arthur had  a hand  in choosing. He  sees it as a  building that  will become the  "heart and head" of a more illustrious city  to  be.  Caught up  by his enthusiasm and   confidence, and   filled  with  delight by an  extraordinary building in the mak­ ing,  a  Toronto  reader cannot  help  but be  convinced  and   heartened  by  such  a VISIOn.
Will  someone  please  write  a  book  like
this  on  Montreal?
WILLIAM TOYE


FOOLISHNESS
IS NOT SUBLIME

siMON  GRAY, Simple  People. Queenswood
House. $5.75.

"Well, we  don't get  much  opportunity  to talk    to   people about  personal matters at home.  People  have   different  things  to  say there. They like  discussing Nova  Scotian politics  and   higher education. It's  an  im­ portant  problem."
She   took   the   smallest  of  steps   sideways.
"The  people Sam   knows   don't  talk   about things like   that."
"No, I noticed that." He  resisted an  im­ pulse   to  take  a  step  farther away  from  her,  which    was   itself   a   matter  of   resisting   an
impulse to  take  a step  nearer to her.  "Things are   definitely  more   personal here."
"Yes." She  took  another little step.  "We
are."

THAT  THINGS ARE  MORE  personal   at Cambridge,  and    in   England,  than    in Nova   Scotia   is  one   of  the   theses,  per­ haps   the   main    one,   of   Simon   Gray's  Simple  People,  the  second  novel  by this

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Canadian writer  to be published in  Eng­ land.   His  first,  Colmain,  was  agreeably  received in Britain  and  earned what  must be the  highest  accolade an  English  criti­ cal establishment can bestow on a colonial  writer,   namely,   that   he   has   a  gift  for style,  and   the  "quiet,  malicious comedy of  manners"-not,  it   must   be  agreed, attributes which  instantly spring  to mind when  considering the generality of Cana­ dian  fiction.  But  Mr.  Gray's   perceptions were  doubtless  sharpened by some such acquaintance with Cambridge education and   English   life  as  is  afforded his  con­ fused   and   unhappy  Canadian   hero  in Simple  People.
Briefly, this  young  man,  whose  name  is Logan   Bester,   coming   into   a  large  in­ heritance during his  academic  career  at a small  university  in Nova Scotia,  decides to employ  it, in part, towards completing his thesis  on  Wordsworth at  Cambridge. He   meets   his   uncle   Lionel   in  London, obscurely  involved   in  the  shady  side  of the  antique  business,  and  in  Cambridge falls in love with  Joey, the  young mistress of  a  sceptical   and  successful  and  rather vulgar novelist,  Sam  Field   (his   novel  is called  Running  Man, by the way.)  There are  encounters with   bitchy  undergradu­ ates   of  the   literary   establishment,  very high  on  morality  (it  is,  after   all,  Cam­ bridge), evasive  dons, an  ambiguous col­ league   of  his   uncle's   and   a  mysterious friend   of   theirs  known   as  Mrs.  Hodges, or  Maria, or  Gipsy.  All these,  it  is plain,  are  openings   into  the  real  world,  where things  are "more personal", for the young man  from  Nova  Scotia.
Now  my  own  acquaintance with  that
province is  pretty   brief   and   superficial, so I have  to take  it on trust  that  a young graduate of a small university, with brains enough    at   least   to   begin   a   thesis   on
 Wordsworth, could  be quite  as naive and uninformed about worldly matters as Logan  most  decidely  is. That there  is a strong sense of moral  rectitude emerging from  such  Maritime campuses is no sur­ prise:   after  all,  the  Worthington  of  the novel  could  well  be  Wolfville,  where   I believe  there   exists  a  Baptist  university.  And  among   Baptists,  I  suspect  there   to be  combined   a  heightened  moral   sensi­ tivity  without  a  corresponding imagina­ tive  sense of  the  richness  and   variety  of forms   which   immoral   behaviour may take.  All this  might  explain  the  perplex­ ing  character  of Logan  Bester,  though  it does not remove the central problem of coming  to  grips  with  him  as a character in fiction, which  I shall  put  shortly,  as follows:
Mr.  Gray  is concerned to show  us the
impact  of a sophisticated society upon a Puritan, and  his  Puritan is his  hero  and his  point-of-view. It  is  thus   important that  while we laugh  at  certain aspects  of this  encounter -and  parts  of  this  book are  very  funny   indeed-we  ought   not to  feel  that   our   hero   is  so  far   beyond caring  about   that   he  forfeits   any  claim to reality.  It is this claim  to reality which establishes a kind of good faith between writer   and   reader, and   which   some  of the most improbable characters in fiction do  have -Don  Quixote, to  seize an  ex­ ample-but  Mr.    Gray's   Logan   Bester does  not.  Not   that   Logan   is  meant  to exist on the  scale of a Don  Quixote. But after  a promising beginning which  estab­ lishes him  as a  point  of  intelligence, cap­ able   of  irony,   he  slips   into   a  type,   a caricature of the North American student at  Oxbridge,  dogged,   humourless, assid­ uously  keeping bibliographical references  of  file  cards   "to   keep   my  thoughts  m order",  and   given   frequent  recourse   to

75

BOOKS IN REVIEW



locutions  such  as  "I certainly   see  what you  mean,   all  right," and   "in   point   of fact". He  is, in short,  more of a fool than we can believe, and  his foolishness is not sublime.
There is  this,  and   his sexual  naivete. It is possible  that   provincial   young  men coming  up  to Oxford or Cambridge may still be embarrassed by such displays of romantic ardour as may be produced by couples  clasping  in  the  semi-darkness  of an   undergraduate   party,  although I thought  Logan's  reaction   more   appro­ priate    to   someone   the   age   of   Holden  Caulfield, or  younger.  But  nonetheless,  take him as an extreme example  of sexual reticence, Logan  is so  irritatingly not-of­ this-world that  some  of the  comedy  and the  anguish of  his  infatuation with   the young  mistress  of  the Amis-like  novelist is  dissipated    in   clouds   of   verbal   mis­ understanding.  At  other   times,  the  bal­ ance  between  the  funny  and  the  painful  is  quite  beautifully  preserved,  as  in  the moment   of  his  initiation  into   physical love   by   the   delectable  Joey,   our   hero muttering, as  he  gropes  about   her   un­ familiar landscape, "It's a long time since I did  this."
In  short,   a  good  comic  novel  spoiled by a central character who is just too ambiguous. Still,  there  is  a  useful  irony in  its  theme,  and  its  title.  Where  Henry James   posited  that   an  American  abroad was an  innocent among  the civilized and the  corrupt, Mr.  Gray  has put  his finger on  one  of  the  end-products of a  Puritan society which  imported its morality with­ out   also   importing  the   civilizing   and humanizing benefits  of an  older  society:  our   Puritan, operating  under  moral  im­ peratives,  is  a  vastly  more  complicated being than the dons, calculating relatives, and  uninhibited  young  women  he meets
 in   the   old   country. True  or  false?   As Sam  Field  says, "We're very simple, really. Too  simple,  in  a sense."
GEORGE ROBERTSON



GUlLT FOR THE WRONG REASON

FRED  BODSWORTH,   The   Atonement  of Ashley
Morden. Dodd,   Mead.   $6.gs.

WHEN  DR.  ASHLEY MORDEN  decides   to devote  his life to  the  discovery  of a  vac­ cine  to  counteract Lyophilized   S piroides bangalorensis, which  causes  "an  obscure  tropical disease,"  no  one  pays  much   at­  tention. But when  Morden isolates Strain M  of  S piroides-and  accidentally  dis­ covers  his  mutation  is  lethal   enough to kill  a man  who  only sniffs it-Ottawa's Institute of Defence  Sciences  swings into action. Overnight  the  research  project is translated  into   a   defence   project,  and peace-loving  Morden  finds  himself  em­ ployed  to  develop  the  virulence, not  the vacCine.
Ashley Morden is a man  of conscience,
not  an  ordinary research scientist  in  the employ    of   the   military   establishment. During  the   Second    World   War,   Pilot Officer  Morden refused  to engage  in  the bombing  of   Hamburg.  He   was   court­ martialed, sentenced to a year's imprison­ ment  and  "dismissed  with  disgrace." His "atonement"  is  his   selfless   and   single­ minded devotion to the  apparently prob­  lemless  S piroides.  When   his  project  be­ comes  top  priority, Morden is unmoved by  his  fellow  soldier-scientist's  justifica­ tion  of  bacteriological warfare: "Our  job is to  provide weapons, not  decide  where and  how  to  use  them." Nor,  in  light  of

BOOKS IN REVIEW



the atom bomb, does the other classic argument carry   much  comfort: "It  will not  be used.  Merely  having  it  will make it  unnecessary   to  use it."
Morden's  past   and   present   predica­ ment  are  tangled  together  when he crash­  lands  in the winter  forests north of Chur­ chill.  He   is  about to  complete   the  last stages  of  his  experiments, but  fate  inter­ venes  and  he finds  himself stranded. His life  passes  before  him,  and  he  begins  to view  his  deadly  discovery  with  some de­ gree   of   moral   perspective. Then  Lilka Frahm,  the  beautiful but elusive mystery woman, rescues  him,  both  physically  and morally.  Lilka,  it  happens, lived  through the   very   Hamburg  bombings   that   still bother  Morden.
The  plotting and  writing  are  plausible, however,   and   the   novel  is  full  of  new turnings. But the author, Fred  Bodsworth (a  naturalist and   novelist,  the  author of Last   of  the   Curlews   and  The  Strange One, and   a  staff-writer for  Maclean's), fails   to   find   the   main   issue-that  of guilt-and   follow    it   through.  Just   as Canada  consistently refused  to  face  the issue of nuclear arms, Morden only makes a half-hearted moral  commitment to  his pacifistic   principles.  In   the  eyes  of  the air  force   he  might   have  been  guilty  of traitorous behaviour over  Hamburg, but certainly not  in  his own  mind; hence  his "atonement"  is  noble   but   unnecessary. But  when  he  unwittingly unleases  a new microbiological  menace  on   the   world, one would  think  a real "atonement" is in order: he  should   redress  the  balance  of nature  and   spend   the   rest   of  his  life searching for  the  now-necessary  vaccine. Instead, Morden returns to the  northern forests  to  be  by Lilka's side.  Fred  Bods­ worth   has  his  hero   guilty,   but  for   the wrong   reason. 	JOHN  ROBERT COLOMBO
 INSIGHT AND BLINDNESS

w.  o.  RAYMOND,    The  Infinite  Moment   and Other  Essays in  Robert  Browning,  2nd  edi­ tion.  University   of  Toronto  Press.  $7.50.


THIS BOOK FIRST APPEARED in  I950. The second  edition, containing three  new  es­ says   and    omitting   one   on   Browning studies   in  the  first  half  of   this  century, is  dated  I965.  It  represents  forty   years of  research   and  criticism   and   confirms both   the  continuity  and   range   of  Ray­  mond's  distinguished career  as a  Brown­  ing   scholar. The  essays  fall   into   three groups:   bibliocritical  studies    (on   The
Ring  and The Book, the  Thomas J. Wise
forgeries, the  Harriet Westbrook  Shelley letters) ; studies  of specific  poems  ( Fifine at the  Fair;  Paracelsus;  "The Statue and the    Bust";   "Bishop    Blougram," "Mr. Sludge", Prince  Hohenstiel-Schwangau and  Fifine  again, in an  essay on "Brown­ ing's  Casuists") ; studies  on more general­ ized   aspects   of   Browning's  work   (bio­  graphical  in  "Our Lady of Bellosguardo", theological   in   "Browning  and    Higher Criticism," philosophical in  "A  Study  of Browning's Imagery and  Humanism") .
In  his introductory essay, "The Infinite
Moment",  Raymond undertakes to evalu­ ate   Browning's  "place   amongst   English men  of  letters," promising to  centre at­  tention  on   the   poet's   "artistic  worth." Though   he   offers   "touch-stones" of Brownin,g's   poetic   worth-incidentally proving  himself  closer as critic  to Arnold  than    the   post-Richards  period-Ray­ mond  seems  concerned less with  Brown­  ing's   "artistic  quality"  than    with    his "philosophy  of   life"   moulded,  we   are told,   by  "two  important  environmental

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



influences": the  romantic idealism  he in­ herited  from   Shelley   and   the   religious coQvictions  "represented  by  Evangelical Christianity".  Having   devoted  himself and  much  of his book  to examining "the  interplay between  the transcendental and humanistic   elements"  in   Browning's world-view,  Raymond  concludes  (in  an essay  published  in  1955)   that   the  "hu­ manism   of  Browning's ethics  may  justly be  called   the  core  of  his  philosophy   of life."
Much critical insight  and some real blindness   is  revealed  in   Raymond's  at­ tempt to  reconcile Browning's  Shelleyan  idealism   with   his  homespun  humanism. Emphasizi:Qg Browning's insistence on the sovereignty  of human  love  and  intuition, Professor   Raymond   protests    too   much  (at   least   forty   times)   against  his  "ra­ tional   agnosticism",   "intellectual nes­ cience"   and   "negations  of  knowledge". This  critical cliche,  a crude over-simplifi­ cation,  simply    ignores   statements  like those  made  in letters to Elizabeth Barrett: "all   passive  obedience  and   implicit  sub­ mission  of will  and  intellect is by far  too easy ... Chop off  your legs, you will never go  astray;  stifle  your   reason   altogether and   you  will  find   it  difficult   to  reason
ill.,
Another cliche,  "too oft  expressed,  but never  well  thought out", is the  assertion that    "Browning  shows   little   interest   in social  progress,  the  evolution of the  race, laws and priQciples which have a general bearing    on   humanity ... political   phe­ nomena."   Here    Raymond    contradicts himself,  having stated  earlier  that  some of  Browning's poems  "have a  close rela­ tion   to   contemporary   movements  and controversial  issues, artistic, religious  and political." In  identifying both  Browning  and  Aprile  (in  Paracelsus)   with  the sub-
 jective  poet  as  defined   in  the  Essay  on Shelley,  Raymond assumes  too much. Aprile  conforms more  closely to  the  des­ cription of the  objective poet  (as defined in Sardella  and  the  Shelley Essay), while Browning   cannot  be  assigned   to  either  category.   A  past  age  speaks  when  Ray­  mond  says he is  "repelled by the  sordid­  ness of Red  Cotton Night-Cap Country"; and  when   "Blougram",   "Sludge", H ohenstiel-Schwangau and Fifine are dis­ missed as "dry  and  tortuous reading" be­ cause  "over-weighted with ratiocination", Professor  Raymond must  be admonished for  failing   to  see  that  to  Browning,  as to Donne,  a  "thought ... was  an  experi­  ence" capable of  generating an emotional excitement    productive   of   poetry    well worth  reading.
JOHN  HULCOOP


POETRY IN PAMPHLETS

ANNE KEKES,   The Suspended  Landscape.
Fiddlehead. $ 1 .oo.
DOROTHY LIVESAY,  The Colour  of God's Face.
Unitarian Service Committee. 6o¢.
ROBIN MATTHEWS,   Plus  Ca  Change. Poetry
North. so¢.
SEYMOUR  MAYNE,   Tiptoeing on  the  Mount.
McGill  Poetry Series.  $1.00.

A  READING   of  these   four   pamphlets  of poetry,  issued  during the  last  year  or  so, is likely to induce reactions  varying  from despair  to enthusiasm in anyone  sincerely interested in the immediate moment of poetic development in Canada. Thematic and stylistic dissimilarity are accompanied by remarkable differences in  quality.
Although she writes about  everything from  the  forms  of poetry  to  the forms  of love,  Anne   Kekes   has  not  managed  to

79

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



raise any of the  poems  in The Suspended Landscape above  the  level of rather dull prose.  Her   vision  is  handicapped  by an inability to understand the poetic  essence of  the   many   aspects   of  life  which   she describes  so thoroughly. Ideas  are photo­ graphed  from   every  possible  angle,  and the   observations  carefully   recorded    in verse, but  the final  result lacks depth  and solidity.  The  wit is never quite  witty,  the dialogue-where it  appears-is  uncon­  vincing,  but  perhaps  the  most  distressing quality  about  most  of these  poems  is the fact  that  they  lack even  a strong  sense of rhythm. Only  on  one  occasion,  in  "The Meeting", are  rhythm and  content  satis­ fyingly  unified.
If the  fault   of  Miss  Kekes  is  that   of
choosing   too  wide  a  variety  of  subjects and  treating them  all  inadequately,  Sey­ mour   Mayne has  limited   the  interest  of Tiptoeing  on  the   Mount   by  stubbornly insisting  on   interpreting   everything around  him   as  a  sexual   symbol.   With awesome ingenuity,  fruit,  vegetables, tomahawks, snow,  balloons,  seesaws  and mothholes in his girl-friend's sweater  fur­  nish  excuses for  erotic  statement. Within  the   limited   range  of   this   self-imposed monotony,  Mr.   Mayne  has  sustained   a mood   of   witty  ease  which  prevents   the poems  from  slipping away  into  vulgarity  or  sentiment. Quick   rhythms   contribute to  the  lightness   of  the  total   impression and  alleviate the  tedium often  produced by  the  predictability of  the  end  of  each poem   once   the   initial   image   has   been established. There  is  no  intellectual  ob­ scurity   whatever,  and   often   the   poems depend on  simple  puns  for  their  resolu­ tion.  The   simplicity   has  its  own  charm, but   hardly  justifies   the   presence  of  so many   similar   poems   in  one   collection.  The   title   is  misleading,  for,   despite   a

8o
 tiptoeing style, it  is with  a  rather leaden determination that   Mr.  Mayne  tramples on  the  mountain of  love.
It is a  pleasant  experience to  feel  en­
thusiastic at  the  end  of  the  first  page  of a collection of poems, and  to continue reading  with   a  growing   awareness   that the  initial  impression was  well-founded. In  Plus Ca Change, Robin  Matthews be­ gins with  five completely satisfying poems "from the  Pacific  Suite" and  moves  on, through some  excellent  descriptive verse, to  the  triumph of  the  book,  "Actualites d'Automne".   Using   mesmeric    rhythms that  blend  perfectly with each  theme  and mood,   and  selecting  imagery   from   both the   world   of   untamed  nature  and   the world   of   terraces,  footmen,  tea   rituals  and  white  piazzas,  Mr.  Matthews places man  somewhere  between   the  two,  both "strange  and   true",  and   always   lonely. The  sea  with:
Its  roving eye of honeyed adoration, Its  salty  hands that move  imploringly Upon the  gray, uncertain shore,
both compels and rejects man, who had "watched the fountains curling over stone."
The sea, with its special imagery  and rhythms, is  the  unifying theme of  "Five Poems  from  the  Pacific  Suite". The  lyric poems  that   follow,  each  a  cry  for  com­ munion,  are   dominated  by  a   sense  of haunting loneliness.  The  culminating poem,  "Actualites  d'Automne", captures the  autumn  moment of  the  seasonal  fer­  tility  myth,  giving  subtle  promises  of  re­ birth    in   the  very   fact   of   decay.   The stanzas  of   this  poem,  with  their  sprung rhythm   and    their    hint   of   rhyme,   are carefully  constructed  in  contrast  to  the free  forms   of  the   earlier   poems  in  this volume.  The fallen seed representing both death and  birth  is the  central ambiguity


of  the   poem,  and  it  is extended  to  the human condition until:

The leaf  contains the  metaphor, and  in The metaphor the perfect visible  resides. Together in  our  ignorance we know
The elegant enigma will not  pass.

None  of  the  other  pamphlets afforded me quite  the same pleasure as Dorothy Livesay's  The Colour  of God's  Face. The poems   in   this   volume   were   composed when  Miss Livesay  was teaching English in  Northern Rhodesia under  the auspices of  UNESCO. During these years  in Africa,   the   poetic   rhythms   which   have always   given   her   poetry   its   particular power  were exposed  to the magnetism of African  songs and  dances.
Yet  Miss Livesay  has not  written  Afri­ can   poetry   in  these  verses  written  after  her   return  to  Canada.   While   her  con­ temporaries have  often  turned to  myth­ ology  for  new  imagery, Miss Livesay has successfully turned to a new environment for  hers. The tree, always a central  image in her poetry, is now a wild fig tree whose "dry   leaves/whistle  November".  The poetry  is a  deliberate fusion  of  imagism and  interpretation, and  because this itself is experimental, it  demands extreme poetic sensitivity for a unification of the aspects  of the  particular and the universal which   is  made   possible  by such  a  tech­ nique.   In   this,  and   particularly  in   her highly  personal  selection  of  imagery  and rhythms inherent in a particular environ­ ment,  lies Mrs.  Livesay's  originality.
HELGA HARDER
 


KLEIN'S SOURCES

Sir,

I   was   particularly   interested  in   the Klein  Symposium (Canadian Literature, No. 25)  because  last January I took part along   with   Miriam  Waddington  and James  Reaney  in  a  Klein  Forum   put  on by the  Hillel  Foundation at  the  Univer­ sity   of   Western Ontario.   This   dealt  chiefly  with  The  Second  Scroll,  and   at that   time   I   became   aware  how   much  the  book  depended  for  its  structure on the story of Rabbi Nachman of Bratzlav's journey   to  Palestine.  I  have   not   previ­ ously  seen  this  parallelism discussed  and it  seems  to  me  so central and  important in  any  consideration of  the  book  that   I think  it  ought   not  to  be  neglected.
There is an  account of this  journey  by Martin  Buber,  included in  his  Tales   of Rabbi   Nachman,  published by  Horizon and  translated by Maurice Friedman. Buber's   work   was   written  in   German about forty years ago, and I don't know whether  Klein   was   drawing  upon   this book or the earlier record of Nachman's utterances collected  by his disciples (Sefer ha-Middoth), but  he certainly must  have known   the   story   in   some  form,   as  he seems to have known most of the Jewish literature and  scholarship in  existence.
Rabbi  Nachman  of   Bratzlav   (I 772-
I 8I o)   was  the  great-grandson  of   Israel ben  Eliezer,  the  Baal Shem  Tov, founder of the Chassidic movement. Rabbi Nach­ man,  born  when  Chassidism had  lost its impetus and   was  degenerating, was  suf­ fused  with  a  passion  to  revive the  failing

OPINIONS AND NOTES



movement. Like Melech  Davidson he was at   times   plagued   with   doubt, and   like Melech  he left  no body of work  but only a few fragmentary expressions  of his feel­ ings.  But  these  vague  similarities  are  of little  concern   in  an  examination  of  The  Second  Scroll.
The  similarities of Klein's book with Joyce's  Ulysses  have  been  remarked, but it  was  Klein's intention, I am  sure,  not to   base   his   work   on   Ulysses,  but   like Joyce  to  base  it  on  the  myth  of  a  wan­ derer.    Joyce   took   his   myth   from   the classical   heritage  well  known   to  Euro­ peans ; Klein  chose  a Jewish  story  raised to the level of myth -not that  of a man  returning home,  but that  of  a man  travel­ ling  outward  and   at  the  same  time  re­ turning,  a   symbol   of   his   people,   to  a spiritual home.
The   mystical   feelings   of   the   Jewish people throughout their  history toward Palestine  are  too well known  to need dis­ cussion here.  The  account of Rabbi Nach­  man's journey,  through  obstacles,  to  the epiphany,  is  a  perfect  crystallization  of them.   Rabbi  Nachman's  yearnings   were intensified    by   the   fact   that    his  great­ grandfather,   the   Baal   Shem   Tov,   had never reached Israel,  but had been obliged to   turn   back   on   the   way.  Apparitions, cherubim with swords, dream-warnings (everyday   phenomena to  mystical  Chas­ sidim)   frustrated  him.  But  the  ghost  of the  Baal Shem  Tov  appears to  Nachman before   his  departure  as  a  sign  that   he may  begin  the  journey.  The ghost directs  him   to  travel   to  Kamieniec   (a  variant spelling  of  Kamenets), and  we  begin  to notice   the   more   obvious   parallels  with Klein.
Of Rabbi Nachman's stay in Kamenets
"it   is  reported  that   he  spent   the   night alone  in  the  city  where   Jews  were  for-
 bidden   to  live  and   that   thereafter  the ban was lifted." Melech Davidson also spends a night  in a Kamenets where  Jews have   been  forbidden  to  Jive -after   a pogrom   in   which   they   have   all   been killed, and  he remains the  last  Jew  alive there.  Klein,  with  a  savage  ironic  twist, has  completed a  cycle.
By spending a night  in a Jewless city before  setting   out   for   Israel,   Nachman has performed a symbolic action that represents  Palestine in the hands of the Canaanites (Nachman's interpretation). "By sending  him  to Kamieniec, his great­ grandfather showed  him  the  way  he was to go." But Melech  has been in the hands  of the  Canaanites in  actuality, and  there  is no  place  but  Israel   where  he feels  he can  go.
The relationship between  Nachman's adventures  and   felech's
one-for-one concurrence. One  of the most important of  them is dealt out  to Melech's  nephew. In  Haifa, Rabbi Nach­ man  is annoyed  by the affectionate atten­ tions  of  a  young  Arab who,  as  it  turns  out  after  a  rather  angry  misunderstand­ ing,  only  wants  to  hire  out   horses  and  donkeys for  the  journey.  Later the Rabbi speaks  to  his  pupils   of  "the   mysterious danger  that  lay  behind  this  episode,  and  the  pupils  understood him  to  mean  that  the  Arab  had  been  Satan in  person."
Klein   uses  this  incident  to  present   a much more explicit and complicated threat. His Satan figure, Settano, who accosts  the  nephew   in  Rome,   threatens him  both  physically  and  spiritually,  try­ ing to seduce him by indirection to betray his  deepest  religious   beliefs.
Nachman's  route   is  roughly   the  one
followed  by Melech, and  the  Rabbi ends his stay in the Holy  Land at Safed.  From there,   in   spite  of   many  obstacles   he

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



reaches   Bratzlav, and  feels  that   his  life has   become   transfigured  and   complete. But he does not die there. When he feels himself   near  death he  moves  to  Uman, whose  entire Jewish  population has  been massacred  by the Cossacks thirty  years before -in  order  that  his soul, after  his death, may  be on  hand  to lift  to heaven the  bound   and   hovering  spirits  of  those who  have  been  slaughtered  before  their time.  This   is  echoed   by Melech  David­ son:   "At   times  I feel ... that  the  num­  bered   dead   run   through  my  veins  their plasma, that  I must  live their  unexpired six million  circuits,  and  that  my  body  be the  bed  of each  of their  nightmares."
Rabbi Nachman dies on the eve of the Sabbath after   Tisha   B'Av  (the  anniver­ sary  of  the  Destruction of  the  Temple, on the  Ninth  day of the month of  Ab) .
"Shortly before,  he  had  moved  into  a new  house,  his last,  where  he looked  out from  a  window  on  to  a garden  and,  be­ yond that, the cemetery-with the graves of  the  thousands who  have  perished   in the  great  Cossack  massacre; he looked  at it  again  and  again  and  said  how  good  it would   be   to   lie   among   the   martyrs." Nachman is ready  with  his  death   to  re­ deem  the  numbered  dead,  to  close their unexpired circuits.
Melech  Davidson also dies on the Sab­
bath  eve  after  Tisha  B'Av.  His  nephew, who  had  gone  to  Mount Zion  with  the elders  of  Jerusalem  on  this  anniversary, and  listened  as they  wept  for  the shrines and   tombs   unredeemed in  the  hands   of the invader, now feels that Melech's death also  opens  up  a  redemption for  the  lost of  his  race:
"The company of men  now he had  left and  was  one  with  the  soil of  Israel,  but here  in  Israel  these were not really tombs but  antechambers to  new  life,  the  mise-
 en-scene  for  an  awakening. Dramatically one  speaker   pointed in  the  direction of the   tomb   of  the   prophet  Hosea,   great prophet  of  social   justice,  and   again  to­ ward  Meron, where  is the  mausoleum of Rabbi Simon   ben  Yochai,  great   patriot and  mystic, pronouncing them  not graves but  halidoms, deaths invested  in life."
This  is a  letter,   not  a  thesis,  so I will
not take time to explore many other similarities. The  ones  I have  shown  are textual  points   mainly:  there   are   many more  of these  as well as deeper  compari­ sons. One  small item  I found particularly interesting was that  one of the little poems shown   to  Melech's  nephew  by  the  poet in  Tiberias:

Madness said  the  deafman watching the man
On  the  podium.

is  simply   a   condemnation  of   one   of
Nachman's parables.
On   dipping,  just  now,  into   my  copy of the Hasidic Anthology (a non-Buber collection), I have  come  to  two  conclu­ sions.  (I) Klein must have known Buber's  stories  very  well, and   ( 2)  Buber's  Nach­ man   is  largely   of   his  own   creation. I can't believe  the  actual  man   who  is on record   in  his  own  Sefer  ha-Middoth as saying: "Toothache comes to a man  who has   no  compassion  for   animals," could truly   have   been   the  model   for   Melech  Davidson, no matter how kindly and well­ meaning he  might  have  been.
I hope   I have  shown   to  some  extent how   deeply   Klein   depended  on   Nach­ man's  journey    (Buber's   version)    as   a model   for   The  Second   Scroll.   Perhaps someone   with   more  scholarly interests  than  I will find  this a profitable direction for  research.
Yours  sincerely,
PHYLLIS GOTLIEB.
