$2.00 per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE
N°·65
Summer,1975



LINKS WITH THE GREJIT TRJIDITION



Articles
BY  GEORGE BOWERING, CHARLES  MURDOCH,  SANDRA D1WA,
KENNETH 1· HUGHES, BIRK SPROXTON, BRANDON CONRON,  1· M.  KERTZER


Poem
BY  MIRIAM WADDINGTON


Review  Articles and Reviews
BY  GEORGE BOWERING, ANN P. MESSENGER, ANDREAS SCHROEDER, PETER STEVENS, ERIC  THOMPSON,  FRASER SUTHERLAND, STEPHEN SCOBIE, PAT  BARCLAY, ROBERT BRINGHURST,
HERBERT ROSENGARTEN, PHYLLIS GROSSKURTH,  LINDA ROGERS,
NORMAN NEWTON, DAVID  WATMOUGH, SANDRA MARTIN, W. H.  NEW



A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW








VICTORIES AND FAREWELLS






THE RECENT TRIAL in Vancouver, in which a Canadian Broad­ casting  Corporation official brought  a  libel suit  (expenses  paid  by  the  CBC) against a Vancouver Sun columnist, Lisa Hobbs, has implications that go beyond the world of newspapers  and  broadcasting  and  affect the literary  world  as well. For the issue was in fact the freedom of criticism; we were faced by the astonish­ ing spectacle of a public corporation,  part of whose duty is to foster and  promote free criticism, not only condoning  but actually  paying for an  attempt  to prevent that  very activity.
The trial itself was, in detail, less impressive than the principle involved, though it revealed more defects in the internal functioning of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation than  its bureaucratic heads had perhaps expected  when  they rashly decided to start on the path of litigation (a procedure which incidentally  was condemned  by every CBC producer with whom we discussed it). But the verdict was of crucial importance, since it showed that  the jury of ordinary  citizens, presumably not critics themselves, respected the right of the critic to make scath­ ingly condemnatory statements  where they appeared  to be necessary.  More  than that,   the  verdict  showed  strong  misgivings among   these  jurymen   and   jury­ women, not themselves involved in the worlds of newspapers or  broadcasting or literature, about  the libel law as it stands in Canada. For  they  found  that  Lisa Hobbs was in fact technically culpable, but assessed damages at $1. The  implica­ tion  is that  what  she said  was  justified and  only the  malformation of  the  law made  her statements  actionable.
One hopes that  the heads of the CBC will take note, and  henceforward  regard criticism as a reason for keeping their own operations  in trim  rather  than  as an excuse for trying to muzzle the critics; in this way they may save from embarrass-


3

EDITORIAL



ment  not  only themselves but  also those of us who, as friends  of the  CBC  and advocates  of its revitalization  as a cultural  service unhampered   by commercial considerations,  found  our loyalty roughly shaken  by this case and  its revelations. One  hopes that  the politicians will also take note and radically  revise the law of libel so that  criticism,  as distinct  from  false accusation,  shall  henceforward   be fully  and  specifically  protected.   One  hopes  finally  that  people  involved  with literature-and especially such professional organizations as the Writers' Union­ will become active in seeking changes in the law to protect writers from  unjusti fied litigation.  In  recent years the generally permissive atmosphere of our society has  meant  that  the  libel  laws  have  been  less ferociously invoked  than  in  past generations;  the decision of Robert  McGall to bring his case against  Lisa Hobbs and  that  of the  CBC to support  it were quite  out of  character  with  the  temper of the  times-these  early  197o's.  But  the  law  remains  such  that  in  a  more restrictive era-such as the signs tell us we shall probably be facing even before
1984-it  can  be  interpreted so  as narrowly  to  restrict  criticism  without   any strengthening of the wording of the statutes  being necessary.
So far as we are concerned,  it is the action  of writers that  is important. They should  not  only  work  for  the  radical  amendment of the  laws of libel  to  give specific protection  to critics; they should also, while the law remains unliberalized, show their  concern  for the freedom  of writing  by declining to sue, and  by boy catting  lawyers who  conduct  libel actions. This  is why the  present  writer  pro tested in Quill & Quire when there was talk of a libel action  in connection  with an  admittedly  despicable  piece referring  to  Margaret  Atwood  that  appeared  in Northern  journey, and found it disturbing  that  an organization  set up to protect the interests of writers, the Writers' Union  of Canada,  appeared  to condone such a suit when it should obviously have been using its energy in demanding a recon sideration  and  revision of the libel law to protect  its members and  others in the literary community.  If we use a bad law, we strengthen  it;  the case is as simple as that.  The  potential  dangers  to writers, editors and  publishers involved in the libel law as it now stands seem so important that  one can only regret the narrow scope of the newly founded  Book and  Periodical  Development  Council,  the one organization  that   unites  all  the  bodies  representing  the  various  factors  in  the literary world. For our common interests go beyond matters of marketing  and financing;  they include  also guarantees  of the freedom and security of the writer, the editor and  the  publisher  in a legal way as well, and this means a review of all the laws affecting them, with libel and copyright taking first and  most urgent place.

4

EDITORIAL



ONE  DOES NOT  HAVE  to be a fanatical  mouth-frothing nation­ alist to bid a joyful farewell to the special privileges granted  under  Canadian tax laws to those inveterately American  magazines, Time and  Readers Digest, and  a farewell also, apparently, to the Canadian edition of Time  at least. The  circum­ stances under which those privileges were granted  have always offered a distaste­ ful  and  humiliating  witness to the subservience of successive  Canadian govern­ ments to American  pressures, and  one hopes that  their  revocation  will be a sign that such subservience is drawing  to an end.
So far as Time is concerned-I cannot speak of Reader's Digest since I have
found  it too dull to have followed its progress-one is also relieved by the end­ ing of an  insulting and  patronizing  pretence. Time  has offered  what  it  claimed was a  Canadian edition;  it has had  an  editorial  staff consisting  partly  of tame Canadians, and  offices in Canada; it has had  Canadian printers working for it. But what gave a fragile appearance of being Canadian to the actual  journal, as it came into one's hands,  was an insert of 4 or 5 pages of  items on Canada at  the beginning of the journal, out of a total length of  between 64 and  So pages. Thus what  passed itself off as a magazine slanted towards Canadians in fact  contained between 5%  and  7%  of material  devoted  to Canada,  selected in such  a way as to be unrepresentative of current  Canadian preoccupations  and  written  with  a pronouncedly  American  slant,  so  that  the  true  Canadian viewpoint  was  more often than  not ridiculed  by  implication. Time  Canada, as it described  itself, has been an imposition on our  patience and credulity one is glad to see coming to an end.  As an  American  magazine  and  nothing  more,  informing  us from  its own point of view of  happenings  and  attitudes south of the border,  Time  will always be welcome in  Canada, entering  without  privileges and  taking  its equal  place beside other American  journals which present a different view of the Union, such as the Nation and the New Republic.
Indeed,  one of the advantages of putting Time in its place is that  rival Ameri­
can  journals may benefit and  we may have readier access to a more varied spec­ trum  of American opinion. The  other advantage,  of course, apart  from the boost to  our  self-esteem of  Canadians, is  that  some if not  all  of  the  advertisement revenue diverted from Time  and  Reader's Digest will certainly flow to Canadian publications.  Maclean's appears  set on  a  course to  become  the first  Canadian news magazine,  a resolution of inner contradictions  that  may  be all to the good, since recently it has  been  floating  in  a Sargasso of  indecision, having  virtually given up  pretensions to being  a  journal  of opinion,  having  cut  connections  (to all appearances) with the team  of "real"  writers which it announced so proudly

5

EDITORIAL



when  Peter  Newman   took  over  the  editorship,  and  having  marked   time  for months as a neither-fish-nor-fowl-nor-good-red-herring features magazines. Much more encouraging  is the reappearance of Saturday  Night, the only large circula­ tion  journal  in  Canada that  has consistently sustained itself both  as a  forum  of opinion  and  as a vehicle for discussing the arts. So, bidding  farewell  to the old Time, let us welcome the  new Saturday  Night.

GEORGE  WOODCOCK














DESMOND   PACEY

While this issue of Canadian  Literature has been going through the  press,  we  have  received  with  great  sadness  the  news  of Desmond  Pacey's  death,  after a long though intermittent illness. For  thirty  years Desmond  Pacey has been intimately  associated with the movement  for the serious study of Canadian writers and writing, and his contribution over that period, as literary historian and  critic and  editor,  was invaluable. In  our next issue we shall devote more adequate space to his achievements;  now we record our  regret,  personally  and  on  behalf  of  all  who  have  known Desmond Pacey and his work.













6


COMING  HOME TO THE WORLD



George Bowering



T.TYPICAL  SETTING lor a poem by D. G. Jone<, in  I953
or 1973, is some rural  place in the Canadian Shield at that  time of year when it
is still winter  but  perhaps  beginning  to  be spring. The  difference  between  the
1953 poem and  the  1973 poem lies in where the poet is situated.  In  the earlier poems Jones is the interpreter  of the landscape. In the later ones he is part  of the landscape.  It is as  difficult as  that.  To  put  it  another  way:   during   his  early career  he  seemed  faced  with  a  dispute-shall  he be "realistic"  or  "mythic"? Later he succeeded in discarding both poses, in favour of being actual.  He learned to listen to his own body, the music it was (forced)  to make in its environment, and  there is the body of his later work, as beautifully trim as any we have heard in this country.
Jones has a reputation  as an "intellectual" poet, though I have never seen that any  critic  has  delineated   that   notion.  Certainly   he  has  always  distinguished himself from  the  majority  of Canadian lyric poets writing in English,  they who are satisfied to tell you how they are feeling right now about some occasional perception.  Jones  has always wanted  to know that,  plus:  what  does it mean?  In that  he is more like our major  poet, Margaret  Avison, save that  he does not have the Christian  faith to go with the fine ear and curious mind. In fact a consecutive reading  of  his work  reveals that  he has always been looking for  a  world-view that  would  seem sensible given  his perceptions  and  emotions. In  this  paper  I hope to find the features of his work that will show his progress from intelligence noetic to intelligence heuristic.
We  move  backward,   through   our  carried-over  European   mind,  that   male
slayer and  conqueror,  to the actual  New World, found  behind  transparent eyes. Peculiarly, for a man  with a Welsh name, or not so peculiarly, Jones  embodies the spirit  of the Anglo-Saxon  poet in  a strange  wintery land,  the first morning

7

COMING HOME TO  THE WORLD



outside  Eden.  For  that  was  the  European   Eden,  not  so much  a  garden  as a garrison,  where the animals  were paraded  in front  of you and  you were allowed to  name  them  and  subject  them  to  your  use. The  consistent development  and improvement  of Jones'  writing  has come about  as the words seeped through  the walls, as the man  became  resolved to living the rest of his life in his own wilder­ ness, himself as explorer, with memories, maybe, of "home". He has come through the struggle to free his mind's  eye from his mind, to the job of minding the poem, which has its own life, no matter  what you name it.
Much of the struggle had to do with the methods of learning. Jones decided courageously to acknowledge  his traditions,  both as Wasp and as Canadian poet. (Many   of  us didn't even  know  that  there  was such  a  thing  as a  tradition of Canadian  poetry.)   Jones  read  the  past,  and  one  can  find  traces  of  loyalty to those  other  men  who  signed  their  initials  to their  poems-D.  C. Scott,  F. R.
Scott,  A. J. M.  Smith,  E.  J. Pratt.  In  his first book, Frost on the Sun  ( 1957),
you may find this echo of (Charles)  G. D. Roberts:

Of sluttish waves that sidle and lick
With insolent ease the indolent rock

which  is meant  to  copy  the  sound  of the  water,  but  more  obviously resembles
Roberts' humanizing and abstracting of nature.
That   first  book,  collecting  the  work  of  a  poet  who  was  also  a  university literature  student,  exhibits the early lines of the conflict in Jones' poetics. In  the introductory  poem,  "John  Marin" (which  must  have  been  written  later  than most of the book) , the poet announces that he wants to make poems as particular and  interdependent as the  rest of nature; that  is, not  poems about  nature,  but poems to  take  their  place in nature -as  William  Carlos  Williams said,  not to copy nature  but to imitate  nature. So the poem begins with a smart identification of strophe with plant and bird, themselves difficult to separate:

Do poems too have backbones: stalks of syntax on which sway the dark
red
or blue images­
a flock of red-wings
swaying in the alders -

(though   he subsequently  messes this up  a little  by retreating  into  a simile that undoes  that   natural  knitting,  "their   common  passion".)   Com pare  some  lines

8

COMING HOME TO  THE WORLD



written  in  1970,  where  the  urgency  to fabricate  metaphor  has been  overcome, and  the poet simply submits  to his own functioning in the place and  poem:

I am led into the winter air
by certain nameless twigs, as bare as we are. I would find

them also in our mouths.

(Canadian  Forum, June 1972)

You  see there  the  twigs  are  certain,  they  do  not  have  to  be  broken  down  to nature to advantage undressed.
But  in  the  first  book  we  are  met  by  the  Popery  (pot-pourri)  of syllabics, iambics,  prescribed  stanza-structures,  etc. They  are competent  as those things go as  late  as  the  fifties, but  the  things  said  are  often  the  directors  of  the  things observed  there,   the   latter   becoming  exempla,  or   the  fibre  of  an   extended metaphor. Sonnets,  rondels,  the  plungings of a student  poet trying  to say some­ thing  serious-you  must  give him that.  He gets observably more  interesting  as the  forms  assert  themselves over  the structures-in that  way  Jones  became  a most serious and  worthwhile  demonstration  of the great leap forward  in postwar Canadian literature.
There  is a  great  deal  of  energy  being exercised in  that  first  book, so much being  tried  out,  so much  desire on the young poet's  part  to meet,  perhaps,  the cosmos, especially  the  portents  in  its immediate  manifestations,  birds,  the  sun, snow. Hoping  to be equal  to the real itself, Jones brings to the poetry-making  act all  the  tricks of  poem-writing.  He is performing  them -lay a  Greek  name  on the landscape  here, a simile there, a couplet  beside that.  But the  poem, not the poet, is made  to live in that  scene. We can see him equally  walking  away from it. But  I  remember  reading  Frost on the  Sun  in  the late  fifties and  saying that Jones  had  opened  up  the  fist of the  prescriptive  poets. The  book itself was an agon.  He  knew what  he wanted  to do, to speak of nature  without  words. Even in the trussed-up  poems he spoke of principles he was only later to enact:

the bones of animals are luminous and dry­
perceived as clearly as the sharpest stone

-just like the later  poems, where the heaps of chosen adjectives were left behind.
It is a curious  (subjective?)  thing that  you can  feel Jones' mind  moving more than  you can  most  poets',  and  thus  you  can  feel  the  difference  between  the tangled lines that try to feed rime-schemes, and the others that attempt to re-enact


9

COMING HOME TO  THE WORLD



perceptions.  In  a  poem such  as "The Phoebe"  you are made  to feel the  poem trying  to  trace  mind-perceptions in  verse prosody, as the subject  bird  is said to have its body and area  wed to "configuration  of the mind." In "Northern Water Thrush" the  birds  trace  "the  old/  calligraphy  of living things," destroyed  every human  year.
The  sun,  too,  is an  image  for  human  intelligence, and  it appears  over  and over,  usually a  winter  sun  (the  one found  in Ontario  and  Quebec), appearing in  a  haze,  muted,  falling,  a  lighter  grey  than  the  surrounding grey. It is an intelligence  that  clearly  has sufficient power, but that  is fuzzed by local weather conditions.  If there  is frost on the sun, and  we are under  its nutrient, what  are we to  make  of that  picture?  Are  we at  the stage where the sun is beginning  to melt the frost, or where the sun is being cooled? The centre of Jones' work tries to  resolve the  dialectic  between  that  pessimi'!m and  that  hope. The  influence of Robert  Frost can  be guessed at here, and  the worlds of the two poets are not all that  far apart,  vestiges of Puritan  New England  and U.E.L.  Canada. The  reader can't  help noticing  that  in these early poems Jones views nature  from and  in his solitude:

It is not love reveals the world
Or lays one naked with the earth,
It is aloneness when all loves are laid to bed And in the uncompanioned darkness every star Submits her abstract maidenhead.

That poem refers to Paul  Klee, but  also to Frost on the Sun.  Other  people are not found  in this book. But in the later  poems they are, and Jones then  calls on love to reveal the world:

I would have you smile, and see the sun arrested, rest among your bones

("The Birdhouse," 1972)

The  early loneliness outside of Eden is met by an earth, nature  that  endures, and Jones  consistently  shows it  enduring despite men's  depredations.  It is certainly not   the  monster   nature   of  Margaret   Atwood's  Survival,   but  an  observable reminder  that  the  power  is there,  that  it does not need to assert itself at  men's expense, that  the  rock doesn't  change  simply because a man sees Hermes  in the rock. The  city may be a monument  or graveyard  of stones but the snow falls on it as on the pre-cambrian rock.


IO

COMING HOME TO  THE  WORLD



In his best moments during  the early period, Jones approaches that  power with the  modesty he learned  from  the  Imagists, a decision he brings to great  grace in Phrases  from Orpheus.  "The Lilypad"  is a  poem  as lovely as its subject,  that rides with the water and  never cleaves it. Sometimes one thinks of Souster's keen eyes in the middle of the gritty metropolis:

... a table and a kitchen chair, zinc tubs
a broken basket filled with snow make of this half-lot a
disreputable paradise within the machined residential row

This can be Eden nor is it out of us.
And maybe the late-winter,  early-spring poem, "Thaw", is the most important poem  in  the book, not for the  poet  (it is of pretty conservative  art)   but  for the man/poet. The  image  is lovely, little,  tentative,  the  small sign of large  unseen (e) motion, the Wasp condition, its problem and beautiful strength:

When the snow melts to the ground leaving between hillocks of snow
many little pools where
green grass and dead leaves grow,
the currents which run from pool down to pool are too slight to be seen,
yet they ripple the pools as though
all earth were trembling in its frame.


IF IT  MAY BE   SAID that  Frost on the Sun  was the  book of a student,  it may be said that  The  Sun is Axeman  ( 1961)  is the book of a teacher. It  contains some of the best poems from the first book, and some of its problems
in  poetics. But importantly, it shows a desire on Jones'  part  to compose longer poems, to get beyond the lyric, and  beyond the stasis imposed by presentation  of a mind  willing only to reflect upon a universe. By this time, 1961, Jones sounded to these western ears as if balanced  between British and American  influences, the former   somehow  connected   with  his loyalty  to  Smith,  Scott,  etc.,  the  latter revealed in his ( mis) quotation of William Carlos Williams.
The  English  connection,  with  the voice of Auden  somehow  heard  along  the
line, seems to have  produced  two essentially "academic" features: the fact  that


I I

COMING HOME TO  THE WORLD



so many  poems work  upon  extended  metaphors,  and  the  pose of the  detached sensibility. The former  might  be found in the contorted  conceits that  the descri tion  and  complicated  rime  scheming  manufacture in "Blue  Jay  in Haliburton" ("Everywhere some small design/  Erupts,  and the profusion foals/  Chaos on the mind"). The  latter  is obvious  in  these Audenish  lines about  a  small  Ontario
village:

Yet houses and the bridge
Are well kept up:  the boys and girls
Are not too lonely, I suppose ...

The  result is that  despite  the  place names the places often do not appear Cana­ dian,  or more importantly, do not sound as if they had contributed to the compo­ sition of the  poet's  blood and  bones. "The  Return" is a  neat  I 780  poem about the Gaspe. "The River:   North  of Guelph" (inviting comparison, naturally,  with Purdy's  "Country North  of Belleville")  is an exercise in syllabics, wherein gentle Wordsworth   is  found,  so  odd  in  the  Canadian  landscape.  Perhaps   the  best example  of  the  detached   and   academic   poem  is  "Antibes:   Variations   on  a Theme", wherein  abstract  noun-phrases  lie dead  where one  wants  to find verbs or where the lyric with its unlikely verbs sags into reflection, a reflex of the cortex wanting  to  respect  itself. Often   the  abundant similes are  used  to  connect  the natural scene  with  the  Hellenic  one  in  the  teacher-poet's  head,  leaving  in our museum a picture of the academic  back home on the family farm.
The   problem,  of  course,  is  Jones'  decision  to  appear   as  observer,  to  keep
himself hidden  from  any  eyes looking back. It is an unhappy  mode invented  by critics  and  poets in  the  period  I 9I 8-I 945, when  it became  horribly  easy to be hurt  on  exposure.  It  unfortunately met the Anglo mind  like an  epipsyche,  and gave  us the  neo-neo-augustans in  Britain  and  the  New Criticism  in the  U.S.A. In  Canada a little later  we heard  and  rewarded  the genteel mystified  despair of poets such  as Wilfred  Watson  and  Douglas Le Pan.  I  think  that Jones  instinc­ tively distrusted  the mode but found that  he had to punch  his way out of its bag with  its gloves on his hands.  Moments  of clarity and actuality  are shared  when he is not concerned with sustaining a metaphor or structure.
In  referring to nature  at this time his favourite abstract  noun is "candour." It is the quality  of nature  most worth imitating. Referentially, the implications  are radical-they lead to acceptance of a fatherless universe, to what Jones calls "a friendly/  Nothingness",   and   they  lead  to  agreement  that   one's  death  will  be nothing new under that axeman, the "old, redundant sun".

12

COMING HOME TO  THE WORLD



But what  of candour  in the making of a poem? The  word means glowing pure white, like the sun, and would seem to ask in a poem for virginal incandescence. AI Purdy  noticed in a review that  Jones' sensibility seemed innocent.  Then  what is he doing  presenting  the persona of a man who may reflect on the coomos with a  mirror  of codified antiquity?  He is a  poem, unseen inside  a  "poet," and  the latter  writes  a "realistic" piece called "Teenagers", tamping  it  with  the  mythic tombstone  line, "Dragon's teeth across the land".  The  piece succinctly illustrates the  agon  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  false  alternatives  of  "realism" and  "myth­ making".   The   poem  inside  appears   as  the  everpresent  sun  reflects  from  an undeniably  authentic  and  happenstance  mirror  (also appearing as a final image) in the aforementioned  "The River:  North of Guelph". For two pages Jones  has related  his mind  with  the very small river, but  we remain  suspicious because of certain   British-anthology   language.   However,   the   brilliance   of  Jones'   later breakthrough is foreshone in the found image at the end of the poem:

A tin funnel,
pitched into the middle of the stream, catches the light
and sends it back

Say  what  you like about  the  metaphorical  opportunism  of the  object  found  in the water-I am convinced that the poet did not throw it in.
In  the notes on Jones in 15 Canadian  Poets (I 970)  Gary Geddes and  Phyllis Bruce say that  in  Axeman  the poet found metaphors  that  are "organic,  drawing the  reader  toward,  rather  than  away  from,  the subject". Except  for  the  word "organic" I would agree, though  I would say that our attention  is more rewarded here  by observing  the  discoveries than  the  results. "For  Fran oise
justly well-received  poem,  a  lovely study  that  looks forward   to  the  sculptural confidence  found  in  Phrases  from Orpheus.  In  it  the  poet  has found  the  form that  gives that  desired  candour   to the  formality  of presence  he always  felt  he must have. The  poem is not simply still-life, not simply domestic -the actuality of the images of vegetables, daughter,  kitchen, opens the universe to the reader's senses, and  thus  to  his imagination.  "For  once things  are  what  they  are.... " Two  pages later  a "Poem  for Good Friday"  asserts the natural winter/spring landscape  against  Christian  metaphor,  that  theft  of  the  senses that  can  be so easily allowed. An irony lurks around  the poem, but the poem does announce a primacy  of  perception  over interpretive  myth-counting. It is significant  that  in

COMING HOME TO  THE WORLD



these  poems  Jones  lets  it  be  known  that   he  would  like to  avail  himself  of  the painter's aptitude. I am  reminded of what  Henri Michaux wrote  on  seeing  his first Carribbean port:

Only  painters  can  get  much  out  of that  first moment  of contact  with  a strange place. Drawing,  colour  is everything,  and  this suggests itself then  and  there. This pate  of  God-knows-what, well,  that's  nature-but  objects,  no, not  a one!  It  is only after  mature,  detailed  inspection  from different  points of view that  you come up with a name. A name is an object which you have detached.
(Ecuador, 1970)

Of  course  one  cannot  detach anything from  nature  without  detaching  oneself from   most  of  the  rest.  That is  the  lesson  that   Jones  was  learning as  well.  In Butterfly  on Rock  he mentions more  than  once  Robert  Frost's  statement that  we must  give ourselves  to the land  in order  to receive its gifts. I think  that  Jones  goes further on  that  implication, believing  that  one  becomes the  land  and  vice-versa. In   an  eight-section  poem  called   "Snow   Buntings" the  birds  become  confused with   earth, snow,   stones,   flowers,  wood,  grain,   grass  and   seeds.  The   poet  is addressing a  sculptor, in  whose  participatory  mind  the  confusion  should   take action. The  message, finally, is to imitate, not to copy, nature:

You must lie down in the dark
In the naked fields.
You must think of the birds

And make them as you will.

Such   imitation  calls  not  for  surrender  but  for  integrity   of  the  person  within integration with the rest of nature.
Just  so the  earth  is seen  to respond  to a wintery  April sun in "Standing in the April  Noon". And,  significantly, actual  people appear in this letter-poem. In fact, that  is how  Jones  finds  a  way  to  break  out  of  the  frozen  ground, to  compose poems  addressed  to people,  those  world's  actors  who  never showed  up in the first book. A tentative opening to them  is made in another important poem, "Soliloquy to  Absent  Friends". (To conjure personal  history  again,  I remember remarking that  it  seemed  the  most  important poem  in  the  startling anthology, Poetry 62.) It  begins  with   an   admission   of  the  drear   winter   soul,  and   resolves  that,   as Margaret Avison  puts  it,  "Nobody stuffs  the  world  in  at  your  eyes./  The  optic heart  must venture: a jail-break/ And  re-creation."
Geddes  and  Bruce  say that  in Axeman  "a hostile nature is presented, one that
IS   stunted  and   barren, mute   and   unsympathetic." But  I think   that   they  are

COMING HOME TO  THE WORLD



extrapolating  from  their  experiences  of  other  Canadian  poets   (see  Atwood's "position  two" in Survival). I would prefer to accept Jones'  term, the "friendly/ Nothingness".  In  the  poem  at  hand,  addressed  to "Micheline" and  "Quixote", there are five sections arranged  as an ode. In section I we have an image of the (mind  as)  leafless fall, the  farmland  grown meaner,  consumed  for this year. In section II the  poet calls for a dropping  of large vain campaigns,  for patience  of one's perceptions, quoting  Williams' red wheelbarrow and agreeing  that so much depends  upon  it.  Section  III speaks of love for small  hopeless things,  the  root retails  that  hold  us  from  drifting  in  the  abyss. Section  IV  is  a  Wordsworth imitation,   a   homely   pastorale   about   humans   who   join   for   warmth   in  a (temporarily) frozen land. Section V ends:

Let us be bare, Let us be poor,
such poverty makes honest souls, and solitude is capital for love.
Out of that silent contemplation of the trees,
amid the vast candour of the snows, rich in loneliness, will come
drenched in sunlight, as from empty seas,
myriad wings and leaves -as though our tongues grew green with language and informed a world.

That  synthesis and  re-creation  thus called for make  the theme  demonstrated  in the art  of Jones'  most  recent  poems. So the  poet's imitation  of nature  then  will call for winter  patience,  the promise of an uttered spring, faith  and  works totally depending  on  the  primacy  of  perception,  the  world and  language  as  Merleau­ Ponty describes them, not as the tool-makers would use them.


BUT IT IS NOT EASY to make that  jail-break, to step out of the mind-forged garrison.  In fact the way out is no door or gate-it is a tunnel, deep underground, through  the  permafrost,  through  the  alienated  Anglo  psyche, oh
yes, through  the museum  he and  his ancestors have gathered  down there. That's the voyage Jones makes painfully in Phrases from Orpheus.  It is a hole once dug for  Lazarus,  Odysseus, and  Jesus,  part of whose sufferings had  to be the stories that must be told, the dark dreams that must be turned into song.
The story was hinted  at in a spooky poem in Axeman, "Little Night Journey",
in which the soul meets and  becomes the Hadean  boatman-fisherman in moody

COMING HOME TO  THE WORLD



cloud night. While the vocabulary  is detached,  the rhythm and  rimes give power to the  "statement" that  real  (underworld) life begins when  the day's commerce and  reason lie down  to die awhile. One is finally not convinced, because the poet stays awake, using the simile, he is like  Lazarus, at this point describing, finding literary  parallels to the psychic underworld  experience, the mind still maintaining that   it  is only  a  resemblance  observable  through  conscious thought   about  its shadow  self. But Jones  does speak  of having  the experience  prior  to the  poem, through  which "the  fisherman  glides, my soul in his eyes." The subconscious may be  alive  in  the  landscape.  The  soul  vampirically  becomes one  with  the  soul­ fisher. It is such  a  scary  dream   that  the  poet  insists on  the  conscious  mind's control of the poem. Later  he dares go back to sleep, to give himself even to that strange new land outside Eden.
And  inside Adam.  I  mean  for God's sake, Adam's sojourn  outside paradise is Odysseus'  trip  or  Orphic chase  through  Hades.  The  main  thing  that  makes it possible to survive, to find any surcease, is connection with other  people, the old Hemingway  theme. Phrases  from Orpheus is blessed with an unusually good dust jacket  note,  where  we are  prepared  for  poems evoking "affection  for  particular people and  things and for the creative  power of life that  demands  the death  and passing of those things."  We are  prepared  to meet the theme of "one's  isolation, or  imprisonment   within  the  self, when  confronted  with the  difficulties of  com­ munication   and  communion   and  with  death." And  there  is a  hint  of  Jones' jailbreak,  the assertion  that  "time  and  change  are the essence not the enemy of life." It  is for the thought  and  work on these matters, as well as for the very fine craftsmanship of the verse, that  I find this to be one of the best books of poetry yet made in this country.
One  can't  help feeling gratified to find that once again here the clear attention to voice as the base for form opens for the reader a clear vision of the materials and  thought  presented. A naked strophe takes its place in the field beside a sunlit rock. The  particulars  of the  verse imitate  human  speech, and  speech is nature, to advantage undressed if you like. I am suggesting that Jones' welcoming of life (his  argument, what  it means, etc.)  depends  upon  the  bright  (candid)  sharp profile of his line and  stanza  in these poems-I don't  think  that  anyone could read  them  aloud  and  be confounded  by the voice that  is articulated. It  is the clarity  of Yeats, Pound,  and  Williams, the music of the human  voice that  makes the sun rise in the morning.
Part  of the advance  is made  by the class of the language. Academic  inversions
and  circumlocutions  are  dropped   in  favour  of  highly vocal  exclamations  that

16

COMING HOME TO THE  WORLD



remind one  of Williams-"What a ruckus!" Authentic personal slang  finds  its way in  now,  and  brings  the  poems  home, so that  after  the  poet  refers  to a  "two­ bit  creek," one  feels with  him  "a  new  respect  for/ Metals,  rare-earth, salt." But most  of the  advance is in the integrity of the syllable, line and  stanza,  particulars that   respond   to  the  rhythms of  a  voice,  part  feeling,  and  once  into  print, part  ideogrammatic.
Jones  demonstrates the  advance in  his craft  early  in  the  book,  in  an  exercise­ poem  called  "Animals" -are  they  animals  or poets?-and the  reader is hereby instructed to read  it aloud,  to learn  to read  the rest of the book, to hear in his ear the great  purchase and  leverage  on natural metaphor that  the  poet  holds with  his punctuation, for instance, including the cadences.

So slight a thing as a new poem can move mountains.

There is a faith  that  is so much  more  poetry's  province  than any  old  description of a mountain.
Yes,  he  finds,  you  can  still  take  the  cosmos as your  subject, but  not  as your equal  or  counterpart, as the  earlier  poems  tried  to do-rather  as your  place  of
action, of actuality, or yourself as its place of action:



all things
 And so

Deliquesce, arrange,  and rearange in field.

So  he says in  "Mr Wilson,  the  World," another "poetics" poem  addressed to an artist.  One  may  enter  the  act  of re-arranging and  thus  enter  the  process of world and  the  role  of artist,  such  a  thing  more  engaging  for  the  reader than the  cool detachment seen earlier. Look how Mr. Wilson's music is made from  mineral, vegetable and animal (all moved by spirit breath) :

Enough if Mr. Wilson's pleased, if brass, if reeds,
If skins of animals and steel
Strings

Translate his birdtracks into sound ...

Birdtracks, indeed.  That is so much  more the real, making  or finding of metaphor in the  world,  than  bipolar  similes that  use the world. "To imitate the  process and to  apprehend/ The  ephemeral substantiality of things.  Enough," says one  artist

COMING HOME TO THE  WORLD



to  the  other.   (Italics mine.)  He  is the  Orphic artist,  in  his loneliness  singing  to enact  his attachment to all the mutable world:

Have a sense of the void through which pours, Molecular, vertebrate,  cellular, on wind or in wave, The  host whom the lovers inherit-of that solitude

In which there cohere

All things.

It is a beautifully crowded solitude.
It is  Adam's acceptance of  the  void  that   has  become,  with  love,  world.  In "The  Perishing Bird," another  of  the   poet's  more  familiar  lyrics,  we  find  a refutation  of  Yeats'    "Sailing  to   Byzantium."  Jones   says  that   Yeats'   timeless natureless refuge  is a  hell,  a  place  where  only  the  mind  is alive,  the  senses and body  emotions  dead, a  hell  more  dreadful than  the  dread  of death. He  chooses the  wild  bees over  the  golden  bees, and  though  it is sad,  places himself in death's kingdom, where  one  may  have  a  place for feelings, so one  may  feel at  least sad. Jones  is a  romantic all  right,  but  not  a  Platonic yeamer-who  would  want  to get  back  into  Eden   when  all  your  dying  friends  are  out  here?  This  earth  is his certain   death, and  it  calls  up  love. "To en joy what  we must  suffer" is to make songs such  as does the  perishing bird,  the mind  in time, Orpheus' haunt.
So  Jones  does  explore   the  earth   of  the  exile  in  these  poems,  but  we are  all exiles,  that  is a  portion of  our  friendships. He  speaks  of  loss and  isolation,  but also of  how  to  do  something with  them,  not  over  them.  If there  is an  Orpheus there  must  be  a  Eurydice, if an  Adam  an  Eve. She appears now,  as the  poems attempt to find  flowers growing among  the  pre-cambrian rocks. In fact, in "View from  my Window"

The hillside has been hidden
And the stones
Come up out of the snow
Like flowers.

There is a  lovely  image,  ambiguously optimistic and  ironic   (don't choose one)
as in the resolution  of the title poem, which we will come to.
So the  items of nature are  no longer  pathetic, but  joined and  celebrated. That change, as it involves  the  poet  and  his poems, is the source  or energy  of hope, or at   least  hope  of  reconciliation. The   poems  are  still  set  in  winter   and   before hovering spring,  but  now  "We shall survive/ And  we shall  walk/ Somehow into

COMING HOME TO THE  WORLD



summer."   Somehow-there's  resolution  and  qualification   in  that   word.  The earlier  poet Jones  was, with  his detachment  and  brainy  irony, an idealistic, and a stoic. Now he is a stoic, but  he says "I thought  there were limits to this falling away,/  This  emptiness.  I  was wrong."  His poetry is now a part  of that  process, not its opposite, not its dreamy  redemption.  Poems are not finite, but  constantly metamorphose   themselves. They  are  not  signs of the  poet's  control  over  (his) nature; being inside nature, they are process:

The spirit is thirsty, drinks
When we least are aware

And  the words beginning  the following love poem to an  Eve may speak for the poet or the poem:

I have nothing to give you but a place to stand. I will be nature and uncritical.
You may walk in me and be alone.

The songs of Orpheus are not sung against fate, but like those of Jones' admired birds, part  of the cosmos' motion. It is good to recall that  Orpheus may not look back,  and  that  while  Eden's  Adam  was given  the animals  to use or dominate, Orpheus  was given the grace to call them to his circle, to be among  them.  It is by this grace that  he stands for the coming of a man into adulthood, where death and  the rest of life are  realized, the new home. "For  Robert  Duncan" speaks of
a circle of music makers,  Duncan,  Louis Zukofsky, Zukofsky's son  the violinist,
and Jones. The musicians are

making private worlds public and digesting the public
privately-making them real

-that is, not describing them.
Reviewing the book in The  Canadian Forum (AugustI g68), Douglas Barbour wrote of Jones' "proper poetic objectivity". Proper  the poems may be, if we go to the  root  of  the  word,  but  objective  they  are  not,  no  more  than   is Orpheus' lyre-plucking simply a  comment  on the  morning's  beauty. Barbour  also says (I am paying attention  to his review because I think that  it represents a wider mis­ hearing  of  Orphic   Jones)   "His  words are  never  chosen for  their  sound  value alone:  they are all there to serve the meaning as well." Just  about  every term of that  sentence is off the mark. Barbour's  positing of choice and  the two channels of sound and  meaning  just don't  apply to Orpheus.  In  him is the  best  example

I9

COMING HOME TO  THE WORLD



of meaning  as the  action  of sound.  Here  is the  world of actuality,  not  simply reality, not only truth,  not those observations of the rich tourist from Eden.
That  safe garden  is scorched in "To  Eve in Bitterness". The  poet says now he is not Adam  but  the Angel who must bitterly destroy Eden. But in his bitterness he is a poet, whose ghost is the memory of the garden,  Orpheus' forbidden  path which  can't  be  retraced,  and  whose muse is the spirit,  the  breath  of  Eve,  the garden's  last creation,  now mortal.  She is an earthly, not  a heavenly muse. The singer is Orpheus,  not Apollo. Even the sun, Jones' old favourite, is now imaged as a moving woman. They are the motion of the world, not its equal.  In speaking to his love in "En  guise d'Orphee", the poet does not say he will make verses that try to equal  her  beauty,  but  that  while she walks into the morning  "like a girl/
From a long illness",

There my song
Shall burst upon you like the god.

In the title poem the Orpheus we see is largely the Orpheus in the underworld, but the story's tension holds the promise of the musician in his forest. The under­ world is that  adult  winter-knowledge  of his own life, the  present and  its future,  face forward.  The  poem must be, then, large, not simply lyric. It is sixteen pages long,  Jones'  longest  to  this  time.  It  is a  strophic  poem wherein  all contiguous thought  may  be  gathered  to  present sthenic  ambiguities  of hope  and  suffering that  must be lived and  projected,  not "objectively"  observed and  reflected upon. The  various  margins  of the strophes set two or four story lines in  the same suite of rooms  (stanzas), providing  metaphor  more authentic  than your  pushy similes. It  is a  shuffied ode,  one  might  say. Read  aloud,  the  poem  does make  Orphic music, the tones clearly leading all thought.  It is rather arcane  (and  thus properly the subject  of a separate  essay),  and  one is led to believe it  by the care of the musical notation,  not to be bamboozled  but  to be, literally,  charmed.  Read,  for instance,  page 58:
The distant
sirens, crying in the street
an accident?

a wire

bird whistles in the wood
I hear
Sirius calling, or

beyond


20

COMING HOME TO  THE WORLD



I ask
a question of the dog past Cerberus
beyond death's  bark

(Such  beautiful  puns  join with the music in making real metaphor.) The  theme might  be easily passed off as the adult admission and examination  of solitude and mortality.  The  voyage of Orpheus takes place in the sub-sidereal  underworld  of lovers made  mortal  by their  fervour, so "death  ... is but  a door/ open/ to love, makesj love dear."  The  ambiguity  earlier spoken of is made  inescapably  active and   present  because  it  is  not  clever or  described.  At  the  end  the  use of  two margins,   through   which  we  hear  two  voices  mimetically  dependent  on  one another, says that the poet's love is and is not alive in the afterdeath.
But  that  poem's depths  cannot  be walked in this quick  critical  journey.  It  is deep, and has song at its centre, as Carlyle said all deep things do. It is the depth, to shift  a  metaphor,  of nakedness.  When  you want  to speak of the surfaces of things, people or feelings, you exert detached rational control over your materials, like Pope dressing nature  to  (your)  advantage,  leading the very birds into  your limed  fitting  room.  As in  his earlier  poems, in  this  book  Jones  records  many images  of  rural  nature-seasons, weather,  soil, growth.  But  now  there  are  so many  images of nature  denuded,  bare branch,  stone, the great  naked  Canadian Shield  that  does not  provide  welcoming  habitat  for  furze  or  figure  of speech. Feelings, like signs of life, must be tenacious and carefully searched  for, "deep  in the silence/  Which is continuous sound."
The  image  of nakedness  has special emotional  meaning  for someone  writing
out  of  the  Anglo  puritan   and  academic  backgrounds.  It  bespeaks  strong  and once-infibulated  desire. But it is the way to join rather  than  observe the  earth: "This  is the  nakedness  that  I  would share,"  says Jones  of the  late-winter  rural scene. It  calls for re-creation,  bare earth,  empty page. In  "The Stream  Exposed With  all its Stones",  one of his best-known  poems, the main  image  is what  the puritan  secretly knows, that  there is an "underworld" of dancing  activity beneath
the serene snow:

I tell you
Nakedness is a disguise: the white
Is dark below.

-but  that  realization  comes only with disrobing. Eve's  potential  would  never have been guessed at within the garden.

21

COMING HOME TO  THE WORLD




BuTTERFLY ON   ROCK  ( 1970)  can tell us much  of the place that Jones the poet has come to by the end of the sixties. At the same time as the book  is the  most  convincing  symbolic  reading  of our  literature we have  seen recently, it states in prose many  of the principles the poet has come to as his own due to the Orphic  voyage.
Paramount among these is the  replacement of the ego. It once peered over the battlements  of the stockade -now it is looking for an explorer's  way across the uncharted  continent.  It must first work its way through the insecurity it feels when inherited  lines are rubbed  out. Jones speaks of that experience for the early Cana­ dian  poet  (and  often  for  the  more  recent one),  of his "sense of exile,  of  being estranged  from the land  and  divided  within oneself." For American  parallels see William Carlos Williams' In the American Grain.
Jones makes use of Frye's picture of the garrison of culture  vs. the hostile land,
and  gives the sense that  he has learnt  to identify with the savages who were seen not as inhabitants but as representatives of that unwelcoming surround. One must, he says, learn to let the wilderness in-that is the only way that  the mind-forged prison can be escaped. Such is the preoccupation of Eastern Canadian writers and critics in  this  age,  and  Jones  is still writing  within  the  tradition, though  at  its vanguard. That  tradition includes the sentiment of Robert  Frost suggested earlier, the desired realization "not  only that the land is ours, but that  we are the land's." Jones  adds  that  the  re-settled  poet  has to leave  his garrison  of  Mediterranean words and listen in the seeming silence, where he will hear a voice he will discover to be that  of his own poems, and  that "the voice that demands  to be heard is the voice of the  land." For  cross-reference  read  Earle  Birney's  poem, "Way  to the West".
It  is  not  surprising,  then,  to  note  that  the  word  "courage" has  become  as important to Jones  as the word "candour" once was. It is the courage of Adam, "not  the  courage  to resist so much  as the courage to accept,  not the courage  to defy but the courage  to affirm, to love, and celebrate a world that sooner or later demands  of them the sacrifice of their lives. Only within such an affirmation can man  discover his identity  and  community with the rest of nature." The  emphasis is on heart and discovery, thus mortality-and such realization calls for its repre­ sentation  in the form  of the verse. Jones' verse becomes, around  this time, open and  vocal,  responsible  and  vulnerable  to  changes  in  the  weather,  exterior  or interior.
In  Butterfly  on Rock  Jones  says that  Canadian  literature  has always been the


22

COMING HOME TO  THE WORLD



story of Adam and  Eve because the land seemed such an outside-of-Eden experi­ ence. The U.S.A. may have been seen at one time as a new Eden for a lot of reborn Adams,  but  Virginia  does not  have the snowy Canadian Shield as its  backbone. Whereas  the early Canadian writers, such as Susanna  Moodie,  might  look back upon  England  as lost Eden, the later generations  had no such dreams to fog their landscapes, or they should not have. Proteus is awake. The  Ark has landed. "The  land  is both  condition  and  reflection, both  mirror  and  fact."  It  is  no use trying to  make  it into  a  New  England   (see James  Reaney's  "The  Avon  River  above Stratford, Ontario")  or to try to impose on it an ideal order. Jones decries "the  impulse to impose upon nature,  upon the life of the land as upon human  life, an ideal  order."  The  implications  for a  poetics are clear:  no  I 8th  century  English verse forms for Northern  Ontario, or-don't  dress your loved one like Ariadne, for the frost will freeze her diaphanous gown to her blue body.
Adam  had  to accept both  the world and  his mortality. The  necessary courage
is the courage to live without "conquering" nature, knowing one's human limita­ tions in a huge and  maybe frightening,  and  finite, world. For Jones  the courage seems to  involve  the  necessity of fear  and  bitterness, the  possibilities  that  were unsuccessfully avoided  by the stance of detachment  at one time. He admires, in the writings of other  people, a sense of joy that  has come through suffering con­ nected with death  and its message concerning our own. Acceptance  of death  and acceptance  of Eve and  the children, that  is the "double hook" of birth.  For man the "first days of Creation ... of naming and discovering" come after the gates are closed behind  him,  for  the  poet as for the  father  of our  line, a "jailbreak and re-creation.''



E     written since Phrases  from Orpheus are songs of a man  who is once again  above ground  and  now at  home there. The  lines and stanzas  are  more thoroughly  integral,  fully used, than  ever before, and  they are shaped  by the  poet's  full  physical faculties, as inevitably  authentic  as the inter­ reactions of wind and tree-stand.
The scenes are still generally winter, or the last days of winter, but now winter
rimes with the rest of the year and not allegorically with poet's gloom:

The climate of the flesh is temperate here
though we look out on a winter world
(Canadian  Forum, June  I972)

COMING HOME TO THE  WORLD


I have already mentioned the ending of this poem  ("Also") : I am led into the winter air
by certain  nameless twigs, as bare as we are.  I would find

them also in our mouths.

The  synthetic connection of self with  nature makes  homely  the  ambiguity found in  the  Orpheus poems.  The  twigs  are  naked,  yes, but  at  the  same  time  they  are the   part   of  the   tree   that   will  do  spring's  job,  announce the  re-creation. The mouths,   passages  of sustenance and  poetry,  were  mentioned in  "A  Brief  to  the People," written a year earlier:

0 let our mouths against the silence open into silence
we can share and be

(Canadian Forum, June  1972)

I believe that  the  poet  means  that  last phrase,  "share and  be",  to speak of process, of  cause.  "As  a  mouth I serve," said  Layton, but  in  his  poem  he  became  the spokesman of  nature. I think  that  Jones'  position  has  appeared past  that  two­ part   image  of  the  world.   It is  a  placement of  himself,  his  love,  his  poem,  in nature, as nature.
This  means  that the  poem  cannot be ripped  off like birch  bark.  "The Route Out" (in  Made  in  Canada,  1969)  is a  good  example of  a  poem  whose  rime grows  rather than being  laid  on, as it was in the early  poems. It is now the fabric rather than   the  cut  of  the  fabric. The poet  and/or the  land  is singing,  neither explaining nor  explained, that  is never  laid  out  flat  for  us, none  of that  position for  rapine as dear  to the  dirty  mind.  I mean  even  in a poem such  as "Fiat Lux" (Arts   Canada), in   which   ancient  Greek  stone   is  the   primary material, the unnamed mythic life is enate, it grows from the elements.
Jones'   birds  are  still  here  too,  but  now  they  speak  for  themselves.  In  fact,  in
an  unpublished  poem  called  "Winter  Walk," they  teach  language to  the  com­
poser, who walks along a horizon

perhaps  to discover
the language of a few birds, the shape of our breath, a relation

uncentred

24

COMING HOME TO  THE WORLD



-that is, not the mute  cosmos centred in the  poet or his exhalation. The frag­ ments of birdsong and  smoke wraith  are  part of "one song/  an endless/ protha­  lamium" suggested in  another   poem, and  Jones  now clearly sees the  poems as similar particles, not end-stopped observations on life.
There  are lots of people in these new poems. They  are addressed  in title and
poem;  they are simply in the world. The snow now has signs of people in it, their tracks that mess up a perfect quatrain and let us follow -who is to say that  their steps are  not ours as we put  our  feet into them? Jones  is no longer  the idealist. He is at  home now. In  fact the house has become a very important image. He is living there,  with other  people, no longer a spectre on the rise of the landscape. In  "To  Tory"  (Made in  Canada), a poem addressed  to his sleeping daughter, the  world's  terror   is  shut   out   as  abstract,   while  spring   makes  itself  known concretely to those inside:

The world
continues on its wobbly course and water drips
in the fireplace -spring announcing itself

The  house resembles personal  lif time
"For  this House"  (Canadian   Forum,  June  1972). It  is a  neat  presentation  of Jones'  double  feeling-that the  house will not  endure  through   all  weather's time, but that in it a person can make his own nature's season, grow green sprouts
in February:

I am relieved
that no house lasts

But I am glad
that this house stands
and in the snow

preserves the order of green plants your hands sleeping now
let go

The  poem grows, it can  not be broken into  passages of argument. It grows and changes  as time's seasons do. Jones  has learned  to love to live in his time as he has come similarly to his space.
The  house is where  one lives in the world. It  is no garrison-spring is seen
and  heard  inside, coming  down  the chimney  into  its hearth  and  heart.  In  "A

COMING HOME TO  THE WORLD



Garland  of Milne"  (Quarry, Summer   1g67) Jones writes of the painter  who is associated with the region of woods north of Peterborough  where Jones grew up:

He was at home, sitting
with the small birds around him gathering seeds ...

The  poet says the  painter  gathered  seeds and  "let  the trees stand," no garrison­ builder,  he. "Who flies with  the  whirlwind  is at  rest." Who seeks to defy it is a fool and  a  bad  artist.  Interestingly,  Milne is shown as placing some wildflowers in  a  pickle  jar,  perhaps  to sketch  them.  It  is an  image  that  shows  this  reader three  things that  Jones  feels close to. The  painter  was at  home with  the  joining of the natural  and  the homely. He did not pretend  to leave nature as its "gods" demanded. He  would  have  the  flowers in  that  simple used  jar  whether  he was going to draw  them or not. It is an image of relaxed formality that is Jones' own provmce.
Jones'  poetics are  probably   most overtly  presented  in  an  unpublished   poem called  "Dance  for  One  Leg",  which looks at a picture of a man  with a cast on his leg. A broken  leg is natural, and  the mending is natural, and  it can  be not imposed  but  co-operated   with  by  the  plaster's  imitation   of  bone.  The   poem
begins:

Not to be driven, above all by oneself
to improvise as fields
forget the glacier and the driven plough and move like milk.
Then  the poem moves to children dancing, to a finding that a break is an occasion
to discover love

(how  often the word "discover," to make naked, appears in these poems)  to this ending:

They dance

the tall man with a cast dances

thus, together

COMING HOME TO  THE WORLD



as estranged bones knit, as fields invested in the driven snow forget themselves

become one flesh.

At home in the flesh, at home  in the land,  at home in the number one, after  all the  enumeration in  Eden  and  on  the  Ark  has  become  only  rumoured  history. D.  G.  Jones  is  proof  that   there  is a  tradition of  English-Canadian poetry,  and that  the tradition is going to be here.



























CANADIAN AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available at
the bookstore
UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
2075  WESBROOK PLACE
VANCOUVER, B.C. V6T 1W5  /228-4741


ESSENTIAL GLASSCO



Charles Murdoch






sEEKING TO  PINPOINf the "e=ntiaJ Gl=co" and attempt­ ing to systematize  his work is a frustrating  task. Over  a  writing  career  of forty years he appears  in  numerous  different  guises. At  one moment  he's "Nijinsky's faun,  fresh from some sylvan adventure"1 and the next he's the bearded  old man on the mountain hurling  down  his tablets of doom. There's the  profligate  youth chronicling  the escapades  of the lost generation  and  the  reclusive poet wrestling with death  and  consciousness in the  Eastern Townships,  the mischievous master of erotica  and  the  elder statesman  of Canadian  letters.  Clearly,  in dealing  with such  a  complex  personality   and   versatile  artist,  it  is  safest  to  begin  at  the beginning.
John  Glassco was born in 1909 into an establishment family that  had  been in Montreal  since  before  the  American  Revolution.  Education   at  Selwyn  House School and  Lower  Canada College prepared  him  to take  his place  among  the English-speaking  power  elite of Quebec  but  he lacked the temperament for this role. Glassco early  decided  to  be a poet and  he had  the  independence  of spirit to rebel against  his fate  and  the craftiness to manipulate parental  dismay to his own ends. At seventeen he quit McGill. Amazingly well-read for his age and thoroughly  acquainted with all the post-war avant-garde literature,  he saw  him­ self as a  surrealist  poet  suffocating  in  Montreal.  After  extorting  an  allowance from  his disapproving father  he set  off to  live and  work among  the  dazzling expatriate literati  of Paris.
Shortly after arriving,  he abandoned surrealist poetry and in a characteristically self-confident  move  decided  to  write  his memoirs. Glassco was very sure  of his untried  abilities and  as it turned  out,  rightly so, for as a record of his next four years we have that  remarkable achievement, Memoirs of Montparnasse, a portrait of an age, a study of youth, and  a very clear picture of the young John  Glassco.
The  Memoirs are outstanding because they manage successfully to be so many
things at once. There  are the people who came and went, Joyce and Hemingway,

ESSENTIAL GLASSCO



Gertrude Stein and Robert  McAlmon, making Paris in the 192o's the improbable centre of English writing. Glassco makes a historical contribution through  the brilliantly  recalled  conversations  about  literature  among  the  people  who  were forging its twentieth  century  form. But there  is more in  the  Memoirs than  just literary history. Primarily  they are an account  of hedonism on a heroic scale, the remembered  joy of a total  indulgence  of appetite.  The  reader  is dragged,  to his own delight,  through  an  exhausting  and  continuous  course of parties  and  esca­ pades of debauchery  and excess. Finally, the centre of interest becomes the young man  through  whose eyes all this is seen, the  not-yet-artist  who  is simply  living and  garnering  experience.
The  book was not written  at the time of the action.  It  was put  together  from diaries  when  the  author   was considerably  older-twenty-one-and awaiting an operation for tuberculosis with a slim chance of survival. The shadow  of death hangs over the Memoirs and there is created an added  piquancy of lost happiness as the scene from time to time shifts back to the silence and sterility of the hospi­ tal room.
This  young man  who assembled his memoirs in  the  Royal  Victoria  Hospital
justifies the  archness  and  arrogance  he showed  toward   his elders  and  literary superiors  by proving  himself a  prose writer  of uncommon  ability.  Louis Dudek has called the  work "the  best book of prose by a  Canadian writer  I  have  ever read".2  Ignoring for a moment the material, one must recognize the technical excellence of the  writing  itself, the  power  to  entrance  and  entertain, and  the ability to select and  edit  while still revealing the entire  picture.
A couple of years are condensed into twenty-six chapters  dealing with probably
twice as many  days. The  narrative  moves effortlessly along  as  adventures are interspersed  with  reflection, conversations, and  portraits.  The  reader's  attention is never allowed  to flag. Both  Glassco's prose and  poetry  are  enhanced   by  his great power to recall totally a situation and reconstruct  its mood. In the Memoirs this is accomplished  by the  use of a dramatization of dialogue  which  does not even pretend  to be a verbatim  account  of the  actual  conversation.  The  author simply withdraws and lets the characters reveal themselves. It is Glassco's greatest ability and the one which gives his scenes such economy and  freshness. It is also an invaluable technique in a memoir with a cast in the dozens. The problem of capturing the  atmosphere  of a  party  is handled  in  the same  way.  Like  Evelyn Waugh,  the  greatest  chronicler  of revels, he achieves success by relying on  the selective presentation  of catches of conversation.
The  first edition  of Memoirs of Montparnasse was sold out  within  weeks of


29

ESSENTIAL GLASSCO



its publication in  1970. The key to its great  popular success lies in  its engaging style. As  an  example, here  is Glassco's  impression  of Gertrude Stein,   at  whose salon  he had  arrived uninvited.

A rhomboidal  woman  dressed  in  a  floor-length  gown apparently made  of some kind  of  burlap,  she gave  the  impression  of  absolute  irrefragability; her  ankles, almost concealed by the hieratic folds of her dress, were like the pillars of a temple: it was impossible to conceive of her lying down. Her  fine close-cropped  head  was in  the  style of  the  late  Roman  Empire,  but  unfortunately  it  merged  into  broad peasant  shoulders  without  the  aesthetic  assistance of a neck;  her  eyes were large and  much  too piercing.

It is this  combination of  impudence and  elegance  that  consistently   charms the reader.
The Memoirs  are  valuable also for what  they tell us about the  man  who, forty years later, won  the  Governor General's Award  for  Poetry.  The book  chronicles an important period  in the development of Glassco's sensibility.  He  went  to Paris to write  poetry,  to  communicate, to  instruct, but  gave  it  up  when  he  found   he was the one who needed  instruction.

I had, moreover, no experience of anything  but ecstasy. I had never known despair or anguish,  which  I looked on as literary  expressions. I had  not endured  hunger, frustration, illness or chastity;  these were the afflictions of others. I had nothing on my  conscience  and  had  never  wept  except  from  loneliness, fright,  or  boredom. How  then  was I  qualified  to write?

He then sets out  conscientiously to acquire experience,  and  abandons himself to a life of self-indulgence which  he considers  the  appropriate course  for  a  man  of his age.  "Half of man's miseries," we are  told,  "result  from  an  insufficiency  of leisure,  gormandise and  sexual  gratification during the  years  from  seventeen   to twenty." Glassco sees himself  as the  appropriate artist,  the  poet-not-quite-yet.
As well as lacking  experience, he shuns  commitment and  dedication which  he sees  as  "so  many   pairs  of  weighted   diver's  shoes-of  no  use  to  anyone   who wanted to remain on the surface of life."  But this existence  on the  surface of life could  not  last,  and   the  commitment comes  unlooked-for when  Glassco  falls  in love with  an American Inillionairess  whom  he himself recognizes as worthless  and a  "mangeuse d'hommes". Here   the  real  learning  experience begins   with   the ecstasy  and  suffering of unreturned love. Glassco links the  experience directly  to the  breakdown of his health and  the  resulting  tuberculosis.
It must  be  remembered that  the  Memoirs,  as they  are  presented, are  filtered
not  only  through the  consciousness  of the  young  man  of the  boulevards but  also

ESSENTIAL GLASSCO



through  the sensibility of the  slightly older  man,  gravely ill and  facing  a  very uncertain  future. The younger man was "still engrossed by detail", while the hospitalized  author  is seeking to communicate,  through  the  Memoirs, a  "more extensive view of life". There  is here a link between action  and  death.  Glassco's surrender to  romantic  love had  destroyed  his  youth,  and  nearly  ended  his  life. Without  this experience he would still have been young and  healthy,  yet he says if he  had  it  to do  over again,  he would  do  nothing  differently.  This  dilemma forms a theme  which  recurs constantly  in  the later  work of Glassco. The  poet, like the young memoirist, seeks the overview, and in the shadow of death  grapples with  the  burden  of consciousness and  the value of commitment.
In  the final chapter,  the author  says he is writing "to  recapture a little of the brightness of those days when  I  had health  and spirits;  for  that  brightness  even seems to gild these long, dreary days." At the same time, Glassco is spreading out his life  before  him,  examining  it,  drawing  conclusions, and   passing  them  on. Working  at  the task single-mindedly  every day,  he has made  a commitment to communication, and  this marks  the end of the apprenticeship of the  artist.



WTH THE  OPERATIONS for tuberculosis, the young man of the Memoirs  disappeared  completely. The  energy, the arrogance,  the self-confi­ dence and the gregariousness were left behind, and Glassco moved to the country, adopting the secluded life of a semi-invalid that  his slow recovery forced on him. He  lived  first at  Baie d'Urfe and  in  I936  moved  to  the  Eastern  Townships, getting  by on a small  private  income supplemented  by a  few dairy  cows and  a rural  mail route. These were empty years for Glassco the artist. Turning his back on the literary world, he was part  of no movement, and  had  no contact  with the Montreal  poets of the  I93o's  and  4o's. A novel was undertaken but  never com­ pleted, and  of the surviving poetry produced in this  period, the earliest  piece we know of was written in  I 940.
Finally, Glassco the artist resurfaces in I958 at the age of 49 with the publica­
tion of The  Deficit Made  Flesh, a book of twenty-seven poems. Since then, hardly a  year has gone by without  the  appearance of some work  written  or edited  by Glassco;  three books of poetry, two novels, the memoirs, three  books of  transla­ tions. It is the beginning of a new career.
The  John  Glassco of the Memoirs  was not a mature  artist. He  had  an  admir­ able  style, complete  technical  command  of  the  language,  lots  of  anecdotes  to relate, but could only speak with authority  on youth. John  Glassco  the  poet was

ESSENTIAL GLASSCO



a long time in developing,  and  when he does emerge, he reveals a sensibility and a wisdom of age, a vision of life that  no young man  could  have. It is a  poetry of the  end  of life, inspired  by the  imminence  of death.  All  his best poems are written from the vantage  point of a hilltop, where the "future is abolished" 3  and where for a prolonged moment a man can tum and suiVey the past laid out before him. The  experiences and  the emotions, the goals and  the motivations  are sifted through  in the light of the  harsh,  newly-realized truth  of death.
The  intolerable  loss of consciousness must somehow  be  made  tolerable.  The place of the individual's ego must  be rethought  so that  death  can  be seen as a cuhnination of life rather  than  a contradiction.  It  is this  process of sifting  and rethinking  that  is the inspiration  and  which provides the  raw  material  for John Glassco's later  career  as a poet.
The  poems which spring  from  this special sensibility are  of two  main  types. There  are  the  long  meditative   poems  which  deal  with  consciousness and  the workings of the mind.  They  recreate  and  analyse at length  a mood  or emotion. The  psyche is isolated and  we see it again and  again assaulted  by love, ambition, sensuality, or the awareness  of approaching death.
The  other  category  consists  of shorter,  tightly-wrought   poems  built  around
symbols in  the  external  world.  Included  here is most of the  townships  poetry. The  images, concrete,  familiar  and  prosaic, are  brilliantly  manipulated by the poet.   Old   houses,  crumbling  barns,  and   deserted  homesteads  are   perceived through  an eye which alternately  sees in them horror and  tranquility, corruption and  beauty.
To  date,  there  are  three  volumes of poetry. The   Deficit  Made Flesh  was fol­
lowed in 1964- by A  Point  of Sky, and in 1971 the Selected  Poems  appeared  and won the Governor-General's Award  for poetry in English.
The  selection for  this last  volume  was not  in fact  made  by Glassco, but  by
A. J. M. Smith. Smith  has chosen all the best poems from  the earlier books and added  a few new ones. His organization  of the material  into four  sections is of
great  value  in  interpreting the  poet.  As  in a  piece of music,  the  reader  is led through  various moods and styles in the different sections, the themes developing and  repeating,  slowly revealing  the  Glassco sensibility from  all angles.
The  townships  poetry  is all contained  in the first section. Though  this group
of sixteen poems alone would not reveal the entire Glassco, the important themes are immediately  brought  to light by these powerfully presented rural scenes. First is the "Rural Mail",  a poem of the country which shifts in focus from a pastoral view of the green  good  valley  to a grotesque  close-up of the  hard,  embittered

32

ESSENTIAL GLASSCO



existence  of  the  farmer, "man on  man's  estate  of  nature, Farmer on  farm, the savage  civilized." In  the  last stanza  the  focus  again  expands; the  eye pulls  back to view the end  result,  the  reward of this life.

Where  the bull, the buzz-saw, and  the balky mare
Are the chosen fingers of God for a farmer's  sins,
Like the axe for his woods, and  his calves and  chicks and  children
Destined  for slaughter  in  the course of things.

Already  in this first selection,  written  in 1940,  we have the situation, the point­ lessness of a life which  is an  enslaved  existence,  without  consolation, and  ending finally  in  an  absurd   and   brutal death. Very  frightening stuff,  it  illustrates the poet's  view of the  essentially  tragic  nature of the  individual's life.
Success in Glasco's  poems lies in finding  a permanence, not  in  cheating death but in finding  values which  will make  a whole life complete unto  itself within  the brackets   of  birth   and   death. The  conventional, socially   approved  goals   and dreams don't work.  Many  of the  poems, like the first, are  tragedies, but  tragedies are the result of mistakes,  and  a mistake implies the failure  to perceive  and  follow the  correct  course.
"The White Mansion" deals  also with  false goals  mocked  by death, and  men
made  the fools of time. The  mansion is the creation of the homesteader who made it his dream  and  the  focal  point  of his life. But  the  master  of the  farm  has  been himself over-mastered and  has become the slave of the vision. In the poem, this controlling obsession  has  become  personified  in  the  mansion  itself  as a  mocking demon  who  captures the soul of a man  and  wrings  him  dry.

Ere  I was done  the dying farmer  cursed me, Crying  within  the strangling  noose of hope.
I am  the grave of the husbandman's hope. I am a shining temple, a tall man's  pride.
The house,  a  projection of  the  individual ego,  must  be  supreme and   its  slave
must  have  no  other  gods  before  it.

Two  hearts,  two bodies clove, knew nothing  more. Ere I was done I tore them asunder.  Singly
They  fled my ruin  and the ruin of love. I am she who is stronger  than  love.

This  poem is the most powerful  and  direct  in the section. Glassco's  great  ability has always been the  creation of dramatic characters, as witnessed  in the  memoirs.

33

ESSENTIAL GLASSCO



Some of the poetry tends to be a bit didactic,  and  the poet is always at  his best when least visible. His themes are best revealed by his characters  in other  poems such as "The Death  of Don Quixote" and "The  Web" who can speak with more conviction and  more freedom  than  the poet can  permit  himself.
Interspersed  with  these  poems  of negation  and  denial  are  others  of  a  more tranquil  mood and more positive tone which, in affirming life, lead the reader on to the next step, the consolation,  and  the transcendence  of time.
In  the  poems  already  mentioned  time  was shown  as  the  enemy  of man  by means of the decaying farmhouses  and  the fields grown back to weeds. The col­ lapse of man's  monuments  to  himself was the  act  of a  malevolent  nature.  In "Luce's  Notch",  the same workings of time are presented in a different  light, in a poem of a very different  mood.
Once again the scene is the abandoned farm, Glassco's principal symbol of mutability.  This time the poet's attention  is fixed on the forces of nature  that  are reclaiming  the homestead  of Aaron  Luce. He compares his feelings in these sur­ roundings with the impressions he had fifteen years earlier in the same place. The  result is a didactic  exposition of the lessons learned in the meantime, the  process of coming to terms with change,  and  time, and  death.
The young man's  feelings are

Of that ecstatic suffering which is joy, That  sense of being unable to possess A natural scene.

The ego is supreme, the one power in the world that must be fed. The frustration arises from the inability  to dominate  nature,  and to bend it to the will. This atti­ tude is the cause of the tragedies  witnessed in the earlier poems. Building monu­ ments to the  ego and  seeking immortality  for  the consciousness are  endeavours that  will be mocked  by death.
In the second half of the poem we are granted  entry into the higher state of consciousness which  the  poet  has achieved with  age.

This madness I have no more. I only see
Beauty continues, and so do not I.

Desire is the great  danger,  the indication  of the ego in control. The poet must be
content  merely to see, to comprehend  and  to communicate  the truth.
In  nature  has  been  found  a  permanence  which  transcends  death.  Far  from mastering  the natural world, the mortal  human  being must come to see himself as a small and  transient  part  of unchanging  but seasonal nature,  completely sub-

34

ESSENTIAL GLASSCO



servient to its rules. Success in the short span of life lies in realizing this and  thus escaping the fate of time's fool.
All that makes man  unique is his faculty of consciousness, his ability to see and to perceive. Tills is his only real possession, and  it is an instrument which allows him  to organize experience,  apprehend   beauty, and  approach truth.
"Luce's  Notch"  celebrates  and  recreates a moment  of awareness,  the  realiza­
tion of man's place in the universe. It ends with an invocation  of nature  to reveal more.

You natural  scenes to whose eternity
My transient vision and my life are bound,
Teach me to see ...

. . . Keep me as I am now, Here on this solitary mountain-top,
Purged of each last impulsion of desire
To make you mine, to carry you along
On the wings of possession.

Glassco's position is blocked out in the first section of the book. It differs from the other sections in that it is nature  poetry, the medium  being the contemplation of scenes in  the  Eastern  Townships.  In  the second  part,  the  subject  matter  is more  human,  but  the same  themes continue  to develop. "Brummell at  Calais" and  "The Death of Don Quixote" are two tragedies of consciousness.
Glassco's eulogy of the notorious  dandy of Regency England  is distressing and ambiguous. Brummell, we are  told, succeeded in life because  he never did  any­ thing. He did not try to wrench anything from the world, so he had nothing that death  could take from  him. He is compared  to a butterfly,  a thing of beauty  in nature  which gives delight and exists for its allotted time without  plan  and  with­ out fear of mortality. Brummell managed  to escape suffering and frustration  and in this way perfected "an  art  of being".

For see, even now in the long implacable twilight, The  triumph of his veritable art,

An art of being, nothing but being, the grace
Of perfect self-assertion based on nothing,
As in our vanity's cause against the void
He strikes his elegant blow, the solemn report of those
Who have done nothing and will never die.

However, we recognize something of the cop-out in this. Brummell's  tranquility


35

ESSENTIAL GLASSCO



is that  of an  idiot or an  animal.  In  rejecting  the  unique  human  faculty  of the conscious, the dandy  has settled for a lower form of life. He  has escaped despair in the same way as those who undergo a lobotomy and is consequently  less than a complete  man.
Much  more affecting  and  noble  is the character  of Don  Quixote,  dying sane and disillusioned.

The withdrawal of the vision, The  removal of the madness,
The supplanting  of a world of beauty
By God's sticks and stones and smells
Are afflictions, I find, of something more absurd
Than  any book of chivalry.

Here is a man  whose life was animated  and committed. Was his mad  vision just an  illusion? And  is the  reality  better  than  the illusion? Is the  reality  more true than  the dream?  We return  to the  problem of consciousness which is a gift, but also a responsibility and  a burden.  Brummell rejected its responsibilities and  was less for it. Don  Quixote's madness is merely a symbol of this consciousness that animates  and  seeks to  give form  to  the  brief space  between  birth  and  death. Impelling  man  to  work  toward  some end,  it is the  force  referred  to earlier  in
"The  Brill Road".

. .. we follow the blinding years, Into the sweeping, swallowing wind,
Into the gape of all and the loss of the person, Driving his birthright  deathward in a trance Over the mountain's  swollen Jovian brow,

The road is a trick, like every form of life, A signal into the dark impartial storm

These  lines echo  the  young  Glassco of  Montpamasse   who  was unwilling  to make a commitment and  to surrender  control  of his life to a  purpose. "Litera­ ture,"  he reflected, "like any other form of gainful employment,  was  just  another trap."
In  the  Don  Quixote  poem the  force of the vision is represented  symbolically
and  ironically  as a form  of madness,  a mental  aberration. Our  sympathies  are entirely with the old knight  as he mourns  the loss of his "world  of beauty",  but his dream  must  be wrong  for  it cannot  accept  death  and  will not  prepare  the dreamer  for the loss of consciousness. Don Quixote,  therefore, must be consigned

ESSENTIAL GLASSCO



to the same category as that  less romantic  egotist, the builder of the White Man­ sion. The  only difference is that  the old don does not die alone. His one consola­ tion is Sancho,  "faithful unto  death". Though  the dream  is gone,  the  love and devotion  of the old companion  still remain.
The  last three  lines of "The Death  of Don  Quixote"  are  an  introduction to the love theme which works through  the remainder  of the Selected  Poems. One gains nothing  by "remaining on the surface of life";  that  was Brummell's  error. The commitment is necessary, but commitment to another  person is more reward­ ing and  lasting than  devotion  to an ego-centred idea.
The  third  section is composed of poems of love:  carnal,  unrequited  and  lost. The  concentration is on human  relationships, the  meeting  of two  isolated  egos. Love is the one viable dream  that  will fill the space of life with  joy and  beauty. Glassco's concern is always the problem of maximizing the quantity  and  quality of experience. He  puts it this way in the love poem "One Last Word".
The means are more important than the end, Ends begin only as excuse for action,
For adventures sought for their own sake alone, Pictures along the way, feelings
Released in love ...

At the end  of life, all that  remains is memory,  the recollection  of the  experi­ ences and  adventures  encountered  in the  pursuit  of the  dream.  Memory  is the theme of "The Places Where the Dead Have Walked".

. . . What piece of ground
Impressed by a beloved foot
But has not gathered up the sound to keep it captive underground
And store its music underfoot?

The  piece of ground  is the  consciousness which  has the  power  to  recreate  and relive past experience. Though  the lover is gone, the love is not  lost. It  can  live on in  the  memory  and  continue  to be a source of  joy and  beauty.  As Glassco pointed out much earlier in the Memoirs, the consolation of consciousness is that time and  place can  be destroyed at will by closing the eyes.4
In the fourth  section, the poetry is once more written from the moment  before death.  The  individual  is alone,  without  hope,  though  not  in  despair.  In  "The Day" the ends and  the means, the actions and  the motivations  of the ending  life are examined.

37

ESSENTIAL GLASSCO



Here  are  all  the  themes  brought together. First,  there  is presented the  unde­
niable  terror  of the  end  of consciousness.

On  that  day
We shall rise on our elbows and  glare around  us, looking
For the abolished  future
In  that  moment  of supreme consciousness
Of unmedicinable dismay
Of absolute  from  time ...

Next there  is the  betrayal of death, the cancelling of the vision, here named the "impossible city"  which  was the initiator of life's actions,  Don  Quixote's madness. The dying  man  is betrayed too  by romantic love which  has failed  as a goal. He ascribes  the  motive  of selfishness to his loved  one, and,  unwittingly, to himself.
This  first part, in  which  the  ego confronts death, is all bitterness and  despair,
but  the second  part shows  how  to make  a good  death. In  the  first stanza, dying is equated with  giving.
This  poor man, this dying one ... The  mask of humanity
Mock of consciousness
Where  is his city
What  is he doing?
-All that  he is
His struggle  and  suffering
In  part  of ourselves Exists for us only, This  is the last gift
Of  his life's meaning
All that  he sought
In  the marvellous  city Relinquished  and offered To  us the survivors
As it will be
Ours  to pass on
To  those who have taken
Our  hearts  in their keeping ... The  infinitesimal
Glimpse of a beautiful  blessed falsehood

Death is the last gift. If one lives for others the ego is transcended and  death holds no terror because  the  important things are not dying. This idea is expressed  again in an exhortation to love which  follows.

ESSENTIAL GLASSCO



Forget the stones and scents and sounds of the fabulous city
Here in the heart of another blooms a miraculous home Hide your proud head, renounce your ridiculous freedom Content  you to be the singing prisoner of love.

With this poem, the problems of life, and of death,  developed  throughout the book, are finally resolved. This is attested  to by the tranquil passing of the con­ sciousness in the last stanza.

Removed from time Dependent  on nothing When nothing will matter You will escape
Like a mouse in the darkness ...
The shadow will touch you
Engross you wholly, And soon, soon
The day of others Freed of your sickness, The day of their freedom
Dawn quietly without you.

This is a skeletal outline  of some of the important themes of Glassco's poetry. The  young man  who write the memoirs could "see every hair  and  pimple  on a face without  seeing the  face  itsel£."5   The  older  poet  has attained the  overview which was denied to the youth. The  experience of living and  dying is encircled, organized,  and  reduced  to its essential facts.
First there is man's  place in nature, where the race may survive, but each indi­ vidual is doomed. Then  there comes the problem of making  a meaning  between birth and death,  that  brief period of consciousness. And consciousness itself, that unique  gift, is a two-edged sword which permits man  to see and  learn, but  also creates the ego and  gives birth  to dreams and  visions that  are unattainable and doomed  to frustration. The  only cominitment  that  is  worthwhile  is to  another  human  being. Self-sufficiency is abandoned; the individual  ceases to be isolated and  becomes part  of the chain which is immortal.



GLAssco's POETRY is intensely personal,  and  nowhere  are there to be found  the social themes of the contemporary  urban  poets. Yet, with the growing success of his second career as a man of letters Glassco recovered the gregariousness of the younger  man who constantly sought  the  company  of other

39

ESSENTIAL GLASSCO



artists, and in the 196o's he once again became involved in the literary  world. He was the  principal  organizer  of the  Foster  Poetry  Conference  in  1963  and  later edited  English Poetry in Quebec  containing  the proceedings and  main  addresses of that  gathering.  In  1965  he was awarded  a Senior Fellowship by the  Canada Council, and still continues to be an important force in the advancement of poetry in Canada.
One  of his major  contributions in  this field has been his  work in  presenting Quebecois literature  to English Canada. He edited The  Poetry of French Canada in Translation, an  anthology  which  appeared  in  1970, containing  the  works of
48 poets from the I 7th century  to the present. Over  6o of the poems were trans­
lations by the editor himself.
As early  as 1962  he translated  into  English the  journal  of  Saint-Denys-Gar­ neau, a poet with  whom  he feels a special affinity. Both lived  and  wrote in the shadow  of  death.   Each   abandoned  an  affluent  Montreal   background   for  a secluded  rural existence, seeking in isolation to organize experience  and  come to terms with mortality.
John  Glassco's first book was Contes en Crinoline, written in French  and  pub­ lished in Paris in 1929. He  mentions  it in the memoirs as "a  series of  historical sketches with  a  unifying  transvestite  theme".  Since  then  Glassco has  produced several volumes of commercial  erotica  for fun  and  profit. Many  were  published pseudonymously, and  the author  insists they are of no literary  value. They  are, however, a delight,  because one finds that  the older man  has not  at  all lost the rascality of the youth in Paris.
Under  the  Hill,  published  by Olympia  Press in  1959 is his completion  of the unfinished manuscript by Aubrey Beardsley. In this retelling of the tale of Venus and Tannhauser, Glassco studiously cultivates the style of the decadents. The changeover  point is impossible to detect, and Glassco's tableaux  are as bizarre as Beardsley's. The  effect is exotic,  titillating,  and  a little frightening.
Harriet  Marwood, Governess is an enormous  joke. It deals with  the  relation­ ship  between  the lady of the  title and  her adolescent ward.  Over  its  250 pages a great love develops, cemented  by frequent  applications  of stem discipline. This is Glassco's revenge on Victorianism.  Written  in the style of a  19th century lady novelist, perhaps the literary  wife of a country vicar, Harriet  Marwood  maintains a tone of impeccable respectability while describing the most corrupt  acts of sado­ masochism. The  English are portrayed  as the most depraved  people in the world, with  whom anything  goes as long as proper  appearances  are kept  up.
The prose works6  do not reveal the complete Glassco, but then neither does the

ESSENTIAL GLASSCO



poetry. It has  been  argued that  the  verse  is the  more  serious,  and  so it is if by serious one means grave and  humourless. Glassco's reverence  for the form  excludes all amusement and  makes the poetry more  earnest  than  the man. There is another side  to  Glassco which  delights  in the  absurdities of life and  has  the  will and  the ability  to make  us laugh.  The  comic  vision  revealed  in the  simple,  elegant prose of the  Memoirs and  Erotica is no less of an accomplishment and  of no less artistic value  than  the  very different vision  presented  in the  poetry.

NOTES

1 Leon Edel, Introduction to Memoirs  of Montparnasse,  1970.
2 Louis  Dudek,  the  Montreal  Gazette;  quoted  on back  cover of  the  memoirs,  Feb.
7, 1970.
8  John  Glassco, "the  Day", in Selected  Poems OUP,  Toronto,  1971.
'Memoirs of Montparnasse,  p. 106.
a  Ibid., p. 70.
6  This  essay was written  and  accepted  before the publication  of The  Fatal Woman,
reviewed elsewhere in this issue. ED.


CANADIAN  POETS AND THE GREAT TRADITION



Sandra Djwa






IN  THE BEGINNING,  ..s  Fmncis  Bacon ob=ves, "God  Al­ mightie  first Planted  a  Garden  ... the  Greatest  Refreshment  to  the  Spirits  of Man.m  It is this lost garden  of Eden  metamorphosed  into  the  Promised  Land, the Hesperides, the  El Dorado  and  the Golden Fleece which  dominates  some of the sixteenth  and  seventeenth  century  accounts  of the  New  World  reported  in Richard  Hakluyt's Principal  Navigations, Voyages, Traffiques  and  Discoveries  of the   English   Nation  ( rsg8-I6oo)  and   the  subsequent   Purchas   His  Pi/grimes ( I 62 5). References to what is now Canada  are considerably more restrained than are the eulogies to Nova Spania  and Virginia; nonetheless there is a faint  Edenic strain  in the early reports  of the first British settlement  in the New World.
John  Guy implemented the first Royal Patent  for settlement  at  Cupar's Cove, Newfoundland in  I 610, a settlement  inspired  by Bacon and  supported  by King James, who observed that  the plantation  of this colony was "a  matter  and action well beseeming a Christian  King,  to make true  use of that  which God from the beginning  created  for  mankind"  ( Purchas,  XIX) .  Sir  Richard   Whitbourne's "A  Relation  of the New-found-land" (I 6 I 8)  continues in the same Edenic vein as he describes Newfoundland as "the  fruitful  wombe of the earth":

Then  have you there faire Strawberries red and white, and as faire Raspasse berrie, and Gooseberries, as there be in England; as also multitudes of Bilberries, which are called  by some Whortes, and  many other  delicate  Berries (which I cannot name)  in great abundance.  (Purchas, XIV.)

Many of the first Planters  in Canada  saw themselves, at least initially, as new Adams  beginning  again  in the garden  of the New World  reserved by "God  ... for us Britaines,"2  which, if not Eden itself, was at least a Golden Fleece sufficient to show the "wayes to get wealth, and to restore Trading."3  Yet, as the first poetry and  the  journals of exploration  assert, the upper  half of North  America  was not

THE GREAT TRADITION



a garden  but  a wilderness. Newfoundland  was a rocky and  unprofitable  fishing station,  no Eden even for the soaring flights of the seventeenth  century imagina­ tion.  Hayman  in  1628  writes  that  the island  is "wild,  salvage  ...  rude,  unto­ wardly". As a remedy, he proposes "neat  husbandry", that combination of physi­ cal and moral endeavour which will transform a "plain, swarth, sluttish lone" into a virtuous matron,  "pretty pert, and neat with good cloathes on."4  Lacy, writing a century later inI 729, turns the satirical eye of  Restoration  comedy on the bleak land and inhabitants.

Most that inhabit are a fearful Tribe, Whose Characters I cannot well describe; Who, like Siberians, lonely here reside, And, in a willing Banishment, abide.
It  is this sottish People's common use
To warm their Veins with an Infernal Juice, Both Men and Women do this Liquor choose, And rarely keep the Bottle from their Nose.5

As Lacy's unpromising  reports might indicate, the Adamic impulse which had led England to foster the plantation of settlers in Newfoundland  was quickly diverted after the first quarter  of the seventeenth century into settlement of the more prom­ ising colonies of Virginia  and  New England. The  consequence for the  Canadian section of British North  America  was a cultural  silence which settled  down  for almost two hundred  years.

As A  FRAMEWORK  TO   the literature which  was slowly to emerge  from  these  colonial  beginnings,  I  would  like  to  suggest  the  following
points: first, English Canadian literature has been characterized  by a literary dependence upon British models and by a distinctively moral tone; secondly the English  great  tradition,   as  reflected  by  Canadian  poets,   has  been  essentially Royalist rather  than  Puritan; and  thirdly,  the  introduction of  Darwinism  into Canada  coincided  with  the emergence of Romanticism.  As a  result of all these factors, that  vision of nature  and of society reflected in English Canadian  poetry differs sharply from  that  written  in the United  States or Great  Britain.
Historically, Canadian poetry has been both imitative and didactic. The first original poetry written in English in the new world, R[obert] H[ayman] 's Quod­ libets, Lately Come  Over  From  New  Britaniola, Old  Newfound-Land   ( 1628), consisted of "Epigrams and  other small parcels, both  Morall  and  Divine."  The

43

THE GREAT  TRADITION



first four  books of this volume  were Hayman's,  the others were translated  from the Latin of the English epigrammatist, John  Owen, and others, concluding  with "two  Epistles of that  excellently wittie Doctor Francis Rablais."  Quodlibets  is, of course, written from within the seventeenth  century literary tradition which sanc­ tions  both  imitation  and  the  moral  function  of  literature.  Consequently,  it  is questionable  whether  we can accept  Hayman  as the progenitor  of a distinctively Canadian poetry  rather  than  a  minor  figure in  the  British tradition,   versifying abroad.
However, this distinction  cannot  be applied  two hundred  years later  when the
Canadian Oliver  Goldsmith  (grandnephew of the celebrated  Oliver  Goldsmith) writes a lengthy narrative poem, The  Rising Village, to show the fate of those suffering  English  countrymen   who  left the  "sweet  Auburn" of his uncle's  The Deserted Village for North America where "Wild  Oswego spreads her swamps around,/And Niagara  stuns  with  thundering sound."6   This  poem focuses upon the conquering  of the wilderness and  the rising of the Canadian village but  has an  apparently disjointed  middle section, a tale of sweet Flora  and  her faithless lover Albert. Goldsmith's  reasons for including this moral tale of "Vice as a warn­ ing to Virtue"  are  not at all clear  until we recognize that  "sweet  Flora" is ana­ logous to  Wordsworth's "Ruth"  and  her  faithless lover to  the  impetuous,  but amoral,  young  man  from  Georgia's  shore.  It  then  becomes  apparent that  the purpose  of the  interlude  is to express  Goldsmith's  Deistic  belief that  there  is a necessary connection between the ordered laws of nature and the laws which must control  human  passion;  without  such moral dictates the rising village of Acadia cannot  hope  to  progress in  emulation  of  Britain's  "laws  and  liberty".  As  this summary  might suggest, the political, moral and literary aspirations  of the young settlement  are described  by Goldsmith as immediately directed  towards  a follow­ ing of the colonial vision of the British  tradition.
Quodlibets  and The  Rising Village may be taken as representative specimens of early Canadian verse until approximately 18go. The  emphasis on moral teaching in relation  to the development  of community  and  the ascriptions  of these values to Great  Britain  is characteristic of later  epics such as Thomas  Cary's  Abram's Plains  ( 1789)   and  of  William  Kirby's  The   U.E.: A  Tale  of  Upper  Canada (I 859), while the whole question of the social compact of people, King and God is particularly  explored  in the heroic dramas  of Charles Heavysege, especially in Saul  (1857)   and  ]ephthah's  Daughter  (1865). In  addition,  much  verse written in Canada in the eighteenth  and early nineteenth  century can be characterized  as a response to the picturesque  landscape  of Canada  filtered through  the prevailing

44

THE  GREAT TRADITION



British model.  Hayman borrowed from  Owen,  Goldsmith from  his English grand­ uncle,  Heavysege  from  Shakespeare and,  on  the  basis of internal  evidence, from Charles Lloyd's  I8I5  translations of the  Italian dramatist,  Alfieri.  Isabella Val­  ancy Crawford and  Sir Charles G. D. Roberts, often  hailed as Canadian originals,  were actually  highly indebted to their  contemporaries and  predecessors. Crawford borrowed  from  Tennyson,  Longfellow   and   Dante;  Roberts' Orion    ( I88o)  is modelled   on  the  Orion   (I 843)   of  Richard  Henry   (later Hengist) Home, an
English  Victorian. It is not until  E. J. Pratt's parody, The  Witches'  Brew ( 1925),
a farcical  inversion  of Paradise Lost, which  manages, incredibly, to  combine an Adamic sea-cat,  an  alcoholic  apple and  a satire  on Temperance, that  Canadian poetry  begins  to  move  away  from  the  English  stream; significantly, this  move­ ment   is initiated by  parody. Ironically, the  book  was  first  published  in  Great  Britain  as Pratt's Canadian publisher, Lome Pierce  of Ryerson  Press,  regretfully  refused  the  manuscript, explaining that   this  "sparkling" brew   was  a  little  too strong  for an  United  Church publishing house.7
The most  attractive rationale for  the  general  practice  of  literary imitation is given by Thomas Cary  in the preface  to his Abram's Plains:
Before Ibegan this Poem Iread Pope's Windsor-Forrest  and Dr. Goldsmith's Deserted  Village, with  the  view of endeavouring,  in some degree,  to catch  their manner  of writing;  as singers in  country-churches  in  England, to  use a  simple musical comparison,  modulate  their  tones by the  prelusive sound  of a pitch-pipe.

The  most dogmatic assertion  of the  Canadian allegiance  to the  English  tradition is given  nearly  one  hundred years later  in  r883  by Charles G.  D.  Roberts, then a  rising  young  poet,  in  an  Alumni Oration at  Fredericton entitled "The  Begin­ nings of a Canadian Literature":
Now it must be remembered  that  the whole heritage  of English  Song is ours and that  it is not  ours  to found  new  literature.  The  Americans  have  not  done  so nor will they. They have simply joined in raising the splendid structure, English litera­ ture,  to  the  building  of  which  may come workmen  from  every  region  of  earth where speaks the British tongue.

Implicit here  is the  assumption that  the  Canadian poet  is addressing himself  to an  English  audience, a  pervasive  view of  the  poet's  function which   would   not encourage the  development of an  indigenous Canadian tradition.
Not only was eighteenth and  nineteenth century  Canadian verse a colonial reflection   of  the  English   tradition  but  it  was  directed   towards one  aspect   of this tradition which  we might  provisionally  describe  as the  Royalist  strain. Unlike

45

THE  GREAT TRADITION



the  first poetry  of the  United  States  in  which  the  Puritan   insistence  upon  the supremacy  of the individual  spirit  cuhninated  in political and  cultural  indepen­ dence,  Canadian poetry,  which  originated  in  a  brief Royalist  period  and  then began again under eighteenth  century Deism, is essentially hierarchical, positing a social compact  of subject,  King and God, reflecting the monarchical vision of the moral  and  social  order.  The   first  Planters  of  Newfoundland  were  prominent Royalists-Lord Baltimore,  Lord  Calvert,  the learned  Lord  Falkland-and as there  was no leavening  influx  of Puritan  immigration,  there  is no seventeenth century  English  Canadian literary  heritage of Puritan  verse. French  Acadia  did not become British Nova Scotia  until the Treaty  of Utrecht  (I 7 I 3)  and  Quebec did  not fall to the  English  until I 759· Consequently,  those  English poems pro­ duced  in the newly conquered  Quebec  after  I 770 are primarily  an exposition of eighteenth century Deism with handy political encomiums to the surpassing virtues of the  British monarch,  the  British moral  order  and  the  British  God.  Further­  more, after  1776 this  view of society was substantially  re-inforced  by the whole­ sale  emigration   to  Nova  Scotia  and  Quebec  of some  4o,ooo  United   Empire Loyalists who shared  the same  belief  in  the essential interdependence of subject, king and  state  as did  their  seventeenth  century  Royalist forebears.  The  Loyalist code was, in tum, interpreted by their nineteenth  century  descendants  (in  parti­ cular,  by  William  Kirby  in  The  U.E.:  A Tale  of Upper  Canada,   I859)   as a legacy of  moral and social behaviour:

Religion was  with  them  more  deed  than  word; To  love their  neighbour and  to fear  the Lord; Honour their  King  and  yield his high  degree.

As Kirby's epic demonstrates, the Loyalist emigration  was to provide the intel­ lectual  matrix  for  the  nineteenth   century  flurry  of Confederation verse  which developed  between  I 86o and  I Bgo around  the political vision of Canada as the "New  Nationality" within  the "Vaster  Britain"  or so-called "Imperialist" move­ ment. Because the dominant literary vision of Canadian nature  developed  during the same period which saw the emergence of the new nationalism, several of the literary  nationalists,  in  particular Charles  Mair,  Charles  Sangster  and  Charles G. D. Roberts,  tended  to view Canada's struggle  to maintain  her  political sov­ ereignty against the United  States from the perspective of the Darwinian  struggle for survival.  The  encompassing  political myth,  as Carl  Berger has  pointed  out, proclaimed  that  Canadians were the "Northmen of the New World,"  associating freedom,  law and  moral  rectitude  with Northern  nations  (as distinguished from

THE GREAT  TRADITION



the effete, degenerate  South) , and maintaining  that Canadian freedom and moral order lay in the continued  connection with Great Britain.8  In verse, Mair's  drama Tecumseh   ( 1886),  the  Canadian national  anthem   "0  Canada" with  its lines "the  true  north,  strong  and  free",  Roberts'  meretricious  poem "Canada" ( "0
Child of Nations, giant-limbed") and  W. D. Lighthall's  anthology,  Songs of the
Great Dominion  ( 188g)  are all reflections of this prevailing  Darwinist  myth.



LE FRAMEWORK, then, for the evolution of an English Cana­ dian tradition  has been political and cultural; it may be described  as "Royalist" in the seventeenth  century,  "Loyalist"  in  the late  eighteenth  century  and  "Im­ perialist" in the latter  part  of the nineteenth  century. Mter  1870,  the  dominant thematic  concern  of the  poetry, that  vision of moral  and  social  progress which transforms the rude wilderness into the cultivated garden,  is to be contained  with­ in a modification  of Romanticism  as dictated  by Darwin.
Darwinism  had a profound  effect on English Canadian Romanticism  because The  Origin  of Species  ( 1859)  appeared  just as the first "native" poetic group, that  of the  Confederation of 186o poets,  was emerging.  Because the  Canadian mythos was the  product  of a hard,  sparsely populated  country  and  because  the literary vision of Canadian nature  developed after  Darwin  and  after  the loss of Sir John  Franklin  at  the  North  Pole, it was already  too  late  in  time  to  gloss successfully the struggle  for survival  with  the  Edenic  vision of  an  Emersonian transcendentalism  as had been done in the United States some thirty years earlier. As a  result,  Canadian Romanticism  was infused  from  its inception  with  over­ tones of Darwin's  nature,  an  accident  of literary  history  which  strongly  distin­ guishes the Canadian view of nature  from those of the United  States and  Great Britain.
Consequently,  although  the poets of the Confederation  do attempt  to write in the  old  Romantic  mode-in  fact,  the  transcendental   dream  is the  dominant metaphor  of the  period - such  poetry often  breaks  from  within  because  it  is attempting  to hold in  reconciliation  two opposing views of nature.  As we  read through the poetry of the 188o's and 18go's we can see the Roberts' uneasy recon­ ciliation between the Romantic world spirit and the Darwinian germ of  life must ultimately  break  down,  as it later  does, into  glimpses of  a  fearful  and  amoral nature  in  the  poetry  of Archibald  Lampman   and  Duncan  Scott.  By the  mid­
I 8go's, especially in the  poetry of Lampman  and  Scott,  the dream  as metaphor has become an indicator  of a schism in Romantic  sensibility because it functions

47

THE GREAT TRADITION



in a failed attempt  to transcend  a Darwinian  world. Still later, in Duncan Camp­ bell Scott's poem "The Height of Land" (  9I 6),  the transcendent  vision becomes a "Something [that] comes by flashes" and the poet's eye is directed  out towards the Northern  landscape :

Upon one hand
The lonely north enlaced with lakes and streams,
And the enormous targe of Hudson Bay, Glimmering all night
In the cold arctic light ...

The  earlier,  Darwinist-inspired, political vision of Canada  as a Northern  land is to continue  into the 192o's and  193o's with the efforts of the Canadian  Forum to promote a new and virile art worthy of the young and powerful Canadian nationality. This new art  had already been signalled by the strong Northern land­
scapes of the  Group  of Seven and  was soon to be paralleled  in  poetry  by E. J.
Pratt's  "Newfoundland", by A. J. M. Smith's  "The  Lonely Land" and  by F. R. Scott's "North Stream". This  new Canadian nature  described  by Smith  as "The
beauty  of strength/ broken  by strength/ and still strong"  first appears  in Pratt's Newfoundland Verse  ( 192 3).  The  title lyric asserts the powerful crash of sea on rock and  presents a people as strong as the nature  they resist. The  tides of  New­
foundland flow

with a lusty stroke of life
Pounding at stubborn gates, That  they might run
Within the sluices of men's hearts.

In Pratt's  view, man, evolving from the sea, still carries part of the sea with him; this primitive inheritance can lead  him to fall backward into atavism,  or, guided by Christian  ethics,  he may  move forward  along  the evolutionary  road.  In  his post-Darwinian view of nature  and  in his stress upon an ethical interpretation of Darwinism,  Pratt  is characteristic  of the Canadian tradition.
That the  Darwinian   debate  in  Canada  was largely ethical  is evident  from  a survey  of  articles  published  in  the  relatively  popular  Canadian  Monthly and National  Review  for  the  decade  1872-1882.9   Articles such  as "Darwinism   and Morality",  "The Evolution of Morality",  "The Ethical Aspects of Darwinism:  A Rejoinder", "Evolution and  Immortality", indicate that the Canadian attempt  to adapt  evolutionary  theory of existing religious and social structures  is far closer to the English debate  between  Darwinism  and  religion which culminated  in T.  H.

THE  GREAT TRADITION



Huxley's "Evolution and   Ethnics" (I 893), than  it  is to  the  popular  reception given  to  Herbert Spencer's "survival of the  fittest"  in  the  United States  during the same  period.  For  example, Goldwin  Smith's essay, "The Prospect of a Moral Interregnum," which  developed one aspect of Spencer's The  Data  of Ethnics  was largely  accepted when  published in the United States  in the  Atlantic Monthly in I 879; in Canada, it was greeted  with a storm  of protest  when  re-published in the same  year  in  Rose-Belford's Canadian Monthly  and  National Review.
The   poetry  of the  period  manifests  a similar  yoking  of  evolution and  ethics. Isabella Valancy   Crawford's poem,  Malcolm's Katie   (I883)  may  be  read  as a rejoinder to Goldwin  Smith's essay "Pessimism" of  I88o,  also reprinted in Cana­ dian  Monthly. Smith  had  introduced Hume's speculations on  a  malignant  Deity and  eloquently  described  "fatherless" man  as "the  sport  of a  blind but  irresistible  force.mo  Crawford's poem,  a  Victorian love  triangle  set  against   the  clearing  of the  soil  and  the  rising  of  the  Canadian  settlement,  assigns similarly  compelling but  ultimately discredited statements  to  the  villain,  Alfred,11   gives  the  voice  of evolutionary progress  to the  hero  Max,  and  places the whole struggle for survival  in the  human and  natural world  within  God's hand:

In  trance  of stillness Nature  heard  her God Rebuilding  her spent fires, and  veil'd her face While the Great  Worker brooded o'er His work.

Equally, in Roberts' poetry  and  prose we find  a consistent  attempt to  bring  the Darwinian struggle  under  divine  plan,  as is explicit  in the  title  of his first animal story,  "Do Seek Their Meat  from  God".
E.  J. Pratt's relation to  the  English  stream  was  even  closer  than   that   of  the
poets of the Confederation yet, ultimately, he was to move out  of it entirely. Born in  I 882  in  Newfoundland, then  still  a  British  colony  for  reasons  best  expressed by that  popular Newfoundland ballad,  "The Anti-Confederation Song," ("Our hearts  turned to Britain, our  backs  to the  gulf/   Come  near  at  your  peril,  Cana­ dian  wolf,") Pratt was the son of an  English  Methodist minister. His early  read­  ing  included  Shakespeare, Carlyle's French   Revolution and   Milton's  Paradise Lost.12  But his integral relation to the English stream  is best indicated in a cursory survey  of his first verse:  Rachel   ( I917), narrative, is a  Newfoundland version  of Wordsworth's "Michael";  Clay   ( I 9 I 7), a  badly  written verse  drama,  contrasts evolutionary pessimism derivative of Hardy's The  Dynasts  with  Christian evolu­ tionary ethics suggestive  of "The  Paradox" by  Alfred  Noyes. However, with  the parody of The  Witches' Brew  ( I925) and  the  realism of The   Roosevelt and  the

49

THE GREAT  TRADITION



Antinoe  ( 1930), Pratt  began to move away from the English stream. The  latter poem, a moving account  of an actual  I926 rescue at sea, seems to have led Pratt away from literary imitation  into the documentation  of life.
Strongly  influenced  by  his  Newfoundland   experiences  of  continued  struggle against an implacable  nature,  a struggle which he characterizes  in his "Memories of Newfoundland" ( I937)   as "the  ironic  enigma  of Nature  in  relation  to  the Christian  view of the  world",  and  by his early  training  in  theology,  much  of Pratt's  poetry can be seen as the attempt  to equip man with an evolutionary ethic to counter  Darwin's  nature.  In an address given at Cornell University during  the I 94o's  he remarked  that  he could  not  reconcile the Romantic vision of nature with the Victorian  need "to  put man in his evolutionary setting." At that  time he stated: "We look upon life with the eyes of a Thomas Huxley who saw the ethical and the cosmic in perpetual  struggle."
As his acceptance  of Thomas  Huxley's evolutionary ethics implies, Pratt  felt a strong moral revulsion to some of the implications of social Darwinism;  in  parti­ cular,  he could not agree with  the ethical sanction  given by Herbert  Spencer  to "the  survival of the fittest".  The  early poem, The  Great Feud  (I926), described by  him  as a  "fantastic picture  of some stage  in  the  evolutionary  struggle  for existence,"  was written  "to  show  how near  to extinction  a  race  might  come, if the instinct to attack  and to retaliate  upon attack were given absolute rein without any  moral  considerations." The  poem, an  uneasy mixture  of jocular  beast fable and satiric allegory (of World  War I)  nonetheless firmly asserts that  a perversion of morality and reason, resulting in the destruction of community,  must inevitably accompany  the survival of the fittest individual.  The  protagonist  of this poem, a female ape, "the  cleverest of her  time",  distorts both  truth  and  a newly evolved moral law as she takes upon  herself "the strain/ Of descent". This punning  con­ clusion to The  Great  Feud  implies not only the ape's descent to a neighbouring valley where her brood lies hidden,  but also the perverted "reason" of the descent of evolutionary  man.
In  his Romanes  lecture,  "Evolution and  Ethics,"  T.  H.  Huxley  had  argued "the  ethical  progress of society depends, not on imitating  the cosmic process, ... but  in  combating  it  ... by the  substitution  of what  may  be  called  the  ethical process; the end of which is not the survival of those who may happen  to be the fittest, ... but  of those who are  ethically the  best."  It  is essentially this view of
evolution that  E. J. Pratt  adopts. The whole struggle on the Titanic  (of the I 935
poem of the same  name)   is summarized  in the conflicting impulses of the  pas­
sengers just before the ship goes down;  "self-preservation fought/ Its red primor-


50

THE  GREAT TRADITION



dial battle with the 'ought.' " Red and primordial,  this battle is an internalization of the struggle of the survival instinct against the ethical sense. Similarly, the significance of Brebeuf's magnificent endurance  under torture  in the 1940 epic, Brebeuf and  his Brethren,  is the  triumph  of  moral  man  in  moral  community against amoral  nature; in the largest sense it is an allegory of western man  at the outset of World  War  II.
Huxley  had  also suggested in the Romances  lecture:  "It may seem an  auda­ cious proposal thus to pit the microcosm against  the macrocosm;  and  to set man to subdue  nature  to  his higher  ends.''  In  "The Truant" ( 1943),  Pratt's most characteristic  poem, this ethical  paradigm  is explored. Here,  the microcosm,  tru­ ant man, is pitted against the macrocosm of the natural  order  (or cosmic process) jocularly described by Pratt  as "a grand  Panjandrum" (a false God or pretender to power) . Opposing  the natural  process of mere survival, the truant affirms the grandeur  and  spiritual  dignity of man's  heroism  in  the service of the  Christian  ideal. In the last epic, Towards  the Last Spike  ( 1952), a narrative of the build­ ing of the  Canadian Pacific Railway,  Pratt  turns  back to  the  concerns  of  the earliest pioneer poetry, the conquering of the land. With this poem, Pratt's evolu­ tionary  thought  moves full-circle:  from  Huxley's  dominantly  pessimistic view of natural  process (as  expressed in  the first  narratives)   to a dominantly  optimistic view of the  relation  between man  and  nature  in Towards  the  Last  Spike.  This optimistic  view of evolution is highly suggestive of Jan  Christian  Smuts'  Holism and Evolution  ( 1926). Smuts had argued that  all parts of the evolutionary  pro­ cess work for the good of the whole, whether  the organism is rock, cell, man,  or the nation state. By adapting Smuts' holism in Towards the Last Spike  (especially as revealed in the metaphors of metamorphosis which transform Scots labourers  to Laurentian rock),  Pratt  is  able  to integrate  man  with  nature.  Man,  composed of the same elements as the rest of nature,  is also equipped  with "Mind" which, in Smut's view, has the capacity for directing ethically the whole. As in the earlier poem The  Roosevelt and The  Antinoe, the ethical triumph  is the result of human co-operation  as opposed to Darwinistic competitive individualism.  It is character­ istic of Pratt's poetry that there are no individuals as such; even Brebeuf is generic man,  and  representative  of group  idealism. Pratt's  insistence on  man's  capacity to make an  ethical choice and so shape his own evolutionary  development, is as representative  of the Canadian interpretation of Darwinism  as Robinson  Jeffers' pessimism regarding  human  progress and  his insistence on man's  depravity  is characteristic  of the American.
In his presentation of a moral and hierarchical society, Pratt  reflects the histori-

THE  GREAT TRADITION



cal  development of  English  Canadian poetry.  His  poetry,  from   Newfoundland Verse   (I923)  to  Towards the  Last  Spike   (I952) spans,  both  topographically and  aesthetically, Canada's  development from  colony  to  nation, from  the  New­ found-Land origins  of  Hayman's  Quodlibets (I 628), still  firmly  rooted  in  the English  tradition, to  the  entry  of British  Columbia into  Confederation  in  I 87 I and  the  beginnings of a distinctively  Canadian view of nature. Darwin's  nature and  T. H.  Huxley's cosmology  may  have  provided   the  intellectual  outlines   of Pratt's poetic  world,  but  Canadian history,  Canadian geography and  Canadian cultural experience, as well as Pratt's good  heart  and  his moral  vision,  give sub­  stance  to this world. The major narratives, Brebeuf and His Brethren, Behind  the Log, Dunkirk  and  Towards the  Last Spike, all recapitulate Canadian  experience
-the struggle against  the  wilderness,  the  building of the  railroad which  united the country, Canadian participation in the Second  World  War-in terms  which Canadians have  understood and  with  which  they  have identified. It  may  be that the evolutionary myth  is particularly suited  for adoption by a developing country where  the  vision of progress  still remains  a  powerful  one and  where  the  struggle against  nature has always  been  a constant  feature of life.

NOTES

1 Francis Bacon, "Of  Gardens," Essayes or Counsels, Civill  and  Morall.
2   William Vaughan, The Golden  Fleece,  I626.
3 Ibid.
4  R[obert]  H[ayman], Quodlibets, Lately  Come   Over   from  New  Britaniola, Old
Newfound-Land,  I628.
5  B. Lacy, "A Description  of Newfoundland," Miscellaneous Poems,  I 729.
6  Goldsmith  quotes  these lines from his uncle's "The  Traveller," in his introduction to The Rising  Village and  Other  Poems,  I834·
7  Letter  from Lome  Pierce to E. J. Pratt,  Lome  Pierce Collection, Douglas Library,
Queen's  University.
8  Carl Berger, "The True  North Strong and Free," Nationalism in Canada, ed. Peter
Russell, I 966.
9   Index  to the  Canadian Monthly and  National   Review  and  Rose-Belford's  Cana­ dian Monthly and  National Review, Marilyn G. Flitton, "The  Canadian Monthly, I872-I882," unpublished  M.A. thesis, Simon Fraser University,  I973·
10 Goldwin  Smith,   "Pessimism,"   Rose-Belford's Canadian  Monthly   and   National
Review, IV  (March I88o).
11 Isabella  Valancy  Crawford,   "Malcolm's   Katie,"  Old  Spookses'   Pass, Malcolm's Katie  and Other Poems,  I884. Alfred's assertions regarding  human  mutability  and the existence of earlier  worlds, now destroyed, are directly suggestive of the argu­ ments  of Lucifer  in  Byron's  Cain   (I 82 I). In  effect, Crawford  merges  Lucifer's Manicheanism  with Darwinian  pessimism.
12 Henry W. Wells and Carl F. Klinck, Edwin]. Pratt, the Man  and his Poetry,  I947·


BY THE  SEJI
For A.M. Klein





Miriam U'addington








His grief it fell and fell;
he mourned  that  his brain could never be like new - a seamless whole again.

He polished it with spit
and sealed the cracks with glue, he pinned it to the air -
yet away it flew.

He caught  it in a net
of silken words and wit, but his broken brain
was fragmented  and split.

He quilted  it with grass
and anchored  it with ships, he sailed tilting words,
they foundered  on his lips.

He  dropped  a silver line into the tides of verse,
and found  his broken brain
had  hooked  it to a curse.


53

BY THE SEA



He  called  the angels down from  balconies of sky,
they emptied  out ills life but  would not let him die.

Someone drained  the ponds of his unlettered  land,
a stranger  hid  the road beneath  a mile of sand.

And  Apollo's golden ear was sealed against ills cries, his lonely broken brain
was barred  from  paradise.

His grief it falls and falls
on green  fields and  on white, he rocks ills broken  brain
that  never mended  right

And sings ills silent song
to earth  and  tree and stone, we hear it when we hear
the rain beat on the stone.

The  rain  beats on the stone:
but how many  recognize ills broken  brain, ills fear, are nothing  but our own?














54


MALCOLM'S KATIE
Images and Songs


Kenneth ]. Hughes and
Birk Sproxton





tABELLA VALANCY CRAWFORD'S  "Malcohn's Katie", as we learn from the sub-title, is a love story. But even the most cursory reading  reveals that  this is not simply the story of love between a man and a woman.  "Malcolm's Katie" in fact  consists of a series of interrelated  love stories. In  addition  to the story of the love of Max and  Katie,  we have the story of Malcolm's  love for his daughter, the story of Katie's  love for her father,  the story of Alfred's  perverse love for Malcolm's gold, and the story of Max's patriotic love of his wilderness community  and  the nation  of which it is a part.  These stories culminate  in  the triumph  of love in all its manifestations,  the  creation  of a  new  Edenic  society, and the transformation of Malcolm and Alfred from alienated  beings, whose first love is wealth, to total human  beings capable of love in the widest and  narrowest senses of that  term. On all levels there is conflict, and on all levels love triumphs in the end.
The  main image of the poem is the ring of the opening lines, and it provides a
key to an  understanding of the many love stories:

Max plac'd a ring on little Katie's hand, A silver ring that he had beaten out
From that same sacred coin-first  well-priz'd wage
For boyish labour, kept thro' many years.

The  image of Max's reworking of the prize of his labour  introduces  the two anti­ thetical  value systems that  are to dominate  "Malcolm's Katie" and  generate  the power that  will vitalize the dramatic structure.  Money, the symbol of exchange, is transformed  into ring, the symbol of love. But values are embodied  in persons, and  thus  we have in  this poem  two kinds of persons:  the  ring  or love people, Max and  Katie,  on the one hand,  and the money people,  Malcolm  and  Alfred, on the other. This  broad  conflict is carefully dramatized,  and  the  tranquility of

55

MALCOLM'S KATIE



the  conclusion  tells us that  the  money  people have  been  transformed  into  ring people.
The subtlety and  richness of the dramatic  structure  in "Malcolm's Katie"  can be suggested by a consideration  of the recurring garden  images which support  it. These  images  function   in  a  number   of  ways:   they  indicate   the  relationship between  Max and  Katie  (Part I), the relationship  between Katie  and  Malcolm (Part III), the quality  of life at  Malcolm's  domain  (Part  III), and  the quality of life in the new Eden  (Part VII). The  garden,  in short, functions  as an image of  a  society in  which  love  and  harmony  are  the  ruling  principles.  It  can  be thought  of, therefore,  as both  the  microcosmic and  macrocosmic  correlative  to the ring image.
In  Part  I  Katie  says to  Max,  "I have made/Your heart  my garden."1  The
garden  in this instance  stands  as an image of love and  fertility at  the individual level. Part  III opens with a picture of the "great  farmhouse,"  which is a  projec­ tion of Malcolm's  utilitarian impulses:  "The  great farmhouse of  Malcolm Graem stood,/Square-shoulder'd and peak'd-roof,  upon a hill,/With many windows look­ ing everywhere ..."2    The  house, like Malcolm, stands  isolated and  looks out  at the  wheat  (wealth)  fields. But this somewhat  stark  structure  has been  partially transformed  by Katie's  garden: "Katie's gay  garden  foam'd  about  the  walls,/ Leagur'd  the prim-cut  modem  sills, and  rush'd/Up the stone walls-and broke on the peak'd  roof." The  garden dominates the farmhouse  precisely to the degree that  Katie has influence  over  Malcolm at this point, and  thus we see that  it is an objective  representation of  Katie's  love in  the  process of  converting  Malcolm from  an  acquisitive,  isolated  individual  into  a "social-soul'd"  person like Max;  for the climbing vines will grow as they are wont to do and soon cover the house entirely.3   At the end Malcolm leaves his isolated house when he leaves his isolated individualism  and  becomes a member  of the new Edenic  community.
In  the  conclusion  Malcolm  is in  a  new  world,  a  new  culture.  Katie  affirms that  she would not change  her "wild  and  rocking woods,jDotted by little homes of unbark's  trees/  ... For  the smooth sward  of selfish Eden  bowers ...".  The new Eden, then, is quite the opposite of the grim and grey utilitarian  world  typi­ fied by Malcolm and  his farmhouse.  In this new world both Malcolm and Alfred are fully human,  which  means  that  they have rejected their former  individually centred  values and  come to accept  the socially centred  values of  the  new com­ munity.  They  have  found  love in  its social form  and  escaped  their  alienation. The  garden,  therefore,  functions  as the symbol of a  civilization  based  on  love rather  than  power.

MALCOLM'S  KATIE



Like the garden,  Nature  performs an  important dramatic function  in "Mal­ colm's Katie," and  this can  be seen in the  correlation  between  nature  and  the psychological drama. The  poem  begins with  Max  and  Katie  in  harmony  with external  nature: "Nay,  Kate,  look down  amid  the  globes/Of  those  large  lilies that  our light canoe/Divides, and  see within  the  polish'd  pool/That small,  rose face of yours-so dear, so fair ..." The  time is summer and  the hills are "Rich  with hill ftow'rs and  musical with rills." External  nature becomes a reflection of the lovers' internal  states,  for  they have  pledged  an  undying  love-an  eternal love existing in an  eternal  summer-which the  poem  will soon put  to the  test.
Part  II  opens with  a glorious passage:  "The South  Wind  laid  his moccasins aside,jBroke his gay calumet  of ftow'rs, and  cast/His useless wampum, beaded with cool dews,jFar from him, northward  ..." The  time is Indian summer  when "At  mom  the sharp  breath  of night  arose ..." Bound  together  by the chain  of necessity, the  opposites,  summer  and  winter,  are  anthropomorphized  and   the Indian  summer  playfully  mocks  the  symbol of  winter,  the  moon:   "Esa! esa! shame  upon  you, Pale  Face!jShame upon  you,  Moon  of  Evil  Witches!/Have you kill'd the happy,  laughing  Summer?"  This  parallels the ways in which  Max playfully mocks Katie  in Part  I where Kate  answers:  " 'Oh,  words!'  said Katie, blushing, 'only words!/You build  them  up that  I  may  push them  down'." The sun  (summer on one level, Max on another)  is absent from the moon  (winter  on one level, Katie on another) and the movement from summer  to Indian  summer with  its cool mornings  is made  to mark  the degree  of separation of Max  from Katie;  the further  movement  to the end of Indian  summer  in Part  II,  with  the bare trees where the  "pale,  sharp  fingers crept",  prepares  us for his trial  in Part IV. External  nature  thus  is made  to represent  Max's  psychological state.  For if Max  labours  safe  in  the  knowledge  that  he  is loved,  and  if  nothing  eventful happens in Part  II,  the images of a changed external  nature  prepare  us emotion­ ally for what  will happen  in Part  IV. The  extended  opening  in Part  IV,  there­ fore, where  we meet  the  North  wind  and  an  external  nature  in  which  "High  grew the snow beneath  the  low-hung sky," tells us that  something  is about  to happen  to Max,  for  it objectively  represents Max's  inner  state.  We  are  in  this way prepared  for  his depression and  madness when  we  meet  him  in  this  Part.  Again, the North wind tells his "white squaw,"  "Spread thy white blanket on the twice-slain dead,/And hide them, ere the waking of the sun!" The sun, of course, will be the new summer  sun  and  the "twice-slain  dead" prepares  us for  Max's double  defeat  at  the  hands  of Alfred.  His  subsequent  "death" underneath the fallen tree makes him like all the  other  dead  things  beneath  the snow.  He  dies

57

MALCOLM'S KATIE



but he will rise again like the sun, a principle of natural  regeneration  and simul­
taneously a Christ-like figure who will save Katie in Part  VI.
Katie is tested in Part  VI ; the season is autumn: "The  Land  has put his ruddy gauntlet  on,jOf harvest  gold, to dash in Famine's  face ...". But this will be an autumn  from  which  no  winter  will ever follows, for here,  too, external  nature reflects an inner state. There  is the fear of winter in the external  world and there is the internal  fear  that  Max  may no longer love her, but  good  overcomes evil and true love triumphs.


l:EsuN-MOON  IMAGE sequence serves a dramatic function and supports  a number  of themes in "Malcolm's Katie."  This  imagery  operates
both on the human  and external  nature  level. Asked by Katie, "Are you content?" Max replies, "Yes, crescent-wise, but not to [sic] round, full moon."  Literally the image is one of the young crescent moon with which we can see also the shape of the full moon since it is outlined  by light from  the  other  side of the  earth.  In folklore this is known as the new moon in the old moon's arms, and  on the the­ matic level we can see Katie  and  her father,  the new Canada  in the arms of the old. Clearly, "crescent-wise"  also refers to her tender  years and  the outlined  full moon may serve a double  function  by suggesting the fulness of her  womanhood  which is already discernable. Above all, the moon is a symbol of  Katie's  spiritual chastity  and  constancy. This  is Katie  as Diana.  Yet again,  the moon symbolizes the feminine  principle  and  Katie  is nothing  is she is not  feminine.  Max,  for his part,  as we saw in the discussion of nature  and the  psychological drama, is con­ nected with the sun, the masculine principle. Obviously there are cross-references to  be made  here  with  the  garden  imagery  also, because Max  is the  garden  in which she grows and the resurrected sun  who brings life to her in her despair  in Part  VI.  The  fertility  of love connects the two images.
In the external  nature  of the poem the sun and moon are mutually  dependent contraries  which divide  between  them  day and  night  and  summer  and  winter; they represent respectively life and death.4  In Part II we find Max separated  from Katie  and  "In this shrill moon  the scouts of Winter  ran."  Indian  summer  gives
way to winter:

... too late the Sun
Pour'd his last vigour to the deep, dark cells
Of the dim wood. The keen two-bladed Moon
Of Falling Leaves roll'd up on crested mists,

MALCOLM'S KATIE



And where  the lush, rank  boughs had foil'd  the Sun
In  his red  prime,  her  pale, sharp  fingers crept
After  the wind and  felt about  the moss....

The same   moon  threatens Katie in  Part V:  "Katie on  the   moonlit  window lean'd,jAnd in the airy silver of her voice/Sang of the tender blue  Forget-me-not
... " As with  Max,  so with  Katie; the  threatening moon  is an  objective repre­
sentation of her own state  for she is going  to fall victim  to the  fear  that  Max  no longer  loves her. Indeed, the  "Forget-Me-Not Song"  reminds us of this.
The moon is made to represent not only death  in external nature, however,  but also the death and  decay  of civilizations.  For when Alfred  argues that nations are not  immortal he says:

... The  lean, lank  lion peals
His midnight  thunders  over lone, red plains, Long-ridg'd  and  crested on their dusty waves With  fires from  moons red-hearted  as the sun,

Below the roots of palms, and  under  stones Of younger ruins, thrones, tow'rs and cities Honeycomb  the earth.

The solution  offered  to  the  problem  of change  in  its  many  forms  is love  in  its many  forms.  On  the  individual level of the lovers we find  that

... Love, once set within a lover's breast, Has its own sun-its own peculiar sky, All one great  daffodil-on  which do lie
The  sun, the moon, the stars-all seen at once, And never setting,  but all shining straight
Into  the faces of the trinity-
The  one belov'd,  the lover, and sweet Love!

On  the social and  political  plane  we see the refugees from  a world  without love in "the quick  rush  of panting human wavesjUpheav'd by throbs of angry poverty,/And driven  by keen  blasts  of hunger  from/Their native strands"  mov­ ing  into  a  new  world  of  harmony and  love  as  they  "Throb down   to  peace  in kindly  valley beds,jTheir turbid bosoms clearing  in the calm/Of  sun-ey'd  Plenty,  till the stars,  and  moon,jThe blessed sun  himself, have leave  to shine/ And  laugh  in their  dark  hearts!" The  steam  engine  images  of "panting",  "rush", "throbs", and  "blasts" serve simultaneously as nature images  and  suggest the  state  of the  immigrants; they  have  been  ejected  by the  industrial  machine of the  old  world

59

MALCOLM's KATIE



and  they will become closer to nature  in the new. As with  the lovers, so for all others  in  the  new  Edenic  community  are  "The  sun, the  moon,  the stars-all seen at once", for the problem  of change has been transcended.  And so it is with the new Eden of the conclusion;  there is no mention  there of seasons or seasonal change  because they would have no function. They could not reflect change in a stable society which, as the vision has it, is without  change. The  new civilization will give the lie to Alfred's  claim that no nation is immortal!
We do not have  to read  too far into "Malcolm's Katie"  before we note that there is a constant  anthropomorphization of nature  and  that  a goodly portion of the work presents us with a picture of nature as Indian.  There seems to be a good reason why Crawford  specifically singles out Indian  culture  and  continually  col­ lapses it into nature  so that  the two become as one. The  function  of this anthro­  pomorphization of nature  as Indian  seems to be to provide  a  background  onto which  other  images of society can  be superimposed  in  much  the same  way  as succeeding  forms of an  evolving  western culture  were  superimposed  on  a  land that  formerly belonged to the Indian.
So far as nature  as Indian is concerned  it is but a short  leap from  the meta­
phorical "From  his far wigwam sprang the strong North  Wind/ And rush'd  with war-cry down  the steep  ravines,/ And  wrestl'd  with  the giants  of the woods" to
the literal

The warrior stags, with does and tripping fawns

[had  never]  Seen, limn'd against the farthest rim of light
Of the low-dipping sky, the plume or bow
Of the red hunter;  nor, when stoop'd to drink,
Had from the rustling rice-bed heard the shaft
Of the still hunter hidden in its spears;
His bark canoe close-knotted in its bronze, His form as stirless as the brooding air....

The  Indian  here blends completely into the nature  of which  he and  the culture which he represents are  part.  For his is a culture which did not  (generally)  seek to transform  nature  and  it is precisely for this reason that  the anthropomorphic images of nature  as Indian   prove such a useful background  for  the cultures  of the white men who did.
Malcolm is one of the figures who has been busy in the  process of transform­
ing nature,  both external  nature  and  his own. In terms of his own nature  we see him  described  by Max  in  images of rock and  we learn  that  for  him grains  of

6o

MALCOLM'S KATIE



wheat  are  "ingots!" A  good  image  of  the  transformation of  both  internal and external nature we see  in  the  long  passage  where  Malcolm's "noisy  mills"  and the  "goods" mark   the  extent   to  which   Malcolm   and  all  that   he  represents is separated from  the  untransformed world  of  the  Indian. And  it  is between the extremes  of Malcolm (not  to mention  Alfred)   and  the  world  of the  Indian that Max's vision  of a  "lowly  roof,"  "Kine," and  "A  man  and  woman" falls. 5   Max will have  his new  civilization tied  neither  to the  necessities of an  untransformed nature which  is the  way of the  Indian nor  to the  alienating necessities of wealth as Malcolm  is. Moreover, Max  is constantly  connected with  the  axe  and  we see that  three  "technologies" are contrasted in this work:  that  of the  bow and  arrow, that  of the  axe, and  that  of busy mills.
Obviously  Alfred  can  have  no positive image  of society attached to him  in the
poem  because  he is a nihilist,  but  we do get an  impression  of his vision indirectly in terms  of a reference  to the  love theme.  And  this has social implications. He  is part  of nature red  in tooth  and  claw as we shall  see from  the  following  passage.
The hill speaks:

On  my slim, loftiest peak, an eagle with
His angry eyes set sunward, while his cry
Falls fiercely back from all my ruddy  heights, And his bald eaglets, in their  bare, broad  nest Shrill  pipe  their  angry echoes:  'Sun,  arise, And show me that  pale dove beside her nest,
Which  I shall strike with piercing  beak and  tear
With  iron talons for my hungry  young.'

And that  mild dove, secure for yet a space, Half  waken'd,  turns  her ring'd  and  glossy neck To  watch dawn's  ruby pulsing on her breast, And see the first bright golden motes slip down The  gnarl'd  trunks about her leaf-deep nest, Nor sees nor fears the eagle on the peak.

At this  point  the scene shifts  to  Malcolm's house  and  we  hear  the  words  " 'Yes, sing, sweet  Kate,' said  Alfred  in her ear ... " Alfred  is the  eagle  and  the  eaglets are  the  many  cries  of  his  unrestrained will:   "If all  man's days  are  three-score years and  ten,jHe needs must  waste them  not,  but  nimbly  seize/The bright, con­ summate blossom that  his willjCalls for most loudly". His will makes many  cries and  he simply  follows the loudest.  The  dove is Katie  through whom  he will seek to increase  his riches for "my  pangs of love for gold must  needs be fed ... " Katie

61

MALCOLM'S KATIE



happens  to be the  present  object  of his attentions,  but  he defines hhnself  as a type  who  would  not  act  differently  with  others.  Indeed,  he  goes further,   and believes that others should share his views, hence his proselytizing speeches to Max (Part  IV). His vision of society is that  of ruthlessly competitive struggle  marked by the survival of the fittest, a superb exemplum of social Darwinism.  No wonder then  that  he is the only character  in the  poem to use the word  "Chance"  (five times)  and to insist that  the world is ruled by Chance.



SoNGS PLAY  AN  IMPORTANT   ROLE  m  "Malcolm's Katie". Dorothy Livesay has observed that  we should not take the songs out of their con­ text  in  the  poem  as mere  anthology  pieces, and  she is surely correct;  they  are essential components of the thematic and dramatic structures. Unfortunately space limitations  will allow only a summary  treatment  of them  here.
There  are seven songs in  "Malcolm's Katie"  spread  throughout the  first six
Parts.  There  are  none  in  the  conclusion. Of  these seven songs two are  for solo voice, four for chorus, and one for solo voice and chorus. The  two solo songs are sung  by Katie.  These  are  the "Lily  Song"  in Part  III  and  the  "Forget-Me-Not Song" in Part  V. The  four songs for chorus are, "0 light canoe, where dost thou glide?"  (Part I), "0 Love builds on the azure sea"  (Part  II), "Doth  true  Love lonely grow?"  (Part V) , and "Who curseth Sorrow knows her not at all" at the beginning  of Part  VI.  The  latter  is definitely not a song but  a choral  chant  in which  the  verse form  follows that  of the  work  as a whole. The  work  song  of Max's in Part  IV, "Bite deep and wide, 0 Axe, the tree!" is a song for solo voice and  chorus. Certainly  it would seem reasonable to argue that  the axe's responses to Max should  be sung by a chorus, for the axe speaks for a society, even if that society does not  yet exist. However  this may  be, we see Crawford's skill in  the way in which she has placed  the songs. For  Max's song is at  the  centre  of the poem and it is surrounded by Katie's  lyrics which in turn  are surrounded by the four choral songs in a neat  geometrical  pattern.  Moreover, the pattern  recapitu­ lates the main themes.  Max is enclosed by Katie's  love and  both are enclosed by the  new society they  are  building.  If we look at  this surrounding  process as a series of concentric  circles we have a geometrical and symbolic  representation  of the many  forms of love.
The songs in "Malcolm's Katie"  also serve a dramatic function.  In essence they do one of two things:  they either  reflect personal states and suggest the direction that  the  action  will take,  as the songs of Max  and  Katie,  or they comment  on

MALCOLM'S KATIE



particular situations  from outside,  as in the choral songs. Thus  the  choral  song, "0 light canoe, where dost thou  glide?" at the end of Part  I shows the  unity of the lovers, the canoe, the heavens and earth, reflecting a universal harmony result­ ing from the pledge of eternal  love. It also suggests, however, that  there may be rough  waters ahead  for this true  love. The second song, "0 Love builds on the azure sea,"  hints that  Max  is safe even as the threatening nature  imagery  sug­ gests his coming trial.  For even though  Max is busy in the wilderness attempting to create  a community  in which  love can flourish, the  song says that  love does not finally need buildings because "Love's solid land is everywhere!" Katie's  lyric in Part  III, the "Lily  Song,"  is one that  was written  for her  by Max  in  which the lilies tum  out to be an objective representation  of  Katie. The  song with  Max and the axe in Part IV shows the love Max has for his nation-building labour and sets the scene for the arrival of his tempter  Alfred. Katie's "Forget-Me-Not Song" in  Part  V  implies her  growing  fears  that  Max  has indeed  forgotten   her.  The choral song at the end of Part  V, "Doth  true Love lonely grow?" assures us that true  love will triumph  even as all the cards seem to be stacked  against  it. The choral chant  at the beginning of Part VI, "Who  curseth Sorrow knows her not at all," prepares us for the darkness of Part VI  which will be followed by the light of the Edenic  Part  VII.
As inadequate as this summary  is it offers some sense of  the  dramatic and
thematic  functions of the songs. Since the songs are so carefully  placed in a neat geometrical  pattern  we must  assume that  Crawford  knew exactly  what  she was doing. This assumption  being granted,  the question arises as to why there are no songs in the conclusion. In view of the theme we might well have expected some­ thing at the end in the manner  of Schiller and the last movement  of  Beethoven's Ninth.  We can only speculate  but it seems possible that  Crawford  tells us by the absence of song in Part  VII  that song, art, has disappeared  into the fissures of the new Edenic society itself, for society has now become one large  undifferentiated work of art.  This view is in keeping with  the vision of  "Malcolm's Katie",  for Max  is a poet. We see in him the balance of labour, love, and  art.
The songs and main image patterns  of "Malcolm's Katie"  all work to support the dramatic structure  and  the result is a complete, coherent,  and  perfectly  con­ sistent work of art.


NOTES

1 Connected with the image of Katie as flower is the image of her as lily, for she surely is the lily of Max's "Lily Song".

MALCOLM'S KATIE



2   Note  also the  careful juxtaposition of Malcolm's "great farm-house" at  the begin­
ning  of Part  III with  'the  black  slope all  bristling  with  burn'd stumps/ ... known
... as 'Max's House' " at  the  end  of Part  II.
3  This  process is supported by another image.  Max  describes  Katie as "A seed of love to cleave  into  a  rock/And  burgeon thence  until  the  granite splits/Before its subtle strength". The  rock  will  be Malcolm which  the seed  (Katie's love)  will gradually break  up  and  help  to  convert to fertile  earth. Since  Max  is the  garden in  which Katie grows, Malcolm also will become a garden. And  they will all live in the better than  Edenic garden at  the  end.
4  Note  also  the  connection between   some  moon  and   axe  images: "the  bright   axe cleav'd  moon-like  thro' the  air"; "The keen  two-bladed Moon". If the  moon  sym­ bolizes  death in  external nature, it  is still  only  one  phase  of  a  dialectical  process because  we are  assured   that   the  sun  and  regeneration will  necessarily  follow.  Just so Max's axe destroys  like the  moon,  but out  of that  destruction will arise a regen­  erated society.
5  Max  and  Malcolm are  contrasted by socio-political images. Malcolm is described  as "lordly" and  as the  "king" of "silent  courtiers". This  suggests  the  hierarchical view of society  and   the  sense  of  his own  position  in  such  a  society  that   has  prompted Malcolm to reject  the lowly Max. Max on the other  hand  takes an egalitarian view. He  will have  no slaves  to build  his civilization   (his  house). Indeed such  a  civiliza­ tion  will bury  kings:  "And have  I  slain  a King?/ Above  his ashes  will I  build  my house--/No slave beneath its pillars,  but-a King!" While  Max  is speaking about  kings  of the  forest  the  image  obviously  goes much  further than  this  and  connects  with  the  nationalist and  anti-imperialist theme.


ON CARL  F. KLINCK



Brandon  Conran






MORF. THAN THIRTY YEARS  AGO,  when   he  publffihed Wilfred  Campbell: A Study  in Late Provincial Victorianism   ( 1942), Carl Fred­ erick Klinck emerged  from  what  was then  an unfashionable  area  of  scholarship into what  has since become the mainstream  of Canadian criticism.
Though   Wilfred  Campbell   (originally  written  as a  Columbia   Ph.D.  thesis) concerns a writer whose work spans the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, Klinck's particular  interest  over a long career  as critic and  scholar  has been the  writing done in the English language  during the period before Confederation  in what  are now Ontario and  Quebec.  His contributions  in this area,  through  the  discovery of unnoticed  material  and  the establishment of its authorship, have been invalu­ able;  he has brought  long inaccessible texts to light, and,  providing  illuminating  critical introductions  that  place them soundly in their  North  American  context, has presented  them to a wide reading public. Yet Klinck has never accepted  the
arbitrary  boundaries  of period  or genre. As a  pioneer biographer  of E. J. Pratt
and  William  "Tiger" Dunlop;   as co-editor of Canadian  Anthology, one of the first comprehensive  collections of our country's  prose and  poetry;  as co-creator of the  pioneer  reference  work  in  biography  and  criticism,  Canadian   Writers/ Ecrivains canadiens;  as the  careful  investigator  in  volumes like Tecumseh and The  journal of Major  ]ames Norton of the Indian  element in our historical litera­ ture,  and  as  initiator,   general  editor  and  contributor   to  Literary  History  of Canada,  he has manifested  not only an impressively wide scope of  interest,  but also a flexibility of response that  has made him sensitive to virtually  every aspect of Canadian literary life.
A graduate at nineteen  of Waterloo College  (then  affiliated with  the  Univer­
sity of Western Ontario), Klinck completed his M.A. two years later at Columbia University, which was a fortunate  choice in view of the later  development  of his interest in Canadian writers and  writing. As early as 1924  V. L. 0. Chittick's monograph  on Thomas  Chandler  Haliburton and Carl Y. Connor's  brief study of

ON  CARL  F. KLINCK



Archibald  Lampman's letters were published as Columbia  doctoral  theses. Henry W. Wells, a critic of broad interests who later collaborated with Klinck in writing Edwin  ]. Pratt: The  Man  and  his Poetry  (I 947), offered him  enthusiastic  en­ couragement  at Columbia  from the beginning, as did Pelham  Edgar  who, during  a summer  of lecturing  at Columbia  as a change from his duties at the University of Toronto, gave Klinck  useful advice in connection  with his M.A. thesis, which was entitled  "Influences on  the  Poetry of the  Canadian Group  of  the  Sixties". "The Sixties" of course were the I 86o's,  and  during  the  period  of  his research Klinck  gathered  valuable  personal  reminiscences on Archibald  Lampman from Charles D. G. Roberts  and  Duncan  Campbell  Scott;  he also reached  the conclu­ sion that Wilfred Campbell  (who, with Lampman  and D. C. Scott, had expressed individual  and  highly independent critical  views in the  Toronto Globe  column "At  the  Mermaid  Tavern")  was a  central  figure in  the  Confederation Group of poets.
Lome  Pierce of the Ryerson Press, who was always alertly watchful for promis­
ing  critics,  arranged for  Klinck  to  meet  Wilfred  Campbell's  son,  Lieutenant­ Colonel Basil B. Campbell,  who, with his sister, Mrs. E. S. Malloch, gave Klinck free access to their father's  letters and supplied copious biographical  details. The  result was Wilfred  Campbell: A Study  in Late  Provincial  Victorianism. One  of the first systematic studies  of an  Ontario writer,  it  examined  the entire  body of Campbell's  work  and  explored  his  Emersonian  attitude  to  nature  and  natural objects, his interest in myth-including Indian legend -as a way of explaining human  responses (as well as of partly  cushioning  the impact  of the  Darwinian  concept of evolution), and the kind of "true  British idealism" which he espoused. Klinck's  personal  travels in Scotland  enabled  him to identify  the  Scottish influ­ ences on  Campbell,  and  especially  that  of John  Douglas Sutherland Campbell,  ninth Duke of Argyll and Chief of  the poet's clan. In this exhaustive investigation Wilfred Campbell  was interpreted in the light not only of the personal influences he absorbed  but also of his historical time and  his literary contemporaries.  Unfor­  tunately  the  Ryerson  Press  published  Wilfred  Campbell  without  the  full  bibli­ ography of  Campbell's writing and of secondary source materials relating  to him which  Klinck  had  prepared; this was issued later  as a typed and  bound  supple­ ment  and supplied  to a number  of Canadian  libraries.
In  I928,  after  finishing  his initial  graduate   work at  Columbia,   Klinck  was appointed  Instructor of English  at  Waterloo  College, and  during  the next four years-with a rapidity  that  would stagger a contemporary  Promotions and Ten­ ure Committee-he had  hurdled  the intervening  ranks to full professor. In  this

66

ON  CARL  F. KLINCK



early academic period he displayed an extraordinary combination of industry, competence and versatility. While carrying a full teaching  load, he found  time to act as college librarian  from 1936 to I942, and when he served as Dean of  Water­ loo College between I 942 and  I 947, the year he went to the University of  Western Ontario,   he  maintained   a  substantial  lecturing  commitment that  ranged  into virtually every major  period  of English and  American  literature.
Klinck's second important contribution  to Canadian literary history was the biographical  section of Edwin ]. Pratt:  The   Man  and  his  Poetry, published  at the  time  when  he was leaving  Waterloo  for  London,  where  he  has  lived  ever since. This  was the  book in  which  he collaborated  with  his former  Columbia mentor,  Henry W. Wells, who had successfully sponsored the American  publica­ tion  by Knopf  of Pratt's  collected  works. In  his part  of the  book,  which  John Bartlett Brebner in his Foreword  appropriately  described as "an intimate,  imagin­ ative and affectionate enquiry", Klinck worked very closely with Pratt,  who made manuscripts,  lectures and  other  relevant material  freely available.  Because it was derived so largely from  first-hand  contact  with the  poet's  own  autobiographical account,  read in manuscript  and  heard in conversation, Edwin ]. Pratt  will con­ tinue  to serve as an  invaluable  authentic  basis for subsequent  studies  of Pratt,  especially in relation to his early life.
The  University of Western  Ontario  had  pioneered in giving courses in  Cana­ dian Literature ever since the early 192o's, and while Head of the English Depart­  ment  there from  I948  to 1956, and  subsequently Senior  Professor of  Canadian Literature,  Klinck increasingly devoted his teaching  and scholarship  to the writ­ ings of our  country.  At  this  time  one of the  most urgent  needs  for those  who taught  and  followed courses in  Canadian Literature  was a  suitable  anthology.
A. J. M. Smith's  excellent critical  and  historical verse anthology,  The   Book  of
Canadian Poetry, had appeared  in I943, and Earle Birney's Twentieth Century Canadian Poetry followed in 1953, but there was no volume available for  under­ graduate study which embraced  both poetry and  prose and  supported  the selec­ tions with relevant  and  accurate  biographical  and  bibliographical  information.  In collaboration with R. E. Watters, who was then working on the first edition of his Check   List  of Canadian  Literature and  Background   Materials, 1628-1950
( 1959), Klinck developed  the kind of book that  seemed best fitted  for  the  pur­
pose. The  result  of  these  joint  efforts  was Canadian Anthology;  published  in
1955, revised and expanded  in  xg66 and in  I974, it has, with its judicious selec­
tion of writers, its excellent biographical introductions and its bibliographical aids,

ON CARL F.  KLINCK



played a considerable part  in making courses in English-Canadian literature  pos­
sible and even -ultimately -respectable.



KLINCK HAD  LONG  BEEN FASCINATED, in a more special field, by the  exploits of William  "Tiger" Dunlop,  which  were  related  admiringly  by Robina  and Kathleen  Lizars in their late nineteenth  century book, In  the  Days of the Canada Company, IB2S-IBso, and in the late rgso's  he became curious about references to Dunlop  in  Fraser's  Magazine and  in  Blackwood's, to the latter  of which  Dunlop   had  actually   contributed.  Obviously  in  England   Dunlop  was regarded  as a distinguished literary  figure, and Klinck set out to find what in the previous connections  of this  agent  for  the  Canada   Company  in  Goderich  had given  him  this reputation. Dunlop  had  in fact  published  little  in  Canada,  but from researches in Edinburgh, in the British Museum and  the Colonial  Office in London,  in the newspapers  which Dunlop  had once edited in Calcutta, and in a variety of other  locations,  Klinck  established that  Dunlop  had  been closely  asso­ ciated  with  Christopher   North,   John  Gibson  Lockhart  and  James  Hogg,  the founders of Blackwood's. As intimate  friends and convivial drinking companions they had  met in Ambrose's  Tavern, from which their column,  "Noctes  Ambro­ sianae",  acquired  its name.
Out  of these discoveries emerged William ccTiger" Dunlop: Blackwoodian Backwoodsman (I g62), a careful  biographical  and critical study  which not only provided an understanding of Dunlop's early career and of his international repu­ tation,  but  also revealed  his hitherto  unsuspected  influence on  the  development of literature in  Canada. Dunlop  presented  Blackwood's as a model  for aspiring Upper  Canadian writers. His Statistical  Sketches  of Upper  Canada was an impor­ tant  book in its time, very popular  in England  and well reviewed in Blackwood's, Fraser's and elsewhere. Its tone was ironic and satirical, and its whimsical descrip­ tions of real conditions in Upper  Canada  poked fun at the flattering  misrepresen­ tations of current  travel and immigration  literature. Dunlop's  career showed that, if Upper  Canada  did not acquire  a humourist on the scale of Haliburton, it did possess the makings of a vigorous satirical tradition. William  Maginn,  one of the contributors to Blackwood's, was also the editor of a series of sketches of famous writers that  appeared  in Fraser's Magazine, and he considered Dunlop  important  enough  to include  him  among  his distinguished English colleagues, in an article illustrated  with drawings  by  the  once famous artist Daniel  Maclise.
Another  of Klinck's  persistent interests was first aroused by the  Columbia  lee-

68

ON CARL F. KLINCK



tures on the Indian  in American  literature  which were delivered  by Hoxie  Fair­ child, later the author  of The  Noble Savage. Klinck's desire to know more about the part  played by the Indians  in the early history of Ontario was sustained  by reading  A. C.  Casselman's  edition  of  Major  John  Richardson's  War   of   1812
(  I 902)   and  Mabel  Dunham's regional  history,  Grand  River   (  I 945), and  he began  in  particular to search  out  contemporary   writings  on  the  great   Indian leader Tecumseh.  He found in the British Museum  Richardson's poem, Tecum­ seh or The  Warrior  of  the West   (I828), and  other  references  to  Tecumseh  in Richardson's prose. Later,  when  he was working on the Lower  Canadian writer Levi Adams  in the  National  Library  of Scotland,  Klinck  discovered  an  anony­ mously published book entitled Tales of Chivalry and  Romance   (I826). At that period,  moved  by a feeling that  the literary  contribution  of early  Ontario had been grossly underestimated in comparison  with  that  of the  Maritimes,  he had been digging  into early  journals in the  hope  of finding vital  information about Upper  Canada between  I8oo and  I85o, and even earlier. In the process he found that a poem entitled "Tecumthe",  which appeared  anonymously in the Canadian  Review  of December  I826,  was identical with an item in Tales  of  Chivalry  and Romance. By analyzing various shreds of  evidence, he was able to establish  that Levi Adams, the author  of other  poems in the Canadian  Review  and  in Tales of Chivalry  and  Romance, had  also written  "Tecumthe". In  Tecumseh: Fact and Fiction  ( I96I ),  Klinck  performs a  notable synthesis of English,  Canadian and American records of the Indian leader. Originally designed as a text book of prim­ ary source material  for  undergraduate term  papers, the book in fact  illuminates not only the career of  the Shawnee chief, but  his entire period as well.
Even more extensive researches into early Canadian Indian history than  those involved in Tecumseh  went into  Klinck's  preparation,  with  the  historian  James
J. Talman, of the fine Champlain Society edition of The   journal of Major   fohn
Norton  ( I970). Led by his search for the writings of the  Mohawk  chief Joseph Brant,  Klinck  discovered  Norton's  hitherto  unpublished   journal  in  the  library of an  English  nobleman,  and  immediately  recognized the  value of this account of  North  American  Indian   life during  the  early  nineteenth  century.  Norton's journal, written in  I8I6, includes both the narrative  of a thousand  mile  journey down the Ohio from the Grand  River in Upper  Canada  and  through  the states of Kentucky  and  Tennessee with  a visit to the Cherokee  country,  and  accounts of the Five Nations from  an  early  period until  the end  of the  war  of  I 8 I 2- r 4· It  is a  remarkable  historical  document,  presented  in  an  objective  and  realistic manner,  and evidently designed to interest potential future readers in what Norton

69

ON  CARL  F. KLINCK



did,  saw,  thought  and  was told  on  his journey  in  1809-10  and  his campaigns between 1812 and  1814.
Born of a Scottish  mother  and  a Cherokee father,  and adopted  as a Mohawk, Norton also left many letters in which he relates intimate  details of his correspon­ dence  with  Wilberforce  and  various  Quakers,  and  of  his  own  adoption   of  a Christian  humanistic  attitude. In  these letters and  in the Journal  to which they form a background,  he portrays  Indian  ways and  aims unsentimentally,  and  he notes that the relationship  between whites and Indians in early Canada was quite different from, and generally more humane than, that which existed in the United States. The background  information  copiously and carefully assembled in Klinck's Biographical Introduction and in Talman's Historical Introduction combines with the  actual  substance  of the  journal  to  make  this  a  publication  of considerable importance in terms of Canadian  cultural  and  political history. In  many ways it offers fresh evidence  to substantiate a  concept  long  nurtured by  Carl  Klinck:  namely, that  Canadian and  American  literatures  are both  North  American  con­ tinental  in  their  orientation, but  in  different  ways. They  have  many  parallels because they are  often  inspired  by similar or even the same  material,  but  their developments have been different  because political and social attitudes,  especially in such directions as law and order and immigration,  have been different.
Of the many  critical  articles which Carl Klinck has written  it is impossible to
discuss every one,  but  among  those that  should  be mentioned  are  his  excellent introductory  essays to the  New  Canadian Library  editions of Frances  Brooke's The  History of Emily  Montague ( 1961), Susanna  Moodie's  Roughing  it in the Bush  ( 1962), «Tiger"  Dunlop's  Upper  Canada  ( 1967), Major  John  Richard­ son's W acousta  ( 1967)   and  Rosanna  Eleanor  Leprohon's  Antoinette  de Mire­ court ( 1973). These imaginative  essays are models of the process by which critical perception and  broad scholarship  combine to reinterpret and  revitalize an earlier age. Also notable  is Klinck's introduction  to the Alcuin Society's 1970 reprint  of Abraham S. Holmes' spicy early Victorian  tale of seduction in Chatham, Canada  West, Belinda: or, The  Rivals:  A Tale of Real  Life  ( 1843).
Yet perhaps  Carl  Klinck's most important work has lain in the synthesizing of Canadian literary history. His first work in this field was a development  of Lome Pierce's  An  Outline  of Canadian  Literature  ( 1927), which  for years had  been the standard  reference work on Canadian writers in English and  French.  During the early fifties, Pierce urged Klinck to undertake  a revision and  updating of that book, and,  although  it was  not  until  after  Pierce's  death  that  the  project  was completed,  Canadian  WritersjEcrivains canadiens  ( 1964, rev. 1966)  was dedi-

70

ON CARL F. KLINCK



cated  to  his memory  and  fulfilled his aims.  In  this  work  I  collaborated   with Klinck  and  with  Guy  Sylvestre, author  of Anthologie  de  la  poesie canadienne franfaise,  Panorama  des  lettres  canadiennes-francaises  and   numerous   literary essays, and  a critic well qualified  to treat  the  French  Canadian writers  in  their own language.
Though  it included a Chronological Table of literary and  historical events from I6o6 to I965 and a selective Bibliography of basic reference texts, Canadian WritersjEcrivains canadiens was mainly an alphabetically  arranged handbook  of information  concerning more than  350 authors and their work. It did not attempt to be all-inclusive but only to treat  for the most part writers who have "produced a notable first or second book and have thereafter embarked  upon a literary career with  repeated   publications   of  generally  acknowledged  merit." This   reference volume, which owed a great deal to Klinck's encyclopaedic knowledge of  English­ Canadian literature,  provided  biographical  and  bibliographical  information  that at the time of its publication  was not otherwise readily available.



DOUBTLESS THE MOST IMPRESSIVE of all Carl Klinck's con­ tributions  to  Canadian literature   has  been  the  initiation   and  co-ordination  of Literary History of Canada  ( I965), and his personal contributions to that volume. Originally  conceived in a conversation with  Northrop  Frye, the  Literary  History was actually  initiated  in  I957  when  the  University  of Toronto Press accepted Klinck's  proposal  that  it should  be a  work  of various  hands.  He  then  gathered together Alfred G. Bailey, Claude Bissell, Roy Daniells, Northrop  Frye and  Des­ mond Pacey, all of them leading authorities on diverse phases of Canadian litera­ ture, to assist as contributing editors, and twenty-nine other scholars as contribu­  tors. This  huge  task of  survey and  assessment, reaching  almost  I ,ooo  pages in length,  "had  two principal  aims:  to publish a comprehensive  reference  book on the  (English)  literary  history of this country,  and  to encourage  established  and younger  scholars to engage  in  a  critical study  of that  history  both  before  and after  the appearance of the work."  Its translation  by Maurice  Lebel,  L'Histoire litteraire  du Canada  ( I970), made  this valuable compendium equally  available to French Canadian readers.
Despite the obvious difficulties presented by multiple  authorship and  differing individual  approaches  to  a vast  amount  of material,  the  book  is a  fascinating account of how our writers over the centuries have responded  to their natural environment  and  to their  society against the background  of other  literary  tradi-

7I

ON  CARL  F. KLINCK



tions in English. The story unfolds in four parts:  "New Found  Lands",  "The Transplanting of Traditions", "The Emergence  of Tradition", and  "The  Real­ ization  of  a  Tradition". It treats  not  only such  central  genres  as  poetry,   fic­ tion, drama  and  criticism,  but  "other  works which  have influenced  literature  or have been significantly  related  to literature  in expressing the  cultural life of the country": folk tales, Canadian publishing, the growth of  Canadian English, the writings  of historians,  social scientists, philosophers and  theologians,  travel  and nature  books, children's  literature, essays and  biography.
The  Introduction and  two large chapters  on literary  activity  in  the  Canadas
( I8I2-1841) and in Canada East and West ( 1841-I88o) were written  by Klinck himself. These  chapters,  which  reflect the  result of his life-long  gleanings  from libraries  in Canada, the  United  Kingdom  and  the United  States,  bring  to light much fresh material,  clarify influences and  relationships between  English, Ameri­ can  and  Canadian literatures,  and  give in vivid and  lively prose the  first syste­ matic and connected story of this early period. They provide, moreover, an invalu­ able guide to what significant  books of the time merit study or reprinting.
The  Literary History, a revised and  updated  edition of which is scheduled for publication  in 1975, establishes that there is plenty of good writing in this country for which neither boosterism nor apology is needed. As Northrop Frye points out in his brilliant concluding  chapter,  "The  writers featured in this book have identi­ fied the habits and attitudes of the country, as Fraser and Mackenzie have identi­ fied its rivers. They  have also left an  imaginative  legacy of dignity  and  of high courage." Without  Carl  Klinck's  inspiration,  patience and  industry  the extent of this legacy could  not  have  been  recognized so soon in such  clear  perspective.
Carl Klinck started  publishing creative evaluations of Canadian writings in an age when few of his fellow academics took their own country's literature seriously and  there  was little encouragement for any kind of scholarship  at  all. Despite a number  of surveys by some distinguished  "zealous amateurs", the only historically oriented  treatment of  the  early  Canadian period  was  Ray  Palmer   Baker's  A History  of English-Canadian   Literature  to  the  Confederation   ( 1920).  Special studies had  been published, such  as Casselman's valuable  notes in  his edition  of Richardson's  War  of  1812  (1902), Chittick's  Haliburton  (1924), Pierce's Wil­ liam Kirby  ( 1929)  and James Cappon's Bliss Carman and the Literary Currents and Influences of his Time   ( 1930). In 1936 the University of Toronto Quarterly introduced  its annual  review of "Letters  in Canada", and  W. E. Collin  brought out  his White Savannahs. In  1943, the year after Wilfred  Campbell, influential
works like E. K. Brown's On Canadian  Poetry and A. J. M. Smith's  The  Book of

ON  CARL  F. KLINCK



Canadian Poetry  appeared. That year, too, although  J. B. Brebner described  the meetings  of the  Royal  Society of Canada   as "drowsy  gatherings  ... the  trans­ actions  slumber  undisturbed", the  Humanities   Research  Council  was  formed. Within  a decade  one of the  recommendations  of the  "Massey  Report"  (I 95 I ) led to the establishment  of the Canada Council.  Both these bodies not  only pro­ moted literary scholarship by various grants and aids to publication, but they also created  an  atmosphere  in  which  careful  investigation  and  considered  judgment of our  own  writings slowly replaced  the  characteristic  dilettante approach and parochial  hyperbole of earlier literary comment.
As this new era of critical appreciation  began, Professor Klinck was already  an experienced   journeyman.  Familiar  with  both  English and  American   traditions, he was well qualified to study Canadian writing within the context of universally accepted  literary  criteria.  From  the first his critical  attitude was both  historical and comparative. His interpretations reflect meticulous research of a work's entire background  and  period, and invariably clarify influences and  relationships  which would have been missed in the old belles lettres cavalier treatment. A pathfinder in the application of this systematic approach  to Canadian history and  culture, Klinck with his perennial enthusiasm and sensitive scholarship has encouraged  an increasing number  of followers to explore and chart the various regions of our country's imaginative  landscape.
Since  retirement   from  Western  in  I973  Carl's  productivity   has  continued
unabated   (in  addition  to supervising  the  revision of the  Literary   History   and turning  out scholarly articles, he is currently  writing a book on Robert  Service). His patient  and informed sleuthing of obscure source material,  his shrewd sifting and  thoughtful  analysis of various clues to identity  or meaning  in  their  proper context,  and  his ability because of his breadth  of view and  range  of interests  to synthesize our literary heritage  have made  Carl  Klinck the many-sided  historian­ scholar-critic  appropriate to our Canadian situation  and  needs.














73


THE PAST RECAPTURED


J. M. Kert;:;er



The  texture  of youth  was still intact  in him. No blow or unhappiness is ever accepted  as truth, so long  as time  can always be made to begin at the beginning agam.



ERNEST BUCKLER excels in conveying the texture of youth, and in The Mountain and  the  Valley presents a young man  who suffers a series of blows and gradually  loses, but finally, if ambiguously, recaptures  the power to "begin  again."  Unlike  novels about  boys growing  to maturity   (Who Has  Seen the  Wind, Portrait  of the  Artist  as a Young Man, Sons and  Lovers) which con­ clude  by looking  ahead  to  the  expanding  future  of adulthood,   The  Mountain and  the  Valley concludes  by looking back at  youth,  but  at  a  youth  which,  on re-examination, expands  in significance. From  Prologue  to  Epilogue  the  novel circles the thirty  years of David  Canaan's life until  his final walk up the moun­ tain,  which proves to be a means of rediscovering his own past. This experience is matched  by the patchwork  rug stitched together by Grandmother Ellen. As she works, each  rag  evokes memories of the clothing  it  came from,  the  person who wore it, the  time  it  entered  the family  wardrobe. Thus  she stitches  together  a family tapestry and  brings the past into a pattern: "The  years were like a ribbon she was in the act of pleating." David does the same as he climbs the mountain,  and  Buckler does the same in  his novel:  as  Ellen fits a last scrap  of white lace into the centre of her rug, David's "vision" turns white, he dies in the snow, and the novel comes to an  end.
Throughout the novel, David's maturing is studied in terms of time. His grow­ ing self-awareness entails a growing sensitivity to time and  its role in his life. He discovers that  his life-or  lifetime-is  essentially temporal,  that  his  sense of himself and  his relation  to others  and  to the Annapolis  Valley  depends  on  his relation  to his own  past,  present  and  future.  Consequently,  when  his awareness grows so intense  that   he  is "nothing  but  one  great  white  naked  eye  of self-

74

THE  PAST RECAPTURED



consciousness", he becomes obsessed with the "tick, tick, tick, of emptiness" within him;  this in contrast  to his unreflecting  friend,  Steve, who  "had  lived  as many years as David, but time itself was a thing he would never hear or see." The importance to Buckler of time,  particularly  past time, has been noted,  especially by D. 0. Spettigue/ but  it has not received the close attention it requires.  The Mountain and the Valley  is a study of what Georges Poulet calls "human time", time as the forum of human  growth and emotion and  thought.  In it, as in  Buck­ ler's second  book, The  Cruelest  Month, characters  tally  up  their  lives  through  "the  arithmetic  of time"; they measure  their  condition  "by  clock's  time  ... by joy's time ... by dread's  time";  they are people "whose mainspring has snapped," balanced  uneasily between  "memory  and  desire,"  between  past  and  future.  In such a study,  time is not  just a source of metaphor  to express  their  experiences. It is a felt constituent  of experience, or the very condition of  experiencing. Joseph Conrad,  in one of his ironic moods, noted that  all man  has to make him human is his mortality,  which  is a "scurvy,  mangy, little  bit of  time."  David  finds that his life is composed  of such  rags of memory,  and  his last  act  is to stitch  these together  and  reassemble his past.
David's intelligence allows for direct discussion of time, but more often his condition is registered by illustrative incidents. His life is lived, not  just discussed. We find that  there are  two modes of time conditioning  his life:  the time of the valley and  the  time  of  the  mountain.  The  first is chronological  time,  carrying David  from  childhood   to  adulthood.  The  second  is a  timeless  transcendence which surmounts  and  encompasses linear time, just as Ellen's  rug gathers  into a unity the disparate  times of her life, making them all co-present. These two times are  in counterpoint through  the  novel, and  a source of tension  in  David's  life. The  story traces the tightening  and  final resolution of that  tension.
Time and tension are established at once in the Prologue where David's  condi­
tion is shown through  temporal  contradictions.  He has a boy's face which some­ how seems old:  "The longer you looked, the less you could  be sure whether  the face was young or old."  His expression of patience,  which  waits  calmly for  the future,  is "disputed" by one of quickness, which  anticipates  it.  Similarly,  he is restless, yet "any  impulse  to  movement  receded  before  the  compulsion  of  the emptiness:  to suspend the moment  and prolong it, exactly as it was, in a kind of spell." The  novel consists of one great flashback tracing  the development  of this tense state of affairs. Through it, Buckler explores the temporal  "arithmetic" of David's life and death.
In  Part  One,  David  is eleven years old and  immersed  in  a  childhood  world


75

THE PAST RECAPTURED



dominated  by a present continually  fresh. He knows nothing  of time because the present is always sufficient to him.

There was nothing repetitive about  the  mornings then.  Each  one  was brand new, with  a  gift's  private shine.  Until the  voices of  late  evening  began   to  sound  like voices  over  water. Then,  quite suddenly, sleep  discarded  it  entirely. You  woke again, all at once.  The  instant thought that  another day  had  something ready  for you made  a really  physical  tickling in your heart.

This is the innocent  age of the  "Baptism  Pool," the rainbow  and  Christmas.  It is the magic time Buckler celebrates in Ox  Bells and  Fireflies:  the "instantaneity of youth" when "Time was neither  before you nor behind you:  you were exactly opposite the present moment." The  present moment is everything,  and  so David has little sense of change. In  his eagerness to set off for the mountain, he cannot eat, yet cannot  conceive of growing  hungry  later:  "If he could only make them see how meaningless  the  possibility of being hungry  later  on  was."  At  times of great  enjoyment,  such  as  Christmas,   the  moment  "brims",  "spills  over"  and becomes magical. These are "moments  out of time altogether". "It  was as if the cable of time had  been  broken  and  they were all magically marooned  until  its strands  were sliced together  again." David is too young to have a past or to con­ ceive of the future  except in the vaguest of terms. He always feels that  it is a day of "promise",  a feeling which may look to the future,  but is rooted firmly in the present.  When  he declares  that  he will be the greatest  general  in  the  world  or climb the mountain every day or marry  Effie, he is forming convictions to fill the present and give it intensity. The idea of death, which interrupts  the joyful fishing trip,  means  nothing  to him.  At  the funeral,  he can  appreciate  the  grief of the moment and promising to marry Effie, but he cannot conceive of death as a future possibility for himself or,  more  abstractly,  as the end of time  ("human time") entirely. Anna  listens in excitement  to the stories of her  Grandmother, the tradi­  tional means by which age entices youth out into life and experience. But again, death  is a contradiction: "It isn't sound or silence. It isn't  here or there;  now or then."  Even  more  puzzling is an  idea which will  recur, the idea of dying while still young. This  is the fate of Effie, Toby, David  and  the sailor in Ellen's story. Children  associate death  with the aged, but death  is neither "now  or then"; it is "over  the rim of Never",  as he says in Ox  Bells  and  Fireflies, and  beyond time.
In Parts Two and Three,  when David is between thirteen and sixteen years old,
he enters the world of adolescence. Here he discovers the past. To  a child, life is all of a piece and all in the present;  but now past time begins to differentiate  itself in a process of fragmentation-of  the self, of the family, of the community-

THE  PAST RECAPTURED



which builds through  the novel. Awareness of change  in himself prompts  David to compare  the  way he is now with  the way  he was before.  Consequently,   his gaze tends to be directed  back to the  past which is more accessible to  him  than the still undefined future.  In  a contrary  view, D. 0. Spettigue  describes the first half of The Mountain and the Valley  as looking forward  in time and  the second half  as looking back.1   While  David's  mood  often  does modulate from  hope  to regret, it is really his attitude to change that  alters and  defines his position. Here we find an interesting  reversal that  will contribute  to the tension in his life. As a youth,  he  notices how much  things  have  changed:   he is oriented  to  the  past. Later  in life, the very unlikelihood  of any  further  change  makes  him  painfully aware  of the future  which will offer no relief. Thus  Part  Two  opens amid  signs of the past. As they drive to the graveyard,  David recalls local stories and legends: the tale of Effie's great-great-grandmother, murdered  by a drunken  Indian;  the tale of Lord  Rothesay's visit to his grandparents. He considers the  history of the valley, his neighbours,  and  his own ancestry. His sense of the  past is strongest at the graveyard. Once again, death does not make him look to the future  or beyond time. It makes him look back at all that is "unchangeably ended":  "all  the stain of the word 'ago' was suddenly in that spot." And again, as he looks at the grave of Barney Starratt  who died  at  age seventeen, David  ponders  the  contradiction of dying while young.



EN            it manifests itself first as emo­ tion. The  feelings attendant on David's  new awareness of the past are a sense of privacy,  of loss and  of betrayal.  The  present  joy or  pain  of childhood  can  be shared,  especially within  a  family,  but  the  world  of memory  is  personal  and private.  Memory is allied to solitude. As Ellen looks at her family, she finds that each  face contains something  of the others, and  David, who in  different  moods resembles different members of the family, "seemed to have no face of his own." He has been inseparable from his family. Now he must detach himself as a private individual  and  assume his own face. At first he en joys doing so, and  in the new house has his own room where "there  was the exciting feeling of being unreach­ ably alone. It wasn't  the isolation of real severance  (that  was intolerable), but a cosy isolation of his own making."  Privacy is comfortable,  but  more  and  more, time and  change  bring  pain.  David's  new  individuality  also prompts  a sense of loss. He feels there is something  gone  which  cannot  be recovered.  As  he leaves the graveyard:

77

THE PAST RECAPTURED



it seemed as if ... the whole place had drawn  all its life back within  itself. It was like a  house you've  always  lived  in,  at  the  moment  of  leaving.  It  would  never bring its life out for  them  again,  just for  them alone.

What are lost are simplicity, family  unity  and,  to the adolescent  Chris  and  David, sexual  innocence. David's sexual  experiences  with  Effie destroy  the childish friend­ ship they shared  and  replace  it with a new, but as yet unformed, love. But David's sensitivity  to the  past  is stronger than  any  awareness  of future  development, and  so his strongest  feeling  is "a kind  of loss. She was like a  part of  himself  that  had slipped  away." Furthermore, he realizes he has betrayed  her in order  to prove his new  virility  to  his  boyfriends. Later,   his new  allegiance  to  Toby  forces  another betrayal: "Suddenly he  had  to do what  he did.  He  had  to show  Toby  he went all the  way  with  girls."  David  finds  himself  both  the betrayer and  the  betrayed. He feels betrayed by Chris  when  he learns  of his brother's relation with  Charlotte. He  feels that  he is betraying himself  by taking  advantage of  Effie. And  he feels betrayed by time,  by a course  of events in  which  he has  participated, but  which  he cannot control. For  David, the  tension  between  past  and  present  is measured by  guilt.  When   Effie dies  (although, in  fact,  through no  fault   of  his),  all  the feelings  which  have  grown  out  of his sense of the  pa t-
guilt -converge on  him:

The  guilt soon passed from  voice to echo. But it was the first thing  he could  tell no one. It  taught  him that secrecy about anything  (even a hateful  thing like this) made it a possession of curious inviolability, and  tempted  him to collect more. The essence of childhood  is that  the past is never thought  of as something  that  might have been different.  He was never, even for a moment, all child again.

This  is David's first realization that  one cannot  always "begin again" because  the past is irrevocable. It is his first realization that  death  is final. When he seeks com­ fort  by imagining the same  events  turning out  happily,  the  "gust  of fact" exposes his pretence and  "the crush  of 'never' got in behind  everything."
Time continues to bring  pain  into David's life in Parts  Four  and  Five when,  as a  young  man  in his twenties,  his gaze finally  turns  to the  future. It is a sign  of immaturity that  this  should   happen so late  in his life. His  ties to  childhood, to family   and   to  the   past   have   been  too  strong   and   inhibited  his  development. Childhood "promise" has  not  led  to adult  "fulfilment". Anna leaves  for  school and  Toby  goes off  to sea  while  David  remains  in  the  valley.  His  love for  Effie never  has  a chance to develop and  is replaced  by a meaningless affair  with  her mother, Bess, an  older  woman who forms,  in effect, another bond  with  the  past, holding  him  back.  When he does tum  to the future, it is already too late,  as the

THE PAST RECAPTURED



episodes of the  rock and  the scar  indicate. Where  before  his position  in time  was gauged  by feelings  of loss and  guilt,  now  it is gauged by reference  to the  future through an  uneasy  suspense  which  gives way  to  a  desolate  suspension.
One  path  to the  future that  David  might  take  follows  his father's foot-steps. This  is the  only course offered  by the life of the  valley,  but  David  cannot take  it. To  Joseph,  the  great  rock  which  he and  his son succeed  in  moving  suggests  per­ manence and stability, a continuity through time binding him to the land, binding father to son to grandson:

My land  fits me loose and  easy, like my old clothes. That   rock  there  is one  my father  rolled out, and  my son's sons will look at these rocks I am rolling out today. Someone of my own name will always live in my house.

But to David, the land  is no longer  "home." To  him,  the  rock suggests  inertia, a life of exhausting routine advancing at "the pace of an ox" into  a future which  is a tedious  repetition of the  present:

He looked toward  home. He felt  as if he were in a no man's  land.  He  felt  as if time had  turned  into space, and  was crushing against  him. He  felt as if he  must leap somewhere out  of the  now, but everywhere it was now.

This is the crisis in which  Buckler's  characters find themselves: in a no man's land between  youth  and  age,  memory  and  desire,  regret  and   hope,  past  and  future. David  tries  to  run  off  to  Halifax, but  finds  "he  could  neither leave  nor  stay." However, the suspense  he feels also suggests waiting  or anticipation. It still  hints at  the  possibility  of change:

Each year marks the tree with another  ring, the cow's horn  with another  wrinkle. But until  you were twenty,  you were not marked. If one day was lost, the  others closed over it so quickly that,  looking back, there was a continuous  surface. Every­ thing was this side of the future.

David  still  has a future; but  then  he is painfully  "marked," and  the  scar  on  his face indicates a deeper,  inner  wound.
An  air  of suspense  pervades the  pig slaughtering episode.  Buckler  delays  the
accident-which is inevitable; the  reader  has  been  forewarned-while assem­ bling references  to blood,  knives, cutting and  razor  edges. David  feels a "tension" in the "horrible lull"  before the slaughter; it is not the  killing  but  the  uncertainty of waiting  that  bothers  him: "Did the pig have ten  minutes left, or fifteen?" The suspense in his own  life is broken  too when  he awakens  after  a  period  of  uncon­ sciousness, a  break  in  time,  to  a  constant   pain  which  becomes  "the  climate of

79

THE  PAST RECAPTURED



his mind."  Gradually  he realizes the significance of this pain,  and  moves into  a deathly  state  of complete  suspension. Time  begins to lose its meaning:
It didn't  seem like five years that he's been alone here.
It didn't  seem like any time at all. These years were like a kind of suspension, before time became really, movingly now again.

There  is still a future,  but time is described as flowing "parallel" to rather  than through  him:  he is not part  of any change. Once, his watch stops as he works in the field, and he works on unaware. This is a sign of what is to come. A visit from Toby and Anna  prompts the final realization that there will be no further  changes in his life. He  is cut  off from  his past, as he sees in "a  stricken  glimpse of the years gone by as of an  utter  emptiness." He cannot  even take refuge in memory because "Even  the ghosts of whatever  things had  happened  here seemed to have fled." And the future is now closed to him as well:  "He  realized for the first time that  his feet must  go on  in  their  present  path  ... My own  life brimmed  and emptied  so soon, and  I could never fill it again."  His life is over and  he cannot begin again. The clock has stopped; time is suspended: "There was no beat in the day. Time was not a movement,  but a  feature of the frozen fields."



RuNNING AS   A   couNTERCURRENT  to  the  chronological  de­ velopment  of David's  life and  self-awareness is another  kind  of time  which  he periodically encounters,  rejects, but finally embraces. In the valley, he has become frozen  in a static  present;  but  when  he completes his long deferred  trip  up  the mountain, he rises above his own life, views it whole and turns, characteristically,  to the  past. In  The Cruelest  Month, Kate  Fennison  realizes that  life is not

a quantitative  thing. It was not stretched out  parallel to  the  railway tracks of time, so that  any part  of it you failed to seize as the train  came opposite was forever lost. It was a qualitative thing. It repeated its eternal entity opposite each moment. It was available whenever you chose.

This  is David's  discovery on  the  mountain.  He  had  been  living  quantitatively, linearly,  until  his time  ran out.  Now he enjoys a  privileged moment  of timeless vision, which is also the moment  of his death.
This new dimension  of experience is expressed by the sea, by literature and  by
the  mountain. The  sea  is  a  timeless  realm  of  adventure,   glamour,   romance. According  to Ellen, who carries a locket with a  picture of the  young sailor she once  helped  to  hide,  at  sea "it  seems as if everything  is somewhere  else." The

8o

THE PAST RECAPTURED



locket contains  the subject  of one's secret concern or the focus of one's  dreams. Ellen sees in it a  picture  of her sailor;  Anna  sees a  picture  of Toby;  the  self­ regarding  David sees a picture of himself. David dreams of being the sailor  who lives the  fullest life imaginable: "he'd   be  the  only  man  who  ever  went  every single place in the world and did everything in the whole world there was to do." Toby is reminded of the sea by the peace he feels at the mountain top, but Anna, who is standing  beside him, associates the sea with death.  Earlier  in David's short story,  he saluted  the spirit  of adventure  by proclaiming:   "The  sea  was in  us." Now, the phrase means something  more sinister to Anna: "The sea would be in Toby's  mouth,  when he could swim no longer. She hated  the sea." Several char­ acters in the novel drown: Barney  Starratt,  Spurge  Gorman  and  Effie's father,  Toby,  Bess (who  drowns  herself  in  the  "Baptising  Pool"). The   adventurous escape of the sea is allied to the ultimate  escape of  death.
In  literature,  David  discovers the world of the imagination  and  its expression through  language.  At  first, it  is merely a  timeless world  of illusion  which  can supplant reality, as he finds when he ecstatically reads Robinson  Crusoe  (a tale of the sea). But later he finds that  this illusion can illuminate reality because "things stated  exactly"  reveal "the  thing  itself", the  basic truth  of the  world.  Truth is exposed  through  fiction. Literature resolves such  contradictions  because  it fuses opposites:  the imaginative  and  the ordinary, the subjective and  the objective, the self and others. Thus  in the words of the school play David finds a "refuge", an intensely private world, which nevertheless links him to others in a shared experi­ ence. In  performance,  the play takes on a life of its own, in a transcendent time of its own:
the total plan sprang up instantly.... Oh, it was perfect now. He was creating something out of nothing....  None of all this was consecutive and  time-taking like  thought.  It was glimpsed instantaneously, like  the  figures of  space. And orchestrated in the subliminal key of  memory.

But the beautiful illusion seems "treacherous", "foolish", "shameful", when it col­ lides with  coarse reality  in  the  form  of a  crude  jest after  the  delighted  David kisses Effie. The  exalted  moment  is suddenly "shorn  of all its  dimensions". The words lose their magic. In a characteristic  manner,  David  then  punishes himself, rushes  off  into  solitude  and  derides  what  he  once  valued.  The   experience  is repeated  when he takes up writing. It seems to him the "key  to freedom"  which eases his pain,  allows him  to  "surmount  everything",  and  yet to  accept  every­ thing,  to  "possess ... things  by describing  them  exactly."  More  important, it

8x

THE PAST RECAPTURED



offers a means of coming to tenns  with his own life, of resolving its tensions and contradictions.   His  short  story  is  autobiographical, confessional,  a  "cleansing cathartic" that  shows "How  a man  could be trapped  by his own  Nature." But again, harsh reality-Charlotte's pregnancy, the intrusion of others-dispels the illusion. Instead of soothing  David by allowing him to work out the conflicts with­ in him, his writing  has just been another source of tension in his life.



LIKE THE SEA, the mountain  is associated with beauty, peace, clarity  of vision, and  with  death.  Its  time is "the  shut-in  time  of a  dream"  in which Anna  reaches "the  peak of her whole life" just before realizing that  Toby will soon  die. The  mountain is the  site of Joseph's  death  and  of  David's.  As David  begins his ascent,  time,  which seemed frozen,  begins  to thaw  and  flow. Vitality  returns  to the  world:   "A  little pulse crept  back into  the  road  and  the trees." The  ghosts of memory are released and swarm about  so rapidly  that  time seems spatialized, flattened  on a single plane with all moments equally accessible:
It was as if time were not a movement now, but flat. Like space. Things past or future were not downstream or upstream on a one-way river, but in rooms. They were all on the same level. You could walk from room to room and look at them, without ascent or descent.

David loses himself in memory so fully that recollection gives way to "translation" to another  time. The  past is not just recalled, but recaptured. Change  is no longer irrevocable since one can always go back to begin again:
It is not a memory of that  time:  there is no echo quality to it.... It  is not a returning:  you are  there for the first time, immediately. No one has been away, nothing has changed-the time or the place or the faces. The years between have been shed. There is an original glow on the faces like on the objects of home. It is like a flash of immortality:  nothing behind you is sealed, you can live it again. You can begin again ...

In  this exalted state,  David  is transported  from moment  to moment.  He  repos­ sesses his life as he gazes down  on  and  through  everything.  Buckler  frequently relates time to vision:  how one sees depends on how time focuses the objects of perception. One might experience the blindness of a dull present, the "shine" of a glowing moment,  the sudden  clarity of prevision, the "cross-eye of  anachronism", as he says in The  Cruelest Month.  As David  transcends  time,  he  attains  total clarity  of vision. Each  pine  needle, each snowflake is distinct;  yet all are  inter­ related.  He  differentiates  every object,  every person, every  thought,   until  he is

THE PAST RECAPTURED



overwhelmed  by their multiplicity. As in the case of the Borges character  ("Funes the Memorious") whose memory is perfect, the past expands infinitely and maddeningly  with each  past moment  an eternity in itself. Because the  past is no longer irrevocable,  it is no longer  permanent. There  are  always further  alterna­ tives, further   possibilities stretching  out  infinitely. The  magic  of   memory  has become diabolic.
But just as, in performance,  the disorderly school play took shape,  just as the scrambled short story suddenly fell into a controlling  pattern,  so a further  "trans­ lation"  unifies David's  chaotic  vision. It gains  a  harmony  that  resolves  all  the tensions and  temporal  contraditions of his life. The  desolation  of  solitude  fades before a feeling of communion  with everyone in the valley.  Isolation  gives way to friendship  and  love. Guilt is relieved by "acquittal," betrayal  soothed  by "an  absolving  voice." Suspense and  suspension are  broken  by an  unquestioned   cer­ tainty  of the future: he will be "the  greatest writer in  the whole world"  even if this means he must work for "a  hundred  years". Time offers no more obstacles. Writing  provides the  final, most complete  "translation", for  by "telling" things exactly, "you  become  the thing  you told." David finally masters and  unites him­ self with  the  world  which  has brought  him so much  pain.  The  budding  artist finally achieves a timeless, aesthetic vision. He must work, not sequentially  through  time, documenting things "one  by one",  but  by abstracting  "their  single core of meaning". This is the same  harmony,  the same focussing of essentials, the same triumph  over time, which has calmed the chaotic vision and sorted out  his entire life.
The significance of this last scene and  of David's death  is ambiguous.  Because
it is presented from  within, as experienced,  there is no objective comment  on it. Is it a triumph  or a failure? Can the past be recaptured  only through  death?  One romantic  possibility is that through  his final agony David dies in a blaze of glory: in a sort of liebestod  with literature,  time and  the mountain  he attains  what  in Ox  Bells and  Fireflies Buckler calls the "saving instant that  brimmed him whole." While he is filled to overflowing with memory through  which  he repossesses his whole life, it is less likely that  this is his salvation. The  partridge  soaring  over the far side of the mountain  suggests the flight of David's spirit,  released through  a still purer  "translation"; but  it is countered  by the  image  of  the  log  which  is indistinguishable  from his snow-covered body. This is the lower order  of physical valley-reality which he has sought  to escape, but  which now lays claim  on  him. He  must combine  mountain  and  valley, spirit  and  flesh, and  the  two  orders  of time each inhabits if he is to be "saved".  This is the synthesis of art  which  fuses

THE PAST RECAPTURED



fiction and  fact,  illusion and  reality. The  artist  has the  ability "to  make  a story out of a fact,"  that  is, to create  aesthetic order,  beauty and  meaning  out  of the disorder of ordinary  experience. Buckler insists (and  demonstrates)  that  the latter cannot  be  ignored.  It can  be  "translated", but  not  escaped,  which  is why  a spiritualized  interpretation of the  Epilogue  would  not  do  justice to  the  tone  of the  novel. The  lyricism of The   Mountain  and  the  Valley  is grounded  in  the natural world of potato  harvesting  and  hog butchering,  of dirt,  blood and  toil. The spirit is felt through  the flesh, divinity through  the soil, through  a reality too concrete  and  compelling  to  be  disregarded.  It  is so compelling  that   when  it intrudes  on David's  imaginative experiences-at the play, while composing  his short story -it  proves too coarse and  dispels his grand  but  fragile  illusions.
The  reverse occurs at the end of the novel when David claims to discover his
vocation in literature. Now, illusion dispels reality:  from the mountain,  the valley becomes insubstantial and  resembles "the  intactile  landscape  of a dream". Con­ trasts  with  similar  experiences  in  Proust  and  Joyce  are  clear.  In   Le  Temps  Retrouve, Marcel recaptures  his past by weaving it into the immense novel which the  reader  has  just completed.  Similarly,  at  the  end  of Buckler's  second  book, Morse Halliday  regains the inspiration  to write what is, presumably, The  Cruelest Month. But David Canaan does not write The  Mountain and the Valley  or any other  novel. Marcel  does not  use his past as a refuge. He  turns  to it because he discovers aesthetic  perception  is essentially retrospection:  only  by  reconsidering one's  past can  the  truth  be found  and  re-created.  Indeed,  the  discovery of his literary vocation reawakens in him a desire to live. He feels revived; he has found a future for himself and  a way of making up for the time he has lost. He finds a timeless world  of essences-time in  its pure  state-in  art, not  in  death.  But David  turns  to  death  and  embraces  his  past  at  the  expense of any  future.  He regresses to the world of promise where one can always begin  again,  but  where, therefore, there can be no fulfilment and no finish. He speaks again with the voice of childhood, saying that  he will be the greatest writer in the same tone as he said he would be the greatest general or the greatest actor. He will never become any­ thing because the chronological  world of becoming is the valley. In  A Portrait of the  Artist  as a Young   Man, Stephen  Dedalus'  decision to  become  an  artit  marked  by a  similar  "epiphany"  associated  with  timelessness and  the  soaring spirit;  but Stephen  then  returns  (perhaps  despite himself)  to the tea leaves, lice and  mud  of  Dublin,  his  equivalent  of  the  valley. David  does  not  return.   He abstracts  himself still further  until, in his eyes, "the  valley was completely gone." He can forgive, feel forgiven  and  achieve communion  with others only when he

THE PAST RECAPTURED



is high on the mountain and  furthest  removed from them.  He  resolves to be the literary  voice of the valley-folk only when he is out of earshot.
The  Mountain and the Valley explores a vision of childhood  which  gradually
grows  insidious.  In  his  essay on  Buckler,  D.  0. Spettigue   reminds  us  of  the prominence in English-Canadian fiction of reminiscence, especially of rural, child­ hood scenes. Buckler brings this theme into critical focus by showing how the past can become a trap. In Survival, Margaret  Atwood observes that Canadian litera­ ture  is full of such  traps: traps  of environment,  marriage,  family,  solitude;  the snares which trap  wild animals.  For  Buckler, the snare  is  memory.
David seeks to escape from a world which has lost all vitality. This world is the Annapolis  Valley, but  it is also his own state of tedium  and  his own adulthood. Increasingly,  escape means  a  voyage of the imagination   into  literature, up  the mountain, out  to sea. His  retreat  from the world  turns  inward  and  becomes a retreat   into  memory.  Throughout his  life,  time  has  been  an  enemy  bringing change,  pain and  mounting  tension. To return  to the past is to cancel  these and recapture  the  "instantaneity" of  youth.  But  it  is also a  regression  that  dooms David  to immaturity: he has chosen not  to develop, not  to go forward.  This  is ultimately  life-denying,  which  is why the  novel concludes  with  his death.  For Proust, a comparable  experience  proves life-affirming. Georges Poulet  notes that Proustian  memory plays the same supernatural role as grace in Christian  thought; it is a miraculous  phenomenon  offering Marcel's fallen and  divided  nature  "the highway of its salvation".2  David's  memory is not his salvation,  but  his undoing. In  his last moments,  he is childlike again.  His writing  too  has  been  immature, and  now will never improve.  While he always engages our  sympathy  and  often our  admiration, our  judgment  of David  becomes increasingly critical.  To  some extent  he  may  appear   heroic,  as  Warren  Tallman   contends,   because  of  the intensity of his suffering.3   Without  such dignity, he would  be unworthy  of such prolonged  attention.  But our admiration for him decreases, especially on second and subsequent  readings of the novel, as his shortcomings  become evident,  as he proves incapable  of developing  his obvious talents. In  our  final view of him, he joins the ranks of those who venture out to sea only to drown. If he has resolved the tensions in his life, it is only by entering into another  paradox, that  of dying while young.

NOTES

1 D. 0. Spettigue, "The Way It Was," Canadian Literature 32, 1967.
2   Georges  Poulet, Studies in Human Time, trans. Elliott Coleman, 1956.
3  Warren Tallman, "Wolf  in the Snow", Canadian Literature s-6,  Ig6o.


review articles



THE SITE OF BLOOD


George Bowering


AUDREY THOMAs,  Blown Figures. Talonbooks. Cloth $12.95, Paper $5·95·


WHAT ARE   FIGURES, and  what is  blown?   There  are   fly-blown   corpses, and corpses were once figures. Craftsmen blow figures  in glass. If you don't have  a good figure  you'd  better  tum the light  off if  you  want   to  be  blown.  Bad  counters blow  their   figures.  Poets  who  reach   for effects   blow  their   figures   up  fat.   Some flute-players blow outlandish figures. Add your  own,  and   you'll   be  ready   to  read Audrey   Thomas' new  novel.   It is  what you  are   asked   to  do -note  how  often the   narrator drops   citations from   Skeat into her text.
Audrey  Thomas' first book, a collection of stories called  Ten Green  Bottles, was nearly  altogether conventional. Since  that time her writing has moved through transformations that   have  given  less due to  the  narrative  necessity,  and   more  to the con-frontation of reader with text. Blown   Figures  is,  finally,   an   explosion. When   you  open   the   boards,   the   pages should  tumble out  and  blow about your shape.
There  are   547  pages,   it  is  true,   but fewer  than   half  of  them   are  filled  with lines.  The   rest  are   nearly   white   pages, with  some  black  marks  on  them,   words and   pictures. These   may   be  single  sen­ tences  uttered by the  main  figure,  Isobel

86
 
Carpenter, or African comic strips, or African letters from the  lovelorn, or misremembered  nursery   rimes,  or  items of etymology, or none of the above.
Let   me  perhaps  mislead   you,  or  put
this out  of reach  of perspective, by sum­ marizing some of the story. In  Mrs. Blood the  unnamed  lsobel   had  experienced  a painful   miscarriage  in  a   West   African  hospital.  In   Blown   Figures,   she  leaves husband  and  two children in Vancouver, and   travels  back  to  West  Africa,  osten­ sibly  to  find  out  what   had  happened to the  foetus; if  she  were  African the  pur­ pose  might  be  religious  or  superstitious, but  as she  is  North   American it  is more likely to be neurotic, compulsive, fixated.  Or  it  might  be a  dream, you  never  can tell.
If you can't  tell, show. That is, if you are  not  writing   a  novel,  make  a  poem. This  book  is not  a  novel,  Thomas once said,  it  is a  book  (though the  title  page says a  novel). It is a  lot  like a  big  con­ crete  poem, or better, a found poem. It is perhaps a  found   novel,  at  least  half  so, and  that's interesting. Not  always  totally accomplishing, but interesting, and  that's what  you want.
How  is it  interesting? It begins  as an
enjoyable read,  sort  of the  way  Heart  of

REVIEW ARTICLES



Darkness  starts,   as  a  catchy   yarn,   with the flotsam of symbols knocking  gently against the hull.  It is a narrative, and  we settle  down  like passengers  in a B-747, to have  it appear before  us. At least  a little before  us. The  first chapter gathers up Thomas' previous  books, so that   readers of Mrs. Blood, Songs my Mother  Taught Me, etc., feel themselves sinking into the womb of the delivering voice. The  first chapter details  the character of Isobel, dramatizing her phobias  very deftly: "Sometimes it was necessary  to leave everything and  get out.  Walk  home  along the  tilting sidewalks  weeping,  'Why  me, why  me?'," yes, "(You had   to  be  in  a room  with  a window  which  could  be opened. You  had  to  know  where  all  the exits were.) ."
Isobel   is  on  the  boat   that   will  carry her  from  England to Africa.  Riding in a symbolic vessel that  is still necessary, not climbing the  struts  of  a  fabricated  sym­ bolic  structure; very good.  At  the  begin­ ning  of  this  whole  trip   there  is  nearby,  down   the  rail,  a  screaming  baby.  Natu­  rally-Thomas   is  always   a   symbolist writer, but  one  is happy  to see that  here she   has   dropped  her   earlier    habit   of literary stuff  from  the English  anthology. This  will  be a  journey  into  Isobel's  per­  sonal  past.  The narrative zips  back  and forth  through time,  into  the  African ex­ perience of five years ago, back further to sexual   experiences  in  England,  forward to  three  days  ago.  It is not  at  all  annoy­ ing, and  we know that  in some books it is annoying. What  else would  you expect  to pass  through the  mind  of  somebody  who is  thousands of  miles  from  domesti-city, and   half-way   to  the  puzzle  in  her  own past?  Neat story-telling.
But we who have  been carried thus far
remember  that   the   front   cover   of  the
 book  displays  the  hideous figures  of "Lovers in  a  Landscape,"  (the  conven­ tion is "Figures in a Landscape")  painted by  Claude  Breeze.  Also  that   the  second page  of  dedication  says:   "to   Isobeljbe­ cause   you  are   fond  of  fairy-tales,  and have been ill,JI have made  you a story all for  yourself -J a  new  one   that   nobody has  read  before."  (That in  itself  a  para­
dox.)  We have to be a little  uneasy,  then. This  might  be a fairy-tale; it is at least doubtful. Over  the  page  we read :
We have  all Africa  and  her  prodigies
Within us.
Sir  Thomas Browne
Religio  Medici, 1642

(yes, Thomas)  so we think  of the  Prodi­ gal Son, thinking of Isobel's child, it, and here   we  go.  The   book  is  full  of  puns, poetry's  principal  antagonist  to the  serial narrative.
The   book  is a  veritable mine-field   of
such  puns  and  jokes, often  with  the  kind of  external reference that   will  bring  the reader   in,  hollering aha! In  Isobel's  de­ lusionary   penitence scene  near   the  end, for  instance,  we  are   told   that   African  tree-lurking "red  snakes  hung  down  and hissed  at  her  as  she  passed,"  and   then  when  the  next  thing  she  sees  it  "a man  nailed  through the  head  to  a  chair," we remember that  we saw  that  latter image in   a  segment   of  the   "Monty  Python" show.  Okay,  a  pun  on  Breeze,  a  pun  on Python. What   about   Isobel   Carpenter? Well,  a  carpenter  this  crazy  lady  could never   be,  no   joiner   she.   "Iso-"  means equal,  and "bel" means  beauty. We'll see. But  Thomas always  invites   us  to  recall our  childhood songs  and   jokes.  Is  a  bell necessary  on  a  bicycle,   remember, and ask,  is  this  trip   necessary?   For   there   is Isobel,  fretful   traveller, she  who  dislikes her fellow voyagers, going  by plane, ship,

REVIEW ARTICLES



train,  bus,   taxi,   ferry,    truck,    on   foot finally, for what  reason?
What   reason.  If we  were  m  the  busi­ ness of  reason  we  wouldn't  be  travelling through  a  book  threatened   so  often   by the  snips of madness thrown at  us by the newspapers and  the  Bros. Grimm. "Crip­ ples, one-eyed  people, pregnant women," the  first  phrase  of  the  book,  suggests  an alignment strange at  first  sight,  but  yes, they  are  all  perhaps  publicly  avoided, or looked   away   from   through  embarrass­ ment.  They  are outside the main  body of life. Going through French Africa,  on the way  to  finding   her   abandoned  "baby", Mrs.  Blood  sees that  "at every  stop  crip­  ples   and   beggars   and   one-eyed   people swept    through   the    train     demanding alms". The  Thomas landscape is usually populated by figures grotesque and maimed. Isobel pines for a clear objective world,  all  the  time  living  in one  haunted and  transformed by her fears.
She  is filled  with  fears,  fear  of flying,
fear  of queues,  fear  of dreams and  fear of their    loss.  She   feels   victimized    ("why me?" she  asks over  and  over)   by all  her meetings   with   the  world,   and   demands the  role of victim  as the  last  justification of her  egoistic  scorn  for  the folks around her  in  the  story,  all  of  them  doing  their jobs seemingly without second  thoughts. Isobel  the  victim  realizes  her  nightmare in  the  end,  and  there  she goes, the  total­ ized Canadian, if Anansi  has his way.
People  who seek to become  victims  are not  christlike,  they  are  guilty, guilty-feel­ ing.  Isobel  Blood  remembers:  "She   had killed   the   child   and    then   ignored    its corpse-blasphemed the ghost-mother by her actions,  her sacrilege." Isobel's doubt­ ful  mind   seizes on  the  African  supersti­ tions  to lay shadows  on  the  reality  of her near-child's  death   and    disappearance.

88
 What   is  inside  her  now,  where   the  life had   been -a  ghost.   She  is  a  haunted house.  How  do  you fix a haunted  house. You burn it down. You blow it up. You commit  (psychic)  suicide.
You   psychology   majors   will  say  that Isobel  is neurotic, neurotically travelling to  the  place  of  action    (psychosis). She lives  all  the  time  at   the  outer   edge  of madness   discovered   by  the  Edible  Wo­ man.  References to Alice  in Wonderland buzz  throughout  her   story.   She  is  un­  usually drawn  to ritual  and exorcism. She sees herself often  as a mannequin behind glass,  visible  but  iso(bel)lated from   the passerby,  Mrs.  Thing. She  is  journeying in solitude, that dangerous state.
There are  no other main  characters in the  book,  only  the  others-there. She doesn't   like  any  of  them,   not  even  the "Dutch  boy"   she   has   sex  with,   finger against    the   deluge,   on   the   boat.   The natives   of   the   African countries don't understand what  a solitary  white  woman is doing there.  Neither does the reader. Neither, probably, does  Isobel.  The  cus­ toms  men  are  always  asking  her  where are  the children  listed in her passport.  At home  with  their  father, the  painter who (see  M unchmeyer)  paints  the  torsoes of women, framed  without heads.
The  book abounds with  images,  found and  otherwise,  of headless  bodies and severed heads, including meals of chicken heads  and  animal heads.  Headlessness suggests craziness,  one  guesses, and  bears an  acute   relationship with  the  image  of the  abandoned womb.
But the heads, and the headless bodies make  only one line  of images.  The  book, one learns,  is organized more  around images  than  along  lines of narrative. The question  is, are they telling images? Some­ times  they  appear to be  superfluous and

REVIEW ARTICLES



gratuitous. I was suspecting that  Thomas laid  in so many  isolated  snippets because she  wanted    to   use   as  much   disparate material from   her  notebook   as  possible. But there is no doubt that a week after reading  the   book,   I   remember  it  as  a story,   I   have   digested   it   as  I   do  any novel,  no  matter  how  presented. I   re­ member  the effect  of the many images of eggs, of blindness  and  one-eye,  of blood, menstrual and  other.  Generally, I admire  the refusal  by Thomas to allow  narrative flow,  that  attempt at  capturing  illusion. But  the  non-conventional keeps  shifting its approach, desperately, one guesses, and that is a bother.
I   feel   intruded  upon,    for   instance,
when  I  get  this  supposition for  the  first time,   on  page  I 5 I : "The three  people who   concern   us  are   sitting   in   padded  vinyl   armchairs and   underneath  the stars." One  doesn't, I guess, like a  jarring  note  among  the  welcome  inconsistencies. That  sort  of  thing,  the  one  I  just  cited, argues  a coolness of an  unattached narra­ tor. The excitement I'd  been  feeling  was a result of the contest  between  the author and  her  "narrator". Isobel  the  egoist try­ ing  to  control   her  defence  against  the world,   and   the  rain   of   found  material augmenting the discovery that  the wobbly story can't  be controlled  by an expressive ego.   Thomas isn't  fooling or  fooling around. She  has  entered  where   lots  of Canadian  "experimental" fiction  writers have  not  had  the  nerve  to go lately,  into the  life-or-madness  care   of  real   risk.  I have the feeling  that  if this book had  not been  taken  over  by the  imagery  and  the non-linear,  the   pen   might    have   been taken  away from  her for ever.
So  perhaps  (one  hopes  so)  it  was not only  Isobel,  but  also  Thomas, who  sur­ rendered  to  the  outside,  who  starts  by
 trying  to tell the story  of her  trip,  and  in the  strange  heat  of Africa  becomes  a col­ lector. The  composition becomes  the pro­ cess of exploded  shapes  falling  into place, side-by-side.  Isobel  herself,  then, becomes one  or  some  of  them.  The  sane  say,  or hint  at saying, get yourself  together, com­ pose yourself.
"The past,  ever  the  perfect host,  gives
way to the present." That was true  in the past   too,  Isobel.   I  draw   two  meanings from  the  statement: that  one  feels  com­ fortable in  the  home  of  the  past,  settles down  in  the  best  chair   with  good  com­ pany   and   a  generous drink, but   it  all fades  as inferior   host  present  takes  over;  and   the  past  steps  backward  quietly   as the  present,  a boorish  guest, becomes  the death of the party.
In  one  of  the  found scraps,  the  West African   newspaper astrology  advisor  El­ mohr   says,  "Scorpio  people   often   seek refuge  in  the  past  and   fear  the  present  and  the  future. It is a  feeling  that   can lead Scorpios  to fear  travel  and new faces and  places,"  so I  assume  that  Isobel  and Audrey   are   Scorpios,   though  as  always with  that  starry  nonsense,  I  don't know what  that  has to do with  the story. Well, what   of  Isobel's   past?   We  re-encounter the   lover,   Richard,  who   betrayed  her love,  the  husband,  Jason,  who   ignored  her  sex, and  the  fear  that  both  hurtings were  her  own  fault. That  the  victim  in­ vites the victimizer. Hence the guilt  about  the   tiny   mangled  corpse   her   body   re­ jected,   or   vice   versa.  To  enlarge  that  possibility, a found  list on page  3I  Ioffers ten   possible  causes   (African)  for   mis­ carriage, at  least  half  of which   (I. adul­ tery  on  the  part  of  the   wife ... g.  the sight  of  blood) pertain in Isobel's  case. It was,   to   her   mind,   a   miscarriage  with justice. And this is the whole  text  of page

8g

REVIEW ARTICLES



3r 8:  "Sexual intercourse with   a  ghost results in death." If Isobel dies at the end of  the  book,  it  is  because   she  spent   too much  time screwing  around with  the past.
If she dies. If she goes crazy. As before in  Thomas' work,  we are  entertained  by the  Is  It  Real  problem. I  always  assume for the reader's part  that  it will always be real.  So  the  problem remains for  Isobel, and   when   the   end   arrives   there   is  a greater  problem   that   serves  to  amortize the  first.  "She   never  doubted they  were real," we hear  of  the  cockroaches that disgust Isobel, and  doubt sidles in. The determined victim  seizes on  the  "reality" of  all  vague    (non) threats, rather  than become  less to  everyone   than   the  aban­ doned,  the  mannequin. The greatest fear of all  is suggested  by  the  ambiguous one line  of page  5 I : "There  is nothing to be afraid of." Isobel is.
Somehow   or  another  all  this  story  is being  addressed to one  "Miss  Miller". It is not  that  Isobel  is the  narrator, at  least not  all of Isobel, or  the  Isobel  you know; nor  that  she is telling  this whole  story  to "Miss  Miller". Nor  that  someone  else is telling  "Miss  Miller" the story  about  one red-headed woman gone Kurtzy in Africa.   Nor  that   there   is  a  Miss  Miller
 there.   But   she  is  interesting. One   does want  to know. And  it doesn't really settle things   to  hear   this,   half-way through: "You're only a sort of thing  in my dream, Miss  Miller; you're  only  a  sort  of  some­ thing   in   my   dream".  The   suggestions make  themselves  known.  Mrs. Blood split into   halves,   sharing   Isobel   with   Mrs. Thing, so perhaps this "thing" in Isobel's "dream" is the  sacrificial  penitent's altar ego.  More   simply,  she  may   be  Isobel's  attendant at the  loony  bin. At  the end  of the book, the hysterical speaker  is making outrageous  accusations  against   her,  and  screaming  at   her:   "No    MORE  TWIST."  Presumably Miss  Miller  knows what  that  means.   It's   beyond   my   rational  mind, grist,   perhaps,  for   someone   else's   mill. (One   thought  momentarily  of  Daisy Miller,   the  innocent  abroad  across   the Atlantic.  Henry   James   shows  up  often in Thomas' earlier  works.)
Some people coming to this book, especially   because   it  is  published  by  a partly   avant-garde  house,   are   going   to read  it  as self-indulgent. It may  be. But
I would caution that  they wonder,  as Thomas has in ceding  "control" to the environments,  about   the   parameters  of the  self.




MORE UTILE THAN DULCE

Ann P. Messenger

HERSCHEL HARDIN, Esker Mike  & His Wife  Agiluk. Talonbooks. $2.50. SHARON POLLOCK, Walsh. Talonbooks (revised edition). $3.00.
DAVID FREEMAN, Battering  Ram. Talonbooks. $3.00.
DAVID FREEMAN, You're Gonna  Be Alright  Jamie Boy. Talonbooks. $3.50.


A PLAY IS  a slice of life-any slice,   whether   it   be   the   thick   wedge carved   for  himself   by  the  historian, the

go
 
neatly   trimmed   piece  of  the  sociologist, the oblique  cut of the psychologist, or any of  the  variously  shaped   chunks  chiselled

REVIEW ARTICLES



off  by  other   students of  human  experi­ ence.   What  matters  is  how   well   the dramatist transforms his chosen slice into something that  reaches  out from the stage to  the  minds  and  hearts of  the  audience in  order   to  raise  their  consciousness   (or conscience)   or  to tickle  their  fancy-in the classic formula, to instruct or delight. The four recent Canadian plays reviewed here are designed almost  exclusively  to do the   former.   There  is  precious   little   to delight   in   the  clashes  of  white   culture with  the cultures  of Eskimos and  Indians, in   the   sexual   conflict   of   a   physically crippled  man   and   an  emotionally  crip­ pled   woman,    or   in   the   agony   of   an intelligent  young  man   dominated   by  a brutal, TV-zombie of a father. But  there is  instruction  aplenty,  and,   in   varying degrees,  the  dramatists succeed  in  reach­  ing us.
Herschel   Hardin's Esker  Mike & His Wife  Agiluk, the   oldest   of   these   four plays, has been performed in Canada and in  London  with  only  moderate  success. In  an  interview   published in  the  Cana­ dian  Theatre  Review  No.  I,  Ken  Gass, director of the  Factory  Festival  of Cana­ dian  Plays in London, offers  his explana­ tion  of  the  play's  lukewarm  reception: "People tended  to  look at  Esker  Mike  as just  a  social  tragedy about   Eskimos,  de­ spite the play's diffuse action  and  oblique, Buchner-like structure."  Though  it  is difficult to pin down exactly why the sociology  of  the  play  does  not  quite   jell into  drama, the diffuseness  that  Gass mentioned  may   be   one   source   of   the trouble. The  husband and  wife are  given equal billing in the title, the relationship between  them  is part of  the  drama, but Agiluk gradually emerges  as the major figure, a sort of mysterious  northern earth mother whose tragedy  dominates the last
 


A Joumal of Radical Perspectives on the Arts


PRAXIS CONTENTS OF SPRING  ISSUE (Publication Date: June)

Art  Against Imperialism, E. San  Juan;  Bruno's Castle, or Some  Literary Misconceptions, Gene H.   Bell;  Brecht,  Godard  and   Epic   Cinema, Naomi  Greene;  Reflections on  Literary Theory and    Culture,  fohn    Fekete;    A   Shift  in   the Weather  (poem),  Ruth Lechlitner; Art,  Cen­ sorship  and  Socialism, Stefan  Morawski;  May­ akovsky; Language  and   Death  of  a   Revolu­ tionary,  John  Berger  and   Anya  Bostock;   Art as   Humanizing  Praxis,  Marx   W.  Wartofsky; The   Living   Theatre   in    Brazil,     Theodore Shank;   The   Education   to    Despair:   Some  Thoughts on  Death  in  Venice, Duncan  Smith; Three  Drawings    by    William  Gropper; The Lumpen  Drama  of   Frank  Wedekind,  Frank Galassi;  The End   of   Criticism; Some   Reflec­ tions   on  Radical   Practice,  Kingsley  Widmer; Hegemony, Praxis  and   the  Novel  Form, Alan Swingewood; The  Contemporary Social   Film: Its    Contents  and    Aesthetic   Characteristics,
Antonin   f.  Liehm; Against Duchamp,  Carl
Andre;    The  San    Farncisco   Mime    Troupe
Perform Brecht, Lee  Baxandall; The  Case  for
Revolutionary Culture:  The  Mime Troupe Versus   Baxandall,  Ira  Shor;   Doubt  and   Re­ flexive  Politics   of  Gunter  Grass, Charles  Rus­ sell;   We   Must    Begin    by   Making   Sacrafice (excerpt  from  The  Red,  White  and  Blues:  A Burla  in  Two   Acts), Earl  Conrad;  James T. Farrell at  Seventy, Alan   Wald;  Games  with History, George Woodcock.

Subscription Rates  ( 3 issues)  in the U.S. :
$8 (Individuals)	$12  (Institutions) Elsewhere: $1 Additional

2125 Hearst Ave., Berkeley, Ca. 94709




91

REVIEW ARTICLES



scenes of the play. One  member of the audience at  the Vancouver production reports that  the play seemed  to draw most of  its  power   from   the  character of  the witch  Toomik, but  when  the  play  is read in the study she appears quite  peripheral. One  also asks if the  play  is about Eskimo culture per se-and  it does  indeed  con­ vey  much   that   is fascinating  about  that  culture-or if it is about the destructive influence  of white  culture on  the  Eskimo way   of   life.   One   must   conclude  that  "Buchner-like"  diffuseness  is  not   neces­ sarily a virtue.
The language of Esker Mike  is another possible source of the trouble. Discarding, for the most part, conventional "realistic" dialogue, Hardin has written a kind  of poetry  that  cries out  for metre  to support the  differentness of  the  diction. Here  is Sgt. Green,  restraining his Constable who wants  to hurry  and  put  the  handcuffs on Agiluk:
Cuffs?  Let's  rest   awhile,  Mac.  Things  go slow  in  the   North. The ice  breaks slow  on the    River  of   Disappointment.  Fish    grow slow.   Our  justice is  slow,   though  it  locks fast,  like  the  grip  of  frozen   brass  on  a  bare hand. This is  a  funeral. Sit  down here on the  moss and  rest  awhile.
The  otherness of the North is mirrored in the otherness of the language, but  Hardin has  not  quite  gone  far  enough. The formality of metre, even  the kind of loose metre   of  Christopher Fry's  plays,  might have  worked  its subliminal magic  on  the pulses of the audience and  thus sustained the atmosphere better.
Perhaps  the   real   reason   why   Esker Mike remains sociology instead of drama has   to  do  with   the   cultural  mores  in­ volved.  The play   presents   the  different Eskimo  attitude to human life and  hence to  human  relationships,  which  may  ex­ plain  the  relative  thinness  of  the  charac-

92
 ters. They are representative figures rather than  individuals, and  such  figures seldom  engage  an  audience. At  the  crisis of the play, the Constable exclaims, "Bru­ tal!   Life   here   is  brutal!"  and   we  are ready  to agree with  him.  But  Sgt. Green,  who knows the North, will not allow that  kind  of  emotional reaction. "Not brutal, Mac," he  says;  "Difficult.  Life   here  is difficult." Is  the  southern  audience per­  mitted to feel for  the  characters in  their plight  or  is it being  instructed that  these characters,   especially   Esker   Mike,   are without  sympathy for  each  other, are "as simple  as cold"  and  as off-putting? Per­ haps  the  very  success  of  Esker  Mike   in displaying  Eskimo  mores  has  "alienated" the  audience more completely than Brecht   ever  did  and   left  us  admiring a piece of dramatized sociology rather than reacting fully to a play.
No such  problems  bedevil  Sharon  Pol­ lock's   Walsh. The  focus   is   clear,   the language rings true,  and  the gap  between  two  cultures is firmly  bridged by a com­ mon  humanity.  Pollock  has  taken  on  the difficult  job of  writing a history  play and has   solved   the   immense  problems   that  that   thick  slice  of  life  involves,  particu­ larly   problems   of  exposition  and   com­ pression. The story of Sitting Bull's search for  refuge  in  Canada after   he  defeated Custer and  his Longknives at Little Big Horn   is one  of  many   tragic  chapters in the  annals  of  the   North   American   In­ dians.   For  some  years,  Sitting  Bull  and  his Sioux camped  near  Fort  Walsh, nego­ tiating  with   the   North  West   Mounted Police and  through them  with Parliament for a permanent home,  a reservation like that  given  to the  Santee  Sioux  in  Mani­ toba.  But  it  was  decided  that   these  In­ dians were the Red  Children of the Great White  Father, not of Queen Victoria, the

REVIEW ARTICLES



Great White Mother, and  they  were  in­ structed  to   return  across   the   line.   To insure  their  compliance and  to keep rela­ tions smooth  between  Ottawa and  Wash­  ington, Sitting Bull  and  his  people  were given  no food,  clothing, or other  supplies.  For   a  while,   they   chose   to  starve   and freeze.  Finally, trusting  American prom­  ises, they went  back. Those  promises were broken  and  Sitting Bull went  to jail. Ten  years later, Sitting Bull was killed.
The bare  bones  of  the  story  are  com­ plex  enough in  themselves; a  wealth of detail   that   can  put  flesh on  the  bones  is available in  such  sources  as  Dee  Brown's Bury  My  Heat  at Wounded  Knee, which Pollock   occasionally  echoes  in  her  own dialogue.  But   the  dramatist  is  the  one who  has to make  the hard choices, select­ ing  what  a  play  can  contain and  still  be a  play,  not  just  history  on stage.  Pollock has  made   the  right  choices.  The play  as printed, a  revised  text,  deals  successfully with  the business of narration and  expos­ sition  that   can  strangle an  episodic  his­ tory  play.  The original text  as produced at   Theatre  Calgary  raised   the   critical eyebrow of Jamie Portman, writing about these  problems  in Canadian Theatre  Re­ view   No.  2,   though he  found   the  play "vibrant and  exciting" despite  the severe­ ly  limited    time   and   money   that   were expended  on   the   production.   Portman said  that  Sharon Pollock  was working  on the problems.  She worked, and she solved them.  The play is now alive from the very beginning, despite  the weight of historical fact   it   must   communicate. The   device that   accomplishes  this   is  Harry,  who moves easily between  his roles as narrator and  as wagon  master,  with  the American flavour of his speech setting him off from the  others   and   complementing both  his roles. I have  not seen the original version,
 but  I  suspect  that  Harry saved  the  day.
The  focus of the  play,  however, is not Sitting    Bull   but   Major  James    Walsh, North  West Mounted Police, and  the play centres  on  what  the  Sioux  dilemma  does to him.  Here  is the  stuff  and  structure of classic  tragedy: a man  torn  between genuine devotion  to his duty  and  the principles and  virtues  it involves,  and  his human commitment to a suffering fellow­ creature who  trusts  him.  He  must  betray that  trust  to fulfill his duty. When  Sitting Bull  is  killed,   the   circle  of   betrayal  is complete. In  a  moment  of   the  kind  of wordless   visual  symbolism   possible  only on  stage,  Walsh  strips   off  his  gun   and scarlet   tunic.   Like  Creon   in  Sophocles' Antigone, he  is destroyed, not  physically but  morally,  by the consequences of his impossible   tragic   choice.  The play   pre­ sents  the scope  of history,  the  sorrows  of the   Indians and   the  perfidy  of  govern­ ments,  all  focussed  in  the  tragic  conflict within  Major Walsh.  It is a fine  piece of work.
David   Freeman has taken   psychology as  his  portion. In  a  sense,  all  dramatists do,   but   Freeman  is   particularly   con­ cerned  with  the  psyches of  extraordinary people  facing  the  exigencies  of  ordinary life.  In   his  widely-acclaimed  first   play, Creeps,   the   extraordinary  people   were victims  of  cerebral   palsy,  trapped in  the destructive protection of a sheltered workshop.   In   Battering Ram,  a  young man  in a wheelchair is brought home  by a middle-aged hospital aide who wants  to "help" him  to  find  out  what   he  can  do with  his life;  after  making an  unsuccess­ ful  pass  at  her  daughter,  virginal Virgil  ends  up  in  bed  with  the  mother. Later, the   daughter  too  is   about   to  succumb when  Irene,  her  mother, interrupts them and,  in  a  rage,  drives  Virgil  out.  Is  the

93

REVIEW ARTICLES



rage outrage? Irene would  say so. Or  is it jealousy?   The   play   indicates  that   it  is, and   that   Irene   would   never  face  up  to such an emotional truth about herself. Whether Virgil himself has planned the whole  thing,   from   the  threat of  suicide that   brought Irene  to  his  rescue  to  the loss of his virginity  on  her  hide-a-bed, is somewhat  less  clear.   He   makes  sugges­ tions early in the play  that  they go to bed, which  she turns  aside  as nonsense,  and  at the  end  his exit lines indicate that  he has achieved  what  he came  for:  "And  thanks,  I got what  I wanted. And so did  you." A great  deal would  depend on the degree of Machiavellian cunning that  the actor managed to project. What is clear, how­ ever,  is that  Irene, long  the  exploiter of the  handicapped for her own unacknowl­ edged   emotional  purposes,  has  been  in tum  exploited  by one of  them.  A satisfy­ ing play.






The Faithless Mirror

by John  Reid


limited and  signed  edition of 200 copies: $24.00


DARKWOOD   PRESS  LIMITED

BOX 911  STATION K TORONTO


Trade & library discounts






94
 Jamie,  in   You're  Canna  Be   Alright Jamie Boy, is handicapped by being an intelligent and sensitive young man in a family  of appalling vulgarity. Irene,  in Battering Ram, was  an  uncultivated woman   addicted  to  late   movies  on  the TV; Jamie's family  have  lost  what  little humanity they ever had  in their  devotion to the Tube.  Ernie, his father, is the most serious case; he sees life as illustrating the realities  of "Adam 1 2" and  "Gunsmoke". It would  be funny  if it  weren't so awful
-which is usually  true  of the  situations
in   Freeman's  plays.   Jamie   Boy  begins with preparations for "family night", beer and  potato  chips,  the  arrival of the mar­ ried  daughter and  her  husband to spend the evening  watching TV  with  the family and   eating   TV   dinners.  Freeman's  ear for  dialogue  is  unerring;  the  banal  lan­  guage   of   family   in-fighting  is  exactly  right.  As the play unfolds,  the seriousness of the  family  conflicts  becomes  apparent. We see the damage that  has been done to Jamie and his sister, the violation  of their beings by Ernie's desire to be "a  patriarch like  Will  Geer  on  'The  Waltons'," and finally  their  violation  of  his being  (what  there  is  of  it)   as  they  make  their  break for freedom. Freeman draws  these psyches with  crystal  clarity.  And  it is good  to see him moving forward in his work.  Neither of these plays  has  the  gut-wrenching power, the sharp comedy and agony of Creeps, but they show the growing  powers of an  artist  who has dared  to break  loose from  autobiographical material  to  work on   a  canvas   that   is  becoming  steadily wider.
Peter  Hay,  the editor  of Talonbooks, is
doing   Canadian  drama  a  great   service with  these well-produced volumes of  sig­ nificant   new  plays.  It  is  unfortunate  to

REVIEW ARTICLES



see the local mispronunciation of "New Westminister" preseiVed for posterity  as Sharon  Pollock's  address,   but  such  mis­ prints    are   few.   Hay's   introduction   to Esker  Mike  is querulous  about  the status  of  Canadian drama in  the  theatres, but
 that   status   has   improved  in   the   years since   he  wrote   and   he   has   wisely  re­ frained   from   further introductory  com­ ment.  He  allows  the other slices of  life to speak  for   themselves,   which   they  do - vitally.





NEXT YEAR IN LETHBRIDGE


Andreas  Schroeder


The Sound   of Time, edited by John P. Miska,  released by the  Canadian-Hungarian
Authors' Assn.,  Lethbridge, Alberta.


IN   HIS  FOREWORD to   the anthology of  Hungarian-Canadian authors  entitled  The  Sound    of   Time, editor  John   Miska   complains  at   some length   of  the  severe  "under-representa­ tion   of  creative   writing  of  Hungarian origin  in the multicultural world  of Can­  ada".  He  had,  several   years  previously, picked  up  a copy  of  the  Department of Citizenship   and   Immigration's  publica­  tion  The   Family  Tree   and   found   it  to contain very few references to Hungarian­ speaking  individuals. Both  the  cause  and the   effect   of  this,   Miska   decided,  was that   few  literary   works   by  Hungarian­ Canadian authors are  as yet  available in English  or  French. The  only  exceptions  are   the   works  of   George   Faludy    (My  Happy Days  in  Hell,  Karoton), George Jonas   (The  Absolute  Smile, The Happy  Hungry  Man,  Cities),  John  Marlyn (Under The Ribs of Death, So  Runs  My  Dream),   George   Payerle    (The   After­ people,  Soft   Projectiles,    Words  To   No One) ,   Gyorgy   Porkolab   (widely   pub­  lished  in  North  American literary  jour-
 
nals), Stephen Vizinczey  (In Praise of Older  Women; Rules  of Chaos), Robert Zend  (From Zero To  One), Karl  Sandor (many CBC-produced plays), and John Miska himself, who has been involved in countless literary projects.
(In  view of the  above,  one  might  pos­
sibly be tempted to remark that  such representation for  a self-proclaimed "minority group" isn't  exactly peanuts­ but  I suppress  the temptation.)
The   Sound   of Time, then,   was  pub­ lished  to correct the  aforementioned im­ balance,  and   to  that  end  it  includes   the work  of  some  18  new  Hungarian-Cana­ dian  authors. They  range  from  a scatter­ ing of university professors and  journalists to  librarians, doctors, civil seiVants and students. Most  have been published previ­ ously   in   Hungary,  and   all   have   been writing   for  quite   some  time.  Many   are the authors of untranslated, or translated but   not  yet  published  novels  or  critical works.
Well  and  good.  In  fact,  bravo;  being
editor  of a  regular journal of  translation


95

REVIEW ARTICLES



myself,  I'm   always   particularly  glad   to see the  minor  languages of Canada given a  boost.  They   need  it,  and  often   rather badly  too.  But  anthologies such  as  these also tend  to pose a number of difficult problems   for  the  critic,  the  most  funda­ mental of which  involves  the  question of merit.
Crudely generalized, and  with  the  ex­ ception  of  non-fiction,  most   books  are published  not  so  much  for  the  informa­ tion  they  contain as  for  the  succinctness with  which  they  manage to  describe  for us  what  we already know.  One  may  be­ come   briefly   annoyed   with   a   clumsily written piece  of  non-fiction, but  as  long as  the  content is  reasonably discernible, one  lets  it  pass. A  piece  of creative writ­  ing, needless to say, tends  to be dealt  with far   more   rigorously   on   this  point.   The  critic's  problem   with  "representative an­ thologies" is  just  how  to  deal  with  such books;  i.e. as fiction  or  non-fiction. Is the main  value  of the collection to rest in the fact  that  it is a record  of what  thoughts/ attitudesjbeliefsjabilities exist(ed) among a certain   people  at  a given  time?  And  is the  reader   to  place  some  sort  of  socio­ logical  or  historical value  on  the  reading experience, rather than  an  aesthetic one? Or   is  the   editor   taking   thoughts/atti­ tudes/etc. for granted, and publishing the book  to  demonstrate the  high  quality  of these,  to  be  enjoyed   for  their  excellence  rather than  for  the simple  fact  that   they exist?
I  make  this  point   at  such  length  be­ cause  what   we  have  here  is  actually  an example of what  is fast becoming a world­  wide   literary  craze:   the   publishing  of representative  anthologies, as  entire cul­ tures   the   world   over   threaten  to  self­ destruct   or  become   eroded   before   ade­  quate  recording of  their   knowledge/his-

g6
 tory has occurred. Some,  needless  to say, are  considerably more  legitimate than others; collections  of  old  U ji Shui  tales and   anthologies  of  Sinhalese literature can be found  rubbing spines with "Moun­ tain-Climber" anthologies and   the  col­ lected  ravings  of all  those  who  could  be found   to  have   made   use   of  the   same toilet in a given house in Vancouver dur­ ing the year of 1970.  (All four  collections  actually  exist.)   I  suspect,  in  fact,  that  it all  began  with  the  newsletter movement some  time  during  the  late  fifties,  when minority  or  special-interest groups,  espe­ cially  those  of international  proportions, began  to  add  a  newsletter committee to their   election   slate   as  automatically  as they  did  the  president or  the  secretary. The  step from the newsletter to the rep­ resentative anthology was short; the former   seemed   virtually  to   imply   the latter.  And   now   they've   grown   to  the point  of  being  a  self-contained  category on the literary  market, with  literally hun­ dreds   being  produced  each   year.  Even Quill  & Quire  lists them  separately.
Now it is not my intention to associate The Sound  of Time with  anything even remotely approximating the sillier regions of  the  anthology boom.  This  was a  seri­ ous  project   and   obviously   handled  that  way.  However,   the  book  does  share,  to some  extent,   such   anthologies'   twilight  status  with  respect  to  merit: as  a survey of  what  is being  written  by  Hungarian­ Canadian  authors in  this  country, as  a sampler  of the formerly untranslatedjun­ available   work  of  18  new  writers,  it  is undoubtedly a very useful, valuable docu­  ment.   As  a   repository   of  64  pieces  of supposedly  fine  literature, it  is consider­  ably  less  so. In   fact,  the  explanation of Mr.  Miska's   "imbalance  of  representa­ tion" may  very  well  lie,  not  in  the  fact

REVIEW ARTICLES



that  these  authors have  been  passed  over due to the general laziness of Canadian publishers, but  in  the  fact   that   most  of them  simply  do not yet write well enough. Their  work,   in   translation  at   least,   is mostly   marginal,  some   of  it   quite   un­ publishable.
And  there  may very well lie part  of the explanation. A  poor  translation gives  it­ self  away  very  quickly  when  it  hugs  the original too closely, when  it  negotiates its meanings on  a  line-by-line  basis without a  constant overview  of  the  whole  piece, both   in   terms   of   content/style, and   in terms  of  what   the  English-speaking ear will   tolerate   as   opposed    to   what    the original piece demands. Such  translations show  a  marked tendency to stumble and drag,  to  be  uncomfortable in  their   new English  skin.   In   many   of   its   weakest spots,   The  Sound   of  Time  was  poorly served  by  its  translators; the  reader   can sense  that.  Of  course  there  were  Cal!es in which   the   translators  were   given   very little  to begin  with,  and  in such  cases the blame   must  quite   properly remain  with the original author. But  there  were a few translators who consistently  sinned,  the worst offender being in my estimation a David  Cunningham, whose knowledge of Hungarian may very well be flawless, but whose command of English  literary  writ­ ing  is nothing of the sort.  Unfortun tely,  his   translations  were   used   extensively.  Example:

SONNET OF  DENIAL (Sandor Kristof;
trans!. by Cunningham)

Not  ever  in desires  I sway My prayers are  never  said Lightless lights  I do portray My  vacant  lovewords fall  dead

In absent dreams I void  dismay  No kisses burden my lips unfed Toneless  tones  do toll  upon  my way Hueless colours are  my bread
 Penitence for sinless  sins  I stay Only  for hopeless hopes  I care Songless  are  the songs  I spread

Darkest nights  I trembling fare
But  truant tears  I shed
-For me there  is no future share!

Fortunately for  The Sound   of Time, it had the services of another translator whose abilities I would place at the very opposite  end  of  the  scale.  Watson  Kirk­ connell,  of whom  the  book  tells  us  noth­  ing,1    probably    should    have   been   per­ mitted   to  translate  the  whole  book.  He showed   astonishing   facility   in   jumping from   style  to  style  without  mishap;  he seemed  able   to   translate  free  verse, rhymed  verse or  prose equally well, dem­  onstrating an  ear   that   rarely   missed.  I doubt   very  much,   in  fact,   that   it  was simply  coincidence  that   the  work  of  all those  authors who  kept  the  book  afloat (which were those previously  listed as "available" plus  two  others: Marta Leszlei-Dosa and  Janos  Szanyi, both prose-writers) were either translated by Kirkconnell, themselves, or one of each other.  The  only exceptions were Robert Zend's  poem "Ariamata" which  was eng­ lished by John  Robert Colombo  (who,  as everyone   knows,   translates   from   every language ever  invented -and  not  badly either)  and   John   Miska's own   story "Homecoming",  translated by Joseph Simon, who, unfortunately, translated nothing else in the book.
On  the  brighter side  of  the  collection, those   two   new  prose-writers  just   men­ tioned    were   really    quite    fine.   Marta Leszlei-Dosa,  a professor  at  the School  of Librarianship at Syracuse  U.,  is author of

1 How   long   will   it   be   before  editor; .final y begin    to   give   translators  equal  b!lhng    J.n books of translation? Surely they're every  b1t as crucial to the publication as the original authors!

97

REVIEW ARTICLES



two  books of short  stories  and  one  novel, all   published  in   Hungary.  One   of  her stories  in  The Sound   of Time   (entitled "Bobo") describes a small  black boy's first realization of  his  colour   in  an  all-white Bavarian town. Most  of the point  of view is Bobo's, who sees the  world  from  about two  and   a-half   feet   above   the  ground, through two  huge,  often  very  frightened young eyes. The  story is merciless, charm­ ing,  humorous, tight  and  alarming all at the   same   time;  I have   rarely   seen   a child's   mind   so  convincingly  portrayed. If Madame   Leszlei-Dosa  has   more   of such  writing available, by all  means  let's have  a bookful or two. The same goes for Mr. Janos  Szanyi, a graduate of the Uni­ versity   of  Budapest,  who   only   recently immigrated to Canada and  who presently lives in Ottawa. His "When the Last Leaf Falls"  manages a sense of paranoia remi­ niscent of theNotebooks of M alte Laurids Brigge;  the same erratic,  almost  raggedly  sharp  perception  at   work.   Excellently translated, incidentally, by writers George
 Payerle and  Karl  Sandor. As the evidence piles up, one might  well be led to suspect that   the  best  translators  are   those  who also write  themselves.
I will say nothing of the work of  those "available"  authors  mentioned   before, since,  as  Mr.  Miska  acknowledges,  their work  is known,  and  since  much  of what  appears  in   The   Sound    of   Time  has appeared   elsewhere   previously.    I note from  the  blurb  on  the  book's  dustjacket, by the  way, that  more  collections  of  this kind  are in  the  wings:   might  Imake  a parting appeal to Mr. Miska  to forego further anthologies for  at  least  the  pres­ ent, in favour  of a few solid collections  of stories   by   the   two   or   three  best   new talents  in   the   Canadian-Hungarian Authors  Association; it  would  benefit  us all and  undoubtedly bring  more  credit  to the organization than  such as The Sound  of  Time. Anthologies  are  the  democratic gesture, certainly, but they rarely make consistently   good  reading, even  at  their best.






HONESTY AND ANARCHY
 


Peter Stevens



FRED COGSWELL,  Light Bi,-d of Life: Selected Poems. Fiddlehead Press.


IN THE SPRING of 1973 Cana­ dian   Literature  published  a  letter from Fred   Cogswell   replying  to  a  charge   by Ralph  Gustafson  that    too   many   poets were  being  published in  Canada. Cogs­ well  asserted   that  eclecticism  was  better  than  limited  publication based  on  "some preconceived procrustean bed  which exists  in   a  critic's  mind   as  the   proper

g8
 
shape    and   size   for   poetry."   Cogswell signed  his letter,  "Yours for  literary  an­ archy."
Cogswell  has  operated  with   this  kind
of  literary  anarchy  in   the   publications from   his   Fiddlehead  Press,  a   press   to which   he   has   devoted    his  energy   and money   for  a  number  of  years.  He   has been  threatening to  close down  over  the

REVIEW ARTICLES



past  two or  three  years but  still the books roll  off  his  press,  though  in  decreasing numbers,  Certainly  one   can   complail11 about many  of the  books he has accepted for publication, but  the roll call of Fiddle­ head   poets  who  achieved some  recogni­ tion is quite  astonishing: Purdy, Nowlan,  Brewster,    Livesay,    Finnigan,   Kogawa, Gutteridge, Colombo, Wiseman, McNeil,  Fox,  Barbour, Marriott among  others­ a very creditable record; how many  other  publishers  of  poetry   have   published  in Fiddlehead  quantity  and   in  the  process accepted  books  of  the  quality  produced by these and  other  authors? (As an addi­  tional  personal  footnote that  shows  that  Fred   Cogswell  has  never  been  a  simple Maritimes chauvinist, he published sepa­ rate  books  under  the  Fiddlehead imprint by the Windsor group of poets.)
Though no chauvinist, he has always been interested in writing from  the Mari­ times-witness his work for The Literary History  of Canada  and  his  publishing of the   newer   poets  gathered   in  the  Mari­  times.  Yet  he  was  also  one  of  the  first
critics  to  question the  greatness of  E. J.
Pratt. For  the  most  part, Pratt criticism up  to the publication of Cogswell's  "E.  J.
Pratt's Literary Reputation" in 1964 had virtually taken  for granted that  Pratt was our   major    poet.   Cogswell   denied    that claim in his essay, refuting the notion  that Pratt was a modern poet,  calling  him "a mid-Victorian with eighteenth century practicality as a writer," finally suggesting that  over  the  years  Pratt would  come  to be  considered  as  a  poet  with   the  same kind  of reputation as Bliss Carman.
Such   stalwart  iconoclasm   seems  con­ trary  to  the  notion   perpetrated  by  some other  small press editors  that  the editor  of Fiddlehead  Press   is   old-fashioned  and
 slack   in   his   literary   judgments  of   the poetry  he accepts.
Cogswell  has  also  devoted some  of his
energies to the field of French-Canadian literature-he has  published  three  vol­ umes  of  translations  of  Quebec  poetry,  perhaps  the   only   collections   that   chal­  lenge  to some extent Glassco's volume  in the same field.
Given  all  these considerations, his plea for literary  anarchy does not strike one as strange, even  though these anarchist  feel­ ings  hide  behind  a gentleness of  manner and  a quietness  of approach.
And  what  of his own  poetry?  Does this anarchic feeling penetrate his writing? These  questions can  perhaps be answered by  a  reading  of  Light   Bird  of  Life,  a selection of his poems  made  by Peter Thomas, taken  from  his work  of the  last twenty  years.
The   title  of  the  volume   comes  from
"Art", a poem  that  deals  with  the inade­ quacies  of art  in trying  to capture reality.  It is a  simple  eight-line poem,  using  the same  image  of bird  flight  that  two other  poems  on  the  same  subject  use:   Pratt's "Seagulls" and  Ondaatje's "The Gate In His   Head".  Unlike  these   two   poems, Cogswell's  is in strict  form  and  I wonder  whether  such   strictness   operates  more ironically  within   this   context  than   the freer   structures of   Pratt and   Ondaatje, with   Cogswell  perhaps  recognizing that  "the  brave  flight" of  art  is killed  by  too rigorous  a  form.  The   traditional stanzas  and  the use of rhyme  become  a trap: they are  "the static  swords" that  the  poem  in­ sists  deal  the  mortal blow  to  the  flight. But   perhaps  this  irony   with   regard  to form  is  unconscious on  Cogswell's   part; he  certainly uses irony  in  his  poetry  but perhaps it  should   be  used  more  against some   of   the   regular  structures  in   his

99

REVIEW ARTICLES



poems, and in this way the more obvious flaws in the  poetry  would  be presented in part  as under the  critical eye of the  poet.
It is true  that  the critical claims against Cogswell's  poetry  by other critics can be substantiated by reference to some of the poems  in  this  volume. The   reader  will find   here   the   stilted   and   obvious   lan­ guage,  the  descent  into  cliche,  the  awk­ ward  rhythms and  wording for  the  sake of rhyme,  the too pat  drawing of a moral.  But  it  is  too  easy  to  dismiss  the  poetry,  even  though these  flaws occur, for  Cogs­ well can  operate an ironic mode on occa­  sion,  he  can   use  poetry  for  satiric   pur­ poses,  and   I  suspect  that he  himself  is aware  of some of the inadequacies of his poems even as he commits them  to paper, a  position  he  makes  clear  in  a  poem  not included in  this selection, "A  Defence  Of Amateurism", a  poem  in which  he states he  has  "never been  a  star". But  in  the same   poem   he   suggests   that   even   the amateur  can   reach   "the  joys  the  great stars have". In poetry,  as in games, "every honest  player" can  pull  off feats "that lay beyond   [his]   skill."  Such   feats  may  be rare  but are the  justification for the effort expended. That  kind   of  modesty   and humility is a pleasant change in a poetry world  that  too often  evaluates the bump­ tious  and   the  immodest, the  poets  and critics   who  have   an  imperturbable cer­ tainty   about   the  true  method   of writing poetry.  Light  Bird  of Life  illustrates this kind  of  modesty,  which  is coupled  in  the book  with  some  ironic   twists,  some  epi­
grammatic thrusts and  with some satiric jousts.
Cogswell   in  his  philosophic  lyrics   (if
that's  not   too   heavy   a   description   of them) plays off innocence against experi­ ence,  at  one  time  hoping  innocence will not be destroyed, at another realizing  that


100
 the   human  will   often   wants   to   break down  innocence in  order   to  enter   what looks like the more enthralling world of experience. Arising from  that  teeter-totter of   innocence  and    experience  are   the poems that  acknowledge human pain  and suffering; these seem conditions necessary to human life, yet ironically Cogswell at times  implies   that   man   accepts certain pains as naggingly delicious,  like a tongue probing a decayed  tooth.
In the poem already quoted, "In Praise
Of Amateurism", Cogswell  maintains the honest  player  can  outreach himself  and he  sees  this  as  a  general  possibility  for man.    Sometimes    the   stepping   beyond limits comes through love, when  a certain atmosphere is generated to enfold  two people    ("Inside  The   Room's  Electric Air") . So  in  these  poems  the  existence and   persistence   of   idealism   is  possible. Man may recognize the possibilities for idealism  in other  people; a  kind  of  free­ masonry  of idealism  persists  (I  take  this idea  to be the  burden of "Star  People") , but  that  Cogswellian  irony  will  not allow man  to live in the rarefied  air of  idealism  for long. Just as man  falls into experience from   innocence, so  reality  impinges   on the  ideal.   Man   has  experienced  his  de­  scent  from  Eden   (the  title  of one  of his poems  which  was  used  as  the  title  for  a previous  selection  of his poems  in  I 959) but   even   here   the   possibility   for   out­ reach  remains: the ape is caught between "the golden  waters  of the  sun"  and  "the night of  blood."
Most  of  these  philosophical lyrics  are
sensible and honest but rather ordinary, enlivened   by an  occasional  succinct  turn of phrase and a rightness of rhyme. But perhaps all of this  philosophy is  summa­ rized in one short epigram :

REVIEW ARTICLES



It was the chains of Lilliput
Taught Gulliver he was a giant.

These   ideas   are   also  embodied  m  a series of poems about  people, often in the mode    of   some   early    Nowlan    poems, though Cogswell does not  use his charac­ ters as specific examples of  Maritimes life. His   people   are   put   in   situations  that illustrate lost  opportunities  which  nag  at the   people  involved,   though  again   the irony  operates:  the   opportunity  missed may  be  viewed  ambivalently  as  in  "In These Fall Woods". Although Cogswell's characters are often  failures, the poems show compassion  for  them: Helen Good­ child,   George   Ernst,  Joe   Angus,   Paul, Deacon Johnson are  some  of these  char­  acters  caught  in a few lines.
But   in   other   poems   the   compassion turns to anger and the satirist emerges. Cogswell  can  tum sharply against people
and  things  he dislikes -the woman  who
 takes such  delight  in  recounting her  own troubles,  the  racist  mind  of  Fredericton, the    ageing    sexual    athlete,   the    "poet friend" who can see no good in Cogswell's poetry.
Some  poems report in admirable terse­
ness a situation that  exemplifies  seriously or  ironically   the  clash  of  innocence and experience or idealism  and  reality.  These poems are much more successful than the lyrical  meditations discussed  earlier:  two such   poems,   one   using   the   traditional means of the ballad   ("A  Ballad  Of Orch­ ard  Evening")  and  one  using  free verse ("The Cheat") are  the  best  poems in the volume.
Light  Bird Of Life  will certainly not set the world of poetry on fire but for its amateurism that  includes the occasional "leaping catch", its honesty  in playing  the game  of  poetry,  it  is a  volume  that  em­ braces   well  the   many-sided and   gentle  anarchy of Fred Cogswell.





PLAIN AND FANTASY
 


ric


CAROL SHIELDS, Intersect. Borealis Press.
LINDA ROGERS,  Music for Moondance. Fiddlehead Poetry  Books.
CHRISTOPHER  WISEMAN,  The Barbarian  File. Sesame Press. $2.50.
susAN MUSGRAVE,   Gullband: Thought Measles  was a Happy Ending. J. J. Douglas.
$6.gs.

TRYING TO   DECIDE what, if anything, this quartet of books had in common,    I   at   length    played   my   first hunch: fantasy.  Not  that  these  poets fantasize  in  the  same  fashion,  of  course. If read  in  the  above  order, indeed, their work  moves  from  a  relatively  uncompli­ cated   vision  of  experience  to  a  steadily more   elliptical   outlook.   The  language,
 and  the  skill employed  in  each  case, also vary  considerably. Still,  if  fantasy is  the life-blood  of poetry-the poet's  image­ making   faculty  which   nurtures and  sus­ tains his imagined view of himself and his experience of the world -these poets are fantasists,  in a minor  key.
Carol  Shields'  Intersect is an  attractive little   book,   her   second    (the   first   was


101

REVIEW ARTICLES



Others, I 972).  Her   poems   are   plain­ spoken,  deceptively so, like the disarming candour of  her  photograph  which  stares out   from   the   back   of  the  book's   dust­ jacket.  Shields'  observations  of the  world proceed   from  a  remarkably  sensible  ap­  praisal  of  the  persons  and  things  which matter to  her:  family,  ancestry, friends,  and   life  in  southern   Ontario. There is certainly  nothing  dazzling about  her  themes  and  imagery. Rather she displays a quiet  acceptance of the  life she knows, an  acceptance which  might  be construed as complacent were it not for the nuances she highlights which  make  that  life inter­ esting.
"Mother" is  an   excellent    poem   and fairly   typical   of  her   craft.  During  the night   children  listen   through  "dull  un­ focused/dreams" to  the  hoarse  scrape of furniture  being   moved   about   by   their mother, and

In  the  morning we found
the amazing corners, startled by pure circuits of light  we'd  never
seen  before, pleasing
elbows  of space  and  new shapes to fit in to     bringing us
closer  to rebirth
than we ever
came      in all  those  years.

Discovering the  unsuspected, or,  simply, the  magic  of  ordinary experiences is Shields'  forte.  In  "Rough Riders" her objective is satire; she  achieves  her  goal by  contrasting the  players'  obedient  be­ haviour-"more like  goodly  country lads/than  contract  heroes"-to  their murderous   intent-"plotting   death/by number".  And  "A  Couple   Takes  a  Sun­  day  Drive" is a superb  example of irony, again achieved by contrast, but  more subtly. Always, this poet seems to say, the fantasies    in   life   are   delicate   mysteries

I02
 which passionately oppose "the killing clout/Of  sanity".
Linda   Rogers  is a  very  different  kind of  poet  than  Shields,  more  introspective, more  intense.  Music   for Moondance is a book of brief, imagistic  poems, sometimes elusive in meaning, yet unified  by themes of change-change within  nature itself, and  change  from  natural to social states. Rogers  is  fascinated  by  the   secretive things  of  nature  (moths), and  the  intri­ cacies  of  human   constructions   (Chinese  lacquer   boxes and  French  clocks). Even more,   she   is  awed-and    not   a   little frightened-by  the  transience of life as, for  example,   when  the  naturalness of  a flower is destroyed by being snipped  to fit a vase.
These  interests  and  themes  are  brought
together  in complex  relationships in a number of poems  which  explore  the gradual sense of  loss and  dislocation felt by a  woman  in  sexual  intercourse,  preg­ nancy   and   childbirth.  Notice,   for   in­ stance,  these  lines  from  a  fine  poem,  "I Like an Empty  House":

A tap  drips  in  the  kitchen,
the lamp swings  back  and  forth, ivy grows  over the  window.
I never  noticed.

Slowly,
my body opens  like drawers,
empty, waiting.

The  poet is aware  of silent, shaping forces within  her, and  without; as she says m "Tablet", nothing is empty  for long:

It is the  blank  spaces  that interest me. Like skin,
they wrinkle fade  and  fill with  answers.

Joy  is followed  by pain,  and  the  memory of pain brings anguish, or sorrow.  Images of flesh being torn, bones cracking, and staring  eyes, alternate with images of sun, moon  and  waves.  Much of  this  imagery

REVIEW ARTICLES



seems private symbolism,  and  yet we can detect   the  indelible patterns  of  Rogers' fantasy: the imprisoned soul  (or  psyche) seeks release,  and  in finding  freedom dis­ covers   new   realities   to   test   its   will   to endure.
The  problem of  survival,  really­ more  than  endurance-is  the subject  of Christopher Wiseman's The   Barbarian File,  a  sequel   to  his  earlier  Waiting  for the   Barbarians    (I 97 I).  In   the   former  book Wiseman had  begun  to develop  the persona of "B",  his representative type of contemporary man; in the new collection  he  fills  in  and  amplifies   the  portrait­ with   mixed   results.  B,  we  are  given   to understand,   is   a   creature  of   the   real world,   befuddled  by  the  quotidian, an Unknown  Citizen.  But    whereas,  in Auden's  poem,   it  was  the   lack  of  any personal   identity  which   made   the  pro­ tagonist  so  chillingly   real,  in  Wiseman's version it is the diffuseness  of  the portrait which   makes   B  ultimately  unreal. The  poet  seems  unable  to  decide  whether his creation is a genuine hysteric or an  anti­  hero  struggling for  coherence; in  effect, B is a  plastic  man  of  many  identities­ failed academic, suicide, middle-class slob, etc. Many of  Wiseman's poems,  too, are   little   more  than   unfunny  jokes.  In some  poems,  however,   the  comic  pathos  of B's life does emerge  clearly,  and  Wise­ man's verse sizzles with  both  "relevance" and  insight.  Good  examples are  "Report from  the  Ivory  Tower" (a  timely  satire on   decadence  in  academe)  and   "Bar­ barian  in Calgary" (a marvellously accu­ rate  debunking of the  "Mahler is Heavy
... Switched-On Bach" kitsch  in  urban culture).
Perhaps the funniest  poem in the book,
"His  New  Car", is a  bewitching mixture of whimsy and  macabre horror. B's pride
 reaches its zenith as he glides smoothly around  town  in  his  shining new  model, with "all  systems working perfectly". Then, one  day, without warning, the capricious  machine  wrests  control  from the  hapless  B, and   heads   out  with   him beyond the  town "towards dark  roads/ unspeakably remote":
helpless strapped in
gas tank  showing full he was carried away
into  the  darkness
in his cushions and  music
so perfect was the  soundproofing that nobody  heard his screams
This  is the kind of dark  fantasy Wiseman aims for, but seldom  attains so well.
Susan  Musgrave's fourth book of verse, Gullband: Thought Measles  was a Happy Ending,  ostensibly   a   work   meant   for children, is pervaded with  a similar dark vision.  Gullband  is  a  cat,   and   his  erst­ while  friends,  Grim, a toad,  and  Thrum, a lizard,  inhabit a  foreboding  landscape. But  Musgrave's book is hardly  children's literature in  the  usual  sense,  despite   her publisher's claim  that  it  may  be enjoyed by "adult children" (!)  and  that   it  has affinities with  Alice in   Wonderland! Actually,   the  poet   receives  more   credit  than  she deserves,  both  for  the  quality of her verse and  in terms of authorship. The  book is, strictly speaking, a collaboration: the  illustrator,  'Rikki'  (Erica Ducornet, an American friend  of the  poet  who  now lives in  France) , has done  more  than  her share with her excellent  drawings to make the book visually attractive.
The  main  failure in  Musgrave's  story­ poem  is  a  lack  of  narrative  continuity. What  we are  presented with is a series of vignettes  and  barely-connected incidents involving   the   three   little   beasts.   Grim,  who  has  a  "mouth/Like a  dry  crust  of/


103

REVIEW ARTICLES



Bread", is perpetually glum,  lonely, and fearful  of   many    calamities  large   and small.  Thrum is besieged  by constant sneezes  and   has  a  sore  throat. And  the much-travelled Gullband, who  arrives  on the  scene  suddenly in  a  fat  brown  enve­ lope,  is trying  to  forget  certain  Brazilian  adventures  he   wishes   he   hadn't  had.  Clearly, the  present   is an  unhappy time for   these   little   creatures,   and   they   all seem  to be in  retreat from  their  pasts  as well.   Thus   each   is,   perforce,  dreamily preoccupied  by  private  dreams of  wish­ fulfilment: Gullband, for instance, climbs a tree,  and  as he sits in  the  top  branches he   pretends   he  is  a   bald-headed  eagle "Scanning the sky/For fish".


MUY HOMBRE
 Well,  all  this  seems  harmless   enough. So what  if the  animals are  neurotic? we might   say,  they're   not   mad.   But,  lines such  as "Gullband entered/The atoms  of the   dark"  are   nevertheless    disturbing, even more  so because  the meaning is obscure.  Readily  felt,  too,  is the  aimless­ ness of  their  lives. They   always  seem  to be searching for the unattainable and  are continuously  misled   by  realities  around them.  Gullband,  completely  oblivious  of the  nature of Grim's affliction, thinks  his "measles  was a  happy  ending". Naivete, finally,  is only  the  least  bewildering trait  of these creatures, whose fantasy  lives are a  paradigm of the  agonies  of real  people.






Fraser Sutherland


E. A.  LACEY,  Path of Snow. Ahasuerus. $9-95·


EowARD LACEY's Path of Snow may  not  be  the  best  book  of  poetry pub­ lished  this year  but  it is certain to be the most   remarkable -one  can  confidently predict that  no others  shall  include three pages   of  passport   stamps,  a  page   with snapshots of ex-boyfriends, and  a glossary complete with  travel  notes.
I confess to reviewing this book from  a special  point  of view:  I read  many  of the poems   in   manuscript  and   was  one   of several  the  poet  consulted on  selection.  I hope  this  bias  is stated as forthrightly as Lacey presents his expatriatism and homo­ sexuality, the principal themes in his work.
To   any  reviewer   who   happens to  be
heterosexual  Lacey's  explicitly   autobio­ graphical poems,  written over  a  22-year period, pose a  problem: one  is  admitted into  a  world   of  which   one  knows  little


I04
 
and   hence  must  be  led,  so  to  speak,  by the poet. Inevitably there  must follow a certain  qualification  in   the   critic's   un­ favourable  perception  of  a  given  poem.  I   may   term   as   "slight"  a   poem   like "Ramon", which simply describes a casual  sexual  encounter, and dismiss the  poet  as hopelessly  romantic  (Lacey,  in  his pref­  ace,  calls  himself  a  "decadent  romantic traditionalist")  in  his  plaintive recall  of vanished   ecstacy.  Yet  one   is  forced   to consider  that  the  poem  may  be stating a fact, perhaps even the ultimate fact, about homosexuality. "The gold  of bodies  does not   melt;/ preserves   itself  in  what   was felt,"  Lacey  says in  "Poeme des  Amours Fugitifs", that funny,  oddly-moving poem with    its   rocky   metre    and    memorable refrain.
Again  and  again, but  without seeming

REVIEW ARTICLES



monotonous, Lacey pounds  away at this central  homosexual sentiment,  the  pain of  nostalgia  and  of lost good  times.  One of   the   three   epigraphs   (an   attractive feature of the book is the charming streak of pedantry) comes from  Antoine Gerin­ Lajoie's "Un Canadien Errant":
Si tu vois mon pays, Mon pays malheureux,
.va, dis a mes amis
Que  je me souviens d'eux

Sometimes remembering  "my  friends"
-the   book   is  dedicated  "for   all   my friends" -amounts to a mere  joke, as in the  admittedly well-told  "Les  Visites  In­ terprovinciales". The  poet at  age 14 is on an interprovincial exchange with  a slight­ ly older  Quebec boy. On  their way to the latter's home at Lac St. Pierre they spend overnight in  Montreal;  while  "pretend­ ing  to  sleep"   their   hands  explore   each other:
Still pretending to be asleep, but now excited
beyond discretion,  we accelerated
the rhythms of our inexperienced hands,
adept  only at self-use,
up and down, back and  forth,  to and  fro,
over and  over,
until we broke, both at once, in waves of silent pleasure
that  covered our underwear, bedclothes  and hard  teenage  bellies
with the sperm of an Ontarian and a
Quebecois.
-I can still smell the sharp odour  of the gissom
on that first night, the first of all my nights.

Thus  they  make,   the   poet   says,  "notre vraie  visite interprovinciale."
The  skin  of another man  is  commun­ ion,  consolation, covering.  In  the  second of  "Two Poems  for  Leobardo" he  says that   "Far away   now   I sleep,   my  little one./  I do  not  have  the  smooth   silk  of your  skin/  to  wrap  me  in."  In the  first and  best  stanza   of  "Now" he  says  that
 "sex was just a brightly-coloured robe to wrap   youth  in".   And  like  blankets on  a cold  night   there  is  comfort in  numbers, the  Mexican and South American "amours fugitifs." At the end  of his "City of  2oo,ooo"  he  says  that   "this is not  an age/  for individual passions" and  contin­ ues  the  theme   in   the  comical  "Stavros Remembers" in  which  a Greek  recollects how   he   and    three    other   boys   would tumble four  girls  in  the  field  near   their  village:
Sometimes  there  was a moon. You do not know how good it is
to see the other  bodies rise and  fall
and  know that  what  they feel is what  you feel.
But this communal joy has its dark  side also. Promiscuity brings with  it  the crabbed awareness of increasing age, and of self-disgust.  In "Night Thoughts" the poet  has  his own  group fornication, out­ door-style:
Drank  several  beers, roamed once more from one brightly  lighted
door to another,
saw two teenage  boys, strung up with lust, staring
into  one of the doorways, wanting  to crow, but obviously penniless, approached them with an offer, was
gratefully  accepted,
and we three cocks made it in a field of grass
where people go to shit, before they crow.
He sourly concludes, "to  paraphrase D. H. Lawrence,/ that   if  men   were   as  much men   as  roosters   are   roosters,/ they  still would  not  be worth listening to."  In  the magnificent long  poem  "1o1", he  is left "naked/ except  for  my towel  of excuses." At  the  same  time  as  he  is  beset  with post-coitus   tristesse,  the  commingling of sex and  death, he is appalled by the num­ ber and senselessness of the world's deaths, and   thus  a  personal sentiment  becomes the  political   one  running  through "City

REVIEW ARTICLES



of  2oo,ooo",  "Urubi Roi", "London  La­ bour  and   the  London Poor",  "Salvador Allende", the  ironically-entitled  "Peace­ ful  Deaths",  and  the  blackly-humourous "Meknes I" and  "Meknes II". The death and  life  emotions  even  come  together­ the   pun   is  intended-in    the   curious "Carlos  Eduardo  Robledo  Puch",  con­ cerning a 20-year old Buenos  Aires hood­  lum who murdered 15 people:
I have begun to dream  at nights of Robledo
Puch, and I  cannot
cannot  suppress  the urge toward
masturbation
when his face from  the tabloids stares  out at
me.

But  though death  resides  in  the  hush that  follows orgasm,  or in the contempla­ tion   of  the  decay   and  violence   around him,  past  or  present,  life  for  and  in  the moment-promiscuity-remains  the answer,  or at  least  a reconciliation to the course   of   the   poet's    own   life.   Where Matthew  Arnold   put   faith   in   the   one ("Ah, love,  let  us  be  true/ To  one  an­ other!") his Canadian cum  Latin Ameri­  can    successor   seeks   absolution   in   the many,  acts  on  lust  that  simultaneously is the expression  of an instinct  and  the most rational of human  emotions. Such  is the ambivalent sadness of "C'est fini, le temps ou  l'on  s'amusait" and the   resigned, bittersweet  cheerfulness  of  "Poeme  des Amours  Fugitifs":

and  growing older,  [I] only enthuse for money, to keep on buying youths to warm my age with their hot hands: the best loves are one-night stands!
The  gold of bodies does not melt:
preserves itself in what was  felt.

The   "je  me  souviens" sentiment  links with  another phrase  from  the  "Canadien Errant"  epigraph:  "mon  pays  malheu­ reux." Canada  is  the  unhappy  country,

106
 half of the northfsouth dichotomy that  is the  other   theme  of  the  book.  The  poet plainly   hates   Canada,  yet   needs   it   to polarize  his South  American experience. South   America   is  warmth, light,  sun, yet also the fecund  darkness: cabbies  and shoeshine  boys; it is noise, uproar, vitality and  sudden  death, or  death in  the  form of disintegration like a rotting mango. It is  torrential rain  and   the  cock  crowing, the  hum  of lust  and  bodies  shining  with sweat,  fishermen  on  the  white  sand  and kite-boys,  "young  hawk  boys of  Copoca­
bana." It is "Eggplant":

Peel it, boil it, mash it, eat it now,
soft cream- or green-coloured, laced  with
sesame seeds and  oil,
warm, almost liquid,  melting  in the mouth
-what is it that  it reminds  you of?
Food is sex is race is history.

Canada is cold winter night  whose only sanctuary is a  tavern   full  of "man-talk". Yet  at  closing-time   each   man   must  go along  "his  path   of  snow".   ("Taverne") It is silence, or the merciless crashing materialism of the  puritan ethic  become the  spirit  of capitalism; it  is ossification, a petrified  forest impersonating the popu­ lation   of   Lindsay,   Ontario,  the   poet's birthplace; it  is grim  secrecy,  constraint, frustration. Canada is like a stroke-victim trying  to articulate; like  the silent  object of Dorothy Parker's famous remark, when informed that  Calvin Coolidge was dead.  "How  can   they   tell?" she  asked.  It  is "February:  Ontario":

The  boys playing hockey are frozen in a tableau  of green, gold and  red;
a dog's silvered breath  rises skyward:
and  they are dead.

The son of puritanical Catholic parents, the   poet   recalls   Lindsay   "Where  amid your  undying  snows f My  father  flogged
me with a rose." ("The Invocation: Lind-

REVIEW ARTICLES



say"). In  Lindsay   that  father trapped a hummingbird  inside   a  glass  bottle,   apt metaphor for the child's own predicament ("Upon  the  Growing  Boy") ; there   the child   is  terrified   by  what   a  closet  may hold,  is  told  he  is not  a  man; there  he becomes  aware of  his  lonely  uniqueness ("Si  Le  Grain Ne  Meurt") -he kneels in   a  cornfield   and   prays   for   rain.   He heads   south,  encounters  the   oppressive forces   of  society,   is  given   a  five-years' suspended sentence for possession of mari­ juana by  Judge Ben  Connally of  Hous­  ton,  Texas (the  same  man,  the  poet  tells us, who sentenced Dr.  Timothy Leary  on a  similar   charge) .  He  goes  to  Mexico, Trinidad, Brazil,  there's an  explosion  of joy, of  being  alive  ("Under  the  Sun") : burning, turning toward death to be sure, but  burning with  that long-harboured, oh how  much   desired  flame.  Even  thinking of Canada  ( "Saudade")  makes  him  feel cold,  though  in  Chile,  "so far  south  that  south  becomes  north", he  finds  a  quasi­ Canada- ("without  Canadians,    fortu­ nately -") . His  mother dies when  he is away: her  malady  is  archetypally Cana­ dian -a stroke.
He  recalls  his ancestry   ("Coins") :

Years fell into  the earth  like cool, dark coins,
heavy with births and deaths,  matings and
growings.
And now my grandmother is dead, and  now
my mother,
gone into  the earth, and  I remain,
the one coin that she cast and my father
minted
-collector's item.

This  collector's item of a book is no masterpiece. The  poet   is  struggling,  as AI Purdy did at one point in his poetic vocation, between old-fashioned verse forms  and  a more  open  structure. He has obviously  opted  for  an  infrastructure, as
 Purdy  did, rather than  the classical struc­ tural  shell of smooth  metre  and  balanced rhyme. Which  is as well, since he is weak­ est when  he attempts the latter: although I know  him  to have  a superb  knowledge of prosody his metrical sense is sometimes  deficient.  Rhyme,  too,  is  occasionally in­ appropriate, as  when  it  seriously  mars  a potentially brilliant  poem like  "Stroke." After  a splendidly  rhetorical, totally  pas­ sionate  volley of  vers libre the  poet resorts in  the  last  stanza to  repeating the  end­ word, "stroke" thrice  and  rhyming it five times, thus producing lines like "my  aunts  the nuns  throwing holy water on her  like Coke."  The  irony  is a good  idea  but  the heavy-handed  rhyme   is  not  and  demol­ ishes the  tragic  mood  established  earlier.
Influences are many.  Lacey  is an extra­ ordinarily allusive poet  and   echoes abound. There are straightforward  "imi­ tations" of  John  Keats   ("Bright Star") and  Carlos  Drummond  de   Andrade ("The   Lindsayite")  as  well  as  transla­ tions of Francis  Jammes' "Il  Va  Neiger", de  Andrade's "Ser", and  Antonio Mach­ ado's "Caminante." Canadian echoes, too, chiefly  of  Robert Finch,  Irving  Layton, and  Raymond Souster.
For  all  his linguistic  facility   (the  poet
speaks French, Spanish, Portuguese, Ger­ man,    several    Indian   languages -and English) and  the extreme knowledgability that   makes  itself   effortlessly   felt  in  the poems' detail, Lacey  is somewhat light  on ideas.  He  is  a  responsive   organism, not really a thinking one, and  like E. J. Pratt has a keen interest  in the "cruel, purpose­ less,   meaningless life of the swamp", ("Mossbacks"). But what  the poems con­ vey most is the voice of an honest man speaking  honestly,  muy   hombre. Despite the  echoes  there   is  no  one  writing  like him. He is his own school.


107





GLASSCO'S MUSE

JOHN  GLASsco,  The  Fatal   Woman.  Anansi,
$3.95 paper, $8.50  cloth.

ALONG WITH   all   his  other  gifts,   John Glassco has a real flair for disclamatory prefaces. "This young man," he assures us before  we set  out  on  Memoirs  of  Mont­ parnasse, "is  no  longer   myself ... in  my memory   he  is  less  like  someone   I have been  than   a character  in  a  novel  I have read." One  wonders if  the  writer of  the prefaces  is not  also  to some  degree  a fic­ tional  character, created as a pre-emptive defence  against criticism.
The Preface   to  The   Fatal Woman, a
collection  of three  novellas  written over a period  of forty years, is characteristically modest.   The   novellas   are  referred  to  as "these three little books", and Glassco apologizes   in  advance for  the  fact   that they  do not  show  any  "aesthetic or intel­ lectual  development". He  admits  that  he is working,  by  temperament  rather than  by choice,  in  a  limited   form.  "And here they   are," he   concludes:   "three  faded  tributes   to  the   Fatal   Woman  who   has been   and   remains   my   constant  Muse, three   dried-up little  sticks  of  incense  lit on   her   altar  for   the   inhalation  of  the judicious."
The  impeccably controlled tone of that apology,  deliciously  balanced on  the edge of  mock-solemnity,  is  in  itself  a  strong indication  that  we  should   refuse  to take Glassco's   disclaimers  too   seriously.   No matter what  Glassco is doing  (even  those "aphrodisiac works  which   exploited the Fatal  Woman    as   an   article    of   com-

108
 
merce") , he is a superb  writer,  probably the subtlest  prose stylist in Canada today. Nevertheless, it is true  that  the novellas
in question  operate in a limited  or minor genre. This statement is intended to be descriptive, not  opprobrious: the  degree to  which  a  culture can  value  its  minor forms is one measure  of its maturity. Only a desperately insecure  writer  tries to solve the  problems  of  the  universe  every  time he sets pen to paper.
The  limitation of the genre  is the limi­
tation  of the concept of the Fatal Woman itself. The Fatal  Woman is a sexual  fan­ tasy of long, even of archetypal standing, but   like  all  such  fantasies   it  is  limiting and    ultimately   dehumanizing.   Glassco links its modern forms with  the sensibility of Romanticism, which  he describes-in the  most  fascinating piece  of intellectual speculation in  the  book -as  "a  kind  of disease,"  which  results in a "sick"  art.  In this  sense,  the  obsession  with   the  Fatal Woman    is  a   sickness,   a   deformity   of normal  human experience.
A   limited   form   may   also,   however, produce  at   its  best  a  kind  of  intensity which  a broader, more humane view may be unable to account for, and  which  may thus    be   profoundly disturbing. Thus, much of the most interesting pornography, such  as Samuel  R. Delany's  The  Tides  of Lust,   Pauline    Reage's   Story   of  0, or Glassco's   own   "aphrodisiac  work,"   the anonymously published  Harriet Marwood, Governess  (Grove   Press,  1967),  derives its  power  from  its  exploration of  obses­ sion,  an  obsession  necessarily  contained within  very narrow and formalistic limits. The  sado-masochistic apparatus of whips and   lonely   chateaux   becomes   in   these works  purely  symbolic of the  isolation  of certain   aspects  of  the  human  condition from   the   broader  context   which   is  the

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



true  milieu  of  the  "major"  writer. The word "isolation" may  here also be used in its clinical  sense, as Glassco himself uses it when   he  suggests  that   the  germ  of  the disease  Romanticism  was  "first   isolated and  pampered by Rousseau".
But   isolation,    in   the   physical   sense, seems  to  be  a  necessary   convention for such  stories.  The   least  successful  of  the three   novellas   in  The   Fatal  Woman is "Lust in Action", where Glassco attempts, in a satirical manner, to build  up a whole speculative-fiction society based on the dominance of the Fatal Woman. He can't do  it. The social structure he describes  is paper-thin, and   the  story  has  to  revolve on  a  couple   of  drearily  repeated  jokes. More    important,  the   central  situation lacks the tension found in the other two novellas, and  this is partly because  it can­ not share  their claustrophobic privateness, their  oppressive  feeling  of  closing  off an obsessive  world   from   which   all   else  is excluded.
This   is  a  pity,  for  "Lust  in  Action" starts  off in a very sprightly manner with Glassco's  splendid   disquisition on  "vesti­ ary  foibles".  The  first  section,  using  long rambling sentences   which  often  end  on disconcertingly matter-of-fact phrases, sets a  jaunty  tone  which  the  inadequate dra­  matic structure of the ensuing  events can­  not maintain.
The other two novellas, "The Fulfilled Destiny  of Electra" and  "The Black Hel­ met", are  much  more  successful. Both set up  a hermatic environment  within which Glassco  can  explore  the  equally  enclosed mental landscape of obsession. Even when the external world intrudes, at  the end of "Electra", in the shape  of two bewildered  police  officers,  the intrusion is effortlessly assimilated  into  the  myth,  becoming the instrument  by  which   the  self-destructive
 destiny of the central male  character is fulfilled.
The limits of the closed world set up a complete dramatic situation, which should be, in Glassco's  view "static" or "motion­ less".  The    tension   should   then  vibrate between   the   fixed   points   of   the   char­ acters'   hieratic  roles,  rather than   derive  from   any   forward   thrust    of   narrative action.  The  preface  tells  us  that  Glassco considered  he had come closest to achiev­ ing  this  in  "The   Black   Helmet"; even so, "it  was clearly  a failure."
It is clearly  nothing of the  kind.  It is a complex   and   subtle   narrative structure, in which  Glassco  contrives to provide an ironic  context  for  his presentation of  ob­ session while at  the  same  time  preserving a sense of  that  obsession's  intensity. This  is achieved   by  alternating  the  narrative between  the hero's  diary, in which he both records and analyses his devotion, and  the ironic overviews  provided, at one remove,  by the goddess Artemis  and  the structural myth  of  Endymion,  and,   at   the  second remove,  by  the  implicit  presence  of  the author himself, John  Glassco, in all his superbly  delicate indelicacy.
These  different layers  of awareness are
continually producing subtle  effects, of which only a couple  of examples can here be given.  At  one  point,  the  hero,  Maim­ bert,   pursues   the   fantasy   of   the   Fatal Woman back  through his brilliant specu­  lations   on   the   Romantic  sensibility   to­ wards  the level of pagan mythology, only to  find  his  own  delicate sensibilities   re­ volted by Frazer's fertility-myth version of Artemis. Mairobert turns  away  from  this vision,  back  to his  memories of his Eng­  lish    governess    Miss   Marwood,   whose dominant image  is being  appropriated  by the mysterious  Miss Delarchet. But  the reader  is aware, firstly,  that   Miss  Delar-

109

BOOKS IN REVIEW



chet  is in "fact" none  other  than  Artemis herself, and  the infatuated youth  is the sleeping  Endymion; secondly,  that  this rather unvirginal Virgin Goddess  is plan­ ning  a  new  "rite  of  spring" for  the  un­  knowing   Mairobert;  and   thirdly  (per­ haps)    that   the   highly  suggestive   name  Marwood is also  used  by  Glassco  in  the much   more  explicitly  pornographic and sado-masochistic pastiche which  he wrote  for Grove  Press.
Or   again:  Mairobert's diary   at   one point  gives a brilliant analysis of a process of  perception, in  which  a  person's  active desires  project a  complementary  passive response,  and   both  impulses   may  them­ selves be viewed in another detached per­ spective   within  the  same  consciousness. But  this  account is  introduced by a self­ consciously  outrageous image   of  bizarre pornography-Mairobert is  recalling a brothel  in Paris where  he had  two whores dress   him   in   female   clothes   while   he watched the  process in a mirror -and is immediately  followed   by   a   derogatory comment from Miss Marwood fDelarchet/ Artemis: "Heavens ... the  young  man  is almost  demented. Did  you ever hear  such nonsense?"
The  climax of the story-the apotheo­ sis  of  Endymion, the  subjection  of  the "moonstruck" male -is accompanied by two  of  Glassco's  most  outrageous verbal flourishes; and  it  may  not  be inappropri­ iate  to end  on  this note, since the linguis­  tic texture of  Glassco's  work  remains one of its chief  delights. As Artemis  bestride5 the youth, her hips are described  as "ens­ sating".  The  word   is  unknown  to  the Oxford  English   Dictionary:  Glassco  ap­  pears  to  have  coined  it  directly from  the Latin "crissare," which  means  "to  wiggle the  backside   while   having   sexual   inter­ course." And  a moment later,  in the most


110
 bizarre image of which even Glassco is capable, "Her sex  gripped  him  like  the oiled fist of a wrestler."
Dried-up  little   sticks  indeed, for   the inhalation of the  judicious.

STEPHEN  SCOBIE


STICKING TO LASTS

ELIZABETH   BREWSTER,   The   Sisters.   Oberon, cloth  $6.95; paper $3.50.
DOROTHY  FARMILOE,  And  Some  in  Fire. Alive
Press, $3.00.

ELIZABETH BREWSTER's first novel is like much   of  her   poetry -descriptive,  pre­ occupied  with   people    from    the   past, prone  to literary  allusions.  So much of it appears to have  been  taken  directly from diaries  that  inevitably one  begins  to view it as transparent autobiography, with only names  and   the  occasional  circumstance altered  for  the  sake  of   privacy   or  con­ venience.  The  result  is  less a  novel  than  a catalogue of details which  are  doubtless  of  prime  importance  to  their  chronicler, and    which    could    conceivably   interest some  future student  of  small  town  New Brunswick  life in the nineteen thirties and forties,   but   which   are   also   enough   to weary  the  persistent,  madden the  hasty, and discourage the rest.
Structurally, however, The Sisters shows
a  certain   promise.  Although there  is no index   of   chapter  headings  to   indicate what  is to  follow,  we  soon  discover  that more  than   one  voice  is speaking to  us. There are three sisters in the Marchant family-Vickie, the  pretty   one,  Lottie, the stolid one, and  Jane, the youngest, bookish one. Ms. Brewster  has  attempted to  apportion sections  of  her  novel  to  all

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



three,  but Jane (whom  we soon come to identify with  Ms. Brewster  herself)   easily outstrips the others  in importance. Vickie and   Lottie are  left  to  scrabble   along  in her  wake.  This  they  do  most  unconvinc­ ingly,  each   sounding  like  an  unlettered imitation of Jane.
Both  the  title  of  the  book and  its  sur­ face   organization,  then,   promise   more than   they  fulfill.  The reader  infers  that Ms. Brewster  would  have liked  to tell the same  story  from  three  varying   points  of view,   but    found    the   undertaking  too much.  She has not been able, apparently, to  get  inside  anyone's  skin  but  her  own.
A further difficulty  lies in her ability  to dramatize. There is  plenty  of  drama  in the story of a good man broken by the Depression, the hard  facts of poverty,  and the  awakening of a girl's first love, but to find  it  in  The  Sisters one  must  read  be­ tween  the lines.
Some of Ms. Brewster's  descriptive pas­ sages  are  finely  drawn  ("The  tjme  was late  August,   verging   toward  September, that  period  when  summer is still with  us, but   autumn  can   be  felt   in   the   bones, when  the  evenings  begin  to  be cool  and the   chokecherries   ripen") . More   often she   is  merely   plain-spoken  and,   for   a poet,   remarkably  prosaic.   Surely   there could   have   been   a   better   use  for   the material in all those faithful diaries  (if diaries  there  were)  than  this novel.
Another first  novel  by a  woman   poet
-And Some  in Fire by Dorothy  Farmi­ loe-does  little   to  shake  my  gathering conviction that  most  poets,  like  all  good shoemakers,  should   stick   to   their   lasts. Farmiloe's "Spring Haiku":
Spring  returns  again
to bathe  a tired Demeter­
new virginity
is far  from  perfect,  yet it is preferable to
 this  ambitious novel  on  a  similar theme. And Some in Fire tells the story of beauti­ ful  Venessa  Norden, held  in  virtual cap­  tivity   by  her   wicked   husband  Leo   in Shuniah,  Northern    Ontario.   Together they operate the Norden Hotel, a popular jumping-off  point  for  hunters, fishermen, artists, prospectors and  a handsome, hard­ boiled    American  entrepreneur   by   the name  of Ron  Harding.
This  setting  gives  author Farmiloe ample  scope for  colourful description, which she handles with  ease. Some  of her images   continue  to  sound   in  the   mind long after  they  have  served  their  purpose ("I  was nineteen, but  I sank like squashed muskeg   whenever  he  stepped  on   me"; "One full  breast  sagged  in  the  crook  of her elbow like a dead  infant").
Yet  language alone   is  not  enough  to save   this   book   from    its   own   built-in bathos;  And  Some  in  Fire  reads   like  a parody  of that  siren  will-o'-the-wisp, the great  Canadian novel.
The  presence  of  Harding and  various other  hotel  guests from  the  U.S.,  for example, gives Farmiloe a wide-open opportunity  to  lambaste  U.S.   attitudes and policies, and this she does with more vigour  than  discernment. ("None of our tax money goes to support the Queen. We outgrew  that  jazz years ago, for chrissake. Don't  you   guys  ever   read   any   history except  your  own?")
In  the  figure  of  Harding, Farmiloe is able  to  merge  her  two  principal  themes. On  the one hand  he is the wicked  foreign entrepreneur who  sees  the  object   of  his lust   as  another  exploitable  natural   re­ source;  on the other, he is a recreation of Pluto,  god  of the  underworld. (Harding wants  to spirit Vanessa  away, in his shiny pontooned  Cessna,  no  less,  to  the  smok­ ing Hades of Pittsburgh!)


I I I

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



The   political   theme   fares   moderately well  as  the  story  progresses:  Venessa  is finally   freed   from   her   male   imperialist bonds  and  is preparing to  face  life  inde­ pendently  in   Toronto,  where   she   will bring   up  her  unborn  child.  The myth­  parallel, however,  grinds   to  a  somewhat sticky  halt.  Both  Venessa  and  her  young daughter  Virginia   (who   drowns   in   a boating  accident)   are   identified   with Persephone,  yet  Venessa   is  also  clearly intended to represent Demeter, goddess of the earth.
Which   point   brings   to  mind   another
aspect  of the book which  is perhaps better left  unremarked. Still,  it is the  reviewer's solemn  duty  not  to mince  matters. I refer to Farmiloe's persistent references  to Venessa's  menstrual problems. Why these should  assume the importance they do is mystifying,  unless they are  meant to rein­ force the sufferer's  earth-goddess alter ego.
At any  rate,  we read  on  page  one  that the "key"  to Venessa's "pattern  of life ... was premenstrual tension". And  Some  in Fire  may  claim  the  distinction of  being the   first   Canadian  novel   ever   written about  the  consequences of this  particular ailment; let  us hope,  however, that  it  is also  the  last.  Certain  disabilities, among them  pre-menstrual tension,  prostatitis, teenage  acne  and  diaper rash,  are  as  un­ welcome  in fiction  as they are  in life.

PAT BARCLAY

CLINTS & GRIKES

J.  MICHAEL   YATES,   Nothing Speaks   for  the Blue  Moraines:   New   and  Selected   Poems. Sono  Nis, $rg.so.
THIS   IS  unquestionably  the   key  Yates book  to  date.  As chrestomathy, the  vol­ ume  does  all  one  could  ask  of  it.  It  re­ prints   entire   the  important  Canticle  for


112
 Electronic  Music, which  has  been  out  of print  for some years. It includes  a number of new poems-good ones-and it con­ tains  the  best  possible  selection  of  work from Yates' Spiral  of Mirrors, Hunt  in an Unmapped Interior, and  The Great  Bear Lake Meditations. The  earlier  books have not been  disembowelled or butchered. In particular, the  structure of  the  Medita­ tions  is intact. The   internal  divisions  of that   volume  remain; and  the  system  of internal  echo,  the  machinery of  tension  and   release,  and  the fundamentally im­ portant sequence of discovery are all very much  in working order.
As a  practical  consideration,  Nothing
Speaks  for the  Blue Moraines is welcome because one can  find things in it. (The Meditations have  heretofore been  incon­ venient  to study  or  rethumb  because  the Oberon edition  had  no page numbers,  let alone a table of contents.)
And as regards  humour, the Great Bear joke  about   the  moon's  halitosis  has  sur­ vived the process of selection, as doubtless it deserved  to do.
At   minimum,  one   praises   in   Yates'
work precisely that  virtue  assigned by Johnson to verse of the Metaphysical School:  " ... if  their   conceits  were  far­ fetched,   they  were  often  worth  the  car­  riage.  To  write  on  their  plan,  it  was  at least  necessary  to  read  and  think." And in  reading them,  "the  mind  is exercised
... something   already  learned   is  to  be retrieved, or something new is to be examined." This  formulation of Johnson's is very  well-known, but  it  is  not  and  it never  has been  very  informative. (It doesn't, for instance, tell us why Donne makes  better   reading  than   Cowley,  nor why  Johnson   considered  the  opposite  to be  the  case.)   But  it  will  serve  as  a  re­ minder   that   the  intellectual  subsoil  and

BOOKS IN REVIEW



superstructure of Yates' work, as of Donne's or Cavalcanti's, demands and repays precise attention.
Consider  the  title:   Nothing Speaks   for
the  Blue  Moraines. The word  "nothing" appears again  on  the  book's  last  page,  in a quotation from  Octavia Paz'  Corriente Alterna: "Nothing is meaningful because everything is language." There is no doubt that  both  this adscript and  the  title of the book are,  within  the  orbit  of Yates' writ­ ing,  declarative sentences:   positive,  not negative  sentences. Grammatical transfor­ mation or  the  pseudo-algebraical opera­ tions  called  explication  de  texte   will  go awry  if  performed under the  assumption that Nothing= o.
A  commentary  on   this  aspect   of  the poems is contained in Martin Heidegger's essay Was ist M etaphysik?1 - a key docu­ ment   just  as Grosseteste's essay  De  Luce is  a   key  to   the   poems   of   Cavalcanti. Heidegger's essay is not amenable to short quotation, but  a few sentences may do to suggest its relevance:

Wo  suchen wir  das  Nichts? Wie  finden wir das  Nichts? ... Da-sein heisst:  Hineingehal­ tenheit in  das  Nichts.... das  Nichts   ist  der  Ursprung der  Verneinung, nicht umgekehrt. Wenn    so   die    Macht   des   Verstandes  im Felde  der  Fragen nach dem  Nichts und  dem Sein   gebrochen wird, dann  entscheidet sich damit auch das  Schicksal der  Herrschaft der "Logik"  innerhalb  der    Philosophie.   Die Idee    der    "Logik"  sebst   lost   sich   auf   im Wirbel  eines   urspriinglicheren Fragens.... Die  Hineingehaltenheit des  Daseins  in  das Nichts    auf   dem   Grunde  der   verborgenen Angst  macht den  Menschen zum  Platzhalter des  Nichts.

Consider  also the location of these moraines,  for  whom  the  signifying  Noth­ ing speaks. W o sue hen wir?
Yates is now  rather widely  known  as a writer  specializing  in, or addicted to, "the

1 Yates  assures  me he has never read  it.
 North". This  is undoubtedly accurate in its way, but  it has bothered me somewhat as  being  subject   to  a  particular  miscon­ struction. Yates  is not, of course, a writer  of travel  literature. That body of  his work which  is infused  with  the  northern land­ scape-including in particular The Great Bear Lake  Meditations-is not  an  addi­ tion  to  the  "tourist poetry" which,  in an age of  government grants and  ubiquitous ticket-counters,  has   become   one   of  the fundamental genres  of  throwaway  writ­ ing. The  North  is in Yates' work as Greece  is in Seferis',  or as London is in Eliot's or Dublin in Joyce's: as firing chamber and bolt,  not  as an  Arden  Forest  full  of trees to hang one's poems on.
The   potencies,   valences,   angular  mo­ menta   of  the  image   "North"  will  bear considerable critical inspection. As direc­ tion,  North  is after  all an allotropic form of up. And it is an up which,  like a bright  light   or   a   very  small   object,   must   be looked  at or  looked  for by looking  a little  off-centre,   not   righteously  straight  on. Pursued   by  the  compass,  it  vanishes  into the maw of  the earth some 25° off what  is usually  meant  by "the Pole".  Pursued by celestial  navigation, it  dwindles  into  ver­ tigo  at  a  place   where   a  stopped  clock keeps  perfect   time.  And  pursued  by  the rigorous  logic of meridians, it arcs relent­ lessly into  its  inverse  until  all  thirty-two points  are properly called South.
There  is  at   least   one   other  location which  exhibits  many  of the  properties of Yates'  Pole. That place  is the axis nefan­ dus, Satan's crotch  in  Canto  XXXIV of the Inferno:

il punto a!qual si traggon d'ogni parte i pesi,

also  icebound,  also   a   place   where   the language which   guides  us  through  time

I I 3

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



and   direction  unravels.   (And   the   one place  in Dante where  "Nothing" has meaning.)
Yates'  Selected   Poems  are   not,  to  be
sure,  a new  Commedia. But  there  is nascent    within    them    an   archetectonic which  may bear Dantescan voltage,  if not Dantescan power.  The "conceit"  (John­ son's  word) which  they  carry  is  a system with   all  the  symmetry  of   Thomist  cos­ mology,  but  a  system  which is "down to earth"    (though  not   earthbound) .   Its components  are   not   metaphysical  con­ structions, but   the  sudden  twists,  inter­ stices   and   dropoffs   latticed  into   those constructions.  It is  a  system,   therefore, which   is  adumbrated  not  via  the  syllo­ gism,  but   via  something for   which  we may  have  no  better word  than  riddle  or enigma  or conundrum. The prologue, for example, to the Canticle :

This is for whatever, like it, Moves nowhere, saying to itself, Between one nothing and another.

One  falls off the  period  at the end of that third  line because it marks a genuine precipice,  not  because   a  practical  joker has stuck  it there, surrounded by verbal grease,  to trip  up  the  unwary. And  the location   of  that   precipice, according to another of Yates'  titles, is "the unmapped interior."
To be sure, the North is also an exterior
terrain. It is barren and  forbidding, and its centre  or amphidromic point is not unrelated to  the  core  of  hell.  But  it  will not suffice to label it a landscape of damnation or purgation. The well-known line from  the Canticle, Canto I, is:

By and  by the wilderness came over me.

The  noun   is  ''wilderness,"  not  "waste­
land," and   the  verb  is "came over", not


II4
 "overcame." Or, m   a  piece entitled
"When Wolves":

My mind  turned
As the moose turned,
Fur,  feathers, Weather,
And  the  leaves.

Beneath  the pale-green
Snake-fire  that  strikes and straightens
Across the wide winter  night, My eyes....

Page  after   page  the  animals, and   page after  page  the arctic catalogue. The  per­ mafrost  and  felsenmeer,  the ground brines and  the silt boils, the dints and grikes and thermokarst and   pack-ice  and   polynya.  They   all  transfer  nicely  into   the  word­  scape,  and   they  serve  very  well  as  ana­ logues  for  a  topography of  the  soul,  but that  is not the point  either. The landscape is not in  these poems  to symbolize, but  to teach.   It  breeds  an  attitude: a  concern  with  elementals,  with   fundamentals,  by drawing the mind  into an environment in which   there  is  little  time  for  trivialities and  seldom  any survival  of sizeable error. And in which, of course, there  is neither compass   nor  pole-star  to  set  course   by when   close  to  the  mobile   and   invisible goal.  The delineation of  that  uninhabit­ able   landscape  is  a  feat.  These  poems perform  it. The  relentless inquest  into  the nature of the  human  animal who  never­  theless   insists  upon,   or   is  forced   into, inhabiting that landscape is a greater feat.  These  poems  record   the  performance of it:   signifying   nothing,  which   is  every­ thing: that  is to say the language, and  the landscape  rising  out  of  it,  and   the  man moving over it, alone.

ROBERT BRINGHURST

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ADMIRABLE PURPOSE

JOHN  REID, The Faithless  Mirror: An  Histori- cal Novel. Darkwood Press.  $24.00.

joHN REID has  written what  is probably the  weightiest  novel in the  history of Canadian  fiction;  it  is  over   6oo   pages long,  with  about   a  quarter of  a  million words,  and   tips  the  scales  at  over   four pounds. This  over-long and  wordy  book would  have benefited  greatly  from an editorial pencil, wielded  by someone less involved   than   the  author in  the  intrica­ cies of  theological debate. The  Faithless A1irror  is a study  of the struggle  between good  and  evil in the  heart  of  man, of the illusions  with  which   he  surrounds  him­ self, of the  temptations which  impede his progress  towards  a true understanding of his  relations to  God  and  to  other men. Described thus,  the work must  sound  like an  extended  sermon, which  in  some  re­ spects it is; and  like most sermons,  it will draw  respectful approbation,  from  those among   the   devout   who   have   not   suc­ cumbed to sleep.
The setting is Yarkville,  the small hippy district of Toronto, in  the  years  rg66  to rg68. A Catholic priest named  Crawley arrives  in search  of a runaway from his parish,  and  is drawn  to stay in the district by   his  sense  of  the   spiritual  needs   of those who  live  there-drug-addicts, drop-outs, prostitutes, the detritus of a materialistic and  success-oriented  society. He  opens  a  centre   to  help  such  people regain   a  grasp   on   reality,   and   tries  to awaken   a  sense of  God  in  them; in  the process,    he   becomes    something   of   a martyr and  a  hero-figure, a  thorn in  the side of the Church establishment, a threat to  those  who seek to exploit  the  idealism
 and  aspirations of confused  young  people for the sake of profit.  Father Crawley en­ counters every  kind  of  vice  and  perver­ sion,  but  refuses  to  give  up  his  mission;  at  length,  however,  he is sucked  into  the world    of   illusions    he   had    sought    to destroy,  and  becomes  an  advocate of the kind  of  "free   love"  approach  that   con­ fuses  self-indulgence  with  spiritual free­ dom.
His antagonist, and  ultimately the cause of his defeat,  is a mysterious figure  called Barringer, associated   with   black   magic and Satanism. He recognizes the human potential for evil, and  makes use of the "counter-culture" to give that  evil greater expression. His motive  is a lust for power; his aim is to create an anarchic society devoid   of  law  or  belief,  in  which   man will have put  his own image  at  the centre of the universe, in place of God's. Torn between  this   devil-figure and Father Crawley  are  a  number of  youthful  deni­ zens  of  Yorkville,   in   various   stages   of moral  decay;  most  notable  among them is  Steyle,  a  would-be  writer  and   draft­ evader    from   Berkeley,   whose   intellect seems to be paralyzed by drugs  or despair, or  both.  Steyle  (presumably "style" plus "stale")   finds  a  refuge   from   guilt   and self-hatred  behind   a  mask   of  cynicism and contempt for others.  Under Father Crawley's  influence, however,  he  regains a moral  perspective which  gives him, finally, the ability  to resist Barringer and aid  in his destruction, in  the  novel's  gory and Gothic  conclusion.
Had   the  author been  content  to  pre­ sent  a  study  of  character or  a  novel  of straightforward action or social comment, his  materials would   have  sustained  the reader's  interest;  the   plot   has   all   the realism   of   a   social   worker's  case-file. However,  Mr.  Reid  was  determined  to

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



invest  his  work  with  deeper significance, to  make   it  into  an  intellectual  journey into   the  farthest  reaches   of  the  human spirit; and   therefore he  asks  us  to  view his characters as latter-day inhabitants of a Dantean hell, exemplifying the  various sins of incontinence, bestiality  and  fraud. The  epigraph of the  novel  is from  Canto III of  the  Inferno; Steyle  is haunted  by memories  of  a  dead  girl  called  Beatrice, whom  he had  once loved; even  the  name of the press under which  the novel is published, Darkwood Press, echoes  the opening lines of the  Inferno. Seen  in  the light  of  such  illustrious associations, the plight  of Yorkville's  damned should  take on   a   symbolic   aspect,  and    their   fate should  strike us as representative of the human condition.
That this does not  happen is primarily because  so much  of the  novel is occupied with  analysis  rather than  action; charac­ ters  and  events  are  buried  in  a  welter  of words.   The   characters  may   have   had real-life  originals,  as  a  prefatory note  to the  novel  implies; but  any  resemblance to   real   life   fades   once   they   begin   to speak.   The   pressures   and    frustrations which   beset   them   are,   doubtless,    real enough; but  would   a  group of  teenage  drop-outs spend  their  day discussing  finer points   of   faith    and   philosophy  like   a gaggle  of  earnest   novices  in  a  nunnery? They  explore  their  souls  a:t great  length, regaling    each    other,  and    the   wilting reader, with  their  discoveries.  "The  way to  get  over   a  death  hang-up is  to  die. Die  and  go  to  hell.  That's where  I  am. It's   a  groove   and   you  can't  get   there. Heaven  and   hell -it's really  the  same place. The fire only burns  while you resist it.  You got  to   become  the  fire". They   speak  of  love  and   hate,   God  and the  devil,  in  carefully   formed  contrasts

116
 and  paradoxes  that   seem  contrived and awkward in  the  context of informal con­ versation.   "Like    opposites   depend   on each    other.... We   need    the    straight world,  man; the  straight  world  needs us. There'd be no light  if  there  wasn't  dark­ ness,  no  sound   if   there   wasn't   silence. Like  these  are  all  aspects  of one  thing - like the  world  isn't  them  or  us, man,  it's them-us,  if   you   dig   what  I  mean". This  is how  the  characters speak  to  (or at)   one  another  throughout  the  novel;  the  occasional  overdose  or suicide  comes almost   as  a  relief   from   the   tedium   of such dialogue.
It  would   be   wrong   to   suggest   that
there  is  nothing realistic  in  the  descrip­ tion  of  a  group   of   "turned-off"  young people  posing as world-weary cynics, and spouting  Camus   or   Rimbaud;  but   too often   the  scene  takes  on  the  air  of  an Honours   seminar,   and    the   characters sound  as  if  they  are  re-hashing old  lec­ ture   notes  in  an   effort   to  impress   the professor.  In  such  a  learned  atmosphere one   is  not   surprised    by  the   choice   of Hamlet  as bedtime reading for  a  fifteen­ year old runaway, or even by the allusions to St. Thomas Aquinas and  Dante made  by   a   small-time  local   racketeer,  who quotes   from   the   Inferno,  in  Italian  of course.  The  roll-call   of  scholarly   refer­ ences   is    impressive,    testifying    to   the author's   wide  reading,  if  nothing  else; Newman, Teilhard de Chardin, Leibnitz,  Nietzsche,  Russell,   Cocteau,  Mallarme, Milton,  Poe, C.  S. Lewis,  Tolkien, Frost
-these and  other  names grace  the pages of  The   Faithless  Mirror   and   lend   the appearance  of  substance  to  some  very insubstantial talk. The  exchanges  between Father Crawley  and  Steyle,  liberal  priest and   would-be   writer,   are   so  academic that   the  reader   half  expects  to  find  ex-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



planatory footnotes. Steyle's study of Beowulf,  for   example,  has   taught  him that   society  is less "civilized" now  than it was at the time of the Anglo-Saxons: "Maybe  I'm    pissed   off   with   a   world where  there  are  no  more  monsters  -or their  mothers- to  fight.  A dragon  does you in  and  you get  lof-fame,  renown. And  you earned it by death. For  a  thou­ sand  years  that   fucking  manuscript was lost.  Instead  of  wyrd   we  have   weirdos, like me".
The   use  of  swear-words in  such  pas­ sages  is revealing; it  is an  unconvincing device  to give the appearance of life to a character who is little  more  than  a tissue of  ill-assorted   ideas  and   theories   culled from  a  hundred  different sources.  If we could detect  the author's presence  behind all  this,  mocking   the  characters' preten­ tiousness or using it to reveal  their empti­ ness, we might  be  the  more  ready  to put up  with  the  phoney  philosophizing; but there  is  no  sense  of  a  detached, critical  observer  whose view  of life may  be more rational  and   balanced   than   that   of  his characters. Reid  shows  people  struggling towards  self-knowledge, but  gives  us  no firm  vantage point  from  which  to  judge their  progress;  even  the  sensible  and  hu­ mane priest  is shown  to be erratic, incon­ sistant   and   confused. There  is  no  clear discrimination  between   different   points of view, so that everything the characters say  seems   to   be   of   equal   weight   and value,   its   significance   or   validity    only measurable by what  comes  next.  Perhaps it  was  John  Reid's   intention  to  deprive  us of a fixed standard of value, to empha­ size his  point about  the collapse  of moral standards in  our  society;  but  to  involve the  reader in  the  consequent  confusion can   only   run   counter  to  his   purpose. That  purpose   is  wholly   admirable:  to
 warn  of the dangerous forces  of evil that may  enslave  us  by  blinding us  to  God; but  high  moral  seriousness  is not  an anti­ dote   for   an   overdose   of   words   and   a blurring of narrative focus.

HERBERT ROSENGARTEN



VAPOUR FROM
A JEWELLED CASKET


ANNE   HEBERT,    The   Silent    Rooms.    General
Publishing,  $7·95·
IT  IS A   VERY  DISCONCERTING   experience to be forced  to read  a writer's works back­ wards.   This   was   what   happened   with Marie-Claire Blais  and  now  we are  sub­ jected    to   the   same   disorientation  with Anne   Hebert.  Both   the   novel   and   the film   Kamouraska   were   such   enormous successes that  her editors now seem confi­ dent   that   her  first  tentative  novel,   Les Chambres  de   Bois   ( 1958)   will   receive rapturous attention in its English  transla­ tion,  The  Silent  Rooms.
I had  difficulty with  this novel from  its first  stagey  sentence, "Catherine's  home was in a town where blast furnaces flamed in  the  sky, day  and   night,  like  the  dark palaces   of  the  Apocalypse." It  must   be the  translation, I  thought. I remembered how a French friend  had  fumed  over  the translation in Kamouraska of "la  galerie" as "balcony" and  "porch". Obviously, she complained, the   American translator simply  didn't know  Quebec or  he  would never  have  confused  "galerie" with  a "balcony"!
I  began   to  look  for  the  same  sort  of
solecisms in Kathy Mezei's  translation. "Sous   l'abondance d'un  pain   aussi  dur,

117

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



des femmes  se palignaient doucement contre la face  noire  des  hommes  au  desir avide" becomes  "Bread was plentiful but hard-won, and  women  complained  softly against the sooty faces of men quick  with desire." Again,  "II  parla  de la solitude de la ville pierreuse, du  vent sur la place, de l'homme qui  est  sans  gite,  ni  recours,  de la violence du sang chez les filles qui se damnent" has  now  become  "He spoke of the  loneliness  of  the  stony  town,  of  the wind  on  the  square, of the  man  without home  or  friends, of  the  passionate blood of girls who are damned."
I feel uneasy about such renditions, but
not irritated beyond  endurance as I am by Hannah  Josephson's embarrassing  trans­ lation  of  Bonheur  d'Occasion. Each  year the  New Canadian Library brings out  the same  edition of The  Tin Flute, with  such unbelievable phrases  as "in  a trice", "You  look  quite  fetching, I  assure  you,"  "over yonder" ... No  wonder  there  is a  credi­ bility gap between  the two solitudes. Sure­  ly there is some cultural group within  this country  who  could   ensure   that   the  best possible translators were selected?
Miss Mezei has had a very difficult  task and   my  sympathies  are  with   her.  How does  one  translate a  book  in  which  each sentence is a complex and  allusive  meta­ phor?   In    French    unquestionably    the heightened style sounds better; in English it is artificial, stilted,  theatrical; what  may be grand  in French becomes  grandiose in English. To describe  it as a poetic  book is not   adequate-it   is  not   good   poetic prose. I am willing  to admit that  Les Chambres  de  Bois was  apprentice-work for  Kamouraska  which  I  found  effective in  a gorgeously  operatic way, a  Madame Bovary  with  brio.  By then  Anne  Hebert had learned to control narrative and to create  characters  who   were   more   than

II8
 sensibilities.  Les Chambres de Bois is a transitional work belonging in that indul­ gent   and   rather  murky   region   between  poetry and  prose.
She  loves  sensuous  images,  statements that   suggest  profound  meanings,  mood and atmosphere of frozen immobility. The "events"  in   the   novel   have   only   the vaguest  associative connection with each other. The "characters" are  histrionic voices. A hand  is raised  languidly, a ciga­ rette   is  stubbed   out,   a  chord   is  struck  upon  the piano. Some young sisters, whose mother has  recently  died,  stay  for a  time with  an  uncle in the country. One day in the  woods  they  encounter the  local  seig­ neur   with   his  son  and  daughter. Some years later  the oldest  girl, Catherine, and the  son,  Michel  a  dilettante artist, meet.  They  have  a few inconclusive encounters and   when   Michel's sister,   Lia,   takes  a lover,   he   suddenly    asks   Catherine  to marry   him.  They   move   to   Paris   to  a small flat overflowing with expensive,  use­ less  things.  Catherine, who  is fundamen­ tally  an  earthy   peasant, is  moulded  by Michel   into   a  beautiful, listless  object. Lia,  abandoned by her  lover,  moves into the flat. An indefinable turbulent relation­ ship is re-established between brother and sister  from  which  Catherine  is excluded. Stifled  and  isolated,  she  becomes  very ill and  leaves  her  prison  to  convalesce  in  a sunny  climate. Here  she meets  a vigorous man  who  gives her  the  strength to leave Michel forever. And that is all.
Presumably there are implications of themes  which  run  through her  poetry­ dependency, solitude, death, the  need for natural roots. But  all is hint, vague echo, allusion,  a vapour,  evapourizing from  a jewelled casket.

PHYLLIS GROSSKURTH

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



HANDFUL OF DUST

RONA  MURRAY,   Ootischenie. Fiddlehead Books.
SEYMOUR  MAYNE,  For  Stems   of Light. Valley
Editions.
FRASER SUTHERLAND, In  The  Wake of. North­
ern  Journey  Press.
LEN  GASPARINI,  One  Bullet  Left. Alive  Press.
PETER   STEVENS,  Family   Feelings  and   Other
Poems. Alive Press.

FROM THE  little   presses,   a   handful  of poets  fumble in  earth, dusty  pages  and the  forbidden corners  of human flesh for words  to  colour  maps.  With   varying in­ tensity   of  light,   the  star-hand  bursts  in every  direction, scattering pages of print.
Ootischenie, by  Rona  Murray, is  the
record  of a mind  bending into  a new landscape. Murray, l'etranger,  is  the visitor  absorbing the life of the  village  of Ootischenie, "Consolation", dominated by stark   seasons,   heaven    (snow)    and   hell (fire) ,  and   the  Doukhobor  people   who have   struggled  and   died   there,   forcing new life out of the land.
Let me go
in to the half frozen fields
and  manure the bloody earth
In  the  natural dialectic of fathers and sons, the Doukhobor children are  moving to the city or dying on highways, escaping into  death. There is an  urgency  in  Mur­ ray's word photographs. History  is written  in  lyric gasps.  Even  as the shutter  lets in the light, the subject changes.
How may words
melting  through  fingers retain  all this?
As she  mourns   the  passing  landscape, the firing of love into violence, Murray becomes Doukhobor, "spirit wrestler", herself,   ensuring  the   continuity  of  the land  and the rough  philosophers who civilized it once.
 I celebrate
bulb beneath  the sod egg within  the goose
sun burning

For Stems  of Light, eleven  poems  by Seymour  Mayne, is a travel  book whose locus,  lines  of  verse,  is  points  of  revela­ tion   illuminating  the   poet's  quest   after  the parts  that  make  up the human family.  The  stems of light  are spokes  in a wheel,  the circle completing his relationship with the universe.
In  most of the poems,  it is the wander­ ing  Jew  who  searches the  ancient land­ scape,   "blood    of    Jerusalem's  morning sun",  for signs and  voices to link the dead  past  with  the  living  present. But  beyond Jewishness, there  is a family  bond  that  is evidenced   in   Western  art,   antique and  modern.   In   "Division"  and   "Only  the Feet   Remain",  the   sculpture  of  Henry Moore and  Phaidros, the philosophical centre  becomes real  and  human,

The  arterial arms of the spatial heart

The   wheel  is ecumenical flesh  of  which the   poems,   the   Biblical   desert,   the   art galleries are only spokes.
Poems   written  by  Fraser   Sutherland "In the  wake  of  looking   at  poems  and paintings", impressions, imitations and translations, make  up  a  phantom  collec­ tion of verse reflected  off the  two dimen­ sional  surfaces  of  paper and  canvas.   In The  Wake  Of maps  neither  human nor geographical landscape, is simply a guided  tour  through the  books  and  paintings of real   artists  like   Verlaine,  Rimbaud, Brecht, Munch, Vasarely, and, final insult,  Auden,   who   according  to   Sutherland, "kept  life in one  pocket,  work  in another
-like pencils."
There is no shape  to the  pale  imitation

119

BOOKS IN REVIEW



of art,  no  real  or  imaginary substance to the  flat  word  on  the  page.  The  obituary for  this experiment in  vicarious poetry  is contained in "Ars  Poetica", after  Vicente Huidobro.

What  we see we create,
What  we hear can never die.

In the  epigraph to  One   Bullet  Left, a patchwork collection of poems cut  from urban and  rural  settings  and  sewn  into  a rather eclectic quilt,  Len Gasparini quotes Kenneth Patchen;

\[  have but one bullet left
And there are so many  things  to kill.

The  bullet,  presumably, is the  poet  him­ self, the  unity  in a multiplicity of  experi­  ences described in the  story poems.
The  poet wears many disguises as he wanders through the city at night,  "I pose as Melmoth the wanderer", tough  guy, truckdriver, and husband helplessly watching painful childbirth. The realities of Melmoth are  assumed  from  songs and celluloid.

This  was the theatre that  projected our youth  on to its screen;
the temple  that  symbolized a certain truth
we did not learn  in school
and certainly didn't know then.

The  mask falls off in nature. Poems written in gardens and  at  Point  Pelee are gentle   and   true,   free   from   the   forced humour of Melmoth the role player. "The rain   ripens   these  perspectives for  a  still life."
Family  Feelings  and  Other Poems,  by
Peter  Stevens,  is a  series  of  photographs taken out of windows and in mirrors. Gradually   the    public    exposures  move closer and the poet turns the camera on himself.
Good  documentary poetry  is rare  and
Stevens   traps   himself   in  the  rhetoric  of


I20
 the soapbox, in the celluloid  snarl of news­ casting.  Poems like "State of the Nation" and  "The Mahatma" really  add  nothing to  the  conventional notion  of  public  fig­ ures and events.
Only   in   the   landscape  pictures  like "The Tide  Flats" and  "Farm Girl  Looks Out  After  the Long  Winter" do we begin to approach the real  artist  in the photog­ rapher-poet.
It  is  in   the   houseful   of  people   and
mirrors  that  the chiaroscuro of real life is finally  printed on  paper. In  the  family poems,  the  dark   and   light  sides  of  love and   life  are  juxtaposed in  words  some­ times  funny   and   often   painful.  Finally  alone with himself, the poet records, while

Others  sleep
where nursery rhymes
are bleeding
light down walls.

LINDA ROGERS



HEAYEN-BORN ANCESTORS

Visitors  Who   Never  Left: The   Origin  of the People of Damelahamid, translated by Chief Kenneth  B.  Harris    in   collaboration  with Frances  M.  P. Robinson,  U.B.C.  Press.

THIS  LONG-AWAITED BOOK  tells the myth of  the  people  of  Damelahamid  (Temla­ ham) ,  the  heaven-born  ancestors  of  the Gitksan  of  the  Skeena. The  story  is told by Chief  Kenneth  Harris, H agbegwatku ("first-born of  the  nation"), who  claims direct   descent  from  the  founders of  the great   village  or  city   of  Damelahamid. Many  of  these  stories  have  appeared in print  in  other  forms,  and  Chief  Kenneth Harris and  his distinguished mother, Mrs. Irene  Harris (now  deceased), have  told

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



them  to me and  to others; but  this is the first  time  they  have  been  published as a cycle. The great  importance of this book is that  it  gathers the  main  myth-motives not  only of the Gitksan, but  of the Tsim­ shian,   Haida and   Tlingit, into  a  brief, unified  mythical history.  It is a  magnifi­ cent   story,  comparable  to  the  myth   of Manco Capac  and   the  founders  of  the Incaic dynasty of Peru.
The stories  have  been  conscientiously
introduced and  annotated by Frances M. P. Robinson of the Department of Fine Arts, University of British Columbia. Per­ haps   I had   better   point   out   the  short­  comings  of the  book  first, since  I  wish to make  it  clear  that   it  is a  most  valuable  one.
First  of all,  we are  not  given  any indi­
cation  of the  fascinating formal  qualities of these stories, which  are as close to being epic poems as an oral,  non-metrical tradi­ tion  will allow.  Certainly much  has been lost, since they are translations of  transla­ tions -first  told  by Arthur  McDames in an  archaic language or  dialect  known  as Tsomalia   (no  indication  here  that   local linguists   find   the  existence   of  this  lan­  guage   interesting),  then   translated  by Irene  Harris into  modern Gitksan, then in   turn   translated  by   Chief   Kenneth Harris into  English.  However, there  are two  important facts  about   these  stories: the first is that  they are full of traditional verbal   formulas   (like   North   European sagas) , the  second  is that  there  are  songs at  key  points  in  the  narrative. Some  of these I have on tape, sung by Mrs. Harris: they    possess   a   majestic and    archaic beauty. The versions in this book have at times the quality of simple "Indian  tales". This  textural and formal  loss really should have been pointed  out in the introduction.
Secondly,  one must  regret  Mrs.  Robin-
 son's avowed decision to eliminate Chief Kenneth Harris's statements of the "morals" of these stories. The Gitksan did not have our strange fear of "moralizing": the morals are ancient and  intrinsic.
Thirdly,  Mrs.  Robinson  gives  an  un­
satisfactory account of the  theory  of Northwest Coast  history which  Kenneth Harris, and other  keepers of the tradition, have   derived   from   the   myths.   I   know myself that  this theory  is far  more  than  a matter of mere  "folk-etymology", though it inevitably contains some such elements, the  results  of  a  modern degeneration of the ancient intellectual system and  the intrusion of European habits  of thought. They  deserve to be presented in full, since they contain much  of great  value.
Perhaps, since  Mrs.  Robinson is a spe­ cialist  in  fine arts  and   (if  I am  correct) an  anthropologist, she  has  suffered   from bad  "professional advice". It is clear  that  she recognizes the beauty and  importance of these stories.
If we go back far enough, the stories of
Damelahamid may be related  to myths  of immense  age,  existing  all  over  the  hemi­ sphere  and  in the Old  World  as well. It is likely  that, along  with  other  sacred-city myths,  they  once  embodied  rich  associa­ tions,  among them  symbolism  relating to astronomy and the cardinal points.  Never­ theless,  this  tradition is the  only  unified myth  of a  great  cultural centre and  the migrations of its people  known  to us from the  Northwest Coast.  Related Haida tra­ ditions are clearly derived  from  the main­ land.   Fragments  of  a  similar  cycle  are found  among  the  coastal  Tsimshian, but since  they  are  found  among the  Killer­ Whale   clan,   to   which   Chief   Kenneth Harris's  Fireweed  Clan  is closely  related, their  existence  is no argument against the centrality and   priority   of  the   tradition


121

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



represented in this book. There are several other    cycles   found    on   the   Northwest Coast,   but   this  is  the   only  extant  one which  relates  the  beginnings of a civiliza­ tion  to  a  particular cultural  group. The  so-called   "Raven"   (Weeget)    tradition, which   also   deals   with   the   coming   of material  culture,  is  integrated  into   the Damelehamid  cycle in  this  version,  per­ haps by main force: the reverse has never been the case. The very close relationship of the Raven cycle to paleoAsiatic Raven stories shows that  it arrived late.
It would  thus  appear that   the  stories
collected  here  are  in some sense a key to the  mythology  of the  Tsimshian  (includ­ ing   Nishka   and   Gitksan) ,   Haida  and Tlingit areas.
I have  indicated that  the stories in this version show much  "smoothing out", sim­ plification, and  a  loss of  the  traditional literary style. Some  of the latter, though, survives  in Chief  Kenneth  Harris's trans­  lation   of  the   story   of   the  Medeek, or monster  bear.
The  people had returned to Damelahamid and   had   reconstructed  it.  They   started  to flourish.   They   started  to  flourish   in  large numbers.   They   found   that   Damelahamid was no longer on the shores of the big ocean. They  found  that  the ocean  was no longer
at   the   doorsteps   of  Damelahamid.   Before
the flood, the shores of the ocean  were right up to Damelahamid and  it wasn't  until after
the flood that  the  tidal  waters  receded  down the river.
They  found  that   there  were  now several
lakes. There were lakes all over. They  found that   water,   running  water,   was  plentiful.
There was running water  from  all  the  little lakes  and   ponds  that   were  created  by  the big flood. Any  little  hollow  capable  of  con­ taining  water,   retained  the  water  and   be­
came a lake ...
Here  we  have  a  kind  of  ritual  repeti­ tion  which   not  only  has  analogies with the  visual  design  and  musical   construc­ tion  of  the  area, but  reminds one  of  a

122
 literary style which  reached its peak in MesoAmerica and may be found  (for example) in the Quiche Mayan play of Rabinal Achi. In this latter, verbal  phrases are  used  like musical  ones  and  repeated in  a  "House That  Jack   Built" fashion. One   may  also  see  stylistic   relationships with   the   Popol  Vuh. However, in   the Northwest Coast  stories  the  symbolic and arcane, which  dominates 1\fesoAmerican epic and  drama, is subordinated (without being lost)  to the narrative and  human interest.
Books like this reveal  the  ancient roots of British  Columbian traditional culture. Properly   used,  they  show  us  the  way  to our  cultural identity, and   point   up  our deep   relationship  with   the  ancient  cul­ tures of the  rest of the  hemisphere.

NORMAN NEWTON


SAID OF CANADA

JOHN  ROBERT  COLOMBO,  Colombo's Canadian
Quotations. Hurtig. $15.oo.

IF WE  WERE BORN in this country long enough  ago  to feel  the  raw  weight  of its then  sense of inferiority, or whether we became   naturalized  citizens   while  Can­ ada   still  had   only  a  vestigial   belief  in herself, the publication of a massive tome that    stands   in   immediate   comparison with  both  John  Bartlett's  Familiar Quo­ tations  and   The   Oxford   Dictionary  of Quotations,  must  surely  give us pause.
The Oxford volume claims over 4o,ooo quotations while  Bartlett,  (the  first  edi­ tion  of which  was  r8gr  with  the  edition in  my  possession  being  1937)   has  some
1578  pages  for  over  2,400  contributors.
Our  book,  Colombo's  Canadian  Quota-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



tions, reputedly contains 6,ooo quotations and  runs  to  735  pages.  However, if  the junior    in   genesis  and   statistical  entry, with   a   weight   of   three   and   one   half pounds,   Colombo's   effort   might   be  said to be the peer of its British and U.S. counterparts  for,  in  my  inexpert   judg­ ment,   they  seem  to  be  roughly  compar­ able in avoirdupois.
"Might  be  said" -but really   should
not   be.  For  in  fact   the  Colombo  tome stands   only  in  the  most  superficial  rela­ tionship  to the other  two works:  a factor  determined  not  by  any  reference  to  its editor's scholarship and industry, but aris­ ing  from  deliberate limitations  of  scope and  historical  fact.  Colombo's  own  term of connection is "follow  in  the footsteps"  of Bartlett and  Oxford but what we have in  the  new  work  is a  book  whose  boun­ daries  are  strictly  Canadian-either by the  quotation's  reference or  the  origin  of the quoted.
So we can straightway forget  the pages of  Holy  Writ,  Shakespeare, the  Classics or  the  translations from  many  languages, which   provide  such  a  generous  propor­ tion  of material for  the  other  two works, neither of  which   is  limited  by  national origin  and,  which  both  benefit,  from  the accumulation of many  quotable remarks  from  many centuries.
John  Robert   Colombo's  compilation, on  the  other   hand,   is  not  only  derived from   Canadian sources  but   is  intended for Canadians. Outside of a few  univer­ sity contexts  to the  south  and  east  of us, it  is  unlikely  that   the   vast  majority of entries  in this book will be meaningful to the  Briton  or  American  who  would  turn quite  naturally to  Bartlett or  the  Oxford  to  refresh  the  memory  or  to  ponder the change  of  popularity in  those  quoted   in the various editions.
 But   the  difference  goes  deeper  than that.  The   majority of  quotations in  the two international reference works  have  a literary  genesis:  the  most  quoted are famous  men  of  letters.  Not  so with Colombo's  composition. To  the  contrary, one of the most striking characteristics of the work under  review is the absence of several  of our  better-known novelists  and short-story practitioners.  (Though a proper  Canadian flavour  is conveyed  here by   the   necessary   qualification  that    in terms of the bookmen, the east  is charac­ teristically   better  represented   than    the west. You will search  in  vain  amid  these pages   for   such   as  Jane   Rule,  Audrey  Thomas, or Rudy  Wiebe.)
Colombo  has not  attempted, of course,
to fashion  a cultural parthenon from  his six  thousand   entries, and   should   hardly be faulted  for not doing  so. The  words  he himself invokes  in  his preface as to what kind  of dictionary he  has  come  up  with are  "celebration", "mosaic", "living  col­ lage",   "repository"  and   "inventory"­ none  of  which   suggest  anything  in  the nature of an hierarchy. One  certainly has the  impression   that  Colombo wished   to stress a democratic quality in  this largest of  all  Canadian  dictionaries, and  this  is surely  indicated  when   he  tells  us:   "All along  I have  thought it better  to include  than  exclude."
However,   such   is  the   state   of  fallen human  nature, that  the  most  lofty inten­ tions  all  too  frequently  materialize at  a much  baser  level.  And  unless all  twenty­  odd million of us had been given an entry  there  is no way  entirely to obviate  reac­  tions  motivated  by  snobbery   or  chagrin as to  who  is "in" and  who  is "out". In­ deed, one has it on good report that  a gigantic  parlour game has already been established  across the country on the basis


123

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



of guessing  who "made it into  Colombo" and  who did not.
This  might  be the first good cause  that
the publication of Colombo's Canadian Quotations might  be  held  to serve. Any­ thing  that  stirs  up  a  little  controversy in our  somewhat soggy cultural climate and incidentally  heightens our   national self­ awareness,  is not  to  be  dismissed  out  of hand.
Apart  from  such  restricted goals,  what
is the  true  significance of the  book?  Does it,  for  example, tell  us lively  and  intelli­ gent  things  about  ourselves  and  our  past
-as its  editor   patently hopes?   And  at
another level  altogether, does  a  perusal of its  pages  provide one  with  enjoyment if not edification?
My  own  answer  to  all  these  questions is affirmative. Though  I  must  qualify  by stating that  it  is ultimately more  divert­ ing than  instructive.
At a general  level-assuming a reality
to  the   collective   representation   here­ the entries are not particularly aphoristic. But  that  is not  to say there are not  occa­ sional  gleams  of  wisdom,  as  exemplified for  example, by Chief  Dan  George  with his entry:
When the  white man  came  we  had  the  land and   they  had  the  bibles; now  they  have  the land and  we have the  bibles.

And his lament:

I  was   born    in   an   age   that  loved    the things  of  nature  and   gave   them  beautiful names like  Tes-wall-u-wit instead  of  dried­ up  names like  Stanley Park.

But   such   canny    comments  are   the exception  rather   than    the   rule:   more general  is a wry, self-deprecating humour that  does seem to have  a distinctive Can­ adian  contour  to  it.  One   would  expect something  along   those   lines   from   such established  political  humourists as  John


124
 Diefenbaker, or from such  darlings of the media  as British Columbia's Ma  Murray. More   surprisingly   it  is  the  publisher of the Vancouver Sun, Stuart Keate, who most  deftly  catches  the  tone  of many  of the intrinsically Canadian contributions:

The national bird  of  Canada is  the  grouse.

And rather more cleverly:

In  any  world  menu Canada must  be con­ sidered the vichyssoise  of nations -it's cold, half-French, and difficult to stir.

A   problem   with    the   included   com­ ments  made  by  distinguished  visitors  to our shores is that  too many  of  them  were delivered   before  audiences at  the  Cana­ dian  Club  of Toronto-a context  where politeness  tends  to  take  precedence over percipience.
What  might  be strengthened in a sub­ sequent  edition  is the proportion of entries  by  contemporary  foreign   commentators on Canadian life, letters, etc. One  would assume,  for  example,   that  ex-President Nixon's   terse  description  of  our   Prime Minister  would  find  a  place.  And  by the time such  a new edition came  into  being we  might   hope   that   the   world   outside might   have  a  little   more   awareness   of what  extraordinary things have happened culturally across this land  since the annus mirabilis  of Expo-Montreal. As it  is, too many of the "foreign" entries  to be found here, were responses to Canada's remoter past,  when,  comparatively speaking,  this was rather a dull  place.  So  that,  not  un­ naturally, there  is a sameness  of  response and  even an echo of that dullness.
This  category of contribution in the current version  may  well serve  the cause of our  historians,  but  in  the light  of both the excitement and  dangers of the new nationalism and  its  transforming powers, more   of   us,   I   think,   will   respond    to

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



descriptions of and  reactions to the Can­ ada   in   foment,  which   is  after  all,   the salient   characteristic of  this,  her  second century.
DAVID WATMOUGH


THEORY & PRACTICE

JIM   CHRISTY,  Beyond     the    Spectacle.  Alive
Press.
ERLING    FRIIS-BAASTAD,    ed.,   Outlaws.  Alive
Press.  $3.00.

SPECTACLES,  according  to  Jim   Christy, are  the circuses that  inexorably transform us into mindless followers of the system. Hypnotized  by   the   mass   media,    "that most  dangerous and  effective  arm  of the Corporate Capitalist Ogre", we shuffle along  en  masse to the very events, demon­ strations,   and    protests    that    link    our chains.  Canadians don't even  have  their own spectacles; we import them from  the United States.
For Christy  anarchism is the solution  to
the bankrupt ideologies  of the  sixties because   " ... a   real  street   person   is  a natural born  anarchist who creates situa­ tions and  responds  without  preconceived notions."  His  slogan   is  simple:  "Don't follow leaders."
Of  course,  Christy   himself  is  a  spec­
tacle.  Twenty-nine  years  old,   he  is  de­ scribed  accurately by Doug Fetherling in the introduction to Beyond the Spectacle : "Like  an  Italian Indian, with high cheek­ bones,   a   Dick   Tracy   jaw   and   square  shoulders  that   make   you  think   he  has forgotten  to  take  the  hanger   out  of  his coat  before  putting it  on."  In  his  home town of South Philadelphia, Christy  was a regular on  American Bandstand   (a spec­ tacle  if  ever  there  were  one), and  later,  among  other   things,  a  college  drop-out,
 protest   organizer,  wanderer,  and   draft­ dodging anarchist cum  Canadian citizen.  He  provides  his readers with  an immedi­ ate  touchstone to the counter culture and his writing  exudes,  at  one  and the  same time,  an  air  of  suppressed  violence   and  an all-encompassing empathy. He is often self-indulgent and occasionally naive  and misinformed, but  more  important, he  is sharply  perceptive  and  totally  lacking  in artifice.
His  publisher, the  Marxist-Leninist Alive  Press, seems  devoid  of  any  artistic sense,   never   mind    artifice.  The   fuzzy brown   ink   ebbs  and   flows  across   each shoddy   page   in   this   poorly   edited    (no table   of  contents,  "irregardless",  "sepe­ rate", plus myriad  typographical  errors), atrociously designed and  printed collection of some  twenty  reviews  and  articles. But these complaints are  the stuff  of pedantry beside  the  force,  vitality  and   acuity   of such stories as "On the Bum in Toronto", "Nashville Plus",  "Beyond   Fredericton", "April  in America", "Looking Back",  and "Toronto  The ... ". The last  is a  sensi­ tive  portrait of the Annex  area  of Toron­ to,  a few  streets  in  the  heart  of  the  city where  at  least  five different nationalities live separately, but  equally-rather like America  before the pot melted.
Lining  up   with   down-and-outers   (in "On the Bum in Toronto") Christy com­ prehends the  hierarchy of the  jobless and sees how  easily  the  poor  fall  prey  to  the image-makers -those  reporters, sociolo­ gists and  writers  who transform them  into "just   another  image  in   the   continuous montage  of  images  fed   to  viewers   and readers". Whether  sitting  in  a  nightclub listening    to   an   imported  country  and western    singer,   marching   in   a   peace demonstration, or hanging out  in a youth hostel  in fusty  Fredericton, Christy is the


125

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



fair   witness   and   no   detail  escapes   his scrutiny  or passes without judgment.
Christy   (in  "Nashville  Plus")   decries the  youth  at  the  next  table,  "dressed   in the  finest  suburban hip  goin'-up-to-the­ country splendour,  belled,  coiffed,  body­ shirted, cowboy-hatted.... " In 1968 dur­ ing  the  October March  on  Washington (in   "Looking  Back") ,  Christy  watched "poor Norman Mailer cavorting  patheti­ cally  for  the  TV  cameras while  the  rest of  the  cocktail  party liberals  looked  on."  When  Mark  Rudd and  his  followers  be­ sieged   the  administrative  offices  of  Co­ lumbia University and  forced   the  presi­ dent  to resign, Christy was there  and  saw "four students  huddled  in  the  doorway  of a campus building busily cutting strips of  gauze  from  a  red  cross  roll,  dousing  them  with  mercurochrome,  tieing   them around  their  unscathed heads  and  rush­ ing off down  the ivy lane."
He  does  have  heroes,  and  not  surpris­ ingly,   they   are   activists,  agitators,  and anarchists.  But   the   accounts  of  people like Emma  Goldman, Blaise Cendrars and Jack  Kerouac curiously fall flat.  A minor exception  is  "Craven," but  then  Arthur Craven,  Dadaist,  friend   of  Blaise  Cen­  drars, founder of M aintenant  (a  scandal  sheet  that   he  distributed from  a  wheel­ barrow) ,  was  an   apocryphal  character who  Christy   claims   was  reincarnated a B.  Traven, author  of  The  Treasure of Sierra  Madre and  The Death  Ship. Christy,   the  chronicler of  the  common­ place   and   not   the   recorder   of  the   re­ nowned,    seems   unable    to   vivify   these sketches. And  the same  can be said of the several   film,  art,   and   book   reviews  in­  cluded    here.    They   are   all   competent enough,  but   they   lack   the   spark   that  enlivens  his descriptive prose.
Continuing  the   thesis   established  in
 Beyond  the  Spectacle, Outlaws comprises pieces by Jim Christy, Pat Lane,  Marcel Horne and  Charlie Leeds, selected  and edited  by fellow contributor Erling  Friis­ Baastad. (If  possible  the  editing is  worse and  the  typographical errors  more  proli­  fic, but  still the ink is a  reassuringly con­ sistent  black.)   Three  of  the  contributors (Leeds,   Horne, and   Friis-Baastad)   are Christy   proteges  who  embody   the  spirit  of  his  philosophy  and  so  the   book  be­ comes   more   than   a   mere   companion volume  to Beyond  the Spectacle. Outlaws is the practical application of the word as defined  by Jim  Christy. Frankly, I prefer the theory.
It  may   be  true   as  Christy  states   in Beyond  the  Spectacle that  Charlie Leeds, a jazz player,  poet, painter, and  junkie, is "a man  without defences" whose  "voice
... has   been  nurtured  in   the   thick   of
life" or that  firebreather Marcel Horne is "a man  who has cast away fear, who is involved   totally-mentally   and   physi­ cally-in    his   art."  But,   that   doesn't make  them   poets  nor  does  it  give  their voices "awesome  power".
Christy's story, the rambling, seemingly interminable "Bo",  lacks  the discipline of his earlier  work  although the  reunion, in a  sleezy  small   town   dance  hall,   of  an aging hobo with  his matronly lush of a sweetheart is starkly  powerful. Editor Friis-Baastad's verse is typified by such juvenilia  as "Carl Jung's Theory":

When  I was younger, no one loved  me

Later, when  everyone loved  me it was  too late

I was already writing poems

The  best  by far  are  the  pieces written by B.C. poet  Pat  Lane.  His  poetry  pene­ trates  with a painful clarity:

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



well you hafta dispel  the  myth sooner  of later bring  all  the sound down  to what you are  without filling  everyone up with  legends they can't believe  or
understand

It is Lane  who articulates the theme  of the  collection   and  who  gives  cogent  ex­ pression   to  the  other  contributors'  life­ styles. In  the  essay "To the  Outlaw" he writes  of  the   nature  of   poetry,   casting scorn  on  the  academics  in  their  creative  writing    departments    "For  they    place boundaries  around   the   poem   with   the laws  they  write  as  if  creativity were  the sum of one  plus one." And,  later  he con­ cludes: " ... beyond  all  temporal boun­ daries  of  ethics  and   morality is a  place called   beauty   where   the  outlaw  resides.
... It is from  here  the  poem  comes. It is there  the poet lives."

SANDRA MARTIN


PERFORMING  LIFE

CONNIE   BRISSENDEN,   ed.,    The   Factory   Lab
Anthology. Talonbooks. $3·95·
JAMES   REANEY,  Apple   Butter &  Other Plays for Children. Talonbooks. $4.00.

The Factory  Lab  Anthology is a  collec­ tion   of  five  of  the   plays   produced  at Toronto's  Factory  Lab   Theatre  since May    1970.  They   are   short.   They   are plays  for  voices.  And  for the  most  part they are  tonally  unclassifiable,  containing elements  of absurd  comedy  and  grotesque realism   which   sometimes    enhance  and sometimes  conflict  with  each  other. The most  clearly   comic  of  the  five  is  Larry Kardish's "Brussels  Sprouts", a  contem­ porary   bedroom-farce-on-the-Youth­ Hostel-circuit  in  which   the   respectable masks and  the  orgiastic  ambitions of two young   travellers   become   confused.   But
 even   it   dissolves   into   petty   bickering, which   neither  the  comic  beginning nor the  surreal allusions  to magical  transfor­ mation can dispel.
Perhaps the intent of the contrast is to
make  an  audience contemplate  the  dis­ parity  between  romantic dreams  and  the barrenness  of  so   many   people's   actual lives, a disparity between  the  world  their private  imaginations   glimpse   and   that  which  their  public  selves enact. Kardish certainly makes a distinction. In  moments of   imaginative   seizure,    his   characters speak  in  verse  and  in  long  passages  that  reach  toward  but  never  achieve effective communication  with   the   other   charac­ ters;   when   they  do  exchange  conversa­ tion, it is at  another level and  in another voice,  in  a  kind  of   monotonous flat  di­ meter  that  gives evidence of the restraints under  which  they live their  lives.
More  direct  at  evoking  those restraints
-family   pressures,    public    reputation, competitive sexual  ambitions, self-centred friendship-George  F.   Walker's   "Am­ bush at Tether's End" manages to render some of the most arresting  scenes in Bris­ senden's anthology. The    shallow    ex­ changes  here  convey  the  solipsism  of the friends  and  family  who arrive in a young man's  room and  on discovering his corpse deny   their   involvement  with   him.   The bizarre dialogue  does not  develop  beyond individual  scenes,   however,    and   when the  play  dissolves in  violence,  one  is left with  more  of a sense  of impatience than a   sense   of   horror.   Michael   Hollings­ worth's   "Strawberry  Fields",  using  com­ parable techniques of  dialogue, manages better   to  sustain   for  the  whole  play  its concern    for   grotesquerie  and   mindless violence.  Like  Raymond  Canale's  "The Jingo Ring", it involves  the  presence  of a stranger in  a  society  and   the  alteration

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



which  that  stranger, knowingly  or not, effects.  Hollingsworth's stranger  is a  big homosexual rapist, whom  two itinerant youths  fight  off  and  kill  only  to  become sexual   prey   to  each   other.  Their  early passion   for   cleanliness  is  overcome  by their  recurrent encounter with garbage, excrement and a fascination with pimples. If the  murder is an  initiation, what  does it lead them to? Lovelessness? power? contempt for life?  Ken  Gass, in an intro­ duction to  the  anthology, reads  the  play as a parable of  Canadian-American rela­  tions.  If  so,  the  Canadian  identity that  emerges  by  the  end  is  as  selfish  and  as void    of    values    as    any    stereotypical "American" identity from which it divides itself. Perhaps that  is the reason for the playwright's despair.
The  most  mordant piece  of  theatrical legerdemain   in   the    anthology   is   Bill Greenland's "We  Three, You  and  1",  an expose  of  the  power-   and   ego-structure of professional  charity groups  and  of the uses   to   which    these   organizations put their   subjects/victims. The  only  hint   to the  audience of what  is to  happen is an item  in  the  programme to the effect  that a   brief   appeal  by  "Children's   Interna­ tional" will be made  prior  to "We  Three, You  and   I". In  fact   the  appeal  is  the play;  life becomes  theatre, and  the  huck­  ster  matron hawking her wares -a crip­  pled  girl  whom  she  reduces  to  inarticu­ late  whimpering-either wins  the  audi­ ence into  her  world  or enrages  and alien­ ates   it.   Perhaps  both.   Either   way  she wins;  theatre becomes  life. But  only  be­ cause Greenland has contrived a vigorous language with  which  to voice his observa­  tion   of   social   malaise.   His   society   is neither more  nor  less  crippled than  Hoi-
 lingsworth's or  Walker's, but  his  render­ ing  of  it  makes  it  seem  more  chillingly sterile.
To  move  from  these works  to the four plays    for    and    about    children   which James   Reaney   wrote   in   the   196o's­ "Apple  Butter",   "Geography   Match", "Names and  Nicknames", and  "Ignora­ mus" -is  to  move  to  a  writer   who  has a  consistently  much   richer  sense  of  lan­ guage,  but  not  to escape  the  unpleasant­ nesses which  preoccupy the  Factory Lab  experiments.  Reaney's   world   is  stuffed with  fairytale  violence:  with  orphanages, old  maids,  anger,   and  argument. Apple Butter  must flee and  learn  to combat  the restrictive  authority   of   Spoilrod,  Nip­  chopper and Pinch; the people of "Names and  Nicknames" endure reductive taunts until   they   learn   how  to  declare  them­  selves. The overlong  satire  of educational systems   (progressive  and   traditional)  in "Ignoramus" and  the  animated  explora­ tion    of   Canadian   cultural   history    in "Geography Match" offer other instances  of   thoughtless    emotional   cruelty.  But people  outlast  their    tormentors  in Reaney's   plays;    their    spirit    prevails.  While  Greenland and  Kardish show sar­ donically    the   games    adults   get    con­ founded by, Reaney's  humour establishes the   tenor   of  the  games   children  play:  competitive, but    ritualistic,   hence    in­ vested   with   the  power   of  release.  The  Factory   Lab  plays  are  tight-lipped  and emotionally    strained;   Reaney's  verbal aerobatics are  reinvented with  each  per­ formance.   By   their   own   method    they reject  imaginative restriction. And  that,  as Apple Butter says, "bears thinking on".

W. H. NEW
