$1.25 per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE
N°·45
Summer, 1970

CONFRONTJITIONS, CORRESPONDENCES,  COMPJIRISONS

Articles

BY  RONALD SUTHERLAND, MARGARET ATWOOD, NEIL CfRSON, KEATH FRASER, EDWIN HAMBLET, STEPHEN  SCOBIE

Chronicle

BY  JOHN D. COX

Reviews

BY D. G.  JONES, D. 0. SPETTIGUE, F. M.  FRAZER, GEORGE WOODCOCK, MIKE DOYLE, KEATH FRASER, RUSSELL M.  BROWN, JANE FREDEMAN, A. W. PURDY, MARY JANE  EDWARDS, PAT  BARCLAY, DAVID M. HAYNES, W. H. NEW

Opinions and Notes

BY  P. K. PAGE, WYNNE FRANCIS, LOUIS DUDEK, PHILIP STRATFORD


A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW









PERMUTATIONS OF POLITICS






THERE ARE TIDES  in the social consciousness of artists, and  of writers especially. Often  the  rising and  falling of the  waters of interest  can  be traced  in  the  works  of  a  single writer:   Auden,  for  example,  or  perhaps  even better  Spender,  returning, after  two decades of imperfect  aestheticism,  to  relive vicariously in the youth  rebellions of the Sixties his own original  revolt of thirty years before.
In  the  marginal   area  where  literature  merges into  journalism  such  shifts  of fashion, sensitive to the feeling of the time, are especially perceptible. Orwell was the classic example  of a writer standing  on that  volatile frontier.  Never sure that he was a good  novelist, or  a  novelist at  all in  any strict  sense, he  combined  a a passion for the exact and  appropriate word with a knowledge of his own  time­ liness as a  journalist.  In  the  twenty  years of his writing  life, Orwell  remained acutely conscious of the social and  political issues of his age, yet in his last days it seemed possible-given his growing interest in exploring a Conradian  type of fiction-that if he had lived into the Fifties he would have followed most of the men of the Thirties  into a detachment  from current issues, out of which he would probably  have emerged,  as so many others have done, into the commitments  of the Sixties.
Inevitably,  with that  change in climate, our age has become, like the decade of
the  Left Book Club  and  The  Road  to Wigan  Pier, a time when  journalists and even writers with  more portentous  ambitions turn  back towards  the disinherited, and  immerse  themselves  again  in  that  world  of les bas  fonds which  fascinated the  French  quasi-anarchist writers of  the I 89o's,  the  Russian  writers  who  ap­ peared  between  the revolutions of 1905 and 1917, and  the English writers in the age of the Spanish  Civil War.

3

EDITORIAL



The  best of all  these works of documentary  reportage   to  appear  in  Canada has  been  one  that  did  not  look directly  at  the  distress of  the  present,  but  re­ minded  us of it by holding up the misery of the Depression, admirably evoked, as a mirror  for today  or  perhaps  tomorrow.  It  was James  H.  Gray's  The  Winter  Years, which appeared  in 1966.
Neither of the two recently published Canadian books that  strike me as symp­
tomatic of the climate at the beginning of the 197o's is as well-crafted or as mem­ orable a book as Gray's little masterpiece. And, even if craftsmanship  or  memor­ ability are not merits at  which their  authors  aspire,  these books are  not  even so effective in the art  of communicating  experience.  Both-The  Poverty  Wall  by Ian  Adams  (McClelland  & Stewart,  $2.95)   and  The  Underside  of Toronto  edited  by  W.  E.  Mann   (McClelland  &  Stewart,  $8.95) -reveal in  varying degrees the limitations of perception which the development  of the social sciences has imposed on the natural  history of poverty  in  the later  twentieth  century.
The  Underside  of  Toronto  is far  the  more  disappointing of  the  two  books;
its title is probably  the most exciting  thing  about  it. Anyone  remembering  Or­ well's Down and Out  in Paris and London,  or even Thomas Mayhew's  London Labour and the  London  Poor, will recognize by comparison  the general  poverty of insight in this uneven collection of pieces which Professor Mann  has scrambled together,  the  prevailing  lack of  the  ability  to  evoke sympathy  or  involvement, above  all  the  widespread -but fortunately   not  quite  universal -replacement of interest  in  the actual  human  being by an  immersion  in  the  generalities  and abstractions of pseudo-science. It is clear that  Professor Mann  and  the sociologists on  whom  he mainly  relies have  little sense of  the  uses of  literature   to  further their desire to communicate  knowledge, and  one can  only  regard  it as fortunate  that  not  every  aspect  of  the  underbelly  of Toronto has  yet  been  explored  by researchers  with  their  notebooks and  hidden  tape  recorders.  On  some subjects the editor has been forced to rely on enterprising  journalists who got there before the survey squads. There,  indeed, is something uneasy and  apologetic in the way he introduces  essays by professional writers  who  do  not  use  the  quasi-hermetic cant  of  the  social  sciences. Yet  these  essays -by  Robert   Fulford,   Elizabeth Kilbourn,  Jack  Batten-are  the best  pieces in  the  book  because  they are  con­ cerned with making  people directly  aware of what  it is like to live in the under­  world  or  to go there  as an  observer with  his senses unblinkered   by theoretical preconceptions,  and  because-avoiding tribal  lingoes -they  make the  attempt  to tell their stories in clear and  attractive  English.
Since, as Orwell argued, the clarity and precision of our language  both  reflects


4

EDITORIAL



and  conditions our  patterns  of thought,  it is not surprising  that  one finishes The Underside  of Toronto with  a feeling that  the men and  women whose profession it is to communicate their  observations  have  produced  accounts  of  the  life of the poor and  the neglected that  are not merely more evocative and  revealing but also -in the  last  analysis -more  honest  than  the  dense  and  arid  writings of those who habitually  subdue  life as they  meet it to  the imprisoning  network of research methods  and  classificatory conventions.
Rather  firmly in  the  Orwellian  manner  is The  Poverty  Wall   (Ian   Adams), but it is the manner  of Orwell  at his least successful (The Road  to Wigan  Pier) rather  than  that  of his best works of social reportage,  Down  and  Out  in  Paris and  London   and  Homage  to  Catalonia.  The  most  telling  criticism  of  Wigan Pier was that  it was really two  books; a direct  report  on  the  conditions  of the English  unemployed  in the  Depression, and  a polemical discussion of the  plight of British socialism. A similar  criticism might  be levelled at  The  Poverty Wall. Ian  Adams  has  had  a vast  direct  experience -both  as an  underdog  and  as a journalist-of  the various faces of Canadian  poverty, and  there  are  many  pas­ sages in  which  he describes his experiences with a  starkness  that  is completely convincing and  needs no polemic to support  it. This is the personal and original content  of The  Poverty  Wall.  The  rest of it-the  statement of  the  hypocrisies that  underlie  current  talk  about  the Just  Society and  the  factual  and  statistical analysis of  the  true  condition  of  the  Canadian   poor-needs  to  be  presented, but  not in this book. Indeed,  its very presence induces a curiously schizoid tone, and  in  effect de-emphasizes  the  passages of personal  experience  and  direct  ob­ servation,  in the same way as the opinionizing in the latter  part  of The  Road  to Wigan   Pier defused  the  bombshell  revelation  of slum  existence  in  the  opening chapters  of Orwell's  book. Today  one looks for new classics of the  literature  of social and  political  revolt, but  in  Canada  they have  not  yet been  forthcoming, and one is hardly  aware of them elsewhere.



A SOMEWHAT DIFFERENT INTRUSION of politics into our litera­ ture during  recent months  has only confirmed the editors of Canadian  Literature in  their  long-sustained  view, that  petty localism has no  place in  our  assessment of literature  or  any  other  art.  We  refer  to  the  recent  agitation  by  a  group  of extreme  Canadian nationalists  against  the inclusion of Warren  Tallman  among the  jury that  recommended  the recipients of the  Governor-General's awards  for literature  in 1g6g.

5

EDITORIAL



The  objection  to Warren Tallman, whose perceptive essays and  reviews on Canadian writers and books are familiar  to readers  of this journal,  is apparently that  he is still an American citizen. Let us look at the facts more closely. Warren Tallman came  to teach  at the University  of British Columbia  in  1956.  For  the past fourteen  years he has lived in  Vancouver,  and  has shown  every sign  that this is his chosen home. If he has not decided  to become a Canadian citizen, it may be that  he is not impressed by the formal  implications  of a man's  domicile, but that,  in our view, is a matter  of his personal choice. The important fact is that he has been fully involved for many years in the Canadian academic  community and  has  applied  himself sensitively over  this  period  to  the  study  of  Canadian writers  whom  he  understands  more  profoundly   than   many  scholars  who  are birthright  Canadians.
But, really, we do not have to prove even that  Warren  Tallman is a long-term resident  with  an  acute perception of Canadian values to  justify his inclusion on the committee  selecting books for the Governor-General's awards.  The  criterion by which such books are chosen is not the extent or nature  of their Canadianness, if such  a quality  can  be assessed. It  is their  literary  value,  and  that  should  be manifest  to any good  judge of books provided  his language  is the same  as that of the writers he is considering. In the visual arts it has long been accepted  prac­ tice in the case of important  exhibitions to include  on the jury at least one expert from  another  country, and  the procedure  has its value since it assures  that  there is always an  eye whose vision is not  coloured  by  the  local  influences  to  which we  are  all  unconsciously subject.  We  believe  that   Warren   Tallman  combines with  a  peculiar  felicity  the  understanding of  one  who  has  lived  long among us with  the objectivity of one who has not  yet made  a final  gesture of commit­ ment.
The  editors of Canadian Literature  are as aware as the most ardent nationalists
of the dangers of American economic and  political domination. They  are equally aware of the dangers of a Canadian nationalism that  narrowly denounces the participation of individual  non-Canadians in  our  literary  and  artistic  life. Our culture, like our society, is a river composed of streams that  have flowed in across the frontiers;  cut off the streams, and  the river will die in the desert of isolation.








6



THE FOURTH SEPARATISM



Ronald Sutherland






T.RE ARE   FOUR   KINDS    of  Separatism  ill the   Provinee   of Quebec. The  first kind, manifested in mailbox bombings and  other  acts of noisy desperation,   forms  the  subject   matter   of  Hubert   Aquin's   Prochain  episode, Claude  Jasmin's  Ethel  et le terroriste, Ellis Portal's Killing  Ground, and  to some extent  of Jacques  Godbout's Le Couteau  sur La  table  and  Hugh  MacLennan's Return  of the Sphinx. Based upon  the fairly reliable premise that  an established power structure will never  voluntarily  relinquish  power,  it  is an  attitude  which is hardly new to the world or to Quebec. It is, for instance, the theme of a minor French-Canadian novel  published  nearly  thirty  years  ago -Rex  Desmarchais' La  Chesnaie.  But  with  a  hero  modeled  after  the  Portuguese  dictator  Antonio Salazar  and  a revolution  somehow intended  to take up  where  Papineau  left off in  1841,  Desmarchais' novel did  not create  much  of a stir.  Recently,  however, there have been a number  of stirs, and a great deal of writing in addition  to the novels  listed  above.  The   first  kind  of  Separatism,   then,   whatever   menace  it represents  for  the  Canadian nation,  has  certainly  been  a  shot  in  the  arm  for Canadian literature.
The second kind of Separatism  in Quebec is illustrated  by Rene Levesque and his Parti  Quebecois;  although  there is some doubt  as to how  wholeheartedly  all the  members  of  the  party  share  Levesque's  articulate   moderation.   He  is,  of course,  just as dedicated  to the goal of an  autonomous  State  of Quebec  as are the adherents  of the first brand  of Separatism.  The  distinguishing  feature  of his attitude  is that  he has repeatedly rejected violence and force. Like the Scottish nationalists,  he feels that  independence  must be achieved  by means of the  elec­ toral system. As soon as the  Parti  Quebecois elects a majority  of  representatives to the Provincial  Government, there will no longer be a provincial government.
Another  distinguishing  feature  of Uvesque's philosophy is that a future separate Quebec  would  maintain  economic union with  the rest of Canada, thus  possibly avoiding the often-suggested danger  of becoming a hockey-stick and  maple-sugar

7

THE FOURTH SEPARATISM



republic. Rene  Uvesque justifies his position by the argument that  only national independence can cure the frustrations and inferiority complex which have long haunted  French  Canada. Only  independence  can  restore group  pride  and  self­ confidence. A benevolent federalism, like a loving mother  who will not or cannot untie  the apron  strings, can never fulfil the  psychological needs of a  people who have come of age. And  just as a grown girl does not want  her  mother  to choose her boy friends, Quebec  wishes to conduct  her own external affairs.
The  other  two kinds of Separatism  have  not been so widely publicized as the first two. There  is the Separatism  of those who  do  not  really want  a  politically independent  Quebec,  but who have learned that  the Separatist  Movement  can be a  useful lever  to obtain  concessions from  English  Canada, and  even  from  the United States and France.  Whereas the other brands  of Separatism  are nourished by the fears in  the  hearts of French  Canadians, this  kind  reverses the situation and  exploits the  fears and  aspirations of those  who  are  not  French  Canadians. Once  again,  the  principle  is time-honoured  and  productive-it has  long  been used  by  politicians  in  the  American  South  and  more  recently  by  the  "block­ busters" in the American  North.
The  fourth  variety  of Separatism  is the  opposite  of  the  third,  and  it  is un­
doubtedly  the most significant of all four. It is the genuine  desire for group self­ detennination which  is shared  by thousands,  perhaps  millions of French  Cana­  dians who nevertheless refuse to declare themselves Separatists.  These  people are the confused  masses. They  know there is something  wrong. They  feel frustrated  and  dehumanized, manipulated   by a  system  which  they  vaguely  identify  with English Canada and  the United  States. But because  the  identification  is vague, and  because the  positive stance of the  terrorist  groups seems an over-simplifica­ tion;  because the terrorism itself is alien to their  thinking  and  apparently  futile; because these people have been conditioned  over  the  centuries  to accept  the im­ perfections of life on earth,  they have  not  as  yet  openly  committed  theinselves. Many  are  afraid  to do so; others  do  not  know  how.  At  the  moment  they  are Separatists  in  as much  as they wish to  protect  themselves, build  a  wall around themselves,  escape  from  something,  escape  from  the  boiling  ocean  of  North American society and gain the reassuring warmth  of the family circle. As I have said, these people vaguely identify the oppression  they feel with English Canada and  the United  States, often grouping the two together  under  the term mentalite anglo-saxonne. If ever  Quebec  actually  does secede from  the  Canadian Union,  it will be because this vague identification  has been changed  to something  posi­ tive and specific. And not necessarily with benefit of logic.

8

THE FOURTH  SEPARATISM



The  four  kinds of Quebec  Separatism,  then -terrorist,  political, opportunist and psychological-are quite distinct from one another,  and it seems to me that a knowledge  of these distinguishing  characteristics is a  necessary prelude  to  ex­ amination  of the literature  of Separatism.  Hubert  Aquin's  Prochain  episode, for example,  was written  by a man  who at one time openly embraced  the  attitudes of our  first category;  in  fact,  the  book  was composed  while  Aquin  was  being detained  in a Montreal  jail after his arrest for alleged terrorist  activities. It is an
unusual,  highly original  novel, interweaving  an apologia  pro vita sua with a spy
story and  using both  threads  to present symbolic or direct  commentaries  on  the malaise of Quebec.
This  malaise is eloquently sung from the beginning  to the end of the book. It is tied up with the narrator's personal frustration.  "Le  salaire du guerrier  defait," says Aquin,  "c'est  la depression. Le salaire de la depression nationale,  c'est man echec."  A little later  he comments:  "C'est  vrai que  nous n'avons  pas d'histoire. Nous  n'aurons d'histoire  qu'a   partir  du  moment  incertain  ou  commencera   la guerre  revolutionnaire. Notre  histoire s'inaugurera dans  le sang d'une  revolution qui  me brise et que  j'ai mal servie; ce pour-Ia, veines ouvertes, nous ferons  nos debuts  dans  le monde." Here  as in  Negro  America,  violence is regarded  as  a necessary ritual-the  new identity must be baptized  in blood and  in fire:  "Un sacrement  apocryphe  nous lie indissolublement a la revolution. Ce que nous avons commence, nous le finirons."
But the novel has another aspect. Interwoven with the narrator's agonized protestations  is a  description  of the  events which make  up  the  first episode, or at least the episode which precedes what is to be le  prochain episode. This story is an intriguing  allegory. H.  de Heutz  in his several guises of historian,  financier and  government  agent is a symbol of English Canada  and  the  Canadian  power structure,  or the  Establishment  if you will. K., the girl with  the long blond  hair whom the narrator loves passionately and  who is presumably  his inspiration  and accomplice in the attempt  to eliminate H. de Heutz, is symbolic of Quebec  and the Quebecois. In  the usual spy-thriller way, the narrator follows the trail left by H. de Heutz,  becoming  more and  more fascinated  as he picks up additional  bits of information about  his many-sided  quarry.  The  true  identity  of H.  de  Heutz becomes increasingly cloudy. He has other names and  personalities. And he is cunningly  dangerous.  When  the narrator  eventually  finds him  in Geneva,  he is himself overpowered  and  becomes a  prisoner. Taken  to  H. de  Heutz's  chateau for questioning, the narrator invents a classic soh-story about  abandoning his wife and two children  because of debts and then lacking the courage  to rob a bank  or


9

THE FOURTH SEPARATISM



kill himself with the gun found on his person. H.  de Heutz,  of course, dismisses the story, but  the narrator  manages  to catch  him  off-guard,  grabs  the  revolver, and the tables are turned.
Then  the plot takes a curious twist. When the narrator has transported  H. de
Heutz  to a forest and  is about  to shoot him,  the  latter  begins to  weep  pitifully and plead for his life. Then  to the narrator's  mystification, he repeats exacdy the same sob-story that  the narrator had used shordy  before. This incredible develop­ ment  has  a  hypnotic  effect on  the  narrator. He  hesitates.  And  before  he  can condition  himself to  perform  the execution,  a friend  of H.  de  Heutz  has crept up behind him and the intended  victim escapes. The  friend, incidentally, is a girl with long blond hair.
The  narrator has one more unsuccessful encounter  with H.  de Heutz;  then  he
is instructed  to return  to Montreal,  where plainclothes  policemen, one of whom is hidden  in a confessional booth, capture  him in  the  Notre  Dame  Church.
What  does all this mean? For one thing, Aquin  appears  to be saying that  the
narrator, the  would-be  terrorist  executioner,  fails because H.  de  Heutz,  despite his chateau   with  a  reproduction  of  Benjamin  West's  "The Death  of  General Wolfe" hanging  on the wall, does not correspond  to the  narrator's idea of what his  antagonist  ought  to be. And  the correspondence  becomes less and  less satis­ factory  the more the  narrator  finds out about  H.  de Heutz.  Towards  the end of the novel he says: "H. de Heutz  ne m'a  jamais  pam  aussi mysterieux  qu'en  ce moment  meme,  dans  ce chateau   qu'il  hante  elegamment.  Mais  l'homme  que j'attends  est-il bien l'agent  ennemi que  je dois faire  disparaitre froidement?  Cela me parait incroyable, car l'homme  qui demeure  ici transcende avec eclat l'image que  je me suis faite de rna victime."
Moreover, the narrator  and H. de Heutz  are strangely  alike in many respects. They  share  a  taste for  history and  historical objects.  Their  identical  sob-stories indicate  emotional interinvolvement  and similar patterns  of thought. At one point, the narrator even mentions that  he feels he is almost  a spiritual  medium  for H. de  Heutz.  In  short,  the  narrator  fails because  he  cannot  really  identify  his  in­ tended  victim with an enemy who must be destroyed. He has developed a Hamlet  complex. He is like a boxer who, confronted  with  a certain  opponent,  is unable to muster enough  killer instinct.
There  is also the  suggestion-more  than  a  suggestion  really,  for  why  else would  Aquin  repeatedly  include  the  detail?-that H.  de  Heutz's   blond  girl friend  is actually  the  narrator's  beloved K., who  has been  up  to a litde  double­ dealing. Aquin's  terrorist group,  as we know, was not supported by the  populace


10

THE  FOURTH  SEPARATISM



of Quebec.  In  fact,  the ring  was broken  by Quebec  police. And  the capture  of the novel's protagonist in a church is probably Aquin's  way of saying that Ia resignation  chretienne which has long been preached in Quebec,  is not the stuff to light the fires of revolution.
Some critics, understandably enough, have regarded  Prochain  episode  as a sort
of  manifesto  for  the  first of  the  four  brands  of Separatism  defined  at  the  be­ ginning  of this analysis. Certainly  it  deals with terrorist  ideas,  and  as we  have seen,  in  certain  moods  the  narrator calls for  blood  and  revolution.  On  close examination, however, the novel is unmistakably a negation  of terrorism, a strik­ ing dramatization of the futility of violent intervention.  "Je suis devenu  ce  revo­ lutionnaire voue a la tristesse et a l'inutile eclatement  de sa rage d'enfant," says the narrator towards  the end  of the book. What  Prochain  episode  does provide is an expression, and  a convincing expression indeed, of the desperate frustrations which have resulted in our fourth  kind of Separatism, the Separatism  of the con­ fused masses. "C'est  terrible  et je ne peux plus me le  cacher:   je suis desespere," writes  Aquin.  "On ne  m'avait   pas  dit  qu'en  devenant   patriote,   je serais  jete ainsi dans  la detresse et qu'a  force de vouloir  la liberte,  je me  retrouverais  en­ ferme."  The  idea that  to struggle for something better  might  well lead  to some­ thing worse is undoubtedly  one of  the  reasons why neither  the terrorist front  nor Rene  Levesque has yet been able  to conscript  the masses of French  Canadians. Nevertheless, the malaise-the fear  of being swallowed up and  having all iden­ tity destroyed  by the  amorphous monster of North  American  society-remains
undiminished:  "J'ai  peur  de  me  reveiller  degenere,  completement   desidentifie,
aneanti.   Un  autre  que  moi, les  yeux  hagards et  le  cerveau  purge  de  toute anteriorite, franchira  la grille le jour de rna liberation."  The  narrator goes on to say that  he does not know what  the  prochain  episode  will be. But he does know that  something  has got to give, and  I have no doubt  that  he speaks for millions more than  himself when  he says, "je  porte en moi le germe de la !'evolution."




hERE ARE  A   NUMBER  OF  PARALLELS  between  Aquin's  book and  Claude  Jasmin's  Ethel  et  le  terroriste. Both novels derive  from  the  F.L.Q. activities which led to the death  of an elderly watchman  in a bomb  blast behind an  Army  recruiting  centre  on  Montreal's  Sherbrooke  Street.  Jasmin,  however, takes  an  objective  approach, analyzing  the  psychology of  a  young  man  who plants such  a bomb,  then  goes to New York in an  attempt  to escape. Paul,  the


II

THE FOURTH SEPARATISM



young  man, becomes  a terrorist  partly  because  of the same  sense of personal  and group fn1stration which haunts the narrator of Prochain episode. His reminiscence of Quebec vividly reveals this feeling:

My country  served up like rotten  meat  more than  a hundred  years ago to a band of long-toothed  loyalists. My country  stuffed  with  multicoloured  cassocks,  small­ time  grocers, skinny woodcutters,  a few isolated  giants,  exceptions  providing  the material  for our  legends, which a great  joker with  a beaver  face sings at  the  top of his voice to our pimply college boys, to our decrepit functionaries, to our street­ corner  clerks-in  parliament  we have  nothing  but  a  bunch  of fat-arsed  whore­ mongers  with  their  noses buried  in  huge  cheeses  made  of  taxes,  taxes  collected from  the  two-bit  grocers  and  functionaries,  nothing   but  an  army  of  gnawing rodents  who  have  themselves blessed every  Sunday,  who  parade  about  spouting stupidities  which  are  taken  for  promises.  They  get  themselves  elected  with  no bother  at  all by fooling the  people, by  muddling  the  wits of our  grocer-function­ aries.  And  in  the  wings of this  theatre of  vermin,  the  cassocks and  the  loyalists clap their  hands.1

Quebec, curiously  like Nova Scotia  with its exiled  Highlanders and  dark  clouds of religion,  has nurtured its legends of giants  to offset the  nothingness in  the lives of ordinary men.  Paul,  in  Jasmin's Ethel  et le terroriste, must  have  more  than legends  for sustenance. The  author shows how  the  terrorist organization provides for  him,  as it  does for other  members, a chance to  do  something significant  for the  first time,  a chance to fill a void  which  the  conditions of life in  Quebec and in Canada have  not  been able  to fill. Speaking of his reception in  the  organiza­ tion,  Paul  says, "Et  on m'a  ser:re les mains.  On  m'a  dit  que  j'etais indispensable! Tu  entends. On  ne m'a  jamais  dit <_;a,  sais-tu." On  another occasion he says, "Je ne suis plus  un simple  'canoque' de  quartier du pare Lafontaine. Des heros." And when  the  time comes for Paul  to do his part, he acts blindly,  unthinkingly: "J'en ai des tics pour  un  long moment, et  puis apres?  J'avais des ordres.  Oui. C'est  ce que  je voulais.  A un  moment, j'ai fait  ni un  ni deux,  j'ai  dit  aux  gars:   'donnez­ moi  le  paquet, l'heure, l'endroit.' C'est  tout.  Je  ne  voulais  rien  savoir.  J'avais besoin  d'un travail   aveugle." And  like  many  of  the  desperate men  who   jump  from  bridges  or hijack  airliners,  Paul  has his  brief  moment in the sun.
Jasmin's story,  however, goes beyond  the  simple  delineation of a character unbalanced by a need  for recognition. The  book suggests  that  many  of the  other members of  the  terrorist  organization fit into  that  category, with  various  added personal  neuroses  to  spur  their  hate; and  so  far  as  the  typical  terrorist is  con­ cerned, Jasmin is probably  not far  from  the  truth. But  Paul,  like the  narrator of Prochain  episode, has  enemy-identification problems. He  finds  it  easier  to  love

12

THE  FOURTH SEPARATISM



than  to  hate.  In  particular, he  passionately loves Ethel,  who  is Jewish.  Ethel shares  his feelings of  frustration. She shares  his moments  of  childlike  joy,  his essential innocence.  She can  even share  his aspirations  and  understand   his need for release through  violence. But she cannot  endorse group  hatred  and  murder, and  naturally  the terrorist  group is dependent  on group  hatred.  Paul is told  that he must  abandon Ethel,  something  which  he cannot  and  will not do. Thus   he ends up in an  impossible situation,  alienated from his former  gang members  and being  propositioned  by  the  police to save himself by  turning  stool  pigeon.  His only sympathizer  besides Ethel is an American  Negro professor called Slide, who had been collaborating with the terrorist group, but who has become disillusioned by the group's  drift  from  "Third-World" idealism to  gutter  xenophobia.   Paul, then, like the protagonist  of Prochain episode, is a failure  as a terrorist.
But  while  both  Claude  Jasmin  and  Hubert  Aquin  dramatize  the  futility  of
terrorism,  they  nevertheless  confirm  the  existence  of  an  explosive  malaise   in Quebec. Jasmin  does not see it as something limited to Quebec.  He sees Quebec's problem  as part  of a fairly  universal unrest, which of course it is. Towards the end of the novel, Paul  tells Ethel:

The  campaign  that  must  be fought.  You  know,  the  war,  the  true  war.  The struggle to throw off this great fat cow, this diseased and lazy animal that is lying on top of us all. On your country and on mine. On the black people, on the people of Greece, on those of Turkey and on those of China and Scotland. An enormous beast. The  evil, Ethel,  the true evil, the only one-it's ignorance. That  is what should be fought. That  is the true enemy. Our only enemy. Ignorance.  Nothing, Ethel, is more serious or  worse than  ignoranc-e.  That  is what  seeds confusion, what fosters mediocrity, taboos and prejudices.1

Jasmin  thus  identifies the  desperation  currently  manifest  in  Quebec  as  essen­ tially part  of a worldwide  phenomenon.  He  is, of course,  not  alone  in  making  such  an  observation.  Other   Quebec  writers, including  Aquin,  have  said  much the same thing. The  term negre blanc has come into use, and  its legitimacy  with respect  to  French  Canadians was recently  the subject  of  a  lengthy  analysis  by Max  Dorsinville.2    Such  books as Jacques  Renaud's  Le  Casse  or  Roch  Carrier's La  Guerre,  yes  sir convey  a  sense  of  depression  and   hopelessness subject   to momentary  eruption  in  violence, as a  condition  of  life  hardly  peculiar  to  the Province  of  Quebec.  Jacques  Godbout's  Le  Couteau  sur  la table is even  more explicit.
It  is a cunning  book, packed  with subtle  undertones  and  connotations.  As in
the novels of Aquin  and  Jasmin,  the deep involvement  of the protagonist  with  a

THE FOURTH SEPARATISM



girl has  particular  symbolic meaning.  Godbout's  Patricia-rich,  blond,  beauti­ ful, the ultimate in female comfort and accommodation -represents  the affluent North American society, the land of the Lotus Eaters  from which the protagonist cannot  easily withdraw.  She is the jet set, gourmet food, flashy motels and Florida vacations.  When  he speaks to  her of the struggles  of oppressed  peoples, of the threat  of nuclear  bombs, or of his own bitter  existential  vacuum, she  responds by offering  him  her  splendid  body, showered  and  perfumed.  Then  being  half Jewish  and  half  Irish  in  origin, Patricia  combines  two  ethnic  traditions  which have long had special significance in French Canada. Each  of the two groups has had  a love-hate relationship  with les  Quebecois.  It  has been  possible to identify with the Jews as a cultural-religious entity surviving against great odds, and  with the Irish as Roman  Catholic Celts victimized by English oppression. On the other side of the coin, French  Canadians have thought  themselves exploited  by Jewish businessmen  and   endangered   by  the  assimilation   potential   of  their   English­ speaking,  vendus, Irish  co-religionists. It  is, therefore,  understandable that  God­ bout's protagonist  should have a love-hate relationship  with Patricia.
At the end of the  book he acquires another  girl friend,  Madeleine,  who sym­
bolizes French  Canada, the quiet, obedient French  Canada of days gone by. But he does not give up Patricia. Indeed,  the three of them live together in an apart­ ment  on  Mountain Street  in  Montreal,  with  Madeleine  temporarily  occupying the  hero's  emotional   energy  and   Patricia   his  prime-time   Sunday   afternoons. Shortly,  however,  Madeleine  is killed in  an  accident-decapitated  by  a  truck while  riding  the  narrator's motorcycle. A  funeral   parlour  scene  symbolizes the death  of Quebec's  old order,  which the protagonist  can witness  with interest  but without  particular   regret.  Then  he  proceeds  to  seduce  Madeleine's  little  sister Monique.
Throughout Le  Couteau  sur la table  Godbout   makes  recurrent  reference  to
nursery rhymes. Such rhymes, of course, are the most basic and simple indicators of cultural  differences. Moreover, the rhyme  "I, ni, mi, ni, mai,  ni mo,"  which turns up most often, signifies the state of indecision in the narrator's mind. As the story ends, despite the stirrings aroused by Madeleine, her sister and the Separatist Movement,  the protagonist remains in a state of indecision.  Patricia  is still there, but  his attitude  toward  her has changed.  "Je  ne te ferai  aucun  mal, si tu  ne dis
mot,  Patricia," he says. "D'ailleurs  il ne te servirait   a rien de te debattre  ou de
crier  ou  meme  de  parler  de  nos  amours  anciennes.  Le  couteau  restera  sur  la table de la cuisine." The  knife is on the table.
In essence, therefore, all of these French-Canadian novels dramatize  our fourth

THE FOURTH SEPARATISM



kind of Separatism. All of them emphasize the pressing desire for action  and  the potential  for violence. As the announcement  on the back cover of Jasmin's  Ethel et le terroriste puts it: "Tout jeune Quebecois de vingt  ans porte theoriquement une  bombe sous le bras."  The  factor  which  prevents  the  theory from  becoming practice and wholesale support  of Separatism is the difficulty of isolating and identifying  the  enemy.  English  Canada   and  federalism  have  been  readily  pin­ pointed  by some,  but  have  not  as yet been accepted  as the  malignant  tumour
by the  many.


OF THE   TWO  ENGLISH-CANADIAN NOVELS  dealing   with
Separatism,  Hugh  MacLennan's Return  of the Sphinx  and  Ellis Portal's  Killing
Ground, the second  need not occupy much of our time. Portal's  novel is not  an attempt  to  analyse  motivations  or to offer insight into  sociological and  psycho­ logical realities.  Rather   it is a  projection  of what  would  happen   to  Canada if ever civil war  were to become a fact. As such, it makes a point.  Canadians are just as capable  of  bestiality  and  cold-blooded  slaughter  as  any  other  civilized Christian  nation.  Naturally  there  would  be a  mess. Portal's  novel, however,  is marred  by overabundance of sensational detail, which  reinforces rather  than  sus­ pends the reader's  disbelief. Raping  the enemy's  beautiful  women  is a common  human  response hallowed  by tradition; chopping off their  breasts with Bren gun blasts is a little too bizarre.  The  book eventually deteriorates  into  a comic-opera sequence of events including  wife-stealing and  interchange  of roles. The  more  I think about it, the more I seriously doubt if  Killing Ground  has any value at  all.
Hugh  MacLennan's Return  of the Sphinx  on the other  hand,  contains  a great many insights which are pertinent  and valuable. Toronto  book reviewers and  the Governor General's  Award  committee notwithstanding, it is probably the most important Canadian  novel  to  appear  for  many  years.  I  emphasize  the  word Canadian, and  I  am  going  to  make a general  observation  about  the  works  of Hugh  MacLennan which  may  disturb  some critics in this  country.  As  I  have become  more  and  more  deeply involved and  conversant  with  Canadian  litera­ ture  in  both  languages,  it  has  become  increasingly  evident  to  me  that  Hugh  MacLennan is one of the few writers in the emerging mainstream.  By mainstream I mean that  sphere of experience, consciousness and identification which is essen­ tially  and   peculiarly  Canadian. Every  writer  must  perforce  operate   within   a particular  emotional  and  intellectual  sphere of consciousness, and  among  Cana-

THE FOURTH SEPARATISM



dian  writers several  such spheres can  be discerned.  With  few exceptions,  these spheres  of  consciousness  are  defined  and   restricted   by  geographical   area - Ontario,  the  small  town,  the  prairies,  the  Atlantic   seaboard,   rural,   Quebec, Quebec  City, English Montreal,  French  Montreal, Toronto, Vancouver,  Winni­ peg. Furthermore, for English-Canadian  writers the broader  spheres of conscious­ ness are ones which have been defined by American  writers, or at least are shared with  them.  The  small  town  of Sherwood  Anderson,  for  instance,  is much  the same as the small town of Sinclair Ross or W. 0. Mitchell. The  border  does not really exist for the prairie sphere of consciousness. Stephen  Leacock made a point of leaving his readers free to imagine that  his settings could  be almost anywhere in North  America.
What,  then,  is a sphere of consciousness essentially  and  peculiarly  Canadian? I should  think that  the main distinguishing feature  would  have  to be dependent upon the main distinguishing feature of the Canadian Nation-the co-existence of  two  major  ethnic  groups.  To  be in  the  emerging  mainstream  of  Canadian literature,  therefore,  a writer must have some awareness  of fundamental  aspects and  attitudes  of both  language  groups in  Canada. It is just such  awareness  on the part  of a few which is slowly moulding a single, common  Canadian mystique out of the previous parallel threads of evolution.3  The  parallel  threads,  of course, are still there, and  the majority of Canadian writers seem content,  in some cases consciously determined  to continue  the  process. But  Hugh   MacLennan is one exception. And  not only is MacLennan  one  of  the  few in  the  mainstream;  his body  of  works is the  current  which  has  given  that  mainstream   definition  and momentum.  It is not  surprising  that  the  perceptive   American  critic  Edmund Wilson, in describing his reaction  to Hugh  MacLennan, should say, "I came  to recognize that  there did now exist a Canadian way of looking at  things."  Nor is it without  significance  that  George Woodcock should  entitle  his classic essay on MacLennan "A  Nation's  Odyssey." So  many  other  Canadian  writers-good writers  such  as  Sinclair  Ross,  Morley  Callaghan,  Margaret   Laurence,  Sheila Watson,  Stephen  Leacock-are in the tributaries rather  than  the  mainstream. And  what  is more,  they are in the tributaries  of American  literature,  not  Cana­ dian.  Which  does not mean,  of course, that  the  work of  these authors  has any less literary  merit.  Indeed,  in terms of universality of theme  and  appeal  it could mean,  and  in some  cases has  meant,  the  very  opposite.  The  mainstream   is a matter  of sphere of consciousness, not artistic skill; although sometimes the latter  can be conditioned  by the former.

16

THE FOURTH SEPARATISM



So  far  as  French-Canadian  writers  are  concerned,  until  recently  the  great rna jority have  been  caught  up  in  the  various  Quebec  tributaries  of  Canadian literature.  In  other  words,  they have  been  regional in  spirit  as well as setting. Lately, however,  a  number  of authors-Jacques  Renaud, Andre  Major,  Roch Carrier  for example-have embraced spheres of consciousness which, like those of many  of their  anglophone  colleagues, are  more or  less extensions of spheres already defined in the United  States. But these writers, and other such as Gerard Bessette, Rejean  Ducharme, Aquin, Jasmin and Godbout,  by virtue of a broaden­ ing awareness which includes English Canada  to varying degrees, are moving de­ finitely  toward   the  Canadian mainstream.  As their  awareness  shifts  from   the general implications of English-speaking America to the particular implications  of English-speaking  Canada, they will enter the mainstream more and  more.
Hugh  MacLennan, on the other hand, is already there. Provided  that  Canada continues to exist as a single nation, he may well be creating  for himself a special status.  I suspect  that  the day  will come when  Hugh  MacLennan is considered to occupy a position much  like that of Mark Twain  in the United  States,  as the prime mover in the emergence of a distinctive Canadian literature.
Return  of the  Sphinx   provides  a  panoramic  view  of  the  different  kinds  of Separatism.  Daniel  Ainslie, son of the protagonist, becomes a would-be  terrorist. Like the heroes of Aquin  and  Jasmin,  he is a failure,  and  for the same  reasons. He  cannot  make  a  positive identification  of  the  enemy,  his  problem  being  es-  • pecially complex  in  view  of  mixed  ancestry  and  a  father   who  is  Minister  of Cultural  Affairs in the Federal  Government. A weakness in Return  of the Sphinx
is that  MacLennan's characterization of Daniel is incomplete. The  young  man  is believable enough,  particularly  after one has examined  the supporting  evidence in Prochain episode and  Ethel et le terroriste. But the characterization of Daniel lacks  the  psychological  penetration   and  necessary intricacy  of  the  portraits   of terrorists  by Aquin  and  Jasmin.  Comparatively  speaking,  Daniel  is a  skeleton. The  trouble,  it  would  appear,  is that  Hugh  MacLennan, despite  considerable power  of empathy,  cannot  sufficiently withdraw  from  the  regions of sweetness and  light. With  regard  to Daniel, the author  is at his most effective in the scene where Marielle, a mature,  passionate and attractive  emigree from Algeria, intro­ duces the young man to the delights of physical love, while at the same time from her own experiences making him painfully aware of the bitter harvests of hatred.
Aime Latendresse in Return  of the Sphinx  is an example of the second  variety
of Separatism,  and  he is presented  quite sympathetically  and  convincingly.  Like
Rene Levesque, he makes a lot of sense when he speaks of the disadvantages and

THE FOURTH SEPARATISM



humiliations  long endured  by French  Canadians and  the  absolute need for  new confidence and self-respect, for simple dignity. But in all fairness it must be said that  MacLennan gives Latendresse an attitude  much  more sinister than  any ever indicated  by Rene  Levesque himself, although  it  is identical  to  that  of certain other  independentists.  Latendresse, as might be expected,  is a pretre manque. At another  time, in another  age, his energies and  intellect  would  have been quietly expended  within the greystone walls of a college classique  nestled at the outskirts of a small town. But now, like many of his counterparts in real life, he is at large, a man with an undeniable sense of mission coupled to a knowledge of history and great cunning.  Here is no mongoloid misfit about  to place a bomb in a mailbox. Yet because of the sincerity and  determination  arising from  his sense of mission, Latendresse is not above manipulating  others  to do what  he might  not do  him­ self. If the means serves the end,  he will not question  it too deeply. "I sincerely hope so," he replies, when asked if independence  can  be achieved  without blood­ shed.  But then  he adds, "In  the entire  history of the human  race, has that  ever happened?" Marielle  tells Daniel  that  Latendresse  is an  evil  man.  But  that  is because she -and  one suspects that  Hugh  MacLennan feels the same way-is convinced  that  anyone  who  would  endorse  a  cause  which  is likely to  lead  to hatred,  bloodshed  and  misery has got to be evil.  Latendresse,  however, is only evil inasmuch  as the great majority of the world's leaders, revered and unrevered, have  been evil; that  is to say, having dedicated  himself to an end,  he is willing to  grant   that   a  certain  number  of  individuals  must  be  sacrificed  to  achieve that  end.
Daniel's  Uncle  Ephrem  provides an example of our  third  kind of Separatism. Chantal tells Gabriel  of his views:  " 'This  is a good  thing,  this movement.  It's the first thing that's  ever made  les Anglais squirm.'  But I  tell you, Gabriel,  that if the  Queen  visited Quebec  tomorrow,  Uncle  Ephrem   would  probably  be  in command  of the guard  of honor, and if he wasn't  he'd  be furiously angry."
It is Joe Lacombe, however, the R.C.M.P. officer and former Air Force buddy of Alan Ainslie, who expresses the fourth  brand  of Separatism, and  he does so in a way quite similar to that of the heroes in the French-Canadian novels we have discussed. Contradicting the ancient Quebec dictum  dramatized in Maria  Chap­ delaine -"Rien  ne changera" -Lacombe says:

Ca  change!  Ca  change! And  the  feeling's wonderful.  Tabernacle,  haven't  we suffered enough? Supported enough for more than two hundred years? Prayed enough?  Gone  to  mass often  enough? Given  the  Church  enough?  Taken  the lousiest jobs and eaten pea soup long enough because there were too many mouths

18

THE  FOURTH  SEPARATISM



to feed  on  much  else except  once a  week and  sometimes  not  even  that  often? Why should  it always be us to carry  the load for everyone? Be tired  all the time like  sa  mere, smile  like  sa  mere   because  there  wasn't  anything   else  she  could afford  to do?  Work  for  the English  boss all the time  like P'pa  speaking  English always  to  him  in  our  own  home?  Or  suppose we  want   to  work   in  our  own milieu -what then?  In  some dirty way with our own dirtiest  politicians because they were the ones the English always liked because if they took money they knew they had  them,  took money under  the counter and then  did  the opposite  to what they  promised  the  people who voted for them?  Why can't  we be free  and  clean and  proud of ourselves? Why can't  we succeed as French  Canadians and not as imitations  of the  English  and  Americans? Why should  they  be the  ones to  judge whether  we're any good or not?  Why can't  we judge that  ourselves?

Return of the  Sphinx thus  echoes the  message of Prochain  episode  and  Ethel et le terroriste. What is more  important, however, is the novel's  additional dimen­ sion,  the  observations MacLennan  makes  on  English-Canadian  attitudes. At  the beginning of  Return of the  Sphinx, we are  introduced  to  Herbert Tamley, the prototype of  the  Anglo-Canadian businessman.  Tamley, of  course,  is concerned about  only one  thing-the security  of his investments. MacLennan endows  him with  a  curious,  yet  typical  duality:  through various  informants he  has  a  good idea  of what  is happening in French Canada and  he is obviously  worried; at  the same  time  he  can  state  categorically that  if an  independent Quebec were  to  try to  nationalize industry,  she  "would   find   herself  an   appendage  on   the   Latin  American desk of the State  Department [in Washington]." Tarnley, like so many  of  his  counterparts in  real  life,  is clearly  a  dynamic,   capable man, the  sort  of person  one  would  want  to  organize a  blood  drive  or  charity campaign. He  be­ lieves in solutions,  and  his solution  for the unrest  in Quebec is that  the  authorities should  be firm  and  show  no  weakness.  Clearly  everyone  benefits  from  a  stable  society;   therefore Quebec  should   be  maintained  as  such.   Tarnley's great   de­  ficiency is that  he cannot understand  spiritual  and  psychological  aspirations. He  is incapable of communicating with his son, but  he does him  the  precious  service of  having   his  paintings evaluated  by  experts  to  establish   that   the  boy  has  no artistic  talent. When  Ainslie is more or less kicked out  of the government, Tarn­ ley offers to endow  a college and  make  him  president.  In  other  words,  he knows what  is good  for  everyone;  and  when  Herbert Tarnley has  control, everyone  is going  to get  what  is good for  him  whether  he likes it or not.  Tarnley and  Laten­ dresse are  thus  brothers  under the skin;  and  if Latendresse is an  evil man,  then  in the  end  Tarnley is equally  evil.  Neither  of  these men  will solve  the  problems  of Quebec or  Canada.

19

THE FOURTH SEPARATISM



Nor will the mighty politician, Moses Bulstrode. Fearless, absolutely honest, competent,  built  like a bear and  Bible-bred, Bulstrode is the  epitome  of all the old warrior  values. He takes no nonsense from  anyone-members of the oppo­ sition, shrewd  businessmen like Tarnley,  editors or college professors. His attitude to Quebec  is neatly summed  up in a remark  he makes to Ainslie:  "What gives the French  Canadians  this idea they've had it so  tough? ... It  was twenty times tougher  in the Yukon than  it ever was in Quebec." And looking at the situation in Bulstrode's terms, undoubtedly it was.
MacLennan makes clear  that  Bulstrode is far  from  being  anti-French   Cana­
dian.  Indeed,  Moses Bulstrode sympathizes with the  people of Quebec  who have suffered  from  the  exploitation  of  Westmount  financiers,  whom  he  regards  as ruthless and  corrupt.  But as a strict  matter  of principle  Bulstrode  refuses to  be­ lieve that  French  Canada  should be accorded  any special  consideration. And  it is here that  Hugh  MacLennan  puts his finger on the crux of the Canadian riddle. If Bulstrode  were a  political operator  or opportunist, if  he were  pro-English  or anti-French, if he were simply ignorant,  then he would  not  constitute  much  of a threat.  But he is none of these things, and I believe that  he represents a dominant  body of opinion  in English Canada  today. Sincere  and  dedicated  to the  admir­ able principle  of equal treatment  for all, Bulstrode will  never accept  or compre­ hend  the subtle  distinctions which  put  French  Canadians in  a special  category. To  his mind,  the  poor in  Toronto  slums or  Newfoundland fishing villages are just as deserving of attention  as the residents  of St. Henri,  and  who can  argue the point?
Return of the Sphinx, as the title intimates, does not solve the Canadian riddle.
Ainslie, who has struggled to create an entente  between  the  English and  French of Canada, ends  up  effectively excommunicated   by both  groups.  In  this  novel MacLennan reverses the  Odyssey pattern  of  his  previous  books -the  hero  re­ turns  to a house in disorder, but  his wise Penelope,  in  this case Constance,  dies when he needs her most, and his son is bent upon stirring up more disorder. Still, as MacLennan states  at  the  end  of the  novel, Ainslie continues  to  believe  that Canada will endure.
And  we, gentle readers, are left with the question-will  it really endure?  Or
from  another  viewpoint-should it endure?  Or  to become  completely involved in the  puzzle-how  will Canada  endure?
I  am  not  a prophet,  but  I  remain  convinced  that  one can  learn  more about people and  society from creative literature  than  from  scientific reports.  In  Mac­ Lennan's  story, Herbert  Tarnley  and  Moses Bulstrode  are  obviously of  the  type

20

THE FOURTH  SEPARATISM



of person  who  would  never  waste  time  reading  fiction.  Consequently, they get  to know  the facts,  but  they  are  unlikely to be attuned to the  underlying fears, hopes and  frustrations. And  the  one  point  which  surfaces  from  the  troubled waters  of the  novels  of  Aquin, Godbout, Jasmin   and   MacLennan is  that   the  significant brand  of Quebec Separatism is precisely a matter of fears,  hopes and  frustrations. All four  writers  advance the  thesis that  Quebec  is psychologically  sick. Bilingual civil servants  and  bilingual districts  may salve a few of the  superficial  irritations, the skin diseases, but  they  will not cure  the disturbed  psyche.
Is there  anything which  can  effect such  a cure?  Is there  any  way to instil self­ confidence, a sense of cultural security  and  a feeling  of  dignity  in  the  masses of French Canadians who  have  not actually  committed themselves  to the Separatist Movement? I  think  that   there  are  certain   moves  which  would  have  a  definite  remedial effect.  For  one  thing,  the  egalitarian attitude  represented by  Bulstrode in  Return   of the  Sphinx   and   apparently  an  entrenched  principle   of   English­  Canadian thinking, must  be modified.  French  Canadians, as the  novels  we have examined clearly  illustrate, think  of themselves  first as a group  or  nation  rather than  as individuals. Thus the idea  of equality  does not  have  the same  bearing  in French Canada as  in  English  Canada. In  Quebec, it  signifies  equal   treatment for the  French-Canadian nation-on a group  basis rather than on an individual basis. What  matters is how  the  French-Canadian collectivity  is  treated. In  other  words,  French Canada as a whole must  have  a special status. And  in the light  of the  psychological  problems discussed in all the  novels, such  a  special  status,  in­  cluding   the  greatest   degree  of  autonomy  possible  within   a  confederate system, makes  sense.
But  if a  genuine feeling  of  cultural security  is to  be  created   once  and  for  all in  Quebec, a  cultural security   which  will  make  the  novels  we  have  examined historical   documents instead   of  reflections  of  actuality,  there  is  one  vital  step which  must  be  taken-Quebec must  become  an  officially  unilingual, French­ language province. I can  see no other  way  to create  a sense  of cultural security and  to  make  French Canadians as  a  group  equal  to  English  Canadians. After all, the other  nine provinces are essentially unilingual. Whatever the glories of bilingualism, so long as it smacks of necessary accommodation it will be regarded in  Quebec as a threat to  the  French language and  to  French-Canadian culture, as a  step  away  from  cultural security.  To  the  average  English  Canadian,  bilin­ gualism  means  acquiring a  second  language; at  the  moment, to  many  French Canadians it means  the  likelihood  of  losing a  first one.  Yet,  if  through  official unilingualism  a  sense  of  cultural security  were  to  develop  in  French  Canada,

21

THE FOURTH SEPARATISM



then  the current  linguistic tensions would  undoubtedly  diminish,  and  the  result would  be more  genuine  bilingualism  than  ever  before.  Right  now,  to  French­ speaking  Quebeckers  cultural security means  more  than  even  the  tourist  dollar. Settle the problem of security, and the tourist dollar  will take care of the rest. In short, ironic as it may seem, an officially unilingual  Quebec  would  be the greatest possible boost for Canadian bilingualism.
I might add  that  a unilingual Quebec, legally instituted  rather  than  forcefully imposed, need not present any danger or special inconvenience  to  English-speak­ ing  Quebeckers.  According  to  the  1961  Census,  nearly  30  per  cent  of  them already speak French,  compared  with less than  25 per cent of  French  Canadians who  speak  English.  Where  English  Canadians  are  in  sufficient  numbers  they should be permitted  to maintain schools and other institutions,  but with adequate  and efficient teaching  of French  as a condition. And  with more than  half of the television channels  seen  in  Quebec  already  coming  from  over  the  American border,  English-speaking Quebeckers are  not  going to develop  a complex  about the imminent  disappearance  of their mother  tongue.
Now if Quebec  is to have special status amounting to virtual  autonomy  and if she is to  become officially unilingual,  why  not  go  all  the  way  and  declare  an independent nation? Do not these concessions amount  to independence?  In effect, they  do.  But  as agreed-upon  concessions, they  could  be  a  means  to  avoid  the hatred,  violence and  bloodshed which are described  or suggested in each of the novels we have considered. They  could be a means  to avoid outright  separation and  the dangers of economic chaos, political anarchy  and  possible American intervention, against which even Rene Levesque can offer no guarantee. In a conversation  with  his son,  MacLennan's protagonist  Alan  Ainslie says:   "Well, perhaps  Quebec  will separate.  But if she does, let it be done  decently. Let it be done without  hatred  and  murder  and all this paranoia of you and  your friends." Special status  and  official unilingualism  do  not  mean  separation, but  they  are important steps Canada  can  take to  relieve the  malaise so vividly portrayed  in the  novels of Aquin,  Jasmin,  MacLennan and  Godbout.  They  are  a means  to foster the cultural and spiritual independence  Quebec clearly must have, an independence which  French  Canadians  would  thus  be able to achieve decently.


FOOTNOTES
1 Claude Jasmin, Ethel  et le terroriste.  All translations are my own:
Mon pays livre comme charogne, il y a plus de cent ans, a une bande de loyalistes
a grandes dents. Mon pays bourre de soutanes multicolores, de petits epiciers,
de maigres scieurs de bois, quelques geants isoles, exceptions qui entreti:ennent

22

THE  FOURTH SEPARATISM



nos 1egendes,  qu'un grand   gaillard   a  l'air   d'un   castor   chante a  tue-tete a  la face   de   nos  collegiens   boutonneux,  de   nos   fonctionnaires  cacochymes, de nos  commis   des  coins  de  rue-il  y  a,  au  parlement, une   bande   de  grosses morues,  tous  le  nez  au  fond  de  gros  fromages  a  taxes,  taxes  des  "p'tits  culs" epiciers  -et fonctionnaires, une  armee   de  rongeurs,   qui  se  font   benir   tous  les dimanches, qui  paradent en  declamant des  aneries  qui  font  des  promesses.  Ils se font  elire  sans  peine  en  trompant le  peuple,  en  debauchant les  cervelles  de nos epiciers-fonctionnaires. En  coulisses de  ce theatre de  vermine,   les soutanes et les loyalistes  applaudissent. (pp.  67-68)
La  campagne qu'il  faut mener.  Tu   sais,  cette  guerre, la  vraie.   Cette   bataille pour  terrasser cette  grande vache  grasse,  ce  veau  malade et  paresseux  qui  est couche  sur  nous. Sur  not  pays et  sur  le mien. Sur  le  peuple  nair,  sur  le  peuple de  la  Grece,  sur  celui  de  Ia  Turquie et  sur  celui  de  la  Chine  et  de  l'Ecosse. Une  grosse bete.  Le  mal,  Ethel,  le vrai  mal,  le seul, c'est !'ignorance. Voila  une bonne   raison   de  se  battre. C'est   la  le  vrai  ennemi.   Notre   seul  ennemi.  L'ig­ norance. Ethel, !'ignorance, rien  n'est  plus  grave,  ni  plus  mauvais.  C'est  elle qui  seme  les confusions, qui  entretient la  mediocrite, les tabous  et  les  prejuges. (pp.  I 13-114)
2    Max  Dorsinville,  A  Comparative  Analysis  of the  American  Negro   and   French­ Canadian Protest  Novel   (Thesis  presented  for  Master  of Arts Degree  in  Compara­ tive  Canadian Literature, Universite de Sherbrooke, rg68).
3  For  discussion  of this common mystique  and  the  parallels  in  French-Canadian and English-Canadian Literature see my essay "Twin Solitudes," Canadian Literature, No. 31  (Winter, rg67).


MACEWEN'S MUSE



Margaret Atwood



Now  you comprehend  your first and  final lover in the dark receding planets of  his eyes, and this is the  hour  when  you know  moreover that  the  god you have loved  always will  descend  and  lie with  you in  paradise.
-MacEwen,"The Hour of the Singer"  (unpublished, rg6g).




IN READING  Gwendolyn MacEwen's poetry it is a temptation to become preoccupied with the original and  brilliant  verbal surfaces she creates, at  the expense of the depths  beneath  them.  But it is occasionally  instructive  to give at least passing attention  to what poets themselves say about  their work, and MacEwen   has  been  insisting for  some  time  that  it  is  "the   thing  beyond  the poem"/ the "raw  material"2   of literature,  that  above all concerns her. There  is, of course, more than  one thing beyond the poems, but  there is one figure whose existence is hinted  at throughout  her work and  who acts as a key to much  of it. This  is the  Muse, often invoked  and  described  but  never  named;  and  in  Mac­ Ewen's  poetry  the  Muse, the inspirer  of language  and  the  formative  power  in Nature,  is male. Ignore  him or misintepret  him  and  her  "muse"  poems  may be mistaken for "religious" 3  ones or reduced  to veiled sexuality. Acknowledge  him, and  he will perform one of the functions MacEwen  ascribes to him:  the creation of order out of chaos.
The   twentieth-century   authority   on  the  poetic  Muse  is,  of  course,  Robert Graves.  In  his White Goddess/ he asserts that  the  Muse  is always female,  and if it isn't  it should  be. Poets who have the  bad  luck to  be women should  write either as priestesses of the Goddess, singing her praises or uttering  her oracles, or as  the  Goddess  herself. That  some female  poets  have  recalcitrantly   invoked  a Muse of the opposite sex would be viewed by Graves as new-woman  perversity; but  then,  he labours  under  the same  difficulty as does Freud  when  he  tries to discuss female  psychology and  Jung  when  he deals  with  the  animus  archetype: he's  a  man.  There  are several  male  Muses  about,  even  in  Canadian  poetry;5

MACEWEN'S MUSE



often  when  the  reader  comes  across an  unnamed  "you," he  would  be  better employed searching  for the  Muse than  for someone with  a birth  certificate  and a known  address. But no-one  has invoked  the  male  Muse  with such  frequency and devotion as has Gwendolyn  MacEwen.
MacEwen  is a poet whose interests and central images have been present from
the  time of her  early  publications,  though  her  ability to elaborate  them,  clarify them,  transform  them  and  approach  them  from different  angles has developed over the years. Thus  her first small pamphlet,  Selah  (I g6 I), contains two images which are later  viewed more specifically as incarnations  of the  Muse:  the  God­ figure and  the  winged  man.  The  God of the first poem  is spoken  of as having "fathered" the hills and  as being "the  guardian/ of the substance  of light," 6  but he is remote;  he  encloses the  individual  human  life  but  remains  unknown  by it  ("we ... do  not  even ... hint  You") .  This  distant  God  reappears  in  Mac­ Ewen's  later  work  as the  "almost  anonymous"  God  of "The Two  Themes  of the Dance" 1 and  the electrical  First Cause of "Tesla".8  Although  he is the ulti­ mate source of all power, including  the power of language   (as early  as "Selah" he  is spoken  of  as  one  who  "writes,"   and  "sound  and  light"  flow  from  his "tongue" in "Tesla"), he cannot  be conversed with. This  may explain  the rare­ ness of his appearances: MacEwen  much  prefers a Muse who may be addressed or who may provide the other  voice in a dialogue.
The  image  of the winged man  does not begin as an  incarnation of the  Muse. In "Icarus" (Selah), the parallel developed is that  between Daedalus  and Icarus, and  the  Muse, addressed  as "you,"  and  the  poet, with  the wings -instruments of flight-being  quite  explicitly the poet's pen, and  the flight of Icarus,  ending in destruction,  being the writing  of a poem which is later  burnt.  Here  the Muse stands  in  the  relation  of quasi-father  to  the  poet,9    as is usually  the  case when MacEwen  employs the words "legacy,"  "heritage," and  "inherit." 10  But having once used the  Icarus  image,  MacEwen  takes it  through  a whole series of  trans­ formations.  Always  the  man-bird  is a  creature  halfway  between  human  being and  supernatural power.  When  he is ascending, he  is a  human  being  aspiring towards  godhead; 11  when  he is descending, he is the  divine  Muse in  the  act of becoming incarnate.
In  the first "Icarus" poem, in  which Icarus  becomes a  "combustion  of brief
feathers," the  idea  of  burning  is connected  with  the  winged  man,  and  it  re­ appears  almost  every  time  the  figure itself does. For  the  god-man   the  first is divine;  for  the  man-god  it is either  destructive  or  regenerative,   the  fire  that precedes a  phoenix-like  rebirth.  The  man  who flies but  dies is readily  available

MACEWEN'S MUSE



for sexual  metaphor, as witness "Black  and  White" and  "The   Phoenix." 12   In the first poem the  Muse is descending, becoming  incarnate; in  the second  he is an  individual  man  becoming  Muse  ("beyond   you,  the  image  rising  from  the shoulders I is greater  than you ..."). In  A  Breakfast  For Barbarians  the flaming birdman  makes an ironic appearance as a "motorcycle  Icarus," "without  wings,
but  burning  anyway,"  a  profane  version of  the  divine  Muse  who  "cannot  dis­ tinguish  between  sex and  nicotine." 13  Instead  of  the  Muse's  descent  into  the flesh or even  Icarus'  descent into  the sea, the  poet  imagines  a splashdown  into Niagara  Falls. But  the flying Muse is back  again  full-fledged  in  The  Shadow Maker. In  the  book's first poem, "The  Red  Bird You Wait  For,"14  he appears, now more bird than  man, as poetic inspiration  itself, the Muse in its Holy Ghost form  which  rises phoenix-like from  its own  ashes only  to  descend  once  more
"uninvited:"
Its shape is a cast-off velvet cape,
Its eyes are the eyes of your most forbidden lover
And its claws, I tell you its claws are gloved in fire.

That the  image  of  the  descending  Muse  caught  in  mid-flight  is far  from  ex­ hausted  for  MacEwen  is made  evident  in  the  recent  unpublished  poem,  "The  Hour  of the Singer."




HAVING BECOME INCARNATE,  the  Muse  may  both  disguise and  reveal himself in many forms. There  are a number  of poems in The  Rising Fire and  A  Breakfast  For Barbarians  which  praise  men  in  action:   the  athletes, the  escape  artist,  the surgeon  who  is "an   Indian, and  beautiful,  and  holy," 15 the several  magicians,  are  all men  but  more  than  men,  possessed at  the  sacra­ mental  instant  by a power greater  than  their own,  the  power of their craft,  skill or  performance.16    In  these  poems  the  poet  places  herself  at  a  distance;   she watches the act but  does not participate  directly. Instead  she transforms  the act into  a  metaphor for  the  poetic  process; in  "The  Magician,"  for  instance,  the
magician's  "fingers'  genius I wave out  what  my poems have said." 17  This  kind
of male  figure is thus  both  Muse  or  inspirer  and  one  who  is himself inspired. Though  these figures are  partial  masks assumed  temporarily  by the  Muse, they are never total  revelations.18
All of  the  above  figures are  taken  from  "real" life:  some  of  the  poems in
which  they appear  are dedicated  to  actual  people,  others  (such  as "The Ath-

MACEWEN's MUSE



letes," set in an explicitly Canadian park)  are located in a world which may be identified, more or less, with  the objective external one. But there  are two other forms of the  Muse which  belong to his own proper  realm,  that  of the imagina­ tion. These  are  the  king  and  the singer-dancer,  the  Muse  at  his  most  static  as sacramental  object  and  at  his most dynamic  as sacramental  creator-actor.  Song and  dance,  princes  and  kings are  used as images in  the  early  pamphlets,  and "The  Two  Themes  of  the  Dance"  and  "The  Absolute  Dance" 19  are  tentative explorations  of  the  relationships  among  dance,  poetry  and  the  divinity  of  the Muse;  but  not  until  A Breakfast For Barbarians are  Muse, dance  and  kingship synthesized.
The  poems  most  important in  this  respect20    are  "Black  Alchemy,"  "Finally Left  in  the  Landscape,"  "Subliminal," and  "The   Aristocracies."   "Black   Al­ chemy"  and  "Finally   Left  in  the  Landscape"  complement  each  other.  In  the first, the emergence  of the  elemental  Muse from formless water  and  his  taking shape  as "the  prince of laughter" "cancels the cosmos:"  the world  disintegrates, turns fluid, to be recreated  by his word which is a dance:

... in his dance
worlds expire like tides, in his flaming dance the nameless cosmos
must await its naming.21

But in  "Finally   Left  in  the  Landscape,"  it is the  Muse,  not  the  world,  which has disappeared. Here  the  poet invokes the "dancer" who is also a "deity."  He is both  present  and  absent:   the  poet seeks him,  but  finds  only  possible  frag­ ments of him. Her  task is to gather  him together  (vide  Isis and  Osiris), to seek him as a whole, and  her poetry is part of the attempt  to recreate him; though her
"lines can  only I plagiarize  his dance," 22   since, though  absent,  he remains  the
originator  of both  language  and  world.
"Subliminal"  and   "The Aristocracies"  deal  with   the  relationship   between Muse and  poet, and  with their mutual involvement in time. In "Subliminal," the poet,  having  achieved  a  state  of mind  in  which  "there is no  time ... but  co­ presents, a static  recurrence," 23    is able to  hold the  Muse still for  an  instant  in order  to contemplate him:  "... in that substratum  I hold,  I unfold  you at  ran­  dom."  He is seen as both  dynamic  and static:  "... you do not  move I but  are always moving."  But such a state cannot persist: both  must re-enter  the world of time, in which movement  forward  is the only possibility:

MACEWEN's MUSE



I rise to see you planted in an earth outside me, moving through time through the terms of it, moving through  time again along its shattered latitudes.

"The   Aristocracies"  is placed  at  the  end  of  A  Breakfast   For  Barbarians,   and pulls  together  a  number  of  its  motifs. The  figure  addressed  is  the  Muse,  in­ carnate  as lover but also as a "natural" king;  the tension in the poem is  created as the poet's vision moves from the Muse as man  to the  Muse as a supernatural
power  ("The body  of  God  and  the  body  of  you  I dance  through   the  same
diagonal  instant   I of  my  vision ..."24 ), a  movement   which  both  traps  the
human  element in  the man, turning  him into  a "crowned  and  captive  dancer," and  makes him eternal:

You must dance forever beneath this heavy crown
in an aristocratic landscape, a bas-relief of living bone. And I will altogether cease to speak
as you do a brilliant arabesque within the bas-relief, your body bent like the first letter
of an unknown, flawless alphabet.

The  Muse exists both inside and outside time, and  like the letters on a  page he is static  yet in  movement.  Bodies as alphabets  occur  earlier  in  A  Breakfast   For Barbarians,  and,  again,  word-thing  metaphors  date  back  to  Selah;   the  impor­ tance of this body-letter lies in the fact that  it is the first letter  and  the  alphabet  to which it belongs is unknown. The  Muse is always about  to be interpreted: he can  never  be completely deciphered.
Two  attributes  of  MacEwen's  Muse  worth  noting  are  his  preference  for  a certain  sort of landscape  and  the cyclical nature  of his appearances. Before The Shadow Maker, the  Muse's landscape  tends  to be identified  with actual,  reach­ able landscapes:   those of the south  and east rather  than  those of the  north  and west, exotic Palestinian, Arabian  or Greek locales as opposed  to bleak  Canadian ones. The  landscape  of the  Muse is also the  landscape  of the  imagination,  and there is often a sense of the grim "altogether Kanadian"  reality of metal  cities, snow, breakfasts  of "unsacred  bacon" 25    and  the  mechanical  clock-time  present pulling against  a different  kind of reality, that  of  the  ornate,  hierarchical  land­ scapes and  the ancient  stone city-scapes of the  Middle  East,  or of the bell-time or  blood-time26    of  a  more  organic  past.  In  The  Shadow Maker, the  poet  is

MACEWEN'S MUSE



clearer about  the relationship  between self and  Muse. Here she takes "the  roads that  lead inward ... the  roads that  lead downward," 27   and  although  the  south­ eastern  landscapes  are  still  present/8   the  Muse's  most  authentic  landscape  is identified more positively with the inner landscape of dream  and  fantasy.  "Song  for a Stranger" has  Muse  and  poet meeting in a mutual  dream  to "plot  I the
birth  of a  more  accurate  world"  in  a setting  of "pavilions"  and  "pools."  29    In the  two songs  from  the  "Fifth   Earth," the  meeting  takes  place  in  a  kind  of science-fiction otherworld.  Towards  the  end  of The   Shadow Maker, the  Muse is seen  more  as  a  potential  force  than  as  an  actual  or  incarnate  being:   the "chosen  abyss" of the  title  poem30   has replaced  the "chosen  landscape" 81  of  A Breakfast   for Barbarians.



bE ENCOUNTER BETWEEN  MUSE  AND   POET  is an  increasingly dominant   theme  in  MacEwen's poetry. Through their  meeting  each  actualizes the other,  and  together  they are able to enter  the Muse's landscape,  he as a  re­ turning  exile, she  more  often  as an  alien  discoverer or  explorer  rather  than a native. Together, also, they form the divine or cosmic couple which is a  recurring image  in  the  poetry.  This  couple  may be either  the original  (and  rather   vege­ table)  Adam-Eve,  the "man  and woman naked and green with rain"32  of "Eden, Eden"   (who   reappear,  for  instance,  in  the  pastoral,  innocent,   season-linked couple of "We  Are Sitting  on  a  High  Green  Hill" 33 )  ;   or it  may  be an  earth­ sky couple  like that  in  "Seeds  and  Stars." 34    It is  interesting  to  juxtapose  the early "couple" poem,  "Tiamut," 35   in which  the  female figure is "Chaos," "the earth ... sans form"36  and  the male figure is the shaper,  the divider, the  former  of Cosmos, with  the later  poem "The  Name  of  the Place,"  in a sense its other  half.  In  the later  poem,  the god and  goddess  responsible for  the  divided  world momentarily   glimpse  a  regained   unity:   "All  things  are  plotting   to  make   us
whole I All things  conspire  to make  us one." 37    There  is a strong  pull in  Mac­
Ewen's poetry towards completion, synthesis:  if the divine couple could  ever permanently   join, the  universe  which  has  emanated   from  their  division  would be drawn  back into  them  and  all things would indeed  be truly one, a sky-earth, flesh-spirit, spirit-flesh  landscape  which  would  also be  the  homeless "adam" 38 returned  from  exile39    and  a dance  containing  its own  "extremity." 40    Time   and space would be abolished.
But the union of Muse and  poet is limited by the flesh, and even when it takes place in  dream  or fantasy  it  is bound  by the strictures  of time  and,  in  poetry,

MACEWEN'S MUSE



by  the  length  of  the  poem.  Hence   the  emphasis   on  the  cyclical  nature of  the Muse's  appearances. Again,  the  wheel  or  cycle  is an  image   used  frequently  by MacEwen. The  revolving  wheel is an organizing symbol  in  julian the Magician, and  in  "The Ferris  Wheel" 41 it  is made  a  "wheel of  lyric"  connected with  the writing  of poetry  as well as with  the  movement of life around the  "still  middle,
the  I point  of  absolute  inquiry." Wheel,  circle  and  still  centre occur  as images
again  in  "The Cyclist in Aphelion." 42  But  the  moving  wheel  becomes  the shape of time  itself in three  poet-Muse  poems in  A Breakfast For Barbarians:  "She," 43 which  draws  on  Rider  Haggard's tale  of  the  reincarnations of  a  pair  of lovers; "Green with  Sleep," 44  in  which  the  "great  unspeakable wheel," which  is both diurnal time  and  the  mythical time of recurrences, renews  the  lovers;  and  "Car­ taphilus," 45   in which  the  two lovers encounter each  other  repeatedly:  "Whoever
you love it is me beneath you  I over  and  over. ..." In  The  Shadow  Maker  the
wheel  image  is connected  not  only with  the  poet's  own  circular movement/6  but also  with  the  circularity of  time  and  the  recurrences of  the  Muse.  "First Song from  the  Fifth   Earth" is  even  more  positive  than is  "Cartaphilus" about   the underlying identity   of  all  the  incarnations of  the  Muse: "I say  all  worlds,  all times,  all  loves  are  one...."47     "The Return," in  addition  to  illustrating the theme  of recurrence, is one of the clearest  "Muse" poems  MacEwen has written, and  is worth  quoting in its entirety:

I gave you many  names and  masks And longed for you in a hundred  forms And I was warned  the masks would fall And the forms would lose their fame
And I would be left with an empty  name

(For  that  was the way the world  went, For  that was the way it had to be,
To  grow, and in growing lose you utterly)

But grown, I inherit  you, and  you Renew  your first and  final form  in  me, And  though some masks have fallen
And many names have vanished  back into my pen
Your face  bears the  birth-marks  I recognize in  time, You stand  before me  now, unchanged

(For  this is the way it has to be; To  perceive you is an act of faith
Though  it is you who have inherited  me) 48

go

MACEWEN'S  MUSE



Who  has  created  whom?  Is  the  male  Muse  as  Marduk  shaping  the  female chaos of the poet into an order  or defining her by contrast  (as in "The  Shadow Maker"), or is the  poet  putting  the  Muse together  out  of words, as she some­ times suspects? 49  Is the  Muse outside the poet, or is he inside, a fragment of the self? Does he exist outside  time, or  can  he be apprehended only  through  time and  through  the senses? These are questions the poems ask;  the answers to them are never final, since another  turn  of the wheel may invalidate  all answers. The poet  wrestles with  the  angel,  but  to win finally, to learn  the  true  name  of  the angel, would be to stop the wheel, an event which she fe .50   The  last poem in The  Shadow  Maker, "The Wings," is a series of questions;  in  it the  Muse, des­ pite  his  many   names,  languages   and  landscapes,  is  again   nameless.  He  has created,  destroyed  and  restored  innumerable  worlds and  several  phases of  the poet  herself, and  through   the  poet's  invocation  is about  to  begin  the  process again.
"I want  to  construct  a  myth,"  Gwendolyn  MacEwen   has  written,  and  she
has  indeed  constructed  one.  MacEwen  is not  a  poet  interested  in  turning  her life into myth;  rather,  she is concerned  with translating  her  myth  into  life, and into  the  poetry  which is a  part  of it. The  informing  myth,  developed  gradually but with increasing clarity in her poetry, is that of the  Muse, author  and inspirer of language  and  therefore  of the ordered  verbal cosmos, the  poet's  universe. In MacEwen's myth  the  Muse  exists eternally  beyond sense, but  descends  period­ ically  as  winged  man,  becomes  incarnate   for  a  time  as  magician,  priest-king, lover or  all of  these,  then  dies or  disappears,  only  to  be  replaced  by another version of himself. Though  the  process is cyclical, he never  reappears in exactly the same  form.  Each  time  he  brings with  him  a  different  landscape  and  lan­ guage,  and  consequently  a  different  set  of  inspirations,  though   beneath   these guises he keeps the same  attributes.  He is a dancer  and  a singer;  his dance  and his song are the Word made flesh, and both contain and  create order and  reality. The  poet's function  is to dedicate  her life to the search  for  the  Muse,52   and  the poetry itself is both a record of the search and an attempt to reproduce or describe those portions of the song-dance  which she has  been able  to witness. The  Muse is both "good" and "evil,"  both gentle and violent, both creative and destructive; like language  itself, he subsumes all  opposites. Since he  is infinite,  the  number of  his incarnations is  potentially  infinite  also. Though   the  final  poem  in  The  Shadow  Maker  may  look like a  last word, each of  MacEwen's   previous collec­ tions has an  ending  which  is  really a  beginning:  the  "growing" of The  Rising Fire, the  "unknown"  alphabet  of  A  Breakfast  For Barbarians. Here  the  final

MACEWEN'S MUSE



word is "floods," chaos comes anew, a chaos which invites the creation of a fresh cosmos. There  is little doubt  that  the  Muse will rise again from  his ashes in  yet another  form.53



1 "The  Double Horse," TRF, 18.
2   Introduction,  BB.
 FOOTNOTES
23    BB,  3 I.
24    BB, 53·

3  A.  Schroeder in  The   Vancouver  Province,
July   25,  1g6g.
4   With   which    MacEwen   is   familiar:   see
"Thou Jacob," BB,  27.
5   Where however the  Muse,  male  or  female, is   more    typically  a   place   rather  than    a person.  But   see    e.g.  Jay   Macpherson's Angel    and    some   of   the   male   figures   in Dorothy Livesay's Plainsongs.
6   "Selah,"  Selah.
7   TRF, 41.
8  BB,   Ig.
9   cf. Graves,  for  whom   the  Muse   is,  among other  things,  a   Mother.
1o  cf.  e.g.  "The  Return," SM,   81.   Nor   is  it strange  to  find   the   "boy" as  parallel for the   poet: : this   is  elsewhere  the   case   in MacEwen's poetry; see e.g. "Dream Three: The Child," SM, 56.
11 cf.  the  astronauts of "The Cosmic  Brothers" (TRF)  and    "The  Astronauts"  (BB);  cf. also  the   poet   as  a  child, attempting to  fly with   the  help  of the magic  word SHAZAM, as  humorously recounted in  "Fragments of a  Childhood"   (Alphabet, No.   15,  Decem­ ber   1968,   10).
12  TRF, Ig,  57·
13  "Poem Improvised Around a  First   Line," BB,   16.
14  SM,   2.
15  "Appendectomy," BB,  42.
16  cf.  also  Julian in  Julian  the  Magician.
17 BB,  36.
18   MacEwen's interest  in  Christ is  connected with  his  role  as  divine  priest-king-physician incarnate; he  is  not  the original or  arche­ typal    Muse,  but   another  of   the    Muse's earthly  incarnations.
19 TRF, 4''  43·
20    Though  see  also   "Thou  Jacob," the  "Ar­ canum" series,  and  the  cosmic  dance at the electron  level   in   "Tesla."
21  BB, 40.
22   BB, 52·

32
 25    "The Last   Breakfast," BB,  35·
26    See   for   instance  "The  Drunken  Clock," the   last    poem    in   the   pamphlet  of   that name.
27    "The  Wings," SM,   82.
28   As  in,   for   instance, such   poems   as  "One
Arab Flute" and "the Fortress of Saladin."
29    SM,   53·
30    "The  Shadow Maker," SM,   8o.
s1 "Finally Left   in   the   Landscape," BB,  52.
32    The   Drunken Clock.
33  SM, 58.
34    SM,   7'·
35    TRF,  5·
36    cf.  other  woman-as-earth images:  e.g.   in the    verse    play    Terror    and    Erebus,    m "Poet  vs.   The  Land"   (Selah),  and    in "The  Discovery" ( SM,   3 I).
37    SM,   16.
38    "The  Catalogues of  Memory," TRF,  66.
39    cf. also  "The Caravan," BB, 5'·
40    "The  Absolute Dance," TRF, 43·
41  TRF, 49·
42    BB,  7·
43  BB,  g.
44    BB,  28.
45   BB,  46.
46    See  "Dream Three: The Child," SM,  56.
47   SM,  68.
48  SM,  81.
49    See  e.g.  "The  Face," BB,  g.
50    See   e.g.   "Fragments  of  a  Childhood,"  in which   the  pronouncing of the "Final Form­ ula" would   stop  everything.
51  BB,  Introduction.
52    cf. again Graves; though for  MacEwen the Muse is less Nature than  creating Word or Logos.
53  See,  for  instance, the  recent poem  "Credo" (Quarry, Vol.   Ig,   No.    I,  Fall    Ig6g,  s), in   which  the   poet   says,  "no   one   can   tell me   that I the   Dancer  in   my   blood   is  I dead...."



GEORGE RYGA	AND
THE LOST COUNTRY


Neil Carson






GEORGE RYGA fint  attracted  my attention  as the author of  "Indian", a  half-hour   television  drama   produced   on  the  CBC-TV   series "Quest" in 1962. This  powerful short play about  an encounter  between  a  tran­ sient Indian  labourer  and an official of the Department of Indian  Affairs seemed to  me at  the  time  one  of the  finest one-act  dramas  on  a  Canadian  theme  that I had seen. If it was perhaps  a little too reminiscent of Edward Albee's Zoo Story, it nevertheless revealed a dramatic  talent of great promise. Now after  two novels and  numerous  television and  film scripts, Ryga  has written  a major  play for the stage.  "The   Ecstasy of Rita  Joe"  was cominissioned by  the  Playhouse  Theatre in Vancouver,  where  it  was first performed  in  1967.  More  recently  audiences in the East had  an opportunity to see it at the Opening  Festival of the National  Arts Centre  in Ottawa in June.  It was broadcast  on  CBC radio  in August  and plans call for a television version to be shown sometime in 1970. In  my opinion, "Rita  Joe"  establishes Ryga  as the  most exciting talent  writing  for  the stage in Canada  today.
This  is not, it must  be admitted,  an  extravagant  claim since the  competition is not  keen. Of  all the  fields on the Canadian Literature  farm,  drama  is surely the most barren,  the most uncultivated.  This  is partly  because the extravagance of  the  drama   has  never  seemed  congenial  to  Canadians.  Until   recently  the theatre  has played  a  very minor  role in  our  national  life and  few writers  have been attracted to it as a medium. This does not, however, justify the continuing indifference  of many  literary  critics and  historians who still tend  to concentrate their  attention  almost  exclusively on  the  printed  word. Since  very few of those original  Canadian plays which  have  been  produced  in  the  last few years have been  published,  there  is  a  growing  body  of  vigorous  writing  which  remains largely  unknown.  Ryga  seell1S  particularly  worth  discussing in  this context  be­ cause  "The   Ecstasy  of  Rita  Joe"  has  been  more  widely seen  and  heard  than

33

GEORGE  RYGA



many   new  Canadian  plays  and   because  it  is  closely  related   to  his  published work,  especially  his  novels  Hungry  Hills ( 1963)    and   Ballad of  a Stonepicker (1966).
The  play is about  two  representative Indians, Rita  Joe,  an  accused  prostitute
and  Jamie Paul,  an  advocate of Red  Power,  who are  destroyed  in a hostile white environment, in  this  case  Vancouver. Opposed  to  them   on  the  one  hand   are the  rather papier   mache  figures  of  white  authority, the  magistrate, the  police, the  priest,  the social  worker  etc. On  the other  stands the  patriarch Indian Chief, David  Joe,  a symbol  of the  old  way of life which,  however  heroic  and  dignified in  the  past,  is  no  longer  viable.  Although  much   of  the  time  Ryga  seems  too emotionally involved  in  his subject  to  raise it above  the  level  of  a  propaganda piece,  there  are  many  moments   of  fine  dramatic  writing. These   reveal  Ryga's extraordinary talent   for  creating an  approximation of  Indian dialect   which   is capable of immense  poetic effect. Like Synge,  he has formed  out  of the speech  of a  remote   group  a  dramatic  medium   of  far   greater  range   than   either   simple realism  or the  "poetic" dialogue  which  is usually  thought of as the  only  alterna­ tive. Two  examples will illustrate  the sort of thing  I mean. The  first is spoken  by Chief  David  Joe  directly  to the  audience:

But when I was fifteen years old, I leave the reserve to work on a threshing  crew. They  are paying a dollar a day for a good man ... an'  I was a good strong  man. The  first time  I  got work there  was a girl about  as old as I ... She'd  come out in  the  yard  an'  watch  the  men  working at  the  threshing  machine.  She  had  eyes that  were the biggest I ever seen ... like fifty-cent  pieces ... an'  there  was always a flock of geese around  her.  Whenever  I  see her  I feel good. She  used to stand an'  watch  me, an'  the  geese made  a  helluva  noise. One  time  I got  off my  rick an'  went to get a drink of water ... but  I walked  close to where she was, watch­ ing  me.  She  backed  away, and  then  ran  from  me  with  the  geese  chasin'  after her,  their  wings out  an'  their  feet  no longer  touching  the  ground ... They  were white geese ... The  last time Rita  Joe comes home  to see us ... the last time she ever come home ... I  watched  her leave ... and  I seen geese  running  after  Rita Joe the same way ... white geese ... with their  wings out  an'  their feet no longer touching  the  ground.  And  I  remembered  it  all,  an'  my  heart  got  so  heavy  I wanted  to cry ...1

The  second  is also spoken  by the  chief to  Jamie Paul  and  to his silent  daugh­
ter,  Rita  Joe.

FATHER:   You're  a  good  boy, Jamie   Paul ... a  good  boy ... (To   Rita,  talking slowly, painfully)  I once seen a dragonfly  breakin'  its shell to get its wings ... It floated  on  water  an'  crawled  up  on a log where  I was sitting ... It dug  its

34

GEORGERYGA



feet  into  the  log an'  then  it  pulled  until  the shell bust over  its  neck. Then  it pulled  some more ... an'  slowly its wings slipped out  of the shell ... like that! Shows  with  his hands  how  the  dragonfly  got  freedom.
JAMIE:    (Angered and  deeply  moved   by  the   father)  Where  you gonna  be when
they  start  bustin'  our  heads  open  an'  throwing  us into  jails right  across  the goddamned  country?
FATHER:   •.. Such  wings  I never  seen  before ... folded  like  an  accordion ... so fine, like thin  glass an'  white in the morning sun ...
JAMIE:  We're  gonna  have  to fight  to win ... there's  no other  way!  They're  not
listenin' to you, old man! Or  to me.
FATHER:   ... It spread  its wings ... so slowly ... an'  then  the  wings  opened  an' began  to  flutter ... Just  like that-see!  Hesitant  at  first ... then  stronger ... an'  then  the wings beatin'  like that  made  the dragonfly's body quiver  until  the shell on its back falls off ...
JAMIE:  Stop  kiddin'  yourself! We're  gonna say "no"  pretty  soon to  all  the  crap
that  makes us soft an'  easy to push this way ... that  way.
Rita  Joe is now  reduced  to a child  before  her  father.
FATHER: ••• An'  the  dragonfly ... flew  up ... up ... up ... into   the   white  sun
... to the green sky ... to the sun ... faster an' faster ... Higher ... HIGHER2!

(The second   passage  also  illustrates   fairly  well  the  social  protest   sloganeering which  is one of the  unfortunate features of this play.)  Together they show Ryga's continuing concern  with  themes  that  are far  deeper  and  ultimately more  troubl­ ing  than   the  hiring   policies  of  B.C.  industry   or  the  alleged  dishonesty  of  the Vancouver police.  In  the  evocative  description  of the  geese-symbols of  doom or  possibly sexual  passion -as  well  as in  the  aspiration implicit  in  the  symbol of the  dragonfly, Ryga  returns to two ideas that  are central to much  of his pub­ lished  work-the elusive nature of love and the search  for  meaning or for  what  in  Ballad   of a  Stonepicker he  calls "the  country".
Love  as it is usually  understood by the  readers  of women's magazines or  the more  lurid  modern novels  is rarely  fulfilling  in Ryga's  works.  Although it  calls forth  some of his most sentimental writing -

I pulled her to me and  kissed her on the mouth, and her friends looking on. Then I turned  away and  went  home, blind,  because my eyes were full  of  tears and  I couldn't  stop them  coming ...3

more  often  his tone  is bitterly  ironic.  At the end  of Ballad  of a Stonepicker a girl who  has  been  made   pregnant by  a  man  who  has  deserted   her  murmurs  over the  grave  of the  narrator's father, "It's love  that'll make  it  all  wonderful. Find love quickly-today." Far  from  being  a fulfilling experience, love (and  especially

35

GEORGE RYGA



sexual love)  is shown more frequently  as a destructive,  almost perverting  force. In  Hungry Hills it is embodied  in  the incest of the  Mandolins,  In  Ballad of  a Stonepicker it is represented by the  pathetic  infatuation of Clem  the blacksmith and  Freddy  the  idiot,  by the  disappointment of  Helen  Bayrack  and,  perhaps most vividly, by the coupling of Marta  Walker  and  Hector  in  her father's  tool shed made safe by the killing of the watch  dog. Physical love indeed seems to be presented  as a weakness into which the disappointed  or  the fearful  escape. The narrator  of Ballad of a  Stonepicker feels that  it is only after  he has "killed  the animal  in himself" that  he can bury his father  without  shame.



IF RYGA REJECTS  romantic  and  physical  love,  he  does  not conclude  that  meaningful  human  relationships  are  impossible. On  the  contrary
he frequently  shows a bond between individuals  which  he clearly believes to be more exalted  than  love in the  usual sense. Ordinarily   this is a  relationship  in a family  (between  brother  and  brother  in "Indian", father  and  daughter  in "Rita Joe",  boy and  aunt  in Hungry Hills). Occasionally,  as in the father's  grief over the loss of his horse in Hungry Hills and  in  the comic episode of Timothy  and his ox in  Ballad of  a  Stonepicker, the  relationship   may  be  between  man  and animal.  Indeed  it  is the  potential  strength  of  this  latter  bond  that  makes  the slaying  of the  dog  by the sexually aroused  Marta   and  Hector  so chilling,  and Minerva  Malan's  coolly efficient slaughter  of the  rooster in  Ballad of  a  Stone­ picker so symbolically right.  But in  the  world  Ryga  writes  about  there  is little enough even of this second kind of love. It comes fleetingly, in moments of crisis, or in flashes of understanding,  but is never indulged  and often not even acknowl­ edged. Ryga's  vision of the fragility of love is perhaps  most  poignantly  conveyed in his description of Mary and Peter Ruptash  in Ballad of a Stonepicker:

They'd  been married fifteen years before they had a kid-a girl with one missing arm. Pete had  built a playroom ten years earlier for her coming. The  playroom had wallpaper with rabbits on it, a small crib, rocking toys and a little desk with a chair. And then this baby came.
It  had learned to walk and was able to say 'mama,  I  busy' and  'da-da'  when
it caught diphtheria and died. Pete had to beat his wife with his fists to take the kid away so he could bury iU

If Ryga's  characters  are  partly  tormented  by their  need  for  love in  a  world that  denies it or corrupts its expression, many  of them are even more profoundly

GEORGE  RYGA



troubled  by existential longings. In  Ballad of a Stonepicker the narrator attempts to describe his feelings at  hearing  of the death  of his father.  "I felt I was in  a strange  town,"  he says, "... trying to find the gates of the country."This is an echo of an earlier  passage in the novel describing the feelings of the scholar son, Jim,  just before his suicide in England.  In his last letter  home he speaks of  him­ self as "a  young  man  who lost one world and  never felt  at  home  in  another." The  sense of spiritual  homelessness is common  in Ryga's  work and  many  of his characters  define  themselves  by  their  relationship  to  a  country  they  have  lost or one they never find.
In  his early  work,  this country  seems to represent  the  lost time of youth,  in­ nocence, and  happiness  that  is replaced  by the cares of maturity  and  responsi­ bility. The  crisis is often  a  moment  of choice which  is precipitated  by outside factors  but  which  is faced  by the  protagonist  with full  awareness.  In  "Indian" the transient  labourer  speaks of such a moment.
I ... kill ... my ... brother.  In  my arms I hold him.  He  was so light-like  a small boy. I  hold him ...rock 'im  back and forward like this -like mother  rock us when we tiny kids. I  rock 'im an'  I cry ... I get my hands tight on his neck, an' I squeeze an' I squeeze. I know he dead, and I still squeeze an' cry, for every­ thing is gone, and I am old man now only hunger an' hurt  left now ...6

Here,  although  the situation  is symptomatic of social injustice, Ryga is more con­ cerned  with  understanding the existential consequences than  with  attacking the evil itself. To  a large extent,  the Indian's  identity is a product  of  this action and his compulsion to recount  the murder is intimately bound  up with  his own sense of who he is.
A similar  concern  with  identity  and  with growing  up  is evident  in  Hungry
Hills. Snit  Mandolin, after  spending  some time in  a  Welfare  Home  and  later as a mechanic  in  a garage  in  Edmonton,  decides to  return  to  his home  in  the Alberta  foothills. He  cannot  articulate  his reasons for going  home,  but  the  rest of the story concerns  his search  for his origins and  his final  attempt  to create  a life of  dignity  for  himself.  One  thing  he learns  is that  the  misfortunes  of  his family are  not  only the  result of the hostility of outsiders  but  also of deliberate choice.

"We done it ourselves, Snit-don't you see?" There were tears in Aunt Matilda's eyes now. "We done it long ago, and other folks had  no part  of it-it  started long ago, when two sisters and a brother came on this farm. There was no proper life for anyone when the  work was done. But instead of going out  and  doing what we shoulda done, saving ourselves for a good life, we turned ourselves inside

37

GEORGE RYGA



out, killing everything  we touched  until  we didn't  know what  was right  or wrong any more. Your  pa and rna paired off, and  you were born.  I was one of the out­ side folks then,  and  I hada  start  taking  care  of  things.  I could  been  like  your rna-could've  come and  gone in  the same  way-just  like your  pa  did. I  was saved for a taste of life-but it came too late, Snit!" 1

Although here  too  Ryga  shows  the  conflict  between   man   and   his  neighbours, he  is  more  fundamentally  concerned   with   man's  struggle   with   himself.  The "heroine" of  the  story  is Aunt   Matilda who  has  learned  to  endure the  conse­ quences  of her  choices.
. . . she  stood  erect  and  proud,  like nothing   would  knock  her  down-nothing she saw or lived through.
"I gotta  die,  Snit-same  as  anybody  else. But  I ain't   gonna  die  easy. My
conscience won't  let me!"
"Ya'  ain't  alone-I'm with ya. I don't  want  to hear  anymore!"
"But  you've got to listen, Snit-you've  got  to  understand. Once  you've made up your mind,  there's  no turning  back." 8

In  Ballad  of a Stonepicker, there  seems  to  be  far  less emphasis  on  conscious choice. Although the father is destroyed  by his decision  to give excessive financial support to one son,  most of the characters are  shaped by forces  over  which  they have  no control. The  stonepicker asks, "when had  the  boyhood  gone,  and  when did  the  man  take  over  in  me?"  Here  the  protagonist no  longer   recognizes  the crucial  moment of decision  and  is caught instead  in  a  process  which  he does  not understand. The impression  of passive suffering rather  than  deliberate action  is conveyed  further by the  structure of the  novel  itself.  Reminiscent of  the  ballad form,  it consists of a number of apparently random memories  told  by an  anony­ mous  narrator. The central  character is essentially  faceless,  a  symbol  of  the  in­ articulate victim.  "I've stood  for  hours  out  there  in  the  field,"  he  says  at  one point,  "the wind  blowing  all around me,  drying the  soil and  sapping the  water  out  of my  flesh. I've  felt it all, but  could  never  tell others  how  it felt." 9
But  if Ryga  is suggesting  that  suffering  is only  partially explicable in  terms  of our  own  choices,  and  that  many  men  are  victims  of  a  Fate  they  cannot control or  comprehend, he  does not  seem  to deny  the  possibility  of  meaning altogether. For  the  narrator's attempts to find relevance  in his seemingly  unrelated memories are  not  entirely  unsuccessful.

Then  it came  to me-the  truth  I had  never  realized  before-the truth  Nancy Burla  saw when she married  the doctor. These  arms  were all I had  and  all that anybody  had  ever  wanted.... they  were  the  reason  for  my  life.  Here  was  my

GEORGE  RYGA



strength and my food and my bed. There was no other part of me worth anything
-never  had  been. In  so short a time they raised their Jims, their  babies, their
invalid mothers and fathers-and  then they shrivelled and brought unhappiness to the man willing to work but not able bec-ause  his visions twisted downwards into a patch of earth no larger than a grave.10

Whether  or  not  these  twisted  visions are  the  only visions possible is  not  made clear in the novel. Ryga himself seems temperamentally  caught  between the romanticism  of  hope  and  the  romanticism  of  despair.  But  the  intensity  of  his writing  (in  this  novel at  least)  suggests that,  although  the  stonepicker  has  lost his way, a way does nevertheless exist.
"The  Ecstasy of Rita  Joe" seems at first to be far less complex than  the novels
which  precede  it.  In  outline  its conflicts are simple, the  alternatives  apparently black and  white  (or  perhaps  red and  white), the target  for outrage  clearly  de­ signated.  In  this play  (unlike  in "Indian") a great  amount  of time  is  spent  in describing the in justices of white society and  proportionately  little on  the  deeper, more perplexing issues. But it would be a mistake to see the play as nothing  more than  a social protest  melodrama.
In  structure,  it  closely resembles Ballad of  a Stonepicker or  Arthur   Miller's
After  the  Fall, being  a  dramatization  of  memories and  a  search  for  identity. On one level Rita  Joe makes a sharp  distinction between the remembered  happi­ ness of childhood  in the country  and  the harsh  realities of adult  life in  the  city. The  reservation where love cannot  be bought for a thousand  dollars is contrasted to the city where love seems to be purely commercial. Rita Joe's fate in  her own memory  has  been caused  by white  prejudice  and  bureaucratic  inefficiency. But Ryga shows that  Rita  Joe's memories often deceive her and  that she sees in them only what she wants to see. As the Magistrate  points out, "The obstacles to your life  are  here,  in  your  thoughts ... possibly even in  your  culture." 11 Although Rita  Joe  does  not  articulate   the  idea,  both  Jamie  Paul  and  David  Joe  know that  Indian  culture  cannot  survive unchanged.  They  know  that  "If we only fish an'  hunt  an'  cut  pulpwood ... pick strawberries  in  the  bush ... for  a  hundred  years more, we are  dead." 12  David  Joe  puts his faith in  education.  Jamie  Paul in Red  Power. But it is not clear that  Ryga shares either  view. In  the end  it is uncertain  what  new country  the dragonfly will find or if indeed  his escape from the shell is anything  but  momentary.  Perhaps  the only certainty  in  the  play is the inexorability  of time. As Rita Joe says, "I wish we could go back again  then an'  start  livin'  from  that  day  on,  Jamie."  13  Or  in  the  words  of  the  song  that closes the play,


39

GEORGERYGA



The  blue evening
Of the first warm day - Is the last evening.

"The Ecstasy  of Rita  Joe"  is one  of the  products of  a  new  working  relation­ ship  between   the  professional  theatre and  creative   writers in  this  country. An increasing number of regional  theatres  are  looking  for  original  Canadian plays and  some of  them  are  working  closely with  local  authors to  get  them.  A  grant from  the Centennial Commission  made  it possible for  Ryga  to  be associated  with the  Playhouse  Theatre during the  production of  "Rita Joe". It is to  be  hoped that  some such  relationship can  be continued. For  Ryga  has  that  very  rare  gift for  writing  dialogue that  has  the sound  of ordinary speech  but  the  resonance of poetry. If he  can  master  the  technical  and  structural  demands of  the  stage,  we may  yet  have  a  Canadian play  worthy  to  be  mentioned in  discussions  of  con­ temporary drama.

FOOTNOTES

1 "The Ecstasy of Rita Joe"  (Unpublished  playscript,  May  Ig6g),  p. 41.
2    Ibid.,  pp. 6o-6I.
8  Ballad of a Stonepicker  (Toronto: Macmillan,  1966),  p. 123. "  Ibid.,  p. 23.
Ibid.,  p. 153.
6    "Indian", The  Tamarack  Review  (Summer,  1965),  p. 17.
7   Hungry Hills  (Toronto: Longmans,  1963),  pp. g8-gg.
8  Ibid.,  p.  I64.
9   Ballad of a Stone picker, p.   I 24.
10  Ibid.,  p. 156.
11   "The Ecstasy of Rita  Joe", p. 23.
12  Ibid.,  p. 55·
13  Ibid.,  p. 20.



NOTES ON
ALDEN NOWLAN


Keath Fraser



READING THE BODY  of Alden Nowlan's wo•k one begills to share his acute feeling for place. The ideal landscapes of Roberts and Carman, his literary ancestors, are the ones he avoids and de-mythologizes:

... here persistent misery endures;
growing thick-headed like a cow, it chews thistles in mute protest against the rain
of innocence it cannot lose or use.

To  get beneath  a Maritime  cliche the poet here brandishes  a prudery  he  recog­ nizes and  undercuts  a countryside  he does not. Elsewhere  he writes  that  water "the  colour  of  a  bayonet .. .j glitters  blue  and  solid  on  the  page/  in  tourist folders, yet some thirty  towns/  use it as a latrine"; and  while acid  from  "heaps of decomposing  bark  torn  loose/  from  pulpwood driven  south" kills  the salmon
-in the summer  "the stink/  of the corrupted  water" fills the air. Yet the tourist
pictures  have  not  lied, says  Nowlan:   "the  real/   river  is  beautiful,  as  blue  as steel."  As  he  views it,  the  Real  McCoy  resides not in  any  Platonic  folder,  the idea of landscape,  but in the stab of the river above and  below the ice, in winter and  in summer. If Beauty exists it arises from  a comprehension  ubiquitous  and therefore  poetic,  not  a  romanticized  abstraction  which  excludes  pain  and  cold­
ness:
Ours was a windy country and its crops were never frivolous, malicious rocks
kicked at the plough and skinny cattle broke ditch ice for mud to drink and pigs were axed.

Individual  poems hint that  in this world where "Spring  is distrusted", "Summer is not a season",  and  "December is thirteen  months long",  there can be no hark­ ing  back  to Tantramar for  lost experience:   any loss boils down  simply  to  the absence  of  harshness,  not  to something  that  creates  combustion  in the  mind.

NOTES ON  ALDEN NOWLAN



While   Roberts would  rather  remember his  environment,  the   New   Brunswick writer  sees it for  what  it is:

Only the leaves of the thistle have retained  their  greenness even in the grave:  they remind  me of men,
poor, ignorant,  wise, who only shrug
at each new effacement of history ...

To  my mind  this consequence of calcified  regionalism clutches  Nowlan most noticeably. Because  he prides himself on  writing of what  he  knows  the  threat of piecemeal  living  seems  never  distant  from  his  regional   world.  "I went  to  work when  I was  15 years  old, peeling  pulpwood 12  hours  a day" (he  wrote  in  The Canadian  Forum, January rg6g). "Until I received  my first  pay  cheque -two weeks  after  starting work-I lived  on  boiled  potatoes   flavored  with  vinegar." Thus in  his short  story,  "A Call  in  December", where  the  narrator and  an  old man  bring  a Christmas hamper to a starving mother and  baby,  the  hunger  evi­ dent  in "two  empty  sardine  cans,  their  tops drawn back  like the  open  mouths of crocodiles", appears  stark   and   unpretentious.  Nowlan  chronicles  himself   and others  via a milieu  where  the  pain  of his own  experience  contributes to much  of his work,  such  as this widely  published  poem  which  takes its  title  from  the  first line.

When like the tears of clowns the  rain  intrudes Upon  our ordered days and  children  chant, Like repetitious birds, their sexless shrill:

My heart crawls lean and  lewd, a shrinking  thing, To  haylofts where, when I was ten and  whipt, Tall horses swore fidelity and  drummed
As wolf-thoughts howled within  my punished  wrists.

There  in the seasoned hay's unsubtle  tang
The  lash of fleshly pride  unleashed  my lips

And in a dream  I saw the meek bequeathed
Their  deep and  narrow  heritage  of earth.

This  poem  counterpoints the  tragi-comic, and  juxtaposes pain  caused  by coming of age with  a symmetry  of images  that  is informed by the  boy's rural,  puritanical heritage; rather than  a shaking-off  of legacy,  there  seems  a  masochistic  attempt to comprehend its influence.  Certainly the  poet's  roots  are  painful to  relate,  for his parents are  victims of a calcified  conscience.  In  "Beginning" he writes,

NOTES ON  ALDEN NOWLAN



From  that  they found most lovely, most abhorred, my parents  made  me:  I was born like sound stroked from  the fiddle to become the ward
of tunes  played on the bear-trap  and the  hound.

Not one, but seven entrances they gave each  to the other, and  he laid her down
the way the sun comes out. Oh, they were brave, and  then like looters in a burning town.

Their  mouths  left bruises, starting with  the kiss and  ending  with the proverb, where they stayed; never in making  was there brighter bliss,
followed  by darker shame. Thus  I was made.

The  outcome of  parental degradation shambles  through "Child of Tabu",  too, where  children taunt one  of their  playmates  "who  was  conceived  so casually  by strangers/ in the soft hay  and  the  high  noon":

Begotten furtively  in the marital  night, beneath  the crush of blankets
and  the long shame,

we avowed our  ancestry
with  the  ruthless simplicity of children offering our  gods
a dripping handful  of his heart.

The  blissful love  of  the  tabu   parents  contrasts  vividly  with  an  ascetic  condition that  comes "bordered" (in  another poem)  "by  the rumpled quilts/ And  children bred  from  duty  as the soil/  Was  ploughed  to hide  the seed  and  not for  joy."
A short  story,  "The Glass Roses", demonstrates that  regional  parents will never
tolerate  imaginative encounter. Stephen's father tells  him  that  if  he  is to  learn the  ropes of pulp-cutting and  manhood he must  disown  the  Polack  and  his alien sensibilities;  for  lumberjacks, as Nowlan  the  poet  acquaints us elsewhere,

are  the men who live by killing  trees­ their  bones are ironwood, their  muscles steel, their  faces whetstones and  their  hands conceal claws hard  as peavy hooks:  anatomies
sectioned  like the men in the Zodiac.

In  "The Migrant Hand" the  calcified  working  man  arrives  shut  inside  "the last ten  hours  of blackflies  and  heat,/ the  last two  hundred barrels  of potatoes." Yet

43

NOTES ON  ALDEN   NOWLAN



the regionalist at his best canalizes attention  toward  the  aggregate  experience  of this individual,  the Everyjoe who has served all masters in a universal regionalism:

For how many thousands of years, for how many millions of baskets and waggonloads and  truckloads of onions,
or cotton, or turnips has this old man knelt
in the dirt of sun-crazy fields? If you ask him,
he'll put you off: he's suspicious of questions. The truth is that Adam, a day out of Eden, started him gathering grapes: old Pharoah
sold him to Greece; he picked leeks for the Seljuks, garlic for Tuscans, Goths and Normans,
pumpkins and maize for the Pilgrim Fathers ...

By and  large,  then,  Nowlan,  like the  preacher   in  "The Young  Rector" - fascinated  with indigenous spirituality-cannot help  but  witness that  the abject people he intuitively  loves "are  dead/ all they  need  is someone/  to throw  dirt over them./ Passionless, stinking, dead."  For this writer  (fortunately, his admirers might add)   both  Eden  and Tantramar are gone;  only his struggle  against  asce­ ticism and  the nitty-gritty  remains where "farmers maddened/ by debt  or  queer religions winter  down/  under  the ice".




ILE     of his early work praised  Nowlan  for the accuracy of his images, they also admonished  him for flatness and  failure  to  ex­ periment  much  with  form.  A  tendency  not  to  whack  home  more  forcefully  a poem's potential  also came under fire; what his poems of the early sixties needed more of was the expansive yet integral conclusions of his later ones, which exhibit an adroit  control.  In  Under  the Ice  (I g6 I ) , his fourth  and  final  chapbook,  one discovers him finding his range, adjusting his sights, but shooting erratically  none­ theless; even some previous poems are decidedly  better  than the ones which now describe  his  middle  period.  "The Egotist" from  The   Rose  and  the  Puritan
( 1958), for example,  explores a favourite  theme  of violence with  more sophisti­ cation  than  the  later  "Bear".  The  earlier  poem  clinches its simple  but electric statement  superbly.


A gushing carrousel, the cock
Revolved around the axeman's block.

44

NOTES  ON ALDEN  NOWLAN



Sweet Christ, he kicked his severed head
And drenched the summer where he bled.

And terrible with pain, the scream
Of blood engulfed his desperate dream -

He knew (and knowing could not die) That dawn depended on his cry.

"Bear",  on the other  hand,  lacks as much voltage because its conclusion is bathe­ tic. In the first stanza  a she-bear comes crashing down with rifle-fire; the second stanza  pictures  a  bear cub  chained  beside a  highway restaurant  in order  to at­ tract  tourists. While the bloody death of the mother appears  a high point climac­ tically, it  does not  imagistically;  the second verse requires  at  least  a  sustaining image, or as in "The Egotist", one of an ascending kind that survives  as part  of the resolution.
Concerning his poetic endeavours at this time Nowlan could rationalize all he wished:  "If all life is to be the stuff of poetry, and  it should  be, poetry will be banal  occasionally",  he wrote  in  review of  Irving  Layton  (Fiddlehead, Spring
1960). Banality,  of course,  merely concocts an  excuse for stuff  that  would  be better  left alone  or written  up in prose. Ironically  enough,  he was criticized for this identical  weakness in a review of his A Darkness in the Earth  ( 1959)  in the very issue of Fiddlehead his own review appeared: "When  he fails", commented the  reviewer, "the  failure  is usually in  the subject  matter  itself which  is badly chosen, partially  perhaps  because of a desire to explore  through  poetry  almost anything  which  he feels or  with which he comes in contact."  In  Under  the  Ice Nowlan  reveals  limitations,  not  because  a  number  of  titles  read  like  a  rural Who's   Who   ("Jack  Stringer", "Charlie",  "Georgie  and   Fenwick",   or  "The Flynch  Cows"), but  because  the  poems  themselves often  forfeit  neat  contours of structure   and   perception   (a  notable  exception  is  "Warren  Pryor") . Verse like  "Georgie  and  Fenwick",  for  instance,  assembles tattle  that   makes  better fiction. Nowlan  realizes his use of local folk in  the short  story "The  Execution of Clemmie  Lake"  much  more effectively; the gossipy nature  of the inhabitants of  Larchmont, New  Brunswick,  who  watch  Clemmie  hang  twice  because  the rope  breaks  once,  and  who  whisper  "Clemmie  messed in  his  pants  when  his neck broke" -the  writer  cauterizes in  authoritative fashion  that  gains  perspec­ tive when  he  retraces  the  story of  the  unfortunate victim  through  eye-witness accounts  of  his hanging  on  October  18,  1923.  Not  that  Nowlan's  fascination with  the insecurity  which  gives rise to  this need for gossip really  diminishes  in

45

NOTES ON  ALDEN NOWLAN



his later  work, but  the treatment  of it in  Bread, Wine  and  Salt  (1967)   proves more consequential.  "Small Town  Small Talk", by its title, foreshadows a  meas­ ure  of irony that  articulates in a few lines the  isolation  of  two  people,  so the dreary  procession of busybody verse as in Under  the  Ice  vanishes;  or  from  the same  volume,  "Every  Man  Owes  God  a  Death", the  irony  expressed  by  the crafty  narrator-cum-gossip  again provides a double edge when the attempt  to con­ strue  his landlady's  niche in  capitalism  makes  universal  the  shame  peculiar  to them  both as Calvinists. With Bread, Wine  and Salt  Nowlan  commands  a hear­ ing  with  such  poems  as  "Sailors",  "0",  "Footsteps in  the  Dark", and  "The  Fresh-Ploughed  Hill"  where, instead  of  petering  out,  his images accelerate  suf­ ficiently to spurt  past the banal  and  overtake  the significant.

The  fresh-ploughed hill slopes down  to  the  sky. Therefore, the  sower,
broadcasting his seed, runs faster  and  faster.

Bounding like a stone the skirts of his coat straight out  behind  him.

See  how he falls, clawing at  the earth  -
nor  will let go but  still clutches
dirt  in his fists, rolling
into  the  bright  depths  of the  sun.



IN THE  PREFACE to The  Things  Which Are  ( 1962)  Nowlan reminds himself to "Write  the things which thou hast seen and  the things which are"  (The  Revelation of St. John  the Divine). Consequently  one perceives in a
good  deal  of  his  writing  the  importance   he  attaches  to  a  theme  like  coming of age. As observed in "When  Like the Tears  of Clowns",  a fearful  encounter is  responsible  for  the  transition  toward  some   measure  of  maturity   and   the presence of "A  Night  Hawk  Fell With  a Sound  Like  a  Shudder" in  the  same volume,  his first,  leads  one  to  suspect  that   it  too  traces  unexpected   growth. Here   the  poet  feels suddenly  "lonely  and   cold",   foreseeing  his  own   death perhaps,  when  the  winged predator  descends upon  some field rodent.  In  Now­ lan's  third  chapbook,  Wind  in  a  Rocky  Country   ( 1960), the  poem  "Partner-

NOTES ON  ALDEN NOWLAN



ship"  again  picks  up  this  image  of  the  hawk  and  uses it  to  describe  a  boy who, taught  by an  old  man  "about  mermaids",  "filches/   bay  rum  and  tonic" for  his  teacher.   The   boy's  attainment  of  any  maturity   hovers  ambiguously, however,  because-only "half-certain  he's seen a  star/   fall  like  a  hawk  and roll  in  the  dooryard" -he  senses no  apprehension  as  does  the  figure  in  the previous poem, nothing  to jar  him from  an adolescent and  debilitating  naivete. Coming  of  age  crops  up  in  short  stories like "Hurt", "A  Sick  Call",  "In  the Finland   Woods"   (all  from   Miracle  at  Indian  River,  1968),  and   reappears trenchantly   in  the  later   poem,  "The   Wickedness  of  Peter  Shannon",  where fourteen-year-old   Peter   suffers  humiliating   guilt  for  his  masturbation.  Here shame  and  inferences  of an  austere  heritage  obstruct  the  course of maturity  by creating  tension  which  adumbrates epiphany;   but  while  the  analogous   poem "When Like the Tears  of Clowns" emits a Calvinist flavour,  this one echoes an Irish religious orthodoxy.  With such exclamations by the boy as "Oh, God, God, God,"  "ohhhhhh,/ Jesussss", and  "my cheeks/  burning  as though  Christ slapped them!" the  poem  establishes a cyclical guilt  that  nestles as deeply  within  Peter Shannon  as within  Stephen  Dedalus. And  the myth of Daedalus  is not  remote from  at  least one  recent  and  personal  poem by Nowlan.
"I, Icarus"  recounts "a  time when  (he)  could fly", navigating  himself through his  bedroom  window  "above  the  pasture  fence,/   above  the  clothesline,  above the  dark,  haunted   trees/  beyond  the  pasture."  Nevertheless the  poet's  transcen­ dence,  an  imaginative  release accompanied  by "music  of  flutes",  requires  con­ siderable  effort for his flight outside. As a result the artist  implies  a falling-back at dawn  into what  he cannot  overcome-as Icarus fell into  the ocean  when  he flew too near  the sun  that  melted  his wings. The  inside-outside  motif, suggested here, carries through  Nowlan's  poetry of the past decade, and receives an obvious statement  in  his first volume  (as  Milton  Wilson noted,  The  Canadian  Forum, June  1959)  with  such  poems  as "Sparrow  Come in  My  Window", where  the outside which invites escape remains cut off by a window  that  isolates the narra­  tor and  the bird  he wishes to share his loneliness within. This confining  window image  continues  clear  in  later  poems like "Warren  Pryor",  "Party at  Bannon Brook",  "Jane at  Two",  and  in  "Wasp" where  the  poet  discovers  "a  thorned phallus"  inside his car windshield  and -experiencing  a "sudden  pity j for him, myself and  every other  being/  beating  at  unseen  walls"-he rescues himself by grabbing  the insect with his fingers and  flinging it outside,
Like a hot coal
grasped in the naked hand!

47

NOTES ON  ALDEN  NOWLAN



Foolishly happy, exhausted, licking my sore paw like a dog,
I sit here, thinking of glass
and  the jokes it plays in the world.

The nature of glass makes it difficult  to distinguish what  is real,  a  difficulty  ob­ servable   in  the  second  paragraph of  "The  Foreigner", a  short  story  set  in an asylum  and  indicating Nowlan's interest  in  the  insane:

Every day we spend an hour in the exercise yard.  The  yard  is bordered  on three sides by a  high  board fence and  on the  fourth  side by the  red  brick  wall of the hospital.  Things  that  will grow anywhere,  grow here:  daisies, dandelions,  thistles. There  is even  a  tree, a  maple  about  twice  as tall  as a  man.  And  we smell the earth  instead  of iodoform  and  lysol. But it  does not  seem that  we are  outdoors. It seems that  we are in a  huge room  with  a  dirt  floor and  a  window  opening on  the  sky, such  a  room  as one might  find  in  a  dream.  And  perhaps  what  we see is not the sky but a plate of tinted  glass. How  can  we be sure, since we  can­ not  reach  it?

What escapes  the  entrapped  patients here-what  eludes  the  boy  narrator  m another story,  "At   the  Edge  of  the  Woods"-is  a  foothold in  either   the  real world   or  the  unreal. "To  be  a  stranger is enough, to  be  a  stranger/  in  two worlds:  that  is  the  ultimate loneliness."  Nowlan himself  seeks  familiarity  with both  worlds  to  understand  better  the  real  one,  but  its  price  exacts  the  shut-in seclusion  required to create  art.
While   the  confined  sparrow  of  an  earlier   poem   returns  briefly  in  "Home­ coming" ("a wild  bird/ flying  from  room  to  room" in  a  deserted  house  with "the windows  blind"), so all the birds vanish -together with  the artistic  inspira­ tion  they  represent-from inside  another house  in  "Poem".

A silence like a lizard on the tongue,
quiet that  is not peace stalks through  the mind, searching for words in all the  empty  rooms,
birds that  no wicker cages have confined.

Grim is the shadow of wanton  despair,
icy the  rooms where  not  a  bird  is crying. Stop at the window, motionless as mute,
even the  hawk may come, when  you've ceased trying.

Here the  repetitive hawk  again  suggests itself  antithetical to  life  (this  time  ima­
ginative life), while  the  possibility occurs  of  artistic  fulfilment deliberately pur-

NOTES ON  ALDEN NOWLAN



sued in an  inside world.  But for the artist  this world must  balance  ideally with its counterpart (the  outside) : or else asceticism, a condition of calcified  regional­ ism, will grip  the  poet-seen  as Time  Traveller  in  "The   Eloi and  The  Mor­ locks" -as it has the squatters  observed as Morlocks who "venture  no farther/ than  their  murky  doorways",  "shielding  white faces" from  the light. The  hawk as one  creature  of  prey  bears  close watching,  but it  is the  Morlocks  and  their peculiar  human  severity  that  seem  more  to  resemble those  regional  woodsmen who aim to chop down  Stephen's  imagination,  stomp all over his glass roses.
The  inside  may  afford  temporary  relief, but  inevitably  this  solace  confirms
loneliness:   as  it  does  for  the  Puritan   whose  abstemious  condition   within  his "cubicle"  contrasts keenly (if unsuccessfully) with the predatory  beasts that roam beyond its walls  ("The Rose and  the  Puritan") ; for the  poet who occasionally desires "a  world  no bigger than  the coupling bodies/  of two clockless strangers" ("Sometimes"), but  experiences  "beginning  pain"  when  passion subsides  and his lover crowds  him  "toward the wall"  ("Porch") ;  also for  the  woman  who every morning  salvages twigs from  the night  wind in order  to warm  her windy shack  ("The Gift") ; and  even for the cat that  instinctively enjoys "the  crackling stove"  then  shortly  "stiffens/   and  shies away"  from  the  outside  winter-one of its eyes "a  hideous crust of blood and  pus"  ("The Cat"). Nowlan's  regional sphere  squats  as an  inherently  unbalanced  one  where  winter  "that we share,/ shut  out  and  young  or  shut  away  and  old"  ("New  Brunswick")   bespeaks an existence not only lonely but precarious. His artistic appeal  for harmony  attempts to  re-unite  God  and  devil  ("The Drunken  Poet") ; it  proposes an  inexorable search  for  the  real  world  where  security is not cramped   but  universal.  Mean­ while this search, in the context of isolation, death, and redemption -the funda­  mental  upshots of down-to-earth living-presupposes certain  ironies.
Viewing  a  world  close to  the  earth,  as "Comparison" does, exposes its  gro­
tesqueness and  judges its humanism  with images that  are  violent.

Comparing pigs  with  cattle,  Jack  the  butcher says he likes cows and  understands them.  They
go where  they're sent  and  stand  until  they're struck
by his great  hammer, then  bleed drowsily.

Pigs, on  the  other  hand, disgust  him;  running, darting and  leaping  and  befouling  him
with  blood  that  spurts  out  of their  backs  because they  won't accept the  axe like gentlemen.

49

NOTES ON  ALDEN   NOWLAN



For  Nowlan  there  are two  ironies:   ( r)  an  ironic  violence as displayed  in  this poem and  another  like "In  Our  Time",  where a newspaper  captions  the kicking to death  of a Congolese rebel, "the shoe is on the  other  foot";  as well as ( 2)  an ironic  humour  which undercuts  situations  not violent  themselves but still hostile to our credibility. In the short story "Miracle at  Indian  River",  for instance,  the author  weaves a hilarious tale of how a puritanical  pastor of the Fire-Baptized Tabernacle of the Living God takes it upon  himself to allot marriage  partners  to those who refuse to acquiesce to more gentle  persuasion. Or  another  story, "'Ibe Innermost  One", hitting squarely at  the  recent  penchant  in  North  America  for seeking out  meditating  monks of the  Far  East  for  spiritual  inspiration:  where we see  Martin   Rosenberg,  the  American  poet  who  receives an  audience  with The  Innermost  One, "roughing out in his mind"  the poem he will write of his encounter-until His Holiness asks Martin,  since he is from California,  whether he knows Larry,  Moe, and  Curly-Joe.

"Larry, Moe and Curly-Joe," echoed Martin, in bewilderment.
"They call themselves The Three Stooges," The  Innermost One explained.

Obviously  an  extension of regional boundaries  creates  a sort  of pop  mythology that  still permits  humour  the irony of local colour.  "The  Anatomy  of Angels", for  example,  maintains  that  while  angels  of  love  songs  are  mere  sprites,  the seraphim  "that up-ended/ Jacob  had sturdy  calves, moist hairy  armpits,/ stout loins to serve the god whom she befriended".  And who would suppose that an unattractive woman  who  avoids  the  indecent  sun  like  the  Morlocks,  had  the night  before  danced  in  a  tent  with  "God  Himself,  the  Old  One," kissed the sweaty  Christ -"the  smell of  wine  and  garlic  on  his  breath" -and  spoken "the  language  they speak in heaven!"  as result of possession by the  Holy Ghost ("Daughter of Zion") ?  Saving grace for  his characters, apparently, leads often to the  author's tongue-in-pen  engagement  with  their  eccentricities.  Ironic  over­ tones  thus  provide  an  individual  like  Francis  who  laughs  insanely  and  wears winter  clothes  in  the  hot  July  sun  ("Francis"), with  a  simple  logic-"what keeps out  the cold, she'll keep out  the heat" -evidently  required  of those who would redeem sanity and  reality from climatic  extremes of their local microcosm.
Dedicated   honestly  and  humbly  to  his  art,  equally  at  home  in  more  than one  genre,  Alden  Nowlan  furnishes  an  unhip,  thoroughly   non-academic  world with  splashes of  exquisite insight.  A  Grade   5  dropout, he  has  taught   himself that  the  archetypal  image  ( "oh,  admit  this,  man,  there's  no  point  in  poetry j if you withhold  the truth  once you've come  by it")   is not  necessarily a sacred

NOTES ON  ALDEN NOWLAN



cow, but  a local  breed  that  he might  wryly milk in  order  to construct  a  more truthful  image  of a rural

silence broken only by the almost inaudible humming
of the flies rebuilding their world.

If I  have emphasized  his poetry at  the expense of his short stories it is because themes attendant to both  are  illustrated  more felicitously by the  poems. Yet as a fiction stylist he discloses an equivalent  delicacy and  intuition,  apparent upon a reading,  say, of "Annointed with Oils" or "The  Girl  Who  Went  to  Mexico". Of course his unashamed  simplicity in everything he writes best accounts for the scale  of  his  experience:  a  tide  of  magazine  publications,  seven  books  (three more  in  various  stages),  an  already  wide  anthologizing-his  work  reveals  re­ lentless growth,  while his regional  qualities  continue  to  endure.  And  these last do serve to remind  a country  often reluctant  to acknowledge  them,  of the  per­ spective of its heritage  and  the roots of its contemporaneity.


LE MONDE  CLOS
Dube et Anouilh


Edwin Hamblet




LA CRITIQUE CANADffiNNE pade  souvent  du mppmchement du  dramaturge Marcel  DubC avec Arthur   Miller,  William  lnge,  et  Tennessee
Williams.  Elle a  raison  d'ailleurs  puisque  les personnages  et  les themes  de  ces ecrivains  refletent  fidelement  Ia vie tragique  de  l'homme   moyen  en  Amerique du Nord. Pourtant, DubC manifeste aussi dans son oeuvre !'influence  de Jean Anouilh.  Une  analyse plus profonde  du  theatre  dubeen  revele Ia situation  par­
ticuliere et le desarroi du  Canadien-fran<;ais dans  sa difficulte a s'identifier  avec
les elements  discordants  de  son  contexte  nord-americain. II  decouvre  soudain que paradoxalement il n'est ni Europeen  ni Americain  de mentalite,  mais plutot un  melange  curieux  des deux.  Car  Marcel  Dube,  lui  aussi, rappelle  fortement Jean  Anouilh.  C'est  precisement  cette  qualite  qui  rend  DubC interessant  dans le cadre des etudes des litteratures  europeennes et nord-americaines.
Dube se passionna pour le drame  d'Anouilh  apres avoir vu une mise en scene
d'Antigone  en   1949.  Ce  premier  contact   avec  le  theatre   l'encouragea   a  lire
I'Antigone de Sophocle et l'oeuvre complete d'Anouilh. II convient alors de noter les paralleles frappants  qui existent entre Dube et le celebre dramaturge fran<;ais.
Florence  de DubC, par  exemple, ressemble etroitement aux  personnages  et  a
!'atmosphere qui  regne dans  La  Sauvage   d'Anouilh. Therese,  heroine  de  cette derniere  piece, est issue d'une  famille ouvriere  composee de  musiciens mediocres qui  ne s'aiment  guere.  Elle tombe  amoureuse  de  Florent,  riche  pianiste  repute. Celui-ci  veut  epouser  Therese  en  lui  offrant   l'occasion  d'echapper  au  milieu sordide de son enfance et de trouver l'amour,  Ia securite,  et le bonheur  qu'il  lui
paraissait  inaccessibles. II ne semble pas avoir  d'abord d'obstacles  a son amour
jusqu'au  moment  au elle commence  a sentir  une  barriere   psychologique entre
Florent  et  elle-meme  ce  qui  ecarte  Ia  question  de  mariage.  Florent  est  riche, couronne  de succes, independant, et Therese  elle, souffre  du fait qu'elle  ne peut
rien apporter  a cette existence si parfaite  apparemment. Les enormes differences

LE  MONDE CLOS



sociales qui  les separent  sont  a l'origine  de Ia frustration  et  de Ia faiblessse qui enfin obligent  Ia  jeune femme  a s'enfuir.  La situation  est encore  aggravee  par
les deux  families  respectives. Florent  ne  peut  comprendre   le  raisonnement   de Therese,  et par  consequent, i1 ne reussit pas a voir en elle un  individu  tragique et predestine incapable  d'oublier  son passe dans sa quete du bonheur.
Florence,  premier  personnage  dans Ia piece de Dube, naquit  dans  une famille
ouvriere   comme  Therese.   Florence,  d'ailleurs,  est  un  personnage   typique  de Dube  car  elle s'efforce  d'echapper a son  mode  d'existence.  Cependant, elle se trouve genee par ses parents  qui lui rappellent  constamment  le fait  que sa  per­ sonalite est solidement  accrochee  a son passe. Elle est dechiree  entre  des interets et  des  normes  sociales contradictoires:  son  foyer  etouffant  ou  predomine  une atmosphere   janseniste  s'oppose  a  Ia  promesse du  bonheur  que  son  paste  de secretaire  et les nouveaux  contacts  a l'exterieur  lui offrent.
Florence,  comme Therese,  ne differe de Ia plupart  des femmes de son milieu
que  par  le fait  d'etre  consciente de Ia paralysie qui  menace  son existence. Elle desire ardemment vivre a l'ecart  de ce milieu opprimant et elle s'isole de plus en
plus de sa famille  a  cause du  nouveau  code de moralite  qu'elle  trouve  dans  le
monde  exterieur.  La tension s'accroit  en elle jusqu'au  moment  ou elle n'est  plus capable  de controler  ses emotions  et doit  exprimer  ouvertement  sa  repugnance devant  l'inertie  de ses parents.  Elle les juge impartialement, quai  qu'elle  ait  peur de paraitre  ridicule lorsque Ia comprehension et Ia sympathie  inattendues de son pere  Ia  desarme   completement.   Florence  avait  pense  auparavant  pouvoir  se separer  de  son  passe en  quittant sa  famille  et  en  rampant ses fianr;ailles avec Maurice,  son ami ennuyeux.  Mais son passe et ses traditions  familiales sont  en­ racines dans son caractere  psychologique.
La nouvelle liberte que lui offrent son emploi et son patron  Mathieu  n'est  pas
satisfaisante.  Florence  apprend   rapidement   que  son  prix  est  l'isolement  et  Ia solitude. Elle considere Ia possibilite d'abandonner le code moral de sa famille en devenant  Ia maitresse de Mathieu  parce qu'elle pense que ce code perpetue  l'etat de  torpeur  et de satisfaction  d'elle-meme  qu'elle  deplore  tant.  Mathieu  lui  pro­ pose un moyen d'evasion.  Mais cette echappatoire  ne mene qu'a  Ia porte  d'une  chambre  a  coucher  ce qui  n'equivaut qu'a  une fuite  temporaire.  Elle  ne  peut s'evader  indemne; sa conscience Ia rend  pleine de remords et craintive des con­ sequences  de son  aventure  decevante  avec  Mathieu.  L'independance  effraie  Ia jeune secretaire et lorsqu'elle  trouve Ia force de se vevolter, elle n'a  ni le courage
ni l'amoralite  pour  vealiser son but.  Incapable  de composer  avec sa  conscience, elle tranche  le dilemme  en s'enfuyant  a New-York.


53

LE MONDE CLOS



Une  fatalire  tragique  toute  puissante  pese sur  Florence  comme  sur  Therese dans  La  Sauvage  car  ces deux  personnages  habitent  un  monde  clos sans issue. La  situation  ,economique des deux  femmes  est  un  remplacement   moderne  de l'idee classique du destin:  le pouvoir ecrasant  d'une societe impersonnelle de bureaucrates, au lieu d'un  fa onnement
Dans la vision du monde de Dube et d'Anouilh,  l'individu  est aux prises avec ce desarroi et n'y peut  rien. Dans l'univers que Dube  a cree pour  Florence, le libre arbitre  et la liberte  n'existent  point.  Le suffocant  milieu canadien-fran ais fatalite  opprimante creent la sombre atmosphere  pessimiste qui  domine  toute  la piece, representant  une  vision de la  vie quasiment   janseniste. Comme  les  habi­ tants  d'un  monde  janseniste, Florence est marquee  d'une  souillure re ue
passe. Bien qu'elle lutte avec acharnement pour s'en liberer, ses efforts sont vains. Therese  ressemble a Florence sous cet aspect car elle tente aussi sans succes de se
transformer  afin d'atteindre un etat  de purere  dont  elle con oit possibilire.




LEs PERSONNAGES   d'Anouilh   font  typiquement   un  effort pour se nettoyer de la fletrissure re ue
lure  ressemblant  au  peche originel  est un  des themes  dominants   dans  l'oeuvre
d'Anouilh. La critique  traditionnelle  y voit un  jansenisme sans le Christ.  L'indi­ vidu implique  ne peut se laver de cette souillure  car il est un esclave  contamine qui a ete marque  par chaque mot et par chaque  geste et doit lutter  avec futilite pour  se liberer  de  cette emprise.  La  philosophic  janseniste  predominante dans l'enfance  de Marcel Dube au Canada fran ais
tive  melancolique   de  la  vie.  Le  jansenisme  presente  une  vision  pessimiste et fataliste semblable  a celle manifestee dans  le theatre  de Dube  et d'Anouilh. En­
nuyes  et  degoutes  de leur  milieu,  leurs  personnages  cherchent   un  bonheur  in­ accessible. lls  essaient de s'inventer  de  nouvelles identites.  Dans  leur  quete  de purification, l'evasion offre un moyen d'effacer  cette souillure et pendant quelque temps, ils se permettent  l'illusion d'avoir  atteint  un etat  de felicite qui  est reelle­ ment  hors de leur  portee. Au debut,  Florence  et  Therese  se laissent entrainer; elles apprennent par la suite que leur  passe les a  marquees;  de fa on
11 n'existe pas de bapteme  non plus pour enlever cette tache.
Les themes de  Dube  et d'Anouilh  se recoupent,  en  particulier  le conflit  psy­
chologique  qui se produit  dans  la societe capitaliste  occidentale.  Un  proletariat


54

LE  MONDE CLOS


miserable  enlise dans  sa  crasse  physique  n'arrive  pas  a communiquer  avec  Ia haute  bourgeoisie enlisee dans sa crasse morale. L'amour, dans ce sens, est ou impossible ou coupable  parce  que Ia societe et l'education  representent  des  bar­ rieres  insurmontables  entre   Therese  et  Florent,  et  Florence  et   Mathieu,  par exemple. Therese  et Florence  finissent toutes deux par  refuser Ia  vie telle qu'elle
est. Dans Ia rigidite de leurs convictions, elles manifestent l'impossibilite a s'adapter
aux  normes  du  monde  reel;  elles refusent  le  compromis  de  l'acceptation   des regles etablies comme  une voie satisfaisante. Therese est engloutie  dans sa  pauv­ rete tandis que  Florence est prisonniere de sa conscience. Ainsi, l'evasion  reste Ia seule solution viable a leurs problemes profonds.
Depuis Tarzan, jeune heros de Zone  ( 1953)  jusqu'a Genevieve, heroine d'Au retour des oies blanches  ( 1g66), les personnages de Dube, tout comme Becket et Jeanne   d'Arc   dans  l'oeuvre   d'Anouilh,   restent  intransigeants.  II  s'agit  d'une
question d'honneur personnel qui les empeche de se conformer  a Ia volonte d'une
personne ou  d'une  societe qui  leur est odieuse. La tare  innee  de chacun  de ces heros est de nature  psychologique ou sociale et menera  par la suite  a leur ruine. Les heros  de  Dube  et  d'Anouilh  sont  appeles  a !'action   ce qui  est admirable.
Mais ils echouent  inevitablement   dans  leur  lutte  achamee contre  le destin  car ils sont emmures dans un monde clos.



























55



MAGIC,  NOT  MAGICIANS


((Beautiful Losers" and ((Story of 0"



Stephen Scobie





OuR CULTURE;, one which  se" a  eat
viduality, the preservation of the unique personality. This idea is one of the bases of democracy,  of capitalism,  and  of the  Protestant religious ethic,  all of which systems are of course inter-related.  The  precepts  of the "new  morality"  proceed from  the  assumption  that  no general,  inflexible  rules can  be laid  down  which cover all possible situations;  instead,  each  case  has  to be evaluated  on its  indi­ vidual  merits.  Not  only morality,  but  our  whole  romantic   conception  of   love and sex, derived from sources as diverse as Provenc;al poetry and  lipstick  adver­ tising, is centred  on the sanctity of the individual  personality  and  its  uniqueness. This value finds its fullest expression in literature, which we look to for the artist's personal  vision of the world. At least since the  Romantics,  we  have  valued  not only the writer's own "originality"  (a  process aided  by  copyright laws),  but also the differentiating  individuality of fictional heroes and  anti-heroes.
It is against  the background  of these generalizations  that  I wish to make a few
remarks  about  two novels, which have at  least  this in  common: that  both  des­ cribe, and  perhaps  endorse, a principle directly  counter  to those outlined  above, namely,  the  deliberate  attempt  to destroy  one's  own  individuality.  Part  of  the profoundly  disturbing  impact of both books is due to the fact that  they  do strike at such basic preconceptions  of our cultural  orientation; and  the books  are even more  disturbing  in  that  they treat  the  theme  directly  in connection  with  what is still the uneasiest of our social taboos, sex.
The  two books are Leonard  Cohen's  Beautiful Losers, and  Story of  0, pub­
lished  (Paris,  1954)  by an unknown  author,  whose pseudonym  "Pauline Reage" has  never  been  penetrated.  Both  novels (but  especially Cohen's)   are  rich  and complex  works, and  this article does in one sense distort  them  by isolating one thread  from their varied tapestries:  that  of the central  figure's steady progression

s6

MAGIC, NOT MAGICIANS



towards loss of self, an apocalypse of utter impersonality,  and  of the function  of the secondary  characters  in teaching and  preparing  the way for them.
A brief summary  of the action of Story  of 0 may be necessary at  this point.
The  novel tells of a young woman, 0, who voluntarily  becomes the sexual slave of her  lover,  Rene,  and  of the  man,  Sir Stephen,  to  whom  he gives her.  The form  is that  of a  pornographic novel, complete  with isolated  chateaus,  dissolute aristocrats, and a large variety of whips, riding-crops, branding-irons, etc. 0 progressively loses all  trace  of any identity  save that  of  a sexual  object;  she  is grotesquely  marked  with  the  insignia  of  Sir  Stephen's  ownership,  and  in  the climactic scene she is publicly displayed wearing an owl mask, so little  recogniz­ able  as a human   being  "that   no-one  thought  of questioning  her,  which  would have  been the most natural  thing  to do, as though she were a real  owl, deaf  to human  language,  and  dumb." In  a  suppressed  final  chapter,  she  requests  her own death.
It is not the purpose of this article to suggest that Story  of 0 exerted a discern­ ible influence  on  Cohen  (though  it would  not  be surprising  if he had  read  it), but  rather  to  point  out  certain  thematic  patterns  which  the  two  books  have  in common.  In  Canadian Literature 34, Desmond  Pacey writes of  Beautiful Losers that  its  main  theme  is  "voluntary   loss of self for  some  higher  cause",   while Sandra  Djwa  comments  (somewhat  disparagingly)   that  "I", in  his final  meta­  morphosis, "escapes from ... the human  predicament."  Both of these comments  seem slightly to  miss the  point.  Pacey's is true  of the  secondary  characters, but for "I" himself there is no "higher" cause for which  the self is lost:  the cause  is the loss of self, which  may  be viewed as an  answer  to,  rather  than  an  escape from,  the human  predicament.
The inversion of values is apparent in the titles of both books:  Cohen's  heroes, however beautiful,  are still losers, and  0 stands  for negation,  the denial  of  per­ sonality, the unimpeded  movement towards death. This involves the characters in a  degree  of  genuine  misery. 0, for  instance,  is not  a  physical  masochist:   she enjoys the  idea  of submitting  herself to  the  men  and  becoming  nothing  more than  their  object,  but  she never enjoys the actual  whippings  and  other  physical tortures  which she undergoes. One of the characteristics  of the individual  in any situation,  sexual or otherwise, is the  retention  of power,  power over  the  disposi­ tion of one's own  body, power over  other  people's feelings, etc. O's  major  tech­ nique in what  Susan  Sontag  calls  her "project  for completely  transcending per­ sonality" 1 is to surrender completely all vestiges of this power.
Power is also one  of the  major  themes of Beautiful Losers. As Cohen  writes


57

MAGIC,  NOT  MAGICIANS



in  the commentary  on Gavin  Gate  and  the  Goddesses, "Oh   God!  All states of love give power!"  F. wields not only  personal  power  over  "I" and  Edith,  but also economic  and  political power;  conversely,  the  history  of  Edith's  tribe,  the A---s,  "is  characterized   by  incessant  defeat."  Catherine  Tekakwitha  has  the power of a saint,  through  her intercession with  God,  through  the  miracles  per­ formed in her name, and through  the influence her example exerts over the faith­ ful  (including  "I".) The greatest power of all is Magic, celebrated in the famous "God  is alive. Magic is afoot" section. It is towards  this power that  "I" is being led;  F. writes to him, "Here  is a plea based on my whole experience:  do  not be a magician,  be magic."
The  equivalent  force in  Story  of  0 is sex, and  0 "progresses simultaneously toward  her  own  extinction  as  a  human  being  and  her  fulfilment  as  a  sexual being." Sex is impersonal;  0 rejoices that Sir Stephen's satisfaction  of his desires bears no relation whatever to her as a person, and F. talks of the "nourishing anonymity  of the climax."  The  image of O's  dehumanization in  the  owl mask has, as its rough  equivalent  in  Cohen's  novel, the  image,  simultaneously  comic and sublime, of the Danish Vibrator.
The  initials D.V.  (deo volente)  point up, as Pacey notes, the fusion of religion and  sexuality  which is another  theme of Beautiful  Losers. F. and  Edith  indeed suffer at the will of God, not at their own will, but this God is "ordinary eternal machinery", made  in  Denmark.  To  its  will, their  wills become  utterly  trans­ parent,  as the  saint's  is to  God's,  or  O's  to  Sir  Stephen's. All  distinctions  of personality are lost:  Catherine,  Edith,  Mary,  Isis, all become one; and  the  pro­ tagonist of the significantly third-person  Epilogue is an indistinguishable amalgam of "I" and  F. (IF, "a  remote human  possibility.")
The  idea of pain  and  physical torture  is an  integral  part  of this complex:  F.
and  Edith  excite themselves by reading  of the  martyrdom of Brebeuf and  Lale­ mant   before  submitting   to  the  whip  of  a  seedy,  popular-mythology   Hitler;  Catherine tortures  herself with whips and  thorns  to approach closer to  God, and her  programme  of self-extinction is echoed by "I". O's  very similar  programme  also centres  upon  pain;  pain  is, after  all,  one  of  the  most  apparent signs  of power, and the whippings which 0 undergoes are evidence of  mental dominance  rather  than  physical pleasure. 0, as has been said,  takes no  masochistic pleasure in her pain;  and  the book, which is told completely from  her  point of view, lays no stress at all upon the men's sadistic pleasure. Indeed,  as Story of 0 progresses, the male figures come to seem important  only as instruments for O's  destruction of herself.

MAGIC, NOT  MAGICIANS



It would perhaps  be too fanciful  to suggest that Sir Stephen  comes to envy 0 the fulfilment  she is able  to  achieve through  his agency;  but  this feeling is  de­ finitely present in the case of Edith  and  F., and is most strongly marked  in  their dialogue  before  the  Argentinian  orgy. It  is here that  F. says, in  bitterness  and resignation,  "I was  the  Moses of  our  little  exodus. I would  never  cross.  My mountain   might  be  very  high  but  it  rises from  the  desert."  F.  and  Edith  are religious acolytes, preparing  elaborate  rituals and  initiations  for  another's  fulfil­ ment, sacrificing themselves to "I" as Catherine  Tekakwitha  sacrifices herself to her God.
Again  we have  arrived  back  at  the  religious metaphor.   It  is inescapable  in Beautiful Losers, and  it is also implicit in much  of the language  of Story of  0. In  a  preface  to  "Pauline Reage's"  book,  the  novelist Andre  Pieyre  de  Man­ diargues  (whose Girl Beneath The  Lion is a beautiful and  lyrical  treatment of a very similar  theme)   describes  it  as  a  mystic book  rather   than  an  erotic  one. Susan  Sontag,  in  her    excellent  essay "The   Pornographic  Imagination", com­ ments that  "Despite  the virtual  incomprehensibility  to  most  educated  people to­ day  of the  substantive  experience  behind  religious  vocabulary,  there  is a  con­ tinuing  piety toward  the  grandeur of emotions  that  went  into  that  vocabulary. The  religious imagination  survives for most  people today as not  just the primary but  virtually  the  only  credible  instance  of  an  imagination   working  in  a  total way." 2   This  kind of "total" experience is analogous to what  Cohen  means when he defines a saint  as "someone  who  has  achieved a  remote  human   possibility", and  both  religion  and  sexuality  may  be  viewed in  these  books  as  metaphoric modes of achieving such a possibility.
What  then  is the total  experience  with which these novels deal?  For  Story of
0, the  answer is simply  Death.  Death  is the goal towards  which  0 inexorably advances.  It  is an  obsessive book, in such details as its continued  concentration on O's  clothing,  and  in its unity of theme and  directness of movement  (though this has been overemphasized  by the omission from consideration of the secondary theme  of Jacqueline.) The  goal is summed  up in O's  name:   negation,  eternity, or  a  bodily  orifice. The   novel  is  a  dark  realization  of  the  Jacobean   pun  on "death". 0 denies  all  the  values of  personality which  our  society  holds  to  be fundamental, and  she finds her  fulfilment  in  that  denial.  The  ultimate  value is not the self, but  the willed loss of the self.
In  Beautiful Losers, the issue is not quite so clearcut.  Loss of self is again  the
main  process, but  the secondary  characters   (F.,  Edith,  Catherine Tekakwitha)
clearly do so for a definite further  purpose. In Catherine's  case, this further  pur-


59

MAGIC, NOT MAGICIANS



pose is union  with  God;  there  are  also suggestions in  the  final  paragraph of a Christlike  compassion being extended  to "you,  darling  and  friend,  who  miss me forever in your trip  to the end"  (though  who speaks this final paragraph -the Jesuits,  Catherine,   "I" metamorphosed,   or  Cohen  himself-is  very  far  from clear.)   But for  F. and  Edith,  the further  purpose  is the fulfilment  of  "I", and that  fulfilment can only be described as the dispersal of self, as the old man loses all  human  identity  and  merges  with  the  magical  form  of  reality,  cinema.  His eyes are blinking in synchronization with the "ordinary eternal  machinery" of the movie projector,  and what  he sees is the blackness between  the frames,  nothing. He has indeed  become what  F. never was:  not  a magician,  but  magic itself.
Our  society has assumed that  any answer  to "the  human  predicament" must start  with  the individual's  acceptance  of the responsibility of his own individual­ ity. The  protagonists of these two novels respond  by annihilating  that  responsi­ bility. The  artist's  response is to present these "remote  human  possibilities", and to invite  the reader  to re-examine some of his basic  presuppositions,  to question the unquestionable. The  reader's  response is, as  always, his own  affair.

FOOTNOTES
1 Susan Sontag, "The  Pornographic Imagination,"  in Styles  of Radical   Will   (New
York, rg6g), p. 58.
2    Sontag, p. 6g.

























6o





NORMAN  LEVINE

An Interview
by John D. Cox




NORMAN LEVINE lives with  his  wife and  th<ee teen-aged
daughters  in a comfortable  house on a quiet  residential street in St. Ives,  Corn­
wall,  where  he  leads,  like  many  writers,  a  rather  sedentary  life.  He  is seldom seen on the  narrow  cobbled streets he wrote  about  in "A  Sabbath  Walk"  or  in the  pubs he frequented  as an optimistic young expatriate  writer  fresh from  Mc­ Gill University  in  1949.  Long  ago he withdrew  from  the frenetic  social  life he wrote  about  in  "The  Playground," which  flourished  among  young  artists  and writers in St.  Ives in  the  idealistic post-war  years. He  has  lived in St.  Ives for most  of twenty  years, yet what  attachment he  has for  the  place  seems largely a metaphysical  one. Before the interview, he sat near  the fire in the  parlour  and talked about  the presence of the sea, the waves, which have been lapping  against the sand long before one was here, and will continue long afterward. The  theme plays a role in his new novel.
The  interview  took place in  the room in which he writes, the large garret  of
the  house whose window-paned  gables offer a low-level view of the  village and St.  Ives  Bay. The  white-walled  room  is so sparsely furnished  that  it  gives an austere appearance, an impression only slightly diminished by the presence of organized  clutter.  The  room contains one straight-backed  chair,  a large wooden table on which he writes, and two wooden cabinets. Across the top of one cabinet is a row of books. The  surface  of the other  is covered with  high,  neat  stacks of periodicals containing  his short stories, articles and reviews, an impressive record of his work which  he no longer  tries to keep up. On  the light  brown  linoleum floor across the end  of the room  near  his table are three  rows of neatly stacked manuscripts-short stories and  early drafts  of his new  novel, From  A  Seaside Town.  On  the wall above  the table are stuck picture  postcards,  mostly of  Corn­ wall,  but  one  of  flowers,  "Gentians-I like  the  blue."  A  small   name-plate

61

NORMAN LEVINE



reads:  "Norman Levine, Resident Writer".  It is a memento  of his year at  Uni­ versity of New Brunswick. A match stick holds up a copy of a poem. There  are two small Soutine  prints and  a large drawing  by the late  Peter  Lanyon of a girl undressing-"his last birthday  present to  me."  It is a  room  which  to a visitor seems neither  warm  or "homey",  but  it is a clean,  well-lighted  workroom  of a man  who allows himself few distractions. "I don't  do  anything  here but  write."

* 	* 	*
In  Canada Made  Me  you write:  ui  like  the  lower  towns, the  place across the  tracks,  the   poorer  streets  not   far  from  the  river.  They represent   failure, and   for me   failure here  has a strong  appeal." Why  ar.e you  so interested   in failure?

I don't  think  I am interested in failure in the way you mean.  But in that  part about  Lower  Town  Ottawa, I  was thinking  of  my father's  generation.  People who came over from Europe  to Canada  before or after  the first world war  and just couldn't  make much contact  with Canadian society. They  were sacrificed
a kind of stepping-stone  for the next generation,  my generation.  But they had  a
lot of qualities I admired.

Why do you think  so many  post-war Canadian writers  happen  to be  jewish? And  come  from this generation  you've  mentioned?

It's  hard  to generalize. There  are a lot of possible reasons. I think,  with  me, it was seeing the change from my parents  to myself. Usually  this sort  of change takes several generations  to happen.  But this was happening as part  of my grow­ ing up. Then  there  was the business of coming from -well,  a tradition,  having an  identity-and being forced  to come  to  terms  with  a  society that  was still looking for some identity. I should think there  were enough  tensions  and stresses there to start  anyone off ...

Was  your  childhood   an  unhappy one?

I don't  think  so. I don't  remember  it as an  unhappy one. There  were times when it was a bit boring.

At   18  you   joined  the   RCAF  and   eventually  ended   up   on  a  Canadian Squadron in  England   on  Lancasters.  What effect  did  the  war  have  on  your writing?

NORMAN LEVINE



I did use some of it in the very early things. But I wasn't  equipped  then,  as a writer, to handle it. Or  perhaps, more accurately, my experience of the war itself was superficial.  Apart  from  the  flying. I  was much  more  affected  by the life I found  in England  away from  the air force stations. The  way people lived  their lives during  the  war.  I'm  sure  this was one  of the  reasons for  my  wanting  to go  back.

But  before  you went  back  to  England  in  1949,  you went  to  McGill. Ap­ parently you did very well:  your BA  with  first class honours in  English,  your MA in one  year, several prizes, a  fellowship  for postgraduate  work. There  is no evidence  from your work then of the kind of writer you have  become.  Did something  traumatic  happen  at university?

No, not at university. In fact, once I decided to do English, I found  university much  too  easy for  my  own  good.  And  then  the  literary  standard  for  under­ graduate writing  was not  very high. Of  course I  didn't  know it  at  the  time.  I was much  over-praised  for  some youthful  romantic  writing  I  did  in  verse and prose. This  helped  to give confidence. But  when  I  came  to  England  in I 949, I was riding  this crest. I  had some poems published, I had  finished a  novel and won a prize with it at McGill, I had a fellowship. And coming to England,  to the tail-end  of  that  post-war  romantic-idealistic  time,  standards  weren't   very  high either.  Enthusiasm  was. The  Angled  Road  received some  very  good  reviews in England.  And  when  it  came  out  in  Canada  the  Canadian  reviewers, for  the most part,  followed the English reviewers. But by then  I  already  knew the  book wasn't  any good. And here I was a writer. Writing things that  weren't  anywhere as good as I wanted  them to be.

What  did  you do?

I didn't  have another  book out for six years. And during  that  time I did a lot of  reading  and  writing -and  discarding  what  I had  written.  Some  writers, you  know,  come  fully  equipped   with  their  first  book. And  often,  with  them, their  first book  remains  the  best.  But  there  are  others  who  take  several  books just to get on the rails. And that  happened  to me.

Where  were you when The  Angled Road  was published?

We were living in Mousehole.  In  a  nice house on  the side of a  hill, with  a stone-walled garden,  and  copper  beech, palms, and bamboos in the garden.  The house had been, at one time, a school. And I was trying to write in a large room

6g

NORMAN LEVINE



built on to the house-I think it was where  they used to put  on  plays -there was a raised platform  at one end.

What  did  you write then?

Short stories.

Who   published them?

Northern Review published one, and some English literary magazines, and a Norwegian one published in English from London called The  Norseman. They published four or five of my stories. But there  was hardly  any money in it. The best payer was The  Norseman. I used to get five or six pounds for a story. I think they went as high as seven pounds for a long one. Things  were getting  difficult.
I  remember  going  to  Penzance  library  and  looking  at  the  glossy magazines - seeing which  one  carried  stories by good  writers.  I  found  Harpers  Bazaar did. And  I  remember  thinking if they paid  25 guineas,  what  we would  do with  it? And  at  that  time  just being  in  Harper's  Bazaar  would  have  been  a  great  en­ couragement. So I sent them  a story. And  of course it came  back.  Some seven or eight  years later  when  I  had  a couple  more  books out  and  Harpers  Bazaar had  published three or four stories of mine-I sent  them  this early story  again. Back came an  acceptance  and  they said  they were paying  me their  highest  rate for it.

Did you tell them?

Of course.

One of your stories in One Way Ticket is set in a mine in Northern  Ontario. The   place must  have  made  quite  an  impression  on  you.  It  is  also in  The Angled  Road  and  in  Canada   Made  Me.  When did  you  go to  work  in  the mine, and why?

It was during  the  summer  holidays-the summer  of I 947 -while  I  was going to McGill. I went to work at Helen  Mine,  Wawa.  It  was part  of Algoma Ore. The  place was called Jamestown.  I was shown Sir James  Dunn's  bungalow about  50 yards from  where  we ate.  He  was said  to  come  and  live there  from time  to  time.  I  went  to the  mine  quite  deliberately.  My  parents  expected  that I would  take some office job in Ottawa  with some government  department for the summer.  And I didn't  want  that.  I had  been doing  just that  before I  joined the air force. I felt a war had  been fought  and  that  was behind  me. Also going

NORMAN LEVINE



to the  mine,  at  the  time,  was a bit of bravado.  A new experience.  And  I  was hungry  for experience.

Another  place that seems to have left its mark is the French Canadian village of Ile  Aux  Noix,  by the  Richelieu  River. It is the  setting  for your story, The Cocks Are Crowing, and appears in The Angled Road and Canada Made  Me.

It  was also responsible for several early poems and  other stories. I  went there in  the  summer  of  1948  to  tutor  a  French  Canadian  and  three  of  his school friends -Guatemalans -in  English. They  were hoping  to enter  Loyola in  the Fall. The  woman  who owned  the house and  where we all stayed  was a widow, a  Huguenot. She  was quite  a lady. She taught  the late  Tyrone  Power  how  to drive a car.  And  as a Huguenot she didn't  go along with the sort of village life that  was around  her. I was brought  up in a French  Canadian section of Ottawa
-but this was the first time I lived in an entirely French  Canadian  community
-mostly farming.  It  was also the first time I lived by a river. I spent  a lot of the  time  outside:  sailing,  fishing, canoeing.  It  was a  very nice  time.  And  I'm still drawing  on it.

Several reviewers of  your stories have  pointed out that  though  some are set in England and some in Canada- wherever you go you seem to  find the same sort of thing.  Is this  true?

Perhaps  it is. I don't  do it consciously.

Has this so-called permissive society of  the last  few years had  any effect  on your writing?

Yes, I think it has. I know I felt much freer writing  the new novel-dealing with marriage -than  I would  have done earlier.

Is it  correct to assume  from the  title of your new  novel, From  A Seaside
Town,  that it is not  set in Canada?

Like most of my books half of it is set in Canada  and  half  in  England.  The parts in Canada are Ottawa, Montreal,  and Quebec City. But it's connected  with Canada  in other  ways than  the setting.

You  mentioned  earlier that  your books have their largest sale in Germany. Why do  you think  this is?

I don't  really know. Perhaps  more people in Germany  buy books. But my new

NORMAN LEVINE



translator  there  is Heinrich  Boll. And  as you probably  know  he is one of Ger­
many's  leading  writers.

One  question about your method. How important  is rewriting to your work? Has its  function, and extent, changed over the  years?

It's  very important. A first draft  for me is just what  it is, a first draft.  I write very quickly. Then  I go back and revise, and  revise and  revise. In  the early work revision usually meant cutting  things out.  Now, I find it means adding  things in.

What  changes can you see from your earlier work?

There's more humour,  I think. More fun in my recent things.

Have  you  published everything  you have  written?  Or  do  you have  stories or novels in  manuscript  form?

I have published everything I've thought  finished. Except for one story. Eleven years ago -it was a nice night in summer-I had  half a bottle of brandy  and went  upstairs  to see what  I  could write on  that.  I had  never done  this before, nor  have  I since. By morning  the  bottle  was empty  and  I  had  written  a short story of some g,ooo words. I went to bed thinking  it was pretty good. But some­ time next day I read it again ... I have never tried to publish it. It's  a children's kind of story.

Could  you  say which  writers have  influenced   your  work,  and  whom   you enjoy  reading  today?

Well, early on-an awful lot of writers influenced  me. I can't  pick out  any­ one in  particular. But if you look around  this room  you can  see on  the  desk a book by Orwell,  another  by Hemingway,  Babel, but  mostly Chekhov  and  Gra­  ham  Greene.  And  Joyce-I like the Joyce  of The  Dead, not  Ulysses. On  the wall I've got a poem by Charles Causley, a friend of mine, that  I like very much. It's  called "Walking." And it has this marvellous last line:  Birds, big as history, lumber  by.  I  have  my favourite  poems, stories,  a  few  novels. And  I keep  re­ reading  these. I like Chekhov and  Graham   Greene  because reading  them  I am reminded  of  things  in  my own  life. With  Greene  there's  something  else. The  vitality of his prose. I find that  stimulating.

You've been in England now  for 20 years. Are  you still a Canadian  citizen?

Yes, and  I  don't  see myself changing.  A  person  I  know,  a  Canadian from

66

NORMAN LEVINE



Montreal,  over  here for  as long as I have been and  married,  like myself, to  an English girl, has decided  to take British citizenship. He's  a businessman. And  I can  understand how  he feels. But it's not  the  way I feel. And  I think  part  of the  reason why  I feel the way I do is because of being a writer. The  Canadian upbringing  is important to me. Just as being a Canadian living in England  gives life a certain  tension.


review articles


VOICES IN THE DARK

D. G. Jones


PHYLLIS   GOTTLIEB, Ordinary, Moving. Oxford.  $4.00. MIRIAM   WADDINGTON,   Say Yes.  Oxford.   $4.00. CLIFTON WHITEN,   Putting   the  Birthdate   into   Perspective. Clarke,  Irwin,  $3.95. FRANCis  SPARSHOTT,  A  Cardboard  Garage. Clarke,  Irwin,
$3.95.  R. G.   EVERSON,  The   Dark  Is  Not  So  Dark.  Delta.   $2.00  paper,   $5.00
cloth.  RALPH GUSTAFSON,  Ixion's  Wheel. McClelland & Stewart, $4.95.


NEVER  BEFORE  HAS  language been strained through so many  media,  at such  volumes,  in  the  service  of so many and  such  insistent  demands. At the  same time,  the  radical   changes  in  our  human world    appear  to   have    outpaced  our capacity to make  them  articulate-as if some fantastic cultural mutation had  left the   old   linguistic   exoskeleton   in   frag­ ments.  For  the  modern writer,  the  price of   relevance  has   often   been   distortion and   fragmentation,   language   fused   in apocalyptic vision  or  dispersed  in  encyc­ lopaedic  perceptions. From  Rimbaud  to Sylvia  Plath,  Pound to the  Black  Moun­ tain   poets,   poetry   has  run  the   risk  of impenetrable delirium or  pedestrian dull­  ness. Particularly for  poets  on  the  lower slopes  of  Olympus,  the  problem  of  how to  make  it  new  without  loss of  control  has  become  acute.  No  sure  convention remains.  And   they   may  well  ask  with John  Newlove  whether it is fit to whisper or  to  shout.
This   problem    of  language  is  clearly raised  by  the  six  new  books  of  verse  to be reviewed  here.  No  two are  alike  and, for  good  or ill, none  reflects any  domin­ ant  or sure  convention. If there is some-

68
 thing they  share, implicitly  at  least,  it  is a sense of loss:  a loss of language and through that  of a world.  It is the explicit concern  of  at   least   three   of  the   poets. As  Miriam  Waddington says  in  "Look­ ing  for  Strawberries in June" :

I have  to tell  you about   the  words  I used  to know    such
words    so  sheer    thin
transparent   so light and  quick    I had  such
words  for  wind  for whatever grew
I knew  a  certain  leaf-language from somewhere  but  now

it  is all  used  up
I  have  come  to  the
end  of  some  line  or
other   like  walking
on  railroad ties  in the  country  looking
for  strawberries in June and suddenly the ties end in the middle   of  no-place

Francis Sparshott begins on the same note.   In  his  hot   teens,  he  tells   us,  he found a wealth of  phrases  he could  turn with  ease.  But  now,  like  the  old  paper­ maker  whose  ability  to mat  the  fibres  of the   pulp    in   a  few   sure   twists   of   a

REVIEW ARTICLES



screened   frame  has   deserted    him,   the poet  too  has  lost  his knack.

What  locks  the  fabric   in  a  turn  of  phrase I  never  knew    the  numbers  used  to come thrown  like  medusae   on  a  public  beach. One   day   the   cliched   oracles   went   dumb.

And  he "mourns rhetoric and  her  wrung neck."
A Cardboard Garage is an eJCercise in rhetoric,  ironic,   sometimes   academic, bleakly amusing or plainly savage.  An autobiographical "summing-up," with references   to  Harley-Davidsons, hunting in  the  North woods,  driving through Illinois,   is  prefaced  with   the   title  of  a poem  in  Arabic:  "The  Ma'   Allaqua  of Imr    Al-Quais."   Such    a   juxtaposition might   please  a  man  like  Borges.  It  indi­ cates,   I   gather,  that    the   most   diverse worlds  reveal  the  same  basic  human ex­ perience.   The  basic  experience  of  most of these poems, however, is of desolation, the   loss  of   meaning. Things  are   what they  are and  they  do  not  add  up  to any­ thing.   Rising   from   memory   there   is  a sparse  landscape eroding in  the  wind,  of which  the speaker says:

Now  let  me  see if I can  remember  my lessons
Reading  from   left   to   right     gate    horses field    fences
here   is  a  blown  grey  lake  and   here  is  a
scorched  drumlin
-all  better   seen  than   said
Ask me which way
and I won't know 	Living from hour to day

Sparshott's garage is in the middle of  no­ place.  And  it  houses  some  equally  para­ doxical   vehicles.  Traditionally  patterned poems  are   parked   in  a  section  labelled "Brittle  Bodies."   More   open   and   con­ temporary-looking   poems  are   in   a  sec­ tion   labelled    "Soft  Engines."  As   a brittle  body,  "Oarsmen" is rhymed, mixes the   colloquial   "out  of   gas"   with   the
 archaic  or   poetic   "alas,"  and   demon­ strates   with  stoic  assurance  that  all  we know  and   steer   by  is  the  past.   It is  a good   old-fashioned ride,   but   a   "ride" nonetheless; it  can   hardly  take  us  any­ where   that    we   haven't   been   already. "Argument with  Dr.  Williams" is a  soft engine,  which  in  part  suggests  that   the  modern may  be  just one  more  variety  of rhetoric. It  is  as  tightly   controlled  and  more  coldly  sardonic than   the  so-called brittle  bodies.

But  nothing  depends on  your old  wheel barrow.

In  the  last  fire  storm of  Hamburg not
one  man

there  was not  one  killed but  would  have  died
at  last

Life pushes up blindly, oblivious to the creation of art  or the  destruction of cities or  the  fact  that  love:

has  never  learned   to give up its hold
on  rain

drops  on  wheel  barrows and   burned   children screaming

for  mothers  whose  milk is boiLed  out  of
their   breasts.

A little  histrionic? Perhaps the  most  ter­ rible  lines  are  to  be  found in  the  seem­ ingly   jaunty    couplet    which   concludes "Deep Freeze",  one  of the  brittle  bodies. We  read:

Here's   the  whole  matter  in  a  little   space
I  love  you    to  your   hurt 	and   my disgrace.

Sparshott  ends   by  resigning   his  role  as puppet master.   He   will  hang his  crea-

6g

REVIEW ARTICLES



tions  in  the  trees  where,  he  says, "they dance  better  at  the  wind's  bidding/ than they ever  did  at  mine."
There is  no  use  calling   on  Dr.  Wil­
liams  or  on  anyone   else.  The   tricks  of rhetoric, old or new, cannot help. Miss Waddington arrived at  the  same conclu­ sion  in  the  poem  cited  already:

I mutter Lenin
Karl  Marx     Walt  Whitman
Chaucer    Hopkins     even
Archibald   Lampman  but
nobody comes     I don't

know  the  password
I only   know   it  has
nothing to do with being good or true nothing to do with being   beautiful.

R.  G.  Everson  in The  Dark  Is not So Dark calls on everybody, Goethe and Raymond  Souster,   Roethke and  Baude­ laire,   Valery   and   Robinson  Jeffers,  but nobody    comes.   Everson   has   given   us some  good  poems   (e.g.  one  in  Oxford's The  Wind  Has  Wings), but  not  in  this collection. The  language is  out  of  con­ trol.   The  poems  vary  from   doggerel   to epigram,   popular  ballad   to   free   verse. The  trouble is,  the  tone  may  vary   just as  widely  within a  single  poem.  One  of the  most colourful is the ballad-style re­ collection  from   childhood, "The  Night We   Lost   With    Sir   Wilfrid    Laurier," when  "Grits lay  down  and   died/  under Tory   pride,"  and   the  speaker   crawled away  to the  barn  to  hide  his shame.  But look  what   happens  to  the  form  in  two verses from  a  ballad   on John Bunyan.

Johnny Bunyan fought  sin
so  hard  that  Bedford dungeon locked him  in

for  twelve   years
while  he  tried   to look  after his family
 at first  by  mending kettles
and    then  by   making  thousands  of   long­
tagged  thread-laces.

It is sadly  ironic that  the  title  should  be taken  from  Valery,  an intricate and painstaking  craftsman.  A  certain  irony and  fantasy  in  the  poems  themselves  ap­ pears   to  sustain   the  conviction  that  the dark   is  not   so   dark.  But   without  the necessary  control  these  qualities become levity   rather  than   irony,   fancy   rather than   imagination,  and   we  end   with   a parody  of   that   tough    gaiety   the   title  intends. The   result   is  grotesque,  with precisely   the  grotesqueness  of  "Waking in  Moonlight," where  a bat  blunders into the speaker's room  and  we read:

Not  a  snake   though he  hisses
Not  a  bird   though he  flies
and   unable  to  walk   on  paralyzed  legs
the   bat    now   hangs  upside  down    on   the
drape
He's worse  off  than  Baudelaire's albatross

Between  my  birth  and   my  death
I  who  cannot  comprehend what I  am (museum of  leftover bones  from  Early Man museum of  leftover  religions)
stare at this  ignorant creature

He  is flying  again
flying  in  grotesque hope

Perhaps  the   book   is  more   eloquent in failure than   it  might have  been  in  suc­ cess,  for  its  reveals   dearly that  neither the   language  nor   the   imagination  are  equal   to  the  situation,  and  the  situation is  terrible:  loneliness,  frustration, alien­  ation,    madness,    on   the    highways,    in suburban  homes,   in   the   hospitals   and  asylums. One  sonnet  (?)  consists of four­  teen  repetitions of   "nameless dread." It will  take  more  than the  spark  from  the local  incinerator  to  light  up  this dark.

When the  Syrian onyx  is  broken
Out  of   the   dark,   thou,  Father   Helios,
leadest,
but   the  mind as  Ixion, unstill, even  turning.

REVIEW ARTICLES



These    lines   by   Pound    serve    as   the epigraph to Ralph Gustafson's Ixion's Wheel. Despite the  obscure  allusion,  they speak  with  lwninous clarity  and  precision in   this   particular   context.  Gustafson  is no Pound. He  never  attains the  sweep of these  lines.  Yet   the  epigraph  is  appro­ priate. He  does catch  something  of their elliptical  swiftness  and   knotty  intensity.  He   knows  what   can   be  achieved   from knowledge,  craft,  a steady awareness  and persistence   of  mind.   He  may   call  upon Pound,  upon   Hopkins   or   Shakespeare, but  he  also  knows  that  he  must  labour himself  if  they  are  to  be  of  any  help  at all.
I xion's Wheel covers a decade of work. The  first   of   four    "years   of   voyages" reprints Rocky Mountain Poems,  first published  by Klanak Press. The second reprints selections  from  Sift  in  an  Hour­ glass. The  third  and  fourth are  made  up of   new   poems   sprung  from   travels   to Europe,   Scandinavia   and   the   eastern  Mediterranean.   Of    these,    the    Rocky  Mountain  Poems    are    his   outstanding achievement and  surely  one of  the lasting  contributions  to  be  made  to   Canadian poetry  in  these  six  volumes.
Unexpectedly,   perhaps,   Gustafson   is one   of   very   few   poets   equal  to   the Rockies.  He is equal  to them  because he approaches them  slowly, almost  doggedly, with  the  careful  precision   and  indirect­ ness of the  man  who  climbs  them.  As he says, "There was  a  care  needed; stones/ On   the   path   could   break   the   ankle." He   builds   up   his   mountains  stone   by stone,  step  by step.  "On mountains," he writes,   "One  does   not   try   out   meta­ phors." He  keeps  his eye on  the  ground: "My   mind   was  on  boots."   And  on  the small.   Running   into   a   patch  of   wild strawberries, he  remarks,  "All   that   day
 the  sweet berries/ Kept  our  heads  to  the ground." Yet   the   peaks   are   there,  im­
plied,  towering   above  their   bent   heads. Later    Gustafson    will  say   a  propos   of
the  Parthenon, "Proportion  is all  things of beauty."  It  is the  tension,  the  imagin­ ation   balancing  the  opposites,  the  large and  the  small.  As a man  climbs  a chim­ ney, matching his  weight  against   moun­  tains and  gravity, so from  details  of rock, moss,  branches,  flowers  streaming  with pollen,    thirst,    scratches,   more    rocks, underground   streams,  waterfalls  and glacial   vistas  there   finally  emerges   that  sense of  "greatness cragged/And  broken, lying  on  the  mind/Until the  mind  gave in." That immensity has  been  made  arti­ culate.
Similarly  in the second  year of voyages a   model   of   the   Matterhorn  and    the twisted  shoe  of a  dead  man,  "grazed   by that   grandeur," serve  to  evoke  the  am­ biguous  face  of  the  mountain.  What   is contained  in   the   little   museum   evokes the  uncontainable  reality  without.
Yet  the  whole  world  of  the  later voyages tends  to become a musewn whose relics  provoke  in  the   turning mind   re­ flections  on   passion   and    death.   So   in "Sunday Queue: Tower of  London," we are   told   that   "Descended   stones/are knowledge"  and  "Grief   is  monuments." What the tourist sees are  the  magnificent reflections   of   human   desire   in   revolt against   banality    and    death,  reflections left in the stone  by design  or by accident. "Jane's hair/tangles with  the  axe. Dying/ is   coronation,  the   bloody   tower jis   of royal   blood."    The  ironic   eye   tempers any  rhetorical extravagance, insisting  on the  banal  and   the  mortal: Liszt  in  car­ pet  slippers,   Pasiphae  with   her  eye  on an  ant,  the  coke  machine on  the  top  of Milan   cathedral, the  skulls  and  turnips

REVIEW ARTICLES



that    circumscribe  every   life,   Agamem­ non's,    the   Pharaohs',  Galla   Placidia's, that  of a  Princess  of the  Nile  and  of the author himself.  But  we  weary  of  reflec­ tions,  of  the  continual  return   to  Shake­  peare's
the   bones.  It is  true,   the  stones  them­ selves may come  alive, as in "The Horses of Saint Mark":

Had   virgin
Such   beautiful   feet? Ha! hoofs!
Placed   on  their   pedestals, One  forefoot  up,
Nostrils  snared   in  the  Venetian   wind.

Yet  even  here,  in  that  "Ha! hoofs!",  for example, we catch   the  echo  of  the  past, of  earlier  resolutions of  certain   tensions which  have  since  been spent.  One  wants the  naked  body in a nameless wind, mak­ ing  it  new.
Phyllis Gotlieb begins at home, in the streets,   "every   carstop  a  cram   course." Eye and ear attentive to the recurring elements  of  speech,   she  ends   up   with some  of  the  most  basic,  perennial forms of   human  expression:  nursery   rhymes, game  songs, ballads  and  proverbs,  "a brainful of  rain   and   A   WALL  OF   GRAF­ FITI."    "Ordinary  Moving," she  says  in the   title   poem,    "is   the   name   of   the game."

laughing, talking  where  the  ball  bounces in   the  forgotten   schoolyard
one   hand,   the   other   hand;   one   foot,  the other   foot
you  know  the  one
(Saturday  Afternoon   Kid
blackball-muncher, scotchmint-muncher
handkerchief-chewer extraordinary)
clap  front, clap  back
ball  thwack  on  the  boardfence

::tnd so on  "roundabout/until you're out." "Ordinary  Moving" is something of a tour   de   force  in  which   a  host  of  chil-

72
 dren's songs and  folk-rhymes serve to sketch   the   whole   course   of   life.   With blunt  humour and  verbal highjinks they acknowledge the  terrors  of sex, birth  and death, the  struggle   to  digest  individual and  class differences, the  conflicts  of  lan­ guages,    race    and    religion.    They   can hardly  refine  our   insight,   nor   are  they really  new.  But  they  renew   our  aware­ ness of  th-e variety  and  tough  vitality  of both  language and  people,  which  is pre­ cisely   the   point    on   which    "Ordinary Moving" concludes:

we turn  the  world  away  from  night we raise  the  sun,  we bring  the  light
if  we  don't   act  the  way  we  should
too  bad  for  you.  We're  here  for  good.

In keeping  with  this logic we find a Petrarchan sonnet  invaded by the Saint Louis  Blues, a ballade in which  a Jewish Villon laments the world's cruelty and indifference. All is not  variation or  ven­ triloquism,  however.   There  are   several delightful and  vigorous  poems  one  wants  to   remember  that   are   more   nearly   in Mrs.   Gotlieb's  own   words,  for  example "First  Person   Demonstrative,"   with   its characteristic opening, "I'd  ratherfheave half  a  brick  than  say/I  love  you,  though I  do,"   or   the   fantastic   versification   of the  human skeleton  in "A  Discourse," or the  classical  sonnet   "I  Ask   You,"   with its  jazzed-up   language  and  conventional cynical   wisdom.  Throughout we  are  re­ minded  of   poetry's roots  in  the  play  of language.  And   Mrs.  Gotlieb   does  catch  something of the  "heyrube and  racket  of carnivals."   Still,   we  are   reminded  that  this  perennial  speech   is  also  a  kind   of rhetoric and   that   it  may  become,   as  I fear   it   does   in   "Nothing,"  a   sort   of "busted slapstick." The  heyrube of  car­ nivals   and   even   the   songs  of   children

REVIEW ARTICLES



seem  somehow   to   belong   to  an  earlier and   more   innocent  world   of  discourse. One   doubts  whether  they   can   in   fact raise  the  sun,  bring  the  light-whether we  are  "here for  good."   The most  con­ vincing   note  may   be  that   of  the  witty, ironic,    yet    finally   puzzled    "Death's Head."  Lying   awake,   the  speaker    (be­ tween   breaths)    contemplates  her   own mortality  sustained  by  nothing  but   her continued  breathing and  the  realization: "and   yet  I  seem  to get  to sleep."
One   wonders  if  Clifton  Whiten  ever gets  to sleep,  he is so busy, as  the  blurb­ writer  says, keeping his eye on  the clock and   the  calendar. Putting  the  Birthdate into  Perspective is a first  book, on  which no final  judgement of Mr. Whiten's work can   be   made. The   poems  vary   from personal  reminiscence  to impersonal com­ ments  on the  news. The  language wobbles between   parody  and  plain   speech.  The  insights  range  from  the  profound to  the callow.   Perhaps   the   best   thing   in   the book  is  "Of  Ourselves," with  its fairly straightforward  and  firm  opening:

This  is  no  easy  task,  this,  filling  the  shoes of a  dead  man,  but  be  done  it must
I  tell  myself-and doing  it,  admit
I  overdo  it.

Yet it becomes a little  embarrassing when he  steps  into  Eliot's shoes  ("noble Eliot and   I")  or   Will's   (Shakespeare's, that is).  It is equally  embarrassing to hear  the latter called  "William S. the  word  boy." The  constant comparison with  childhood friends   and   historical  figures,   the   "old roomie"  and  the  famous  dead,  betrays  a painful   self-consciousness  and    lack   of proportion.  The  indiscriminate  intimacy with  first names  becomes  merely  flippant. The  author was  born  in I 939,  under  the sign  of the  familiar "V" for  victory.  On the  shoulder-blades of a childhood friend,
 this  sign  was  the  envy  of  all.  But  later the  speaker   in  the  title   poem  discovers the same sign transformed: it stares from the  photograph of a faceless  man,  a sur­ vivor  of  World   War  I. There  is  some­ thing   very   black   indeed   to   be   put   in perspective.  But it will never  be managed with  puns  on  "busts" and  the  grotesque undergraduate  mixture  of   language  we find, for example, in  the lines:

But  do  come
to see me my lovely. I'll  have  been  some
good  time  awaiting   you-old  high-school
chum.

Bawd,  bawd,  bawd  demon!  Aroint
(avaunt?)  thee  devil!
You'll  bring  Toronto about  my ears.
So  evil.

Strangely,  it   is   Miriam   Waddington's Say Yes, whose  language is closest  to the conventional lyric, that  of all these  books appears freshest,  surprises  with  sudden illumination, touches  us  with  her  gaiety and  convinces  us of her  gravity.  Her language   enlivens    the    dark.    Acutely aware  of the  loss of love, of language, of a familiar  world,  she confronts it directly and   articulates it  honestly.  With   a  pos­ sible   hint   from   Dr.   Williams   she   has devised  a  rather  baroque,  run-on   form made  up of lines of two  to four  feet  into which   the   most   prosaic  sentences   may be  fitted,  in  a  potentially  endless  series. But  the  variations are  far  from  prosaic,  as  in   this  sure,   delicate   and   haunting passage:

I  see
empty  nests falling
in  the  cold  air
forced  out  of the  trees by a  stiff wind
I  am  afraid
of  this  bird-emptiness and  the  ratgrey  dark
that  comes
to nuzzle my loneliness

73

REVIEW ARTICLES



I am  afraid
of the  cries
of little  animals
Idon't  know  that  language
Iwonder
if Ican  still  sing

Looking  at  an  intricate network  of  lines in  a drawing by Ronald   Bloore she asks, why should it, then,  "remind me of the world/broken  and   burned    by/lightning the   world   of/dead  roads   I  thought  I/ had  left  behind   me/forever?" In the country, in  the  city,  in art  or  in  nature, everywhere the  dark  appears.  In "Shake­ down" we read:

Time  like a  raftered roof has shaken   us  down  like  grain  or brickdust   into   the  lowest  bin of  the  dark  world.

One  poem  is entitled "Swallowing  dark­ ness is swallowing  dead  elm  trees."  And swallow  it  Mrs.  Waddington  does.  The  dark  is not simply an alien dark; it is our own.    Running   "like    a   homeless   dog through/the  muddy   fields,"   where   the children fly kites in  the lonely spring  and the  speaker  is  troubled by death  and  the song  of the  dark  polluted  river,  she con­ cludes  that  the  "song  heard/by all  those who   run   in   fields/is  nothing  but   the
 sound/of  our  dark   crying." The dark  is the  home  of the  inarticulate "other." Moving into  the  dark  with  affection, she retains her  language and  enlarges  it,  re­ discovering  her   world    in   the   bleakest times  and   the  most  unpromising  places. Iron bridges  fold  their wings  like swans;  construction   cranes  like   colourful  am­  phibious  animals  bring   her   a  breakfast basket   of   helmeted  workers   and   bricks by  the   ton.   And   in   "Time"  the   most ancient  love  lyric  is easily  and  surely  re­ newed:

When  Irun  to  meet  my  love
Iam  large-eyed   and  swift as  spring  on  the  outskirts
of Jaffa.

Despite   the    strangeness  of   Cities,  the "black leather police," empty  libraries, empty   rooms,   Eros  survives.  It  survives to  inform the  imagination and   the  con­ trol  of the  language, and  with  it  survives the  capacity for  song.

the  world  is getting dark  but  I carry icons     I  remember the  summer
I will  never  forget the  light.




WHERE TO  GO?
 


D. 0. Spettigue



JAMES   BACQUE, The   Lonely  Ones.  McClelland &  Stewart.  $6.gs.
LAWRENCE    GARBER,  Garber's  Tales   from  the   Quarter.  Peter   Martin  Associates.
$4·95·
STEPHEN   VIZINCZEY, The   Rules  of Chaos.  Macmillan. $5.95.


START WITH  The  Lonely Ones because  it's  easy.  It calls  itself  "a  novel of contemporary Quebec", and  it is, with Separatists and   Artists  and  Sex,  just  as

74
 you'd   expect, and   a  made-to-order plot that   creaks  a  little.  "My  life  is Chaos", it  begins  but  the  novel  does  not  live  up to   this   promise.  Harry   Summers  is  a

REVIEW ARTICLES



man  of impulse, not  of  chaos.  About  to marry  a   nothing-girl,  Shirley   (well-to­ do  English-that is   English-English­ and  very sweet,  the girl  Everyman wants  to  carry  off  to  his  cabin  in  the  woods), Harry  sees  her   suddenly  as  a   trap,   a threat to  his  Art,  and   runs  out  on  her. Back  in  Canada a  day  later  he  runs  the rapids  in  a  canoe  to  reach  the  safety  of his  cabin  in  the  woods  only  to find  him­ self threatened by an armed Separatist. Harry is half  French-Canadian; his French  bosom-pal    and   artistic  mentor has gone  political  and  Harry is drawn in­ differently  into   a  plot   to  seize  a  radio  station.   Co-habiting  with    his   friend's wife, and  trying  to  paint  again, he man­ ages  at   least   to  send   for  Shirley   who arrives   the  day  of  the  plot.  Fleeing  the results  of  the  prime  minister's assassina­ tion   the  four   (English,  English-French, French-English   and    French)   sort   out their  confusions  and   end   on  a  note  of what  is  meant to  be  perennial optimism  in  the face  of  unlikelihood:

Down   the  stairs and   out   both   mad  from trying  to   stay   sane   in   this   country, but we'll  make  it.  We  made it this  far  and   this isn't   the  end,  oh  no,  you  haven't won  with the  cops  politics  bombs  ancestors hate, no, you  lose  you've been  losing  all  the  time  and that's why  we  aren't bitter, go,  go.

... Running. The car. "OK. I'll make it.''
"Yeah, come  on,  we'll  make  it."

What comes  through is the  irrational­ ity  of  choice,  Harry's  confused good  in­ tentions. But  not chaos,  because  the  neat plot  and  mathematically polarized   char­ acters    and    settings   (England-Canada, bush-city,    Montreal-Toronto)   suggest just   the   opposite.  We   may   not   know where  we're  going  but  we're  fully in con­ trol  of  the   representations  of  our  con­ fusion.
 The  breakdown of order  under  the pressure of irrational rebellion  may be inevitable,  but Stephen Vizinczey would create  a rationale for  revolt  by freeing  it from   its  origins   in  f.ear  and   undefined anger. Rid yourself, he suggests, of the illusion   of   the   omnipotent  system   and your  gesture  of  freedom   can   become  a happy   self-expression   instead   of  a   ner­ vous  twitch.   The   Rules  of  Chaos  is  a liberating  book,  and   a  little  frustrating too.   You   nod   vigorously   all   the   way through it; you  mutter  "quite right" at intervals.  Here  is an  author who  thinks  what   you  oft  have  thought  and,   damn him,   expresses  it   better   than   you  ever could.  All those letters  you were going  to write  to  the  Editor   can  now  be  burned
-this says them  all.
It says  that   cause-and-effect  are  illu­ sions,  that   only  in  retrospect do  events  seem  orderly.   "Events  do   not   develop,  they   are   born   out   of  chaos."  Further­ more,  the  trend   of  our  time  is  to  chaos because  the  illusion  of   control  can   not be sustained  much  longer.
It's  always  a  little  startling to  realize how  young  modern science  is. This  book must be one of thousands reflecting  the difficult   transition  from   the   certainties of a Newtonian law-governed universe  to the   post-Darwinian  one   which   includes our relativist-existentialist present.  The decentralizing process, accelerated since mid-century,  reflects   the   increasing   ac­ ceptance of  the  lack  of  a  cosmic  centre. Without  such   a   metaphor   all   applied  notions   of   centrality-central    govern­  ment,  authority of  state,  law,  church­ are seen to be baseless.
How  Mr.  Vizinczey  releases the theore­ tician  in  us!  Power,  he  says, is  an  illu­ sion. A Johnson, a Nixon, cannot promise  peace   in   Vietnam   because   he   has   no

75

REVIEW ARTICLES



power to effect one. Conversely, North American  nightmares  of  creeping   con­ spiracy   are   generated  by  the  mistaken  assumption that  other   nations  and  their leaders,  or  groups  within  a  nation, have the   power   to  direct   events   against   us. But    power-the     foreseeing,   planning and   direction of  history-is  an  illusion both   because   human  actions   are   irra­ tional  and  uncontrolled and  because  the permutations of circumstance are  beyond calculation.
How,  then,  make "Rules"? Mr. Vizinc­
zey invites  us to free  ourselves  from  fear by  accepting the  reality  of  the  present. The historical  past  is an illusion of order, the  future a  projection  of  the   illusion, and   "delusions  breed  cowardice". What he  leads  us to  is the  paradox that   once we  can  accept   that   we  have  no  control
-and  no one  else has  either -then  we can  control our  lives,  make  choices,  by taking   no  thought for  the  morrow   and living  fully  in  relation to others  and  our­ selves in  the  present.   (Rule  no.  2)
Hardly a  new  concept, but  one  Mr.
Vizinczey recognizes particularly needs emphasizing  when   the   myth   of   state­ control and  computerized  societies seems to  threaten  everyone's  freedom.  At  the core  of  his  book  are  essays  on  Eugene  McCarthy and   on  Stendhal, individuals who  were  bigger  than  their  times in  pro­ portion  to   their   power   to  see  through illusion   to   the   reality   of   the   moment. "If  Nothing is Certain, Nothing is Im­ possible."
In his  didactic role  Mr.  Vizinczey  in­ evitably   overstates   his  case  in  order  to tempt us to  his essentially  anarchic posi­ tion.    Perhaps   he   knows   the    cautious reader   will    provide   the    qualification. Thus,   when    he    says   "pure   chance" governs,   the  reader   will  object   that   in-
 numerable limitations reduce  the  odds  of "pure chance" to  those  of  an  uncertain probability. And  this granted, the reader's final   position   is  likely  to   be  a   wistful regret   that   he  cannot follow  the  author all  the  way.
Much of  the  book  is intended to  pro­ vide  a  context for   the   two  enthusiastic portraits,  and   at  the  same  time  to  give a  slight  fictional   colouring  to the  whole. Vizinczey  uses wife  and  daughter in  the  roles of straight-men and pleasant  sceptics to  lighten  the   didactic   burden  and   to establish  that  some  parts  of his book  are  of  the  fictional  form  known  as colloquy, as  others   are  of  the  familiar essay.  The  effect  of  the  whole  is  to  add  personality to  theory  and  so  to  make  both  pleasant and   persuasive  what  must   be,  finally,  a futile   process-the   reasoning  toward, and   establishing rules for,  spontaneous behaviour. The  fictional  element only heightens the paradox because it is so marginal  as  to  acknowledge  the  inade­ quacy  of fiction  to say boldly what needs to  be  said.  And   thus   the  paradox that  without the  fictional  vehicle  the  message is finally  unconvincing because  it  is said rather  than lived -true,  no  doubt, but merely  true.
Unlike the  other two, Garber's book is
big   and   spready  and   might    be  called chaotic but  for  a  unity  of  subject. The subject is sex, but  that  word  is not  brutal enough for  this  book. It is not  often  one reads  fiction  that  is physically  nauseating and   the  question  therefore, arises,  Why read    it?   Why   publish    it?    (The   legal wrangles  over  mildnesses  like Lady Chat­ terly's   Lover  and   Ulysses  become  point­ less now;  if you don't ban  this you don't ban  anything.)  From  the  opening copu­  lation   to   the   last   public-lice hunt  the book  oozes its  400-odd   pages  of obsceni-

REVIEW ARTICLES



ties. For  what?  Nobody's pleasure, surely, since the effect  is certainly not  titillation. And   that   is  probably  the   point.   In literary  terms   this   book  is  a  confession and   an  anatomy; confession   because  it is a first-person account of  the  observer­ protagonist's descent  into   the  life  of  the Quarter   in    Paris    in    ever-descending circles of dead-pan debauchery to end  in satiety  and  disease;  anatomy, because  it is an  exploration of the  nature and  prac­  tice  of  sex  where   there   is  no  other   in­ terest.  It is an  Anatomy of Love.  At one point  it  becomes  a  richly  ironic  colloquy on  love, the  narrator taking  an  idealized as  well  as  clinical   view,  the  antagonist
(Rose,  yet)   pragmatic:

Garber :  Sometimes love  is a  vicious testing ground. As if  there were  some  deep  interior goblin that  is  not   satisfied   with   the   more

a vivid picture of life in the north woods .•.

Lumbering Songs
from the
Northern Woods

by Edith Fowke
 forward urges, but   must   continually  renew itself   in   acts   of   outrage  and    contumely. Love  often   drains off  its  own   existence  by driving  toward  some   extreme  and   unhal­ lowed   proportion that  overreached  its  very meaning.
Rose: Oh   fuck  off,  Grubs.
Garber: ... The imp  is  a  two-headed  gob­
lin; its  janus  face  is deceptive and  betrayed you   into   the   impossible equation  that   to render was  to  withhold.
Rose: Yes  well  I'm not  finished   with   that
ass-bleeder yet.  I'm   going   to show  that fart a  windstorm; he'll know  what  fancken love is,  I'll   find   him   and   shove   love   right  up his queer.
Garber:   At    least    you    still    care. That's
something I   wouldn't   have   suspected. "Forked man has  yet  his  charm," I see.

None   of   the   charm   of   unaccommo­ dated  man  remains  from  this  book. The ironic  narrator  carefully  betrays  himself in  describing  in  abundantly lyrical  terms a  week's excursion   with  friends  into  the






























77

REVIEW ARTICLES



chateaux-country where  they rouse them­ selves from  the  miseries  of cold  and  pot­ hunger and  boredom only  once  to  enjoy their   wilful   corruption   of    a   boyscout troop.
Irrational, almost  automatic  behavior,
a   determined   amorality.  Questions  of ought  and  must  do  not enter  this  upside­ down  world.  It is the  ultimately  permis­  sive society,  if a series of  portraits of the lost   whose   separate   interests   are   only their  particular hang-ups, can  be called  a society.  They   come   together   in  groups only   when   one   personality,  like   Van­ grin's,  forms a  centre for  daily  meetings  of  the  bored.
The   comic  element is  present   in  the
book, more  than  one  realizes at  first, but it is difficult  to savour among the stronger odours.   (Constance:  What's  the  differ­ ence  between   decadent  and  debauched? Bunny: Debauched  is when  you do it in the   rain) .   What   dominates   is   not   a Rabelaisian gusto  but  a  Swiftian  disgust at  the  flesh.  The  truth this  book  offers is that  down  is merely  down.  There is no
 revelation  awaiting  us,   as   the    "Black Romantics" would  have  it, at  the  bottom of the abyss. The limitations of mind  and body-satiety, apathy, disease-circum­ scribe  experience. The  protagonist  with­ draws  at  the  end  through a  hollow  Eng­ lish   limbo   toward   Canada   where    the "truth"  of   the   Quarter  can   never   be believed,  does  not  in  fact  exist.  ( "Cana­ dian? What  does  that   precisely  mean?" "It  is  the  northem extremity of  an  atti­ tude  prevalent in  New  York.")  We  are out   of   it,   here   in   Canada,  we   know nothing of the  gay life; ours is a different kind  of Limbo.  For  us, distance, conven­ tion  and  deception may  still  romanticize love,  but   under   the  microscope  of  this book  the  thing  lies bared  as a horror.
A   highly    sophisticated   work,    Tales
from   the   Quarter   approaches  one   of those   limits   of  literature  beyond   which there is  no  place   to  go.  So,  in  another way, does the marginal Rules of Chaos. Which is very interesting, because  where to  go  is  the  contemporary question for each  of these  three  authors.




THE MYTHICAL MONSTER

F. M. Frazer


SHEILA  EGOFF, G.   T.  STUBBS, and  L.  F.  ASHLEY  (eds.), Only  Connect:  Readings on   Children's  Literature, Toronto  and   New  York,   Oxford   University    Press, rg6g,  $7.50.


CHILDREN ARE  SIMPLY  IMMA­ ture  people  (J. R. R. Tolkien)  -except that    they   are,   at   least   potentially,  so much   better   than   their  elders   that   the adult world  may  not  be  fit  for  them  to grow   up  in   (Jason  Epstein). They   are
 innocent and  love justice  (Chesterton, quoted  by   Tolkien) -but theirs   is   a savage  innocence, and  their  sense of  jus­ tice   is  confined    to   the   treatment   they themselves   receive;   they    have    "none whatever   in    regard     to    anyone    else"

REVIEW ARTICLES



(Penelope Mortimer).  They   aren't  con­ cerned   with   whether  or   not   a  story  is true  or  false,  'real' or  'unreal'  (Edmund Leach) -perhaps   because   they   imme­  diately   translate   every   classic   fairytale into  a  euphemistic  symbolization  of  an often-steamy home  truth  (Michael Hor­ nyansky).
In fact,  if one  could  only  connect   all
the   psychological   and   moral   definitions of  children  explicit   and   implicit in  the forty   essays  that   constitute  Only  Con­ nect, one  would  have  the  outline  of  the mythical  monster to end  them  all.
The    reader    attempting  an   uninter­ rupted  passage   through  the   book,  and rendered  slightly   seasick  by   the  variety of child-concepts, tends  to  recall  the  old recipes   for   girls   and   boys,   "sugar   and spice and  all things nice" -"scissors and snails  and   puppydogs'  tails",   with   new appreciation.  But   although  the   hetero­ geneous   definitions are   commonly    in­ voked   to   back   opinions   about  what   a child's   book  should   be,  it  becomes  evi­ dent  that  literary  judgment and  taste  are the  primary  determiners of  the  essayists' likes  and  dislikes,  promotions  and   con­ demnations. The  psychologizing and  the psychology    (two   contributors  are   psy­ chiatrists) are  largely supportive in thirty­ eight  of  the  articles.
The  two exceptions are Jason  Epstein's " 'Good   Bunnies   Always   Obey':   Books for  American Children"  and   Nat  Hen­ toff's  "Fiction  for  Teenagers".  For  Ep­  stein,  the  mortal sin  of  a  writer for  the young  is  apparent  advocacy  of  submis­ sion to circumstances or  authority. In his view,  the  theme that  "organized society is hostile to growth and  freedom and  de­ feats  the  individual as,  in  the  literature of an  earlier  epoch, nature used to do..." is  the  supremely attractive  and   healthy
 one  for  children. Yet,  he  says,  children are beset by 'experts' who would impose upon  them  fictional   glorifications of  ac­ quiescence  and  who  only  occasionally  let a  book  like Edwin  Tunis's  Frontier Liv­ ing through their  bureaucratic ranks.

Unlike most  books  in  its category, it  neither patronizes  nor  sentimentalizes  the   Indians, whose  side  it  takes  against the  whites  where it   is   necessary    to   do   so.   The  Kentucky settlers are   described as drunken and  brutal, while   it  is  revealed  that   the   towns   farther west  were  often   bothered  by  gamblers and prostitutes.  The   directors  of   the    Union Pacific   and    Central  Pacific   are   described as   thieves   and   exploiters  who   co-operated with   the   California  legislature  to   rob   the public,  while   the   United   States  senate  is shown   to  have   been   frequently faithless in its  treaties  with   the   Indians.  In   its  atten­ tion   to   detail  and    the   cleanliness   of   its style,    Frontier    Living    is   a    considerable achievement-one of  those   books   that   is [sic]   likely   to   inspire   strong   feelings    of social    justice   and    patriotism   in    certain young   readers  by  providing them   not  only  with  a sense  of  their   uniqueness but  with  a link  to  the  common welfare.

Nat Hentoff  is troubled by teenagers' complaints  that   "there  are   many   more hang-ups in being  young than  are even intimated  in  most  of  the   books  they've seen." He feels obligated to meet "the challenge ... to   make   contact  with   the sizeable  number  of  the  young  who  sel­ dom  read  anything for  pleasure  because  they  are  not  in  it".  And  mindful  of  this challenge,  he  is impressed   by  seventeen­ year-old   Susan   Hinton's The  Outsiders, which,  despite  a  plot  that   is  "factitious at  times",  "has  been  widely  read  among heterogeneous sections  of   the  young  be­ cause  it stimulates their own feelings and questionings  about   class   and   differing life-styles".
Even  if idealization of  rebellion   per se and  the  exaltation of  ignorance and  in­ experience  into   trailing  clouds  of   glory

79

REVIEW ARTICLES



were not  the  new conformity, Epstein's demonstration of "doctrinal adhesion" would  be alarming from  a man  of letters
-especially from  a vice-president of Random House. And although Hentoff's bent  is  clearly   practical  as  well  as  hu­ mane,  since  the  solipsistic  teenagers  who worry  him are apt  to be with  us for some time,  he is surely inviting proselytism and the  reduction of  literature  to  an  instru­ ment  of  social therapy. Moreover, Robert  Rosenheim's  program, sketched  in "Chil­ dren's   Reading   and    Adults'    Values", seems   more    likely   to   develop    people worth  contacting. He  says:

... I  would    suggest   that ... we   do   not bother   inordinately  with  questions  such  as
'Is   this  a   great   book?'   Or   a   wholesome one.  Or  an  up-to-date one.  Or  an  informa­ tive  one.  Or  even  a  'broadening'  one.  The  questions   I would  ask  would   tend   to  be: Will   this   book  call   into   play   my  child's imagination?  Will  it  invite   the  exercise  of genuine    compassion   or   humour   or   even irony?  Will it  exploit  his  capacity  for being curious?    Will   its   language   challenge   his awareness  of  rhythms  and  structures? Will its   characters   and   events   call   for-and even    strengthen -his    understanding   of human  motives  and circumstances, of causes and  effects?  And will it provide  him with a joy that  is in some  part  the  joy of  achieve­ ment,  of  understanding, of  triumphant en­ counter  with  the  new?

Effective  imaginative literature is an  amal­ gam   of  the   new  and   strange -whatever taxes    credulity    and    complacency-with what  is somehow  believable,  authentic, and immediate. And  I  should  argue  that  if  the balance  is  to  be  tipped  it must  be  tipped in   the   direction   of  novelty,  of   the  alien and  challenging.  For  all  genuinely  memor­ able  literary   experience   is,  in  some  meas­ ur.e,  an   initiation  into   the   previously  un­ known....

These  essays apart, with  the  varying theories  of the other contributors about what  constitutes a child, there is a large amount of  agreement in  Only  Connect.

So
 Writer  after   writer   rises  to  the  defense of   fantasy  against  charges    that    it   is escapist  or frightening or diabolically inspiring. C. S. Lewis and Donnarae MacCann make  the  point  that  wish­ fulfilling  "realism" about  triumphant children feeds the gluttonous ego and engenders "undivine  discontent", where as fantasy  can  stir  and  trouble  its reader "(to his  lifelong   enrichment)  with   the dim  sense of something beyond  his reach and, far   from   dulling or  emptying the actual world ... [give]   it  a  new  dimen­ sion   of   depth"   (Lewis).  And    several essayists assert  that  children enjoy  a little  horror (like  being vicariously frightened), cannot  be  terrified   by  literature  unless the   penchant  for   terror   is  present    in them  any  way, and  are  themselves  pretty  frightening   in    their    unconscious     and hence   unrestrained  sexuality   and   their aggressive   hunger  for   power.   Anthony Storr   gives  some  of  this  theory  its  most violent  expression:

... it   is   only   the   child   who   is   already emotionally disturbed who will act out  his fantasies.  If this  were  not  so we should  all have   strangled   our   brothers    and    sisters, slept    with    our    mothers,    castrated   our fathers,  and  reduced   to  pulp  all  those  who in any  way  opposed   us.

Michael Hornyansky says much  the same thing   with  mixed   ruefulness,  tenderness, and    hilarity.  And    Penelope    Mortimer and  Diana Goldsborough declare  the hardiness  of  the   average   child's  psyche with  the  cool  candour and  wit  that  seem to  characterize literate Englishwomen.
There is also  considerable harmony concerning specific  books and  authors. Predictably, Lewis Carroll,  Kenneth Grahame, E.  E. Nesbit,  C. S. Lewis, Rosemary Sutcliff, and  Mary  Norton  re­ ceive accolades. Less predictably, Frances

REVIEW ARTICLES



Hodgson  Burnett,  once severely censured for  the  sentimental   prettiness   of  Little Lord  Fauntleroy,  is given  respectful  at­ tention   for   her   addictive   The   Secret Garden.  A surprising  revival  may  be in store for the Oz books. Martin  Gardner,  the  annotator of Alice, recommends  that The   Wizard   be  restored  to  children  to fill  in  the  bookshelf  gap  left  by  Alice, which has, he claims, been an adults-only book  for  several  decades.  Jordan   Brot­ man's "A Late  Wanderer in Oz" is a de­ tailed, joyous appreciation of Frank L. Baum's  Oz  series.  (I   am   unconverted, but  cannot   find  a  single  copy  of  that shelved lot in which to check my faint memory of rather flat, thin writing and relentless contrivance.) Three other slight shocks  are  the  bundle  of  qualifications in which Elizabeth Janeway wraps her commendation  of Little Women, the fact that  T.  H.  White  receives only one, fleeting  reference,  and  the  absence from this  Canadian book  of  any  reference  to L.  M.  Montegomery  in general  or  Anne of Green Gables in particular.
Some of the  best writing  in 0nly Connect  is, of  course,  in  the  articles  by major  authors. Tolkien's  justly celebrated "Children  and   Fairy  Stories"  is  repre­ sented  by a long extract.  The  book also contains   C.  S.  Lewis's   persuasive  "On  Three   Ways  of  Writing  for  Children", T. S. Eliot's warm and  winning appraisal of   Huckleberry    Finn,   and   Graham Greene's  finely  serious  treatment of  the art  of  Beatrix  Potter.  Rosemary  Sutcliff contributes  "Combined   Ops",   an  excit­ ing,  involving  evocation   of  the  genesis of  The   Lantern  Bearers. Less successful are Rumer  Godden's  "An Imaginary Correspondence" and  P.  L.  Travers' "Only   Connect". Rumer   Godden's  fic­ tional  exchange  between  Beatrix  Potter
 and   a  soulless, virtually   mindless  pub­ lisher   is   apparently    a   necessary   and necessarily   broad    corrective    in    some quarters,  but  in the company  it  keeps in Only   Connect   it   appears   to   comprise forty whacks to a very dead  horse. P. L. Travers'   contribution  is   full   of  taking anecdotes  and  fascinating  bits  of  infor­ mation   and   quasi-information,  but  her style verges on  and  sometimes slips over the  border  of coyness, which  the editors avowedly  avoided.   (The   book  abounds in  typographical  errors,  but  contexts  af­ firm that she really meant "lordily" and "folkly".)
On  the  whole, appreciations of  parti­ cular  authors   and  works  are  the  most satisfying contributions. Furthermore, the mingling  of  authors'  actual   voices with the  voices of  their  critics  gives an  im­ pression of   interplay  that   modifies  the sensation   imparted    by  the   isolated  "a child  is"  pronouncements that  potential discussions are  for ever  frozen in  poten­ tiality.
Of the articles by sub-creators-essay­
ists who are  principally  critics-several are  distinguished  by  prepossessing styles or provocative  ideas or both.  Alison White's piece on the life and works of Edward  Lear  is a  sparkling  little  study of the victim of "almost  everything  that the   pre-aspirin   age  could   inflict"   and his defiant, delirious, inspired gaiety. Michael  Hornyansky  gives an  irresistible impression of  mirthful   fright  as he  sug­ gests  a  new   look  at   the   "tiny   down­ trodden  egoist"  in  the  nursery.  Edmund  Leach  uses Babar  as an  illustrative  case for  his thesis that  adults  are  the  fragile, apprehensive  creatures  whose  fears  and taboos impose  limitations upon  fantasies ostensibly  written  for  children.   (If  he is right,  perhaps  'What   is an  adult?'  1s  a

81

REVIEW ARTICLES



more   pertinent  question   than   the   one that  peripherally or centrally  obsesses the writers   of  Only  Connect.)   Sheila   Egoff posits  the  possibility  that   young  readers have  a natural affinity for  science fiction because  they  want   instant   solutions  and are,  in  Leslie  Fiedler's terms,  "new mutants"  to   whom    machines    are   ex­ tensions   of  themselves.   Roger  Duvoisin  provides  useful  information and  interest­ ing opinion on the intrinsic  and historical  differences  between   painting  and   illus­ trating.
All  in   all,  Only   Connect  is  a   book
well   worth    the   making.   But   the   wise reader  will   take   it   bit  by  bit,  or   else start at the end with Sheila Egoff's sane, sensitive,  enormously knowledgeable essay on   the   past   and   present   of  children's
 literature and  adults' beliefs  about  it,  an essay  that  can  prepare him  for  much  of the book's multitudinousness. He who attempts it  head-to-tail  and   whole   will find   himself   giddy   from   shifts   of  style and  approach, bemused  by treatments of a single problem in variant terms and different problems in similar  terms, and beguiled  by some actual correspondences and  sympathies into  distrusting his own bemusement. He  may  well  be  left  cling­ ing  to  the  surety  of a single  sharp  asser­ tion,   perhaps  worthwhile   in  itself   but a  fragment  nonetheless. I  emerged   from my  rash   first   reading   holding  hard    to Frederick Laws' comfortingly certain cer­ tainty   that   "An  insufficiency   of  pigs  is one  of  the  great   faults   of  modern chil­ dren's  books".




JUNGLE AND PRAIRIE

George Woodcock


MARGARET  LAURENCE,   The   Tomorrow-tamer  and   other   Stories.   New  Canadian Library, McClelland   &  Stewart, $1.95.   A  Bird  in  the   House.  McClelland  & Stewart, $5·95·


As  A  SHORT STORY WRITER, attracting  attention  in  little   magazines like Prism and  university  journals like Queen's   Quarterly, Margaret  Laurence first  made Canadian readers  aware  that a new voice of major  importance had emerged among them.
Those  early  stories  were  exotic  in  the most   literal  sense;   they  emerged    from the  experiences of years the author spent as an  engineer's wife  in an  Africa  grow­ ing   towards   independence.   The   West African  stories  - which   complement
 Margaret   Laurence's   descriptive  books on life in Somaliland -were collected  in
1964   into   a  volume   entitled  The  To­
morrow-tamer   (title of  one  of  the  indi­ vidual stories) , and   this  has   now  been republished in the  New Canadian paper­ back   series  at   the  same   time   as   Mrs. Laurence's new  book  of  stories,  A  Bird in  the  House, makes  its appearance.
Whether  this   simultaneous   presenta­ tion   of  the   two  collections  was  merely coincidental, or a result  of  the publisher's planning, it  reminds one  forcibly  of  the

REVIEW ARTICLES



multiple claims  Margaret Laurence has established   to  being  accepted  as  one  of our  finest  prose  writers.  For  she is much more than an excellent novelist. The Prophet's Camel  Bell, a narrative of  her life in Somaliland, is a combination of autobiography and  travel  writing of a quality neither genre  often  attains in Canada. Her  Long  Drums  and Cannons is a workmanlike presentation of a vital phase  in Mrican literary history.  And the volumes  under review,  taken  together, clearly  establish   her  as  one  of  the  three best  short  story  writers at  work  in  Can­ ada  today.
There are  similarities between  the  two books, but  there is also a remarkable progression. Each,  of course,  has its own kind  of  unity,  its  own  special   mark.   In The  Tomorrow  Tamer  the  physical  look and   feel  of  Africa   are   recorded with  a precise  and  brilliant brushwork; perhaps the   impasto  is  at   times   rather  heavily applied, but  the  impressions  of a tropical environment press so weightily  on the stranger who enters it that  they often do appear  exaggerated  to  those   who  have not  experienced them. Temporally the stories are united  by the fact that all are devoted   to  the  period   of  Margaret Laurence's  own   life  in   Africa,   and   in theme  they are  united  because  each  in its way records  a displacement; all the characters and  their  predicaments are in­ volved in a larger  and  essentially political  pattern -the  complex  of   changes   that  affects  individual lives and  fates  when  a country  gains   its  own  identity  through independence.
The  main   flaw   in   The   Tomorrow­ tamer is the obviously didactic intent, for in  almost   every   story  there   is  a  moral  which  the  author has  not  sufficiently  ab­ sorbed  into  the  fabric  of  the  action.  For
 example, "A  Gourdful of Glory'', the  tale of  an  African   market woman's triumph on the day when freedom comes to her country,   has  much   of  the   blunt   point­ making   that    has   marred   officially   ap­  proved  Russian  fiction  over  the  past  two decades.  Yet  the awkwardness with which the   theme   is   handled  in   that   particu­ lar   instance   is   exceptional.  The    best stories  follow   the   pattern  of  alienation implied   in   "The  Drummer of  All  the World",  which   concerns   a  missionary's  son,   brought up  among Africans  and accustomed  to think  Mrica his home, to whom  independence and  the  hostilities  it unleashes    even    among    children   who shared the same nurse's breast bring a disillusioning  realization. "The old Mrica was  dying,"   he  muses,  "and I felt  sud­ denly   rootless,   a   stranger  in   the   only land  I  could  call  home."
Here  is a truer ring  than  in "The  Per­ fume   Sea",   where   two   European   hair­ dressers  who  have  deliberately cut  their  roots  with   the   past   find  a  comfortable place  in  the  new  Africa.  "The  Perfume Sea"  is  so  evocatively  written  that   the surface  charm of  the  story  at  first  woos one  into   accepting  its  pleasing   fantasy, but  one  is  unconvinced  by  the  denoue­ ment, which  projects  a dream brilliantly but   hollowly   fulfilled.   It is  the   stories which accept   that   for  strangers Mrican dreams  will  go  unfulfilled, which   apply this   knowledge   even-in    the   case   of "The Rain  Child" -to Mricans  return­ ing  from  Europe, that  are  the  most  ur­  gently   felt   pieces   in   The   Tomorrow­ tamer.  In  comparison, the  stories  about Mricans  struggling  with   the   changing world  that  engulfs  them  have  a  remote­ ness  of  feeling,   almost   as  if one   were reading a  translation,  and,  indeed,   in  a way  they  are  translations, for,  however

REVIEW ARTICLES



sensitively  Margaret  Laurence may  have absorbed   and   understood  the  traditions of   Ghanaian   peoples,    we   are   always aware   that  she  is expressing  them  in  an alien  idiom.
Thus, though I regard  a  third  of  the
stories   in   The   Tomorrow-tamer  as   re­ markably successful,  and  admire the  at­  mospheric quality of  all of  them,  I  find the  book as a whole  incompletely satisfy­ ing.  I would   find   it  hard   to   justify  a similar  judgment of  A Bird in the House. For  here  one  enters a  world  far  tighter, far  more  self-consistent, far more  directly apprehended and  expressed  than  that  of The  Tomorrow-tamer.
A  Bird  in  the  House  is  a  group   of
stories  about   a  girl  growing  from  child­ hood    into    adolescence   in   a   fictional  Manitoba  town.   The stories  are  popu­  lated  for  the  most  part  by  the same  cast of   characters:   Vanessa   MacLeod,  her parents, grandparents,  aunts  and  uncles, with  other small-town characters appear­ ing  on  the  periphery  of  this  tightly-knit world  of two connected but rival families, the    professional   MacLeods   and    the pioneering Orange-tinged Connors.  Story flows  into  story,  to  such  an  extent   that when  they  are  collected  a perceptible de­ velopment  from    one   to   the   other   be­ comes  evident, and   it  is  hard   to  know whether to  define   A  Bird in  the  House as  a  collection  of  tales  or  as  a  loosely knit  and   unconventional  novel.
The  autobiographical content    of   A
Bird in the House, the solid  basis of  per­ sonal   experience, is  even  more  evident  than  in  The  Tomorrow-tamer. Much  in the  earlier book  was  obviously  inven  ed, but, though there  are clearly many wholly imaginary  incidents  in   A   Bird  in  the House, one  feels  that  as a  whole  it  is an illuminated series  of  variations on  Mar-
 garet  Laurence's own experience of a depression-age childhood in a Manitoba small   town   very  similar   to  Manawaka, where  the  action of A Bird in the House is enacted.
By predicament as well as by place  the people  of  A Bird in the House are united, and   here -as  in  The  Tomorrow-tamer
-the   sense   of   alienation   is   crucial, though now  it  is not  the  transformation of  a  society  so much   as the  failure of  a society   that    sets   the   tone.    Society   in general   having failed,  the  natural  social units  become  important again,  and  fami­ lie  are   willy-nilly   reunited, Aunt   Edna coming  home    from    jobless    Winnipeg, Dr. 	MacLeod    moving     in    with    his widowed  mother because  his  patients can no  longer   pay  him  in  cash;  the  depres­ sion  in  fact  renews  the  pioneer  intensity of  relationships within  small  and  threat­ ened  groups, and  that intensity  Margaret Laurence mordantly evokes.
A  Bird in  the  House  shows  the  same
power   of   creating  a   convincing   back­ ground   as   The   Tomorrow-tamer,  but here,  because   it  is  not  an  exotic  setting  that  is being  portrayed, the  brushwork is even   more  exact,   while   the  colours   are modula ed
in   clashing  vividnesses.    But   it   is   not merely  the  setting that  is so superbly  ap­ propriate and  sufficient  in  A  Bird  in  the House. Perhaps the most notable achieve­ ment   is  the  skill  with   which   Margaret Laurence has  shown   the  lives  and  emo­  tions  of  older   people  through  a  child's  eye, until  in the end  the child  moves into  the   age   when   those   emotions  become identical with  hers,  and  the  perceiver be­ comes  the  perceived.






WHERE PRUFROCK WAS

GEORGE JONAs,    The Happy    Hungry    Man.
House  of  Anansi.  $s.oo.

SoME MONTHS   AGO, when  George  Jonas came  to read  in Victoria, I was asked  to introduce  him.   New  in  Canada, I  had not met  him  or read  his work. That afternoon I read  all The Happy Hungry Man  aloud   (twice)  and  discussed  it with my students.
Jonas's  talent  was   obvious   at   once.
His  poems  are  easily  available and  read aloud   well.   His   range   and   intelligence are  immediately appealing.  Several  stu­ dents   asked   where   they   could   buy   the book, and  bought it.  A few  admired the skill, but  had  misgivings  about the  pose, the  cynicism  on  show.
At his reading, later,  Jonas offered  the
more  "serious" pieces. Having been taken with   his  book's  lighter   moments, I  got him  to  add  "Wakes up  next  morning to the strains  of 0 Canada" (a  piece which cries out for its proper space in all the anthologies)  and  the  comic  odyssey, "He hitches  a  ride". Nothing further was  re­ vealed  about   him  in  the  brief  post-read­ ing  discussion,  with  its  generally  opaque questions:	"What   do    you    think    of Leonard Cohen?", etc.
All this by way of first response to a talented, rather  engaging poet.  Jonas   is not   the   Canadian  poet   (that  much   is clear,   leaving   aside   what  a  "Canadian poet"    may   be).  He   isn't   even   North
 American,  but  is an internationalist  writ­ ing  in  English.  Nationalities,  alienation, angst,   role-playing,   bombers,    "they", Brecht,   a   good   lay-the    book's   sub­ stance,  with  the  expressed   wish  to  nar­  row  his  circle  of  experience  to  the  last of  these. And  why  not?
Rereading  it   now,   I  am   less  happy
with   the  book.  Its   angst  is  fashionable rather than  deeply felt. Jonas's scheme, making  a  day's  quotidian progress  a  re­ ference  point  for  all  "the happy  hungry man's" impingements, is  quite  imagina­ tive  (related to the sense of the common­ place  in  such  poets  as  Frank  O'Hara) , but  it  limits  his  basic  approach, chiefly to   the   one-page   "lyric"   which   tells   a little   story-a  mode   which   right   now seems  old-fashioned  and  restrictive. The chance events  of  "the happy  hungry man's"   progress  - picture   of   Lorca, Radnoti poems, Brecht-seem  rather calculated  (may  not  be,  need  not  be­ given   the   type   of   persona,  who   belies everywhere  the  photograph  of  the  starv­  ing  Asian on  p.  7, -but  they  seem  that  way).
The   book   opens   with   statements  of
what   "the   happy   hungry man" believes in 	(three   lines) .   Line    4    reads:	"I wouldn't  mind    believing   in   something myself".  This  should  make  us uneasy. So, the  "happy hungry man" is not a persona for the  poet?  Or  is he? Who is he?  That poem's  closing line is a puzzle which  also reveals  much: "Sometimes one  is almost tempted to go on living".  Happy? Temp­ ted   by  what?  Does  one,   then,  charac­ teristically,   not   want   to  go  on   living? If "the happy  hungry man"  is  all  of  us, wouldn't it  be truer  to  point  to our  con­ tinuing   fierce  desire   to   go   on   living? "Almost tempted"?  We  shall  reach  con­ clusion  before  we are through  that, who-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ever   he   may   be,   "the   happy    hungry man" has no strong  temptation to do himself  in.
Much  in   The  Happy    Hungry Man
depends  on  readers'   associations.   Noth­ ing  new happens with  the language (the  life  of "the   poem"  itself is  therefore not at   issue  as  something to  "believe   in") . Nothing interesting is going on rhythmic­ ally/musically.  Much  of the  work  would be  more   in   keeping   with   "an   average  river"   (photo  of   junked   cars  on  river­ bed,  p.  33)   if  it  were  in  broken   form, but  Jonas's staples  are  free  verse   ( dic­ tated   by  grammatic  phrasing)  and   the kind    of   "loose   iambic"   Robert   Frost talked  about. Slippery  stuff, it becomes "memorizable"  as   poems   of   ideas   (as in   the   "0  Canada" poem   mentioned above).
Incidental  pleasures   are  fairly  plenti­ ful,   such   as  the   portrait  of   the  virgin travelling in  the  clubcar:

Soon  she  will  respond  to  the  last  call  for lunch
A  happy   piece  of  salmon  will  sit  in   her
plate
Which  she  may  reward   with  half  a  gentle
smile,

or  "the happy   hungry   man's" wry  con­
frontation with  g-o-d:

I met  God  yesterday.
He  sat  on  a  sort  of  throne
We  were  both  slightly  embarrassed.
"I  have   no   answers   for   you,"   he   said
finally.
I was  relieved  but  tried  not  to  show  it.
I had  no  questions.

These are  typical  of  a  quiet,  ironic  wit which   is  both  a  plus  and   a  minus  for Jonas-plus  because  it  is witty  and  ac­ complished,  minus   because  it   reveals  a whole   attitude  of   urbane   non-commit­ ment.  Yet   this,  in   turn,  may   have   its

86
 bonuses,  as  in  the  case  of the  "marginal affair", now  over:

We  nod  when   we  meet  in  the  street,   we smile
And    we   still   share    the    same   cleaning lady.

Everything is relative  in "the happy hungry  man's"   world;  he   isn't    really happy, he isn't  really  hungry. Death will ensure that  no one's actions, mistakes, commitments, will "make the  slightest difference", being a Canadian suits "just fine"  since  it  means   having  "to  remem­ ber   no  one   &  nothing". It's  only   "on  second  thought he  screwed  her/  On  the New  York   Thruway  to  Canarsie",  this "happy hungry man":

Passing
With  my  lights  out
Unknown
At  any  address
Matching
No  description.

Foolish  to  quarrel with  another man's response    to   his   own   experience. One hasn't the  right  and, here,  it's  beside  the point.  Jonas has  many  good  qualities­ wit, intelligence, talent, and others  which may  be good-a sense of  irony,  detach­ ment,  etc.;  but  his  non-commitment, his careful abdication,  permeates  his  book's texture. He  entertains, but  does  not  ex­ cite.  He reminds us of horrors he does not actually  make   us  feel.  Centring  poems on  widely  significant  experiences   of  our time,  he does not illuminate. We haven't, in  this  book,  moved   a  step  from   where Prufrock was over  fifty years ago:

If this  is heaven,  we'll  make  the  best  of it. There must  be music  of a kind,  there  must
be  sex,
And  refreshments will  be  served  at  ten  to
SlX.

MIKE DOYLE

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



EXISTENCE AND SONOROUS ART

ALDEN  NOWLAN,   The   Mysterious  Naked  Man.
Clarke Irwin, $3.95.

IF  ALDEN  NOWLAN's   Bread,   Wine  and Salt   notched   a  new  stage  in  his  poetic growth, The   Mysterious Naked   Man  re­ veals   an   even   roomier   accomplishment in  terms  of the  grace and  strength of his colloquial voice.
Poems  like  "The First  Stirring of  the
Beasts",   "The  Mosherville Road",  and "In  Memoriam:  Claude  Orser    ( r 894- r g68)"  exude  the  centring  sadness which typifies this collection, a complete indifference to facile  epiphany. For the reader, enlightenment arrives  from some­ where   beyond  poetic   parts,   from  a  sum impossible  to convey  without  quoting an entire  poem  that comprehends wonder  or
fear   or  love  so  altogether  and   without
coercion.
Consider  "The Persistent  Caller". The first twenty-six lines describe a simple situation: the poet refuses to answer the doorbell  because  he's busy working inside, and  likely it's  some  kid calling  on his son who  isn't  home  anyway.  But  then  knock­ ing  starts,   grows  louder, until   the  man needs to reassure  himself  that  as an adult  he has a perfect  right  to refuse answering a child. "Still", the poem concludes,

I keep  my eye on  the  door in  case whoever it is making all  that noise should turn  the  knob
and  start to push  it open.

What one perceives  here is an example of the   repercussion  which   amplifies   Now­ lan's   attempts to  universalize  such  low­ brow  events.  In  this  case  the  controlling
 image  connotes   the  sort  of  dismay  that might  derive from  a grenade going off in slow motion, when words are too late for anything but ineffectual excuse, after  one has  inexplicably   pulled   the   pin.  That's why  his insight   at  its  richest  contains a swelling,  inescapable  fascination, and why   (as  Nowlan   says  in  the  final  lines of  the  book)   he  is

bursting to  tell  someone about the  great sight  seen,
yet  not even  sure  why  it should seem so important.

Irrationality  suggests   the   recent   sur­ realism that  also lends to this new volume  its expansive  success.

A  thousand nights
I've  flown  with  Beurling, cried  out  in  nightmare from   the  beaches
of  Normandy,
sweated  in  engine rooms until   it  seemed
my  skin  peeled
as  from  sunburn, endured winds  so cold
my teeth  chattered until, one  by  one,
they  fell out  and  bounced
off  icy  decks
into  the  North Atlantic.

Yet although war  has begun  to interest Nowlan-he can   present   it  surrealisti­ cally or  naturalistically  ("Ypres: rgrs")
-its characters  relate   inevitably  to   a
familiar social  centrality; even  most  of the  half dozen or so poems set in Ireland and England  involve  working-class people one  remembers from  the  earlier  work.  As in the past, too, the fluidity of Nowlan's colloquialism  stands  out; perfected by delicate  qualification it becomes his own metre:

but when  I tell  you
she's  a woman  who  can  set fires

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



in a man's body  with
those  same  fingers,  well  then, it becomes an  act  of holiness, that little gesture.

Certainly Nowlan  remains  unique  for the extensive  interest   he   manifests    in   his search   for  awareness through the  action of  others.  And  through, of course,  those things  which  are, which are.
Such  as grotesque normality.  The mys­ terious   naked   man   of  the  title  poem  is not   so  inscrutable  as  the  witness   who cannot  describe   his   appearance  to  the police  because  he  is  naked:   a  perverted case of not seeing the forest for the  trees, the  human  malaise. And throughout this collection  of  eighty-five  poems  the naked fugitive  reappears in  the guise of a terri­  fied  boy  or  an  insane  woman  or a legen­ dary leper  or an  ascetic  recluse or a poet near  death. A Brueghelian world,  finally, where

each  one  of these  thousands has created me, is therefore my god,

or

laughter is the  wail of wind  in alder leaves  sucked  dry and
dying,
or  where   the  gap  dissolves  between   the cacophony or existence  when
 all  that comes  out
is the  sound of one  sick old  man scraping a  shaky  bow
across  an  out-of-tune fiddle,

between  that, and  sonorous  art.

KEATH  FRASER



ODYSSEAN JOURNEY

ROBERT KROETSCH,  The  Studhorse Man. Mac­
millan. $4.50.

ROBERT KROETSCH  once  described  him­ self  as  having "lived   my  life  alternating between   various   parts  of  the  frontier or wilderness  and  various universities." It is a statement he must  be weary  of by now, for  it  has  been  dutifully  recorded on  the jacket   of  each   of   his   three   novels   as though it  somehow   contained the  secret  of  the  man.  But  it  does, in  fact,  provide  an  interesting  perspective on  his  novels. Each  of them  could  be called  "regional" in   their   use  of  setting    (the   first   takes place  on  the  Mackenzie River,  the  next two  in  rural  Alberta) , but  in  the  hands of  the  university-trained writer  these  set-





Write  or Phone

THE   UNIVERSITY BOOK  STORE Vancouver  8,  B.C.	
 Text
Trade
Medical

whenever  you need

BOOKS


88
 
Technical Hard Back Paper Back

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



tings  are  transmuted  into  something which   goes  far  beyond   regionalism. For while  the  journey  in The  Studhorse  Man is from  Edmonton to a small  town  called Coulee  Hill,  the  novel's  events  take  place on   a   mythic,    rather  than    a  realistic, plane.
This    mythicizing  Kroetsch    accom­ plishes   particularly  through   his   use  of names.  Demeter  Proudfoot  is  the  book's narrator-author, a name  which  joins the Greek  goddess  of  marriage to  an  English equivalent  of  the  name   Oedipus, while the  hero  whose  wanderings he  chronicles  is called  Hazard  Lepage ; as he  leads  his stallion   Poseidon   about  in  search   of  a perfect  mare,  Hazard encounters women with  such  delightful  names  as  P.  Cock­ burn, the  widow  Lank, and   Hole   (with her  husband Stiff). The  effect of this technique is suggested  in  one  of the  nar­ rator's reflections:

I  have   more   than  once   remembered that the  pleasure in  listening to  a  hockey  game, as   I  do   each    Saturday  night  during  the long winter, resides  not only in the air of suppressed and yet  impending violence, but also   in   the   rain  upon our   senses  of  those sudden and   glorious names.

Style  reinforces the  mythic quality, for the  novel  utilizes  the  precise,  sparse  lan­ guage  of the  fable.  It eschews  the  use of descriptive detail   for  verisimilitude,  and the   description  it  does  employ   is  most frequently the   symbolic   detail  of   the dream:

Hazard  also   implied ... that  the   ultimate horror  came   at   \laving, while standing  on the   back   of   the   galloping  horse,    to   leap through  a   ring   Of   fire.  The  flaming circle blazed    before   his   eyes   like   a   hole   in   the darkness,  waiting   to   swallow    him    down. He   could   neither leap at  the   bright  circle nor   jump   from   the   back  of  the  mare. The mice  were  a shrill hum at Tad's bare  feet.
 In  fact,  Kroetsch conceives  of  his principal  role   as   that    of   myth-maker (and  feels that   as such  he  is working  in the tradition of other  western  Canadian novelists  such  as  F.  P. Grove  and  Mar­ garet   Laurence) .  For  example,  each   of his  novels  provides   the   reader   with   its own   reworking   of   the   Oedipus   arche­ type.  In  But We  Are  Exiles, young  Peter Guy  must  try  to  reconcile  his  accidental (but  desired)  killing of the  man  who has stolen   his   girl   friend   and   whose   very name, Hornyak, suggests  the  threatening aspect  of male  sexuality.   In  The  Words  of My  Roaring  the  novel's  protagonist, John  Judas  Backstrom, is locked  in  poli­ tical  struggle   with   an  older   man,   Doc Murdoch, a man   who  has  been  like  a father  to  him.  Here   too  the  battle  be­ comes   a  sexual   one,   a   struggle   which revolves  around Murdoch's  daughter.
In The Studhorse Man this archetypal conflict   is  given   new   form.   It  is  the novel's fictional  author, Demeter, who believes himself to be a rival to the very character whose  adventures he  is  chron­ icling.   Hazard,  here,    is   the   powerful male  force, leading about  the stud  Posei­ don,  a  phallic  symbol  on  a  leash   ("You  four-legged    cock,"    he    sometimes    ad­  dresses the animal). The youthful Deme­ ter  stays  close  to  home,  and  to  Martha, the woman  to whom  Hazard will eventu­ ally  return.
But in this novel even  the  phallic  male has  difficulties,  for  Hazard's quest  for  a mare  to breed,  and  thus  preserve  the Lepage  line of horses, is unsucoessful. "Whoever  thought,"  muses   Hazard  at one  point,  "that screwing  would  go out of  style?"   And   here,   much   more   than in  the  other   two   novels,  the   two  male figures are revealed  as the duality which exists within  man.  Hazard and  Demeter

8g

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



merge:  Hazard  takes  the  alias  "Proud­ foot"; upon  occasions  he  assumes  poses which  are characteristic of  Demeter; and he   may   be -in fact   probably    is-a creation of  the  narrator's  imagination, a projection of   Demeter's divided   self.
The Oedipus myth  is not  the  only im­ portant archetype working in these novels however-nor  is  it   really   the   central one. The plot  of each  takes its  particular form  from  its  own  controlling  myth.  As its epigraph suggests,  But We  Are Exiles is shaped  by the story of  Narcissus.  (Seen in   these   terms,   Hornyak   becomes,   in some  sense,  a   reflection   of  Guy's   own personality.)   The  Words  of  My  Roar­ ing works with  the  seasonal-rebirth myth of Pluto and  Persephone, and  its struggle ultimately becomes  that  of  the  forces  of death against  those  of life.
In The Studhorse Man, Kroetsch has employed    an    archetype  which    must
surely   be  difficult   for  any  post-Joycean
writer  to  attempt, that  of the  journey  of Odysseus.  But  since  Kroetsch is a  writer of  comic  vision  (the  mistake  of  his first novel,  he feels, was its attempt to  create a tragic  world), he takes his hero on a delightfully insane  mock-odyssey which  is all  this  author's own.  Demeter  becomes a  Telemachus who  wishes  to  have Martha, a parodic Penelope  who  keeps a hotel,  for  his own.  The  faithful Euryclea and   the   patient  hound    Argus   are   re­ placed   by  the   aching and   aged   house­ keeper   Mrs.   Laporte and   her  setter­ and   now,  rather than   being  recognized by a  scar,  Hazard  finds  himself  seduced by  the  woman,   and  scarred   as  an  out­  come.
Poseidon, the god that kept Odysseus moving,   is  here   Hazard's  horse,   hence his own  turbulent phallic  energy. And  in the  novel's  parody  of  the  Odyssey's  re-

go
 union   scene,  Hazard's  phallus   becomes, for   Martha,  like   Odysseus'   bedpost­ the  centre  of  the  universe  and  its source of stability:

There was  no  tree  of  knowledge   to  equal that  one in her  will to know,  no ladder  and no  hill.  Axis  mundi, the  wise men  tell  us, and  on  it  the  world  turns.

But it is an  Odyssey in which  Odysseus dies  in  the  end,  and  in  which  Hazard's very   striving  for   fertility    becomes   in­ verted   by  modern  civilization   into  ster­  ility:

I must  intrude here  a  little   scientific   jar­ gon ... [says  Demeter   to  explain   the   use to  which  Poseidon  was  put  after  Hazard's death].  PMU   is  an  abbreviation   that   en­ ables  one  to  avoid  saying  Pregnant Mares'  Urine.   From   the   urine  of   pregnant  mares (to   be  more   precise,  from  urine   collected during   the  fifth  to  the  ninth  month  of  the eleventh-month   pregnancy),  scientists   are able  to  extract  the  female  hormone  known as oestrogen.  With  oestrogen,  in  turn,  they have  learned  to  prevent   the  further multi­  plication  of  man  upon  the face of the earth.

With    its  ingenuity,  its  skilful   mani­ pulation of  the  twin  foci  of  Hazard and Demeter, and  its spirit  of  comic madness,  all  handled  with   great  technical  ability  and    careful   craftsmanship,  The   Stud­ horse Man  is  a  significant achievement.
RUSSELL M.BROWN



NEWSMEN


MURRAY DONNELLY,   Dafoe  of the  Free  Press.
Macmillan.
WILFRED   EGGLESTON,    While I  Still   Remem­
ber.  Ryerson.

A BIOGRAPHY is by definition concerned with  the  whole  of  the  subject's life,  but rightly    organized,  the   balance  of   the

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



study must fall to the years of greater influence or creativity, and to some degree the  reader  anticipates  the  same  weight­ ing in an autobiography. Neither Murray Donnelly's  biography,  Dafoe  of the  Free Press, nor  Wilfrid  Eggleston's  autobiog­ raphy,  While  I  Still Remember, answers this expectation.
Donnelly's failure is one of emphasis. Unfortunately for  him, the  crucial  years of Dafoe's career  had  already  been  thor­ oughly  covered  in  Ramsay  Cook's  The Politics  of John  W. Dafoe  and  the  Free Press  (a  book  never  referred   to  in  the present  volume).  Donnelly's  consequent attempt    to   find   a   centre   other   than politics in  tracing  the  course  of  Dafoe's development  is coupled with  his desire to reach  the  largest  possible audience,  and by leaning  too far  towards  the  popular, he not only provides little for the special­ ist  but  also does a disservice both  to his subject  and  to the lay reader.
It may  be  that   a  biography  written without  the  panoply of scholarship  befits
the  journalist  J. W.  Dafoe,  who  recog­
nized the  generalist  nature  of  his trade.
Nonetheless,  Dafoe,  himself  formed   by the course of events, was for  many years a shaper of Canadian opinions, and the evolution of his thought  demands  a seri­ ous  treatment.  Donnelly  does,  in   fact, perceive the watersheds Dafoe  passed  on his way to  becoming  an  internationalist, and  the  key issues  which  involved  him. Yet  he  buries the  essential man  under  a mountain   of   bathetic   attempts   to  read Dafoe's  attitudes  as an expression of his environmental experiences.
Donnelly's primary  thesis is apparently that  Dafoe  is yet  another  successful Horatio  Alger, a backwoods boy made good, even an exponent  of survival of the fittest, always distressed by his inability to
 eradicate the breed of Tory imperialists. Dafoe is characterized  as "the rough, red­ haired,   deep-chested   backwoods  hick," "the  boy from  Combermere,"  "the  boy from   Winnipeg,"    "the   boy   from   the backwoods,"  who  "vented   his  anger  as cuttingly  through   his  pencil  as  he  had once wielded  an  axe";  who  "slashed  at ideas  he  did  not  like  as  if   he  were  a lumberjack  climbing  a  tree."
Despite  the   author's   claim   that   his
method  is original  ("This  book is not a biography in the traditional sense, but is rather   an  attempt   to  describe  and  de­ lineate  the  interaction   between  a   man and   his   environment." -Preface)    his book belongs to what  may  be called  the "lone  pine" school of biography,  one  of the  least  attractive   Victorian  contribu­  tions to the genre. Possibly Donnelly took his theme from  Dafoe's  belief that  "sur­ roundings mould habits and form charac­ ter,"  but  the  feeling  for  their  homeland that   Dafoe   demanded   from   Canadian writers  and   his  own  abiding   love  for Canada   have  little  to  do  with  the  sup­ posed effects of certain  trees and of cold winter  nights  on a young boy.
Countless Canadians developed in communities  like Combermere,  travelled on wood-burning  trains,  raced  on  snow­ shoes, and were seasick while crossing the Atlantic. Doubtless all  these  things were
stored  up in J. W. Dafoe's  memory, but
the constant  iteration  of them  leaves the
reader  with  the  picture  of  a  man  still naive and not very well-informed in his fifties, a  portrait   which  manifestly  dis­ torts   the   outspoken   and   free-thinking  Dafoe. Geography and  climate  were and are  essential Canadian  facts, and  Dafoe knew  it.  He   also  knew   that   the  "two solitudes"  and   the   British   government had  much  to  do  with  Canadian  history,

gr

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



and   in  his  continuing  concern   for   na­ tional   identity,  these  considerations  oc­ cupied  him  much  more  than  the physical conditions. Always  emphasizing  what  he supposes   to  be  the  psychological  effects of  Dafoe's  environment, Donnelly  buries the  references   to  his  changing attitudes in  mid-paragraph. As illustrations-the reader  is told "he  knew now that  Canada could   never  be  a  melting  pot"  in  a  sec­ tion  which  begins  "He was more  than  a year   older   than   Canada...."  and   the description of Dafoe's ultimate  advocacy  of  centralization  of   government  follows "he   was  old  and  would  soon  die  while the   country  was   young;   and ... would continue to  grow."
It is  more  difficult  to  fault   an  auto-­
biography for misplaced  emphasis; the reader   can  only  complain   that   what   he had  hoped   to  find  is not  there.  In  Wil­ frid   Eggleston's  case  what   is  missing  is an   expression   of   the   tenaciousness    of spirit   which   enabled  the  author  to  rise from  stockboy  in  Pakowki's  general  store to  Chief  Press  Censor  and  finally  to  the head  of  the School  of Journalism in Ot­ tawa's  Carleton College.  Whether humil­ ity,  a   general   desire   not   to  offend   or genuine  feeling  is  the  source,  the  whole of  the   memoir   is  coloured   by  the   rosy view of  retrospect.
In  one  way  Eggleston's   essentially  ro-­ mantic  survey  of  a  virtually   unmarred past  provides  a  healthy  corrective to  the study  of  Dafoe,  for  their experiences  of youthful poverty  and  hard-gained educa­ tion   are   parallel   and  Eggleston   baldly states   the  general  financial   situation  of rural  Canada   ("We  were   poor   but   so were  all  our  neighbours")  without sug­ gesting  that  it  was  the  prime  shaper   of his success.  On  the  other  hand, by omit­  ting  or  glossing  over  events,  particularly
 conflicts   of   personalities,  which   deter­ mined   policies,  he  deprives   his  audience of  the  insight  into  the  newspaper world of  the   twenties   to  the  forties  which   he could  well  have  given.
Eggleston's style is in accord  with  his vision of events. The smooth  flow, simple diction, brief  paragraphs, and  strict  ad­ herence  to  chronological  order   are  the cumulative result  of his years on the Star and  Star  Weekly, and  his many  years of free-lancing. What he must  have  learned  of  sensationalism  and   invective  on   the Star  itself  and  in  the  Ottawa  Press Gal­  lery  is  throughout  overshadowed  by  his temperamental  suitability for the journal­ ism  of  the  Star  Weekly which   was  de­ signed  for  "relaxed reading".
If it  is  unfair  to  judge  Eggleston   or his  work  in  this  way, it is an  impression he   clearly   leaves   by  design.   While   he adds  to the  fund  of anecdotes, his stories, with  the  possible  exception of  the  J. R. Bone -H. C.   Hindmarsh  clashes,   are related  in  the  kindliest   way,  with   any­ thing    reflecting   to    anyone's    discredit visibly  softened.  A  single  example  will suffice;  Mitchell  Hepburn's  presentation of the  Ontario  brief  to the  Rowell-Sirois Commission. What is generally  agreed  to have   been   an   intended  insult    to   the Federal   government   is   described  by Eggleston   as   "uncomfortable  and   em­ barrassing", a report "conceived in the spirit  of  high   jinks."
Were  they additions to a well-tilled region,  these  two  books  might   be  evalu­ ated   differently, but   they  exemplify   the way   in   which   the   study   of   Canadian journalism  has   been    neglected.   While Eggleston is not  the first Canadian  news­ paperman to write his memoirs  and  Don­  nelly  is  not   the  first  to study   John  W. Dafoe,  the   time   has   come   when   such

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



works  need  to  be  related   to  the  larger field, when  journalism must  cease to be  a peripheral interest.
JANE FREDEMAN



AMAZONIAN
TRAVELS

GEORGE  WOODCOCK,   Henry  Walter Bates, Na­ turalist  of   the    Amazons.   Queenswood House,  $7.00.

HENRY WALTER BATES was a self-taught English    naturalist.  He   went   to   Brazil (with   Alfred  Russell   Wallace)  in  1848, nearly penniless, stayed eleven years, wandering  the   Amazon   River   and   en­ virons,   collecting  "no   less  than   8,ooo hitherto unknown species of insects, birds, mammals  and   other  forms   of   animal  life."
Bates'   book,   The    Naturalist   on  the River  Amazons,  1863,  forms  the  princi­ pal source of George  Woodcock's account of his life. The  Naturalist  was one of the most  popular travel  books of  its time, its merit  previously  attested  by Charles Dar­ win,  D.  H.   Lawrence,  George   Orwell,  and   now  by  George  Woodcock   himself. Their quadruple testimony impresses,  but does  not  altogether convince the  sceptic in me.  For I  think  much  of the  merit  in the  new  book  is supplied  by  Woodcock.
However, the  idea  of a young English­ man   living   off   the   proceeds  of  selling dead   insects   and   animals to  museums,  wandering  among  the   Indians  of  then little-known Brazil, is interesting of itself. The  sheer bulk of  information about  mid­  nineteenth  century  life  in  Brazil  is  also impressive.  But  Bates'  life, in  the  quoted  excerpts  from   his  book,  remains  some-
 what  impersonal, as if he were describing himself outwardly but  not internally. And that  is perhaps unjust  of me, for this is a travel  book, not a novel.
Bates and  Wallace   (the  two men sepa­
rated    not   long   after   reaching  Brazil) were part of that  yeasty boil of British scientific  theory  that   preceded   Darwin's The   Origin  of  Species;  they   were   the field   men   who   visited   the   far   places others read and theorized about, endured hardships, recording their  experiences in books.
But curiously, when Bates returned to England in  1859,  he  became   the  proto­ type  of  a conventional  life,  getting mar­ ried,  accepting an  appointment with  the Royal  Geographical  Society,  and  did  no more   field   work.   That  his  health   was somewhat impaired  by  years  in   Brazil does  not  explain   his  life  breaking   into these  two  distinct parts,  though   perhaps lack of money and family responsibilities does.
Bates died in 1892, a minor scientific figure  perhaps, but  of  interest   also  as  a writer  and  traveller. And I  join George Woodcock  in  speculating that   his  mind may  have  wandered  back  to  those  early days in Brazil, "as it lapsed  toward  death in  the  bedroom   of  a  Victorian suburb."
A. W. PURDY


BIRO'S EYE VIEW

DESMOND  PACEY, Essays in  Canadian Criticism
1938-Ig68, Ryerson,  $7.00.

Essays in  Canadian  Criticism  1938-1968 is a collection  of twenty-four articles  that Desmond   Pacey  has  published  on  Cana­ dian  literature in English  during the past thirty    years.   These    essays   display   his

93

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



thoughts  on a wide variety of subjects in many  kinds  of  articles  through  several types  of  criticism.  He  reprints,  for  ex­ ample,  from  Culture   ( I953)   a  critical analysis of Lampman's "Heat", from the Queen's  Quarterly   (I 962)   a  paper  on "The   Young   Writer   in   Canada",  ori­ ginally  given  at  a  Student   Conference on  Creative  Writing  in  Canada   at  the University  of  Toronto,  and  from  Cana­ dian   Literature    ( 1967)    a   study,   first delivered   as  a   lecture   at   Sir  George Williams University,  of "The  Phenome­ non  of  Leonard   Cohen"  which  traces some   relationships   between   Cohen's earlier  work  and  Beautiful  Losers. This collection,  then,   provides  a  bird's   eye view of the charactistics  of Pacey as cri­ tic that  he has shown previously in works like  Creative  Writing   in  Canada,  Ten



ALPHABET 18 will centre around the Hieroglyph, features poem drawings by JUDITH COPITHORNE, an original song by Vancouver  Island's  LYLE CROSBIE.
JANE SHEN is assisting with the planning of this issue, one of the most striking
and original to come from Alphabet
Press. Summer  1970.

ALPHABET  19-Horoscope Astrologica in the painting of Hieronymus Bosch viewed by
JETSKE SYBESMA.
"2001:  a Space Commedia?"  by
JAMES POLK.
"Solar  Flares" a poem by
PHYLLIS GOTLIEB.
Various astrologers are at work. Autumn  1970.

$1.00 at most bookstores or order direct  from English  Department/University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario. A Subscription is
$2.00  per year  for two issues. Please make
cheques  payable to  Alphabet.



94
 Canadian  Poets, and  the  chapter  on "Fiction    ( I 920- I 940) " in the   Literary History  of Canada.
Pacey  as  critic  is  impressive.  For  the past three decades he has been one of the few critics  in  Canada who  have  consis­ tently and  frequently  written  about  Can­ adian  literature in  English. He  has been industrious,  ingenious,  and  opportunistic in bringing  forgotten, neglected, and  new authors  to  the  attention of students  and readers   of   this   literature.  One   of  the articles    in    Essays,   "Frederick    Philip Grove"  ( I943)   was a rehearsal for Fred­ erick   Philip   Grove   ( 1945),  until   very recently the only published, book-length study of this author. All Pacey's qualities as a critic  are  displayed in  Essays in Canadian  Criticism.
Pacey as critic  is also disturbing, how­ ever.  One   gets  tired  of   statements  like "Of    the    best-known    writers    of	this period    [ 1900-I920]  - Ralph   Connor, L.  M.  Montgomery   and  Norman  Dun­ can  in  prose,  W.  H.  Drummond,  Tom Macinnes, Robert  Service, and  Marjorie  Pickthall  in  verse-only  Marjorie  Pick­ than,  and she only in a minor way, was a serious  artist."   One  longs  to  ask  Pacey what  he  means  by "serious  artist",  and one  begins  to  suspect  that   he  has  not read  many of these authors'  works. Since he  categorizes  L.  M.  Montgomery  as  a writer   of  "books  for  juveniles",  I  cer­ tainly  wonder  if he has read  her  Emily books, which,  to the extent  that  they are autobiographical, suggest that  she was a serious, if  not  totally  successful, novelist who  did  not  write  particularly  for  chil­ dren.
Furthermore,  although    Pacey  warns
the reader  in the "Foreword" that  "some of these essays express attitudes and opinions  to  which  [he]   no  longer  sub-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



scribes",   he  neither tells  the  reader   that they   contain  facts   which   are   incorrect nor   does   he   use  footnotes  to   indicate errors  when  they  occur. One  example of inaccuracy is  his  account of  the  life  of Frederick  Phillip   Grove.   While  Douglas Spettigue's  Frederick   Philip   Grove   was probably   published   too   late    to   allow Pacey  to  consider   Spettigue's version  of Grove's life,  suspicion  has  been  cast  by critics   for   many   years  on  the   accuracy of  Grove's   autobiography, In  Search   of Myself, the  chief   source   of  Pacey's  in­ formation  for   both   the   article and  the book.
Finally,   his  tone  is  sometimes  annoy­ ing.  The reason  for  this  is  suggested   in the  last  article in  Essays, "The  Outlook for  Canadian Literature"   ( Ig68). Here  Pacey characterizes  himself  as a "doctor'' who  has  been  "for  over  a  quarter of  a century ... taking the  pulse  of Canadian literature"  and   says   that    he   has   "the  satisfaction of   knowing  that   the  patient is in  rather  better health than  when  [his]  diagnosis  began". Canadian literature in English  may   have  suffered   from   minor  ailments  like  laryngitis and   frost-bite in the   past,   but   it   has   never-and   cer­ tainly  not in the  past  twenty-five years­ been  sick  enough  to   need   a  doctor  as critic.
Perhaps Pacey provides  the fairest assessment  of  Essays  in  Canadian  Criti­ cism 1938-Ig68 and  of himself  as critic  at the end  of "Sir  Charles G. D. Roberts".
I have  substituted some words for Pacey's
and  changed the  tenses in  the  quotation:

He  does  have  many weaknesses; in  particu­ lar   as   if  he   feels   that   single-handedly  he must    [criticize]  Canadian literature in   all its  branches, he  has  tried to  do  too  much, become  a   [critical]  jack-of-all-trades. But by  virtue   of   his   influence  on   others,  and  by  virtue  of  the  few   truly excellent [criti-
 cisms)  he himself  has written, he certainly deserves a place  in  our  living tradition.

Essays in Canadian Criticism rg38-rg68 likewise  deserves  a  place  on  our   book­ shelves.
MARY JANE  EDWARDS


NOT WITHOUT RESERVATION
SHEILA  BURNFORD, Without   Reserve.  McClel­
land   &  Stewart. $6.g5.

SHEILA  BURNFORD is of Course the  author of  The  Incredible Journey. Her   second book, Fields of Noon, a collection  of naturalist  essays,  far   surpassed   Journey in style, wit, and command of material. Because the second book rose above the defects   of  the  first,  and   because   as  an essayist  Mrs.   Burnford  revealed    herself an intelligent, witty, honest  person, the prospect   of  a  third   book  in  which   she relates  her  experiences "among the northern  forest   Indians"  (to   quote   the dust  jacket)   was  full  of  promise.  And  a human subject  was  the  logical  next  step in  her  development as  a  writer, was  it not?
The logic turns  out  to  be  purely  acci­ dental, however. Without Reserve is little  more  than   a  collection  of  notes  spread  over  some seven  years  when  forays  were made   into   the   northern   Ontario  bush. This   time  the  author's  quarry  was  not mushrooms or  wild  duck, but   the  Cree  and  Ojibwa Indian.  At  the  outset,  Mrs. Burnford  is  careful   to  make   clear   her own  lack  of intent:

Neither Susan [the artist who  accompanied her)   nor  I, committing sketches or  words  to paper in  those  days,  did  so with  any  idea  of eventual  publication,   only    for    our    own

95

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



satisfaction    and   our   own   records.   Much of what  follows here  has been lifted  straight out   of  journal,   notes,  or  sketchbook;  the rest   has  been  edited   or  enlarged   or  deli­ berately  written  for  the  sake  of  continuity. There are  no drums  beaten  throughout the pages,  no  problems  solved.  We  were,  and are,  never  happier than  among  the  Ojibwa  or  Cree   people  on   their  far   northern  re­ serves, and  that  is  all  there  is to it.

Then, as  though conscious  this  may  not be enough, she adds:

We shall  be happier  still if our  descriptions will   do   anything  towards   helping    other non-Indians   to    understand   something    of the   background  from  which   these   people are  now  slowly  emerging.

Unfortunately, one  cannot  help  inferring from  this that  the desire to publish  a new book has taken  precedence over  the  hope of fostering understanding.
One   misses,  too,  a  sense  of  dramatic
unity.  Without Reserve  is neither a  log­ book  nor  a  collection  of essays; it  is  evi­ dent  that  a serious  attempt at continuity has  been  made. Yet  could  not  the  mate­ rial  have  been  better  arranged, perhaps to  illustrate an   unfolding  theme?  This  said, it must  be emphasized  that  Without Reserve  is  nevertheless  well  worth   read­  ing.  Mrs.  Burnford's style is literate and  witty,  her  observations acute.  The  many  drawings  by  Susan   Ross  add   a  further dimension  to  the  descriptions of  Indian life  and   help   to   unify   the   book.   One  finishes  it  with  admiration for  the  good fortune   and    enterprise   of   these    two women,  "Mizraw and   Mizburp" as  the Indians  would   have  it,  who  eventually succeeded in  breaking through whatever curtain   (Moosehide?)  may   be  said   to divide  the  two  races.
Mrs.  Burnford devotes  the  first  chap­ ter  of  her   book  to  explaining  why  the unhousewifely  pastime  of   Indian-watch­ ing attracted her  at all. She had, it seems,

g6
 a vivid  childhood experience while  visit­ ing her  grandparents in Canada  (she was born  a  Scot  and  is a  naturalized Cana­ dian) , where  the  physical  dexterity and  unsunbonnetted  freedom of a briefly-met Indian  child   filled   her   with   envy   and  despair:

I  felt   most   unbearably  inadequate  and wrong ... Effete    and    somehow    repulsive would  be the words I would  have used to describe   myself  had   I   known   them   then. She  was so essentially  right ....

She   also   had,    she   tells   us   proudly, a distinguished forebear, one "Scotty" Philip,  who  "had lived  among the  Che­ yenne  and   the  Sioux" and   who,  more­  over,  had  married a sister-in-law of  Chief Crazy   Horse.   The  childhood   romantic dreams which   she  spun   from  these  two threads turned  out   to  be  poor  prepara­ tion  for  later  emigration to  this  country, where  she  was  confronted  with  the  sad evidences   of  Indian life  to  be  found   in and  around what  was  then  Port  Arthur, Ontario.
Realism  may  have succeeded in quenching the  romance, but  curiosity blazed   on.   She   met   Susan   Ross,   who shared  her  persistent interest, and  at  last the  first important contacts were  made. Over   the  years  as  one  contacted  to  an­ other  they   visited    Lake    Nipigon,   Big Trout Lake,   Sandy   Lake,   Fort  Severn,  Casabonika and  Yelling  Falls,  staying  at nursing   stations and  schoolhouses, seek­ ing  always  to  assimilate life  on  the  re­ serves.
For Mrs. Burnford, who suffers from shyness,  the   process  of  assimilation  was not   always   easy.   What  could   she  find to  do  with  herself  on  a  reserve?  Watch­ ing  their  baggage  being  unloaded at  Big Trout Lake,  the  "most  northerly Ojibwa

BOOKS IN  REVffiW



settlement   in   northwest   Ontario",   she comments enviously

All  the  world  loves a  painter ... I realized that  I was going to have to find myself a profession  as obvious  as Susan's  if I wanted to  be accepted  by, and  consequently  listen to,  these  people.

Her solution was ingenious and simple. Remembering  that  at the last minute she had  brought  along  wool and  needles,

I went  forth, thankfully, to meet  the  popu­ lace   in   my   new   profession  of    Knitter (Extraordinary) .

What  does Mrs. Burnford  think  of the Indian  people   now   that   she   has  met them  on their  own ground?  It is evident that  she is impressed  by physical abilities which   she  has   not   observed   in   white men.  She admires,  for  instance,  the "aware  stillness" of the silent Indian  who can  wait  for  hours  in  a  canoe  with

only  the  movement   of  eyes  to  mark  some­ thing  momentous ... hunter's eyes certainly,  but   not   the   sharp  predatory   eyes  of   a white   hunter-they    were   truly   "seeing" eyes.   I   used   to   wish   that   I  could   see through  them   just  once,   to  find  out   how different  the  world  must  look.
 She expresses concern  over and gives telling examples of the poor quality of education, the poverty and the inhibiting effects of traditional ways on ambition. She  is  distressed   by  inadequate   com­ munications  between  Indian  spokesmen, the  more isolated  bands and  Ottawa.
And  yet  there  are  compensations.  In
her next-to-last chapter  "Ohnemoos: the Indian   Dog",  we  see  symbolized  ( (ap­ parently   unconsciously)   her   underlying attitudes  to  the  Indian   way  of life and our  own.  The   undernourished,  ragged Indian  dogs who roam  Post Island "had an   unquenchable   spirit   and   ebullience
... I have  never  encountered   so  many unforgettable  personalities among  so many scrawny dogs." Meanwhile, beyond the  picket  pale  of  the  weather  station "sat  the only pedigreed dog on the island, a  Springer  spaniel ... he  was  immacu­ late."   He  is  also  "rather   stupid"   and "effete",  and  lacks only a  sun-bonnet  to make the parallel complete.
Which   just  goes  to  show,  one  sup­
poses, that  romantic dreams  take a long time in dying.
PAT  BARCLAY









RJchaRb asel & company, 1nc.

Scholarly Books in the Arts and Sciences


TORONTO
PORTLAND,  SAN  FRANCISCO,  LOS ANGELES,  DENVER, CHICAGO,  NEW  YORK



97

BOOKS IN REVIEW



SAMPLING THE HARVEST

JEAN-CHARLES    FALARDEAU,  Notre   sociJte   et son roman.  Editions  HMH.

IT  IS  NOW ABOUT  TEN YEARS  Since the sociologists discovered French-Canadian literature, and  Professor Jean-Charles Falardeau, who has laboured  in this vine­ yard  since  the  first  hour,  here gives  us a useful  volwne containing a  sampling   of his   harvest.  He   has   brought  together  seven   of   his   articles   on   the   French­ Canadian   novel,   published    in   various places from  r959  to  rg65, and  has added  to  them  extended  studies  of the  novelists Robert  Charbonneau  and  Roger   Leme­ lin,  both  written in I g66.
This  is a collection  of considerable variety  and  interest. The  first two articles examine certain ideological  themes found in  Jean Rivard  (I 862-64), Charles Gue­ rin  ( r 846-53), and  Robert  Laze  (I 903), the latter slightly  out of place in a group­ ing   of   "romans   canadiens   du    XIXe  siecle."   The   third   chapter,  "Recherche d'une  voix:   le  Canada  fran<oais par   sa litterature" offers  in  nine  pages  an  im­ pressive  number of   penetrating observa­ tions on  French-Canadian literature: the difficulty  of establishing its chronological divisions   ("deux  genres   importants  au moins,  le  roman et  la  poesie, ont  connu des  tempts  d'evolution fort differents l'un de  I'autre"), the  rhetorical character of much    nineteenth-century   French-Cana­ dian   writing,  the  divorce  between   oral and  written literature in the same period, the  myth  of   the  "pays   d'en   haut," the periodic  alternation  between  French   in­ fluences and  native  inspiration in the his­ tory  of   the  literature, the  role  of  intro-

g8
 spective  writing in  Quebec, and  the  way French-Canadian authors have frequently "maternalized" their  female  characters. Many   of  the  suggestions   thrown   out  in this brief chapter could  well be expanded into   articles   or   books:    Professor   War­ wick's  admirable study,  The   Long  Jour­ ney, illustrates how  fruitful such  investi­  gations  could  be.
The same  seminal   quality is found   in Chapter Four,  written in I 959, which  is a surprisingly early  effort  to encourage a comparative study of our two Canadian literatures. In  more  recent  years some Canadian  universities have advanced hesitantly  into   this   field,   and   in  I 969
Clement Moisan   has  taken  up  the  same
cause   in   his   book-length  essay,   L' Age de   la  litterature   canadienne.   Professor Falardeau's fifth  chapter  attempts  with rather  less   success  to   apply   Roland Barthes'  distinction  between   "ecrivains" and   "ecrivants" to  the  Quebec literary scene.  Next  comes  a  somewhat  old-fash­ ioned   sociological   analysis  of   the  geog­ graphical  settings,    family   relationships, social   classes,   occupations   and   institu­ tions depicted in a score or more  of post­ Second- World- War  French- Canadian novels.  The  final chapter of the first  part  is an  original  and  suggestive  account of the  literary  movement  launched  by  the "generation  de  La  Releve"  in  I934; un­  fortunately,   having  been   composed    in
1965,  it  does  not  include Robert  Char­ bonneau's   thinly-veiled   eye-witness    ac­ count   of   that   phenomenon  in   his  last novel,  C hronique  de l' llge amer  ( 1967) .
Turning to  the  two  longer   studies   of the second  part, one is aware of a change of  direction. In   the  older   articles,  Pro­ fessor   Falardeau's  approach  had   been essentially    sociological,  concerned   with ideological content:  "Nous avons surtout

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



cherche",  he   had    stated,  "a  degager l'ideologie propre  a l'auteur de  chaque
ceuvre".   In   the   second   part,   however, sociological   considerations  are   kept   in the  background and  there  is much analy­ sis  of  structures,  themes,   symbols  and myths:  "Tout  univers  romanesque com­ porte  aussi une  pluralite de  significations  globales.   Il   recele   une   multiplicite  de structures".  It  is evident   that  the  critical  context   has  changed. Indeed,  with   the exception   of    an   excellent  introduction describing  the  social  background of  the novels of  Charbonneau and  Lemelin,  this part   is  given  over  to  orderly   and   thor­ ough-going  analyses   of  the   spatial   and temporal elements of  each   novel,  of  the characters  and   their   relationships, and of   the   novels'   thematic  and    symbolic aspects.  The   presentation is  perhaps  ex­ cessively schematic, and  there  is a visible attempt  to  bring   out   the  unifying  fea­ tures  in  the  total  work  of  each  novelist. Very  little  attention is  given to  precisely why  neither  of these  novelists  seems des­ tined   to  have   any  more   than   a  merely historical   place   in  the  evolution  of  the French-Canadian   novel.   Charbonneau's reputation  has  already become  fixed:  he will  be   remembered  as  an   essayist  and literary  theorist, as  our   most  intelligent disciple  of  Mauriac, and   as  a  necessary link  between   the  "generation de  La Re­ teve"  and   the   interior  novelists   of  the forties    and    fifties,   Elie,   Giroux   and Langevin; even  university courses,  notor­ iously respectful of independent  thinkers, have  already  dropped  his  fiction. Leme­  lin is proving  more durable, but  his three  ill-digested  novels are  rapidly  taking  on a quaintly  primitive  air  beside  the  ingen-
 
iously  experimental works  of  the  writers of the  sixties. The breath-taking rapidity with  which  literary works  become  obso­ lete  in  modern  French Canada  is  surely a fascinating question for  sociological  in­  quiry,   yet  there   is  no   hint   of   this   in Notre  societe et son  roman. Nor  is there  any  study  of  the  younger   novelists  who during the  past decade have  had  a great  deal   to  say,  directly   or  indirectly about French-Canadian society:  Hubert Aquin, Marie-Claire Blais, Jacques Ferron,  Jac­ ques  Godbout or  Claude Jasmin,  all  of whom   had   published important   books before  I g66.
Similarly  disconcerting is Professor Falardeau's apparent  indifference to  the work  of  his  critical  predecessors.   When he writes of  the  ideology  of Jean Rivard there  is no mention of Maurice Lemire's Laval  thesis  on  that   very  subject; when he  examines   the  work  of  Charbonneau one  would  think   that   Miss  M.  B. Ellis, Romain Legare or Allan  McAndrew had written    nothing   of   interest  on   that author. And  one  hardly  expects  to  read a  volume   of  sociological   criticism   pub­ lished  in I 967  which  takes  no  notice  of the  theories  of  Lukacs and  Goldmann.
Despite these omissions, to which might   be  added  the  lack  of  an  index, Notre societe et son roman remains  a  re­ warding volume   for  the  student of   the French-Canadian novel, full of acute ob­ servations  and  stimulating suggestions for further investigation. There is little doubt that   the  major  articles of  this  collection will  stand   for   many   years  as  the   best treatments of  their  subjects  we  possess.
DAVID M. HAYNE






99

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



JOHN MITCHELL'S ROSES

PATRICK    SLATER,    The    Yellow   Briar.   Mac­
millan,  $7·95·

"PATRICK SLATER's"  The  Yellow  Briar, a novel couched  as the idyllic reminiscences of an  old  Irish  Ontario settler,  has  been reprinted  many   times  since  it  first  ap­ peared  in 1933,  but  never so handsomely as now, with  block prints  by Alan Daniel  decorating  each   chapter.   The  illustra­ tions  do  not  change  the  quality of  the book,  however,   so  the  new edition  will carry   much   the   same  appeal   to  much the   same   readership   as   it   did   before. Every  age of  modern  readers  has a  book by which  it  reaches  back  not  simply  to its  own  childhood,  but  to  an  age  of  in­ nocence  that  it  now dreams  once  existed
-Huckleberry Finn,  Penrod  and  Sam,
House  of Children,  and  so on.  In  Can­ ada   place   as   well   as  time   affects   the issue, and  innocence becomes a regional motif   and   thus   a  semi-private domain. Who  Has Seen  the Wind  (in  the  West), The   Mountain  and  the  Valley   (in   the Maritimes), and  The  Yellow  Briar (in Ontario) all have their champions for emotional reasons.  As William  Arthur Deacon wrote of "Slater's" book in the Saturday  Review  of Literature  in  1934:

[it]  reproduces the   rural   Ontario  of  an earlier  day  with  such  fidelity of atmosphere that   we ... are  a  bit  ashamed  of  ourselves for having gone soft around the heart over anything so ingenuous.... [It is] a  book to be loved  rather than  admired.

Though  insisting   also   that    it   "is   not nearly  so guileless  as  it seems",  he  never goes  on  to  explore   what  might   make  it artistic;  it   remains  "enchanting",  "ac-

100
 curate",  and    "charming" -which  are the  subjective responses  that  someone outside the region  ought not even to be expected to feel in any but a tolerantly sympathetic way.
For   other  readers  the   most   valuable section   in   this   new  edition  will  be  the
44-page popular biography of its author, by Dorothy Bishop. "Patrick Slater", as remarkably  few   people    in    1934   were aware, was an  unsuccessful  lawyer and nurseryman  manque  named   John   Mit­ chell,  who erratically preserved  his anony­  mity  and   enjoyed  his  measure  of  fame.  Delighting in  his  ruse  of   passing Slater  off   as   a   real   person,    he   managed  to deceive   both   the  Toronto  Star  and   the London  Times, whose  picture of  a re­ miniscent  old  man  spilling   home   truths and   genuine   religion  perhaps  reflected more  of their own  expectations of a rural philosopher  than   their  actual assessment of  the  work  at  hand. Slater's garrulous character,   however,  is  convincing,  and  for  all  its  sentimentality, the  character­ ization  is one  of the  more  successful  ones in  Canadian fiction   prior   to  the  1940's. But Mitchell was never  successful in matching  this   accomplishment, and   his later  verses and  prose, as Dorothy Bishop points  out,  regrettably demonstrate the author's

helpless   inability  to   write   with   the   emo­ tional   vigour   which   one   feels.   It   is   not the   absence   of   the   thought,   itself,   per­  haps ... It is  the  inability  to  transfer   such thought  in   the   rainbow  garments  of  pure  wonder....

The  words,    ironically,   are    Mitchell's own.  It is not  that Miss Bishop condemns his work-she is much  too sympathetic towards him  for  that-but  she  tempers her  appreciation of his charm with  criti­ cal   objectivity.  As  a  result,   her   bio-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



graphical  note is both warm  and inform­ ative,   as   it   traces   Mitchell's   career through   farming,  literature, law,  litiga­ tion,  a  jail  sentence,  and  penurious  old age.  It  makes  an  interesting  companion piece to The  Yellow  Briar itself, and will introduce readers  admirably  to  the novel's background.
W.H.NEW



LA GUERRE, YES, SIR

RocH   CARRIER's  novel,  La  Guerre,  Yes Sir!  was  reviewed  in  Canadian  Litera­ ture  No. 40 by Ronald  Sutherland when it first appeared  in  French.  We now wel­ come  its  publication   in  English.  It ap­ pears,  under  the  same  title,  in  an  ade­ quate   but   not   brilliant   translation   by Sheila  Fischman.  The  publisher  is House of  Anansi  (Cloth  $5.oo, paper  $2.50) .



ON THE VERGE

****   DONALD  CREIGHTON.   Canada's   First Century. Macmillan. $9-95· Good,  partisan history.    Creighton's   conservative  views   are more   dominant  in   this   than   in   any   of  his earlier  books. He  presents  nothing new in  the way  of  facts,  but  gives  his  narrative  a  con­ troversial    vigour    by   the    consistency    with which   the  Liberals   appear  as  villains,   while the   first  century   of  confederated   Canada  is shown  as  the  virtual  creation  of   Creighton's great   hero,  Sir  John   A.  Macdonald. Uncom­  promisingly  anti-American,  which   is  popular in  the  current  climate   of  Canadian  opinion, Creighton  is   equally   opposed    to   dominant trends  of opinion in  present-day Quebec,  and his  reluctance to  do  justice  to  the  grievances of  the   French   in  Canada  goes  beyond   con­ servatism   into   reaction.  Most   unpalatable  is
 his attempt to justify, by denigrating Riel, Macdonald's major   political   error  and  crime.

***   JOHN  S.  MOIR and  D.   M.   L.  FARR. The Canadian  Experience. Ryerson.  $10.00.  The format   of  this   book   suggests   that   it   is   in­ tended   primarily   as  a   text   for   educational purposes.  If so,  it  is  to  be  welcomed   as  an intelligently  comprehensive  study  of the Cana­ dian   past   and   present.   Even   amateur  his­ torians  are  likely  to  find  few  nuggets  of  un­ familiar   knowledge,  but  the  frankness   of  the approach  to  Canadian  problems  and   the  ab­ sence   of   hero   worship   or   false   patriotism  make   it  an   admirable  book  for  introducing the  young  to  Canadian  history.
***   WALTER  D.  YOUNG.  Democracy  and  Dis­
content.  The    Frontenac   Library,    Ryerson.
$2.50.  The  Frontenac Library   is a  new series
of brief, well-documented studies in Canadian history,   arranged   thematically   rather    than
chronologically.   In   the   present   study  Walter Young,   author   of   the   recent   history  of  the CCF   (The  Anatomy   of a  Party)    deals  with the   emergence   in   Canada  during  the   years after  World  War  I  of  movements  and  parties expressing   the   discontent  of  Canadians   with the  existing  social  order   and   with   the  pen­ dulum  succession of  Conservative and  Liberal governments.   Professor   Young's   study   is  re­ stricted   to  the  west,  and   he  has  nothing   to say of  the movements   bred  in  Quebec  of dis­ content  with  dominant trends  in  government.

***   1.   K.  STEELE.  Guerillas  and  Grenadiers. The   Frontenac  Library,    Ryerson.   $2.95.   In the  same  library   as  Young's   book,  Guerillas and  Grenadiers  is a  study  in  military   history dealing   with   the   rivalry   during  the   Franco­ British conflict in the  New  World  between  the warfare  of  frontier   guerillas   and  the  warfare  of  regular   European-trained   troops.   Though  both  ways of  warfare   have  their   advantages, and   in  tactical   terms  the  guerilla   can  often defeat  the  regular,  Mr.  Steele's  view seems to be  that  in  the  long  strategic haul  the  battal­  ions  have  the  advantage, "... Canada.  fell  to fortune's  favourite-the biggest  army.  Is  this not  sufficient  reason  for  the  fall  of Canada?" How  can  one  square   such  a  conclusion   with recent   events  in  the   Middle   East?   Or   with the situation  in Viet  Nam? What  commentary does it  present  on  the  theories  of Mao?  There is  room  here  for  fertile  speculation.

***  FRED  BRUEMMER.   The Long  Hunt. Ryerson,   $12.50.   This   may   well   be  one   of the  last  eye-witness  accounts   of  a  way of  life that    is   now   almost    extinct -that   of   the


101

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Eskimo   hunter  using   traditional  methods   in the high Arctic. Already, along the shores of Hudson's   Bay   and    in   the   Barren    Lands, there   are  few  real  hunters   left  and   the  dog team   is  becoming   an   archaic   rarity.   But  at Grise  Fiord,  on  Ellesmere Island,  Fred  Bruem­ mer,   a   photographer  and   journalist,   found men  still  following  the  old  life  of  the  hunt, and   spent   two  months  with   them   travelling  by  dog  team  and   living  off  the  land  in  this most   northerly  of   Canadian  territories.    He describes   sea  hunts  and  bear  hunts,  encoun­  ters   with    the   musk    ox  which    are   slowly re-establishing  themselves in  the remoter  parts of  the  Arctic,  and   the  day-to-day   hazards  of travel   in   "this   immense   land   of  black  and white,   so  cold,  so  rugged   and   remote,   and, apparently,   without    life."   The    narrative  is workmanlike  and   adequately  descriptive;  the photographs  are  fine  and  unusual.
***  CLARA THOMAs,   Ryerson  of Upper  Can­ ada.   Ryerson   Press,   $5.95.  A   biography   of the  distinguished  educationalist and the "Pope  of   Methodism",   published   appropriately   by the  press  that   bears  his  name.  It  is a  useable introduction to  Ryerson's  life,  but  the  princi­ ples  on  which  it  has  been  composed  are  not immediately   evident.   The   136   pages  of  text obviously  do  not  use more  than  a  fraction   of the   material   available   on   Ryerson,   yet   the author  has  found   it  necessary  to  pad  heavily
-even  to  the  extent  of giving  a  pocket  his­
tory   of  Methodism  and   a   brief  account   of
Upper   Canadian   pioneer    society,   both    of which  could  be looked  up  by the  reader  who needs  to  be  supplied  with  a  background. Ryerson   is  a  great   Canadian  parent   figure; he  deserves  a  grander  presentation.
** ROBERT  SELLAR,  A Scotsman  in  Upper Canada:  The  Narrative    of   Gordon   Sellar. Clarke  Irwin.  $2.25. The  narratives of the pioneers are being rediscovered and reprinted nowadays at a fine pace, as if publishers were doubtful  how  long  the  bull  market  in  Cana­ diana will  continue. This  one  is  pleasing  for its  spare  and  lucid  style, but its re-appearance (it   was  first  published   in   1915)   really  adds little   to  the  knowledge  of   pioneer  life  which the  average   collector  of  such  items  will  have acquired during  the  past  decade.
** The   Elizabethan Theatre. Edited  by David Galloway.   Macmillan.  $5.50.   These   are   the papers   given  at  the  International  Conference on  Elizabethan Theatre which was held at  the University  of  Waterloo in  1968.  They   bring one  up-to-date on the  most recent  views about the   kind   of   theatre  in  which   the   plays  of

102
 Shakespeare and his fellow Elizabethans were performed.  All  in  their   way  are  informative, but  some are  prize  examples  of congested pedantry.

**  GEORGES    CONCHON.     Canada.    Queens­ wood  House.   $12.75.   Georges  Conchon   is  a member   of  the  French   literary  establishment who  came  to  Canada  to  write  a  travel   book in   the   Beaux   Pays  Series   published    by  the English  firm  of Kaye  &  Ward.  An  assignment  of  this  kind  is  always  difficult,  and  Conchon  has  dealt   with  it in   the  best  way,  by  being wholly     idiosyncratic.     He    obviously    knew nothing about   Canada  when  he  started, and
-at   least   in   the   west-he  seems  to  have been   told   and   to   have   believed   some  lofty tall  stories,  for  at  times  his  facts   waver  vio­ lently   towards   fiction.  Yet  in  an  impression­ istic  travel  book  the  accuracy  of   every  detail is  not  essential; much  more  important  is  the intuitive  sense  of  a   place's   spirit,   and   this Conchon   does  possess. He  has  it particularly for  the  rural  parts  of  French  Canada, and  for the   older   parts   of   Quebec  City   and   Mon­ treal,  all  of  which  he  observes  as offshoots  of an  old  France  dead  in  Europe; he  has  little feeling  for  the  new  spirit  in  Quebec. Wisely, he devotes  more than  half  his space  to French Canada, and  fills  in  the  west  and   the  Mari­ times  with   bold   but  sensitive   strokes.   Apart  from   the   inspiration  of   getting   a   book  on Canada  done   by  a  metropolitan  Frenchman rather   than   an   Englishman  or  a  Canadian, the  publishers   should   be  congratulated  on  a splendid   selection   of  well  reproduced   photo­ graphs.   Visually   the  book  is  a  triumph.

** HELEN  EVANS  REID,  All  Silent, All Damned:  The   Search   for  Isaac  Barr.  Ryer­ son.  $6.g5.   An   uninspired    but   conscientious  attempt  to  reconstruct  the  history  of  the  ill­ fated   Barr   Colony   in   Saskatchewan  and   to do  more  justice  than  most  writers  to  its  ori­ ginator, Isaac  Barr.  Convincing, on the  whole, but  the  facts  have  to speak  strictly  for  them­ selves;  they  are  presented   without   eloquence.

*  JOHN   sAYWELL. Canada   Past  & Present. Clarke   Irwin.  $1.95.  A  brief,  bright   panning shot   over  Canadian  history.   Not  the  cup-of­ tea   of  anyone   who   knows  much   about   the subject,  but   the   kind   of  slim   essay   to  send off to the English  aunt  on her way to Canada, or   to  despatch  en  masse  to   American   poli­ ticians   whose   knowledge   of   our   country   is usually    far   inferior    to   their   knowledge    of certified  banana  republics.
G.W.

NOTES AND OPINIONS






MONTREAL POETS


Sir  :
I read Christopher Xerxes Ringrose's article  "Patrick   Anderson  and   the  Cri­ tics" with great  interest  and  pleasure.
There  are  three  minor  points however I should  like to comment  on. Mr.  Ring­ rose refers to the  "magazine  he  [Ander­  son]  ran  for  three  years", implying  that he was the  editor  of  Preview.  An  editor would  be  more  accurate.  Preview  was edited    by   an    editorial    board    whose names   appeared   on   the   cover   of  the magazine.  (This  is  not  to  put  Anderson down.  Without   him  there   would  have been no Preview  in  the  first place.)
Ringrose says of me that  I was a sten­ ographer. He elevates me unduly. I think no  employer  in   his  right   mind   would have  taken  me  on  in  that   role.  I  was something   much   more   lowly:   a   filing clerk.
And finally, he talks of "the English background  of P. K. Page, Anderson and James Wreford". In my case this was literally true. My background  was indeed English  but  my foreground   is Canadian with the exception of a brief period from birth  to  two years.
P. K.  PAGE

Sir:
For a period of ten years I have taught courses  in  Canadian Literature. If they were  asked,  some   I 200  students   could
 testify that  I deliberately  brought  to their attention  the poetry of Patrick Anderson. I discussed  his  poems  with  enthusiasm and frequently  expatiated  on his talents, his background, his role and influence on poetry in  Montreal. I usually concluded by remarking that  it was necessary to introduce    Anderson    to   them   because there  would  almost  seem  to  be  a  con­ spiracy in Canada  to ignore, neglect and play down  this excellent  poet.
I knew Patrick Anderson personally. I admired his work. I, with many others, regretted   his  leaving  Canada.  When   I wrote  the    article    entitled    "Montreal Poets of the Forties" I included a lengthy passage on  Anderson,  the  man  and  the poet. My manuscript was considered too long  and,  with  considerable  reluctance, as Dr.  Woodcock can attest,  I permitted the  editor  to excise certain  passages,  in­ cluding  that  on Anderson.
It is ironic,  therefore,  that  Mr.  Ring­ rose  should  take  me  to  task   for  "dis­ approving"   of  Anderson,  or  for  giving him short shrift.  I do not wish  to quarrel with   Mr.   Ringrose's   interpretations. I wish merely  to  assure  him  that  I share his  interests  in   Anderson   and   to  com­ mend  him  for  drawing  the  attention   of your readers to the talent  of such a poet. But  I  must  protest   Mr.  Ringrose's  use of  the  word  "jibes",  in  referring  to  my article.  When  I  wrote:  "Patrick   Ander­ son,  proletarian by choice, Canadian by desire, and  poet  aflame with  purpose"  I was merely  stating  well-known  facts. Allow me to restate those facts for Mr. Ringrose: "Patrick Anderson deliberately adopted proletarian sympathies; he wanted  very  much   to  become  a  Cana­ dian;  he  was  a  dedicated  poet."  Jibes? Hardly. I am certain  that  Patrick Ander­ son himself, as well as others  who knew


103

NOTES AND  OPINIONS



him,  would  endorse  these observations as being   an   accurate  description  of   that phase  of  his  career   which   he  spent   in this  country.
WYNNE FRANCIS




MONTREAL PRESSES

Sir,
May  I just  add  a correction  to Doug­ las Barbour's review  of six Delta Canada books  (Canadian  Literature  No. 43)  be­ fore  misconceptions begin to multiply.
Mr.  Barbour refers  to  the  Delta  Can­ ada   press   as  Dudek's  "own   publishing  house"  and  seems  to  attribute  to  me  all editorial decision  for the books published, commenting on  my  "eclectic  tastes  as an editor". I am  grateful, but  I  would  not want    to   accept  praise   for   something which  is not  my  due.
It is difficult  for  those outside  to know
how  a  particular small  press operates - at  least  until  the  "papers" are  deposited in  some  library-and so  the  comment on  littl-e magazines and   presses  is  often distorted  by  giving   credit   to  one  figure in a group  at  the  expense  of others,  who are  sometimes   far   more  active   and   in­ dustrious. In  the  case  of  Delta  Canada there   are   three   editors,   M.  Gnarowski,  Glen  Siebrasse,  and  myself.  (At  the  be­ ginning, R.  G.  Everson  also formed  part  of  the  group, but   he  is  now  only  asso­ ciated   as  a  friend) .  Most  of  the   hard  work   of  the   press -production, corre­  spondence,  business  work   and   distribu­ tion -is done  by Glen  Siebrasse. All edi­ torial  decisions  to  date  have  been  made

104
 by the  three  editors  together, with  equal votes   (although for  the  first  year  or  so I was  granted  absolute   powers -I  did not   in   fact   exercise   them) ;  and   some manuscripts  have   been  entirely   scouted and  edited  by Gnarowski and  Siebrasse, under the  joint  editorial system. Two  re­ cent  series  of  books,  the  Buckbooks  and a series of "Quarterback" chapbooks, are to be edited  exclusively  by these  two edi­  tors without my participation, other  than  in  the  way  of advice.  It would  therefore be a great  exaggeration to say  that  Delta  Canada  books  are   my  sole  province. I have  a  strong   say,  but   no  greater  than  that  of  the  others.
For   those   interested, I  may   also  say that  Delta Canada books invariably lose money   (only  two  small  books  in  our  list show  a positive  balance). Our total  losses in the past five years equal over $3,300, though this  is somewhat set  off  by  Can­ ada   Council grants  totalling  $2,213  for the   same   period.  We   have   at   present  nineteen  books   on   our   list,   and   nine others  in  course  of  production.
LOUIS DUDEK




Sir,
In the  winter issue  of  Canadian  Lit­ erature I noticed  Douglas  Barbour saying that   "Delta Canada is   Montreal's  only English   language  entry  in  the  field   [of little   presses]", p. 88.  For  the  record   I think    that    Poverty   Press   and   Tundra Books should  also be mentioned and  per­ haps,    though   they   don't  specialize   in poetry,   Harvest  House,   Palm   Publishers and    Cha.teau   Books:    all   English    lan­  guage   presses   in   Montreal  tend   to   be small,  but  not  negligible.
PHILIP  STRATFORD
