per copy $1.oo



CANADIAN
l TERATURE
NO·]







Summer, 1959

RODERICK HAIG-BROWN  on
The  Writer  in  Iso tion

A.  J. M.  SMITH  on
Duncan Campbel -S'tott

ROY  FULLER  on.
Recent Canadian Poet

HUGO MCPHERSON  on
Gabrielle Roy


GERARD TOUGAS
Bilan  D'Une Litterature Naissante

DWIGHT  MACDONALD on
Five Canadian Magazines

A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW




















A NEW  MAGAZINE always appears in a double guise. It is in one sense the arriving  guest, anxious to exert whatever  attractions it may possess on its potential host-the particular public  to which it has chosen to appeal.  But at the same time it sets out to become a host itself, offering its hospitality  to writers and their ideas, and ready to welcome to the salon of its pages the most brilliant  and  the most erudite  of guests.
During  the past months we have spent much  time and energy pressing
the claims of Canadian  Literature  as a potential guest of the literary pub­ lic of our  country.  We have  pointed  out  that  it will be the first  review devoted only to the study of Canadian writers and  writing.  It will-we have added-throw a concentrated light on a field that  has never been illuminated systematically  by any previous periodical; and we have em­ phasized the kind of services it will provide for writers, scholars, librarians and -by no means least -the curious  reader.
By the very fact  of appearing, a magazine  renders obsolete such  pro­ phecies and  projections.  It exists, and  must become its own  justification. But its very existence may have been rendered  possible only by the faith of people and institutions  who have been willing to become-in one way or another-its  hosts. This  is the  case with  Canadian  Literature. We have been enabled  to start  publication partly by the support  of the Koer­ ner  Foundation, which  has  provided  a  grant  towards  initial  expenses, and  partly  by the confidence  of the  hundreds  of individuals  who  have sent their subscriptions  before our first issue even went to press.

3

EDITORIAL



Proust's  Madame Verdurin thought  that  the ideal hospitality was that which  restricted  itself to the exclusiveness of the "little  clan."  Canadian Literature  seeks to establish  no clan,  little  or large.  It  will not adopt  a narrowly  academic approach, nor  will it try to restrict  its pages to any school of criticism  or any class of writers.  It is published  by a university, but  many  of its  present  and  future  contributors live and  work outside academic circles, and long may they continue  to do so, for the independ­ ent men and women of letters are the solid core of any mature literature. Good writing, writing that says something fresh and valuable on literature in Canada is what  we seek, no matter where  it originates.  It  can  be in English or in French,  and it need not necessarily be by Canadians, since we intend  to publish the views of writers from south of the border or east of the  Atlantic,  who can observe what  is  being produced  here  from  an external and detached viewpoint.
As for the subject  matter of Canadian  Literature, the contents  of the
present number  will at least suggest its scope. We welcome the reflections of writers  on their own craft  with as much interest  as the analyses of the critics. Our  field is that  of Canadian writers  and  their work and setting, without  further  limitations,  and anything that  touches on this subject­ the  biographical as  well as  the  purely  critical  essay, the  discussion of general  literary  problems as well as that  of individual authors-can ex­ pect our friendly consideration.



X



THE NEXT ISSUE  of Canadian  Literature  will include: "Cat Among  the Falcons," Ethel  Wilson's  reflections  on the writer's craft; a discussion  of the author's role in broadcast drama by George  Robertson; an  analysis  of  A.  M.  Klein's The  Second  Scroll by M.  W. Steinberg; a study  of Margaret Avison's  poems  by Milton  Wilson, and  the first of two essays  by Desmond Pacey  introducing new  biographical material on  the early  Canadian novelist,  Major John  Richardson. It  will also feature a dis­ cussion  of the  new legislation  regarding obscenity  in books.



4


THE	WRITER	IN
ISOLATION


Roderick Haig-Brown


A SURPRISED EXPLORATION OF A GIVEN SUBJECT


TERE CANNOT BE, for  a  writer or for  any  other  man, complete  isolation. He will not find it in a monastery, nor in a hermitage, nor even in the careful  architecture of some retreat especially designed
towards  that  state.  Influences are everywhere  and  the very fact of  with­ drawal,  if he attempted it, would be in itself a most powerful influence. A writer  is, by definition  almost,  a man sensitive to influences; he may reject  them  or accept  them,  search  for them  or flee from  them,  but  he cannot  be neutral or unfeeling about  all of them.
The  isolation of my title, then, is something  at once less and more than the impossibility of withdrawal. It has no special reference  to the "social consciousness" that  was considered  essential by many writers  and critics of  the  depression  years,  nor  to  the  "engagement" of postwar  writers, especially  Europeans. It simply refers to the writer  who, by accident  or design,  has placed  himself and  done his work largely  beyond the  reach of intellectual groups  or associations. How  does it work out?  Is it good or bad, satisfying or disappointing, confining or broadening? If a deliber­ ate  choice  does it serve a useful purpose?  If accidental, does it lead  to frustration and indifferent  work?
Absolute   isolation   from   outside   intellectual  and   artistic   influence should  produce  that  rather  vague  being,  the  primitive.  But true primi­ tives are  rare  creatures in  a  time  of universal  literacy; a  painter  or a musician absolutely  without  academic training or sophisticated influence is a possibility; but a writer's  basic skills are taught in school and no one with literary  inclinations,  even though  they may be dormant, is likely to

5

THE  WRITER IN   ISOLATION



evade  all acquaintance with  the writing  of the ages. So a writer's isola­ tion is likely to be qualified almost from the beginning. Someone will have tried  to teach  him to write  more or less acceptably in his own language,  and  he will have  experienced  in some measure  the power and effect of good  writing.  If he has  any  natural skill and  ability,  this  may well be enough  to start  them  working  for him.
Most young writers feel strong doubts about  the quality  and  potential
of their skill, as well they may. After  all, anyone can write.  Why should one man's  writing  be of value, another's worthless? Where is there a test, whence can come the beginnings of self-confidence? Where can be found the  assistance  or  instruction   that  will transmute ordinary writing  into writer's  writing?
The  natural answer  to these doubts, and  the almost inevitable  fate of
the urban  writer, is association with other writers, established or aspiring. Nearly  all artists turn  to such associations at some stage of their  careers. Some treat  them  lightly and casually, some take them very seriously and use them extensively. Some men become lost within the groups so formed, contributing much  within  them  and  nothing  at  all outside  them; still others find refuge from their own incompetence in talk of art rather  than artistic  production; others again contribute greatly and produce strongly; others  may pass quietly,  almost unnoticed,  and go on to become import­ ant artists  or great  patrons  or businessmen or ditch diggers.
There is nothing  very strange  about  this. All professions and  interests tend  to associate among  their own kind and  all such associations contri­ bute more or less to their  participants. There  have been some great  and successful associations among  artists-forced associations such as that  of the  Impressionists,  purposeful  associations  such  as the  Group of Seven, deliberately  chosen associations such as that of the Pre-Raphaelites, natu­  ral  associations  such  as  those  of the  eighteenth  century  coffee houses, casual  associations such  as those of  Paris  and  Bloomsbury  between  the wars.  Every capital  and  most large cities of the world  breed  them  and have done so since the flowering of Athens. They are always of some im­ portance to the individuals concerned  and occasionally of importance to all civilisation.
It is these associations that  the writer in isolation denies himself, either
deliberately or through  force of circumstances.  Does he gain or lose? Obviously it is an individual  matter and can only be discussed in terms

6

THE WRITER IN   ISOLATION



of individuals.  And  when  I think it through, with a mind always faulty in recalling  what  little  it has learned,  I realise I do not know who were, or  who  were  not,  writers  in  isolation.  Herman Melville,  perhaps,  and W. H.  Hudson,  Thomas  Hardy, Kipling-but it won't  really do; these men may have been independent of groups and group influence, but they were not out  of touch  with  other  writers  of their  times. Thoreau seems like a lonely man,  but he was never far from his group.  Old  Izaak  Wal­ ton,  simple  and  contemplative though  he  was,  regularly  foregathered with  such  noble  minds  as  Henry  Wootton,  John  Donne,  John  Hales, Michael  Drayton  and  Ben Jonson.
Among  the artists  I think  of Winslow Homer  and,  paradoxically, the
Group  of Seven. Why these? Because they set out to see a new continent through   new  eyes, cutting  themselves  off as best they  could  from  aca­ demic  theory,  and  they succeeded.  But surely there  had first been train­ ing, associations, discussion and understanding of the older theories before a new theory could develop. They  merely did what  most artists of value do-they grew through  associations and  went out boldly into the isola­ tion of maturity and  production.
Consider,  at the other end of the scale, those amateurs of painting  and literature who are to be found in almost every Canadian settlement, how­ ever  small.  A few are  primitives,  unashamed as Adam  and  Eve  before the serpent  gave them  an interest  in life, and  their  work should  be pro­ tected  from  the light of day, with flaming swords if necessary.  Most are in touch  with  others  like themselves;  they may grow alone and produce  alone,  but  they are  not really in intellectual isolation.
When  the  topic of this essay was suggested  to me, I readily  assumed that  I had some claim  to be considered  a writer  in isolation. Now I am very doubtful  about  the claim.  I was raised in a stoutly philistine atmos­ phere of athletics  and field sports, but it was broken by a number of good school teachers  and  by a good post-school  tutor; it was broken, too, by the memory  of a father  and  a grandfather who had  written.
By the time  I was eighteen  I had sold one or two short  pieces of  writ­ ing and  was working  in Pacific Coast  logging camps.  But  I was not in isolation. For one thing, I read a good deal and not altogether badly;  for another, my companions  nearly  always knew that  I had  ambitions  as a writer and did not hesitate  to advise and guide me. I recall dozens, if not hundreds, of bunkhouse discussions not a fraction less intense, if possibly

7

THE  WRITER IN   ISOLATION



less recondite,  than  those of the  most vigorous intellectual groups.  My friends  were realists  to a man; they begged me to tell the truth, all the truth,  not as poets and writers and film directors see it, but as they them­ selves saw it-the daily truth  of hard  work and  danger,  of  great trees falling  and  great  machines  thundering, of molly hogans and buckle guys and  long-splices. They  made  a profound  impression.
In  my early twenties  I began to publish books and soon found  myself on  the  fringes  of intellectual groups-in  London,  Seattle,  Vancouver. They were mixed groups generally, film and theatre people, a few writers, painters,  musicians  and  those non-practicing amateurs of the  arts  who are often the strongest members of the groups. I contributed nothing that I can  recall, invariably felt myself immature and insensitive, yet learned a good deal that  removed me still further from the simplicity of isolation. Remembering my friends  in  the  bunkhouses,  I  even  became  afraid  of learning  too much. I had a belief that  if I could apply a straightforward mind  to a wholly new country,  then in some miraculous  way the power of the pen would do the rest and produce literature. This was a conscious fear and a conscious belief and both, I think even now, made some slight measure  of sense. I was never very happy  with the theories of the groups and  felt  no urgent  need  of them.  But I wonder  if I  did not withdraw mainly because of a sense of my own deficiencies. I lacked the intellectual background,  the depth of reading and the measure of artistic understand­ ing necessary to take full part  in such groups. Rather than face the prob­ lems of learning  in public, I turned towards an isolation where I supposed I could  learn  for myself.
I wonder  sometimes  whether  I might  have become a better  writer  if
I had  talked  and  listened more to theories about  art  and writing.  But it is a profitless wondering.  I am not a person who takes kindly to groups. I mistrust,  for  myself, most  theories of writing  that  do not fit with  my O'A'Il  instincts  about  it.  I  feel  that  showing  unpublished  work  to other writers  not directly  connected  with its publication is a form of indecent exposure.  I am  fearful  of too much  close analysis of style and  purpose, because  I feel it may destroy both.  And  I believe too much  talk  before audiences,  however small  and  select, wastes a writer's  substance.  Occa­ sionally it may sharpen  something  in advance  of the actual writing,  but too often  it simply defers  the hard  test of  writing-sometimes forever.
Even in retreat from the fringes of my uncertain groups I did not find,

8

THE  WRITER IN  ISOLATION



nor  really seek isolation.  I married an  intellectual, far  better  read  and artistically  far more sophisticated than  myself. She has an untiring  mind, which  has  grown steadily,  and  I have  not been able to hide  from  it or run away.  A hundred  areas of thought  and  theory  that  might  otherwise have  remained  closed have  been opened  to me;  a dozen disciplines are there  to test careless  adventuring or shallow expression,  a multitude of enthusiasms  to stimulate and suggest. These are seldom spoken things or applied  directly  to  the  craft  a writer  must  always  ply alone;  they  are the simple outgrowth  of living and companionship and  by far the more powerful  for that.
Few serious professionals, be they poets, novelists or essayists, can afford
to live and write in isolation from the science of their times, and I am no exception.  Biologists, educators,  lawyers, sociologists, psychologists and  a host  of others  expert  in their  various  fields have  directed  me with  in­ fluences as hard and unshakeable  as those of my early bunkhouse mentors. It  is true  that  they  influence  thoughts  and  conclusions  rather  than  the techniques  and emotions of writing,  but this scarcely makes them less im­ portant or reduces their  impact  on the protective  rim of isolation.
Lastly, there are the quiet and easy associations of maturity, the voices of  those  wise and  experienced   friends  with  whom  one discusses many things  for  the sake of discussion, for the sake of broader  understanding and  deeper  sympathies.  These  also are  influences, fine shadings  of  in­ fluence that  make larger  differences than  all the hot and  anxious argu­  ments  of youth.  Nothing,  perhaps,  is farther from  isolation  than  these, no influence more subtly corrective.
It would be hard,  I should think, for a writer of plays in English to live
very far from London or New York. Producers,  directors,  actors, the very theatres  themselves are all part of his life and his craft.  Away from them, here on the shores of the Pacific Ocean  for instance,  theatre itself seems less important, a remote  and  artificial  medium  instead  of the lively and powerful  one it really is in its proper  setting.  Film,  radio  and  television are less remote,  but one still tends to approach them, if at all, as an out­ sider, a provincial.  This,  for the writer  of books and  verse and ordinary prose, is a beneficial isolation;  he is largely  spared  the urgings and  im­ portunities  and temptations of these other  crafts.
But the  writer  of books and  verse and  ordinary prose is never in any degree cut  off from  the  excitements  and  discoveries and  stimulations  of

9

THE  WRITER IN   ISOLATION



his own craft.  Books, reviews and  criticism  are  his for the  reading  and no man  has the advantage of him in this because reading  at its best, like writing,  is a solitary  affair.  A book read in New York or New Denver  is the  same  book and  carries  the same  values for  the same  reader.  Books alone,  without  radio or television or films, without  groups or discussions or any other  intrusion  of man,  totally destroy intellectual isolation. And this is a type of destruction that few writers are likely to feel any inclina­ tion to resist. Jamie  Anderson,  the fur trader's son, rhyming  his Cariboo  ballads in Barkerville during  the gold rush, might have been a better poet if he had  never heard  of Robert  Burns. On the other hand, he might  not have written  at all.
I have  written  of isolation as though  it were at once highly desirable
and  completely  unattainable. Neither  suggestion is altogether accurate. As Domdaniel told  Monica: " .. creators  must simply do what  seems best to them.  Some like solitude,  some like a crowd."  Some writers  like to think slow thoughts  and struggle with them alone; others like the bril­ liance  and  stimulation of constant  intercourse  with  their  peers. Neither  is likely to produce  poorer  work for doing what  he likes, or better  work for doing  what  he hates.
I think  I have been overly afraid  of influence or possible interference
with  my natural inclinations  and  such natural ability  as I have. I know now that  neither  of these things is easily shaken or distorted or perverted. Any writer who has the necessary minimum  of integrity can readily afford to expose himself to influences of all kinds without  fear  of loss and with some real chance of gain. Yet talk is a danger  to writers. More than that, talk  is a  positive, ugly menace.  Talk  is so much  easier  than  writing,  its satisfactions  are  so immediate, that  some of the need  to write is all  too easily lost in it. It may be true that  no man will talk himself out of being a writer if he has it in him to write, and no doubt some men have capacity for both. But I think the frustration of enforced silence is good for most of us. Young  writers  who meet  in groups  to discuss their  own work would be  better  at  home  writing  more  and  talking  not at all;  and  old writers who yield to the incessant  demands  of service clubs and other organisa­ tions are  bleeding  energy they need for the vastly more important busi­ ness of writing.  Even service club members  can  read if  they would;  and if they want a writer's  words, the printed  page is where to find them.
I have said nothing  of the intrusion of economics upon isolation. They

IO

THE  WRITER IN   ISOLATION



do intrude, as every professional knows. If communication is the purpose of writing, which  I devoutly believe,  the  intrusion is not  always  vicious; it may even be a healthy discipline. Publishers, agents  and editors under­ stand  communication; their  guidance is usually  important and often  ar­  tistically  valuable. They can  easily interfere too much,  but  the wise ones do  not  and  the  wise writer always  knows  where  to draw  the line  of his treasured isolation,  as surely as he knows when  he can yield to economics  without harm to his faiths. I have  known  moments of panic and  despair at  the thought that  London and  New York were thousands of miles away,  but  one  weathers these.  The mail  serves  somehow, the  needed  advance arrives,   the  commission  is negotiated, the  editorial  doubts are  resolved.  And  in  the  long  run  remoteness still serves a useful purpose. One  is pro­  tected   from  easy dependence and  from  small  interferences that  do  not travel  easily by mail.  Associations with publishers, agents and  editors  are  likely to be among the  pleasantest and most satisfying a writer can  have.  But a measure of distance helps to preserve respect  on both  sides.
In the end, all writing is isolation. A man  observes  and  absorbs  readily
enough   among his friends. He  may  test  ideas  or  sharpen argument or search for  encouragement in talk.  But he must  mature his thought, deve­ lop  and  control his emotions, plan  his work,  alone.  And  he must write  it alone.
Whatever measure of isolation  I have  known,  I do not regret. Writing is the  most  natural of the arts  because  it stems  directly from  man's daily habit  of ming  words  to express  his thoughts and  emotions. Refinements of style and  technique, sophistication of thought and  approach, are desir­ able  in  their   time  and  place.  So also  is freshness,  sometimes  even  sim­ plicity,  of view and  the impact of the  uncluttered mind  upon the ancient scene.  Reconciling these  two  propositions is by  no  means  the  simplest  of  the  large   personal problems every  writer must  face.  I  believe  some measure of isolation  is helpful in this, but  at  the same  time many  outside influences  must  play  their  part. It would  be as absurd for the  novelist  of
I g6o  to come  to his craft  in the  same  frame of reference as Richardson
or Smollett or Fielding as for the automotive engineer to go to Leonardo for  his ultimate  refinements.
No  man,   not  even  the  primitive, has  ever  written from  a  vacuum.
There are always influences, sought  or unsought, subtle  or obvious, funda­
mental and  superficial. A blade of grass or a city street, a fine mind  or a

I I

THE  WRITER IN   ISOLATION



rough one, friends or enemies, love or hate, joy or fear, reasoned argument or unfettered emotion,  any or all of these things and many  besides have made their impact  upon the mind that guides the pen. Isolation can never be more than a matter of degree. It would be grossest ingratitude for me to deny my influences by claiming  to have written  always in isolation.
















12


DUNCAN CAMPBELL SCOTT
A RECONSIDERATION



A.  ]. lvl. Smith

This essay is the  substance of a lecture delivered by Dr. Smith in 1958 at Carleton University under the
auspices  of the  Institute of Canadian Studies.
The complete paper  is being  published
this  year  by  the  University of Toronto Press in Our Living Tradition
(Second and  Third Series). We  are indebted to both  institutions for their agreement to its  publication in Canadian Literature.



DUNCANCAMPBELL  scoTT's first poems were pub­ lished in 1893 in a volume entitled  The  Magic  House and Other Poems, and they took their place at once in the main stream  of what  was clearly
a great  new movement  in Canadian poetry.  In  that  year appeared  also Bliss Carman's first collection, Low Tide  on Grand Pre, Archibald Lamp­ man's second, Lyrics of Earth, Charles  G. D. Roberts's third, Songs of the Common Day, and  Wilfred  Campbell's third,  The   Dread  Voyage  and Other  Poems. At a first glance or after  a casual  reading  all these books appear to have much  in common.  They  all have a high  literary  polish; they  all  show  the  influence  in  varying  degree  of some  of  the  English Romantic poets, of Tennyson,  of Arnold  or of the pre-Raphaelites; and all  deal  with  nature, realistically,  passionately, or  mystically;  but  there the  resemblance  ends.  Each  of these  poets, indeed,  is remarkably indi­ vidual,  and  even when, as all of them  more or less consciously did, they submit  to literary  influences, they choose eclectically  and  respond  to in­ fluences each  in  his own way.  Duncan Campbell Scott  is closer to his comrade and,  in poetic matters, his encourager and inspirer,  Lampman, than  to any of the others,  though,  as we shall see, he has at times a pas­ sionate  intensity  and  a  troubled  emotionalism  that  is matched only by Carman.
What  strikes one immediately about  The  Magic  House is the sureness

DUNCAN CAMPBELL SCOTT



with which it takes its place in the tradition of English poetry and at the same time how responsive it is to all the new winds that  were blowing in the nineties. Some of the poems, as E. K. Brown has noted, are definitely fin de siecle. The  two sonnets "In  the House of Dreams" cry out for illus­ tration   by Aubrey  Beardsley  and  are  filled  with  symbols that  modern Jungian critics would recognize as Archetypal images and relate perhaps to those of Spenser  or Coleridge.  The  title poem itself catches  perfectly the languid  note of William  Morris and is filled with images and phrases that  recall  now  the  Blessed Damozel  and  now  the  Lady  of Shalott  or Mariana in the moated  grange.  The  first two or three  lyrics in the book suggest  the  early  Tennyson  of Airy  Fairy  Lillian,  but  there  are  other poems  that  have  taken  severer  models-Matthew Arnold  and  Robert Bridges-and the  result, in such poe ns
"In the Country  Churchyard," is much more permanently satisfying.
All this sounds a little discouraging,  I fear. Yet the impression that  the book lacks originality,  that  it shows promise  only, or  that  it  makes  no positive  contribution to Canadian poetry  would  be a  hasty  and  super­ ficial one. Let  us begin to read it more closely. Can we discover from it the nature of the peculiar  sensibility-and of the technical accomplish­  ment  that  enables this sensibility to express and communicate itself;  and then  beyond  that  can  we trace  a line of  development running  through  the  whole  body of Duncan  Campbell Scott's  work, and  thus define and evaluate  his contribution to our literature?
I have spoken of the dreamy  lawn Tennysonianism of some of the less successful of the  lyrics in The  Magic  House.  In  the  first poem, for  in­ stance,  where  we find  such  puerilities  as "rosy  west,"  "dreamy  lawn,"  and poppies  that  begin to yawn, we suddenly  come upon an intense and accurate image:  "A shore-lark  fell like a stone." And on the second page in the  midst  of a flowery and  insipid  pastoral  we are startled  to find a hard,  clear,  sharply-etched picture  that  shows in its most concentrated form the  union of intensity  and  clarity  that distinguishes genuine  poetry from  pretty  verses. It is only a moment,  but  it is a fine one-just  the picture of "the  little sharp-lipped pools, Shrunken with the summer sun,"  but not even Lampman has excelled that.
As we read further  into the book, the vividness and intensity increase.
The  literary  cliches drop  away,  and  more and  more poems appear that are almost completely satisfying or that at least can stand as homogeneous

DUNCAN CAMPBELL SCOTT



and  individual works. The  nature, at least of their  originality, can be dis­ cerned in their  imagery, and  this in turn  is a reflection of the poet's indi­ vidual  sensibility. Let  me illustrate by quoting some of these images,  and  before  long  you will  begin  to feel for  yourselves  the  quality of the  man  and  the  nature of the  poetry  we are  concerned with.
In  a lyric  called  "The Voice  and  the  Dusk" we have  this:

The  king-bird rushes up and out,
He screams and  whirls and screams  again

A thrush  ...
.  .  .  .  throws  his rapid  flexile phrase, A flash of emeralds in the gloom.

The  rapture from  the amber  height
Floats  tremblingly along the  plain

The  swooning  of the golden  throat
Drops  in the mellow dusk and dies.

There is a  mingling here  of sounds  and  colours; the  verbs are  intensive and  dynamic; the  fusion  of the  senses takes  place  in a flash, and  the re­ sulting  disturbance of equilibrium trembles and  subsides  slowly. The re­ action  is psychological, a  fusion  of sense impressions that  stimulates an emotional response-here a  rapture that  slowly dies away. The  whole poem  is like the striking of a gong that  glitters and fades slowly away.
This  strangely beautiful poem  is full  of  qualities we  meet  over  and
over  again   in  Scott's poetry; its  dynamism,  the  juxtaposition of  light and  shade,  of colours  and  sounds, of sense impressions and  emotional responses,  all  are  characteristic of what  is most  original in Scott.  His  is the  poetry  of a musician and  of a man  enraptured and  enthralled by the song  and  the  sight  of birds  and  by the  flash of colours  in nature. In an­ other  poem,  "The Fifteenth of April", appropriately dedicated to A. L., we have  an  amazing (and  accurate) richness  of colour  discerned in the commonest of places-the muddy soil itself:

Pallid  saffron glows the broken stubble, Brimmed with silver lie the ruts,
Purple  the  ploughed  hill

Down  a path  of rosy gold
Floats  the slender  moon  .  .  .

DUNCAN CAMPBELL SCOTT



So far,  colours;  but soon we hear  the  bird-song,  "the  vesper sparrow", and
Ringing  from  the  rounded barrow
Rolls the robin's  tune.

and presently, "a hidden shore-lark  Shakes his sparkling song"; and then the  night  deepens,  the  dewy sounds dwindle,  and  in the  violet vault  of the sky "twinkling tapers  touched  with steady gold" bring  us back again to the "saffron" of the opening  earthy  lines.
Scott was fascinated by dusk, evening, and night. Of the forty-seven poems in The Magic House, sixteen, or more than  a third,  are nocturnes
-evocations of the world after  sunset. And nearly all of them  illustrate the  peculiar  power  of his sensibility. Darkness  is filled with  tension and suspense, and the poet chooses those scenes and situations  that  allow him to deal  with nature  dramatically and  sensuously. In "A  Night  in June" there  is a wonderful  evocation of the coming of a nocturnal storm when the oppressive  heat of summer  seem<; about  to break,  and a sudden  flash of lightning shows the hidden animal  life that suffers also in the darkness.

There is no stir of air at all,
Only  at  times an inward breeze
Turns back  a pale leaf in the trees

A hawk  lies panting on the grass,
Or  plunges  upward through the air,
The  lightning shows him whirling there   .

All is movement  in the  intense  warm  blackness, and  all is hushed  and breathless,  so that  the  slightest  sounds  have  an  almost  unnatural and shattering force:  "The beetles clattered at the  blind"; "The hawks fell twanging from  the sky"-and when  at last the rain comes, it is with a roar  like fire, and  after  the lightning,  thunder rips the shattered gloom.
In "Night and the Pines", which I think is the finest of all Scott's noc­ turnes, the darkness is intensified by the darkness of the pine woods. The  poem  is actually  an  ode, and  it recalls Longfellow's  fine "Hymn to the Night"  with  its  magnificent  opening  chord,  "I heard  the  trailing  gar­ ments of the Night," but the decor is not classic and literary  but unmis­ takably  northern. Yet the feeling itself is classic, and after the half-heard thunder of a lonely fall and the eerie cry of the loon-"that cry of light despair,  As if a demon  laughed  upon the air," the croak of a raven, and

DUNCAN  CAMPBELL  SCOTT



the sound of a pine cone dropping in the dark, we come at the end to the invocation of a Sibyl and the reminder  that we

. . . cannot  come within  this grove
But all the quiet  dusk remembrance brings
Of ancient sorrow  and  of hapless love,
Fate,  and the dream  of power, and  piercing  things, Traces of mystery  and  might,
The  passion-sadness of the soul of night.

The  association  here of love with sorrow, night,  dream,  mystery, and power  may lead us into a consideration of a group  of poems even more remarkable than  those that  deal with the nocturnal aspects of  nature­ the divided  and often ambiguous  love poems that  bulk large in the body of Scott's  collected  poetry.





DUNCAN  CAMPBELL scoTT's love poems are the pro­ duct  of the clash between a fervid  and indeed  passionate sensibility and a  courtly,  gentle,  and  rather   nobly archaic  -but very  firmly  held­ conviction about  the nature  of love as a school of ideals. According to this conviction,  love is an act of adoration and  the Beloved is the object of a truly  religious worship,  of a service which  paradoxically involves an act of desecration,  both real and symbolic, as its central  mystery and its cul­ minating  hope.  As a result,  many  of the  love poems express, or betray, an ambivalence that gives them a curious intensity and interest. It is hard to describe,  but  they seem to have a  mercurial and  doubtful  sensitivity. They  are tremulous  and a little feverish. They  hang in the balance,  as it were,  and  we don't  quite  know which  way they are going to fall. What  contributes to  this effect is the  simultaneous  presence  of two opposing forces. T. S. Eliot has named them rightly in a famous passage describing the  quality  of sensibility in one of the lesser known Elizabethan drama­ tists as  fascination and  repulsion.
Let  me,  however,  replace  the  Elizabethan example  with  a poem  of Duncan Campbell Scott's,  and then continue  with  Mr. Eliot's comment. I think  you will find it applies perfectly. The  poem is a small one, a little

DUNCAN CAMPBELL SCOTT



serenade  or  night-piece   from  the  poet's  first  volume;  hardly  more,  it seems, than  a goodnight  kiss. It is called "At  the Lattice".

Good-night, Marie, I kiss thine eyes, A tender  touch  on either  lid;
They  cover, as a cloud, the skies
Where  like a star  your soul lies hid.

My love is like a fire that  flows,
This  touch  will leave a tiny scar, I'll claim you by it for my rose,
My rose, my own, where'er you are.

And when you bind your hair, and  when
You lie within  your silken nest, This  kiss will visit you again,
You will not rest, my love, you will not rest.

It seems hardly  more than  a good-night  kiss, I said. But consider  the nature  of this kiss. Physically, it is gentle-only a tender  touch;  but the emotion  that  prompts  it is "like a fire" and like fire it leaves a scar. The kiss is a magic one and its spell is powerful and dangerous.  What  are we to make of the tone of triumph in the exultant  and somehow almost sinister last line, "You  will not rest, my love, you will not rest"?  Here  indeed  is love as an act of adoration paradoxically involving as its central  sacrificial climax an act of desecration,  and at the same time the emotional accom­ paniment that  generates  the poem, and  is generated by it, is a fusion of tenderness and cruelty; or, as Mr. Eliot has described it, "there is a com­ bination  of positive and negative emotions:  an intensely strong attraction toward  beauty  and  an equally intense fascination by the ugliness which is contrasted with it and which destroys it." The  intensity of the conflict, and  therefore  of the  implied  drama, is greater  also  when,  as here,  the "ugliness"  is in the subconsciousness of the protagonist. To drag  it forci­ bly out from there into the realm of consciousness is the real object of the poem,  however  deceptively  it  may  pretend  to be only a pretty  compli­ ment. It is an acknowledgment of  what  in a poem I shall come to later the poet calls "The little evil thoughts  that  trouble  beauty".
The  scar left by the kiss is invisible:  what we have is not an image but a symbol. Much  later, in The  Green Cloister of 1936, the symbol appears again.  It occurs in a dramatic poem called "By the Seashore" that might

DUNCAN  CAMPBELL SCOTT



have  been written  by Hardy  or Lawrence.  At dusk on the sands a man lights a fire of driftwood  "as the tide and the sunlight are ebbing away." He is a lover, and he is burning  old letters  (he promised  to burn them)  ; the image of faith  and  a sacrificial ritual  is clear, and again we have the touch  of fire and  the symbol of a scar-"The desire of the heart  leaves sorrow  that  lives in a scar".  The  most powerful  moment  in this rather subdued and elegiac drama  grows out of the restraint  with which the poet pictures  the ironic destruction by fire of the love-words of the letters:

The  flame flutters  and  vanishes.
Here  and  there  the word 'love' shines and expires  in gold. The  word  'forever' lives a moment  in  grey on  the  cinder, A shrinking of all the char  in a brittle heap -
It is done, nothing remains  but the scar of a sorrow.

This,  because of the restraint, the irony, and  the controlled  passion, is a much more mature and satisfying poem than the strange little serenade. It  is a song of experience,  not of innocence; and  if it lacks the  tremu­ lous nervous  excitement  of the  divided  poems in which  there is a clash between  pleasure  and  pain,  or  between  duty  and  desire,  or  between the  dream  and  the  reality,  it has something  better-a  more  universal humanity.
Yet it is the tremulous  excitement  that  provides even some of the less
successful of Scott's  love poems with  a glamour  which,  if a little fortui­ tous, is nevertheless significant, for it lights up an important aspect of the poet's metaphysic  of love-his chivalric and courtly worship of maiden­  hood, at  the worst destroyed  and  at  the best  transfigured  by desire and passion. We can examine this theme in a curious and not very well known lyric, "The Water  Lily".
"The Water  Lily" is placed  in Scott's Selected  Poems  next to the alle­
gorical  dream  poems, "The Magic  House" and "Avis",  and it impresses itself on the mind  as a symbolist poem akin  to Mallarme's evocation  of the snmvy swan or Yeats's of the rose upon the rood of time. There  is an exotic, almost oriental  luxury about  the imagery  and  atmosphere of the poem  that  recalls Coleridge  and  again  the  early Tennyson.  There  is a strange  and  very powerful  fusion of whiteness  and  coldness on the one hand  with  passionate,  almost  tropical,  ardours  and odours that  serves to dramatise what  I feel is the hidden  theme  of the  poem-the presenta-

DUNCAN CAMPBELL SCOTT



tion  of an  ambivalent attitude towards  virginity.  "In  the  granite-mar­
gined pool," the poem starts-

Hot  to its shallow  depths, The  water-lily sleeps
And wakes in light  ...

All is rich and luxurious, and everything  is tremulous,  almost over-sensi­
tive, soft, and  responsive.

Like moonstones  frail,  the waterdrops
Invade her  red-rimmed pads, Tremble mercurial there.

Each of the senses attends  and pays court to "the  starry-pointed wonder, Lolling so languidly  by the lotus leaves."
But now there  is a change.  All the virginal and languid  lily had  been created  for is about  to happen:

The  intense  heaven  of her cold white
Is troubled  with colour; The  shadow  cast by light Of its own substance lies; The  clear  etherealities Are tremoured with  fire;
Conscious  and still unconscious  of the sun,
The petals  swoon amourously; The gold-tipped sceptres  of desire Shine  in the warm  cradle  cup
Of the luxurious pure  lily
Trembling in ecstacy  by the lotus leaves.

And then in the beautiful  climactic final section we have the creative  act itself, presented  as a descent into the dark waters of generation:

Maturity broods in water  and  air; The starry-pointed wonder
From  the root tangled  lair
Feels ripeness lure her  under;
She sinks reluctant from sunlight

Down  the dark  pool of silence; The  world  lost, -
All lost but memory
And the germ of beauty.

20

DUNCAN CAMPBELL SCOTT



0 banishment to cloistral  water, The  pause  in the limpid  hush, There to recreate .  .

The  end  of the  poem  is ecstatic  joy, consummation, release,  and  rest. Nothing in D. H. Lawrence  is deeper, more accurate, or more unmistake able than  this.





CoM  THE  BEGINNING, of course, there  had  been pres ent in Duncan  Campbell Scott's  work another  and  very different  strain from  the tremulous  and feverish one that  pulses through  the love poems. From  love and  from  certain  aspects  of nature, particularly from  those associated  with  night  and  storm  and  the  hours  and  seasons of change, come  the  impulses  that  kindle.  But  there  were  also  the  impulses  that restrain.  These  are  derived  from  the  poet's  traditions-partly  artistic and  partly  social and  religious. An education in the classics, the enthm iastic reading  of Wordsworth  and Arnold as well as Keats and Tennyson and Rossetti, and the example perhaps of Archibald Lampman, equipped Scott  for  the  writing  of perfectly  chiselled  lyrics and  descriptive  pieces that  for  clarity  of expression  and  delicate  precision  of observation  are worthy of any of his masters. In the first book are "Off Riviere du Loup" with  its fine opening  lines:

0 ship incoming from  the sea
With  all your cloudy  tower  of sail

the haunting lyric, "Memory", the deeplyfelt elegy written  for his father, "In  the Country  Churchyard", and  a number  of calm  and  exact nature poems -the two sonnets called "First  Snow", for instance, or the sonnet "September" which  are  very close to the spirit  of Lampman.
Let us consider for a moment how Lampman and how Scott see nature. Lampman is an impressionist.  Sensation  rather  than  idea is what  he de rives from landscape. Details  of shape and  colour, seen in the light of a precise  minute  and  valued  for  their  own  sake are  what  give a special significance  to  Lampman's portrayal of nature. I  think  this is true  of Scott also; but while it serves to define almost  the whole of Lampman'<; originality,  it is only a part  of Scott's. And in Scott, nature is usually less

21

DUNCAN CAMPBELL SCOTT



exclusively presented  as a picture: more often it is a picture  and an idea.
In Lampman's famous poem "Heat", there is not a single concept until we come to the end of the poem:  everything  is perception, impression - sounds  and  sights, colours, shapes,  tactile  impressions  and sensations of movement,  and  above  all  a  pervasive  feeling  of heat.  There are  what might  be called  conceits  in the poem, but they are  physical conceits, not metaphysical ones. For  example:

Into  the pale depth  of noon
A wandering thrush slides leisurely
His thin  revolving  tune

or,
 

The  grasshoppers spin into  my ear
A small innumerable sound.


At  the beginning  of Scott's  comparable poem, the  double sonnet  "First
Snow", we have this:

The  field-pools gathered into frosty  lace; An icy glitter  lined the iron  ruts  ...

And these lines are pure Lampman; but soon we come upon a touch that is rare indeed in Lampman but frequently  met with in Scott-the meta­ physical expression of a physical phenomenon:

Between  the dusky  alders' woven  ranks
A stream  thought yet about  his summer  banks, And made  an autumn music in the place.

or,
 
The  shadow cast by light
On  its own substance .  .  .


This  is a device that  serves a twofold function.  It intensifies the expres­ sion and  gives it an intellectual as well as a sensational significance. Pas­ sages like these-and some quoted  earlier  in this essay-suggest that  the characteristic virtue  of Duncan  Campbell Scott  as an interpreter of nature  and  the  real  mark  of his originality  is the glowing fusion in  his poetry of keenness of observation  with clarity of thought  so that  the thing and  the idea seem to be struck out together.
When we have the happy combination of this kind of sensibility with a
classical precision and conciseness of style, we have work of a major  ex­
cellence. This excellence can be illustrated in all of his books, and in the

22

DUNCAN CAMPBELL SCOTT



latest  more  effectively than  in  the  first. To  cite  one fine passage  from Green  CloisterJ the collection  of later  poems published  in 1936, here is the way the  poet re-creates  a moment  of mist and silence in the heart  of the  mountains. In  the  intense stillness the attentive ear  detects a sound so delicate  that  we can hardly  say whether  it speaks to the senses or di­ rectly  to the  heart  and  mind.  It is from  the  beautiful third  lyric in the series called "In  the Rocky Mountains":

For the mist had  cloaked  the range Hiding the vista and  the flowing sky-line; Almost a silence there,  but strange - Came  a water-sound, a far off crying;
All the ferns and  firs
Held  the mist till they could bear  no more, Then  shed their  store
Of tears  with sudden  sighing  .  .  .

It is the intimate interplay of light and shade and the delicate  half-states of twilight and mist together  with the magnification and slight distortions of sound  that  seem to appeal  most intensely to Scott  and set him apart from the other  poets of his generation in Canada. He is as sensitive and intense as Carman, and far  more accurate; as accurate as Lampman or Roberts, and more truly passionate  than either.  It is this love of the inter­ mediate  stage,  the  moment  of change,  when  things  and  qualities  are intermingled and partake of one another's characteristics that contributes much  of the  movement  and  drama   to Scott's  nature  poetry.  His  most vivid and characteristic scenes are pictures of change, flow, and conflict. The  times  that  fascinate  him  are  times  of  change-sunset, dawn,  or spring-and it is movement  and  change that make  even his descriptive pieces dramatic; they are filled with images of storm, of melting, of thaw­  ing, of burgeoning  or dying; colours are intermingled; sounds, sights and odours  are  fused with  the  emotional  overtones  that  generate or accom­ pany  them.  Sometimes  a  subtle  perception   of such  a fusing  is simply stated,  its perceptiveness  being its own sufficient recommendation, as in this almost casual sentence from "Compline":

An odour  arises from  the earth
From  dead  grass cooling in the dew, From  the fragrance of pine needles That smoldered  all day in the heat.

23

DUNCAN CAMPBELL SCOTT



Or as in the description  of what one sees from the window of a train stop­ ping "for  no apparent reason"  by the edge of frozen lake in the wilder­ ness:

The  sun is burning in the South; the season
Is winter  trembling at a touch  of Spring. A little hill with  birches  and a ring
Of cedars-all so still, so pure  with snow­
It seems a tiny landscape in the moon.
Long wisps of shadow  from the naked  birches
Lie on the white in lines of cobweb-grey;
From  the cedar  roots the snow has shrunk  away,
One  almost hears it tinkle  as it thaws.

I do not want  to give the impression that  these descriptions,  sensitive, accurate, and  intense  as they  often  are,  are  placed  before  us as being self-sufficient-though they might well have been, for they are valuable in  themselves.  But Duncan  Campbell Scott  is not an Imagist  poet, and all his observations,  impressions,  and  experiences  are put  to use. And  I do not mean  in an obvious or didactic  way. The  question  arises:  What use does the poet make of his perceptions  and impressions? To answer it, let me continue  the description  of what  the poet saw from the train win­ dow. He  looks at the foreground now:

Traces there  are of wild things in the snow­ Partridge at play, tracks  of the foxes' paws That broke a path  to sun them in  the trees. They're going fast  where  all impressions  go On a frail  substance -images like these, Vagaries the unconscious mind  receives
From  nowhere,  and  lets go to nothingness
With  the lost flush of last year's autumn leaves.

The  theme  of the poem, we see, is psychological-the way fleeting im­ pressions fasten on the mind; and it is traditional as well-the great clas­ sical commonplace of the impermanence of all things. But the  triumph of the poem depends  not so much  upon the subtlety and precision of the observation  as upon the casualness and  informality  of  the occasion. The  homeliest  and  most ordinary experience  can  be  made  both  unique  and universally  significant-when it  happens  to a  true  poet.

DUNCAN CAMPBELL SCOTT



And  when  we read  it and  take it in we ourselves become  true  poets, and our eyes are opened  to the possibilities of enrichment in the sensuous world of phenomena. That is why poems like this have a value-I needn't hesitate  to call it a usefulness-that is incalculable. But quite apart from this, I would cite these lines as characteristic of a new clarity and simplic­ ity that  Scott  attains  to in the poetry of his last years. It is a poetry that  one might  well call  modern,  if it were  not  timeless. It  owes nothing  to Tennyson  or Morris or Matthew Arnold,  but it can take its place beside the  best  nature poetry  ever  written,   beside  that  of  Clare,  or  Edward  Thomas,  or Robert  Frost-and that  without being directly indebted  to any of them.  It  is both  traditional and  original.  This  is high  praise  in­ deed, but not unjust  praise.




































25


WESTERN	MYTH
THE WORLD OF RALPH CONNOR




F. W. Watt






LLR
 



ALPH  CONNOR"  is a  name  which  is virtually  lost

in the  mists of time.  Apart  from  librarians and  specialists in Canadian literature, the few who remember  it must do so with the nostalgic smile reserved  for  childhood  things  only valued  because of their  associations. I imagine  few  browsers in our  libraries  today  let their  eyes rest on  the long shelf that contains  his two dozen or more novels, and fewer still will have chanced  upon  The Life  of ]ames  Robertson, Missionary  Superin­ tendent in theN orthwest Territories (I go8)  and Postscript  to Adventure, The Autobiography of Ralph Connor ( I938)  which carry his real name, the Rev. Charles  W. Gordon.  Half  a century  ago the situation was very different.  For  years the  presses whirled  frantically to  keep up with  the demand  for  Black  Rock   (I8g8), The Sky  Pilot  (I8gg), and  The Man
from  Glengarry  ( I go I ) , his first  (and  best)  three  novels. We are  told that  one publisher,  George H. Doran,  built his house on a foundation of Connor  novels, and by I937 when Connor died, his fame well on the de­ cline,  the  total  of copies sold was over five millions. Those  books were read  in  Canada and  abroad,  by Scottish  crofters  and  presidents of  the United  States,  by businessmen, socialist thinkers,  cabinet  ministers,  and ordinary people  everywhere.  When  Connor  travelled  he  was welcomed by high  and  low as a distinguished  author. George Doran,  in his lively autobiography, Chronicles of Barabbas   ( I935),  records  a  typical  inci­ dent:  "The last time I saw him [Connor]  was in London. I was to send

WESTERN  MYTH



him  a letter.  Where
am stopping  with  the Prime  Minister,' was his quiet  rejoinder."
How are we to account  for Connor's  extraordinary popularity, and his equally extraordinary fall from favour?  By way of answer it is necessary to consider for a moment  the literary  and historical situation in which he appeared.
The  history of the Canadian novel is a more dismal story than  that  of
Canadian poetry,  and where  the nineteenth century  novel is weakest­ almost non-existent in fact-is in the mode which depicts contemporary reality.  We can  understand this best if we remember  that  the novel in the  realistic tradition depends  heavily on a social context,  and Canadian life, even where it had risen beyond the struggle for physical survival, was a rapidly growing, changing,  evolving flux for most of the nineteenth cen­ tury. Naturally writers turned  away from this confusing immediate scene to the more stable, clear-cut,  traditional patterns of past communities for their  matter, particularly to the  colourful  simplicities  of early  French­ Canada.  Moreover  the  prevailing  conventions  of  piety,  decorum,  and gentility  in fiction discouraged  any robust approaches to the contempor­ ary scene-Goldwin Smith's  "Seven Lamps of Fiction" are a good sum­ mary  of  accepted   critical  criteria-and  so  the  serious  problematical approach was  ruled  out  or  made  very difficult.  Contemporary reality, then,  entered  if at all in its most trivial and innocuous forms.
In 18g8 into the quiet sheepfold of genteel society novels and historical romances  Ralph  Connor  burst  with  his portrait of the  raw,  turbulent, crude  life of a Rocky mountain mining camp,  Black  Rock, A Tale of the Selkirks. Having  in 18go accepted  a call to "the  new Presbytery  of  Cal­ gary, the largest presbytery  in the world"  (as Superintendent Robertson  called  it), Connor  had seen that  life at first hand, experienced its hard­ ships and  dangers,  and  had  caught  the fever of  its excitements.  Just  as the physical horizons of Canada were suddenly pushed back to allow the flow of settlers  and  opportunists to pour into  the  plains and  mountains  of a new  world, so the  literary  horizons were expanded by an outburst  of what  appeared at first glance  to be a bold  uncompromising realism, unafraid of  hard  truths,  vulgarity,  violence, sardonic  humour, cruelty, immorality, and  all  the  other  things  Canadian  Victorianism preferred to turn  its back  upon.
Not  everyone,  of course, rejoiced  in this pushing  back of horizons at

27

WESTERN  MYTH



the opening  of "Canada's century." The crude, boisterous era of western expansion, which began abruptly in the 18go's and tapered  off only after the disillusioning impact  of the First World War  and its domestic conse­ quences,  provoked the disgusted  reaction  of many intelligent Canadians. Understandably so, for few periods  of Canadian history can have been less comfortable for the sensitive artist or the intellectual to live and work in. Unable  or unwilling  to share  in the scramble  for easy  money which land speculation,  mineral  discoveries, industrial expansion and the swell­ ing immigrant population promised,  intellectuals fled to the artistic  Eo­ hernias of New York or Europe,  men like Carman, Duncan,  and Charles  G. D. Roberts, the Father of Canadian poetry who chose to spend twenty­ five years of his paternity abroad.  Those who remained  turned  in revul­ sion from  sordid  materialism; "Beauty  has  taken  refuge from  our  life, That grew  too loud and  wounding," opined  the austere  D. C. Scott.  Or they sought out quiet corners of the land where nineteenth century peace and  stability could  be imagined still-Drummond's French-Canada, or the. idyllic Prince  Edward Island of Anne of Green  Gables. A few bolder spirits were prepared to contend with the enemy. Stephen  Leacock hum­  orously drew  attention to the  plight  of the "little  man" drowning  in a world  of increasing  "bigness"; shot his satiric  darts  at  the folly of little towns that  rushed  eagerly to meet  their  fates as big cities; and  laid the whip  on  the corrupt urban  Arcadias  of the new plutocracy.  Peter  Mc­ Arthur returned  to his paternal homestead  to defend  the dwindling  ag­ rarian  paradise against the serpents of commercialism and urbanism with his eulogies of  farming  as a way of life and  his war-cry,  "Back  to the Land."
These were the "inner-directed" men, aristocratic, austere, puritanical,
cynically witty,  romantic, incorrigibly  nostalgic  (or whatever  form  their independence took),  but  they  were  the  minority.  Far  more  numerous, setting  the temper  of the era,  were the Services and  the Steads, who did not flinch from coarseness, vulgarity  and materialism. They might prefer the pen to the shovel or the placer pan, or to the glib tongue of the specu­ lator,  but  they could find thereby  their  own way to share  in the profits. These  were primarily  writers  who welcomed  and  exploited  the opening of the West. Ralph  Connor took his stand, though as we shall see a rather different one, with them.
In Eastern  Canada the boom era showed itself in rapid  industrial de-

WESTERN  MYTH



velopment, in  the  growth of  urbanism, and,  consequently, in  that  vast increase in  social  interdependency which  brought an  end  to  the  nine­ teenth century era  of  economic  individualism, in  fact  and  in  myth.  A social revolution was carried out which was not immediately grasped. The  units  in economic relations were  no longer  individuals, the employer and  his employee, but  combinations-corporations,  trusts,  mergers, unions,  associations. "Bigness" had  inescapably arrived.  How  to  conciliate the large,   powerful forces  contending within the  body  politic   became the main   problem of astute politicians like  W.  L.  Mackenzie King,  whose recognition of  the  corporate nature of  social  life  constituted a  major change in  the  philosophy of Liberalism. Late  nineteenth century Cana­ dian  liberals,   by clinging to simpler   theories  of individual liberty, had  remained  out  of  touch   with   the  contemporary trend  to  collectivism. Ralph  Connor was  committed  temperamentally and  by  religious  faith  to an individualistic view of  human experience. He had  first-hand know­  ledge  of the  social  changes in  progress,  for  he was for years in the  thick of  Winnipeg's labour  unrest,  and  he  acted   as  arbitrator  (of  the  Mac­ kenzie  King  school)  in  innumerable disputes. But  the  two  later  novels which   deal  with  such  subject-matter, To  Him  that  Hath  (1921)   and  The Arm  of Gold  ( 1932), treat social issues mainly in terms  of personal­ ities  and  individual sins and  folly.  It was  only  the  West  that   provided him  with  matter his individualistic approach could  handle to advantage. Western  life  was still  too  fluid  in  the  early  19oo's  to crystallise  into  an urban civilisation of any complexity, and  the ideal  of individual initiative could  with  some  justice  hold  sway.






T.IE WORLD  OF  Ralph Connor, in  so far  as it  existed at  all,  lasted  for  only a short  period. It was already passing  as he wrote about it.  And  indeed, he  was  well  aware of  this,  for  he  set  himself  in part the  task  of  recording it  before  it  was  entirely lost.  Why,  it  might be asked,  did  he  choose  for  his  subject  what   nineteenth century  Cana­ dian  novelists  preferred to ignore  for that  very reason,  the changing im­ mediate scene? The answer  is, I believe,  that  he saw what other  novelists failed  to  realise: that   the  present   moment, with  all  its  novelty  and  its

29

WESTERN  MYTH



fluidity,  is significant only in so far  as it reveals an old, stable,  enduring subject,  man's  essential  nature  and  condition,  and  he felt the  transient life of the West to be especially illuminating in this respect. Like James Joyce,  Connor  saw himself as writing  a chapter in the moral  history of his country,  and  the fact  that  his best novels can still catch  at our atten­ tion despite  their  radical  faults  suggests to me that  he sometimes came close to succeeding.
In the opening pages of that first novel Black Rock, the narrator Ralph
Connor  is led far  away from  the familiar  East, from  the "cosmopolitan and kindly city" of Toronto, into a primitive  lumber camp six miles from the mining  village of Black Rock in the heart  of the Selkirks. Connor  is a  photographic observer,  and  we get  details  of the camp  which  make the  then  original  setting  vivid. The  loggers are  a tough,  colourful,  un­ couth  bunch-Connor nicely catches  their  mixture  of dialects  and  ac­ cents-but  they meet  their  match  on Christmas Eve when  the hero of the  tale  appears,  the  Presbyterian minister  Mr.  Craig,  and  proceeds  to Christianize, willy-nilly, their  rollicking  pagan  festival.  The key-note of the book, and indeed  of much of the later  Connor,  is struck when Craig, by telling  the  meaning  of the  Christmas  story  in the  most  informal  of sermons, captures his reluctant audience,  and especially the oldest, hard­ est, fiercest sinner  of them  all:  "Old man  Nelson held  his eye steadily on  the  minister," Connor  says. "Only  once  before had  I seen that  look on a human  face. A young fellow had broken through the ice on the river at home, and as the black water was dragging  his fingers one by one from the  slippery  edges, there  came  over  his face  that  same  look. I used to wake  up  for many  a  night  after  in a sweat  of  horror,  seeing the  white face  with  its parting lips and  its piteous,  dumb  appeal,  and  the  black water  slowly sucking it down." Connor narrates as at first hand  the long, violent, brutal  and not entirely successful struggle of the powers for good, lined up with Craig,  to save souls like Nelson's from their black waters of damnation, against the powers for evil, the bootlegger and gambler Slavin and  his gang  of  rough-necks.  The  tale  is full of action,  from  the  vivid knock-down-drag-out fight between the Drys and the Wets, to the colour­ ful race of four-horse combinations,  in which the loggers' team edges out the citizens' and  the miners' in a wild finish; but the theme of conversion and  re-birth  underlies it all.
The  novels that  followed in the next decade  largely develop and  vary

WESTERN  MYTH



the Black Rock  formula.  It had proved a sudden and unexpected  success. There were, aside from the large official issue, eleven pirated editions of that  first book. The  Rev.  Charles  W. Gordon  had  become  the famous novelist  Ralph  Connor  overnight,  and  he worked  his vein  thoroughly. Take  a  wild,  barbaric setting  away  from  the  civilized  gentility  of the East;  fill it with a crowd of virile, bold, lusty, profane,  hard-fighting and hard-living men, often  with  pasts to live down,  who are  exploiting  the unrestrained individuality of frontier  life to the full;  introduce morality and  religion,  usually in  the  form  of a Presbyterian minister  who fights bravely against  great  odds to save the souls of the indifferent  and hostile sinners;  add  a  touch  of  romance,  a  virtuous  maiden,  wife or  mother to soften  and  uplift  the  harder   hearts; mix up  the  moral  and  physical battles,  letting  the  blood flow freely, and  bring off victory for the forces of good; cap it with conversion and salvation  for the evil as well. All this Connor  did with considerable  technical  fluency, and  a clever manipula­ tion of tensions and  contrasts  and  the simpler  dramatic devices that  ap­  peal  immediately to  our  feelings.  The  mild,  gentle,  boyish Sky Pilot, humble,  aware  of his own inadequacies as a man  of  God, shatters  the cynical,  callous indifference  of the Albertan  cowboys  by his enthusiasm and  his innocence.  The  Glengarry  war-horse  Macdonald, recently  con­ verted,  endures  the cruellest  goadings of his enemies  rather  than  forget the Lord's  message, "Vengeance is Mine."
Individual scenes of dramatic power and photographic vividness stand
out  in  each  novel, as for  example  the  funeral  procession in The Man from  Glengarry:  at  night  by the  light  of cedar  bark  torches  the  body of young Cameron  is carried  home to his waiting  parents,  and when the bearers  arrive  the  father  silences the  mother's terrible  scream  of grief, recalling  her  to her  duty-"Whisht, Janet, woman! .  .  .  Your son is at the door." Every novel has its special locality to exploit  (the Selkirks, the  foothill  country,  the  Ottawa river,  the  Crow's  Nest Pass, and  that boyhood home described so lovingly in Glengarry Schooldays); there are many  special  customs  or  colourful  local  activities  to describe:  maple­ sugaring,  a stump-pulling bee, a house-raising,  a wake, a harvesting  con­ test, and so on. The informative scope is panoramic  (Connor's regions in­ clude almost the entire breadth of Canada), and sometimes we are shown striking scenes and experiences once common enough in this country  but long since forgotten. The  Foreigner   (1gog), for example,  describes  the

WESTERN  MYTH



sordid shack-life of Russian immigrants in Winnipeg in the earlyI goo's; to find any other  writer  who dares deal  with such material we have  to turn  to  the sociologists, or  rather  to their  only equivalent  at  that  time,
men like J. S. Woodsworth  whose My  Neighbour and other  books angrily
drew  attention to the  same  situation.  Throughout Connor's  novels we get a sense of teeming  vitality  and  an endless reservoir of varied exper­ iences and  exciting adventure. It is not surprising  that  the  rough-riding Teddy  Roosevelt  and  Ralph  Connor  were mutual admirers.
Through all the novels too runs a rich vein of humour.  The vivid Mc­
Gill-Toronto rugby match  which is described at the beginning of The Prospector   (I 904)  gains a dimension  by the presence  there  of the pious little old Scots widow, Mrs. Macgregor, for whom the players' violence is nothing  compared to the clan-wars  she has known in the Old  Country; who  turns  out  to  be an  expert  in  the subtleties  of the  game;  and  who sends her giant of a son "Shock" into the scrimmage  with the admonition, "Run away  Hamish,  and  be careful  of the laddies."  The  sentimentality of the Sky Pilot's funeral  is cut astringently by the description  of another funeral   procession  which  ends  in an  unseemly  race  between  the  sleigh bearing   the  corpse  and  the  two  carrying   the  mourners  and  the  pall­ bearers  respectively. Afterwards, the corpse-driver, having  won the  race to the burial-ground, "fairly  distributed the blame,"  as Connor tells us: "'For his part,' he said,  'he knew he hadn't ought  to make no corp get any such move on, but he wasn't  goin' to see that  there corp take second place at  his own funeral.  Not if he could help it. And as for  the others, he  thought  that  the  pall-bearers had  a  blanked  sight  more  to do with the  plantin' than  them  giddy mourners'."
But humour  is after  all not an added  feature, an occasional ornament or  the sugar-coating to Connor's  writing; it is an aspect of his essential good-will,  high-spirits,  tolerance,  or to choose the  best word-charity. There is a love of action,  of experience,  and  of people of all kinds and classes running  through  much  that  Connor  has  written  that  makes far better  Canadian writers  seem by comparison  a little  cold, narrow, prig­ gish, snobbish,  or dessicated  in their  orientation to their  own  lives and towards  their  fellows.





32

WESTERN  MYTH




kE CHIEF   REASON  for  the  large  sale  of  Connor's earlier  books was no doubt  their  timeliness.  By the  late  18go's all eyes were  on  the  West.  The  flood of immigrants from  the  East  and  from abroad  so long expected  was at last flowing strongly. What  was the new land  they  were  going  to  really  like? Was  it  as  thrilling  as  the  reports claimed?  Connor  provided answers, and exciting ones at that.  The coun­ try  west of the  Great  Lakes was vast, infinitely  rich in  potential. If at times the  latter  part  of The Man from Glengarry  now  reads  to us like propaganda for the Canadian Pacific Railway, it is more likely that many of its first readers were deeply stirred  by the vision of  the "empire of the Canadian West"  that  it tries to project  before our  eyes. And it was the existence of real opportunities, not merely enthusiasm,  that peopled Con­ nor's novels with men on the make, young Scots from Glengarry  or immi­ grant  Slavs, rising in spectacular  fashion  from  ignorance  or poverty  to power, importance and  the life of  wealth  and  refinement.  The  West, in­ deed,  was a world on the make.
Naturally there  was less time for some of the subtleties,  even religious subtleties,  of more  settled  communities,  and  human  beings were  likely to appear in their simplest, clearest outlines. The  God of Connor's  West is of an  appropriate nature, generous  minded,  not  too concerned  with the letter  (too little the theologian  to satisfy Calvin, surely), sympathetic to the spirit in unlikely places, ready to have His work done by whoever will  put  a  hand  to it.  Presbyterian ministers,  saintly  widows, Catholic priests,  rough-mannered miners  or  lumbermen may  equally  enter  into and  even  (at  a pinch)  conduct  religious services. The  people tend to be a little larger  than life as the Easterner knows it. The men are tall, broad­ shouldered,  immensely  strong,  hardy,  brave  and  tender-hearted.  There are of course cads as well as Christian  gentlemen  (a distinction  in nature, not social class),  but  the most vicious of villains are  redeemable  despite their terrible  cruelty and wickedness; they repent movingly. The  women are pure  and  modest  and  maidenly  and  beautiful.  Nothing  quite  equals in the power for good "the  sweet uplift of a good woman's face"  (in those days  no  other  uplift  would  have  crossed  a  gentleman's mind).  Their  voices have such a sweet, thrilling tone that  the savage breast is soothed with a single song; their eyes plumb the depths  of a man's  heart  and see what  really lies there,  or glow luminously with a warmth of simple love,

33

WESTERN  MYTH



or fill with  tender  tears,  or disappear modestly from  the too frank  gaze of  admirers.   What   mothers   they  make,  and  what  wives! Timid   and gentle,  but brave as lions in the cause of virtue.
As the  novels proceed  we become aware  that  we are  in the  presence of a full-blown  myth of the West, not merely a feeling of jingoistic pat­ riotism or a sense of vast resources just being realized.  When  one of the characters in The Foreigner  exclaims, "It is a wonderful country, Can­  ada," she has something  else in mind, for she says: "How wonderful  the power  of this country  of yours to  transform  men!JJ In  The Prospector  (1904)  Connor  may be giving us an account of his own evolving experi­ ence when he describes the impact of the West on Shock, the book's hero:


He  was  making   the  discovery  that  climate  changes   the  complexion, not  only  of men,  but  of habits  of thoughts and  action. As Shock  was finding  his way to new adjustments and  new  standards he  was  incidentally finding  his way  into  a  new feeling  of  brotherhood as  well. The  lines  of cleavage  which  had  hitherto  deter­ mined  his interests and  affinities  were  being  obliterated. The  fictitious  and  acci­  dental were  fading out  under   this  new  atmosphere, and  the  great  lines of sheer humanity were  coming  to stand  out  with  startling clearness.  Up  to this time creed and  class had  largely  determined both  his interest and  his responsibility, but  now, apart from  class  and  creed,  men  became  interesting,  and  for  men  he  began  to feel  responsibility. He  realized  as never  before  that  a  man  was  the great  asset  of the  universe-not his  clothes,  material, social or  religious.


This  is a somewhat  startling position for a budding  young Presbyterian minister  to have reached  (such is Shock)  and for Connor it is an expres­ sion of a genuine break-through from the excessive refinement and gentil­ ity which  swaddled  many  Victorian Canadians. The  West  had  become a  mythical  land,  a place  where  such  revelations  were forced  upon  one. Men  went  there  to escape  the old life and in search  of a new life, and there  the faith  in conversion and re-birth  took on a new meaning.  It was a  place  where  biblical  parables  easily merged with  actuality.  The  Rev. Craig  telling the story of the Prodigal  Son's home-coming  to his congre­ gation of western fugitives and exiles (who listen like so many distraught Dean  Moriaritys)  concludes:  "There you  are,  men, every man  of you, somewhere on the road. Some of you are too lazy, and some of you haven't enough  yet of the far  country  to come back  .  . .  Men, you all want  to go back  home."  This  is a world seen  through  Christian eyes, where  all

34

WESTERN  MYTH



endeavour, temptation, success, failure and hope is translatable into terms of heroic  Christian  struggle.




No ONE WOULD THINK  of Connor's  portrayal of the West  as  realistic  any  longer.  Far  from  it.  Too  often  he stepped  from actuality  into  far-fetched success stories or melodramatic love fantasies. But many of his distortions  are of another  kind, the result of his endeav­ our  to see religious meaning  in the  drama  of western  life. It  is for this reason  that  Connor  stands  above his contemporary Canadian novelists, and  because he dared  to write  about  things  that  really  mattered-the state of his characters' morals and of their souls, not merely the historical past or the surfaces of contemporary life. In this way he often escaped the incredible  triviality  of so many of the other  western writers,  Nellie Mc­ Clung,  Stringer  and  Stead  for  example,  and  there  is often  a  touch  of grandeur in what he was trying to do. Moreover  it is not because Connor was a preacher  first and  an artist  second that  he failed.  Distinctions  of this sort are  based on a modern  notion with  which  many  great  writers would  have  little  patience.  In  fact  one could  argue  that  Connor  failed because  he  did  not  take  his role of preacher  earnestly  and  profoundly enough, but gave it up at times for a feeble and debased notion of "novel­  ist". For not being a good or a passionate enough preacher we must blame him;  for his conception  of the  novelist  we must  blame  his readers,  his critics, his society as well. They wanted and expected  romantic  nonsense, and  too often  he willingly provided  it.  It  is interesting  to notice in this respect that  the later  novels, in which Connor is very rarely the preacher, are  his most  unconvincing  and  trivial.
For  the  writer  of realistic  fiction  the chief  challenge  is to project  an
image  of life which  is both consistent and deeply problematical. Connor came  within  a hairsbreadth of a solution in his conception  of the West. Here  was an  arena  where  the  ancient  battle  was actually  being fought out daily  (or so it seemed to him)  between good and evil, Christian and Hopeful  and  Mr.  Valiant-for-truth against  the forces of Appolyon  and the  temptations of Vanity  Fair.  Connor  only regretted that  his palette did not contain  sharp  enough  whites and  blacks to show the intensity of that  conflict, in which  the costs at stake were  (to him the only ones that

35

WESTERN  MYTH



really  mattered)  the salvation  or  damnation of human  souls. He  tried to see life everywhere  in the  same  thrilling  terms.  But, as I have said, Connor  could  never  sustain  a level of consistency for long. His realism had  a disconcerting  way of shifting  abruptly  into  romantic  fantasy  and back again, like those incongruous mixtures of photography and cartoon­ ing perpetrated by Walt Disney. No doubt the life of the West failed Con­ nor as much  as Connor  failed  the West:  it could scarcely avoid the de­ scent to the ordinary  and humdrum, losing its angels and its devils.
The  Canadian novel since Connor  has been tamed  and trained. Flam­ boyance  and  grand   (or  grandiose)   ambition  has faded  away.  There is more artistic integrity,  and the iron laws of probability are not so casually flouted.  Though one  cannot   honestly  lament   the  passing  of Connor's world, there  has truly been a loss of elan and an increased danger of that desert of exact  likeness to ordinary reality in which  Eliot feared  realism would  perish.  However,  the  best recent  writers  have continued,  mainly in the realistic tradition, to try to project  deeply problematical patterns of experience,  and  with  increasing  success. F. P. Grove's flawed  works are  nearly  redeemed  by the  greatness  of his theme,  the  tragedy  of the pioneer  whose heroic conquest of nature brings to birth a new generation and  a civilisation in which he finds himself superfluous.  Hugh  MacLen­ nan's  earlier  secular  gropings  for significance  in the issues of Canadian nationality  (Connor  would  have  appreciated that  vision of Canada  as the future  arch of the civilised world!)  have happily  given way to artistic exploration of more fundamental moral and religious issues. Morley Cal­ laghan's  whole oeuvre now takes on its full force when seen as a develop­ ing  dialectic  in  which  all  the  contemporary appeals  to man's  faith - naturalistic atheism  or agnosticism,  Marxism,  and  traditional Catholic­ ism -compete  for  the  souls of  his characters. And  to come  closer  to home, that  latest addition  to the novels of the West, Sheila Watson's The Double  Hook, achieves what  Connor might have valued most-a radic­ ally simplified  but powerful  image of human  life freeing  itself from  the chains  of its own sinfulness, a parable  of re-birth.  None of these earnest artists could ever share in the popularity and other  rewards of this world that  Connor  enjoyed,  though  any one of them is a far more faithful ser­ vant  of the  Muses. But then  art  which  is both  fine and  immediately or ever popular  is too rare  a thing  for any writer  to expect,  least of all in Canada.


BILAN
D'UNE LITTERATURE NAISSANTE






Gerard Tougas






QR CELUI qui  sc sent  attirC  par  les multiples  prob­ U:mes de  da  critique  litteraire, il n'est  pas de phenomene plus curieux, plus  riche  en  renseignements et  qui  en  derniere   analyse  ne  jette  plus de lumiere sur les grandes traditions litteraires elles-memes qu'une littera­
ture  naissante.  Les questions  de base que le critique  ne cesse de se poser sur l'autonomie de l'reuvre  d'art, sur le role des archetypes, sur la  possi­ bilite d'etablir une hierarchie des valeurs, sont reduites,  dans une littera­ ture  qui  n'est  pas  encore  sophistiquee  ou qui  commence  seulement  de l'etre,  a leur  plus simple expression. La fondation  d'une revue comme la notre,  consacree  exclusivement  a la critique  de la litterature canadienne et  au  recensement  de  la  production courante  pourrait done  ouvrir  un champ  d'observation fructueux aux  esprits friands  de speculation  sur la creation  litteraire et desireux de penetrer dans la realite  de la litterature canadienne.
L'entreprise que represente  la parution a intervalles  reguliers de Litte­
rature Canadienne  presuppose un nombre  relativement eleve d'ecrivains et une tradition deja suffisamment  riche pour permettre les reinterpreta­ tions ou  meme  les decouvertes  d'reuvres  oubliees.  La  litterature cana­  dienne,  dans sa double  expression anglaise  et franc;aise, nous semble ar­ rivee a un developpement qui legitime la fondation d'une  revue critique,  destinee a eclairer sa marche,  desormais assuree. Une telle conclusion eut

37

BILAN D'UNE  LITTERATURE



paru  contestable  il y a une vingtaine  d'annees,  tout  au moins en ce qui concerne  la litterature canadienne-fran<;aise.  Aussi ne serait-il  pas super­ flu de rappeler  les grandes  !ignes de !'evolution  de la  litterature cana­  dienne-fran _;aise et de souligner le dynamisme des ecrivains d'aujourd'hui.
Comme  toutes  les litteratures issues de !'Europe, la litterature  cana­ dienne-fran _;aise a du passer par une periode d'imitation. Ce qui doit sur­ prendre n'est  pas  la lenteur  avec laquelle  les ecrivains  canadiens-fran­
<_;ais ont appris  a s'affranchir d'infiuences  litteraires fran _;aises-d'aucuns n'y  parviennent pas meme  de nos jours-mais bien qu'une litterature ait pu naitre  des debris d'un  petit  peuple conquis de soixante mille ames. Apn's
les balbutiements de poetes en herbe,  d'historiens copistes et de drama­ turges de province aient  pris suffisamment de consistance pour permettre l'eclosion  d'une  modeste  ecole nationale  de litterature.
C'est  aux environs  de  I86o,  dans  la vieille ville de Quebec,  que  l'on
peut  situer  le premier  mouvement  intellectuel digne de ce nom. Parmi les ecrivains qui s'evertuerent a jeter les bases d'une  litterature nationale, nul ne saurait  etre  compare a l'historien  Fran _;ois-Xavier Garneau. Son Histoire  du Canada  ( I845-I848), I'un des rares classiques de la littera­ ture canadienne-fran _;aise, fournissait sous une forme noble les principaux themes dont allaient  s'inspirer  les poetes du siecle. A la meme epoque,  le poete Octave  Cremazie  ( I827-I87g) at !'abbe Henri-Raymond Casgrain  ( 183I-1go4)  s'interrogeaient sur  les  virtualites d'une  litterature cana­  dienne  et  par  la inauguraient  la  premiere  critique suivie dans  l'histoire  de la litterature canadienne-fran _;aise.
Si des I 86o une matiere  canadienne, riche des mythes et des archetypes dont  se nourrit  toute  creation  litteraire, rendait  theoriquement pos ible une Iitterature nouvelle, celle-ci ne pouvait  voir le jour aussi longtemps que  l'ecrivain  canadien, par  une  timidite  bien  comprehensible, n'osait affirmer sa personnalite. Avec une touchante fidelite, poetes et romanciers iront  chercher leurs precedes  litteraires en France.  Par  malheur, ih imi­ teront  les romantiques quand  la France sera deja realiste et parnassienne, voire symboliste. Quand enfin vers la fin du dix-neuvieme siecle le Can­  ada  fran _;ais trouvera   en  Emile  Nelligan  son premier  grand  poete,  ce dernier  sera  bien  parnassien  par  la  technique  du vers  et souvent  sym­ boliste  par  le vocabulaire, mais  restera  essentiellement  romantique par I'inspiration.

BILAN D'UNE  LITTERATURE


Au DEBUT  de  ce  siecle,  c'est  la  cntique  universi­ taire  canadienne qui, par son apparition, annonce indirectement qu'une  tradition litteraire commence a se dessiner. Fidele admirateur de Sainte­
Beuve et de Brunetiere,  Camille Roy (I 87 I- I 943) chercha  a canadianiser sa dette  envers  eux en adjoignant a la methode  biographique et a une conception  assez simpliste  des genres,  les "lois"  qui  conviennent  a  une litterature naissante.  Un  autre  clerc,  Louis Dantin   ( r866-I945),  moins rigoriste  que  Camille  Roy, porta  la critique  canadienne-fran aise niveau  qu'elle  n'a  pas encore  depasse.
Depuis,  la  critique canadienne-fran aise
mais elle n'a produit aucun veritable theoricien. De nos jours, Pierre de Grandpre et Rene Garneau, par leurs comptes rendus qui paraissent  dans Le Devoir  (Montreal) et Le Mercure  de France, font  preuve  d'un ele­ gant  eclectisme sans reussir a se degager  de leurs maitres  fran  ais.
egard,  les Canadiens-fran ais
gue  anglaise  un  Northrop Frye,  dont  la  derniere   reuvre,  Anatomy of
Criticism  ( 1957), revele un esprit d'une  rare penetration.
Plus  heureux  dans  la poesie, les Canadiens qui  avaient  applaudi aux reuvres de Cremazie  et de Frechette (1839-I9o8) avant  meme  celles de Nelligan, furent  eblouis par les prestigiditations de Paul Morin,  dans son Paon  d' email   (I 9 I 2).  II fallut  attendre cependant l'arrivee de  Saint­ Denys Garneau ( I9I 2-I943)   pour  que la poesie canadienne atteigne  et surpasse  le sommet  de  Nelligan.  Artiste  inquiet  jusqu'a  la  mort,  Saint­  Denys Garneau, bien qu'imparfait au point de vue de la technique,  a su trouver  quelques  accents sublimes.
Alain  Grandbois,  par  ses Iles de la nuit  ( 1944)  se place  d'emblee  au premier  rang des poetes canadiens-fran ais;
d'un  maitre   poete.  Anne  Hebert, en  pleine  evolution,  n'a  d'egale  que Risna Lasnier, pourtant si loin d'elle par la fermete de cristal d'une poesie fort  originale.
Or, ce palmares,  qui ferait honneur  a de plus anciennes litteratures que la notre,  se complete  par  une remarquable pleiade  de  jeunes poetes. A leur tete se trouvent  Jean-Guy Pilon, Fernand Ouellette, Reginald Bois­ vert, Claude  Fournier,  Roland  Giguere,  Gilles Henault, Pierre Trottier. Joignant l'audace a  une  fertile  imagination, ces  irreverencieux poetes ( comme  il se doit, la plupart d'entre eux conspuent la poesie tradition-

39

BILAN o'UNE  LITTERATURE


neUe pour se jeter a corps perdu  dans le monde incree  de demain)  sont
a l'avant-garde des ecrivains  canadiens,  pour  le plus grand  epanouisse­
ment  de la personnalite canadienne-fran<_;aise.
Le roman canadien-fran<_;ais temoigne lui aussi de la vitalite de la jeune litterature canadienne-fran<_;aise. I1 n'en a pas toujours  ete ainsi. Avec la critique, le roman  a souffert de la situation  si particuliere qui est faite en Amerique au  groupe  francophone, perdu  parmi  pres de deux cent mil­ lions d'Anglo-Saxons.  Pendant tout  le dix-neuvieme  siecle et  jusqu'aux environs  de la  deuxieme  Guerre  mondiale,  les  Canadiens-fran<_;ais, tres conscients des valeurs spirituelles  dont ils se trouvent  les heritiers  dans le
nouveau  monde,  n'etaient pas  psychologiquement prepares a accueillir
le  roman  objectif,  reftet  de  leur  vie nationale. De meme  qu'en  Union
sovietique,  les consignes officielles ant  presque  tue le roman  tel que l'ont pratique Gogol, Tolstoi", Dostoi"evsky et les autres  grands  artistes de l'age d'or  de la litterature russe, le roman  canadien-fran<_;ais, qui depuis 1837 devait  exalter  les creurs, demontrer la saintete  de la cause  religieuse et nationale, ne produisit  en fin de compte  que quelques  reuvres honorables comme  les M emoires  ( 1866)  de Philippe  Aubert  de Gaspe et Angeline de Montbrun (1881)  de Laure  Conan.
Puis vint  Louis Hernon.  Ne dans  une famille  d'universitaires, forme, dans sa jeunesse, aux methodes  des ecoles realiste et naturaliste, Hernon,
parce  qu'il  avait  appris  a consigner fidelement  dans son carnet  le monde
exterieur, devait operer  une petite  revolution  par son evocation du Can­
ada Fran<_;ais. Maria  Chapdelaine, une fois passe le petit scandale  auquel donna  lieu sa publication, exer<_;a entre les deux guerres une influence salutaire sur les romanciers  canadiens.  Deux le<_;ons, toutes deux fecondes, se degageaient de cette reuvre qui resume encore aujourd'hui pour l'etran­ ger la litterature canadienne-fran<_;aise.
Le<_;on d'abord d'honnetete. Le roman canadien s'etait  fait depuis 1837 de pieuses recettes,  aussi eloignees que  possible de la realite  quebecoise,
parfois assez triste. Grace  a 1'exemple de Hernon, le romancier  canadien apprendra a se voir sans honte ni dilection et passera ainsi du tract poli­ tico-religieux  a l'art.  Le<_;on  aussi de  technique. Comme  taus  les  jeunes
peuples  issus de  la colonisation  europeenne, les Canadiens-fran<_;ais ant eu a resoudre  le probleme  de la langue  litteraire. Fallait-il dans le desir
decreer une litterature canadienne faire fond sur les particularismes lin­
guistiques des Canadiens-fran<_;ais ou au contraire devait-on s'en remettre

BILAN D'UNE  LITTERATURE



au bon usage courant  en France?  Incapables de s'entendre sur ce point, les ecrivains canadiens  avaient  verse leur sac de canadianismes dans leurs ceuvres ou  s'etaient   ingenies  a  faire  parler  leurs  personnages  en  salon­ nards. Apn':s Hernon, les ecrivains canadiens,  la conscience apaisee, adop­  teront  presque  tous la seule formule  raisonnable: ecrire en franc;ais, lan­ gue  universelle,  sans  avoir  peur  du  canadianisme  lorsque  celui-ci  fait image  ou  joue un role indispensable  dans  le  dialogue.
C'est  Ringuet,  par  ses Trente arpents   (I 938)  qui ouvre  brillamment
la serie des authentiques romanciers  canadiens.  La lec;on realiste de He­ rnon aura  ete si bien apprise  qu'apn':s Trent arpents, ceuvre plus veridi­ que  a certains  egards  que  Maria Chapdelaine, il n'y aura  plus  de sur­ prises a attendre du roman  du terroir.
Gabrielle   Roy  arrivait  done  a  point  nomme  en  publiant   Bonheur d' occasion  (I 945).  Les trois romans qui ont suivi:  La  petite  poule d'eau, Alexandre Chenevert, caissier et Rue  Deschambault ont largement fran­ chi les frontieres  du  Canada et ont contribue,  tant  par  leur  description  du monde  ouvrier  que par  l'emouvante humanite de leurs plus brillants  passages, a modifier  l'image  d'Epinal que l'etranger se fait trop souvent du Canada Franc;ais.
A  ce  meme  elargissement   participent  plusieurs  romanciers   dont  le nombre  va grandissant d'annee en annee.  Aaron   (I 954)' etude  fouillee de l'a.me juive et par extension du temperament canadien-franc;ais, puis­ que c'est une meme lutte qui se livre pour preserver les vertus ancestrales,  avait  confirme  le talent  deja si exceptionnel  d'Yves Theriault. La paru­  tion en  I958  d'Agaguk, brillante  analyse de  l'aventure amoureuse  d'un couple  esquimau,  constitue   un  evenement  litteraire. Andre  Langevin,  bouillonnant d'idees  et  d'energie, n'a  pas dit son dernier  mot  apn':s Le temps des hommes ( I956); Roger Lemelin,  dont il est facile de medire, pourrait rejoindre   ceux  qui  pendant son silence  l'ont  depasse;  Robert  Elie,  le plus  lucidement  introspectif  des romanciers  canadiens  n'a  sans doute pas encore atteint son etiage, si ouvres que soient La  fin des songes (I 950)   et Jl suffit  d'un   jour  ( 1957). L'on  pourrait evoquer  beaucoup d'autres noms. Mais puisque nous cherchons  ici non a etre complet mais a situer  une litterature en pleine evolution, concluons:  le roman,  reste si longtemps exsangue et rachitique, attire  a lui, avec la poesie, les meilleurs talents de la presente  generation. Les romanciers  canadiens-franc;ais,  par la haute qualite  de leurs ecrits, impriment au mouvement  litteraire cana-

BILAN D'UNE  LITTERATURE



dien  une  impulsion  irresistible.  Quand, en  une  meme  annee   ( 1958) paraissent  Agaguk et Les chambres de bois d'Anne Hebert, tousles doutes sont  leves:  au  Canada Fran<_;ais se developpe  une dynamique tradition litteraire.



0uE DIRE   du theatre? Ce n'est pas le recent ouvrage de  Jean  Beraud,  350  ans  de  theatre  au Canada  Franr;ais ( rgs8)   qui confere  a  la  litterature  canadienne des dramaturges ou  des comiques.
S'il est exact que les Canadiens-fran<_;ais ont toujours  eprouve  un vif  in­ teret  pour  le theatre, il est tout  aussi vrai  qu'un  repertoire compose en partie  de pieces de college  ( le dix-neuvieme  siecle, qui compte  Le  jeune Latour  (I 842)  de Gerin-Lajoie et veronica de Frechette n'a guere fourni autre  chose)  ne saurait  constituer  une veritable tradition. Il est fort pos­ sible qu'avec la recente creation  d'un theatre  national  a Montreal, il soit permis a Toupin,  a Langevin,  a Dube eta d'autres de doter la litterature canadienne-fran<_;aise de  ses  premieres  pieces  de  theatre dignes  d'etre  jouees devant  les auditoires de l'avenir.
L'histoire,  qui n'appartient ala litterature que lorsqu'elle est ecrite par
un  Fran<_;ois-Xavier  Garneau, a  toujours  ete  assidO.ment servie  par  les Canadiens-fran<_;ais. L'ecole  actuelle  d'historiographie, telle  que  prati­ quee  par  Guy  Fregault, a  renove  les etudes  du  regime  fran<_;ais  en les doublant  de considerations  economiques  et politiques serieusement  con­ trolees et surtout  en revalorisant  les mythes que les historiens  du passe, trop  enclins  a !'edification, ont  inconsciemment  repandus. Si meritoire  que soit cet effort, il est a souhaiter  que quelques-uns  des nombreux  his­ toriens canadiens-fran<_;ais se tournent enfin vers les Etats- Unis. Vouloir retravailler la  matiere  de l'epoque de  la colonisation  fran<_;aise est  une tentation  comprehensible mais  qui ne  donne  pas assez de prise aux  in­ contestables talents des historiographes canadiens.  Places au centre meme de l'univers  americain  dont  l'enorme   puissance  de  penetration s'etend  jusqu'aux pays les plus recules, les Canadiens-fran<_;ais ne peuvent  plus se desinteresser d'un  pays qui a tant influe sur leur destin eta qui leur avenir est etroitement lie. Au dix-neuvieme  siecle, Edmond  de Nevers, et de nos jours, Gustave Lanctot, ont accompli  les premiers  pas dans ce sens. Aux

BILAN D'UNE  LITTERATURE



autres maintenant de suivre, car c'est en s'appropriant l'histoire politique, culturelle et  economique des  Americains que  les  historiens  canadiens­
fran<;ais se feront  lire a I'etranger.
Quant a la  philosophie, a proprement parler elle  reste  a etre  fondee. Rien   de  comparable au  Canada  Fran<;ais  a  I'essor  d'une  philosophie
americaine, qui  est  une  philosophie de  !'action s'appuyant sur  les  me­

thodes  des sciences de la nature. A considerer cette  question de plus pres, il est  fort  douteux que  le Canada Fran<;ais arrive jamais  a fonder   une
ecole  philosophique qui  le distingue des  grands courants de  la  philoso­ phie  universelle. Charles Sanders Peirce, William James,  Josiah Royce, John Dewey,  George  Herbert Mead, dans  leur  anticartesianisme opti­  miste  reftetent cette  societe  dynamique et  profondement originale que sont  les  Etats-Unis d'Amerique. La  societe  canadienne-fran<;aise a elle
aussi son originalite, mais celle-ci,  au lieu de s'opposer a !'Europe, y cher­
che  sa stabilite dans  le catholicisme. II est naturellement possible, prob­
able  meme  qu'avec le temps  le Canada Fran<;ais produise des penseurs qui ne devront pas tout au thomisme. Dans la mesure ou ils s'en ecarteront ils  deviendront mains  representatifs de  la  collectivite  canadienne-fran­
<;aise.
Le thomisme est-il assez souple pour admettre les redefinitions qui tien­ nent  compte de !'evolution de l'humanite? A cette  question le catholic­ isme  repond par  un oui des plus  affirmatifs et la pensee speculative mo­ derne  par  un non categorique. C'est  dire que le thomisme canadien-fran­
<;ais ne risque  pas de debaucher sur  l'exterieur et restera !'expression du
particularisme  philosophique des  Canadiens-fran<;ais.
II faut  reconnaitre que  les richesses  du  thomisme sont  loin d'avoir ete exploitees au Canada Fran<;ais. La doctrine thomiste, "essentiellement progressive et  assimilatrice" selon  la  formule de Jacques Maritain, n'a des chances de l'etre que si les grands problemes du monde  moderne sont poses d' abord  et  que  la  philosophie thomiste vienne  les informer  subse­ quemment. Or,  c'est la marche inverse  qui est souvent  suivie dans les uni­ versites  canadiennes-fran<;aises. La  monde  dans  lequel  nous vivons s'in­  sere comme  il peut  dans  la  philosophia  perennis.  D'ou  l'air de byzantin­ isme qui s'attache aux etudes  philosophiques au Canada Fran<;ais.I

I Pour  une  interpretation plus favorable du  thornisrne  canadien-franc;ais, consulter Edmond Gaudron, "French  Canadian  Philosophers," The  Culture  of  Contempor­ ary  Canada, Edited  by Julian   Park,  Cornell  University  Press, 1957.  pp.  274-292.

43

BILAN D'UNE  LITTERATURE



L'erudition, elle, se porte  mieux.  Les deux  tares  qui ont  marque ses debuts, une information incomplete  et la partialite, tendent  a disparaitre. Fort  heureusement aussi, !'erudition s'etend  aujourd-hui a  d'autres  do­ maines qu'a  ceux de l'histoire  et de la litterature nationales. La premiere  contribution canadienne a la litterature fran<_;aise qui soit un enrichisse­ ment pour cette derniere  est l'etude  de Romeo Arbour, Henri Bergson et les lettres  franr;aises (Paris,I 955). Qu'un pretre canadien puisse aborder la litterature fran<_;aise en toute serenite,  en evitant  d'adjoindre aux con­ siderations  esthetiques  eta l'histoire  des idees des declarations doctrinales est la meilleure  preuve  que la societe canadienne, sans rien renier de ses origines  spirituelles,  peut  et  doit  participer aux  batailles  pacifiques  de l'esprit  moderne.
Encourageants aussi pour  l'avenir  de !'erudition canadienne-fran<_;aise sont  les  ouvrages  de  vulgarisa tion,  telle  1'Introduction  a l' histoire   de
!'Amerique latine   (Montreal, 1949),  de Dostaler  O'Leary. De temps a autre,  des esprits curieux au Canada Fran<_;ais ont porte leurs regards  sur le monde  exterieur  et en ont  rapporte des temoignages  de qualite.  A la generation precedente, Jean  Bruchesi avait  explore  les pays qui se  trou­ vent  aujourd'hui sous !'influence  russe et  avait  ecrit  Aux  marches de l'Europe  (Montreal, 1932). 11 faut  esperer  que se multiplient ces sond­ ages des pays etrangers,  puisqu'ils seront un signe de confiance en soi chez les erudits  canadiens.
En  conclusion  l'on  peut  affirmer  que  la litterature canadienne-fran­
<_;aise tend a creer une tonalite  qui lui soit propre  dans la poesie, le roman et l'histoire.  Le theatre, la philosophie et I'erudition pourraient a l'avenir completer  la physionomie d'une litterature qui, des lors, serait I'expression d'une  culture  originale.
Est-il  possible de prejuger  l'avenir  de la litterature canadienne-fran­
<;aise d'apres sa lente mais progressive montee depuis plus d'un siecle?
Dans son ensemble, la litterature canadienne-fran<_;aise semble destinee a trouver son equilibre  par  un dosage inedit  des esprits fran<_;ais et anglo­ saxons.  La  France,   par  l'entremise de sa litterature, offrira  aux futurs  ecrivains  canadiens  l'exemple  toujours  fecond  de ce que peut  la pensee lorsqu'elle  s'allie  aux  prestiges  de  la forme  et  du  bien  dire;  le monde anglo-saxon,  par  son genie politique  et sa puissante organisation  sociale, inclinera  les esprits  canadiens-fran<_;ais vers l'action  exterieure,  vers un sens de la solidarite humaine et peut-etre aussi vers la sentimentalite. Ces

44

BILAN o'UNE  LITTERATURE



influences  divergentes, la litterature  canadienne-franc;aise de demain  les conciliera  par  ce  puissant sentiment  religieux   qui  assure  la  survie,  en
Amerique, de la naissante culture canadienne-franc;aise. Portee a un niv­
eau eleve, cette  litterature serait susceptible un jour de s'ajouter glorieuse­
ment  a celles  qui  s'elaborent aujourd'hui a travers le monde.








DRAWING  BY   LIONEL  RAMPEN
FROM   The  St. Lawrence, BY   WILLIAM  TOYE





45


THE	GARDEN	AND
THE	CAGE



Hugo McPherson

THE ACHIEVEMENT OF  GABRIELLE  ROY







IN THIS CENTURY, echoes of Alfred  de Mussel's  des­ pairing  cry, «]e  suis venu  trap  tard  dans  un  monde  trap  vieux,"  have begun to reverberate through  the great new democracies of North Ameri­  ca. The  bright  hymns of our patriots  ("sweet  land of liberty", "the  true North,  strong  and  free")   have more  and  more  been drowned in a dark chorus  of disillusion.  We have  met  Scott  Fitzgerald's sad  young heroes of  the  Jazz  Age;  Faulkner's sacrificial  victim,  the  idiot  Benjy, in The  Sound  and  the  Fury;  Morley  Callaghan's benighted  journalist  of The  Loved  and  the  Lost, searching  vainly for a  vanished  church; and  Jack Kerouac's frantic  voyagers, crossing and re-crossing "the  great American night." We have met few novelists, however, who have looked with vision­ ary clarity  at the  plight  of wholly ordinary people in our modern  cities.
Gabrielle  Roy is one of these writers,  and  Theodore Dreiser  (though
he must  bow to Zola as an influence in her work)  is her chief American predecessor.  But where  Dreiser's  typical  hero is Clyde Griffiths, the sad dreamer  of An  American  Tragedy, Gabrielle  Roy's central  figure is the frail  banker  Alexandre Chenevert, an experienced teller of our nation's true  accounts.  And  though,  like Dreiser,  Gabrielle  Roy recognizes that truth-telling is unwelcome  to customers who hope for a large credit  bal­ ance, she looks beyond mathematical calculations in a way that Dreiser does not.  In  the midst of this commercial Canadian time and place she is able to make a quiet affirmation.  Her statement is more important than  we have recognized.

THE  GARDEN AND THE  CAGE




AT SIXTEEN  Gabrielle   Roy  had   her  first  troubled premonition  of the isolation and pain that  a serious story-teller  (especial­ ly, perhaps,  in a country  as young as Canada)  must encounter.  In "The Voice of the Pools," one of the most moving chapters of Street of Riches,  her fictional  alter-ego  Christine,  la Petite Misere, tells her  mother  that  she intends  to be a writer.  "Writing is hard," Maman replies. It is "like cutting  yourself in  two, as it  were -one  half  trying  to live, the  other watching,  weighing  .  .  .  I  think  other  people  never  forgive it."  Years later,  remembering this critical  moment  in her  development, Christine  makes as poignant  a statement of the artist's  loneliness as we can find in fiction:

I still hoped  that  I could  have  everything: both  a warm  and  true  life, like a shel­ ter-at  times,  too,  unbearable with  harsh  truth-and  also  time  to  capture its reverberations in  the  depths of  the  soul;  time  to  walk,  and  time  to  halt  that   I might   understand; time  to  withhold myself  a little  along  the  road, and  then  to catch   up  with  the  others,  to  rejoin  them  and  to cry  joyously, "Here  I am,  and here  is what  I've  found  for  you  along  the  way!  ... Have  you waited  for  me?
... Aren't   you  waiting for  me?  ... Oh,  do  wait  for  me!  ..."

The  artist's  ineluctable choice lies between sharing fully the life of his fellows, and  the lonely process of taking "time  to halt" -time to under­ stand  and  record what  Henry  James called "the  look of things  .  .  .  the look that conveys their meaning." For Gabrielle Roy this choice was made before she could fully envisage its consequences.  Writing  was  her voca­ tion.
But if the mere fact of embracing a vocation  and following it uncom­ promisingly  is in  some  degree  isolating,  the  nature of  Gabrielle  Roy's vision has further cut  her off both  from  her fellow artists  and from  the popular  audience.  The typical heroes of Canadian fiction are intellectuals who search loquaciously for their own identity or Canada's, or "superior" observers  who  smile condescendingly  at  Canadian manners,  or various sorts of crusaders,  pioneers  and  rebels who face life boldly and  bring it triumphantly to heel. Gabrielle  Roy knows that  such exceptional people do exist,  but  her  whole  concern  is for the  unnumbered thousands  who "lead  lives of quiet  desperation" -the  terrible  meek.  And  she records their plight with a tolerance  and compassion that  rests not on patriotism, humanism  or religiosity, but on a deep love of mankind.  In the same way,

47

THE  GARDEN AND THE  CAGE



though   she  shares  the  existential   concern  for  the  individual of  such French  contemporaries as Sartre, Camus, Malraux and De Beauvoir, she does not wield the scapel of intellect  with their clinical vigour. Gabrielle Roy  feels rather than  analyzes, and  a sense of wonder  and  of mystery is always with  her. She is a "witness" to the aches of her century  and  her culture  rather than  a reformer; and  she believes that  only Love  can  re­ deem the time.
Thus  in her fiction Gabrielle  Roy has held the mirror  up to nature in the only way possible to her, but the image which she captures has been less and  less a picture  which Canadians understand or esteem. Her  most popular  book is The Tin Flute   (Bonheur d'occasion, 1945), a story of Montreal slum dwellers. Its success, however, derives largely from its stunning  documentary quality.  Even in a decade enthralled by the expose this book had  a stinging  authority. It  arraigned the monster  of big-city poverty  with  an  accuracy  that  caught  the  last  syllable  of  the  market­ vendor's  cry  and  the  tragic  rhetoric  of  the  Saint-Henri  bum;  and  for English-speaking readers  it  revealed  a backyard  squalor which,  though unpalatable at  home, was vicariously exciting when spiced with un zeste de Quebec. The  works that  followed, though welcomed  by a few critics, lacked  its  topical  appeal,   and  were  proportionately less well  received. Where Nests  the  Water Hen  (La  Petite  Paule d'Eau, 1951)  and  Street of Riches (Rue  Deschambault, 1957)  were  thought  of as romantic re­ treats into a charmingly simple but irrecoverably passe frontier. And The Cashier   (Alexandre  Chenevert, 1955)  -her  most important work­ was rejected  as an altogether too painful  case history.
Clearly  Gabrielle  Roy's  development  has  not  been  directed   by any
desire for popular acclaim. It is time, therefore,  that we attempted to look steadily at the vision of life which she has created-that we pause long enough  to see what  it is that  she has found for us "along  the way."





ALAN BROWN is the  critic  who  has come  closest to a broad  definition  of Gabrielle  Roy's vision. Writing  in The Tamarack Review,' he said:

' Issue I, Autumn, 1956, 61-70.

THE GARDEN   AND  THE CAGE



The  first and  third  novels of Gabrielle  Roy  [The  Tin Flute  and  The Cashier] tell about  the  impact  of poverty,  war,  and  the twentieth century on a few unsus­ pecting inhabitants  of  Montreal. The  second  and  fourth describe  the  relatively simple  lives  of country people  and  children   in  Manitoba. Taken  together, they might  be said  to form  a dialogue of experience and  innocence .  .  .  What  seems to interest   Gabrielle Roy  is  the  interaction of  the  two  conditions ... Man  ex­ pels  himself  from  the  Garden but  can  never  quite  forget   the  significance  of  the time  he  passed  there.  On  the  other   hand, because  of  circumstances peculiar  to life in large  modern  cities, it may  be increasingly hard  to recall  that  such  a  thing  as a garden ever  existed.

In  Gabrielle  Roy's  imaginative landscape,  that  is, big-city  living, with its  soot  and  noise,  its  mechanical  routine  and  impersonality,  suggests simultaneously  both  the  pains  of adulthood and  the  dislocations  of this unhappy century.  By contrast,  the warm  and  simple life of the frontier and  the provincial  town is becoming a thing of the past-as dear,  and as irrevocably  lost as childhood  or innocence.
This  perception  of the controlling  pattern in Gabrielle  Roy's work is
essential to an understanding of her statement. The values of the garden, childhood,  innocence,  and  the  past,  array  themselves against  the forces of the city, adulthood, "experience," and  the present.  Mr.  Brown's ceil­ ing closes in, however,  when he suggests that  fulfilment  is possible only in the  green  reaches  of the frontier   ("Whether it is rural  Manitoba or the  Garden  of Eden would seem to be immaterial, so long as it is not a twentieth-century city"). It is true that,  like Willa Cather, Gabrielle  Roy endorses the values of the past and  the frontier.  The happiest  character in all her  fiction is the Capucin  priest of the Little Water  Hen country, Father Joseph  Marie,  a shepherd  who never  doubts  that  God's  Provi­ dence  is ultimately  benign:  "The  world's  pain  remained  inviolable  for him,  always inexplicable; but  the same held true for joy and love." Un­ like Cather, however,  Gabrielle  Roy is unflinchingly  aware  that  there  is no real escape from the present. Here and now is where Everyman  lives; and  his greatest  gifts in a world  where both faith  and  justice have per­ ished are his ability to endure and to love. The critics who have regarded Street  of Riches  and Where  Nests the Water  Hen  as day-dreaming re­ treats from the present, then, are mistaken; these works are rediscoveries, deceptively gentle and subjective, of the meaning  of valour, pain, aspira­  tion and love. They are, for Gabrielle Roy, exact equivalents of Alexandre Chenevert's trip to Lac Vert which I shall discuss below. The "dialogue"

49

THE  GARDEN AND THE  CAGE



of which Mr. Brown speaks is less a dialogue of innocence and experience than a debate  between the steely voice of the urban present and the secret voice of the self which  knows that  values do  existJ however  cruelly  the world  appears to deny them.
But there  is another  feature of Gabrielle  Roy's imaginative landscape
which  her critics have overlooked. If the garden  and  the past constantly draw  her  characters away from  the cage-the grid-like  pattern of the modem  city-the prospect of the  future constantly  beckons to them and entices them.  For the ingenuous  Everyman,  indeed,  the future  is a shin­ ing hope -a  world of grandiose  dream  and  fantasy  in which suffering will magically  end;  and  it is always  just ahead.  Thus  one group of Miss Roy's  characters look backward:  Nick Sluzick, the  irascible  Ukrainian of the remote  Water  Hen  country  flies farther and farther North  to es­ cape  civilization;  the  Russian  trapper in The  Cashier  is equally  a fugi­ tive; and  even Rose-Anna,  the all-suffering mother  of the Lacasse brood in The Tin Flute  yearns  (with  a deadly awareness  of the futility  of her yearning) for  a  return  to  the  sugar-maple farm  of her  girlhood.  But  a second  group,  the slaves of  the future,  are  more  imporant to Gabrielle  Roy's vision. Florentine Lacasse, the dime-store waitress, never abandons her dream  of comfort and wealth; her father, in the act of giving himself up  to the  machine  of  war,  is sure that  good fortune  is just ahead; and her seducer,  Jean  Levesque,  believes that  he can  climb  to happiness  on the  heights  of  Westmount.  The  hope of the future  is a greater  consola­ tion to Everyman  than  the dream  of the past, but Gabrielle  Roy's narra­ tive  makes  it clear  that  both  past and  future  are insecure  anchors.  The present is inescapable; it is now; the past and the future  are delusions.
In  this  vision, Alexandre   Chenevert, the  anonymous  Cashier  whose teller's cage becomes a symbol of our money-counting society, dreams of the  unspoiled  life of nature,  and  imagines  vainly  that  he can  repossess that  simplicity  by returning (in the future) to the uncomplicated life of the pioneer. His experiment, of course, is a failure.  He is a city man, and he must find out  how to live in the sooty slums and smog-filled canyons which  are  the setting  of twentieth-century life. Gabrielle  Roy sees with frightening clarity,  that is, that  the flux of life (which optimists call "pro­ gress")   cannot  be stopped  or  turned  back.  Youth  goes forward  blindly and  joyfully into the travail of the future,  never imagining  that  it will be, in Lampman's phrase,  "the  city of the dreadful night". Thus,  in earlier

so

THE  GARDEN AND THE  CAGE



days  when  the  banks of the  Lachine  canal  were  still sunny and  green, Pitou,  the  droll  little  musician  of The  Tin  Flute,  ran  desperately  after his older playmates,  calling in tragic innocence: "Wait  for me. I'm com­ ing  too."  But  the  playmates,  intent  on  life's games,  could not  wait  for their  musician  Pitou  (or  for  Ia Petite  Misere,  their  artist).  The future  beckons. It is Everyman's  character to hope and aspire;  it is his fate, ap­  parently,  to learn that his power to achieve is tragically short of his ability to dream.
This is Gabrielle  Roy's vision of life. It is far more significant,  I think, than  the  vision of many novels which  are  more  self-consciously "Cana­ dian",   and  far  more  pertinent  than  the  statistical   "firsts"  which  our press uses to shore  up our wavering  identity.  The  world  may  be mildly impressed  to know that  we have more nickel and better wheat  than any­ one else; that  we have the Mounties,  the Seaway, the C.P.R.  and Social Credit.  But these externals  are no more than guideposts  to the labyrinth that  Gabrielle  Roy has explored, for she has told us something about our­ selves-about  Man.
But a greater  question  remains.  Is the urbanized  life which  we are so busy creating totally  dismal-a  dark  valley between  the sunny hilltops of past and future -or can the cage of adult and urban life be made bearable?  To  answer  this  we must  look searchingly  at  Gabrielle  Roy's two novels of city life.
Since The  Tin  Flute was Gabrielle Roy's first major statement, we shall turn  to  it  first.2      Its  original  title,  Bonheur  d'occasion,  has  no  English equivalent.  The  blues singer might  translate it freely as "Happiness is a some-time  thing",  for it implies "chance" happiness,  "grab-bag" happi­ ness and  "bargain" happiness-a deceptive,  fleeting  joy. Its  heroine  is Florentine  Lacasse, daughter of a poverty-stricken Montreal family who live precariously  amid  the factory  whistles, railway crossings, slaughter­ house smells and soot of the St. Henri  quartier. Appropriately, the name Lacasse  suggests a "box" or "locker," for these  people are  thwarted­ caged-born  into a world of ugliness and want which  they are  power­ less to escape. But all of them,  in  individual  ways, dream  of a happier  world. Azarius, the father, childishly protects his amour  propre by under-

, I am indebted to McClelland & Stewart Ltd.  for  permission to use some of the material from  my "Introduction" to the  New  Canadian Library edition  of The  Tin Flute. Toronto: 1958, v-xi.

THE  GARDEN AND THE  CAGE



taking  a succession of impractical ventures  which  he believes will make his  fortune  overnight; Florentine imagines  extravagantly that  she will marry  a rich gallant; nine-year-old  Yvonne asks no more than to become a nun;  and  little  Daniel-dying of leukemia-finds his hospital  ward the  happiest   place  that  he  has  known,  and  a  tin flute which  has  been given him  the most  beautiful  possession imaginable.
The  central  situation  of the story records  Florentine's seduction  by a
ruthless young orphan, Jean  Levesque  (Mr.  "Bishop"), her desperation when  she learns  that  she is pregnant and  unwanted, and  her  reluctant marriage to Levesque's shy friend  Emmanuel Letourneau ("a starling"). It is in this situation,  and in the excruciating history of Florentine's par­ ents,  Rose-Anna   and   Azarius,  that   Gabrielle   Roy's  irony  reaches  its deepest  level.  Jean  Levesque  is a  calculating  young  opportunist; and Florentine is a yearning,  empty-headed little fool. Yet they both, finally, strike  us as disarmingly  pathetic, for neither  the opportunist nor his vic­ tim is really in control  of his destiny, and neither realizes that  wealth,  if it is not somehow warmed  by compassion and love, can be as hideous as poverty. The novel's central  perception and its chief irony is its depiction  of the nature  of poverty, the scourge which blinds its victims to all motives but acquisition.
The  story of Rose-Anna,  Florentine's mother,  is at once more painful
and  more  reassuring.  Rose-Anna  has been able to forgive all of her hus­ band's  failures,  but  when  he abandons his family  in order  to bequeath them the regular income of an Army Private's allowances  (a "fortune" in St. Henri  terms)  she feels his action as a betrayal.  In the last analysis, the love-pain  nexus that  binds  people  together  is more important than  the digits of a bank account.  Rose-Anna,  we feel, is an image of the universal mater  dolorosa, the infinitely loving mother whose "poverty  of spirit" will inherit  the earth.  Yet her secret is not a conscious formula; it is simply a question  of unpremeditated giving.  In  existentialist  terms  she is totally engage-committed to a way of life in which  the moment  is all-impor­ tant,  and in which fortitude, compassion and love are the essential values.
But if these are  the only values that  can triumph over the squalor  of St. Henri,  The Tin  Flute does not affirm that  the world will accept  them easily as a remedy for mankind's suffering. Rose-Anna  ends hers career in  the same  pose as her mother,  a woman  who has lived her life in the "garden" of a  Quebec  farmstead; each  of them,  with  the  stoicism of

52

THE  GARDEN AND THE  CAGE



resignation,  rubs  her  fingers  abstractedly against  the  seat  of her  hard wooden chair.  Even Emmanuel Letourneau, whose vision is close to Rose­ Anna's, finds no confident solution to the enigma of the human situation.  His  wife, Florentine, is incapable of understanding a love devoid of ul­ terior  motives, and  as he goes off to fight in a dubious war he sees from the train  windows a desolate city:  "Low on the horizon, a bank of heavy clouds foretold a storm." "Emmanuel" is prepared to give his life to save his fellows, but  he  cannot  be certain  that his sacrifice will redeem  the time.
The  statement of The  Tin  Flute is veiled; Gabrielle  Roy allowed "the look of things"  to convey its own meaning  without  authorial comment. In Street  of Riches and Where  Nests the Water  Hen she adopts a highly personal,  subjective  manner.  These  are  works of "spiritual  autobiogra­ phy",  but their  insights are not essentially different  from the document­ ary histories of the  Lacasse family  and  Alexandre Chenevert. Gabrielle  Roy's experience  has taught  her that life offers an endless series of storms and  mischances,  whether   they  be  blizzards  in  the  remote  Water  Hen country,  snowstorms  that  cut  the  arteries  of  Winnipeg's  life, or  cruel Arctic  winds that  sweep through  the quartier of St. Henri.  (The  image of the storm, indeed, is a leading motif in these novels.)  In country places, however,  we see life in its simplest form-stripped of the complexities of the city.
But  if country  life is a spring  of revelation,  there  is no stopping  the cycle of history  from  frontier  to  provincial  town  to big city-or  from canoe  to Titanic to space-ship.  Rightly  or  wrongly,  wisely or  stupidly, man aspires. And hence a final question arises. Is the idea of progress an illusion? Is there no possibility of turning  the cage into a blessed garden? Gabrielle  Roy  answers  this  ultimate question  by describing  the  ordeal of Alexandre  Chenevert, the  Cashier.




IT wouLD be difficult  to imagine  a less promising sub­ ject for fiction than  the career  of Alexandre  Chenevert, for he is a man to  whom  virtually   nothing  happens-a nonentity   who  breaks  down under  the pressures of city life, escapes briefly to the "earthly paradise"

53

THE  GARDEN AND THE  CAGE



of Lac Vert,  and  returns  home to die. Yet from the very first sentence he has an almost hypnotic  fascination  for us:

It was still dark.  The  bed was warm,  and  the room quiet.  Alexandre Chenevert had  been  awakened by what   he  thought was  a  noise, but  was  really  a  nagging recollection. One  of  his overcoat buttons was  dangling loose by  a single  thread. And  then  too, it was spring.  Spring reminded him of the income  tax.  "If I should forget  to have  that  button sewn on  ..." he reflected,  and  then  the notion occur­ red  to him  that  perhaps there  wouldn't be any  war,  simply  because  the  weapons  of today  have such  terrific  killing  power.

This  little  man,  his mind  awash  in an endless tide of anxieties,  is much more than  a nameless Montreal clerk who suffers from insomnia and  the aches of urban  life;  he is the neighbor  across the street  or  the stranger who  sits across from  us in  the  cafeteria.  Alexandre  is us- Everyman. The  doctor  whom he consults when he can no longer disguise his illness recognizes with  painful  clarity  that  the  little  bank  clerk's  malady  is a condition  that  medicine  cannot  cure:
Of a sudden  he realized  how this man  could so greatly plague  him:  it was because his name,  indeed,  was legion.
Every  morning at  a set  hour  he  walked  down  a thousand staircases at  once, running from  every  corner  of the city  toward bulging  streetcars. He crowded  into them  by  the  hundreds and  thousands. From  tram  to tram, from  street  to street, you  could  see  him  standing  in  public  conveyances,   his  hands   slipped   through leather straps,  his arms  stretched in a curious  likeness  to a prisoner at  the  whip­ ping  post.

Alexandre's malady  is simply the human  condition.
But  Gabrielle  Roy does not, as a number  of her critics  have  argued, intend  her story as a simple condemnation of urban  living, for the cage of the  bank  (and  the city)  in which  Alexandre passes his days is in its deepest  sense  the  cage  of  adult  life-of  experience.  Thus  his trip  to Lac Vert  and the pristine beauty of nature  is not a rejection  of the abra­ sive facts of experience  but an attempt to reassure himself that happiness and  peace  are  genuine  possibilities. "Are  you thinking  of  settling  down here for good?" asks the Lac Vert farmer:
"No   ... that   is   ... well,  no."
That was  not  the  big  point.  What mattered was  that  Lac  Vert  should  exist, and   that   Alexandre should   have  seen  it  with  his  own  eyes. Later on  it  would always  remain  his property. To  believe in  an  earthly Paradise-that was what he had  so deeply  needed.

54

THE  GARDEN AND THE  CAGE



Given this reassurance  that  man's  highest dream  is not vain, Alexandre is ready  to go home. A New Jerusalem is possible. He leaves Lac Vert "two  days before the end of his vacation."
And  then,  as his bus brings him tortuously  back to the tangled  city of
men, he sees a terrifying  image:

A statue of Christ  loomed  up along  the  road.  Electric wires linked  it to a Hydro­ Quebec pole. On  its  back  you could  glimpse  a full-fledged installation: a network  of  twisted  cables  .  .  . and  what  was  probably a fuse  box.  Alexandre  wondered whether there  was not  likewise a meter, keeping  track  of the number of  kilowatts the  Christ   might   consume   when  it  was  illuminated  at  night; ...  Long  after  they  had  passed  by, the  electrified  Christ  continued to  bother  him.

This, perhaps,  is the most ironic image in all of Gabrielle  Roy's work. In  modern  life, even the  figure of Christ -the  symbol of brotherhood and  love -has  become a towering  mechanical monster.  In  the cage of modern  experience  even Love has lost its way.
Yet this is not the end of Alexandre's ordeal.  Soon after,  he learns that
Gandhi,  the  simplest  and  greatest  man  of the  century,  has  been assas­
sinated:

Now  you could  expect  every  sort  of excess and  violence,  Gandhi no longer  being here  to  condemn them  with  one  stern  look!  A tiny  slip of a man,  feeble,  sickly, Alexandre reflected  tenderly. Oh!  it  was not  always the sturdy  ones who  brought the  most to pass in the  world-far from  it!
They  had  looked  a bit alike;  others  had  also  noticed  it;  ... It was certainly
his  own  best  self  which  today   they  had  killed  for  him  .  .  . but  he  would  con­ tinue   to  suffer  as a  protest  against   violence,  war,  and  murder. Why  had  he not earlier understood that   his  role  in  life, as  Gandhi had  pointed  out  for  him,  lay in meekness?

In  these  words we come once again  to the  very core of Gabrielle  Roy's vision. There  can be no return  to the garden,  but meekness and love can plant flowers in the cage and the wasteland.  The poor in spirit-Mahat­ mas Gandhi,  Alexandre  Chenevert-have the secret. A final knowledge of Love's power comes to Alexandre as he lies in a hospital  bed dying of cancer: the visits of his simple friends  and clients reveal  to him that  his life has  not  been  worthless  or  meaningless.  In  the face of his childlike helplessness, his friends abandon all past pettiness and  rivalry:  "Alexan­ dre closed his eyelids. As Heaven,  he could see nothing  better  than earth,  now that  men had  become good neighbors."

55

THE  GARDEN AND THE  CAGE



But  did  the  priest  really  not  believe  that  men  would  come  to love one  another? Couldn't one  see signs of this  happening? Might   not  Heaven, after  all,  little  by little,  come  to  be on earth?
"No." The  chaplain was categorical; ... Men  would never be ripe for heaven upon  earth.

Perhaps  Alexandre's dying  vision was an  hallucination. Gabrielle  Roy does  not  intrude to  debate   the  priest's  official view.  Nevertheless  the spindly  Alexandre  Chenevert   (Mr.  Green  Oak)   stands  as a compelling figure of Everyman,  not unlike the tragic salesman  Willy Loman,  or the all-American failure  Studs Lanigan, but rising above them in his final awareness.  The  money-counting world takes small  notice of his passing, and  yet this humble  sufferer whose name suggests both a conqueror  and a sturdy,  growing  tree, achieves a curious kind of immortality. For even now,

elsewhere  than  in  churches, it  happens still today, after  these  several  years,  that name  is uttered -and  is it  not  a  thing  tender  and  mysterious that  to this  name there  should  attach a bond?   .  .  . It happens that  here  or there  in the city some­ one says:
"...  Alexandre Chenevert  ..."





IT IS IMPOSSIBLE on this occasion  to notice  a number of features  of Gabrielle  Roy's  art  which  must  qualify  and  modify  our estimate of her achievement, but my primary purpose has been to explore her "importance" as a voice speaking  in this Canadian place and  time.
I have omitted  mention,  for example,  of the wry and  tender understate­ ment of her humor; I have ignored her tendency  towards episodic narra­ tive,  and  the  occasional  awkwardness  in chronology  which  breaks  the unity of Where Nests the Water Hen  and  Street  of  Riches.  I have also been  unable  to  weigh  the  losses incurred  in  translation -losses which seriously reduce the impact  of The  Tin  Flute  (Harry Binsse's translations of the later  books are inspired).
At  the  moment  these  matters   bulk  large,  because  we are  always  in
some degree  the slaves of literary  fashion. Our  final judgment,  however, will rest firmly on two things:  has Gabrielle  Roy had something  signifi-

THE  GARDEN AND THE  CAGE



cant to say? and has she said it well? She falls short, I think, of the panor­ amic sweep of our greatest  novelists, and she lacks something  of  the in­ tensity which  enables a Katherine Mansfield  to distill the meaning  of a world in the microcosm of a moment.  She has, however, given us a vision of ourselves which is immeasurably more  powerful than  "the  vision" of windy  Prime  Ministers  and  journalistic  patriots.  She  convinces  us, in­ deed, that  the truth  which Canada has revealed to her is a timeless truth. And she persuades  us to bear  witness to its importance.










WOOD  ENGRAVING  BY  ALISTAIR BELL









57



TOWARD A THEORY  OF CULTURAL REVOLUTION

The Criticism of Northrop Frye





E. W.  Mandel







l:E STRUCTURE  of a critical  theory may easily be ob­ scured  behind  the mass of detail  which  it supports,  and  when the detail  is as fascinating and spectacular as it is in Northrop Frye's criticism,  it is not wholly surprising  that  even so imposing an intellectual framework as his cultural theory  should  be difficult to discern.  His essays, pronounce­  ments, credos, and epigrams  have provoked a variety of reactions,  but in almost  every case the  technical  rather than the  thematic question  have been mumbled  and  worried  by the reader. One  exception  which  comes to mind is the review of Fearful Symmetry by H. M. McLuhan. I Profes­ sor McLuhan writes that  the "awareness of the unity of mythopoeic  ac­ tivity in history and art" has given rise to "one of the principal intellectual developments  of the past century", "the supplanting of linear perspective  by a multi-locational mode of  perception". And it is this "advance in the tools of intellectual analysis" which "has given modern  man a sense once more of the simultaneity of all history seen at the psychological and intel­ lectual  level, as well as of  the  close bonds  between  all members  of the human  family past and present". This is the theme or informing principle  of Professor Frye's criticism,  the relationship of criticism to culture.  Con­ sequently,  the boundaries  of this discussion may be defined by the polar­ ity of terms like "popular" and  "provincial", "primitive" and "sophisti­  cated", "prophetic" and "worldly" or, perhaps, "urbane". Obviously, one

I Sewanee  Review, LV,  t947, 7t0-7t5.

ss

THE CRITICISM OF  NORTHROP  FRYE



of each of these pairs has some relevance  to Canadian readers and Cana­ dian subjects, but the context of our discussion is considerably larger than the history of Canadian critical  theories. And in either  a local or a more extended  context,  it is less of a paradox than  it  appears, at  first, to say that Professor Frye's criticism can be understood as a defense of the popu­ lar and an attack  on the provincial  in both art and criticism,  that  is, as a theory  of culture.  Such  polemical  terms  as "attack" and  "defense", of course,  are  appropriate to his subject  and  go some way as well toward explaining  the wit and irony of his style.






VINCIALISM clearly has something  to do with bound­ aries,  and  it  is revealing  to notice  what  a  difference  can  be  suggested in  the  quality  of a  work simply  by altering the  borders  within  which it  is placed.   In  discussing  a  criticism  of  the  sort  implied  above,  con­ cerned  with  first principles,  we are  not merely subsidizing  local  talent,  which  would  be one form  of literary  provincialism.  We are  concerned  instead  with  the foundations and structure of one of the central  human­ istic disciplines,  and  it follows that  we are  not interested  in personality or gossip, but  in theory  or idea. From  this point  of view we can  define provincialism,  as in  effect  Professor  Frye  defines it  in  the  Anatomy of Criticism, as the failure  to suspect the existence of a systematic criticism distinct  from  the  history  of  taste.  Provincialism   here  appears to  be a derivative  of a particular theory of criticism,  the theory  that  criticism is parasitic  rather than autonomous, and that  therefore  it can never deserve serious  attention  on  its  own  merits.  Thus  the  ancestral and  persistent voices of taste  murmuring that  it is nasty, brutal,  and  parochial to talk about  criticism, especially  in a half-empty literary  country.  There  is an attack on this position in the Polemical  Introduction to the  Anatomy of Criticism:

A public  that tries to do without criticism,  and  asserts  that  it knows what  it wants or  likes, brutalizes the  arts  and  loses its  cultural memory.  Art  for  art's sake  is a retreat from   criticism   which  ends  in  an  impoverishment of  civilized  life  itself. The  only  way  to forestall the  work  of criticism  is through censorship, which  has the  same  relation to criticism  that  lynching has  to  justice.

59

THE  CRITICISM OF NORTHROP FRYE



The  parochial attitude, in fact,  is that  menacing  or brute  silence main­ tained  in the face of the urgent  need for criticism,  and  criticism itself is defined  in the  Anatomy  of Criticism  as "the  whole work of  scholarship  and  taste concerned  with  literature which  is a part  of what is variously called liberal  education, culture, or the study of the humanities".
This begins to sound like Matthew Arnold. Indeed,  Arnold's  argument in "The Function  of Criticism  at the Present  Time" might  very well be the  point  of departure in this essay, for  the  reason  that  Professor Frye takes up Arnold's  argument, with some ironic twists, in his own "The Function  of Criticism  at  the  Present  Time" which  forms  the substance of the Polemical  Introduction to the Anatomy of Criticism. Both writers are  concerned  with  establishing  the autonomy  of criticism  and  yet both are  anxious  that  this shall  not mean  that  criticism  is isolated from  the world  of humane  letters.  In  Arnold,  the  familiar   terms  which  one  en­ counters are "disinterestedness" and "culture". Criticism is a disinterested  activity  which yet will "make  an intellectual situation  of which the crea­  tive power can profitably avail itself". In Frye, the terms are "autonomy" and "conceptual universe".  Criticism  is not a subdivision of literature.

Criticism, rather, is to art  what  history  is to action  and  philosophy  to wisdom:  a verbal   imitation of  a  human  productive power  which  in  itself  does  not  speak. And  just  as there  is nothing which  the  philosopher cannot consider  philosophic­ ally,  and   nothing which   the  historian cannot   consider  historically,  so  the  critic  should  be able  to construct and  dwell in  a conceptual universe  of  his own.  This  critical  universe  seems  to be one  of the  things  implied  in  Arnold's  conception of culture. (Anatomy of Criticism).

A metaphor which  we will meet  again  in  Professor  Frye's  criticism lurks in this passage. It is of a subject  visualized as a figure between two similar,  but not identical,  flanking figures  (criticism  between philosophy and history)  which, in certain  situations, are seen to be inside the central figure and, in others, outside of it. In a sense, the whole of Professor Frye's work can be explained  as a search for and an account  of this mysterious unity in multiplicity,  and  it is the possibility of such unity which informs his conception  of criticism and  art  as central  human  activities, centres of culture   and  civilization.  This  fierce  desire  intensifies both  content  and style,  making  the  one  inclusive,  the  other  radically  metaphorical and paradoxical. It  also accounts  for the feeling one has that  anything Pro­ fessor Frye writes is related  to everything else he has written.  This is true

6o

THE CRITICISM OF  NORTHROP FRYE



whether   he  is commenting   on  Canadian poetry  chap   books, defining an age of sensibility, accounting for the  typology of Paradise  RegainedJ analyzing colonial painting, reviewing film or ballet, or identifying  myths in Toynbee,  Spengler,  or Shakespeare. And it is this quality  of his work which M. H. Abrams seems to have in mind, in a review of the Anatomy of Criticism," when  he notices in Professor  Frye's  criticism  "the  regress to one hypothetical Urmythos behind the multitude of individual  literary phenomena". "It's function," comments  Professor Abrams, "... is meta­ physical"  and  the  certainty it  yields "is  not  the  certainty of  empirical proof, it is the security of an ultimate  abiding place for the monistic com­ pulsion of the human  spirit." Whatever else it may be, this notion of an autonomous   conceptual universe  of criticism  is the  centre  of Professor Frye's  theory,  and  any  discussion of his theory  is  inevitably  confronted with questions about  the source and nature  of such a conception  and the relation  of it to a theory of culture  and popular art.





AT THIS  POINT  it  becomes  necessary  to  introduce what  will surely sound like a resounding commonplace and  to insist that, as Professor  Frye himself  demonstrated at some length  in Fearful  Sym­ metry, the source of his view that  "criticism  has an end in the structure of literature as a total  form,  as well as a beginning  in the text studied" (Anatomy of Criticism) is Blake. But if this is a commonplace, it is both a  needed  and  a valuable  one. It  is valuable,  as we shall see, because it corrects  the view that  since archetypes  are a late nineteenth-century dis­ covery they never existed before that  time and therefore  anyone finding them  in  an  earlier  work  of literature  is  "reading into"  the  work.  It  is evidence  (the value of which is still an open question)  that  "The axioms
and  postulates  of criticism  ... grow out  of the art  it deals with"  and
that there is a considerable difference between finding "a conceptual framework for  criticism  within  literature" and  attaching "criticism   to one of a miscellany of frameworks  outside  it"  (Anatomy of Criticism). It is a needed commonplace because, despite the overwhelming  evidence to the  contrary, readers  of Frye continue  to find his source everywhere

•  University of Toronto Quarterly, XXVIII, I959, I90-I96.

61

THE  CRITICISM OF NORTHROP FRYE



but  in  Blake. Thus,  one of the  formidable Aristotelians  from  Chicago, R.  S. Crane,  in a discussion of modern  critical  theory  (The  Languages of Criticism and  the  Structure of Poetry, 1953)  groups  Frye with  "the late  Professor Coomaraswamy, Maud  Bodkin, Kenneth Burke, Edmund Wilson,  Lionel  Trilling,   Richard Chase,  Francis  Fergusson",  with,  in other  words,  a  group  of  critics  "largely  intent  on  interpreting  poetry
'reductively,' in  terms  of something  assumed  to  be far  more  primitive
and  basic in human  experience". And Crane  locates the sources of such criticism,  not  in  literature, but  in insights  "of  theorists  and  scholars  in several  other  disciplines  that  have  risen  to  prominence since the  later years of the nineteenth century," in particular, "the cultural anthropology of Sir James  Frazer,  Jane  Harrison, Emile Durkheim ... and the psy­ choanalysis or analytical phychology of Sigmund  Freud  and C. G. Jung". Crane  mentions in addition  "the  efforts of philosophers of knowledge like A.  N.  Whitehead, Ernest  Cassirer,  Susanne  Langer  ... to  construct  general  theories of symbolism". To this imposing list of  sources the liter­ ary historians  William  K. Wimsatt  and  Cleanth Brooks have nothing  to add  in their  discussion of Professor Frye's criticism  (Literary Criticism: A  Short  History, 1957), except that "critics,  under  the stimulus of such studies, write  with  the excitement  of  men who have suddenly  envisaged a whole new hemisphere" and indeed that for Northrop Frye such studies point "to  the possibility of turning literary  criticism for the first time into a true science". M. H. Abrams, in the review of the Anatomy of Criticism already  referred  to, agrees  that Frye's  purpose  is "to  work in the impli­ cations for literary analysis" of "depth psychology" and "theories of ritual  and myth in Frazer and other cultural anthropologists", and adds as well a  third  development, "the  revival  of serious interest  in mediaeval  sym­ bology".
Where,  then, is Blake? The  answer,  in this context  at least, is the last chapter of Fearful  Symmetry and a good part  of the Anatomy of  Criti­ cism.  Blake's  philosophy,  psychology,  metaphysics,  and  poetics,  as  ex­ pounded  in Fearful  Symmetry, echo, as indeed  they are intended to, in the  Anatomy of Criticism. No attempt is made  to deny the resemblance  between  these and modern  theories:  Blake's Ore cycle is said to resemble theories of history as a sequence of cultural organisms; his Los is said to resemble  modern  metaphysical theories  of time;  his Four  Zoas, psycho­ logical theories of contending forces within  the soul; his Druidism,  mod-

THE CRITICISM OF  NORTHROP  FRYE



ern  anthropological theories,  and  so on. But  in  no single one of these modern  theories is there a unifying principle. Studies of dream and ritual, in fact,  are dismissed as possible sources of a principle  which would have both critical  and cultural significance:  "A comparative study of dreams and  rituals  can lead  us only to a vague and  intuitive  sense of the unity of the human  mind;  a comparative study of works of art should demon­ strate  it  beyond  conjecture." Blake,  we are  told, "insists  ...  urgently on  this question  of an  imaginative iconography, and  forces  us to learn
.  .  .  much  of its grammar in  reading  him."  And,  in a masterpiece of
deadpan  ambiguity:  "...  Blake's  own  art  ... is ... a  beginner's guide  to  the  understanding of an  archetypal vision of which  it  forms part."
Going outside Fearful Symmetry, we find Professor Frye ten years later
doggedly insisting3   that  Blake teaches  us the structural principles  of  fic­ tion and poetry. His argument here is the same as that  in the third essay, "Archetypal Criticism: Theory  of Myths",  of the Anatomy  of Criticism. The argument turns on a distinction  between representative and creative  art,  the sort of distinction  which  occupies Reid  MacCallum in the title essay of his Imitation and Design. The structural principles of literature, according  to this argument, are more evident in non-representative than  in imitative  works, and it is to the "abstract and stylized" and "primitive" which we must go to learn such principles. Blake is obviously the poet we need.  His "prophecies are so intensely mythical  because his lyrics are so intensely  metaphorical" and  since  "Metaphor is a formal  principle  of poetry,  and  myth  of fiction"  it  follows  that  "just  as Blake's lyrics are among  the  best possible  introductions to poetic  experience,  so his pro­ phecies  are  among  the  best possible introductions to the  grammar and structure of  literary  mythology."  And  though  this  may  not  be clearly understood  now, "opinion  will have  changed  on  this point  long before the tercentenary rolls around."
The  structural principles  of  literature and  of  criticism  are  located
therefore  inside literature rather  than  in depth  psychology, cultural an­ thropology,  or philosophical  symbolism. We are  presented  now with  the wondrous paradox that  poetry like Blake's prophecies-obscure, esoteric, complex, erudite-is popular  poetry. In this context  "popular" does not mean  "what the public  wants",  but instead  refers to recurring elements
s  "Blake  After Two Centuries", University of Tor onto Quarterly, XXVII,   1958, 1o-2 1.

THE CRITICISM OF NORTHROP FRYE



in great  art,  "even  very complex and  difficult art". It  refers to "the  art which affords a key to imaginative experience  for the untrained".
We begin to see the outlines of a cultural theory in the form of arche­
typal  or systematic  criticism.  Modem theories of criticism  are  not read back  into  Blake,  but  Blake is not  an  anachronism: "Blake  suggests to the student  of English literature that  to recognize the existence of a total form  of vision would  not  be a  new  discovery, but  a return  to essential critical  principles  that  should  never  have  been  lost sight  of."  (Fearful Symmetry). In Fearful  Symmetry, we are told that  to understand Blake's thought historically we must keep in mind "an  affinity between three Re­ naissance  traditions,  the imaginative approach to God through love and beauty  in Italian Platonism,  the doctrine  of inner  inspiration  in the left­ wing  Protestants, and  the  theory  of creative  imagination in occultism". In  "Blake  After  Two  Centuries", we are  told  that  popular  art,  in the sense described  above, is "the  art  which  is central  to a specific cultural tradition". The  English cultural tradition is then described as Protestant, radical,  and Romantic. The comprehension of this tradition is said to con­ stitute  a cultural revolution,  and it appears that  the term is used in two mam senses.
One  is related  to the  paradoxical sense of the  word  "popular". The
arts  do not  improve,  but  what  does improve  is "the  comprehension of them, and  the refining of society which results from it". A cultural revo­ lution  is created  not  by the  production of art  but  by an  intensified  re­ sponse to it, for "while  the  production of culture  may be, like ritual,  a half-involuntary imitation of organic  rhythms  or processes, the response to culture  is, like myth, a revolutionary act of consciousness." Hence,  the modem  cultural revolution  is not  anthropological or psychological,  but critical,  since the key to an imaginative iconography  is in art,  not outside of  it.  In  this sense, "The  contemporary development of the  technical  ability to study the arts, represented by reproductions of painting, the re­ cording  of music, and modem  libraries,  forms part  of a cultural revolu­ tion which  makes  the  humanities quite  as pregnant with  new develop­ ments  as the sciences." This is not what  it first appears to be, a techno­ logical revolution, but a revolution in "spiritual productive  power".  (Ana­ tomy of Criticism).
The  second sense in which  Professor Frye speaks of a cultural revolu­
tion is even wider and more visionary than  the picture of a whole genera-

THE  CRITICISM OF NORTHROP FRYE



tion reading  Blake's prophecies.  As art  is to criticism,  criticism is to cul­ ture, and the structural principles of one provide a conceptual framework for the other.  This is worked out both in terms of the relation of various types of criticism  discussed in the Anatomy of Criticism  to social reality, and in terms  of a complex  and  elaborate analogy  between  mathematics and  literature. What  is sought for is a conception  of criticism as at once disinterested   and  engaged  with  social  reality:   "though literature, like mathematics, is constantly  useful-a word which  means  having  a con­ tinuing  relationship  to the common field of experience-pure literature, like pure  mathematics, contains its own meaning." Literature, then, is a "hypothetical" art,  and  it is the  task of criticism  to identify  the  hypo­ theses. This  suggests that criticism can supply the conceptual framework for a theory  of culture:

... is literature like mathematics in  being  substantially useful, and  not  just inci­ dentally so? That is, is it true  that  the verbal  structures of psychology, anthropol­ ogy,  theology,  history, law,  and  everything else built  out  of words  have  been  in­  formed  or  constructed by the same  kind  of myths  and  metaphors that  we find, in their original hypothetical form, in literature? (Anatomy of Criticism).

The  answer,  of course, is yes. And  it follows that  criticism  supplies  the unifying principle in culture,  "a language  capable of expressing the unity of this higher intellectual universe". When that language is finally spoken well by criticism,  the "social  and  practical result"  will be that  its words fuse together  "the  broken links between creation  and knowledge, art and science, myth and concept".






ETHER this  argument for  the  integrity  of  cnti­ cism and its cultural significance is dismissed as dreary  rhetoric, sonorous nonsense, or cloudy logic, its practical efficiency cannot  be denied.4  This brings us back to an earlier  part  of the argument, the opposition  of pro­ vincial  and  popular  in art  and  criticism.  What  would  be the practical effect of applying  these  critical  principles  to a  provincial  art   (that  is, "dingy  realism"  or "nervous  naturalism")  and  to a provincial  criticism (that  is, an unsystematic criticism)? One aspect of Northrup Frye's work

6s

THE CRITICISM OF NORTHROP  FRYE



is the  practical application of  his criticism  to  Canadian literature. In articles like his major  review of A. J. M. Smith's  The  Book of Canadian
Poetry 5   and  his reviews of the  year's  work in poetry  in the "Letters  in Canada" series of the University  of Toronto  Quarterly  he has rewritten the history of Canadian poetry, adjusting it to the focus of his mythopoeic lens. Thus,  in "Letters in Canada: 1957", he notices "a  tendency  that  I have seen growing since I began this survey eight years ago". In Jay Mac­ Pherson's  The  Boatman, in the second volumes of Douglas LePan, P. K. Page,  and  James  Reaney,  in  the first volumes of Wilfred .Watson and Anne  Wilkinson,  and  in all  the  volumes of Irving  Layton  since In  the Midst  of My  Fever, one can  see a concern  with  "poetry  as a craft  with its own traditions and discipline".  And "It is consistent with this that  the more amateurish approach which tries to write up emotional experiences as they arise in life or memory has given way to an emphasis on the formal  elements  of poetry,  on myth,  metaphor, symbol,  image,  even metrics." Clearly,  Professor Frye did not write the volumes he mentions,  nor did he create  this growing professionalism in Canadian literature, but clearly al­ so he contributed to it, as one poet at least6  is more than willing to admit.
So many more significant issues are raised in Professor Frye's criticism,
that  it may seem an abysmally provincial place to reach the end, in a dis­ cussion of practical, rather than  theoretical, results. But at the end I shall not be misled by what Professor Frye calls the donkey's carrot  of criticism, a demonstrable value-judgment. Whether his work proclaims a real apo­ calypse in art  or criticism,  I do not know, but that  it is accompanied by all the sounds of that  wonderful  time, there can be no doubt at all. There


4    Frye's  theory  that  a  conceptual framework for  criticism  may  be derived  from the  formal   principles of  poetry  has  been  criticized  as wishful  thinking and  as mere metaphor: "We  are  stating, in short,  not a relationship of effect  to cause,  but of like to like-that  is, of analogy merely; our  proposition is a kind of proportional meta­ phor" (R. s. CRANE, The  Languages of Criticism) : "... archetypal statements are em­ pirically  incorrigible ...."  (M. H. ABRAMS, University of Toronto Quarterly, XXVIII, I959); "Recurrence is one thing; organization is another. A pattern cannot organize" (G. WHALLEY, review of Anatomy of Criticism, TAMARACK REVIEW, 8, I958). One  can only observe that  distrust  of metaphor is a curious  critical  attitude.

5    "Canada and  Its Poetry", Canadian Forum, XXIII,  I943,  207-2Io.

6   JAMEs REANEY,  "The Canadian Poet's   Predicament",  University  of Toronto
Quarterly, XXVI,  I957·

66

THE CRITICISM OF  NORTHROP FRYE



are  trumpets,  and,  to adopt  a fine phrase  from  the Blake book itself, if you listen closely you might  be able to hear the squeaking axles of "Char­ iots of fire" lining up for the critical  Armageddon.























:e



/?nO





k








/cl§tJ#
/kv

clcY4

.LJ












68


review articles



THREE CANADIAN  POETS
A VIEW FROM ENGLAND

Roy Fuller



IRVING LAYTON.  A Red  Carpet   for the  Sun. McClelland & Stewart. Paper
$r.g5, Cloth  $3.50.
JOHN GLAssco. The Deficit  Made  Flesh. McClelland & Stewart. $3.50. RONALD BATES.  The  Wandering World.  Macmillan. $2.75.



To  DISCOVER at 47 a consider­ able poet of precisely one's own age, writ­ ing in  the same  language-this  has  been my surprising and pleasurable experience with  A  Red  Carpet   for the  Sun, Mr.  Ir­  ving   Layton's  collected   poems  of   I942 to  I958.  I  hope  I  am  as  curious  as any poetry   reader   in  England, but  the  haz­ ards  of Canadian and British literary ex­ changes  have  hitherto kept  me  ignorant of  the  extent   of  Mr.  Layton's achieve­  ment.
This  volume  contains the  poems  of its
period  that  the author wishes to preserve, and  since  there  are over  two hundred of them  it  is  plain   that   entry into  middle age-for  many  of  his  English  contem­ poraries a time  of poetic  hesitancy-has been  for  him   a  fertile  and  stimulating experience. The  general  situation  of  A Red   Carpet   is   the  mature  man   whose settled  place  in  society  and  conventional personal  relationships make  him  acutely aware  of  his subversive  thought and  un­ diminished lusts.
 Golda, Fruma, Dinnie, Elinor,
My  saintly wantons, passionate nuns;
0 light-footed daughters, your  unopened
Brittle  beauty  troubles an  aging   man Who   hobbles   after  you  a  little  way Fierce    and   ridiculous.

Put  in  this  concrete way,  the  strains of  the  poet's   rebellious  flesh  are  proper and  moving  mainsprings for  poetry, but I found  tedious Mr.  Layton's Lawrentian praise  of the  body  and  celebration of his virility.  'Real  pleasure and  goodness  Are in  your   rippling  breasts,'   he  says  in  a poem  addressed  to  Mrs.  Arthur  Miller, but we cannot  help feeling that  the senti­ ment  is as  tired  as  the  adjective.  Much  of   Mr.   Layton's  no   doubt   celebrated naughtiness arises  from  the  same  rather provincial notion  of  freedom.

You went  behind  a bush to piss. Imagine Wordsworth telling this! About  Lucy? And Robert Bridges About   his  dear   lass ?

Mr.  Layton will  convince  no one  but the  callow  adolescent   that   they   should have   told,  and   that   anything  very  m-

6g

REVIEW  ARTICLES



teresting would  have  been  gained  there­ by:  though  his  poem  is  entitled   'Anti­ Romantic,' the  idea  it embodies is really embarrassingly romantic.
So, too, there  is something second-rate
about   the   quality  of  Mr.   Layton's  in­ tellectual  protest,  his  indignation   with society.

The   church  is  gone, The   street is  paved,
The  Horne   Bank   thrives
Where  Jesus   Saved.

Such  criticism  is too easy, too conven­ tional; and   in  fact   Mr.  Layton  rarely  makes  us feel that  the  quality of his liv­ ing  has  forced  upon  him  the  dissidence to  which  he aspires.
However, all this is perhaps merely  a somewhat unkind  way of saying  that  we must  not  look  to  Mr.  Layton for  com­ plexity   of  conclusion   or  for   profundity of moral  statement. These  are almost  all very short  poems, and  their  surprises  are in  their   assembly  of   images  and   pene­ tration  of   observation.  Mr.   Layton  is not,  in  fine,  a  didactic poet,  though   he sometimes   tries  to  be  one.   In   his  best poems   the   content  is  modest,   the  lan­ guage  daring; the  moment  of  experience fixed by wholly fresh comparisons. There are  tropes  in this  book as  remarkable as any  I  remember  during  many   years  of reviewing:  the  likening  of a swimmer  to
'a  brown   weed  with  marvellous  bulbs', of tramcars to 'stained bacilli'; and  the description of a frog as 'Chaplin-footed' and  with  'sensitive  pianist's  hands'.
The  ironically poignant feeling  in  this frog  poem   (which  is echoed  in  a  subse­ quent    poem   about   a   cat),  articulated throughout its greater than normal  length by an  extraordinarily  exact  visual  sense, seems  to  me  to  indicate a  way  for  Mr.  Layton's talent  to make  a still profound-

70
 er effect  on  us  (and  he is one of the few poets  of  his  age  now  writing  whose  de­ velopment, in  any  non-pejorative  sense, can  be  adumbrated). Some  of   the  rhe­ toric  in the  earlier  poems comes off with enormous  success:

Life is horrifying, said  Cezanne,
but  this  is not
what  he   meant  who   picked    flowers
blooming
in   the   slaughterhouse;  he   meant  the
slit   throats,
The   bear    traps   smeared  with   blood,   the
iron   goads, the  frightened
servant-girl's Caesarian,
And   this   planet  dancing  about  Apollo,
the   blood   drying  and   shining  in   the
sun,
Turning  to  Titians,  beauty, the  Arts   ...

But  the dangers and  difficulties  of this kind  of  poetry  are  obvious:  it  will  con­ stantly tend  to the turgid, the empty, the sterilely  general   (though it  must  be add­ ed  that  in  Mr.  Layton's  case  his  ear  is so sure  that  his verse  can  proceed  with­  out  the anti-speech rhythms that  so often help  to deaden  rhetorical poetry). What in  the  end  is  reassuring about  Mr.  Lay­  ton  is his  power   to  set  a  precise  scene, to  make  us  feel  through the  exercise  of all his senses the  vast implications of the physical   world-even   the  small   world of  domesticity and  suburbia:

On   either side  the  even  expensive
Sod;   the   bungalow  with   the  red  border
Of  roses;  the  woman  past  her  middle years In  gabardine shorts, and   her  hard  fists That  held    in   place    over   her   suntanned
knee
A  book,   half-shut, in  spectacular  covers.

I hope  some English  publisher  will not too long delay introducing this excellent poet  to  a  new  public -a  public  which still   remains    to   be   convinced    of   the maturity and  significance  of Canadian literature.

REVIEW  ARTICLES



MR. GLAssco and   Mr.  Bates are  also  poets  whose  work  was  new  to me. I gather from  the  blurb  that  though Mr.  Glassco has been writing since the twenties,   this   is  his   first   collection   of poems. During the  war  he drove  a coun­ try  mail  route,   and   there   is  nothing in his  book  quite   so  good   as  its  opening  poem,   'The   Rural  Mail',  in   which   he arrives  at a remarkably profound accept­ ance  of  the  contradictions of  man   and  nature:

... here  is man  on  man's estate of nature, Farmer  on  farm,  the   savage   civilised
Into the  image   of  his  God  the  weather  ..

The   poem   goes  on  with   some  sharp and    unpretentious observations ('The ring as the  Knowlton News  goes in')  and some colloquial  speech  ('Far as I'm  con­ cerned, the  war  can  go on  forever,' says the  prospering poultry  farmer), so that  its   conclusion,  having   been    properly worked  for, strikes home with fine effect:

... the  bull,   the  buzz-saw   and   the  balky mare
Are    the    chosen    fingers    of   God    for    a
farmer's  sins,
Like   the  axe  for  his  woods,  and  his  calves and  chicks  and  children
Destined  for   slaughter  in   the    course    of things.

Mr.  Glassco  does not  seem ever  again to  have  found   materials so suitable for his  talent, and  many  of his poems  begin promisingly    ('The Whole   Hog', for  in­ stance)  but  stay  cold  and  somewhat  in­  human.  He  often   piles   up   parentheses and  subordinate  clauses  so that  the  tex­ ture  of his verse is made  needlessly  diffi­ cult  and  opaque.  He  is  most  successful and  attractive, I  think,  in  the  poems  on literary  and  artistic  themes,   where   the donnees  give  the  poetry  a sharpness and  point   which  otherwise it  is  inclined   to lack.   A   poem   called   'The    Cardinal's
 Dog'    (of  which   I  quote   the   first   two verses)   shows  this  civilised  and  accom­ plished  style  at  its  best:

The  unknown Master  of  Moulins
Painted  the   Nativity: we  see
The stable, the  stupid ox  and  Mary,
Simpering  Joseph   on   his  knees
And   the  Cardinal Rolin   on  his  knees   too, His  red   robe  centred  by  a  rat-faced  dog.

They  all   look   at   each   other:  Joseph    at
Mary,
Mary  (her   face   is  blue)   at   the  child, The  Cardinal  looks,   if   anywhere,  at   the
ox;
But   the   child   looks  at   the  little  dog,
And  the  dog  at  nothing, simply  being  well­
behaved:
He  is  the  one  who  feels  and   knows   .  .  .


MR. BATES I thought not so much  an  indifferent poet  as perhaps not a  poet  at  all-a  writer   working  in  the wrong  medium.

Nor   would   the  sound   of  pebbles   dropping down
A  disused   well  awaken  echoes   half
So terrifyingly as the  cold  silence  hung
Like faint funereal wreaths about the square.

The   well  image   is  a  not   unfair   ex­ ample   of  the  pointless   comparison   Mr.  Bates   too  frequently evokes   (and  why, one  asks, 'disused'?), and  the movement of the verse can  be seen to depend  lamely on a counted blank  verse line rather than  the  rhythms of speech or sense  (compare my   last   quotation   from   Mr.   Layton). And when speech is attempted it is some­ times  feeble:

True,  I've   made   mistakes.  I'll   not   deny
I'm human. But  to  think   I'd try
A  stunt like   that. And  with   my  own  son, too! 	('Dedalus'.)

The book is divided into sections ('Histories',  'Myths',  and   so  on) ,  and the  most  rewarding, I  think,  is the  most modest-'Landscapes'. Here  there  is true

71

REVIEW  ARTICLES



feeling    for   weather   and    the    seasons which enables the poet to bring out some memorable  phrases    ('snow   is  real   and
 grass  Chimerical', for  example) ,  and   a sense of real life which  seems to me lack­ ing  from  most  of  the  other  sections.






NEW BIOGRAPHY IN CANADA
 




George Woodcock


w.  J. ECCLES. Frontenac:  the  Courtier  Governor. McClelland & Stewart.
$6.so.
MICHAEL  BRECHER.  Nehru:  A  Political  Biography. Oxford.  $8.g5.
R.   MAC GREGOR  DAWSON.   William Lyon  Mackenzie King, Volume   One.
University  of Toronto Press. $6.50.


BIOGRAPHY    should    be   con­ cerned    with    the   history    of   a   human personality, to which  all  other  consider­ ations -age and  place  and  circle-are regarded as   subordinate.   In    modern practice there  is a  tendency  to diminish  the stature of the  man  by increasing the scale of these elements  in his background, and   it  is  disturbing  to  me-as  a  bio­ grapher-that the three Lives by Cana­ dian  authors which  I am  now discussing should   all   be   afflicted   by   the   division of  purpose  that   springs  from   trying   to portray a man  and  his period  with  equal emphasis.  One   of  the  writers, Dr.   Mi­  chael  Brecher, is aware  of the  nature of the  task   he  has   attempted,  for  he  re­ marks in his Nehru: a Political Biography that  "the  book is both  a biographical his­ tory  and   a  political   biography."  A  bio­ graphical  history  seems, to me at  least, a creature as unnatural as the griffin, since history  (as  Dr.  Brecher  clearly  means  us to understand it)   is concerned with  man m  general, and  biography with  man  as

72
 an  individual. And  yet it  is the  attempt to  write   biography  that   will  read   like history that characterises not only Dr. Brecher's    Nehru,  but   also   Frontenac:
The   Courtier   Governor   by W. J. Eccles
and  William Lyon  Mackenzie King, the
first  volume  of the  massive  biography of the   Liberal   leader   which   Dr.  R.  Mac­ Gregor  Dawson   left  unfinished  when  he died  in  I958.
Before discussing  these books individu­
ally,  it  may   be  useful   to  speculate  on why   all   their   authors  should   adopt   a hybrid  form  whose very  division  of  pur­ pose impedes  their  success.  I  suspect  the reason   is,  primarily, one  of   profession.  None of these writers  belongs to the class of humanist men-of-letters who produced the  best  of  the  classic  biographies. They  all come  to writing by  way of other dis­ ciplines;   Eccles   is  a  historian,  Brecher  a  political   scientist,  Dawson   a  political  economist.  And  each  is seeking  to annex  biography to his own  domain  rather than  to become  a biographer in the full sense;

REVIEW  ARTICLES



each  tries  to  use  the  art  to  present   his own  v1ew of  social  man   rather than   to re-create  an   individual  man.   It  is  for this  reason   that   none  of  them  has  pro­ duced   one   of   those   detailed   portraits, well-fleshed   with  humanity,  that  please us  when  we  read  even  such  a  relatively  minor   biographer in  the  classic  manner as Hesketh   Pearson.
All of them,  in effect,  limit  biography
by  trying  to  incorporate alien  elements, and we have to judge them in terms of comparative rather than  total  success. Which of them has produced  the most effective  portrait?


I THINK W. J. Eccles has done this in  his Frontenac. It is a well-written book which only rarely stumbles into pedestrianism;  it  is  also  a   provocative book which avoids being sensational. Professor  Eccles  takes  the fatuous  popu­ lar  image  of Frontenac-the stereotype saviour  of New  France-and  examines it  in  the  light  of  what  one  realises,  with some  astonishment, is  the  first  rigorous  research   to have  been  done on this  emi­ nent   Canadian  hero.  Those  who   have long  suspected  Parkman's view of Fron­ tenac   will  be  intrigued by the  face  that  appears as  Eccles  wipes  away  the  layers of  legend  and   propaganda. In   the  end the  real Frontenac is exposed -a seven­ teenth    century    nabob,    whose   military achievements lay largely  in his own ima­ gination, and  whose contributions  to the French  empire   in  North   America  were the  by-products of an  unashamed  desire to  use  his   power   as   governor   to  line his  pockets   with   beaver  skins.  Strange­ ly  enough,  the  cantankerous,  arrogant, grasping, selfish man whom Eccles evokes is  less  exasperating than   the   idealised
 Frontenac  of  the   past;   he   is  at   least probable  and   human.  Professor   Eccles does  in  fact   succeed   notably in  one  of the   great   biographical  tasks-that  of projecting  the  quality  of  an  individual man;   the   principal  defects  of  his  book grow  from  the  fact  that  he tries  to com­ bine his portrait of Frontenac with a his­ tory  of  New  France  from  I66o  to  qoo. This   means   that   the   unity  of   the   bio­ graphy is broken  by detailed  chapters on events   in   Canada   during   Frontenac's absence   between    I 682  and   I 68g,  while the  details  of  Frontenac's  own  life  dur­ ing   this   time   and   also  before   his  first governorship are  too skimpy  for  the  bio­ graphy to be even  in  tone  or full enough  in information.  Nevertheless, it is a most readable   book,  and   if  Professor   Eccles could forget-while acting as biographer
-the wider  demands of  his  historian's profession,  he might  become,  as the pub­ lisher's  blurb  suggests,  a Canadian  equi­  valent  of Lytton Strachey.



A  DASH  OF   Stracheyian acid might   have  improved the  books  of  Pro­ fessors   Brecher    and   Dawson,   both  of whom  are  too  much   in  sympathy with their  subjects  to  portray  them  with  any­ thing   approaching  the  vividness  of  the Eccles  Frontenac.  Yet  it  is  hard   to  be critical  of   Brecher  on   these   grounds, since  in  presenting  Nehru  he  is  clearly concerned to   emphasise   those   positive elements  in the Indian leader's character that   have   been   obscured   by  the  petu­ lance   of   politicians  and   journalists   of­ fended   by Nehru's  political   neutralism. To  document his study  Brecher  has car­ ried  out  a massive  task  of  investigation, and  much  of  his  knowledge of  the  poli­ tical  world  which  Nehru  dominates  was

73

REVIEW  ARTICLES




Shakespeare.·
A Portrait  Restored

BY   CLARA LONGWORTH  DE   CHAMBRUN
One  of the  most  recent literary and  historical studies. Many years research have  resulted in a readable and  highly  significant work.
$6.gs
An Approach to Shakespeare

BY  D.   A.   TRAVERS!
A revised  and  enlarged edition of
one of the  major  modern achievements
in Shakespearian criticism.
 gained   at  first-hand  from   long  periods of  residence   in  India. What emerges  is a  curious   tripartite  work:   a  biography of Nehru, a history  of the Congress movement, a study  of the  Indian  repub­ lic since liberation. It might  appropriate­ ly have been entitled Nehru's India, since it is even  more  the portrait of a country than   the  portrait  of   a  man;   the  back­  ground  grows  progressively   in  size  and vividness   until  Nehru   himself  is  almost dwarfed by it. He is most clearly  in focus in   the   first   chapter-"Portrait   of   a Man" -in    which    Brecher    introduces him  by  means of  a  New  Y orkerish  pro­ file,   and   in   the   other    early   chapters which  describe   his  youth.   But   as  time


Letters from Hilaire Belloc EDITED BY   ROBERT SPEAIGHT
".•.. Belloc  enjoyed writing
letters  more  than  he enjoyed   writing
anything else .... they  reverberate
still the  undying testament of
his  integrity".
-ROBERT   SPEAIGHT
 $r.gs
 and   the  book  go  on,  it  is  the  political
aspect of Nehru's life that  becomes domi­ nant,  and  the  sense  of intimate  contact on  a  human level fades  long  before  the end.  I  found   Nehru  a  most  informative book,  and   I  shall  certainly   keep  it  on my  shelves  for   historical   reference,   but as  a   biography  it   never   overleaps   the divisions  which  its  author's  varying  pur­  poses  create.

There are  two letters in which  Belloc writes  of his impressions of Canada.

$6.oo
Rise Canadians
BY   MARGARET  BELLASIS
A stimulating contribution to Canadian history, especially the revolt  of  1837.

Palm Publishers Limited
395  SELBY STREET, WESTMOUNT MONTREAL   6.

74
 DR. DAwsoN's  William Lyon
Mackenzie  King   is  more   disappointing than  one might  have  expected  of a work so notably  heralded. In  part  this may  be due  to  the  fact  that  it  is an  incomplete study,   ending   with   its  subject   in   mid­ career.  Even  so, there  is a  lack  of  sharp outline   in  the  emergent   image  of   Mac­  kenzie  King   which   is  due   partly   to  a graceless  style and   partly  to  the  lack  of any  very  clear   general  form.  It is  true that  these defects  are  easy to understand when  one  considers  the kind of task  that  Dawson  had  to face.  King  was a human packrat on  a  Gargantuan scale,  and  the

REVIEW  ARTICLES



selection  of material from  his files led the author  and   his  research   team   through two  million  pages  of miscellaneous  docu­ ments.  It was  an  achievement  merely  to reduce   this   vast   paper   midden  to  the dimensions   of  a   readable  book.  But  in the  process  Dawson  seems  to  have  been affected  partly by the  mechanical char­ acter  of  team  research   (always  liable  to stifle   individual  intuitions)   and   partly by  the  attitude of King's literary execu­ tors,  who sought  specifically  a writer  "in general   sympathy  with  Mr.  King" and then  expressed  the hope  that  "Mr.  Mac­ kenzie King  might  be allowed  to  tell  his own  story." We  have  in  Dr.  Dawson's book  what   the  Literary  Executors  evi­ dently    wanted:  an   official   biography which  fails  to  bring  into  relief  the  char­ acteristics that   made    King-beneath the familiar public exterior-a fascinat­ ing eccentric ridden  by curious  obsessions and torn  by conflicts that  projected them­ selves   into   his   political    career.  Once again,   the  political   career  and  its  rami-
 fications   get   constantly  in   the   way  of our   picture  of  the   real   man,   and   al­ though  Dawson   does  at  times  indicate to us the  elaborate self-deceptions which led King  to see a divine  purpose  in social climbing,  and  also suggests  the  power  of crude  superstition in shaping his life, he rarely   makes   such   points   emphatically enough.
On   the   whole,  indeed,   Dr.   Dawson seems  so  anxious   to  preserve   the  sym­ bolic   image   of   King    as   reformer   of Liberalism  and   founding  father  of  the Commonwealth of Nations  that   the  real man  constantly slips away  from  him,  as the  real King  slipped  away from many  of those   who  knew   him   publicly.   Yet  we must  be grateful to Dr. Dawson  for  what one might describe  as a great  biographical dig.  He   has  done   the  excavation  work which  others  will not care  to repeat,  and as  a sourcebook   his  William Lyon  Mac­ kenzie   King   will   be  the   acknowledged point   of   departure  for  other   and   more critical  biographies.





A GENTLEWOMAN  OF UPPER  CANADA
 





Carl F. Klinck



susANNA MOODIE. Life  in the Clearings.  Edited  and  introduced by Robert
L. McDougall. Macmillan. $5.00.


IN   I852,  twenty   years  after her arrival in Upper Canada, Susanna Moodie  published   Roughing  It   in   the Bush, making  a book of "Canadian Sket­ ches" which she had  written  for the Mon­  treal  Literary  Garland.  Life in the Clear-
 ings appeared a  year  later,  in I 853,  also in London, England. Most of the sketches it contained were composed  a dozen years after  those  of the  "bush"  period.  Profes­ sor  Robert  McDougall   has  now  edited the  first Canadian  printing of the Clear-

75

REVIEW  ARTICLES


ings, with his own critical  foreword, Mrs. Moodie's  preface,  and  also her  Introduc­ tion  to one  of her  novels, Mark  Hurdle­ stone.
Librarians will shelve this  new volume
beside  Roughing It in  the  Bush-in  the "History" section-several  stack-levels  a­ way from  the natural habitat of searchers  for  Canadian literature. Here, of course, Mrs.  Moodie   will  be  in  good  company with  displaced   persons  like  Dr.  "Tiger" Dunlop, Mrs.  Anna  Jameson  and  Major  John  Richardson. If it is now true,  as the jacket of the new book declares,  "that for general   use as much  has  been  preserved of  this   writer   as  is   worth   preserving," Mrs.  Moodie  will probably  remain  under  "History", the bits  and  piece  of her  con­ siderable production in poetry, fiction and essays  being scattered elsewhere.
Life in the Clearings is described  as a "companion-piece" to Roughing It in the Bush  because  it shows Mrs.  Moodie's de­ sire to add  her record  of the clearings,  or growing  towns and  villages, to her earlier  one  about  the  bush,  or  backwoods.  Is it, however,    the   same   kind   of   book?   Is Roughing It  in  the  Bush  a  novel,  and  is Life  in  the  Clearings something else?



THESE BOOKS  owe  their  pre­ servation to  public  interest  in  the  social life of the  pioneers,  and  Mrs.  Moodie  is established as typical  of the gentlewoman of  Upper Canada. Her  historical   worth has  thus  obscured   her  literary   position, and  her  individuality  has  not  been  suffi­ ciently  recognized, although her curiosity, prejudices,  circumstances, and  especially her characterization of herself among  her neighbours make  her  readily  distinguish­ able even from her sister, Mrs. Trail!. Her book, Roughing It in  the  Bush, has  also
 been  regarded as representative of  colon­ ial  history  rather than  of  colonial  litera­ ture.  Yet it is both unique and  illustrative of  the   practices  in   writing   which   pre­  vailed in the Canadas during the first half of  the  nineteenth century.   Mrs.  Moodie  wrote  within  the  current fashions,  as she knew  them  in  the colonies, and, in doing so, found  her own way, shaping a form  of fiction  which  incorporated and  transcen­ ded  the  raw  facts  and  ideas  drawn  from life around her.
Acquaintance with colonial writings makes  one suspect  that  it was not  illiter­ acy  or  even   the   distractions  of   menial  work which  kept the pioneers from mem­ orable   literary   composition;  many   were overcome  by the technical problems  posed by facts,  too many  new facts about  a new land,  and  by  opinions-too many  plati­  tudes  to  be  rooted  in  a new  society, and too many assurances of good behaviour to be given  to  the  people  back  home.  Fic­ tion, in the sense of something to be made  by  the  author, suffered  because  so much  fact  was ready-made.
Not  all  writers  succumbed. The  early ones had  come  prepared in a way which promised  success-in a steady concentra­ tion  upon  lively details  of  actions,  minds and  speech  of  individual  men  and   wo­ men.  Before  Mrs.  Moodie  arrived, jour­ nalists   in   Halifax,   Montreal  and   York were  practising  the  still  popular art  of Addison  and  Steele's essays with the time­ ly variations of Blackwood's, Washington Irving,  and   American   humourists.  The  Scribbler   and   other   Canadian  literary journals  of the  I82os  and  I83os, "Tiger" Dunlop, John   Galt,  Joseph   Howe,  and  Thomas Chandler Haliburton carried on this tradition. Characterization and  anec­  dote provided reading  matter more appe­ tizing  than  that  later  put  on genteel  Vic-

REVIEW  ARTICLES



torian   tables;   and   the  related   "tale" in the  form  of the  short  story,  beginning in annuals and gift-books for one's maiden aunts,   was  ready   to  serve  any  kind  of taste.  While  letters,  diaries,  travelogues, and   handbooks of  advice  for  emigrants were often hopelessly bound  to fact and opinion,  uninhibited observers  also made an   approach  to  fiction   through  gossip, story-telling  and self-dramatization.
Early  Canadian romances,  like Mrs. Hart's St.  Ursula's  Convent or  Richard­ son's W acousta, probably contributed lit­ tle to colonial explorations in realism, but John  Galt's Lawrie Todd (I 830)  and  Bo­ gle Corbet  (I 83 I)  had  underlined all the recurring  compositional problems  which Mrs.  Moodie  would  face  when  she came  in   I832,  carrying   a  load  of  "do-good" papers  ranging from the verses of Enthus­ iasm to moral  tales like Little  Downy,· or, The   History  of a  Field-Mouse.
The  merging  of these streams  in a fictional   form,   which   one   may   call   a novel,  could  have  been  predicted. It did
 not come in the pages of the Literary Garland, in  Mrs.  Moodie's   conventional novels,  or  in  the  separate "Canadian Sketches"  which   first   appeared  in   the I84os. But it did come when these were brought together   in  Roughing It  in  the Bush,  a  culmination  of  colonial  fiction, the  development  of  which  is distinctive and  traceable.



So ONE REACHES Life in the Clearings,  here   considered   as  belonging to  literary,  rather than  to social,  history. The  period is that  of the  r8sos.  Although chronologically  later   in   Mrs.   Moodie's life, and  in some ways more mature or "civilized,"  the   Clearings   looks   like   a trial  effort,  not  like  a sequel.  It  is made of   similar   stuff,   including   remainders from   the  earlier   volume.   But  it  is  not self-contained; it proceeds  without imag­ inative  cohesion,  the lack of  which is felt in spite  of a mechanical scheme  of travel through towns from Belleville to Niagara and  in  spite  of  the  predictable flow  of Mrs. Moodie's admirable convictions.  She has put on a one-man show of the various materials and tendencies  out of which her masterpiece grew. But the prize exhibit hangs in another gallery.
The personal and sociological values of Life  in the Clearings will not be reviewed here; they  can  be  found   on  page  after page  of  the   text  with   genuinely  enter­ taining illustrations drawn   from  experi­ ence  and  gossip.  Professor  McDougall's introductory essay is an excellent  guide to this  book  and   to  Mrs.  Moodie   herself. He has brought us to the point,  we think,  where   a  study   of   this  author's  literary  theory  and  practice,  and  a critical  biog­ raphy    are   not   only   possible,   but   are urgently  required.

77






COYOTE
AND STAG

SHEILA  WATSON.  The Double   Hook.  McClel­
land   &  Stewart. Paper $1.75.  Cloth $3-95·
EDWARD  MCCOURT.   Walk   through the  Valley.
McClelland &  Stewart.  $3.50.


THESE two novels have not only the same publisher, but  also  very  similar  settings; both  are  concerned with  isolated  groups of   people   in   the   foothills   of  Western Canada. Beyond  this,  however,  they  are about   as different as two  novels can  be, different in conception, in execution, and in  value.  The   Double   Hook   is  unusual in  conception,  consistent   and   imagina­ tive in execution, and compelling to read. Walk   through the  Valley, on  the  other  hand,   violates  its  conception by  distort­ ing  both  plot  and  characters in order  to provide    a   "dramatic"   conclusion, and although   entertaining,   does   not   have much  impact, largely  because  its  author  shows  himself  unwilling to  embrace his Muse. To  drop  the  metaphor but  follow up  the point,  I would  say that  two com­ mon  ways  for  an  author to  engage  his imagination  are   either   to  project   him­ self into  one  of his  characters or  to im­ merse the whole situation in himself. The  latter  is what  Faulkner  did  in  As  I  Lay Dying,  where  ostensibly  each  few  pages is given from  the  point of  view of a new character but  actually  most  of the  char­ acters    speak   Faulkner's   strained  and Romantic  prose. Although  Mrs.  Watson does  not   label  her  chapters with   char-
 
acter  names, she uses the same technique as  Faulkner, and  her  story  is in  many ways  similar   to  his:  in  both  a  woman
dies  and  is heard   from  after  her  death,·
in  both  a girl  has  become  pregnant after
aiding   her   own   seduction;  in   both   a character  who  has   never   exerted   him­ self  comes  to  grips  with  life;  and  both end  on  a  note  of  mild  affirmation. Al­ though   there   are  other   parallels    I do not  wish to imply  that  Mrs.  Watsn simply  transposed  Faulkner into  Cana­ dian   terms.   For  one  thing   her  novel  is not   obviously   Canadian  in   locale;   for another  her   novel  stands   by  itself-it is genuine.
Professor    McCourt  had   presumably taken   the  other   means  of  engaging  his imagination.  He   uses  his  central  char­ acter   as  the  focus  for  his  point  of  view (third person  interspersed with  second). His  style  is  usually   clear   and  straight­ forward. Since  the  protagonist  is a four­ teen-year-old boy, simplicity  of  language is appropriate and  would  be  effective  if maintained.  Unfortunately   it  is  not.   I quote  one  of  many  violations.   The   boy Michael walks  up  to  his teacher "work­ ing  over  a  chart  which  was  probably a time-table. Nine  to nine-thirty, arithme­ tic; nine-thirty  to ten,  geography-that sort  of  thing.  The   pattern of  servitude. Not  that  Michael minded  studying such an  awful  lot,  especially  history  and  geo­ graphy   and    literature  and    stuff   like that." If  authorial  intrusion were  more frequent   (or   controlling,  as  it  is  with Fielding), or if Professor  McCourt were able  to  handle it well, it  would  not  be a problem.   As  it  is,  we  have   to  swallow stuff  like  this:

Sin  and  high  romance -were  the  two  the same?  Michael  was  troubled in  spirit  for the  instincts derived from  a  Calvinist heri-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



tage  were  at  odds  with  an  imagination fostered by  a  literature which,  in  a devious way,  set  the  magic  of  illicit  love  far  above the   prosaic  reality  of   conventional   mar­ riage.
In  contrast, The   Double  Hook  is  ren­ dered,   as  we  say, and  dramatic.  Where  Professor   McCourt  insults   us   and  his Muse by telling all, Mrs. Watson mystifies and   occasionally   irritates  us   (in   good Faulknerian style)  by not  telling  us. She does  not  follow  Faulkner  into  the  realm of cloudy  rhetoric,  however.  In  fact,  her language  is  in   many    respects   simpler than   Professor   McCourt's.  Here   is  her second   paragraph:  "James  was  at   the top  of   the  stairs.  His  hand   half-raised. His  voice in  the  rafters." This  simplicity  is  obviously   a  conscious  attainment, as are  the  complex  structure and  the  ren­ dered  scenes. As a result  the reader often has  the  feeling  that  the author's will has
 pinned  her Muse to the floor-not a desirable victory.  The  impression  I mean to convey by picking  up this previously abandoned metaphor is that   Mrs.  Wat­ son's desire to be a novelist would appear to   be  greater  than   the   power   of  her imagination to sustain  her aspirations.
But  as  one  who  approves of  symbol­ ism,   I   must    applaud   Mrs.   Watson's effective  use of  it.  The  passage  on  page
55 from  which  her title is drawn  contains images   that   involve  seven  of  the  char­ acters   intimately  and   that   provide   an emotional-philosophic basis  for  the  plot. The  reader   feels  more  for   these  seven characters  in  a  I I 5-page   novella   than  he  does  for  any  of   professor  McCourt's stereotypes  during  222 pages. Yet  we do not  finally  feel  quite   enough   for  them. Distinct  and  original  and  driven  though  they  are,  the  characters in  The   Double




THE 	CRUISING 	AUK

by GEORGE JOHNSTON

George Johnston's poetry  has  appeared in  The New  Yorker, The  Spectator, Atlantic Monthly,  Tamarack Review and many   other  magazines. Now  presented for  the  first  time  in book  form,  it  will be read  with  pleasure by all  who agree that
if philosophy is the best  poetry  humour is the  best philosophy.

'The verse  is   pithy, immediate,  sometimes wry,  sometimes

delightfully irreverent.' The Ottawa Journal.



OXFORD


79

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Hook  yet somehow fail to give themselves up  to the  reader. Since  Mrs.  Watson has taken    a   heavyweight's  stance,  I   will again   use  Faulkner for  comparison: for all his wild swinging  and  mannered  style he manages to connect. Her  mannerisms, on  the  other  hand, do not  undergo what Faulkner would  call  an  apotheosis. Her habitual use of homey  similes and  details begins   to  bore  instead   of  illuminating.
Both authors use animals as important symbols,   Mrs.   Watson  a  coyote   which never  appears, Professor  McCourt a stag which  does.  Whereas the  stag  is tabbed from   the   first   as  an   ideal,   a   sign  of power and  freedom, the coyote  remains mysterious, at  first  taken   as  evil  and  a sign  of  death, later seen  as  symbolic  of that   darkness  which   must   be  faced   in man's   own  mind.   The   reader   will  have to   decide   for   himself   whether  he  ap­ proves  of  the  short   bits  of  poetry  Mrs. Watson occasionally includes  in  connec­  tion  with  the  coyote.  But  I  cannot help trying   to  influence   his  opinion   of  Pro­  fessor  McCourt's  treatment of the  stag.  Towards  the  end   the   boy  sees  it  "im­  mense    and   lonely",    looking    "at  him across  the  gulf  of  earth and   time" and causing   the  boy's   thoughts  to  be  "an­ nihilated by the surge of the strongest emotion   he  had  ever felt"  (anyone read "The Bear" recently?).
Although The   Double  Hook  has  what might   be  called  a  happier  ending   than Walk   through the  Valley, I do  not  feel that  the result is forced  or the purpose blurred. If anything, Mrs.  Watson's aim is, as  previously  implied,   too  clear.  Her novel  is touted  by the  publishers as "sharply  experimental";  yet   ironically the  section   which   is  most  successful  is section  Four, twenty pages of straight, almost    conventional   narrative    which

8o
 takes   one  of  the  central  characters  to town  away  from  the  others.   Perhaps if Mrs.  Watson could  permit   herself  to  be more    natural,  her   imagination   would come  through more  fully.  In  any  case, just as one is depressed  to learn  that  this is  Professor   McCourt's  fifth   novel,   so one  1s  hopeful  discovering  that   The Double  Hook  is a first  novel.
ELLIOTT GOSE



AN AFTER-GLANCE AT MACLENNAN

HUGH  MACLENNAN. The  Watch that  Ends the
Night. Macmillan. $3-95·


IN The Watch that  Ends the Night  Hugh MacLennan again demonstrates that  his fictional   house  is  divided   against   itself. On  one level he has thoroughly mastered the  art  of representation, but  on another he seems to have only an indifferent sense of where  his strength as artist  is centered. Much the finest writing  in the novel is in the representation of Jerome  Martell's childhood experiences  culminating in  the murder of  his mother and  in  his escape from  the  murderer, flight  to  civilization and  subsequent adoption by the Martells. This sequence belongs with the equally superb  Nova  Scotia  brawls  that  figure  in Each  Man's Son, the  conscription  incid­ ents in Two Solitudes and  the  brilliantly sustained explosion  episode  in  Barometer  Rising.  All are characterized  by a traum­ atic intensity  of perception which lifts the representation up to a level with the very best that  has been done in our time. Mac­  Lennan's  capacity for  representing  per­  sons  mesmerized  by the  presence  of long

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



repressed  and  then  joltingly  released  fear and violence is really magnificent.
More,  violence  is at  the  heart  of The Watch that  Ends  the  Night. Martell has been subjected to the actuality during his mother's murder and  George  Stewart has been  subjected throughout childhood to his father's evidently, schizophrenic fanta­ sies of destruction. And  Martell's  partici· pation  in  the  first  war,  his  enlistment in the  Spanish  war  and  his  subsequent im· prisonment in Germany, Russia  and  Chi­  na, make him a man who has experienced much   of  the  violence  that   the  modern world  has had to offer. Yet crucial  as the question of  violence  is in  the  novel  it  is strangely dissociated  because Martell's ex· periences  are  so drastically subordinated to Stewart's narration. And Stewart's nar­ ration  is badly  marred by his mania   for handing out  crashing   complacencies  on almost  every imaginable major  considera­ tion  in  life:   marriage, religion,  modern love,   art,    war,    sex,   neurosis,   politics, philosophy,  peace,  the  seasons. Although Stewart's garrulousness may be believable in  a  radio  broadcaster who  has fallen  in love with  the sound  of his own voice it is in curious  contrast to his other  mania  for emphasizing his many  insufficiencies:  as Catherine Carey's  youthful sweetheart, as an  intellectual, as a  news  commentator, as  odd  man  out  in  a love  triangle.  The fact  would  seem to be that  MacLennan's artistic  powers  assert  themselves  with  ex­ ceptional effectiveness  when  he is repre· senting  persons driven  to experiential  ex­ tremes   and   falter   markedly   when  he  is representing his intrinsically less interest· ing  but  nonetheless  central types  of  the ruminative mind.
It may  be  that   his  ruminative   types stem from  a stubborn determination on MacLennan's part  to be not only an artist
 but   also  a  spokesman   for  his  time  and place.  Yet  surely  he  must  be  aware  that what  the artist  has to tell us is likely to be valuable by virtue of his capacity  to re· present  experience rather than  by virtue of an)l parallel  capacity  to comment upon it. When  what  he has to represent as art· ist clouds  into  what  George  Stewart has to say as commentator there  is an uncom­ fortable feeling,  for  this  reader  at  least, that   someone   has  forgotten  to  turn   off the radio. But when what  George Stewart has to say fades out  and  Jerome Martell's childhood experiences move into presence under  steady  pressure  of  absolutely  sure­ handed  representation,  one  realizes  with something of a shock that this disastrous­  ly divided  novel nonetheless contains some of the finest  writing  of our  time.
WARREN  TALLMAN



LOVE, FAITH AND TRUTH

MARY ELIZABETH   BAYER. Faces  of Love. Ryer·
son  Press.  $ 1.00.
DOUGLAS LOCHHEAD.   The Heart  is Fire.  Ryer·
son  Press. $ r .oo.
MICHAEL  COLLIE. Poems.  Ryerson Press.  $1.00.

MARY ELIZABETH BAYER's Faces of Love are cool, impersonal poems about love between  people;  the  one  unfortunate ex­ ception  is patriotic. They  never define the particular  moment or  the  single  event,  and  so appear like  exercises  or  thematic inventions. Occasionally, however, she al­ lows  herself  a certain  emotional involve­ ment,   and   the  result   (in  "0 Do  Walk Softly"  and  "Ad  Astra")  is a  breathless, tender quality  of language. Her hand  is always  facile,  and  at  times  the  sureness and  grace  of the  language create a  kind

81

BOOKS IN REVIEW





«Alive and  wonderful .. "*


George  Woodcock's

INCAS
and 	OTHER	MEN


"...  After  his  distinguished  book on  Mexico--To The City   of the Dead-Mr. Woodcock has moved down   to  Peru.   He  has  the  art  of putting his travels  before  us, hour by hour."* V.   S. PRITCHETT in  the Statesman and  Nation.

"The writer of the intimate travel book has assumed  the   role  of the  nineteenth-century explorer. Courage and  intrepidity are  today required to take  the  ordinary routes   through a  foreign country, to  see   no   one   in   particular  on behalf   of  no  organization   what­ soever  ...
"Mr.  Woodcock possesses  these qualities.  He   also   has   an   edu­ cated,  civilized   mind   without  a trace  of arrogance or  pretentious­ ness.   Most   important   of   all,   he can   write."  ROBERT  KEE   in  The Sunday  Times.
 of cold passion. Here  is an  example from
"Feast of Kings":

So midnight maid  I feast  and  feasting fast
Reserve the  right to die
Once every  time I love, each  love a life
I live in  that last  moment of my right
reserve  ...

Douglas Lochhead's poetry  in The Heart  is Fire is uncommon and  engaging. Although his themes  are varied,  he views them  all  with  an  open,  unselfconsciously personal  eye, and  the book has an intern­ al coherence and  growth  entirely  lacking in Miss Bayer's Faces of Love, despite  her vaguely  chronological  arrangement  and her unity of theme.
The   dedication  (to   his  parents)   sets the  tone,  which  is earnestly   traditional. He is one with  his forebears  and  with  the Atlantic Canadian landscape, wherein  he finds  a  satisfyjng  vision  of completeness.
The  simplicity  of his form  and  language
. 	.
IS   persuasive.
The  note  of faith  is in  all  the  poems. The   Heart  is Fire is in  fact  an  affirma­ tion.  Through images  of flame  the  poet defines the continuing spirit: the burning heart   that   will  outlive   "the  claws  and cage",  the "white and  hollow bone",  and the dyjng hawk:

Now in  the  golden  glory  of his armour the  raging beak  is voiceless,  there,
there in  the  ivory  silence.   Look, the  feathers are  aflame,
death sings  and  claws lock  tight

FABER
Illustrated
 $5·75
 as he fans  the fatal fire.

Mr.  Lochhead's book is engaging  to  the reader  accustomed  to  poems  of  conven­

BRITISH BOOK SERVICE
(Canada) LIMITED
I 068 BROADVIEW AVENUE TORONTO  6, ONTARIO
 tional  chaos and  fear.  It presents  a world
of certainty, and such  a world is rare.
Poems, by Michael  Collie, provides  the complete contrast. There is no traditional bond  and  there  is no certainty here.  Of the three  books it is the most difficult and

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the  most  rewarding. Here  we find  highly personal  images-the owl, the falcon,  the booming  ice-recurring as if by an inter­ nal  necessity,  to articulate  his  search  for meaning  that   "accords  completely   with the  truth", a search which  turns  delicate­ ly between  the inner imaginative world­ which  he  seems  to fear  as painting false enamels  on "reality", and  the  purely  ex­ ternal world "where  falcons draw", which seems  at  times  to  have  its own  meaning and  at times to be devoid  of meaning.
His search  for objective  truth is obsess­ ive.  It is described   as evading  him,  ob­ scured   by  his  own  lack  of  subtlety   and again  by an over-subtle reluctance to ap­ prehend it, by the  adherence of personal  meanings and  again  by an  alluring belief in  a possibly non-existent external mean­  ing. At the same time there is his constant struggle  with  language, his  repeated ad­  mission that  he cannot communicate pure experience by his "painful art", and a curious  blindness  to  the creative  (as  op­ posed to recreative) or evocative qualities  of  language.  He  strives  continually  to­ wards  the  boundaries of  existence  which he feels cannot be expressed  by language
-"What words  can  say I do not wish to hear"-yet he allows  ("Notes for a Poem on  Meaning") that  his search  has  mean­ ing  in  itself,  that  "words  are  toughened by uncertainty".
Mr.  Collie's  present  concern  is largely with  natural objects  like rocks and  drift­ wood,  and  with  natural  sounds  like  the cry of the  owl, and  extends gradually to touch-with an even finer  and  more  un­ certain hand-his   experience  of   other  people.  It is in  this  direction-although there  is so  much  reticence,  remorse  and self-cancellation that  he is seldom  able  to make   a  statement-that one  senses  his real concern  is turning. His poem "Asser-
 tion",  ecstatic   though   it  is and  couched in  a  dreamlike tower  imagery,  expresses an  explicit  hope  that  transcendent truth can  be  grasped   through a  human  rela­ tionship.
HEATHER  SPEARS  GOLDENBERG



BITTERSWEET
MASK

GEORGE  JOHNSTON.  The Crusing  Auk. Oxford.
$ .5o.

IN A  TIME when comic verse, like the newspaper "funnies", usually  proves as comic as a clout in the kidney, it is pleas­ ant   to  come   upon   a  poet   like  George  Johnston. Mr.  Johnston's humour is, cer­ tainly,  grained   with  melancholy,  but  the substance remains  solid fun.  It is  not  in­ laid with  the shards  of fractured wit that  often   characterise Canadian  light verse (and  Mr. Johnston is a Canadian). Much  of  our  humorous  verse  in  fact   reads  as though written  as an  alternative to kick­ ing the dog, drawing  inspiration less from Calliope  than from  Dyspepsia,  but   Mr. Johnston amiably  celebrates  canine  ritual in  "Noctambule":

Mr.  Murple's got  a dog  that's long
And  underslung and  sort  of pointed wrong; When  daylight fades  and  evening lights
come  out
He  takes  him  round the  neighbour lawns about
The which  he does in drops  and  by degrees
Leaving his hoarded fluid  only  where
Three-legged ceremonious hairy  care
Has  been  before  ...

This  sensitivity  to the  call of nature  is not  restricted, in Mr. Johnston's verse, to dogdom.  It is human nature, in its setting of  the  city  rather than  the  country, that he  finds  evocative.   Rain   pools  in   city

BOOKS IN   REVIEW


streets,  cats,  Mrs.  McGonigle's boarders, even fish arc citified,  humanised:

May  he  be a cannier chap
Altered into  me,
Eye the  squirming hook,  and  trap, Choose  the  squirming sea.

Mr. Johnston is well aware  that  he is jesting   in   the   shadow   of   the   nuclear come-uppance, but remains  alert  to the human comedy  that  continues to play it­ self  out.   That  the  sober  note  at  times dominates  the  major   of   amusement  at­  tests  to  the   profounder  element   in  the poet's  work.  But he has the disposition  to be objective  about  everything, including his own temptation into gravity.
The  result is a kind of poetry that  the traditional masks of comedy  and  tragedy no longer  suit. A third  mask, for  the bit­ ter-sweet,  is required  to represent coexist­ ence  of the smile on  the lips  and  sadness in  the eye. Despite  the intimations of ex­ tinction,  however,   good   temper   is  not grounded. The  auk is cruising:

The world  is a boat  and  I'm in it
Going  like hell with  the  breeze  ...

It is to be hoped  that  Mr. Johnston will be encouraged, by the  public  response  to this first book of his collected  verse, to provide  more, though  he risk general pop­ ularity  and  a fate  wo'rse than  Betjeman.
ERIC  NICOL
 


A-
PAINTER


A.   Y.    JACKSON.  A  Painter's Country.  Clarke, Irwin.  $s.oo.



AT THE AGE   of 76, A. Y. Jackson, Cana­ da's   "best-known, best-loved   and  most­ travelled    painter",  to  use  a   frequently heard   phrase,   has  written  his  informal and   engaging  autobiography  under   the title  A Painter's Country. The book takes him   from   his  early  days  as  a  child   in Montreal, through the  exciting  'twenties when  he shared  with  the other  members of the Group of Seven  not only the revo­ lutionary creative  excitement, but also the public  abuse thrown  at their early exhibi­ tions,  right  up  to  the  present  which  ac­ knowledges  the Group's work as the only indigenous  movement   in   the   story   of Canadian  art,   and   himself   as  "a   great  Canadian painter, a great Canadian, and a legendary  figure in the Canadian scene"  (from  the foreword  by the Rt.  Hon.  Vin­  cent   Massey).  But   most  of  all  it  is  a record  of  his  travels,  which  are  always sketching trips, to the islands of Georgian  Bay, to  the remote  villages of Quebec, to cattle country in B.C., to the open  prairie country of Saskatchewan, to  the  Alberta Rockies, and on several occasions to the Arctic  itself. And  as the scene shifts con­ tinuously,  so do the characters, dozens of whom, many of them well-known Canad­ ian   personalities,  are introduced briefly and   then   seen   no  more   (a  fact   which must  at  times make some readers  outside  the  circle  of  Canadian art  feel  that  they have stumbled into  a conversation about persons  known  to  all  present   but  them­ selves).

A Check List of Canadian  Literature and Background Materials, 1628-1950

COMPILED BY  R.  E. WATTERS

This  book attempts to provide  as complete a record as possible of the separately published  works
that  constitute the literature of English-speaking Canada. Each  entry is coded  to show the library  or libraries  in which  the works can be found.
Part I of the Check  List records all known titles
in poetry, fiction and drama that  were produced by English-speaking Canadians up to I950. Part  II includes  selected  works of biography, literary criticism, scholarship, local history, etc. 	$I5.oo


Dickens on Education

BY   JOHN  MANNING

Among the multitude of books on Charles  Dickens there  are surprisingly few that  have discussed
his treatment of schools and education at any length.
Professor  Manning's account of Dickens'
interest  in education covers his life and  times,
and  his fiction, speeches, articles  and  letters, as well as
giving the background against  which Dickens  wrote,
by reference  to school inspectors'  reports,  private
diaries,  and  biographical material.    $5.50


The Ethical Idealism of
Matthew Arnold













UNIVJERSITY
 
BY   WILLIAM  ROBBINS

Professor Robbins  traces  the development of Arnold's religious and  philosophical thought, and shows how his mission of reconciliation between  the forces of scientific investigation and those of ecclesiastical reaction met with hostility from both sides. Nonetheless he made  an invaluable contribution to the debates  of the sixties and seventies, and
laid the foundations of a humanistic, ethical  idealism
which also has relevance to the difficulties of our
own time. This study will be valued  by the
serious student of literature, philosophy, or religion,
indeed, by all those interested in the interplay of
ideas  between  science, religion, and  humanism. 	$3.75

OJF	TORONTO
 


Toronto 5, Canada

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Those who have had the pleasure of meeting  Mr.  Jackson  may  have  the illus­ ion, as they read, of hearing his voice, for the  book is written in  precisely  the  easy, relaxed,  uncomplicated  narrative manner of his speech. There is too the same habit  of  hooking  each  episode  of  the  story  on some humorous or homely  little  incident, which  "fixes"  it-like a  pastel  drawing from  smearing  in  the  portfolio  of  mem­ ory. Thus  it is entertaining to learn  that  Doctor   F.  Banting, with  whom  Jackson shared  a  number  of sketching  trips,  liked to  work   incognito  in  old   clothes,   that  Lawren  Harris had  a passion for  Roman Meal, that  A. H. Robinson was a brilliant mimic and  so on. Stylistically  these anec­  dotes have  a way of sometimes obtruding from  the  texture of  the  writing, like fas­ cinating  warts   on  an  otherwise   smooth skin. But most of all in the book, it is interesting to hear at first hand  of the wonderfully adventurous, youthful, spirit­ ed  days  when   the  Group of   Seven,   of which  Jackson   of course  was  one  of the key figures, were building  their revolution  which  was  to have  such  an effect  on  the subsequent course  of art  in  Canada.
The  book has a curious  external quali­ ty  a  little  disappointing in  an  autobiog­ raphy-as though  it  had  been  developed  from  a  painter's log  rather  than   a  soul­ searching diary. There is no evidence  of a
'man's   inner  search  for  himself,  or  of  an
artist's   struggle   to  find  his  creative  self; and  no  intellectual discussion  of  art,  his own or anyone else's. This too will be a limitation for some readers; however, Jackson  is not and  does certainlynot pre­ tend  to be that  kind of person, or painter, and  naturally he does not write that  kind
.of  book.  Given   that,   by  natural  talents and  urges, he is to be a painter, he turns to  landscape,  as  naturally  and   unques-

86
 tioningly  as  a  fish swims  m  water   or  a beaver chews on wood.
His  painting philosophy,  if  one  could call it that,  rests on the assumption that nature,  as  seen  in  the  Canadian   land­ scape,  is  a  manifestation of  the  highest grandeur, a source  of good  in itself, and that  the  painter's task is to interpret this good in his work. Hence subject  matter is of prime importance; it is the spirit which belongs   to  the  subject  that is to be cap­  tured  and  presented. Hence  too, the prob­  lem to a considerable extent  for Mr. Jack­  son  is  one  of  having   good   material  to interpret and  this  has  involved  him  in  a good deal of moving about. Not that he contends "that it is necessary or even ad­ visable for the artist  to cover the whole of a country looking for subject matter" but by disposition   he  enjoys  "moving about  and  seeing  strange  places"-like a  blind person  physically  exploring with  his fin­ gers every little bump  and  wrinkle  in or­ der  to know fully  the face  of his friend.
"To make  us appreciate the  beauty  of our  own  country"-the days  when  such a  simple  drive  could  animate a  vital  art are gone. "Is  all this vast and  lovely coun­ try to be turned over to the Kodachrome operators? Will there  be no place in it for artists  like Tom  Thomson, Maurice Cul­  len,  Emily   Carr   or  David  Milne   with their  intimate  interpretation of  the  part  of the country they  lived in?"  He  cannot resist  asking  the wistful  question  but  he knows  the   answer;  the   changes   which have  taken,  and  are  taking  place  in  the world  of art are inevitable. But it is clear that   at  heart  A.Y.  Jackson   will  always remain A Country's Painter.
DORIS  SHADBOLT

BOOKS IN REVIEW


PORTRAIT  OF AN ACTOR

LESLIE   RUTH   HOWARD.  A  Quite  Remarkable
Father. Longmans, Green. $4.75.

THis IS a biography of Leslie Howard by his daughter, who is Canadian by marri­ age.  As a portrait of one of the most im­ peccable  actors  of this  century, it suffers from   two  defects   (if  you  leave  out  the rather limp  title, which makes a third).
Firstly,  and  naturally enough, the  au­ thor  stands far too close to her subject for a really impartial view. The general  tone of the book is adulatory, although it tries hard  not to be-yet  this is not surprising, because Leslie Howard, in addition to his acting  competence, seems to have  been a devoted  family man  completely  removed  from  the frenzied social and private  world of   the   actor,   often   seriously   unhappy away from his wife and children. Second­  ly, and  more  damaging, the  arrangement of  the  book is almost  entirely  chronolog­ ical, with neither selection nor emphasis. Minute details  of  home  life,  acting  per­ formances, and  holidays  are piled on  one another; everybody   Leslie  Howard  met is  named   and   carefully  identified.  This  treatment is flat  and  monotonous; most of the  book reads  like this passage: "The weekend  was otherwise  highly  successful. Leslie went  swimming  and  played  tennis. Geoffrey   Kerr   and   his  new  wife,  June  Walker, were staying with the Mannerses, and  Leslie drove  back  to New York with them  and   was  taken   on  to  a  party   at Gloria    Swanson's   apartment  where   he saw a movie, The  Grand  Duchess and the Waiter, with  Adolph  Menjou and  Flor­ ence   Vidor.   He   thought  it   very   good indeed."
The  best  chapters are  those  departing
 from  chronology   and  attempting an  as­ sessment  of Howard's character. He  was an  actor  of perfect  technique,  whose per­  sonality  reflected  a  very  English  reserve and   modesty.  He  is well  worth  a  book, and  perhaps a better  one than  this.
MICHAEL R. BOOTH



FOR  THE  EYES OF CHILDREN

DONALDA DICKIE.  My  First  History  of Canada.
J. M. Dent & Sons. $3.75-
RAGNHILDUR GUTTORMSSON. Jan of Red  River.
Ryerson  Press.  $3.25.
ROBERT   D.     FERGUSON.   Man  from   St.  Malo.
Macmillan. $2 .oo.
MARGARET MASON  SHAW.   Canadian  Portraits. Geologists  and   Prospectors.  Clarke, Irwin.
$2.50-


THESE four  books are  linked  together  by common   themes   and   by  like  purposes: they all deal  with  the ingredients that  go into  the making  of Canadian history  and they  all  are  designed   to  instruct and  to entertain  the   young   Canadian   reader. How far they are successful in doing what their  authors intended is hard  for  me  to judge, for my childhood lies in the mist of the  past,  and   my  youthful   reactions   to books such  as these have  long since been changed-perhaps    hardened or   even warped-by; the  acquisition  of  age  and some  knowledge,  if  not  of  wisdom.  Yet sympathy  is still mine,  and  Ishall  try  to judge    these   books   as   they   should   be judged-as works that should  bring  to the very  young,  the  inexperienced  reader   a feeling   of   wonderment,  of  excitement, even   of  awe  and   mystery,   but   also  as works  that   should  be  well  written, and, in the realm  of the factual, free from dis-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



tortion,  falsehoods,  or  unreasonable  bias.
The  reputation of Dr.  Donalda Dickie as  educator and  as  author of  texts  and books for  children is, of course,  well and soundly  established.  In  My  First History of Canada  she attempts to do what is per­ haps  impossible  to  do  well-to  tell  the story  of Canada from  the  arrival  of  the Indians, who "came from Asia", down  to the  present  day and  to tell it for children not much  beyond  the level  of grade  two, or at  most grades  three  or four.  The  lan­ guage,  the style, and  the approach are all tuned   to  an  elementary  level  of  educa­  tion,  and  the  facts,  which are  numerous, are  interlarded  with  anecdotal material designed  to catch the attention of the very young. Many  of the sections  are interest­ ing   and   told   with  considerable charm, but  the  brevity  of the  work  (I go pages) forces  the  author into  an over-simplifica­ tion of history. Distortion is the inevitable result.  For example:

Wildhorse in the  Kootenay was one of the wildest  of  the  gold  camps. There were shootings and   murders every  few  days  till, one   morning, Judge  O'Reilly  rode   in  and called  the  miners  together.
"Boys," he  said,  "I am  here  to  keep  law and  order. Those who  don't want  law  and order  can   get   out.  For   boys,   if   there   is shooting in Kootenay, there will  be hanging in  Kootenay." After  that, if anyone wanted to shoot  anyone else they stepped over  the boundary line  into  the  United States.

Or,  on  the  origins  of  the  Second  World
War:

Hitler  was   a  strange  little  man   who   had been  a sign  painter. He  dreamed of  making Germany master of  the  world   and  wrote  a book  about it.  The Germans read  the  book and  crowded  to  hear   and   follow   him.   He gave  the   army  all  the  latest  weapons, big guns and  planes.  Instead of marching, his soldiers   travelled in  cars  and   motor   cycles. They  seized   Austria,  Czechoslovakia,   Pol­ and, Denmark, Norway, Belgium,  and  Hol­  land.

88
 History is not quite as simple as these passages indicate, and  I am not sure that even the very young should  be given such diluted draughts to swallow. They  might be better  off to wait  until  they can  drink a  more   powerful   brew.  Yet  the   book's virtues  outweigh  its faults,  and  youth may well look after  itself. As an eight year old­ ster  said  to  me, "The book is filled  with facts   which   I  can't  remember,  but  it's certainly educational."
Man   from  St.  Malo  and  I an  of Red River  are  both  devoted  to small  but  not unimportant slices  of  Canadian  history. The   first-one of  Macmillan's fine  his­ torical  series, Great  Stories  of  Canada­ is a biography of Jacques Cartier the six­ teenth  century   explorer  who  opened   up the  vast  St.  Lawrence  River  for  France. Mr.   Ferguson   readily  acknowledges   his debt  to Biggar's  edition  of The  Voyages of Jacques  Cartier, and  A  Collection of Documents   relating   to   Jacques  Cartier  and  Sieur  de  Roberval, but  he  has  also shown  a great  deal of ingenuity in adapt­ ing  his  material and  in  bringing a  con­ trolled amount of excitement and  drama to  his  story.  The   account of  the  second voyage, including the tragic  events of the first  winter   at  Stadacona, composes  the core   of  the   book,  and   the  young  pre­ adolescent reader  is brought close to  the mixed   feelings   of  courage  and   despair  shown   by  Cartier  and   his  companions when  the scourge  of scurvy  lashed  them,  bringing to cold graves a half of the cour­ ageous  little  band. Some portions  of  the work,   especially   those   devoted   to   dia­  logue,  are  admittedly fictional,   but   the work  is   basically  historical, and   a  well told tale it is.
The  work of Mrs.  Guttormsson is best described   as  an  historical   novel  for  the young.  Its  materials are  drawn  from  the

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



records  of the  Selkirk Settlers,  who came as colonists  at  the beginning of the  nine­ teenth  century to farm  the  prairie  lands at  the  junction  of the  Red  River and the Assiniboine  in  Manitoba. The characters who move vaguely in the background are historical; the  central  characters,  the young  boy  Ian   McLeod  and   his  friend  Don, who come with the early settlers are, as far  as I  know, purely fictional.  It is a story  of  high  adventure-of  encounters with  Indians  and  half-breeds, of  buffalo  hunts,  of  attacks  and counter  attacks-all reaching a peak in the Seven Oaks massa­ cre  when many  of the  settlers  were slain by  the  Nor'  Westers,  and  when  Ian  be­ lieves he has  killed  one  of the  attackers. At  times  the   outlines   of  the   story  are blurred and  at times the boys' dialogue  is far   from   convincing,  but  generally   the action  moves rapidly and a feeling of ten-










OLD,  OUT-OF-PRINT. COLLECTIONS OR  SINGLE   ITEMS OF  GOOD  CANADIANA
WANTED TO  PURCHASE. WRITE   FOR   FREE   LISTS    TO

(C.   D.  AND  H.  R.  QUILLIAM)
R.R.    1,  KINGSTON ONTARIO.
 sion,  even  of excitement, is conveyed  to the  reader. It is  not  a  great   book,  but, through the imaginative treatment of the author, it breathes  life into  a brief  mom­ ent  in  the  history of Canada's  West, and it deserves,  I believe, to be called  a good book.  It is, by the  way:,  Mrs.  Guttorms­ son's first book;  I hope she writes more.
Canadian Portraits, by Margaret  Ma­ son Shaw,  belongs  to a series being  pub­ lished  under  this  general  title  by  Clarke,  Irwin.   This   volume   is  devoted   to  bio­ graphical sketches  of two Canadian geol­ ogists-Joseph  Burr  Tyrrell and  Charles Camsell-and  two prospectors-Julian Gifford   Cross  and  Gilbert   Adelore  La­ Bine.  The  portraits  are  designed  to  stir the imagination of the teen-age  reader, to make  him realize that  Canada's greatness springs from  the greatness  of certain  men who have, through their intelligence, their





Mg First Historg of Canada
DONALDA DICKIE
Children will  delight
in  this  fascinating  book from the  pen of
this  brilliant  authoress. An  Ideal  Gift
for the  Young Canadian.
TRADE  EDITION  $3.75

J. M. Dent & Sons
(Canada) Limited
TORONTO &:  VANCOUVER


8g

BOOKS IN REVIEW



courage, and  their  faith  in  their  country, contributed to the nation's development. The   facts  are  given-each man  is duly born,  educated through perseverance and sacrifice, has youthful  adventures, roman­ tically  meets  and  marries  an  understand­ ing  girl,  slowly and  courageously climbs the   ladder   of   success,  achieves   honour and  fame,  and  grows  old  gracefully. To be  blunt,  as  biographies,  or  even  as bio­ graphical  sketches,  I  find  them  failures.  The  author scratches  surfaces,  but  never uncovers  the  rich  veins  of ore  that  must lie beneath. Each man, in his own way, accomplished much  and dared  much. Tyrrell, in his geological surveys, travelled through vast areas  never  before seen by a white   man; Camsell  also  ranged   far  to the   north   in  his  explorations, and   was caught up in the fury of the rush for gold in  the Yukon; Cross opened  up the great deposits  of  iron  ore  under  the  waters  of Steep   Rock  Lake;   and   LaBine-among many other  discoveries-uncovered the great  uranium deposits  in the Great  Bear Lake  area.  What  were  the inner  motives that  made  these men?  What were  they­ or  are  they-as men  beneath  their  tough exteriors?  Rarely   does  the  author show the  type  of  penetration  that  might  have given  the  reader  at  least some partial an­ swers. True, she  weaves  a  fair  strand of narrative, but  her style is basically pedes­ trian,  lacking vitality, and  incisiveness. As factual  statements  of  rich  achievements these  portraits may  bring  some  form  to adolescent   dreams  and  hopes  still  form­ less. But  when  I  think  of what these por­ traits  might  have been I grieve at what  is not  now there.
Typographically the books by Dr. Dic­ kie and  Mr.  Ferguson  are  of good  quali­  ty, with  some  pleasant, even  some excel­ lent  illustrations. Of  the line drawings  of

go
 the four men in Canadian Portraits I can say only this:  unlike the subjects  they are intended to portray, they are flat and undistinguished. Good  camera portraits would have been infinitely better.  But perhaps  economy--or rather false econo­ my-raised its little  head  and  frightened the publishers.  I wonder.
S. E. READ



AN OMISSION
CORRECTED

R.   E.    WATTERS.   A   Check    List   of  Canadian
Literature and  Background Materials, r628-
1950. University of Toronto Press. $rs.oo.


PROFESSOR  Desmond  Pacey  remarked in I 952  that  "It is a  grim  commentary on our cultural apathy that  there  is as yet no satisfactory and  comprehensive bibliogra­ phy  of Canadian Literature."  Dr.  R.  E. Watters after  some seven  years  of labour  has  now supplied us with such  a bibliog­ raphy.  His Check  List of Canadian Liter­ ature   and   Background   Materials  I628- I 950 is an attempt to provide  as complete
a   list  as   possible  of   English-Canadian
literary  works.
It is probably  not possible to reach agreement on  what  constitutes  a  "satis­ factory" bibliography. Where  could  one find ten librarians, university teachers  and students who  would  agree  on method of organization? Dr.  Watters  has  classified the  first  part   of  his  bibliography  under  the  headings   Poetry,  Poetry  and   Prose, Fiction,  and  Drama, and  the second  part  under   Bibliography,  Biography,   Educa.; tion, Essays and Addresses, Local  History  and  Description, Religion  and  Morality, Social  History,  Scholarship, Travel  and

BOOKS IN  REVIEW








Description, and  Miscellaneous. Most scholars and readers  (to whose needs Dr. Watters gave preference over those of librarians and  book  collectors)   will  per­ haps  be content,  although  some  will  re­ gret  the lack of a classification  under  the heading "Humour" for the books of Lea­ cock,  Hiebert,  Nicol  and   others.   Some librarians,  no  doubt,  would   prefer   that  the  organization were alphabetical under  author with a subject index.  Most people, however,  will just be grateful that  such a list has been compiled.
There is no disputing that  Dr.  Watters
has  provided a "comprehensive" bibliog­ raphy  of Canadian Literature. Even here, however,  it is impossible  to satisfy every­ one.   Many    reviewers,   armed   with   the critic's  magnifying  glass and  ignoring the obvious impossibility  of  perfect  complete­ ness  in  a  national  literary   bibliography will  no doubt  find  many  titles  that  have been overlooked. On the other  hand, one reviewer   tells  us  that   he  has  already   so succumbed to laughter because  the  list is not  selective  that  his  abdominal muscles ached  for  a  week. Had  he  exercised  his mind  to the same extent  as his muscles he would  have  realized  that  in  the  pioneer
 listing of a country's literature  (especially by a single editor  and  a handful of  assist­ ants)   selectivity  is impossible, were it in­ deed  desirable.
The  purpose  of the Check  List is "to stimulate interest  in  our  literary  culture, to reveal individual figures and areas of investigation  rich  in  published   material, and  to facilitate the  finding  of the  books concerned." The  embarrassingly slight list of  books  under   "Scholarship" attests   to the  need of such a work as an indispensi­ ble  tool  for  future  research  in  Canada's literature. George  Woodcock  has pointed  out  that  "The coming of American litera­ ture  to independent maturity in fact coin­ cides  historically  with  the  rise of  Ameri­  can criticism, and the  juxtaposition is not accidental." Perhaps now that  we have  a basis for research  we can  hope for a simi­ lar parallel  development. One can  be cer­ tain,   in   any   event,   that   Dr.   Watters' Check   List  will be  referred to  for  many years more  than  any  other  single Canad­ ian  book.
INGLIS  BELL


HUMANISM
AT BAY?

PAUL WEST.  The Fossils of Piety:   Literary  Hu­
manism in  Decline. Vanguard Press. $2.75.

IN  SPITE  OF the  extravagant promise  of his subtitle,   Paul  West  disclaims  any  in­ tention of writing  an  exhaustive  treatise.  In  view of the fact  that  the essay runs  to little   more  than   seventy   pages,  perhaps the  disclaimer   is  not  entirely  necessary. The   book  is "an   argument  with  instan­ ces",  the  author  explains.  "Its theme  is the  apparent inadequacy  of  attempts to write  about  man  as  sufficient  to himself,

BOOKS IN REVIEW



and the various evasions, pretenses and vacillations into  which  the humanist wri­ ter is compelled. Lacking  an agreed world picture, such writers  have  tended  to  turn to the spurious  neatness  of  systems, to the prison-growths  of   aestheticism,  to  atti­  tudes  that  console by impoverishing their sense of life."
Clearly  Mr.  West  does  not  lack  confi­ dence.   He   knows,  by  empathy,  exactly what  it  feels  like  to  be  tortured  by  the "agonies" and  "despairs" of  humanism, and  his manner is brisk and clinical  when it comes to suggesting a remedy. The  sick, sick   humanist   need   only   abandon  his "evasions,  pretenses and vacillations" and embrace  revealed   religion   to  be  made  whole again.  And  Mr.  West very decent­ ly does  not  insist  on  any  particular reli­ gwn.
The  essay is divided  into  four  sections, the  first of which  deals  with  Andre Mal­ raux  and  what  Mr.  West  would  call  the "prison-growths of aestheticism". A com­ parison   of  Malraux's views  on  art  with those of Walter  Pater  is concisely drawn, and  then  the support  of Wyndham Lewis, of all  people,  is  invoked, with  disastrous effects  on  the structure of the  argument. Anyone    well   acquainted  with   Lewis's writings  will  be  surprised   by Mr.  West's summing-up:   "Taste's  partisan,  he  in­ dulged   his   personal   whims  very  little."  The surprise  becomes  stupefaction  when






92
 Mr.  West asks:  "Does he [Lewis]  not be­ long   with   Malraux,  Eliot   and   Aldous Huxley?"
T.   S.  Eliot   is  rebuked   for  removing himself  "quite out  of his own  context  of
'race,  place  and  time'  into  the  rose  gar­ den   of  the  Church."  Irving   Babbitt   is called  up, only to be  dismissed, and  then it is Matthew  Arnold's turn.  "Arnold, on the  other  hand, perhaps because  he  was too uncertain or  too courageous to aban­ don  himself  to retreat or  the world  to its gains,  remains   essentially  without  seren­ ity, and, in some ways, the most appealing figure of the three."
The   next  section,  entitled "The  Pre­ tense of Action", sandwiches  three pages on Sartre between  ten on Camus and  six on   Cesare   Pavese,   and   provides   little nourishment.  Chapter   three brackets  Hemingway and  Junger  under  the head­  ing  "A  Sensitive  Default", and  the  final chapter reveals Santayana rather uncosily bedded  beside  Simone  Weil, although so much   space  is  given  to  Lionel   Trilling
that  it almost  becomes a menage  a trois.
If literary  humanism can  be identified as a  movement, and  is really  in  decline, then  something more  than  this slight  dis­ sertation is  necessary  if  the  author  is  to be acquitted of charges  of  superficiality, and  of putting shaky arguments into  the mouths   of  others   in  order   to  demolish them.
There is  no  doubting Mr.  West's  sin­ cerity.  He   apparently  feels  strongly  the urge  to save  literary  humanists from  the all-consuming fires. I suggest he begin  by refuting the arguments of Kathleen Nott,  whose  "The  Emperor's  Clothes" covers most of  Mr.  West's chosen ground  a great  deal  more  thoroughly than  he  has  man­ aged  to do-in a book, a real  book.

TONY  EMERY






LANDSCAPE THROUGH A PEEPHOLE


AN  AMERICAN GLANCE AT SOME CANADIAN MAGAZINES
 


Dwight Macdonald


We  sent a group of recent Canadian magazines to a well-known American journalist  for review.  His comments were embodied  in the Letter  we reproduce  below.



I'vE READ   the  magazines   you sent  me,  and  I'll  take  your  word  for  it they  are representative.' I must  take your word, because I am totally ignorant of Canadian art  and letters.  Peering  through the tiny peep-hole  these magazines  afford me, I make out personages apparently familiar to Canadians but novel to me; Irving Layton, recently  canonized by the Times Literary Supplement as the "father figure  of  modern   Canadian poetry; the late   Sidney   Earle   Smith,   an   academic figure  who sounds impressive; a group  of painters called  The  Seven  who  seem  to have   revolutionised Canadian  art   some time  ago.  It may be that  my blankness  is a   reflection   on   myself,   in   which   case there's   no  more   to  be  said.  But  let  us assume,  so I may  at  least  continue, that

r    They  are   the   current,  as  of  last   May, issues of The Canadian Forum, The Tamarack Review, University of Toronto Quarterly, Queen's Quarterly and  The Fiddlehead.
 to some extent  it isn't. In that case it must be  (to  some  extent)  a  reflection  on  Ca­ nadian art and  letters.
Several years ago I took a three-day automobile trip  through Eastern Canada, my only visit to date.  Except  for Montre­ al, which  was alive like a  French provin­ cial  city, which  indeed  it  is, the  trip  was dispiriting. It seemed like a mingy version of the United States,  with  all the vulgar­  ity  and   monotony  of   twentieth  century landscape (and  townscape)  and  without the  one  attraction  our  own  land-town­ scapes   have-the  visible  effects,   some­ times  stimulating, sometimes   wackily grand,  sometimes   even   rather  pleasant, of a great  deal  of money.
Reading your magazines gave me some­ what  the  same  impression,  of  a  starved, pinched  version of our own culture. They  weren't exactly  bad, but  they weren't ex­ actly  good  either.  There was  a  certain flatness, like  old  soda  water,  and   there

93

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



was  also  a  lack  of  that  quality   the  exis­ tentialists call  "authenticity". They  were neither  cosmopolitan nor  were  they indi­  genous. They  were, in short,  provincial­ that   is,  dependent   on   the   capital  city (London or New York), and  yet insistent  on  a local  autonomy which  there  aren't the   resources   to  sustain.   Compared  to similar  American magazines,  their contri­ butors   lacked   strong,   individual  voices; compared  to   the   London   intellectual press,  they  were  stylistically  clumsy  and culturally  uneven; they  had  neither   the intensity   of  the  former   nor  the  uniform  high   cultivation  of  the   latter.  Suppose  that  our  own  Northwest  were  to secede, culturally, from  the  union  and  set  up its own special Northwestern division of arts and  letters; the result would be not unlike the  present situation in Canada.
Very  well, but  what  about   the  maga-
 zines  you sent  me?  Here  are  some  reac­
tions:

THE  FIDDLE HEAD,  Spring: A little  "little magazine"-as against   big  "little  maga­ zines" like Partisan Review-which could just as well come from  Frederick, Md., as from  Fredericton,  N.B., except  that  then it  couldn't print  ads  like:   "Congratula­ tions  to 'The Fiddlehead' for  EXPAND­ ING  RECOGNITION, which  illustrates the continuing spirit  of  the early scholars who  have  made  New  Brunswick  Culture and  Literary Art  a  Canadian Tradition, with  compliments  of  GANONG BROS., LTD.,  Pioneers  and  leaders  in  the  Fine Chocolate  and   Confectionery  Industry since  1872".  Mostly  poetry,  which,  as in other magazines,  seems livelier and  better  than  the  prose,  but  this  perhaps because modern verse is not my pigeon. One short





TO THE  FIRST  ISSUE  OF

CANADIAN LITERATURE

COMPLIMENTS  FROM

POCKET  BOOKS OF CANADA,  LTD.

DEVOTED   TO

Providing  students  with distinguished  books at lowest prices. Stimulating enthusiasm  for independent and group  reading. Increasing communication of ideas  among  college students.

Now  available  from the University of British Columbia Book Dept.

POCKET  BOOKS 	•  CARDINAL  EDITIONS •   PERMABOOKS WASHINGTON  SQUARE  PRESS    •  POCKET  LIBRARY



94

OPINIONS AND   NOTES



story-my pigeon-flatfooted realism with  sentimental trimmings; cf. Frost's "Death of  the  Hired  Man" if you  want to  see  what   can  be  made   of  the  same theme.

UNIVERSITY OF  TORONTO QUARTERLY,  Ap­ ril:  Subtitle "A Canadian Journal  of  the Humanities". But  why Canadian? Time­ less, placeless, a not-bad academic anthol­ ogy-interesting  piece  on  Samson Agon­ istes,  complicated  one  on   Berkeley,  pe­ dantic one  on  Browning,  sensible  one  on Hawthorne,  sensible  but  superficial   one on  Orwell-but why Canadian?

QUEEN's QUARTERLY, Spring: Subtitle "A Canadian  Review", partly   justified,  but again   why   this  provincial  emphasis   on "Canadian"? Kenyon Review  doesn't call itself   "An   American    Quarterly"; The Spectator  isn't   labelled   "British-Made". Lots   about   Canada,  some  informative, thoughtful ("Stratford After  Six Years", "The Social  Sciences in Canada") , some meaningless  to the  non-Canadian  layman (infighting about  Champlain's veracity, a review-article on a biography of  Macken­ zie King  that  is mostly arcane  discussion of fine  points  of Canadian  political  biog­ raphy   ending   with   an   inside-the-inside jeu  d' esprit,  an   algebraic   equation  ex­ pressing  Mr.  King's   relationship  to  Ca­ nadian  politics), and  some specialised  to the point of tedium  ("Restriction of Out­ put  in  Canada's Oil  Industry" is  merci­ less,  beginning    "Shut-in   production  is nothing new in the history of the Canad­ ian oil industry", and ending  "Sales in the Minneapolis-Saint  Paul  area  depend on United States import policy and  the well­ head  price acceptable to producers in the mid-continent fields"). The  non-Canad­ ian  pieces vary from  good  ("Strangers in
 the
Tamarack
view



Issue Twelve contains three  distinguished  stories by JACK LUDWIG, WAYLAND  DREW,  and
VINCENT  SHARMAN,
poems by PHILIP PINKUS, JACOB ZILBER,
GEORGE   JOHNSTON,  and

RAYMOND SOUSTER,
a travel  piece on Holland
by DOUGLAS GRANT,
and  reviews by
HUGO MCPHERSON, JOAN IRWIN, KILDARE  DOBBS
and  others.



$I.ooacopy
$J.soayear

BOX  I57, POSTAL STATION K TORONTO

95

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



Britain") to ghastly  (a lengthy  skit called "The  Editor   Regrets"). Again,   an  an­ thology   rather  than   a  magazine;  great difference  in  tone  and   quality;  editors must  be porously  open-minded.

THE   TAMARACK REVIEW,  Spring: A  big "little magazine"-Contains  the only dis­ tinguished  piece  in  all  these  magazines,  Warren  Tallman's   "Kerouac's   Sound", done   with  great  style  and   brio, though  flawed by taking Kerouac too much at his own  valuation:  "When his fictions  con­ verge  towards  meanings  something vital in him flinches back. His sound  is primar­ ily a life sound, sensitive to the indwelling qualities  of  things,  the life they  bear.  To be  Beat  is  to  be  wary  of moving  such  a sound  into  the meaning clutter. It  might become lost, the life. So Kerouac draws back.  Which   is  his  limitation. But  also
 his   strength."  This   seems  to  me   mis­ guided,   absurd-if one  sees  meaning as anti-life, a mere  clutter, one  should  per­ haps  be a  jazz player  but  certainly not  a writer-but Tallman  has stated  his thesis so well, with such insight, that  one can at least   disagree   with   it.  But   Kerouac  is American-as, I've  just  learned  from  the Contributors'  Notes,  is   Mr.   Tallman­ and  so is Carson  McCullers, the  subject  of  the  other  critical   article,  which  is  by a  Canadian  and  is as stiffjointed as  Mr.  Tallman's is  supple,  as provincial as Mr.  Tallman's is sophisticated, from  the sub­ title   ("Lonely Huntress")  to  the  three­ page summary of The  Heart is a Lonely Hunter, which  might   be  journalistically valid if this novel were "news" but  which is surely  now supererogatory. Of  the  two stories,   "Antigone" is  stylish   (all   these classical  Greeks  in modern dress)  but,  to



A CAUSE FOR
by  WILLIAM  TOYE

'Vivid'
'Authentic'
'Impressive'
'It was impossible for me  to  put  the book  down'   Globe and   Mail.
' •.. the  prose seems  to  spin  a web  around   the reader  and  in  the end  the  book becomes  a kind  of terse,  under­ stated   poem' Toronto Star.

LAVISHLY ILLUSTRATED

$4·5°
OXFORD

g6

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



me, opaque, while "The Salesman", com­ petently  wrought  though  it is in the slice­ of-life  cum-wry-twist manner,  is  all  too transparent.  The   poems,  again,  seemed good-perhaps,  here,   a   real   Canadian contribution.

THE   CANADIAN FORUM,  May:   A  liberal journal,  stupefyingly   dull  except  for  the verse  which   (again!)  is  lively  (I  liked especially  "Re  Doctor  Kirkonnel", "Coll­ ege  Reunion"  and  "Where  the  Skeena  River   Margin").  No  sense  of   editorial urgency,  no passion or direction, another anthology. The   non-Canadian   material (Tibet,  Rhodesia, U.S.   Race  Question, and  especially  an  academic  excursus  on "The Age of  the  Coup  d'Etat") is on  a higher   level  than   the  Canadian articles, which  read  like  lawyers'  briefs. I suspect the   editors   will   print    almost   anything about  Canadian affairs  because,  after  all, it  is  a  Canadian  magazine,   but  if  local issues like "The Hours  Controversy" and "The  Newfoundland Labor  Legislation" produce such  dreary  stuff,  perhaps  they should  reconsider  their editorial criteria­ or dig up some competent commentators; I  found  Time  more illuminating, for ex­ ample,   on   the   Newfoundland  scandal
 than  the  Forum.  The  critical  section  was more  readable, but  still not very good. In short,  I'd  say that  the  Forum  is about  as far  below  the  level  of  our  own  Nation and  New  Republic as they  are  below the level of the British Spectator and New Statesman.

This  is what   I  see through the  peep­ hole  of  the  magazines  you sent  me.  It's  a  very  limited   point  of  view,  just  some recent  issues of  Canadian  magazines.  It may well be I underestimate what's  going on  there,  to  the  north, and  that  if I had more  knowledge,  I'd  be more  impressed. Or,  of  course, not.


LINGUISTICS
AND LITERATURE IN CANADA

A NUMBER of linguists in Canada, as elsewhere,  hope  that devel­ opments in  linguistic  description  in  the last few decades  will provide  a firm foun­  dation  for   stylistics,  especially   for   the description of verse  forms.  The  only sig­ nificant   work  yet  published   in  stylistics in Canada,  however,  is Stylistique Com­
paree du  Fran ais                                 J.P.
Vinay   and   J.  Darbelnet  (Paris,   Didier,
and  Montreal,  Beauchemin, 1958), and for the time being two other  kinds of linguistic research  are  most  likely  to  in­ terest   Canadian  literary  critics:  lexico­ graphy and  linguistic geography.
Lexicography is obviously useful to the
historian of  Canadian literature and  to the  foreign  critic,  who should  not  be ex­ pected   to  work  entirely without  native  reference    works.   Linguistic   geography should  be useful  to those concerned with

97



WOOD ENGRAVING BY  JESSIE WEBB

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



regional differences in language and liter­ ature, both   differences between  one  part of  Canada and   another, and  differences between  Canadian  English  and  Ameri­ can   English.
The great New   English  Dictionary  on
Historical  Principles  (the  OED)   is  so taken  for   granted  by  most   critics that they  frequently fail  to  acknowledge what a  basic  critical tool  it  is. Unfortunately, few  Canadian works  are  included in  its sources, and  it is little  help  to  those  con­ cerned with  language that  is  distinctively Canadian.  The  Dictionary   of   American English and  the  Dictionary  of  American­ isms   are   occasionally  helpful,  but   they,  too,  used  few  Canadian  sources and  they  do  not distinguish between Canadian and American.   A   Dictionary   of   Canadian English on  Historical Principles is at  last under way.  The Canadian Linguistic As-



NOW   AVAILABLE

Jome //eM
22Cmcan ilf:r: : yt /e//
doct
,S>f:c/fr/"a/r/nyt:ma:
and CJ//!eM

SELECTED  AND  EDITED  BY
ARTHURS. BOURINOT (Editor, The  Lampman Letters,
The  Thomson Letters,
At  the  Mermaid Inn, Etc.)

VERY LIMITED  EDITION-PRICE   $3.50

Order   /rom
ARTHUR  S.  BOURINOT
I 58 Carleton Road, Rockcliffe, Ottawa
 sociation  and   the   University  of  Alberta have  cooperated to set up the Canadian Lexicographical Centre at  Edmonton. Under the  direction of Professor M.  H. Scargill, the   Centre hopes   to  produce a desk  dictionary and   a  historical  diction­ ary.  Volunteer readers are urgently need­ ed.  Anyone who  is willing  to return from wanderings in  the  alien  fields  of  anthro­ pology, psycho-analysis, archetypal yearn­ ings, etc.,  to  the  study of the  language of literature will be welcomed by Professor Scargill.
Canadian  French  has   long   been   the
subject of more study than Canadian English. La  Societe du  Parler Fran<;ais au Canada, based  at Laval University, is one of the oldest  linguistic societies  in North America. Instrumental in publishing such works   as  the   Glossaire   du   Parler   fran­ ais



[A:J(ADIAN LITE1(ATURE Fiction  -  Poetry   -  Essays
Canadian  Art
New  and   out-of-print
!800·1959
8 nglish- French
We  own  a  most  extensive stock  of Canadian  fiction    and   poetry  and shall  be  pleased   to submit  lists  and supply   wanted  titles.

'DAVIES
'BOOI(   [OMP ANY
LIMITED
3468  MELROSE  AVENUE MONTREAL,  QUEBEC HUNTER  6-2494

We  are   always   interested   in   pur­ chasing co11 e c t ions of   Canadian books and  scientific libraries.



99

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



as a coordinator for  studies  of Canadian French. In  Montreal, Le  Centre de  Re­ cherches  en Lexicologie de l'Universite de Montreal has  begun  work, under  the  di­
rection   of  Professor  J.  -P.  Vinay,  on  a
scholarly  bilingual  dictionary which  will give Canadian French and English  usages and  words.
The  linguistic  geography of Canada is proceeding somewhat more  rapidly  now.
 It is hoped  to coordinate work on  Cana­ dian   English   under   Professor  Rex  Wil­ son, R.M.c., of Kingston, Ontario.
Full  annual  bibliographies of works on the languages of Canada appear in the Journal  of the Canadian Linguistic  Asso­ ciation, but those of interest  to literary criticism   will  also  be  included in  Cana­ dian  Literature.
R.   J. BAKER






























t











100

