$1.25  per copy


CANADIAN
l TERATURE
N°·15







S}ILUTE TO }1. J. M. SMITH



Articles
BY A.  J. M.  SMITH, EARLE  BIRNEY, MILTON WILSON,  ROY FULLER, MARILYN DAVIES, ALVIN  LEE, WILLIAM TOYE


Reviews

BY WILFRED WATSON,  ALBERT TUCKER, INGLIS F. BELL, HUGO MCPHERSON,  MARGARET LAURENCE,  E.  M.  MANDEL, PHYLLIS WEBB AND  OTHERS

Annual Supplement
CANADIAN LITERATURE CHECKLIST,  1962



A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW








SMITH'S	HUNDRED



THis ISSUE  of  Canadian  Literature is in  part   a  celebration occasioned by the  publication of the Collected  Poems of A. J. M. Smithr, one of
Canada's important writers  and,  since  the  1930's,  a poet  of international repute. It is an  act  of homage, but  just as much  a conversation in which  various  writers, including the  poet  himself,  express  their  views on  his achievement; as  becomes evident, it is an  achievement by no means  confined  to the  hundred poems  which Smith   at  this  time  has  chosen  to  represent   him.  Earle  Birney,  who  has  known
A.  J. M.  Smith ever  since  the  early  days  of the  renaissance of Canadian poetry
during our  generation, speaks of  his  virtues as  a  leader in  a  literary  move­ ment  and  as an  anthologist who  has  used  his trade  to help  shape  the  Canadian literary consciousness.  The  distinguished English  poet  Roy  Fuller  who,  like  the
editor  of  this  magazine, appeared beside  A.  J. M. Smith  in  the  English  poetry
magazines of  the  1930's   (New Verse  and  Twentieth Century Verse), takes  up the  thread again  and  examines Smith's poetic achievement as a whole. The  critic Milton   Wilson,  of  a  younger  generation, considers  the  relation between   Smith
the critic  and  Smith the  poet. And A. J. M. himself, contributing two new poems,
talks of his own  work and  how it has come into  being.
There is little  we would  add  editorially to a group  of opinions which  appears to  us satisfyingly  cohesive.  But  we must  at  least say  that  in  deciding to  pay  this kind  of tribute to Smith  we were moved  not merely by our  view of the  excellence of  his poems   (here   we  agree  with  Roy  Fuller  that  they  form  one  of  the  distin­ guished  collections of the century), but  also by his insistence on high  and rigorous  standards in  appreciating the  writers  of our  country, an  insistence  which  created the  situation where  a  magazine like Canadian Literature could  not  only  have  a critical  function to perform but could  also find the means  to perform it.


1 A.  J· M.  SMITH. Collected  Poems. Oxford. $3.25.


3


A. J. M.S.





Earle  Birney








IT WAS  NOT    MY   GOOD   LUCK  to  be  a  fellow-unde<graduate with  Arthur  Smith.  In  the same early twenties  I  too was one of a small group
of Canadian students  reading  Pound  and  Yeats and  Eliot, casting  a cold eye on the  Maple  Leaf  school, and  hoping  for  a  New  Canadian Poetry.  But  U.B.C., lately emerged from McGill College, was yet no McGill, Vancouver  no Montreal.
We  lacked  not  only a literary  magazine,  but  the  ability  to start  one. A. J. M.
Smith  and  F. R. Scott, with  Klein and  Kennedy,  were in the milieu and  of the calibre to create the still memorable  Fortnightly Review. Short-lived,  it yet existed long enough  to launch  some of the best poets to write in Canada in this century, and  eventually  to  influence,  by stimulus  or  reaction,  most  of  what  poetry  has succeeded it in the country.
Such  effects were  by no  means  immediate.  It is a  measure  of  the isolation
between  east  and  west in  Canada  in  the  twenties  that  we at  U.B.C.  were  un­ aware  of the existence of the Fortnightly Review until we were graduated and it was defunct. It was only through  the pages of the Canadian Forum, and later, in Smith's  News  of the  Phoenix  and the first books of Scott, Klein and Livesay, that we in the west had  the proof that the metaphysical  and  the symbolical could not only grow in English-Canadian soil but develop within it their  own strains. Such of  Smith's   poems  as  "The   Archer", "A  Hyacinth  for  Edith", and  "The Plot against  Proteus"  were,  of course,  no  more  independent  of  European   traditions  than  had  been  the  verses of Carman  and  Roberts  which  had  bored  us in  high school;  but  the traditions  were now contemporary, free of the colonial time-lag, tough  and  demanding, while the evidence of  originality  in  their  absorption  was plain. Smith  and  his fellows spoke to us not as sentimental eastern  regionalists or

4

A.J.M.S.



as glib  Canadian nationalists but  as free and  hard-thinking citizens  in that  world of  international  culture with  which  we  had  great  need  and  great   desire  to  be identified.
As it turned out,  Smith was to prove  less fertile  a poet  than  most,  and,  though
he was to continue to set us all high standards when he did publish,  his dominance was  elsewhere.   What  happened was  not  merely  the  absorption of  his  energies into   the  profession  of  teaching literature  (one  far  less friendly   to  the  creation of it than  most  people outside  the universities  realize) ; it was perhaps a conscious turning from  creative  towards critical  leadership. He  became our  first anthologist of professional  stature, and  he is still essentially without a rival  as such,  however limited  some  now  feel his  judgements have  come  to be in  relation to the  newest generation  of  poets.  He  was  the  first  of  our  critics  whose  opinions were  based both  on  a close, sympathetic reading of the  corpus  of Canadian writing from  its beginnings, and  on  a  sophisticated  awareness  of contemporary critical ideas  in the  larger   society  of  Europe and  the  United States.  As  a  consequence he  has been  both  historian and  shaper of our  literature, perceptive in  discovering new talents, courageous in  reassessing  established  ones. His  anthologies, and  the inci­ sive editorializings contained in them,  have  not only cut  away  much  of the dead­ fall  cluttering our  literary  woods;  they  have  let us see what  trees still stood  with sap in them.
In  many  of these  judgements, as in his own  poetry,  one is aware of an impor­
tant  dichotomy. Crawford's "Malcolm's Katie", which  he  rescued  from  neglect is, he wrote,  the first poem  before E. J. Pratt "that can  be really called  Canadian, because  its  language and  its  imagery, the  sensibility  it  reveals  and  the  vision it
embodies, is indigenously northern  and  western." Here  it is evident that  though contemporary internationalism gave Smith  his critical standards, the impulse to evaluate, like  his  own  impulse  to  create,  came  from  his sensitivity  to  what  was unique in  the   Canadian  experience. Even  when  he  felt  it  was  nothing  more, Canadian literature has always interested him as "a record of life in the new circumstances of  a  northern  transplantation," and  he  is most  inclined to  praise technical  brilliance  when   it  is  used  to  achieve  "a more  intense   and   accurate expression   of  sensibility" to  this  very  northernness. In  Smith   both   regionalism and  Canadianism have not been so much  abjured as transcended.
It is  a  process  which   has  widened   and  deepened   with  his  latest   anthology, The 0xford  Book  of Canadian Verse. Here  he has not only come to critical  terms with  the  poetry  of French Canada, the other  of our two literary Solitudes; he has also, for the  first time in  Canadian  anthologizing, wedded them.  If it is a shotgun

5

A.J.M.S.



marriage, it  may  still turn  out  to  be  a fruitful one.  And  it  is a  ceremony most emblematic  of  Arthur  Smith's consistent   purpose,  to  discover   and   encourage whatever uniqueness in the Canadian pattern, either  "Canadian" or "cosmopoli­ tan", may  be  worth the  world's  attention. The  world  so far  may  have  attended to us very little;  but  what  little  it has we have  owed  largely  to the sensitivity  and
the persistence  of A. J. M. Smith.



















6



A POET
OF THE CENTURY


Roy Fuller





TONE WHO, ae I did,  pas.,d his poetic youth in the thirti<", the  few  poems  of  A.  J. M.  Smith  that  appeared in  the  English  little  magazines
of the day  will have  the  memorableness and  inevitability of nursery  rhymes:

The  bellow of good Master Bull
Astoundeth  gentil cow
That standeth  in the meadow cool
Where cuckoo singeth now.

And:






And:
 

After the gratifyingly large
number  of converts had been given receipts the meeting adjourned to the social hall
for sexual intercourse  (dancing)  and eats


Nobody said Apples for nearly a minute­ I thought  I should die.
Finally, though, the second sardine
from the end, on the left, converted  a try.


I do  not  think  in  those  days  that  I realized  that  he was  not  an  English  poet. Indeed, so  brief  and   clever  and  "contemporary" and  stylistically  various  were the  poems,  that  perhaps I imagined him  (aided  by the name, which  rescued  itself from  blatant pseudonymity merely by the incongruous amateur cricketer's initials) a  composite   poet   (like  the  undergraduates who  composed   the  Oxford "group" poem) or  the  alter ego of the  magazines' editors  themselves  (as  Geoffrey  Grigson of  New  Verse  used  to  masquerade as  the  exotic  "Martin Boldero"). I was  not, therefore, particularly  conscious  of  his eventual virtual disappearance  from  the English  literary scene.

7

A POET OF THE CENTURY



Of  course, with  the passage of time I  (and  I use the pronoun  as standing  for other  English  verse readers also)  came  to know of A. J. M. Smith's  nationality and  of his outstanding place in Canadian literature, but the knowledge was frag­
mentary  and  mostly at second-hand.  I  think  I  am  right  in saying  that  neither of  his collections of  poetry  (News of the  Phoenix and  A  Sort  of Ecstasy)  was published  in  England: certainly  they  are  not  in  the  London  Library.  Accord­ ingly, most of the one hundred  poems in the  Collected   Poems  were new to me, and  reading  them has made me aware for the first time of the proper nature  and stature  of his poetry.
The  first thing  to be remarked  is that,  like Wordsworth, Smith  has obscured
his progress as a poet by arranging  the collection subjectwise, not chronologically. The  book is divided  into five sections, the  opening  poem of each  nicely chosen to  announce the section's mood or theme.  Though  one's  chief curiosity about  a poet  who  has  reached  the stage of his collected poems thus  remains  unsatisfied, it seems to me that  the shape of the book comes off completely. Smith is above all a clever, literary and fastidious poet, and what, looked at over the years, might have seemed too fragmentary  or eclectic in his work, is given by this arrangement a  cumulative and  intellectually  stimulating   effect.  This  is seen  very  clearly  in Part  2, a section of "imagist"  poems. We take these more as evidence of the poet's interest  in  the scrupulous finding of accurate  words for the accurate  observation of nature  than,  as might easily have been, a manifestation  of the somewhat  stale zeitgeist  emanating from the  vers libre,  no initial  capitals,  period  of Flint,  H.D. and  the rest.
Nevertheless,  we are  bound  eventually  to ask ourselves about  Smith's  stylistic origins and  the effect on him of his times. I think it is highly significant that  by date  of birth  he comes between  (say)  Edmund Blunden  and  Cecil Day  Lewis. That is to say,  he  was too young to  have served  in  the  First  World  War  and rather  too old to  have been shaken  by the Auden  revolution.  In  fact,  I902  was one of a few injudicious  years round  the start  of the century  for an English poet to choose to be born in. Indeed,  the outstanding "name" of that  lustrum  is, like Smith,  a "colonial", Roy Campbell  (b.  I90I) -and he went round  the stylistic pitfalls of his time by infusing a galvanic vigour into quite traditional means  (get­ ting himself overvalued in the process). Another  poet, Michael Roberts (b. I 902), though  acting  as entrepreneur of the new poetry of the  thirties, was in  his own work  condemned   mainly  to pastiche.  It  is interesting  also to  think  of  Smith  in con junction  with  Edgell Rickward   (b. I 898), whose brilliant  career  as a poet scarcely survived into the thirties at all.

8

A POET OF  THE CENTURY



Against   this  background, then,  Smith's Collected   Poems  are  all  the  finer  an achievement. Not to have  remained bogged down by either  strict  traditional forms of "strict" vers libre,  not  to have  been  daunted by the  new-found social concerns of the  poetry  of the  thirties, nor  to have  collapsed  with  their  collapse-these are manifestations of character and  intellect  that  must, I think,  be taken  into account in assessing the volume.
Of  course,  I  have  been  conceiving  of Smith  as an  English  poet  and  1 think this  is  right,· though he  has  spent  almost  all his life in  the  Western   Hemisphere and  has  clearly  learnt much  from  his contemporaries in  the  United States.  But he plainly  takes his place in the gap  between  Blunden  and  Day  Lewis rather than in  that between   (say)   Hart  Crane and  Richard Eberhart.  And,  again, this  is being  complimentary about  his  poetic  nature, for  it  cannot have  been  easy  to commute  spiritually  between   Canada  and   some  metropolitan  source   of  style and  idea.
With  all  this  in  mind  even  the  aspects  of Smith's work  that  I find  least satis­ factory  take on a necessitous quality. The  poems influenced by Yeats, for instance, are  perhaps somewhat of  a  mistake,  but  one  sees that  for  so bookish  (I  do  not use  the  term   pejoratively)  a  writer  the  themes  of  human love,  the  making   of paraphraseable  statements, and  so  forth,   were  a  most  useful  discipline-  far better  than  that  which  might  been  more  congenially  provided  by some less forth­ right  American poet.  Then, too, though  we may feel now  that  the  poem of anec­  dotal  clarity  but  obfuscated significance  does not  entirely  withstand the  passage of time,  I guess that  Smith's writing  of such  pieces enabled him  to move from  his rather bloodless  and  formalistic early  imagism  to  the  often  remarkably universal  statements of his later  verse.  I find  (though I  realize  I may  be alone  in this)  his charm less excusable. It is a  native  quality,  though  it is also shown  in  his choice of poets for translation (Gautier and Prevert, for example: he is a dazzling trans­ lator  and  has obviously  used this exercise from  time to time  to keep himself going as a poet).
However, it  would  be ludicrously ungenerous not  to emphasize that  there  are passages  of enviable force  and  skill even in  the  most  wayward anecdote  ("This cracked   walrus  skin  that   stinks/Of  the  rank  sweat  of  a  mermaid's thighs")  or whimsical  fancy:

I wandered in a little wood, and there
I met a shepherdess. 	So fair
She seemed, I dreamed
She were a moonbeam, a fountain, or a star.

9

A POET OF THE CENTURY



My   opening  quotations revealed   a  little   of  Smith's talent for  comedy   and satire.  Such  pieces seem to me to stand  up  very  well to what  most ravages  work of this  nature -the  passing of the occasion  and  the  forgetting of their  allusions. Even  matters which  I imagine  are  unexportably Canadian communicate a sharp glint  of their  significance. But Smith's wit  (in  the broadest sense)  -the epigram­ matic  statement, the  paring  away  of inessentials  (and above  all his verse is extra­ ordinarily gnomic) -extends to all his work, even  the most serious  and  seriously felt.  The  high-water mark  of this book is its last section,  on  death  -but such  a theme  does  not  mean  for Smith,  as it would  for  many  poets,  the  portentous, the high-falutin,  strain,  sentimentality, self-pity.   The  wry  view  of  the   world,   the retrained and   precise  use of epithet, the  masterly  technique, continue. In  some of  these  poems   ("Prothalamium", "The Two  Sides  of  a  Drum", "The Bird", "On  Knowing Nothing", "My Death"  "Epitaph"-and  the  last  poem  of  the previous  section,  "The Bridegroom")  Smith  achieves  the force  and  clarity  which  throughout the  more  ambitious  poems of  the  rest  of  the  volume  we  have  been concerned with  might  not be quite within  his scope. A few are lyrics in the classic tradition: the one that starts thus, for example:

Breast-bone and ribs enmesh
A bird in a cage,
Covered for the night with flesh
To still his rage ...
Others, more  remarkable, contain  a less impersonal realization of these high themes:

No matter: each must read the truth  himself, Or, reading it, reads nothing to the point.
Now these are me, whose thought  is mine, and hers, Who are alone here in this narrow  room -
Tree  fumbling pane, bell tolling,
Ceiling dripping and the plaster falling, And Death, the voluptuous, calling.

All help  in  the  end  to put  this collection,  despite  its spareness, among  the  most distinguished, I believe, of the century.








IO



SECOND AND THIRD THOUGHTS  ABOUT SMITH



Milton Wilson






ACCORDING TO T.  s. ELIOT, we  learn to distrust the favourite poets of our  adolescence. To this custom he attributes some of his uneasy feeling  about Shelley.  As an  adolescent, I couldn't have  cared  less about Shelley, but  my favourite Canadian poet was called Smith. I encountered him in that invaluable anthology New  Provinces, which, at the beginning of the war,  virtually was  contemporary Canadian poetry  to someone  who,  like me, had  only  recently discovered  that  it actually existed.  But I don't  attribute my second  thoughts about Smith  mainly  to premature exposure: I  just started  to read  his criticism.
I  read   it  looking   for  the  wrong  things  and  distracted by  the  Smith   legend
already growing up around his "difficult,  lonely music". Much  of his terminology struck  me  as deriving from  an  Eliot  either  misunderstood or  vulgarized, and  I attributed an  exaggerated importance to Smith's minor  habits  of speech.  Take "classical", for  example, which  is really more  of a Smith legend  than  a favourite Smith  term,  and  which  he generally  replaces  with  such  supposed  equivalents as "austere", "disciplined", "concise", etc. T. S. Eliot let us know  in  an  unguarded moment that  his critical ideals  were classical,  but he never  claimed  that  the  term had  much  application to his own poems, or to those of his leading  contemporaries. Indeed, he  took  pains   to  deny  it.  But  Smith  seemed   to  find  the  classical  role congenial and  even  possible, although he can  hardly  be blamed  for the  extremes to  which  Pacey  has  taken   him  in it,  any  more  than  for  Collin's earlier   attempt to  turn   him  into  a  "spiritual athlete" or  desperate mystic.  Certainly you  don't have  to talk  to Smith for  long to realize that  he relishes the thought of being odd classical  man  out  in  a  society  of  romantics, and,  from  the  jacket  blurb of  his Collected   Poems, we  once  again   learn,  presumably with  the  author's sanction, that  he knows  how  to  be  "austerely classic" in  his own  graceful way.  It's some­ thing  of  a  let-down to discover  how  merely  Pamassian or  decadent or  imagistic

I I

SECOND AND THIRD THOUGHTS



his classicism  can  be. Smith's less diffuse  Medusa  (in  "For Healing") isn't  that different from  Swinburne's, his Hellenic  swallows  from  H.D.'s, or  even  his  Pan from  Carman's. It is tempting (as  I discovered in  reviewing Smith's second  col­ lection  of  poems  eight  years  ago)   to  resign  this  particular legend  to  the  limbo  of Auden's Oxford:

And through the quads dogmatic words rang clear: "Good poetry is classic and austere."

More   obtrusive   and   far  less legendary  in  the  Smith  terminology is  "meta­ physical" and   all  the  phrases  that  Eliot (himself the   heir to  a  long  line   of nineteenth-century critical  formulas, as  Frank  Kermode points  out)   has  taught us to trail  along  behind  it: the "disparate experience", "passion and  thought" or "sense  and  intellect", "fused" into  a "unified sensibility". It hardly seems to mat­ ter  whether Smith is writing  a  jacket  blurb  on  John  Glassco,  analyzing Ronald Hambledon's "Sockeye  Salmon", improvising on  Margaret  Avison,  addressing a conference of librarians on contemporary Canadian literature in general, review­  ing  Towards the  Last  Spike, or  introducing  Alfred Bailey's  work  by  telling  us how  well  his  "learning" is "fused" with  his  "sensibility and  feeling": the  same  formula automatically recurs.  Indeed, it is so persistently and  widely applied that  in the  end  one  balks  at trying  to understand  what  he means  by Anne  Wilkinson's "metaphysical romanticism" as much  as by  Wilfred Watson's "classical  precision of form".
But how relevant are my second thoughts? Do unskilful  classification  and a perfunctory terminology really stand  in the  way  of Smith's critical  achievement? Not,  I  think,  if we recognize  where  his real and  remarkable virtues  as a critic  lie and  refuse to demand what  he has no intention of giving in the first place. Smith's key terms  and  classifications  are  useful only because, having  provided something of  the  sort,  he  can  then  feel free  to exercise  his  best  talents  elsewhere.  The  dis­ tinction between   the  natives  and  the  cosmopolitans, on  which  Smith  hung  the organization of  much  of the  first edition  of  A  Book  of Canadian  Poetry,  has  in the  latest  edition   been  silently  dropped, with  no  loss to the  virtues  of a difficult task  finely  carried out.  He  is lucky  to have  discovered, and  been  encouraged to take  on,  the  role  for  which  his critical  skills best suit  him. He  seems born  to be an anthologizer, not of familiar, well-stocked and well-combed fields, but of virgin territory; he  is  happily   doomed   to  exercise  his  finely  perceptive and   carefully  developed faculty  of choice on the dubious, the  unpromising, the untried and  the provincial, and  by his example  to show  his  readers that  such  choice  is both  pos-

I2

SECOND AND THIRD THOUGHTS



sible  and   necessary.  Before  Smith,   Canadian  anthologies were  either   uncritical appendages to  national aspiration or simply  of "the  vacuum cleaner  type"   (as  a reviewer   has  remarked of  a  recent  example) . Here   are  Smith's own  words  in
1939,  when  he  was  just starting to work  on  A Book  of Canadian Poetry. "Dis­ crimination has  never  been  an  essential  part  of a  Canadian anthologist's  equip­ ment.   Enthusiasm,  industry,  sympathy, yes;  but  taste,   no."   In   the  successive editions  of the  Book  and  in  the more  recent  Oxford Book  of Canadian Verse, he has  given  us a  model  of discrimination and  scrupulous choice,  which  is salutary even for those whose preferences are very different  from his. Smith offers no hard­ won  aesthetic  principles, no  freshly  cleaned  critical  concepts,  no  brilliant argu­ ments  to  inevitable  conclusions; but  one  cannot  read  his  Canadian  anthologies (introduction  and   critical  apparatus included)  without  responding to  the  firm,  delicately   sharpened,  continuous pressures  of  a  mind  exercising   its  powers  on materials which   he  finds  half-alien and  grudging in  their  Victorian beginnings, and  perhaps equally  alien,  if a good deal  richer, in their  post-war ends,  but  which he  manages somehow   to  coerce  into  satisfying  the  personal   demands that   he started with.  I respond   to  the  same  process  in  his  best  essays  and  reviews,  like the  recent  one  on  D.  C.  Scott  in Canadian  Literature  and  on  Margaret Avison  in  the  Tamarack  Review. In  reading the  Scott  essay, once  I have  repressed a few gestures  of annoyance at the old surface habits  (there is far  too much  invoca­ tion  of that  most  delusive  of  standards, the  "accurate image"), I can  experience with  great   pleasure  and  profit his untwisting and  discriminating and  reweaving of  the  threads of  Scott's  sensibility,  his  finely  selected  anthology of  quotations, and  his  convincing  sympathy with  a poetic  mind  whose  qualities, I realize  with something of a  shock,  are  very like his own.  He is equally  discriminating on  the  diction   and  imagery  of  Margaret Avison,  with  whose  centrifugal  poetics  and subordination  of  poem  written to  poem  writing   (she   has  almost no  sense of authorial "natural  piety"), he  can  have  very  little  in  common at  all,  although, of course,  he  manages to feel steady  by invoking  the  "fusion" of "sensation and thought" in her "undissociated sensibility".
Smith, then,  is a  critic  who  stands  or  falls by purity  of perception alone.  He has  a  critical sense so fine  (to  adapt Eliot's  famous  remark  on  James)  that  it is incapable of  being  violated  by an  idea  or  even the  lack  of one.  Far  from  being an  intellectual critic,  or  (as  he  would  no doubt  prefer)  a "unified" or  "whole" one,  he shows  what  can  be done,  and  perhaps can  only  be done,  by sharpening taste  at  the  expense  of its critical  companions. But he shows this not only in  writ­ ing  criticism. As  I read  the  Collected   Poems  which  Oxford has  just  given  us, I

SECOND AND THIRD THOUGHTS



realize,   as  I never  did  before,   just  how  all-of-a-piece, as  well  as  how  varied, Smith's work  really  is. "Metaphysical poetry  and  pure  poetry  are  what  I stand for," he has insisted.  One  may  be justly dubious about his "metaphysical" quali­ ties, but he is as pure  a poet as he is a critic.






E	in  this  new  collection  come  from  thirty years  of  work.  It contains  every  poem  but  one  from  News  of the  Phoenix   (38) and  A  Sort  of Ecstasy  ( 22). The  others  ( 40)  do include a few early,  uncollected pieces,  of  which   the  longest  and  most  interesting is "Three Phases  of  Punch", ninety  per  cent  unchanged since its last appearance (as  "Varia") in the  London Aphrodite of  April,   1929;  but  most  of them,  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge, are the  latest  Smith. It is surely no longer  necessary  to waste  time  refuting the silliest of all  the  Smith  legends:   that  his taste  has stultified  his invention and  narrowed his range,  that  he has spent  thirty  years husbanding a minimum of creativity for a  minimum of  purposes.  So  I  won't   try  to  make  a comprehensive survey  of his long-sustained, inventive,  and  remarkably varied  output, which  is certainly equal in  range  to that  of any  Canadian poet of his generation. Instead, I would  prefer simply  to  watch  the  Smith  "purity" at  work  in  a few  characteristic places, con­ centrating on  what  he does to other  poets  (the  tributes, parodies,  pastiches  and  translations), where  the continuity of his poetry  and  criticism  is likely to be most apparent, and  pursuing the argument into adjacent areas wherever it seems useful.
The  tributes are inseparable from  the parodies,  the parodies from  the pastiches, and   the  pastiches  from  the  translations. There  must  be  at  least  twenty   poems which  belong  somewhere within  this continuity of categories, beginning with  the ode  to  Yeats  and   the  praise  of  Jay   Macpherson at  one  end,  followed  by  the revisioning of Vaughan and  the  reductio  ad absurdum of George  Johnston, mov­ ing  through  the  glazed,  wooden   hyacinth for  Edith Sitwell,   the  variations on Anne   Wilkinson   and  the  love song  in  Tom   Moore   tempo,  continuing with  the souvenir of the  twenties,  the Jacobean prothalamium and the lyric to a Catullan Anthea, and  reaching at last  the  Gautier and  Mallarme  translations at  the  other  end.   I cannot possibly  think  that  Smith's translations  are  not  as good  English poems  as  the  originals are  French ones.  In  fact,  what  could  be  better  than  his version  of "Brigadier"? And  the high spirits of some of  these pastiches  are enough  to  convmce   even  the  most  hidebound primitive that  literature which  claims  to

SECOND AND THIRD THOUGHTS



forswear  precedent has  no  monopoly  on  vitality.  What is more  to my point,  the process of discrimination and  selection  responsible  for the  anthologies and  for the Scott   and  Avison  essays  can  here  be seen  most  clearly  at  work-in the  lively redistorting mirror he provides  for George Johnston, Tom Moore  or Edith  Sitwell, and  in  the  more  sober  ecstasy  that  he filters through Anne  Wilkinson  or  Henry Vaughan.
The  Smith purity  shows  at  its best in the  admirable Vaughan poem,  which  is
worth  saving  for  the  last.  It works  less convincingly  on  Yeats,  as the  somewhat faded   intensities of  the  "Ode on  the  Death  of W.  B. Yeats"  demonstrate. The obvious  comparison is with  Auden's "In Memory  of W.  B. Yeats". Smith  shares some  Auden   mannerisms, particularly in  the  handling of epithets (see the  third stanza), but  the  nature of his poem  is very different. Auden's rich,  diffuse, sec­ tional  elegy  tries  to  include a  great  deal -intellectual,  political,  psychological, aesthetic-not only of Yeats  but  of the world in which  Yeats died, and  of course he  ruminates and  draws a  moral  or  two.  Smith's  Yeats,  however,  is purified  of almost  everything except  a few basic images.  But, instead  of  distilling the essence of a great  poet  (as the Vaughan tribute does), the "Ode" succeeds  only in reduc­ ing a great  poet to the level of his own cliches.

A wild swan spreads his fanatic wing. Ancestralled  energy of blood and power Beats in his sinewy breast....
The  swan leaps singing into the cold air ...
. . . crying
To the tumultuous  throng
Of the sky his cold and passionate song.

Even  if it  were  one  of Yeats's  most convincing poses that  Smith  has  taken  over, one  could  still  detect  something of the  stock  response  at  work  here.  In  another Smith  poem,  "On Reading an  Anthology  of Popular Poetry", we are  told how
The  old eternal frog
In the throat  that comes
With  the words mother, sweetheart, dog
Excites and  then numbs.

In  reading early  Smith, I feel the same way about  the word  cold.
Fortunately, the  Collected Poems allows the reader  to put  Smith's more  ascetic mannerisms in  perspective. The   poet  may  protest  too  much,   he  may  risk  suc­ cumbing to a formula, he  may  even seem to imagine  that  he can  escape from  a soft  cliche  by  exchanging it  for  a  hard  one,  but  his  talent is too  rich  to  allow

SECOND AND THIRD THOUGHTS



doctrinaire confinement.  The  angularities  of "The Lonely  Land" do have  their important share  in Smith's  "sort of ecstasy", but his sensibility achieves its fullest release when  the crisp, clear, cold, smooth, hard,  pointed,  austere, lonely, etc. (I choose my list of adjectives from "To  Hold  a Poem") is complemented  by the shimmer  and  fluctuation,  the flash and  fade,  which Smith  has helped  us to  per­ ceive in D. C. Scott. "The  Fountain", "Nightfall" and  (especially)  "The Circle" are  more fully characteristic  of Smith  than  "Swift  Current" or "In  the Wilder­ ness" or even "The Lonely Land" itself.
If the Smith  brand  of purity  works better  in the  Vaughan  poem  than  it did in  the  Yeats, it is perhaps  because in the former  so much  potential  impurity  is held in willing suspension.

Homesick? and  yet your country Walks Were  heaven'd for you. Such  bright stalks Of grasses! such pure Green!

The  gently  puzzled  and  at  first only half-comprehending tone  in  which  Smith presents  Vaughan's combination  of homesickness for  eternity  with  sensitiveness to the divinity  of his place of exile (his peculiarly  ungnostic  gnosticism)  is fully absorbed  into a concentration  and refinement of Vaughan's sensibility and idiom (Smith's  extract  of Vaughan-and a wonderful  distillation  it turns out to be), while the religious paradox

(Yet  thou art Homesick! to be gone
From  all this brave Distraction
Wouldst  seal thine  ear, nail down  thine eye; ... Thou art content to beg a pall,
Glad  to be Nothing, to be all.)

seems in the end so transparent as almost to be purified of religious meaning. But what  the  Smith  purification  of Vaughan   makes  only  half-apparent (Vaughan, after  all, is a  pretty  special case)  is unmistakable  if one sets Smith  beside "that preacher  in  a  cloud  from  Paul's",  his favourite  Donne,  from  whom  our  basic concept  of a metaphysical  poet must necessarily come. Smith  obviously lacks the sheer argumentativeness, the sequential  pressure of intellectual  give and  take, the involvement  in  conceptual  definition  and  differentiation which  gives Donne  so much  of his flavour.  What  he possesses are  such  things  as the intellectual  high spirits  of the  superb  "What  Casey Jones  Said  to the  Medium" or  the  forceful syntactic  logic  of  poems like "The   Archer",  "To a  Young  Poet",  "The Flesh

16

SECOND AND THIRD THOUGHTS



Repudiates the  Bone"  and   a  good  many  others.  I choose  one  short  enough   to quote.

This flesh repudiates the bone
With such dissolving force, In such a tumult  to be gone,
Such longing for divorce,
As leaves the livid mind no choice
But to conclude at last
That  all this energy and poise
Were but designed to cast
A richer flower from the earth
Surrounding its decay,
And like a child whose fretful mirth
Can find no constant  play,
Bring one more transient form to birth
And fling the old away.

If one  must  use the  terminology of the sacred  wood,  then  what  Smith  gives us is less like Eliot's  required fusion of thought and  emotion  than  like his "emotional equivalent of thought". And  if one can't resist a seventeenth-century title,  there's always  "cavalier" ready  for  the  taking.  But the  temptation had  better  be resisted. Having watched Smith  refuse  to be contained by his own formulas, I can  hardly expect  him  to  be  contained by mine.  "The plot against Proteus" can  be left  to other   hands:  "when you  have  him,  call.'r·In the   meantime, the   continuous liveliness  of  texture in  these  Collected  Poems  keep  rousing  my  prejudices-for and  against. My third  thoughts about  Smith  are unlikely  to be my last.



















I7


TWO	POEMS





A.]. M. Smith







IN THE CHURCHYJIRD JIT SOUTH  DURHJIM, QUEBEC

Circa 1840


Underneath this grassy mound
Sleeps one who for a while
Walked by our side on common ground
A country mile.


Her thoughts were with the fair, The happy and the wise;
She seemed to breathe the purer  air
Of Paradise.


Tread  softly: tenderness and grace, High promise and sweet trust Perfume this quiet place
And sacred dust.








r8

TWO POEMS



WJILKING IN Jl  FIELD, LOOKING  DOWN JIND SEEING  Jl  WHITE VIOLET

Threading
the ragged edges of meadowgrass and avid arches of tendrils
and torn leaves and straws
of last year's grass and strings
of crass comwisps
windwafted from last year's sheaves

the eye


plays Jackstraws to disentangle
the skywhite skyblue first shy white shoot of a white violet
lifting a graygreen stalk
out of the welter
of leafgreen grassgreen folded over the old grayblack earth's mothermilky
breast








rg



A	SELF- REVIEW





A. ]. M. Smith













the lines beginning
 POET  I  am  not  the  sort  unenviously described   in


Though  he lift his voice in a great 0
And his arms in a great Y.

When I  write  a  poem  I  try  to  know  what   I  am  doing-at least  with  respect to  craft. Luck  is  needed  too,  of  course,  and   luck  is unpredictable. All  I  know about it  is that  it has to be earned. Everything beneath the  surface  of technique remains obscure. It is this subterranean world,  now  that  this  book  is out  of my hands, I shall try to explore in these very tentative notes.
I  remember  a  paradox of  the  psychology  pundits:  "How can  I  know  what I think  till I see what  I say?" To  apply  this to the  poet we need  more  verbs:   feel, fear, hope, love,  hate-an infinite  series whose sum  is am  or be;  so the question becomes  for me "How do I know  who I am  till I hear  what  I write?"

How all men wrongly death to dignify
Conspire, I tell

Sounds differently from  "I tell how all men  conspire to dignify  death  wrongly", and  expresses   (or  is)  a  different person.  One   can  understand, then, that it  is with  a good  deal  of trepidation that  I look into  the  handsome volume,  as into  a magnifying mirror, that  is a credit  at least to Mr.  William  Toye,  the  typographer and   designer,   and   Mr.  Theo   Dimson,   who  drew   the  beautiful black  and   red Phoenix.

20

A  SELF-REVIEW




SOME PEOPLE may  think  it  presumptuous to call  a  book of only a hundred short, mainly  lyrical  pieces of verse Collected Poems- but actu­ ally that  is exactly  what  it is. Though I have  a file full of verses in every stage of gestation  from  mere  spawn  to almost  finished  (that is, nearly  right)  poems, those in  the  book  are  all  that  I want  to let out  of my hands  now, as being beyond  my power  to improve. Of  these  hundred, a few were  written when  I was an  under­ graduate and  published in  journals  as different  as The  McGill Fortnightly Review and  The  Dial. And  a few were written  just the other  day. Which  is which  would be  hard   to tell.  Many of the  poems,  though  started  long  ago  and  some  of them printed in an  unsatisfactory version, were not corrected or really finished  (that is, not  written)  until  years  later-in  one  or  two  cases until  I  was  correcting page proofs  last summer. The second  to last line of Far West, for example, as it stands  now  was  a  happy afterthought', which  not  only intensified   the  accuracy of the experience but  got  rid  of  a  miserable  echo  of  Cummings that  had  troubled my conscience  ever since  the  poem  was first published  in England in the late  thirties.  The second  couplet of  the  last  stanza  of  The  Fountain  had  never  seemed  quite  inevitable, but  many   hours  working  over  it  in  proof  finally  got  it  right-or  at least  I think  so. Anyway, for  better or  worse, it remains, and  now  the  third  time round, the poem is written at last.
A  really  new  poem,  though made  out  of some  very  old sketches,  is The  Two Birds. Working on  the  page  proofs  I became   dissatisfied  with  a  piece  of  tech­ nically  accomplished and  rather emotionally enervating word-music that  second thoughts told  me  ought   to  be  dropped. (The   Circle and   Nightfall  were  about all  the  traffic  would  bear  of that  sort.)   Almost  by chance I came  on a  batch  of old McGill  Fortnightly  Reviews stacked  away  in the attic.  Looking through them I found  a long forgotten poem  called  Something  Apart. It was awkward, clumsy, and  undigested. There were some good lines in it but  also some very trite  phrases  and   hazy  images.   There was  also  one  brief  bit  that  had  been  taken  over  and  worked  into  The  Lonely  Land.  But  the  poem  consisted  of three  stanzas of seven lines each; and  that was exactly  the dimensions of the  piece I wanted a substitute for.  So I started to work  on  the  rediscovered  sketches.  I put  a new ribbon in my typewriter, got  a  batch   of  typewriting paper  and  a  couple  of soft  pencils,  and  started in. Suddenly  my imagination caught fire, and  all the  vague  cliches of the

' The  last two lines of Far West  now run thus:
As the cowboys ride their skintight stallions
Over  the  barbarous  hills of California.


21

A SELF-REVIEW



thing  began  to  drop  away.  I  was  able  to  organize it, tighten  it, work out  a development  and  bring it to a satisfying and  unexpected  close. The  last lines had been  particularly   weak  and  sentimental.  They  told  how  the  raucous  bird  was "something  apart" -you  have  guessed it! -"from  the  sorrow  in  my heart". But  now  everything  was changed-the  title,  which  awakens  a curiosity which is not  satisfied  until  the last line  (though  a clue is dropped  in the  middle  line of the middle stanza,  "a  voice as twisted as mine") ; the image of the heart as a second foul  bird;  the  "gold  sun's winding stair"  of the second stanza; and,  last of all to be written,  the title and  the first word  of the  poem,  So, to suggest an antecedent  unspecified source of the bitterness, remorse, and  self-disgust that  the
complete  poem  finally  expresses. Unspecified,  of  course,  because  irrelevant -
"another story",  hinted  at  perhaps  in the "Who is that  bitter  king? It  is not I" of the  first poem  in  the  book and  the  reference  to "this  savory fatness"  in On Knowing  "Nothing", one  of the last. And  here  perhaps,  with  luck, will be the source of poems yet to be written.
You will see from all this that  I do not believe in progress in the ordinary  sense of the  word.  The  more  recent  poems in  this collection  are  neither  "better" nor "worse"  than  the  earlier,  and  what  differences  there  are  depend  on  the  genre or  the  occasion, not  on  the time of writing.  Such  development  as has occurred took  place  before  the  poem  was printed.  If the  development was not  marked enough  then  the  piece remains in the notebook  or file. The  different  voices and different  modes called for by the different occasions should not obscure the under­ lying unity pervading  even the most apparently  different  poems. Ballade  un  peu Banale is in one tone, Good Friday and  Canticle of St.  fohn are in another; but each  is equally serious, and  each modifies the others.  The  same is true  of  (say) The  Offices of the First and the Second Hour  and  Song Made  in  Lieu of Many  Ornaments, the first a programme  of asceticism and  the second a playful but not frivolous  treatment  of  the  Pauline  doctrine  of  holy  matrimony.  I  agree  with Geoffrey  Grigson  that  there  is no  essential  difference  between  an  epic  and  a limerick.  "You  cannot  suppose a divine or  an  inspired  origin  for one against  a secular or rational  origin for the other." Each  must be equally  well written; each must  be as good  as its author  can  make it.  That is the  function of the  poet with respect to his poems. He is a craftsman,  and for a great  part  of the time he is a conscious craftsman.  It is only  in  the essential climactic  moment  (or  hour)  that  the  Muse takes over and  the work goes on one cannot  say how or why.




22

A SELF-REVIEW


My POEMS ARE  NOT,   I think, autobiographical, subjective, or  personal in  the  obvious  and  perhaps superficial  sense. None  of them  is revery,
confession,   or  direct   self-expression.  They   are  fiction,   drama,  art;  sometimes pastiche, sometimes burlesque, and  sometimes  respectful  parody; pictures of  pos­ sible  attitudes  explored in  turn;  butterflies, moths,  or  beetles  pinned  wriggling
-some of  them,  I hope -on  the  page  or screen  for  your,  and  my, inspection.
The  "I" of the poem,  the  protagonist of its tragedy  or the clown of its pantomime, is not me. As Rimbaud said,  Je est un autre, I is another.
"Indeed?" I can  hear  you  explain. "Then who  is this  collector  of  butterflies
and   bugs  you  have  been  describing? Your  emblem  ought   to  be  the  chameleon or mole, not the Phoenix or swan."
You  have  a  point  all right.  And  it's  an  important one. It goes to the  heart  of
the  general   problem  of  the  role  of  personality, conscious  and   unconscious, in artistic  creation-the  problem, indeed,  of personal  responsibility. As a poet  (no philosopher or  moralist)  I  can  only  touch  upon  it lightly  and  indirectly-as in the poem  Poor Innocent:

It is a gentle natural (is it I?)  who
Visits timidly the big world of
The  heart, &c.

The question is answered  (or  not  answered)  in  the  denouement of  the  little metaphysical comedy  that  is so well suited  to the dynamics of the  Italian sonnet:

Back to your kennel)  varlet!  Fool, you rave! Unbind that  seaweed) throw  away that  shell!

The  controlling mind, the  critical  shaping faculty  of  the  rational  consciousness sends the tremulous instinctive and sensuous fancy packing.
It is this  rather bossy intelligence which  chooses what  is to be expressed,  con­
siders  how,  and   judges  the  final  outcome.  But  what  a lot escapes  it-or  cajoles it,  or fools it! It  did  not  choose  the images,  the  metaphors, the sensations, or the sounds   that  chime   and   clash   in  the  consonants  and   vowels-though it  did eventually approve them.  What or who was it, indeed,  that  suffered  a sea-change so it could  breathe in a world

Where salt translucency's green branches bear This sea-rose, a lost mermaid, whose cold cave, Left lightness now, the lapping seatides lave
At base of Okeanos' twisted stair

A SELF-REVIEW




or watched
 

what time the seamew sets
Her course by stars among the smoky tides
Entangled?


I  do not  know.  Where  do  the images of a writer  come from?  From  experience, I suppose. But not-in my case at least-from experience  as emotion, and  not remembered   (that  is, not  consciously  remembered)  in  tranquillity  or otherwise. When,  for  instance,  did  I  look up  at  an  "icicle sharp  kaleidoscopic  white sky" or  see "birds  like dark starlight  twinkle in  the sky"?  When  did  I  gaze on "the gold sun's winding stair" in the deep pinewoods or see "the  green hills caked with ice"  under  a  bloodshot moon?  I don't  know  when,  but  I must  have, waking or in  dream,  and  the experience sank into the depths  of the Self to be dredged  up heaven knows how long afterwards.
I do remember-not any one specific moment,  but as in a dream  many times,
always at evening or in the early morning, the swallows skimming over the rapids by the old mill at  Laval-sur-le-Lac  near Saint  Eustache  where we used to go for the  summer  when  I  was a  child.  I  remember  August  4th,  1914,  there,  and  I remember  helping  to search for the body of a young man  drowned  in the rapids. And  so the swallows, associated with loneliness and  death  by water, swerve into one or two of the more intimate  of the poems and become a source of simile and metaphor. But why crisp should seem to be an obsessive word and love more than
once evoke stinging whips I do not know.






LET us  RETURN to  the  known  world  of  the
 
consciousness.

Irony  and  wit are  intentional,  and  I  note  that  there  is one device of irony  that
I  have  seemed  to find  particularly  congenial.  This  is ironic  understatement  or anti-climax,   the  intentional  and  rather  insulting  drop  into  bathos.  This  can  be dangerous   when  turned  upon  oneself; ironic  self-depreciation  can  be too easily taken  by others  as sober literal  truth.  But  when  turned  against  the  knaves and fools  who  are  the  traditional  targets  of classical satire  it  can  be very effective. I find a number of instances of it, however, whose intention  or effect is less certain. I will try to take one or two of them apart  to see how they work. This  may per­ haps help the reader to know why he thinks them good or bad.

A SELF-REVIEW



In  the  following  lines  from  Bird  and  Flower  the  destructive criticism  is con- centrated in the bathos of the last word:
Some holy men so love their cells they make
Their  four gray walls the whole damned stinking world
And God comes in and fills it easily.

The  paradox here  is in  the  statement that  God should  find  anything easy or  (by implication therefore)  hard.  What   we  have  actually   is  an  inverted  hyperbole calculated to emphasize how small and  mean  is the monru;tic world  of the  "holy" men  who  blaspheme the  world  of natural love. Only  for  them,  not  for  the  poet and  the  particular woman he is writing  about,  is the  world  a damned and stink­ ing world.
There is a  similar   paradoxical  misapplication of  a limiting adverbial idea  to the  infinity  of  God  in  the  comic  poem  Ballade  un  peu Banale  where  in order  to take  the  virgin  cow to heaven Christ  is described  as having to make  use of "some miraculous device." This  sort  of thing  is found, without irony,  in many  primitive Christian paintings. I find  another application (this  time  without any  pejorative intention)  of  a  similarly  incongruous or  limiting  epithet on  the  lines To Henry
Vaughan
Lifting the rapt soul out of Time
Into  a long Eternity.

As applied  to the  infinite  duration of Eternity long is understatement and  bathos. Its  purpose, however, is not  to  be ironic  at  the  expense  of the  naivete  of Henry Vaughan. Far   from   it.  The   poem  is  a  genuine   tribute to  a  wholly  admirable poet  and  seer.  The purpose of the  figure  is to convey  as sharply ru;  possible the identification of  time  and  eternity  (see also The  Two Sides  of a Drum) in  the mind  of Vaughan as a mystic.
Where Heaven is now, and still to be.

I think  this  gets  across  for  the  reader   who  is sympathetic to  Vaughan or  to Christian or  Platonic ideas.  For  one  who  is not  (and  the  present  writer  is some­ times  one  such  reader and  sometimes  the  other)  the  effect  of irony  does  come through after  all, and  gently  indicates the noble futility  of Vaughan's magnificent piety.
A  couple  of other  instances of this device  will emphasize how  characteristic it
seems to be. From  Noctambule

Reality at two removes, and mouse and moon
Successful.

25

A SELF-REVIEW



Merely  successful,  not  triumphant or  victorious  or  right  or  good, so that  even mouse and  moon  (as well as lion and sun)  suffer from  the deprivation  that  it is the main business of the poem to lament.
And in The  Common  Man:

At first he thought this helped him when he tried
To tell who told the truth, who plainly lied.

The  hyperbole in the idea that it is a matter  of great difficulty to tell who plainly lied is the concisest way of suggesting the confusion of values in the modern world of political  propaganda, mass media  brainwashing, and  cold-war  bilge. Though this  poem  was  written  in  the  mid  forties it  has  got  truer  every decade  and  is another  version of the ironic series of events outlined  in the angry political poems on the threat of nuclear suicide.




IT IS OBVIOUs that  there is much  here that is consciously con­ trived;  much  too  whose author,  a  greater  poet  might  say, is in  eternity.  How good either  is, it is not for me to say. I hope every reader  of this piece will buy
the book and  judge for himself.



THE BIRD OF HEAVENLY AIRS

Thematic Strains in
Douglas Le Pan)s Poetry




Marilyn Davies





IF T. s. EUOT's THEORY ;. valid-"that genuine poet'Y can
communicate before it is understood"'-then Douglas Le Pan is one of Canada's
most "genuine" poets. A merely casual  reading  of either The Wounded Prince" or The Net  and  the  Sword3  leaves the reader feeling that  he has experienced  the immense grandeur and  tragedy of human  existence, and a study of Mr.  Le Pan's poetry moves one to believe-with the historian Arnold  Toynbee-that in this world are some privileged few who attain  to sublime heights of universal compas­ sion, and  that  in  the  translation  of that  compassion into  deliberate action,  is an intense suffering and  martyrdom  that rivals the anguish of a Christ crucified.
The  con junction  of the  name  of the  poet Le Pan,  with  that  of the historian
Toynbee,  is not incidental.  It is rather  the theme of this exposition that  an under­ standing  of  many of  the  ideas   which  underlie  Arnold  Toynbee's   A  Study of History,4   will lead  to  a fuller  understanding and  appreciation   of the  poetry  of Douglas Le Pan.
Much  of Mr.  Le Pan's  poetry concerns itself with the heroic, that is, with those rare  personalities  who  actively  respond  to  the  challenge  which  a  life lived  for humanity  brings.  Thus,  "to  dive for a  nimbus on the sea-floor," says this poet, "calls for  a plucky steeplejack," a "dolphin-hearted journeyman," or even "dar­ ing's virtuoso"  (NS, p. 34). And it is the destiny of these courageous  and creative individuals  to show the way for the masses of humanity: the "bleary hordes ... afraid  to wake"  to a nimbus clutched in a hero's hand; the pale sophisticate  who leers a set grin  over his "weather-beaten mask," so that  he not only "sees every­ thing"  but  "has  the  air  of having seen it  all before,"  as  described  in Image  of

THE  BIRD OF HEAVENLY AIRS



Silenus   ( WP, p.  36).  This  mass-man  of  the  grey  flannel  mind,  haloed  in  his "man-made twilight,"  has all but lost the capacity  to marvel  at "the  great  blue heron"  who is:
unmistakeably a wonder, Unmistakeably blue among the indistinguishable limbs and boughs.

This  heron, "a great bird/With wings stretched  wide as love", also the "stranger" in  The   Nimbus  who  will "plunder the mind's  aerial  cages,"  and  the  "bird  of heavenly  airs"  who  is The  Wounded  Prince- these are  the  precious few, the singular  beings who freely and  dynamically  take  up all the challenges in living; who seek a face to face encounter  with life's realities, no matter  how bitter;  and who crave personal involvement rather  than  escape. These  are the dedicated  few who  live and  die  for  their  ideals. Such  is the  controlling  motif  which  touches much of Le Pan's poetry.
Something  of  this  heroic  approach   to  living  may  be  found,  too, in  Arnold
Toynbee's   A  Study   of  History.  In  fact,  to  touch  upon  some  of this historian's views may help to illuminate,  for the reader,  the particular sort of heroism with which Mr. Le Pan is concerned.
Near the beginning of Chapter  Five Toynbee says: "an  encounter  between two superhuman  personalities  is  the  plot  of some  of  the  greatest  dramas   that  the human   imagination   has  conceived"   (p.  6o). One   of  the  central  themes of Toynbee's  philosophy of history rests in this word  "encounter". In  his terms, an encounter  is a response to a challenge. Where society is confronted  by problems, "the  presentation  of each problem is a challenge  to undergo  an ordeal"  ( p. 62), for out of encounter  comes creation. Laying stress upon individual  response to challenge,  Toynbee  quotes  the  following  passage  by  Henri  Bergson to  amplify his theme:

Just as men of genius have been found to push back the bounds of human intelli- gence ... so there have arisen privileged souls who have felt themselves related to all souls ... and have addressed themselves to humanity in general in an elan of love. The  apparition  of each of these souls has been like the creation of a new species composed of one unique individual (p. 212).

It is this sort of willing commitment  which  informs  Mr.  Le Pan's  heroes. In his Portrait of a Young  Man  ( WP, p. 7), says Le Pan, "He, like Ulysses, his own thongs  commanded." In  Lines  for a Combatant (NS, p. 23)  he speaks of "the fruition  that  blooms around  elected  action."  In  the same  poem  the  concept  of selfless dedication is emphasized:

THE BIRD OF HEAVENLY AIRS



having made my peace from brittleness, To the air committed  ambition, expectation,
My soul, even, that flickers above me fitfully I wait here in the olive-grove ..."to die, To die so long as it is in the light."

This   theme  is  more  concentrated and  more  graphically portrayed in  the  poem
The  Net and the Sword  (NS, p. 20).

Who could dispute his choice
That in the nets and toils of violence
Strangled his leafing voice
Enforced  his own compassionate heart to silence, Hunted no more to find the untangling word
And took a short, straight sword?

Here, the  ancient Roman arena symbolically  represents   the  modern battlefield. Of   the   two  gladiators, one  holds  the  net  which  entangles-this signifies  the complexities of  warfare where  all is "littered/And looped  with  telephone  wires, tank-traps, mine  fields/Twining about  .... " The  second  gladiator in  this  en­ counter is the young soldier  who, with clear-eyed  purpose, chooses to be entangled in  this  mesh  of  war  by  taking   up  a "short, straight sword". The  very  bluntness of Le Pan's expression  stresses the lad's  immaculate decision.  He consciously steels himself for  combat by stifling  his "compassionate heart to silence". He  no longer seeks escape  by  an  "untangling word"  that  could  detach  him  from  the  world's  problems. Rather,  with  single-purposed  "eyes  thrust  concentrated and  austere", he freely  elects  "among the  sun's  bright  retinue" to die. In  dedicating himself at least  to  a  partial fulfilment of  peace,  he hopes  for  a  new  growth of civilization. Certainly, he himself  does not  expect  to put  an end  to war-"to strike  the vitals of the knotted cloud" -but he knows that  his "smooth as silk ferocity" translated into  action  will cut  away  some of the ropes in  the web of war  and  "at  least let in the  sun", a  symbol   of  enlightenment and  growth. Toynbee,  who  also  stresses individual response  to social  challenge, may  cast further light  on  the  complexity of Mr.  Le Pan's poetry  when  he states in his philosophy  of history  that  essentially the  part, not  the  whole, is at stake; yet, adds Toynbee, "the chances and  changes  to  which   the  part   is  exposed   cannot  conceivably   leave  the  whole  unaffected" (p.  65). Each  man  then,  may  choose  his dynamic  role in  the  vast  amphitheatre of the world.
On  the  other  hand, in Finale ( WP, p. 34), Mr.  Le Pan  depicts  several  forms

THE  BIRD OF HEAVENLY AIRS



of insular  existence:  "the  spy . . . living in  a  perpetual  cellar",  "the  criminal, working at night",  and "even the lovers living on their island". But, says Le Pan, this attempt  to cut oneself off from the ordinary  life of society cannot  long con­ tinue,  for  "always  the  path  leads  back".  Somewhere,  somehow,  contact  with society is made,  even against the escapist's will. His return  may seem to offer no more than  "dust,  heat, noise" -but out of this the creative genius will fashion a new world. It may be enlightening  to recall, at this point, Toynbee's theory that non-detachment from the affairs of the world is a positive humane  principle,  as opposed  to  that  of  escapism or  isolationism  which  repudiates  humanity. Still, Toynbee  does uphold a principle of temporary  withdrawal and  return. The  crea­ tive  personality  may  withdraw  from  society in  order  "to  realize  powers within himself which  might have remained  dormant  if he had not been released for the time being from  his social toils and trammels"  (p.  2 I 7). Such  privileged person­ alities, following  the  path  of mysticism pass first out  of  action  into  ecstasy but, unlike the Buddhist  mystic, they do not remain  in a state of abstract  contempla­  tion-of  Nirvana-but  rather  pass once  more  out  of ecstasy into  action  on a newer  and  higher  level. Or,  as Mr.  Le  Pan  puts  it,  once  returned from  the escapist world of "the  long voluptuous silence", that  world which hears its "bird­ calls issuing from the arras of a dream",  the individual  must face again the world of "steel-bright  necessity". Here, says Le Pan, the creative person operates on

those notes
That sound so improbable, to weld a music like a
school-boy's song,
Out of those metals to hammer, to conquer, the
new and strenuous song.

A slight  variation  of the same theme is evident  in Canoe-Trip  ( WP, p. I 3). Here,  a brief escape to the woods and streams of northern  Canada results in

crooked nerves made straight;, The fracture cured no doctor could correct.
The hand and mind, reknit, stand whole for work.

Once  the  person  is  re-animated,  says the  author, "content, we face  again  the complex  task".  This  return  to creative activity seems to follow a sort of spiritual transfiguration  which,  in  Toynbee's  words  "transcends the  earthly  life of  man without  ceasing  to include it"  (p. 439). The  idea  of a "transcendent" being in fierce contact  with earthly  reality is depicted  in Le Pan's  poem  Angels and  Arti­ ficers ( WP, p. 30). Here, "the fiery artificers" work to create a perfect civilization,

THE  BIRD OF HEAVENLY AIRS



Hammering it into curious shapes, annealing,  burnishing, Intent about  the smithy, blowing it to a pitch
Of their quick zeal. Their breath was ardent, flickering
A Pentecost that played about the senseless mass
And conquered  it. But like a lover.

The  comparison of the  breath of these creative  individuals to a "Pentecost" sug­ gests  the  Christian  concept  of  a  spiritually transforming  love  which  informed Christ's  disciples  with   a  desire  to  serve  mankind.  Toynbee  expresses  this  love­ service  idea  in  the  following words:  "the faculty  which  we shall  think  of first as being common to man  and  God will be one which the philosophers wish to mortify  and  that  is the  faculty of love"   (p.  530). Further on  he says:  "the terminus is the  Kingdom of  God; and  this  omnipresent Kingdom calls for  service  from  its citizens on  Earth here  and  now"  (p. 531). The  awareness that love bears a heavy burden in  its  total  commitment to one's  fellow  man  is  expressed  by  Le  Pan  in Elegy in the Romagna  (NS, p. 47).

Their  cries are mine,
Their  miseries thrill through  my impoverished  nerves, People the dungeon of my bowels with fancies.

Toynbee goes so far  as to state  that  such a selflessly creative love operates in strain and  tension  which  involves suffering  and  even a Christ-like martyrdom. Similarly, referring to A Fallen Prophet  (WP, p. 32)  Le Pan declares:

Pain was your vocation and achievement, The  restless sea your anthemed citadel. But when the waters have gone over you,
Flashing shines still your dying, ransomed gift.

In  I mage of Silenus  ( W P, p. 36), when  the superficial  mask  opens  to reveal  the hidden "figures of desire" we see that,

... other figures, neither gold nor silver, Tell of the ultimate  wish to do and suffer.

In  Reconnaissance  in  Early Light  (NS, p. 16)  the  young  officer in  command is described  as one of these transfigured leaders of men,

His gaze alone is unperplexed,
He sips from this thin air some sacred word.

THE  BIRD OF HEAVENLY AIRS



Through  all his veins the sacrament  of danger, Discovering secret fires, runs riot.

Again,   it  is  the  wounded  prince  who  endures a  terrible humiliation from   the stupid   indifference of  the  mass  man  wasting   in  oceans  of  sludge.  So,  too,  the great   heron   with   wings  "stretched  wide  as  love"  symbolizes  the  crucifixion of those rare  and  marvellous prophets in every age who are "killed" by the unfeeling, unvisionary mob.  It is for such  reasons that  Le Pan  pleads,  in The  Nimbus  (NS,
p. 34):
Stranger,  reconquer the source of feeling
For an anxious people's sake.






kERE IS GREAT   NOBILITY of mind  and  character in a man  who dedicates himself  to  the  betterment of  civilization; but  this  borrows  a  touch  of the  sublime  when  one  realizes  that  this uncompromising, total  dedication, is for an  ideal   which   at  best  is a  hazardous risk,  with  the  odds  stacked  impressively against   success.  In   conveying  this  spirit  of  daring involved   in  such  a  venture, Toynbee interprets  the  words  of  Faust   to  Mephistopheles after   their   pledge  is made: "in  attempting this I am  aware  that  I am  leaving  safety  behind  me. Yet, for  the  sake  of  the  possibility  of  achievement, I  will  take  the  risk of a fall  and destruction" (pp. 64-65). The  historian  also refers to the expulsion  of Adam and Eve from  Eden  as the result of a similar  risk:  "the Fall, in response to the tempta­ tion  to eat  of the  Tree of the Knowledge of Good  and  Evil, symbolizes the accep­ tance  of a challenge to abandon this achieved  integration and  to venture upon  a fresh  differentiation out  of which  a fresh integration may-or  may not-arise" (p. 65). The combination of tragedy  and  grandeur in  these  statements is truly overwhelming. How  heroic is he who stakes  his all on  so  perilous  a speculation! There is moving   pathos  in  the  suffering  of one  such  dedicated soul in  Le  Pan's poem, One of the Regiment  (WP, p. 26).

No past, no future
That he can imagine. The  fiery fracture
Has snapped  that  armour  off and  left his bare
Inflexible, dark frown to pluck and stare
For some suspected rumour  that  the brightness sheds
Above the fruit-trees and the peasants' heads

THE  BIRD OF HEAVENLY  AIRS



In this serene, consuming lustrousness
Where trumpet-tongues have died, and all success.

This  theme  is also emphasized in Lines  for a Combatant (NS, p. 23).

Apprehension  of an improbable event

Has offered my marrow and the gristle in my eye
To speculation.

The soldier's "speculation" is that  a

fruition  that blows around elected action Will cultivate  the barbarous heavens with thin scions Of a blossoming fiction.

A  negative expression  of  this  theme  is seen  in  the  paltry  puppet-minds of those images  of Silenus  who  lament in their  blind  despair,  "What if the  promise  were puffs  of air?" and  who come  to believe that  the  bird which  they actually  saw was "only  a blue mirage" ( WP, p. 36).
It is a  cause  for  wonder, how  any  individual-transfigured or  not-could
wager  so much, against so tremendous a risk. Toynbee suggests that  the  response of  genius  is possible  because  it  seeks what  is universal  and  eternal, rather than what  is local  and   particular; and  furthermore, that  this  is rendered possible  by an  awakened sense  of the  unity  of all things.  He says, "the painfully perturbing dissolution  of  familiar forms,  which  suggests  to  weaker  spirits  that  the  ultimate reality  is nothing but  a chaos,  may  reveal  to a steadier  and  more  spiritual vision the  truth that   the  flickering  film  of  the  phenomenal world  is an  illusion  which cannot obscure   the  eternal unity  that   lies beneath it" (p. 495). Such  a  unity, "broadens and  deepens as the vision expands from  the unity  of mankind, through the  unity  of  the  cosmos,  to embrace the  unity  of God" (p. 43 I). Le  Pan  inter­ prets  the  unity  of mankind  beautifully in  his poem,  Field  of Battle  ( N S, p. 3 I ) , where  the  soldier  integrates the  humane purpose  of his life in a crumbling world, to that  of Christ  crucified.

Estranged  from me-but yet you are not strange, I see humanity  as the wound you bear
Cleft in your side and mine uniting us.

At  times  there  occurs  an  awareness of the  temporary disruption of unity  in the cosmos,  as in  Le  Pan's Elegy  in  the  Romagna (NS, p. 57)   where  the  poet  takes

33

THE BIRD OF HEAVENLY AIRS



a lesson from  a painfully  industrious spider.

Still the slow spider weaves.
And so make to trial.    To imitate the spider, From our unravelled  tissues,
To spin an intellectual  thread, no more
Mercurial  nor more pure than this so precious crew, That mounting, mounting, breaking, respun, as
thin
As starlight, perhaps at last might clasp the upper air
And there restore relation and identity.

But  it is in Tuscan  Villa  (NS, p. 7)  that  war,  chaos,  and  destruction are seen as a veritable part of the total  unity. Le Pan speaks of that perpetual human fire that one  moment in  history  builds  castles  and  at  another, bums castles. The soldier, "too tightly  closed  in  a luxury  of flame", fails  to see or  understand that  his life­ giving  role shares in an almost  sacramental beauty. Then too, the deep awareness of  the  unity  of everything in  God  is focussed  in  the  same  poem. Here,  during a lull in  battle, the  author surveys the  physical signs of the destruction of a civiliza­ tion,  a destruction which  he has helped  to "create", and yet he is moved  to say:

Surely this is not out of God's grace,
Where soldiers and a dying tower are lapped in peace.

So  much   for  those  heroes  who  meet  life's  challenge in  dedicated,  personal encounter. There are  also  those  who  fail  to  respond   either   to  the  challenge of environment, or  to  the  challenge from  within. In  Elegy in  the  Romagna   (NS, p. 47)   Le Pan  depicts  the  other  soldiers  around him  who fail  to see the  unity  in chaos,  and so cannot perfectly ad just to their environment.

Strand  after strand I hear
Phrase after phrase blown one way by the muffled wind.
And so the air is peopled.    One  breathes, 	"I've seen too much."
Another, "Let  me be lucky and be killed."

The failure to respond  to the challenge from  within  is best seen in Image of Silenus (WP, p.  36). Here, the  "inner city,  the  city  of  phantoms" behind  the  mask,  is the  unseen,  inner  man  where  all the  potentialities, all the  aspirations of a human being  have  been  denied  fruition. These  human beings  of miniature heroics  exist,

34

THE BIRD  OF  HEAVENLY AIRS



debased,  in a world of wishful thinking. The  inhabitants of their minds are only "the  shrunken  figures of desire";  they are unreal in so far as they represent vicari­ ous living never to be realized in the objective world.

The runner here is always first to break the tape, The infant Hercules compels the snake,
The surgeon cuts the flesh to an exquisite thinness, The climber stands triumphant over Everest.

This  is  non-fulfilment:  a  sick  feasting  upon  ephemeral   fancies  and  anaemic hopes. These  are  the  mass  men,  "animal, inarticulate", who -merely  existing in  a  mechanical  and  materialistic  civilization -"are souls underground, buried under miles of brick" in "the  real and suffering city" to be seen from any "railway
viaduct".
They are rows of jostling seeds, Planted too close, unlikely to come to maturity.

They guard their nonentity,  their death and despair, by that "guiling glass", the "invisible  barrier" of unmoved,  inanimate  faces where, sophisticated,  "the  mask grins  again". It is one  of  Toynbee's  theories that  "in  the  Macrocosm  growth reveals  itself  as a  progressive  mastery  over the external en vir on men t; in  the Microcosm  as a  progressive self-determination or  self-articulation" (p.  18g). Thus, if there is no articulation, there is no growth; there is only

A ground swell continually making for the shores of speech
And never arriving.

There is only stagnation  and spiritual death. An image of Silenus.
The  stagnation  of the individual  mind in Le Pan's  I mage of Silenus is magni­ fied in  Tuscan  Villa   (NS, p.  7)  to encompass the  aridity  of an  entire society. The  villa itself is the symbol of the decadence of an opulent culture. Its paralytic stupor is vividly depicted in the second stanza where it is

now too old, too torpid
To care. Explosions seep through the thick walls as rumours. What little is left of the villa's heart beats slow,
Integuments hardening inwards, all orifices
Closing.   Daydreaming towards its end.

Insularity  from events in the external  world is an unmistakeable  sign of that stasis which Toynbee considers in his concept of the breakdown of civilization. This phenomenon occurs when a civilization is still alive, but does not grow. It rather

35

THE  BIRD OF HEAVENLY AIRS



lives  on  the  memory of some  attainment in  the  past.  It is  an  arid  civilization caught in a moment of stasis. Toynbee, too, has this to say:  "a civilization  that  has become   the  victim   of  a  successful  intrusion  has  already in  fact  broken   down internally and  is no longer in a state of growth" (p.  245). Mr.  Le Pan,  in Tuscan Villa, expresses  his  consciousness of  the  internal decay  of  a  society  when   he
questions:

Was there some vileness lurking  understairs, Infection curled in the bud before it flowered,
That brought this dreadful cleansing on the house? The answer  is given in the succeeding lines.
And in the bowels of the house clot deadly humours,
The  surfeit of garlanded  years kept locked in the dark, Furs, faience, crystal, silver, jewels,
A fistula soon to be broken in exquisite riot. Death, finally. The dark cornucopia
Where  the patron  past dropped  treasure  lavishly, Is corrupted  by its own confined effulgence.

Thus, the  death of  a  whole  society  is a  form  of  suicide.  Still  time,  historicity, motion  in life, according to Mr.  Le Pan, is cyclical.  A continuous pattern of death and  resurrection establishes itself as the underlying unity in the life of individuals, of  nations, and  even  of entire  civilizations.  The laying  waste  of Tuscan Italy  at different times  in  history,  whether by Hun, Visigoth, or  Canadian, is all one  in Mr.   Le  Pan's sweeping  view.  It is a  "dreadful  cleansing" of internal decay,  a necessary  and  almost  sacramental purification in  the  human situation. A similar tone  of  optimism can  be  found  in  Toynbee's  philosophy of  history  for  specific reasons  which  may  help clarify our  understanding of Mr.  Le Pan's comprehensive view of life. To Toynbee it is not inevitable that a civilization will disintegrate, for growth  depends on  whether   "the   divine  spark   of  creative power  is still  alive" (p.  254)   in inspired individuals or minority groups; then  "breakdown" may  not occur. Rather, it is more inevitable that,  once  the old culture disintegrates, a new society  will  be  born.  Such  a  confidence  in  creation out  of decay  threads its  way as a thematic motif  throughout Mr.  Le Pan's poetry. Consider, for example, the prophetic final stanza of Tuscan Villa:

Winds veer
And the weathervane  veers
And the instruments are packed away.

g6

THE BIRD  OF  HEAVENLY  AIRS



But the crown with diaphanous  veils
Of fire
Over  the tower
And the trampled  fields prevails
And will prevail that far-off day
When other towers are circled with mild birds.

Beneath   the  cyclic  disturbance from  peace  to war,  and  from  decay  to  regenera­ tion-as symbolized in  the  veering  winds-is an eternal harmony which  "pre­ vails"  now  (though obscurely  concealed  behind  a veil of chaotic war), and  "will  prevail  that   far-off  day"  when  peace  will  crown  the  world  again.  The creative evolution of  society  moves steadily forward  so long  as  there  is  a  "wounded prince", a "bird of heavenly  airs" who, though

Impaled, sings on;
Will not disown its fettering crest and crown;

So that  what never could be dreamt  of has been made.






b:Is POET, LE  PAN,  is by choice  a  passionate  pilgrim  through his world,  and   his  poetry  bespeaks  a  man  unafraid of  passion  in  a  literary  era marked   by  much   cold  and   chromium-plated verse  which,  one  fears,  is far  too often  assembled   by  the  century's mechanical brides.  Mr.  Le  Pan  may  well  feel alien  in an age "without a mythology" since he possesses so dynamic and purpose­ ful  a myth  himself.  Perhaps this is partly  why his poetry  is unique, for  in a very real  sense these  poems  represent that  land  which  only  "the passionate  man  must travel". The true humanist, the individual engage, is rare in any age, and precious. Mr.  Le Pan  is no Silenus  ( WP, p. 36). He will not gather protectively about  him a  goat's  hide  as Adam did,  his second  skin.  Nor  will  he  carry  the  sophisticate's "weather-beaten  mask" before  his  face:  the  blase,  insensitive   "mask   that  sees everything/That has  the  air  of having  seen it all before", the  mask  which  denies  man's  human sense of wonder; the mask whose
strained grin has been rivered by marks of rain
Since first it was set up in the garden;  it is not so bright now
As when it left the hands of the makers.

This  is the mask of the common man  which only occasionally  and  "unaccountably


37

THE BIRD  OF  HEAVENLY AIRS



opens" to reveal  an  "ill-assorted  choir": Dionysus,  Christopher, Francis, Apollo, Aphrodite, Hamlet,  and   Oedipus. These   are   vicariously  worshipped  midgets, captive   aspirations  imprisoned  in  the  mass-roan's  mind   but   never  brought  to fruition. Therefore, they  are  "not heroic,  filling  all the sky" like the  "great bird/ With  wings  stretched wide  as love".  They  are  "miniatures rather, toys in  a toy shop  window". This   ravaged   mask  of  Silenus  hides  the  "inner city"  of  man's mind. It is merely a "city of phantoms".
Mr.   Le  Pan,   then,  is no  Silenus.  He  is, however, "like  one  of the  images  of Silenus" in  the  way  in which  Alcibiades  used  that  figure  to describe  Socrates in Plato's Symposium.5 It is, in  fact,  from  this  classic  that   Le  Pan  draws  the  title and  epigraph for  his  poem,  Image   of Silenus. Evidently part of  this  Canadian poet's  function is to reveal,  like Socrates,  what  Alcibiades calls "the wants  of those who  have  need  of gods and  mysteries"  (p.  I 77), and  this,  according to Le Pan, in  a  country which  lacks  a  mythology.  Perhaps it is significant that  Douglas  Le Pan  often  portrays  stasis of mind  as Canadian muskeg  or "palsied swamp" (NS, p.  34), not  as desert.  Again,  as Alcibiades  said  of Socrates, his very "words are like  the  images  of Silenus  which  open" (p.  I84), and, "he  who  opens  ... and sees what  is within  will find ... words  which  have  a meaning to them  ... of the widest  comprehension ..."  (p.I85). Alcibiades  adds,  "when I opened  him,  and looked   within   at  his  serious  purpose, I saw  in  him  divine   and  golden  images of ... fascinating beauty  ..."  (p.  I 78). In  experiencing rightly  the  richly  tex­ tured   poetry  of  Mr.  Le Pan,  the  reader  may  respond  in  much  the same  way  as Alcibiades  to  Socrates.   He  may  sense  too,  the  power   of  "poetic  incarnation" whereby "word", somehow,  has  become  "flesh", and  poetry  itself  an  expression of love for humanity.
One  might  well  borrow  Mr.  Le  Pan's words  from  The   Nimbus (NS, p.  34)
to indicate that  in  his own  poetic  way he comes  "With the  nimbus in  [his]  fist," and  swims

from the foundered  sunburst's  roar
With lost treasure on his back.




NOTES
' T. S. Eliot, quoted  by F. R. Leavis in New Bearings in English Literature  (London,
I 950) , n.  I, p.  I I 2.
Douglas  Le  Pan,  The  Wounded   Prince  (London,   I948); hereafter  cited  in  the text  as WP.

THE BIRD OF HEAVENLY AIRS



3   Douglas  Le  Pan,  The  Net  and the Sword  (Toronto, I953); hereafter cited  in the text  as  NS.
4   Citations from  Toynbee in  the  text  are  to  A Study  of History, abridged edition  of vols. I-VI  by D.  C.  Somervell (Oxford,  I947).
5  Citations from   Plato's Symposium refer  to  the  text  in  The  Portable Plato, ed.  by
Scott  Buchanan  (New  York,  I948).






























39



A TURN TO THE STAGE

Reaney's Dramatic Verse: Part I


Alvin  Lee


L,ESSAY OFFERS   a  description   of  the  majoc  wntmgs  of
James  Reaney,  in  an attempt  to show something  of his development  as a verse
dramatist. Until  recently, Mr.  Reaney,  now thirty-six years old, was known  pri­ marily  as a  poet  and  as a writer  of short stories. He is the author  of a  volume of poems entitled  The  Red  Heart  (I 949), in which  a youthful  poet  emerges as "an  exile from  the  paradise of childhood". Nine years later  he  published  A Suit of Nettles  ( I 958), a long cyclical poem  of satirical  intention.  His  many  other poems, published in various places, include a chapbook,  Twelve Letters to a Small Town ( I962), in which Stratford,  Ontario, is described in a series of poetic remi­ niscences.  Mr.  Reaney's  short stories are in several  publications; there  is a very funny  one,  "The Bully", in  the  World's Classics  volume of Canadian  Short Stories edited by Robert  Weaver. Most important of  all, for our present purposes, Mr. Reaney  has in the last four years written several dramatic works:  the libretto for a chamber  opera  (Night-Blooming Cereus), A  One  Man  Masque, and  three comedies (The  Killdeer, The  Sun and The  Moon, The  Easter Egg).
Since The  Red  Heart sets forth, in its rather  uneven  but  powerfully imagistic way, several of the  human  figures, situations,  and  themes  which later  dominate the  dramas,  it is important to establish at  this point  something  of the character of this germinal work.
The  world  of The  Red  Heart  is clearly imagined; it  is palpable,  immediate, confining,  and  so far as it has an actual  geographical location,  it is a farm  near Stratford, Ontario, or, in one cycle of poems, the larger area of the Great  Lakes system. Urban  Ontario,  and  the world beyond, are dimly apprehended mysteries perhaps   to  be  explored  in  the  future,  after  escape  from  "this  dull  township/ Where  fashion,  thought  and  wit/Never penetrate". Most of the forty-two  poems

A TURN TO  THE STAGE



are set in an old farmhouse,  or in the garden,  fields, and  lanes immediately out­ side. Such  a setting  might  have been idyllically pastoral,  with happy family life, easy work, games, singing, and  the beauties of nature  much in evidence, but The  Red  Heart  makes  only  vestigial use of an  unspoiled  pastoral  ideal.  The  farm­  house  is lonely  and   haunted, almost  totally  empty  of  human  companionship, inhabited   by an  unhappy, imaginative  child  and  by  pink  and  blue  wallpaper,  banisters,  staircases,  mouseholes,  wardrobes,  closets,  and  a  clock  which  "with  ice-tones ... strikes".  Outside,  in the humdrum green summertime,  plump  ripe plums  hang,  or  fall from  their  tree's green  heaven,  like dead  stars  rushing  to a winter  sea. Spring  must  come to this garden, and summer  clearly does, because plums do  ripen  and  hollyhocks  blossom, but  there is little sense of nature  in  all her changing  moods, especially  her lighter ones. Autumn,  dead gardens,  lanes of leafless trees, dead  leaves  "languageless  with frost",  and  winter-these  are  the seasonal symbols which quickly succeed any marks of a more benevolent or vital natural order.  This is a  world abandoned  by Adonis, kept alive only by the beat­ ing of a child's  red  heart  and  by the emergence of a poetic consciousness.
The  figure of the child  varies considerably from poem to poem. At times it is "he", at times "she"; occasionally it is even "we",  but most often "I", which probably  suggests at  least a  rough  analogy, if no easy equation,  with  the poet's own  early  life. The  age of the  protagonist  ranges, not  chronologically  so far  as the organization  of the  book is concerned, from the unborn  state to young adult­ hood. But youth  has a way of aging quickly in The  Red  Heart;  as soon as there is even  a  rudimentary consciousness, the  child is aware  of time  and  death.  In "Dark  Lagoon"  an infant  has just come from the foetal world where the mother's  heart  was  the  distant   tick-tocking  of the  chisel that  would  one  day  carve  his name  on a monument. The  baby is still very young, but the poet describing him is rather  old-mannish, prematurely  disillusioned with the world of  human  experi­ ence. He has lived long enough to hear

The cry of "Eenie, meenie, minie, moe",
By which children choose a loser in a game, And by which Fate seems to choose
Which children shall be which:
One-eyed, wilful, hare-lipped, lame,
Poor, orphans, idiots, or rich.

In  The  Red  Heart  fate  has chosen several ways of making  children  losers. The figure of the orphan recurs several times, and  two poems are given over entirely

A TURN TO THE STAGE



to  its  perspective.  In  "The   English  Orphan's  Monologue" an  angry,  resentful hired  girl, who  feels herself enslaved on  the  farm  where  she works, sits by the stove in the evenings plotting  her revenge, with  a sadistic glee worthy  of one of Browning's  obsessed characters.  She plans to get pregnant  by the son Harry  and get them  both  thrown  out, a policy which might well continue  the ugly problem described in a similar poem, "The  Orphanage". Here the plain white, "cretinous" faces of children in yellow dresses peer through  gray orphanage windows, thinking about  the lust of the "young  men who play hockey in winter"  and  "crawl  over ghastly  women"  in  the summer:   "We  are  the  answers/To those equations/In ditches and  round-shouldered  cars." But from such unions springs life, and there­ fore the possibility of all the dirty tricks an adult  world can play on a child. The sense of deep  offence at  the sexuality of men  and  women,  a theme  which  runs through  much of the book, stems from the wretchedness of the child's experiences, all of which, of course, would have been impossible had he never been born.
On  the whole the adult world comes off very badly in The  Red  Heart. When
the child  is not  miserable in his isolation, he is haunted  by a stepmother,  or by some other figure of oppression and cruelty. In one poem he comes across an old woman  who  wants  to  buy  his  tonsils and  fingers, so that  with  them  she  may mend  the curry-combs she uses on two great  black hounds  and  on a great  black horse;  he apparently escapes from this threat  only to meet a sly fox in his den, "as  charming  and  good-mannered/As the  President  of France,/But his kitchen­ floor he's scrubbing/With a tub of blood." Children's blood, no doubt. Teachers  in school are  cold  and  authoritarian. There  is also a  rich  man, giggling, in his luxuries and  in the  accoutrements  of art,  at the appalling working conditions of
the proletariat:

Well ... is it not all very beautiful? As you stand hungry in the rain
Just look to what heights you too may attain.

God is just as bad,  known only to the small boy as the one who will send a bear to eat him up if he swears.
There  are two exceptions to these tyrannical  adults. In "Pink  and White Holly­ hocks" pre-Raphaelite ladies, the blossoms on the green  hollyhock spires, ascend intensely from July  to September  to the topmost  rooms of their  towers, and there lie down  with  their  lovers, having blown out  the pink lamps forever. The  "dear  fat  mother"  of  the  Katzenjammer Kids  in  the  comics  keeps only  "fairly  good guard" over the fat  pies she bakes, thus showing that  she at least  resists the blue

A TURN TO THE STAGE



Captain and  the orange  Inspector  who notice the Kids only to spank them:  "Oh, the blue skies of that funny paper weather!"
One  might  expect  that  a youthful  world so seriously and  continuously  threat­ ened as this would result in the writing of elegy, in a lament for a lost happiness; but  Mr.  Reaney,  in  his lyric  phase,  does  not  write  elegy,  even  as  now in  his dramatic phase  (if  one  may  use these expressions),  he does not  write  tragedy. There  would seem to be several reasons for this. Already in The Red  Heart  there has  developed  considerable  ironic  detachment,  which contrasts with  the accom­ panying  lyric sense of shock and longing following a premature loss of innocence. Irony  is the death  of elegy, because elegy requires a strong  belief in ideals, in a faith  that  something  better  did once exist. The  detachment is evident in the few poems he puts in  the mouth  of someone else, and  also in  that  quite  large group in which  the attention  is focussed on a third  person or  object. Several  pieces are dialogues rather  than  lyrics, and  dialogue objectifies, sets the artist  at a distance, or out of the matter  altogether.  Even in the first-person lyrics, that is the majority of the poems, there is almost no self-pity; the situation  described may be pathetic to the  reader,  but  the victim  has  more interesting  ways of fighting  than  simply bemoaning  his personal fate. And since these ways generate  several kinds of con­ flict,  out  of  which  drama   later  appears, it  is important to  note  them  before passing on.
The  most elaborate  compensation  the child has for the deprivation of human
love is a rich life of fantasy,  some of it liberating  but some of it simply an exten­ sion  of  horror  already  realized.  In  "The  Clouds,"  the  child  sees a  cloudy sky, metaphorically, as the  wallpaper  of a  bedroom;  out  of this identification  come others,  fanciful  and  filled  with  interest  for  a  child's  imagination. But  then  he wakes from  his reverie, and  the poem ends on the disappointing thought,  "They  were only clouds". The  longing for the metaphorical identification  remains, how­ ever, the  desire that  the fantasies  be true:  "What  are  the clouds that  sail by so slow ... ./If not that  fancied  wallpaper  ... ?" This is all innocent  enough,  but there are other poems filled with macabre imaginings. In "Dream within Dream" first he saw himself riding  with a demon  who ate human  hair,  then  he woke up and  killed a man,  next  he  pushed  a woman over a cliff, then  he choked a viva­ cious gentleman, and finally he stabbed a girl.

Each time the face of the man became
More like my father's face;
And that of the woman, of course, Began to seem like my mother's,

43

A TURN TO THE  STAGE



As if I could have slain my parents
For that foul deed that struck
Me out of chaos, out of nothing.

The  destructive fantasy,   as  a  means  of  hitting back,  is a  theme   which  runs throughout the  book.  It may  be  treated  playfully, as in  "The  Sundogs"; these animals of the Sun  take puppyish  delight  in bringing the storms  which  will drown the  crickets,  set  the  killdeer  birds  crying,  send  shingles  flying,  and  press the  oats to the ground. In  "Suns  and  Planets" the artist  looks for the "thick autumn time" when  a  great  wind  will pluck  Venus  and  Mars  and  grey  Pluto  like fruit  to the ground. One  of the  children  in The  Red  Heart  wonders why he traces  the letter A on a window-sill, because  his name  contains no A;  he wonders why his mother looks at him so sadly, why his father stares, and  why both  flowers and  weed avoid his fingers.  When  his feet  become  hooves  and  make  his shoes pinch  he does not let on, lest he be shot for a monster.

He wondered why he more and more
Dreamed of eclipses of the sun,
Of sunsets, ruined towns and zeppelins,
And especially inverted,  upside down churches.

Not until later  does he learn  that  he is Antichrist.
To  strike  back  is one  possibility. To  become  an  inanimate object,  for  instance a  top  on  a  string,  is another possibility;  then,  after  crazy  spinning periods,  one could  have  long  intervals  of peaceful  rest. One  can  also withdraw into  the  past, regress, refuse to go on; this theme  is especially  persistent in Mr.  Reaney's writings and   is perhaps best  illustrated in  The  Red  Heart  by  the  conclusion of a  retro­ spective  poem,  "The School Globe". Wandering about alone  in an empty school­  room,  the adolescent sees a faded  globe as a parcel  of his past childhood, a period  of his life to which  he would gladly return:

if someone in authority
Were here, I'd say
Give me this old world back
Whose husk I clasp
And I'll give you in exchange
The great sad real one
That's filled
Not with a child's remembered  and pleasant skies
But with blood, pus, horror, death, stepmothers, and lies.

44

A TURN TO  THE  STAGE



The   meditative  nostalgia of  this  piece  is as close to  elegy  as we  come,  and  the lines just quoted are  a fit statement in miniature of the kind of existence  struggled with  in  The  Killdeer, The  Sun  and the Moon, and  The  Easter Egg. Through all  his  wanderings and  experiences though, the  bearer  of the  red  heart has  one overriding, if futile,  wish:

wherever I go, Wherever  I wander
I never find
What  I should like to find;
For example, a mother and father
Who loved me dearly
And loved each other so,
And brothers and sisters with whom,
In  the summer, I'd  play hide-and-go-seek
And in the winter, in the snow, Fox-and-goose week after week. Instead  I must forever run Down lanes of leafless trees Beneath a Chinese-faced sun; Must forsaken and forlorn go
Unwanted and stepmotherishly haunted
Beneath the moon as white as snow.

Failing in  the  search for  a  family,  the  red  heart  turns  away  from  this  world altogether and  for  a time  becomes  mistress of a golden  lover,  the Sun.  The Sun, though, is eternal, and  its cycle cannot  be contained in  the  blood-filled  dungeon of  a  human heart; like  an  autumn leaf from  its branch the  heart  falls from  life and   the  gold  prisoner flies away.  In  the  title  poem  of  the  book  the  question is asked,  "Who shall   pick  the  sun/From  the  tree  of  Eternity?" and   the  answer comes  back,  "It seems  that  no  one  can." The  result  is destruction for  all things in the mutable world.
Each  reaction of the  child  to the  world  of experience -fantasies,  pleasant or
macabre, vengeful  striking back,  metamorphosis into  a  top  or something  inani­ mate, withdrawal into  the  past,  continuing the  search  for  family,  or  aspiration towards the  order  of  eternity -each  of  these  reactions  leads  to  a  dead  end,  to the  gray  grave  where  all shall  be trampled. Throughout it all runs the  horror  of the  dark  sensuality which  brings  the  baby  into  the  world.  It is,  then,  a mark  of the  ambiguity of this  early  volume,  that  the one remaining  possibility, one  which  emerges  fitfully  throughout and  more  insistently  towards  the  end,  is the  love of

45

A TURN TO  THE STAGE



man   and   woman. At  times  its  treatment is ironic   and   closely  associated   with themes  of death. In  "A  Fantasy and  a  Moral" a young  woman with  ballooning breasts  is wafted   mysteriously  to  a  demon  lover  who,  unknown to  her,  impreg­ nates  her with a poisonous child:
So love, though measured breath  by breath, May seem like walking in a summer dream, Visiting nowhere but pleasant places;
So love does often lead a filthy way to Death.
A more  romantic view of love appears, in enigmatic form, in "A  Riddle": We need no gloves,
Our  hands englove each other. We need no scarves,
Our  arms that purpose serve.
We need no trousers, No overcoats, no hats, Ourselves do clothe each other
Fully against all cold, wind and rain. What are we
Who need no raiment
Nor the help of weavers, hatters, Tailors, milliners, stitchers, glovers, To whom no winter matters? Answer: A pair of very loving lovers.

It is, however,  in  the  poem  entitled  "To My  Love"  that  one can  see opening up most clearly  the dimension  which, in the plays, is to be set against  those childhood attitudes we  have  been   considering. By  the  age  of  twenty-one the  poet  has "devoured all substance", but  he must  not die  until  he "tries on"  love.
Though  I've devoured all substance
In  twenty-one years,
I shall not, must not die
Until, my Love,
Like a fantastic white glove
You my hand
(Each finger for a special sense) Tries on
Then  dig my grave
For I am ripe
For senseless, languageless lifelessness.

The  Red  Heart is a  book  of beginnings, of attempts to  handle large  matters,

A TURN TO  THE STAGE



both   poetic and existential. At  times  it  is ironic  and   playful  and   at  times  it achieves  a  poignant beauty  not  easily forgotten. Above  all it is filled with inven­ tiveness  and  experimentation, with  a  willingness  to strike  out  new  and  palpable images  or  unusual rhythms. If the  result  is irregular at  times,  and  it  is, this  is because   Mr.   Reaney  at  this  point  has  not  yet  achieved   the  close  synthesis  of emotion   and  intellect which  is one  of the  really  extraordinary  things  about   his recent  writings. In  1958,  when  he published  A Suit of Nettles, the sartorial activity  of "trying on"  new experiences was left to the  central  goose character, Branwell, while  the  very  knowing and  sophisticated poet  made  use  of  literary   and  intel­  lectual  resources  almost  completely  foreign  to him  nine years earlier.






IT  IS NOT   MY   PURPOSE  here  to consider  A  Suit  of Nettles at any length, primarily because it does not seem to me to be as immediately relevant to the  plays  as does the  earlier  work.  It does represent  an  enormously disciplined imaginative effort,  and  the social or cultural reference  of its satirical themes  leads naturally to the  communal interests  set forth  in the comedies.  Two  or three  of the central characters also  are  very important. The  tragic  hero,  if one  can  use such a  term  about a  goose  who  can't quite  become  a swan,  has  been  made to  look ridiculous by  a  pretty  goose who  has  rejected  his love;  in this sense,  Branwell is about one  step  further on  the  road  to adult  experience than  the speaker in The Red   Heart. A  Suit   of Nettles is  a  decisively  cyclical  poem,  each  of  its  twelve pastoral eclogues  being  concerned with  one  month of the  year. The main  theme is that  of sterility  versus  fertility  and  the scope is meant  to take  in  "all  the intel­ lectual  institutions of the  age". The  same  irony  which  let  the  gods  stay  dead  in The   Red  Heart  now  becomes  Inilitant, changes  to satire,  and  sets forth  visionary  alternatives to  the  land   of  upturned privies.  The  purpose  is  to  fertilize  a  dead  land,  by beating it with  the  Punch's stick of satire  until  the phallos blossoms, and  until   the  "life   and   heart   and   mind-line" of  the  barnyard  society have  been thoroughly anatoinized.
A mechanical clock  ticked  relentlessly  through The Red  Heart, in accordance with  the  idea   that   life  is simply  an  awakening into  death; time  passes  no  less relentlessly  in  A  Suit  of Nettles and  most of the geese are sacrificed  for Christmas dinners at  the  end.   Twelve   months   earlier   Branwell,  even  though plunged   in lover's  melancholy, rejected a friend's invitation to embrace a  Platonic idealistic

47

A TURN TO THE  STAGE



love  and   thus  transcend  all  sensual  life:   "the  heart-of-vampire sexual  eye  of ooze".  For  Branwell  the  land  to which  this  friend  beckoned was "A  round  con­ crete  continent of  snows"; what  he  himself  wanted was  "offspring  summerson autumnman  winterage", the  whole  natural life of man, the  "world's hot middle" rather than  a "round cold sea"  of sterility.  His  tragedy  is not  that  his desires are wrong; simply  that  death  has  come  so swiftly  that  almost  none  of  his ambitions have  been  fulfilled.  He would  gladly go back into  the  barnyard because  he "can't see a  path  that  leads  between  one's  Head  & one's  body". Branwell  can't, but  his faithful female  friend,  Effie, can.  Throughout the  poem  Effie has  been  cheerful, generous, full of inner  music, and  possessed of a strong belief in an  after-life.  For her  self-sacrifice  is no  problem, because  she  believes  it  foolish  to  "Cling to  this cramped stupid  goosehouse  world"; her  desire  is to  throw  off the  suit  of nettles  of self and  become  the swan  she is meant  to be. For  Effie life inside  the  ring,  to which  Branwell  clings, is life inside  "a crazed  prison  of despair", and  she  urges him  to go willingly  with  her into  the  world  of the  unspoiled pastoral. This  is the world  thought impossible  to achieve  in The  Red  Heart, and  it is the one to which  Night Blooming Cereus and  the comedies lead.
There were  two  other  compositions before  a straight stage  play  emerged, the
libretto for  the  chamber  opera,   Night-Blooming   Cereus,  and, what  is in  some ways a companion piece, A One Man  Masque. The  opera  was done  in collabora­ tion  with  the  Toronto composer,  John Beckwith,  and  has  already  become  some­ what  familiar to a fairly  wide  audience. Commissioned by the C.B.C.,  it was first performed on a Wednesday Night  radio  broadcast early  in  1959,  and  was staged, along  with  the  masque,  a little  over  a year  later  in  Hart  House  Theatre. Ettore  Mazzoleni conducted  both  performances and   Pamela  Terry directed the  stage  version.  The libretto is subtle  and  sophisticated in  execution, but  its  impact is simple  and  direct  somewhat in  the  manner of  Wordsworth's Lyrical Ballads; the music,  as I recall it from  two hearings,  is almost always  apt -groping, mocking, active,  melancholy, or triumphant-as the words require.
I do not  propose  to discuss this opera  and  the  masque in detail-this has been done  just recently  by Mr.  Reaney  in Canadian  Literature- but  their  structural and  thematic relationship to what  goes before  and  to what  comes  after  needs  to be  traced. Night-Blooming  Cereus is unashamedly romantic. Its  theme  is one  of human loneliness,  appropriately symbolized  by the  Night-Blooming Cereus  whose flower  appears only  once in a century   (actually a Cereus  blossoms much  oftener, but   that   is  unimportant). The   time  of  the  action   is  a  Saturday night  in  late March and  the  setting  is the  village  of Shakespeare, Ontario. Old  Mrs.  Brown,

A TURN TO  THE STAGE



the  protagonist, is described as one  who  "could  easily take  care  of granaries" or "plant and  harvest  a whole £armful of crops",  but who has to be content with the window-sill   of  a  two-room  cottage   and   "no   harvest  except   a  heart   and   mind filled  with  the  delight  of  watching and  waiting". The   great  disappointment of her  life is that   years  ago  her  only  daughter ran  away  to get  married and  never returned. As  we  see  her  at  her  simple  household   tasks-eating, washing   up, sweeping, rocking,  sewing,  and  singing  a  hymn  at  her  little  organ  -the  theme of loneliness is given strong  expression.
The simple   plot,  developed in  three  scenes,  brings  about   the  union  of  Mrs. Brown  with  her  daughter's daughter, Alice, come  to ask of the  old  woman  for­ giveness for  the long-lost  girl who  has recently died. Before this union  takes place, however,   four   other   people   have  become  involved; they  are  the  old  woman's guests,  invited   to  witness  the  opening of the  Cereus.  As they  wait,  still  unintro­ duced  to Alice,  whom  Mrs. Brown  thinks  a ghost, each  reveals something funda­ mental  about  himself  or  herself.  There are  Mrs.  Wool,  the  local  switchboard operator, Ben,  the  storekeeper's son,  and  Barbara Croft, the  village  orphan. Mr.  Orchard, the  fourth and  last  arrival, unlike  the others is revealed as complete in himself  and   therefore as somewhat mysterious.  It is  he  who  prepares the  group  spiritually for the miracle  which  takes place at the end. On  the most obvious level, the  representational one,  Mr.  Orchard is a  gardener  and  a  neighbour, but  he quickly  takes  on  connotations of a fertility  spirit  as he  hands  out  packets  of seeds from  his plantation up  at  Sunfish  Lake.  As described  by the librettist, this visitor "knows the  mysteries  of the  writing  in the  hand,  the fire in the  branch, the dark  lake  in  the  head,  the  Saviour in  the  thigh." The invited  guests  together form  an abstract pattern:  two  older  people  of different  sexes, apparently contented with their  lives, and  two  younger  people,  very discontented, also of different  sexes.
As the  group drink  tea  together, the  roaring of a midnight train  shatters their conversation and  then  passes into  the  distance. The  Connecticut clock signals the beginning of Sunday. At this point  the mechanical tick-tocking world  of actuality and   human frustration is  mysteriously  left  behind  and  the  little  community in the cottage experience a moment of revelation:

The  clock stopped  striking.  Beside it  stood a huge  book, Mrs. Brown's  Bible. It too was a sort  of stove, a  harmonium,  a clock and  a thunderous train  and  in it the whole world burned  and did not, spoke and did not.

A  hymn  is sung   ( "Oh sweet  bird  sing  now/Of  my  soul's  new  spring"),  Mrs. Brown  and  Alice are  quickly  united, and  the flower begins to open,  each  member

49

A TURN TO  THE STAGE



of  the  group seeing  in it  what  he  needs  to see-a  father and  mother, a  black­ smith's shop,  a  flower  opening, the  meaning of working  in  the  earth, happiness and   joy. The  structure is completed by  the  singing  of a  chorale:  "When  I  be­ hold/All this glory/Then I am  bold/To cross Jordan .. ./To call on God  .. ./To end  my story". Effie's vision triumphs.
The  companion piece,  A  One  Man  Masque, takes  a  different route   to  the
same  revelation. Performed by  the  author himself  in  Hart House, and  later  on C.B.C. television  by Jeremy  Wilkin,  the  masque could  be  described as an  ana­ tomy  of human corruption. In  it the  darker vision of The  Red  Hearl and  A Suit of  Nettles  returns to lay bare,  in  a series of stage  images,  a definition of  human life in  which  the  filthy  road  to death theme  sets in stark  relief  the  few  flashes of human  beauty. As  the  actor  moves  about   among a  motley  array of  props,  the main  ones  being  a cradle  and  a coffin, he recites sixteen  monologues which  con­ tain   the  verbal  substance of  the  masque. A  selection  includes the  following: a baby  who  has  just  rescued  the  diamond of  his  mind  from  rats  in  his  mother's womb; a principal of a boys' school whose interest  in the boys is not academic; A Saint   Hilda's girl  reflecting  on  the  annual erotic  dating rituals  of  Trinity and  Saint Hilda's; a golden  foundling child,  taken  in  and  loved  by the  poet,  only  to become  a prostitute; a hag,  called  Granny Crack, wandering over  country roads, having  long  ago  earned   the  name  of "the burdock girl"  for  her  role  as a  pigsty Venus.   There are  others,  in  this  dissolution   of  the  human  form,  but  the  most depraved is the last, a dwarf, who catalogues his achievements. Sold by his father, he became a court  jester, and  his jests, in their cruelty,  have  far  outdone the  jests of  Lear's Fool.  He  has  turned the  young  queen   mad   with  lust,  has  created a Cain-Abel  situation  between   the   princes,  has  destroyed   the  servants' faith   in angels,  has degraded the swineherd, frustrated the  elopement of the  princess,  and  filled the  court  with lust. He has even set the four elements at war with each  other and  as a final  annihilation of  all created  harmonies he had  the  minstrel's tongue  cut  off. Now  the  castle is empty,  inside  out,  and  he lives alone  among the  ruins, "the  compressed cause  of  everything". He  crawls  into  a  manger, props  up  the dead  queen's body, and calls for some shepherds to adore:

To the curious observant baby The humble and the royal bow Hush a bye my baby do, for see That spider on your mother's brow.

If A One  Man  Masque ended  there  with  this parody of the Nativity, one might

so

A TURN TO  THE  STAGE



well conclude  that  its sole purpose was to shock. But Mr. Reaney is writing satire and  this means  that  his aim  is moral,  redemptive, as is the case with all serious satire.  To  take  apart  a rotting  body is the work of a ghoul, unless some rational purpose is operating.  The  masque ends with Milton's Holy Ghost bird searching over an empty sea until it finds the cradle beside the coffin. It rescues the cradle, kneels beside it as a shepherd, and says:

I push the shore and kingdom to you,
0 winter walk with seed pod ditch: I touch them to the floating child
And lo! Cities and gardens, shepherds and smiths.

Satire  makes its  moral  norms  clear. Here  it is a question  of creative  work and civilization set against  perversity and  destruction.  The  Masque  ends in the same place structurally as does Night-Blooming  Cereus, with  a vision of divine  crea­ tivity, but  to get there  it goes a different road,  through  the kingdom  of  shadows and death.





BOOK DESIGN
IN CANADA






William Toye










ANYONE WHO TAKES an ;ntmst ill Canaill= books wHI have noticed that  they look better than they used to and that  their appearance - their  design-is  often  referred  to in  the  reviews  (at  least in  Toronto). It  has become  something  to  be mentioned,  and  not  only  by  reviewers  but  by almost everyone  else, especially if it is the author  you are  talking  to, for it provides an easy subject  for comment  and  obscures the fact  that  you haven't  read  the book and  don't  intend  to. Authors  themselves are  gratified  by this interest;  it is only human  to feel that  a superlative looking package  reflects favourably  on the con­ tents,  and  authors  are only human.  Then  there  are  the  annual  well-publicized typography  shows to focus further  attention  on the non-literary aspect of a book. They  consider  books as objects of design and  isolate their  handsomest  elements, just as though  the reason for it all-the author's words that lie behind the arrest­ ing  jacket, the handsome  binding, the clever display lines, the type and drawings and  paper -were of secondary value.· When  I  join others in gazing solemnly at the latest exhibition of our best designs in print,  I keep expecting to hear someone say over  my shoulder,  "Who  gives a damn?"  and  I  ponder  a suitable  reply. I have  done  my little  bit in fostering what  may  be thought  a blown-up interest  in book-design, pulling it out of the context of the whole book; furthermore, I design myself; yet I also help to publish books, and in publishing  the first and last things must be the author's words. I know what the cynical viewer in my fantasy means, but  I  am  convinced  that  the sneer would  be  undeserved.  Reviewers who notice

52

BOOK DESIGN IN  CANADA



good  design and  authors  who  prize it are  perfectly correct  to do so;  publishers who provide for it are  responsible and wise; shows that  celebrate  it are salutary; the average reader  who notices it and talks about it is exercising a natural aesthe­ tic sense and  is also taking one step towards comprehending the book as a whole, if its outward  form can be thought  of as an allusive invitation  to read. When the design of books is considered  out  of context,  made  an  arty, fashionable  subject of interest for its own sake, it can be boring and sterile. But the fact remains that  the designer is in a position to serve the written word  profoundly; first of all by making  it  legible,  giving  it  the  proper  type  face,  length  of line,  leading,  and margins,  and  handling   the  type meticulously. By  using imagination, taste, and craftsmanship, he can also put every aspect of the physical book in perfect accord with the work itself, and  even heighten its meaning. Whether  this is done or not done, whether  it is done well or badly, is surely of some importance.
Of  course  the  very  nature  of a  book implies the  need  for  design, and  great gifts have been lavished on its appearance from the days of the incunabula. Even those unknowing  people who produce  the ugliest books are  designers in a sense: they make decisions about  page size, type etc. that give their  books form. As long as books are  made  they will have to be designed-planned in detail  to produce some  kind  of  harmony-and their  design  will have  an  effect  on  them,  and on  the  reader  as  well, conscious or  unconscious, pleasing  or  otherwise.  It is inescapable.
The  movement  to have Canadian books designed by people with training  and skill was begun in the middle fifties by several English designers who had recently come to Toronto  and eventually  joined with Allan Fleming,  who had been doing some  jackets and  cases for  Macmillan's,  and  Carl  Dair  to form  The  Society of Typographic Designers of Canada. (Mostly through its annual  exhibitions which it  co-sponsors with  the  Rolland   Paper  Company  of  Canada, the  TDC  has  for­ warded  the cause of Canadian book design ever since then.)   While a few Cana­ dian  publishers had the odd  book designed outside the firm, most books up to this time  were  conceived  and  produced  by editors  who  had  acquainted  themselves with  the various  structural requirements  of the book but  lacked  a  knowledge of type. As they  were  editors  first, it would  have  been surprising  if  they had  had anything  more  than  a  groping  sense of how to achieve  graphic  effects and  the taste to choose between  good and  bad. They  were vaguely aware of the conven­ tional style of English  book-designing and  frequently  and  amateurishly  used this as their guide;  often, in  the press of work, they left such things as choice of type and display to the printer.  So it is not to be wondered at that  the books produced

53








( left)
Half-title spread/
FRANK NI'.WFELP/ Dynamic Decade/ McClelland  & Stewart
(right )
Title page/ROBERT  REID/ The   private  press  of
Reid  &  Tanabe




Case/FRANK  DAVIES/In  Search  of Canadian  Lib eralism/
Macmillan.


rlllti.!AJAIJ
THE FIRST fliT YEARS

Ill  1111 .,.






Ill



Ill
16t..10
o:uoao    4
.. """'uun •u.u  •



Title page/WILLIAM  TOYE/ Oxford.
 Jacket/ALJ. AN  FLEMING / Macmillan.








LOVE
CJo !iAOIAW t.OVt POI IIJ IIIL&,  TID  If UY IIfG LA YTOif
ou•III(O$     , HAk0LD  TO•III •••uu.•• "' oto     o1  ._.,. .

















Title  page/FRANK  NEWFELD/
McClelland &  Stewart.
 



JEA N-lOU IS B ARRAULT









Text page/PAUL  ARTHUR/ Portraits
of  Greatness/University of  Toron to  Press.







...,....,........A.m_k..	_
.,..._  TWI.LWL  .....T it.
-- dulllltbt.._MM.,.._..._,._.._,.

._.....
 .........





Drawing by  TIIEO  OIMSON /
T he  S unken Cit y/ Oxf ord .
 Case/LESLIE







-wut'lll·-.o..-..,r
	·-· ·- 	
...............
 
...,.r


(left)
·'
 .........lw:oal.•..W.•-
................... er................

HAROLD KURSCHEN SKA / University of
            Toronto  Press.
( right )
                        Drawing & text  page/
FRANK  NEWFELD/
Your Poetry   Book  s!
 		Gage.
 ·-· /
·. 	.·
• .. ..... ..... .... ..    -fl
"'




Case/ HANS KLEEFELo/Oxford




0

ON&
C ltiN Ua
N OO N

J.  T UZ O  WILSON
::=:::::
 
..,.._».•-..,..,.....,.,.•   .,.
...,   ,    .,.........
,.dl:. ..ur.&,.
,._,.h.w..·.a...w,...,.,.,.. ,.. .lh.
.,.,WthM...,Itoc:lbrftMMnbow.Ha-
if illa -w\y .......,ill....,.to      .11ro-CIDIIW
-...--IIIII ,._,_ ...,_ tbcy twp 11 W
_aofd,.N_M..I.*_"."PIlI"-"*'_"...W....ii.....W..n.-....... 10

-w.-..........,...
 .-ad'-.,-. Y0111
-a..-

·AM lab-tha K q«..•added P'lllfitt. wbo wa.t, alw
,.n:
It .ry- -
F'....... ..... tk,"-11 11 .... ... ..............,..
_..,..,.r
'"1'-II*M cr*!Nfp.,_,...._
b..
--

._...,,......O..,.IW .,W.....W ........
 N-.•.,w to


,..,WI.
o-n,_, ..Joobd ..MIIII M....
""""'"'ba....


Title  page/ARNOLD  ROCKMA N/ Longrna ns.
 Drawing by   AR NAUD  MAGGS,
text-spread  by  ARNOLD ROCKMA N/Nunnybag;:r/Gage.

BOOK  DESIGN  IN  CANADA



in  this  way,  usually   the  result  of  several  people's   thinking, were  scrappy and gauche -unprofessional, in other  words. And indifferently produced, for without sufficient   guidance in  matters of  typesetting, choice  of  paper, machining, and binding, printers and  binders gave less than  their best.
Sometimes designers  in  reminiscent mood  like to recall  among themselves  how they  came  to philistine Toronto and  put  book publishers  and  printers on the rails where   design  and   production  were  concerned. But  at  least  the  publishers had the  sense  to  take  them   up -after  a  little  diffidence  and  hesitation -and  give them  a chance to exercise  their  craft  freely,  and  to increase  their  skill  (for  how­ ever  much   these  designers  improved on  current native  work,  their  own  attain­ ments  were  far  below  the level they are  at today). It was the beginning of  a time of expansion in  Canadian  publishing, when  the growing  number of  books being published created  a  need  for  getting   them  produced more  efficiently  and  in  a style  that  would  make  them  distinctive  in  a lively  competitive market. Not  only did  this  coming  together of publisher  and  designer  happen at  the  right  moment; it was fateful, and since then  neither has looked back.
Now  the  few designers  who  practised  in the  middle  fifties have  multiplied and their  own  competition among themselves  (not  overt)   stimulates the  work of all. In  contrast to  the  two  or  three  publishers  who  occasionally  and  experimentally had  a design  job done  outside  the office, today  virtually  every Canadian firm that does original publishing has  most or all of its books designed  by a free-lance  pro­ fessional  or  by  a  qualified   designer  within  the  firm.  At  the  judging  for  the  first typography show  in  1958,  a  large  number of  books  were  so  ill-conceived they were thrown out  after  a few seconds'  riffling. At the judging  for Typography '62, 1 only two or three  books were given this summary treatment; all the others-and the  submissions  were  numerous-demanded  thoughtful examination before  the best  were  chosen.  Finally, discussion  of Canadian  book  design  has  evolved  from didactic preachments on first principles  and  how they were flouted  into  appraisals of superior accomplishment, or  opinions  ventured on  how  a  body  of interesting though uneven   work  can  be  made  even  better. No  one  doubts that  there  is still room  for improvement. But it is a relief now  to deal with  the work  of craftsmen who  draw   on  training and  imagination, not  with  amateurs whose  realm  is the accidental.
Perhaps some fragmentary impression  of the work of the leading  book designers in  English-Canadian  publishing will  give  an  idea  of  what  is being  done  today

1  It  is  hoped   that   this  exhibition, which  has  already  been  shown  in  Montreal, Quebe.c, and
Toronto, will visit Vancouver.

57

BOOK DESIGN IN CANADA



and  provide more background  to the field. (The  fine graphic  designers in French Canada have  not  yet had  much  to do with  books.)  I shall  discuss them  alpha­ betically.
PAUL  ARTHUR asserted himself as a home-grown  typographer of promise while
he was still in university in the forties when he designed the format  of the Indian File poetry series for McClelland & Stewart,  and of course with his famous maga­ zine  Here  & Now. Then  he spent several years working  for  the  Graphis  Press, and  in  Zurich  the fresh clean  waters of Swiss typography  washed  over him and brought  about  a kind of designer's rebirth. He came home with the best methods of the  Swiss at  his command,  a  reliable versatility, great  assurance-especially with  the  large-format,   de  luxe  book -yet  retained  something  of  his own,  an English  orientation, that  keeps his most successful  work from  being completely derivative.  He  is responsible for the fine catalogues  of the  National  Gallery col­ lection   (University  of Toronto   Press),  but  his  masterly  production   of  Karsh's  Portraits  of Greatness  (also University of Toronto) is probably  his best and shows a strong  design that  is truly handsome-entirely fitting to the contents-and a firm  adherence   to  those  production   standards  that   make  for  the  immaculate book, though  perhaps his Dutch  printers should share the credit for this.
FRANK  DAVIES  attended  art  schools in England  and  specialized  in illustration
before starting  to design books. Most of his book work in Canada has been for Macmillan. His Collected  Poems  of E.  ]. Pratt-with its elongated,  unadorned text so appropriate to the  poems, and  the inspired  case with  titles handwritten by Pratt -is  probably one of the soundest Canadian book designs, only slightly weakened  by the  drabness  of its exterior  colours.  Davies'  ability  to suggest  the four-square   plainness of some of our  creative  writers  is shown  also in  his  text­ pages forMorley Callaghan's Short  Stories. He sometimes slips into colourlessness, though  his graphics  can be effectively bold, as on the  jacket and  case of Under­  hill's In  Search  of Canadian Liberalism where the letter Lis a forceful decoration and  hardly  seems to have come from  the same  person who  designed  the patchy jacket for Brown  of ''The Globe".
HAROLD KURSCHENSKA,  a Canadian by birth, is largely self-taught  and has had some experience as a printer. His flair for design and his skill with type give many of  the  books he  does for  the  University  of Toronto Press a strong  typographic look that  is handsomely modern.  Two  of his best are  A  People  and  Their Faith and  The University as Publisher.  His weak title page and  case for the otherwise excellent  In  Search  of  Greatness  by Karsh  is an example  of how his taste some­ times falters.  (If  I harp on taste, it's because it is essential to the serious designer

BOOK  DESIGN  IN  CANADA



and  is the  missing  factor in  much  that  is being  done  today.)  Nevertheless he is becoming an  accomplished craftsman and  will doubtless  achieve  a wide  reputa­ tion.  He  and   his  colleague ANTJE  LINGNER- whose  work  is more  uneven, for though  usually  graceful in  basic  design,  it  is  often insipid in  the  colour  and  character of the  decoration-and the  University  Printing Department keep  to a steadily  improving standard for enlightened craftsmanship in book production, as a university  press should.
The  most  prolific  book  designer  in  Canada, FRANK  NEWFELD,  was  trained in England, and  brings  to his work a background of training and  practice as painter, engraver, illustrator, typographer, student printer, teacher, and  lately as art direc­ tor of McClelland & Stewart. I think  of him not  just as a book designer but as an illustrator-designer. Not  only does he illustrate  or decorate and  do the  jacket  art­ work  for  most  of  his  books  himself,  but  his handling of  type,  white  space,  and  decoration  bespeaks   the  painter's eye for  pattern, colour,  and  texture; he  also has  a  fine  imaginative  inventiveness. This  last  gift  exists  alongside  an  ability  to produce undecorated work  that  is beautifully disciplined and  simple  (see Eccles: Frontenac). But  there  is a  conflict  sometimes  when  his  artistic  facility  and  exu­  berant ideas  overpower the  basic  book,  which  is essentially  a conservative thing. When  the  two  harmonize, however,  and  he keeps his cleverness  in check,  then  a rich, satisfying  job results, as in Mowat's Coppermine journey, Hanson's Dynamic Decade, and   in  the  quietly  appropriate,  meticulous designs  for  the  eighteenth­ century   History   of  Emily   Montague  and   Klein's   religious  novel  The Second  Scroll,  both  in the  New  Canadian Library  paperback series. Newfeld's output for McClelland & Stewart-many successes and,  inevitably, some failures,  all inject­ ing  variety,  colour,  and  liveliness into  the stream  of otherwise fairly  sober  Cana­ dian  books -is  too large  for  me to do even  a few titles  justice here.  But  I must mention  the  series  of  poetry   books  that   designer,  publisher, paper-maker,  and  printer  have  collaborated on  to  make  volumes  of  high  production quality and decorative appeal at  no  extra  cost to the buyer.  Gustafson's River  Among Rocks is  probably  the  best.  Its  unusual feature is  an  abstraction of  water   and   rocks printed on  transparent paper  and  inserted  in  the front to suggest  the  depth and movement of water-a  gimmick, perhaps, but  one  that  does not  interfere with the  text  and  adds  immeasurably to the atmosphere of the  book. The  typography is  faultless  and   the  production commendable. Cohen's The  Spice  Box  of Earth is  in  the  same   class.  Its  vigorous  drawings have  annoyed some  poets  who  feel they  encroach  too  much   on  the  written   word.  Four  type  ornaments too  many give  the  impression  that   they   were  used  excessively,  but   to  me  the  drawings

59

BOOK DESIGN IN CANADA



punctuate the poems and contain some of their own character. Are the drawings to be criticized because they are so strong? And should  poetry never have evoca­ tive art  work? No to both questions I would say. The  latest volume in this series, Daniells'  The  Chequered  Shade,  has a beautiful   jacket and  an  ingenious effect on  the  case made  by covering the cloth  with  striped  crash.  Perhaps  one of the most  difficult  tests Newfeld has ever had  as a designer  was  imposed  by Irving Layton's  anthology  Love  Where  the  Nights  are Long  in its sixty-five dollar edi­ tion. Its page size is  12  by 18  inches. (It's  a coffee-table book, someone has said;  all it needs is legs.)  It has an original  etching  by  Harold  Town  as frontispiece and  other  Town  drawings-some elegantly  sensual, others  wispily insignificant
-scattered  throughout. Assuming there was good reason for such a jumbo book
(the  poems? surely not;  the etching? it belongs on a wall),  the handling  of the outsize  title  and   text  pages  is superb.  A  monumental display  of  Newfeld  the master  typographer   and  of Town  the  matchless  draughtsman, it  has one flaw: book and  drawings  are  not in  visual harmony.  Still it is a splendidly  grandiose volume  to  come  from  a  Canadian publisher,  and  may  very  well fetch  several times its present price before it is forgotten.
ROBERT R.  REID practises in  Vancouver  completely  detached  from  the flurries and  forced intimacy  of designers in Toronto, and  he has remained  his own man in everything,  working with marked success to realize his ideal  of the well-made book that  is an amalgam  of good materials well handled  and strong, conservative design. He  rigorously refuses to let design proclaim  itself in a kind of duet  with the  text-a  failing  that  besets some  of  his eastern  colleagues. And  his work reflects  a  disposition  that  is probably  indispensable  for  the  producer  of  books that  make a claim  to lasting effectiveness -he is a booklover:  underlying every­ thing  he  does is an  attention  to  mechanical  details  that  preclude  the  kind  of breakdowns   (too  transparent paper,  say, or  shoddy  cloth  and  stamping)  that inflict  themselves on  the rest of us, as well as a pervasive  respect  for the author  and  his  work  and  for  the  reader.  The  basic  typographic  design  of Canadian  Literature  shows his skill and  taste. Most of his books that  I have seen were pro­ duced  privately  by himself and  his wife  Felicity in small  numbers,  and  reflect a richness of materials  and  a fineness of  design that  set them  apart  as volumes for the  bibliophile.  (Gold  is one splendid  example.)   But  two of his books done for McClelland   &  Stewart  and  Macmillan  and  printed  in  Vancouver-B.C.:  A Centennial   Anthology   and  Margaret  Ormsby's   History  of  British Columbia­ show him carrying  his painstaking  efforts to provide  the most appropriate, read­ able,  and  pleasing  format  into  the  commercial  field.  I  think  the  history is the

6o

BOOK DESIGN  IN  CANADA



better  of the  two;  this  and  the  striking  curiosa  he  has  printed  privately suggest that  it  is books  on  the  Canadian past  that  he responds  to most  happily; I  wish more  of our  histories could  be designed  by him.  When  you acquaint yourself with Reid's work  you  feel  that   he  should  be  enabled  to  pass  on  his  knowledge and ideals  to students, and  it  is good  to know  that  he has  been  doing  this,  and, un­ wittingly   perhaps, shaping what   Carl   Dair  calls  hopefully   a  British  Columbia school of typography.
ARNOLD  ROCKMAN,  born  in  England, was  mostly self-trained in  Canada. His work  for  Longmans and  Gage  shows intelligence,  imagination, inventiveness, and courage to  try  new  things; all it lacks is discipline.  Few  of his books stand  up as complete design  units,  right  in every  detail.   (Tuzo Wilson's  One  Chinese  Moon does-it  is  excellent-and his  handling of  the   voluminous  Source-book of Canadian  History   is  also  noteworthy. Both  are  Longmans  books.)    He  is  an impulsive designer  who  lacks  the  patience  to blend  his ideas  or to winnow  them until  the  book  at  hand  is a carefully  integrated whole;  it is as though there  were a  split  in  his  design  personality between  the  intellectual who  is passionately  in­ terested   in  the  written  word   regardless  of  how  it  looks,  and   the  designer  who can't resist  drawing on  his  graphic ingenuity to  embroider the  basic  text  with frills. But  he  brings  a fine modern vision to his designs and  has a vigorous talent.
LESLIE   SMART has  a  background as  a  printer,  a  teacher of  printing, and  an embryo   designer   in  England, and   his  book  designs,  most  of  which   have  been done   for   Macmillan,  are   characterized  by  a  minimum of  decoration and   a dependence on  type  forms  for  his effects.  His  books are  uneven:  though always readable  and   tidy,  some  are  weak  in  their  display  matter. When   he  uses the simplest  means  of display  and  layout  his work  can  be strong,  clean,  and  quietly tasteful: see Cursory  Observations (Oxford), the  jacket  of Massey's  Speaking of Canada, and   Ethel  Wilson's Mrs.  Golightly. But  ungainly type  effects  crop  up when  he  departs from  this  simplicity,  or  when  he has  an  abundance of copy  to style,  as on  the  title  pages  of Quebec 1759  and  The   New  City. His  handling of MacLennan's Seven   Rivers   of Canada is pleasing,  with  a  fine  case  and   jacket and  good  styling  inside,  except  that  the  two-colour  title-page design  wants  to be centred  and  the inside margins are too narrow.
Finally   there  is my  own  work.  I  am  self-trained, without the  advantage of a printing or  art  school  background. My  aim  has  been  to  use the  full  resources  of type  to  maximum  effect  in  producing  strong-looking books  that   are   not  only appropriate  but  are   completely  and   permanently  pleasing  to  the  most  critical eye. I have  not  yet done  this. For better  or for worse, restraint is one of my watch-

6I

BOOK DESIGN IN CANADA



words; I sometimes  make mistakes in judgment and still show signs of uncertainty. I suppose  my best-known  design  was for The  St.  Lawrence  whose  extended  pre­ lims  came  in  for  most  comment. I wanted to  establish  the  topography  of  the river  at  the  very  beginning  of  the  book,  and it seemed a  good idea  to  use a sequence of pages as though  they were one wide page; the style of Leo Rampen's drawing of  the  river  was  suggested  by  a  fold-out map  in  an   I 86o  travel  guide from   Niagara to  Quebec. Of  my  recent  book  designs,  The  First  Five Years:   A Selection   from The  Tamarack  Review  is the  one  that  satisfies  me  most  at  this moment.
I must  conclude this summary of designers  by  referring only  briefly  to  other
names  in  the  field.  CARL  DAIR  does  not  design  many  books,  but  his Karsh  and Fisher See Canada  (Allen)   is notable for combining photographs and  text hand­ somely.  ALLAN FLEMING, one of the finest graphic designers  on the continent, did Reaney's A  Suit  of  Nettles  (Macmillan)  in  I958, to  me  a  favourite Canadian book  design.  The   unattractive books  produced for  years  by  the  Ryerson   Press are  now  giving  way  to  more  skilful  and  prepossessing  designs  under   the  super­ vision  of  ARTHUR  STEVEN,  whose  own  work  so  far  seems  at  its  best  in  jackets and   cases.  TAKAO  TANABE  of  Vancouver designed  A  Quality  of  Halves  among other  distinguished books for the  Klanak Press. ISOBEL WALKER  has overseen,  or done  herself,  some  pleasant  things  for  Clarke  Irwin, whose  least  successful  book designs  have  always  tended  to  be weak  but  never  ugly. ARNAUD MAGG's  Annual of  the  Art  Directors Club  of Toronto ( Ig6I-McClelland  & Stewart) has  ori­ ginal  touches  that  are stunning in their simplicity. Illustration for children's books, which  could  do with  a short  article  of  its own,  is a special  skill, and  Maggs  is one of our  few graphic artists  who do original and  memorable work  in this field  (his Nunnybags for  Gage  is  outstanding), along  with  THEO DIM SON (The Sunken  City  for  Oxford); LEO  RAMPEN  (Canada's  Story  in  Song  for  Gage; Swann  & Daphne  for  Oxford) ;  and   FRANK  NEWFELD   (Your Poetry  Book: 5  for  Gage; The  Princess of Tomboso  for Oxford). Two  artists  who have  thus  far  concerned themselves  only with  the exterior  of the book should  be mentioned for their arrest­ ing  text-book  cases:  ROLF  HARDER  (The   Methods  of  Science  for  Clarke Irwin) and  HANS KLEEFELD (This  Land for Oxford).




CANADIAN BOOK DESIGNERS  have done  few things  that  could not  be  improved  upon.  But  whatever their  faults  of over-  or  under-design, the

BOOK DESIGN IN CANADA



maJonty  of  our  books suggest  imaginative  planning  of some sort.  The  volume of publishing in the United  States and  Britain is of course very much bigger, but considering   this,  the  number   of  commonplace,   cheap-looking   (though   high­ priced)   books produced  there  is huge;  the superbly designed ones are few. The Fifty  Best Books catalogue  of the American  Institute  of Graphic  Arts  annually bemoans the very things we used to complain about ourselves:  ignorance of basic design principles  and  poor  production  standards.  (From  the  1961 Jury  Report:  "The  argument that  the  economies of  book publishing  do  not  allow sufficient time for good  design was disproved by the many books [on  which]  someone had expanded  much  effort  to make  bad.") Given the interest in design of our pub­ lishers, the  strivings of our  designers, illustrators,  and  printers,  and  the number of books that  are receiving the best attention  of all, the situation  here is a healthy one. The  possibility that  Canadian design may eventually  rank  with the world's best is not by any means remote.
But  we try  not  to  think  of that.  It is the  book at  hand  that  commands  our attention -the  challenge  of taking  these words, those conditions  and  materials, and adding something of the mind to create a thing that serves its purpose honestly and  leaves nothing  to be desired in the way of visual rightness. With every new book this objective  is live and  fresh-though usually, in the end, it seems mad­ deningly unattainable.



review articles




AN INDIGENOUS WORLD


Wilfred Watson



JAMES  REANEY. The  Killdeer & other Plays. MacMillan. $4.75.


TAKEN ALONG  WITH  his The Red Heart, The Suit of Nettles and the recently  produced play, The  Easter Egg, this   new   book  of   plays  tempts   one   to suppose   that   in  James   Reaney   Canada has found its first  major  poet-if  by this term  we  mean  a  writer  who  can  create a world  that  is entirely  his own, that  is indigenous, and  that  compels  us to want to enter it, because it supplies something lacking  in  the  country or  milieu  produc­ ing   it.   Mr.   Reaney  has   the   power   to create such  a  world,  and   the  world  he does  create,  though  it  invites  compari­ sons  with   Dickens,   Kafka  and   Charles Addams, is genuinely  Canadian and  his own.   Yet   it   is   always   more   important than  any of his  particular excursions  into it,  whether as  lyric, narrative, or  drama­ tic   poet,   and   perhaps  this  is  why   we often  hear  critics  speak  of him  in a con­ descending way, as if his merit  existed despite  our misgivings about  his craft  as dramatist or  poet.  Very  important too  is the  way  in  which   Mr.  Reaney   supplies us with  something Canadian we have lacked; and  it is this supplying of our deficiencies  which  distinguishes him  from poets like Earle Birney, or Irving Layton,
 or even  from  novelists like Morley Callag­ han  or  Hugh MacLennan. These  writers  often  force  us to look most sharply  at the  world  about us,  but  they  do  not  to  any great  extent build  something new  on  un­ mistakably  Canadian soil. Of  this  world that   Reaney   creates,  The   Red   Heart gave  us a  first  glimpse,  and  The  Suit  of Nettles  procured us a  longer  perspective if   an   oblique   one.   The  importance of The   Killdeer   and   other   Plays  is  that here   we  have  full  entrance into  a  land which   we  have   only   seen  by  lightning flashes  or  in  a  Spenserian twilight.
Full  daylight still reveals a Charles Addams-ish world.  But  Reaney's terrain of The   Killdeer  is pelted  with  images  of such  reality  that  there  is danger we may suppose he does no more than give us a deformed vision of rural  Ontario. Ontario is  perhaps  its   metaphor;  still,   as  with all  good  metaphor, the  real  significance lies  in  the   linking   of  dissimilar   entities. We  admit there is melodrama:

MR. MANATEE
One  day   the   only   man    who   could  have hanged me
Died and   ever  since   I have  been   designing
Swings, devising trapdoors and   tying  knots.

REVIEW ARTICLES



HARRY
It took  you  half  an  hour   to do  that last  one
In Toronto. Where was all your  craft there?

MR. MANATEE
The fool!  He  wouldn't give  in  to  the  rope. Like    a   woman   giving  birth -you must
relax.
I'm the  doctor who  delivers your  immortal soul.
Like  a greasy  burlap moth  it flutters out.
... This young  woman -
She'll swing  into  it  like a bird.

Here  in The Killdeer  a midwife-hangman sees his victims  as birds. Mrs. Budge sees herself and Mrs. Gardner (Harry's mother who  has  helped   Mr.  Manatee to the  hanging he gloats  about in prospect) as a  "pair of  old  hens  in  the  barnyard"
-here is the  base of the  triangle but  its apex  points  to  the  world  of  the  killdeer, which  is neither Ontario nor melodrama­ land,  but  some  other place.  In  fact,  it is the  world  of The Red  Heart, of a

dead red  mistress
Whose sweet  rooms  and  dungeons
Now  swarmed and  whirred with  decay.

And  it  is  the   world   of  the   "April  Ec­
logue"  of The Suit  of Nettles:

I speak   I speak  of  the  arable earth, Black  sow goddess huge with  birth; Cry  cry  killdeers in  her  field.

Perhaps none-certainly  not   all  of  its inhabitants are  clearly  seen  in  full  com­ plexity.  Mrs. Gardner  looks  like  an  Ontario  farmer's wife.  Mrs.  Shade,   the abortionist-blackmailer  of   The  Sun   and the  Moon, looks like Grand Guignol, but neither  Mrs.   Gardner   nor   Mrs.   Shade  can  prevent  us  from  the  realization that  where  they  actually exist is a third  place, a new Canadian world,  where  the  poetry of  Eli   Mandel could   pass  for  common  speech -"I   have   seen  by  the   light   of her   burning  texts/how   the   indifferent blood  drips"; and  so could  the  poetry  of
 Roy  Daniells-"Too many  bastards al­ ways on  the  make  ..."  I am  suggesting that  James  Reaney  has annexed territory worth  two Ontarios.
Since  his first  book,  Mr.  Reaney's  en­ deavour has  always  been  to  appear  art­ less -this  seeming  neglect  of  art  which conceals   art   is  an  important  ingredient of  his  widespread appeal.  Thus in   the Killdeer  as  well  as  in  The  Sun   and  the Moon we are  not  aware  at any  time  of a striving  for  theatre effects.  We  may  even feel  that  drama form  has been  neglected
-until we  realize  that   all  the  time  the playwright has  been  bending the  theatre to his purposes.  His  theatre technique we can   see  plainly   in   One-man  Masque. Reaney   invests   cradle,  chair,    carriage, cup  and  saucer,  bed,  rocking  chair   with the comment of poetry-the elaboration of  properties by verse  is  the  core  of  his theatre. But  theatre form  is  bilingual­ the    language  of   the   actor's  voice   is counterpointed  against   the  language  of his  body. Verse  must  speak  as verse  and it   must   specify   the   actor's  gesture;  it must   not  only   interpret  but   incite.   At present   Mr.   Reaney    seems   content  to leave  the second  language of  the  theatre to   his   director.  Certainly  he   has   been very  well served  so far  by Pamela Terry. But   it   seems  not   unlikely   that   in   the future he will concern himself  more  with theatre  form,   since   he  manages  so   ad­ mirably,  when  the  occasion  prompts,  the things    it   can    do-for    example,   the brown  paper  outlines  of  the  bridegroom and  best   man in  The  Killdeer, who, Rebecca, the  bride-to-be,  tells  us

... laid   themselves down   after  their   bath last  night
On   big  sheets  of  brown   paper and chalked out
Each   other's outline.

REVIEW ARTICLES



The Killdeer  and other Plays is an exceedingly readable  book;  in  fact,  one soon   forgets   one   is  reading  plays  and finds  oneself  held  by the  suspense  of the story. Yet this book contains more sheer poetry  than many  Canadian poets have written  in  a  lifetime. This   book  should be a  boon  to Canadian literature courses
 both  because  it  is compellingly readable, and  because  it is a sort of key to Reaney's other  work, especially  the somewhat cryp­ tic Suit  of Nettles. But  what  is especially  to be hoped  is that  it  will make available these  plays to theatre producers, and  that they   will   be  soon   and   frequently  pro­  duced.






POPULAR  AND MISTRUSTED

Albert Tucker



CHESTER  NEW,  The  Life   of  Henry  Brougham  to   r83o.  Oxford  University  Press.
$7-50.


THE  HISTORIAN  must  always be  interested in  biography. It is a  form of study in which he often develops most clearly   his  concern  with   the   particular and  the  unique rather than  the  symbolic and the abstract in human affairs. Through the  individual he  may  also  be able  to focus  the  broader intellectual and social  currents of  a  period.  Some  of  the best   historical  writing    in   Canada  has been  in  biographical form,  though Cana­ dian   historians  have  shown  a  parochial tendency to  be  preoccupied  with  Cana­ dian   figures  and   Canadian  history.  The  late   Chester  New   was   unusual.  More  than   thirty years  ago,  in  1929,  he  pub­  lished   a   biography  of    Lord    Durham which    is   still   the   most   scholarly   and  comprehensive study  of   that   figure  and the  great   part   which  he  played  both  in English  political  reform and  in Canadian legislative   independence.  At   that   time, when   New   was  already   forty-seven,   he

66
 had   become   interested  in   Lord   Broug­ ham   and   had   begun   his  research  for  a second    biographical   study,   entirely  in English  history.  It  was thirty years in the making  but   the   conception  of   biogra­ phical writing  remains the  same  here  as described in  the preface to  his  study  of Durham: "I  have  conceived the  task  of the  biographer  as simply  to set  the  stage and   permit  the   central  figure,   his  col­ leagues,  friends, and  opponents, to speak and  act  for  themselves."
Inevitably,  what    resulted    is  an   his­ torian's  biography, a  work  of   thorough research and painstaking  objectivity. Brougham is placed  so deeply within  the context  of   public   issues   and    humani­ tarian causes  that his private life remains as  anonymous  as  the   personality of  his biographer. So  scrupulous was  Professor New   that   he  was  able   to  publish   only one   volume   before   his  death,  covering Brougham's   career  to   1830   when   the

REVIEW ARTICLES



latter still  had  thirty-eight years  to  live, for  Brougham lived  to the  age  of ninety. It  was,  in  fact,   his  physical   stamina which  helped   to  make  him  unique.  Few figures    of   nineteenth-century   England compare  with   Brougham  in  eloquence, industry, and   courage.  Macaulay  wrote of   him   in I 830:    "He   is,  next   to  the King,  the  most  popular man  in England. There is  no  other   man   whose  entrance into  any  town  .  .  . would   be  so certain to  be  with   huzzaing  and   taking   off  of horses."  Brougham belongs  among  those few  and  remarkable self-made men  who forced   their  way  up  into  the  class-circle of   English    nineteenth-century   politics. Like  Canning,  Disraeli,  and  Joseph Chamberlain,  he   found    it   difficult   to adhere  to  rigid   party   lines.  Once  com­ mitted he remained outspoken and alone,  forcing  the  pace  of reform  and  antagon-
 izing  the  cautious  and   respectful party followers.  Like  the   other  three,   he  was ambitious and  egocentric and  his  public causes  were  hard   to distinguish from  his personal    ambitions.   Politically,   Broug­ ham    was   the    least   successful   of   the group.   He   had   to  depend  for  election  on   aristocratic  owners of   patronage boroughs  and  he  was  too  suspect  among  the   Whig   leaders   to  be   provided  with safe  seats.  Not  untilI 830  did  his  popu­ larity  reap  its  reward   in  his  election  for Yorkshire,    and   even   then  he   was   too mistrusted   to  receive  any  Cabinet office which  would  give  him  a  decisive  voice. He  was induced  to  become  Lord  Chan­ cellor  and  leader  in  the  House of Lords, and    never   became  prime  minister.  It should  be  noted,   however,  that  Canning and  Disraeli achieved  that   office  largely by  accident, Chamberlain  never  did, and





MARCH   TO   SARATOGA
General Burgoyne and the American Campaign, 1777

BY  HARRISON BIRD

General "Gentleman Johnny" Burgoyne  and  his  British  Expeditionary Force  swept  down  from  Canada with  the aim of splitting the  rebellious American colonies  in  two along  the classic invasion route  of the Champlain-Hudson Valley.  How  this army-the best-equipped foreign army  ever  to  appear on  American soil-advanced,  and  how,  through its own miscalculations and  the colonists' resourcefulness, it was brought down  to defeat,  is the  theme  of this book. The  story is told  with  drama and  colour,  the  battles are  vividly  recreated, and  the  major figures  on both  sides  of  the  struggle   come  alive-especially  "Johnny"  Burgoyne.

$7-75

Oxford

REVIEW ARTICLES



if we add  Winston Churchill to the same group,  the   point    might   be   illustrated further that   in  English  politics  the  man of  singular ability  and  individuality has won   the   highest   power   rather  by  con­ tingency   than  by acceptance or  trust.
Professor    New    firmly   believed    that
Brougham's popularity was well-founded in  his dedication to humanitarian  causes and   his  remarkable facility  in  the  writ­ ten and  spoken  word. Born in Edinburgh in   1 778,  attending   its  1:1niversity from
1 792-g6,   his   mind   was   nurtured  in   a
society  which   took  its natural science  so broadly   that   no  social  or  moral  problem seemed  beyond  solution.  It  was a society of   intellectual   confidence  among   very young  men    which   included   besides Brougham, Francis Jeffrey,  George  Birk­ beck,   Henry  Cockburn,  and   Francis Horner.  Brougham was  president  of  the Speculative Society   by  the  time  he  was twenty-one and  had already written three  papers for   the  Royal  Society.  In   1802, with  Jeffrey  and Sidney Smith  he helped  to   found  the   Edinburgh  Review   and  began   the  first  number with  six  articles  by himself. Thereafter, until  1830, hardly  an  issue  was  published  that   did  not  in­ clude   three   or  more   articles   by  Broug­ ham.  Professor  New  traced  them  all  and listed    them    in    an    appendix   to   this volume.  Their writing  was remunerative for   Brougham  and   the  Review  in  turn depended on  his capacity to  meet  dead­ lines. Indeed, the success and  the charac­ ter  of  the  Edinburgh Review  owed  more to  Brougham  than   to  anyone  else.  For the   first   seven   years   his   contributions adhered   to   the   original  policy   of   no political  bias. When he moved to London in  1804,  though  he  became  a  barrister, he    concentrated   on   politics    and    this activity    spilled   over   into   his   writing.

68
 In   18og  his  political   journalism turned the Edinburgh Review into a decidedly Whig   journal. He  used  it  "to  serve  the great   cause   which   he   led,   particularly the  anti-slavery movement, popular  edu­ cation, and  law  reform...."
One   of  the  truly  outstanding features
of  this   book   is  the   detail   and   fairness with   which   these   causes   are   discussed. Each   receives  a  separate essay  based  on Professor    New's   exhaustive  manuscript research. The  effect  of  this  approach is often   tedious  and  sometimes   superfluous but  it  makes  Brougham understood in  a more  profound way than  ever  before.  He consistently opposed   the  slave  trade and was   responsible   for   tightening  the   law against   it  in   1811.  He   defended  Leigh Hunt in  the  latter's resistance  to flogging in   the   army.   The  Orders in   Council against trade with  Europe were  repealed in  181 I because  of Brougham's stand  on Parliament,   and    he    led    the    way   in abolishing  the  income   tax  in  1816.  He took  the  initiative in forming the  Society for   the  Diffusion  of  Useful   Knowledge and    the    Mechanics'  Institutes  in   the twenties,   and   he  was  one  of  the  domi­ nant  figures  behind   the  establishment of the  University of  London. But  he  never joined   the  Radicals or  the  Benthamites and  both groups  attacked him as an equi­  vocator,    a   man    who    would    sacrifice principle  for  immediate political   advan­ tage.  He  was  not  doctrinaire enough to accept    their    programme   of   universal suffrage  and  annual parliaments, neither of  which  had  a  chance of being  carried. His  liberalism had  its roots  "in  the  revolt of  his  youth   against   the  tyranny of  ex­ clusion   in   Scotland,  in   the   hatred   of oligarchy  that   was  then  burned  into  his soul,  and  in  his own  sympathy with  the French Revolution."  It was  a  liberalism

REVIEW ARTICLES



that    stressed   opportunity,  merit,   work, utility,    and    education.  They    were   all middle-class virtues   to  which   Brougham was  not  simply  dedicated  as  to  a  cause but  which  he  could   not  help  expressing if  he  was  to  fulfil   his  own   personality with  integrity. Professor  New  might  have made  more  clear  that  this  is why  Broug­ ham   had   such   confidence and   energy. When   he   successfully   defended   Queen  Caroline in  1820 in  the  divorce  proceed­ ings  brought on  by  George  IV  and   the Tories,  Brougham  was  well  aware   that  he was playing  a role  which must  appeal to   the   middle    classes.   They   saw   the Queen not  as  she  was  but as  a  woman  persecuted  by a  corrupt  monarch and  a closed aristocracy.   Brougham  never fooled   himself   that   the   Queen  was  an injured  woman   but   defending  her   was part   of  his  game   to  court  middle-class
 popularity and  so  carry   the  Whigs  to  a wider  basis of support. His  victory  "gave the  liberal  Whigs  the  upper hand  within the  party,   and   made  it  much   easier  for them  to pass the  Reform Bill in 1832."
Success and  popularity, however,  were not   enough   to   make   men   follow   him. Even  reformers were  repelled  by pathetic flaws  in  his   character.  He   could   not resist shouting his  victories,  turning  con­ fidence   to   arrogance, and   criticism  to indiscreet  attacks on individuals. His  im­ mense   energy   collapsed  from   time   to time  in  depression which  left  him  help­  less,  perhaps  a  natural  reaction  to  the dominant but  lonely  political  position which   he  maintained, with  no  intimate and   close   relationship  to   sustain   him. These  complexities and  shades  of  charac­ ter  are  incidental  to  the  biography  but their   description adds   to  its  distinction.




VICTORIANS REVISITED

TENNYSON
Not  just  the  spokesman of a dull  and  complacent age, but  a Romantic poet,  aware   of  the   terror   of  flux  and  formlessness  behind   the  stolid Victorian fac;ade.
Tennyson  Laureate
BY VALERIE PITT
306 pages,  $7.50


DICKENS
Not  just  the  popular novelist  of caricature, rudimentary social  protest, and  sickly pathos, but  a macabre, subversive, tormented artist.

Dickens  and the Twentieth  Century
EDITED BY  JOHN  GROSS AND  GABRIEL PEARSON
268 pages,  $5.25
UNIVERSITY  OF  l:l!l TORONTO  PRESS



6g

REVIEW ARTICLES



The book will remam a basic work of reference  for  every   student   of  England in  the  early   ninteenth century.   Perhaps no  finer   tribute  is  needed   to  Professor New's  scholarship. As a Canadian,  how­ ever,    his   achievement   is   further   en-
 hanced  by  the   fact   that   this  is  among the  two  or  three  major works in  the  past half century to be published by a native Canadian  historian, working  in  Canada, beyond   the  subject   of  Canadian  history.




GREEN MEN  AND OWLS
 


Inglis F. Bell


PIERRE BERTON, The  Secret World  of Og. McClelland and  Stewart.
FARLEY MOWAT, Owls in the  Family. Little, Brown.

We   may  conclude,  then, that  a child's   story  must, ideally, be  written   from the heart  and  from at least  some  memory  of and  contact  with  childhood ..
MARGERY FISHER


THE  AUTHORS OF THESE two books   are   more    comparable  than    the stories  they  tell. Berton  and  Mowat share many  distinctions, not  the  least of which is a  powerful attraction  for  hostile  criti­ cism  and   this  is  not  at  all  unrelated  to their  appeal to children. However  I will leave  the  reader  to  explore  the  Freudian implications  of   this   curious   talent   and pursue  a  less  exciting common   interest  but  one  more  pertinent to  the  review­ the   happy   and   nostalgic  recollection Berton   and  Mowat have  of  their  child­  hood.
Both    writers    so   thoroughly   enjoyed their  barefoot days that  they have never entirely  escaped them. They still retain youthful  exuberance,  curiosity   and   in­ ventiveness,   delight   in  exaggeration  and slapstick   humour, love  of  tall  tales  and high    adventure,  and    they   write   their stories in  this spirit.  Understandably  they know  children  and   what   they  like,  and can   open   doors   to   adventures  credible  and  entertaining to  their  young  readers.

70
 Their stories  are credible because  the authors wanted to write  them-Mowat from  the  necessity  to give  permanence to the   places,   loyalties   and   experiences  of his  youth, and  Berton  from  the  pleasure of participation with his family in an imaginary  adventure.  They    are   enter­ taining because   the  authors  enjoyed   the telling.
Berton's fantasy, like those of Lewis Carroll,  grew   out   of   a   story  told   to children and  later  written down.  As in Carroll  the  listeners   are   also  characters in  the  story;  they  begin  their  adventures by dropping through a hole and descend­ ing  into   an  underground  world  of  fan­ tasy.  The transition  from  reality   to  the imaginary world  is smoothly  and  credibly managed.  Pamela,  one  of  the  five  chil­ dren    in   Berton's   story,  an   imaginative dreamer who frequently sees other-world fairies, trolls and  elves, is thereby  already in  contact  with   the  fairy   world.   When  Pamela  first  sees  the   little  man,  sawing  a  trap  door  in  the   Playhouse   floor,  she

REVIEW ARTICLES



is reading comic-book stories  so fantastic that   the  little  man  seems  quite  credible. It  is  only   natural  that    Pollywog,   the baby,  who  spends  his  days  planning and carrying out  "jail   breaks" from  his crib, playpen  and  high-chair, should escape through the hole in the Playhouse  floor. Predictably the  other children, who  had been made  responsible for watching him "every  single  minute", quickly  follow  in pursuit. The whole  episode  is completely matter-of-fact.
Berton's  success   in   achieving   credi­
bility undoubtedly is due in part  to the necessity  (and   challenge)  of making  the story   not  only   believable   to  the  reader but    also    in    keeping    with    what    his listeners   who  are  also  characters in  the story,  would  themselves find  credible.  In The Secret  World   of Og, as in the  better family  situation fantasies of this  century, everything that happens depends on character. Each  child  has a distinct, indi­ vidual  and  believable   personality  (based on  those  of  five  of  the  Berton  children) and  reacts  to  each  situation  accordingly. Their   adventures  are   within   the   scope of  their   abilities   and   they   realize   their aim   of  returning  home   with   Polly  not with    the    aid    of    magic    but    through resourcefulness,   courage  and   common­ sense.
Berton,   with   what    appears  to   be  a
natural talent for fantasy, also makes  the green people and their world perfectly credible. The  Secret   World   has  its  own order  and  logic  which  is never  departed from.  The Ogs  are  children playing chil­ dren's games   and   quarrelling,  like  chil­ dren,   over   who   will   be   who.  Nothing they  do  is  unbelievable  once  you  accept  the  situation. They  engage  our  sympathy and   laughter  and   therefore  our   belief too,  because  of  their  fears,  vanity,  ignor-
 ance  and  foolish  heroics  and  because  we see  our   own   reflections   in   their   faces. Their  possessions  are   the   familiar  lost, stolen or cast-off  playthings from  the children's world above-small ordinary stage   properties  which   make   folk  tales and  fantasies  credible. The atmosphere is contemporary North   American   mish­ mash   of   Peter   Pan,   Robinson   Crusoe, TV   cowboy  and   comic   book    mad monster.
A  persevering critic familiar with children's classics could  unearth many literary   precedents to  the  Secret   World of   0g: the   children,  like   Alice,   drop down   a  hole   into   a  world   of  fantasy; the   family    situation   is   similar    to   E. Nesbit's  Five  Children  and  It; the  Ogs like  the  Borrowers  steal   up  from   their hidden  dwellings and  make  off with whatever  is  left   lying  around  and   not nailed  down; the  people  and  the  World of   Og   are   green   like  the   people   and Emerald City in the Land  of Oz, and Dorothy's  dog  also  accompanies her  on her   adventures.   Nevertheless,  the   Ogs and   their   world   are   a   very  individual North  American conception. The adven­ tures,   the   characterizations,  the   atmos­ phere,   and   the   stage   properties  are   as distinctly  regional as  those  in  Anderson's fairy  tales  or  Carrol's  Alice  in  Wonder­ land.
The Secret  World   of Og  and  Owls  in
the  Family  have,  on  the  surface, little  in common.  One  is a  fantasy,   the  other  an animal story.  Berton's is pure  invention, Mowat's personal reminiscences. The characteristics, however,  that  Berton  and Mowat   share,   catalogued  at   the  begin­ ning   of   this   review,   give   their   stories one  rna jor  ingredient in  common-the verbal  wit,  situation  comedy  and  simple humour   of    incongruity   that    children

REVffiW ARTICLES



enjoy.  Berton  and  his audience never  tire of   the   tomfoolery  centred    around  the Og's  language which  has only one  word, or   the   comedy   of   Pollywog   the   baby, vice-president of the Escaper's Club, working on Grand Escape Plans or the incongruity of  the  tiny  Yukon  King  be­ lieving  himself  a  fierce  malemute.
Children will  find  even  more  humor­ ous   (but   not   necessarily   more  interest­ ing)   the  violent,  earthy,  farcical adven­ tures   of   the   youthful   Mowat  and   his unusual pets.  His  story is crammed with situation   comedy,   practical  jokes   and boisterous   nonsense.   The   teacher,  Mr.  Miller,  safe  after   his  death-defying leap from  the tree,  concludes  that   owls  can count  when   the  murderous attack  by a defiant mother owl results in the total destruction of his carefully  constructed "blind"; the  T. Eaton Co.   pet  parade erupts  into   utter   shambles    when    the judges  open  the  box  releasing  the  "SUr­ priS  PET", an  ancient but  venomous­  looking    rattlesnake;   poor   unsuspecting Mutt is stalked  by the clever, unrelenting Wol,   who  delights in  seizing  the  dog's tail  in  his  vice-like  talons;   and   humans and  animals  alike   flee   in   stomach­ curdling nausea  when the uninvited Wol proudly bears  his  own  lunch  to  the  din-
 ing  table  in  the  form  of a fragrant  still­
warm   skunk.
These  hilarious,  outlandish,   exagger­ ated   incidents  presumably  would   strain  the   belief   of  even   a   ten-year-old.  But they   do   not.   Mowat's  story  achieves   a remarkable   credibility   that    leaves   his youthful  reader   chortling  in   good­ humoured   affection  for   the   handsome, sportive   Wol  and   his   perfect  foil,   the melancholy, pensive little Weeps. This realism   is  based  upon   Mowat's own  ex­ perience  as   a   practical  naturalist   who spent  a  good  deal  of time  observing  and enjoying  wild  life.  The  incidents  them­ selves,  highly  coloured though  they  are,  are  based on actual fact; as a boy Mowat lived    on    the    outskirts   of    Saskatoon, owned  wild  pets of many kinds, two owls included among them. The fact  that  the owls   actually   existed   provides  a   firm basis for  his believable yarn-spinning. In­ deed  probably all of  the owl's adventures actually   did    occur   in   part    at    least, although  Mowat  has  exaggerated, tele­ scoped,   and   embroidered  for   dramatic effect.  The  uncluttered  background, however, of  Saskatchewan prairie is au­  thentic,  and  told  in  the  simple   natural language of a youth  of Mowat's age and  cultural  background, the  whole  effect  of Owls  in the  Family  appears accurate and believable. The  turn  that  gives  an  inci­ dent  its   gut-busting  humour   may   be exaggerated  but   does  not  damage one's belief  in  Wol  and   Weeps.  Further, the fact   that this  is  a  child's  story,  told  by a child  once  removed, carries  the  reader through   farcical   exaggerated   slapstick situations with  unquestioning acceptance since  this  is  the  normal routine method of    children    when    they    are    relating humorous  incidents to  one  another.
Mowat writes  with  sensitivity  and  sim-

REVIEW ARTICLES



plicity,  and  with  the  skill  to  create  in  a few  words  the  effects  he  seeks. His  per­ ceptive  mind  and  eye and  his  enthusias­ tic  interest  contribute  to   his  skill  as  a writer. His  area  is limited  because  almost all   of   his   writing   is   autobiographical, but  he  relives  his  experiences so vividly and   exuberantly   the   action    rings   with an  authenticity  the  reader  can't help  but enjoy.   He   has   been   criticized   for  over­ writing   by   reviewers   of   People   of  the Deer   and   The  Desperate    People,   but when    writing   a   humorous   book    for children, overwriting is not  always a disadvantage.
Berton,  a  skilled   journalist,  versatile in his range  of subject matter, ventures successfully  again, in  this instance into children's fantasy. His  story  is dramatic
 and    swift-paced,  maintammg   suspense by the simple but effective cliff-hanging literary  technique employed in  serial comics  and  old  serial  movies.
Both   authors  handle   dialogue  easily
and  naturally. The  children in Og  are effectively  characterized and  Wol  and Weeps   are   truly   unique.  Both   authors are   sometimes   too   exuberant  and   un­ disciplined    in   their    writing,  but   since children  themselves indulge  in   fanciful embroidery of factual incident,  they  will not   be  disturbed  by   occasional   heavy­ handed exaggeration  and  overstretching. Indeed these  faults  are  only  minor criti­  cisms  of  two   books   that    children  will find   credible,   exciting    and    hilariously funny.





THE  BOWRING  STORY
BY  DAVID  KEIR
A  graphic account of  the  expansion of  the  Bowring interests,  from  a watchmaker's shop   in  western England  in   I803 to  their  present international  prominence, told against  the   turbulent  background of  Newfoundland's development during  the  last
I 50 years-the  ups  and   downs  of  the  sealing industry, the  golden age  of  sailing
ships   plying between St.  John's and   Liverpool, and   the  fortunes of  codfishing on
the  Grand Banks.  Illustrated $I3.25.

MAD,  IS  HE?
The  character and   achievement  of  JAMES WOLFE
BY DUNCAN GRINNELL-MILNE
This  thorough  study  of   the   strategy  and   action  of  the   battle  of   the   Plains  of Abraham is  designed  not  only  to  defend  Wolfe   against his  detractors but   also  to give   much  fuller  consideration  than  ever   before  to  the   many  factors  which   in­ fluenced  his   plan  of  attack. It  will   be  equally  valuable  to  students  of   military and   political history and   to  those  particularly interested in  Canadian  history. With maps  and   photographs $7.50.

COLOURFUL CANADA
BY  KENNETH  MCNEILL WELLS
The new  edition of  this  perennial favourite includes a  pictorial map  and  six  pages of  facts   and   figures about Canada. It  has   a  stiff  paper  binding printed  in  full colour. Colourful  Canada was  included in  the  Toronto Telegram's list  of  the  ten best   books  of   I962. 9rl  full-colour  photographs  $2.50.

BRITISH BOOK  SERVICE  (CANADA)  LIMITED
Io68 BROADVIEW AVENUE, TORONTO 6, ONTARIO



73






PRODIGIES OF
GOD AND MAN

GABRIELLE ROY.  The Hidden  Mountain,
McClelland & Stewart. $4.50.

IN  RECENT  CANADIAN FICTION  the  artist­ hero   has  assumed   the  same  importance that   he  had   in  American  fiction  of  the
185o's   when   the   nation   was  finding   its
tongue in  the  work  of  Hawthorne, Melville  and Poe. The  hero of Hugh MacLennan's Two  Solitudes  is a  writer; writers,  singer  and   actors  are  the  storm centres of Robertson Davies'  fiction; and Sinclair Ross, Ernest Buckler and Morde­ cai  Richler have  all  studied  the  anguish  of  failed   Canadian artists.  In  a  climate  where  most  people  huddle  cosily in  fur­  lined   pieties,   the   artist   is   an   outsider. He   must   somehow   face   the   rigours   of his   world   uncloaked,  and -a   prophet and  prodigy-proclaim  its  true  temper­ ature.
In  The   Hidden   Mountain  Gabrielle
Roy   has  at  length   turned  to  the  artist­ hero   (it  was  inevitable that  she  should)  but   her  subject   is  less  the  artist's rela­  tion  to society  than  the nature of artistic  vision.   Miss  Roy   has  already   sung   her songs of experience in The Tin Flute and The   Cashier,  and  given  us  her  versions of  pastoral in   Where   Nests  the  Water Hen   and   Street   of  Riches.   What  she gives   us   now   is  the   first   novel   by   a Canadian   to   consider    the   tension   be­ tween  the  artist's creation and  God's.  In its superb  descriptive passages, its  limpid

74
 
moments of soothsaying, and  its tender, understated encounters between  people, this novel has flashes of great  beauty. Unhappily,  however, it  lacks  the  coher­ ence   and   control-the    inevitability­ which  Miss  Roy's  great  theme  demands.
The action of The   Hidden  Mountain
concerns  the   odyssey  of  Pierre,   a   self­ taught painter of  mysterious origins  who journeys  from  the  bleak  upper  reaches  of the   Mackenzie  River   to  its  delta; then  east across the  frozen hinterland  of Canada to  the  heart of  Ungava where,  in   a   brief,   sub-arctic  summer,  he   dis­ covers  a  majestic mountain  known  only to   the   local   Eskimos.   Lingering  fondly over  this  wonder, he is caught by winter,  and  escapes  only  at  the  price  of killing  a gentle  caribou, a creature which  in some mysterious way typifies a part  of his own nature  ("their shadows in  the  moonlight were  again  strongly  mingled, like that  of a   single   exhausted  being";  they   were like  "one   single  solitary   being,  the  pur­ sued  and  the  pursuer -one") .
Having  survived this  revelation of nature's primitive beauty and terror, Pierre  becomes  the  protege  of a  mission­ ary  who  urges  him  to study  in  Paris.  But the  city,  for  all  its  splendour,  depresses him; he  is overwhelmed by  the  richness  of  the  Old   Masters in  the  Louvre, yet his  northern  vision  dominates; he  recre­  ates   in   his   garret   studio    the    austere atmosphere   of   a   trapper's  cabin-the hard   truth  of  "places primitive and  un­  defiled."   A   young   Russian   painter,  his only  friend,  tries   to  persuade  Pierre   to be  content  with   something  less  than   a complete vision of experience. Ill and shaken,  Pierre  at   last   consents   to  sign his  canvases,  only  to  regret  immediately this   "cowardly  surrender".  He   has   no right  to  sign  his  "full name": "All  this,

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



all these things, were only preliminaries!" Like   the   sled  dogs  of  the   Arctic,   who work  well  only  when   hungry, the  artist knows  a  "perpetual  hunger".  Then,  in an   ultimate   moment   of   vision   Pierre again  sees his mountain, not  as in nature but   humanized,  complete.  Now   at   last he has  seen fully;  now,  like God,  he is a creator, or  so he  believes.
But  this  vision   (the   vision  denied   of
old   to  Job)    does   not   unlock   the  final mystery  of  experience:

At  the  center of  this   blessed   independence of  the   soul,   what  was   at work   if  not   the master of the  world, pushing him  on  toward his own  creation?

The paradox of free  will and  divine omnipotence-of     the    artist's  creation and  God's-remains; the artist's hunger, and his anguished journey, are indeed perpetual. No canvas  is large  enough  to compass  the  power  and  glory  of the  hid­ den  mountain.
In   thought, this  study  of  the  artist­ God's prodigy-takes  us  decisively  be­ yond   the   statement  of   Gabrielle  Roy's earlier work.  In  technique, The  Hidden
 Mountain is equally  a departure. For  her great   theme   Miss   Roy   has   chosen   the mode   of  parable,  but   she   is  not    (as Herman  Hesse   was   in   Siddhartha) a master  of this  mode; and  Harry  Binsse's all-too-literal  translation   further   dimi­ nishes  the  power   of  her  language.  Like her  artist-hero, Miss Roy wants to express "the  very simplest  things"; and  like  him she  discovers  that  "simple truth  [is]  the most  difficult  of  all  to set forth."
The  greatest  of her  formal problems  is this:  she fears  that  her  episodes  of action and  conversation will not speak for them­ selves; instead  of simply  "rendering" the  moment,  she   is   impelled   to   comment upon  its  meaning.  In   addition, she  has not  found   images   which   grow  organic­ ally, as they  do  in  Melville and  Conrad, to produce  a sustained symbolism.  There are finely developed rhythms involving trees, rivers,  and  mountains, but  these rhythms  do  not,  finally,  produce a coher­ ent   pattern;  they   comment   upon    the  central theme,  but  they do not  unite  with it. The  Mackenzie River, for  example, is seen as a life-current which sweeps Pierre  from  his obscure  origin  to  a  delta  village in which he learns  that  he must  renounce such  guides  and   friends  as  the   woman  Nina  and  the  trapper  Sigurdson. Later, in  Paris,  he  realizes  that he  cannot light a  campfire   on   the   cultivated  banks   of the  Seine.  But  the  contrast  between  the river  of nature and  youth, and  the  river of   civilization    and    experience   is   not sharply  realized.  We  end,   instead    (and  the  translator  compounds  the   difficulty by  omitting an  important  sentence from  the  original)  with  the  general question: "Do  not  all  rivers  of  the   world   belong to  all,   exist   to   mingle   all,   and   all   to reunite?" The  thought is  lovely,  but  its relation   to  Pierre's isolated   quest  is  not

75

BOOKS IN REVIEW



clear.  Miss  Roy's  symbols, unlike  the images  of  Ishmael's epic  whale  hunt, do not forge a series of "linked analogies" between  nature and  the  soul. Yet despite this failure in coherence, The  Hidden Mountain  is   a   rewarding  book.   Miss Roy's  artistic search,  like Pierre's,  is sensi­ tive,  urgent and  unremitting.
HUGO MCPHERSON

HOLY TERROR

w. o. MITCHELL.  The Kite.  Macmillan. $3.95.

1
 The  apparatus of   plot   in   this   book appears  to   me   to  creak   rather  rustily, and   the  attempt to  instil  deep  meaning seems both  unfortunate and  unnecessary. All these things, however, are almost incidental to  the  core  of  the  novel.  The Kite   somehow   comes   off,  in  my  view, despite  its familiar cracker-barrel philoso­ phy   and   the   stereotyped   nature  of   its story,  because  of  the  character of Daddy Sherry.  Mitchell   has   not,   thank  good­ ness,  idealized  him or  made  him  quaint. The old  man  can  be  maddeningly diffi­ cult   at   times,  whining petulantly  when he  does  not   get   his  own   way.  He   has spells  of   morbidity which  embarrass the carefully   cheery   inhabitants  of   Shelby, such  as  the time  he  spent  days  in  choos­ ing   his   coffin   and   tombstone.  He   also has   moments  of   wild    exuberance,  as when  he  decides   to  become  an  acrobat and   terrifies   the   townsfolk   by  swinging from   the  loft  of  a  bam. One   aspect  of Daddy Sherry  which  rings especially  true is his  non-existent sense of  history. Events, of course,  are  never  history  when they are being lived. What the old man remembers about   the  Saskatchewan  Re­ bellion   is  not   the   issues  which  were  at stake,  but  the  misery  and bad  food,  the unfairness  of  officers.   He   recalls   Louis Riel  not  as the  fiery-eyed  prophet of the Metis  but    as   a   man   who    suffered wretchedly from  dysentery  in  prison.   In his  more  contemplative  moments, some of   Daddy   Sherry's  comments  seem   to strike   just  the   right   note  and   to  avoid  the  falseness  of  so much   homespun wis­ dom-"Live loose  an'  soople  an'  you'll come  through without a scratch. Live careful  an'   you'll   break   your   goddamn neck."
Daddy Sherry  seems  to me  to be quite the   best   and   most   complete character

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Mitchell has  yet  created. Because  he comes across so well, one cannot help wishing that  the other characters were equally    alive    and    the    "message"  less forced. However, I  am  grateful for  the existence  of this one old man,  who strikes me  as a genuine holy  terror.
MARGARET LAURENCE

ANTIC DISPOSITION •
RONALD HAMBLETON,  There Goes MacGill.
McClelland & Stewart. $4.00.

APPEARING  FIRST AS  POET   in  the  1940's when  he  published Unit  of Five  Ronald Hambleton has since split into a kind of multifarious literary personality: critic, journalist, interviewer, television and radio   performer, documentary-writer, and   novelist.   Something  of   this  multi­ plicity  of roles was hinted at  in  the intel­ lectual   gyrations of  his  early  poetry  and  in  the  comedy   of  his  first  novel,  Every Man  Is  An   Island, and   it  reflects  itself in  his  latest  work,  a  rogue's  novel  called There Goes  MacGill. The  form   permits  an   antic   disposition   which   Hambleton puts  on  with  ease and  skill and  with  not a  little  of the  energy  needed   to burst  the seams  of the  social  masquerade to reveal in  the  face  of  a  fool  the  other   mask  of death-in-life.
In   form,   then,   a   melange  of  satire,
symbolism,    comedy,   and    masque,    the novel  explores   its  subject  in  an  equally varied   tone   ranging from   bawdy  collo­ quialism to metaphysical allusiveness  and in  a  style  ranging from   puns   and   epi­ grams   to  looping  descriptions and  asso­ ciative image  patterns. All  this  is appro­ priate  to   the  rogue's quest,  here   inter­ preted in  a curious way  as a search  for a life-in-death embrace.  Patrick  MacGill's
 voyage   to   Ireland  aboard  a  Canadian ship of fools  (which is also both  a ship of death and  his own  body)   puts  into con­ junction   for  satiric   and   visionary  com­  ment   groups   of  characters  who  are   all too  obviously  segments   of  the  Canadian consciousness.   Not   particularly   memor­ able  in  themselves,  the  matrons, lovers, perverts,   ''squadron-leaders",  ping-pong players,   boozers,  lonely  maidens-in­ waiting,  and   mysterious  beauties   move toward   and   shrink   from   the   embraces MacGill's  activities demand.  For  like  a vulgar   Mr.  Arcularus,  MacGill searches after  his own  corpse  with  a  relentlessness that   shakes   this   loveless  and   perverted society  as  it  becomes  increasingly aware of  his  true   nature. But t MacGill's  apotheosis, a  shatteringly vio­ lent  eruption  in  the  "organized" life  of the  ship.  With   almost   Jacobean frenzy, we   are   given   a  final   orgy   at   a  ship's masquerade   which    becomes    a   dance­ macabre  ending  with   attempted   rape,  castration, suicide,  and  MacGill himself, disguised   as   "Departed   Spirits"  and  crowned    with   empty    whiskey    bottles,  lying  dead  in  the  arms  of  a  Protestant minister.
This   double   pattern  of  embrace and
quest is counterpointed not only by the interplay of  MacGill  and  the  ship's society,  but   by  a  second,   parallel quest, that  of Mr.   Peavey,  M.A., LL.D., D.D., the sick, Scottish-Presbyterian minister. And it is difficult  to avoid  the  implications of the last hideous scenes of the novel.  Who killed  Cock  Robin? I, said  Mr.  Peavey, with  my puritan bone  and  marrow; for  I am  the  knife  and  the  grave.
Of course, one has to grant Hambleton his point  of view,  though to some  readers it  will  seem  pointless   to  go  on  beating the   dead   dog   year   in   and   year   out.

77

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Granted too  that   the  unmasking masked fool  infuses  vitality  into  the  cabin'd, cribbed, confined   life  of  his  world   (not­ ably in a tour  de  force of scenes in which the    hallucinatory   effect  of   extreme drunkenness is powerfully conveyed) , still one   feels   the   pattern   of   the   novel   is blatant  and   much   of   the  imagery   con­ trived.  At  the  level  of  low comedy,  there  are  some  amusing  jokes  (MacGill crash­  ing  a  French-Canadian  M.P.'s party  on the  parlour car  of a  train; the  desperate attempts of  a  sweating  ex-squadron­ leader   to  reveal  his  Lolita-complex to  a drunken   MacGill    watching   a   sinister attempt at  seduction), but  there  are  also pseudo-philosophers like Mr.  Kirk  cynic­ ally  posing  as  a  Buddhist, a  paper   air­ plane  photograph of a faded Christ  which refuses   to  fly  off   the  ship,  a   bloodied crucifix,  and  a numinous moonlight scene which   embarrassingly  transforms  rogue to  saint.  The   traumatic  conclusion, too, will  repel  some, but  it generates the same sort  of morbid energy  which  one remem­ bers in the scenes of another novelist con­ cerned  with   the   same   repressions   and  explosions, expressed   with  the   same  murderous intensity:  the  ending  of Each Man's  Son   or   the   canoe-flight  of  The Watch that  Ends  the  Night.
In   fact,   thinking of  these  scenes, one
wonders  whether   the   rogue's   novel   is not  in  some  peculiar  way  the  strongest line in Canadian fiction.  MacGill  belongs with  Richler's  Duddy  Kravitz,  with Birney's   Turvey,  with   Callaghan's  Kip Caley.   There's a  touch   of  him  in  Mit­ chell's  Saint   Sammy, and  he  appears in the  role  of  poet  more  than  once  in  the work   of   Layton,   Souster,   Purdy,    and  Acorn.   One   is  even   tempted  to  see  his original  in  some  aspects   of  Sam   Slick, "the  ring-tailed   roarer" who  loved   tall
 tales  and  the  endless  originality of  invec­ tive.  Perhaps  the   wise-fool,  rogue-saint, criminal-innocent   is  inherent  in   the nature and  quality of  the  Canadian per­  sonality.   "There  are  indeed   people  who
lack a developed persona", remarks Jung,
"'Canadians who  know  not  Europe's sham   politeness' -blundering  from   one social  solecism  to  the  next,  perfectly harmless and  innocent, soulful  bores or appealing children, or if they are  women, spectral Cassandras dreaded for their tactlessness, eternally misunderstood, never  knowing what   they  are  about,  al­ ways taking forgiveness  for granted, blind to  the   world,   hopeless   dreamers."  Like MacGill  they  come  out  of  the  northern woods  journeying toward some impossible  Irish  heaven where  they were  born.
E. W. MANDEL


A PROBLEM OF LOVE

DIANE GIGUERE. Innocence. McClelland &
Stewart. $3.50.

THIS   IS  ANOTHER  of  those  first  novels by a young  French Canadian, and  it is another good  one.  I can  understand  why it  should   have   been   published  in  Paris before   being  translated:  it  has  the  exis­ tentialist anguish  (whether  empirical or doctrinaire the  reader may not  always  be sure) .  It also  has  a  characteristic of  the Sartre  school,  focussing  on  sexual  inter­ course  not  as  romantic passion  but  as  a sordid   part  of   reality; the   three  central characters  of   this  novel   use  fornication and  adultery either as substitutes for love or  as  a  means  of  moving  toward it.  Yet love eludes all three. It eludes M. Moreuil, the  professor,   perhaps  because

BOOKS IN REVIEW



he is ugly but  more  likely because  he has been convinced by others that  he is not loveable.   Jeanne, the  aging   actress,  has the  theatrical ability   to  convince   herself that   she  finds  it  in  each   of  her  affairs. But   her   illegitimate daughter  Celine   is sure  that  Jeanne has  never  loved  any  of the  men  who  deserted her.
Celine  is the  teen-aged heroine  of the
novel's  teen-aged author. Like the heroine of   Mad   Shadows,  she  has   a   demonic streak.   But   Innocence  takes   place  in  a world   much   more   like  the  one  we  live in  than   the  world   of  Mad  Shadows.  It accepts the  Sartrean and   Freudian  pre­ mises;  in  fact   it  simply   takes  them  for granted  and   moves   beyond   doctrine  to investigate  the   problem   of   the  need   to love and  be loved.
The novel  begins  melodramatically enough, with   Geline   contemplating  sui­ cide,  but  as it  gets  under way, that  urge becomes  more  explicable and  convincing. And   it   has   the   virtue  of    putting  all Geline's   motives   for   action   beyond   the simpler ideals  and   illusions  of  ado­ lescence.  She   looks   for   no   rescuing knight; she  knows  only  her  mother, who does  not  love  her  but  through whom  she must  find  herself.  So she focusses  on  her mother,  largely  out  of aversion  and  hate,  follows  her  to  an  assignation, and  after­  wards impulsively joins mother and lover, M.  Moreuil, in  a  bar.  Young   daughter and   old   ugly   lover   are   attracted  and enter   into   an   affair.  But   to   state   this baldly  as  a fact   gives  no  notion   of  the misery  of  the  relation. For  M.  Moreuil, lust   has   become   a   necessary   substitute for   the   love  he  is  hopeless   of  finding; yet  Geline   never   considers enjoying   the sexual act. Her motives for becoming his mistress are connected with the central concern of the  novel,  her  attempt to find
 a  reason  for  living.
At  first  she   thinks   that   perhaps  she hopes   to   destroy   M.   Moreuil,  to   pull another down  "into the  abyss"  with  her. In  doing  so, she  would  be accepting her most   obvious   identity,  choosing   "to   be the  monster  she glimpsed  lurking within her-the  rejected child,  an  inexplicable sport   of   nature."  But   another  side  of her   wants   to   live,   to   find   a   positive identity. The direction this  will  take  her is back  to childhood and  a simpler  love. She   knows  her   mother  cannot  give  it, but  if  she can  find  a  father ... "Could it  be  that   this  man-for  all   his  ugli­ ness-had  actually aroused  her  in some way?  Might   she  not  have   made   him  a substitute for  the  father she  never  had? She  had  liked  the  way he held  her  hand in  his, ever  since  that  first  contact after their expedition through the wood." Therefore  she  keeps  the  relation  going, even   though  M.   Moreuil  is  not   strong enough  to   be   satisfactory  either  as   a lover  or a father.
But  Celine  gains  strength, and  as  she does the  others  weaken.  Jeanne's illusion of youth is destroyed  when she fails in auditioning for  the  role  of  Ophelia. She becomes  tormented by the shadow which she  had   refused   to  acknowledge in  her nature and  which  now  drives  her  to madness.  M.  Moreuil is urged  by Celine to act  out one of the Freudian corollaries of  their   relation.  I  shall   have   to  leave each  reader   to  come  to  terms  individu­ ally with  the  end  of the  novel.  But  I can say that  Miss Giguere deals  with  a prob­ lem   of   importance   for   this   culturally displaced   ag-
bedevil  us and  the  patterns we trace  out in  the  attempt to find  ourselves.
ELLIOTT GOSE



79

BOOKS IN REVIEW



MAGNETIC FIELD
 we  encounter the  entire  race of men  just  by being


ALFRED PURDY. Poems   for all the  Annettes.
Contact Press.  $2.00.
 
Ourselves amorous ourselves surly
 alive  here


AFTER   READING ALFRED  PURDY'S   Poems for all the  Annettes, I  have  come  to the conclusion  that    he   is  one   of   the   few important voices in  Canadian poetry  to­ day.  It has  taken  me some time  to arrive  at  this verdict  because  the method in this book is occasionally  open  to criticism  and  because   the   tone   of   much   of   Purdy's  work  is, at  first  reading, offensive.  And deliberately so.  In  his Ryerson  chapbook The  Crafte  so  Longe   to  Lerne   (I 959),  he  took  up  his  position   in  a  surprising villanelle:   "Embrace, my   verse,  the  language  of   the   age,/Coeval  sewers  of speech  that  make  a  poem/Live argot  for the  vermifuge of rage."  The  language of the  age,  which  involves  a  wide-ranging and  often  a  too  arcane vocabulary, and  a   richness   of  allusion   after   the  Layton manner are  two of the elements compris­ ing  the  vermifuge for  his rage.  But  these constituents  do   not   in   themselves   ac­ count  for  the  largeness of  his work.  This  comes  from  a  quality  of  mind.  Purdy  is at   times   almost  aggressively   conceptual ("Mind   Process   re  a  Fawcet",  "Uncle Fred   on  Cote  des   Neiges"),  but   he  is also  importantly  thoughtful. Out of  the trivial, alienating environment in  which so many  of his poems grow  comes a kind of  stateliness, a  kind  of  "migawd  gran­ deur" born  from  the  surrounding  "verbs  that  itch  like acid,  nouns  that  ache":

... the  form  is HERE
has to be must   be
As if we were  all  immortal
in  some  way  I've not  fathomed as if all  we are
co-exists in so many forms

So
 ourselves smiling
and immortal as hell  . . .

The poem  from   which  these  lines  are taken,  "Archaeology of Snow", appeared to  me  on  first  reading an  incredibly clumsy,  even  redundant, work.  Closer study  produced my  present  opinion that it  is  the  central poem  in  the  collection. The   confusion arose   from   the   extra­ ordinary fragmentation of  the  piece,  but fragmentation, division,  time  are  its sub­ jects.   At   one   point   the   poem   actually threatens to  disintegrate,  just  as  the  im­ print  of   Anna's   buttocks   in   the   snow (she  dead,  or  gone)  is in  the  process  of disappearing.  But  then  the  poem  gathers together again and  moves with  emotional firmness   to  its  conclusion. The  poet,  in a  passion  of  insistence, seeks there  in  the snow evidence of the  real/ideal complex, "the form  is HERE/has to be", for  Anna  is moving  "in/the sub/-divisions of time." My  guess  is that   Purdy in, "Archaeology of  Snow" is  working, in  ironic   fashion, from  central concepts and lines of Gerard Manley Hopkins, in particular "God's Grandeur" and "That Nature is a Heraclitean Fire", where these lines occur: "0  pity  and   indignation!  Man­ shape,  that  shone/Sheer  off,  disseveral,  a star,  death blots  black  out;  nor  mark/Is any  of  him  at   all  so  stark/But vastness blurs  and  time  beats level. ..."
Though  Purdy's  subject   matter  may be as mundane as buttocks or debt  ("Col­ lecting  the  Square Root  of  Minus One") or  as  obvious   as  the  artificial insemina­ tion  of cattle ("TV  Programme on  Sun­ day"), he  never  leaves  his subject as he found  it   but   sets  it   free   to  pursue   its

BOOKS IN REVIEW



larger   intentions. Purdy's weakness  now has   always   been   his  weakness: clutter. Many  of  these  poems  need  trimming. In this  book,  unlike  The Crafte so Longe  to Lerne, the  poems are open; he is working in  the  "field", and   the  field  invites  the casual   thought, the  extra   adjective, the self-indulgent deception. The field ought to  be  magnetic, but  it  ought  not  to  be too attractive.
PHYLLIS WEBB




"MUSIC WAS MADE, ARISES  NOW"

PHYLLIS   WEBB.   The Sea   is   Also   a  Garden.
Ryerson. $3.80.

I  SUPPOSE THERE  IS,  for  each   of  us,  a limit  to what  the imagination can hold without breaking. And  I suppose the importance of a work of art  comes  partly from   its  allowing  us,  held   by  another's craft,  to reach  further into  human experi­ ence   than   we  ourselves   could   reach.   If I   speak,   as  it  occurs   to  me   to  do,  of Phyllis   Webb's  new   book,   The   Sea   is Also  a  Garden, in  terms   of   balance   or range   or  control,  I  speak   of   secondary  things.    The  primary   thing   for   me   as reader   is  the  experience I  can   risk  be­ cause  there  is  in  the  single  poem  a craft  strong  enough to  reveal  and  control, be­ cause   there   is  in   the   book  a  reflecting  and   reverberating  order    and    counter­ pmse.
In this  book  one  poem   may  seem  to
comment  on  another, as  "Sitting"  may on  "Beachcomber" and  even  on  "Plank­ ton  nor  Perch  ...". More  obviously,  the
 and "Making") or the grouped (like "Occasions of Desire" and  "A  Pardon to My  Bones",  or  "To Friends Who  Have Also  Considered Suicide" and "The Effigy")    work   together  like   strokes   of pure  colour,  the absoluteness and  intensi­ ty of each poem allowed  because the other  is absolutely  and  immediately  there  too.
It is not  at  all that  these  views modify each  other.   The   wry,  severe  and   tender poem,    "Bomb    Shelter",  is   concerned with fear of destruction of ourselves, our bodies, our  race,  our  meaning.

Yes, there  will be splinters. Yes, there  will  be cancers to split  this  partial temple.

But,  like  Saint  Sebastian,
in love with  our  destruction, at  least  await  deliverance. from  a  familiar  essence.

And  the  poem  ends  with  the  require­ ment  that  we do  "more than  wait", that  though  "gill  and  fin"  be  underdeveloped

we  must   swim  dark in  phosphorous  seas with  whales and   rayfish   and  amoeba with  the  spinning aqueous plethora
taste  the  faults salting down the  tide
and   in  our   nakedness and  in our  peace  abide.

This   poem  stands   beside  the  comedy and   wonder   of   "The  Time  of  Man", which  moves  from   Loren   Eisley's  state­ ment  that  "The little  toe  is  attractive to the student of rudimentary and  vanishing organs" to  this  reflection:

When  the  adored  ones
pass  through the   door   ("the  future
of no invention can  be guaranteed")
who  does  not  follow  them,
half  in  love  with  his tears, tickled  by the  lower  brain,
"the fossil  remnant,"

clearly  matched poems   (like  "Breaking"
 scratching at   the   large
 claws


8I

BOOKS IN REVIEW



symbolic   order, animal sad,   watching the  members
fade ...

The  animal sadness  at  the  fading of the   members  here,   the   requirement in "Bomb  Shelter" that   "with  undeveloped gill  and  fin/we must  swim dark  in  phos­ phorous seas"  do  not  modify  each  other. They  coexist.  And each  somehow touches  and   is  touched  by  the   title   poem.   In "Mad  Gardener  to   the   Sea"  man "dreameth ever  back  to  water". As  the line  is set, it gives a sense  both  of retreat and   of   profound   exploration.  But   the oceans  man  dreams  back to in this  poem are   "oceans  of  an   unloving   dark" and in  them  grows a coral  orchard that  cares nothing  for  the  dream or  the  man.
The  final    line    of   this   first   poem
("l'homme inconnu et solitaire") rings through the  book.  This  is the  man  who loves  and   lives  in   a  world  of  creation and  destruction, history  and  politics,  old buildings and  young mountains. His range    is given not only in such natural images as  sea  and  dust,  plants  and vanishing  or   undeveloped   organs    but also in  a fragile,  hard, civilized  image  of glass,   a   "poise   of   crystal   space",    an "image  for   the  mind/that if  outmoded has  its  public  beauty."
In  "The Glass  Castle" the  mind  is  to
live  in   and   see  through.  The   vision  is lonely.   The calls  one  hears   are  painful and   can   be  answered  only  by  acknow­ ledgement	("I  am    here.    I    do    not know ...")  and  by small instinctive tidy­ ings.  The temptation is  to  break  out,  or at  least  to  put  out   the  light,  to  darken the   mind,  "for   the  reward   of  darkness  in   a   glass   castle/is   starry   and   full   of glory." But  the  attempt is, if possible,  to stay  sane,  balanced -and still  seeing.
In many  of  these  poems,  l'homme in-
 connu   et  solitaire  has  the  freedom that attends  our   being   unknown,  the   range that   is  given   us  by  our   solitude. There is energy  in  the  humour of some  poems, the  assertion or  tenderness or  the  singing let-out  rhythms of others.  In the final, ringing  "Poetics Against  the Angel of Death", tension  has  turned to gaiety  and balance to  choice.

because I want to  die writing Haiku
or,  better,
long   lines,   clean  and   syllabic  as  knotted
bamboo. 	Yes!

H. W. SONTHOFF


CANADIAN COMPETENCE

The First  Five  Years:    A  Selection  from The Tamarack  Review. Ed.  Robert  Weaver. Oxford. $s.so.

IT  IS  a  sobering,  even  shattering  experi­ ence  for  someone  like myself, who prides himself  upon  a  broad  knowledge of cur­  rent   literature  (and   who  has  spent   the last  decade  shuttlecocking between  Lon­  don,  San  Francisco and   New  York)   to pick   up   an  anthology  and   thoroughly enjoy  a  great   deal  of its contents-only to   realize   that    virtually  every   author whose name appears in it is an unfamiliar one.   So  much   for   omniscience! But   at least I now have something concrete on which  to base my sympathy for the gall Canadian.s must  surely  feel when so much distinctive work by so many competent writers   remains so  persistently unknown both    south    of   the    border    and    across the  seas.
My  impulse, on  reading this collection from    The  Tamarack  Review,  was   to

BOOKS IN REVIEW



compare it  with   those  anthologies  most fresh  in my mind,  the selections from Partisan  Review, The Chicago Quarterly and  even Mademoiselle. But I soon found myself going back several years to the publishing  of  The  Golden Horizon, the anthology culled  from  the  pages  of Cyril Connolly's British   magazine of  the  war years  and   immediately after.   For  it  was in  that   Horizon  anthology one  found   a similar   comprehensiveness  and   the   re­ freshing absence  of a strict  editorial focus that   would   appear  to  characterize  The Tamarack Review.
Nor  does  the  comparison  cease  to  be apt  when one has mentioned a similar diversity  of  content in  the  two  antholo­ gies.  Some  of  the  finest  writing  in  The  First   Five   Years   appears  in   the   travel  pieces,  which   are   alive   yet  civilized   at one    and    the    same    time.    This,    too,
 characterized   Tamarack's   British    pre­
decessor.
At  least  two of the  contributors  repre­ sented  here,  Morley   Callaghan   and Mordecai Richler,   state   their   personal  affinity and identification with the Ameri­  can   scene,   which    is  rather  what   one would expect.  Yet such quietly  humorous and  gracious evocations as those of Anne Wilkinson   in  her  "Four Comers of  My World" belong  not at all to the current American disposition, but  seem  to me  to be  very  much   a  Canadian rooting   of  a branch torn  out  of  Edwardian England.
I  might   have  allowed   that   this  ethos effected   by   Anne   Wilkinson    grew   ex­ clusively  from   her   own   personal   back­ ground, had   I  not  also  come  across  the descriptions of  Leningrad  entitled "Ville  Superbe,  Que   Fais-Tu   La?"  by  Diana Goldsborough, the   "English  Notes"   by




THE RISE OF THE
BOFFINS BYRONALDW.CLARK

Many  astonishing stories are  told  for  the  first  time in  this  fascinating account  of  how  science  trans­ formed war  between   I935 and   I945·
Ronald  Clark's  book   forms   a  stimulating   back­ ground to  current defence  controversies as  it  pro­ vides  an  authoritative picture of a critical  phase  in the  application of science  to  war.

Illustrated and  Indexed:

J. M. DENT & SONS  (CANADA)  LIMITED


I 00 SCARSDALE  ROAD TORONTO, ONTARIO
 
1132 ROBSON STREET VANCOUVER, B.C.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Millar  MacLure (which begins in the somewhat Duchessy  fashion: "Yesterday, in the Piccadilly tube station") and Christopher  Wanklyn's "Going  Tanger­ ine": a  lively  yet  urbane  description of Tangiers.
As  a  matter  of  fact,   these  evocations
of  place,  along  with  George  Woodcock's "A   Road   in  The  Andes",   represent   to my   mind   some   of   the   most   satisfying matter  in  this  anthology.  Satisfying  be­ cause   there   is  a  distinction  of   style,  a completeness  of  content   (which   offsets that  inevitable bittiness  which  is the bane of   all   anthologies)   and  in   several   of them,   a  specifically   Canadian  yardstick of  evaluation which  struck  me  as either  quaint or exotic-I cannot decide  which.
One  is made  keenly aware  in travelling these  pages  of  the  distinctly  Jewish  con­ tribution to  contemporary  Canadian let­ ters.  The  Jewishness of   both   Richler's story  and   that   of  Jack  Ludwig   entitled  "A   Woman  of   Her   Age"   reaches   out beyond   the  ostensibly  Canadian context  and  makes  common  cause  (in  flavour  if not  entirely  in  competence)  with  Jewish writing   in   the  United  States   and   to  a lesser   but    growing    extent    in   today's  England.  Basic  emotions   such  as  anger  and  laughter imbue  the  poetry  of Phyllis Gotlieb, Eli  Mandel, and  Irving Layton, just as they do the prose of Richler  and Ludwig-qualities largely conspicuous by   their    absence    in   the   contributions from   Canada's  goyim.
And  now  for  my  gripes.  The  decision not  to date  the  various  contributions not only  blemishes   an   otherwise   finely   pro­ duced   volume   but   negates  a  good  deal of  the   selections.   The   literary  world  is never   static   and   both   Robert  Weaver's interview  with   Callaghan  and   Nathan Cohen's  with   Richler suffer  in  this  an-
 thology  by not  being  pinpointed in  time. In   both   cases   they   refer   to   situations which  are  redundant.
Much of the  material in this anthology suggests   that   small   perfection  we  have rather come  to  take  for  granted in  mid­ century short   stories  and   poems,  especi­ ally   in   North  America   where   sheer professionalism  seems  stronger  than    in England.  But   by   the   time   I   put    the volume   down   I  had  grown  a  little  rest­ less, a  little  disquieted. To  put  it  bluntly
-I enjoyed   the   gravy   but   where   was
the   meat? I  missed,   for   example  the sense of moral  upheaval which character­ izes some  of  the  best  in  the  sister  litera­ tures   of   the   English-speaking  world.   I was surprised  to find  nothing of the great  Canadian   dullness    (what  a  Gon,charov could   have  done   for  Canada!). And   I missed   that    puritan  obsession   which   I detect  in   the   Canadian  voice  and   per­  ceive in  Canadian custom.  Where, if not in  The Tamarack Review, is to be found the  literary echo  of  that   moral   anguish which   sits   so  heavily   upon    this   semi­ Presbyterian realm?
My   pulse  quickened  at   the  reference to   suffering  in   W.   E.   Collin's  article, "Andre  Langevin And  The  Problem of Suffering" -but that   turned out   to  be as   dull   and    sterile   as  the   other   neo­ Teutonic   literary   appraisal   by   Milton  Wilson,  and   should   have  sat  with  it  be­ tween   the  covers  of  almost  any  learned journal  from  the   commonwealth  of American  campuses.
All  in  all,  though, I'll  admit this anthology stirred a  jaded  appetite. Cana­ dian  competence is caught in  these pages for  the   world   (if  it  is  mindful)  to  see. In   magazine  form   Tamarack   Review might  be some  kind of  interior Canadian dialogue, but  in  this  permanent form  of

BOOKS IN REVIEW



anthology it  deserves  to  be  read  where­ ever    creativity  m   English   is   taken seriously.
DAVID WATMOUGH



GLASSY UNREALITY

D.   K.  FINDLAY. Third   Act.  Collins.  $3.75.
LEO  VAUGHAN.  The   jokeman. Ryerson.  $3-95·

Two RECENT  CANADIAN NOVELS,  Third Act, by  D.  K. Findlay, and   The  Joke­ man,  by Leo  Vaughan, though  disparate in   manner,  possess  a   remarkable  simi­ larity  of  import-they  are  almost  com­  pletely   desolate,  for   almost  without exception   the   characters  they   are   in­ volved  with  do  not  rise from  the  page to even    cardboard   dimension,    let    alone body and  soul.
Charlot and  Will  Blaikie  of Third  Act
are saga characters, whose lives roughly parallel  the Canadian epoch  from  the Golden  Age  to  the   present.  Charlot  is Old  Ottawa, Will is Goodwood, Ontario; he   becomes   a  lawyer   and   they   marry. After  Ottawa, the  Blaikie.s are  briefly happy  in the  less sophisticated  parochial­ ism   of   Goodwood,  but   then   they   are forced   to  waste  their  capital buying  out of  a  scandal   not  of   their   own  making.  They   go  north,  to  some  small   mineral holdings   of  Will's  in  Temiskaming and  after   some   years   of   hardship  strike   it rich,    eventually    very    rich.    Financial, social,  and  political success notwithstand­ ing, Charlot and  Will drift  apart, despite three   brilliant   children.  But,    after    a couple  of  flings  and   a  forest   fire,  they are   reunited:  "The  play   was  not  over yet,  there  was  still  an  act  to  come  . . .", and  Charlot "looked forward with  relish, she looked  forward with  gaiety."
 The   possible  source  of  the  relish  and gaiety are elusive, for as sentient beings Charlot and   Will  do  not  exist.  We  are told   many   things   about    their    thinking and   feelings;   faced   by  the   bleakness   of their  hovel  in  Temiskaming, Charlot excuses  herself  and   weeps  in  brave  pri­ vacy;   nearly   ruined  just   as  his  biggest gamble  was about  to come through, Will comments  wryly,  "The  mining  business is a g,ood place  to practise stoicism." But, although  they  are  mannerly, attractive, forbearing,  and  all  the  good   things   we expect  from  hero  and   heroine, they  are not  real; they  have  no depth or  juices.
What    relish   and   gaiety    (or   passion and  imagination, for  that  matter)  obtain in  Third  Act   are   fleeting   moments  of place,   not   person;  cloying   resort   sum­ mers, bleak Temiskaming,   suburban failure  in Winnipeg-these have  a timid  life   not   entirely   swept   away   by   Mr.  Findlay's concern  with  keeping his story moving.  But  finally,  Third  Act  is only  a framework of a  novel;  it occupies space, but  no  time.
Leo   Vaughan's The  Jokeman is  for the  most  part   as  g,lassily unreal a  novel, but  it does suggest some landscapes whose figures   attain  to  a  world   of  continuity and  passion. Its  protagonist,  Archie Bleeker, is a lambent young  American working  precariously as an instructor of English  in  an  unsavoury  London  school of language. He  does this  because  he can just manage  to get  along  without getting ahead.  Archie  hates   the  idea   of  getting ahead,  but   if  he  doesn't  get   along   he will  have  to  go  home,   and   in  America "just  by breathing almost,  you did  pretty well";  he would  probably have  to take  a job in his father's newspaper empire or "some  other  silly empire". To  Archie, London is Regent's Park,  the  Atlantic  is

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Walden Pond,  and  he is Thoreau; from college   he  retains "a lingering   affection for   the  old  hermit". It is  impossible  to take   Archie    seriously,   but   this   joshing prattle about   him  fills the  book.  He  has no  face-more,  he  has  no  head-but he  has  what  the  Blaikies did  not  have­ a few  juices-and these save The Joke­ man  from  being  utter  nonsense.
In  London, Archie  tutors  a group  of wealthy  Somalis  who  have  come  to London to  attend trade  school.  The Somalis are at once blandly feudal and haplessly   innocent.  Archie  cannot  com­ prehend them  but  is involuntarily sympa­  thetic to  all  their  anomalies; he  loses his job   when   their   final   essays   return  the appreciation, extolling his diffuse virtues: "Our techer  splended fellow."
Archie  accepts  a  job from  the Depart­ ment  of Residual Dependencies as a lec­ turer  at   the    University  of    Kojast,  a Persian  principality  Britain   is  eager   to dispose  of,  but  no  one  wants. Kojast   is so dreamily unreal a  landscape that  even Archie    seems   a   landmark  in   it;  it   is almost  as if Mr. Vaughan has researched every    moviecomedy   cliche    about    the Near East,  down  to the lovably larcenous valet-cook  who   steals   his  master    blind to the extent  that  at story's end  he is well on    the    way    to    being    his   economic superior. Here  are  the devious Oriental bureaucrats who will view a crow as a nightingale  or   a  vulture,  according  to the exigencies of the hour, their coltish offspring,  coated    with   Western   mala­ propisms,   the    sardonic  but    dedicated colonial doctor, the amusing grotesqueries of  the  degenerate  European  settlement.
Though  most  of  The   Jokeman  takes place  in Kojast and a sultry aura of moondream blurs  the  scenes,  unaccount­ ably    some   of   the    papier-mache that

86
 Archie    touches    comes   to   life.   Judith Larkin, an  English  girl  whose  reputation is  built   on  the  silence  of  men   too  em­ barrassed  to   refute  it,   an   interlude  in jail  during which   a  sense  of  his  Anglo­ Saxon  superiority catches  Archie  by sur­ prise  and   shames  him-these,  like  the Somalis,  have  some  depth and  echo,  but relate  structurally  to  nothing else in  this disoriented  book.
BARRIE HALE


REPRINTS

THE    CONSIDERABLE    NUMBER of	new books  appearing from   Canadian presses during recent  months makes it impossible to  give  lengthy   attention  to  all  the  im­ portant  reprints.  We   would   like,  how­ ever,  to  draw   attention to  the  fact  that  five   more  novels  have   appeared  in McClelland &  Stewart's  New  Canadian Library:  Swamp  Angel  by  Ethel   Wilson ($1.25),  They  Shall   Inherit  the   Earth by   Morley    Callaghan	($1.25),    Each Man's Son by Hugh MacLennan ($1.25), White  Narcissus   by   Raymond   Knister ($1.25)  and   that   early  Canadian  semi­ classic,   Roughing   It    in   the   Bush    by Susanna  Moodie  ($1.25).   Also   in   the New  Canadian  Library's  recent   titles  is Masks  of Poetry  ($1.50), Canadian criti­  cism   of   Canadian   verse   collected  and  presented   with    an   introduction  by
A. J. M. Smith; it is a worthy  companion
to   his   earlier    collection   in   the    same series,  Masks  of Fiction.
Other  reprints include editions in  Pan Books  of  three   of  Mazo   de  la  Roche's hardy   perennials-Young   Renny, The Whiteoak  Brothers and Morning at Jalna,  all distributed by British  Book Service  and  published at  85 cents  each.


CfiNfiDifiN	LITERfiTURE - 1962
















Jl  CHECKLIST EDITED BY INGLIS F. BELL


ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE
compiled by Inglis F. Bell





COLLECTIONS
BARBEAU,  MAR!US.  Folk-songs of Old  Quebec.
Ottawa, Queen's Printer, 1962.  72  p.
-. Jongleur  Songs  of Old  Quebec.  Toronto, Ryerson,  1962.   223   p.
-. Tsimsyan  Myths.  Anthropological   Series
No.  51.  Ottawa, Department of Northern Affairs  and   National  Resources, 1961.  97  p. (National   Museum   of   Canada,   Bulletin No.    174).
CREIGHTON, HELEN.   Maritime    Folk   Songs.
Toronto,  Ryerson, 1962.  228  p.
Five  New   Brunswick   Poets:   Elizabeth   Brew­ ster,  Fred   Cogswell,   Robert   Gibbs,  Alden Nowlan, Kay  Smith. Fredericton, N.B., The Fiddlehead,  1962.   64   p.
LAYTON,  IRVING, ed.   Love  Where  the  Nights
Are  Long.  Toronto, McClelland &  Stewart,
1962.   78  p.
-, ed.   Poems   for  27  Cents.   4877   Westhill
Ave.,   Montreal, 1961.   32  p.
PACEY, DESMOND, ed.   A  Book   of  Canadian
Stories.  Revised edition.  Toronto,  Ryerson,
1962.   340   p.
Thirteen  Canadians. Preface  by  John  Robert
Colombo.  Poet.  [Vol. 2,  No.  2;  September
1961;  Canadian  Number]  4   Motilal  St., Madras-17, South  India.  29  p.
TOYE, WILLIAM,  ed.   A  Book  of Canada. Don
Mills,  Ont., Collins, 1962.  416  p.
WEAVER, ROBERT  L., ed. The  First Five Years: A  Selection   from "The Tamarack   Review", Toronto,   Oxford   University  Press,    1962.
376  p.


FICTION
ALLEN, RALPH.  Ask  the   Name   of  the   Lion.
Toronto,  Doubleday,  1962.   189  p.

88
 BESSETTE,  GERARD. Not    for   Every   Eye;    a Novel. Translated  by  Glen Shortlifle. Toronto,  Macmillan,  1962.   98   p.   (Trans­ lation of  Le  Libraire).
BIGMAN, SIDNEY. Second  Sight; a Novel.  New
York,   D.  McKay,  1 959·  2 19  p.
BUELL, JOHN  EDWARD.  Four  Days. New  York,
Farrar Straus and   Cudahy, 1962.   232  p. CALLAGHAN,   MORLEY  They  Shall   Inherit   the
Earth. Introduction:   Frank  W.  Watt.  To­ ronto, McClelland &  Stewart, 1962.  256  p. (New  Canadian  Library, No.   33) .
CAMPBELL, GRACE. Thorn  Apple   Tree.  Don
Mills,   Ont.,  Collins,  I962. 230  p. CUNNINGHAM, LOUIS ARTHUR. Whisper   to  the
Stars.   New    York,    Arcadia   House,   1958.
222   p.
ELLIOTT,  GEORGE. The Kissing  Man. Toronto,
Macmillan,  1962.   136  p.
FINDLAY,  DAVID KILPATRICK.   Third   Act. Lon­
don,   G.  Bles,  I 961.   262  p.
GARNER, HUGH.  The  Silence   on   the   Shore.
Toronto,   McClelland   &     Stewart,    1962.
332  p.
GIGUERE, DIANE.  Innocence.  Translated    by
Peter  Green.  Toronto,   McClelland  &
Stewart,  I 962.  19 1  p.
GREEN, HENRY  GORDON. A Time  to Pass Over; Life  with  a Pioneer  Grandmother. Toronto, McClelland &  Stewart,  I962. 189  p.
HAMBLETON, RONALD. There  Goes  M acGill.
Toronto,   McClelland   &     Stewart,    I962.
192   p.
HARDY,  WILLIAM   GEORGE.  The   City  of  Liber­
tines.  London,  Hamilton,  1960.   348   p. HARLow,  ROBERT. Royal   Murdoch. Toronto,
Macmillan,  1962.   243   p.
HINE, DARYL.  The   Prince  of Darkness  & Co.
Toronto,  Abelard-Schuman,  I961.  190   p. HOLLAND,  ELIZABETH.  A   Separate    Person.
Toronto,  Macmillan,  I962.   248   p.

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



HOOD, HUGH. Flying  a  Red   Kite. Toronto, Ryerson,  I962.  240   p.
JACK, DONALD LAMONT.  Three Cheers for Me;
the   journals of Bartholomew Bandy, R.F.C. Galt,  Ont.,  Brett-Macmillan,  I962. 274  p. JOHNSON, LEE. The Medallion. Toronto, John
Gifford,  I962.  I92   p.
KNISTER,  RAYMOND.   White  Narcissus.  Intro­
duction:  Philip Child. Toronto, McClelland
&   Stewart,  I962.  I35   p.   (New  Canadian
Library,  No.   32).
LONDON, JACK.  The  Call   of   the    Wild  and White Fang.  New  York,  Washington Square Press   I962. 337   p.
LOWRY, MALCOLM. Ultramarine. New   York,
Lippincott,  I962. 203  p.
-. Under  the    Volcano. Harmondsworth, Middlesex,  Penguin,  I962.  376   p.
MCDOUGALL, COLIN MALCOLM. Execution. Lon­
don,   Ace   Books,   I 96 I.  I 88   p.   (First   pub­
lished   London,  Macmillan,  I 958).
MAC KENZIE,  DONALD. The   Genial  Stranger.
Boston,,  Houghton  Miffiin,   I962. 2 I 3  p. MACLENNAN,  HUGH. Each   Man's Son.  Intro­
duction: Alec  Lucas. Toronto,  McClelland
&   Stewart,  I962.  222   p.   (New  Canadian
Library,  No.   30).
MACK, ELSIE FRANCES (WILSON).   A  Woman of   jerusalem.   Toronto,   Doubleday,   I962.
3I2  p.
MCNAMEE, JAMES.  My    Uncle   foe.   Toronto, Macmillan,  I962.  63   p.
MIRVISH,  ROBERT FRANKLIN. Point   of Impact.
New    York,    W.    Sloane  Associates,  I961.
3I2  p.
MITCHELL, w.   o.  The  Kite.  Toronto,   Mac­
millan,  I962.  2IO   p.
MONSARRAT, NICHOLAS.  The   Time  Before
This.  Toronto,  Cassell, I962.  I26   p. MOORE,  BRIAN. An   Answer  from   Limbo.  To­
ronto, Little,  Brown,  I962.  322   p.
NEWTON, NORMAN.  The  House   of  Gods.  To­
ronto, Copp Clark,  I 961.   240  p.
O'GRADY,   ROHAN.  (pseud.  of   June   Skinner)
Pippin's  journal.   New    York,    Macmillan,
1962.   230  p.
ORVIS, KENNETH. The  Damned and  the  Des­ troyed. Toronto,  McClelland &    Stewart, I962.  223   p.
PACEY, DESMOND, ed.   A   Book    of   Canadian Stories. Revised edition. Toronto, Ryerson, I962.  340   p.
 PARR,  DOUGLAS KERMODE. Mixed    Cargo.
Fredericton,  N.B.,    Brunswick  Press,    I961.
207  p.
ROY, GABRIELLE.  The  Hidden Mountain.  To­ ronto, McClelland &  Stewart,  I962. I86  p. SANDERSON,   DOUGLAS. Night   of   the   Horns. Harmondsworth, Middlesex, Penguin  Books
in  association with  Seeker & Warburg, I 961.
205   p.   (First  published London,  Seeker   &
Warburg, 1958).
SKINNER, MRS.  JUNE.  see  Rohan O'Grady pseud.
SPENCER, ELIZABETH. The Light in  the  Piazza.
Toronto, Heinemann,  I 961.  99  p.
TEGART, WILFRID  ALBERT  SIBBALD. In the  Face of   the    Winds.  Saskatoon,  Modern  Press, I962. 37I   p.
VAUGHAN, LEO. The  ]okeman. Toronto,  Ryer­
son,   I962.   239  p.
WALKER,  JOAN  (suTER).  Marriage of  Harle­
quin. Toronto, McClelland & Stewart, I962.
256   p.
WALKER,  MARGARET. Come  Down  From  Yon­
der   Mountain.  Toronto,  Longmans,  I962.
277  p.
WIEBE,  RUDY HENRY.  Peace    Shall    Destroy Many.   Toronto,   McClelland  &    Stewart, I962.  239   p.
WILSON, ETHEL. Swamp Angel. Introduction:
Desmond Pacey. Toronto, McClelland & Stewart,   I962.   I50    p.    (New     Canadian Library,  No.   29).
YOUNG, KENDAL.  (pseud   of   Phyllis    [Brett]
Young)  The   Ravine. Toronto,  Longmans, I962.  208  p.
YOUNG,  PHYLLIS  (BRETT)  see  Kendal  Young
pseud.
ZINK, LUBOR.  The  Uprooted. Toronto,  Long­
mans,    I962.  343   P·


POETRY
BATES, RONALD.   The  Wandering World.  To­
ronto, Macmillan,  I959· 6o  p.
BENSON, NATHANIEL A.  One   Man's   Pilgrim­ age.  Toronto,  Thomas Nelson, I962.  98  p. BIRNEY, EARLE. Ice,  Cod, Bell   or   Stone;  A Collection  of   New   Poems.   Toronto,   Mc­
Clelland &  Stewart,  I962. 62  p.
BOURINOT,   ARTHUR  s.  Harvest From   Deep­
wood    (Poems,  1962).  Ottawa,   I962. CARMAN,  BLISS. The  Selected Poems   of  Bliss

8g

ENGLISH-CANADIAN  LITERATURE



Carman.  Edited  by   Lome  Pierce.    Second edition.  Toronto,   McClelland  &   Stewart,
1961.   119P·
DAVEY, FRANKLAND WILMOT.  D-day  and  After;
Poems.   Oliver,  B.C.,    Rattlesnake  Press  for
Tishbooks,  Vancouver,   1962.   24  p.
Five   New   Brunswick  Poets:    Elizabeth   Brew­ ster,   Fred   Cogswell, Robert    Gibbs,   Alden Nowlan, Kay  Smith. Fredericton,  N.B., The Fiddlehead,  1962.  64  p.
GOTLIEB, PHYLLIS.  Who  Knows  One?   To­
ronto, Hawkshead  Press,  1961.   Broadsheet. KENNEDY, A.   ALLISON.  Wisps;  Lyrics    and Other Verse. Toronto, Burns  & MacEachern,
1956.  70  p.
LAYTON,  IRVING, ed.   Love   Where  the   Nights
Are  Long. Toronto, McClelland &  Stewart,
1962.   78  p.
LOWRY,  MALCOLM. Selected Poems  of Malcolm Lowry. Edited by Earle  Birney  with  the assistance  of   Marjerie   Lowry.  San   Fran­ cisco,   City   Light  Books,   1962.   79  p.
MACEWEN,  GWENDOLYN. The  Drunken Clock.
Toronto, Aleph   Press,  1961.  Unpaged.
-. Selah. Toronto,  Aleph   Press,  1961.   12  p. MILLER, GEORGE   c.  Ladders to   High   Places.
Toronto,   Cl6    Chluain   Tairbh   (Clontarf
Press), 1962.   22  p.
MILLER, PETER. A  Shifting  Pattern. Toronto, Contact  Press,   1962.  77  p.
NOWLAN, ALDEN.  The   Things   Which  Are.
Toronto, Contact  Press,  1 g62.  71  p.
-. Wind   in    a   Rocky   Country.  Toronto, Emblem   Books,     1960    [1g61].  Unpaged. (An   Emblem  book,   7).
o   BROIN, PADRAIG.  Than  Any   Star;  Selected
Poems.  Toronto,   Cl6   Chluain  Tairbh,  52
Derwyn Road,  1962.   143  p.
PARR,  DOUGLAS KERMODE. Mixed   Cargo.
Fredericton,  N.B.,    Brunswick  Press,   1961.
207   p.
PRATT, EDWIN JOHN.   Here   the   Tides   Flow.
Toronto,  Macmillan,  1962.   169  p.
PURDY, ALFRED.  Poems    for  All   the   Annettes.
Toronto,  Contact  Press,   1962.   64  p. REANEY, JAMES.  Twelve  Letters  to   a  Small
Town.   Toronto,   Ryerson,   1962.    32    p.
(Ryerson Poetry Chapbook, Number 200). ROBB, WALLACE HAVELOCK.   Kay-On-A-Kon­ Te,  "Daughter of    the    Gods".  Kingston,
Abbey   Dawn Press,   1961.   29  p.
ROSENFIELD, DAVID.    0 Men, 0  Compadres.

go
 Montreal,  Editions  d'Orphee,   1961.   55   p. SMITH, ARTHUR JAMES MARSHALL.  Collected Poems.  Toronto,   Oxford  University  Press,
1962.   124   p.
soUSTER,  RAYMOND.  A  Local   Pride. Toronto, Contact  Press,    1962.   131  p.
-. Place  of Meeting; Poems  1958-1960.  Illus­
trated  and  original lithographs by  Michael
Snow.   Toronto,    Gallery   Editions,    1962.
67   p.   (Gallery  editions,  2).
Thirteen  Canadians. Preface by  John  Robert
Colombo. Poet.  [Vol.  2,  No.   2;  September
1961;  Canadian  Number]  4   Motilal  St., Madras-17, South  India.  29  p.
TURNBULL, GAEL. Land    That  I   Knew.   To­
ronto,   Cl6    Chluain  Tairbh,   52    Derwyn Road,   1962.   8   p.   (Contact  Poetry   Read­ ings,  Fifth Series).
WEBB, PHYLLIS. The  Sea   Is   Also   a  Garden.
Toronto,  Ryerson, 1962.   39  p.

DRAMA
COULTER, JOHN.  Riel; a  Play   in  Two   Parts.
Toronto,  Ryerson,  1962.   142  p.
OSBORNE,  JOHN  JAMES AND ANTHONY CREIGH­ TON.  Epitaph  for   George   Dillon;   A   Play in  Three  Acts. New  York,  Criterion  Books,
1958.   94   p.
REANEY,  JAMES.   The   Killdeer  and    Other Plays.  Toronto,  Macmillan, 1962.   224  p. RYGA,   GEORGE. Indian.  Maclean's 75:30-33,
45-52,  December   1,  1962.

ESSAYS
COLLARD,    EDGAR   ANDREW. M ontrea/    Y ester­
days.   Toronto,  Longmans,  1962.   320   p.
MC AREE,  J.  v.   Culled  From    Our    Columns.
Toronto,  Longmans, 1962.   225  p. MCGEACHY,  JAMES   BURNS.   A     Touch   of
McGeachy; A  Collection of  the   Best  From the   Pen   of   f. B.  McGeachy. Toronto, Financial  Post,    1962.   191  p.
PARR,  DOUGLAS KERMODE. Mixed   Cargo.
Fredericton,  N.B.,   Brunswick  Press,    1961.
207   p.

HUMOUR

BERTON, PIERRE. Fast, Fast,  Fast   Relief.  To­
ronto, McClelland &  Stewart, 1962.   185  p. JACK, DONALD LAMONT.  Three Cheers for Me;

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



the   Journals  of  Bartholomew Bandy, R.F.C. Galt,  Ont.,  Brett-Macmillan,  1962.   274   p.
KINRADE,   LAURA.  Half   Pints.   Toronto,   Burns
&  MacEachern,  1962.   122  p.
NICOL,  ERIC. A  Herd   of Yaks.  Toronto,  Ryer­
son,  1962.   201  p.
SHERWOOD, BASIL.   The  Poodle. Toronto, Rupert  Hart-Davis, 1962.   10  p.
WILSON,  JOHN   FRANCIS.  The  Migration  of
Skivins.  Toronto,   Macmillan,   1962.   Un­
paged.

BIOGRAPHY

BARBEAU, MARIUS. Cornelius  Kreighoff.   To­ ronto,  McClelland  &   Stewart,  1962.  30  p. (Gallery of  Canadian Art,   1 ) .
BUCHANAN, DONALD W.   Alfred     Pellan.   To­ ronto,  McClelland  &   Stewart,   1962.  30  p. (Gallery of  Canadian Art,   4).
CAMPBELL,  MARJORIE WILKINS.  McGillivray: Lord    of   the   Northwest.  Toronto,   Clarke Irwin,  1962.   337   P·
DOBBs,  KILDARE. Running  to   Paradise.   To­
ronto, Oxford University Press,  1962.  160 p. EARL, LAWRENCE.  She   Loved  a  Wicked City; the   Story  of  Mary   Ball,   Missionary. To­ ronto, McClelland &  Stewart, 1962.  240  p. FRY,   ALAN.  The   Ranch   in    the    Cariboo.
Toronto, Doubleday, 1962.   281  p.
GRAHAM,  w.  H.  The  Tiger of  Canada West.
Toronto,  Clarke  Irwin,  1962.   308   p. GRANT, JOHN   WEBSTER. George   Pidgeon;   a
Biography. Toronto,  Ryerson,  1962.  158  p. HOBSON, RICHMOND PEARSON. Grass   Beyond the   Mountains.  London,  May   Fair   Books,
1961.   192   p.
-. The  Rancher Takes a  Wife. London, G. Bell,   1 g62.   236   p.   (First  published   Phila­
delphia, J. B.  Lippincott, 196 1 ) .
HUBBARD, R.   H.    Tom   Thomson.  Toronto, McClelland &  Stewart,  1962.   30  p.   (Gal­ lery  of  Canadian Art, 2).
HYDE, H.  MONTGOMERY.  The  Quiet Canadian.
London, Hamish  Hamilton,  1962.   255  p. JARVIs, ALAN.  David   Milne. Toronto,  McClel­
land    &   Stewart,  1962. 30   p.   (Gallery  of
Canadian Art,  3).
KARSH, YOUSUF. In Search of Greatness:   Re­ flections  of Yousuf Karsh. Toronto,  Univer­ sity  of  Toronto Press,   1962.   210  p.
LAMB, WILLIAM KAYE. The  Hero    of   Upper
Canada.  Toronto,   Rous  &   Mann   Press,
 I962.  28  p.
LIVINGSTON,  SIR PHILIP. Fringe  of the  Clouds.
Toronto,  Ryerson, Ig62. 264  p.
MCGREGOR,  F. A. The Fall  and   Rise   of  Mac­ kenzie    King: I9II-I9I9.  Toronto,   Macmil­ lan,   I962.  345  p.
MACGREGOR,  JAMES GRIERSON. Pack Saddles to
Tete Jaune   Cache. Toronto,  McClelland &
Stewart,  I962. 256  p.
MCPHERSON, FLORA. Watchman  Against the
World. Toronto, Ryerson, Ig62. 189  p. MILLER, RICHARD  B.  A  Cool   Curving World.
Toronto,  Longmans,  1962.   220  p.
MOODIE, susANNA. Roughing It In the Bush. Introduction: Carl  F. Klinck. Toronto, Mc­ Clelland  &   Stewart,  1962.   240   p.    (New  Canadian Library, No.  31).
O'NEALL, HAZEL.  Doukhobor   Daze.    Sidney,
B.C.,    Gray's  Publishing  Ltd.,   Box    7 18, Sidney, B.C.,   1962.   143  p.
POPE, LT.-GEN. MAURICE  A. Soldiers  and  Poli­
ticians: The  Memoirs of Lt.-   Gen. Maurice A.   Pope.   Toronto,  University  of   Toronto Press,  1962.  4 74  p.
SELKE, FRANK  with  H. GORDON GREEN.  Behind
the  Cheering. Toronto, McClelland & Stew­
art, 1 g62.  1 go  p.
SMEETON, MILES. A   Change  of  Jungles.  To­ ronto, Rupert  Hart-Davies, 1962.    192  p. TOMKINSON, CONSTANCE. What  a   Perform­
ance!  Don  Mills,  Ont., Collins, 1962.  200  p. TOYNE, JOHN.   Win Time  For   Us.   Toronto,
Longmans, 1962.  241  p.
TRENT, WILLIAM. Northwoods Doctor. Toronto, McClelland &  Stewart, 1962.  88  p.
WHALLEY, GEORGE. The Legend of John  Horn­
by.  Toronto, Macmillan, 1962.  328  p.

JUVENILES
AVIS, W.  S.,  R.  J. GREGG,  C.  J.  LOVELL AND M.  H.   SCARGILL,  eds.   The  Beginning   Dic­
tionary.  Scarborough,  Ont.,   W.   J.  Gage,
1962.  747  p.
BERRILL, JACQUELINE. Wonders  of  the   Ponds
and    Streams   At    Night.   Toronto,  Dodd
Mead, 1962.  So  p.
BINGLEY,   BARBARA. The Story   of  Tit Be  and His  Friend  Moufette. Toronto, Abelard Schuman, 1962.  154  p.
BRAITHWAITE,   JOHN   VICTOR MAXWELL. The
Cure    Searchers.  Toronto,   Ryerson,   1962.
173  p.

ENGLISH-CANADIAN  LITERATURE



-. The Mystery of the  Muffled Man. Toronto, Little,  Brown,    rg62.  r6o   p.
-. Voices of  the  Wild.  Toronto,  McClelland
&  Stewart,  rg62. 122  p.
BREDIN,   THOMAS    F.   Rivers of   Canada. To­
ronto, Longmans, rg62. 134  p.
CHALMERS,  JOHN   w.   Horseman  in   Scarlet.
Toronto, W.  J. Gage,  rg62.   r65   p.
CLARK, CATHERINE ANTHONY (sMITH). The Diamond  Feather; or  The Door  in  the Mountain; a Magic Tale  for Children. To­ ronto,  Macmillan,  rg62.   224  p.
COLLINS,   ROBERT.  The Legend   of  the   Devil's
Lode. Toronto, Little, Brown,   rg62. r6o  p. DAVELUY,  PAULE    (CLOUTIER).    Summer  in Ville-Marie. Translated by  Monroe Stearns. New    York,    Holt,  Rinehart  and    Winston,
rg62. 142  p.
DEWDNEY,  SELWYN  HANINGTON.  The St. Law­
rence.   London,    Oxford   University   Press,
1 g6 1. 31  p.  (Rivers of  the  World, Series  1 ) . DONOVAN, EDWARD  JOSEPH.    Adventure    on Sunset  Trail.  Toronto,  General  Publishing
Co.,   rg61. 150  p.
EARL,  LAWRENCE.   The Riddle of the  Haunted River. Toronto, Little, Brown,  1 g62.  159  p. FRITH,  AUSTIN  F.   The Lost   Stagecoach.  To­
ronto, Macmillan, rg62. r68  p.
GAMMON,    DAVID.   The  Mystery  of   Monster Lake. Toronto, Little, Brown, rg62. 156  p. HAIG-BROWN,   RODERICK  LANGMERE.  Fur   And
Gold. Toronto,  Longmans, rg62.   131  p.
-. The  Whale People. Don  Mills,  Ont.,  Col­
lins,   rg62.  184  p.
HAMMOND, ARTHUR.  The Secret  Tunnel Trea­
sure.  Toronto, Little, Brown,   rg62.  158  p.
 HARRINGTON, EVELYN  (DAVIS).  The Real  Book of    Canada.  London,   D.    Dobson,   rg62. rgo  p.
LEITCH,  ADELAIDE. The Great  Canoe. Toronto, Macmillan,  rg62.  115  p.  (Buckskin  Books, r).
LINES,   KATHLEEN  AND HAROLD JONES.   Noah and   the   Ark.  London,  Oxford  University Press,   1 g61.   32  p.
LITTLE, JEAN.  Mine for  Keeps. Toronto, Little,
Brown,   rg62.  r86  p.
LONGSTRETH,   T.   MORRIS.  The Calgary  Chal­ lengers. Toronto,  Macmillan,  rg62.   165  p. MCLAUGHLIN,   LORRIE.   West   to   the   Cariboo. Toronto,  Macmillan,  rg62.  122   p.   (Buck­
skin   Books,   2).
MACPHERSON,   JAY.  The Four   Ages  of Man: The Classical  Myths. Toronto, Macmillan, rg62.    r88   p.
MARS,   ALASTAIR.    Unbroken; the   True   Story
of   a   Submarine.   Abridged  edition.   Edin­ burgh,   Oliver   and    Boyd,    rg62.    146   p. (Unabridged   edition  first   published    Lon­ don,   Muller,  I 953).
MAY,  CHARLES    PAUL.   A   Book    of   Canadian
Animals. Toronto,  Macmillan,  rg62.
MILLER,   ORLO.   The  Water  Savers. Toronto, Ryerson,  rg62.  152   p.
MOWAT,   FARLEY.   The  Black    Joke.    Toronto,
McClelland  &  Stewart,  rg62. 179  p.
Nunnybag. Toronto, W.  J. Gage, rg62.  128  p.
RITCHIE, c.  T. The First  Canadian: The Story of  Champlain.  Toronto,   Macmillan,  rg62.
r 55  p.   (Great  Stories of  Canada, No.  24). Rubaboo. Toronto,  W.   J. Gage,  rg62.   209  p. SCHULL,  JOSEPH.   Ships  of  the   Great    Days:
Canada's  Navy  in   the   Second World War. Toronto,  Macmillan,  rg62.  159   p.   (Great Stories of  Canada, No.  26).
SHAW,    MARGARET  MASON.   Bush   Pilots.   To­
ronto, Clarke Irwin,  rg62. 178  p.
SMITH, H.  MURRAY.   Footprints in  Time;  a Source Book  in Canadian History  for Young People. Toronto, House of Grant (Canada), rg62.   141  p.
STRAITON,  BILL  AND LEN  NORRIS.  The Winkle Pickers. Toronto,  Longmans,  rg62.  54  p. SWAYZE,  BEULAND  CARLAND. Father   Gabriel's
Cloak.  Toronto,  Macmillan,  1 g62.   122   p.
(Buckskin Books,  3).
SWAYZE, JAMES  FREDERICK, Manitoulin  Man­
hunt. Toronto, Ryerson, rg62. 171  p.

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



SWINTON, w.   E.  Digging   for  Dinosaurs. To­
ronto, British Book Service (Canada),  rg62.
32  p.
WALKER,  DAVID. Dragon Hill. Don   Mills,  Ont., Collins, Ig62. 140  p.
WILSON, CLIFFORD. Adventurers from the  Bay:
Men  of  the   Hudson's  Bay   Company.  To­ ronto,   Macmillan,   Ig62.   I56    p.    (Great Stories of  Canada, No.  2 5).
wooD,   KERRY. Wild  Winter.  Toronto,  Mac­
millan, rg62. 175  p.  (First published Boston, Houghton Miffiin,   1954) .
wouRro,  EVA-LIS. The  Island of  Fish  in  the Trees.   Toronto,   Nelson,  Foster  &   Scott, I962. 59  p.
YOUNG, sCOTT. The Clue   of  the   Dead   Duck.
Toronto,  Little, Brown, I962.  I59   p.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

BALL, J. L. Theatre in  Canada:  a  Bibliogra­ phy.    Canadian  Literature   No.   I4: 85-Ioo, Autumn  Ig62.
BELL, INGLIS  F.,  ed.   Canadian   Literature­ Ig6 I:  A   Checklist.    Canadian  Literature No.  I I: 79-I04, Winter  rg62.
BONENFANT,  JEAN-CHARLES. Canadian  Index to    Periodicals   and     Documentary    Films. Canadian  Library  I8:237-238,  May    rg62. CANADIAN    CULTURAL INFORMATION CENTRE. Canadian   Cultural   Publications:    Publica­ tions   Culturelles  Canadiennes.  Tenth   edi­
tion.  Ottawa,  I962. Unpaged.
Canadian Index to  Periodicals and  Document­
ary   Films;  An   Author  and   Subject Index.
1948-59. Edited by  Margaret E. Wodehouse and  Ruth Mulholland. Ottawa, Canadian Association, Association canadienne  des  bib­ liotheques,  rg62.  rr8o  p.
Canadian Index to  Periodicals and  Document­ ary  Films. Index  de  Piriodiques  et  de   films documentaires  canadiens. v.  14;   1961. Ot­ tawa,    Canadian   Library  Association and National  Library  of  Canada,   rg62.
Canadian Literature. The  First   Three  Years. Canadian  Literature  No.   I 3:8g-100,  Sum­ mer   Ig62. [Index to  the  first   I2  numbers.] Canadiana.  1950   & 1951.  Ottawa,  National Library  of  Canada,  Bibliotheque nationale
du   Canada,  I962. 258,  88  p.
Canadiana.  1961.  Ottawa,  National  Library of  Canada. rg62. 2v.,  rooo  p.
 FIRTH,  EDITH G.,  ed.   Early    Toronto   News­ papers    1793-1867, A   Catalogue  of   News­ papers  Published  in  the  Town of  York  and the  City   of Toronto  from  the  Beginning to Confederation.   Introduction:    Henry   C. Campbell.    Toronto,   Toronto   Public  Li­  braries,   rg62.   3I   p.
HAYWOOD,  CHARLES. Canada. In  his   A   Bib­
liography of North American Folklore and Folksong. Second   revised  edition. New York, Dover   Publications, rg6I.  422-428.
THE LITERARY  GARLAND  (INDEXES).  An  Index
to   the   Literary  Garland  (Montreal   1838-
1851). Compiled by Mary Markham Brown. Toronto, Bibliographical Society of Canada, Societe  bibliographique  du   Canada,  Ig62.
6I   p.
MEASURES, HOWARD.   Styles  of   Address.   To­
ronto, Macmillan,  Ig62.  ISO  p.
ST.  JAMES, MAN. PUBLIC LIBRARY.  A  Bibliog­ raphy  of Canadiana in  the  St.  fames Public  Library.  St.   James, Man.   Ig62?   (mimeo­ graphed;  various  pagings).
TANGHE, RAYMOND.   Supplement   to   Bibliog­
raphy  of Canadian Bibliographies. Toronto, Bibliographical   Society  of   Canada,   rg62.
24  p.
VINAY, J.P., J. B. RUDNYCKYJ,  AND W. S. AVIS. Linguistica  Canadiana;   a   Linguistic   Bib­ liography   for    1961   and    Supplement   for Previous Years. Canadian   journal  of  Lin­ guistics   7:1I3-Ir8,  Spring   Ig62.
WATT,  FRANK  w., ed.  Letters in Canada: Ig6 I.
University  of   Toronto  Quarterly  31:431-
587,  July   rg62.

BOOKS AND  READING

DAIR, CARL. Design   for   a  Budget.  Quill  and Quire 28:24-26, January-February  1962. D'ALTROY, RONALD. The   Piecemeal   Press.
British  Columbia  Library Quarterly  26:  I  I­
I4,  July   I962.
FRYE, NORTHROP, ed.   Design    for   Learning: Reports Submitted  to  the   Joint   Committee of the  Toronto Board  of Education and  the University of Toronto Press.  Toronto,  Uni­ versity  of  Toronto Press,   rg62. I48  p.
GZOWSKI, PETER.  Quebec  Report.  Maclean's
75:63, May  5,  rg62.
HAGLER, RONALD   A.  Introduction  to   an   In­ quiry. Ontario Library Review  45:223-225, November Ig6r.

93

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



HAMLIN, DOUGLAS L. B.,  ed.  The Press and  the Public.   Toronto,   University   of    Toronto Press,   1962.  48  p.
KESTERTON,  WILFRED. Journalism. In John T. Saywell, ed.  The  Canadian Annual Review for   1961. Toronto,  University of Toronto Press,   1962.   335-345·
KIDD,  JAMES   ROBBINS.  18  to  8o:  Continuing
Education in  Metropolitan Toronto;  a  Re­ port   of  Enquiry Concerning the  Education of Adults in Metropolitan Toronto. Toronto, Published  by   the   Board   of   Education  for the   City   of  Toronto,   1961.
LAMB,    w.    KAYE.     The  National  Library  of
Canada.    Canadian   Geographical  journal
64:124-125, April   1962.
NEWFELD,  FRANK.  Harold  Kurschenska. Quill and  Quire 28: 16, 18, 20, March-April  1962. PIERCE,  LORNE.  Building a  Canadiana  Coilec­
tion.   [Extracts from  letters to  Queen's  Uni­
versity Librarian].   Douglas   Library  Notes
11:9-16,  Winter  1962.
REVELL,    PETER.    Censorship  Facts.   Ontario
Library Review 46:95-96,  May  1962.
WAITE,  PETER  B.  The Life  and  Times of  Con­ federation, 1864-1867:  Politics, Newspapers, and   the    Union  of  British   North  America. Toronto,  University of  Toronto Press,  1962.
388  p.
WEAVER,   ROBERT   L.   Books.   In   John   Allan Irving,  ed.   Mass   Media  in   Canada.   To­ ronto, Ryerson, 1962.  31-50.


PERIODICALS

NEW TITLES
Black  Magazine. No.1; 1962; 3504  Durocher, Montreal.
The  Bogtrotter Post.   No.   205   [i.e.   No.   1]; November 1962; Box  2566, Vancouver, B.C. The  Cygnet. No.  1; April   1961; 97  Pleasant
Park  Road, Ottawa  1.
Moment. No.  1;  1959; 20 Dupont St.,  Apt.  4, Toronto 5,  Ontario.
Motion:   A    Prose   Newsletter.  No.    1;  May
1962;  Published  in   affiliation  with   Tish­
books,   4439   West   4th   Avenue, Vancouver
8,  B.C.
Mountain. No.  1; May  1962; 142 Sunrise, Hamilton, Ontario.

94
 Region. No.  1;  February 1961; 432  Richmond
St.,  London, Ontario.
T eangad6ir.  Series   ii,   Vol.    1;   No.    1;   July
1961; 52  Darwyn Road, Toronto 6.
Tish: A  Magazine  of  Vancouver  Poetry. No.
1;  September   1961;  3591  West  11th
Avenue,  Vancouver  8,  B.C.

HISTORY AND CRITICISM
Action on  O'Leary  Recommendations  on  Pub­
lications.  World  Affairs 27:13-14,  March,
1962.
BATTEN, JACK  H.  Magazine Chronicle.  Cana­
dian   Forum 41 :232,  January  1962.
-. Magazine Chronicle. Canadian Forum 42:
15-16,  April   1962.
-. Magazine Chronicle. Canadian Forum 42:
108,  August  1962.
COLOMBO, JOHN  R. Tish: A Magazine of  Van­
couver  Poetry.  Canadian  Forum  41 :211-
213,  December  1961.
DANIELLS,   ROY.    The  Long-Enduring  Spring.
Canadian  Literature  No.   12:6-14,  Spring
1962.
DAVEY,   FRANKLAND    WILMOT.     Anything but Reluctant: Canada's Little Magazines. Canadian  Literature  No.    13:39-44,   Sum­ mer   1962.
DE     BRUYN,  JAN.   Little  Magazines.  Canadian
Literature. No.    14:82-84,  Autumn  1962.
FRANCIS,     WYNNE.     Montreal Poets    of    the Forties. Canadian Literature No. 14:21-34, Autumn  1962.
WATT,  FRANK  w.  Climate of  Unrest:  Periodi­ cals  in  the  Twenties and Thirties. Canadian Literature  No.   12 : 15-27,   Spring  1962.


LANGUAGE

The Canadian Dictionary; French-English, English-French.  Concise  edition.  Editor-in­ chief:   Jean-Paul   Vinay.    Editors:   Pierre Daviault  and    Henry   Alexander.  Toronto, McClelland &  Stewart,  1962.   862  p.
GAGNE,   RAYMOND  C.   Towards a  Canadian Eskimo  Orthography and  Literature (I). Canadian  journal  of  Linguistics 7:95-107, Spring  1962.
-. Towards a  Canadian Eskimo  Orthography and   Literature (II).  Canadian  Journal  of Linguistics 8:33-39,  Fall   1962.

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



MOON, BARBARA.  Does   Anybody Here  Speak Canadian? Maclean's 75:24-25, 50-51, June 2,   1962.
VINAY,  J.  P.,  J. B. RUDNYCKYJ,  AND W. S. AVIS.
Linguistica Canadiana;  a  Linguistic  Biblio­ graphy for   I 96 I  and  Supplement  for  Previ­ ous  Years. Canadian  Journal  of  Linguistics
7:1I3-1I8,  Spring I962.

LITERARY  HISTORY AND  CRITICISM

GENERAL
BARCLAY, PATRICIA. Regionalism  and  the Writer:  a  Talk with   W.  0. Mitchell. Canadian Literature No. 14:53-56, Autumn I962.
COLOMBO, JOHN   ROBERT. A   Conference  on
Creative  Writing.  Canadian Forum 42: I3-I5,  April  I962.
COOK, ELEANOR AND  RAMSAY   COOK. Writing
in   English.  In   John  T.  Saywell, ed.   The Canadian  Annual   Review   for    1961.   To­ ronto,  University  of   Toronto   Press,   I962.
356-370.
 DANIELLS, ROY. The  Long-Enduring  Spring.
Canadian  Literature  No.    I2 :6-I4,  Spring
I962.
DUDEK, LOUIS.  The  Two  Traditions.  Litera­ ture  and  the  Ferment in  Quebec.  Canadian Literature  No.   I2 :44-5I,  Spring   I962.
HIRANO, KEIICHI. The Aborigene in  Canadian
Literature; Notes   by  a  Japanese.  Canadian
Literature  No.   I4 :43-52,  Autumn  I962. KIRKCONNELL, WATSON.  Homesickness  in
Several     Minor   Keys.     Royal     Society   of Canada, Transactions  3d  ser  55   (Proceed­ ings)  :57-62,  1961.
LILJEGREN, STEN  BODVAR.   Canadian Studies
in Sweden. Upsala, A.-B.  Lundequistska Bokhandeln, Copenhagen, E.  Munksgaard, I961.   39  p.   (Canadian Essays  and  Studies,
6).
MCCORMACK,   ROBERT. Letter  from   Toronto. Canadian Literature  No.   I I :53-57, Winter I962.
MATTHEWS, JOHN  PENGWERNE.  Tradition  in Exile; a  Comparative Study  of  Social   In­ fluences  on   the   Development  of   Australian and    Canadian  Poetry    in   the   Nineteenth




ULTRAMARINE
BY MALCOLM  LOWRY

This  first   novel   by  the   author  of  Under  the   Volcano  and   Hear Us   0 Lord    From   Heaven  Thy  Dwelling Place   (winner  of   the Governor-General's  Award)  was  written  when   Lowry  was  in   his early   20's.  It is a  remarkable account, largely autobiographical,  of a  sensitive  boy's  encounter with   the  sea,  with   ships   and   the  men who  sailed them. Based  on  a  journal Lowry kept   on  his  own  first voyage   to  the  Far   East   when   he  was  I9,  it  is  quite  evidently the production  of  a  born   writer. It has  all  the   promise that  was  ful­ filled  in  his  later work.

Ultramarine  was   revised   by   the   author  before   his   tragic death in  I957· A  Canadian edition, with  a new  Introduction by Margerie Bonner Lowry, will  be available early  in  March.

$4.00 at  all  bookstores

CLARKE  IRWIN TORONTO  -VANCOUVER




95

ENGLISH-CANADIAN  LITERATURE



Century.  Toronto,   University  of   Toronto Press in association with F. W. Cheshire, Melbourne, I962. I97  p.  (University of Toronto.  Department  of   English.  Studies and   Texts No.   10).
o'BROIN,  PADRAIG.   Fire-Drake.  [Report  of   a talk   by  Irving Layton on  Jewish   writers in Canadian  literature].  Teangad6ir Series   ii, I :7 3-8o,   November  I 96 r.
PACEY,  DESMOND.  The Young   Writer and   the
Canadian Milieu. Queen's Quarterly 69:
378-390, Autumn  I962.
PRITCHARD, ALLAN. From    These  Uncouth Shores:  Seventeenth-century Literature of Newfoundland. Canadian Literature No.  I 4:
5-20,   Autumn  I962.
WATT, FRANK w.  Climate of  Unrest:  Periodi­
cals   in   the   Twenties  and   Thirties.   Cana­ dian  Literature No.  I2 :I5-27, Spring  I962. WATTERS, REGINALD  E.  A  Quest for  National Identity.    IIIrd    Congress of    the    Inter­ national   Comparative  Literature    Associa­
tion, Proceedings. I962. 224-241.
WEST,  PAUL.  The  Arts   in   St.   John's,  New­ foundland.  Saturday   Night     77:22-23, March 3,  I962.

FICTION
BESSETTE, GERARD.   French  Canadian  Society as Seen  by Contemporary Novelists.  Queen's Quarterly 69: I65-I76,  Summer I962.
MULLINs,  s. G.  The  Didactic Novel   in  Post­
War    Canadian   Fiction.  Culture  23:137-
153,   juin   1962.
WATT, FRANK w. Letters in  Canada:  1961: Fiction.   University  of   Toronto   Quarterly
31 :454-473,  July  1962.
WEST, PAUL. Canadian  Fiction and  Its  Critics.
Canadian Forum 41 :265-266, March 1962.

POETRY
 gina!,   No.  03).
FRANCIS,  WYNNE.   Montreal   Poets     of    the Forties. Canadian Literature No. 14:21-34, Autumn  1962.
FRYE, NORTHROP. Letters in  Canada:  Poetry, I952-196o.  In   A.  J. M.   Smith, ed.   Masks of  Poetry. Toronto,  McClelland &  Stewart,
1962.   96-Io9.  (New Canadian Library Ori­
ginal,  No.  03).
LIGHTHALL, w.  D.  Introduction  to   Songs  of the    Great    Dominion,  1889. In  A.   J.  M. Smith, ed.  Masks of  Poetry. Toronto,  Mc­
Clelland   &    Stewart,   1962.    17-25.    (New
Canadian Library Original, No.  03). MCCORMACK,   ROBERT. Unspeakable  Verse.
Canadian  Literature  No.   I 2:28-36, Spring
1962.
REANEY, JAMES. The Canadian Poet's  Predica­ ment.  In  A.   J.  M.   Smith,  ed.   Masks  of Poetry. Toronto,  McClelland &    Stewart,
1962.     1 ro-122.   (New  Canadian   Library
Original,  No.   03).
ROY, GEORGE  Ross. Le  sentiment de  [a nature dans   [a  poesie   canadienne anglaise, !867-
1918. Paris, A.  G.  Nizet,   1961.   219  p.
SMITH, ARTHUR JAMES MARSHALL,  ed.  Masks of Poetry:  Canadian Critics on Canadian Verse.  Toronto,   McClelland  &    Stewart,
1962.   144   p.  (New Canadian Library Ori­
ginal, No.  03).
The Taxpayer's Stake in  Coffee  House Poetry
Readings.  Maclean's  75: 6o,   February   24,
1962.
WILGAR,  w.  P.  Poetry  and   the  Divided  Mind in   Canada. In  A.  J. M.  Smith, ed.  Masks
of  Poetry. Toronto,  McClelland &  Stewart,
1962.   65-71. (New Canadian Library Ori­
ginal, No.  03).
WILSON,  MILTON. Letters  in   Canada:  I961: Poetry. University of Toronto Quarterly 31:
432-454, July  1962.
-. Other  Canadians and After. In  A. J. M.

DAVEY, FRANKLAND WILMOT. Anything  but
Reluctant:  Canada's  Little  Magazines.
 Smith,   ed.    Masks   of    Poetry.
McClelland    &     Stewart,    1962.
 Toronto,
123-I38.

Canadian  Literature  No.   13:39-44,  Sum­
mer   1962.
-. Present Scene. Delta   No.  I9: 1-2,  October
1962.
DEWART,  EDWARD HARTLEY.  Introduction
Essay,    Selections   from     Canadian   Poets,
1864. In  A.   J.  M.   Smith,  ed.   Masks  of Poetry.   Toronto,   McClelland  &    Stewart, I962.  13-16. (New Canadian Library Ori-

g6
 (New  Canadian Library Original, No.  03).

DRAMA AND THEATRE
BALL,  J.  L.   Theatre  in   Canada:  a   Biblio­ graphy.   Canadian  Literature   No.    14:85- roo. Autumn I962.
BILSLAND,  JOHN  w.  Edmonton's Studio Thea­
tre.  Tamarack Review No.  25:26-32, Autumn  1962.

ENGLISH-CANADIAN  LITERATURE



BOOTH,   MICHAEL  R.  The Actor's Eye.  Impres­ sions  of  Nineteenth-century  Canada.  Cana­ dian    Literature   No.     1 3 : 1 5-24,    Summer
1962.
-. Gold    Rush  Theatres   of   the    Klondike.
Beaver   292:32-37, Spring 1962.
DAFOE,  CHRISTOPHER.    The   Winnipeg  Story.
Tamarack  Review  No.   25:41-47,  Autumn
1962.
FRIEDSON, ANTHONY. The Undemanding Audi­
ence.  Arts   Council  News  [Vancouver].  13
No.  8: 1-2,  May   1962.
GANONG,  JOAN.   Backstage   at   Stratford.   To­
ronto,  Longmans,  1962.   198   p.
GARDNER,  DAVID.  Drama:  English Canada. In John T. Saywell, ed.  The  Canadian Annual Review for  1961. Toronto,  University of Toronto  Press,   1962.   371-386.
HAMELIN,  JEAN.   Montreal: the  French  Thea­
tre.  Tamarack  Review  No.  25 :69-75, Autumn   1962.
HAWORTH,     PETER.    Theatre  in    Vancouver.
Tamarack  Review  No.   25: 18-25,   Autumn
1962.
HICKLIN,     RALPH.     The  Theatre  Season in Toronto 1961-62: a  Survey. Tamarack  Re­ view   No.   25 :6o-68,  Autumn   1962.
HOOD,  HUGH.   The   Ingenue   I  Should  Have
Kissed   But   Didn't.   Tamarack  Review  No.
25 :3-17,  Autumn   1962.
H.,  s.A. Exit   Muttering by  Donald Jack: Grenville  Street   Playhouse.  Alphabet   No.
4:6,  June  1962.
KIDD,  J. R.  Films.  In  John  Allan  Irving,  ed.
Mass  Media in  Canada. Toronto,  Ryerson,
1962.   51-86.
PETTIGREW, JOHN.  Stratford's  Tenth  Season: A  Director's Year. Queen's Quarterly 69:
442-453, Autumn  1962.
RUSSEL,    R.    Towards a    National  Theatre.
Canadian   Art 	19:156-157,   March-April
1962.
The  Season's Theatre:  A  Report  by  Robert Russel,    Ralph   Hicklin,   Donald   Stainsby, and   Chester Duncan.  Saturday Night  77:
25-29,   June  9,   1962.
SOLLY, WILLIAM. Nothing Sacred. Humour in Canadian Drama in English. Canadian Literature  No.   11 : 14-27, Winter  1962.
sowTON,    IAN.   Cockcrow &   the    Gulls    by Wilfred Watson:   Studio  Theatre,  Edmon­ ton.   Alphabet  No.  4 :4-5, June  1962.
 STRATFORD, PHILIP.   Ten  Birthday Wishes   to Stratford.   Canadian  Forum  42 :I74-176, November  1962.
TERRY,   PAMELA.   Six   Days   and   a  Dream   by
John Volinska:  Drao Players. Alphabet No.
4:6-7,  June  1962.
Theatre. Arts   Council News   [Vancouver]. 14
No.  2: 1-3,  November  1962.
TOVELL, VINCENT.  The Stratford  Festival:  the
Tenth  Year.  Tamarack  Review  No.   25:
49-59,   Autumn  1962.
WEAVER,  ROBERT  L.  The Role   of  the  Canada Council. Tamarack Review No. 25:76-82, Autumn   1962.
WINTER,     JACK.     Stratford, 1962.    Canadian
Forum  42:124-125,    September   1962.
WINTERS, KENNETH. Look  Ahead! by Len Peterson: Manitoba Theatre Centre. Alpha­ bet   No.  4: 7-8,  June  1962.



INDIVIDUAL  AUTHORS

BELANEY, GEORGE STANSFIELD Pseud:  Grey   Owl.
DICKSON,    LOVAT.   Grey   Owl's  Adventures in
England.   Maclean's   75 :42-66,   November
17,  1962.

BERTON, PIERRE
KATZ,  SIDNEY.  Pierre's Adventures in  Berton­
land.  Maclean's  75:19-21,  8o-89, October
20,   1962.

BIRNEY, EARLE
WEST,  PAUL.  Earle Birney  and   the  Compound Ghost. Canadian Literature No.  13:5-14, Summer  1962.

CALLAGHAN, MORLEY
wooDcocK,   GEORGE.    The   Callaghan   Case.
Canadian Literature  No.  1 2 : 60-64, Spring
1962.

CAMERON, GEORGE FREDERICK
LAMPMAN,  ARCHIBALD.  Two Canadian Poets:
a   Lecture,  1891.   In  A.  J. M.   Smith,  ed.
Masks  of  Poetry. Toronto, McClelland &
Stewart,    1962.     26-44. 	(New     Canadian
Library Original, No.  03).

97

ENGLISH-CANADIAN  LITERATURE




CARMAN, BLISS
GUNDY, H.  P.  The  Bliss  Carman  Centenary. [Author's note  and  letters and  extracts from the  correspondence of Carman]. Douglas Library  Notes   ro:1-16,  Summer  rg61.
MACKAY,  L. A. Bliss  Carman:  a  Dialogue. In A.  J. M.  Smith, ed.  Masks of  Poetry.  To­ ronto, McClelland &  Stewart,  rg62.  55-59.  (New   Canadian Library Original,  No.  03).

CARR, EMILY
DANIELLS, ROY.  Emily    Carr.  In  Robert L.
McDougall,   ed.     Our     Living   Tradition. Fourth  series.   Toronto,  Published in   asso­ ciation  with    Carleton   University  by   Uni­ versity   of  Toronto  Press,   rg62.  1 I9-I34·

CLARK, CATHERINE ANTHONY SELBY, JOAN.  The  Creation of   Fantasy, the
Fiction of  Catherine  Anthony Clark.  Cana­
dian  Literature No.  I 1:39-45, Winter  rg62.

DE  LA  ROCHE, MAZO
WEEKS, EDWARD.   Mazo   de  Ia  Roche.  In   his
In  Friendly Candour. London, Hutchinson, r g6o.   84-97.

DUDEK, LOUIS
LAYTON, IRVING. An   Open  Letter  to   Louis
Dudek. Cataract  1  No.  2;  Winter  rg62.

GROVE, FREDERICK  PHILIP
PACEY, DESMOND.  Frederick  Philip  Grove.  A Group of  Letters.  Canadian Literature No.
1 1 :28-38, Winter Ig62.

HAILEY, ARTHUR
Flight  into    Fiction;   Interview  with    Arthur
Hailey.   Canadian   Author   and    Bookman
37:6-7,  Winter  rg62.

HALIBURTON, THOMAS CHANDLER CHITTICK, v. L. o. The Hybrid Comic; Origins of  Sam   Slick.  Canadian Literature No.  14:
35-42, Autumn  Ig62.

HOWE, JOSEPH
BECK,  J.  M.   Joseph Howe. In  Robert L.
McDougall,  ed.    Our Living  Tradition.
Fourth  series.   Toronto,  Published in   asso-

g8
 dation  with    Carleton  University  by   Uni­
versity   of  Toronto  Press,   I 962.  3-30.

JOHNSON, PAULINE
SHRIVE, NORMAN. What Happened to Pauline? Canadian  Literature  No.    I 3 :25-38,   Sum­ mer   Ig62.

LAMPMAN,  ARCHIBALD
COLLIN, w.   E.  From Natural Landscape. In A.  J. M.  Smith, ed.  Masks of  Poetry.  To­ ronto, McClelland &  Stewart,  Ig62.  60-64. (New Canadian  Library Original,  No.  03).

LAYTON, IRVING
ELLENBOGEN, GEORGE. An   Open   Letter   to Irving Layton. Cataract I  No.  3, July Ig62. Irving  Layton  Replies.  Cataract  I  No.   3, July  rg62.
LAYTON, IRVING. Correspondence.   Canadian
Forum  41 :281-282,  March  rg62.
-. Correspondence. Canadian Forum 42 :41-
42,   May    rg62.
-. Foreword  to  A  Red   Carpet  for  the   Sun. In  A.  J.  M.   Smith, ed.   Masks  of  Poetry. Toronto, McClelland &  Stewart, Ig62. 139-
143·  (New   Canadian  Library Original, No.
03).
-. An  Open Letter to  Louis  Dudek. Cataract
1  No.   2,  Winter  rg62.
MATHEWS, ROBIN. Correspondence. Canadian
Forum  42 :58, June  rg62.

LOWRY, MALCOLM
LOWRY, MALCOLM. Letter from   Lowry.  Cana­
dian   Forum 42 :62-63, June  1962.

MCCOURT, EDWARD
BALDWIN, R.   G.   Pattern  in    the    Novels    of
Edward  McCourt.  Queen's  Quarterly  68:
5 74-587, Winter  1962.

MACEWEN, GWENDOLYN
MACEWEN, GWENDOLYN.  Genesis. Teangad6ir
Series  ii,   1 : 73-8o,  November  1961.

MITCHELL, W. 0.
BARCLAY, PATRICIA. Regionalism and  the
Writer; a  Talk with  W.  0. Mitchell. Cana-

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



dian    Literature   No.     14:53-56,   Autumn
1962.

MOORE, BRIAN
FULFORD,  ROBERT.  Robert  Fulford  Interviews
Brian    Moore.  Tamarack  Review  No.   23:
5-18,   Spring  rg62.

OSTENSO, MARTHA
MULLINS,   s. G.  Some   Remarks on  Theme  in
Martha  Ostenso's Wild  Geese.   Culture 23:
359-362,  decembre  1962.

PIERCE, LORNE
GUNDY,  H.  P.  Lorne Pierce: Friend and  Bene­ factor.  Douglas  Library   Notes    11:1-6, Winter  rg62.
KYTE,  E.  c. Bode   a  Goun  O'Gowd.   Douglas
Library Notes  1 I: 6-8,  Winter  rg62.

PRATT, E.  J.
BIRNEY, EARLE.  E.  J. Pratt and   his  Critics. In
A.  J. M.  Smith, ed.  Masks  of  Poetry.  To­
ronto, McClelland &  Stewart, rg62. g6-rog. (New   Canadian  Library Original, No.  03). BROCKINGTON,   L.    W.    Tribute to    a    Poet; Address. Atlantic  Advocate 52 :22-23,  May
1962.

REANEY, JAMES
REANEY, JAMES. An  Evening with  Babble  and Doodle. Canadian Literature No.  12 :37-43, Spring  rg62.
 ROBERTS, CHARLES G.  D.
CAPPON,   1 AMES.  From    Roberts  and   the   In­ fluences   of   his   Time,  1905.   In   A.   J.  M. Smith,   ed.    Masks   of    Poetry.    Toronto,
McClelland  &  Stewart,  rg62. 45-54.  (New
Canadian  Library Original,  No.  03).
LAMPMAN,   ARCHIBALD.   Two Canadian Poets: a   Lecture,  1891.   In   A.  J.  M.   Smith,  ed. Masks  of  Poetry.  Toronto,   McClelland  &
Stewart,  rg62.    26-44.   (New   Canadian  Li­
brary   Original, No.  03).
PACEY,  DESMOND.  Sir   Charles G.  D.  Roberts. In  Robert L. McDougall, ed.  Our  Living Tradition.   Fourth   series.    Toronto,    pub­ lished    in   association  with    Carleton   Uni­ versity    by    University   of   Toronto    Press, rg62. 31-56.

SCOTT, DUNCAN CAMPBELL
WILTON,   MARGARET  HARVEY.  Duncan   Camp­ bell    Scott,   Man   and     Artist.    Canadian Author  and   Bookman 38 :3-5,  20,  Summer rg62.

SETON, ERNEST THOMPSON
READ,  STANLEY  E.  Flight to  the   Primitive: Ernest Thompson  Seton.  Canadian  Litera­ ture   No.   13 :45-57, Summer  rg62.

WATSON, WILFRED
BILSLAND,  JOHN   w.   First    Night  in   Edmon­ ton.    Canadian  Literature   No.    12 :52-55, Spring rg62.




















99

LITTERATURE

CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE

liste etablie par Doreen Dowd





ANTHOLOGIES

BOSQUET, ALAIN, ed.   La   poesie   canadienne.
Paris,  Seghers et  Montreal, Editions HMH, I96!l.
MANDEL, ELI and  PILON, JEAN-GUY. Poetry  6!:l.
Toronto, Ryerson Press,  I961. II6  p. Moisson. Montreal,  Editions  Nocturne,   196!l. Prelude Estival. Montreal,   Editions   N oc­
turne,  I96!l.   1!l8  p.


ROMANS  ET NOUVELLES

BLAIS, MARIE-CLAIRE.  Le   jour  est  noir.  Mont­
rea),   Editions du  Jour, 1962.   I 2 I  p.
BOSCO,  MONIQUE.  Un amour   maladroit. Paris, Gallimard, I96I.  2I3 p.
Bossus, FRANCIS. La  seconde  mort. Montreal,
Beauchemin, I962. I86  p.
CHOQUETTE,  GILBERT. L'interrogation.   Mont­
real,  Beauchemin,  I962.  173  p.
DARIOS, LOUISE,  camp.  Contes etranges du
Canada. Montreal,   Beauchemin,   I 962.
156  p.
DES] ARDINS, GILLES. Les  corridors. Montreal, Beauchemin, 1962.  I85  p.
DESPRES,  RONALD. Le    scalpel    ininterrompu.
Montreal, Editions a Ia  Page,   I962. I4o  p.
DEYGLUN, SERGE.  Ces   {Iiles   de    nulle    part.
Montreal, Editions Atys,  1960.
DUPUY, JACQUELINE.  Dure   est  ma   joie.  Paris, Flammarion,  I962.  I87   p.
FAUCHER,  CLAIRE (MONTSEUIL) Quand  j'aurai
paye ton visage, par Claire  Martin, pseud. Montreal, Cercle du  Livre  de  France, I962. I87   p.
FERRON, JACQUES. Contes du   pays  incertain.
Montreal, Editions d'Orphee,  I962. 200  p.
-. Cotnoir.  Montreal,   Editions  d'Orphee
I962. 99  p.
FILION,   JEAN-PAUL.  Un  homme  en    laisse.
Montreal,  Editions  du   Jour,  1962.   I!l4  p.

100
 FONTAINE, NATHALIE.  Le   kepi  et  [a cravache.
Montreal, Cercle du  Livre  de  France, I962.
21 I  p.
GELINAS, PIERRE. L'or    des   Jndes.  Montreal, Cercle  du   Livre  de   France,  1962.   188   p. GODBOUT,   JACQUES. L'aquarium.   Paris,   Edi­
tions   du  Seuil,  I96!l.   I56   p.
HAMEL, CHARLES. Prix  David. Montreal,  Edi­
tions   de  )'Homme,  I962.  288  p.
HOLLIER, ROBERT.  Marche  ou   creve,  Carnig­
nan.  Montreal, Editions de  l'Homme, 1962.
300   p.
LANDRY,  LOUis.   Vacheries.  Montreal,   Deom.
1962.   242  p.
LAPLANTE, JEAN DE. Le   petit   juif.  Montreal, Beauchemin,  I962.  I62   p.
LORD, DENIS.  Aller-retour.  Montreal,   Beau­
chemin,  I962.  I73   p.
LORRAIN, ROLAND. Perdre    [a  tete.  Montreal.
Editions du   Jour,  1962.   188  p.
MAILLET, ANTONINE. On   a   mange  [a  dune.
Montreal,  Beauchemin,  I962.  I75   p. MALOUIN, REINE   (VOIZELLE)   Ce   matin,  [e
solei/  ... Montreal, Fides,   I962. 95  p.  (ed. orig.  Pro fonds  destins, I 957).
MARCOTTE,  GILLES. Le   poids   de   Dieu.  Paris, Flammarion,  I962.  2 I8   p.
MICHAUD, PAUL.  Quelques  arpents  de   neige.
Quebec,   Institut    Litteraire   du    Quebec, I96I. 367   p.
MORIN, CLAIRE. Autour   de   toi   Tristan,  par
Claire  France,  pseud.  Paris,    Flammarion,
1962.
PINSONNEAULT, JEAN-PAUL.  Les    abimes  de l'aube. Montreal, Beauchemin, 1962.  174  p. STILMAN, ABRAM.  Mariette. Traduit  de  I'ang­
Iais.  Montreal,  Beauchemin, I962. THERIAULT,  YVES. Si  [a bombe m'etait contee.
Montreal,  Editions du   Jour,  1962.   I 28  p. THERIO,  ADRIEN. Le    printemps   qui    pleure. Montreal, Editions  de  )'Homme,  I962.
l!l7   p.

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE FRANCAISE



POESIE

BELANGER,  MARCEL.  Pierre  de cecite. Montreal, Editions  Atys,   1962.   55   p.
BLAIS,    MARIE-CLAIRE.   Les    Voyageurs  sacres.
Ecrits  du  Canada   franc;ais  I4: I93-257,
1962.
BOSQUET,   ALAIN,   ed.   La   poesie    canadienne.
Paris,   Seghers, et  Montreal Editions HMH, I962.
CHAMBERLAND,    PAUL.    Geneses.  Montreal,
Cahier  no  3  de  l'A.G.E.U.M.,  1962.   94  p.
DANTIN,  LOUIS.  Poemes d'outre-tombe.  Trois­ Rivieres, Editions  du   Bien   Public,   1962.  DEMERS,   PIERRE.   Sonnets pour  Noel  et  le  car­
naval.  Montreal,  Beauchemin,  1962.
DESILETS,   GUY.  La   tension  des  dieux.  Mont­
real,   Editions de  l'Equinoxe,  1962.
DOR,  GEORGES.   Chante-pleure. Montreal,  Edi­
tions   Atys,   1961.   50   p.
DUBE,  RODOLPHE.  Poemes europe ens, par Fran­ c;ois  Hertel,   pseud.  Paris,  Editions   de   Ia Diaspora  Franc;aise, 196 I.  s6  p.
Emourie, automne  I962. Quebec, Editions de
!'Arc,  I962.
 FILION,  JEAN-PAUL.  Demain les  herbes  rouges.
Montreal,   Editions  de   l'Hexagone,   1962.
3I   p.
FONTAINE,  ODETTE.  Les   joies  atroces. Quebec, Garneau, 1962.  92  p.
FRANCOEUR,    SYLVIE.    Nuage au   vent.   Mont­
real,   Editions Nocturne,  1962.
GARNEAU,  MICHEL.   Langage.  Montreal,   Edi­
tions  a Ia  Page,   I962. 117  p.
GAUGUET-LAROUCHE, JEAN.   Cendres  de  sang.
Montreal, Editions Atys,   I961. 24  p.
GODIN,    GERALD.   Poemes  et    cantos.   Trois­ Rivieres,  Editions   du    Bien   Public,    1962.
43   p.
GOULET,  ELIE.  La   cantilene  des  heures.  Que­
bec,  Libraire Canadienne,  1962.   88  p.
HENAULT, GILLES.  Semaphore, suivi de Voyage au   pays   de   memoire.  Montreal,   Editions de  l'Hexagone,  I962.  71  p.
HORIC, ALAIN. Blessure  au  flanc  du  ciel. Mont­
real,   Editions de  l'Hexagone,  1962.  49  p.
JACQUEs,  MICHEL.  Mousses trempees.  Artha­
baska,   Le  Pont   Invisible, I962.
LABERGE,   MARIE.    Les    passerelles    du    matin.
Quebec, Editions  de  !'Arc,  I961. 67  p.








Livres  et Auteurs Canadiens I962
 A  panorama of  the  literary  production  of the  year in  French  Canada.
A  complete  bibliography of  the  publica­
tions of 1962.
Reviews of the most important books, in fiction,   poetry,  essays and   juvenile  litera­ ture.
The  literary  events of the  year.
List of the  doctoral theses defended in the
Universities of French  Canada in  1962.
An   illustrated   magazine  of   a   hundred pages.  On  sale at  $1.00.


Adrien  Therio, directeur,
LIVRES ET AUTEURS CANADIENS
R.M.C.  Kingston, Ontario.

The   1961  issue  is still  available  at  the same  price.




101

ENGLISH-CANADIAN  LITERATURE



LAPOINTE, GATIEN. Le   temps    premier. Paris, Grassin, I962.
LAURIER, CLAUDE. D'un   monstre  a   ['autre.
Montreal,  Editions Atys,  1961.   40  p. LEMIEUX-LEVESQUE,  ALICE. Silences.  Quebec,
Garneau,  Ig62. 78  p.
MAJOR, ANDRE. Holocauste  a  2  voix.  Mont­
real, Editions Atys,  1962.  51  p.
MANDEL,  ELI et  PILON, JEAN-GUY, eds.  Poetry
62.  Toronto,  Ryerson Press,   1961.   116  p. MARSOLAIS, JACQUELINE.  Le  gagne-espoir, par
Mariane Favreau, pseud.  Montreal, Editions d'Orphee, 1961. 59  p.
MENARD, JEAN. Plages.  Montreal, Beauchemin,
1962.   63  p.
Moisson. Montreal,  Editions Nocturne,  rg62. MONDOR,  JACQUES. Les  sang lots  de  la  savane.
s.r.,  1961.   135  p.
MORIN, LORENZO.  L'arbre et  l'homme.  Mont­
real,   Beauchemin, 1962.  105  p.
PARADIS, SUZANNE. La   malebete.  Quebec, Garneau, 1962.  92  p.
PETEL, PIERRE. Aiel   aiel   aiel   Montreal,  Edi­
tions   a  Ia   Page,    rg62.
Prelude Estival.  Montreal,   Editions   Noc­
turne,  1962.   I2B  p.
RENAUD,  JACQUES. Electrodes. Montreal,  Edi­
tions   Atys,   1962.   36  p.
ROBERGE, ZENOR.  Avec   rimes  et  raisons. Trois­ Rivieres,  I g6r.  46   p.
ROUSSAN, JACQUES DE. Le   pouvor   de   vivre.
Montreal,  Editions Atys,  1961.  44  p. TOUCHETTE, KATHELINE. joies   et  peines,   par
Rita  Manvil,  pseud.  Paris,   Editions  de   Ia
Diaspora  Franc;aise, 1 g6r. 45  p.
TROTTIER, PIERRE. La   route   d'Oedipe.  Ecrits du   Canada franc;ais   I3 :74-93,  1962.
VERNAL, FRANCOIS-CHARLES   METZER DE.  Le jardin     de    mon    pere.    Montreal,   Lemeac, Ig62. 75  p.

THEATRE

CLOUTIER, EUGENE. Le  dernier   beatnik. Ecrits du  Canada franc;ais  14:11-91,  Ig62.
DEROME, GILLES.  Qui    est   Dupressin?  Ecrits du   Canada franc;ais   14:95-158,  I962.
HUARD, ROGER-BERNARD.  Echappee. Montreal, Editions Agora, 1962.   1 19  p.
-. Ouais; cinq   pieces  en  un  acte.   Montreal, Editions  Agora, 1962.
LANGUIRAND,    JACQUES. Les   insolites  et   Les


102
 violons   de  l'automne. Montreal, Cercle du
Livre  de   France,  1962.   209   p.

ESSAIS

BAILLARGEON,  PIERRE. Le   scandale  est  neces­
saire.   Montreal,   Editions  du   Jour,   I962.
154   p.
DUBE,  RODOLPHE. journal    philosophique   et litteraire, par  Franc;ois  Hertel, pseud. Paris, Editions  de   la   Diaspora   Franc;aise,  1 g6r.
71  p.
DUHAMEL, ROGER.  Lettres  a  une   provinciale.
Montreal,  Beauchemin,  1962.   252   p.
LE  MOYNE, JEAN.  Convergences. Montreal, Editions HMH,  1961.   324  p.
STANKE, ALAIN, ed.   Toges,  bistouris,  matra­
ques    et   soutanes.  Montreal,  Editions  de
!'Homme,  1962.   158   p.

HUMOUR ET  SATIRE
BRAULT,  MARIE-CLAIRE.    Ni    queue     ni    tete.
Montreal, Editions de  !'Homme, I962.
CHEZ  MIVILLE  ... COM ME SI VOUS Y  ETIEZ!
Montreal,  Editions  du   Jour,  1962.   160   p. HAMEL, CHARLES. Prix  David. Montreal,  Edi­
tions   de  !'Homme,  1962.   2BB p.
LANDRY,  LOUis.   Vacheries.  Montreal,   Deom,
1962.   242   p.

UTTERATURE CANADIENNE FRANCAISE



BIOGRAPHIES

BENOIT, PIERRE. Lord   Dorchester. Montreal, Editions HMH,  Ig6r.  203   p.
BILODEAU,   ROSARIO. Champlain.  Montreal, Editions HMH,  Ig6I.  Ig8   p.
BONIN, FERNANDE. Le  Reverend Pere  Norbert­ Marie  Bettez, o.f.m.  et   ses   muvres.  Mont­ real,    Ig62.  I64   p.
CARRIERE, GASTON. Le    pere    du    Keewatin,
Mgr   Ovide Charlebois, o.m.i. Montreal, Rayonnement,  Ig62.  240   p.
-. Planteur   d'eglises.   Montreal,    Rayonne­
ment,  Ig62.  200   p.
-. Le   voyageur  du  Bon  Dieu:  le  pere  Jean­ Marie Nedelec, o.  m.i.    ( I834-I8g6)   Mont­ real,   Rayonnement, Ig6r.  I62   p.
GAGNON,  MARCEL  A. La  vie  orageuse  d'Q[ivar Asselin.  Montreal,   Editions   de   )'Homme, Ig62.  2v.  300   p.
LABELLE, GEORGES. M a    derniere   bouteille.
Montreal,  Editions   de    )'Homme,   Ig62. I25   p.
LAMONTAGNE, ONESIME.  Un temoin de  ['autre
monde:   le   Pere   Frederic   dans   l'intimite. Trois-Rivieres, Editions du  Bon  Pere Frederic,  Ig6o.  I02   p.
LAPOINTE, RENAUDE. L'histoire   bou[eversante de   Mgr    Charbonneau.  Montreal,  Editions du   Jour,  Ig62.  I56   p.
LA  ROQUE,  ROBERT.  Les  canadiens d'autrefois, par   Robert  de   Roquebrune,  pseud.  Mont­ real,   Fides,   Ig62. 289  p.
POISSON,  JOSEPH   HERMANN. Rose    de   l' As­
somption. Montreal,  Ig6 r.  209   p.
TESSIER, MGR   ALBERT. Canadiennes.  2.  ed. Montreal, Fides,    Ig62.  I58   p.
THEORET,  ABBE PIERRE-EUCHER.  Kateri (I656- I68o)   vierge    iroquoise.  Paris,   Emmanuel Vitte,  Ig6r.  I5I  p.
TRUDEL, PAUL-EUGENE.  Mgr Ange-Marie Hirai, o.f.m., se  gardien et  cure  aux  Trois­ Rivieres.  v.5.   Montreal,   Editions   Francis­ caines, Ig6r.  228  p.
VACHON, STANISLAS. Alphonse Desjardins, fondateur  des  Caisses   populaires. s. r.,  Ig62.
44  p.


LITTERATURE DE  JEUNESSE

BEAULAC,  SIMONE. Campti, compta. Quebec, Editions Jeunesse,  Ig62.
 BER, ANDRE.  Le  repaire   des  loups   gris.  Mont­
real,   Fides,   Ig62.  I67   p.
BERNIER,  GASTON. Jean   Rigaud, [e  caid,   par Le   Routier,  pseud.  Quebec,  Centre   Peda­ gogiqu ,   I g6 r.  g6  p.
BUSSIERES,  SIMONE.  Fable    des    trois    com­
meres.   Quebec,  Garneau,  Ig62.
CARETTE, MARCEL. Au    pic    d'ambre,  par    )e Toucan,  pseud.  Quebec,  Centre   Pedagogi­ que,   rg62.   95  p.
-. On   s'evade   toujours   trois   /ois,    par    le
Toucan,  pseud.  Quebec,  Centre   Pedagogi­
que,   Ig62. 95  p.
CERBELAUD·SALAGNAC,   GEORGES. L'annee   de carillon. Montreal,  Fides,    I g6 r.  I 44  p. CHABOT,  CECILE. Et  [e cheval   vert. Montreal,
Beauchemin, Ig6r.  I93   p.
CLEMENT, BEATRICE. Election   au   terrain  de jeu.  Quebec,  Editions  Jeunesse,   Ig62.
coTE,  MARYSE. Le  dragon de  Mycale. Quebec, Editions Pedagogia, Ig62.
DAVELUY, PAULE (CLOUTIER) Dro/e  d'automne.
Quebec,  Editions  du   Pelican,  Ig6 r. I 33  p.
-. Sylvette  et  les  adultes. Quebec,  Editions
Jeunesse,  Ig62.  I48   p.
FORTIN,  CHARLES-HENRI. Les    aventures   de Pierre.  Quebec, Centre  Pedagogique, Ig6r. FRANCHEVILLE, GENEVIEVE DE.   Le    mirage.
Montreal,  Beauchemin,  I g6 r. 242   p. GAGNON,  CECILE. La   peche   a  ['horizon.  Que­
bec,  Editions du   Pelican, Ig6r.  35  p. HAMELIN-ROUSSEAU, BERTHE. Les  grands  ber­
ceaux. Montreal,  Lemeac,  Ig62.  23  p. HARVEY,   FRANCINE. Bruno    des  Ues.  Quebec,
Centre Pedagogique, Ig62.
JOLY, RICHARD.  Piquette et  Piquet. Montreal, Centre  de    Psychologie   et   de    Pedagogie, rg62.  57  p.
JULIEN,  CLAUDE. Le    tresor   de   Durfort,  par
Norbert  Romain,  pseud.  Montreal,  Fides, Ig62.  I42   p.   (ed.   orig.   La  chouette verte, I948)
LACHANCE-HAMMOND,  CARMEN.  L'amour  avait
un   message. Montreal,  Beauchemin,  Ig62. LEBOEUF, LUCILLE. "Le  colibri". Quebec, Cen­
tre   Pedagogique,  Ig6 I.  go  p.
MATTEAU, FRERE ROBERT. Micoumicou,  par Robert  d'Estrie,  pseud.  Montreal,  Editions de  )'Atelier,  Ig62.  I40   p.
MESSIER, ADRIENNE. Battements  d'ai/es.  Mont­
rea),  Beauchemin,  I g6 I. 48  p.
-. Etincelles  de  vie.   Montreal,  Beauchemin, Ig62.

103

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE FRANCAISE



-. Gazouillis dans  le  matin. Montreal,  Beau­
chemin,   1962.
-. La    magie    des   chases.   Montreal,   Beau­
chemin,  1961.   48   p.
-. Passeport    pour   demain.  Montreal,  Beau­
chemin, 1962.
-. Premieres envolees. Montreal,   Beau­
chemin, 1961.   48  p.
MIVILLE-DESCHENEs, JEAN. L'aventure est au coin   de   la  rue.  Quebec,  Centre  Pedagogi­ que,   1962.
NAUD, MARTIN.  Detectives  en  herbe. Quebec,
Centre  Pedagogique, rg62.  95  p.
-. Ondoa,   le    negrillon.   Quebec,   Centre
Pedagogique, 1961.  96  p.
ROSEAU, PIA. Marraine Mance.  Montreal, Beauchemin,   1962.
SAINTE-MARIE,  JACQUES. L'Astra  I  appelle  la
terre.  Quebec,  Centre  Pedagogique,  1962.
92  p.
SAINT-ONGE, PAULE.  Le    temps  des    cerises. Montreal, Centre de Psychologie et de Pedagogie,   I 962.
SAVOIE, JEAN-YVES.  La  caverne   des  faux  mon­
nayeurs. Quebec, Centre Pedagogique, Ig62.
-. L'Ue   aux   espions. Quebec, Centre  Peda­
gogique,  I 961.   96  p.
-. ]ojo    entre    au   college. Quebec,  Centre
Pedagogique,  1962.
THERIAULT, YVES. La  montagne  sacree.  Mont­
real,   Beauchemin,  I962. 6o  p.
-. Nakika. Montreal,  Lemeac,  1962.   23  p.
-. Le   rapt   du   lac   Cache. Montreal,  Beau- chemin,  I962.  6o   p.
THERIO,   ADRIEN.  Le     journal 	d'un    chien.
Montreal, Editions de  !'Homme, I962. TRUDEL, REJEANNE. L'ile  d'en    face.  Quebec,
Centre  Pedagogique, I 96 r. 91  p.
VALLERAND, CLAUDINE   (SIMARD) Au   pays  des va-nu-pieds. Montreal,  Fides,   1961.    r6  p.
-. La   pomme  de  Nathalie.  Montreal,  Fides,
1962.  16  p.
-. Le    pommier    tortille.   Montreal,   Fides,
1962.   16  p.
-. Reviens printemps. Montreal, Fides,  1962.
16  p.
-. Le   soleil   de   son  coeur. Montreal,  Fides,
1962.   16  p.
-. Le  violoneux. Montreal, Fides,  1962.  16 p. VINCENT-FUMET, O.   Kiri     bfitit    sa    maison.
Montreal,   Centre   de    Psychologie   et    de
Pedagogie,  1962.


104
 -. Kiri le   petit   castor. Montreal,  Centre  de
Psychologie  et  de  Pedagogie,  1962.


BIBLIOGRAPHIES

BALL, J. L. Theatre in  Canada, a bibliography, I6o6-I959· Canadian Literature 14:85-100, autumn,   1962.
BONIN, FERNANDE. Le  Reverend Pi!re Norbert­
Marie  Bettez, o.f.m., et  ses  wuvres.  Mont­
real,    I962. I64  p.
CENTRE  D'INFORMATION CULTURELLE    CANA­ DIENNE.  Canadian  cultural   publications. Publications culturelles  canadiennes. I 0. ed.  Ottawa,  1962.   12  p.
DULONG, GASTON et   LA  SOCIETE DU PARLER
FRANCAIS  AU CANADA.  Bibliographie  raison­ nee   du   parler  fran<;ais  au   Canada.   Revue de  l'Universite Laval   I6 :462-469; 67I-672, jan.    et   mars    I962.
INDEX DE  PERIODIQUES   ET  DE    FILMS  DOCU­
MENTAIRES  CANADIENS: AUTEURS ET SUJETS I948-59.  Ottawa,  Canadian  Library   Asso­ ciation,  Association canadienne  des   biblio­ theques, 1962.   I I8o  p.
LIVRES ET AUTEURS  CANADIENS: 1961.  Mont­
real,     I962.
SELTH, GEOFFREY  POOLE. Canadian literature,
1961.  Litterature canadienne-fran<;aise. Canadian  literature   I I :96-103,  winter, I962.
TANGHE, RAYMOND.  Bibliographie   des   biblio­
graphies canadiennes. Supplement   1960   &
1961. Toronto,  Societe bibliographique du
Canada,  1962.   24  p.
VINAY, JEAN-PAUL,  et  autres. Linguistica  cana­ diana . . . Bibliographie  linguistique   pour l'annee   I 96 I   et   complement   des    annees precedentes.   Revue   canadienne  de   linguis­ tique  7:1 I3-l r8,  printemps  1962.
WATT,  FRANK  w.,   ed.   Letters  in   Canada: I961.   Livres   en    fran<;ais.    University   of Toronto  quarterly 3I  :545-577, July  I962.


OUVRAGES  CONSACRES A  L'EDITION
ASSOCIATION  DES EDITEURS  CANADIENS. Cata­ logue    collectif    de   ['edition   canadienne. 2. ed.   Montreal,  1962. I03   p.
BASILE, JEAN.  Une  nouvelle collection (tres)
populaire  a   vu   le   jour    aux    Editions  de

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE FRANCAISE



!'Homme. Le   Devoir   53: I5,  oct.   I3,   Ig62.
CHARTIER,  EMILE.  La  collection Figures  cana­
diennes. Lectures  g: g- I I,   sept.    I g62.
CHEVALIER, WILLIE.  Journaux,  "intellectuels", et   politique.  Maintenant   g :304-305,  sept. rg62.
DALLAIRE, HENRI.  Notre Presse: catholique au
libre? Maintenant 5:171,  mai   rg62.
HAMELIN, JEAN.  Fides quittera  le  domaine de
!'edition purement litteraire.  le  Devoir   53 :
15,  Sept.  29,  1962.
LECLERC,   R.   Les   25   ans   de   Fides.  Lectures
9:30,  oct.    1962.
LEGARE,    ROMAIN.    IVe    Salon   du    Livre    de
Montreal,  rg62. Culture  23: rgr-192, juin
1962.
POISSON,   JACQUES.  Nos   douze  quotidiens  et les  agences d'information.  Action  Nationale
51 :682-686,  avril  1962.
ROBERT,   GUY.   Les   Editions  du   Jour.   Main­
tenant  7-8:272,   juillet-aout  rg62.
-. Trois  collections:  Les   Ecrits  du   Canada fran;ais;  le   N enuphar;    I'Alouette  bleue. Maintenant   ro :349-350,  oct.    rg62.
VINGT-CINQ  ANS   D'EXISTENCE   DE     FIDES.    Cul­
ture   23:307-308,  sept.  rg62.


REVUES

LIBERATION  NATION ALE;   journal social  et  cul­
ture!.    Montreal, Ig6r-
LIVRES    ET    AUTEURS    CANADIENS.    Montreal, rg62- 	annuaire
MAINTENANT; revue  mensuelle de culture et d'actualite  chretienne. Montreal,  rg62-
TEL QUEL;  revue litteraire. Ottawa, Les  Etudi­ ants   de  Ia  Faculte des  Arts   de  l'Universite d'Ottawa,   1962-


LINGUISTIQUE

ACADEMIE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE.  OFFICE  DE LINGUISTIQUE.     Bulletin. no    5 r-54,    jan.­ avril   rg62.
ANGERS,  FRANCOIS-ALBERT.  Le  geme  d'une langue.  Action  nationale  5 r  : 525-528,  fev.
1962.
ANJOU,  JOSEPH  D'  Balayer devant  sa  maison.
Relations  256: 103,   avril    rg62.
-. "Charabia  contemporain".  Relations 258:
!58, juin   rg62.
 Cordonniers,   a  vas    semelles!  Relations
259 :I g6,   juillet  I g62.
-. Un    enseign ment   efficace    du    franc;ais.
Relations  255 :8o-8r, mars   rg62.
-. L'illusion  du   bilinguisme. Relations  256 :
rag, avril    Ig62.
-. Jargon sportif a Radio  Canada.  Relations
253:20, jan.   rg62.
-. Nous   corriger, enfin! Relations 260:223, aout   1962.
-. La  paille  et  Ia  poutre. Relations 257: 139, mai   1962.
-. Un   peu  de  tout. Relations 263 :322,  nov.
1962.
-. Plaire et  faire   plaisir. Relations  262 : 288, oct.   rg62.
-. Pour  un  "le" ou  un  "du".  Relations 259:
rg2,   juillet   rg62.
-. Prepositions.   Relations    255 : 79,    mars.
1962.
-. Repeter  pour   apprendre.  Relations 264:
352,   dec.   1962.
-.Trap est  trap. Relations 254:46, fev.  rg62.
-. Vitesse  contre rigueur. Relations 26 I  : 26 r, sept.    rg62.
BROCHU,   MICHEL.    Bilinguisme compare,  au Canada, en  Belgique, en  Finlande, en Suisse et  en  Union Sud-Africaine. Action nationale
51 :666-68I, avril   rg62.
-. L'impasse   du    bilinguisme   au    Canada.
Action   nationale  5 r :596-602,  mars    rg62.
-. La    politique   anglo-saxonne  des   contin­ gentements   du    bilinguisme  au    Canada. Action nationale 51 :491-496,  fev.   rg62.
CASSELL's   new    French-English,    English­
French  dictionary.  London,  Cassell,  rg62.
655   p.






105

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE FRANCAISE



CHANTAL,   RENE  DE.     Chroniques  de   fran ais. nouv.  ed.  rev.  et  carr. Ottawa, Editions de l'Universite d'Ottawa,  I96r.  273 p.
CHIASSON, REMI JOSEPH.   Bilingualism in  the
schools    of   eastern  Nova    Scotia.  Quebec, Editions Ferland,  I962.  250 p.
DICTIONNAIRE CANADIEN;    fran<tais-angJais,
anglais-fran<tais.  ed.   abregee.  Redacteur-en­ chef,   Jean-Paul  Vinay.   Toronto,   McClel­ land   &  Stewart, I962.  86I   p.
DOR,  GEORGES.   Notre  bilinguisme est  Ia  mar­ que  de  notre inferiorite. MacLean  2:7, ro, juillet    I962.
DULONG,  GASTON,   et   LA    SOCIETE  DU    PARLER
FRANCAIS  AU   CANADA.  Bibliographie  raison­ nee   du   parler  franc;;ais  au   Canada.   Revue de  l'Universite Laval   16 :462-469; 671-672, jan.,    mars    1962.
LA  FOLLETTE, JAMES E., et VALIN, ROCH. Un curieux emploi de Ia negation en fran<tais canadien.  Revue canadienne de  linguistique
7: IS-25, automne  1961.
LARUE-LANGLOIS,  J. Les franco-manitobains sombrent dans  l'anglicisation. MacLean 2:4,
10, avril   1962.
LEGER, JEAN-MARC. L'etat de  Ia langue, miroir de  Ia  nation. Journal des  traducteurs 7:39- SI, avril-juin  I962.
MASSIGNON,   GENEVIEVE.  Les   par[ers   frant;ais de    l' Acadie;   enquete   linguistique   Paris, Klincksieck,  I962. 2   v.  975  p.
PLASTRE,  GUY.  Le  bon  usage.  Revue  de  l'Uni­
versite    d'Ottawa   32:322-334,  juillet-sept.
I962.
POISSON,  JACQUES. Les  anglicismes. Action nationale  52:264-266, nov.   1962.
-. La    soiree    du   hockey.  Action   nationale
5 I : 72 I -724, avril   I 962.
-. Toujours Ie  meme   reflexe.   Action  nation­
ale.  5I :407-410, jan.    I962.
ROBERT,   A.S.S.A.  Anglicismes. Journal des traducteurs  7:55,  avril-juin  1962.
ROY,  ARCHELAS.  Echenillons.  Action  nationale
51:410-414, jan.    1962.
ROY,  TREFFLE.   La  langue, eJoge  de  Ja  contra­
diction.  Action  nationale  52: 142-I44, oct.
1962.
TAILLON, LEOPOLD. Diuersite  des [angues et bilinguisme. 2.   ed.   Montreal,  Editions  de
!'Atelier,  I959·  95  p.
TURENNE,    AUGUSTIN.   Petit    dictionnaire  du
"joual"  au   frant;ais.  Montreal,  Editions  de
 !'Homme, 1962. 93 p.
VINAY, JEAN-PAUL,  et  autres. Linguistica  cana­ diana .  .  .  Bibliographie   linguistique   pour  l'annee 1961  et  complement des  annees pre­  cedentes.  Revue   canadienne  de  linguistique
7: 113-II8, printemps  1962.


HISTOIRE ET
CRITIQUE LITTERAIRES

OUVRAGES ET ARTICLES GENERAUX
ANJOU,  JOSEPH  D'   La  liberte de  nos  critiques.
Relations  225:82, mars   1962.
DUDEK,  LOUIS.  The  two   traditions; literature and  the  ferment in  Quebec. Canadian litera­ ture   12:44-51, spring  1962.
ETHIER-BLAIS,  JEAN.  Quelques  remarques  sur
Ia  litterature  canadienne-fran<taise.  Le   De­
voir  53: 13, oct.   20,  I 962.
FALARDEAU,   J BAN-CHARLES.  Recherche d'une voix.  Le  Canada fran<tais  par  sa  Iitterature. Canadian  literature  11 :5-13,  winter  1962. LIVRES  ET   AUTEURS  CANADIENS;  panorama de Ia   production  litteraire  de   l'annee 196 r.
Montreal,  1962.  99  p.
MARCEAU,   CLAUDE,   et  SAVARD,  RAYMOND.
L'Ecrivain  canadien  face  a  la  realite. Mon­
treal,  Editions Nocturne,  1962.  62  p.
MARCOTTE, GILLES.   Une [itterature qui  se  fait. Essais critiques sur [a litterature  canadienne­ frant;aise.  Montreal,  Editions  HMH,   1962.
293  p.
PILON,   JEAN-GUY.  L'annee  litteraire  au  Can­
ada   fran<tais.  Canadian literature  13:58-6I,
summer   1962.
ROBERT,   GUY.   Une  demi-douzaine de   chefs­
d'oeuvre, s.v.p.  M aintenant 6:230-231, juin
1962.
-. U ne   litterature  sans   racine:   Ia   notre?
Maintenant  1:38-39, jan.    1962.
TOUGAS,  GERARD. Une epoque de  synthese; quelques   aspects   des    rapports   litteraires entre  Ia   France,  Ia   Suisse   romande  et   le Canada  fran<tais.   Canadian  literature   11:
46-52,   winter 1962.
WATT, FRANK  w.,  ed. Letters in Canada: 1961. Livres en fran<tais.  University of Toronto quarterly  31:545-577, July    I962.

LEROMAN
BESSETTE,  GERARD.   French  Canadian  society as  seen   by  contemporary  novelists. Queen's


•·vCv:

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE  FRANCAISE



quarterly  69: 177-197, summer  I962. DUHAMEL, ROGER.  Letters  in   Canada:   I961.
Livres  en   franc;ais.    Romans  et   nouvelles.
University  of   Toronto   quarterly  3 I :550-
566,  July 1962.
ROBERT,  GUY. Coups d'oeil sur   douze   romans de  196I.Maintenant3:Iri-II2,mars I962.

LA  POESIE
FARGES,  MARCEL. Quelques poetes etrangers de langue  franc;aise    ( canadiens-suisses) .  Paris, Editions de  Ia  Revue Moderne,  I962. 77  p. LASNIER, RINA. L'heure  de   Ia  poesie.   Action
Nationale 5I:6I7-6I9, mars   I962.
ROBERT, GUY. Poesie  d'ici et  de  Maintenant. Maintenant 9:3II-3I2, sept.   1962.
SYLVESTRE, GUY.  Letters  in   Canada:    I961.
Livres  en   franc;ais.   Poesie   et   theatre.   Uni­ versity    of   Toronto   quarterly  3 I: 545-550, July   I962.

LE  THEATRE
DIX ANS  DE  THEATRE AU   NOUVEAU   MONDE.
Montreal, Lemeac, I 96 I.
HAMELIN, JEAN. Montreal: the  French theatre.
Tamarack  review   25:69-75,  autumn  I962.
-. Le  renouveau du  theatre au  Canada  fran­ c;ais.   Montreal,   Editions  du    Jour,    I 961.  I60   p.
SYLVESTRE, GUY. Letters  in   Canada:  I96I. Livres  en   franc;ais.   Poesie   et   theatre.  Uni­ versity    of   Toronto   quarterly   3 I:545-550, July    I962.


OUVRAGES  CONSACRES AUX  ECRIVAINS

BIBAUD, MICHEL
HAYNE, DAVID   M. Des  vers  inedits de   Michel
Bibaud.  Revue   de   l'Universite  Laval    I6:
9I3-9I4,  juin   I962.

BUSSIERES, ARTHUR DE
WYCZYNSKI, PAUL. Arthur de  Bussieres   ( I877- I9I3).  Lectures 9:3-6, sept. I962.

CHAUVEAU,  PIERRE-JOSEPH­ OLIVIER
LEBEL, MAURICE.  P.-J.-0.  Chauveau, human-
 iste   du   XXe   siecle.   Revue  de   l'Universite
Laval    I 7: 32-42,  sept.    I 962.

GARNEAU, SAINT-DENYS
BRAULT, JACQUES.  L'ecrivain d'apres ses manu­
scrits.  Maintenant 5: I9I, mai   I962.
ELIE, ROBERT. Saint-Denys Garneau. Our  living tradition. 4th  series.  Toronto,  University of Toronto Press,   I962. p.  77-92.
GARNEAU, JEAN.  Saint-Denys Garneau; l'homme  de   tous  les   jours.   M aintenant  5: I92,   mai   I962.
LACROIX,   BENOIT. L'homme  de   ]a   tradition.
Maintenant 5: I9I,  mai   I962.
ROBERT, GUY.  Ne  le  I3  juin  19I2.  Saint-Denys
Garneau. Maintenant 5: I89,   mai   I962.
-. Saint-Denys Garneau:  il y aura cinquante ans   le   I3   JUill    naissait. Le   Devoir    53:9,
9  juin   I962.

GIGUERE, ROLAND
MARCOTTE,    GILLES.  Connaissez-vous  Roland
Giguere?  Cite   libre   I3:26-28, mai   I962.

GIROUX, ANDRE
PLANTE, JEAN-PAUL.  Le  theme de  mesquinerie dans   l'ceuvre   d'Andre  Giroux, et,  Entretien avec Andre Giroux. Revue de l'Universite d'Ottawa 32:4II-430,  oct.-dec. I962.

HEBERT, MAURICE
LEGARE, ROMAIN.  Maurice Hebert. Lectures 8: I32-I34, fev.   I962.

REMON, LOUIS
SAINT-GERMAIN, CLEMENT.  Louis  Hernon.  Lec­
tures  8: I63-I64, fev.   I962.

LANGEVIN, ANDRE
EDWARDS,   MARY  JANE, et   BESSETTE, GERARD. Le  theme  de  Ia solitude dans  les  romans de Langevin.  Revue  de   l'Universite  d'Ottawa
32:268-279,  juillet-sept.  I962.

LANGUIRAND, JACQUES
HAMELIN,  JEAN.  Jacques  Languirand   et   le culte   de  l'insolite. Le  Devoir 53: I 2, 3  nov. I962.

107

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE FRANCAISE



LASNIER, RINA
COURTEAU, GUY. Rina Lasnier. Lectures 9: 87-
89,   dec.   1961L

LEMOYNE, JEAN
PELLETIER,   GERARD. Jean Le  Moyne:  ecrivain necessaire. Cite   libre   13 : 2-3,  fev.  1962.

LEVEILLE, LIONEL
CHARTIER, EMILE. Lionel Leveille, dit   Engle­
bert   Galleze   ( 1875-1955).  Lectures  9:59-
6o,   nov.   1962.

PILON, JEAN-GUY
BURRELL, MAUREEN. La   poesie   de   Jean-Guy
Pilon   et   d'Yves  Prefontaine. Liberti  4:54-
62,   jan.-fev.  1962.
 PREFONTAINE, YVES
BURRELL, MAUREEN. La   poesie   de   Jean-Guy
Pilon   et   d'Yves Prefontaine. Liberti  4: 54-
62,   jan.-fev.  1962.

RAINIER, LUCIEN
LAVERGNE, CLAUDE. Lucien Ranier. Montreal, Fides,   1961.  95  p.

SEERS, EUGENE
GARON, YVES.  Louis    Dantin  et   Ia   "critique intime".  Revue  de   l'Universite Laval  16:
421-432;  521-535,  jan.-fev.  1962.

THERIAULT, YVES
JACOB,  ROLAND. Yves   Theriault,   romancier. Revue   de   l'Universite  Laval     17:352-359, dec.  1962.









THESES

compiled by Carl F. Klinck



ALLISON, GORDON   H.  The  Westminster   Com­ pany. M.A., University of  Toronto,  1962. BERTHE, s. G. c.  SOEUR SAINTE. Le  sentiment
national et  la  poesie  canadienne. M.A.,  Uni­
versite d'Ottawa,   1961.
EDWARDS,  MARY  JANE. The Search for Unity: Modern Canadian Poetry  and  Its  Critics. M.A.,  Queen's  University,  I962.
JEAN-BERNARD, A.   S.   V.    SOEUR. Madeleine
/ournaliste. M.A. U niversite d'Ottawa,  1962. JEAN   DE   L'IMMACULEE, S.   G.   C.,   SOEUR. Angeline  de   M ontbrun, etude  litteraire   et psychologique.   M.A.,  Universire d'Ottawa,
1962.
RENAUD,  ANDRE.  Silvio.   M.A.,   Universite






I08
 d'Ottawa,   1961.
SAINT-BERNARD DE CLAIRVAUX,  S.G.C. SOEUR. Henry   Desjardins  {1874-1907)   sa   vie   et son  reuvre, avec  un  supptement comprenant les textes de tous  les poemes  et articles  de Desjardins. M.A., Universire d'Ottawa,  1962.
THOMAS, (MRS.)  CLARA. Anna Jameson. PH.D.,
University  of  Toronto,   1962.
WALSH,  JOAN A. Stephen  Leacock as  an American Humorist. M.A., University of Toronto,  1962.
WILSoN,  JENNIE  M. A  Comparative Study  of the  Novels of Frederick Philip  Grove  and Theodore  Dreiser. M.A., University of  New Brunswick,   1962.
