$5.oo  per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE
N°·85
Summer, 1980

CONTEMPORJIRY DRJIMJITISTS
& THE JtRT OF THE THEJtTRE

Articles

BY  DIANE BESSAI, BRIAN PARKER, JOHN  RIPLEY, NEIL CARSON, ROBERT WALLACE, CHRIS JOHNSON
Poems

BY  KIM MALTMAN, ALEXANDRE L. AMPRIMOZ, S. MAYNE, PETER CHRISTENSEN, TONY COSIER, ROO  BORSON
Reviews

BY   JERRY WASSERMAN, SUSAN STONE-BLACKBURN, P.  NODELMAN, ANN MESSENGER, JOHN  RIPLEY, DAVID M. HAYNE, CAROLE GERSON, KEITH GAREBIAN, ROBERT JAMES  MERRETT, D.  W. RUSSELL, CHRIS JOHNSON, PATRICIA KEENEY SMITH, RON MILES,  BRUCE WHITEMAN, E. E. GREENGRASS, ANDREAS SCHROEDER, TERRY GOLDIE, ANTHONY JOHN HARDING, W. H. NEW
Opinions and  Notes

BY  PHILIP STRATFORD, GEORGE WOODCOCK, ANN MESSENGER, ROTA LISTER,  MARIAN FRASER

A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW







CURRENT TRENDS




THERE IS  A HABIT OF  MIND most of US fall into now and  then: which is to predict  the future  on the basis of the  present.  Statisticians  tell us so often that "if current  trends continue" such-and-so will follow that  unless we pick up quickly on the supposition involved we are  likely to believe what  they say. It strikes me that "current trends" seldom continue. People, being human,  have such a persistent knack for changing their minds and  acting as individuals and  making separate  choices that  they confound those who would classify and  categorize their behaviour.  But even a statement  like this one is built on certain  assumptions:  one of  them being a hope that there will continue  to be options among  which people will be able to choose. That  might be equally  as blinkered  a belief as the statis­ ticians' set of axioms.
Consider  what  has happened  in the publishing  industry  in the  past few years. During the 1g6o's there was such an explosion of print that we all began to accept such a quantity  of books and information  as the norm  we lived with. The Cana­ dian literary scene thrived; scores of books of fiction and  poetry  (and more lately, drama)  appeared, not all of it good by any  means,  but  all  contributing  to  the general  seriousness  with  which  people  (academics,  governments,  industry,  the public at large)  began to treat Canadian  writers and writing.  Last year and  this, there have been quite extraordinary  cutbacks in the quantity  of Canadian books published. Tundra has cancelled its excellent children's literature  programme  (and coincidentally  Canadian  Children's  Literature  and  Contemporary Literature  in Translation  have folded) ; Talon briefly suspended  publication  (and  as the major drama  publisher in the country, this had serious ramifications  regarding  the avail­ ability of play-texts); Macmillan  has cut back both on publication  and on distri­ bution,  its future  under Gage unknown;  MeGill-Queen's announced  its demise; McClelland  &  Stewart  has removed  all items  from  its backlist  that  have  been selling fewer  than  1000 copies per year  (including items in  the  New Canadian Library),  and  refuses now to consider  manuscripts   that  have  not  come  to  the company via literary agents; the University of Toronto Press has indicated  it will publish more "high-scale"  academic  works  (specifically meaning  biography  and

2

EDITORIAL

social science, and by implication meaning fewer works in literature  and criticism). Companies  across the country  have been raising prices of books in  backlist; and all face the future  in a certain  tension. Unfortunately  neither  the tension nor the cut in quantity  guarantees any increase, even on average, in quality. The industry's reflexes are not aesthetically or altruistically motivated,  but responses to inflation, to government  policy, and  to development in retail sales. The  effects of these ac­ tions may well in the short run be to minimize financial losses; but in the long run they will also curtail  the development of a richly varied Canadian literature, and reduce, for school students and  public alike, both the availability of books and  the opportunities for choice.
One cannot  blame the publishers for these actions. As responses to inflation­ even if inflation  doesn't  make  sense-the actions  make  sense. As  responses to government   policy-over   two  governments-they  are,  moreover,  protective stances. One  would like to attribute  tiredness, for example, during  the recent elec­ tion campaign,  as the sole motivation for the then Minister of  Cultural Affairs to assert that  the number  of copies sold was an accurate  measure of a book's quality (such a statement  came as a defence of a policy that supported  publication  in a ratio based upon  number  of  copies each  publisher sells:  i.e., best-sellerism);  but that  does not  necessarily explain  the  policy.  Mentioning  Shakespeare  in such  a context does not clarify matters: the current  policy applies over single publishing seasons-which is why the retail sales policies of the big chains  (now taking over so large  a  part  of the  retail  book market)  also have  their  effect. By choosing mainly to stock mass sale volumes -and by not keeping backlist items in stock - the centrally controlled chains compound the impression given the public that  best­ sellers are  the only current  works of  quality,  and  they closely restrict  the choice from among which people may select books to read. By not stocking all works that publishers do produce,  they create  problems both for author  and  publisher;  but by controlling the market, they also come dangerously close to controlling the avail­ ability of art  and  information.
Textbooks  constitute  a  distinct  subset  of  this  problem.  Enough  of  us  went through  Canadian schools with American textbooks to remember that  the cultural bias of texts designed outside the country will often interfere with education  rather than aid it. To take an easy example:  think of that question that  always appeared as a writing assignment-"Discuss the role of our President." The  fact  that  he wasn't "ours" was only mildly intrusive; and the weak teacher's simple substitution "Discuss the role of our Prime Minister instead" was only mildly irritating. Deep at the heart of the question  (and  the substitution)  was a far more disconcerting prob­ lem of attitude: whatever  role the President has in the United  States, it is neither the same  as the  Prime  Minister's  in Canada, nor do  the  two  functions  occupy the  same  position in  each  nation's  set of  cultural  priorities. To  effect a  simple substitution  implies  that  they  do, and  that  the societies in structure  and  values

3

EDITORIAL

merely mirror each other. Surrendering  to the assumptions of the misleading texts (whether  American,  British, French, or whatever)   meant  in some degree surren­ dering the viability of one's own culture. It doesn't always happen,  but we cannot afford to ignore that  it sometimes does, and that  cultural  bias and education  are related in more than obvious ways.
In the last ten years, one of the efforts of Canadian publishers has been to make
a lot of Canadian textbooks available. Again we are concerned  both with quality and  with  availability:   with  choice, and  with  preserving  for  new generations  of students an availability of resources which will individually and variously aid them. Now, with the general paring away of national  publishers' backlists, a lot of  text­ books -and  consequently  the  opportunity   to  choose  to  use them -have  dis­ appeared  along with  remaindered  volumes of poetry, fiction,  and  drama. Once again we have to match the reality of financial exigencies against the more general threat  of cultural  loss. One must applaud  the efforts of many cost-conscious school boards not to waste public funds-provided, of course, that  they have a sensible definition  of "waste": even when a generation  of students is  small, as now, the individual students have the right to expect from their society a quality  education.  It  has to be funded  adequately;  it has to make  advantageous use of all current resources, including  teachers  first of all, and  space,  and  mechanical   and  other equipment, and  books; and it has to cultivate individual  talents and  encourage  a breadth  of cultural expectations. This is something that  the Uvesque government has understood  about  the youth of  Quebec:  the government  is acutely concerned to invest in the young, and  in a  particular  belief about  the future.  By contrast, Anglophone Canada seems intent lately on sacrificing a generation  to the economy and to have rooted its educational imagination in the managerial world of Frederick Philip Grove:  the watchwords are Cut  Back and Control  rather  than  Encourage or Choose. The difference has implications for publishing as well as politics.
I have been considering lately a variety of Canadian texts concerning  the teach­ ing of French to elementary school children:  in part  because they reveal some of the differences between Quebec publishing and  publishing  elsewhere in the coun­ try, and  in part  because they focus on a  political/educational  dilemma.  Clearly having a command  of both English and French is an advantage for anyone, facili­ tating  a flexibility of movement  and  expression;  yet for  political  and  economic reasons  (stubbornly  ignoring the  commonsense attitude  that  says it behooves us to insist that  the next generation  be as skilled in all the skills it possibly can  be),  we all too often in Canada  have dismissed second language  training  as unimpor­  tant  or improper.  Texts have been unavailable. And the market  has been suscep­ tible  to  the  Package  Deal  promotions  of  American  textbook-tape-&-machinery companies. To find Canadian  materials now coming available at this time of bur­ geoning bestsellerism is therefore  both  a remarkable  and  a welcome event. Two particular series are worth  careful  notice. The  first, from  Copp  Clark-Pitman, is

4

EDITORIAL

called  Invitation a la lecture, and  comes as a set of seven small  simply-illustrated books  (at  level 2; there  are other  levels as well),  by Claudine Courtel and  Marie­ Antoinette Mantione; though one balks, in one of the  volumes,  at  the comicbook biases used to portray Indians, the mini-stories  appeal  to children  and at the same time show a pedagogical sensibility  at  work. The  writers  are  aware  of  the impor­ tance  of sound, and  the stories  are  written  to develop  a sense of  cadence, which second-language teaching  so  often  ignores.   (Indeed,  Copp  Clark-Pitman's En franfais, s'il vous plalt, intended for early teens, is far less successful in part  because it fails to transform grammar into  a flow of speech.  It  tries to.  It  nicely balances  cartoons and  photographs and  tries  to  emphasize  the  linguistic   function   of  the melange of points each  chapter asserts;  but  the situations it offers as bait-"this chapter will enable  you  to do ... " -are not  coherent  enough  for  a student on
his own to be able  to sort  out  what  he is learning, or interesting enough  for most teenagers to want  to bother.) From  Quebec, however,  comes another quantity of material designed  for second-language learning. Two  records,  designed  to supple­ ment  printed material, are  quite  simply  marvellous  kindergarten  songs  to  listen to:  Guy  Auger's Chansons  dans le vent  (Les  Editions  projets)  celebrates seasons and  festivals,  city  and  country, and  so on;  while  C'est  la  recreation,  by  Edith  Butler,  Angcle  Arsenault, and  Jacqueline Lemay,  is a game and  nonsense  record that  just plays vigorously  with sound  and  takes great  joy in  the  patterns of speech. Again  the stress is on  cadence, on the  mastery  of voice;  and several  levels of text (books like Du solei! pour toi, Fantaisies, and Farandoles)  entertain as well as in­ struct, while addressing themselves  to aural  mastery.  In  an  age when  print  seems such a foreign  medium to so many  people, this assertion of the connection between voice and  the  printed word  reaffirms  the fact  that  language can  at  once  be func­  tional  and  give pleasure.
A number of children's books from  Lemeac,  boldly coloured  and  in large  type, reinforce  the delight  in language that  can come from an elementary "educational" book;  in  particular I admire Celine  Larose's  Petit soulier and  Une  Tomate  in­ quiete, the  latter a witty  story,  despite  a lame  ending,  of a tomato's quest  to dis­ cover its place  in the  vegetable kingdom. These  are richly  coloured  texts, and one must  be impressed  by the quality of print  as well as of text  (and  by the amount of financial support that  must  have  been given these Quebec publications). Though also handsome, Rita  Scalabrini's La Famille Citrouillard aux poissons des chenaux seems illustrated more  for the  adult  than  the child, not  geared  exactly  to the level of  its  informational story  about a  St.  Lawrence  fish.  This  is  a  flaw  in  much  English-language children's publishing as well-such  as Elizabeth Cleaver's col­ lages in The  Fire Stealers (Oxford), aesthetically interesting but  debilitated by a colour sense all wrong for the subject. The story, moreover,  lacks in this version the punch that  the  Ojibway tales have in  Doubleday's fine collection  The  Adventures of Nanabush, told  by Sam  Snake,  Chief  Elijah  Yellowhead, and  other  elders  of

5

EDITORIAL

the Rama  Ojibway  band;  but the Doubleday  tales-moral and marvellous-of the  great  but  imperfect  magician  Nanabush,   arc  illustrated  only  mechanically. Finding  a balance  seems difficult in other  ways as well. Christie  Harris's  Mouse Woman and the M uddleheads  (McClelland  & Stewart) is disappointing; Haida stories are transformed  by a European  set of conventions into fairytale fantasy of no  particular distinction.  Joe  Rosenblatt's  Tommy Fry  and  The   Ant  Colony (Black  Moss)  is an  unfulfilled  and  under-financed  production   about   a  boy's affinity with  ants and  his ability to lead charges upon  his unsavoury  and  unsur­ prisingly insect-like neighbours. And Tibor  Kovalik's  edition  From Tale  to Tale (Mosaic  PressjValley  Editions), a simply worded  but arbitrary  collection of tales from  various  places, seems like one of those  books that  adults  give to  children because they think they ought to be interested in it, without  much  justification.
One might wish a lot of books written expressly for children to be better written
and  better  produced.  But one does not wish for  fewer resources to be available. To follow up the pedagogical suggestions in Alice K. Hale's  An  Introduction  to Teaching  Canadian  Literature  (Atlantic  Institute  of Education)  or Peter  Bird­ sall's Antitoenailimagery (Canlit,  P.O.  Box 155, Peterborough)-despite  occa­ sional  lapses:  a  raspberry  to  Birdsall's  "The  Madawaska World  of   Margaret Laurence" ! -would in  fact  require  teachers  to  make  inventive  use  of  a  wide variety  of resources as they encourage  their  students  to recognize the  vitality  of their literature  in the vitality of the culture  at large. Among recent books that  an able teacher could use imaginatively are Andre Bernier's Le Vieux-Sillhy (Quebec Ministere   des  Affaires  culturelles),   Theo   Dimson's   Great   Canadian   Posters (Oxford) and  Pierre Des Ruisseaux's Le Livre  des expression quebecoises (Hur­ tubise HMH). Bernier's book is a collection of  maps, drawings,  photographs  and commentaries  that  provides an  integrated  history  of a  French  village becoming an  English establishment  becoming a city  suburb; from  it one derives a way of comprehending not  only place but  also  visual design:  of perceiving the  relation between home and  place, and  the process of transformation in time that  converts place into  literary  setting. One  might  hope  for  more  direct  social history  from Dimson,  but  he concentrates  more on design  than  society-despite which,  his book offers a visual way into the  past that  scores of textbook  dates  could  never match. And from Des Ruisseaux one discovers a language  in use and  in flux:  on peut  avoir  une  memoire de chien, it seems (remarkable; d. elephant); ou etre malade  comme un chien (from the English) ; or be obscure  ( noir comme chez le chien) ; or  abandon hope (son chien est mort)  ; and  much  much  more.
At least, one can if the books are available. In  1g8o, Canadian literature is still being written;  Canadian voices are still there to be heard;  I would hope that  it is not yet time to abandon  hope about  Canadian publishing.  There  is no question but  that  we face dramatic  times, but there  does exist the  posibility that  current trends may not continue.                                                                                     w.H.N.

6


THE REGIONALISM
OF CANADIAN DRAMA
 





Diane Bessai

NF.ITHER  MODERN CANADIAN THEATRE nor modern Cana­
dian  dramatic literature is so well established that  one can  pronounce  on them
absolutely at this stage of development. However, for the present the term regional is the most descriptively useful: in the past decade, the period which has seen the definite rise of a native  Canadian theatre  at last, regional activity  has made  the most  identifiable  and  creative  contribution   to  the  movement.  Of  recent  play­ wrights, Reaney,  Cook, Tremblay,  Murrell and  Glac;s are among those who write from specifically regional observation and experience. Among theatres and theatre  companies such  names come to mind as Alberta  Theatre Projects, Theatre Passe Muraille, Open  Circle, Mermaid, the Globe, the St. John's Mummers as examples of the varied  regional voices in the Canadian theatre scene.
As a term,  regional  creates bad vibrations in the collective aesthetic  psyche­
perhaps second only to the term  provincial. Certainly  I do not use the words synonymously, in as much  as the latter suggests subjugation  to some central  cul­ tural influence or control. Nor need regionalism be regarded,  as it often is, as nar­ row, limited,  parochial,  backward,  out-dated  or isolationist. In  its positive  sense regionalism  means  rooted,  indigenous, shaped  by a  specific social, cultural  and physical milieu.  It  reflects the  past as well as the present and  at its best  absorbs innumerable influences from beyond its borders, particularly  as these have bearing on the informing  regional perspective.
Thus  no denigration  need be implied in the suggestion that  the late-developing arts of the modern  theatre  in Canada  have little dependence  for their vitality on influences radiating from a particular  centre. Canadian theatre  in the present day exists in pockets, and  while some pockets bulge more than  others, there is still no national  theatre  movement  per se-at least not one to which we can point as our own special equivalent  to Broadway, the West End, or other such models of artistic or commercial success. We do have a National Arts Centre  in Ottawa, but from the national  point of view this functions only as a theatrical  cross-roads, insofar as it hosts successful productions  mounted in Canadian  theatres elsewhere. While the N.A.C.'s recently inaugurated policy of country-wide  tours of its own permanent companies has been heralded  by some as the long overdue beginning of a genuine national theatre, this is to ignore the real dynamic of theatre growth in this country. Another form of irrelevance  to the essential reality of Canadian theatre  activity is

7

REGIONALISM


the  equally  spurious ambition for  instant   internationalism. This  is a  peculiarly inverted  form  of provincialism observable  in  theatre circles  with  an  ambition to develop exportable productions; ironically the  process as observed  most recently involves preliminary importation. This happened most conspicuously in Edmonton in  I978 with  the  controversial hiring  of Britisher  Peter  Coe  as artistic  director of the Citadel. Coe's avowed internationalism in his choice of programme and  players in his first season  is a simple sign of that  theatre's archaic view of the  Canadian scene. In  one way this recalls that  until  the late  I 94o's  professionals  usually  came from outside the country  and that  Canada's theatres were touring houses to accom­ modate them.  By now, however, with the notable exceptions of Toronto's O'Keefe Centre and  the Royal  Alexandra, theatres are  no longer  committed to road-house policies. Touring comes from  regions within  the country rather than from  outside,  and  normally  the  mandate of the  regional theatres is not the international market  (coming  or going  in either  direction) .
The  tradition of  regionalism  in  Canadian theatre of  course  originates in  the peculiar  geographical and cultural conditions  of the colonial  and  post-colonial era. In the days of the predominance of foreign  professionals,  such  native  development of theatre as there  was depended on the many  dedicated groups  of amateurs who developed   their   own  community  theatres-which they   did  virtually  in  every region of the country. Inevitably provincialism predominated in its most parochial terms.  This  became  evident  when  the Earl  Grey  Musical and  Dramatic  Competi­ tions  (held  between   I 907 and  I 9 I I ) attempted to provide  the community groups  with  a sense of participation in a national theatrical  adventure. Clearly  from  the participator's point  of view such  an  enterprise  appealed to  regional  rather than  national pride,  whatever the intentions of the organizers. For  example, when  the Edmonton Amateur Drama Club  won  the  trophy  in  I9I  I  with  The Tyranny of Tears, there  was obvious  local  satisfaction  in  the  triumph over  companies from Toronto, Ottawa and  London, because  Ontario was then  the  colonial  centre  for Western  Canada. Further, when  Albert  E. Nash,  the  lead  in  the  play,  also won the  best acting  award, there  was relish in the adjudicator's comment that  the  part was played with  "such  intellectual distinction" that  he almost  suspected  Mr.  Nash a  professional. From   Edmonton's  point  of  view  this  was  no  mean   praise  from Hector   Charlesworth, a Toronto  drama critic  of  distinction. The  most  dazzling  compliment of all  (quoted  admiringly by A. B. Watt in  a I 949  series of articles  "Old Edmonton Theatre Days"  in the Edmonton journal) was that  this  produc­ tion "coming from  a town as far  away as Edmonton [the location  for the  festival that  year  was Winnipeg's Walker  Theatre], where  opportunities for studying the best theatrical models are almost  non-existent, came  as a genuine surprise."
The  question  of when  local  boosterism  in a given  area  turns  into  genuine  and self-confident  pride in local achievement would  be difficult to answer, but as the community theatre movement grew stronger, particularly in the  decade  following

8

REGIONALISM


World War I, the problem of non-existent theatrical models certainly became con­ siderably less acute. Betty Lee, in Love and Whiskey, identifies the completion of Hart  House at the University of Toronto in I9I9  as "the  first real sign of the com­ ing amateur  boom": its theatre  offered over 1 oo plays  between  192 I  and  192 5 alone.  The  Winnipeg   Community   Players,  the  Vancouver   Little  Theatre,   the Ottawa Drama  League, the Edmonton  Little Theatre  Association were among the many  community  groups founded  in the  I 92o's. The  organization  of provincial festivals marked  the next phase of  development;  thus the time was ripe for Lord Bessborough's 1932  invitation  of  country-wide  representatives  from  the  regional amateur  groups  to  meet  in  Ottawa  for  discussion of  the  foundation  of  the Dominion  Drama  Festival.
The debate over this development as a positive detriment  to the rise of a native Canadian professional theatre  still goes on, but certainly, with the decline of the syndicated  touring companies in the depression years, a theatre  vacuum  was filled. Nevertheless  in  I 933  B.  K.  Sandwell  expressed telling  reservations  about   the organization  of a nation-wide  amateur  movement. He thought  that  the "impelling motive" of "self-conscious patriotism" was a bad start for the serious development of the dramatic arts in Canada. He also feared that amateurism would not provide proper direction for either writers or performers; this "must be competent, original, experienced,  creative," he wrote in Saturday  Night. "It must also be continuous over a considerable period of time."1 Hindsight makes it easy to second-guess the specific problems he had in mind:  the "pointless socializing" which so disgusted Dora  Mavor  Moore even back at the time of the Earl Grey competitions,  or  per­ haps  the  limited  aspirations  inevitably  imposed  by  the  boosterism  inherent in competition which in theatre leads to safe choice of play. The failure of the Festival to accommodate  itself to experimental  theatre was early noted by Laurence  Mason in the Toronto Globe:  there was simply no marking system provided for the proper evaluation  of a play such as Herman  Voaden's Rocks, for example. Years later, in "Ten  Years at Play"  (Canadian  Literature, 1969), James Reaney  was to note to his dismay and astonishment  that for amateur groups he worked with in London, Ontario, the  most important rehearsal  was  the  theatrical  one-surely  a carry­ over from the competition era.
On  the positive side, E. G. Stemdale  Bennett, who was a regional adjudicator for the first festival, postulated  at  the end of the first season that  the Dominion Drama  Festival could serve as the foundation  stone from  "which  we might erect a glorious edifice of drama,  a National  Theatre." But  this, he added,  need  not mean  "a  centralized  plant  with its difficulties of maintenance and  management but,  rather,  a  brotherhood   of effort  assisted, guided  and  encouraged   by  some parent  body."2  Indeed,  the D.D.F. can take a portion of the credit for its part  in laying the foundation of certain  professional companies within  regions where the participating community  theatres  flourished.  In  Quebec,  Father   LeGault's   Les

9

REGIONALISM

Compagnons de St. Laurent was the seedbed  of Jean Gascon's Theatre du  Nou­ veau  Mende established  in  I952; in the late  196o's  two francophone  professional  groups  unabashedly entered  and  won  most  of  the  D.D.F. awards   (Gurik's Le Theatre de la Mandragore and  Pierre  Voyer's  Les Enfants de Voiture).
In  English-speaking Canada, the most significant development of a professional theatre company from  amateur roots  was  the  Manitoba Theatre Centre;  tech­ nically  this was an  amalgamation of the long-established Winnipeg Little Theatre and  a new professional company of one season called Theatre 77 founded by John Hirsch  and Tom Hendry. The latter  were both  Winnipeggers who had served  their theatrical apprenticeship in the  W.L.T. In  his retrospective  comments for  Cana­  dian Theatre Review (Fall  I974), Hirsch  spoke of "the excitement that  can come from  a  theatre that  grows out  of a  community" and  Tom   Hendry paid  strong  tribute to  the  role  of  the  W.L.T. in  the  new  theatre  centre   development. The  whole  conception was summed   up  in  Hirsch's  account  of  an  interview   he  had given to Ann  Henry  of the Winnipeg Tribune some four  years  previously:

I outlined  what  I wanted  to see happen,  not only in Winnipeg  but in Canada. I said  that  Winnipeg  needs a  theatre  centre,  a  regional  theatre   with  a  children's theatre  attached and a school which would tour  regularly.  I said that  this Centre would be the first in a series of theatres  across the country  that  would eventually be linked.

Interestingly, this is a professional  version  of Stemdale Bennett's conception of a de-centralized national theatre among  the amateur groups.  It  is extremely impor­ tant  also to note  that  at the outset  M.T.C. was linked  to its specific community in several vital ways. As Christopher Dafoe  points out in the same C.T.R. issue, while production was expanded to make  room  for first class  professionals  from  outside,  the theatre school also expanded to take touring productions to local schools. Also Hirsch recalls how "we  constantly  went  to the community to get extras  and  good young  people  for  small  parts." For  several  years  there  was  a  policy  of  bringing original material to the stage as well.3
Hirsch had  a philosophy  of community theatre as creating "an organic connec- tion between  the  audience and  what  went  on stage":

Even  the  plays which were not about  Winnipeg  responded  to something  close to our audience.  Repertoire  was always chosen with the community  in mind.  I didn't mind doing Arsenic and Old Lace because I knew the next show would be Mother Courage. I knew The  Dybbuk  was not a Canadian play but  I also knew  that  6o percent  of our audience were Jewish and that  a lot of Ukrainians in the city would understand this  play about  peasants,  the  kind  of background   from  which  many of them came.

Unfortunately by the time of this  I974  interview Hirsch  had  to admit that  many of these  important connections  between  the  M.T.C. and  its audience had  begun to fade. He  himself left the organization in  I 966,  although in subsequent years he

IO

REGIONALISM

was a frequent   guest  director.  After  the  building  of the  new large  theatre  on Market  Avenue  in 1970, the school did not flourish, and  it was closed in 1972; nor did  regional  touring  and  theatre  workshop develop  according  to the  initial hopes of the founders. In recent years the centre has concentrated  more and more on traditional repertoire.  Nor have smaller, alternative groups developed out of the M.T.C.'s initial creative energy as had been the hope in earlier days. Nevertheless, the foundation and  the development of the whole idea of a regional centre here is of great importance in modern Canadian theatre  history and in its initial concep­ tion  could  well stand  as a  model  for  newer  regional  developments  elsewhere.4
Nevertheless the example  of M.T.C.  is instructive on the negative as well as the
positive side:  pride of space seems to encourage  conservative tastes among  many of the now established  Canadian regional theatres,  and  perhaps,  too, the ghosts of the old D.D.F.  regional boosterism still enforce conventional rather  than experi­ mental standards of theatre excellence. Fortunately, however, there are other forms of regional  expression  in  the  theatre,  offering  healthy  signs of truly  indigenous contemporary  development  in Canadian  drama.


ERA THEATRE  MOVEMENT TO  STAY ALIVE   and  develop, it is necessary to go beyond mere conformity, to initiate rather  than  to imitate. There­ fore it is important to consider the process whereby provincial dependency develops into a genuine regional cultural  maturity.  Recently even Northrop  Frye has given his consent to theories about  regionalism:  in his Henry  Marshall  Tory lecture  at the University of Alberta, "Reflections of a Canadian  Humanist" (OctoberI 97 8),
he spoke of a mature Canadian cultural direction as "a decentralizing  movement," finding genuine unity the opposite of conformity, and he emphasized that the more specific the literary material,  the more universal its application. The  negative term for  Frye, however, is "localism,"  for which he rather  curiously chooses the  con­ temporary  cultural  crisis in Quebec as his prime example. Certainly in the colonial phase of the  Canadian theatre  movement -the  Earl  Grey  Competition  phase, for example -the last thing a group  wanted  to be accused of was localism. But in modem  times the term  does have a certain  positive thrust, Frye notwithstand­ ing. Indeed  one might  argue that localism in its contemporary  theatrical  forms is a demonstrably  important phase in the establishment  of a mature,  decentralized culture.
For example,  it is not  by accident  that  in the drama  localism is often  firmly rooted in various forms of documentary.  In many ways Canada is still, as Catha­ rine Parr  Traill  termed  it in 1836, "a  matter  of fact country."  Carl Ballstadt,  in his introduction to a collection of nineteenth-  and early  twentieth-century critical essays, The  Search  for English-Canadian  Literature, notes that  many of the early literary commentators saw great virtue in work which recognized the need to estab-


II

REGIONALISM


lish and  clarify  fact  and  immediate experience as  the  basis  for  literary  develop­ ment  in  a  new  country  (where  the  temptation to  borrow  inappropriately from established  traditions from  elsewhere  was  all  too  strong) .  In  the  second  half  of the  twentieth century, in a country  with  practically no  native  dramatic tradition of relevance  to  the  modern  day,  one  type  of  borrowing  from  European, British and  American sources has lent itself both to assimilation and  further inventiveness more than  any other: European forms of  political,  epic, and  documentary drama
-in combination with  the  American "living  newspaper" of the  193o's-have
found  fruitful soil in several Canadian regions in recent  years. In fact,  the need  to develop such a type of drama in Canada has arisen  from  the similar  cultural con­ ditions  which   have  made  documentary theatre  popular  in  regional  theatres in Britain. In his book Post-War British Theatre, John Elsom  has recently noted  that

For the growing regional repertory theatre  movement  in the 196o's, the local docu­ mentaries  provided  a means of establishing a theatre's identity  as part  of  a  town or region, without losing its function as a theatre.5

His  prime  example is Peter   Cheeseman's Victoria Theatre  at  Stoke-on-Trent, where  local  documentaries have  been  developed   through the  careful  research  of the actors and  writers  in an effort to focus on working-class themes  of this particu­ lar  community. In  regional  Britain, local creativity in  the  theatre has  been  over­ shadowed because  the transfer  and  touring  systems to and  from  the West  End  are the inhibiting factors. The  aim of Peter  Cheeseman (and those who subsequently took their  lead  from  him, as in Hull,  Newcastle  and  Leeds)  was to establish  new local  theatrical material for  new  local  audiences  who  otherwise   would   seldom venture  into  a theatre at  all. In  this, of course,  he had  the  model  of Joan Little­  wood,  both  in  her  pre-war  Manchester days  and  the  post-war establishment of Theatre Workshop in London's East  End.
In  Canada, the  problem  of establishing  a  theatre's local  identity is also a  key factor  in its success, if, in  part,  for different  reasons.  The task  is further  compli­ cated  by the  need  to establish  the identity  of the  locality  itself in  dramatic terms. James  Reaney  pointed  to the problem succinctly  in his article "Ten Years at Play" when he wrote:

The  tendency in the society in which I lived was to see drama  as, first, something somebody else wrote  thousands  of miles away, and  as something  that  you could evolve physically, as out of a can.'6

Paul  Thompson  returned to  Canada in I g67  after   working with  Planchon  in France (eventually to  become  artistic  director of  Theatre Passe  M uraille)  with the conviction  that  imported Broadway  and  West  End  plays  (or  Canadian imita­ tions thereof) were bad  business in the typical  community theatres which

try  to over-reach  themselves with something  like There's a Girl in  .My  Soup  or
The  Entertainer  where  they're  trying to deal  with  people  and  problems  (not  to

12

REGIONALISM

mention  accents)   that  they've  only encountered  in other  plays or  movies, when there  is such rich and  satisfying and  much more immediate  material  in the  living community  around  them.7

To  make  the  living  community yield its own  material and  to  proffer  a theatrical interpretation and  analysis  of this  material has  been  the  intent of  a number of small  theatre groups   which   came  into  existence  in  various   regions  during the
197o's.
Most groups  of this type begin as localist and  may choose to stay that  way: this is particularly true  of those that  concentrate primarily  on collective  creations. The Mummers' Troupe of St.  John's is a  prime  example  of a company formed   with the  explicit  intention of creating new audiences for theatre, to  be drawn through mutual interest  in  original  material of local  appeal. In  critical  comments about the  Mummers it has become  almost a commonplace to point out  the flawed  quali­ ties of their  plays and  the  inexperience of their  actors.  Certainly they eschew  any obvious  ideals  of slick  professionalism, are  very much  a company in  process,  and play for the  audience they  please most and  in a manner they  believe  reaches  that  particular audience most  effectively.  In  a July  9,  1975,  Toronto  Star  interview, the artistic  director Chris  Brookes said :

Theatre in  Newfoundland   is moving away from art-as-art   to specific social  use­ fulness. We're very community-development oriented. It's living in Newfoundland, where you're always engaged in a social-cultural emergence. You have to be. You've got to show people themselves before they forget who they are.

The  activist  bias of the  company first emerged  in a  public  way in  1973  when they were soundly  condemned on the front  page of the Cornerbrook Western  Star for their  show  Gros Mourn. In  this they intruded both  on  provincial and  federal governments during the  inauguration of Gros  Morne  National Park  by focussing attention (albeit too late) on the plight  of the residents of Sally's  Cove, one of the several  small  coastal  communities sacrificed  to the project. Break-down or threats to community traditions have  been strong  motifs in the  Mummers' repertory ever since.  (This has  been  a characteristic form  of Newfoundland angst since  the  re­ settlement projects of  the  late  195o's.)  In  1974  the  troupe was  invited   by  the workers  of the  company town  of Buchans to create  a  play  which  examined  the continuing uncertainty of the  community's very existence  because  of the depleting resources  of the  mines  which  are its life-line. In Toronto, Star critic Urjo Kareda found  the play theatrically "unadventurous" in comparison to the socially-oriented collective  creations of Passe  Muraille. However, Brookes  had  already forestalled such  an attitude (in  the  1975  interview) with his remark that

The  people in Buchans  thought  it important to do ... because Buchans is sympto­ matic of a bigger system. At the same time, however, the show is made for Buchans: I'm  not interested  in saving anyone's soul in Toronto.

REGIONALISM

From  the  beginning tours  through both  the  outports and  the  interior  of  New­ foundland have  been  essential  to the  Mummers' mandate. Eventually  they  even managed to  compete with  perennial   Newfoundland bingo  fervour  and  are  wel­ comed  wherever  they  go as a  voice of the  people.  In  April  I 976  Sandra Gwyn wrote  in Saturday  Night  of the  response  in  the  logging  town  of  Badger   to  the l.W.A. Show,  a production which  dealt  with  an  important strike  there  in  I959=

In the Town Hall, plastered with pink crepe-paper rosettes left over from the Kins­ men's Dance,  I sit down by a pair of loggers and  their  wives. They're  big, impres­ sive people in their fifties, and for quite a while it's hard  to tell how they're reacting. When  the play gets to the sequences Donna  [Butt]  worked out, where she plays a striker's  wife who changes gradually from a shy homebody  to a fiery militant  who takes her husband's  place on the picket line when he goes to jail, the  two women sit bolt  upright.  Almost before the scene ends,  they  jump  to  their  feet  and  start clapping.  Then  they turn and put their arms around  each other.

Still  adhering to  the  philosophy  that  "Newfoundland frames and  motivates us," the  Mummers toured  They  Club  Seals Don't They?  across  Canada in  I978; this was a show  designed  as much  for the  road  as the  home  audience, presenting as it did  the  controversial sealing  question   to  the  rest  of  the  country from  the  New­ foundlander's point of view. But even here they refused to compromise their home­  based   production  techniques:  even  the  three-ringed  circus   they   made  of  the Greenpeace mission, while a rather amateurish, farcical line of attack to those who have  more  sophisticated views of satire,  could  be seen  as the  proper  reflection  of the  situation for  the  audiences  for  whom  the  production  was  initially intended. When  the  Mummers travel,  they  are  simply  inviting others  to  be  an  extended Newfoundland audience for an evening.
The  Theatre Passe Muraille conception of touring shows is quite  different and with  this difference can be seen the  possibilities of the  wider  interest  of grass roots or "localist" theatres. This is to say that  the collective creations this company began to develop  under  the artistic  directorship of Paul  Thompson (appointed in  I97I) are intended for varieties of audiences from  varieties  of locations and  walks of life. Their strongest  breakthrough in this  direction was in September I972  with  their first version  of The  Farm Show. That summer the  company had  been  living and working in the farm community of Clinton, Ontario, with  the deliberate intention of creating a play from their experience. The  next year they tried  a similar  project, although of urban orientation, in the decaying mining town  of Cobalt; Under  the Greywacke  was  the  result.  In  a  Performing  Arts  Magazine   interview (Winter
1973), Thompson said of these productions:

we went right to the people in Clinton and Cobalt  and  made our play out of those people, out of the texture of those people. I keep talking to the actors about  texture work because one of the things that  is missing in Canadian Theatre in general  is an identifiable  base for characters.  Instead,  there's  a kind of general  base and  you

REGIONALISM

see too much of what I call movie-acting where, for example, if you want to do a small town character,  everybody's trying to be Paul Newman in Hud  instead of going out to a small town and sitting around in the corner drugstore, finding out how people are  there, catching their rhythms and  building off that.  Part  of the problem is we're still ... well, I guess "culturally imperialized" is the phrase  the nationalists use.

The attempt  "to bring back a kind of living community  portrait  or photograph" in these various "essays" of dramatic  journalism has stood this company  in good stead on the several occasions when they have gone outside their own region; for example, they spent the summer  of 1975 working in Saskatchewan  to create The West  Show,  consisting of another  series of portraits, sketches, historical vignettes through  which they made  a highly successful attempt  to interpret  Saskatchewan rural life. They caught  its radical spirit in politics and the sturdy  independence  of mind  of its farm  people in  the face of Saskatchewan's  well publicized  environ­ mental  obstacles. Their  work with Rudy  Wiebe -specifically for their dramatic adaptation of Sam  Reimer's  Vietnam  call from The  Blue Mountains  of  China,  led to plans for a full scale play in co-operation with that  writer.  In  April 1977, they presented Far As the Eye Can See at Theatre 3 in Edmonton: here they were able to combine  their  interpretive  talents with Wiebe's special  knowledge of the Alberta political and social scene. The result was a script which examined specific energy issues of the time from both a localist and regional point of view.
During  that  first summer  in Saskatchewan,  Passe Muraille  also established  a fruitful  contact  with  Andy  Tahn's 25th  St.  House Theatre in  Saskatoon.  This company, too, was anxious to develop local material for performance.  If You're  So Good Why are You  in  Saskatoon? was the  piquant  title of their  apprenticeship collective, a work which, with the help of Thompson's  troupe, provided them with the essential experience for this kind of theatre -leading in 1977 to their more ambitious  and  widely toured  Paper Wheat, a  play about  the  formation  of  the wheat co-operatives in the West.
Since 1976 Theatre Network, based in Edmonton,  has been developing similar collectives and touring  them on a smaller scale; its first was Two Miles Off, based on  the experience  of living in  Elnora,  a small decaying  community  in  the  Red Deer area.  Network's most successful and most widely toured show is drawn  from observation  of life in the  burgeoning  Tar  Sands community  of Fort  McMurray. Hard Hats and Broken Hearts attempts to combine the techniques of the collective vignette format  with a specific plot line dealing with some of the social problems brought  about  by the uprooting  of people in a changing  environment.
The collective has become increasingly popular in the West. In the fall of 1978, Regina's   Globe  Theatre toured   Number   One  Hard  in  Saskatchewan,   a  play developed  by  the  company  in  collaboration  with  playwright  Rex  Deverell.  In

15

REGIONALISM

some ways a challenge to Paper Wheat, this work  subtitles itself "an  investigative documentary on the grain  industry" and  is a satirical attack against  the misman­ agement of grain  resources. The  Globe's  experience with  this fmm, however,  is of longer standing than  that of the other  Western  companies referred to thus far, and  more closely parallels Theatre Passe Muraille's development of the collective docu­  mentary play.  In  the  spring  of  I97I each  theatre presented  productions of  this type:  the Globe opened  March Iin Regina  with  Next  Year Country  (having first performed it in  Prince  Albert  as a "homecoming" production), a collective  com­ piled  by the  company in collaboration with  writer Carol  Bolt, while  in  April  of that year  Passe  Muraille presented  its  company-researched  play  Doukhobors  in Toronto.
The  subsequent history of the Bolt-Globe  Next  Year Country  makes  an instruc­
tive comment on the way in which initial local and  regional  definitions  can  prompt broader dramatic patterns. In  I972  Bolt and  Theatre Passe Muraille collaborated in a reworking of the script  to create  Buffalo  jump  for  Toronto  performance. A large  portion  of the  revised play deals with  the inception of the work camp  strike, the organization of the working  men in Vancouver and  the  counter movement of the  prime  minister's Ottawa office. It  also focusses on  the  human interest  of the mass boxcar  ride  in  its various  stages  before  Regina-in  the  process  offering  a variety  of comic and satiric views of several locales through which  the  unemployed passed. Caricatures, particularly of R. B. Bennett  and  Bible Bill Aberhart, are also prominent.
What the play lost in its specifically prairie  flavour and  historical  detail,  the new Buffalo  jump  gained  in  dramatic shape,  particularly through its form  of  cross­ country coverage  and  its borrowings  from  agitprop tradition. At  the  time  of the play's  publication Carol  Bolt said  that  she  was  more  interested in  "myth"  than  history in any  case-here the  romantic celebration of the  heroic failure of those brought low by the machinations of an autocratic government. In this manner the play also gained  something of the energy of the post-October Crisis era, particularly in the guerilla theatre technique of its last scene, as performed in Toronto: instead  of staging  a full-scale  version of the Regina  riot of the strikers and  the  R.C.M.P., a brief scene of violence was quickly terminated by actor policemen  who promptly began  to  hustle  an  astonished  audience out  of  the  theatre door.   In   I977   Bolt worked  with  the  Great  Canadian Theatre Company in Ottawa to add  additional Ottawa material to the script,  providing  for this audience a specifically  local  per­ spective  by adding scenes which  dealt  with  the  large  convergence on  Ottawa at the time by eastern  workers who planned to join the  Westerners in their  assault on the  Bennett  government. The  expanded  localism  of the  play during its successive performances was  an  interesting  exercise  in  the  dramatic analysis  of  an  historic national issue from  a variety  of  regional  points  of view.

REGIONALISM



CLEARLY THEN, LOCALISM AND  VARIOUS FORMS  of collective creativity  are important in themselves to the initiation  of indigenous  theatre,  ex­ emplifying a dynamic relationship integrating  actor, director, writer and audience. Yet inasmuch as this type of work energizes new and special interests in the theatre,  so does it also provide a proper environment  for a new dramatic literature  whose chief strength  also lies in its regional origins. The point may be illustrated  well by reference to certain  of the  Western  regional  theatres  which  have  done  much  to promote  the writing of new plays. For example, in the first four years of its exis­ tence, Alberta Theatre Projects in Calgary, founded by Douglas Riske and Lucille Wagner in 1972, produced only Canadian plays, most of these commissioned from local writers.8   The  practice  of engaging  a  playwright-in-residence  has also been fruitful  at A.T.P.  For two years John Murrell  worked in Calgary in this capacity, leading to the production  of his A Great Noise, A Great Light in 1976, a fictional play of the Aberhart  era, and Waiting   for the Parade, 1977, a nostalgic recollec­ tion of the Calgary  World  War  II home front.
Rex Deverell's similar association with the Globe has not only led to his develop­
ment as one of the best writers of young peoples' plays in Canada (for example, Next  Town Nine  Miles,  1976,  and  Superwheels,  1977); he  has  also achieved some success with his adult  play Boiler Room Suite, 1977. That  the setting for this semi-Absurd  work is the basement of an abandoned  Regina  hotel is certainly not the play's chief point, yet this does nevertheless indicate that regional roots provide the basis for dramatic exploration  of contemporary  human  conditions in the urban world.9
There are also several Western playwrights who have responded more individu­
ally to the demands generated  by regional theatres. Ken Mitchell, for example, combined  his talents with Humphrey and the Dumptrucks  for the 1975 premiere of Cruel Tears at Persephone  Theatre,  Saskatoon. This  prairie folk opera  version of the Othello  story was performed  the following year at the Habitat Festival in Vancouver  and the Olympic  festival in Montreal, later to be revived by the Van­ couver Arts Club for a cross-Canada  tour. Mitchell has also worked at the Globe: in 1972 he adapted Arnold Wesker's Roots to a Saskatchewan setting, and in 1978 his play Davin: The  Politician was premiered there. This last is a lively chronicle of Nicholas Flood Davin, founder  of the Regina Leader and  volatile federal M.P. for the Northwest Territories in the post-Riel era.
Sharon  Pollock's Walsh, a version of the Sitting Bull-in-Canada incident,  was first developed  at Theatre Calgary  in 1973 under the direction  of Harold  Bald­ ridge and  performed  at Stratford in revised form the following summer.  Pollock has also worked considerably in Vancouver, there too responding to contemporary  regional interests in her plays:  Out  Goes You, 1975, is a satire on B.C. provincial politics, performed at the Vancouver  Playhouse. The following season saw the Play-

REGIONALISM

house production of The  Komagata M aru Incident, a semi-documentary  handling of an ugly World War I racist incident in Vancouver harbour  concerning the admission of Sikh immigrants;  the general as well as the regional appeal  of the work has been demonstrated  by subsequent productions  elsewhere.
The important point to be made here is that  the impetus for the writing of new
plays has had to come from the theatres, and where the record for the prairies on the whole is not spectacular, there has been a steady flow of original  work in the past ten years or so. M.T.C.  has made two important commissions, ten years apart. In Centennial  Year Ann Henry was asked for Lulu Street;  and for M.T.C.'s twen­ tieth anniversary in the 1977-78 season, Joanna Glass was requested to write The  Last Chalice. These two cases are interesting in different  ways. During the forma­ tive years of M.T.C., Henry  (as theatre  critic for the Winnipeg Tribune) was a sympathetic  observer of the  theatre's  development.  John  Hirsch  wanted  a  play about  the  1919  Winnipeg  general strike  and  turned   to  Henry  because,  in  her words:

My father was one of the  platform people,  one of the speakers,  so I had  grown  up with  stories  about  it;  met  people  like Woodsworth and  others....  I had  many  of my father's speeches.  I think  it's  absolutely  essential  to  know  the  truth about  our history,  and  you can  say things  in  a  play  that  you  can't say otherwise. I was  fas­ cinated by the  effects on  people,  the  stresses and  the  strike.  It was  a  marvellous opportunity to write  a play.10

The  result was a happy  example of the way local subject  matter  of deeply  em­ bedded  interest can attract  audiences. The  report  on the attendance at this  play makes its own point about the value of the material: people came who had never been  to a theatre  before because  they  were deeply  interested  in  how  the  strike would be handled. Thus a new playwright emerged out of specific local interest.
The  instance of the Joanna  Glass play is instructive  from  an opposite  perspec­ tive. Glass is an expatriate  Canadian (born  in Saskatoon)   who now lives in Con­ necticut.11 Her initial recognition as a playwright has come from the United States:  the now well-known pair of one act plays Canadian  Gothic and American Modern  were presented first in workshop at the  Manhattan Theater  Club  in 1972. The premiere of Artichoke was at the Long Wharf  Theater in  New Haven,  1975. Be­ tween  these years and  since, however,  these plays have  been  given several  per­ formances in Canada. Their specific appeal  (with  the obvious exception of Ameri­ can Modern) is in their sensitive rendering  of  prairie experience. Yet the M.T.C. invitation  was the first time Glass was  approached to  write  a  play for  a  major staging in a Canadian theatre.
Clearly the regional theatres are not always as sensitive to the potential for new plays as they should be, nor are they always responsive to already established work. The  instance of Herschel Hardin  is illustrative in the West, with specific reference

18

REGIONALISM


to his play The Great  Wave of Civilization. Written  in I 962, this quite  powerful Epic  theatre  analysis of the  winning of the West through  the  heartless abuse of the Indian  peoples won a Centennial  prize in Alberta five years later,  but waited another  nine years for its premiere performance at the Lennoxville Festival. It has never  had  a  prairie  performance, although  Hardin's later  play Esker  Mike   and His  Wife  Agiluk, premiered  at  Factory  Lab  Theatre, Toronto,   in  I 97 I,  was mounted  at  M.T.C. in  the  I973-74 season. In  the past two or three years some theatres  are  making  concerted  efforts to locate  more  plays and  playwrights. In Edmonton, for example,  The  Playwrights  Unit,  jointly  sponsored  by Theatre 3 and  Northern  Light,  provides a playreading service and  offers professional work­ shops of half a dozen plays a year. Their  efforts have led  to several full scale pro­ ductions in prairie theatres.12
It  will be observed that  much of the regional drama  referred  to in this discus­ sion has either  historical,  political, or sociological bias. There  is a view  that such interests merely serve a playwright  in his apprenticeship   (and  perhaps Canadian drama  in its apprenticeship)  rather  than  in his maturity.  This  would  be to say that  the inexperienced  dramatist  lacks the confidence to write out of  the fullness of his personal experience  and  therefore  must, at first, take  refuge  behind  issues and fact. It is certainly  true that  a playwright's work in collectives  (and  these fre­ quently  fall into the category of documentary) can serve as an  excellent training  in writing for the theatre-although equally well an experienced playwright can help  the actors  and  director  better  realize their  intentions  on  the stage. But the truly important considerations  about contemporary  Canadian regional drama  are that, first, regional drama  establishes the validity of a specific milieu as the subject for dramatic interpretation;  second  that  it draws its strength  from  the audience interest it thereby generates;  and third and equally important, that  it feels free to experiment  in styles and stagings in order to communicate its particular vision in its own particular way. Indeed there is a positive advantage  in the very lateness of the development of a Canadian dramatic literature. No Canadian playwright need feel the constraints  of the well-made tradition  and its modern  sit-com variations.
Further, while the evolutionary  theory of cultural  development  (that  we move
from history to individuality, for example, or from either nationalistic or regionalist self-consciousness to a more cosmopolitan artistic realization)  may have its attrac­ tions, its desirability and  even its validity are open to question. James Reaney, the best of the  Canadian regional  playwrights, and  therefore  quite  possibly the  best of all English-speaking  playwrights in Canada  up to now, has demonstrated  in his Donnelly trilogy that  regional  historical detail can be animated   by a gifted dra­ matic  imagination. The  universals of personality or  individuality  are surely best contained  within the fabric of a specifically realized time and  place. The imagina­  tion must soar if that  is its gift, but the best  chance for its success lies in its con­ tinuing reinforcement  of that  rootedness which makes flight possible.

REGIONALISM

NOTES

1 Quoted by Lee in Love  and Whiskey (Toronto, I973), p. 113.
2  Ibid.,  p. I 20.
3 Hendry lists Desperate  Journey, by Mort  Forer; Look  Ahead  and  All  About  Us  by Len  Petersen; A Very Close Family, Bernard Slade; Names  and  Nicknames, James Reaney; and  two  Canadian adaptations by Betty  Jane Wylie:   An  Enemy of the People and  Georges Dandin.
4  While  the  country does now have  theatres in  almost  every  major centre, this does not  constitute a  true   network   which   the  term   "decentralized national theatre" implies.  Among  such  organizations as the  Neptune, Theatre New  Brunswick, To­ ronto  Arts  Productions or  Vancouver Playhouse, one  may  see one  or  two  of  the early aims of M.T.C. taking  root, but  none exemplifies all of them.
5   (London, I976), p. I02.
6  Rpt. in  Dramatists in  Canada, ed. W. H.  New  (Vancouver: Univ.  of B.C.  Press,
1972),  p. 72.
7  Performing Arts Magazine (Winter I973), p. 3I.
8  Playwright Paddy  Campbell and  composer  William Skolnik  have  collaborated  in several  musical  plays:  Hoarse  Muse, I974; Under the  Arch, I975  (which  evolved from  the  company's first production, The  History  Show); Passengers,  I978. Other playwrights who  have  provided  regional  material for  this stage  include  Bonnie  Le May,  Roundhouse, I975; Jan  Truss,  A Very Small  Rebellion, I974;  and  Claudia Gibson,  We  Don't  Need  Another Widow McEachren,  I973·
11   Rod  Langley also worked  as a  writer  with  the  Globe: Tales of a Prairie  Drifter, I973; Bethune, I 974, a joint commission with  the Centaur, Montreal. The  choice of subject as well as the co-sponsorship can  be seen  as another way in  which  regional interests  work   in  Canada:   Saskatchewan's political  radicalism  and   Montreal's belated  local  pride  in Bethune  combined  suitably to create a play of general  interest but from  a specifically regional  impetus.
10  Sarah Yates, The First Twenty Years  (Winnipeg, I978), p.  I5.
11 She studied  acting with Betty Mitchell in Calgary in  I955 and  obtained an  Alberta
Arts Council scholarship to work further at  the  Pasadena Playhouse.
12 These   include  Frank   Moher's Stage   Falls,  Mary Baldridge's The  Mary   Shelley
Play, and  Gordon Pengilly's Songs  for Believers,  all in the  I 978 season.



CANADIAN  AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available at
the bookstore
UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
2075  WESBROOK PLACE
VANCOUVER, B.C. V6T IWS / 228-4741


20


MUNICIPJIL SWIMMING POOL

KimMaltman

The sky
is like paper, flawless,

from  the  blur  of white, the  blue  heat  shimmering against the  hills,
a kind  of static
presses down  into  the earth. You  wander off a bit,
the  pressure  underfoot,
the  damp trunks  almost  dry, a  thin  shirt,
dust  so fine the  touch is like a soft  cloth drawn  across  your  feet,

you  navigate between  the  details, clumps of thorn  grass, thistle,
all  in  clusters,

and  the  jolt of cool that  hits  as water burns off
comes  back,

then  you  turn, the  bodies,
almost  motionless the
bodies scattered on  the  grass are  breathing
quietly
against the  sunlight.










2I

ON THE EDGE

Michael Cook's Newfoundland Trilogy


Brian Parker


MICHAELcooK HAS WEAKNESSES AS  A DRAMATIST that have drawn  down  upon him  the obloquy of critics, and  it is perhaps  as well to consider these first. He thinks of himself basically as a poet, and has explained that
plays occur to him not in the form of Aristotelian  "action" but  poetically as "a series of images, dramatic  scenes, and  circumstances."1  The  obvious difficulty he has in organizing  his work, perhaps his most serious defect as a dramatist, reflects this centrifugal  habit  of imagination. None of his plays has  much  conventional plot and all tend to be wordy and overwritten.  At one extreme,  he uses overlong "realistic" monologues, as in Quiller and Therese's Creed, which reveal the effect of his apprenticeship to radio drama; at the other,  he throws heterogeneous ma­ terials loosely together  in  quasi-historical  Brechtian 2   structures  with  huge  casts, like Colour the Flesh the Colour of Dust, The  Gaydon Chronicles, and On the Rim of the Curve,  where social caricature,  historical or regional  realism, and  poetical philosophizing  all  clash.  He  compensates  for  his  plays'  verbosity  with   rather
obvious stage effects:  either  by the  detailed  recreations  of everyday  routines -
cooking, washing, net making -or by vaudevillean songs, dances, and allegorical tableaux,  according to whether the bias of a particular play is realistic or presenta­ tional.  His  work can  be thematically  confusing  because  it  combines  an  almost reflex sympathy  for  any  underdog  with  a  more  existentialist  concern  with  the strain   isolation  imposes  on  human   relationships.   And   these  imprecisions  are reflected in unevennesses of rhetoric. Cook is capable  of  genuine  poetic intensity, but  too frequently  he falls into  philosophical  overexplicitness  or  poetical  over­ writing, both of which can strain characterization.
Nevertheless, Michael  Cook remains an important dramatist, because beneath the technical  crudities, at the poetic heart of his work, lies an intensely imagined experience of Newfoundland  life, presented  with such integrity  that  at its best it rises to comment on the human  condition.
Paradoxically,  Cook is helped in this because he is not  a Newfoundlander by birth,  but a Briton of Anglo-Irish  descent who arrived  in  Canada as recently as
1965.3   Thus  he brings to Newfoundland  an outsider's  eye like that  of the original settlers. What  he sees is the "survival"  experience  which critics such as Northrop


22

COOK


Frye  and  Margaret Atwood  have  argued  is the central  Canadian literary  theme: confrontation with  a  relentlessly  hostile environment which  undermines all  con­ fidence  in human institutions and  even in identity  itself. By its very nature drama finds it more  difficult to represent  this experience  than  poetry or the  novel because it can  only  represent reactions to the experience,  not  the  confrontation itself, and Cook  is perhaps the  most successful dramatist so far  in  conveying  the experience in stage terms. He says specifically  that our drama needs
to try and come to terms with the landscape, the environment, and  the people like any stranger  walking  new in  the  land.  Like any immigrant, either  now or  four hundred  years ago.... we have never developed a theatre  of character in conflict with environment. Which  also implies, the environment  being what it is, a theatre inhabited  by Gods and  Heroes.4

Hence one  of his attractions to historical  drama, to  which  he says he  returns in order  to reactivate his own original  experiences.5
Newfoundland seems to Cook  "the last human  frontier,"6  and  it has given  his work  "focal identity" because  he found  surviving  there  a tragic  and  heroic  indi­ vidualism: "a  way of life in which  individuals struggle  with  timeless questions  of worth  and  identity against an  environment which  would  kill them  if  it could.m  Newfoundland experience strikes  him  as "essentially  Greek,  profoundly tragic,'' 8 with
a kind of mythic  quality,  a kind of elemental  quality,  very primitive,  very brutal, and yet with immense community and tribal strength which we have just about lost everywhere else.9

"The experience of such  a people," he says in his 1974 C.T.R. interview,

teeters  between  primitive  suffering and  defiant  joy. Their  expression  is essentially artistic,  a Satanic  struggle  to impose order  upon experience  rendered  frequently chaotic by a blind and savage nature.

This  "essentially artistic" mode of life takes several forms.  It can  be manifest  in the rituals  of work and  celebration of The  Head, Guts and Sound-bone  Dance, or in the  very houses themselves,  as climactically in  ]acob's Wake:

Their  craft  is manifest  in the work of their hands, the boats made from wood, cut and  hauled  laboriously  during  the dark  winter  months;  the  houses whose simple design often deceives visitors, for they are built with absolute economy ... in addi­ tion to acting  as the prow of the ship in the teeth of Atlantic  gales.

But pre-eminently for Cook,  artistry  is to be found in the  Newfoundlanders' reten­ tion  of "a  language colourful, new, musical,  scatalogical ... full  of the  power  of ancient metaphors."10
Experience on this primitive, existential  plane appeals,  Cook thinks,  to men who have  come  to realize  that  "somewhere in the  transition between  rural and  indus­ trial  man  they left behind  a portion  of their souls."11 His main  purpose  as a play-

23

COOK

wright  is thus twofold:  to reaffirm the validity  of the  traditional  Newfoundland way of life, while also exploring the tragic  cost of such  "Satanic" assertions of order, and, at the same time, to record its demise beneath  the pressures of a shal­ low, regimented,  urbanized  civilization with  which  Cook has little  patience.  He has explored these themes in some forty plays/ 2  but  his strengths  and  weaknesses and the range of his technique can be discovered by looking in some detail  at his so-called "Newfoundland Trilogy"-Colour the Flesh the Colour of Dust ( 1972), The  Head, Guts, and Sound-bone  Dance  ( 1973), and  Jacob's Wake   ( 1975)  - recognizing, however, that  they are  not strictly  a trilogy at  all, since there  is no continuity  of action  or characters  between them  and  they are  written  in wholly different  modes. (Indeed,  Cook seems originally to have envisaged Colour as the second play of the trilogy, to be preceded by a play on Sir Humphrey Gilbert which eventually became On the Rim  of the Curve.13 )   What  binds the plays together  is their common concern with unmediated  experience  "on  the edge of the world."14



CoLOUR THE FLESH THE COLOUR OF DUST was Cook's first stage play and  is something of a mess. Ostensibly  it is a Brechtian  "epic"  about the  surrender   of St.  John's  to  the  French  in  1762  and  its subsequent  recap­ ture  by the English. However, as the "Spokesman" character in the  plays  points out, "Historically, this has been a pretty inaccurate play." Its interest lies in Cook's reactions to Newfoundland, but the overall effect is incoherent because he has tried to cram too much into it without a clear sense of priorities.
Perhaps  the simplest element-the one that  the reviewers seized on with relief
-is the broad satire directed against a hypocritical  merchant  called Tupper and his ally, magistrate  Neal, who  manipulate the  political  situation  for  their  own advantage ("Wars may come and wars may go, Tupper ... but trade ..."). This concentrates  in two main scenes. In Act I Tupper adulterates his flour with saw­ dust only to discover that he must now purify it again in order  not to antagonize the French,  and  in Act II he tries to learn French  in order  to trade  with the new garrison  and  insists on teaching  his shopboy what  he does not know himself. But the comedy of these situations is complicated  by other elements. In the first act a more savage level of satire comes into play when Tupper cheats the pathetic  Mrs. McDonald   whose  family  is starving,  and   justifies himself  with  selfconsciously villainous irony:

It wouldn't be  right  now, for  me  to give  you  something and  you  worrying about whether you'd  ever  pay  it  back.... it's  a  terrible thing in  these  times  to  have  a working  conscience, Mrs.  McDonald; and  I'm afraid yours  will drive  you  to  the grave.

Later  we hear that  Mrs. McDonald  is dead.  Morevoer,  in each scene there is an

24

COOK

episode with  the shopboy  in which the action overlaps with another,  more com­ plicated concern of the play. In a dumbshow at the end of the flour scene the Boy encourages  starving  urchins  to loot  his master's  stores, and  during  the  French lesson in Act  II he reveals an  unexpected  (and  implausible)   command  of idio­ matic  French  and  menaces his master with a knife. Both incidents remain  comic within the context of the scenes, but their suggestion of hidden violence relates also to a more complex  aspect  of the  play-its  presentation  of  the  populace  of St. John's,  towards  whom Cook's attitude  seems ambiguous.
Basically, Colour  the  Flesh conveys a sympathetic  awareness that  history does
not interest or affect ordinary  people except for the worse. Their  concern is always for survival:  whichever side governs, the drudgery of work must go on; social inequalities  will continue; at most, war provides a break in bleak monotony and perhaps the chance of a cathartic outburst of violence. This attitude is made expli­ cit in speeches by the Spokesman. He refuses the Lieutenant's challenge to personal combat in Act I  (and  encourages the mob to overwhelm him)  with the explana­  tion,

You need  time  and  money  to uphold honour. And you need  to think  of yourself  as being  someone with  a  place  in life, as having  a situation, you see. But  us now  ... we're scum....

And  in Act  II he elaborates  on this directly to the audience  in a speech which seems to  have  been  influenced  by the  Common  Man  of Bolt's  A  Man  for All Seasons,  claiming  that  concern  for survival  represents  the  natural  truth  of  hu­ manity: "We  are  the  nature  you try to subvert,  divert,  convert;  and  in  general screw up in a lot of ways."
This  basic attitude is complicated  and  confused by several factors.  Reminders of the Irish antecedents  of the populace, for example, while serving to emphasize the gap between  them  and  their governors, tend  to shortcircuit  their  more basic position by popular  jokes against  the  English, or to suggest that  ambiguities  in their attitude  are typically and exclusively Irish. Thus,  the Woman  criticizes their adulation  of her lover Sean, who has already  been hanged  at the opening of the play for distributing stolen bread, by complaining  that

you made a hero  of a fool  and  you didn't lift  a finger.... Jesus  Christ, isn't  that
Ireland all over ... To  make  heroes of fools and  every fool a hero.

In fact, the crowd shows no tendency at all to foolish heroics, so her generalization is confusing.
The crowd's actual  behaviour  also has its contradictions. The idea that ordinary people have no stake in war is challenged by a scene in which a deputation  of loyal fishermen try to persuade the demoralized Captain  to defend St. John's.  Yet Cook also recognizes a viciously destructive side to the populace, an appetite for senseless violence. The Woman  tells how her trapper  husband gratuitously  killed an inoffen-

COOK

sive Indian  ("and it seemed as if nothing had happened") ;15 and the play presents in sadistic detail what Cook's stage direction calls the "communal orgasm" of the mob's killing of an  English soldier, the nihilism of which is later  directed  at  the audience  itself when  the Spokesman  threatens  that  "one  day,  we'll kill you all. Because there'll be nothing else left to do."
The  murder  is explained  (a little too glibly)  by one of the soldier's comrades:
"In  a funny  way, Willie, you've saved us all ... I mean  ... it was like you were a bleeding sacrifice ... ," and its specifically sexual nature -impalement through the groin with a hook-seems intended  to reflect relationships  between potency and survival, imperialism and sexual exploitation  that  Cook has not really man­ aged to make clear. Respect for a vitality that  is destructive  yet at the same time necessary for survival is an important motif in Cook's tragic  vision, but in Colour the Flesh he is not sufficiently in command  of its contradictory implications.
A result of this is that the play's imaginative  force is concentrated on the nega­
tive aspect of Newfoundland  experience-the spiritual  defeat  created  by life on a barren  rock hemmed  in by the sea, where, as the  Captain explains,  nothing human  seems able to endure:

People  build.  Then fire. Or  drowning. Or  famine. Or  disease.  Or  just  ... failure of the  spirit.  The thin  scrub  marches  back  across  the  cleared land  ... The  flake rots  into  the  sea ... I  tell you  nothing will be  remembered here  ... That people will be born and  live and  die and  their  passage  will go unnoticed. That their  build­ ings will fall and  rot back  to the land.  That their  history  will die in  their  children.
. . . It belongs to the bottom  of the sea ... to secrecy and  silence.

The  play shows this spiritual  demoralization  in various ways. At its simplest it is seen in the  British soldiers of the opening scene, who have  lost all hope for the future  and  all pride  in their  profession, yet at  the  same  time  hate  the  pointless brutality  they have fallen into. More thoroughly,  this state of mind is explored in the characterization of Captain  Gross, the garrison  commander. Gross tells Lieu­ tenant  Mannon  that he was just as keen for "law" and "honour" as the Lieutenant  once, "But  this rock now ... something in it defeats  the spirit." Squalor,  insub­ ordination, separation  from his family, sexual infidelity, a  growing sense of isola­ tion, the harshness of the land, and the drink with  which he has tried  to dull his sensibility, have eaten away his self-respect.
At first the remnants  of the man he was are reflected in a rather  dandyish, epi­ grammatic turn  of speech, reminiscent of Shaw's  General  Burgoyne:  "Honour is an expensive luxury, reserved for naval battles  and  campaigns mounted  for Im­ perial gain"; but  when a whore breaks in to shame  him  with  her scolding, this brittle  elegance snaps  and  Gross drops  abruptly  into  a  more  symbolic mode  of speech:  "I see icebergs in my sleep. All the time." The switch of rhetorical  levels is shocking but quite deliberate:  it reflects Gross's surrender to a different plane of experience;  and  this poetic style becomes his  norm  for  the  rest of the  play. At

COOK


times it seems a bit selfconscious, as when he answers Tupper, who has said he tries to avoid the sea:
But we are at sea, Tupper.  At this moment ... Can't  you hear it? We're adrift, man. Helpless. The  whales and ice thrash about us. Without a rudder, what can a man do? Drifts, Tupper.  Only his head above the wave. Limbs, loins ... ice cold ...

-where poetry and dandyism seem to mix. But this, too, may be deliberate, since there is always a certain posing quality in Gross, a need to have his situation appre­ ciable by others.
Gross's speeches play a large part in establishing the special Newfoundland  angst of Colour the Flesh, as in the lines already quoted  where he describes his pain at human  impermanence, evoking despair in terms of the environment that  caused it; and in that  particular scene, which is a key one, the setting strengthens the link, because Gross speaks the lines to the Lieutenant  when the two meet in a fog. Like the tattered  uniform that he insists on wearing even after St. John's  has been recap­ tured, the fog becomes a conscious symbol for the Captain. It  represents his sense of isolation and spiritual  drift,  but at the same time, as he recognizes, it  provides comfort by insulating  him from reality ("The fog, I find, always makes life more bearable") ; moreover, it also leads to greater self-knowledge ("a  man learns things walking alone in the fog"), since it is in the fog that he recognizes that the seed of his collapse was already  in him before he came to  Newfoundland: "[My spirit] was defeated  before I got here."
What that seed was is illustrated  by his reasons for not defending St. John's.  His
initial explanation, that  the garrison is outnumbered, is immediately  (and  a little too patly)  contradicted by the arrival  of the contingent  of loyal fishermen. This drives him back to the real reason, his inability to take moral responsibility for the loss of life that  a battle will entail. Our  reaction to this is meant  to be ambivalent. Gross's reluctance  to take  life agrees with  the  play's conclusion  that   just being alive, mere existence, is man's  basic value; but it also relates to the idea, recurrent in Cook's drama, that  feelings of humanity  may be weakness in a savage environ­ ment-a  point the Lieutenant's Woman  later states explicitly. The  play  returns to a similar ambivalence  at the end, when Gross tries to comfort  the Woman  for the Lieutenant's death  by emphasizing  the fact that she and  the child she carries are still alive. This is very close to the Woman's  own position, yet she rejects the Captain's support  because from  it he extrapolates  a sentimental justification for his own collapse, appealing to authorities  the Woman does not recognize:  "I will tell them that  you live here.... That  I did what I did  because you live here." As in his pathetic consolation that  the official report of the debacle will secure for him some measure of remembrance, Gross shies away from the isolation of his position. He cannot  dispense with an external  source of notice and  justification, even if it condemns him.

COOK

The  Captain's breakdown is interestingly complex but not quite clearly worked out, and  as he is not the play's protagonist,  he is slightly offcentre  in our interest anyway.  Potentially  more interesting  than  Gross, though  even less developed,  is the character  of Lieutenant  Mannon.  He, too, feels the isolation of their position:

We are stranded  on some island at  the edge of time. There's  the sea. And the fog.... We can't gentle it in any way ... impose order or a universal design upon it.... Ultimately we respond to the ferocity of the sea. And the impermanence of life.

His hobnobbing  with the common soldiers in scene one suggests that  this experi­ ence has already begun to corrupt  the Lieutenant's concern for "spit and  polish," but the challenge of the French invasion apparently revitalizes his sense of  "duty" and "honour." During  the action, however, he discovers that  he does not  believe in these values for their own sake but because, without  them, he, too, would face a moral collapse:  "It's all I've got, see. Certain  loyalties. Certain obligations and contracts." The strained nature of such ideals forces him into unnecessary rashness and falsifies his relationship with the Woman.  Significantly, at the end he is shot in the  back by one of his own men. A major  flaw in the dramaturgy is that  the reason for this killing is never made explicit, but there are sufficient hints for us to assume that  it must be because of the pressure that  the Lieutenant's idealism puts on others,  a  certain  selfserving quality  in  his  "honour" that  Cook  would  later develop more fully in the monomaniacal skippers of The  Head, Guts, and Sound­  bone Dance and  jacob's Wake.
Cook explores the  nature  of the  Lieutenant's failure  through  his love for the Woman,  who began the play mourning for the hanged Sean, another  "fool" killed for resisting things  as they are. The  affair  has been condemned  as a misleading cliche/6  but it seems to me quite central to Cook's purpose. At one level, it can be seen as a further  stage in the Lieutenant's corruption, since, like Captain Gross and the common soldier, he is betraying the wife he left behind. Certainly, the Captain associates the Lieutenant's idealism with sexual guilt:  "It's your conscience then and not our impossible position that's  exciting you ..."; and  the Lieutenant him­ self admits he is tempted to settle down as a Newfoundlander, but recoils from the "rot" he thinks this will involve. More complex than  this suggestion of  corruption  is the  confrontation the love affair  establishes between  rival  alternatives  to  the Captain's surrender   to  despair,  nicely  emblematized   in  a   tableau   where  the Woman,  having  rescued the Lieutenant  from  the  mob,  holds  him  prisoner  by a noose around  the neck.
The  Woman  says she is attracted  to the Lieutenant by two factors:  by "the  life that  runs in my loins" (in contrast to Gross's image of frozen loins, cited earlier), but also by an element she sees in him that she calls "dignity," which he shares with her  previous lover, Sean:  "You  have  been  gifted  with  a  sense of yourself that nothing  can break ... Sean had that."

COOK


It turns  out  that she  is wrong: the  Lieutenant relies on  the  external order  of "honour," not  the  internal strength of "dignity." After  she finds she is pregnant, this  leads  the  Woman to retreat to the  other,  more  basic  need  to "be." She  now condemns her  previous  "humanity" because  "It's not  possible  to  live  very  long once  you accept that"-a sentiment adopted more  cynically  in the  Magistrate's advice about controlling the  populace: "No  matter how much  they hate  you-at the  moment of violence,  weaken  ... be generous  ... it destroys the  flame  of their spirit." The  Woman pleads  for the value  of mere existence  ("You want  to begin and  end things  ... we exist"). In contrast to Gross's reliance  on his written  report, she insists that  her  unborn child  will be "the  only testament we can scribble  on"; and   her  position  is summed up  with  the  simple,  almost   banal  comment: "the bravest  people  I know  are  the ones who endure."
This  is the  stoic  note  on  which  the  play  concludes,  though not  without some further nuances. Colour the Flesh ends as it began  with  the  Woman mourning a dead  lover,  but  whereas  the  first death  was emblematized by a tableau in which she cradled Sean's body  like a  pieta, at the  conclusion  of the  play the stage direc­ tion tells us she hugs her pregnant belly:  an image of life has replaced the opening image  of death. She comments to the dead  Lieutenant:

You were nothing  to anyone,  but  me; and  your sense of honour,  your King  and Country.  Now you're dead. And the honour of the King and Country  lie dead with you. And there's  only me left ... me and him ... me and her ... what's it matter?

This  is an  affirmation, if a very bare  one;  but  "What's it matter?" is ambiguous, meaning either  "What does it matter whether  the  child  be a  boy or  a girl?"  or, more bleakly, "What does it matter that  the child and  I survive?" This shadowing even  of stoicism  is also  reflected  in her  repudiation of the  Captain's attempts to console  her  because  "there's life in  you yet"; and  is expressed  in  the  "Woman's Song" that  gives the  play its title and  is returned to at  the  end:

But to you I gave as give I must
to colour  the flesh
the colour of dust
But it's a fool
who doesn't  trust to give himself because he must.

Dust  colours the  flesh; love ends in death. Nevertheless,  it is foolish to deny them.
As a  work  of  art  Colour  the  Flesh is exasperating yet  memorable. There are striking scenes, passages of vividly evocative poetry, and some shrewd insights into behaviour;  but  the  overall  structure is incoherent, as  Cook  himself  recognizes ("Colour  the Flesh is a lousily structured play"  7 ). The presentational elements­ the  Spokesman's address to  the  crowd  and  a voice-over  reading  of  the  official

29

COOK

report  of the surrender   (which  was cut  in  production) -are  not  adequate to establish a truly "epic" mode; the songs can be tangible  (as in the ballad of "Old Noll Cromwell") and sink sometimes to pretentious doggerel; the rhetoric is uncer­ tain, with no attempt  at the Newfoundland  dialect used so effectively in the other two plays of the trilogy; and the symbols of the hanged  man, the fog, and the pieta (made  more explicit in the original draft  by comparisons  to Christ,  the Romans, and Mary)  are all rather  too obvious.
Nevertheless, for all its faults, Colour the Flesh stays stubbornly  in the mind be­ cause it does manage  to convey Cook's intuition  of a double-edged  vitality in exis­ tence itself, destructive yet enduring, and his sense that this may be our last defence against  spiritual  collapse. These  intuitions  are  developed  further  in  The  Head,  Guts, and Sound-bone  Dance, which is his most powerful stage play to date.




EREAS Colour the Dust is very loosely organized, Dance has a form that is almost perfectly suited to its theme. At its core is the same harsh Newfoundland   experience,  but  confrontation   with  it  is  now  more  active  and heroic. Moreover,  the focus has been shifted  to the tragic  price exacted  for such heroism, and the main threat  is no longer nature  itself but the modern  world that renders heroism obsolete. Cook summarizes the  plot as "Two old men  trying  to keep the past alive to the exclusion of the rest of the world.ms
The  action centres on a Newfoundland  fisherman,  Skipper  Pete, an  "Ancient leader  of a savage  pack with the instincts still there  but  the  ability  in  pitiful  re­ pair,"19 who in his "splitting  room" on a fishing stage  jutting  into  the  Atlantic tries to keep tradition  alive by remembering  past glories and  ritualistically making preparations for "one more trip." Pete stands uncompromisingly for
The old way. The  only way. The  proper  way to do  things.  Greet  the  day  at  cock­ crow. The  sea, no matter what  the  weather. Stack  the  gear.  Mend  the  nets. :Make the  killick  [a  stone  anchor]. Keep  the store  in  order. There's nothing  without it.

His son-in-law, Uncle John,  once the cook on the  Skipper's  fishing boat,  aids him, and so does his simple-minded son, Absalom, a sixty-year-old who is the only one of the three still physically able to go fishing. For most of the play, John's  wife tries unavailingly to free her husband  from the Skipper's  domination, until a fatal accident convinces him she is right.
Our  attitude to the Skipper is contradictory. He is admirable in his intransigent insistence on natural truths that  lie beneath  the surface  of contemporary society; but, at the same time, he is a monomaniac  like Melville's Ahab/ 0   who refuses to recognize change or alternative styles of life and  is prepared  to sacrifice everyone to his own stark vision. Though  in the past he was famous for never losing a man, Uncle John accuses him of tyrannizing over his crews for self-aggrandizement:

COOK


You saved  'em  alright.  But  not  to stand  up.  Not to walk  the  world.  Crawl!  Ye made  'em  crawl.  Ye  made  me  crawl. ... We  escaped  the  rule  of  others.  And exchanged  it for the rule of our own kind .. .

and  he reminds the Skipper that  (like the Magistrate in Colour the Flesh) he never showed  humanity except  to disarm  men on the brink of mutiny. This  same  brutal imposition of  personality continues into  the  present  with  the  Skipper's vendetta against seagulls; his sneer  that, if John  had  gone to the  war,  "You'd never  have survived. Unless  I was  with  you"; and, more  comically,  with  his insistence  that his son-in-law must  urinate decently,  as though  he were  still  on  board   his ship. Most strikingly, it is shown  in the  elaborate work rituals-preparing  equipment, cleaning, salting, and  cooking  the fish, and  careful  cleaning up afterwards -that he enforces  before  he  will allow  his companions to  celebrate, also  ritualistically, his son Absalom's "end of voyage"  and  miserably  small  catch.
The  Skipper sees these rigid  codes as necessary to impose  order  upon  chaos:

I 'low the sea's a big place.  Now a man's a small place. You've got to have order. Decency. There  'as  to be a way of doing  things. A man's  way. That's why we're here, isn't it? They's  only we left.

And  according to the  opening stage  direction, this tension  should  be reflected  in
the  play's set. The  "splitting room" is crammed with

an immense variety of gear representing  man, and fish and sea in a tottering,  near derelict  place, and  yet also [revealing], as we become accustomed  to it, an almost fanatical  sense of order.

The egotism  of the  Skipper's need  to impose order  is qualified, however,  by a strain  of mysticism in him. He holds that  it is useless to demand meaning, as Uncle John does at one point; life can only be accepted: "It doesn't matter what  it means. It's  enough   that   it's  there." Fishermen in  the  past  knew  their   proper place  in nature : "We understood each  other -the sea, the cold, and  the  dogfish, and  the sculpin  and  the shark  and  the whale. They  knew us and  we knew they.... "
And  in spite  of the  fish's disappearance, Skipper  Pete  believes -or  wishes  to
believe -that  this state  of things  will return, ousting  the  modern world  of relief, welfare,  and  education, for which  he has total contempt: "We waits.... And  one day,  they'll  come  back  in their  t'ousands.... They's  waiting for  the  old  days like we is."
These  two sides to his attitude -the "Satanic" compulsion to an  order  based on egotism and  his mystique of man's  relation  to nature -are given  religious over­ tones,  which  are  handled much   more  skilfully  than  the  hanged man  and  pieta devices  of Colour  the  Flesh. On  the  surface, the  Skipper  is an  intolerantly con­ servative  Catholic who  will  not  attend his sister-in-law's funeral because  it  is to be held  in a  Pentecostal church, nor  welcome  the visiting  bishop  because  he  has come  by car  instead  of boat  and  the  traditional floral  arches  have  not  been  built

31

COOK

to welcome him. The Skipper's orthodoxy is wholly superficial, however. He warns Uncle  John  that  "God  is not merciful.  Don't  ye ever forgit  that," and  seems to substitute  his own authority  for the bishop's when  he defends the sternness of his regime by claiming  "I  made an arch  for ye." When  the Skipper  boasts of never changing  a habit or opinion, Uncle John  replies with irony:  "You  and  the Pope
'as got something  in common after all then, Skipper ... ," and John's  wife pushes the implications of this a stage further when she says her father is "Only  one breath away from God or the Devil himself." On  the other  hand,  the Skipper's  reaction to the news of young Jimmy Fogarty's death  is wholly pagan  and fatalistic, deify­ ing not himself but the sea:  "The  sea wanted him. Old Molly. She took him in her good time.... "
The  set reflects this pantheism.  The  left  wall of the  "splitting  room"  has "a
ragged window-once a church window, saved from an abandoned church some­ where and  put to use by a crude insertion into the room ... ," and  it is through this window that the Skipper gazes as he rhapsodizes about  the past and envisions its return.  At the end, when he is left alone, the setting sun dies through it to con­ clude the play.
For a while, with memories, work rituals, drink, and snatches of song, the Skip­ per and  his two companions manage  to create their own reality within  the shack, culminating  in the drunken  dance of triumph  that  gives the play its title. A stage direction tells us that during this dance "For  a moment  they are all one. All free";  and  one implication  of the title is, of course, the  celebration  of a sense of life in the raw, a dance of fundamentals.  But as the title also implies, it is a dance of dis­ carded  remnants  as well, the pieces of the fish that  are thrown  away:  the dance is ultimately a dance of death. All along, the emphasis on heroic individualism  has been balanced  by a recognition of the sterility of the Skipper's way of life. His is a world with no place for women or children. Though his sister-in-law, we hear, was good to the family, Skipper Pete has no intention  of  attending her funeral; and he despises his daughter, Uncle John's  wife, partly because he wanted  to father  only sons, but  also because he realizes she is a bitter  rival for John's  loyalty, without which  he cannot  keep his vision alive:  "Memories ain't  no good unless you can see someone else working out the same ones."
Uncle John  and  his wife have only daughters themselves, their son having been stillborn;  and  John  blames this on the Skipper,  who, he claims, killed their sex­ life by his expectations of a grandson. We hear  that  when the Skipper's own son, Absalom,  was young, his father  sent  him  back  into  a  fifteen-below  blizzard  to gather  five more  sticks of firewood  and,  when  the  boy's  horse  returned   alone, refused to go to look for him because "Ye know ye had  to bring 'em  up hard  or else they wouldn't  survive."
Absalom is now retarded,  a sixty-year-old with  the face of a child, still unable to look his father  in the face. When  he asks the Skipper  to sing, his uncle under-

32

COOK

lines the significance of his name by repeating the psalmist's cry for the son he has destroyed, "Oh Absalom, my son. Absalom. Absalom."
This destructiveness  focusses in the action round  the death  of Jimmy  Fogarty,
which alters the relationships  within the play. When at the end of Act I another child comes to the shed  to beg aid for Jimmy,  who has fallen  off a  wharf  and cannot  swim, the Skipper  and  Uncle John  ignore him,  continuing  drunkenly  to gaze through  the  church  window, discussing a drowning  that  happened   in  the past. This callousness looms behind the subsequent celebration of Absalom's catch, as the noise of the search  party is heard increasingly outside;  and  at the end it is Absalom who finds the body and brings it to his father: "Look  what  I caught  by the side of the  boat  ... I nivir caught  a boy before. What  shall I do with  him, Father?  ... Can  I have him?"
Up to this point Skipper  Pete has been insisting that  the death  must have been fated, that  "Old  Molly," the sea, touched  the boy the day he was born  and  has taken  him  in  her  own  good  time -"passionately  believing  what  he  wants  to believe," as the stage direction  explains-but confronted  by the body in his own son's arms, the tragedy  finally touches him:
Absalom  is facing Skipper Pete,  the dead  boy in his arms.  The  grandson he might have  had! Skipper Pete puts  out  his hand  slowly, traces  the blind,  wet face with  his horny  hands. Then, he  turns,  the  hand   that  touched   the  dead  child's face  to  his throat, as if it is a weight  that  will choke  him.

Uncle  John   had  genuinely  not  noticed  the  child's  plea,  in  fact,  because  the Skipper's  arm  had  kept  him  turned  towards  the  church   window,  but  now  he realizes that Skipper  Pete had heard and had deliberately ignored the cry for help. The  doubts and  rebellions that  have worried John  throughout the play come to a head,  and  he  breaks  at  last from  his father-in-law's  dominion,  taking  Absalom with him  ("he  don't  know nothing  about  boys. Only fish"). The  play ends with Skipper Pete alone, stubbornly  returning  to the ritual of his evening chores by lamplight,  as the sun dies out in the shack's church window.
Except for the rather  forced situation  where the child's  plea is ignored,  Dance is remarkably  economical  and  successful in fusing realism and  symbolism. Cook admits that  the Skipper's  disregard of the child's request is "unrealistic," but says "The scene was intended  to drive home the Skipper's character";21  and the adver­ tisement for a CBC production  of the play expands this by explaining that in the Skipper "fatalism  reflects an acceptance of tragedy that seems like inhumanity."22
Yet it is less the situation  itself that  is at fault  than  the  fact  that  so little  of its
significance gets into the dialogue. The Skipper's remarks about "Old Molly" emphasize his fatalism  retroactively, but his deliberate willing  of the disaster at the time of the child's  plea is left wholly to the actor;  the closest the dialogue  comes to it is that,  at that  time, the Skipper and John  are discussing the drowning  of a young man whose father  was restrained from trying to rescue him. Similarly,  the

33

COOK

Skipper's  anagnorisis, when the tragedy of Jimmy  Fogarty's  death  at last strikes home to him, is all in dumbshow;  Pete does not speak again  after  he has seen the body in Absalom's arms.
Apart  from  this particular  incident  the ingredients  of the  play are  admirably
coherent.  The   characterization  of  the  four  main   personages-Skipper   Pete, Uncle John, Absalom, and John's  wife-is sharply individualized; the set, while realistic, has rich symbolic suggestiveness; sounds-off-the sea itself, the mocking cry of seagulls, the bells for Aunt Alice's funeral,  and the encroaching noise of the searchers for Jimmy  Fogarty's body-all acquire  thematic significance;  and  the elaborate  rituals of preparing  equipment,  feeding  the stove, making  tea, cleaning and cooking fish, and  preparing  a celebratory drink,  do not substitute  for action, mere visual filler, but reflect the old men's attempt  to use routines  to recreate the past. This culminates in the grotesque dance, which, like the shanties sung by Pete, absorbs "presentational" techniques into the play's realism yet also carries a level of symbolism. The  use of a modified Newfoundland  dialect  which is sparse, pro­ verbial, coarsely comic, and repetitive, gives a sense of authenticity which can rise effortlessly to poetry-as, to give one brief example,  Uncle John's comment  that Absalom dreams "Of  the mackerel thicker'n  on the water  than  moonlight,  whis­ pering together."  And the result is a powerful, credible  picture of the end of an heroic tradition.
The  Head, Guts, and Sound-bone  Dance is bracketed  by two of Cook's shorter
plays, each centring on a character like Skipper Pete, which were written originally for radio but subsequently staged:  Tiln  (I 97 I) a very successful piece which takes the symbolism of  Dance a step further,  and  Quiller  (I 975), a less interesting, mainly  realistic monologue. A brief comment  on  these pieces is pertinent  before turning  to the final play in the trilogy, jacob's Wake.
The setting of Tiln  is a lighthouse -"a platform  on the very edge of space and time" -inhabited by the keeper Tiln, " a crazy old man ... living on the exposed edge of his soul," who has come to believe that  he is God, and by Fern, the dying survivor of a bombed ship from the south  (the  direction  of dangerous  civilization where Tiln has refused to go),  who with his bible, phonograph, and single record of "Eternal Father, strong  to save," has  tried  for  ten  years  to  keep alive some human  feeling in Tiln's  monomaniacal  world. The language  of the play is wholly poetic, combining  Beckett's stripped  down  repetitions  with  lusher  passages that show a debt to Dylan Thomas:

I, Tiln. God of Light. Of the tilting universe.
Lord of the bladderwrack and the black sea moss.
Keeper of the pearled and fishy parables of the sea. Master of sailing barns.
Executioner. Jonah's hangman.

Tiln's  rituals to impose order  and  their eventual  undermining by a sense of lost

31

COOK

humanity   constitute  what  action  there  is. Like Skipper  Pete,  Tiln  wages  war against the mocking sea gulls; he ascends and descends his ladder  ceremoniously, counting the rungs and pausing on every third step; he decides to light the lamp in a fixed position to blind the gulls, instead of letting it revolve to warn off shipping ("There are no travellers. There  are none to save or destroy"); and climactically he refuses Fern's  request to have the burial service read over him, repudiating his appeal  "we  have been good to each other"  (as Pete repudiated  his debt to Aunt Alice),  tearing  his bible and  breaking his record of "Eternal Father," and  finally "burying" him still dying in a barrel  of salt brine:  "You  are  no martyr  but  my sacrifice. Me. God Tiln.... Tiln  giveth. Tiln  taketh away. That's your service." Once  alone again,  Tiln  finds his isolation unbearable,  and  the  play ends with a tableau  like the  pieta with  which Colour  the Flesh began:  Tiln  cradling  Fern's head in his arms and sobbing "You've  cheated  me."
Quilter goes to the opposite, realistic extreme. Apart  from very brief incursions from some children  and  two passing women, it takes the form of an old sea cap­ tain's  rambling   monologue  and  hallucinations  about  the  past,  lusting  after  a neighbour  woman, waging war against the mocking children  (like Pete and  Tiln against  the  gulls),  and  conducting  folksy conversations  with  God   ( "Mornin', Lord. Dis is your servant,  Quiller'') and  his long-dead  wife, Sophie. Its mixture of reminiscence, gossip, simplistic philosophizing, and attempts  at earthy  humour show a good ear for Newfoundland  speech and a compassionate understanding of character, but the piece is too long and too static for the stage, without  any of the symbolic excitement of Tiln. It does show a new aspect of  Cook's technique,  how­ ever, which is important in Jacob's Wake.




EREAS Colour the Flesh is in presentational  "epic" form and  Dance, for all its realistic elements, operates symbolically, in  ]acob's  Wake  Cook relies mainly on contemporary  realism. He has said, in fact, that  "Of  all the plays I've written, it's the one that is most closely based upon the people I know." 23
Yet this concern for realism is combined with a variant  of the Newfoundland experience that is difficult to present realistically. Cook's object now is apocalyptic. He wishes to convey the destruction  of a humanity  that  has tried to turn  its back on nature,  evoking

an  environment no  longer  responsive  to  the  timeless  bonding between   itself  and man  which  makes  communion on this earth  possible, an  environment with  the  will
for  destruction  to  match our  own  ... an  environment which  bred   E. J. Pratt's
Titanic sinking  iceberg,  a  vast  neolithic structure created for  such  a  time  when
man's  hubris  had  made  him  blind  to nature.

An absolutely crucial  aspect of the staging,  therefore, which Cook emphasizes in


35

COOK

his "Production Notes," is a sense of the steadily increasing storm  outside the out­ port  house which  is the setting for the  play:  "It is essential ... that  the  storm becomes a living thing, a character, whose presence is always felt, if not actually heard, on the stage."
For most of the play, however, this storm is strictly background  for the human
failings displayed  within  the  house, where  the  celebration  of  Good  Friday  has brought together three generations of the Blackburn  family, who represent succes­ sive stages of alienation from nature. The traditional heroic fatalism of  Newfound­ land  is represented  by Elijah  Blackburn, an old sealing skipper  very like Skipper Pete of Dance, who lies bedridden  upstairs, confusedly mingling  past and  present as he has his log books read aloud and barks out orders as though  he were afloat. Elijah  shares the  Newfoundland  attitude  which  holds that  "A  house  is a ship. Lights agin the night ... Some adrift ... Some foundered,  some rotting old hulks full of the memories of men ... They's  no difference."
Like Skipper Pete, he also has a mystic belief that  the vanished seals will return and that somehow he will be able to hunt  them again: "They'll come back. The swiles'll come back in their t'ousands and when they do, I'll go greet 'em  just like in the old days." But his attitude  to nature is "Satanic" ( "Swiles is bred and killed in Hell, boy") . He defies the storm like Lear in his madness -and his attraction to sealing lies not in the value of the catch but in the excitement  of the hunt  itself, the risking of one's own life to have the primitive pleasure of killing.
Like Skipper  Pete,  he scorns his daughter, Mary,  an  old-maid  schoolteacher whom he wishes he had never begotten, and considers her a "poor  substitute"  for his second son, Jacob,  who was lost while hunting.  But  Elijah  is more complex and sensitive than  his predecessor. Offsetting his dislike of Mary is his comfortable rapport  with  his daughter-in-law Rosie; and  he is still remorseful  over his dead wife's grief for their son, and distressed by her refusal to believe that  he did all he could to save him. Indeed,  as the title indicates, Elijah's  overriding  sorrow is the abandonment of Jacob  to the ice, a sacrifice that  ended  the  family's  capacity  to face nature  with traditional  defiance.
The  Skipper's  other son, Winston,  and  Rosie, his wife, are  utterly  non-heroic but have a capacity for love which provides an alternative  to Elijah's  pride. This centres on  Rosie, whom  Cook  presents as an  almost  too  perfect  Irish-Catholic mother, loving, undemanding, and self-sacrificing.2• Rosie lacks grandchildren, however, and  like Elijah  mourns  the  death  of a  child,  a  daughter Sarah,  who might have carried on her kind of values.
Sarah  was also Winston's favourite  ( "Everytime I gits affiicted with me family I thinks of the one that might have been different"), and her birth galvanized him for once to a courage in defying the elements that  reminded  Rosie of Elijah: "I never see ye like it. Ye were like a wild man. Like yer fader  almost.... I believe ye'd 'ave faced the Divil dat night and gone on."

COOK

For Winston, life collapsed after his daughter's  death  ("It was never the same after she died. I doesn't  know why ..."), and  he has since been left believing in nothing:   "They's nothin',  Rosie. Nothin'.  They's madness  and  they's death  and they's some who work at it and some who wait for it."
Winston, in fact, is the most complex character  in the  play, to whom our atti­
tude changes radically. At first he seems merely idle, vulgar, and malicious, drink­ ing  heavily, hazing  his returned  sons, and  teasing  his spinster  sister  with  inde­ cencies. There  is a sense of violence in the man, moreover, which culminates in his ineffectual  firing of a shotgun  after  he hears that  his son  Alonzo has forged  his name.  His cry on hearing  of this -"My  name ! 'Tis  all  I've  got left" -reveals the damaged  self-respect  beneath  this coarseness. Winston is an  Esau  figure, an elder son who is aware he has not satisfied his father's expectations  ("I  wish some­ times that  I could have been the son he wanted") ; and his self-contempt emerges movingly in a conversation  with his wife late in the second act:

What else could  I ha'  been, Rosie? What else could  I ha' done?  ... It weren't good enough  ... Everything changed afore  I knew what  to do. The  old  ones so damned sure ... Though what  about, the Lord  knows. And  us, Rosie,  us ... Like  rats  in a trap, with  the  Welfare as bait.  I  didn't know  what  to  do,  so I  didn't try. There didn't seem any  p'int.

He drinks and curses to cover this sense of worthlessness: "I drinks because it helps me to forgit  where  I  am  and  I swears because I like it. It sounds good  and  it protects me from  your  [Mary's] kind of literacy." As Cook's note on the use of dialect  points out, "Winston  is a man of considerable experience  and  education, both of which he seeks to suppress."
Our  sympathy  for him grows as we realize this sensitivity and  note his tender­
ness not only for Rosie and the dead Sarah  but also for the tragic Mildred  Tobin, who froze to death  with her illegitimate child when her father  turned  her out into a storm.  Moreover,  though  he  knew the  culprit  was really  his own  son  Brad, Winston  loyally kept  this quiet  even when gossip fathered  the child on  himself. Though  he has proved a disappointment, the Skipper has a liking for him  ("But y'are  human.  Ye talk  to me"), and  Winston in return  is imaginative  enough  to appreciate  his father  despite  his feeling of rejection:  "I encourage  him  because beneath  that  wrinkled  old skull and  those mad  eyes I  kin sometimes see a truth about  meself that  might make some sense o' dying." He therefore  resists the move to commit the old man to a mental home, and by the time his sister rejects his offer of  reconciliation,  throwing   beer  in  his face,  our  sympathies  for  the  two  have switched completely.
In the Blackburns'  degeneration  Mary has a position between that of Rosie and Winston and that  of their children,  and our attitude  towards  her balances exactly our  attitude to  Winston.  Initially,  we are sympathetic  to  her  pride  in  teaching standards, her contempt  for her coarse brother and the nephew Alonzo, her opposi-

37

COOK

tion to her father's tyranny and to all the men's exploitation  of Rosie's good nature, and the pride she shows in her favourite nephew,  Wayne.  But gradually  the  nar­ rowness and  lack  of generosity in  her  nature   emerge.  Laudable  independence shades into closefistedness, distaste for sexual coarseness becomes  a  chilling con­ demnation  of the  pathetic  Mildred  Tobin,  and  pride  in Wayne shows itself pos­ sessive and even snobbish, as she exults in the impression they will make riding in his car to church.  It is she who is ultimately  behind  the move to put the Skipper in an  asylum-a move that  denies the  values  of  both  Elijah  and  Winston­ though it is Wayne who is her willing instrument  in this treachery,  just as he has been responsible for the final breakdown  of his brother  Brad  by getting  him dis­ missed from his parish.
The   third   generation  of  Blackburns  has  degenerated   completely  from   the heroism of the Skipper, in fact:  the "time of the seal" has given place to "the  day of the dogfish." Winston describes their attitudes  to Elijah  without  illusion:  "One of 'em pretends ye don't  exist and the other wants  to save yer black soul. And the third waits fer yer will."
The eldest, Alonzo, is perhaps slightly less unsympathetic than  his brothers.  He is mainly  what  Winston  pretends  to  be:  drunken, vulgar,  and  brutal,  forever daring  his brothers to fight. He has no intention  of accepting  the responsibility of marriage  but  is promiscuous  himself and  the  purveyor  of lust  to  others-the proprietor of a roadhouse where he hires prostitutes as strippers-and the original inciter of Brad's  affair  with Mary  Tobin.  With  his politician  brother  Wayne  he trades business deals for votes, and to get a motel contract  is prepared  to commit his grandfather to an asylum by forging his father's  signature-a cheat he claims to  have  performed  frequently  before. Yet  just  as  'Lonz  is the  only  brother  to retain his Newfoundland  accent, so too he has some qualms about  committing  the Skipper  and  shows at least a vestige of sympathy  for  both  Elijah  and  Winston. The second brother,  Wayne, has no such traces of humanity. His affection for his Aunt  Mary  is unhealthily  self-centred, and  he has used the  culture  she strove to acquire  for him  merely to become a dishonest  politician.  Wayne  is the  furthest removed from nature  of them all. Though  he expects to become the  Minister  of the Environment, he has sold the island's last so,ooo acres of standing  timber  to the Japanese, and his personality collapses when the government he depends on for his power resigns ("Christ. He's  turned  to stone"). Most  ruined  of the  three  is the youngest son Brad, who is also the first to be destroyed. His guilt for Mildred Tobin  has  turned   him  into  a  religious fanatic,   projecting   his  self-disgust  onto others, and  harrowed  by fiery visions of an imminent last judgment.  This collapse began  when,  as a  child,  he  was maliciously abandoned  to  raw  nature   by  his brothers-an incident  which  not only foreshadows  his final  destruction,  when he goes out into the storm to die like Mildred  Tobin, but also shows the brothers' complete lack of sympathy  for or trust in one another. As 'Lonz  states,  perhaps

COOK

too badly, "There was never any love here, sure ... We was too busy survivin'  to put up with any o' that  old foolishness." This lovelessness is reflected in a savage humour  that finds its outlet in cheating, hazing and constant  malicious joking, like the laughter  of the ice which the Skipper swears he heard when Jacob  died.
The  realism of these family  relationships  (which  have  more  than  a  whiff of
O'Neill  about  them)   is deepened  by religious symbolism. Placing  the action  on Maundy  Thursday and  Good  Friday  not only provides a realistic excuse for the family's reunion but is also meant to relate to Elijah's sacrifice of Jacob on an April
5th  many  years before. Thus  the mourning  for Christ is also Jacob's  Wake, and their  parallelism  is driven  home by the crucifixion image,  borrowed  from David Blackwood's striking series of Newfoundland  etchings "The Lost Party," in which the Skipper  recalls his last sight of his son:  "The  way dey was, so far  away, dey seemed to form a t'in black cross on the ice. Den the ground  drift swallowed dem up.... " This image is recapitulated later as a premonition of disaster:  " 'Tis  the shape of death,  boy. I kin see'n jest like that first time, rising out of the drift, mov­ ing across the ice widout a sound, a man like a cross growing up into the sky."
The  key names are also significant. The  Old Testament  Jacob  was, of course, the favoured  son who wrestled with the angel and who, by fathering twelve sons, established  the  tribes of Israel;  thus  Jacob's  death  is clearly the  loss of Elijah's hopes for the future.  Similarly, Elijah  himself was the Old Testament prophet  of doom to Ahab's false gods, and his ascent to heaven in a chariot of fire is probably meant  to relate to the Skipper's  curious apotheosis at the end of the play. A level of religious awareness  is also maintained  by the  Easter  hymns  coming  over  the radio,  which  the Blackburns  occasionally join in. Not  only do these incorporate Cook's usual device of song realistically into the play, their sentimental  rendering makes a point about  the religious shallowness of contemporary  society, while the particular relevance of several of them to the sea-"Eternal Father," for example, and John  Newton's  "Amazing  Grace" -deepens the symbolic significance of the action, though  that significance is far from being Christian.
As usual in Cook, there is also an attempt  to use the set to suggest several levels of response. Wayne's type of society is represented by the blandness of the radio's music and its stilted weather forecasts, which gradually give place to the real thing as the storm  increases in  violence, screaming  round  the  house and  finally  over­ whelming  the radio  and  the lights. Within  the house itself a distinction  is estab­ lished between the ground  floor and  the bedrooms. On  the ground  floor  the ordi­ nary aspects of outport  life are conveyed by realistic conversation  and  methodical processes of quilting, cooking, drying firewood, playing cards, and even  preparing  drinks-"a traditional part of the family ritual." The bedroom level, by contrast, is appropriately the realm of vision-Brad's nightmares of the last judgment  and the Skipper's  reliving of his sons' death  and premonitions that  the house is a ship drifting to disaster.


39

COOK

At the end these levels are suddenly reversed. While the apparent corpse of the Skipper is visible on his bed above, his "ghost"  enters below to take charge of the house like a ship, impressing his son and grandsons as part of the crew, and head­ ing, he says, defiantly into the truth of the storm:  "Comes a time.... When ye has to steer into the storm and  face up to what  ye are."  There  is also  the sound of seals, and  Elijah exults, "The  swales is back. Newfoundland is alive and  well and roaring down the ice-pack...."
But then the play ends with nature  triumphing in "a  blackout  and the sound of
a cosmic disaster ... the final release of the insensate fury of nature  that  has been building  throughout the play." When the lights go up, the fragile house is empty save for the death  mask of Elijah,  and "All fades into the lone quiet  crying of a bitter wind."
This conclusion is certainly not "one of the most ludicrous cop-outs in the annals
of Canadian theatre," as one reviewer complained.2     Its significance is clear in the context  of Cook's other  work;  he has mingled  realism  and  symbolism in all his plays; and  jacob's Wake  itself has a persistent symbolic level, with the identifica­ tion of house and ship repeated  many times before the transformation. Neverthe­ less, the experiment  fails: the reversal of levels is too extreme, and the significance of the end remains unclear. Cook himself tacitly admits this when he suggests that, instead of a realistic set, an "acceptable alternative" might  be

a stark  skeletonized set. ... as white  as bone, stripped of formality, the house equiv­ alent   of a  stranded hulk  of  a  schooner, only  the  ribs  poking   towards   an  empty  sky ...

thus freeing the director for "an  existential interpretation of the play."
The  failure  is an  instructive  one, however,  because  of its very  boldness. The dilemma  Cook faces as a playwright  is that  the  experience  he wishes to convey arises from an only too actual  reality-the awesome environment of  Newfound­ land -which  he cannot  present on stage. He is forced to convey its significance poetically, through  heightened language and stage symbolism, but this has an alle­ gorical effect, removing the experience from  the actuality  that  is its very essence. Only  in The  Head,  Guts and  Sound-bone  Dance  has he found  a  form  to fuse these levels, and even there it is at some cost to the realism.  ]acob's Wake  switches between  the levels too abruptly; while the  "epic" looseness of  Colour  the  Flesh allows  realism  and  symbolism to  coexist without   a  proper  fusion.  Perhaps  the problem is insoluble in stage terms; but unless it is solved, Michael Cook's imagina­  tion  itself  remains  "on  the  edge,"  its  undeniable  power  denied  an  adequate dramatic form.26

NOTES

1Stage Voices,  ed. Sister  Geraldine Anthony (Toronto:  Doubleday, 1978), p. 215;
see also pp.  211, 222.

COOK


2  John Arden  and  Robert Bolt are other  influences  in this direction.
8  For  an  account of Cook's  career,  see Canadian  Theatre  Review,  I6  (Fall   I977),
pp. 26-28.
4  Interview, Canadian  Theatre  Review,  I  (Winter I974), p. 76.
5  See  Rota Lister, "An   Interview with  Michael  Cook," Canadian  Drama,  2   (Fall
I976),  p.  I79·
6  Toronto  Star, 9 February  I974·
7  Guide to Special Collections, University of Calgary, I978, p. 24.
8  C.T.R., I, p. 74·
9  Interview, York  Theatre Journal, 5 (Spring I973), p. 52.
10  Univ. Calgary Guide, p. 24.
11 Ibid.
12 For a full list of Cook's  work, see C.T.R., I6, pp. 28-31.
13 Ottawa  Citizen,  14 October  I972.
14  C.T.R., I, P· 74·
15 This  concern with  the savage  murder of Indians who had  a proper link with  nature is the central theme  of On  the Rim  of the Curve.
16 By Urjo Kareda, Toronto Star,  I7 October  I972.
17 Can. D., 2, p. I79·
18 Saskatoon Leader-Post, 5 December I977·
19  Playscript of The  Head, Guts, and Sound-bone  Dance  ( I973), p.  I I; a revised  text was published in  C.T.R., I   ( I974).  The  "Sound-bone" is the  backbone of  a fish.
2 ° Cook  makes  this comparison himself:  Calgary Herald, 26 October  I974·
21  Ibid.
22  CBC-TV, First Choice, 472 (4 October I974), p. 2.
23  Stage Voices, p. 227.
24   A fuller  portrayal of this type  can  be found  in another of Cook's  monologue plays, Therese's  Creed,  published in "Tiln" and Other  Plays (Vancouver:  Talonbooks, I976).
25   Audrey  M. Ashley in  the  Ottawa  Citizen, 23 July  I975·
26   I should  like to acknowledge the help  of Heather MacCallum and  Ronald Bryden in getting the data on  which  this essay is based.

,
DERitCINE

Alexandre L. Amprimoz

this is not  your landscape

you knocked
on a wrinkled door to find  time
with  a cut  wrist

POEM

and  you sat  under  the  wilted lamp
and  you stared  at  the  rug
-eroded  memory

look at  the rain
how  it slaps  the  window leaving  your heart
almost  uprooted with fear like a child's  first tooth

this is not your landscape no one talks to you
about venetian tunics or  tunisian  venus
and  it is alone  that  you dream of holbein's  hands
drawing erasmus'  hands




THE M71N WHO  P7tiNTED
WITH  HIS FINGERS

Alexandre L. Amprimoz

The brush was always a poor  translator:
I let  nothing stand between  the light and  the canvas.

Call  the dead  moth
and  weep  on  the cricket's  grave;
tomorrow we will go with  dead  leaves
to the funeral of the snail.

I turn  the open  field from  green  to grey
and, bankrupt in the lungs,
I am  tickled  by tall  chimneys and  the poison of smoke stacks.

POEM

I paint with  my naked  fingers
the  madness of your  "Starry Night" and  I squeeze  the coloured paste
to see like rare  sunflowers  in a dark  field
the stars  turn  their  heads towards an  invisible  sun.



THE  CITJIDEL
for David  Amason
 



Alexandre L. Amprimoz


the citadel
contained its own  provence
and  could  surprise  you with a dream  or a  silkworm
caught in a lavender field
once  it even  locked  the  murmur of africa
with  girls fearless  of garlic biting  into  a  crisp  sun

in the citadel
the wind  coughed
like a congested tower
but  paris  was at  least an  echo and  winter was a louvre

in the citadel
i could  still  read  symbols and  be french
and  dream of mills as if i were lowell
in  the citadel
where  ladies  longed for lacy castles
i was a lean  promeneur fond  of liquid  language

but  here  the sky is a still turtle and  under it
a golden  boy denies an  aching man

43

FROM ALIENATION TO TRANSCENDENCE

The Quest for Seljhood in
Michel Tremblay's  Plays


John Ripley




IN SUGHTLY  MORE THAN A DECADE of sustained  productivity, Michel  Tremblay  created no less than  eleven plays set in the working-class envi­ ronment   of  east-end  Montreal.   With  the  advent   of  Damnee   Manon,  sacree Sandra, he announced  that the collection was in fact "un  premier cycle" and now complete.1  The  series comprises Les  Belles-Soeurs  (I 968), En  pieces  detachees (I 969), La Due hesse de Langeais  (I 969), Trois  Petits Tours   (I 969),  Demain matin, Montreal  m'attend  (I 970), A toi,  pour toujours,  ta  Marie-Lou  (I 97 I), Hosanna   (I973), Bonjour,  la,  bonjour   (I974), Surprise!   Surprise!   (I975), Sainte Carmen  de la Main  ( I976), and Damnee Manon, sacree Sandra  ( I977) .2
Tremblay's failure to clarify his intentions at the outset has led critics to treat  the
scripts  in  piecemeal  fashion;  and  no  comprehensive   analysis  of  the  cycle  has appeared since the  playwright  underscored  its coherence.  As a modest  and  pre­ liminary step in this direction, it may be useful to identify one of Tremblay's major themes  and  to  examine  systematically,  if somewhat  superficially,  its  theatrical  metamorphoses  from the first play to the last.
Fairly early in his career, Tremblay declared  his commitment to a theatre dedicated  to social inquiry and, implicitly, social animation. His plays, he told Fernand  Dore in I969, were designed as an antidote  to "une  paresse d'esprit" and "une  carence  dans le sang" which he found  endemic  in working-class quebecois society. "Le theatre  que j'ecris presentement,"  he continued,  "en est un de 'claque
sur la gueule,'  qui  vise a provoquer  une  prise de  conscience chez le spectateur.
Voyons  nous,  une  bonne  fois, tels que  nous sommes,  pour  un  jour,  peut-etre, depasser tout  cela."3  A year later  he informed  Marc-F. Gelinas  more succinctly, "Je  fais de la sociologic avec un instrument, le theatre."4   Like Ibsen,  Chekhov, and  Sherwood  Anderson,  he places a  relatively small  and  self-contained  society under  an  artistic  microscope. In  the  grey shabbiness  of life  on  the  rue  Fabre, strait-jacketed by religious and social sanctions, and the garish glitter of the Main's (St. Lawrence  Boulevard's)  Clubland,  with its siren-song of freedom,  he discerns

44

TREMBLAY


local truths with  universal validity.  His findings, although uniquely stated  and especially germane to Quebec, are reflected  and  magnified  in international Humanities and  Social  Sciences  literature since  World  War  II.
Tremblay's sociological  orientation, like that  of contemporary sociology  itself,
evinces a keen  awareness of the  inter-relatedness of psychological  and  social  pro­ cesses.5  Specific  areas  of his psycho-social concerns  may  be usefully illuminated by the  work  of  Freud, Erikson, Adorno,  Goff man,  and  others; but  the  theories  of social  psychologist  Erich  Fromm permit  a  more  comprehensive  overview  of  the cycle,  and  a  remarkably coherent interpretation of  the  diverse,  enigmatic, and unorthodox components of the  constituent parts.  Indeed, the  plays may  be read almost  as theatrical explorations of the  dilemma of the alienated self, both  indi­  vidual  and  societal,  classically  mapped by  Fromm   in  his  Escape  from Freedom
( 1941) and  The  Sane Society  ( 1955).
As imperative a part  of man's nature as his physiological  drives, Fromm argues,
is "the need  to  be  related  to the  world  outside  oneself,  the  need  to  avoid  alone­ ness."6 During the months of foetal development the child's primary ties are to the mother; however,  with  the  moment of birth,  an  inexorable process of  individua­ tion  comes  into  play.  "The more  the  child  grows  and   to  the  extent  to  which primary ties are  cut  off, the  more  it develops  a quest  for  freedom  and  indepen­ dence."7  This  positive  side  of individuation is matched  by  a  corresponding and  potentially negative aspect  -a  "growing aloneness."  Ideally  the  forward thrust of  individuation should   be  accompanied by  an  equivalent development of self­ strength; but  this,  unfortunately, is not  always the  case.

While  the  process of individuation takes place automatically, the growth  of the self is hampered for  a number of individual and  social reasons.  The  lag between  these two  trends  results  in an  unbearable feeling  of isolation  and  powerlessness.8

Faced  with  the irreversible process of individuation, man  has two choices avail­ able  to  him.  He  may,  if he  can  find sufficient  inner  resources,  resolve  the  crisis through an  "active solidarity with  all men  and  his spontaneous activity, love and  work, which  unite  him again  with  the world, not by primary ties but  as a free and  independent individual."9  If he cannot  do so, the misery  of  independence without self-strength may  oblige  him  to resort to some form of  escape mechanism. Fromm identifies  three  major types: authoritarianism,  a  strategy which  leads  the  indi­  vidual  to seek "new 'secondary bonds'  as a substitute for the  primary bonds  which  have  been  lost";10  automaton  conformity, a  state  in  which  he  assumes  so  com­ pletely  the  cultural patterns of  his society that  he believes  them  to be of his own choosing; and,  as a last resort, destructiveness, which  has as its end the elimination of the threat or the annihilation of the individual himself.
Tremblay's cycle,  begun  in  the  early  years of Quebec's Quiet Revolution and completed shortly  after  the  accession  to  power  of  the  Parti Quebecois, may  be

45

TREMBLAY

read literally as a series of case studies of alienated  individuals,  most of whom, when faced  with  the challenge of self-realization,  opt  to escape from  it.  At  the level of allegory or  parable,  the cycle depicts  and  indicts  a society  (or  nation) which  rejects  its  birthright   rather   than   confront   the   perils  inherent   in  self­ responsibility. Tremblay's vision, if bleak, is nevertheless not  entirely  pessimistic. Among a host of commonplace  prisoners of their  own fears,  he highlights  a few bizarre marginals  who, through  an act of will, break  their  defeatist  patterns  and learn  to respect themselves and to love others. Their  feats of self-conquest,  how­ ever trivial and  grotesque, signpost the route to be taken  by a more conventional populace in search of personal and national  liberty.
Each of the eight  major  plays in the cycle contributes  uniquely  to Tremblay's analysis. Trois  Petits Tours, three sketches; Demain matin, Montreal m'attend, a musical;  and  Surprise!   Surprise!, a lunchtime-theatre piece, may  be left out  of account  since they merely confirm the  playwright's  overall  thesis and  offer little that is not better expressed elsewhere.
Les Belles-Soeurs, the first play and the cycle's cornerstone, is a horrifying group­ portrait of the rue Fabre's alienated females. To the kitchen of Germaine Lauzon, at  some  time  during   the I gsa's,  Tremblay   brings  fifteen  married  and  single women,  ranging  in  age from  adolescence to  advanced  senility.  Throughout an evening spent  pasting into books the million trading  stamps  won  by Germaine  in a contest, the women bemoan their bondage  and  powerlessness; yet they remain, in  Fromm's  phrase,  "quite  incapable  of experiencing  the  feeling  of 'I want'  or
'I am.' "11 The  seven married  women  consider  themselves  victims  of  sexually­ insatiable  husbands  and  demanding  families. But  the  spinsters  are  hardly  more liberated.  Des-Neiges Verrette,  demoralized  by aloneness,  orders  her  life about the monthly visits of a brush-salesman. The  ghoulish crones, Rheauna and  Ange­ line, bondslaves to a death-wish, forge a cannibalistic  attachment to each other. Pierrette,  although  she defies neighbourhood  conventions  and  finds  work  in  a Main  nightclub,  wins at  best a Pyrrhic  victory.  Intimidated by the  prospect  of freedom, she becomes the mistress of her employer, only to find herself rejected at the appearance of the first wrinkles. The teenagers,  Linda,  Lise, and  Ginette, are doomed,  for  want  of  positive models,  to  repeat  the  negative  patterns   of  their elders.
To assuage the anxieties of individuation without self-strength, the women compulsively seek refuge in what  amounts  to  an  authoritarian sisterhood:   and their individual  and  collective practice of masochism and  sadism, the two major types of authoritarian behaviour noted by Fromm, give the play its heartbeat. The expressionistic soliloquies and  choruses are exercises in masochistic  release, while the realistic dialogued sequences reveal the sadistic impulse rampant.
The  goal of masochism is, according  to Fromm,  "to get  rid of the  individual self, to lose oneself;  in other  words, to get  rid  of the  burden of  freedom.... To

TREMBLAY


teel utterly small and  helpless is one way toward  this aim;  to be overwhelmed  by pain  and  agony  another; to be overcome by the effects of intoxication  still  an­ other."12 The masochistic resources of the rue Fabre women are virtually limitless. Marie-Ange  Brouillette,  in a speech marked  by excremental  association, shrinks her significance to wellnigh the vanishing point:
C'est  pas moe qui aurais  eu c'te  chance-Ia! Pas de danger!  Moe,  j'mange d'la marde,  pis j'vas en manger  toute rna vie!  ... Ma  vie est plate!  Plate! Pis  par­ dessous le marche, chus pauvre comme Ia gale! Chus tannee de vivre une maudite vie piate!13

Rheauna Bibeau  wallows  in  ill-health  to  excuse her  lack  of  fulfilment.  "J'ai souffert ben plus que toe, Angeline!",  she brags in an orgy of self-pity. "J'ai pus rien qu'un poumon,  un  rein, un sein."  Pierrette, unable  to reconstruct  the  frag­
ments  of her  shattered  existence, passively concludes, "Tout ce qui  me reste  a
faire, c'est de me soUler." Similar instances could be multiplied.
Sadism,  defined  by  Fromm   as  "pleasure  in  the  complete  domination   over another," allows the powerless individual  the illusion of strength,  a second means of escape from inner weakness. Sadistic behaviour, according  to Fromm, may take three major  forms:  the desire "to  make others dependent  on oneself and  to have absolute  and  unrestricted  power over them"; "the  wish to make others suffer or to see them  suffer"; and  "the  impulse  ... to exploit  [others], to  use them,  to steal from them."14
Fromm  could hardly  wish better clinical examples of all three types of sadistic strivings than  those offered by Tremblay's females. The ese's
of the senile, wheelchair-ridden Olivine Dubuc and Rheauna's moral subjugation of Angeline are clearly of the first sort. The  merciless beatings about  the head to which  Therese  periodically  subjects  her  mother-in-law,  the  abject   humiliation forced  by the  group  upon  Angeline, and  the heartless ostracization  of Pierrette belong as patently  to the second type. The exploitative form of sadism -the theft of Germaine's stamps-constitutes the play's central action. The  social structure of the  rue  Fabre  is founded  upon  a  universal  commitment  to  chronic  despair. Germaine's good  fortune  offers her  hope,  and  thus  threatens  to destabilize  the neighbourhood. The  systematic  sack  of  Germaine's  dreams,  concluded   by  her despairing  cry, "Y  me reste pus rien! Rien!  Rien !",  simultaneously  restores her to the masochistic fellowship and  vanquishes the menace of change.
In ninety minutes of black comedy, Tremblay  explodes two centuries of popular
belief, ecclesiastical teaching, and literary myth about Quebecois women. Far from being the traditional guardians of religious and moral values, happy  progenitors of large families, and  good-humoured housekeepers, they stand  revealed  as malevo­ lent misfits, consumed with hatred of life and of themselves. The corrupt wellspring of female neuroticism,  Tremblay argues, infects the whole of  Quebecois society; and its malign effects are traced in detail in the plays which follow.

47

TREMBLAY

Although  Les Belles-Soeurs may be viewed simply as a psycho-social case study, it yields additional  resonance when considered as a political parable.  The  195o's era seems to represent for Tremblay  the nadir  of Quebecois self-esteem; and  the stifling despair  of Germaine  Lauzon's  kitchen  mirrors  allegorically  Quebec's cul­ tural  alienation  during  the  Duplessis regime's  final  years. The  traditional  male traits-independence,  adventurousness,  and  strength-are  absent.  Creativity, nurture, and  love-customarily associated with  the female-have degenerated  into sterile authoritarianism. The  ills of Quebecois  society, like those  of the  rue Fabre   women,  derived,  Tremblay  seems to  suggest,  less from  external   forces than  a subjective inability to assert its identity, to accept self-responsibility, and to risk moral aloneness. Inexplicably, self-strength failed. The  maintenance of Cana­  dian  ties offered escape from the fear of freedom;  yet the sense of powerlessness evoked by such a choice drove the Francophone community  to cannibalize  itself in frustration. Tremblay's allegorical intent  is transparent in the concluding  mo­ ments of the play as Germaine's  predators triumphantly warble  "0 Canada." It is devastatingly  appropriate that  the song  which  celebrates  the  demise  of Ger­ maine's aspirations to self-respect should be the anthem  which symbolizes for Que­ bec nationalists  the  victory of hostile  dependency  over  cultural  integrity.  When Germaine,  in a fit of masochistic abandon,  dries her tears and  lifts her voice with the authoritarian  sisterhood, Tremblay's bitterness is almost palpable.



IN En  pieces detachees  Tremblay again  returns  to the Duples­ sis era,  and  now places a  rue Fabre  family  under  his psycho-social  microscope. Alienated  from their individual selves, each other,  and  the community, the aging Robertine,  her daughter,  Helene/ 5   and  her son-in-law,  Henri,  vent their  frustra­  tions behind  closed venetian blinds. Meanwhile,  like  a  Greek  tragic  chorus,  the neighbourhood women,  in  apartment  windows  opposite,  deride  their  aloofness and  mouth  the virtues of conformity.
Robertine, victim of an unhappy  marriage  and  neurotic  guilt at the birth  of a retarded   child,  long  since sentenced  herself  to  a  life  of  masochistic  isolation. Helene, determined  to escape her mother's  passive negativism, scandalized  the neighbourhood with a brief bout of unconventional behaviour  during  adolescence; but her quest for freedom was promptly betrayed  by her want  of self-strength.  In a gown of midnight  blue, and her hair dyed fire-engine red, she entered  a shotgun marriage  with  the  handsome gigolo, Henri,  and  eclipsed all  hope  of fulfilment. Her  bridegroom,  unable  to accept  the  role of family-provider, conveniently  suf­ fered an accident and opted for a career of invalidism and fantasy.  Over the next fifteen  years, tranquillized  by self-pity and  television  cartoons,  he  revels in  the growth of Popeye's muscles while his own virility ebbs away. Meanwhile, Francine,

TREMBLAY


the  child  of  the  unfortunate union,  evolves into  an  adolescent   nonentity.  Half­ heartedly training to  become  a  hairdresser, she is predestined  to  failure  by  her total  want  of self-esteem.
HeU ne,
breadwinner. From   humble beginnings   as  a  Kresge's  salesgirl,  she  attains the coveted  eminence of  waitress  at  the  Main's Coconut Inn;  but  her  reliance  on alcohol  as a substitute for  inner  security  inevitably  occasions  her  dismissal.  Em­ ployed  in a smoked-meat joint  on  Papineau Street  as the  play  opens,  she smarts  at  the  loss of both  status and  income.  Like the  alienated sorority  of the  previous piece, she seeks release from  her pain in a succession of sado-masochistic exercises; and   her  exertions, as  desperate as  they  are  futile,  constitute the  play's  central  interest.
In  the  drama's final  episode,  Helene's retarded brother, Claude, now  insane and  institutionalized, escapes custody and  returns  home.  At curtain-fall, as the household  wail, "Chus pus capable de rien faire !", Claude, in a travesty  of  From­ mian  self-strength, proclaims his  omnipotence. When   he  wears  sunglasses  and speaks  English,  he  asserts,  "Moe, j'peux  toute  faire! J'ai  toutes  les  pouvoirs !" Claude's illusions  of power,  albeit  the fruit  of insanity, leave  the  impotent Henri with  his mouth a-water.
The  authoritarian females of En pieces detachees differ little from  their counter­
parts  in Les Belles-Soeurs, and  warrant no detailed  comment. It should  be noted, however,  that  the  women  of both  plays, despite  their  insecurities, maintain their role-functions. Henri and  Claude, precursors  of a succession  of  alienated  males, do not.
En pieces detachees, a morality play populated exclusively by vices, finds Trem­
blay's confidence in Quebec's cultural future wellnigh  non-existent. Where,  he demands allegorically, are  the  robust  male  virtues  to  be  discovered? If Henri's sloth  perpetuates static  despair, Claude's self-delusion invites  outright disaster.  To seek  selfhood   through  invisibility   (which   Claude  believes  is  conferred  by  the wearing of sunglasses)   and  foreign  speech  is the  counsel  of manifest  lunacy;  yet the  madman's formula was consistently  adopted by hosts of Quebecois, male  and female, as a survival strategy from  Montcalm's defeat  onwards. And  the outcome, Quebec nationalists argued, could  only be cultural annihilation.
In  La  Duchesse  de  Langeais,  a  monologue spoken  by  a  sixty-year-old   trans­
sexual,  Tremblay depicts  another mode  of  escape  from  male  impotence -the resort to what  Erikson  terms  a "negative identity." This  psychological  mechanism, close to the  ultimate form  of masochism,  involves the  adoption of a role precisely the opposite of the one normally expected. "The history of such a choice," Erikson maintains, "reveals a set of conditions in which  it is easier  for a  patient to derive a sense of identity out of a total  identification with  that  which  he is least supposed to be than  to struggle for a feeling of reality in acceptable roles which  are unattain-

49

TREMBLAY

able with his inner means."16 Tremblay  makes little effort to explain the origins of the  Duchesse's identity  shift. Her  femininity  is simply  there,  absolute  and  irre­ vocable. Sexually  active with males since the  age  of six, and  a  prostitute  since twelve, the Duchesse can scarcely conceive of a time when she was not female.
The  role-models adopted  by the Duchesse were not  those offered by the  drab submissive rue  Fabre  sisterhood;  rather  she  chose  as  her  exemplars  the  show­ business queens-women like Tallulah   Bankhead, Esther  Williams,  and  Mae West -who dedicated  their lives to the pursuit  of glamour,  and  used  it to buy power. Materialistic  prosperity, social status, and international travel, the lodestars of the Duchesse's existence, were readily to be found  within  the homosexual sub­ culture;  and  a forty-year career as a prostitute  and  female impersonator  brought her a fair measure of all three. But her success did not come cheaply. Her sadistic
exploitation of wealthy admirers  ( "Je suis une mante  religieuse, une mangeuse de
males!")  necessitated  the  systematic  dehumanization  of  both  herself  and  the objects of her conquest. Now drunkenly sunning  herself at a southern  resort, with only memories of her erstwhile triumphs  to solace a desolate old age, she endures the consequences of a loveless past.
Tremblay's account  of one man's flight into negative identity  as an antidote  to weakness is shrewdly observed and  poignant.  But its parabolic  import  is infinitely more telling;  for the  plight of the  Duchesse mirrors  in microcosm  the  fate  of a society which  forgoes its identity  in  favour  of an  alien  mask.  Quebec's  virility crisis, Tremblay graphically argues, cannot  be solved by an effeminate surrender to  North  American  materialism  and  its meretricious  cultural  trappings.  Such  a course amounts  to prostitution  and  evokes an  even greater  alienation.  Tremblay is not yet prepared  to suggest a viable alternative; but  his rejection  of the  ludi­ crous, and  ultimately  pathetic, strategy adopted  by the Duchesse, and  thousands  of his Quebec  compatriots, is virulent and  total.
A toi, pour tou jours, ta Marie-Lou sees Tremblay return  to domestic life on the rue Fabre,  where he now explores with sustained  precision themes only outlined previously. In  a complex dramatic  structure  composed  of two intermeshed  time planes, the sisters, Manon  and  Carmen,  visit together  at  their  childhood  home, while their  parents,  Leopold and  Marie-Louise,  simultaneously  relive the marital hell which culminated  in their murder-suicide ten years earlier. The daughters alternately  participate  in the past action, analyze it in the present, and attempt  to assess its influence  on their future.  Tremblay's intricate and  sensitive analysis of the conflict-ridden  union of Leopold and Marie-Louise  at once clarifies the source and  nature  of the male-female hostility evident  in earlier  dramas,  and  charts  its effect on the next generation.
Rue  Fabre  inhabitants, male and female, are, Tremblay suggests, victims of a societal structure  which places a higher value on role-identity than on personal identity. Women are categorized as mothers and  housekeepers, and men as fathers

so

TREMBLAY


and providers. Words like individuality, will, and self-realization have no place in the local vocabulary.  Marie-Louise,  pregnant  at eighteen, married  simply because it was expected of her. She brought to her marriage, in lieu of a sense of selfhood, only her mother's  authoritarian complex and  an implacable  aversion to sex. For her, as for Rose in Les Belles-Soeurs, physical lovemaking was an act of violence perpetrated upon  a helpless female by a bestial male. "Pour  moe, faire c;a, c'est cochon !", she insists. "C'est  bon pour les animaux." Leopold, equally susceptible to community  pressures, accepted the role of family-man,  and with it a life of automaton  conformity  in  a  factory.  Futile  rage  at  his  servitude  was  his  only reward.  His  frustrations might  have  been  somewhat  ameliorated   by  con jugal happiness;  but Marie-Louise's  neuroticism denied him even this release. To forget his isolation and  impotence  he retreats to the tavern where he weaves intoxicated daydreams of freedom and choice. His return home, to a renewed sense of despair, invariably  prompts  an attempt  to claim his marital  privileges by force.
For  both  partners,  marriage  is a sado-masochistic  battle  with  no  prospect  of victory for  either  side. Systematically  Marie-Louise  undermines  Leopold's  frail self-image, frustrates  his sexual  urges, and  turns  his family against  him. And  he retaliates  with  renewed  brutality.  As  Uopold's alcoholism  lures him  ever closer to insanity,  Marie-Louise  takes refuge in a life-denying religiosity.
And  what  of the  children  of the  ill-starred  union?  The  relationship  of both parents to their young son, Roger, is particularly significant; for it throws valuable light on the identity  crisis of the Duchesse and  the dilemmas of the  protagonists of the next two plays. Not the least of Leopold's miseries is his shame at the inade­ quate  role-model  he offers his son;  and  in a pathetic  effort  to affirm  his virility and  confirm  his authority, he  physically abuses the  boy on  the  slightest excuse. Marie-Louise  in  turn   capitalizes  upon  Roger's  terror  of   Uopold  to  forge  an unhealthy  identity  bond  with him. Leopold's refusal to allow Roger to share  her bed evinces a  justifiable fear of the sexual  consequences for his son;  yet he fails to recognize that  the  primal  source of the  threat  to Roger's  male sexuality, and that of other  rue Fabre  men, is not maternal domination  but paternal  alienation.  Leopold's  daughters pose no  threat  to his ego and  are  largely ignored  by him. While he looks on with ironic tolerance, Marie-Louise indoctrinates them with her sterile authoritarianism and warped  notions of male sexual degeneracy.
The  sado-masochistic  struggles  of  Leopold  and  Marie-Louise  inevitably  cul­ minate  in  disaster. If all else fails, Fromm  tells us, "I can  escape the  feeling of my own powerlessness in comparison with the world outside myself by destroying it."17  And  Leopold,  in  a  perverse final act  of self-assertion, does  just  that,  and more.  While  driving  with  his  wife and  son on the  Boulevard  Metropolitan, he crashes the car  into  a concrete  wall. At one stroke he  annihilates  Marie-Louise, the  source  of  his  anguish,   himself,  the  sufferer,  and  Roger,  the  heir  to  his alienation.

TREMBLAY

Manon  and Carmen,  who fortunately escape the death-trip, are left, at the ages of fifteen and sixteen, to cope with life as best they can. And their modes of  adap­ tation  are  very different.  Manon  passes the  next  decade  in  her  parents'  house, perpetuating the  pattern  of sexual  frigidity  and   religious  fanaticism  espoused by her mother. Her authoritarian devotion to God at once mitigates her need for human  contact  and  relieves her of all responsibility for  her own fulfilment.  Car­ men,  happily,  discovers some vestiges of self-strength; and  by  a  positive act  of volition puts the  past and its destructiveness behind  her. "Chus v'nue  au  monde dans'marde, pareille comme toe, Manon," she declares,  "mais au moins  j'essaye de m'en sortir!" Her escape is not a sensational one. She is  just  a cowboy singer at the Rodeo bar, disguised as an American  cultural  hero and celebrating  an alien mythology. But she has at least taken a first step toward freedom  and  happiness.


A TOI,  POUR TOUJOURS  is not  only  a  devastating  psycho­ social analysis of the traditional  working-class Quebecois  family, but an eloquent allegorical appeal for national emancipation  from a destructive  authoritarian past.
The  achievement  of self-determination,  for Quebec  as for  Carmen, demands  as a first step, Tremblay insists, an  exercise of the  will. Quebec's  initial  essays in self-reliance may seem to outsiders  puny  and  even  absurd.  As Carmen   puts  it, "Y'en   a  qui  trouvent  <;a   niaiseux,  une  chanteuse   de  chansons  de  cow-boy."
"Mais," she continues, "quand c'est <;a que tu  voulais faire,  pis que t'as  reussi a
le faire t'es ben moins niaiseuse que ben du  monde." With  Carmen's ingenuous,
yet trenchant, declaration,  Tremblay  permits  the  first rays of hope to penetrate the hitherto  unrelieved darkness of the cycle.
Carmen's assertion  of  the  right  to  shape   her  own  destiny  marks  but  the beginning  of  her  quest  for  Fromm's   desiderata -love and   productive   work. Tremblay  will report  on her  progress later.  Meanwhile,  in  Hosanna,  he  under­ takes another  study  of the  male identity  crisis, a  bizarre  account  of the  stresses within  a  homosexual  union.  Out   of  a  relationship   fragmented  by  individual  alienation,  the  play's  protagonists  create  a  harmony   unknown   to  heterosexual couples in previous dramas.
Claude  Lemieux, a rural youth dominated  by a mother  who preferred  to have him homosexual  rather  than  attached  to another  woman,  migrates  to Montreal where he assumes the negative identity of Hosanna; and, like the Duchesse, adopts the  trappings  of  American  movie  heroines  to  lend  glamour   and  status  to  an otherwise sordid existence. Her lover, Raymond  Bolduc alias Cuirette,  has equally thorny  identity  problems. His sense of maleness is present, if precariously so; but he is unable  to accept  his homosexuality. Compulsively  bolstering  his masculine image with leather suits and a motorcycle, he seeks sexual release with transvestites

52

TREMBLAY


or the half-invisible males who haunt the unilluminated toilets of Lafontaine Park. Four  years of sado-masochistic cohabitation bring  Hosanna and  Cuirette close to the  desperation of Marie-Louise and  Leopold.  Promiscuous sexual  contacts  out­ side their  relationship yield no satisfying  alternative liaison;  yet their  life  together has become  intolerable.
In  the course of the  play, the illusions upon  which  both  predicate their  survival are shattered. Hosanna enters  a transvestite masquerade contest  dressed  as Eliza­ beth  Taylor in  the  role of Cleopatra. When  she  discovers  that, in  collusion  with Cuirette, the  entire   community has  donned   the  same  garb,   her  humiliation is complete. Cuirette suffers  a  comparable trauma  when   the  city  erects  lights  in Lafontaine Park  and  robs him  of a major  source  of sexual satisfaction.
Out   of  the  shattered  fantasies of  both,  however,  comes  a  rebirth. Hosanna
refuses, despite  her  shame, to be cowed  by her  enemies.  In  an  unwonted act  of self-strength, she takes the stage  in her turn  and  endures the  unavoidable ridicule. Simultaneously she  comes  to  recognize  her  escapist  fancies  for  what   they  are. "J'me sus dit," she tells Cuirette later,
"CU opatre
Ecoute ben  a,
Pis j'ai toute demoli mes decors en papier mache! ... Chus t'un  homme, Cuirette!
... Va falloir que tu habitues a , a,
Cuirette also makes  discoveries.  At  the  moment  of Hosanna's inner  triumph,  he realizes that  he loves her-not as Hosanna, but  as Claude. And  her  female  dis­ guise is no longer  essential  to their  relationship. Claude  acknowledges that  he is a man; and  Raymond accepts  the fact  that  he loves a man.  For the first time in the cycle, one  human being  admits to love for another.
Claude and Raymond are social deviants and  will always be so; but marginality, they  come  to  realize,   need   not  imply  alienation. Their  recipe   for  relatedness requires as its key ingredient acceptance of, and  respect  for,  one's  own  individu­ ality.  "My own  self,"  contends Fromm, "is  as  much   an  object   of  my love  as another person."18  A sense  of self-worth  in  turn  creates  for  the  protagonists the freedom to love others,  to engage  in what  Fromm describes  as "an  experience of sharing, of  communion, which   permits   the  full  unfolding of   one's  own  inner activity.m9  The  nationalistic moral  of Tremblay's fable  is transparent.  Quebecois society  may  be a  North American minority and  comparatively powerless,  but  it need  not  be alienated. Its salvation lies not in  a submissive  retreat into  negative  identity or aggressive  displays  of mock-virility, but in an acceptance of its unique­ ness, and  the cultivation of love and  respect for itself. Only  through confidence in its own integrity can it achieve ties of solidarity with the world  outside.
"What matters," Fromm maintains, "is the quality of loving,  not the object." 20
In  Bonjour, la, bonjour, as if to test the implications of Fromm's assertion, Trem­
blay explores  the  plight  of a man  who  discovers  that  the  object  of his love is his


53

TREMBLAY

sister. So compelling, however, is his need for love, the ultimate  remedy for aliena­
tion, that  he defies society's strictest taboo in order  to attain  it.
The  mother  of the play's hero, Serge, died when  he was barely out of infancy, leaving him to the mercies of a father  (Gabriel) who, like Leopold, sought in the tavern  escape from  family duties and  the tedium  of factory  labour.  Three  older sisters-Lucienne, Denise, and  Monique -became surrogate  mothers  to Serge and his youngest sister, Nicole. From early childhood  the senior sisters encouraged an excessive intimacy  between  their youngest siblings;  and,  with  adulthood, the relationship  ripened into incest. Serge, at twenty-five, and  Nicole, at thirty, finally confront  the long-term  implications of their involvement,  and  decide to separate to  contemplate   their  options.  After  a  three-month  European  vacation,  Serge returns with his mind made up.
In a series of encoWlters during Serge's first evening at home, Tremblay  juxta­ poses the socially-accepted authoritarian destructiveness  of the  rest of the  family with the socially-reprehensible happiness of the illicit lovers. Gabriel, Serge's father,  withdraws  into deafness. The  aging aunts,  Albertine  and  Charlotte, measure  out their  days in illness, self-pity, and  mutual  hate.  Serge's  elder  sisters  are  equally maladjusted: Lucienne seeks solace for an  unhappy marriage  in a succession of young lovers; Denise eats incessantly to compensate  for spiritual  hollowness; and Monique  downs tranquillizers with abandon  to dull the pain of  loneliness. If this be normality, Tremblay  demands implicitly, what is deviance?
Fortunately Serge eludes the authoritarian toils which  enmesh  the  rest of the family, and stoutly resists any attempt  to entrap him. He doubts  neither  his male identity  nor his heterosexuality. Such anxieties as he has are prompted  less by the unorthodox object of his love than by his concern for the quality of his feeling. His attachment to Nicole was initially, indeed,  predetermined; but  as an  individual possessed of reason  and  freewill he refuses to  be the  creature  of blind  authori­ tarianism.  "C'est  vrai que j'ai pas eu ben ben le choix,"  he tells Lucienne.  "C'est  vrai que toute la famille m'a  jete dans les bras de Nicole ... mais c'est-tu a j'veux  vraiment?" After  long  and  careful  thought,   he  concludes  that  he  loves Nicole not out of compulsion but volition;  and  to reject  his chance  for happiness would be foolhardy. By the deliberate exercise of reason and will, the brother  and sister assert their  right to choose their  destiny  and  their  readiness  to accept  the consequences of their decisions. Inevitably  a high  price must be paid for flouting social convention; but their happiness  justifies it.  "J'me sacre de ce que  le reste du  monde  peut  penser," Serge insists, "nous  autres  on  est  heureux  pis c'qu'on ressent l'un  pour  l'autre,  si c'est une maladie, c'est  une  maudite  belle maladie !"
"Productive love," according  to Fromm,  "always  implies a syndrome  of  atti­ tudes;  that  of care, responsibility,  respect and  knowledge." 21   The  productive love of Serge and  Nicole animates not only their own relationship,  but extends beyond it  to the  ailing  Gabriel.  Out  of Serge's own  struggles  for  fulfilment  comes the

54

TREMBLAY

capacity  to empathize with  his father's  alienation,  to forgive his past  blunders, and to accept responsibility for his future. Serge's cry, "Popa, j't'aime" (according
to Tremblay, "la  premiere  fois dans le theatre  quebecois qu'un  fils dit  a son pere
qu'il  l'aime") 22    marks  a  felicitous resolution  of the  male  identity  crisis which
haunted  earlier  plays.
The  nationalistic  import  of Tremblay's incest metaphor  needs little explication. His impatience with the alienated  destructiveness which passes among  Quebecois for normalcy is self-evident. The play is a clarion call to renounce negativism, and, through  the  deliberate  employment  of  reason  and  will, to seek love-if only within  the cultural family. Such a love, far from being aberrant, is positive and productive.  It  allows not only fulfilment today, but reconciliation  with yesterday. To say "Popa, j't'aime" to the past is to understand  it, to forgive its errors, and to accept responsibility for the future.  It is, in short, to discover a sense of historical identity.  Tremblay's use in  the  play's title of the salutation, "Bonjour," a word spoken in Quebec  both  at meeting and  parting,  signals at once the  birth  of love and the death of alienation.
In  Sainte  Carmen  de la  Main  Tremblay  resumes the  tale  of  Carmen,  who achieves at last Frommian  freedom only to be martyred  by the social forces which thrive on human  bondage. This, the penultimate  play of the cycle, simultaneously celebrates Tremblay's belief in man's  potential for self-realization and  betrays his fearful conviction that in modern society the odds are heavily against its fulfilment.
Over the years since A toi, pour toujours Carmen's  career on the Main  has prospered;  and  in  recent  months she has journeyed to Nashville to improve  her vocal technique at the expense of her lover, Maurice,  proprietor  of the Rodeo nightclub  and  underworld  kingpin.  As the play opens, she is about  to make  her second debut  at the Rodeo, an event eagerly awaited by local transvestites, prosti­ tutes, and other denizens of the area. She begins her performance with translations of Western  "hits"; but  toward  the end switches to songs she has  written  herself about  the lives of Main-dwellers.  Her  lyrics are  hymns to the  value and  beauty of the  human  spirit,  and  the  redemptive  power of  self-strength.  As Sandra, the transvestite,  and  Rose Beef, the  prostitute,  put it, "Carmen a dit qu'au  fond  de moe  j'etais  forte!" Overnight   Carmen  becomes a  heroine  to her  public,  and  a material  threat  to Maurice,  whose lifestyle is supported  by the very  weaknesses Carmen  decries. When  she  refuses to  heed  either  her  lover-employer's  pleas or warnings, her career as social animator  is cut short by two shotgun  blasts; and her place is filled by her rival, Gloria, a purveyor of Latin American schmaltz.
Arguably  Carmen  is not  perfect. She is naive, over-confident,  and  impulsive; worse still, her alliance  with a brutal  hood makes her  the indirect  author  of her own destruction. Yet  the splendour  of her love redeems all faults.  It  now  goes beyond the love of self or a particular  individual  and  embraces an entire society. "If I love,"  writes Fromm,  "I care-that  is, I am actively concerned  with  the

55

TREMBLAY

other  person's  growth and  happiness....  I respond  to his needs,  to  those  he can express and  more so to those he cannot  or does not express." 23   Carmen cares pro­ foundly; and  her art  (Fromm considers  art  a "prototype" of productive work)   is the inevitable and  happy  effect of her altruism. "Avec  rna voix j'ai decide d'essayer
d'aider la Main  a sortir  de son trou," she announces to Maurice.

Si y faut  y montrer .a respirer, j'y montrerai  a respirer ... si y faut  toute y montrer j'y montrerai tout c'que  je sais, meme si c'est pas ben gros ... y m'ecoutent, moe! Y m'aiment, moe! Pis moe aussi j'les aime!

This  consummate synthesis  of love and  productive work,  in  an  environment  im­ placably   hostile  to  both,  at  once  precipitates Carmen's  ruin  and  vindicates  her claim  to sainthood.
As an  object  lesson in humanism, Sainte Carmen  functions admirably; but  at
the level of allegory it disappoints. According to Tremblay, the  piece was designed as a parable dealing with "laplace de l'artiste dans  la societe' ;24  and  when  read thus,  it smacks  more  of self-conscious  posturing than   passionate conviction. Can the  playwright be seriously suggesting  that  the socially-committed artist  inevitably suffers destruction at  the  hands  of hostile authority? Such  has  not  been  his lot  at any  rate.  Nor  can  one  give  much  more  weight  to  his simplistic  conclusion   that escapist  art  (represented by Gloria) must  prevail  over  higher  forms  (epitomized by Carmen). Does Tremblay believe in art as an instrument of social reform  at all? His decision  to kill Carmen before her work comes to fruition conveniently evades the question  altoegther.
Sainte Carmen  completes  Tremblay's exploration of man's need for  Frommian "rootedness" and  "relatedness"; and,  in  the  final  play  of  the  cycle,  he  turns  to a third   human drive   noted   by  Fromm-the impulse   towards  transcendence. Damnee  Manon, sacree Sandra,  a deeply-moving personal statement,  voices the playwright's recognition that  for  him,  as for Sandra, "La  survie  tout  court,  <;a se peut  pas. Y faut  que <;a soye accompagne par  quequ'chose, la survie ... Quequ'­ chose d'enveloppant pis de chaud !"
The   protagonists are  familiar figures  from  previous   plays.  Manon, the  God­ ridden  recluse of A toi, pour toujours, and  Sandra, a transvestite who is mentioned in Hosanna and  appears in Sainte Carmen, occupy  houses facing  each other on rue Fabre. Both lived in the area during the period of En pieces detachees when Sandra was the  small  boy, called  Michel.  Exactly  the  same  age,  they  developed   a  close childhood friendship, the  nearest  thing  to  love  either   was  to  know.  Now  about thirty,  living  in  physical  proximity but  long  estranged, each  pursues  in  isolation her  own  mode  of  transcendence. Sandra views herself  as  gross  flesh, the  passive instrument of an omnipotent sexual  drive, and  seeks transcendence through erotic  fantasy  in the play's early sequences.  Manon considers herself pure spirit, the yield­ ing  plaything of God,  and  pursues  a metaphysical union  with  the  Deity  through

TREMBLAY


faith  and  unrelenting self-abnegation. In the course of the  drama each  protagonist is increasingly reminded of past links with  the other; and  both  come  to recognize themselves as alter  egos. Simultaneously their transcendental obsessions begin to intermingle. Manon's spiritual devotion  is tainted  and  hindered by sensual distrac­ tions, while Sandra's mirages  take on religious overtones.  In  an orgy of  narcissistic spirituality, Manon attempts to  repress  her  memories  and  the  call  of  the  flesh; but  she  meets  with  indifferent success. Meanwhile Sandra,  having  dismissed  her exotic  reveries,  enters  imaginatively into  Manon's consciousness.  It becomes  ap­  parent that  Sandra has it in her  power to give or withhold from  Manon the spiri­ tual  ecstasy she craves. In  an act of love, born of childhood memories and  a recog­ nition  of  her  own  imperfect efforts  at  transcendence,  Sandra gratifies  Manon's desire.
"Closely  connected  with  the  need  for  relatedness," writes  Fromm, "is  man's situation as a creature. ... Being endowed  with  reason  and  imagination, he  can­ not be content ... with  the  role of dice cast out of a cup.  He  is driven  by the urge to transcend the  role of the  creature, the  accidentalness and  passivity of  his exis­ tence,  by becoming a 'creator.' " And  to create  "presupposes love for  that  which one creates.''25  If one cannot love and  create,  one may  seek  transcendence by less desirable  means.  "To destroy  life," Fromm  reminds  us, "makes me also transcend it."26   Manon's inability to love and  create  leads her to withdraw from  productive human contact into  an authoritarian and  ultimately self-destructive kind of trans­  cendence. Sandra, although a victim  of negative identity, is saved  from  Manon's fate  by her  power  to empathize and  love her fellow creatures. In  boyhood  Sandra sensed  the  want  of colour  in the lives of her  playmates, and  created  Batman fan­  tasies to cheer  them.  Today, in empathetic  conversations in  the  street,  she shares the  misery  of  the  same   children  now  gro\.vn older.  Sandra's decision  to  allow Manon her  religious   rapture, a  similar  act  of  love  and   creation,  renders   her "sauee"; while  Manon, bent  solely on  narcissistic  fulfilment, is damned in  her solipsist heaven.
Considered as allegory,  Damnee Manon, sacree Sandra is a sensitive and open­ hearted account of  the  playwright's own  passion  for  transcendence.  Sandra is clearly Tremblay himself;  indeed,  prior to her adoption of a negative identity,  she bore  his name.  His  plays,  like Sandra's Batman fantasies,  are  not  only efforts  to animate a society  mired  in  despair, but  also attempts to  transcend  through crea­  tivity  the  sense of having been  created. Manon's awareness of her  origins  in  the will of the  author  ( "Croyez done  en  moe ! Meme ... si ... j'ai  ete ... invenree
... par ... Michel") echoes Tremblay's recognition  of his own  plight; and  in her
successful  flight  into  transcendence  he  vicariously  realizes  his  own  aspirations. "Monte! Monte! Monte!," he  cries.  "Pis  tire-moe  avec  toe! ... Moe  aussi  j'ai ete inventee!" Manon's mode  of transcendence cannot, of course,  be his, however attractive it may seem  at  times. His lot is to attempt through art  to transcend  his

57

TREMBLAY

existential  pain  in a gift of hope  to his society. Sandra's imaginary speech  to the rue  Fabre housewives  metaphorically reveals  Tremblay's own  frailty, his oneness with the alienated products of his creation, and  the impulse that  gave them  life.

Aie, c'est moe, regardez, vous rappelez-vous  de moe? ... C'est  moe qui  organisais les pique-niques  au  pare Lafontaine  ou ben done  au  pare  Laurier.  C'est  moe qui hantais ... les ruelles, le soir, pour vous faire  peur!  Si vous saviez! Si vous saviez
comme c'est moe qui avais peur! ... J'vous ai toujours  possedes a contretemps  mais
si vous saviez ... si vous saviez comme j'vous aime!

It is upon  the  transcendent vitality  of his love that  Tremblay predicates any  hope he may have of moral or artistic salvation.
When   compared  with  the  best  of  contemporary  plays  dealing with  human alienation, it must  be admitted that  the Les Belles-Soeurs  cycle pales alongside the work  of  Miller, Albee,  Beckett,  Pinter, or  Genet. Tremblay's commitment to nationalistic allegory  inevitably  obliges him  to sacrifice  breadth of social observa­ tion, complexity of psychology, and catholicity of appeal. His weakness as a world­  class dramatist, however,  is precisely the  source  of  his  power  as a  Quebec play­ wright. His  dramas were  not  designed  as universal theatrical  statements, but  as works of social animation for a specific place and  time -Quebec during the Quiet Revolution. And  no one  understood better, or  articulated more  poignantly, the national psychology of the period. His recreations of particular segments  of Quebec life were  authentic and  revealing;  and  his allegorical message  was  apt,  compre­ hensible,  and  effective.  The impact of his theatre upon  Quebec's cultural evolu­ tion over the  past  decade defies measurement.
But  Quebec is forever  changing. Already  his social  analysis  is being  criticized as  outdated.27    Yesterday's revelations   have  become   today's cliches.  In   another decade, one suspects,  most of the  plays in  the  cycle  will  have  been  consigned  to Quebec's cultural history  cupboard. Their potential relevance to the  rest of  Can­ ada,  however,  remains to be explored. If as a nation  we are to understand Quebec's present,  we must  comprehend its past. And  its recent  past, characterized by a des­ perate  struggle to replace  authoritarianism, negative identity, and  destructiveness with self-respect,  love, and  transcendence, is nowhere better  encapsulated than  in the Les Belles-Soeurs  cycle.

NOTES

1 Adrien  Gruslin,  "Michel  Tremblay  acheve  un  premier  cycle,"  Le  Devoir,  Feb.
26, 1977·
2 Dates are those of first productions. For further details see "Biographical Checklist: Michel Tremblay," Canadian Theatre  Review  (Fall  1979),  pp. 47-51.
3 Femand Dove, "Michel  Tremblay,  le gars  .a barbe  sympathique," Le  Magazine
Maclean  (June  1969),  p. 1o.

TREMBLAY


4  Marc-F. Gelinas, "Je pense  en  joual,"  Le Magazine  Maclean  (September I970), p.46.
5  See Introduction to Mental  Illness and Social Processes, ed. Thomas J. Scheff  (New
York: Harper & Row,  I 967).
6  Erich  Fromm, Escape from Freedom (New York:  Holt, Rinehart & Winston, I964),
p. I9.
7  Ibid.,  p. 28.
8  Ibid.,  p. 3I.
9 Ibid.,  p. 36.
10 Ibid.,  p. I4I.
11 Ibid.,  p. I42.
12 Ibid.,  pp.I 52·53·
13  References are  to  the  following  editions  of the  plays:   Les Belles-Soeurs, Lemeac, I 972; En  pieces detachees, Lemeac, I 972; Hosanna suivi de La Duchesse de  Lan­ geais, Lemeac, I973;  A toi, pour toujours, ta Marie-Lou, Lemeac, I97I;  Bonjour,  la, bonjour,  Lemeac,  I974;  Sainte  Carmen  de la Main,  Lemeac,  I976;  Damnee Manon, sacree Sandra, Lemeac,  I977·
14  Fromm, op. cit., p. I44·
15  Although this  character is given  the  name  Therese in  the  edition from  which   I quote,  she  is designated Helene in other  editions.  She  is also referred to as Helene in Damnee Manon.
16 Erik H. Erikson, Identity: Youth  and Crisis (New York: Norton, I968), p. I 76.
17  Fromm, op. cit., p. I79·
18 Ibid.,  p.  I I5.
19   Erich  Fromm, The  Sane  Society  (New  York:   Holt,  Rinehart & Winston, I964), p. 31.
20   Ibid.,  p. 32.
21 Ibid.,  p. 33·
22   Martial Dassylva, "Tremblay: une piece plus froide et plus subtile," La Presse, Sept.
2I, I974·
23   The  Sane Society, p. 33·
24   Martial Dassylva,  "Une piece inspil'ee de la tragedie  grecgue," La Presse, May  I3, I978.
25  The  Sane Society, pp. 36, 37·
26   Ibid.,  p. 37·
27  Les Belles-Soeurs was considered to some  degree  out  of date  as early  as  I973· See Albert  Brie, "Les  Belles Soeurs-subissent-elles I'outrage des ans?", Le Devoir, Oct. I3, I973·








59

THREE POEMS




N011H

The snow finds no cease falling  and  sloping
till dunes  reach  up
high  as the Rockies

Under the  papery  slips you and  I lie
buried  like the hulks of two sunken  ships

No one calls the  beasts
to file in pairs  and  fours so as to preserve  them for  later  feasts

We sleep bones sky-blue as ice beneath the sun and from  the frozen  seas
a trickle  rises from  the glow

and  flows like blood until  the thaw
releases us from  the hold urging  us upon  the flood

Two arks upon  the  waves we swim towards
the  raft  of Ararat anchored to Asia and  safe

The waters  fall  back and  above a  rainbow  arches
around to the ground hatching the solitary  dove
 


S. Mayne





6o




JIBEL

It falls from  my hand,
flint for the creature's throat. With  flesh and  fat
the altar sizzles.
The  Lord  is hungry. I give  the  best
but  there's sullen  Cain
threshing grain  and  reproaching me for the tenth  time
with  his self-righteous bloodless  mouth. His hand is as tense as a claw.







CJIIN

No one  dared offer  the fire flesh
of ripe  berries  and  fruit. He  knelt  there
altogether too  pleased - smoke crying  out
from  the stinking sheep. Ravenously flames  rose up and  roasted.
Who  would  offend  the Lord? Why should  I
bow  before  spilt  blood?
Brother, you are  so silent
there  at  the  uprooted vines­
how can  you sleep?
 POEM

TOWARDS A POPULAR THEATRE IN ENGLISH CANADA

Neil Carson


ONEOF THE FEATURES OF  THE Quebec theatre that .eem' to the outsider  to be a sign of its healthy development  is the broadly based popu­ larity of so much of its drama.  Works such as Tit  C oq  (I 948)  and  Bousille et les
justes ( I 959)  established attendance  records which  have never been matched  in other parts of Canada. These works of Gratien Gelinas, and plays by other Quebec dramatists  such  as Marcel  Dube  and  Michel  Tremblay have  presented  French­ speaking Canadians with easily recognized dramatic reflections of their  lives in a language  that  closely resembles their own. A particularly  striking characteristic of much  of this drama  is the obvious affection the  playwrights have for their  char­ acters and  (by logical extension)  for the audiences for whom they write.
This  affection is particularly  evident in Gratien  Gelinas. Gelinas'  work  (in  his own plays and as Artistic Director of La Commedie  canadienne) has always been animated  by a strong  populist bias. "The  ideal  dramatic form,"  he believes, "is the one which  will interest the audience  in its totality,  the one which will reach not only the most numerous,  but also the  most diversified public." 1 The  way to reach such an audience  is to be relevant and  entertaining. "What is wrong with modem  theatre  is its detachment  from the  central  facts of our society and  from the concerns of the ordinary  man. Theatre has become an art  in isolation, unlike television and  cinema which create a world directly related  to the pattern  of our daily lives."2    For Gelinas, the theatre  is not a forum  for debate  or propaganda; it is primarily a place of entertainment. "If there is a message ... so much the better. But  you can  do without  the  message, and  you cannot  do  without  moving  the audience  or entertaining  the audience."3  Furthermore, Gelinas  ranks the  impor­ tance of communication with the audience above the achievement of purely literary or even dramatic excellence. "I maintain  that,  given not only an equal,  but even a vastly inferior  dramatic  quality in comparison  with  the  great  masterpieces  of the foreign theatre,  past or present, a play of Canadian inspiration and expression will always appeal  more to our  public." 4   Not  everyone  in  Quebec  agrees  with Gelinas, of course. He has been attacked  by the critics as being too popular  and by the radicals as insufficiently ideological. But because of  his own personal popu-

POPULAR THEATRE


larity and  the phenomenal success of his plays, Gelinas has not only been able to create a popular  drama  in Quebec,  he has also inspired younger  playwrights  to cater to the audience  he discovered.
How different  is the situation  in English Canada! It is hardly an exaggeration
to say that  a truly indigenous  popular  drama  in English does not exist. Playgoers in Halifax,  Winnipeg,  Edmonton, or Vancouver  seldom see their own lives mir­ rored on stage, and when works of Canadian inspiration are produced  they rarely get transferred  to other theatres. There are many reasons for the neglect of  popular drama  in English Canada, but prominent  among these is the strong elitist feeling in  the  critical  and  theatrical establishments.  The  conviction   (most succinctly expressed by Ronald  Bryden)  that the purpose of the theatre is to produce master­ pieces5 is one that  has seriously hampered  the development of a  robust Canadian drama.  The  pursuit  of "excellence" to the exclusion of almost all else has resulted in a national  broadcasting system which produces superior  programmes  that  are ignored  by the  vast  majority  of listeners and  viewers; it  has forced  the  Artistic Directors of many of our theatres  to "justify"  the production  of popular  plays by promising the concerned  funding  agencies to "educate" their audiences to appre­  ciate the historical or modern  "classics" of  Ibsen, Shaw, Brecht, or Beckett; it has made the sane assessment of Canadian drama  all but impossible by implying that  every new play written  in this country  must  be compared,  not with  the average product  of the commercial  theatre elsewhere, but with the best dozen or so plays from the last one hundred  years. But the most deplorable  aspect of the  "master­  piece syndrome" is the  fact  that  it is all too often a rationalization  for a  thinly veiled (or possibly unconscious)  contempt for the mass audience.
It is scarcely surprising,  therefore, that  the history of genuinely popular  drama in  English  Canada is a  short  and  melancholy  one.  If we  exclude  such  para­ dramatic successes as the Dumbells, Spring Thaw, or My  Fur Lady,  then one of the earliest  plays to attract  national  attention  was Eric  Nicol's Like  Father  Like Fun, first produced  at the Vancouver  Playhouse in 1966. The play is an innocuous commercial comedy about  the sexually inhibited son of a B.C. timber  baron  who is "educated" by an  attractive  female  artist  on  the  instructions  of a  concerned father.  Vancouver audiences were amused by what they imagined to be references to a certain  prominent  local family, and  the play enjoyed an  unexpected  success during  its limited  run.  Influenced,  perhaps,  by  the hilarity  around  him,  a Van­  couver stringer  for the Globe and Mail  called  the play a "masterpiece," and  on the strength  of such reports,  Ed Mirvish  decided to bring the  production  to To­  ronto  and  then  send  it to New York. Three  weeks before the Toronto opening, Like Father Like  Fun had sold more tickets than  many major  U.S. imports,  and it looked as though  Mirvish  had found a hit.
The Toronto reception  proved a shock for promoter and  playwright  alike. The critics were divided  about  the  play. McKenzie  Porter  called  it "an  outstanding

POPULAR THEATRE

Canadian farce  with subtle and  serious overtones."·6   Herbert Whittaker  allowed that  it had "a lot of promise in a disarmingly modest way." 7  But Nathan  Cohen, probably  the most influential  of the Toronto  critics,  was withering  in  his scorn. Like Father Like Fun, he grumbled,  was "the  worst play to be performed  in the Royal Alex since the end of World War  Il."8  When  ticket sales slowed, Mirvish began to revise his plans. The  New York opening  was quietly  cancelled and  the Toronto run extended. A two-week engagement in Montreal  followed, after which the show was closed for the winter. Hoping that  the enterprise  might somehow be salvaged, Mirvish  hired a new director and  cast, got Nicol to rewrite the play to eliminate an expensive scene change, and  proceeded  with his planned  invasion of Broadway. The  play went into rehearsal in New York and  Nicol continued  tore­ vise it to meet the objections of the American company.  When it finally opened at the Brooks Atkinson Theatre, it met cool reviews and  closed after one day.
In retrospect it seems that the New York fate of LFLF  was inevitable. The  pop­
ularity of the play in Vancouver  depended  rather  too much  on its local allusions. Both the play and  its initial  production  suffered from  a kind of provincial inno­ cence that  became evident as soon as the work was moved East. The  cast  (which even McKenzie  Porter called "one of inexplicable and excruciating mediocrity") 9 could be changed.  But the basic situation  was essentially foreign  to the more so­ phisticated  Eastern audiences. Mirvish might have been warned by the somewhat baffled response of the  French  Canadian critics, one of whom  found  the sexual hangups of the young man incomprehensible. "It is good to see English humour  of the 'put  down' variety. Being French  Canadian, however, I found  the portrait  of the artist and the problem of the young man completely unrealistic."'0


A SECOND PLAY TO  ACHIEVE WIDESPREAD popularity  across Canada was George Ryga's The  Ecstasy of Rita  ]oe (I g67), a compelling study of the destruction  of an Indian  girl by an uncomprehending white society. Mter
its initial production  at the Vancouver Playhouse, Rita]oe became one of the most widely produced  English Canadian plays of the late sixties. It was chosen to open the Studio Theatre at the National Arts Centre  (I g68) ; it was broadcast on CBC television  (I g6g), and  made into a ballet  ( I 97 I ) . It  was also produced  abroad in Washington,  Edinburgh, and London.
Rita   foe was a seminal work in modern  English  Canadian drama.  To  begin with, it showed that  there was an audience  for Canadian plays which attempted to deal seriously with important social issues. The  original  Vancouver  production provoked editorials in the local press and was the subject of an extended open-line radio programme. Secondly, it demonstrated  the effectiveness of Canadian (as opposed to mid-Atlantic) speech in Canadian drama. Although  there were excep-

POPULAR THEATRE


tions such as the doughty Nathan Cohen,  most critics felt that  Ryga  had succeeded in  transforming the  speech  of  uneducated Indians into  a  moving,  even  poetic, dramatic language. Finally, Rita  joe was a  triumphant vindication of the  close collaboration between  writer  and  actors. Ryga,  who had  written for radio  and tele­ vision, had  practically no experience of the stage. During the creation of the  play he worked  closely with  director Malcolm  Black and  the  actors.  The  result  was a fertile interaction in which  Ryga's  rather amorphous poetic vision was given excit­ ing theatrical form  and  reinforced by moments of psychological truth  contributed by  performers such  as Dan  George.  More  than  any  other single  work,  perhaps, Rita  foe combined the new dramatic and  theatrical ideas current in the mid-sixties into  a relatively  accessible  dramatic experience.  The  seventies were  to see a rapid  proliferation of dramatic activity in English  Canada in  which  the  happy  balance  of Rita  foe was rarely  recaptured.
The  development of Canadian drama in the last decade has been  marked  by a rather uneasy  relation between   the  playwrights and  the  theatres. The  apparent reluctance of several  of the large  regional  theatres to stage  Canadian works led to open  hostility  on  the  part  of many  of the  dramatists and  the  commentators who took  it upon  themselves  to speak  on  their  behalf.  Related to  hostility   (either  as cause  or  effect)   was a seeming indifference on  the  part  of many  playwrights to the  kinds of audiences the  regional  theatres had,  of necessity,  to cater  to. In  their efforts  to write  "the great  Canadian play,"  to explore  the  more  recherche byways of theatrical experimentation, or  to transform the  drama into  an  instrument of social criticism,  many  of the dramatists seemed to turn  their  back on the large mass audiences. It is significant, perhaps, that  neither  Eric  Nicol  nor  George  Ryga  has repeated his early  popular success. Both  have  continued to write  plays,  but  they have  failed  to  create  the  kind  of dramatic form  that  would  guarantee the  com­ munication of their  ideas to a large audience.
The  reluctance or inability of playwrights to  produce the  kinds of scripts  that the  companies felt they  needed  led some of the  troupes to turn  to their  own  re­ sources.  Companies such  as Toronto Workshop Productions and  Theatre  Passe Muraille began  as long  ago  as the  early  sixties  to experiment with  a  process of collective  creation. Typically, this method  involves the improvisation of  a number of  sketches  on  theatrically-related subjects,  strung   together  in  chronological se­ quence. The  sketches  are  frequently the work of the actors themselves  who rely on their  own  research  for  background. If a writer  is involved  in  these  creations, his role is often subordinate, and  consists of a tightening or ordering of materials that  have emerged  in rehearsals.
One  of the  most interesting (certainly the best documented)  experiment in col­ lective  creation is Theatre Passe  Muraille's influential piece,  The  Farm Show.  In earlier  productions of  this  kind,  the  "research" of the  actors  often  consisted  of reading documentary material such as transcripts of court  proceedings, newspaper

POPULAR THEATRE

accounts, or official reports of the events to be dramatized. Inspired,  perhaps,  by Peter  Cheeseman's  work in Stoke-on-Trent  where  the  company  recorded  inter­ views with  local  residents, Paul  Thompson   decided  to  attempt   a  more  literal dramatic transcription of Canadian life. Accordingly,  in the summer  of  1972, he and  his  actors  moved  to  Clinton,  a small  agricultural community  in  Southern  Ontario, where they mingled with the residents, and learned as much as they could about local history and conditions. At the end of the summer  they presented their impressions of the region to their hosts and  subjects  in a  performance  in a local bam.  The result, an affectionate look at the problems and  pleasures of farm life in general and at the lives of certain Clinton residents in particular, was a great suc­ cess and has become a staple of the company's repertoire.
If collective creations have succeeded in mirroring life in certain  regions of the
country,  they have been less successful in affecting  the  mainstream  of Canadian drama. Most  of the  plays of Toronto  Workshop  Productions  or  Theatre Passe Muraille, for example, have never been produced  elsewhere. In part this is a result of the fact that  a large part of any single production consists of elaborate  panto­ mime that  has been worked out in rehearsal and  is difficult to describe in a text. What is true of the actors' "business" is equally true of other aspects of  production.  There  is usually a heavy reliance on music, spectacle, and other essentially theatri­  cal devices and  a correspondingly lighter emphasis  on text. A number  of writers, including  Jack  Winter,  Rick Salutin, Carol  Bolt, and  Rudy  Wiebe, have worked on collective creations. It is my impression, however, that only James Reaney-in the  extraordinary Donnelly trilogy -has  been  able  to  incorporate   the  creative contributions of the actors into an organic whole and  to impose a coherent  vision on the finished work.
A more traditional method of collaboration  between  theatre  and  playwright  is
practised by Bill Glassco at the Tarragon Theatre in Toronto. Glassco is interested in ensuring that  the production of Canadian plays will be of the highest standard and to this end he works closely with new playwrights  during the period of  rehear­ sals. By far the most successful dramatist  to emerge from Tarragon so far is David French  who seems in some ways to bridge  the  gap  between  the  alternative  and regional theatres  in  Canada.  It  is ironic  that  his very success  has  made  French suspect among many of the very proponents of Canadian drama whom one would expect to champion  him.




EENCH's  FIRST   PLAY  FOR    THE   STAGE  (he  had   previously written  only for  television)  was Leauing  Home, produced  by the  Tarragon in
1972. The  play became one of the most popular  ever written  in English Canada and earned  French  in excess of $2o,ooo a year for the next three  years. Leaving

66

POPULAR THEATRE


Home  is a "Family  play" which deals with the conflict between a father  and  his sons. As the title suggests, the crisis is precipitated  by the younger son's marriage and the decision of the elder one to move in with his brother. This threat  of family division triggers long-standing resentments and misunderstandings  between Jacob Mercer and his first-born, Ben. The play ends with physical violence and the crea­ tion of a final gulf between the two men.
This  is familiar  ground,  and  French  covers it in a rather  faltering  way. The
causes of the difference  between father  and son are not brought  out as clearly as they might  be, and  Ben's decision to leave home seems hardly sufficient  provoca­ tion for Jacob's  almost hysterical reaction. The strength  of the play lies less in the narrative  structure than  in French's  skillful mixing of comedy and  tragedy,  and in his reproduction of regional speech. Although  obviously related  to such  plays as Death  of a Salesman  and  Long  Day's  journey into  Night, Leaving  Home  is lighter in tone and  more easily accessible than  its predecessors. The  humour  and sentiment in French's  work provide a contrast with the tension and violence which is reminiscent  of the early plays of Sean O'Casey  in which  the tragic  is counter­  balanced  by a rollicking sense of the ridiculous.
French's  ability to mix comedy and  pathos is even more evident  in his second Mercer family play, Of the Fields Lately  (I 973). In this work, French  continues the story of the father-son  relationship  a few years after  the incidents  of Leaving Home. Ben arrives to attend  the funeral of his aunt only to discover that  his father has had a heart  attack  about  which he had not been told. Somewhat  against  his wishes, Ben allows himself to be persuaded to stay home so that  he can support  the family while his father  recuperates. Jacob is temperamentally incapable  of  remain­ ing inactive, however, and  makes life intolerable  for those trying to save him. In the end, Ben realizes that  his father cannot  be helped, and he returns to Saskatch­ ewan  where  he has been living. A short  time later Jacob  dies on  the  job. Once again,  the structure of the  play is derivative  (French  uses a flashback  technique  which recalls The  Glass Menagerie), and the characters are presented with a senti­ mentality that  would be mawkish were it not for the humour. But the play reveals a profound love of life on the part of the author, and an affection for his characters  that sets French apart  from many of the dramatists writing in English Canada.
In his third  play, One Crack Out  (I 975), French turns to an entirely new milieu
-the world of the Toronto sub-culture-for his subject. On one level, the play tells the rather sordid story of the decline and rise of Charlie  Evans, an aging pool hustler. The action opens with the main character  both impotent  and  in a profes­ sional slump as a result of (or occurring  at the same time as)  his wife's infidelity. When Charlie  fails to place a bet for a friend  he finds himself owing $3,ooo with very little prospect of raising the money. As one after another  of his possible sources of funds are exhausted  or shut  off, he faces the prospect of  having  his hands  or legs broken by an implacable loan collector. Just as he is about  to go into hiding,

POPULAR THEATRE

he  discovers  that  his wife  has begged  for  an  extension of the  loan  period.  Both moved  by her loyalty and  humiliated by his inability to protect her,  he challenges the  debt  collector  to play  pool for  the  money  owing.  The   play  ends  leaving  the audience with the conviction  that  Charlie's problems (both business and  domestic) are over.
One  Crack  Out  was not  as  popular with  the  critics  as  French's earlier  plays.
Some reviewers complained that  the action  and  the milieu  were rather too special­ ized.  It should  have  been  obvious,  however,  that  the  play  is much  more  than  a study  in  local  colour.  Indeed it  deals  with  many  of  French's  familiar concerns. Charlie, like Jacob Mercer, is a man  who  defines  himself  by a  professional  code which leads him to behave in ways that seem irrational to an outsider. The Toronto pool shark, like the  Newfoundland carpenter, is an  example of a  man  caught in changing circumstances and  facing  a loss of  professional  confidence.
French's latest  play,  jitters ( 1979), was Tarragon's most successful  hit in three
years, playing for several weeks in the company's regular season before being trans­ ferred  elsewhere for an extended run. The  work deals with a group of  actors open­  ing a new play in a small Toronto theatre, and  is based in part  on  French's experi­  ence with Glassco at the Tarragon. The  story concerns Jessica Logan, a Canadian actress  who has returned home after  a modest  success on Broadway. The last play she had  appeared in, however,  had  been badly reviewed and  she is hoping  that  the present  work  will be the vehicle in which  she will make her  triumphant return to New York. She has invited  a Broadway producer to the Toronto opening and  the imminent arrival of this outside  observer  provides  a focus for  the  hopes and  self­ doubts  of the  playwright and  the  other  actors.  When  the  producer fails to show up,  the  company is compelled  to exercise its own  critical judgment. The  author turns  to the director for reassurance that  his play is really "good enough" for New York; one actor  exclaims "He was my last chance, he was an American." The  end of the  play is ambiguous. The actors finally resolve their  personal differences and  get on with  the show. But it is not at all clear  that they  have  achieved  the  kind of professional  self-confidence that Charlie, for example, regained at the end  of One Crack Out.
jitters is essentially a light comedy  and  it would  be foolish to probe it too deeply
(especially  in view of French's acid comments about "academics looking for mean­ ing").  But  it  would  be  equally  wrong  to  dismiss  jitters  as  pure  farce.  Like  his earlier  plays,  fitters is concerned with  the  problem  of integrity-of  living  one's life according to one's inner  convictions  in spite of the  pressures exerted  by family  obligations, self-doubts,  or the opinions  of others.  In  the  Mercer plays, the problem  is seen  in  rather conventional terms,  first from  the  point  of  view of the  son  then from  that  of the father. One Crack Out is a new departure in that  the "family" in that  play  is an  entire  sub-culture in  which  the  conflicts and  codes  are  somewhat broader.  jitters, too, deals with a closely-knit group made unstable by tension  and

68

POPULAR THEATRE

personal  rivalries.  But  the  theatrical world  of  jitters  is a metaphor for  the  world of Canadian culture as  a  whole.  It is not  only  actors  and  playwrights who  are reduced  to  a state  of forelock-tugging diffidence  by the  prospect  of international recognition.
The  rather schizophrenic attitude that  condemns  the  commercialism of Broad­
way while at the same time envying its success has done much to confuse theatrical policy in Canada. Underlying many  of the  arguments about Canadian drama is an unspoken  assumption that audiences in this country  are somehow  different  from their  counterparts abroad. It is the apparently sincere  conviction of many  people in the arts  in Canada that it is possible to create  a high  culture while  at the same time neglecting popular culture. But the hope that  Canadian plays in the tradition of the  European avant-garde can  ever win a large audience here  (any  more  than they have won such an audience elsewhere)  is a pious illusion. The  only thing  that will win spectators away  from  Broadway and  West End  commercial comedies  are Canadian commercial comedies.  If Canadian drama and  theatre are  to come  of age, then it is necessary  that we overcome  our elitist  prejudice against  "showbusi­ ness."  Artistic  Directors, funding agencies,  critics,  and  academics  must  face  the fact  that  drama is a living but  ephemeral art, and that  the "masterpieces" that  are so earnestly  hoped  for from  our  playwrights (when  they  come)   will form  a very small  percentage of the  total  dramatic output. It is time to assert  the  importance of  popular, simple-minded,  unpretentious,  easily-accessible  dramatic entertain­ ment.  What we  need  are  not  more  Brechts,  Pinters,  Becketts  or  Tennessee  Wil­ liamses in this country, but  a Canadian Simon,  Ayckboum, Rattigan or Inge.  We need  more  dramatists like David  French  who can  be serious  without at  the same time  having  to be solemn.

NOTES

1 "A   National  and   Popular Theatre,"  rpt.   m  Renate  Usmiani,  Gratien   Gelinas
(Toronto: Gage,  rg77), p. 83.
2 Gelinas,  quoted by Michael Richard in "Gelinas," The Stage  in  Canada, 4, No. 3 (May rg68),  p. g.
3 Gelinas  in a CBC  interview on "Report on  the Arts,"  January g,  rg62.
4  Usmiani, p. 8r.
5  Ronald Bryden,   "Toronto  Theatre:  Mademoiselle est  partie,"  Canadian  Forum
(August 1978), p. I I.
6 McKenzie Porter, The Toronto Telegram, July  r8, rg66.
7   Herbert Whittaker, The Globe  and Mail, July  rs,  rg66.
8  Nathan Cohen, The Toronto Daily Star,  July  rs,  rg66.
9 Telegram, July  r8, rg66.
10 Yves Robillard, La  Presse, August  24, rg66.


6g

THE NGELOFMYTONGUE
Peter Christensen

I will lie
like dry sticks in the sun
and  befriend
the mouth  of fire

I will be judged
by earth  and  wind
There will be serpent  tongues

In  the dry season
I will be afraid

The savanna must  burn
Deer  run
in the hot  blast
Mice  cower
in  their  tunnels like brains

Hawk  will follow the fireline

A snake will coil strike  my heart

Earth and  wind
will consume  the ash

my logic will begin
and  the angel  of my tongue  speak

my hands  will be the wind and  I will kiss
the  mouth  of fire again  and  again


GROWING  PAINS

Toronto Theatre in the 197o's


Robert Wallace


(for Brenda Donohue)

"The geography  of the  situation  becomes  so dense,  so rich  with possible  paths,  that  the  instinctive  sense  of direction  fails,· and questions  of destination are rapidly  replaced  by  the  concerns  of survival.))- MARTIN KINCH

"In this country there's  an appetite  to  put buildings  up, to equate culture  with  cupolas  and  glass palaces.))- PAUL  BETTIS





IN AN  ARTICLE PUBLISHED  in Canad;an Theat" Rev;ew, no.
21, in  1979,  Ken  Gass,  founder of Toronto's Factory  Theatre Lab,  concludes:

Toronto may be a bustling, chic metropolis with abundant resources and an  active theatre  industry, but it is also thoroughly conservative and  not the most conducive environment for serious theatre  work.

Gass's  opinion of Toronto theatre at  the  end  of the seventies  is not  as important as the fact  he takes for granted: in just ten years, an "active theatre industry" has emerged where  little  was before.  The  1979/Bo  edition  of the  Canadian  Theatre Checklist  contains over  fifty  listings  of  theatre buildings  and   companies in  the Toronto area,  few of which  existed in 1969.1  City Nights, a weekly entertainment guide  circulated throughout the city, offers a constantly  changing roster  of  theatri­ cal events.  At least one  review of a new play, cabaret act,  or theatre  piece can  be found  in  the  entertainment sections  of Toronto's daily  newspapers.  Commercial ticket  agencies  with offices in the suburbs are thriving while pre-curtain box-office queues  are  customary at  many  downtown theatres. Dinner theatres, cabarets and revue  houses  flourish  across  the  city,  not  to mention  the  taverns, bars  and  pubs featuring a  wide  variety  of acts  and  complementing the legitimate theatres. For better  or for worse, theatre has become  business in Toronto, the inevitable result of an artistic  evolution in which  success is equated  with an  ever-widening audience.
Toronto theatre has also become  real estate. Theatre Passe Muraille, Tarragon Theatre, The  Factory Theatre Lab,  and  Toronto Free  Theatre -the  corner­ stones of new  theatre in the  city over  the  last decade -have all  acquired build-

TORONTO THEATRE

ings,  mortgages and  renovation bills.  Modest  beginnings such  as Theatre  Passe Muraille's basement workshop  in Rochdale College  in  1969  have  grown  to two­ and  three-stage enterprises-the theatre "complex" replete  with  bar, restaurant, and  office space,  projected   if  not  already   built.  The "two-stage"  season  of  the regional  theatre is now an accepted feature of many  Toronto theatres, as are sub­  scription series,  preview  performances, press  kits  and,   in  the  case  of  Adelaide Court, the  highly successful home  of Open  Circle  Theatre, Theatre du  p'tit  Bon­ heur  and  New Theatre, dinner  packages  and  twelve-dollar  seats. That a dissatis­ faction  with the regional theatre's "balanced" seasons of proven  plays was a major impetus to the rise of theatres such as these seems to have  been forgotten. And  the premise  that  "theatre is event, not architecture," 2   an  attitude which  united  artists  as diverse  as Passe Muraille's Paul  Thompson and  Tarragon's Bill Glassco in the early  seventies, appears to have  been  definitely  revised.
The changes-some would  say  compromises -that  have  accompanied the phenomenal growth of Toronto theatre during the  Seventies  have  elicited  con­ siderable criticism  from outside  the theatre community as well as substantial self­ analysis from  within.3  Central to most of the criticism  is a disillusionment with the various  theatres' acknowledged shift  from  "alternate" to  "establishment" status. The reasons for this shift are both  artistic  and  financial, and  worth  considering as many  Toronto theatres begin  to pursue  commercial  independence. The  results of the shift are less clear, being  part  of the transition which  is still going on. That the shift  is well developed  needs  little  debate. Gass  in  his  article in  CT R  (no.  2 1) suggests that  the  term  "alternate" is already archaic and  can  only  be appreciated in  its  historical   context.   A  legitimate  discussion   of  Toronto  theatre  demands "removing the label  of Alternate from  what  is now the  mainstream." Gass's idea echoes  a  statement by Martin Kinch  who,  as Artistic  Director of Toronto Free Theatre, said  two  years earlier, "There's a  need  for  us to  become  an  institution. At least then  people will get out of the  habit  of calling  us a small  theatre or alter­ nate  theatre or  any  of those  condescending terms."4    Bill  Glassco,  a  pioneer   of Toronto's "all-Canadian" theatrical stance, presumably agrees:  an  article  in  the Toronto Star,  March  1979, begins  with  his statement, "We're trying  to create  a Broadway," and  concludes  with  "I know  down  to  my  toes  that  I want  to  do  a Rogers  and  Hart  Musical, but  I don't know  when  the  time  is right."5
Clearly, the  time  is fast approaching. January 1980  saw  six musicals  premiere in   Toronto's  "new"  theatres. Although  two   of   these-George  F.    Walker's Rumours   of Our  Death  at  the  Factory Theatre  Lab   and   Michael Ondaatje's Coming  through  Slaughter  at  Theatre Passe  Muraille-continue the  "serious theatre work" traditional to their  respective  theatres, the  others  amount to enter­ taining diversions  of little challenge or  consequence. Their emergence and, more importantly, their success, suggests that  a major cause of the shift  from an  "alter­ nate" aesthetic that  typified  Toronto theatre during the  late  Seventies will con-

'I'ORONTO THEATRE


tinue  to affect it during the  Eighties.  Discussion of this cause is best begun  by con­ sidering Bill Glassco,  who as early  as I974 recognized  the  need  to re-evaluate his theatre's artistic  policy in light  of financial  pressure and  audience  response. After four  short  seasons,  Tarragon Theatre had  been  acclaimed "the  most  alert  and influential in  Canada,"6   "the brightest  and  most  professional  showcase  for  new Canadian plays.m  Such  acceptance had  its negative  effects,  however,  as Glassco explained when  he decided to close the theatre temporarily in I 975:

Suddenly,  you see, we had four box-office winners:  French,  Freeman,  Reaney and Tremblay.  We had  won this special reputation  for delivering  a first-rate show and the more we used our increasingly successful playwright, the more intolerant  we all
-the audience  and  the theatre-became of experiment  and  failure. 8

The freedom  to experiment and  to fail had  been central to the  development of new Canadian plays and  to the search  for Canadian themes  and  talents that con­ tributed to  the  alternate aesthetic. Gass, in fact,  cites  "the development of  new theatrical  experiences, particularly in  terms  of  new  Canadian plays,  which  the regional  theatre system  had  markedly discouraged" as  the  prime  artistic  aim  of the  alternate movement.'9 That  "new  experiences" should  become  intolerable so quickly says less about the  power of the new plays than  the immensity of the  need that  they filled. David  French's Leaving Home was hailed as a minor  masterpiece not  because  of its theatrical daring, which  is all but  non-existent, but  because  of the  identification it allowed  the  audience with  its characters. It, like David  Free­  man's Creeps, Michel  Tremblay's Forever Yours, Marie-Lou, and  James Reaney's trilogy  about the  Donnellys, more  than  fulfilled  Tarragon's original intention "to  produce new  plays of our  own  culture as well  as possible,  to  nurture Canadian playwriting talent, to act  as a testing  ground  and  as a source  of new  plays from which  other  Canadian theatres could  draw"; 10  but  that  it should   be  viewed  as the  prototype for  new  Canadian drama  was  more  than   unfortunate -it  was debilitating, given  the  demand it  created  in  the  audience. The  problem, quickly labelled  "the hit syndrome," would  have long-lasting  effects,  the  nature of which Jane Glassco, Tarragon's publicist, suggested  in December I974=

We've been programmed into becoming an institution.  You don't  gamble anymore when you're programmed.... If a new David Freeman came along with a play that called for a cast of eight or nine, we couldn't  do it. We couldn't take the risk on a new play, but we'd have to wait until his second or third... _11

As Glassco was to acknowledge in I 977, this problem  didn't go away:

In season one I did Canadian plays, because we had to do Canadian; and I wasn't thinking  of a  big audience   then  because there  wasn't  any  audience  at  all;  and when  I didn't  have  that  many dollars, I wasn't  risking losing many  dollars. It  all made sense then,  but it would  be folly now.12

Tarragon's I977  season  suggested  the  sobering  effects  of  Glassco's  new  prag-


73

TORONTO THEATRE

matism and  marked a significant change in the theatre's artistic direction. Stating "we're  at  a stage where it's important that  we test ourselves against  established work from the rest of the world," 13   Glassco included  in his line-up  three adapta­ tions  of  world  classics, Chekhov's  The  Seagull, Frank   Wedekind's  Lulu,  and Strindberg's A Dream Play. This trend continued  the next year with productions of Lillian Hellman's  Toys in the Attic and  Racine's  Bajazet. The 1978/79 season also introduced   another  departure from  Tarragon's  original  artistic  policy:  the inclusion of plays, productions, and  directors from other  Canadian theatres-in this case, John  Gray's  18 Wheels, which  had  premiered  at  Passe Muraille  the previous year.14  Explaining this development, Glassco might have been summariz­ ing what  appears  to be his present attitude: "I  realize now the object  is to fill your season with the best possible shows."15  These,  of course, are  not necessarily Canadian nor are they likely to be untried scripts by unknown  authors-at least not very often. Although  both the 1978/79  and  the current  seasons contain  new works by Canadian  playwrights,  these "risks"  are  balanced  by shows that  have proven themselves elsewhere. In  short, the  Tarragon season now resembles that of Toronto Arts  Productions,  the  regional  theatre  whose consistently formulaic offerings at the St. Lawrence Centre  invariably  include  a modem  classic, a con­ temporary  British or American play, a period drama  in modem  dress and a Cana­  dian play, rarely new.



CHARTING THE  CHANGES  THAT  TARRAGON has made during its rise to national  acclaim is useful only insofar as it establishes a historical context from which to view the current situation of Toronto theatre. Although Bill Glassco is no longer fostering new Canadian  plays and  developing  new playwrights to the degree he once did,  his commitment  to Canadian drama, like his contributions, remains integral  to his work. "What's at stake now is how can our theatre  remain unique  and  grow at  the same time."16  His question  is crucial  and  indicates  the very real dilemma  of Toronto  theatres  much  more vulnerable  than  Tarragon to the  vagaries  of  commercial  expediency.  Discussing  Tarragon's  problems  with success does little to explain the financial crisis that all these theatres must continue to face;  indeed,  a full understanding  of Tarragon's policy changes  demands  the recognition  that  its funding  structure  has also altered  drastically  during  the last decade.  Mallory  Gilbert, Tarragon's administrator in 1977, explained  that "cost­ per-production  is two or three times higher  now than  it was when we  began six years ago.m 7   Ironically,  this is partly  a  result of Tarragon's success  as  well. In October  1974,  for  example, Actors  Equity  found  it  necessary  to  reclassify the theatre  from a studio operation because it had grossed more than $3,200 a week. This  reclassification required the theatre  to raise actors' salaries to $130 a week; this, in tum, broke the projected  budget  and  necessitated  corporate  fund-raising

74

TORONTO THEATRE

when the Canada Council refused to enlarge its grant to compensate for the unexpected deficit. The scaling of Equity rates to the size and solvency of a theatre is now common  practice  and  has resulted  in  higher  costs for  Toronto  theatres above and beyond ordinary  inflation. Government grants, on the other hand,  have not risen comparatively; rather,  the theatres  have been pressured  by subsidizing bodies to increase  their  box office
councils correctly maintain  that  this allows them to adjudicate theatres  according to their community  support,  it also makes the theatres  dependent  on  their  com munity  appeal.  Marketing a theatrical  product  that  attracts the  widest  possible audience  is more  appropriate to television than  indigenous  theatre; yet this  is what  the  councils demand. In  such a situation,  the freedom  to experiment  and develop new talent  becomes increasingly restricted.
Given such  a  climate,  the  increased  commercialization  of Toronto theatre   is hardly as surprising  as the fact that experimentation  continues to exist to a fairly healthy degree. And that  most theatre being produced in Toronto at the beginning of the eighties continues  to be Canadian, albeit  "safe,"  suggests the  inestimable impact  of the  alternate movement.  Although  Ken  Gass feels he  must  plan  Ills future  theatre  work elsewhere,'8   many  other  artists  are  now  able  to  plan  their careers at home. As Glassco says: "There's so much work for the better actors in tills country.  You can't  hold on to them  even for a tour. ... They're already  in the situation  of picking and choosing what they want to do. And it is on them that the  new Canadian theatre  is focusing. . . . When  I talk  of making  our  theatre strong, I mean  making  actors survive and  grow."19  Although  Glassco's remarks are  overly optimistic-many young actors  still move south  in  search  of  more regular  work -they  reflect a real increase in opportunities  for actors, directors, playwrights, and designers who have developed reputations  within the city. Actors such  as R.  H.  Thompson, Fiona  Reid,  Clare  Coulter,  and  Brent  Carver  now receive "star  billing" in production  publicity. Plays by local playwrights as diverse as Larry Fineberg, Erika Ritter and George F. Walker do healthy business regard less of reviews. Innovative directors  the like of Paul  Bettis, Pam  Brighton,  and Eric Steiner  often  attract  more  publicity  than  their  productions.  And  designers such as Michael  Eagen  and  Mary  Kerr  need to travel  less to win contracts  and recognition.  What  has yet to emerge is a transfer  house that  will allow  popular productions  by such artists to move from their original theatres  for a longer run. The emergence of commercial  producers like Marlene Smith and David  Pacquet, however, suggests that  one might soon be found;  Smith's successful run of Tarra gon's  production  of David  French's  jitters at Toronto  Workshop  Productions  in
1979 augurs  well for the future.  And as extensions of popular  plays such as Pam Gems'  Dusa, Fish, Stas and Vi  or the  MillerjWitkin musical  Eight  to the  Bar become  more  common,  Glassco's  pursuit  of  "Broadway   North"   proves  more feasible.


75

TORONTO THEATRE

Given  the current situation, Glassco's switch in focus from  the  playwright to the actor  is also understandable: traditionally, the  theatre audience is most interested in  the  performer.  Ironically, this  switch  is  consistent   with  one  of  the  avowed principles of the  alternate aesthetic,  at  least  as it  was  defined  by Theatre  Passe Muraille, the  other  Toronto theatre that  has  captured the  most  national interest besides Tarragon. Jim  Garrard, founder of Passe Muraille, outlined this principle in one of the theatre's first manifestos in 1969:
The  renaissance  of the theatre  as experience,  as event,  demands  that  contact  be made  (i)  among  the actors, who  must  work  together  as a  continuing  ensemble;
( ii)  between  the  actors  and  those individuals  termed  'the  audience'; and   (iii), because theatre  is a human event, between people and  people.20

The   most  appropriate name   for  such  a  theatre, Garrard  explained, would   be "theatre without walls" -hence Theatre Passe M uraille. Although Passe M uraille acquired its own  theatre inI 976,  its  interest  in  "a theatre free  of  distinctions between  actor  and  spectator, between  'inside'  and  'outside,' between  drama as one art  form,  music  as  another and  dancing as  yet  another," survived   the  move; indeed, Garrard's demand for  a  theatre without walls  should   be  regarded as  a figurative, not  a literal,  direction. A theatre "whose  main  reason  for  being  is the link  between  it and  its audience" can  exist anywhere, as Passe  Muraille's  utiliza­ tion  of playing  spaces  as unconventional as haylofts,  auction  rings, church base­ ments  and  union  halls makes  clear.  What is important is that  the  theatre "find  new  ways  to  reach   people  and   use  people  ... that   every  project   must  be  ap­  proached freshly  and  that  the  methods must  be  rediscovered." Passe  Muraille's constant search  for the "authentic" and  "alive" experience for both  audience and  pedormers is responsible  for  its unique  position  in Toronto theatre today; of all the  Canadian theatre groups  that  participated in  the  Festival  of  Underground Theatre in August  I970-an  event  which  is often  cited  as the  beginning of the Toronto alternate theatre21  -only  Passe  Muraille has  been  able  to  integrate its alternate aesthetic  with  a  viable  commercial policy.  Although this  has  not  been achieved   without  compromise, the  theatre still  maintains many   of  its  original aims; doing so, it persists as a nucleus  for much  of the  city's experimental theatre.
Most of the credit  for this must go to Paul  Thompson who,  as Artistic  Director, assumed  Garrard's position  inI 97 I after  it had  fallen  briefly  to  Martin Kinch. Although Thompson has allowed  the  theatre to  develop  in  the  multi-directional ways  appropriate to  its  compass-like  logo,  he  has  persistently influenced   his  co­ workers  with  an  anti-establishment approach to  both  the  making and  marketing of theatre that  is still remarkably consistent  with  Garrard's original  intentions. In an  interview with  the  now-defunct Toronto  Telegram  in  1969,  Garrard  made these abundantly clear: he is worth  quoting at length  both  to recognize  the manner in which  Toronto theatre has altered  in ten years and  to realize  the ways in which Theatre Passe M uraille  has not:

TORONTO THEATRE


Theatre must   be  indigenous. It  must   be  organic....  The professional   artist   is ruining theatre. They   think  theatre takes  place  in glass cages.  They  think  theatre is real estate  so they  build  big arnphitheatres but  they have  no one  to fill them.  We don't need  a St.  Lawrence Centre. Not  if George  Luscombe [of  Toronto  Work­ shop  Productions] can't pay his mortgage. It's  important to get out  of the  theatre. Out into  the streets,  into  schools and  parks,  into  prisons,  and  apartment  buildings.
. . . We need a guerilla theatre front,  to involve  people in real  warm  confrontations. Theatre in  the  subways,  get  a  truck  and  do  theatre in  small  towns,  real  circusy, grab   people   in  the  streets....  I'd   like  to  make  theatre as  popular as  bowling. People  say theatre is dead  but  in  Nathan Phillips  Square we  had  an  audience of
300 standing around on  those  ramps  watching while we did  exercises. If we could build  fourteen to fifteen  people  who  work well together, who  have  a dialogue, we could   probably turn  a  lot  of  people  on  to  theatre. The   ensemble  becomes  the resource.22

Although Garrard's  "living theatre" rhetoric now  may   seem  embarrassing to some, its relevance to Theatre Passe  Muraille's success  can't be ignored. The basis of Passe  Muraille's reputation is its use and  refinement of "collective creation," the process  by  which a group of  people-usually the  cast-collaborates  to develop
a play  through research and improvisation. The development of an  ensemble that
could "dialogue" about their experience of an  event, place, or  person  was  central to  such   early   Passe  Muraille hits  as  Doukhobors, The  Farm  Show,  1837:  The Farmer's Revolt, and I Love You, Baby Blue; here,  actors such  as  Miles  Potter, Janet Amos, David Fox,  and Anne Anglin were  allowed (required?)  to transform personal experience into scenes  that were  then   juxtaposed to  become an  episodic play.  In  an  interview with  Open  Letter in  1973, Thompson explained his  use of the  actor as resource in such  productions:

Part  of the concept of doing  'collective' plays is saying  that  the  actor  has more  to give  than  often  is required or demanded of him in  traditional plays.  I  think,  you know,  he should  be more  than  a puppet. He's  got a head,  he's  got  his observations and  he's quite  as capable as anybody else of making  a statement or passing on observations. In the  kind  of work we're  doing,  we like the  actor  to really  put  some of himself  in  the  play.  We  also work  through the  skills an  actor  has.  If an  actor could  yodel,  for example, then  I'd  really like to put  his yodel into  a play.23

The discovery and utilization of the  actor's skills within the  creative process  con­ tinues to  result  in  some  of  Passe  Muraille's best  productions and   to  make  Paul Thompson a  magnet for  actors from all  across  the  country. That some  of  these,  like Ted  Johns or Linda Griffiths, unearth a genuine talent for  writing while work­ ing  with  him, is an added  dividend. Although Thompson dismisses his function in the  collective process  as  that of  "gluepot," both  his  critics and  collaborators are  quick to  proclaim his  centrality.  Reviewing Griffiths' Maggie  and  Pierre, for  ex­ ample, one  Toronto critic wrote, "Much of the show's charm comes  from the stage­ craft [Linda Griffiths] has developed with  director Paul Thompson, her  long-time mentor."24   That Thompson's contribution has  been  prolific  as  well  as  consistent

77

TORONTO THEATRE

can  be recognized by glancing  at the Members  Catalogue  of the  Canadian Guild of Playwrights:  twenty-two collective  creations are  attributed to  Passe  Muraille up  to 1979  and, as the editor  states,  "Paul Thompson, as scenarist  and  director, centralized the  shaping of the  Collective  Creation into  a staged  play  production, by himself where  no playwright  or other  name  is mentioned, and  as a shared func­ tion where  a name  is mentioned other  than  the collective."25



ALTHOUGH IT  WOULD  BE  PRESUMPTuous to  trace  the  na­ tional  interest  in collective creation 26   to Passe Muraille, the  theatre's popularizing of the form  within  Ontario can't be denied. In  all fairness,  George  Luscombe at Toronto Workshop Productions had  been  preparing Toronto  audiences for  the  revue form  most typical  of the collective product throughout the Sixties:  but  Lus­ combe's  development of productions like Hey Rube!  and Chicago Seventy, heavily influenced by his apprenticeship at Joan  Littlewood's Theatre Workshop in  Eng­  land, always  bore  the  imprint of  Luscombe's own  particular  vision  and   style. Thompson's work  is more  varied,  marked more  by  its  eclecticism   than   by  any consistent  visual or presentational form. This  is partly due to the fact that  he, more than  Luscombe, allows  his actors  free  reign  and  that  he  works  with  writers  the strength of Carol  Bolt, Rudy Wiebe, Rick Salutin, and  Betty Jane Wylie. The  Passe Muraille collective  creation, rather   than  becoming predictably stylized,  changes according to the interests and energies of its various  creators. As a result, the shows continue to attract both  old  and  new  patrons, assisted  by Thompson's aggressive attempts to reach  people for whom  theatre is a  new  experience. Passe  Muraille's decision to decline an offer to take The  Farm Show to New York in 1974 in favour  of touring Ontario farm communities suggests the degree  to which  Thompson was adhering to  one  of  Garrard's original  demands, namely  that   the  theatre "get  a truck  and  do theatre in small towns." Thompson's subsequent use of various spaces throughout  the  city for the staging  of plays-most  notable in  The  Immigrants, a  play  devised  for  Italian, Greek,  and  Portuguese community clubs-although not  always  successful,  reveals  another, namely   that   "the theatre find  new  ways
to reach  people." As Thompson said  in  1973,  "I'm  interested in  discovering  the audience. I  think   the  really  interesting  people   are  the   ones  who  don't  go  to theatres."27
Thompson's fear  of becoming  "locked  in"  or  creatively restricted by  any  one dramatic form or theatrical style was well developed as early as 1972. A statement he made that  year,  as well as being  prophetic of the  current situation, reveals  his awareness of  "the hit  syndrome" and  suggests  that   an  adherence to social  and artistic  integrity is still commercially viable:
Once  you have  one show that  works you start looking  for another. The Factory has had  three  light  comedies  in a row. Within a year  four  or five Brussels Sprouts will

TORONTO THEATRE

be offered  to it. Canada's answer  to Neil Simon!  Tarragon Theatre and  Factory are  going to have  to turn  somewhere. If you become dependent  on  a  box office you become dependent on the success of your shows. Or dependent  on subsidization. That's not the  point  of Passe Muraille.... If you're going to work that  way, you work towards  acceptance. The  Passe Muraille  is like an  art  gallery-it changes with each exhibition.28

Although Passe Muraille's production history is not without shows that pander to commercial tastes and  expectations (as, for example, I Love You, Baby Blue 2 - a  blatantly empty  attempt to exploit  the  name  and  publicity  of their  earlier  suc­ cess),  it demonstrates a consistent  avoidance of revivals  and  extensions  that  sug­ gests the theatre's adherence to more than  commercial aims. Money, of  course, has always been as much  a problem  in Toronto as anywhere else. Indeed, I Love You, Baby Blue was  allowed  to  run  for  months  to capitalize on  its  attempted closure by the Toronto morality squad  and  the interest  that ensued.  The show was accused of "sexploitation" and, because of its extended  run, is sometimes used to argue that  Passe  Muraille would  "go  commercial" if it only could.  Such  arguments usually fail  to  recall  that   Futz,  Passe  Muraille's very  first production  in  rg6g,  also  was invaded  by the  Toronto Morality Squad: "daring" and  "controversial" are  con­ sistently  applicable to  this  theatre even  as "obscene" is  not.  And,  as Thompson explained in an interview with the Canadian Theatre Review, Baby Blue was quite  in keeping  with  the theatre's policy:

Much  of the  work at  Passe Muraille  is built  upon a  kind  of idealism. What  ties people together  is the exploration  of a theme and  the challenge  of exploring  that theme in a theatrical  way. For  I  Love You, Baby Blue we took the  techniques  of The  Farm Show  and tried to apply them to the sexual fascination  of a big city. We had  a feeling  that  if it worked it would be a hit and  a lot of people  would  come and see it-but our definition of a hit did not remotely anticipate the potential  of Baby Blue. As an intense theatrical  experience 1837: The  Farmer's Revolt  was just as important, perhaps  more important in political tenns. But in Baby Blue, because of the taboos and  the unavoidable  personal nature of one's own sexuality, the doors were really opened.  I don't  think there was any attempt to see what  we could  do with the morality squad....29

That the  proceeds  from  I Love You, Baby Blue were used for the  down  payment on Passe Muraille's permanent home might  seem less than  idealistic  if it were  not for what  the  theatre has  been  able  to accomplish  because  of the  acquisition of a permanent space.  Thompson's organization of  Passe  Muraille's warehouse into different  types  and  sizes of perfonning areas  has allowed  him  to expand  experi­ mentation and  pay for it at  the same  time.  Playing  commercial successes like Les M audit  Anglais and  Billy Bishop Goes to War  on  the  main  stage  has  financed an  ambitious programme of new  works on  the  two smaller  stages  that  facilitates Passe  Muraille's support of  new  talent  and  maintains its  interest  in  "theatre as experience."

79

TORONTO THEATRE

In a time typified by the depletion  of investment funds, Theatre Passe Muraille's research  and  development function becomes increasingly important. The  theatre's original  seed  programme, by which  unknown artists were  given  minimal budgets and  rehearsal space  with which  to develop  a show,  resulted  in a series of readings, workshops and  showcases throughout the city, twenty-one of which  are  described under Theatre Passe Muraille in the 1977 and  1978  editions  of Canada on Stage; at least three  of these went on to main-stage productions. More  importantly, they provided a focus for  what  might  be termed  Toronto's "new  alternative," a  com­ munity of artists  and  spaces  still  available to  experimentation and  failure  who attract an audience interested  in less mainstream work.  That some of  these artists,  notably  Cheryl  Cashman, Michael Hollingsworth and  Margaret  Dragu, have  al­ ready  gained  more  "establishment" reputations is an  inevitable  progression; that  others  such  as Marien Lewis and  David  Type fight  such  mainstream co-option  is just as worthwhile. The  success of the seed  programme has  resulted  in its expan­ sion  into  Passe Muraille's New  Works  programme  which,  under the  directorship of Clark  Rogers,  has seen workshops  of twenty  to thirty productions over  the  last year;  the  arts  councils'  enthusiasm for  the  project  is evident in  their  increased subsidization,  with  funds  specifically  ear-marked for  new  works.  Clearly,   they recognize  that  Passe Muraille's discovery of such innovative artists  as John Palmer and  Brant Alianak  in the early Seventies and  its introduction of groups  like New­ foundland's  Codco   and   Saskatoon's  Twenty-fifth   Street    House   to   Toronto audiences throughout  the  decade is a  tradition  that   must  be supported  if  the city's  theatre is to creatively  continue.
Passe  Muraille's ability  to simultaneously finance experimentation  and  attract a  popular audience is its major  accomplishment and  what   distinguishes it  from the  Factory Theatre Lab,  the  other  Toronto theatre actively  involved  in  the development of new plays and  playwrights. The  Factory's reputation as "the home of  the  Canadian  playwright" has  declined   in  recent   years  from  its  ascendancy during the  early  Seventies  when  it staged  such  highly-acclaimed productions as Herschel Hardin's Esker Mike  and His Wife, Agiluk  and  Larry  Kardish's Brussels Sprouts to the  point  where  recent  productions like  Ken  Gass's  Winter Offensive and  George  F. Walker's Rumours of Our  Death  have  been  reviewed, as "trash." Such  irresponsible "criticism" fails to suggest, let alone  support, the valuable con­ tribution of this  theatre's artistic  policy which,  by  nurturing new work  regardless  of audience expectations and  critical  response,  continues to challenge and  enrich  Toronto theatre. The  Factory's refusal to bow to commercial expediency following its  early  string  of  hits  is well  maintained by  its  current  workshop programme which,  under  the industrious guidance of Bob White, remains adamantly "fringe." The ideal that  the Factory  should  "pursue unconventional programming and  [a]  restless search  for  something indigenous  and  unique"30   has  plagued   the  theatre since Ken  Gass founded it in May  1970. Rather than  change his intentions when

8o

TORONTO THEATRE


the going  became rough, Gass insisted that  the  Factory  "remain eclectic  and  not settle  into  formula programming."31   Writing in  1975  about his  difficulties  with this approach, Gass could  be summarizing what is still the  Factory's predicament:

there has always been a discrepancy between what the public  (including  the critics and  funding  agencies)  recognized about  the Factory and  what  we considered  our most important accomplishments.  The  public  has wanted  recognizable  products, more hits, and  a clearly defined  policy. They can't  pin us down. The  Factory  has been  preoccupied  with  the search  itself, with  the  process, with  experimentation, yet with  an  outward  energy  that  often  borders  on  proselytism. Somehow  in  the midst  of  financial  turmoils,  bureaucratic  battles  with  government   councils,  the unions, city inspectors, the powerful pigeon-hole mentality of critics, we have tried not to compromise  our ideals.

The   Factory Theatre  Lab's  inability   to  find  "the  Canadian  middle   road [between]  meaningful experimentation on  one  hand   [and] public  acceptability on the other"32  has resulted  in its loss of profile in the daily  press but  not its status in  the  theatre community. Nor  has  it  disappointed a consistently  loyal  audience eager  to participate in the  theatre's experiments despite  negative  reviews.  One  of the most positive signs that  Toronto theatre is surviving  commercialization in early rg8o  is that  Rumours of Our  Death has  been so popular. 33   Although it relies on music and  a popular rock performer for its appeal, the play is by no means  "safe"; publishing the script  as a "work-in-progress," the Canadian Theatre  Review  terms it "a Jarry-esque allegory  of man's incoherence towards  man,  of a mythical coun­ try's  incoherence towards its mythical people,  of a not-so-exotic world's  incoher­ ence towards itself. An allegory  of national diseases...."34  That such  a  play could develop  a following  attests  to the  Factory's continued viability  and  suggests  that  "pioneering" principles are never obsolete.




AT                HOWEVER, is a  fact  that  even such  a  brief  look  at  Toronto  theatres in  the  Seventies  makes  clear.   By  1975 most  of the  theatres that  had  emerged   during the  first  half  of the  decade  were suffering not  only  financial problems   but  also  artistic   uncertainty and   creative fatigue. As  Martin  Kinch, co-founder with  John   Palmer and  Tom  Hendry of the Toronto Free  Theatre in 1972,  put  it: "There seemed  to be creative exhaus­ tion  everywhere. We  had  filled  the  first  promise  and  many   of  us  simply  didn't know  where  to go.... There were  other  attendant problems too. The arrival  of CBC  drama attracted a lot of actors  and  scripts  away  from  the live  theatre and for the first time  we were  having  to scrounge."35  This  latter problem  was particu­ larly  detrimental to Toronto Free Theatre, which saw as its mandate the  develop­  ment  of a  permanent company of  actors  who  could  work  with  a  small  core  of writers  and  directors "to  build  a  repertoire of  representative Canadian  work."36

8r

TORONTO THEATRE

In  1972,  Kinch suggested,  "These days, almost  any  given  Canadian play can  get a  production. But  there  is no process of development. The Factory Theatre Lab develops   playwrights,  the  Theatre  Passe   M uraille   develops   directors  and   we wanted to  develop   a  relationship between   actor, director and   playwright in  a residence sense."37  Within  three  years, Free Theatre had  achieved  its goal, gather­ ing a marvellous pool of actors-including Saul  Rubinek, Chapelle Jaffe, Brenda  Donohue, Booth Savage, Nick Mancuso, David  Bolt, and  R. H. Thompson-who contributed to a succession of hits such  as John Palmer's The End,  Kinch's Me?, Carol  Bolt's Gabe and  Red Emma, and  Michael Ondaatje's The  Collected Works of  Billy the  Kid.  But  by 1975,  these  actors  and, to  a  lesser  degree,  Palmer and  Kinch,  were   receiving   attractive  offers  elsewhere.   Recognizing  how   the   new theatres were  affecting   the  mainstream, Kinch   began   a  re-evaluation  of  Free Theatre's aims,  concurrent with  Glassco's  sabbatical at  Tarragon,  Thompson's move  to  a  permanent home,  and  Gass's  period  of  redefinition. His  conclusion  made  as much  sense then as it does now;  it also foreshadowed the  creative conun­ drum which  continues to inhibit Free Theatre's realization of its potential:

What  should be happening  now, and is to a small extent,  is that  the people-the writers and  actors and directors-who have worked  their  way up in the Toronto theatres,  be allowed into the major  theatrical  institutions  of the country.  That  will make  room for  the new ideas coming  up  here,  which  is what  will keep our  par­ ticular  perspective  alive  and  help  renew  the  larger  institutions.   If this  process doesn't  happen,  I don't  really like to think  of what  will become of places  like the Free Theatre....38

Within two  years,  many  of Kinch's actors  were  working  elsewhere.  Palmer had moved  to New York. Kinch, in his own evaluation of the Toronto theatre climate published in  This  Magazine,  revealed   his  growing   despair   about the  situation. Although his words address the plight of many  Toronto theatres in the late Seven­ ties, they are most applicable to his own experience at  Free Theatre:
Theatres allowed themselves to announce  entire seasons long before the announced plays were actually in existence. Panic-decisions were made to fill the holes when the promised works failed to appear.  In the rush, and  the acceptance of rigid opening­ night  dates,  supposedly dictated   by audience   needs,  many  plays  opened  in  the second draft  which should have opened in the fifth. For the playwrights, on whose output the growth of the theatres  depended,  the pressures resulted  in quick debili­ tation.  Some developed blocks. Some moved rapidly towards  formulaic  repetition.  Very few were able to develop and  mature  in this atmosphere.  Fewer  could  pro­ duce the deep and  resonant images needed for the creation  of strong  dramatic  ex­ perience.39

Although Free Theatre offered some exciting  fare  during the second  half of the Seventies-notably the  collective  creation  The   Fits  and   George   F.  Walker's Zastrozzi-its focus  became  increasingly   diffuse.  In  1978,  artistic direction fell to  William   Lane,  whose  productions of  new  British  and   American  playwrights

TORONTO THEATRE

such as William  Hauptman and  Sam  Shepard  caused  more  interest  than  those of new Canadian writers like Tom  Walmsley or curiosities such as Brecht's Baal and Somerset Maugham's Rain. Guest productions such as Centaur  Theatre's Nothing  to Lose by David  Fennario  and  touring shows like Paper Wheat  or the Newfoundland Mummers' Some Slick were used to round out subscription seasons.
1980  began  with  a transfer  from  Adelaide Court  of Erika  Ritter's  hit  comedy,
Automatic  Pilot, in a production directed by Lane for New Theatre. Not only has the creation of "a repertoire of representative Canadian work" apparently  been abandoned, but  the development  of a "small  flexible group  of artists and  other theatre  workers who are  united  by a sense of mutual  respect, faith  and  belie£"40 seems, temporarily  at least, to have been dropped.  Although  there is considerable validity to Kinch's  notion that  "the  Canadian play and a commitment  to its pro­ duction  will mean  increasingly  less if its mere presence is considered  a  success," its mere absence does not insure  the theatre's  return  to "its  initially serious pur­ poses."41 Free Theatre's current  situation, in fact, hints at the opposite effect:  that the theatre,  "in  its desire for a short term hit, abnegates its more serious function
-the imaginative exploration  of our  life and  our  reality."  As  Free  Theatre's actors, directors and  writers become interchangeable with companies as expert as New  Theatre,  Open   Circle  Theatre,   The   Phoenix  Theatre,  Young  People's Theatre, and  Theatre Plus, as well as Toronto  Workshop  Productions, Toronto Arts Productions  and  the other once "alternate" theatres with which it has shared the  limelight,  it  loses the  unique  approach  and  perspective  that  was its raison d'etre. That  Toronto's burgeoning  theatre  market may support  such a change  is probably true;  that  it should require it would mean an unfortunate loss for Cana­ dian drama.
It is just such a loss that  makes the shift from an alternate aesthetic problematic. With financial considerations  increasingly controlling the size, nature  and appear­ ance of new plays, enthusiasm for the possibility that Toronto  theatres may achieve commercial  independence in  the  Eighties is half-hearted. Kinch's  fear  in  1976
that  "the  audience  has stopped  growing and  is diminishing"42  appears  to  have
been unwarranted; its corollary,  that  the audience  is expanding, can  be seen as equally disturbing.  Although Bill Glassco is probably correct when he asserts that "the  days of  the  production company  are  passing,"43    the  possibility that  Free Theatre might become merely a transfer house for productions such as Tarragon's is disturbing.  Certainly  such  a space would contribute  to the greater  solvency of some Toronto theatres; but that  it "would also clear the already  available spaces for a wider range of new works,"44   as Kinch  hoped in 1976, is unlikely. What  is a surety, however, is the increased  co-operation amongst all the Toronto theatres. A grouping of various theatres  to protest the Toronto  Star's hiring of Gina Mallet as Drama Critic in 1976 achieved self-recognition of communal  strength,  if  noth­ ing else. The  cost sharing  of co-productions  has now become a reality  that may

TORONTO THEATRE


mean survival for  Toronto's smallest theatres. Unless they  cynically pursue  com­ mercial status in  the   manner  of  the   phenomenally  successful Toronto  Truck Theatre by mounting plays like Agatha Christie's The  Mousetrap, or attach  them­ selves to a sponsoring "institution" like  Passe  Muraille for  the  duration of  a pro­ duction, there are  few  alternatives to  amalgamation. The  possibility that  a new, small, and experimental theatre could  now  emerge and survive becomes  increas­ ingly  slight. Paul Bettis,  Artistic Director of  Theatre  Second Floor,  one of  the  most  original theatres to develop in Toronto during the Seventies, closed his theatre in  I 979, explaining "I don't want to get  bigger and I don't want to charge more
at  the  door."45  As Bettis's attitude  becomes a  rarity, the  complexion of  Toronto
theatre in  I 990 grows  indeterminable. That  it  will  survive is indisputable;  how is another matter.

NOTES

1 Ed., Don Rubin and  Mimi  Mekler  (Toronto: CTR Publications, 1979), 11-24.
2   Press  release,  Theatre Passe Muraille, dated  I969.  Available through  the  Theatre Department, Metro Toronto Public Library, whose "vertical files" of press clippings and   information  on  Canadian  theatre  history   and   criticism   are   an   invaluable resource  for  the student of Canadian theatre.
3 For an example of the former,  see Don Rubin, "Sleepy Tunes in Toronto," CTR, 20 (Fall  I978), 93-95;  of the latter, see Martin Kinch, "Canadian Theatre:  In  for the Long  Haul," This Magazine, IO, Nos. 5-6  (November-December I976)' 3-8.
4  Quoted in  Ray  Conlogue,  "Little theatres try  to  get  out  of  the  wilderness," The Globe  and Mail, I 5 August  I977· Newspaper references without page  numbers can be found  in  the  "vertical files" of the Theatre Department of  the  Metro Toronto Public  Library.
5 Gina   Mallet, "Tarragon Theatre boss rolls  up  string  of  hits,"  Toronto Star, I7
March  I979·
6  Urjo Kareda, "Tarragon's short  history  buoyant with  success,"  Toronto Star, 8
September 1973.
1  "Tarragon will take time off," Toronto Sun, I3  March 1975.
8  Quoted in John Fraser, "Tarragon, Glassco back in business,"  The Globe  and Mail,
3 June  I976.
9 Ken  Gass,  "Toronto's Alternates: Changing Realities," CTR, 2I   (Winter I979),
p. I27.
10 Press release,  Tarragon Theatre, I972.
11  Quoted in Sid  Adelman, "Eye  on Entertainment," Toronto Star, I 2 August  I 974·
12  Quoted in Conlogue.
13  Quoted in "Toronto's Tarragon Theatre faces challenging dilemma," London Free
Press, I2 February I977·
H This  trend  has  also been  continued with,  for  example, Jack  Blum's  production of Joe   Wiesenfeld's  Spratt    (April   I978)   and   Guy   Sprung's  productions of  Tom Walmsley's Something Red  (February I98o).
15  Quoted in  Bryan  Johnson, "Glassco's  mission  a  matter of  trust," The Globe  and
Mail, I6 September 1978.

TORONTO THEATRE


1a  Quoted in Mallet.
17  Quoted in Conlogue.
18 Gass, p. I 34·
19  Quoted in Mallet.
20   Press release,  Theatre Passe Muraille, I969.
21 E.g.,  John Bentley  Mays,  "Taking it on  the  road," Maclean's,  92  (4  June   I979), p. 6o.
22   Quoted  in  Merle   Shain,  "Pursuing the  need   for  a  guerilla  theatre,"  Toronto
Telegram, I March I969.
23   Bob Wallace, "Paul Thompson at  Theatre Passe Muraille: Bits and  Pieces,"  Open
Letter, 2, No.7 (Winter I974), p. 54·
2     Ray  Conlogue, "Maggie and  Pierre  shows power,  finesse and  insight," The  Globe and Mail,  I5 February Ig8o,  p. I7.
25  Chris   Mallgren,  ed.,   Members   Catalogue:  Canadian   Guild   of  Playwrights,    I ( I979)' 38-39· Available from  the Guild,  24 Ryerson  Ave., Toronto M5T 2P3.
26   This  is now  so developed that  two festivals  by Canadian theatre groups  involved with  collective creation have  been  held.  See Jerry  Zientara, "Theatre Synergy: a collective  festival," CTR, 24  (Fall  I979), I I4-2r.
27   Wallace, p. 64.
28   Quoted in Herbert Whittaker, "Artist's sets give play unique look," The  Globe and
Mail, 22 May  I977·
29   "The Trial of Baby Blue,"  CTR, I3  (Winter I977), p. 8.
3° Ken  Gass, "Perspective," Theatre  Notebook,  I, No.  I  (October I975), p. 3· To  my
knowledge, only  one  issue  of  this  newspaper was  published; it  is on  file  in  the
Theatre Department, Metro Toronto Public  Library.
31 Ibid.,  p. 3·
82   Gass, "Toronto's Alternates," p. 132.
83 This was  accomplished  by  the   ten-member  company  taking   over   co-operative responsibility for  the  extension, working  without pay  and  sharing the  profits.  See "People," Maclean's, 93  (25 February 198o), p. 27, for a report.
34   Don  Rubin, epigraph preceding Rumours  of Our  Death, CTR, 25 (Winter I98o),
p. 43·
35   Quoted in John Fraser, "The revolution's over in underground theatre," The  Globe and Mail, 27 August  I975·
36   Quoted in Tom Hendry, "The Stage," Toronto  Citizen,  27 January  I972.
37   Quoted in Urjo Kareda, "Alternative theatre offers hope  for  the  future," Toronto
Star, I6 September I972.
88  Quoted in Fraser.
39   "Canadian Theatre: In for the Long Haul," This  Magazine,  Io, Nos. 5-6  (Novem- ber-December I976), p. 6.
0     Quoted in Hendry.
u Kinch, p. 8.
2  Kinch, p. 3·
8    Quoted in  Mallet.
H Kinch, p. 8.
45  Quoted in Conlogue.

THE DEfiLING
for Theodore Roethke
 



Tony Cosier


Twenty-three cents of stamp, my envelope, My handful of paper  and  ink stayed  here. In  all the magazines  and  catalogues
There were  not many  I could  send my verse.
I did  not  care  too much.  But  now  I  care.

I stand  beside  the  bookcase,  take  in hand
Your  handful of paper  and  ink,  alone, So very much  alone.  I want  to send
My book of songs to you. But where  are  you,
For  life's sake where  are  you, old  windspinner?

How  can  I trade  my book back for your own? Can  I really fling its white  wings on  the  air, Shovel  its black  impressions  under sod, Murmur its mysteries in the ear  of the  cat, Shake  it to call you like a chapel bell?

When  you crossed over  that  mild  thin  pale  line
You did  us out  of dealing. All one  way
The dealing with  us now. I read  you.
I stand  beside my bookshelf and  read  you. All one way.
The finger I scraped  on a rock heals silently.
My hair  grows silently.  My hushed  veins go with  the moon without a sound.

















86


GEORGE F. WALKER

B-Movies Beyond the Absurd


Chris Johnson





IT 's NOW TEN YEARS S>NCE  THE Factory Theat<e Lab opened its first season in a makeshift  theatre  above an auto-body shop on Dupont  Street in Toronto. Theatre Passe Muraille  had been in operation  for two years, and Tar­ ragon Theatre and Toronto Free Theatre were to join the new Toronto "alterna­ tive  theatre  scene"  shortly.  Together,  the four  theatres  played  a  major  role in encouraging  the  upsurge  in  interest  in  Canadian  drama  whose  impetus  we are still feeling. The  renewed burst of theatrical  activity in Toronto, this time with a distinct Canadian accent,  encouraged  increased interest in  Canadian drama,  and a number  of Canadian writers who had been exerting  their  productive  energy in a  theatrical   direction  for  several  years, among  them  Robertson   Davies,  John Herbert,  George Ryga, and  James  Reaney, acquired  an  increased  importance  in the eyes of those interested  in the development of  Canadian culture.  Encouraged to investigate, scholarly  inquiry  revealed  that  there  have  been in  the  Canadian literary past a number  of playwrights whose work is of more than  passing interest. As Northrop  Frye notes in his conclusion to the first edition of the Literary  History of Canada, the deficiency of many  individual  Canadian literary  works has been balanced  by the significance  of  their contribution  to  the  "entire  enterprise"  of Canadian literature. With  the added efforts of Passe M uraille, Factory  Lab, Tar­ ragon,  Toronto  Free  Theatre,  and  the  writers associated with  these companies, Canadian drama  was seen for the first time as an "entire  enterprise," a suddenly more impressive whole whose parts deserved more attention.
The  new movement also created a new cohesion, a sense of drama  in the fullest meaning  of the word, not the isolated work of individual  playwrights  but a body of work linked  by emulation, rivalry, and  a shared  audience.  It  is little wonder, then, that the  similarities and  differences between these  companies and  the theatrical styles  they  have espoused have  had  a profound influence on  the generation  of Canadian playwrights  who have achieved  maturity in the  decade just drawn  to a close. It  must be understood that  any schematic  analysis of what was a fairly complex  cultural  phenomenon  cannot  hope  to explain  satisfactorily the full range of activity, and  that  this brief summary  of the aesthetic preoccupa­ tions of 197o's alternative  theatre  in Toronto  necessarily omits mention  of excep-

GEORGE F. WALKER

tions to the general  rules, the numerous examples  of crossovers and  idiosyncratic experiments: none of the theatres under discussion adheres to the rules of a clearly defined "school." Hrant  Alianak's whimsical experiments  first saw light of day as "seed  shows"  sponsored  by Theatre Passe  Muraille,   a  company  with  a  much clearer  sense of social purpose than  Alianak  has. David  Freeman,  a  playwright whose work is nco-realistic in the manner  predominantly favoured  by the Tarra­ gon, had  his first production  at the Factory  Lab,  whose bias has frequently  been anti-naturalistic. George Walker, closely associated  with  the  Factory  Lab  during most of that  theatre's  history, has seen three of his last four plays premiered  at the Toronto  Free. Still, generalizations have their  value  as  rough  guides, and  some attempt  to sort the trees into woods is in order.
Tarragon Theatre, with a standard  of finished production  generally higher than that  of its rivals, had the greatest appeal  to a general  audience.  The  nco-realistic, well-made  plays which constituted  the bulk of the fare offered were easily  acces­ sible, and  with  the familiar conventions, David  French  and  the other  Tarragon playwrights  showed  audiences the  previously unfamiliar, Canadians  themselves, or  at  least  facsimiles of themselves that  audiences  were  willing,  even  eager,  to accept.  "That's us! That's us!",  Greg Leach  has summarized  audience  reaction to French's  Leaving  Home.1  The  Tarragon plays have  been  Canadian by virtue of their  content; this, and  their accessibility, recommended  them  to the  literary critics, and  the  Tarragon   playwrights were among  the  first  of the  new wave to receive widespread  critical reaction. By and large the plays were treated  as exten­ sions of Canadian literature  rather  than  as dramatic  entities, and  comment  was usually devoted  to incorporating  the new Canadian  drama  within  thematic  pat­ terns applicable  to Canadian  literature  as a whole.
Passe Muraille's  approach has been much more theatrical  and much more theatricalist. The  docu-drama, the form for  which  the  theatre  has become  best known, goes a step beyond the "Canadianness" of the Tarragon plays in that  the depicted  reality  almost invariably  influences  the  form  of the  work  itself;  if the subject  is Canadian, the form  will be Canadian too.  Passe Muraille's  distinctly Canadian and  highly theatrical  style, its influence  on  writers  who  have  worked with  the company,  and its influence on theatre  groups  elsewhere in the  country made the organization  a favourite subject of theatre  critics, and Passe Muraille followed Tarragon into the general critical consciousness.
The  Factory Theatre Lab and Toronto  Free Theatre, perhaps the most eclectic of the four, were less concerned with Canadian content,  and  the  plays produced by these companies fitted less neatly into the established thematic  patterns of  Can­ litcrit;  at  the  same  time, the  internationalist   theatre  style of the  plays  did  not deviate sufficiently from the European  avant-garde model to attract  the attention  of critics of a  more  theatricalist  bent.  Here,  in short,  was the  TISH  group  of Canadian drama, insisting on cosmopolitan values but  at the same time asserting

88

GEORGE F. WALKER


the  right  of Canadians to pursue  those values and  to be heard  while doing  so. While  Tarragon and  Passe Muraille  realized  their  objectives  earlier  and  more fully than  did  the  Factory  Lab,  the  Factory  Lab's objectives were more elusive and were pursued through  policies designed to produce results over a longer period of time. With  its aggressively nationalistic decision not to produce  non-Canadian plays, its trading  off of production  polish for larger numbers of plays staged in a year, its comparative indifference  to immediate  popular success, and  its focus on writing, the  Factory  Lab  and  its founding  Artistic Director,  Ken  Gass, provided a  trade  school  for  Canadian  playwrights  entirely  unprecedented  in  Canadian theatre  history. The  energetic creative atmosphere, the opportunities to put  works to the test, and  perhaps above all, the new freedom to fail from time to time, have all produced over the long run the valuable results Gass and his co-workers origin­ ally envisaged;  the Factory  Lab has fostered some of the most intensely personal, formally innovative,  and  accomplished dramatic writing in the country. It  is the purpose of this essay to examine the work of George F. Walker, one of  the best of the  Factory  Lab  playwrights,  as a first step toward  rectifying  critical  neglect of the company  and  its writers, and  toward  assessing the  place in recent  Canadian drama  occupied  by Walker and the theatrical  movement he represents.
As well as being one  of the  most accomplished  writers  to emerge  from  Ken
Gass's laboratory process, Walker is a writer with a long and close connection  with the theatre: his first play was produced inI 97 I in the company's  second season, he was for a number  of years the Factory Lab's resident playwright,  and he served for a brief period as the theatre's  Artistic Director. He wrote his first play, "Prince of Naples,"  in  response to the  Factory  Lab's  ubiquitous  posters calling  for  new scripts;  until  then,  he had  only dabbled  in verse and  short  fiction. The  one-act piece, and  the full-length  play which followed shortly after,  Ambush  at Tether's End,  are  both  clearly the work of a writer  new to theatre,  of a writer  of urban and cosmopolitan  sensibility looking to established writers for models in the form new to him.
"Not  many prairie landscapes in George Walker's plays," Ken Gass remarks in his introduction to a collection of Walker's plays.2   Indeed  not. Or  as Walker him­ self puts it:

It would  be very dishonest of me to attempt to write  any sort  of rural  play.  I had been  surrounded by things  like movies,  television-you know  The  World  at Six, that  sort of thing-theatre and  literature of all kinds all my life. What did  I know about the  farmer and  his wife?  And  yet I was criticized.  Everyone kept  telling  me I  should  go  to  the  grass  roots  and  that  Canadian plays  should  be  naturalistic or historical. Naturalism was  very  big  in  Toronto for  a  long  time.  I couldn't help thinking that  was one kind of theatre, but there  were other types of theatre as welJ.S

"Prince of Naples" concerns a relationship familiar to every North American, that of student   and   teacher,  and  draws  extensively  on  the  perspectives  of  a  con-

8g

GEORGE F. WALKER

temporary  urban  world, simultaneously literate and electronic. The  work shows its literary ancestry through its form:  in its use of language,  transforming pat phrases into extended  and  volcanic passages of nonsense, in  its heavy dependence  on  a central theatrical  image, and in its concerted effort to include the audience  within the emotional  event the characters  are experiencing,  the  play models itself after the Theatre of the Absurd in general and after lonesco's The  Lesson in particular. Walker reverses the usual power structure  in the educational process, making the young the instructor  of the old, to examine a social phenomenon, the cult of the young and the supposedly liberated,  associated with the sixties, and in the process questions the new credo of relativity:

Now the word insane has been reapproached by the wide-eyed armies of time and given a  new meaning. The  word has been dragged out  of the dampness of our mental basement and placed high on the clouds of our consciousness.4

The  method  of employing a form to question ironically  the ideas underlying  the form became characteristic  of Walker's work.
Ambush  at Tether's  End  was Walker's second exercise in  the  theatrical  tech­ niques of the Absurd:  this time, the most important model appears  to be Samuel Beckett's Waiting   for Godot.  The  central  character in  the  play  is a  corpse  (an echo of Ionesco's Amedee, or How to Get Rid of It?), a poet-philosopher  who has hanged  himself and  who  has  left  a  series of  notes  attacking   the  values  of  his friends, challenging  them to confront  "reality" as he  has with  a "definitive  act"  equal  to his. While  there are similarities linking  the  friends  to Beckett's  tramps  (Mullaly  correctly  identifies rhythmic  similarities in  their  speech),5   Walker  has localized the situation,  and  has made from the  dichotomy  depicted  by Vladimir  and Estragon a more North American opposition of obsessions, those of the ambi­ tious businessman and the sexual athlete. If those who wait are diminished, so too is that for which they wait. Max, the moralizing corpse, endangers  his own authen­ ticity  through   his posthumous  showmanship,  and  the  philosophical  life is dis­ credited  by the dead  man's  petty rivalry with a colleague. While  Galt  and  Bush are,  predictably,  destroyed  by the dilemma  in which  they find  themselves, there is little to recommend an alternative  to their views if Max  is the representative  of that  alternative. Walker  sees both  the  society he  satirizes  and  the  modish  and pseudo-romantic challenge to that society as inadequate, and in the play constructs a theatrical  model of the intellectual  quandary in which  many  of his generation found themselves.




E       Theatre of the Absurd  can  be seen in many of the plays produced in the Factory  Lab's  first few seasons, and several critics were quick to identify their derivative nature.  In his review of The  Factory

go

GEORGE F. WALKER

Lab  Anthology, in which  Ambush  at Tethers End  appeared, Edward   Mullaly writes:
Twenty-five years ago  the  enunciation of man's  absurd  situation might have  con­ stituted a positive  statement. But a similar  inability  to discover  or point  out shapes and  structures today  no longer  constitutes experimental, or even  interesting, drama  regardless of the country in which  it is written. 6

Of Walker's play itself he asks "why Walker has spent his time on a script Beckett had  already  written  with much  greater  discipline, intelligence, and  skill." 7  While Walker's early efforts are in many respects undergraduate exercises, few saw at the time that  they are superior  undergraduate exercises, and  that  in turning  the form against  its content,  Walker  avoided slavish imitation.
The  Theatre of the  Absurd  has  remained  largely a  European phenomenon :
American  playwrights  have had as much  difficulty transplanting its insights and techniques  to a North American  milieu and audience as have had  the Canadians Mullaly  criticizes. Martin  Esslin attributes  the difficulty to history:
the  convention of  the  Absurd  springs  from  a  feeling  of  deep  disillusionment, the draining away  of the  sense of meaning and  purpose  in  life, which  has  been  char­ acteristic of countries like France and  Britain  in the  years after  the  Second  World  War.  In  the  United States  there  has  been  no corresponding loss of  meaning and purpose.8

While the statement  is undoubtedly  less true than it was when it was first written, it is significant that most of the American  playwrights whose work had close affini­ ties to the European avant-garde of the fifties and early sixties have subsequently developed  in  different  directions.  Thomas  Porter  advances  a  more  commercial explanation  in Myth and Modern  American Drama. While mainstream American drama  consistently portrays  the failure  of the American  Dream,  that  which  has maintained the illusion of "meaning and  purpose,"  the  American  theatre-going  public has an aversion to the next step, a dramatic  form which not only discusses but reflects the disintegration  of the Dream.  In  consequence, American  attempts  to transfer the technique as well as the message have been stillborn.'9  The American playwrights who have most successfully communicated  to an  American  audience those insights usually associated with the Theatre of the Absurd  have been those, like Jean-Claude van  ltallie  or  Sam  Shepard,  who  have  taken  particular care to couch these insights in an American idiom, who have employed  the disjointed nature  of American  popular  culture  to display a fragmented  theatrical  vision of lost "meaning and  purpose." Shepard,  whose work is most clearly  relevant  to a consideration  of Walker's,  has proven  particularly  adept  at employing  the trivia of American  society as a  means  of both  celebrating  the  vulgar  vitality  of  that society and suggesting an emptiness beyond.
In Walker's  third  play, Sacktown  Rag, he draws on North  American  pop cul­
ture  in a manner  somewhat  similar  to Shepard's,  and  in  turning  to more auto-

GEORGE F. WALKER

biographical  subject matter,  discards some of the literary self-consciousness which intrudes  in the earlier plays. The structural technique  is that  of the cartoon: the schoolboy protagonist experiences the traumas of growing up in a world sometimes realistic and  sometimes drawn  in the lurid  colours of the comic strip.  While  the caricatures of parents  and  teachers sometimes  have  the  gleeful  and  scatological energy of schoolboy graffiti, Walker  does not  entirely  trust  his conventions  and chooses to explain them away with an unconvincing  memory frame: the play sub­ sequently loses the impact of the cartoon without gaining enough in  psychological insight  to compensate.  It  is probably  the  least satisfying of  Walker's  published work.
In  Bagdad  Saloon, first produced  in 1973 and  subtitled  "a  cartoon," Walker
does not dilute his pop art conventions:  the result is a bawdy, sprawling  collage of short scenes, music, and coups de theatre. The cartoon figures are less personal than the graffiti of Sacktown  Rag; characters  drawn  from American  high and low cul­ ture,  Gertrude Stein,  Henry  Miller,  Doc Halliday,  have  greater  resonance,  and extend the implications of the piece beyond itself.
The  incident  which precipitates the action of the play is the kidnapping of the American  legends by a pair of improbable  Arabs who want to learn  the secret of mythic  immortality.  The  attempt,  of course, is futile:  Halliday  and  Miller  are frauds, and Stein, while she has visions, proves incapable  of communicating what she sees. The  American saloon is grafted  onto fabled  Bagdad,  and  Aladdin  decks himself out as a dime store cowboy in pursuit of a new and  neon mythology, even while the efficacy of any myth in staving off the chaos is put in question:

AHRUN: Fame  is a fickle commodity. Not  bad,  mind  you. Just  fickle.

DOC:
STEIN:
 So what? Exactly.

AHRUN: It needs to be guided,  so to speak. And if it's guided  in  the right  direction, it  can  create   things.  Purpose. Glamour.  Mystique. (Pause)   Artists.  Or folk heroes.  All things which  we find  very scarce  around here.

STEIN:
 What happens then?

AHRUN: Folk-lore.

STEIN:
 And  then?

AHRUN: More  folk-lore.

STEIN:
 And  then?

AHRUN: And then  ... and  you can -and then  there's always ...
STEIN:	Yes?
Doc:	What?
( Ahrun  shakes his head violently. Turns. Leaves. .. .)

So much  for identity, Arab, Canadian, or otherwise.
As Gass points out in his introduction, the first movement of the play constructs the  saloon  and  decorates  it in  all  its  crass  glory,  while  the  second  movement destroys and  discredits the structure.  Unfortunately, the  process is unduly  pro-

92

GEORGE F. WALKER

tracted  and  Walker is often distracted  by his fascination  with the decoration;  the piece is theatrically  inefficient. Still, in  Bagdad  Saloon  Walker  shows increased control  of his new medium,  and  develops further  the  talent  for stage metaphor revealed in the earlier  plays:  the image of the all-American  hero, sportsman,  and pop  singer  as pathetic,  speechless grotesque is an  image  that  lingers long  after memories of the irritating meanderings  have faded.



IT IS A  COMMONPLACE THAT,  particularly in matters of  struc­ tural  convention,  theatre  has been drawing  for the last two or three  decades on popular  electronic forms, especially film, reclaiming the debt  that  art form owes theatre  in general and  August Strindberg  in particular. Walker  has not been the first Canadian playwright  to borrow from cinema:  Ryga's  "liquid  dramaturgy" owes as much  to film as it does to the folk song/0  and  James Reaney  cites Walt Disney as an important influence. The  older playwrights, however, use cinematic devices to shape  the  presentation  of their vision of the  world  whereas for  play­ wrights of Walker's  generation,  the vision itself is frequently  filmic.
Like so many of my generation, my mind is sort of a media garbage bag sometimes. We're all so heavily influenced by television and movies and you don't have to be very perceptive to see it coming out in new plays. The dilemma for me was not to rebel against the problem-it is, after all, a fairly central reality-but to assimi­ late it and make something of it.11

As Walker suggests, the influence is to a certain extent  involuntary,  the result of a lifetime's exposure for the generation  which grew up with television and  whose dreams are, in effect, movies. The process of "making something of it" has involved becoming aware of this mode of thought as just that, an artificial construct rather than  part of the natural order  ( Esslin identifies the post-war generation's  frequent inability  to make that  distinction  in the postscript to the  revised The  Theatre of the  Absurd) ; it has also meant  exploiting the dramatic possibilities of a contem­ porary pool of shared understanding, which becomes the basis of a coherent  (if not necessarily logical)  set of social assumptions to which the social act of theatre  can be addressed.
Obviously film is a richer source of theatrical  convention  than  is the cartoon, and  provides fuller access to the popular  pool of understanding. It  also provides, especially through  the so-called B-movies, a  rich source  of images,  plot models, and  a set of stock characters not unlike those used in melodrama or Commedia dell'Arte,  an  iconography  available  to the  contemporary   playwright  to  be  em­ ployed as he sees fit. While Walker uses a number of cinematic  structural devices in Bagdad  Saloon, he makes comparatively little use of filmic iconography; Beyond  Mozambique  ( 1974)   marks  the  beginning  of  extensive  recourse  to  the  raw material  of the  B-movie, material  characteristic  of all  his subsequent  work.  In


93

GEORGE   F. WALKER

employing stock  characters  and  situations  as the  vehicles for  insights and  ideas beyond the capacity  of the popular  form from which  they were drawn,  Shepard in  Mad   Dog  Blues  or  Angel  City  and  Walker   in  Beyond  Mozambique and Ramona  and the W kite Slaves follow well-established theatrical  practice:  Beckett and  Ionesco draw  from music hall and  film comedy;  Pirandello,  Chekhov,  and Ibsen drew from melodrama; and, of course, Moliere  made  use of the characters and conventions of Commedia  dell'Arte.
The  B-movie also provides an  ironic mode, an  element  acquired  through  the almost  accidental  manner  in which  the  older  B-movies were  reintroduced   into the mainstream of popular art through  late-night  movies on television and  hence into the imaginations of the generation  shaped  by television. In  this way, trivial work which would otherwise have perished, as do novels unworthy  of reprinting or plays not worth  reviving, lead an extended  life;  the extension, the survival  of artifacts meant  to be disposable, frequently leads to levels of meaning  not intended by their creators. The  B-movies of the forties and  fifties present a vision of life so simple and  naive that  the effect is comic, while the  rapidity  of shifts in popular taste gives the films a quaintness which emphasizes the naivete and  heightens the comic effect.
In adapting the world of the B-movie for the stage there are two dangers. The first is that an audience might accept that world at face value, despite the integral irony of a topical  perspective out of context. The  second pitfall is the temptation to revel in the exuberant  awfulness of it all:  the result, here, is usually described as "camp." Tom  Cone's  "Shot  Glass" and  Hrant Alianak's  The  Blues are  ex­ amples  of plays which  duplicate  the  mood  and  rhythms  of  old  B-movies  very accurately  indeed, but which offer almost no perspective  from outside the worlds they depict,  which  remain  satisfied with  accidental irony,  and  which  therefore succeed as anachronistic  replicas, camp artifacts,  rather  than  as original  works of art. In Beyond Mozambique and subsequent  plays, Walker circumvents the perils through  the addition  of elements from other modes, hyperbole, and explicit com­ ment on the theatrical  context.
Beyond Mozambique is a jungle movie, but  contrary  to the opinions of several first-night  critics, it  is not  just a  jungle movie. Set  on  the  porch  of a  decaying colonial mansion in the jungle, the play throws together  six disparate  characters, in the best "ship of fools" tradition, and allows these figures, or "masks" as Richard Horenblas  describes  them,12    to  enact  for  us  the  decline  and  disintegration   of western civilization;  while its mode is that  of the B-movie, its content  is not: tedmology does not triumph over nature, white heroines are not pure, white horses are not all-powerful, and while the embattled  whites are not overwhelmed  by the forces of "savagery" drumming in the bush, they do succumb  to the chaos within, and it is the drumming of that threat which provides the play's rhythm and central theatrical  metaphor.

94

GEORGE F. WALKER

The  play's central  character, played by Donald Davies in the original  produc­ tion in 1974, is that most twentieth-century of archetypes, the mad scientist. Rocca combines the familiar  B-movie archetype and hints of  concentration  camp "medi­  cal experiments," sadism disguised as a quest for knowledge, or, perhaps, the quest for knowledge undisguised;  he is both the  historical nightmare  and  the  popular rendition of the obsessions in part responsible for those nightmares: in the face of impending  disintegration, he can  think  only of pressing on with  his experiments  and  of acquiring the  necessary  subjects.  While  he  is horrifying,  Rocco  is,  in Walker's  wry view, the most  positive character  in the  play;  he has a Kurtz-like integrity  which compels him to define, to defy chaos even if in a perverse way, a drive often expressed in gloriously B-movie lines: "There's something about  com­ mitting  crimes against  humanity  that  puts you in touch  with the  purpose of the universe."  Parody  makes  the  line funny;  history,  and  the  terrifying  possibility that  Rocco may  be right,  given an Absurdist vision of the  universe, make it not funny.
Rocco is accompanied by the requisite hunch-backed  assistant, Tomas,  who is primarily  responsible for acquiring  the experimental subjects and initiating  a one­ man crime wave. Tomas  says very little, and  much of that  in Greek  (a sardonic  combination   of  classical  heritage  and  bestiality  personified),   but  his  presence brings onstage a manifestation  of the savagery by which the central characters  feel themselves threatened, and  makes explicit the erotic and  racist implications  of all those glistening dark  bodies in B jungle movies. As the whites decline, non-white Tomas  ascends, expropriating for himself the style and  trappings  of power. Later in the play, we encounter a third  B-movie personage, the failed priest; again  the element  of parody  is present,  as Liduc  does not go  to the  ends of the  earth  to redeem himself, but has been sent by a Church  which sincerely hopes he will never be heard from again.  His presence makes possible the introduction  of the pseudo­ philosophical  observations so characteristic  of  the B-movie as a form, and  which Walker gleefully deflates and  redirects:  "Jesus doesn't  mind losers but  he has no patience for idiots."
To these refugees from a jungle movie, Walker adds figures from other  worlds, but  worlds no less threatened by the surrounding  chaos. Olga,  Rocco's  wife, is obsessed with  the world of Chekhov's  plays to the  point  where she believes that she is the character of the same name from The  Three  Sisters, complete  with  a sentimental  attachment to the artistic traditions  of the ancien regime  (represented in the  play  by a treasured  Renoir  which she employs as a talisman  against  the forces of the jungle), a determination to preserve social form at all costs, and  the obligatory yearning  for Moscow. In the original production,  the part  was played by Francis  Hyland,  further   heightening  the  effect created  by introducing   high culture  into flamboyant  pop. The  introduction  of a Chekhovian  character  points the  pattern  of  non-communication and  obsession in  the  piece, gives an  added

95

GEORGE F. WALKER

significance to the manner  in which characters  are isolated from each other,  and adds a dream-like memory of bitter-sweet against  which Walker  can contrast  his more garish effects.
Corporal  Lance, formerly of the R.C.M.P., brings a distinctly  Canadian  con­
tribution  to the model apocalypse; we, too, get a share in the fall of the West. The Corporal  is the only explicitly Canadian character  in  Walker's  work  (although the unpublished  plays, "Gossip" and "Filthy Rich," are nominally set in Toronto) and it is a reflection of Walker's views on what Canadian theatre  ought to be that the character  is a very crafty  parody:   the  Corporal  is inept   (natives  have  dis­ mantled  his motorcycle and  he can't  put  it  together  again),  naive,  apparently clean-living, and  very Canadian -in the grip of malarial  hallucinations,  he sees wheat. The character is a good example of Walker's growing ability to manipulate audience  expectations. The  Corporal is at first  merely a comic mountie,  who, as we would expect, fails to understand  what is happening in the sophisticated  world of decadent  allusion, worries about  not  having  anything  formal  to wear  but  his scarlets ("Am  I over-dressed?"), and gives his wholesome all to the battle against subversion.  But  this  quintessentially  Canadian  joke,  which  makes  possible the uniquely  Canadian  pleasure  of   being  self-deprecatory   and   self-congratulatory simultaneously and which therefore neatly disarms a Canadian audience's defence mechanisms, acquires an uglier, more sinister quality  as the play progresses: he is so distressed by misery  that  he puts  to death  all  who suffer,  hence  making  his Canadian wholesomeness an agent of the final destruction.  The  acute but unkind comment  about  our  national  personality is administered while  we are  still  dis­ tracted by the reassuring cartoon.
The  last of this stranded  crew of expatriate  whites is both  of the  world of  B­
movies and  not of that  world, thus  providing a bridging  device and  a means of comment.  Rita  is a  porn-movie star  engaged  in  jungle smuggling  operations  in an attempt  to raise the money to finance a legitimate movie and realize her dreams of respectable stardom: "This  one is going to be a classic. It'll  have sex. But it'll be sex with class." A classic definition of the romantic  B-movie, or, for that matter, B jungle movies. Rita is the character  most fully aware of the theatrical  and  cine­ matic elements of their plight, and the one most given to consciously dramatizing the situation; through  her, Walker adds to the devices of hyperbole and  film the technique  of explicit comment  which makes Beyond Mozambique  more than  an exercise in nostalgia and parody:
Sometimes I  just pour  myself a stiff gin and  lean  against that  big tree  outside  my tent  and  just let  that  sun  sink slowly down  into  the  ground while  I shake  the  ice cubes around in the glass. And when  I do that  I get so deeply  into  Rita  Hayworth I could  just about die.

We all play our roles to the death. Rita also prepares the way for the final moments of the play in which the characters  become aware of the audience,  either  making

g6

GEORGE F. WALKER

us the drummers or including  us within  the circle surrounded  by the drummers, and so involving us in this last moving picture show just before the final darkness descends.



BEYOND MOZAMBIQUE is a much   more  disciplined  play than  is Bagdad  Saloon,  evidence  that  Factory  Lab's  policies were  paying  off; some of the original writers were dropping  away while others, like Walker, pushed doggedly on, learning  the language of the theatre. The  comparatively  poor show­ ing of much  of Canada's earlier  drama  can  be attributed to the  extremely  high proportion  of first plays: the earlyI 97os was one of  the few times and the Factory Lab one of the few places allowing a playwright  progression  from production  to production. Beyond  Mozambique has tighter focus, and  a  clearer sense of direc­ tion, in part  created  by Walker's  continued  progress in the creation  of the single, unifying stage image, the device which gives Theatre of  the Absurd  much  of its trenchant force. The split between Walker's manic sense of humour  and his more serious  concerns  is  effectively  healed;   Beyond   Mozambique  is splendid   black comedy, combining  the  comic and  the  grotesque to  produce  Jonsonesque  social comment. And Walker completed, in this play, an important step toward  develop­ ing an efficient personal style. In his perceptive discussion of James Reaney's plays, Ross Woodman  notes that  in order  to progress from the early pastoral  comedies, Reaney  needed  to develop a "lens" through  which  his  personal  vision could  be viewed by an audience ;13 in  Reaney's case, the necessary "lens"  was provided  by childhood games, rituals, and rhymes. Walker, too, needed a "lens," and in Beyond Mozambique he  discovered  that  his  lens was  the  B-movie.  When  watching  a Walker play, we, like Leonard  Cohen's  Nancy, see "the  late late show/ through a semi-precious stone."14 The world revealed is eerie, often beautiful,  the ordinary made extraordinary by the unnatural hues and  the lateness of the  hour.
Having  used this lens to bring social comment  into focus in  Beyond  M ozam­ bique,  in Ramona  and  the White Slaves  (I 976)  Walker  directs  his new  instru­ ment on the problems of characterization, an area of dramatic endeavour  notori­ ously weak in much  Canadian drama. Set in  what is  apparendy a  brothel  in a turn of the century, impossibly decadent  and chaotic Hong  Kong, the play shows us the  Madam/Mother,  Ramona, and  her  convoluted  relationships   with  her daughters,  their lovers, her crippled son, and  a man  who may be her  pimp,  her missing husband,  or both. Two  frameworks are provided:  the  piece begins with Ramona's opium dream  in which she is raped by a lizard -and  there is a strong possibility that  the entire  play is an opium  dream  (a drug induced  state of mind is another  "lens" to which Walker sometimes resorts) -while commentary  is pro­ vided by a detective ostensibly attempting to solve a murder,  one of many,  which occurred  in the street  outside  the  brothel. The  detective  (a  device  Walker  also

97

GEORGE F. WALKER


employs  in  "Gossip," I 977,  and  "Filthy Rich," I 979)   has  a  long  history  as  a useful dramatic device, and in addition provides  the B-movie lens. Cook's inquiries do not produce the answers he sets out to find, nor do they reveal much biographi­ cal  information about  Ramona, for  most  spectators guess  early  in  the  play  the bizarre secret  of  the  ex-nun's history.  The  search, however,   takes  us  through a tour  of Ramona's psyche, the obsessions which  compel  her  to devour  her children and  which  make her, simultaneously, a powerful  and compelling figure, a B-movie Medea. Her  character provides one of the  most  rewarding roles for an  actress  in Canadian drama, a striking  presentation of the mother /whore dichotomy so cen­ tral to Western  erotic fantasy, and the play makes an extraordinarily effective use of eroticism.
Walker's growing  skills as a social satirist  and  his developing expertise  in  por­ traiture are  both  brought to bear  on Zastrozzi (I 977). After  a period  of  personal  crisis  and   discouragement, which   Ken   Gass  documents in  his  introduction  to Three Plays  by  George  F. Walker, Walker  had  begun  with  the  preceding play, "Gossip," to  alter  his  tactics  somewhat, to  make   his  plays  "more generous."15
Zastrozzi is certainly more  accessible  than  all  but  his earliest  plays,  and  this,  in combination with Walker's continued growth  as a playwright, has made Zastrozzi his most popular work. The  play is, unabashedly, a melodrama, and  is subtitled as such.  It pits good against  evil in a plot taken  from  Shelley's  novel,  but  a note  in the  Playwrights Co-op edition  of the  play informs the  reader that  Walker  worked from  a description of the  novel:  therefore the  play  is not  really  an  adaptation of the  original work.  In  the  context  of this  discussion,  it is important to  note  that there  is certainly as much  Errol  Flynn  as there  is Percy  Bysshe Shelley in Walker's play, and  that  Walker  is continuing to make  use of his B-movie  lens.
As William Lane, the  director  of the  original production, implies  in  his intro­ duction, Zastrozzi   is, in  addition to  being  a  melodrama, a  contemporary   (and tongue-in-cheek) morality  play;  Walker  evidently  believes that morality plays are rare  in  contemporary theatre and  ought  to be supplied,  but  is also aware that  a contemporary audience is unlikely to accept  a naked statement of central proposi­  tions:   our  defensive  objectivity  or  superficiality or  materialist disbelief  must  be circumvented through giving  us the  opportunity to  laugh. "The moral centre  of the  play  is Zastrozzi  himself-the very  one  who  never  has  a  moral   crisis." 16
Zastrozzi,  in  fact,  constitutes  the  moral  centre  through his implacable desire  to follow  the  dictates of a kind of morality to that  point  where  morality annihilates itself.  "Mankind is weak.  The   world  is ugly.  The only  way  to save  them  from each  other  is to destroy them  both."17  This  is a logical extension  of the thinking of both  fundamentalist  Protestantism and   the  playwrights of  the  Absurd. In  the plot,  Zastrozzi  is the  play's  villain,  the  master  criminal of Europe, and  the  ada­ mant pursuer  of his mother's murderer, a man  turned saint  or fool by the magni­ tude  of the  act.  Within the  play's  metaphorical structure, Zastrozzi  is  the  prin-

g8

GEORGE F. WALKER


ciple  of order, standing as the  last  bastion  against  the  coming  of  a  new, liberal, "pleasantly vague" world  being  born  at  the  tum of the  century, the  time  of the play's events and  the  beginning of our own era. As William Lane  observes:
Zastrozzi is already a figure out of his time. He comes on like some medieval night­ mare,  wielding  his sword  and  dagger  as though  they  were  still  the  most  lethal weapons on earth....  Zastrozzi's attitude  is mercilessly aristocratic.  His foe is the new middle class with its shiny new liberal education  and its fancy for art.

He  is, in short,  "the master  of discipline," the  one  who  takes  it  upon  himself  to supply  an  absolute, a  means  of assuring  that  everyone  is answerable.
Evil has great  stage  presence,  and  given the theatrical advantages ever afforded
the  villain,  it is inevitable that  the  eponym  seizes and  holds  the  attention, and  in some ways, the sympathy of the audience (after all, the murder of a mother  is diffi­ cult  to forgive,  even allowing for extenuating circumstances and  the  fact  that  the lady  herself may  have  been  a killer) . Walker  himself has expressed  some concern  over the implications of the  attraction a figure such as Zastrozzi commands, com­ pared  to the evidently  pallid  alternative, Verezzi the guilty saint :
There's  been a tendency  to think of him  [Verezzi]  as moronic.  I think  that's  just a reflection of our own age. We cannot  accept God, obsession or goodliness, when in fact,  a Verezzi has his own power....  It's  a sign of our  times that  we tend  to think of Verezzi as a fool, and  Zastrozzi as a charming  evil villain  who's more in touch  with  reality.  Well, maybe he is, but I still think  there's  room in this world for people like Verezzi. At least I hope so.18

Walker is surely leading his interviewer down  a garden path. He  deliberately  pre­ sents the B-movie  hero-in-white in such a way that  contemporary cynicism cannot  fail to judge  the character a fool. The  man  whom Zastrozzi  has pursued for  three  years cannot recognize  the  danger he is in, choosing instead  to fantasize that  he is a sort of messiah,  complete with  invisible followers;  most  telling stroke  of  all, he is a sexual flop, and  we certainly don't  want  to identify  with  that. At the same time, Walker  puts into  the  mind  and  mouth of a character we are sometimes invited  to despise  sentiments with   which   we  know  we  ought   to  agree.   At   first  glance, Zastrozzi  seems  to  run  contrary to  Walker's  usual  practice of  using  a  form  to undermine the  mode  of thought behind  the  form:  for  the  play,  like  melodrama and  melodramatic B-movies, makes a clear distinction between  good  and  evil, and gives each side the formalized statements of  faith or anti-faith. However, by giving to the villain  a  passion  for order  and  definition  in some  respects  attractive to the inhabitants of chaotic times, as well as many of the best lines, and  by giving to the putative hero  qualities which   we  know  cannot   stand   up  to  current  events  or intellectual trends,  Walker  encourages the  wry  and   condescending smile  with which  we customarily respond to melodrama (unless it has been updated with  the contemporary  trappings of  T.V. social  drama)  and   with   which   we  reject  the melodramatic world  of good  and  evil revealed.  Walker's skilled  evocation of the


99

GEORGE F.  WALKER

double response leads us into an old fashioned examination  of the nature  of good and  evil; again,  the theatrical  hand is quicker  than  the eye of the audience,  who thought  they were just watching swashbuckling  melodrama and  parody of  swash­ buckling melodrama.
Melodramatic simplicities are  further  complicated  by Victor.  In  some  ways,
Zastrozzi and Verezzi are opposites: Zastrozzi is a realist and Verezzi is an idealist. In  other  ways, they  are similar;  both  shape  their  lives with  absolutes.  In  this respect,  and  others,  both  find their  opposite  in  Victor,  servant  to  Verezzi  and failed priest, who, in order to keep a promise does his utmost to protect the victim from  the  destroyer.  Realistic, materialistic,  pragmatic, Victor  commands  respect for  his decency,  resourcefulness, and  courage.  It  is here  that  Walker's  growing powers of characterization are most impressive, for despite all his decencies  (and decency is notoriously boring on stage) , Victor  is an  interesting  character; he is the one who, as Lane points out, has the moral dilemma,  and  he responds to it i
a manner  with which most members of the audience  would agree. He calls a mad­
man a madman, acts instead of hypothesizing, and, alone among the characters,  is possessed himself of a sense of humour. We identify  with him;  he is like us. And like us, he is wrong, and the error results in his death.  His secular faith  also has its limitations,  and  his balance, his moderation,  is ultimately  his undoing.
We therefore  agree intellectually with one character, feel we ought  to respond spiritually to a second, and identify most closely with a third.  While B-movie con­ ventions would lead us to expect an either j or proposition, we are given three poles, and  ambivalent  poles at that. Walker uses the rest of the cast of stock  characters  to extend the central issue, and to comment upon it. An assistant villain is present not only to facilitate  the plot in the usual manner, but  to demonstrate  the differ­ ence between ideological evil and mere thuggery. The presence of a villainess and a purer-than-white heroine gives a sexual shape to the contest, reducing the cosmic struggle to "naughty" vs. "nice,"  and  at the same time adding  a strong strain  of eroticism to help bring the point home, to bed. Zastrozzi's imaginary  seduction  of Julia is a very compelling scene indeed.




b:E VALUES WHICH  EMERGE from Walker's  work seem to be those  of  a  small-"c" conservative,  the  technical  trappings of  the  avant-garde. Zastrozzi  ultimately  asserts that evil does exist, is not the product  of environment, and  must be confronted.  In "Prince  of Naples,"  the easy assumptions  based on a facile acceptance of relative values are pilloried, and  Bagdad Saloon dismantles a system of value based on the publicizing of subjective  fantasy. Walker is a cham­ pion of language  and  definition, a concern  that  has increased  as his  career  pro­ gressed, and  he rejects naturalism,  in part, because it has forgotten  how to reach

100

GEORGE F. WALKER

areas of human  experience accessible to older dramatic  forms. In this, he resembles Eugene lonesco, who claims not to be of the avant-garde at all; Ionesco dismisses much  recent  drama, finding  "Ibsen  heavy, Strindberg   clumsy, Pirandello  out­ moded," and wants in his own work to return to the theatre  of the Greeks and the Elizabethans,  a large  than  life theatre  "concerned  with  the  human  condition  in all its brutal  absurdity."19  That is what we are left with at the end of  Zastrozzi as the villain surveys a positively Jacobean  heap of corpses, enjoying  his impersonal Greek blood revenge.  The  form  is contemporary  but  the  clash of  forces therein depicted  is an old and  vital one.
While  Zastrozzi  is a  continuation   of  Walker's  earlier  thematic   explorations (there  are, for instance, striking similarities between the obsessions of Rocco and those of Zastrozzi)  and of the playwright's technical development  (the manner  in which Victor  is employed  to manipulate  audience  expectations  differs from  the way in which  the Corporal  was used only in that  the  technique  is elaborated  in the later play),  it is at the same time a meticulously constructed  and highly success­ ful piece of entertaining theatre: to be truly successful, parody must be as skilfully constructed  as that  which  it  parodies, and  in this respect Zastrozzi  is  a literary in-joke-poker-faced, Walker demonstrates that he is perfectly capable of writing
a well-made play, and  does so without sacrificing his personal, non-documentary vision.
This  new concern  with "generosity"  is evident in Walker's  other  recent  plays. "Gossip" and "Filthy  Rich"  appear  to be detective B-movies, and can be enjoyed at that level, but they are really contemporary  comedies of manners,  high comedy revived.  Rumours of Our  Death,  first produced  in  1g8o  and  published  in  the Canadian  Theatre Review, No.  25, is, on  the  surface,  a  Ruritanian  romance­ cum-spy  movie, and  was given punk  rock treatment  in the original  Factory  Lab  production,  but  it introduces  politics through  a tantalizing  political  fable which at times seems to apply to Canada, and at others (no doubt as a result of the play­ wright's  intention) snatches  the easy and  national  answer  away  by interrupting the  pattern. Walker  is using popular  forms, primarily  B-movies, as a means  of exploring old dramatic verities, rather  as John  Gray does in Billy Bishop Goes to War, as Maynard Collins does in "Hank Williams:  The  Show He Never Gave," and as the Hummer Sisters do in their video-theatre-rock-and-roll extravaganzas.
The  man who appears  to be among Canada's most abstruse and  esoteric  play­ wrights has, in fact, a thorough  grasp of populist techniques, and can use the forms of popular  theatre   as both  popular  vehicle and  as a  means  of sharing  with  a broader  audience  a more demanding dramatic  view. In this ability to speak to a more general  audience,  Walker  resembles the  populist  docu-dramatists  of  Passe Muraille  or the Tarragon playwrights, who address a  popular,  middle-class audi­  ence within the conventions it knows best, and in the process, he gives them some penetrating  analysis  of  themselves.  The  tendency  to  commercialism  in  recent


101

GEORGE F. WALKER

Canadian drama and  commercialism in  the  artistic   policies  of  many  Canadian theatres has  been  decried,  as it should  be,  but  commercialization should  not  be confused   with  a  movement underway in  Canada for  some  time,  a  movement whose aim  has  been  to take  theatre to a larger  audience, abandoning the  coterie audiences of the regionals and  attempting to reach  instead  an  audience previously unaccustomed  to  attending formal,   legitimate theatre. The  venture, should   it prove  successful,  could  help  to change  the  status of theatre as mere  social status symbol,  to which  it has unfortunately so often  been  relegated in twentieth-century North  America, and  to restore  to the  theatre the  power  of  broad  appeal which has  traditionally given  drama an  edge  over  other  literary forms.  This  increased ability  to reach  out to an audience is one of the directions which  theatre has taken in  response  to  Esslin's  question,  "After  the  Absurd, what?" And  it is a direction to which  Canadian drama has  been  a major  contributor. Seen  in the  context  of these larger  movements, Walker  and  the Factory Lab  are not mavericks at all, but the source of one of the most theatrically potent  streams within  the  new Canadian drama.


NOTES

1 "Tarragon's Trademark was Script Development," That's  Showbusiness, 4, No. 24 (January 1976),  p. I.
2  Three Plays by George  F. Walker: Bagdad  Saloon, Beyond  Mozambique, Ramona and  the White Slaves  (Toronto: Coach House, 1978),  p. g.
3 Myron Galloway, "George Walker-Resolving the World's Chaos," Montreal Star,
3 March  1979, p. 18.
4   George F. Walker, "Prince of Naples," in Now  in Paperback: Canadian Playwrights of the  1970's, ed. Connie Brissenden (Toronto: Fineglow Plays, 1973), p. 76.
5  Edward  Mullaly, "Waiting  for Lefty, Godot, and  Canadian Theatre," The  Fiddle- head, No. 104 (1975),  p. 53·
6  Mullaly, p. 51.
7  Mullaly, p. 53·
8  The Theatre of the  Absurd  (Garden City, N.Y.:  Doubleday,  1969), p. 266.
0  Myth and Modern American Drama  (Detroit: Wayne State  Univ. Press, 1g6g), p.
255·
10 Peter  Hay,  Introd., Sunrise  on Sarah,  by George  Ryga  (Vancouver:  Talonbooks,
1972),  p. 6.
11 John  Fraser, "Walker  Turns  to Murder  With  Comedy,"  Globe  and Mail, 19 April
1977, p. 2 3·
12 Richard  Horenblas,  "Playnotes," Scene Changes, 3, No. 10 (October  1975),  p. 8.
13 James  Reaney  (Toronto: McClelland  & Stewart,  1972),  pp. 48-49.
14  "Nancy," Leonard  Cohen: Live Songs, Columbia  Broadcasting System, 65224, 1973·
15 Fraser, p. 23.


102

GEORGE F. WALKER


16  William Lane, lntrod., Zastrozzi: The Master  of Discipline  (Toronto:  Playwrights
Co-op,  1979), p. 5·
17  Zastrozzi: The Master  of Discipline  (Toronto:  Playwrights Co-op,  1979), p. 12.
18 Chris  Hallgren, "George Walker, The  Serious  and  the  Comic," Scene  Changes, 7, No.2 (March/April 1979), p. 24.
19 Esslin, pp. 164-65.













WILD HORSES
 


Roo Borson


There are  horses of sorrow  that never  change their  expressions, their faces  hang  like shadows,  as if suspended from  something bright, bright  horses whose shadows
these  faces are,  horses
that  rammed like an ocean  wave across the  plains and  left  them  bare,  and  the  sky tells nothing
of where  they went,  the sky is too bare.

The horses  (the  dark  ones)  stand  now in a stable, no one comes  to release  them,
each  face  framed in its stall
of beaten  wood,  wood  marred by weather and  the flanks of these horses
that  have  been here  too long, restless, with  nowhere to go.

Now  and  then  riders  come  to ride  them
over the plains,  but their  expressions do not change, fixed  in the  fixed wind,  though they are  roving
over  territory those others  owned
when  they lived  here, they are saddled  with  riders and  their  shadows,  they are  shadows.




INTEGRAL/ FRACTIONAL

TIMOTHY   FINDLEY,   Can   You   See  Me   Yet.?
Talonbooks, $4-95·
JAMES  REANEY, The  Dismissal. Press Porcepic, h95·
GEORGE  RYGA, Ploughmen of the Glacier; Seven
Hours to Sundown. Talonbooks,  $4.95 each.
DAVID   LEWIS  STEIN,  The  Hearing.  Playwrights
Co-op,  $3.50.
HERE ARE  TWO PLAYS about  contempor­ ary   political  realities,   and   one-more immediate  and   more   telling  - about  Realpolitik in  the  last century; a moving exploration of  personal responses to reali­  ties  too  oppressive,  and  a  play  which  is itself  merely  oppressive  and   never  quite  real. Within this interesting mixed-bag of recent Canadian  drama  there   are  some notable   common   denominators  of  style and   theme.    Perhaps  most   immediately evident is what  these five plays are not­ that  is, even vaguely  naturalistic or struc­ turally   "well-made."  Without  generaliz­ ing  too much  from  such a small,  if fairly random, sampling, we might  still note  an apparent  movement  away  from   certain  stylistic tendencies of five or ten years ago. What is  surely  beyond  argument is  the manifest and  welcome  theatricality of all these  plays. They  share  a  fluidity  which comes  from  incorporating scene  changes  within  the  action   rather  than   offering static, stop-action staging. Canadian play­ wrights-or at least these playwrights­ seem  in  the  process  of  developing  their own  idioms  and  theatrical conventions to help get  their plays off the page and  onto  the stage.
There is a broad  range  of subjects  and presentational techniques here, from cam-
 
pus  rebellion   in  the  form   of  a  musical revue  to  a  documentary-styled  investiga­ tion  of municipal rezoning  practices. Yet the  thematic focus  of each  of these  plays is  remarkably  similar.   Their  structural attempts at  stylistic  integration  and   or­ ganic  unity  seem  reflected  in  the  central concern of each play for the ideas of per­  sonal  integrity  and   social  reform.   "The integral  versus   the  fractional  life"  is  a chant taken  up  by  the  student chorus  in James  Reaney's The Dismissal,  protesting the  firing  of  Professor  William  Dale  for maintaining  his  integrity in  the  face  of the  college's  fractional and  factious  poli­ cies.  It  could   just  as  easily  serve  as  an anthem  for  any one  of these  plays.
George  Ryga's  Ploughmen of the  Gla­ cier is the  least  successful  of the  lot.  Ac­ cording to  the  publishers,  "conversations between  an aged  prospector and  a retired  newspaperman   permit  George   Ryga   to examine the myth  of the  men  who  made  the  West." Unfortunately, Ryga's  charac­ ters  are  neither human  nor  mythic   but rather vaguely drawn cartoons masking  as portentous symbols. As the  opening stage direction tells us, "The setting  is possibly surrealistic to suggest  a mountainside, up and  down  which  POOR BOY  struggles in his eternal, groping quest." The  whole play is as tentative and  woolly as that  first sentence. In  spite  of scattered references to  real   communities  in   the   interior  of British  Columbia, there  is never  any firm sense of place or time.  And as for charac­ ters ... well, there's Volcanic, the grizzled and   ornery   old  prospector  who'll   never stop  wrestling  with  them mountains until they  yield  him  up  enough  gold  to found  his New Jerusalem, Volcanic City,  where
"there's not gonna be no schools, banks or churches." His  antagonist is Lowery,  the hardboiled city newsman whose cynicism helps  keep  Volcanic's romanticism in check.   And   between    them,    serving   as choral  commentator and  blowing  his har­ monica  every time  Ryga wants  to mark  a

BOOKS IN REVIEW



transition, is Poor  Boy, eternal and grop­
ing. Here  is a brief scene from  the play:

[POOR  BOY] plays  a  harmonica interlude  as he   peers  about    for  a  good   government   or meaning to  his  life.
LOWERY: If there is  a  God   ... I'd   say  he was a laughin' God  ... tough as boot  leather and   laughing a  lot   of  the   time. He   must have   laughed  when he  made me  short   an' gave  me  tall  wants ...
VOLCANIC  groans  and  writhes with  pain.

At  the  end   both   Lowery   and   Volcanic literally   drop  dead  on  stage  for  no  par­ ticular reason, accompanied, as one might  expect,  by Poor Boy's pathetic harmonica. Ryga's   attempts to  define  and  have  his characters  live   "the   integral  life"   are ploughed    under    by    his    own    heavy­ handedness.
Ryga  is in much  firmer  control of his material with  Seven  Hours  to Sundown, a "problem play"  with  debts  to Ibsen  and Arthur Miller,  and  the  result  is a brood­ ing  and  often  compelling drama. At first it looks like a relatively simplistic conflict about power  politics.  On  one  side  is the small   town's   establishment,   represented by the  redneck  mayor  and  his developer­ alderman ally. On  the  other are  the  pro­ gressives:  a  young investigative reporter, the  mayor's  idealistic   daughter, and   her boyfriend, a  hand-craftsman with  liberal  politics  and  long  hair.  But  a  number of characters as well as the issues themselves manage  to  transcend  the  ostensible   for­  mulae.
Sid Kiosk, the mayor, is a small-town combination of Archie  Bunker  and  Willy Loman.  Power   in  his  case  does  not  so much  corrupt as simply  allow  him  to act out some of the corruption that  has been seething inside  him  since  his  youth.  He has  come  to such  power  as he  has, para­ doxically,  through a series  of  severe  per­  sonal  failures. And  while  there  are  weak­ nesses in  Ryga's  development of  him­ some rather unconvincing pop-psychology and  excessive  (if  inevitable)  melodrama
 -his situation still  moves  us. Every  at­ tempt on his part at the integral leaves his life further in fragments.
Similarly,  Jerry  Goyda  turns  out  to be much  more complex than  the aging hippy he initially  appears to be. He  had  tried  to maintain his political  integrity against threats  from  the right,  and  as a result lost his teaching  job. He  has lost his wife and child  to a kind of Jonestown; and  now he tries to maintain the integrity of his small business  against threats from   both  right and  left, and  will probably lose it  too. In his beleaguered condition we see most clearly  Ryga's  skepticism   about  reconcil­ ing  individual  aspirations  with  commu­ nity  values  when  a  community is merely a  collection   of   self-serving   individuals. Goyda  and  Kiosk  come  together in  the powerful ending, revealed  as doubles, mu­  tually  victimized   and   betrayed  by  those who should  have  been  their  allies. This  is a  dark  view, not  just  of  politics  but  also of  human fate. The most successfully "in­ tegral" character in the play, who has the last words, is both  blind  and  crippled.
David  Lewis  Stein's The  Hearing  suf­
fers  from  some  of  the  same  problems  as
Ryga's  plays. Stein  can't seem to decide whether the  issues comprising his drama of urban  redevelopment are somehow greater than the sum of the individuals involved in it, or whether the issues are merely functions of private human needs and  desires. In  the  event,  his attempts to give each character some depth and back­ ground are  fairly  half-hearted and  some­ times simply  inept. The soap-opera qual­  ity  of  his  forays  into  character-develop­ ment,  with one major exception, tends  to mar rather than reinforce the play's vision of how community issues are  actually re­ solved. Stein's  dramatic sensibility  rests somewhere  between  Brecht  and  Fennario, but  never  quite comes  into  focus  in  this instance.
The  play is structured around a  hear­
ing  to decide  the  fate  of a  proposed   so-

IOS

BOOKS IN REVIEW



storey apartment building in downtown Toronto. This  is an  effective  frame:  the hearing itself, with  its documentary style, presents the public conflict clearly and straightforwardly, while  the  private  con­ flicts fade  in and  out  of the  main  action. The   developers  proposing the   building squabble  among  themselves;  so  do   the members of the  uneasy coalition opposing  it  - bourgeois   homeowners,   would-be  radical   organizers,  and   "working  class" interests. Insofar as Stein  tries to avoid suggesting  monolithic forces at work here, he succeeds. Beyond that, however, the stereotypes take  over.
As in Ryga's  case, Stein is most success­
ful with a character to whom he might naturally seem   to  be  least  sympathetic. Joe  Markowitz, the  ruthless  Jewish  busi­ nessman,  cliched  cigar  and  all,  suddenly becomes  in  the  second  act  the  play's one man  of genuine integrity,  refusing  to sell out    to    the    American    conglomerate. (What  is  there   that   seems  to  guarantee the dramatic success of an old man  taking  a desperate, last-ditch stand  against  pres­ ent-day  realities?)   The   play  features  a woman   of  integrity, too, in Jeannie, the uncompromising revolutionary. The  fan­ tasy   of   her   grim   revolutionary   justice with  which  the  play  ends is  dramatically unsuccessful   because  we are  never  given to know whose fantasy it is, and  hence the sudden, radical  shift  in  style  seems  un­ justified.  But  the  final  image  of her  alli­ ance  with  Neal,  the  young  developer­ a  union  of  right  and left, clipboard and gun,  technocratic  efficiency and  Stalinist  "justice" -is   provocative  and   chilling.  For  Stein   the  price  of  political   or  eco­ nomic  success may be just such marriages of   convenience   as  this  and   the   multi­ national corporation. Better,  perhaps, the fractional  life.
The third  and  by far  the  best of these overtly   political   plays  is  Reaney's The Dismissal, or Twisted  Beards & Tangled Whiskers. As its subtitle  suggests, Reaney

I06
 does not  approach his subject with  much solemnity.  Nevertheless,   this    good­ natured, colourful, and  very funny musi­ cal  satire   is able  to  tell  us  a  great   deal about the  politics  of  everyday life. And it does so through the brilliant virtuosity of styles  that  we  have  come  to expect  from Reaney's work  in  the theatre.
Written to mark  theI soth birthday of the  University of Toronto, The  Dismissal chronicles the  Class ofI 895 and  specific­ ally  its  short-lived  rebellion  against   ad­  ministrative   arrogance    and    hypocrisy.  When a  professor  is  fired  and  a  student editor   expelled   for    telling    the    truth (mainly about  nepotistic hiring  practices that   discriminate  against   native   Cana­ dians), the students strike. But young William Lyon  Mackenzie King  sells out his  best  friend   and   his  fellow  protesters in  the  course  of practising his first lesson in  the  fine  art  of  political   doublethink: "If I speak   out-how   will  I  get   the power   I need  to  make   people   listen   to my outspokenness?" Revisionist history  at its best,  and  done  to the  accompaniment of period  music  and  songs from  the  Uni­ versity  Songbook, a  College  Council de­ bate   in   the   form   of  a   lacrosse   match which   modulates into  a  hockey  game,  a Jehovah who  responds  to prayers  by des­ cending from  the  flies  as a  set  of  giant­ sized   white   whiskers.   Reaney  operates here  with great  theatrical elan and  always manages to make  the elaborate transitions within  his  baroque structure look easy.
Who  else  but  Reaney could  get  away
with  things  like  having a  student chorus (as  a  group of  cattle!)  protest   the  dis­ parity  in   faculty  salaries   by   chanting: "The  average salary   of  a  Canadian  is
$I 700. The average salary  of a foreigner is $2700. This  is intolerable and humiliat­
ing"? Here  and  elsewhere,  the  play's serious issues shine out amid  the general silliness as do  the  dignity  and  integrity of its heroes,  Professor Dale and  Jim Tucker. While  both  are  publically defeated, and

BOOKS IN REVIEW



cynical   pragmatism  is  shown   to  be  the path  to political success, the  play  quietly celebrates their  virtues.  That the integral life  is worth   trying  to  live,  even  against all  odds,  cannot finally   be  dismissed  as easily as its practitioners.
In  all  these  plays  integrity of one  sort or another struggles to survive  in a hostile environment. The protagonists are essen­ tially   outsiders  for   whom    the   system of  things-as-they-are (or  are-becoming) looms as a constant and identifiable threat to  their   personal  wholeness.   None  is so fundamentally   threatened,  however,   as Cassandra  Wakelin in Timothy Findley's  Can   You  See   Me   Yet? To   survive,   to remain whole, is for her simply  to remain sane; yet when  the entire  world  is a mad­ house,  where  is one  to seek asylum?
Findley's rich  and  sensitive  play  about survival  takes its epigraph, appropriately, from Margaret Atwood,  and  has clear affinities  of  mood   with  her   work   (as  it does  with  the  novels  of  Margaret  Laur­ ence,  who  contributes an  introduction). But  it  is most  evocative of  Ingmar Berg­ man: the deceptively pastoral isolation  of its characters, the  lyrical  excursions  into memory,  the  deep  sense  of  loss, and  the not-so-quiet  desperation of  the  quest  for personal  salvation. There  are  echoes  of Bergman,  too,  and  of Faulkner, in  Find­  ley's   revelations  of  family   life  and   its devastating  possibilities.  Cassandra's  fall out of grace  with  her family is what has brought  her   to   the   particular   asylum where she tries  to re-enact, and  hence re­ verse, her  drama of disintegration.
The  play's  primary images,  although blatant, are  in no way glib. The setting  is a garden in the insane  asylum  which Cas­ sandra inhabits in the late, hot summer  of I 938.  It also serves  as  the  garden of her family   home   to   which   she   returns  in
memory  to search  for  her  lost innocence.
(These transitions are  beautifully done, with Cassandra's fellow inmates assuming the  other   family  roles.)   With   the  world
 perched  on the edge of chaos,  and  masses gratefully accepting the  false  sanctuaries of politics and  religion,  Cassandra  never­ theless  refuses  to  embrace the  safety  of easy answers.

The world  is ending all  around us,  and   we need  each  other now. And  yet there is no sanctuary. Nowhere. None. In all  the  world. In all  the  width and   depth and   breadth of the  human heart-where  there is  room  for
·sanctuary-there is  none.  I know,  because there is none  in  mine.  I'm sorry.  Sorry.

Findley's   triumph  is  in   maintaining  a hard  edge to speeches like this, never allowing lapses into  pathos  or cliche. Cas­ sandra's self-discoveries   are  functions of hard-earned truth.
The  truths  that   these  plays  unveil  are rarely   pleasant  ones-which   is  not   to say  that  they  are  revealed  in  unpleasant ways.  Can  You  See  Me   Yet? is no Cuckoo's  Nest,  but  its mad  men  and  wo­ men  can   be  charming and   funny  even while trying  desperately to shore  up frag­  ments  against   their  ruin.  In  spite  of  de­ feats  there  are  victories,  however  minor. Reaney's    Professor   Dale   retires   to   his father's  farm   and   writes   a   history   of Rome; Cassandra, in  a  roundabout way, finds her way "home" again. The  cry that  rings   through  the  play  is  one   of  both despair  and  triumph. "Listen to me,"  she cries, "no one can  kill who  you are."

JERRY WASSERMAN



CHILD'S PLAY

JAMES   REANEY,   Apple Butter; Names and Nicknames; Geography Match;  Ignoramus. Talonbooks, $3.95  each.
JANE   HOWARD  BAKER,  A  Teacher's Guide to
Theatre  for the  Young. Talonbooks, $4-95·

]AMES  REANEY's four plays for children, written in  the   I g6o's  and   recently  pub­ lished  by Talonbooks, all  display  delight­ fully his enchantment with  language and


I07

BOOKS IN REVIEW



his  sense  of  humour. The   simplest  and most  charming is a  play for  marionettes, Apple Butter, which  features a bright  and cocky  young  orphan. His  kind-hearted rescues of a tree and  a cow in trouble  are rewarded by a tree fairy and  a bone fairy whose  magical   assistance  helps  him  win his struggle  against  three mean adults. Though little  direct   audience  participa­ tion is called  for, children  can easily iden­  tify  with   the   central  character  and   so share  in his jokes and  triumphs.
The earliest  of the  other  plays, Names and  Nicknames, suffers  most  from  the techniques  Reaney    employs   to   replace
stage  sets.  "The setting," he  explains   in
the  introduction, "can   be  accomplished with words, pantomime, the human body, music from  rhythm band  instruments and the  audience themselves." True, and  the mime  may  be great  fun  for  child  actors, but  the  effect  for  the  audience is likely to  be  bewilderment  and   boredom  with all the multitudinous peripheral details. Though Reaney  asserts quite  rightly  that "nothing should   stand   in  the  way  of  a flowing story line that  proceeds without a break  until  the  very  last chorus," he  de­ votes  five and  a  half  pages  of  directions for  mimed   action   and   choral  chant  to establishing  the   farm   setting -milking cows,   separating  cream,   slopping  pigs, harnessing horses -before  the  story  line is introduced  at  all,  and  other   long  se­ quences  are necessary  later for every shift in scene. Even  the stars on a winter  night  are  "acted." These  are  fine  exercises  for children, and  the  choruses  are  excellent, but the story line about a wicked old man who hates  children and spoils babies' christenings by  thinking up  horrid  nick­ names  for  them  is  too  weak  to  make  a play out  of this experiment in  words  and gestures.
Geography Match and Ignoramus are shamelessly  didactic plays for  older  chil­ dren.   Geography  Match   was  conceived  as  a  Centennial  Play.  The  list  of  char-

108
 acters  is long,  but  Reaney   has  provided for  a  good  deal  of  doubling, so the  cast can  be cut  to twelve.  Two  groups  of  stu­ dents,  "Academy Kids" and  "Continua­ tion  School   Kids," enter   a  contest   de­  signed   to  test  the  stamina  of  Canadian youngsters by  challenging  them   to  cross Canada in thirty days on a minimal bud­  get.  As  they  cross  the  country, they  are helped   or  hindered   by  characters from  Canadian  history   and  legend,   such   as Tecumseh, who turns  into a tortoise  when he  dies,  and   the  bear   and   coyote  who represent night and  day in Indian legend; they re-enact bits of Canadian history such as  the story  of  Madeleine de  Vercheres and the Battle of Moraviantown; they experience such  features of contemporary Canada as  the  wood  products industries in Ontario and  the shops, stock exchange and  heavy  traffic  of downtown Toronto. Often the brief episodes develop  little dramatic interest, and  the  rapid  changes of  place,  time,  and  episode  tend  to  pro­ mote  a sense of chaos.  However, the main  plot of the contest between  the cheats and  the  heroes  sustains interest  more  success­ fully  than   does  the  plot  of  Names  and Nicknames.
Ignoramus   pits   Dr.   History's  pupils against Dr. Progressaurus' pupils in a con­
test  between   progressive  education and traditional education. The  content and methods of the lessons are  wonderfully varied    to   maintain   dramatic   interest. That  Reaney's sympathies are  with  Dr. History  from  the  first  is never  in  doubt; the  interesting result  is that  Dr. Progres­ saurus' lessons are more successful drama­ tically  and   his  students,  whose  idiosyn­ crasies are given full  rein, are  more  inter­ esting  individually. The tie  declared be­ tween  the contestants at  the end  is a con­ siderable surprise:  the  conclusion  is  ill­ prepared for, but Reaney is qualifying his preference for  traditional education with the  acknowledgement that the  occasional  exceptional child  may  flourish  in  a  per-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



missive atmosphere. Despite  its large cast, Ignoramus   is  the  most  coherent  of  the three  stage  plays, and  it  is also  the  most fun.
Study   guides   for  Reaney's four   plays are  included in  Jane Howard Baker's  A Teacher's    Guide   to   Theatre  for	the Young. Also included are  guides  to three children's plays  by Dennis Foon:  Hera­ cles, Raft  Baby, and  The  Windigo, and one   by   Irene  N.   Watts:   A   Chain   of Words.  The book  contains  some  attrac­ tive suggestions  for  Foon's  plays  and  for rhythm study  in  connection  with  Names and  Nicknames.  Otherwise  it   is  unfor­ tunately not likely to do much to persuade teachers  that   the  plays  might be  worth  teaching  to   their   classes.   Even   in   the introduction  Baker  does  not  say how ele­ mentary   school   children  might  benefit from  reading and  discussing  or  perform­ ing a play except to note  that  this is "good  practice to   produce  co-operative  work habits   in  the  classroom." Reaney  has  a right  to hope  for  greater benefits  to chil­ dren  who  experience his plays.

SUSAN  STONE-BLACKBURN



DEFENSIVE ROLES

JOYCE DOOLITTLE and  ZINA BARNIEH,  A Mirror of Our   Dreams: Children  and  the  Theatre in Canada (with a chapter on  Theatre in Quebec  by   Helene   Beauchamp).   Talon­ books,  $6.95.
DENNIS   FOON,  Heracles; The  Windigo;  Raft
Baby. Talonbooks, $3.95  each.
IRENE N. WATTs, A  Chain of Words. Talon- books, $3.95.
A Mirror  of Our  Dreams is not  the  "de­ tailed  history  of the development of  chil­ dren's theatre in  Canada" its  publisher  claims.  Its authors say that  such  a history already exists  (as  an  unpublished disser­ tation) : "what   we  have   tried  to  do  in­  stead  is to give an  overview,  and  present
 the  main   challenges  facing   theatre  for young audiences as we enter  the  1g8o's." The  overview  consists of descriptions of specific  companies which   are,  theoretic­ ally,  representative enough   to  stand   as models;   but   each   description  acknowl­  edges   the   company's   uniqueness,  and seems rather  pointless.  And  the  presenta­ tion  of challenges facing  children's thea­  tre   is  actually   a   defence  of  what   the authors stridently call "an  unappreciated, unnoticed,  undervalued,   undetwritten, under-rehearsed underdog" -a  defence



TALON
PLAYS   IN   PRINT   BY:   Marie·
Claire  Blais, Connie Brlssenden, ed.,  Christian Bruyere, Michael Cook,   Rex   Deverell,  D1vld  Fen­ narlo,    Timothy   Findley,   Dovld Freeman, Robert Gurlk, Herschel Hardin, Jullu•  Hay,  Tom  Hendry, Ann Henry,  John  Herbert, larael Horovitz,  Betty   Lambert,  Rod Langley, Ken Mitchell, Eric Nicol, Sharon  Pollock,  James  Reaney, David Rudkin, George Rygo, Rick
Sllutln, Sam  Shepard,  Beverley
Simoni, Michel Tremblay, Joe Wleoenleld and George  Wood· cock.

FORTHCOMING: Lennox Brown, Goeton Charlebois, Ron Chudloy, David  Fennarlo'• Bakonvllle, David French'l Jltterl, George Hulme,  Jame1   W.   Nichol.

THEATRE FOR THE YOUNG: Dennis    Foon,    Jamea     Reaney, Irene  N. Woth and  Joyce  Doo· little & Zlno Bornloh'o A Mirror of Our Dreama.

FROM 	ENGLAND: 	PLUTO PLAYS:  Margaretta   D' Arcy John   Arden,    Darlo    Fo,    Steve Gooch,     Trevor   Griffith•    •nd othera.

FROM  AUSTRALIA: CURRENCY
PRESS:

Peter

Konno,

Roy
Lawler,

John

Romerll,

Steve  J.
Wllllamoon ond othero.

BOOKS

109

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



whose pomposity is unlikely to persuade anyone  not  already committed.
But  Doolittle and  Barnieh's  defence  of children's  theatre  does  suggest  the  con­ fusion  with  which  grownups typically  ap­  proach    arts   for   children.   On   the   one hand,  they   like   children's  theatre. But they  seem   to  feel  silly  about  doing   so, because  they  try  to  justify it. They  make gloriously  profound  (and  profoundly out­ of-context)   quotations  from   writers   as diverse  as  Edward Bond  and  Bruno  Bet­ telheim, in order  to prove  that  children's theatre is just as important as other  kinds of  theatre. They  ask, "How  widespread is the attitude that  theatre for  young audi­ ences  is  somehow different from  legiti­ mate   theatre? If it  is, we must  work  to correct it."  In  other words, Doolittle and  Barnieh defend the importance of a spe­ cial  theatre for children by implying  that such  a  theatre  ought   not  to exist -that good  children's  theatre is  just  like  good theatre for  grownups.
Furthermore,  their confusion about children's theatre makes them confused about children. They  speak  of "the  false and   condescending notion   that  children are  naive  and  that  their  innocence  must be  protected."  But   they  insist  that   we should  "nurture the qualities  of innocence and  imagination, so widely praised  but poorly served in our society." They want children to  be both  innocent and  not in­ nocent, different enough  from  grownups to  need   their   own   theatre  but   similar enough  for  that  theatre to  be  taken  seri­ ously.
The same  ambivalence plagues discus­
sions  of  children's literature, which  fre­
quently demand special  consideration for children's books  for  the  curious  and  un­ convincing  reason   that   good   children's books are  just like other  good books. They  are   not,  of  course,   and   good  children's theatre is  not  like  other  good  theatre. I suspect  we will have  no worthwhile criti­  cism  of arts  for  children until  we recog-

110
 nize that  they are  profoundly unlike  their grownup equivalents.
That is not to say they are more limited. But unsatisfying art  for children usually is limited, as  these  plays  by  Dennis  Foon and  Irene N. Watts show. They  are  quite
different from  plays for grownups. Unlike recent plays for grownup Canadians, they are  "Canadian" only by virtue  of their willingness  to borrow  everybody  else's cul­ ture.  Watts' play  tells Japanese  folktales,  while  Foon  dramatizes a Greek  myth,  an Algonquin belief,  and  a Peace River  leg­ end.   None   has  any  discernible  connec­ tion to the lives of  their  intended audience
-unless we blithely  assume  that  children are  unsophisticated, and  so are myths and legends,  and  therefore children ought   to like myths  and  legends.  But  despite  their
diverse   origins,   all  four   plays  have   the
same strange effect; whatever these stories might have  meant to those who originally heard  them,   Watts  and   Foon   dissipate their  energy.
They  do that  by using the techniques of storytelling rather than  the  techniques of drama. Actors announce the names  of the characters  they   are   playing;  characters step  out  of  their  roles  to  narrate  events. We  are  not  allowed  to  become  involved with  the characters as people  to whom something is happening; we must  stand back  and  observe  the stories as interesting events  that  have  already happened. This is different from  most  theatre for  grown­ ups, and  much  less interesting.
Foon   and   Watts may  use  these  tech­
niques  simply because  they are cheaper to produce  than   more   dramatic  ones.  Or they  may  simply  have  adopted the  over­ worked    conventions  of   "story   theatre" without giving   it  much   thought.  But  I suspect  there  is more  to it  than  that. All four  of  these  plays  imply  a  common as­ sumption about children -that  their  art  must   be  diluted  because  they  are  them­ selves weakminded, and  incapable of un­ derstanding or tolerating anything of real

BOOKS IN REVIEW



importance.  The   result    IS     unexciting theatre.
P. NODELMAN


TABLE OR SHELF?

ROLF   KALMAN,   et   a!.,   eds.,   A   Collection  of
Canadian  Plays.  Simon   &   Pierre.   Vol.   1,
$17.75; Vol. 2,  $17.75; Vol. 3, $17.75; Vol.
4, $19.75; Vol. 5, $19.75.
THEATRE IS AN EPHEMERAL   ART. Drama need  not  be, if  plays  are  published, and published in durable format. The format that  Rolf  Kalman and  his associates  have chosen   for   A   Collection  of   Canadian Plays is both  durable and  beautiful. This series of handsome books began  to appear in  I 972  and   the  end  is not  yet  in  sight. The texts of the plays are set out  in hand­ some  type  with  generous and  artistic use of empty  space.  Each  volume is profusely illustrated with  original  drawings, photo­ graphs  of  productions,  historical  prints,  and   other   appropriate   decoration.  The  books  are   big   and   attractively  bound.  They  would  look well  on  the  coffee table  and  will   endure   on   library  shelves. Libraries, in  Canada  and   a  number  of foreign  countries, are   among  the  chief buyers of  the  hard-back series,  while stu­ dents  and   actors   can   pick  up  the  indi­ vidual  plays   in   paperbacks,  which   are issued    simultaneously   with    the   hard­ backs.   A  sensible   publishing   scheme­ though  the  relatively  low  prices  of  the hard-backs make  them  a  better  bargain.
The range  of the contents is impressive.
Volume  Four  is   devoted  to   children's plays,   Volume  Five   to   previously   un­ translated Quebec  plays.  Most  are  gen­ eral,   with   their   contents partly  selected on   the   principle  of  what   won't   fit  in Simon  &  Pierre's Canplay  series,  which is  devoted   exclusively   to  plays  that   are proved  commercial successes. The editors  of  the  Collection  also  make   a  point   of presenting   plays   representing   different
 genres, plays from  different regions of Canada,  plays  written  in  various   styles and   dealing   with   various   subjects.   The authors  range   from   names   to  conjure with   (Mavor  Moore,  W.   0. Mitchell, Merrill  Denison)  to  relative  newcomers to Canadian theatre.
Predictably,  this  emphasis  on  variety results  in  variable quality. Volume One
contains    a   fairly   convincing  historical drama (Michael Cook's  Colour  the  Flesh the Colour  of Dust), a stiff, unconvincing one  (Stewart Boston's  Counsellor  Extra­ ordinary) ,  and    a    cleverly    allegorical quasi-historical   play	(Munroe    Scott's Wu-feng);  there  are  also  two  promising one-acters (Sheldon Rosen's  Love  Mouse  and   Meyer's   Room)  and   a   thoroughly professional  farce-comedy  (Donald Jack's Exit  Muttering). Volume  Two  contains William  Fruet's Wedding  in White, the stage version of the movie about  a sordid, pathetic forced   marriage;  three   one-act plays by Hugh  Garner,  two  of which  are about  commonplace  middle-aged women  and   their   commonplace  problems,  and  the third,  a charming piece, about  a cour­ ageous  and  imaginative old  lady;  W. 0. Mitchell's The  Devil's  Instrument, full of local  colour,   in  which   a  Hutterite  boy breaks  away  from   his community; three short  plays  by  Mavor Moore, which   he describes   in   the   introduction  as   "idea plays"  concerned  with   theatrical  ambi­ guity;  and  Brock  Shoveller's Pinteresque Westbound  12:01, in  which   the  master of a  more-or-less disused  railway  station is   psychologically    dismantled.  Volume Three   enshrines  Merrill  Denison's   un­ performed Marsh Hay  ( 1923); it  reveals a daffy  triangle of  urban  sophisticates at play  in  the  comic  Unreasonable  Act   of Julian    Waterman   by   Ron    Taylor;  it shows   Aviva   Ravel's  command  of   the Jewish  family scene in The Twisted Loaf and   of   the   complex   consequences  of women's liberation in Soft Voices; it dares to  tell  the  case  history  of a mother  who

III

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



murdered her  two  children, in  Grahame Woods'  Vicky; and  it  offers  an  unusual angle  on  the  Quebecois corporation executive  in  Joseph   Schull's   The  Vice­ President.
Volume Five performs a particular ser­
vice  for   Anglophone  Canada  by  intro­ ducing     previously     untranslated    play­ wrights,  considerably enlarging our  sense of  the  kinds  of  drama  being  created in Quebec. Michel  Garneau provides a good vehicle  for four  actresses in Four to Four, which  orchestrates the  joys, sorrows, con­ flicts, and  confusions  of four  generations of women,  with emphasis  on the youngest, who  bears   the  burdens of  her  heritage. Renald  Tremblay's Greta, The Divine  is a fast-paced burlesque history of Quebec's first   230  years,   a   hilarious   romp   that leaves nobody's dignity intact. Andre Simard's  Waiting  for   Gaudreault  has little  to  recommend it beyond  the  wit  of the title and  the upbeat  conclusion of solidarity  among  the  workers.   (Perhaps the  humour  which   the  critics  found   in the   play   got   lost   in   the   translation?) Serge  Mercier's A Little  Bit Left, "a  play in  three  meals,"  records  the  banalities of an   old   couple's   conversation, poignant on   the   page,   reportedly  funny   in   per­ formance. Serge  Sirois's  Dodo is kitchen­ sink  drama in  which   the  usual  squalor produces consequences disturbing in their nature  and    intensity.   Claude  Rossin's Looking  for a Job,  a  deftly  staged  piece, deals  with   the  kitchen sink  and   all  the rest of the contemporary Quebec scene in manic  and   mature  comic   fashion.   Are You  Afraid  of Thieves? by Louis-Domi­ nique Lavigne is an interesting if rather long-drawn-out  experiment  using  six actors  to play what  seems to be two char­ acters; it  makes  a  statement  about   the difficulties and  the  fragmented  nature of communication.
The  plays  in   these  five  volumes   are
uneven, perhaps unavoidably. The volume of children's plays seems to be uneven  for


112
 a  purpose. A hotly  debated issue in  chil­ dren's theatre is the  degree  to which  the children  in  the  audience are  to  be  in­ volved   in   the   play  itself.   Sensibly,   the editors give  us in  Volume  Four   the  full range   of  possibilities,  from  plays  which allow  the  children to watch and  listen, to plays   which   turn   the  actors  into   little more  than playground  directors who  put the  children  through  a  variety   of  exer­ cises. Some  of these plays are  oppressively  educational,  while  others   are   genuinely imaginative.   Some   condescend   to   the level  of  a  child's  vocabulary, others do not. Some expound a heavy moral,  others  let actions speak  for  themselves.  The bag is very  much  mixed.
Variable quality is no great  shortcom­ ing in such a collection. The weaker  plays are  not  without interest  and  do  serve  to illuminate  the   superior  qualities  of  the stronger plays.  The  serious  shortcomings of  the   Collection  are   in   the  apparatus that   accompanies  each   play.  Rolf   Kal­ man    and    his   fellow   editors   began    as theatre   people,   not   as  publishers,  but they would  have been well advised  to hire a  professional  copy  editor  from  the  very beginning  of   the  series  to  correct  their spelling,  grammar, typos,  and  other   me­ chanical and  stylistic  errors.  Beautiful books deserve  better English  than  is to be found here in the introductory sections. More  serious yet, and  more surprising because  the  editors  are  theatre people,  is the  lack  of  theatrical information about these  plays.  It is  not  always  possible  to deduce  from   the   apparatus  whether a play   has   been   performed;  it  is  almost never  possible  to  tell  where  and  when  it was performed, even  when  the fact  of performance is clearly  mentioned. The director of a play may appear in a photo­ graph accompanied by a  biography, but the  date   of  his  production  is  not  given. Photographs   of    performances   do   not identify the  actors  in  the  pictures or  the characters  they  are  portraying. A histori-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



cal play for children, Carol  Bolt's Cyclone Jack,   has   no   notes   about  the   factual events  it  embodies; a  slightly  discursive stage direction at  the very end  is the only clue,  for  the   uninitiated, that   it  is  his­ torical.   Volume  Five   tells   which   plays have  been  published in French, but there  are    no   indications   in   the    first   four volumes  that  some  plays  have  been  pub­ lished  before,  in  Canadian  Theatre  Re­ view or  by the  Playwrights  Co-op.  Some have    no   dates    of    composition   given beyond  the  copyright  date  of the  volume of  the  Collection  in  which   they  appear, yet they are  often clearly  of another year or even  another  decade. One  play is said to have  been  "produced recently," which causes  the  reader   to hunt up  the date  of the  volume  in  which   it  appears and  to wonder  what  "recently" means.  Yet  for
a  very  few  plays,  month, year,  theatre, director, and   designer  (but   never  cast) are  neatly  listed.  It is incredibly  sloppy work.  At  a  time  when  theatre  historians are  organizing  to  begin   the   job  of   dis­ covering   and   preserving  (among  other  things)    data   about   performances,  it  is especially   depressing  to  find   such   data  omitted from  its  most  appropriate  home
-durable and  handsome volumes  that, because  of these  oversights, may after  all be better  suited  to the coffee table than  to the library  shelf. One  can  only hope  that the volumes yet to come will be made genuinely  worthy  of  both   locations.

ANN  MESSENGER



w
 PLAYS THAT TIE

ANDRE   RICARD,   Le   Casino   Voleur. Theatre/ Lemeac,  n.p.
PIERRE   GOULET,   Les   Lois   de   la  Pesanteur.
Theatre/Lemeac, n.p.
DAVID  FENNARIO, Nothing  to Lose. Talonbooks,
$4·95·
RICK  SALUTIN   with   KEN  DRYDEN,  Les  Cana­
diens. Talonbooks, n.p.
JOHN    COULTER,  Franfois    Bigot.    Hounslow
Press, $4-95·
PIERRE  MORENCY,  Tournebire et /e Malin  Frigo
and  Les Ecoles  de Bon Bazou. Lemeac,  n.p.

ONE  OF THE  MOST POTENT barriers to national  unity   is  the  tendency  of  both major language groups to generalize  about each   other. Biased  school  history   texts, the   media,   and   political    interests   con­ spire  daily  to  invest  the  notion   of  Two Solitudes with   the  status   of   immutable and  divine  truth.  Meanwhile  geographi­ cal and  linguistic  isolation  fosters  mutual stereotypes   of  the  most   dangerous  and  baseless  sort.   Prejudice   feeds   upon   the stereotype,  which   in   turn  is  premised  upon  a denial  of  individual difference. "I hate  and  detest that  animal called  man," remarked Swift in an oft-quoted letter  to Pope,  "but I  heartily love  John, Peter,  Thomas, and so forth." Half  a dozen con­  temporary Anglophone and  Francophone playwrights dealing in one way or another with   Quebec  sidestep   Swift's   emotional ambivalence by a rejection of  generaliza­ tions  of any  sort -Man,  the  Quebecois, the   WASPS,   or   whatever.   They   focus strictly  upon  limited  geographical areas,  individuals or small groups,  single institu­ tions,  and   particular  moments in  time.  The   reader  or  theatregoer is left  to  ex­ trapolate  as  he  sees fit.  Taken together, their  plays  offer   a  fascinating  series  of insights into  the complexities of the Que­ bec consciousness.  Those   who  encounter them  may not  be seized with  instant love for  the  other  language  group; but   they will,   I  think,   emerge   less  comfortable

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



with  their  prejudices. And  that,  after  all, is a start.
Andre Ricard's Le  Casino  Valeur (Crooked  Casino)  recognizes   the   cen­ trality   of  politics   at  all  social  levels  in Quebec,  but   highlights  the   evanescent meaning it gives to the lives of  those who participate actively,  and  the  devastation wreaked   on  the  ego  when  power  is lost and old age beckons. Fleurimond Bluteau, a former Union  Nationale organizer and ex-mayor   of  a  small   town  in  the  rural  Beauce   region,  receives  a  morning visit from   his   longtime  political   henchman, Gaudiose Giguere, now retired  and  living on  Old  Age Security  in a nearby  village. Fleurimond,   bankrupt   and    disgraced, finds himself  saddled with  a decrepit ser­ vice  station,  separated  by  a  ditch   and mountains of  landfill  from  a  new  auto­ route  which  "inside  information"  prom­  ised would  funnel  traffic by his door. The fact  that   the  highway  passes  behind   the building renders  his frustration complete. He  applies  for government compensation for  damages;  and   while  he  awaits   the appraiser,  his  wife,  Aurelienne, struggles vainly  to  convert  an  adjoining dumping­ ground into a campsite for rich American tourists.  An  infusion   of  capital   for   the project is imperative; and Gaudiose's for­ tuitous   call   turns   into   a   psychological poker  game,  with  his meagre  income  the stake  needed   to give  the  Bluteaus  a  last crack  at  prosperity.
Ricard, despite  his gently satirical treat­ ment  of the Bluteaus,  never denigrates the still  vital    conservative   values   of   rural  Quebec, a phenomenon too often  ignored  by   the   media    in   their   obsession   with Montreal and  Quebec City.  Fleurimond and  Aurelienne  may  blame  the  PQ  for their  plight; but at  the root of their  woes is their  warped  view of politics as a casino to be fiddled  for personal  advantage, and their betrayal of the traditional principles which  make  country society work.  In  the Beauce,   and   regions   like  it,  the   home-
 stead,   the  family,   the  church, and  per­ sonal  loyalties  still  matter. The  politician or student of Quebec society who neglects that  axiom  does so at  his  peril.
This   play,   Ricard's  third    and   best, catapults him  into  the  first  rank  of  Que­ bec dramatists. The literary quality of the piece  is  high.   His   treatment  of   human frailty    is   sensitive,   warm-hearted,   and forever   enriched   by  a  keen  eye  for  the absurd  and  the  comic. His feel for struc­ ture,  style, and  dialogue is sure.  Years  of stage  experience,  a  number of  them   as Artistic Director of  Theatre de  L'Estoc, have  given  him  a consummate command of his medium. His  characters are  finely­ drawn   and    eminently    playable.    The actor's  movement is   broadly   indicated, but  not  minutely dictated, by the  rhythm of  the  script,  and  is enhanced by calcu­ lated   suggestive    business   which    grows easily   and   powerfully  out   of  everyday paraphernalia-paint cans, brushes,  lad­ ders, and  the like. The Bluteau's symbolic redecoration  of  the   garage   fat;ade   is  a neat  case  in  point.  Few  Canadian  play­ wrights  can  match his delicate orchestra­ tion  of  sound   and   silence:   the  roar   of cars  on  the  autoroute and  the  unembar­ rassed  conversational   pauses  of  the  old are  as crucial   to  the  dramatic texture as the dialogue itself. A  work  of this stature deserves  national  exposure, preferably in the original but, if  need be, in translation.
Pierre Goulet's Les Lois de la Pesanteur (The Laws of Gravity),a less subtle  piece of  social  satire,   employs   rollicking   farce to  probe  another  unfamiliar segment   of the  Quebec scene.  Set in Outremont, Montreal's  French  equivalent  of   West­ mount, the  play  pillories  upper-class na­ tionalists   who  invoke  Quebec's  cultural uniqueness with  one side of their  mouths while   gobbling the   benefits   of   North  American capitalism  with  the  other. Na­ tional  identity and  human decency  alike fall  prey  to  Mammon.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Marcel Renaud, an  employee  of Armand  St.-Onge,  a  wealthy  manufac­ turer  of soles for  shoes,  invents a  pair  of anti-gravity  boots. St.-Onge invites  Fran­
<;ois   de   Montauban,  a   Parisian   indus­ trialist, to  pay  him  a  visit  to  discuss  the manufacture and  marketing  of  the  foot­  wear  as a  Franco-Quebec  economic pro­  ject;   but  de  Montauban,  soon  after   his arrival, scotches  the idea. The  commercial future of the  product will be determined, he  argues,  not  in  France or  Quebec, but in  the  United States.  Aided  and  abetted by St.-Onge's son, Gerry,  a  Management student  at   McGill,  he   rushes   to   New York  to  arrange a  promotion  campaign for  the  "Bionic Boots,"  leaving  St.-Onge culturally disappointed, but consoled  by visions of economic splendour. The pres­ sures  of  American  capitalism  inevitably lead  both  men  to neglect  their  wives. De Montauban's Gina  falls in love with  Mar­ cel,  and  St.-Onge's  Maggie,  bored  with the   role   of  social   ornament,   takes   up Real  Estate  sales,  prompted by the  fem­ inist   theories   of   her  daughter  Linda, a student at  the  University of Quebec.
In  a  hilarious climactic sequence,  St­
Onge, de  Montauban, and  Gerry  gather in front  of the television  set to watch  their product launched. As eight  New York firemen  climb  the  Empire State  Building, wearing the  Bionic  Boots  and  bearing a Quebec flag,  Maggie  departs with  Linda for a tour of China, and  Marcel and Gina elope   to   Italy.  With   Marcel  goes  the patent for  the  boots,  a  contingency  St.­ Onge  and  de  Montauban failed   to  pro­  vide  for  in  their  economic grand  design.
To  outline the  bare  bones  of  the  plot is to do the play scant  justice.  Its strength lies  in  its  social  comment, implicit and explicit;  and   Goulet's  observations  on the contradictions within  bourgeois Que­ bec nationalism are some of the shrewdest to   date.   St.-Onge  pays   lip-service    to France as his spiritual  homeland, but  his real  loyalties  are  to  the  bowling  alley  in
 his basement  and  the mechanical wonders of his American car.  Is  the superiority of French  culture merely  chimerical in  any case?  Although the  de  Montaubans snig­ ger  at  the  St.-Onges' homespun  accents and    unrefined    tastes,    their    anglicized idiom  and  obsession  with  "Babyfoot" (a table  football  game)   are  hardly   a  com­  pelling alternative. The tension and  suspi­ cion   which   often   characterize  French­ Quebec social contacts, a fact rarely  noted  by English commentators, is treated with frankness and  wit.
Ultimately, in  Goulet's view,  cultural and   economic   nationalism  must   always bow to the profit motive. St.-Onge, who disdains  English  aggressiveness,  sends  his son to McGill to learn Anglo business methods. De Montauban, who laments American  cultural decadence, happily recruits Burt Reynolds and  the Bionic Woman  to boost  his sales. Canadian  na­ tionalists  may  derive  some  comfort  from the fact  that  North  American materialism





HISTOIRE SIMPLE ET VERITABLE.
Annales  de l'Hotel-Dieu de Montreal, 1659-1725
Marie  Morin
• Bibliotheque  des  lettres quebecoises"
Edition critique presentee par Ghislaine Legendre
1979. 352  p. 	S19.95
La   Fondation    et   l'etablissement  de Viii e-M a rie,    son    developpement    en­ trecoupe  des guerres iroquoises et des ten­
tatives  d'invasion anglaises, se  greffent a
l'histoire de Ia Communaute de Montreal et
de I'Hiitei-Dieu.








115

BOOKS IN REVIEW



will  in   the   long   term   prevent   Quebec from  going its own way; but it's a chilling thought that  greed rather than  human concern may  be  the  tie that  binds.
Goulet,  an   able   journalist  and   tele­ vision  playwright, essays the  theatre  for­  mat  with originality and zest. His flair for physical   comedy   (how  often  do  we  see characters  pace   the  ceiling?)   and   con­ tagious   mirth  keep   the  action   riotously alive  and  untainted  by bitterness.  Ironic­ ally, though, the  piece is marred to some degree  by the dramatist's exceptional im­ aginative   and   intellectual  fertility:   he draws   a  bead   on  sundry   targets   simul­ taneously  with   an   unfortunate   scatter­ shot  effect.  And  the  fault  is compounded by  a  tendency  to  warp  and  stint  char­ acterization,  particularly  the  portraits of Linda  and   Marcel,  in  the   interests   of polemic. Nevertheless, the theatricality of the  play  is patent, and  Goulet's promise undeniable.
Point  St. Charles, the site of David Fennario's Nothing to Lose, is only a few miles from  Goulet's Outremont, but its working-class English,  French, and  ethnic minorities  in   their   decaying   tenements are   socially   continents  away.   Here   the daily   battle   for  rent   money  and   a  few groceries   leaves  no  time  to  ponder  cul­ ture,   language,  and   politics.  The   unity issue  is hardly   pressing  either:  even  the most   disparate   backgrounds   meet   and mingle  in  a  common struggle  to  survive with   some   degree   of   dignity.   It  is  a couple  of hours  of this life, an  amalgam of violence,  human concern, and  raucous laughter,  which  Fennario re-creates.
Two  young  men  who grew up together in  "The  Point" are  reunited   in  a  seedy local  tavern. Both  are  disillusioned  sur­ vivors   of   the   idealism   of   the   'sixties. Jerry, a  successful  writer  and  confirmed armchair  Marxist, has  rejected  the  self­ indulgent values  of   the  Toronto artistic establishment and  returned to  Montreal in  a  huff.  The  arts  as practised, he con-

II6
 tends,   have   betrayed  their   social   trust. Jackie, now  a warehouse truck-driver trapped by bread-and-butter  realities, is beyond  caring. Incipient alcoholism  has already taken  its toll. In the course of a monumental   booze-up,    both    men   re­ examine  their   values  and   make  a  fresh start.
Jackie, angered  by  a  tyrannical  fore­ man,  leaves  his truck  parked  at  the load­  ing dock,  blocking  all movement while he downs  beer  at leisure. His act of  rebellion prompts a ninety-minute interaction with as  sharply-etched  a   group   of  working­ class  characters  as  we  have  yet  met   in Canadian theatre:  Gros  Gas,  a  militant French-Canadian  unionist; Fred,  a timid Anglophone traditionalist; Frank, Jackie's slow-witted  Italian partner; and  Murray, a Jewish ex-warehouse hand  turned union representative. Claude, the waiter, hovers in  the  background,  pleading  bilingually for order  and  decorum. "It's the law!" he insists amid  table-hopping, brawling, and drunkenness; but  the appeal to law is lost on men  whose self-respect has reached the vanishing-point. Chabougamou, resident tavern-drunk and  scrounger, meanwhile functions as pathetic chorus  and  visual symbol of those  the law  has failed.
Fennario's dramatic power  flows from
his honesty.  A thoroughgoing stage natur­ alist, he eschews sensationalism, and  ada­ mantly refuses  to  fiddle  time  or  human behaviour for mere  theatrical effect.  Like Katherine  Mansfield, he  finds  his drama in  the  scarcely-noticed  flutters of  sensi­ bility  which  alter  the shape  of individual destiny; and   gives  it  a  physical  context at  once  ordinary,  authentic, and   evoca­ tive.  Empty  and   full   glasses,  wiped-up spills, cut-offs, Mini-Loto tickets, and  fre­ quent  urination punctuate and  underline the psychological  narrative. The dialogue  is bare  and  repetitive, like the lives of the people  who speak  it; but  it is never  dull. Fennario's vision,  raw,  uncompromising, and    cumulatively   telling,    is   tempered

nOOKS  IN REVIEW



throughout by laughter-sometimes  of­ fensive,   sometimes    defensive-but    an omnipotent weapon   against despair.
It's  a  pity,  though, that  Fennario  can­
not   laugh   more   easily   at  himself.   His grave  sympathy for  Jerry's Marxist  rhet­ oric  blunts  the  play's  edge  at  times, and lends it more  than  a hint  of  propaganda. But  the  author's political  bias  need  not materially mar  our  theatrical  enjoyment or  cloud   the  sensitive   insights   the  play contains.  Happily,  his  more   recent   Bal­ conville  is less doctrinaire.
Sport in Quebec transcends all barriers
-cultural,  linguistic, and   class;  and  at the Montreal Forum devotion to the city's hockey  team   temporarily harmonizes all discords.   Rick   Salutin's  two-act   drama, Les Canadiens, examines the  history  and significance  of the team  as a unique Que­ bec institution. Anglophones prize it as the epitome of athletic expertise, but Franco­ phones  have  made  it  an  almost  mystical symbol of cultural puissance. "Ever  since the  Plains   of  Abraham,"  to  quote   Red Fisher,   "the  French  people   have   been number two,  but  on  the  ice  they're num­  ber one."  The accession of  the Parti  Que­ becois  to  power  changed  all  that, Ken Dryden  argues  in   an  engaging  preface.  "It is people  and institutions from  other  parts   of   Quebec society-politics,    the arts,   literature-that  are    now   at   the focus." The first half  of Salutin's drama, a  series  of  real  and   imagined  vignettes from  the  team's history,  traces  the  mak­ ing  of  the  myth; and   the  second  half,  a fictionalized  day  in  the  life of  Dave Kirk (November 15, 1976),  details  the  break­  ing of it.
Cast  in  drama-documentary form,  the
play  is implacably a  thesis-piece, with characters and   action   the  servants   of  a social   hypothesis.  Like   Goulet,  Salutin tries  to  cover   too  much   ground  in  too brief   a   time   span;  and    the   result   is neither good  history  nor  riveting drama. People   and  events  flash  by  us  with  the
 speed  of light,  leaving  no lasting impres­ sion. Documentary materials  and fiction cohabit   uneasily,  one  diluting  the  force of  the  other.  Despite  such  shortcomings, Les  Canadiens'    sheer   energy,   nostalgic  charm, and intriguing social point  should  guarantee it an active,  if ephemeral, stage life.
The  same,  unhappily, cannot be  said for   John   Coulter's  Franfois  Bigot,  al­ though   it  is a  considerable  achievement for a writer  past  ninety.  To a  brief court­ room  inquisition, he  summons a number of Bigot's contemporaries to testify to the moral,   political,   and   military  circum­ stances surrounding the  fall of Quebec in
I 759· Their sorry  tales of greed,  lust, and violence  wither   the  laurels  of  traditional
heroes on both sides of the conflict. The debacle,  Coulter contends, was the direct result of Louis XV's  neglect  of the colony and Bigot's abuse of authority. Wolfe's victory, far from  the glorious  conquest  of song and  story,  was a vicious  rape  of the city by morally  bankrupt ruffians to whom Bigot may have  virtually sold  the keys to the citadel.  The  latter point  is never sub­ stantiated, however; Wolfe,  when  asked, replies only, "You  must wait for answer­ till the  Day  of Judgement." And  so, one suspects, must  Coulter and  the rest of us. Again, as in Les Canadiens, the indiscrim­ inate   wedding  of  fact   and   fiction   be­ wilders our responses and vitiates  the dra­ matic  effect.  The  play, while  readable, is non-theatrical.  Stiffly-structured and   de­ void  of action  or  other  stage  interest,   it recommends  itself  mainly  to  devotees  of closet-drama.
While  adults wrestle  with  Quebec's social  realities,  children continue to  play and  dream. And  Pierre  Morency's Thea­ tre  for  Children fantasies,  Tournebire et le  Malin   Frigo  (Tournebire and  Frigo­ the-Evil) and  Les  Ecoles  de  Bon  Bazou (Bazou's   Schools)   wonderfully   utilize youthful  freedom  from   fixed  notions  of time,  place,  and   circumstance to  create

117

BOOKS IN REVIEW



alternative worlds  which  enrich  and  en­ lighten. In  the  first, Mirliflore,  her short­ sighted   friend, Zipertatou, and  the  deft robot,   Tournebire,  confront  and  defeat  the  North Pole  villain,  Frigo,  who  aims to freeze  the  planet. The second  records  Bazou's   miraculous   bathtub-voyages  in which   imagination   teaches  a  small  boy truths  undreamt  of   in  the  schoolroom.  Child-play, far  from  being  irrelevant to our  political  and  cultural dilemmas,  may even  offer  a  flickering  hope  of  solution.  National rediscovery  of our long-lost drive to  dream,  the  impulse   to  defy  accepted notions   of  what   is  in  favour   of  what might  be, could  mark  a giant  step in our pursuit  of adult  togetherness.

JOHN RIPLEY



THEATRE HISTORY IN QUEBEC

PIERRE  PAGE,  Repertoire des dramatiques  Que­
bicoises  a  la  television,  195:2-1977·  Fides,
n.p.
ETIENNE-F.  DUVAL,   Anthologie thematique du theatre Quebecois au  XIXe siecle.  Lemeac, n.p.
RENEE LEGRis,  Robert Choquette, romancier et dramaturge de la radio-television. Fides, n.p.

THE RECENT  COMING  OF AGE of Canadian theatre in  both  English  and  French   has been accompanied by increasing  scholarly interest  in the history of theatre in both national  languages. Quebec  theatre  his­ torians  were  first in  the field, the  Centre de  documentation of  the  Universite du
Quebec a Trois-Rivieres having  been  in
operation for  more  than  a  decade. The
1977  annual  meeting of  the  Association canadienne-franc;aise pour l'avancement des sciences  was  held  in  the  Centre and was devoted  to theatre in Quebec; its transactions, edited   by Etienne-F. Duval of  the  Centre, appeared under   the  title

II8
 Aspects   du  theatre   quebecois  in   1978. That  same   year   Professor   Duval   pub­ lished  his Anthologie thematique  du thea­ tre quebecois au XIX• siecle, the  first of three  works  under  review  here.
The Duval  anthology accepts  the  fact that   no   great   or   enduring  plays   were written in nineteenth-century Quebec. Its compiler argues  nevertheless that  a  num­ ber of dramatic texts  of  considerable his­ torical  and  ideological interest  were com­ posed  and  performed  during the century, and   that   at  least  the  more   typical   pas­ sages of these deserve  to be preserved. Of some  150 plays written between  r8o1 and
1900, Duval  has included fifty, which  are
represented by excerpts from  five  to  fif­ teen  pages  in  length. Each  of the  thirty­ one  authors is introduced by a short  bio­ graphical note  provided  by  Duval's col­ league  at  the  Centre, Remi  Tourangeau. The volume   opens  with  an  introduction sketching the  ideological  context of  the plays   and   closes  with   indexes   of  play­ wrights  and  play titles. No important play of  the  period   is  omitted, and   the  selec­ tions provided are suitably  long and  suffi­ ciently representative to give an adequate impression of the content and  style of the plays. Four  nineteenth-century plays by Louis  Frechette are  already  in print in Lemeac editions  with  short  introductions by Duval, Tourangeau, and  others; the plays    of   Pierre    Petitclair   and    Felix­ Gabriel  Marchand  are   being  edited   as part   of  a  major  programme  of   critical editions being  sponsored   by  the  Associa­ tion   for  Canadian  and  Quebec  Litera­ tures.  Thus within  the  next  few years  the essential    dramatic   works   of   Quebec's nineteenth  century   will  be  available  to students;   Professor   Duval's  useful   an­  thology  is an  important step  towards this goal.
The other two  books  under  considera­ tion  belong   to  a  different  period-our own-and  are  concerned  with  a  differ­  ent   category  of   writing-what is  now

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



called   paraliterature. They   are  the  most recent   publications of  the  very  produc­ tive  research   team   composed   of  Renee
Legris   of  the   Universite  du   Quebec  a
Montreal,  and    Pierre    Page   of   Trois­
Rivieres.  Specializing in the dramatic literature of Quebec radio  and  television, Legris  and  Page  have  already given  us a monumental  Repertoire  des  oeuvres   de la  litterature  radiophonique  quebecoise,
1930-1970  (Montreal: Fides,  1975)  and Le  Comique et !'humour a la radio  que­ becoise:    aperfus   historiques   et    textes  choisis, 1930-1970  (Monti'eal: La  Presse,
1976) . The  latest  addition to the series is their  Repertoire des  dramatiques  quebe­
coises ala  television, 1952-1977·
Television broadcasting began  officially
in Quebec on September 6, 1952, and television    drama   appeared    simultane­ ously:  indeed, the  first  telithiatres listed by Page and  Legris  had  been  transmitted experimentally    during    the     preceding month. Three categories of original tele­ vised theatre are included here: there  are
335  television  dramas  ( teletheatres),  48 television  serials  and  series  (feuilletons), and 97 examples of televised  children's theatre  ( dramatiques pour  enfants), but translations  and   adaptations of  English or   American  television   drama  are   ex­ cluded. The   tremendous volume  of  ma­ terial  thus inventoried can  be imagined  if one  remembers that  an  hour  of televised drama represents between eighty  and  one hundred pages  of  script.  Each   drama is listed  by  author and   by  date,   with  cast lists  for  every  performance, followed  by indexes  of  titles  and   producers. This  ex­ haustive  listing  of  television  dramas, like the earlier repertory of radio scripts,  pro­ vides the only systematic access to the archives   and   history   of  the  French  ser­ vice  of  the  CBC,   that   body  having  ap­  parently made little   effort  either   to  or­ ganize its archives or to record  its history.
The   final   title   in  this  group,  Robert
Choquette, romancier et  dramaturge  de
 la radio-television, appears under  the sole name  of  Professor   Legris,  it  being  a  re­ vised  version  of  her  1972  doctoral  thesis presented    at   the   Universite  de   Sher­ brooke. Robert Choquette's literary repu­ tation  in Quebec has  until  now rested  al­  most   exclusively   on   his   poetry,   repub­ lished  in  a  two-volume  collected   edition in  1967,  but   including  verse  collections that    appeared  from    1925   until    '953· Legris   demonstrates   convincingly,  how­ ever, that Choquette's role as a radio  and  television  writer   has  also  been  a  major one.  Having made   extensive   use  of  the author's papers, she here studies  155 radio sketches,  six  radio-series  (of  which   the three  most important covered  a period  of twenty  years), fifteen   television   dramas and  a  four-year   television  serial: a  total of some  56,ooo  pages  of  radio  and  tele­ vision  scripts  composed   over  nearly  half a century.  Choquette's Le Cure de village,  first  broadcast in  January  1935,  was  the earliest  example of  a radio  serial  in Que­ bec. It  ran for  three  and  a half  years:  his Metropole  ( 1943)   was  to  continue  for thirteen,   and    Claude-Henri   Grignon's Un  Homme et  son  peche  would  run  for twenty-three, convincing testimony to the public's  affection for the genre  Choquette had  first introduced.
Generously  illustrated, the  Legris study is a voluminous compilation of historical and   thematic  information  about   Cho­ quette's radio  and   television  writing. Its first section  describes  the  corpus  of texts; the  second  places  each  script  or series  in its   chronological   setting,  giving   a   full account of its genesis, production, themes  and  reception; the third  part, methodo­ logically  the  most  debatable, analyses  the scripts as a sociological  commentary on Quebec  society  from   the   192o's   to  the
196o's. Thirty pages  of bibliography and a   detailed    chronology   of   Choquette's career  complete the  volume,   which   will undoubtedly remain  the  single  all-inclu­ sive work of reference on Choquette's con-

ug

BOOKS IN REVIEW



tribution to radio  and  television  in  Que­ bec;   in  fact,   this  study   provides   much more information than  the average reader  will ever  wish to have  on  the subject.
Anthologies of inaccessible  dramatic texts,   bibliographies  of   theatrical   sub­ genres,  and  studies  of the  dramatic  pro­ duction of a single author: these  are  but three  of  the  many  types  of scholarly  in­ vestigation   currently  being   undertaken with  respect  to  theatre in  Quebec. The  substantial  contributions made  at  Trois­  Rivieres  and   elsewhere   during  the  past decade  have   laid   the  foundation  for  a new  branch of literary-historical study  in Quebec.
DAVID   M. HAYNE


LOST - AND FOUND

ANTON WAGNER and RICHARD PLANT, eds., Canada's Lost  Plays.  Volume One -The Nineteenth  Century.  Volume   Two-Wo­ men  Pioneers. CTR Publications, $11·95; pa.
$6.gs.
LITERATURE SCHOLARS with a taste for archeology can  find some satisfaction by engaging in the  recovery  of Canada's  lost cultural history. Premising that  we cannot know  ourselves  until  we  know  our  heri­ tage,  they search  dusty  periodicals, crum­  bling   newspapers,  government   archives  and  university libraries for long-forgotten literary artifacts. Their  findings  may  not be great  literature, but they are  worth  re­ publishing  if   they   dispel   some   of   the shadows looming over our  past  and  shed a few  bright  rays on the present.
This   certainly appears  to  be  the  out­ look of Anton  Wagner and Richard Plant,  the editors  of Canada's Lost Plays. In two volumes,    they   now   make   accessible   a dozen  previously unrecognized works, ten of them  from  the nineteenth century. Five of the six plays in  the first volume,  cover­ ing  the  period  I856-I895,  are  comedies.  If  representative, this  proportion  should


120
 modify  the  current view  that   our  Scots­ Irish  ancestors frowned on frivolity-al­ though we can  also see that their  theatre reinforced their conservative social values, anti-American nationalism, and  Rule Bri­ tannia  imperialism. Volume  One  reveals that  during the  second  half  of  the  nine­ teenth century the  citizens  of central Canada enjoyed  lively performances of in­ digenous theatrical entertainments whose authors-if   they    were   ever   known­ have  since been  consigned  to oblivion.
While   the  plays  in  Volume   One  have been selected  to represent a particular chronological era,  those  in  Volume Two
-spanning more   than   a  century,  from I84o  to  I956-have been  chosen  to  re­ present  the work  of a particular sex. This division  leaves me somewhat uneasy, since it sets up a rather artificial separation be­ tween  male  and  female  cultural  domains which  is not borne  out  by the plays them­ selves. Gwen  Pharis  Ringwood's Depres­ sion  drama, Pasque  Flower  (I 939),  and Patricia Joudry's Teach  Me  How  to Cry (I 955),   two  realistic   plays  designed   for and  successfully   mounted  on  the  stage, are  more  similar   in  form  and  sensibility to  the  work of their  male  contemporaries than  to  the  heroic  closet  dramas of their nineteenth-century  predecessors. The work of the latter, in turn, is better appre­ ciated  within  the  context supplied  by the first volume  of the series.
Taken as a group, the  ten  nineteenth­ century  plays  in  the  two  volumes   indi­  cate    that    early   Canadian  playwrights catered to a wide range  of taste. The only area  in  which  the  editors  allow  the  wo­ men  exclusive  representation  is  the  pa­ triotic  historical drama, given  an exuber­ antly   feminist cast  in  Sarah  Anne  Cur­ zan's  poetic  Laura  Secord, The   Heroine
of 1812 ( I876), and  a more  conventional
anti-American bias  in  When  George the
Third   was  King   (I 897),   by  Catharine Nina   Merritt  (U.E.L.)   [sic]. The  sort of  ponderous,  neo-Shakespearean heroic

BOOKS IN REVIEW



closet drama usually associated  with the name  of Charles Heavysege  is represented in this series by two plays, Thomas Bush's extravagant  Santiago  (I 866)   and   Eliza Lanesford Cushing's more subdued pseudo-historical tragedy, The Fatal Ring
(  840) . Thoroughly un-Canadian in sub­ ject,   both   works   illustrate the   colonial assumption that  great  moral  and  drama­ tic issues can  be worked  out  only in suffi­ ciently  exotic  and   distant  locales. Bush's play  is set  in  the  Andes,  where  robbers'  dens,   unscaleable   peaks,   and    ominous  crevasses  provide a suitable  backdrop for an   almost   mythical   encounter  between  the  forces  of  good  and   the  emissaries  of evil;  Cushing's play,  featuring "the   first tragic  hero  in  English-Canadian drama," exploits the exotic  decadence of early six­ teenth-century   France   to   present    the moral  corruption and  unenviable  fate  of a pure  young  lady  who  is lured  from  her rustic   castle   to   the   licentious   court   of King  Francis.
Closer   to  home,   but   still  colonial   in form,  is  William Henry Fuller's H.M.S. Parliament   (I 88o).   Produced  by  E.  A. McDowell, this  delightful parody  of  Gil­ bert  and  Sullivan's  Pinafore  entertained
large audiences when it toured  western Quebec and  central Ontario, poking  fun at  Macdonald's National Policy and  bur­ lesquing   a  number of  prominent  public figures.  Political  matters also inspired  the other  comic   pieces:    a   power   struggle  within  a local church in The Female Con­  sistory    of   Brockville     ( 1856) ;   general  political    corruption   in   Nicholas    Flood Davin's The Fair Grit  ( I876); the efforts of women  to gain entrance to the univer­  sities  in  Sarah  Anne  Curzon's  delightful farce,  The  Sweet Girl  Graduate  (I 882) ;
rejection of  the   United  States in  J. N.
Mcllwraith's Ptarmigan (I 895) ; and na­
tional  unity  in  Dolorsolatio   ( I86s). The cast  of  the  latter is especially  engaging: it includes  Mr.  Abe North and  Mr. Jeffer­
son  South, "two noisy  neighbours"; To-
 ronto,  "a  young  lady  with  a  very  good opinion    of   herself";  and    Ottawa,  "a young  lady scarcely  'out.'" These  come­ dies reveal  a  consistent   interest  in  trans­ lating   Canadian  political   issues  to   the stage, for amusement, but also to ask seri­ ous questions and suggest sometimes  obvi­ ous answers.
However, I feel that  the very topicality of these  plays  raises  a  few  questions.  All five comedies in the first volume comment on  local  social  and  political   events  in  a fashion  that  is almost  allegorical,  featur­ ing   characters  like   Madame   Noheart, Grandpapa Canada, and  Maple Leaf, "an  athletic  Canadienne  in   love   with   her country." One  begins  to wonder if topic­  ality and  historical  relevance, rather than  dramatic and literary value, inadvertently became   the   editors'  governing  criteria. Some  of  the  comments in  the  introduc­ tion  to the first volume  support my suspi­ cion  that  Wagner and   Plant do  not  al­ ways  distinguish work  that   is interesting for  the insight   it  provides   into  cultural history  from  work  that   can  stand   on  its




Out-of-Print

CANADIANA  BOOKS
and
PAMPHLETS



HURONIA-CANADIANA
BOOKS
BOX  685
ALLISTON, ONTARIO  LOM lAO

Catalogues free on request



I2I

BOOKS IN REVIEW



own  aesthetic merits.  This  becomes espe­ cially  clear   when   they  link  pieces  from the  past  to  issues which  are  relevant to­ day.  For  example, of  The  Female  Con­  sistory   of  Brockville   the  editors   claim: "The  play  stands apart  from   the  often crude,  polemical satires  and  farces  that  precede it  by presenting  both  sides of its dramatic conflict,  at  least  indirectly air­  ing  the  case  for  women's  rights."  True, the  play  does  look  at  both  sides  of  the problem of  women's rights. However, the spokeswomen for  female  government are such  stereotyped shrews  and  gossips that one  very  soon  realizes  that   the  case  for women's  rights    is   being   faultily   con­ structed  to  allow  the  audience to  enjoy its  quick   and   brutal  demolition   by  the forthright spokesmen  of decency  and  na­  tural  order. The  play is  certainly impor­ tant-not  for  its  modernity, as the  edi­ tors  imply,  but  for  its  exposition   of  the conservative  attitudes which  are  a  signi­ ficant  element of  our  social  history.
In  the  introduction to  the  second volume,  the plays are justified by their historical significance  rather than  their more questionable individual merits.  My own reservations notwithstanding, Anton Wagner argues  persuasively in favour  of discussing   plays   by   women   separately from  those  by men,  by tracing   the  rela­ tion  between   women's  writing  and  dom­  inant  cultural  attitudes,   showing   how some  writers,  like Eliza  Lanesford Cush­  ing,   conformed,   while   others,    notably Sarah  Anne  Curzon, rebelled.  He  packs a  wealth  of  well researched  detail  into  a concise   and    comprehensive   survey   of Canadian women  playwrights,  their  work and  their  milieu; this essay alone  is an invaluable contribution to Canadian liter­ ary   history.   Indeed,  both   volumes   are graced    by  impressive   examples  of   the peculiar genre  of the  introductory essay. The introduction to  the first volume  ap­  proaches the  plays from  the point  of view of theatre history,  taking  into  considera-

122
 tion  performance history,  theatrical  con­ ventions and   the  mechanics of   produc­ tion. The  editors' inclusion  of illustrations and   reprinted  title   pages   enhances  the historical   orientation   of    both    books, which  admirably fulfil their declared pur­  pose  of  helping us  to  recover   Canada's lost cultural past.
CAROLE GERSON



CHAOS & COMIC BOOKS

Five  Plays by Larry  Fineberg.  Playwrights Co­
op,  n.p.
Five Canadian  Plays, Intro. by Ken  Gass.  Play- wrights Co-op, n.p.

IT'S A  GOOD THING  I DON'T have  to gener­ alize  about the  state  of Canadian  drama from  the two collections before me. Larry  Fineberg, who has become  a grand  young man  of  Canadian drama  largely  on  the undeserved  success  of   Eve, a  most  un­ subtle  adaptation of  Constance Beresford­  Howe's novel, has much  that  is to his ad­  vantage as a  playwright but  nothing that  would  stamp  him  as a  rna jor force.  The  other  five   playwrights-Ken   Mitchell, John   Lazarus,  Brian   Shein,   Ken   Gass, and Cam  Hubert-provide confirmation of  the  proclivity of  Canadian drama  to­ wards  burlesque, parody, and  literal  real­ ism generally  without any significance  of thought  or   sensibility.    I   except   Brian Shein   in  this  instance  because   his  play, Cowboy Island, struck  me  as  being  the single  innovative piece  that  had  the  dar­ ing  to  take  a legend  and  ritualize it sur­ realistically.
Fineberg's merits  are  not negligible. He has  an  eye for  grotesque  comedy-per­ haps  derived   (contrary  to  what  Michael Feingold    believes   in   his  introduction) from  Jewish  literary  tradition rather than  from  Edward Gorey  or  Edward Bond-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



and   his  satmc  dialogue can   be  sparsely effective, setting  up small bitter  explosions of  truth within   their   comic   frames.   He can   startle  us   by   the   violence   of   his imagery-a man's severed  hand lands  in the  mousse  at  a  garden party; a  woman is deliberately pinioned against a  tree  by her suicidal  father in a wheelchair-and in his sombre  tone-piece, Death, he shows he has obviously learned the  value  of  im­ pacted   terseness  and   threatened  cruelty from  Pinter  and  Beckett.  But  he  doesn't  amount to much.
Death  is  perhaps  his  most  intriguing
drama with  its three  characters whose in­ ward  tensions  are  held  in  check  by  tight language and   a  refusal   to  elaborate  the emotions in  brief  scenes:

MAX:   The  wasp, dying. The spider in putting off its death. Winter's coming.
 JOHNNY:   That's what  they  always  do.  It's instinct.  How did  they suffer?  They're bugs.
MAX:    (soft)   I  could  feel  their   pain  inside me. (Pause)   Just  like humans.
JOHNNY:  It's  instinct.
OONA:   (Entering) What's all  the shouting? What's  all  the  trouble  here?  Father?
Blackout

Fineberg's comedy,  on  the  other  hand, is subject  to excess. It is really  black  hu­ mour  with flashes of light  breaking in, but the dark  is murky  and  turgid, as if  noth­  ing succeeded  like excess. Hope  is a case in  point  as  it  bloats  itself  up  out  of  all proportion  to  its  eventual  revelations of human   covetousness,   irrationality,  and  guile. The  trite  is made a measure  of the true  with  bad   puns,  banal  cliches,  and  crude  parodies  chasing one  another with Marx   Brothers  zaniness   in  a  mad   plot






Room
of On 's


The   most  recent   issue  of  ROOM OF  ONE'S OWN is  a  special double  one to celebrate DOROTHY LIVESAY'S 70th BIRTHDAY and  her  role as matriarch of Canadian Poetry.

It includes   original  poetry  and   prose,  previously   unpublished, on her  life  in  Winnipeg, Toronto, France and  Zambia; an  interview done  on Galiano Island, B.C.;  personal  reminiscences by Anne Campbell, Nadine Mcinnis, Anne  Marriott, Barbara Pentland, Elizabeth Varley; and   criticism   by  George   Woodcock   and   Joyce Whitney. The issue  is illustrated and  includes  an  introduction and checklist  of publications.

The issue costs $4.00  (add  $.50 for postage and  handling).
ROOM OF  ONE'S OWN P.O.  Box 46160, Station G Vancouver, B.C.  V6R 4G5



123

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



where   characters  keep  trying   to  find  a rich  family  will. The farcical  anarchy, however, hardly  makes an effective meta­ phor  for  the chaos  around  us.
One  sometimes  feels that  Fineberg  likes the  sound  of his own  humour too much for  a  play's  good.  Thus,  how  to explain the thinness  and  amateurishness of Stone­ henge  except  to account it a  juvenescent  exercise   in  black  comedy?  Two   Jewish sisters have  shared  the same lover  who is suddenly   found   dead   under   mysterious circumstances. The  subject  of death  and secrecy  as  an  endless repetition  is sand­  wiched  between   largely  flaccid  and  gra­  tuitous  dialogue  in  a synagogue  hall  and mad  farce  in a funeral parlour. There is one   fanatically   funny    character-old Etta Wittgenstein, blind  in one eye, false­ limbed, loose-bladdered, and mentally un­ hinged  -and  a hint  of seriousness  to all the  broad  comedy  of manners  and  situa­  tion,  but  the  stretched fabric  wears  thin at  the end.
To  Fineberg's credit, there is never any tone of righteousness or remorse.  At their best,  his dark  comedies  are  clean,  spare, and  crisp. They  don't whine for sympathy or play cute.  Human Remains sketches several  feelings  with some weight  without losing its bantering tone or overdoing its homosexual ripeness. Life's squalor  is very evident in  the  triangular situation where a  man   discovers   his  two  ex-lovers   (one male,   the   other   female)    are  living   to­ gether. It has an  ugly, brutal,  raw under­ side,  and  pessimism  continually competes  against cynicism,  but  the startling theatri­ cality  surmounts the  tawdriness  and  fre­ quent banality.
Fineberg, however,  doesn't  give us any­ thing  much  for  the  mind,  and  this  defi­ ciency   is  especially   noticeable   in   those plays  where   he  tries  to  achieve  a  witty texture. Eve,  for  instance,   coarsens   the title-character and  loses the  quickness  of her   mind    that   so   pervades   Beresford­  Howe's  novel.   What  Fineberg  does

124
 achieve   are  images  of  the  world's chaos and   absurdity-the  "round about"  of Ibsen's Great  Boyg  (alluded  to  by Michael Feingold  in the introduction), though, of course,  he  has none  of Ibsen's schematic didacticism or philosophic den­ sity. His humour is frequently outrageous, even  cartoonish, without  being  quite  the benign  silliness  of several  of  the  plays in the    second    collection,   Five    Canadian Plays, a coalescence of  drama around the theme  of heroes.
The problem  with  Five Canadian Plays is   that,  with    the   exception  of   Brian Shein's Cowboy Island, all the plays seem to  be  oriented  towards   teenagers rather than  towards adults. There is something much  too banal  and  demotic about their textures and  fantasy. Their ideas  are generally trite, their modes of satire and parody crude, and  their energy is obtained in a comic-book milieu.
This   is not  a  new  trend   in  Canadian
drama. Les Canadiens, Paper Wheat, and Les   M audits    Anglais    used   comic-strip treatments   of   their    subjects,    whether these  themes  were  politics,  sociology, his­ tory,  or  sport.   But  each   of  tl1ose  plays entertained  for  an   hour   and   a  half   or more,  whereas  most of the plays in Gass's volume    don't  have   the   same   sure-fire  theatricality.
Ken  Mitchell's Heroes, based on Super­
man  and   the  Lone   Ranger comics,  is a debunking of heroes.  Each  of the  larger­ than-life characters suffers  from  culture­ shock   (if  such  a  thing   is  possible  in  a comic-strip world), and  we  see how  the real world "has  aged them, changed them,  and  now forgotten  them." Heroes  tries to have  it  both  ways:  it offers  us fantasy  in the  guise of reality, and  tries to be "good  light-hearted entertainment" on a childish level,  while suggesting  real  emotions and pain.  It  thrives  on incongruity: the  Lone  Ranger chases  dope-peddlers rather than train-robbers; Superman is a mean  cynic who's  convinced that  "everybody's out  to

BOOKS IN REVIEW



screw   the  other  guy."   Their  respective foils are  experts in  manipulation: Tonto owns a couple  of resort  hotels  in the Ca­ naries  and  quoteFrench proverbs  to ad­  vantage; and Lois Lane  has a twisted view of  reality  and   bristling  sexual  innuendo. It's   these  "supporting"  figures  who  sur­ vive  best  because  they  aren't  trapped by glorified  legend.
At  the opposite end  of the  literal  scale is Ken  Gass's Hurray For Johnny Canuck,
the   longest   play   in   the   collection and probably the most  tedious  in its relentless­ ly  breathless  silliness.  It   heartily  enjoys "the  comic-book milieu,  in  which   'men  can  be men'  and  heroes accomplish great  deeds  single-handedly."  Much of  its fun comes from a satirization of the mechanics of theatrical production:  we are shown  a false proscenium arch, cartoon panels that  change  from  scene  to scene,  a trap-door, a gaudy curtain, prop cupboards, costume  racks,  actors  caught  virtually in  undress, and  stage-crew  rushing around to set  up a  scene.  But  the  substance  of  the  play never   really  transcends  the  pop  comic­ strip   style.   The  R.C.M.P. and   Nelson Eddy,  the  patate-frite French Canadian, grotesquely  evil  Nazis  (Hitler, Goebbels,  Bormann),  the  Queen, Churchill, Cana­ dian ruralism and  puritanism, Italian fas­ cism,  are   all  sent   up  in  Sock!   Wham! Ugh! Guffaw! fashion. But by simply rev­ elling  in its own  silliness, the  play doesn't acquire charm or  point,  and  will appeal only   to  those   children  reared   on   Mad magazine  or   Bell   Comics.    Incongruity runs  riot: a  Nazi  drug   ring  operates in Canada's north, Canadian saboteurs dress as Austrian tourists  at Frankfurt, a Major Domo  bangs his head  against  a wall every time  he  wants   to  think  or  express  emo­ tion;  Hitler reads  Superman comics;  and Goebbels   wants   Johnny  Canuck's  auto­ graph.
Cam Hubert's "The Twin  Sinks Of  Al­ lan  Sammy" gives  us life without  comic­ strip   exaggeration,  though  it  is  no  less
 glaringly  simplistic   at  the  end   than   the plays already  mentioned. Allan  Sammy, a West Coast Indian, has to choose between the bureaucracy, commercialism, and cul­ tural  corruption of the city and  his  freer,  simpler  life on  a reservation. Locked out of work because  of a union dispute, he is left without  unemployment insurance. His wife, Mary,  suggests  they go home  to  the tribe,   but  Sammy   is  adamantly  against  this. A crone counsels Mary  to leave Sam­  my  and   return   home  herself.   A  whore  tempts  her  to stay and  take  to the streets.  Sammy  is  himself  counselled, though the advice  he  gets  from  Nanis,  the  ghost  of his grandfather, isn't altogether wise. It is a staunch defence of old ways that  brooks no  compromise  with  a  changing  world, and  it promotes-as the  ending  does­ a falsely paradisal resolution of an identity
CriSIS.
The  play is really a parable with a cen­ tral   metaphor  for   native    identity   and  tradition. Sammy keeps his tribal coppers and  returns   to  his  people,  but  the naive symbolic   polarities  of   tribe   and   white society  reduce  the   play's   credibility.  A pity  that   the   dynamic   structure,  collo­ quial   muscularity, and  parabolic simpli­  city are all forced  to serve wish-fulfillment propaganda.  This  is  not  to  suggest  that  Sammy  makes  the wrong  decision  or that  the  Indian's  way  of  life  has  no  advan­ tages;  it's simply that  the  tough  reality  of the  play is  eventually displaced by a soft sentimentality.
Naive metaphor also shows in John Lazarus' Babel Rap  whose title-pun is the best wit of the piece. This is a modern version of the  Tower of Babel  story from the  viewpoint of two ordinary workmen. In building the tower, they discuss the philosophy  and  nature of this work in counterpoint. But  the  level  of argument is too low, and  the  reversal  of roles at  the end  too glib. Yet there  are effective  comic moments-as when   the  two  men  com-

125

BOOKS IN REVIEW



pete with hymns to God, and at the end dissolve into a babble of tongues.
The  most  sophisticated and  innovative play   is  Brian    Shein's   Cowboy   Island, whose   imagery   and   ritual   derive   from Robert  Graves' The   White   Goddess.  I don't know  if the  play  adds  up  to much beyond  a striking  juxtaposition of  Ameri­ can  legend  and  pagan mythology, but the re-enactment of  the  slaying  of  the  king ritual has a pristine beauty,  suspended in time and  space. The deliberate anachron­ isms  and  incongruities  (Pat   Garrett re­ cites   a   Robert  Graves   poem;   Paulita Maxwell  chants Greek   like  a  priestess) stress artifice  and  primal  drama. There is a lovely lyricism in the slow dance of Billy and  Pat,  and  the theatricality of the piece transcends any  objection one  might  have to  the  deliberate yoking  together of  dis­ parate mythologies.
KEITH  GAREBIAN


COMMUNITIES
MICHAEL  cooK, Three   Plays. Breakwater.  n.p. CLYDE  ROSE,   ed.,  The   Blasty  Bough.  Break­
water.  n.p.
RUDY  WIEBE   and   THEATRE  PASSE   MURAILLE,
Far  As  The   Eye  Can  See.  NeWest   Press,
$4·95·

REGIONAL   LITERATURE  WHICH  strategic­ ally  restricts   itself  to  the  local  and  tem­  porary   possesses a  limited  scope  for  at­  taining general  significance. By pretend­ ing  to  detach  itself  from  a  full  literary  context and  from  the  meaning of estab­ lished  forms  and   motifs,  it  risks  either banality or experimental thoughtlessness. But  regional   writing which  deals  intelli­ gently   with   the   paradoxes  of   time  can accommodate   itself   meaningfully  to  re­ strictions imposed  by setting.
Although his plays have specific settings, Michael Cook's  treatment of time  resists the  regional  mode.  In  On the Rim  of the
 Curve  he celebrates the  extinction of the Beothuk   Indians  of  Newfoundland. He assigns to the generations of colonists a materialistic sense of the future which heightens their  hypocrisies  about  civiliza­ tion  and  religion. But  while  their vicari­  ousness   reflects   their   contempt  for   the moment and  while they debase their  liter­  ary culture by giving it merely social func­ tions,  the Indians speak  in a biblical  and poetic   idiom   which   manifests  the   har­ mony  of  their   spiritual  and   communal ideas.  Cook's  pagans seize the  future re­ ligiously.  Their  extinction is not  an  his­ torical  accident nor  is it really effected  by the  colonists.  Rather the  Indians' mythic  awareness  of  spiritual   timelessness   per­ mits  them  to  achieve  the  inviolability of death. Curiously, this  play transcends the regional because   in  challenging our  no­ tion of history  with myth Cook also makes his   Indians   exemplars  of   our   cultural history.
In The   Head,  Guts  and  Soundbone
Dance Cook  depicts bleak  "outport" cul­ ture,   but  his  emphasis on  time  conveys more  than  that  Newfoundland's future is uncertain. His  central  characters  are  pa­
thetically  decrepit   fishermen  who   feel
superior  to  everything  modern.  Nostal­ gically  they  recall  days  of  heroic  endea­ vour and  commitment to community. But conflicts  prove  their  nostalgia   to conceal  economic greed, arrogance, and  spiritual hollowness.   Their   actual  contempt  for family  and  community demonstrates that  they  are  isolated   from   the  present. The  cruel  irrelevance  of  the   local   idiom   in which  they  describe  the  "good  old  days"  is signalled  by their enraptured oblivious­ ness  when   a  child   pleads   with  them   to save his drowning friend. Their  imagina­ tive kinship  with  the  sea is fantastic; it is no model  for  the  present, nor,  because  it resists  the  process  of  history,  can  it  pro­ vide a hope  for  the future.
In  Theresa's  Creed  Cook's  interest in time's   relation  to  culture  underlies  his

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



creation of a  lonely,  middle-aged  widow of  a fisherman. She  is drawn equally  by the  determinate  social   structure  of  her past and by the indefiniteness of modern society.  But  she  belongs   to  neither. Her memories of community cannot serve  as an  imaginative ending or  beginning. Be­ cause  she lives in  transition she can  have no real  creed.  She  cannot believe  in  any­ thing  beyond  the flux of  impressions. The  old folk ways were as deficient as modern society  is in  educating her  to  a  sense  of time.
A journalistic lament begins  Rose's  re­
gional Newfoundland  anthology The Blasty Bough. Anecdotal and  full of  wise­ cracks, it sentimentally records the benefits that  accrue to the  local  culture  from  the outmoded transportation system. Yet, in a cliched   way,  it   views   this   system  as  a token  of  the  island's  second-class status. An  over-abundantly  colourful idiom   to­ gether   with  the  lack  of  a  sustained   atti-
 tude  towards   the  past  and   future  char­ acterizes  this  and  other pieces in  the an­  thology.   Particularly   disturbing   is   the writer's  claim  for  the  vitality  of oral  cul­ ture  when  set against  his inability  to pro­ duce  creative  liveliness  in  the  dialogue.
By contrast, Anne  Hart's "Help Me, Hepplewhite" is  perhaps the  most  com­ pelling  piece  in  the  anthology  because  it is a  first  person   narrative  which  avoids anecdotes and  whimsy in  its employment of  verbal  and   situational  irony  to  com­ ment  on the  relation of  time and  culture. The   story   concerns a   volunteer  social worker   with   an  obsession  for  antiques. She  discovers  a  fine  chair   in  the  apart­ ment  of a  psychiatric patient who is soon to  return  home   from   the  hospital. The volunteer's   charity  and   sense  of   com­ munity   dissolve   as  she   rationalizes   her inevitable appropriation of the chair.  Her gross appreciation of art evidences  moral  turpitude and  madness:  her  encyclopae-






Fiddlehead Poetry Books

(from  the current  list)

NOVENA TO  ST. JUDE THADDEUS, by M. Lakshmi Gill, $5.00
MOVING INLAND, by Diana Hayes,  $4.00
A SPLIT IN  THE WATER, by Candice James, $5.00
ON THE BROKEN MOUNTAIN, by Norman  Newton, $3.00
SYNTAX OF  FERMENT, by Liliane  Welch,  $4.50
COUNTRYSIDE CANADA, by James  Wreford,  $5.00

Order   from FRED  COGSWELL P.O. Box 4400
English  Department, University of New Brunswick
Fredericton, N.B.  E3B 5A3

(CATALOGUE SUPPLIED  ON  REQUEST)



127

BOOKS IN REVIEW



die knowledge of furniture abstractly cele­ brates  the  past  for  values  which, because she so severely objectifies  art  and  imagin­ atively  evades   the  reality  of   the  chair's owner,  she  actually subverts.
Harold Horwood's Look  Man, I  Love Y au is disturbing because  it neither  con­ trols  irony   nor  implies   its  author.  This  first-person narrative is that  of a  teacher  who,  while  alert   to  the  failings  of  tradi­ tional  pedagogy,  cherishes  the  social structure which  supported it. The  vicari­  ous  sexuality   which   the  former   system allowed  him  seems mostly responsible  for his  single-minded  contempt for  modern education  and   contemporary  sex  roles. His   conservatism   is  excessive,  and   his cliched  language proves  that  his  human­ ism is illusory. His satire  on the present  is rendered  worthless   because  of   his  (and  perhaps the  author's)  hypocritical use of time.
Patrick    O'Flaherty's  Looking    Back­ wards:  the  milieu  of the  old  Newfound­ land  outports tries  to avoid  nostalgia  and propaganda.  But   the   central  assertion that  preconfederation  fishermen  lived  in a separate universe which  was dominated by primitive  technology and  uninterested in cultural  identity is a simplistic  way of expressing   gratitude  for   confederation. The  writer's  refusal   to  equate folk-tales  with  popular culture is salutary, but  his argument for the complete difference of past  and  present together with  his regret that  old  communal values  are  being  lost to  the  enervating habits  of Canadian  in­ trospection reveals  a merely propagandis­ tic  notion   of  time   and  culture.  O'Fla­ herty's  essay begs  important questions; it erects  its  point   of  view  on  slogans,  and,  despite  intentions, it does not escape  nos­ talgia.
Uncertain  ideas   about   time  and  cul­ ture  are  also evident in  two essays  by G. M.  Story.   He  maintains that  Canadian literary    history   should   recognize   New­ foundland  ballads  since   their   colourful
 idiom  and  imagery  reflect local conscious­ ness.  These reasons   are  insufficient. He postulates that Newfoundland society was preliterate and  never  self-consciously  his­ torical;  and   he   complains  that    Con­  federation  has made   the  people   despise their  culture and  history.  The dangerous simplicity of  this  disjointed sense of  time is further apparent in his claim  that  the regional culture is more  the subject of anthropology than  of literary  scholarship. Having begun   by stressing  the  relevance of   ballads,  Story   ends   by  emphasizing their  esoteric  and  inaccessible  nature.
Far As The Eye Can  See is an amusing but   inconsequential  play.   It may   have topical   interest  because   its  situation  in­
volves  a  rural   community's resistance   to a strip-mining proposal and  it  may  have an historical element because the action seems to be supervised by three deus ex machina figures from  the past: Crowfoot, Princess  Louise,  and  Aberhart. But, as an announced attempt to  capture the  spirit of the people  of Alberta, it fails because  it does not  try. The play  is actually a farce. In  review  fashion  it pokes fun at  its char­ acters;  it   generates  humour   by   typing  them  in  a  dismissive  way. There  is  little  undercurrent of  important  emotional or political conflict.  The local  ironies  which expose   banality,  vicariousness,  and   cor­  ruptibility do   not   imply   an   informing irony. This means  that moments of pathos have  a merely  local  and  therefore absurd  effect.  For  comic  reasons  the  characters' language  is  limited    and   this   prevents them   from   embodying a  sense  of   com­ munity. What makes  the  play  more  dis­ turbing is that it toys with  the characters; it  exposes   them   but   does   not  measure their  inadequacies. Its  negative implica­ tions  about  politics  and   corporate spirit  seem  cynical  because  there   are  no  posi­ tive  implications  about  the   relation  of time  and   collective understanding.

ROBERT JAMES  MERRETT



,
LEMEAC'S VARIETY

MARCEL DUBE,  Octobre. Lemeac,  n.p.
MICHELE  LALONDE, Dernier recours  de Baptiste
a Catherine. Lemeac/L'Hexagone, n.p.
BERTRAND  B.   LEBLANC,  foseph-Phitemon  Sans­
chagrin, ministre. Lemeac,  n.p.
ANTONINE   MAILLET,   La    Veuve  enragee.   Le­
meac, n.p.

THE  INCREASE IN THEATRICAL activity  in Quebec over  the  past  two decades  can  be gauged  from  a comparison of publication figures.   In  1 g6 I,  only   three   new  plays were   published;  by   I971,   the   annual figure had  passed  a dozen; it is now close to two dozen  titles yearly, yet these repre­ sent  only  half  the  new  plays  performed each  season.
A sampling of  four  texts  published in I 977 will illustrate the  variety  of current production, while incidentally attesting to the dominant role  now  played  in franca­ phone   theatrical  publication  by  a  single Montreal publishing house.
Marcel Dube's Octobre, originally pro­ duced  as a radio play in  I 954 and printed in  Ecrits  du  Canada  fran ais
later,   belongs  to  the  category of  "retro­ publications," early  and  almost  forgotten works  by a  subsequently  famous  author, that   appear  on   the   market  once   their author's  celebrity  guarantees  their   sale. As   the    first    of    Dube's   "middle-class dramas," however,  Octobre does  have  a certain  historical   interest,  which   is  en­ hanced   by  the  fact  that   the  participants in  its lovers'  triangle are  anticipations of characters  in  some  of  Dube's later   and better-known  plays.
A second  group is  that   of  dramatiza­
tions  of  works  of  fiction,  and   it  is here that   Antonine  Maillet's  La   Veuve   en­ ragee  can  be  placed. Encouraged by  the remarkable and   deserved   success  of   La S agouine  ( 1 97 I ) , Mme  Maillet has since blended   a  similar   mixture of  earthy  hu­  mour  and  picturesque  Acadian speech  in
 BOOKS IN REVIEW


a series of novels of which  Les Cordes-de­ bois is the  source  of  La  Veuve enragee.  The   widow  of  the  title  is  a  humourless representative of property rights and  pub­  lic   morality,    constantly   mocked    and  thwarted  by  three  generations of  joyous female  squatters who  haunt the   wood­ loading dock.  These  unlettered  enchant­ resses offer their  gypsy hospitality to pass­ ing  seamen,  one  of  whom,  the  Irishman Tom  Thumb, is finally persuaded to jump  ship  and  join  them.  Very  little  else hap­ pens  in  these  eleven  scenes,  but  they  are  saved   by   the   quality  of   the   dialogue, which   is  racy,  colourful  and   frequently amusing,  typical  of the  Acadian folkloric tradition  of  which  Antonine Maillet has become  the  principal exponent.
Social   and   political   satire   is  another
well-established tradition in modern Que­ bec  theatre, dating back  to  the  Fridolin reviews of Gratien Gelinas  in pre-Second­ World-War  Montreal.  Outside  the   me­ tropolis,    Quebec   writing    moves   at    a slower   and    more   popular   pace,    and  Bertrand   B.  Leblanc's  Joseph-Phitemon Sanschagrin,  ministre   employs   the   un­ pretentious realistic  techniques of Quebec fiction   of   the   194o's   and   195o's;   Yves Theriault's novel Les V endeurs  du tern ple mined  the same  vein  in  1951. Leblanc, a businessman and  local booster in the Lac­ Saint-Jean area, has a lighter  touch  than  the  novelists  of  the  later  Duplessis  era: his  depiction  of  rural  life  and   political corruption   in   high   places   is   amusing rather than depressing, a reflection  of the changed  political  climate in Quebec over the last quarter-century.
Politics  of a more  intense  and  self-con­ scious kind  is very close to the surface in the final category, that  of  "committed" or "engaged"  theatre.   Michele  Lalonde's
Dernier  recours  de  Baptiste   a Catherine,
inspired  by the  impending demolition in
I972 of a nineteenth-century church in a working-class  district of Montreal, is a series of tableaux drawn from  the history


129

BOOKS IN REVIEW



of Quebec. The  five episodes, dated  I 760, I776,  I837,  I85o and  I875, all take place in  a  church, and   similar  characters  re­ appear, symbolizing  the continuity of  tra­  dition  that  forms  the  essence of  national existence.  The author of "Speak  White" shows here again  her gift for impassioned  commentary on political topics, and  gives an  original and  moving  defence  of  cur­  rent  nationalist ideology.
The four  categories illustrated here  do not by any means exhaust  the resources of contemporary Quebec dramaturgy. They take no account of several trends of recent years:  the theatre  joualisant of Michel Tremblay and   Jean Barbeau,   the  audi­ ence-participation spectacles  of  Fran<_;oise Loranger,  or  the   controversial  feminist theatre of Denise  Boucher.  Nor  are  these
I 977 contributions outstanding or durable works;  their  interest   lies in  their  variety and  vitality,  not  in  their  literary quality. They  do  serve  to  demonstrate,  however, that  despite  recurrent complaints of a "crisis"  in Quebec theatre, the dramatists themselves  are  by no means  discouraged, and  their  rate  of production continues to increase  from  year  to year.

DAVID M. HAYNE



PARADIGMS OF FOLLY

PIERRE GODIN, Le  Fou  et ses doubles: figures de la  dramaturgie  quebecoise. Les  Presses  de l'Universite  de   Montreal,  "Lignes   quebe­ coises," $r3.75·

PROFESSOR GOBIN's study of  the   fool and  the  theatrical representation of  mad­ ness in  Quebec theatre is a  densely  writ­  ten  work  which   covers  a  great   deal  of material in a relatively short space.  In his introductory chapter Professor Gobin out­  lines  in  detail   the  difficulties  of  defining his  topic   and  limiting the  scope  of  his study:  although  ideally  one should  study all  original  plays  performed  or  read   in
 Quebec from  the  beginning of the colony up  to  the  present, for  practical  reasons the study has been limited  to all published works  (occasionally including exceptional unpublished works). The definition of the fool and  madness, which  is particularly difficult,  has been solved by adopting as a paradigm for the study  the Jean  Barbeau play  Le Chant  du  sink, which  Gobin  sees as presenting six characters who are eminently  representative   of   the   major types  of  madness,  or  alienation, in  Que­ bec.   His   analysis   of  Quebec   drama  is organized, consequently, into six chapters, each   one  concentrating on  a  particular form  of folly.
The   first  deals  with  the  adepts of  re­ ligion,  the  "Fous de  Dieu," and  includes  mystics  obsessed  by  the  land.  The type character  from   Le    Chant   du   sink   is Bernadette who  has  a  cross  on  her  back and   wears   ice   skates,   but   is  "not  too swift." The  second   chapter   deals   with political  alienation,  championed by Ver­  cheres,   the  character in  Barbeau's  play who  is  disguised   as  a  guerilla   but   who remains paralyzed by all her revolutionary paraphernalia.
Cultural alienation is represented in the paradigm by Esther ("La rousse") , who is dressed  like a  tragic  heroine,  complete with  dagger  in  the  back,  and  who speaks like  a  dictionary and   suffers  most  when she  hears   joual  spoken   in  her  presence. The  enormous Barbie   doll  character  in Barbeau's play  is the  symbol  for  the  de­ basement engendered  by economic  dom­  ination. The  cat/psychiatrist/plumber of Barbeau's  play  who  frees  up  the  sink  by discovering  the  dead   rat  is seen  by  Pro­ fessor  Gobin  as  representative of  the  at­  tempt  to combat madness  by therapy. And finally, Gisele the  realistic wife who intro­ duces  the  liberating  laugh  into  her  hus­ band's  psychosis  is  a  paradigm  for   the liberation attained  by  willingly  assumed buffoonery.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



The attractive neatness of the Barbeau paradigm has  to be expanded and  modi­ fied,  of course,  when  it is applied  to  the corpus  under   study.   Thus  in   the   first chapter three  main  groups emerge: plays which show instances of  divine or diabolic  possession, in either the  active  or  passive mode; plays in which  the spiritual power is "immanent" or "laicised" into  a mystic relationship with the landscape; and plays in which  the spiritual dimension is proble­  matic  (where, for  example, the  innocent is also  victim  of his own  naivete). In  the chapter dealing with  political  alienation three  main  thematic zones are delineated, with subdivisions  within the zones. For example, when  the  political  system trans­ forms  the  "patrie" into  a prison  (the  first thematic zone),  the  protagonist  can  go truly   mad,   or   become   a   wanderer  in search   of  a  "pays  incertain" or  retreat into  a  self-imposed  ghetto, be  it  kitchen  or tavern, or escape from  the  prison  by a disguise,   or   suicide,   or   finally,   he   can retreat into impotence. This  sort of modi­ fication   of   the  original   paradigm, made  necessary  by  the  variety   and  complexity of  the  texts  studied,  serves  at  times  to suggest  that the  paradigm proposed   for the  synchronic study  is not  a  completely adequate device  to  circumscribe the  cor­ pus. The  use of the  paradigm  also  tends to prevent the  discussion  of any one play under  several  headings, because  to do so would  mean  cumbersome repetition. As a result,  many  plays  (for example, those of Michel  Tremblay)  which could fit equally  well under  several rubrics  are  discussed in detail  in only one of the  chapters.
But although one may have some reser­
vations    about  the   organization  of   the study, one can rarely disagree with the analyses  of  the  plays  presented  by  Pro­ fessor  Gobin.  Of   all   the   plays  studied, those  of Michel Tremblay, Jacques Lan­ guirand, and  Jacques  Ferron and  Jean­ Claude Germain  surface most  frequently in  his  analysis,  and  in  his  conclusion he
 places these dramatists in  the  front  ranks of  Quebec   drama. The emphasis of  the study is by no means only on these drama­ tists, however, and  the real strength of the work lies finally in the number of percep­ tions provided  on a wide variety  of plays. It is impossible  here  to  comment on  all the  worthy  examples, which   range  from the  treatment of  L.  H.  Frechette's  Felix Poutre  to the  discussion  of Gaureau and Savaugeau.
Professor Gobin  has broken  new ground
in his analysis of Quebec drama, and  we shall  remain  indebted to him  both  for his new insights  and  for  the  questions which this study  raises. The wider  context of Quebec society  and   history   which   Pro­ fessor Gobin  alludes  to in his introduction and  his conclusion draw  attention to the  need  for  a  study  of  radio  and  television drama from  this  viewpoint, and   to  the examination   of    the    chronological  de­  velopment   of    the   subject,  neither   of which is touched in the present study.

D. W. RUSSELL


THEATRICAL SCRAPBOOK

THEATRE  PASSE   MURAILLE,  The  Farm  Show.
Coach House Press,  n.p.

IN  HIS INTRODUCTION  TO the  Coach House  edition  of The Farm  Show, Paul Thompson of Theatre Passe Muraille cautions,  "There is no  'story' or  'plot' as such. The  form  of the  play is more  like a Canadian Sunday School  or Christmas Concert where  one  person  does a  recita­ tion,  another sings  a  song,  a  third   acts out   a  skit."   In   I972,   members  of  the Passe Muraille company spent  a summer in   the  farming  community  of  Clinton, Ontario, living  with  farm   people,  doing farm work, learning through observation and  imitation to talk and  move as Clinton

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



men  and  women  do, and,  in the  process, collecting material for their modern Can­ adian  concert,  a   collage   of   vignettes,  songs,  and   scenes  depicting  life   in  the community. The collectively created piece was  first  performed  in   Ray   Bird's   hay barn    in   Clinton,  and   subsequently  in auction  barns  throughout  rural  Ontario, as  well  as in  more  conventional theatres in Toronto, Stratford, Ottawa, and  Win­  nipeg.   The   Farm   Show   has  also  been broadcast and   televised,  and  is the  sub­ ject  of  Michael  Ondaatje's  film,  "The Clinton Special." In one form or another, performances of  The   Farm  Show   have reached a  very  large  audience, and  now the  creators  have  attempted  to  present  the  work  as a book, although Thompson, at  the conclusion of his introduction, ex­ presses some  doubt  as to  "how  much  of this will come through the printed  word." Both  the attempt and  the doubt  are valid.
In   the   tradition  within   which   Passe
Muraille works,  performance is a  means of  achieving aesthetic unity  rather than a  means  of  transmitting a  unity  already present. Their  "concerts" resist  transla­ tion  into  print: the  reader  is  not  able  to predict the  development of  the concert's shape,  and   he  experiences  no  delight   in theatrical surprise   to  compensate for  his confusion,  problems  which  do  not  arise in  the  reading of  a  play  whose  conven­  tions both  guide  the reader's  expectations and  supply  consistent  illusions  to  project  in  the  theatre of  the  mind.   The  Farm Show  not  only  avoids  plot,  but  also  ab­  jures the  conventions of illusion to which,  still,  most   of  us  are   accustomed.   Passe Muraille's work  resembles  Brecht's in  its dissociation  of   actor   and   mask,   Peter Cheeseman's  in  its  juxtaposition  of  the authentic  documentary  detail   and   the flamboyantly theatrical gesture,  and  Me­ gan   Terry's  and   Joan   Littlewood's  in its  efforts   to  break   the  one-to-one  rela­  tionship between   actor  and  role,  assign­ ing  each  actor  many  roles and  using  the
 movement between  roles as well as the movement  between    theatrical  and   de­ picted  realities  as a vehicle  for  theatrical statement. None  of these  innovations are as effective  on the  page as they are on the stage :  the  actors   merge  into  their  char­ acters,  the  jazz-like flow from  role to role is broken  into  blocks  of  dialogue lacking  the    cohesion    provided    by   the    single player,   and   the   interplay   between   real stage  object  and  mime  is lost, for  the on­ stage   bale   of   hay   and   the   elaborately mimed  hay-baler are  equally  feats of the imagination to  the  reader.
While  elements of performance assume structural and image-making tasks more often  assigned  to language in the conven­ tional  drama, language is not  without its function  and   value   in   Passe   Muraille works such  as The Farm  Show. In  large part,  language in  this  set  of conventions is  documentary data,   lifted   out   of   its everyday   context  by  a  highly   theatrical performance style and  heightened by art­ ful  editing and  calculated  juxtaposition of speeches  or of  speech  and  stage  image.  The  approach   produces  powerful  mo­ ments  when  the  presentational technique records  and  transmits a  subject's discus­ sion  of  something which   means  a  good deal  to  him;  the  spare  declarations have been  honed  further still  in  the  rehearsal process,  leaving  and  thereby  highlighting the  stronger features of Clinton's  speech in  the  reading of  a  hermit's letters,   an account of a farm  accident, a man's des­ cription of  the  thoughts he  thinks  when he  works   in   the   fields,  Bruce   Pallett's analysis   of  the  economics  of   Canadian farming. Through  the  accumulation  of such  heightened  moments, the  audience receives     an    impression    of    Clinton's opinions,   values,   and,  most   effectively, Clinton's  fears;   in  this  way,  The  Farm Show  succeeds   in  reaching  beyond   the boundaries of the Canadian farming com­ munity.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Field  thoughts and   memories of  acci­ dents  show  us that  in  Clinton, death fre­ quently takes the form  of a tractor. When  we know what  a tractor engine's stopping may    mean,   silence   between     carefully  chosen   words   acquires   new   depths   of meaning. Later, the  effect  of the  preced­ ing silences adds a  new dimension to the essentially comic  treatment of the  tractor tug  at  a  local   fall  fair.   Indeed, one  is struck   by  the  relationship between   men and   machinery,  both   by  the   frequency with  which  it  is a  factor in  the  lives of the characters and  by the  presence  which the   perception  of  the  farmers  and   the clarity of  Passe  Muraille's  reporting give the  relationship. There are  references   to the   old,   natural   antagonists,  drought, crop  failure, flood, fire, and  storm,  so familiar  to  readers of  earlier   Canadian plays with farm settings, but in The Farm Show, the ambivalent machine is a much stronger theatrical presence. An audience of city-dwellers not only gains  a new per­ spective  on  a  universal fear,  but  finds in death's  twentieth-century shape   on   the farm  further comment on  their  own  way of life.
Paul Thompson has rejected the label "regionalism," preferring what  he calls "particularism," a  fidelity   to   the   facts observed. This  fidelity,  not  mythic  or fictional  pattern, is the object  of  presenta­ tional   arrangement, although  if  enough  details   are   presented  clearly,  faithfully, and   theatrically, larger  insights, such  as that     into    death    by    machinery,   will emerge.   Passe  Muraille's  "particularism" is evident in its approach to dialogue, and also  in  the  physical  staging of  its shows (Passe   Muraille  performers  themselves make  a  careful distinction between  "do­ ing  a  show"   and   "doing  a  play"). In performance, particularism is often  taken to the extreme of using on stage objects belonging  to   the   person   being   imper­ sonated.   To     illustrate     particularism, Thompson cites  the  company's use  of  a
 hat,   hand-made  tools,  and   letters   (not just the words of the letters but the letters themselves, as stage  objects) belonging  to Charlie  Wilson,   the  recluse   featured  in one  sequence   of  The  Farm  Show. The intrusion of reality  has a startling effect when   the  authenticity  of  the  object   is clear  to the audience; on a smaller  scale, the  sensation  must  resemble  that  experi­ enced by audiences at  the height of natur­ alistic staging  when  David Belasco moved real  settings  onto  his New  York,  turn  of the  century   stages,  reconstructing  tene­ ment  interiors  brick  by  brick  to  achieve  sensational  effects,  appeals to voyeurism,  inaccessible to conventional stage carpen­ try.  Passe  Muraille's physical  particular­ ism  could hardly be described as sensa­ tionalist,  although it  can  be admired for the wrong  reasons.  Because  it is selective, whereas  Belasco's methods obviously were not, Passe Muraille's introduction of touching,    personal  exhibits   stylizes  the life from which  the  objects  are  drawn, as the  company's editing stylizes real  words spoken by real people.  In discussing the actions of steelmen at work, Peter Cheese­ man,   in   his  introduction  to   Fight    for Shelton  Bar,   employs    the   concept  of dance   to  explain  his  company's stylized use of  documentary  material: when  the real movements of  work are isolated  from the  purpose   they  are  intended  to  serve, the result can  be a dance, forceful  gesture  often   of   extraordinary  beauty.   In   per­ formance, The  Farm   Show   displays several  moments of such  gesture,  for  the principle Cheeseman describes  applies  to the movements of Clinton farmers as well as to those of British  industrial workers.
While The Farm Show  resembles  Fight for  Shelton   Bar,   which   the   Canadian show  predates, in  matters of  perspective and presentational theory, the works are entirely   different  because   of  the   struc­ tural   influence   of  that   which   is  shown,  the   influence    which    the   documentary conventions invite  from  the subject  mat-

133

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ter.  Passe  Muraille frequently rejects  the suggestion  that  their  work is nationalistic, but  the  work  is very  much  of  its  place; when  Clinton  (or  Canada)  provides  not only subject  matter and setting but also contributes to  the  style  and  structure of presentation, the result is of Clinton  or of Canada as a  matter of course.  Being  so in such  an  unselfconscious manner  is an admirable characteristic.
Thompson   has    described    work    on shows like The Farm Show or "Under Greywacke" as  attempts  to  produce "a living    community   portrait   or    photo­ graph." In  this  respect,  The  Farm Show resembles  the sort of older Canadian con­ cert  or  pageant  described  by W. H.  New in   his   introduction  to   Dramatists   in Canada; there  is little continuing sense of individual characters and  hence  no char­  acter  development,  for  these are  forgone in   favour  of   the   collective   character, Clinton.  Passe  Muraille's  presentational techniques thus  conform   to  the  prefer­  ence  for  collective  heroes  over individual heroes which several critics have informed  us is typically  Canadian, but which is also typical   of  the   left-wing   perspectives   of the  European companies which  first used many of the conventions Passe Muraille employs, and  which  is, probably  most sig­ nificantly,   characteristic of  the  work  of Roger    Planchon,  the   French   director under    whom   Thompson  served   a   two year  apprenticeship. While  there  is  little dramatic movement toward  conflict  in a conventional sense, dramatic conflict does occur  at  the level of the collective,  as the audience becomes  aware,  through an  ac­ cumulation of  individual scenes  pointing  in the same direction, that  the way of life Clinton  represents is in danger  of dying. This  menace  achieves   a  stage   presence chiefly in the  second  act, and  makes The Farm  Show  more  than  the mere celebra­ tion  of a community  which  many  of the pageants  and   concerts   of   earlier   Cana­ dian  drama were. Chamber of commerce

134
 opt1m1sm  is  not   allowed   to  gloss  over what   Thompson  calls   the   "texture" of small  town  reality.
Additional tensions, serving to replace dramatic  conflict    between    individuals, arise   from   the  separation  of  performer and  depicted reality,  a  separation  which is   frequently  clearly   revealed:   recited stage  directions establish  setting  with  the precision  of imagist  poems,  the  audience is called  upon  to applaud the sheer virtu­ osity   of   almost    acrobatic   acting    (the  council  meeting sequence  seems  to serve little  other purpose), and  in story-telling sequences, we  are  aware  that   the  act  of story-telling  occurs   on   two  levels.  The Canadian  playwright  frequently has  his characters tell stories; in older  plays,  the stories  too often interrupt the play, as the playwrights   seem   incapable  of  resisting rhetorical    temptations,   stopping   their plays  in  order  to  allow  characters to  tell stories.  In more   recent   plays,  the  story still  makes  frequent appearances, but  the act  of story-telling itself has been made dramatically functional; in  Cook, Trem­ blay,   Ryga,   story-telling  is  a   dramatic action  which   the  character  employs   to achieve a  dramatic  objective.  In  the  ex­ ploitation of  this  device,  Passe  Muraille excels.  Les  Jervis's   story  about   his  deer,  the  Jesus   bus  story,  and  others are  not included for  their  own  sake  only,  nor  is their  primary purpose merely  to add  local colour. They  are actions,  means  by which  Clinton  expresses  its values  in opposition to those  forces which  the community sees as  threats,   and   in  so  doing   resists  the threat.  Because   the   theatrical  reality   is clearly  before  us, the  story-telling is also the  means by  which  Passe  Muraille can establish  dramatic conflict  between  stage and   auditorium:  while   an   urban   per­ formance of  The  Farm  Show  loses  the communal celebration present  in  an  auc­  tion  barn   performance, the  city  produc­ tion     compensates     through     dramatic strengths created  by  the  company's cast-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



ing  the  audience, from   time  to  time,  in the role of the antagonist, a collective antagonist  balancing  the  collective  pro­ tagonist. The intention is certainly  politi­ cal,  but   because   their   style   provides   a model  of  the  political  conflict,  incorpor­ ating that  conflict within  working  drama­ tic  actions,  Passe   Muraille  usually  suc­ ceeds in avoiding the animated pamphlet, so   often   the   bane   of  overtly   political theatre.
Often, 	adverse   criticism 	of	Passe Muraille's work   fails  to  take   into   con­ sideration those conventions within  which the  company works:   the  result  is a con­ sideration of what a Passe Muraille show is not rather than of what  it is. All this is not  to say that  the conventions of the col­ lectively  created show  do  not  admit   of failure. One  of the  primary requirements of the  form -and  of "particularism" - is honesty,  an  honesty  which   Passe  Mu­ raille  often   proclaims, frequently  with  a bit  too  much  self-congratulation.  In  the company's community portraits  there  is, accompanying the  stylization, some ideal­ ization; this idealization is usually excused by  the  romanticism  of   Passe  Muraille's perspective, for the romanticism is usually
a  vital  one  which  attempts to  inject   the dramatic  into   the   reality   of  Canadian life,  deliberately choosing   this  approach over  an ordering of that  life and  a  bring­ ing  of its elements into  formal  harmony. Nonetheless, the temptation to show Clin­  ton  what   it  wants rather   than   what   it needs  must   be  enormous.   (The distinc­  tion  is difficult  to  make  and   even  more difficult  to  heed  within  Passe  Muraille's theoretically  egalitarian philosophy.) The consequence of yielding  to the temp­ tation   to  flatter  is  dishonesty, and  pre­ cisely  because   Passe   Muraille's  conven­  tions  are  what   they  are,  such  slips  from grace  are   jarring, and  damaging to  the tone   of  the   show   as  a   whole.   Such   a stumble  is  "Miles  Meets   Mr.   Merrill," the  second  scene  in   the  show.  A  Passe
 Muraille actor  represents himself meeting for   the   first   time   one   of   the   Clinton farmers  whose  lives he  wants   to observe and  interpret. Since  this  scene  purports to show the audience the beginning of the process which led to The Farm Show  (the proverbial  box  containing the  sound   of its  own  making), we  expect   some  clues as to the  validity  of what  we are  seeing. Passe  Muraille  is  at   great   pains   to  be honest   about    the   subject,    but   in   this scene  especially,  the  showmakers do  not take  such  care  to be honest  about  them­ selves. Miles'  city yokel  self-parody  is too crude  a picture of  naivete: "Boy, it sure must  be great  being a farmer.... I mean  you get  up  in  the  morning and  get  your hands  down  into  that  good  honest  dirt." Sometimes   the    Passe   Muraille   actors' eagerness   to   deprecate  themselves    be­ comes   a   form    of   condescension :   the farmers  are  implicitly flattered  and   pa­ tronized  by the  false contrast. These  tac­ tics, fortunately rare  in The Farm Show, clearly   diminish    the   credibility   of   the Clinton portrait, working  directly against the show's central objective.
The  faults  of the second scene are par­ ticularly  clear  in  contrast to  the  success of the  justly celebrated bale scene. Again, a Passe Muraille actor  is playing  himself, helping with  the  haying  in  the  mow  in the  heat   and   the  dust,  scrambling  and heaving  and   scrambling  some   more   to keep  up  with  the  loader.  Here,  the  self­ mockery  is not at all obsequious,  and  can,  therefore, achieve some satiric  bite;  com­ parisons  are  not  forced,  and  the qualities of  the   farmers  emerge   as  a  matter  of course.   The   juxtaposition   of   reflective anecdote and  the immediate conflicts  be­ tween  man and  hay, man  and  machinery, city man and  country life, give substance to   the   concluding  rhetorical  question about farming as a way of life. This  time,  the  "sound   of  the  making" is truly  part  of  the  portrait.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Does    all    this    "come    through   the printed word"? Coach  House and  the "assembler," Ted  Johns,  have  done  their best to help  the script  through  the design of the book, which is excellent. The  cover, a wrap-around, panoramic portrait of the original audience, is a  striking  image  of the  unusual relationship between  subject and  audience which  is at  the  core of the show. The  text is well illustrated with photographs of Clinton farmers,  Orange Day  parades, and  scenes  from  the  show (a  scrapbook  of sorts) . Here,  too,  one is struck   by  the  relationship between  sub­ ject and  representation, and  the  produc­ tion  photographs do  help  the  reader   to visualize  the acting style, particularly pos­ ture  as metaphor.  Pictures  of the set  are also helpful, demonstrating how the large map  of the district, providing both  back­ drop  and floor-cloth, served the company  as  yet  another  stage   metaphor  for   the relationship between  map and  territory which  the company set out  to explore. Typography   attempts   to    convey    the effects of simultaneity and ensemble  work, with   varying   degrees   of  success.   Ulti­ mately,  a show is a show, and  cannot   be fully  translated  to  the  page  or  even  to the  theatre of the  mind; but  this edition  of  The  Farm   Show  is  a  valuable  and  frequently evocative record  of an  impor­ tant  theatrical event.
CHRIS JOHNSON


HIT AND MISS

JOE:N  TE:OMPSON, At  the  Edge  of the  Chop­ ping  there   are  no  Secrets.  Anansi,    $6.oo cloth,  $2.95  paper.
JOE:N  TE:OMPSON, Stilt  Jack. Anansi,  $5.95.
RALPE:  GUSTAFSON,   Soviet   Poems.  Turnstone
Press, n.p.
MIRIAM WADDINGTON, Mister  Never. Turnstone
Press, n.p.

THE  POETRY OF JOHN THOMPSON  is sin­
cere,  serious, and  ironic.  An Englishman,
 residing in New Brunswick since Ig66, Thompson writes  poems  that  are imagin­ atively   restricted   to   that   world.  They  seem  born  of a self-imposed  and  perhaps privileged exile  in  rough  country. Espe­ cially  in  At  the   Edge   of  the  Chopping there  are no Secrets, existence is measured by  its  fidelity   to  the  sort  of  bread, fire and   kitchen   garden  survival   one   finds sentimentalized in  folk  museums   and  by the  possibility  of individual articulated response. To be fair, all is not wood and leather; there  are  the  more  modem and generally  available staples  of Italian wine and  television !
Thompson believes  in  the  significance
of  the  physical,  but  too often  he  cannot make    a   completed   art -pictorial    or mythic-of it. Frequently enough, poetic craft fails  to  render, fittingly,  this  driven sensibility.  Form and   tone  are  not  suffi­ ciently  varied. Too many poems betray  the over-extending of  experience,  the  desire to write  more  effectively,  in a rather pre­  conceived direction,  than   facility    will allow.   Thompson  does   not   permit  his writing  to  explore  the  real  dilemma  of living   deliberately  in  austere  surround­ ings;  he  strains too  obviously  to connect love, nature and  the purified  life; he can­  not  really  confront  what  has  been  called  the    indifference   of    nature  to   human values.  The  book  suffers  from   an  awk­ ward  tension  between the author's expec­  tation   and  his  unwillingness to  confront its  very  interesting disappointment.
The world  of essences  that  Thompson
creates has appeal, and his good lines cap­ ture  it sensually: a lamp  lighting "dainty ships"  on  the  horizon; the  sun  hungrily "sniffing  the  earth" in  a  massive  horse;  the  Great  Bear  constellation looking  on our  shining  green world,  as at  "an  apple
deep  I under ice"; "huge milky  potatoes
bursting I from  the moist  earth"; the act of  shooting at  a  tin  bam roof  so  that  it
"shouts and  sinks."  The  poet  is  particu­
larly  convincing when  suggesting  the  re-







UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIJI MED]IL FOR C]IN]IDI]IN BIOGR]IPHY

1979


The  several  fine biographies of 1979-of  Riel, Donald Gordon, D. H. Lawrence, Emily  Carr, and  Chief  Factor Archibald McDonald-have little   in  common  except   one  thing:  a  fascination  with   biographical method  perhaps as  much   as  with  their  subject.  They  draw   attention to  the  fact   that   biographies can   be  written in  different  ways,  some answering the  question what?  and  some answering the  question why? Some,  in other words,  choose  to emphasize  the "life's  story" -making a  linear   narrative out   of  a  personality-and others   emphasize the fragments and   the  amorphousness of human experience, which  none­ theless  cohere into  individual character. Jean  Murray Cole's  Exile  in the  Wilderness, a life of McDonald, is a book of the first kind, detailing all  the  daily  events,  the  doses of  jalop  and  the  dinners of  ptarmigan, that  connect the factor's world. So is Maria Tippett's account in Emily  Carr  of  the  facts  of a  painter's "unpaintability" of  Canada's "farthest edge." Paul  Delany's D. H.  Lawrence's Nightmare  is a work  of a dif­ ferent  kind,  magnificently exploring the four  "war years" of passi'onate and  difficult  relationships in  the life of a passionate and  difficult  man.  Joseph  Schull's The Great  Scot also seeks the motives  behind  a subject, and  its candid and  anecdotal accounts of  the animosities, the  hungers, and   the  bearishness  of  Donald Gordon  declare   the  importance of  a public  man's private life  as a  revelation  of his public  actions.
This  year  the  medal  goes to a fifth  volume  in  this impressive  group: Thomas Flanagan's provocative, persuasive,  and  compellingly readable enquiry into  Riel's  religious  enthusiasm, Louis  <David' Riel:  <Prophet of the  New  World'. In  some ways it is alive with  the question why, and it  is a  work  with  which  all future Riel  studies  must  somehow engage. Flanagan has  taken  seriously  that  side of Riel's character which  earlier commentators-and  earlier biographical approaches-dismissed   as madness or  fraud. The religious  beliefs, however  unconventional  they might   seem,  here   become  evidence  of  Riel's  deep  conviction  that   he had   a  divine   mission.  Taking account of  them  must  inevitably alter one's  assessment  of  the  man.   In  seriously  exploring the  psychological undercurrents  of  Riel's   public   life,  Flanagan  illuminates  a  singular personality; he also places  himself  at  the cutting edge  of contemporary biographical  writing. 	w.N.





137

BOOKS IN REVIEW



luctance and  richness  of alternate,  ever­ present   states:   darkness,    winter    and death. The   best  pieces  trust  image  and word,    allow   ideas    to   find   themselves through those  means,  repay  exact  obser­ vation   of  self  and  surroundings  with  a clear  original  expression  for  "elemental" living modified, as it must be now, by the contemporary mind.
Effective   poems  also  manage   to  con­ tain  rather than  distortingly over-empha­ size  one  of  the  book's  preoccupations - that   language  is  inadequate  to  express "possession   or  abandonment by  a  god." This concern   often   worries  Thompson's art into  one  or  a  combination of several faults: evasiveness,  long-windedness,  un­ certain structure, vague endings. The poet can  also sound  derivative (bread  bakes in
the  oven  the  way "a  moon gleams  I and
fattens") and  contrived.
Nevertheless, when  works  are  allowed to breathe, we get a fine chiselling together of sight, sense and  sound. There is a wonderful circularity in the poem "Fish," for  example, where  "a  hammer perfectly
steel, perfectly I struck" strikes to become
the   victim   of  the   fisherman's hammer
striking. There are  perhaps  fifteen  other poems    in   a   book   of   over   forty   that achieve, in varying  degrees, unity  and impact.
Thompson's second  book, Stilt  Jack, is based  on  the  ghazal,  a  classical  form  of Urdu poetry  originating in Persia.  The writer  who   ranges   so  widely   for   form takes great  risks. He  needs to be a synthe­ sizer  of  the  subtlest   kind,  able  to  trans­  late  cultural assumptions and  perceptions often  foreign   to  the  Western  mind.  The  ghazal  is composed  of  couplets,  five to  a poem; they  are  not  necessarily connected by theme,  logic or narrative. Rather, says Thompson, tone  or  nuance   provide   the links. As  Adrienne Rich  (another practi­ tioner)   puts  it,  the  unity  of  the  ghazal  emerges from  underneath.
Rich's use  of  the  form  is cryptic   and
 intellectually challenging. For Thompson, it  is technically liberating. He  is right  in announcing  the  freedom   found  artistic­ ally,  but  wrong  in  denying  that  his gha­  zals are  free-association poems. Most  are, and  often  quite  successfully so. Mood  and emotion flow freely.  One  is  fascinated to follow  these  mindtracks through basically the  same   source  material  as  Chopping, but  without such  forced  writing. Finally,  though, the  vision  runs  thin.  Generating moments in  Stilt   Jack  seem  much   more real,  but the range  remains narrow. There are   too  many   of  these   poems   for   the quality  to  be uniform. One  wonders  how this  poet, given   time,  might   have  fared  out  of the  woods.
The   spell   cast   by  Ralph  Gustafson's
Soviet   Poems   may   be  a  deceptive  one. Our great  glittering ignorance of  Russia today,  our  perhaps exaggerated reaction to place names-Novgorod, Tashkent, Samarkand - predispose     our    interest. However, such likely curiosity  and excite­ ment  is not  justified  by most of  the poems on  their  own  merit.
Too many fall victim to the arbitrary linestop, the rhetorical phrase,  an unhelp­ ful  use of capital letters  and  a  lot  of list­ ing which  occasionally  produces a sort  of suspect   music  or  meaning.  In   "Winged Flight,"  names   have   wonderful  sounds ( Shakhi-Zinda),  whereas  "The Kobzar" is   mainly    name-dropping.   Yet,    some memorable images emerge  from the book:
"We   flew  with   the  sun  into   the  sun  I
Lying  low  on  the  wide  horizon   I Like  a disk of copper metal  I Thrown by luck."
Each  piece is accompanied by a prose travelogue which  shouldn't be necessary, and   is at  times  condescending in  its  in­ formation.
The most  difficult   problem   is  that   of tone.  The  writing seems to suffer  from  an obligation  to  make   philosophical   state­ ments,  take  a moral  stand. Any authentic personal voice becomes muted by the con­ scientious ambassadorial  voice.  An  effec-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



tive   lack   of   resolve   between    the   two creates some ambiguity, and  this in poems where   specifics  could   speak   for   them­ selves.    "The  Old     Moscow    Woman" (about a  street  sweeper)   might  tellingly have ended  with the line: "The street  will always be dirty," a simple  and  partial an­  swer to the question, "What is this happi­ ness?"  Yet  Gustafson  must  go  on  about  man's imperfection,  the littered streets  of other  cities:  "New York,  Moscow,  Mont­
real  I It is the  same." It is not,  so easily,
the same,  not  at  any  level of implication.
This  is a  kind  of intellectual  whitewash, or at  least  thwarted thinking.
By contrast, an  ironic   point   is scored
more  naturally in "Tashkent," where  the atmosphere of "fabled caravans from  the East" is simply  juxtaposed with the "tran­ sistors, card  and  tin"  found  in G. U. M., the  State   Department  Store.  Never  is a statement so poignantly made about  Rus­ sia,  as  when   one  compares  some  func­  tional,  commonly available  Soviet  prod­  uct and  a sumptuous monument or modus from   the   splendid,   if   tyrannical  past. Again,    "On   the   Road    to   Novgorod" identifies  our shared humanity, with con­ crete   images   and   no   false   conclusions.  The  most  convincing poem  in  the  book is  "By  Way  of  Postlude." It meets  many dilemmas   squarely,  makes    admissions: "One  gets   weary    of   official    virtue." Troubling questions are  asked: Where  is
"the unstatistical labour," or "laughter, I
The natural factory"; could  liberty  cure
all? Yet the poet is well aware of paradox, of "freedom's own failures," existing  now for  him  beside  the  generosity, friendship and   "honourably glorious   dead" he  has found, beside  "strictures" born  of love.
Western  poems  observing modern Rus­ sia are  few enough. One  expects  a  resili­ ent  art,  equal  to  the  challenge of  a  rich and  recalcitrant subject. Unless  we  infer an  unrealistically simplified  humanity, it is not enough  to say, as Gustafson does in an  early  statement  and  as  we  would  all
 like to say, that  "Unpolitical humanity is the same."
Miriam  Waddington's Mr. Never might be  called  a  fantasy of  desire  and  disap­ pointment.  Thematically,  it    treats    of "absence  . . . unreturned love  . . . a  one­ sided projection of the self." The  voice is consistently   lyrical,   expressing  itself   in imagery  alternately  superb and  strained. Artistically  rendered  states  of  mind  give us this:
the  mosaic
roofs  of Dijon preened themselves like  peacocks
in  the  sun  of  a mustard summer
but  also expose  us to  this:
You  ...
make
designs  like  the  mosaic
of cut  logs floating downriver from Ottawa to the  Chaudiere where the match company saws  them into  matches.
Physically,   Waddington's  book   main­ tains  a sort of decorated elegance  due  to small  fine  print and   the  wispy  tapering shape  of most  poems. Linestops, however,  remain   a  mystery.   There  are  lapses  in taste,  even  sense,  as  in  "spaced   wides"
and    "tallnessess    I  of   air."   Confusion
results,   too,   from   some   sloppy   syntax
and   verbal  coupling  ("warmsun,"  "sky­ speeds"), a  lazy  practice which  is  likely to clog and  cloud  response.
Yet   the   poet   can   sing.   "Journey"   is truly  a  song  of  praise,  nullifying  in  its joyful sweep the effect of any possible awkwardness. "Dreaming  of Mr.  Never" is a  ruefully   clear   lament.  Nevertheless, the trouble with lyric is that it can lead Waddington into  facile  rhyme.  She  often succumbs  to  the  lure  and  trance of song, so that  meaning gives way to sound.  The use of whimsy is also problematic. "Mister Never  In Winnipeg" makes  it work:
Your  shoulders
are  wooden   pillars

139

BOOKS IN REVIEW



of the  veranda half­
filled  with  the
snows  of Winnipeg.
"Mr.  Never   Playing" does  not  fare   so well.
So,  the  book  is uneven.  Concepts,  in­
forming metaphors, myth-making of a colourful but  somewhat fragmented and fussy patchwork-qui!t variety,  aesthetic patterns of  every  kind  can  be attractive and  original. However, this manner of control   risks   superficiality,   is   anyway rarely  complete in a poem or guaranteed over  the  whole.  One  is left  with  an  un­ fortunate sense of hit and  miss.

PATRICIA KEENEY  SMITH


GIVEN THE WORKS

PHYLLIS     GOTLIEB,     The   Works:    Collected
Poems. Calliope Press,  $r 0.50.

AFTER TWO HUNDRED and fifty-four pages of Phyllis  Gotlieb's poems-a gathering of three  earlier books and some new verse
-the urge to pun is irresistible. Gotlieb does,   again    and    again.   Examples are found   in  the  titles  of  the  book  and  of many  individual poems, such  as an auto­ biographical piece  called  "This One's  on Me"; and  bald  punning establishes  itself as a  rna jor  technique in  so many  of  the lines she has decided to collect. The  puns can  be seen as simply a symptom.  Because the  disease  of  wordplay  for  its own  sake takes  many  forms,  The Works is mostly play. Childlike  (or  childish)   games  with gratuitous sound  undermine whatever seriousness   surfaces   from   time   to  time. That in itself may be part  of Gotlieb's thematic purpose, but  the  resulting  coy­ ness  is  often   frustrating.   Although   her approach  recalls   Reaney's,   comparison greatly  favours  him.
Putting aside the inclination to see The Works as  play,  but  retaining the  pejora­ tive slant  of that metaphor, one is almost

140
 obliged  to suggest  that  many of the poems are  mere exercises, rather than  substantial work.  Gotlieb  often  seems  to have  asked herself  what  she  could  say about this  or that   feature  of  her   everyday   life,  and then  to have  published her  answer. As a result,  most  of  the  poems  lack  urgency, seem forced. This  effect is not  relieved  by her   tendency  to  over-explain  the  strong images  that  do appear: "the clenched  fist in  the  heart /  (called  poignancy) "; nor is  it  overcome  by  superficial  music  and ineffective  line   breaks.  The  poems   are sometimes so  weak  that   one  prefers   her italicized   introductions  and   transitional passages.  The latter are  relatively naked
-free  of  the  crowded  craftiness of  the
main   poems-and much   more  natural. By themselves,  the italicized entries  lack sufficient  impact, but  they make  one wish for  a  middle ground  between   simplicity and  contrivance.
Even   the   highly   contrived  can   have
pleasing aspects, and the usual delights of poetry  are  present  in The Works. "Ordin­ ary,  Moving" is  twenty-one  pages  of  in­ teresting  doggerel, for   example - in­ tended  doggerel;  many  of  Gotlieb's  in­ sights into  her  milieu  (in this case, Jewish and  urban) are entertaining; her fascina­ tion   with   the  evocative  power  of  small details,  such  as telephone numbers which recall characters and  events, is intriguing; and   her   endings  are   often   very   satis­ fying.   It  may   be  that    her   weaknesses result  from  an  emphasis  on last  lines,  re­ sounding conclusions that  came  first  and required the  fabrication of verses to  pre­ cede   them.   Perhaps  her   poems   should have  come   from, rather than  because  of,  those  last  lines,  should  have  pushed  fur­  ther.  Then The Works  would  have  con­ tained more.
Maybe, too,  The  Works should   have contained less. The verse  dramas, which admittedly cannot be judged  justly on the page, are  nevertheless dull in print.  Many of  the  other poems  cry out  for  a selector

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



rather  than    a   collector.  A   "collected works" should  enhance a writer's reputa­ tion, but the best works of Gotlieb-such as  "First  Person  Demonstrative" -have been  anthologized  already. Her   reputa­ tion, for the moment, should  rest in them.

RON   MILES


SHAGGY  RAG OF BOREDOM

DAVID s. WEST,  Poems  and  Elegies   1972-1977.
Fiddlehead, $4.50.
D.  H.   SULLIVAN,  Wind Sun   Stone  and   Ice.
Fiddlehead, $3.50.
KEVIN  ROBERTS,  Deep   Line. Harbour  Publish­
ing,  $3-95·
LAZAR   SARNA,   Letters  of   State.  Porcupine's
Quill, $10.95; pa.  $4·95·
As LONG AGO  AS   1957, Louis Dudek  posed the   question  in   Delta,   "Are   we  being fiddleheaded  to   death?" It  is  a   point worth  reconsidering. The books of poetry continue to pour  out  of Fredericton at an alarming rate   (the  two  under  review  are numbers  238   and    241),   all   with   the express  and  laudable intention of  giving the   virtually  unknown  poet   an   oppor­ tunity  to get into  print. All very fine; and indeed  over  the  years  Cogswell  has  pub­  lished work by some fine writers  (Livesay, Yates,  Nowlan, Gutteridge).  At  the same time  he has managed to flood  the country with  drivel   that, at  best,  ought   to  have progressed  in  the  public  domain no fur­  ther  than  the  pages  of  the  poetry  maga­  zines. It is perhaps not a reviewer's place to  dwell   too  philosophically  on  such  a phenomenon;  he  ought, rather,  to  talk about the  books. But  the  most  outstand­ ing thing about the two Fiddlehead  books considered here  is that   they  do  give  rise to  just such  speculation, over  and  above any   thought  or  pleasure that  the  texts themselves  might be expected to occasion.
 David  West has a disarming habit  of ending many of his poems with an ellipsis, as  though   the  mechanical  muse  having run  down,  the  poem  must  somehow   be brought to a close, and  the devil take any logic  of  image  or  form.  He  shares  with D.   H.   Sullivan   a   repertory  of   images drawn from  the  natural world,  but  in the case  of both  poets  this  amounts to  little more  than  impression unilluminated by a keen  eye or  intelligence. In  the  first of a number of poems  entitled "Waiting," Sullivan  writes:

watching from  an old  rock waiting for words

to  assert nothing greater than now and   here

nor  make  it worse  with any  purpose

(to  enjoin my self
is enough)

Well,    this    pseudo-modernist   aesthetic won't  do, at least not in the case of a poet who, despite  the  disclaimer of this poem, uses language in a determinately  referen­ tial  way to get  matters important to him off  his  chest.  Theoretically  this  is  fine, but  in neither  case do  the  poets  come  up with  language  powerful enough  to  con­ vince us that these matters are important. West's  best  poem  is perhaps his elegy for Eric  Ivan  Berg,  the  young  poet  who  was killed   years  ago  in  a  logging   accident, but  even  it  is  marred  by  unconvincing
tropes   ("to  face  trees  and  rivers  I man­
handle them  into shape  I revise them  like
poems"). Sullivan's poetry   fails  by  and
large  to rise above  similar  infelicities, and is too  often  confounded by such  descrip­ tions  as  that  of  the  poet,  who  is said  to

BOOKS IN REVIEW



be  "the   fearless   I circumnavigator  I of the  word."
Olson  once  advised  that  a  poet  choose some  concern and   dig  into  it  until   the
subject  was exhausted and  he knew more about  it than  anyone  else. Kevin  Roberts' book Deep Line (and  it does, incidentally, include  a poem entitled  "For  Charles Olson")  shows  the  advantage of writing out  of just such  a saturation. He  may not know more than  anyone else about  fishing off  the  coast  of  B.C.,  but  the  poems  at least   testify  to  a  real  life  lived  among things other than  books and  university classrooms.  His  poems are  generally  short and  spare,  but  flexible  enough  to include both   the  brute  idiom   of  the  fisherman
("shit  no  never   I use  the  bar   I if  the
fucker  backfires  I it'll  ream a hole I clear
through the  hull")  and  the  more  florid,
though still  direct   language of  the  love poet   ("when I take  it  I out  of  you it  I glistens  I like a white  tulip  I after  rain") .
The  poems  are  by turns  meditative,  ten­
der,  and  gutsy in  their  head-on  approach to the  inhuman or  threatening aspects  of the  poet-fisherman's  experience. Deep Line is a small book and its compass of concerns too is small; but within  that cir­ cumscribed world  Roberts has many suc­ cesses, and  these "carved reliefs of a hum­ ble art" (to  borrow  from  the Seferis pas­ sage that  serves as epigraph  to the book) offer a good deal  of  pleasure.
Lazar  Sarna's  Letters   of  State   is  a
curious  book. A first reading  left me feel­ ing  that  I had  been  through a volume  of translations from  the French. Perhaps I'm  influenced by knowing Sarna's The  Man Who  Lived Near Nelligan, but many lines sound   like  an  average  translation  from some  not  quite  specifiable  French  poet. Sarna's  situation  (he  is a  Montreal law­ yer)    perhaps  explains   this.   His   poems sound  very  un-English, and  indeed  often overreach themselves in a manner more common in certain types of Spanish  or French verse  (e.g.,  his description of an
 intersection as "conflicting urgencies  I in the  I universal history  I of tar") .
The subjects of these  poems  are  at  the
opposite end  of  the  scale  from  the  other three  books discussed  here: the  two long­ est poems  ("Memoirs of an  Elder States­  man"  and    "Camilien  Houde   and   the Convict")  are  public  and  political  works dealing with  W. L. M. King  and  the for­ mer  mayor  of  Montreal who  was  put  in jail in 1940 for advising citizens  to ignore the National Registration Act. Not exactly  what   one  would   term   the  ripe  stuff  of poesy, but Sarna goes a long way toward  making this refractory material into verse. Unfortunately he doesn't go quite  far enough, and   the  final  impression one  is left with  is of a book with some fine lines, but dry rhythmically and  rife with uncon­ nected  and  strange images.
The small  presses continue to be our lifeline,  and  perhaps it is more  than  one can  expect   that   twenty-five   per  cent  of what   they  publish   as  a  whole  should   be fresh  and  interesting. These  days, even amidst   the  receding flood,  that   is  some­ thing  to hang on  to.
BRUCE WHITEMAN


NICHOL'S  PROSE

BP   NICHOL,  Journal. Coach  House Press, $4.00. BP   NICHOL, Craft Dinner. Aya Press, $5·95·
IN BOOK v OF  The  Martyrology, bpNichol muses,  "thinking  constantly of  friends  I lives  we've   lived   together I  what   is  it makes  up  the  poem  I journeyal  I a long­
ing  work."
There is the  chiefest  image  in  Nichol's dozens  of books and  chapbooks, in  verse, prose,  and   drama. It is  of  motion and emotion, coterminous functions of the book-making. The  Martyrology, twelve years  and   six  hundred  pages  long  now, tells   us   continuously   that    it   is  being penned on  the  road,  between  the  home-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



sites of friends, from  feeling  to feeling. Journal  is a  prose  book  that  Nichol  car­ ried with  him on trips around the country in the seventies.
The author carried for  a few  years  a small  ledger  full  of  lines,  filling  it  with words during his travels, then it was typed and  printed, and  as a book  travelled  out to his friends, more  of them  now. It sug­ gests a pleasant relationship between lone life and  publishing.
It is also a scarifying new novel derived of dreams and  fears. The first chapter be­ gins :  "as  these  things  are  they  are  only dreams as  i  have  told  foretold the  wish it  seems  to  be  made  whole  as  words  are extensions  of our  fears & longings." As in dreams, all  the  characters  are  manifesta­ tions  of  the  dreamer, here  a  man   in  a cloak, a boy digging in the sand, a woman  in  a  red  dress,  and  a  few  other versions less often seen. Their mythic  solitudes  and meetings  are  the  coming   and  going  au­  thor,  his  functions as grown  man,  child, and  female.
The  Freudian displacement and  syn­ thesis  are  enforced  by  the  shifting  pro­  nouns    (the   approach  of   the   Concrete poet)    as  well  as  interchanged  clothing (the   dramatist)   and   the   more   radical  shuffling of characters  (post-Beckett nov­ elist). As the characters un-name one an­  other, hit each  other, couple,  they change  inevitably it appears from  the novelistic I, he,  she,   to   the   "we" one   finds   at   the centre of  the  author's desire  in The Mar­ tyrology.
That is why one  naturally comes to say that  in its confessional language of  ther­ apy,  the  incantatory father-hate  passage, the repetitive rhythm, the fantasies fed by comic  books, dreams, and  the  coagulated alphabet,  Journal  is the  subconscious of the  waking  Martyrology.
The main  theme  of the  book  is loneli­ ness, or  perhaps more  accurately  "alone­ ness," and  the  hope  that  it can  be ended  or at least alleviated:
 such  a funny lot      we's  such  a funny thing we is we are  & how  far  does  that take  us
far  enough  to  see  the  form   of  this  history
far  enough  to  see  we  all  of  us  are  born & die   not   knowing  each   other        this   is  a story  of four  of us         this  is a story  of four of  us  not   knowing each   other &  how   that affected  our  living  & dying

Nichol does convert  incantation to nar­ rative,  but  the  intent   is not  so  much   to illuminate  the   world   seen   and   remem­ bered  from  the  eyes (a la  Munro) , as to tell outward what's behind  the  eyes dur­ ing  composition.  Where   plot  isn't   hap­ pening,  and  language isn't  action, where feeling is primary.
Journal  is a successful  derivation from Stein   (Part II, I is an  imitation of The Making  of  Americans), but   the  book's form  is more  like Beckett's, wherein  the "writer" only sometimes  mentions that  he is writing. We receive it as a recitative exploring the  relationship between  crea­ tive fiction and  happening life.

we  will  say  that that is what  hap­ pened  because it  is &  it did           we  will say these  things &  they  are  true &  that  is  why we  say  them           yes  i  will  say  these  things
&  i  will   repeat  them   because  i  say   them
because  they  are   true          yes  they  are  true
& i am  saying them & that is enough

But do not  imagine  that  there  is a lack of story here.  Journal  tells one of the few stories worth  worrying  about. At the very end  the author says that  "to  speak  to any­ one  you  just  put   your  book  down  look them  in  the  eye  & tell  them   what  it is exactly  that   youre  feeling." Those  pro­ nouns  are  not  bad  grammar. If a  fiction is supposed  to tell  us how  people feel  to­ gether  and  apart, this  is a  successful  fic­ tion.
Craft  Dinner  is not  a cheap meal  but it collects most of Nichol's short  fictions since Ig66. As in the novel, he first makes himself  busy  destroying "distance," that shibboleth   of  the   realists.   At   times   he rather belabours the  point.   bp  Nichol  is never really witty, something that  seems a


143

BOOKS IN REVIEW



deficiency  at times, but is often a strength, because   he  demands  feeling  more   than any  other response.
In   this  collection,  nicely  printed  and
bound  by Tim and  Elke Inkster, we'll find all   kinds   of  extreme  handlings  of   the page,  the  declaration that  prose is first a spatial experience. The  story  might  be simply  "about" a  man  diddling a  young woman on a B.C. ferry, but the setting is really the opened  book. Canadian writers, unlike  those  in  other civilized  parts,  are not given  much  to what  Raymond Feder­ man   calls  "surfiction."  Kroetsch   knows what  it  is, and  goes  after it  with  one  of his eyes. Hugh  Hood  in his recent  stories has  been   attacking  his  reputation  as  a realist.  David Young's work will be recog­ nized   as  a   harbinger  when   it  is  better  known.    Ondaatje's   Coming     Through Slaughter  is a  fine  post-modernist novel. bp Nichol, famous and  dedicated, is doing our most serious anti-realistic work for us.
These  pieces,  thirteen  in  all,  are   all short. Their author, in a pre-realist tradi­ tion,  wants   them   to  operate  "both  ways a middle beginning ending." Here  a  text is called  "ketchs," a kind of  sketch  which suggests  that  it will start when  the reader  gets his "s" in gear. "The Book of Days"  is made of  ruminations about  contempla­ tions about composing meditations. With Nichol one  ceases wondering whether he is coming at one as poet or fiction  writer. He  just produces bp writing,  and  we read it, and  they can  worry about  how to cata­ logue or reward  it. The reader  is not  per­  mitted  passivity.   It is  no   wonder   that sometimes he  will  hanker  for  somebody  comfortable to read,  like a Margaret.
William H.  Gass  wrote  that  "for  most people,  fie tion is history; fiction  is history without  tables,   graphs,   dates,   imports, edicts,   evidence,  laws;   history   without hiatus-intelligible, simple, smooth.  Fic­ tion  is sociology  freed  of statistics." Cer­ tainly  that  predilection is most popular in Canada, and  it is re-enforced by our main

I44
 literary critics.  When  Nichol's  "The True Eventual Story  of  Billy the  Kid" helped him   to   win   his   astonishing   Governor­ General's Award,  it was argued into Han­ sard,  and  the decreation of history  was at last  begun  here.
That story,  and  its two  brothers, "The
Long  Weekend  of Louis  Riel," and  "Two Heroes" (Billy & Louis)  are, with  their humour and  their  serious attack upon fiction   as  easy  history,   the  best  stuff  in this book. Collected as "Three Western Tales," they  argue events  versus  history, argue Riel  versus  the  Canadian  literary Riel  industry, make  a case for  the  reality of a Billy or a Louis,  the actuality of  writ­ ing, as opposed  to the  notion  that  we can make   a  thousand  novels,  plays,  operas,  epic  poems  about our  past  and  thus  pro­  duce a national consciousness or a "Cana­ dian  Tradition."
For that work bp Nichol deserves the gratitude of all future devotees  of the art of fiction  in this country.

E. E. GREENGRASS


HIGHJINKS & POWER

ANN cOPELAND,  At  Peace. Oberon, $15.oo; pa.
$6.95.
ROBERT  GIBBs,   I've    Always   Felt   Sorry   for
Decimals.  Oberon, $12.95; pa. $5·95·
w.  P.  KINSELLA, Scars.  Oberon, $12.95;  pa.
$5·95·
DAVID   LEWIS STEIN, City  Boys.Oberon, $12.95;
pa. $5·95·
THE  LAST TIME  I ENCOUNTERED a collec­ tion of short  stories  that  brought me right out  of  my  seat  was  in  I976.  Somebody gave  me  a  copy  of  D.  M.  Fraser's Class Warfare  just  as  I  was  setting  off on  the so-mile  trip   home   from   Vancouver  to Mission  City,  and  I  threw  a  glance  into  it  at   the   next   intersection  because   the light  was slow. The recognition was im­ mediate.  Half   a   dozen   stoplights and

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



repeated choruses  of impatient honkings later   I  finally  stopped  trying   to  do  two things  at  once,  pulled   over  to  the  curb, shut   off  the  engine   and   read   the  book cover  to cover.  It was a  real  treat.
Ann Copeland's short-fiction collection
At  Peace falls into  the same  category. It's a grouping of seven  stories  about a  nun­ nery -Copeland  reportedly spent  much of  her  youth  in  one -and  they're  writ­ ten   with   a  degree   of  precision,  insight and  lightness  of  touch   which   is  delight­ ful to encounter and  altogether gratifying to  read.  A  good  deal  of  the  reason  for this   appears  to   lie  in   the   qualities  of Copeland's recollections themselves: vivid, sure,   yet  with   a   pleasing   water-colour lack  of  ostentation;  kindly,  yet  somehow utterly  uncompromising. Copeland is one of  those  rare  writers   who  seems  able  to describe  people  quite  ruthlessly without appearing to  be  ruthless at  all.
That last point  warrants some examin­ ation  because  a hasty reading of  At Peace might   mislead   the  inattentive  reader   to decide  that   Copeland is too  nice  to  her stories'   principals. The  conspicuous  ab­ sence  of  hurled  stone  tablets   and  so on. In fact  these projectiles are  outlined quite distinctly,  but not  front  stage  centre,  be­ cause  for  Copeland (I  get  the  distinct impression) the simple separation into Sheep   and   Goats   is  a   judge's,    not   a writer's function. As a result,  while many of her characters might well register as perfect villains or angels on some people's moral  scoreboard, Copeland somehow manages to make  such  judgments both unmistakable yet  (ultimately)  irrelevant. By  the  time   she  takes   her   pen  off  the page we have come to understand Sister Paula,  Mother Clarence, Sister  Gertrude or the Reverend Mother so well from  the inside  out,  that   we  couldn't possibly  ex­ pect  them  to be better or worse than they are.  And  that's not  necessarily to  be  ex­ pected  from  an  autobiographical account of  life  in  a  nunnery  (or  any  closed  or
 inward-looking community such as a monastery,   prison,   religious   sect,  etc.) : the  compression of a closed  community's daily life into  its regulation straitjacket normally  affords such an  unnaturally magnified  view of human folly or charity that  the  temptation to  melodramatize or take    sides   is   almost    irresistible.    Few writers seem to manage it. Copeland manages  it very  well.
Much  of my delight in  the  book came from  the quality of its attention to the everyday details of convent life (I was reminded  of   the   suppers  of  fresh   rye bread,  butter and  a bottle  of red wine we used to eat when  tramping across France: simple  and   compelling) . That there   is, for  example,  a  notable  absence  of  male­ ness in a convent is as obvious  to  me as the fact  that  little  children are short,  but it took a film-maker's sensible decision  to shoot  a  film  about kids from  a  two-foot  high  tripod  to fully drive  the  point  about  children home. Suddenly I  realized   the extent  to which  a young  child's  universe is composed  of  the  undersides of  things, the sides we really never  intended anyone to see. Copeland's book is full of the same kind  of  touches.  When   a  young  nun   is permitted to  attend an  educational con­ ference  in  a  nearby   (secular)  university  after  a lengthy submersion in the convent, her identification of maleness  begins back at  a  beginning so fundamental, most  of us  probably  don't  remember (or  at  least pay attention to)  it anymore:

Still-the  smells.  Even  now,  when  pipes and   cigars    had    been   extinguished  as   re­ quested, there  lingered  an    unmistakably male  smell  in  the  room.  Ladies  were  sprin­ kled  here  and  there,  most  in  suits,  several looking   like   trim  grandmothers, but   some­  how  they  made  little dent. Acrid, pungent smells  she  identified  as  male   invaded  her  senses,  seemed  to  float   into her   head  and  inflate  it. And   textures -like the   arm   of the   jacket   on   the   table  beside   her,   lovely soft    blue    and    grey    (herringbone -from some  buried  jar   of  memory  she  extracted the   term),  a  slight nap   that  invited  the

145

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



fingers, hidden  now   in   the   extra  fold   of long   black   sleeve   designed  to  render  nuns armless, handless in  public  . . .  She  studied the  shapes of  legs  in  the  first  row,  stocking colours-deep brown, navy  blue,  grey,  one black   even.   She  felt   herself  growing giddy, light-headed. The man  opposite her  had   a marvellous beard, exquisitely trimmed. How does   he   do   it,   she   wondered?  His   wife? Are    there   special  beard   trimmers  now? What does  it  feel  like?

If "simple and   compelling"  describes the book's spirit,  it's a label largely applic­ able  to its style as well. Copeland  uses no fancy    stylistic    devices    or    techniques. Strictly   by  virtue   of  sharp  and   diligent  observation, a  roughly  chronological de­ velopment  and   by  shifting   the  point  of view  from  character  to character as  the stories progress, she succeeds in giving the reader    an    almost     holistically    photo­ graphic insight  into  the many-sided intri­ cacies  of  sectarian  life.  In   addition  to having   been  privy  to  the  most  personal  feelings   and   attitudes  of   the   convent's various  residents,  I had  the distinct  sense of having  been through the whole experi­  ence  quite  independently  as well, as if  I had been able  to observe much  more than  simply   that   which   the  writer   had   pro­ vided   on   the   page.   In   short,   my  only serious  quibble  with  this  book is with  its binding. It fell  apart  after   the   second read.
Being  read  back  to back with  the likes
of  At  Peace  would   put  almost  anyone's book  at  a disadvantage, and  for  the first few pages Robert Gibbs'  I've  Always  Felt Sorry  for Decimals seemed  no exception. After   Copeland's  clarity   and   precision Gibbs'   style  seemed   curiously   cluttered and  momentarily confusing,  but after  I'd become  acclimatized I decided   this  was probably due  largely  to the  way  the dia­ logue  was  braided  into   the  first-person  narration,  without  being  set  off  by  in­ dented, separate lines. The  result  is page after    page   of   only   occasionally   para­ graphed  run-on   monologue,  giving   the
 narration  a   faintly    monotonous   over­ drone, which  takes  a  bit  of  getting  used to.  But  it's  quickly  worth it.  The stories are   immensely entertaining,  all   written from  the  point  of view  of an  eight-year­ old  boy  named   Hutchison  Killam, who, in close consultation with his mischievous  little   scamp    of   a   six-year-old    brother Pompman  (the  name  alone  is worth  the price  of the book)  observes with  bemused  wonder  the   carryings-on  of  his   pente­ costal,  holy-rolling, revivalist   uncles  and aunts.  Who  in  turn,   it  can   be  testified, disappoint no  one.  I  must  confess  I  had no idea that  so many of the more extrava­ gant outcroppings of the  Pentecostal and  Baptist movements had  found  footing  in the  Maritimes. I've  never even  heard  of half   of   the   denominations  Gibbs   lists: The  Latter   Rain   Free   Fellowship, The Double  Portion, The Nothingarians, The New  Light, The Reformed Baptists,  The Russelites, The Holy  Rollers,  The British Israelites. It  seems   clear   that   we   can finally stop  using Yoknapatawpha County as  the  standard conjuring device  for  the image  of  revivalist fervour.
The book  is primarily about the  boys, the  adult shenanigans being  used  mainly as  backdrop, but  the  backdrop proves  so detailed and  colourful and  some of the incidents so telling   (not  to  mention  out­ rageous)  that  Decimals virtually doubles  as  a  de  facto   folk-history  of   Maritime rural   and    small-town   life,    somewhat reminiscent  in  vitality   and   imagination of   Roch   Carrier's  crazy   tales   of  early twentieth-century rural  Quebec. At  the end  of  the  book  I was  indeed   left  with the  memory   of  two  thoroughly loveable  little  rascals  who  had  charmed my pants  off  for  147  pages,  but  I found   I'd   also developed a whole  new sense of the Mari­ times, its heritage and  its real  (as opposed  to political)  history.  That proved  an  un­ expected, and  much  appreciated, extra. Thus, I've   Always   Felt  Sorry   for   Deci­ mals  does  for  small-town Atlantic  Cana-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



da  what   Alistair   MacLeod's stories  are doing for its outports and  coastal  villages. Slowly  but   surely   the   pieces  are   being fitted  together.
In   Scars,  W.   P.   Kinsella  creates   a
story-writing Indian named  Silas Ermine­ skin  who  narrates sixteen  tales about  life on  the  Hobbema Reserve, where he lives with  his friends  Frank  Fence-Post, Louis Coyote,  Sadie One-Wound, Mad  Etta,  et al.   The   stories   are   for   the   most   part  hilarious,  zany  burlesques; clever,  inven­  tive,  missing  nary  a  cliche  or  stereotype  but  profiting briskly  from  that  residue  of truth  found   at   the  bottom of  all  plati­ tudes.  Quite frankly, I  have  a lot of mis­ givings  about this  book,  but  I  feel like a prude admitting to  them. What  Kinsella  has  done,  in  effect,  is  create  something like  a  Canadian   Amos  'n  Andy   about  Indians,  and   one   could    spend    many column    inches   complaining  about  the stereotyped  characters,  the   appropriate­ ness  (or  lack  of  same)   of  a  white  man writing  "autobiographical" fiction   from an   Indian's  point    of   view    (especially when  his   half-dozen  Indian  voices  all sound   exactly   the  same -like Anthony Quinn  pretending to  talk  Inuit, Indian, or  Arabic) , the  sometimes appalling sen­ timentality, the   Muzak-ed   renditions  of white-Indian  relations  which  coat   such often   tragic   collisions  with   just  enough  humour to  make   them  seem  innocuous, harmless-in short,  exactly   the  sort  of arguments  levelled  time  and   time  again against  Amos 'n Andy, a show which  por­ trayed    black    America   as   comfortably amusing,   almost childlike, harmless­ and  because  of  its  enormous  popularity set  back  America's whites'  understanding of  America's blacks  about 50  years.  On the other  hand, those stories were, as Kin­ sella's  are,  an  extremely entertaining col­ lection  of  high jinks  which  make  for  the most  part  very  amusing reading,  and  at least  one  part of  me  resists  the  notion that  every  Newfie  joke coming down  the
 pike has to carry a full load of social responsibility   on  its  shoulders. So  you'll just  have   to  make   up  your  own   mind whether   your   social  conscience   or  your funny bone comes first. My decision seems to change  every  time  I look at  the  book.
Which   leaves,   last   but   definitely   not least, City Boys, a sort of David  Stein "reader" containing new stories  and  old, an  excerpt  from  an  upcoming novel  en­ titled  Taking  Power, and  selections from  various   journalistic writings   about  New Left activities  in Chicago, New York, To­ ronto, etc., which  Stein  filed from  rg65 to
1970.  This   is  a  book  which   represents, grab-bag appearances  to  the  contrary, a fairly   thoughtfully  organized  assessment of the  social/political implications of the sixties, written by a man  who  lived  them hook  line  sinker  yet  kept  at  least  one  of himself always on  the sidelines,  writing  it all  down.  The result  is  some  extremely fine fiction which  derives much  of its urgency   and   forcefulness   directly   from that   (Stein's)  participant/observer  com­ bination;  Stein   is  one  of  the  very  few writers   I've  encountered who  is  able  to use his fiction  to puzzle out  the intricacies of politics  and  political  morality without sounding tiresomely didactic or dogmatic. His  stories   live   those  questions  just  as much  as he  does.
Much of  City  Boys looks  back.  Both
"The  Avenue" and   "Marvin, Marvin," two extraordinarily powerful  stories about growing  up  Jewish  in Toronto at  a  time when  Torontonians still  went  to  Buffalo for their kicks  (as opposed  to today when, ironically,  it's  the other way around), are the slightly sorrowful stock-takings of protagonists   who    have    reached  that (mid) point  in  their  lives  when  the  first mad   dash   is  over,   and   when   the   fear of an  anticlimactic future is greatest. Through  them   Stein   touches   base  with his own  origins,  his own  ideals  and  pre­ judices,  his  receipts and  losses of  grace,  his  revolutions  and   reactions.   He   also

147

BOOKS IN REVIEW



manages  to   weave   in   a   very   sensibly handled perusal  of what  it meant  to be a Canadian  nationalist then   and   what   it means today, the differences between the Canadian and  the American approach to life, and  what  it means  to be a Canadian writer   in  view  of  the  above-all  ques­ tions  which  have  been  flogged  to  death by  theorizing public  debaters but  which are  just  beginning to come  to real  life in our  poetry  and  fiction  (which  is probably where   they  really  belong). The   writing is brisk, clear and  never self-indulgent, proving once  again   that   a  good  fiction writer  who commits journalism for a  liv­ ing  always  stands   to  gain  a  little  extra from  the  cross-pollination of his  two  oc­ cupations. And at least three of  the stories (comprising well over  half  the  book)  are so  effective,  so  evocative   and  so  utterly  ruthlessly  frank,  that  by the end of them I just ached -not only for the protagon­ ist, but  also for  the writer, and  for me.

ANDREAS SCHROEDER


GENTLE THEMATICS

JOHN  Moss, ed.  The Canadian   Novel:   Here and  Now.  NC  Press.

WHAT  FORM    SHOULD literary   analysis take?  Such  speculation is spawned   by a reading  of   John    Moss's   "Critical   An­ thology," The Canadian Novel: Here and Now. Only  four  of the fourteen  pieces in it  have  not  been  published  elsewhere.  Of the  others,  six  were  originally  published in  ]ournal  of Canadian Fiction. There is, of  course,  nothing  wrong   with   this,  al­ though  Moss  seems  to  want   to  hide  it. The  real  problem is with  the  choice  of material. If these   are   the   best  articles Moss  could  find,  I'm   afraid we  haven't been  doing  much.  The  introduction  sug­ gests that  the only editorial limitation was to choose  analyses  which  deal  specifically with   one   of  the   six   "most   significant"
 contemporary  Canadian   novelists,    At­ wood, Davies,  Laurence, Munro, Richler, and  Wiebe.  Even  if one agrees with  these "most  significant,"  the   works  Moss  chooses  to  "reveal and  celebrate" them need  some  justification.
Almost all of the articles present gentle thematic treatments. Each  goes through a series   of   interpretations  and,  in   some cases,  evaluations. The  type  of  observa­ tion  is well  represented by the  following  statement  from    Allan   Dueck's   article  about Rudy Wiebe:

That the  Indians in  Big Bear share with the  best  Christians in  Wiebe's other  fiction an  intense awareness of  transcendent reality and    a    strong   sense    of   peoplehood   and equality suggests not  that they  are  thinly disguised Mennonites but  that   Wiebe  recog­ nizes  the  validity of  other varieties  of  relig­ ous  experience than his  own.

A  nice  statement. One   that  few,  if  any, would   reject   or   even   argue   with.   But what  does it really  say?  Is there  anything more   to  this  than   what   every  sensitive reader of Wiebe  has  thought? And  this is one of the better  pieces in the book. Is it worthwhile  to   publish    a   collection  of what  are  really  classroom  interpretations of a series of novels?
One  hesitates to  damn   thematic  criti­ cism  in  general and  fall  into  the  gaping trap  of  the  formalists who  seem  waiting  to grab  us all. As one of my students once said,   "Don't  you  think   the   novelist   is more  interested  that   we  know  what he is saying  than  that we dissect how he says it?"  But  because  the writer's statement is usually   reasonably  clear  to  us,  thematic studies  must  be something more.
One  way to break  new ground is to reappraise a work  and  to reroute critical interpretation. Another is to study  some­ one who is not usually considered. A third  opportunity is presented by unusual com­ parisons.
But   the   essays  in   this  collection are mainly   rather  tired   rehearsals  of  quite

BOOKS IN REVIEW



familiar ideas. Even  those  that  are excep­ tions  have  obvious  faults.  Frank  Pesando provides     some    interesting    perceptions about  Margaret  Laurence  but it  is  the type  of essay which  requires  an  overview and  there  is no mention of The  Diviners. The  argument thus seems to be left hang­  ing.  The excuse,  of course,  is that  Pesan­ do's  article   appeared in  ]CF  in  1973,  a year  before  The  Diviners. But  Moss pro­ vides  no  dates   for  the  original  publica­ tion  so one  must  become  a  detective to place  essays like  that   of  Pesando   in  his­ torical  perspective.
Tim  Struther's insightful connections between   Alice  Munro and  other writers of "photographs in  print" is damaged  by the imbalance between  the introductory emphasis   on   the  fact   that   these  others are from  the  Southern United States  and the   failure  to   develop    the   American­ Canadian   comparison.  If   there    is   an "American  influence"   Struther  doesn't  show it. And  Gordon  Roper's very useful introduction  to  Jungian  ideas   does  not become a well-integrated study of Davies. He   misses   the   minutiae,   although  in many ways  the  minor   and   very  specific points   of  Davies'   use  of  Jung  are   the most  revealing.
So why  the  book?  I don't know.  Most
of  the  critics   anthologized  have  written better pieces elsewhere, often on the same writers.
TERRY GOLDIE
 MICROSCOPE

IVON   OWEN    and    MORRIS   WOLFE,   eds.,   The Best Modern  Canadian   Short  Stories. Hur­ tig,  $12.95·
ROBERT WEAVER, ed., Canadian Short Stories: Third   Series.  Oxford,  $5·95·
DOUGLAS  BARBOUR,  ed.,  The   Story  So  Far  5.
Coach  House, $4-95·
JOHN   METCALF and   CLARK  BLAISE,  eds.,  78: Best   Canadian    Stories.    Oberon,  $ r 5.00; pa.  $6.95.

LET ME BEGIN WITH  the microscope. Con­
sider  this passage :

In  the   summer  time   the   mountains  were soft,   deceptive  in   their   innocency, full   of crags  and  crevasses and   aretes and   danger. In   the   winter  they   lay   magnificent, white and  much  higher, it seemed, than in  the summer time.  They tossed,  static, in  almost visible   motion  against  the    sky,   inhabited only   by  eagles   and  -so   a   man   had   told Mr.   Willy,   but   he  didn't  believe   the   man
-by mountain  sheep    and    some   cougars,
bears,  wild  cats  and, certainly, on  the  lower slopes,  deer, and  now   a  ski  camp far   out of sight.

These  three  sentences  are  not  notable  for economy or precision.  The  phrase  "in  the summer   time"   is  needlessly   repeated  in the  second  sentence, and  so is the  word "man" in  the  third. It  is  not  apparent why   the   archaic  form    "innocency"  is used; nor is it clear whether the third sen­ tence  refers  to  winter, to  summer,  or  to both seasons. The phrase  "inhabited  only by eagles" seems on first reading to apply to the nearest  noun -"sky" -but  when the  other   fauna are  introduced,  after   a rather long qualifier, the  reader is  forced to  detach  the  whole  list  from  "sky" and apply  it  instead   to  the  pronoun  "they." Presumably the   man   whom   Mr.   Willy didn't believe  told   him  about  the  deer and  the  ski camp,  as  well  as  about   the sheep,  cougars,  wild  cats  and   bears,  but if so it isn't clear why the existence  of the deer   and   the   "out  of  sight" ski  camp  should  be more  certain than  the existence

149

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



of the other  things. And can a ski camp, strictly  speaking, inhabit   the  mountains, in  the  way  bears  do?
Now  this:

Now  in  the  early   evening  the  sun  is  flash­ ing  everything in  gold.  It bathes  the  blunt grey  rocks  that  loom  yearningly  out  toward Europe  and   it   touches  upon   the   stunted spruce  and   the   low-lying   lichens   and   the delicate hardy ferns  and  the  ganglia-rooted moss  and   the   tiny   tough   rock  cranberries. The  grey   and    slanting   rain   squalls  have  swept  in   from   the   sea  and   then   departed with    all   the   suddenness   of   surprise  ma­  rauders.

The  tautness of  these  three  sentences  is at  once  apparent. Words  do  double  and triple    duty:   "blunt"  means    not   only "rounded,  worn," but   also  "stubborn"; "slanting"  refers   to  both   the   angle   at which  the  rain  has  been  falling  and  the rapid  movement of the squalls across  the land.   An  impression  of  resourceful  life, persevering under   difficult  conditions, is economically conveyed  in the oxymoronic phrases  "delicate hardy  ferns"  and  "tiny tough  rock cranberries." "Ganglia-rooted moss"  suggests  both   the  lumpy  appear­ ance  of  the  moss  roots  and  their sinewy strength. We have already  a fairly precise idea  of  the  scene's  location  (Newfound­ land)  and  the time of year  (late  spring).
I make  no large  claims for this exercise
in stylistic  analysis,  and  am  certainly not suggesting that  Ethel  Wilson,  the  author of  the  first  extract, is incapable of  pre­ cision,  nor  that   Alistair  MacLeod  (from  whose  "The Lost Salt  Gift  of  Blood"  the second  extract comes)   has  a  monopoly,  among Canadian writers, over descriptive power.  (The  syntactical  confusion  of the Wilson  passage can be defended, perhaps, as   reflecting the   superficiality    of   Mr.  Willy's   own  attitude towards   the  scene outside   his   window.)     My   substantive point  is this:  the  new generation of Can­ adian  writers, particularly Blaise,  Hood, Levine,  MacLeod,  Metcalf,  Munro, Thompson and   Wiebe,  is setting  a  new
 high  standard in  short  fiction  for  econ­ omy   and  "particularity"   (Metcalf's term). In  the  twenty  years  since  Robert Weaver   edited    Canadian   Short   Stories for Oxford's World's Classics series, Can­ adian  writing   has  diversified   out  of  all recognition, and criticism  has some catch­ ing  up  to do.
Owen  and  Wolfe's The Best Modern Canadian Short  Stories is intended as a landmark by which  these  changes  might be measured-the editors  call it a "stock­ taking." Despite the  claim  implicit  in  its title,  the  reader  who  really wants  to keep up  with   modern  Canadian  writing   will find   it  out-of-date  quite   soon.   (In   the introduction,  however,    the   editors   are quite  frank  about the  "conservative" ten­ dency  of their  taste.)   Morley  Callaghan, Anne    Hebert,  Hugh    Hood,   Margaret Laurence,  Alice   Munro,   Sinclair  Ross, Gabrielle  Roy,  Rudy   Wiebe   and   Ethel  Wilson    are    represented,   with    fifteen others:  among  those  omitted are  Shirley Faessler,  Mavis   Gallant,  Hugh   Garner, John  Metcalf, Joyce   Carol   Oates, Jane Rule,  and  Kent  Thompson.
More than half the stories have "urban settings,"  as   the   introduction  helpfully tells us; but this obscures the fact that a Canadian "urban  setting" is very  unlike New   York   or   Paris.   In   Margaret   At­ wood's    "Polarities,"  set   in   Edmonton, Louise, a graduate teaching assistant  who adores  Blake, tells her sceptical  American friend  "The city  has  no right  to  be here. I mean, why is it?  No city should  be here, this  far   north." The  wilderness   has  re­ ceded,  but  it's  lying  low, biding  its  time, and  every  so often,  like  the  Minotaur, it claims  another  victim:  another mind  is violated   by  that  great   white   space.   Its annual  tribute is  psychological, not  car­  nal.  Atwood's Louise,  Rudy  Wiebe's  Mr. Tudor, Ethel  Wilson's  Mr.  Willy, Hugh Hood's  Ellie   Haskell,   all   experience a peculiarly Canadian   anomie, and   yield up  their  minds  to a monomania that  will

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



somehow  fill the interior space.  A wilder­ ness doesn't have  to  be  geographical, as Thoreau realized  in  Walden. The trans­  formation  of   geographical  into   mental space  is most  skilfully  achieved by Hugh  Hood,   in  "Three Halves   of  a  House"; Ellie  has  tried  apocalyptic religion  to fill up  that  interior vacuum, but  at  the  end she  lies  on  her  deathbed  listening to  the sirens of  the  ships  passing  by on  the  St. Lawrence, and  she  flows  with   the  river (in  a black  parody of Anna  Livia  Plura­ belle  and   the  Liffey?)    "down  east  past the  Plains  of Abraham, farther ... to the darkness, the sleety impassible impassable Gulf."  Hood's  luminous   sense  of  place and  firmly  voiced  dialogue  are  outstand­ ing  features of  this story.
Upholding or  resuscitating an  ancient
culture is  usually,  in  these  stories,  a  pa­ thetic or  absurd gesture.  Dave  Godfrey's protagonist in "On the River" says of his family,  "The only  thing   that  held  them together was  the  queen, I  used  to  think, and  of course  that's absurd  now." All the same,  he  buys  his  wife  challah, "so  your traditions don't die  out  in  a  new  land." Small,   even   consciously   trivial   gestures replace the grandiose, exhausted faiths.
Escape  is impossible, or  is bought at  a dear  price. Norman Levine's Alexander Marsden escapes  from  the  Jewish  sector of Montreal, its "strong family  and  relig­ ious  ties,"  to seek a  "wider view  of  life" in  England, but  he  finds  nothing there  for  him  but  intellectual  numbness. The  land  is strong,  indeed; if  you stay  it may destroy   you  anyway,  but  if  you  go  its vastness  will  pursue,  haunt and  emascu­ late you.
Robert Weaver's Third Series of stories,
unlike  the first two, has  to share  the field with  other anthologies of high  quality. It will hold its own. Three of the  best stories in Owen-Wolfe ("Polarities," Alice Mun­ ro's  "Material," and  W. D. Valgardson's "Bloodflowers") also  appear  in  Weaver's collection;  the   contributions  of   Clark
 Blaise,   Norman  Levine,    Alistair   Mac­ Leod,  Joyce  Marshall,  Audrey  Thomas and   Rudy   Wiebe   are   better   than   their contributions   to    Owen-Wolfe,   in    my view.   Weaver   describes    the   anthology simply as "a collection of short  fiction first published   in   the   late    196o's   and    the
197o's," avoiding with  wise modesty  the claim   that   he  is  "taking stock."  Child­ hood, continuity, ritual, the 197o's search  for simplicity,  the  questioning of border­ lines and barriers -these themes give the anthology  a unity  (not  uniformity) which is more satisfying than  the rather specious modernity of  Owen and  Wolfe. Children and  old  people,  in  the  stories  by  Mavis Gallant,  Alistair   MacLeod, Joyce  Mar­ shall  and Jane Rule,  shake  their  heads wonderingly  over   the   mid-life   crises  of the citified and  prosperous middle-aged. Since  Hagar Shipley we have  listened  to the  very old  and   the  very  young  again; they  may  not  be  seers  blest,  but  at  least their senses are  not blunted by years of e!ectronic   hype   and   Ph.D.   comprehen­ Sives.
Jane  Rule's  children ("My Father's House") have  the awful  lucidity that  is caught  so  well   by  Danish  writers   like Karen Blixen  ("The Dreaming Child") and  Martin  Andersen Nex0   ("Adrift") , devoutly  believing  what  they  hear  adults say, and  applying it  with  disconcertingly unambiguous   logic   to   what    they    see around them.  Irina, in the story by Mavis Gallant, is the  widow  of a militant Swiss atheist,  whose will patronizingly instructs their  children  to  cherish   Irina,  "his flower," now he is gone. Tired of being cherished  after a few Christmases Irina decides  to stay  at  home  and  start  living; her  sons and  daughters, worried, arrange for a grandchild to be sent  to her, think­ ing she needs "a  symbol of  innocent, con­ tinuing life,"  but  it is the  child  who  will most  profit  from   the  visit.  A  complex, resonant  story.    In   Alistair    MacLeod's "The  Lost   Salt   Gift   of   Blood,"   like

151

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



"Irina" a  mysterious, understated  tale,  a middle-aged folklorist  ("I have  collected many    things    I   did   not   understand'') comes  to  Newfoundland where  his child is  being   cared   for  by  its  grandparents. "The old and  the young singing now their songs of loss in different comprehensions. Stranded here,  alien  of my  middle  gen­ eration,   I    tap    my   leather    foot   self­ consciously...."  Reality,   now,  is  some­ thing  that happens to you before you are fifteen  and  after  you  are  fifty,  when  the senses are  alive  and  precious. John Met­  calf's  exiled  English  academic, recalling  with  Nabokovian  vividness his childhood in  southern  England, is hard  on  Words­  worth -"no  philosophical cast  of  mind can do justice  to particularity" -but the story  works  only  because  Metcalf  can do justice    to   particularity.  He   remembers the feel of Hampshire turf  under  his feet, and   the  fishermen's name  for  the  blud­ geon  they  use  to stun  fish.
Particularity	in 	characterization	is
Alice   Munro's  strong   suit.   "Material,"
already  reprinted  from   Something   I've Been  Meaning   to  Tell  You   ( I974)   by Rudy   Wiebe   in  Double  Vision   (I 976) and   in  Owen   and   Wolfe,  reappears  in this  collection, but  I  would  not  have  it left  out.  With  Hugo Johnson-bearded, wildhaired, born in the bush, claiming experience  as   a   lumberjack  and   beer­
slinger   (you   need   at  least  a  slight  ac­ quaintance with  the  wilderness  to  make it  as  a  male  writer  in  Canada),  playing Mellors   to   his  wife's   Lady   Chatterley, adored by wives of doctors and engineers
-Munro has   half   the   writers-in-resi­
dence   of  Canada pinned   and   wriggling on  the  slab.
The sheer  quality of the writing  in the Weaver anthology-in the stories I have mentioned,  but   also   in  some   vigorous work  by Clark  Blaise, Hugh  Garner, Jack Hodgins, Audrey  Thomas, Kent Thomp­ son  and   Rudy   Wiebe-makes  it  essen­ tial for any library  of Canadian literature.
 The "experimentalism" that is excluded from  Weaver, and  all  but  excluded from Owen-Wolfe (the exception being Jacques Ferron's "Melie and  the Bull"), is in full flower   in  Barbour's  The   Story  So  Far
5, which  includes  bp  Nichol's graphic "Scraptures,"  Wayne Clifford's  neo­ Joycean, syncretistic "An  Interruption," John Shirley's surreal and  frankly  rather tedious  "Modern  Transmutations of  the
Alchemist," Daphne Marlatt's  story­ about-a-story, "In  the   Beginning," and David  Arnason's   polymath   "Binary Lovers." To  my  mind  only  the  last  two of   these   work,   and   Arnason's,  though  numerate and  funny  (yes, Virginia, there  is humour  in  Canada), is so  at  the  ex­ pense  of   (yes)   another  wenching, beer­ swilling  Hugo Johnson, and  another cul­ ture-starved, man-hungry doctor's wife. (And   Amason's closing  Fibonacci  series is  unfortunately made   nonsense  of  by  a silly  misprint.)   Dalphne   Marlatt   does what  Ethel Wilson  tried  to do in  "Cross­ ing the  Frontier," the story as  journey,  as bridge  between  real and imagined worlds;  Marlatt has  more  economy  and  sophisti­ cation  in narrative technique.
Steve  McCaffery's "Sunday Funnies" aren't, as far  as this  reader  is concerned, but  his other contribution, "The Murder of Agatha Christie," includes  a  nineteen­ line  tour  de  force  that  turns  article-plus­ noun-plus-verb into  a veritable, veritable nightmare.   Brenda   Riches    ("Styx,"  a short  short  story of  bizarre  sexuality) and Stephen  Scobie   ("Gunfight")  are   more  sure  of  themselves than most  of the other experimenters:  less  is  more.   Wade   Bell ("An Animal Tale")  could  take  lessons in economy from  either  of them.
The  remaining eight  stories  in  The Story So Far 5 are less innovative in form, but  carry  on  the  series'  favourite role  of
opening up  new  territory. A summary of Jack    Hodgins'  "The   Leper's  Squint" (Canadian  writer goes  to  Ireland to  try and   overleap the  five  generations divid-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ing  him  from  his  Irish  ancestors)  makes it  sound  unoriginal: it  isn't.  Philip  Des­ mond   is  the  most  believable  writer-pro­ tagonist  in  any  of  these  anthologies, and though he is not  beery, egotistical or anx­ ious   about   impotence  he   holds  the  reader's  attention  completely. Bill  Kin­  sella  creates   a  wholly   believable Indian community, waging   a  nasty  but  appro­ priate kind  of  biological   warfare  against the  representatives of  "Culture  Canada" (who   are   none   of  them  Canadians, of course)  :  another lesson  for  anyone  who thinks   Canadian  writing  has  to  be  hu­  mourless,  and   also  one  of   the  very  few stories in these collections with  a political  edge.  Tom  Marshall deserves  some  kind of prize for the most  tongue-in-cheek line of dialogue:  "God, this is a boring  town. I'm  going  to Toronto."
78:  Best Canadian Stories, though  not quite  the Michelin of Canadian fiction as its blurb  proclaims, is a good  route  map. Its  ten  stories  (nine fewer  than  Barbour, eight   fewer   than   Weaver)  are  of  more consistent   quality  than   Barbour's  collec­ tion, yet sufficiently  varied  to suggest that  the   editors   have   avoided   any  kind   of apriorism. It  is   (surprisingly)  the  only anthology of  the  four   to  print anything by Joyce  Carol  Oates -a  skilful  tale  of nineteenth-century  spiritualism,   "Night­ Side." Alice  Munro heads   the  collection  with    an    incisive,    unsentimental   story about    love   at   graduate  school,   "The Beggar    Maid."    The   Great  Canadian Vacuum has   its   victims   here,   too:   in Peter   Behrens'   "In   Montreal"  the   re­ cently  tenured  young  archeologist, living in  St. Henri  for  its cheapness and  prole­  tarian cosiness, watches his wife, a prom­  ising  artist,  pack  away  her  pigments and give  herself  up  to  the  insidious  power  of an incense-laden, ascetic  religion. As with the   MacLeod   and    Thomas  stories   in Weaver, many   protagonists look  for  the simpler  realities, but  find  they  have  been cheated of  them:  in  Kent  Thompson's
 "The Pilot," the air is heavy with  a sexu­ ality  that   fails  to  become   quite  tactile, just as the stunt  pilot  who is to entertain the Dominion Day crowds disappears into  the fog, and  fails even  to amuse  them  by crashing. Not   even   baseball   is  immune from  the  joyless  technocrats of  the  7o's. Hood's  "Ghosts  at  Jarry" is  as  modern a story as any in The Story  So Far 5, but it   indicts   neo-capitalistic  megalomania much  more effectively,  placing the Olym­ pic  Stadium where  it  belongs.  The   hot­ dogs  at  old  Jarry Park   may  have   been wet  and   turd-like,  but   they   were   real, they  shared  something with  the  earth  it­ self  ("without form  and   void"); at  the Olympic Stadium  the  outfielders  bounce  around  on   an   emerald-green   easycare  plastic   surface   out   of  a  laboratory,  the human  smell  of  the  game  banished  by
I 984-ish  architeeture.
All four of these anthologies deserve  to be read; three  of  them  deserve  to be  re­ read,  studied   and   criticized, for  reasons given by a character named David  Ama­ son in David  Arnason's  "Binary Lovers," who tells his students-in all seriousness,
I  hope -"the  greatest art  is that  which gets  the  most  and  the  best  criticism.... that's why Canadian art  is not  superior. We  haven't  taken   it  seriously  enough." We haven't: but  we can start  now.

ANTHONY JOHN  HARDING


THE ART OF HAUNTING GHOSTS

MAVIS  GALLANT,   From  the   Fifteenth  District.
Macmillan, $12.95.
THE TITLE  STORY IN  From  the  Fifteenth District is an odd piece. In three anecdotal sketches,  it  tells  three  separate stories  of haunting: but  in  the  turnabout world  of Mavis Gallant it is the ghosts who are haunted. People   who  remain alive  pur-

153

BOOKS IN REVIEW



sue, perceive  them,  and so perpetuate the images  they have  created of them,  which are  always external, and  therefore always inaccurate. Major Emery Travella wishes to  be  rid  of  "the entire   congregation of St.  Michael and  All Angels on  Bartholo­ mew  Street," who  pursue  him  with  tape recorders  and   "burn  incense  under   the pews"; Mrs.  Ibrahim, mother  of twelve, wishes  to be rid  of the  doctor  and  social worker  who  refuse  to agree  on  the  truth  of the  treatment they have accorded her;  and  Mrs. Carlotte Essling wishes to be rid of a husband who keeps insisting she is an angel  (whereas angels, she says, are either  "messengers" or  "paramilitary," and  al­ ways "stupid"). Such  sketches amply  dis­ play  Gallant's  sardonic asperity  and  the precision   of   her  social   conscience.   Yet what,  as  fiction,   do   they  signify?   One  answer  to this question might  well be that  they  don't have  to signify  anything; they just  have  to  exist,  as  artistically-turned objects  for  us to  marvel  at  and  pass  by. But  that  won't  do.  Insistently the  stories call  attention to themselves, and then to something else; the nature of human rela­ tionship, perhaps-but that  is too bland; more  closely,  our  human  compulsion  to visit ourselves  upon  the  past,  in order  to secure  a  significance  we  fear   we  might  otherwise be unable  to possess.
By chance, I read  this book at the same time  as I read  Margaret Atwood's Life Before  Man, a brittle elegy for the I 97o's in which  egocentricity triumphs over affection, demonstration over ceremony, and  distance over  relationship. Much about the old  traditions ridiculed  and  re­ jected  in  Atwood's book is shown  clearly to  be  ridiculous and   rejectable,  yet  the empty  generation of  the  story-despite sex  and  intellect:  despite  either   Reason  or  Passion-can find  no  way  to  escape its  own  emptiness.   Even  the  narratorial voice is aloof,  cautious, caustic  at critical  moments   as    though    insecure.    About what? Presumably about what  it all signi-

I 54
 fies.  For  ultimately  the  characters don't matter; they  are  would-be urban  sophis­ ticates,  chocolate rabbits  without centres. Readers  are  invited   to  watch  them,  but there  is no life with  which  to engage; and all that  does seem finally to matter in the book is the  texture of the language itself, an   inwardly-spiralling   evocation  of   an attitude that  in turn epitomizes an elusive decade.
In  Gallant's world  characters do  mat­ ter,  despite the  fact  that  their  lives seem often  as  bone-barren as any  in  Atwood's case  studies.  I  think   this  is  so  because,  however insignificant the lives, in each  of them  something of  consequence happens. The textures of  Gallant's stories-all  as third-person  as  Atwood's-work to  ex­ pose   the   fabric   of  consequence rather than   the  tissue  of  appearance. And   the fictionality  of  "From the  Fifteenth  Dis­ trict" points  to the  process  whereby such revelations happen.
The stories  are  set in  Europe. French, Italian, Swiss, German, the characters are variously survivors, exiles, emigres, border­ crossers,   visitors,    and   prisoners-of-war. But  most  of all,  if  we  can  trust  the  title story, ghosts.  In  "The Moslem  Wife,"  for example, a  woman  named   Netta   Asher inherits a hotel  and  a  world  in  the  south of France, marries  her  cousin  Jack  Ross, and sets out to live an ordinary life. When  World   War   II  intervenes, catching  her there  and  Jack in America, each  develops separately, and  when  later  she  writes  to him  she  wants  to  send  the  truth of  her own  experience:
'I suppose that you  already have  the  fiction of  all  this.  The fiction must  be different, oh very  different, from   Italians sobbing with home-sickness  in   the   night.  The  Germans were  not  real,  they  were  specially got  up  for the  events of  the   time. . . .  Only   in  retreat did   they   develop faces   and   I noticed then that  some   were   terrified  and   many   were old.... '
This  true  story   sounded  so  implausible that she  decided never to send  it. She  wrote a  sensible letter  asking   for   sugar  and   rice

BOOKS IN REVIEW



and for  new  books; nothing must   be  older than 1940.

But  she  cannot pass  into   new  territory; his memory  will not let her. He sends food but forgets about books, and  then  returns, asserting that  a walk  with  her  before the War  was "the happiest event  of his life." Despite  all  her  intentions, all her  experi­ ence,  all  the  changes in  her  tangible  self, she  is  haunted  by  this  foreign   presence that  lays claim  to the reality  of a previous  existence.   Gallant  then   closes  the  story with  one  of  those  magnificent, moodily detached   sentences   which    characterize her   writing.  In   the   face   of  Jack's  flat declaration, no matter how  unconvincing it  is, Netta  surrenders: "Having no  reli­ able counter-event to put  in its place, she let the memory  stand."
One  questions, of  course,  the  satisfac­ toriness  of   such a   relationship.  But what  the  story  does  is  make  us aware  of the  inadequacy of   any  relationship,  the nature of  its  genesis,  and  its  undeniable reality.   As  with   the  finest  of  the  other  stories  in  the  book-"The Remission," for example, in which  a sick Englishman takes longer  than  expected to die on  the Riviera, with  an impact of an  unexpected kind  on  his  family; or  "The  Latehome­ comer," in  which  a German  prisoner-of­ war is held longer  than normal in France  because   his  papers  have  been  lost,  and finally  returns  home  unfulfillingly, want­  ing  a  prewar  mother, who  herself  wants a   postwar   son-"The  Moslem   Wife"  takes  the  present, twists  it  sharply   with the  past,  and   watches   the  exchange  of ghosts. The picture that  emerges  is not  a jolly  one,  though  it  is  not  without   wry amusement,  but   it  is  intensely  compas­ sionate.  To  be human  in  Gallant's world is to  be touched  almost  always  by dura­ tions  of distress,  but  it  is not  as a conse­ quence to  be  out  of  reach  of love. As a result,  the  book  is an  enormously satisfy­ ing one.  Neither flamboyant nor slick nor particularly easy to read,  it is a splendidly
 written   work,  full   of  nuance  and   per­ sonality  and   compellingly  evocative  de­ tail.  It draws  us slowly  into  the  vortices  of human   behaviour,  and  asks  us  to  ob­ serve more faithfully than  we might  have  thought possible  the intricate simplicities of our  fellows and  ourselves.

W. H. NEW



NOW IN PAPER

Inexpensive  paper   editions  of   a   number  of Quebec  texts   are   now   available  from   Fides. The  "Bihliotheque quebecoise"  series    (com­ plete  with  working bibliographies, chronologies, and    critical  comments)   now   includes  Saint Denys-Garneau's  Poemes  choisis;  Alfred  Des­  rochers's  A  l'ombre  de  l'Orford;  and   several novels,  histoires, and  story collections from  the  past     (Rodolphe    Girard's  Marie   Calumet), from  mid-century  (Andre Giroux's Au  dela  des visages  and  Alain  Grandbois's Les  Voyages de Marco   Polo),    and    from    the    near-present (Honore  Beaugrand's La  Chasse-galerie, Felix  Leclerc's  Dialogues d'hommes  et  de  b tes, Robert de   Roquebrune's  Testament  de   man  enfance) .  All welcome   back,  in  a helpful for­  mat   for  school   use.   Also   available  is  a   3rd  edition  of   Adrienne  Choquette's  La   Nuit  ne dart  pas, with  the  addition of two  unpublished tales     (les    presses     Laurentiennes);   and   a French  translation, by Eric  Diacon, of Timothy Findley's The Wars ( Guerres, L'arbre HMH).

W.H.N.


****   MICHAEL   ONDAATJE,   ed.,   A   Book    of Beasts,  drawings by  Tony Urquhart.  Oberon, pa.  $9-95·     It is  rare   that anthologies of  any kind  are  things of  beauty, but   this  is  a  hand­ some  book,  a   (relatively)  inexpensive  edition of  a  work   that first   appeared  in   197I.   On­ daatje  has  collected  various  "animal  poems"
-by Newlove, Coleman, Birney, Webb, Acorn, Atwood, Lane, and  others. In themselves they are   a   pleasing collection,  and   an   interesting
commentary upon  Canadians' fascination with animal tales; but  with  Urquhart's  drawings as well,  the  book  becomes  an  art object, to  read and  to  admire.
W.N.

155






WRITER AT PLAY

IN CONCLUDING  HIS "Conclusion" to the most  recent  edition   of  the  Literary  His­ tory  of Canada  Northrop Frye enjoins  us, rather soberly,  to play for  posterity.  One  Canadian writer   to  have  taken   this  in­ junction fully  to  heart,  but  long  before Frye's  prompting, is George  Woodcock.  I mean    no   disrespect.   Woodcock's  play would stagger  the average  worker. He has written 50 books in the  past 40 years and continues unabated. He  has  made  a  life of  the  game   of  letters   and   while  very serious in his widespread interests has, one feels, always enjoyed  playing at literature in Frye's  elevated  sense.
The  more  one looks at  his professional play, the more one is struck  by its variety. We knew  him as critic,  traveller, journal­ ist, biographer, historian, poet, polemicist, political   essayist  and   editor,   not   neces­ sarily   in   that   order.  Who  would   have guessed  that  he is a playwright and  trans­  lator   as  well?  On  the  other   hand, why not?  In his preface  to a verse translation of Racine's Phedre  he tells us that  in the mid-Ig6o's he translated several  plays for Gerald   Newman   of   Vancouver   CBC, Moliere's Tartuffe and Le Bourgeois Gen­ tilhomme  among   them.   His  Phaedra   is published  in   the   Spring  1978  issue  of Contemporary  Literature  in Translation and,  as another example  of his dramatic play,  two  other  texts,  originals  this  time, "The Island   of  Demons" and  "Six  Dry Cakes   for   the   Hunted,"  appear  in   a volume  entitled  Two Plays published   by Talonbooks.
Phedre  is a great  bugbear  to the  Eng­ lish genius.  Racine is the geometrician of the  passions,  measuring,  bisecting,  elabo-
 rating exquisitely  precise  and  complex formulae of feeling.  The   tight  structures of the  French language, the  niceties of its (to  us)  abstract vocabulary, the  pellucid flow of the alexandrines, all are emphatic­ ally  right   for  Racine; all  are  devilishly difficult  to put  into loose-structured, con­ crete-worded,  (to  them)  thumping iam­  bic   pentameter.   How    does   Woodcock  make  out?
His translation is trustworthy and regu­ lar. If one  wishes to  thread  the labyrinth of  Phedre's passion,  his  decasyllabic line is a good  guide.  But  perhaps he has  been too  faithful. The  only liberty  he  takes  is to  allow  a  few  archaisms. The effect  to the  English  ear  is a  strict  and  somewhat stilted  version  as monotonous, in the long run,   as  those   hypnotic  French  alexan­ drines.
In  his preface Woodcock notes  that  he consulted   no    other   translation.  One
understands this policy  but,  prompted by an invidious comparative urge, I read one other, a  worthy  competitor, Robert Lowell's Phaedra  (I g6o). Lowell  notes in his preface  that  Racine "has  few verbally inspired  lines" and,  apologizing for "the fraudulence  of  my  own   heavy   touch," allows  that   he  introduced some  "unRa­ cinian   humour and   bombast."  Although his  translation  is  in   rhyming   couplets,  compared  to  Woodcock's it  is  idiomatic and   exciting. Perhaps  the  real  test,  the one  to  make  the  game  more challenging, would  have been to read some other  trans­  lations,  noting their excellence  and  short­ comings,  and  then  to  have  tried  to steer a still  original  course  among them.
Alternatively,   the    translation   might have  been  tested  by  being  rehearsed  by actors,  and  reworked several  times by the author before  it reached its final  version. I do  not  know  whether  Woodcock's Phaedra   had   benefit   of  production.  At any  rate  it cannot have  received  the long and close attention that  David  French's recent  translation of Chekhov's The Sea-

OPINIONS & NOTES



gull   did   (General Publishing, Ig78). French is  able,  because   he  worked  inti­ mately  with  the  Tarragon Theatre  pro­ duction of the  play, to give a version  that  (like   Lowell's   Phaedra)   is  modem  but ageless,  idiomatic without  being  idiosyn­ cratic; one that  is striking in its cleanness, naturalness and  economy when  compared to  other   Chekhov   translations.  In   dra­ matic  translation,  as  in  everything to do with  the  theatre, nothing can  replace  ex­ perience gained  by collective  play.
What of Woodcock's original dramas? Although no mention is made  of the fact, they  are  patently radio  plays,  or  at  least plays for voice principally; there  is little action   and  stage  effects  are  more  audio than  visual. The first, "The Island  of Demons," is based  on the legend  of  Mar­ guerite, niece  of Sieur  de  Roberval, who in  I54I  was stranded for  a  winter  on an island   in  the   St.  Lawrence.  In   Wood­  cock's  play she is stranded there  with  her lover, her maidservant, and  three  demons  "dressed  in  the  style  of  modern  public relations   men,"  the   demons  of  Doubt, Discord and  Regret. Flaunting her uncle's disapproval of her love for a commoner, Marguerite hopes  to  live  an  Edenic   life with  him  in  the  New  World. But  Cana­ dian  nature, as  in  Frye's  dictum,  proves to be primeval, pagan, terrifying and  hos­ tile.  Her   lover  is  killed   by  a   bear,  her maidservant by  wolves,  and  Marguerite, haunted by demons, though  rescued,  is a broken  woman.
In his critical writing Woodcock is sceptical  of the simplicity of Margaret Atwood's Survival  thesis,  but  his play  is a dead  ringer  for  it. The lover  is a  Posi­ tion  Ivictim, one who does not realize he is   a   victim:  an   aggressive   imperialist European  male   romantic,  he   wants   to dominate nature with  his gun. The maid­ servant knows she is a victim but  is religi­ ously  resigned   to  her  fate:   Position   2. Margaret struggles  with  her  victimhood and  her demons  but, despite a last minute
 intervention  by   the   Virgin    Mary,   she barely  reaches  Position  3· The   moral  of the  play,  for  it  is a  morality, as  in  At­ wood's  "Progressive Insanities  of  a  Pio­ neer,"   is  that   one   cannot  impose   Old World  patterns on  the  wilderness.
Apart  from  the  fact  that   the  action  is thin   and   the   animal   executioners  too obvious, the  play might  have  more  bite if it were not for  the language. The  human characters speak  antiquated English,  the PR  demons  bureaucratese. This  kind  of "poetic" diction lulls and  dulls  the senses when it should  sharpen and  assault  them. "Six   Dry   Cakes   for   the   Hunted" is about   the  Northwest  Rebellion  and   its hero is Gabriel  Dumont. In  his article  on Atwood,  Woodcock notes  how  typical  it is  of  the   Canadian  martyr-complex   to have chosen Brebeuf  as subject for an epic instead  of Dollard, and  to have  preferred Riel as folk-hero over  Dumont. Does this play  correct   the   imbalance?  Perhaps  in part.  Dumont is an  interesting character, shrewd  and  practical, but  with  the poetry of the  prairies  in him  and  the wisdom  of the  buffalo  hunter. He  is contrasted well with  the visionary, theocratic Riel.  He  is a  survivor.  The play  opens  with  his safe arrival at  Fort   Assiniboine   in  Montana after   the  battle of  Batoche and  consists of I 5 flashback  scenes recounting the fail­
ure  of the  rebellion.
Because there is more  background to research in this "Canadian myth" than  in the  "Canadian legend" of Demon  Island (Woodcock  has written a book about Dumont), plot and character are stronger. Prose  is  also  a  better   medium  for   the drama  than   the   poetry   of  the  previous play.  Despite   the   documentary  flavour, we do gain insight,  dramatically, into  the plight  and  heroism  of the  rebels  and  the justice   of   their   cause.   In   the   end,   of course, it is another history  of failure  and Riel  the  victim  steals  the  limelight from Dumont the  survivor for  all  his courage, wiliness and   stoicism.   Had   Dumont  the

157

OPINIONS & NOTES



hunted hunter stood  larger  by some  dra­ matic contrivance or other, he might have taken  on  stature as a  truly  mythic  hero. But  here   we  are   talking  more  about  the  nature of  tragedy  in  general  than  of any   Canadian   victor /victim    syndrome.  Which  is a good  place to leave this wide­ ranging  discussion   of  Woodcock's   work as  it  returns again   to  the  larger  context
of creative play.
PHILIP STRATFORD



VOJCES  SET  FREE

I WRITE  ABOUT  RADIO DRAMA and  fairly recent  developments that  have  made  it a distinctive mode  of dramatic writing; I shall  propose   that   various  liberating  cir­ cumstances have  enabled  radio drama to proceed   more   boldly  in  certain  experi­ mental directions than either  of the other  main  forms  of  Canadian drama-plays for  the stage and plays for television.
This   is  not   the   first  time   radio   has played   a  crucial role  in  Canadian  dra­ matic  writing and  production. During the decades  before  theatre began  to revive in Canada at  the  end  of  the  1950's,  play­ wrights   and   actors  spent  far  more  time working  for CBC radio than  for the stage. They   learnt  their  arts  mainly   in  radio  studios-for most of them  there  was no­ where else to learn. And they worked out­  side the CBC  so rarely  that  in the  194o's and   even   later    one   would    encounter dramatists with  perhaps fifty  radio  plays to  their  credit   who  had  not  seen one  of their  plays on  stage.
In  the  absence  of live theatres  produc­ ing  Canadian plays,  radio  in  that   early period  had  to cater  for all dramatic tastes. A title  from  the  early  days  that  has  sur­ vived,  CBC  Stage,  almost   literally   des­ cribed  what producers like Andrew  Allan from  the so-called  Golden  Age of Radio  were   attempting.  Within  the   limits   of
 their  technical facilities,  they  tried  to evolve a kind  of play that,  by closing one's eyes,  one  might   imagine going  on  in  a theatre. How  to  create the  illusion  of  a visual  dimension was  a  problem   that   in those  days haunted both  writers  and  pro­ ducers; dialogue was  written and  sound effects were  manipulated to stimulate the mind's eye. But in fact  it is the  mind's ear that   radio   most  effectively  stimulates­ that  region  of  perception where  we hover between  feeling and  thought, in states  of mind  that do not  require close anchoring to  the  visible  world.  In  a Canada where the  professional theatre  survived  only  in a few large  cities, radio was diverted from this natural course  by the fact  that  it had to  substitute, to  offer   the   illusion   of  a theatre. It  was  conditioned  by  the  de­ mands and   examples of  both  stage  and cinema.
There were  exceptions, indeed, even in those  early   days-allusive poetic   plays that  occasionally found  their  forlorn way into the pattern of visualizing realism. But in  general it  was  less radio  drama than radio  documentary that  began  to explore the    special    possibilities    of   the   audial medium. Unlike drama, documentary had no tradition before  radio. It emerged dur­ ing  the   socially  conscious   193o's,  when prose  reportage, in  the  hands of  writers  like   George    Orwell  and   James   Agee, gained    recognition  as   a   literary   form.  Documentary  appeared,  roughly   simul­  taneously, in  radio  and  film.  At  its  best, in films like Flaherty's Man of  Aran,  the early  film  documentary  used  visual  actu­ ality  in a poetic  way to project a manner of life,  a  human  plight,  and  so to  evoke feeling  that  could  not  actually be  repre­ sented   on   the  screen.   The   radio   docu­ mentary-of  which  the  best early  exam­ ples  were   produced  by  the  BBC  under Louis  MacNeice and  Rayner Heppenstall
-attempted a similar  task by audial means, and  thus  went  beyond  the static conventions of  the  stage  that  dominated

OPINIONS  & NOTES



early  radio  drama and  from  which  tele­ vision drama has hardly even yet escaped.  Radio  documentary  could   range    over time  and  acquire a  historic scope  which conventional early  radio  drama evaded. It  was  able   to  dispense  with   elaborate substitutes for  visuality  when  it  explored  mental  states   that   disembodied  voices could  project with  no attempt to evoke a physical  setting. And  in  ways  resembling  those  of the  classic  Greek  playwrights, it learnt how to deal  with  action, when  that  seemed    dramatic,  by   remote   allusion rather than  direct description. The docu­ mentary  from   the   beginning  was  in  a very  special  sense  a  radio genre,  at  least in its sound  form.  It could  not be adapted to  the  stage,  where   its  lack  of  invention and  visuality  were obvious  disadvantages; it did  not work  well in print  for  the very reason  that  made  it  an  ideal  radio  form, its dependence on the special  authenticity of  the  spoken  word   and   on  sound  dra­ matically used.
If radio  documentary differed  from ra­ dio  drama in  not  being  invented  in  the sense  of  having  a  fictional  plot,  it  was often  more  genuinely imaginative in  the sense of creating a  new  and  autonomous world   in  the  mind's eye.  As  time  went on,  the  two  genres  began  to  draw  close. Documentaries began  to contain invented scenes  acted   out  within  the  body  of  the script,  which  established  a sense of close­ ness, of emotional involvement, in a kind of  programme  that  otherwise tended   to­ wards  the  middle distance of objectivity. And  radio drama began  to take over some of the narrational and  other  technical de­ vices  of  documentary, though   in  the  be­ ginning these  were  used  to enhance the visualizing  theatricality of the sound  play rather  than   to  explore its  audial  possi­ bilities.
The late  fifties  and   early  sixties  were the  period   when   radio drama began   to undergo the  radical changes that   led  to the  kind  of  plays  representative of  con-
 temporary radio  drama, of which  I shall discuss later  the  following  examples  pro­ duced  by the CBC in Vancouver in recent  years:   Hope:  The Colours  of  Time and  The Top  of the  World, both  by Michael Mercer; The Assassination  of Christopher Marlowe  by Eric Green; A Love Song  for Chile by Santo Cervello; Grasshopper Hill by Betty Lambert; The  Apple  in the  Eye by Margaret Hollingsworth; and The An­  tique  Bandit  by Laurence Gough.
These  are  plays  of imagination rather than   invention,  of  history   merging   into myth;  plays   that    seem   to  surge   from dreams  and  memories and  to  operate in that  inner  territory of the mind  which  lies between  the subliminal and  the conscious. At  times they  are  almost  parapsychologi­ cal in linking  minds  by  means  other  than  conventional  dialogue,  and   even   when written in prose they advance in the direc­ tion of a new kind of poetic  drama where  the  tones  of  words  are  as  important as their  denotations  and   where   statements are  more  important for  what  they  imply than for what  they say. They  speak above all to the mind's ear, and  so they achieve what  radio can  best do.
Before I discuss these plays in detail, it is appropriate to enlarge on  the  changes in  radio  that  made  them  possible.  Nega­ tively, television was a liberating influence  by  providing a  directly   visual  substitute for  stage  drama,  so  that   imitating  the theatre was no longer  necessary for  radio  which-with a  thinned-down audience
-began to explore  sound  itself as a stim­
ulus to the imagination.
On  the  positive  side, even  before  tele­ vision  decimated  radio's  audience,  new kinds of radio drama were being heard. A key event  was the BBC production of Dy­ lan  Thomas's Under Milk  Wood in 1954· Literary critics  have been  inclined  to dis­ miss this as one of  Thomas's lesser works, since it reads loosely on the  page  in com­ parison  with  the  concise  intensity   of  his shorter poems. Theatre people  find it vir-

159

OPINIONS & NOTES



tually  impossible  to project  on  the stage; it cannot look convincing. Thomas called it  a "play  for  voices,"  and  it was in fact a  pattern of  thoughts, spoken   and   un­ spoken,  in  the  day  of a  Welsh  village,  a pattern  dependent on  echo  rather  than  dialogue.  When  Under Milk Wood comes to an end, nothing much  has happened in the ordinary  theatrical  sense, but our  un­ derstanding  of  the   way  people's   minds link  beneath  the  surface  of  speech   has been greatly  enhanced. We have lived for a  while   in  an   autonomous  poetic   con­ tinuum,  and   it   is  we  rather  than   the people  in  the  play  who  emerge  with  our minds somewhat changed.
This  is something quite  different from ordinary  theatrical  drama  or  even   the early visualizing kind of radio play. In a theatre our  minds  project onto  the stage, where  in Elizabethan times the privileged part  of  the  audience actually  sat.  In  the kind  of radio  drama developed  since U n­ der  Milk  Wood  we  open  our  minds  to the  voices,  and   the  recent  developments in  dimensional sound  technique  through stereoscopic  transmission  mean   that   the voices  no  longer  project forward from  a speaker  as  they  would  from  the  pictorial  space  of  a  stage; they  are  all around  us, impinging on other levels of listening con­ sciousness  as  well  as  the  thinking  mind.  One  is, as  it  were,  among  speakers  in  a landscape of sound.
From  the early  tg6o's onward CBC pro­
ducers  like John Reeves  in Toronto, and a  whole  group in  Vancouver-includ­ ing  Gerald   Newman,  Norman   Newton,  Robert   Chesterman,  and   Don   Mowatt
-have been   experimenting  with   plays
which  show  that  types of drama difficult on   the   stage   can   be  very  effective   on radio.   The  temporary revival   of  verse plays  on  the  stage  which  in  the  1950's centred on the rocket-like career  of Chris­ topher Fry  in  Britain, proved  that there was not much  of a place for poetic drama, so dependent on  the quality of sound,  in

16o
 the  modern theatre. But  verse  plays and plays in lyrical  prose, unnaturalistic in ap­ proach and  very stylized in structure, have  been   notably   successful   on   radio.  Even plays  once  shelved   as  closet  dramas  be­ cause   they   seemed   too  literary  for   the stage  have   been  produced  effectively   in sound.   One  example  was  Gerald  New­ man's production of Shelley's  The  Cenci, immensely    powerful  when   one   merely heard  it. Another was  Norman Newton's production  of  Peter   Haworth's  conden­ sation   of  that   neglected  Canadian clas­ sic from  pre-Confederation days, Charles Heavysege's neo-Jacobean Count  Filippo. A  third,   produced  by  Gerald  Newman, was my own  verse  translation of Racine's Phedre, a  play  so stylized  in  the  French neo-classical manner  that  English-speak­ ing  theatres have  consistently  avoided   it. Like  the  other  examples I  have  given,  it worked  on  radio precisely  because  of  its stylization,  which  gave  an  unvisual   pat­  tern  for  the mind  to grasp,  and  also  be­ cause   its   poetic    character  required  so much  emphasis on  the  sound  of the  lan­ guage. To  translate resonant neo-classical French into  equally resonant modern English  had  been  my  problem, and  that was  an  advantage in  writing   a  play  for radio,   whereas   it   would   have   given   a quite   inappropriate  emphasis on  verbal form  in  a  play  for  television  or  even  the stage.
I  think   what   I  have   said   places   the plays by Mercer, Green  and  others  in the context  of a kind  of drama for  voice and sound that for two decades now has been drawing away  as  a  separate genre  from stage  and  television  drama, largely aban­ doning the  stimulation of  the  visual  yet not  losing  in  dramatic impact; indeed, if anything, increasing that impact through the multiplication of  levels of awareness.
The first  four  plays  I mentioned-all produced by Don  Mowatt-are  histori­ cal  in  the  sense  that  even  when  they  are not   concerned  with   historic   personages

OPINIONS &  NOTES



they are evoking states of mind in which significant events   took  place  in  another time.   All,  even   in  prose,   verge   on   the poetic,  using  language connotatively and leading us by suggestion  rather than  fac­ ing  us  with  statement. All  make  use of dramatic indirection in  ways  not  unlike those of the classic Greek tragedians; they are  not  plays  about  events  as  such,  but plays  about   the  states  of mind  that  lead to  events  and  lead  out  of them.  Thus  in Eric  Green's The Assassination  of Chris­ topher Marlowe we do not hear  Marlowe being killed,  but  we enter  deeply  into  his mind  and  the  minds  of those  whose  mo­ tives    made    his    death  inevitable. In Michael Mercer's The Top of the  World we do  not  hear  the  slaughter of the  Ice­ landers   by    the    Greenlanders at    the  bidding of the  half-mad Freydis,  but  we do  become  wholly  involved  in  the  world of memory  and  guilt  through  which  the killers  sail  back  from  Vinland  to Green­ land.
Hope:  The Colours  of Time is a  play that  at  first sight  seems in  the  lineage  of Under Milk   Wood, and  the  resemblance is not  accidental, since  Mercer intended it  in   part   as   tribute  to  Thomas.  Like Under Milk  Wood, it  evokes a day  from prewaking to  sleeping   in  the  lives  of  a small   community,  and   just  as  Thomas called   Under  Milk   Wood  a  "play   for voices," Mercer called Hope: The Colours of Time "a drama for  voices,"  using dis­ embodied speech  and  sound as thoroughly as  Thomas so  that   the  play   becomes  a pointilliste   mosaic    of   voices   reflecting various  stages  of awareness and  creating a  mood   vision  of  place   and   time   that stands   in   the   mind   like   a   translucent structure of memory.
But there the resemblance between Thomas and   Mercer ends,  and   a  more ironic  and  less vatic  mind  takes over. The title-Hope:  The Colours   of  Time­ conveys something of the layers of intent. The place  where   the  play takes  place  is
 the  moun tainfoot village  of Hope  at  the start  of the  long  hard   gold-miners' road to the Cariboo. The "time" of the  title is I9I I  when "hope" in the form  of mining prospects fills the village. Here  the word colours plays its ambiguous role, for in mining  terminology "colours" means  the yellow glitter  in  a  pan  that   tells  a  pros­ pector  he may  have  struck  pay dirt. The  strike  at  Hope   (we  learn  from  a historic  voice  at  the  end)   is a  hoax,  but  on  the day  of  the  play's   action   nobody   knows the future  and  the atmosphere is hopeful.  As for  "time," it  digs down  through the play  to  the  bedrock of  the  past,  of daft  deaf  Daddy  Yates's   senile  and   tumbled  memories   of   the   Fraser   Valley   rush  of
I 858 when  the  colours spoke  true.
Daddy  Yates  tells  nothing, but  others enter  his dreams through their  own,  for Hope:  The  Colours  of Time makes  great use of a kind  of  telepathic  consciousness in  which  people's thoughts and   dreams interact. It begins  with   two  narrational voices  that   alternate  through  the   play. One,   Mercer  remarks,  "delivers  chiefly concrete information";  it  is the  voice  of the  past-what would   be  history   if  it were   important  enough.  The  speaking characters exist  in  what   that   first  voice calls  "a  promising present  that   lies  be­ tween  an  unknown future and  an  undis­  tinguished   past." It is a   I 9 I I   present  of hope  streaked   with  loss, for  even  if gold is found  the  deer  will  never  come  down again   from   the   mountain   and   the  fish have   almost   gone   from   the   river.  The second   narrational  voice,  a  lyrical  one, embraces  all  in  a kind  of  external poetic present, symbolized   in   the  dew-bearing chill   that   moves   into  Hope  before   the dawn:

In  this   river-born  chill,  the   dreams  of   a river-born    town      germinate    under    the warmth of  feather  comforters and  counter­ panes: they  grow  in  a  head, in  a  bed,  in  a room  in a building in  a town; and  take  root finally   in   the   friendly  soil   of   an   inward world   far   from   the   shriek  of   the  lumber-

OPINIONS & NOTES



mill  cat,  that now  cries  on  the  steps  of  the
Coquihalla Hotel.

Only   five  characters speak,  their   voices first emerging to tell in broken  pattern of the dream of Daddy Yates, remembering the virgin  river and  the ten thousand men with   uncombed  beards:   "And   in   the midst of it all, Daddy Yates, a man  barely boy dancing a  jig with  a  jug in a ring  of teethwhite goldcapped faces that  stop  up the spaces  between  the trees." The  voices of Hope are  those of a precise and patron­ izing  hotel  keeper,  a grumpy  and consti­ pated   real  estateman, a  braggart hard­ rock  miner, a  naive  Irish  hotel  maid  in love with  the  local  bounder, and  a spite­ ful  puritanical  widow  who  "sees  herself as  Queen  Victoria without the  error  of children."
Sometimes they  meet  in street  or hotel and  their  talk  is direct; sometimes   their thoughts converse  as discontinuously as a Chekhov  dialogue;  at   one   point   their waking  voices ordering medicines  in day­ time    penetrate    through   memory    into druggist   Duckering's dreams  of  walking  through a pharmacopia  transformed into landscape. Duckering  never   speaks;   he remains in the background like a shaman with  magical  secrets.  Daddy  Yates  never speaks; he  has  opted  into  the  everlasting present   of  senility.   The  speaking   voices trace  a day in the town's life when Daddy almost shoots  the  puritanical widow, tak­ ing  her  for  a  magpie,   when   the   hotel maid's lover receives a suspended sentence for robbery  but  does not return, when  the gold miner's futile  hopes are  boosted  and boasted,    when   people   leave   for   Van­ couver    and   galled   packhorses   for   the mines,  when  meals  are  eaten  and  malice is exchanged, when  poker  is  played  and constipation endures. All is  enclosed  in a tense  membrane  of  speech   and   sound,  ironic,   punning and   parodic.  The   play ends  in  the  deliberate  anti-climax of  the prosaic  first  voice  telling  us how  all  the hope  of Hope  failed.  The  colours  we are
 left  with  are  not  those  of gold;  they  are the mutable colours of time, ghosts of a hopeful day, and  the drama lies in the contrast between  the hard  precision  of history as we record  it and  the nebulous discontinuum   of   human    consciousness that  is any  ordinary day  in  any  place  in time.
The Top of  the  World   complements the  ahistoric way  Hope: The Colours  of Time treats  history with  the sharp edge of episodic  drama. This  is not  a play  about any  day  in any  place.  It  is about  a stark, bloody  event   that   marked  the  dawn   of known  Canadian history: the  tale  told in The  Greenlanders' Saga  of  how  Freydis, Leif Ericsson's half-sister, caused the slaughter of Helge  the  Icelander, his men and  their  women,  on  a  voyage  to  New­ foundland.
Mercer precipitates us into  the  sound­ ridden world   of  the  north,  where   birds cry   and   water    speaks,   ice   creaks   and whales   call   to   celebrate  a   cold   world whose  land   is  meagre   and  whose  deep waters are  full  of life. The  murders have taken  place; the  murderers  are  returning in   the   great   ship   the   Icelanders  once owned.  The  mists close in, full of ghostly guilts   and   as  the  ship's  course  sets  for Greenland and  a  due  reckoning, the  tale of  the  murders  is  revealed   in  the  mem­ ories of  Freydis and  her  companions.
It is  the  treacherous age  of  Macbeth, yet  the  hearts of  the  voyagers  are  har­ rowed  by recollection, and  they think and whisper   about  what    they   have  bound themselves by blood  oath  not  to tell. The ancient violence  of  the  sagas  is evoked, in  a setting where  animals are  moved  by the  same  stark  fatalities as seem  to  have moved  Freydis  to  the  madness  in  which she led  her  husband and  his men  to slay the  Icelanders. Going  beyond  the  Green­ landers' Saga,  which  suggests that  Freydis acted  out of mere  greed,  Mercer etches in an affair  between  her and  Helge,  the Ice­ landic leader, which  Helge for politic rea-

OPINIONS  & NOTES



sons ends,  stirring a fury  of mortification in  Freydis  and  lifting  what   might  easily be mere  historical melodrama into an authentic revenger's tragedy.
The death of Christopher Marlowe has
long  fascinated historians, and  the  origi­ nal   official   explanation-that    he   was killed   in   self-defence during  a   tavern  brawl  by  a  political   spy  named  Ingram Frizer-has long been discounted in view of evidence  suggesting  that  Marlowe was killed  because  his freethinking statements embarrassed  notable people  who  had  pa­ tronized  him.
In   The  Assassination   of  Christopher Marlowe Eric  Green   takes  the  tangle  of facts  and  suppositions and   weaves  them into  a  tragedy  which  is not  a mere  mur­ der  play-for, as I have  said, we are  not made  witnesses of Marlowe's death-but a dramatic clash  of motives and  views of life.  Marlowe is shown  as  a  Promethean rather  than  a  Faustian-one  who  seeks to offer men the truth even  when  it seems a   dangerous   gift.   He   is  a   paradoxical figure, zesting for life in all its animal and intellectual amplitude, yet  aware that  in the  age  he inhabits such  zest can  be self­ destructive; one can find death in seeking too hard  for life. Against him  are ranged  all  those  who,  though some  of  them  are touched by the questing intellectualism of the  Renaissance, are  tainted even  more by those calculations  which  made  a later  dramatist, John  Webster, declare in The Duchess  of Malfi  that  "a  politician is the devil's  quilted anvil." As the  play goes on we  see  Marlowe attacked  by  bigots  and perjurers, betrayed by fearful friends  like Thomas Kyd,  cast off by his patron Wal­ singham  who   dreads  contamination  by association, and  finally abandoned by the Queen who  for  a  time  defended him  on the grounds of poetic liberty. Left  to paid killers, Marlowe dies a victim  of the state that  dare  not  openly  condemn him.
Eric Green,  too, manipulates telepathic states, so that  when  Kyd  is tortured in the
 Tower    his    cnes    alternate   with    the thoughts of  Marlowe in  the  London streets,   and   as   Marlowe's  death   draws near  it  is not  the  assassination  we  hear but the concatenation of his betrayers' voices justifying  themselves.  To  my mind the  real  strength  of  the   play  is  in  the powerful  use of language in dialogue. Marlowe   does  not   speak   in  the  penta­ meters of his plays, but in a rich and  mus­ cular  prose that  sounds authentically like the  speech  of  the  man  who  would  have written   Dr.  Faustus.   Perhaps  the   most dramatic  confrontation  during the  play, the meeting  between  the  poet  and  Eliza­ beth, gains its effect from the contrast between  the  natural vigour  of Marlowe's speech and the baroque elaboration with which  the  Queen talks  of  the  perils  at­ tending  monarchy and  the duties  of  poets in  an  intricate eloquence that  disguises how she is enslaved  by her  own power.  It is a fine play about the  moral  dangers  of politics  and   perhaps,  ironically, it  gains some of its authenticity from  the fact  that  Green  has himself dabbled in the political  arts.
We  all  know  Wordsworth's  poetic recipe  of  "emotion  recollected  in   tran­ quillity," and   I  think  something  similar applies  in  historic  drama. It only  works well -on  radio  as on stage -if  there  is a  distance  in  time  and   if  the  dramatist can  look on  his  subject with  a  measure of  compassionate   detachment.   A   Love Song  for Chile  is not as good  as the  three  plays  I  have  just  discussed  because   the author, Santo   Cervello,  is  still  so  pas­ sionately involved  and  therefore so parti­ san. The  tragedy of  Chile  is a  poignant one and  may  well  become  the  subject  of great  historical  drama, but  not  yet.
A  Love  Song   for Chile  is the  story  of three  boys brought up  in  a  Chilean  vil­ lage  who  become  adult at  the  time  Al­ lende's  government topples  towards crisis. One  becomes  a  folk  singer; one  a  trade union leader; and  the third  a political  spy

163

OPINIONS & NOTES



for  the  right.  The action  goes backward and  forward in time  to show the links between   manhood  and   childhood, and this is well done. But there is a baroque excess about  many aspects of the play that comes  from  the  burning desire  to  vindi­ cate  a cause.  The  language is florid,  the symbolism  of  dying   birds  and  wounded  stallions  and   predatory  eagles  is heavily obvious,  and  there  is a partial  regression to old-style  radio  drama in  the  desire  to create    dazzling   visual   tableaux  in   the mind:  in  the  unwillingness  to  trust   in speech  and sometimes let the speech drop  near  to silence.  A Love  Song  for Chile  is a play that  attempts to use current direc­  tions in radio  drama, but gets tangled  up in  unrestrained sincerity  and  remains  too much  on  the level of unassimilated  argu­ ment  to achieve  the  haunting mixture of distance  and    intimacy,   of    myth    and dream,  which    characterizes   the    most appealing of modern radio  drama.
The expansion of history into  myth,  as in Michael Mercer's plays, and  the recon­ struction of  history   in  terms  of  psycho­ logically  plausible alternatives, as in  Eric Green's  Marlowe  play,  are  two  of  the functions the  new  radio  drama will ful­ fill. But  the liberation of  relationships-in­ time   and   of   subliminal   speech,   which figure in such plays, can be, and  are, used for  different  purposes by  other   contem­ porary   radio   dramatists  who   are   con­ cerned  with  those ambiguities of human relationships that  can  be seen outside  the context of  time-the  relationships that are not amenable to logical arrangement because  they  emerge from  the  irrational sub-strata of beha,·iour and consciousness.
There is, indeed, a superficial  historical element to Betty Lambert's oddly  titled Grasshopper Hill, since at one end of its twisted  funnel of human relationships lies that  arch-realm of the irrational and atro­ cious  in  behaviour, the  Hitlerian  Third Reich. But  Grasshopper Hill, we are told very clearly,  is a "memory drama," not a
 historical play,  and   there  are  two  levels of memory  involved.
The play  begins  at  a  railway   station where  pseudo-lovers part,  Gustav leaving Vancouver,  Susan   seeing   him   go;   one knows from the immediately following snatch of dialogue between  Susan  and  a woman  friend  that  this is the end of the relationship. And  from  this  point  the different levels of memory  react on each other. First  there  are  the  more  probably exact    memories   of   Susan -a   not-so­ young   university teacher,  thinking  over the  relationship from  the  moment when she  first  encountered  this  young  German whom  she thought an unregenerate Nazi, down   through  the   tortuous  pattern  of their  encounters in which  we perceive,  by means of what  he  tells her  (again   trans­ muted through  her memory), the  bizarre reality   (or  pseudo-reality)  of his life  be­ fore  he  reached Canada.
It  is  a  tangle   of  betrayals  and   self­ transformations. For   Gustav,  whose  be­ haviour is so  much   that   of  the  authori­ tarian  German,  presents  himself   as  the Jew  who  saved  his own  skin  in  the  con­ centration camps  until  the point  when  he could  escape  and  become  a partisan, kill­ ing   Germans,  and   eventually  betraying the camp guard  who had  more  than  once saved  his life and  whom,  in his misogynist homosexuality,  he  seems  to  have  loved. But   are   we  ever  sure   that   the  story  is true? Is it not  perhaps a tale  invented to establish  power  over the women  he meets in Canada-not only the narrator Susan, but  also  her  student, whom   he  seduces, and   the  others   who  are  not  named?  Is the   elaborate  play   within   the   play,   in which   Gustav tries  to  make  Susan  ima­ gine   herself   a   mother  in   an   ingenious Nazi  exercise  testing  the  strength of  hu­  man  affections by  involving the  mother's child  as an alternative victim-is this no more   than  a charade that  is really  only part  of   his   victimization  of   Susan? I know  of  one  real-life  Vancouver story  of

OPINIONS & NOTES



a  victimizing victim   which   may  or  may not be the origin  of Grasshopper Hill, but which  does  suggest  to  me  that   the  true centre of the  play is not actually Gustav's past,  not whether he was a Nazi or a col­ laborating  Jew,   but   rather  the  way  in which   the  past,  made   real  in  the  mind,  can   dominate  and    shape   the   present.  This,   as   I   have   said,   is   presented  as a  "memory drama," and   memory-as Proust    showed    us -is   not   necessarily what   happened;  it  is   the  myth   in   the mind  that  controls our perception of now as well as then, and  it is history's  opposite.
Betty  Lambert has  been  writing   radio
plays  for  well  over  a  decade, and  this  is one of her  best, against which  the remain­ ing two plays, interesting as they are, seem slighter  stuff,  using  the mental  recessions, the complex mnemonic echoes that  radio  techniques now  make  possible,  with  less complex effect.
Laurence Gough's The  Antique  Bandit,
which  Robert Chesterman also produced, is modern radio drama's equivalent of the well-made play.  The plot  is a  traditional one:   the  villainous hosts -in  this case a landlady and   her  lover -who  plot  to murder their guests for the sake of their money. Lillian and  Seymour have already done in one old man  when  Howard, a wanderer  with   few   possessions,  arrives and looks like being an ideal victim. But Howard is in  fact  a  clever  bank  robber who  operates under the  guise  of an  en­ feebled   blind   dotard,  and   Lillian   and  Seymour  are  undone when  they take it on themselves  to open  his mysterious wooden chest  just as the police arrive on an anony­ mous  tip,  given  in fact  by  Howard (who  had  just carried out  his biggest coup  and  who  intends to  escape  after   he  has  seen his enemies  arrested). But  there  is a last ironic   twist,  grimly  worthy   of  Maupas­ sant,  as  Howard  and the  police  captain sit  down   to  eat  the  little   poisoned  feast which   Lillian   and  Seymour  have   pre­  pared  for  Howard.
 The   point  of  The   Antique   Bandit  in terms  of  the  new  radio  drama is that  it is constructed in speech  situations which do  not  need  visualization for  us to  know what   has  been  going  on  and   to  admire the play of rival cunnings that  is in opera­ tion.   Indeed,  there   are   so   many  dim rooms   and   dark   stairways   in   Lillian's house and  also in  the  minds of the  char­ acters  that  one can  describe The  Antique  Bandit as a very anti-visual play.
Which  is not  quite the case with  Mar­ garet   Hollingsworth's The   Apple  in  the Eye,   produced   by   Tom    Kerr,   where  drama shifts on  to a stream-of-conscious­ ness level that  one  rarely  encounters out­ side experimental  fiction.  There are  only two characters  (if one discounts the voice of a football commentator), Gemma and  her  academic  husband Martin.  Martin's is always a "present voice," a man  speak­ ing  in  his  household  with  the  authority that  Sunday  leisure  allows  him.  Gemma speaks  in  a  "present" voice  as  she  re­ sponds  to Martin, and  also in a "thought" voice   that   partly    constructs   the   back­ ground to their relationship-what actu­ ally  happens  in  physical   terms  on  their Sunday, and  in  part  cultivates Gemma's unending  Molly-Bloomish fantasies. The  current  fantasy   transforms Martin  into Marat  about   to  be  dragged  out   of  his bath  by  Gemma's alter   ego,  Saskis,  but this is  later  superseded by a  vision  of an elusive  apple,  first seen speared on  Gem­ ma's  toe and  finally being drunk down  by Martin as she drops  it into  his late  after­ noon  sherry.   It  is  surrealist  drama, ex­ treme  and  amusing, and  especially  inter­ esting  because  it  brings  back  the  visual into  radio  playwriting, but  in quite  a dif­ ferent  way from  the  illusionist  visualiza­ tion of early radio, which  was intended to add   verisimilitude  to  scenes  the  listener  created in  his  mind's eye.  Here,  in  The  Apple in the Eye, a singularly appropriate title  for  such  a  play,  the  visual  image  is liberated  into  a  different kind  of  plausi-

OPINIONS & NOTES



bility,   that    of   the   daydreaming  mind searching out   new  symbolic  patterns of existence   in  startling  concatenations  of objects  that  take on an active  life of their own  within  the  fiction-not  unlike  that of  things   in  the  choseiste  novels  of  the French nouvelle  vague a decade  or more ago.
GEORGE WOODCOCK


BETTY LAMBERT'S IISQRIEUX-DE-DIEU"

ScRATCH  THE SURFACE  of a  popular  sex comedy and what do you find? romantic sentimentalism? tragic satire?  a Message? the  Void?  or, simply,  nothing at  all?  We have  not  often  had  the  chance   to  make such an experiment on a Canadian play. Before the recent flowering of Canadian drama, the  comic voice was faint  at  best. It  babbled  virtuously  of romance, it tried to echo Shaw  and  the wit of British draw­ ing   rooms,   it  said   a  few  smart   things about  history  and  politics. But not much.  Recently,  the   comic   voice   has   gained  strength -in  both  languages.  Yet  there  has been precious  little  that  fits the rubric  "popular  sex   comedy."   Theatre  Passe Muraille's I Love You, Baby Blue is about  sex,  but  it  is not  a  comedy; Ken  Gass's Hurray   for Johnny  Canuck   is a  comedy but   it   deliberately   excludes   sex;   Eric Nicol's  Free  at  Last  is not  very  popular. And  Bernard Slade  got away.
But   Betty  Lambert's  Sqrieux-de-Dieu fills the bill admirably. Welcomed  in Van­ couver  in  1975,  lavishly  praised  in  Len­  noxville   in   1976  and   1977,  anticipated rather  nervously  by some  of  the  smaller  provinces when  it  toured  in  1977, it is a first-rate sex  comedy.  The  success  of  its surface  has been attested to by newspaper reviewers   from   coast   to  coast.  Most   of them  liked  it  because,  in  typical  phrases, it "dares to be nothing more than  honestly

166
 commercial" and  has  "no  pretensions to being   more   than   very   good   entertain­ ment." One or two disliked it for the same reasons. This "zany  sex farce," this "smash  hit," this  "marvellous  piece  of nonsense" caused,  single-handedly, the  Lennoxville festival and  Canadian drama to "come  of age."   Audiences  blushed    and   laughed. Actresses became  nationally known stars. Artistic  directors queued up  to inquire if they might  produce it.
The plot gives some  new twists to tried and   true  comic  formulas. In  the  eternal triangle,  the  mistress,  Gracie, though a corporation lawyer  with  three  degrees,  is a  frustrated  homebody, while   the  wife, Brenda, conducts amateur group therapy sessions and  tries,  with  black  leather and the  usual  appurtenances thereof, to fulfill her  promise   that   her  husband's sex  life will never  be boring.  The husband enjoys beer,  television,  and  domesticity with  his mistress.  Being  a  macaroni - and - cheese man -Velveeta,  at   that-he  does  not enjoy  his wife's surprises. When,  near  the end  of  the  play,  the  two  women  change places,  he  is  quite   relieved.   Yet  as  the triangle loses one  corner, it  acquires  an­ other; a new mistress,  his former student, Susan,  moves over  to occupy that corner, or  bed.  There is  a  touch   of   "Captain's Paradise" about   it,  but  the  variation on the old  theme  is still fresh  and  funny.
Susan  is literally the  centrepiece of the group therapy session in  Scene  Two. Naked  except  for lashings  of ketchup and imitation whipped cream, she lies on a wooden  chest, surrounded by Brenda's group, who are supposed  to raise their consciousnesses of their own sensuality by licking  the  red  and  white  guck  from  her body.   Only   Nelson,   a   "beautiful   late­ hippie,"1 refuses  to  participate.  Fearing for   the  ozone   layer   because   the  cream  came  from  a spray  can,  he  has  retreated into  the  lotus  position  in  search  of inner  peace.  Gramma, Brenda's  mother, a  fas­ cinated  and   sardonic  observer   of  these

OPINIONS  & NOTES



goings-on,  says Nelson is concentrating on his "manta ray."  Here  and  elsewhere  the satiric  barbs  bristle  on  the very surface  of the  play.  No  need  to  scratch deeper  for them.  Trendy psychologizing, upper-mid­ dle-class stodginess, fashionable kinkiness, cliches of the counter-culture and  the self­ expression   set:   all  are   neatly   skewered and  held up to be laughed at.
But  the  satire   goes  deeper   than   that.
One  or two reviewers  followed  it down  to the second  layer,  discovering there  a play about relationships between  people, about communication and  role-playing. It is also a  play  about the  difficulties,  in  our  per­ missive age, of knowing  oneself, knowing  which  role  is  the  right  one,  especially  if one  is a  woman.  Brenda,  with her  whip and  ankle  chain, serving her  husband raw oysters for  breakfast, is as  pathetic as she is comic.  Wife  and  mother, she  wants  to be  the  perpetually  exciting mistress.  She attempts  to  achieve  this  ideal   with  her paraphernalia  from   the   love  shop,   her oysters   and    macrame,  her    half-baked group   therapy, carefully planned  strate­ gies  as  inappropriate  as  boning   up  on Masters  and   Johnson  would   be   for   a Maenad attempting to achieve Dionysian  ecstasy. At the end of the play she switches to another set of  paraphernalia-Gracie's high-rise apartment, complete with swim­ ming  pool, sauna, and  intercom-confi­ dent  that   these  new  toys will  deliver  the happiness she expects.  As she turns  to the single  life,  Brenda may  be  beginning to understand  that   relationships  to  others are  founded  on   relationship  to  oneself, but she does not yet understand that rela­ tionship  to oneself cannot be created from outer  forms.
Gracie does understand. As the  play opens,  her  need  to be wife and  mother is growing  within  her  after  years of lying to her   "lining"  with   the   pill.   The  outer forms  of home,  husband, and  children (ready-made)   are   bestowed    upon    her when she changes  places with Brenda, but
 the  depth   of  her  need,   which   is  estab­ lished in the first scene, brings real mean­ ing  to  the  outer   forms  of  the  role.  And Gracie    understands  roles.   In   the   first scene,  which  consists  of  a  dialogue   be­ tween  George  and   Gracie  in  her  apart­ ment,  she plays  his  wife,  referring to the Gracie   he  is having an  affair  with  as  a third    person.    The   audience  does   not know  her identity  until  the scene ends as George  exits:  "'Night, George"; "'Night, Gracie."2    There  are   roles  within   roles. George and Gracie are  watching a movie on  TV  and   discuss  the  actors   and   ac­ tresses; George  imitates W. C. Fields and Groucho Marx;  they   echo   lines   from "Brief Encounter" and  play with accents; finally,  Gracie   brings  a  ketchup-covered knife from  the  kitchen, claiming that  she
has  murdered  the  children,  a la  Albee
only  more  so.  It  is  all  very  clever  and
vastly amusing; at the same time, it points to Gracie's  consciousness  of role, an intel­ ligent  consciousness  that  is still  function­ ing when she accepts Brenda's  place  "for the   moment."  She   understands   more about   relationships  to  self  and  to  others  than  Brenda  does.
Gracie   and   Brenda are  wife,  mother, and  mistress.  Susan, the  whipped-cream girl,  completes   the   spectrum  of  female roles because  she is a virgin.  As such, she is  profoundly attractive  to  George,  who still resents the fact  that  Brenda  was pregnant when  they married, even though he  was  her  first  lover  and   the  father of her  child.  The cycle  is  about   to  begin again   when,   at   the   end   of   the   play, George kisses Gracie good-bye and accepts Susan's  offer of a  ride  to work.  His final line resonates  with  suggestions: "We  who are  about   to  die  salute   you!"   The  old sexual  meaning of "die" is obvious,  as is George's  mock  fear   of  the  Porsche  914
Susan  is driving. And  George   is indeed
going  forth   to  do  battle with  Susan,   a fact which makes connections with deeper layers  of  the  play.  As a  student, she  at-

OPINIONS  & NOTES



tended  only one  of George's  lectures.  She left  the  course  because  he  was  "reading from  old  notes," including an  old  joke in the  margin  about  a  book  he  meant   to write; his  performance  was  not   boring but  showed,  according to Susan,  that George  was  bored.  "I knew  I  was going to have to save you," she states calmly. George  is aware of the danger when  a woman  is "after his soul" and  calls Susan "the priestess  of an  ancient  fertility  cult" who will "regenerate" him after  she tears him to pieces with her bare hands. The extravagant statement is funny,  especially when  Gramma  comments, "That'll  be nice."  It also  forges  a  link  between  this "sex  farce" and   Euripides'  Bacchae,  in which  the  Maenads dismember Pentheus in  that   very  manner. Clearly,   the  new triangle will  not  be  exactly  like  the  tri­ angle  which  has gone  before.
But  S qrieux-de-Dieu  is  not   the   Bac­
chae;  it is a comedy,  solidly located with­ in  the  conventions of  that  genre,  which adds  another layer  to its meaning. Tradi­ tionally,   comedy   moves  from  sorrow   to joy, from situations and relationships that are  painful, frustrating, or  otherwise  un­ satisfactory,  to   situations  and   relation­ ships in which life is renewed,  repressions liberated,   desires   fulfilled.   There  is  no one "blocking" character to be overcome here,   to   use  Frye's   term;   Brenda   and George   "block" each  other,   themselves, and  Gracie, until,  under  the  influence  of Dionysus  in the form of a pitcher of  mar­ tinis, George confesses to Brenda  that  he has  been  having an  affair  for  five  years. Although  she  doesn't  believe  him,   this confession  is the  turning point that  makes possible the rearrangement of  everybody's  life -that  is, the  comic  renewal.
Paradoxically, while its liberating some­ times  goes  so far  as  to be  revolutionary, comedy   is  also  profoundly  conservative, conservative of the on-going social order.3
The renewal for  the individual is also the
renewal  for  society.  Gracie   will  have  a

168
 baby;     Susan    will    lose   her    virgmlty; George may  write  his book;  Brenda, hav­ ing scrapped her  therapy group, will look for a  job. All of this will be accomplished with  no  upheaval of  the  existing  family; George's four   children  still  have   home,  father, and  mother-albeit a  different mother  and  probably a  better   one.  The social  order has  been  both  conserved  and regenerated:  the  traditional  paradoxical accomplishment of comedy.  This  time  it has  been  done  rather in  the  manner of a Cabinet  shuffie,  and, like  such   shuffies, brings   no  real   guarantee  of  permanent improvement. But  the  possibility  is there. The  principals are   alive   and   moving, perhaps even  moving  forward. There are no traditional weddings or dances  to con­ clude   this  comedy; its  final  statement is not that  unequivocal. But Brenda goes off to what  she  feels will be freedom, Gracie goes  off  to  her  longed-for  kitchen,  and  George goes  off  with  Susan.  Nelson,  the beautiful late-hippie, wanders in from  the garden   at   the   last   minute,  playing   his flute.  Gramma recognizes  the  tune  "and stretches  up   her   arms   to  embrace  the morning" as the  music comes  up and  the curtain comes  down.   It is  the  "Ode  to Joy."
Gramma brings  us down  to yet another
layer. After  the barbed  farce,  the thought­ ful satire,  and  the  traditional comedy,  we arrive at  myth.  This is not  to say that  the play   is  disunified.  All  the  layers   inter­ penetrate: Susan,  for example, is the new mistress of comedy and the gorgeous  nude  of   farce  - and   more;   Brenda  is   the obvious  butt  of  farcical laughter and  the less  obvious  object   of  thoughtful satire.  But  we need  myth  to understand Gram­ rna.
Gramma killed  her  husband. The sub­ ject   of   death  is  nearly   taboo   in   most comedy.4   People  may  be presumed  dead,  if they are  made  to reappear. Very occa­  sionally,  a remote death may  be reported, like that  of the  Princess's  father in Love's

OPINIONS  & NOTES



Labour's  Lost. When   a  character in  the play   dies,   like   the   little   boy   in   The Winter's  Tale, we  are  uneasy  about "comedy" and  reclassify  the  play  as "drama" or "romance" or perhaps "prob­ lem  comedy." And  surely  murderers are rare  in  comedy.  Yet  Gramma killed  her husband.
Act  Two  opens  with  Gramma  tidying up  after   the  night   of  whip,   chain,   and martinis, singing   "All  things   bright   and beautiful" -a   nice   bit  of  irony-and announcing that  she has decided to be the reincarnation of the Great Earth Mother. In  her  long  soliloquy, she  speaks  of  her aging,  of  her  husband  who  was  "a  fine big man" but  who grew long in the tooth, of her  efforts  to renew  their  life together. Nothing  worked, not  even   rejuvenation pills  from   a  handsome travelling  sales­ man, the  Watkins' Man. On  a  morning that  a Chinook had  fooled  into  thinking it was spring, Gramma mixed Paris Green  with  the Saskatoon berry  jam  and  killed her   husband. The  Year  God   must   die when  his powers  fail.  This  Pentheus was not  resurrected like a  true  Year  God,  but better   death than  sterile  life.  Gramma's husband   understands:  "just  before   the end,  he saw my logic." She  had  meant to die  too, but  the  sunrise,  the crocuses,  and a  meadowlark  changed  her   mind:  the priestess  does  not  follow  the  sacrifice  to the  underworld. She  survives  to  become the Earth Mother, the Chorus of the play, the  senior  citizen   misunderstood  by  the younger   generation  (except for  George) but  understanding them.   When   the  taxi comes  to take  Brenda away,  Brenda feels a pang  about her mother: "I know you're never going to understand." But she does: "Just go, Brenda. Maybe  it's  better  than Paris Green." The old priestess recognizes the  ritual  of renewal, no matter what  its guise.  Even  her  funny "That'll  be  nice" when  George  fantasizes about Susan  sac­ rificing  him  on  her  altar can  be  under­ stood  as the  utterance of  the  priestess  as
 well as the  farcical one-liner of the  sup­ posedly daffy oldster.  This  time the sacri­  fice may  be  resurrected. Comedy  is life­ enhancing; George   is  getting  Susan   in­  stead  of  Paris  Green. His  final  exit  line ("We  who are  about  to die salute  you!") does   contain    the   possibility   of   death, physical  or  psychic,  but  it  also  contains the  possibility  of  victory,  a  feeling  sup­ ported  by the  "Ode to Joy."
In  addition  to  Gramma, other   char­
acters  and   elements   in  the  play  help   to create  the mythic,  even specifically  classi­ cal,  layer.  Gracie's  knife  dripping  with ketchup suggests  Medea's murder of her children for  revenge  against   Jason. The next   scene  shows  Susan,   wearing  both whipped cream   and   ketchup,  naked   on what  looks rather like an  altar and  sur­ rounded by  the  therapy group  devotees.  And, of course, Susan  is the young  priest­  ess  who   will   sacrifice   and   regenerate George.  George   needs  regeneration; his "vital   fluids  are  ... on  vacation. . . .  In Hawaii." Not  even  Gracie's vibrator can bring    them    back.   Susan    may,    unless George is too far gone in hubris. He seems to think  he is in  control; it is both  funny and   frightening  when,  after   Gracie   and  Brenda  have   arranged  their  switch, George   preens  himself:  "it   would   seem to  appear that   I've   worked   things  out rather well." The  gods, in  the  person  of Susan,  who  "just   ... appeared. Out  of the  Blue,"  may   have   something  to  say about that. There is even  a  direct  men­  tion  of  Greece.  George,  groaning at  the thought  of  the  sexual   surprises   Brenda has  in  store  for  him  that  night,  contem­ plates  killing  her,  but   Gramma  doesn't think  much  of  the  idea.  "Don't be silly, George," she  says. "It would   take  enor­ mous  energy   to  kill  Brenda.  Have  you ever  thought of  sending her  on  one  of those  educational tours  of  Greece?" Per­  haps    contact  with    her   cultural  roots would   help   this   strong   but   misguided bacchante to reach  her ecstasy.

169

OPINIONS & NOTES



Myth   pervades  the  play-the  farce, the satire, the comedy-and myth lies deeper  than  farce,  satire, or comedy. Per­ haps  this  is where  the  genres  blend, for myth  also  lies  beneath  tragedy.  Perhaps this  is why  Plato  has  Socrates  point  out in   the   Symposium   that   the   genius   of comedy  is  the  same  as  that   of  tragedy,  and  that  the  true artist  in tragedy  is also an   artist   in   comedy-a   passage   that  Betty   Lambert   likes  to  append  to  the reading list when  she teaches  a course  in drama.5 The passage  stands  as a warning to  those  who  would  mistake  the  Reddi­ Wip  surface  of  this  play  for  the  Cordon  Bleu cake  inside.

NOTES

I Betty  Lambert, Sqrieux-de-Dieu (Vancouver: Talonbooks, 1976).
2  Despite the  echo  here  of the  Burns  and  Allen radio show,  Betty  Lambert  disclaims any  in­ tentional reference.
3 A frequent notion among theorists of comedy. See,  e.g.,  Wylie   Sypher, "The  Meanings of Comedy" ( 1956), in  Comedy: Meaning and Form, ed.  Robert  W.  Corrigan   (San  Fran­ cisco: Chandler, 1965), pp.  1 fl-6o, especially p.  51.
4 Murder and  war  comedies are  an obvious exception;   Hitchcock   thrillers   are    often comic  and  Johnny Canuck is full  of  corpses, slain  with  two-dimensional cardboard  guns.
5  "SFU   English  Department   Course   Offer­ ings," Fall  1979,  p. 37;  her  list for a different course  (p.  26)   includes Euripides'  Bacchae. I am  grateful to  Betty  Lambert  for  lending me  her  files  of  newspaper  reviews  and   cor­  respondence about her  play.  I do  not  think  my   reading  of   the   play   has   been   unduly influenced by the author's intentions revealed in  her   letters to  W.   B.  Davis,   the   Artistic Director  at  Lennoxville; for  instance, when she  calls  Susan   an  "assassin" and   says  that  Gramma went  to bed  with  the  Watkins' Man  the  night  before  she  killed  her  husband, I do not  find  these  "hard facts" in  the  text  of the play,    however   real    they   may    be   to   the author. But  I need  the  author's notes  for  an explanation of  the  title. It was  her  own  pri­ vate  "childhood curse":  "when I got  myself into another mess  (thinking I could  control life),  I  always  said,   'Oh  scroodidoo.' " The
 term   has  come   to  mean "the Screw  of  God. If I have  to  be  literal"; and  the  gods  do  not tolerate hubris. There are  further overtones: people think the  play  says "Screw the middle­ class  god  ... and  in  a  way  it  does  say  that." The   suggestions in    the    title    reverberate throughout  the   layers   of  the   play.   (Quota­ tions  from  a letter to  W. B. Davis, 13 Febru­ ary  1976.)
ANN  MESSENGER


ALlEN VISION IN CANADIAN DRAMA

FROM THE  BRILLIANT FIGURE OF OEDIPUS, who   is  in  turn   outsider, redeemer and outcast, drama appears to have cast  up a series of misfits who could  not  be ignored by their  respective societies.  In  this coun­ try  of newcomers and  ethnic  diversity,  it is  not   surprising  to  see   Canada's  first major dramatist build  his dramatic mag­ num   opus,  Saul, around  two  great   out­  sider  figures. Charles Heavysege,  an  Eng­  lish  immigrant who  arrived   in  Montreal in    1853,   gained   sufficient    stimulation from  the  Old  Testament story  of  Israel's  first  two kings, Saul  and  David,  to trans­ mute   I  Samuel:  8-31  into  three  five-act plays. As in  the  biblical  source,  Saul  and David  are  outsider kings,  called  to  their high  office from  obscurity  through God's personal  choice   and   the  agency   of  the prophet Samuel. The first of these  poetic dramas shows  us Saul's rise from  anony­ mity  to ruler  of a nation  and  vanquisher of  her   external  enemies;  it   also  shows Saul's  moment  of   disobedience  to  God when  he  spares  the  life  of  Aga,  king  of the  massacred  Amalekites. This  moment  is merely  a crystallization of Saul's  grow­  ing pride. From then  on,  until  the  catas­ trophe  in  Act  VI  of the  third  part  of this trilogy,  we  see  Saul   increasingly  in  the grip  of  Malzah, a demon  sent  by God  to plague  Saul.   He  is incapacitated for  his appointed task of leader  and  redeemer of Israel,  and  the  need  for a  new  redeemer

OPINIONS & NOTES



-another outsider, the boy David-is clearly  shown.  David, however,  unlike Saul, gives full credit  to God as the source of his extraordinary abilities.
A  different  kind  of  figure   is  the  Re­
deemer.  Charles  Mair,  a  native  Cana­ dian,  sets his epic  drama of  national de­ liverance, Tecumseh, in  Upper Canada,
1812. His redeemer figures, General Brock
and   the   Indian  leader  Tecumseh, are both  destroyed   in  their  courageous  resis­ tance    of   the   American   invaders.   But Canada is saved.  The  titular hero  of this poetic  drama is clearly represented as the good  leader  who gives his life in order  to protect his people:

Oh, I have  loved  my life,
Not  for  my  own  but  for  my  people's cause.
Who   now   will   knit   them?  who   will   lead them  on?

0 Mighty  Spirit,  shelter-save-my people!

And  it is a Judas figure,  Brock's  successor Proctor, who  is to blame  for  Tecumseh's death  on   the   battlefield. Writing  their plays   without  the   support  of  an   indi­ genous  dramatic tradition, that  is, Cana­ da's   two  dramatic  pioneers,   Heavysege and    Mair,  found    matter   and   manner enough  in  the   Bible  and   the  Christian vision  of  life.  These  sources,   moreover, provided them  with figures of a kind  that  later  Canadian  drama also  made   use of in a kind  of  alien vision.
As  The Oxford English  Dictionary shows, there  is no necessary connection between  the  nature and  status of an  out­ sider and  that  of a redeemer or of  an out­  cast.  The  outsider is "one  who is outside  of or  does not  belong  to a specified  com­ pany,  set, or party,  a non-member ... one whose  position  is on  the  outside of some group or series."  No  moral  values  attach themselves  to this definition, which  refers to social  position  only. If the  use of  this term   in  the  context  of  horse-trading  is added, another dimension of the outsider
 may  become  clearer:  an  outsider   is  "a horse not included among the 'favourites,' and  against   which  in  betting long  odds are  laid;  one  not  'in  the  running.' " The difficulties   created  for   David   by   Saul during the greater part  of Heavysege's tragedy,  and  those  heaped upon  Tecum­ seh  by his own  brother, the  Prophet, as well as by Proctor, greatly reduce  respec­ tive  chances   of  success  and, indeed,   of survival.   We   may,   then,   accept    as   a limited  definition of  the  outsider  in Can­  adian   drama that  he  is a  character who does  not  belong  to  the  dominant social group  of the  play  and  whose struggles  to prove  himself  to  that  group are  rendered more   difficult  either  by  indifference  of the  majority  or  active   opposition  from one  or  more  insiders  or  competing out­  siders.  From   the   point   of  view  of  the insiders,  the  outsider may  be a nuisance,  a mystery, or as in the  case of David  and Tecumseh, a saviour  in times of crisis, an infuser  of  new ideas  for  those  who  have run  out of  ideas.
Some  Canadian dramatists appear  to be fascinated by the kind of person  who is not  a  complete   outsider  to  a  particular group  but  who,  because  he  feels himself somehow   undervalued  by  the  majority, acts against  the best interests of the group and  who, when  recognized  for what  he is, is made  an  outcast for  his misdeeds.  One such  destructive man   apart, who  is  ex­ cluded   from   the  circle   of  fortune's  fa­ vourites,  is Desjardins, a scheming notary  in  Wilfred   Campbell's  poetical   tragedy  Daulac.  He   manipulates  the  society   of aristocrats   and    their    servants    (which  forms  the  microcosm of   this  play  about  France   and  New  France)   to  create   ad­  vantages   for  himself   at   the  expense,  in particular,  of   the   gallant  titular  hero whom  he  cheats  out   of  his  inheritance and  whose  uncle  he  murders. Under the guise of  friendship, he makes  every effort to  ruin  the  love  between   the  hero   and his   fiancee,   the    beautiful   and    gentle

I? I

OPINIONS & NOTES



Helene, largely  because he himself desires the  love  of  this  socially  and  morally  su­ perior    woman.    His   unmasking   as   an enemy   is  accomplished  at  the  battle  of the  Long   Sault   of   I66o,  where  he  has assumed    the    outward    appearance   of Daulac's Huron enemy:

DAULAC:  What mean   you,  Desjardins?  why this  sinister mask?
DESJARDINs:  Are  you  a dauntless spirit?
DAULAC:   Whatever Daulac's faults, and   he
hath many,
No  mortal ever  turned him  where  he faced!

DESJARDINS:   Then know  the  truth: this  is the  true Desjardins;
The other was the  mask....
Desjardins' vengeance hath  not   burned  in vain.

You  think you  are  a hero,  you  who  are
A  poor   tricked creature, taken  in  my cunning.
You  ask how you  have  sinned. In your  whole being!
You   crossed   my  nature since  your   earliest years.
All  that you  had  I lacked, I speak  it  plain, And  hated you  with  an  instinctive hate. You little  knew   the   hell  that walked   your
side,
The enemy   that crept into  your  life,
That  probed your   very  weakness,   searched
your  follies,
To  take  you  in  this  final  trap at  last.

This passage reminds us of Milton's ascription of motive   (envy of the  Son of God)   to the  rebel  angels, led by Lucifer/ Satan. !ago's envy  of  his betters  and  his jealous suspicion  which  combine  to moti­ vate   his  hideous  "revenge"  upon   them likewise  come  to  mind.  As  Bernard  Spi­ vack   has   demonstrated   in   Shakespeare and the  Allegory  of Evil, the fatal  schem­  ing conducted under  the  mask of friend­ ship   to  the   victim  links  Iago   with   the Vice figure of  medieval  drama. This  Vice character   was   the  leader   of  the   Seven Deadly  Sins  in  their  assault  upon  Man­ kind; he was the chief tempter of the fal­ lible  human  hero   at   the  centre   of  the morality play. The motive of envy as well
 as  the  method  of  temptation  combined with  deceit  derives  from  the arch-tempter and  eternal outcast, Satan, whose  war  of guile  against God  and  His  creation  took the  line of least  resistance: the  seduction of weak  and  credulous mankind.
A recent  example of  this  type  of  out­ sider   behaviour  provides   the   action  of Robertson Davies'   At  My  Heart's   Core. The three  spirited  pioneer women  (Fran­ ces  Stewart, Catherine  Parr   Traill, and  Susanna  Moodie)  who  share   the  func­  tion  of protagonist in  this ironic  comedy,  are  deliberately  tempted and  then  shown to   have   succumbed  to   temptation  by Edmund   Cantwell,  an   Irish   immigrant who  has  decided   to  give  up  on  Upper Canada. The recognition scene reveals his character and  motives:

MRS.  MOODIE:   Do  you  mean that  you  did what you  did  in  revenge upon   us?
CANTWELL:  Do  you  recall  your  boast  to  me, this  morning, that  there was  no  temptation in  the  forest? It was  you,  Mrs.  Traill,  who said    that  there  was   nothing  here    which might lead  ladies of gentle birth and  good education astray. You  were  mistaken.

I have  observed that there is one  temptation which  only   the   strongest  spirits  can   resist. It is  the   temptation of  discontent....  It is only  the  crude seducer who  takes  a woman's honour, and   in  order  to  do   that  he   must have  some  liking for  her.  It is a more  lasting and   serious   injury to rob  her  of  her   peace of  mind. These  ladies will  never, I  think, know   perfect content  again. They  will  say to  themselves that  my  temptation  was  be­ neath contempt, but  they  will  never be  free  from   it.  It will  always   linger at  the  heart's core.  And  yet  a  little humility this  morning, and  a  little charity toward Mrs. Cantwell a few   months  ago,   might  have  spared  them  this  distress.

The features of perfect obedience to God, and   self-sacrifice   for  the  common  good which is associated  with Christ and  Old Testament types of Christ, were discerned in the dramatic figures of David  and Tecumseh. One  of them  was an  outsider of lowly status  who was chosen  to achieve

OPINIONS & NOTES



greatness, imitating  the   typical   story  of the  male  Cinderella folk-tale hero; the other, an  ethnic outsider to  Anglo-Saxon Upper Canadian society,  belongs  to  the epic   tradition:  he  makes   a  heroic   last stand  for a doomed nation, the North American Indians, and  at  the  same  time, like Roland at  Roncesvalles, stems the invading tide  for  the  sake  of  his friends and  allies. The two Satanic outsiders are imposters and  tricksters, character types frequently found in folklore. These char­ acters  always  enjoy  fooling  and  cheating their  victims,  their  behaviour is a kind of sport or game for them. They like to boast about their  exploits,  particularly to  their  victims. Desjardins, the  professional man,  belongs to the folk-tale category of helper,  but   he  is  a  false  helper;  Cantwell, the Irishman, is another ethnic outsider and,  through  his   particular  culture,  may   be related to  the  mischief-makers of  Celtic  mythology.
Whether a  particular  outsider  reveals
himself  or  herself  as redeemer or as  out­ cast,  as bringer of  joy or misery, depends  partly upon  the  character and  motive  of the  outsiders; it  depends  as  much   upon the  community into  which  this  outsider  is introduced by the  dramatist. To  what  tasks does the community put  him or her? What  identities does  it  project upon  the outsider? What  missing  element does  it obtain from  the  outsider? Munroe Scott emphasizes this  protean  indefiniteness of the  outsider very  well  in  Wu-feng. The outsider in  this  play,  quite  appropriately, is  nameless;  among  the   dramatis   per­ sonae he appears merely  as "Stranger: A Chinese   wanderer." He  is  perceived  by the  inhabitants of  the   play's  Formosan mountain  village according to their  indi­  vidual attitudes towards outsiders: Piong­ shih, Head Chief  of the Mount Ali Tribe, casts him in the role of wandering beggar,  and  the Stranger does not  refuse  this role. Margama,   Piong-shih's  disinherited  son, and  his  friends, who  wish  to  restore  the
 ancient  tribal   scapegoat  harvest   ritual, perceive other  possibilities in the Stranger:

POOLEE:    We    are   planning  a   festival.   A
stranger will  be  useful.
MARGAMA:   Forgive  our   clumsy   use  of  the High  Tongue. Poolee  means  that  a stranger, travelling   alone   and     with     no    powerful friends, will  be "welcome".
LI-YU:  It is  a folk  festival.
POOLEE:  There will  be  music,  dancing, and a beautiful, beautiful ceremony. It will touch you  deeply.
LI-YU:  You  can  participate.

In    the    play's    recognition   scene,   the
Stranger explains his personal  philosophy:

STRANGER:  I am  whatever people   wish  me to be. (Indicating Piong-shih) He  said  I was a beggar. I became a beggar. (To Wu)  You said   I was  a  scholar. I  became a  scholar. (To Serenity) She  said   I was  her  lover.   I became  her  lover.
WU··FENG:   What madness is  this?
STRANGER:  Madness? Is  it  madness to serve others? I abdicate my  desires, my  emotions, my   needs,    myself-all-everything-to the  service  of others.

What an   outsider  is  allowed   to  con­ tribute to  a  particular  dramatic  micro­  cosm  also  depends very  much  upon  the structure of  the  play.  Is  it  a  comedy?  a tragedy?  an  absurd play? From what  ini­ tial   condition  is  the   community  to   be moved?  to  what  final  condition? Merrill Denison's Marsh Hay, an  ironic  comedy, exhibits   a   depressed    backwoods    com­ munity  in which  the  women  are  drudges and  the men bullies. When  it appears that  the   younger    daughter  of   the    Serang family  has  become  pregnant as the  result of a rape, the characteristic squalor  of the Serang   household  changes   for   a   short  time   to  tidiness   and   an   atmosphere  of mutual  caring. This  change is  the  con­ sequence of the chance appearance of a stranger:

PETE:   I  wonder what changed maw,  any­
ways?
JO:   I aint sure but  they  was  a  city  woman that  went   through  to   Pembroke  in   a  car

I73

OPINIONS & NOTES



and   she   had   a  puncture  outside our   gate and   she   come   in.   It was   just   after  maw learned about Sarilin. She  talked   to  her.
PETE: ••• What did  she say  to maw?
JO:  ..• after she  went  maw  stayed  out  there by  the   gate   for   an   hour, lookin   down   the road. 'N   she   went   round  in   a   kind   of  a daze  and   wouldn't speak  to  no  one.
Lena  Serang explains her  changed  out­ look  to  her  neighbour, Mrs. Clantch, by contrasting the stranger's ideas  ("She  says now  that   the  baby  was  comin  the  only thing  to do was to give it the best chancet as we could....")  with the local minister's conventional   condemnation  of  "illegiti­ macy."  But   the   play's   ironic   structure demands that this enlightened doctrine of true  charity be shelved: when  the  preg­ nancy   of  Sarilin  is  discovered   to  have been  a hoax,  everything returns to "nor­ mal"  and  the society  of the  backwoods  is spared  the effort  of  self-examination and regeneration.
When  the gospel  of Christian love and forgiveness  is brought to an isolated  Inuit community living  by its traditional  mor­ ality   of   blood-revenge,  tragedy   is   the result   of  this  culture clash  in  Leonard Peterson's The  Great  Hunger. The tragic resolution    is   by   no   means   inevitable; though    the   traditional   view   has   very powerful  supporters, especially in the per­ son of  the  shamaness  Saodlu,  the  Chris­  tian    message   brought   by   Pitsoolak,    a stranger to  the  band   but  also  an  Inuit, appears for  a  time  to  triumph over  the old religion. It is again  the discovery that  a fraud   is  involved  in  this  new  and  sup­ posedly  better   way  of  life  which  results in   the   triumph  of   the   "unregenerate" way of  life. The fraud, in this case, is the outsider  himself: though Pitsoolak  coun­ sels  forgiveness    of   an   old   murder  to Noona,    the   tragic   hero   and   revenger­  designate,   Pitsoolak   does   not   practice what   he   preaches.  He  murders  Saodlu  because she has defeated him in a contest of religious  and  priestly  powers. Though he escapes,  an  outcast once  more,  Noona
 loses  his   life   in   the   ensuing   revenge­ confrontation  with    his   stepfather,  the murderer of  his  natural  father.
The alien  vision is not  always defeated by the conservatism of the community. In two  of  Robertson Davies'  comedies  it  is fairly  successful  in breaking down  old at­ titudes and  creating readiness  for change. Franz Szabo,  the  "Fifth  Business" char­ acter   of  Fortune, .A1y  Foe,  is  a  Czech refugee    who   entertains   a   sampling  of Kingston's "establishment" with his art  of puppetry. His puppeteer's version  of Don  Quixote  and  his  philosophy of art  serve as  a  kind  of  touchstone for  a  variety  of Kingston tempers. Mrs.  Philpott and  Mr. Tapscott of the Recreation Committee respond with  the  narrowness of the men­ tal  health faddist:

MATTIE  [Philpott]:  ... we  have  psychology today, you know. We can't show  a play  to children which has  a  maladjusted person  as the  chief  character.
NICHOLAS:  But  Don   Quixote is  one  of  the great characters of  the  world's literature.
TAPSCOTT:  No,  Mrs.   Philpott is  right.  You teach kids  to  make  fun  of a lunatic and  first thing  you   know   they'll  all   be  delinquents.
MATTIE:  ••• We've got   to  protect  the  child against such   brutal stories   as  this! ... We can't throw overboard thirty years  of child psychology!

Ursula Simonds, the  token  Communist among the  characters, reminds Szabo  of reactions he tried  to leave behind  the Iron Curtain:

URSULA:   You're all  wrong, the  whole   pack of  you! The play  is  no  good  because it  has no  message! Give  it  meaning! Make Sancho the  proletariat;  make Don  Quixote  class government; make   the  windmills capitalism and   private profit! Then  you  will   have   a play  that makes  sense!
NICHOLAS:  Then you'll  have  a chunk of propaganda!

The most  intelligent response  is assigned to  James "Chilly" Steele,  the  proprietor of  the  private club  at  which  this  puppet performance is staged :

OPINIONS & NOTES



CHILLY:   I never   expected  to  see  anything like  that in  this   joint. It gives  me  a  feeling I haven't had  since  I was a kid -a religious feeling. . . .   You    know    how    religion is: you've always suspected that  something existed, and   you've wished   and   prayed that it  did  exist,  and  in  your  dreams you've  seen little  bits   of  it,   but   to  save   your   life  you couldn't  describe  it   or   put   a   name   to  it. Then, all  of  a  sudden, there it  is, and   you feel  grateful, and   humble, and  wonder how you  ever  doubted it. That little stage  makes me feel  like  that-

Nicholas  Hayward, the play's  comic hero, is   a   junior     instructor   in   English    at Queen's University and  is capable of a fairly  sophisticated response  to art:

NICHOLAS :  . • •   I  see  exactly  what   Chilly means. I feel  much   the  same  myself.  It fills a need  in  the  heart. Why  not  call  the  feeling it   arouses  religious?  Look   at  it:  brilliant colour, warmth and  gaiety-qualities  men once   sought  in   the   churches, and   seek  in vain,  now....

What is, however, most  significant  about the alien  vision in this play is the outsider who  brings   it  to  the  Kingstonians:   be­ cause  of  Franz Szabo's  determination to "stick  it  out" in  Canada, Nicholas  Hay­  ward,  who had intended to make  his aca­  demic  fortune  in  the  U.S.A.,  decides  to stay in  Canada  as well:

NICHOLAS:  •  •  . If you  can  stay  in  Canada, I can,  too.  Everybody says Canada is a hard country to govern, but  nobody  mentions that for  some  people it  is also  a  hard country to live  in. Still, if we all  run  away  it will  never be  any   better. So  let   the   geniuses  of  easy virtue go  southward; I know  what they  feel too  well  to  blame them. But  for  some  of  us there is  no  choice; let  Canada do  what  she will  with  us,  we  must  stay.

The other Davies  comedy  in which per­ sonal  regeneration and  social transforma­ tion grow out  of the efforts of a foreigner, Hunting Stuart, relies  upon  the  infusion  of glorious  family  history  to raise  the op­ pressed  hero  above   his  oppressors. The outsider, again a "Fifth Business" charac­ ter,  with  the  exotic  name  of  Dr.  Maria Clementina Sobieska,  enters  the stuffy so-
 ciety of Ottawa civil servants as a "distin­ guished  figure  in  the  world  of  ethnopsy­ chology  ... deeply   concerned   with   the problems  of heredity." She  brings  to  the Stuart household  the message that  its de­ spised   "head,"   Henry  Benedict   Stuart, unsuccessful  in  the  Ottawa establishment because  of  his  supposed   German origin,  is in actuality "the oldest  living direct  de­ scendant of  the  Royal  House  of Stuart." By means  of  recall  of  the  ancestral past under  hypnosis,  Henry   Benedict   Stuart proves the  truth of her  claim.  He  enacts, unknown   to   himself,   the   character  of Bonnie Prince Charlie, his glamorous fore­ bear.  Return  to  his  former drab,  wife­ dominated existence  holds  no appeal for him after his trance is over:

He  moves  downstage in  the  moonlight,  finds a  number  in  the   telephone  directory,  and dials  it.
British  Airways? I want a  passage on  your next  flight  to  Scotland ... Tonight, if  pos­ sible....  Yes,   it   is   urgent-Government business -oh  yes, on  the  highest level.
He  smiles  as the   CURTAIN   falls.

Intellectual, moral  or  aesthetic superi­ ority  does not constitute a  necessary  part  of  the  outsider's  equipment. Some  out­ siders  represent  the  underprivileged, the true   outcasts   of   our   society.   Rita   Joe,  West   Coast   Indian  heroine  of  George  Ryga's  The  Ecstasy  of Rita   Joe,  cannot comprehend   the   reasons   for   white   so­ ciety's  legal and  social  buffettings of her­  self and  her associates.  Mona, the  gentle homosexual  among the  "toughs" of John Herbert's prison  society  in  Fortune   and Men's Eyes,  cannot  match  the  superior survival  skills of  his fellow  homosexuals. Tit-Coq, illegitimate titular  hero  of  Ge­ linas' sardonic comedy  about  the triumph of  conventional  respectability  over  love, ends where he began: an outcast from  the society of the legitimates. These  outsiders, like  their  more  fortunate counterparts in the plays already examined, hear  a differ­  ent  drummer  than   the  members   of  the

OPINIONS & NOTES



group  from  which  they are excluded. Un­ like  them,   they  lack  the  social  prestige which  would  incline  the insiders to listen to their  version of reality. In each of these plays, the  outsider  character  suffers  har­ assment  because, like the Stranger in W u­ feng, he or she is perceived  by more  than  one of the insiders to be poor, alone,  and without  powerful   friends.  These  charac­ ters  are  society's   victims;   they   are   too weak  to turn  their  outsider  status  into  an asset;  they  are  too different from  the  in­ siders  to allow  assimilation; they are  too noticeable  to  be  ignored.   The  insiders, therefore, turn  on  them.  They may  drive them   out  into   a  social  wilderness,  they may punish  and imprison them,  they may maim  and  kill  these  outsiders.  As Frazer  pointed  out many  years ago in his Golden  Bough, the  treatment  of  the  scapegoat  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  chosen  indi­  vidual's  personal  merit  or lack  of it; the scapegoat is simply  a  convenient  vehicle to  convey  the  accumulated  evils  out  of the community.
While  there  may  be little  resemblance
between    the   successful   transformers  of society,   such   as   Heavysege's   David   or Davies'  Franz  Szabo,  and  these poor  and helpless   victims   of  its  intolerance,  it  is possible to detect  in both types of outsider phases of the mythological hero-redeemer. Jung and  Ken!nyi,   in  their  Essays  on  a Science   of  Mythology, explored   certain aspects  of  the  universal  archetype of  the child-god and  the child-hero, and  agreed substantially  with   Otto  Rank's  earlier findings,  published  as  The Myth of the Birth  of the  Hero.  Common features of child-god and  child-hero are  unusual cir­ cumstances of  birth, adversities  of  early childhood, including  abandonment  and danger through persecution. According to Jung and   Ken!nyi,   these  universal   ten­ dencies  in  hero-legends  and   myths  sym­ bolize   the   potentialities   present   in   the newly  born  and  the  difficulties  and  dan­ gers  which  must   be  endured  and   over-

q6
 come  if  these  potentialities are  to  be  ac­ tualized. Joseph   Campbell's  study,  The Hero With a Thousand Faces, traces these typical  hero  experiences as  phases  of  the universal  pattern of the  adventure of the hero,  whether the  hero  be warrior, lover, or  redeemer. He  or  she who  would  fulfil the  difficult   task  of  the  hero   must  first become  an  outsider, must  separate  him­  self or  herself  from  the community, must  undergo a  series  of  ordeals   as  well  as  a kind of ritual  death; the reborn  hero, who has  become  a spouse of the  gods, returns to the community with  a special gift from the  gods. But  some  do  not  return. These are  the  victims  of  the  ordeals,  who  col­ lapse   under  the   burdens imposed   upon them.   Others are  strong   enough   to  win their   way  back.  They live  to  transform their  societies.  George   Ryga's  Ecstasy  of Rita  Joe concentrates on the  tragic  phase of the hero's adventure, Robertson Davies' Fortune, My   Foe  on   the   phase   of  the triumph  over  adversity  and   infusion   of the   wisdom   gained  into   a   community which  stands  in need  of such  redemption.
The overall  tendency in Canadian plays is to present outsiders as pathetic, that  is, as victims, or as benign,  as redeemers. But the  large  number of  ethnic and  cultural outsiders  in   Canadian  drama,  whether new immigrants like Franz  Szabo or origi­ nal inhabitants like Rita Joe, also appears to  mirror truthfully the  particular social fabric of  our  country.  Our   strangers in drama are  often  mysterious   not  because  they are evil but because  they are  alien.

ROTA  LISTER



CANADA ON THE ENGLISH STAGE, 1704

Liberty   Asserted    ( I704), a   tragedy   by John  Dennis, has  the  uncertain  distinc­ tion  of  being  the  first  representation on

OPINIONS & NOTES



the English stage of the North American Indian. It  is an  inauspicious debut, a du­ bious honour for  both  the drama and  the Indian. The play is very much  a  product of  limiting and   peculiar   theatrical  and political  circumstances. The popular tra­  dition  of the  Noble Savage,  to which  the play  contributes, is  a  tradition more  sav­ age  than   noble,  reflecting the  essentially egocentric involvement of the  Europeans with   the   natives    of   the   New   World. Nevertheless, the  play  is interesting as a record  of a Canadian presence  in the English   literary consciousness,   as  an  in­ stance  of  the  literary exploration, if  not exploitation,  of  the  discovery   in   North  America   of  real  counterparts  to  the  an­  cient  concept of a pre-civilized  man,  and as an  example of  neoclassical  tragic  the­ ory in practice. John  Dennis ( 1657-1734)  is of  course  best  known  as  a  critic; this was  his  most  successful   play,  first  pro­ duced  at the Lincoln's Inn Fields Theatre on  24th  February  1704,  and   performed eleven  times in that year.1
The play is set in Canada, taking  as its starting point  the French-Iroquois wars which   came   to  a  tentative close  in  the summer of  16g6,  when  the  Governor of New  France, Louis  de  Buade, Comte de Frontenac, led a desultory final  campaign against  the decimated and  war-weary In­ dians.  The  dramatis personae  include   a heavily  fictionalized Governor Frontenac, an idealized  English  general named  Beau­ fort  who is the ally of the Iroquois, and  a young   Indian  warrior   named  Ulamar, who  bears  the  ethical,  political, and  ro­ mantic burdens of the play on his broadly  heroic   back.  Ulamar  and   his  mournful, histrionic mother   Sakia   are   "wretched slaves,"  Hurons  by  birth,  who  were  cap­  tured  by  the  Iroquois twelve  years  prior to the  time  of  the  play and  deceived  into slavery.  Ulamar has  grown   to  manhood under    the   tutelage   of   the    "generous Beaufort," and  has  renounced his Huron birth  and  become  a triumphant leader  of
 the Five Nations of the Iroquois in war against  the French and  Hurons. Both Beaufort  and  Ulamar love Irene, daugh­ ter of Zephario, an  Iroquois chief;  Beau­ fort is awarded her hand  in marriage, but graciously  deeds  her  to  the younger  Ula­ mar; "0  noble  Friendship! Unexampl'd Rivalship!"
Sakia,  however,  deplores her  son's  be­
trothal and  his history in war; her "dread Secret" is that  Ulamar "No Huron is, nor of Canadian kind, but descended  of a Christian Sire,"  the French nobleman, Miramont. When  she learns  that  Ulamar has narrowly missed killing a commander named  Miramont on the battlefield, she insists  that   her   son   negotiate  a   peace treaty  with the French. Ulamar at first refuses to betray  the  Iroquois and  "God­ like Liberty," but  he is clearly  moved  by his  mother's plea.  Ulamar's  hamartia   is unfortunately the  play's  structural flaw;  after   establishing at  great  length   that   a peace treaty  with  the perfidious  French is the  most  foolish  course  of action  for  the Indians, Ulamar  is  then   moved  to  pro­ pose such a  treaty upon  hearing that  his mother  is   poised   for   suicide.   Beaufort, horrified   but   sympathetic,  intones    the moral  of  the  play:

This is what has  captivated  Europe
Where their  domestic Interest  most   prefer
Before  the   Weal   and   Honour of  their
Country
Though private Good   on  public Weal depends. . . .  (III,vi)

·Within  moments, the  French have broken the treaty and killed most of the Iroquois.  Governor Frontenac and  his kinsman  Miramont shamefacedly appear, apologizing for the treason that they as commanders are  helpless  to  prevent  be­ cause "from  Europe the severe Command arrived." Dennis is  satirical   throughout the  play in  his treatment of  "those  pests of human race  the French." Louis XIV is in  absentia  the  real  villain  of  the  piece;  Frontenac  and   Miramont   are   seen   as

OPINIONS & NOTES



"prostituted to thy  Monarch's Pride." Happily,  Ulamar  detects   in   Frontenac "the seeds of every noble virtue, but by Custom /  And  vain  Opinion   choak'd"; Frontenac is in  fact  Ulamar's father the long lost Miramont, who had adopted the family name  of Frontenac upon  the death of his older  brother. Frontenac is moved, ironically,  by  the   same   love  of  family which  was  almost   the  downfall   of  Ula­ mar; not  only is Ulamar saved from exe­ cution, but,  in a triumph of  rhetoric over logic,   Frontenac   renounces   his   French command and  agrees  to become  "king  of all Canadian France." In  the final scene, French,  English,   Huron,  and   Iroquois embrace, "And Peace  and Joy in all their Looks  appear."
In  the  Preface  to Liberty  Asserted, Dennis  discusses the  play's Canadian  ele­ ments:

The Scene  of this Tragedy lies at  Agnie in Canada;  which, for   the  sake  of  the   better sound, I call  Angie.  Canada is a vast  Tract of  Land in  Northern  America, on  the  back of  New   England  and   New  York.   As  New England  and   New   York  ... belong   to  the English, a  considerable part  of  Canada   is possessed  by the  French; and  as the  English and    the   French  divide    the   country,  they divide  the   Natives. The  most   considerable Nation of  Canada, next  to  the  Iroquois are the  Hurons, who  are  Friends to  the  French. But  the  five Warlike Nations of the  Iroquois are  our  Confederates; of those  five  Nations, Agnies  or  Angies  is one; and  the  chief  place of  the  Nation is  Agnie  or  Angie,  and   thus much I thought fit  to  premise  for  the  sake of those who have never read Hennepin or LaHontan.

Agnie  is  the  French word  for  the  Mo­ hawk, and  the locale  described  by Dennis  is  south   and   west  of  Lake  Ontario  in what  is now  upper  New York State. It is interesting  that   Dennis  assumes  famili­  arity  in  his  audience  with  the  names  at least of Hennepin  and Lahontan, both  of whom  have  scarcely  lustrous  reputations as  historians, yet whose journals  are im­ portant contributions to our knowledge  of

q8
 early  Canada, and   to  the  literary  tradi­ tion  of  the  Noble  Savage.  Louis  Henne­ pin   (I640-I705)  was  a  mendicant friar, best  known  for  the  first  European draw­ ing  of  Niagara Falls,  and  for  his appro­ priation  after   La  Salle's   death  of  that  explorer's   achievements.  Baron   de   La­  hontan  (I666-I7I5)  served  under Fron­ tenac,  travelled extensively   with  the  In­ dians,    was    ultimately   banished   from France and  thus published in England his New    Voyages  to   America   (I 703),  of which the clearly fictitious "Dialogues between  the Author and  Adario, a Noted Man   Among   the  Savages" form   a  con­ siderable part.2  These  dialogues,  in which the merits  of civilization are  found  want­ ing  beside  the  virtues  of  the  natural life, are   unfamiliar  precursors of   Rousseau's Discourse    on   Inequality   ( I754),  and, especially  in their  criticism of  the French, can  be seen  to contain the central idea  of Liberty Asserted.
Dennis  markets the  feelings  of the  dis­ illusioned Lahontan  as  English   patriot­ ism;  his play  was intended as a  warning to  the  English  not  to follow  the  example of  tyranny set  by  the  French.  Although his savages are improbable, the play is not unrealistic in  an  historical  and  political  sense;  Dennis   was  clearly  familiar  with the  absurdities of  French  policy  in  New France,  whereby   local  officials  were  no more  than  puppets abroad. Dennis would have  the  English  avoid  similar   folly.  In the  Preface to  Liberty  Asserted, he  de­ clares   that   " 'Tis  the   want   of  publick  Spirit that ruins  us, and  the design of this tragedy  is  to  inculcate that...." He  de­ fends  his baldly chauvinistic purpose  with reference  to  ancient precedent; "the In­ structions  which    we   receive   from   the Stage  ought to  be for  the  benefit  of  the lawful  established Government. That this was  the  case  among  the  Athenians  ap­ pears  plain  to me...." Tragedy is serious drama,  the  proper  vehicle   for  patriotic expression; its heroes  are  role models  for

OPINIONS & NOTES



loyal    Englishmen;   its    audience    may "gently sigh  with  sorrow  not  your  own." In   the  popular tradition,  the  origins, values and  intrinsic qualities of the savage are  immaterial; his function is to provide glamorous contrast to and  ingenuous crit­ icism  of civilized  man.   In  works  such  as Aphra Behn's  Oroonoko ( I688), Defoe's  Robinson   Crusoe    (I 7 I g),   and   George Colman's I nkle  and  Y arico  ( q87), the characteristics of the Noble Savage  litera­  ture  can  be  seen.  The  savage   has  little inherent  significance, is  highly  romanti­ cized,  and,   in  appearance  or  by  birth,  is  carefully  whitewashed,  Europeanized. Ulamar,  in   Liberty   Asserted,  is  half­ French, a  Christian, and   has  been  edu­ cated  by an Englishman. Like Lahontan's Adario,  he  is little  more   than   a  mouth­
piece  for political sentiments.
Whatever the illusions perpetuated by Dennis concerning the natives  of Canada, he is at least not lacking  in understanding and  some  sympathy for  the  problems  of the   French  colonists.   At   least   one  ex­ change in  the  play  has  not  lost its  ironic edge:

FRONTENAc: Always  a male-content. MIRAMONT:  Am  I alone?
Are  there not  thousands here in  Canada?

NOTES

1 A copy of the  first  edition of Liberty Asserted is in the  Public Archives of Canada collection of pamphlets 1497-I877. All references to the play  are   to  this  pamphlet. The  Preface is included  in   The   Critical  Works  of   John Dennis, 2  vols., ed.  Edward N. Hooker  (Balti­ more: Johns Hopkins, 1939-43).
2   Louis   Hennepin,  A  Discovery  of  Louisiana (Paris,  I 683), and   A   New   Discovery  of  a Vast  Country in   America  (London,  I 698). Lahontan's  Voyages, ed.  Stephen  Leacock (Ottawa: Graphic, I932).

MARIAN FRASER
 ON THE VERGE

*****    MARKETA GOETZ-STANKIEWICZ,   The Silenced Theatre:  Czech Playwrights without a Stage. Univ. of Toronto Press,  $25.00.   This is an  excellent and   timely  book,  telling of  the struggle  of  Czech  and   Slovak   playwrights  to sustain their  art in  a  changing  political  atmos­ phere   that   is  only  intermittently  hospitable to free  expression in  writing or  in  speech. As  in Tsarist  Russia,  drama  and   other  forms    of literature  have   become in   Czechoslovakia  a covert   mean   of  expressing  forbidden  political and   social   truths,  and   even   when   the   play­  wrights have  no  stage  available to  them, they  write  for  surreptitious  reading and   sometimes are  produced abroad,  though at  great peril   to themselves,  as   the   case  of   the   recently  im­  prisoned  Vaclav   Havel  shows.   The  Silenced Theatre is a  thorough book,  discussing Czech  theatrical  traditions and   how   they  have   been adapted   to  present  circumstances,  comparing western   views   of   Czech    theatre  with   Czech  views of  western theatre, showing the  different meanings  the  concept of absurdism acquired in different    political   circumstances,   and    very lucidly   analyzing  the   work   of   the   principal Czech   and   Slovak   dramatists.  Depressing  as many  passages  are,  it  is  basically an  inspiring book  in  its  demonstration of  the  ever-renewed vitality of  the  literary imagination, that  stub­ born   seed  beneath the  snow  of  oppression. It should   give  courage to  those  Canadian  critics who  lament our   own  cultural  colonization. If we have,  as Canadians, a creativity of our  own,  it  will sustain itself  in  darkness and  in  light  as surely   as  that of  the  Czechs   and   the  Slovaks
has  done. 	o.w.

****    L. F. s. UPTON, Micmacs and  Colonists: Indian-White   Relations   in    the    Maritimes,
1713-1867.  Univ. of  British   Columbia   Press,
$22.00. The Micmacs have  probably been  in sustained contact  with   Europeans longer than any   other group  of  Canadian  Indians;   per­
haps   because   the   period of  acculturation has been  so long,  lasting from  the  founding of  Port Royal   in   I6o4, far   less  has   been   written on this  group than on  others, like  the  Indians of the   plains   and   the   Pacific   coast,  whose  cul­ tures   remained  relatively  unchanged  well  into the  nineteenth century, and   whose  lives  were  in  any  case  more   dramatic in  a  way  that  ap­  pealed   to   European   romanticism.   Professor Upton's  book   is  a   welcome   addition   to   our  knowledge of  the  Micmacs,  and  one  can  only  regret that, apart from  a  brief introduction  on the   Micmac culture  and  on   seventeenth-cen-

179

ON  THE VERGE



tury   contacts, the   book  is  in  fact,   as  its  title suggests, confined  to  "Indian-White  Relations in  the  Maritimes, I7I3-1867," and  not  all such relations, since  there is very  little  about the Micmacs' neighbours in  the  Maritimes, the Malecites. Nevertheless, in  an  area  scantily served  by historians or  by anthropologists, this is a  welcome book,  and  particularly so since  it is  written  with   an   unassuming lucidity and with  an  awareness that  history, for  all  its scientific aspects, is  first  of  all  a  literary art.

G.W.

****   DOUG FETHERLING, Gold   Diggers   of
19  9.                                      Historians are  rarely qmck   off  the   mark.  Perspective, which   they
regard as a  necessary virtue, can  prevent them from  recognizing the  long-term importance of events  too  near  to  them. Yet  the  erosion  of information does  not  operate only  with  regard to  distant episodes; recent history  can  quickly become   obscure, and   one  of  the   least  under­ stood  events  of modern times  is the  great  stock market crash in  1929,  a  shade  over  fifty  years ago.   The  epicentre  of   the   crash   was   New York,   but   Canada  was   closely   involved  and  some  of  the  more  enigmatic  participants were Canadians.  Until   now    what    happened   in Canada has never  been  thoroughly investigated and   brought into   a  single  volume, but  Doug Fetherling has  now  done  it in  Gold  Diggers of
1929. Fetherling is a good  poet  and  a good newspaperman, and  these   two  virtues,  which
so often  seem  incompatible, work  well  together o
In!ormatlve, and   in  an  oblique way  chillingly
mmatory.  We   have   been   conditioned  to   be­
lieve,  over  the  past  forty  years,  that   the  Crash
-and the  Depression so elusively  linked  with
it-could  never   happen again. What  Fether­ ling   shows  is  how  fragile are  such  structures of confidence.
G.W.

***   RICHARD CHIPPINGDALE, Laurier:    His Life and World. McGraw-Hill Ryerson, $r7.95· This book is part of a series on Canadian prime ministers and  their times, in which  different authors  have   varied  the   proportions  between the  times  and   the  men.  Richard Chippingdale tends to  give  us  a  great deal  about the  times and  not  enough about the  man,  so that  we see a  lightly drawn Laurier  against a  heavily  de­ tailed  background,  and  the   result   does   not make   for   good    portraiture. It  is   true   that  Chippingdale is  more   critical in  his  presenta­ tion  of  Laurier's personality than  earlier biog­ raphers like  Skelton  and  Schull,  but   we  still

180
 have   to  go  back   to  them   for   the   detail that gives  meaning to  our  view  of  a  man's life.  At best    this    is   an  interesting first   glimpse  of Laurier.                                                 G.W.

***   JEAN MURRAY coLE,  Exile in the Wilder­ ness:   The    Life    of   Chief   Factor   Archibald McDonald, 1790-1853. Burns  &  MacEachern,
$r5·95·   Its  subject makes  this  a  minor  biog­ raphy. Archibald McDonald had  an interesting life, coming to Red  River under  Lord Selkirk's auspices,  entering   the   Hudson's   Bay   Com­ pany's service, taking  part   in  the   first  actual descent by  canoe  of   the  Fraser  Canyon, and  running various fur-trading posts in  the Colum­ bia  Department, but  he  was  no  nation-maker, reat
hfe  has  to  be  regarded as exemplary of  a  way
of   living  rather   than   extraordinary.  Given these   limitations of  the  subject, Jean  Murray Cole    has    produced   a   well-made   biography which makes  the  most  of its  material and  pro­ jects    McDonald's  personality   sympathetically as  well  as  telling  his  adventures and   achieve­ ments  in   a   nicely   restrained  and    balanced prose.                                                                     G.W.

***   GEORGE wooDcocK, The Canadians. Fitz­ henry & Whiteside, $19.95·    Handsomely illus­ trated  with  prints  and   photographs  that   do much  to  animate the  stories   of  Canadian his­ tory,    Woodcock's  account   of   the   Canadian people is a  literate, accessible, and  visually  at­ tractive  book.   Unfortunately, it  is  also  badly marred  by  misquotation and   misprint. In   his own   words    a   "collective biography"  rather than a political history, the  book  is a tribute to regional individualism and   to  a  collectivity of regions  that somehow makes  a  nation. Perhaps for  this  reason it  is  most  alive  in  its  chapters on   B.C.,   Quebec,  and    the   Maritimes;  there seems   Iitle   sympathy  for   centralist   political argument. But  it  is also  largely  an  account of the   artistic  accomplishments of  the   people - essentially  as  a  demonstration of  a  particular kind   of  geographical determinism. Sports and business,    too,    enter  the    picture    Woodcock draws; but   oddly, for   a  social   history   of  this persuasion, there is little account of  Canadian science in  relation to  climate and   landscape: nothing on  aerial photography, standard  time, ecological  management,   or   enough  on   com­ munications theory to  demonstrate its  national political significance. Hence -though  there  is much  to  learn from   this  work -one  remains at the  end  aware that the  collectivity is larger still. 	w.N.
