1/2.oo per copy



CANADIAN
liTERATURE N°·50
Autumn, 1971

POETRY OF P. K. PJIGE


Articles
BY GEORGE WOODCOCK, A. J. M. SMITH, BRUCE NESBIT, GEORGE BOWERING, C. M.  MCLAY

Poems
BY  P. K. PAGE

Review Articles and Reviews
BY G. L. BURSILL-HALL,  MIRIAM WADDINGTON, STEPHEN  SCOBIE,
LEN GASPARINI, LAWRENCE RUSSELL,  JIM CHRISTY, MARY JANE EDWARDS, RONALD SUTHERLAND, CLARA THOMAS, L. J. SWINGLE, PETER STEVENS, ROY DANIELLS, PAT BARCLAY, ANTHONY APPENZELL,  FRED COGSWELL,
JOAN COLDWELL, MIKE IX>YLE

Illustration
BY  P. K. IRWIN

Opinion
BY  DONALD CAMERON

A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW



SWARMING OF POETS

An Editorial Reportage





George Woodcock





W..NCanadian  Litnatu" began,  twelve years ago, I
promised  that  every  book of verse by a  Canadian poet,  as well as every novel
published in this country,  would be reviewed in its pages. It was an easy promise in  a  year- 1959-when   twenty-four  volumes  of  poetry  were  all  that   the bibliographer   who  compiled   our  checklist  of  publications   could  discover.  All twenty-four,  I  believe, were duly reviewed. Through the  Fifties, Northrop  Frye, writing his yearly poetry article in the University of Toronto  Quarterly,  had been able to devote a few sentences or even a few paragraphs to every book of verse that appeared; they came, in those days, mainly from the regular  publishers, who lost money on good poets to give prestige to their lists. There  were few small presses; amateur  publishing  hardly  existed; the mimeograph  revolution had not begun.
The  change  since  then  was  brought  home  to me  with  formidable  emphasis
on a recent morning  when nineteen books of verse arrived for review in one mail delivery. Tihe poetry  explosion  of  the  past  decades  was  a  phenomenon   I  had already  talked  of lightly enough;  now it was going bang  in my face. Last year, according  to Canadian  Literature's annual  checklist, more than  120 collections of verse in English  alone  were published in  Canada,  and  that  is a minimal  count, for we were well aware  that  by no means every title had  been flushed out of the coverts and  copses of amateur  publishing. This  year, if  that  one day's  mail  was a fair augury, the total  may well run into 250 or 300 titles in English. With  that realization  I  had   to  admit   to  myself that  it  was  time  to  abandon  even  the pretence of reviewing every book or pamphlet  that  a Canadian poet might drift on to the current  of public attention.

3

SWARMING OF  POETS



Now came the nag of editorial conscience. If only thirty or forty books of verse can  be noticed at meaningful length, someone has to make the choice, and  since editing  like writing is a craft  that  cannot  be performed  in committee,  the choice has  to be made  by an  individual,  and  inevitably  his perceptions  and  tastes will be dominant. This editor presents as his justification -and  his limitation -that he was weaned into writing on Imagism and  Original  Dada,  proved his youth in the shouting Thirties, saddened into manhood  in the romantic  Forties, and  came in the Sixties to a solitary selfhood expressed in verse drama  which only the CBC has seen fit to encourage. He claiins, at the least, an experience varied  enough  to spot  when  poets are  merely doing again what  was done  better  when  it was first conceived, a caution  about condemning anything  that seems to have new life, an old dog's nose for the smell of failure, a bone-deep knowledge of the flaw in every success.
But once the score or two of books to be reviewed  have been duly selected by such eminently fallible means, wihat of the books that  remain?  The  least one can do is to list them for reference, and this we have tried to do year after  year in the Checklist, but  with  a growing sense, as more  and  more  collections of verse are merely  listed, of  the  need for something  more,  some  kind  of  occasional  survey of the  poets and  trends  that  are emerging into significance  and  the little  presses that  encourage  them.
During  the last month, in the attempt  to do at least this minimal  justice, I have read some eighty books and booklets of verse that  have accumulated on my desk. I  cannot  say that  I  have  reached  any  portentous  theoretical  conclusions;  there has  not  been  time  to  be  more  than  impressionistic.  But  perhaps   that   is  not inappropriate at a time when the current  prejudice  against structure has helped to prevent  even the emergence of a definable trend  that  might  be compared  with those of the Thirties  or Forties. One has the feeling of a guerilla army percolating in all directions, and  not always forward, for often the movements  whose outlines one  fleetingly recognizes are in  fact  ghosts, the  ghosts  of  Dada, of  Surrealism, even, in the latest wave of younger poets, of the social Thirties.


Now FOR   A   HEADER  into  the  book pile!  On   top  are  the anthologies;  of  the  first two I  turn  up, one  is made  by a  young  poet selecting
from  the  stars  of  Establishment  1970;  it  is  Fifteen  Canadian Poets,  edited  by
Garry  Geddes  (Oxford,  $3.95). The  second is selected, by one of the Establish-


4

SWARMING OF POETS



ment  stars, from  among  the  young  (an  unspecified "upper  age limit"  thas been imposed, but it is hard  to determine, since at least eight of the contributors  have crossed into  the  thirties  and  some  born  later  are  already  old  at  heart)  ;  it  is Storm  Warning, edited by Al Purdy  (McClelland  & Stewart, $2·95). Out  of this group,  Purdy  believes, the next Establishment will emerge, and  he may be right, for  already   the  leading   poets  of  the  day  as  Geddes  reveals  them  in  Fifteen Canadian  Poets are  different  from  those an  anthologist  working  ten  years  ago would have  presented. Then  Purdy,  Cohen,  Mandel,  would  have been regarded as junior  members,  doubtful  borderline  cases; now, next  to Birney, Souster and Layton,  they seem  the  elders in  Geddes'  collection, and  even  George  Bowering and  Margaret   Atwood,  of  whom  very few  had  heard  in  1961,  have  become accepted literary personalities; the only real newcomers to the group are Victor Coleman  and  Michael  Ondaatje. Even in five years, some of Purdy's  unknowns or half-knowns will obviously have moved into that little circle of celebrity whose light we in the world of letters call fame.
Fifteen Canadian  Poets is a finely chosen anthology,  picked mainly-though not  entirely-from  poems  written   during  the  Sixties,  avoiding  over-familiar works, and  convincingly  demonstrating the imaginative  and  textual  richness of the best Canadian poetry produced  during the decade that  has just ended. There are  other  poets I would  have included-P. K.  Page  and  Miriam  Waddington certainly  and  George Jonas  perhaps-and at least two of the  poets included  I would  have left out,  but  it is precisely in such debatable  cases that  the  intang­ ibilities of taste take over from  the relative certainties of critical  judgment.  And despite differing  preferences,  I  doubt  if any anthologist could  have  composed  a selection  which  as a  whole  is more  effective than  Fifte,en  Poets.  I  suspect  the limitation in the number  of poets, like the very lucid notes on them,  was primarily intended  to make  the  book useful to students  and  teachers,  but  for  the general reader  as well this kind of selective anthology is the ideal supplement  to a classic
general   collection  like  A.  J. M.  Smith's   Modern   Canadian    Verse.  Smith  is
extensive; Geddes is intensive. We need both views.
My strongest  impression  on  reading  Storm  Warning  was of  the  obvious  pre­ eminence  of David  Helwig  among  the poets Purdy  has collected. He is older, of course,  than  at  least four  of the  Geddes Fifteen, and  he writes  with  a  sureness of rhythm  and  a clearness of imagery, a positively visual evocativeness, that  place him-and   have  placed  him  since  his  first  book-firmly  within   the  major tradition as it exists in Canada.
So far  as the other  poets are concerned,  I like to consider Storm  Warning  in


5

SWARMING OF  POETS



relation  to two collections of work by younger poets which The  House of Anansi has recently  published:  Soundings  ($2.50  paper,  $6.oo  cloth), a selection from "new   Canadian  poets"  made  by  Andy   Wainwright   and   Jack   Ludwig,  and Mindscapes   ($2.50  paper,  $7.50  cloth)  which  is devoted  to four  poets-Dale Zieroth,  Paulette  Jiles, Susan  Musgrave and  Tom  Wayman.
In  general   Purdy's  collection  gives  an  impression  of  greater   fluency  than
Ludwig-and-Wainwright's, and this one can relate to the flowing pace of Purdy's own  poems which is reflected in his taste for other  poets' verse. Though  some of the  items  included  are  common  to  both  volumes,  Soundings  projects  a  dryer, more  "brainy" flavour, a faint  smell of damp  coats in  creative  writing  seminar rooms. But the cumulative effect of the two collections, combined  with the larger batches of poems in Mindscapes, is a modestly exciting one. There  are, as in most recent anthologies, poems that  are pretentious and dull, poems that  are mechani­ cally experimental,  poems that have reduced simplicity to  poverty-and by that
I don't  mean the transfiguring poverty of which anarchists speak, but a destitution of the word, a positive desiccation that  has made  the task of reading  through  so much   recent  minor  poetry  resemble  the  trials  of  an  explorer  condemned   to traverse the  Gobi  desert  with  no  other sustenance than Shredded Wheat. Both anthologies, in other words, have their share of non-poets busily writing themselves into impasses. But when one counts these out, and  when one suspends hasty praise of those authentic  voices that  need more exercise (such  as Gail Fox, Terry Crawford  and Andrew Susnaski, all of whose work may well reward the following),  there  are  still  a  number  of  poets  who  stand   out   not  merely  as individuals  but  as portents  of a deepening  of  the  general  poetic stream  which recently has been running so widely but shallowly through  the rapids of easy publication.  (For  the  poetry  explosion, like  the  population   explosion,  while  it proceeds  geometrically,  still  produces  geniuses  only  in  arithmetic   proportion.) Let me name some names:  Kenneth  Belford, Brenda  Fleet, Patrick  Lane, Dennis Lee, Sid Marty,  Tom  Wayman.  These  are  poets who  not  merely promise;  they have  already,  and  in notably varied  voices, achieved.
They  have  grown  out  of  the  breathing   exercises and  funny  spelling  games which  made  a kind of literary  Palm  Springs out of a good deal of recent  Cana­ dian-particularly  west Canadian-poetastery. They  have  learnt,  by  various ways of solitude, that  the histrionics of the reading  circuits may earn  easy  money and  heady applause,  but do nothing for a poetry that  is meant  to be more than  a transient  succession of happenings. They  are allowing  their inner  voices .to speak and  deepen,  they  are  acting  as if craft-as  it  does-presages art,  they  are

6

SWARMING OF  POETS



clarifying their images; they are acknowledging that a poem is not a mere episode, that  it may begin in passion and incite to action, but, if it is to achieve its intent, must be transmuted into  an artifact  detached  from the poet and  eventually con­ templated  by those whose only access to its final depths will be-despite Maitreya McLuhan-that still  aperture in  the  jabbering  wall  of  multiple  consciousness which the white window of the page can offer.
I  confine  myself to  brief  impressions, since  these are  poets  whose  work  will
certainly  be reviewed more intensively in Canadian Literature. In general  terms, the three tendencies I find attractive  in such poets are:  (a)  a veering of emphasis from  the alienation  of industrial  society towards reintegration by a direct  return to the natural world;   (b)   a beginning-at very long last-of  the transmuta­ tion  of new  radical  styles into  real  poetry of social significance,  as one  used to call  it  in  the  Thirties,  with -again  at  very long  last-some  of  the  Thirties passion and  purposiveness;  (c)  an inclination  to return  to a  poetry of memory and  continuity,  in  which  the  past  is again  recognized  and  a  historical  view is recreated.
The  first tendency  appears  in some variety in  the  work of  Kenneth   Belford, Patrick  Lane  and  Sid Marty,  all of them writing from experience of the  wilder­ ness or its margins,  and  together  forming the vanguard  of what  may  be  a  new Canadian mythology,  replacing  Frye's garrison  mentality  by a guerilla  mentality which,  to  adapt Mao's  image, sees the  poet swimming  like a fish in  the waters of the natural world. As Kenneth  Belford puts it in The  Post Electric Cave Man (Talonbooks,  $3.00) :
The  literal nature of this
country.   The
geography of
it.
Leading me somewhere. And I willing.

That is perhaps  an  unfair  example of the verse these poets are  producing.  Most of it is much less laconic and elemental, but Belford in this case uses his spareness, I think,  to make a  necessary point. Among  these mountain men  poets, it is Sid Marty,   so  far-I   gather-volumeless,  whom  I find    the  most  varied   and rewarding.
During  the  later  Thirties there  came  a time  when social  protest  turned  from an invigorating  to a debilitating  element in poetry;  that  was when  we began  to

7

SWARMING OF POETS



see how the  Stalinists  had  betrayed  the  Left  in Spain.  Something  like this may well happen  again,  but at  present we are still in  the invigorating  stage so far  as tJhe  better  Canadian poets of rebellion are  concerned   (though  I have  also seen some abominable  Stalinoid crudities coming from  West Coast rhymesters). I find a deep appeal, for instance, in the superimposition of anger on a lyrical gift which Brenda  Fleet  demonstrates  in  a  poem like "Quebec" (included  in  Storm  War­ ning). But in social poetry it is necessary not  only to appeal,  but  also to shock and  to stir sardonic  laughter,  and  here it is Tom  Wayman  who, in all the three collections of  young  poets I  have  mentioned,  but  particularly   in  Mindscapes, emerges as one of the true originals in contemporary Canadian  poetry. Wayman has convictions, but he does not produce  propaganda, and, whatever  group  may have his affiliations, he is no party slave in his writing.  He has moments  of con­ trolled, grave lyricism even in his most committed  poems, of the kind that  makes his "Dream of the Guerillas"  not only impressive as a statement  of position but also  convincing  as  an  artifact,   a  work  that   may   well  survive -if mankind survives at  all-to  take  a  future  reader  for  an  instant  into  the  heart  of such idealism as exists in our  age.

And night quiet after  the dream. Street lights burn on.
The slogans are calm on dim walls.	The clock,
the clock says: now
the guerillas are coming and you must go with them.

There  are  Wayman  poems of intense bitterness against  the ruling system, poems of honesty about  the weaknesses of new radicals and  new radicalism  (such as one had ceased to expect in so self-righteous a Movement), poems of sardonic comedy in which the counter culture for once observes and mocks its own clowning. Thus, as a bonus  to their  great poetic vigour, Wayman's poems-like  all good poems of social interest -have a genuine documentary value.
Dennis Lee's  recognition  of the past, of the sweep of history necessary for the understanding of a present which, whatever  our  romantic  instants  may demand, is never comprehensible merely as the everlasting  Now, sharpens  his political bitternesses  with  a  there-but-for-the-grace-of-God  admission  that  statesmen  are often merely the scapegoats for other men's inertia,  complicity and shame:

... Doesn't the
service of quiet diplomacy require dirty hands?

8

SWARMING OF  POETS



(Does the sun in summer pour its warm light into the square for us to ignore?   We have our own commitments.)
And then if it doesn't work one is finally
on the winning side, though that is
unkind. Mr. Martin is an honourable man, as we are all
Canadians and honourable men.

But Dennis Lee's talents  are already recognized, as a poet and  above all as the superbly  resourceful  publisher  of experimental  fiction  and  poetry  at  the  House of Anansi. Dale Zieroth, though :he appears in Storm Warning, Soundings and, at some  length,  in  Mindscapes, has  not  yet  published  a  volume,  and  his  quite exceptional poetry has, to my knowledge, been little praised. Yet Zieroth may well be that  genuine  recollective poet of the prairies for whom we have been waiting. What  Bowering, Mandel  and  Newlove do occasionally in their poems remember­ ing prairie childhoods  and  journeys, Zieroth does in depth with the reconstruction, in  images of dark  and  almost  Proustian  luminosity, of life in  a  minority  com­ munity  of  a  small  and   remote  prairie  town.  He  writes,  as  Purdy   and  Tom  Wayman  do, in fluent  long-line verse, logical and sequential,  based on sentences and  their  appropriate rhythms  rather  than  on  a mosaic of phrases,  and  mostly avoids  the  voice-constricting   narrow  column  which  nowadays  has  become  as monotonously  usual as the iambic pentameter  once was. It makes Zieroth's poetry all the more effective that,  again  like Proust, he does not merely  involve himself in recollections of a childhood  environment.  He has moved  as a countryman to the  city,  and  that  experience  is intertwined   with  the  rural  past,  and  the  two are  cemented  by descriptions  of revisitings, so that  past and  present  establish  a continuum, and  the life of the prairies is seen in the context of  a way of existence familiar  to most contemporary Canadians.  "Prairie  Grade School",   "The People of Lansdowne", "Father", "Journey  into Winter",  are  perhaps  the key poems in the  structure of  this  recollective  vision, though  the  individual   poem  that   im­ pressed me most of all, and  that incidentally  brings Zieroth near  to the mountain men  (and  especially to Patrick  Lane's  "Wild  Horses" with its similar  casting  of man  rather  than  the  natural world as the  aggressor)  was "The  Hunters  of the Deer".  The   hunters  go  out  and  kill and  return   to   the  farmhouse,  and  after feeding, all but the farmer  depart.

And when they leave, the man sleeps
and  his children sleep while the woman waits and listens for the howling of the wolves. To the north, the grey


9

SWARMING OF  POETS



she-wolf smells the red snow and  howls. Tonight, while other hunters sleep, she drinks at the throat.

For  my taste, Sid  Marty,  Tom  Wayman  and  Dale  Zieroth  are  the  best of the younger  poets who have  recently emerged  in  Canadian magazines  and  anthol­ ogies. But  they  are  by  no  means  all  who  are  worth  watching,   as my  month's  impressionistic survey of the products of the little presses convinced  me.


IF I  HAD TO   NAME the half-dozen  men who have done most to stimulate  interest in Canadian poets during  the last decade,  I would pick Robert Weaver for instigating CBC patronage  to scores of poets, A. J. M. Smith  as the master  anthologist, Jack  McClelland  and  Dennis  Lee as general  publishers, and
Louis Dudek  and  Fred  Cogswell for their small  press activities. Picking my way among  the  presses from  east to west, I begin in  Fredericton  with  Cogswell. He has  now  withdrawn   from  editing  the  magazine  Fiddlehead,  but  he  continues under  its imprint   to  publish  a  great  variety  of  pamphlets   and  small  books of verse. I have never been able to find any principle on which Fred Cogswell makes his selections, unless it is that  any dedicated  poet of even the most modest ability deserves an edition of 500 copies to try his work out on something  wider than  his immediate  circle of friends.  I  have  twenty-two  of  these little  books in  the  pile before me, and  that  is not a year's whole Fiddlehead  list. Indeed,  year by year, such brochures appear  in greater  numbers. Only a few are the work of poets who have really found their way; the rest are at best notes for poetry. Cogswell himself seems to  recognize a  hierarchy  by printing  a few  and  mimeographing the  rest, and  it is the  printed  booklets that  include  all but  one  of  the  Fiddlehead  poets worth  watching  in  this  batch.  I  mention  especially,  among  the  younger  poets, Gail  Fox's  The   Royal  Collector  of  Dreams,  Marc   Plourde's  Touchings,  Derk Wynand's  Locus, and  Marg  Yeo's Game  for Shut-ins.
Not  all the  poets Fred  Cogswell prints  are  young  writers.  Some  have  names
that  echo, even if faintly, down  the decades. Neil Tracy's Voice  Line is perhaps representative  of them.  Tracy  can  best be described  as a  competent  archaicist. His disgust for the present is so great  that  he not  merely  uses outdated  language but  also sets most of his poems in a pioneer past. There is an outworn  poeticism about  much  of Goodridge  Macdonald's work as well, yet there  are verses worth any critic's respect in his Selected Poems, and especially that  chilling piece, "The Harried  Hare", where man's life finds its analogy in that of the beast he hunts.


IO

SWARMING OF  POETS



And if at last
Fence-leaping, circling over snow and  moss,
Over the rocks of broken pasture land
And frozen furrows of the farm's fall ploughing,
Backtracking among trees, at night he comes Alive, to a burrow under log or stone, Eluding the last hunter, knowing
That  the last hound has now been whistled home, And snuggles into sleep: -Then comes the stoat
Whose teeth slit to the jugular while he sleeps, And all his little life is sucked away.

As the snow falls again upon the fields
And the wind cries across the frosted fields.

That, it seems to me, is a good farewell from the last of the old Fredericton  clan of poets.
One encounters  much  more rarely than  even ten years ago the kind of  Tenny­ sonian-Georgian pastiche  that  was produced  in suoh  quantity   by  the  good old ladies of the Canadian Authors'  Association. Most of its practitioners,  I imagine, have  departed. Yet  traditional verse is still  being  written; it  is  only  that  the tradition  has shifted  forward  to Lawrence  and  Eliot and  even  Wallace  Stevens, and  conservatism  tends  to be in  form  and  image  rather  than  in  sentiment  and vocabulary.  The  poets who  work in such  an idiom often  find  themselves in  the same  position  nowadays  as  painters  who  do  not  happen   to  fit  in  with  the ascendant   and  sometimes  spurious  modernism  that   has  taken   the  place  and authority  of  the  old  academy; the  neophiliacs  are  in,  whioh  means  that   the traditionalists  are  out,  and  that  is no more  just than  the  old situation.  In  their own  manner   traditionalist  poets  nowadays  are  inclined  to  be  more  competent and  flexible in their techniques  and  to have more to say than  the CAA versifiers who  preceded  them,  and  one  welcomes a  venture  like  the  Ladysmith  Press in Quebec,  whose  recently  established  series of  traditionalist   poets includes  Alan Shucard's The  Gorgon Bag, Sean Haldane's The Ocean Everywhere and Marnie Pomeroy's  For Us Living (all  paperbound, $1.75).
Moving  westward,   Montreal   has  several  small  presses that   publish  mainly
poetry.  The   most  justly  prestigious  is,  of  course,  Delta  Canada, which  Louis Dudek  founded. Glen  Siebrasse is now  Managing  Editor.  Delta  has  taken  the first risk  on  an  astonishing  number  of  young  Canadian  poets  who  have  now become Establishment  figures, and has kept in print a number  of older poets who have somehow  missed a  wider  recognition.  Far  from  resting  on  the  laurels  the


I I

SWARMING OF POETS



past  has  brought (too  meagrely  in  my view) , Delta's editors  now  are  planning a broadening of  their  activities,  and  it  is evident   that, far  from  being  exclusively dedicated  to  the  new  and  the  instant, they  see  poetry   in  its  proper temporal context. I quote  from  a recent  letter  from  Glen  Siebrasse :

Poetry is, for us, historical as well as living fact. Our  titles, then  might  be divided into  three  broad  categories:
the  poem as contemporary  event, the  poem as historical  fact, critical studies in poetry.
In  the  first category,  we have  concentrated  on  publishing  the  work  of  younger writers;  first and  earlier books account  for some 70%  of all our  poetry.
The  second and  third categories are  also important ones. We feel that  concen­
tration upon the contemporary, without equal emphasis on the historical, destroys continuity,   fragments   the  reader's   perspective,   and   reduces   the   possibility  of accurate  critical  judgment.  Ideally, we would  like to see reprints  of all important early Canadian poetry made available  for study  in the  classroom. While we have not, as yet, done  much in the  third  area,  we hope  to move, more ambitiously, in this direction  this year.
All of the  above, of course, falls within  a  general  context  of Canadian  pub­ lishing.  Our  concern  is with  our literature:  its  assessment,  encouragement  and promotion.

In  recent  months the two leading  publications of Delta Canada have been Louis Dudek's Collected  Poetry and  Eldon  Grier's Selected  Poems, and  these  books of the first importance will shortly  be reviewed  by Canadian  Literature. Meanwhile, among the  briefer   recent  Delta   books,  I found of  particular interest   Stephen Scobie's   In  the  Silence  of  the  Year   (I especially   liked -perhaps because   it touched a  shared vein  of  nostalgia-the recollective   "Poem for  my  Father") and  Douglas Barbour's Land  Fall. Another of Barbour's books,  A Poem as Long as a Highway, has  recently  appeared from  Quarry Press  of  Kingston  ( $2.00). As the  titles suggest,  Barbour  is a travelling topographer of  a  poet,  with  a  close feeling  for  the  natural surface  of  the  earth, its  emanations, its  inhabitants,  its destroyers. He  is  not  one  of  the  emotively   direct   mountain men   poets,  but   a watchful traveller who,  in  poems  like "The  Distances", etches  the  chill  naunces of life in our  land :

Say only an uncoiled spring a  singing wire
stretched
across the  deep  white valleys

12

SWARMING OF  POETS




the cold, the seasons of
 
death:

say only this, say only the hope the urge expressed
in the movement  outwards  the sweeping gesture of construction; and  isn't  this enough and
can't  we say, and  saying


its magnanimity:

to whisper
across this frozen country certain  possible words.
 comprehend

The  latest  and  smallest  Delta  venture  is a series of superslim chapbooks, Quarter­ backs, which  give slight samplings (five to eight  pages)  of the  newest poets. Eight have  appeared, at  25 cents  each; those by Bruce  Elder  and  Robert  Currie made me  want  to  read  more  than the  four  poems  given  in  one  case,  and  six  in  the other.

A TORONTO PUBLISHER  told me recently  that  in his view the
West  Coast  presses  were  "somewhat  promiscuous", and  if  he  meant   that  they
publish  a great  many  titles without a great  deal  of editorial discrimination, he  is probably right.  They  are-it is a disorder  that  afflicts all of us on  the  Pacific  to some  degree -inclined to  act  like  playboys  in  a  mythical  western   world.  So many  good  poets  have  passed this way  (and  quite  a few  remain) that  it does  not always  seem  unreasonable to  assume  that   the  Castalian Spring   has  abandoned Delphi  and come bubbling up on the slopes of Seymour Mountain or perhaps somewhere on  the  Malahat. Alas, British Columbia may  be God's  and  Bennett's Own   Country, but  the  Muses  are  still  merely  on  visiting  terms.  And  so,  when one  mail  brings   me  ten  little  glossy-bound   volumes   from   the  Sono   Nis  Press ( Wlhich Michael  Yates   now   edits   from   the   Queen    Charlotte Islands),  and another mail  brings  me seven  greyly mimeographed bundles of  heady  verse  and pictorial typography sent  out  by Bill Bissett from  the  Blew Ointment Press,  and a  batch  of  very  elegantly   printed material in  almost  perfect  visual  taste  arrives from  Talon Press,  I remember how  little  effect even  a gargle  and  a footbath at the  real  Castalian Spring had   upon  my  own  poetic  powers,  and   I read   with caution.

SWARMING OF  POETS



The Sono Nis Press was born under a bush called Creative  Writing, and its productions  have  largely tended  to display  that  combination   of inverted  acad­ emicism and  competitive  ambition  which characterizes the ingrown  atmosphere  of  the  writing  classes. Now  Sono  Nis -like its  creator,  has  withdrawn   from academia,  but  the  signs of the shift are slow in  appearing. The  uniform  series of  $2 booklets which  the  Press is issuing  has  almost  every  initial  point  in  its favour. The  28 pages to which all the booklets run is a sufficient length to give a fair sampling  of each  poet; they come with a quite attractive  surrealistic  drawing or  photomontage on  the front  cover and  a  romantic  chiaroscuro  photograph of the author  on the back cover, and  tihey are  printed  in a clean  and  legible type­ writer facsimile process on good paper. Yet one bites into many of these attractive  fruit,  and  the  dust  of pretentious  failure  dries one's  palate.  Reading  them,  one seems  to  hear  the  sneakered  tread  of  the  legions of  poetes  manques  tramping  away from the writing schools of  North America  with those fine diplomas  which may make them teachers in other writing schools but will never alone certify that they are poets.
Yet  there  are  exceptions  among  the  Sono  Nis  booklets,  and  three  of  them
impressed me:  three out of ten-a good publishing  score!  File of Uncertainties brings forward  once again the extraordinary  baroque  talent of Andreas Schroeder, a poet of metaphysical cast and verbal fertility who already stands out among the young poets of the  Far  West. Private  Speech: Messages  1962-70  is the  work of an established and  accomplished elder poet, Robin  Skelton;  the  "messages" are, in the better sense of the word, notes for poetry,  wellings-up which the  poet has wisely left unrefined.  Finally, there is In  the  Meshes, the  work of  Mieszko Jan Skapski,  a  poet  who  appeared  fairly widely in  little  magazines,  but  has  never before published  a volume. Skapski is a working  fisherman  who for six years has operated  his own boat off the coast of British Columbia-this after  a Paraguay boyhood.  He  is in  the  process of turning  deeply  felt  experiences  into  a  poetry awash with correspondences.

Currents corrode currents.
The onwash breaks on iron rocks.

He wakes the days it drizzles - Caulks the open seams in existence: Rot tangles in his nets.

Twilight finds him turning home
At the upper reaches of this tributary.

SWARMING OF  POETS



The shore breezes turn back to the sea.

Blew Ointment Press sends out its books like those guerillas whose ostentatious carelessness of dress betrays  them  immediately.  Everything  is done  on  a  highly economical scale, on  paper  that  takes ink badly, and  by processes, of which Bill Bissett holds  the  secret,  so devastating  that  my copy  of  a  set  of  neo-surrealist montages  by Gary  Lee  Nova  (Cosmic Comics)  tantalizes  with  mere  hints  of a visual wit ahnost  completely concealed by the baffling greyness into  which  every­ thing  is blurred.  That baffling greyness, indeed,  seems to epitomise Bill  Bissett's achievements,  obstinately  and  by principle  amateur,  indefatigably  performed  in the  shadow  of  arbitrary  persecution,  all  of  which  can  only  inspire  in  one  an esteem he  perhaps  neither  wants  nor reciprocates, so much  a  man  of the  tribal outside inside he has made  himself. One  encounters  the  uncompromising  outside insideness even in  his poetry,  whioh he so fences in  with arbitrary  spelling  and bad mimeography  that one advances into it seemingly against the poet's will. The primitive  warrior  pointing  his spear, white blade flashing out of shadows of grey ink, on the cover of his latest mimeo-pamphlet, S  TH  STORY I TO, seems to have  more than  decorative  intent.  There  is a  no-trespass atmosphere  about  it all which  contrasts,  even  among  like-minded  experimenters,  with  bp  nichol's  dis­ arming  and  inviting  elegance. Yet in these enormous  wads of tangled  typescript (deliberately   avoiding   anything   that   might   be  remotely  suspected   of  visual attractiveness  in  the  same  way as the  poems themselves avoid  audial  graceful­ ness) ;  in  the  vast  minglings  of  zany  fantasy,  and  life  style  propaganda,  and political  criticism,  and  piteous  lyricism,  and  batik-like  typewriter  patterns,  and drawings  that  recall Cocteau's Opium, one is reminded  that  to most people who first read  them  Pound's  Cantos  seemed equally  chaotic  and  devoid  of meaning at  the  core;  they  still  do  to  many,  including  some  of  Pound's  self-proclaimed disciples. There  is a  meaning  in what  Bissett has to say, but  it is as diffused  as Monet's  light.  One  does  not  read  that  meaning;   one  absorbs  it  by  osmosis, surrendering oneself  to the baffling greyness, to the god who appears  as a potent fog. Bill Bissett, I conclude, is both a myth and a mythmaker.
I  have  mentioned  Monet's  light  and  bp  nichol, and  this brings me  to Talon Books, last of the  presses whose books appear  in my pile. Talon's  publication  of Ken  Belford's  Post  Electric   Man   I  have  already  mentioned; the  press's  most original  recent  publication  is something very different-a little black box filled with white cards each bearing a few words or even one word printed  in sans-serif type.  It is an  artifact-one  can  hardly  call it  a  book-by  bp  niahol,  named

SWARMING OF  POETS



Still Water  ($2.50).  Visually the still water is represented  by a square of bright, slightly crinkle-surfaced  silver paper  on the lid of the  box. This  forms a mirror that  floods with fragmented  impressionist light, all the colours in it purified and intense.  One  lifts it  and  is astonished  to  see  a  shimmering   portrait-oneself painted  by some instant  Bannard; one beams it over one's shoulder and the backs of books gleam out in tones as intense as far northern flowers; one lives, for the instant,  in  an  irradiated  world  as of  the  eye  made  innocent   by  childhood  or mescalin. With a certain  reluctance one lifts the lid;  the contents  are elegant, but slightly anti-climactic,  refining George Herbert's  old game of shaping  his words to represent  visually the altar or the cross of which he writes. And so we have word picture poems like this:
moon
owl
tree 	tree 	tree 	shadowy

The  effect is to create  out of a few words and  their  relative  positions a web of association from  which springs a visual image  that  a  poet  writing  descriptively would  need  a verse and  perhaps  thirty  words  to  explain.  Amusing?  Definitely; the box and  its contents  are a successful play object.  Poetry?  Art? All I can  say is that after a time some of the pages stirred me in the same way as a conventional poem,  and  clearly  because  I  had  been  collaborating,  and  had   filled  what   I wanted  into  the  maker's skeleton of words. But  as I  write,  a  vague  recollective image  of something  very similar  comes into  my  mind; I see some  pages of an issue of New Verse about the time of the Surrealist  exhibition  in 1936. Not that  I am suggesting imitation.  Even unconsciously, this is an era when pasts are much relived.



kERE HAS  BEEN a great  deal of the random  in this article. I took the books that  by chance had accumulated after  those by established poets had been sent out for review, which explains the absence of known  names. Some presses are  not  mentioned  because  they  have  not  been  sending  in  books  with enough  regularity  for  any to  be lying around; others  because  nothing  they  had produced  in  the  last few months stirred  my interest.  But  the  exercise, however chaotic,  however subjective, seems to have  been  worthwhile,  if  only in showing how every year new and interesting poets emerge into the light, as they have done each season since Canadian  Literature began.

16



THE POETRY OF P. K. PAGE




A.J.M Smith





0THE  CANADIAN POETS   who  Jed the  second  wave  of modernism  in  the  Forties and  Fifties, P. K. Page holds a curious and somewhat
anomalous  position; she had  certainly not received the critical attention  that  the remarkable  fusion of psychological insight and  poetic imagination  which  charac­ terizes and individualizes  her poems would lead one to expect.  Perhaps the effort to discriminate  between  the subjective  and  objective  elements  of  her  work,  or between image and symbol or memory and desire, has been thought  by the critics too unprofitable  or found  too fatiguing. There  is no doubt  that  she is  a difficult poet-at least  I have found  her so -and  the difficulty is not  intellectual.  Her moons  are  not  reason's,  so  that  what  the  reader  who  is to  get  the  maximum enjoyment  needs-or  the critic who is to get the maximum comprehension-is
a sensibility and  an  intuition   that  have  to  be  nourished  and  educated   by  the poems themselves as he reads  and  re-reads  them. Though   I  feel a certain  pre­ sumption  in approaching this subject, I can say that  I have found  the experience of trying to come to terms with it an absorbing one. Her gardens  may be imagin­ ary, but more than  the toads in them are real; and are not her angels also?
Of course the fact that  P. K. Page has not received the attention  that has been
given to some other poets of her generation can be partly accounted  for more charitably  and  more  prosaically.  Her  output  has not  been  large.  She published only  three  volumes  of  verse  at   rather   long  intervals-As T enJ   As  Twenty
( 1946), The  Metal  and the Flower ( 1954) -which won the Governor-General's Medal-and a  retrospective  selection, Cry  Ararat!    ( 1967), which  contained seventeen new poems. For some ten years of the Fifties and  the early Sixties she was out  of  Canada  with  her  husband,  who  was in  the  Canadian  diplomatic

I7

THE POETRY OF  P. K. PAGE



service in Australia,  Brazil and  Mexico, and  for  much  of this time she gave up writing  (or  publishing)   poetry for  painting.  "Gave  up",  of course, is not  really true;  her  painting  and  her  poetry  complemented   one  another; each,  I  think, made  the other  better, or made it more deeply what  it was, which is much  the same thing. And  then  the immersion in the language,  landscape  and  mythology of the strange,  intense, and  perhaps  intensely  unCanadian places had  a  stimu­ lating and enriching  influence on all her latest poems. One  does not have to rely on the evidence of the poems alone to corroborate these  remarks-though that would  be  ample.  In  the tenth  anniversary  issue of  this  journal,  she  wrote  her own  account  of her  experiences during  the  years of  fruitful  "exile",  and  in  an article  entitled  "Traveller, Conjuror,  Journeyman"  in  Canadian   Literature  46, she gave an account  of her philosophy of  composition  and  of the part  played by memory,  dream,  sensation  and  technique  in  both  her  poetry  and  her  painting.  These  essays and  her  recent  poems  will  mark,  I  believe,  the  beginning  of  a new, far  juster and far higher estimate of  her standing  among  our  poets.
The  comparative  lack of attention  given to P. K. Page's early work, published in the little magazines of the Thirties  and  early  Forties  when she was an  active member of the Preview group in Montreal,  is due partly no doubt  to the fact that they were overshadowed  by the flashy political  poems of Patrick  Anderson  and the simpler satirical  or amatory  verses of Frank  Scott. Even  when she was most herself she was associated in the mind  of a critic as alert  as Milton  Wilson with Anderson  as a writer of "decadent pastorals... , whose glass-tight but vulnerable aquarium leaves  me  gasping  for  air."1  This  did  not  prevent  Professor  Wilson from giving us some just, discerning, and generous  analyses of one or two of the most striking  of the early poems.
No critic or literary  historian,  however, has made  any serious attempt  to deal at  length   with   Miss  Page's  poetry  or  to  define,  illustrate,   and  evaluate   her psychological symbolism  and  her  strongly  personal  treatment of  the  universal themes of isolation and  frustration -much  less point  to their  transfiguration  in certain  epiphanies  at the close of some of her  remarkable  poems. This,  for want of a better  workman,  I shall try to do.

IBEGIN    WITH   a  few  generalizations  and   then  shall   tum immediately  to  a  close reading  of  some  of  her  finest  and  most  characteristic
poems. This  will perhaps enable us to isolate the special quality of her excellence and  help place her in the developing pattern  of modern  poetry in Canada.

18

THE  POETRY OF  P. K. PAGE



There  are certain  themes that occur over and  over again  in her  poetry and  a number of archetypal  images and symbols that stamp their impress on most of the best poems in each of her three books, and in her work as a whole.
Her  subjects  are:
Childhood,  its innocent  eye, its clarity of vision, and  its imaginative  richness of invention,  all leading  to the discovery of a new and  other  reality than  that  of adulthood  and  reason;
Love,  either  faithful,   happy  and  unifying,  or  faithless,  disillusioned  and
lonely-the end-point   of  self-regarding  love -that   must  be  mastered   by  a conscious effort  of the  will;
and lastly, Dream,  where child, poet, artist and wit live and have their being
in what  in some poems is a garden  of innocence,  Eden  before the  Fall,  and  in others  a briary  wilderness or a sinister painted  arras.
Her images and symbols are White and Green, images of snow, winter, ice and
glass; or of flowers, gardens,  leaves and  trees;  or else glass again,  and  salt,  the transparent  green  suffocating   crystal  sea.  Her  symbolic  world  seems  mostly mineral  or  vegetable,  but  there  are  symbols  also of  birds,  the  swan  and   the peacock especially, and fish. And there are breathing  human  creatures  also:  girls, adolescents, lovers, and  some selfish, isolated, lonely men. But what  most vividly lives and  breathes  here  is the  Eye, the  Lung,  the  Heart,   and  the  feeling  and perceiving Mind.
What  is most strange  and  most revealing in this world is that  the workings of
its  Mind  are  almost  unconscious, often  as in  dreams,  and  that  even  the  wit  is controlled  from  Elsewhere.  Hers  is in  its final effect a  poetry  of vision, and  it demands  a  quality  of sympathy  in  the  reader  tlhat its  poetic  richness  helps  to create.  Indeed,   to  speak  for  myself, it  casts  a spell  that  has  made  it  possible to value it not as vision only but as revelation.
I  would  like then,  from  the  point  of view of theme  and  imagery  to  discuss, analyse, or  perhaps  just talk about  some of the  poems that  have  impressed  me most deeply. A rough classification might go something like this:
Poems in which  images of winter  predominate, where White  is the  colour,
and  ice, snow, glass, and  a breathless cold make  the  mind  and  senses tingle - among  these are "Stories  of Snow", "Photos  of a Salt  Mine",  "The Snowman", "Now  this Cold  Man", and  many  lines or stanzas  of other  poems, such  as the last few disillusioned or awakening  lines of "Images  of Angels."
Poems  of  flowers  and  gardens,  where  vegetable  dominates   mineral,   and
Green is the primal symbol; many of these are dream  gardens, and  there are two

THE  POETRY OF  P. K.  PAGE



opposed or contrasting  gardens, gardens of innocence  and  grace,  and gardens  of imprisonment  or exile, or perhaps they are one garden,  before and  after  the Fall. Until  its close "Images  of  Angels" is of  this  group; so  in  part  is "Stories  of Snow".  In  this group  also are many of the  poems that  deal  with childhood  and some of the newer poems such as "After  the Rain", "Giovanni and the Indians", and "The Apple",  which is followed by its sad and  desolate retrospective sequel, "To  a Portrait  in a Gallery". The  garden  songs of innocence  give way to songs of experience, and here are the most intense and powerful of all the poems. Close to these in theme  is "The  Metal  and  the Flower",  though  perhaps  the  antidote for the poison it contains is found in the much  later  "This Frieze of Birds".
Along  with  the  poems  centred  around  snow  and  ice,  or  green  gardens  of pleasure or  terror -not  too strong  a  word for  "Arras" or  "Nightmare" -are those where image and symbol are derived from the sea-the sea of poet and psychologist, where sleep is a drowning  and  the submarine world is the world of the  unconscious. Among  the  most striking of these are  "Element", "Portrait of Marina", "Boy with  a Sea Dream",  and  "In   a Ship  Recently  Raised  from  the Sea".
Other  classifications might  list poems under  such  heads  as Childhood,  Love, Self-love and  Dream; but in  all of them  the same  dichotomy  of innocence  and experience, happiness and despair, or good and evil could be discovered. Classi fication carried  too far defeats its own end;  it is time to come to a close reading of some of the poems I have named.


"STORIES OF  SNow" grows out of memories, reveries, and dreams of childhood -"some never-nether land" -where snow storms are held "circular,  complete"  in the crystal globes kept  in  a  high  tall  teakwood  cabinet.
Encapsulated   here  are  evocations of innocence  and  perfection  opening  "behind the sprouting  eyes" caught  in the "vegetable  rain". The  conciseness and  allusive richness of  the  language  and  imagery  of the  brief  opening  stanza  set  the  tone at once and imply as a leading theme the contrast  between childhood's  innocence (or  ignorance?)   and  the  safe  and  changeless  purity  of  the  sterile  snowflakes imprisoned  or preserved in the small glass globe where  the child  (or  poet)  may shake up a storm. The  major contrast in the poem, however, is that  between the white  world of innocence  and  art  and  the lush  tropical  landscape  of "countries where the leaves are  large as hands/ where  flowers protrude their  fleshy chins/

20

THE POETRY OF  P. K. PAGE



and call their colours," which stands for the natural  world of instinct and  appear­ ance,  of  uncontrollable  organic  growth,  that  strangles  and  betrays  but  which child and  poet, or poet as child, can escape from into  what  the couplet that  ends the poem names  "the  area  behind  the eyes/  where silent,  unrefractive  whiteness lies."
This  somewhat   esoteric  ending  is led  up  to  through   a  series  of  anecdotal
pictures   tlhat  seem  like  a  multiplication   of  the  famous   ice-locked  swan   of Mallarme -but  with  a  richness  and  dramatic  variety  that  needs  more  room than  the sonnet  can  offer.
The  illustrative  central  part  of the  poem  begins with  the  lines "And  in  the
early  morning  one  will  waken/   to  think  the  glowing  linen  of  his  pillow/   a northern  drift,  will find  himself mistaken/   and  lie back  weeping."  The  dreams of this wakened sleeper in a land  of fleshy flowers proliferate  out  of the opening stanza,  become the whole poem, and lead to its climax. In  Holland,  in  winter­ we realize now that  the "never-nether land" of the opening  was the embryo of a pun-hunters, their  breath  in plumes, "part  the flakes" and sail in  their  white winged ice-boats over the frozen lakes to hunt  the swan. All the images here are of whiteness and  no-colour, of snow-flakes and ice, and  we see that  the innocent world  of  the  child's  glass  globe  has  taken  on  a  new,  beautiful   but  sinister significance.

And  of the  swan  in death these  dreamers tell of  its last  flight  and  how  it  falls, a  plummet, pierced  by the  freezing  bullet
and  how  three  feathers, loosened  by the  shot,
descend  like  snow  upon  it.
While  hunters plunge  their  fingers in its down deep  as a  drift,  and  dive  their  hands
up  to the  neck of the  wrist
in  that   warm  metamorphosis of snow
as gentle  as the  sort  that  woodsmen  know who,  lost in  the  white  circle, fall at last and dream their  way to death.

"Stories  of  Snow"  is the  outstanding  success of  P.  K.  Page's  first  volume, comparable  in magnificence and complexity to "Images  of Angels" in her second. These  are  perhaps  the  finest of  the  many  very individual   poems  that  seem  to grow like beautful  flowers out  of childhood  memories, recurring  dreams,  and  a crystal clairvoyance.  Innocence  and  experience, illusion and  disillusionment, find

21

THE POETRY OF   P. K. PAGE



expression  in an overflowing  of powerful  emotion, remembered not in tranquillity but  with  a craftsmanly excitement and  an exquisite  shiver  that  sets the rhythmical pattern of all her  most moving  poems.
"Images of  Angels",  like  "Stories  of  Snow", "Photos of  a  Salt   Mine", and
some of the  newer  poems, "After Rain" and  the  finest of all "Cry  Ararat!", is a kind   of  sentimental  education -sentimental   not   in   any   pejorative  or   ironic Flaubertian sense-that, recognizing  worlds  without love, seeks to explore  ways of transforming them  or coming  to terms with  them. Here  images of ice and snow give way  at  the  beginning  to the daisy fields of childhood. This  is the sharpening contrast  to  the   close  of  "The  Snowman", the   poem   immediately  preceding "Images of  Angels"  in  the  inclusive  volume  of   1g67. Here   are  the  concluding lines  of  "The Snowman":

And as far as I could see the snow was scarred only with angels' wing marks or the feet of birds like twigs broken  upon  the snow  or shards

discarded. And I could hear  no sound as far  as I could  hear  except  a  round kind of an echo without  end

rung  like a hoop below them and  above jarring the air they had  no need of
in  a  landscape  without  love.

And  here is the  beginning of "Images of Angels":

Imagine  them as they were first conceived:
part  musical instrument  and  part  daisy in  a  white manshape.
Imagine  a crowd on the Elysian grass playing ring-around-a-rosy,
mute  except for their singing,
their  gold smiles
gold sickle moons in the white  sky of their  faces. Sex, neither male nor female,
name and  race, in each case, simply angel.

This   gives  us  the  traditional almost  Sunday-school picture-card  of  the  Angel, innocent, Wlhi.msical,  happy,  but  it is  done  with   the  wit  and   knowledge of  the mature and  critical  grown-up poet.  The   angels  are  white,  and  gold,  and   holy; but  they  are  to be pitied-they  were  made   (by  Whom?)  "never to be loved  or

22

THE POETRY OF  P. K. PAGE



petted,  never to be friended". Almost at once a sinister note intrudes.  Somehow the angels are  realized  now to be "mixed  with  the father,  fearful  and  fully/  ... when the vanishing  bed/  floats in the darkness ..."
In  the body of the  poem we have three witty and  dramatic  characterizations
-representative figures who might be thought of as imagining  angels:  the "little notary",  the  financier  or  business man/ and  "the  anthropologist, with  his  tidy science".
For  each  the  Angel is a special symbol. For  the  little  notary-the  scene  is
surely  Quebec -"given  one  as  a  pet",  it  is  his  private  guilt,  and  might,  if discovered, be his  private  shame,  and  he keeps it "behind   the lethal  lock/  used for his legal documents", guiltily shut  up.  Reading  this today  one  thinks of the legal and political repression of the Duplessis days before the Quiet Revolution, an allusion impossible to have been in the author's  mind when the poem was written in  the  early  fifties. This  is an  illustration,  I  think,  of  the  growth  into  an  even wider significance that  some poems undergo with time.3
The  eleven-line stanza  devoted to the business man  is lighter in tone than  the rest and  more  frankly  witty;  could this be the reason it has been omitted  from the reprinted  version? "Angels are dropping,  angels going  up."

What business man would buy as he buys stock as many as could cluster on a pin?

But the stanza  ends by humanizing  the business man  by filling his heart  with uneasiness  and  shame  as  he  remembers  childhood  tying  a  tinsel  angel  to  his children's  Christmas  tree,  and  the  poem  returns  for  a  moment  to  the world  of such innocent  poems as "Christmas  Tree-Market Square."
For the anthropologist, the Angel is the miraculous transcendence  and perhaps the  condemnation to  futility  of  all his  classifiable observations.  Where  in  the writings of philosophers or poets has the triumph  of imagination  over reason been more brilliantly and  wittingly put than  here?

The  anthropologist with his tidy science had  he stumbled on one unawares,
found as he finds an arrowhead, an angel­
a what-of-a-thing
as primitive as a daisy,
might with his cold eye have assessed it coolly. But how, despite his detailed observations,
could he face his learned society and explain?

23

THE POETRY OF  P.  K.  PAGE



"Gentlemen, it is thought that they are born with harps and haloes,
as the unicorn with its horn.
Study discloses them white and gold as daisies ...

as they  were described, indeed,  at  the  beginning  of  the  poem.  This  is the  tone and  language  of light verse and intellectual  prose, but  the poetry rises out of the thought  as naturally  and inevitably as in Marvell.  The  union  of the homely and the  profound  is so quietly accomplished  that  hasty  readers  may  never  notice it. Somewhat  in this vein the poem ventures other perceptions: "Perhaps only a dog could accept them wholly j be happy to follow at their heels ..." and again, "Or, take  the  nudes of Lawrence  and  impose/  a-sexuality  upon  them;  those/   could meet with ease these gilded albinos."
The  next and  penultimate  stanza  returns  to the  child's  world  and  the  child's
faith  of  the  beginning,  where  the  sphere  of  consciousness  and  imagination   is reduced  to something  as small  and  self-contained  as the glass globe of "Stories of Snow".  This  prepares  us for  the  close of  the  poem -unexpected  and  very strange:  the summer  imagery  of daisies, sun-dazzle,  and  lamb-white  gives way to  the  white of cold  and  snow.  The  child, "this   innocent",  (the  poet  herself) "with   his almost  unicorn"   (his  imaginary  angel,  the  poem  up  to  this  point) "would  let it go ..."

and feeling implicated in a lie, his flesh would grow
cold
and snow
would cover the warm and sunny avenue.

Does this ending  repudiate  imagination,  faith  and  the fairytale  world of  child­ hood so convincingly recreated  not only in this poem but in many others such as the beautiful  "Christmas Eve -Market Square" and  the pieces gathered  in the last book under  the  title of one of them,  "The Bands  and  the  Beautiful  Child­ ren"?  I do not think so. These closing lines are an affirmation  of sincerity and  of an integrity that is moral as well as aesthetic-a look at the worst as the images in so many poems of flowers and sun and summer  are an attempt  to find the best.



BEFORE ATTEMPTING  an analysis of "Arras", which I  think is the  finest, if among  the  most difficult of  the  poems, let  me  jot down  a  few notes on some in which imagery  and  symbol are  drawn  from  the sea and  from

THE POETRY OF  P. K. PAGE



salt or metal.  In some the sea is clearly, like sleep, a symbol of the  unconscious and,  indeed,  for  the sensitive and  perhaps  easily hurt  spirit  of  the  poet  a  dark place of refuge. This  is the  theme  of one of the shortest  but  most explicit,  the beautiful  and  touching  "Element":  "caught   and  swung  on  a  line  under  the sunj  I  am  frightened  held in  the light that  people make/   and  sink in darkness freed  and  whole  again/ as fish returned  by dream  into  the stream." Although the key statement is the line "I am not wishful in this dream  of immersion,"  the poem ends with  the agonizing  image of "gull on fire or fish/  silently !hurt-its mouth  alive with  metal."
Much  more objective  and  therefore  free to be more witty, but  inevitably  less intense is "Boy  with  a Sea  Dream". Here  are images of masts of ships, ancient hulls, and  keels rusting in the iodine air-a  dream  of immersion  again  "where like a sleep/  strange  men drown  drowsily/  spiralling down  the sea's steep  under­ lip..." Once again the sea is a symbol of dream as the cinema of tlhe unconscious, but without  any of the  jargon of the clinical psychologist. For the critic, who like the poet ought  to have a poetry-crammed  head, the associations are with the music and  imagery  of  "Lycidas", "Full   Fathom   Five",  and  the  "Voyages" of  Hart  Crane.
The   end  is  strange   and  subtle,  a  sort  of  inside-outside   reversal  recalling, distantly, of course, some passages in Jay  Macpherson  and  Robert  Graves.

. . . like the  perfect schooner which is pushed through the slim neck to  fill a bottle's shape his dream has filled the cavern of  his head and he, a brimful seascape,
a blue brine,
with undertows and sudden swells which toll his bells
and watery laws to be obeyed and strange salt death to die

Images  of sterile salt and  metallic cold are found in  a number  of poems that analyze  self-love  with  what   can  only  be  described  as  a  kind  of  cold  fury. Among  these  are  "Isolationist", "Only   Child",  "Foreigner", "Man  with  One Small Hand", "Mineral" and  "This  Cold  Man".  The  last three  are  particularly impressive  for  the  concentrated  angry  wit  that   turns  experience  into  a  new universal  and  instant  myth.
A striking quality  of many of tlhese poems is the sudden  immediacy  of percep­
tion  and  emotion.

THE POETRY OF  P.  K. PAGE



Look, look, he took me straight to the snake's eye ...

begins "The Apple" -a  magnificent  opening,  equalled  only  perhaps  by Anne
Hebert's  awakening  in "La  Chambre  fermee" -

Qui done m'a conduite ici?
11 y a certainement quelqu'un
Qui a souffle sur mes pas ...

It  is these  quick  exclamations  of  bewilderment,   horror  or  agony  that  give so much  of its intensity  to the  haunted  dream  garden  of "Arras". Here  the  per­ fection  and  purity  of  the  classical Eden  has  been  violated  by  a  strange  and somehow sinister intruder:

... a peacock rattling its rattan  tail and screaming
has found a point of entry. Through  whose eye did it insinuate in furled disguise... ?

The  agonizing questions come tihick and fast:  "Who  am I/ or who am I become that  walking  here/  I am observer, other... ?" "What did  they deal  me in  this pack?"  Alice's looking-glass garden  has grown  menacing  and  lonely. "I want  a hand  to clutch,  a heart  to crack ... the stillness is/  infinite. If I should  make  a break ..." Then  the truly terrifying line:

The stillness points a bone at me.

And now the prisoned dreamer breaks under the reiteration  of the self-imposed questioning:



It was my eye.
 
I confess:

Voluptuous it came.
Its head the ferrule and its lovely tail folded so sweetly; it was strangely slim to fit the retina ...

This fearful  magnificence gives way to a simple homely cry, which in its context has a grandeur beyond the reach of rhetoric-"Does no one care?"
This  poem alone would be sufficient to place P. K.  Page among  the fine poets of tihis century,  and it is good to know that  while it is perhaps  the high  point of her achievement  it is also the high point of a school of symbolist Canadian poets

THE  POETRY OF P. K. PAGE



among whom  Iwould  name Anne  Wilkinson,  Anne   Hebert, Jay   Macpherson, Daryl  Hine  and  Gwen  MacEwen.
These  are the  poets in Canada who write not for the immediate moment alone.
They  are  the  poets  who  will live when  the  urbanized hitch-hiking social  realists or the  lung-born egoists of instant experience  have  been long forgotten.


Postscript

THAT GREAT MAN,  Frank Underhill, once sent  me  a collection  of his  political essays,  not  ironically  but   too  modestly  inscribed,   as  to  a  poet,  "these   prosaic offerings." When Iread  the  poems  of  P.  K. Page  and   her  equally   profound notes4  on  poetry,  painting and  magic I am conscious  of how  prosaic  this offering is. My hope,  however, is that  it  may  lead  other  critics  to write  of her  work  with their  own  perceptions.


NOTES

1 "Other Canadians  and  After,"  in Masks of Poetry, ed. A. J. M. Smith  (Toronto,
1962)' p. 126.
2  The  stanza  on  the  business man  has been deleted from  the  poem as it appears  in Cry  Ararat  (1967). I enjoyed  the passage and  cannot  feel that  it is out of keeping with the rest of the poem.

8  Poems by Shelley, Auden,  Anne Hebert  and  Frank  Scott  might  be cited in further illustration.
4 The  article in Canadian  Literature  46 referred to above, and  the earlier and  briefer
"Questions  and  Images"  in Canadian  Literature 41.


THREE	POEMS




P.K.Page







LEVJ]ITH]IN IN ]I POOL



I


BLACK and white plastic inflatable
a child's giant toy
teeth  perfectly conical tongue  pink
eyes where ears are
blowhole  (fontanelle
a rip in a wet inner  tube
Third  Eye)
out  of which speeoh breath
and  beautiful fountains  flower

So much  for linear description phrases in place of whale

This  creature  fills that  pool as an eye its socket
moves, laughs like an eye
shines like an  eye -eyebright eyeshaped, mandorla



THREE POEMS



of meeting worlds forked tail attached and fin like a funny sail

It  is rotund  and  yet flexible as a whip
lighter tihan air going up
and heavy as a truckload of bricks
It leaps sky high -it  flies and  comes down  whack
on its freshly painted  side and  the spectators get wet drenched,  soaked  to  the  hide

Tongue  lolling like a dog's after a fast run
pleased with itself and  you
it seems to want  to be petted rears its great  head  up
hangs it, its tiny eyes gleam Herring,  minute  as whitebait slip down its throat
Dear  whale, we say, as if to a child
We beam

And it disappears. Utterly
With so dark  a thrust of its muscle
through  silver tines
of water
only streamers of brine
tiny tinsels of brine remain



II

"SWIM ROUND the pool vocalizing," the boy says and "Toot" they call through  their blowholes "Toot  toot. Toot."

THREE POEMS



At sea they will sometimes sing for thirty minutes cadences,  recognisable series of notes, songs which carry
!hundreds of miles. Sing together. Sing singly. Here in a small pool they vocalize on command joyous short  toots, calls.

Why am  I crying?



III

HAIDA  AND NOOTKA respond to whistle signals. Eaoh  whistle has its own pitch
and  each whale knows which is which.

Haida and  Nootka respond to hand signals. Fresh from  the wild Pacific
they answer to hand signals.

(The  words are for us who have not yet learned that  two blasts
mean:
'Give your trainer  a big kiss' or a flick of the wrist
means:  'Vocalize.')

Chima white as Moby albino and still a baby is deaf
and  has poor vision
like white cats

(white  men and women?)

so Chima
cannot  respond to hand or whistle.

Yet this high spirited
'lissom'
girl of a whale


31

THREE POEMS



unexpectedly pale
as if still not dressed responds:
she leaps like Nootka
flaps like Haida vocalizes.

What  are her cues and signals in what realm
do her lightning actions rise?

I lean upon the pool's wet rail through  eyes'
sightless sideways glances seem to see
a red line on the air
as bright as blood
that threads them on one string trainer  and  whales.



PREP]IR]ITION



Go ouT of your mind. Prepare  to go mad. Prepare  to break
split along cracks
inhabit  the darks of your eyes. Inhabit tlh.e whites.

Prepare  to be huge.
Be prepared  to be small the least molecule of
an unlimited form. Be a limited form
and spin in your skin one point in the whole

THREE POEMS



Be prepared  to prepare
for what you have dreamed to burn  and  be burned
to burst like a pod
to tear  at your seams.

Be pre-pared. And pre-pare. But it's  never like that.
It is where you are not that  the fissure occurs and  the light crashes in.



CULLEN REVISITED



CuLLEN AT  FIFTY, arsonist, set fire
to  the  whole  accumulation.  Rings, wrongs,  rights from  buds of flame burst into flower
burned  like magnesium, white, or red as rags.
The  bag of tricks banged off-flared, fumed, smoked. Butt ends of jokes, lexicons, old chains like briars
glowed on the night sky, dimmed, spluttered,  blacked out.
The  conflagration  could be seen for miles.

Cullen  among  the charred  remains,  himself down  to the bone, scuffed, shuffled, poked, recognized nothing. The span of his life reduced to nails, pearl  buttons, gravel, twists of wire
all hard, all black, all useless. Cullen smiled
and  a wind arose like the wind the Holy Ghost
bears in its wings and the flames broke out and smoked and  flickered in white and gold before they died
for the second time in a feathery ash as grey
and  soft as feathers  plucked from a dove. Cullen  departing stubbed  his toe, upturned
-darkened face of the moon in solar eclipse -


33

THREE POEMS



a disc, heart-sized and  heavy for its size, makeweight, touchstone, lodestar?  And this he kept. It squinted  where he rubbed  it, like an eye.

So Cullen began again. Trees  bloomed. Sun shone. And  he, the Ace of Wands, green-sprigged,  was borne high in a Giant Hand  through  a running sky.
At night in a rain of shooting stars he slept. Parrots, peacocks, miraculous  plants and  jewels in  underground caverns  filled his head.
Veins on fire he slept the grey days through
like a wintering bear.
He waked
to tea-colored kings and queens upright  as staves small, wren-boned, walking in purple,  heads bound in embroideries, braceleted  wrists -
and  all reflected as though in water, twinned
as royalty in a card deck. Cullen slept and  tall black naked  warriors like divs
sprang from the earth like grain -green at the groin -
constructed  walls of intricate  mosaics, each stone polished and cut and then exactly placed.
He waked again. The rubbed disc winked and shone.

All this was in World One.
World Two  was where he explored the golden ship -cabins and  hold, hoisted its golden sails and  from its gold
craw's nest sighted the Third  World
hazy at first and seen from his position half way between earth  and  heaven
half blinded by the sun -seeming to rock and  hum.










34


A GIFT OF LOVE

Lampman and Life





Bruce Nesbitt






ARCHmALn LAMPMAN is rightly remembered foe the few
nature  poems illuminated  by his personal "small clear flame".  Unfortunately  we
are  still  waiting  for  a  definitive  biography  to deal  with  all that  annoying  ash, those refractory  clinkers that  have to be swept away without  putting  out the fire. A tantalizing  clue to the most important and disturbing single influence in Lamp­ man's  life, for example,  was not made  public until 1959, when Arthur Bourinot published  some  correspondence  between  Duncan   Campbell   Scott  and  E.  K.  Brown. These  letters  reveal  the  connection  between a  manuscript  copy-book of Lampman's poems-acquired   by  the  University  of  Toronto   Library   in  the
I 940s -and a Miss Katherine Waddell.
This copy-book is in fact one of five in which Lampman transcribed  his poetry as he wrote it, and  was presented by him  (probably  in  I 893)  as a gift of love to Miss   Waddell.   The   volume,   tentatively   titled  "Poems"  ( r889-1892)  is  the second  of  four  that  follow  in  a  definite  chronological  sequence  from   I883  to
1894· As  well as containing  129 of the nearly  3500 lines of Lampman's  poetry that  remain  unpublished, it also affords an interesting commentary on the effects of  what  Duncan Campbell  Scott  tactfully  called in  1925  "an  intense  personal drama" concerning  his friend  Lampman. By 1943 Scott felt free enough  to pub­ lish "A  Portrait  in Six Sonnets"  in At the Long Sault and  Other  New  Poems as "the  record  of a friendship  strong in affection, and, to  judge by the last Sonnet, high  in  emotional   value."  But  to  whom  do  these infuriatingly  oblique  glances refer?


35

LAMPMAN AND LIFE



Katherine Thompson Waddell was twenty-one, four  years younger  than Lampman, when  she  joined his office in the  Post Office Department on  r8 Janu­ ary I 887.  According to Scott,  whose impressions  were  recorded by E. K. Brown in a  private memorandum, their  "love  began  in the  early  nineties  and  was still a powerful thing  at  the  end  of Lampman's life.m  His sole confidant  during these stormy   years  was  E.  W. Thomson, who  was  having  an  affair  in  Boston  at  the same  time.  Scott  must  have  been  less a friend  to Lampman than he thought, for he  only  learned what  happened from  W. D.  LeSueur,  Lampman's office chief, after  the  poet's  death.
Part  of  the   cause   of  their   entanglement, Scott   suggests,   was  devastatingly
simple:  Lampman  "found his  wife  unsympathetic to  poetry  although she  was very  devoted to  his study  and  practice  of  it-and  thought that  in  this  girl  he would  find  a spiritual mate. The  idea  of spiritual affinities  was very important to Lampman.... His  wife was not such  an  affinity." Although Lampman was sure that  Katherine was a soul-mate, she was apparently unresponsive.
In  a  (mercifully)  unpublished and  untitled poem  written in September r8g3, Lampman expressed  a quaintly  ambiguous and  tepid  passion:

I may not love you dearest
And you may not love me
Tho'  one in truth and nearest
I think our hearts must be

And so from fear not knowing
What advent, what surprise
Might  bring the overflowing
We meet with coldest eyes

For fear of things sincerest
We pass and let it be
I may not love you dearest
And you may not love me.

By the  following  February it is clear  that  Katherine was determined merely  to be polite, while her less than  ardent suitor  plunged himself in misery:

Couldst thou but know my secret heart
The sorrow that  I dare not tell
The  passion that with bitterest art
I hide so well ...

Ah couldst thou know this and descry
The sorrow and the dull despair

LAMPMAN AND  LIFE



Wouldst thou but smile and pass me by, Or  wouldst thou care?

Scott  firmly  attests  that   Lampman failed  to  circumvent the  moral propriety of Ottawa and   Miss  Waddell; the  affair  remained   "spiritual", since  at  its  height Lampman's wife  bore  him  a  son,  and   apparently  remained  a  good  friend   of Katherine. Although Scott  was a very coy witness concerning his friend, another unpublished poem  that  Lampman confided  only to his scribbler in  I 895 suggests that  Scott was right :

Sweeter than  any name
Of power or blessing, tumult or of calm, The  pride of any victory with its palm, Than  praise or fame-
The love we bear to women in our youth
When ardour  cleaves to ardour, truth to truth,

When  Beauty cuts her sheaf
And flings its loaded ardour at our feet But bitter, bitter! even as this is sweet The  gathering gulf
Of passionate love misplaced, or given in vain
The love that bears no harvest save of pain.

While  it  would   be  unsound to imply  that  Lampman's poetry  was  profoundly affected   by  his friendship with  Miss Waddell, it is clear  that  his inability to  re­ solve  his  personal conflicts,  and   particularly his love  for  Katherine,  heightened his instability to the  point  of creative  breakdown. There exists positive documen­ tary   evidence, moreover,  to  indicate that   at  this  time   his  vaguely  humanistic sentiments were  being  sharply focussed  into  poems of social  protest.  Lampman's letters  to  E.  W.  Thomson describe  his  "spiritual revolution"; the  MS  book  he presented to Katherine reveals some of the results of this disturbance.
In  the  MS  version  of  "Winter-Store", written  in  December I 88g,  Lampman had  simply  declaimed the  joys of recollecting  summer's fruits  in  the  tranquillity of  winter.  In   the   version   published  in  Lyrics  of  Earth    (I 895), however,   he dropped this  view,  together with  the  opening twenty-eight lines, to substitute a bitter   poem  first  published in  the  Toronto Globe  for  I9  November  x8g2. The "time of songs"  of  the  original version  became,  through the  rearranged stanzas of  "Vision" from   the   Globe, a  time  of  spiritual  desolation  as  intense   as  the "nameless hunger of the soul" that  seized the poet at  the end  of the  poem.  When

37

LAMPMAN AND  LIFE



Lampman suggested  that  we must  stop  "refashioning what  was once  divine", he was speaking of man, not Gatineau  timber-farms.
At  the  same  time  Lampman   had  long  been  "constitutionally sensitive  to  a
morbid  degree",  and  it might be difficult to ascribe the  tone of his unpublished "Individual  Duty"   (alternatively   titled  "Life")  to  Miss  Waddell's   influence, much  less Poe's. Although  it is the opening  poem in the  MS book he presented to her, it was possibly written before she rejected him:

Housed in earthen palaces are we
Over smouldering fires,
When through the flames creep witheringly, Doubts and hot desires,
And our souls in that dense place
Lose their grace.

Some forever grope and climb
Toward the outer air, Some into the nether slime
Slip and stifle there,
Others with alternating mind
Wander blind.

Yet each palace -this we know - Hath one central tower,
Round about it breathe and blow
Winds for every hour,
And its spire through ether driven
Enters heaven.

At its base a narrow slit
Gleams and that is all;
And the daylight slants through it
Like a solid wall.
Enter lest thou find that door.
Nevermore.

It is no accident  that  the spire of each palace enters heaven, for Lampman could always see beyond  the  "vast seething companies" of frustrated mankind  to "the banner  of our  Lord  and  Master,  Christ."  He  was less certain  of the  role of a Church   he  regarded  as corrupted.  In  "The King's  Sabbath," probably  written as early as I 884, the King replies to a priest's petulant  reminder  that it is Sunday by holding the burning  bush in his bare hands. By the I 8gos in an untitled piece in the Toronto MS Lampman  is rather more direct:

LAMPMAN AND LIFE



How dealt the world, Oh Christ, with thee, Who shrank not from the common rod,
Whose secret was humility?
They mocked and scourged, then hailed thee God!

And built out of thine earnest speech, Whose gift was for the simplest needs,
Whose meaning was in all men's reach, The strangest of phantastic  creeds.

While  Lampman's more   bitter  and  despondent poetry   may  usually  be  termed poetry  of social  protest  only  by broad  definition, it is significant  as an  early  con­ tribution to  that   thin  stream which  is as  figuratively  seasonal  as  the  Canadian economy. We  might  also  take  it nearly  as seriously  as Lampman  himself  did,  if we accept  his statement written three years before his death:

We form  an  ideal of ourselves and  claim what seems to be due to that  ideal. The ideal  of  myself is entitled  to love and  approbation  from  my fellow  creatures­ but the love and  approbation does not appear and I feel and abuse the constitution of things. To  the  ideal  of myself money and  power and  practical  success are  no doubt due, but they do not come and again I abuse the constitution  of things.

Lampman's  letters   and   unpublished  work   suggest   that   Katherine  Waddell's "love  and  approbation" came  to  be his greatest  hope,  and  their  denial  his most frustrating disillusionment. It  is scarcely  surprising, then,  to  discover  that   with three  possible exceptions-"The Vagrant" (still unpublished), "The King's Sabbath", and  "Freedom" -his poetry  of social protest  was written during and after   his  "crisis"  over   Katherine.2    We   may   properly   suspect   that   Canadian literature lost  no  great  poet  of social  protest  at  Lampman's premature death in x8gg. Nevertheless as one of those "poor  shining  angels,  whom  the hoofs betray", both  in his poetry  and  his semi-tragic life, Lampman continues to typify an aspect of  that   curiously   thwarted  radicalism which  every  Canadian appears to  carry within  him.3



FOOTNOTES

1 Public  Archives  of Canada, E.  K. Brown Papers. The  following three  poems are also transcriptions in the Brown Papers made by E. K. Brown from Lampman's notebooks.
2   See Library  of  Parliament, Ottawa,  four  holograph  MS copy-books by Lampman entitled  Miscellaneous  Poems,  Alcyone, David  and  Abigail, and  The  Story  of an Affinity.

39

LAMPMAN AND  LIFE



3  Remaining  unpublished  poetry   from   the  Toronto  MS   is:   an   untitled  four-line fragment, and   the   four-line   stanza   originally   concluding "The  Land   of  Pallas" (called  in  the  MS  "The Happy Land" and,  in  the  identical version  in the  Alcyone MS,  "The Country of the  Ought-to-be"), both  noticed  by F. W. Watt  in his "The Masks   of   Archibald Lampman",   University   of  Toronto    Quarterly,   XXVII, 2 (January I958); a  complete   54-line  poem  "The Old   Berserker", dated  October
I 88g;  and  seven  lines  from  "After Rain", originally the  third   stanza.  The stanza
appearing in  the  Memorial Edition  of Lampman's poems  was  written on  27 April, I 8g5, and  appears as a revision of f. 7v of the MS.































RJchanb asel & company, 1nc.

Scholarly Books in the Arts and Sciences


TORONTO
PORTLAND, SAN FRANCISCO, LOS ANGELES, DENVER, CHICAGO, NEW YORK



THAT  FOOL OF A FEAR

Notes on "A Jest of God"





George Bowering







MANITOBA was taken from the Cree,  m>d the name means
God's country.  Neepawa  means land of plenty. Margaret  Laurence  sets many  of
her stories in Neepawa,  Manitoba, and calls the town "Manawaka". For a person such as Rachel  Cameron, aware to much of irony in her life, the Cree names for her home might be taken as a jest of God. Anyone knows that in novels set on the Canadian prairie,  place is a determinant, sometimes even a character. Margaret Laurence  has  been lately speaking  of a sense of form  for  the  novel. She  would begin with  a sense of form  for  the place. Not simply the flatness and  the  river, but also, in  A   fest  of God, the changing  advertising signs over the front  door  of the funeral  parlour  Rachel  nears as she is walking home. In  the mid-fifties, when I arrived  in rural  Manitoba, I was told that  this is God's country.  You  must  be joking, I replied.
The  town is split into  two parts, each  making the other  feel guilty, and  so is
Rachel.   Manawaka  speaks  with  two  voices, Scots-Canadian  and   Ukrainian. Rachel speaks with two voices that  are unheard  except when she speaks in voices, as in the tabernacle, or later  in the ecstatic utterances  concerning  her experience of Nick. One  gets the sense of place correctly when one gets the language  right. Margaret  Laurence  is the rare  Canadian writer who shows a care  for  the  novel as good  writing,  language  shaped  to find  literature.  Serious  writers  know  that the "content" of their  work is no reality-all content  is made-up or referential. In  your language,  in your voice, you can strive to make a record  of the  real,  at least  in  so  far  as  the  written   word  may  be  taken  as  score  for  the  tongue's workings.

THAT FOOL OF  A FEAR



In  A  fest of God, seen as formally failed by some nineteenth-century reviewers, Margaret Laurence  assays a responsive vocal style, the voice in  the ear  pursuing Rachel's  mind even into the deep places where  the most superior  fiction  (Joyce, Beckett, etc.)  comes from. Instead of doggedly getting on with the "story", the draggiest  part  of a  book, the writing  begins in  its place  and  expands  outward from  the keystone province.
From  my reading  I  have  a  nice visual sense of  the  place,  looking  out  from those eyes. It  is not  the  narrator's   grabbing  control  of  her  scene,  because  she doesn't  have  it  as a  prospect. That way  vocal:  instead  of  a  sifted  and  settled version of  Rachel's  summertime  adventure   we get  close with  her  most  private mind  in the  present  tense. We hold a present,  and  it is tense. If we can  do so, we should  read  the  book aloud.
Then   we may  hear  Rachel's  tense mind  as she sits for  the  first time  in  the
Pentecostal  tabernacle. The  reality is tolled by the music, as in poetry:

Oh my God. They can sit, rapt, wrapped around and smothered willingly by these syllables, the chanting of some mad enchanter, himself enchanted?

The  rime tells the time. Here is a rare privilege in our  fiction, the enjoyment  of hearing the mind moving, rather than being on the receiving end of recollection, arrangement, description, and expression.
So I praise the  process, beginning  with  place  and  voice, leading  to that  third thing hard  to name, something like the risk or gift of getting  naked, so that  your nakedness  may touch  something  that  is not  yours. The  form  of the  novel, first­ person  and  present  tense,  works  as  Rachel's   opening-out   does,  to  get  naked. Margaret  Laurence  shows uncommon  courage  making  this  book,  to  confront social and deep personal stupidities and fears in the womb of her narrator. There  is no prince charming  waiting at the neck of the womb, but we inlookers are led to see Rachel  finding herself, who had  always been appalled  by open  utterance,  expressing her desires physically, with  tenderness and  violence  that  both frighten and  liberate  her  sensibilities to  an  extent.  To  an  extent  we  are  not  urged  to believe but simply allowed to witness.




MANAWAKA is in the brown  middle  of one of the world's widest countries, a long way from exotic, or so it would seem for anyone desiring elsewhere. Rachel  has a mind, that  is more important than  any reveiwer has no-

THAT FOOL OF  A FEAR



ticed, and she feels as if her mind has already removed her from her town, as if the town is holding her by circumstances opposed to her mind. In this way she is fixed there  by her mind.  We are introduced  to this state of mind  as she listens to the ohildren's  skipping  songs in  the spring of the  book, as  Rachel's  ears  pick them
out:

The  wind  blows low, the  wind  blows high The  snow comes  falling from the sky, Rachel  Cameron  says she'll die
For the  want  of the  golden city.
She is handsome, she is pretty,
She is the queen of the golden city--

and  a  paragraph later  we  are  similarly introduced  to  a  sensing  of  the  town's mindless dislike for the exotic, as the children sing:

Spanish  dancers, turn  around, Spanish  dancers, get out of this town.

But poor Rachel is not allowed even to associate herself with the Spanish dancers, who  are  hated  not  only for  their strangeness,  but  also for  their  grace.  She sees herself as an awkward  crane-like creature, or a streak of chalk, or a "tin  giant."
Writing  as she does, from  inside Rachel's  neurotic  head,  Mrs.  Laurence  feels that  she  has  to  go  to  some  objective  means  of  presenting  the  town's  kitschy insularity,  and  the  entrapment of dreams.  So she  presents  to  the  reader  sitting behind  Rachel's  eyes a  number  of ikons such  as the  children's  skipping  songs. When  Rachel  goes to  the  teenage  hangout  Regal  Cafe  she  sees venerable  Lee Toy, "his centuries-old  face not showing at all what he may think of these kids." Lee Toy is still sending  money to his wife in China,  a woman  he has not seen in forty  years. Rachel  knows that  like him she is isolated and  secret, but fears that unlike him she is not  relentless. Lee Toy's  patient  resistance is shown  in the two pictures on his cafe's wall:  a Coca-Cola  poster and a painting,  "long  and narrow like  an  unrolled  scroll,  done  on  grey silk -a  mountain, and  on  the  slope  a solitary  and  splendidly plumaged   tiger."  [italics mine.]  The  painting  is that  old Romantic  trick, the dream  stuff, in this case delicate and  exotic.
So  that  when  Rachel  has  her  self-induced  masturbation dreams,  the  image must  be removed  from  the  town  that  has  taught  her  repression.  The  faceless fantasy-lover  enters her in a forest or on a beach. "It has to be right  away from everywhere." At one time it is a gaudy Hollywood orgy in ancient  Egypt, Rachel as both escapist and  voyeur, dreamy outsider in a tangle of flesh.

43

THAT FOOL OF A FEAR



When she does finally lie naked with a man  they are on the ground  outside the town, but  more important, her lover is a Ukrainian immigrant's son, whom she tries to picture  as exotic barbarian  rider from  Genghis  Khan's  hordes. This  lover has a face, of course, one that  interests Rachel  because of its slavic near-oriental cast, a face unlike the Anglo-Scottish faces of her ancestors. Mrs. Laurence  makes much  of the hold  maintained  by her  people's  ancestors.  In  A  Jest of  God that notion  makes up a good portion of the sense of place.
Manawaka is a  symbolic Canadian town,  originally  Scottish,  with  a  patina (or   mould,  depending   on  your  side  of  the   tracks)    of  more  recent   eastern European immigration. Mrs. Laurence  simply sees the  Scottish side  teaching emotional  repression,  but  also that  Rachel's  notion  of the  exotic  in  the  poorer section is a normal  stereotype.
Thinking on another ikon, ilie sign over the undertaker's door, Rachel  remarks on how it has been replaced and  reworded more than  once through  the years in order  to soften  the  idea  of  death,  at  least  for  the  Scottish  Protestants  of  the town:

No  one  in  Manawaka ever  dies, at  least  not  on  this  side  of  the  tracks.  We  are  a gathering of immortals ... Death is rude,  unmannerly, not  to  be spoken  to  in  the street.

Spanish  dancers,  get  out  of M1is  town.  Rachel's  closest ancestor  is her  mother, who  runs  about  tidying  the  house every night  so  that  it  will look  "as  though no frail and  mortal  creature  ever set foot in it."  When  Mr. Cameron  the under­ taker  had  been alive, Mrs. Cameron  had  put  doilies on  all the furniture so that  his  corpse-touching   hands  would  not  touch   the   place  of  her   habitude.  She apparently  felt  the same way about  his touch  on  her  body,  an  interesting  fear of the touch  of both  death  and  life, a double  fear  that  her  daughter  has picked up.  It is only after  she allows herself to be  touched,  and  after  she  then  inaug­  urates  the  touching,  that she takes some open-eyed  control of her  own life, and even over that  of her  mother.
Previous to that  time, we may see Rachel's  curious suspension in her attitudes toward  the  two  ohurches. She  can  feel superior  to  the  uppity  Protestants  who want  their church  to be bloodless and  quiet,  but she herself squirms  with embarrassment at  the very thought  of being seen in  the  Pentecostal  tabernacle. When  she is in the middle of the famous service at the  tabernacle,  she suddenly associates the loud singing with her childhood dream  of the horsemen of the Apocalypse. At that  time her mother had  wakened  her  to say, "Don't be foolish

44

THAT FOOL OF  A FEAR



-don't  be foolish, Rachel-there's -nothing there."  Mrs. Cameron  goes to her church  every Sunday  morning  and  there is nothing there, and she is no fool, has no chance  now of becoming  a fool, God's fool or her own.  Later,  when  Rachel goes to her doctor  with her fear of becoming a mother  and  finds that she has a uterine  irregularity,  she thinks

I  was  always  afraid that   I  might   become  a  fool.  Yet  I  could  almost  smile  with some grotesque lightheadedness at  that  fool of a fear,  that  poor  fear  of fools, now that  I  really  am  one,

really am the town fool, the object of its children's songs, and its potential  teacher, not satisfied to be its grade  two teacher.
The  untaught town is realized by its language,  the reported  cliches of mother
May's  card-playing cronies:  "I guess they must keep you pretty  busy, all  those youngsters" -poor   vision  of  the  teaching   process,  and   "Well,   I   think   it's marvelous,  the  way  you  manage"-no  insight  into  Rachel's   problem   with managing.  This  catching  of ordinary  real dialogue  is Margaret   Laurence's  first easy accomplishment, the stuff her earliest writing was based on, and  useful here as the antagonist  to Rachel's interior verbal trouble, just as the town is that speaks that  way. At  the  extreme,  Mrs. Laurence  manhandles  it into  unconscious  irony versus Rachel's  overconsciousness, as when, speaking of a movie, one of the old women says, "The one  next week at  the Roxy is The  Doomed  Women. I can't imagine Wlhat it can  be about."
The  town  teaches  not  only  repression but  also the  desire  to  put  up  a  good
appearance. Constantly  the town is accurately described to show that  the outsides of buildings  are  misleading  declarations,  as Rachel's  appearance might  be. The quiet  brick  houses are  too  big  for  their  remaining  occupants.  "Nothing is old here,  but  it looks old."  Hector,  the current  undertaker  in  the building  with  the rose window, is the agent  of the people's wishes to  have someone unfamiliar  and well-dressed  take  care  of  confrontation   with  a  crisis in  life.  For  him  it  is  a business; as in the Scottish church  it is the business to make a good appearance. Here  is the  cheapened   hold  of the  ancestors. Calla's  mother  named  her  after the lily, probably  because both sound and  picture gave the appearance of  pretti­ ness, but Calla  is not conventionally  pretty. The  calla lily is the symbol of  death
-death  and  a  good  though   not  exuberant   appearance, basic  white,  like  the
town. But  Calla  rejects  the  mortuary  flower and  paints  her  door  a  lilac color, thus offending  her neighbours,  as Nick's father  would have if he'd  left his house painted  the  bright  colours he wanted.  While flinching  at  that  openness,  Rachel

45

THAT FOOL OF A FEAR



tells Nick that  she has always envied  it, thinking  of  the  Ukrainians as "not  so boxed-in,  maybe. More outspoken.  More  able to speak out.  More  allowed  to­ both by your family and by your self ... In  my family, you didn't get emotional. It  was frowned  upon."




P.T OF   RACHEL's QUANDARY  springs  from  the  condition  of her female-dominated world, a world that  mitigates, by its condition,  against her growing  naturally  out of her  adolescence, perhaps.  That condition  traps  her  as much  as the isolation of the shrinking  town.  Most of the  males she sees are  no help  because they are remote or they are symptomatic of the  town-Lee Toy, Hector  the  undertaker,   Willard  the  school  principal,   the  teenage  boys in  the coke  cafe.  Only  James  Doherty  and  Nick,  two  figures  of  outward, offer  any surcease  or hope.
James'  mother,  to begin with, is atypical  of the  mothers  in  Manawaka.  She lets her  son  run  free in nature  when  he is supposed  to  be suffering  under  the town's indoctrination in school. When she casually touches him, arousing Rachel's jealousy, he squirms  away, and  his mother  "smiles, not  unpleased  that  he wants to be his own and  on his own." One  feels that  this mother  would  not  urge her child to believe that  there is "nothing there"  in his dreams.
The  danger  and sadness of corrupting  youthful optimism  was a theme running through   Mrs.  Laurence's  African  stories. Rachel  sees that  she,  desiring  to  be a mother  especially to her favourite  pupil,  is in  danger  of  fulfilling the  role of typical  Manawaka mother;  and  her relationship  with James is more complicated than  that. She knows that  children can quickly detect  falseness in their  teachers, and become adversaries. She has a rather strong fear of becoming James'  enemy, so she  becomes  his  tormentor,   because  she  also  knows  that  if she  shows  her liking and  admiration of 1him, he will be made  to suffer  by his classmates, who have been taught  by their community  to detest and  ridicule tender  human  touch. So she  hits him  with  a ruler  (for  a  moment  unable  to  rule  herself)  or speaks sharply  to him:  "It's so often James  I speak to like this, fearing  to be too much the  other  way  with  him."  She  projects  on  to  him  her  longing  to  realize  her uniqueness:  "Looking  at his wiry slightness, his ruffian sorrel hair,  I feel an exasperated   tenderness.  I wonder  why  I  should  feel  differendy   toward   him? Because he's  unique,  that's  why."  (None  of us is unaware  of the sexual  attrac­ tion,  but  that's  not  my direction  here.)   But  a  paragraph later  she  betrays  her

THAT FOOL OF  A FEAR



mind-forged  manacles  when she thinks of Calla, "If only she looked a little more usual." But she allies herself with James' uniqueness and independence of imagination, comparing  him favourably with the majority  of the pupils, who are given a "free  choice"  drawing  class and  have to wait  for suggestions, their own (sad)  houses, what  they did last weekend. James draws a splendidly complicated and efficient spaceship,  a vehicle to get him away from here, in all senses. Rachel may  at times identify  with  James,  or feel that  she tacitly collaborates  with  him against  the  town's  trap,  or  see him  as  potential  wish-gratification,   as  parents normally  do. "He  goes his own way as though he endures  the outside  world but does not  really  believe in  it,"  she  thinks. Before she  observes  the  unassuming rebellion of his mother  Grace,  she simply envies her,  thinking  that  "she  doesn't deserve to have  him."
But, curiously, James  also focusses the realistic part  of her mind.  Ordinary  re­ pressed people like Willard  can go ahead  and strap  a boy like James,  protesting that it is a duty he doesn't  relish, but Raohel considers that she at least realizes her odd sexual botherings while ordinary people do not. "I am not neutral-I am not detached-I   know  it.  But  neither  are  you,  and  you  do   not  know  it,"  she imagines  herself saying  to  the  young  married-man  principal.  (Such  realization is often  missed by readers of Rachel's  book.)  From  that  realization  to directness of expression is where  Rachel  will have  to go  when  she gets close to  Nick, but she finds it taught  by Grace  during  a scene in  which she talks to James'  mother about  his  truancy.  Rachel  offers the  woman  an  excuse so  that  she  can  "save face,"  but  Grace  simply admits  that  she sometimes allows James  to run  around in  nature  instead  of going to school. Rachel is so startled  that  she doesn't  know what  to say, strange  position for an  authority-figure  to find  herself in. She  has found  out  that  this  mother  simply  loves her son, and  wants  for  him  what  she would  want  in  his  place.  Rachel's  own  mother  characteristically   says that  she simply cannot  understand why Rachel would want to do certain  things, generally things that  contravene  the mother's  poor wishes. So when James  later  hides from Rachel  what  he is drawing, she makes an "open  utterance," striking  him on the face  with her staff  of office, her  ruler. Her  response is similar  to the end  of the tabernacle  scene - she is not sure she can distinguish between  her spoken words and  those she  bottles-up inside. She is not sure she can  watch  her  words.
As far  as the community  is concerned,  little James  has a lot of the Old  Nick in  him;  and  for  Rachel,   the  older  Nick  is a  kind  of  extension  of  what  the son-surrogate   James   presents  to  her  confusion.  At  first  Nick,  the   boy  who escaped  the town, intensifies the  normal  battle  within her. In  their  first conver-

47

THAT FOOL OF  A FEAR



sation   he  simply  asks,  "Been  here  long,  Rachel?"   and   before  speaking   her hesitant  answer, she thinks:  "There is something  almost gentle  in his voice, and suddenly  I long to say Yes, for ever, but also to deny everything  and  to say Only a year- before that, I was in Samarkand and Tokyo."  He, on the other  hand, is immediately  open;  he begins to tell her  his family stories right  away-ihe  is the  Ukrainian milkman's  son. Rachel  thinks:   "He's easy  to  listen  to.  Easy  as well, it almost seems, to reply to. If only it could be that  way." She is, then, still thinking  of herself as the acted-upon, the conditioned.  Nick will teach the teacher to act  upon  her  world and  her  words. As a  beginning,  she finds herself, unlike herself,  pouncing  for  the  telephone  so  that  her  mother   may  not  beat  her  to Nick's  voice.
Nick provides a curious balance for Rachel's incipient schizophrenia. His twin brother  died  as a  boy, so that  he is survivor  of that  relationship  as well as his upbringing in  the  town. "I wanted  to be completely  on  my own.  And  then  it happened that  way," he says. Now his closeness will offer one of Rachel's  selves an  opportunity  to  assert itself free  from  its  unidentical twin.  One  might  also remember  that  Nick's brother  had  been the  more  approved  by his parents,  just as Rachel's  complying self is approved  by her  mother  and  the  other  controllers.
Nick  suggests what  he  may  do  with  Rachel,  when  on  entering  his  parents'
house with her, he goes to the windows and opens the curtains,  to let the sun in. (She  later  refers to  Nick as the sun.)   We  have  earlier  been  told  that  Rachel's home is surrounded by the ancestors' trees to protect  it from  eyes (including  the sun's)   outside.  Windows let light in, and  they  also let eyesight out.  When  Nick then  enters  her  body and  leaves his sperm  there, she  curiously thinks  of herself in language  that  might speak of a house:  "the  knowledge  that  he will somooow inhabit   me,  be  present  in  me,  for  a  few  days  more-this,  crazily,  gives  me warmth,  against  all reason."  However, it is also language  that  could  describe  a disease, the  dis-ease that  Rachel  is filled with  when she imagines  her  body  and her self occupied  by foetus or tumour,  or the eccentricities  of advancing  age and the town's influence. Reason, indeed.
Contrary to the  invasion is Rachel's  excursion,  the  risk she learns  to take for the first physical love that  comes to her  in her  thirties.  She  reaches  out  to him now; it is she who goes first to the telephone. She suggests to Nick that  he could teach in Manawaka instead of Winnipeg,  and  is at once struck  by her openness, her  loss of  pride:   "No,  I  have  no  pride.  None  left,  not  now. This  realization readhes me all at once calm, inexplicably, and almost free. Have I finished with facades?  Whatever  happens, let it happen. I won't  deny it." Here is a lesson she

THAT FOOL OF  A FEAR



is learning  from  Nick, from  time, and from her reading of St. Paul  up in Calla's room.  (Paul  said  to allow  yourself to become a fool in  order  to find  wisdom. That  is, share  in  God's  joke, don't  be its butt.)   The  next  time  they  are  alone with one another's bodies, it is she who reaches out  to touch  first, to ask for it, and  of course  it  is he  who  moves away  first afterwards,  saying  that  he is not God, that  he can't  solve anything.  Finally, in the hospital in Winnipeg,  the little tumour,  which  like a  child  she takes as a  personal  gesture  from  fate,  departs, and  with  it goes Nick's  inhabiting  of her.  Now she  can  move into  that  house, and  when she does she arranges  the furniture  as she wants.  Literally, she  packs up and  moves to Vancouver,  where fools may live in God's  grace, making  their
own traditions.


ISEE THE CHANGE in Rachel's consciousness as a result of her getting in touch  with her body, that  part of self the Scottish Christians  preferred
to  cover  with   rough   wool  and   to  forget.  Rachel's   mother,   poor  dear,   was mortified that  her husband  made his living by handling bodies, and kept his hands off hers. The  first thing  we see of Rachel is that she is displaced  from  her own body-on  the  first  page  of  the  book she  imagines  her  eyes looking  from  a pupil's  desk at  Miss Cameron, the  "tin  giant".  Odd  metal  for  "the  queen  of the golden city". At other  times she pictures her body, seen in fugitive reflections from hall mirror or street window, as a "stroke of a white chalk on a blackboard" (again   two-dimensional,  like  tin), a  "goose's  feather", a  "crane   of  a  body", either bird or construction  machine, such juiceless things.
We  are  also quickly  introduced   to  her  fear  of  aging  and  dying,  especially poignant  because she hasn't  gone through  all the steps of the life cycle thought appropriate to a woman  of her age. The  mature  part  of her consciousness joins with  her immaturity in  looking for  the signs of her  becoming  an  eccentric  old woman.  But  her  mother   treats  her  as if she  were  "about   twelve".  Rachel  is displaced  from  her  womanhood's  age  as  well  as  from  her  body:   "What  a strangely  pendulum  life  I  have,  fluctuating   in  age  between  extremes,  hardly knowing myself whether  I am too young or too old." There  is an operative  irony in the fact that  the story is being told in the present tense.
Rachel  seems  to  prefer  her  inside to her  outside,  because  it  is abstract  and hidden  from  outsiders,  hence  untouchable  for two reasons. But her  desire to be opened  does battle  with  her sense of good taste and  behaviour.  While discussing


49

THAT FOOL OF A FEAR



the misdemeanour  and punishment  of James, she concentrates  her glance on her own  nicely manicured  fingernails  with  their  colourless polish, and  realizes that she  desires to  touch  Principal  Siddley's  furry  hands   though   they  repulse  her. She  makes  "reasonable" excuses to  soften  the  guilt  of  her  masturbation.  She blames her  rising during  the climax of the  tabernacle  scene  upon  the  touch  of her  neighbours  who lifted her  to her feet  as a consequence  of their  movement. She is relieved  by her  own  anger  when  Calla's  kiss scares  her  away  from  her friend.  Characteristically  she tries to pass her fear  of self-exposure off as disgust. About  the  people in  the  tabernacle  she  thinks:  "How   can  they  make  fools of themselves like that,  so publicly?" To  become a fool one  must cast off fear,  not disgust, sometimes the Protestant fear disguised as disgust. If you like your inside better than  your outside, there should be no obstacle to revealing it, certainly  no reason for poor snobbery.
Taste is another idea that confuses things for Rachel.  How can she be sure that
her  response  to  the  awful  beehive  hairdoes  of  the  town  girls  is not  simply  a mixture  of her snobbery  and  her alienation  from  the  present? She is jealous and hurt  when she thinks that  these empty-headed  sillies are  probably  being touched by  boys in  farm  fields and  Fords  every  night.   Later,   Rachel  sees  herself  as graceless and  hasty in her scramble  to get her  clothes on  after  her  first pastoral scene with  Nick.
Any way, shortly after seeing the young beehive heads on the streets of town,
she goes to sleep, and  before conjuring  her erotic  onanist  images, she is assailed by a vision of herself trapped  by time, a giant  clock:

The night feels like a giant Ferris wheel turning in blackness, very slowly, turning once for each hour, interminably slow. And I am glued to it, or wired like paper [two-dimensional  again],  like  a  photograph,  insubstantial,  unable  to  anchor myself, unable to stop this slow nocturnal circling.

In  one sense time  must simply be co-operated  with-it  is the  earth,  after  all, that  circles slowly and endlessly in the dark, the earth  that  Rachel  has not moved over. But time, or the using of it, can also be a control  device for the good folks of  town.  There  is  a  second  scene  in  which  Racihel catches  herself  staring   at Willard's  hands -"with  them  he touches  his wife" -and she quickly looks at something  else, the  familiar  royal blue  Bank  of  Montreal   calendar,  which  "is not  so frivolous  as  to  display  any  picture."   The  hands   and  the  calendar   act dramatically  here  as objective correlatives of the  conflict in  Rachel's  conscious­ ness. But  to  this  point  Rachel  is still  caught   being  favourable   to  the  closed

so

THAT FOOL OF A FEAR



attitude.  When  Willard  takes off his protective glasses and shows a look of vulnerability,  Rachel feels almost affectionate, and moves backward  instead of towards  him.
During  the  tabernacle  scene, too, Rachel  is embarrassed  by vulnerability  that
leads to people touching one another even in spirit. Calla explains that  the "deep and  private  enjoyment" of making "ecstatic  utterances"  leads to a sharing  of the ecstacy among  people who have got together. This is a pretty obvious comparison with  sexual  experience,  as are  the  words of the hymn  the  congregation  sings: "In full and  glad surrender,  j  I  give myself to Thee."  Mrs. Cameron's church, by contrast,  is then  seen as antagonistic  to both spiritual  touch  and  sexuality,  a place  were  people  present  only  their  protective  coverings  to  one  another,  and probably  to  the  Holy  Ghost.  "I don't  think  it would  be  very nice,  not  to go. I don't  think  it  would  look  very good,"  says Mrs.  Cameron   to  her  daughter. Furthermore, she says it would not be nice for Rachel to go in her orange scarf, because it is too bright. The  old woman would be "shocked"  if her minister ever spoke to his God with  emotion or sincerity, as if God were actually  there.  Even this church's  Jesus is beyond and out of touch:

... a stained glass window shows a pretty and cleancut Jesus expiring gently and with  absolutely no inconvenience, no gore, no pain,  just this  nice and  slightly effeminate insurance salesman who, somewhat incongruously, happens to be clad in a toga, holding his arms languidly up to something which might in other circumstances have been a cross.

This  is another   of  the  many  pictures  Rachel's  eyes and  mind  fall  upon,  the reflectors Mrs.  Laurence  is fond  of holding  up for  the  mind  she  has chosen  to write from inside of. For instance, compare  that  Christ witih the image of Rachel the lapsed Protestant  when she is around  Pentecostal Calla:  "I hold myself very carefully when she's near, like a clay figurine, easily broken, unmendable," some­ thing you ask your visitors not to touch.
Part of the time Rachel  feels like a rube, unenlightened,  and much  of the time
she is bookish,  as if that  separates  her  from  her  environment,  for  good  or  for bad. But small towns usually contain a few bookish rubes, the untouchables,  who are not the same as the town fools. When  Nick gets through  to Rachel, she turns against her bookishness, rejecting the words of "some nitwit in Shakespeare," but the  words still come. Rachel  perhaps  sees herself as a character  in  a novel; she is unfortunately analytical. She is prepared,  because she knows herself as someone like Willard  does not, to know it all.

THAT FOOL OF  A FEAR



But she has to learn that  touch can come before and lead  towards knowing - "yet I've touched him, touched his face and his mouth. That is all I know of him, his face, the bones of his shoulders. That's not knowing very much" -and even that  touch  touches  both  ways, both  people  at  once,  so  that  knowing  yourself happens  from the skin inward.  That  touching  of two makes  "possession" irrele­ vant,  her  mother's  phrase, "a  woman's  most  precious possession", something  to reject in oneself. Her mother said of her father,  "he  was never one to make many demands  upon me."  In contrast,  Rachel finds "this  peace, this pride",  when her body is touching  Nick's. They  are most un-Protestant feelings for the soul. So also is her  new way of viewing. She finds herself fixing on  "a  leaf with  all its veins perceived, the fine hairs on the back of a man's hands," rather  than  accepting  the Protestant  and spinsterish "abstract painting of a world".
Not only does touch lead to knowing, it leads  to wanting  to know, by touch­
ing:  "Then I want  my hands  to know everything  about  him,  the way the hair grows in his armpits,  the curve of his bones at  the hips, the  tight  muscles of his belly, the  arching  of his sex."  It  is here  that  she is inevitably  touching  herself, getting  past the two-dimensional pictures of her own body.
Now,  too, her  obscure sex-fantasies are  being  replaced  by dreams  of  herself in  bed  with  actual  Nick, and  the scene is no  longer  distant  unnamed   beaches, but "a  Hudson's  Bay point blanket on the bed, scarlet",  something  real to anyone who  has  felt such  cloth on  his  bare  skin.  During   the  same  daydream,   Rachel notices that  her  cloudy fears have been touched  away:  "I've felt a damn  sight better  since I stopped  considering my health."  This  is not  to say that  Rachel  is cured,  but  she is changed,  and  that  is very much  to  the  point  for  the  woman halfway  through  her  life who  could  have settled  for  declining  sameness in  the small  isolated  town.  Still she fantasises, but  now  about  marriage,  and  now  the fantasy is rejected not so much from shame and guilt, but from a sense of reality.
Now  she does not  hurry  past  the  mirror.  She  stops  to  look into  it  and  sees actual  woman,  with  blood running  in  actual  veins. With  a similar  courage  she descends for the first time to the funeral  chapel  below-floors, and  makes another open  utterance:  "Let   me  come  in,"  directionless,  or  towards  the  site  of  h.er father's peculiar  laying on of hands.  She feels some small  surprise  that  she will do such  a thing,  but sloughs it off:  "Suddenly  it  doesn't  matter  at  all to  me." When  Hector  tells her that  her  father  chose a life in  which  he need  not  touch living  flesh,  she  first  says  why  mourn,   then   changes   it  to  why  cease  from mourning.
In  the following scene, Rachel  goes to see Calla,  and  is now disconcerted  to

52

THAT FOOL OF  A FEAR



see the  fear  she  has  instilled  in  the  woman  who  would  like to  touch  her.  To find  herself capable  of such  control  now that  she has learned  how good it is to abandon oneself to two-way touch is source for a new kind of guilt, but one that leads to instruction. It is echoed in the words of St. Paul,  as read  here by Calla, who  does  not  realize  their  immediate  application:  "If  any  man  among  you thinketh  himself to be wise, let him become a fool, that he may be wise."
That is a version of Margaret Laurence's  theme.
Rachel  has  pondered   it  another   way  just  before  hearing  those  words. She thinks  that  "if  you think  you contain  two realities, perhaps  you contain  none." I like to think  that  the operative  word here is "contain." Reach  out,  Rachel, fill yourself up. Something  has to give. "My  trouble, perhaps, is that  I have expected justice. Without  being  able to give it,"  she admits to God,  who is not  there,  of course. She is going to lose Nick, but it was his body her fingers pushed against to send feeling back into her own.
One  of the lovely things  about  Margaret  Laurence's  novel is the gradualness of  change.  It is  not  that   Rachel   realizes  steadily.  Her   early   weakness  and confusion,  her  thirty-five-year  old  character  traits  are  still there,  at  the  end  of the  book. They  are  just  not  so bad  now. They  are  accompanied  by  the  later knowledge  and  experience  that  alternate  with  them  in  her  mind,  and  modify them somewhat.  For example,  when Rachel goes to the Parthenon Caf,e to think about  her  pregnancy,  her tired  mind  talks to Nick. At first she wants  him to be there  so  that  she  can  see  him  and  speak  with  him,  not  asking  to  touch  him. But two pages later,  after  she has faced her self in the middle of crisis, thinking of  abortion,  she  admits  that  she  could  forego speaking  with  him  if she  could hold him  and  lie down  beside him. Touch  is the first thing she wants  now. She manages to go again to Calla, to touch her with an admission of her trouble, to establish greater intimacy than they have ever known. At the same time, Rachel decides to shake her mother's formerly awful control:  "My  mother's  tricky heart will just ihave to take its own chances." There is confiding and confidence, outside and  inside.
Margaret Laurence   has  spoken  of  Rachel's  experience  as  part  victory,  part
defeat. The  woman  has managed  to step outside her own mind for a little, to see the eyes looking back as not totally stupid nor totally ridiculing. While Dr. Raven is touching  her womb to find life or tumour,  Rachel has a moment  of seeing the real  world, one  in  which  any  individual  person has to  make ,his own  way. Dr. Raven,  the old family friend,  is "one  well-meaning physician who wants to help me  pull  myself together   and  yet  can't  help  having  an  eye  on  the  clock,  the

53

THAT FOOL OF A FEAR



waiting  room still full." All life goes on, everyone's, and  time is not  just a tyrant tying lonely Rachel  to some monster clock. He  hasn't  the time to concentrate on iher.
So Rachel  steps into the middle ground  she could not reach earlier  because of
the grip of her ancestors. Whereas she had  formerly  been seen by her mother  as child,  by  herself  as  ageing  spinster,  and   perhaps   by  the  reader   as  arrested adolescent,  she  now  becomes woman  and  mother  in  a  weirdly  symbolic  birth scene. After  the  tumour  is removed  and  she  is lying in  the  Winnipeg  hospital bed, she hears herself saying "/ am the  mother  now."  She is referring  largely to the  relationship  between herself and  old  Mrs.  Cameron. She  will complete  the age-old  cycle, becoming tihe mother  of her  ancestors,  those people we all see as children,  socially or  historically. When  Rachel  begins to  assert herself and  take over  control  of  the  family  affairs,  including  especially  the  leaving  of  the  old town,  her  mother  makes the  complaint  of  all  children  being  moved,  that  she cannot  stand  to leave all her playmates. Her  mother  says to Rachel,  "you're  not yourself," and  either she is or she is not.
Rachel  has  changed  somewhat,  and  change  is life,  as  they  say,  though   not
often  enough  in  Manawaka. When she encounters  Nick's  parents  on  the street back  home, she is surprisedly open  in introducing herself to  them.  But  as Mrs. Laurence  cautions,  this is a story of real life, not a Hollywood  movie set in  New England.  When she speaks to Nick's parents and finds that  Nick lied to her about his being married,  we have another  in  a series of unsurenesses about  misunder­ standings; we still have a woman near middle-age,  waving her hands at the mist of life and  its meetings. I  am changing  and  coming  into  focus, but  who  am  I?






ONE OF  THE  REASONS for  my attention   to A  ]est of God is the seriousness of the work as literature.  Margaret Laurence  is an unusual  bird among  Canadian novelists, in  that  she  works  on  the  premise  that  form   (not "structure")  matters  pre-eminently  in  the  endeavour   to simulate  reality.  What happens  happens  in the writing, not in front  of it. One sees through  the eye, not with  it.  Mrs.  Laurence  is not  talking  about  life;  she  is trying  to  re-enact  the responses to it.  I  differ from  most commentators in  praising  the success of the present  tense and  the  interior,  confused,  first-person  narrative. The  subject  of the book is Rachel's  mind, and  the realism consists in our separation  from  it by


54

THAT FOOL OF  A FEAR



virtue  of its unsureness  and  confusions. That  separation   brings us so close. Be­
cause we are in the position of wanting to talk to Rachel.
We are early convinced  of a versimilitude of thought,  while being introduced to young James  in  the  classroom. Rachel's  mind is on  him,  asking  herself why she speaks so han;hly to him in particular  when it is to him  that  her feelings go out  most longingly.  Then   before thinking  on  him  some  more, she  asks herself why she didn't bring  a coat to work, as the spring wind  makes her shiver, and  a cold will pull her down so surely. We know then that  in some way her spinsterish fear  of aging  and  getting  cranky  about  her  declining  health  is related  to  her desire to love a son, especially one who exhibits the independence  of mind  that Rachel  has betrayed  in herself.
Mrs. Laurence  engages  the reader continuously this way, inviting  and  obliga­ ting  him  to  evaluate   Rachel's   thoughts,  not  simply  to  receive  them  toward  a narrative  completion.  We  remember  that  we are at  all  times privy  to  Rachel's speaking  to  herself,  and  must,  for instance,  evaluate  her  adjectives.  When  she says to herself, "My  great  mistake was in being born  the  younger.  No.  Where  I went  wrong  was in  coming  back here, once  I'd  got  away. A  person  has to  be ruthless.  One  has  to  say  I'm   going, and  not  be  prevailed  upon  to  return," a reader  may want  to substitute  "courageous"  for "ruthless." Yet the reader is still the half of the dialogue  who is holding his tongue. He should extend to her some of his imagination, i.e. sympathy; he should  not  condemn  her, or  her vision of reality. Somewhere  between  that  "ruthless"  and  "courageous," or  whatever  the second  adjective  may  be, rests the real. The  real  is like the  real  in  real life­ it is mainly encountered in dialogue, encountered  but  never totally characterized  in words.
Similarly the  reality of character  is found  in how the  person talks more  than in  what  he says. Mrs.  Laurence  engages this poetic discovery  as a  literary  ap­ proach.  So the  language  with  its rhymes and  cadences  reveals the  condition  of Rachel's shocked mind as she finds herself speaking ecstatically in the tabernacle:

Chattering,  crying, ululating,  the forbidden transformed cryptically to nonsense, dragged from the crypt, stolen and shouted, the shuddering of it, the fear, the breaking, the release, the grieving -
Not Calla's voice. Mine. Oh my God. Mine. The voice of Rachel.

What  I  mean  to say  is  that  Mrs.  Laurence  does  not  seek to  use  words  to explain  ( L.  explanare,  lit.,  to  make level.)  the important things  that  are  hap-

55

THAT FOOL OF A FEAR



pening. Take for instance Rachel's words on her wishing that something bad will happen  to her mother:

You mean it all right, Rachel. Not every minute,  not every day, even. But right now, you mean it. Mean. I am. I never knew it, not really. Is everyone? Probably, but what  possible difference can that make? I  do care about  her. Surely I  love her as much as most parents love their children.  I  mean, of course, as much as most children love their parents.

Rachel's  mind  picks  things  up  and  lays them  down  like  a  distracted   woman walking through  a department store. As we have seen, she gets a purchase on her life after she discovers that she is no longer the child,  but something  like the new mother.  In the passage just quoted, Mrs. Laurence  does not introduce  the product of Rachel's  mind. She shows the motion of the machinery. No fooling.
One  small section  of the  novel is told  in  the  past  tense,  the  first four  pages of chapter  eleven. It  is the scene in the Winnipeg  hospital,  a scene that  is both interlude  (the only time told outside of the little town and Rachel's day-to-day confrontations  with  its people),  and  dramatic  keypoint.  The  past tense both fills in the news and  provides a sense of Rachel's mind  taking control of her situation, especially striking  after  ten  chapters  of  up-close  hesitancies  in  the  immediate present.
Certainly  when one speaks to God one has to use the present  tense( cf. Stacey,
in The  Fire Dwellers), as Rachel  does at  the  end  of chapter  nine, through  her irony, declaring  her  decision to have a child  of  her  own  for  a change.  If  God is alive he  may  or  may  not  be  having  his little  joke. If this  happens   in  the present tense, it happens  to you, and  that  makes it more  important than  funny. God's  jests are  not  just vocal-the word is made  flesh, i.e. the eternal  present. It  is in  understanding this that  Margaret  Laurence  chose wisely to write in  the present tense, to present the fool made wise by folly.
God's grace shines on fools. Poetry is hospitable  to the fool's tongue, and  vice versa. Rachel's  acceptance  speech is poetry:

All that. And this at the end of it. I was always afraid that I might become a fool. Yet I  could almost smile with some grotesque lightheadedness at  that  fool of a fear, that  poor fear of fools, now that I really am one.



EVERY MAN  IS AN ISLAND

Isolation in "A Jest of God"




C.M.McLay



"N0   MAN    IS  AN   ILAND,  intire   of  itselfe,"   quotes   Ethel
Wilson  in  Hetty  Dorval, for  Wilson  like  Donne  believes  in  human  community,
and  the  novel  examines the  effect  upon  mankind of  the  wilful  isolation  of  one of its members. Yet this truth is only partial. Margaret Laurence in  A  ]est of God suggests  a  complementary truth, that   every  man   is  an  island,   a  theme   more typical  of the  twentieth century  and  already  apparent in the "Marguerite" poems of Matthew Arnold, with  their  overpowering sense of isolation  and  human incommunicability:

Yes! in the sea of life enisled,
With  echoing straits  between us thrown, Dotting  the shoreless watery wild,
We mortal  millions live alone.
The  islands feel the enclasping flow,
And then  their endless bounds they know....

Who order'd   that  their longing's fire Should  be, as soon as kindled, cool'd? Who renders vain their deep desire?- A God, a God their severance ruled! And  bade  betwixt their  shores to be The  unplumb'd, salt, estranging sea.

In  her essay in  the Tenth Anniversary Issue of Canadian Literature, Margaret Laurence observes  that  after  the  African  novels her  theme  became  "Ten  Years' Sentences", "survival, the  attempt of the personality to survive  with some  dignity,

57

EVERY  MAN  IS  AN  ISLAND



toting the load of excess mental  baggage that  everyone carries, until the moment of death," and  adds that Rachel's  partial  victory in A  fest  of God is due to her "beginning to learn the rules of survival".  Yet Rachel's  acceptance  of life is attributable to her acceptance of her central  predicament, her essential aloneness. She  cannot  escape through  dream,  fantasy  or  nightmare: "I'm on  my own.  I never knew before what  that  would be like. It means  no one. Just  that. Just­ myself." And  with  this comes the simultaneous  realization  that  every one else is alone  too, that  even  the closest human  relationship  cannot  cross the  barrier  of self. She  cannot  bear  the  problems  of her  parents,  even  know  them,  nor  they hers.   Returning  to  the  Japonica  Funeral   Chapel,   her   father's   undertaking establishment,  many years after his death, she meditates:

Everything looks just the same, but now it does not seem to matter much that my father's  presence has been gone from here for a long time. I can't  know what he was like. He isn't here to say, and even if he were, he wouldn't  say, any more than  Mother does. Whatever it was that happened with either of them, their mysteries remain theirs. I don't  need to know. It isn't necessary. I have my own.

It is her  recognition of this overwhelming  truth  that  frees Rachel  from  her  past failures,  with  her  father,  with  her  mother,  even  with  Nick,  and  enables  her  to face her future  with fortitude.  And it is Laurence's  ability  to capture  this truth, to recreate in fiction the sense of isolation, where human  beings reach out to each other  and  reach  out  futilely, which  makes  A   jest  of God  and  the  earlier  The Stone  Angel  notable aohievements in Canadian and in world literature.
All the characters  in A  fest of God, minor as well as major,  are isolated. Only the young seem to be unaware  of this, and  Rachel  envies their  surface sophisti­ cation,  their  other-worldliness.  The  girls of sixteen  are  "from   outer  space.... Another   race.  Venusians";   the  young  lovers  in  the  cemetery  exist  in  and  for themselves, and  James  Dougherty  pulls away  from  his mother,  wanting  "to  be his own and  on his own".  The  old huddle  together  pathetically, to evade a sense of their  own isolation, their subjection  to time. The  old  men  sit in  the sunlight on the steps of the Queen  Victoria  Hotel, or gather  by the oak  counter  in  twos and  threes  to  recall  the  past,  their  faces  crinkled  and  unshaven, their  throats scrawny  with  prominent  adam's  apples. The  old ladies  play  bridge  and  gossip, yearning for the days of Claudette Colbert and  Ruby  Keeler,  their voices "shrill, sedate,  not  clownish  to  their  ears  but  only  to  mine,  and  of  such  unadmitted sadness  I  can  scarcely listen  and  yet cannot  stop  listening".  Mrs.  Cameron   at first seems shallow in her martyred  and  predatory  coyness, but  later  to Rachel's

sa

EVERY MAN  IS AN  ISLAND



sharpened   perception  she  becomes pathetic  too, fearing  the  outside  world  as a child fears a dark  cellar;  Rachel  has always blamed  her  mother  for  her father's withdrawal from  life,  but  the  rejection,  she  comes  to  see,  was  on  both  sides, and  Mrs. Cameron  mumbles  in half sleep "Niall  always thinks  I am  so stupid". And the middle generation  too are alone. Calla lives with a songless canary,  who does not even notice her, for she finds comfort in listening to some movement in the darkness of the night,  and  Rachel  asks herself at  the Tabernacle, as she sees her  in  new circumstances,  "Don't I  know  her  at  all?"  Willard  Sidley, the  self­ possessed principal  who has both attracted  and repelled Rachel, she now views in a new light as asking her for something,  perhaps condolence,  and  she  wonders: "if he's asked for it before, and  if at  times he's asked for various other  things I never suspected,  admiration or reassurance or whatever  it  was he  didn't  own in sufficient quantity." And  even funny  little Hector,  her  father's successor in  the Japonica Chapel, she sees for a moment of truth "living  there behind  his eyes".
Human  relationships,   then,   are  a  reaching  out,   an   attempt    to  cross  the barriers  of the  "unplumb'd, salt, estranging  sea".  But the  contact  is spasmodic, momentary.  In Arnold's  poem, the lovely notes of the nightingale  echo across the channel  of calm,  moonlit  nights, and  join the islands  momentarily.  Then  each draws  back into  its separate  world and  the  moment  is lost.


0N A  SUPERFICIAL LEVEL, A ]est of God is a love story with an  unhappy  ending.  Yet  the  central  relationships  are  not  confined,  static,  but
multiple  and  ambivalent. Rachel  both  protects  James  and  threatens   him;  she loves her father  yet hates him for his rejection of her. She loves her  mother  "as much  as  most  children", yet  wishes her  dead.  She  longs  for  a  child,  yet she hesitates:

The  process doesn't  end  with  birth. It  isn't  just that,  to  be reckoned with.... You're left with a creature who had to be looked after and thought  about, taken into consideration for evermore. It's  not one year. It's  eighteen, maybe. Eighteen years is quite a long time. I would be fifty-two then.  All that  time, totally responsible. There would not be any space for anything else-only that one being.

She searches for permanent relationships, with father,  lover, child, to escape from her sense of isolation,  yet isolation too brings invulnerability, an escape from  the present,  as she  recognizes in  the mournful  train  voice and  the lonely call of the loons at Galloping  Mountain:


59

EVERY MAN IS AN  ISLAND



They  were  mad,  those  bird  voices, perfectly  alone,  damning   and  laughing  out there in the black reaches of the night water where no one could get them, no one could ever get at them.

Even  the  relationship between  twins  is complex and  shifting. Rachel  considers Nick  and  Steve  and  wonders  if twinship itself is an  insurance against loneliness: "Would it make  a person feel more  real or less so? Would  there  be some  constant communication, with  no doubt  about  knowing  each  other's meanings, as though your  selves were invisibly  joined?"  But  Nick  denies  this :

I used to be glad we [Nick and Steve]  weren't  the same.... How would  you like there  to  be  someone  exactly  the  same  as  yourself .... People  used  to  group   us together,  although   we were quite  different.  He  never  seemed  to  mind.  He  just laughed  it off. But I hated it. ... I wanted  to be completely on my own.

Rachel's desire for sexual love, although it seems central to the  novel, is in fact another aspect  of iher desire to reach  out,  to escape  out  of  herself  into  another's identity. In   the  early  part  of  the  novel,  the  dream lover  serves  this  function, and  later, Nick. Rachel runs  her fingers along  Nick's  ribs "just to feel  you living there   under your  skin",   to  reach   through skin  and   bone  to  the  unique  being underneath. For  the moment  of union,  flesh, skin, bones and  blood  are connected, but  only for  tihis moment; when  they  pull apart they  become  again  two separate, inviolate  personalities. And  Rachel comes  to  realize  that   the  Nick  she  knows, like her  father, exists only in her  mind:

I talk  to him, when he is not here, and  tell him everything  I can  think  of, every­ thing  that  has ever happened,  and how I feel and  for a while it seems to me I am completely  known  to him, and  then  I remember  I've  only talked  to him  like that when  I'm  alone. He hasn't  heard  and  doesn't  know.

But  the  dominant relationship of the  novel is not  between  lovers,  but  between mother and  child  where,  for  a  period  of several  months, two  human beings  do exist  within  one  skin.  The  child,  Rachel thinks,  "is  lodged  there  now.  Lodged, meaning living there.  How incredible that seems," and  again:

It will be infinitesimal. It couldn't  be seen with the human  eye, it's that  small, but the  thing  will grow.... It  will have a voice. It will be able  to cry out.... [You] could  see that  it  has the  framework  of bones, the  bones  that  weren't  set  for  all time but  would lengthen  and  change  by themselves, and  that  it had  features,  and a skull in  which  the convoluted  maze did  as it  pleased,  irrespective  of  theori , and  that  it had eyes.

Even  in  Part  II, the  summer  with  Nick,  the  desire  for  this  child  to  replace   her

6o

EVERY MAN IS AN  ISLAND



loneliness  is strong. The second  time  after  she  and   Nick  have  made   love,  she whispers  urgently to  herself: "Nick, give it to me."  And  it is this  demand for  a ohild  which  ultimately destroys  her  relationship with  Nick:

'Nick-'
'Mm?'
'If I had  a child,  I would  like it to be yours.'
This seems so unforced  that  I feel he must see it the way I do. And so restrained as well, when  I might  have torn at him-Give  me my children.

Nick's  reply,  "I'm not  God,  I can't  solve anything," is primarily a  protection of his own  independence, his ego, but  it is also a recognition that  Rachel demands too  much  of  human  relationships. Like her sister Stacey  and  Gracey  Dougherty, she  seeks  a  child  for  her  own  fulfilment,   to  escape  her  isolation   as  a  separate being,  and  God  alone  can  grant her freedom.
In  the  first  part  of  the  novel,  Rachel satisfies her  maternal instincts  through her  classes of  seven-year-olds, although  even  then  she  realizes  that   the  phrase "my  children" is a threat to her  as it is not  to Calla.  She  faces  the summer with regret,  for  "this   year's  children will be  gone  then,  and  gradually will  tum into barely  recognized faces,  no  connection left, only  hello sometimes  on  the street." Later  she  tries to explain to  Nick:

I see them  around  for years after they've left me, but  I don't  have anything  to do with  them.  There's nothing  lasting.  They  move on,  and  that's  that.  It's  such  a brief  thing.  I  know  them  only for  a year, and  then  I see them  changing,  but  I don't  know them  any more.

Her  affection  for  James Dougherty, her  "exasperated tenderness", her  belief  in his uniqueness and  her  contempt for  the  moronic  mother who  "doesn't deseiVe to have  him", are  clearly  the  result of suoh a substitution. For  after  the summer, as she  watches the  children entering her  classroom,  "two  by  two,  all the  young animals  into  my ark", she realizes that  there  will never  be another James, "no  one like that, not  now,  not  any  more".
Yet it is in  Part  I  that  she learns  the  true  nature of the  mother-child  relation­ ship.  She  has  despised   the  possessiveness which  leads  her  sister  Stacey  to  rush home  to Vancouver and  her  children   after  only  a  week's  visit:  "I  know  they're quite  okay, and  safe, but  I don't feel sure unless I'm  there,  and even  then  I never feel sure -I  don't think  I can  explain -it's just something  you feel about  your own  kids, and  you  can't help  it."  After  observing  Grace  Dougherty with James, Rachel comprehends:

EVERY  MAN  IS  AN  ISLAND



Her  [Grace's]  voice is filled with capability. She gains strength from his presence. This is what happens. I've seen it with my sister. They  think they are making a shelter for their children, but actually it is the children who are making a shelter for them. They don't know.

But while she understands  this in principle, she has not  accepted  it in fact;  she too wants a child to shelter and be sheltered by, and  the discovery that she carries not a child but a tumour  she attributes  to "a  jest of God". Her wail is like that  of the other  Rachel  "wordless and  terrible",  and  Rachel  "weeping  for her children
... [who]  would not be comforted  because they are not." The  children of Rama were real;  their  destruction  was real. Rachel  Cameron's child  is an  illusion;  yet it is Rachel's  recognition  of this illusion which ironically  frees her.
"I am  the  mother  now,"  Rachel's apparently  cryptic  remark  under anesthesia,
indicates  her  acceptance  of her  role as adult  and  mother  to  her  ageing  child. She  cqmes  to see  that,  under  her  mother's  foxiness,  her  calculated   emotional appeals  and  demands,  lies a terrible fear of isolation  and  desertion  which is the lot  of  every  human   being,  even  mothers.  Her   mother   is  like  a  child,  totally dependent, totally trusting:  "She believes me because she must, I guess. If I came back late a thousand  nights, I now see, and  then  told  her  I'd  be away  an  hour, she'd  still believe me."  And while Rachel  resents her mother's  dependence,  even wishes her dead, she concedes, "I do care about  her. Surely  I love her  as much as most parents love their children.  I mean, of course, as much  as most children love their  parents." She agrees that, to take her mother  to Vancouver,  away from home  and  memories, is cruel,  unfair,  and  may  even  cause  her  death.  But  she also realizes:  "It isn't  up  to me. It  never was. I  can  take  care,  but  only some. I'm   not  responsible  for  keeping  her  alive."  Her   present  child  is elderly;  her future  children  may  be only  her  school-children,  yet she  comprehends   at  last that  the tie of motherhood  does not ensure immunity  from isolation:  "It may be that  my children  will always be temporary,  never  to be held.  But so are  every­ one's."
While  human   relationships  are  an  attempt   to  counter   isolation,  death  is  a recognition  of it,  and  thus  it  plays a  central  role  in  A  ]est of  God. Donne's statement,  "any man's death diminishes me, because I am involved in Mankinde" approaches  death  as a destruction  of human  community.  In  Laurence,  however, death  merely accentuates  our consciousness of an  isolation  which  already  exists. Nick and Steve, though twins, are separate  identities, and the death of Steve does not  effectually  alter  the  personality  of  Nick.  Rachel's   father   and  mother   are separated   not  by death  but  by life, and  similarly,  Rachel  lost her  father  long

EVERY MAN  IS AN  ISLAND



before he entered  the world of the dead which he had always preferred.  Rachel's "child" is lost, yet it has been not living but dead, a symbol of Rachel's  negation of life. It  is only in facing death  that  we are able to assess life, and  to recognize our  own  isolation.


IT IS  BECAUSE death  reveals the true  nature  of individuality that  its truth  is evaded  by the people of Manawaka. Hector  changes  "Japonica Funeral  Chapel" to read  "Japonica Chapel"  because "lots of people aren't  keen
on  that  word."  People  do  not  die;  they  "pass on".  When  Rachel  suggest that death  is  unmentionable,  Hector  replies:   "Let's  face  it,  most  of  us  could  get along  without  it."  He  succeeds  as a  business man  because  he  understands the human  psychology of death.  "What am  I  selling?" he asks Rachel,  and  answers himself:  "One: Relief. Two:   Modified   Prestige."  He alleviates the  panic of the bereaved  when  faced  with  the  body,  and  handles  all the  details  according  to three  price ranges, to simplify probleins of ohoice concerning  oak or  pine, velvet or  nylon:  "They  want  to know that  everything's been done properly,  of course, but the less they have to do with it, the better. ... You take your average  person, now. It's  simply nicer not  to have to think  about  all that  stuff".  This  refusal  to face death  reaches its extreme in the cosmetic skills of the undertaker  who paints and  prettifies "the  last dried shell ... for decent burial".  It is not merely a denial of reality for appearance but  an attempt  to make death  look like life, to negate the difference. The  ultimate  form of this denial is seen in Mr. Kazlik who, in his senility, asks after Rachel's father and calls Nick by the name of his dead brother.
Yet  this  denial  of death  is healthier  than  Rachel's  fascination  with  it  which both obsesses and frightens  her. She emerges out of a background  of death,  as the daughter of the  local  undertaker   who  prefers  his silent  companions  downstairs to friends  or  family.  As  a  child,  Rachel  was not  allowed  to go down  into  the funeral  parlour,  and  she came  to believe that  there  must be some  power of the dead  which  might  grasp  and  hold her  as it had  held her father.  Her  mother  is morbidly concerned  with death, saving the pink nylon nightgowns sent by Stacey every Christmas  "for  hospital  and  last illness, so she'll  die demurely." Even  the
house itself, with the  Japonica  Chapel  downstairs, represents  a world of shadow
and  nightmare; the dense growth  of spruce  trees surrounds  Raohel and separates her from  the world outside:
No other  trees are so darkly sheltering, shutting out  prying eyes or  the  sun in swnmer,  the  spearheads  of  them  taller  than  houses, the  low  branches  heavy,

EVERY MAN  IS AN ISLA.ND



reaching down to the ground like the greenblack feathered strong-boned wings of giant and extinct birds.

From  the beginning of the novel, Rachel  is caught  between  the world of dream and  the  world of nightmare  and  death,  as indicated  by  the  childish  jingle she overhears and remembers:  "Rachel  Cameron says she'll die I For the want of the golden city." Here the contrast is accentuated  between the real world of wind and snow and  the illusory  world of the child and  adolescent.  "She  is handsome,  She is pretty, I She is the queen of the golden city." The  choice is simple:  the dream or death,  and  it is her failure  to move from  the simple  alternatives  of the child
to the  more complex understanding of the  adult  which  marks  Rachel's  delayed development.
In  Part  I, Rachel's  world alternates  between dream  and  nightmare, love and horror.  The  images of the  night  are  Poe-like, demonic.  Night  brings "Hell   on wheels";  it becomes "a gigantic ferris wheel turning  in blackness, very slowly ... interminably slow. And  I  am  glued to it, or wired,  like paper." The  essence of Hell  is its isolation, its annihilation  of humanity  by sucking  it  into  the  maw  of meaninglessness or tearing it apart,  skin from bone :

The slow whirling begins again, the night's wheel that turns and turns, pointlessly. When  I close my eyes, I see scratches of gold against the  black, and  they form into jagged lines, teeth, a knife's edge, the sharp hard hackles of dinosaurs.

Countering  these  horrors  are  scenes  of  love:   the  dream   lover  with   blurred features,  under  the sheltering  wall of pine  and  tamarack, or  the  Egyptian  girls and  Roman soldiers, banqueting on oasis melons, dusty grapes and wine in golden goblets, and copulating  sweetly under  the eyes of slaves. The  sexual union of the love scenes counters  the isolation of Hell and  death,  but  these scenes too merge into  death.  In  the  first, the  shadow-prince   disappears   to  be  found  downstairs among  the  bottles  and  jars, king  of  the silent  people.  And  in  the  second,  the scenes of  copulation  fade  into  nothingness:   "The night  is a  jet-black  lake.  A person could sink down and even disappear without a trace."



h:E JUXTAPOSITION OF   LOVE   AND  DEATH OCCUrs not only in the  dream  world but  in the real one. The  sequence  of Rachel's  first visit to the Kazlik house and her conversation with Hector  in the Japonica  Chapel  is central to the structure  of the novel. But earlier, Rachel  comes upon  the young lovers in the cemetery, as spring replaces winter and  the crocuses bloom palely against the

EVERY MAN IS AN  ISLAND



grass  of  last  year  "now   brittle  and  brown  like  the  ancient bones  of  birds".   In Part  II, when  Nick and  Rachel first make love, Nick quotes  the lines of Marvell: "The grave's a  fine and  private  place j But  none, I  think, do there  embrace." And  as they  pull apart after  Rachel demands her child,  and  return finally to their separate selves,  Nick  comments, "I  never  realized  you  could  see the  cemetery  so well from  here."
Despite  her  fascination with  death   in  Part  I, Rachel fights  for  survival  even here.  She  wears  a  white  raincoat so  that  she can  be seen  by  a  driver  on  a  dark night; she  worries  that  she  might  set  fire  to  the  house  by smoking in  bed.  The turning point  in  her  movement away  from  death  and  back  to life occurs  in  the scene  with  Hector in the  Japonica Chapel, where she  relinquishes her  hold  upon the past  and  the dream of her father, not as he was but  as she wanted him  to be: "Nothing is as it used  to  be, and  there's  nothing left from  then,  nothing of him, not  a  clue."  She  recognizes  in her  voice a  bitterness,  "some  hurt  I didn't know was  there", and  concedes  the  truth of Hector's claim: "I  would  bet  he  had  the kind   of  life  he  wanted  most."  Her   father  had  chosen   his  own   path   in  life, isolation   from   human  contact and   communication  with   the   dead. In   turning away  from  this, Rachel comes  to accept  both  her father's right  to his choice  and his rejection of her:

If my father  had  wanted  otherwise, it would have been otherwise. Not necessarily better,  but  at  least different.  Did  he ever try to alter  it?  Did  I, with  mine?  Was that  what  he needed  most,  after  all, not ever to have  to touch  any living thing? Was that  why she came  to life after  he died?

She  refuses suicide-"They will all go on in somehow,  but  I will be dead as stone  and  it  will  be too  late  then  to change  my  mind" -and faces  life,  with resignation:  "Everything is  no  more  possible  than   it  was.  Only   one  thing  has changed -I'm  left  with  it." And  she  accepts  too  a  limited form  of free  will: "I will have  it  [the  child] because  I want  it  and  because  I cannot do  anything else."  Laurence's "modified pessimism",  as she calls it in "Ten Years'  Sentences", is the  recognition with  Edgar in King  Lear  that  life must  be endured, that  we are not free  to determine the  manner of our  death  any  more  than  our  birth:

We must endure
Our  going hence, even as our  coming hither; Ripeness is all.

While  death isolates,  then, love is an  attempt to cross the  barriers of isolation. But  isolation   may  involve  not  only  separation from  other   human  beings  but  a

EVERY MAN IS AN  ISLAND



separation  from  God. The  modern  doubt  of God  which  implies too  a sense of loss is conveyed  by Arnold's  lines:  "Who   renders  vain  their  deep  desire?  / A God,  a God  their  severance ruled!" and  the  vagueness of "a  God"  suggests the vain searching  for some power of justice and  order  beyond  human  life, a theme more explicit in "Dover Beach". Laurence's  title "A Jest of God" in itself suggests that  the  novel is concerned  with something  beyond  human  limitations,  with  a God  all-powerful  but  mocking  who  as an  outsider  looks down  upon  a  world "distorted,  bizarre,  grotesque, unbearably  a  joke".
The  people of Manawaka  evade a real recognition  of God as they do of death. The  church  the Camerons attend is tasteful and  controlled,  essentially unreal  like the scene on the stained glass window of "a  pretty  and  clean-cut  Jesus, expiring gently  and  with  absolutely  no  inconvenience,  no  gore,  no  pain,  just  this  nice and  slightly effeminate  insurance  salesman  who, somewhat  incongruously,  hap­ pens to  be clad  in  a toga."  The  minister  is "careful  not  to say anything  which might be upsetting,"  for the large part of the congregation  is like Mrs. Cameron: "If  the  Reverend  MacElfrish should suddenly  lose his mind  and  speak  of God with  anguish  or  joy, or out  of some  need  should  pray  with  fierce  humility  as though   God  had   to  be  there,  Mother   would  be  shocked  to  the  core."  The superficiality  of  this  view of  God  is underlined   when  Rachel invokes  Him  as the only authority  on her mother's heart,  in place of  Doctor Raven: " 'God?' she shrills, as though  I had voiced something unspeakable," and  then,  as an ex-choir member, she hastens to concede:  " 'Well, certainly,  dear,  of course, all that  goes without  saying'."
Specifically contrasted  with  this empty  ceremony  are,  on  the  one  hand,  her
father's  professed atheism and  on the other,  the  flamboyant  exuberance  of The Tabernacle  of the  Risen  and  Reborn,  with  its  pictures  of Jesus  "bearded and bleeding, his heart  exposed and  bristling with  thorns  like a scarlet  pin-cushion." Its  pulpit  is draped  in white velvet, and  the wood is "blossoming  in bunches  of grapes and small sharp  birds with beaks uplifted". While the congregation  of the Reverend  MacEifrish  denies sensation  and  a  direct  communication  with  God, the people of the Tabernacle  flaunt  emotion  in  a form  of eroticism. To  Rachel with  her  tight  restraint,  the Tabernacle suggests a  Hell,  dark,  cold and  "foetid with the smell of feet and damp coats. It's like some crypt, dead air and staleness, deadness, silence." The room becomes claustrophobic, "swollen with the sound of a  hymn   macabre"  and  the  people  "crouching,  all  of  them,   all  around   me,
crouching  and  waiting".  Their  exhibitionism  is, to  Rachel,  indecent:   "People
should  keep  themselves  to  themselves-that's the  only  decent  way."  Yet  the

66

EVERY MAN  IS  AN  ISLAND



congregation of the  Tabernacle uses religion  to escape from  themselves  and  their own  isolation  into  a  relationship with  those in their  circle  and  with  God.  Their escape  may  be  momentary; Calla   must  return to  her  room   and   her  songless canary. It  may   be  unreal, for  the  speaking   in  tongues   too  is  illusionary. Yet Rachel is horrified   not  because  she  understands the  unreality, but  because  she fears  public  exposure of her  inner  self. It is not only Calla's admission  of love for her  which  makes  her  feel  violated; it is her  denial  of  commitment, not  only  to Calla  but  to God.  She  cannot share  Calla's  religious  experience for  she  will  not accept  its premise :

In  full and  glad surrender, I give myself to Thee, Thine utterly  and  only, And  evermore  to  be.

Rachel's relationship to  God  is ambivalent. She observes  the  Sunday ritual of ohurch   to save  argument with  her  mother, but  she  does  not  believe:   "I didn't say  God  hadn't died  recently,  within  the  last  few  years,  but  a  long  time  ago, longer  than I could  remember, for  I could  not  actually   recall  a  time  when  He was alive."  Yet she cannot accept  His non-existence. After her exposure  in the Tabernacle, she  remarks, "If  I  believed,  I  would  have  to  detest   God  for  the brutal  joker  He  would   be  if  He  existed."   And  later, when  she  learns  of  the "ohild":

I could  argue  with  You  (if You  were there)   until  doomsday.  How  dare  You? My trouble,  perhaps,  is that  I have expected  justice. Without  being able to give it.

Doubting the  reality  of God,  she demands His existence.  She  comes to admit the exaggeration of both  her  "monstrous self-pity"  and  her self-abasement, indeed  her uniqueness to God  among millions of beings.  And  she confesses her  deep  need:
Help - if You  will-me.  Whoever  that   may  be.  And  whoever  You  are,  or where.... We seem to  have fought  for  a long time,  I and  You.... If You  have spoken, I am  not  aware  of having heard.  If You have  a voice, it is not  compre­ hensible to me. No omens. No burning  bush, no pillar  of sand  by day or  pillar of flame by night.

Yet  even  when  she  turns  to God,  not  through "faith, or  belief,  or  the  feeling  of deserving  anything" but  through desperation, she has  not  yet renounced her own desires.  For  having  accepted life instead  of death, the  child  instead  of  abortion, she  is  not  prepared  for  the  final  irony,  the  tumour:  "Oh  my  God.  I  didn't bargain for this. Not this."

EVERY MAN IS AN  ISLAND



Thus she finally faces her own isolation. Even  God cannot  solve her problems. She has admitted  earlier  that  she imagined  horrors,  exaggerated  them,  to  make the  real  ones seem  lesser. Now  there  are  no  more  horrors,  for  she  no  longer needs them. She has feared  to be a fool, but  now she has no more fears, for "I really  am  one."   Like  King  Lear,  she  achieves  wisdom  through   folly;  as  St. Paul  has said:   "If  any  man  among  you thinketh   himself  to  be  wise, let  him become  a  fool, that  he may  be wise." Her  reply to  her  mother's  question,  that God  may  know  her  future,  surprises Rachel  herself,  although  she  does not  yet know  whether  this is "some  partial  triumph  ... [or]   only  the  last defeat".  But her new wisdom brings compassion, not only for men, isolated and  alone, but for God  Himself,  isolated  from  man:    "God's   mercy  on  reluctant   jesters.  God's grace on fools. God's pity on God."
Thus  A  fest of God represents Rachel's  descent  into  the  world of nightmare,
the  "Everlasting  No," and suggests too a return  to life, a modified "Everlasting Yea," as anticipated  in the quotation  from Sandburg's "Losers": "[With Jonah] I was swallowed one time deep in the dark  j And came out alive after all." The tone is more bitter,  more ultimately  pessimistic than  either  The  Stone  Angel  or The  Fire-Dwellers, for both  Hagar  and Stacey  affirm the importance of human relationships  to give meaning  to an  unstable  universe.  Yet despite adverse  criti­ cism, the novel is on the whole more universal than  The  Fire-Dwellers. Rachel's  world  is no  more  confined  than  our  world;  it  has  the  same  potentialities,  the same  failings.  Her   thoughts,   however  trivial   and   self-concerned,   reflect  our thoughts  and  momentary  reflections if we record  them impartially.  Her  view of Calla,  her  mother,  Nick, is one-sided,  uncorrected  by  an  omniscient  narrator; Laurence   rejects  what  is,  after  all,  only  a  fictional   device  for  a  technique closer  to  reality.  For  this  is indeed  her  primary   message,  that   we  can  never truly  know  another   human   being,  never  penetrate behind   their  facade,  since words  which  reveal  also conceal.  We must  accept  others  as  they  appear  to  us, reach out  to them in compassion, yet be free to stand  alone.
A  fest of God, like The  Stone  Angel, deals with  a universal  human  problem, and  the  protagonist  is close to the primitive  essentials of love, birth  and  death. In  the  moment  of  facing  death,   both  Hagar   and   Rachel   affirm  life.  While Rachel's  predicament is essentially feminine, it is also human. If the child  were real,  Rachel   would   become  dependent   upon   another   human   being   for  her existence;  she  would  live  for  the  child.  But  the  "child" does  not  exist,  and Rachel  is forced  to  face  the  essential isolation  of  the  individual:  "We  mortal millions live alone."

68



review articles




HOW  CANADIANS SPEAK

G.L.Bursill-Hall


MARK M.  ORKIN,  Speaking  Canadian  English.  An  informal  account  of the  English language  in  Canada. General  Publishing.


AT  A   TIME  IN  THE   HISTORY of  this  country when  national  conscious­ ness  and   a  quasi-phobia   about   foreign influences   are   constant   themes,   it  is  a sobering thought that  there  is  no  single adequate account of   the  brand   of  Eng­  lish   spoken   by   native-born  Canadians;
it  is  indeed   a  sad   commentary  on  the
English  and  Linguistics Departments of Canadian  universities that   they  seem  to have  failed   to  produce scholars  who  are prepared to devote at least part of their scholarly   activity   to  making an  accept­ able  description  of  one  of  our  national languages. My   critical   remarks  are   not intended to embrace that  small  group  of linguists   scattered  around   Canada  who have  laboured to  create an  awareness  of Canadian  English,   but  theirs  is,  I fear, a herculean task. The same  strictures can certainly  not   be  made  of  the  efforts  to describe  the French language of Quebec. But   surely   it   is  part   of   a   Canadian's meaning  to  sound   like  a  Canadian,  by which  I  mean that   there  is a  distinctive form   of   English    which   can   be  called Canadian  English,   and   just  as  surely  it is part  of  a Canadian's heritage to  have on hand  an  account of his language writ­ ten  by competent scholars.
 Under  these  circumstances, one  has  to be pleased at any attempt to add to our meagre  knowledge of Canadian English. Speaking Canadian English, by Mark  M. Orkin, is one of the more  recent  attempts to  say  something about   Canadian  Eng­ lish.  The   book  consists  of  a  preface,   a list of words  and  phrases,  a bibliography, and   nine   chapters  which   set   out   the origins,   ingredients,  and    characteristic features  of  Canadian  English   as  well  as its pronunciation, grammar, lexicon,  and onomastics, the  last  two  chapters  being a  discussion  of  Canadian slang  and   the future of  Canadian  English.
It  is a  book  which   contains a  lot  of useful  information,  but   it  is  a  difficult book  to review.  It  is not  that  its subject matter is controversial or  that  the  author has not done his "home-work"; Speaking Canadian   English  is  written  with   con­ siderable elegance and has  been a pleasure  to  read.   It is  obvious   that   the   author has  done  considerable research, his  bibli­ ography   alone   is  quite   impressive,   and he has exploited  his sources  to the full  in order  to  provide his  reader with  a  great deal   of  factual   information  about    the history   of   Canadian  English.   However, Mr.  Orkin  is not  a  trained linguist; this

6g

REVIEW ARTICLES



is revealed  by  his uncertainty in  the  use of   certain  technical  terms,   the   serious gaps in his bibliography, his unfamiliarity with  recent  developments in  general  lin­ guistic  theory  and  their  implications  for dialect study,  and  above  all his failure  to state   adequately  his  criteria. One  might  well  get  the impression from  reading the book  that  the English  spoken  in  Ontario is the  norm for  Canadian English; there are  nods  of  recognition  at   the   English spoken   in  other   regions  of  Canada  but there  is little  or no attempt to relate  these varied   references   to  regional  differences in Canadian English.  It is perhaps a little unfair  to   criticize   Mr.   Orkin  in   these terms  and  it  is certainly  not  intended  as any  animadversion  of  his  efforts,  but  I fear  that   his  book  for  these  reasons  will not  have  much  appeal to the  professional linguist.
The core  of  the  problem  is once  more the  professional  versus the amateur, even if,   as  in   this   instance,   the   amateur   is well-intentioned and  the  professional  the real  object of our criticism. The difference is revealed quite clearly in the author's account  precisely   of  those  areas   which are  of greatest interest  to the professional, and  it  would  not  require  much  effort  to dismiss parts  of the book as being of little interest or  else written in such  as way as to be close to useless. The  amateur, parti­ cularly  when  dealing with language, often  fails to recognize  that  a language is much  more   than   pronunciation, lexical  items, and   place  names; the  amateur will  in­ evitably   reveal   his  unawareness  of  the significance of metalanguage and  of the necessity of accuracy in the use of the metalanguage of linguistics.  One  cannot successfully  talk about  the central  features of  a  language  in   common-sense   terms, and  the  reason  is that  ordinary language
 is  inept   when   it   comes   to   talk   about itself;   therefore  the   linguist   has  no  re­ course   but  to  resort   to  the  more  exact and  refined  language of linguistic science. This  is not a matter of  jargon  (and  I am among the  first  to  condemn  the  implicit mystification created by the  needless  pro­ liferation of technical  terms) ; to use such a term  in  this context  would  be to reveal one's amateurishness. I am  not suggesting  that   Mr.   Orkin  commits this  particular error.   However,   despite    all   his   good intentions, he  does  expose  himself  by his lack  of  scientific  rigour  to  the  destructive criticism of the professional linguist who may  well  have  failed  to perceive  his intentions and  is looking  for  a more adequate account of the phonology  and grammar of Canadian English.
It would   be  easy  to  pick  out  certain
statements which   are  extremely  frustra­ ting  to the  linguist, e.g.  p. 142, where  we are   told   that   the   cluster    [ nt]  between  vowels  is  modified   to  [nd],  but  in  fact  in words such  as "winter, twenty, plenty", the  consonant is  a  nasalized   flap.  I  am not  sure   what   the  author  means   by  a "bugle 'u'" (p. 137), but  I am  assuming that   he  means  a   palatalized  consonant followed  by a  high-back vowel.  Such  in­  adequacies  could  be multiplied, and  it  is perhaps unfair to draw  attention to these, but  it  is  precisely  this  type  of  statement that  mars  a  chapter that  otherwise con­ tains   a   lot   of   interesting  information about the speech  habits  of Canadians and which  reveals  an  alert  and  observant ear. It is a  pity  that  the  author did  not  con­ sult  a  phonetician (rather than  a phono­ logist)   for   this  section,   since  he  might  then   have   been   saved   from   statements which  are bound  to make  the professional  linguist   look  at  the  whole  book  with   a marked    degree    of    scepticism.    Of   the

REVIEW ARTICLES



chapter "Spelling and  Syntax", little  can be  said; its  value  is  questionable   (com­ pared  to other  sections  which  are  rich  in factual information),  and   it  reveals   no familiarity  with   contemporary  work  on syntax,  meaning, and  the  creative nature of language. It  would,  therefore, be easy to  criticize   Mr.  Orkin  for   the   lack  of theoretical   sophistication.  But   is   there then,   any   good   reason   why   he  should have   to  demonstrate a  close  familiarity with    technical   linguistics  in   order    to make    statements   about   his    mother­ tongue? All I am  saying  is that  he could have  improved certain parts of the  book by making more  specific use, not so much of the findings of the linguist, but of the methods of  descriptive  statement  devel­ oped   by  the  linguist.   I  can  say  this  be­ cause   despite   the   fact   that   the  author has  given  as  the  sub-title  an  "informal account"   of   the    English   language  in Canada, he does make certain claims and statements, viz.  p.  ix,  which   could  well expose  him  to  the  attacks of the  linguist.
Despite   these   and   many   other   stric­ tures,  this is a very readable  book  and  its admirable  style   could   be   a   model   for many   practising  linguists  who  so  often lack  any  elegance of  language. Even  if  I could   not  recommend   it  to  students  of linguistics as a successful  account of Eng­ lish as spoken  in Canada, it is nevertheless  a  book  which  could  be enjoyed, even  by the professional  linguist  when  he has overcome his feeling  of  unease,  and  cer­ tainly   by  anyone interested in  and  con­ cerned   for   the   linguistic   well-being  of Canada. The  author  is  to  be  congrat­ ulated  and  applauded  for his courage in attempting this  study   while   the   profes­ sional   linguists   of   this  country  by  their very   pusillanimousness conspire in the perpetuation  of  an   appalling  ignorance
 about    Canadian   English.    Mr.    Orkin rightly   says   (p.   5)    that    "the   greatest barrier  to the investigation of Canadian English  has always  been a lack of  scienti­ fic information"; the question must  there­  fore  be asked,  what  has  the linguist  done to  rectify  this?
Let   me   conclude  this   review   with
something   close  to  a   personal   plea.   It ought   to  be  a  matter  of  shame   to  the linguists  of  Canada that   it  has  been  left to the non-professional to record our ignorance of one  of  the  two  official languages  of this  country. It is time  that something  more  than  lip-service  was paid to language study  and  linguistics  in this country-Royal Commisions are  no an­ swer! National consciousness  is tied close­ ly to  the  language of the  country  just as human consciousness  is closely  related  to an  awareness   of  language.  Programmes in  Canadian Studies  are  springing up  in the  universities  of this country; they  can­  not achieve  anything more  than  a hollow success if they  are not  structured around a systematic  study of the  English  (as well as  the  French)   languages of  Canada. I am   inclined   to   think   that    the   picture borders  on  the shocking when one realizes how   little   is  done   in   English   Canada, compared to  the  amount of  work  done  in  Great   Britain,  America, or  for   that  matter in  French Canada; this  linguistic  myopia  is  all  the  more   unforgivable in view of the need for well-trained teachers  of   English    (Canadian   English)   as   a Foreign  Language.  How   many   Depart­ ments of English  or  Departments of Lin­ guistics in the English-speaking parts of Canada offer  courses  which  aim at a systematic   description  of  Canadian  En­ glish?  It  is  no  argument to  suggest  that  students  might  be bored  by such  a study; it  is  the  teaching, not  the  subject,  that

REVIEW ARTICLES



produces boredom, and  I for  one  believe that   Canadian  students would   be  very much  attracted to such a study  because it would  increase   their  awareness  as Cana­ dians.  It is therefore high  time  that  one university    at   least   in   English   Canada should   create  a  centre  (with   adequate support  from   the  Canada  Council   and other    agencies,   e.g.   C.I.D.A.)   for   the scientific   study   of   Canadian  English.   I subscribe to  Mr.  Orkin's hope  that   the English  language in Canada will continue to flourish,  but  I  must  add  that  this will
 be so only if it is seen for what  it is, a distinctive  type   of  English,   and   it  will remain and  be seen  as a  distinctive type of English  only when  an  organized effort is  made to  dissipate our   colossal  ignor­ ance  of our  language. This  not  a  matter of  jingoism,  or  vulgar  nationalism, or for that     matter   of    "Canadian   content"; language, the   knowledge  of  one's   own language, the  characteristic marker  that  every  man  possesses of  his  humanity, is ultimately   the   only   real    key   to   self­ knowledge.




GARNER'S GOOD EAR
 


Miriam Waddington


HUGH  GARNER, A  Nice  Place to Visit. Ryerson.  $6.gs.


HUGH GARNER  has often  been praised   for   his  good   heart   when   it  is really   his  good  ear   and  sharp eye  that deserve  our  admiration. It is  no  use  to praise  him  for  his  compassion  because  it is a matter of grace  whether a writer  has it  or  not,  and  a  matter of  cultural  con­ ditioning  whether  a  reader   values  it  or not.  But  a good  ear  for  dialogue,  speech rhythms, and  local semantic nuances  can­  not  be  brushed  aside  as  easily  as  mere goodness  of heart.
The way  a  novelist  hears  words  and uses them,  has to do with all the complex problems   of  language, and  even  of  cul­ ture.  Speech  is a  form  of action,  and  in the   area   of  dialogue-which   is  action between   characters -Garner  stands  out among his Canadian  contemporaries.
His   seventh    novel,   A  Nice   Place   to
Visit  is full  of rich  casual  alliterated  lines like "from Newfy  to Nanaimo" and  such spirited   outbursts as:   "the  lifetime  shout

72
 of  a   world   filled   with   nonentities   dis­ guised   as  taxi  starters, restaurant   host­ esses,  elevator  operators,  parking  meter  attendants, security  guards and  others  of their   ilk,   the  sorority-fraternity   of   the failed   and  fallen." Garner also  makes  a completely   selfconscious  and    natural use  of   local  place   names,   brand   names  and	celebrity     names.    Any    Canadian reader    will   easily   recognize,    scattered through Garner's pages, his own  favourite beer,  political   party  and  TV  show;  he'll even  find  his  most  familiar moral  dilem­ mas.  And  if  anyone   is still  searching for that    elusive   now-you-have-it-now-you­ don't  Canadian  identity he  need  search no  further.  Canada  may   claim   two   or more   identities,  but   Garner  conveys  at least   one   of  them   through the  conver­ sations,  attitudes and  secrets  of  the  char­ acters  who  inhabit his small  town.  He  is also  the  only  writer  I  know  of  who  has managed  to  capture what  E.  K.  Brown

REVIEW ARTICLES



called  the  mysterious  and   obnoxious quality of  Toronto, and  he  certainly catches the furtive suspiciousness  of its outlying small  towns.
A  Nice  Place to  Visit  is  the  story  of
Ben   Lawlor,  a   fifty-nine-year-old   free­ lance   journalist, divorced,  sometimes  al­ coholic  and   nearly  always  penniless-a man  with  nothing  left  to  lose. He  has  a middle-aged  woman  friend and  the  rela­ tionship between  them,  peripheral as it is, is one  of  the  most  touching in  the  book. As the story  opens  he gets  an  assignment to go to Graylands and  uncover  the facts about  an  eighteen-year-old youth  who  is serving a sentence for  the murder of a pregnant girl. A citizens'  committee in Toronto, whose  members believe  the  boy to  be innocent, has  organized a lobby  to re-open  the  case.
During the  process of finding  the facts, a lot happens, and  we meet a host of characters.  There   is   the    town   drunk (who is also the local  historian with an unpublished book in his drawer), the unfortunate homosexual, the  old-maid school  teacher, the  bully  policeman, the married Don  Juan, the local welfare  case, a few  hippies  and  chippies, and  the  rich landowner  who   is  also   the   unmarried father of the  boy who  was  convicted  for murder. And  they say that  Canadians are colourless!
Garner's  plot  is  so  loud   and  compli­ cated  that   I forget   the  details  and  only remember the  people.  They are as mem­ orable   as  poems   and   participate  in   a number of  archetypal,  or  as  we  used  to call  them,  stock  situations: the  personal  fate  becomes  the  typical  fate; there  is a fight,   a   tavern   scene,   a   comic   sexual encounter, a pot-smoking session and  the final completion of the  assignment. These incidents are sharply observed, the details
 fastidiously   accurate. I  personally   can't tell a mutation mink  from  a muskrat, but Garner can.  He  can  also  recognize  Irish twist  tweed, cuffiess trousers  and  stylish lapels.  He  not  only  tells  us what  people look like, how they dress, how much they earn,  and  what   they  think,   but  he  goes some way towards interpreting these facts and  their implications.
Ben  Lawlor is  not  especially  tolerant; he   (or   is   it   Garner  himself?)    heaps scathe  and  scorn  on Toronto's "grounded jet set,"  the  black-painted doors  of  their town houses in the annexe, poets who are dumb enough to drink their Pernod with seven-up   at   par;ties,  and   "jerk   editors" who  needlessly  mark   up  a  writer's copy. To Ben, they all seem as false, pretentious and as heavily ironic as the sign outside Graylands which  proclaims it to be a nice place  to visit. At fifty-nine  Ben  has  gone a   long  way   towards  divorcing   himself from the world but he still clings to one morality; truth.
Garner's concern with  truth places  his work in the realm of social realism. The typicality  and  representativeness of his characters reinforces this literary position. I  am    defining    realism    according  to George   Lukacs,    who   suggests   that    in realist   novels,   man    is  portrayed   as   a social  being  and   not  an  isolated  one,  as he  appears  to  the  modern  existentialist view. Lukacs has pointed  out that in the m_odern naturalist novel, social  norms  no longer  exist,  while  collective  values  have been  replaced  by a myriad  of individual ones. In addition, the modern novel more and  more denies the existence of objective reality;  it   has   moved    the    theatre  of human action  from  the  outside world  to some  inner  stage.  In  such  a  world  time cannot  exist;  there  is no  past,  no  history and  there  can  therefore be no future, no

73

REVIEW ARTICLES



hope.   There  is  only   the   eternal    static present    in   which   nothing  can   change except  the  individual's states of conscious-· ness.
In   realist  fiction,   however,  characters
change  as  a  result   of  their   encounters with  objective reality.  The  world  acts on them,  and  dynamically they  also  act  on the  world.  This  happens in  A Nice  Place to Visit, even though it happens in a very odd  and  surreptitious  way.
Ben discharges  his obligation  to the Citizens'  Committee to find out the truth. He   also   uncovers    other    truths  which Garner  sometimes    fails   to   deal   with, except  as he deals with them  unconscious­ ly. Just   as  Ben  is  the  hero,  Alex  Hurd, the   owner   of   the   Graylands  furniture factory, is the villain. Yet throughout the novel   the   latter  remains   shadowy   and unindicted  as a villain,  and  fails to come through   as   a   man   whose  motives   are believable.
Hurd is well-mannered, rich, and handsome, even  at  the  age of sixty-three. He  has made it  a  lifelong  custom  to  use his housekeepers as sexual conveniences, and  when   Ben  visits  him  he  notices  an Indian girl  of  thirty-three who  now  fills that  role. Tommy, Hurd's son by a former housekeeper, is the  youth  who  is serving the  sentence for  murder. By his own  ad­ mission,   Hurd  has   also  fathered   other  illegitimate  children  in   Graylands   and elsewhere,  and   it  is  common  knowledge in  the  town  that  he has had  a long series of casual  sexual  involvements with  work­ ing-class women  both  before and  after  his marriage.  Yet   we  are  asked   to  believe that  he had  these affairs because all along he was, and  still is, really in love with  his own  wife,  a  good  and   beautiful   woman of  his  own  class;  unfortunately she  was driven   mad   by  sexual   jealousy,  so  that

74
 now  she  is doomed   to spend   the  rest  of her  life  in  a  mental hospital. Yet  Hurd talks glibly about his love for  his son, lies to  Ben  about  the   trial,   and   keeps   two fierce  watch-dogs,  who  in  the  course  of the  story,  mangle  and  kill a  man.
It is  therefore  astonishing  when   you
stop  to  think   about it  that   neither  Ben nor anyone  else in  the  novel ever has any hard   feelings  or  critical   thoughts about Hurd. The latter, sure  enough,  because of  his  wealth   and   power   proves   to  be handy in a crisis. He knows how to give orders; his long  business  experience with manipulating men  and   affairs   have   not only made him  skilful in sexual seduction, but  have  also taught him  how to manage prosecuting attorneys and  village police forces.
Surely  Alex  Hurd is the  villain  of  the story even  if Garner does not  recognize  it or  allow  him  to  emerge  as  one.  Neither Ben  Lawlor nor  Garner seems  conscious of the  cruel  and  humiliating significance of  Hurd's  housekeepers, or  the  falseness of his  feelings  towards his wife  and  son, or  of the  effects  of his power  over  Gray­ lands.  What finally  saves  the  novel,  and Ben  as  well,  is  unconscious   ethics   and intelligence. Since   Ben  is  the  hero,  and thus  represents an  aspect  of  collective  or social  morality, he  acts  in  the only  way, at  the  end  of the  story, which  can  reveal Hurd's  cold   grey-haired   concupiscence for  the  destructive force  that   it  is.  Ben shows  that   up  through the  episode  with the  hippie which  remains  episodic,  while with Hurd the sexual  episode  has become the  life  style.
After  Ben returns to Toronto with his assignment completed he  collects  his  fee and  decides to marry his middle-aged mistress.   Ben's   decision   to  get   married seems  to  take   place   almost   in  spite   of

REVIEW ARTICLES



Garner. Lawlor does not share  the class values  that   apparently prevented the author from   seeing  Hurd  as  the  reader must.  Or,  maybe,  as sometimes   happens in  novels, a good  character knows  better
 than   his creator how  to  act  so  that  his story can  achieve  artistic balance.  It's  the fact  that  Garner leaves Ben free to act­ almost  in spite  of his own  novelistic  plan
-which proves  his worth  as a writer.





POETS EN MASSE
 


Stephen Scobie


JOHN   LACHS,  The   Ties   of  Time, $1.oo.   MICHAEL  HARRIS,   Text  for  Nausikaa,
$2.50.  EUGENE   MCNAMARA,   Quterings, $1.00.  WALLY  KEELER,    Walking on  the
Greenhouse   Roof,  $2.50.  ALAN  PEARSON,   14  Poems,  $1.25.  All  Delta   Canada publications.


IN  ONE OF HIS POEMS, John Lachs  speaks  of  a  "future without art." It may  well  be that  this  dystopian cliche will  come  true:  but  not  yet,  and  not  in Canada, if  the  present   mass  publication of small  books of poetry  is any indication. The  latest  issue  of  the  newsletter   of  the League   of  Canadian  Poets  lists  59  new books of poetry.  In  this  kind  of situation, the  quality of  what  is being  published  is bound  to be variable; and  this is certainly true of these five books from Delta in Montreal. Though none  of them  is with­ out  interest  (what book  ever  is?)   I  feel that   only  two  of  them   can   be  strongly recommended  to  the  reader  picking   his way through those 59 titles.
In  his introduction to John Lachs'  The
Ties  of Time, Glen  Siebrasse  tells us that since  the  writing of  these  poems  "Lachs has  been concerned largely  with  the phil­ osophical  essay."  Certainly the  greatest  strength of  this  book  is its firm  hold  on ideas; Lachs  is a writer  who knows what  he  wants   to  say,  and   does  so  in  clear, direct  language and  images. The sequence  of  poems   in   the   book  is  also  carefully  ordered.
 The  book begins with  a series of  char­ acter  sketches,  or  short   narrative  poems. The   people   presented   are   the  losers  of society:   a  man  imprisoned  by  his  sister, a   drunk   and   importunate   friend   at   a party,  a  university   graduate  whose  con­ tentment with  his  extremely  limited   life and   accomplishments  is  presented  with savage  irony.  The tone  of  these  concise, bitter  narratives is well exemplified by "Father":

When father  goes to see his only daughter
in the foster home where she is treated  well,
hat  in  hand  he stands  before  the  butler and  the foster  mother  says "0 it  is that
man"-
her  eyes descend  to search  him  on  the landing
as she whispers  warning  in  his daughter's
ear.

Implicit  also   in   these   poems   is  the decay of the body and  the mind:  flesh collapses and  erodes, "below  the elegant / mouth lurk  degenerate kidneys";  an
18-year-old   Helen   "wheezes   and   puffs" with   one  lung   removed. This  decay   is seen as the natural and  inevitable state  of man: the  "permanent  enemies" who assault  the  body  are  "also  my  citizens".

75

REVIEW ARTICLES



Yet  the  reader   may  well feel  uneasy,  by the  time  he has  worked  his way  through nine or ten of these poems:  the cynicism comes  to seem a  bit  forced,  to  be almost a pose, of always  looking  at  the  bad  side of things. Do the birds which "taught me slow  affection" always  have  to  die  and leave   only   hate   behind?  Are  there   no Helens with whole  lungs? These  questions do not seem to me to be naive, but  rather realistic.
With   the  poem  "Conversation with  a
Drunkard",  Lachs   begins   to   open   his book  out  to  include not  just  the  indivi­ dual   losers  but  the  whole  society  which produces tl1em.  He  begins  to  present   a society  of "machines to make machines", the   "future  without  art". A  contrasted pair    of   poems,    "Lake  Superior"  and "Montreal",   indicates  that   there   is  no escape,  either  in so-called  "nature" or  in so-called    "civilization".  In   "Darkness" and  "The Office Building", the losers lose even  the  individuality of names  (the  Jud  Mikens, Joe,  Ed,  and  June  of the  earlier  poems),   to   be   defined   only   by   their function  within   the  system:   commuters, clerks, supervisors.  Their dreams of escape are   reduced    to  sordid   sexual   fantasies, which  dehumanize the worker  into  a creature "with the  plateglass  eye  / of  a fish"; and  the  picture of the  office work­ ers'  home  life is presented  with  a  distaste amounting almost  to  loathing:

At  supper nobody   wants  to  eat,
the  stomach and   the  small  intestines are shot  to  hell  by the  thick  beer,
so we  go and  watch from  bed
a  vapid T.V. show.

Against  this background, the faint  hope expressed  at  the end  of "The Office Buil­ ding" seems  scarcely   credible;  and   the book  returns, in  the  poem  "Lipstick", to its air  of savage  distaste.
 A final  small  group of  poems  sees this dead   society  as  a  microcosm   of  "a  self­ tortured  universe   in  pain", and  the  old Deist   idea   of  God   as  a   clockmaker  is invoked   with   Lachs'   characteristic  sour twist  in  the  final  poem  of the  book:

the  clock  universe needs  winding this  universe runs  down.

Each  as stupid as a star:
was  this  the  Maker's art? A  mechanic
of  very  moderate  skill could   have  done  as  well  and
conceivably will

I  said   at   the   outset   that   the   book's greatest  strength  was   its  firm   hold   on ideas; but  this is also, of course, its great­ est weakness.  The very fact  that the  book lends  itself  so easily  to the  kind  of analy­  sis  I   have   just   attempted   speaks   of  a certain schematic rigidity  of  outlook. Sie­ brasse,  in  his introduction,  speaks  of  the book's  "corruscating  force",  but  for  me that   force   is  rather   diminished  by   its single-mindedness and predictability. Fur­ ther,   I  do  not   really   believe  that   good poetry  can  be  written out  of disgust  and  loathing; the  greatest satire  is always  in­ formed   by   an   underlying  love.   Lachs  writes:   "The   ties  of  time   are   stronger  than/  the ties of love"; but  there  is very little in  his poetry  to convince  the  reader  that he  really  knows  what  the  ties of love are.
Whereas Lachs   deals,  fairly   precisely, in  ideas,  Michael Harris's Text  for Nausikaa  is  much   less  precise.   It   deals with  atmosphere, feeling,  suggestion; it evokes  rather than  states.  A good  deal  of this is implicit in the  physical  appearance of  the   book:    from   the   brilliant  typog­ raphy   of  the  title  through all  the  tricks and   changes of  type  in  the  poem  itself. I'm   not   sure  to  what  extent  Harris  in-

REVIEW ARTICLES



tends  the  word  "Text" to  be  understood in  the   kind   of  way  a  theoretician  like Max    Bense   uses   it,   but    certainly  he evinces  more  concern with  the  "text-ure" of  his  writing than   do  any  of  the  other poets  under   review.
"All   knowledge  if  concrete  and   pro­ jected  is spherical," Harris writes  in  the final   stage   of  his  sequence (the  words themselves   in   a  circular   arrangement), "and words  do  not  undo the  possibility."  The problem, of course,  is that  words  are normally  linear    rather   than  spherical: Lachs,  for  instance,  follows  a direct  pro­ gression  of   language, so  that the  image for   his   book   would   be  a   straight  line rather  than   a  circle.  In order  to  project  his  "perfect circle", Harris  has  to  break words  away  from  linear  patterns,  distort­ ing   the   conventions  of    syntax,   typog­ raphy,  and   semantic   usage.   Hence   the physical  appearance  of   the  book;  hence also   the   static,   circular  nature  of   its central  images.  The  book  presents,  not  a progressive   line  of  ideas,   but  two  situa­  tions,   neither  of   them   changing, in  re­ lationship to each  other. There is Ulysses, trapped in Dante's hell,  talking timelessly with Diomedes: "And the  other people  j go  about  their   deaths  much   the   same way."  And  there  is Harris himself,  or his persona,  in   Montreal   without   enough money  to  get  his  bed  off  the  floor.  Be­ tween  these two loosely defined situations, the  poems  exist:  harsh  words, love words, imprecisely   evocative  words,  words  "be­  cause   for   this   moment    there    are   no others," the  words  spoken  because  "there is  jnot  much   else  / to  do."  The reader  is not  invited   to  change  this  into  some­ thing else,  something explained or  inter­  preted :  he  can  either take  part  in  it, as an  experience,  a  state of  being;   or  he can   regard    it    as,   perhaps,   Nausikaa
 would: a text, a complete thing  in words, naked  on a  beach  one  morning.
Having   said  that, I  must  confess  that I have  reservations about   this  book also. It is not  an  easy  book  to  come  to  terms with, and its rewards may not seem to everyone   commensurate  to   the   effort. The  texture is perhaps too  dense;  and  if Harris is  indeed   working   somewhere in t!le general  area  of concrete poetry,  then I  rather long   for   the   clean   lines  and classic   simplicity    of   the   best   concrete work,  and   for  its  sense  of  exhilaration. It's  not an easy book to find critical  terms for,  but my own  emotional response is to feel  it  as  dark,   glowering,  and   a  little stodgy.
For   all   my   reservations,  however,   I think  both  The Ties   of Time and  Text for  Nausikaa   are  very  interesting and worthwhile books which  I can strongly recommend.  I   am   less  sure,   however, about  the other   books  under review.
Eugene  McNamara's Outerings is really far  too  short   for  the  reader   to  get  any strong  impression  of  its  writer's  person­ ality  and   capabilities.  (Why,  why,  why include   seven   blank   pages  at  the  end? It you're  going  to  use the  paper  anyway, why  not  put  some  poems on  it?)   There is a  long,  ambitious  poem,  "Dark at  the Closing,"  which  isn't long enough  to fuse together   its  very  impressive parts  into  a developed   whole;  there are   a  few  very fine short  poems,  such  as "The  Sleepers" and  "January"; some  others which  seem more like creative writing exercises, with­ out  enough  feeling   behind   them;  and  a rather  laboured  humorous  poem,  "The Rime  of the  Antient Studd",  which  just doesn't work  at  all. But  for  what  is good in  the   book,  especially   the  stirrings   of really   powerful   work   in   "Dark  at   the

77

REVIEW ARTICLES



Closing", I would  have liked  to see those seven extra pages.
The   feeling   that   McNamara's  collec­ tion  is too short  is strongly  reinforced   by the   109  pages   given   to  Wally  Keeler's Walking  on the Greenhouse Roof. Keeler  is  a  fresh   and   pleasant   young   poet,  to whose work  the word  "adolescent" might  be applied in  all  of  its good  senses and surprisingly  few  of  its  bad  ones.  But  he comes  to  us  weighed   down  with  the  ex­ pectations  aroused  by such  a large  selec­ tion  and  by a glowing  introduction from Alec   Lucas.    "There  is  nothing  here,"  Lucas   writes,    "of   the   pellet-like    trait  often  apparent in  volumes  of  slim  verse squeezed   out  year  by  year.  There is  no­ thing   here   of  a  fear   of  words   and   of unduly   cautious  polishing." Or  in  other  words,  here  is  a  diffuse,  repetitive  poet who has not yet learned  to control  words, and  who  is still capable of  referring to his penis   as   a   "pregnant   jewel."   But   my complaints about this book are  not  really directed  at   Keeler,   but   at   the   absurd  inflation  of   the   presentation.  A   good, critical editing could  have produced from this  MS   a   20-page   book  which   would have  left  most  readers   happy  and  eager to  hear  more  from  Wally  Keeler; but  I confess  that   by  the  time  I  reached   page
 109 ("May pus forever  be / limited  to teenagers") ,  I  felt,  most  unfairly, that   I couldn't care  less if  I  never  heard   from him  again.
"Cautious polishing" might  also be  re­ commended for Alan  Pearson's 14Poems. The book is full of good ideas, but  practi­ cally none of the  poems comes off. Poems which  appear to  be  going  places  get  lost in  the  middle;  others  arrive, but  at  no­ where in particular. There is another the­ wilderness-is-bigger-than-us poem; anoth­ er   poet-on-suburban- bus-congratulates­ himself-on-being-more-sensitive-than-his­ fellow-passengers  poem.   Yet   there    are continual touches  that  suggest  Pearson  is really    capable  of   writing:   "Montreal Summer Evening" starts  as  fine  descrip­ tion  before  becoming a  bit  overwrought; "In  the  Museum" has  a fine central idea but   gets   bogged    down   in   the   middle stanzas;  "Shamsville"   and   "Spring II" are  both  funny without quite being funny enough;   in    "Waiting   for    Sleep"    the women    beautifully   described    as   being  "nameless  as  birds"  suddenly  lapse  into  "what elemental  noise  / of lovely voices." If I too may lapse, in conclusion, into  the  oldest  cliche of reviewing,  I look forward with  interest to his next  book.  And  to the
s8 others.




Write or Phone

THE  UNIVERSITY  BOOK STORE
Vancouver 8, B.C.	
 Text
Trade
Medical

whenever you need

BOOKS
 
Technical Hard Back Paper Back







ELDON GRIER

ELDON    GRIER,    Selected   Poems:   1955-1970.
Delta  Canada. $s.oo  cloth.  $2.50  paper.

THE   PUBLICATION   of  a   poet's   Selected Poems  is always  a literary event,  and  this handsome edition  makes  it  exactly   that for  the  painter turned poet,  Eldon  Grier, whose work has been shamefully neglected by the obtuse and academically-incubated critics  we have.  In  a way, this  book is his life story.  It contains poetry culled from  a half-dozen previous volumes  over the past fifteen  years, fromA Morning from Scraps ( 955) ,  published  when   he  was  thirty­ eight,   to  Pictures   on   the   Skin   (I g67), and  many  new  poems  never  collected  in book form.
Lyrical  sketches  of  persons  and  places, and   poems  about European  painters fill the  first  twenty   pages   of  Grier's  book. The sketches   are   often   shaded   in  with ironies obscure  and  obvious,  while the poems on art  exhibit a facile, sometimes organic use of metaphor. These  particular traits  attest  the  ingenuity of Grier's  style. And his ability  to see all the relevant data in meaningful relationships amounts to a keen  intuition.  To   give  an  example  of this, take  his poem  In  Memory of Garcia Lorca  (which   stands out  in  my mind  as innovative  since   it  sheds   new  light   on the    dark    side   of   human   life).   Now enough  poems have already been written about Lorca's death, the  tragic  circum­ stances,  the  poetic  truth  he  represented, etc.  But  Grier's  poem   goes  beyond   the
 sentimental reportage and  apotheosis  of Lorca. He  links Lorca's execution with poetry,  history,  society, and  poetry  again, in plain  powerful language. Lorca's poet­ ical  self becomes  his undoing:  "Did you guess/  the brilliant words/   had made you alien/ and  (strangely)  evil?" His dubious place  in  the  Spanish   politics  of  military fascism  branded him  as  bourgeois,  thus: "Granada let  you  die/   like  any  freak;/ forgot  the day,/ forgot which  pit it was." Franco   still   lives,   and    Lorca's  death proved   nothing.  "Gypsies,  farmers, gen­ erals,/  priests,   tourists,/  and   the   quiet  rich,/   now pass blandly/ overhead." This is what Grier  is getting  at, the ineffective­ ness  of  poetry  on   most  people.   Franco continues    to    live   a   comfortable  life; Franco, the  one   responsible   for  Lorca's death. At  least  the  last lines of the  poem reveal  the state  of poetry: "Ask around./ Somewhere,/  buried,/  is  a  silver  skull." It's  unfortunate, but true.  Poetry hasn't changed   a  thing. It manages,   somehow, to survive  like Lorca's "silver  skull."
Grier's   negative capabilities are  mani­ fest in Season  of Uneasiness. Even  moral  scepticism  underlies the  achievements of science.  The poem  is  a  Romantic-Sym­ bolist summing up  of  the  present:

I  would  like  that  special  sound, something  so distinct   that  I  might
sit in  bars on  one-time  disaster days and  not  be overcome  by
the  sadness  of  the  exhausted, or  the  early  bluster  of  the
newest  breed  of  world  possessors.

And  it conveys  the tension  in Grier's empirical self.  His  total   commitment to poetry   is  perhaps  a  talisman  of   health and  sanity,  a  talisman because  poetry,  or art  for that  matter, takes on a religious significance,  and   for  it  to  be  fully  suc­ cessful   it   must    replace  God,   without

79

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



being   opposed    to   science.   This   is  the poem's  inference, and  the other  stanzas support it: "The moon ..." "The element of   stillness ..."   "... the   lake ..." All become  philosophical in  retrospect.
I'd  like to quote  Four Pastoral Stanzas
in its entirety, so poignantly does it make its  point.   Man's alienation from  nature; the  poet  trying  to seiVe as mediator, and the    growing    impossibility    of   this.   "A climate of intensities/ leaves  the  average poet   hostile   toj   his   neighbours  in   the wood."   But  all  is  not  lost  or  hopeless: "In spite of this the  poem finds its word/ as darkly  as the  striking flesh/  reveals its origins ..."Again  poetry must  be listened to  and   understood  if  man   is  to  live  in peace   and   harmony  with   nature. The final  stanza   ends   on  a  note  of  despair though,  but   the   despair   is  realistic   in essence  due  to  man's destructive nature: "I walk,  a man  released  from  crime ..." "And    now   instead    of   mirroring  and mime/ the lake  rots at  my feet."
Grier's long  poem,   An  Ecstacy,  is  in
twenty  parts.   This poem  is a  mosaic  of themes  concerning man  and  his  environ­ ment,   and   the  forces  and  things  which contribute to  its  growth  and  decay.  The poet   is  described   as   being  "prodigious, magical  and  just-" And  people must  be like  him,  sharing his feelings  and  aware­ ness. "From  now  on/ the  poet  will work in  the  bank/  and  the  banker   will  write poetry,/ to his  own  astonishment." Some beautiful   and    intelligent  lines   follow:  "Closeness has become  an infinity/ purity
has  turned to  spawning cells - f  we  are
at  the  beginning." Space  exploration and the  supposedly ameliorative effects of technology are  considered :  "Look   up  at the  colourless  dark/  that   may  soon  be­ come  as  familiar to  us/  as  the  green of grass."  A storehouse of  meaning  is con-

So
 tained   in   the   simple   imagery   of  those lines.  A reconditioning process  inevitably sets  in,  whose  purpose is motion:

Look  about   at  our  blue-bound  world, at  the gentle  rivers flowing like smoke, at  the  women,  young  and  erect,
at  the  marvellous invitation of  their  breasts.
Life  must  come  from  their  life. And  beauty  risk  rebirth in  strange
surroundings.

A  regression   into   instinct,  an   atavistic longing  for  mindlessness   and   the  primal source  are  explicit. Section   (I 3)   of  this poem  is the  real  winner though, since  it concerns  the Anglo-Saxon tradition. "Sen­ sible is the  label  which  most suits  us -". Dull   people    who   live   in   their   super­  saturated society.  Grier  says:  "As  a  poet I need  to  experience ecstasy." Visions  of Rimbaud.   (English  poetry   never   went crazy,  a  Frenchman said.   It  was  not  a compliment.)  And  come  to  think   of  it, no  Canadian poet ever committed suicide.  This  fact  is strangely  relevant. Bourgeois  liberalism   rarely    breeds    good    poetry.  "Our  poets   must   give   themselves   to  a kind/ of  unsensible  madness;/ they  must hear  music  not  meaning as  they  write." Perhaps this accounts for  the  recent  drug  craze  among North American youth.  Not to  write  poetry, but  because  the  human spirit  is  sometimes peiVersely  opposed  to comfort.  Section  (  g)   is  a  tremendous realization of the  times,  and  what  can  be done  about it. Grier's technique is superb, and    his   language  hums    with    vibrant urgency.
Other  poems,   equally  strong,   round out  the  book:   I  Am  One  Who  Sleeps in the  Lap of an Old  Port, Kissing Natalia, Van   Gogh  at  Aries,  Of  Walls  and  the Sea,  Picasso at  Antibes,  I  Was  Brought Up  by the  Sea,  Bonnie  Parker, Cimate, and  maybe  a few  more.  In form  and  free

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



association of images, Grier  has affinities with  the  American Negro  poet,  Bob Kaufman, and  the Russian, Andrei Voznesensky. Of course, some of his archetypes can be traced  to Apollinaire, Reverdy, and  Neruda. He  really  doesn't have too much  in common with other Canadian  poets,   except   Milton  Acorn. Both of them  are so universal in their treatment  of  subject   matter.  They   are not  bogged  down  by petty  parochialism, but   freely   encompass  whatever   moves them  to  write.
With  this book, Eldon Grier  firmly establishes himself  as a major Canadian poet,  and   there   should   be  no  doubt   in anyone's mind  about  that. Critics  pay at­ tention, a poet strides  among you. "There are   words   that  are   the   incomparable beasts/   of  our  imagination." And  Grier has  given  them  not  a  syntactic zoo,  but the  wild  freedom of their rightful domain, in  music and  beauty.
LEN GASPARINI



RYGA IN PRINT

GEORGE   RYGA,   The  Ecstacy    of   Rita    Joe   & Other  Plays.  Edited   by  Brian  Parker.   new press, $3.00 paper.

I SAW Indian, the  first  play  in  this  new collection,   on   the    C.B.C.    programme Quest   in    1963,   and   it   impressed    me greatly   at   that   time;  now,   eight   years later, reading the script  for  the first time, I    find    myself    even    more    impressed. Indian is short; it is a one-act play and  is about an identity crisis in a young Cree Indian labourer. The action confines  it­ self  to  one  extended scene  (landscape  a "flat, grey, stark,  non country") in which the  Indian  is  harassed  by  his  bossman,
 Watson, and later  by a nameless Indian Affairs  Agent.  The Agent  does  not  have the clear-cut malignancy of Watson  the bossman;  he is simply  your  average well­ meaning white  liberal.  However, he finds his ethics severely abused when the Indian tells him  how, after  his brother  had  been critically    injured   by   a   cave-in    whilst digging  a  clay  pit,  he  (the  Indian)  per­ formed  a  mercy  killing.  At  the  end,  the Agent   flees  the   scene,   his   car   driving dust  across  the  stage,  and  the  Indian is left  driving   his  hammer at  the  head   of a  post,  an  indicator of  what   he  would like  to  do  to the  white  "sementos", the soul traders of the  world.
A good  play.  Beautifully written. The dialogue  is dead-on, and  the  conflict  (so necessary to any stage play)  is totally credible.   There  is  one  excellent  mono­ logue  (about the  clay pit)   and, although the  plot is minimal, this  allows the  char­  acters  and   the  theme   to  emerge   as  the play's  main  concern. The  coarse  texture of the  black  and  white  television  picture in  George  McGowan's  Quest  production was   particularly   suitable  for   rendering the  harshness  of   the  landscape  (itself  a reflection  of the  psychic  condition of the Indian). The  play  also reads  well, and  I hope  that  this publication will lead  to its production by  some  of  our  small  drama groups    across   the    country.   My    only criticism  concerns  the  hero:  in  spite  of his  fragmented dialogue,   I find  him  ex­ tremely   sensitive   and   articulate,  and   I cannot find  this convincing. Ryga  has romanticized him in order  to make  him a sympathetic character  (white bourgeois audiences   are   always   responsive   to   the "noble  savage" motif). But  what  illiter­ ate,  Indian or  otherwise, would  bemoan  the  loss of his soul?  (There is an equally  romantic and   unconvincing  line  in  Rita

81

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Joe when  Jamie Paul  cries "Gimme back my truth!")  However, given that,  I think Ryga   has   scored   the   essential   mystical truth  concerning not  only the  Canadian Indian but  Man himself;  the  who  am  I of  the   human  situation is  brought out very  clearly.
The title  play, The Ecstacy of Rita  Joe,
comes  second   in  the   book.  I  find  it  a weak   play   for   several   reasons.   Tech­ nically,   it  is  prehistoric.  It is  set   in  a court-room (turn on  your  television  any night  of the week and  what do you see?) and  indulges in  a  series  of  meanderings through  time   and   space   (to  the   reser­ vation, to a jail cell, to a railway  crossing, etc.)   where   we  meet  the  key  figures  in Rita Joe's   life  (a  priest,  a  teacher, her father, her   boy  friend,  etc.) .  On   stage this  is  accomplished by a gruesome split­ focus technique of shifting  spotlights and playing   areas;   the    clumsiness   of   this method is particularly acute  at the climax of the play where an awkward  flux of melodramatics (taped "consciousness" flashbacks,   and   the   heavy-handed   sym­ bolism  of  The Three  Murderers)   deve­ lops. Rita  Joe's  boy friend  Jamie  Paul  is beaten  by  The  Three   Murderers   who drop  him  on  the  railway tracks  and  he is killed   by   the   train;   Rita  Joe   is  then  beaten and  raped  and  dies. I know  Ryga has  a  fondness   for  the  form  of  classical tragedy  but   this   is   too  much;  at   this point   his   romanticism   has   driven   him into  outright  sentimentality. If it  were not  for  the  humanitarian instinct   behind this  play,  I  would  have  to condemn it as pretentious claptrap;  instead   I   suggest that   Rita   Joe  would   stand   better   as  a movie  than as a stage  play;  the continual splitting of focus is much  better  suited  to the  rhythm of  the  moviola  than   that  of the  proscenium stage.
 The third   play,  Grass  & Wild  Straw­ berries, is the  weakest  of  the  three.  The  plot   is   banal.  It  concerns   the   classic generation gap  and  focusses on  the  alien­  ation   of  a  pair   of  teenage  lovers,  Allan and   Susan.   Allan's   father  is  the  stereo­  typed  bourgeois mess and Susan's appears to  be  identical. The  cops  are   pigs,  and  Captain  Nevada  is   a   completely   un­  convincing  space   preacher  who   draws  his   archetype   from   the   much    abused  Timothy   Leary.   Nevada   has    all   the plastic  unreality of, say, Liberace playing  a  California motorcycle heavy  in a 'so's Hollywood beach-party flick aimed  at the drive-in audience. (I know  he is a parody, but even parodies  have  to be convincing) . Uncle Ted, although he  becomes  tragic in  the  end,  seems  to  have   no  bona  fide function in  the  play  other  than feeding us left-wing propaganda. The characters, every one of them, are cliches, and as a consequence  the   play   bogs  down   in  ir­ relevancies,  and  an  overview  which  once again  smells  of  romanticism and   roses. The Vancouver Playhouse production, of course,   was  popular   because   it   utilized the  Collectors  rock  group, but  here,  on the  printed  page,  the play  reveals  itself to  be  nothing  more than  a  collage   of cliches. If I did  not  know  Ryga,  I would be  tempted to  say  that   the  play  was  an attempt  at   cashing  in   on   the    youth culture ... but  no;  Ryga  is a  totally  sin­ cere  person.
Brian  Parker's introduction does not ignore  the  obvious  weak  points in  Ryga's drama. He  says:   "... most  important  is (Ryga's) concern with  the 'oft-told', his sense of the  importance of  the  common­ place  and   typical   in  popular  art,  which has  led  to  his  being  criticized  (occasion­ ally   with   justice)     for   falling   into   the  cliches   of  soap   opera   and   agit   prop."

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Parker's introduction  is  beautifully  writ­ ten  and  impressive in its analysis of Ryga's work; however,  his  recurring  defence  of Ryga's  cliches,  although  interesting and fair,  is totally  false;  the  true  redundancy of  Ryga's  drama is not  in  what  he says, but  in  how  he says it. In  his eagerness  to propagandize ... or  humanize, he  tackles subjects  too  big for  the  stage   (time  and space  are  his leading problems), subjects which  are  better suited to a C.B.C.  docu­  mentary or  a  Walter Cronkite  newscast (you  can't put  the  universe  on  the  stage but   you  can  put  the  stage  in   the   uni­ verse).  Ryga,  like  Brecht,  believes  that  you   can   change  people   by   talking   to them;  thus,  like  Brecht,  Ryga  makes  his stage  a pulpit for  lecturing the  audience. Fine.  If the  lecture is well-deserved, then perhaps the  play  will  be good.  However, in I 97 I, how  many   people   want   to  sit and  hear  a  lecture?
George  Ryga  is a self-taught man   (he left   school   after   seven   years)    and   he makes  his living  as  a  professional writer
-something  which  few  Canadian  writ­
ers  are  able  to do.  He  has a good  ear  for dialogue and,  when  he  sticks  to  realism, his  characters are   authentic  (he  knows his  peasants better   than   his  priests)   and his humour sharp and appropriate. There is a  texture to  his writing (even  when  it suffocates  from  romanticism)   which cannot  be  denied; I  refer   here   to  his ability  to  infuse  his  writing with  "land­ scape". When  you read  Ryga,  you feel he has  felt  what   he  writes.  The  Ecstacy  of Rita   Joe  & Other Plays  is  full  of  this sense of "landscape" and  it is  this "land­ scape"   which   indicates the  authenticity of his writing.
LAWRENCE RUSSELL
 

THE FRUIT MAN, THE MEAT  MAN
& THE MANAGER by  Hugh  Hood
Hood is one  of the  best  story-writers in Canada  and  this  is his newest collection.  A superb  performance. Cloth  $5.95 I Paper  $2.95
FOURTEEN STORIES HIGH: BEST CANADIAN STORIES  OF  71
edited by  David Helwig &  Tom Marshall
First in a  series  of anthologies, each  containing the  best Canadian stories  of the  year. MacEwen, Garner,  Gotlieb, Bowering,  Engel, Nowlan,  Schroeder, levine and  others.  An indispensable guide to short  fiction in Canada
today.  Cloth  $5.95 I Paper  $2.95
THE YEARS by  Raymond  Souster latest  work  of one  of Canada's  most distinguished  poets.  A major  collection. Cloth $5.95 I  Paper  $2.95
SKYDECK by  Stuart  MacKinnon
Fulfills all  the  promises  of The Welder's  Arc. "MacKinnon  strikes  me as a fine and  intelligent craftsman, a  fastidious worker  who  writes  from necessity  and  delight" (George  Whalley). First
in a series  of  New  Canadian  poets. Cloth $4.95 I Paper  $2.50
CATALAN POEMS by  George  McWhirter "Catalonian poems  written  about Belfast personalities by an  Irish-Canadian immigrant
to British Columbia. Anyone  who  loves
language will  read  them  deeply and  often" (J. Michael  Yates).  A dazzling performance. Second  in the  New Canadian Poets series. Cloth $4.95 I  Paper  $2.50
THE DAY BEFORE TOMORROW
by David  Helwig
This is a  novel  about the  makings of revolution
-Helwig's first.  Unlike his poems  and  stories,
which are  largely private and  personal, this novel is public  and  universal. This is history, Helwig says,  how  are  we going  to become  part
of  it? Cloth  $5.95 I Paper  $2.95
ABC by  bpNichol
A new  book  by the  winner  of the 1971
Governor-General's Award  for  Poetry.  Nichol has  designed 26  concrete poems,  one for each letter  of the  alphabet. A surprising, beautiful book.  Printed  at the  Coach  House Press.
Paper  only  $2.95
THE BROKEN ARK
edited  by Michael Ondaatje with drawings by  Tony Urquhart
A book of  beasts for grownups. 25  poems  by
25  Canadian poets  with  pen-and-ink drawings
by Tony Urquhart. A new  kind of bestiary.
Printed at  the  Coach  House  Press. Cloth only  $5.95
0 OBERON

Sg

BOOKS IN  REVIEW


ORNAMENTS AND EMBELLISHMENTS


JOHN    ROBERT  COLOMBO, Neo   Poems.   Sono
Nis. $5.95.

THE  POEMS  in  this  book are  like a light fluffy   dessert -whipped  cream,   or   a delicate  parfait. Dessert  is fine, of course, but  it  should   follow  a  main  course.  By itself it is not  nourishing. Also, if you eat too much  you are  surfeited.  So it is with Neo  Poems;  a  few  calories  but  no  sus­ tenance.
If found poems  came  from  the  land­ scape -from advertisements, street signs, cereal   boxes,  old  texts,  this  "new" form derives  its  raw  material from  the  minds'  terrain. The  poetry  consists  of  random ideas,   thoughts,   cliches,   and   puns   ar­  ranged   in   barely  connective  or  uncon­  nective lines. The intent behind  this is to confront  the  reader, to get him involved. The  reader  can  attempt the associations, he  can  shrug   his  shoulders  and  pick  up another  book,  or  he  can  fall  asleep  in the  middle   of  the  poem,  but  regardless, he has been confronted.
This   idea   of   participation  has   pro­ voked  critics   to  herald   Colombo  as  an "innovator",  a   "trendsetter",   and   one who   has   "a   rare   feeling   for   the   con­ temporary scene".  McLuhan  has  praised "involvement in  depth", and  the  activist is  our   new  culture  hero.  The problem  with all this, in terms of Colombo's  "neo" poems,  is that  there  is  very little  of sub­ stance   to  be  derived   from   the  readers'  participation. Thus  the  readers'   activity  is  negated.  Unlike  games,   which   offer "rewards",  no  matter how   artificial, Colombo's  poems offer practically nothing.
 


In  the  first  poem  of the  book, "What­ ever Happened To", the reader is offered  a  number of  suggestions  which  are  sup­  posed  to  stimulate a  flurry  of  ideas  and unlock  the  memory.

Whatever  happened  to
Anastasia
The  angelic  Archers  of Mons
The  Angels who danced  on the Head  of
the  Pin
Atlantis

As a  parlour game  this could  be fun,  but the poetic  message is weak.
Colombo states  that   his  book  is  influ­ enced   by  Kurt Schwitters, "the  German artist  of collage". I doubt  if the influence  has  been  absorbed. What was  present  in Schwitters'  poems,   paintings,   and   con­ structions was a sense of  daring. Likewise with  other experimenters. Everything was surrendered   to   chance  when    Tristan Tzara pulled  words out  of a hat; you can feel   the   bombardment  of   the   modem world  in  the newspaper, telegraph, advertising  collage poems of  Blaise Cendrars; you  are  aware  of the  immedi­ acy of Dos Passos' Camera Eye  sequences; Burroughs'  cut-ups and  fold-ins  vividly reflect contemporary  sense-assault of images.
Colombo's "neo" poems  lack  not  only
the  imagination and  freedom inherent in the work  of these men  but  the seriousness and  dedication of  "conventional" poetry as well.
Colombo has  a firm  grip  on  the  estab­
lishment  life-line.   He   is  most   assuredly "the lieutenant of  the  Canadian  literary establishment". There is  no  reason   why he should  be the  wild-eyed  experimenter of Canadian literature; he could  go back to  writing nice  prosy  poems  like  those  in The   Varsity  Chapbook  of  1959.  But,  if he  assumes   the  roles  of  "innovator", he

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



should  be  willing  to  take  a few  chances. As it  is he  risks  nothing, and   the  result is poetry  devoid of emotion, intellectual stimulation,  a   sense   of   humanity.  E.g. from  "Materializations":

There are  cultures that do  not  flow  into world    culture.  They  may    record   breath­ taking achievements, but  submerged  or  sus­ pended,  they   disappear   forever.  Canada's might be one  of  these.
"Here  was   a   man  and    the   things    he
loved." Words for  an  epitaph.
There are   those  that are;  and   those  that
be.

Colombo does offer some interesting information, mostly  aphorisms and  quo­ tations,   but  they  exist  alone,  not  in  any poetic   context.  At   its  best   Neo   Poems indeed, could  be considered an  informa­ tion   bank   in  which,   if  you  search   dili­ gently,  you will discover some  true  gems.

"Try in   your   sleep   to  exist."-Jean-Paul de  Dadelson.
quoted in  "Heliotropes"

"In  the   long   run   we  are   all   dead,"  said
Keynes.
from  "La  Grande  Permission"

"All  you  owe  the  public is a  good  perform­
ance," said  Humphrey Bogart.
from  "A  Said  Poem"
I write, write,  write,
as the Wandering  few  walks, walks, walks.
(H. P. Blavatsky toW. B. Yeats).
from  "Levitations"

Yes, the  adjectives "witty", "urbane", "civilized" are  applicable to Colombo's poetry.   Louis  Dudek   was  most  accurate when  he  described Colombo as "a  defi­ nite   ornament  on   the   literary   scene." Look   to   Colombo  for   embellishment; elsewhere   for    the   life-body  of   our  literature.

JIM CHRISTY
 DOUBTS AND RESERVATIONS

MICHAEL   GNAROWSKI,   Archibald    Lampman.
Ryerson. $3.95·

Archibald Lampman, a collection  of eighteen  essays about  this late nineteenth­ century  Canadian writer,  is  the  third   in the "Critical Views on Canadian Writers" series published  by  Ryerson  Press. Edited and   introduced  by  Michael  Gnarowski, who is also the Series Editor, the  volume  anthologizes  a   variety   of  comments  on Lampman's   poetry.  The  first-and earliest-selection is an  excerpt on Among  the  Millet   ( 1888)   from   Agnes Maule   Machar's  "Some   Recent   Cana­ dian   Poems",    a   review   article   in   the Week  in  188g; the  last-and  most  re­ cent-Frank    Watt's "The   Masks    of Archibald Lampman" from  the  Univer­  sity of Toronto  Quarterly in  1958. Essays on  Lampman by Arthur  Stringer, Louis Untermeyer, W. E. Collin,  John  Suther­ land,  Desmond  Pacey,  and  Louis  Dudek  are  also  reprinted. Gnarowski introduces the  collection   by  analysing   briefly  each of  the articles. A "Bibliography" listing "Principal  Works   by  Archibald   Lamp­ man" and  some  secondary  sources about  him concludes  the volume.
Theoretically, such  a work  on a Cana­ dian   writer,   especially   one   who   is  re­ spected   but   rather  neglected, should   be useful.  One  problem  for  the  student of Canadian  literature has  been  the  lack  of accurate, complete, and  readily  available bibliographical information on,  and  sec­ ondary sources  about, Canadian  writers.  In  the  past  ten  years, of course,  publica­ tions   like   the    Oxford   Companion    to Canadian   History   and   Literature,   the Literary  History  of  Canada,  and  Cana-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



dian Literature itself have alleviated the difficulty. Still, I agreed to review  Archi­ bald  Lampman with  the  thought  that  a work  with  Michael  Gnarowski  as editor and  Lampman   as subject  would be par­ ticularly illuminating.
In   some  respects  I  was  not   disap­ pointed.  Although  Lyrics    of   Earth  (I 895)  and Selected  Poems of  Archibald Lampman ( I947)  are listed  without  an­ notation  in  the  bibliography  of primary material,   for  each  of  the  other  entries Gnarowski   provides   a   paragraph  that capsules   important   information    about the book  being described. His "Introduc­ tion" is  also valuable  because it sketches a  history of the criticism of Lampman's poetry and  outlines  the characteristics  of his  work  which   have   preoccupied   the critics.
The   essays  provide   the  colours  and
shades. Lampman's poetry is praised and damned.   The   quality  of  his  earlier  vs. his later work, of his sonnets vs. his other lyrics, and of his "nature" vs. his "social" poetry  is debated.  Individual   poems are analysed  for   their  techniques, their "Hellenism", and  their  relation  to  non­ Canadian poetry.  There  is often  a  tone of  "high   seriousness"  in  the  articles - much  of  Lampman's  poetry  invites  this approach-but  there   is  also   wit,  hu­ mour, and  refreshing  honesty. I particu­ larly enjoyed Leo Kennedy's  explanation of why his generation  of Canadian  poets were  "over  prone  to  greet  the  versified manifestations  of both  [Lampman's]  in­ heritance    and   outlook   with   a   Bronx cheer"   ("Canadian  Writers  of  the  Past
-v:   Archibald   Lampman",  Canadian
Forum,   I933).  Finally,  if  one  purpose of reading  secondary sources is to stimu­ late  the  reader's  interest  in a  writer  and a second is to drive him back  to primary

86
 material,  then  Archibald  Lampman is a success.  I  have   been  rereading   Lamp­ man's  poetry.
Still,  I  have  doubts  and   reservations about the book. I wonder why a more complete bibliography of secondary sources on  Lampman was  not  included. On Canadian Literature r8o6-r960 lists articles published before I96o omitted in Gnarowski's  bibliography; more, besides Roy   Daniells'    chapter    on   "Lampman and  Roberts" in  the  Literary  History  of Canada, which is mentioned,  have been published   since.  Bruce  Nesbitt's  "Mat­ thew   Arnold    in   Canada;  a   dialogue begun?"  deserves  a  note,  for  it  suggests that   Lampman's poetry  was  known  to, and  admired   by, Louis  Frechette   (Cul­ ture,   I967).  Despite  Gnarowski's  asser­ tions  in  the  "Introduction" that  "there is  no  real   need,  in   this   instance,   for another  account  of Lampman's life" and that  "there is a good deal  of biography"  in   the  critical   selections,  an  outline  of his  life,  similar  to  the  "Chronology   of Important  Dates"   in   the   "Twentieth­ Century   Views"  series,  which  "Critical Views on  Canadian  Writers"  resembles, should   have   been   included.   If it   did nothing   else,  it   would   at   least  clarify some points made in the articles.
I  am  also puzzled about  the  choice of
some essays. In  his description  of  "Criti­ cal  Views",  Gnarowski  states  that  "the  emphasis  is on a selection  of  representa­ tive and essential critical writings bearing on a particular subject within  the frame­  work of a modern point of view" [Italics  mine] .  In   the  "Bibliography" he  men­ tions "other  valuable  sources on  Lamp­  man  not  included   for  reasons of  length or  ready  accessibility  elsewhere".  While these are good reasons for exclusion, they have  not  always  been  used. At least two

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



of  the  articles  are  readily  accessible  else­
where.  In  Masks  of Poetry  (1962)   A. J.
M.  Smith has  anthologized a  passage  on
Lampman   from    W.   E.   Collin's    The White  Savannahs   (1936)    that   is  very similar to-in  fact   the  final  version  of
-his earlier  work on the  poet. Desmond Pacey   has   republished  his   reading  of Lampman's "Heat"  in  Essays in  Cana­ dian  Criticism  1938-Ig68   (1969).  Fur­ thermore, I think  that Duncan Campbell Scott's  "Memoir"  on  Lampman  should have  been  included.  It  is long,  but  it  is not  readily  available and  it is more  essen­ tial  than   some  essays that  are  reprinted.
Actually, the  choice  of  articles  seems to depend on  the  term  modern.  Not only does  it  appear in  the  description  of  the series,  but  it  is also  used  in  the  "Intro­ duction":   "Bernard   Muddiman's  paper  coincides,   more   or  less, with   the  begin­ nings   of   modernism  in   poetry   in   the English   language"  ("Archibald Lamp­ man",  Queen's  Quarterly,  1915); "with Raymond  Knister's  essay  on  Lampman we   mark    the   beginning  of   a   modern approach  to   the   poet's   work"    ("The Poetry   of   Archibald  Lampman",  Dal­ housie  Review,  1927);   "the   Kennedy article   is  interesting  historically in  that it  represents an  assault  on  lingering  ele­ ments    of   Victorianism   made    by    the modernists of the Twenties and Thirties". Since  the  comprehension of  much  of the "Introduction" to the volume, the  choice of  articles  in  it,  and  the  raison d'etre of "Critical  Views   on   Canadian  Writers" all   depend  partly   on   the   meaning  of modern  and  its variants, somewhere they should  have been explained. If these terms were more fully defined, perhaps I should  not  be  left  with  doubts and  reservations about   the  complete success of  Archibald Lampman.	MARY  JANE EDWARDS
 USES OF THE GROTESQUE

ROCH  CARRIER, Jl est  par ltl, [e  solei/. Editions du  Jour.  $2.50.

RocH  CARRIER has now proven  that the language fireworks,   the  scenic  brilliance and   the  comic  diabolics   of  La  Guerre, yes sir were  not  a one-night stand. With Il est par la, le solei[ (It's over  there,  the sun)    he   completes    the    trilogy   which began   with   La  Guerre   and   continued with  Floralie, ou es-tu. The expression "trilogy", however,  is used  loosely by Carrier. Certain of  the  fascinating  char­ acters  introduced in  La Guerre  reappear in  the  two  other   novels ; the  protagonist of  Il  est  par la is  Philibert,  son  of  the grave-digger Arsene.  But  the  third  novel, like the second,  is quite different in spirit  from  La Guerre, though it has a lot more in common  with  the  powerful first  novel than   with   the  somewhat  disappointing Floralie.
For  one  thing,  in  Il  est  par la Carrier
exhibits  again  the  extraordinary capacity for   fantastical  realism    (as   opposed    to pure  fantasy)  which  characterized  La Guerre. Here  again  he  uses depiction of the  unusual  and  the grotesque not simply for the sake of shock value  and  absurdity, but   with   purpose,  often   charged  with bitter  irony.  The procession  of  the  Lali­ berte  family  through  the  village  streets, for  instance,   is  stunning and   unforget­ table.  Behind  the  priest  and  the  mother and   father,  the   Lalibel.'tl'!   children  are  being   pushed   in  wheelbarrows,  twenty­ one  outsized  heads  and  helpless  blobs  of flesh!  They  must  be  wheeled  with  great  care; otherwise "les corps de chair  liquide s'ecouleraient  par  terre   comme une  eau

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



sale."   Meanwhile,  Jonas   Laliberte  and his wife murmur prayers as they march along:  they   are   thanking  God   because "ils ont  ere elus  pour  etre  les protecteurs des vingt-et-un petits anges que Dieu a choisis dans son ciel pour les envoyer representer   sur   terre    sa   justice   et   sa bonre."  One   is  reminded  of  Gabrielle Roy's  Rosanna and   the  perverse  "resig­ nation chvetienne". But  Carrier  with  his skill  at   exploiting  the  grotesque  strikes the  imagination far more effectively  than  Roy  has ever  done in all her  books.
1l est par la, it must  be said, is inferior to La Guerre  in organic  unity and  artistic structure,  but   there   is  compensation in terms  of  variety  and   depth  of  social  in­ sight.   It is a  picaresque novel,  held  to­ gether    by   Philibert's   journey   from   his small  Quebec village  to the metropolis of Montreal.  The   adventures  of   Philibert include  running  on   to  the   ice  of   the Montreal Forum to  throw  a  punch  at  a Toronto  Maple  Leafs  defenceman  who had   just  tripped  Maurice Rocket   Rich­  ard.    The   picaresque  technique  allows Carrier  to   explore    a   cross-section    of society  and  to create  a number of ironic  situations.   Philibert,  whose   English    is limited  to "yes sir",  eventually  finds him­  self  in  an   English-speaking  city  district (Westmount?)   after    hitchhiking   from home.   Hungry,  he  finds  a   shovel   and clears  the  snow from  several walks in the hope  of  earning some  money.  Finally   a woman opens  her  door: "Poor  boy," she says.  "You   don't speak   English.... Are you  an  Italian?" The woman  goes on  to speculate:  "What  a  pity!  These  immi­ grants ought to learn  the language of the country before  they set out  for  Canada."  The   climactic  irony   of   the   book   is Philibert  being   named  the  heir  of  "La Neuvieme Merveille du  Monde", a giant

88
 who  had  made  his living  by  performan­ ces  where   people   paid   to  pummel   him with  their  fists. For  a  time  Philibert was the   impresario  for   this   man,   "Donato Ambrosio,  alias  Louis Durand, alias  Aga­ dad  Aglagayan,  alias  Jean-Baptiste Tur­ cotte,    alias    Boris    Rataploffsky".  The giant,  of  course,  is ironically symbolic  of the  little  man  in  modern society,  and  in particular  of  "les  petits  Canadiens  fran­ c;;ais". And   when    this   embodiment  of immense   human  power  decides   that   he has been  punched  enough, the  results are dramatic and  the implications sinister.
ll est   par  la,  le  soleil  is  filled  with typical  Carrier humour, a highly amusing novel  with  a sensitivity  for  language and life.   Compared  to   much    of   the   soul­ searching,   engage,   tormented    writing produced  in  Quebec  over   the  past   ten years or so, it  is a gust  of fresh  air.
RONALD SUTHERLAND


BASHING ON

MARGARET LAURENCE,   jason's Quest. Toronto, McClelland Stewart,  $5.95.

jASON,   A   YOUNG    MOLE,    emerged  from the  Great North Tunnel into  the  dark­ ness of Thither, the  vast  and  frightening upper  world.  He skittered across the grass to  his  secret   observation   centre  in   the midst  of  the  Pink  Jungle,  and   there   he met   Oliver, a  friendly  tawny   owl.  To­ gether, they  planned a quest-Jason, to find a cure for the strange sickness infect­ ing   Molanium,  the    once-great  under­ ground city  of  the  moles;  and  Oliver  to find  the  wisdom   that   everybody  expects of  him,  but  that   he  feels  he  sadly  lacks. Calico,  the  sensible  cat,  who  wants  to do a  noble  deed  for  the  honour of  all Cat­ dam,   and   Topaz, the  frivolous  cat,  go

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



along   with   them   as   their   friends   and trusty   steeds.

Bash  on,  bash  on  in  majesty,
And  thwart the fouling  churls-

is their  motto. It,  the  friends  they  meet, the   magic   "Cap  of  Deeper  Thinking", the  Flying  Umbrella, and  their  own bravery,  good  intentions and  good  hearts, carry  them  through many  dangers to splendid success and  the  rejuvenation of the  mole-folk.
There is a  real  lawn  in  England with a   real   pink   rose   jungle   and   two   cats called   Calico   and   Topaz.  Margaret Laurence calls  Jason's  Quest   a  gift,  for she  imagined  it  all  happening after   an all-too-real infestation of moles on her property. Some  gift!  The book  is a  tour de   force,  built   on  the  quest   theme,   its every detail  embroidered with joyful imagining. The World  of Smaller Animals with  its heroes  and  villains,  its pubs, boutiques  and   discoteques  has   a   most valid  existence  in any  imagination, young or old. Its addition gives our  world of everyday  a  splendid extra  dimension.
When Margaret Laurence's inventive powers  and  pervasive humour are  turned towards such  fantasy, the  result  is a  pro-­ liferation of details  of ridiculous  delight. What child -or adult-is  not  enriched by  knowing   that   underneath a  London subway   platform  lives   Glitter   La   Fay (Now  Mrs.  Weepworthy), former star  of the   Mole   Music   Hall   and   now,  in  her retirement, dreaming of   past  glories;  or that   Digger   O'Bucket,  proprietor of  the Mole    Hole,    (theatrical   costumes    and stage  scenery),  is  Glitter's long-lost  love who  will  be  restored   to  her  through the efforts of the questing four; or that  Police Constable Wattles, Strine, an  Australian Cat,  and   Spice,   a   Jamaican  one,   are
 providentially on  hand   when   their  help is needed  against the  evil mouse-and-rat­ pack, the Blades?  Or who would  be with­  out  this  transcendent vision  of  the  four surveying   Trafalgar  Square  from   bet­ ween one of the  bronze  lions' paws at the base  of  Nelson's   column. At  last  Oliver  feels  like "an   owl  of  the  world".  "Look  at   those  millions   of  pigeons,"   he  says. "Fancy spending your life like that, living in   the   throbbing  heart  of   this   mighty city."
Underneath   all   this    sun-shower   of
invention,  the   mythic  quest,   of  course, goes on -good battling evil, a near  thing sometimes, but a final victory in the end, marked   by  the  ritual escape  across  the river that  the  Blades cannot cross. This  is the    kind    of   book    that    adults   enjoy reading to children. Its double  level of meaning is  firmly,  skillfully,  but  unpre­ tentiously  woven  into its fabric and  it was a  wise decision  to  note  "for  all  ages"  on its dust  jacket. Every  detail of  its produc­ tion  is elegant-paper,  type  and  especi­ ally the drawings of  Staffan Torell. These  are  so good  that  there  is really  no excuse for  ranking them, except  for the  pleasure  of    mentioning   especially    his   splendid panelled    Council   Hall    of   Molanium. There on  the  walls,  decorated with  the coats  of arms  of illustrious ancestors,  are the two chief mottoes  of the old-fashioned Mole    people- Festina     Lente     (Make haste  slowly),  in  gold  and  crimson,  and the other  one in gold  and  blue:

They  who think  ye worlde  not flat
Deserve  to  be consumed  by cat.

In finding  the  cure  for  his city, Jason also found  his own  confidence, for  he realized  that, many   times,  he  had   been able  to  act   more   bravely   than   he  felt. The  courage  to  "bash   on"  is the  special

Bg

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Margaret Laurence signature-to Jason's
Quest, as to all  the  rest of her fiction.
CLARA THOMAS

WORDSWORTHIAN SENSITIVITY
GEOFFREY    DURRANT,     William    Wordsworth.
Macmillan. $3.95

THIS   SLENDER   VOLUME,  the   second   in the Cambridge series, "British  Authors: Introductory Critical Studies,"  is designed for general readers and students just beginning serious  study  of  Wordsworth. Too  often  such  studies  are  simple  and  so not  very  useful,  or  else they  are  idiosyn­ cratic and   so  harmful; but  this  one  is different. Professor   Durrant  gives  us  an introductory study  which  is  in  fact  that.  It should  prove  helpful  to readers  seeking a solid  foothold in  Wordsworth's poetry.
Professor  Durrant  concentrates on  par­ ticular  poems   "in   an   attempt  to  show something of  the  range  and  quality" of Wordsworth's  achievement.   He   devotes a  chapter  apiece   to  "Tintern  Abbey",  "Resolution and  Independence", and  the "Immortality" Ode.  The Prelude is given two  chapters,  and  there  are  chapters on "Michael",  the   "Matthew"  poems,   the "Lucy"  poems,  and  the sonnets.  Perhaps most  interesting is  the  chapter "Words­ worth  and  the  Daffodils", a discussion of some   minor    poems   that   often   do   not receive  sufficient  attention: "I wandered lonely",   "The  Reverie of  Poor  Susan", "To  the   Cuckoo"  (I 8o2),   and   "There was  a  Boy".
Professor   Durrant  reads   poetry   very well.  He  is at  his  best  with  the  shorter, less standard poems  where  his sensitivity to  the  complex vibrations among  indivi­ dual   words    and    phrases   best   displays

go
 itself. His close analysis of "I wandered lonely"   is  a   fine   example  of   sensitive but  hard-minded criticism.  Initiates to Wordsworth should  profit  from  this. Too often  beginning students think  of  Words­ worth as a  heavy,  thick  sort  of  poet,  the Rock    of   Romanticism   writing   blank­ verse  philosophy; their  experience of  his poetry    is   associated    with    copying    in notebooks    his   doctrines   about    love   of Nature and  with  memorizing the  "myst­ ical"  passages  about   feeling  a  Presence. Professor   Durrant's  discussions   demon­ strate by example that  Wordsworth was first of all a poet  writing poetry,  and  that understanding   Wordsworth  is  a   poetic  experience.  Further, I suspect   these  dis­ cussions  will attract  readers  to   Words­  worth's lyrics and  to the anecdotal poems, such    as    "Michael,"  which    is   where serious study  of Wordsworth should  prob­ ably  begin.
It is unfortunate that  Professor Durrant
accepts  the old  notion  that  Wordsworth's powers  were  greatest in  the  period   I 798- I 8os   and   that they   declined   thereafter. This myth  has  not  enhanced our  under­ standing of Wordsworth, and  one dislikes seeing  it  passed  on  without  question  to new  generations  of  readers.  But  on  the whole,    Professor    Durrant's   reading  of Wordsworth   is  traditional   in   the   best sense,   as   is   desirable  in   an   introduc­ tion.  Behind  the  poems  of  I 798- I 8os,  he traces  "a  struggle of the mind  to come  to terms   with   the  situation   of  man   in   a world   transformed  by   the   progress   of natural  science." For  Professor  Durrant, as  for  Morse   Peckham and  other   recent  critics,  Wordsworth  is  the  celebrator of man's  ability  to  give  order  and  value  to the world,  thus  to redeem  the world from apparent  deadness. He   properly  stresses Wordsworth's  recurrent  theme   of   man

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



suffering  through time,  man's  attempt to come  to  terms   with   a  world   in  which growing  is at  the  same  time  dying.  And he gives attention to how the classics, Christian myth,  Milton  and  science (especially    Newton)   influence   Words­ worth's  thought.  This   study   will   help beginning students  avoid   many   of  the common    misconceptions:    the    Private, "Mystical"  Wordsworth;  the  "Natural" Anti- Intellectual      Wordsworth;     the Happy-Optimistic  Wordsworth.
Two   basic   weaknesses   of   the   study
should   be  mentioned. First,   I  was  sur­ prised  that, for  all  the  special  attention given    to    influences    on    Wordsworth's thinking,  the   powerful  influence. of  the empirical tradition  in  English  philosophy is not  emphasized. This causes  some dis­ tortion.   When    in    The   Prelude,  for example,    Wordsworth   speaks    of	the "auxiliar light" from  his mind  bestowing "new  splendour" on  the  setting sun,  this calls  to  mind   not  so  much   "the  light  of ancient    poetry",  as   Professor   Durrant suggests,   but    rather   the    exciting    yet troubling epistemological problem  of the subject-object relation which  John  Locke and   the  eighteenth-century  philosophers bequeathed to  the  Romantics. This  sub­ ject surely  deserves  attention in an  intro­ duction to  Wordsworth. Second,  I  think  Professor  Durrant has  not  quite  decided what  part  memory  plays in  Wordsworth. Significantly, his chapters on The  Prelude do   not   examine   Wordsworth's  famous  and    enigmatic   "spots  of   time".    This weakness	affects	Professor 	Durrant's readings of  those  poems in which memory  plays an important role. For  example,  we are told  that "The Two April  Mornings"  suggests   "that  man   is  defeated  by  his very   nature."  But   that  poem   is  better  read  as a  celebration of  man's   ability  to
 remember,   and    hence    to   maintain a painful  but  triumphant human  resurrec­ tion    paralleling  and    challenging   the April-resurrections in  the  natural world.  A  similar   difficulty  occurs   in   Professor Durrant's   otherwise  excellent   discussion of  "Michael":  not  enough   attention  is given  to  the  fact  that this  is a  poem  of memory,    and    that    the    poet-narrator speaks  of  the  tale not  as  tragedy   but  as something  that  will "delight" its listener.
However,   strengths  outweigh   weak­
nesses  in  this   study.   Professor   Durrant has  given  us  a  useful  introduction to Wordsworth.
L.   J.  SWINGLE


DARK MOUTH

MARGARET  ATWOOD,    Procedures   For   Under­
ground.  Oxford   University  Press. $1.95.

MucH oF  WHAT Margaret Atwood  says in this volume  she has said in her previous books. She  presents  a world  of  peripher­ ies, under-surfaces, divisions and isolation  similar  to  the  one  in  The  Circle  Game, but  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  think   that  Procedures  For  Underground  is simply  a repetition of   her  earlier work.  Certainly the  surface  of   these  poems  remains   the same;  many  of  the  images  of drowning, buried  life, still life, dreams, journeys  and returns recur and  the  book  is locked  into  a  very  repressive   and   inhibited  atmos­ phere, even  though the  time-scope of the book  is large,  covering  the  chronological stretch  from   pre-history  to  the  present. As in The  Circle Game, personal relation­ ships  offer  only  minimal hope,  yet  most of the  second  half  of this  book  expresses a  promise  of  breaking-out that  did   not occur  in the  earlier work.

9I

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Even    the   title   suggests   that    people need  not  be  trapped  or  buried   in  stasis but that they can take action: there are motions that  will  push  life and  the  indi­ vidual  forward. This  volume moves in its second  half  more  and  more  to the  notion that  words  can  break  the  authorities and inhibitions that  fetter us  and  even  a  cry of agony  is worth shouting, for it expres­ ses that  deep  underside with  its  "mouth filled  with  darkness". This  howl  may  be an  automatic  response  to  fear   or  pain, simply  "uttering itself",  but  it  is a  state­ ment,   and,   as  such,  is  preferable  to  the blankness   of  "a   white  comic-strip   bal­ loon/with a  question  mark; or  a  blank button."
People  still  live  on  the  edge  in  these
poems,  surrounded  by  flux,  imperman­ ence   and    repression,   haunted   by  bad dreams, menaced  by objects  but

in fear  everything lives, impermanence
makes  the  edges  of  things  burn

brighter.

In  our  present  pre-historic state of human relationships  we  are   at   least   evolving; "we  are  learning to make  fire."  Flux  and disintegration continue but  the  poet  has the   means   of   preserving    experience - "Over  all   I   place/a  glass  bell."   This attempt  at  preservation  does  not  neces­ sarily  have  the  effect  of a dead  hand. In one  poem  a  swimmer   dives,  is lonely  in the lake  but  the marks  on paper  that  the poem   makes    about    the   swimmer    are words  which  "move outwards". Art  may be "the link  between/the buried  will and the   upper /world  of  sun".   Things  may frighten man  but  he is a creator; he may in   fact   create  his  own   fears,   his  own divisions, his own dreams and  nightmares but  the  act  of creation, in  particular the
 act  of poetry,  becomes  an important  pro­
cedure.
The volume  progresses  from  the  open­ ing  poem  presenting a picture of  entrap­ ment   with   parents  inside  a  fantasy   zoo created by  the  I  figure  within the  poem to  the  closing  poem  about   those  parents dancing. There is still  entrapment within  the  circle  of  the  dance but  that  circle  is constantly     "forming,   breaking".   The  dance  continues "transformed/  for this moment/always"; it "goes/on in a differ­ ent/time (because/ I say  it)."
"Because I  say it" -that's the  impor­
tant  triumph in  the  end.  The progression in   the   book   is  towards  a  fundamental belief in the prerogatives of poetry  in a threatening, tense  world.  Even  the  lining of  the  poems,  still  the  usual  broken,  ten­ tative  expression    she   has   used   before, somehow    sounds  firmer,    playing   some kind   of  strength  against   the  details  of violence,    repression,  doubt    and    fear, finally  emphasizing the courage of coming  to   terms   with   that   lower   layer   where  "you can learn/wisdom and great  power,/ if you  can  descend  and  return safely."
Margaret Atwood  has returned safely, broken  the  circle,  shaken  off the  persona of  Susanna  Moodie which   to  my  mind was  a  restriction on  her  own  personality as a  poet.  Her  own  clear  voice  rings  out from   this  book  to  give  us  her  best  col­ lection  to date.
PETER STEVENS

UNASSUMING GUIDE

BALACHANDRA RAJAN,   The Lofty   Rhyme: A Study of Milton's Major  Poetry.  Routledge and  Kegan   Paul.

lT   IS   A    COMMONPLACE   that    academic critics  find  Milton perennially attractive and   his  works   an   exhaustless  mine   of

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



richly  ambiguous concepts. He  is one  of the few figures in English literature who successfully   and   on   a  large   scale  com­ bine  poetic  sensibility   and   religious  fer­ vour.    His   achievement   is   many-sided, with  major and  minor  works,  a  balance  of  prose  and   poetry,  a  public  as  well  as a  private life, an  ability  to represent and speak  for  his age.  His  capacity for  sum­ mation -whether  of   the  Classics  or  of Christian  doctrine -gives   his   work   a solidity   no  single  sensibility   could   ever impart.  His  ambivalences  do   not   baffle or  distress,  but  enrich our  perception of reality.  He is modern, not only in that  he reveals  the Protestant ethic  in full flower but   also   in   his   premonitions:   protest,  pollution,   therapy,  birth-control,  televi­ sion,-they  are  all  in  Paradise  Lost.
It follows that  the best critics of Milton
are   those  who   feel  he  is  in  every  way greater than  themselves, who  do not deal with   Paradise   Lost  but  let  it  deal  with them,  and  who  induce the same  response in   their   readers.  Professor   Rajan  plays this role to perfection. We hear only the modest   voice   of  an   unassuming  guide. We  have  a sense of being,  not  informed, but  reminded, of being edged  up to view­ points  from   which   the  whole  panorama of  Milton's poetry  will do  its work  upon us. The panorama becomes  a single composition.  We  are  persuaded of   Mil­ ton's    continuity,   the    continuity   of    a continuously creative  personality. We seem  always  to  have  known   about   this but  never  to have  got  it  in  focus for our own  recognition until  now.
Milton's critics  have  to bear  a heavy burden  of  erudition. So  much   to  read: so  many   views  to  acknowledge, to  aug­ ment,    to   confute.  This  load   Professor Rajan assumes  with  the  ease  of  a  gold­ miner   wearing  a  money-belt.  Profusion
 without encumbrance. A characteristic touch is seen in his habit  of qualified appreciation. The  borrowed point is trimmed,  pushed    a   little   farther,   de­ flected, or  additionally barbed. But what  we  are  being  offered  in  these  pages is a good deal more  than  a revised, expanded or  more  penetrating view of  Milton.  We experience  less  an   argument   than    an immersion; we become acutely  concerned  with   the   actions  and   passions   of   the human  mind, -whether creative, in  the poet;  or  judicial,  in the  critic; or respon­  sive,  in  the  reader. This concern   is sus­ tained  by small  inset  sentences,  hovering between  image   and   aphorism:  "To  see the  whole  with   lucidity,   one  is  obliged to  bring  to  it  a  certain sense  of shape." "The hope of freedom  discloses itself only when we know who the enemy  is." "Edu­ cated  innocence is not  easy  to  achieve." "Paradise   Lost  is  tactful  about   its  the­ ology.  It is a  poem  designed  to  be  read without  anguish  by   those   who   do   not share  Milton's views."
Rajan has the  double  faculty of  direct­ ing  us  toward   the  perception of  certain  bed-rock  strata sustaining the  weight  of Milton's intentions and,  simultaneously, of  awakening our  faculties to  the  land­  scape   so  that   we   look  "on   herb,   tree, fruit,   and   flow'r  Glist'ring  with   dew."  Things   seem  simpler,   more    luminous, more   significant   than    we   had   remem­ bered. Lycidas  appears as a consistent "struggle   of   contraries"  out   of   which pattern is forged.  In Paradise Lost, Christ "may  be an actor  in the scheme of things but he is also the force that  encloses the action." Samson Agonistes  is indeed, as Milton   claimed, a  tragedy:  "the  provi­ dence  of  God  requires the  death  of  the hero."
Here   is   fresh   evidence  that    Milton


93

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



scholars  in  Canada are  maintaining and extending their  field  of  action.  The antenna-like sensitiveness, the gentle  tone of confident assertion,  the steady  percep­ tion  of  centrality, the  sense of  enormous bliss in  the  total  experience  of   Milton: these  owe  much   to  an  Indian  sensibility and   a  Cambridge  provenance  but   par­  take  also  of  the  Canadian critical  tradi­ tion   going  back   through  A.S.P.  Wood­  house.
One   closes The Lofty   Rhyme with  a
sense one  had  not  possessed before, -of Milton's total  vision, of the unending contention  between   light  and   darkness, of   the   purposes  of   God   transcending man's  understanding but  never  failing  to meet  his need.  And  we find we have  not only   been   reading  a   superb   piece   of literary criticism  but  also hearing a  pas­ toral   admonition  and   a   tract   for   the times.
ROY DANIELLS


SEMANTIC CHAOS

Sm:

In  Canadian   Literature  46  (Autumn
1970)   Mike   Doyle   alludes   to  a   poem called  "Semantic chaos equals moral anarchy"  in   his  review  article   on  con­ crete  poetry. He  states  that  this  poem  is by  bp   nichol.   I  am   flattered   that   he should   single   this   poem   out  for  praise and  more   than   flattered that  he  should think   it  is  up  to  the  standard  of  a  bp nichol  piece.  Perhaps  you could  re-order this  particular  piece  of  semantic  chaos by informing your readers  that  that  poem was in fact  written by

Yours sincerely, PETER STEVENS

94
 INDIAN  SEESAW

ALAN   FRY,   How   A   People   Die.   Doubleday
Canada Limited.

AccoRDING TO THE strikingly   illustrated book  jacket  this  is "a  documentary  novel about the  tragedy of  the  "North  Ameri­ can  Indian". The only  accurate  word  in that    description   is   "tragedy";   "North American Indian"  really  means  the  in­  habitants of  a  tiny  village  on  the  B.C. coast,   and   "documentary   novel"   seems an  over  generous assessment  of Mr.  Fry's achievement.  All  but   plotless,  with   too many indistinct  and eminently forgettable characters,  How  a People  Die is scarcely a  novel.  Nor is it  truly  "documentary", if  we  take  the  word  to  mean  supported by   facts  from   real   life.  There  are   no maps,   no  excerpts  from   genuine   news­ paper   pages,    no   verified    statistics  or photographs. What  the  book  does  con­ tain,    though,  is   something  few   mere literary  novels could  provide: an examin­ ation of a major social  problem based  on
I 5  years'  personal experience.
Mr.  Fry  is an  Indian agent; so is his chief  character and  apparent  spokesman, Arne  Saunders. Arne,  like the  Indians, is a product of his past:

He'd been  born  into   the  backwoods of  B.C. during the  depression and  raised  into  hard, unremitting labor   and  a  profound  distrust of  the  welfare state.

Conflict between  Arne's  "Protestant work ethic" and   the   life  style  of  the   Indian people  he administers is inevitable.
In   the  days  when   the  people   had   to
work   to  live,  there   was  dignity. In  the days  of the  dole,  not  even  hope  remains. Most   of  the   Indians  Arne   sees  ride   a relentless  seesaw which  spans  the  gap between    work    (decency)   and    poverty

BOOKS IN REVIEW



(squalor), with  a  dreadful nemesis  (al­ cohol)   forever  weighting the  balance on the  poverty  side. There are cases of three weeks' drunken squandering  by men  who have   earned   more   in  a  season's   fishing than  Arne's field officers do in a year. To  Arne,  as in  Aesop's  fable  of  the  ant  and the   grasshopper,  the   moral  is  clear­ but  for  the  sake  of the  children, he must issue relief. The book ends  as it began, on a  note of frustration and  despair.
What gives the  "novel" its greatest interest is the  variety  of viewpoints Fry assembles.  We  hear  from  doctor,  police­ man,   and   Indian chief,  reporters,  social workers,   welfare   officers  and   the  CYC.  Other spokesmen  include Indian children  and  adults  of both  sexes and  all ages, and various  white neighbours. All would  have to agree  that the "Indian  problem" stands  little  chance  of  improvement  under   the paternal  system.  As  Arne  puts  it,
How   do   you   talk   to  a  man who   doesn't share  your   notions  about  work   or   money or   wife  or   kids  or   house   or   sanitation  or what  the  hell  he's   going   to  live  on  tomor­ row  or  next  year  and   reach   him  where  he's  really   alive   inside  and    he   can   reach   you back?
Although  Arne's   (and   presumably Fry's)   attitude towards Indians may  not command our   respect, it  has  been  born of experience and  as such  deserves a hearing. In misrepresenting the  nature of the  book and  thereby  ensuring it a wider audience,  his   publishers  may   not   have done  him  a  disservice  after  all.
PAT  BARCLAY


GARLANDS THAT FADE

FoR  soME  TIME now  the  symposium  of essays-and   occasionally  of   poems   as
 well -on   contemporary  problems    has been a fashion in Canadian publishing. Some  of  these  efforts,   well-timed, have produced interesting and  even  stimulat­ ing  documents of the  collective  preoccu­ pations   of  the  nation's  intellectuals; A. W. Purdy's collection, The  New Romans,  was  probably   the  best,  though its  lesson was  lost  where  it  should  have  been  best learned,  among   Americans  who   most need educating in the feelings of their neighbours.
None  of  the  collections   that   have  re­
cently appeared displays quite the same uniting  passion  as The  New  Romans  or, for   that   matter, quite   the  same  timeli­ ness, though William   Kilbourn's  anthol­ ogy-Canada:  A  Guide  to  the  Peace­ able  Kingdom   (Macmillan,  $8.95)  -is timely   in   an   unintended   way,  since   it came  out at a time when Canada seemed to  be  one  of  the  least  peaceable of  the world's  countries. Yet  it  was  perhaps a good  thing  to  be  reminded  in  the  close aftermath of the  FLQ crisis that  we had  in  fact   held   such  a  view  of  ourselves,  and  to  be  brought back,  in  perusing  the writings  Kilbourn  had   collected,   to  the feeling  that   perhaps  we  were  provoked  into  an  excessive  pessimism  by  the  sav­ ageries of obscure fanatics.
Canada:   A  Guide   to  the   Peaceable
Kingdom  is  in  fact  the  best  of  the  col­ lections   here   reviewed   because   it   does not  strive  to  be  exclusively   novel  or  to be devoted  to a limited  political  or social view.  Kilbourn  has  gathered  his  mosaic of Canadian attitudes from  already pub­  lished  writings that  express  our  genera­ tion;  if  there are  dull   pieces,  and   frag­ ments  of  platitude so characteristic as  to seem almost  essential,  there  is also a great  deal  that   is  stimulating, curious,  evoca­  tive, or  positively  wise, and  all of it  had

95

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



been  selected   by  time  before  the  editor got  to work.
One   characteristic  that    unites   these
collections,  with  the  possible exception of Living  in  the  Seventies   (Peter  Martin Associates,  paper,  $3.95,   cloth,   $7.50), which   is  really   a   collection   of  mainly boring  papers  from  the  Harrison Liberal Conference  of   1969,  is  the   panorama they give -if not of an establishment of letters,   learning  and   political  theory­ at   least  of  a  definite  mandarinate,  an unacknowledged section  of John  Porter's vertical  mosaic.  At  a  rough  guess, about  half the contributors to Canada: A Guide to the Peaceable Kingdom  are also among  the   "Fifty   Canadians  in   Search   of   a Future"   who   appear  in   Visions   2020 (Hurtig,   paper  $2.95,   cloth   $6.95), a symposium  on  the  world  to  come  (am­ biguous  phrase!) compiled  by the editors  of   Canadian   Forum   as   part   of    that  journal's fiftieth  anniversary  exercises. It is  a  garland  of  prophesies  that   by  turn  intrigues and exasperates because it shares with  all  Utopian  writing  the  excitement of   assembling facts   about   a   possible future  with   a   deficiency   in  the   precise delineation,  so  that   we  never   do  more than  look forward through a glass, darkly.
Wilderness  Canada  (Clarke  Irwin,
$29.95)   also leads  us to contemplate the future, but in  the  terms  of the  present­ that  of the  great  Canadian  wilderness­ which  we may  lose, at least in its pristine  form,  if  we  are  not  prompt to  halt  the destruction of its  delicate ecological  bal­ ances.  Dedicated  to  the  memory  of Blair Fraser,  Wilderness  Canada,  in  its  essays celebrating  various   aspects  of  our   land beyond  the  settlements and  its  magnifi­ cent  photographs recording the splendour that  still  survives,  may  well  become-if the  next  decade is as visionless as the last

g6
 has  been -the  elegy  on  a  land  instead of, as it  may  now  be taken,  a celebration of it.
This  great   wave   of  symposia   shares one  characteristic. Every  one of the books I   am   noticing  dies   with    a   whimper. Partly   this  is  because   the  reader   begins to tire of adjusting his mind  to so many different viewpoints, but partly  also it is because   of   the   temptation  that   makes every  editor crowd  his brightest items  in the  beginning and  centre of his collection and   leave  the  end   to  take  care  of  itself as  he  arranges his  weakest  pieces  into  a dying  fall.
Do   the   collections  tell   us   anything
more  in  a general way?  That Canadians are  more  inclined towards consensus  than towards  the   individual  stance,  for   ex­ ample? I doubt it.  The  symposium  is a publishing  form   temporarily  popular  in all  countries, and   this  is a  by-product of the infiltration of the worlds of literature and   art   by   the   ideas   of   participatory democracy. As  a  fashion   it  will  depart, and   perhaps  should   do  so  quickly.  For after   two  or  three   years,  most  300-page volumes   of   passing   thoughts appear  as ephemeral   as   a   bundle  of   last   year's newspapers,  documents no  doubt, but  to be consulted  rather than  read.
ANTHONY APPENZELL

LENSMEN  AND MADMEN
STANLEY   COOPERMAN,   Cappe/baum's  Dance. University of  Nebraska   Press.  $1.95  paper. HENRY BEISSEL,  Face in  the  Dark.  new  press.
$3.50  paper.
h WAS   E.  E.  ("Skylark")  Smith   who created   the    lensmen,     those    watcher­ guardians of  Galactic  Civilizations  that  delighted   my   fantasy-reading   boyhood.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



In  Cappelbaum's Dance, Stanley Cooper­ man's  persona is a lensman of a different sort.  With   his  imagination he  turns  the lens    of    his    perceptions,    recombining observed   and   read   glories   and   horrors  into  new ones with  the impersonality and ease of a kaleidoscope:
Kangaroos and   ice-cream cones;
everything
is magic, like sawdust
swimming in  the  green sea, or  dolphins
leaping down Granviiie Street tickled with   smog.

The  poetry-lover, encountering for  the first time the flexibility and freshness with which  Cappelbaum recreates his world, must   feel   like   Keats'  "watcher  of  the skies" when  "a new planet swims into  his ken".  Innumerable passages  like  the  fol­ lowing   have   clarity,  economy,   and   an ease  of   utterance  that    takes   away   the breath   (almost) :
When I walk  through the  street there are old  women
crucified
on  telephone  wires,
a  sound of  humming in  the  air like  mwnbles of  thick
laughter:	and   priests with   hooks
curved to  the  end  of  their arms ... they  hang
from   their ow.n blackness.
Even  the  snapdragons bite  one  another,
fighting for  room, fighting
for  a  deeper swallow
of  light  and air;
their colors
hammer the  swnmer sun with  a fire  of painted teeth.

Alas! unmodulated excellence  carried out at  great  length   ultimately palls,  and  be­ fore  the  reader has  explored many  pages of   the    pyrotechnics   of    Cappelbaum's mind  he has discovered -to use a mixed
 metaphor -its  Achilles'  heel,  the  equi­ valence or near  equivalence of  everything in   the   universe.   Few   readers  possess  a similar  sense  of  the  one-ness  of   things; consequently, a reader prepared to accept  murder in  a  general  way  as  one  of  the fine  arts   ("Chamber   Music   for   Guitar and  Hand  Grenade")  is apt  to be some­ what  more  than  irritated when  the  same cool detachment is used on a theme where  his  personal  feelings  are  involved   ("For Martin  Luther King").  Ultimately, he is bound  to reject   Cappelbaum's  aesthetic use of  experience as  a  brilliant disguise for  moral  nihilism  and  a fear  of commit­ ment.  Perhaps this is what  Stanley Cooperman wants  us to do. If so, I would suggest   a   more   consistent    positive   ap­ proach   to  us, for  his "committed"  "End of Term in  Oregon" hit  me  harder  than  any other  poem  in the  book.
Despite   the   above,   Cooperman's  per­ sona, who seems always relatively fulfilled by  the  mere   act   of  reshaping  memory  and   desire   in   the   creative   flux   of   a changing  now,  is  the  powerful  antidote to   the   philosophy   expressed    in   Henry  Beissel's Face on  the  Dark. Here,  life  is not  an  imaginative game  for  a  poet  but a   drama   extending  through  time   and space in which men and women are the personae   for   one   or   both   of  two  con­ flicting forces,  the  beautiful ideal and  the sordid    reality.    In  the    early   domestic  poems, Henry Beissel shows  how  through love, on a personal level at  least, the  gap can  be bridged and  co-existence achieved ("en  la casa  de  la inquisicion", "To My Daughter at   Age  Oneandahalf",  "Nup­ tials"). However, in the remaining poems, Beissel evidently  feels  it  is impossible  to bridge   the  gap  between   the  actual  and  the ideal in the social and  political  world,  and  he deliberately takes sides, hoping to

97

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



further the  abolition of the existing  order in the interest of some Utopian unity. Beissel does not seem to be aware  that  his political   position  is  as  intolerant on  the side of the  angels  as is that  of the  devils he attacks; however,  in "Ballad of the Madman of  Marbridge" he  reveals  that he understands that  what  really  mars  the bridge   between   us  is  our   awareness   of death, the  "madman of Marbridge" who goes "looking only for  bones".
Technically, Beissel's poetry is strong, clear,  and  (considering the pressure of feeling   behind   it)   controlled.  Its   chief fault  is an over-reliance upon the mere cataloguing of horror:
Stillness wears  rubber gloves  and  breathes through gauze  soaks ichorous blood  oozes where steel  slits  lobes  of lung  and  colon
a  brain quivers under the  mask  memories groan
mutter my  mother yells  in  cancerous  spasm the  hand  that  stroked and  slapped  me
clutches
her  anus   praeter  slobbering pus....

This  is  really,   done   up   in   a  different fashion,  what  A.J.M. Smith was attacking when  he wrote:
Cries from   the  stitched heart .... The old  etemal frog
In  the   throat  that  comes
With   the  words  mother, sweetheart, dog
Excites, and   then  numbs.

It   is  also   what    Irving  Babbitt    meant when  he  said  that   Realism  was  Roman­ ticism  walking  on  all  fours.
FRED  COGSWELL

FROM THE INSIDE

AUDREY THOMAS,   Mrs.  Blood. Thomas  Allen.
$7.95·

PRousT  had  it easy with  his tea and  bun. So reflects a woman in the throes of miscarriage, having  a far  less dainty  im-

g8
 petus  to her  remembrance of things  past. Her  situation does  not  immediately  sug­ gest lively material for  a  novel  and  Mrs. Blood  is scarcely  a  compelling title.  But from  this seemingly  unrewarding starting­ point,  Audrey  Thomas creates  an  absor­  bing study  of a woman's coming  to terms with  herself  through  pain, loneliness, fear  and  guilt.  Though  the  time-span of  the novel   is  a   few   weeks   only,   flashback reconstructs most of the  woman's past  so that  we  have  as  complete a character as Margaret Laurence's Hagar Shipley,  built up  by  somewhat similar shifts  from  pre­  sent to past  and  driftings in the stream  of semiconsciousness.
With   the   heightened   introversion  of
the  sick, the  narrator sees herself  in  two alternating  roles,   as   Mrs.   Thing  when pain  or  social  unease  or  housewifery reduces  her   to  an   object,   and   as  Mrs. Blood  when  she  is oppressed  by  the  ty­ ranny  of the mind. The novel is sectioned into  Mrs. Thing thoughts and Mrs. Blood thoughts,  the   former  more   in  evidence  early  in  the  book,  the  latter  dominating the  final  part.
Mrs.   Thing, Smith   College   graduate with   literary inclinations, married an English  artist, lived  in England and Can­ ada   and   is  now   in   Ghana   where  her husband is teaching. She  has  two  story­ book children, a native  boy who  runs  her house  and  a social  circle  of  young  Euro­ peans.   It's  a  familiar  pattern these  days and  Mrs.  Thing's  problems are  ordinary enough: she feels out  of place  among  the bright,  efficient  faculty  wives,  the  most efficient  infuriatingly as pregnant as her­ self;  love-making  with   Jason,  her   hus­ band, lacks  passion  and   joy and  now  in hospital,  isolated    among  native    nurses and   Indian  doctors, she   is  terrified   of pain  and  death.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



It is as Mrs.  Blood that  she relives sup­ pressed anxieties and  guilt,  the memories,  painful   and   ecstatic,  that   have   shaped her individual identity. Most of these are to  do  with  sex,  from  the  first  childhood impressions   to  casual  affairs  and  experi­  ments  and  then  to  the  one  great  passion of her  life. Death  figures,  too,  in  a series of  gruesome  accidents imprinted  on  the  memory,  and  madness in  the  reliving  of horrific experiences as a student helper  in an asylum. The Proustian journey  merges into Alice's  descent   of  the   rabbit-hole: "How  do   you   know   I'm    mad?"   said Alice. "You  must  be,"  said  the  Cat,  "or you wouldn't have come here." Africa becomes  the  rabbit-hole and   the  rabbit­ hole  becomes  hell;   the  blood  of  miscar­  riage  turns  into  the  blood  of  sacrament, of atonement; the foetus  is a dove, a fish, a symbolic  sacrifice  "on  the  broken  altar  of the  past".
The  apparently  random  movement of memory   through  Mrs.   Thing  thoughts and  Mrs. Blood thoughts is carefully con­ trolled  and  only  at  the  end  does  the last fact  complete the  design.  Although guilt and   nemesis  are  introduced  very  early, their  full implications are  concealed until Mrs.  Blood/Thing has   burned  through every stage  of her  obsessive fear  that  she, Jason's   wife,    might     be    indeed     Mrs. Medea.
That there  is a distinctively feminine sensitivity  and   outlook   is  amply  demon­ strated  by  women   novelists  of   the  nine­ teenth century but  only  recently   has  the novel   began    to   explore   the   biological conditions   affecting  that  sensitivity. Women   alone   can   fully   judge   Audrey Thomas's accuracy in  conveying physical processes,  the   nuances of  mood   created by  body  chemistry, the  peculiar  fluctua­ tions  of  shame and   pride.  When   Brian
 Moore  attempted sympathetic  identifica­ tion   with   menstrual   blues,   he   showed that,  with  the  best  will  in  the  world,  he was emphatically not  and  never  could  be Mary   Dunne.  Mrs.  Blood, by  contrast, gives us woman  from  the  inside.
If the  prospect unnerves, take  comfort
in  the  fact  that  Audrey  Thomas is also a perceptive observer  of  the  world  around her  and  that   her  novel  builds  a  convin­ cing  Ghanaian setting,  especially  rich  in sounds   and   smells.  There is  a  sizeable cast   of  minor   characters,  present   and  past, and  they are  sharply  individualized. But  the  glory  of  the   book  is  its  prose. Though  the    stream   of    consciousness method   is  susceptible to  pretentiousness, Audrey  Thomas  handles it  masterfully,
so  that   the   near-Joycean   passages,  the
quotations and   the   language  rituals   do not  jar  with  a  clear   narrative style  and authentic dialogue.
I  have   not   mentioned   that    this   is Audrey Thomas's first novel  because there is nothing  in it  to excuse  on  the  grounds of inexperience, no  need  to  patronize or exaggerate. I found  faults  in it, certainly, in  the  overloading of  literary  reference at times and  in a few memories that  were never  unjumbled. But  Mrs.  Blood is  ac­ complished   writing; it  does  not  bear  the marks  of a first  novel  and  it  must  surely not  be Audrey  Thomas's last.
JOAN COLDWELL

INCLUSIVE CANADIANISM
Made in Canada:  New Poems of the  Seventies, edited by Douglas Lochhead and Raymond Souster.  Oberon   Press.  Cloth  $6.95;  paper
$g.so.

FEw   ANTHOLOGms are   decisive   literary acts, and  this is not  one of them.  Rather,

99

BOOKS IN REVIEW



it performs two other  functions of the anthology-to offer pleasure and to advertise.  Pleasure is  here  in  some  pro­ fusion,   from   Acorn   to  Fetherling   and beyond; but  perhaps, for one  who is still a  "landed immigrant" (and  an  explorer  in the  territory of Canadian writing), the intriguing  question  is:   What   is  being advertised  here?   A   number   of  things: Canada  herself,  poems  made  in  Canada (all  in the  past  twelve months,  the  book's sub-title may  mislead   us  into  thinking) and  the  poets  who  are  making  them.
From   the  viewpoint of  the  first  com­
modity   it   is  perhaps unfortunate that nearly one-third of those poets invited  to offer   work  did   not   respond.   Hence  we have a version  of Canada without Bower­ ing,   Layton,  Purdy,    and   without  the younger  people  who helped to make  New Wave  Canada    such    a   lively   book­ Daphne  Marlatt,  for   example,  Victor  Coleman, bp  Nichol,  David  Cull,  Gerry  Gilbert, etc.  On  the  other  hand,  twenty per   cent   of   those   included    were   born elsewhere  and  came to Canada as adults.  From  one  angle  this  matters little,  since most  of  these  poets  have  done  their  best work  here  and  Canada has at least modi­  fied their  consciousness.  As an outsider, I can  appreciate the   editors'   openness   in being thus  inclusive, especially when  their main  concern appears to have  been in gathering  a  body   of  work  which   is  at once  accomplished and  assertive  of a national identity. Certainly they have  not made    the    task    of   defining   Canadian poetry  any easier  for  themselves. One  last note  in  this  vein:   I wish they  had  either drawn  attention to John Glassco's new collection of French Canadian Poetry in Translation or, better  still, included some work from  it.
Introducing  their    floral   tribute,  the


100
 editors  display    a   perhaps   pardonable touch   of  chauvinism,  claiming  that   the Canadian  scene  "is  equalled  in  variety, excitement and  technical excellence  only in the  United States" (a very large claim, indeed,  but   why   not?   "I am   what   is around   me",    said    Wallace    Stevens.) Later,  however,   Lochhead  and   Souster admit the  strong  influence  of the  United States,  declaring that, "we  can't turn  to England any  longer-the poets there  are seeking   new   influences   even   more  des­ perately than we are." With  pleasure we can  reassure  them,  many good  poets  here  do  not  seem  to  be  desperate in  the  way suggested. Similarly, one feels the oddness of  the  editors' claim  that   the  book  "has  the   word    'now'    stamped  all   over   it". What we are given is an engaging mixture of new and  old and,  in this  instance, one is grateful for  the  compound.
For  me  Made in  Canada   has multiple value; a chance to see the latest  advances of established poets such as P. K. Page, Dorothy Livesay, Earle Birney;  an oppor­ tunity to  meet   poets  for  the  first  time, such   as   Bryan    McCarthy   and  Chuck  Carlson.  Best  of  all,  it  is  good   to  en­ counter work  by  poets  already familiar, to  find  that   they  are  off  in  a  new  and
fruitful   direction.  Such    a   case   is   J.
Michael Yates in his selection from The Great   Bear  Lake   Meditations.  (Now   I must  read  the  book) .
Helped by the  alphabet, the  anthology opens   strongly   with   Milton   Acorn.   His three  poems here are of a piece with his collection, I've  Tasted My  Blood   (Ryer­ son,  r g6g) , with  a characteristic  gusto,  a good  ear  for  the  colloquial  (is  it  Cana­ dian?),  a  command  of  the  loose-limber line.  He  has  range,  too.  A  socialist  poet, respecting the  joy and  dignity  of working  with  the hands, he can  (in "She")  deploy

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



a  long  line  and   rather  loose  syntax   to bring  off a poem  which  is tender, myster­ ious, lyrical.  Acorn  seems to be a genuine  "Earth  lover", to  whom  experience  has added  a   complementary   touch   of   the  cynic,  but   his  mainstay  is  an   engaging immediacy and  warmth.
Because  of  the  very  variety of  talent, for one thing,  it is impossible to derive a coherent sense of Canadian poetry  from these pages. Since this means responding impressionistically I admit to a preference for sparse statement, functional line struc­ ture  and  syntax,  a  minimum of  rhetoric, large  gesture,  laboured  metaphor, know­ ing synecdoche.
Notations, then:  I  don't mind  that Margaret  Atwood's landscape  (of  imag­ ination)  is  a  cold   moon,   but  here  her shadows   are   too   shadowy.   These   four poems   do   not   match    the   best  of  The Animals   in   that    Country.   Ondaatje's poems  zing  off  at  interesting, sometimes bizarre,    tangents,   revealing  a   personal world,   very   much   alive.   Nelson   Ball's taut   poems   aim   for   total   accuracy,  in language, in identifying the  true  occasion of a  poem. One awaits  eagerly  his forth­ coming The  Pre-Linguistic  Heights. Two poets  new  to  me:   David  Donnell's poet­ self   is  appealing,  perceptive,  perhaps  a shade over-explicit, but  true; Bill Howell's adroit use of  the  line  is applied  equally well to the small private occasion  ("Mech­ anics  of Living")  and  to a larger,  histor­ ical,  sweep.  Poignant as it  is, Gustafson's "Nocturne:  Prague I g68"   also   suffers from  over-explicitness.  Everything is laid out   as  in  an   undertaker's  parlour, per­ haps  appropriately,  considering the  oc­ casion.  Contrast the  unstated elements in Dorothy Livesay's  sequence "The  Oper­ ation", a fine,  nervy  piece  of  work,  cap­  turing as  it  does   the   tentativeness and
 pain of slow recovery.  Another dimension offers   itself   in   the   group    of   Newlove poems, four  which  hint  great  range,  from the compression (of thought, syntax, rhythm)  in  "Man Drift" to  a  variety  of subtleties   (mental, verbal,  linear)  in  the "Dream" poems. I admire the descriptive and  rhythmic integrity of Peter  Stevens's poems, especially  "Coming Back".  From the editors, the ear and wit in Lochhead's "Canadian Jollies" are  pleasurably lively; Souster   has  chosen   to  give  himself  one page,  but  he offers  us two  beautiful little poems. "Yeah Tigers" is particularly moving.
Much  good  work  here  I haven't men­
tioned.   While   I   don't  want   to  be  the over-polite guest,  declaring everything good  to  eat,   even  the  egg  which,  well, err-urn,  whiffs   a   little    and    is  greeny purple inside  the  shell, I can  say there  is very very little work here which I don't respect.   To   my  as  yet   unpractised   eye and   ear,   nothing  in   Made   in  Canada seems distinctively and  exclusively  Cana­ dian,   but   this   is  a   book   of   Canadian poems   and   it   manifests   sufficient   zest, verbal  muscle, sensitivity and  imaginative life  to   be  worth   reading,  worth   being represented  in  and  worth   having  edited  and  published.
MIKE DOYLE



ON THE VERGE

*****  DAVID   STAFFORD.  From  Anarchism to Reformism: A Study of the  Political  Activities of Paul Brousse 187o-go.  University  of  Toron­ to  Press, $rs.oo. This  is political  history  of a high  standard. The   r 87o's  were  the  Homeric  age  of  modern   politics,  when  history  caught the  petty  struggles  of  the  First  International in   its   magnifying    light   and   enlarged  them into   the   battles   of  a   latter-day  Iliad,   with Marx  and  Bakunin  as its  Achilles and  Hector.

101

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



All the important later divisions in left-wing politics, between  democratic socialists and dictatorial communists,  between  both  of these and   the   anarchists,  date   from   those   years. Among  the  lesser  heroes  of  that  time  of  pro­ phetic   struggle   was  Paul   Brousse,  a   fervent Bakuninist    who   graduated   from   anarchism into   a   kind   of   socialism   called   possibilism, pragmatic   and    fervently   anti-Marxist.  The  point   which  David  Stafford  makes  very  con­ vincingly   in   his   study   of  Brousse   (the   first written  in  English) is that  the  temporary  alli­ ance   between   the   Latin  anarchists and   the English   trade   unionists   against   Marx   in  the First  International was  not  accidental. There were  libertarian  elements  in  non-Marxist  so­ cialism  and  pragmatic elements  in  anarchism  which  joined  to form  a common ground  for at least  temporary action  and  allowed  Brousse to slip  from  one  to  the  other  without feeling  he had   committed  political  treason.   One   might extend  the  idea  by  showing  how far  the  poli­ tical  background  of  the  English  trade  union­ ists in  tum  had  come,  via Robert  Owen,  from William  Godwin,  father of all anarchists.  The practical  point  to all  this is that  a Mithridatic dose of  anarchism is necessary for all  political parties  that  do  not wish to surrender to totali­ tarian  temptations.
****   RAMSAY  COOK.   The   Maple   Leaf   for Ever:  Essays on Nationalism  and Politics in Canada.  Macmillan, $7·95· Perhaps   the  sad­ dest  feature of  the  upsurge  of  nationalism   in contemporary Canada  is  the  extent   to  which it  has  not  only  made   Canadians  forget   (a) that   internationalism   does  not   imply   conti­ nentalism,   and   (b)   that   Canada   possesses a political  outlook   (rather than  a  political  phi­ losophy)  whose  development into  a full-grown federalism  might  well  be  as  important, in  a world  where nationalism has  become  increas­ ingly suicidal,  as British  parliamentary institu­  tions  and  French  revolutionary impulses  were in  their  time.  The   nation  is an  anachronism; the   federation  has  a  future.   In   playing   the variants on this point  of view Ramsay Cook performs  a timely service.
****   E. L. M. BURNS. General  Mud.  Clarke Irwin,  $6.so. The  profession  of arms  and  the profession  of  letters   have  an   uneasy  but   re­ current   relationship;   from    Caesar    to    de Gaulle,   generals   have  often  proved   eloquent  writers,  their  styles disciplined  by the  exercise of  strategical  thinking.  General  Burns  has  a place  among  this  military  minority.  His  liter­  ary  accomplishments,  beginning   with  articles in   the   American   Mercury    under   Mencken,

102
 have   been  considerable, and   now  he  follows his memoirs  of peacekeeping in  the  Near  East, and his writings on modern warfare, with his recollections of  the  two  world  wars  in  which he fought.  As his title, General Mud, suggests, there  are  no false heroics  when  General  Burns writes   on  war.   He   regards   it,  at   best,  as  a grim   inevitability,  and   his  accounts  of   cam­ paigns    are    written   with    a   wry   spareness, which  deflates  the  pretensions  of  leaders  and,  in   rather  Tolstoyan  vein,   demonstrates  how far   their   plans   are   modified  by  such  incal­  culable  influences  as "General Mud". As mili­ tary  history,  this is a small gem which deserves its  place  in  any  library  of  Canadian  records; its  fault   is  that  while  General   Bums  appears as   a   very   human  and    tangible    personality when  he  is  a  subaltern in  World  War,  in  the second  conflict  he  fades  into  aloofness  as  the role   of    the   field   commander  establishes   its impersonal  mask.
**   EDWARD   MEADE.   Indian   Rock   Carvings of   the   Pacific   Northwest.  Gray's   Publishing Ltd.,  $8.oo.   Except   for  a  few  boulders   that have   been   taken   into   museums,   the   Indian stone  carvings  that  record  the presence  of prehistoric peoples along the coast of British Columbia  are   gradually  wearing   away  from the  work of weather and  human  vandals.  This makes  a  record  of  them  urgently  needed,  and the   novelist   Edward  Meade   has  spent   many years  on  the  task  of  photographing almost  all the  accessible  petroglyphs. Now, with  a rather laconic  commentary, his  prints  are  published; they   form   an   indispensable addition  to  the library  of anyone  interested in  the  great  artis­ tic   tradition  of   the   Indian  peoples   of   the Pacific  Coast.
G.W.

ERRATUM
WE  REGRET that  in  the  "Canadian  Liter­ ature Checklist" for  1970 which appeared in  issue  48,  a  non-existent  book  was  re­ corded. The entry  ran  as follows:
PURDY, AL. Earle Birney. Toronto, Copp Clarke,
1970.  (Studies in Canadian Literature.)
The book was indeed  planned and  its forthcoming publication announced, but in  fact  it  has  not  been  written, and  the entry  was made in error.
ED.






THE PROFESSIONAL CANADIAN

IF  THERE's  A    LIVING  WRITER  I admire more   than    Mordecai  Richler  I   don't know  who  it is. But  I wish  people  would stop calling  him a Canadian.
When   Life  wants  a  story  on  Canada, whom   do   they   phone?  Why,   good  old Mordecai, naturally. And  where  do  they reach   him?   Why,  in  London, England, that's where.  That's where  he lives, after all. He writes  Letters from Canada  to the London   Magazine,  and    Letters    from London to  Canadian  magazines. In  En­ counter, you  can  read  his  impressions  of Montreal. He  writes  in  The New  States­  man  on  the  opposition  press  in  Canada. He  covers  Expo   67  for  The New   York  Review   of Books, and  he  edits  the  book that   triggered  all  this,  the   Penguin   an­  thology  Canadian  Writing Today.
Then he  turns  around and  writes  an­ other    kind   of   piece   for   domestic   con­ sumption, like  an  inferior wine:  How  I Came Back  To  Canada and  Was  Aston­ ished   to  Find   So  Much  Changed. This  stuff   goes   in   Maclean's,   Star    Weekly, even  Canadian  Literature. "After being rooted   in   London,  England,  for   more than  15 years,"  he confides  to the readers  of   Weekend, "I  woke  up  one  morning and  decided   it  was  time  for  a  change." So  he  took  up  a  year's  appointment  as writer-in-residence  at   Sir   George   Wil­ liams,  soaking   up  impressions and  whip­ ping  them  into  print  at  two-bits a  word.
 
Having  complained  in  the   past   of  our indifference  to   the   arts,   he   can   now damn   us for  spending lavish  sums  when there aren't many-he would say "aren't any"-significant  artists.   There aren't? How   about   Mordecai Richler, for  one? But  no:   National Arts  Centre is "a  sort of Yankee  Stadium without Babe Ruth." Sometimes   the   exotic   and   the   home brew  can  be  mixed.  In  1967,  he  tells  us in  his Expo  piece,  he "planned to return to  Canada  for   the   first   time   in   three years." Aha, thinks  the experienced Rich­ ler  reader,  a  clever  variation.  This time he's going to be Astonished  for  American
consumption.
I met Richler only once, inI g66, when I  was a student in  London and  went  out to interview him  in his comfortable home in   Kingston-on-Thames,   a   few   miles out of London. Meeting a writer  whose work  I  had  loved,  one  of the  few  Cana­ dians  who's  made  an  international name
-yes, yes, I concede   it: he's  a  terrific writer  and  his books have  left  their  mark on   me   in   all   kinds   of   ways -I   was scared stiff. Richler, however, was thoughtful,  generous,  kind   and   a  little shy.   I  liked   him   immensely,   though I suspect  I bored  him. Who  wants  to spend an  afternoon with  a tongue-tied fledgling academic, a kind  of Peeping Tom  on the world  of writers? But  he  did,  and  I was abjectly  grateful.
But   damn    it,   why   can't  he   content himself  with   writing  marvellous  novels, and  never mind  being the Just-Add-Hot­ Water-and-Serve  expert  on  Canada? When   I  met  him,  he  had  been  working  the   expatriate   routine  both    ways   for years.  So I was  staggered to find  out  he had  never  been  as far  west  as  the  Lake­  head.   So far  as  I can  make  out  he  still hasn't been  to  the  Maritimes. When   he


103

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



talks about "Canada," he's talking  about just  two  provinces.  In  the  Penguin  book he talks about "Saint John's," New Brunswick. Saint  John's is in  Newfound­ land,  fella; this  one's  called  Saint  John, and   if  you'd  ever  seen  either  one  you'd know  the  difference.
That's  nit-picking, sure.  As  it  would be  to  point  out  that   he  thought  separa­ tism   dead    and   violence   impossible   in
1967-after all, a lot of people  did.  But do  you  remember Richler's return home in 1967 to be Astonished for one of the weekend   supplements? A  month   before the  Liberal leadership convention, Rich­ ler appeared with  his observations on the leading   horses.  As  I recall,  he  put   his money  on John Turner, finding in  him a kind   of   youth-and-responsibility  combi­ nation  which  might   put  a  little  gas into  the  doughy   lump   of  Canadian life.  But it  was his commentary on  Pierre  Elliott Trudeau, whom  he clearly would have preferred,  which   I took  the   trouble   to write  down.  Richler found  Trudeau "the most   intellectually  impressive,  perspica­ cious  and  charming man  I  met  in  Otta­ wa",  but  he doubted that  Trudeau could make   it  to  the  leadership.  Too   stylish, too  obviously intelligent, too much  of an individual for  dull  old  Canada. I was, I blush  to admit, among Trudeau's fans at the  time, even  joining  the  Liberal Party, in a burst of folly, to help get him elected.  I   knew   it  was   possible, and   if  Richler weren't so far out  of touch  with the emotional bases of Canadian politics he would  have known  too.
The  ignorance has  even  shown  in  his








104
 novels. He  hasn't published a really good one  since  The   Apprenticeship of Duddy Kravitz  in  1959· Cocksure  and  The  In­ comparable   Atuk   are   bores,   unusually good   college   jokes  drawn   out  to  three  times  the  length  they  deserve.  And  Saint Urbain's   Horseman,  though   a  splendid novel, is based  not on Canada, but on the international world of film and  big-money  writing. The  novelist  in  Richler admits  the  truth: he only  knows  about Canada in  retrospect  and   as  a  tourist. He  con­ ceded   the  point  himself  years  ago.  Con­  sidering  Montreal,  he  admitted  he  "no longer  understood the  idiom.  Doomed to always  be a  foreigner in  England, I was now in danger of finding Canada foreign  too."
He  knows  about books and  writing­ the   Penguin   anthology, for  instance, is assembled   with   taste   and   discernment. He  knows the international set. He knows London  about  as  well  as  a  non-native can.   But  when   it  comes  to  Canada, he knows   about   a  small   part  of  the   past, geographically located  in  Montreal and, to  a lesser extent, Toronto. I grew  up  in Vancouver and   live  in   the   Maritimes, and    I've    never    really   recognized   my Canada  in  Richler's, except  in  bits  and  starts.
If you   don't  know   about   something
you shouldn't write  about  it. "Mordecai", I would  like  to say,  plucking him  gently by the sleeve and  speaking quietly,  for he is a man  and  writer I admire, "You  know about novels.  Go  write  them.  You  don't know about Canada any more."
DONALD CAMERON
