$1.25  per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE N°·44

Spring, 1970

LOWRY'S REJIDING


Articles

BY W. H. NEW, GEOFFREY DURRANT, DAVID  BENHAM, PAUL G. TIESSEN, PERLE EPSTEIN

Letters

BY  MALCOLM LOWRY

Review Articles and Reviews

BY  JULIAN SYMONS, GEORGE WOODCOCK, W. H. NEW, JOHN REID, MARGARET HOWARD BLOM, FRASER SUTHERLAND, LEN GASPARINI, A. W. PURDY, FRED COGSWELL, RONALD SUTHERLAND,
H. J· ROSENGARTEN, FRANK DAVEY, V. SHARMAN, DOUGLAS BARBOUR, FRANCES FRAZER

Annual Supplement
CANADIAN LITERATURE  CHECKLIST, I g6g


A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW







THE ABSORPTION OF ECHOES










ALL WRITERS are derivative;  all good writers plagiarize;  theft IS  a literary virtue. So, with minimal exaggeration, one might characterize  the fundamentals of a  modern  critical  attitude  which -more  than  half  a  century after  Eliot,  Pound,  Joyce  and  Proust established in  practice  the  artistic  validity of  derivation -has  at  last  replaced  the  romantic  and   pernicious  fiction  that complete originality  was a possible or even a desirable goal. Every artist, indeed, has a new way of looking at the world, because every personality is in some de­ gree unique, but the world that  he as an artist will see (and  in his work  present) inevitably includes  (even if in negative)  the perceptions of all those  artists who have preceded him and of whose work he may be directly or indirectly unaware.  When  an  artist  is such  a  voracious  consumer  of  the  work  of  other  artists  as Malcolm  Lowry, whose interests spilled exuberantly  from  literature   (considered in  its  widest  and  wildest  sense)  into  the  visual  (the  cinema)   and  the  aural (jazz), and  all is blended  with a sharply direct response to the physical environ­ ment   (exemplified  especially  in  his skill as a  swimmer), then  the  web  of  in­ fluences and  derivations  becomes as dense and  complicated  as it was in  the case of either Joyce or-that most haunting semblable  -Proust.
In this issue we explore, in a series of essays by Canadian, English and Ameri­ can  critics, and  in  a  pair  of interesting  and  hitherto  unpublished  letters  by the author,  this  aspect  of  Lowry's  work. The  exercise may  be  regarded  also as  a probing  into  the  whole general  question of the  boundaries  between  the  derived and the original, and  the extent  to which an artist's success depends on his blend-

3

EDITORIAL



ing all that  he has borrowed into a work that  is self-consistent and self-subsistent, that  lives within  its own world and its own existence.
In  this context  it  is perhaps  significant  that,  while  all  the  critics  who  write in  this  issue  are  quite  evidently  agreed  in  accepting   Under   the   Volcano   as Lowry's best work, the only one that touches on perfection, a great deal of atten­ tion is in fact  paid to his lesser works: to the various versions of the novella that was eventually  published in a compilation  of other  hands  as Lunar  Caustic, and to that  curious  travel story, "Through the  Panama". This,  I suggest, is appro­ priate,  for,  when  we proceed  from  the  contemplation of  an  artist's  works  as icons, standing  in  their ownness and  completeness, to examining  the sources of his creativity,  it is inevitable that  we should  find  them  most clearly  revealed in his imperfect  and -in a  writer  who found  finality  as elusive as Lowry did - in  his  uncompleted  works. These  are  the  works  in  which,  to  borrow  a  word used by Lowry in the letter  to Albert Erskine published  in this issue, the  echoes have  not  been  "absorbed". For  absorption  surely  is  the  key  word  when  we consider  the  difference  between  a  superbly  complex   and  complete   work  like Under  the Volcano, and  an  unresolved mass of writing  like Dark as the Grave wherein my Friend is Laid.
I leave it to W. H. New, in his essay "Lowry's  Reading", to carry further  the
introduction   of  the  various  essays and  the  tracing  of  their  relationships.  But, before ending,  I must thank  Margerie  Lowry for her great  helpfulness in provid­ ing  the  two  letters  by  Malcolm  Lowry  which  we  publish,  and  also  in  giving generous  permission  for  the  use in  some  of  the  essays of  quotations  from  his
unpublished  writings.

G.W


















4



LOWRY'S READING

An Introductory Essay



W.H.New





IN TWO LARGE BOXES at the  Unive<Sity of British  Columbia
are  the remnants  of Malcolm  Lowry's library,  a motley collection of works that
ranges  from  Emily Bronte  and  Olive  Schreiner  to  Djuna  Barnes  and  Virginia Woolf,  from  the  Kenyon, Partisan,  and  Sewanee  Reviews  to  A  Pocketful  of Canada,  from  Latin  Proe
from Elizabethan  plays to Kafka  and  Keats. Little escaped his attention, in other
words, and  even such a partial  list as this one indicates his eclectic and  energetic insatiability  for  books. That he  was also an  inveterate  film-goer  and   jazz  en­ thusiast, and  that  he absorbed  and  remembered everything he experienced, makes any  effort  to  separate  out  the  individual  influences  on  his  work  an  invidious one;  rather  like chasing a rabbit  through  Ali Baba's caves, the activity seems in­ commensurate with  its surroundings. But on frequent  occasions an  appreciation  of the scope of his references or the source of a single allusion will take us closer to Lowry's  tone  and  method.
Richard   Hauer   Costa,  for  example,  writing  in  the  University   of Toronto Quarterly  in  1967,  points  out  that  "unacknowledged   literary  kinship"  between Under  the  Volcano, Aiken's  Blue Voyage,  and  Joyce's Ulysses:  the  central  use of the  quest  theme,  the  burgeoning  sense of remorse,  the  "impatience" of  the author  with  usual  narrative methods,  and  so on. The  Consul's  "garden scene" in  Chapter Five  thus  becomes an  analogue  to Joyce's  Nighttown  episode,  and Lowry's  dislocation  of  time,  his recognition  of  what  Costa  elsewhere  calls  the "weight  of the  past",  relates  to Joyce's  and  Proust's.  Such  parallels  have  their value.  It  is by comparison  that  we learn  our  way into  a  new  novel,  and  only after  this process has taken  place that  we come to understand   the  individuality (if it exists)  of the novel's own  world.

5

LOWRY's  READING



Lowry acknowledges the comparative  approach when in 1951  he finds in the work of Hermann Hesse the closest spirit  to  his own.  And  Clifford  Leech  uses comparison  as a technical method in Imagined  Worlds  ( 1968)  when, to investi­ gate  the  "free  manipulation of event"  that  characterizes  the structure  of  Con­ rad's  Nostromo,  he brings in an analysis of Under  the Volcano  to illuminate  his discussion. In both books the simultaneity of present and  past, achieved by allow­ ing an equivocal double viewpoint of character  and  narrator,  affects our  under­ standing  of the situations and  the ideas. As Leech  puts it: "to  have lived and  to be the subject of anguish in recollection is in some sense to be living still." This has one meaning  with reference to the Consul and  Laruelle,  another  with refer­ ence  to  Lowry. On  a still larger  scale  the statement could  apply  as one  of the aims of criticism, or one of the accomplishments of art-to recreate  the moment (of anguish,  terror,  hope, or  whatever)   that  the  author  wished to convey, or  to continue  to engender  that experience as the moment  (and  so the reader)   alters; but these are aspects of  the same problem of freedom  and  fate, essentially meta­ physical in  nature,  which all of Lowry's work continually  explores.
Lowry envisioned the universe as a series of Chinese  boxes, with  man  in one of them,  controlling  some and  controlled  by others.  The  scheme is not quite  so simple,  of course, for  the  boxes  (both  external  and  internal)  can  be "factual" in  any  number  of  epistemological systems. And  the  whole  prospect  is further complicated  by matters of fate and  free will. Man  can  either  control  the  worlds inside his mind or  himself be governed,  be in  harmony  with  the sensory worlds outside him or be terrified and dislocated-and about such  abstract  possibilities as Destiny and  Judgment   (however tangible their effects in his life)  he can only suppose. The scene in "Through the Panama", where Wilderness  (aboard a ship in the Canal  Zone)  has relinquished control to the Captain, the Canal  operator, and  the Canal  Zone Authority, is apropos. The  overt image of multiple contain­ ment is obvious; embodied in it is a metaphor  about  the sensibility of  an artist­ not only to the  materials  that  can  be rendered  into  art  but  also  to  his own  en­ gagement  with the task. The artist, that is, pursues control over a body of knowl­ edge  until  it  catches  him  and  takes him over.  Such  knowledge  is the  "strange  comfort" that the profession provides-whether it be the S.S. Diderot's captain's extra  ability and  hence extra grounds  for fear  in  the face of a strong  storm, or Keats'  medical  knowledge  disabusing  his  mind  of  any  hope  of  recovery  from his tuberculosis, or Sigbjorn Wilderness-cum-Malcolm Lowry's absorption  in the present-ness of the past. The past cannot  be escaped  nor its reality  (as preserved in  memory,  or  in  Wilderness's notebook, or  in  Lowry's  novel)   denied.  Herein

6

LOWRY'S READING



lies the  thematic  basis for  both  Hear Us  0 Lord  and  Dark  as the  Grave, and a further  indication  of the author's  structural  method.
In  Lowry's  letters  we find  other  ramifications of this question  of control.  In
1951  he acknowledges Jung's  concept of "man  in search of a soul" as important to his  work;  in  1950  and  again  in  1953  Pirandello's  Six  Characters  in  Search of an Author suggests a "not  dissimilar theme",  which he relates to Existentialism and  to  Ortega's  philosophy  of  history.  Wilderness  he  identifies  as  "Ortega's fellow, making up his life as he goes along, and trying to find his vocation". "According  to Ortega," moreover, "the  best image for man himself is a novelist," being written by his books as much as writing them. In  Lowry's case, any percep­ tion of events-in-time is complicated  by his literary experience, so that Faust and the  Castle of Udolpho and  Dante  in  purgatorio start  to  have  in  him  a  reality equally as forceful  as the "actual" direct influence of, say, Aiken  and  Dollarton and  Nordahl  Grieg.  The  references  multiply:  Poe's  maelstrom  can  be stepped into,  O'Neill's  long day's  journey can  be followed into  night,  Fitzgerald's  crack­ up can  be experienced  again  in "Through the Panama", though  it can end  this time not in fission but  in healing. Again the topics are  pursued  till they become his own:  they cease to be objects read and  become  part of the subjectivity with which  he renders  experience.


As DAVID   BENHAM  shows in his essay on  Lunar  Caustic,
the  presence of  Herman   Melville in  Lowry's  work  provides  another   plane  on
which  to approach  questions  of good and  evil and  the reality of the perceptions of  the  human   mind.  God  and  the  devil-if  not  carrying  all  their  Methodist connotations-do  exert  themselves in  Lowry's  world;  heaven  and  hell  exist. That one must descend to "hell"  before locating "heaven" is a Jungian, Roman­ tic  concept  he  accepts  completely -with  the  added   implication   that  in  the Inferno  is Paradise,  if we can see it. For  Heriot in Ultramarine, Plantagenet  in Lunar  Caustic,  and   Wilderness  in  Hear  Us  0 Lord,  this  is  worked  out  in separate  metaphors  of voyage and discovery; for the consul it is tied up with his alcoholic descent into  a  Mexico  that  is both  a landscape  of  fact  and  a state  of mind. To be drunk  is to be in extremis as far as the rational world is concerned, yet for the  Consul  it is paradoxically  also a way of most  vividly perceiving  his own  relationship  with  others.  Seeing things clearly, still  differs  from  acting  on the basis of that  perception.  In  her recent book, The  Private Labyrinth  of Mal-

7

LOWRY'S  READING



colm Lowry  ( 1969), for example,  Perle Epstein  has pointed  out  how the  Con­ sul's vision, for all its profundity and accuracy, is a sterile one because his talents are  never exercized in an effort to grasp  the  harmony,  the  heaven, that  (as for "successful" characters  like Cosnahan  or Wilderness)  lay in his path.
The   problem  of  harmonizing  the  mind  with  the  outside  environment is, of course, a central  one in works like Coleridge's  "Rime of the Ancient  Mariner", which  Lowry  absorbed so thoroughly  as to  bind  it integrally  into  the structure and  effect  of  "Through  the  Panama". From  Coleridge,  Lowry  also accepted many of his ideas about the fluidity of time -a  more direct  borrowing, in fact, than  anything  from Joyce or Proust. Yet Coleridge  himself absorbed so  much­ from the occult sciences and elsewhere-and influenced  so many, that the ques­ tion of primary  and  secondary  routes of influence  seems a  tangle  too  dense  to uncoil. Much  came  via Nordahl  Grieg, for example,  whom  Lowry  met in 1930;  much  came  via J. W. Dunne's  An Experiment  with Time  ( 1927), a  book ex­ amining  the  proposition  that  the  future  can  be  objectively  experienced  in  the past. Though it had a strong following during  the decade  or so after its publica­ tion,  it  has  also been  attacked -for  "spatializing" a  non-spatial  concept,  for identifying   the  problems  of  time  passing  with  those  of   time  passed,  and  for interpreting time as itself a process in time -but such  objections  did  not  parti­  cularly  disturb  Lowry. Paul  Tiessen shows how  Lowry's  "cinematic" technique in works like Under the Volcano, for example,  is adapted  to presenting  temporal flux in spatial  terms.  Dark as the Grave  extends  the  method  and  most clearly demonstrates  Dunne's  idea.
Whereas  Dunne  may prove finally unacceptable to philosophical  theoreticians, Lowry perceived the applicability of the theory  to the process by which an  artist attaches  himself to his work and  then is separated from it. His novel Dark as the Grave, that  is, concerns his character  Wilderness  (another novelist)  discovering the separation  between himself and  his own character Trumbaugh -in a linear sequence that  opens up Dunne's  notion of "regress": events in time past, relived in  the  memory,  occur  simultaneously  in  time  present,  which  epitomizes  in  its way  the  process of "re-creation" that  reading  a  novel involves readers  in.  But further: Wilderness, returning  to his own  and  his novel's  Mexican  past,  is still moving  through  time into  the future.  Out  of his memory of the past  he  antici­ pates events in  the  future,  which  possess a  vivid  and  objective  reality  for  him and  do "happen." On  the  basis of this "dream" experience,  however,  the  will may exert itself and  thus alter the nature  of the  "actual" experience  that subse­ quently  occurs. To  Lowry this process was extremely  important. Certain  as he

8

LOWRY'S READING



was that there existed a unity between life and death,  body and soul, reality and unreality, he found  here a key to the metaphysics that  joined them.
His search in  Kant's Critique  of  Pure Reason was for  answers to one of the
dilemmas  he found  himself in,  and  his passion for fateful  coincidences led him into the works of P. D. Ouspensky  (A  New  Model  of the Universe,  193I)  and Charles Fort  (particularly Lo !, 193I; Wild  Talents,  1932;  and  The  Book of the Damned, I gIg) . He  traveiled  to Haiti  (in  I 947)  to discover something  about Voodoo,  and  became  interested  there  in  the  work of  a  young  Haitian   writer named  Philippe  Thoby-Marcelin. He  found  occult  signs in  the  natural  world about  him,  and  in  order  to  interpret   them,  as  Geoffrey  Durrant suggests, he seems to have absorbed  many of the ideas of Neoplatonism  that  developed from the school of Porphyry.  Even  his interest in  the  Greek  Classics stems from  this search  for  omens  and   explanations;  throughout   Ultramarine   the   Eumenides sound their voices, for example,  till Hilliot hears. And in the later work-parti­ cularly  the manuscript pages of October  Ferry to Gabriola and  La  Mordida­ fragments from Ouspensky, Toumeur, Plato, Fort, and  the I  Ching are gathered together  to  influence  and  explain  the  fate  of  Ethan  and  Jacqueline Llewelyn and  of Sigbjom  and  Primrose  Wilderness.
But if Lowry sympathized   with  the  pursuits of Ouspensky  and  Fort,  it  is in the  work  of  a  Vancouver   cabbalist   named   Charles   Robert   Stansfeld-Jones ("Frater  Achad") -an   acquaintance  of  the   better   known   English  mystic Aleister Crowley-that he found  much of the occult system on which some of his later writing hangs. Jones's work-particularly Q.B.L., or the Bride's Recep­ tion and The  Anatomy of the Body of God, privately published during the 1920's
-explores the theory that  the universe is constantly expanding  yet constantly ordered.  In his terms, the expansion can be seen in the psychic progress of adepts within it; the order  is described by the principles and symbols of Cabbala,  which will  allow to an adept  the knowledge that  can lead to hell or  to heaven, to the barranca or the garden,  to torment or to peace. Thus  numbers,  colours, animals, and  all the symbols of the Tarot pack acquire  a meaning  that  is significant  not only within  the framework  of an individual  story but  also within  the  constructs of occult  philosophy.
Lowry's unpublished fragment The Ordeal of Sigbjorn Wilderness (like Lunar Caustic  set  in  a  hospital)   makes  the  metaphysical  intent   of  human   "ordeal" quite  explicit;  an  authorial note quotes from  the Anglo-Irish  theosophist  Annie Besant to explain  the several kinds of spiritual  truth  in religion:

9

LOWRY'S READING



(I )   One eternal infinite incognizable real Existence.
(2)   From  THAT  the  manifested God,  unfolding  from  unity  to  duality, from duality to trinity.
(3)  From the manifested Trinity  many spiritual  intelligences, guiding the Kos­
mic order.
(4)  Man  a  reflection of  the  manifested  God  and  therefore  a  trinity  funda­ mentally, his inner  and  real self being  eternal,  one  with  the  Self  of  the umverse.
(5)  His evolution by repeated incarnations, into  which  he is drawn  by desire, and  from which he is set free by knowledge and  sacrifice, becoming divine in potency as he had ever been divine in latency.

The  passage explains  much  of what  Lowry intended   by  the  multiple  identities that  Wilderness possesses and  much  of the  thematic  unity that  he hoped  to  de­ velop by joining all his works into  a single cycle to be called The  Voyage  that Never  Ends.  In  that  context  the fiction repudiates  the  more obvious  platitudes about   character   and   plot  analysis,  and   transcends   even  the  basic  structure Lowry admits  to deriving from the Divine Comedy, in order  to try to  render  all human  experience  and all its paradoxes of time,  place, and  perception, in some­ thing  more  emotionally  overwhelming  than   abstract   terms.  Possibly  for  that reason the  task was not completed;  because of  Lowry's  own  developing  under­  standing,  it never could  be.




NOT ALL   OF   THE  INFLUENCES  that  impinged  on  Lowry's consciousness can be as precisely dated  as that  of Charles  Jones, who arrived  in Lowry's life as a census enumerator  in  1941.  He  was frequently  provided  with cogent subplots  and  evocative images, for  example-as can  be seen in  Under the  Volcano, or  the  published  chapter  from  October  Ferry, or  the  manuscript pages of  a  story  like "Ghostkeeper" -by  reading  such  ephemeral  material  as neighbourhood  newspapers. His knowledge of the Greek and Roman  Classics, Shakespeare,  and  Dante,  however,  presumably  dates  from  his  English  public school education; Aiken, Grieg, and  jazz were undergraduate enthusiasms;  John Davenport  was a school acquaintance, and  James  Stern  a friend  from  his Paris days in the early 193o's. But Lowry's casual references to Donne, Dostoevsky, Chatterton, Crabbe,  Roethke,  Chekhov,  Faulkner, Farrell,  Dylan Thomas,  Elli­ son,  Yeats  and  a  host  of  others  are  dropped   like  handkerchiefs  through  his letters. They  have  their  pertinence  and  their  own  claims  to  recognition,  but  if

10

LOWRY'S READING



we stop to pick them all up we run the danger of being lured into aimless alleys.
Certainly  many  of  the  references  to  Canadian  writing  fall  into  this "blind" category.  Lowry  knew  the work of Ralph  Gustafson  and  Al Purdy  and  a  pro­ letarian  poet of the early I gsa's named  Curt  Lang-but  not  well, and  not to the point of its affecting his own work in any observable way. Even  the adapta­ tions  of  Maria  Chapdelaine   and  "The  Marine  Excursion  of  the  Knights  of Pythias"  that  he  wrote  for  the CBC  are  geared  to the  CBC's  own  programme  formulae. Though October  Ferry makes passing reference to both  Hernon's  work and  Leacock's,  it  was  really landscape  more  than  culture  that  influenced  him in Canada. One  particularly  pointed passage in October  Ferry makes this clear:  if Canada has  any originality  at  all it lies in its uncontrolled  wilderness. To  be taming  it is one  thing;  to have it  tamed  is another-a  dead  situation  that  de­ mands  undoing  in order  to begin afresh. So the physical  environment furnished him once again  with  a metaphor  for the artist's  predicament: to be taming  the wilderness of language  and ideas is more exhilarating  than  to have accomplished the task. To  know that  and  yet still to be spurred  into  writing created  an ironic dilemma  that  was Lowry's own.
He did know some writers in Canada,  like Dorothy  Livesay and  Earle  Birney,
better  than  Gustafson  and  Lang,  and  in  Turvey  he found  an  ironic  sensibility towards  society to  match  his own. It is an important point,  for it  forces us to recognize the neglected  but obvious truth  that  Lowry's work is genuinely comic. In  all his grim systematizing  there is room for laughter,  and  his observation  of "Joyce's  complaint   re Ulysses:  'They  might  at  least have  said  it  was damned funny'", has a kind of reflexive barb  attached  to it. Perhaps this is simply another way of showing  how heaven  is linked  with hell-or  how, as in "Elephant and Colosseum",  man's  reaching  for harmony  is linked with his perception  of "God's joke":   the  elephant.   For  the  joke has  its serious side;  the  elephant  is named Rosemary,  and  "remembrance" (as  October  Ferry and  Dark  as the  Grave  re­ mind us)  can work both as escape from the present and  as conscience to  remind us of the "normality" of guilt -another  example of the "strange comfort"  that the  fact of being human  affords to an individual  man.
Such a process of "taming" his own landscapes led to his constant  revision of
his work, his constant  search for knowledge, his continual  urge to read  more and to begin writing  again. Early in  I949  (while Turvey  was being written), Lowry wrote to Birney to express his delight in the book. After discovering its seriousness as well as its comedy, and likening it to The  Good Soldier Schweik  and  Dangling Man  and  Dead Souls, he adds a significant note on Gogol:


II

LOWRY's  READING



The  swing  between  farce  and  the  purely  lyrical  might  be  of  value  technically. And  the  almost  Moussorgsky-like sadness and  longing  he is able  to distil simply by describing some crummy little hotel.

The  range  and  apparent  casualness of the references is typical;  the fragmentari­ ness of the observation suggests a characteristic  process of  authorial  note-taking,  both for Wilderness and himself. Like other references to his reading, it shows not only the importance he attached  to the things he encountered, but also the meta­ morphosis  they underwent  in his mind. At the same  time, it offers us a glimpse of his ideas in  the process of being born.









































12



DEATH IN LIFE

Neo-Platonic Elements in

"Through the PanamaJJ





Geoffrey Durrant






L EXPLORATION   of  Malcolm   Lowry's  symbolism  will  no doubt  occupy scholars for many years; in this field at least we are offered "God's
plenty".  What   I  suggest  in  this  article  is meant  as  a  mere  foot-note  to  such studies as Perle Epstein's of the influence of the caballa, and as a suggestion for possible further  investigations.1
To a reader  who is familiar  with the literature  of neo-Platonism  it seems likely
that  at times Malcolm  Lowry is drawing on a system of symbols derived not only from  general  Cabbalistic   lore,  but  from  more  particular   sources  in  the  neo­ Platonic  tradition. In  this  tradition,  as  it  is represented  by  the  work  of  such writers  as  Proclus,  Porphyry,  Apuleius  and  Claudianus,   the  Platonic  view  of the world as a cave of darkness is united with the Greek and  Roman  pantheons, and  with  Homer,  to create  a  philosophical mythology-a  mythology  in  which the fate of Psyche, of Persephone, of Narcissus and of  Ulysses is understood  as an allegory of the descent of the soul into the world of  the senses -the dark  wood or the  dark  sea of matter. The  principal  English  source  for  this  material  is to be found  in  the  writings  of Thomas  Taylor  the  Platonist; this  is in  part   now made  widely accessible through  the publication  of  a selection of his writings  by Kathleen  Raine  and  George  Mills Harper.2
Before proceeding  to  an  examination  of one  of  Malcolm  Lowry's  stories  to illustrate  this suggestion,  it  is  necessary to  point  out  that  in  the  neo-Platonic

13

DEATH IN  UFE



system of myths the soul has its true  home  in  the  heavens;  through  an  error  it falls in love with  its own generated  image,  and  proceeds  into  generation.  That is to say, it is hom  into this world of darkness,  where  its task is to  purify itself of the material grossness which encloses it, and  to ascend through  the elements to the heavenly region of the stars -the true  home from  which it has been exiled. The  journey of the soul is variously represented  as the flight of a bird, a voyage over the  dark  sea of matter,  or  a fall into  dark  waters.  The  life of  the senses is represented  as entrapment in a web, a dark  wood, or a cave. The  stars  are  a constant  reminder  of the  life that  has  been  lost  through  generation,   or  birth, since the stars  to  which  we look up  are souls  that  enjoy  the  divine  life of  the heavens. We  yearn,  like Coleridge's Ancient  Mariner, "towards   the  journeying Moon  and  the stars"; the Moon is regarded  in  this philosophy as the sphere  of judgment,  the staging  post between  the divine  and  the  fallen  worlds, since the sphere of the moon marks the limits of the world of generation.
Malcolm   Lowry's  story  "Through  the  Panama" 3    evidently  has  an  eschat­ ological significance, and  a gloss from "The Ancient  Mariner" is there  used as a comment  on this statement:

... And later, the stars: but now Martin saw the fixity of the closed order of their system: death in short. The thought comes from Keyserling. (They are not dead when I  look at  them with Primrose.) Wonderful  truth  in Lawrence about  this. "Somehow my life draws  (he writes) strength from  the  depths of the universe, from the depths among the stars, from the great world!"

The  gloss from Coleridge is as follows :

In his loneliness and fixedness the Ancient Mariner yearneth towards, the journey­ ing Moon, and the stars that still sojourn, yet still move onward;  and  everywhere the blue sky belongs to them, and is their appointed  rest and their  native country and  their own natural  home, which they enter  unannounced,  as  words that  are certainly expected, and yet there is a silent joy at their arrival.

As we shall see, the  journey to the south and  again  to the north  is itself a  repre­ sentation,  in the neo-Platonic system, of the myth of a fall by generation, or birth, into  the  world of the senses, and  of the long  voyage  home  to the  native  land, the paternal  port  of the soul. The  inclusion of this gloss in  an  evidently  eschat­ ological  account  of  a  voyage suggests strongly   that   Lowry  understood   "The Ancient  Mariner" as drawing  upon a related eschatology-a view which, given Coleridge's early interest in the neo-Platonists and in the work of Thomas  Taylor, is by no means to be dismissed as absurd.

DEATH IN LIFE



In the neo-Platonic  interpretation of the voyage of Ulysses, the life of man on earth  is represented  as the  voyage of the  intellect over the  dark  sea of matter; the  ship  represents  the  body,  the sailors the  human  faculties,  and  Ulysses the intellect.4   Exiled from  his true  home, or natal  port,  Ulysses is assailed by many temptations,  and  finally  returns  to his paternal  home, where  he is united  with Penelope, the  true  wisdom, and  is once more at  peace. 5   Closely associated with this myth, in Thomas  Taylor's  account, is that  of the  Cave of the  Nymphs, for which  the chief source  is also in  Porphyry.  Here  the  cave  represents  the  world of the senses; it has two gates, one towards the north  and  the other  to the south. It is through  the  northern  gate  or  'port'  that  souls descend  into  the  cave, and through  the southern  that  they ascend to heaven:

From among  the  number  of these [signs] the  theologists consider Cancer  and Capricorn  as two ports;  Plato calls them two gates. Of  these, they affirm that Cancer  is the  gate  through  which souls descend, but  Capricorn  that  through which they  ascend, and  exchange a  material  for  a  divine  condition of  being. Cancer, indeed, is northern  and adapted  to descent:  but Capricorn  is southern, and accommodated to ascent.6

These  two accounts  are  not  fused into one  by Porphyry,  or  by Taylor,  though Taylor  originally published his version of Porphyry's Voyage  of Ulysses as a foot­ note of great  length  to his translation  of Concerning  the Cave  of the  Nymphs; this footnote  refers immediately  to the following sentence in  that  work:

Indeed  it  appears  to  me  that  it  was  not  without  foundation  that  Numenius thought that  the person of Ulysses in the Odyssey represented to us a man who passes in a regular manner over the dark and stormy sea of generation.7

When  these  two closely related  interpretations of Homer  are  taken  together, they produce  a myth in which the human  spirit embarks through  a port or gate on  a southerly  voyage on  the dark  sea of matter,  descends to imprisonment  in the  Hades of the senses in the extreme south,  and  then  proceeds  northwards to the  port  or  gate  of the  north,  where it  may  hope  to escape from  its long  and stormy exile. There  are I believe strong indications that  "Through the  Panama" is deliberately coloured  with suggestions of this myth, and  moreover  that  Lowry interpreted "The Ancient  Mariner" as an expression of the same myth.
In  "Through the  Panama" the  port of departure is Vancouver; in  the  neo­ Platonic  myth  it is the  port or gate of birth,  through  which  the soul  enters  the dark  sea of matter.  The  ship  is the  Diderot-a vessel of  "enlightenment"; its engines sing "Frere Jacques" to awaken  the intellect  .(There is a  paradox  here

DEATH IN  LIFE



only  on  the  surface,  for  it  is only  through the  life of  the  intellect   that  the  ship may  hope  to  arrive  at  its  true  destination.) The birth   imagery   is  unobtrusive; midnight and  mud  are  traditional symbols  of  generation:

Leaving  Vancouver,  British Columbia,  Canada, midnight, November  7th,  I947, S.S. Diderot, for  Rotterdam.
Rain,  rain  and  dark  skies all  day.
We arrive  at  dusk, in a drizzle. Everything  wet,  dark,  slippery ...

(This  morning,  walking  through  the  forest,  a  moment  of  intense  emotion:   the path  sodden, a morass of mud, the sad dripping  trees and  ocherous fallen  leaves; here it all is. I cannot  believe I won't  be walking  down  the  path  tomorrow.)

The  use of Stanley  Park  and  Dollarton as versions of Paradise is evident  enough in two other  stories  in this volume-"The Bravest  Boat" and  "The Forest  Path to  the  Spring"; here  the  paradise  is lost  as  the  voyager   prepares to set  out  on his  journey.
The journey  to the south  begins:

... The  black  cloudy  sky was  breaking  and  stars  were  brilliant  overhead.  The Northern   Cross. November 8th.  High  salt  wind,  clear  blue  sky, hellishly  rough sea  (zig-zagged  with  a  lashing  rip  tide)   through   the  Juan   de  Fuca  Strait.­ Whale geometry of Cape  Flattery:  finny phallic furious  face of  Flattery.

The generation theme  is evident   here,  not  only  in  the  obvious  phallicism, but also in the strong  wind and  the "hellishly  rough  sea"  under the sign of the  North. Porphyry, in  Taylor's version  of The  Cave  of the  Nymphs, writes:

Indeed,  Boreas  (the  North  wind)  is proper  to souls passing into  generation:  for the  northern   blasts  recreate  those  who  are  on  the  verge  of  death ... For  the north,  from  its superior  coldness, collects into  one,  detains  and  strengthens   the soul in the most moist and frigid embraces of terrene  generation....8

(Here it may  be  noted  that   the  Ancient   Mariner is  blown  southward  by  the northern storm-blast, which  is "tyrannous and  strong". The similarity here  and elsewhere suggests that there is a close relationship between Lowry's story and Coleridge's poem.) That the sea is "hellishly  rough" is only  the  first example of Lowry's  use, in  an  apparently offhand   way,  of  conversational expressions   that are   meant   to  carry   a  considerable  weight  of  significance. Since,  in  the  neo­ Platonic  philosophy,   this  world  is Hades   or  Hell,   the  sea  that  represents  the  world  of the senses is indeed  "hellish".
The condition of the  exiled  soul is that  of  alienation:

DEATH IN  LIFE



This  desolate  sense of  alienation   possibly universal  sense of  dispossession. The cramped  cabin one's obvious place on earth.

At  Los Angeles  another passenger  is taken  on: "His  name? Charon. Naturally." The  voyage  to the south  continues, and  the  hellish desolation  increases:

Strange  islands,  barren  as  icebergs, and  nearly  as  white.  Rocks! -The Lower California  Coast,  giant  pinnacles,  images of barrenness and  desolation,  on  which the heart  is thrown  and  impaled  eternally.

In  "The Ancient Mariner" the  journey  to  the  south  brings  the  Mariner to  the desolation of  a  world  of ice.  Lowry  cannot directly  use  this  in  a  voyage  to  the Panama Canal; but  he can  see the likeness of guano-covered islands  to icebergs, and  so continue the  relationship with  Coleridge  that  is made  explicit  first in  the stories  of the  attempt to shoot  an  albatross  and  the saving  of a man's life by an albatross. In  the  increasing desolation  of the southward voyage,  the  song  of the Diderot's   engines,  which   awakened  the  mind   to  consciousness  and   adventure, now  turns   to  a  lament. The   voyage  has  led  this  Ulysses  into   the  shadow  of spiritual death; the  albatross  of salvation  is replaced  by the  digarilla, "a  bird  of ill omen". As  rational consciousness  awakens,  man  becomes  imprisoned  in  his world:

Man  not enmeshed by, but  killed  by his own book and  the malign forces it arouses. Wonderful  theme. Buy planchette  for necessary dictation.
-Death takes a holiday. On  a Liberty  ship.
-Or does he?  All day I hear  him "cackling  like a pirate."

The  voyage  of enlightenment and  liberty,  with  the  S.S.  Diderot  headed  for  the south  -the  world  of material things -is a  journey  to spiritual death; the soul has  been  entrapped:

... I am a voice, yet with physical feelings, I enter what  can only be described­ I  won't  describe it-with  teeth, that  snap tight  behind me:  at the same time, in an  inexplicable  way,  this  is  like going  through   the  Panama  Canal, and  what closes behind  me  is, as it  were, a lock:  in  a  sense I am  now  a  ship,  but  I  am also a voice and  also Martin  Trumbaugh, and  now I am, or  he  is, in the  realm of death.... Death  himself is a hideous looking red-faced  keeper  of a  prison....

The  world  of  'reality' as a trap, a death-in-life, a prison; this is centrally in  the nco-Platonic tradition. That  the  human being  is "a  ship" is  also,  as  we  have seen,  one  of  the  traditional myths  of the  neo-Platonists.

17

DEATH IN  LIFE



IN THIS  WORLD, consciousness, as for the Ancient  Mariner,  is a  hellish condition, since the love of life is lost. Here  Lowry's  gloss from  "The Ancient  Mariner" indicates a death-in-life:  "And  envieth  that  they should  live,
and so many lie dead." However, the ordeals that  Ulysses undergoes are prepara­ tions and  testings of the soul, and  Lowry sees even  this state  of  alienation  and grief as an ordeal that can be miraculously overcome:

Sigbj121rn  Wilderness (pity my name is such a good one because I  can't  use it) could only pray for a miracle, that  miraculously some love of life would come back.
It  has: apparently this retracing of a course was part of the main ordeal; and even at this time Martin knew it to be no dream, but some strange symbolism of the future.

The  crew of this ship will not  mutiny,  because "(a) this is a happy  ship"  and "(b) they want  to be home for Christmas."  The  symbolism here is accompanied by praise  of the  French  and  is followed  by the  Captain's refusal  to shoot  the albatross that  appears "crucified on the cross-trees". The  Diderot, it seems, repre­ sents  the  kind  of enlightenment  that  is not  necessarily or  permanently  at  war with  the  human  senses and  faculties,  but  gives them  happiness  in  the  prospect of  "home". At  the same  time  the  Captain has  reverence  for  life and  for  the principle of salvation  represented  by the Albatross-Christ.  There  is, it  may be, a suggestion of brotherhood  in liberty in  the  repeated  use of "Frere  Jacques" in this story;  certainly  at the end it appears  as an expression of the  enlightenment  of love.
The  Panama  Canal  itself is presented, through  the device of a historical gloss
in the margins, as the achievement  of a "great  new era of enlightenment" and as a  technological  realization  of  the  modern  spirit.  In  the  traveller's  personal  ex­ perience, however, the Canal  is the most hellish part  of the  journey:

Blackest history of  canal's  horror,  failure,  collapse, murder,  suicide, fever,  at Calabra  Cut.... Hot here as a Turkish  bath  in  hell. Jungle  has to be chopped back every day.

The  Diderot is travelling to the eastern  world  (in  Porphyry  the abode of gods) while the Manatee, from  London,  is going to the western  world  (the  abode, in Porphyry,  of demons) : 9
Another  ship from  London,  all  going the  other  way steaming  very swiftly as with the current.  (Bergson.)

18

DEATH  IN  LIFE



The British ship,  as opposed  to the  French, is travelling  with  the  current of  his­ tory, and,  as the  gloss suggests,  learning  nothing  of the  madness of the  westward  journey  to  demonic mechanical achievement:

... You would scarcely credit  that  so many people for  so many  years during  this long era of enlightenment could  be so goddamned  stupid,  could  be so ferociously ignorant,  could  have learned  so little, that  they went on doing  precisely this same sort of bloody thing.

The emergence of  the  Diderot  from  the  last  lock of the  Canal offers  an  end  to the  fear  of separation, or  alienation, from  Primrose:

And ourselves, watching,  happy,  happy  at  the  news we won't  be separated  after all.

As I shall show,  this  apparently casual  comment conveys, or  attempts to convey, the  happiness of the  watchful and  awakened mind  at  the  knowledge of its union with  the  soul.
The   journey  to  the  north-east is still  perilous,  but  Charon has  been  dropped,
and  the  wine  ( pinard)  and  the  cake  indicate the sacramental hope  that  at  the same  time demands a sacrifice,  and  is therefore  threatening:

But  what  is  that  cake  going  to  demand  of  the  Trumbaughs?  The   cake  itself seems a nightmare. In  spite of stars, wind, and sun, Martin  had  almost foundered in some complicated  and  absurd  abyss of s.elf, could only pray for another  miracle to get out  of it.

In  the  late  classical  eschatology, the  journey  of the soul  to its  heavenly  home is achieved  through a process of purgation, in which  it is washed  by rain,  blown by the wind,  and  tormented by lightning, so that  it is purified  by the  elements  of water, air,  and  fire. 10 Lowry  duly  brings  this in:
Two  squalls;  cobalt  thunderstorms. Wind  catches spray  and  blows it  across the sea like rain,  a tiny squall  of rain.
Martin  was gloomy and  savage, lying all day in his bunk  predicting  death  and disaster.
During  these  last  days,  since  going  through  the  Anageda  Passage, have  been through  some important spiritual  passage too-what  does it mean?

"What it  means" is that   the  soul  is being  cured  of its  attachment to  material things,  and  is passing  through its purgatorial ordeal.

Terrific  squall towards sunset. Thunder. Cobalt lightnings  reveal a sizzling sea ...
vision of creation.


19

DEATH IN  LIFE



-Am glad  to be welcomed by skipper  again-really  believe I have  now gone through  some spiritual  ordeal ... though  a little  hard  to see what.

The  voyage into  the Atlantic takes the ship  into  a "godawful storm"; the  term is not  to  be  taken  lightly, for  the  wind  that  blows  from  the  south  is the  terrible wind  of God  that  blows souls out  of generation into  the  true  life after  death, the equivalent of the "good  south  wind" that  blows the Ancient Mariner northwards. The fear  of death  is evoked by Lowry  in the  passages for  translation into  French where  "the man  was not dead  but  his wife told  him  he had  died  two  days ago"; and  "she  dressed  herself as the Goddess of Death." This  is the "King Storm whose sheen  is Fearful". The  terror  of  death   is further  heightened by  the  Conradian description of the storm,  where  the gloss from  Coleridge adds  the suggestion  of a metaphysical terror:
He  heareth  sounds, and  seeth strange  sights and  commotions  in  the  sky and  the elements.

The  religious  dread is continued in the  Rilke  quotation from  the  Blessed Angela:

... "Si  [Dieu1 ...ne me changeait  pas moi-meme, s'il ne commen ait
moi  une  nouvelle operation,  au  lieu de  me faire  du  bien, les sages, les saints  et
Dieu  exasperaient   au  dela  de  toute  expression  mon  desespoir,  rna  fureur,   rna tristesse, rna  douleur,  et  mon  aveuglement!"

The meaning of  the  wind  that  blows  the  soul  northward with  a  terrible  speed into  the  new  birth of death  is to be found  in the  classical  eschatology:

... The  southern  gales dissolve life.... the  south   (wind)   is more  vehement  to­
wards  the  end.11

Cicero  records  the  speed of the soul as it leaves  its corporeal nature:

Add  that  the soul comes to make its escape all the  more  readily  from our  air ... because  there  is nothing  swifter  than  the  speed  of  the  soul;  there  is no sort  of speed  which  can  match  the speed of the  soul.12

In  Lowry,  the  gale  gets steadily  worse;  and  the  climax  is reached off the Azores;
here  Lowry  uses Coleridge's gloss:

The  Mariner hath  been  cast  into  a  trance; for  the  angelic  power  causeth  the vessel to  drive  northward  faster  than  human   life could  endure.

In  spite  of  the   realistic   trappings,  and   the   apparently  leisurely   discussion  of literature and   life,  the  intention is  evidently   to  represent  the   terror   of  death. Lowry  here  permits himself a little  joke:

20

DEATH IN  LIFE



We  have  had  to  change  our  course,  the  skipper  says, and  are  going  by  dead reckoning.

The storm  at sea is paralleled by the storm  in Martin's soul;  on  the  northward and  eastward voyage  he searches  his conscience,  and  undergoes a kind  of  purga­ tion:

Now you see how easy it is to be carried  away by an impulse of hatred! There  is some truth  in  what  I say  (that  is, it  is certainly  true  that  I hate  these people) but  what  of the  whole  thing,  read  aright?  What  a  testimony  to my inadequacy, my selfishness, my complete  confusion indeed!

The self-examination and  the  moral  anguish  in  Martin's experience provide  the natural  counter-part of  the   elemental  purging   by  wind,   rain,   and   lightning. Doubt  and  fear  assail the soul;  the story about  being  thought to be the author of The  Trial, and   the  claim  to  have  recognized   Kierkegaard  before  he  was  well known,  are  not  mere  anecdotes:

The  author  ... feels himself to be some sort of unrecognized  pioneer,  who maybe even lives himself in a state of Fear  and  Trembling,  perhaps  even  in  undergoing some sort  of Trial  at  the  moment.

In  this situation Martin somewhat surprisingly  turns  not  to  beatific  visions or  a sense of sin,  but  to well-established Pythagorean  and  neo-Platonic virtues:

Equilibrium, sobriety, moderation,  wisdom:  these unpopular and  unpleasant  vir­ tues,  without  which  meditation   and  even  goodness are  impossible,  must  some­ how,  because  they  are  so unpleasant,  be  recommended  as states  of  being  to  be embraced  with a kind of passion.

These  virtues  are  those  recommended by the  neo-Platonists, as a  preparation for vision of the beautiful:

Indeed,  as the  ancient  oracle  declares,  temperance  and  fortitude, prudence  and every virtue  are  certain  purgatives  of the soulY

It is not  surprising, then,  to find  Lowry  ending  this passage  with  a  Pythagorean insistence  on  the  unity  of being,  and  the  need  for love, not only  of men,  but  "of all God's  creatures, human and  animal".
The promise  of reconciliation and  release is offered in the  memory  of a French movie  of The  Fall of the  House of Usher:

... The   unspeakably   happy  ending  of  the  film,  by  the  way,  Martin  thought, under  the stars, with  Orion  suddenly turned  into  the cross, and  Usher  reconciled

21

DEATH  IN LIFE



with his wife in  this life yet on another  plane, was a stroke of genius perhaps beyond Poe himself.

The  significance given here to the appearance of Orion  as the cross reflects the use of  pagan  myth  mixed  with  Christian  doctrine.  The   theme  of  union  and separation  is important in  the story, and  seems to reflect a  modification  of the attainment by Ulysses, in the myth, of union  with his Penelope,  the true wisdom of the soul. Of this Porphyry, in Taylor's  account,  tells us:

... Ulysses will not always wish in vain for a  passage over the dark ocean of a corporeal life, but by the assistance of Mercury, who may be considered as the emblem of reason, he will at  length be enabled  to quit  the magic embraces of Calypso, the goddess of Sense, and  to  return  again  into  the arms of  Penelope, or  Philosophy, the long lost and proper object of his love.14

Martin's voyage, unlike that  of Ulysses, begins in union  with  his true  love, and only the entry into  the Panama Canal-the  hell of a rational  and  mechanical "enlightenment" -threatens him with separation from her:  "Primrose  and  my­ self are  the sole passengers aboard  the freighter." The  home  they  have  left  is, it seems, the true home of Primrose, who may be disquieted on the voyage if she is reminded  of it:

"Keep  quiet about house or will spoil voyage for  Primrose." Martin  and  Primrose are happy  in their  union  within  the ship:
Nov. g.  Primrose and  Sigbj0rn Wilderness are  happy  in  their  cramped  Chief
Gunner's  cabin.

Primrose  is the  very source  of living vision to  Martin; "the  stars  are  only  not dead when I look at them with Primrose".  Primrose is shown as characteristically responding  to beauty and life:

A flying fish skidding over the sapphire sea toward an albatross floating to meet it:  ecstasy. Primrose in seventh Heaven.

(This is clearly a symbolical passage, the flying-fish of the soul aspiring to the albatross  of salvation.)   It  is only with  the arrival  at  the  Panama Canal  that  a separation  is threatened:

Bad news: due to the unexpected arrival of more passengers in Cristobal, perhaps
Primrose and I are to be separated, into different cabins.

However,  even the Canal  does not separate  them,  so that  it seems that  Lowry is claiming  a unity through  the darkest  part  of his journey  with his Primrose or

22

DEATH  IN  LIFE



true  wisdom of the soul.  It  is she who explains to him  the  significance  of the locks:

Significance of locks:   in each one you are locked, Primrose says, as it were, in an experience.

The  separation  seems not  to  take  place, though  this is perhaps  designedly not made  quite  clear  in  the story. After  the  voyage through  the  Canal  the fear  of separation  is removed.  It is Primrose who suggests the  buying of wine. Primrose is "afraid  of this boat,  thrown  together  in  wartime  by makers  of washing  ma­ chines,"  a significant  passage, since the soul is unhappy  in the ship of the body, which  is to  undergo  its  purgation.   Primrose  is the  principle  to  which  Martin  wishes to be true:

Above all things perhaps he wanted to  be loyal to Primrose in life. He wanted to be loyal to  her  beyond life, and  in  whatever life there  might  be  beyond. He wanted to  be loyal to her beyond death. In short, at the bottom of his chaos of a nature,  he worshiped the virtues that  the world seems long since to have  dis­ missed as dull or simply good business or as not pertaining  to reality at  all.  So that, as in his lower, so in his higher nature too, he felt himself to be non-human.

In  this way  Primrose  is given  the  character  of  Martin's  true  soul, or  wisdom. The  saving  of Primrose  is, it seems, the concern of the ship's  crew:  "All  night we have been saving  your life Madame."
The presence of Martin's Primrose throughout the  journey thus imposes an important modification  of the Ulysses theme;  but it does not represent  a weaken­ ing of the neo-Platonic  content.  For to those familiar with the tradition in which Lowry  is writing,  Primrose  is early  in  the story identified  with  Psyche, exiled from  her starry  home and  threatened  with separation  from  Cupid, her  rational nature.  In  this way two different  but  related  myths are  interwoven  in  Lowry's story.
Of  the myth of  Psyche Taylor  writes:

Venus is represented desiring Mercury to proclaim Psyche through  all lands, as one of her female slaves that has fled from her service.15

As the ship leaves Vancouver, the first mention of Primrose reveals her "wearing all her Mexican silver bracelets, calmly tense, electrically beautiful  and  excited". This  is a slight  but  distinct  hint  of enslavement.  When  Primrose  is next  men­ tioned,  Martin  says he  must  "keep  quiet  about  house or  will spoil  voyage for Primrose". The  true home of Psyche or the soul is in Heaven,  as Taylor  records:

DEATH IN  LIFE



[The  descent of  Psyche] signifies the  descent of  the  soul from  the  intelligible world into a mundane condition of being, but without  abandoning its  establish­ ment in the Heavens.16

This  may be taken  with the following passage in Taylor:

The gems, too, on which Psyche is said to have trod in every part of the Palace
[Heaven],  are evidently symbolical of the stars.U

As the ship leaves Vancouver,  the stars as jewels-the floor of Heaven-shine over the lovers as they set out on their southward   journey:

Leaving at  night  the  jeweled city. Baguette of diamonds  on  black velvet, says
Primrose: ruby and emerald harbor lights. Topaz and gold lights on two bridges.
Primrose is very happy. We embrace in the dark, on deck.
And later:  "Our  house. Incredible  jewel-like days in  December, sometimes." The embrace  "in  the dark"  evokes the love of Psyche for her Cupid,  whom she
was not allowed to see, and whom she loved in the dark. That she is "happy" is a reflection of the heavenly joy from which she is now departing on her exile, with its threat  of separation.  Psyche, according  to Taylor,  is tempted  into  the  world of  material  things  by her  sisters, "imagination  and  nature", at  the  behest  of Venus.18  Throughout the story, Primrose  is shown  taking  an  eager  interest  and delight  in  nature,  and  an  imaginative  response to its life. Further, in  the same passage, Taylor  informs us that  Psyche, after  her descent, is "represented as hav­ ing  a stumbling  and  reeling gait,"  since  "Plato, in  the  Phaedo,  says,  that the soul is drawn  into  the  body  with  a  staggering  motion." 19  This  is  humorously touched  on when Primrose, in the storm, "comes staggering  in every so often  to reassure me". Lowry is at times over-ingenious in the use of his myth. He  repre­ sents  his  Martin   as  "heroically"  reading  "a  few  pages  of   William  Empson's Seven Types  of Ambiguity  each night before going to sleep, just to keep his hand in, as it were, and  to keep up with the times...." So he is capable  of represent­ ing the "defiling"  or staining of the bodily vesture of the soul, and its consequent anguish, in the following terms:

Crash! Coffee, milk, etc. falls into Primrose's lap and on the floor. I fear she will be scalded (she was too)  but she is wailing because her pretty new red corduroy slacks are stained.

The  sleep  into  which  Psyche falls in  the  myth  is  interpreted   by  Taylor   as representing  the Platonic sleep of the soul, which, if not made  vigilant  and  alert

24

DEATH  IN  LIFE



by the intellect, will "descend  to Hades,  and  be overwhelmed  with  a sleep  per­
fectly profound." 20

The  death  of the soul is, while merged, or baptized, as it were, in  the present body, to descend into matter, and  be filled with impurity ... For to be plunged into matter  is to descend into Hades, and fall asleep.21

This helps to explain  the insistent use of "Frere Jacques", repeated  seven times in the story, which  moreover  both  begins and  ends with  this song. What  it asks is "Brother,  are  you  asleep?"  It also calls for  the  ringing  of the  matin  bells (of spiritual  awakening) ; and  it announces in turn  both doom and salvation. It may therefore  be taken  that  one of the rna jar themes of the story is the importance  of intellect in rousing the soul from its lethargy and fear. The tradition  within which Lowry was working was centrally intellectualist;  the soul, or affective principle in man, was saved not by love alone, but by love under the guidance of intellect, the divine principle in man. In spite of its fearful voyage, the S.S. Diderot  is travelling eastward  to  the  realm  of light and  of the gods, and  it  bears a  name  that  does homage to the enlightenment of the mind.
The story ends with the awakening of the passengers to arrival  at the harbour, signalled as in "The Ancient  Mariner" by the lighthouse  ("Bishop  light")   and with  the  engines  ringing  the  matins  of a  new dawn  ( "Sonnez  les matines!"). That  this is the dawn  of love is made  plain by the gloss from  Coleridge:

And to  teach  by his own  example, love and  reverence to  all  things that  God made and  loveth.

Finally, lest it be thought  that  Lowry unfairly left his readers without a  warn­ ing of the kind of attention he was hoping for, we must  note a hint  given early in  the story:

Brilliant comment of a person to whom I once lent Ulysses  on returning it  the next day:  "Thanks  awfully. Very good."  (Lawrence  also said:  "The  whole is a strange assembly of apparently incongruous parts, slipping past one another.")

This is a clear enough  warning  to the reader  not to suppose  that  "Through  the Panama" is itself a "strange assembly of apparently  incongruous  parts",  a series of heavily annotated travel  notes, and  nothing  more.  Lowry, it seemed,  hoped that  he would  find  readers  who would  have more to say about  his story than: "Thanks awfully. Very good." The  choice of Ulysses  as an illustration  of  philis­ tine inattentiveness  is perhaps  not as helpful as it was intended  to be; one of the problems for  an  esoteric  writer  is to  judge with  any  accuracy  what  degree  of

DEATH  IN  LIFE



knowledge he may expect his readers to supply. It  does however suggest that  the use made of the sea-voyage is not simply derived  from  "The Ancient  Mariner", but that  Lowry recognized, or thought  he recognized, the presence of the Ulysses myth in Coleridge's  poem.
"Through the Panama" is scarcely so successful a story as others in this volume
in  which  myth  and  reality are  more subtly  mixed.  Its  interest  lies in the  open exposure of the method,  and of its relationship  to classical eschatology;  and  this in turn  suggests that  we might do well to turn  to "The Ancient  Mariner" once again,  with the help of Lowry's insights into  that  poem  and  into its relationship to the tradition.
If there is indeed a deliberate use of the neo-Platonic  tradition  in this story, it
seems fruitless to ask where Lowry might  have  come  across it.  Interest  in  neo­ Platonism and the publishing of Taylor's works flourished in America untilI 8go, as Professor Harper records.22   It is possible that  Lowry came across Taylor  either directly  or  through  conversation  in  the course of his  research  into  the  esoteric. During  the  past  eighty  years the  tradition   has  almost  entirely  vanished  from sight. Those  of us with  a predominantly  academic  education  are  only  now  be­ ginning  to  realize  its  earlier  importance;  but  an  adventurous   and   voracious reader, seeking for what  might feed rather  than  deaden  the imagination, might well, like Yeats, have  turned  to  the  neo-Platonic  tradition as  a source  of  new significance and vitality.


FOOTNOTES

1 Perle Epstein, The   Private Labyrinth  of Malcolm   Lowry-Under the  Volcano and the  Caballa, New York, 1969.
2   Kathleen  Raine and George Mills Harper, Thomas Taylor  the  Platonist, Prince­
ton,  Ig6g.  (Referred  to hereafter as Taylor).
8   Malcolm Lowry, Hear Us 0 Lord  from heaven  thy  dwelling  place, Philadelphia and  New York, I961.
• "Ulyxem existimamus esse intellectum animae ducem; socios, mentis agitationes et congenitas  vires  atque  facultates."  De   Ulixis   Erroribus  ethice   explicatae,  tr. Johannes Columbus, Stockholm, I678,  p. 23.
"But our true country, like that of Ulysses, is from whence we came, and where our father  lives." Plotinus, On  the  Beautiful,  quoted  in  Thomas  Taylor,  Por­ phyrius, Select Works,  London, 1823, p. 271.
6   Thomas Taylor, The  Philosophical and  Mathematical Commentaries  of Proclus,
2 vols., London, I792,  II,  p. 287.  (Hereafter  referred  to as Proclus.)
7   Proclus, II,  p. 294·
8   Proclus, II,  p. 28g.
9  Proclus, II, p. 292.

DEATH IN  LIFE


1° Franz  Cumont,  Astrology and  Religion among the Greeks and  Romans,  tr.  J. B.
Baker,  London,  1912, p.  105. See  also Dupuis,  Origines  de  tous  les Cultes,  10
vols., Paris, 1834, VI, p. 1o8.
11 Proclus, II,  p. 289.
12  Taylor,  pp. 313-4.
13  Cicero,  Disputations,  I, xix, 43, in Tusculan   Disputations, ed.  J. E. King,  Lon-
don,  1927.
14   Taylor, p. 156  (from  Porphyry.)
15  Thomas  Taylor,  The  Fable of  Cupid  and  Psyche, London,  1795, p. ix.
16  Cupid  and  Psyche, p. vi.
17  Cupid  and  Psyche, p. vi.
18  Cupid  and Psyche, p. vii.
19  Cupid  and  Psyche, pp.  viii- ix.
2° Cupid  and  Psyche, p. xiv.
21  Cupid  and  Psyche, p. xv.
22    Taylor, pp. 49-102.



LOWRY'S PURGATORY

Versions of" Lunar Caustic"




David Benham








IN 1934 MALcOLM LowRY  spent a lew days in New Yo,k's
Bellevue Mental  Hospital.  Horrified  by  what  he  saw  there,  he  wrote  a  story,
now lost, about  a  journalist,  who,  through  a  misunderstanding, is detained  at the  hospital.  Two  years later  Lowry  recast  the  story  as  a  novella,  called  The Last Address; and  in 1940 he produced  yet another  version, titled Swinging the Maelstrom. At his death  he was working on a melding  of these two versions, to be called  Lunar Caustic. Lowry himself was not  to complete  the  melding/ but typescripts of the  two versions are  extant; we find  in  them  not  two successive states of a single work so much  as two distinct  works which  differ considerably in  method  and  intention.
In  Lowry's original conception  of The  Voyage That  Never Ends as "a  Dan­ tesque trilogy", Lunar Caustic was to play the Purgatorio to Under the Volcano's Inferno.  This  provides a useful hint, because  Purgatory  is a kind of  median  be­ tween  Heaven  and  Hell, a  place of transition  where  opposites  meet.  Here  evil is cauterized  from  the soul-lunar caustic  itself is the  painful  but  medically effective silver nitrate-and  knowing this, the soul is ecstatic in its agony;  and, although  the  process is a kind of death,  this death  is the prelude  to rebirth.  But modern  man  cannot  cominit  himself to such  a  Dantesque  conception  of Purga­ tory, even as a metaphor; his faith  in salvation is not strong  enough.  The  hos­ pital's  patients,  like  Purgatory's  sinners,  are  allowed  no  rest;  but  the  patients' painful shuffling around  the ward  is no more  than  a mindless "marathon of the dead." The  world of Lunar  Caustic is deeply  ambiguous,  and  is closer to  hell than  to heaven.

LOWRY'S PURGATORY



Ambiguity  runs  through  the  descriptions both of New York and  the hospital itself. The  city we see in the story is one in which the transitory  is most in evi­ dence. Its factories  wave a farewell  to life; the ships which  come and  go  bring sometimes  a suggestion of hope, but  more often of hopelessness. The  cry  of the hospital  patients is described  as

... partly a cheer and  partly  a wailing shriek, like some cry of the imprisoned spirit  of  New York itself, that  spirit  haunting  the  abyss between  Europe  and America and which broods like futurity over the Western Ocean.

Encompassing  the  polarity  between  joy and  despair,  placed  uneasily  between the New World  and  the  Old,  New York personifies a kind  of insecurity. It is a city perched on the edge of a chasm.
The  hospital, which is at once a prison and  an asylum, lies on the  East River in the centre of this city of shifting meanings. In the two wharves before the observation  ward,  we  are  presented  again  with  the  juxtaposition   of  life  and death, of hope and despair;  on the one is the powerhouse and  the hanging  noose, while moored at the other are the white and blue boats "which  seemed to tell as they  nudged  and  nibbled  ceaselessly at  the suicidal  blackness of  the  water,  of white and  blue girls in summer". Between the wharves is the  wrecked barge on which,  momentarily,   the  protagonist  sees the  crumpled  body  of  a  sailor;  this barge,  to  which  the boy Garry  will return  again  and  again  in  his stories, is the external  emblem  of the  world  of decay in  which the  patients  live. Throughout the  description  of the  setting,  opposites coexist, but  the  negative  elements  pre­ dominate; we are  made  more aware  of death  than  of life, of decay  more  than of any  possible regeneration.
The  ambivalence  of  the  outside  world  is reflected  in  the  patients  and  staff of the  hospital.  Garry,  for  example,  is an  entertaining   innocent,  but  one  who has  committed   a  horrible  crime.  He  is  a  moral  paradox   personified;  neither guilty  nor  guiltless, in  him  the  cycle of innocence -guilt -repentance -re­ demption  is broken.  He  is creative,  but  this creativity  can  be seen  both  as an attempt   to  formulate  a  vision of reality and  as an  attempt   to avoid  coming to terms  with  reality.  Again,  we can  see in  Claggart  a  conscientious  doctor  who is doing his best in an  almost impossible situation,  and  an  insensitive  bully who cares little for his patients.
In this world where orientation is impossible, Sigbjorn Lawhill, the protagonist of The  Last Address, is utterly  alone;  his father  and  his son are  dead,  his wife has left him. As a sailor, he is related  to no particular  place. There  is nothing,

29

LOWRYS  PURGATORY



either in terms of awareness of the past or relationships  in the present, by which his personality might be defined; he is a man  in a vacuum,  a man without iden­ tity. The  Last Address is an account  of his attempt  to find himself in  relation  to others;  for only by caring for and  helping  others  can  he escape the  limitations of his own  mind.  This  theme  is adumbrated in  his cryptic  shout  as  he  enters the hospital:
"Veut-on que  je  disparaisse, que  je  plonge, a la  recherche  de l'anneau ... I am sent to save my father, to find my son, to heal  the  eternal  horror  of three,  to resolve the immedicable horror of opposites."

Yet  Lawhill  is attracted  by the isolation  he  has  to  escape  from;  like  Geoffrey Firmin,  he is drawn  to extinguish  the self in  alcoholic oblivion. The  dichotomy within  his own  mind  parallels  those in  the  outside  world.
The  only  way  Lawhill can structure  his world  at  the  beginning  of  the story is through  his "hysterical  identification"  with  Melville;  he integrates  his  experi­ ences in the hospital by relating  them to the  patterns  of experience  which  Mel­ ville works out in M oby Dick and  Billy Budd. He associates, for example, the boy Garry  with  Melville's Pip, who, by losing his sanity, saw into  a  deeper  reality; and  while watching  the groping  hand  during  the  puppet-show,  he murmurs  to himself "Leviathan". The  identification  with  Melville serves not only as an indi­ cation  of  Lawhill's  neurotic  perception  of   the  world,  but  also forms  a  major structural element  in  the  story.  Lawhill  is  associated  both  with  the  doomed Pequod  and  the  alienated  Ahab;  the first  quotation from  Moby  Dick  which  is applied  to him suggests some impending disaster-"feeling that  he encompassed in  his stare  oceans  from  which  might  be  revealed  that  phantom   destroyer  of himself".  Like Ahab,  he has to risk  destruction  in order  to test reality, and  the destruction  might  be  total  annihilation -insanity or  some  irrevocable  psychic death -or  the  necessary  prelude  to regeneration.
The  first  people  Lawhill sees on  waking  up  in  the  hospital  are  Garry  and Horowitz,  the spiritual  father  and  son for  whom  he  has  been  searching.  They are  ostensibly in  the  hospital  because  their  insanity  is dangerous -Garry  has killed  a  young  girl  and  Horowitz  has  threatened  to  kill  his  brother-in-law's family;  nevertheless Lawhill cannot  accept  that  they are, in any significant sense of the word, insane. He feels that  Garry is a kind of unlettered  Rimbaud, a boy whose obsession with the decay which  permeates  the world  reveals a perceptive intuition  which  is fundamentally   artistic;  the  stories  which  Claggart   dismisses as normally  abnormal  fantasies are, to Lawhill,  frightening and  valid  visions of

LOWRYS PURGATORY



chaos. Similarly he sees Horowitz  as the Wandering  Jew, a man  who epitomizes in  himself suffering  mankind,  and  is sympathetic  to his claim  that  he has been institutionalized  because of his Communist  views.
With  the  companionship of these two  people, Lawhill  begins to take  an  in­
terest in those around  him. He is quickly sickened by the degradation  and casual cruelty  which seem an  accepted  part  of the hospital life, and,  realizing his own relative health, comes to feel that he has a responsibility to draw  attention  to  the patients' situation.  Yet at the same time, in watching  the derelicts trapped  in the hospital,  he  becomes increasingly  aware  of  the  ambiguities  of existence;  when he sees the old men eating, he "gradually  thought  he understood  the meaning  of death,  not  as a sudden  dispatch  of violence, but  as a  function  of life".  There can  be  no  unity  within  life itself, for  the  unity  is composed  of  both  life and death; terror  is inescapable.  Opposites collapse into one another: "even  Nature herself is shot through  with  jitteriness".
For  Lawhill, insanity is often an understandable response to an  insane world;
the  job of the  physician is not  to teach  his patients  to  adapt  to this world, but to give them  a  new  awareness  of themselves. With  his new-found  concern  for others, he tries to explain to Claggart  that many of the patients are being brought to a debased and servile acceptance  of themselves and of the world. "Many," he argues,  "who  are  supposed  to be mad  here ... are simply  people  who  perhaps once saw, however confusedly, the necessity for change in themselves, for rebirth". But Claggart,  while admitting that  the hospital is less than  perfect, has no  diffi­ culty in  discrediting  Lawhill's  central  arguments.  He  sees Lawhill's  complaints about  the inhumanity of the  hospital  are  merely reflecting his  refusal  to accept authority,  and  his perception  of the patients'  need for rebirth  as no more than  a projection  of his own  neurosis. He  never admits  that  Lawhill's  ideas  have  any kind of objectivity;  they arise only from "his own state." When apparently talking about other  patients, he is really talking about  himself; in describing Garry as an unformed  Rimbaud, he is merely playing out his own desire to write.
In  this clash between  Lawhill  and  Claggart,  it is difficult to say that  either  is
right  or  wrong.  While  Claggart's   name,  the  parallels  with  Melville/   and  the extreme distrust  which leads the doctor  to  dismiss Billy Budd itself as a fabrica­ tion on Lawhill's  part  all suggest that  truth,  or at least goodness, lies  with Law­ hill in the shifting  ambiguities set up in the episode, both are, in their own terms, men of goodwill. They simply cannot  communicate; there is no way for Lawhill to express his ideas within Claggart's  terms of reference, and  therefore he cannot  persuade  him  to  change  the  situation.  Under   this  trial  he  begins  to  validate

31

LOWRYS  PURGATORY



Claggart's  analysis; he is reduced  to bitter  and  insulting  sarcasm,  to fantasizing on his experience, and  to challenging  the doctor  to a test of strength.




l:E ENCOUNTER WITH  Claggart  represents  the farthest  exten­ sion of Lawhill's  attempt  to live in the outside  world  and  to help  those  around him, and  with his failure he begins to slide back  into  the  abyss of his  own self­ absorption.  Looking out at the city from the annexe  to Claggart's office, he sees that  a storm  is gathering; symbolically it is the storm  which  threatens  to engulf humanity  as well as his own mind, but only the patients  in  the hospital, rejected by the "sane"  world, are aware of its approach. As the storm breaks Lawhill feels for a moment  a sense of release, of "being  already  outside, free to run  with the wind if he wished". But the hope that  regeneration  will  come  with the storm  is raised only to be immediately  extinguished,  for  he  realizes that  the bars  on the windows are only the external  counterparts of the spiritual  bars  which are  fixed in his own mind. This recognition of the fundamental identity  between the inner world and the outer is, for Lawhill, the last twist of the knife;  he is trapped  not merely in  the  hospital  or in  the  world,  but  within  his own  psyche, and  he  is himself a product  of the decay which he finds at the centre  of the world. Man's state is hopeless; unable to reach outside himself, he can  never become complete. In  despair,  Lawhill sums up the immense agony of the story in a passage which draws  together  the  East  River,  the  grotesque  ships  which  pass on  it,  and  the equally grotesque  minds which  brood over it:

This  world of the river was one where everything was uncompleted while  func­ tioning in degeneration, from which as from  Garry's  barge, the  image  of  their own shattered or unformed souls was cast back at them. Yes, it was as if  all com­ plementary  factors  had   been  withdrawn  from  this  world!  Its  half-darkness quivered with the anguish of separation from the real light;  just as in his night­ mare,  the  tortoise crawled in  agony looking for  its  shell, and  nails hammered held nothing together, or one-winged birds dropped exhausted  across a maniacal, sunless moon.

The  forces working to destroy  Lawhill  begin  to close in. The  appearance of the  Martha's  Vineyard  reminds  him of the  trip  he  took  with  his wife to  New Bedford -the  place from  which  Melville started   his whaling  voyage;  and  he begins to see a  recurring  pattern  emerging  in  the  chaos  of the storm.  His own quest  for truth  or  destruction  began  at  the same  place  as  Melville's;  and  now,

32

LOWRY'S PURGATORY



in the hospital, he is within sight of "the  last address" at which Melville finished Moby  Dick. Lawhill  remembers  that  the ship which  had  brought  him  to  New Bedford  was, appropriately, the  Providence;  and  this ship,  at  the  height  of the storm, sails past the hospital. Yet though  the name of this ship, and its reappear­ ance  at  this  crucial  moment,   reinforce  the  idea  that   a  pattern  underlies  the world's chaos, the pattern  remains one of anguish. The patients, seeing the Provi­ dence  pass, rush  to the  window  and  begin to scream, and  their  scream  is asso­ ciated  with  the "mechanic  calamity  of the rocking city".
Lawhill learns  that  his friendship  with Garry  is to be broken;  he is returned
to the isolation in which  he began. At  this moment  a seaplane  appears-as  a roar  associated  with  a seaplane  had  accompanied  the groping,  menacing  white hand   during   the  puppet-show-which  becomes, in  a  terrifying  fantasy,  the Moby  Dick which is to destroy  him. The  destruction  comes in  a flash of  light­ ning, but it proves to be neither  total extinction nor the shattering  of the old self which is the necessary prelude  to rebirth;  instead he suffers a spiritual  annihila­ tion  which  presages his physical death.  As Garry  tells Claggart,  "It  only looks like spring."  The  regeneration  which  Lawhill had hoped for cannot  come about in  the world in  which  he finds himself; he is condemned  to the  life-in-death  of perpetual  incompleteness.
He is little changed  by his stay in the hospital. When he leaves he immediately starts  to drink  again;  and  he still searches for human  contact,  imagining passers­ by to be his relatives, or  patients  he had  met in the hospital.  As he  throws his empty  bottle  at  an obscene sketch on  a lavatory  wall which  symbolizes for  him all the obscenity in  the world  at large, he remembers how  Garry  had  described the murder  of the girl:  "It was only a little scratch."  The  two acts of violence link  Lawhill  and  Garry  together,  and  he is forced to  recognize the  paradoxical duality  of human  nature-the coexistence of  innocence  with  guilt, of compas­ sion  with  a  frightening   capacity   for   violence -as  operating   within   himself. Man's  nature  is such  that  he is  inevitably condemned  to suffer;  and  if patterns underlie  chaos,  the  patterns  themselves have  no  meaning  and  imply  no  value. Lawhill's  only escape lies in  embracing  his isolation. At the end  of the story he returns  to the  presexual state  which  Garry  had  never left, finding  security  and oblivion in retiring  "to  the obscurest corner of the bar, where, curled  up like an embryo ... Sigbjorn  Lawhill  could not be seen at all".
The  Last Address is an often  terrifying account of a man  trying to raise him­ self out  of the  pit  of self-absorption,  but  it is a  work  which  leaves  the  reader dissatisfied. One  of the reasons, I think, is that  the onus of blame  for  Lawhill's

33

LOWRY's  PURGATORY



failure is placed largely on the world outside him. His rejection by a man as unsympathetic   as  Claggart  constitutes  an  evasion  of  a  central  problem-the extent to which Lawhill is able to bring himself to accept responsibility for others. Consequently  the questions we want to ask-to what extent he has chosen isola­ ion in the past, and to what extent he is continuing  to choose it in the  present­ can  never  be answered. And  because  we cannot  determine  the  validity  of  his observations of the world around  him, we can  attach  no value to  his final non­ solution.
Swinging  the  Maelstrom  is a  reworking  of  the  situation   and  setting  of The
Last  Address,  but  two  crucial  changes-the protagonist's   failure   as  a   jazz musician,  and  his  relationship  with  the  doctor-lead  toward   a  resolution  of these problems. Bill Plantagenet's  failure as a musician is used in part  to empha­ size the fact  that  his isolation is the  product  of an  inadequacy  in  himself;  it  is both  a symptom  of and  a metaphor  for his  total  spiritual  failure. This  point  is made  when he tries to persuade  Philip,  the  doctor,  that  he is not  a  good  piano player  because  his  hands  cannot  stretch  an  octave.  Philip  replies,  apparently  irrelevantly,  "You  didn't  leave  Ruth   because  your  hands  couldn't   stretch  an octave,"  but he later adds, "Perhaps it was your heart  you  couldn't  make stretch an octave".
The  fact  that  Bill and  Philip are cousins gives Bill a position of responsibility among  the  patients.  As he develops a friendship  with  the  boy and  the old man (who is called Kalowsky in this version),  he comes to feel, like Lawhill, that  the hospital cannot  help them. He determines  to discuss their cases with Philip,  and they  accept  him  as a  potential  saviour.  But  Bill's job is harder  than  Lawhill's, for  his cousin, unlike Claggart,  is a humane and  perceptive  man.  Philip  works as well as he  can  in a situation  which  he  cannot  entirely  control;  during  the puppet-show  it seems to Bill that  the drama

... was being diverted from its course by some s1mster disposition of the  pup­ peteer's; he sensed ... the doctor's increasing discomfort, as of a god, he thought, who discovers all over again that  man is not long to be trusted with  the  strings of his destiny.

However,  the most striking aspect of Philip's  character, as contrasted  with Clag­ gart's,  is his experience of horror.  When  Bill begins  to suggest  that  the  doctor does not  understand  suffering,  Philip  reveals  a  knowledge  far  deeper  than  his own;  deeper  because, while Bill has inflicted suffering on himself,  Philip  has to live with the responsibility of inflicting it on others.

34

LOWRY'S PURGATORY



In  their relationship  as cousins, their detachment  from  the patients,  their  joint responsibility for Garry  and  Kalowsky, and their knowledge of horror,  Philip and Bill form  a  two man
biguity in their relationship,  marked  by the "certain  rebelliousness" which Philip rouses in Bill, and  the long silences which occasionally punctuate their  conversa­ tions,  they  can  like  and   understand   one  another.   Nevertheless,  Philip  is  the greater   person;  his  knowledge  is  wider,  his  insight,  suffering,  and   humanity deeper.  As  a result,  Bill finds himself unable  to  press his  arguments  for  Garry and  Kalowsky;  instead  he comes to accept  the necessity  for  the  apparently  in­ human  institution  of which Philip is a part. Lawhill failed in his plea to Claggart because  they  could  not  communicate; Bill fails  precisely because  he  can  sym­ pathize with Philip's  point  of view so readily.
In  becoming, in effect, part  of the system which is crushing  the  patients,  Bill fails to live up to the spirit of his promise to Garry  and  Kalowsky. He is unable to tell them that  he has implicitly condoned  their treatment in  the hospital, and so for the first time a false note enters into their friendship; he says little to them on  returning  from  Philip's  office, and  refuses to  meet  Garry's  eyes. As a  result of his community  with his cousin, he is driven to isolate himself once more. This isolation, however,  is not  quite  what  Lawhill  reverts to at the  end  of The  Last Address, for while Lawhill  has looked at  the world and  decided,  in effect, that nothing  could  be done,  Bill realizes the necessity of doing  something; his guilty participation in  the system  which  has  produced  Garry  forces him  to  recognize his responsibility to combat  the evil around  him. His phone  call to a relative of one  of the  patients  suggests his need  to cast himself, in some sense, in  the  role of a doctor.
His  release  comes  after  he  has  momentarily  actualized   the  violence  within himself  by  throwing  his  bottle  at  the  obscene sketch.  In  conversation  with  a friendly stranger,  to whom  he introduces  himself as "Herman Melville", he  mis­ takes the name of a passing ship;  the name he hears is the  Acushnet-the ship on which Melville made  his whaling voyage. The ship turns out  to be a Spanish Loyalist, engaged  in  conflict  with  the  White  Whale  of  Fascism,  and  although there  is danger  in  joining  her,  she  offers  an  escape  from  the  paralyzed  self­ absorption  which is Lawhill's  only response to a world of  irresolvable  ambiguity. Bill is able to accept  the implication  that  he, like  Melville, must voyage, must be prepared  to  risk total  annihilation. He is still  isolated, since  he has lost contact with Philip,  Garry,  and  Kalowsky, but  he has  broken out  of the self-destructive circuit  which had  trapped  Lawhill, and is ready to  renew his spiritual  quest.


35

LOWRY's PURGATORY


As STUDIES IN  ALIENATION, The  Last Address and  Swing­
ing  the  Maelstrom  are less compelling  than  Lowry's  major  works;  they  reveal
neither  the  appalling  insight into  man's  potential  for self-destruction  which  we find in Under  the Volcano  and  the later  Mexican  novels, nor  the  awareness  of man's  need  to relate  himself to his total  environment which  is a central  theme in Hear Us 0 Lord  From Heaven  Thy  Dwelling  Place. But  though  imperfect, they are  deeply moving, and  they enable  us to draw  some tentative  conclusions about  The  Voyage  That   Never  Ends,  which  was  to  have  been  composed,  as Lowry first conceived it, of the trilogy:  Under  the Volcano; Lunar  Caustic;  In Ballast to the White Sea.
The  basic  pattern  of  the  trilogy  was,  as  Lowry  called  it,  "withdrawal and
return". The  withdrawal  is from the community  of mankind  into  a kind of hell
-the hell  of  alcoholism,  of  utter  isolation,  of  self-absorption;  and   this  self­ absorption  is  also self-abnegation,  a  complete  loss of  the  individual  sense  of identity. This  descent into hell is an integral  part  of the process of  regeneration,  a recognition of the powers of darkness which operate  in the human  psyche; but it must be followed by a re-entry into the world. The protagonist  begins to relate to  and  identify  with  others,  and  with  this  identification   comes  the  realization that  he has to act. The  final step is his complete  involvement  in the world;  with action,  his human  potentialities, his ability to love and  to create,  become actual.
In  Under  the Volcano,  Geoffrey Firmin  has gone so far  in his self-absorption that  he cannot  make the re-entry. We learn  from  the letter  which Laruelle  reads in  the first chapter  the desperation  with  which  the  Consul  yearns for  Yvonne's return,  but  when  she actually  appears  he is utterly  incapable of responding  to her,  either  verbally  or sexually. As the  day  wears  on,  he is drawn  increasingly to Parian  and  the Farolito;  when, with the discovery of the dying peasant,  he is faced  with  the  human  necessity for  action,  he is not  even  tempted  to  play  the Good Samaritan. Finally he chooses his isolation. "I love hell," he tells Hugh  and Yvonne;  "I can't  wait to get back there."  Yet in fact  he has no choice, for, like Milton's  Satan,  he has become his own hell;  his self-absorption  has been carried to such an extent that his entire spiritual energy is channeled  towards his own destruction.
The  Last  Address is an  account  of an  attempt to  make  the  return,  but  the
attempt  fails because the only relationships which the protagonist can enter into cannot,  by their  nature,  survive. Bill Plantagenet, on  the other  hand,  motivated by his kinship with  his cousin and  his sense of guilt  toward  Garry,  is ultimately

g6

LOWRY'S PURGATORY



able  to act; he  begins  at  last  to orient  himself  in the  outside  world.
Lowry's  account of In  Ballast to the White  Sea (in  a letter  to David  Markson dated August   25, 1951)  indicates that   the  novel  reworked  and   extended   the themes  of Lunar Caustic. The protagonist (called  A in the  letter), like Lawhill and  Plantagenet, is trapped in  a circuit  of inaction; he drinks  heavily,  is unable to  relate  in any  significant way  to others,  and  can  only  identify  with  a  writer, X,  who  is personally   unknown to him.  A's  identification with  X  does  not  serve to structure reality  for  him; it  is so strong  that  it  becomes  a  threat to  his own identity. Obsessed  by  the  idea  that  he  has  in  some sense  been  written by  X,  A is paralyzed by his inability to find  any source  of value  in  the  world.
Like  Plantagenet, he  is eventually able  to  break  out  of  his  inaction; after  a period  of hesitation he  undertakes his voyage  to the  ambiguous White  Sea,  with the intention of trying  to find  X. The  journey  also turns  into  a pilgrimage to the past, for A, after  being  paid  off from  his ship,  finds himself  close to his mother's grave.  In  the churchyard he meets a girl with whom  he falls in love -the setting clearly  indicates the  idea  of  rebirth  -and  in  doing  so he  re-establishes  contact with others. Finally  the series of coincidences which leads him to X, and  the correspondences between   them,  suggest  some  design  in the  chaos   which   both perceive;  and   this  experience  renews  each   man's   faith   in  his  creativity. The search  for  value  is over;  it  is found  to lie not  in  the  individual self,  but  in  ful­ filling  the  self  through interaction with  others.


FOOTNOTES

1 An  edition  of  Lunar  Caustic  by Earle  Birney and  Margerie  Lowry  which  com­ bines the  two  earlier  versions  has  been  published  in  Paris Review   29,  and  by Jonathan  Cape   (London,   1968). Lowry's  typescripts  are   held  by  the  Special Collections  Division  of  the  U.B.C.  Library,  and  are  catalogued   under  the  title Lunar  Caustic. The  latest  complete text of The  Last  Address is ts. 4,  while ts. 8 is the  best copy of Swinging  the  Maelstrom.  My quotations  are  taken  from  the Cape  edition.
2   Claggart  is the  false accuser  in Billy Budd. The  episode  parallels  Chapter 20  of Melville's  novel:   in  each  case  the  innocent  and  honest   (Billy  Budd,  Lawhill, and, by extension,  Garry)   is accused by duplicity  (the  two Claggarts); the inno­ cent  is left  literally  or  figuratively  speechless, and  can  only  express  himself  in violence.








37



MALCOLM LOWRY
AND THE CINEMA




Paul G. Tiessen











LOWRY's THOROUGH KNOWLEDGE and  appreciation of  cine­ matic  technique came  from  his  sustained, intense   interest   in  the  world  of  the film, a world in which  he participated as viewer, critic  and  writer.  His own words express  best his ardent enthusiasm as a viewer,  even  while  he  was living outside  the  urban area  of Vancouver:

I think  I have seen nearly all the great German  films, since the days of Caligari, some of them  many  times, risking my neck even  when  at  school  (where  movies were forbidden)   to see ... Conrad  Veidt in The  Student  of Prague, and  Murnau's wonderful  things, all the films of the great  Ufa days, and  other  later masterpieces.
. . . and  it is an enthusiasm that  has not deserted  me, for only recently we [Lowry
and  his wife Margerie]  have trekked  through  the snow,  (still risking our  neck­ physically on  these occasions because of the ice)   just to keep  up with  the  times, to see Murnau's Last Laugh,  Fritz  Lang's  Destiny  (a  pioneer  piece if  there  ever was one)  and  other  contemporary  films and  Klangfilms  at  the local  Vancouver Film Society.1

This  exuberant reaction   to  the  great  German films  had  already been  expressed in Chapter One  of Under the Volcano, where  M.  Laruelle, a former  film  direc­ tor, nostalgically recalling  his past,  reflects Lowry's personal interest  in

the  old  days  of  the  cinema.... his own  delayed  student   days,  the  days  of  the Student   of Prague, and  Wiene  and  Werner  Krauss  and  Karl  Gruene,  the  Ufa days when a defeated  Germany  was winning  the respect  of the cultured  world  by the  pictures  she was making.

MALCOLM LOWRY AND  THE  CINEMA



The  life-long relationship  between Lowry and  the cinema  reveals itself  every­ where in  his work.  Lowry  himself was not  unaware  of  the  pervasive  influence of the cinema,  particularly  that  of Germany,  upon his own  work:
Nor has anything I  have read influenced my own writing personally more than the first twenty minutes of  Murnau's  Sonnenaufgang   or  the  first and  the  last shots of Karl Gruene's The  Street.2

As film-writer,  Lowry first spent  an  unhappy  period of  time working  in  Holly­ wood,  shortly  before  beginning  his  original  short-story  version  of   Under  the Volcano in  1936:
He worked on several movie scripts, with John  [Davenport], a friend from Cam­ bridge days and  others. He  was always interested in  the cinema ... but  he was unhappy in Hollywood; he didn't like their methods of working, or much of their results, and  he found  it  difficult to work in  tandem  with  several other  writers on the same script. So as soon as possible he left Hollywood and went to Mexico.3

In  a comment  referring  to  Las  Manos  de  Orlac, the  film which is of symbolic significance in his novel, Under the  Volcano, Lowry's mock-praise of Hollywood's version of that  movie-"a remake ... of truly awe-inspiring badness"  4  -wryly records his  reaction  to  the  American  movie factory.  However,  the  Hollywood experience did provide Lowry with the opportunity  of becoming directly involved in the practical  application  of cinema  technique.  Later,  his work -particularly his two unpublished  screen scripts and his main novel-was to provide evidence of his interests in and experience with the cinema.
One  of  the  two  unpublished  film scripts,  "The   Bravest  Boat",  is a  delicate screen adaption of his own  beautifully  and  sensitively woven short-story  of  the same  title.  However,  his  much  more significant  contribution   to  film  art-"by no means  an  ordinary  kind  of script"-
page movie version of F. Scott  Fitzgerald's  novel. Lowry  worked  on  this great
cinema-piece  in 1949  and  1950 in collaboration  with his wife Margerie.  Frank Taylor's  assessment of the  work is certainly  valid. In  a  letter  to  Lowry  he  ob­ served:

I have read many scripts and seen many pictures, but  never before have I  seen writing so purely cinematic. The  impact of your work was much, much greater than that of the novel. It goes devastatingly deep, and  its direct filmic evocation of life's complexities is magic and miraculous.6

In  his arrangement of concrete  visual images chosen specifically for the camera­
eye, Lowry employs many  devices analogous to those which he uses in his novel,


39

MALCOLM LOWRY AND  THE CINEMA



Under the Volcano. Thus, the critical commentary  which Lowry interspersed throughout    the   massive  manuscript   expands   the   reader's   understanding  of Lowry's  techniques  not only in the film-script  but  also in  his novel.
A few years after  the  publication  of Under  the Volcano,  Lowry considered
the possibility of doing a screen adaptation of the novel. His insistence that  it be done  in  Germany  was his greatest  personal compliment   to  the  film art  of  that country:

Nothing could make us happier-happy is not the  word,  in  fact-and  what an opportunity it is! -than for a film to be made of the Volcano in Germany, providing it were done in the best tradition of your great films.7

In  typically  buoyant  letter-writing  style,  Lowry  modestly  recommends  himself and  his wife as writers who might  be exceptionally  eligible for such  an  under­ taking:

I would myself very much wish to make a treatment  of the V oleano for the film, and  Iwould  be very anxious to work on  that  and  the scenario with  my  wife, who not only was a movie actress for  years, but  has collaborated  on  one  film with me ... and  who ... knows the Volcano backwards ... : so,  incidentally  do I, though I say it myself, and we are a first class team, the like of  which is scarcely to be found, I dare say, even in Germany or anywhere else....8

Even  though  Lowry did  not  write  the  projected  scenario,  the  cinematic  idiom which he had already used in the novel would  have made  the problem of  trans­ position relatively simple.



IN ANY  CINEMATIC SCRIPT the role played by the concrete pictorial  images is of primary  concern.  The  camera  itself is used  to  write  the visual poetry. Other  elements take their cue from the visual image. In Under the Volcano,  to  make  the  reader  consciously aware  of  the  primary  role  of  visual
idiom in the work, Lowry intermittently  draws attention by implication  or direct reference to the nature  of the camera itself as a medium  of perception.
During  the  bus-ride of  Chapter   Eight,  for  example,  the  bus's  windows  me­ chanically  define the margins of the scene outside the bus, as if the "movement" of the countryside  and  the  volcano is being  held  within  the  margins  of a  rect­ angular  movie screen. A quick  visual rhythm  is created  by  the ominous  recur­ rence of the changing shapes of the volcano. Long-shots alternate  with close-ups:

MALCOLM LOWRY AND  THE CINEMA



as, descending,  they  circled  round  and  round,  Popocatepetl  slid in and  out  of view continually,  never appearing the same twice, now far away, then vastly near at  hand,  incalculably  distant   at  one  moment,  at  the  next  looming  round   the corner....

The circular movement of  the  bus  imitates  the  panning motion  of  a  mobilized motion  picture camera. The successively alternating views of  the  central  space­ object,  the  volcano, provides  an  effect  analogous to  that  produced by film  mon­ tage,  in  which  "discontinuous" visual fragments of spatial  reality  are edited and juxtaposed.
As the  novel  proceeds  and  the  Consul  literally  moves  closer  and  closer  to  the
threatening form  of  the  volcano  and  to death, a much  heavier  visual  rhythm  is established by the  insistently  regular, temporal reappearance of  Popocatepetl, of whose  nearing presence  the  reader is constantly kept  aware. First  the  volcano  is reflected  within   the  frame of  Yvonne's  mirror   which,  again   mimicking  movie­ making  apparatus,  mechanically manipulates her  view so that  she  sees  only  the  one volcano. Popocatepetl now  was "nearer, looking over her shoulder.... [But] however  she moved  the  mirror she couldn't get poor  Ixta in." Thus, mechanical devices  preclude  the  visual   reunion  of  the  legendary  lovers,  Ixta and   Popo­ catepetl. Some  time  later, as  the  Consul  cries, "I love  hell,"  and   (rejecting life with  Yvonne)  flees  toward death in  the  barranca,  it  seems  as  if a  camera is shooting a  close-up  to  emphasize the  fact  that   his  destruction is  already upon him:

Before  him  the  volcanoes,  preap1tous,  seemed   to  have   drawn  nearer.   They towered up over the  jungle, into  the lowering sky-massive  interests  moving  up in the background.

The seething  rhythm, beating out  the  rushing  approach of inevitable death, does not  cease;  and  several  pages  later  another, closer shot,  taken at  a  sharp angle, imposes  itself  upon  the  eye of the  reader's imagination:

... the  whole  precipitous   bulk  of  Popocatepetl  seemed  to  be coming  towards them ... leaning forward  over the valley.

Finally  the intense  visual  rhythm stops.  It strikes its final  resounding note  above the  head  of the  Consul,  who  is being  meagrely  sustained  in  the  end  by  nothing but  two death-laden mescals:

Popocatepetl towered  through   the  window, its immense flanks  partly  hidden   by rolling  thunderheads; its  peak  blocking  the sky, it  appeared   almost  right  over­ head,  [the  Consul]  directly  beneath  it. Under  the volcano!

MALCOLM LOWRY AND THE CINEMA



The  immense  mass  of the  volcano  spreads across  the  screen,  which  is here  de­ fined  by  the  window  of the  bar.  That a static  landscape has  been  imbued  with a  sense  of  flux  in  which  temporal form  is given  to  the  visual  death-rhythm of the  volcano  is essentially  cinematic. "In  the  cinema," it has  been  said,  "space loses its  static   quality   and   acquires   a  time-charged dynamic  quality. Parts   of space  are  arranged in a temporal order  and  become  part  of a  temporal structure with  a temporal rhythm." 9
The first four  paragraphs of Under  the Volcano  demonstrate a method of  in­
troduction which  also is analogous  to a  traditionally conventional camera  tech­ nique  in  the  film  medium  itself:  the  camera varies  its  range  from  long-shots  to close-ups,  from  the  universal  to  the  intimate. Indeed, this is the  method which Lowry  uses in  his two film scripts  as well. To  introduce "Tender  is the  Night":

The   picture  opens  in  dead  silence  with  a  tremendous   shot  of  the  night  sky, the stars  blazing....
The  camera  seems to be bearing down  upon  us, so that  the sensation  we have
is of  receding  downwards  from  the  sky and  the  moon,  and  from  this  rhythm, to the earth.
The  next instant  the clouds become smoke coming out  of a tunnel  from  which
we see a train  emerging into  morning  sunlight; the  next  we are  in  this  train ... with  Rosemary  Hoyt  and  her  mother,  watching   the  landscape   of  the  French Riviera  out  of the window. Immediately  we draw  almost  to a stop  before a sign standing  in a field....
Meantime,  as the  camera  comes closer, we see as much  as is necessary ... of
the  sign itself ... :
Touriste   Americaine!  Vous  vous  approchez   maintenant  de  la  ville  ancienne d'ANTIBES.... Everything  for the  American  tourist  at  popular  prices!

The cheap commercial seediness  here  emphasized by the  final  close-up  contrasts with  an  overwhelming sense of awe inspired  by the  initial long-shot.
In Lowry's  first paragraph of the film script, "The Bravest  Boat," the relation­ ship  between  the  camera   movement there-from  long-shot to  close-up-and that of Under  th'e Volcano  is at once self-evident:

In  long shot we see the  rip-teeth  of the  winter-white mountains  across the  bay; closer in,  the  combers  riding  in  toward  shore;  and  close-up, what  was there  all along:  the single flare of a rain-drenched  blossom on a flowering tree....

In  Under  the  Volcano, first  Mexico-associated by  latitude with  Hawaii and India-is  the  subject  for  the  camera's bird's-eye view;  for  in  Mexico   Lowry has found a visual image  for the  expression  of universal  truth. Then the  camera

MALCOLM LOWRY AND  THE  CINEMA



seems to zero in first on the  whole town, Quauhnahuac, and  then on  the Hotel Casino de la Selva. Finally,  a close-up of two men in  white  flannels introduces the reader  particularly  to  M.  Laruelle,  the former film-producer,  who will pre­ sent to  the  reader  a  "re-run" of the story of death  which  took  place one  year before.
Another  cinematic  technique,  one which  the cinema  may, in fact,  have  bor­ rowed  from  literary  art,  is the  mechanical  use of typographical  details  which function  with the same visual directness whether caught  by a movie camera  and reflected on a screen or whether  figuratively caught by a camera and  typograph­  ically  reproduced  on  the  pages  of  the  novel. For  example,  the  reader's  visual sense is literally  stimulated   near  the  end  of  Chapter  Eleven  by  the  pictorial reproduction of the black hand,  ominously confirming  the direction  of the Con­ sul's  plunge  toward  death.  An  extension of such  visual, typographical  detail  is Lowry's  use of foreign  phrases or  the words  from  posters, advertisements,  post cards  and  newspaper  headlines-always  ironically informative,   never  thema­ tically incongruous  or artistically irritating. Speaking critically of a similar use of "signs, words, advertisements" in  "Tender  is the Night,"  Lowry says:

... all contributes to what one might call the subconscious life of the movie itself, thereby rendering it the more organic. More than that, such attention  to detail, philosophically speaking, gives the film a sort of solipsistic world of its own which, if expressed in accordance  with strict realism that in turn  is in accordance with the actual historical facts, will inevitably increase our response to it by appealing to facets of the consciousness not usually called into play.... And since, finally, there have to be some signs, etc., why not, without overdoing it, some (as there are in life)  significant ones?

In  Under  the Volcano,  the  choice of signs by the camera-eye,  as it  were, also provides visual landmarks which recurrently  draw  attention  to the deep, spiritual currents  of the novel.
Finally, concrete, visual images are used to create montage.  Because the novel moves across a  landscape  of  pictorial  imagery  which  is depictable  in  terms  of camera-perception, Lowry is provided with material to follow, at least in the figurative  sense,  Eisenstein's  dictum:  "Cinematography is,  first  and  foremost, montage.... By the combination  of two 'depictables'  is achieved  the  representa­ tion  of something  that  is graphically  undepictable." 10   Throughout  Under  the Volcano,  Lowry's subtle  combination  of a  multiplicity  of visual images  creates a  complexity  of  montage   "explosions".   Because  visual  details  which  are  re­ peatedly  associated  with  particular characters  or  occurrences  in  the  novel  are

43

MALCOLM LOWRY AND  THE CINEMA



frequently  juxtaposed  by Lowry's camera-eye,  the  montage,  by  translating  the themes of the  novel into  cinematic  idiom,  contributes  to  the  tightly  integrated structure  of the novel. Deriving visual, emotional  and  conceptual  depth  from  all aspects  of  the  novel  with  which  the  visual  images  or  image-clusters  are  asso­ ciated, the montage in turn dynamically confers dimensions of increased  signific­ ance  to  those  parts. Frequently,  for example,  the  conjunction of  visual  images exposes the tension of the emotional undercurrents which  prevent real union and fellowship among  the characters  of the  novel. The  montage,  in  such  instances, is an instrument  of irony. The  juxtaposed images are  brought into contrast  with the  hypocritical,  surface-dialogue  which  attempts to  realize  at  least  an  illusion of propriety  and  brotherhood.  For example,  in  Chapter  Four,  while the  Consul sleeps, Hugh,  his  half-brother,  who  has  already  once  betrayed  the  Consul  by seducing  Yvonne,  persuades  Yvonne  to  ride  with  him  on  horseback.  As  they move  along,  Lowry's  camera-eye,  selecting  minute  visual  detail,  informs  the reader  that  "a  lizard  vanished  into  the  bougainvillea  growing  along  the  road­ bank,  wild  bougainvillea  now,  an  overflux,  followed  by  a  second  lizard."   No explanation  is required by the narrator. Nothing  is spoken by Yvonne and  Hugh.  The "camera" alone, in its creation of montage  while exploring the landscape,  has graphically  symbolized the  passions beneath  the decorous surface,  as thoughts  of adultery  with  Yvonne   (bougainvillea)   again   creep  into   the   mind   of  Hugh (lizard; reptile).  Hugh's  pictorial  association  with  symbols  of  temptation and betrayal,  with  the  "future-corruptive serpent," is graphically  reinforced  for  the reader  as "Hugh  actually did ride over a garter  snake."  In  Chapter  Five, upon waking,  the  Consul  sees his wife and  Hugh  standing  together,  and  he  realizes that  they  have  met once again  while he was sleeping. "Yvonne's  arms  were full of  bougainvillea... ;" and the Consul shouts to her companion,  "Hi  there, Hugh, you old snake in  the grass!"  Vivid images of Yvonne,  bougainvillea,  Hugh  and the  serpent  merge  and  explode  to  underline  the  unspoken  fears  and   tensions lying beneath  the surface of the dialogue.
Thus,  Lowry selects, as the film-maker would, external  objects which add dimension to the dialogue of his novel. Through the  juxtapositioning  of pictorial objects which, outside the context of his novel, would  be emotionally  "neutral," Lowry  achieves  a subtle  means  for  expressing  deepfelt,  complex  emotions.  In­ deed, in  many  instances, a rapid succession of externally  depictable  images  pro­ vides Lowry with the best means for the surrealistic  expression of the  tormented  inner  world  of the  alcoholic. A  vivid example  of  the  combining  of  images  to reveal  the  hallucinatory  phantasmagoria of the  inner  world  of the  Consul  also

44

MALCOLM LOWRY AND  THE  CINEMA



affects the  reader's  visual imagination: "the  thin shadows of isolated  nails, the stains of murdered  mosquitoes, the very scars and  cracks of the wall, had  begun to swarm,  so that,  wherever  he looked, another  insect  was born,  wriggling  in­ stantly  toward  his heart."



IN Under  the Volcano,  man  has relegated  the control of his own fate to the arbitrary relentlessness of inhuman  forces. These forces, whether within  man or external  to man  but created  by him, come together in the image
of the  maquina  infernal,  the  Infernal  Machine.  It  is perhaps  one  of the  most interesting  aspects  of  Lowry's  preoccupation  with  film  technique   that  he  uses images from  the cinematic  process itself-particularly the image of the motion picture  reel, with  its fragmented   rendering  of  reality-to  establish  metaphors which  will express  the  mechanized  certainty  of man's  spiritual  death.
The  identification  of the image of the  motion  picture  reel with  the image of
other  revolving wheels, particularly  those of the Ferris wheel and  the carrousel, is explicitly evident  at several points in the novel. At the close of Chapter  One, for example,  a movie reel in  a forebodingly darkened  room seems to  transport the reader  to a passage of time which has already begun  and  ended  exactly one year before, and  of which  the ending  is known  to be death: "in  the dark  tem­ pestuous  night,   backwards   revolved  the  luminous  wheel."  Chapters  Two   to Twelve,  unrolling  like a strip  of celluloid mechanically  fixed with its immutable  sequence of images, mercilessly record that  death.  Like the frequent  use of flash­ backs in  the  novel,  these  eleven  chapters  emphasize  Lowry's  anxious  concern with time past. Thus,  like the image of the motion picture  reel,  the form of the novel itself is circular,  Chapter One  being  both  prologue  and  epilogue.  Form merges  with  theme,  then,  as  the  pattern  of  inevitable  death  becomes  tightly locked into the  novel's spiral  descent of soulless rotation.  The  mechanical  circu­ larity seems to preclude  the admittance  of love, trust, life. That the present can­ not  escape the  past,  that  the impotence  of man's present  merges with  the guilt of his past, is symbolically best expressed in a cinematic style where the circularity of the form, imitating the circular  motion of  the reel, can  manipulate the over­ lapping and merging of time. Thus, while the novel, in Lowry's own words, must be accepted  as "a  prophecy,  a political  warning,  a cryptogram,  a crazy film, ... [it  also]  can  be thought  of as a kind  of  machine." 11 The  novel's rush downhill toward  death  unrolls  with  macabre  and  machine-like  efficiency. Damnation IS

45

MALCOLM LOWRY AND  THE CINEMA



the only end.  The  blind,  brutal  wheeljreel  of fortune,  of  fate,  of  time  catches man on its circumference  merely to crush him;  just as the series of images on the celluloid strip  permanently  determines  the  course of the  actor's-man's,  Mex­ ico's-jerky attempts  to mimic life. Quite  conscious of his own  destruction,  but too impotent  to prevent it, man feels caught  in "the spoked shadow of [a]  wheel, enormous, insolent...."
Lowry's graphic  description of another  attraction found  at the midway further emphasizes  his  central  preoccupation   with  the  mechanized, circular  image  of the  movie reel:
The   huge  carrousel ... was  thronged  by  peculiar   long-nosed  wooden  horses mounted  on whorled pipes, dipping  majestically as  they  revolved with  a  slow piston-like circulation.... Jacques  was  pointing  to  the  pictures  on  the  panels running entirely around the inner wheel that  was set horizontally and  attached to the top of the central revolving pillar.

The  construction  and movement of this machine  are  remarkably  similar to those of the innumerable forerunners  of the  modern  movie  reel itself. One  such  ma­ chine, for example,  was simply a toy,

... consisting of a peculiar circular receptacle on a wooden stand.... You could tuck inside the  rim  [of  the  receptacle] ... a  series of small  pictures depicting such images as a rider and  horse jumping a fence.... In  the centre of the  re- ceptacle was a  [revolving]  polygon of  mirror  faces.... If you kept  your eyes fixed on only one of  the faces of  the  mirror  polygon, the  riders appeared  to jump.l2

This  toy, called a Praxinoscope, and  many similar  toys depending  on  the  rotat­ ing circle for  the  effect of continuous  movement  and  flux, inflexibly  reiterated a mechanically  predetermined  illusion of life held  within  the futility  of  circular motion.
In Chapter  Seven, still a third mechanical  analogue  to the movie reel provides Lowry with an image for the fullest and  most vivid expression of a theme  which involves the tyranny of the soulless machine.  Here  the Consul, who is now drunk and is trying hard  to avoid involvement with the begging children  who surround him, escapes confrontation  with reality and  life by merging  himself literally with the blind  reeling motion of the Infernal  Machine.  The  Consul,  who has lost all inner  spirit  of his own, crawls into the machine  and,  passively gives himself up to this "huge  evil spirit, screaming  in its lonely hell, its limbs writhing." Crowds watch  passively too:  it  seems as if  "no  one  could  stop  the  machine,. . .   the monster,"  which  has taken  control of the hapless man.

MALCOLM LOWRY AND  THE  CINEMA



Thus,  "trembling in  every limb  under  [the]   weight of  the  past,"  destitute, guilty man  has acquiesced  to the mechanized  heartlessness of the  machine,  the wheel,  the  reel;  and  he  has  the  feeling of  being on  the  edge  of  a  "drunken madly  revolving world."  But even the circular  image of the motion  picture  reel
-the novel's visual point of thematic  reference-is but a parody of the organic unity  and  perfection  usually associated with  the  circle. For  while the  celluloid, looping  through   the  projector  from  the  reel of  the  motion  picture  apparatus, attempts  to affirm organic  life and  movement and flux, its unrolling can  portray only a succession or series of static,  inanimate,  inorganic,  fragmented  still shots or frames. Each  frame  is separated  by a dark  temporal  gap,  a void, an  abyss, a barranca -a "frightful cleft," where it is "too dark to see the bottom.... finality indeed,  and  cleavage!"  As the  barranca, or  ravine,  rending  the  Mexican  land­ scape  provides a concrete,  visual image of the fragmentation of the  community of man,  so the separation  between the frames  provides a metaphor  for  disunity within  mankind.  Because this metaphor  is also associated with the image  of the motion  picture  reel, it  reinforces  the  warning  already  implied  by  that  image. The  isolated,  static  frames  of  the  mechanized  monster,  which  man  has set  in motion  and  to which  he has  acquiesced, can  provide only  a  lifeless travesty  of real life; and  in such a grip,  man  can  "wait  only for  the  ratification  of death." He  can  wait  only  for  the  darkness,  for  the  barranca  between  the  frames,  to swallow  him  up  when  his jerky movement  ceases.
Just  as  Lowry  draws  attention   to  the  image  of the  motion  picture  reel,  he emphasizes  the  fragmentary  quality  of  the  film's  attempts   to  reconstruct   life. He stresses particularly  the darkness of the temporal gap which precludes  the possibility of organic  life in  the film. For  example, the  "illuminated news aloft travelling  around   the  Times  Building, ... snapped  off  into  darkness,  into  the end of a world.... And everywhere, that darkness, the darkness of a world  with­ out  meaning,  a  world  without  aim."  In  another  instance,  the  mutual  isolation of each  panel  in the "procession  of queer  pictures"  which  circles the  great  car­ rousel emphasizes a mechanical  fragmentation which  apes life.  Similarly, in  his descriptions  of  a  number  of  murals  in  Under  the Volcano, Lowry  stresses the disjointedness of each consecutive panel of the different  murals. While the visual content  of each  mural  brings  into  focus the  themes of  the  novel,  the  medium itself suggests static  fragmentation rather  than  organic  life.  In  the  cantina  El Bosque, for  example,  a series of identical  pictures  illustrates  a  pack  of  wolves pursuing  a sleigh "at  intervals  right  round  the  room, though  neither  sleigh nor wolves budged  an inch in the process." Here, not only the discontinuity  between

47

MALCOLM LOWRY AND THE CINEMA



the pictures, but also the pictures themselves provide only static illusion of  move­ ment  and life. Several such murals suggest the false impression of organic  move­ ment in film, where continuity is really being disintegrated  by the darkness which interrupts the illusory persistence of light. Thus  the machine which controls man is  merely  mimicing  life  while  driving   man   toward   death.   Mechanically   re­ iterated   flashes of light, representing  only superficial  efforts  to  achieve  organic unity,  parallel  man's  superficial  efforts  to  maintain  the  forms  of  brotherhood  without love. The  montage in the following example merges the theme, the tech­ nique  and  the controlling metaphor  of the  novel:  "the  lights of Quauhnahuac's one cinema ... suddenly came on, flicked off, came on again. 'Nose puede vivir sin a mar'."
Unable  to love, unable to accept love in a world full of social deception  and mechanical  guise, the Consul, in his drunken  stupor,  experiences more fully than all  the  other  characters  the  finality  and  darkness  and  horrors  of  the  barranca which keeps man lonely and alone. The  metaphor  of the barranca, while provid­ ing  an  analogue  for  the  Consul's  fragmented,  uncontrolled   perception,   also points to the technique  which  Lowry uses. The  flashback, with its dislocation of chronological  time,  and  the  camera-eye's  juxtapositioning  of  disparate  external objects  to create  montage,  provide  mechanical  or stylistic  parallels  for  the  kind of incongruities  which attract  the  Consul's  attention.  It  seems as if a  barranca slashes across his sense of sight  to  disintegrate  its  continuity  into  a  "continual twitching  and  hopping  within  his field of vision,"  just as moments  of darkness create  the ultimate  fragmentation  of the motion  picture.
Under  the Volcano,  then, is a coherent  and integrated  artistic expression of an incoherent  and  fragmented  world. The  images  of  the  barranca  and  the  wheel are  of central  importance.  Both  point  to  the  synthesis of form  and  content  at which  Lowry arrives in the novel. There  is a fusion of visual metaphor,  theme, characterization and technique. The  visual metaphors-wheels and  barranca­ draw  much  of their strength  from  their  association  with  the  cinematic  process, in  which  mechanical  fragmentation  underlies  the  apparent  continuity   of  the motion  picture. In cinema technique,  Lowry finds not only a  method  but  also a metaphor to express the tormented,  surrealistic  world  of his  characters.

MALCOLM LOWRY AND  THE  CINEMA



FOOTNOTES

1 Malcolm Lowry,  unpublished letter,  October gt, 1951;  addressed to Herr Clenens ten  Holder, German translator of Under  the  Volcano.
2   Ibid.
3   Margerie Lowry,  "Malcolm Lowry's  Life,"  unpublished biographical sketch.
4   Malcolm Lowry,  Selected  Letters  of Malcolm  Lowry.  Edited  by  Harvey   Breit and  Margerie Lowry   (Philadelphia,  1965), 251.
5  Ibid.,  gog.
6   Frank Taylor, Selected  Letters, 441.
7    Malcolm Lowry,  unpublished letters,  October g1, 1951.
8  Ibid.
9   Ralph  Stephenson and   J.  R.  Debrix,   The   Cinema   as  Art   (Harmondsworth,
1967),  1gg.
10  Sergei  Eisenstein. Film  Form,  in  Film  Form:  Essays in  Film  Theory   and  The
Film  Sense.  Edited  and   translated  by  Jay   Leyda    (Cleveland  and   New  York,
1967), 28, go.
11  Malcolm Lowry,  "Preface to  a  Novel,"   translated  from   French  to  English   by George   Woodcock. Canadian   Literature,  IX    (Summer,  1961).  Clarisse   Fran­ cillon's  original French version,  published  in  1948, was  based  on  a  conversation with  Lowry.
12  Ivor  Montagu. Film World   (Harmondsworth, 1964), 18.





























49



TWO 	LETTERS


Malcolm Lowry









TO ALBERT ERSKINE






Dear  Mr. Erskine:
Well, every man  his own Laocoon!
 DOLLARTON ( I 946)

Concerning  a letter forwarded  me yesterday by Hal  Matson,  about  your  hav­ ing postponed  the VOLCANO I wrote you one asking you if it was still  not too late to change  your mind without doubtless taking  fully into account  that  it was the amount  of research I seemed calmly suggesting you do, quite apart from the number   of  corrections  I was  making  myself,  not  to  say  insertions,  many  of which may have appeared  to you quite  negligible, that  had  been responsible for the  postponement.
On  top  of these iteins I perceive clearly  the  paradox  of  Cape  tying  up  the Canadian rights  with  the obligation  if you  bring  the  book out  this  year  while your  author  meantime  makes it quietly  and  maddeningly  impossible for  you to do this.
I did  not  of course make  any such suggestion  to Cape  myself, but  so far  as that goes I'm  writing him anyhow on the subject and  I'm sure he'll waive the stipulation. I have no British agent at the  present. I should  have had  Hal's representative  act  for me over there,  but  the  insane  coincidence  of getting  the news of the  book's  acceptance  on  the same  day  in  two  countries  at  once  was enough  to ravel  any  author  into  knots.
For myself the delay has been caused by the arrival  of the MSS from  Mexico, as well as by second  thoughts  due to  my recent  visit there,  the  awful  difficulty

TWO LETTERS



of getting books here, the non-existence of our own owing to the fire, and numer­ ous other  difficulties I  won't  go into,  but  which,  all  piling  up  at  once  at  this point, make me believe in Cocteau's  remark, "Truly,  our books hate  us."
For the rest, while I am proud of having written UNDER THE VOLCANO,
I  must  confess to being  slightly tremulous  of it.  I  have  not  been  fortunate, to say the least, in my work so far and it would distress me to think you were losing interest in it so soon  after  you had seemed to have such high hopes for it.
There  are really no echoes etc. that  I do not myself really consider to be abso­ lutely  justifiable and  assimilated,  absorbed,  and  I  have  mentioned  them  to  you partly  for  my  own  psychological benefit  and  partly  in  case  you  might,  some­ how, disagree.
I  will not  now  make  these  the subject  of  a separate  appendix  to  my  notes but  when  I come to any either  coincidental  or otherwise will simply mention  it and  the page in question, since I feel you should know of their existence.
Enclosed are  notes to IV. There  is nothing  in V  to speak of save the Jardin problem,  already  solved, nothing  in  VI  I  can  see now save  the  German  to be verified, nothing  in  VII  save  a  little  Spanish  and  the  garden   again,  in  VIII little, IX  nothing  at all unless you consider something, in X I'll  try  to cut some­ what,  and  nothing  to speak  of in  XI  or XII.
This  may still,  I  am  aware,  leave too much  for  you  to  do  to  get  it  out  by
October,  but  I  hate  to let  you down, if that  is what  I  seem  to be doing,  and am willing and  ready  to cooperate  wherever and  however  I can.  In  either  case, would you give me a deadline?  I seem to remember  there is one on the contract
but  I have no copy of it.
Chapter  V
p. 128.    Significance of "interlube" has passed from my mind. But it might have something  to  do  with  the  London  Daily  Herald  or  the  United   Press, if  that matters.  Cable  is based on  real one and  used by permission of the reporter  who sent it I having sat in at the concoction thereof. Cable was, until lately, in my possession.
p. 129.    For  Bill H-substitute  Bill Hod.
p. 130.    in brackets  "for  he was secretly enormously etc."  please cut  the for.
p.  134.    After  sentence  beginning:   Unconsciously he  had  been  watching  her, please  place  comma   after   "arms", cut  "against"  and   place  another   comma after  "slacks."
p. 137.    typografical  error: emanate.
p.  138.    Man  with a dog named Harpo,  is partly old pal of mine, John  "Volun-


51

TWO  LETTERS



teer in Spain"  Summerfield,  who survived  after  all. De  Quincey  incident  men­ tioned  in Volunteer in Spain, likewise in  letter  to  me at  that  time.  I  don't  see how anyone could  be hurt,  least of all John,  who painted  a wild  portrait  of me in  his novel, The  Last Week End  (not  to be confused  with  Lost)  published  in London. De Quincey comes in also because of Mr. Quincey  and the knocking at the gate bit in V.
p. I40.    In  the middle I would have cut Yvonne's  dialogue  at "saying  that  you wanted-" and  have  Hugh  interrupt   at  that   point  without  any  "Hugh  an­ swered"  It remains  as it is as a concession to the  reader.
p.  I43·    "You've  got your cattle again I see," Yvonne said in a bracket.  It is a technical  echo  of something  in  Faulkner's  Wild  Palms, I  think  in  a  similar bracket,  "There's your horse again,"  she said,  or something.  The  trouble  about acknowledging such a thing, it embarrasses the embarrassee  yet somewhere  else. p.  I44·    top.  In  Yvonne's dialogue,  please insert  the  word  "together" between ridden  and  before.
p. I45·    Please verify Spanish at top. I think it's O.K.
ibid.  At  the  end  of the  first long  paragraph, after  shadow  his  brother  every­
where, please cut  dots.
I47· 	Ejido.  Please verify. I'm  pretty certain  it's  right. p. I 50. 	Las  Manos  de  Orlac.
p.  I52·    This  Judas  passage was written  before I  had  read  Dorothy  Wellesley's poem  in  Yeats  Oxford  book  of  Modem   Verse,  where  she  likewise speaks  of Judas  having  a hangover. Any resemblance is purely coincidental.
p.I 54,    In  bottom  paragraph semicolon after  machinery  was intentional but  if
you changed  it to a comma  that's  O.K.  by me.
p. I 6g.    Buy one,  please give this a question  mark
p.  I64. 	Please change  Bab-el-Mandeb  to Arabian  Sea. p.I 7 1.    ditto.
(UNSIGNED) 1













52

TWO  LETTERS



TO DAVID MARKSON








Dear  David  Markson:
 DOLLARTON, BRITISH  COLUMBIA CANADA,  JUNE 20, I95 I.
(OWING TO  MORE  "AUXILIARY CIRCUMSTANCES)

I thank  you sincerely for your letter, the remarks therein, and the honour  you do me.
As I said  the least I can do is to see if I can lighten  at all such  a formidable
chore  for  you  in  a  hot  summer,  especially since  my  name  means  "servant  of Colomb"  and  we have  two  Columbias  in  the  address2    not  to mention  a selva, if not oscura, while we literally  do live in a forest, or rather  at the edge of one.
Moreover  just  as  I  received  your  letter  I  too seemed  to  have  been  reading
a bit of Faulkner  hotly pursued  by Djuna  Barnes, Dante,  Joyce, etc.,  and  feel· ing  frightened   by  my  limitations-incidentally, if  I  may  say so  in  a  tone  of complete  joviality and  politeness you made  a wonderful type error, unless it was done on purpose  at this point:  you said "freightened." Now I only remark  this because having  begun  this letter  in  pencil  I  went on  to  use it  to  introduce  my apology,  viz, that  our  typewriter  was  then  lying at  a  garage  having  its  inner workings cleansed  by an  aeolian instrument  for blowing up tires:  so, writing  as I do now in pencil I did not lay myself open  to such type-errors-if I do now, all I can say is, may they be as good as that one of yours! For you said a mouth­ ful. If your vocation is to be a novelist you certainly couldn't  do  better-in  my sincere  if by  no  means  new  opinion -than  to  be  "freightened" rather   than "frightened" by the said limitations: one should  (upon the "£righter" or life) take them to Palembang with one and deliver them in good order as may be-after all they can  be among  the most valuable  cargo one has, those limitations! Though
I don't   mean  quite  to  say  as  Melville somewhere  marvellously  puts  it-one should  "never  wait  for fair  weather,  which  never was on  land  or sea, but  dash with  all one's  derangements at  one's  object,  leaving  the  rest  to  fortune."  Not quite;  very unsound  advice:  though it may be very necessary at times.
But  this is not  answering  any of your questions. Re  those, I think  the  most helpful  thing  I  can  do  at  the  moment  is to send  you -it will go  off  by  the same post as this letter-a copy of the French  translation of Under  the Volcano which contains  a preface  written  by myself, as also a postface written  by some­ one  else, so many  faces indeed  that  instead  of being much  help  they  probably

53

TWO LETTERS



serve to the contrary  as so many masks over the material.  This  preface was writ­ ten  in  Haiti -or  going  there -and  was  originally  intended   for  the  British edition.3   (You  will note that  I  received news of the acceptance  of the Volcano from  England  and  America, upon the same day, delivered  by a  character  in the Volcano,  and  in  a  house that  figures in  the  Volcano,  in  Mexico  itself, where ten  years after  I'd  begun the book we went  back on a short visit-the original of Laurelle's house I'd  never set foot in before, was now turned  into apartments: the very tower described in the Volcano was the only  place we could find to live
-this sort of thing-a sort of Under  Under  the Volcano or fantasia of the Law
of Series or the History of Peter  Rabbit's imagination-E. M. Forster says some­ one should  write  the  history of someone's  imagination  -is roughly  the  theme of what  I'm  working on now and  one day  hope  to complete -I  had  some set­ backs as you will see-who doesn't?)
In  this preface  also I go on  about  the  Kabbala   in  a  way  that  is-in  this
case -quite misleading  and  probably  not  a  little  juvenile,  and  which  was  no doubt  suggested  by the  magnificently  abyssal and  heavenly  motions  of  one  of your  bauxite  freighters  on  which  the  preface  was written,  rather  than  in strict fact.  Moreover we had probably  been drinking  rum  with  the skipper, not to say listening  to  the  voodoo  drums  battering  and  tambouring and  otherwise  gene­ krupaering along that inlet when you begin to sail into  that  Heart  of  Lightness and  Tightness  and  Barbancourt  and  Cine  Etoiles. It is true  that  the  Kabbala  played  a part,  though scarcely anterior  to  the fact  of writing  the  book;  I mean I didn't  group  it consciously  around  any of the correspondences within  that  un­ resting and  dynamic filing cabinet-cum-tree of knowledge. But  that  I ran into a Kaballist  at a critical and  coincidental  moment  in the writing of the book:  that is true,  right in this forest also. But apart  from  that  my  remarks  here-though not the other  remarks  I have cited-can  be taken  about on  a par  with Sgana­  relle's Latin:
Sgnanarelle  (assuming various comic attitudes) Cabricias  arci thuram, catala­ mus, singulariter,   nominativo,  haec  musa,  the  muse,  bonus  bona  bonum Deus sanctus,  este oratio latinas? Etiam,  Yes. Quare? Why.
Geronte: Ah!  Why did I not study? Jacqueline: What  a clever man !
It might  have been more honestly to the  point  if I'd  mentioned  the influence
of Bismarck -to wit Bix Beiderbecke -especially a break  in Singing  the Blues in  an old Frankie  Trumbauer record, in that  preface-but it appears  I like to be  thought  erudite: the  truth  is other;  I  have  the  kind  of mind  that  is some-

54

TWO LETTERS



times politely called  archaic,  it is true,  but  not in the  sense that  it  is on  really fraternal terms with the scholastics and mediaeval philosophy.
Subjective,  stream  of  consciousness, multi-leveled and  symbolic. Yes indeed, but  this is too symbolic, multi-leveled, conscious and subjective  a matter  for me to speak about  in a short  letter  in a way which would be much  use to you.
Joyce,  Dante,  Djuna  Barnes,  Faulkner.  Of  these I'm  not  really  qualified  to speak either, though  I'll try and reply to anything, should you ask me any specific questions.  I think  there  are  certain  writers who in  youth  tend  to  react  against anything  like a  ready-made  tradition,  or  the suspicion  that  teachers  or  another poet taught  may be foisting a tradition  upon one for reasons of their own; there­ after they approach these recommended  writers tentatively,  preferably when they have  fallen  into  more  disrepute.  Meantime  the  writers  the  writer  feels he  has discovered  for  himself  remain   the  more  valuable.  I  know  that's  more  or  less true  of me.
Re  Joyce  and  Djuna   Barnes  I find  myself ungratefully   inclining  a  bit  to Leavis' distaff  view on  The  Great  Tradition  (even  though  he is trying  to  im­ pose a tradition  and  is dealing  with  the  English tradition  of novelists. But  this is a  valuable  book  if  only  it  encourages  you  to  read  George  Eliot's  Middle­ march.)  I've never grappled  with the whole plan of Faulkner  yet, though I mean to. I didn't  realise for myself what  a tremendous  writer  he was  at  his best until fairly  recently.  (Dante's still  a  bit  too famous  for  me,  though  you  caught  me reading  him on the sly, when  your letter arrived.)
Ultramarine is very fortunately out  of  print  (was  never  really  printed  as it was meant  to be)  and  is an absolute flop and abortion  and  of no interest to you unless you want  to hurt  my feelings. As my brother said  to  me recendy  when I mildly suggested  to  him  that  the  British  Government  owed  me  some  cash - "Don't even speak  of it to  me!"  However  I mean  to  rewrite  it-or  rather  to write it-one day. A later work, Lunar  Caustic-not published  yet in America because  I wanted  to  rewrite  it  but  I  believe to be  published  in  France  as it stands-is  maybe of  more interest;  anyway  I think it's  good.  Unfortunately I haven't  got a spare copy to send you, but  maybe I can  tell you what  you want to know  about  it. You'll  find some mention  of the general  plan  in  the  French preface which fundamentally has not been abandoned.
My wife-who is American-wrote a grand  book called  Horse  in the Sky which was very unfairly  neglected and should cognately interest  you -we swop horses and  archtypes  with each  other  all the time. She  has  just finished another much  better  book even than  this, which  I  certainly  feel  you  will hear  of.


55

TWO LETTERS



I also  have  had   the  great  privilege  of  being  one  of  Conrad  Aiken's oldest friends. Him  Ihave  known  since  my  teens  and   the  good  old  days  of  bathtub gin  and  the best and  most helpful  of fellows he is.
I am  reading at  the moment  The  Road  to Damascus by Strindberg ... By  the well a large  tortoise.  On  right,  entrance below  to  a wine  cellar.  An  icechest  and dust  bin.  The doctor  enters  from  the  verandah with  a  telegram playing  a  long range  ukulele,  etc....
We live an  extremely  sunfilled  and  seay life between  the  beach-and I mean
the  beach-and  the  forest  here  and  if you're  ever  in  these  parts I hope  you'll look  us up  and  have  a drink  and  some sun  with  us.
With  kindest  regards  and  the best of luck,

MALCOLM LOWRY P.S. Of  course send  along any of your  MSS  you wish to  and  I'll  make  any help­ ful  comments I can.


FOOTNOTES

1 Margerie  Lowry comments:  "I  can only suppose that  since he went directly from the  letter  into  the  notes and  comments  he  must  have  thought   he'd  signed  the letter  and  he didn't.  Ican't  think  of any  other  reason."
2   At this time David  Markson  was attending Columbia  University.
3  There  is a  mystery here.  No  English  version  by Lowry  of  this  preface  appears to have survived, and in I g6o, when Canadian Literature approached the French translator  of  Under the  Volcano, Clarisse  Fran tillon,  she  stated  that  she  had not prepared  the  French  version from  a written  English  text  by Lowry, but  had written  it  directly  in French  after  he had  told  her  orally  what  he wanted  to  be said. The  only  known  English  version  of  the  preface  is in  fact  the  translation by George  Woodcock from  Clarisse Fran illon's
in Canadian Literature No. 9·



SWINGING THE MAELSTROM

Malcolm Lowry and Jazz




Perle Epstein










WEN DURING THE  COURSE of  treatment a psychiatrist asked Malcolm  Lowry to free associate "anything that  comes into your head  that begin  with  B",  Lowry  instantly  replied,  "Bix  Beiderbecke."  For  some  reason the psychiatrist  would  not  accept this answer;  if he had,  he would have learned a great  deal  about  his patient  in  a short  time.  Had  the  therapist  been  a  jazz fan  himself, he  would  have  known  that  Beiderbecke, one  of  Lowry's  lifetime idols, played a brilliant  trumpet and  died an alcoholic at  age twenty-eight.  One short  step,  and  he would  have  understood  that  in  many  ways Bix was to  jazz what  Lowry  was  to literature: an  American  counterpart, in  fact,  only  a  year older  (Bix was born in  1903, Lowry  in 1904), a restless student  with  a middle­ class upbringing,  an  alcoholic,  a rebellious adolescent  who left  home  to  pursue an  unconventional career,  a  musician/nomad who  was forever  dissatisfied with his work. Both young men had a propensity for seeking out father figures in their respective fields: Bix found  his mentor in Frank Trumbauer, a saxophone  player who took the young trumpeter under his wing, developed the young man's talent, and  improved  his technique; Lowry's "literary father" was Conrad  Aiken, who
-as  it  is by  now  well  known -sheltered,  fed,  and  unstintingly  assisted  the
budding  novelist.
Beiderbecke, the archetype for Young Man With a Horn, was an extremely intelligent  musician,  a  man  familiar  with  literature  who,  after  dipping  into  a musical career  at  about  the same age Lowry set out  to sea, attempted   to  return to college, but whose restless inability to cope with regulations and  routine, drove

57

SWINGING THE MAELSTROM



him  away  eighteen  days after  enrolling;  here  the  young  English  amateur  jazz musician fared better  (even during the darkest  hours of his life, Lowry somehow managed   to  draw   Herculean   draughts   of  discipline  from  some  underground source)  for he  emerged from  an  unhappy  stay  at  Cambridge with  his classical tripos, armed  and  ready  to write.  Like Lowry  too, it was at  this  age  that  Bix took up  the  drinking  that  was eventually  to  kill him.
Had  the  psychiatrist  allowed  his patient  to  free  associate  further,   he  might have  learned  that  Lowry was an  avid  jazz fan  as a  youth  at  Cambridge,   that he played the ukelele-or, as he called it, "taropatch" -described by Margerie Lowry as:  "a  long-range  uke with  more strings  and  frets,  and  that's  what  he played  in  later  years though  he started  with  a  regular  small  ukelele",  that  he composed songs and worshipped  Eddie Lang, a virtuoso  jazz guitarist  who, with his lifelong friend, violinist Joe Venuti, played with Beiderbecke and  Trumbauer in the late twenties and early thirties. Lowry loved this essentially "white" sound of the classically trained  jazzmen of the period -the  controlled,  formal  tone of Bix Beiderbecke and  the brilliant,  driving  rhythm  of Lang.  During  the last few years of his life, however, Lowry's love for  jazz abated; he decided  to "leave  it to the young"  and  turned  his interest to classical music instead.  But music, and especially  jazz  music,  the  psychiatrist  would  have  learned   had  he  proceeded further,  had  been  one of the  great  loves of  Lowry's  life. A  friend  during  the Cambridge days, Dr. Ralph  Case, recalls:

His sense of rhythm  and  phrasing was impeccable-he had  that  subtle some­ thing which every true jazz fan instantly recognizes.... Where jazz was concerned, his taste was, in  my view, impeccable.... I  would say that  Bix was Malcolm's chief love among jazz musicians of the time ... Closely linked with Bix, of course, was Frankie  Trumbauer ... 'Clarinet  Marmalade',   'Singin'  the  Blues', 'Ostrich Walk', 'Way Down Yonder in New Orleans', 'River Boat Shuffle', ... all of these were like manna  from heaven to Malcolm ...

Lowry  also favoured  another  all-white  jazz group,  The  Memphis  Five  (active between  I923  and  1928)  in their recordings of "Lavey  Lee",  "How  Come  You Do Me Like You Do?", "Beale Street Blues";  and  later,  a group of Toscanini's symphony  musicians  who called  themselves The   New  Friends  of Rhythm, and their  recording  of "Bach  Bay Blues."
Dr. Case continues:

... his [taste]  was unerring in picking out the gold from the dross -he had no time for corny or pretentious numbers ...

SWINGING THE  MAELSTROM


And  Gerald  Noxon,  writing  in the Lowry issue of Prairie Schooner, says: [Lowry]  was  passionately fond  of  jazz ... I  had  a  phonograph;  a  small  but
respectable collection of  jazz records ... mostly blues, for  which  Malcolm  and
I shared a particular  fondness.

According  to  prominent   jazz critic  Marshall  Stearns,  jazz is associated  with protest  and  rebellion  and  identification  with  the  underdog.  Bix and  his fellow white,  Midwestern  musicians "... sacrificed ease and  relaxation  for  tension and drive.... They   had  read  some  of  the  literature   of  the  twenties ... and  their revolt against  their own middle-class background  tended  to be conscious." Across the Atlantic,  the  young Lowry, engaged  in similar turmoil, set to writing as Bix had  turned  to his music. Ultramarine, what later became  Lunar  Caustic, Under the Volcano, "Elephant and  Colosseum", all feature  the  protagonist's identifica­ tion  with  the  dispossessed, the  "philosophers", the  "poor  in spirit,"  the  gentle animals, the borrachos, and  the peons who bear the entire  burden  of  civilization on  their  backs. Love of  jazz  was really  another  facet  of  Lowry's  romanticism which extended  later  to his fondness for the simple lives of the  Manx  fishermen, their  unsentimental faith,  and  their  hymns. "But  I  was  attached   romantically to  those  days,"  says the  musician-hero,  recalling  "Prohibition" and  the  "Jazz  Age",  in  "The Forest  Path  to  the  Spring."  For  the  older  man  jazz  came  to represent  youth itself. So much for the psychological value of free association.


As A WRITER, Lowry often attempted to put  prose to work as music. In  fact,  he compared  his novel to "a  kind of symphony ... a kind  of
opera ... hot  music ... a song",  and  referred  continuously  to "chords  being  re­ solved",  "contrapuntal dialogue",  and  the  like. One  chapter,   he  says,  "closes with a dying fall, like the end of some guitar  piece of Ed  Lang's ..." And, "the  best  kind  of  novel" -he  confides  to  friend  James  Stem -is  that  which  is "bald  and  winnowed,  like Sibelius, and  that  makes  an  odd  but  splendid  din, like Bix Beiderbecke." So that  when he told his wife that  "the early records had tremendous  influence on  his style of writing,"  he apparently knew  what  he was about. Only  the slightest familiarity  with music is necessary to  see that  his works are shot through  with such  purely musical techniques as reiterated  refrain,  aria, and  the  particular influence  of Debussy on  the  alliterative,  rhythmic,  and  ono­ monopeic  effects used to describe nature,  the sea, wilderness. From  the  earliest

59

SWINGING THE MAELSTROM



writing  on  there  is a consistent identification  between  music, sound,  and  word. In  Ultramarine, for  example,  "... down  in  the  engine  room  three  submarine notes floated  up  and  were followed by the  jangling of the  telegraph,  while the engine  changed  key." Bells on  a ship's  bridge-"tin-tin:  tin-tin"-recall the memory  of goat  bells, "tinkle  tonkle tankle  tunk", and  pure  young love, which is soon to be pitted against the lure of sin at a port whose name itself is musically related  to the young hero's thoughts:  "Tsang-Tsang." Memory,  love, fear-all are  associated with sounds, the  creaking  music of  the ship's  winches, the  bells, the engines, a violin's notes blown in the wind from  another  ship docked nearby. And  since Lowry's writing was all so closely autobiographical, the  young sailor hero of Ultramarine, not surprisingly, plays the  "taropatch".
Music has its demonic aspects:  the young boy's first encounter  with  a  prosti­ tute is accompanied  by a jazz number  ironically entided  "Dead  Man Blues", for Dana  Hilliot/Malcolm Lowry was then virtually  obsessed with  the fear of death by venereal  disease.
Over  and over again we find countless references to jazz-even tiny "inside"
favours  to  jazz  fans  are  interspersed   throughout;  tidbits  like  "Trumbaugh: named   after   Trumbauer-Frankie.   Beiderbecke,   et   al."   in   "Through  the Panama," or  the  nickname  for  his hero's  wife in  "Elephant and  Colosseum": "Lavey  (her nickname came from Lavey Lee, an old recording  by the Memphis Five)", or in "The Forest Path  to  the Spring": "One evening on the way back from the spring for some reason I suddenly thought  of a break  by Bix in Frankie Trumbauer's record of Singin' the Blues that had always seemed to me to express a moment  of the most pure spontaneous  happiness ..."1
And  so it goes in story after story, novels, manuscripts  for  future  stories and
novels-innumerable allusions to  jazz which  finally culminate in  a  discernible pattern   wherein  the  chaos  and  despair  in  the  minds  of  Lowry's  protagonists suddenly  merge into order during  a brief moment  of illumination  and  joy. Like the  pattern   of  Dixieland  music  itself, each  story  in  Hear  Us  0 Lord  From Heaven Thy  Dwelling Place begins slowly, almost  mournfully,  and  builds in  its sorrow  until  it seems almost  too much  to  bear-then  just  as suddenly,  it  ex­ plodes in  a climax  of  joy and  hopefulness. This  stylistic signature  is best  illus­ trated  in  its earliest and  therefore  its crudest  form  at  the  end  of  Ultramarine, Lowry's  first novel:

And  all  at  once  the  maelstrom of  noise,  of  tangled  motion, of  shining steel  in his  mind   was succeeded   by  a  clear   perception  of  the   meaning of  the   pitiless regularity of those moving  bars;  the  jiggering  levers began  to k<tep time  to a queer

6o

SWINGING THE MAELSTROM



tune  Hilliot  had  unconsciously  fitted  to  their  chanting,  and  he saw  that  at  last the interdependence of rod  grasping  rod, of shooting straight  line seizing curved arms ... had  become  related  to  his own  meaning  and  his own struggles. At last there  dawned  upon  him  a reason for his voyage ...

Here  in  the  young  boy's  soliloquy  of  reconciliation   to  the  sea  is  the  embryo  of the  dying  Consul's-albeit  illusory-"vision" of  the  perfect   pattern of  exis­ tence  at  the  close of Under  the Volcano, also rendered  largely  in  musical  terms.

Mozart  was it?  The  Siciliana ... No, it was something  funereal,  of Gluck's  per­ haps, from  Alcestis. Yet there  was a Bach-like quality  to it. Bach?  A  clavichord, heard   from  far  away,  in  England   in  the  seventeenth   century.  England.   The  chords  of a guitar  too, half lost, mingled with the distant  clamour  of a waterfall and  what sounded  like the  cries of love.


Lowry  peppered his works  with  references  to  Beiderbecke,  Lang, Venuti and others,  utilizing   his  expert   knowledge of  their  musician's style  to  create  meta­ phors,  moods,  even  at  times  structuring his own  stories  within   their  formal  in­ fluence.  If the  reader happened to  be  unfamiliar  with   analogies  comparing a beautiful day  to  a Joe  Venuti record  (Under  the Volcano) or  a  newsboy's  cry to a piece of  jazz mounting towards a break  ("The Bravest  Boat")  so much  the worse for that  reader. This  was part  of Lowry's  vocabulary  (as  were  many  other far  more  esoteric  subjects like  occultism,   Indian  legend,  and   the  Blakean   ex­ cesses of  drink)  so  that   "... to  anyone  who  knew  Malcolm intimately, it  was inevitable that   jazz  should   be  tied  with,  indeed   a  part   of  his  literary   output" (Dr. Case).
Three of  Lowry's   literary  hero-mouthpieces are  in  fact   jazz  musicians: the
nameless  narrator of "Forest Path", Bill Plantagenet of  Lunar  Caustic,  and  the Consul's half  brother/alter ego,  Hugh in  Under  the  Volcano. Inevitably, some working  knowledge of  Lowry's   jazz  background is necessary  in  order  to  under­ stand   these  characters, the  conflicts  presented   and,   in  the  case  of   Under   the Volcano, the  structure of  the  plot  itself.  "The Forest  Path   to  the  Spring" con­  cerns  a  jazz  musician who  has  given  up  the  debilitating night  life of  the  clubs for  the wholesome  life in  nature-in other  words, has exchanged death for life.

Before I had  married,  and  after  I  left the sea, I had  been  a  jazz musician,  but my health  had  been ruined  by late hours and one-night stands  all over the hemis­ phere.  Now I had given up this life for the sake of our  marriage  and  was making a new one-a  hard  thing  for a  jazz musician  when he loves jazz as much  as I.

SWINGING THE MAELSTROM



With  the  help  of  his old  colleagues, the  narrator obtains  a  piano  and  is thus able to earn  a small living by composing and  titling  jazz tunes. Things  go well for a time;  the narrator  learns how to cope with the rough ways of the wilderness
- specifically, the fetching of water for the cottage  from  the source of a spring, which  requires a rather  long walk through  the forest. Like other  Lowry  heroes, the narrator falls gradually into a state of despair,  undergoes a dark  night of the soul (embodied  in the absolute loathing  he conceives for his water-carrying  task) and  is very suddenly  bolted by a  recollection  of a  Bix Beiderbecke solo into  a "moment of the most pure spontaneous  happiness" and  the desire "to  do some­ thing good." Goodness is synonymous with  creation  and  the very Protestant  em­ phasis on work, as evil is associated with torpor  and  neglect; so that  our  jazzman determines  now  to  write  "a  symphony  in  which  I  would  incorporate  among other  things ... the  true  feeling  and  rhythm   of  jazz.... The   theme  was  sug­ gested  probably   by  my  thoughts  of  cleansing  and   purgation  and   renewal." (Italics  mine). Here  the  power of music assumes religious overtones,  when  the very core of suffering  (in this case the initial abandonment of the so-called "jazz life", and  its resumption  under  entirely new circumstances)  becomes a force for regeneration.  Lowry  was constantly  placing  his characters  in hell so  that  they might  reach  heaven:   compare  Bix himself  and  countless  other  jazz  musicians who were both exalted and destroyed by their work.
The  hero  of  Lunar  Caustic  is not  only  a  jazz musician  but  an  alcoholic  as well. As if things weren't  bad enough,  Bill Plantagenet is unemployed,  an  alien adrift in New York, and hallucinating. The  breakup  of his band in England is consonant  symbolically with the  breakup  of  his marriage  and  of  his total  per­ sonality.  The  inability  to  play, that  is to  work  as a musician,  is  tantamount to disintegration.
"Bill  Plantagenet and  his Seven  Hot  Cantabs ..." he  introduces  himself  to
the  psychiatrist  at  Bellevue, where  he  has  voluntarily  committed   himself, "We went  a treat  in Cambridge ... we were all  right  with  our  first records,  too, we took that  seriously.... You know you people get sentimental  over England  from time  to time.... Well, this was the other  way  round.  Only  it  was Eddie  Lang and  Joe Venuti  and the death  of Bix ..." that  presumably  brought  this English­ man  to America  in the hope of patching  up  the pieces of his own life. But even here in the madhouse  he is rejected  by the only people who can  understand his music:  a  Negro  patient  named  Battle is infuriated when  Bill sits  down  to  play the  piano. "Something  in the rhythm  of his [Battle's]   blood, it seemed, did  not like  Bill's music;  not  because  it  was  alien  music,  it  was  precisely  because  it

SWINGING THE MAELSTROM



sounded  too cognate  that  he would not conform to it." Bill's one attempt  to com­ municate  results in what  was known in  jazz parlance  as a cutting contest, where two musicians "battle it out"  for first place. Bill plays "In  a Mist" and  "Singin'  the  Blues."  "He   played  Frankie  Trumbauer's old  version  fast."  The  tension builds as the appropriately named Battle sets up a counter song about the sinking of the Titanic,  and  a discussion about  black versus white  whales ensues among the  patients.
"Glancing at  Battle  for  approval", Bill launches  into  "Clarinet  Marmalade"
-only to be eyed "stonily"  by the Negro. " 'Say listen,'  Battle demanded, 'let's have some truckin' -don't you know any truckin' ..." (i.e. backing up a soloist on the  piano.)  Suddenly  Bill is pushed from  the  piano by a "mental defective" who somehow  manages  to bring  all the  patients, even  the  truculent  Battle,  to­ gether  in  a  symphony  of  discord.  Symbolically  defeated,   the  lonely  alcoholic Englishman  is soon after dismissed from the hospital as an alien. His moment of self recognition comes when, once again down and out  on the street, it suddenly becomes clear  that  two  pathetic  creatures  left behind,  a senile old  man  and  an angel-faced  schizophrenic  boy, are  his only friends in  the  world.  His music re­ jected even by the insane,  Plantagenet  stumbles out drunk  and  ironically "free,'' into  the streets of the city.
In contrast  to "The Forest Path  to the Spring",  jazz in this novella is used to
depict  the lonely distintegration of an  unsuccessful artist  and -by  extension­ the  isolation  of  all  men.  Lunar  Caustic is perhaps  the  closest  Lowry  came  to presenting a written  tribute  to the tragedy of Bix Beiderbecke's life and  his own.



IT IS   GENERALLY AGREED that   Hugh   and  the  Consul  are fictionalized  versions of  the  young and  older  Malcolm  Lowry.  In  fact  Hugh's
musical shenanigans, the  Bolowski music publishing fiasco, and  the songwriting, are  thinly veiled autobiography stemming  from  a  period  during  his Cambridge career  when,  according  to  Dr.  Case,  Lowry  and  a  friend  named  Ronnie  Hill "wrote  a number  called  'I've  Said  Good-bye to Shanghai" which  was actually printed  but was never sold.... I think, though I am not sure, that  Malcolm and Ronnie did pay for the printing  or 'publishing'."
Biographically interesting details such as these can only furnish half the story behind  so brilliant  a  novel as Under  the Volcano. Still more fascinating,  how­ ever, is the  way in  which such  a complex novel was put  together.  Each  time  I

SWINGING THE MAELSTROM



read  it I found  some  new skein to trace.  In  my book on  Lowry  and  the  Cabbala I pointed  out  that  the  construction of Volcano  with  its twelve  chapters is based to some  extent  on  the  Zohar  with  its emphasis on  the  mystical  number twelve. Here  I would  like to  note  that  the  blues form  in  jazz is also based  on  a  twelve­ bar  construction. Being a connoisseur  of blues  and  an  amateur song  writer  him­  self, Lowry  could  really  have  meant  it  when  he  referred   to  his  book  as  a  jazz tune.  Introduced in the  slow blues manner, the  first  chapter of  the  novel is de­ voted  to a lament for the  dead -the  Mexican souls  abroad  on  the  Day  of  the Dead, and  more  specifically, a lament for  the  dead  Consul. To remind  us in  the old  manner of  the  Negro  mourners in  New  Orleans,  Lowry has  Laruelle hear "a despondent American tune,  the  'St.  Louis  Blues,'  or some such ..." This  first chapter states  the  "blues" or tragic  theme  of the  novel as the  Dixieland musicians  playing  a mournful tune on  their  way to a funeral state  the  theme  of death. Dr.  Vigil  and   Laruelle provide  the  chorus   (they   are  choral in the  classical  Greek sense, too)  and  the  rest of the  novel unfolds  as a series of variations and  explana­ tions  of  their  commentary.
Geoffrey's, Yvonne's,  and  Hugh's individual "stories", their   points  of  view, might  be compared with  the improvisations of soloists, but  the  theme  is resolved, in the final chapter, on the same  note that  ends  the  first chapter: dolente, dolore
-the ringing  of the  bell for the souls of the  dead.
Under  the Volcano  is in many  ways a catalogue of human suffering, much  as the  blues are. The harmony in the  novel is provided, however,  not  by the  crude stringing  of  guitars  (although  fictional   guitar  stringing occurs   consistently throughout) but  by stream  of consciousness  techniques and  by the  imposed  con­ tingencies  of  the  outer   world  on  the  mind : Peter   Lorre cinema   posters,  over­  heard  snatches of  conversation in  a  bar,  recurring advertisements for  sporting events,  etc. The final  chapter of the  novel  is the  closest  possible  literary  version of  a  complicated harmonic piece  of  jazz  music   (Malcolm used  to  play  one  of his songs on  the  piano  in  "the advanced and  improbable key of six  flats!", says Dr.  Case)   that  drives  to a terrifically  charged "hot" finish.  Lowry  also had  the  musician's knack  for  establishing  a  theme -for  example, the  bull  throwing at Tomalin-very early  through Geoffrey's  eyes, say, and  then  picking it up  again  from  Yvonne's point  of  view. This  is similar   also  to  the   jazz  soloist's  variation on a melody; with  the Consul  playing  lead  trumpet  throughout,  Hugh, Yvonne,  and  Laruelle function as "sidemen" who  act  and  react  to  his signals.
The older  jazz form  concentrates on  statement of  the  chorus,  solo improvisa­
tion,  and  often  a kind  of counterpoint that  occurs between two instruments, the

SWINGING THE MAELSTROM



clarinet   and   trumpet  perhaps; these  instruments will  "talk" to  each  other   or sometimes  against each  other  after  the solos, building  up  toward  the  final  chorus when  all the  musicians play  ensemble.  This  is neatly  accomplished by  Lowry  in chapters ten,  eleven,  and  twelve,  which  culminate in  the  frenetic climax  of  the novel.  In   chapter  ten   the  competing  "instruments"  are   Hugh   and   Geoffrey locked  in  an  argument ostensibly  about  Communism. Hugh is trying  to explain why  he  believes in it while  Geoffrey  tries to describe  his own  drunkard's plight.
" 'See here, Geoffrey-'
" 'See here,  old  bean ... to have against  you Franco,  or  Hitler  is one  thing,  but to have  Actinium,  Argon, Beryllium, Dysprosium" etc., etc.
" 'Look here, Geoff-'
" 'Ruthenium, Samarium, Silicon,' " etc., etc. " 'See here-' " etc., etc.

The  musical  nature of this "cutting contest"  strikes one immediately with  Hugh's "Look  here"  and  "See  here"  punctuating in short  blasts  Geoffrey's  long,  rhyth­ mic  enumeration of  the  elements.  The   Consul  is "playing" hot  and  fast; even Cervantes, the  cafe  owner,   joins in  with  the  traditional pattern of  call and  re­ sponse that  underlies all  jazz forms.
" 'Cervantes  ... you are  Oaxaqueiian ?' "'No, senor ... I am Tlaxcalan, Tlaxcala?'
"'You are ... Well, hombre, and are there not stricken in years trees in Tlaxcala?' " 'Si, si, hombre.  Stricken  in years trees. Many  trees.' "

Suddenly a  man  with  a  guitar appears and  begins  to  play.  Geoffrey,  who  has not finished  his solo",  says:  " 'Tell  him to go away .. .' " And  then,  as if to  con­ firm  the  underlying musical  foundation of  the scene,  the  Consul  actually  "sees"  his performance in  terms  of:
... a  piece on  the  piano,  it  was like  that  little  bit  in  seven  flats  on  the  black keys ... like that  little piece one had learned, so laboriously, years ago, only to for­ get  whenever  one  particularly   wanted  to  play  it,  until  one  day  one  got  drunk in such a way that  one's fingers themselves recalled the combination  and, miracu­  lously, perfectly,  unlocked  the wealth of melody ...

The   theme   of  the  final  chapter opens  on  discord:  a  mixture of  "I'm  just a country  b-boy", drunken references  to  Mozart, the  imagined  plaintive cries  of Yvonne  through her  letters,  a fiddler  playing  "The Star  Spangled Banner", "It's a  Long  Way   to  Tipperary", builds  to  a  simulated  resolution   in  order   when the  Consul  "hears" Bach  as his life ebbs away,  and  finally  ends  in  a very  literal dying  fall  (d. Ed.  Lang's guitar)  as Geoffrey  is flung  down  into  the  ravine.

SWINGING THE MAELSTROM



Corroborating these musical intentions in  his Letters, Lowry sums up by say­ ing:  "Is  it too much  to say that  all these chords, struck  and  resolved,  while no reader  can  possibly apprehend  them on first or even fourth  reading consciously, nevertheless vastly contribute unconsciously  to the final weight of the book?"
Since  jazz is not at all intended  to be "weighty", yet is nonetheless both  gay and  tragic  at once, and  since the same can  be said  of  Malcolm  Lowry,  I  will close  with  a  humorous   musical  anecdote.   It  was  a  warm  summer   night  in Dollarton.  Malcolm  and  Margerie  Lowry  were seated  on  the  platform  of their shack that  led to the water;  they were feeling fine after  a few drinks,  and  were enjoying the lovely night. Malcolm began to play hot  jazz on his taropatch, then he started  dancing  to  his own  music, which  grew  hotter  and  hotter,  until  he "finally  danced  right  bang off the end of the  pier and  into  the  water,  uke and all." s


FOOTNOTES

1 "In fact  this  solo is usually  considered  one  of  the  three  most  celebrated solos in jazz  history.... It is a  solo  of  intense,  brooding beauty,   carefully built  up  to  a typical  tumbling break  in  the  middle  with   a  surprise explosion after   it.  There was  hardly  a  contemporary white  musician   of  jazz  pretensions who  didn't learn it  by  heart." George  Avakian,   Liner   Notes  on  Bix  Beiderbecke  Story,  Vol.   II, Columbia Records.
2    "He said  many  many  years ago ... that  Bach  was the  background for  all  classical jazz."  (Margerie  Lowry)
3  I am  indebted for  this anecdote to my friend Margerie Lowry,  to whom  I express my  general   gratitude for  her  help  in  gathering information for  this  article; I express my gratitude also to Dr.  Ralph Case of London for  his full and  generously transmitted recollections of Malcolm  Lowry's  "jazz  days".



















66




review articles


LITERARY WORLDS AND THEIR DENIZENS

George Woodcock



JOHN GLAssco, Memoirs of Montpamasse. Oxford,   $6.50.
LOVAT DICKSON, H. G. Wells:  His Turbulent Life and Times. Macmillan, $1o.oo. LEON EDEL, Henry  James. The  Treacherous Years:  rBgs-rgor. Lippincott, $10 nn. D. E. s. MAXWELL, Poets of the Thirties. General  Publishing,   $g.oo.
Fin de Siecle. Edited  by C.  J. Dixon. Clarke  Irwin.  $6.oo.


MosT  LITERARY  WORLDS   are small places, rather  as classic Athens was, however grand  they may seem in history. It is not really surprising  that  Leon Edel, the  author   of  one  of  the  books  I  am reviewing, should  write  the  introduction to another  of them, by John  Glassco, and should   be  extensively   mentioned   in   a third,  by Lovat  Dickson. Of  course,  we are  dealing  with  the  Canadian  literary world which,  despite its vast distances, is probably  smaller  and  closer  than  most, but  John   Glassco's  Memoirs  of  Mont­ parnasse, the story of a young man's brief interlude   in  the  Paris  of  the  Twenties (when  it  was  a  real  ville  lumiere)   re­ minds  one within  what  limited  circles of shared  interests even English and  Ameri­ can writers have always moved.
Memoirs of Montparnasse is a strange projection out of time, an event in kind rather   like  the  long-delayed  publication by Robert  Bridges of the  poems of  Hop­ kins,  except   that   in  this  case  the  dis­ coverer  who  reveals  this  long  conceal·ed
 work to the world  is the  author  himself, grown  thirty-five  years  older   than   the youth who actually wrote it, mostly when he was sitting in a hospital bed and half­ expecting  an   early  death   in   the   early Thirties.  "This  young  man  is no  longer myself; I  hardly  recognize  him ..."
In  1928, eighteen  years old, John Glassco set off with his friend  Graeme Taylor to find the earthly paradise of Montpamasse.   Whether  it  was  the  pre­ cocity of his own talent,  or  the  peculiar intensity of the life that  he, like so many others,  lived  at  that   time  and  in  that place, John  Glassco wrote  then  and  has resurrected  now a  remarkably  appealing account  of what  it  was  to  be  young  in that  magical  and  departed  Paris  of  the Third  Republic,  the  Paris  which  was­ until the internal combustion  engine and puritans  like Madame  Richard  destroyed it-still recognizably the city of Verlaine and Baudelaire;  in parts, even, the city of Balzac.
It was not merely a setting of inexpen-

REVIEW ARTICLES



sive  romance  that    Paris  gave   to  John Glassco  and  others   like him.  It was  the sense  of  a  living  literary  world,  and  the opportunity to  meet-gathered as  they have  never  gathered since-so  many  of the great  writers  and  the great  failures  of the  .early  twentieth century.  Wilde  once said  to  boasting   Frank   Harris  (who  in­ cidentally  makes   a  faltering and   aged appearance in  these  pages), "My  dear Frank, we know  you have been in all the best   houses   of   London -once."   One  could  also say  that  John  Glassco  met  all the  grand   figures  of  that   time -once. But   once   can   be  enough   if   the  eye  is sharp  and   the   memory  clear,  and   the encounters  which   decorate  Memoirs  of M ontparnasse -encounters with  George Moore and James  Joyce and  Hemingway ("his   eyes  were  curiously  small,  shrewd  and   reticent,  like  a  politician's"),  with Gertrude Stein  ("a  rhomboidal woman") and  Ford  Madox Ford  and  Andre  Breton and  ... and  ... -are described  not  only with  a  real  visual  evocativeness,  but  also with   a   twist   to   the   visual   that   opens windows  for  deep  looks into  characters. Not  a  little  of  the  emperor   without  his clothes  in all this, the intellectual urchin's eye!
But the best thing  of all about  Memoirs
of Montparnasse  is  their  sheer  contem­ poraneity, their  glittering freshness. Some chapters were  written  there  and  then,  in Paris  when  it  was  all  going  on,  and  the  last  were  written in  I933 in a hospital  in Montreal,  so   that,   unlike   Callaghan's memoirs of the same era  in  Paris,  which are   excellent   as  long-term  recollections, Glassco's   are   nearer  to  the   time   than  almost   any   book   written   on   the   great days  of  Montparnasse. Is it only to those of  us  who  knew  the  last  glimmerings of that  extraordinary  furnace of  creativity

68
 and  Bohemian daring which  was Paris  a generation  ago   that  this   will   seem   a golden   book?  I do  not  think  so. Anyone concerned with  the  ambiances of literary creation will,  I am  sure,  be  indebted to the   John  Glassco  who  wrote   this  book and   to  his  other self  who  excavated it from  the  past.
With   the  other   books  I am  reviewing
we  recede  steadily  from  the  writer   as  a directly apprehended human being. Lovat Dickson  at  least  knew slightly  the subject of  his  H.  G. Wells:  His Turbulent  Life and  Times. Leon  Edel,  despite   the  cosy intimacy of  his  writing, came  along   too late   to  have   any   personal contact  with Henry    James,  of   whom   he   writes   his fourth volume  in The  Treacherous Years, I895-190I. Edel  is still abundantly  bio­ graphical, so that  at  least  the  illusion  of a human contact with  the  Master is  at times attained. D. E. S. Maxwell  in Poets
of the  Thirties   and   C.  J. Dixon   in  his
critically  introduced  anthology,  Fin  de
Siecle,  are   getting  away   from   the  bio­ graphical,  into   textual  analysis   on   the one  hand and  intellectual  history  on  the other. In  other  words,  in these five books by   Canadians  on   literary   worlds   and  literary  men   outside  Canada, we  have almost   every  gradation  from   the   auto­ biographical  proximity of the  participant to   the  austere  distance of   the   literary historian.
Months ago,   on   the   night   men   first walked   on  the  moon, I thought a  great deal   about  H.  G.  Wells,  but   I  noticed that his name rarely  appeared in public comments on  that  event  he  had  so  ima­ ginatively and  so  long  ago  projected  in fiction. I  remembered how,  in  my  teens, far  off  in  the  Twenties,  Wells and  Shaw  had  seemed  mental  liberators on a much  grander and  more iconoclastic scale than

REVIEW ARTICLES



the  Germanic academics and  hysterical Latin   American slogan-mongers who  as­ pire  to  that   role  today.  Wells  and  Shaw offered   us  new  mental worlds  and  new minds'  eyes to see them,  and  if  they have gone  largely  out  of fashion  (Wells  more than  Shaw), it may  be unjust, but  it is a tribute to  their  influence and  their  fore­ sight; they  have ceased  to  be interesting because  so  much   they  stood  for  when  it seemed  revolutionary and   novel  has  be­ come  part  of the  commonplace fabric  of our  lives.
I am sure some feeling  of this kind prompted Lovat Dickson  to write the strange book which  he calls a "biography" of  H.  G.  Wells.  In  fact,  it  is so  incom­ plete   as   biography  that   it   sweeps   the whole  of Wells' life after  rgr8 under  the carpet  in   thirty  hurried   pages,   and   I suspect  that  a further  reason  for  writing  it   was   the  fact   that  Dickson   has  been able   to   use   the   Wells   correspondence which   he  discovered   in   1943  in  the  ar­  chives  of   the  publishing house  of  Mac­  millan.  The   letters   between    Wells  and Frederick  Macmillan  peter   out   towards the  end  of  World  War  I, and  it  is obvi­ ously  not  accidental that   Dickson  chose this  as  the  point   at  which   to  close  his book in a hurry.
Yet  there  is a  justice  in  all  this.  As a literary artist  of distinction Wells did  not survive  beyond  rgzo; his unfortunate association   with   the  Fabians had  set  in motion   a  process  by  which   the   teacher within  him  came  uppermost, but  the teacher had said everything novel and influential  that   he  was  to  say  by  rg.r8. The vast compilations like the  Outline of History, and  the  bland  empty novels that followed it were the works of a great popularizer, not  of  a  major  artist-as
 


Butterfly on Rock


A   STUDY  OF THEMES   AND IMAGES IN CANADIAN   LITERATURE


D.  G.  JONES


This fresh and unconv.entional discussion, based on the  author's wide  knowledge  of the original  works, makes  Canadian liter­ ature   (primarily that  written in  English)  intelligible   in   terms   of  its   imaginative patterns  and   inner   concerns.   The   ap­ proach is  cultural  and  psychological rather than   purely  aesthetic or  literary. The   book  considers  some  of  the  themes and  images that have taken  root in Cana­ dian   poetry  and fiction  during the  past three  generations, and   by isolating  these themes it defines more clearly some of the features that  recur  in  the  mind,  the mir­ ror of our imaginative life.





UNIVERSITY OF  TORONTO PRESS

the   Wells  of  half   a  dozen   early   books ---------------

6g

REVIEW ARTICLES



undoubtedly was-or of  a seminal teacher,  as   the   Edwardian  Wells   had been.
Dickson  writes with a great  urbanity of
manner  and   with   considerable  wisdom, very  sensibly   disentangling  the   teacher from  the artist  in Wells' important works, and  linking  both  to the peculiarities of personality that  made Wells at once so amiable and  so detestable a human being, so admirable and  so despicable. The criti­ cism  is  not  in  detail  or  in  much  depth, and  the  biography lays no claim  to schol­ arly  rigour, but  within  its modest field of intention this  is a  good  and  sympathetic book   coming   at   a  time  when   Wells  is excessively  neglected.
I  suppose Leon Edel's large  five­
volume  biography of James  has to be considered  as some  kind  of  monument, and   I wish  I could   feel  more   warmly towards a  book  that  shows so much  evi­ dence  of industry, so much  obvious effort to  understand. But  it  remains  for  me  a curiously  sleek and  impervious work, and this   volume   seems   hardly   an  improve­ ment  on its predecessors. There are many things that  disturb me about The Treach­ erous Years;  here are the most disturbing.
An air of gossip hangs like a cloud of sparrows, twittering over the  narrative. Gossip, of course,  is an important source of  raw  material for  the  biographer, but it  has  to  be refined,  assimilated,  whereas here  the  very  tone  of  the  book  is often that  of  rambling scholarly  tittle-tattle in which even documentary sources are absorbed  into  the pattern of breathless bavardage.
This  is linked  to my second  ground  of
disturbance, which  is the author's failure to  discipline the  temptation to digress. A character  is  introduced  into   the   story, and  we  must   pause  for  two  or  three  or
 four  pages  while  he is explained and backgrounded  before   we  can   return  to the  main   stream   of  James   and   his life. At   the   beginning  of  The   Treacherous Years there  is an interlude six pages long describing the  career  of the  actress Eliza­ beth  Robins, in which  James is not men­  tioned  once,  and  while  this is interesting stuff  in  its  own  way,  it  is  out  of  place there.   Edel's   taste   for  such  divagations largely   explains   why   his   biography  of James  has   become   so   unconscionably long.  It could,  one  realizes  at  this  point,  all  have   been  done  quite   adequately in two  large  volumes.
Finally, I find extremely disturbing the almost  compulsive inclination Edel  shows to explain everything that  James wrote in terms  of  actual and   usually  early  events in  his  life,  a  heritage of  the  obsolescent school   of  psychologically   oriented  criti­ cism,  according to  whose  tenets  Freud's theory  that  all  our  mental  troubles have their  source  in  our  childhood had  to  be transferred to  the consideration of litera­ ture,   which   thus   became   a   process   of exorcism. This inclination reaches  a point  of   absurdity when   Edel  deals  with  The Spoils  of  Poynton  and   finds  its  sources not  in  the  author's creating imagination but,   because   Mrs.   Gereth   refers   to  the loss of her  beloved  antiques as an "ampu­ tation",  in   his   father's   long   decayed wooden leg  and-even  more  incongru­ ously-in  the  more  recent  personal dis­ aster  of the  destruction of  Guy  Domville by a hostile audience. I am no fanatic for the   kind   of  close  textual  criticism   that  ignores   the   biographical  element  in  all works  of art,  but  I feel  Mr.  Edel  carries  on  his work  as a literary detective with  a zeal  that   destroys  his  sense of  the  works as  achieved   objects,  and   even   at   times mars   his  view  of   James   as a  complete

REVIEW ARTICLES



person. He has got so close to the detail of the Master's life that he can rarely generalize  interestingly   about   him,  and often the most significant remarks on his pages are those he quotes, like Jane Emmet's:  "He hangs poised for the right word while the wheels of life go round." Edel rarely says anything  so good, so concisely.
In a different way Poets of the Thirties is also a very limited  study of its period. While  Mr.  Maxwell  does provide  an  in­ troduction   which  considers  the  kind  of intellectual  background   to the  time sug­ gested  by the  works of  Graham  Greene and  Eric Ambler-seedy  and  violent - he  also  reflects an  obstinate  misconcep­ tion  of  the  Thirties by concentrating on the  famous  four,  Auden,  Spender,  Day Lewis, MacNeice, with some reference to Charles Madge and to those Communist martyr-poets,  Christopher Caudwell and John   Cornford,   assured  immortality   by death in the Spanish Civil War. He fails completely  to  recognize  that  there  were two  groups  of  significant   poets  in  the later  Thirties  who  also expressed in  dif­ ferent   ways  the   preoccupations  of   the decade:   the  Twentieth  Century   Verse group, centred  around  Julian Symons, to which   I  adhered    and   of   whom   Roy Fuller  has survived  to become England's most interesting  elder poet of the 197o's; and   the  irrationalists, led   by  Dylan  Thomas, George Barker, David Gascoyne, Philip O'Connor and  the English surreal­ ists.  Maxwell makes glancing  mention of some of these, but discusses none of them as  poets, and  he  omits  any  reference  at all  to Kathleen  Raine  who, in the Thir­ ties,  was   a   Marxist   poet   married   to Charles  Madge.  In  other  words, this is a very  incomplete   view  even  of  the  new and  "revolutionary" poetry  of  the  Thir-
 ties, reflecting the myths which Geoffrey Grigson zealously fostered  by using New Verse   as the  special  organ  of  a  limited group of poets.
Apart  from  all  this,  I find  Maxwell's
writing  dull, and  his analyses pedestrian. One   of  his  difficulties  undoubtedly   is that, once one has mastered the clique imagery, the poems of the major Thirties writers are transparently obvious in their intent.  What  is there  to explicate  when all is so plainly said?  Of course, there  is one  exception  to  that  rule:   Auden,  the sole poet of major stature  that the decade produced. Maxwell recognizes the special quality of Auden's work, but why it is special he cannot  explain.
Finally, Maxwell's knowledge of his background is not always thorough. For example,  he  twice  takes  John  Cornford to  task  for  the  empty   rhetoric  of  two lines in one of his poems.

Raise  the red flag triumphantly
For  Communism  and  for  liberty.

What  he does not know is that  Cornford is quoting. The  lines are a translation  of the   refrain   of  the   Italian   Communist song   (sometimes  pirated   by  the  Anar­ chists), "Avanti  popolo". There are other errors  of  this  kind  which  no  man  who had   been  at   the   heart   of   the  English Thirties  would commit.
Fin  de Siecle  is an  anthology  that  be­
lies its title, since it is really a brief collec­ tion accompanied  by a long introduction, of poems from  the last  two-thirds of the Victorian  era, starting in 186o. It is true that  a spiritual  malaise was spreading  in the   Victorian   world   about   186o,  but Arnold had already caught it beforehand,  and  it  is  definitely  not  what  we  mean when  we  talk  of  the  real   fin de  siecle, which  by  definition  was the  end  of  the

REVffiW ARTICLES



century, the  Nineties-age of the Deca­ dents,  with  Swinburne and   Pater   as  its prophets. Really,  there  is no  deep  com­ mon   element  in   the   poems  Dixon  has brought  together,  varying  from  Kipling to  Dowson   and   from   Hardy to  Wilde, while he has left out many of the real and very interesting fin de siecle poets. Noth­  ing  on the  period  has recently  been done
 as good as the  anthology of Nineties  verse which  A.  J. A. Symons  compiled   in  the
Thirties, and  this  is perhaps because Symons was  temperamentally  sympa­ thetic to  the  real   fin de siecle spirit,  and Dixon  is  not,  which  is why  he  failed  to recognize  the essential difference between  the  Nineties  and  the other  late  Victorian decades.




SCRUTINEERING ORWELL

Julian Symons


KEITH  ALLDRITT, The  Making  of George  Orwell.  Macmillan, $6.gs.


THE  BASIC  IDEA  of  Mr.  All­ dritt's study  is that  George  Orwell's work is interesting "not  as social  commentary
"  or as political  thought" but as a continu­ ally developing eJrercise in self-knowledge "distinguished  by its  directness,  its lively movement and  its assimilation  of some of the  idiom   and  the  raciness  of  common  speech." So  far  so good,  except  that  an either/ or   is   postulated   which    doesn't  seem quite genuine. Granted that  Orwell approached most problems from a highly personal  attitude, isn't  this the very qual­ ity that  makes his work  particularly valu­  able  as  social  commentary? The merits  of  the  book  rest in  some of the  glancing observations  made in  it,  rather than   in its general theory.
Given  his prime  assumption, it follows
that    Mr.    Alldritt  is  particularly   con­ cerned  with  what  he  calls  the  "autobio­ graphical" works from  Down and Out in Paris and London  onwards. In the course of  examining  Orwell's  attempt to  "re­  solve the  ambivalences in  his own  Inind"
 he  makes  some  points  more  sharply  than other critics  have  done.  He  is very  good on  the  importance to  Orwell   of  poverty as a  subject, his  awareness   that   a  man without money,  or even shabbily  dressed, was  regarded  by  many   people  as  abso­ lutely  inferior to  somebody  wearing the proper  middle or   upper  class  gear.  He has  an  enlightening  comparison  of  Or­ well's  attitude  in  the  Thirties with  that  of   two    other   autobiographers  of   the
period,  Christopher  Isherwood and  J. B.
Priestley,  pointing out  that  where  Isher­ wood  retreats into  "anecdotal  trivia  and  rueful    self-depreciation" and    Priestley always comments upon what he calls "the working  folk"  from   a  distance, Orwell's involvement  is  profound,  agonised, and  above  all  personal.
He   is  right   too,  of  course,  in  saying
that  "the lack  of felt  experience" of  just this   kind   is  the   crucial   defect   of   the novels.   He   spends   perhaps  rather  too much  time  in demonstrating that  Orwell lacked   much   awareness of  other   people

REVIEW ARTICLES



or much  interest in  their  characters. No­ body  thinks  now  that  Orwell was a  very good  novelist,  and  Orwell  himself  came  to  that   conclusion.  (See   the  Collected Essays,  Journalism   and   Letters,  which perhaps came  too  late  for  Mr.  Alldritt's use,   although  he   mentions  them   in   a couple  of  footnotes.)  In  general it seems to me that he does not distinguish enough between   the   often   valuable but   some­ times  foolish  and   erratic  work  that   Or­ well produced up  to the beginning of the
1939  War  and  the  consistently  important writings  of  his  last  ten  years.  By cutting himself  off  almost   completely from  any consideration of  the  part   Orwell  played in  the  political   life  of  his  time,  first  in opposing  Stalinism and  then  in  support­ ing   the   Labour  Party,  Mr.   Alldritt commits himself   to   some   imperceptive attitudes, in  particular  about the  essays.
Orwell's increased self-knowledge was valuable not  as  a  thing  in  itself,  but  in the  ability  it  gave  him  to comment upon the social events  around him  with  greater depth and  honesty  than  was shown by anybody   else   at   the   time.   When   Mr. Alldritt says that  there  are "no  claims"  to be  made   for  Orwell as  a  literary  critic on  the  ground that  he did  not  adhere  to the   "methods  and   criteria  for   making value  judgements" proposed  in  Scrutiny, one  has to say first that  no such  methods and  criteria exist  (the  value   judgements come   down   in   the   end,   as  Dr.   Leavis himself  has said,  to  the  impact of a  par­ ticular  work   of  art   upon   a   particular sensibility) ,   and   then   that   the  purely  literary  approach  of   many   Scrutineers would    have   seemed   to   Orwell  simply inadequate. The essays  on  Dickens   and  on crime  fiction,  for instance, interweave social   and   literary   criticism.  To   deny their   existence   as   literary  criticism   be-
 cause  Orwell's  prime  concern is to place art   in  a  social  context, is  also  to  deny that the Edmund Wilson who wrote The Wound  and the Bow was a literary critic. Perhaps Mr.  Alldritt would  do  just that.
To understand Orwell's virtues  it is necessary first of all  to consider  his work in  relation   to  his  own   life  and   to  the society in which  he lived. The almost continuous autobiography of his writings has its full impact only if we think  about the semi-ostracism he endured before  the war   and   his   unpopularity  with   many "Left-wingers" during his  whole  writing life.  There is much  in  the  Essays, Jour­ nalism  and  Letters-and  a  good   deal that  was easily accessible before  their publication  in   book   form -that   con­ tradicts  Mr.   Alldritt's  views.   A   single example:  he  makes   a  lot  of  play  with Orwell's   favourable  view  of   Tropic   of Cancer in 1939 and  suggests that  part  of Orwell   continued  to  be  drawn  towards  "the  passive non-cooperative attitude im­ plied  in  Miller's  work".  But  to assess the article on Miller  properly we should  have to  take  into  account the  fact  that  it  was written  before  the  war,  at  a  time  when Orwell   was   most    deeply    disillusioned  about   Left-wing   intellectuals,   and    to consider also the scathing attack he made on  Miller  as a political  reactionary a few years later.  His sympathy for Miller's "quietism", as  distinct   from  an  admira­ tion of his energetic prose, didn't last long.
I don't  want  to  be  unfair to  Mr. All­ dritt's book.  A  lot  of  the  things  he  says are suggestive and  valuable. But the book we need about  Orwell is one which  places him  in social and  personal  contexts,  and not  in  relation   to  an  arbitrary  standard of  scrutineering  excellence.  Such  a  book Mr.  Alldritt  is  not  equipped by talent  or sympathy  to write.

73


INDEPENDENT CRITICISM

W.H.New


HALLVARD DAHLIE, Brian Moore. Copp  Clark  (SCL  2), $1.95.
DOUGLAS  o. SPETTIGUE, Frederick  Philip Grove. Copp  Clark  (SCL  3), $1.95.
VICTOR HOAR, Morley  Callaghan. Copp  Clark  (SCL  4), $1.95.


THE FIRST TWO things to say about the  recent additions to Copp Clark's Studies  in Canadian Literature series both involve compliments to the publishers. One:   the   books  are   hand­ somely designed, colourfully jacketed, and  dearly printed. And  two:  the  format of each   study   varies   with   the  author  and subject, a  welcome  departure in  a  con­ forming  age.  Though  uniformity of  ap­  proach may  be a  boon to publishers, it is a sign of  critical  malaise,  threatening the artist  with  a  mechanical set  of interpre­ tive   judgments  and   turning  the   critic  into  a  talking doll.  The  ghost  of  Sarah Binks walks through all those studies  that arbitrarily concoct  early, middle, and  late periods  for  tedious  analysis.  Fortunately in   Morley   Callaghan  by  Victor   Hoar, Brian  Moore   by  Hallvard Dahlie, and Frederick Philip Grove by Douglas  0. Spettigue, Sarah's  ghost  nowhere  lurks.
Not  all  the  success of  the  series  obvi­ ously   goes  to   Copp   Clark.   The   cover designs   are   Alan   K.  Daniel's,  and   the contents of each  book  testifies  to  the  in­ dependence of  the  respective  critic.  The  most   traditional  approach   is   Hallvard Dahlie's, whose  studies  of   Brian   Moore  have   been  earlier  published  in  Critique and  elsewhere.  In  a series of  well-made essays,   he   examines  each   of   Moore's  novels  in  chronological order,   exploring the recurrent themes  of isolation,  artistry,

74
 Catholicism, and  despair. He  shows how from    Judith   Hearne   to   Mary   Dunne there  is a "progressive emancipation of [Moore's] characters" as they escape suf­ focation  in  Belfast,  discover  flux  in  the New World, and  finally emerge  triumph­ ant.
It is character, therefore, that  most attracts  Dahlie's attention, and   because of that  his approach to Moore  can be interestingly compared with Victor Hoar's  response   to   Morley   Callaghan. Hoar divides  his work into  two long chapters: "The Technique" and  "The Themes", and  for  a change  it  is the sec­ tion  on  Callaghan's usually  reviled  tech­  nique   that    comes   off   the   better.   The  technique, he  insists,  is  not  slapdash or ill-mannered, but  stems  consciously  and  directly  from   Callaghan's   contact  with Imagism -his "ambition to refrain from any  overt value  judgments and  simply to strive  to see the  thing as it is, for  the act of   clear   perception  was   itself   moral". Thus   characters   themselves  become things   to   be   perceived,  the   pawns   of social   forces   who    may   yet    (like   the characters in   Now  That   April's  Here) learn  a "new  vision  of themselves  and  of the  world  around them" and  be left "enriched and  excited".
Such a conflict between the objective observation of  the  thing  and   the  admis­ sion  that   the  "thing" can  itself   have  a

REVIEW ARTICLES



subjective response  could create a highly dramatic tension  in  Callaghan's  work­ of  the  sort  that   Such  is My  Beloved or the   short   stories   possibly   reveal.   At  its worst  it leads  to the passionless  "passion" of   A  Passion  in   Rome, observed   with unflagging  distance  and   careful flatness that  fails  to  involve  either   the  reader  or the characters in the lives they lead. Thus Victor  Hoar  can be found  saying the following:
He wrote  the way he saw and  if we want  to fault   the  way  he  wrote  and  has  continued to  write,  then  we have  to fault  his  particu­ lar  vision, his way of seeing  things.

And  a page later:

Paradoxically, if  the  subject   matter   of  A Passion  in  Rome is memorable, the form  by which it is conveyed is not.
All his analysis  of the  author's irony  and candid    realism    and    conscious    use   of simple  idiom   (in  order   to  highlight the flat observation of madness or anger or violence  when  it occurs)   does  not resolve this basic paradox. Which  returns us to Moore,   for   it   is  the   kind   of   paradox which  Hallvard Dahlie never   really  has to  contend   with.  Moore's characters are affirmatively subjects-"I Am Mary Dunne"  shouts   one   of  his  titles-and Judith  Hearne's "lonely   passion"  is one in which  she and  all readers acutely  par­ ticipate.  It is  the   plight  of   Callaghan's characters that   stirs  his  readers, not  the characters  themselves;  with   Moore   the two  are  less separable.  And  as with  Cal­ laghan  such  a "stir" is  likely  to  be intel­  lectual,   so  with  Moore   it  has  emotional impact.  Both   routes   can   illuminate  the reader's world  for  him,  if the  author has any  talent, but  each  artistic method   will dictate,  as   here,   a   quite  different  ap­  proach    to    the    critic    who    wishes   to understand it.
 Douglas  Spettigue's method   in  Frede­ rick Philip Grove  is necessarily  different again,  for  he  finds  in  Grove  the  Man  a more   complex    character   than  any   of Grove's  creations. Such  a  generalization may  seem  hardly startling,  yet Spettigue constructs  out  of  it  a  fascinating adven­ ture   in   research   and   a  genuinely   new contribution to  Canadian  studies.   Dis­ satisfied  with   the known   inconsistencies  in   Grove's   biography-many  of  them spawned   by  Grove's own   A  Search  for America and  In  Search  of Myself- he went  himself  in  search  of objective  facts. What   he  found is still  a  shadowy  back­ ground  for   the   Manitoba  novelist,  but accompanying the dead  ends  are a string of questions  that  pulsate  like the  close of a  soap   opera.  Grove   was   of   German rather than  of Swedish  origin,  that  much now  seems clear,  and  quite  certainly   he was married and  had  a family  and  taught and  owned  a  farm   in  Kentucky  before coming  to Canada. Questions: when  was he  really born? are  the  Frederick Grove and  Philip  Grove  families  now in  Louisi­ ana  related  to him?  was he the son rather than   the  husband  of  the  Minna Grove who  sailed  with  him  from  Hamburg to New   York   on   the   Furst   Bismarck  in
18g2?  (or was he -most mysterious pos­ sibility   of   all-someone    else   entirely,  who  met   Minna  and   Friedrich  aboard  the ship and  absorbed their history, aban­ doning  his own?)
After  the  excitement  of  the  chase,  it comes as something of an anticlimax to return  to the  Grove  canon, but even here Spettigue  displays   the   critical    acumen that  makes  this  a  fine  book.  By refusing to  find  in   Grove's  novels  what   is  not there,  he perceives  the  virtue  of what  is, and thus restores to them the historical importance they  have  in the development

75

REVIEW ARTICLES



of  realism  in  Canadian fiction.  Comple­ mented by an  excellent  bibliography, this book -like  the  others  in  the  series-is
 both  well-documented  and  lucidly  writ­ ten.   It sets  a  fine  standard for  further critical  writing on  Canadian  literature.




TURNING  FICTION INTO  FICTION

John Reid


J. MICHAEL YATES, Man  In The  Glass Octopus. Sono Nis Pres, $s.oo.
RAY    SMITH,  Cape  Breton  is  the  Thought  Control   Center   of  Canada.  House  of
Anansi,  $2.50 paper.
BARRY CHARLES,   You  Used  To  Like  My  Pies. House  of Anansi,  $1.95  paper.


0F THESE  THREE BOOKS, Man   In   The   Glass  Octopus   is  worth reading  and   was  therefore  worth   pub­ lishing.
It is a collection of related  short  stories that  can be compared to Travels Into Several  Remote  Regions of the World (which  is  reputedly  by  one   who   was "first  a  Surgeon, and  then  a  CAPTAIN of  several   ships",   and   who  announced that   his  name  was  Lemuel  Gulliver,  al­ though there  was  no such  person.)   Nei­ ther  is there  such  a  person  as  Sono  Nis, who  is the  narrator and/or  subject  of J. Michael Yates's  tales.  Both authors, over two hundred years apart, present  a world that  men  are  turning into fiction.
Gulliver  was  created   by Swift  out  of an  amalgam of observations of Empirical Man, a fiction  created in tum by John Locke  who  was  bent  on providing a counter-fiction to  Cartesian Man. Gulli­ ver, the empirical observer,  notes without comprehension, but  with the need  (being  an   empirical  observer) to   record   each thing  as it happens, in the order  in which it  occurs.   And   Gulliver  describing how he discovered, in Lilliput, that  during his sleep  he  has  been  bound  to the  earth   by
 minute men,  is doing  what  Mr.  Yates  is doing, through his  narrator, on  the  first page of his first story.

I  awoke   that   morning    to   the   sound   of colossal movement  in  the  street  outside. Perhaps a  parade. But  neither   shouts  nor music  rose  to  my second-storey.  The  sound was  rather of  running than  marching  feet. And  there  were  no shots.

Observation and  interpretation of  phe­ nomena: there  was no war for there were no  shots.  By consciously  limiting  himself in this story  ("The Passage of Sono Nis") to  the  empirically given,  by  dogged   ad­  herence  to   the   procedures,   Mr.   Yates reveals   its  nature.  It is,  said  Locke,  all that  can   be.  "The mind   has   no  other immediate object  than  its own  ideas."  As to  what  the  substance of external reality is,  Locke   only   knows   that   it   is  some­ thing,  "we know not what".
This also is the world of Sono Nis. The street  is full  of running men. Sono  Nis is safe  inside; but  he will, he reasons, even­ tually  starve.   He  believes  he  can  escape through the  crowd; he  becomes  part of it.  There is only  one  thing  to do:  record  it: that   is  all  the  meaning it  can  have. And   the   reader  finds,  as  he  frequently

REVIEW ARTICLES



does  in  fiction,  that   he  is reading  some­ thing  that  the  narrator could  never  have written; Sono  Nis claims  to have shouted  it   in   the   street,   to   preoccupy  himself while running towards no known  destina­  tion, to "you  who hear nothing and  know as much  and  as little  as 1."
The  narrator's  name   translates  as  I
Am Is  Not.  He  is Mr.  Yates's  invention; he is also the  child  of  Mr.  Yates's  medi­ tation on  the  situation of man  today.  In another story  of  a  disc-jockey  who  calls himself Tim  Hawker, but insists that  that  is  not  his  name, not  only  is  The   Man Who  Is Not,  but  makes  it his occupation to subsume others into  his  non-existence. "The  miserable vestigial  business  of tak­ ing  people  instead of  the rhythm for  the central thing.  Who  they  were  was  noth­  ing.  Who  I was  was  nothing." We  have moved   beyond   Swift's  miming  of  the declarative  sentence. Speech  comes from a man; the declarative sentence, in print,  seems creator of itself. At last, there  is no distinction between   speaker and  listener, in  a  "sheer   dream-stream  of  syllables", for,  by a  chilling   logic  of  Hegelian  des­ truction, both  are  reduced to the scienti­ fic formula "Every organism is a process. Thus   the  organism is  not  other  than  its actions."
This   is  the   theme  of  many   of   Mr. Yates's stories;  it is also the stuff of which our   times   are   made -as   though  the dream-world of nineteenth century  poetry had  become actualized in our  midst. Con­ sciousness  has  usurped primacy from  the thing  of which  we are  conscious. We may believe we believe in Evolution; in reality we   have   become    prisoners   inside   the mind  of Leibniz.
"God  of  the  World" is a story  of how non-entity   must    triumph  in   a   world where  metaphor has  become  the  ground
 of being. If it is an account of an imper­ sonal  hubris   that   reveals  the  vacuity  of our   chosen  goals,  the  final  and  longest story  makes  clear  what   this  and  all  the other  stories are about.
"An   Inquest  into   the  Disappearance
and   Possible  Death of   (the   late)   Sono Nis,  Photographer" is  a complex  meta­ phor  of a  consciousness  chiefly  aware  of its   own   consciousness;    all   objects,   all others,  become  mirrors  for  its  own  state  of  being.  If consciousness  is  a  mirror of reality,  then  in a story such as this mirrors are  apposite  images  of the story's  theme.
And  here,  for  the first time,  Mr.  Yates is  deceived   by  his  theme.   The   original mirror    in   "An    Inquest"  is   one-or rather  two,  face  to  face-in  a  barber shop. Beside the child Sono Nis sits "the expert" who  "wonders why, in  a  hetero­ sexual  society, the sensuous  hands of the barber  moving  over  neck, head,  and  ears aren't  looked   on   with   suspicion." The trouble  is that  we, and  Mr.  Yates, do not look  on  the  expert  with   suspicion.   For when  a barber cuts hair  he touches  neck, head,  and  ears:  otherwis.e he cannot cut hair.
Throughout the  story  reality  is sought
in  the  image.  Sono  Nis  begins  with  the family   photograph  albums;  he   photo­ graphs  these, then  photographs the photo­ graphs.    And    he   photographs   himself,  using  x-ray   and   infra-red  film.   In  the end,   he  sets  up  "hundreds" of  motion  picture cameras  in  his house,  all  operat­ ing  simultaneously. The  punishment for self-preoccupation is to become as unsub­ stantial  as   the    innumerable,   obsessive images of oneself.
Metaphor, where  one  thing   "images"
another, can  become  a  technique, then, of destroying entities. We see it in: "The impressions  we  take  away  from  the  mir-

77

REVIEW ARTICLES



ror  are  so cursory.  We  memorize  a  con­ struct  of   data    about  ourselves   as   we memorize  data  from  a primer  of  photog­  raphy ... " This   ignores   the  difference  between  looking at a person and studying  a   formula.  But   when   a   measurement from   arch   to  armpit,  which  in  itself  is supposed   to   have   some  significance   as self-knowledge, is described  as "following the  contours of  the  body  as  the  eye fol­ lows  swells  of   the  sea  which   is  all  the death, the terminus of all rivers, all laby­ rinths   of  blood,  and   beach  is the  boun­  dary  between   land   and  water,   not  land and  not  water,  the  changing ribbon  be­ tween  life and  death -nothing grows in this  saline  sterility" -then  we recognize that  we  have  encountered a  person  who is  not  interested  in  reality,  but  is trying to create a state of being where the mind becomes  a substitute for the existent.
The  sea, as  in  much  romantic  poetry, is also an image  that  can be manipulated. "The reporter would  recognize  the sensa­ tion  of  him  covering her  anywhere. He breaks   between   her   knees   and   sweeps over   her   like   a   magnificent  breaker." This    implies    that    reporters   recognize sensations,   including  the   sensation    of Sono  Nis, disguised  as Poseidon, covering any  part  of  the  girl.  Copulation becomes a  natural, lonely force, rather than  the expression of communion between two persons.
In a photograph of his grandparents, "behind them, at a distance, sea-spray covering  sea-rocks  the  way a man  covers a woman-a swell on the horizon arriv­ ing, arriving, towering towards the coast, then  impact, mist,  thinness,  thinness,  re­ ceding  until  the rocks re-emerge  to wait."
All  that   action -in  a  photograph! In
 believe   that   women,   slightly   more   sen­
tient, do.
This prison of  mirrors Sono Nis believes,  mistakenly, is the  inevitable  by­ product of writing poetry  and fiction. So, at  one  point  he  revolts,  and  in  place  of art    (or   its  abuse)    offers  "drinking  to­ gether   and   dancing, to  the  magnificent drugs  which  burst  all the old  horizons  of consciousness." Again, Mr. Yates  has lost touch:  April,   1938,  is  described   as  "to­ wards  the  end" of  Sono  Nis's  life:   psy­ chedelic   drugs   were  not   in   those   days popular.
But  Mr.  Yates  is  right,  at  this  point,
in permitting Sono  Nis to become an ineffectual  Nietzchean  who   comes    (he says)  "like the dark  god from  Asia, like Dionysus ... that  mammoth energy,  that




ALPHABET 18 will centre  around the Hieroglyph, features poem drawings by JUDITH COPITHORNE, an original song by Vancouver Island's LYLE CROSBIE.
JANE SHEN is assisting with the planning of this issue, one of the most striking
and  original to come from  Alphabet
Press. Out  by June, 1970.

ALPHABET  19-Horoscope Astrologica in the  painting of Hieronymus Bosch viewed by
JETSKE SYBESMA.
"2001: a Space  Commedia?"  by
JAMES POLK.
"Solar Flares" a poem  by
PHYLLIS GOTLIEB.
Various astrologers are at work. September 1970.

$1.00  at most  bookstores or order direct  from English  Department/University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario. A Subscription is
$2.00  per year  for two  issues. Please make cheques  payable to  Alphabet.

reality,  no  rocks  "wait",  but  some  men	 	

REVIEW ARTICLES



chaos, that  drunken holy destruction ... " As  part   of  his   doctrine  of  destruction Sono   Nis   advocates disregarding "the distinctions of  gender, the  distinctions of color,   and   all   other    distinctions.   Dis­ crimination is a matter of mind,  of  form, not of body."
All  this  leads  to  the  inevitable: a  sui­
cide note:  "Not words. An act. I'm  going to the  darkroom." Inevitable, because  all Sono   Nis's  activities  have   been  a  slow motion   suicide,   a  destructive duet   with his own image,  as though  he had  married his own mind.
When  one  turns  from  this  book  to the two  from  the  House  of  Anansi,  the  first thing   one  is  aware   of  is  how  well  Mr.
 Yates writes.  Also, how  well he :reads his proofs. For in Cape Breton is the Thought Control  Center   of Canada   there  are  in­ numerable errors.  The   House  of  Anansi should be supported; but  its editor should forbid   expressions  such  as  "for  e.g."  If Ray Smith  wishes to state  that  he learned  his technique from  Ezra  Pound, he must expect   those  who   know   Pound's  work
and   principles   to  pass  only  one   judge­
ment  on him: incompetent.
Barry Charles  (You Used  To Like  My Pies)   is  a  teen-ager; so  was  Rimbaud, when  he wrote  the  poems of which  these are,  intentionally or  not,  a dull  pastiche. But  perhaps   Barry  Charles should   keep it up:  look where  it got  Leonard Cohen.


































79





THE CHARM OF THE PAST

New  Canadian  Writing, 1969; Stories  by John
Metcalf, D.  0. Spettigue and   C.  J.  New­
man. Clarke,  Irwin,  $2.95.

THE  TWELVE SHORT  STORIES in this col­ lection   may  be  recent,  but  they  are  not new  in  any  qualitative  sense.  While  the three    authors   represented   demonstrate competence  which    at   times   verges   on slickness, their  stories are not memorable; in fact, one feels one has read them  many times  before-in  the  195o's. The mate­  rial is dated.
John Metcalf, represented by five stories, seems unwilling or unable  to pre­ sent   complex   characters and   problems; he  chooses  instead   to  work  with  stereo­ types,   easy  generalizations,   or   obvious, but   ineffective irony.  "The  Estuary" describes  a  sensitive  young  man's rejec­ tion of the unfeeling, unreasonable world,  but  since the boy's sensitivity is limited  to an  ability  to  observe  such  details  as  the "raw" hands   of  the  girl  next  to  him  in the  bus  queue,  and  his only  specific  in­ dictment of his environment  consists of a dislike  of the library check-out  rules, the story  is an  exercise  in  presenting a  non­  answer  to a non-problem. "The Children Green and  Golden" and  "Robert, Stand: ing"  comment on the inability  of religious belief  to  cure  all  human suffering,   but surely   the   Church   is  not,   as   Metcalf implies,  oblivious  of  this  limitation:  in­ deed, traditional Christian teaching trains  man  to  expect  release  from  pain  only in

So
 the   life   to   come.   Thus  when   Robert denies  the  Mormon missionary's exhorta­ tion  to  become  a saint  by submitting "to  all   things   which   the  Lord  seeth   fit  to inflict,"  and   instead   screams   from   his wheel  chair,  "If I  was  standing up, ... I'd   be  six  foot  three," we  are  not  con­ vinced,   as  Metcalf   seems  to  believe  we should   be,  that   religion  is either ridicu­ lous  or  useless. That  Robert cannot ac­ cept the spiritual  consolation, which  is all the  missionaries   are  trying  to  offer  him, is  believable,   but  since  the  missionaries are   not   hypocrites  preaching  a   magic cure  for  physical  ills, we  are  left  with  a fact  but  not  an idea.  Looked  at from  any other point  of view, the story is equally meaningless.  Its   painstaking  description of  the  morning bath   of  a  man  confined to  a wheel  chair  gives the  reader  a sense that  he is spying  through a keyhole, only to discover  the surely  obvious  knowledge that  for  the  handicapped, life is difficult, frustrating and  sometimes  degrading.
D.  0. Spettigue's four   stories  gain
by being  seen  in  relation to one  another since each  presents  characters whose ideal vision  of  themselves is at  variance with the  roles  they  actually play.  "The  Hay­ ing"   and   "Spring  Song"   are   the  most successful,  for  in  both,  Spettigue's ability to  create atmosphere  contributes  to  the effectiveness   of  his  thematic  statement. The shift  in "The Haying'' from  the sun­ drenched, sleepy, rich landscape that  sur­  rounds the  boy  when he  is  unaware of the hwnan potential for pain,  to the rain­ sodden   vista   he   surveys   when   he   has achieved  tragic  knowledge is obvious  but well done.  In "Spring Song,"  the delivery boy's   clumsiness,   which   in   itself   unfits him for  achieving his dream of becoming a  pharmacist, becomes  more  apparent as he  ineffectually attempts  to  keep  labels

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



dry  in  the  driving rain,  and  his  blighted dream  finds  its  correlative  in  the  wet, cold world to which spring will seemingly never   return.  Moreover,  this   character goes beyond stereotype. The  ineffectual bumbler   is  a  familiar comic  figure,  but the  narrator of this story is not laughable in  his struggles  to deal  with  the  recalcit­ rant  material objects of his  world.
The   two  most  successful  of  the  three stories  by C. J. Newman deal,  as does his novel,   We   Always  Take   Care  of  Our Own,  with  the  problem  of what  it means to be a Jew  in a gentile  world-a well­ worked  theme  in American fiction  of the
1950's.  In  both  "Yenteh" and  "An  Arab Up  North," this question is not merely discussed  in itself, but  is used as a means of probing the complexities of human response.    Determined   that    his   family shall become "the ideal North American family  my father so plainly  wanted  us to be," the  boy  in  "Yenteh" sees his mother's friendship with their vulgar neighbour as a betrayal of the family goal and   as  a  danger  to  herself,   in  that   it suggests  a  latent  similarity between   the two  women.   Thus  Newman clearly  re­ veals that  the boy's attack on his mother's friend   is  the   result   of   his   ambivalent desire    to   both    hurt   and    protect  his mother. In "An  Arab  Up  North," a Jew and  an  Arab  define  themselves  in  terms of   the   love-hate   relationship  which   is their  common heritage.
These   twelve   stories   display   no  real
inventiveness  of   style   or   theme;  what charm  they  have,  alas,  is  the  charm  of the  past,  but  they  may  be worth  reading for that  charm alone.

MARGARET HOWARD BLOM
 THE FIXED LANDSCAPE


ANDY WAINWRIGHT,  Notes  for a Native  Land.
Oberon,  $2-95·

THE  LANDSCAPE by which Canadians know  their   country  has   become  firmly fixed. The  writers  of  Notes  for a Native Land  present  this  landscape without the passion  found   in  The   New  Romans,  an earlier   and   better   anthology,  but   with more   consistency.   Most   of   the   writers agree  on the  look and  feel of their coun­ try,  though   not  on  where  it  should  lead them.
The editor, Andy  Wainwright, wisely asked  a spectrum of Canadians for  their thoughts on  Canada and the  poets, painters, film-makers, story  tellers, teach­ ers  and   newspapermen  checked  off  the things   that   make   Canada   what   it   is, canoe-trips included. "It's almost  true  to say that  I have  had  my strongest  spiritual sensations in a canoe, watching the North­ ern   Lights,"   Graham  Fraser   says.  The remark   comes   after   some   Hamlet-like brooding:  " ... I sat  down  two or  three times  and  started typing; to  my dismay, I never seemed to get farther than  all the old chestnuts  and  cliches:  elaborating on
'Man   pays, ce  n'est   pas un   pays, c'est
l' hiver',  the   nearness   of   'the   cleansing wild'; what  Fernand Dumont called  the
'quality   of  small   nations'  ... " Though
he  may   worry about sounding trite, Fraser's  instincts  are sure. He looks at the Northern Lights  and  comes  face  to  face with  his land.
In  his rambling letter  to  Wainwright,
Fraser also dwells on the French/English split   that   is  part   of  Canada. But  it  is Hugh  Hood,  Montrealer and  Expos base-

8r

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ball   fan,   who   is  most  forceful   on  this point. "Independence?  Blague!" says Hood,  and  backs up his stand with quota­ tions   from   his   plumber,  M.   Leopold Husereau, who sees no chance of it. Then too,  there   are  all  those  Quebecois  base­ ball   players selling  tickets to   Expos games.  "You'd  be  surprised   how  much baseball is played in  the province," Hood  says. If two  solitudes  cannot, in  Rilke's phrase,  meet and  greet and  embrace each other,  they can  at  least play baseball.
At  the  end  of his  note, Hood  becomes
sombre.   "If  Quebec were  alone,   there would  be no  Quebec as we have  known it, but  you won't get rid of Quebec by wishing,  fearing, hoping, suspecting, pick­ ing at sores. Quebec is our conscience."
Compared to most  countries,  Canada's
conscience   is  clear,   James   Bacque  says. "The failure of Europe and  America  has been  that   men  have  turned   politics  into war."  Because  Canada is not  hamstrung by the sense of divine purpose that great states   possess,  Bacque   believes  it  is  the one nation  which  can safely lead.

The  success of Canada has been that we turned   war   into   politics.  The  war  of  the French  and English, of the Americans and Canadians, of  the  Indians and  the  whites, have  all  been   converted   into   issues,  elec­ tions, debates  and  solutions.

The   refugees   are   pouring   in  from   the USA  already. Soon  the  world  will  look  to us and  wonder.  We must be ready.

Lionel  Rubinoff, in his bookish way, agrees  with  Bacque  on what  are  the Canadian virtues.  But  he rejects  the idea of mission. "May heaven  protect  us, then, from  intellectuals in search  of their Cana­ dian   identity  and   from  philosophers  of history in search  of a  Canadian destiny."  Mission  leads  to  politics and  politics as a complete  goal is fatal, Rubinoff  says.
 In   one   of  the   weakest   pieces  in  the book, Northrop Frye comments that "Our  political   independence, such  as  it is, is the chance that  enables  us to make common cause  with  the  genuine  Ameri­ can  that  Thoreau and  Jefferson and  even Ezra   Pound   were   talking  about."  Frye admits  this   is  "very   vague,"   though   a "statement of  belief."  We are  to  trust  in America's goodness and wisdom.
The  answer   to  Frye's   drivel   is  in  a
poem  by  Walter Bauer,  translated from the    German  by   Henry Beissel. In "Canada", Bauer  says, "Here you receive another kind  of wisdom,/ Bitter  and  icy and  not  to everybody's taste." Bauer con­ cludes  that  "The arctic expresses the sum total   of  all   wisdom: /  Silence.  Nothing but  silence.  The end   of  time."  Here  is strong   and   vibrant poetry  rooted  in  the Canadian  landscape.   From   this   secure ground, it  projects  universal  feeling.
Margaret Atwood  knows the landscape
and  the  dangers that  beset it.  In "Thoughts from  Underground" (a bad title)   she says:

due  to natural resources,  native  industry, superior  penitentiaries
we will all be rich and  powerful

flat as highway billboards

who can  doubt  it, look how fast  Belleville  is growing

Unlike Miss Atwood, most  of the writ­ ers   in   Notes   for  a  Native   Land   write  badly.
There are  the cheap, fat, hollow words,
like Lister  Sinclair's: "Instead of  threat­ ening  to secede,  I wish  Quebec  national­ ists  would  infect  the  rest  of  the country with   their   exaggerated   patriotism.  We need   it   badly."  There  is  the   fumbling caress  of  Wainwright's  introduction: "I suppose  I am  concerned that  this country

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



does  not  exist.  I have  tried,  at  different times in my life, to be its child,  its student and  its poet.  These stages have come together in my present role of lover.  (Are you  listening Canada?) " As  for  Dennis Duffy,  he seems  to  think  that  his reader is  a  heckler:  "Take  the   Toronto  anti­ war-in-Vietnam demonstration  of  26
October, I g68. The cops,  having  trained
a 'tactical' (i.e. riot control) force in imitation  of  the   fashionable  U.S.  cops, tried  out  their  shiny  new  toy  in  a  situa­ tion  that   had   no  need  for  such  techno­ logical  professionalism  (yes,  cops  on horseback  in  formation can  be as valid  a reflection  of  our  technology-fixated soci­ ety  as  urban  freeways.)" Duffy   cannot get  through a  page  of  prose  without at least two such  asides.
As a  book,  Notes   for a Native Land  is also  flawed   by  a  badly-designed cover and  no  table  of contents. To  find  Chris­ topher  Chapman's  poem,   for   instance, one  has to blunder through  two-thirds of the   book.   For   its  simple,  almost   na.lve charm, the   poem   deserves  to  be  found more  easily:

I have felt forest  and  prairie  sky, Mountain and  rocky lake,
Hot  and  frozen space -and all of us.
A youthful  stumbling country  that  is me.

Notes   for  a  Native   Land   shows  how others  react  to the youthful stumbling country we've  known  all along.
FRASER SUTHERLAND

PERIPATETIC POETS
Thumbprints: An Anthology of Hitchhiking Poems. Edited by Doug Fetherling. Peter Martin Associates.  $2.50.

jUST   FOR THE  HELL  OF IT  I retraced my former  peripatetic steps, brandished a
 big  thumb  and   hitchhiked  on  impulse over a hundred miles a few days after receiving this book. In his Introduction, Fetherling  postulates the mystique of hitchhiking:  "Understand  that   the  rea­ soning  behind  this kind of life is even less explicable   than   the   way  in  which   it  is lived."  Consequently my  jaunt  was  justi­ fiable.
There  are   twenty-five  poets   in   this
anthology; more  than  half  of them  have contributed one  poem  only,  which  is sensible  enough -considering  the  them­ atic uniformity. John  Newlove, a veritable highway   saint,   has   ten.   I   particularly appreciated  "The  Hitchhiker" and   "By the  Church   Wall."  They   both   evoke  a kinetic  landscape of human isolation  en­ hanced by the  sounds  of wind,  rain,  cars and   loons.   "I  have   travelled   this  road many  times,"  Newlove  says, "though not in  this  place -"  One   can  visualize  his figure   receding   in   a   rear-view mirror. And  his perspectives,  like hypnosis,  leave a  haunting,  indelible impression on  the mind.
Most  of the other  poems are anecdotal, spur-of-the-moment things  which lack co­ herence  and  poetic  structure. They  seem to  have  been  written on  the  run, left  on paper    napkins   in   roadside   diners,  etc. David   McFadden's "In  Praise of  Older Women" is an  exception. This  poem  de­  tails the events  leading up to the  last two lines;  the interplay of  characterization is superb.  I really laughed  reading this one. It   tells  the  truth.  Fetherling comes  on rather  ebulliently, but  I  wish  he'd  drop  the hippie-drag pose and  the  typographi­ cal  symbolism.  There is still too  much  of the Whitmanesque in his style; the stance is lean,  and  the follow-through resembles a  vaudeville  skit.  This  type  of  Vachel Lindsay troubadouring  died   after the

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Depression, it was exhumed  by the  post­ war  Beats-and  now  wears  long  hair like  the   Beatles.  I  wouldn't   think   of picking  up some shabby young  itinerant  who  is  too  lazy or  beatific  to  wash  his socks. All of them are defeating their own purpose, in poetry and prose. Why don't they do it another  way; camouflage their intent,  beat the bourgeois enemy at  their own  game?  Layton  suggested this  years ago.
Fetherling  claims that this is "probably
the  first  how-to poetry volume ever published in Canada." Man, he's dead wrong! I admire  his coffee-house propa­ ganda, but only those of his ilk are going to  buy  it.  Human   nature  remains  the same -and  sometimes  poets  can be the greatest  hypocrites.  This  anthology  un­ doubtedly   adheres   to  the   tradition   of socio-realism, and  the main  critical issue raised  by  it  is  that   of  expression  and communication. The bringing together of these  two  terms  is  today  an  especially important   problem   for  the  critic  who believes in objective aesthetic values. But even  the  discussion of the  problem  (not to mention its solution)  involves ideas of dramatic  inclusiveness  and   artistic   de­ tachment  which lie far beyond the range­ finding   sensitivity  of  the   propagandist programs.  In  other  words, you need one school  to  misunderstand  the  other-in order  for  art  to  exist.  We  can't  all  be Platos or Ortega  y Gassets.
Getting  back to the book:  I found the
work of W. W. P. Bums quite frank and joyful;  at  least  he  doesn't   juggle  self­ conscious motives.  It was  just like  that, he says. Finally, the anthology closes with seven Burma-Shave  jingles (Art and  the Masses?)  collected by John  R. Colombo. I, for one, felt sentimental recalling these signs that  I used to see  along  the  high-
 ways. Perhaps poetry should be compared to  the  sensation  you  felt  when  you  ran away from home for the first time-a sensation filled with dangerous wonder. This   hitchhiking   anthology  succeeds  a little  in offering  that  particular parallel.
LEN GASPARINI



BETRAYEO BY THE EVENING STAR

PHYLLis  GOTLIEB, Why  Should I Have All the
Grief?  Macmillan. $4·95·
MORDECAI RICHLER,  The Street. McClelland &
Stewart. $4·95·

FROM   THE    STYLISTIC   POINT   OF    VIEW only, Phyllis Gotlieb and Mordecai Rich­ ler  make  an   interesting   contrast.   Mrs. Gotlieb's dialogue is more discursive; her humour  is apt  to  be  self-lacerating;  she
aims directly  and  seriously at  the  target­
meaning;  there  is nothing  oblique  about her. Richler  uses short  snappy sentences, more  in  the  tough  Hemingway  manner, I suppose;  his humour  is wicked,  some­ times obscene, sometimes wryly aimed at himself.  Above  all,  the  point  he has  to make is something  the reader must figure out  for  himself  or  herself.  Mrs.  Gotlieb advances    her    values-which   in   this novel are generally one variety of love or another -like  an  artillery  general  mov­ ing  up  his big guns  to batter  the target­ reader. Richler's  values are generally the opposite  things  to  those he attacks:  un­ like Mrs.  Gotlieb,  he is not greatly  con­ cerned  with  making   a  moral  point   of any kind, only with  looking at  the world the way he sees the world:  and  consider­ ing all his books, he sees the  world as a sea  of  chaos  and  cruelty,  having  a  few rare  islands of  calm  and  gentleness.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Mrs. Gotlieb's novel is about Heinz Dorfman, a German-Jew refugee  in Can­ ada,  survivor  of the  Nazi ovens at Ausch­  witz.   Dorfman's  father,   who   died    at Auschwitz, seems  almost  to  have  been  a Jewish    Marquis  de   Sade.   He   treated Heinz   like   property,   owned,  bullied,  pushed   around. His  other son,  Gershon, apparently survived  the  ordeal  of having  such   a  father  with   less  serious   psychic scars.
Heinz  Dorfman in  Canada, as  a  mar­ ried   man,    is  little   different   from   the cringing child  he  was in  Germany under  his  father's  tyranny. His  wife,  Sara,  has grown   frantic  and   discouraged,  living with   a  man   who  cannot open   up  into  any   kind   of   generosity   or   love.   When  the  novel   opens,  Zalman Dorfman   (an uncle) ,   has   just    died,    and    Heinz    is dragooned  by  one   Birenbaum,  to  take part   in  the  Jewish   death-ceremonies  at a small  town  outside  Toronto. For  three days Heinz's emotions are pummeled, jabbed    and   variously   assaulted  by  the old tailor,  Birenbaum. At the end he is beginning to come alive, able to feel something for  other people; his wife  ex­ periences "the  beginnings of  hope".
Mter reading fifty  pages  of  this  novel
I still  wasn't much   interested, in  fact   I
 would   have  abandoned  it,  except   that this  review  had   to  be  written. I  dislike being  bludgeoned  with   the   necessity  to love,  whether personally   or  in  a  moral­ istic  novel.  And   I'm   profoundly   unin­  terested   in  the  details  of  Jewish   ritual  and   custom -except  as  they   touch   on something  more   universal   and   human. Idon't  like  moral tracts under  the  guise of  novels.
However,   Mrs.   Gotlieb  writes   pretty good  prose  despite  the  terrible handicap of   being   a  poet.    And   eventually  the reader   who  has  survived  her   beginning learns  that  Heinz's hang-up is really  that his father deliberately took  the  elder  son (Heinz  himself)  along  to the  Nazi  death­ camp  to die with  him,  whereas he helped the  younger  to  escape.  Mrs.  Gotlieb  has a   broody-hen  sort   of   earnestness  that  makes   this   denouement   expected.  Per­ haps   the  derivation  is  Old   Testament, with  a strong  undertone of hysteria.  The  central  idea  of  the  novel,  this  "choosing of  the  slain"  business,  was  also  used  by Yael  Dayan  in a novel  called  Death Had Two  Sons.
Mordecai Richler's The  Street  is hard
to  classify,  consisting   of  personal  mem­ oirs,   short   stories,   essays,   etc;   a   pot­  pourri and  a  grab-bag, even  using  three






RIChanb as€l & company, 1nc.

Scholarly Books in the Arts and Sciences


TORONTO
PORTLAND,  SAN  FRANCISCO,  LOS ANGELES, DENVER, CHICAGO,  NEW  YORK

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



or four  paragraphs from  his contribution to a  book  I edited. But essentially  it  is a close-up  view  of Jewish  life in  Montreal for  a few  years  before,  during, and  after the  Hitler war.
Whatever  else  Richler   is,  he's   not   a
preacher. If  you   want    meaning  and moral  truth from  his writing  you'll  have to   find   it   by  indirection,  in   what   he doesn't say, in the  obvious alternatives to the   things   he   attacks.   And   he   attacks most of the time. No tame non-offensive academic toasting marshmallows for  any establishment, nor  (alternatively) a picker  of  hippie buttercups, is Richler.
In  an   article  in  Weekend   Magazine
(July  5,  1969)  the interviewer says to Richler: "If you're anti-just-about-every­ thing,  what  are you  pro?"  Richler: "I'm pro-good-taste  and ... gentle  people." One  feels  this  is  rather inadequate, but it's  all  the answer  we're  going to get, for Richler  is  no  apologist  for  himself  and doesn't  really  explain  anything:  he  sup­ poses  the  reader   has enough  intelligence to figure  things  out  himself. But many  of his readers  don't or  can't.
I think  The  Street is a minor  effort  by
Richler, minor   in  comparison  with   his full-scale novels.  But  stand  the  book  be­ side   the   work  of  any  Canadian  writer but   one,   and   it  towers  high.   My  own fault-finding consists  mainly  in  thinking that   the  parts  which  compose  the  book remain parts,  refuse  to cohere  as a  com­ plete   entity. The  segments   remain   seg­ mented. Just  the  same, Richler's wit  and the  cutting edge  of his tongue hurt where they're meant to hurt. I'm  sure  the  veri­ similitude of Jewish  Montreal during the Hitler-war  is  close  to  exact; the  senti­ ment    is  non-sentimental.  The   book   is finally   unclassifiable,    inimitable  and - excellent.

86
 Reverting  to  Mrs.   Gotlieb's  novel­ this  too  is a  fine  book.  But  for  me, it  is flawed  by so many  people  living  at  such a  high  pitch   of  intensity,  maybe  like  a well-written soap  opera.  Flawed   also  by its  very  openness   to   understanding, for the   writer    does   most   of   the   reader's thinking: and  many  will  think   this  is a virtue. My  thoughts about  the  book con­ verge    particularly   around   a   sentence near   the  end,   when   everything  is  ex­ pected   to   work   out   and   all  concerned may  live happily ever  after: "A  window where   the  evening star   might   be  seen." Mrs.  Gotlieb  was betrayed in her  age by that  evening  star.
A.W. PURDY



LONELY RUNNERS

RONA  MURRAY,  The   Po,wer of the  Dog.  Mor­ riss   Printing   Company,    Victoria.    Hard­ bound   $6.so,   paperbound  $3.25.
ELIZABETH  GOURLAY, Motions  Dreams & Aber­
rations.  Sono  Nis  Press.  $3.25.

Oh  keep  the Dog far  hence,  that's  friend  to men,
Or  with  nails he'll dig it up again.

So  CONCLUDED John  Webster's "Dirge" in The  White Devil. In de Gubernatis' Zoological Mythology, we learn  that  the mythical dog  of  India stood  as  watcher at  the gate  of both  morning and  evening. In the  latter  capacity, he  presided   over death, night,  and  the  moon. The  Egyp­ tian   dog-god   Anubis   presided  over   the entrance to the  land  of the dead  and  the weighing of  the  souls  after  death. The power  of  dog,  then,  is  the  sinister  aspect of change  in  the  universe -change  that  culminates in death.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



In the  first  section  of  her  title  poem, "To Angels", Rona Murray tries to "keep the  Dog far  hence"; she does not wish to swnmon  to   her   aid   angels - she   has offended  them   and   before   their  honest strength her nakedness  would  perish. The defences  she  has  built  against  death  and  change  are   all,   despite  her   pretences,  vulnerable.  Although the  angels  exact  a price   she   does   not   wish   to   pay -the terrible   "steel   of   the    knives   in   their wings"-reality-nevertheless  she  will pray  to them,  not for her self, but:

Keep my darling from  the  power  of the dog.

In section  II, "Prayer Against  Accidie", the  dog  himself  is directly exhorted to depart:
take
your  shadow from  my dark your  claw
from  the  left  white breast of my darling
What  emerges   from   the  sequence   of fifteen   sections   that   make   up   the   title poem-each one  as taut  and  fieshless as
a   skeleton -is   an   urgency    of   will  so
centred on  love that  it defies the  logic of reality.   Each   part, as  it  were,  is an  in­ cantation to keep  the  dog  at  bay-shor­ ing   up   against    the   possibility   of   ruin allusions   to  the  hanged  man   of  Eliot's  "The  Waste  Land" and   Roualt's "Old  King". In  the other poems of the volume, Rona Murray  displays  a wider   range  of theme and sensibility,  praising life as well as dreading death:
Walk  across  the  bridge of your  arm
(feet  find  the  road)
enter the  tunnel of your  ear
(way  was made a fly blown day),
remember
lark, dandelion, dover.
Elizabeth Gourlay's poetry  on  the sur­
face  is less philosophically powerful  and
 unified and more directly influenced by creative   writing classes.  This   initial  ap­ pearance is, however,  deceptive. She  has learned  the lessons of imagism extremely  well and  can convey  mood  or idea by the juxtaposition without  comment of seem­ ingly  unconnected  snapshots -a  cinema  technique here well adapted to poetry.  A good  example is "Picture", which  begins tamely   and   harmlessly,   but   ends   in   a landscape where  a dog,  obviously  identi­ cal  to Rona  Murray's is about  to find its prey:

I
Like  some  exotic bird
the fuchsia droops its fall  of crimson
petals,-
the  Pekingese too  has  feathered foliage,
gold  with  black  edges.

II
In  the  azure space beside the clematis the  poet  floats
no  butterflies
only
a  rosy octopus small  in  size the  mind  too has  tiny  feet
tentacles of a kind.
III
Between the  barbed wire  fence the  distant black  mountains
a field  of tall  hay
with  streamers of sunshine.

IV
All  summer long only
the  whispers of swallows the  cooing  of wood  doves now
in   this  dawning
the  scream of  the   jay
sharp as  the  north wind
ragged as  icicles.
v
Long  shadows in  the  sun
the  woman guides the  puppy on  a  leash
not  noticing

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the  grizzled  dog
who limps  persistently
behind.

It is  idle  to  compare  these  two  books. Poetry  is essentially  a lonely race that  the poet   runs   against  himself.   Both   poets have  run  their  races  well. Their books - attractive in  format, unified, and  of high quality-deserve a  place  in  any  library in Canada where  depth  and  sensitivity of human perception and  honesty of expres­ sion are  valued.
FRED  COGSWELL


CROSSING
THE THIN LINE

ROCH  CARRIER,  Floralie, oil. es-tu?  Editions  du
Jour. $2.50.
RocH CARRIER has wasted  no time bring­ ing  out   the  second   volume  of   his  pro­ posed  trilogy  on  the  "Middle  Ages"  of French  Canada.  The  first   novel,   La Guerre, yes sir, was published only a year ago  and   is  already,  with  good   reason, taking   on   the   appearance   of  a  minor  classic.  There is serious  talk  of  its  being made  into  a movie.
Floralie, ou es-tu, filled with  boisterous,
ribald  humour and  stylistic fireworks, is another impressive accomplishment-a genuine relief  from   the  agonized,  novel­ escaped  - from  - the - confessional - booth trend  in  contemporary  French-Canadian writing. In  more  ways  than   one,  how­ ever,   Floralie   is   a  step   backward.  La Guerre, yes sir  centres  around the  return of the  body of  a soldier  killed in the  war to   his   native   village   in   rural   Quebec. Floralie  moves even  farther into  the  past and  describes  the  wedding night  of  the soldier's  parents, Anthyme   and   Floralie

88
 Corriveau. But  this  chronological  retro­ gression   is  attended  by  a  curious  retro­ gression  in narrative technique. The book incorporates  much  of  the  paraphernalia of  mediaeval  literature,  including dream allegory,  monologue  debate, sorcerer   of a  sort,  enchanted forest   and   the  seven deadly  sins. Carrier seems to  have  taken  the  "Middle Ages"  motif  quite  seriously.
Between   fantastical  realism   and   real
fantasy,  however,   there   is  a   very   thin line.  And  it seems  to  me  that  the  differ­ ence   between   Carrier's  La  Guerre   and  his  Floralie,  the  difference  which  makes  the  former a  more  powerful  and  mean­ ingful   novel,  is  that Floralie  crosses  the thin   line  into  fantasy.   If the  first  book can  be  described as  Faulknerian realism in  its  method of  probing the  motivating forces   and   special   genius   of   a  society through   exploration  of   the   more   gro­ tesque  and  bizarre  means  by  which  that  society  reveals  itself,  the same cannot be said of the second  book. Floralie is funny, often  hilariously funny, and  Carrier's gift for  engaging narrative  and  brilliant col­ loquial  diction stands  him  in good  stead.  But   the   novel   offers   few   insights   into  what   makes   Quebec  tick,  and   that, for better  or  worse,  is  what   I  suspect  many  readers of  La  Guerre, yes sir may  have come  to expect  of Carrier.
On  the  other hand, Floralie  does have something   to   say   about  what    makes people  tick,  and   about   the  mental  pere­ grinations  which   can   occur   when   they are  not  ticking  the  way they should. An­ thyme   and   Floralie, of  course,  live  at  a time  before  the  coming  of  the  Pill,  civil marriage and  divorce courts  to the  Prov­  ince of Quebec. They are even  before  the  time  when  the  charitable practice began in  some  hospitals  to  renovate  ruptured hymens  with  a  stitch   or  two,  and   after

BOOKS IN REVIEW



reading Carrier's  Floralie  one  can  well understand  how   this   practice,  regarded by some  to  be  rather hypocritical and  to smack  more  of  the  methods of the  used­ car   dealer    than  of   modern   medicine, gained   a  certain  popularity.  The reason for  the  anxieties of  both  Anthyme   and  Floralie  on  their  wedding night,  anxieties which  resolve into quarrels, agitated soul­ searching and   troubled  dreams, is  that  the  young  bride,  having once  rolled  in  a field of  oats with  an  itinerant Italian rail­ road  worker   who  played  sweetly  on  the harmonica, does  not  come  to  the  union complete with   maidenhead. Anthyme   is not  an  experienced  lover  and   he  is not sure  what  to  think,  but  he does  have  the idea   fixed  in  his  head   that   somewhere along  the  line  there ought   to  have  been
a little  "mur" or  "au  moins  un  rideau  a
dechirer." And  if  there  was  one  field of
oats in Floralie's past,  perhaps there  were several   fields  of  oats,   and   of  hay  and barley  and  wheat  besides.
Floralie,  ou   es-tu,   like  Carrier's  first novel,  is  rich   in  amusing dialogue and incident. It  is  entertainment  of  a  high order.   There can  be  no  doubt that  here is  a  major   talent,  temporarily  marking time in terms of psychological and social insight   perhaps, but  capable of   produc­ ing  a great  deal  more  and  very  likely to do so.
RONALD SUTHERLAND


FITFUL SUNLIGHT

DAVID  HELWIG,    THE    STREETS   OF   SUMMER.
Oberon   Press, $4-95·

THE SHORT STORY is a flourishing species in Canada; and  some  of our  best writers
-Callaghan, Richler,  Laurence,  Now­
lan,  for  example-have produced  some
 of their best work in this form. David Helwig's  stories  are  a welcome  contribu­ tion  to this developing  tradition; and  his importance  has   been   acknowledged  by the   inclusion   of  one   of   his   stories   in Robert Weaver's Canadian Short  Stories (second series) .
This  is not to say that  there  is anything
particularly Canadian about  the fourteen stories that  make  up The Streets  of Sum­ mer.  The   locales  are  frequently  in  To­ ronto,  but  they  might   just  as  well  be  in London or  New  York.  Helwig's charac­ ters are  not  afflicted  by an  acute  sense of national  consciousness,  or  confronted  by issues of cultural  conflict. Age, loneliness, the   search   for   love  or   the   attempt  to regain  it:  these are Helwig's  subjects,  and  he  treats  them  with  pathos   but  without sentimentality. His  people  are  trapped in drab,   undistinguished   lives  into   which the  summer  sun  shines  only  fitfully  and with  an  illusory  warmth. When  they  ask for  more  than   their  share,  or  attempt to break  out  of  the  bounds   of  convention, the   world   responds   with   distrust,   con­ tempt  or  outright  rejection. The  quality of  such  an  existence   is  conveyed  in  the first   sentence   of   "The   Winter   of   the Daffodils": "She  had  lived  a life of con­ tinued  disappointment, and  now she was about  to die."  An  air  of quiet  pessimism pervades the  atmosphere of  most of Hel­  wig's stories, and  is certainly a dominant element  of   "The   Streets   of  Stunmer'', the  longest  story  in  the  collection.   Matt Barker,   a   highly-strung  and   semi-alco­  holic  actor,  lives  in  defiance of  conven­ tional  values, and  mocks his rival in love, John  Morris,   who  is  a  dull  and   rather prim   young   graduate student. " ... to you  it's  all  an   illusion,"   he  tells  John, who   disapproves  of  his  drinking, "the Boy  Scouts  would   never   believe  that   I

8g

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



drink  to let out  the  joy inside me. They'd say it's  a lie. Maybe  so, but  it's  a beauti­ ful  lie."  Matt's defiant  behaviour  is irri­ tating  rather  than   heroic   to   a   world controlled by Boy Scouts, and  the futility  of  such  passionate gestures  is underlined by  his  suicide.  At  the  end  of  the  story, John, who  has  been  momentarily drawn  towards the  actor's rebellious  spirit,  puts aside  the  girl  they  have  both  loved,  and returns  with  relief  to the  frugal  and  dis­ ciplined  life   of   a   student,  where   the "sense  of  emptiness   at  the  centre of  his life" will not disturb him.
There are  other  aliens  in Helwig's stories,  other   misfits,  like  the  proud  old tramp  in   a   striking  story   called    "In Exile",  or  the young deaf-mute girl in "Something For  Olivia's  Scrapbook I Guess",  who  is wanted  for  brutally  mur­ dering  her  mother.  Not  all  of  Helwig's  characters are  such  complete  failures  or outcasts,   however; some  have  had  their moment of  triumph or  happiness in  the past,  remaining clear  in  their  memory  as a  constant reproach  to  the  dreary hope­ lessness of the  present. In "The Colonel", Helwig   presents  the  loneliness  and  frus­ tration  of  a   retired   army   colonel   who sees the  world  changing round  him,  and whose  work  in civil defence  is little  com­ pensation for past glories. He tries to maintain the  principle of order  and  self­ discipline in  his  life  as  he  grows  older, keeping   his  few   books  in   line   on   the shelf, laying  out  his studs and  brushes on the  dresser.  "Yet  he had  the  feeling  that somewhere  close   behind   all  this lay chaos." Finally,  as if to  assure himself of his  own  existence,  "he  took  down  from the  shelf  the  official  army  history  of the war.  He  read  several times the only  page where  he  was  mentioned." Helwig  often relates   the  past  and   the  present  in  this

go
 way;  his people  look back to events in the past, often in their youth, which might somehow  redeem  the dry monotony, the hardening of emotional arteries, the dead­ ness of spirit  in  adult urban  life.  Happi­ ness is a brief  interlude before the  prison doors  shut  completely; it  is  fleeting  and elusive,  like  the  butterfly  which  perches  momentarily  on  a  woman's  breast,  and  years   later   haunts   the   memory   of  her deserted  husband, in "A Hundred Things Forgotten."
The butterfly image  is  perhaps rather too self-conscious  and  "clever"; but such ponderous symbolism  is rare in Helwig's writing. His style is usually plain,  but  not flat;  he knows how  to introduce a brief phrase,  to change the  rhythm or empha­ sis within  a  sentence, in  order  to convey the consciousness  of the character around whom   the  story   is   built.  Unobtrusively but  convincingly he can  create  the sensa­ tion   of  suppressed   panic   in   the   aging  soldier  of  "The  Colonel", or  the  agoniz­  ing   self-awareness  of   the   middle-aged spinster in  the  company of her  fiance,  in "One Evening". Some  of  the  stories  are clearly  experiments in technique, and  not always successful.  "A  Note  From  Jimmy" tries to create the  consciousness of an uneducated young convict,  who is writing a touching "confession" while he waits to kill  himself;  but   primitive punctuation and   phonetic  spelling   is  too  obvious   a device   to  conceal  the  contrived  quality of  the  situation. "Among The  Trees of the  Park" has  several  shifts  in  points  of view   and   tense   in   its  description  of  a rather shabby  rendezvous between  adul­ terous  lovers;  but  here  the  brevity of the  form   and   the   triteness   of  the  situation make   the   tricks   of   technique   seem  strained and cumbersome. However, such faults are  relatively minor;  the  abiding

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



impression   left   by  these   stories   is  that David   Helwig   is  a  writer   with   a  keen sense of human frailty,  and  with  the capacity to make  us respond  sympatheti­ cally  to   his   characters'  weakness  or failure.
H. J. ROSENGARTEN


THE LIMITATIONS OF WIT

LIONEL KEARNs, By the  Light  of the Silvery McLune. Vancouver: Daylight Press  and Talon Books.  78 pp.  n.p.

"MEDIA PARABLES,   Poems,   Signs,   Ges­ tures,  and   Other Assaults  on  the  Inter­ face"    reads    the    subtitle  of    this   new collection  by Lionel  Kearns. One gathers  from  this  classification that  Kearns does not  feel all  these  "assaults" to  be poems, and  in some  cases one  can  see why. The book   contains  three   excellent  concrete poems    (probably   "signs"),  four   verse parables, and  many  shorter poems  all of which  appear to be more  than  "gestures". Some  of  these  latter possess that   unique  combination   of   music   and   insight   that  one  associates with  Kearns' work  ("En­ vironment," "Expression,"  "Medium," "Personality," "Content"), but  too many others   reflect  only  a  competence at  the bitter  humour of activist  light  verse. For example, "Tradition":

Eat  with  your  right hand Wipe  your  ass with  your  left And  if it  happens
that you're left-handed
Man, you're in  trouble

The  four   parables  form   about   one­ third   of  the  book  and   are  probably   its most  controversial  pieces-though more for  artistic than  for  ideological  reasons.
 These  four  vary considerably in style and subject.  "Telephone" is a humorously surrealistic  tale of a man  permanently trapped in a glass telephone booth.  Like
the  surrealistic "fictions"  of  J. Michael
Yates,   this   tale   presents   its   theme ·of man's  alienation from  society in an origi­ nal   but   artistically   simplistic   manner. Here  Kearns  manages to deal only super­  ficially  with  his  subject  because  he  sub­ stitutes  wit  for  the  more credible  art  of accurate   perception.   "Ventilation" is  a similarly  fanciful tale  which  tells  how  a narcotics   detective  apprehends   a   shy marijuana  smoker  by  entering his  bath­ room   through  its   ventilator.   Here  the humour  is  richer   than   in   "Telephone" because   the  ridiculous  is   now  frighten­ ingly  close to  the  actual,  although once again   the   tale   as   poetry   is  texturally shallow,   relying   chiefly   on   wit   for   its effect.  And  once  again   it  is  based  on  a simplistic  and  superficial  view of its sub­ ject:    narcotics detectives are  not only underhanded   but    masochistically    self­ deceiving   about  marijuana's   pleasures,  while marijuana smokers  are retiring and unjustly  persecuted   hobbits.  Surely  more can  be said than  this.
"Transport" is  the  most  entertaining
work  in  the  collection.  This  story of one man's  rise from  amateur pimp  to operator of a "come  as you go" limousine /brothel service  and  finally  to  Minister of  Trans­ port   is  a  rollicking   indictment   of  the cynical   commercialism  which   so   often elevates  our  governors to  power.  This  is hyperbolic  satire  rather  than   surrealism, but  again,  of  course,  it  is  art   based  on oversimplification. It is a good-humoured parody   of  a  way  of  life,  but  is  literally neither  true nor false. The fourth parable, "The  Seventh   Seal,"   is   an   intolerably clumsy  and  naive  story  of  how  Eskimo-

91

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



exploiting "Wolves" (white men)  are converted  by  their   children's marijuana to  magnanimity and  love, so that  all,  in the  unforgettable words of the work's conclusion,

settled  down  to love one another  and rejoice in the warmth  and  dignity
of their own humanity ...

This is scarcely  worthy  of a  junior secon­
dary  newspaper.
I  must  stress, however,  that  this  book, with    the    exception  of   "The   Seventh Seal", is exceedingly  well-crafted within the limitations that  Kearns accepts  for himself.  It is the  wisdom of these limita­ tions  which   I  question,  particularly  the limitations  of   artistic   precision   which Kearns incurs   by  working  from  general  to  particular, from  ideology  and  idea  to person  and  story, and  of literary  resource which  he incurs when employing  wit and  irony   to  the  exclusion   of  other   effects. These   limitations  are  serious,  for   they cause   him   to  distort   reality   and, as  a consequence,  to  offer  his  readers  over­ simplifications so  gross  that   they  are  at best  irrelevancies, at  worst,  lies.  Kearns  has  written a limited  book well,  but  one wishes  he  had   set  higher  standards for himself.
FRANK DAVEY


A JUNKED-UP LANDSCAPE

PETER  sucH, Fallout. Anansi, $1.95·

PERHAPS THE CHIEF characteristic of Peter  Such's  novel Fallout  is that  its attempted  complexities do  not  come  off. The plot  is framed by an  author-charac­ ter's   comments as  he  re-visits  the  Elliot

92
 Lake-Blind  River   setting   of  the   novel, manuscript  in   hand.  These   comments form   a  kind   of  epilogue  and   prologue that   are  intended  to  help  elucidate the meaning  of   the   past,   when   the   boom went   out   of  Elliott   Lake-the plot  of the  novel,  which   doesn't   need  it. Chap­ ters   (or  episodes)   within   the  frame   are so  arranged  that   they  give  the sense  of fragmentation that  is only  partly  success­ ful. There is also a complexity of sentence structure  and   of   metaphor  that   often causes confusion and pretension. In short,  the  attempted  complexities do  not  create  ironies ;  instead  they  tend  to  inflate  and obscure.  The  difficulty   seems  to  be,  in part  anyway,  the  old  one  of the author's unsureness of his own  position  in relation to   what   he  is  writing (something that the  epilogue-prologue characterizations might  be trying  to help solve).
Beneath  the stylistic surfaces  of Fallout
lie  the  characters Robert, Johnny, and Doris,  who  are  Indians seeking  meaning to  life,  the  lesbians  Jill  and   Frieda, and the   white   men   Paul,   George,   and   Mr. Mochar,  the   manager  of   the   uranium workings.  He  and  his  wife, a  cantanker­ ous female,  spend  much  of  their  domestic  time  trying  to keep  their teen-age daugh­ ter  Marian on  the  white-narrow path  of virtue,  while   her   desire    (once   she   is beyond    the   Walter    Scott    novels   she reputedly   reads)     is   to    flee   with    the Indian,  Robert  (a  life-force   figure), on his  ark   (boat), the  two  of  them,  to  an Eden-life  of  Indian fish- and  deer-gods. The  novel   concludes  with   her   leaping out  of a tornado-shattered window  in her parents'  home,   going   to   find   Robert: "She landed  on the rock neatly and  loped quickly  down  the  rock-trail to  the  high­ way.  They   would  find  her  in  a  day  or two ... But  for  now -the  hell  with  it."

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Such   coyness  is  not  uncommon in  Fall­
out.
Disintegration and  alienation: the  El­ liott  Lake  boom  is  bust.  The  characters all  move  out,   to  new  mine  projects,   to Montreal  offices,  and   to  the  Caughna­ waga  Reserve,  which  Johnny  and  Doris see  as  their   promised   land.  In   Elliott  Lake,  nature will take over  again,  just as Robert   allows   the   nature-gods  of   his ancestors  to  dominate his mind  over  the teachings of white  missionaries. Here  lies true   happiness:  transcendence  all   that industry and   money  have  done   to  junk up  Nature, by believing  in  Nature as the universal  power,  or in Art, which  can  use the  debris  of civilization as its  raw mate­ rial: the  sculptor welds  together  old  in­ dustrial  parts   into   an   ironic  structure, the  top  piece  of  which   is  "recognizable as  an  old  Ford  thunderbird,  black  with a  red  grille".
The   characters of  Fallout  are  not  de­ veloped  with  much   depth;  nothing  that  happens to  them,   then,   can  have  much significance. The  plot  is oversimplified­ things   merely   happen,  and   then   other  things  happen, and  most of it happens at the same high pitch,  achieved by stylistics or  events,  or  both.  Conversely, effective episodes   (such   as  Robert's  pushing his car)    are   simply   and   straightforwardly told,  without attempts to  heighten them with   strained  diction   (squeezed    water, dynamite thunder),  extreme metaphor (his  tongue   was  in  her  mind), and  in­ voluted  syntax.
The  strength of Fallout  is in its images
of  the   junked   up  countryside that   man inflicts  on  nature:  the  mines,  the  refin­ eries, the cars,  boats,  towns,  shack  towns, and   graveyards. The  detailed  images  of such   things   are   the   most   effective   in Fallout    because    they   come   closest   to
 achieving   their   own  integrity, that  is  to say,  plastic  flowers  in  the  Indian  grave­ yard,  or  steel  cable   at  the  refinery  are  more  real  than   any  of  the  characters or their  actions.  It is the  stuff  of  pollution that  is the success of Fallout, the artifacts that  "pile  up  the  world  over  like ancient fallout  from  warm  seas", whether piles of sulphur, record  players, metal  identifica­ tion  discs, or  the  piles  of  junk  to  which the  refinery  is  reduced  by  the  tornado:

There  were    piles   of   things  all   over   the camp  waiting to be trucked out.  Reinforce­ ment  rods,  netting, gutter pipes,  sand  piles, gypsum  sidings.... The  huts   began   splin­ tering.... Big   kites  of   plywood ... The tower  had  fallen. From inside  it  the  stored ore   poured  out,   roared  out.  Lord  what   a mess.

Fallout,  especially   the  epilogue "Fall Out",  leaves   the   impression   that    Mr. Such  might  have  written some very  ele­ gant    essays  on   nature   long   suffering  under  man's ineptitude and  greed;  as  it is, however,  Fallout  is much  more  a pre­  sentation  of  the  difficulties  inherent  in writing   a  novel   than   it  is  a  successful novel.   Fallout   is   one   of   Anansi's   new Spiderline   editions,    "a    series   of   first novels by the most  exciting  writers  we've found," their  advertising says.
V. SHARMAN


LOW KEY

JOAN  FINNIGAN,  Entrance   to  the  Greenhouse.
Ryerson. $2-95·

Entrance   to  the   Greenhouse  is  a  single long poem sequence, and  is surely Joan Finnigan's best work  to date. Miss Finni­ gan   has  created  in   her   poem   a  single long meditation for  her  persona, a loving woman.   This   meditation  is  tied   to  the  change  of the  seasons.

93

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Joan    Finnigan  is  a   very   emotional poet,  and  her  central concern  is love and communication among   individuals. This concern   has  often   betrayed   her   into   a kind of strident sermonizing  which has ruined   more  than   one  good  poem.  En­ trance   to   the   Greenhouse   represents  a real   victory    of   the   artist's   discipline.  There   is   no    needless    repetition,   no preaching  or   exhortation  at   all.   The  poetry,  its  images  and  symbols, its  tone, carry  all  the meaning and  all the energy, as they  should,  and  the  result  is a  poem of    richness    and    delight.    Her   persona moves through the garden of the year, gathering strength for  love,  to  make  up for all the  losses flesh is heir  to. The nat­ ural   is  noted   in   the   inner   eye,  and  is finally  seen  as  the  grace  sought  all  un­ knowingly  by  the  speaker  and  by  us all.
The separate sections  of  the  work  are deceptively simple;  but  slowly the  poem as a whole gathers a rich complexity of meaning and  emotion   unto  itself.  Early in  the  book, for  example,  she says:

Light  in  the  arms of the  pear  tree
its blossoms lie

like love
in its beginnings

Later:
Wherever  you leave  me the  last  leaf
of the  catalpa

closing

shuddering down

Connections are  continually realized  be­ tween   the   speaker  and   the   world   she moves through:

"To live is to go forward and  forget"

and  I  protect  my torn  parts

94
 move on  to the  grandeur of the dying

elm

It is the  growing  web of these connec­ tions  that  holds  the  whole  book  together, an  organic unity  of certain  beauty.
It would   be  very  easy  to  dismiss  this
book  as  lightweight woman's verse,  as  I have  seen  one  reviewer  do,  but  to  do so is to  miss the  point.  Certainly it  is not  a major work  of  art   (how  few  of  those  is one  generation granted!).  But,  as a  low­ keyed  yet truly  felt  effort,  it is a  real  be­ ginning, a  kind  of   prolegomena  to  fur­  ther  work  and  life.  The  last  two sections indicate this:

Love is a greenhouse

Here  is the entrance

DOUGLAS BARBOUR



BOOKS FOR CHIC PARENTS

ELIZABETH  CLEAVER AND  WILLIAM TOYE, How Summer Came to  Canada. Toronto, Oxford University  Press, $3.95·
ELIZABETH  CLEAVER AND   WILLIAM TOYE, The Mountain Goats of Temlaham. Toronto, Oxford  University  Press, $3.95.

WHEN   HE  WAS a  toddler, my  brother discovered  that   on  a  farm   milk  is  not obtained from  bottles  as it  is in  the  city. He  immediately  passed  this  news  on  to the  rest  of  us. Asked  to enlarge  on it, he said    with  impressive exactitude,  "It come  out  of a cow.  Underneath the  cow
-in th·e  middle-near  the   back­ hanging  down-there   are   a   thing." Thereafter he  was  contemptuous of  any representation  of   a  cow  that   arbitrarily omitted the  important "thing".

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Though less science-minded than my brother, I share his old-fashioned concern for   fundamental  verisimilitude, at  least on the near side of that  broad grey area between  representational and  non-repre­ sentational   art.    I   am   troubled   by   a Glooskap  with  one  half-formed shoulder, one   impossibly   double-jointed  one,   re­ versible  feet,  and  watercress in  his  hair  instead   of   the  moss  proclaimed  in  the bookjacket  blurb  of How  Summer Came to   Canada,  an   Indian  legend   sparsely retold by William Toye and lavishly illustrated by Elizabeth Cleaver. But  the colours of Miss Cleaver's neo-primitive pictures are certainly exuberant and often   magnificent.  And  the  eleven-year­ old  I asked for an  artistic opinion gasped happily    at   them    and   accepted  crassly improbable   figures   without  a   quibble.  She   particularly   liked   the   hot   violent colours    of   the   summer  pictures    that  strike  me  as  garish   and   feverishly   busy, whereas I   like   the  frosted  mauves, purples  and  blues  of  the  winter ones.
Our   reactions may  constitute  sketchy
evidence   that  How   Summer  Came   to Canada   contains appeals  to  a  range  of tastes not significantly linked  to age. They may   even   cast   doubt  on   my  long-held
 belief  that   although children are  indul­ gent   toward   the  crudities of   their own artistic  productions, they  are  uncompre­ hending and  critical of the sophisticated crudities  perpetrated   and   approved  by adults.  But lacking  firm evidence I prefer  to  believe that  Miss Cleaver's mosaics of myriad  colours  and  tones are so variously  pleasing  as  patterns  that   the  often  static  and   deformed   human  (and   demi-god) figures involved in them  are forgivable to young   eyes   rather  than    interesting  or admirable.
My consultant gave only cursory atten­
tion  to the story  of How  Summer Came. This  was not  surprising, since it is one of the   least  plotted  and   most  arbitrary of the Glooskap  taies. It  concerns the settle­ ment  of the giant  Winter in eastern Can­ ada,   Glooskap's  first   effort   to  dislodge him,   the   giant's   imposition  of   an   icy spell upon  Glooskap,  Glooskap's importa­ tion  of  Queen Summer from   the  south,  and  the  treaty   between   the  two  visitors that determined the climate of the  Mari­ times from  that  day forward. Why didn't Winter's spell  upon  Glooskap   hold  him indefinitely?  Why  does  Queen Summer perennially  need  a  moosehide cord,  like Theseus's  twine  for labyrinth, to reach  us





Write or Phone

THE UNIVERSITY  BOOK   STORE
Vancouver  8,  B.C.	
 Text
Trade
Medical

whenever you need

BOOKS
 
Technical Hard Back Paper Back



95

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



and   find   her  way  home,   when   Winter can  navigate unaided? Mr. Toye is as enigmatic as  the  Indians. In  fact  he has no room  to speculate in the  two or  three lines  of  text  allowed  him  on  most  pages.
The  illustrations only add  to the num­ ber   of   puzzlers.    Glooskap   apparently stood  on  the  whale's back   (on  those  re­ versible   feet,   at   that)   all   the   way   to Summer's southern  realm. And  Summer took   peculiar   advantage  of   the   sleigh Glooskap  provided for  her   journey  into  Wintry  Canada: barely  touching it  with her  rather flat feet, she leaned  backwards forty-five   degrees   and   travelled  in  defi­ ance  of gravity.  Still  more eccentric after  her  visit, she floated  away along  her cord like a hovercraft, horizontal but debonair.
A companion volume  to How  Summer
Came, The  Mountain Goats  of  Temla­ ham,  contains  a   better   story.   William Toye's  version  of a B.C. Indian  legend  is similarly  spare  and  subordinate  to Eliza­ beth   Cleaver's  illustrations,  but   in   this tale   there   are   legitimate  mysteries  and  some  suspense  as  well.  The story  of  the goat  people's  vengeance  upon  an  Indian village  for  the  wilful  maltreatment of  a kid, and  the ordeal of the kindly boy they spared at a cost to his nerves, has some of the weird  power of a nightmare. And this time some of Elizabeth Cleaver's pictures contain animate figures  as well as  hand­ somely-designed  feasts  of  colour.  Those that  don't are stylized "stills"  of  violence, as static yet suggestive  of  ferocious  natu­  ral  life as a totem  pole. Clever too is Miss Cleaver's technique of  building a picture vertically with  layers  edged  in  irregular shaded  white-torn-paper edges  to cre­ ate  effects  of depth, sharp  contrasts, and special  kinds of design.
The words  "clever" and  "stylized" are
perhaps keys to my misgivings about  both

g6
 books as books for children. Undoubtedly an  adult may  appreciate the  representa­ tion   of  Glooskap's  drowsy  surrender  to cold   as  the   experience  of   enchantment and  of spring  thaw  as the tears of Winter. An  adult  may   take   an  anthropologist's interest in  the  Indian  concept of  shape­ shifting as  touched  on  in Glooskap's six­ month hibernation  and  explicitly  treated in  the  mountain  goats'  adoption of  hu­  man    form.   Similarly,  adults   may   find associative  pleasures in  the  pictorial evo­ cations  of  ancient arts-wall  paintings, totem  poles,  ancient mosaics.  But  will  a child  see much  more  than  a fairly  vapid  and  unlikely story in How Summer Came  to Canada, a somewhat more  satisfactory one in  The  Mountain Goats  of  Temla­ ham, and  bonanzas of colour punctuated by perfunctory human and  animal forms  in  both?  I suspect  not. Granted that  the pictures are  streets  ahead   of  the  stereo­  typed  chocolate-box and colouring-book illustrations of drugstore children's books. But  maybe  they  are  too  far  ahead  -or off  in  the  wrong  direction. They  have  a faintly  improving air.  Subject to the cor­ rections  of   numerous readers   under twelve,   I  predict that   these   books  will land  on  the  coffee  tables  of  chic  parents rather  than   in  the  hands of  book-lovers  among their  offspring.
FRANCES FRAZER



ON THE VERGE

*****   GUY  FREGAULT.   Canada:  the  War  of Conquest. Translated  by Margaret M.  Came­ ron.  Oxford, $g.so. At  last  one  of  the  impor­  tant   works  of  Canadian  history   has  become available, in  impeccable translation,  for  those who   have   not   read   it  in  the  original.  It is not,   in   the   strict   sense,  a   military   history; rather,  the  total   history  of   a  war,  shown  in the  lives of the  societies  involved  as well as in

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the  campaigns waged between them, and illuminated above   all  by  the  constant play  of opinion derived from  the author's exhaustive reading of  the   political  writings of  the   time in  England, France and   North America. Basi­ cally,   the   thesis   is  that  two   imperial  systems
-far  closer  to  each  other because of common economic  and    territorial  aims    and   circum­ stances than  most   historians  have  understood
-were struggling for  the  hegemony of  North
America. One had   to  win,  for  the  land   could not  contain both, and   whichever did  win,  the other,  by   the   rules   of   the   game,  would   be crushed.  Mr.   Fregault  is  refreshingly  free   of the  nationalist moralism of many  French Cana­ dian   historians;   he    writes   with    exemplary objectivity, and   though he  sees  mordantly the tragedy in  the  fact   that the  destruction of  its imperial  function  meant   the   destruction  of the   original Canadian   community, he  grants that the  alternative  would  have  been  a similar destruction of  the  British   American communi­ ties.  This view  leads   him   to  deflate some  old heroes, particularly Montcalm, and  to rehabili­ tate  some  old  villains, particularly  Vaudreuil, who emerges from  the  book  convincingly larger than  his  traditional  image. First-rate, fascinat­ ing, sane  history.
*****   CARL  BERGER.  The  Sense   of  Power: Studies in  the  Ideas of Canadian Imperialism, I867-1914. Toronto, $ro.gs. With the  publica­ tion  of  this  book,  Carl Berger   reveals  himself one  of  Canada's most  interesting and  eloquent younger historians. The  Sense   of Power  is not merely  a treatise in  nineteenth century politics. It is  also  a  most   competent  study of  the  de­ velopment of  Canadians' views  of   themselves as   a   group  and   of   their  role   in   the   world; agonizing  about   the    Canadian    identity   is nothing new.  The nineteenth  century imperial­ ists  in   this   country  were   most   definitely  not colonialists. They  saw  in   imperialism  a  com­  pact of  equality, a  guarantee of  dignity and  independence.  Today,  when  Canadian nation­ alism  is again  to  the  fore,  and  we are  reassess­ ing,  with  some  anxiety, our   relationship with  the  United  States, Professor Berger's essays on various  facets of  the  imperialist frame of mind  are  particularly topical. But  this  is a book  that  does  not  depend on  any  immediate appeal. It is  a  well-based work  of  history that will  have  a  permanent relevance, and  as writing it  is far better  than  we  have   been   accustomed  to  ex­ pect   from   our   historians, at   least   when   they originate their works  in  the  English  language.
****   FRASER  SYMINGTON.   The Canadian
Indian: The  Illustrated History of  the   Great
Tribes  of   Canada.  McClelland  &   Stewart,
 $2o.oo. Our   coffee  tables  are, by  now,  break­ ing   down   under  the   vast   weight  of   massive  picture books  on  Canada-great  tomes that have   been  descending on  us  since  Centennial Year, mainly   from   the  presses  of  McClelland
& Stewart and  largely owing to  the  editorial activity of  Pierre Berton. Had this  been  mere­ ly  another  Pierre  Berton visual   treasure, our
inclination would  have  been  to  place  it  low on any   critical  list,   just    because  surfeit  makes sated.  But   it   is   more.   The  illustrations are excellent, often  quite  unfamiliar,  and,  where rather  well-known artists like  Catlin and  Kane and   Bodmer   are   necessarily resurrected,  they are    examples that,   however  western  their style,   convey   the   intensity of  direct  observa­ tion.  The captions are not  always  exact, and  here we  gather the  author of  the  book  is  not responsible, though  many   readers  will  assume  that he  is,  which   is  unfortunate,  for  his  nar­ rative,  substantial and   wide-ranging  as  it  is, does  recreate very  sensitively the  panorama of the   Indian  past,   its  nobility and  its   depths, an,d  poignantly  evokes  the  tragedy of  its  end­ ing   as  well   as   the   peculiar  tenacity  of   the  Indian  nature  that has  produced  renewal out  of  apparent death. It makes  one, as  a  Cana­ dian, proud   of  one's predecessors and   coevals in  the  land.
****   WALTER  D.   YOUNG. The  Anatomy of a
Party: The  National CCF, 1932-61. Toronto,
$B.so.  This  is an  exemplary instance of  parti­ san  objectivity. Dr.   Young is  an  active  mem­ ber  of the  CCF, not  without  ambition to serve  it   in   political  office,   but   in   his  history-cum­ analytical  study   of   the   movement   he    has  treated  it  in  such   a  manner that  his  evident sympathy   has    not    prevented   a    thorough examination of  faults  as  well  as  virtues, of  the political   disadvantages   which    the    CCF  in­  curred   through  being   a   movement  of  social  change, and  of  the dilution of  idealism that in­ evitably  took  place when   it  began  to  change from   a  movement into   a  party that aimed at the  gaining and   holding of  power. The  anar­ chists   would  say  that the  aims  of   parties and  movements are  incompatible and  irreconcilable, and    Dr.   Young's   analysis   appears  to   show  that in  this  dichotomy is  rooted the  perennial status of the  CCF (and  the NDP) as a  minor­ ity  party. He  is frank  about the  tactical errors of  CCF propaganda,  and  about the  oligarchi­ cal   nature  of   the   party  structure,  which  he considers an  inevitable if paradoxical feature of   democratic  politics. A  little more   care   for literary style,  a  greater concern for  the  drama of  personal  relationships  which  was  undoubt­ edly  a  part  of  CCF history, might  have  made

97

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



this   a   more   interesting  book,   a   less  flawed piece  of literary craftsmanship than it  is;  they could   hardly  have   made it  a  truer book,  for what stays with  one  to the end is the sense of complete  candour,  a   quality  most   partisans avoid.
G.W.


NEW NOVELS

***  ROBERT KROETSCH. The Studhorse Man. Macmillan, $4.50. Robert Kroetsch's earlier novel, The  Words  of My  Roaring, promised a great deal; the  author showed  a  fine  sense  of timing, a  gift  for  comedy, and  enough  knowl­ edge  of  myth   to  mock  it sympathetically. The Studhorse  Man   adds to  this   reputation.  Full of  bizarre incidents, roiling puns,  and  absurd parallels, it operates (like  Birney's Turvey) on at least  three levels: narrative epic,  national burlesque,  and    literary  parody. The  central story   concerns Hazard  Lepage's quest   in  vain across   Alberta, with   his  virgin   stallion  Pose­ idon,  in   search  of   an   available   mare   that  will   allow   his   horse's  bloodline to   continue, and    a   farmer  willing  to  pay   for   the   deed. Hazard,  who   spends  much   of  his   time   with his  horse,  spends   much of  the  rest  of  it  either urinating  or   climbing  in   and   out   of   ladies' beds,   avoiding  lifesize   wax  figures,  jails,  and  judges whenever  possible.  Unfortunately, in  a rather gory  climax, he  finds he can't avoid  the horse,   and   his  quite  literal  downfall destroys  him.  The myth  of  opportunity that surrounds the  frontier is  thus  successfully  debunked, but  beneath   this    lies    the    literary   parody,   for Hazard can't get out of  the  way  of his unfaith­ ful  Sancho Panza Boswellian biographer either. The  epic catalogues are  pedigree lists; the   epic battles    are   verbal   contests  in   which    truck drivers   and    others  heatedly  hurl    about  the  terms  that  ten-year-olds use for   their   naming of  parts. The Penelope-figure is Martha Proud­ foot  of  Coulee Hill, thirteen years  abandoned by  Hazard  but   not   exactly   languishing;  and the  pompous stiff  biographer/bard is her  first cousin, Demeter. Kroetsch's style controls Demeter's, however, and his  deliberate use  of understatement and  anti-climax contributes happily  to  the  success  of  his  witty   and  enter­ taining book.
**   SEYMOUR  BLICKER.  Blues Chased  a  Rab­ bit.  Chateau Books  Ltd., $6.95.   Sex,  sadism, murder, drugs, and  race  prejudice characterize the   world  of   this   unattractively-printed  but

gB
 emotionally committed first novel  by a young Montrealer. Set  in  the  increasingly less private world   of  a  Mississippi hamlet, it  explores the inhumane attitudes and   aberrant  actions with which   a  young   black   man   must   contend.  As his  manhood  and   existence are  challenged, he is forced  pathetically into  violent action. Many of the scenes are  repulsively and gratuitously grotesque, but  there is a talent here that may develop.
*  BILL T. o'BRIEN. Summer of the  Black Sun. Prism   International  Press  in   association with November  House,  $4-95·  A  black   comedy  of Billy  Louper, incarcerated  because insane,  re­ calling  vigorously  the   madnesses  of  the  sane  world   that  got   him   where  he  is  today.  The inversion is deliberate; the  beginning and  end  of  the  bootoy with  the  likeness  between  kill­  ing  and   being killed. Compared with  the  mad  world  of  a novelist like  Janet Frame,  however, the   madness  here  seems   contrived,   and    the incidents  on   which  the   comedy   hangs  seem accordingly self-indulgent.
*  WILL R. BIRD. An  Earl Must  Have  a Wife. Clarke Irwin, $5-95·  Admirers of Bird's earlier works   will   find   this   character  narrative -a fictional  biography  of   J.  F.   W.   Des   Barres (P.E.I.'s   Lieutenant-Governor,    I8o4-I2)­ equally  interesting.   Traditional   in   construc­ tion   and    "light"  in   intent,  the   novel   traces Des  Barres'  transAtlantic affaires  with  dispas­ sionate   wit.   The stiff   dialogue  and   sonorous expositions seem  curiously out-of-date in  11970
-not bad  in  themselves, but  reminders of  an Edwardian  time   when prose  fiction moved   at a more leisurely pace.

JOHN   LATIMER. The  King's    Rock.    General Publishing,   $4-95·    A   Roman  adventure  in Egypt,   by    Edward    Bulwer-Lytton   out    of Franklin  W.  Dixon-a   sort   of  Hardy  Boys Visit    to   Pharaoh's  Tomb.  The  author  has trouble starting,  but   as  his  style  calms   down, his  story   gains   pace.  Yet   the   characters are never  rounded out   (as  in Mary Renault, for example), nor  is  the   Age  of  Domitian  revivi­ fied.
HILDA SHUBERT. They  Came   from  Kernitza. Chateau  Books   Ltd.,  $6.50. Here,  there  are three   stories   about   Jewish     immigrants   to Canada.  So,   they   seek   after  the   ambivalent tones   of  which   Sholom  Aleichem was  a  mas­ ter.  However, they  fall  short-largely  because of  the  enexvating preponderance  of  Introduc­ tory  Adverbial Constructions.
W.H.N.


CJINJIDIJIN LITERJITURE -1969

















]I  CHECKLIST  EDITED  BY RITA BUTTERFIELD


ENGLISH-CANADIAN

LITERATURE


Compiled  by Rita Butterfield





FICTION
AKULA,  KASTUS.   Tomorrow  is  yesterday.
Toronto,  New  York,  Pahonia   Pub.,   1968.
225  p.
ATWOOD,   MARGARET.   The  edible  woman.
Toronto,   McClelland   &    Stewart,     1969.
281  p.
BACQUE, JAMES.  The  lonely ones. Toronto, McClelland &  Stewart, 1969.
BASSETT, DAVID.  Tresilian, a novel.  Montreal, Canadian British  Pub.,  1968.  408  p.
BURKE,  JAMES.  The  firefly hunt. Toronto, Collins,  1969.
CASTLE,   JOHN     (pseud.) &   Arthur   Hailey.
Runway zero-eight.  Toronto, Bantam  Books,
1969.   r68   p.   (First   published   in  1958  as
"Flight into  danger").
CLUTESI, GEORGE. Potlatch.  Sidney, B.C. Gray's
Pub.,  1969.  r88  p.
COHEN,  MATT. Korsonilof!.  Toronto, House  of
Anansi,  1969.  ro6 p.
CORNISH,   JOHN.    A    world    turned    turtle.
Toronto, Clarke  Irwin,  1969.
DE   MILLE, JAMES.  A strange manuscript   found in a copper  cylinder. Introduction by R. Watters.  Toronto,  McClelland   &  Stewart,
r 969.  255  p.   (New  Canadian Library   no.
68.  (First  published   r 888.)
DESBARATS, PETER,  editor.  What   they  used  to tell about, Indian legends  from Labrador. Toronto,   McClelland   &    Stewart,    1969.
92  p.
EARL,  LAWRENCE.   Risk,  a  novel  of  suspense.
Toronto,   McClelland   &    Stewart,   1969.
192  p.
ENGEL,  MARIAN. No clouds of glory. Toronto, Longrnans,  Canada, 1968.  r8r  p.
EUSTACE, c.  J. A spring in the  desert. Garden
City, Doubleday, 1969. 288 p.

IOO
 FINDLEY, TIMOTHY.  The  butterfly   plague. New
York,  Viking  Press, 1969. 376 p.
FOXELL,     NIGEL.     Carnival. Ottawa,  Oberon
Press,  r 968. 139 p.
GARBER, LAWRENCE.  Garber's tales  from the quarter.  Toronto, P.  Martin,  1969.  396  p.
GIBSON, GRAEME. Five  legs. Toronto, House of
Anansi,  1969. 194 p.
GOTLIEB, PHYLLIS.   Why   should  I  have  all the grief?    Toronto,   Macmillan   of    Canada,
1969.  149 p.
HARRIS,  CHRISTIE.  Let  X   be  excitement. Toronto, McClelland &  Stewart, 1969.  236 p. Also:  New  York,  Atheneum,  1969.
HELWIG,    DAVID.  The    streets  of  summer.   Ot­
tawa, Oberon Press, 1969.  r88 p.
HOLDEN,   HELENE.   The   chain,  a  novel.  Don
Mills, Longmans Canada,  1969.
IRWIN,   GRACE.  Contend with  horses. Toronto, McClelland &  Stewart, 1969.  284  p.
JANES,   PERCY. House  of  hate.  Toronto,  Mc­ Clelland &  Stewart, 1969.
KIRBY,  WILLIAM.   The   golden   dog  ( Le  chien d'or ), a romance  of Old  Quebec. Abridged edition.  Introduction  by   Derek    Crawley. Toronto, McClelland &  Stewart, 1969.  321 p.  (New  Canadian Library   no.  65.)    (First published  1877.)
KOCH,   ERIC.  The   French   kiss.  Toronto,  Mc­ Clelland & Stewart, 1969. 223 p.
KROETSCH,   ROBERT.  The studhorse man.
Toronto,   Macmillan   of    Canada,    1969.
168 p.
LAURENCE,  MARGARET. The fire-dwellers. Toronto, McClelland &  Stewart,  I 969.  soB p. Also:  New York, Knopf,  1969.
LAURENCE,   MARGARET.  Now   I  lay  me  down.
London, Panther Books, 1968.  r88  p.

ENGLISH  CANADIAN LITERATURE



LOWRY, MALCOLM.   Lunar   caustic.  Edited  by
Earle Birney  and Margerie Lowry. London,
J.  Cape,   1968.    78    p.    (First   published
1963).
MACKENZIE,  DONALD. Dead   straight.   Boston,
Houghton, Mifflin,  1969. 209  p.
MCLEISH,  DOUGAL (pseud.).  The    Valentine victim  [by  D.  J. Goodspeed]. Toronto, Macmillan of  Canada, 1969.  201  p.
MAROIS, RUSSELL.  The  telephone  pole. Toron­
to, House of Anansi, 1969.  143  p.
MONTROSE,   DAVID. Gambling with  life. Toron·
to  Longrnans Canada,  1969.  192  p.
New  Canadian  writing, 1969. Stories by John Metcalf, D.  0.  Spettigue and   C.  J.  New­ man. Toronto, Clarke, Irwin, 1969.
NEWTON, NORMAN.  The   big  stuffed   hand  of friendship.  Toronto, McClelland & Stewart,
1969.  203  p.
NICHOL,  B.   P.   Andy I For   jesus    sunatick.
Toronto,  Coach  House  Press,    1969.   Un­
paged.
o'BRIEN,  BILL T.  Summer of the  black  sun. Vancouver, Prism  International Press in association  with    November   House,   1969.
!62   p.
PARKER, WILLIAM w.   M. Belle  Anne  of  Pine
Point. Edmonton, 1969. 100  p.
PETER JOHN. Runaway. Garden  City. Double­
day,  1969.  300  p.
RICHLER,  MORDECAI.    The   apprenticeship of Duddy    Kravitz.  Introduction   by   A.   R. Bevan.  Toronto,   McClelland   &   Stewart,
1969.   319   p.   (New  Canadian  Library  no.
66). (First published 1959).
ROSS,  WILLIAM E.  D.  Airport   nurse   by  Rose Williams   (pseud.)    New     York,     Arcadia House, 1968.  192  p.
ROSS,  WILLIAM E.  D.  Barnabas   Collins,  by Marilyn  Ross   ( pseud.). New   York,  Paper­ back  Library, 1968.  157  p.
ROSS, WILLIAM  E. D. Behind   locked  shutters.
New  York,  Arcadia House, 1968.   192  p. ROSS, WILLIAM  E. D. Dark  of the  moon.  New
York,  Arcadia House, 1968.  192  p.
Ross, WILLIAM  E. D. Girl  in  love.  New  York, T. Bouregy, 1968.   192  p.  Also:   Toronto, Ryerson Press,  1968.
Ross,  WILLIAM   E.  D. Let   your  heart  answer. New  York,  T. Bouregy, 1968.  190  p.  Also: London, B. Hale, 1968.
ROSs,  WILLIAM  E. D. Network   nurse  by  Rose
 Dana (pseud.) New  York,  Arcadian House,
1968.  192  p.
ROSS,  WILLIAM E.  D.  Whitebridge  nurse  by
Rose   Dana  (pseud.).  New   York,   Arcadia
House, 1968.  192  p.
SANDMAN,  JOHN.  Eating  out. Toronto, House of Anansi, 1969.  94  p.
SHAFFER,   IVAN.  The  Midas  compulsion.
Toronto,   McClelland   &    Stewart,    1969.
365   p.
SHUBERT, HILDA. They  came   from  Kernitza.
Montreal, Chateau  Books,  1969.  245  p. SMITH, FRANK. Corpse  in  handcuffs. Toronto,
Macmillan of  Canada, 1969.  176  p.
SMITH,  RAY.    Cape   Breton    is   the   thought control  centre   of Canada. Toronto, House of Anansi, 1969.  135 p.
SPENCE,  RAYMOND. Nothing  black  but  a  Cadil­
lac,  Don   Mills,   Longrnans Canada,   1969. SPENCER, ELIZABETH.  Ship   Island,  and  other
stories. Toronto, McGraw-Hill, 1968.  175 p. VERMANDEL,    JANET  GREGORY.   Murder    most
fair. London,  H.   Jenkins,   1968.   168   p. VERMANDEL,  JANET GREGORY. Scratch  a lover.
New  York,  Dodd, Mead, 1969.  184  p. WILLIAMS, GERSHOM.  The    native    strength.
Toronto, Century  Press,  c1968. 102  p. wooDs,  SARA    (pseud.)   Knives    have   edges.
London,  published for   the   Crime  Club  by
Collins, 1968.  254  p.
WOODs, SARA   (pseud.)  Past  praying  for. New
York,  Harper & Row,  1968.  230  p.
wooDs, SARA  (pseud.)  Tarry  and  be hanged.
London, Collins, 1969.


POETRY

ACORN,  MILTON. I've  tasted  my  blood,  poems
1956-Jg68. Selected  by  AI  Purdy. Toronto, Ryerson  Press,  1969.  136  p.
Alberta   poetry    yearbook,    1968.   Edmonton,
Edmonton  Branch,  Canadian   Authors  As­
sociation, 1969. 78  p.
ANSON, PETER, editor. Canada   first. Toronto,
House of Anarui, 1969.  111  p.
ANSTEY, EDYTHE. Rainbow   collection,  a  book of poems. Vancouver, 1968.  20 p.
BAGLEY,  RAY. Those   other  days. n.p.,  R.  Bag­
ley,  1969.  102  p.
BALL, NELSON. Water-pipes and  moonlight. Toronto,  Weed/flower  Press,    1969.   12  p. ( 150  copies).

101

ENGLISH CANADIAN LITERATURE



BAUER,  WALTER.  The   price of morning.  Pref­ ace    by   Henry  Beissel.   Vancouver,   Prism International Press,  1968.  I 47  p.
BAUER, WILLIAM A. Cornet   music   for  Plupy
Shute. Fredericton, University of  New Brunswick,  rg68.   26   p.    (New   Brunswick poetry chapbook).
BIRNEY, EARLE. The    poems  of  Earle  Birney.
Toronto,  McClelland &  Stewart,  Ig6g.   64 p.   (New   Canadian Library, 6.)
BISSETT, BILL. Awake  in  th  red  desert. Van­
couver, Talonbooks and   See/Hear  Produc­ tions,   I g68.  63  p.  &  a   I 2-inch  LP  record­ ing.
BISSETT,  BILL.  Lost   angel   mining   company.
Vancouver, Blew Ointment Press,  Ig6g. Unpaged.
BISSETT,   BILL.   Sunday   work?    Vancouver,
Blew  Ointment Press,   1 g6g.  Unpaged. BOWERING, GEORGE. The   gangs   of  Kosmos.
Toronto, House of  Anansi, Ig6g. 64  p. DOWERING,  GEORGE.  Rocky  Mountain  foot;  a
lyric,   a   memoir.   Toronto,  McClelland  &
Stewart, cig68. I27  p.
DOWERING,  GEORGE.  Two   police  poems.  Van­
couver, Talonbooks, Ig6g.  23 p.
BRAIDWOOD,  TOM. The journey  of  Terion Cariate Guilda. Vancouver, Lighthouse Press,  rg68.  I8  p.
BREWSTER, ELIZABETH. Passage  of  summer, selected   poems.    Toronto,  Ryerson     Press, rg6g.  I29  p.
CARMAN,  BLISS. A  vision of Sappho.  Toronto, Canadiana  House,  I g68.  7  p.   (Reprint  of New  York  I903  ed.).
CHARLES, BARRY. You   used  to  like  my   pies.
Toronto, House of  Anansi, 1969.  48  p. COGSWELL, FRED. Immortal    plowman.   Fred­
ericton,   N.B.,    Fiddlehead    Poetry   Books,
Ig6g. 38  p.
coLOMBO, JOHN. John  Toronto, new  poems by Dr. Strachan   [Edited] by John Colombo. Ottawa, Oberon Press,  Ig6g. 94 p.
COOPERMAN, STANLEY. The  day of the  parrot, and other poems. Lincoln, University of Nebraska Press,  cig68. 86 p.
CORMIER, LOUIS.  The    silent  cowboys  of  the East. Fredericton, N.B., Fiddlehead Poetry Books,  Ig6g. 28 p.
DAY, STACEY B. Poems and etudes.  Montreal, Cultural and Educational Productions, c1g68.  I 10  p.


102
 DIXON,  LANGFORD. When laughter   put  to  sea.
Toronto, Langmar Studios, 1968.  52  p. ESHLEMAN,  CLAYTON. The  house of Okumura. Toronto, Weed/flower Press,  1969.  37  p. EVERSON, RONALD G.  Dark   is  not   SO     dark.
Montreal, Delta Canada, Ig6g.
FERRARI,  LEO. The   worm's  revenge.  Foreword by AI  Pittman. Fredericton, Mortuary Press, Ig68. 56  p.
FETHERLING,    DOUG,  editor. Thumbprints.
Toronto, P. Martin, Ig6g. 70 p. FETHERLING,  DOUG.  The    United    States    of
Heaven,   Gwendolyn  Papers.   That   chain­
letter    hiway.   Toronto,  House  of   Anansi, Ig68. 77  p.
FLEET, BRENDA. Catching   the  sun's  fire.  Fred­
ericton, Fiddlehead Books,   Ig6g. Unpaged. FORD, R.  A. D. The  solitary  city,   poems  and translations. Toronto,   McClelland   &   Ste-­
wart, Ig6g. 94  p.
FRASER,  RAYMOND. /'ve    laughed    and   sung
through  the   whole   night   long,   seen   the summer   sun  rise in  the  morni,ng. Montreal, Delta Canada, Ig6g. 59  p.
GERVAIS, c.  H.   Something. Toronto,  Bandit
Press,  I g6g.  8 p.
GILBERT,  GERRY. Phone  book.  Toronto,  Gang­ lia  Press  &  Weed/flower Press,  1g6g.  49  p. (Cronk, ser.  3,  no. 3, June  1969.)
GNAROWSKI,  MICHAEL.  The    gentlemen    are
also    lexicographers. Montreal,   Delta
Canada, 1969   [Cig68]. 25 p.
GOTLIEB, PHYLLIS.   Ordinary,  moving.    Don Mills,   Oxford  University Press,   Ig6g. g6  p. GOURLAY, ELIZABETH.  Motions,   dreams    & aberrations.   Victoria,  B.C.,   Morriss Print­
ing,  1969. 68  p.
GROVEs, EDYTHE M. Funnybones: Comic  verse.
Strathmore, Alta., 1969.  68  p.
GUSTAFSON, RALPH.  /xion's   wheel.   Toronto, McClelland & Stewart, I g6g.  I 28 p.
HELWIG, DAVID.  Sign  of the  gunman. Ottawa, Oberon Press,   1969.
HINE,   DARYL. Minutes;  poems.   New    York, Atheneum, Ig68. 53  p.
HOWE, THOMAS CORNELL.  There is  the  sun­
shine.   Vancouver,  Lighthouse  Press,   1 g6g. JOHNSON,  E. PAULINE. Flint  and   feather;  the
complete   poems    of   E.   Pauline    johnson.
With an  introduction by  Theodore  Watts­ Dunton.   Toronto,  Hodder   &    Stoughton,
1969.   170   p.  (First  published 19I2).

ENGLISH  CANADIAN LITERATURE



KEARNS,  LIONEL.  By   the   light   of  the   siluery M clune;  media  parables    poems   signs   ges­ tures   and   other    assaults   on   the   interface. Vancouver, Daylight  Press,  1969.  So  p.
KEEFE, GEORGE.   Sounding off.  Montreal  West,
Ink/Inc., 1969.  20 p.
KNIGHT,   DAVID. The army   does  not   go  away.
Toronto, House of  Anansi, 1969.  42  p.
KOBLER, SANDRA. All there  is of loue. Toronto, McClelland &  Stewart, 1969.   100  p.
LAYTON,  IRVING.  Selected poems.  Edited  by Wynne  Francis. Toronto, McClelland & Stewart, 1969.  139  p.
LAYTON,  IRVING.  The whole   bloody   bird; obs, aphs  & pomes. Toronto, McClelland & Stewart, 1969. 155  p.
LOCHHEAD,   DOUGLAS.   A   & B   & C   &; an alphabet. Toronto,  Fathom Press,  1969.  30 p.   ( 6o  copies) .
MACEWEN,   GWENDOLYN.   The  shado,w-maker. Toronto, Macmillan of Canada, 1969.  93  p. MCNAIR,   MARGUERITE.    Lilacs; and    other
poems.   Fredericton, N.B.,   Printed  by  Uni­
press,  1968.  24 p.
MARLATT, DAPHNE.  Leaf  leaf's. Los  Angeles, Black  Sparrow Press,  1969.  53  p.
MARSHALL, TOM.  The silences  of  fire. Toronto, Macmillan of  Canada, 1969.  70  p.
MAYNE,   SEYMOUR.   Anewd.  Vancouver,  Very
Stone House, 1969.  13 p.
MAYNE,  SEYMOUR. Manimals. Vancouver, Very
Stone House, 1969.  38 p.
MAYNE,  SEYMOUR.  Mutetations. Vancouver, Very  Stone House, 1969.  8 p.
MURRAY, RONA.  The power  of the  dog  & other poems.    Victoria,   Morriss  Printing,   1968.
59   p.
NOWLAN,  ALDEN.  The mysterious naked   man.
Toronto, Clarke Irwin, 1969.  93  p.
OLIPHANT,  ROBERT G. Fiue  and  three; a small collection   of    my    poetry.   Victoria,   B.C.,
1968.
ONDAATJE,    MICHAEL.    The  man    with    seuen toes.  Toronto, Coach House Press,  1969. Unpaged.
PARKER,   MARTHA   J•    (pseud.) A   pot   of  oil.
n.p.,  1969.  24 p.
PEARSON,    ALAN.   Fourteen poems.    Montreal, Delta Canada, 1969.
PENNER,   HELEN.    Poetry  lane.   Strathmore, Alta., printed by  E.  M.  Groves, 1969.  53 p.
 PURDY,  A.    w.   (ed.)  Fifteen winds. Toronto, Ryerson  Press,  1969.
RAE,  JAMES   PENMAN   (ed.) Poets  of Canada,
1969.  Ottawa, Tae-Art, 1969.  1179 p.
RICHARDS,    K.    P.    Contrasting poems, or   a Blond  girl in a photo by a dressing table. [Vancouver? 1969]. 47  p.
The   Saskatchewan  poetry 	book,   1968-69.
Regina, Saskatchewan Poetry Society, 1968.
48 p.
SAUNDERS,  THOMAS.   Red   River   of  the   north and   other   poems   of  Manitoba.  Illustrated by George  Swinton. Winnipeg, Peguis  Pub!. (1969?]. 59  p.
SCHROEDER,  ANDREAS.  Ozone minotaur.  Van­
couver, Sono  Nis  Press,  1969.  58  p.
SHUSTER, scHOEL.  Hatchings. Montreal,  Or­
ganism Press,  c1968. 47 p.
SIEBRASSE,   GLEN.   Man:   unman.  Montreal, Delta Canada, C1968. 88  p.
SKELTON, ROBIN   (ed.)  Introductions from  an
Island.   Victoria,   University   of   Victoria,
1969.  41  p.
SLABOTSKY, DAVID.   Parables. Vancouver, 1969. SOMMER,  RICHARD.  Homage  to  Mr.  MacMul­ lin.   Montreal, Delta Canada,   1969.   19  p. SOUSTER,   RAYMOND. So   far SO    good.  Ottawa,
Oberon Press,  1969.
SPARSHOTT,   FRANCIS.   A    cardboard   garage.
Toronto, Clarke, Irwin, 1969.  59  p.
STEDINGH,  R.   W.   and    MCMILLAN,  A.     Ashes;
poems.  Halifax, Phoenix Publications, 1969.
70  p.
STELFOX,  HENRY.   When the   sawflies   mate in summer,  and    other    Alberta   poems.    n.p.,
1968.  112  p.
STEVENS,   PETER.   Nothing but   spoons.  Mon­
treal, Delta Canada, 1969.  34  p.
TAYLOR,  JENNIFER    REYNOLDs.    One    + one.
Poetry [by] Jennifer Reynold Taylor;
Photography [by] Gerry M. Laarakker. Hamilton, Ont., printed by  Monarch Litho, [1968?]. Unpaged.
THOMPSON, KENT E. Hard  explanations. Fred­
ericton, University of New  Brunswick, 1968.
30  p.   (New   Brunswick poetry chapbooks). TROWER,   PETER.    Moving   through   mystery. Poems   by   Peter    Trower.  Visuals  by  Jack Wise.   Vancouver,  Talonbooks,   1969.   Un­
paged.
TURNBULL,  GAEL.  A  trampoline, poems   1952-

ENGLISH CANADIAN LITERATURE



1964.  London,  Cape  Goliard  Press,   1968. Unpaged.
WADDINGTON,   MIRIAM. Say   yes.   Don    Mills, Oxford University Press,  1969.  g6  p.
West  coast   seen.   Edited  by  Jim  Brown   and
David Phillips. Vancouver, Talonbooks,
1969.  212  p.
WHITEN, CLIFTON. Putting the   birthdate into perspective. Toronto,  Clarke,  Irwin,   1969.
8o  p.
YATES, J. MICHAEL. Man in  the  glass octopus.
Vancouver, Sono  Nis  Press,  1968.   109  p. YOUNG,  IAN. Year  of  the   quiet   sun.  Toronto,
House of Anansi, 1969.  49  p.
YOUNG, IAN.  White  garland;  9   poems    for
Richard. Scarborough, Ont.,  Cyclops, 1969.
15  p.


DRAMA

GRAY,  SIMON. Sleeping  dog;   a   play   for   tele­ vision. London, Faber &  Faber, 1968.  73  p. GRAY, SIMON. Wise  child. London, Faber   &
Faber, CI968.  84  p.
ISRAEL, CHARLES. The  labyrinth. Toronto, Macmillan of Canada, 1g6g.  91  p.
OTTAWA  LITTLE THEATRE. Canadian  playwrit­ ing    competttwn.   Ranking   plays    series   2, Numbers   22·53·    Ottawa,    Ottawa    Little Theatr.e, n.d.
REANEY, JAMES.  Colours   in   the   dark.   Van­ couver/Toronto,   Talonplays  with   Macmil­ lan  of Canada, 1969.  gop.
siMONS, BEVERLEY. Crabdance. Vancouver, In
 FRASER,  BLAIR.  Blair  Fraser  reports, selections
1944-1968.  Edited   by  John  and    Graham
Fraser.   Toronto,   Macmillan   of    Canada
1969.  312  p.
RICHLER,  MORDECAI. Hunting   tigers    under glass;  essays  and   reports. Toronto,  McClel­ land  & Stewart, 1968.  160  p.
TRUEMAN,  STUART. You're only  as old  as  you act.  Illustrated by the author. Toronto, McClelland & Stewart,  Ig68. 16o  p.


HUMOUR

BRAITHWAITE, MAX. Neuer    sleep   three    in   a bed.  Toronto, McClelland &  Stewart, 1969.
218  p.
CLARK, GREG. May your  first love  be  your  last.
Toronto,   McClelland   &   Stewart,    1g6g.
224  p.
HALIBURTON,   THOMAS CHANDLER. The  Sam Slick   anthology.  Selected  &  introduced   by R.    E.    Watters.  Text  edited  for   modern readers  by   W.   S.   Avis.   Toronto,  Clarke Irwin, 1969.   (Clark Irwin Canadian  paper­ backs,  35).
LEACOCK, STEPHEN  BUTLER. Behind  the   be­ yond,  and    other    contributions  to   human knowledge.  Introduction   by  Donald   Cam­ eron. Toronto, McClelland &  Stewart, 1969.
125   p.    (New    Canadian  Library  no.   67) (First published 1913).
LEACOCK, STEPHEN BUTLER. Laugh with  Lea­ cock,  an   anthology  of   the    best   work   of Stephen  Leacock.  Toronto,   McClelland  & Stewart, 1968.  339  p.  (Canadian best  seller library, 41)    (First  published 1930).

Press,  1969.  59  p.


ESSAYS
 MOWAT, FARLEY.
float.     Toronto,
1969.  243  p.
 The  boat    who    wouldn't
McClelland   &    Stewart,


BOYLE,  HARRY I. Straws in  the  wind. Toronto, Doubleday, 1969.  162  p.
BURNFORD, SHEILA.  Without  reserve.   Illus­
trated by Susan Ross.  Toronto, McClelland
&  Stewart, 1969.
CHAPMAN, ETHEL. Humanities  in   homespun.
Toronto, Ryerson Press,  1969.
DILTZ,  BERT  CASE.  Stranger   than     fiction.
Toronto,   McClelland   &    Stewart,    1969.
1!:18  p.
 NEEDHAM,  RICHARD.  A   friend  in  Needham,  or
a   writer's  notebooks.  Toronto,  Macmillan of Canada, 1969.  53  p.


BIOGRAPHY

ALLAN, IRIS. White Sioux. Sidney, B.C., Gray's
Pub!.,  1969.  209  p.
BIGELOW,  w.  A. Forcep, fin  and   feathers, the memoirs of  W. A.  Bigelow. Altona, Man., Frieson, 1969. 1 16  p.

ENGLISH  CANADIAN LITERATURE



BIRD, WILL  R.  An    earl   must   have   a  wife.
Toronto, Clarke Irwin, 1969.
BOORMAN,  SYLVIA.  John  Toronto, a biography of Bishop  Strachan. Toronto, Clarke Irwin, I969.
CHALMERS,  FLOYD S. A gentleman of the  press.
Toronto, Doubleday, I969.
DANIELLS,  ROY. Alexander Mackenzie and  the
Northwest. London,  Faber  &  Faber,  1969. DE  BOILIEN, LAMBERT.  Recollections  of  Lab­
rador life. Edited by Thomas F. Bredin. Toronto, Ryerson Press,  1969.  134  p.  (First published  r86r  ) .
Dictionary    of   Canadian  biography.  vol.   II
1701-1740. Edited  by David Hayne.  Toron­
to,    University   of    Toronto   Press,     1969.
725  p.
DONALDSON,  GORDON.  Fifteen   men,  Canada's
Prime   ministers    from  Macdonald  to   Tru­ deau.  Illustrated  by  Don   Morrison.  Toron­ to, Doubleday, 1969.  265  p.
HEMBROFF-SCHLEICHER, EDYTHE.  M.C.: a
portrayal    of   Emily    Carr.   Toronto,   Van­
couver, Clarke, Irwin, 1969.   123  p. HENDERSON, J.  L.   S.  John   Strachan,  1778-
1868.  Toronto, University of  Toronto Press,
1969.  112  p.
JACKMAN, s.  w.   Portraits   of   the   premiers.
Sidney, B.C.,   Gray's  Pub!.,   1969.   272  p. MACEWAN, GRANT. Tatanga   Mani.   Walking
Buffalo   of  the   Stonies.  Edmonton,  M.   G.
Hurtig, 1969.  208  p.
MACIVER,  ROBERT  M. As a tale that  is told, the
autobiography of R.  M.  Maciver. Chicago, University of  Chicago  Press,  CI968. 269  p.
MACLEAN,  HUGH.  Man   of  steel,  the   story  of Sir    Sanford    Fleming.    Toronto,   Ryerson Press,  1969.  I45  p.
NULIGAK. I,  Nuligak. 2nd   edition.  Toronto,
P. Martin, I969. 208 p.
O'BRIEN, MARY SOPHIA.  The   journals of Mary O'Brien 1828-1838. Edited   by   Audrey Saunders  Miller.  Toronto,   Macmillan  of Canada, 1968.  3I 4 p.
PETHICK, DEREK. James   Douglas:   servant  of two   empires.   Vancouver,   Mitchell   Press,
1969.  306  p.
RICHLER,  MORDECAI. The   street.  Toronto,  Mc­ Clelland & Stewart, I969. I28  p.
RODNEY,  WILLIAM. Kootenai  Brown;   his  life
and  times, 1839-1916. Sidney, B.C.,  Gray's
Pub!.,  I969. 25I  p.
 SELLAR, ROBERT. A  Scotsman in  Upper Canada, the  narrative  of Gordon Sellar. Toronto,   Clarke,   Irwin,    I969.    136    p. (Clarke,  Irwin   Paperback  no.   35)    (Pub­ lished    in    I9I5  as   The    true   makers   of Canada).
SEWID,  JAMES.  Guests   never   leave   hungry; the  autobiography of James  Sewid, a  Kwa­ kuitl  Indian. Edited  by  James  P.  Spradley. New   Haven,  Yale   University   Press,    1969.
3IO  p.
STURSBERG, PETER.   Those    were   the   days.
Toronto, Peter Martin, I969. I6o  p. SWETTENHAM, JOHN.   McNaughton.  Vol.   2
1939-1943   and  Vol. 3  1944-1966. Toronto,
Ryerson Press,   I969.
THOMAS,  CLARA    MCCANDLESS. Ryerson    of
Upper    Canada.    Toronto,    Ryerson   Press,
1969.  151 p.
THOMPSON,   SAMUEL.  Reminiscences   of    a
Canadian   pioneer   for  the   last   fifty   years
1833-1883; an  autobiography. Toronto, Mc­ Clelland & Stewart, 1968.   288  p.  (Reprint of  I 884  edition).
TRAILL, WALTER. In   Rupert's  land,  memoirs of Walter  Traill. Edited by Mae Atwood. Toronto, McClelland & Stewart, 1969.
WELLS, KENNETH MCNEILL. The  owl pen reader. Wood  engravings by Lucille Oille. Toronto, Doubleday, I969. 445  p.
YOUNG, sCOTT.  Hockey    is  a   battle;   Punch Imlach's  own  story.  Toronto, Macmillan of Canada, I969. 203  p.


JUVENILE

AIKEN, JOAN.  A   necklace   of  raindrops,  and other  stories. Illustrated by Jan  Pienkowski. London, J. Cape in  association with  Clarke,
Irwin, Ig68.  107  p.
BERRILL, JACQUELYN. River   girl.   Illustrated by George Loh. New  York, Dodd, Mead, cr968. r8o  p.
BURNINGHAM, JOHN. Seasons. Toronto, Clarke
Irwin,  1969.
CARKIN, HELEN s. Once  upon  an Indian  tale; authentic    folk  tales.  Collected  by  Norman H.   Lerman.  Phrased  in   grammatical   Eng­ lish   and   illustrated  by   Helen  S.   Carkin. New    York,    Carlton  Press,    cr968.   54   p.


105

ENGLISH CANADIAN LITERATURE



CLARE,  JOHN.    Trouble    at    Bronco    Butte.
Toronto,  Ryerson Press,  1969.  124  p. COWELL, vr.   Normie's   goose  hunt.   Toronto,
Copp, Clark, 1968. 24 p.
CRAIG, JOHN.   No   word   for  good-bye.   Illus­
trated  by  Harri Aalto.   Toronto, P.  Martin,
1969.   194  p.
CREIGHTON, LUELLA.  The   hitching    post,   a
story  dealing  in  magic.  Illustrated by  Tom
McNeely. Toronto,  McClelland &  Stewart,
1969.  94  p.
EATON,  SARA. Lady  of the  backwoods. Toron­
to,  McClelland & Stewart, 1969.
FOWKE, EDITH. Sally  go round  the  sun.  Illus­ trated  by  Carlos  Marchiori.  Toronto,  Mc­  Clelland & Stewart,  1969.
FRY, ROSALIE K.  Whistler   in  the  mist.  Illus­
trated by Robin Jacques. New  York,  Farrar, Straus and  Giroux, 1968. 139  p.
LITTLE, JEAN. One  to  grow on. Illustrated by
Jerry  Lazare.  Boston, Toronto, Little
Brown, 1969.  140  p.
MARQUIS, HELEN. The  longest day of the  year. Don     Mills,     Ont.,    General   Publ.   1969. rr6  p.
PEREZ,  NORAH A.  Strange   summer   in  Strat­ ford.   Illustrated  by  Robert  Ihrig.  Boston,  Toronto, Little Brown, 1968.  176  p.
PRICE,  WILLARD. Gorilla adventure. New  York,
J. Day,  1969.  r89  p.
SCHWARZ, HERBERT T.   Windigo  and   other
tales  of  the  Ojibway. Paintings  by  Norval Morrisseau.  Toronto,   McClelland  &   Ste­ wart, 1969.  40  p.
SUDDON,  ALAN. Cinderella, retold in story and
collage.  Ottawa,  Oberon Press,    1969.  Un­
paged.
TOYE, WILLIAM. How summer  came to Canada.
Illustrated by  Elizabeth Cleaver. Don  Mills, Oxford University Press,  1969.  32  p.
TOYE, WILLIAM.  The mountain   goats of  Tem­ laham.    Illustrated   by   Elizabeth    Cleaver. Don   Mills,   Oxford  University  Press,  1969.
32  p.
WALKER, DAVID.   Pirate  Rock.   Toronto,   Col­
lins,  1969.  I90  p.
WALKER, DIANA. An  eagle  for courage.  Lon­
don,     Toronto,   Abelard-Schuman, cr968.
176  p.
wooD,   KERRY. Samson's  long  ride. Illustrated by  Audrey Teather. Toronto, Collins,  cr968.
77 p.

106
 wuoRro, EVA-LIS. Save  Alice!  New  York, Holt, Rinehart & Winston, c1968.
YATES, ELIZABETH. With pipe,  paddle   and song;  a story of the  French-Canadian  voya­ geurs,   circa   1750.  Toronto,  Clark,   Irwin, cr968. 256  p.
YOUNG, DELBERT  A. Last  voyage  of the  Uni­ corn.  Illustrated  by  Mary  Cserepy.  Toron­ to, Clarke Irwin, 1969.


LANGUAGE

scARGILL, M. H. "Canadianisms from  Western Canada, with  special reference to British Columbia." Royal  Society  of Canada Trans­ actions   Ser.   4,   vol.   6   p.    rBr-185, June
1968.


BIBLIOGRAPHY

GNAROWSKI,  MICHAEL. "Contact  Press; 1952-
1967,   a   check   list   of   titles." Culture   30:
227-232, September 1969.
MORGAN,  HENRY JAMES. Bibliotheca  canaden­ sis;  or,  a  manual   of  Canadian   literature. Detroit,  Gale   Research,  1968.  411  p.  (Re­ print of Ottawa, r867  edition.)
THIERMAN, LOIS MARY,  COmp. Jndex   to  Ver­ non  Blair  Rhodenizer's 'Canadian  literature in  English'. Edmonton,  printed  by  La  Sur­ vivance Print, 1968.  469  p.


BOOKS AND READING

"Centrifugal publishing [editorial]" Canadian literature  39:3-4, Winter 1969.
GRAY,  JOHN  M. "For  arguments sake,   [copy­
right]"  Quill   and   Quire   35:5  September
26,   1969.
HULL,    RAYMOND. Writing   for	money    in
Canada. Toronto, Longmans Canada, I969.
2I I  p.
JEANNERT, MARSH. "Publishing-a  national responsibility" Quill  and  Quire  35:9 &  1 1, April 25,  1969.
PARKER, GEORGE  L.  "Canadian  publishing in the     196o's"  Times  Literary    Supplement
3523:981-2, September 4,  1969.

ENGLISH  CANADIAN LITERATURE



PERIODICALS

NEW TITLES
Ballsout.   Vol.    1,   Mar./June  1969.   Pendejo Press,   3358   West    rst   Avenue,  Vancouver, B.C.
Connexion. Vol.  1,  December  I968. Mythical
Press,  Box 874,  Windsor, Ont.
Duel.  No.   1,  Winter  1969.   Students  Associa­ tion,  Sir  George Williams  University, Mon­ treal, Que.
Sunyata  magazine.  Vol.  1, Winter I967. Mon­
treal, P.O. Box  IOI2.
Tempo. Vol.    I,  November  I968.  Edited  by
E.   M.   Fay.   982   Parkview  Ave.,   Windsor
16, Ontario.

HISTORY AND  CRITICISM
ROBERTSON,  GEORGE. "Alan Crawley and  con­
temporary  verse".Canadian Literature   4I:
87-96, Summer  1969.
SMITH,  A.  1. M.  "'Canadian  literature', the first   ten   years."   Canadian Literature   41:
97·I03, Summer I969.
WOODCOCK,  GEORGE.  "Getting away   with  sur­ vival".  Canadian Literature  4 I:5-9,  Sum­ mer   I969.


LITERARY HISTORY AND CRITICISM

GENERAL
"An  absence of Utopias [editorial]." Canadian
Literature  42:3-5, Autumn I 969.
BAKER, RAY    PALMER. A   history   of   English­ Canadian   literature  to  the   Confederation; its  relation to the  literature  of Great  Britain and  the  United  States.  New  York,   Russell  and    Russell,     I968.    200    p.    (Reprint   of Cambridge, Mass.,  I920.)
BOURINOT,  SIR  JOHN  GEORGE.  A  short  review
of Canadian   literature. Toronto, Canadian House,  I968.  25   p.   (Reprint  of   London, I900.)
DANIELLS, ROY. "High  colonialism in Canada." Canadian   Literature 40:5-I6, Spring  1969. GREENE, DONALD. "Western  Canadian   litera­ ture."  Western  American Literature  2:257-
280.
"Letters in   Canada:   1968" edited by  David
M.  Hayne. University of Toronto Quarterly
38:339-501, July  1969.
 LOWER, ARTHUR R.   "Canadian  values    and
Canadian  writing." Mosaic   1:79-93,  I967. MACMECHAN,  ARCHIBALD. The   headwaters  of
Canadian  literature. 2nd  ed. Toronto, Cana­
diana House, 1968.  247  p.  (First published
Toronto 1 924).
MATTHEWS, JOHN.   "The  inner logic  of  a people, Canadian writing and  Canadian values." Mosaic  1 :40-50.
MATHEWS, R. D. "Parochialism and   the  past." journal    of    Commonwealth  literature    6: I00-105, January  1969.
NEW, WILLIAM H.  "A   wellspring of  magma; modern Canadian writing." Twentieth  Cen­ tury  Literature   14:123-132.
PACEY, DESMOND. Essays  in   Canadian   criti­
cism,   1938-1968.   Toronto,   Ryerson  Press,
1969.
STEVENS, PETER. "The writing of  the  decade.
5·   Criticism."   Canadian    Literature     41:
131-138, Summer  1969.
WISEMAN,  ADELE. "English writing in  Canada, the  future." Royal  Society  of Canada  Pro­ ceedings  and  Transactions.  Ser.   4,  Vol.   5 p.  45-so, 1967.

FICTION
JACKEL, susAN. "The  house  on  the  prairies."
Canadian   Literature   42:46-55,  Autumn
1969.
KREISEL,  HENRY.  "The  prairie;  a   state  of mind."  Royal   Society   of   Canada   Trans­ actions. Ser. 4, Vol. 6, p. 171-J8o, June 1968. NEW, WILLIAM  H. "The writing of  the  decade,
3· The novel  in  English." Canadian  Litera­
ture  41:121-125, Summer I969.
STEPHENS, DONALD. "Lilacs out  of  the  Mosaic land:   aspects of   the   sacrificial theme in Canadian  fiction."  Dalhousie   Review   48:
500-509, Winter  1968-6g.
STEPHENS,  DONALD. "The  writing of   the decade, 4· The short  story  in English." Canadian   Literature 41:126-!30,  Summer Ig6g.

POETRY
COGSWELL, FRED.  "Eros  or   Narcissus?  the male   Canadian  poet."  Mosaic    1:103-I 11. DUDEK, LOUIS. "The writing of  the  decade.  2. Poetry  in   English."  Canadian    Literature
4I: III-120,  Summer 1969.


107

ENGLISH  CANADIAN LITERATURE



GREEN, PAUL.  "The  relevance of  Surrealism with   some   Canadian   perspective." Mosaic
!l:59-70, Summer  I 969.
MILHAM, MARY-ELLA.   "Arcady  on   the  Atlan­ tic."    Humanities   Association    of    Canada Bulletin  I9: 42-5 I.
SEAMON,  ROGER. "Open  city;  poetry  Vancou­
ver    I968."  The    far  point   I :48-59, Fall/ Winter I968.
STEVENS, PETER (ed.)  On  the  McGill  move­
ment:   A.   ].  M.   Smith, F.  R.  Scott,   and Leo  Kennedy. Toronto, Ryerson Press, 1969. (Critical views  on  Canadian  writers.)
TALLMAN,  WARREN (ed.)  On  the  West  Coast
school:  Tish  and  the  Vancouver poets. Toronto, Ryerson, I969.  (Critical views on Canadian writers).

DRAMA
EDWARDS,    MURRAY   D.  A   stage  in  OUT    past, English  language  theatre  in Eastern Canada from the  1790's  to  1914. Toronto, Univer­ sity of Toronto Press,  I968.  2 I 1 p.


INDIVIDUAL  AUTHORS

ACORN, MILTON
BOWERING,  GEORGE. "Acorn  blood   (a   revieW
article]."    Canadian Literature    42:84-86, Autumn 1969.
LIVESAY, DOROTHY. "The  poetry    of   Milton
Acorn."  Canadian  Literature  40:33-42, Spring 1969.
BOURINOT, ARTHURS.
THOMSON,  DON. "Arthur  Stanley Bourinot, an
appreciation." Canadian  Author  and  Book­
man 44:9 &  12, Spring 1969.
BUCKLER, ERNEST
CAMERON, DONALD. "Letter  from    Halifax."
Canadian  literature  40:55-60, Spring  I 969.
BUELL, JOHN
CARYAS, HARRY  J•    "John  Buell,    Canada's
neglected  novelist."  Renascence   2 I : 28-3 I.
CALLAGHAN, MORLEY
HOAR,  VICTOR. Morley    Callaghan.   Toronto,
Copp,  Clark,   I 969.    I 23   p.    (Studies  in
Canadian literature, vol. 4).
CLUTESI, GEORGE
"Clutesi + Gray's  = recognition." Quill  and
Quire, 35:1-2  September I2,   I969.


108
 COHEN,  LEONARD
"Leonard Cohen: the  poet  as  hero."  Saturday
Night  84:!l6-3I, June I969.

DAVIES, ROBERTSON
LAWRENCE,  ROBERT G. "A  survey  of  the   three novels  of Robertson Davies." British Colum­ bia  Library   Quarterly   32:3-9,  April  1969.
GARNER, HUGH
ANDERSON,  ALLAN. "An interview with  Hugh Garner."  Tamarack review  49: I9-34, Third quarter 1969.
GIBSON, GRAEME
GEDDES, GARY. "The  muse    acclimatized   [a review   article]."  Canadian   Literature  42:
93-96, Autumn 1969.
GROVE, FREDERICK PHILIP SUTHERLAND,  RONALD. Frederick Philip Grove.
Toronto,  McClelland &   Stewart,  I969.   64 p.  (Canadian writers, no.  4).
SPETTIGUE,  DOUGLAS. Frederick  Philip  Grove.
Toronto,   Copp,  Clark,   1969.  I 75   p. (Studies in  Canadian literature vol.  3)
HALIBURTON, THOMAS CHANDLER BISSELL, CLAUDE  T. "Haliburton, Leacock and the  American humourous tradition." Cana­
dian  Literature 39: 5-I9, Winter  I969. HARDING,  L. A. A. "Compassionate humour in
Haliburton."  Dalhousie  Review  49: 223-228, Summer  I 969.
HARDING, L.  A.  A.  "Yankee at  the   court  of
Judge   Haliburton."   Canadian    Literature
39:6!l-73, Winter 1969.
RIMMINGTON,    GERALD  T.  "The  geography of Haliburton's  Nova   Scotia."  Dalhousie   Re­ view 48:488-499, Winter I968-69.
LAURENCE,  MARGARET
GOTLIEB, PHYLLIS. "On  Margaret Laurence." Tamarack  Review   49: 76-8o,   Third quarter I969.
LAURENCE,  MARGARET. "Ten years  sentences."
Canadian  Literature  41:10-16,    Summer
1969.
THOMAs, CLARA. Margaret  Laurence. Toronto,
McClelland &  Stewart, I969.   64  p.  (Cana­
dian  writers series  no. 3).

LAMPMAN, ARCHIBALD
GNAROWSKI, MICHAEL  (ed.)   On   Archibald Lampman.  Toronto,   Ryerson  Press,    1969. (Critical views  on  Canadian writers).

ENGLISH  CANADIAN LITERATURE




LAYTON, IRVING
MANDEL, ELI. Irving   Layton. Toronto, Forum
House,  1969.   82  p.   (Canadian  writers and their  works) .
LEACOCK, STEPHEN  BUTLER BISSELL,  CLAUDE T. "Haliburton,  Leacock and
the  American humourous tradition."  Cana­
dian  Literature 39:5-19,  Winter  1969. CROOKS,  GRACE. "A   taste   for  humour." Cana­
dian  Library  26:222-228, 1969.
MAGEE, w.    H.    "Leacock,   local    colourist."
Canadian  Literature 39:34-42, Winter 1969.
LEVINE, NORMAN
LEVINE,  NORMAN.  "The  girl    in    the    drug
store." Canadian Literature 41 :49-52, Sum­
mer  1969.
LIVESAY, DOROTHY
LIVESAY, DOROTHY.  "Song and   dance." Cana­
dian  Literature 41:40-48,  Summer  1969.
LOWRY, MALCOLM
EDMONDS, DALE.  "'Under  the    volcano':  a
reading  of   the   'immediate  level'." Tulane studies in  English  r6:63-105.
LUDWIG, JACK
JAMES,   ESTHER.    "Ludwig's  'Confusions'."
Canadian  Literature 40:49-53, Spring 1969.
MACLENNAN, HUGH
BUITENHUIS, PETER.  Hugh MacLennan. Toronto, Forum House, 1969.  83  p.  (Cana­ dian writers and   their works  series).
MACLENNAN, HUGH.  "Reflections  on   two decades."  Canadian Literature 41:28-39, Summer 1969.
HIRANO, KEIICHI.  "Jerome  Martell  and   Nor­
man   Bethune: a  note   on   Hugh   MacLen­ nan's  'The  watch  that  ends   the   night'." Studies in  English   Literature   (English Lit­ erary  Society  of   Japan)    English  number. p. 37-59·
WOODCOCK,  GEORGE.  Hugh  MacLennan.
Toronto, Copp Clark, 1969.  121  p. (Studies in  Canadian literature) .
MCLUHAN, MARSHALL
DUFFY, DENNIS. Marshall  McLuhan. Toronto,
McClelland &  Stewart, 1969.  62  p.  (Cana­
dian writers series  no.  r ) .
MANDEL, ELI
OWER, JOHN. "Black and  secret poet,  notes  on
Eli   Mandel."  Canadian   Literature  42: 14-
25, Autumn 1969.
 SIMMS,  NORMAN. "An    idiot    joy    [a   review article]." The    far  point   2:63-68, Spring/ summer 1969.
MONTGOMERY, L. M.
FITZPATRICK,  HELEN.  "Anne's first  sixty years." Canadian  Author  and  Bookman  44:
5-7  & 13, Spring 1969.
MOORE, BRIAN
DAHLIE,  HALLVARD.   Brian   Moore.   Toronto,
Copp   Clark,   1969.    132   p.    (Studies  in
Canadian literature vol.  2).
MOWAT, FARLEY
CARVER,  J.  E. "Farley Mowat; an   author  for
all   ages."   British  Columbia   Library  Quar­
terly 32:10-16, April  1969.
MARTIN, BETTY. "The world   of Farley Mowat."
Canadian   Author   and  Bookman   45:1-3  &
13, Winter 1969.
NEWLOVE, JOHN
FERNS, JOHN. "A   desolate country  [a  review article]."  The    far  point   2:68-75, Spring/ summer 1969.
PAGE,P.K.
PAGE, P.  K.   "Questions  and  images."   Cana­
dian  Literature   41:17-22, Summer 1969.
PRATT, E. J.
GIBBS, ROBERT J.   "The  living    contour,  the
whale  symbol  in  Melville and   Pratt." Cana­
dian  Literature   40: 17-25,  Spring, 1969.  PITT,   D.  o.   (ed.)  On   E.  J.  Pratt.  Toronto,
Ryerson   Press,    1969.    (Critical  views   on
Canadian writers) .
WILSON, MILTON. E.  J.  Pratt.  Toronto,  Mc­ Clelland &  Stewart, I969. 64  p.  (Canadian writers series,  no.  2) .
PURDY, A. W.
"A.   W.   Purdy,  an   interview   conducted   by
Gary    Geddes."   Canadian    Literature   4I:
66-72,  Summer 1969.
HELWIG, DAVID.    "The  winemaker  [a   review article]."  Queen's   Quarterly 76:340-344, Swnmer 1969.
RADDALL, THOMAS
CAMERON,   DONALD. "Letter  from    Halifax."
Canadian  Literature  40: ss-6o,   Spring, I969.
REANEY, JAMES
LEE,  ALVIN A.   James   Reaney.  New    York,
Twayne  Pub!.    [cr968].  187   p.  (Twayne's world  authors series,  no. 49).


I09

LITTERATURE CANADmNNE-FRANCAISE



REANEY,  JAMES.   "Ten years  at  play."  Cana­
dian  Literature   41:53-61, Summer  1969.
RICHLER,  MORDECAI
RICHLER,    MORDECAI.  "The   uncertain  world."
Canadian  Literature  41:23-27,  Summer
1969.
TALLMAN,    WARREN.     "Beyond    Camelot     [a
review  article]."  Canadian   Literature   42:
77-8r, Autumn   I969.
ROBERTS, CHARLES G. D.
KEITH, w.  J. Charles G. D. Roberts.  Toronto,
Copp  Clark,  I 969.  I 36 p.  (Studies  in Cana­
dian  literature, vol.  I).
ROSS, SINCLAIR
NEW,   WILLIAM  H.   "Sinclair Ross's ambivalent
world." Canadian  Literature  40:26-32,
Spring  1969.
 
ROSS, W. W. E.
STEVENS,    PETER.    "Qn  W.   W.   E.   Ross."
Canadian Literature 39:43-6 I, Winter  I 969.

SUTHERLAND, JOHN
WADDINGTON,   MIRIAM.   "All   nature  into   mo­ tion,  John   Sutherland's  poetry."  Canadian  Literature 41:73-85,  Summer  I969.

WATSON, SHEILA
MORRISS,     MARGARET.   "The  elements   trans­ cended."   Canadian   Literature    42:56-7 I, Autumn I969.

WILSON, ETHEL
NEW,  WILLIAM H.  "The irony  of order,  Ethel Wilson's  'The innocent traveller'." Critique I0:22-30.



LITTERATURE

CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE

liste etablie par Pamela Piddington


ANTHOLOGIES

BOSQUET,   ALAIN,  ed.  Poesie  du  Quebec;  an­
thologie. Paris,  Seghers;   Montreal, HMH,
1968.  271  p.
BOURGEOIS, GASTON,  comp. Poetes du  Quebec;
aperr;u  de  la   poesie  contemporaine. Paris, Editions   de    Ia   Revue    Moderne,   1968.
195 P·
COTNAM,  JACQUEs,   comp.  Poetes  du  Quebec,
r86o-rg68;  anthologie. Precede   d'une  bib­
liographie. Montreal, Fides, 1969.  222  p.
Ecrits  du  Canada   franr;ais. no.  25.  Montreal,
1969.
Ecrits  du  Canada   franr;ais. no.  26.  Montreal,
1969.
RENAUD, ANDRE. Le recueil de textes litteraires canadiens-franr;ais. Montreal, Editions  du Renouveau Pedagogique, 1968.  319  p.
RIGAULT, JEAN,  ed. Jl etait  une  fois en terre Quebec; anthologie  de s6 contes  et recits quebecois  [par] Jean  Rigault  et ses co!Iegi­ ens du  CEGEP de Sherbrooke. [Sherbrooke,

I 10
 College   d'Enseignement  Generale   et   Pro­
fessionnel,  1969] 134  p.
SELECTION  DU    READER'S DIGEST. 0  Canada,
mon   pays,   mes   amours;    une   anthologie.
[Montreal, 1969] 316  p.
VACHON,    G.-ANDRE.    Eloquence indienne.
Montreal, Fides,  1968.  96  p.
WEBER, KARL L.,  comp.  Poesie de la France et du  Canada   franr;ais [compiled   by]  Karl  L.
Weber,  Ramon   J. Hathorn [and]  Neal  R.
Johnson.  [Don   Mills]   Longmans Canada,
I969. 427  p.

ROMANS ET NOUVELLES
ANDRE,   GERARD.  La  Ugende  du  vieux   phare.
Rouyn  [s.e.]  1968. 104  p.
ANGERS, FELICITE  voir CONAN, LAURE.
ANGERS,   FRANCOIS   REAL.  Les  revelations   du crime,  ou Cambray  et  ses complices; chron­ iques  canadiennes  de    1834·    Quebec, Frechette,  r837;    [Montreal]   Reeditions­ Quebec, 1969.  105  p.

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



ARCHAMBAULT, GILLES.  Le  tendre   matin;  ro­ man.     [Montreal]    Cercle   du    Livre    de France, 1969.  146  p.
BALLOT, M.   Beaucoup  d'histoires, par  M. Ballot
[et autres] Ill. de   P.  Poulain. [Montreal] Centre  Educatif  et   Culture!,  1968.   190  p.
BEAULIEU,  VICTOR-LEVY.  Race  de  mondef  Ro­
man.   Montreal,  Editions  du    Jour,   196g.
!86 p.
BEDARD, B.  La  barbue  de  Montferrand.  Arn­ prior, Ont., Montferrand, 1963.  8 p.  (Texte bilingue)
BERNIER,   JOVETTE.    Non    Monsieur;   roman.
Montreal, Cercle du  Livre de  France, 1969.
220  p.
BLAIS, MARIE-CLAIRE. Une saison dans la vie d'Emmanuel;  roman.    35   illus.    de   Mary Meigs.   Ed.   limitee  de   grande  luxe.  Mont­ real,  Editions du  Jour, 1968. 136  p.
-. Vivre! Vivre!  Roman. Montreal,  Editions
du  Jour, 1969.  170  p.
BLANC HOT,   PHILIPPE    voir  J OANNETTE, RICHARD.
BOSQUET,   ALAIN.   Tigres   de   papier;    roman.
Paris, Grasset, 1968.  381  p.
CARRIER,  LOUIS-GEORGES.   Hold-up!   Photo­ roman  en dix  chapitres  [par]  Louis-Georges Carrier  et  Marcel DuM.  Version inregrale. [Montreal]  Lemeac,  1969. 94  p.
CARRIER,  ROCH.   Floralie,   ou   es-tui  Roman.
Montreal, Editions du  Jour, 1969.  170  p.
CONAN, LAURE. Laure  Conan. Textes presentes par    Micheline  Dumont.   Montreal,   Fides,
1968.  96  p.
DELORME, FLORIAN.  Les  derniers  emois. Mont­
rea),  Editions du  Belier, 1968.  153  p.
DES GAGNIERS, JEAN.  Le [unameron.  Quebec, Editions du  Pelican, 1968.
FAILLE,   ARMAND.  Contes   et  nouvelles.  [Que­
bec,  Belisle,  1969] 224 p.
FERRON,  JACQUEs.   Contes. Edition  inregrale. (Contes anglais/  contes du   pays  incertain/ contes inedits).  Montreal, Editions HMH,
1968.  210  p.
-. Historiettes. Montreal,   Editions  du   Jour,
1969.  182  p.
FOURNIER,  ROGER.  L'innocence d'Isabelle; une histoire.    Montreal,   Cercle   du    Livre   de France, 1969.  238  p.
ORANDPRE,  PIERRE  DE.  La  patience  des  justes.
Montreal,   Editions  du    Renouveau    Peda­
gogique, 1969. 247  p.
 GUEVREMONT,  GERMAINE.   Le  survenant.  Pre­ cede  d'une  chronologie, d'une  bibliographie et  de  jugements  critiques.  Montreal,  Fides,
1968.  248 p.
JASMIN,   CLAUDE. Les  coeurs  empailles;  nou­
velles. Montreal,  Editions  Parti-pris,  1967.
135 p.
JOANNETTE,    RICHARD.   Chair   aux   encheres,
suivi de deux  nouvelles:  La charrue rouillee, et  L'habitacle  sans  faste. Montreal, Editions Aries,  1969.  124  p.
LABBE,  JEAN-PIERRE.    Annick;   roman.   Sher­
brooke,   Librarie  de   Ia  Cite   Universitaire,
1969.  97 p.
LAMARCHE, GUSTAVE.  Le  conte  des sept  jours.
Montreal, Editions  Paraboles, 1969.  291  p. LAWRENCE,   CLAUDETTE.    Les    solitudes d'automne. Quebec, Editions Garneau,
1969.  135  p.
LECLERC, FELIX.  Le  calepin  d'un   flaneur. Pre­
cede  d'une chronologie, d'une  bibliographie et  de  jugements critiques. Montreal,  Fides,
1968.  180 p.
-.Pied nus dans  l'aube.  Precede d'une  chro­
nologie,    d'une  bibliographie, et   de   juge­
ments    critiques.   Montreal,   Fides,     1968.
215  p.
LE   MAY,   PAMPHILE. Pamphile  Le May.  Textes
choisis   et   presenres  par    Romain  Legare. Montreal, Fides, 1969.  93  p.
LEPAGE, MARIE-PAULE. Zig Zag. Montreal, Edi­
tions  du  Belier, 1968.  206  p.
MAILHOT,  MICHELE.   Le   fou  de  [a reine;  ro­
man.   Montreal,  Editions  du   Jour,   1969.
126   p.
MAJOR,   ANDRE.  Le   vent   du   diable;   roman. Mont!'eal, Editions du  Jour, 1968.  143  p. MARTEL,  EMILE.   Les  enfances   brisees;  recits. Montreal, Editions du  Jour, 1969.  127  p. MONTEPIN,   XAVIER  DE.   La   porteuse  de  pain.
Montreal, Editions Solei!,  1968.  319  p.
PELLETIER,   AIME.   Louise    Genest.   Montreal, Cercle du  Livre de  France, 1968.  172  p. PERRAULT,  PIERRE.  Le  regne  du   jour.  Mont­
real,  Editions Lidec, 1968.  !61 p.
-. Les  voitures  d'eau   [par]  Pierre Perrault, Bernard Gosselin [et] Monique Fortier. Montreal,   Co-edition   Lidec-lei    Radio­ Canada,  1969.   176   p.
POULIN,   JACQUES.   jimmy; roman.  Montreal, Editions du  Jour, 1969.  158  p.
POUPART, JEAN-MARIE.  Que  le diable  emporte


I I I

L1TTERATURE CANADffiNNE-FRANCA1SE



le titre; roman.  Montreal, Editions du  Jour,
1969.  147  p.
sAVARD,  FELIX-ANTOINE.   L'abatis.   Precede
d'une   chronologie,  d'une  bibliographie  et de  jugements critiques. Version definitive. Dessins   d'Andre  Morency. Montreal,  Fides,
1969.   r68  p.
-. Menaud,  maitre-draveur. Precede   d'une
chronologie, d'une  bibliographie et  de  juge­
ments   critiques.   Montreal,   Fides,     1968.
214  p.
THERIAULT, YVES. Antoine   et  sa  montagne;
roman.   Montreal,  Editions du   Jour,  1969. I70  p.
-. Mahigan; recit.  Montreal,  Lemeac,  1968.
107  p.
-. Tayaout, fils d'Agaguk. Montreal, Editions de !'Homme, rg6g. rs8 p.
-. Les  temps  du  carcajou;  roman.  Montreal,
Editions de !'Homme, 1969.  244 p.
-. Valerie. Montreal,  Editions  de  !'Homme, Ig6g. 123  p.
TREMBLAY, MICHEL.   La    cite    dans   l'oeuf;
roman.   Montreal,  Editions du   Jour,  1969. I8r   p.
TROBRIAND,   REGIS  DE.  Le    rebelle;   histoire
canadienne. Quebec,  Aubin  et Rowen, 1842; Montreal,  Reeditions-Quebec,  rg68.   38  p. TURGEON,  PIERRE. Faire  sa mort  comme   faire l'amour;   roman.    Montreal,   Editions   du
Jour, 1969.  I82  p.
VAC, BERTRAND  voir  PELLETIER, AIME. VADEBONCOEUR,  PIERRE. La  ligne  du   risque.
Montreal, Editions HMH,  rg6g.   286  p. VILLENEUVE,  PAUL. j'ai  mon  voyage/  Roman. Montreal, Editions du  Jour, 1969.  rs6  p. WEINIGEL, LEON. Malgre  nous. Montreal, Edi­
tions  Aries,   rg68. g6  p.
WYL,   JEAN-MICHEL.  Les   chiens   de   Satan.
Montreal, Belier,  1968.  380  p.


POESIE

BAILLARGEON,   GERALD.  Ennui;   poem.  Fiddle­
head  77:71, 1968.
BEAULIEU,  MICHEL. X.  Montreal,  Chez  !'Ob­ scene  Nyctalope, rg68. I v.  (non  pagine) BIBAUD,  MICHEL. Epitres,  satires,  epigrammes
et  autres   pieces  de  vers. Montreal,  Duver­
nay,    183o;  Montreal,   Reeditions-Quebec, rg6g.
BIDA, CONSTANTINE.  Poesie  du   Quebec   con-


112
 temporain;  anthologie.  [Trad.   par    Hlib
Sirko et  autresJ  Montreal, Librairie Deom,
1968.   195  p.   (Texte  bilingue, franc;ais   et ukrainien)
BOILEAU·DESPREAUX,  NICOLAS.  L'art   poetique
a  l'usage   du   Petit   Seminaire   de   Quebec.
Quebec,   r83o;   Montl'eal,  Re,editions-Que­
bec,  rg6g.
BOILY,  REINA. L'eolienne. [Quebec} Editions: La  Revue de  !'Ecole Normale et  du  Centre de  Formation des  Ma!tres, I969. 43  p.
BOSQUET, ALAIN, ed.   Poesie  du  Quebec;  an­
tho/ogie. Paris, Seghers; Montreal, Editions
HMH, rg68. 271  p.
BOURGEOIS, GASTON, comp.  Poetes du  Quebec; aperfu  de  la   poesie  contemporaine. Paris, Editions de  Ia Revue Moderne, 1968.  195 p. Cahier de  poesie.   Liberte   10:   I03-I2I, rg6g. CHATILLON, PIERRE. Solei[  de  bivouac.  Suivi de   La   geste   du   prince   (prose   poetique).
Montreal, Editions du  Jour, rg6g.  93  p. CHRISTIANE    (pseud.)   Ecoute, 1960-1967.
Montreal, Editions La  Fregate, rg68. 47  p. COTE, GHISLAIN.  Vers   l'epaisseur.   Montreal,
Librairie Deom, 1969.  91  p.
COTNAM,  JACQUEs, comp. Poetes  du  Quebec,
186o-1968; anthologie. Precede  d'une  bib­
liographie. Montreal, Fides,  1g6g. 222  p. DESPRES,  RONALD. Le   balcon   des  dieux   in­
achevees;  poemes.   Quebec,  Editions  Gar­
neau, Ig6g. 59  p.
DIEU,  PIERRE·K.  Clopec.   Dessins:   Raymond
Dupius.  Montreal,  Editions du   Cri,   1969.
53   p.
FERLAND,  JEAN-PIERRE. Chansons.  Introd.  de
Pierre  Duceppe.  Montreal,  Lemeac,  1969.
218  p.
GARNEAU, SAINT-DENYS. Poemes  inedits  de Saint-Denys Garneau.  Presentes par   Nicole Brossard. La barre du  jour 2 I : 6g-76, 1969. GEOFFROY, LOUIS.   Graffiti.   Montreal,   Chez
!'Obscene  Nyctalope, rg68.  I  v.    (non
pagine)
-. Les  nymphes  cabrees;   poemes.  Montreal, Chez  !'Obscene Nyctalope, 1968. 1  v.  (non pagine)
GIGUERE, ROLAND. Adorable  femme des neiges; poeme.  Illus. par  !'auteur. [Montreal}  Edi­ tions  Erta, 1959.  gf.  pliees   (dans un  etui)
-. Naturellement;  poemes  et   serigraphies.
Montreal,   Editions   Erta,    Ig68.   Sf.,    8 planches.

LITI'ERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



GIROUX, EMILE. Flore  fete le  printemps.  (Des­ biens,  Que., Editions du  Phare, Ig68]  s6  p. GODBOUT, JACQUES.  La   grand    muraille   de Chine    [par]   Jacques  Godbout    [et]  John Robert  Colombo.  Montreal,    Editions  du
Jour, 1g6g.  109  p.
GOUIN, GASTON. Temps obus, 1963-1968.  Avec six encres de  !'auteur. Sherbrooke, Librairie de  Ia  Cite   Universitaire, 1g6g.  100  p.
GRANDPRE, IRENA KWIATKOWSKA DE. Le coeur contre les murs; poemes. Ill. par !'auteur. Montreal, Centre educatif et  culture!, Ig6g.
105  p.
GUAY,  JEAN-RENE. Evanescents;   poemes.
[Thetford Mines, lmpr. de  Megantic, 1g68]
14f.
-. Onirisme; poemes.  [Thetford  Mines, lmpr. de  Megantic, 1968] 15f.
-. Le  pont    des   jours;    poemes.    [Thetford
Mines, Impr. de  Megantic, 1g68]  15  f.
-. Le   revenir    des   eaux    troubles;   poemes.
[Thetford Mines, lmpr. de  Megantic, 1g6g]
!8 f.
LAVERDIERE,  MICHEL C. R.I.P. (Montreal] Editions Aries  [ 1968] 121  p.
LELIEVRE, SYLVAIN.  Les  trottoirs   discontinus. [Sillery] Editions de  !'Arc [1g6g] 88  p. LEVESQUE,  RAYMOND. Quand   les hommes  viv­
ront   d'amour;  poemes,    chansons,   mono­
logues.  Quebec,  Editions de  I'Arc,   1968. LOISELET,  ANDRE. Le  mal des anges. Montreal,
Editions Parti-pris, 1g6g.  63  p.
MARCIL, MARIE-CLAIRE.   Poeme    a  !'enfant  de
reve.  L'action  nationale 59:  90-93, Ig6g.
MICHALSKI, MADELEINE (OUELLETTE) Le dome.  Montreal,  Editions Utopiques, 1968. g6  p.
MORAY, SIMONE  voir  MURRAY, SIMONE  G. MORENCY, PIERRE. Poemes   de  la  vie  deliee.
[Sillery] Editions de  !'Arc, 1968.  85  p.
MORIN, PAUL.  Paul  Morin.  Montreal,   Fides,
1968.  g6  p.
MORISSETTE,  GISELE DIONNE. Coeur   a coeur
avec   Imagie. [Thetford  Mines, lmpr.  de
Megantic] 1g6g. 37  f.
MURRAY, SIMONE  G. Chants d'argile aux Jtoiles. Avec  cinq  dessins  de !'auteur. Quebec, Edi­ tions  Garneau, 1g6g.  82  p.
NELLIGAN, EMILE.  PoJsies.   Ill.   de   Claude Dulude.   Montreal,   Fides,     1967.    253    p. (Edition limitee, de luxe)
 PAGEAU, RENE.  L'ombre    de   l'hiver. Quatre encres   de  Marcel Ducharme. [Berthierville, Ig6g] 103  p.
PARIZE, ROBERT. Visages  des  tles.  Quebec, Editions Garneau, 1g6g.  g6  p.
PELOQUIN,  CLAUDE. Manifeste infra, suivi  des
Emissions   paralleles.   Montreal,  Hexagone,
1967.  77 p.
-. Pour  la   grandeur   de  l'homme.   [Mont­
real,  Chez  !'auteur, Ig6g] I v. (non pagine) PETEL,  PIERRE.  Jl   n'y   a   plus   d'Indiens  a
Hochelaga;  poemes. Montreal, Ferron, 1968.
6o  p.
PILON, JEAN-GUY. Comme eau retenue; poemes
1954-1963.   Avant-propos  de   Rene  Char. Montreal,  Editions  de   l'Hexagone,   1968.
195  p.
RATTE,  JEANNE-MANCE. D'argile    et    d'eau; chansons et  poemes. Quebec, 1968.  95  p. RHEAULT,  ROSE-AIME  PROVENCHER.  D'une
terre a 1'autre, les hommes  sont  freres. Nico­
let,  Que., 1967.  140  p.
RIVIERE,  MANCE.  voir   RATTE, JEANNE-MANCE. ROBERT, GUY. Ailleurs  se tisse;  poemes  a vari­
antes   mobiles.   Quebec, Editions Garneau,
1g6g.  1 v.  (non pagine)
-. Quebec   se  meurt.   Montreal, Editions du
Songe, 1g6g.  8g  p.
ROBITAILLE,  GERALD.  Images.   Inside   drawing [par]  !'auteur. Montreal, Delta Canada, tg6g. 44 p.  (Texte bilingue).
ROCHE,  ALICE  (BRUNEL).   Au    creuJC    de   la raison. Montreal, Deom, tg6g. 81  p.
ROYER, JEAN. Nos corps habitables.  [Quebec] Editions de !'Arc, tg6g. 103  p.
ST.-GERMAIN, ANDRE. Sens unique   (Montreal, Ig6g] 37  p.
SAVARD,    FELIX-ANTOINE. La    symphonic  du
Misereor.  Ottawa,  Editions de  l'Universire d'Ottawa, 1968.  44 p.
SEGUIN,  OMER.  Poemes laurentiens   [par]
!'auteur des  Poemes du   Quebec.  St.-Louis­
de-Gonzague, Que., 1g6g.  so f.
SIMONEAU,  JEAN. Hymnes   a l'amour, la  vice,
la  revolte  (poesie   de   jet).  Montreal  [s.e.]
Ig68. 142 p.
THEBERGE,  JEAN-YVES, Entre  la  riviere  et  la montagne.  Montreal,   Editions   du   Jour, Ig6g. 76 p.
TREMBLAY,  CAMILLE.  La  mer  intJrieure,  prJ­
cede   de    Voyage    au   centre    d'un    arbre.

I 13

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



Metabetchouan,  Lac    Saint-Jean,   Editions du  Club  Poetique, I 968. 92 p.
TREMBLAY,   GEMMA. Les   feux    intermittents.
Paris,  Grassin, I968. 39 p.
TURCOTTE, JEAN-ALEXANDRE.    Volutes.  Sher­
brooke, Librairie  de   Ia Cite   Universitaire,
I969. I I8  p.
VALIQUETTE, JEAN-MICHEL.  Un  poete nous est
ne.   Montreal,  La    Barre    du   Jour,   I968.
76  p.
VANIER, DENis. Pornographic  delicatessen.
Prefaces de Claude Gauvreau et de Patrick Straram. Montreal, Esterel, I968. I  v.  (non pagine).
WEBER,  KARL L., comp. Poesie de la France et
du  Canada   franr;ais [compiled  by]  Karl L. Weber, Ramon  J. Hathorn [and]  Neal   R. Johnson.  [Don  Mills] Longmans Canada,
I969. 427  p.

THEATRE

AUTEUIL,  GEORGES  HENRI D'. Le  theatre. VOlT
les  numeros de  Relations.
DUBE, MARCEL.  Pauvre  amour;   comidie  dra­ matique  en   cinq    tableaux.   Montreal, Lemeac, I969. I6I   p.
DUFRESNE,  GUY. Les  traitants. Mise  en  scene
d'Albert Millaire. Montreal, Lemeac, I969. I76  p.
DUMAS,  ROGER. Les  comJdiens; piece en  deux
actes. Montreal, Holt, Rinehart et  Winston, I969. 7I  p.
FORTIN, ODETTE-MARIE-DES-NEIGES.   Les   plus
beaux  lauriers.  (Ed. I969.  Renovation  com­ plete, modernisee.)  Desbiens, Que., Editions du  Phare, I969.  66 p.
GERIN-LAJOIE, ANTOINE. Le    jeune    Latour;
trag/die en trois actes. Montreal, I844; Montreal, Reeditions-Quebec, I 969.  55  p.
GRANDMONT, ELOI DE. Theatre, v.  I. Montreal,
Editions  Maisonneuve,  I968.   (v.    I    com­
prend  Un  fils  a tuer, La  fontaine de  Paris,
et Le  temps des fetes.)
QUESNEL, JOSEPH.  Colas  et  Colinette, ou  Le bailli   dupe;  comedie   en  trois   actes,  eten prose, mitee   [sic]  d'ariettes; les  paroles et
la  musique   par  M.Q. Quebec, J. Neilson,
I 8o8;  Montreal,  Reeditions-Quebec,  1968.
78  p.
Le  Statu  quo en  diroute [par  U.A.F.]  Platts­
burgh,  N.Y.,    1834;  Montreal,   Reeditions­ Quebec, 1969.  3I  p.

I 14
 ESSAIS, LETTRES, MELANGES LITTERAlRES
BLAIN,   MAURICE.  Approximations;  essais.
Montreal, Editions HMH,  I968. 246  p. CARTIER, JACQUEs.  Jacques   Cartier.   Textes
presentes   par     Marcel  Trudel.   Montreal,
Fides, I968. 96  p.
DUBE,  RODOLPHE Du   mJtalangage. Postface de  Camille Souyris. Paris, Editions de  Ia Diaspora Franc;aise, 1968.  I 24 p.
GAGNON, MARIE-MICHELINE. fe    reve   et   je chante.  [Boischatel? Que., 1968] 72  p.
GILL, CHARLES. Correspondance. Reunie,  clas­ see   et   annotee  d'apres  les   originaux   par  Reginald Hamel. Montreal,  Editions Parti­ pris,  I 969.  245  p.
GRANGER, LUc. Ouate  de phoque. Montreal, Editions Parti-pris, I969. 266  p.
HERTEL, FRANCOIS  voir  DUBE, RODOLPHE. JASMIN, CLAUDE. Rimbaud, mon  beau  salaud!
Montreal, Editions du  Jour, 1969.   I42  p. LEFRANC,  MARIE.  Lettres    a   Louis    Dantin.
Avant-propos   de   Gabriel  Nadeau.   Trois­ Rivieres,  Editions  du   Bien   Public,    I967.
6o  p.
LESCARBOT, MARC. Marc   Lescarbot.    Textes presentes par  Rene Baudry. Montreal, Fides, I968. 96  p.
MARIE-VICTORIN,   Frere.  Confidences   et   com­ bat:    lettres,   1924-1944.    Presentation    et notes:   Gilles    Beaudet.    Montreal,   Lidec,
1969.  251  p.

LITTERATURE DE JEUNESSE
ACHARD,  EUGENE. Le  trJsor  de l'Jle-aux-Noix; chroniques   de  Richelieu. Edition  definitive. Montreal,  Editions  Eugene  Achard,  I969. I40  p.
ALENCON, MAY D'.  Les  6   garnements    de  la Roche-aux-chouettes. Ill.  de  Pierre Belves. Montreal,   Centre   Educatif   et   Culture!,
1969.   I57  p.
AUBRY, CLAUDE. Le violon magique et autres Ugendes du  Canada   franr;ais. Avant-propos de  Marius Barbeau. Gravures de  Saul Field. Ottawa,  Editions  des   Deux  Rives,    I968. roo  p.
BELLEMARE,   PIERRETTE (ROULEAU) voir   LE­ CLERC, CLAUDE.

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



CORRIVEAU,  MONIQUE (CHOUINARD). Max  au rallaye;  roman.  Quebec, Editions Jeunesse,
1968.  145  p.
DAVELUY,   PAULE  (CLOUTIER).  Get   hiver-la;
roman.   Quebec,   Editions   Jeunesse,   1967.
147  p.
DELABIT, REGINE voir    WYCZYNSKI, REOINE (DELABIT).
DES RIVIERES,  MADELEINE-M.  Rond   autour  de mon   pays;  contes  canadiens.  Quebec,  Edi­ tions  Jeunesse, 1968.  I27  p.
LABRECQUE, MADELEINE-G. Vol   a   bord   du Concordia; roman.  Quebec, Editions de Jeunesse, 1968.  154  p.
LECLERC,  CLAUDE. Maternelle, ma  joie. Ill.  de
Lise   Dupuis.  Montreal,   Editions  Ia   Que­
becoise,  1966.  77 p.
MAILLET, ANDREE. Le    chine    des   tempites.
Montreal, Fides, 1968.  1 15 p.
MARCHAND,  LOUISE. Fille  balafree.  Montreal, Editions Paulines, 1969.  I 75 p.
PESKEYNS, PIERRE.  Les aventures de Foinfoin:
1-Le    captif    dorlote.    Montreal,    [s.e.] I968. 32  p.
WYCZYNSKI, REGINE  (DELABIT).  Drame   au
pays des Touareg; roman.  Quebec, Editions
Jeunesse, I967. I36  p.

BIBLIOGRAPHIES

HAMELIN, JEAN. Un  catalogue des  periodiques au  Canada francoais. Genese de quelques instruments  de   travail.  Recherches   socio­ graphiquesB:  2II-2I3,  1967.
HAYNE, DAVID  M. Bibliographie   critique  du roman  canadien-franfais, rBs7-1900 [par] David M.  Hayne [et]  Marcel Tirol. Toron­ to, University ofTorontoPress, I968.141 p.
Letters in  Canada:   I968. Livres en  francoais.
University  of Toronto  Quarterly 38:  45I-
486,  1969.
Livres  et  auteurs   canadiens  1968:   panorama de  l'annee   litteraire. Montreal,  Editions Jumonville, I968. 268  p.
Bibliographie generale  I 968,  p.  254-266. Etudes  de   Ia   litterature   canadienne-fran­ coaise publiees au  cours  de  l'annee dans nos revues, p. 251HI53·
PORT, susAN. Canadian  literature  Ig68.  Lit­ terature  canadienne-frant;aise.   Canadian literature 40:  I IO-I IS,  I969.
 TERNAUX-COMPANS, HENRI.  Bibliotheque americaine,  ou Catalogue  des ouvrages  rela­ tifs  a  l' Amerique   qui  ont   paru  de puis  sa decouverte   jusqu'a l'an 1700.  Paris,  Arthus­ Bertrand,  IB37;  Amsterdam,  Gruner, 1968.
191  p.

OUVRAGES CONSACRES A L'EDITION
LAPOINTE, RAOUL. Histoire de l'imprimerie au Saguenay,  r879-1969. Chicoutimi, Societe historique du  Saguenay, 1969.   292  p.
These (M.A.)-Catholic    University of
America, Washington, D.C.
MIRON, GASTON. Creation   d'une   agence   lit­ teraire. Vient de  paraltre  5: 1 : 15,  1969. RICHER, JULIA.  Presence  du   livre   canadien­
frant;ais.    L'action    nationale    58:429-432,
Ig6g.

LINGUISTIQUE

BONIN, RENE. La   coherence dans le  francoais.
L'action  nationale  59:275-282,  1969. BOUDREAU, EPHREM.  Le  parole acadien du  sud
du   Cap   Breton. Cahier  de  La  Societe  his­
torique  acadienne  2: I87-2oo, I967.
CLAS, A.   Phonitique  appliquee, par   A.  Clas,
J. Demers,  et   R.  Charbonneau.  Montreal,
Beauchemin, I968. 203  p.
CONGRES SUR   LE   ROLE  DES   UNIVERSITES CANADIENNES   DANS L'ENSEIGNEMENT DU FRANCAIS ET DE L'ANGLAIS COMMES LANGUES SECONDES, UNIVERSITE LAVAL, I967. Proceedings. Deliberations. Ottawa, Association des universites et coiH:ges du Canada, 1968.  7 I  p.
DUMAREAU, PIERRE.  En   Acadie:   vitalire de  Ia langue  francoaise.   Culture  Franfaise   I 7:6-
24,  1968.
LA  FOLLETTE,   JAMES E. Etude  linguistique   de quatre  contes  folkloriques  du  Canada   fran­ fais;   morphologie   et   syntaxe.  Quebec, Presses  de  l'Universite Laval,   I969. I63  p.
LAVOIE, GILLES.  Le rythme  et la melodie  de  Ia phrase litteraire  dans l'oeuvre  de Mgr  F.-A. Savard;  essai de  phonostylistique. Quebec, Presses  de  l'Universite Laval,  I969.  I68   p.
LEON, PIERRE  ROGER.  Recherches sur la  struc­ ture  phonique  du  franfais  canadien. Mont­ real,  Didier, I968. 232  p.

115

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



PAINCHAUD, LOUIS. Le  bilinguisme  a l'univer­ site;  description  du  bilinguisme  et  du  bicul­ turalisme de  l'Universite  d'Ottawa, de l'Universite   Laurentienne    et    du    College militaire    royal   de    Saint-Jean.    Montreal, Beauchemin, 1969.  248 p.
-. Langue et  linguistique. Culture  30:50-52,
1969.
ROussEAU,  M. Contribution au  glossaire du fran<;ais   universe!; domaine  canadien.   Vie et langage  190: Io-18, 1968.
SOCIETE DU  PARLER FRANCAIS    AU   CANADA. Glossaire  du  parler  franfais au  Canada.  2e ed.   Quebec,  Presses   de  l'Universite  Laval,
1968.  709  p. Ed.  original 1930.


REVUES
Babelian illustrations; Illustrations  babeliennes. no.    1- 	1969-	Montreal, Centre  d'­ Etudes  canadiennes  fran<;aises,   Universite
McGill.
Les  cahiers  de  la  muse.  v.I- 	avril, 1969- Montreal, CEGEP d'Ahuntsic.
Dossiers de  cinema.  1- 	1969- 	Mont-
real,  Fides.
Les  herbes  rouges.  no.   1- 	oct.-no.,  1968- St.-Hyacinthe, Gaudet.


SATIRE ET HUMOUR
FALARDEAU, CLAUDE.  Des Zeroquois  au:c  Que­ becois;   Precis  tres   precis  et  tres   precieux d'histoire  historique  du Canada, 1534-2034.  Ill.  du caricaturiste Dupras.  Montreal, Presses  Libres, 1969.  121  p.
LEGAULT, AGATHE. L'homme, cet  animal  retif [par]  A.   Legault   [et]   Colette  Gagnon. Dessins    humoristiques   de    Jesus    Liceras. Montreal, Lidec, 1968.  145 p.


BIOGRAPHIES
BARBEAU, MARIUS.  Louis    Jobin,    statuaire.
Montreal, Beauchemin, 1968.  147  p. BASTIEN,  HERMAs.   Ces   ecrivains   qui   nous
habitent. Montreal,   Beauchemin,   1969.
227  p.
BOUSQUET, JEAN.   Claire   Tranchemontagne­
Pelland, fondatrice  temporelle  des Moniales de  Berthierville. Sackville, N.B.  [s.e.]  1968.
102  p.

II6
 DUBE, JEAN CLAUDE.  Claude-Thomas Dupuy, intendant   de    la   Nouvelle-France,   1678-
1738.  Montreal, Fides,   1969.   395  p. DUCHARME,  LOUIS-LEANDRE.   journal   d'un
exile   politique   aux   terres  australes.  Mont­ real,    Cinq-Mars,  1845;  Montreal,   Reedi­ tions-Quebec, 1968.  106  p.
FALARDEAU,    EMILE.  Marc-Aurele-alias-Suzor­
Cote,peintre et sculpteur, 1869-1937. Duver­ nay,   Que.,  J. Falardeau,  1969-           v.I­ Milieu familial: ses debuts.
HENDERSON,  CHRISTINE. Cent   ans  deja.  Pro­ pos  de   Christine  Henderson   recueillis   par  Alain    Stanke.  Montreal,    Editions  de    !'­ Homme; Editions lei  Radio-Canada,  1968.
94  p.
LABELLE, SUZANNE. L'esprit    apostolique   d'­
apres  Marie-de-l'Incarnation. Ottawa,  Edi­ tions  de  l'Universite d'Ottawa, 1968.  220  p. LAPORTE, JEAN-LOUIS.  Daniel   johnson,    cet inconnu. Montreal,  Beauchemin,     1968.
112   p.
LECLERC, ANDREE.  Felix  Leclerc,  ou  Mes  25 annees    dans   l'intimite   de   Felix   Leclerc [par]  Andree Leclerc [et]  Jean-Paul   Syl­ vain. Montreal, Editions de !'Homme,  1968.
157  p.
MAILLE, MICHELE. Blow-up   des  grands  de  la
chanson  au  Quebec. Montreal, Editions de
!'Homme, 1969.  1 v.  (non pagine).
NOELlE,  AGNES. Soeur  Valerie  Saint-Jean, fille de  la  Croix,  1878-1948. Sherbrooke,  Edi­ tions  Paulines, 1968.  186  p.
ROBERT,  ADOLPHE.  Souvenirs     et    portraits.
Manchester,  N.H.,  Impr.  Lafayette,   1965.
289  p.
ROBERT,  GUY. jerome, un   frere  jazze.  Mont­
real,   Editions du  Songe, 1969.  85  p.
ROY, JEANNE. ll veut  que  je marche:  Marie­ Anne     Ouellet,   1871-1966,   fondatrice     et premiere  superieure   generale  des  Servantes  de  Notre-Dame, Reine   du  Clerge.  Lac-au­ Saumon, Que., 1968.  182  p.
SAVARD,   PIERRE. jules-Paul   Tardive[.   Mont­
real,  Fides, 1969.  94  p.
SEGUIN, FERNAND.  Fernand   Seguin   rencontre
Gilles    Vigneault.  Montreal,   Editions   de
!'Homme; Editions lei  Radio-Canada, 1969.
87  p.
SELECTION DU   READER'S DIGEST, 0 Canada, mon pays, mes amours; une anthologie. Montreal, 1969.  316  p.

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



STANKE, ALAIN. "J'aime  encore  mieux   le  jus de betterave!" Souvenirs d'un  enfant  de la guerre.   Montreal,   Editions  de    !'Homme,
1969.  175  p.
TESSIER, THEODORE.  Mgr   Luc-Napo/eon  Cas­ tonguay,  p.d.,  cure   d'Asbestos,   1907-1949 [par]  le  Frere Fabien. Sherbrooke, Editions Paulines, 1969.  104  p.
VIGNEAU,  PLACIDE.  Un   pied  d'encre;  journal de   Placide    Vigneau.  Document   presente par  Gerard Galliene et annote par  Rene Belanger. Sillery, Gallienne,  1969.  31 1 p.


HISTOIRE ET CRITIQUE LITTERAIRES

OUVRAGES ET  ARTICLES GENERAUX
Les  automatistes. La  barre du  jour no.  17-20,
1969.
CAHIERS DE SAINTE-MARIE  I. Litterature  cana­
dienne.    Montreal,   Editions   Sainte-Marie,
1966.  120  p.
CAHIERS  DE SAINTE-MARIE  15.  Voix  et images du   pays, II: Littbature quebecoise. Mont­ real,  Editions Sainte-Marie,  1969.  194  p.
CAHIERS DE  SAINTE-MARIE 18.   Le   symbole; carrefour   interdisciplinaire.  Montreal,  Edi­ tions  Sainte-Marie, 1969.  160  p.
COTNAM, JACQUES.  Le  Quebec a J'heure de  sa
derniere chance. Culture 30: 1-18.
DIONNE, RENE. Le  creuset montrealais, ordalie du  Quebec.  Relations 343:304-306,  1969. DOBBS, BRYAN  GRIFFITH. The case  for  Cana­
dian  literature.   Western Canadian   studies
in   modern   languages   and   literature   1 :44-
50,  1969.
DORSINVILLE,   MAX. La   negritude et  Ia  Jittera­
ture   quebecoise.  Canadian    literature   42 :
26-36,   1969.
DUHAMEL, ROGER. Correspondance,   souvenirs et essais:  Lettres canadiennes-fram;aises. La revue   des  deux   mondes   n.s.,    1 1 :360-369,
1969.
GRANDPRE,  PIERRE DE. Histoire   de  la  littera­
ture   fran,.ais du  Quebec. Tome II  (1900-
1945) Montreal, Beauchemin, 1968.  386  p.
-. Histoire  de  la litthature  franfais  du  Que­
bec.  Tome Ill:  La   poesie  de  1945   a  nos
jours. Montreal, Beauchemin, 1969.  500  p.
 -. Histoire  de la litterature  franfais du  Que­ bec. Tome IV:  Romans, nouvelles, essais et autres  genres. Montreal, Beauchemin, 1969.
500  p.
JONES,  HENRI. Le  surrealisme  ignore.  Mont­
l'eal,   Centre  Educati£  et   Culture!,   1969.
16o  p.
Les   lettres  quebecoises  en   1968.   Etudes  lit­
teraires 2:203-237, 1969.
Litterature   canadienne-franfaise.   Montr,eal,
Presses  de  l'Universite  de  Montreal,  1969.
346  p.
(Conferences J. A. de  Seve,  no.  1-10)
Litthature du  Quebec. Paris, Folloppe, 1969.
354  p.
( Reedition  d'Europe no.  478-479, 1969)
MOISAN, CLEMENT. L'age    de   la   litterature canadienne.    Montr•eal, Editions  HMH,
1969.  192 p.
Les   prix   litteraires   1968.   Livres   et  auteurs
canadiens 1968.  p.  13.
Les   prix   litteraires  1968.   Vient    de   paraitre
5: I: J7-22,  32-33, 1969.
RICHER, JULIA.  Presence  du   livre   canadien­
franr;ais.    L'action   nationale    58:429-432,
1969.
ROBIDOUX,  REJEAN. L'autonomie d'une petite litterature. Mosaic  1:3:97-109,  1968.
TOUGAS, GERARD.   La   litterature   canadienne­
franr;aise.   Canadian  literature   41:104-1 10,
1969.
VACHON, G.-ANDRE. Une litterature de combat,
1778-I8Io; les  debuts du  joumalisme cana­
dien-franr;ais.  Etudes   franfaises  5: 249-375,
1969.
VIATTE, AUGUSTE.  Chroniques des  lettres  fran­ r;aises  hors    de   France:  le   Canada.   Con­ jonction 105:5-11,  1967.

LE  ROMAN

BECK, BEATRIX.  Le  nouveau   roman.  Quebec, Presses  de  l'Universite Laval, 1968.  18£.
Douze  ecrivains,   douze   nouvelles.   Montreal, Editions Liberte-lei Radio-Canada, 1968.
197  p.
MOISAN, CLEMENT. Le    roman  canadien  de
1945  a  1960.   Etudes  littbaires 2:143-156,
1969.
SIROis,  ANTOINE. Montreal   dans   le   roman canadien.   Montreal,  Didier,  1968.   195  p. These-U nivet"Site de  Paris, 1 967. Bibliographie: p.  183-190.

LITTERATURE CANADffiNNE-FRANCAISE



SAINTE-MARlE-ELEUTHERE,  Soeur.  La  mere dans le roman  canadien-fran ais,
Quebec,  Presses de l'Universite Laval,  1967.
1114  p.

LA POESIE

GONZALEZ-MARTIN, JERONIMO PABLO. Cinco poetas franco-canadienses actuales. Sevilla, Escuela de estudios hispano-americanos, rg66.  167 p.

LE THEATRE

GAGNON, GILLES.  Le Theatre des Compagnons de  Saint-Laurent. Culture  30:129-145, rg6g.
KATTAN,  NAIM.  Le  theatre   et  les dramaturges
a Montreal.  Canadian literature   40:43-48,
Jg6g.
VALLON,  CLAUDE.  Le  dossier canadien  du theatre  romand. [Lausanne] La  Cite,  rg67.
1115  p.


OUVRAGES CONSACRES AUX ECRIVAINS

BARBEAU, MARIU S
Marius  Barbeau   r883-196g.  Canadian  author
and bookman  44: Io,  rg6g.

BELANGER, MARCEL
PAGEAU,  RENE.   Rencontre avec  Marcel  Belan­
ger.  L'action nationale  59:   I48-157,   Ig6g.

BRAULT, JACQUES
BARBERIS,    ROBERT.     "Merooire" de   Jacques
Brault.  Maintenant 81:279,  1968.
POULIN,    GABRIELLE.   "Merooire" de   Jacques
Brault.  Relations 334: I3-16,  rg6g.
CARRIER, ROCH
SUTHERLAND,   RONALD.  FauJknerian   Quebec:
Roch  Carrier, La  guerre,  yes sir! Canadian literature  40:86-87,  rg6g.
CHARBONNEAU,  ROBERT
Sources   a  consulter.  Fiches  bibliographiques
de    litterature   canadierme    583-584,    fev.
rg6g.

DUBEMARCEL
LAROCHE,   MAXIMILIEN.   Marcel   Dube.  Mont­
real,  Fides,  Ig6g.  1go p.
-. Bilan,  de   Marcel   Dube:  huit   ans  apres.
L'action nationale  58:4711-494, rg6g.

II8
 DUCHARME, REJEAN
GRENIER,    CLAUDE.    L'oceanturoe, de   Rejean Ducharme. L'action nationale 58:465-471, Ig6g.
MONTALBETTI,   JEAN.    Ducharme    deroasque.
Nouvelles  litteraires   rg  jan.,  1967,  p. 3·

FERRON, JACQUES
LAVOIE, MICHELLE.  Jacques Ferron  OU  Je  pres­ tige  du  verbe.  Etudes   franfaises 5: I185-193, rg6g.

GARNEAU, SAINT-DENYS
BOURNEUF,   ROLAND.  Saint-Denys Garneau   et ses  lectures   europeennes.  Quebec,    Presses de  l'Universire Laval,  1g6g.  332  p.
VACHON,   G.-ANDRE.   Hommage a Saint-Denys
Garneau.  Etudes    franfaises    54:455,   457-
488,   Ig6g.
GELINAS, GRATIEN
GELINAS,  JEAN-PAUL.   "Bousille  et  Jes  justes" ( 1959-I g6g)   de  Gratien  Gelinas.   Culture
30:1117-11116,  rg6g.

GODBOUT, JACQUES
PRIMEAU,    MARGUERITE.   Nouvelle vague: Jacques Godbout, Le couteau  sur Ia table. Canadian literature 40:85-86,  1 g6g.

HARVEY, JEAN-CHARLES
ROUSSEAU,    GUILDO.  Jean-Charles   Harvey   et son oeuvre  romanesque. Preface  d'Antoine Naaman. Montreal, Centre  educatif   et  cul­ ture!,  I g6g.  I g8 p.
Sources   a  consulter.  Fiches   bibliographiques
de    litterature   canadienne    6811-683,  juin
rg6g.

HAUMONT,  ROLAND
CINQ-MARS,  EDMOND.  La  grenouillere, de  Ro­
land   Haumont. L'action   nationale   58:4311-
443,  rg6g. HEBERT, ANNE
LACOTE,  RENE.   Anne   Hebert.  Paris,  Seghers,
rg6g.  188 p.
ROSBO,   PATRICK   DE.   Une   parole   qui   est   a
elle-meme  sa  lumiere.   Les  lettres   franfaises
13I11:6-8,  rg6g.
LABERGE, ALBERT
BRUNET,   JACQUES.  Albert   Laberge, sa  vie  et son  oeuvre.   Ottawa,  Editions   de  l'Univer­ site d'Ottawa, rg6g. 176 p.

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



LAFOND, GUY
FRECHETTE,   JEAN-MARC.  Notes   a  propos   des
Poemes   de   l'un, de   Guy   Lafond.  L'action
nationa[e  59:140-147, 1969.
LALIBERTE, ANDRE
DESGAGNE, RAYMOND. Litterateurs sagueneens: Abbe   Andre  Laliberte,   I89!!-I95 1.   Sague­ nayensia I 1: IOI-108, 1969.
LAMARCHE, GUSTAVE
DESCHAMPS,   RENE.   Rencontre avec   Gustave
Lamarche.  L'action  nationale 58:495-498,
1969.
LANGEVIN, ANDRE
SAINT-JACQUES,  DENIS.  Andre  Langevin  aux
prises   avec   le   temps.  Etudes  litteraires  2:
157-176, 1969.
LANGUIRAND, JACQUES
ROY   HEWITSON, LUCILE. Jacques Languirand:
de  Ia nostalgie a !'impuissance. Etudes  fran­
faises 5 : 207-216, 1969.
LASNIER, RIN A
KUSHNER,  EVA. Rina   Lasnier; une  etude  avec
choix   de   poemes, soixante illustrations, une chronologie  bibliographique:  Rina  Lasnier et  son  temps. Paris, Seghers, 1969.  192  p.
LECLERC, FELIX
BERIMONT,   LUC.   Felix    Leclerc;   poete    d'au­
jourd'hui. Montreal, Fides, 1968.  186  p.
SAMSON,   JEAN-NOEL.    Felix    Leclerc.    Mont­
real,  Fides,  1969.  89  p.
LE  MAY, PAMPHILE
Sources  a  consulter.   Fiches  bibliographiques
de    litterature   canadienne   617-618,  mars
1969.
LEVEILLEE, CLAUDE
DIONNE,   ROBERT.  Claude Leveillee et  ses chansons.  College  et   famille     26:119-131,
1969.
NELLIGAN, EMILE
COLLOQUE   NELLIGAN,    UNIVERSITE    MCGILL,
1966.  Nelligan: poesie  revle, poesie vecue. Communications presentees par  Jean Ethier­ Blais.  Montreal, Cercle du  Livre de  France,
1969.  189  p.
WYCZYNSKI,    PAUL.   Nelligan  et   ]a   musique.
Revue   de   l'Universite  d'Ottawa  39:513-
532,  1969.
PANNETON, PHILIPPE
PANNETON, JEAN.  Ringuet. Montreal, Editions
Fides,  1969.  191  p.
 Sources  a  consulter.  Fiches    bibliographiques de    littlrature    canadienne   687-688,   juin
1969.
RINGUET voir PANNETON, PHILIPPE ROQUEBRUNE,  ROBERT DE
Sources  a  consulter.  Fiches    bibliographiques
de  littbature  canadienne 571,  jan.  1969.
ROY,  GABRIELLE
BESSETTE,   GERARD. Alexandre Chenevert, de
Gabrille Roy.   Etudes litteraires 2: 177-20!1,
1969.
DUBE,  GILLEs.   La   petite   poule   d'eau; etude.
Quebec, Editions La  Revue  de  !'Ecole Normale et du  Centre de  Formation des Maitres, 1969.  57  p.
GROSSKURTH,   PHYLLIS.    Gabrielle Roy    and
the   silken   noose.   Canadian  literature  4!1 :
6-13,  1969.
LEMIRE,    MAURICE.   "Bonheur  d'occasion,"  OU le   salut    par   la   guerre.  Recherches   socJo­ graphiques 10:2 3-35,  1969.
SAVARD, FELIX-ANTOINE
LAVOIE,  GILLES.   Le   rythme  et  [a  me/odie  de
la   phrase   litteraire  dans   ['oeuvre   de   Mgr F.-A. Savard; essai de phonostylistique. Quebec, Presses  de  l'Universite Laval, 1969.
!68 p.
PAGEAU,    RENE.    J'ai   rencontre   !'auteur   de
Menaud.  L'action   nationale  59:297-300,
1969.
SAMSON,   JEAN-NOEL.   Felix-Antoine Savard [par]  J.-N.  Samson et   Roland-M.   Char­ land. Montreal, Fides,  1969.  65  p.
THERIAULT, YVES
THERIAULT, YVES.  Textes et  documents. Choix
de   textes,   presentation  et   documentation: Renald  Berube.  Montreal,  Lemeac,  1969.
133  p.
VIGNEAULT, GILLES
BEAUPRE,  VIATEUR.  Vigneault et  Jes faux   pro­
phetes; une  reponse  a P.  Placide Gaboury.
Maintenant 82: 14,  1969.
LACOMBE, FRANCOIS.  La  fragilite dans  !'oeuvre de  Gilles  Vigneault. College   et   famille  26:
103-117, 1969.
RIOUX,  LUCIEN.   Gilles   Vigneault.  Paris,  Seg­
hers,  1968.  191  p.
Sources  a  consulter.  Fiches   bibliographiques
de    litterature    canadienne    597-599,   fev.
1969.

119
